OPen your Ears: For which of you will stop
The vent of Hearing, when loud Rumour speaks?
I, from the Orient, to the drooping West
(Making the wind my Post-horse) still unfold
The Acts commenced on this Ball of Earth.
Upon my Tongue, continual Slanders ride,
The which, in every Language, I pronounce,
Stuffing the Ears of them with false Reports:
I speak of Peace, while covert Enmity
(Under the smile of Safety) wounds the World:
And who but Rumour, who but only I
Make fearful Masters, and prepared Defence,
Whilst the big year, swollen with some other griefs,
Is thought with child, by the sterne Tyrant, War,
And no such matter? Rumour, is a Pipe
Blown by Surmises* Ielousies, Conjectures;
And of so easy, and so plain a stop,
That the blunt Monster, with vncounted heads,
The still discordant, wavering Multitude,
Can play upon it. But what need I thus
My well-knowne Body to Anathemize
Among my household? Why is Rumour here?
I run before King Harries victory,
Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury
Hath beaten down young Hotspurre, and his Troops,
Quenching the flame of bold Rebellion,
Even with the Rebels blood. But what mean I
To speak so true at first? My Office is
To noise abroad, that Harry Monmouth fell
Under the Wrath of Noble Hotspurres Sword:
And that the King, before the Douglas Rage
Stooped his Anointed head, as low as death.
This have I rumoured through the peasant-Townes,
Between the Royal Field of Shrewsbury,
And this Worme-eaten-Hole of ragged Stone.
Where Hotspurres Father, old Northumberland,
Lies crafty sick. The Posts come tyring on,
And not a man of them brings other news
Then they have learned of Me. From Rumours Tongues,
They bring smooth-Comforts-false, worse then True-wrongs.
Who keeps the Gate here ho^?
Where is the Earl?

What shall I say you are?


Tell thou the Earl
That the Lord Bardolf doth attend him here.

His Lordship is walked forth into the Orchard, Please it your Honour, knock
but at the Gate, And he himself will answer.

Here comes the Earl.


What news Lord Bardolf? Every minute now
Should be the Father of some Stratagem;
The Times are wild: Contention (like a Horse
Full of high Feeding) madly hath broke loose,
And bears down all before him.

Noble Earl,
I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.

Good, and heaven will.


As good as heart can wish:
The King is almost wounded to the death:
And in the Fortune of my Lord your Son,
Prince Harrie slain out-right: and both the Blunts.
Killed by the hand of Douglas. Young Prince Iohn,
And Westmerland, and Stafford, fled the Field.
And Harrie Monmouth's Brawn (the Hulke Sir Iohn)
Is prisoner to your Son. O, such a Day,
(So fought, so follow'd, and so fairly won)
Came not, till now, to dignify the Times
Since Caesars Fortunes.

How is this derived?
Saw you the Field? Came you from Shrewsbury?

I spake with one (my L.) that came fro thence,
A Gentleman well bred, and of good name,
That freely rendered me these news for true.

Here comes my Servant Travers, whom I sent On Tuesday last, to listen after
News.

My Lord, I ouer-rod him on the way,
And he is furnished with no certainties,
More then he (happily) may retail from me.

Now Travers, what good tidings comes fro you?

My Lord, Sir Iohn Vmfreuill turned me back
With joyful tidings; and (being better horsed)
Out-rod me. After him, came spurring head
A Gentleman (almost fore-spent with speed)
That stopped by me, to breath his bloodied horse.
He asked the way to Chester: And of him
I did demand what News from Shrewsbury:
He told me, that Rebellion had ill luck,
And that young Harry Percies Spur was cold.
With that he gave his able Horse the head,
And bending forwards struck his able heals
Against the panting sides of his poor Jade
Up to the Rowell head, and starting so,
He seemed in running, to devour the way,
Staying no longer question.

Ha? Again:
Said he young Harrie Percyes Spur was cold?
(Of Hot-Spurre, cold-Spurre?) that Rebellion,
Had met ill luck?

My Lord: I'll tell you what,
If my young Lord your Son, have not the day,
Upon mine Honour, for a silken point
I'll give my Barony. Never talk of it.

Why should the Gentleman that rode by Travers
Give then such instances of Loss?

Who, he?
He was some hielding Fellow, that had stolen
The Horse he rode-on: and upon my life
Speak at adventure. Look, here comes more News.

Yea, this mans brow, like to a Title-leafe,
Fore-tels the Nature of a Tragic Volume:
So looks the Strond, when the Imperious Flood
Hath left a witnessed Usurpation.
Say Morton, did thou come from Shrewsbury?

I ran from Shrewsbury (my Noble Lord)
Where hateful death put on his ugliest Mask
To fright our party.

How doth my Son, and Brother?
Thou trembl'st; and the whiteness in thy Cheek
Is apter then thy Tongue, to tell thy Errand.
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-be-gone,
Drew Priams Curtain, in the dead of night,
And would have told him, Half his Troy was burned.
But Priam found the Fire, ere he his Tongue:
And I, my Percies death, ere thou report it.
This, thou would say: Your Son did thus, and thus:
Your Brother, thus. So fought the Noble Douglas,
Stopping my greedy ear, with their bold deeds.
But in the end (to stop mine Ear indeed)
Thou hast a Sigh, to blow away this Praise,
Ending with Brother, Son, and all are dead.

Douglas is living, and your Brother, yet:
But for my Lord, your Son.

Why* he is dead.
See what a ready tongue Suspicion hath:
He that but fears the thing, he would not know,
Hath by Instinct, knowledge from others Eyes,
That what he feared, is chanced. Yet speak (Morton)
Tell thou thy Earl, his Divination Lies,
And I will take it, as a sweet Disgrace,
And make thee rich, for doing me such wrong.

You are too great, to be (by me) gainsaid:
Your Spirit is too true, your Fears too certain.

Yet for all this, say not that Percies dead.
I see a strange Confession in thine Eye:
Thou shake thy head, and hold it Fear, or Sin,
To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so:
The Tongue offends not, that reports his death:
And he doth sin that doth belie the dead:
Not he, which says the dead is not alive:
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome News
Hath but a loosing Office: and his Tongue,
Sounds ever after as a sullen Bell
Remembered, knolling a departing Friend.

I cannot think (my Lord) your son is dead.


I am sorry, I should force you to believe
That, which I would to heaven, I had not seen.
But these mine eyes, saw him in bloody state,
Rend'ring faint quittance (wearied, and out-breath'd)
To Henrie Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down
The neuer-daunted Percie to the earth,
From whence (with life) he never more sprung up.
In few; his death (whose spirit lent a fire,
Even to the dullest Peazant in his Camp)
Being bruited once, took fire and heate away
From the best tempered Courage in his Troops*
For from his Mettle, was his Party steeled;
Which once, in him abated, all the rest
Turned on themselves, like dull and heavy Lead:
And as the Thing, that's heavy in it self,
Upon enforcement, flies with greatest speed,
So did our Men, heavy in Hotspurres loss,
Lend to this weight, such lightness with their Fear,
That Arrows fled not swifter toward their aim,
Then did our Soldiers (aiming at their safety)
Fly from the field. Then was that Noble Worcester
Too soon taken prisoner: and that furious Scot,
(The bloody Douglas) whose well-labouring sword
Had three times slain the appearance of the King,
Began veil his stomach, and did grace the shame
Of those that turned their backs: and in his flight,
Stumbling in Fear, was took. The sum of all,
Is, that the King hath won: and hath sent out
A speedy power, to encounter you my Lord,
Under the Conduct of young Lancaster
And Westmerland. This is the News at full.

For this, I shall have time enough to morn.
In Poison, there is Physic: and this news
(Having been well) that would have made me sick,
Being sick, have in some measure, made me well.
And as the Wretch, whose Feauer-weakned joints*
Like strengthless Hindges, buckle under life,
Impatient of his Fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keepers arms: Even so, my Limbs
(Weakened with grief) being now enraged with grief,
Are thrice themselves. Hence therefore thou nice crutch,
A scaly Gauntlet now, with joints of Steel
Must glove this hand. And hence thou sickly Quoife,
Thou art a guard too wanton for the head,
Which Princes, fleshed with Conquest, aim to hit.
Now bind my Brows with Iron, and approach
The ragged'st hour, that Time and Spite dare bring
To frown upon the enraged Northumberland.
Let Heaven kiss Earth: now let not Natures hand
Keep the wild Flood confined: Let Order dye,
And let the world no longer be a stage
To feed Contention in a lingering Act:
But let one spirit of the First-borne Caine
Reign in all bosoms, that each heart being set
On bloody Courses, the rude Scene may end,
And darkness be the burier of the dead.

Sweet Earl, divorce not wisdom from your Honour.


The lives of all your loving Accomplices
Leane-on your health, the which if you give over
To stormy Passion, must perforce decay.
You cast the event of War (my Noble Lord)
And summed the account of Chance, before you said
Let us make head: It was your presurmize,
That in the dole of blows, your Son might drop.
You knew he walked over perils, on an edge
More likely to fall in, then to get over:
You were advised his flesh was capable
Of Wounds, and Scars; and that his forward Spirit
Would lift him, where most trade of danger ranged,
Yet did you say go forth: and none of this
(Though strongly apprehended) could restrain
The stiffe-borne Action: What hath then befallen?
Or what hath this bold enterprise bring forth,
More then that Being, which was like to be?

We all that are engaged to this loss,
Knew that we ventured on such dangerous Seas,
That if we wrought out life, was ten to one:
And yet we ventured for the gain proposed,
Choked the respect of likely peril feared,
And since we are o're-set, venture again.
Come, we will all put forth; Body, and Goods,

'Tis more then time: And (my most Noble Lord)
I hear for certain, and do speak the truth:
The gentle Arch-bishop of York is up
With well appointed Powers: he is a man
Who with a double Surety binds his Followers.
My Lord (your Son) had only but the Corpse,
But shadows, and the shows of men to fight.
For that same word (Rebellion) did divide
The action of their bodies, from their souls,
And they did fight with queasinesse, constrained
As men drink Potions; that their Weapons only
Seemed on our side: but for their Spirits and Souls,
This word (Rebellion) it had froze them up,
As Fish are in a Pond. But now the Bishop
Turns Insurrection to Religion,
Supposed sincere, and holy in his Thoughts:
He's follow'd both with Body, and with Mind:
And doth enlarge his Rising, with the blood
Of fair King Richard, scraped from Pomfret stones,
Derives from heaven, his Quarrel, and his Cause:
Tells them, he doth bestride a bleeding Land,
Gasping for life, under great Bullingbrooke,
And more, and less, do flock to follow him.

I knew of this before. But to speak truth,
This present grief had wiped it from my mind.
Go in with me, and council every man
The aptest way for safety, and revenge:
Get Posts, and Letters, and make Friends with speed,
Never so few, nor never yet more need.

Sir, you giant, what says the Doct. to my water?


He said sir, the water it self was a good healthy water: but for the party
that owed it, he might have more diseases then he knew for.


Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me: the brain of this foolish
compounded Clay-man, is not able to invent any thing that tends to laughter,
more then I invent, or is invented on me. I am not only witty in my self, but
the cause that wit is in other men. I do here walk before thee, like a Sow,
that hath o'rewhelm'd all her Litter, but one. If the Prince put thee into my
Service for any other reason, then to set me off, why then I have no
judgment. Thou whoreson Mandrake, thou art fitter to be worn in my cap, then to
wait at my heals. I was never manned with an Agot till now: but I will set
you neither in Gold, nor Silver, but in wild apparel, and send you back
again to your Master, for a Jewel. The Iuuenall (the Prince your Master)
whose Chin is not yet fledged, I will sooner have a beard grow in the Palm of
my hand, then he shall get one on his cheek: yet he will not stick to say,
his Face is a Face-Royall. Heaven may finish it when he will, it is not a hair
amiss yet: he may keep it still at a Face-Royall, for a Barber shall never
earn six pence out of it; and yet he will be crowing, as if he had writ man
ever since his Father was a Bachelor. He may keep his own Grace, but he is
almost out of mine, I can assure him. What said M. Dombledon, about the Satin
for my short Cloak, and Slops?


He said sir, you should procure him better Assurance, then Bardolf: he wold
not take his Bond yours, he liked not the Security.


Let him be damned like the Glutton, may his Tongue be hotter, a whoreson
Achitophel; a Rascally-yea-forsooth-knaue, to bear a Gentleman in hand, and
then stand upon Security? The whoreson smooth-pates do now wear nothing but
high shoes, and bunches of Keys at their girdles: and if a man is through with
them in honest Taking-vp, then they must stand upon Security: I had as lief
they would put Rats-bane in my mouth, as offer to stop it with Security. I
looked he should have sent me two and twenty yards of Satin (as I am true
Knight) and he sends me Security. Well, he may sleep in Security, for he hath
the horne of Abundance: and the lightness of his Wife shines through it, and
yet cannot he see, though he have his own Lantern to light him. Where's
Bardolf?


He's gone into Smithfield to buy your worship a horse.


I bought him in Paules, and he will buy me a horse in Smithfield. If I could
get me a wife in the Stews, I were Manned, Horsed, and Wiu'd.


Sir, here comes the Nobleman that committed the Prince for striking him,
about Bardolf.


Wait close, I will not see him.


What's he that goes there?


Falstaff, and't please your Lordship.


He that was in question for the Robbery?


He my Lord, but he hath since done good service at Shrewsbury: and (as I
hear) is now going with some Charge, to the Lord Iohn of Lancaster.


What to York? Call him back again.


Sir Iohn Falstaff.


Boy, tell him, I am deaf.


You must speak louder, my Master is deaf.


I am sure he is, to the hearing of any thing good.
Go pluck him by the Elbow, I must speak with him.

Sir Iohn.


What? a young knave and beg? Is there not wars? Is there not employment? Doth
not the K. lack subjects? Do not the Rebels want Soldiers? Though it be a shame
to be on any side but one, it is worse shame to beg, then to be on the worst
side, were it worse then the name of Rebellion can tell how to make it.


You mistake me Sir.


Why sir? Did I say you were an honest man? Setting my Knight-hood, and my
Souldiership aside, I had lied in my throat, if I had said so.


I pray you (Sir) then set your Knighthood and your Souldier-ship aside, and
give me leave to tell you, you lye in your throat, if you say I am any other
then an honest man.


I give thee leave to tell me so? I lay aside that which grows to me? If thou
get'st any leave of me, hang me: if thou take leave, thou were it better be
hanged: you Hunt-counter, hence: Avaunt.


Sir, my Lord would speak with you.


Sir Iohn Falstaff, a word with you.


My good Lord: give your Lordship good time of the day. I am glad to see your
Lordship abroad: I heard say your Lordship was sick. I hope your Lordship goes
abroad by advise. Your Lordship (though not clean past your youth) hath yet
some smack of age in you: some relish of the saltness of Time, and I most
humbly beseech your Lordship, to have a reverend care of your health.


Sir Iohn, I sent you before your Expedition, to Shrewsbury.


If it please your Lordship, I hear his Majesty is returned with some
discomfort from Wales.


I talk not of his Majesty: you would not come when I sent for you?


And I hear moreover, his Highness is fallen into this same whoreson Apoplexy.


Well, heaven mend him. I pray let me speak with you.


This Apoplexy is (as I take it) a kind of Lethargy, a sleeping of the blood,
a whoreson Tingling.


What tell you me of it? be it as it is.


It hath it original from much grief; from study and perturbation of the
brain. I have read the cause of his effects in Galen. It is a kind of
deafness.


I think you are fallen into the disease: For you hear not what I say to you.


Very well (my Lord) very well: rather an't please you) it is the disease of
not Listening, the malady of not Marking, that I am troubled withal.


To punish you by the heals, would amend the attention of your ears, I care
not if I be your Physician


I am as poor as Iob, my Lord; but not so Patient: your Lordship may minister
the Potion of imprisonment to me, in respect of Poverty: but how I should be
your Patient, to follow your prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a
scruple, or indeed, a scruple it self.


I sent for you (when there were matters against you for your life) to come
speak with me.


As I was then advised by my learned Council, in the laws of this
Land-seruice, I did not come.


Well, the truth is (sir Iohn) you live in great infamy


He that buckles him in my belt, cannot live in less.


Your Means is very slender, and your wast great.


I would it were otherwise: I would my Means were greater, and my waste
slenderer.


You have misled the youthful Prince.


The young Prince hath misled me. I am the Fellow with the great belly, and he
my Dog.


Well, I am loath to gall a new-heal'd wound: your days service at Shrewsbury,
hath a little gilded over your Nights exploit on Gads-hill. You may thank the
unquiet time, for your quiet o're-posting that Action.


My Lord?


But since all is well, keep it so: wake not a sleeping Wolf.


To wake a Wolf, is as bad as to smell a Fox.


What? you are as a candle, the better part burnt out


A Wassell-Candle, my Lord; all Tallow: if I did say of wax, my growth would
approve the truth.


There is not a white hair on your face, but should have his effect of gravity.


His effect of gravy, gravy, gravy.


You follow the young Prince up and down, like his evil Angel.


Not so (my Lord) your ill Angel is light: but I hope, he that looks upon
me, will take me without, weighing: and yet, in some respects I grant, I
cannot go: I cannot tell. Virtue is of so little regard in these Costormongers,
that true valor is turned Beare-heard. Pregnancy is made a Tapster, and hath
his quick wit wasted in giving Recknings: all the other gifts appertinent to
man (as the malice of this Age shapes them) are not worth a Gooseberry. You
that are old, consider not the capacities of us that are young: you measure the
heat of our Livers, with the bitterness of your gals: we that are in the vaward
of our youth, I must confess, are wags too.


Do you set down your name in the scroll of youth, that are written down
old, with all the Characters of age? Have you not a moist eye? a dry hand? a
yellow cheek? a white beard? a decreasing leg? an incresing belly? Is not your
voice broken? your wind short? your wit single? and every part about you
blasted with Antiquity? and will you cal your self young? Fie, fie, fie, sir Iohn.


My Lord, I was borne with a white head, something a round belly. For my voice,
I have lost it with hallowing and singing of Anthemes. To approve my youth
farther, I will not: the truth is, I am only old in judgment and
understanding: and he that will caper with me for a thousand Marks, let him
lend me the money, have at him. For the box of the ear that the Prince gave
you, he gave it like a rude Prince, and you took it like a sensible Lord. I
have checked him for it, and the young Lion repents: Marry not in ashes and
sacke-cloath, but in new Silk, and old Sack.


Well, heaven send the Prince a better companion.


Heaven send the Companion a better Prince: I cannot rid my hands of him.


Well, the King hath severed you and Prince Harry, I hear you are going with
Lord Iohn of Lancaster, against the Archbishop, and the Earl of Northumberland


Yes, I thank your pretty sweet wit for it: but look you pray, (all you that
kiss my Lady Peace, at home) that our Armies join not in a hot day: for if I
take but two shirts out with me, and I mean not to sweat extraordinarily: if
it be a hot day, if I brandish any thing but my Bottle, would I might never
spit white again: There is not a dangerous Action can peep out his head, but
I am thrust upon it. Well, I cannot last ever.


Well, be honest, be honest, and heaven bless your Expedition.


Will your Lordship lend me a thousand pound, to furnish me forth?


Not a penny, not a penny: you are too impatient to bear crosses. Fare you well.
Commend me to my Cousin Westmerland.


If I do, fillop me with a three-man-Beetle. A man can no more separate Age and
Covetousness, then he can part young limbs and lechery: but the Got galls
the one, and the pox pinches the other; and so both the Degrees prevent my
curses. Boy?


Sir.


What money is in my purse?


Seven groats* and two pence.


I can get no remedy against this Consumption of the purse. Borrowing only
lingers, and lingers it out, but the disease is incurable. Go bear this
letter to my Lord of Lancaster, this to the Prince, this to the Earl of
Westmerland, and this to old Mistress Vrsula, whom I have weekly sworn to
marry, since I perceived the first white hair on my chin. About it: you know
where to find me. A pox of this Got, or a Got of this Pox: for the one or
the other plays the rogue with my great toe: It is no matter, if I do halt, I
have the wars for my colour, and my Pension shall seem the more reasonable.
A good wit will make use of any thing: I will turn diseases to commodity.


Thus have you heard our causes, kno our Means:
And my most noble Friends, I pray you all
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes,
And first (Lord Marshall) what say you to it?

I well allow the occasion of our Arms,
But gladly would be better satisfied,
How (in our Means) we should advance our selves
To look with forehead bold and big enough
Upon the Power and puisance of the King.

Our present Musters grow upon the File
To five and twenty thousand men of choice:
And our Supplies, live largely in the hope
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns
With an incensed Fire of Injuries.

The question then (Lord Hastings) stands thus
Whether our present five and twenty thousand
May hold-vp-head, without Northumberland:

With him, we may.


I marry, there's the point:
But if without him we be thought to feeble,
My judgment is, we should not step too far
Till we had his Assistance by the hand.
For in a Theme so bloody faced, as this,
Conjecture, Expectation, and Surmise
Of Aids uncertain, should not be admitted.

'Tis very true Lord Bardolf, for indeed
It was young Hotspurres case, at Shrewsbury.

It was (my Lord) who lived himself with hope,
Eating the air, on promise of Supply,
Flattering himself with Project of a power,
Much smaller, then the smallest of his Thoughts,
And so with great imagination
(Proper to mad men led his Powers to death,
And (winking) leaped into destruction.

But (by your leave) it never yet did hurt,
To lay down likely-hoods, and forms of hope.

Yes, if this present quality of war,
Indeed the instant action: a cause on foot,
Lives so in hope: As in an early Spring,
We see the appearing buds, which to prove fruit,
Hope gives not so much warrant, as Despair
That Frosts will bite them. When we mean to build,
We first survey the Plot, then draw the Model,
And when we see the figure of the house,
Then must we rate the cost of the Erection,
Which if we find out-weighes Ability,
What do we then, but draw anew the Model
In fewer offices? Or at least, desist
To build at all? Much more, in this great work,
(Which is (almost) to pluck a Kingdom down,
And set another up) should we survey
The plot of Situation, and the Model;
Consent upon a sure Foundation:
Question Surveyors, know our own estate,
How able such a Work to undergo,
To weigh against his Opposite? Or else,
We fortify in Paper, and in Figures,
Using the Names of men, instead of men:
Like one, that draws the Model of a house
Beyond his power to build it; who (half through)
Gives over, and leaves his part-created Cost
A naked subject to the Weeping Clouds,
And waste, for churlish Winters tyranny.

Grant that our hopes (yet likely of fair birth)
Should be still-borne, and that we now possessed
The utmost man of expectation:
I think we are a Body strong enough
(Even as we are) to equal with the King.

What is the King but five twenty thousand?


To us no more: nay not so much Lord Bardolf.
For his divisions (as the Times do brawl)
Are in three Heads: one Power against the French,
And one against Glendower: Perforce a third
Must take up us: So is the vnfirme King
In three divided: and his Coffers sound
With hollow Poverty, and Emptiness.

That he should draw his several strengths together
And come against us in full puissance
Need not be dreaded.

If he should do so,
He leaves his back unarmed, the French, and Welch
Baying him at the heals: never fear that.

Who is it like should lead his Forces hither?


The Duke of Lancaster, and Westmerland:
Against the Welsh himself, and Harrie Monmouth.
But who is substituted against the French,
I have no certain notice.

Let us on:
And publish the occasion of our Arms.
The Common-wealth is sick of their own Choice,
Their ouer-greedy love hath surfeited:
An habitation giddy, and unsure
Hath he that builds on the vulgar heart.
O thou fond Many, with what loud applause
Did thou beat heaven with blessing Bullingbrooke,
Before he was, what thou would have him be?
And being now trimmed in thine own desires,
Thou (beastly Feeder) art so full of him,
That thou prouok'st thy self to cast him up.
So, so, (thou common Dog) did thou disgorge
Thy glutton-bosome of the Royal Richard,
And now thou would eat thy dead vomit up,
And howl to find it. What trust is in these Times?
They, that when Richard lived, would have him dye,
Are now become enamoured on his grave.
Thou that threw dust upon goodly head
When through proud London he came sighing on,
After the admired heals of Bullingbrooke,
Cri'st now, O Earth, yield us that King agine,
And take thou this (O thoughts of men accursed)
"Past, and to Come, seems best; things Present, worst.

Shall we go draw our numbers, and set on?


We are Times subjects, and Time bids, be gon.


Mr. Fang, have you entered the Action?


It is entered.


Wher's your Yeoman? Is it a lusty yeoman?
Will he stand to it?

Sirrah, where's Snare?


I, I, good M. Snare.


Here, here.


Snare, we must Arrest Sir Iohn Falstaff.


I good M. Snare, I have entered him, and all.


It may chance cost some of us our lives: he will stab


Alas the day: take heed of him: he stabbed me in mine own house, and that most
beastly: he cares not what mischief he doth, if his weapon be out. He will
foyne like any devil, he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.


If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.


No, nor I neither: I'll be at your elbow.


If I but fist him once: if he come but within my Vice.


I am undone with his going: I warrant he is an infinitiue thing upon my score.
Good M. Fang hold him sure: good M. Snare let him not escape, he comes
continuantly to pie-corner (saving your manhoods) to buy a saddle, and he is
indicted to dinner to the Lubbars head in Lombardstreet, to M. Smoothes the
Silkman. I pra'ye, since my Exion is entered, and my Case so openly known to
the world, let him be brought in to his answer: A 100. Mark is a long one, for
a poor lone woman to bear: I have borne, and borne, and borne, and have bin
fub'd off, and fub'd-off, from this day to that day, that it is a shame to be
thought on. There is no honesty in such dealing, unless a woman should be made
an Ass and a Beast, to bear every Knaves wrong.

Yonder he comes, and that arrant Malmesey-Nose Bardolf with him. Do your
Offices, do your offices: M. Fang, M. Snare, do me, do me, do me your Offices.


How now? whose Mare's dead? what's the matter?


Sir Iohn, I arrest you, at the suit of Mist. Quickly.


Away Varlets, draw Bardolf: Cut me off the Villains head: throw the Queen
in the Channel.


Throw me in the channel? I'll throw thee there. Wilt thou? wilt thou? thou
bastardly rogue. Murder, murder, O thou Hony-suckle villain, wilt thou kill
Gods officers, and the Kings? O thou hony-seed Rogue, thou art a honyseed, a
Man-queller, and a woman-queller.


Keep them off, Bardolf.


A rescu, a rescu.


Good people bring a rescu. Thou wilt not? thou wilt not? Do, do thou Rogue: Do
thou Hempseed.


Away you Scullion, you Rampallian, you Fustillirian: I'll tucke your
Catastrophe.


What's the matter? Keep the Peace here, hoa.


Good my Lord be good to me. I beseech you stand to me.


How now sir Iohn? What are you brawling here?
Doth this become your place, your time, and business?
You should have been well on your way to York.
Stand from him Fellow; wherefore hang upon him?

Oh my most worshipful Lord, and't please your Grace, I am a poor widow of
Eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.


For what sum?


It is more then for some (my Lord) it is for all: all I have, he hath eaten me
out of house and home; he hath put all my substance into that fat belly of
his: but I will have some of it out again, or I will ride thee of Nights, like
the Mare.


I think I am as like to ride the Mare, if I have any vantage of ground, to
get up.


How comes this, Sir Iohn? Fie, what a man of good temper would endure this
tempest of exclamation? Are you not ashamed to enforce a poor Widow to so
rough a course, to come by her own?


What is the gross sum that I owe thee?


Marry (if thou were it an honest man) thy self, the money too. Thou did swear
to me upon a parcel gilt Goblet, sitting in my Dolphin-chamber at the round
table, by a sea-cole fire, on Wednesday in Whitson week, when the Prince broke
thy head for lik'ning him to a singing man of Windsor; Thou did swear to me
then (as I was washing thy wound) to marry me, and make me my Lady thy wife.
Can you deny it? Did not good wife Keech the Butchers wife come in then, and
cal me gossip Quickly? coming in to borrow a mess of Vinegar: telling us, she
had a good dish of Prawnes: whereby you did desire to eat some: whereby I told
thee they were ill for a green wound? And did not thou (when she was gone
down stairs) desire me to be no more familiar with such poor people, saying,
that ere long they should call me Madam? And did you not kiss me, and bid
me fetch thee 30.s? I put thee now to thy Book-oath, deny it if thou can?


My Lord, this is a poor mad soul: and she says up down the town, that her
eldest son is like you. She hath bin in good case, the truth is, poverty hath
distracted her: but for these foolish Officers, I beseech you, I may have
redress against them.


Sir Iohn, sir Iohn, I am well acquainted with your manner of wrenching the true
cause, the false way. It is not a confident brow, nor the throng of words,
that come with such (more then impudent) sawcines from you, can thrust me from
a level consideration, I know you have practised upon the easie-yeelding spirit
of this woman.


Yes in troth my Lord.


Prithee peace: pay her the debt you owe her, and vnpay the villainy you have
done her: the one you may do with sterling money, the other with currant
repentance.


My Lord, I will not undergo this sneape without reply. You call honourable
Boldness, impudent Sauciness: If a man will curtsy, and say nothing, he is
virtuous: No, my Lord (your humble duty remembered) I will not be your suitor. I
say to you, I desire deliverance from these Officers being upon hasty
employment in the Kings Affairs.


You speak, as having power to do wrong: But answer in the effect of your
Reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.


Come hither Hostess.


Now Master Gower; What news?


The King (my Lord) and Henrie Prince of Wales
Are near at hand: The rest the Paper tells.

As I am a Gentleman.


Nay, you said so before.


As I am a Gentleman. Come, no more words of it


By this Heavenly ground I tread on, I must be fain to pawn both my Plate,
and the Tapestry of my dining Chambers.


Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking: and for thy walls a pretty slight
Drollery, or the Story of the Prodigal, or the Germane hunting in Waterwork,
is worth a thousand of these Bed-hangings, and these Fly-bitten Tapistries. Let
it be ten pound (if thou can.) Come, if it were not for thy humours, there
is not a better Wench in England. Go, wash thy face, and draw thy Action: Come,
thou must not be in this humour with me, come, I know thou was't set on to
this.


Prithee (Sir Iohn) let it be but twenty Nobles, I loath to pawn my Plate, in
good earnest la.


Let it alone, I'll make other shift: you'll be a fool still.


Well, you shall have it although I pawn my Gown. I hope you'll come to
Supper: You'll pay me altogether?


Will I live? Go with her, with her: hooke-on, hooke-on.


Will you have Doll Teare-sheet meet you at supper?


No more words. Let's have her.


I have heard bitter news.


What's the news (my good Lord?)


Where lay the King last night?


At Basingstoke my Lord.


I hope (my Lord) all's well. What is the news my Lord?


Come all his Forces back?


No: Fifteen hundred Foot, five hundred Horse
Are marched up to my Lord of Lancaster,
Against Northumberland, and the Archbishop.

Comes the King back from Wales, my noble L?


You shall have Lette^s of me presently.
Come, go along with me, good M. Gowre.

My Lord.


What's the matter?


Master Gowre, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?


I must wait upon my good Lord here.
I thank you, good Sir Iohn.

Sir Iohn, you loiter here too long being you are to take Soldiers up, in
Countries as you go.


Will you sup with me, Master Gowre?


What foolish Master taught you these manners, Sir Iohn?


Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a Fool that taught them me.
This is the right Fencing grace (my Lord) tap for tap, and so part fair.


Now the Lord lighten thee, thou art a great Fool.


Trust me, I am exceeding weary.


Is it come to that? I had thought weariness durst not have attached one of so
high blood.


It doth me: though it discolours the complexion of my Greatness to
acknowledge it. Doth it not show vildely in me, to desire small Beer?


Why, a Prince should not be so loosely studied, as to remember so weak a
Composition.


Belike then, my Appetite was not Princely got* for (in troth) I do now
remember the poor Creature, Small Beer. But indeed these humble
considerations make me out of love with my Greatness. What a disgrace is it to
me, to remember thy name? Or to know thy face to morrow? Or to take note how
many pair of Silk stockings you hast? (Viz. these, and those that were thy
peach-colour'd ones:) Or to bear the Inuentorie of thy shirts, as one for
superfluity, and one other, for use. But that the Tennis-Court-keeper knows
better then I, for it is a low ebb of Linen with thee, when thou kept not
Racket there, as thou hast not done a great while, because the rest of thy Low
Countries, have made a shift to eat up thy Holland.


How ill it follows, after you have laboured so hard, you should talk so
idly? Tell me how many good young Princes would do so, their Fathers lying so
sick, as yours is?


Shall I tell thee one thing, Pointz?


Yes: and let it be an excellent good thing.


It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding then thine.


Go to: I stand the push of your one thing, that you'll tell.


Why, I tell thee, it is not mere, that I should be sad now my Father is sick:
albeit I could tell to thee (as to one it pleases me, for fault of a better, to
call my friend) I could be sad and sad indeed too.


Very hardly upon such a subject.


Thou think me as far in the Devils Book, as thou, and Falstaff, for
obduracie and persistencie. Let the end try the man. But I tell thee, my hart
bleeds inwardly, that my Father is so sick: and keeping such wild company as
thou art, hath in reason taken from me, all ostentation of sorrow.


The reason?


What would thou think of me, if I should weep?


I would think thee a most Princely hypocrite.


It would be every mans thought: and thou art a blessed Fellow, to think as
every man thinks: never a mans thought in the world, keeps the Rode-way
better then thine: every man would think me an Hypocrite indee^e. And what
accites your most worshipful thought to think so?


Why, because you have been so lewd, and so much ingraffed to Falstaff.


And to thee.


Nay, I am well spoken of, I can hear it with mine own ears: the worst that
they can say of me is, that I am a second Brother, and that I am a proper
Fellow of my hands: and those two things I confess I cannot help. Look,
look, here comes Bardolf.


And the Boy that I gave Falstaff, he had him from me Christian, and see if
the fat villain have not transformed him Ape.


Save your Grace.


And yours, most Noble Bardolf.


Come you pernicious Ass, you bashful Fool, must you be blushing? Wherefore
blush you now? what a Maidenly man at Arms are you become? Is it such a matter
to get a Pottle-pots Maiden-head?


He called me even now (my Lord) through a red Lattice, and I could discern no
part of his face from the window: at last I spied his eyes, and me thought he
had made two holes in the Ale-wives new Petticoat, peeped through.


Hath not the boy profited?


Away, you whoreson upright Rabbit, away.


Away, you rascally Altheas dream, away.


Instruct us Boy: what dream, Boy?


Marry (my Lord) Althea dreamed, she was delivered of a Firebrand, and
therefore I call him her dream.


A Crownes-worth of good Interpretation: There it is, Boy.


O that this good Blossom could be kept from Cankers: Well, there is six
pence to preserve thee.


If you do not make him be hanged among you, the gallows shall be wronged.


And how doth thy Master, Bardolph?


Well, my good Lord: he heard of your Graces coming to Town. There's a Letter
for you.


Delivered with good respect: And how doth the Martlemas, your Master?


In bodily health Sir.


Marry, the immortal part needs a Physician: but that moves not him: though
that be sick, it dyes not.


I do allow this Wen to be as familiar with me, as my dog: and he holds his
place, for look you he writes.


Iohn Falstaff Knight: (Every man must know that, as oft as he hath occasion
to name himself:) Even like those that are kin to the King, for they never
prick their finger, but they say, there is some of the kings blood spilt. How
comes that (says he) that takes upon him not to conceive? the answer is as
ready as a borrowed cap: I am the Kings poor Cousin, Sir.


Nay, they will be kin to us, but they will fetch it from Iaphet. But to the
Letter: -- Sir Iohn Falstaff, Knight, to the Son of the King, nearest his
Father, Harrie Prince of Wales, greeting.


Why this is a Certificate.


Peace.
I will imitate the honourable Romaines in brevity.

Sure he means brevity in breath: short-winded. I commend me to thee, I
commend thee, and I leave thee. Be not too familiar with Pointz, for he
misuses thy Favours so much, that he swears thou art to marry his Sister
Nell. Repent at idle times as thou may, and so farewell.

Thine, by yea and no: which is as much as to say, as thou uses him. Jack
Falstaff with my Familiars: Iohn with my Brothers and Sister: Sir Iohn, with
all Europe.

My Lord, I will steep this Letter in Sack, and make him eat it.


That's to make him eat twenty of his Words.
But do you use me thus Ned? Must I marry your Sister?

May the Wench have no worse Fortune. But I never said so.


Well, thus we play the Fools with the time the spirits of the wise, sit in
the clouds, and mock us: Is your Master here in London?


Yes my Lord.


Where suppes he? Doth the old Bore, feed in the old Frank?


At the old place my Lord, in East-cheape.


What Company?


Ephesians my Lord, of the old Church.


Sup any women with him?


None my Lord, but old Mistress Quickly, and M. Doll Teare-sheet.


What Pagan may that be?


A proper Gentlewoman, Sir, and a Kinswoman of my Masters.


Even such Kin, as the Parish Heyfors are to the Towne-Bull?
Shall we steal upon them (Ned) at Supper?

I am your shadow, my Lord, I'll follow you.


Sirrah, you boy, and Bardolph, no word to your Master that I am yet in Town.
There's for your silence.

I have no tongue, sir.


And for mine Sir, I will govern it.


Fare ye well: go.
This Doll Teare-sheet should be some Rode.

I warrant you, as common as the way between S. Albans, and London.


How might we see Falstaff bestow himself to night, in his true colours, and
not our selves be seen?


Put on two Leather Jerkins, and Aprons, and wait upon him at his Table, like
Drawers.


From a God, to a Bull? A heavy declension: It was Ioues case. From a Prince,
to a Prentice, a low transformation, that shall be mine: for in every thing,
the purpose must weigh with the folly. Follow me Ned.


I prithee loving Wife, and gentle Daughter,
Give an even way unto my rough Affairs:
Put not you on the visage of the Times,
And be like them to Percie, troublesome.

I have given over, I will speak no more,
Do what you will: your Wisdom, be your guide.

Alas (sweet Wife) my Honour is at pawn,
And but my going, nothing can redeem it.

Oh yet, for heavens sake, go not to these Wars;
The Time was (Father) when you broke your word,
When you were more endeer'd to it, then now,
When your own Percy, when my heart-deere Harry,
Threw many a Northward look, to see his Father
Bring up his Powers: but he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
There were two Honours lost; Yours, and your Sons.
For Yours, may heavenly glory brighten it:
For His, it stuck upon him, as the Sun
In the gray vault of Heaven: and by his Light
Did all the Cheualrie of England move
To do brave Acts. He was (indeed) the Glass
Wherein the Noble-Youth did dress themselves.
He had no Legs, that practiced not his Gate:
And speaking thick (which Nature made his blemish)
Became the Accents of the Valiant.
For those that could speak low, and tardily,
Would turn their own Perfection, to Abuse,
To seem like him. So that in Speech, in Gate,
In Diet, in Affections of delight,
In Military Rules, Humours of Blood,
He was the Mark, and Glass, Copy, and Book,
That fashioned others. And him, O wondrous! him,
O Miracle of Men! Him did you leave
(Second to none) vn-seconded by you,
To look upon the hideous God of War,
In disadvantage, to abide a field,
Where nothing but the sound of Hotspurs Name
Did seem defensible: so you left him.
Never, O never do his Ghost the wrong,
To hold your Honour more precise and nice
With others, then with him. Let them alone:
The Marshall and the Arch-bishop are strong.
Had my sweet Harry had but half their Numbers,
To day might I (hanging on Hotspurs Neck)
Have talked of Monmouth's Grave.

Beshrew your heart,
(Fair Daughter) you do draw my Spirits from me,
With new lamenting ancient Ouer-sights.
But I must go, and meet with Danger there,
Or it will seek me in another place,
And find me worse provided.

O fly to Scotland,
Till that the Nobles, and the armed Commons,
Have of their Puissance made a little taste.

If they get ground, and vantage of the King,
Then join you with them, like a Rib of Steel,
To make Strength stronger. But, for all our loves,
First let them try themselves. So did your Son,
He was so suffered; so came I a Widow:
And never shall have length of Life enough,
To rain upon Remembrance with mine Eyes,
That it may grow, and sprowt, as high as Heaven,
For Recordation to my Noble Husband.

Come, come, go in with me: 'tis with my Mind
As with the Tide, swelled up unto his height,
That makes a still-stand, running neither way.
Fain would I go to meet the Arch-bishop,
But many thousand Reasons hold me back.
I will resolve for Scotland: there am I,
Till Time and Vantage crave my company.

What hast thou brought there? Apple-Iohns? Thou know Sir Iohn cannot endure
an Apple-Iohn.


Thou say true: the Prince once set a Dish of Apple-Iohns before him, and
told him there were five more Sir Iohns: and, putting off his Hat, said, I will
now take my leave of these six dry, round, old-wither'd Knights. It angered
him to the heart: but he hath forgot that.


Why then cover, and set them down: and see if thou can find out Sneaks
Noise; Mistress Teare-sheet would fain have some Musique.


Sirrha, here will be the Prince, and Master Points, anon: and they will put
on two of our Jerkins, and Aprons, and Sir Iohn must not know of it: Bardolph
hath brought word.


Then here will be old Vtis: it will be an excellent stratagem.


I'll see if I can find out Sneak.


Sweet-heart, me thinks now you are in an excellent good temperalitie: your
Pulsidge beats as extraordinarily, as heart would desire; and your Colour (I
warrant you) is as red as any Rose: But you have drunk too much Canaries, and
that's a marvelous searching Wine; and it perfumes the blood, ere we can say
what's this. How do you now?


Better then I was: Hem.


Why that was well said: A good heart's worth Gold. Look, here comes Sir Iohn.


When Arthur first in Court -- (empty the Iordan) and was a worthy King: How
now Mistress Dol?


Sick of a Calm: yea, good-sooth.


So is all her Sect: if they be once in a Calm, they are sick.


You muddy Rascal, is that all the comfort you give me?


You make fat Rascals, Mistress Dol.


I make them? Gluttony and Diseases make them, I make them not.


If the Cooke make the Gluttony, you help to make the Diseases (Dol) we catch
of you (Dol) we catch of you: Grant that my poor Virtue, grant that.


I marry, our Chains, and our Jewels.


Your Brooches, Pearls, and Owches: For to serve bravely, is to come halting
off: you know, to come off the Breach, with his Pike bent bravely, and to
Surgery bravely; to venture upon the charg'd-Chambers bravely.


Why this is the old fashion: you two never meet, but you fall to some
discord: you are both (in good troth) as Rheumatike as two dry Tostes, you
cannot one bear with another Confirmities. What the good-yere? One must
bear, and that must be you: you are the weaker Vessel; as they say, the
emptier Vessel.


Can a weak empty Vessel bear such a huge full Hogs-head? There's a whole
Merchants Venture of bordeaux stuff in him: you have not seen a Hulke better
stuffed in the Hold. Come, I'll be friends with thee Jack: Thou art going to the
Wars, and whether I shall ever see thee again, or no, there is no body
cares.


Sir, Ancient Pistol is below, and would speak with you.


Hang him, swaggering Rascal, let him not come hither: it is the
foule-mouth'dst Rogue in England.


If he swagger, let him not come here: I must live amongst my Neighbours, I'll
no Swaggerers: I am in good name, and fame, with the very best: shut the door,
there comes no Swaggerers here: I have not lived all this while, to have
swaggering now: shut the door, I pray you.


Dost thou hear, Hostess?


'Pray you pacify your self (Sir Iohn) there comes no Swaggerers here.


Dost thou hear? it is mine Ancient.


Tilly-fally (Sir Iohn) never tell me, your ancient Swaggerer comes not in my
doors. I was before Master Tisick the Deputy, the other day: and as he said
to me, it was no longer ago then Wednesday last: Neighbour Quickly (says
he;) Master Dombe, our Minister, was by then: Neighbour Quickly (says he)
receive those that are Civil; for (saith he) you are in an ill Name: now he
said so, I can tell whereupon: for (says he) you are an honest Woman, and
well thought on; therefore take heed what Guests you receive: Receive (says
he) no swaggering Companions. There comes none here. You would bless you to
hear what he said. No, I'll no Swaggerers.


He's no Swaggerer (Hostess:) a tame Cheater, he: you may stroke him as
gently, as a Puppy Greyhound: he will not swagger with a Barbary Hen, if
her feathers turn back in any show of resistance. Call him up (Drawer.)


Cheater, call you him? I will bar no honest man my house, nor no Cheater:
but I do not love swaggering; I am the worse when one says, swagger: Feel
Masters, how I shake: look you, I warrant you.


So you do, Hostess.


Do I? yea, in very truth do I, if it were an Aspen Leaf: I cannot abide
Swaggerers.


'Saue you, Sir Iohn.


Welcome Ancient Pistol. Here (Pistol) I charge you with a Cup of Sack: do
you discharge upon mine Hostess.


I will discharge upon her (Sir Iohn) with two Bullets.


She is Pistoll-proofe (Sir) you shall hardly offend her.


Come, I'll drink no Proofs, nor no Bullets: I will drink no more then will
do me good, for no mans pleasure, I.


Then to you (Mistress Dorothie) I will charge you.


Charge me? I scorn you (scurvy Companion) what? you poor, base, rascally,
cheating, lacke-Linnen-Mate: away you mouldy Rogue, away; I am meat for your
Master.


I know you, Mistress Dorothie.


Away you Cut-purse Rascal, you filthy Bung, away: By this Wine, I'll thrust my
Knife in your mouldy Chappes, if you play the saucy Cuttle with me. Away you
Bottle-Ale Rascal, you Basket-hilt stale Juggler, you. Since when, I pray you,
Sir? what, with two Points on your shoulder? much.


I will murder your Ruff, for this.


No, good Captain Pistol: not here, sweet Captain.


Captain? thou abominable damned Cheater, art thou not ashamed to be called
Captain? If Captains were of my mind, they would trunchion you out, for
taking their Names upon you, before you have earned them. You a Captain? you
slave, for what? for tearing a poor Whores Ruff in a Bawdy-house? He a
Captain? hang him Rogue, he lives upon mouldy stew'd-Pruines, and dried
Cakes. A Captain? These Villains will make the word Captain odious:
Therefore Captains had need look to it.


'Pray thee go down, good Ancient.


Hark thee hither, Mistress Dol.


Not I: I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear her: I'll be
revenged on her.


'Pray thee go down.


I'll see her damned first: to Pluto's damned Lake, to the Infernal Deep,
where Erebus and Tortures wild also. Hold Hooke and Line, say I: Down: down
Dogs, down Fates: have we not Hiren here?


Good Captain Peesel be quiet, it is very late: I beseek you now, aggrauate
your Choler.


These be good Humours indeed. Shall Pack-Horses, and hollow-pamper'd Jade of
Asia, which cannot go but thirty miles a day, compare with Caesar, and with
Cannibals, and Trojan Greekes? nay, rather damn them with King Cerberus, and
let the Welkin roar: shall we fall foul for Toys?


By my troth Captain, these are very bitter words.


Be gone, good Ancient: this will grow to a Brawl anon.


Die men, like Dogs; give Crowns like Pins: Have we not Hiren here?


On my word (Captain) there's none such here. What the good-yere, do you
think I would deny her? I pray be quiet.


Then feed, and be fat (my fair Calipolis.) Come, give me some Sack, Si
fortune me torment, sperato me content. Fear we broad-sides? No, let the
Fiend give fire: Give me some Sack: and Sweet-heart lye thou there: Come we to
full Points here, and are et cetera's nothing?


Pistol, I would be quiet.


Sweet Knight, I kiss thy Neaffe: what? we have seen the seven Stars.


Thrust him down stayres, I cannot endure such a Fustian Rascal.


Thrust him down stayres? know we not Galloway Nagges?


Quoit him down (Bardolph) like a shoue-groat shilling: nay, if he do
nothing but speak nothing, he shall be nothing here.


Come, get you down stayres.


What? shall we have Incision? shall we embrew? then Death rock me asleep,
abridge my doleful days: why then let grievous, ghastly, gaping Wounds,
vntwin'd the Sisters three: Come Atropos, I say.


Here's good stuff toward.


Give me my Rapier, Boy.


I prithee Jack, I prithee do not draw.


Get you down stayres.


Here's a goodly tumult: I'll forswear keeping house, before I'll be in these
tirrits, and frights. So: Murder I warrant now. Alas, alas, put up your naked
Weapons, put up your naked Weapons.


I prithee Jack be quiet, the Rascal is gone: ah, you whoreson little valiant
Villain, you.


Are you not hurt in the Groyne? me thought he made a shrewd Thrust at your
Belly.


Have you turned him out of doors?


Yes Sir: the Rascall's drunk: you have hurt him (Sir) in the shoulder.


A Rascal to brave me.


Ah, you sweet little Rogue, you: alas, poor Ape, how thou sweat'st? Come, let
me wipe thy Face: Come on, you whoreson Chops: Ah Rogue, I love thee: Thou art
as valorous as Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better
then the nine Worthies: ah Villain.


A rascally Slave, I will toss the Rogue in a Blanket.


Do, if thou dare for thy heart: if thou dost,
I'll canvas thee between a pair of Sheets.

The Musique is come, Sir.


Let them play: play Sirs. Sit on my Knee, Dol. A Rascal, bragging Slave: the
Rogue fled from me like Quick-siluer.


And thou followd'st him like a Church: thou whoreson little tydie Bartholomew
Bore-pigge, when wilt thou leave fighting on days, and foyning on nights, and
begin to patch up thine old Body for Heaven?


Peace (good Dol) do not speak like a Deaths-head: do not bid me remember
mine end.


Sirrha, what humour is the Prince of?


A good shallow young fellow: he would have made a good Pantler, he would
have chipp'd Bread well.


They say Poines hath a good Wit.


He a good Wit? hang him Baboon, his Wit is as thick as Tewksburie Mustard:
there is no more conceit in him, ^hen is in a Mallet.


Why doth the Prince love him so then?


Because their Legs are both of a bigness: and he plays at Quoits well and
eats Conger and Fennel, and drinks off Candles ends for Flap-dragons, and
rides the wilde-Mare with the Boys, and iumpes upon Ioyn'd-stooles, and
swears with a good grace, and wears his Boot very smooth, like unto the Sign
of the Leg; and breeds no bate with telling of discreet stories: and such
other Gambol Faculties he hath, that show a weak Mind, and an able Body,
for the which the Prince admits him; for the Prince himself is such another:
the weight of an hair will turn the Scales between their Haber-de-pois.


Would not this Naue of a Wheel have his Ears cut off?


Let us beat him before his Whore.


Look, if the withered Elder hath not his Poll clawed like a Parrot.


Is it not strange, that Desire should so many years out-liue performance?


Kiss me Dol.


Saturne and Venus this year in Conjunction?
What says the Almanac to that?

And look whether the fiery Trigon, his Man, be not lisping to his Masters
old Tables, his Note-Booke, his Councell-keeper?


Thou dost give me flattering Busses.


Nay truly, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.


I am old, I am old.


I love thee better, then I love ere a scurvy young Boy of them all.


What Stuff wilt thou have a Kirtle of? I shall receive Money on Thursday:
thou shalt have a Cap to morrow. A merry Song, come: it grows late, we
will to Bed. Thou wilt forget me, when I am gone.


Thou wilt set me a weeping, if thou say so: prove that ever I dress my
self handsome, till thy return: well, hearken the end.


Some Sack, Francis.


Anon, anon, Sir.


Ha? a Bastard Son of the Kings? And art not thou Poines, his Brother?


Why thou Globe of sinful Continents, what a Life dost thou lead?


A better then thou: I am a Gentleman, thou art a Drawer.


Very true, Sir: and I come to draw you out by the Ears.


Oh, the Lord preserve thy good Grace: Welcome to London. Now Heaven bless
that sweet Face of thine: what, are you come from Wales?


Thou whoreson mad Compound of Majesty: by this light Flesh, and corrupt Blood,
thou art welcome.


How? you fat Fool, I scorn you.


My Lord, he will drive you out of your revenge, and turn all to a merriment,
if you take not the heat.


You whoreson Candle-myne you, how wildly did you speak of me even now, before
this honest, virtuous, civil Gentlewoman?


'Blessing on your good heart, and so she is by my troth.


Did thou hear me?


Yes: and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by Gads-hill: you knew I
was at your back, and spoke it on purpose, to try my patience.


No, no, no: not so: I did not think, thou wast within hearing.


I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and then I know how to
handle you.


No abuse (Hall) on mine Honour, no abuse.


Not to dispraise me? and call me Pantler, and Bread-chopper, and I know not
what?


No abuse (Hal.)


No abuse?


No abuse (Ned) in the World: honest Ned none. I disprays'd him before the
Wicked, that the Wicked might not fall in love with him: In which doing, I have
done the part of a careful Friend, and a true Subject, and thy Father is to
give me thanks for it. No abuse (Hal:) none (Ned) none; no Boys, none.


See now whether pure Fear, and entire Cowardice, doth not make thee wrong
this virtuous Gentlewoman, to close with us? Is she of the Wicked? Is thine
Hostess here, of the Wicked? Or is the Boy of the Wicked? Or honest Bardolph
(whose Zeal burns in his Nose) of the Wicked?


Answer thou dead Elm, answer.


The Fiend hath pricked down Bardolph irrecoverable, and his Face is Lucifers
Priuy-Kitchin, where he doth nothing but roast Mault-Wormes: for the Boy, there
is a good Angel about him, but the Devil outbids him too.


For the Women?


For one of them, she is in Hell already, and burns poor Souls: for the
other, I owe her Money; and whether she be damned for that, I know not.


No, I warrant you.


No, I think thou art not: I think thou art quit for that. Marry, there is
another Indictment upon thee, for suffering flesh to be eaten in thy house,
contrary to the Law, for the which I think thou wilt howl.


All Victuallers do so: What is a Joint of Mutton, or two, in a whole Lent?


You, Gentlewoman.


What says your Grace?


His Grace says that, which his flesh rebels against.


Who knocks so loud at door? Look to the door there, Francis?


Peto, how now? what news?


The King, your Father, is at Westminster,
And there are twenty weak and wearied Posts,
Come from the North: and as I came along,
I met, and ouer-tooke a dozen Captains,
Bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the Taverns,
And asking every one for Sir Iohn Falstaff.

By Heaven (Poines) I feel me much to blame,
So idly to profane the precious time,
When Tempest of Commotion, like the South,
Borne with black Vapour, doth begin to melt,
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads.
Give me my Sword, and Cloak:
Falstaff, good night.

Now comes in the sweetest Morsel of the night, and we must hence, and leave
it vnpickt. More knocking at the door? How now? what's the matter?


You must away to Court, Sir, presently,
A dozen Captains stay at door for you.

Pay the Musicians, Sirrha: farewell Hostess, farewell Dol. You see (my good
Wenches) how men of Merit are sought after: the vndeseruer may sleep, when the
man of Action is called on. Farewell good Wenches: if I be not sent away post,
I will see you again, ere I go.


I cannot speak: if my heart be not ready to burst -- Well (sweet Jack)
have a care of thy self.


Farewell, farewell.


Well, fare thee well: I have known thee these twenty nine years, come
Pescod-time: but an honester, and truer-hearted man -- Well, fare thee well.


Mistress Teare-sheet.


What's the matter?


Bid Mistress Teare-sheet come to my Master.


Oh run Dol, run: run, good Dol.


Go, call the Earles of Surrey, and of Warwick:
But ere they come, bid them ore-reade these Letters,
And well consider of them: make good speed.
How many thousand of my poorest Subjects
Are at this howre asleep? O Sleep, O gentle Sleep,
Natures soft Nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eye-lids down,
And steep my Senses in Forgetfulness?
Why rather (Sleep) lie thou in smokey Cribs,
Upon uneasy Pallads stretching thee,
And huisht with bussing Night, flies to thy slumber,
Then in the perfumed Chambers of the Great?
Under the Canopies of costly State,
And lulled with sounds of sweetest Melody?
O thou dull God, why lie thou with the wild,
In loathsome Beds, and leau'st the Kingly Couch,
A Watch-case, or a common Larum-Bell?
Wilt thou, upon the high and giddy Mast,
Seal up the Ship-boyes Eyes, and rock his Brains,
In Cradle of the rude imperious Surge,
And in the visitation of the Winds,
Who take the Ruffian Billows by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them
With deafening Clamours in the slippery Clouds,
That with the hurly, Death it self awakes?
Can thou (O partial Sleep) give thy Repose
To the wet Sea-Boy, in an hour so rude:
And in the calmest, and most stillest Night,
With all appliances, and means to boot,
Deny it to a King? Then happy Lowe, lye down,
Uneasy lies the Head, that wears a Crown.

Many good-morrowes to your Majesty.


Is it good-morrow, Lords?


'Tis One a Clock, and past.


Why then good-morrow to you all (my Lords:)
Have you read over the Letters that I sent you?

We have (my Liege.)


Then you perceive the Body of our Kingdom,
How foul it is: what rank Diseases grow,
And with what danger, near the Heart of it?

It is but as a Body, yet distempered,
Which to his former strength may be restored,
With good advice, and little Medicine:
My Lord Northumberland will soon be cooled.

Oh Heaven, that one might read the Book of Fate,
And see the revolution of the Times
Make Mountains level, and the Continent
(Weary of solide firmness) melt it self
Into the Sea: and other Times, to see
The beachy Girdle of the Ocean
Too wide for Neptunes hippes; how Chances mocks
And Changes fill the Cup of Alteration
With diverse Liquors. 'Tis not ten years gone,
Since Richard, and Northumberland, great friends,
Did feast together; and in two years after,
Were they at Wars. It is but eight years since,
This Percie was the man, nearest my Soul,
Who, like a Brother, toiled in my Affairs,
And laid his Love and Life under my foot:
Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard
Gave him defiance. But which of you was by
(You Cousin Neuil, as I may remember)
When Richard, with his Eye, brim-full of Tears,
(Then checked, and rated by Northumberland)
Did speak these words (now proved a Prophecy:)
Northumberland, thou Ladder, by the which
My Cousin Bullingbrooke ascends my Throne:
(Though then, Heaven knows, I had no such intent,
But that necessity so bowed the State,
That I and Greatness were compelled to kiss:)
The Time shall come (thus did he follow it)
The Time will come, that foul Sin gathering head,
Shall break into Corruption: so went on,
Fore-telling this same Times Condition,
And the division of our Amity.

There is a History in all men's Lives,
Figuring the nature of the Times deceased:
The which observed, a man may prophecy
With a near aim, of the maine chance of things,
As yet not come to Life, which in their Seeds
And weak beginnings lye entreasured:
Such things become the Hatch and Brood of Time;
And by the necessary form of this,
King Richard might create a perfect guess,
That great Northumberland, then false to him,
Would of that Seed, grow to a greater falseness,
Which should not find a ground to root upon,
Unless on you.

Are these things then Necessities?
Then let us meet them like Necessities;
And that same word, even now cries out on us:
They say, the Bishop and Northumberland
Are fifty thousand strong.

It cannot be (my Lord:)
Rumour doth double, like the Voice, and Echo,
The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace
To go to bed, upon my Life (my Lord)
The Powers that you already have sent forth,
Shall bring this Prize in very easily.
To comfort you the more, I have received
A certain instance, that Glendour is dead.
Your Majesty hath been this fort-night ill,
And these vnseason'd hours perforce must add
Unto your Sickness.

I will take your counsel:
And were these inward Wars once out of hand,
We would (dear Lords) unto the Holy-Land.

Come-on, come-on, come-on: give me your Hand, Sir; give me your Hand, Sir:
an early stirrer, by the Rood. And how doth my good Cousin Silence?


Good-morrow, good Cousin Shallow.


And how doth my Cousin, your Bed-fellow? and your fairest Daughter, and mine,
my God-Daughter Ellen?


Alas, a black Ouzell (Cousin Shallow.)


By yea and nay, Sir, I dare say my Cousin William is become a good Scholar?
he is at Oxford still, is he not?


Indeed Sir, to my cost.


He must then to the Innes of Court shortly: I was once of Clements Inn;
where (I think) they will talk of mad Shallow yet.


You were called lusty Shallow then (Cousin.)


I was called any thing: and I would have done any thing indeed too, and
roundly too. There was I, and little Iohn Do it of Staffordshire, and black
George Bare, and Francis Pick-bone, and Will Squele a Cot-sal-man, you had not
four such Swindge-bucklers in all the Innes of Court again: And I may say to
you, we knew where the Bona-Roba's were, and had the best of them all at
commandment. Then was Jack Falstaff (now Sir Iohn) a Boy, and Page to Thomas
Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke.


This Sir Iohn (Cousin) that comes hither anon about Soldiers?


The same Sir Iohn, the very same: I saw him break Scoggan's Head at the
Court-Gate, when he was a Crack, not thus high: and the very same day did I
fight with one Sampson Stock-fish, a Fruiterer, behind Greyes-Inne. Oh the mad
days that I have spent! and to see how many of mine old Acquaintance are
dead?


We shall all follow (Cousin.)


Certain: 'tis certain: very sure, very sure: Death is certain to all, all
shall dye. How a good Yoke of Bullocks at Stamford Fair?


Truly Cousin, I was not there.


Death is certain. Is old Double of your Town living yet?


Dead, Sir.


Dead? See, see: he drew a good Bow: and dead? he shot a fine shoot. Iohn of
Gaunt loved him well, and betted much Money on his head. Dead? he would have
clapped in the Clout at Twelue-score, and carried you a fore-hand Shaft at
fourteen, and fourteen and a half, that it would have done a mans heart
good to see. How a score of Ewes now?


Thereafter as they be: a score of good Ewes may be worth ten pounds.


And is old Double dead?


Here come two of Sir Iohn Falstaffes Men (as I think.)


Good-morrow, honest Gentlemen.


I beseech you, which is Justice Shallow?


I am Robert Shallow (Sir) a poor Esquire of this County, and one of the
Kings Justices of the Peace: What is your good pleasure with me?


My Captain (Sir) commends him to you: my Captain, Sir Iohn Falstaff: a tall
Gentleman, and a most gallant Leader.


He greetes me well: (Sir) I knew him a good Back-Sword-man. How doth the good
Knight? may I ask, how my Lady his Wife doth?


Sir, pardon: a Soldier is better accommodated, then with a Wife.


It is well said, Sir; and it is well said, indeed, too: Better accommodated?
it is good, yea indeed is it: good phrases are surely, and every where very
commendable. Accommodated, it comes of Accommodo: very good, a good Phrase.


Pardon, Sir, I have heard the word. Phrase call you it? by this Day, I know
not the Phrase: but I will maintain the Word with my Sword, to be a
Soldier-like Word, and a Word of exceeding good Command. Accommodated: that
is, when a man is (as they say) accommodated: or, when a man is, being whereby
he thought to be accommodated, which is an excellent thing.


It is very just: Look, here comes good Sir Iohn. Give me your hand, give me
your Worships good hand: Trust me, you look well: and bear your years very
well. Welcome, good Sir Iohn.


I am glad to see you well, good M. Robert Shallow: Master Sure-card as I
think?


No sir Iohn, it is my Cousin Silence: in Commission with me.


Good M. Silence, it well befits you should be of the peace.


Your good Worship is welcome.


Fie, this is hot weather (Gentlemen) have you provided me here half a dozen
of sufficient men?


Marry have we sir: Will you sit?


Let me see them, I beseech you.


Where's the Roll? Where's the Roll? Where's the Roll? Let me see, let me see,
let me see: so, so, so, so: yea marry Sir. Raphe Mouldy: let them appear as I
call: let them do so, let them do so: Let me see, Where is Mouldy?


Here, if it please you.


What think you (Sir Iohn) a good limbed fellow: young, strong, and of good
friends.


Is thy name Mouldy?


Yea, if it please you.


'Tis the more time thou were used.


Ha, ha, ha, most excellent. Things that are mouldy, lack use: very singular
good. Well said Sir Iohn, very well said.


Prick him.


I was pricked well enough before, if you could have let me alone: my old Dame
will be undone now, for one to do her Husbandry, and her Drudgery; you need
not to have pricked me, there are other men fitter to go out, then I.


Go too: peace Mouldy, you shall go. Mouldy, it is time you were spent.


Spent?


Peace, fellow, peace; stand aside: Know you where you are? For the other sir
Iohn: Let me see: Simon Shadow.


I marry, let me have him to sit under: he's like to be a cold soldier.


Where's Shadow?


Here sir.


Shadow, whose son art thou?


My Mothers son, Sir.


Thy Mothers son: like enough, and thy Fathers shadow: so the son of the
Female, is the shadow of the Male: it is often so indeed, but not of the
Fathers substance.


Do you like him, sir Iohn?


Shadow will serve for Summer: prick him: For we have a number of shadows to
fill up the Muster-Booke.


Thomas Wart?


Where's he?


Here sir.


Is thy name Wart?


Yea sir.


Thou art a very ragged Wart.


Shall I prick him down,
Sir Iohn?

It were superfluous: for his apparel is built upon his back, and the whole
frame stands upon pins: prick him no more.


Ha, ha, ha, you can do it sir: you can do it: I commend you well.


Here sir.


What Trade art thou Feeble?


A Woman's Taylor sir.


Shall I prick him, sir?


You may: But if he had been a mans Taylor, he would have pricked you. Wilt
thou make as many holes in an enemies Battle, as thou hast done in a Woman's
petticoat?


I will do my good will sir, you can have no more.


Well said, good Woman's Tailor: Well said Courageous Feeble: thou wilt be as
valiant as the wrathful Dove, or most magnanimous Mouse. Prick the woman's
Taylor well Master Shallow, deep Master Shallow.


I would Wart might have gone sir.


I would thou were a mans Tailor, that you might mend him, and make him fit
to go. I cannot put him to a private soldier, that is the Leader of so many
thousands. Let that suffice, most Forcible Feeble.


It shall suffice.


I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble. Who is the next?


Peter Bull calf of the Green.


Yea marry, let us see Bull calf.


Here sir.


Trust me, a likely Fellow. Come, prick me Bull calf till he roar again.


Oh, good my Lord Captain.


What? dost thou roar before the art pricked.


Oh sir, I am a diseased man.


What disease hast thou?


A whoreson cold sir, a cough sir, which I caught with Ringing in the Kings
affairs, upon his Coronation day, sir.


Come, thou shalt go to the Wars in a Gown: we will have away thy Cold, and
I will take such order, that thy friends shall ring for thee. Is here all?


There is two more called then your number: you must have but four here sir,
and so I pray you go in with me to dinner.


Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry dinner. I am glad to see
you in good troth, Master Shallow.


O sir Iohn, do you remember since we lay all night in the Winde-mill, in S
Georges Field.


No more of that good Master Shallow: No more of that.


Ha? it was a merry night. And is Iane Night-worke alive?


She lives, M. Shallow.


She never could away with me.


Never, never: she would always say she could not abide M. Shallow.


I could anger her to the heart: she was then a Bona-Roba. Doth she hold her
own well.


Old, old, M. Shallow.


Nay, she must be old, she cannot choose but be old: certain she's old: and
had Robin Night-worke, by old Night-worke, before I came to Clements Inn.


That's fifty five years ago.


Hah, Cousin Silence, that thou had seen that, that this Knight and I have
seen: hah, Sir Iohn, said I well?


We have heard the Chimes at mid-night, Master Shallow.


That we have, that we have; in faith, Sir Iohn, we have: our watch-word
was, Hem-Boyes. Come, let's to Dinner; come, let's to Dinner: Oh the days that
we have seen. Come, come.


Good Master Corporate Bardolph, stand my friend, and here is four Harry
ten shillings in French Crowns for you: in very truth, sir, I had as lief be
hanged sir, as go: and yet, for mine own part, sir, I do not care; but
rather, because I am unwilling, and for mine own part, have a desire to stay
with my friends: else, sir, I did not care, for mine own part, so much.


Go-too: stand aside.


And good Master Corporal Captain, for my old Dames sake, stand my friend:
she hath no body to do any thing about her, when I am gone: and she is old,
and cannot help her self: you shall have forty, sir.


Go-too: stand aside.


I care not, a man can die but once: we owe a death. I will never bear a base
mind: if it be my destiny, so: if it be not, so: no man is too good to serve
his Prince: and let it go which way it will, he that dies this year, is quit
for the next.


Well said, thou art a good fellow.


Nay, I will bear no base mind.


Come sir, which men shall I have?


Four of which you please.


Sir, a word with you: I have three pound, to free Mouldy and Bull calf.


Go-too: well.


Come, sir Iohn, which four will you have?


Do you choose for me.


Marry then, Mouldy, Bull calf, Feeble, and Shadow.


Mouldy, and Bull calf: for you Mouldy, stay at home, till you are past
service: and for your part, Bull calf, grow till you come unto it: I will none
of you.


Sir Iohn, Sir Iohn, do not your self wrong, they are your likeliest men, and
I would have you served with the best.


Will you tell me (Master Shallow) how to choose a man? Care I for the Limb,
the Thewes, the stature, bulk, and big assemblance of a man? give me the
spirit (Master Shallow.) Where's Wart? you see what a ragged appearance it is:
he shall charge you, and discharge you, with the motion of a Pewterers Hammer:
come off, and on, swifter then he that gibbets on the Brewers Bucket. And this
same halfe-fac'd fellow, Shadow, give me this man: he presents no mark to the
Enemy, the foe-man may with as great aim level at the edge of a Pen-knife:
and for a Retreat, how swiftly will this Feeble, the Woman's Taylor, run off.
O, give me the spare men, and spare me the great ones. Put me a Caliver into
Warts hand, Bardolph.


Hold Wart, Traverse: thus, thus, thus.


Come, manage me your Caliver: so* very well, go-too, very good, exceeding
good. O, give me always a little, lean, old, chopped, bald Shot. Well said
Wart, thou art a good Scab: hold, there is a Tester for thee.


He is not his Crafts-master, he doth not do it right. I remember at
Mile-end-Greene, when I lay at Clements Inn, I was then Sir Dagonet in Arthurs
Show: there was a little quiver fellow, and he would manage you his Piece
thus: and he would about, and about, and come you in, and come you in: Rah,
tah, tah, would he say, Bounce would he say, and away again would he go,
and again would he come: I shall never see such a fellow.


These fellows will do well, Master Shallow Farewell Master Silence, I will
not use many words with you: fare you well, Gentlemen both: I thank you: I
must a dozen mile to night. Bardolph, give the Soldiers Coats.


Sir Iohn, Heaven bless you, and prosper your Affairs, and send us Peace. As
you return, visit my house. Let our old acquaintance be renewed: peradventure
I will with you to the Court.


I would you would, Master Shallow.


Go-too: I have spoke at a word. Fare you well.


Fare you well, gentle Gentlemen. On Bardolph, lead the men away. As I
return, I will fetch off these Justices: I do see the bottom of Justice
Shallow. How subject we old men are to this vice of Lying? This same starved
Justice hath done nothing but prate to me of the wildenesse of his Youth, and
the Feats he hath done about Turnball-street, and every third word a Lye,
duer paid to the hearer, then the Turks Tribute. I do remember him at
Clements Inn, like a man made after Supper, of a Cheese-paring. When he was
naked, he was, for all the world, like a forked Radish, with a Head
fantastically carved upon it with a Knife. He was so forlorn, that his
Dimensions (to any thick sight) were invincible. He was the very Genius of
Famine: he came ever in the rere-ward of the Fashion: And now is this Vices
Dagger become a Squire, and talks as familiarly of Iohn of Gaunt, as if he
had been sworn Brother to him: and I'll be sworn he never saw him but once
in the Tilt-yard, and then he burst his Head, for crowding among the Marshals
men. I saw it, and told Iohn of Gaunt, he beat his own Name, for you might
have trussed him and all his Apparel into an Eele-skinne: the Case of a
Treble Hoe-boy was a Mansion for him: a Court: and now hath he Land, and
Beef. Well, I will be acquainted with him, if I return: and it shall go
hard, but I will make him a Philosophers two Stones to me. If the young Dace be
a Bait for the old Pike, I see no reason, in the Law of Nature, but I may snap
at him. Let time shape, and there an end.


What is this Forest called?


'Tis Gualtree Forest, and't shall please your Grace.


Here stand (my Lords) and send discoverers forth,
To know the numbers of our Enemies.

We have sent forth already.


'Tis well done.
My Friends, and Brethren (in these great Affairs)
I must acquaint you, that I have received
New-dated Letters from Northumberland:
Their cold intent, tenure, and substance thus.
Here doth he wish his Person, with such Powers
As might hold sortance with his Quality,
The which he could not levy: whereupon
He is retired, to ripe his growing Fortunes,
To Scotland; and concludes in hearty prayers,
That your Attempts may ouer-liue the hazard,
And fearful meeting of their Opposite.

Thus do the hopes we have in him, touch ground,
And dash themselves to pieces.

Now? what news?


West of this Forest, scarcely off a mile,
In goodly form, comes on the Enemy:
And by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon, or near, the rate of thirty thousand.

The just proportion that we gave them out.
Let us sway-on, and face them in the field.

What well-appointed Leader fronts us here?


I think it is my Lord of Westmerland.


Health, and fair greeting from our General,
The Prince, Lord Iohn, and Duke of Lancaster.

Say on (my Lord of Westmerland) in peace:
What doth concern your coming?

Then (my Lord)
Unto your Grace do I in chief address
The substance of my Speech. If that Rebellion
Came like it self, in base and abject Routs,
Led on by bloody Youth, guarded with Rage,
And countenanced by Boys, and Beggary:
I say, if damned Commotion so appear,
In his true, native, and most proper shape,
You (Reverend Father, and these Noble Lords)
Had not been here, to dress the ugly form
Of base, and bloody Insurrection,
With your fair Honours. You, Lord Arch-bishop,
Whose Sea is by a Civil Peace maintained,
Whose Beard, the Silver Hand of Peace hath touched,
Whose Learning, and good Letters, Peace hath tutored,
Whose white Inuestments figure Innocence,
The Dove, and very blessed Spirit of Peace.
Wherefore do you so ill translate your self,
Out of the Speech of Peace, that bears such grace,
Into the harsh and boisterous Tongue of War?
Turning your Books to Graves, your Ink to Blood,
Your Pens to Lances, and your Tongue divine
To a loud Trumpet, and a Point of War.

Wherefore do I this? so the Question stands.
Briefly to this end: We are all diseased,
And with our surfeiting, and wanton hours,
Have brought our selves into a burning Fever,
And we must bleed for it: of which Disease,
Our late King Richard (being infected) died.
But (my most Noble Lord of Westmerland)
I take not on me here as a Physician,
Nor do I, as an Enemy to Peace,
Troop in the Throngs of Military men:
But rather show a while like fearful War,
To diet rank Minds, sick of happiness,
And purge the obstructions, which begin to stop
Our very Veins of Life: hear me more plainly.
I have in equal balance justly weighed,
What wrongs our Arms may do, what wrongs we suffer,
And find our Griefs heavier then our Offences.
We see which way the stream of Time doth run,
And are enforced from our most quiet there,
By the rough Torrent of Occasion,
And have the summary of all our Griefs
(When time shall serve) to show in Articles;
Which long ere this, we offered to the King,
And might, by no Suit, gain our Audience:
When we are wronged, and would unfold our Griefs,
We are denied access unto his Person,
Even by those men, that most have done us wrong.
The dangers of the days but newly gone,
Whose memory is written on the Earth
With yet appearing blood; and the examples
Of every Minutes instance (present now)
Hath put us in these ill-beseeming Arms:
Not to break Peace, or any Branch of it,
But to establish here a Peace indeed,
Concurring both in Name and Quality.

When ever yet was your Appeal denied?
Wherein have you been galled by the King?
What Peer hath been suborned, to grate on you,
That you should seal this lawless bloody Book
Of forged Rebellion, with a Seal divine?

My Brother general, the Common-wealth,
I make my Quarrel, in particular.

There is no need of any such redress:
Or if there were, it not belongs to you.

Why not to him in part, and to us all,
That feel the bruises of the days before,
And suffer the Condition of these Times
To lay a heavy and unequal Hand upon our Honours?

O my good Lord Mowbray,
Construe the Times to their Necessities,
And you shall say (indeed) it is the Time,
And not the King, that doth you injuries.
Yet for your part, it not appears to me,
Either from the King, or in the present Time,
That you should have an inch of any ground
To build a Grief on: were you not restored
To all the Duke of Norfolkes Seignories,
Your Noble, and right well-remembred Fathers?

What thing, in Honour, had my Father lost,
That need to be reuiu'd, and breathed in me?
The King that loved him, as the State stood then,
Was forced, perforce compelled to banish him:
And then, that Henry Bullingbrooke and he
Being mounted, and both roused in their Seats,
Their neighing Coursers daring of the Spur,
Their armed Staves in charge, their Beavers down,
Their eyes of fire, sparkling through sights of Steel,
And the loud Trumpet blowing them together:
Then, then, when there was nothing could have stayed
My Father from the Breast of Bullingbrooke;
O, when the King did throw his Warder down,
(His own Life hung upon the Staff he threw)
Then threw he down himself, and all their Lives,
That by Indictment, and by dint of Sword,
Have since mis-carryed under Bullingbrooke.

You speak (Lord Mowbray) now you know not what.
The Earl of Hereford was reputed then
In England the most valiant Gentleman.
Who knows, on whom Fortune would then have smiled?
But if your Father had been Victor there,
He ne'er had borne it out of Coventry.
For all the Country, in a general voice,
Cried hate upon him: and all their prayers, and love,
Were set on Herford, whom they doted on,
And blessed, and graced, and did more then the King.
But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our Princely General,
To know your Griefs; to tell you, from his Grace,
That he will give you Audience: and wherein
It shall appear, that your demands are just,
You shall enjoy them, every thing set off,
That might so much as think you Enemies.

But he hath forced us to compel this Offer,
And it proceeds from Policy, not Love.

Mowbray, you ouer-weene to take it so:
This Offer comes from Mercy, not from Fear.
For lo, within a Ken our Army lies,
Upon mine Honour, all too confident
To give admittance to a thought of fear.
Our Battle is more full of Names then yours,
Our Men more perfect in the use of Arms,
Our Armour all as strong, our Cause the best;
Then Reason will, our hearts should be as good.
Say you not then, our Offer is compelled.

Well, by my will, we shall admit no Parley.


That argues but the shame of your offence:
A rotten Case abides no handling.

Hath the Prince Iohn a full Commission,
In very ample virtue of his Father,
To hear, and absolutely to determine
Of what Conditions we shall stand upon?

That is intended in the Generals Name:
I muse you make so slight a Question.

Then take (my Lord of Westmerland) this Schedule,
For this contains our general Grievances:
Each several Article herein redressed,
All members of our Cause, both here, and hence,
That are insinewed to this Action,
Acquitted by a true substantial form,
And present execution of our wills,
To us, and to our purposes confined,
We come within our awful Banks again,
And knit our Powers to the Arm of Peace.

This will I show the General. Please you Lords,
In sight of both our Battles, we may meet
At either end in peace: which Heaven so frame,
Or to the place of difference call the Swords,
Which must decide it.

My Lord, we will do so.


There is a thing within my Bosom tells me,
That no Conditions of our Peace can stand.

Fear you not, that if we can make our Peace
Upon such large terms, and so absolute,
As our Conditions shall consist upon,
Our Peace shall stand as firm as Rocky Mountains.

I, but our valuation shall be such,
That every slight, and false-deriued Cause,
Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton Reason,
Shall, to the King, taste of this Action:
That were our Royal faiths, Martyrs in Love,
We shall be winnowed with so rough a wind,
That even our Corn shall seem as light as Chafe,
And good from bad find no partition.

No, no (my Lord) note this: the King is weary
Of dainty and such picking Grievances:
For he hath found, to end one doubt by Death,
Revives two greater in the Heirs of Life.
And therefore will he wipe his Tables clean,
And keep no Tell-tale to his Memory,
That may repeat, and History his loss,
To new remembrance. For full well he knows,
He cannot so precisely weed this Land,
As his mis-doubts present occasion:
His foes are so en-rooted with his friends,
That plucking to vnfixe an Enemy,
He doth unfasten so, and shake a friend.
So that this Land, like an offensive wife,
That hath enraged him on, to offer strokes,
As he is striking, holds his Infant up,
And hangs resolved Correction in the Arm,
That was vprear'd to execution.

Besides, the King hath wasted all his Rods,
On late Offenders, that he now doth lack
The very Instruments of Chastisement:
So that his power, like to a Fanglesse Lion
May offer, but not hold.

'Tis very true:
And therefore be assured (my good Lord Marshal)
If we do now make our atonement well,
Our Peace, will (like a broken Limb united)
Grow stronger, for the breaking.

Be it so:
Here is returned my Lord of Westmerland.

The Prince is here at hand: pleases your Lordship
To meet his Grace, just distance 'tweene our Armies?

Your Grace of York, in heauen's name then forward.


Before, and greet his Grace (my Lord) we come.


You are well encountered here (my cousin Mowbray)
Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop,
And so to you Lord Hastings, and to all.
My Lord of York, it better showed with you,
When that your Flock (assembled by the Bell)
Encircled you, to hear with reverence
Your exposition on the holy Text,
Then now to see you here an Iron man
Cheering a rowt of Rebels with your Drum,
Turning the Word, to Sword; and Life to death:
That man that sits within a Monarchs heart,
And ripens in the Sunne-shine of his favour,
Would he abuse the Countenance of the King,
Alack, what Mischiefs might he set abroach,
In shadow of such Greatness? With you, Lord Bishop,
It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken.
How deep you were within the Books of Heaven?
To us, the Speaker in his Parliament;
To us, the imagine Voice of Heaven it self:
The very Opener, and Intelligencer,
Between the Grace, the Sanctities of Heaven,
And our dull workings. O, who shall believe,
But you mis-vse the reverence of your Place,
Employ the Countenance, and Grace of Heaven,
As a false Favourite doth his Princes Name,
In deeds dishonourable? You have taken up,
Under the counterfeited Zeal of Heaven,
The Subjects of Heavens Substitute, my Father,
And both against the Peace of Heaven, and him,
Have here vp-swarmed them.

Good my Lord of Lancaster,
I am not here against your Fathers Peace:
But (as I told my Lord of Westmerland)
The Time (mis-order'd) doth in common sense
Crowd us, and crush us, to this monstrous Form,
To hold our safety up. I sent your Grace
The parcels, and particulars of our Grief,
The which hath been with scorn should from the Court:
Whereon this Hydra-Sonne of War is borne,
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep,
With grant of our most just and right desires;
And true Obedience, of this Madness cured,
Stoop tamely to the foot of Majesty.

If not, we ready are to try our fortunes,
To the last man.

And though we here fall down,
We have Supplies, to second our Attempt:
If they mis-carry, theirs shall second them.
And so, success of Mischief shall be borne,
And Heir from Heir shall hold this Quarrel up,
Whiles England shall have generation.

You are too shallow (Hastings)
Much too shallow,
To sound the bottom of the after-Times.

Pleases your Grace, to answer them directly,
How farre-forth you do like their Articles.

I like them all, and do allow them well:
And swear here, by the honour of my blood,
My Fathers purposes have been mistook,
And some, about him, have too lavishly
Wrested his meaning, and Authority.
My Lord, these Griefs shall be with speed redressed:
Upon my Life, they shall. If this may please you,
Discharge your Powers unto their several Counties,
As we will ours: and here, between the Armies,
Let's drink together friendly, and embrace,
That all their eyes may bear those Tokens home,
Of our restored Love, and Amity.

I take your Princely word, for these redresses.


I give it you, and will maintain my word:
And thereupon I drink unto your Grace.

Go Captain, and deliver to the Army
This news of Peace: let them have pay, and part:
I know, it will well please them.
High thee Captain.

To you* my Noble Lord of Westmerland.


I pledge your Grace:
And if you knew what pains I have bestowed,
To breed this present Peace,
You would drink freely: but my love to ye,
Shall show it self more openly hereafter.

I do not doubt you.


I am glad of it.
Health to my Lord, and gentle Cousin Mowbray.

You wish me health in very happy season,
For I am, on the sudden, something ill.

Against ill Chances, men are ever merry,
But heaviness fore-runnes the good event.

Therefore be merry (Cousin) since sudden sorrow
Serves to say thus: some good thing comes to morrow.

Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.


So much the worse, if your own Rule be true.


The word of Peace is rendered: hark how they shout.


This had been cheerful, after Victory.


A Peace is of the nature of a Conquest:
For then both parties nobly are subdued,
And neither party looser.

Go (my Lord)
And let our Army be discharged too:
And good my Lord (so please you) let our Trains
March by us, that we may peruse the men
We should have coap'd withal.

Go, good Lord Hastings:
And ere they be dismissed, let them march by.

I trust (Lords) we shall lye to night together.
Now Cousin, wherefore stands our Army still?

The Leaders having charge from you to stand,
Will not go off, until they hear you speak.

They know their duties.


Our Army is dispersed:
Like youthful Steers, vnyoak'd, they took their course
East, West, North, South: or like a School, broke up,
Each hurryes towards his home, and sporting place.

Good tidings (my Lord Hastings) for the which,
I do arrest thee (Traitor) of high Treason:
And you Lord Arch-bishop, and you Lord Mowbray,
Of Capital Treason, I attach you both.

Is this proceeding just, and honourable?


Is your Assembly so?


Will you thus break your faith?


I pawned thee none:
I promised you redress of these same Grievances
Whereof you did complain; which, by mine Honour,
I will perform, with a most Christian care.
But for you (Rebels) look to taste the due
Meet for Rebellion, and such Acts as yours.
Most shallowly did you these Arms commence,
Fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence.
Strike up our Drums, pursue the scattered stray,
Heaven, and not we, have safely fought to day.
Some guard these Traitors to the Block of Death,
Treasons true Bed, and yeelder up of breath.

What's your Name, Sir? of what Condition are you? and of what place, I pray?


I am a Knight, Sir:
And my Name is Colleuile of the Dale.

Well then, Colleuile is your Name, a Knight is your Degree, and your Place,
the Dale. Colleuile shall still be your Name, a Traitor your Degree, and the
Dungeon your Place, a place deep enough: so shall you be still Colleuile of
the Dale.


Are not you Sir Iohn Falstaff?


As good a man as he sir, who ere I am: do ye yield sir, or shall I sweat
for you? if I do sweat, they are the drops of thy Lovers, and they weep for
thy death, therefore rowze up Fear and Trembling, and do observance to my
mercy.


I think you are Sir Iohn Falstaff, in that thought yield me.


I have a whole School of tongues in this belly of mine, and not a Tongue of
them all, speaks any other word but my name: and I had but a belly of any
indifferency, I were simply the most active fellow in Europe: my womb, my
womb, my womb undoes me. Here comes our General.


The hea^ is past, follow no farther now:
Call in the Powers good Cousin Westmerland.
Now Fal^taffe, where have you been all this while?
When every thing is ended, then you come.
These tardy Tricks of yours will (on my life)
One time, or other, break some Gallows back.

I would be sorry (my Lord) but it should be thus: I never knew yet, but
rebuke and check was the reward of Valour. Do you think me a Swallow, an
Arrow, or a Bullet? Have I, in my poor and old Motion, the expedition of
Thought? I have speeded hither with the very extremest inch of possibility. I
have fowndred nine score and odd Posts: and here (trauell-tainted as I am)
have, in my pure and immaculate Valour, taken Sir Iohn Colleuile of the Dale, a
most furious Knight, and valorous Enemy: But what of that? he saw me, and
yielded: that I may justly say with the hooke-nos'd fellow of Rome, I came,
saw, and ouer-came.


It was more of his Courtesy, then your deserving.


I know not: here he is, and here I yield him: and I beseech your Grace, let
it be booked, with the rest of this days deeds; or I swear, I will have it
in a particular Ballad, with mine own Picture on the top of it ( Colleuile
kissing my foot:) To the which course, if I be enforced, if you do not all show
like gilt two-pences to me; and I, in the clear Sky of Fame, o're-shine you
as much as the Full Moon doth the Cinders of the Element (which show like
Pinnes-heads to her) believe not the Word of the Noble: therefore let me have
right, and let desert mount.


Thine's too heavy to mount.


Let it thine then.


Thine's too thick to shine.


Let it do something (my good Lord) that may do me good, and call it what you
will.


Is thy Name Colleuile?


It is (my Lord.)


A famous Rebel art thou, Colleuile.


And a famous true Subject took him.


I am (my Lord) but as my Betters are,
That led me hither: had they been ruled by me,
You should have won them dearer then you have.

I know not how they sold themselves, but thou like a kind fellow, gau'st thy
self away; and I thank thee, for thee.


Have you left pursuit?


Retreat is made, and Execution stayed.


Send Colleuile, with his Confederates,
To York, to present Execution.
Blunt, lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.
And now dispatch we toward the Court (my Lords)
I hear the King, my Father, is sore sick.
Our News shall go before us, to his Majesty,
Which (Cousin) you shall bear, to comfort him:
And we with sober speed will follow you.

My Lord, I beseech you, give me leave to go through Gloucestershire: and when
you come to Court, stand my good Lord, 'pray, in your good report.


Fare you well, Falstaff: I, in my condition,
Shall better speak of you, then you deserve.

I would you had but the wit: 'twere better then your Dukedom. Good faith,
this same young sober-blooded Boy doth no^ love me, nor a man cannot make him
laugh: but that's no marvel, he drinks no Wine. There's never any of these
demure Boys come to any proof: for thin Drink doth so ouer-coole their
blood, and making many Fish-Meales, that they fall into a kind of Male
Greene-sicknesse: and then, when they marry, they get Wenches. They are
generally Fools, and Cowards; which some of us should be too, but for
inflammation. A good Sherris-Sack hath a two-fold operation in it: it ascends me
into the Brain, dries me there all the foolish, and dull, and cruddie Vapours,
which environ it: makes it apprehensive, quick, forgetiue, full of nimble,
fiery, and delectable shapes; which delivered over to the Voice, the Tongue,
which is the Birth, becomes excellent Wit. The second property of your
excellent Sherris, is, the warming of the Blood: which before (cold, and
settled) left the Liver white, and pale; which is the Badge of Pusillanimity,
and Cowardice: but the Sherris warmes it, and makes it course from the inwards,
to the parts extremes: it illuminateth the Face, which (as a Beacon) gives
warning to all the rest of this little Kingdom (Man) to Arm: and then the
Vital Commoners, and in-land petty Spirits, muster me all to their Captain,
the Heart; who great, and puffed up with his Retinue, doth any Deed of Courage:
and this Valour comes of Sherris. So, that skill in the Weapon is nothing,
without Sack (for that sets it a-worke:) and Learning, a mere Hoard of Gold,
kept by a Devil, till Sack commences it, and sets it in act, and use. Hereof
comes it, that Prince Harry is valiant: for the cold blood he did naturally
inherit of his Father, he hath, like lean, stirrill, and bare Land, manured,
husbanded, and tyll'd, with excellent endeavour of drinking good, and good
store of fertile Sherris, that he is become very hot, and valiant. If I had a
thousand Sons, the first Principle I would teach them, should be to forswear
thin Potations, and to addict themselves to Sack.

How now Bardolph?


The Army is discharged all, and gone.


Let them go: I'll through Gloucestershire, and there will I visit Master
Robert Shallow, Esquire: I have him already tempering between my finger and
my thombe, and shortly will I seal with him. Come away.


Now Lords, if Heaven doth give successful end
To this Debate that bleeds at our doors,
We will out Youth lead on to higher Fields,
And draw no Swords, but what are sanctified.
Our Navy is addressed, our Power collected,
Our Substitutes, in absence, well invested,
And every thing lies level to our wish;
Only we want a little personal Strength:
And pause us, till these Rebels, now afoot,
Come underneath the yoke of Government.

Both which we doubt not, but your Majesty
Shall soon enjoy.

Humphrey (my Son of Gloucester) where is the Prince, your Brother?


I think he's gone to hunt (my Lord) at Windsor.


And how accompanied?


I do not know (my Lord.)


Is not his Brother, Thomas of Clarence, with him?


No (my good Lord) he is in presence here.


What would my Lord, and Father?


Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.
How chance thou art not with the Prince, thy Brother?
He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him (Thomas.)
Thou hast a better place in his Affection,
Then all thy Brothers: cherish it (my Boy)
And Noble Offices thou may effect
Of Mediation (after I am dead)
Between his Greatness, and thy other Brethren.
Therefore omit him not: blunt not his Love,
Nor loose the good advantage of his Grace,
By seeming cold, or careless of his will.
For he is gracious, if he be observed:
He hath a Tear for Pity, and a Hand
Open (as Day) for melting Charity:
Yet notwithstanding, being incensed, he's Flint,
As humorous as Winter, and as sudden,
As Flaws congealed in the Spring of day.
His temper therefore must be well observed:
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
When you perceive his blood inclined to mirth:
But being moody, give him Line, and scope,
Till that his passions (like a Whale on ground)
Confound themselves with working. Learn this Thomas,
And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
A Hoop of Gold, to bind thy Brothers in:
That the united Vessel of their Blood
(Mingled with Venom of Suggestion,
As force, perforce, the Age will power it in)
Shall never leake, though it do work as strong
As Aconitum, or rash Gun-powder.

I shall observe him with all care, and love.


Why art thou not at Windsor with him (Thomas?)


He is not there to day: he dines in London.


And how accompanied? Can thou tell that?


With Pointz, and other his continual followers.


Most subject is the fattest Soil to Weeds:
And he (the Noble Image of my Youth)
Is ouer-spread with them: therefore my grief
Stretches it self beyond the howre of death.
The blood weeps from my heart, when I do shape
(In forms imaginary) the unguided Days,
And rotten Times, that you shall look upon,
When I am sleeping with my Ancestors.
For when his head-strong Riot hath no Curb,
When Rage and hot-Blood are his Counsailors,
When Means and lavish Manners meet together;
Oh, with what Wings shall his Affections fly
Towards fronting Peril, and opposed Decay?

My gracious Lord, you look beyond him quite:
The Prince but studies his Companions,
Like a strange Tongue: wherein, to gain the Language,
'Tis needful, that the most immodest word
Be looked upon, and learned: which once attayn'd,
Your Highness knows, comes to no farther use,
But to be known, and hated. So, like gross terms,
The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,
Cast off his followers: and their memory
Shall as a Pattern, or a Measure, live,
By which his Grace must mere the lives of others,
Turning past-euills to advantages.

'Tis seldom, when the Be doth leave her Comb
In the dead Carrion.
Who's here? Westmerland?

Health to my Sovereign, and new happiness
Added to that, that I am to deliver.
Prince Iohn, your Son, doth kiss your Graces Hand:
Mowbray, the Bishop, Scroope, Hastings, and all,
Are brought to the Correction of your Law.
There is not now a Rebels Sword vnsheath'd,
But Peace puts forth her Olive every where:
The manner how this Action hath been borne,
Here (at more leisure) may your Highness read,
With every course, in his particular.

O Westmerland, thou art a Summer Bird*
Which ever in the haunch of Winter sings
The lifting up of day.
Look, here's more news.

From Enemies, Heaven keep your Majesty:
And when they stand against you, may they fall,
As those that I am come to tell you of.
The Earl Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolf,
With a great Power of English, and of Scots,
Are by the Sheriff of Yorkshire overthrown:
The manner, and true order of the fight,
This Packet (please it you) contains at large.

And wherefore should these good news
Make me sick?
Will Fortune never come with both hands full,
But write her fair words still in foulest Letters?
She either gives a Stomach, and no Food,
(Such are the poor, in health) or else a Feast,
And takes away the Stomach (such are the Rich,
That have abundance, and enjoy it not.)
I should rejoice now, at this happy news,
And now my Sight fails, and my Brain is giddy.
O me, come near me, now I am much ill.

Comfort your Majesty.


Oh, my Royal Father.


My Sovereign Lord, cheer up your self, look up.


Be patient (Princes) you do know, these Fits
Are with his Highness very ordinary*
Stand from him, give him air:
Hee'le straight be well.

No, no, he cannot long hold out: these pangs,
The incessant care, and labour of his Mind,
Hath wrought the Mure, that should confine it in,
So thin, that Life looks through, and will break out.

The people fear me: for they do observe
Vnfather'd Heirs, and loathly Births of Nature:
The Seasons change their manners, as the Year
Had found some Months asleep, and leaped them over.

The River hath thrice flowed, no ebb between:
And the old folk (Times doting Chronicles)
Say it did so, a little time before
That our great Grand-fire Edward sick'd, and dyed.

Speak lower (Princes) for the King recovers.


This Apoplexy will (certain) be his end.


I pray you take me up, and bear me hence
Into some other Chamber: softly 'pray.
Let there be no noise made (my gentle friends)
Unless some dull and favourable hand
Will whisper Music to my weary Spirit.

Ca^ for the Music in the other Room.


Set me the Crown upon my Pillow here.


His eye is hollow, and he changes much.


Less noise, less noise.


Who saw the Duke of Clarence?


I am here (Brother) full of heaviness.


How now? Rain within doors, and none abroad? How doth the King?


Exceeding ill.


Heard he the good news yet?
Tell it him.

He altered much, upon the hearing it.


If he be sick with Joy,
Hee'le recover without Physic.

Not so much noise (my Lords)
Sweet Prince speak lowe.
The King, your Father, is disposed to sleep.

Let us with-draw into the other Room.


Will it please your Grace to go along with us?


No: I will sit, and watch here, by the King.
Why doth the Crown lye there, upon his Pillow,
Being so troublesome a Bed-fellow?
O polished Perturbation! Golden Care!
That keep the Ports of Slumber open wide,
To many a watchful Night: sleep with it now,
Yet not so sound, and halt so deeply sweet,
As he whose Brow (with homely Biggen bound)
Snores out the Watch of Night. O Majesty!
When thou dost pinch thy Bearer, thou dost sit
Like a rich Armour, worn in heat of day,
That scald with safety: by his Gates of breath,
There lies a dowlney feather, which stirs not:
Did he suspit^, that light and weightlesse dowlne
Perforce must move. My gracious Lord, my Father,
This sleep is sound indeed: this is a sleep,
That from this Golden Rigoll hath diuorc'd
So many English Kings. Thy due, from me,
Is Teare^, and heavy Sorrows of the Blood,
Which Nature, Love, and filial tenderness,
Shall (O dear Father) pay thee plenteously.
My due, from thee, is this Imperial Crown,
Which (as immediate from thy Place, and Blood)
Derives it self to me. Lo, here it sits,
Which Heaven shall guard:
And put the worlds whole strength into one giant Arm,
It shall not force this Lineal Honour from me.
This from thee, will I to mine leave,
As 'tis left to me.

Warwicke, Gloucester, Clarence.


Doth the King call?


What would your Majesty? how fares your Grace?


Why did you leave me here alone (my Lords?)


We left the Prince (my Brother) here (my Liege)
Who undertook to sit and watch by you.

The Prince of Wales? where is he? let me see him.


This door is open, he is gone this way.


He came not through the Chamber where we stayed.


Where is the Crown? who took it from my Pillow?


When we with-drew (my Liege) we left it here.


The Prince hath taken it hence:
Go seek him out.
Is he so hasty, that he doth suppose
My sleep, my death? Find him (my Lord of Warwick)
Chide him hither: this part of his conjoins
With my disease, and helps to end me.
See Sons, what things you are:
How quickly Nature falls into revolt,
When Gold becomes her Object?
For this, the foolish ouer-carefull Fathers
Have broke their sleeps with thoughts,
Their brains with care, their bones with industry.
For this, they have engrossed and pyl'd up
The cankered heaps of strange-atchieued Gold:
For this, they have been thoughtful, to invest
Their Sons with Arts, and Martial Exercises:
When, like the Be, culling from every flower
The virtuous Sweets, our Thighs packed, with Wax,
Our Mouths with Honey, we bring it to the Hive;
And like the Bees, are murdered for our pains.
This bitter taste yields his engrossements,
To the ending Father.
Now, where is he, that will not stay so long,
Till his Friend Sickness hath determined me?

My Lord, I found the Prince in the next Room,
Washing with kindly Tears his gentle Cheeks,
With such a deep demeanour, in great sorrow,
That Tyranny, which never quafft but blood,
Would (by beholding him) have washed his Knife
With gentle eye-drops. He is coming hither.

But wherefore did he take away the Crown?
Lo, where he comes. Come hither to me (Harry.)
Depart the Chamber, leave us here alone.

I never thought to hear you speak again.


Thy wish was Father (Harry) to that thought:
I stay too long by thee, I weary thee.
Dost thou so hunger for my empty Chair,
That thou wilt needs invest thee with mine Honours,
Before thy howre be ripe? O foolish Youth!
Thou seek the Greatness, that will ouer-whelme thee.
Stay but a little: for my Cloud of Dignity
Is held from falling, with so weak a wind,
That it will quickly drop: my Day is dim.
Thou hast stolen that, which after some few hours
Were thine, without offence: and at my death
Thou hast sealed up my expectation.
Thy Life did manifest, thou lou'dst me not,
And thou wilt have me dye assured of it.
Thou hid'st a thousand Daggers in thy thoughts,
Which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart,
To stab at half an howre of my Life.
What? can thou not forbear me half an howre?
Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thy self,
And bid the merry Bells ring to thy care
That thou art Crowned, not that I am dead.
Let all the Tears, that should be dew my Hearse
Be drops of Balm, to sanctify thy head:
Only compound me with forgotten dust.
Give that, which gave thee life, unto the Worms:
Pluck down my Officers, break my Decrees;
For now a time is come, to mock at Form.
Henry the fifth is Crowned: Up Vanity,
Down Royal State: All you sage Counsailors, hence:
And to the English Court, assemble now
From every Region, Apes of Idleness.
Now neighbor-Confines, purge you of your Scum:
Have you a Ruffian that swill swear? drink? dance?
Revel the night? Rob? Murder? and commit
The oldest sins, the newest kind of ways?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more:
England, shall double gill'd, His treble guilt.
England, shall give him Office, Honour, Might:
For the Fifth Harry, from curbed License plucks
The muzzle of Restraint; and the wild Dog
Shall flesh his tooth in every Innocent.
O my poor Kingdom (sick, with civil blows)
When that my Care could not with-hold thy Riots,
What wilt thou do, when Riot is thy Care?
O, thou wilt be a Wilderness again,
Peopled with Wolves (thy old Inhabitants.

O pardon me (my Liege)
But for my Tears,
The most Impediments unto my Speech,
I had fore-stall'd this dear, and deep Rebuke,
Ere you (with grief) had spoke, and I had heard
The course of it so far. There is your Crown,
And he that wears the Crown immortally,
Long guard it yours. If I affect it more,
Then as your Honour, and as your Renown,
Let me no more from this Obedience rise,
Which my most true, and inward duteous Spirit
Teaches this prostrate, and exterior bending.
Heaven witness with me, when I here came in,
And found no course of breath within your Majesty,
How cold it struck my heart. If I do fain,
O let me, in my present wildenesse, dye,
And never live, to show the incredulous World,
The Noble change that I have purposed.
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
(And dead almost (my Liege) to think you were)
I spake unto the Crown (as having sense)
And thus upbraided it. The Care on thee depending,
Hath fed upon the body of my Father,
Therefore, thou best of Gold, art worst of Gold.
Other, less fine in Char^act, is more precious,
Preserving life, in Med^cine potable:
But thou, most Fine, most Honoured, most Renowned,
Hast eat the Bearer up.
Thus (my Royal Liege)
Accusing it, I put it on my Head,
To try with it (as with an Enemy,
That had before my face murdered my Father)
The Quarrel of a true Inheritor.
But if it did infect my blood with Joy,
Or swell my Thoughts, to any strain of Pride,
If any Rebel, or vain spirit of mine,
Did, with the least Affection of a Welcome,
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let heaven, for ever, keep it from my head,
And make me, as the poorest Vassal is,
That doth with awe, and terror kneel to it.

O my Son!
Heaven put it in thy mind to take it hence,
That thou might join the more, thy Fathers love,
Pleading so wisely, in excuse of it.
Come hither Harrie, sit thou by my bed,
And hear (I think, the very latest Counsel
That ever I shall breath: Heaven knows, my Son)
By what by-pathes, and indirect crook'd-wayes
I met this Crown: and I my self know well
How troublesome it sate upon my head.
To thee, it shall descend with better Quiet,
Better Opinion, better Confirmation:
For all the soil of the Achievement goes
With me, into the Earth. It seemed in me,
But as an Honour snatched with boisterous hand,
And I had many living, to upbraid
My gain of it, by their Assistances,
Which daily grew to Quarrel, and to Blood-shed,
Wounding supposed Peace.
All these bold Fears,
Thou see (with peril) I have answered:
For all my Reign, hath been but as a Scene
Acting that argument. And now my death
Changes the Mood: For what in me, was purchased,
Falls upon thee, in a more Fairer sort.
So thou, the Garland wear successively.
Yet, though thou stand more sure, then I could do,
Thou art-not firm enough, since griefs are green:
And all thy Friends, which thou must make thy Friends
Have but their stings, and teeth, newly tak'n out,
By whose fell working, I was first advanced,
And by whose power, I well might lodge a Fear
To be again displaced. Which to avoid,
I cut them off: and had a purpose now
To lead out many to the Holy Land;
Least rest, and lying still, might make them look
Too near unto my State.
Therefore (my Harrie)
Be it thy course to busy giddy Minds
With Foreign Quarrels: that Action hence borne out,
May waste the memory of the former days.
More would I, but my Lungs are wasted so,
That strength of Speech is utterly denied me.
How I came by the Crown, O heaven forgive:
And grant it may, with thee, in true peace live.

My gracious Liege:
You won it, wore it: kept it, gave it me,
Then plain and right must my possession be;
Which I, with more, then with a Common pain,
Against all the World, will rightfully maintain.

Look, look,
Here comes my Iohn of Lancaster:

Health, Peace, and Happiness,
To my Royal Father.

Thou bring me happiness and Peace (Son Iohn:
But health (alack) with youthful wings is flown
From this bare; withered Trunk, Upon thy sight
My worldly business makes a period.

Where is my Lord of Warwicke?

My Lord of Warwicke.


Doth any name particular, belong (...) ^he Lodging, where I first did swooned?


'Tis called Jerusalem, my Noble Lord.


Laud be to heaven:
Eu^ there my life must end.
It hath been prophesi'de to me many years,
I should not dye, but in Jerusalem:
Which (vainly) I supposed the Holy-Land.
But bear me to that Chamber, there I'll lye:
In that Jerusalem, shall Harry dye.

By Cock and Pie, you shall not away to night.
What Dauy, I say.

You must excuse me, M. Robert Shallow.


I will not excuse you: you shall not be excused.

Excuses shall not be admitted: there is no excuse shall serve: you shall not
be excused.

Why Dauie.

Here sir.


Dauy, Dauy, Dauy, let me see (Dauy) let me see: William Cooke, bid him come
hither. Sir Iohn, you shall not be excused.


Marry sir, thus: those Precepts cannot be served: and again sir, shall we
sow the head-land with Wheat?


With red Wheat Dauy. But for William Cook: are there no young Pigeons?


Yes Sir.
Here is now the Smiths note, for Shooing,
And Plough-Irons.

Let it be cast, and paid: Sir Iohn, you shall not be excused.


Sir, a new link to the Bucket must needs be had: And Sir, do you mean to
stop any of Williams Wages, about the Sack he lost the other day, at
Hinckley Fair?


He shall answer it:

Some Pigeons Dauy, a couple of short-legg'd Hens: a joint of Mutton and any
pretty little tine Kickshaws, tell William Cooke.


Doth the man of War, stay all night sir?


Yes Dauy:

I will use him well. A Friend in th Court, is better then a penny in purse.
Use his men well Dauy, for they are arrant Knaves, and will backbite.


No worse then they are bitten. sir: For, they have marvelous foul linen.


Well conceited Dauy: about thy Business, Dauy.


I beseech you sir,

To countenance William Visor of Woncot, against Clement Perkes of the hill.


There are many Complaints Dauy, against that Visor, that Visor is an arrant
Knave, on my knowledge.


I grant your Worship, that he is a knave Sir:) But yet heaven forbid Sir, but
a Knave should have some Countenance, at his Friends request. An honest man
sir, is able to speak for himself, when a Knave is not. I have served your
Worship truly sir, these eight years: and if I cannot once or twice in a
Quarter bear out a knave, against an honest man, I have but a very little
credit with your Worship. The Knave is mine honest Friend Sir, therefore I
beseech your Worship, let him be Countenanced.


Go too,
I say he shall have no wrong: Look about Dauy.
Where are you Sir Iohn? Come, off with your Boots.
Give me your hand M. Bardolf.

I am glad to see your Worship.


I thank thee, with all my heart, kind Master
Bardolf: and welcome my tall Fellow:
Come Sir Iohn.

I'll follow you, good Master Robert Shallow. Bardolf, look to our Horses. If
I were saw'de into Quantities, I should make four dozen of such bearded
Hermits staves, as Master Shallow. It is a wonderful thing to see the
semblable Cohetence of his men's spirits, and his: They, by observing of him, do
bear themselves like foolish Justices: He, by conversing with them, is turned
into a Iustice-like Serving-man. Their spirits are so married in Conjunction,
with the participation of Society, that they flock together in consent, like
so many Wilde-Geese. If I had a suite to Master Shallow, I would humour his
men, with the imputation of being near their Master. If to his Men, I would
currie with Master Shallow, that no man could better command his Servants. It
is certain, that either wise bearing, or ignorant Carriage is caught, as men
take diseases, one of another: therefore, let men take heed of their Company.
I will devise matter enough out of this Shallow, to keep Prince Harry in
continual Laughter, the wearing out of six Fashions (which is four Terms)
or two Actions, and he shall laugh with Interuallums. O it is much that a Lye
(with a flight Oath) and a jest (with ^ sad brow) will do, with a Fellow,
that never had the Ache in his shoulders. O you shall see him laugh, till his
Face be like a wet Cloak, ill laid up.


Sir Iohn.


I come Master Shallow, I come Master Shallow.


How now, my Lord Chief Justice, whether away?


How doth the King?


Exceeding well: his Cares
Are now, all ended.

I hope, not dead.


He's walked the way of Nature,
And to our purposes, he lives no more.

I would his Majesty had called me with him,
The service, that I truly did his life,
Hath left me open to all injuries.

Indeed I think the young King loves you not.


I know he doth not, and do arm my self
To welcome the condition of the Time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me,
Then I have drawn it in my fantasy.

Here come the heavy Issue of dead Harrie:
O, that the living Harrie had the temper
Of him, the worst of these three Gentlemen:
How many Nobles then, should hold their places,
That must strike sail, to Spirits of wild sort?

Alas, I fear, all will be ouer-turn'd.


Good morrow Cousin Warwick, good morrow.


Cla. Good morrow, Cousin.


We meet, like men, that had forgot to speak.


We do remember: but our Argument
Is all too heavy, to admit much talk.

Well: Peace be with him, that hath made us heavy


Peace be with us, least we be heavier.


O, good my Lord, you have lost a friend indeed:
And I dare swear, you borrow not that face
Of seeming sorrow, it is sure your own.

Though no man be assured what grace to find,
You stand in coldest expectation.
I am the sorrier, would 'twere otherwise.

Well, you must now speak Sir Iohn Falstaff fair,
Which swims against your stream of Quality.

Sweet Princes: what I did, I did in Honour,
Led by the Imperial Conduct of my Soul,
And never shall you see, that I will beg
A ragged, and fore-stall'd Remission.
If Troth, and upright Innocence fail me,
I'll to the King (my Master) that is dead,
And tell him, who hath sent me after him.

Here comes the Prince.


Good morrow: and heaven save your Majesty


This new, and gorgeous Garment, Majesty,
Sits not so easy on me, as you think.
Brothers, you mix your Sadness with some Fear:
This is the English, not the Turkish Court:
Not Amurah, an Amurah succeeds,
But Harry, Harry: Yet be sad (good Brothers)
For (to speak truth) it very well becomes you:
Sorrow, so Royally in you appears,
That I will deeply put the Fashion on,
And wear it in my heart. Why then be sad,
But entertain no more of it (good Brothers)
Then a joint burden, laid upon us all.
For me, by Heaven (I bid you be assured)
I'll be your Father, and your Brother too:
Let me but bear your Love, I'll bear your Cares;
But weep that Horrie's dead, and so will I.
But Harry lives, that shall convert those Tears
By number, into hours of Happiness.

We hope no other from your Majesty.


You all look strangely on me: and you most,
You are (I think) assured, I love you not.

I am assured (if I be measured rightly)
Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.

No? How might a Prince of my great hopes forget
So great Indignities you laid upon me?
What? Rate? Rebuke? and roughly send to Prison
The immediate Heir of England? Was this easy?
May this be washed in Lethe, and forgotten?

I then did use the Person of your Father;
The Image of his power, lay then in me,
And in the administration of his Law,
Whiles I was busy for the Commonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The Majesty, and power of Law, and Justice,
The Image of the King, whom I presented,
And struck me in my very Seat of Judgment*
Whereon (as an Offender to your Father)
I gave bold way to my Authority,
And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the Garland,
To have a Son, set your Decrees at nought?
To pluck down Justice from your awful Bench?
To trip the course of Law, and blunt the Sword
That guards the peace, and safety of your Person?
Nay more, to spurn at your most Royal Image,
And mock your workings, in a Second body?
Question your Royal Thoughts, make the case yours:
Be now the Father, and propose a Son:
Hear your own dignity so much profaned,
See your most dreadful Laws, so loosely slighted;
Behold your self, so by a Son disdained*
And then imagine me, taking you part,
And in your power, soft silencing your Son:
After this cold consideration, sentence me;
And, as you are a King, speak in your State,
What I have done, that misbecame my place,
My person, or my Lieges Sovereignty.

You are right Justice, and you weigh this well:
Therefore still bear the Balance, and the Sword:
And I do wish your Honours may increase,
Till you do live, to see a Son of mine
Offend you, and obey you, as I did.
So shall I live, to speak my Fathers words:
Happy am I, that have a man so bold,
That dares do Justice, on my proper Son;
And no less happy, having such a Son,
That would deliver up his Greatness so,
Into the hands of Justice. You did commit me:
For which, I do commit into your hand,
The unstained Sword that you have used to bear:
With this Remembrance; That you use the same
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit
As you have done against me. There is my hand,
You shall be as a Father, to my Youth;
My voice shall sound, as you do prompt mine ear,
And I will stoop, and humble my Intents,
To your well-practis'd, wise Directions.
And Princes all, believe me, I beseech you:
My Father is gone wild into his Grave,
(For in his Tomb, lye my Affections)
And with his Spirits, sadly I survive,
To mock the expectation of the World;
To frustrate Prophesies, and to race out
Rotten Opinion, who hath writ me down
After my seeming. The Tide of Blood in me,
Hath prowdly flowed in Vanity, till now.
Now doth it turn, and ebb back to the Sea,
Where it shall mingle with the state of Floods,
And flow henceforth in formal Majesty.
Now call we our High Court of Parliament,
And let us choose such Limbs of Noble Counsel,
That the great Body of our State may go
In equal rank, with the best governed Nation,
That War, or Peace, or both at once may be
As things acquainted and familiar to us,
In which you (Father) shall have foremost hand.
Our Coronation done, we will accite
(As I before remembered) all our State,
And heaven (consigning to my good intents)
No Prince, nor Peer, shall have just cause to say,
Heaven shorten Harries happy life, one day.

Nay, you shall see mine Orchard: where, in an Arbor we will eat a last years
Pippin of my own graffing, with a dish of Caraways, and so forth (Come Cousin
Silence, and then to bed.


You have here a goodly dwelling, and a rich.


Barren, barren, barren: Beggars all, beggars all Sir Iohn: Marry, good air.
Spread Dauy, spread Dauie: Well said Dauie.


This Dauie serves you for good uses: he is your Serving-man, and your Husband.


A good Varlet, a good Varlet, a very good Varlet, Sir Iohn: I have drunk too
much Sack at Supper. A good Varlet. Now sit down, now sit down: Come Cousin.


Ah sir (quoth-a) we shall do nothing but eat, and make good cheer, and
praise heaven for the merry year: when flesh is cheap, and Females dear,
and lusty Lads rome here, and there: so merrily, and ever among so merrily.


There's a merry heart, good M. Silence, I'll give you a health for that anon.


Good M. Bardolf: some wine, Dauie.


Sweet sir, sit: I'll be with you anon: most sweet sir, sit. Master Page, good
M. Page, sit: Proface. What you want in meat, we'll have in drink: but you
bear, the heart's all.


Be merry M. Bardolf, and my little Soldier there, be merry.


Be merry, be merry, my wife ha's all.
For women are Shrews, both short, and tall:
'Tis merry in Hall, when Beards wag all;
And welcome merry Shrouetide. Be merry, be merry.

I did not think M. Silence had bin a man of this Mettle.


Who I? I have been merry twice and once, ere now.


There is a dish of Lether-coats for you.


Dauie.


Your Worship: I'll be with you straight. A cup of Wine, sir?


A Cup of Wine, that's brisk and fine, drink unto the Leman mine: and a merry
heart lives long-a.


Well said, M. Silence.


If we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet of the night.


Health, and long life to you, M. Silence.


Fill the Cup, and let it come. I'll pledge you a mile to the bottom.


Honest Bardolf, welcome: If thou want any thing, and wilt not call,
beshrew thy heart. Welcome my little tyne thief, and welcome indeed too: I'll
drink to M. Bardolf, and to all the Cavaliers about London.


I hope to see London, once ere I die.


If I might see you there, Dauie.


You'll crack a quart together? Ha, will you not M. Bardolf?


Yes Sir, in a pottle pot.


I thank thee: the knave will stick by thee, I can assure thee that. He will
not out, he is true bred.


And I'll stick by him, sir.


Why there spoke a King: lack nothing, be merry.
Look, who's at door there, ho: who knocks?

Why now you have done me right.


Do me right, and dub me Knight, Samingo. Is't not so?


'Tis so.


Is't so? Why then say an old man can do somewhat.


If it please your Worship, there's one Pistol come from the Court with
news.


From the Court? Let him come in.
How now Pistol?

Sir Iohn, 'saue you sir.


What wind blew you hither, Pistol?


Not the ill wind which blows none to good, sweet Knight: Thou art now one of
the greatest men in the Realm.


Indeed, I think he be, but Goodman Puff of Barson.


Puff? puff in thy teeth, most recreant Coward base. Sir Iohn, I am thy
Pistol, and thy Friend: helter skelter have I rode to thee, and tidings do I
bring, and lucky joys, and golden Times, and happy News of price.


I prithee now deliver them, like a man of this World.


A footra for the World, and Worldlings base,
I speak of Africa, and Golden joys.

O base Assyrian Knight, what is thy news?
Let King Couitha know the truth thereof.

And Robin-hood, Scarlet, and Iohn.


Shall dunghill Cures confront the Hellicons?
And shall good news be baffel'd?
Then Pistol lay thy head in Furies lap.

Honest Gentleman,
I know not your breeding.

Why then Lament therefore.


Give me pardon, Sir.

If sir, you come with news from the Court, I take it, there is but two ways,
either to utter them, or to conceal them. I am Sir, under the King, in some
Authority.


Under which King?
Bezonian, speak, or dye.

Under King Harry.


Harry the Fourth? or Fifth?


Harry the Fourth.


A footra for thine Office.
Sir Iohn, thy tender Lamb-kinne, now is King.
Harry the Fift's the man, I speak the truth.
When Pistol lies, do this, and figge-me, like
The bragging Spaniard.

What, is the old King dead?


As nail in door.
The things I speak, are just.

Away Bardolf, Saddle my Horse,
Master Robert Shallow, choose what Office thou wilt
In the Land, 'tis thine. Pistol, I will double charge thee
With Dignities.

O joyful day:
I would not take a Knighthood for my Fortune.

What? I do bring good news.


Carry Master Silence to bed: Master Shallow, my Lord Shallow, be what thou
wilt, I am Fortunes Steward. Get on thy Boots, we I ride all night. Oh sweet
Pistol: Away Bardolf: Come Pistol, utter more to me: and withal devise
something to do thy self good. Boot, boot Master Shallow, I know the young
King is sick for me. Let us take any mans Horsfes: The Laws of England are at
my commandment. Happy are they, which have been my Friends: and woe unto my
Lord Chief Justice.


Let Vultures vil'de seize on his Lungs also:
Where is the life that late I led, say they?
Why here it is, welcome those pleasant days.

No, thou arrant knave: I would I might die, that I might have thee hanged: Thou
hast drawn my shoulder out of joint.


The Constables have delivered her over to me: and she shall have Whipping
cheer enough, I warrant her. There hath been a man or two (lately) killed
about her.


Nut-hooke, nut-hooke, you Lye: Come on, I'll tell thee what, thou damned
Tripe-visag'd Rascal, if the Child I now go with, do miscarry, thou had
better thou had struck thy Mother, thou Paper-fac'd Villain.


O that Sir Iohn were come, he would make this a bloody day to some body. But
I would the Fruit of her Womb might miscarry.


If it do, you shall have a dozen of Cushions again, you have but eleven now.
Come, I charge you both go with me: for the man is dead, that you and Pistol
beat among you.


I'll tell thee what, thou thin man in a Censor; I will have you as soundly
swindg'd for this, you blew-Bottel'd Rogue: you filthy famished Correctioner,
if you be not swinged, I'll forswear half Kirtles.


Come, come, you shee-Knight-arrant, come.


O, that right should thus overcome might. Well of sufferance, comes ease.


Come you Rogue, come:
Bring me to a Justice.

Yes, come you starved Blood-hound.


Goodman death, goodman Bones.


Thou Anatomy, thou.


Come you thin Thing:
Come you Rascal.

Very well.


More Rushes, more Rushes.


The Trumpets have sounded twice.


It will be two of the Clock, ere they come from the Coronation.


Stand here by me, M. Robert Shallow, I will make the King do you Grace. I
will leer upon him, as he comes by: and do but mark the countenance that he
will give me.


Bless thy Lungs, good Knight.


Come here Pistol, stand behind me. O if I had had time to have made new
Liveries, I would have bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed of you. But it is
no matter, this poor show doth better: this doth infer the zeal I had to
see him.


It doth so.


It shows my earnestness in affection.


It doth so.


My devotion.


It doth, it doth, it doth.


As it were, to ride day and night,
And not to deliberate, not to remember,
Not to have patience to shift me.

It is most certain,


But to stand stained with Travail, and sweating with desire to see him,
thinking of nothing else, putting all affairs in oblivion, as if there were
nothing else to be done, but to see him.


'Tis semper idem: for obsque hoc nihil est. 'Tis all in every part.


'Tis so indeed.


My Knight, I will inflame thy Noble Liver, and make thee rage. Thy Dol, and
Helen of thy noble thoughts is in base Durance, and contagious prison: Hauled
thither by most Mechanical and dirty hand. Rowze up Revenge from Ebon den,
with fell Alecto's Snake, for Dol is in. Pistol, speaks nought but troth.


I will deliver her.


There roared the Sea: and Trumpet Clangour sounds.


Save thy Grace, King Hall, my Royal Hall.


The heavens thee guard, and keep, most royal Imp of Fame.


'Saue thee my sweet Boy.


My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.


Have you your wits?
Know you what 'tis you speak?

My King, my Jove; I speak to thee, my heart.


I know thee not, old man: Fall to thy Prayers:
How ill white hairs become a Fool, and Jester?
I have long dreamed of such a kind of man,
So surfeit-swell'd, so old, and so profane:
But being awake, I do despise my dream.
Make less thy body (hence) and more thy Grace,
Leave gourmandizing; Know the Grave doth gape
For thee, thrice wider then for other men.
Reply not to me, with a Foole-borne Jest,
Presume not, that I am the thing I was,
For heaven doth know (so shall the world perceive)
That I have turned away my former Self,
So will I those that kept me Company.
When thou dost hear I am, as I have bin,
Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou was't
The Tutor and the Feeder of my Riots:
Till then, I banish thee, on pain of death,
As I have done the rest of my Misleaders,
Not to come near our Person, by ten mile.
For competence of life, I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evil:
And as we hear you do reform your selves,
We will according to your strength, and qualities,
Give you advancement. Be it your charge (my Lord)
To see performed the tenure of our word. Set on.

Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound.


I marry Sir Iohn, which I beseech you to let me have home with me.


That can hardly be, M. Shallow, do not you grieve at this: I shall be sent for
in private to him: Look you, he must seem thus to the world: fear not your
advancement: I will be the man yet, that shall make you great.


I cannot well perceive how, unless you should give me your Doublet, and
stuff me out with Straw. I beseech you, good Sir Iohn, let me have five
hundred of my thousand.


Sir, I will be as good as my word. This that you heard, was but a colour.


A colour I fear, that you will dye, in Sir Iohn.


Fear no colours, go with me to dinner:
Come Lieutenant Pistol, come Bardolf,
I shall be sent for soon at night.

Go carry Sir Iohn Falstaff to the Fleet,
Take all his Company along with him.

My Lord, my Lord.


I cannot now speak, I will hear you soon:
Take them away.

Si fortuna me tormento, spera me contento.


I like this fair proceeding of the Kings:
He hath intent his wonted Followers
Shall all be very well provided for:
But all are banished, till their conversations
Appear more wise, and modest to the world.

And so they are.


The King hath called his Parliament,
My Lord.

He hath.


I will lay odds, that ere this year expire,
We bear our Civil Swords, and Native fire
As far as France. I hear a Bird so sing,
Whose Music (to my thinking) pleased the King.
Come, will you hence?

FIRST, my Fear: then, my Curtsy: last, my Speech. My Fear, is your
Displeasure: My Curtsy, my Duty: And my speech, to Beg your Pardons. If you
look for a good speech now, you undo me: For what I have to say, is of mine
own making: and what (indeed) I should say, will (I doubt) prove mine own
marring. But to the Purpose, and so to the Venture. Be it known to you (as it
is very well) I was lately here in the end of a displeasing Play, to pray your
Patience for it, and to promise you a Better: I did mean (indeed) to pay you
with this, which if (like an ill Venture) it come unluckily home, I break; and
you, my gentle Creditors lose. Here I promised you I would be, and here I
commit my Body to your Mercies: Bate me some, and I will-pay you some, and (as
most Debtors do) promise you infinitely.

If my Tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me: will you command me to use my
Legs? And yet that were but light payment, to Dance out of your debt: But a
good Conscience, will make any possible satisfaction, and so will I. All the
Gentlewomen here, have forgiven me, if the Gentlemen will not, then the
Gentlemen do not agree with the Gentlewowen, which was never seen before, in
such an Assembly.

One word more, I beseech you: if you be not too much cloid with Fat Meat, our
humble Author will continue the Story (with Sir Iohn in it) and make you merry,
with fair Katherine of France: where (for any thing I know) Falstaff shall
dye of a sweat, unless already he be killed with your hard Opinions: For
Old-Castle dyed a Martyr, and this is not the man. My Tongue is weary, when my
Legs are too, I will bid you good night; and so kneel down before you: But
(indeed) to pray for the Queen.


