GOod day Sir.


I am glad you're well.


I have not seen you long, how goes the World?


It wears sir, as it grows.


I that's well known:
But what particular Rarity? What strange,
Which manifold record not matches: see
Magic of Bounty, all these spirits thy power
Hath conjured to attend.
I know the Merchant.

I know them both: the others a Jeweller.


O 'tis a worthy Lord.


Nay that's most fixed.


A most incomparable man, breathed as it were,
To an vntyreable and continuate goodness:
He passes.

I have a Jewel here.


O pray let's see it. For the Lord Timon, sir?


If he will touch the estimate. But for that --


When we for recompense have praised the wild,
It staines the glory in that happy Verse,
Which aptly sings the good.

'Tis a good form.


And rich: here is a Water look ye.


You are rapt sir, in some work, some Dedication to the great Lord.


A thing slipped idly from me.
Our Poesy is as a Gown, which uses
From whence 'tis nourished: the fire in the Flint
Shows not, till it be struck: our gentle flame
Provokes it self, and like the currant flies
Each bound it chases. What have you there?

A Picture sir: when comes your Book forth?


Upon the heals of my presentment sir.
Let's see your piece.

'Tis a good Piece.


So 'tis, this comes off well, and excellent.


Indifferent.


Admirable: How this grace
Speaks his own standing: what a mental power
This eye shoots forth? How big imagination
Moves in this Lip, to the dumbness of the gesture,
One might interpret.

It is a pretty mocking of the life:
Here is a touch: Is't good?

I will say of it,
It Tutors Nature, Artificial strife
Lives in these toutches, livelier then life.

How this Lord is followed.


The Senators of Athens, happy men.


Look more.


You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors,
I have in this rough work, shaped out a man
Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug
With amplest entertainment: My free drift
Halts not particularly, but moves it self
In a wide Sea of wax, no leuell'd malice
Infects one comma in the course I hold,
But flies an Eagle flight, bold, and forth on,
Leaving no Tract behind.

How shall I understand you?


I will vnboult to you.
You see how all Conditions, how all Minds,
As well of glib and slippery Creatures, as
Of Grave and austere quality, tender down
Their services to Lord Timon: his large Fortune,
Upon his good and gracious Nature hanging,
Subdues and properties to his love and tendance
All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glasse-fac'd Flatterer
To Apemantus, that few things loues^ better
Then to abhor himself; even he drops down
The knee before him, and returns in peace
Most rich in Timons nod.

I saw them speak together.


Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill
Feigned Fortune to be throned.
The Base of the Mount
Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of Natures
That labour on the bosom of this Sphere,
To propagate their states; amongst them all,
Whose eyes are on this Sovereign Lady fixed,
One do I personate of Lord Timons frame,
Whom Fortune with her Ivory hand wafts to her,
Whose present grace, to present slaves and servants
Translates his Rivals.

'Tis conceyu'd, to scope
This Throne, this Fortune, and this Hill me thinks
With one man beckoned from the rest below,
Bowing his head against the steepy Mount
To climb his happiness, would be well expressed
In our Condition.

Nay Sir, but hear me on:
All those which were his Fellows but of late,
Some better then his value; on the moment
Follow his strides, his Lobbies fill with tendance,
Rain Sacrificiall whisperings in his ear,
Make Sacred even his styrrop, and through him
Drink the free Air.

I marry, what of these?


When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
Spurns down her late beloved; all his Dependants
Which laboured after him to the Mountains top,
Even on their knees and hand, let him sit down,
Not one accompanying his declining foot.

Tis common:
A thousand moral Paintings I can show,
That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortunes,
More pregnantly then words. Yet you do well,
To show Lord Timon, that mean eyes have seen
The foot above the head.

Imprisoned is he, say you?


I my good Lord, five Talents is his debt,
His means most short, his Creditors most strait:
Your Honourable Letter he desires
To those have shut him up, which failing,
Periods his comfort.

Noble Ventidius well:
I am not of that Feather, to shake off
My Friend when he must need me. I do know him
A Gentleman, that well deserves a help,
Which he shall have. I'll pay the debt, and free him.

Your Lordship ever binds him.


Commend me to him, I will send his ransom,
And being enfranchized bid him come to me;
'Tis not enough to help the Feeble up,
But to support him after. Fare you well.

All happiness to your Honour.


Lord Timon, hear me speak.


Freely good Father.


Thou hast a Servant named Lucilius.


I have so: What of him?


Most Noble Timon, call the man before thee.


Attends he here, or no? Lucillius.


Here at your Lordships service.


This Fellow here, L. Timon, this thy Creature,
By night frequents my house. I am a man
That from my first have been inclined to thrift,
And my estate deserves an Heir more raised,
Then one which holds a Trencher.

Well: what further?


One only Daughter have I, no Kin else,
On whom I may confer what I have got:
The Maid is fair, a' the youngest for a Bride,
And I have bred her at my dearest cost
In Qualities of the best. This man of thine
Attempts her love: I prithee (Noble Lord)
Join with me to forbid him her resort,
My self have spoke in vain.

The man is honest.


Therefore he will be Timon,
His honesty rewards him in it self,
It must not bear my Daughter.

Does she love him?


She is young and apt:
Our own precedent passions do instruct us
What leuities in youth.

Love you the Maid?


I my good Lord, and she accepts of it.


If in her Marriage my consent be missing,
I call the Gods to witness, I will choose
Mine heir from forth the Beggars of the world,
And dispossess her all.

How shall she be endowed,
If she be mated with an equal Husband?

Three Talents on the present; in future, all.


This Gentleman of mine
Hath served me long:
To build his Fortune, I will strain a little,
For 'tis a Bond in men. Give him thy Daughter,
What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,
And make him weigh with her.

Most Noble Lord,
Pawn me to this your Honour, she is his.

My hand to thee,
Mine Honour on my promise.

Humbly I thank your Lordship, never may
That state or Fortune fall into my keeping,
Which is not owed to you.

Vouchsafe my Labour,
And long live your Lordship.

I thank you, you shall hear from me anon:
Go not away. What have you there, my Friend?

A piece of Painting, which I do beseech
Your Lordship to accept.

Painting is welcome.
The Painting is almost the Natural man:
For since Dishonour Traffickes with mans Nature,
He is but out-side: These Pensil'd Figures are
Even such as they give out. I like your work,
And you shall find I like it; Wait attendance
Till you hear further from me.

The Gods preserve ye.


Well fare you Gentleman: give me your hand.
We must needs dine together: sir your Jewel
Hath suffered under praise.

What my Lord, dispraise?


A mere saciety of Commendations,
If I should pay you for it as 'tis extolled,
It would vnclew me quite.

My Lord, 'tis rated
As those which sell would give: but you well know,
Things of like value differing in the Owners,
Are prized by their Masters. Believe dear Lord,
You mend the Jewel by the wearing it.

Well mocked.


No my good Lord, he speaks ye common tongue
Which all men speak with him.

Look who comes here, will you be chid?


We'll bear with your Lordship.


He will spare none.


Good morrow to thee,
Gentle Apermantus.

Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow.
When thou art Timons dog, and these Knaves honest.

Why dost thou call them Knaves, thou know them not?


Are they not Athenians?


Yes.


Then I repent not.


You know me, Apemantus?


Thou know I do, I called thee by thy name.


Thou art proud Apemantus?


Of nothing so much, as that I am not like Timon


Whether art going?


To knock out an honest Athenians brains.


That's a deed thou't dye for.


Right, if doing nothing be death by the Law.


How lik'st thou this picture Apemantus?


The best* for the innocence.


Wrought he not well that painted it.


He wrought better that made the Painter, and yet he's but a filthy piece of
work.


Y' are a Dog.


Thy Mothers of my generation: what's she, if I be a Dog?


Wilt dine with me Apemantus?


No: I eat not Lords.


And thou should, thoud'st anger Ladies.


O they eat Lords;
So they come by great bellies.

That's a lascivious apprehension.


So, thou apprehend it,
Take it for thy labour.

How dost thou like this Jewel, Apemantus?


Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cast a man a Do it.


What dost thou think 'tis worth?


Not worth my thinking.
How now Poet?

How now Philosopher?


Thou lie.


Art not one?


Yes.


Then I lye not.


Art not a Poet?


Yes.


Then thou lie:
Look in thy last work, where thou hast fegin'd him a worthy Fellow.

That's not feigned, he is so.


Yes he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy labour. He that loves to be
flattered, is worthy of th flatterer. Heavens, that I were a Lord.


What would do then Apemantus?


Even as Apemantus does now, hate a Lord with my heart.


What thy self?


I.


Wherefore?


That I had no angry wit to be a Lord.
Art not thou a Merchant?

I Apemantus.


Traffic confound thee, if the Gods will not.


If Traffic do it, the Gods do it.


Traffickes thy God, thy God confound thee.

What Trumpets that?


'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty Horse
All of Companionship.

Pray entertain them, give them guide to us.
You must needs dine with me: go not you hence
Till I have thanked you: when dinners done
Show me this piece* I am joyful of your sights.
Most welcome Sir.

So, so; their Aches contract, and starve your supple joints: that there should
be small love amongst these sweet Knaves, and all this Courtesy. The strain
of mans bred out into Baboon and Monkey.


Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed
Most hungerly on your sight.

Right welcome Sir:
Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time
In different pleasures.
Pray you let us in.

What time a day is't Apemantus?


Time to be honest.


That time serves still.


The most accursed thou that still omitst it.


Thou art going to Lord Timons Feast.


I, to see meat fill Knaves, and Wine heat fools.


Farthee well, farthee well.


Thou art a Fool to bid me farewell twice.


Why Apemantus?


Should have kept one to thy self, for I mean to give thee none.


Hang thy self.


No I will do nothing at thy bidding:
Make thy requests to thy Friend.

Away unpeaceable Dog,
Or I'll spurn thee hence.

I will fly like a dog, the heals a' the Ass.


He's opposite to humanity.
Comes shall we in,
And ^aste Lord Timons bounty: he out-goes
The very heart of kindness.

He powers it out: Plutus the God of Gold
Is but his Steward: no mead but he repayes
Seven-fold above it self: No gift to him,
But breeds the giver a return: exceeding
All use of quittance.

The Noblest mind he carries,
That ever governed man.

Long may he live in Fortunes. Shall we in?
I'll keep you Company.

Most honoured Timon,
It hath pleased the Gods to remember my Fathers age,
And call him to long peace:
He is gone happy and has left me rich:
Then, as in grateful Virtue I am bound
To your free heart, I do return those Talents
Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
I derived liberty.

O by no means,
Honest Ventigius: You mistake my love,
I gave it freely ever, and there's none
Can truly say he gives, if he receives:
If our betters play at that game, we must not dare
To imitate them: faults that are rich are fair.

A Noble spirit.


Nay my Lords, Ceremony was but deuis'd at first
To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown:
But where there is true friendship, there needs none,
Pray sit, more welcome are ye to my Fortunes,
Then my Fortunes to me.

My Lord, we always have confessed it.


Ho ho, confessed it? Handg'd it? Have you not?


O Apermantus, you are welcome.


No: You shall not make me welcome:
I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.

Fie, the art a churl, ye' have got a humour there
Does not become a man, 'tis much too blame:
They say my Lords, Irafuror breuis est,
But yond man is very angry.
Go, let him have a Table by himself:
For he does neither affect company,
Nor is he fit for it indeed.

Let me stay at thine peril Timon,
I come to observe, I give thee warning on it.

I take no heed of thee: The art an Athenian, therefore welcome: I my self
would have no power, prithee let my meat make thee silent.


I scorn thy meat, 'twould choke me: for I should ne'er flatter thee. Oh you
Gods! What a number of men eats Timon, and he sees 'em not? It grieves me to
see so many dip there meat in one mans blood, and all the madness is, he
cheers them up too.

I wonder men dare trust themselves with men.
Me thinks they should enuite them without knives,
Good for there meat, and safer for their lives.
There's much example for it, the fellow that sits next him, now parts bread
with him, pledges the breath of him in a divided draught: is the readiest man
to kill him, 'Tas been* proved, if I were a huge man I should fear to drink
at meals, least they should spy my wind-pipes dangerous notes, great men
should drink with harness on their throats.


My Lord in heart: and let the health go round.


Let it flow this way my good Lord.


Flow this way? A brave fellow. He keeps his tides well, those healths will
make thee and thy state look ill, Timon.

Here's that which is too weak to be a sinner,
Honest water, which ne'er left man in the mire:
This and my food are equals, there's no ods,
Feasts are to proud to give thanks to the Gods.
Immortal Gods, I crave no pelf,
I pray for no man but my self,
Grant I may never prove so fond,
To trust man on his Oath or Bond.
Or a Harlot for her weeping,
Or a Dog that seems asleeping,
Or a keeper with my freedom,
Or my friends if I should need 'em.
Amen.
So fall too't:
Richmen sin, and I eat root.
Much good dich thy good heart, Apermantus

Captain, Alcibiades, your hearts in the field now.


My heart is ever at your service, my Lord.


You had rather be at a breakfast of Enemies, then a dinner of Friends.


So they were bleeding new my Lord, there's no meat like 'em, I could wish my
best friend at such a Feast.


Would all those Flatterers were thine Enemies then, that then thou might
kill 'em: bid me to 'em.


Might we but have that happiness my Lord, that you would once use our hearts,
whereby we might express some part of our zeals, we should think our selves
for ever perfect.


Oh no doubt my good Friends, but the Gods themselves have provided that I
shall have much help from you: how had you been my Friends else. Why have you
that charitable title from thousands? Did not you chiefly belong to my heart?
I have told more of you to my self, then you can with modesty speak in your
own behalf. And thus far I confirm you. Oh you Gods (think I,) what need
we have any Friends; if we should ne'er have need of' em? They were the most
needless Creatures living; should we ne'er have use for 'em? And would most
resemble sweet Instruments hung up in Cases, that keeps there sounds to
themselves. Why I have often wished my self poorer, that I might come nearer to
you: we are borne to do benefits. And what better or properer can we call our
own, then the richer of our Friends? Oh what a precious comfort 'tis, to have
so many like Brothers commanding one another Fortunes. Oh joys, even made
away er't can be borne: mine eyes cannot hold out wate^me thinks* to forget
their Faults. I drink to you.


Thou weep to make them drink, Timon.


Joy had the like conception in our eyes,
And at that instant, like a babe sprung up.

Ho, ho: I laugh to think that babe a bastard.


I promise you my Lord you moved me much.


Much.


What means that Trump? How now?


Please you my Lord, there are certain Ladies
Most desirous of admittance.

Ladies? what are their wills?


There comes with them a fore-runner my Lord, which bears that office, to
signify their pleasures.


I pray let them be admitted.


Hail to thee worthy Timon and to all that of his Bounties taste: the five
best Sencesa cknowledge thee their Patron, and come freely to gratulate thy
plentiou^ bosom.

There taste, touch all pleased from thy Table rise:
They only now come but to Feast thine eyes.

They are wecome all, let 'em have kind admittance. Music make their welcome.


You see my Lord, how ample y' are beloved.


Hoyday,
What a sweep of vanity comes this way.
They dance? They are mad women,
Like Madness is the glory of this life,
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
We make our selves Fools, to disport our selves,
And spend our Flatteries, to drink those men,
Upon whose Age we void it up again
With poisonous Spite and Envy.
Who lives, that's not depraved, or depraves;
Who dyes, that bears not one spurn to their graves
Of their Friends gift:
I should fear, those that dance before me now,
Would one day stamp upon me: 'Tas been done,
Men shut their doors against a setting Sun.

You have done our pleasures
Much grace (fair Ladies)
Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
Which was not half so beautiful, and kind:
You have added worth vntoo't, and luster,
And entertained me with mine own device.
I am to thank you for it.

My Lord you take us even at the best.


Faith for the worst is filthy, and would not hold taking, I doubt me.


Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you,
Please you to dispose your selves.

Most thankfully, my Lord.


Flauius.


My Lord.


The little Casket bring me hither.


Yes, my Lord. More Jewels yet?
There is no crossing him in's humour,
Else I should tell him well, y faith I should;
When all's spent, hee'ld be crossed then, and he could:
'Tis pity Bounty had not eyes behind,
That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.

Where be our men?


Here my Lord, in readiness.


Our Horses.


O my Friends:
I have one word to say to you: Look you, my good L.
I must entreat you honour me so much,
As to advance this Jewel, accept it, and wear it,
Kind my Lord.

I am so far already in your gifts.


So are we all.


My Lord, there are certain Nobles of the Senate newly alighted, and come to
visit you.


They are fairly welcome.


I beseech your Honour, vouchsafe me a word, it does concern you near.


Near? why then another time I'll hear thee.
I prithee let's be provided to show them entertainment.

I scarce know how.


May it please your Honour, Lord Lucius^
(Out of his free love) hath presented to you
Four Milke-white Horses, trapt in Silver.

I shall accept them fairly: let the Presents
Be worthily entertained.
How now? What news?

Please you my Lord, that honourable Gentleman Lord Lucullus, entreats your
company to morrow, to hunt with him, and ha's sent your Honour two brace of
Grey-hounds.


I'll hunt with him,
And let them be received, not without fair Reward.

What will this come to?
He commands us to provide, and give great gifts, and all out of an empty
Coffer:
Nor will he know his Purse, or yield me this,
To show him what a Beggar his heart is,
Being of no power to make his wishes good.
His promises fly so beyond his state,
That what he speaks is all in debt, he owes for every word:
He is so kind, that he now pays interest for it;
His Land's put to their Books. Well, would I were
Gently put out of Office, before I were forced out:
Happier is he that has no friend to feed,
Then such that do even Enemies exceed.
I bleed inwardly for my Lord.

You do your selves much wrong,
You bate too much of your own merits.
Here my Lord, a trifle of our Love.

With more then common thanks
I will receive it.

O he's the very soul of Bounty.


And now I remember my Lord, you gave good words the other day of a Bay Courser
I rod on. Tis yours because you liked it.


Oh, I beseech you pardon me, my Lord, in that.


You may take my word my Lord: I know no man can justly praise, but what he
does affect. I weigh my Friends affection with mine own: I'll tell you true,
I'll call to you.


O none so welcome.


I take all, and your several visitations
So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give:
Me thinks, I could deal Kingdoms to my Friends,
And ne'er be weary. Alcibiades,
Thou art a Soldier, therefore seldom rich,
It comes in Charity to thee: for all thy living
Is mong'st the dead: and all the Lands thou hast
Lye in a pitched field.

I, defiled Land, my Lord.


We are so virtuously bound.


And so am I to you.


So infinitely endeer'd.


All to you. Lights, more Lights.


The best of Happiness, Honour, and Fortunes
Keep with you Lord Timon.

Ready for his Friends.


What a coils here, serving of beckes, and iutting out of bums. I doubt
whether their Legs be worth the sums that are given for 'em.

Friendships full of dregs,
Me thinks false hearts, should never have sound legs.
Thus honest Fools lay out their wealth on Curtsies.

Now Apermantus (if thou were not sullen)
I would be good to thee.

No, I'll nothing; for if I should be bribed too, there would be none left to
rail vponthee, and then thou would sin the faster. Thou giu'st so long
Timon (I fear me) thou wilt give away thy self in paper shortly. What needs
these Feasts, pomps, and Vaine-glories?


Nay, and you begin to rail on Society once, I am sworn not to give regard
to you. Farewell, come with better Music.


So: Thou wilt not hear me now, thou shalt not then. I'll locke thy heaven
from thee:
Oh that men's ears should be
To Counsel deaf, but not to Flattery.

And late five thousand: to Varro and to Isidore
He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum,
Which makes it five and twenty. Still in motion
Of raging waste? It cannot hold, it will not.
If I want Gold, steal but a beggars Dog,
And give it Timon, why the Dog coins Gold.
If I would sell my Horse, and buy twenty more
Better then he; why give my Horse to Timon.
Ask nothing, give it him, it Foals me straight
And able Horses: No Porter at his gate,
But rather one that smiles, and still invites
All that pass by. It cannot hold, no reason
Can sound his state in safety. Caphis hoa,
Caphis I say.

Here sir, what is your pleasure.


Get on your cloak, hast you to Lord Timon,
Importune him for my Monies, be not ceased
With slight denial; nor then silenced, when
Commend me to your Master, and the Cap
Plays in the right hand, thus: but tell him,
My Uses cry to me; I must serve my turn
Out of mine own, his days and times are past,
And my reliances on his fracted dates
Have smit my credit. I love, and honour him,
But must not break my back, to heal his finger.
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
Must not be tossed and turned to me in words,
But find supply immediate. Get you gone,
Put on a most importunate aspect,
A visage of demand: for I do fear
When every Feather sticks in his own wing,
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
Which flashes now a Phoenix, get you gone.

I go sir.


I go sir?
Take the Bonds along with you,
And have the dates in. Come.

I will Sir.


Go.


No care, no stop, so senseless of expense,
That he will neither know how to maintain it,
Nor cease his flow of Riot. Takes no account
How things go from him, nor resume no care
Of what is to continue: never mind,
Was to be so unwise, to be so kind.
What shall be done, he will not hear, till feel:
I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
Fie, fie, fie, fie.

Good even Varro: what, you come for money?


Is't not your business too?


It is, and yours too, Isidore?


It is so.


Would we were all discharged.


I fear it,


Here comes the Lord.


So soon as dinners done, we'll forth again
My Alcibiades. With me, what is your will?

My Lord, here is a note of certain dues.


Dues? whence are you?


Of Athens here, my Lord.


Go to my Steward.


Please it your Lordship, he hath put me off
To the succession of new days this month:
My Master is awaked by great Occasion,
To call upon his own, and humbly prays you,
That with your other Noble parts, you'll suite,
In giving him his right.

Mine honest Friend,
I prithee but repair to me next morning.

Nay, good my Lord.


Contain thy self, good Friend.


One Varroes servant, my good Lord.


From Isidore, he humbly prays your speedy payment.


If you did know my Lord, my Masters wants.


'Twas due on forfeiture my Lord, six weeks, and past.


Your Steward puts me off my Lord, and I
Am sent expressly to your Lordship.

Give me breath:
I do beseech you good my Lords keep on,
I'll wait upon you instantly. Come hither: pray you
How goes the world, that I am thus encountered
With clamorous demands of debt, broken Bonds,
And the detention of long since due debts
Against my Honour?

Please you Gentlemen,
The time is vnagreeable to this business:
Your importunacy cease, till after dinner,
That I may make his Lordship understand
Wherefore you are not paid.

Do so my Friends, see them well entertained.


Pray draw near.


Stay, stay, here comes the Fool with Apemantus, let's ha some sport with 'em.


Hang him, he will abuse us.


A plague upon him dog.


How dost Fool?


Dost Dialogue with thy shadow?


I speak not to thee.


No 'tis to thy self. Come away.


There's the Fool hangs on your back already.


No thou stand single, the art not on him yet.


Where's the Fool now?


He last asked the question. Poor Rogues, and Usurers men, Bawds between Gold
and want.


What are we Apemantus?


Asses.


Why?


That you ask me what you are, do not know your selves. Speak to 'em Fool.


How do you Gentlemen?


Gramercies good Fool:
How does your Mistress?

She's even setting on water to scaled such Chickens as you are. Would we could
see you at Corinth.


Good, Gramercy.


Look you, here comes my Masters Page.


Why how now Captain? what do you in this wise Company.
How dost thou Apermantus?

Would I had a Rod in my mouth, that I might answer thee profitably.


Prithee Apemantus read me the superscription of these Letters, I know not
which is which.


Can not read?


No.


There will little Learning dye then that day thou art hanged. This is to Lord
Timon, this to Alcibiades. Go thou was't borne a Bastard, and thou't dye a
Bawd.


Thou was't whelpt a Dog, and thou shalt famish a Dogs death.
Answer not, I am gone.

Even so thou out-runst Grace,
Fool I will go with you to Lord Timons.

Will you leave me there?


If Timon stay at home.
You three serve three Usurers?

I would they served us.


So would I:
As good a trick as ever Hangman served Thief.

Are you three Usurers men?


I Fool.


I think no Usurer, but ha's a Fool to his Servant. My Mistress is one, and I
am her Fool: when men come to borrow of your Masters, they approach sadly, and
go away merry: but they enter my Masters house merrily, and go away sadly. The
reason of this?


I could render one.


Do it then, that we may account thee a Whoremaster, and a Knave, which
notwithstanding thou shalt be no less esteemed.


What is a Whoremaster Fool?


A Fool in good clothes, and something like thee. 'Tis a spirit, sometime to
appears like a Lord, sometime like a Lawyer, sometime like a Philosopher, with
two stones more then's artificial one. He is very often like a Knight; and
generally, in all shapes that man goes up and down in, from fourscore to
thirteen, this spirit walks in.


Thou art not altogether a Fool.


Nor thou altogether a Wise man,
As much foolery as I have, so much wit thou lack.

That answer might have become Apemantus.


Aside, aside, here comes Lord Timon.


Come with me (Fool) come.


I do not always follow Lover, elder Brother, and Woman, sometime the
Philosopher.


Pray you walk en eere,
I'll speak with you anon.

You make me marvel wherefore ere this time
Had you not fully laid my state before me,
That I might so have rated my expense
As I had leave of means.

You would not hear me:
At many leisures I propose.

Go too:
Perchance some single vantages you took,
When my indisposition put you back,
And that unaptness made your minister
Thus to excuse your self.

O my good Lord,
At many times I brought in my accounts,
Laid them before you, you would throw them off,
And say you sound them in mine honesty,
When for some trifling present you have bid me
Return so much, I have shook my head, and wept:
Yea against the Authority of manners, prayed you
To hold your hand more close: I did endure
Not seldom, nor no flight checks, when I have
Prompted you in the ebb of your estate,
And your great flow of debts; my loved Lord,
Though you hear now (too late) yet nowes a time,
The greatest of your having, lacks a half,
To pay your present debts.

Let all my Land be sold.


'Tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone,
And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
Of present dues; the future comes apace:
What shall defend the interim, and at length
How goes our reck'ning?

To Lacedemon did my Land extend.


O my good Lord, the world is but a word,
Were it all yours, to give it in a breath,
How quickly were it gone.

You tell me true.


If you suspect my Husbandry or Falsehood,
Call me before the exactest Auditors,
And set me on the proof. So the Gods bless me,
When all our Offices have been oppressed
With riotous Feeders, when our Vaults have wept
With drunken spilth of Wine; when every room
Hath blazed with Lights, and braid with Minstrelsy,
I have retired me to a wasteful cock,
And set mine eyes at flow.

Prithee no more.


Heavens have I said the bounty of this Lord:
How many prodigal bits have Slaves and Pezants
This night englutted: who is not Timons,
What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is L. Timons:
Great Timon, Noble, Worthy, Royal Timon:
Ah, when the means are gone, that buy this praise,
The breath is gone, whereof this praise is made:
Feast won, fast lost; one cloud of Winter showers,
These flies are couched.

Come sermon me no further.
No villainous bounty yet hath past my heart;
Unwisely, not ignobly have I given.
Why dost thou weep, can thou the conscience lack,
To think I shall lack friends: secure thy heart,
If I would broach the vessels of my love,
And try the argument of hearts, by borrowing,
Men, and men's fortunes could I frankly use
As I can bid thee speak.

Assurance bless your thoughts.


And in some sort these wants of mine are crowned,
That I account them blessings. For by these
Shall I try Friends. You shall perceive
How you mistake my Fortunes:
I am wealthy in my Friends.
Within there, Flauius, Seruilius?

My Lord, my Lord.


I will dispatch you severally.

You to Lord Lucius, to Lord Lucullus you, I hunted with his Honour to day; you
to Sempronius; commend me to their loves; and I am proud say, that my occasions
have found time to use 'em toward a supply of money: let the request be fifty
Talents.


As you have said, my Lord.


Lord Lucius and Lucullus? Humh.


Go you sir to the Senators;
Of whom, even to the States best health; I have
Deserved this Hearing: bid 'em send of the instant
A thousand Talents to me.

I have been bold
(For that I knew it the most general way)
To them, to use your Signet, and your Name,
But they do shake their heads, and I am here
No richer in return.

Is't true? Can't be?


They answer in a joint and corporate voice,
That now they are at fall, want Treature cannot
Do what they would, are sorry: you are Honourable,
But yet they could have wished, they know not,
Something hath been amiss; a Noble Nature
May catch a wrench; would all were well; tis pity,
And so intending other serious matters,
After distasteful looks; and these hard Fractions
With certain halfe-caps, and cold moving nods,
They froze me into Silence.

You Gods reward them:
Prithee man look cheerely. These old Fellows
Have their ingratitude in them Hereditary:
Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows,
'Tis lack of kindly warmth, they are not kind;
And Nature, as it grows again toward earth,
Is fashioned for the journey, dull and heavy.
Go to Ventiddius (prithee be not sad,
Thou art true, and honest; Ingeniously I speak,
No blame belongs to thee:) Ventiddius lately
Buried his Father, by whose death he's stepped
Into a great estate: When he was poor,
Imprisoned, and in scarsitie of Friends,
I cleared him with five Talents: Greet him from me,
Bid him suppose, some good necessity
Touches his Friend, which craves to be remembered
With those five Talents; that had, giue't these Fellows
To whom 'tis instant due. Neu'r speak, or think,
That Timons fortunes among his Friends can sink.

I would I could not think it:
That thought is Bounties Foe;
Being free it self, it thinks all others so.

I have told my Lord of you, he is coming down to you.


I thank you Sir.


Here's my Lord.


One of Lord Timons men? A Gift I warrant. Why this hits right: I dreamt of a
Silver Basin Ewre to night. Flaminius, honest Flaminius, you are very
respectively welcome sir. Fill me some Wine. And how does that Honourable,
Complete, Free-hearted Gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good Lord and
Master?


His health is well sir.


I am right glad that his health is well sir: and what hast thou there under
thy Cloak, pretty Flaminius?


Faith, nothing but an empty box Sir, which in my Lords behal^ I come to
entreat your Honour to supply: who having great and instant occasion to use
fifty Talents, hath sent to your Lordship to furnish him: nothing doubting
your present assistance therein.


La, la, la, la: Nothing doubting says he? Alas good Lord, a Noble Gentleman
'tis, if he would not keep so good a house. Many a time and often I ha dined
with him, and told him on it, and come again to supper to him of purpose, to
have him spend less, and yet he wold embrace no counsel, take no warning by
my coming, every man has his fault, and honesty is his. I ha told him on it,
but I could ne'er get him from it.


Please your Lordship, here is the Wine.


Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise.
Here's to thee.

Your Lordship speaks your pleasure.


I have observed thee always for a towardlie prompt spirit, give thee thy due,
and one that knows what belongs to reason; and can use the time well, if the
time use thee well. Good parts in thee; get you gone sirrah. Draw nearer honest
Flaminius. Thy Lords a bountiful Gentleman, but thou art wise, and thou
know well enough (although thou come to me) that this is no time to lend
money, especially upon bare friendship without security. Here's three
Solidares for thee, good Boy wink at me, and say thou saw me not. Fare
thee well.


Is't possible the world should so much differ,
And we alive that lived? Fly damned baseness
To him that worships thee.

Ha? Now I see thou art a Fool, and sit for thy Master.


May these add to the number yt may scald thee:
Let moulten Coin be thy damnation,
Thou disease of a friend, and not himself:
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,
It turns in less then two nights? O you Gods!
I feel my Masters passion. This Slave unto his Honour,
Has my Lords meat in him:
Why should it thrive, and turn to Nutriment,
When he is turned to poison?
O may Diseases only work upon it:
And when he's sick to death, let not that part of Nature
Which my Lord paid for, be of any power
To expel sickness, but prolong his hour.

Who the Lord Timon? He is my very good friend and an Honourable Gentleman.


We know him for no less, though we are but strangers to him. But I can tell
you one thing my Lord, and which I hear from common rumours, now Lord Timons
happy hours are done and past, and his estate shrinks from him.


Fie no, do not believe it: he cannot want for money.


But believe you this my Lord, that not long ago, one of his men was with the
Lord Lucullus, to borrow so many Talents, nay urged extremely for it, and showed
what necessity belonged too't, and yet was denied.


How?


I tell you, denied my Lord.


What a strange case was that? Now before the Gods I am ashamed on it. Denied
that honourable man? There was very little Honour showed in it. For my own
part, I must needs confess, I have received some small kindnesses from him,
as Money, Plate, Jewels, and such like Trifles; nothing comparing to his: yet
had he mistook him, and sent to me, I should ne'er have denied his Occasion
so many Talents.


See, by good hap yonders my Lord, I have sweat to see his Honour. My Honoured
Lord.


Seruilius? You are kindly met sir. Farthewell, commend me to thy Honourable
virtuous Lord, my very exquisite Friend.


May it please your Honour, my Lord hath sent --


Ha? what ha's he sent? I am so much endeared to that Lord; he's ever sending:
how shall I thank him think thou? And what has he sent now?


Has only sent his present Occasion now my Lord: requesting your Lordship to
supply his instant use with so many Talents.


I know his Lordship is but merry with me,
He cannot want fifty five hundred Talents.

But in the mean time he wants less my Lord.
If his occasion were not virtuous,
I should not urge it half so faithfully.

Dost thou speak seriously Seruilius?


Upon my soul, 'tis true Sir.


What a wicked Beast was I to disfurnish my self against such a good time, when
I might ha shown my self Honourable? How unluckily it happened, that I should
Purchase the day before for a little part, and undo a great deal of Honour?
Seruilius* now before the Gods I am not able to do (the more beast I say) I was
sending to use Lord Timon my self, these Gentlemen can witness; but I would
not for the wealth of Athens I had done it now. Commend me bountifully to his
good Lordship, and I hope his Honour will conceive the fairest of me, because I
have no power to be kind. And tell him this from me, I count it one of my
greatest afflictions say, that I cannot pleasure such an Honourable Gentleman.
Good Seruilius, will you befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to
him?


Yes sir, I shall.


I'll look you out a good turn Seruilius.
True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed,
And he that's once denied, will hardly speed.

Do you observe this Hostilius?


I, to well.


Why this is the worlds soul,
And just of the same piece
Is every Flatterers sport: who can call him his Friend
That dips in the same dish? For in my knowing
Timon has bin this Lords Father,
And kept his credit with his purse:
Supported his estate, nay Timons money
Has paid his men their wages. He ne'er drinks,
But Timons Silver treads upon his Lip,
And yet, oh see the monstrousness of man,
When he looks out in an ungrateful shape;
He does deny him (in respect of his)
What charitable men affoord to Beggars.

Religion groans at it.


For mine own part, I never tasted Timon in my life
Nor came any of his bounties over me,
To mark me for his Friend. Yet I protest,
For his right Noble mind, illustrious Virtue,
And Honourable Carriage,
Had his necessity made use of me,
I would have put my wealth into Donation,
And the best half should have returned to him,
So much I love his heart: But I perceive,
Men must learn now with pity to dispense,
For Policy sits above Conscience.

Must he needs trouble me in it? Hum.
Above all others?
He might have tried Lord Lucius, or Lucullus,
And now Ventidgius is wealthy too,
Whom he redeemed from prison. All these
Owes their estates unto him.

My Lord,
They have all bin touched, and found Base-Mettle,
For they have all denied him.

How? Have they denied him?
Has Ventidgius and Lucullus denied him,
And does he send to me? Three? Humh?
It shows but little love, or judgment in him.
Must I be his last Refuge? His Friends (like Physicians)
Thrive, give him over: Must I take the Cure upon me?
Has much disgraced me in it, I'm angry at him,
That might have known my place. I see no sense for it,
But his Occasions might have wooed me first:
For in my conscience, I was the first man
That ere received gift from him.
And does he think so backwardly of me now,
That I'll requite it last? No:
So it may prove an Argument of Laughter
To the rest, and amongst Lords be thought a Fool:
I'd rather then the worth of thrice the sum,
Had sent to me first, but for my minds sake:
I'd such a courage to do him good. But now return,
And with their faint reply, this answer join;
Who bates mine Honour, shall not know my Coin.

Excellent: Your Lordships a goodly Villain: the devil knew not what he did,
when he made man Politic; he crossed himself by it: and I cannot think, but
in the end, the Villainies of man will set him clear. How fairly this Lord
strives to appear foul? Takes Virtuous Copies to be wicked: like those, that
under hot ardent zeal, would set whole Realms on fire, of such a nature is
his politic love.

This was my Lords best hope, now all are fled
Save only the Gods. Now his Friends are dead,
Doors that were ne'er acquainted with their Wards
Many a bounteous year, must be employed
Now to guard sure their Master:
And this is all a liberal course allows,
Who cannot keep his wealth, must keep his house.

Well met, goodmorrow Titus Hortensius


The like to you kind Varro.


Lucius, what do we meet together?


I, and I think one business does command us all.
For mine is money.

So is theirs, and ours.


And sir Philotus too.


Good day at once.


Welcome good Brother.
What do you think the hour?

Labouring for Nine.


So much?


Is not my Lord seen yet?


Not yet.


I wonder on it, he was wont to shine at seven.


I, but the days are waxed shorter with him:
You must consider, that a Prodigal course
Is like the Suns, but not like his recouerable, I fear:
'Tis deepest Winter in Lord Timons purse, that is:
One may reach deep enough, and yet find little.

I am of your fear, for that.


I'll show you how to observe a strange event:
Your Lord sends now for Money?

Most true, he does.


And he wears Jewels now of Timons gift,
For which I wait for money.

It is against my heart.


Mark how strange it shows,
Timon in this, should pay more then he owes:
And even as if your Lord should wear rich Jewels,
And send for money for 'em.

I'm weary of this Charge,
The Gods can witness:
I know my Lord hath spent of Timons wealth,
And now Ingratitude, makes it worse then stealth.

Yes, mine's three thousand Crowns:
What's yours?

Five thousand mine.


'Tis much deep, and it should seem by the sum
Your Masters confidence was above mine,
Else surely his had equalled.

One of Lord Timons men.


Flaminius? Sir, a word: Pray is my Lord ready to come forth?


No, indeed he is not.


We attend his Lordship: pray signify so much.


I need not tell him that, he knows you are too diligent.


Ha: is not that his Steward muffled so?
He goes away in a Cloud: Call him, call him.

Do you hear, sir?


By your leave, sir.


What do ye ask of me, my Friend.


We wait for certain Money here, sir.


I, if Money were as certain as your waiting,
'Twere sure enough.
Why then preferred you not your sums and Bills
When your false Masters eat of my Lords meat?
Then they could smile, and fawn upon his debts.
And take down the Interest into their glutt'nous Mawes.
You do your selves but wrong, to stir me up,
Let me pass quietly:
Believe it, my Lord and I have made an end,
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.

I, but this answer will not serve.


If it 'twill not serve, 'tis not so base as you,
For you serve Knaves.

How? What does his casheer'd Worship mutter?


No matter what, he's poor, and that's revenge enough. Who can speak
broader, then he that has no house to put his head in? Such may rail against
great buildings.


Oh here's Seruilius: now we shall know some answer.


If I might beseech you Gentlemen, to repair some other hour, I should derive
much from it. For tak't of my soul, my Lord leanes wondrously to discontent:
His comfortable temper has forsook him, he's much out of health, and keeps
his Chamber.


Many do keep their Chambers, are not sick:
And if it be so far beyond his health,
Me thinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
And make a clear way to the Gods.

Good Gods.


We cannot take this for answer, sir.

Seruilius help, my Lord, my Lord.


What, are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I bin ever free, and must my house
Be my retentive Enemy? My Jail?
The place which I have Feasted, does it now
(Like all Mankind) show me an Iron heart?

Put in now Titus.


My Lord, here is my Bill.


Here's mine.


And mine, my Lord.


And ours, my Lord.


All our Bills.


Knock me down with 'em, cleave me to the Girdle.


Alas, my Lord.


Cut my heart in sums.


Mine, fifty Talents.


Tell out my blood.


Five thousand Crowns, my Lord.


Five thousand drops pays that.
What yours? and yours?

My Lord.


My Lord.


Tear me, take me, and the Gods fall upon you.


Faith I perceive our Masters may throw their caps at their money, these debts
may well be called desperate ones, for a madman owes 'em.


They have e'ene put my breath from me the slaves. Creditors? Devils.


My dear Lord.


What if it should be so?


My Lord.


I'll have it so. My Steward?


Here my Lord.


So fitly? Go, bid all my Friends again,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius Vllorxa: All,
I'll once more feast the Rascals.

O my Lord, you only speak from your distracted soul; there's not so much
left to, furnish out a moderate Table.


Be it not in thy care:
Go I charge thee, inuit them all, let in the tide
Of Knaves once more: my Cooke and I'll provide.

My Lord, you have my voice, too't,
The faults Bloody:
'Tis necessary he should dye:
Nothing imboldens sin so much, as Mercy.

Most true; the Law shall bruise 'em.


Honour, health, and compassion to the Senate.


Now Captain.


I am an humble Suitor to your Virtues;
For pity is the virtue of the Law,
And none but Tyrants use it cruelly.
It pleases time and Fortune to lye heavy
Upon a Friend of mine, who in hot blood
Hath stepped into the Law: which is past depth
To those that (without heed) do plundge intoo't.
He is a Man (setting his Fate aside) of comely Virtues,
Nor did he soil the fact with Cowardice,
(And Honour in him, which buys out his fault)
But with a Noble Fury, and fair spirit,
Seeing his Reputation touched to death,
He did oppose his Foe:
And with such sober and unnoted passion
He did behoove his anger ere 'twas spent,
As if he had but proved an Argument.

You undergo too strict a Paradox,
Striving to make an ugly deed look fair:
Your words have took such pains, as if they laboured
To bring Man-slaughter into form, and set Quarrelling
Upon the head of Valour; which indeed
Is Valour mis-begot, and came into the world,
When Sects, and Factions were newly borne.
He's truly Valiant, that can wisely suffer
The worst that man can breath,
And make his Wrongs, his Out-sider,
To wear them like his Raiment, carelessly,
And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,
To bring it into danger.
If Wrongs be evils, and enforce us kill,
What Folly 'tis, to hazard life for Ill.

My Lord.


You cannot make gross sins look clear,
To revenge is no Valour, but to bear.

My Lords, then under favour, pardon me,
If I speak like a Captain.
Why do fond men expose themselves to Battle,
And not endure all threats? Sleep upon it,
And let the Foes quietly cut their Throats
Without repugnancy? If there be
Such Valour in the bearing, what make we
Abroad? Why then, Women are more valiant
That stay at home, if Bearing carry it:
And the Ass, more Captain then the Lyon?
The fellow laden with Irons, wiser then the Judge?
If Wisdom be in suffering, Oh my Lords,
As you are great, be pitifully Good,
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is sins extremest Gust,
But in defence, by Mercy, 'tis most just.
To be in Anger, is impiety:
But who is Man, that is not Angry.
Weigh but the Crime with this.

You breath in vain.


In vain?
His service done at Lacedemon, and Bizantium,
Were a sufficient briber for his life.

What's that?


Why say my Lords ha's done fair service,
And slain in fight many of your enemies:
How full of valour did he bear himself
In the last Conflict, and made plenteous wounds?

He has made too much plenty with him:
He's a sworn Riotor, he has a sin
That often drowns him, and takes his valour prisoner.
If there were no Foes, that were enough
To overcome him. In that Beastly fury,
He has bin known to commit outrages,
And cherish Factions. 'Tis inferred to us,
His days are foul, and his drink dangerous.

He dyes.


Hard fate: he might have dyed in war.
My Lords, if not for any parts in him,
Though his right arm might purchase his own time,
And be in debt to none: yet more to move you,
Take my deserts to his, and join 'em both.
And for I know, your reverend Ages love Security,
I'll pawn my Victories, all my Honour to you
Upon his good returns.
If by this Crime, he owes the Law his life,
Why let the War receiue't in valiant gore,
For Law is strict, and War is nothing more.

We are for Law, he dyes, urge it no more
On height of our displeasure: Friend, or Brother,
He forfeits his own blood, that spills another.

Must it be so? It must not be:
My Lords, I do beseech you know me.

How?


Call me to your remembrances.


What.


I cannot think but your Age has forgot me,
It could not else be, I should prove so base,
To sue and be denied such common Grace.
My wounds ache at you.

Do you dare our anger?
'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect:
We banish thee for ever.

Banish me?
Banish your dotage, banish usury,
That makes the Senate ugly.

If after two days shine, Athens contain thee,
Attend our weightier Judgment.
And not to swell our Spirit,
He shall be executed presently.

Now the Gods keep you old enough,
That you may live
Only in bone, that none may look on you.
I'm worse then mad: I have kept back their Foes
While they have told their Money, and let out
Their Coin upon large interest. I my self,
Rich only in large hurts. All those, for this?
Is this the Balsam, that the vsuring Senate
Powers into Captains wounds? Banishment.
It comes not ill: I hate not to be banished,
It is a cause worthy my Spleen and Fury,
That I may strike at Athens. I'll cheer up
My discontented Troops, and lay for hearts;
'Tis Honour with most Lands to be at ods,
Soldiers should brooke as little wrongs as Gods.

The good time of day to you, sir.


I also wish it to you: I think this Honourable Lord did but try us this other
day.


Upon that were my thoughts tyring when we encountered. I hope it is not so low
with him as he made it seem in the trial of his several Friends.


It should not be, by the persuasion of his new Feasting.


I should think so. He hath sent me an earnest inviting, which many my near
occasions did urge me to put off: but he hath conjured me beyond them, and I
must needs appear.


In like manner was I in debt to my importunate business, but he would not
hear my excuse. I am sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my Provision
was out.


I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all things go.


Every man hears so: what would he have borrowed of you?


A thousand Pieces.


A thousand Pieces?


What of you?


He sent to me sir -- Here he comes.


With all my heart Gentlemen both; and how fare you?


Ever at the best, hearing well of your Lordship.


The Swallow follows not Summer more willing, then we your Lordship.


Nor more willingly leaves Winter, such Summer Birds are men. Gentlemen, our
dinner will not recompense this long stay: Feast your ears with the Music
awhile: If they will fare so harshly of the Trumpets sound: we shall too't
presently.


I hope it remains not unkindly with your Lordship, that I returned you an
empty Messenger.


O sir, let it not trouble you.


My Noble Lord.


Ah my good Friend, what cheer?


My most Honourable Lord, I am even sick of shame, that when your Lordship this
other day sent to me, I was so unfortunate a Beggar.


Think not on it, sir.


If you had sent but two hours before.


Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
Come bring in all together.

All covered Dishes.


Royal Cheer, I warrant you.


Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield it


How do you? What's the news?


Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it?


Alcibiades banished?


'Tis so, be sure of it.


How? How?


I pray you upon what?


My worthy Friends, will you draw near?


I'll tell you more anon. Here's a Noble feast toward


This is the old man still.


Wilt hold? Wilt hold?


It does: but time will, and so.


I do conceive.


Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would to the lip of his
Mistress: your diet shall be in all places alike. Make not a City Feast of it,
to let the meat cool, ere we can agree upon the first place. Sit, sit. The
Gods require our Thanks.

You great Benefactors, sprinkle our Society with Thankfulness. For your own
gifts, make your selves praised: But reserve still to give, least your Deities
be despised. Lend to each man enough, that one need not lend to another. For
were your Godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the Gods. Make the Meat
be beloved, more then the Man that gives it. Let no Assembly of Twenty, be
without a score of Villains. If there sit twelve Women at the Table, let a
dozen of them be as they are. The rest of your Fees, O Gods, the Senators of
Athens, together with the common leg of People, what is amiss in them, you
Gods, make suitable for destruction. For these my present Friends, as they are
to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to nothing are they welcome.
Uncover Dogs, and lap.


What does his Lordship mean?


I know not.


May you a better Feast never behold
You knot of Mouth-Friends: Smoke, lukewarm water
Is your perfection. This is Timons last,
Who stuck and spangled you with Flatteries,
Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces
Your reeking villainy. Live loathed, and long
Most smiling, smooth, detested Parasites,
Courteous Destroyers, affable Wolves, meek Bears:
You Fools of Fortune, Trencher-friends, Times Flies,
Cap and knee-Slaues, vapours, and Minute Jacks.
Of Man and Beast, the infinite Malady
Crust you quite over. What dost thou go?
Soft, take thy Physic first; thou too, and thou:
Stay I will lend thee money, borrow none.
What? All in Motion? Henceforth be no Feast,
Whereat a Villaine's not a welcome Guest.
Burn house, sink Athens, henceforth hated be
Of Timon Man, and all Humanity.

How now, my Lords?


Know you the quality of Lord Timons fury?


Push, did you see my Cap?


I have lost my Gown.


He's but a mad Lord, nought but humours sways him. He gave me a Jewel the
other day, and now he has beat it out of my hat.

Did you see my Jewel?


Did you see my Cap.


Here 'tis.


Here lies my Gown.


Let's make no stay.


Lord Timons mad.


I feel it upon my bones.


One day he gives us Diamonds, next day stones.


Let me look back upon thee. O thou Wall
That girdles in those Wolves, dive in the earth,
And fence not Athens. Matrons, turn incontinent,
Obedience fail in Children: Slaves and Fools
Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the Bench,
And minister in their steeds, to general Filths.
Convert of the Instant green Virginity,
Do it in your Parents eyes. Bankrupts, hold fast
Rather then render back; out with your Knives,
And cut your Trusters throats. Bound Servants, steal,
Large-handed Robbers your grave Masters are,
And pill by Law. Maid, to thy Masters bed,
Thy Mistress is of the Brothel. Some of sixteen,
Pluck the lyn'd Crutch from thy old limping Sire,
With it, beat out his Brains, Piety, and Fear,
Religion to the Gods, Peace, Justice, Truth,
Domestic awe, Night-rest, and Neighbour-hood,
Instruction, Manners, Mysteries, and Trades,
Degrees, Obseruances, Customs, and Laws,
Decline to your confounding contraries.
And yet Confusion live: Plagues incident to men,
Your potent and infectious Feauors, heap
On Athens ripe for stroke. Thou cold Sciatica,
Cripple our Senators, that their limbs may halt
As lamely as their Manners* Lust, and Liberty
Creep in the Minds and Marrowes of our youth,
That against the stream of Virtue they may strive,
And drown themselves in Riot. Itches, Blaines,
So we all the Athenian bosoms, and their crop
Be general Leprosy: Breath, infect breath,
That their Society (as their Friendship) may
Be merely poison. Nothing I'll bear from thee
But nakedness, thou detestable Town,
Take thou that too, with multiplying Bannes:
Timon will to the Woods, where he shall find
The unkindest Beast, more kinder then Mankind.
The Gods confound (hear me you good Gods all)
The Athenians both within and out that Wall:
And grant as Timon grows, his hate may grow
To the whole race of Mankind, high and low.
Amen.

Hear you M. Steward, where's our Master?
Are we undone, cast off, nothing remaining?

Alack my Fellows, what should I say to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous Gods,
I am as poor as you.

Such a House broke?
So Noble a Master fallen, all gone, and not
One Friend to take his Fortune by the arm,
And go along with him.

As we do turn our backs
From our Companion, thrown into his grave,
So his Familiars to his buried Fortunes
Slink all away leave their false vows with him
Like empty purses picked; and his poor self
A dedicated Beggar to the Air,
With his disease, of all shunned poverty,
Walks like contempt alone. More of our Fellows.

All broken Implements of a ruined house.


Yet do our hearts wear Timons Livery,
That see I by our Faces: we are Fellows still,
Serving alike in sorrow: Leaked is our Bark,
And we poor Mates, stand on the dying Deck,
Hearing the Surges threat: we must all part
Into this Sea of Air.

Good Fellows all,
The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.
Where ever we shall meet, for Timons sake,
Let's yet be Fellows. Let's shake our heads, and say
As 'twere a Knell unto our Masters Fortunes,
We have seen better days. Let each take some:
Nay put out all your hands: Not one word more,
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
Oh the fierce wretchedness that Glory brings us!
Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
Since Riches point to Misery and Contempt?
Who would be so mocked with Glory, or to live
But in a Dream of Friendship,
To have his pomp, and all what state compounds,
But only painted like his varnished Friends:
Poor honest Lord, brought lowe by his own heart,
Undone by Goodness: Strange unusual blood,
When mans worst sin is, He does too much Good.
Who then dares to be half so kind again?
For Bounty that makes Gods, do still mar Men.
My dearest Lord, blessed to be most accursed,
Rich only to be wretched; thy great Fortunes
Are made thy chief Afflictions. Alas (kind Lord)
He's flung in Rage from this ungrateful Seat
Of monstrous Friends:
Nor ha's he with him to supply his life,
Or that which can command it:
I'll follow and enquire him out.
I'll ever serve his mind, with my best will,
Whilst I have Gold, I'll be his Steward still.

O blessed breeding Sun, draw from the earth
Rotten humidity: below thy Sisters Orb
Infect the air. Twined Brothers of one womb,
Whose procreation, residence, and birth,
Scarce is diuidant; touch them with several fortunes,
The greater scorns the lesser. Not Nature
(To whom all sores lay siege) can bear great Fortune
But by contempt of Nature,
Raise me this Beggar, and deny it that Lord,
The Senators shall bear contempt Hereditary,
The Beggar Native Honour.
It is the Pastor Lards, the Brothers sides,
The want that makes him leave: who dares? who dares
In purity of Manhood stand upright
And say, this mans a Flatterer. If one be,
So are they all: for every grize of Fortune
Is smoothed by that below. The Learned pate
Ducks to the Golden Fool. All's obliquie:
There's nothing level in our cursed Natures
But direct villainy. Therefore be abhorred,
All Feasts, Societies, and Throngs of men.
His semblable, yea himself Timon disdains,
Destruction phang mankind; Earth yield me Roots,
Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
With thy most operant Poison. What is here?
Gold? Yellow, glittering, precious Gold?
No Gods, I am no idle Votarist,
Roots you clear Heavens. Thus much of this will make
Black, white; foul, fair; wrong, right;
Base, Noble; Old, young; Coward, valiant.
Ha you Gods! why this? what this, you Gods? why this
Will lug your Priests and Servants from your sides:
Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads.
This yellow Slave,
Will knit and break Religions, bless the accursed,
Make the hoar Leprosy adored, place Thieves,
And give them Title, knee, and approbation
With Senators on the Bench: This is it
That makes the wappen'd Widow wed again;
She, whom the Spittle-house, and ulcerous sores,
Would cast the gorge at. This Embalmes and Spices
To the April day again. Come damned Earth,
Thou common whore of Mankind, that puts odds
Among the rout of Nations, I will make thee
Do thy right Nature.
Ha? A Drum? The art quick,
But yet I'll bury thee: Thou't go (strong Thief)
When Gowty keepers of thee cannot stand:
Nay stay thou out for earnest.

What art thou there? speak.


A Beast as thou art. The Canker gnaw thy hart
For showing me again the eyes of Man.

What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee,
That art thy self a Man?

I am Misantropos, and hate Mankind,
For thy part, I do wish thou were a dog,
That I might love thee something.

I know thee well:
But in thy Fortunes am vnlearn'd, and strange.

I know thee too, and more then that I know thee
I not desire to know. Follow thy Drum,
With mans blood paint the ground Gules, Gules:
Religious Cannons, civil Laws are cruel,
Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine,
Hath in her more destruction then thy Sword,
For all her Cherubin look.

Thy lips rot off.


I will not kiss thee, then the rot returns
To thine own lips again.

How came the Noble Timon to this change?


As the Moon does, by wanting light to give:
But then renew I could not like the Moon,
There were no Suns to borrow of.

Noble Timon, what friendship may I do thee?


None, but to maintain my opinion.


What is it Timon?


Promise me Friendship, but perform none. If thou wilt not promise, the Gods
plague thee, for thou art a man: if thou dost perform, confound thee, for
thou art a man.


I have heard in some sort of thy Miseries.


Thou saw them when I had prosperity.


I see them now, then was a blessed time.


As thine is now, held with a brace of Harlots.


Is this the Athenian Minion, whom the world Voiced so regardfully?


Art thou Timandra?


Yes.


Be a whore still, they love thee not that use thee, give them diseases,
leaving with thee their Lust. Make use of thy salt hours, season the slaves
for Tubbs and Bathes, bring down Rose-checkt youth to the Pubfast, and the
Diet.


Hang thee Monster.


Pardon him sweet Timandra* for his wits
Are drowned and lost in his Calamities.
I have but little Gold of late, brave Timon,
The want whereof, doth daily make revolt
In my penurious Band. I have heard and grieved
How cursed Athens, mindelesse of thy worth,
Forgetting thy great deeds, when Neighbour states
But for thy Sword and Fortune trod upon them.

I prithee beat thy Drum, and get thee gone.


I am thy Friend, and pity thee dear Timon.


How doest thou pity him whom you dost troble,
I had rather be alone.

Why fare thee well:
Here is some Gold for thee.

Keep it, I cannot eat it.


When I have laid proud Athens on a heap.


War thou against Athens.


I Timon, and have cause.


The Gods confound them all in thy Conquest,
And thee after, when thou hast Conquered.

Why me, Timon?


That by killing of Villains
Thou was't borne to conquer my Country.
Put up thy Gold. Go on, here's Gold, go on;
Be as a Plannetary plague, when Jove
Will over some high-Vic'd City, hang his poison
In the sick air: let not thy sword skip one:
Pity not honoured Age for his white Beard,
He is an Usurer. Strike me the counterfeit Matron,
It is her habit only, that is honest,
Her selfe's a Bawd. Let not the Virgins cheek
Make soft thy trenchant Sword: for those Milk paps
That through the window Barn bore at men's eyes,
Are not within the Leaf of pity writ,
But set them down horrible Traitors. Spare not the Babe
Whose dimpled smiles from Fools exhaust their mercy;
Think it a Bastard, whom the Oracle
Hath doubtfully pronounced, the throat shall cut,
And mince it sans remorse. Swear against Objects,
Put Armour on thine ears, and on thine eyes,
Whose proof, nor yells of Mothers, Maids, nor Babes,
Nor sight of Priests in holy Vestments bleeding,
Shall pierce a jot. There's Gold to pay thy Soldiers,
Make large confusion: and thy fury spent,
Confounded be thy self. Speak not, be gone.

Hast thou Gold yet, I'll take the Gold thou gives me, not all thy Counsel.


Dost thou or dost thou not, Heavens curse upon thee.


Give us some Gold good Timon, hast you more?


Enough to make a Whore forswear her Trade,
And to make Whores, a Bawd. Hold up you Sluts
Your Aprons mountant; you are not Othable,
Although I know you'll swear, terribly swear
Into strong shudders, and to heavenly Agues
The immortal Gods that hear you. Spare your Oaths:
I'll trust to your Conditions, be whores still.
And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
Be strong in Whore, allure him, burn him up,
Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
And be no turne-coats: yet may your pains six months
Be quite contrary, And Thatch
Your poor thin Roofs with burdens of the dead,
(Some that were hanged) no matter:
Wear them, betray with them; Whore still,
Paint till a horse may mire upon your face:
A pox of wrinkles.

Well, more Gold, what then?
Believe it that we'll do any thing for Gold.

Consumptions sow
In hollow bones of man, strike their sharpe shins,
And mar men's spurring. Crack the Lawyers voice,
That he may never more false Title plead,
Nor sound his Quillers shrilly: Hoar the Flamen,
That scold'st against the quality of flesh,
And not believes himself. Down with the Nose,
Down with it flat, take the Bridge quite away
Of him, that his particular to foresee
Smells from the general weal. Make curld'pate Ruffians bald
And let the vnscarr'd Braggarts of the War
Derive some pain from you. Plague all,
That your Activity may defeat and quell
The source of all Erection. There's more Gold.
Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
And ditches grave you all.

More counsel with more Money, bounteous Timon.


More whore, more Mischief first, I have given you earnest.


Strike up the Drum towards Athens, farewell Timon: if I thrive well, I'll
visit thee again.


If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.


I never did thee harm.


Yes, thou spoke well of me.


Call thou that harm?


Men daily find it. Get thee away,
And take thy Beagles with thee.

We but offend him, strike.


That Nature being sick of mans unkindness
Should yet be hungry: Common Mother, thou
Whose womb vnmeasureable, and infinite breast
Teemes and feeds all: whose selfsame Mettle
Whereof thy proud Child (arrogant man) is puffed,
Engenders the black Toad, and Adder blew,
The gilded Newt, and eyeless venomed Worm,
With all the abhorred Births below Crisp Heaven,
Whereon Hyperions quickening fire doth shine:
Yield him, who all the humane Sons do hate,
From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root:
Enseare thy Fertile and Conceptious womb,
Let it no more bring out ungrateful man.
Go great with Tigers, Dragons, Wolves, and Bears,
Teem with new Monsters, whom thy upward face
Hath to the Marbled Mansion all above
Never presented. O, a Root, dear thanks:
Dry up thy Marrowes, Vines, and Plough-torne Leas,
Whereof ungrateful man with Licourish draughts
And Morsels Vnctious, greases his pure mind,
That from it all Consideration slips --
More man? Plague, plague.

I was directed hither. Men report,
Thou dost affect my Manners, and dost use them.

'Tis then, because thou dost not keep a dog
Whom I would imitate. Consumption catch thee.

This is in thee a Nature but infected,
A poor unmanly Melancholy sprung
From change of future. Why this Spade? this place?
This Slaue-like Habit, and these looks of Care?
Thy Flatterers yet wear Silk, drink Wine, lye soft,
Hug their diseased Perfumes, and have forgot
That ever Timon was. Shame not these Woods,
By pa^cing on the cunning of a Carper.
Be thou a Flatterer now, and seek to thrive
By that which ha's undone thee; hindge thy knee,
And let his very breath whom thou'lt observe
Blow off thy Cap: praise his most vicious strain,
And call it excellent: thou wast told thus:
Thou gau'st thine ears (like Tapsters, that bad welcome)
To Knaves, and all approachers: 'Tis most just
That thou turn Rascal, had thou wealth again,
Rascals should haue't. Do not assume my likeness.

Were I like thee, I'd throw away my self.


Thou hast cast away thy self, being like thy self
A Madman so long, now a Fool: what think
That the bleak air, thy boisterous Chamberlaine
Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these moist Trees,
That have out-liu'd the Eagle, page thy heals
And skip when thou point out? Will the cold brooke
Candied with Ice, Caudle thy Morning taste
To cure thy o're-nights surfeit? Call the Creatures,
Whose naked Natures live in all the spite
Of wrekefull Heaven, whose bare vnhoused Trunks*
To the conflicting Elements exposed
Answer mere Nature: bid them flatter thee.
O thou shalt find.

A Fool of thee: depart.


I love thee better now, then ere I did.


I hate thee worse.


Why?


Thou flatter misery.


I flatter not, but say thou art a Caytiffe.


Why dost thou seek me out?


To vex thee.


Always a Villains Office, or a Fools.
Dost please thy self in it?

I.


What, a Knave too?


If thou did put this sour cold habit on
To castigate thy pride, 'twere well: but thou
Dost it enforcedly: You would Courtier be again
Were thou not Beggar: willing misery
Out-liues: uncertain pomp, is crowned before:
The one is filling still, never complete:
The other, at high wish: best state Contentlesse,
Hath a distracted and most wretched being,
Worse then the worst, Content.
Thou should desire to dye, being miserable.

Not by his breath, that is more miserable.
Thou art a Slave, whom Fortunes tender arm
With favour never clasped: but bred a Dog.
Had thou like us from our first swath proceeded,
The sweet degrees that this brief world affords,
To such as may the passive drugs of it
Freely command: thou would have plunged thy self
In general Riot, melted down thy youth
In different beds of Lust, and never learned
The Icy precepts of respect, but followed
The Sugared game before thee. But my self,
Who had the world as my Confectionary,
The mouths, the tongues, the eyes, and hearts of men,
At duty more then I could frame employment;
That numberless upon me stuck, as leaves
Do on the Oak, have with one Winters brush
Fell from their boughs, and left me open, bare,
For every storm that blows. I to bear this,
That never knew but better, is some burden:
Thy Nature, did commence in sufferance, Time
Hath made thee hard in it. Why should you hate Men?
They never flattered thee. What hast thou given?
If thou wilt curse; thy Father (that poor rag)
Must be thy subject; who in spite put stuff
To some shee-Begger, and compounded thee
Poor Rogue, hereditary. Hence, be gone,
If thou had not been borne the worst of men,
Thou had been a Knave and Flatterer.

Art thou proud yet?


I, that I am not thee.


I, that I was no Prodigal.


I, that I am one now.
Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
I'd give thee leave to hang It. Get thee gone:
That the whole life of Athens were in this,
Thus would I eat it.

Here, I will mend thy Feast.


First mend thy company, take away thy self.


So I shall mend mine own, by' the lack of thine


'Tis not well mended so, it is but botched;
If not, I would it were.

What would thou have to Athens?


Thee thither in a whirlwind: if thou wilt,
Tell them there I have Gold, look, so I have.

Here is no use for Gold.


The best, and truest:
For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.

Where lie a nights Timon?


Under that's above me.
Where feed thou a-dayes Apemantus?

Where my stomach finds meat, or rather where I eat it.


Would poison were obedient, knew my mind


Where would thou send it?


To sauce thy dishes.


The middle of Humanity thou never knew, but the extremity of both ends.
When thou wast in thy Gilt, and thy Perfume, they mocked thee for too much
Curiosity: in thy Rags thou know none, but art despised for the contrary.
There's a medler for thee, eat it.


On what I hate, I feed not.


Dost hate a Medler?


I, though it look like thee.


And the had hated Meddlers sooner, you should have loved thy self better
now. What man did thou ever know unthrift, that was beloved after his
means?


Who without those means thou talk of, did thou ever know beloved?


My self.


I understand thee: thou had some means to keep a Dog.


What things in the world can thou nearest compare to thy Flatterers?


Women nearest, but men: men are the things themselves. What would thou do
with the world Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?


Give it the Beasts, to be rid of the men.


Would thou have thy self fall in the confusion of men, and remain a Beast
with the Beasts.


I Timon.


A beastly Ambition, which the Gods grant thee to attain to. If thou were
the Lyon, the Fox would beguile thee* if thou were the Lamb, the Fox would
eat thee: if thou were the Fox, the Lion would suspect thee, when peradventure
thou were accused by the Ass: If thou were the Ass, thy dullness would
torment thee; and still thou liu'dst but as a Breakfast to the Wolf. If thou
were the Wolf, thy greediness would afflict thee, oft thou should hazard
thy life for thy dinner. Were thou the Unicorn, pride and wrath would confound
thee, and make thine own self the conquest of thy fury. Were thou a Bear,
thou would be killed by the Horse: were thou a Horse, thou would be
seized by the Leopard: were thou a Leopard, thou were Germane to the Lion, and
the spots of thy Kindred, were Jurors on thy life. All thy safety were
remotion, and thy defence absence. What Beast could thou be, that were not
subject to a Beast: and what a Beast art thou already, that see not thy loss
in transformation.


If thou could please me
With speaking to me, thou might
Have hit upon it here.
The Commonwealth of Athens, is become
A Forest of Beasts.

How ha's the Ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the City.


Yonder comes a Poet and a Painter:
The plague of Company light upon thee:
I will fear to catch it, and give way.
When I know not what else to do,
I'll see thee again.

When there is nothing living but thee,
Thou shalt be welcome.
I had rather be a Beggars Dog,
Then Apemantus.

Thou art the Cap
Of all the Fools alive.

Would thou were clean enough
To spit upon.

A plague on thee,
Thou art too bad to curse.

All Villains
That do stand by thee, are pure.

There is no Leprosy,
But what thou speak.

If I name thee, I'll beat thee;
But I should infect my hands.

I would my tongue
Could rot them off.

Away thou issue of a mangy dog,
Choler does kill me,
That thou art alive, I swooned to see thee.

Would thou would burst.


Away thou tedious Rogue, I am sorry I shall lose a stone by thee.


Beast.


Slave.


Toad.


Rogue, Rogue, Rogue.
I am sick of this false world, and will love nought
But even the mere necessities upon it:
Then Timon presently prepare thy grave:
Lye where the light Some of the Sea may beat
Thy grave stone daily, make thine Epitaph,
That death in me, at others lives may laugh.
O thou sweet King-killer, and dear divorce
Twixt natural Sun and fire: thou bright defilet
of Himens purest bed, thou valiant Mars,
Thou ever, young, fresh, loved, and delicate wooer,
Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated Snow
That lies on Dians lap.
Thou visible God,
That souldrest close Impossibilities,
And make them kiss; that speak with every Tongue
To every purpose: O thou touch of hearts,
Think thy slaue-man rebels, and by thy virtue
Set them into confounding odds, that Beasts
May have the world in Empire.

Would 'twere so,
But not till I am dead. I'll say the hast Gold:
Thou wilt be thronged too shortly.

Thronged too?


I.


Thy back I prithee.


Live, and love thy misery.


Long live so, and so dye. I am quit.


Mo things like men,
Eat Timon, and abhor then.

Where should he have this Gold? It is some poor Fragment, some slender Ort of
his remainder: the mere want of Gold, and the falling from of his Friends,
drove him into this Melancholy.


It is noised
He hath a mass of Treasure.

Let us make the assay upon him, if he care not for it, he will supply us
easily: if he covetously reserve it, how shall's get it?


True: for he bears it not about him:
'Tis hid.

Is not this he?


Where?


'Tis his description.


He? I know him.


Save thee Timon.


Now Thieves.


Soldiers, not Thieves.


Both too, and women's Sons.


We are not Thieves, but men
That much do want.

Your greatest want is, you want much of meat:
Why should you want? Behold, the Earth hath Roots:
Within this Mile break forth a hundred Springs:
The Oaks bear Mast, the Briars Scarlet Heps,
The bounteous Huswife Nature, on each bush,
Lays her full Mess before you. Want? why Want?

We cannot live on Grass, on Berries, Water,
As Beasts, and Birds, and Fishes.

Nor on the Beasts themselves, the Birds Fishes,
You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con,
That you are Thieves professed: that you work not
In holier shapes: For there is boundless Theft
In limited Professions. Rascal Thieves
Here's Gold. Go, suck the subtle blood of the Grape,
Till the high Feauor sees your blood to froth,
And so escape hanging. Trust not the Physician,
His Antidotes are poison, and he slays
More then you Rob: Take wealth, and lives together,
Do Villain do, since you protest to do it.
Like Workmen, I'll example you with Thievery:
The Suns a Thief, and with his great attraction
Robs the vast Sea. The Moons an arrant Thief,
And her pale fire, she snatches from the Sun.
The Sea^ a Thief, whose liquid Surge, resolves
The Moon into Salt tears. The Earth's a Thief,
That feeds and breeds by a composture stolen
From gen'rall excrement: each thing's a Thief.
The Laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
Ha's vncheck'd Theft. Love not your selves, away,
Rob one another, there's more Gold, cut throats,
All that you meet are Thieves: to Athens go,
Break open shops, nothing can you steal
But Thieves do loose it: steal less, for this I give you,
And Gold confound you howsoever: Amen.

Has almost charmed me from my Profession, by persuading me to it.


'Tis in the malice of mankind, that he thus advises us not to have us thrive
in our mystery.


I'll believe him as an Enemy,
And give over my Trade.

Let us first see peace in Athens, there is no time so miserable, but a man may
be true.


Oh you Gods!
Is yon'd despised and ruinous man my Lord?
Full of decay and failing? Oh Monument
And wonder of good deeds, evilly bestowed!
What an alteration of Honour has desperate want made?
What vilder thing upon the earth, then Friends,
Who can bring Noblest minds, to basest ends.
How rarely does it meet with this times guise,
When man was wished to love his Enemies:
Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
Those that would mischief me, then those that do.
Has caught me in his eye, I will present my honest grief
unto him; and as my Lord, still serve him with my life.
My dearest Master.

Away: what art thou?


Have you forgot me, Sir?


Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men.
Then, if thou grunt'st, the art a man.
I have forgot thee.

An honest poor servant of yours.


Then I know thee not:
I never had honest man about me, I all
I kept were Knaves, to serve in meat to Villains.

The Gods are witness,
Neu'r did poor Steward wear a truer grief
For his undone Lord, then mine eyes for you.

What, dost thou weep?
Come nearer, then I love thee
Because thou art a woman, and disclaim
Flinty mankind: whose eyes do never give,
But thorough Lust and Laughter: pittie's sleeping:
Strange times yt weep with laughing, not with weeping.

I beg of you to know me, good my Lord,
To accept my grief, and whilst this poor wealth lasts,
To entertain me as your Steward still.

Had I a Steward
So true, so just, and now so comfortable?
It almost turns my dangerous Nature wild.
Let me behold thy face: Surely, this man
Was borne of woman.
Forgive my general, and exceptlesse rashness
You perpetual sober Gods. I do proclaim
One honest man: Mistake me not, but one:
No more I pray, and he's a Steward.
How fain would I have hated all mankind,
And thou redeem thy self. But all save thee,
I fell with Curses.
Me thinks thou art more honest now, then wise:
For, by oppressing and betraying me,
Thou might have sooner got another Service:
For many so arrive at second Masters,
Upon their first Lords neck. But tell me true,
(For I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure)
Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
If not a Vsuring kindness, and as rich men deal Gifts,
Expecting in return twenty for one?

No my most worthy Master, in whose breast
Doubt, and suspect (alas) are placed too late:
You should have feared false times, when you did Feast.
Suspect still comes, where an estate is least.
That which I show, Heaven knows, is merely Love,
Duty, and Zeal, to your unmatched mind;
Care of your Food and Living, and believe it,
My most Honoured Lord,
For any benefit that points to me,
Either in hope, or present, I'd exchange
For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
To requite me, by making rich your self.

Look thee, 'tis so: thou singly honest man,
Here take: the Gods out of my misery
Ha's sent thee Treasure. Go, live rich and happy,
But thus conditioned: Thou shalt build from men:
Hate all, curse all, show Charity to none,
But let the famished flesh slide from the Bone,
Ere thou relieve the Beggar. Give to dogs
What thou denyest to men. Let Prisons swallow 'em,
Debts wither'em to nothing, be men like blasted woods
And may Diseases like up their false bloods,
And so farewell, and thrive.

O let me stay, and comfort you, my Master.


If thou hat'st Curses
Stay not: fly, whilst thou art blessed and free:
Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.

As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where he abides.


What's to be thought of him?
Does the Rumour hold for true,
That he's so full of Gold?

Certain.
Alcibiades reports it: Phrinica and Timandylo
Had Gold of him. He likewise enriched
Poor straggling Soldiers, with great quantity.
'Tis said, he gave unto his Steward
A mighty sum.

Then this breaking of his,
Ha's been but a Try for his Friends?

Nothing else:
You shall see him a Palm in Athens again,
And flourish with the highest:
Therefore, 'tis not amiss, we tender our loves
To him, in this supposed distress of his:
It will show honestly in us,
And is very likely, to load our purposes
With what they travail for,
If it be a just and true report, that goes
Of his having.

What have you now
To present unto him?

Nothing at this time
But my Visitation: only I will promise him
An excellent Piece.

I must serve him so too;
Tell him of an intent that's coming toward him.

Good as the best.
Promising, is the very Air of the Time;
It opens the eyes of Expectation.
Performance, is ever the duller for his act,
And but in the plainer and simpler kind of people,
The deed of Saying is quite out of use.
To Promise, is most Courtly and fashionable;
Performance, is a kind of Will or Testament
Which argues a great sickness in his judgment
That makes it.

Excellent Workman,
Thou can not paint a man so bad
As is thy self.

I am thinking
What I shall say I have provided for him:
It must be a personating of himself:
A Satire against the softness of Prosperity,
With a Discovery of the infinite Flatteries
That follow youth and opulence.

Must thou needs
Stand for a Villain in thine own Work?
Wilt thou whip thine own faults in other men?
Do so, I have Gold for thee.

Nay let's seek him.
Then do we sin against our own estate,
When we may profit meet, and come too late.

True:
When the day serves before blacke-corner'd night;
Find what thou want, by free and offered light.
Come.

I'll meet you at the turn:
What a Gods Gold, that he is worshipped
In a baser Temple, then where Swine feed?
'Tis thou that rig the Bark, and plow'st the Some,
Settle admired reverence in a Slave,
To thee be worshipped, and thy Saints for aye:
Be crowned with Plagues, that thee alone obey.
Fit I meet them.

Hail worthy Timon.


Our late Noble Master.


Have I once lived
To see two honest men?

Sir:
Having often of your open Bounty tasted,
Hearing you were retired, your Friends fallen off,
Whose thankless Natures (O abhorred Spirits)
Not all the Whips of Heaven, are large enough*
What, to you,
Whose Starre-like Nobleness gave life and influence
To their whole being? I am rapt, and cannot cover
The monstrous bulk of this Ingratitude
With any size of words.

Let it go,
Naked men may see it the better:
You that are honest, by being what you are,
Make them best seen, and known.

He, and my self
Have trauail'd in the great shower of your gifts,
And sweetly felt it.

I, you are honest man.


We are hither come
To offer you our service.

Most honest men:
Why how shall I requite you?
Can you eat Roots, and drink cold water, no?

What we can do,
We'll do to do you service.

Y' are honest men,
Y' have heard that I have Gold,
I am sure you have, speak truth, y' are honest men.

So it is said my Noble Lord, but therefore
Came not my Friend, nor I.

Good honest men: Thou draw a counterfeit
Best in all Athens, the art indeed the best,
Thou counterfeit most lively.

So, so, my Lord.


Even so sir as I say. And for thy fiction,
Why thy Verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth,
That thou art even Natural in thine Art.
But for all this (my honest Natured friends)
I must needs say you have a little fault,
Marry 'tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I
You take much pains to mend.

Beseech your Honour
To make it known to us.

You'll take it ill.


Most thankfully, my Lord.


Will you indeed?


Doubt it not worthy Lord.


There's never a one of you but trusts a Knave,
That mightily deceives you.

Do we, my Lord?


I, and you hear him cog,
See him dissemble,
Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
Keep in your bosom, yet remain assured
That he's a made-vp-Villaine.

I know none such, my Lord.


Nor I.


Look you,
I love you well, I'll give you Gold
Rid me these Villains from your companies;
Hang them, or stab them, drown them in a draught,
Confound them by some course, and come to me,
I'll give you Gold enough.

Name them my Lord, let's know them.


You that way, and you this:
But two in Company:
Each man a part, all single, and alone,
Yet an arch Villain keeps him company:
If where thou art, two Villains shall not be,
Come not near him. If thou would not recide
But where one Villain is, then him abandon.
Hence, pack, there's Gold, you came for Gold ye slaves:
You have work for me; there's payment, hence,
You are an Alcumist, make Gold of that:
Out Rascal dogs.

It is vain that you would speak with Timon:
For he is set so only to himself,
That nothing but himself, which looks like man,
Is friendly with him.

Bring us to his Cave.
It is our part and promise to the Athenians
To speak with Timon.

At all times alike
Men are not still the same: 'twas Time and Griefs
That framed him thus. Time with his fairer hand,
Offering the Fortunes of his former days,
The former man may make him: bring us to him
And chanced it as it may.

Here is his Cave:
Peace and content be here. Lord Timon, Timon,
Look out, and speak to Friends: The Athenians
By two of their most reverend Senate greet thee:
Speak to them Noble Timon.

Thou Sun that comforts burn,
Speak and be hanged:
For each true word, a blister, and each false
Be as a Cantherizing to the root of the Tongue,
Consuming it with speaking.

Worthy Timon.


Of none but such as you,
And you of Timon.

The Senators of Athens, greet thee Timon.


I thank them,
And would send them back the plague,
Could I but catch it for them.

O forget
What we are sorry for our selves in thee:
The Senators, with one consent of love,
Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought
On special Dignities, which vacant lye
For thy best use and wearing.

They confess
Toward thee, forgetfulness too general gross;
Which now the public Body, which doth seldom
Play the re-canter, feeling in it self
A lack of Timons aid, hath since withal
Of it own fall, restraining aid to Timon,
And send forth us, to make their sorrowed render,
Together, with a recompense more fruitful
Then their offence can weigh down by the Dram,
I even such heaps and sums of Love and Wealth,
As shall to thee blot out, what wrongs were theirs,
And write in thee the figures of their love,
Eu^ to read them thine.

You witch me in it;
Surprise me to the very brink of tears;
Lend me a Fools heart, and a woman's eyes,
And I'll be weep these comforts, worthy Senators.

Therefore so please thee to return with us,
And of our Athens, thine and ours to take
The Captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
Allowed with absolute power, and thy good name
Live with Authority: so soon we shall drive back
Of Alcibiades the approaches wild,
Who like a Bore too savage, doth root up
His Countries peace.

And shakes his threatening Sword
Against the walls of Athens.

Therefore Timon.


Well sir, I will: therefore I will sir thus:
If Alcibiades kill my Countrymen,
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
That Timon cares not. But if he sack fair Athens,
And take our goodly aged men by' the Beards,
Giving our holy Virgins to the stain
Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brain'd war:
Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it,
In pity of our aged, and our youth,
I cannot choose but tell him that I care not,
And let him tak't at worst: For their Knives care not,
While you have throats to answer. For my self,
There's not a whittle, in the unruly Camp,
But I do prize it at my love, before
The reuerends Throat in Athens. So I leave you
To the protection of the prosperous Gods,
As Thieves to Keepers.

Stay not, all's in vain.


Why I was writing of my Epitaph,
It will be seen to morrow. My long sickness
Of Health, and Living, now begins to mend,
And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still,
Be Alcibiades your plague; you his,
And last so long enough.

We speak in vain.


But yet I love my Country, and am not
One that rejoices in the common wrack,
As common bruit doth put it.

That's well spoke.


Commend me to my loving Countrymen.


These words become your lips as they pass thorough them.


And enter in our ears, like great Triumphers
In their applauding gates.

Commend me to them,
And tell them, that to ease them of their griefs,
Their fears of Hostile strokes, their Aches losses,
Their pangs of Love, with other incident throws
That Natures fragile Vessel doth sustain
In lifes uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them,
I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades wrath.

I like this well, he will return again.


I have a Tree which grows here in my Close,
That mine own use invites me to cut down,
And shortly must I fell it. Tell my Friends,
Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree,
From high to low throughout, that who so please
To stop Affliction, let him take his haste;
Come hither ere my Tree hath felt the Axe,
And hang himself. I pray you do my greeting.

Trouble him no further, thus you still shall Find him.


Come not to me again, but say to Athens,
Timon hath made his everlasting Mansion
Upon the Beached Verge of the salt Flood,
Who once a day with his embossed Froth*
The turbulent Surge shall cover; thither come,
And let my graue-stone be your Oracle:
Lips, let four words go by, and Language end:
What is amiss, Plague and Infection mend.
Graves only be men's works, and Death their gain;
Sun, hide thy Beams, Timon hath done his Reign.

His discontents are unremoveably coupled to Nature.


Our hope in him is dead: let us return,
And strain what other means is left unto us
In our dear peril.

It requires swift foot.


Thou hast painfully discovered: are his Files
As full as thy report?

I have spoke the least.
Besides his expedition promises present approach.

We stand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.


I met a Currier, one mine ancient Friend,
Whom though in general part we were opposed,
Yet our old love made a particular force,
And made us speak like Friends. This man was riding
From Alcibiades to Timons Cave,
With Letters of entreaty, which imported
His Fellowship in the cause against your City,
In part for his sake moved.

Here come our Brothers.


No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect,
The Enemies Drum is heard, and fearful scouring
Doth choke the air with dust: In, and prepare,
Ours is the fall I fear, our Foes the Snare.

By all description this should be the place.
Whose here? Speak hoa. No answer? What is this?
Tymon is dead, who hath out-stretcht his span,
Some Beast read this; There does not live a Man.
Dead sure, and this his Grave, what's on this Tomb,
I cannot read: the Character I'll take with wax,
Our Captain hath in every Figure skill;
An ag'd Interpreter, though young in days:
Before proud Athens he's set down by this,
Whose fall the mark of his Ambition is.

Sound to this Coward, and lascivious Town,
Our terrible approach.
Till now you have gone on, and filled the time
With all Licentious measure, making your wills
The scope of Justice. Till now, my self and such
As slept within the shadow of your power
Have wandered with our traversed Arms, and breathed
Our sufferance vainly: Now the time is flush,
When crouching Marrow in the bearer strong
Cries (of it self) no more; Now breathless wrong,
Shall sit and pant in your great Chairs of ease,
And pursy Insolence shall break his wind
With fear and horrid flight.

Noble, and young;
When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
Ere thou had power, or we had cause of fear,
We sent to thee, to give thy rages Balm,
To wipe out our Ingratitude, with Loves
Above their quantity.

So did we woo
Transformed Timon, to our Cities love
By humble Message, and by promised means:
We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
The common stroke of war.

These walls of ours,
Were not erected by rheir hands, from whom
You have receyu'd your grief: Nor are they such,
That these great Towers, Trophies, Schools should fall
For private faults in them.

Nor are they living
Who were the motives that you first went out,
(Shame that they wanted, cunning in excess)
Hath broke their hearts. March, Noble Lord,
Into our City with thy Banners spread,
By decimation and a tythed death;
If thy Revenges hunger for that Food
Which Nature loathes, take thou the destined tenth,
And by the hazard of the spotted dye,
Let dye the spotted.

All have not offended:
For those that were, it is not square to take
On those that are, Revenge: Crimes, like Lands
Are not inherited, then dear Countryman,
Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage,
Spare thy Athenian Cradle, and those Kin
Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall
With those that have offended, like a Shepherd,
Approach the Fold, and cull the infected forth,
But kill not altogether.

What thou wilt,
Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile,
Then hew too't, with thy Sword.

Set but thy foot
Against our rampyr'd gates, and they shall open:
So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,
To say thou't enter Friendly.

Throw thy Glove,
Or any Token of thine Honour else,
That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress,
And not as our Confusion: All thy Powers
Shall make their harbour in our Town, till we
Have sealed thy full desire.

Then there's my Glove,
Defend and open your uncharged Ports,
Those Enemies of Timons, and mine own
Whom you your selves shall set out for reproof,
Fall and no more; and to atone your fears
With my more Noble meaning, not a man
Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream
Of Regular Justice in your Cities bounds,
But shall be remedied to your public Laws
At heaviest answer.

'Tis most Nobly spoken.


Descend, and keep your words.


My Noble General, Timon is dead,
Entombed upon the very hem of the Sea,
And on his Gravestone, this Insculpture which
With wax I brought away: whose soft Impression
Interprets for my poor ignorance.
Here lies a wretched Coarse, of wretched Soul bereft,
Seek not my name: A Plague consume you, wicked Caitiffs left:
Here lye I Timon, who alive, all living men did hate,
Pass by, and curse thy fill, but pass and stay not here thy gate.
These well express in thee thy latter spirits:
Though thou abhorred in us our humane griefs.
Scornd'st our Brains flow, and those our droplets, which
From niggard Nature fall; yet Rich Conceit
Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
On thy low Grave, on faults forgiven. Dead
Is Noble Timon, of whose Memory
Hereafter more. Bring me into your City,
And I will use the Olive, with my Sword:
Make war breed peace; make peace stint war, make each
Prescribe to other, as each others Leach.
Let our Drums strike.


