Departing from the darkened dens
which Dicis low doth keep,
Lo here I am sent out again,
from Tartar Dungeon deep,
Thyestes I, that wheather coast
to shun do stand in doubt,
Th'internall fie^des I fly, the foalke
of earth I chase about.
My conscience lo abhors, that I should heather passage make,
Appalled sore with fear* and dread my trembling sinews shake:
My fathers house, or rather yet my brothers I espy,
This is the old and antique porch of Pelops progeny.
Here first the Greekes on princes heads do place the royal crown,
And here in throne aloft they lye, that ietteth up and down,
With stately Sceptre in their hand, eake here their courts do lie,
This is their place of banqueting, return therefore will I.
Nay: better were it not to haunt the loathsome Limbo lakes,
Where as the Stygion porter doth advance with lusty crakes
His triple gorge be hong with Mane shag hatry, rusty black:
Where ^xions Carcass linked fast, the whirling wheel doth rack,
And rowleth still upon him self: where as full oft in vain
Much toil is lost, (the tottring stone down tumbling back again)
Where growing guts the greedy gripe do gnaw with ravening bits.
Where parched up with burning thirst amid the waives he st^s,
And gapes to catch the flecting flood with hungry chaps beguiled,
That pays his parnefull punishment, whose feast the Gods defiled:
Yet that old man so stepped in years at length by trace of time,
How great a part belonges to me and portion of his crime?
Account we all the grisly ghosts, whom guilty found of ill,
The Gnosian Judge in Plutoes pyts doth rosse in torments still:
Thyestes I in driery deeds will far surmount the rest,
Yet to my Brother yield I, (though I gorged my bloody breast)
And stuffed have my pampered paunch even with my children three,
That crammed lye within my Rybs and have their Tomb in me,
The bowels of my swallowed Babes, devoured up I have,
Nor fickle Fortune me alone the Father doth deprave,
But enterprysing greater guilte then that is put in bre,
To file my Daughters bawdy Bed, my lust she doth allure.
To speak these words I do not spare, I wrought the heinous deed,
That therefore I through all my stock, might parent still proceed.
My Daughter driven by force of Fates and destinies deuyne,
Doth breed young bones, lades her womb with sinful seed of mine.
Lo, nature changed upside down, and out of order tornde
This myngle mangle hath she made, (O fact to be forlornde)
A Father and a Grandsyre lo, confusedly I am,
My daughters husband both become, and Father to the same.
Those babes yt should my Nephews be, when nature rightly runs*
She being tumbled doth confound, and mingle with my sons.
The crystal clearness of the day, and Phoebus beams so bright,
Are myxed with the foggy clouds, and darkness dim of night.
When wickedness had wearied us, to late truce taken was,
Even when our detestable deeds were done and brought to pass.
But valiant Agamemnon he grand captain of the Host,
Who bare the sway among the Kings, and ruled all the roast,
Whose flaunting Flag, and Banner brave, displayed in royal sort,
A thousand sail of sowsing ships did guard to Phrygian part,
And with their swelling shatling sails the surging seas did hide*
That beats on the banks of Troy, and flows by her side:
When Phoebus Carte the Zodiac ten times had aver run,
And waste the battered Walls do lye of Troy destroyed and won,
Returned he is to yield his throat unto his traitoress Wife.
That shall with force of bloody blade bereave him of his life.
The glytering Swerd, the hewing Axe, and wounding weapons more,
With blood for blood new set abroche shall make the floor to flow.
With sturdy stroke, and boisterous blow, of pithy Pollaxe given
His beaten brains are pash^ abroad, his cracked Skull is reuen.
Now myschiefe marches on a pace, now falsehood doth appear,
Now Butchers slaughter doth approach, and muriher draws near.
In honour of thy natyue day Aegisthus they prepare
The solemn feast with ^uncketing* and daynty tothsome fare.
Fie, what doth shame abash thee so, and cause thy courage quail?
Why doubts thy righthand what to do? to smite why doth it fail?
What he forecasting might suspect, why should thou take advise?
Why freteest thou, demanding if thou may it enterprise?
Nay: if a mother it beseem, thou rather may surmyse.
What now? how happens it that thus the sm^ing summers night,
When Phoebus from Th'antipodes should render son the light,
On sudden change their turns with nights that last and linger lunge,
When wynters Boreas bitter blasts, doth puff the trees among?
Or what doth cause the gliding stars to stay still in the sky?
We wayght for Phoebus: to the World bring day now by and by.
O Fortune, that dost fail the great estate of kings,
On slippery sliding seat thou placest lofty things
And set on tottring sort, where perils do abound
Yet never kigdome calm, nor quiet could be found:
No day to Scepters sure doth shine, that they might say,
To morrow shall we rule, as we have done to day.
One clod of crooked care another brings in,
One hurly burly done, another doth begin:
Not so the raging Sea doth boyle upon the Sand,
Where as the southern wind that blows in Afryck Land,
One Wave upon another doth heap with sturdy blast:
Not so doth Euxine Sea, his swelling waives up cast:
Nor so his belching stream from shallow bottom roll,
That borders hard upon the ysyfrosen poall:
Where as Boots bright doth twyne his Wayne about,
And of the marble seas doth nothing stand in doubt.
O how doth Fortune toss and tomble in her wheel
The staggring states of Kings, that ready be to reel?
Fain would they dreaded be, and yet not settled (...)
When as they feared are, they fear, and live (...) woe.
The silent Lady night so sweet to man and beast,
Can not bestow on them her safe and quiet rest:
Sleep that doth overcome and break the bonds of grief,
It cannot ease their hearts, nor minister relief:
What castle strongly built, what bulwark, tower, or town,
Is not by mischyefes means, brought topsy turuye down?
What ramperd walls are not made weak by wicked war?
From stately courts of Kings doth justice fly afar:
In pryncely Palaces, of honesty the lore,
And wedlock vow devout, is set by little store.
The bloody Bellon those doth haunt with gory hand,
Whose light and vain conceit in painted pomp doth stand.
And those Erinnys wood turmoils with frensyes fits,
That ever more in proud and hauty houses sits,
Which ficle Fortunes hand in twinkling of an eye,
From high and proud degre drives down in dust to lye.
Although that skyrmishe cease, no banners be displayed
And though no wiles be wroughe, and pollecy be stayed,
Down paysed with their weight the massy things do sink,
And from her burden doth vn^able Fortune shrynke*
The swelling Sails puffed up with gale of westren wind,
Do yet mystrust thereof a rempest in their mind:
The threatening tops (that touch the clouds) of lofty towers
Be soonest paid, and bet with south wind rainy showers:
The darksome wood doth see his tough and sturdy Oak,
Well waynde in years to be clean over thrown and broke:
The lyhhtnings flashing flame out breaking in the Sky,
First lights on the mounts, and hills that are most hy.
The bodies corpulent and of the largest syse
Are ryfest styll to catch diseases when they rise.
When as the flock to grase, in pasture fat is put,
Whose Neck is larded best* his throat shall first be cut:
What Fortune doth advance and hoists up on hye,
She lets it up to ^all again more grievously.
The things of middle sort, and of a mean degree,
Endure above the rest and longest days do see:
The man of mean estate most happy is of all,
Who pleased with the lot that doth to him befall,
Doth sail on silent shore with calm and quiet tide,
And dreads with bruised barge on swelling Seas to ride:
Nor launcing to the deep where bottom none is found,
May with his rudder search, and reach the shallow ground.
O Drowsy oreaming doting soul,
what comes in thy brain
To seek about for thy defence
what way thou may attain?
What ayels thy skittish waiward wits,
to waver up and down?
The fittest shift prevented is,
the best path overgrown
Thou might once maintained have
thy wedlock chamber chaste,
And eake have ruled with majesty, by faith conjoined fast:
Now nurtures lore neglected is, all right doth clean decay
Religion and dignity with faith are worn away:
And ruddy shame with blushing cheeks so far god wot is past,
That when it would it cannot now come home again at last.
O let me now at random run with bridle at my will:
The safest path to mischief is by mischief open still
Now put in practise, seek about, search out and learn to find
The wily traynes, and crafty guyles of wicked womankind:
What any devilish traitorous dame durst do in working woe,
Or any wounded in her wits by shot of Cupids bow.
What ever rigorous stepdame could commit with desperate hand,
Or as the wench who flaming fast by Venus poisoning brand,
Was driven by lewd incestuous love in ship of Thessail land,
To f^t away from Colchos yle, where Phasis channel deep.
With stiuer stream down from the hills of Armenie doth sweep.
Get weapons good, get bylbowblades or temper poison strong,
Or with some yonker trudge from Greece by theft the seas along:
Why dost thou faint to talk of theft, exile or pr^ute flight?
These came by hap, thou therefore must on grea^ter mischief light.
O worthy Oueene among the Greekes that bears the swinging sway.
And borne of Ledas royal blood, what muttring dost thou say?
What fury fell enforces thee, bereaved of thy wits.
To rage and rave with bedlam brains, to fret withfranticke fits?
Though madam thou do counsel keep, and not complain thy case,
Thine anguish plain appears in thy pale and wanny face.
Reveal therefore what is thy grief, take leisure good and stay,
What reason could not remedy, oft cured hath delay.

So grievous is my careful case which plunges me so sore,
That deal I cannot with delay, nor linger any more.
The flashing flames* and furious force of fiery fervent heate,
Outraging in my boiling breast, my burning bones doth beat:
It sucks the sappy marow out the juice it doth convey,
It frets, it tears, it reuts, it gnaws, my guts and gall away.
Now feeble fear still eggs me on (with dolor being pressed)
And cankered hate with thwacking thumps doth bounce upon my breast
The blinded boy that lovers hearts doth reeve with deadly stroke,
Entangled hath my linked mind with leawd and wanton yoke:
Refusing still to take a foil, or clean to be confound:
Among these broils, and agonies my mind beseging round,
Lo feeble, weary, batred down, and under trode^ shame,
That wrestleth, strives, strugleth hard, and fights with the same.
Thus am I driven to diverse shores and beat frow bank to bank,
And tossed in the fomy floods that strives with courage crank.
As when here wynd, and their the stream when both their force will try,
From sands allow doth hoist and rear the seas with surges hye.
The wal^ring wave doth staggeryng stand not weting what to do,
But (houeryng) doubts, whose furious force he best may yield him to*
My kingdom therefore I cast of, my sceptor I forsake
As anger, sorrow, hope, me lead, that way I mean to take.
At all adventure to the seas I yield my beaten Barge,
At random careless will I run, now will I rove at large
Whereas my mind to fancy fond dath gad and run astray,
It is the best to choose that chance, and follow on that way.

This desprat dotage doth declare, and rashness rude and blind,
To choose out chance to be the guide and ruler of thy mind.

He that is driven to utter pinch and furthest shift of all,
What need he doubt his doubtful lot or how his luck befall?

In silent shore thou saylest yet thy trespass we may hyde,
If thou thy self detect it not, nor cause it be descryde.

Alas it is more blasd abroad, and further it is blown,
Then any crime that ever in this princely court was sown.

Thy former fait with pensive hart and sorrow thou dest few.
And fondly yet thou go about, to set abroch a new,

It is a very folishnes to keep a mean therein.

The thing he fears he doth augment who heaps sin to sin.

But fire and swoard to cure the same the place of salve supply.

There is no man who at the first extremity will try.

In working mischief men do take the rediest way they find.

The sacred name of wedlock once revoke and have in mind.

Ten years have I been desolate, and led a widows life.
Yet shall I entertain a new my husband as his wife?

Consider yet thy son and heir whom he of thee begot.

And eake my daughters wedding blase as yet forget I not.
Achilles eke my son in law to mind I do not spare,
How well he kept his vow that he to me his mother swear.

When as our navy might not pass by wynd nor yet by stream,
Thy daughters blood in sacrifyce their passage did redeem:
She stirred and brake the sluggish seas, whose water still did stand,
Whose feeble force might not hoise up, the vessels from the land.

I am ashamed here withal, it makes me repyne.
That Tyndaris (who from the Gods doth fecch her noble ligne
Should give the ghost t'asswage the wrath of Gods and them appease,
Whereby the Grekish navy might have passage free by seas.
My grudging mind still harps upon my daughters wedding day,
Whom he hath made for Pelops stock the bloody ransom pay.
When as with cruel countenance embrewd with gory blood,
As at a wedding alter side th'unpitiful parent stoodt,
It erked Calchas woeful hart, who did abhor the same.
His Oracle he rewd, and eke the back reflicting flame
O wicked and ungracious stock that winnest il with ill,
Triumphing in thy filthy featse ncreasyng leaudnes still.
By blood we win the waueryng winds, by death we purchase war

But by this means a thousand ships at once released are:

With lucky fate attempt the seas did not the losed rout?
For Aulis I'll, th'ungracious fleet from port did tumble out:
As with a lewd unlucky hand the war he did begin,
So Fortune favoured his success to thrive no more therein.
Her love as captive holds him whom captive he did take
Not moved with the earnest suite that could Achilles make,
Of Phoebus prelat Sminthicall he did retain the spoil:
When for the sacred virgins love his furious dreast doth boyle:
Achilles rough and thundering threats could not him qualify.
Nor he that doth direct the fates above the starry sky.
To us he is an Augur just, and keeps his promise due,
But while he threats his captive truls of word he is not true.
The savage people fierce in wrath once might not move his spright,
Who did purloyne the kindled tents with fire blazing bright:
When slaughter great on Greekes was made in most extremest fight
Without a foe he conquered, with leanes pines away,
In lewd and wanton chamber tricks he spends the idle day,
And freshly still he fedes his lust, least that some other while
His chamber chaste should want a stews, that might the same defile.
On Lady Brises love ag aine his fancy fond doth stand,
Whom he hath got, that wrested was out of Achilles hand.
And carnal copulation to have he doth. not shame,
Though from her husbands bosom he hath snatched the wicked dame,
Tush, he that doth at Paris grudge, with wound but newly stroke
Eflamd with Phrygian Prophets love, his boiling breast doth smoke.
Now after Troyan boties brave, and Troy orewhelm'd he saw,
Returned he is a prisoners spouse, and Pryams son in law.
Now heart be bold, take courage good, of stomach now be stowt,
A field that easily is not fought, to pitch thou go about.
In practise mischief thou must put, why hopst thou for a day,
While Priams daughter come from Troy in Greece do bear the sway.
But as for the poor sely wreth, a wayteth at thy place
Thy wyddow, virgyns, and Orest his fatherlyke in face,
Consider their calamityes, to come, and cake their cares,
Whom all the peril of the broil doth threat in thy affairs.
O cursed captive, woeful wretch why dost thou loiter so?
Thy little brats a stepdame have whose wrath will work their wo^.
With gashing sword (and if thou can none other way provide),
Nor thrust it through another ribs then launch thy gory side,
So murder twain with brewed blood, let blood immixed be,
And by destroying of thy self destroy thy spouse with thee.
Death is not saw with soppes of Sorrow if some man else I have,
Whose breathless corse I wish to pass with me to deadly grave.

Queen, bridle thine affections, and wisely rule thy rage,
Thy swelling mood now mitigate, thy choler ^ake assuage.
Way well the wayghty enterprise that thou dost take in hand,
Triumphant victor he retur^es of mighty Asia land
Avenging Europes injury with him he brings away.
The spoils of sacked Pargamy a huge and mighty pray.
In bondage eake he leads the foalke of long assaulted Troy,
Yet dare thou by pollecie attempt him to annoy?
Whom with the dynt of glittering sword Achilles durst not harm,
Although his rash and desperate dickes the froward Knight did arm:
Nor Aiax yet more hardy man up yielding vital breath,
Whom frantic fury fell enforst to wound himself to death:
Nor Hector he whose only life procured the Greekes delay,
And long in war for victory enforced them to stay:
Nor Paris shaft, whose conning hand with shot so sure did aim:
Nor mighty Memnon swart and black, had power to hurt the same:
Nor Xanthus flood, where to and fro dead carcasses did swim,
With armour hewd and therewith all some maimed broken limb:
Nor Symois, that purple wawmes with slaughter died-doth steer.
Nor Cygnus lilly white, the Son of fenny God so dear:
Nor yet the musteryng Thrasian host: nor warlike Rhesus king:
Nor Amazons, who to the wars did painted Quivers bring,
And bare their hatches in their hands with Target and with shield,
Yet had no power with ghastly wound to foil him in the field.
Sith he such scouringes hath escaped and plungde of perils past
Entendest thou to murder him returning home at last?
And sacred alters to profane with slaughters so impure?
Shall Greec thaduenger let this wrong long vnreuengde endure
The grym and fearce coragious horse, the battayles, shouts, cries,
The swelling seas which bruised barks do dread when storms arise,
Behold the fields with streams of blood oreflowne deeply dround,
And al the cheualry of Troy in servile bondage bound,
Which Greekes have writ in registers. Thy stubborn stomach byud,
Suddue thy fond affections, and pacify thy mind.

THe cursed time that evermore
my mind did most detest,
The days that I abhorred have
and hated in my breast,
Are come, are come, that mine estate
will bring to utter wrack:
Alas my hart why dost thou fail.
and fainting fly back?
What dost thou mean at first assalte
from armour thus to fly,
Trust this, the cruel Gods entend my doleful destiny,
To wrap thee in with perils round and catch thee in a band?
Endeuer drudge with all thy power their plagues for to withstand:
With stomach stout rebellious to fire and sword appeal
It is no plague, if such a death thy native destnies deal.

(O partners of my perils all begot of Leda thou)
Direct thy doings after mine, and unto thee I vow.
This drosel sluggish ringleader, this stout strong hearted fire,
S^l pay thee so much bldud again as she^ he bath in fire
How haps it that his trembling cheeks to be so pale and whight,
Lying aghast as in a trance with fainting face upright.

His conscience wedlock vow doth prick brings him home again
Let us return the self same trade a new for to retain,
To which at first we should have stuck and ought not to forsake,
To co^enaunt continent a new let us our selves betake:
To take the trade of honesty at no time is to late:
He purged is from punishment whose hart the crime doth hate.

Why whither wilt thou gad (o rash and vnaduysed dame?)
What dost thou earnestly believe, and firmly trust the same,
That Agamemnons spousal bed will loyal be to thee?
That nought doth underprop thy mind which might thy terror be?
His proud success puffed up to high with lucky blast of wind,
Might make so crank, and set aloft his hawty swelling mind:
Among his pears he stately was ere Troyan turrets torn,
How think ye then his stomach stout by nature given to scorn,
In haughtines augmented is more in himself to joy,
Through this triumphant victory and conquest got of Troy?
Before his voyage Miceane King most mildly did he raygne,
But now a Tyrant truculent returned he is again.
Good luck and proud prosperity do make his hart so rise.
With what great preparation prepared solemn wys^,
A rabblement of strumpets come that clong about him al?
B^t yet the Prophetess of Thebe (whom God of truth we call)
Appears above the rest: she keeps the King, she doth him guide:
Wilt thou in wedlock have a mate and not for it provide?
So would not she, the greatest grief this is unto a wife,
Her husbands mimon in her house to lead an open life.
A Queenes estate cannot abide her peete with her to raygne,
Ind jealous wedlock will not her companion sustain.

Aegist in desprat mood again why see thou me a flote?
Why kindlest thou the sparks of ire in imbers covered hot
If that the victors own free will ^elease his captives care,
Why may not. I his Lady spouse have hope as well to fare?
One law doth rule in royal throne, and po^ pous princclye Towers,
Among the vulgar sort, another in private simple bowers.
What though my grudging fancy force that at my husbands hand,
Sharpe execution of the law I stubbernly withstand?
Recording this that haynously offended him I have:
He gently will me pardon grant who need the same to crave?

Even so on this condition thou may with him compound.
To pardon him if he again to pardon th^ be bound.
The subtle science of the law, the statutes of our land,
(That long ago decreed were) thou dost not understand.
The Judges be malicious men, they spyght and envy us,
But he shall have them partial his causes to discus.
This is the chiefest privilege that doth to Kings belong.
What laws forbidd^th other men, they do, and do no wrong.

He pardned Helen, she is wed to Menela again
Which Europe all with Asia did plunge alike in payne.

No Ladies Lust hath ravished yet Atrides in his life,
Nor privily purloynd his hart betrothed to his wife.
To pick a quarrel he begins and matter thee to blame,
Suppose thou nothing hast commit that worthy is of shame?
What boteth him whom Princes hate an honest life to frame?
He never doth complain his wrong, but ever bears the blame.
Wilt thou repair to Spart and to thy country trudge aright?
Wilt thou become a ronnagate from such a worthy wight?
Deuorcement made from Kings will not so let the matter escape.
Thou easest fear by fickle hope, that falsely thou dost shape:

My trespass is disclosd to none, but to a trusty wight:

At princes gates fidelity yet never enter might.

I will corrupt and feed him so with silver and with gold.
That I by bribing bind him shall no secrets to unfold:

The trust that hired is and bought by bribes and monies fee,
Thy counsel to bewray again with bribes entyste will be

The remnant left of shamefastness of those ungracious tricks,
Wherein of late I did delight, my conscience freshly pricks.
Why kep'st thou such a busy stir and with thy flatring speech,
Enstructing me with lewd advise dost wicked counsel preach
Shall I forsooth of royal blood with al the speed I can
Refuse the King of Kings, and wed an outcast banished man^

Why should you think in that Thiest was father unto me.
And Agamemnon Atreus son he should my better be?

If that be but a tryfle small, and nephew to the same.

I am of Phoebus linage borne, whereof I do not shame.

Why makste thou Phoebus author of thy wicked pedagrew,
Whom out of heaven ye forced to fly when bridle back he drew,
When Lady Night with mantel black did spread her soden shade,
Why make thou the Gods in such reproachfulnes to wade?
Whose father hath thee conning made by slight and subtle guile
To make thy kinsman Cockold while his wife thou do defile.
What man is he whom we do know to be thy fathers mate,
Abusing lust of Lechery in such unlawful rate?
Avaunt, go pack thee hence in hast, dispatch out of my sight
This infamy, whose blemish staines this blood of worthy wight.

This is no new exile to me that wickedness do hannt,
But if that thou (O worthy Queen) command me to avaunt,
I will not only straight avoid the house the town and field
My life on sword at thy request I ready am to yield

This heinous dede permit shall I (most churlish cruel drab)
Against my will though I offend, the fault I should not blab:
Nay, rather come apart with me, and let us join our wits
To wrap our selves out of this woe and parlous threatening fits.

NOw chant it lusty lads,
Apollos praise subborne,
To thee the frolic flock
their crowned heads adorn.
To thee King Inachs stock
of wedlock chamber void,
Brayd out their virgins locks
and thereon have employed
Their savoury garlands green Itwist of laurel bow.
Draw near with us O Thebes our dancing follow thou.
Come also ye that drink of Ismen bubbling flood,
Whereas the Laurel treeful thick on banks doth bood.
Eake ye whom Mando mild, the Prophetess divine,
(Foreseing fate) and borne of high Tiresias lygne,
Hath stirred to celebrate with sacred use and right.
Appollo and Dian borne of Latona bright.
O Victor Phaebe vnbend thy noked bow again.
Sith quie tnes and peace anew we do retain.
And let thy twanckling harp make melody so shrill,
While that thy nimble hand stryke quauers with thy quill.
No curious descant I nor lusty music crave,
No jolly rumbling note, nor trouling tune to have.
But on thy treble Lute (according to thy use)
Stryke up a playnsong note as when thy learned muse
Thy lessons do record, though yet on baser string
It likes thee to play the song that thou did singe:
As when from fyery heaven the dint of lightning flue,
Sent down by wrath of Gods the Titans overthrew
Or else when mountains were on mountains heaped hie
That raise for Giant fell their steppes into the sky,
The mountain Ossa stood on top of Pelion laid,
Olymp (whereon the Pines their budding branches braid)
Down paised both: draw ne'er O Iuno noble dame,
Both spouse of mighty Jove and sister to the same.
Thou that dost rule with him made jointer of his mace,
Thy people we of Greece give honour to thy grate.
Thou only dost protect from per ills Aigos land,
That ever careful was to have thine honour stand,
Most supplient thereunto thou also with thy might
Dost order joyful peace and battles fearce of fight
Accept O conquering Queen these branches of the baize
That Agamemnon here doth yield unto thy praise:
The hollow boxen pipe (that doth with holes abound)
In synging unto the doth give a solemn sound:
To thee the Damsels eake that play upon the strings,
With conning harmony melodious music singes.
The matrons eke of Greece by ryper years more grave,
To thee the Taper pay that vowed oft they have,
The Heyferd young and white companion of the Bull.
Unskilful yet by proof the painful plow to pull.
Whose neck was never worn nor gald with print of yoke,
Is in thy temple slame receiving deadly stroke.
O Lady Pallas thou of most renowned hap
Bred of the brain of Jove that smites with thunder clap.
Thou lofty Trojan towers of craggy knotty flint
Hast bet with battring blade, and stroke with iaueling dint:
The elder matrons with the dames that younger be
Together in mingled heaps do honour due to thee,
When thou approaching nigh thy coming is espyde,
The priest vnbarres the gate, and opes the Temple wide:
By clustering thronges the flocks thine altars haunt apace,
Bedeckte with twisted crowns so trim with comely grace.
The old and ancient men well stepped and grown in years,
Whose feeble trembling age procures hory hairs
Obtaining their request crave de of thy grace divine,
Do offer up to thee their sacrify sed wine,
O bright Dian whose blase sheds light three sondry ways
VVemyndful are of thee, and render thankful praise,
Delon thy native soil thou did fyrmely bind,
That to and fro was wont to wander with the wind:
Which with foudation sure mayn ground forbyds to pass
For Navies (after which to swim it wonted was)
It is become a road defying force of wynd,
The mothers funerals of Tantalus his kind.
The daughters seven by death thou victresse dost account.
Whose mother Niobe abides on Sipil mount
A lamentable rock and yet unto this howre
Her tears new gushing, out the marble old doth power.
The Godhead of the Twins in sumpteous solemn wise,
Both man and wife adore with savoury sacrifyce,
But thee above the rest O father great and guide,
Whose mighty force is by the burninglightning tried:
Who when thou gave a beck and d^dst thy head but shake
At once thextremest poales of heaven and earth did quake,
O Iupiter the root that of our lynage art.
Accept these offered gifts and take them in good part:
And thou O grandsire great to thy posterity.
Have some remorse, that do not swerve in chyualrie.
But yonder lo with stiuing steps the soldier comes amain
In all post hast, with token that good news declares plain
A Laurel branch, that hangs on his spear head he doth bring
Eurybates is come, who hath ben trusty to the king.
SOre tyred after many years
with travail and with toil
Scant credityng my self, the Gods
of this my natyue soil,
The temple, and the alters of
the saints that rule the sky,
In kumble sort with reverence
devoutly worship I.
Now pay your vows unto the Gods*
returned is again
Unto his country court, where wont he was to rule, and reign,
Prince Agamemnon, victor he, of Greece the great rename.
The tidings of a message good unto mine ears is blown.
Where stays my spouse who longing for ten years I have out scand?
What doth he yet sail on the seas, or he is come a land?
Yet hath he fyxt and set his foot bauck stepping home again.
Upon the sandy shore, that lunge he wished to attayne^
And doth he styll enjoy his health enhauncte in glory great,
And painted out in pomp of prays whose fame the sky doth beat?

Bless we with burning sacrifice at length this lucky day

And eke the Gods though gracious, yet dealing long delay:
Declare if that my brothers wife enjoy the vital air
And tel me to what kind of Coast my sister doth repair.

God grant, give us better news then this that thou dost crave
The heavy hap of fighting floods forbiddes the truth to have,
Our scattred fleet the swelling seas attempts in such a plight,
That ship from ship was taken clean out of each others sight.
Atrides in the waters wide torwoyld and straying far
More violence by seas sustaynd then by the bloody war
And as it were a conquered man escaping home al weet
Now brings in his company of such a mighty fleet,
A sort of bruised broken barks, beshaken, torn, and rent.

Show what unlucky chance it is that hath our navy spent.
What storm of seas dispersed hath our Captains hear and there

Thou willest me to make report of heavy woeful gear.
Thou bid me most grievous news with tidings good to part:
For uttering of this woeful hap my feeble mind doth start.
And horribly appalled is with this so monstrous ill.

Speak out and utter it: himself with terror he doth fill,
Whose hart his own calamity and cark doth loath to know:
The hart whom doubted damage dulles with greater grief doth glow

When Troyan buildings blazing bright did burn away and broil,
Kindled first by Grekish brand, they fall to part the spoil:
Repairing fast unto the seas again we come aboard,
And now the soldiers weary loins were eased of his sword,
Their bucklers cast aside, upon the hatches lie above.
Their warlike hands in practise put, and Oers learn to move:
Each little hindrance seems to much to them in hasty plight,
When of recourse the Admiral gave watchword by his light,
And trumpet blast began to cal our army from delay,
The painted Pup with gilded snout did first guide on the way:
And cut the course, which following on a thousand ships did ryue,
Then first a wynd with pipling puffs our launcing ships did drive,
Which glided down upon our sails the water being calm
With breath of western wynd so mild scant moved any walme.
The shining seas bespred about with ships doth glister bright,
And also covered with the same lay hid from Phoebus light:
It doth us good to case upon the naked shore of Troy:
The desert Phrygian plots so bare to view w^e hop for joy:
The yeuth each one besturres themselves, and striking altogether,
They tough their oers with their toil they help the wynd weather
They ^ug and cheerly row by course, the spir^ing seas up dash,
Against the ^atling ^ibs of ships the flapping floods do flash
The hory froth of wrestling waives which ores aloft doth raise,
Do draw and trace a furrow through the marblefaced seas.
When stronger blast with belly swollen our h^ysted sails did fill,
They row no more, but let the Pup to go with wynd at will,
Their sheryng oers laid assyde our Pilot doth espy,
How far from any land aloof our sails reculing fly,
Or bloody battles doth display the threats of Hector stout,
Or of his rattling waggings tells, wherein he rode about.
Or how his gashed carcass slain and trained about the field
To funeral flan es and obit rights for coin again was yield.
How Iupiter embathed was al in his royal blood.
The frolic fish disposed was to mirth in Tyrren flood,
And fetching friskes both in and out plays on the waters brim,
And on his broad and fynny back about the seas doth swim,
With gambals quick in rings around and s^de to side enclynd,
Erwhyle he sports afront the pup, and whips again behind,
Now fiddling on the snout before the dalying wanton route
With iocundary jolly tryckes doth skip the fleet about.
Sometime he stands gazing on and eyes the vessels bright,
Now every shore is covered clean, and land is out of sight,
The parlous point of Ida rock in sight doth open lye,
And that alone epsy we could with fyrmly fixed eye,
A dusky cloud of stifling smoke from Troy did smolter black,
When Titan from the weary necks the heavy yokes did slack.
The fading light did groueling bend, and down the day did shroud,
Against the Stars amounting up a little misty cloud
Came belching out in irksome Iompe, and Phoebus galland beams
He spewd upon, bestayning them duct down in Western streams.
The Sun set swaruing in such sort with diverse change of face,
Did give us cause to have mistrust of Neptunes doubted grace.
The evening first did burnish bright, and paint with stars the sky.
The wyndes were laid, and clean forsook our sails that quiet lie.
When cracking, rattling, rumbling noise, tusht down with thundering sway
From top of hills, which greatter stir doth threaten and bewraye.
With bellowinges, and yellinges load, the shores do grunt groan,
The craggy clyues and roaring rocks do howl in hollow stone.
The bubbling waters swells vpreard before the wrestling wynd,
When suddenly the lowering light of Moan is hid and blind.
The glymsing stars do go to glade, the surging seas are tossed
Even to the skies among the clouds the light of heaven is lost.
More nights in one compacted are with shadow dim and black,
One shadow upon another doth more darkness heap and pack,
And every spark of light consumed the waives and skies do meet,
The ruffling winds range on the seas, through every coast they fi^t.
They heave it up with violence, oreturnde from bottom low,
The western wynd flat in the face of Eastern wynd doth blow.
With hurly burley Boreas set open his blasting mouth,
And girds out his boysteous breath against the stormy south,
Each wynd with al his might doth blow, and works dangers deep,
They shake the floods, a sturdy blast along the seas do sweep.
That rolls and rumbles wave on wave, a northern tempest strong,
Abundance great of flacky snow doth hurl our ships among.
The southwynd out of Libia, doth rage upon a should,
And with the puissant force thereof the quicksandes up be told,
Nor bids in the south which doth with tempest lump and lower,
And force the flowing floods to rise by pouring out a shower.
The stubberne Eurus, Earthquakes made, and shoke the countries East,
And Eos cost where Phoebus first arises from his rest.
How violent Corus stretched and tare his yawning breast full wide?
A man would sure have thought the world did from his center slyde,
And that the frames of Heaven broke up the Gods down would fall
And Chaos dark confused heap would shade and cover all.
The stream strove with the wynd, the wynd did beat it down again.
The springing sea within his banks can not it self contain,
The raging shower his trilling drops doth mingle with the seas,
And yet in all this misery the find not so much ease,
To see and know what ill it is, that works their decay.
The darkness dim oppresses still and keeps the light away:
The blackfa^st night with Hellicke hue was clad of Stygian lake
And yet full oft with glimsing beams the sparkling fire out brake,
The cloud doth crack, and being rent the lightning leaps out,
The wretches like the same so well it shining them about,
That still they wish such light to have (although God wot but ill)
The navy swaying down it self doth cast away, and spill.
One side with other side is cracked, and helm is rent with helm,
The ship it self the gulping seas do headlong overwhelm.
Erwhyle a greedy gaping gulf doth sup it up amain,
Then by and by ^ost up aloft it spewes it out again,
She with her swagging full of sea to bottom lowe doth sink
And drenches deep aside in floods her totring broken brink.
That underneath a dozen waives lay drowned out of sight,
Her broken planks swim up and down, spoiled is her tackle quite,
Both sail and Oers clean are lost, the mayne mast eke is gone.
That wonted was to bear upright the sail yard thereupon,
The timber and the broken bordes lye on the waters brim,
When cold and shivering fear in us doth strike through every limb,
The wisest wits entocksicate dare nothing enterprise,
And cunning practise nought avails when fearful storms arise,
The mareners letting duty slip stand staring all aghast,
Their scoping ores suddenly out of their hands are wrast.
To prayer then apace we fall, when other hope is none,
The Greekes and Troyans to the Gods alike do make their moan.
Alack what succour of the fates may we poor wretches find?
Against his father Pyr^hus bears a spyteful cankered mind,
At Ayax grudge Vlisses doth, king Menela doth hate
Great Hector: Agamemnon is with Priam at debate.
O happy man is he that doth lye slain in Troyan ground,
And hath deserude by handy stroke to take his fatal wound,
Whom same preserves, taking up his tomb in conquered land
Those momes whose melting cowards hart durst never take in hand
Or enterprise no noble act, those force of f^oods shall drown
But fate forbearing long, will take stout Brutes of high rename,
Full well we may ashamed be, in such a sort to dye,
If any man his spyteful mind yet can not satisfy,
With these outrageous plunging plagues that down fro Gods are set,
Appease at length thy wrathful God again and take relent.
Even Troy for pity would have wept, to see our woeful case,
But if that in thy boiling breast black rancour still have place,
And that the Greekes to ruin run, it be thy purpose bent,
Why do these Troyans go to wrack? for whom thus are we spent?
Assuage the rygaur of the sea that threarning hills up reares:
This drenched Fleet the Troyan folk and Greekes together bears.
Then from their prayers are they put, their foultring tongues do stay,
The roaring seas doth drown their voice and caryes their cries away.
Then mighty Pallas armed with the lepping lightning sire,
That teasty Jove doth use to hurl prouokt to swelling ire,
With threatening Iaueling in her hand, her prowess means to try.
And eke her force whose boiling breast with Gorgon fits doth fry,
Or what with Target she can do, and with her Fathers fire.
Then from the Skies another storm begins abroad to spyre,
But Aiax nothing yet dismayed all force withstands stout,
Whom when he spread his swelling sails with Cable stretched out,
She lighting down did wryng him hard, and wrapped him in her flame,
And slang another flashing dint of lightning on the same,
With all her force and violence her hand brought back again,
She tossed him out, as late that feat her father tought her plain.
Both over Aiax and his Pup she flies overthwart,
And renting man and ship, of both she bears away a part,
His courage nought abated yet he all to singde doth seem,
Even like a slubberne ragged Rock amid the striving stream,
He traynes along the roaring seas and eke the waltering wave
By shouing on his bourly breast in sunder quite he drove,
The Bark with hand he caught, and on it self did ripe it over,
Yet Aiax fhyneth in the flood which darkness blind doth cover.
At length attaining to a rock his thundering crakes were these,
I conquered have the force of fire and rage of fighting seas,
It doth me good, to master thus the anger of the sky,
With Pallas wrath, the lightning flames and floods tumultyng hye.
The terror of the warlyck god once could not make me fly,
The force of Mars and Hector both at once sustaynd have I.
Nor Phoebus darts could me constrain, from him one foot to shoon,
All these beside the Phrygians subdued we have, and won.
When other Mecocks flings his darts shall I not them withhis stand?
Yea, what if Phoebus came himself, to pytch them with his hand?
When in his melancholy mood he boasted without mean.
Then father Neptune lift his heat about the waters clean.
The beaten rock with for led m^ce he vndermyning pluckte
From bottom loose, and sunk it down, when down himself he duck.
There Aiax lay, by land, by fire, and storm of seas destroyed
But we by suffering shypwrack; are with greater plagues a^oyd.
A subtyle shallow flood there is flown on a stony should,
Where crafty Caphar out of sight the lurking rocks doth hold,
Upon whose sharpe and ragged tops the swelling side doth flow,
The boiling waives do beat thereon still sweaing to and fro:
A turrret nodding over it doth hang with falling sway,
From whence on either side from height prospect espy we may
Two seas: and on this hand the coast where Pelops once did raygne,
And Isthmus flood in narrow creek, reculing back again,
Doth stop Ionian sea, least into Hellespont it run,
On the other part is Lemnon flood that fame by bloodshed won.
On the other side Calcedon to one doth stand against this forte,
And Aulis I'll that stayde out ships that thither did resort.
This Castle here inhabyte doth our Palimedes sier,
Whose cursed hand held in the top a brand of flaming fire.
That did allure our fleet, to turn on lurking rocks a right,
Entysing them with with blaze to come unto the light.
All into fitters shaken are the vessels on the should,
But other some do swym, and some upon the rocks are roulde.
And other ^lipping back again so to eschew the Rocks,
His bruised Ryb^, and rattling sides against each other knocks,
Whereby the other he doth break, and broken is himself,
Then would they launee into the deep, for now they dread the shelf,
This perk of troubles thau^ct to hap in dawning of the day.
But when the Gods (be^ought of us) began the rage to stay,
And Phoebus golden beams began a fresh to render light,
The doleful day descried all the damage done by night.

O whether may I now lament, and weep with wailing sad?
Or shall I else in that my Spouse returned is be glad?
I do rejoice, and yet I am compelled to bewail
My countries great calamity that doth the same assail.
O Father great whose majesty doth thundering Scepters shake,
The souring Gods unto the Greekes now favourable make,
With garlands green let every head rejoicing now be crounde.
To thee the pipe in sacryfice melodiously doth sound,
And on thine alter lies slain an Heyferd lilly whight,
Before the same do present stand with hanging locks vndight,
A careful Troyan company in heavy woeful plight,
On whom fro high the Laurel tree with spredding branch doth shyne,
Whose virtue hath inspired them with Phoebus grace divine,

ALas the cruel sting of love
how sweetly doth it taste,
A misery is mortal man
annexed while life doth last?
The path of mischief for to fly,
now since there is a gap,
And wretched souls be frankly called
From every woeful hap,
By death, a pleasant port, for aye in rest them selves to shroud,
Where dreadful tumults never dwell nor storms of Fortune proud:
Nor yet the burning fiery flakes of Jove the same doth doubt,
When wrongfully with thwacking thumps be raps his thunder out:
Here Lady Peace th'inhabitours doth never put in flight,
Nor yet the victors threatening wrath approaching right to fight,
No whyrling westernwynde doth urge the ramping seas to prance,
No dusty cloud that raised is by savage Dimilaunce,
On horseback riding rank, by rank no fearce and cruel host,
No people slaughtered, with their towns clean ropsie turuey tossed:
While that the foe with flaming fire doth spoil and waste the wall,
Untamed and unbridled Mars destroys and batters all:
That man alone who forces not the fickle fates a straw,
The visage grim of Acheront whose eyes yet never saw,
Who never vewd with heavy cheer the vgsome Limbo lake,
And putting life in hazard, dare to death him self betake.
That person is a Princes pear, and like the Gods in might,
Who knows not what death doth mean is in a piteous plight
The ruthful ruin of our natyue country we beheld:
That woeful night, in which the roofs of houses ouerquelde,
In Dardans City blazing bright with flashing fiery flames.
When as the Greekes with burning brands enkindle did the frames,
That: Troy whom war beedes of arms might not subdue and take.
As once did mighty Hercules, whose Ouyuer caused it quake,
Which neither he that (...) son, and son to Thetis was,
Nor whom Achilles loved to well, could ever bring to pass,
When glytesing bright in field he ware ^al^e armour on his back,
And counterfayting fearse Achill the Troyans drove to wrack.
Nor when Achilles he him self his mind from sorrow wrast,
And Troyan women to the walls did scuddyng leap in hast.
In myserte she lost her proud estate, and fast rename,
By being stoutly overcome, and hardly pulled down.
Years five five did Troy resis^e, that yet ^ must,
In one nyghts space by destiny he laid in the dust.
Their fained gifts well have we tried that huge and fatal gin,
We light of credit, with our own right hand have haled in,
That fatal gift of Greeckes: what ^yme at entry of the gap
The hugye horse did shyueryng stand, where in the in selves did wrap
The captains close, in hollow vautes with bloody war y^reight.
When lawfully we might have tried, and searched their deceit:
So by their own contryued snares the greeks had bin confound:
The brazen bucklers being shook did give a clattring sound.
A privy whyspering often times came tyckling in our ear.
And Pyrrhus (in a murreynes name so ready for to hear.
The crafty council picked out of falsa Vlifsses brain,)
Did ^angle in the halow Vaut^ that range thereof again.
But fearing and suspecting nought the hea^dy youth of Troy
Laid hands upon the sacred ropes, to hale and pull with joy,
On this side young Astyanax came guarded with his train,
On the other part Pollixena disponsed to be slain
Upon Achilles tomb, she coms with maids, and he with men,
A jolly flock with equal years as young as they were then.
Their vowed oblations to the gods in holy day attire,
The matrons bring and so to church repairs euecry sire.
And all the city did alike, yea Hecuba our queen
(That since the woeful Hectors death or now was never fene)
She merry is: O grief accursed, of all thy sorrows deep
For which that first, or last befell entendest thou to weep?
Our battered walls which heavenly hands ^cected have and framed?
Or else the burning temples which upon their Idols flamde?
Lamenting these calamities we have not time and space,
O mighty parent Pryam we poor Troyans whale thy case.
The old mans thratling throat I saw, (alas) I saw yborde
With cruel Pyrrhus blade, that scante with any blood was gored:
Refrain your tears yt down your cheeks should tricle evermore
With woeful wailings piteously your pryuate friends deplore
My miseries refuse a mate, so much accursed as I:
To few my careful case, refrain your lamentable cry.
As for mine own distress to moorne, I shall suffice alone.

To mingle tears with other tears it doth us good to moan:
In those the burning teary streams more ardently do boyle,
Whom secret thoughts of lurking cares in privy breast turmoil:
Though that thou were a Gossop stout, that brooke much sorrow may
I warrant thee, thou myghtest well, lament this sore decay,
Not sad and solemn Aedon that in the woods doth singe
Her sugared Ditties finely tunde on sweet and pleasant stringe:
Recording Irys woeful hap in diverse kind of note,
Whom Progne though he were her child and of her womb begot,
For to revenge his fathers fault, she did not spare to kill:
And gave his flesh and blood for food the fathers Maw to fill.
Nor Progne who in Swallows shape: upon the rydges hye,
Of houses sits in Biston town bewailing piteously,
With chattering throat, of Tereus her spouse the cruel act,
(Who did by strength and force of arms a shameful brutish fact.
Defile the sister of his wife, fair Philomel by name,
And eke cut out her tongue, least she should blab it to his shame)
Though Progne this her husbands rape lamenting very sore
Do whale, and weep with piteous plaint, yet can she not deplore
Sufficiently, though that she would, our countries piteous plight:
Though he himself among the Swans sir Cygnus lilly whight.
Who dwells in stream of Ister flood, and Tanais channel could,
His weeping voice most earnestly though utter out her would:
Although the morning Halcyons with doleful sighs do whale,
At such time as the fighting floods their Cyex did assail,
Or rashly wexing bold attempt the Seas now laid at rest,
Or being very fearful feed their brood in tottring nest,
Although as squemishe hearted men those priests in bedlam rage,
Whom mother Cyble being borne on high in lofty stage,
Doth move, to play on shalmes, Atys the Phrygian to lament,
Yet can not they this lot bewail, though brawn fro arms they rent.
Cassandra, in our tears there is no measure to refrain,
Those miseries all measure pass, that plunged us in payne.
The sacred fillets from thy heads, why dost thou hale and pull?
They chiefly ought to worship God, whose hearts with grief be dull.

My fear by this affliction is clean abaled all,
Nor praying to the heavenly Ghosts for mercy will I call.
Although they were disposed to cha^e and fret in fus^ten fumes,
They nothing have me to displease, Fortune her force consumes.
Her spyte is worn unto the stumps, what country have I left?
Where is my Sire? am I of all my systers quite bereft.
The sacred tombs and alter stones our blood have drunk swylde,
Where are my brethren blessed knor? destroyed in the fylde.
All widow Wives of Priams sons may easly now behold,
The Palace void and cast of court of silly Priam old.
And by so many marriages so many Wyddowes are,
But only Hellen coming from the coast of Lacon far.
That Hecuba the mother of so many a pryncely wight,
Whose fruitful Womb did breed the brand, of fire blazing bright:
Who also bare the swinge in Troy, by practise now doth learn,
New laws and guise of destiny in bondage to discern.
On her she takath heart of grace with looks so sterne and wild,
And barks as a bedlam bitch about her strangled child
Dear Polidor, the remnant left, and only hope of Troy,
Hector, and Priam to revenge, and to restore her joy.

The sacred Phoebus Prophet is with sudden silence husht:
A quaking trembling shivering fear throughout her Isms hath rushed:
Her Face as pale as Ashes is, her Fillits stand upright,
The soft and gentle goldilockes start up of her affright.
Her panting breathing breast stuffed up within doth grunt and groan.
Her glaring bryghe and steaming Eyes are hither and thither thrown.
Now glancing up and down they roll: now standing stiff they stare.
She stretches up her head more straight then commonly she bare,
Bolt up she goes, her wrestling Jaws that fast together clinge,
She doth attempt by diverse means, on sunder how to wring.
Her mumbling words in gabling mouth shut up she doth assuage,
As Menas mad that Bacchus aares doth serve in furious rage.

How doth it hap (O sacred tops of high Parnassus hill)
That me berapt of sense, with pricks of fury fresh ye fiill?
Why do you me with ghost inspyre, that am beside my wits?
O Phoebus none of thine I am, releasse me from the sits:
Infixed in my burning breasts the flames extinguish out,
Who forces me with fury fell to gad and trot about?
Or for whose sake inspyrde with spryte mad mumbling make must I?
Why play I now the Prophet cold, since Troy in dust doth lie?
The day doth shrynke for dread of war, the night doth dim mine eyes.
With mantle black of darkness deep clean covered is the skies:
But lo two shining Suns at once in heaven appears bright,
Two Grecian houses muster do their armies twain to fight.
Among the mighty Goddesis in Ida woods I see,
The fatal shepherd in his throne as vmpier placed to be:
I do advise you to beware, beware (I say) of kings,
(A kindred in whose cankered hearts old privy grudges springes)
That country clown Aegisthus he this stock shall overthrow,
What doth this foolish despret dame her naked weapons show?
Whose crown entendeth she to crack in weed of Lacon land,
With Hatchet (by the Amazons invented first) in hand?
What face of mighty majesty be witched hath mine eyes?
The conqueror of salvage beasts Marmarick Lyon lies,
Whose noble neck is wurried with currish fange and tooth
The curlish snaps of eager Lyonesle abide he doth.
Alack ye ghosts of all my friends why should ye say that I,
Among the rest am only safe, from perils far to lie?
Fain father follow thee I would, Troy being laid in dust.
O brother terror of the Greekes, O Troyans aid and trust.
Our ancient pomp I do not see, nor yet thy warmed hands,
(That fearce on Greekish flaming fleet did fling the fyry brands)
But mangled members, schorched corps, and sake thy valiant arms,
Hard pimond and bound in bands sustaining grievous harms:
O Troyolus, a match unfit encountering with Achill
(That mighty man of arms) to soon come unto thee I will.
I do delight, to sail with them on stinking Siygian flood.
To view the churlish mastife cur of hell, it doth me good.
And gaping mouthed Kingdom dark of greedy Ditis raygne.
The Barge of filthy Phlegethon this day shall entertain,
Me conquering, and conquered, and Princes souls with all.
You flitering shades I you beseech, and cake on thee I call,
O Stygian poole (whereon the Gods their solemn oaths do take
Vnbolt a while the Brasne bars of darksome Lymoo lake.
Whereby the Phrygian folk in hell may Mic^an state behold.
Look up ye silly wretched souls, the fates are backward roulde.
The sqally sisters do approach, and deal their bloody strokes,
Their smultring taggots in their hands half bru^ie to ashes smokes.
Their vysages so pale do burn, with fyry flaming eyes:
A garment black their g^awed guts doth gyrde in mourning g^yse.
Dire dread of night begins to howl, the bones of body bast
With lying long do rot corrupt in miry pudle cast.
Behold, the weary aged man his burning thyrst forgot*
The waters dalying at his lips to catch endeavours not:
But mourns for the funeral, that shall ensue anen.
The Troyan Prince his royal robes triumphant puts on.

The furious rage clean overpassed begins it self to slake.
And slyps away, even as a Bull that deadly wound doth take
On gasshed neck afront the aares: come let us ease at last
Her limbs, that of the spryte of God hath felt the mighty blast.
Returning home again at length and crounde with Laurel bow
(A sign of worthy victory) is Agamemnon now.
The Wife to meet her Husband, doth her speedy passage ply,
Returning hand in hand, and foot by foot most lovingly.

AT length I do arryue again
upon my native soil:
God save thee O dear loved Land,
to thee so huge a spoil
So many barbarous people yield:
the flower of Asia. Troy:
To bear thy yoke submits her self,
that lunge did live in joy.
Why doth this Prophet (on the ground her sprawling body laid)
Thus reel and stagger on her neck, all trembling and dismayed?
Sirs, take her up, with Lycour warm let her be chearished.
Now peepes she up again, with drooping eyes sonke in her head:
Pluck up thy spryte, here is the port wished for in misery:
This day is festival.
At Troy so was it wont to be.

Let us to Th'alters worship give.

At Th'alters died my sire:
A, Pray we to Jove.

To love whose grace divine doth me inspire?

Dost thou suppose that Troy thou see?

And Priam eke I see.

Troy is not here.

where Helen is there take I Troy to be,

Fear not as maid to serve thy dame.

Nay freedom draws ny.

Take thou no thought how thou shalt I^ue.

All cares for to defy,
Death gives a courage unto me.

Yet say I once again
There is no danger left, whereby thou might hurt sustain.

But yet much troublous danger both hang over thy head I wot.

What mischief may a victor dread?

Even y^ he dreads not.

Ye trusty meny of my men come cary her away,
Till of the spryte she rid her self, least fury force her say
That may be prejudicial, her tongue she cannot frame.
To thee O Father flinging forth the lightnings flashing flame,
That dost disperse the clouds, and rule the course of every star,
And guide the Globe of Earth, to whom the boottes won by war
With triumph victors dedicate: to thee O Iuno hight
The sister dear of doughty Jove, (thy husband full of might)
Both I and Greece with flesh and blood, and eke our vowed beast,
And gorgeous gifts of Arabie, give worship to thy hest.

O GREECE by noble Gentlemen
in honour shining clear,
O GREECE to wrathful IVNO thou
that art the darling dear,
Some jolly worthy lusty blood
thou fosters evermore,
Thou hast made even the Gods, that were
a number odd before.
That puissant mighty Hercules a noble Imp of thine
Defer^ed by his travels twelve, rapt up in heaven to shyne.
For whom the heavens did alter course, and Iupiter with all
Did iterate the hours of night, when dampishe dew doth fall.
And charged Phoebus chariot swyfte to trot with slower pace,
And leisurely bright lady Moon thy homwarde Wayne to trace,
Bright Luci^er that year by year his name a new doth change,
Came back again, to whom the name of Hesper seemed strange.
Aurora to her common course her reared head addressed,
And couching backward down again the same she did ares^,
Upon the shoulder of her spouse, whose years with age are worn
The east did feel, so felt the west, that Hercules was borne.
Dame nature could not clea^e dispatch, to utter in one night,
That boystous lad: the whyrling world did wayght for such a wight.
O babe whose shoulders underprop, the ample spactous sky,
In clasped arms thy prewesse did the crusshed Lyon try.
Who from his fyry yawning throat sp^wes out his broiling brand,
The nimble hynde in Menall mount hath known thy heavy hand*
The Bore hath felt thy fist, which did Arcadia destroy.
The monstrous conquered Bull hath rorde that Creta did annoy.
The Dragon dire that breeding beast in Lerna poole he slew,
And chopping of one head forbad thereof to rise anew.
With clubbed bruising battring bat he crankly did subdew.
(The brethren twins y^ tewde un Teat) whereof three monsters grew.
Of triple formed Gerion the spoil into the east,
A drove of ECttell Hercules did fetch out of the weast.
Away from tyrant Diomede the Thracian horse he led,
Which neither with the grass that grew by Styrmon flood he fed,
Nor yet on Heber banks, but them the v^layne did refresh
His greedy mounching cramming tades with aliaunts blood and flesh.
Their rawfed Jaws imbrewde were with the carmans blood at last,
The spoils and shaftes Hipolyte saw from her bosom wrast
As soon as he with clattring shaft the dusky cloud did smite,
The Stymphall bird that shadowed the sun, did take her flight.
The fertile tree that apples bears of gold, did fear him sore,
Which never yet acquaintance had with Tasters ^ooth before.
But whipping up with lively twigs into the air she fly^s,
And while the chinking plate doth found then Argos full of eyes,
The watchman shrinking close for cold that sleep yet never knew,
Doth hear the noise while Hercules with mettle of yellow hew
Well laden packs away, and left the grove befliched clea^e.
The hound of hell did hold his tongue drawn by in triple cheane,
Nor bark with any boughinge throat, nor could abide the heme,
Or colour of the heavenly light, whose beams he never knew.
When thou were captain General, and did conduct our Host,
(They that) of Dardans Lygne, to come their Stock do falsely boste,
Were vanquished by force of arms and since they felt again
Thy Gray goose winge, whose bitterness to fear might the constrain.
WIthin a revel rexe is kept,
as sore as ever was,
Even at the ten years siege of Troy:
What thing is this? (alas)
Get up my soul, and of the rage
auengmeent worthy crave:
Though Phrygians we be vanquished,
the victory we have.
The matter well is brought about:
up Troy thou rysest now,
Thou flat on floor hast pulled down Greece, to lie as low as thou.
Thy Conqueror doth turn his Face: my prophesying spright
Did never yet disclose to me so notable a sight:
I see the same, and am thereat, and busied in the broil,
No vision fond fantastical my senses doth beguile:
Such fare as Prygians feasts with on last unhappy night
At Agamemnons royal court full daintily they dight:
With purple hangings all adorned the brodred Beds do shyne,
In old Assaracks goblets gilt they swincke and swill the wine.
The King in gorgyous royal robes on chair of State doth sit,
And pranckt with pride of Pryams pomp of whom he conquered it.
Put of this hostile weed, to him, (the Queen, his Wife began say,)
And of thy loving Lady wrought wear rather this array.
This garment knit. It makes me loath, that shivering here I stand.
O shall a King be murdered, by a banished wretches hand?
Out, shall Th'adulterer destroy the husband of the Wife?
The dreadful destinies approcht, the food that last in life
He tasted of before his death, their masters blood shall see,
The gubs of blood down dropping on the wind shall powered be.
By traytrous trick of trapping weed his death is brought about,
Which being put upon his head his hands could not get out*
The stopped poake with mouth set open his muffled head doth hyde,
The mankind dame with trembling hand the swe^d drew from her side,
Nor to the utmost of her might it in his flesh she thrast,
But in the gieuing of the stroke she stayed all aghast,
He as it were a bristled Bore entangled in the net
Among the briars in busshy woods yet tries out to get.
With struggling much the shrinking bands more straightly he doth bind.
He stryues in vain, and would sl^y of the snare that doth him blind.
Which catches hold on every side. But yet th'entangled wreatch
Doth grope about, his subtle foes with griping hand to catch.
But furious Tyndaris prepared the Pollaxe in her hand,
And as the priest to sacrifice at Th'alter side doth stand,
And views with eye the Bullocks neck, ear that with Axe he smite,
So to and fro she heaves her hand to stryke and leauell right.
He hath the stroke: dispatcht it is: not quite fhopt of the head
It hangs by a little crop: here from the Carcass dead
The spouting blood came gusshing out: and there the head doth lye,
With wallowing, bobling, mumbling tongue: nor they do by and bye
Forsake him so: the breathless coarse Aegist doth all to coil:
And mangled hath the gasshed corpse: while thus he doth him spoil,
She puts to her helping hand: by detestable deed
They both accorde unto the kind, whereof they do proceed.
Dame Helens sister right she is, and he Thyestes son:
Lo doubtful Titan stands still the day now being donne,
Not knowing whether best to keep still on his wonted way,
Or turn his wheels unto the path of dire Thyestes day.
O Thou whom of our Fathers death
the only help we have,
Fly, fly, from force of furious foes,
make hast thy self to save:
Our house is ^opsey turuey tossed,
our Stock is cast away,
Our ruthful realms to ruin run, our kingdoms do decay.
Who comes here in Chariot swift thus galloping a mayne?
Brother, disguised in thy weed let me thy person fain.
O Bussard blind, what dost thou mean from foreign folk to fly?
Whom dost thou shun? it doth behove to fear this family.
Orestes now be bold, and set all shivering fear a side,
The certain succour of a trusty friend I have espied.
WIth solemn Pomp I Strophilus
forsaking Phocis land,
Bearing a branch of Paulme, that grows
at Eli^, in my hand,
Returned back I am, the cause
that wild me heather wend,
Is with these gifts to gratefie
and welcome home my friend,
Whose valiant army shal^e, and shook
the tattred Troyan walls,
Who wearied with the ten years war, now flat on floor she falls.
What woeful wight is this that staines her mourning face with tears,
And drowned deep in drousp dumps oppressed is with ^eares?
I know full well this damsel is of Princes lynage borne.
What cause Electra hath this joyful family to morn?
By treason that my mother wrought, my Father lies slain,
And drincking of their fathers cup the children do complain.
Aegist engroceth Caste^s got by fornication.

A lack that of so lunge a time, filicity is none.

I thee request even for the Jove my father thou doest owe,
And for the honour of the crown, whose brute abroad both grow
In every coast: and by the Gods that diversely do deal,
Take into thy tuition, convey away, and steal,
This poor Orest: such kind of theft is piety in deed.

Although that Agamemnoas death doth teach me to take heed,
Yet will I undertake the same, and with all diligence
Orestes shall I go about with strength to have thee hence.
Prosperity requires faith, but trouble exacts the same,
Have here a price for those that do contend and wage in game.
An Ornament with comely grace ordaynde to deck the brow,
And let thy head be couerde with this green and pleasant bow.
And cary this victorious triumphant branch in hand.
God grant this Paulme that planted was in fertile Pisa land,
(Where solemn games were celebrate Ioues honour to express)
May both a safeguard be to thee, and bring thee good success.
Thou that bestryds thy fathers steeds, as he before hath done,
Go stryke a league of amity with Pylades my son.
Now nimble Nagges let Greece hereof recording testify,
With headlong scouring course amain this traytrous country fly.

He is escapte a^d gone, and with unmeasurable might
The Chariot horse with rain at will do scud out of my sight.
Now free from peril on my foes attendance will I make.
And offer willingly my head the deadly wound to take.
The cruel conqueresse of her spouse is come, whose spotted weed
With sprinkels (sign of slaughter) do bear record of her deed.
Her goary hands new bathed in blood as yet they be not dry,
Her rough and churlish rigorous looks the fact do notify.
Unto the Temple will I trudge. Cassandra suffer me,
Oppressed with eagle grief, take part of sacrifice with thee.

O Thou thy Mothers Enemy,
ungracious saucy face.
After what sorre dost thou a maid
appear in public plate?
I have with my virginity
the bowers of Bawds forsook.

What man is het, that ever thee to be a virgin took?

What your own daughter?

With thy mother more modest should,

Do you at length begin to preach, such godlines to me. thou be.

A marily stomach stout thou bast with swelling hawty hart.
Subdued with sorrow learn thou shall to play a woman's part.

A swerd and buckler very well a woman doth beseem,
(Except I dote.)

Thy self dost thou haylefellowe with us esteem?

What Agamemnoon new is this, whom thou hast got of late?

Hereafter shall I tame, and teach thy gyrlish tongue to prate.
And make thee know, how to a Queen thy taunting to forbear.

The whilst (thou Wyddow) answer me directly to this gear.
Thy husband is bereaved quite of breath, his life is donne.

Enquter where thy brother is, so seek about my son.

He is departed out of Greece.

Go fetch him out of hand.

Fetch thou my father unto me.

Give me to understand,
Where doth he lurking hyde his head? where is he shrunk away?

All plunge of perils past he is, and at a quiet stay,
And in another Kingdom where no harm he doth mistrust,
This answer were sufficient, to please a Parent tust.
But one whose breast doth boyle in wrath, it cannot satisefy.

To day by death thou shalt receive thy fatal destiny.

On this condition am I pleased, the Alter to forsake,
If that this hanc shall do the deed, my death when I shall take.
Or else if in my throat to bath thy blade, thou do delight,
Most willingly I yield my throat, and give thee leave to smite.
Or if thou will chop of my head in brutish beastly guise,
My neck a weighting for the wound out stretched ready lies.
Thou hast committed sinfully a great and grievous guilt.
Go purge thy hardened hands, the which thy husbands blood have spilt.

O thou that of my perils all dost suffer part with me,
And in my realm dost also rule with eagle dignity,
Aegisthus, art thou glad at this? (as doth her not behove,)
With checks and taunts y^ daughter doth her mothers malice move.
She keeps her brothers counsel close conveyed out of the way.

Thou mal^pert and w^tlesse wench, thine cluishe prating stay,
Refrain those words unfit thy Mothers glowing cares to vex.

What shall the breeder of this broil control me with his checks,
Whose fathers gutit hath caused him to have a doubtful name,
Who both is to his sister, son, and Nephew to the same?

To snap her head of with thy swerd Aegist dost thou refrain?
Let her give up the ghost: or bring her brother straight again:
Let her be locked in dungeon darck, and let her spend her days,
In Caves Rocks, with painful pangs, torment her every ways.
I hope him whom she hidden hath she will again descry,
Through being clapped in prison strong and suffering poverty
With irksome and unsavoury smells on every side annoyed,
Enforst to wear a wyddowes weed, er wedding day enioyde:
Put in exile and banishment when each man doth her hate:
So shall she be by misery compelled to yield to late,
Prohibyted of wholesome air fruition to have.

Grant me my dome by means of death to pass unto my grave.

I would have granted it to thee, if thou should it deny.
Unskilful is the tyrant, who by suffering wretches die
Doth end their pains.

what after death doth any thing remain?

And if thou do desire to dye, the same see you refrain.
Lay hands s^is on this wondrous wretch, whom being carried on,
Even to the furthest corner of my jurisdiction.
Far out beyond Mycoenas land in bonds let her be bound,
With darkness diui in hiddeous hold let her be closed round.
This captive Spouse and wicked Queen, the Trull of Princes bed
Shall pay her pains, and suffer death by so^ng of her head.
Come, hale her on, that she may follow, that way my spouse is gon,
Whose love from me enticed was.

Do not thus hale me on.
I will before you take the way, these tidings first to tell
Unto my country men of Troy beneath in lowest hell.
How ouerquelmed ships each where are spread the seas upon:
And M^coene country conquered, is brought in subjection.
He that of thousand captains was grande captain general,
Come to as great calamity as Troy it self did fall,
Entrapped was by traytrous train, and whoredom of his Wife,
And by a gift received of her, depriued of his Life.
Let us not linger: on with me, and thanks I do you give.
I ^oy, that it might be my hap, thus after Troy to live.

Go to, prepare thy self to dye thou frantic raging wight.

The fransy fits of fury fell on you shall also light.

ALas ye hateful hellish Hags,
ye furies foul and fell,
Why cause ye rusty rancours rage
in noble hearts to dwell?
And cankered hate in boiling breasts
to grow from age to age?
Could not the graundstres painful pangs
the childrens wrath assuage?
Nor famine faint of pining paunch, with burning thyrst of hell,
Amid the blackest stream of Sticks where poysning breathes do dwell.
Where vapors bile parbraking out from dampishe miry mud,
Increase the pains of Tantalus deserude by guiltles blood,
Could not thine own offence suffice Thyestes in thy Life,
To file thy brothers spousal Bed, and to abuse his Wife?
But after breath from body fled, and Life thy Lymmes hath left,
Can not remembrance of revenge out of thy breast be reft?
What, yet hast thou not laid thy lips, taiaste of Lethes floude?
Now afte death why dost thou come to move thy son to blood?
Could cruel Ditis grant to thee thy pasporte back again?
To work this woe upon the world, and make such rigour raygne,
That Clytemnestra is become the fifty sister dire
Of Danaus daughters, that did once their husbands death conspyre.
Lo here how fickle fortune gives but brytle fading joy.
Lot, he who late a Conqueror triumphed over Troy,
Enduring many srtudy storms with mighty toil and payne
To sow the seed of fame, hath reaped small fruit thereof again.
When as his honour budding forth with flower began to bloom,
(Alas) the stock was hewed down and sent to deadly doom.
And they that of his victory and coming home were glad,
To sudden mourning change their mirth with heaviness bestad.
The lusty pomp of royal court is dead: (O doleful day)
The people moan their princes death with woe and weal away:
With howling crying, wringing hands, with sobs, with sighs, tears,
And with their fists they beat their breasts, they pull hale their hears.
And as the sheep amassed run, and ramp about the field,
When as their shepherd to the Wolf his goary throat doth yield
Even so as mad they rage and rave throughout Micoenas land,
Depriued of their Prince, they fear the bloody Tyrants hand.
While thus were woeful wailings hard in every place about,
The good Cassandra (come from Troy) to death is haled out.
Like as the Swan, who when the time of death approaches ny,
By nature warned is thereof, and pleased well to dye,
Doth celebrate her funeral with dirge and solemn songe:
Even so the noble virgin who in woe hath lived lunge,
Most joyful goes she to her death with mild and pleasant face,
Stout bouistring out her burly breast with pryncely port and grace.
Nothing dismayed with courage bold, and cheerful countenance,
On stage ordained for her death she began her self advance:
As though she had not thither come, to leave her loathsome life,
As though she had not come, to taste the stroke of fatal knife.
But even as it in brydale bed her journey were to meet
Corebus dear, not having mind of death, nor winding sheet,
When looking round on every side she took her leave of all,
From vapourde eyes of young and old the trickling tears do fall.
The Greekes them selves to grief are moude to see this heavy sight,
So pity appears the headmans heart, that thrice about to smite
He stayde the smote: with shivering hand yet once again he tried.
And from her shoulders stroke her head. And thus the virgin dyed.
But now the Greekes another cause of mourning have in hand:
Oresters, Agamemnon^ some, is forced to fly the land.
Among old rotten ragged Rocks there lies an ugly place.
A Dungeon deep, as dark as hell, unknown to Phoebus face.
An hollow huge wide gaping hole, with way still bending down,
Whose mouth with venonous withered weeds is hid and overgrown,
Where stinking smells come belching out from filthy dirty dyke.
Where Verment vile do creep and craule, in hell is not the like.
Ilfauourde, foul misshapen bugs, do luck about this cave,
With dreadful sounds, and roaring noise withing the pit they rave.
Even heather is Electra sent, in darckenesse deep to lye,
In poverty, and comfortless without the light of sky,
Fast clogde with Iron bolts and Chains, thus by her mother laid
In torments, till by her to death Orestes be betrayed:
Who (as Cassandra tells) shall revenge his fathers death,
Depryue with swerd th'adulterour, and Mother both of breath.
So after all these bloody broil, Greece never shall be free:
But blood for blood, and death by turns, the after age shall see.

