Go range about the shady Woods,
beset on every side
With Nets, with Hounds, toils, running
out at random ride
About, about, the craggy crests
of high Cecropes hill,
With speedy foot about the Rocks,
with coursing wander still.
That under Carpanetus Soil,
in Dale below doth lurk,
Whereas the Rivers running swift, their flapping waives do work,
And dash against the beaten Banks of Thrias valley low,
And clamber up the slimy cliues, besmeared with hor^ Snow,
(That falls, when y^ Western wind fro Riphes Mouts doth blow.)
Here, here away, let other wend, whereas with lofty head,
The Elm displays his branched arms, the wood to overspread.
Whereas the Meadows green do lye, where Zephyrus most mild
Out brays his baumy breath so sweet, to gernish up the field
With lusty springtide flowers fresh whereas Elysus slow
Doth fleet upon the Yste flakes, and on the Pastures low.
Maeander sheds his straggling stream, and shears the fruitless sand
With wrackful wave: ye whom the path on Marathons left hand,
Doth lead unto the leauened lands, whereas the heirde of beast
For Evening forage go to graze, and stalk unto their rest.
The rascal Dear trip after fast, you thither take your way,
Where clottered hard Acarnan forced warm Southern winds t'obay
Doth slake the chilling cold, unto Hymetus Ysie cliue
To Alphids little Villages, now let some other d^ue:
That plot where Sunion surges high do beat the sandy banks,
Whereas the marble Sea doth fleet with crooked compassed cranks,
Unhaunted lies too long, withoutten race of any wight.
Who set agog with hunting brave, in woods doth take delight,
Philippis him allures: her hants a fomy bristled Bore
That doth annoy with ghastly dread the husbandmen full sore:
We know him well: for he it is foyld with so many wounds,
But ere they do begin to open, let slip* let slip your Hounds.
But in your leashes Sirs keep up your eiger Mastifs yet,
Keep on their Collers still; that do their galled neekes yfret:
The Spartayne Dogs eiget of pray and of courageous kind,
That soon can single out their game, where they be assygnd,
Tie shorter up within your leash: to pass time shall it bring,
That with the youlping noise of hounds the hollow rocks shall ring.
Now let the Hounds go find of it with Nosthrell good of sent,
And trace unto the ugly de^ere dawning ^ay be spent.
While in the dewish stabby ground the prick of cleaze doth s^icke.
One bear the toil on cumbred neck, and some with nets full thick
Make speed: some with the arming cord by pencil painted red
By slight, and subtle guileful ^eare shall make the Beasts adred:
Loke thou to pitch thy thirling (...) and ^hou to try thy might,
Shalt cope him with broad ^ with hand both left right.
Thou standing at receipt shalt chase the ^ awayne.
With hallowing: thou with limere sharpe vndee him being slain.
Grant good success unto thy mate, Virago, thou Diuyne,
That secret deserts chosen hast for noble Empire thine:
Whose thirled Darts with leauel right do gore the Beast with Blood
That laps the lukewarm liquor of roxis fleeting Flood.
And eke the Beast that sports it self on frozen Ist^s straud.
The ramping Lyons eake of Geate are chased by thy hand.
And eke the wyndy heeled Hart in Ca^die thou dost chase.
Now with more gentle lance thou strikst the Do^ that trips apace.
To thee the Tygar fierce his diverse spotted breast doth yield,
The rough shaghairy Bugle turns on thee his back in field.
Eke salvage Buffes with branch horns: all things thy quarelles fear,
That to the needy Garamas in Affricke doth appear.
Or eis the wyld Arabian enriched by his wood,
Or what the Brutish roches of Pyrene understood,
Or else what other Beasts do lurcke in wyld Hyrcanus grove,
Or else among Sarmatians in desert fields that rove:
It that the Ploughman come to field, that stands in thy grace,
Into his (...) the ^oused beast full sure he is to chase.
No feet in sunder break the (...) and home he brings the Bore
In i^tting wayne, when as the hounds with gubs of clottered gore,
Besmeared have their g^ymed (...) and then the Country rout
To Cottages repair in ranks, with triumph all about.
Lo, Goddess grant us grace: the hounds already opened have,
I follow must the Chase: this gainer way my pains to save,
I take into the woods.
O Country Crete that bears the sway,
upon the Seas so vast.
Whose Ships so thick in every Shore,
the Seas do overcast,
What ever coast as far as is
Assyria land doth lye,
Where Nereus doth the piked Stem
to cut his course deny,
Why force ye me that yielded am, a pledge to those I hate?
And gieuen in Bridal bed to be my enmies Spousal mate,
To languish out my time in tears, in woe to lead my life?
My husband lo, runagate is gon from me his Wyfea,
Yet Theseus still performs his O the alike unto his Spouse.
As erst to Ariadne, when he falsifide his Vows:
He champion stout dare enterprise the darkness deep to pass
Of loathsome Lake, whence yet found out, no way returning was.
A soldier of the Wooer bold Pros^rpin home to bring,
Out pullde perforce from grisly throne of Dire infernal King.
Accompanide with fury fierce he marches forward still,
Who neither dread nor shame could force forbear his wicked will.
With lawless wedlocks ravishments Hippolytus his Sire
Doth in the boiling bottom deep of Acheron require,
But yet another greater grief sways on my pensive breast,
No silent night, nor slumber deep can set my heart at rest.
My sorrow still is nourished, and still entreaseth it,
And ranklesse in my boiling breast, as out of Aetnaes pit.
The stifling vapour upward sties and Pallas Web, it stands
At rest, my dropping distaff down doth drop between my hands.
My luskish mind it hath no lust my vowed gifts to pay
Unto the Temples of the Gods that live my Theseus may:
Nor rigging with Th'athenian Dames among the aulters proud
To toss the fiery brands, unto the sacrifice aloud,
Nor yet devoutly praying at the Aares with godly guise
To Pallas president in earth to offer sacrifice:
It doth delight me to pursue the chased beasts in flight,
And toss my flashing Falcon fierce with nimble hand full light.
What ails thou mind this mad to take conceypte in freight and fell?
My wretched mothers fatal vice a breeding now I smell:
To cloak our crime, our lust doth know, woods are the fittest place,
Alas good Mother, I lament the heavy luckless case:
Thou rash attaint with loathsome lust enamoured is thy breast.
Even with the cruel head of al the herd of salvage beast,
That churlish angry roaring Bull no yoke can be sustain.
And he among the wild, and eke untamed Neat doth raygne.
Yet was inclined to love: what God can grant me my desire?
Or Dedalus with curious craft can ease my flaming fire?
Not if he might return, whom Ariadne hath iustruct
From crooked compassed Labyrinth by thread that out he plucked
Among the lurcking corners close, and wily winding way,
To grope his footing back again, and did deprive of day
Our monstrous Minotaur enclosed in Maze and Dungeon blind:
Although he promise to our sore, no salve yet can he find:
Through me Apollos Progeny doth Venus quite again*
The filthy shame that she and Mars together did sustain.
Whom Phoebus taking at their task all naked in the Sky,
Hung up in Nets, a laughing stock to every gazing Eye:
For this all Phoebus stock, with vile and foul reproach she staines,
In some of Minos family still loathsome lusting raygnes:
One mischief brings another in.
O Theseus wife, and Child
Of Jove, let vice be soon out of thine honest breast exiled:
And quench the raging heat: to dire despair do not up yield,
Who at the first repulses love, is safe and wins the field,
Who doth by flattering fancy fond feed on his vicious vain,
To late doth grudge against the yoke which erst he did sustain:
Nor yet do I forget how hard, and void of reason clean:
A Princes stately stomach yields unto the golden mean:

That end I will accept, whereto by Fortune I can lead
The neighbours weal great comfort brings unto the horie head.

The first redress is to withstand, not willingly to slide,
The second is to have the fault by mean and measure tried:
O wicked wretch what wilt thou do? why dost thou burden more
The stained stock and dost excel thy mothers fault before?
More heinous is thy guilt than yet thy mothers Monster was:
For monsters may thou think are brought by destiny to pass:
But let the cause of sin, to blame of manners lewd redound:
And if because thy husband doth, not breath above the ground.
Thou think thou may defend thy fault, and make thy matter good
And free from fear? thou art beguiled, yet think the Stygian flood
In grisly gaping gulf for aye hath drenched Theseus deep,
But yet thy Sire, whose kingdoms large the Seas at will do keep:
Whose dredfull doom pronounces pangs, and due deserved payne,
Two hundredth wailing souls at once. Will he think thou maintain
So heinous crime to couch? the care of tender Parents breast
Full wise, and wary is to bring their children to the best.
Yet shall we think by subtle mean by craft and devilish guile,
In hugger mugger close to keep our treachery so vile.
What shall thy mothers father Phoebe, whose beams so blazing bright,
With fiery gleede o^ every thing, doth shed his golden light?
Or Jove the Grandsire great of Gods that all the world doth shake,
And brandishes with flaming Fist, his fiery lightnings flake:
That Vulcane doth in Fornace hoate, of dusky Aetna make
Think thou this may be brought to pass, so heinous crime to hide?
Among thy Grandsire all that have each privy thing espied?
But though the favour of the Gods conceal the second time
Thy loathsome lust (unworthy name) and to thy bawdy crime,
Sure faythfulnesse annexed be, that ever barred was.
Each great offence, what will this work? a present plague, alas
Suspicionlest the guilty night bewray thy deed unjust:
And conscience burdened sore with sin that doth it self mistrust.
Some have commit offence full safe from any bitter blame,
But none without the stinging pricks of conscience did the same:
Assuage the boiling flames of this thy lewd ungracious love,
Such monstrous mischief horrible from modest mind remove.
Which never did Barbarian commit unto this day.
No not the Gadding Gothes that up and down the fyel^es do stray:
Nor craggy crested Taurus mount whose hoary and frosty face
With (...) cold abandons all inhabitors the place.
Nor yet the scattered Scithian, thy mother have in mind,
And fear this foreign venery, so strange against thy kind:
The Fathers wedlock with the sons thou seckst to be defylde,
And to conceive in wicked womb a Bastard Mongrel Child:
Go too, and turn thy Nature to the flame of burning breast.
Why yet do Monsters cease? why is thy Brothers cave in reast.
That Mynotaurus hideous hole and ugly couching den
Without an other greedy fyend to mounch up flesh of men?
Misshapen, lothly monsters borne so oft the world shall bear,
So oft rebels against her self confused Nature dear,
As love entangles Nymphs of Crere.

I know the truth ye teach
O Nurse, but fury forces me at worser things to reach:
My mind even wittingly to vice falls forward prone and bent
To bolesome counsel back again in vain it doth relent:
As when the Norman tugs and toils to bring the freighted Bark
Against the striving stream, in vain he loses al his cark
And down the shallow stream perforce the Ship doth headlong yield,
Where reason preaseth forth, there fighting fury wins the field,
And bears the swinging sway, and crank Cupidoes puissant might
Tryumpheth over all my breast this flighty win^ed wight
And puissant potestate throughout the world doth hear the stroke,
And with unquenched flames doth force Io^es kindled breast to smoke,
The Battelbeaten Mars hath felt these bitter burning brands,
And eke the God hath tasted these whose fervent fiery hands,
The thumping thunder bouncing bolts three forked wise doth frame,
And he that ever busted is about the furious flame,
In smoltring Fornace raging hot on dusky top so (...)
Of foggye A^tna mount: and with such slender heat doth fry,
And Phoebe himself that weldes his dart upon his twanging string,
With aimed shaft directly driven the wimpled Lad doth sting.
With power he scores along the Earth and Marble Sky awayne.
Lust favouring folly filthtly did falsely forge and (...)
L^ue for a God: and that he might his freedom ^
Ascribes the name of feigned God to shittel bed lame rage.
Erycina about the world doth send her roving page,
Who gliding through the Azure skies with slender jointed arm
His perlous weapons weildes at will, and working griec uous harm.
Of bones and stature being least great might he doth display
Upon the Gods, compelling them to crouch and him obey.
Some Brainsick head did attribute these things unto himself,
And Venus Godhead with the bow of Cupid little elf.
Who cockred is, triumphing much in fau^ing fortunes lap.
And flotes in wealth, or seeks and sues for things that seldom hap,
Lust (mighty fortunes mischeous mate) assaulteth straight his breast,
His tooth contempneth wonted fare and victuals homly dressed.
Nor handsome houses pleases him, why doth this plague refuse.
The simple sort, and to annoy doth stately bowers choose?
How haps it matrimony pure to bide in Cottage base?
And honest love in middle sort of men doth purchase place?
And things that be of mean estate themselves restrain full well,
But they that wallow in their lust whose stately stomachs swell,
Puffed up and boistred big with trust of Kingly sceptre proud
Do greater matters enterprise then may be well aloud.
He that is able much to do, of power will also be
To do these things he cannot do. Now Lady dost thou see
What things do thee beseem thus sta^d on stately throne on hie?
Mistrust the sceptre of thy spouse returning by and by.

In me I bear a violent and mighty payse of love,
And no mans coming home again to terror may me move.
He never stepped back again, the welkin sky to touch,
That swallowed once and sunk in gulf and glummy cave did couch
Shut up in shimering shade for ay.

Yet do not thou suppose,
Though dreadful Ditis lock with bars, and bolt his dungeon close:
And though the hideous hellicke hound do watch the grisly gates.
Not Theseus alone shall have his passages stopped by fates,

Perhaps he pardon will the crime of loves procuring heate

Nay churlishly he would of old his honest wife entreat.
Antiope his bobbing bu^ets felt and heavy cuffe:
Suppose, yet thou can qualify thy husbands raging ruff:
Yet who can mo^e Hippoly^us most s^ony stubborn mind?
He will abhor the very name detesting woman kind,
And faring frantically, will give himself to single life,
And shun the hated spousal bed of every marride wife,
Then shall ye plainly understand his brutish Scithian blood

To follow him even through the hills, the Forest thycke wood,
That keeps among the clottred cliues besmeared with silver Snow,
Whose nimble heals on craggy rocks are frisking to and fro:
I wysh.

He will resist and not be dalyed with nor coyd,
Nor change his chaste estate, for life of chastity devoid,
And turn perhaps his cankered hate to light on thee alone,
That now he bears to all.

will not he moved be with moan?

Stark wild he is,

and I have learned wild things by love to tame

Hee'le run away.

if by the Seas hef^ie, I on the same
Will follow him.

Remember then thy father may thee take.

I may remember mine offence, my mother eake will slake.

Detesting womankind, he drives and courseth them away.

No strumpets bashful fear against my breast doth hold at bay:

Thy husband will be here.

I wis he comes I warrant him
Pyrothous companion in hellicke dungeon dim.

Thy Father also he will come,

A gentle hearted Sire
Forgeuing Ariadnes fault, when she did him require.

For these my silver shining locks of horie drooping age,
And breast be^ld with cloying cares restrain thy furious rage.
I humbly thee beseech even by these tender tears of mine,
Succour thy self, much health it is, if will to health incline.

Not every jot at honesty exiled is my breast,
I yield me Nurse, love that denies thus under rule to rest
In quietness, let him, let him perforce be battered down.
I will not let my fleeting fame and glorious bright rename
With stain to be dishonoured, this only is the gap,
To shun the perlous path that leads to vices training trap.
My spouse let me ensue with death this strive I shall subvert.

Dear daughter slake the ramping rage of thy unruly heart.
Pluck down thy stomach stout, for this I judge thee worthy breath,
In that thou dost confess thy self to have deserved death.

Condemde I am to die, what kind of death now would I know,
As either strangled with a rope shall I my life forgo?
Or run upon a bloody blade, with gory wound to dye?
Or tops^e turuy headlong hurled down Pallas turret hie,
In quarrel just of Chastity.

Now strengthen we our hand,
Alas shall not my feeble age thy despret death withstand,
Forbear the sway of fury fierce.

No reason can restrain
Him that destreth death* when death he hath determined plain
And ought to die,

Sweet Lady mine (thou comfort of my age
And feeble years) if in thy breast preuayles such mighty rage
Have not regard what sounding blast in trompe of fame be blown
Whereby thy name in stained stock of black reproach be sown,
Or graft in spotless honesty: for fame doth favour small
The most upright, to better worse, to worse she's best of al,
Let us assay the froward mind of yonder stubborn Child
It is my part to set upon the clubbish young man wild
And to compel the sturdy lad with stony hart to yield.

O Goddess great that art the wondrous seed
Of frothie surge in stormy raging seas
Who flamy Cupid armed with scorching gleed,
And Shaftes, to call his Mother it doth please:
This wanton Elf forth putting sappy might
From steadfast Bow how surely doth he throw
His venimd shaftes, through all thy marrow right
The foystring fire doth rankle in and glovve
The secret flame that boils in each vain
The strype laid on shevves not in open mark^:
But invvard marrovv he sucks out amain,
This boy to sound of peace doth never hark.
His scattered shaftes full nimble every where
He darts about, the East that doth behold
The davvning sun himself aloft to rear,
From purple bed, and whether late he told.
With ruddy lamp, in Western wade doth glyde:
If any coastlye under scorching clavves
Of burning Crab, or people do abide,
Beneath the climb of Isy frozen pavves,
Of ugly gargle faced bigger Bear,
That wandering still from place to place doth go
The fervent Fumes, and stouing heate each where
That issues out from CUPIDS burning bow,
The flashing flames of Yongmens burning breast,
He stirs up, enkindling new the heate
Of quenched coals, that vvonted was to rest
In drooping age: and virgins hearts do beat
With strange untasted brands: and doth compel
The Gods descending down from starry Sky,
With counterfeited Vysages, todwell*
Upon the Earth to blind the Lovers Eye.
Sir PHOEBVS vvhilome forced in Thessail Land
To Sheepeherds state ADMETVS Heirdes did drive,
His mourning Harp depriude of heavenly Hand
With ordered Pipe his Bullocks did revive.
Even he that trayles the dusky riding rack,
And wieldes the swaying Poles with swinging swift
How oft did he faynde forms put on his back
And heavenly Face with baser countenance shift.
Sometime a Bird with silver shining wings,
He fluttering flushed, and languishing the death
With sweet melodious tuned voice he sings,
When silly Cygnus gave up gasping breath.
Sometime also with curled for head grim
A dallying Bull, he bent his stouping back
To maidens sport, through deepest Seas to swim
While horny hove made shift like Ore slack
Through waters wyld his brothers perlous cost
With forward glancing breast the stream he brake,
And least he should his tender pray have lost,
Her troublus thought did cause his heart to quake
DIANA bright that sways in circle murk,
Of darkened Sky, with frying fits did burn,
And leaving of the Evening watch her work
Her fulgent Chariot bright, eke did she turn.
To PHOEBVS charge, to weelde it otherwise
Her Evening Wayne APOLLO learned to guide,
And take his turn in lesser compassed sis:
The da^pish nights vvatcht not their vvonted tide
And late it was ere that AVRORA fair
Set forth the morning Sun with gold array,
While that the Marble axell tree in the air
The shogging Carte made crake with swagging sway,
ALCMENAS boisterous Imp did lay aside
His clattering shafts, and also did refuse
To vveare the ramping Lyons hairy Hyde
And Emraudes for his fingers did he choose,
And brayded kept his rufled staring Locks,
Ware Garters wrought on knee with seames of Gold
And on his feet his dirty dabled Socks,
And with the hand where vvhilome he did hold
His Clubbish bat, a thread he nimbly spun:
Both Persia and fertile Lidia knew
(Where golden sanded Pactolus doth run)
ALCYDES bid the Lyons case adieu
And thunder propping brawny shoulderd sier
That heaved and bolstred up the Welkin throne,
In slender Kirtell wrought by Web of Tyre
Did jet about to please his Love alone.
This flame (believe the heart that feels the wound)
Enspirde with holiness excels in might,
Whereas the Land by Seas embraced round,
Where twinkling Stars do start in Welkin bright
This peevish Elf the Conntreyes all doth keep,
Whose quarrels sting the Marble faced rout
Of water Nymphs, that with the Waters deep
The brand that burns in breast cannot quench out,
The flying foul doth feel the foystring flames.
What cruel Skirmish do the Heyffers make?
rickt up by lust that nice Dame VENVS frames.
In furious sort for all the Cattels sake?
If fearful Hearts their Hinds do once mistrust,
In love disloyal then gladly dare they fight,
And bellowings out, they bray to witness just
Their angry mood, conceyu'de in ireful spright.
The painted coast of India then doth hate
The spotty Hyded Tygar, then the Bore
Doth vvhet his Tusks to combat for his mate,
And fomes at mouth: the ramping Lyons roar
And shake their Manes, when CUPIDS corsies move
With grunts and groans the howling frythes do murn
The Dolphin of the raging Sea doth love:
The Elephants by CUPIDS blaze do burn:
Dame nature all doth challenge as her own,
And nothing is that can escape her laws:
The rage of wrath is quenched and overthrown,
When as it pleases Love to bid them paws:
Black hate that rusting frets in cankered breast,
And all old grudge is dashed by burning love.
What shall I make discourse more of the rest
Stout Stepdames doth this gripe to mercy move.

DEclare what tidings bring thou Nurse,
where is Hippolitus?
To cure this puissant breach of ills
no hope there is in us:
Nor yet to quench his flashing flame:
his furies fretting ire,
Doth fry in secret boiling breast,
and though the smothrering fire
Be covert close, yet bursting forth in welked face it fryes:
The sparkling flakes do glowing flash from bloudred rolling eyes
She hanging down her pouched groyne, abhors the loathsome light,
Her skittish wits and wayward mind can fancy nothing right:
Her faltering legs do fail her now, down squatting on the ground
With sprauling limbs her shittell grief doth cast her in aswound:
Now scant she on her lithy neck holds up her giddy head,
Nor can commit her self to couch in rest upon her bed.
Nor harbring quietness in heart with drery dewle and plaint
She languishes through out the night, and now her body faint
She bids them up to lift: and now her down again to lay,
And now her crispen locks undone abroad she bids display:
And strayt to wrap them up again. Thus fickle fanse still
Doth fleet, nor is contented with his wayward wandering will.
No care she casts on her health nor eats one crum of bread,
With feeble fumbling foot upon the floor eke doth she tread,
Her strength alas is quite consumed, her favour sweet doth faint:
Nor ruddy sanguine purple they her cherry checks doth paint:
With greedy gripes of gnawing grief her pinched limbs do pine:
Her foltring legs do stagger now: the gloss of beauty ^yne
In body Alabaster bright is shronke away and wast
Those Crystal Eyes that wonted were resemblance clear to cast
Of radiant Phoebus gold arayes, now nothing gentry shyne:
Nor bear a spark of Phoebus bright her fathers beams deuyne:
The trickling tears tril down her chekes, dew dampish dropping still,
Doth wet her warrye plants, as on the top of Taurus hill
The warry snowes with lukewarm shores to moisture turned do drop
But lo the Princes palace is set open in the top:
She lying down upon her golden bed of high estate
Hurles of her wonted royal robes which wounded hart doth hate:

Maids, have our purple garments hence, vestures wrought with gold*
These crimso robes of scarlet red let not mine eyes behold.
And damask weeds, whereon the Seres embraudet branches brave,
Whose Silken substance gatherd of their trees aloof they have,
My bosom shall be swaddled in with cuttied gaberdine,
No golden collar on my neck nor Indian jewels fine*
The precious pearls so white shall hang no more now at mine ears,
Nor sweet perfumes of Siria shall poulder more my hears.
My flaring ruffled locks shall dagling hang my neck about
And shoulder points: then then apace t^attring in and out.
Let wyndes even blow it where it list, in left hand will I take
A quiver of shaftes, and in my right a Boorespere will I shake,
To cruel child Hippolitus such one his mother was,
As fleeting from the frozen Seas those country costs did pass,
And drove her hierdes that bet with trampling feet The Athenian soil
Or like the trull of Tauais, Or like her will I toil,
Of Meotis that on a knot wound up her crispen locks*
Thus will I trot with moon like targe among the wodes and rocks.

Leave of thy bitter languishing unto the sil^ sort
(That walter thus in waives of woe) grief gives not testing port
Is any measure to be found in thy tormenting fire.
Some grace at wyld Dianae* hand with sacrifyce require.
O Goddess great of Woods, in hills that only set thy throne,
And Gods that of the craggy clyues at worshipped alone,
Thy wrathful threatenings on us all now turn to better plight
O Goddess that in forrestes wyld and groves obtaynest might,
O shining lamp of heaven, and thou the Diamon of the Night,
O threefold shapen Heccate that on the world his face
Dost render light with torch by turns, vouchsafe to grant thy grace
To further this our enterprise and help our piteous case,
O mollify Hippolytus his stubborn hardued hart,
And let him learn the pangs of love and taste like bitter smart:
And yield his light allured ears: entreat his bru^sh breast,
And change his mind, in Venus bounds compel him once to rest.
So froward and untoward now so crabbed cursed and mad:
So shalt thou be with blandishing and smiling countnaunce clad.
Thy shimering cloud clean fading hence then brightly shalt thou bear
And glistering horns, then while by night upon the whirling sphere,
Thy cloudy heeled steeds thou guydes, the raging witches charm
Of Thessal, shall not draw thee from the heavens nor do thy harm
No Shepherd purchase shall rename. Thou come at our request:
Now favour dost thou grant unto the prayers of our Breast:
I do espy him worshipping the solemn Sacrifyce,
Both place and time convenient by Fortune doth arise:
We must go craftily to work for fear we quaking stand,
Full hard it is the buysy charge of guylt to take in hand:
But who of Princes stands in awe, let him defy all right,
Cast of the care of honesty from mind exiled quite,
A man unfit is for the hest of King a bashful wight.

O Nurse, how chance thy limping limbs do crepe into this place?
With blubbered Cheeks, leaden looks with sad and mourning face?
Doth yet my Father Theseus with health enjoy his life?
Doth Phaedra yet enjoy her health my stepdam and his wife.

Forgo these fears, and gently come thy blessed hap to take,
For care constrains me to morn with sorrow for thy sake,
That hurtfully thou looudes thy self with pangs of pluging payne:
Let him rub on in misery whom destny doth constrain:
But if that any yield himself to waives of wilful woe,
And doth torment himself, deserves his we^le for to forgo
The which he knows not how to use: tush, be not so demure,
Considering how thy years do run, take part of sport and play,
Let mirry Bacchus cause thee cast these clogging cares away,
And reap the frutte of sweet delight belonging to thy years,
For lusty youth with speedy foot full fast away it wears.
Erst tender love, erst Venus feeds the young man appetite,
Be blithe my Boy, why Widow like lie thou alone by night?
Shake of thy solemn sadness man that h^rty youth doth spill:
Huff, royst it out courageously, take bridle at thy will
Let not the flower of plooming years all fru^tles fade away.
God poynteth every time his task, and leads in dus array
Each age by order lust, as mirth the sappy youthful years,
A forehed frayte with gravity becomes hoary hairs.
Why dust thou bridle thus thy self, and dulles thy pregnant wit?
The corn that did but lately sprout above the ground, if it
Be rank of root, yet in the luske, with enter at large
Unto the hoping husbandman shall travel all discharge.
With branched bough above the Wood the tree shall raise his top,
Whom rusty hand of canckred hate, did never spill nor lop.
The pregnant Wits are evermore more prone to purchase praise,
If noble hearts by freedom franckt be nourished from decays.
Thou churlish country Clown Hodgelike not knowing Courtly life,
Delight in drowsy doting youth without a loving wife.
Dost thou suppose that to this end Dame Nature ^id us frame,
To suffer hardness in this world and to abide the same?
With courses and kerereyes fet the prancing Steeds to tame?
Or bicker else with battles fierce, and broils of bloody war?
That soueraygne Sire of heaven and earth, when fates do us detarre,
With signs and plagues prognosticate provided hath with heed,
For to repair the damage done with new begotten seed.
Go to, let bedding in the world be used once no more
(That still mankind from age to age upholds and doth restore)
The filthy world deformd would lie in irksome ugly stay,
No flo^ing ships on rambling Seas should hoisted Sails display.
No Foul should skoare in azure Sky, no Beast to woods repair,
And only whisking winds should whirl amid the empty air.
What diverse dreery deaths drive one mankind to dumpish grave?
The Seas, the sword and traitorous traynes whole countries wasted have:
Yet for to limit forth our league there is no destny think,
So down to blackefast Stigian dampes we of our selves do sink.
Let youth that never felt the joys, in Venus lap which lie,
Allow the solitary life, what ever thou espy,
An hut liburly shall become for term of one mans life.
And work it one destruction by mutual hate and strife.
Now therefore follow natures course, of life the soueraygne guide,
Resort unto the town: with men delight thee to abide.

No life is more devoid of sin, and free from grievous thralls,
And keeping fashions old, then that which leaving Townish walls,
Doth take delight in pleasant Woods, he is not set on fire,
Enraged sore with burning Boil of covetous desire.
Who hath addict himself among the mountains wild to live,
Not pricked with prattling peoples bruit, no credit doth he give.
Toth Vulgar sort disloyal still, unto the better part
Nor cankered rancour pale doth gnaw his black and fretting hart.
Nor fickle favour forces he, he bound doth not obey
The payse of Sceptre proud: but weildes the massy sceptre sway,
At ^bbing honours gapes he not, nor moyles for fleeting muck,
Removed far from hovering hope and dread of backward luck,
Not bitter gnawing Envy rank tears him with tooth unkind,
Not quaynted with the mischief that in Cittyes and in mind
Of people presses thick: nor quakes at every blast that flies
With guilty conscience to himself, nor frames himself to lies.
Nor covets rich with thousand pillars close his head to shroud,
Nor guilds his beams with glistering gold for fancy fond and proud
Nor gushing streams of blood upon his innocent Alters flow.
Nor Bullockets bright their hundred heads as white as flakie Snow,
Do yield to Axe, while scattered is on thaulter sacred grain,
But al the quiet country round at will he doth obtain.
And harmless walk too and fro amid the open air,
And only for the brutish Beast contrives a trapping snare.
Another while upon the swift Alpheus banks he walks
Now up and down the breary Brakes of bushy woods he stalks
Where luke warm Lernas crystal flood with water clear doth shine,
And changing course his Channel out another way doth twyne:
And hear the piteous plaining Birds with chirping charms do chide.
And Branches trembling shake whereon soft windye puffs do glyde,
And spreading Beches old do stand, to fast and shake my shanks:
To stamp and dance it doth me good on running Rivers banks:
Or else upon a withered clod to steal a nap of sleep,
Whereas the fountain flows amain with gushing waters deep.
Or else among the baulmy flowers out braying savours sweet,
Whereas with pleasant humming noise the bubbling brooke doth fleet.
The Apples beaten of the tree do ravening hunger staunch,
And Strawberyes gathered of the bush soon fill with hungry paunch.
He shoons assaults, that doth himself from regal royal hold.
Estates do quaff their dreadful drink in Bolles of massye Gold:
How trim it is water to lap in palm of naked hand:
The sooner drowsye Morpheus byndes thy Brows with sleepy band:
The careless corpse doth rest at ease upon the hardest Couch:
The Cabin base hants not by Nookes, to prig and filch a pouch:
In house of many corners blind his head he doth not hyde,
He loves to come abroad and in the light to be espyde:
The Heavens bear witness of his life, they lived in this wise.
I think, that scattred did of Gods in ^ arise.
No doting covetous blind destre of Gold in them was found:
No stones nor s^akes set up in field did stint the parted ground:
The sailing Ship with brazen St^ cut not the waltring wave,
But every man doth know his coast and how much he should have.
No hugy (...) ta^sed w^re, nor Ditches delved deep,
Nor countermured Cast^e strong the walled Towns to keep.
The Soldier was not busied his blun^ed Tools to whet,
Nor rapping Pellets* Cannon shot the barred Gates down bet,
Nor soil with yoked Ox was strained to bea^e the eueting share,
The field even (...) of it self did feed the World with fare,
The plentiful abundant Woods great wealth by nature gave:
A house of nature take they had a dim and darksome Cave:
The covetous mind to scrape up wealth, and despret furious ire,
And greedy Lust (that ^ggeth on the mind all set on fire.)
First brake the bands, and eager thirst of bearing sway stepped in,
To be the strongers ravening pray the weaker did begin,
And might went for oppressed right: the naked Fist found out
To scratch and cuffe, to box and bum, with dealing blows about.
The knarrie Logs, and snaggie (...) were framed weapons strong,
The ga^en Tree vngrayned was with Pikes of Iron long.
No nor the rusty Fawcho^ then did hang along the side,
Nor Helmet crest upon the head stood pe^ing up for pri^e,
Pale spiteful grief ^ Tools, and ^ Mars his brain
Contriu'de new sleights a thousand kind of ^eathes he did ordain:
By means hereof each Land is filled with clot^red gore yshed,
With streams of blood the Seas are died to hue of sanguine red,
Then Mischief (...) measure began through every house to pass,
No kind of vicious villainy that pra^se wanted was.
By Brother, Brother reft of Breath, and ^ake the Fathers Life
By hand of Child, ^ake murdered was the husband of his Wife.
And Mother lewd on mischief set destroyed their bodies seed,
I overpass the Stepdame with her guilt and heinous deed,
And no where pity planted is, as in the brutish beast:
But womankind in mischief is ringleader of the reast,
The insrument of wickedness enkindling first desire,
Whose vile vncesteous whoredom see so many Towns on fire.
So many Nations fall to war, take Kingdoms overthrown,
And raised from the ground, to crushe so many people down.
Let other pass: by Iasons Wife Medea may we find
By her alone, that Women are a plaguy crabbed kind.

Why, for one woman's fault of blame shall every one have part?

I hate, detest, abhore, I loath, I curse them from my heart.
Be it reason, right, or Natures law, or vengeance fury fell,
It likes me to abhor them still: the burning fire shall dwell,
And bide with quenching water first, the dangerous quick Sand
Shall promise Ships with safetinesse upon the should to land,
And Western Thetis soonke aloof and brencht in deepest nook,
Shall force the ruddy Morning Sun from scarlet Skies to look,
The Woolfe shall yield his fleering Chaps to suck the Tet of Do
Ere won by woman's love, to her I crouch and stoup allow.

Love bridles oft with snaffling bits the stubborn wayward heart,
Behold thy Mothers native land in Scythia every part,
The salvage women feel the force of Venus yoking band.
Thou only Child thy Mother had dost this welt understand.

This only comfort of my Mother must I keep behind,
That leefull unto me it is to hate all Womankind.

Even as the stiff and sturdy Rocks have waltring waives wythstoode,
And dashes back from shore aloof the fomy flapping flood:
So lightly be contemns my talk: but Phaedra runs mad
Because of this my long delay with crushing cares y^lad:
What will she do? Aye me alas how shall she now be spead?
Her breathless body to the ground drops suddenly down dead.
A sallow hue like ghastly death ouerstrikes her frenzy Face,
Look up and speak behold thy dear sweet heart doth thee embrace.

ALas to flote in Waives of woe
who me reuines again?
To pinch my mind with pining pangs
and bitter drunts of nayne.
What ease to me it was, when as
I lay in trance at rest?
Why dost thou thus the pleasure of
renewed life detest:
O heart be bold, assay and seek thy purpose to attain,
Be not abashed, nor faced out with churlish words again.
Who faintly craves any boo^e, gives courage to deny:
The greatest portion of my crime dispacht ere now have I:
Shame seeks to late to purchase place within our bashful brow,
Since that in foul and loathsome love we have delight ere now,
If I obtain my will, then shall our wedlock cloak the crime:
Success corrupts honesty with wickedness sometime:
Behold this secret place is void from any witness bye.

My faltering tong doth in my mouth my tale begun deny.
Great force constrains me to speak, but greater hold my peace,
O heavenly Ghosts I you protest, tis this that doth me please.

Cannot the mind that covers talk in words at will out burst?

Light cares have words at will. but great do make us sore aghast.

Mother the grief y^ galls your heart come whisper in mine ear.

The name of Mother is to proud a name for me to bear,
Importing puissant power too much: the fancy of my mind
It doth (...), a baser name of less renown to find.
Me (if thou please) Hippolytus thy Loving Sister call.
Or weighting Maid, and rather so: no drudgry spare I shall,
If thou through thick and thin in snowes to travail me desire,
Or else command me for to run through Coals of flaming fire,
Or set my foot on Pi^dus frozen Rocks, it yrkes me not.
Or if thou will me rashly run thorough scorching fire hot,
Or ravening routes of salvage beasts I will not slowly rest,
With gory Lance of naked blade my bowels to vnbrest.
These Ringdomes left to me in charge wield thou of them the sway,
And take me as thy humble Mate, it fits me to ^ay,
And thee to give commandment, it is no woman's seat,
To claim her Title to the Crown, to reign in Parents seat.
Thou flourishing amid the pride of lusty youthful race
Supply a valiant Prynees room with Fathers golden Mace,
Protect thy humble suppliant, defend thy lowly Maid
Embrast in mercies bosom, at thy Feet so meekelylayde.
Take pity on a stely Widows wo, and wretched plight.

The God that reigns aloft, forbid such luckless lot to light.
My Father Theseus safe in health will straight return again.

The lowering Lord that deep in strong infernal Gail do reign,
And damned up always to pass from Stygian Puddle glum,
Whereby to breathing bodies left alone the ground to cum,
Shall he let escape the Cloyner of his joys from spousal bed,
Unless that Plutos fancy fond by doting love be led:

The righteous Gods will make for him a right returning way.
But while through fear our wavering wills in hovering Baliace sway,
Upon my brethren will I cast a due and earnest care,
And thee defend: believe not that in Widows plight ye are:
And I my self will unto the supply my Fathers place,

O Love (alas) of credit light, O Love of flickring Face,
Is this enough that he hath said? entreatance will I try,
Dear child ^ue on my wretched woe, do not my suite deny,
That lurcking close doth couch in secret mourning breast of me,
Fain would I speak: yet loath I am.

What mischief may this be?

Such mischief as ye would not think, could light in Mothers mind.

With mubling voice perplexed ye waste your words against y^ wind.

A vapor hoate, and Love do glow within my bedlam breast:
It raging rank no inward juice vndried leaves in rest:
The ser sonk in skalded guts through every vain doth fry,
And smothering close in seething blood as flashing flame doth fly,
With egar sweeping sway along up burning beams on hie.

Enamorde thus with Love entiere of Theseus dost thou rage?

Even so it is: the lovely looks of Theseus former age
Which he a sweet welfauorde Boy did bear with comely grace,
When pretty dapper cutted Beard on clear complexio^de Face
Began sprout, on naked Chin, when he the kennels clottred blood
Beheld of mongrell Minotaur, and crooking Maze withstood
By groping long vntwined thredes the beams of beawty bright
That shone th^ (...) his Face, his ^rispen locks with labels bight,
Smooth stroked lay, his scarlet Cheeks by nature paincted bright
Pouldred with spots of golden gloss, and sharpe assaults of Love
Prevailed in his fleshly arms: what grace doth shine above
In the Dianaes Face, or fiery crested Phoebus mine,
Or else in comely count'naunce of this lovely face of thine,
Such Theseus had when Ariadnaes Eye he did delight:
Thus portly pacing did he biare his noble head upright.
It is no counterfeited gloss that shines in thy Face,
In thee appears thy manly Fathers starve and lowering Grace.
Thy Mothers crabbed count'naunce cake resembled in some part
Puts in full well a seemelynesse, to please the Lookers hart.
The Scythian awful Majesty with Greekish favour sweet
Appears: if thou had with thy Sire attempt the Seas of Creete,
(One of those seven from Athens sent elect by luckless lot
To pay such bloody tribute, which King Minos of them got.
The ravening and bloudthirsty Minotaurus foul to feed)
My Sister Ariadne would, for thee have spun the thread.
Therewith in crafty compassed Maze to lead thee to and fro,
In ugly Laberynthus long returning from thy Fo.
Thee, thee O Sister dear whereso in all the Heaven thou are,
And shine bright with blazing beams transform'de into a Star,
I thee beseech come succour me with like distress now cloyed:
Alas us stely Sisters twain one kindred hath desroyde.
The Sire thy smart, the son hath brewd the bane that me doth lees.
Behold an Imp of royal race laid humbly at thy Knees,
Yet never stained, and vndefilde, an harmless innocent,
To thee alone of all the World my crowching Knees are bent,
And for the nones my hawty heart, and Princely courage stout
I did abate, that humbly thee with tears entreat I mought.

O soueraygne Sire of Gods, dost thou abide so long to hear
This vile abomination? so long dost thou forbear
To see this heinous villainy? if now the Skies be clear,
Wilt thou henceforth at any time with furious raging hand
Dart out thy cracking thunder dint, and dreadful lightnings brand?
Now battered down with bouncing bolts the rumbling Skies let fall
That foggy Clouds with dusky drooping day (...) cover all,
And force the backward starring startes to slide a slope withal
Thou starry crested crown, and Titan prankt with beamy blase
Come out, with staring bush upon thy kindreds guilt to case.
Dash out and drown thy leaming lamp eclisde in glummy Skies,
To shrink in shimmering shape: why doth thy right hand not arise
O guide of Gods and men? how haps the world yet doth not burn,
Kindled with three forked brand? on me thy thunder turn,
Dash out on me thy bobbing bolt, and let thy fiery flake
Whirlde out with force, burnt Cinders of my wasted Carcass make:
For guilty ( Jove) I guilty am, deserved death I have,
My Stepdames Fancy I have fed: shall I most sinful slave,
Be worthy thought to blot my Fathers honourable Bed?
Can thou for mischief such through me alone be lightly sped?
O Caitiue thou of womankind for guilt that hears the bell,
Whose enterprised heinous evil doth passingly excel,
Thy Monster breeding Mothers fault with whoredom she alone
Def^de her self, when storming sighs with sorrow began she groan,
Through beastly lust of Bull: till it the Minotaurus ster
In act of generation, had quenched her ^oule desire:
And yet the time concealed long, the grim twishaped seed
At length bewrayd with Bullike brows, thy Mothers naughty deed,
The doubted Infant did disclose: that wicked womb she bare.
With thrice, yea, four times blessed Fate of life depriu'de ye are,
Whom swollen of waltring Seas have sonck, me cankered hate of breath
Despoiled ha^h, and traytrous traynes have quelde by daunting death.
With Stepdames banes and sorcery O Father, Father mine,
I rue thy lot, not to be slain of milder Stepdame thine.
This mischief greater, greater fair the wickedness doth pass
That by Medea despret Dame of Colchis practiced was.

And I do know, what uncouth luck upon our stock hath light,
The thing that we should shun, we seek, it is not in my might
To rule my self: through burning fire eunne after the^ I shall,
Through raging Seas, craggy Rocks, through fleeting Ryuers all,
Which boiling waters ruffling raise, what way so go thou will,
I bedlam Wight with frantic fits will follow, follow still.
O stately Lord before thy feet yet fall I once again.

Do not with shameless fawning Paws my spotless body stain.
What means this? with hawsing me to embrace she doth begin:
Draw, draw my sword, with stripes deseru'de I'll pay her on the skin:
Her hair about my left hand wound, her head I backward wri^e,
No blood Diana better spent thine Alter yet hath died.

Hippolytus, now dost thou grant to me mine own desire,
Thou cools my ramping rage, this is much more than I require,
That saving thus mine honesty I may be given to death,
By bloody stroke received of thy band to loose my breath.

Avaunt, avaunt, preserve thy life, at my hand nothing crave,
This field Sword that thou hast touched no longer will I have.
What bathing lukewarm Tanais may I defiled obtain,
Whose clensing watery Channel pure may wash me clean again?
Or what Meotis muddy m^are, with rough Barbarian wave
That boardes on Pontus roaring Sea? not Neptune grandsire grave
With all his Ocean folding flood can purge and wash away
This dunghill foul of sin: O wood, O salvage beast I say:

Thy crime detected is: O soul, why droupes thou all aghast?
Let us appeach Hippolytus with fault upon him cast:
And let us lay unto his charge, how he by might unjust
Deflower would his Fathers Wife with mischief, mischief must
Concealed be: the best it is, thy foe first to invade,
Since that the crime is yet unknown who can be witness made,
That either first we enterprisde, or suffered of him then?
Come, come, in hast Athenians, O troupes of trusty men
Help, help, Hippolytus doth come, he comes, that Villain vile,
That Ravisher, and Lecher foul, perforce would us defile.
He threatens us denouncing death, and glittering Blade doth shake,
At her who chastely doth withstand, and doth for terror quake:
Lo headlong hence for life and death he took him to his flight,
And leaves his Sword in running rash, with ghastly fear affright:
A token of his enterprise detestable we keep,
Sirs chearish her, that storming sighs with pensive breast doth weep.
Her ruffled hair, and shattred Locks still let them daggle down,
This witness of his villainy so bear into the Town.
(O Lady mine be of good cheer. Pluck up your sprights again,)
Why dost thou tearing thus thy self abhor all peoples sight?
Not blind Mischance but fancy wont to make ashamelesse Wight.

HIPPOLYTVS even as the raging
storm away doth fly,
More swift than whirling Western wind
vptumbling clouds in Sky,
More swift then flashing flames, that catch
their course with sweeping sway,
When Stars ytost with whisking winds
long fiery Drakes display.
Fame (wondering at of aldertime our Ancestors renown)
Fare well with thee, and bear away old worship from our Town.
So much thy beauty brighter shines, as much more clear and fair,
The golden Moon with glorio^s Globe full furnished in the Air
Doth shine, when as her fiery tips of waning horns do close,
When lifting up her fulgent face in ambling Wane she goes,
Upon her nightwatch to attend, the Stars of lesser light
Their darckned Faces hide, as he the Messenger of night
That watchword geues of th'euening tide and Hesperus he hight,
That glading erst was bath'de in Seas, and he the same again
When shedes be shrunck. doth then the name of Lucifer obtain.
Thou Bacchus blessed barn of Jove in warlike India borne,
Thou Lad that evermore dost wear thy hairy bush unshorn,
Whose Iaueling tuft with Ivy bunch, the Tigers makes adred,
And dost with labelde Myter use to prank thy horny head,
Hippolytus his staring Locks thou Bacchus shalt not stain,
To wonder at thy loving looks too much do thou refrain,
Whom (as the people do report) the Ariadne bright,
For beauties name preferde before Bacchus that Bromius hight.
A brittle Jewel beauty is on mortal men employde,
Thou gift that for a season short of Mankind art enioyde,
How soon alas with feathered foot hence dost thou fading slide?
The partching Summers vapour hoate in Verse most pleasaute pride
So withers not the Meadows green, (when as the scorching Sun)
In Tropic ligue of burning Crab full hoate at Noone doth run,
And on her shorter cloudy Wheels vnhorseth soon the night.
With wanny Leaves down hang the heads of withered Lillies whight
The balmy bloomes and sprouting flo^re do leave the naked ^ed
As beauty bright whose radiant beams in corauld Cheeks is spread,
Is dashed in the twincke of Eye: no day as yet did pass,
In which not of his beauty reft some pearls person was.
For Favour is a fleeting thing: what wight of any wit
Will unto frail and fickle joy his confidence commit?
Take pleasure of it while thou may, for Time with stealing steps
Will under mint, on howre past straight in a worser leps:
Why fly thou to the wilderness, to seek thy succour there?
Thy beauty bids not safer in the waylesse woods then here.
If Tytan hoist his totteryng Cart on point of full midday,
Thee shrouded close among the brakes the Naids will assay,
A gadding troupe that beauties B^yes do locke in fountains fair.
To frame their seat then unto thee in senseless s^eepe repair,
Shall wanton Fairies, Nymphs of Frithes, y^ on the Hills do walk,
Which Dryade mountain Goblins haunt, that use on hills to stalk:
Or when from high Starbearing poale Diana down did look
On thee that next old Arcades in heaven thy seat hast took,
She could not weilde her weltering wayne, and yet no foggy cloud.
Eclipsed her gleaming Globe, but we with ^incking Pans aloud,
Began make a noise, agrised at her dead and glowing light
We deemed her char^id with Magic verse of Thessant witches spright
But thou did cause her business, and made her in a maze,
While at thy pleasant lovely looks the Goddess stood in gaze,
That rules the rain of cloudy night she stopped her ru^ning race,
God grant that seldom biting frost may pinch this comely face.
Let seldom scorching Sunny beams thy Cheeks with freckles die:
The Marble blue in quarry pits of Parius that doth lie,
Bears not so brave a glimsyng gloss as pleasant se^ues thy face
Whose brows with manly majesty support an awful grace.
And forehead fraught with gravity of Fathers countnaunce old:
His Ivory coloured neck although compare to Phoebe ye would,
His locks (that never lacking knew) it self displaying wide
On shoulder points doth set them out, and also doth them hyde.
Thy curled forehead seems thee well, and eake thy not^ed hair,
That crumpled lies vndight in thee a manly grace doth bear.
Thou Gods (though fierce and valiant) perforce dost chase, and far
Dost overmatch in length of limbs, though yet but young thou are.
Thou hears as big boisterous brawns as Hercules: thy breast,
Then Champion Mars more bourly bolstred out with broader chest:
On back of horn^toofed Steeds if vawting thou do ride,
With Bridle in thine arrive hand more handsome can thou guide.
The trampling Cyllar horse of Spart, then Princely Castor could,
Thy Leathern loop amid thy dart with former fingers hold,
And drive thy lance with all thy pith, the active men of Creete,
That with their pitched darts afar do learn the mark to bit.
They shall not hurl a slender Reed, but after Parthian guise
To shoot an arrow if they list into the open Skies,
Vnsped without some Bird attaint it shall not light on ground,
Vnbath'd with lukewarm blood of guts in gory smoking wound,
And from amid the lofty Clouds down shalt thou fetch thy pray:
Few men (mark well the time) have borne beauty vnplagude away.
God send thee better luck, and grant thy noble personage
May pass unto the happy steps and stretch to dumpish age.
What mischief vnattempt escapes a Woman's witless rage?
Most heinous crimes she means to lay to guiltles youngmas charge
And thinks to make her matter good with hair thus rent at large,
She towseth eake the pranking of her head with watered plants,
Her sly deuyse no crafty kind of woman's fetches wants.
But who is this that in his face such princely port doth bear?
Whose lofty looks with stately pace hie vauntst his head doth rear?
Like lusty young Pyrithous, he looks in the face,
But that a fainting fallow pale his bleakish Cheeks disgrace,
And filthy baggage hangs on his hash hair raysde upright,
Lo Theseus, it is again restoard to earthly light:

AT length I escaped the glowing glades
of grim eternal Night,
And eake the vnderpropping poale,
that each infernal Spright
Doth muffie in, shut up in shades
lo how my dazelled eyes
Can scant abide the long dessred
light of Marble Skies.
Eleusis now four offringes of Triptolemus deuydes,
And counterpaysed Day with Night now four times Libra hydes.
I earnest in my Parlous toil in doubt what luck to have
Twixt dread of ghastly Death, and hope my feeble life to save,
Some spark of life still in my breahles limbs abiding was,
When as embarkt on erkesome Styx Alcides down did pass,
To succour me in dire distress, who when the hellicke hound
From Tartares grisly gates in Chains he dragd above the ground,
And also me he carried up into the World again
My tyred limbs doth fappy pith of former strength restrain,
My feeble faltering legs do quake, what lugging toil it was
From bottom deep of Phlegethon to world aloof to pass?
What dreary dole mourning noise is this that beats mine ears?
Let some declare it unto me: who blubbered so with tears
Lamenting loud and languishing within our gates appears?
This entertainment sit is for a guest that comes from Hell.
A stubburne heart and obstinate in Phaedras breast doth dwell,
With despret mind to slay her self our tears she doth despise,
And giving up the gasping Ghost, alas my Lady dyes.

Why should she kill herself? why die, her spouse being come again

For this (my Lord) with hasty death she would her self have slame.

These troblous words some perlous thing I wot not what to tell
Speak plain: what lump of glutting grief her laded heart doth quei
She doth complain her case to none, but pensluely and sad
She keeps it secrete to her self, determined thus she had,
To bear about with her the bane, wherewith she means to die.
Hie, hie thee fast, I pray thee now, now have we need to hye.
Our Palace locked with stately stoulpes set open by and by.

O Madame Mate of Spousal bed
thus dost thou entertain
The coming of thy loving Spouse?
and welcome home again
Thy long desired Hosbandes face?
why takes thou not away
My Sword out of my hand, and dost not cheer my Sprites (I say)
Nor show me what doth the breath out of the body chase?
Alas my valiant Theseus even for thy royal mace,
Wherewith thy Kingdom thou dost wield, and by the noble raygne
Of thy belo'ud posterity, and coming home again,
And for the worship that is due unto my fatal grave,
O let me die and suffer me, deserved death to have.

What cause compels thee to die?

If I the cause of death
Disclose, then shall I not obtain the loosyng of my breath:

No worldly wight (save I my self alone) the same shall hear,
Art thou afraid to tel it in thy husbands bashful ear?
Speak out, thy secretes shroud I shall within my faithful breast.

What thou would other to conceal, keep thou it first in rest.

Thou shalt not suffered be to die:

From him that wishes Death,
Death never can be seperate.

The crime that loss of breath
Ought to revenge, show it to me.

Forsooth because I live.

Alas do not my trilling tears thy stony stomach grieve?

It is the sweetest death, when one doth loathsome life forsake,
Bereft of such as should for him most woeful weeping make.

Still stands she mum? ye crooked, old, ilfauord, hoblinge Trot,
Her Nurse for stripes and clogging bands shall utter every jot,
That she forbid her hath to tell: in iron chains her bind,
Let tawing whips wring out perforce the secrets of her mind:

Now I my self will speak: stay yet.

Why dost thou ^ne as^i^s
From me thy weeping Countenance? thy tears why dost thou hide
That gushing sudden fro thine eyes stream down thy cheeks apace
Why hide thou thy flowing floods with Coat before thy Face?

Thee, thee, Creator of the Neauens to witness I do call,
And thee O glittering fiery glede of Crystal Sky with all,
And Phoebus thou from whom at first our royal Race hath roon.
With fawning face flattering words in suite I was not won.
For naked sword, thundering thre^s, appalled was I not:
My bruised bones abode the blow, and stripes when sore he smote:
This blemish black of foul defame my blood shall purge again.

Declare what villain is he y^ our honour so doth slain?

Whom least ye would mistrust.

To know who tis, full sore I long*

This Sword will tel, which sore affright when people thick in throg
Resorted fast, the Lecher vile for hast did leave behind,
Because the people preasing fast he dreeded in his mind:

Ah out alas, O woe is me, what villainy see I?
Alas what uncouth Monster foul of mischief I espy?
Behold the royal Ivory engrau'de and purired fine,
Emboast with golden studdes, upon th'enameld Hast doth shine,
(The Jewel of Actea land) but wither fled is he?

With light Heel running sore dismayed these sruants did him see?

O sacred holiness, O Jove between whose mighty hands
The Marble Poale with weltering sway in course directed stands,
And thou that second Scep^er weilds in fomy fighting wave,
Why doth this cursed brood with such this wicked vengeance rave?
Hath he been fostered up in Greece? or craggy Taurus wild
Among hard rugged Rocks, and Caves, some savage Scythian Child?
Or else in brutish Colchis I'll by Desert Phasis flood?
Cat after kind he is, and will th'unkindly Bastard blood
Return unto his kinreds course, whence first his ligne he clames.
This frantic fury up and down comes of the warlike Dames,
To hate the loyal leagues of love, and shunning long the use
Of Cupids camp, with tag, and rag, her body to abuse,
Become as good as ever twangd: O detestable kind,
No better Soil by any means can change thy filthy mind.
The brutish beasts themselves do Ioath th'abuse which Venus draws,
And simple shamefastness it self obserueth Natures laws:
Where is the brag of Majesty, and feigned portly grace
Of manly mind, that hates new, and old things doth embrace?
O double dealing life, thou cloaks deceiptful thoughts in breast,
And settestout a forehead fair where frounced mind doth rest:
The saucy Jack with bashful brow doth malipiertnes hide:
The rashness of the despret Dicke by stillness is vnspide.
With show of right religion knaves villainy maintain,
And guileful mealemouthd Gentlemen do hold with speaking plain:
The daynty wanton Carpet Knights of hardness boast and prate,
That Woodraunger, that brainsick beast who lived in chaste estate
An vndefyled Bachiler thou rude and homely clown,
Thus dost thou watch thy time, to breed this blot in my renown?
To make me Cuckold first of all did it delight thy mind,
First falling to thy spousal sport with mischief most unkind,
Now, now, to thee supernal Jove most hearty thanks I yield,
That with my first Antiope to dreary death I quelde,
That gone to dampish Stygian Dens I left thee not behind
Thy Mother: go, go Vagabond rawnge, rawnge, about to find
Strange foreign soils, and outcast lands aloof at world his end,
And Isles enclosd with the Ocean flood to hell thy soul shall send:
Beneath among the Antipodes thy self of harbring sped,
Though in the utmost lurking nook, thou shroud thy miching head,
Above the grisly Palaces thou climb of lofty Poale,
Or may above the clottring Snow advance thy cursed Soul,
Beyond the brunt of Winter flaws and threatening rigour pass
And stormy wrath with rumbling rough of ysse Boreas,
With pengeance, vengeance violent fast hurling after thee,
With daunting plagues and pestilence thy sins shall scourged be.
For life and death, about the world in every lurking hoale.
O fugitive I shall not cease still to pursue thy soul.
But seek and search for thee I shall in lands that lye a far,
Al corners blind and caves shut up, Dens locked with bolt and bar*
A thousand ways unpassable no place shall me withstand.
My cursinges black shall light on thee there where revenging hand
With weapon ca not work y^ harm: thou know that Neptuue great
My Sire who flotes on floods, waives, with forked Mace doth beat
Give licence freely unto me three boones to choose and crave,
Which willingly the God hath grant, and sworn I shall it have
Protesting vgsome Stygian Lake, and hallowed hath his vow:
O breaker of the wrestling waives, avouch thy promise now.
Let never more Hippolitus behold th'eclipsed light,
And for the Fathers wrathful rage the cursed child down smight,
To wa^le among the ghastly s^rites o Father bend thy might,
To give (alas) this loathsome aid unto thy needy Son,
I of thy Majesty deuyne exact not to be donne.
This chiefest bone, till puissant payse of ylles do us oppress:
In bottom deep of boylyng Tartar pit, and sore distress^,
In grisly Lymbo Jaws nigh garglefaced Ditis dim,
Amid the crumpled threatening brows of Hellick Pluto grim,
To claim thy promise made to me, as then I did refrain,
Now Sire thy faith by promise due perform to me again.
Yet dost thou stay^ why rumble not the waltring waives yet busht,
Through foggy cloud in dusky skits with stormy blasts ^utrusht.
Unfold the mantel black of Night, and roll away the Skies,
Enforce the fighting floods burst out with mounting waives to rise*
And conjure up the water hags that in the Rocks do keep,
The Ocean surges swelling hi^ cast up from bottom deep.

O Nature Grandam great of Heavenly Sprites,
Eake Jove that guides Olimpus mighty sway,
That rakes the race of twinkling heavily lights
On spinning Sphere and order dost for aye
The straggling course of roaming planets hie,
And weildes about the whirling Axeltree
The weltering Poales, th'eternal course of Sky
To keep in frame, what works such care in thee
That erst the cold which hoary winter makes
Vnclothes the naked wood, and now again
Thesh ades return unto the breary brakes
Now doth the star of Summer Lion raygne,
Whose scalded neck with boiling heate doth fry,
Perbraking flames from fiery ^oming jaws:
With scorching heate the parched corn do dry:
Each season so his kindly course in draws.
But thou that weildes these things of massy might,
By whom the hugy world with egal payse
Even Balanced doth keep in compass right,
Each Sphere by measurd weight that justly swaise,
Alas why dost thou bear a retc les breast
Toward mankind? not casting any care
That wicked men with mischief be oppressed,
And eake to see that goodmen well do fare
Dame Fortune topsieturuy turns at will
The world, and deals her dole with blinded hand,
And fosters vice mayntayning mischief ill.
Foul lust triumphs on good men brought in band
Deceit in stately Court the sway doth wield,
In Lordinges levvde the vulgar sort delight,
With glee to such the Mace of might they yield.
Some magistrates they do both love and spite,
And pen^iue virtue brought to bitter bale,
Receyues reward that doth of right arise,
The continent to Prison need doth hale,
The Lecher raygnes enhanced by his vice.
O fruitless shame, O counterfayted port.
But what news may this messenger now bring,
Who with maine pace comes posting in this sort,
And stays with mourning countnance at the King.

O Heavy hap and cruel chance
of Servants slavish state,
Why am I Post to bring the news
of this il fa^ord fate?
Be not abashed the ruthful wrack
with courage to declare:
My breast against the brunt of broils
still armed I prepare,

My foltring tongue doth speech vnt^
my glutting grief deny.

Our stock with sorrow shuken sore what cares do crush escrie.

Hippolytus (ay woe is me) is slain by doleful death.

Now Father do I know my Son bereaved of his breath,
For why the Lecher life is lost: show in what sort he did.

In all post hast as fugitive to shun the Town he hyde
Once having caught his cutting course apace he scuddes away,
His prancing Pelfrayes strait he doth with Collers close array:
With curbed bittes their s^affled heads at will he brydles in,
Then talking much unto himself to curse he doth begin*
His native soil: alas dear Father, Father still he cries:
And angry lasheth with his whip, while loose his Bridle lies:
Then suddenly a hugy swolue began swell amid the deep,
And starts up into the stars no pipling wind doth sweep
Along the Seas in Heaven so lith no noise at all there was:
The Seas full calm even as their kindly Tide doth drive them, pass.
Nor yet no boisterous Southern wynd the Sycill sand turmoils.
Nor yet with fomie ramping surge the raging gulf up boils,
Heaude up by Western puffs: when as the rocks with flappyng flash
Do shake and drowned Lucates cliue the hoary some doth dash.
The tombling waives together tossed on hills are heaped hie,
The swelling swolue with Monster much to land alofe doth fly,
Nor only shaken ships in Seas do su^er wrack hereby:
The land in hazard lies of storms a waltring wave is ^old
In ^ot^ring wise a wallowing gulf with winding compass fold,
Drives down I know not what withal: a flat uprising new
An head above the water brim doth raise the Stars to view.
In foggy cloud eclipsed is Apollos dusky gleede,
And Scyros Rocks whom Trump of Fame aduaunst by dreary deed
Corynthus eake whom double Sea on either side assail:
While greatly we agriesh* these things do languishing bewail,
The belking Seas yell out the grunting Rocks with all do roar*
The slabby Cliue doth ^eke, fro whence the water ebde before,
It frothes, and keeping course by course it sp^wes the waters out,
As doth Physeter fish (that flittes the Ocean Coast about)
And gulping doth from yawning throat his floods of water spo^te.
The shaken surge did tottre strayte and brake it self in twain:
With wrack (more violent then we did fear) it rushed awayne
Against the shore, beyond the banks it breaks into the land:
And hideous Monster follows: these for fear did quaking stand

What shape that uncouth Monster had and body vast declare.

A boasting Bull, his marble neck advanced hye that bare,
Vpraysd his lofty bristled Mayn on curled forehead green
With shaggy ears pricked up his diverse speckled horns were seen.
(Whom Bacchus erst possessed had, who tames the Cattle wyld,
And eake the God that horne in floods was bred a water Child)
Now puffing he perbraketh flames, and now as leaming light
With sparkling beams his goggle eyes do glare and glister bright.
His greasy larded neck (a mark for to be noted well)
With rough and knobby curnels hie out bumping big do swell.
His snorting Nostrilles wide do grunt and yawning gulphes they sosse,
His breast and throtebag greenishly are daw^d with clammy moss
His side along begrymed is with Lactuse red of hue,
On snarling knots his wrinkled rumps toward his face he drew,
His scaly haunch, and lagging tail most ugly drags he up,
As Pristis in the deep of Seas the swallowed Keele doth sup,
Or else perbraketh out again the vndigested pup.
The earth did quake, the Cattle feared about the field do ramp,
The hunter stark with chilling fear begins to stare and stamp,
The he^dman had no mind his scattrynge Heifers to pursue,
The Dear amazed brake the pale and bad the Laundes adieu.
But only yet Hippolytus. devoid of fainting fear
His neyng horses with the raynes of Bridles hard doth bear,
With w^nted words he cheareth up his nymble Nagges afraid:
A st^epe hie way at Argos lies with stony cliues decaide,
That nodding ouerhangs the Sea, which vnderfleetes that ways:
That ugly Royle here heates him self, and rag^ng wrath doth raise,
And kindling courage hoate, him force with burning breast assays,
And chauflag left himself before began fret with angry hart.
Lo then into a scouring course on sudden doth he start,
With whirl^g pace he girding forth doth scarcely touch the ground,
Lighting a front the trimbling Ea^t with glaring Eyes he glow^d.
Then also doth thy threatening Son with lowering brows upstart,
Nor changes Counte^aunce, but speaks with stout courageous hart.
This foolish fear doth not appaule my bold and hardened breast,
It comes to me by kind, that B^lls by me should ^ee oppressed.
His Steeds defying strait the R^ynes plonge forward with the Cart,
As rage did prick them, sore affright bestoe the way they start.
This bias way among the Rocks they range, and wander wide,
But as the Pilot (least the Bark should totter to one side)
Doth bear it even in wrestling waives: so while his horses skip,
He rules them, now rains them hard, and now with winding whip
Free lashes on their buttocks lays: his Foe doth him pursue,
Now step by step, now meeting full against his face he flue.
Provoking terror every where. No further fly they might:
The horned beast with butting Brow^s began run upon them right.
The trampling Gennets straught of wits do straight way break their ray,
The struggle striving hard to slip the Collar it they may.
And prancing on their hinder Feet, the burden hurl on ground:
Thy Son flat falling on his Face, his body fast was bound,
Entangled in the winding ropes, the more he strives to loose
The slipping knots, he faster ^ticks within the s^ding noose.
The Horses do perceive the broil: and with the Waggon light.
While none there is to rule the Raynes, with ski^tish fear affright
At random out they ramping run, (even as the Welkin hye
The Cart that mist his wonted weight, disdaining in the Sky
The dreery day that falsely was commit unto the Sun,
From off the fiery Marble Poale that down a skew doth run,
Flang Phaeton tops^e toruey tossed) his blood begdres the ground:
And dingd against the r^gged Rocks his head doth oft rebound:
The brambles rent his haled hair* the edged flinty stones,
The beauty batter of his Face, and break his crashing bones:
At Mouth his blaring tongue hangs out with squeased eyne out dashed,
His Jaws Skull do crack, abroad his spurting Brains are pasht,
His cursed beauty thus defoylde with many wounds is spent:
The iotting Wheels do grind his guts, and drenched sims they rent.
At length a Stake with Truchion burnt his ripped Pauch hath caught,
From riued Grind toth^ Navel stead within his womb it raught:
The Cart upon his Master pawsde against the ground ycrusht,
The Fellies stuck within the wounds, and out at length they rush^:
So both delay and Masters limbs are broke bystresse of Wheels:
His dragling guts then trail about the wincing horses heals.
They thumping with their horny Hooves against his Belly kick,
From burst Paunch on hea^es his bloody bowels tumble thick:
The scratting Briars on the Brakes with needle pointed pricks
His gory Carcass all to race with spells of thorny sticks
And of his flesh each ragged shrub a gub doth snatch and rent,
His men (a mourning troupe God knows) with brackish tears ^espret
Do stray about the field, whereas Hippolytus was tore:
A piteous sign is to be seen by tracing long of gore:
His howling Dogs their Masters limbs with licking follow still:
The earnest toil of woeful Wights can not the coars up fill,
By gathering up the gobbets sparst and broken lumps of flesh.
Is this the fla^nting bravery that comes of beauty fresh?
Who in his Fathers Empire erst, did reign as pryncely Pear
The Heir apparent to the Crown, and shone in honour clear,
Like to the glorious Stars of Heaven, his Limbs in piec^s small
Are gathred to his fatal Grave, and swept to funeral.

O Nature that preuaylste too much, (alas) how dost thou bind
Whyth bonds of blood the Parents breast? how love wethe^ by kinte?
Maugre our Teeth whom gullty ecke we would have rest of breath?
And yet lamenting with my tears I do bewail thy death.

None can lament with honesty that which he wished destroyed.

The hugi^st heap of woes by this I think to be enioyde,
When flickering Fortunes cursed wheel doc cause us cry alas,
To rue the wrack of things which carst we wished brought to pass.

If still thou keep thy grudge, why is the Face with seats bespre^

Because I slue him, not because I lost him, I repent.

WHat heap of haps do tumble vpsyde down
Th'estate of man? less raging Fortune flies
On little things: less leaming lights are thrown
By hand of Jove, on that which lower lies.
The homely couch safe merry hearts do keep:
The Cottage base doth give the Golden sleep.
The lofty Turrets top that cleaves the cloud
VVithstandes the sturdy storms of Southren wind,
And Boreas boisterous blasts with threatening loud
Of blustering Corus shedding showers by kind.
The r^ing Dales do seldom noiance take,
Biding the brunt of Lightninges slashing flake.
Th'aduaunced crest of Caucasus the great
Did quake with bolt of lofty thundering Jove:
When he from clouds his thunder dintes did beat,
Dame Cybels Phrygian fryth did trembling move:
King love in hawty heaven full sore affright
The nighest things with weapons doth he smyght.
The ridges low of Vulgar peoples house
Stricken with storms do never greatly shake:
His Kingdoms coast Ioues thundering thumps do souse:
With wavering wings that hour his fligth doth take
Nor flitting Fortune with her tickle wheel
Lets any wight assured joy to feel.
Who in the World beholds the Statr^s full bright,
And chereful day forsaking ghastly Death,
His sorrowful return with groaning spright
He rewes, since it depriude his Son of breath
He sees his lodging in his court again,
More doleful is then sharpe Auernus payne.
O. PALLAS unto whom all Athens land
Due homage owes, because that THESEVS thine
Among us worldly Wights again doth stand,
And sees the Heavens upon himself to shine.
And passed hath the parlous miry Mud
Of stinking Stygian Fen, and filthy Flood.
Unto thy ravening Uncles dreery Gail
O Lady chaste not one Ghost dost thou owe,
The Hellick Tyrant knows his perfect tale.
Who from the Court this shrieking shrill doth throw?
What mischief comes in frantic PHAEDRAS brain
With naked Sword thus running out amain.

THrough pierced with pangs of penstuenesse
what fury pricks thy brain?
What means this bloody blade? what means
this shrieking out amain?
And langishing upon the Corps
which was thy malice made?
O tamer of the wrestling waives
me, me, do thou invade.
The Monstrous hags of Marble Seas to ramp on me send out,
What ever Thetis low doth keep with folding arms about,
Or what the Ocean Seas alo^fe embrace with winding wave:
O Theseus that to thine alies dost still thy self behave
So Currishly, O thou that for thy loving Friends avail
Dost never yet return: thy Son and Father do bewail
Thy passport brought by death, and blood, thy s^ooke thou dost destroy,
By love or hatred of thy wife thou workest still annoy:
O sweet Hippolytus thus I behold thy battered face,
And I it is, I wretch (alas) that brought thee to this case.
What Scinis forced thy limbs so torn his snatching boughs to feel?
Or what Procrustes racked and rent thee streacht on bed of Steel?
Or else what Minotaur of Crete that grim twishaped Bull
With horny head (that Dedalls ^ues with lo^ing s^leth (...)
Hath thee in fitters torn? (ay me) where is thy beauty fled?
Where are our twinkling stars thine eyes? alas, and art thou ded?
Appear a while, receive my words, for speak I shall none ill.
This hand shall strike the stroke, wherewith thy bengeance quite I will.
And since that I, I Ca^ife, I, abridged have thy life,
Lo here I aut content, (...) thee mine with bloody knife.
If ghost may here be given for ghost, and breath may serve for breath,
Hippolytus take thou my soul, and come again from death.
Behold my bowels yet are safe my limbs in lusty plight.
Would God that as they serve for me, thy body serve they might,
Mine eyes to render kindly light unto thy Carcass ded,
Lo for thy use this hand of mine shall pluck them from my head,
And set them in these empty cells and vacant holes of thine.
Thy weal of me a wicked Wight to win, do not repine.
And if a woman's woeful heart in place of thine may rest,
My bosom straight break up I shall, and tear it from my breast.
But courage stout of thine doth loath ^aint woman's heart to have
Thy Noble mind would rather go with manly heart to grave.
Alas be not so manly now, this manliness forheare,
And rather choose to live a man with woman's sprite and fear,
Then as no man with manly heart in darcknesse deep to sit:
Have thou thy life, give me thy death that more deserves it.
Can not my profer purchase place? yet vengeance, shall thou have,
Hell shall not hold me from thy side nor death of dompish grave.
Since fates will not permit thee life, though I behest thee mine,
My self I shall in spite of fate my fatal twist untwine.
This blade shall rive my bloody breast, my self I will despoil
Of soul, and sin at once: through floods and* Tactor gulphes y^ boyle,
Through S^yx and through the burning Lakes I will come after thee:
Thus may we please the lowering shades, receive thou here of m^e
The parings of my Poll, and Locks cut off from forehead torn,
Our hearts we could not join in one, yet wretches now farlorne.
We shall together in one day our fatal hour close:
If thou be loyal to thy spouse, for him thy life then lose:
But if thou be vncestuous, dye for thy lovers sake.
Shall I unto my husbands bed again my corps betake,
Polluted with so heinous crime? O death the chiefest joy
Of wounding shame: Death only ease of stinging Loves annoy:
We run to thee: embrace our sowles within thy gladsome breast:
Hark Athens, hark unto my talk, and thou above the rest,
Thou Father worse unto thy Child than bloody stepdame I.
False forged tales I told with shame, I feigning that did lye,
Which I of spite imagined, when raging breast did swerve.
Thou father falsely punished hast him that did not deserve.
The young man chaste is cast away for mine vncestuous vice,
Both bashful he and guiltles was, now play thy wonted guise.
My guilty breast with bloody Lance of Sword deserved is riuen,
The Dirge toth^ dead to purge my spouse shall with my blood be given.
Thou father of the stepdame learn, what things thy Soon should have
Of life depriued, as to lay his carcass in a grave.

O wanny Jaws of black Auerne, ^ake Tartar dungeon grim,
O Lethes Lake of woeful Souls the joy that therein swim,
And eake ye glummy Gulphes destroy, destroy me wicked wight
And still in pit of pangs let me be plunged day and night.
Now, now, come up ye Gobline grim from water creeks allow,
What ever Proteus huge swolue aloof doth overflow,
Come dowse me drowned in swallows deep, that triumph in my sin:
And father thou that evermore full ready pressed hath bin
To wreak mine ire, aduentring In deed deserving death
With new found slaughter have bereft mine only Son of breath.
His tattred limbs I scatred have the bloody field about,
While th'innocent I punish do, by chance I have found out*
The truth of al this wickedness: heaven, stars, and sprites of hell
I p^ster with my treachery that me doth ouerquell.
No mischiefs hap remains more: iii. kingdoms know me well:
We are returned to this World. For this did Hell unfold
His gates that burials twain I might and double death behold?
Whereby I both a wyueles Wight andeak^ a Sonles Sire,
May with one brand to wise and Son inflame the funeral fire.
O ^amer of blackefaced light Alcides, now restore
Thy booty brought from Hell, redeem to me, to me therefore
These Ghosts that now be gone, ah sinful wretch to death in vain
I sue, most indiscreet by whom these wretched Wights were slain.
Imagining destruction sore about it will I go,
Now with thine own hands on thy self due vengeance do bestow:
A Pine tree bough down straind perforce unto the ground allow,
Let slip into the open air shall cut my corpse in twain.
From top of Scyrons Rocks I will be tumbled down amain.
More grievous vengeance yet I have in Phlegethon River found,
Tormenting guilty Ghosts enclosd with fiery Channel round.
What pit and pangs shall plunge my soul already have I known,
That tyring toil of Sisyphus that retchles rolling stone,
Let yield unto my guilty Ghost, and being laid on
These shoulders, these, these lifting hands of mine down let it sway:
And let the fleeting flood about my lips deluded play.
Yea let the ravening grype come hear and Tytius paunch forsake,
Forglutting food with grasping Cleaze my liver let him take,
Encreasyng still to feed the Foul, and for my torments sake.
And pause thou my Pyrothous Sire, and eke the snackle Wheel
That whirleth still enforce my limbs thy swinging swift to feel.
Gape, gape, thou ground and swallow me thou cruel Chaos blind,
This passage to thinfernall Sprightes is fit for me to find:
My Son I will ensue, thou Prince of ghastly ghosts in hell,
Dread not for chaste we come to thee: give thou me leave to dwell
Among thy dreadful dens for aye, and not to pass again.
Alas, my prayer at the Gods no favour can obtain,
But if that mischief crave I should how ready would they be?

O Theseus to thy plaint eternal time is granted thee:
Provide thy Son his O^it rytes, and shroud in dompish grave
His broken limbs, which Monsters foul dispersed and scattered have.

The shreadings of this dear beloved carcass bring to me,
His mangled members hither bring on heaps that tombled be:
This is Hyppolytus, I do acknowledge mine offence,
For I it is, that have depriued thee of life and sense.
Least that but once, or only I should be a guilty Wight,
I Sire attempting mischief have besought my Fathers might.
Lo I enjoy my fathers gift, O solitariness,
A grievous plague when feeble years have brought us to distress,
Embrace these limbs, and that which yet doth of thy son remain,
O woeful wight in baleful breast preserve and entertain.
These scattred scraps of body torn O Sire in order fet,
The straying gobbetts bring again, here was his right hand set:
His left hand here instructed will to rule the raynes must be.
His left side rybbs (full well I know to be ^ewayld of me
With bittter tears) as yet alas are lost and wanting still,
O trembling hands behold this woeful business to fulfil,
And withered Cheeks forbid your streams of flowing tears to run
While that the father do account the members of his Son.
And eke patch up his body rent, that hath his fashion lost,
Disfigured foul with gorye wounds, and all about betost:
I doubt, if this of thee be piece, and piece it is of thee:
Here, lay it here, in th'empty place, here let it laid be,
Although perhap it lye not right: (aye me) is this thy face?
Whose beauty twinkled as a star, and eake did purchase grace,
In sight of F^procurd to ruth. Is this thy beauty lost?
O cruel will of Gods, O rage in sin prevailing most.
Doth thus the Sire that great good turn perform unto his son?
Lo let thy fathers last fare well within thine ears to run,
Mychild whom oft I bid farewell: the whilst the fire shall burn
These bones, set open his burial bower, and let us fall to morn
With loud lamenting Mopsus wise for both the coarses sake:
With Princely Pomp his funeral fire see that ye ready make.
And seek ye up the broken parts in field dispersed round,
Stop her up hurlde into a Pit, let heavy clodds of ground
lie hard upon her cursed head.


