O Lord of Ghosts whose fyrye flash
(that forth thy hand doth shake)
Doth cause the trembling Lodges twain
of Phoebus Carre to quake,
Raygne reachlesse now: in every place
thy peace procured I have
Aloof where Nereus locks up land
Empalde in winding Wave.
Thwack not about with thunder thumps, the rebel kings be down,
The ravening tyrants Scepterlesse, are pulled from their crown:
By me all daunted is whereon, thy bolts thou should bestow.
And yet O Father, yet the Heavens are still withheld me fro,
At all assays I serve, as might an Imp of Jove behove,
And that thou ought to Father me, my stepdame well doth prove.
Why dost thou linger in delay, is Heaven of us afraid?
Seem we so awful, fell, and fierce? and wherefore are we staide?
And cannot Atlas boysteous back on stouping shoulder tough,
Uphold the payse of Hercules, and heaven well enough?
What is it sier? what is it Jove that thee so much detarres?
What may thee force keep back thy son from scaling of the Stars
For death hath let me pass again from dungeon dark to thee.
When mischiefs fell and monsters all destroyed and spoiled be
That either Land, or Seas, or Air. Or hell engender could
Arcadian Lion none to range in salvage Nemea wolte.
The Stymphall Foul hath chased bin with Bow, and Brusell boulte.
No nimble heart of Menalus doth lye in hill nor houlte
The Dragon daunting with his blood hath goarde the golden grove.
And Hydra hath his courage cooled, and Diomedes drove
Whose puffed paunches pampered were with stoare of strangers blood
That scoarde the Coast and barren banks of cruel Heber flood
I slaughterd them, and that the force of foe might well be seen.
I prowlde away the boottes of the proud Amazon Queen,
Of silent shades in glummy Goulphes the dreadful dooms I saw.
On Cerber black the Tartar Tike the son did shine with awe,
And he with steaming Goggle eyes hath glyed upon the soon:
Anteus yawns, and gapes no more whose gasping breath to done.
A front his alters Busir fell was knocked unto the ground,
By him whose hand gave Gerion his deep and deadly wound
And slew the mighty Bull that was to hundred hearts a dread,
All noyous plagues I spoiled have that ever Tellus bread,
And daunted by my hand they lye: the Gods now need not free:
The world to answer Iunoes ire, no monsters now can get.
Now show thy valiant son his sire, or set him in the clouds,
Thou shalt not need to be my guide, my self will climb the shrouds.
Do thou my passage but allow, and I shall find away,
But if thou dread, that monsters more the earth engender may,
Hast on each monster hideous, to show it self in time,
While Hercules hath his abode beueath the heavenly Climb.
For who encounter shall the fiends? who is't that Grecia hath,
That may be meet, to bide the brunt of mighty Iunoes wrath?
My praise burtes not my health: my fame doth fly, from land to land:
The ysy poale doth know me, where the northern bear doth stand:
The easterlings encombred with the gleede of scorching sun.
The south, where Phoebe by crooked clear of Tropic Crab doth rune:
In every coast O Titan where thou dost thy self reveal.
How I have met thee face to face, to thee I do appeal.
Aloof beyond the compass of thy light I set my foot,
And never could thy blaze so far his glymsinge glory shoot.
As I have forced the honour of my triumphs for to streatch,
The day it self hath had his stint, within my travels reatch
Dame Nature faylde, the world was shogd beside his center dew,
And ougsome night in shimmering shade, from dungeon darck I drew.
And cankered Chaos lodged aloafe encountered me awayne:
Yet from the deep I gat to ground, whence none returns again.
We strove against the Ocean storms, I balasen the keele
Fraught with my weight, that wrestling waives could not copell it reel.
What heaps of hazards tempted I through all the open air,
To qualify thy wedlocks wrath can mischief none repair
The earth would loath such baggage bred as I would match by might,
Yea monsters none are to be found, the fiends do shun my sight.
And Hecules for want of fiends against him self did rage
What eluishe creatures cursed did I with naked arm assuage.
Was ever any peevish thing so big upon the ground
That coapt with me, but that my hand alone did it confound.
Not hither to from vermin vile through fainting fear I leapt
In babish years, not when to me in Cradell laid they leapt:
Each thing that was commanded me, at ease I did obey:
Thus free from painful toil to me there never past a day.
What vermin have I vanquished, no king commanding it?
My courage cloys me more then all the wiles of Iunoes wit.
But what avails me to rid mankind of fickle fear?
The Gods yet cannot raygne in rest: while up the world doth pear,
New rid of furious fiends, it sees a loft in starry skies
The cruel creatures all, that erst on earth did fore aggrise.
Dame Iuno hath transport the elves The scorching Crab doth creep
Abouth the burning zone, and aloof at Africa doth keep
The Tropic line: and Harvest fat he feeds with parching heate:
To Virgo, Leo turns the time, and in a reeking sweat.
He buskling up his burning Mane, doth dry the dropping south.
And swallows up the slabby clouds in fyry foaming mouth.
The Urchins all are creapt to skies, and have prevented me:
I Conqueror from Earth to Heaven, my travels all may see:
These gargle Faces grim on heaven, Dawe Iuno first did set:
As though thereof the terror might to skies my passage let:
Although she scatter them in Skies, or make the Heavens forlorn
More then y^ Earth, or hellike Goulphes, (whereby y^ Gods are sworn)
Yet room for Hercles shall be made, if after monsters quelde,
Or battles fought, or hellike hound in Chains as captive held,
If all exploits cannot prevail, in skies a place to gain,
Then soukt up be the midland Sea twixt Barbary, and Spain,
That either shore may join in one, with channel none between
There will I dam the running stream, that Sea shall none be seen*
Or as for Corinth out shot land that tweene two seas doth lye,
It shall give way to ^yther stream, that through the same shall fly.
And when the seas on passage have, the Fleet of Athens town
May float in Channel new: thus shall the world turn tops^downe:
Let Ister turn his stream, and Tanaus slow another way:
Grant Jove a placket, grant, whereby the Gods uphold I may.
Discharge thy thunder dint. where I shall keep due watch, ward,
If either to the ysy poale thou bid me have regard,
Or burning zone, here let the Gods full safe all force defy:
Prince Paean purchased hath an house amid the crystal sky,
And well deserved he the temples of Pernassus hill,
For slaughter of a Dragon made? how oft recovering still
In Hydra poison Python lay? with Bacchus Perseus strong
By less desert then Hercules, have crept the Gods among.
But all the East (a mighty coast) to bond is brought, by him.
Whom Iuno spightes, how stern a bug was snaky Gorgon grim?
What Imp is he, begot between my stepdame dire and thee,
Whose praised pains have purchaste him a place in heaven to be?
The heaven that on my shoulders I have hoisterd up I crave:
But Lycas, (partner of my pains) dispatch our triumph brave.
Display in pomp the ruin of Euritus house, and Crown:
And for the sacrifice with speed strike yet the Bullocks down,
Where as the Aare (that doth adnaunce the Church of Cenei Jove.)
Lies open to Euboca sea: that wrackful wave doth move.
THe Gods in bliss that man doth couteruaile,
That can at once both Grave, glory gain,
Death upon death the whilst doth him assail
Whose wretched life is lingered on in payne,
With frowning fate in spurning spighte who shiues,
And sets the Keele of gaping goulphe at nought,
Will not submit his captive hands to gives,
As dish of dishonour in triumph to be brought:
Like careful caitiff he shall never droop,
Whelmed in storming thoughts of sower annoy
Whose stomach scorns, for dawnting death to stoup,
Though seas amid the deep in hoisted hoy
Drive him aloof, when as a southern gale
Beats Boreas back, or eastern puff again
Recoiles the western wind, and seems to hale
From deepest sands the surges torn in twain.
That broken planks to catch he scrambles not
Of wracked bark, as one that hopes to have
Amid the Channel deep a landing plot,
When dismal death appears in every wave
He cannot suffer shipwreck all alone:
With pined karrayne coarse, and streams of tears,
And with our country dust our heads upon,
Powldring our locks, we languish out our years.
Neither flashing flame, nor thumping thunder crack
Will once dawnt us: O death thou dost pursew,
Where fortune fawns: but where she works wrack,
Thou shunnest those, that would thee not eschew,
We stand not in our razed country wall,
Whose ground shall now be overgrown (alas)
With bramble, and brier, and down the temples fall:
While mucky sheepecotes are planted in their place.
And now the frostifaced Greek (alas)
This way, this way, with all his drove of Neat
By so much of AEchalia must pass,
As heaped on ashes gloweth still with heate.
The Tessayle shepherd sitting by the way
On iarringe Pipe shall play his country rhyme,
Singing with sighs alack, and weladay,
Thus to bewail the sorrows of our time.
Ere time shall roll the race of many a year,
It will be asked, where erst the town did stand?
O well was I, when as I lived a lear,
Not in the barren balkes of fallow land,
Nor in Thessalia on the foodelesse cliues,
But now among rough Trachin craggy Rocks,
And ugly shrubs necessity me drives,
Whose flaming tops detarres the feeding Ox.
And in the way less woods vntrode before
All comfortless, affright and in a maze
Needs must I trot alone, that would abhor
The salvage beasts, that on the mountains graze
But better lot (if any Dames may have)
They over Inach rambling stream shall row,
Or shroud in Dirce Walls, where Ismen wave
With feeble force of shallow fourde doth flow.
The hawty Hercles mother here was wed,
What Scythian crag, what stones engendered him?
What Rocky mountain Rhodope thee bred,
Of Tyrant, Titans race a cu^sed limb?
Stipe Athos hill, the brutish Caspia land.
With teat unkind fed thee twixt rock stoane:
False is the tale, wherewith thou bear in hand,
Two nights for thee thy Mother dear did groan.
While lingering stars long lodged in purple sky:
The shepherd star his course did enterchaunge
With the load star, and up the Moon doth sty,
That couched Phoebe durst not the Welkin range,
No Lance can pearce his monsters ruggy skin,
The blunted Iron tried it with thumping thwack,
And Steel is not so tough: on naked skin
A swerd was burst, and stones rebounded back.
The force of fate he utterly defies,
And toughly timberd as he is of limb
He doth contrive, how quarrels may arise,
That death might prove his febled force in him
The quaries could not enter to his flesh,
Nor yet the bow with Scythian steule drawn deep,
No nor the glaues, with which Sarmacians fresh,
Hot skirmishes in th'ysy Climb do keep.
No nor the Parthian better Archer far,
Then Creete, who parcht with Phaetons soultring flame,
Under the Equinoctial raises werre,
Gaynst the easterling discomfetinge the same.
He with his body did batter down the wall,
Of Oechalie: nothing may him withstand:
By valiant prowess he hath conquered all:
Tis won before, that he doth take in hand:
The howgy Briar that fifty paunches had,
The hawty Giges with hundred arms likewise,
That clamb up Thassayle hills as Giant mad,
When rebels rage would take from love the skies,
Such steaming Eyes, such ghastly visage foul,
Such Gargle face, such countnaunce glaring grim,
Wherewith stern Hercles glowningly doth scowle,
Those Gyaunts had resembling plainly him.
Thus greatest bliss is prone to greatest bale
There wants no woe whose cup we have not taste
We wretched women have with countnaunce pale.
But careful caytiffe I
do not bewail forlorn
The sweeping flames, nor Idolles, with
their taitred Temples torn:
Nor that the Fathers burn
together with their Sons,
That Gods, men, that tombs Church,
at once to ruin runs.
Upon the common care
wec do not power our plaint,
For Fortune wills us turn our tears with other woes attaint:
And thus my frowning face allotteth unto me
Another kind of wretchedness, that must lamented be:
What shall I first beweep? Or chiefly what complain?
And to bewail them all at once, would mitigate my payne.
Alas that but on breast Dame Nature did me frame,
That blows agreeing to my grief might bounce upon the same.
With weeping Sipill rock, br^se ye my baleful breast,
Or on Eridanus silent shore in sorrows let we rest,
Where as the mourning troupe of Nymphs do hale their hears.
To whale the death of Phairon, with showers of dropping tears.
Or else in Sicill rock cause me encoucht to dwell,
Where Scilla Hag with howling noise, and barking big doth yell.
Or else in Lynnets shape let me tell on my tale,
And weep with Adon in the woods, or turned to Nightingale
As Lady Philomele, records with weeping lay
In shade of hawly Ismar hill upon a tender spray,
With soking sighs her grief, O Gods: and me addight
In shape, that may be suetable vnso my playntiffe plight.
And of my piteous moan let craggy Trachin sound,
Since Myrra saw the tears where in Dame Venus eyes were drowned,
That she for Adopis with smoky sighs did shed,
And Halcion might whale at will her loving Ceyx dead:
The Lady Tastalis get life to weep alone,
And Philomele did change her shape, and earnefully did move
Her tender Itis death: (alas) why are not yet
With flickering Feathers fit for wings, my naked arms beset?
O happy shall I be, and happily be bleast,
When in the woods as in an house I make my shrouding nest,
And sitting like a bird upon my country ground
In doleful harmony shall tune the cares, that me confound.
That thus the people fond may talk how they have seen
In piteous likeness of a Bird, the Daughter of a Queen.
I careful caytiffe, I, beheld my Fathers fate,
When in the Court a deadly club did Pale him on the pate,
And sprawling on the floor with brains pasht out he lay,
Alas if fates would let thy Coarse beshrynde in pit of Clay,
What flowing tears (O Syer) would I on thee bestow?
And could I brooke it Toxeus, to see thy death with woe?
That were vnwand^ in years, and take in pits vnpaysde,
Upon whose naked Cheeks the pregu^ (...) hairs had raysor.
Why should I parents dear your fates with tears detest,
Whom death with hand ind^fferent hath taken hence to rest:
My Fortune seeks my tears, due is mine own distress,
Now as a captive must I dawnce attendance more and less,
Upon my Ladies rock: and twyst her thread yspoon,
Woe worth my beauty, for the which in dread of death I run.
And for thy sake alone my stock hath lost his life,
While that my syer Denies me to Hercles as his wife
And did for fear refuse his stepfather to be,
But to our Laydes baleful bower as Captives hence go we:
WHat furious fits of ramping rage
doth boyle in Women's brain,
When in one roof both wedded wife
and Harlor do remain?
Both Scylla, and Charibdis gulf
no danger like it have,
That raging roll on Sicill shore
by heaps the wrestling wave.
No salvage beast so bad there is,
that betters not the same.
For bruit no sooner blew abroad the captive Harlots name,
And that the beauty of Iolas countnaunce shined brym,
As doth the day, when marble skies, no filthy fog doth dim:
Or like the glimpse of twinkling star, that in the welkin bright
Displays abroad his shooting beams amid the frosty might:
But Deianira Hercles Wife all bedlam like doth stand,
And scowleth as the Tiger wild which couched on the sand
In shade of rock doth shroud his whelps, and buskells up in hesse,
Espying him that of his young both come to make the waste:
Or like as Menas ouercharg with Bacchus liquor sixeete
With Ivy bunch on thurled Dart from place to place doth fleet:
She makes a pause, in doubt where to she might derect her pace,
Then frantically as on bestraught, she (...) from place to place
In Hercles douse. thus was she rayt in rage of flaming ire,
The house to narrow was, to cool the despret dames desire.
She runs in, she ^rots about, she makes a sudden stay.
The mallady in frowning face it self doth plain display.
No galling grief remaynes at heart. The tears gush from her Eyes,
Nor in on kind of temper still in frenly sits she fryes:
Her glowning looks with fury fell do change her former hew,
Now glaring stand her steaming Eyes, and paleness doth ensew
The ruddy colour in her Cheeks: the anguish of her heart
Drives out her dolors deep, to show them selves in every part:
She languishes, she moans for help, she wayles her froward fate,
And all the house an Echo makes resounding her estate.
Lo headlong to and fro she hies, and running still about
Goes mumbling, and the secrets of her mind she mutters out:
Oh Iuno Spouse to Jove, what part of heaven soever thou keep,
Raise up some salvage beast, against lewd Hercules to creep,
That I shall think sufficient: If any combrous snake
With breeding he do craule, more big in alt the slimy lake,
That may not take a foil: or if that ought do yet remain,
So ougsome, grisely, cursed, and grim, so fraught with filthy bayne,
That he may loathe to look thereon, that may his sight appaule.
Undo their Dens, from hideous hoales procure such vermin craule.
Or if that flendes can none befounde, then couture thou my ghost
To what thou ^tst: this soul of mine can welt abide the most:
Some vucouth shape, some ghastly face, such one bestow on me,
Whereby the horror of my pangs may counteruayled be.
My boiling breast cannot conceive the vengeance, I would try:
Why serchest thou the corners far, of lands aloof that lye?
And turnst y^ world thus upside down? why seekst thou harm of hell?
To trance him, furious fl^irndes enough within this breast do dwell:
Make me thine instrument of hate: his stepdame I will be,
And thou may work the overthrow of Hercules by me:
Appoynct my hand to any thing. Why dost thou make delay?
Use thou my frenzy, as the means to compass his decay.
The mischief shall be brought to pass, what ever thou wilt crave:
Why stand ye musing still thereon? contrived all I have:
Thou may forbear thy malice now: thy rancour shall suffice,
To bring this wretch unto his end, my self can well devise.
My Foster gyile, of raving mind, these dreary plaints assuage,
Forbear this heate, and brydell yet the rigour of thy rage:
Behave thy self for such an one, as men may worthy judge
The noble Spouse of Hercules.

Shall Iole (slavish drudge)
Bring basterd brethren to my Babes? of her that is a slave
Shall Iupiter the God of heaven forsooth a daughter have?
The flashing flames, and fighting floods shall toyne together first.
The northern bear to Marble seas shall stoup to quench his thyrst.
Yea vengeounce, vengeance, will I have, though on thy back thou wield
The boysteous heavens, and all the world do peace unto thee yield:
There is a thing shall sting thee worse then Hydra hissing Snake,
The corsey cursed of angry Wife. Doth any fiery Flake
Vpthrowne from Etnas boiling Foarge, so sows the beaten skies?
More then all things that thou hast daunt, my ghost shall thee aggryse.
Shall thou prefer a servile Trull before thy wedded Wife?
For fear of many monsters more I tendered still thy life,
And now for to increase my care. I see no monsters lurk,
And now steps in an hateful whore, (which more my mind doth vrke)
To cumber us, as ill as fiends. O Father thou of might,
The shield of Gods: and Titan thou, that bear the Lamp of light,
I only unto Hercules a loyal wife abod,
And to an Harlots use are turned my prayers made to God:
The fruit of my felticity a Strumpet doth obtain,
And for an Harlots love ye Gods have harde my prayers vain:
Is Hercules returned for her? O grief not yet content.
Devise some tearing torments, seek some pangs, and punishment.
Let Iuno learn of me, what force a woman's fury hath.
She knows not how in deep despite, to use her harming wrath.
For me you did these batrtayles wage: for my sake Acheloe
Did let his streaming blood amid his wamblinge waives to floe.
When snarling Adders shape he took, and to the boysteous Bull
He gieuing up his sloughy shape did bend his malice full.
And thus thou foiled a thousand foes by conquest of this one:
Yet presently thou plunged art, and that by me alone:
A prisoner now must be prefer de before thy loyal wife.
I'll none of that: but even the day that first begins the strife,
And to our wedlock brings the breach, shall be thy dismal day,
And knap in twain the fatal twist where on thy life doth stay:
What means this? my mind relents. My malice breaks his rage:
O wretched grief why dost thou faint? thy spite wilt thou assuage?
With fealty of a faithful Wife dost thou thy conscience charge?
Why lets thou not my boiling ire for to increase at large?
Why dost thou slake thy frying fits? this mallady still survive.
Even now I able was with him for maistership to strive.
In deed I have not craved aid: yet Stepdame Iuno will,
To weilde my hands to work his wrack, be here assistant still:

What treachery entendest thou mad bedlam to commit?
Thy husband wilt thou murder wreatch? whose flickering fame doth flit:
From east to west: whose bright renown the earth could not contain
But raysde aloft, from marble Skies it doth rebound again:
The mother Earth shall rife in arms for to revenge his grave.
His former Stepsiers stock hereby the overthrow shall have:
And all Aetolia royal blood will feel an vtterfall:
In quarrel of thy Hercules the world conspier shall.
Then silly wight how many plagues shalt thou alone abide?
But be it that from the face of man thou might thy body hyde.
Yet Jove the lightning leames of heaven doth hold in armed hand,
Behold the flying fyry flakes in ranks all ready stand:
And threatening thunders thumping thick do bounce out all the day.
Deaths dungeon (that thou dost defy) full duly scaare thee may.
For there his Uncle vmpyre sits: Myche where thou may vnspyde.
And every where thou shalt perceive the Gods to him (...).

I grant it despert deed, whereto despair now doth me drive.

Die sure thou shall.

And die I will, (as presently I live)
The loyal spouse of Hercules. And ere this night do pass,
Day shall not see that Deianire a living Widow was.
Nor of my spousal head an whore shall get the interest.
The dawning day shall sooner make the morning peer in West,
Unto the eastwarde Indians the ysy poale shall melt,
And freezing Scithian first shall fry with flames that he hath felt
Of Phoebus fervent wheel: ere me Thessalia Trulls shall see
Diuorst: my bridal blase shall with my blood iquenched be:
And either let him murdered be, or take away my Life.
So soothly let him count among the foiled flendes his Wife.
Among Alcides labours let me reckned be as on.
His love in heart I hold, until the utter gasp be gon.
Thus vndiuorst (not vureuengde) I will to Hercles tomb.
It Iole be with child by him, i'll tear it from her womb,
And rent it with these paws of mine. Yea in the wedding place,
I flying at her fearce will set my tallantes in her face:
Let him not spare in raumping rage a sacrifyce to make
Of me upon his wedding day, when he his Trull doth take,
So that I falling down may light on Iones senseless coarse
He dyes a happy man, that first hath quelde his foes by force.

O wretched might why dost thou thus increase thy fuming heate:
And feed thy fury wittingly least hap should thee defeat.
He loved Lady Iole, but while her fathers crown
Stood flourishing in royal state and were not bartered down,
And as unto the daughter of a King be suitor was,
But when from type of hawty pomp she did to thraldom pass
He shook her of hot love was coold, and now her bitter bale
Would not allow the wrack ^ kele to bear to hie a sale:
Vnleeful things that should be shunned we gredely desire.
But matters meeter for our state we seldom do require.
The pytying of adversity doth oft enkindle more
The fervent fits of love, and this perhappe doth urge him sore,
To see her reaft of natyue soil, it may his fancy touch,
Her hair not tuct with tresses trim, nor dect with golden ouche
Perhap the man with pity pricked doth love her for her carc.
Unto his noble hart to pity prisoners tis not rare.
The sister dear of Priamus (fair Lady Hesyon) he
Did cause to Thelamon the Greek in wedlock knit to be:
Account how many wives before, and maidens did he love,
And raung'd abroad to cool the rage that Venus brand did move.
Fair Auge maid of Arcadye ententiue set to lead
Dianas drunce, by force of him did leese her maiden head.
And yet no token could she show nor pledge of any jove,
What shall I speak of any more, or doth it me behove,
To pra^e what pranks he played with fifty daughters in one night.
And yet how soon of such a pang he over came the might,
He set much store by Omphale of Lidia land the Queen,
When like a guest on Timolus the mount he hath been seen.
He was so prict with Cupids dart, and caught in Venus trap,
That tucke in woman's weed he sat with distaf in his lap
And spoon the flax with sombling fist, and rudely thumbde the thread
And flong from him the syons case the price of noble deed.
With tresses trick on plaited locks he wailed as a maid
With myrre his ftiseled poale was smeard, and curied bush was braid,
Thus every where as fancy flits, the fondling dotes in love.
But in such sort as easily he can the same remove.

But they whom fickle fancies (...) have taint, do learn at last
In link of love by tract of time to fix affiance fast.

Trow ye that he this captive queen, and on whom he do see
The daughter of his deadly foe, will more esteem then thee?

As gladsome groves at Prime of spring in beauties pride are seen
When fresshest warmth the naked twigs doth clad in pleasant green.
But when could Boreas boysteous blast the pipling puffs doth stop
Of south wind sweet, rough winter powles the naked bushes top:
The barewoode with misshapen stumps doth show a withered Face,
Even so my beauty marching forth a season on his Race
Still fades away, and evermore abates his glimsing gloss,
And what so ever was in me, by care is come to loss.
And that which erst by fancy fed the greedy gazing eyes,
Is fallen away by bearing child: so oft it droupes, and dyes.
And since I came to mothers state. I faded fast away.
And wrinkled age with furrowed face steps in with quick decay.
But yet this bondmaydes ^eauter fresh her sorrow better brookes.
Her comely countnaunce crazied is with lean and wanny looks.
And yet for all her kark and care amid her deep ^istresse.
She bears a glimpse of beauty bright, and favour nothing less.
Her heavy hap, and frowning rate can nothing from her pluck.
Save Sceptre from her royal hand by all this lowering luck.
By means of this first fainting fear did lodge within my breast,
That makes me wake the weary nights, and leese my kindly rest.
In all men's eyes at first I seemed to be a blessed Wife.
And Ladies all at our estate repining very rife
Did wish my watch in spite of fate what S^eps^er shall I hope
As match in majesty to Jove within the heavenly coape?
Dear fosterdame whom shall I make my fear in spowsall bed?
Although Euryst that Hercules to all these toils hath led,
Do link with me in bridal bands, my state shall be impayrde.
Tis small worth to deserve to be to kingly wedlock rayrde.

But Issue is the thing that doth in marriage kindell love.

And Issue is the thing that doth in marriage malice move.

This while the bondmayde to thee for present shall be braught

Lo he ^etreth up and down with pryncely pore full haught,
And buckles fast about his Loins the lively Lyons case,
Who doth invest the wretched with the right of kingly mace,
D^posing those from honours type that late so lofty sat.
And pestereth his puissant paws with huge dvnweildy bat,
Of whose exploits, and maarciale acts the Seres sing aloof,
And all enclosed in Ocean sea thereof have perfect proof
Is now became an amorous knight: the honour of his name
Doth nothing touch his conscience, to tender once his ^ame.
He roueth through the world, as on that doth no whit esteem,
Although that men as soon to Jove shall him unworthy deem.
Nor like the man whose credit through the towns of Greece is great.
He seeks to compass his des^er, to work a Lovers feat.
With single Dames is his delight: If any him deny,
Then to attain his lawless lust by rigour doth he try.
With men he fares frantically, to others smart and blame
He win^ his Wy^es, his folly frail is cloackt by virtues name.
The noble City Oechalie is made a razed town.
The Sun twixt morn and even did set, in one day up, and down*
One day did see it stand in state, the same did see it fall.
These bloody broils, and wasting wars of Love proceeded all,
As oft as parents unto him deny their daughters dear,
So oft I warrant them they need his wrathful fury fear.
So oft a man with Hercules shall be at deadly food:
As he denies his stepfather to be by joining blood.
If he may not be son in law, then doth he rage, and rave:
Why do these guiltless hands of mine still keep him from his grave,
Till he dissemble frantic fits, to bend his aiming bow,
And deaths wound on my child, and me with bloody hands bestow?
Thus hawty Hercules was wont his wedlockes to deuorce.
Yet nought there is, that law of guilt on him might have recorse.
He makes the world blame Iuno, for the ills he hath commit.
O rigour, of my rage why dost thou quallify my fit?
Now must thou set thy hands on work, too't whi^e thy hands be hot.

Thy husband wilt thou slay?

Him who his Leman lewd hath got.

But yet, he is the son of Jove.

And so Alemenas son.

With stroke of steel?

With stroke of steel if it cannot be donne,
Then for to bring his death to pass, i'll set for him a snare.

What kind of madness may it be that makes thee thus to fare?

Such as my husband hath me taught.

Wilt thou thy spouse destroy,
On whom y^ stepdames spite yet had no power to work annoy?

The wrathes of heavenly minds do make the blessed on who they light
So doth not spite of mortal men.

Oh silly wretched wight
For bear thy rage, and fear the worst, mans force may not assail
Him, that against the power of hell, and death could once prevail.

I'll venture on the dint of swerd.

Thy wrath (dear foster child)
Is greater then the crime, that hath thy Hercules defiled.
With eagle malice measure saultes. Alas why dost thou bring
So great and sore, a penalty upon so swale a thing?
Let not thy grief be greater, then the sorrow thou sustaynes.

Set you it light that with our wedlock linked an harlot raygnes ^
Nay rather think it still to much, that doth thy sorrows breed.

And is the Jove of Hercules revolt from thee in deed?

It is not revolt, dear foster Dame, fast in my bones it sticks:
But ire boils hoate in burning breast, when love to anger pricks.

It is almost a common guise, that wedded wives do haunt,
Their husbands hearts by magic Art, and witchcraft to enchaunte.
In winter could I charmed have the woods, to make them sprout.
And forced the thunder dint recoil, that hath bin bolting out.
With waltring surges I have shook the seas amid the calm.
I smoothed have the wrestling waives, and la^de down every walme.
The dry ground gaped hath like gulphs, out new springs have gushed.
The roaring rocks have quaking stirred, none therest hath pushed.
Hell glounimy gales I have burst cape, where grisly ghosts all husht
Have stood answering at my charm the goblins grim have scoulde.
The threefold headed hound of hell with barking throats hath houlde.
Thus both the seas, the land, the heavens, hell bow at my beck.
Noone day to midnight, to and fro turns at my charming check.
At my enchantment every thing declynes from natures law.
Our charm shall make his stomach stoup, bring him more in awe.

What herbs do grow in Pontus sea? Or else on Pindus hill?
To trownce this machelesse champton, where shall I find the ill?
The magic vearse ^uchaunts the Moon from Starry skies to ground,
And fruitful harvest is thereby in barren winter found.
The whisking flames of lightning leames oft sorcery doth stay.
And noonetyde ropsy tur^y ^ost doth dim the dusky day.
And leave the welkin to the stars, and yet not cause him stxsoupe.

The Gods them selves by charm of love have forced bin to droop.

Perhap he shall be won by one, and yield to her the spoil.
So love shall be to Hercules the last and latest toil.
By all the host of heavenly powers, and as thou see me fear,
The secrets that I shall attempt, in council see thou bear:

What may it be, that thou would have me keep so secretly?

No broil of blades, no priue cote, no fiery force perdye:

I you assure I can conceal, if mischief none be meant.
For then the keeping close of it is sure a lewbe intent.

Then look about, if none be here, our council to betray:
Look round about, on all sides cast thy countnaunce every way.

Behold the place is safe enough from any listening ear.)

Beside the place of our estate there is a secret nook,
A covert corner for our talk, that sonneshyne never took.
Neither at morn, nor evening tide, when Titans blaze doth quench.
And he in ruddy western wave his ^iry wheels doth drench.
There secret lies the privy proof of Hercules amorous thought,
I'll tell thee all dear foster dame: This witchcraft Nessus taught,
Whom Ixion engendered of a mysty grouing cloud,
Where Pindus hauiy hill his top among the stars doth shroud,
And other stipe doth heave his Crest about the riding rack
When Achelous over laid, with many a thumping thwack
Of Hercles club, did shift him self to every kind of shape,
And trial made of all his sleights none served to escape,
At length he turned him self into the likeness of Bull.
And so was fowly vanquished in form of horny scull.
(While Hercules being Conqueror did me his Wife enjoy.)
Returning home to Greece again, it happened Even lake
To overflow the drowned marsh and channel to forsake,
And strongly streamde to seas he runs, and swells above his banks.
And Nessu^ used to pass the poole, and search the croaking cranks
As Ferryman demands his fare, and bare me on his back,
And wading forward brake the Waives, and surges of the lake.
At length yet Nessus waded out unto the farther shore,
Yet Hercules had swam but half the river and no more:
And plyde it hard to cut the stream: but when espied had he,
That Hercules was far behind, Madam (quoth he) to me.
(Be thou my booty, and my wife, and clasping me about)
Away he flings, and Hercules besturres him maugre Wave:
Though Ganges gulf and Ister stream (quoth he) thou traitor slave
Might roon in on, yet shi^ to escape them both, well could I make,
And in thy hast a shaft shall soon they running over take:
And ere he spake the word, his arrow flew out of his bow,
And wrought a wound in Nessus ribbs, he could no farther go.
It sped him sure, to look for death. He cried, well away.
The baggage running from the wound reserved as he lay,
And putting it into his hoof the which undoing, he
In cutting yt with his own hand, did give it unto me.
And thus at latter gasp he said, the witches have me told,
That love may charmed be by this, to have and keep his hold.
The conning witch dame Michale did teach Thessalia dames,
Who only forced the Moan to stoup to her from heavenly frames.
Therefore (quoth he) at any time when hateful whores abuse
Thy spoufall bed, or waueryng man do haunt to any stews
Then with this salve annoynt his shyrtes, and let it see no son,
But keep it close in corners dark, the blood then shall not shone
His strength: and thus full suddenly he left his talk with rest:
And deadly sleep with senseless death his feeble limbs oppressed.
Thou Dame to whom in hope of trust my secrets all bewray,
On, that the poison soakt into the vesture bright, it may
Preace through his limbs, unto his hart, sink through every bone,

I will dispatch it all in hast, make thou thy earnest moan
Unto the God, whose tender hand his steadfast darts doth wield,

I thee beseech that art of earth and heaven in honour held.
And thou that shake burning bolts, thou cursed and cruel boy,
Whose eluish weapons make thy mother fear thy sharpe annoy.
Now arm thy hand with speedy shaft not of the slender sort,
But biggest boultes, with which as yet thou hast assault no fort,
We need no little shaft that may stir Hercules to love
Bring cruel hands and force thy how his depest draught to prove
Now, now draw forth thy shaft wherewith thou caused cruelly
The burning breast of Jove by fy^tes of seruent love to fry.
When as the God his thonder bolt and lightning laid assyde,
Began boalne with bumps on fo rehead big: and throught the wave he hid,
And swam with Europ on his back in shape of horny Bull.
Now power down love, and therewithal let Hecles hart be full.
If Ioles beauty kindle heate and Hercles hart doth move,
Quench thou these coals, and force him glow with us in lawful love.
Full oft the thunder thumping Jove hath stouped to thy yoke:
And him that weildes the moary mace of black Auerne to smoke.
Thy flames enforce, and ^ake the Lord of glummy Stigian lake:
But only match thou Hereules, and of him triumph take
O Jove, whose wrath more wrackful is then yreful Iunoes might.
The charm is made in perfect force is al our medcine right,
Wherein the shirt shall steeped be that wearied many wight.
Whose hands on Pallas distasse spoon the weary Web with payne.
And it for Hercules avail shall brincke up all the bane.
And with my charm I'll strengthen it. But lo ye in the nick
Defte Lycas comes here at hand who will dispatch it quick:
But tell him not what force it hath least he the guilt betray.

Alas that faith to kings dwells not in howses of estate:
Have Lycas here this shirt, the which my hands have spun of late,
While Hercules at random roves, and overshot with wine
Doth rudely dandle on his lap the Lidiane Lady fine.
Now doates he after Iole: but this his boiling rage
That burns in his breast I will with courtesy assuage,
For courtesy conquers canckred churls. See thou my spouse desire,
He spare the Shirt, until he set the Franckinfence on fire,
And offer up his sacrifice, and wear his Garlond gray
Of Popler boughs on wreathed ^ckes. And I will go my way
To'th royal Gods, and will beseek the cruel Cupids dame.
Ye ladies and companions that with me heather came,
Now force the fountains of your tears from watered eyes to roon,
To whale our Country Calydon on every side vndoon.

O DEIANIRE dear daughter of our King
OENEVS late, to see thy frowning fates
Woe after woe thus down on thee to fling,
It irks our hearts, that were thy foster mates.
O woeful wight it pitieth us to see,
Thy wedlock in this tickle state to be.
We Lady, we, that with thee wonted were
With flapping Oar on Acheloe to row,
When having past the spring time of the year,
With Channel smooth he newly wexeth lowe,
And makes again his swelling surges calm,
And boobling runs at Ebb withouten walme.
Through weal and woe we still with thee remain,
And now what grief so ever thou fear in mind,
Account thou us as partners of thy payne,
For commonly when Fortune turns the wind.
And makes thee bear thy beaten Sail but low,
Then friendship ebbes, where it before did flow.
And who so guydes the sway of golden mace,
Though people thick do haunt his stately court,
And in at hundred gates do preace a pace,
Yea though that thou maintain so great a port,
To ga^de thee with this garrison, yet shall
Thou scarcely find one faithful heart of all.
In painted porch, and gates of gilded bowers
The lurcking hag Eryn her tusks doth whet:
And stirring s^rife with quarrelling face she lowers.
The portly doar ^ es no s^ner o^pe are set,
But treason black, pale envy deep deceight,
With privy knife of murder step in straight.
And when the Prince appears in open place,
To show him self before his subjects sight,
Swelling despite attends on his grace:
As oft as dawning day removes the night,
And every time the sun at West goes down,
They look another man should claim the Crown.
Few hearts love kings, not few their kingly might:
The glorious show of courtly countenance
Bewitches many: where one sets his delight
How next the king he may him self advance.
That through high streets he may as lord of rule
With lofty looks, ride mounted on his Mule.
Ambitious heate enflames his hawty breast.
Another would his greedy hunger staunch
With gubbes of goulde, (and though he it possessed)
Rich Arabie serves not his pining paunch,
Nor western India (aworlde for to behoulde)
Where Tagus flows with streams of glittering goulde.
The covetous charle, the greedy gnoffe in deed,
In whom from cradell nature so it plants,
No hourded heaps his endless hunger feed.
In plenty pines the wreatch, in wealth he wants.
Some other foundlings fancy thus doth guide,
To fawn on kings, and still in court to bide.
As one disdaining like a Country mome
And crooked clown, the plow to follow still:
Although the dingthryfte daily keep at home
A thousand drudges, that his land do Till:
Yet wants his will and wissheth wealth therefore,
Only to waste on other men the more.
Another claweth and flattreth fast the King,
By clymbing up to tread down every wight:
And some at least to blookam Feast to bring.
And thus he strives to arm himself with might
In blood: but of their ship doth Fortune fail,
When safe they think to float with highest sail.
Whom Moon at morn on top of Fortunes wheel
High swayed hath seen, at fullness of renown,
The glading sun hath seen his Sceptre reel,
And him from high fall topsey turuey down.
At morn full merry, blithe, in happy plight,
But whelmed in woes and brought to bale ere night.
These seldom meet hoar hairs and happy days:
The Lord that lies on stately crimsen bed
Sleeps more in fear, then snoring drudge, that lays
Upon the country clod his drowsy head.
In golden roofs, and hauty courts they keep,
Whose dreadful dreams do make them start in sleep.
The purple robes lies waking many a night,
And slombers not, when homely rags do rest.
O if as at a Grate espy we might
The sorrows, shrined in a Princes breast.
What pangs, what storms, what terror, O what hell
In sighing hearts or proud estates doth dwell?
The Iryshe Seas do nener roar so ruff,
When wrestling waives, and swelling surges rife,
That hoisted are with sturdy northern puff,
As fearful Fansyes do their minds aggryse.
But he sighs not, nor encumbered is with care,
Whom Fortune hath bequeath'de a slender share.
In wooden dish and black beche Bole he swills,
And heaves it not to mouth with quaking hand.
With homely fare his hungry Maw he fills,
And leares not back for fear of those that stand
With naked swerdes: but Kings in golden cup
Wine blent with blood (most dreadful draughts) do sup.
In dainty dish the poison bait is laid,
And treason lurks amid the sugared wine
A^ every bit they quake, and are a frayed,
The sword will fall, that hanges but by a twyne,
And ever as he lifts his head, and drynkes,
The rebels Knife is at his throat he thinks.
Such flattering joys these happy worldlings have.
Their outward pomp pretends lusty lives.
When inward^ly they drowpe, as doth the slave
That pines in pangs fast clogde in golden guies.
Strive not in hast, to climb the whirling wheel,
For hasty climers oft in haste do reel.
Mean dames defy both peerless and glittering spanges,
And golden chains with rubies rich beset,
Nor at their ears do massy Jewels hang
With turkey stones: nor pranked proud they jet
In murrey gowns: nor doth the wool they wear
Of Crymsen dye the costly colour bear
Neither in Tissew, nor silken garments wrought
With needle, nor embroadred Robes they go:
And yet this state is free from Jealous thought,
Their wedding is not unto them their woe.
When thousand storms in Ladies hearts do dwell
By wedlock breach, that breeds their noysom hell.
Who so he is that shuns the middle way,
Shall never find fast footing any where.
The wilful lad that needs would have a day.
And wayghty charge of Fathers chariot bear:
While he from wonted ways his Jade doth iaunce,
Among strange stars they pricking forward prance,
Enforcing them with Phoebus flames to fry,
Whose roaming wheels refuse the beaten rut:
Thus both himself, and all the Crystal sky
In peril of the soulthring fire he put.
So hawty minds that climb above their skill,
Do work their own decay, and others ill.
While Daedalus in flying through the air
Did keep the midst between the sky and ground
He could in safe to Italy repair,
And gave no gulf his name by being dround.
But Icarus presumes to mount on hie,
And stryues above the fethered fowls to fly.
And scorns the guiding of his fathers train.
And in his flight will coape to lofty son:
Which molt his wings so down he drops again
Into the seas, whereby his name they won
Thus proud attempts of hauty climbing hier
Receive shrewd falls to quit their fond desire.
Let other mount aloft let other sore,
As happy men in great estate to sit.
By flattering name of Lord I set no store:
For under shore my little keele shall flit:
And from rough wyndes my sails fain would I keep,
Least I be driven into the dangerous deep.
Proud Fortunes rage doth never stoup so low
As little roads, but them she ouerflyes
And seeks amid mayne seas her force to show
On argosies, whose tops do reach the skies
But lo, here comes our Lady Deianire,
Straught of her wits, and full of furious ire,
ALas through all my quivering joints
a running fear doth rest,
My staring hair stands stiff upright
and in my quaking breast
Deep terror dwells, and eake my hart,
with dread amazed doth pant,
With swelling veins my liver beats,
as when the wynd doth want
Asswagd in calmy day, and yet
the raging Seas do roar
Whose wrestling waives were raised aloft
by Southren blasts before.
So yet my wits be tocksicate, although my fear be gone:
Thus God turmoils us when he means to cloy th'unhappy one.
Thus proud attempts bedasht at length,
Oh wretch, O careful wight,
What mischief may it be wherewith thou art so sore affright.

The shirt with Nessus ban^ imbrewde no souer hence was s^nt,
And wretched woman that I am toth closet straight I went.
(My mind mistrusts I know not what, and treason dath surmyse)
And Nessus by the heate bewrayed, that fainted was the blood:
The God foreshewed that here the force of all the treason stood:
For by good hap the fomy glede no foggy cloud doth dim.
But with full power of burning beams he shined blazing brim.
Scant yet I can for feeble fear unlock my fastened ^wes,
The scorching heate doth d^ye away, and up by force it draws
The soaked blood that being laid amid the frying flame
And boiling heate of shining son did shrink before the same:
Wherein the shyrt was steeped, and all the royal robe imbrewde:
I cannot show the villainy wherewith it was indewde:
For as the Eastern wynd doth force the winter snow to melt,
Or lukewarm South when in the spring fro Mimas mount they swelt
As Lucas else that fronters on Ionian sea, a land
Doth break the wave the beaten surge lies foaming on the strand
Or by the warmth of heavenly heat the frankincense doth drop
So all the venom wastes away, and melts every crop.
And while I wonder still hereon the wonder shrynkes away
But with a froth it spo^es the ground, and there the poison lay,
It rotts the cloth: my woman boalne and swelled doth follow me,
And shakes her head* my son as one astonished I see:
And hying hither all in hast declare what news ye bring.

GO mother go, seek out aloof
if place of bydyng dwell
Beyond the ground both goulfe and stars
beyond both heaven and hell,
Fly mother far beyond the bounds
of Hercules his toil
A mischief great I know not what
within my breast doth boyle:

Unto the royal temples of dame Iunoes triumph hie
These will allow the sanctuary though other it deny

What heavy hap is it that may annoy my guiltless ghost

Oh mother, O that diamond of the world that pillar post
Whom fate as Ioues lieutenant hear have placed for the nones
Is dead: and Nessus burning bane deuouers Hercles bones
The daunter of the brutish beasts he conquering knight before
Is conquered now: he mourns, he walls, what ask ye any more

We wretches love the order of our wretchedness to hear,
Tell me the state now of our stock what countnance doth it bear:
O stock, O sylly wretched stock now shall I be esteemed,
A widow now, a cost of now, and now a beggar deemed.

Thou dost not languish all alone for Hercules yes dead:
For whom the eyes of all the world have cause their tears to shed.
Count not thy fate allotted thee alone: now all our kind
Do howl and morn for him whom thou beway lest in thy mind,
Thou suffrest grief, the smart whereof belonges to every land
Although the sower ^ast thereof first happen to thy ha^de
Thou careful caytiffe dost not whale for Hercules alone.

Speak, speak, how nigh to Deathward was my dear Alcides go^?

Death whom in his own empire he had conquered before,
Did shrink from him and fate durst not allow a deed so sore,
And Clotho she perhap put out her rock with trembling arm
As one that hastening Hercles death, did fear to do such harm,
O day, O dismal day, and shall even Hercules the great
Pass thus to death, and silent shades and to a worser seat

Is he think you already dead or may I dye before)
Speak on, if yet he be not dead

Euboea that doth rise,
With hauty crest rings every where, and Caphar rock likewyse
Deuydeth Hellespontus sea and turns that side to south,
Whereas it bides the boysteous blasts of Boreas wyndy mouth:
Euripus bends his wandering stream and winds in creakes about
His crooked course seuentymes and doth as often break it out:
While Phoebus drenched his wecye team amid the Western wave
(Here on a rock above the reach of clouds a temple brave)
Of Caenaei Jove show bright while all the beasts for sacrifice
At th'alter stood, and through the wood the noise began to rise,
Of al the herd: then of he put he matterd Lyons case,
And likewyse did discharge him of his houge and heavy mace
A^d eased his shoulder from the burden of his quiver light.
Then tuckt in your attire he shone among the people bright
With ugly locks, and on the alter made the fire flame
Receive (quoth he) these fruits (O sire) though fire send the same
And not the harvest Sith: but let with frankincense good store
The fire burn that far the rich Arabyan therefore
Doth gather out of Saba trees for Phoebus sacrifyce
The earth (quoth he) is now at peace, so be both sea and skies
All beasts be conquered, and I am victor come again.
Lay down thy lightning leames (O Jove) in fear thou need not reign
In midst of his prayers thus whereat I was aghast,
He fell to sighs and grievous groans, and al the skies at last
With dreadful crying load he filles Even as the braynsick bull.
When with the axe in wound he scapes doth fill the temples full
Of roaring noise.
Or as the thunder thrown from heaven doth rumble in the skies,
Even so the seas and stars of heaven doth Hercles shake with cries
Both Calpe clyue, and Cyclas yle well hard his yellyng have,
Here Caphat rocks there al the woods thereof an Echo gave.
We saw him weep, the people thought his former franucke fyttes
Had now again as erst they did bereave him of his wi^tes
His servant scatter then for fecare, while he with flaming eyes,
Al staring stands with tleaming looks among them all he pries
For Lyca: him alone he doth pursew, who in his arm
With trembling hand the alter held and escaped al the harm,
By dying first for fainting fear, and while Alcyde* held
The quaking Carcass in his hand thou shalt (quoth he) be queld
And beaten with this fist of mine, O Gods eternal raygne*
Wretch Licas kills Hercules, and hath his conqueror slain,
But ^o another slaughter yet: for Hercules again
Kills Lycas: thus the sacrifyce of Gods with blood they stain,
With Lycas thus his labours and thrown up to heaven they say,
That with his dropping blood the clouds he stained all the way.
Even as the pitched dart of Get with pith doth score the skies,
Or as the whirling sting of Creete doth make the p^ller rise:
So swift he mounted up to heaven, but down his body dropte,
And as his Carcass fell, among the rocks his neck it chopped.
The grave prepared for their corps (quoth Hercules) bestill,
I am no brainsteke frantic man, but lo this defpret ill
More noylome is theu rage or wrath, it caleth much my will
To wreck my rage upon my self, his mallady he scant
Bewryes: but fares frantt^kly: and he himself doth rent
His limbs, and ryflyng them, with mighty hand a sunder tears,
And strives to strip him self of all th'apparell that he wears,
And only this was it, of all the things that I do know,
That past the power of Hercules yet stands he pulling so
And plucks of his limbs withal the vesture doth not linne
To bring of lumps of filthy flesh the shyrt sticks to the skyne
But what should ayl^ the poy^on rank none knows what, nor why
And yet there is good cause it er of: now grovelling doth he lye
And beats his face against the ground to water now he hies,
But water cannot cool his heate, and now to shore he plies.
And for his sucoure seckes to seas, at lengri, his men him calth
We holding him (alas the whilst were able him to match
Now in a keele amid the seas we launched were aloof,
And Hercles payse was hosted with a little southern puff
My Ghost then left my careful coarse and darkness dimd my sight
Why stay I wretch? why doth this dreary deed make me affright.
Her coapefellow dame Iuno doth reclaim, and Jove his son,
The world must render him* then do as much as may be donne,
And boar my body with a sword such sower sauce is dew
To her, whose cursed caytiffe hand her love so lightly slew.
O Jove with fire and lightning flash destroy thy wretched Niece.
Let not thy mighty hand be armed with a slender piece.
Let burst the bolt from skies wherewith thou would Hydra burn.
If Hercles had not bin thy son thereof to serve the turn
Strike me with v^couth pestilence, and with such weapon smite,
As may be far more irksome plague then all my stepdames spite.
Drive forth those deadly darts that erst young Phaethon overthrew
When be full crancke in fiery carte, about the heavens flew:
For thus by slaying Hercules, eake Nations slain I have
What need thou Deianire of Gods a tool of death to crave.
Now trouble not thy stepster Jove, think scorn may Hercles wife
To wish for death, for to her heart her hand shall set the knife
Dispatch then quickly with the blade, yet let thy blade alone,
For who with weapon ends their life tis long ere they be gon
I will be headlong hurled from a rock as hie as skies.
The Oeta hill this shall be it, where first the son doth rise,
Thence will I throw my body down, the edge of brasten rock
Shall cleave my corps, and every crag shall give a broosing knock.
My hand shall hang torn by the way the rugged mountain side
Shall with the gushing bubbles of my dropping blood be died
On death w^re vengeance small, though small yet may it be delayde.
What despret death I should attempt it makes my heart dismayed:
Alas, alas that Hercles swerd within my chamber stuck
Then well were I if for to dye on that it were my luck.
It is enough if one right hand do bring us both to grave.
Come near, come near ye Nations, now let all people have
In readiness, both stone and fire the same to throw at me,
Now hold your hands, and take ye to your tools for I am she
That of your succour spoiled you now cruel Kaysars may
All uncontrolled tyrantlike, in kingdoms weilde the sway,
Now every mischief may start up, and not rebuked be.
The alters now shall up again that wonted wers to see
A bloody offering like him self in kind that offer should.
Thus have I made the guilty gap to let in bloodshed bold
I render you to tyrants kings, bugs, beasts, and grysely devils.
By taking him away that should revenge you of these evils.
O spouse thou of the thunderer and can you yet forbear
Wilt thou not fling thy flames from heaven as did thy brother dear?
Dispatch me hence sent up to Jove, wilt thou not me destroy
The greatest praise that thou might win then shall thou not enjoy
Nor lusty triumph: I am she that bear the name to be
The daughter of the man that would in prowes caape with thee.

Why wilt thou stain thy stock which hath vntaynted been before,
This il procedes of ygnorance although it be full sore:
He is not gylty that committes the gylte not with his will.

Well may he err of ignorance that favours his ill
And spares himself: my self of death most worthy I do deem.

He doth condemn himself to dye that needs will guylty seem.

Death can deceive no one but such as innocents may be.

Wilt thou forsake the glorious son?

The son forsakes me.

Wretch will thou cast away thy life.

Yea though it be to death,
I follow will my Hercules

He hath both life and breath

When he perceived him ouermatcht he hastened his decay.

Wilt thou forgo thy son, and eake prevent thy dying day?

Her self hath lived long enough who buried hath her child.

And wilt thou follow on to death thy spouse

yea Ladies mild
Before their husbands use to dye.

Thy self thou dost accuse
Of guylt if thou codemne thy self.

No gylty one doth use
To take revengement of themselves.

But those are pardoned (...)
That do oftend of ygnoraunce and not of peevish will
Who will condemn the deed he doth?

Each man doth seek to shun
His lot when spite of frowning fate against him seems to run.

And he for whom thou languishest, with arrow slow his wife
Hight Megara, and did destroy his tender childrens life.
When as a braynsicke beast in hand he tossed his knarrye mace,
That squeasde the snake in Lerna lake before his fathers face.
He played thryse the murderer, himself yet he forgave
And for the heinous gilt he did when frenzy made him rave
He purgde himself in Cynips spring toward the Southern poale
And in the water bathed his hand again to make him hoale.
Now whether wilt thou caytiffe wretch, why dost thou dam thy hands

In condemnation of these the ghost of Hercles stands.
I mean to plague the treachery.

Your Hercules well I know,
Perhap he will be hear again and master al his woe:
Then shall your slaked grief unto yobr Hercules give place.

They say the serpents poison doth deuowen him apace
The poison of his wicked While his lusty limbs destroys.

And think ye it to be the serpents bane that him annoys,
That he cannot escape who bare the brunt of it alive,
And how to pare of Hydraes heads he could full well contryue
When as the victor stood with grinning teeth amid the mood,
And all his body slauerde foul with venomous spit and blood,
And shall the Centaur Nessus gore against the man prevail
That made thy pithy strength it self of Nessus for to quail.

In vain ye rescue her that is of purpose set to dye
Therefore I have determinde with my self this life to fly
And long enough he lived hath that may with Hercles dye.

I do beseech thee humbly for this gray and hoary head,
And for these paps that as thy Mother have thee nourished,
Remove the fervent sits that cage within thy boiling breast,
And suffer not these despret thoughts of death in thee to rest.

Who would persuade a wretch to live. He hath a cruel heart?
And though that death be unto me a great and grievous smart:
Yet unto other some it is an e^s^ing of their payne.

O wreatch excuse thy handy work, and say at last again,
It is ignorance that did the deed, and not the wilful Wife.

It wilt be quit whereas the infernal ^endes shall stint the strife
And quit my guilty ghost: my conscience doth my hands condemn.
But Pluta Prince of glummy goulph shall purge from slaughter them:
Before thy banks I will appear forgetful Lethes Lake,
And being then a doleful ghost my husband will I take.
But thou that wields the sceptre black of dark internal skies
Apply thy toil: the heinous guilt that nons durst enterprise,
This ignorance hath overcome, Dame Iuno never dare
To take away our Hercules. Thy plunging plagues prepare,
Let Sisiphs stone on my neck force my stouping shoulders shrynke,
And let the fleeting liquor from my gaping gums to synke.
Yea let it mock my thyrsty throat when as I mean to drink,
And thou that rackes Ixion King of Thessayle O thou Wheel,
My heinous hands deserved have thy swinging sway to feel,
And let the greedy gripe scratch out these guts on either side,
If Danaus pitchers cease: by me the rome shall be supplied.
Set open hell, take me Medea as (...) of thy giult.
This hand of mine, then both of thine more cruel blood hath spilt
More then thou did as in respect of mother to thy thylde.
Or looking to thy brothers ghost whose gore hath thee defylde,
Have with the Lady thou of Thrace for such a cruel wife,
And the Althe that burnt the brand of Meleagers life.
Receive thy daughter now, deny me not thy babe to be:
Why such a one should quail by you, some reason let us see:
Ye honest matrons that enjoy the groves of holy wood
Against me shut the heavens, or such whose hands with husbands blood
Have been imbrewde, if any of the fifty sisters dire
Defying honest duty all that wedlock did require:
But desprat dames with goary blades stood armed: in me let them
See and allow their bloody hands that other will condemn.
I will go get my self among the troupe of cruel wives
But they will shun such gylty hands as shred their husbands lives.
O valiant spouse, a guil^sse ghost, but gylty hands I have
Ah silly woman, woe is me, that given light credit have
O traitor Nessus while I meant by Centaurs subtle charm
To draw from Iole Hercles love my self sustain the harm.
Hence Phoebus hence, and thou O slickring life of her that lacks
Her Hercules and gives day to wretches in their wrackes.
This is a dismal day: to thee Small penance yield I will
And life with all: my woeful fate shall I continue still
Deferryng death, O spouse that of thy hand I may be slain,
And doth their any spark of life yet in thy breast remain?
Or can thy hand yet draw the bow Sarmacian shaft to cast,
Do weapons cease, and have thy feeble hands given up at last
Thy bow? but if thy hardy wife to thee a tool may reach
I long to perysh of thy hand, mine hour yet will I stretch
Like gyltlesse Licas mangle me disperse in other towns
My corpse, and hurl me (...) world beyond the travails bownes.
Trounce me like monster Arcadie or ought that did rebel,
And yet thou shalt do nought but that becommes an husband well.

I pray you mother spare your self, forgive your fatal lot,
If ye offend of ygnoraunce, then blame deserve ye not

If thou regard true honesty, thy wretched mother slay.
Why trembles thus thy fearful hand, why lokest thow away?
Such sin shall be a sacrifyce why dastard dost thou fear?
I spoylde thy father Hercules, this hand, this hand aleare
Hath murdered him whereby I have done thee a more despite,
Then joy I did, in that my wo^be did bring thee first to light.
If yet thou know not how to kill, then practise first on me.
If as thou like within my throat thy blade shall sheathed be^
Or if to paunch thy mother soon thou mean to take in hand
To yield her dreadlesse ghost to thee thy mother still shall stand,
It shall not wholly be thy deed, by thee it shall be done,
And caused by my will to be. Art thou Alcides soon
And all afraid? so shall thou never great exploits achieve
Nor pass the world such feats of arms and slights for to contrive.
If any monster should be bred thy fathers courage show,
And to it with vnfeareful arm, lo overcharged with woe
My breast lies bare unto thy hand. Stryke, I thy gilt forgive
The f^endes infernal for their sin thy soul shall never grieve.
What yerking noise is this we hear* what hag here have we fownd^
That bears about her writhen locks these ugly adders wound,
And one her irksome temples twain her blackysh ^innes do wag.
Why chase ye me with burning brands Megera filthy hag*
Alcides can but vengeance ask, and that I will him get
But have the judges dire of hell for yt in counsel set
But of the dreadful dungeon doors I see thunfoulding leaves
What ancient sier is he that on his tatred shoulder heaves
Th'un weiloy stone that borne toth top again doth downward reel
Or what is ^e that spraules his limbs upon the whirling wheel
Lo hear stood ugly Tisiphon with sterne and ghastly face,
And did demand with steaming eyes the manner of the case.
O spare thy strypes Megera spare, and with thy brands away,
Th'offence I did was meant in love, but whether do I sway
The ground doth sink, the roof doth crack, whether went this raging route,
Now al the world with gazing eyes stand staring me about
On every side the people grudge and call for their defence.
Be good to me O nations whither, shall I get me hence?
Death only is my load of rest there may my sorrows bide
I do protest the fiery wheels that Phoebus chariot guide.
That hear I dye and leave the world, theirs Hercles yet behind.

Away she runs aghast: aye me, she hath fullylde her mind,
For purposed she was to dye and now remaynes my will
For to prevent her that by force her self she shall not kill
O mise rabble pretty, if I my mother ^aue.
I sim a gaynst my father then, but if unto the grave
I let h^r go, then toward her a trespass soul there lies.
And t^hus (alas) on either side great mischief doth aries,
And needs her purpose must be stayde I'll hie and take in hand
To stop her despret enterprise and mischiefy to withstand.

FVll true the dytty is
That holy ORPHEVS sang,
On Thracian harp with sound whereof
the Rocks of Rodop rang,
That nothing is creat
For ever to endure.
Dame Natures birds each on must stoup
when death throws out the lure.
The head with Crispen locks,
or golden hairs full:
In time hath borne an hoary bush,
or bin a naked scull.
And that which tract of time
doth bring out of the grain,
Old SATVRNE sharps his Sith at length
to reap it down again.
Though PHOEBVS rise at morn,
with glistering rays full proud,
He runs his race, and ducketh down
at length in foggy Cloud.
Toth Gaetans ORPHEVS sang
such kind of melody.
And how the gods themselves were bound
to laws of destiny.
The God that doth the year.
By eagle parts dispose,
Howe fatal web in every climb
are daily spun he shows.
For all things made of mold
The ground again will gape,
As Hercles preaches plain by proof
that nothing can escape.
For shortly shall ensue
Discarge of Natures Law
And out of hand the gloming day
of doom shall onward draw
Then all that lies within
The scorching Libicke climb,
The poale antarticke of the South.
shall overwhelm in time.
Poale artic of the North
Shall iumble, all that lies
Within the Axeltree, whereon,
dry BORES blasinge flies
The shiuerynge Sun in Heaven
Shall leese his fading light
The Palace of the frames of Heavens
shall run to ruin quite.
And all these blockish Gods
Some kind of Death shall quell,
And in confused CHAOS blind
they shall for ever dwell,
And after ruin made
Of Goblin, Hedge, and Elf,
Death shall bring final destiny,
at last upon it self.
Where shall be then bestowed
The world so huge a mass,
The beaten hye way unto hell
is like away to pass,
To lead unto the Heavens
That shall be laid flatt:
The space between the Heaven and earth,
enough think ye is that?
Or is it not to much
For worldly miseries:
Where may such heaps of sins be lodgd
what place above the skies?
Remaynes, but that the sea
With Heaven and lowest Hell,
Three Kingdoms cast in one are like
within one roof to dwell.
But hark what roaring cry,
Thus beats my fearful ear
But lo its Hercules that yelles
tis Hercules I hear.
Retire, retire thy breathing breasts,
O Titan blazing bright,
Unfold thy mysty mantle black
of dim and darksome Night:
And dash this dreary day wherein
I Hercules must die.
With blemishblack of filthy fog defile the grisly sky:
Pre^ en^ my stepdames naughty mind. Now should I have resignde,
(O Father) my inheritance of Plutoes dungeon blind
Heaven frames should here there be burst, either poale should crack
Why sparest thou the stars and le^st thy Hercles go to wrack?
Now Jove loke round about the heavens, and if thou can espy
On giant heave the Thessaill cliues against thassalted sky
Vnburdned be Enceladus of hugye Osir hill,
And hurled be on Hercules the mighty mountain still
Proud Pluto shall vnbarre the gates of black and glummy cave
Yet maugre all their might (o Father Jove) I will thee save
From fury of thy ^oes, and set thee up again in skies,
Yet lo Jove, lo, her that on earth thy thunderdint supplies,
And for to be liuetenaunt of thy boultes on earth was borne,
Is sent to burning Limbo lake in torments to be torn
The sterne Enceladus again in ramping rage shall rise
And hurl the weighte (that now doth cro^de him down) against the skies,
Thus by my death they shall presume to conquer heaven all
But ere that day upon my corse compel the heavens to fall
Break down, break down, the welkin that thou suffrest to decay,
O son of thunder thumping Jove no shadows do thee fray,
Now Ossa mount of Thessalie shall Pelion hill down crush
And Athos piled on Pindus top his bushy head shall push
Among the starry skes thereby above the craggy rocks.
Typhoeus up shall climb, and thumpe with store of ba^tryng knocks
Iuarmen stone in Tyrren sea from thence eake shall he beat
The smoky forge of Aetna mount, that glowes with stewing heate
Enceladus not overthrown yet with the thunder crack
Shall hew the mountain side in twain, and truss it on his back
The signs of heaven shall follow thee* and go with thee to wrack

I that returned from dens of death, and Stigian stream defied
And ferryed over Lethes lake, and dragd up, chaind, and tide
The triple headded mastiff hownd, when Tytans teem did start
So at the ugly sight that he fell almost from his cart.
Even I whose pith the kingdoms three of Gods full well have known
Lo yet mine end I daunted am by death and overthrown
But yet no bloody blade against my riued rybbes doth crash
It is no rock that unto death my bruised bones doth pash
Nor as it were with O sir hill that cloven were in twain,
Nor with the sway o^ all the mountain falling am I slain.
The glaring eyed giant grym doth not now squeaze my coarse
With paise of Pindus roch and thus not feeling enemies force
I conquered am and yet alas this coarsie frets me more
O feeble force of man: he whom no might could match before
Withouten any conquest made doth end his latter day,
Without exploit or feat of arms my self I pass away.
O mighty vmpier of the world and all ye Ghosts above
That witness how in quarrel good my right hand ever strove
O all ye lands, O earth alas, may it your mercy please
To spoil the spiteful sting of death that dauntes your Hercules
Fie fie, what shame is it to us what filthy fate we have?
A woman proud shall boast her bane brought Hercles to his grave
Then what are they whose mortal mayme Alcides weapon gave
If thus with sway invincible my fatal wheel do run
And need must on this shameful rock my fatal twist be spun:
As by a woman's cursed hand my blood should thus be shed
Yet Iunoes malice migh have poured this vengeance on my head,
So might a woman's deadly band have brought me to my beer:
But pet a woman wellding sway amid the welkin clear
But this seemed ouerprowde attempt for Gods to take in hand
The paples dame in Scithia borne where pight on hie ^o^h s;tand
The Apeltree whereon the underpropped poales do sway*
It might as well have been her hap to take my breath away,
What woman's might may master me Queen Iunoes hateful foe
Fie stepdame fie the fowler shame by this to thee doth grow?
Why dost thou triumph in this day? why did dame Tellus breed
Such parlous bugs thy humour rank of colour hoate to feed?
A mortal woman's peauishe spite doth pass thy rancour rough,
Thou say thou cannot have revenge on Hercules enough
Then are we twain y^ pass thy power the Gods may blush for sham?
To see their malice ouermacht by such a mortal dame.
Would God the ramping Lyons paw that noyed Neme wood,
Had filled his greedy mounching Jaws with plenty of my blood:
Or while the twining snakes had hembde me in by hundreds thick,
Why might not Hydra swallow up my wrinched body quick?
Why was it not the centaurs hap my silly flesh to gnaw?
Or that I bound on Tantalls rock should gape with greedy Jaw?
In vain to catch the fleeting food when deep from Tartar soil,
Where at the Gods aggrized were, I did purloyne the spoil.
And from the darck infernal Styx I got again to light,
Or Ditis dungeon all the stops and stays I conquered quite.
Death shranke from me in every place that I a noble knight
At length might end my days in shame, and in dishonour spoylde
Oh Jove the creatures terrible thou know that I have foiled
The threefold shapen mastiff cur whom up I draggde in chain,
He starring from the sunnewarde could not hale me back again.
The sheepherdes churlish rabble that aloof in Iber he
Under the Spanish fervent climb could never master me.
Nor serpents twain that unto me in tender cradell creapt.
Aye woe is me that valiant death so oft I ouerleapt:
What honour shall I dye withal?

Behold how death and hell
Cannot appaule the virtuous mind that of deserving well.
By guiltless conscience warrant hath the death that doth him spoil,
Irkes not as thus of such an one to take this filthy foil.
If with this torment life were lost, his mind should much be ^asde,
As with vnwe^ldy Gyauntes sway he had his body squeasde.
Or Titans burden with his monsters all he would abide.
Or wish of raging Giants rent in pieces to have died,
And if thy d^lefull death because that monster none is left.
Who may be worthy thought by whom Alcides life be reft?
But thine own hand to do the deed.

Aye me and wellaway,
What Scorpion scrapes within my Maw? what cralling Crab I say
With crooking cleaze to cumber me, from scorching zone returns,
And boat within my boiling bones the seathing Marowe burns.
My River meanwhile rank of blood my rotting Lunges it tawes,
And tears them in shattred gubs, and filthy withered flaws.
And now my Gall is dried up my burning Liver glowes.
The stewing heate hath stulde away the blood, and Jove he knows
My upper skin is scorched away and thus the Cankar strong
Doth eat an hole that get it may my wretched Limbs among,
And from my frying Ribs (alas) my Liver quite is rent.
It gnawes my flesh, deuowers all, my Carcass quite is spent,
It soakes into the empty bones, and out the juice it sucks
The bones by lumps drop of while it the joints a sunder plucks
My corpulent Carkes is consumed of Hercules every Iim
Yet stauncheth not the festring ^ot that feeds fast ^n him
O what a tingling ache it is that makes me thus to smart,
O bitter plague, O pestilence that grips to the heart.
Lo Cittes, lo what now remaynes of Hercules the great.
Are these the arms that did with stripes the roaring Lyon beat?
And in Nemea wood did tear him from his hary case
Might this hand bend y^ bow from clouds the Stimphall foul to chase?
Are these the shanks that coapt the heart who shifting pace full oft?
Did bear his branched head ypranckt with garlond gay aloft?
Was Cal^e craggy cliue of these my feeble clowches broke?
To raise a dam in ^eas that did their foamy channel choke.
Had these arms pith the breath of Kings, of Beasts, and bugs to stop?
Or might these shoulders tough the payse of heaven underprop?
Are these the lusty Limbs and Neck that shrank not at the payse?
Are these hands that I against the weltering heavens did raise?
Alas whose hands shall now perforce from hence hell Iaylo^ lead?
Alas the noble courage erst that now in me is dead.
Why call I Jove my Father great of whom my stock should rise?
Why by the Thunderer make I my challenge to the skies?
Now, now Ampitrio is my ster all men may it avouch.
Come out thou murreyn foul that dost within my bowels couch.
Why dost thou thus with privy wound my careful Carcass foil?
What gulf under the frozen Climb in salvage Scithian soil
Engendered the^? what water Hag did spawn thee on the shore?
Or stony C^lpe Rock in Spain that borders on the Moare:
O irksome ill, and art thou not the Serpent that doth sting
With crest on ugly head, or else some other lothly thing,
Or sprung of Hydraes blood, or left here by the hellick hound.
Art thou no plague? and yet a plague in whom all plagues abound?
What ghastly countnaunce cariest thou (alas) yet let me know?
What kind of mischief may thou be that dost torment me so?
What salvage sore, or murreyn strange, or uncouth plague thou be?
With open combat face to face thou should encounter me.
And not thus ranckle in my flesh, nor soak into the sap.
By sowltring heate within my bones thy boiling bane to wrap,
And in the mid thereof to fry the Maroe that doth melt.
My jagged skin is ripped, and out my smoky Bowels swelt.
From burst Paunch my self do flea the skin with grasping pause,
And from the naked bones do tear the mangled flesh by flaws,
I searched for thee through my Maw, yet further dost thou creep,
And festring farther in my flesh hast gnawn an hole more deep.
O mischief match to Hercules, what grief could make me greet?
Whence flow these streams of trillig tears y^ down my cheeks do fleet
The time hath bin no plunging pangs could cause our courage quail,
That never use with crystal tears our anguish to bewail.
Ah, fie, I am ashamed that I should learn these tears to shed:
That Hercules in weeping wise his grief hath languished:
Who ever saw at any day in any time or place?
All bitter brunes I bare with dry, and eake vnreky face
The manhood that so many ills hath maistred heretofore,
Hath yielded only unto thee, to thee thou Cankar sore.
Thou first of all hast straynde the tears out of my weeping eyes
Thy gargle face thy visage man that doth me sore aggrise.
More towgh then mossy Rocks, more hard then Gads of sturdy sleele,
Or roaming stream of Simplegade, whereby this smart I feel
Hath crushed my cracking Jaws, wrong the streaming tears fro me.
O wielder of the Welkin swift, lo, lo the Earth doth see
How Hercules doth weep and whale, and to my greater payne
My Stepdame Iuno sees the same, behold, behold again
My Lunges do fry, the scorching heate prevails more, and more.
Whence fell this thunder Bolt on me that burns in me so sore?

Who stoups not when grief doth gal? more tough the Aem of Thrace
Whas meanwhile hawty Hercules, and did no more gieue place
Then doth the marble axelltree, his Limbs he now doth yield
To painful pangs: and on his Neck his aching head doth wielde,
And tossing still from side to side, he bends with hugy sway,
And oft his noble heart doth force his trilling tears to stay.

O Father with thy heavenly Eyes,
Behold my wretched plight,
For never HERCVLES till now
bid crave thy hand of might,
Not when as Hydraes fruitful heads
about my Lyms were wound,
Nor when I locke in Lakes allow
fought with th'inferdall hownde,
These hideous fiends I foiled, with kings, tyrants proud likewise.
Yet in these broils I never looked for succour to the skies.
This hand did still avouch the vow, no thunder for my sake
Did glitter in the holy heavens, this day hath hid me make
Some suite to thee, and of my boones yet here's the first and last,
One only Thunder bolt I crave at me O Jove to cast.
Count me a Giant of my self, I can no less devise,
While Jove I thought of promise true, I spaarde the starry skies.
Be thou either a cruel sier, or pity if thou have,
Yet lend thy son thy help, and get the glory of my grave:
Preventing this my dreary death, of this if thou do scorn,
Or that thy hand abhor the guilt, from Sicill cliue suborn
The soultring Giants that in hand high Pindus mount can weilde,
Or Ossa that it hurlde on me I may therewith bequielde,
Burst up hell Gates, and let Bellone scourge me with Iron rod,
And let in arms encounter me the mighty Martial God,
My brother I acknowledge him but by my s^epdames side,
And Pallas thou my sister take, let at thy brother slide
A thirling Dart. O stepdame mine with humble suite I crave
A wound of thee that woman's hand may bring me to my grave.
Why dost thou feed thy fury now as one whose wrath were end
And satisfied? what seek ye more? I stoup, I yield, I bend.
Thou see Alcides humbly laid, where as unto this day
That ever I entreated thee, no Land, no Beast can say,
Now do I need thy deadly wrath to rid me of my payne,
And now thy rankour is appeasde, thy hate is quenched again,
And thus thou sparest me my life, when as I wish to dye:
O Earth will none make me the fire wherein my bones may fry?
Nor reach a blade to Hercules, convey ye all from me?
So let no country Monsters breed when I shall buried be,
And let none whale the loss of me if (...) more arise,
God send another Hercules to succour Earth and skies.
But as for me on every side ding out my broosed brain,
And crash with sturdy stroke of stones my cursed Scull in twain
And rid my torments: wilt thou not? O world to me unkind,
And are so soon our benefits forgotten in thy mind.
Even to this bower with bugs and beasts thou had (...) over laid
Had not I bin: good people cause his torments to bestayde
That succored you: time gives you leave to recompense my payne,
If ye with death will guerden me, I ask none other gain.
Where shall I wretched mother of Alcides wish to be?
Where is my child? where is my son? If sight deceive not me
With gasping mouth, and panting heart lo where he sprawling lies.
Where as (alas) in raging heart of boiling fits he fryes,
He groves, all is dispacht, dear child let me Alcides mine
Embrace thy pining limbs: with kiss enfoulde my arms in thine
Where are the limbs? where is the neck that bare the skies alone?
What thus hath mangled thee that all thy corps is waste and gone?

I am your Hercles mother dear, whom thus ye see here lost.
Acknowledge me all though God knows I seem but as a ghost.
Why do you turn your face away and mourning visage mild.
Are ye ashamed that Hercules should counted be your child?

What world hath bred this uncouth bug? what land engendered it?
Or else what monstrous mischief may on thee triumphing sit?
Who is't that conquers Hercules?

By treason of his Wife
Thou see how wretched Hercules do leese his loathed Life.

To overthrow my Hercules, what treason hath the might?

That which a wrathful Dame doth seek to case her of her spite.

How hath this pestilence gotten to thy Limbs and bleeding bones?

I^to a Shyrt the woman had conuayde it for the nonce.

Where is the Shyrt for nothing but thy naked coips I see?

The vesture by the poison rank de^owred is with me.

And can such poison be contrived?

I think within my guts,
That hideous Hydra hissing Snake his slowghy body puts,
A thousand plagues of Lerna Poole within my Bowels rampes:
What raging dear is this that drives up all Sicilia dampes?
What E^me of Hell forbids the day to pass the boiling ^one?
O Ma^es amid the greedy gulphes and pooles let me be thrown.
What Ister can my Carcass cool? no not the Ocean mayne
Of these my stewing vapours may the raging quench again?
(Al moisture of my limbs in these my fits are fryde away)
The juice will soon be soaked up, what president of hell
Let me return from under ground again with Jove to dwell
He ought to have retained me still, receive me once again
Into thy dungeon dark that hell may in this pickle plain
Behold the man that conquered yt, no booty bring I will
Away with me: why dost thou quake for fear of Hercles still.
Set on me death coragiously for now I may be kilde

Now stint thy tender tears that down thy checks so long have trild,
And master this thy mallady compel thy sorrows sloupe.
And show that in these plunging pangs Alcides did not droop,
And as it hath been ca^st thy guise force death and hell to shri^ke.

If ugly grested Cau^asue. In chain of yrone link
Should bind me as ag^oning pray the greedy grype to feed
Yet from mine eyes it should not strain a broke tear indeed
If wandering Symplegads would me wish either rock assail,
To bide the brunt of double wrack my courage would not quail.
Let Pindus tumbled be on me, houge Aemus let me have
Or Athos rock in Thracian seas that breaks the weltering wave,
And bode the boultes of thondring Jove although thunweildy mass*
Of all the world should fall on me and might be brought to pass
That Phoebus flaming apeltree should burn upon my grave
No uncouth cry should force the mind of Hercles thus to rave.
Let meet a thousand savage beasts and rent me al atonce
Let Stymphal ^oules with howling hoarse lay strokes upon my bones
Or scrolling bull on tother side strike on with head and horne
Or else of other serpents wild let al my parts be ^orne
With roaring earthquakes, hougy lumps be puffed upon me
With griping grief let all my limbs to nothing pined be
Although I be to powder crushed I will with patience peace
In spite of beasts or bruising blows my sighs and tears shall seace

It is not son the woman's bane that in thy bones doth boil
But festring tears and broosing knocks of thy continual toil
The wrinches old with aching pangs begin to smart anew.

O where is death where is he now? of all that I do few:
Can any witness what it is? let death now bend his bow
A naked hand is strong enough to make me stowpe full low
Let any wight in al the world attempt to set on me
I warrant him, approach let him, Ah wretched might I be
This wayward agony hath take his perfect wits away.
Have hence his tools, and eake his shaftes for danger hence co^uay.
His ruddy gills that glow like fire some mischief do pretend.
To shroud my self (alas) into what corner shall I wend?
This mallady a frenzy is, this only is the mean
To conquer Hercules, why then do I as doting quean^
Thus fall to tears and seek to shrynke, may be that he will have,
Alcmenas hand to give the stroke, to bring him to the grave.
But dye he in a Murreynes name, ere I for coward will
Such deadly penance be enioynde, that on my doings still,
His baynous hand may vaunt it self, lo how the pangs full deep,
With stuggling ceased, do hind the purple veins with deadly sleep,
And beating sore lift up and down his faint and panting breast:
If I O Gods of this my noble Child be dispossessed:
Be gracious yet, and for the world some lusty champion save.
Rid his annoy and let his limbs again their courage have.

O Dismal day, O anguish, O
the heaper up of ill.
Ioues Son is flayne, his Daughter dyes,
his Nephew lives still.
First by the Stepdames treason, is
the Son to ruin brought.
The Daughter likewyse trapt in traynes,
and thereby come to nought.
What hoary head in change of tunes, or teanour of his age
Hath seen, that Fortunes frowning Face hath stirred such stormy rage.
One doleful day bereaves me (alas) of parents twain.
But least I speak to spite the Gods, I will somewhat refrain.
I lost a Father, Hercules this only I complain.
O noble Imp of Hercules, (alas) my Nephew dear,
That dost of wretched Alcmens Son the lively feature bear.
Refrain my child thy wailing words, this quiet sleep perhap
Will overcome these plonging fits. But lo? lo in my lap.
He doth begin to strive again, his fits begin a fresh.
Sleep gieuing up the feeble ghost to ranckle in the flesh.

What means Thrachin craggy crest to show before mine eyes?
Or now forsaking man am I aduaunst above the skies.
Why do the heavens provide for me? the father Jove I see,
And eake my stepdame Iuno dire appeased now with me.
What heavenly harmony is this that sounds in mine ear.
Dame Iuno calls me son in law, I se the palace clear
(Of crystal skies and beaten rakes of Phoebus flaming wheel)
I see the dumpish moary den of glowming lady night
Here he commands darkness dim to show it self in sight.
What means this, who is it that the heavens against me spares?
And am I thus O father mine brought down again from stars.
Even now Appolloes sowltring car did fume about my face
So nie I past the pinch of Death, lo Thrachin top in place
Who brought me back to ground again, beneath me erst it lay
And al the world was under me, thou smart were worn away,
Thou forcest me confess the same. Ah mercy, mercy now.
In stead of farther vengeance do these humble words allow.
Lo Hillus, lo thy mothers gifts such presents she prepared
Ah, might my trunchion punch her puddings once as meanwhile fared
The haughty Lady Amazon well trounsed for her pride
On thedge of ysy Caucasus afront the mountain side.
O noble lady Megara were thou my wretched wife,
When rapt in rage of frantic fits, I rest thee of thy life
Give me my batt and bow in hand, my wrestes I will imbrew.
And force ye all your brages on me with blemish black to rue.
Thus let of Hercules exploits a woman be the last.

Forbear O Sire thy hateful threats, she hath it, all is past.
The vengeance that ye seek on her already hath her sped.
With wound received at your hand my mother lies dead

O blinded anquish: dye she should of Hercles furious hand)
Thus Licas hath his marrow lost the heate of burning breast
Will have me on the breathless coarse for to revenge the rest
Why doth she not yet feel her force both let her want a grave
And on her cursed flesh to feed let beasts her carcass have.

The silly woman was more woe then ye that bide the smart.
Ye will release some part hereof for pity in your hart.
For grief of you with her own hand, alas her self she slew
Thus more then ye do ask of her, she doth her doyng few
Yet is it not your Wife's misdeed that brought you to this plight.
No nor my mothers traytrous hand hath wrought this deep deceit.
This treason Nessus did contrive whom ye did pay his hire,
With arrow shot into his Ribs for rape of Deianire.
Thus father with the Centaurs blood your shyrt was sore embrewde.
At Nessus hand the vengeance of your deed thus have ye rewde.

He hath his will: all is dispacht, our Fates themselves display.
This is the day of death to me. Thus erst to me did say,
A charmed Oak, and all the wood that range with yetling noise
Of Parnass hill the Temples shook, and thundered out this voice.
The dead mans hand whom thou before hast slain,
O Hercules shall murder thee again.
Thou having mot the space of gulf and ground,
And depth of hell, hear shall thou be confound.
I therefore do bewail no more, such should our ending be.
That Hercles conquered after him no man alive may see.
Now let me dye a manly death, a stout and excellent,
And meet for me: this noble day shall valiantly be spent.
Fell all the Timber on the ground hew down all OEta wood.
Let coals deuower Hercules, let fire fry his blould.
But ere I dye thou noble Imp of Peans royal race.
This doleful duty do for me: See that an whole day space*
My funeral fire flaming burn. And now my tender Hill,
The last petition of my mouth make unto thee I will.
Among the captive Ladies, one there is, a noble Dame,
Of royal blood, Euritus Child, Iole is her name:
Accept her to thy spousal Bed, whom victor I vnkind^
Have trained from her native home and but my heart, and mind
Poor silly maid I gave her nought, and now she shall me lose.
Lo thus the wretched woman walls her still increasing woes.
But let her foster that she hath conceived as Ioues ally,
And child to me, be it thine by her that erst begot have I:
And as for thee dear mother mine your dreary dole forgo,
Your Hercules shall live: do not vain tears on him bestow:
My manhood made a strumpet thought a Stepdame unto thee,
But if that either Hercles birth show her unsure to be,
Or be a man my ster or else be falsified my kin.
Now let Ioues (...) cease, and let my mothers slander ^in,
I have deserved a father well that have aduaunst so hye
The glory of the rolling heavens, of nature tramde was I.
To work the wondrous praise of Jove, and Jove him self doth Joy,
To have the name of Hercules, begetting such a boy.
But pardon now my strained tears, but you as Jove his niece.
Shall as a stately matron be among the Dames of Greece.
Though Iuno with the thunderer in spousal chamber lies
And in her heavenly hand doth weilde the sceptre of the skies,
When ever bare she such a Babe, and yet though heaven she hold
In heart against a mortal man she fosters malice old,
For spighte that borne of woman's womb becounted thus I should.
Go Tican go, run out thy Race, thee only I forsake.
I that went with thee foot by foot now to the infernal lake.
And Ghosts, I go yet with this praise to'ch pit down will I pass
That Hercules of open foe yet never foiled was.
But he in open combats brought his conquests all to pass.

O Titan crowned with blas^ing bush whose morning moystures make
The Moon her foamy bridell from her tyred team to take.
Declare to'th Easterlinges whereas the ruddy morn doth rise.
Declare unto the Irishmen aloof at western Skies.
Make known unto the Moors annoyed by flaming axentree.
Those that with the ysy Wayne of Archas pestered be.
Display to these that Hercules to th'eternall ghosts is gone
And to the bawling mastriffes den from whence returns none.
With dusky damp of filthy fog O Titan choke thy blaze,
With lowering light of wanny Globe on woeful wordlings gaze,
And let thy head be muffled up with clouds and darkness dim.
For Hercles sake, when shall thou find, or where the like to him?
(O wretched world to whom wilt thou henceforth thy woes complain,)
If any scattring pestilence on ear^h shall be renewde,
By benom rank, from poison mouth of scaly Dragon spewde:
If any Bore of Arcadie shall cumber all a wood,
And tear the trauelers flesh with tusk embrewed in goary blood:
If any champion rough of Thrace with heart more hard in breast,
Then are the ysy rocks, where as the frozen Bear doth rest,
Shall trample thick his stables foul with blood of slaughterd men,
When people quake for fear of war, who shall assist them then?
If wrathful Gods for vengeance will fo^he monsters to be bread?
Lo now enfebled all of force his Karkasse lies dead,
Whom Natures mold had made a match to thundering Jove in strength.
Hale out (alas) and let your plaint be heard to towns at length.
Let women beat their naked arms, and wring their trembling hands,
Untrusse their hair, and from their locks pluck of their binding bands.
Bolt up, and lock the Temple gates of Gods, and ^ape be none,
But despret Iunoes Chapple doares. O Hercles thou art gone
To Lethes lake, and stream of Styx, from whence no Keele again
Shall bring thee back: O silly soul thou go to remain
Among the grisely goblins grymme: from whence thou meanwhile came
With triumph sooner daunted death, and conquest of the same.
With ghastly face, and karrayne arms, and neck that yields to weight,
Thy ghost returns, but Carons boat then shall not have her freight.
As balased with thy only payse, and yet shalt thou not bide
Among the rascal sprites, but sit on bench by Eacus side,
And with the Judges twain of Creete as Umpier there to be,
Appointing pains to souls that may to their deserts agree.
Fro slaughter hold your guiltless hands, bath not your blades in blood.
Ye states, that bear high sail on earth, and floa^e in worldly good:
It merits praise a maiden sword vndipt in gore to bear,
And while thou rain, to keep thy realm from cruel doings clear.
But virtue hath a pryuiledge to pass unto the skies.
To'th top of frozen Apell tree O Hercules wilt thou rise?
Or where the sun with scorching blaze his burning beams doth rest?
Or wilt thou be a shining star amid the lukewarm west?
Where Calpe Rock is heard with roaring noise of wrestling wave?
What place amid the azure sky entendest thou to have?
What place shall be in all the heavens from hurly burley free?
When Hercules amid the stars shall entertained be?
Let Jove appoint thy biding from the ugly Lion far,
And burning Crab* least thou with grysely countnaunce do the scar.
And make the trembling stars in heaven for fear to break array
And Titan quake: while spring doth prank with flowers y^ tender spray.
Then hasty winter strip the trees of all their branches green.
Or sudden Summer decked with leaves in busshy woods be seen.
And from the trees the Apples fall, the harvest being done:
No age on earth shall wipe away the fame that thou hast won.
As far as Sun, or Stars can shyne, thy glorious name shall go.
Amid the botome of the Sea first Corn shall sprout, and grow,
And brackish Seas his waters salt to water fresh shall change:
And fixed star of ysy bear from Clime to Climb shall range,
And sink into the frozen poole against his kindly sway,
Ere people cease the honour of thy triumphs to display:
O soueraygne Jove we wretched wights this boon of thee do crave,
No monstrous beasts, no noisome plagues, hereafter let us have:
With bloody champions let the earth encombred be no more:
Cast down the hauty sway of Courts: if ought annoyance sore
Shall cloy the earth, a champion to be our shield we cave,
Whom as an honour of the Crown his rueful realm may have.
(That still will keep his swerd from being taint with guiltless blood.)
But lo what means this rumbling noise? Ioe Hercles ster doth groan,
And sighs for his son: is it the Gods that whale, and moan.
Or is it Iunoes fearful shrike, whom Hercles doth aggrise,
That seeing him for fear she roars, and r^nneth from the skies.
Or else did Atlas faltering feet with feeble stirring stumble?
And shrinking from his tottring weight thus force the Gods to rumble?
Or scared he the wauling ghosts, the which to fear he drove?
Or Cerberus burst his jingling Chains with buskling in his cave.
It is not so: but lo where Philoctetes doth appear,
And Hercles famous shaftes to him bequeathed doth he bear.
OF Hercules most heavy haps
Good young man make report
How did he bear it at his death?
In such a cheerful sort
As no man lives.

And could he with
so sweet and merry look,
The scorching pangs and torments of
his ending fire brooke?

That there was any heate at all his face did not bewray,
Who prou'de that power might force al things to stoup and to obey,
That under son untamed be.

Where did the noble knight,
Among the wrestling waives of sea display his matchless might:

That mischief witch all only yet the world knew not before,
Even fire hath bin conquered as beasts, and monsters more
Among the toils of Hercules the fire is crept in.

Declare us how the flaming force of fire could he win.

As soon as he with smarting hand the Oeta hill had grypte,
And forthwith from ye branched Beach ye shrinking shade was wipte:
And felled from the stump it lies, a Pine tree hard he bends,
That crakes the clouds, down from skies his hawty head he sende^
The Rock did totter ready for to reel, and with the sway
It tumbles down, a little grove withal it bears away.
A spreading Oak of Chaon big, whose leaves did ever rush,
And dimde the sun, and did beyond the wood his branches push.
It being hewde doth crack, and eake in twain the wedges knappes:
The steel startes back and thus the tool of Iron bides the rappes,
And flies out of the Log, at length at roore it shogde and shook,
And falling down full lythly the overthrow it took.
Forthwith the place lost all his light, the byrds scaard fro their nest
Do foare about the cropped wood, and holes wherein to rest,
And chirping with their weary wings about the plot they flicker
In every tree the ringing strokes were multiplied thicker.
The holy Oaks in hugy hand the Iron Axe did feel.
No timber on the stallen stocks might escape the hewing steel,
Thus all the wood upon a pile is heaped, and one by one
The Logs are laid as high as heaven that Hercules thereon
Might have a narrow room: his burning bones for to bestow.
On Pynetree top, and towghest Oak the fler begins to glow.
And on the stumped willow flamth, and thus the forest wide
Doth make the Kill* the Popler wood all Hercles blocks doth hyde.
But as the puissant Lyon when his fits do vex him sore,
Lies wallowing on his back, and through the forest load doth roar.
So fares he, who would have thought he had to burning gon?
As one that climbs to heaven, not fire, he was to look upon
When up he stepped on Oera mount and gazed on his Kill.
Being laid aloft he brake the block, so heavy was he still.
The shyues yet could not bear his wayght he calling for his bow
Did say to me, have Philocktet, on thee I it bestow,
This same is it that Hydra with his swarming heads did know.
This did fetch down the stimphall fowls, and all that we have daunt,
Go thou with this let victory, and happiness thee haunt,
For never shall thou shute against thy foes with these but speed.
If at a bird amid the clouds thou aame she dies indeed.
These certain shaftes shall bring thy mark down from the azure sky,
This bow shall not deceive thy hand, full oft I did it try,
And made it meet to bear a shaft, and cast his leauell dew.
Thine arrows shall not fail thine aame if that thou neck them true,
I ask but only this of thee, put fire to the Stack,
Bestow on me my funeral flame to bring me to my wrack.
This knarry Club (quoth he) the which no hand shell ever loss
Shall only with his Hercules in fire go to loss,
This also (quoth he) should thou have if thou could wield the same,
Beside his master let it lye to help toward the flame.
And then beside him down he lays the Lyons vayry skin
To burn with him: the shaggy case hid all the pyle within.
The people sobde, and none there was but sorrow straynde his tears.
The mother mad for egar grief her breast all bare she bears,
And naked down toth Nauill stead displays her tender teates.
And languishing with wrung hands her naked dugs she bears
And cries out upon the Gods on Jove himself she ca^es,
Her shrieking rang through all (...) place so womanlike she yalles*
Be still (quoth he) good mother: force your showers of tears to cease.
Your dreary dole disgraces much the death of Hercules.
Whale secretly unto your self: why make ye Iuno glad,
To se that you a weeping day with store of tears have had?
(It doth her good to see her bawds, to stand with weeping eyes.)
Forbear, forbear your malady, tis deadly sin for ye,
To tear the tears, and rent the womb, that first did foster me.
And as he blustred giving gruntes when carst he led in chain
The hownd about the towns of Greece what time he came again
Triumphing over conquered hell defying Plutoes might,
And dreadful destiny: so on the fire he lay upright.
What conqueror ever sat in coatch with such a chereful grace?
What tyrant did control his folk by law with such a face?
How husht was al thing at his death? himself he could not weep
And also we had clean forgot the wound of sorrows deep
None doth lament him at his death now were it shame to whale:
Alemen (whom nature ought to move) her tears now do her fail.
And thus as ill as was the son the mother stood almost.

But at his burning did he not call on the heavenly host,
Remembering Jove to hear his suite.

As on in deep despair
He lay, and staring up so rolled his eyes into the air
To spy if Jove look down to him from any turret hye.
Then with his hands displayed to heaven (quoth he) where so thou lye,
And lokest down to se thy son, this same, this same is he,
Whom one day eeked with a night engendered hath to thee
If East and West if Scithia, and every burning plot,
That parched is with glowing glede of Phoebus fire hot
Doth sing my praise? and if the earth full satisfyde with peace
If languishing and wailing words in every town do cease.
If none their alters do imbrew with any guiltles gore,
Then Jove let my vncaged spirit have heaven for evermore.
As for thinfernall dens of death they do not me detarre?
Nor scowling Plutoes dungeon darck, but Jove I do abhor.
Unto those ghastly Goblins as a stlly shade to go.
Since I am he whose conquering hand gave them their overthrow.
Withdraw these foggy clouds of night, display the glimsyng light
That Hercles broyld with flying flames the Gods may have in sight
And if thou do deny (O fire) the stars and heaven to me
To give me them against thy will thou shalt constrained be,
If glutting grief do stop thy speech, the Stygian goulphes set oape,
And let me dye, but first declare within the heavenly coape,
That thou accepst me as thy soon: this day it shall be wrought,
That to be raysd aloft to stars, I may be worthy thought.
Thou hast done little for me yet: it may be doubted well
Whether Jove did first beget his son, or damned him first to hell.
And (quoth he) let my stepdame see, how well I can abide
The scorching heate of burning brands: for fire then he cried,
And saith to me O Philoctet in hast upon me throw
The burning logs, why quakest thou? dost dastard thow forslow,
For fear to this wicked deed? O coward peasant slave,
Thou art to weak to bend my bow, unmeet my shaftes to have
What ails thou to loke so pale? and as thou see me lye
With cherefull look courageously do thou the fire ply.
Behold me wretch that broil and burn my father opes the Skies
And unto me son Hercules come, come away he cries.
O father Jove (quoth he) I come: with that I waxed pale
And toward him a burning beam with might and mayne I hale:
But back from him the billets fly and tumbling out they leap,
And from the limbs of Hercules down falls all the heap.
But he encrocheth on the fire as it from him doth shrink.
That many mountains whole were set on fire a man would think
No noise was hard, and all was husht, but that the fire did hiss
In Hercles glowing paunch when as his liver burning is.
It boysteous giant Typhus had amid this fire been thrown,
These torments would have straind his tears forced him sigh groan.
Or tough Euceladus that tossed a mountain on his back.
But Hercles lifted up himself amid his fires all black,
With smoke besmeared his corps half burnt in shivers, gube flaws,
And down the throat his gasping breath flames at once he draws
Then to Alemen he turned himself: O mother mine (quoth he)
Should ye so stand at Hercles death? should you thus whale for me?
And thus between the fire and smoke, upright and stiff he stands.
And neither stoups nor leanes awry, but moves and stirs his hands,
With al his lively gestures still, and thus he doth persuade.
His mother leave the langusshing, and mourning that she made.
And did encourage all his men t'encrease the fire than
As though he were not burning, but would burn some other man.
The people stood astonished, and scant they would believe
That fire had any force on him, or that it did him grieve.
Because his chereful look had such a majesty and grace.
And never wild us meue the fire that he might burn apace,
(And now when as he thought, he had endured pangs enough,)
And stoutly bode the brunt of death, the blocks he doth remove,
That smothering lay, to make the burn: then downward doth he shove
And where the stewing heate did chiefly scorch, and burn most hot,
That way he thrusts his frying limbs, and thither hath he got.
(With steaming countnaunce vnapaulde his mouth now doth he fill)
With burning coals, his comely Beard the blazde about his cheeks:
And now when as the sparkling fire unto his visage seeks,
The flame licked up his s^ged hair, and yet he did not wink:
But open kept his staring eyes But what is this? my think
Alomene comes yonder as a woeful wight forlorn,
With sighs and sobs, and all her hair befrounced rent, and torn.
And bears the remnant in her Lap, of Hercules the great.

Learn Lordings, learn to fear and dread
th'unwelldy fatal force.
This little dust is all that's lef^
of Hercles hugy coarse.
That boysteous Giant is consumed
unto these ashes small
O Titan what a mighty mass
is come to nought at all.
Aye me an aged woman's lap all Hercules doth shroud,
her lap doth serve him for a grave, and yet the champion proud,
With all his lump stils not the room. Aye me a burden small
I ^eele of him to whom whole heaven no burden was at all.
O Hercules, bear child, O son the season meanwhile was,
That thou to Tartar pits, and sluggish deus aloof did pass
For to repast: from deep of hell when wilt thou come again?
For to put loyne the spoils thereof, or bring from captive chain
To life thy friendly Theseus. But when wilt thou return
Alone: can flaming Phelegethon thy ghost in torments burn:
Or can the masti^e Dog of hell keep down thy woeful sprite?
Where then might I come see thy soul and leave this loathed light?
When shall I rap at Tartar gate? what Jaws shall me deuower?
What death shall d^wnt me: go thou to hell, and hast no power
To come again: alas why do I wast, the day in tears and (...)
O wretched life why dost thou last thou shouldest droop and saint,
And loath this dreary day: how: can I bear to Jove agay^e
Another noble Hercules, what son may I obtain
So valiunt to call me thus ( Alcmena mother mine)
O happy spouse Ampliterio twyse happy hast thou been
In entering at the dens of death, and through the noble son
The Deutis arthy presents quake to see thee thither come.
Though thou but forged father were to Hercules of late
Whether shall old beldam go whom many kings do hate:
If any prince remain with blody breast and murdering mind
Then woe to me: if groaning babes be any left behind,
That sorrow for their parents deaths now, now for Hercles sake
Their malice let them wreck on me, on me dire vengeance take
If any young Bustris be, I fear the Persians sore
Will come and take me captive hence in chains for evermore.
If any tyrant feed his horce with gubbes of strangers flesh
Now let his pampered jade unto my Carksse fall a fresh.
Perhap dame Iun^ covets on me to wreck her yr^.
And e^vs of her burning breast will turn the flaming fire
Her wreckful hand doth loiter now since Hercules is slain.
And now to feel her spurning spyte as harlot I remain.
My valiant son is cause of this my womb shall barrayne be,
Least I should bear another child as hardy as was he.
Oh whether may Alcmena go? or whether shall she wend?
What country or what kingdoms may my careful head defend
Where may I couch my wretched coarse, that every where am knownde
If I unto my native soil repair among mine own,
Euristeus is of Argoe lord thus woefully forlorn.
I will to Thebes where I was wed, and Hercules was borne:
And where with Jove I did enjoy dame Venus dear delight.
O blessed woman had I been and in most happy plight,
It Jove with flash of lightning leams and blazing flakes of fire
Had smolthred me as Semele was sowst at her desire.
Would God that Hercles while he was a babe had rypped been
Out of my womb, then wretchedly I should not this have seen
The pangs and torments of my son, whose praise doth couteruaile
Even Jove: then had I learned that death at length might him assail,
And take him from my sight: O child, who will remember thee?
For now vnthankfulnes is great in men of each degree:
(...), for thy (...) I do not know where entertaynd to be).
The ^word* of the Cleonies I will attempt and fire
Whom from the Lyon resc^wde he and made the monster dye,
Or shall I too the Archadians go where thou did sle^ the boar
Where thy renown remain ^ of great exploits before,
The parlous (...) Hydra hear was slayue there fell he dead,
That with the flesh of slaughtered men his greedy horses fed
And yondes were the Stimphall burdes compelde to leave the say
And tamed by the handy toil, now doth the Lyon fry,
And belketh (...) fumes in heavens while thou lie in thy grove
O if mankynd but any spark of thankful nature have
Let all men prcace to succour me Alcmene thy mother dear.
What if among the Thracians I venture to appear,
Or on the (...) of Hebet flood? thy prowess every where
Hath succoured all these soylts: for erst in Thrace thou did put down
The fleshy meangres of the King and put him from his crown,
By slaughter of the salvage print the people live in peace,
Where did thou deny thy help to make tormoyling cease?
Unhappy mother that I am a shrine where may I have
To shroud thy coarse: for all the world may strine about thy grave
What temple may be meet to shrine thy relics safe for aye,
And hallowed bones? what nations unto the ghost shall pray?
O noble son what sepulchere what hearse may serve for thee?
The world it self through flying flame thy fatal tomb shall be:
Who takes here this payse from me his ashes which I bear
Why loath I them? embrace his bones keep still his ashes here,
And they shall be a shield to thee his dust that thee defend,
To see his shadow, princes proud for fear shall stoup and bend
O mother of noble Hercules forbear your dreary plaint:
His valiant death thus should not be with female tears attaint.
Ye should not languish thus for him, nor count him wretched man
In dying, who by noble mind prevent his destny can.
His cheuatry forbyddeth us with tears him to bewail:
The stately stomach doth not sloupe: they sigh whose hearts do fail.

(I'll moan no more: behold, behold. most wretched mother I)
Have lost the shield of land end sead, where glittering Phoebe displays
With whirling wheels in foamy gulphes, and red and purple rays
The loss of many sons I may lament in him alone.
Through him I lifted Kings to frown, when crown my self hadnone
Aid never any mother lived, that needed less to crave.
Of Gods, then I. I asked nought while I my son might have.
What could not Hercles tender love like on me to bestow?
What God would once den^ to ^ or what he held me fro,
I was in my power to ask and have. If Jove would ought deny,
My Hercules did bring to pass I had ^ by.
What mortal mother ever bare and lost so dear a son?
Erst down the cheeks of Niobe the ^
When of her dear and tender brattes she wholly was hereuen,
And did bewa^le with strained sighs her children seven and seue^
And yet might I compare this one (my Hercles) unto those
And I in him as much as she in all her imp^s die lose.
The mothers that are mourning dames do lack on h^d and chief,
And now Alcmene shall be she depriude of all releese,
Cease woeful ^thers cease, if that among you any are
Constrain to shed your streaming tears by force of peas^ue care^
Ye Lady whom lamenting song of women formed rocks,
Give place unto my gluttyng grief, beat on with burning knocks
Ye hands upon my rivaled breast, alas am I alone
Enough for such a funeral to languish and to move,
Whom al the world shall shortly need? yet steech thyfeble arms
To thumpe upon thy sounding breast thy grief with boleful (...)
And in despite of al the gods power put thy woeful erye
And to receive thy flowing tears thy warry cheeks apply.
Bewail Alcmenas woeful state: the son of Jove bewail,
Whose birth did cause the du^ay day in kindly course (...) fail.
The East compact two nights in one: Lo, to, a greater thing
Then glorious day the world hath lost now let your forrowes ring,
Yet people al whose lowryng lords he draw to dens of death
Their blades (that reckt with guiltles (...)) he (...) into the sheath.
Bestow on hin your Crystal tears, which he deserved wellt
Howl out ye heavens, ye mardle seas, and goulphes with gronings yell.
O Crete Dear darling unto Jove For Jove of Hercles ro^e,
Ye hundred cities beat yont arms: my son, for evermore
Is gone among the gries^y ghosts, and shimmering shades of hell
Lament for him ye woeful mightes, that here on (...) do dwell,

WHy Mother whale you me an (...)
^ ho^t of hell?
Or ^ of death, since I
among (...) Spheres do dwell?
Forbear, forbear, to moan for me
for virtue opened hath
To me the passage to the Stars:
and set me in the path,
That guides to everlasting Life,
whence co^s this dreadful sound?
Whence roars this thundering voice. y^ doth against mine ears rebosid,
And bids me to shine my tears? I know it now I know,
The darksome dunge^ daunied are, and Demies of Lakes allow.
O Son art thou ret^rnd to the from Stygian gulf again?
And can thou twice of ugly death the con quest thus obtain?
And burst the baleful prisons twice, of glum and ghastly night.
Aga^st ^ thus by might?
May any escape from ^ thou stape alone?
Hath hell no power to hold thy sprite, when breath from breast is gone?
Or else hath Pluto baalde thee out, for fear least thou alone
Should cloyne his Sceptre from (...) hand, pluck him from his front?
For I am sure I saw thee laid upon the burning trees:
And from thy Corps the slame and sparks against the welkin flies:
That sure thou wast to po^ldee burn, and feeble life was lost:
But sure the deeps and pits of (...) did not lock up thy ghost.
Why were the devils alrayde of thee? why quaked Ditis grim?
And did thy noble ghost seem such a ghastly bug to him?

The dampy (...) of Cocitas could not keep me from light.
Nor Carons fusty musty Barge iramsported hath my sprite,
Now Myther ^ more once have I seem the (...) of hell,
And all the ^ that dwell.
That mortal mold I took of you to nought the flames have fried:
Heaven hath the substance that I took of Jove: in fire yours died.
And therefore rawse your playntius teare^, which parents use to shed,
When wretchedly they whale their sons, that dastardly are dead.
Thus vulgar varlets weep: Ioe virtue hopes the Stars to get:
But fainting fear (...) on death, from heaven where I am set,
You hear my voice: Euristeus now shall bide the deadly push
With chariot sway his cracked scull ye shall on sunder crush
Now must I hence advance my Ghost up to the rolling skies
Once more I daunt the deuilles, and do the goblins grim aggrise

But stay awhile my son: he fades and shrinks from my sight
Aduaunst he is among the stars: doth this my charmed Spirit
Dote in a trance or do I dream that I have seen my son
A troubled mind can scante believe the things he sees done.
But now I see thou art a God possessing heaven for aye.
I see it sure. I will to Thebes thy triumphs to display.

LO virtue scapes the ghastly shades of hell,
Ye noble peers that shyne in virtue bright
Dire destiny cannot constrain you dwell
Among the glowming glades of ugly might,
Nor sink your fame in loathsome lakes of spyte.
But when deaths day draws on the gasping howre,
You purchased glory shall direct your right
To find the passage to the heavenly bower.
When flesh doth fall, and breathing body dies
Then (Fame the child of Virtue) doth arise.
But sluggish sottes that sleep their days in sloth,
Or give their golden age to loath some lust.
Them and their names the wretches bury both,
When as their bones shall shryned be in dust:
The clay shall cover their carcasses forlorn,
As though such kaytisses never had been borne.
But if that ought of memory they have.
In thafter age it shall be filthy shame.
The gnawing worms torment not so in grave
Their rotten flesh, as tounges do tear their name,
That daily killed to further mischief lives.
Lo both the fruits, that vice and virtue gives.

