ALTHOVGH (GENTLE Reader) thou may perhaps think me arrogant, for that I
only among so many fine wits and towardly youth (with which Englad this day
flourishes) have enterprised to set forth in english this present piece of the
flower of all writers, Seneca, as who say, not fearing what graver heads might
judge of me, in attempting so hard a thing, yet upon well pondering what next
ensues, I trust both thy self shalt clear thine own suspicion, and thy
changed opinion shall judge of me more rightful sentence. For neither have I
taken this work first in hand, as once intending it should come to light (of
well doing whereof I utterly dispayred) and being done but for mine own
private exercise, I am in mine opinion herein blameles, though I have (to
prove my self) privately taken the part which pleased me best of so excellent
an author, for better is time spent in the best then other, and at first to
attempt the hardest writers, shall make a ma more prompt to translate the
easier with more facility. But now since by request, fredship of those, to whom
I could deny nothing, this work against my will extorted is out of my hands,
I needs must ^raue thy patience in reading, and facility of judgment: when
thou shalt apparently se my witless lack of learning, prayng thee to consider
how hard a thing it is for me to touch at full in all points the authors mind,
(being in many places very harde and doubtful, and the work much corrupt by
the default of evil printed Books) and also how far above my power to keep
that Grace and majesty of stile, that Seneca doth, when both so excellent a
writer hath past the reach of all imitation, and also this our English tongue
(as many think, and I here find) is far unable to compare with the Latin:
but thou (good Reader) if I in any place have swerued from the true sense, or
not kept the roialty of speech, meet for a Tragedy, impute the one to my
youth and lack of judgment: the other to my lack of Eloquence. Now as
concerning sondrye places augmented and some altered in this my translation.
First for as much as this work seemed unto me in some places vnperfite,
whether left so of the Author, or part of it lost, as time devours all
things, I wot not, I have (where I thought good) with addition of mine own
Pen supplied the want of some things, as the first Chorus, after the first
act begynninge thus. O ye to whom c. Also in the second Act I have added the
speech of Achilles Spright, rising from Hell to require the Sacrifyce of
Polyxena beginning in this wise. Forsakinge now. c. Again the three last
staves of the Chorus after the same Act: and as for the third Chorus which in
Seneca begins thus, QVE LA SEDES? For as much as nothing is therein but a
heaped number of far and strange Countries, considering with my self, that
the names of so many unknown Countries, Mountains, Deserts, and VVoodes,
should have no grace in the English tongue, but be a strange and unpleasant
thing to the Readers (except I should expound the Histories of each one,
which would be far to tedious,) I have in the place thereof made another
beginning, in this manner. O Jove that leadst. c. Which alteration may be
borne withal, saying that Chorus is no part of the substance of the matter.
In the rest I have for my slender learning endeavoured to keep touch with the
Latin, not word for word or verse for verse, as to expound it, but
neglecting the placinge of the words, observed their sense. Take Gentle
Reader this in good worth with all his faults, favour my first beginninges,
and amend rather with good will such things as herein are amiss, then to
deprave or discommend my labour and pains, for the faults, saying that I have
herein, but only made way to other that canne far better do this or like,
desiring them that as they can, so they would. Farewell gentle Reader and accept
my good will.

THe ten years siege of Troy, who list to hear,
And of thaffayres that there befell in fight:
Read ye the works that long since written were,
Of all Thassaultes, and of that latest night,
When Turrets tops in Troy they blazed bright
Good Clerks they were that have it written well
As for this work, no word thereof doth tell.
But Dares Phrygian, well can all report,
With Dictis eke of Crete in Greekish tongue
And Homer tells, to Troye the Greekes resort
In scanned verse, and Maro hath it song
Each one in writ hath pend a stoary long,
Who doubts of ought, and casts care to know
These antique Authors, shall the story show,
The ruins twain of Troy, the cause of each,
The glittering helmes, in fields the Banners spread,
Achilles yres, and Hectors fights they teach.
There may the jests of many a Knight be read:
Patroclus, Pyrrhus, Aiax, Diomed,
With Troylus, Parys, many other more,
That day by day, there fought infield full sore.
And how the Greeks at end an engine made:
A huge horse where many a warlike Knight
Enclosed was: the Troians to invade
With Sinons craft, when Greekes had feigned flight,
While close they lay at Tenedos from sight,
Or how Eneas else as other say,
And false Antenor did the tovvne betray.
But as for me I nought thereof endight,
Mine Author hath not all that story pend:
My pen his words in English must resight,
Of latest woes that fell on Troy at end,
What final fates the cruel God could send.
And how the Greekes when Troy was burnt began wreak
Their ire on Troians, thereof shall I speak,
Not I with sphere who pierced was in field,
Whose throat there cut, or head ycorued was
No bloodshed blows, that rent both targe and shield
Shall I resight, all that I overpass.
The work I wryght more woeful is alas,
For I the mothers tears must here complain,
And blood of babes, that giltles have been slain.
And such as yet could never weapon wreast,
But on the lap are wont to dandled be,
No yet forgotten had the mothers breast,
How Greekes them slew (alas) here shall ye see
To make report thereof ay woe is me,
My song is mischife, murder, misery,
And hereof speaks this doleful tragedy.
Thou fury fell that from the deepest den
Could cause this wrath of hell on Troy to light,
That worckest woe guide thou my hand and pen,
In weeping verse of sobs and sighs to wryght,
As doth mine author them bewail aright:
Help woeful muse for me besemeth well
Of others tears, with weeping eye to tell.
When battered were to ground the towers of Troy
In writ as ancient authors do resight,
And Greekes again repayrde to Seas with joy,
Up rises here from hell Achilles Spright,
Vengeance he craves with blood his death to quite.
Whom Paris had in Phoebus temple slain,
With guile be trapt for love of Polyxeine.
And wrath of hell there is none other price
That may assuage: but blood of her alone
Polyxena he craves for sacrifyce,
With threatenings on the Grecians many one
Except they shed her blood before they gone.
The Sprightes the hell, and depest pits beneath,
O Virgin dere, (alas) do thrust thy death.
And Hectors son, Astyanax (alas)
Pore seely fool his Mothers only joy,
Is iudgd to die by sentence of Calchas
Alas the while, to death is led the boy,
And tumbled down from Turrets tops in Troy.
What ruthful tears may serve to whale the woe
Of Hectors wife that doth her child forgo.
Her pinching pang of hart who may express,
But such as of like woes, have borne a part?
Or who bewail her ruthful heaviness
That never yet hath felt thereof the smart?
Full well they wot the woes of heavy hart.
What is to leese a babe from mothers breast,
They know that are in such a case distressed.
First how the Queen lamentes the fall of Troy,
As hath mine author done, I shall it wryght
Next how from Hectors wife they led the boy
To die, and her complaints I shall resight,
The maidens death then I must last endight.
Now who that list the Queenes complaint to here.
In following verse it shall forthwith appear.
WHo so in pomp of proud estate,
or Kingdom sets delight:
Or who that joys in Princes court
to bear the sway of might.
No dreads the fates which from above
the wavering Gods down flings:
But fast affiance fixed hath,
in frail and fickle things:
Let him in me both se the Face,
of Fortunes ftattering joy:
And eke respect the ruthful end of thee (Oruinous Troy)
For never gave she playner proof, then this ye present see:
How frail and britle is the state of pride and high degree,
The flower of flowering Asia, lo whose fame the heavens refund,
The Worthy work of Gods above, is ba^ered down to ground.
And whose assaults they sought afar, from West with Banners spread
Where Tanais cold her branches seven, abroad the world doth shed.
With huge host and from the East, where springes the newest dea,
Where Luke warm Tygris channel runs, and meets the ruddy sea.
And which fro wandering land of S^ythe, the band of widows sought:
With fire and sword thus battered be her Turrets down to nought.
The walls but late of high renown lo here their ruinous fall:
The buildings burn, and flashingflame, swepes through the pallas al.
Thus every house full hie it smokes, of old Assarackes land:
No yet the flames withholdes from spoil, the greedy Victors hand.
The surging smoke, the asure say, and light hath hid away:
And (as with cloud beset) Troyes Ashes staines the dusky day.
Through appears with ire and greedy of hart, the victor from a far.
Doth vtew the long assaulted Troy, the gain of ten years war,
And eke the miseries thereof abhors to look upon,
And though he se it yet scant himself, belieues might be won,
The spoils thereof with greedy hand, they snatch and bear away:
A thousand ships would not receive aboard so huge a pray
The yreful might I do protest of Gods adverse to me,
My countries dust, and Troyan King I call to witness thee,
Whom Troy nowhydes, and underneath the stones art ouertrode:
With al the Gods that guides the Ghost, and Troy that lately, stood.
And you also you flocking Ghosts of al my children dere:
Ye lesser Sprightes what ever ill, hath happened to us here.
What ever Phoebus waterish face, in fury hath foresaid:
At raging rise from seas when erst, the monsters had him frayed.
In childbed bands I saw it yore, and wist it should be so:
And I in vain before Cassandra told it long ago.
Not false Vlysses kindled hath these fires, nor none of his:
Nor yet deceyptful Sinons craft, that hath been cause of this.
My fire it is wherewith ye burn, and Parys is the brand
That smoaketh in thy towers (O Troy) the flower of Phrygian sand.
But ay (alas) unhappy age, why dost thou yet so sore,
Bewail thy Countries fatal fall thou knew it long before:
Behold thy last calamityes, and them bewail with wares:
Account as old Troys overturn, and past by many years,
I saw the slaughter of the King, and how he lost his life:
By The alter s^e (more mischief was) with stroke of Pyrrhus knife.
When in his hand he wound his locks, and drew the King to ground,
And hid to hilts his wicked sword, in deep and deadly wound.
Which when the ^ored King had took, as willing to be slaynt,
Out of the old mans throat he drew his bloody blade again.
Not pity of his years (alas) in mans extremest age:
From slaughter might his hand withhold, no yet his ire assuage:
The Gods are witness of the same, and eake the sacrifyes,
That in his kingdom holden was, that flat on ground now lies.
The father of so many Kings Pryam of aunient name,
Vntombed lies and wants in blase of Troy: his funeral flame.
No yet the Gods are wreaked, but lo his Sons and daughters all,
Such Lords they serve as doth by chance of lot to them befall.
Whom shall I follow now for pray? or where shall I be led
There is perhaps among the Greekes that Hectors wife will wed.
Some man desires Helenus spouse some would Antenors have,
And in the Greekes their wants not some, that would Cassandra crave
But I (alas) most woeful wight whom no man seeks to choose,
I am the only refuge left, and me they clean refuse
Ye careful captive company, why stints your woeful cry?
Beat on your breasts and piteously complain with voice so hye,
As meet may be for Troyes estate, let your complaints rebound
In tops of Trees: and cause the hills to ring with terible sound.
NOt folk unapt, nor new to vveepe (O Queen)
Thou vvilst to vvayle by practise are vvee taught,
For all these years in such case have we been,
Since first the Troyan guest, Amiclas sought
And sailed the Seas, that led him on his way
With sacred ship, to Cibell dedicate
From whence he brought his vnrepyning pray,
The cause (alas) of all this dire debate,
Ten times now hid the hills of Idey be,
With snovve of Silver hevv all over laid.
And bared is, for Troyan rages each tree,
Ten times in field, the harvest man afraid,
The spikes of Corn hath reaped, since never day
His wailing wants new cause renews our woe
Lift up thy hand, (O Queen) cry well away:
We follow thee, we are well taught thereto.
Ye faithful fellows of your casualty,
Untie thattyre, that on your heads ye wear,
And as behooves state of misery.
Let fall about your woeful necks your hair.
In dust of Troy rub all your arms about,
In slacker weed and let your breasts be tied
Down to your bellies let your limbs lye out,
For what wedlock should you your bosoms hyde?
Your garments loose, and have in readiness
Your furious hands upon your breast to knock
This habit well beseems our distress,
It pleases me, I know the Troyan flock
Renew again your lunge accustomed cries,
And more then erst lament your miseries.
We bewail Hector.

Our hair we have untied, now euerychone,
All rent for sorrow of our cursed case,
Our locks out spreads, the knots we have undone
And in these ashes stained is our face.

Fill up your hands and make thereof no spare,
For this yet lawful is from Troy to take
Let down your garments from your shoulders bare.
And suffer not your clamour so to slake.
Your naked breasts wait for your hands to smight
Now dolor deep now sorrow show thy might:
Make all the coasts that compass Troy about
Witness the souude of all your careful cry
Cause from the Caves the echo to cast out:
Rebounding voice of all your misery:
Not as she wontes, the latter word to sound
But all your woe from far let it rebound
Let al the Seas it hear, and eke the land
Spare not your breasts with heavy stroke to strike
Beat ye your selves, each one with cruel hand
For yet your vvonted cry doth me not like
We bevvayle Hector.

Our naked arms, thus here we rent for thee,
And bloody shoulders, (Hector) thus we tear:
Thus with our fistes, our heads lo beaten be
And all for thee, behold we hale our hear.
Our dugs alas, with mothers hands be torn
And where the flesh is wounded round about
Which for thy sake, we rent thy death to morn
The flovving streams of blood, they spring thereout.
Thy countres shore, and destinies delay.
And thou to wearied Troians wast an aid,
A vvall thou wast, and on thy shoulders Troy
Ten years it stood, on thee alone it staide,
With thee it fell: and fatal day alas
Of Hector both, and Troy but one there was.

Enough hath Hector: turn yonr plaint and moan
And shed your tears for Pryame every chone.

Receive our plaints, O lord of Phrigian land
And old tvvise captive king, receive our fear,
While thou vvert king. Troy hurtles then could stand
Though shaken tvvise, with Grecian sword it wear,
And twice did shot of Hercles quiver bear,
At latter loss of Hecubes sons all
And roges for kings, that hgih on piles we rear:
Thou father shut stour latest funeral.
And beaten down, to Jove for sacrifies.
Like liveless block, in Troy thy carcass lies.

Yet turn ye once your tears, another way,
My pryams death, should not lamented be.
O Troyans all, full happy is Pryame say.
For free from bondage, down descended he,
To the lowest Ghost: and never shall sustain
His Captive neck with Greekes to yoked be.
He never shall behold the Atrids twain
Nor false Vlisses ever shall he see*
Not he a pray for Greekes to triumph at
His neck shall subject to their conquests bear
No give his hands to tie behind his back,
That to the rule of Scepters wonted wear,
Nor following Agamemnons chare, in band
Shall he be pomp, to proud Mycenas land.

Full happy Pryame is, each one we say
That toke with him his Kingdom then that stood
Now safe in shade, he seeks the wandering way,
And treads the paths of all Elizius wood,
And in the blessed Sprightes, full happy he,
Again there seeks to meet with Hectors Ghost.
Happy Pryam, happy whosoever may see,
His Kingdom all, at once with him be lost.

O Ye to whom the Lord of Land and Seas,
Of Life and Death hath granted here the power
Lay down your lofty looks, your pride appease
The crovvned King flees not his fatal howre.
Who so thou be that leadst thy land alone,
Thy life was limit from thy mothers vvombe,
Not purple robe, not Glorious glittering throne,
No crovvne of Gold redeemes thee from the tomb:
A King he was that weighting for the veil,
Of him that slew the Minotaure in fight:
Begilde with blacknes of the wonted sail
In seas him sonke, and of his name they hight.
So he that wild, to win the golden spoil
And first with ship, by seas to seek renovvne,
In lesser vvaue, at length to death began boyle,
And thus the daughters, brought their father down:
Whose s^nges, the vvoodes hath dravven, and rivers held,
And birds to hear his notes, did theirs forsake,
In piece meal thrown, amid the Thracian field,
Without return hath sought the Stigian lake.
They sit above that hold our life in line*
And what we suffer down they fling from hie,
No cark, no care, that ever may untwine
The thirds, that vvoued are above the sky,
As vvitnes he that sometime King of Greece,
Had Iason thought, in drenching seas to drovvne
Who escaped both death and gained the Golden fleece,
Whom fates advance, there may no povvre pluck down
The highest God somety me that Saturne hight
His fall him taught to credit their decrees
The rule of heavens: he lost it by their might,
And Jove his son now turns the rolling Skies.
Who vveneth here to win eternal vvelth,
Let him behold this present perfect proof.
And learn. the secrete stop of chances stelth,
Most ne'er alas, when most it seems aloof.
In slipper joy let no man put his trust:
Let none despair that heavy haps hath past
The sweet with sovvre she mingles as she lust
Whose doubtful web pretends nought to last.
Frailty is the thride, that Clothoes rock hath sponne,
Now from the Distaff drawn now knapt in tvvaine
With all the world at length his end he won,
Whose works have wrought, his name should great remain
And he whose travels twelve, his name display,
That feared nought the force of worldly hurt,
In fine (alas) hath found his fatal day,
And died with smart of Dianyraes shirt,
If prowes might eternity procure,
Then Priam yet should live in liking lust,
Ay portly pomp of pride thou art unsure,
Lo learn by him. O Kings ye are but dust.
And Hecuba that wayleth now in care,
That was so late of high estate a Queen,
A mirror is to teach you what you are
Your wavering wealth, O Princes here is seen.
Whom dawn of day hath seen in high estate
Before Suns set; (alas) hath had his fall
The Cradels rock, appoyntes the life his date
From settled joy, to sudden funeral.
The Spright of Achilles added to the tragedy by the Translator.

FOrsaking now the places tenebrouse,
And deep dens of thinfernall region
From all the shadows of illusious
That wader there the paths full many one
Lo, here am I returned al alone,
The same Achil whose fierce and heavy hand
Of al the world no wight might yet withstand.
What man so stout of al the Grecians host,
That hath not sometime craved Achilles aide,
And in the Troyans, who of prowes most
That hath not feared to see my Banner splaide
Achilles lo, hath made them all afraid.
And in the Greekes hath been a pillar post,
That stvrdy stood against their Troyan host.
Where I have lacked the Grecians went to wrack,
Troy proved hath what Achills sword could do
Where I have come the Troyans fled a back,
Retiring fast from field their walls unto,
No man that might Achilles stroke fordoe
I dealt such stripes amid the Trojan route,
That with their blood I stained the fields about.
Mighty Memnon that with his Persian band,
Would Pryams part with all might maintain,
Lo now he lies and knows Achilles hand
Amid the field is Troylus also slain.
Ye Hector great, whom Troy accounted plain
The flower of chivalry that might be found,
All of Achilles had their mortal wound.
But Paris lo, such was his false deceit,
Pretending marriage of Polixeine,
Behind the alter lay for me in wait
Where I unawares have fallen into the train
And in Appolloes church he hath me slain
Whereof the Hell will now just vengeance have,
And here again, I come my right to crave.
The deep Auerne my rage may not sustain,
Nor bear the angers of Achilles spright
From Acheront I rent the spoil in twain,
And though the ground I grate again to sight:
Hell could not hide Achilles from the light,
Vengeance and blood doth Orcus pit require,
To quench the furies of Achilles ire.
The hateful land, that worse then Tartare is
And burning thrust excedes of Tantalus,
I here behold again, and Troy is this
O, travel worse, then stone of Sisyphus
And pains that pass the pangs of Tityus
To light more loathsome fury hath me sent
Then hooked wheel, that Ixions flesh doth rent.
Remembered is allow where sprites do dwell
The wicked slaughter'wrought by wyly way*
Not yet revenged hath the deepest hell,
Achilles blood on them that did him slay
But now of vengeance come the ireful day
And darkest dens of Tartare from beneath
Conspire the fautes, of them that wrought my death.
Now mischief, murder, wrath of hell draws ne'er
And dire Phlegethon flood doth blood require
Achilles death shall he revenged here
With slaughter such as Stygian lakes desire
Her daughters blood shall slake the spirits ire,
Whose sonue we slew, whereof doth yet remain,
The wrath beneath, and hell shall be their payne.
From burning lakes the furies wrath I threat,
And fire that nought but streams of blood may slake
The rage of wind and seas their ships shall beat,
And Ditis deep on you shall vengeance take,
The spirits cry out, the earth and seas do quake
The poole of Styx, ungrateful Greekes it seath,
With slaughtered blood revenge Achilles death.
The soil doth shake to bear my heavy foot
And fearth again the sceptors of my hand,
The pooles with stroke of thunderclap ring out,
The doubtful stars amid their course do stand,
And fearful Phoebus hides his blazing brand
The trembling lakes against their course do flite,
For dread and terror of Achilles spright.
Great is the ransom ought of due to me,
Wherewith ye must the sprightes and hell appease,
Polyxena shall sacrifysed be,
Upon my tomb, their yreful wrath to please,
And with her blood ye shall assuage the seas
Your ships may not return to Greece again
Till on my tomb Polyxena be slain.
And for that she should then have been my wife,
I will that Pyrrhus render her to me,
And in such solemn sort bereave her life,
As ye are wont the weddings for to see,
So shall the wrath of Hell appeased be,
Nought else but this may satisfy our ire,
Her will I have and her I you require.
ALas how long the lingering Gre^kes in haven do make delay,
When either war by seas they seek or home to pass their way.
Why, show what cause doth hold your ships? and Grecian navy stays,
Declare if any of the Gods have stopped your homeward ways.

My mind is mai'd, my trembling sin was quake and are afraid,
For stranger news of truth then these
I think were never heard.
Lo I my self have plainly seen in dawning of the day,
When Phoebus first began to approach and drive the stars away.
The earth all shaken suddenly and from the hollow grownde:
My thought I hard with roaring cry a deep and dreadful sound:
That shoke the woods, and al the trees ^ong out with thunder stroke,
From Ida hills down fell the st^kes, the mountain ^oppes were broke.
And not the earth hath only quaked, but all the Sea likewyse*
Achilles presence felt and knew, and high the surges rise.
The cloven ground Erebus pits then showed and deepest dens,
That down to Gods that guide beneath, the way appeared from hence.
Then shoke the tomb from whence anon in flame of fiery light,
Appears from the hollow ca^es Achilles noble spright.
As wonted he his Thracian arms and bannars to disploy
And wield his weighty weapons well against thassaultes of Troy,
The same Achilles seemed he than that he was wont to be
Amid the hostess and eas^y could I know that this was he.
With carcass slain in furious fight, that stopped and filled each floude.
And who with slaughter of his hand made Xanthus r^ne with blood,
As when in Chariot high he sate with lofty stomach stout.
While Hector both and Troy at once he drew the walls about.
Aloud he cried, and every coast rang with Achilles sound,
And thus with hollow voice he spake, from bottom of the ground.
The Greekes shall not with little price redeem Achilles ire,
A princely ransom must they give, for so the fates require
Unto my ashes Polyxene spoused shall here be slain
By Pyrrhus hand, and al my tomb her blood shall ouerstayne.
This said, he straight sank down again to Plutoes deep region,
The earth then cloasd, the hollow caves were vanished and gon
Therewith the whether waxed clear, the raging wyndes did slake,
The tombling seas began to rest and al the tempest brake.

WHat time our sails we should have spread,
upon Sygeon Seas,
With swift return from long delay,
to seek our homeward ways.
Achilles rose whose only hand,
hath given Greekes the spoil.
Of Troia sore annoyed by him,
and leveled with the soil,
With speed requiting his abode
and former long delay*
At Scyros yle, and Lesbos both amid the Aegaeon sea.
Till he came here in doubt it stood of fall or sure estate,
Then though ye hast to grant his will ye shall it give to late.
Now have the other captains all the price of their manhood,
What else reward for his prewesse then her al only blood?
A^e his deserts think you but light, that when he might have fled,
And passing Pelyus years in peace, a quiet life have led,
Detected yet his mothers crafts, forsook his woman's weed,
And with his weapons proved himself a manly man indeed:
The King of Mysya, Telephus that would the Greekes withstand,
Coming to Troy, forbidding us the passage of his land:
To late repenting to have felt. Achilles heavy stroke
Was glad to crave his health again where he his hurt had took
For when his sore might not be salud as told Appollo plain.
Except the spear that gave the hurt, restoared help again.
Achilles plasters cured his cuts, and saved the King alive:
His hand both might and mercy knew te slay and then reuyne.
When Thebes fell. Eetion saw it and might it not withstand,
The captive King could nought redress the ruin of his land.
Lyrnesus little likewyse felt his hand and down it fill,
With ruin overturned like from top of haughty hill.
And taken Bryseps land it is and prisoner is she caught
The cause of strife between the Kings is Chryses come to nought.
Tenedos yle well known by fame and fertile soil he took
That fostreth fat the Thracian flocks and sacred Cilla shook
What boots to blase the brute of him whom trump of fame doth show,
Through all the coasts where Caicus flood with swelling stream doth flow?
The ruthful ruin of these realms so many towns bet down,
Another man would glory count and worthy great renown.
But thus my father made his way and these his journeys are,
And battayles many one he fought whylewarre he doth prepare.
As wished I may his merits more shall yet not this remain.
Well known and counted praise enough that he hath Hector slain
During whose life the Grecians al might never take the town,
My father only vanquist Troy, and you have pluct it down.
Rejoice I may your parents praise and brute abroad his acts,
It seems the son to follow well his noble fathers factts,
In sight of Priam Hector slain, and. Memnon both they lay.
With heavy theere his parents wayld to moutne his dying day.
Himself abhord his handy work in fight that had them slain,
The Sons of Gods Achilles knew were borne to die again
The woman queen of Amazons that greu'd the Greekes full sore.
Is turned to flight then ceased our fear we dread their bows no more.
It ye well weigh his worthynes Achilles ought to have
Though he from Argos or Mycenas would a Virgin crave,
Doubt ye herein? allow ye not that straight his will be done.
And count ye cruel Pryams blood to give to Peleus son?
For Helen sake your own childes blood appeasd Dianas ire
A wonted thing and done ere this it is that I require.
The only fault of youth it is not to refrain his rage
The Fathers blood already sturres in Pryams wanton age:
Sometime Achilles grievous checks I bare with patient hart,
The more thou may the more thou oughtst to suffer in good part
Where would ye with slaughtered blood a noble spirit stain?
Think what is meet the Greekes to do, and Troyans to sustain.
The proud estate of tyranny may never long endure.
The King that rules with modest mean of safety may be sure.
The higher step of princely state that fortune hath us signed
The more behou'th a happy man humility of mind
And bread the change that chance may bring, whose gifts so soon be lost
And chiefly then to fear the Gods, while they the favour most.
In beating down that war hath won, by proof I have ben taught,
What pomp and pride in twinke of eye, may fall and come to nought.
Troy made me fierce proud of mind, Troy makes me frayd withal.
The Greeks now stand where Troy late fell, each thing may have his fall.
Sometime I grant I did my self, and Sceptors proudly bear,
The thing that might advance my hart makes me the more to fear
Thou Priam perfect proof presentst thou art to me eftsoon:
A cause of pride, a glass of fear a mirror for the nones,
Should I account the sceptors ought, but glorious vanity
Much like the borrowed brayded hair, the face to beautify.
One sudden chance may turn to nought, and mayme the might of men
With fewer then a thousand ships, and years in less then ten.
Not she that guydes the slipper wheel of fate, doth so delay:
That she to al possession grants, of ten years settled stay.
With leave of Greece I will confess, I would have won the town
But not with ruin thus extreme to see it beaten down.
But lo the battle made by night and rage of fervent mind,
Could not abide the brydling bit that reason had assignd.
The happy sword once slaind with blood unsatiable is,
And in the dark the seruent rage doth strike thee more amiss.
Now are we wreaked on Troy so much let all that may remain.
A Virgin borne of Princes blood for offering to be slain
And given be to slain the tomb and ashes of the ded,
And under name of wedlock see the guiltles blood be shed,
I will not grant for mine should be thereof both fault and blame.
Who when he may, forbids not offence: doth will the same.

And shall his sprights have no reward their angers to appeyse?

Yes very great, for all the world shall celebrate his praise,
And lands unknown that never saw, the man so praysd by fame,
Shall heate and keep for many years the glory of his name.
If bloodshed veil his ashes ought strike of an Oxes head,
And let no blood that may be cause of mothers tears, be shed.
What furious fransy may this be that doth your will so lead,
This earnest careful sutte to make in travail for the dead?
Let not such envy toward your father in your heart remain,
That for his sacrifice ye would procure an others payne,

Proud tyrant, while prosperity thy stomach doth advance,
And cowardly wretch that shrinks for fear in case of fearful chance.
Is yet again thy breast enflamde, with brand of Venus might?
Wilt thou alone so oft deprive Achilles of his right?
This hand shall give the sacrifice, the which if thou withstand.
A greater slaughter shall I make, and worthy Pyrrhus hand.
And now to long from Princes slaughter doth my hand abide,
And meet it were that Polyxene were laid by Priams side.

I not deny, but Pyrrhus chief renown, in war is this,
That Pryam slain with cruel sword, to your father humbled is.

My fathers foes we have them known, submit themselves humbly,
And Pryam presently ye wot, was glad to crave mercy.
But thou for fear not stout to rule, lie close from foes up shit:
Whil thou to Aiax, and Vlysses, dost thy will commit.

But needs I must, and will confess, your father did not fear:
When burnt our fleet with Hectors brands, Greeks they slaughtered wear.
While loitering then a aloof he lay, unmindful of the fight.
In steed of arms with scratch of quill, his sounding harp to smight.

Great Hector then despising thee, Achilles songs did fear:
And Thessale ships in greatest dread, in quiet peace yet wear.

For why aloof the Thessale fleet, they lay from Troyans hands,
And well your father might have rest, he felt not Hectors brands.

Well seems a noble king to give an other king relief.

Why hast thou then a worthy king berieued of his life?

A poinct of mercy sometime is, what lives in care to kill.

But now your mercy moves you a virgins death to will.

Account ye cruel now her death whose sacrifice I crave.
Your own dear daughter once ye know, your self to th'aulters gave.

Nought else could save the Greekes fro seas, but th'only blood of her:
A king before his children ought, his country to prefer.

The law doth spare no captives blood nor wil'th their death to stay

That which the law doth not forbid, yet shame doth oft say nay.

The conqueror what thing he list, may lawfully fulfil.

So much the less he ought to list, that may do what he will.

Thus boast ye these as though in all ye only bare the stroke
When Pyrrhus loosed hath the greekes, from bond of ten years yoke.

Hath Scyros yle such stomaks bred?

No bretherns wrath it knows.

Beset about it is with wave.

The seas it do enclose.
Thyestes noble stock I know and A^reus eke full well,
And of the bretherns dire debate, perpetual fame doth tell.

And thou a bestard of a may de, deflowered privily.
Whom (then a boy) Achilles gat, in filthy lecherr.

The same A chill that doth possess, the reign of Gods above,
With Therys seas: with Aeacus sprights, the starred heaven with Jove

The same Achilles that was slain, by stroke of Par^s hand.

The same Achilles, whom no god, durst ever yet withstand.

The stoutest man I rather would his checks he should refrain
I could them tame but all your brags, I can full well sustain.
For even the captives spares my sword: let Calchas called be.
If destyntes require her blood, I will thereto agree
Calchas whose counsel ruled our ships, and navy hither brought,
Vnlookst the poale and hast by art the secretes thereof sought,
To whom the bowels of the beast, to whom the thunder clap,
And blasyng star with flaming train, betokens what shall hap.
Whose words with dearest price I bought, now tell us by what mean
The will of Gods agrees that we return to Greece again.

The fates apoint the Greeks to buy their ways with wonted price.
And with what cost ye came to Troy, ye shall repair to Greece
With blood ye came, with blood ye must from hence return again,
And where Achilles ashes lies, the virgin shall be slain,
In seemly sort of habit, such as maidens wont ye see,
Of Thessalie, or Mycenas else, what time they wedded be.
With Pyrrhus hand she shall be slain, of right it shall be so
And meet it is that he the son, his fathers right should do.
But not this only stays our ships, our sails may not be spread,
Before a worthier blood then thine, (Polixena) be shed,
Which thirst thirst the fates, for Praimes nephew. Hectors little boy:
The Erekes shall tumble hedlonge down, from highest tower in Troy.
Let him there die, this only way ye shall the gods appease,
Then spread your thousand sails with joy ye need not fear the seas.

MAy this be true, or doth the Fable fain,
When corps is dead the Sprite to live as yet?
When Death our eyes with heavy hand doth strain,
And fatal day our leames of light hath shet,
And in the Tomb our ashes once be set,
Hath not the soul likewyse his funeral,
But still (alas) do wretches live in thrall?
Or else doth all at once together die?
And may no part his fatal howre delay.
But with the breath the soul from hence doth fly?
And eke the Clouds to vanish quite away,
As danky shade flees from the poale by day?
And may no jot escape from destiny,
When once the brand hath burned the body?
What ever then the rise of Sun may see,
And what the West that sets the Sun doth know.
In all Neptunus raygne what ever be,
That restless Seas do wash and overflow,
With purple waives still tombling to and fro.
Age shall consume: each thing that liuth shall die,
With swifter race then Pegasus doth fly.
And with what whirl, the twyse six signs do fly,
With course as svvift as rector of the Spheres,
Doth guide those glistering Globes eternally.
And Hecate her changed horns repeares,
So drauth on death, and life of each thing vveares,
And never may the man, return to sight,
That once hath felt the stroke of Parcas might.
For as the fume that from the fire doth pass,
With turn of hand doth vanish out of sight
And swifter then the Northern Boreas
With whirling blast and storm of raging might,
Driuth far away and puts the clouds to flight,
So flees the sprighte that rules our life away,
And nothing tarries after dying day.
Swift is the race we run, at hand the mark
Lay down your hope, that wait here ought to win,
And who dreads ought, cast of thy careful cark:
Wilt thou it wot what state thou shalt be in,
When dead thou art as thou had never bin.
For greedy time it doth devour us all,
The world it sways to Chaos heap to fall.
Death hurts the Corpse and spares not the spright,
And as for all the dens of Taenare deeepe.
With Cerberus kingdom dark that knows no light,
And streightest gates, that he there sits to keep,
They Fancies are that follow folk by sleep
Such rumours vain, but feigned lies they are,
And fables like the dreams in heavy care.
O dreadful day, alas, the sorry time*
Is come of al the mothers ruthful woe,
Astianax (alas) thy fatal line
Of life is worn, to death straight shalt thou go,
The sisters have decreed it should be so,
There may no force (alas) escape there hand,
There mighty love their will may not withstand,
To se the mother, her tender child forsake,
What gentle hart that may from tears refrain
Or whosoever fierce that would no pity take,
To see (alas) this guiltles infant slain,
For sorry hart the tears mine eyes do stain
To think what sorrow shall her hart oppress,
Her little child to leese remediless,
The double cares of Hectors wife to whale,
Good Ladies have your tears in readiness.
And you with whom should pity most prevail.
Rue on her grief: bewail her heaviness.
With sobbing hart, lament her deep distress,
When she with tears shall take leave of her son,
And now (good Ladies) hear what shall be done.
ALas ye careful company
why hale ye thus your hairs?
Why beat you so your boiling breasts
and stain your eyes with tear?
The fall of Troy is new to you
but unto me not so,
I have foreseen this careful case
ere this time long ago
When fierce Achilles Hector slew and drew the Corpse about
Then then me thought I wist it well, that Troy should come to nought
In sorrows sonke I senseless am and wrapped (alas) in woe,
But soon except this babe me held, to Hector would I go
This seely fool my stomach tames amid my misery,
And in the howre of heaviest haps permittes me not to die,
This only cause constraynes me yet the gods for him to pray
With tract of time prolonges my payne, delays my dying day:
He takes from me the lack of fear the only fruit of ill.
For while he lives yet have I left whereof to fear me still.
No place is left for better chance with worst we are oppressed
To fear (alas) and see no hope is worst of all the rest.
What sudden fear thus moves your mind, vexes you so sore?

Still still (alas) of one mishap there rises more and more,
Nor yet the doleful destinies of Troy be come to end.

And what more grievous chances yet prepare the Gods to send?

The caves and dens of hell be rent for Troyans greater fear
And from the bottoms of their tombs the hidden sprightes appear.
May none but Greekes alone from hell return to life again?
Would God the fates would finish soon the sorrows I sustain.
Death thankful were, a common care the Troyans all oppress,
But me (alas) amaseth most the fearful heaviness.
That all astonished am for dread, and horror of the sight:
That in my sleep appeared to me by dream this latter night.

Declare what sights your dream hath showed, tell what doth you fear

Two parts of al the silent night almost then passed were.
And then the clear seven clustered beams of stars: were fall to rest
And first the sleep so long unknown my wearied eyes oppressed.
If this be sleep the astonished ma^e of mind in heavy mood,
When suddenly before mine eyes the spright of Hector stood.
Not like as he the Greekes was wont to battle to require:
Or when amid the Grecians ships, he threw the brands of fire.
Nor such as raging on the Grees, with slaughtering stroke had slain
And bare indeed the spoils of him that did Achilles fain.
His countenance not now so bright, nor of so lively cheer,
But sad and heavy like to owres and clad with ugly hair
It did me good to see him though when shaking then his head:
Shake of thy sleep in hast he said, and quickly leave thy bed:
Convey into some secrete place our son (O faithful wife)
This only hope there is to help find mean to save his life.
Leave of thy piteous tears he said, dost thou yet whale for Troy?
Would God it lay on Ground full flat so ye might save the boy.
Up stir he said thy self in hast convey him privily.
Save if ye may the tender blood of Hectors progeny
Then straight in trembling fear I waked and told mine eyes about
Forgetting long my child pore wretch, and after Hector sought.
But straight (alas) I wist not how the Spright away did pass,
And me forsook before I could my husband once embrasse.
O child, O noble fathers brood and Troians only joy,
O worthy seed of thauncient blood, and beaten house of Troy.
O image of thy father lo, thou lively bear his face,
This countnaunce lo my Hector had, and even such was his pace.
The pitch of all his body such, his hands thus would he bear.
His shoulders high his threatening brows* even such as thine they were
O son: begot to late for Troy, but borne to soon for me,
Shall ever time yet come again, and happy day may be,
That thou may once revenge and build again the towers of Troy,
And to the town and Troyans both restore their name with joy?
But why do I (forgetting state of present destiny),
So great things wish? enough for captives is to live only:
Alas what privy place is left my little child to hide?
What seat so secret may be found where thou may safely bide?
The tower that with the walls of go^s so valiant was of might,
Through all the world so notable, so flourishing to sight,
Is turned to dust: and fire hath al consumd'e that was in Troy,
Of all the town not so much now is left to hide the boy.
What place were best to choose for guile, the holy tomb is here,
That then mies sword will spare to spoil where since my husband dear.
Which costly work his father built, king Pryame liberal:
And it up raised with charges great, fo Hectors funeral.
Herein the bones and ashes both of Hector (lo) they lie,
Best is that I commit the son to his fathers custody.
A cold and fearful sweat doth run, through o^t my members all,
Alas I careful wretch do fear, what chance may thee befall,

Hide him away: this only way hath saved many more,
To make the enmies to believe, that they were dead before.
He will be sought: scant any hope remains of safenes,
The paise of his nobility doth him so sore oppres:

What way were best to work: that none our doings might bewray

Let none bear witness what ye do remove them all away.

What if the enmies ask me: where Astianax both remain?

Then shall y^ boldly answer make that he in Troy was slain.

What shall it help to have him hid? at length they will him find.

At first the enmies rage is fierce, delay doth slake his mind.

But what prevails, since free from fear we may him never hide?

Let yet the wretch take his defence, me careless there to bide.

What land unknown out of the way what unfrequented place
May keep thee safe? who aids our fear? who shall defend our case?
Hector, Hector that evermore thy friends did well defend
Now chiefly aid thy wife and child and us some succour send.
Take charge to keep and cover close the treasures of thy wife,
And in thy Ashes hyde thy son preserve in tomb his life.
Draw near my Child unto the Tomb, why fliest thou backward so?
Thou takst great scorn to lurk in dens thy noble hart I know.
I see thou art ashamed to fear shake of thy princely mind,
And bear thy breast as thee behooves as chance hath thee assynd.
Behold our case: and se what flock remains now of Troy
The tomb: I woeful captive wretch and thou a seely boy,
But yield we must to sorry fates thy chance must break thy breast,
Go to, creep underneath thy fathers holy seats to rest.
If ought the fates may wretches help thou hast thy safeguard there,
If not: already then pore fool thou hast thy sepulchere.

The tomb him closely hides: but least your fear should him betray
Let him here lie and far from hence go ye some other way.

The less he fears that fears at hand, and yet if need be so,
If ye think meet a little hence for safety let us go.

A little while keep silence now refrain your plaint and cry,
His cursed foot now hither moves the Lord of Cephalie.

Now open earth, and thou my spouse fro Styx rend up y^ ground,
Deep in thy bosom hyde thy son that he may not be found.
Vlysses comes with doubtful pace and changed countenance
He knittes in hart decetptful craft for some more grievous chance.

Though I be made the messenger of heavy news to you,
This one thing first I shall desire that ye take this for true.
That though the words come from my mouth, and I my message tell
Of truth yet are they none of mine ye may believe me well.
It is the word of al the Greekes, and they the authors be,
Whom Hectors blood doth yet forbid their countries for to see.
Our careful trust of peace unsure doth still the Greekes detain,
And evermore our doubtful fear yet drawth us back again.
And suffers not our wearied hands, our weapons to forsake,
In child yet of Andromacha, while Troyans comfort take.

And saith your Augur Calchas so?

Though Calchas nothing said
Yet Hector tells it us himself, of whose seed are we frayed.
The worthy blood of noble men oft times we se it plain,
Doth after in their heirs succeed and quickly springes again.
For so the hornles youngling yet, of high and sturdy b^ste,
With lofty neck and branched brow, doth shortly rule the rest.
The tender twig that of the lopped stock doth yet remain,
To match the tree that bare the bough, in time startes up again
With equal top to former wood the room it doth supply,
And spreads on soil allow the shade, to heaven his branches hye.
Thus of one spark by chance yet left it happens so full oft.
The fire hath quickly caught his force and flamth again aloft.
So scare we yet least Hectors blood might rise er it be long,
Fear castes in all thextremity and oft interprets wrong.
If ye respect our case ye may not blame these old soldiars
Though after years and months twice flue, they fear again the wars.
And other travails dreading Troy, not yet to be well won,
A great thing doth the Grecyans move, the fear of Hectors son.
Rid us of fear, this stays our fleet, and plucks us back again,
And in the haven our navy sticks, till Hectors blood be slain.
Count me not feerce for that by fates I Hectors son require,
For I as well if chance it would Orestes should desire.
But since that needs it must be so, bear it with patient hart:
And Suffer that which Agamemnon suffered in good part.

Alas my child would God thou were yet in thy mothers hand.
And that I knew what destentes thee held or in what land.
For never should the mothers faith her tender child forsake:
Though through my breast the enmies al, their cruel weapons struck.
Nor though the Greekes with pinching bands of iron my hands had bound,
Or else in fervent flame of fire beset my body round.
But now my little Child (pore wretch alas) where might he be?
Alas, what cruel destiny what chance hath hapt to thee?
Art thou yet ranging in the fields and wander there abroad?
Or smothered else in dusty smoke of Troy: or ouertroad?
Or have the Greekes thee slain (alas) and laughed to see thy blood?
Or torn art thou with jaws of beasts? or cast to fowls for food?

Dissemble not, hard is for thee Vlisses to deceive,
I can full well the mothers crafts and subtilty perceive.
The pollecy of Goddesses Vlisses hath undone.
Set al these feigned words assyde, tel me where is thy son?

Where is Hector? where al the rest that had with Troy their fall
Where Priamus? you ask for one but I require of all.

Thou shalt constrained be to tell the thing thou dost deny.

A happy chance were Death to her that doth desire to dye.

Who most destres to die, would feign live when death drawth on,
These noble words with present fear of death would soon be gone.

Vlisses if ye will constrain Andromacha with fear,
Threaten my life for now to dye my chief desire it were.

With stripes with fire tormenting death we will the truth out wrest
And dolor shall thee force to tel the secrets of thy breast.
And what thy hart hath depest hid for payne thou shalt express,
Oft times thextremity preuayles much more then gentleness,

Set me in midst of burning flame with wounds my body rent,
Use al the means of cruelty that ye may al invent.
Prove me with thirst and hunger both, and every torment try,
Pearce through my sides with burning irons in prison let me lie.
Spare not the worst ye can deuyse (if ought be worse then this)
Yet never get ye more of me. I wot not where he is.

It is but vain to hyde the thing that straight ye will deteckt
No fears may move the mothers hart, she doth them al neglect.
This tender love ye bear your child, wherein ye stand so stout,
So much more circumspectly warnth, the Greekes to look about.
Least after ten years tract of time and battle borne so far,
Some one should live that on our children might renew the war,
As for my self, what Calchas saith, I would not fear at all
But on Telemachus I dread, the smart of wars would fall

Now will I make Vlisses glad and all the Greekes also,
Needs must thou woeful wretch confess declare thy hidden woe.
Rejoice ye sons of Atreus there is no cause of dread.
Be glad Vlisses tell the Greekes that Hectors son is dead.

By what assurance proves thou that? how shall we credit thee:

What ever thing the enmies hand may th^ea ^en hap to me
Let speedy fates me slay forthwith, and earth me hyde at ones
And after death from tomb again, remove ye: Hectors bones,
Except my son already now, do rest among the dead.
And that except Astianax into his tomb be led.

Then fully are the fates fulfild with Hectors childes disceace.
Now shall I bear the Grecians word, of sure and certain peace.
Vlisses why what dost thou now^ the Greekes will every chone,
Believe thy words, whom creditst thou? the mothers tale alone.
Think thou for safeguard of her child the mother will not lye?
And dread the more the worse mischance to give her son to die?
Her faith she byndes with bond of oath, the truth to verify,
What thing is more of weight to fear, then so to swear and lye?
Now call thy crafts together al, bestir thy wits and mind,
And show thy self Vlisses now, the truth herein to find.
Search well thy mothers mind: behold she weeps and wayleth out,
And here and there with doubtful pace, she ranges al about,
Her careful ears she doth apply to harken what I say,
More frayd she seems then sorrowful. Now work some wily way.
For now most need of wit there is and crafty pollecy,
Yet on^e again by other means I will the mother try.
Thou wretched woman may rejoice, that dead he is: (alas)
More doleful death by destiny for him decreed there was.
From Turrets top to have been cast and cruelly been slain.
Which only tower of all the rest doth yet in Troy remain.

My spright failth me, my limbs do quake, fear doth my wits cofounde
And as the Ise congeals with frost, my blood with could is bound.

She trebleth lo: this way, this way I will the truth out wreaste,
The mothers fear detecteth all the secrets of her breast:
I will renew her fear go sirs bestir ye speedily
To seek this enemy of the Greekes where ever that he lie.
Well done he will be found at length, go to still seek him out,
Now shall he dye. what dost thou fear why dost thou look about?

Would God that any cause there were yet left that might me fray,
My hart at last now all is lost hath laid all fear away.

Sins that your child now hath ye say already suffered death,
And with his blood we may not purge the hostess as Caschas saith.
Our fleet pass not (as well inspired doth Calchas prophecy)
Till Hectors ashes cast abroad the waives may pacify.
And tomb be rent now sins the boy hath skapt his destiny.
Needs must we break this holy tomb where Hectors ashes lie.

What shall I do^y mind distracted is with double fear.
On the one my son, on tother side my husbands ashes dear,
Alas which part should move me most, the cruel Gods I call
To witness with me in the truth, and Ghosts that guide thee all
Hector that nothing in my son is else that pleases me.
But thou alone God grant him life he might resemble thee:
Shall Hectors ashes drowned bee^hide I such cruelty,
To see his bones cast in the Seas? yet let Astyanax die,
And can thou wretched mother bide, thine own childes death to see?
And suffer from the hie towers top that headlong thrown he be?
I can and will take in goad part, his death and cruel payne,
So that my Hector after death be not removed again.
The boy that life and senses hath may feel his payne and dye,
But Hector lo his death hath placed at rest in tomb to lie
What dost thou stay? determine which thou w^lt preserve of twain.
Art thou in doubt? save this: ^oe here thy Hector doth remain,
Both Hectors be, the one quick of spright drawing toward his strength
And one that may perhaps revenge his fathers death at length.
Alas I cannot save them both: I think that best it were,
That of the twain I saved him that doth the Grecians fear.

It shall be done that Calchas words to us doth prophecy,
And now shall all the sumptuous work be thrown down utterly

That once ye sold?

I will it all from top to bottom rend.

The faith of Gods I call upon Achilles us defend,
And Pyrrhus aid thy fathers right.

This tomb abroad shall lye:

O mischief, never durst the Greekes show yet such cruelty.
Ye strain the temples and the Gods that most have favoured you,
The dead ye spare not, on their tombs your fury rages now.
I will their weapons all resist my self with naked hand,
The ire of hart shall give me strength their armour to withstand.
As fierce as did the Amazons beat down the Greekes in fight,
And Menas once enspierd with God, in sacrifyce doth smyght,
With spear in hand, and while with furious pace she treads the ground
And wood as one in rage she strykes, and feels not the wound:
So will I run on midst of them and on their weapons dye,
And in defence of Hectors tomb among his ashes lie.

Cease ye: doth rage and fury vain of women move ye ought?
Dispatch with speed what I command, pluck down al to nought.

O slay me rather here with sword rid me out the way,
Break up the deep Auern, and rid my destinies delay.
Rise Hector and beset thy foes, break thou Vlisses ire,
A spright art good enough for him, behold he casts fire.
And weapon shakes with mighty hand do ye not Greekes him see?
Or else doth Hectors spright appear but only unto me

Down quite withal.

What wilt thou suffer both thy sons be slain,
And after death thy husbands bones to be removed again?
Perhaps thou may with prayer yet aprease the Grecians all.
Else down to ground the holy tomb of Hector, straight shall fall.
Let rather die the child pore wretch and let the Greekes him kill,
Then father and the son should cause the tone the others ill.
Vllisses, at thy knees I fall, and hm^bly ask mercy,
These hands that no mans feet else knew, first at thy feet they lye.
Take pity on the mothers case and sorrows of my breast,
Vochsafe my prayers to receive and grant me my request.
And by how much the more the Gods have thee advanced hie,
More easily stryke the pore estate of wretched misery.
God grant the chaste bed of thy godly wife Penelope,
May thee receive and so again Laerta may thee see,
And that thy son Telemachus may meet thee joyfully.
His graundstres y^ares, a^d fathers wit, to pass full happily.
Take ptty on the mothers tears, her little child to save,
He is my only comfort left, and th'onely to^ I have.

Bring forth thy son and ask.

COme hither child out of the dens to me,
Thy wretched mothers lamentable store,
This Babe Vlisses (lo) this Babe is he.
That stays your ships and fears you so sore.
Submit thy self my son with humble hand,
And worship flat on ground thy masters feet,
Think it no shame as now the case doth stand:
The thing that Fortune wilth a wretch is meet,
Forget thy worthy stock of Kingly kind,
Think not on Priams great nobility,
And put thy father Hector from thy mind,
Such as thy Fortune let thy stomach be,
Behave thy self as captive bend thy Knee,
And though thy grief pearce not thy tender years,
Yet learn to wa^le thy wretched state by me,
And take ensample at thy mothers tears.
Once Troy hath seen the weeping of a child,
When little Priam turned Alcides threats,
And he to whom all beasts in strength did yield,
That made his way from hell, and brake their gates
His little enmies tears yet overcame,
Priam he said receive thy liberty,
In seat of honour keep thy Kingly name,
But yet thy Sceptors rule more faithfully.
Lo such the conquest was of Hercules.
Of him yet learn your hearts to mollify,
Do only Hercles cruel weapons please,
And may no end be of your cruelty?
No less then Pryam, kneeles to thee this boy,
That lies and asks only life of thee.
As for the rule and governance of Troy
Where ever ^ortune will there let i^ be.
Take mercy on the mothers ruthful tears
That with their streams my cheeks do overflow,
And spare this guiltles insantes tender years
That humbly falls at thy feet so lowe.
OF truth the mothers great sorrow,
doth move my hart full sore.
But yet the mothers of the Greekes,
of need must move me more,
To whom t^ts boy may cause in time
a great calamtie.
May ever he the burnt ruins
of Troy reedify?
And shall these hands in time to come, ereckt the town again?
If this be th only help we have, there doth no hope remain
For Troy, we stand not now in case to cause your fear of mind,
Doth ought avail his fathers force, or stock of noble kind?
His fathers heart abated was, he drawn the walls abought.
Thus evil haps, the haughttest heart at lengh they bring to nought,
If ye will needs oppress a wretch what thing more grievous were
Then on his noble neck he should the yoke of bondage bear?
To serve in life doth any man this to a King deny?

Not Vlisses with his death, but Calchas prophecy.

O false inuentor of deceit and heinous cruelty,
By manhood of whose hand in war no man did ever dye.
But by disceipt and crafty train of mind that mischief seeks,
Before this time full many one dead is, yea of the Greekes,
The Prophets words and guilties Gods say thou my son require,
Nay: mischief of thy breast it is, thou dost his death desire.
Thou night soldier, and stout of hart a little child to stay.
This enterprise thou takste alone and that by open day.

Vlisses manhood well to Greekes to much to you is known,
I may not spend the time in words, our Navy will be gone

A little stay, while I my last farewell give to my child,
And have with oft embracing him my greedy sorrows filled.

Thy grievous sorrows to redress, would God it lay in me,
But at thy will to take delay of time I grant it thee.
Now take thy last leave of thy Son, and fill thy self with tears.
Oft times the weeping of the eyes, the inward grief out weakes.

O dear, O sweet, thy mothers pledge, farewell my only joy,
Farewell the flower of honour left of beaten hows of Troy.
O Troyans last calamity and fear to Grecians part
Farewell thy mothers only hope, and vain comfort of hart.
Oft wish I thee thy fathers strength and half thy graundstres years
But all for nought the Gods have all dispoynted our desires.
Thou never shalt in regal court thy sceptors take in hand,
Nor to thy people give decrees nor lead with law thy land.
Nor yet thine enmies overcome by might of handy stroke.
Nor send the conquered nations all under thy servile yoke.
Thou never shalt beat down in fight, and Greekes with sword pursew,
Nor at thy Chariot Pyrrhus pluck, as Achill Hector drew
And never shall these tender hands thy weapons wield and wrest,
Thou never shalt in woods pursue the wyld and mighty beast.
Nor as accustomed is by guise and sacrifice in Troy,
With measure swift: between the aulters shalt thou dance with joy.
O grievous kind of cruel death that doth remain for thee,
More woeful things then Hectors death the walls of Troy shall see.

Now break of al thy mothers tears I may no more time spend.
The grievous sorrows of thy hart will never make an end.

Vlisses spare as yet my tears and grant awhyle delay,
To close his eyes yet with my hands er he depart away.
Thou die but young: yet feared thou art thy Troy doth wait for thee,
Go noble hart thou shalt again the noble Troyans see.

Help me mother?

Alas my child why take thou hold by me?
In vain thou call where help none is I can not succour thee.
As when the little tender beast that hears the Lyon cry,
Straight for defence he seeks his damme, crouching down doth lye,
The cruel beast when once removed is the damme away,
In greedy ^aw with ravening bit doth snatch the tender pray
So straight the enmies will thee take, and from my side thee bear.
Receive my kiss and tears pore child, receive my rented hair.
Depart thou hence now full of me, and to thy father go,
Salute my Hector in my name and tel him of my woe
Complain thy mothers grief to him if former (...) may move,
The sprightes: and that in funeral flame they leese not all their love.
O cruel Hector suffrest thou thy wife to be oppressed?
With bond of Grecians heavy yoke and lie thou still at rest?
Achilles rose: take here again my tears and rented hear,
And (al that I have left to send) this kiss thy father bear.
Thy coat yet for my comfort leave, the tomb hath touched it
If of his ashes aught here lye I'll seek it every whit.

There is no measure of thy tears I may no longer stay,
Defer no further our return break of our ships delay.

O Jove that leadst the lamps of fire,
and deckst with flaming stars the sky.
Why is it ever thy desire
to care their course so orderly?
That now the frost the leaves hath vvorn^
now the sprig doth close the tree.
Now fiery Leo rypes the corn,
and still the soil should changed be?
But why art thou that all dost guide,
betvvene whose hands the poale doth svvay,
And at whose will the Orbs do slyde, careless of mans estate always?
Regarding not the goodmans case, nor caring how to hurt the ill.
Chance bears rule in every place and turns mans estate at will.
She geues the vvronge the upper hand the better part she doth oppress,
She makes the highest low to stand, her Kingdom all is orderlesse.
O parfite proof of her frailty, the princely tovvres of Troybeat down,
The flovvre of Asia here ye see with turn of hand quite ouerthrovvne.
The ruthful end of Hectors son, who to his death the Greekes have led,
His fatal hovvre is come and gone, and by this time the Child is ded:
Yet still (alas) more cares increase, O Troyans doleful destiny,
Fast doth approach the maids decease, and now Polixena shall die.
WHat ever woeful wedding yet,
were cause of funeral,
Of wailing, tears, blood, slaughter else
or other mischiefs all,
A worthy watch for Helena,
and meet for me it ware,
My wedding torch hath been the cause
of al The Troyans care.
I am constraynd to hurt them yet,
after their overthrow,
The false and feigned marriages of Pyrrhus must I show.
And give the maid the Greekes attire and by my pollecy:
Shall Paris sister be betrayed and by disceypt shall die.
But let her be beguiled thus, the less should be her payne
If that vnware without the fear of death: she might be slain.
What ceasest thou the will of Greekes, and message to fulfil?
Of hurt constraynd the fault returnth to th'auter of the ill.
O noble Virgin of the famous house and stock of Troy,
To thee the Grecians have me sent I bring thee news of joy,
The Gods rue on thy afflicted state more merciful they be,
A great and happy marriage lo, they have prepared for thee.
Thou never should if Troy had stood, so nobly wedded be,
Nor Priam never could prefer thee to so hie degree.
Whom flower of all the Grecians name the prince of honour hie,
That bears the Scepters over all, the land of Thessaly
Doth in the law of wedlock chose, and for his wise require.
To sacred rights of lawfu bed, doth Pyrrhus thee desire:
Lo Thetis great with al the rest, of Gods that guide by sea.
Each one shall thee account as theirs and toy by wedding day.
And Peleus shall thee daughter call when thou art Pirrhus wife,
And Nereus shall account thee his the space of all thy life.
Put of thy monrning garment now, this regal vesture wear
Fogret henceforth thy captive state and seemly broyd thy hair.
The fall hath lift thee higher up, and doth thee more advance
Oft to be taken in the war doth bring the better chance
This ill the Troyans never knew in all their griefs and payne
Before this time ye never made us to rejoice in vain.
Troy towers give light, O seemly time for marriage to be made,
Who would refuse the wedding day that Helayne doth persuade?
The Plague and ruin of each part behold dost thou not see,
These tombs of noble men, and how their bones here scattered be?
Thy brydebed hath been cause of this for thee all these be ded
For thee the blood of Asia both and Europe hath been shed.
When thou in joy and pleasure both the fighting folk from far,
Hast viewed: in doubt to whom to wish the glory of the war.
Go to, prepare the martages, what need the Torches light?
Behold the Towers of Troy do shine with brands that blase full bright.
O Troyans all set to your hands, this wedlock celebrate:
Lament this day with woeful cry and tears in seemly rate.

Though care do cause the want of wit, and reasons rule deny,
And heavy hap doth ofttymes hate his mates in misery
Yet I before most hateful judge dare well defend my part,
That I of all your grievous cares sustain the greatest smart.
Andromacha for Hector weeps, for Priam Hecuba,
For only Paris privily bewails Helena.
A hard and grievous thing it is captivity to bear,
In Troy that yoke I suffered long a prisoner whole ten year.
Turned are the fates, Troy beaten down, to Greece I must repeare,
The native country to have lost is ill, but worse to fear.
For dread thereof you need not care your evils all be past,
On me both parts will vengeance take al lights to me at last.
Whom each man prisoner takes God wot she stands in slipper stay,
And me not captive made by lot yet Paris led away.
I have been cause of all these wars, and then your woes were wrought,
When first your ships the Spartayn Seas land of Grecia sought.
But if the Goddess wild it so that I their pray should be,
And for reward to her beauties judge she had appointed me,
Then pardon Paris: think this thing in wrathful judge doth lie,
The sentence Menelaus geues, and he this case shall try.
Now turn thy plaints Andromacha, and weep for Polyxeyne
Mine eyes for sorrows of my hart their tears may not refrain.

Alas, what care makes Heleyn weep? what grief doth she lament?
Declare what crafts Vlisses castes, what mischief hath he sent?
Shall she from height of Idey hill be headlong tombled down?
Or else out of the turrets top in Troy shall she be thrown?
Or will they cast her from the clieues into Sygeon seas?
In bottom of the surging waives to end her ruthful days?
Show what thy countnaunce hides and tell the secrets of thy breast.
Some woes in Pyrhus wedding are far worse then all the rest.
Go to, give sentence on the maid, pronounce her destiny:
Delude no longer our mishaps, we are prepared to die.

Would God the'xpouder of the Gods would give his dome so right
That I also on point of sword might leese the loathsome light,
Or at Achilles tomb with ^ake of Pyrrhus hand be ^apne:
And bear a part of al thy fates O wretched Polixeyne.
Whom yet Achilles woes to wed, and where his ashes lie,
Requires that thy blood be shed, and at his tomb to die.

Behold lo how her noble mind of Death doth gladly hear,
She decks her self? her regal weed in seemly wise to wear,
And to her head she sets her hand the broyded hair to lay,
To wed she thought it Death, to die she thinks a wedding day
But help (alas) my mother sounds to hear her daughters death,
Arise pluck up your heart and take again the panting breath.
Alack good mother how slender stay, that doth thy life sustain?
A little thing shall happy thee thou art almost past payne.
Her breath returns: she doth reuyue, her limbs their life do take.
So see when wretches fain would die, how death doth them forsake.

Doth yet Achilles live (alas) to work the Troyans spite?
Doth he rebel against us yet? O hand of Paris light.
The very tomb and ashes lo* yet thirsts for our blood,
A happy heap of children late on every side me stood.
It wearied me to deal the mothers kiss among them al.
The rest are lost, and this alone now doth me mother call.
Thou only child of Hecuba, a comfort left to me.
A stayer of my sorry state and shall I now leese thee?
Depart O wretched soul, and from this careful carcass fly,
And ease me of such ruthful fates, to see my daughter die.
By weeping wets (alas) my eyes, and staines them over al,
And down my cheeks the sudden streams and showers af tears do fall.
But thou dear daughter may be glad, Cassandra would rejoice,
Or Hectors wife thus wed to be if they might have their choice.

We are the wretches Hecuba in cursed case we stand.
Whom straight the ship shall toss by seas into a foreign land.
But as for Heleyns grieves be gone and turned to the best,
She shall again her natyue country se and live at rest.

Ye would the more envy my state if ye might know your own,

And grouth there yet more grief to me that erst I have not known?

Such masters must ye serve as doth by chance of lots befall.

Whose seruaunt am I then become whom shall I master call?

By lot ye fall to Pyrhus hands you are his prisoner.

Cassandra is happy, fury saves perhaps and Phoebus her.

Chief king of Greekes Cassandra keeps and his captive is she.

Is any one among them all that prisoner would have me?

You chaunsed to Vlysses are his pray ye are become.

Alas what cruel* dire and ireful dealer of the dome.
What god unjust doth so divide, the captives to their lords?
What grievous arbiter is he? that to such choice accords,
What cruel hand to wretched folk, so evil fa^es hath caste?
Who hath among Achilles armour, Hectors mothers plaste?
Now am I captive, and beset with all calamity.
My bondage grieves me not, but him to serve it shames me.
He that Achilles spoils hath won, shall Hectors also have:
Shall barren land enclosed with seas receive my bones in grave?
Lead me Vlysses where thou will, lead me. I make no stay,
My master I, and me my fates, shall follow every way.
Let never calm come to the seas, but let them rage with wind,
Come fire and sword, mine own mischance and Priams let me find.
In mean time haps this deep distress my cares can know no calm:
I ran the race with Priamus, but he hath won the Palm,
But Pyrrhus comes with swiftned pace thretning brows doth wrest.
What stayste thou Pyrrhus? strike thy sword now through this woeful breast.
And both at ones the parents of thy fathers wife now slay,
Murderer of age, likes thee her blood? he draw my daughter away
Defile the gods and stain the sprights, of hell with slaughtered blood,
To ask your mercy what avails? our prayers do no good.
The vengeance ask I on your ships, that it the gods may pleas,
According to this sacrifice, to guide you on the seas.
This wish I to your thousand sails, Gods wrath light on them all,
Even to the ship that bears me, what ever may befall.

A Comfort is to mans calamity
A doleful flock of fellows in distress.
And sweet to him that mourns in misery
To here them whale whom sorrows like oppre^
In deepest care his grief him bites the les,
That his estate bewails not all alone,
But sees with him the tears of many one.
For still it is the chief delight in woe,
And joy of them that sonke in sorrows are,
To see like fates by fall to many more,
That may take part of all their woeful fare,
And not alone to be oppressed with care.
There is no wight of woe that doth complain,
When all the rest do like mischance sustain.
In all this world if happy man were none,
None (though he were) would think himself awretch.
Let once the rich with heaps of Gold be gone,
Whose hundred head his pastors ouerretch,
Then would the poor mans hart begin to stretch.
There is no wretch whose life him doth displease,
But in respect of those that live at ease.
Sweet is to him that stands in deep distress,
To see no man in joyful plight to be,
Whose only vessel wind and wave oppress,
Full sore his chance bewails and weeps he,
That with his own none others wrack doth see
When he alone makes shipwreck one the sand,
And naked falls to long desired land.
A thousand sail who sees to drench in Seas,
With better will the storm hath overpassed
His heavy hap doth him the less displease
When broken boardes abroad be many cast,
And shipwrecked ships to shore they flit full fast,
With doubled waives when stopped is the flood,
With heaps of them that there have lost their good.
Full sore did Pirrhus Helens loss complain,
What time the leader of his flock of sheep,
Upon his back alone he bare them twain,
And wet his Golden locks amid the deep,
In piteons plaint (alas) he began to weep.
The death of her it did him deep displease,
That shipwreck made amid the drenching seas.
And piteous was the plaint and heavy mood
Of woeful Pyrrha and eke Deucalion
That nought beheld about them but the flould,
When they of all mankynd were left alone
Amid the seas full sore they made their moan
To see themselves thus left alive in woe
When neither land they saw, nor fellows more.
Anon these plaints and Tro^ans tears shall quail,
And here and there the ship them toss by seas:
When trumpets sound shall warn to hoise up sail,
And through the waives with wind to seek their ways
Then shall these captives go to end their days
In land unknown: when once with hasty ore
The drenching deep they take and shun the shore.
What state of mind shall then in wretches be?
When shore shall sink from sight and seas arise?
When Idey hill to lurk aloof they see?
Then point with hand from far where Troia lies,
Shall child and mother: talking in this wise:
Lo yonder Troy, where smoke it fumes hie,
By this the Troyans shall their country spy.
ODyre, fierce, wretched, horrible,
O cruel fates accurste,
Of Mars his ten years bloodshed blows
the woefullest and the worst.
Alas which should I first bewail?
thy cares Andromacha?
Or else lament the wretched age
of woeful Hecuba?
What ever mans calamityes
ye whale for mine it is.
I bear the smart of al their woes each other feels but his
Who ever he, I am the wretch all haps to me at last.

Slain is the maid, and from the walls of Troy the child is cast.
But voth (as them became) they toke their death with stomach stout.

Declare the double slaughters then, tell the whole throughout.

One tower of all the rest ye know doth yet in Troy remain,
Where Pryan wonted was to sit, and view the armies twain.
His little Nephew eke with him to lead* and from a far,
His fathers fights with fire and sword to show on feats of war.
This tower, sometime well known by fame, and Troyans honour most.
Is now with captains of the Greeckes, beset on every coast.
With swift recourse and from the ships, in clustred heaps anon.
Both tag and rag they run to case what thing should there be done
Some clime the hills to seek a place where they might see it best,
Some one the rocks a tiptoe stand to ouerloke the rest.
Some on their reples wear the pine, some beech, some crowns of bay,
For garlands torn is every tree, that stands in they way,
Some from the highest mountains top aloof beholds all.
Some scale the buildings half thurne, and some the ruinous wall.
Yea some there were (O ^tichtee lo) that for the more despyghte.
The tomb of Hector sits upon beholders of the sight.
With princely pace Vlisses then past through the preased band
Of Greekes, King Priams little nephew leading by the hand.
The Child with vnrepyning gate past through his enmies hands,
Up toward the walls, and as anon in turrets top he stands,
From thence down his lofty looks he cast on every part,
The nearer death more free from care he seemd* and fear of hart.
Amid his foes his stomach swells. and fierce he was to sight.
Like Tygere whel^e, that th^rats in vain with tu les chap to bight.
Alas, for pi^y then each one, few on his tender years,
And al the route that present were, for him they fhed their tears,
Yea not Vlisses them restraynd, but trickling down they sal,
And only he, wept not (poor fool) whom they bewailed al.
But while on Gods Vlisses called, and Calchas* words expound,
In midst of Pryams land (alas) the child leapt down to ground.

What cruel Calchas could or scith such slaughter rake in hand
Or by the shore of Caspyan Sea, what barbarous lawles land.
Busyridis to th'aulters yet no infantes blood hath shed
Nor never yet were children slain for feast of Diomed.
Who shall alas in tomb thee lay, or hyde thy limbs again?

What limbs from such a headlong fall could in a child remain,
His bodies payse thrown down to ground, hath batred al his bones.
His face, his noble fathers marks are spoiled against the stones.
His neck anointed is: his head so dashed with flint stoane stroke*
That scattered is the brain about, the skull is al to broke.
Thus lies he now dismembered corpse, deformd and all to rent.

Lo herein doth he yet likewyse, his father represent.

What time the Child hath headlong fain thus from the walls of Troy,
And at the Greekes the selves bewaild y^ slaughter of the Boy,
Yet straight return they back, and at Achilles tomb again
The second mischief go to work the death of Polixeine.
This tomb the waives of surging seas, beset the utter side,
The other part the fields encloase about, and pastors wide.
In vale enuyroned with hills, that round about do rise,
A sloape on height erected are the banks in Theatre wise.
By al the shore then swarm the Greekes, thick on heaps they press
Some hope that by her death they shall their ships delay release.
Some other ^oy their enmies stock thus beaten down to be:
A great part of the people, both the slaughter hate, and see.
The Troyans eke no ^esse frequent their own calamityes
And all afraid, beheld the last of all their miseries.
When fi^st proceeded torches bright as guise of wedlock is.
And author thereof led the way the Lady Tindaris.
Such wedlock ^ray the Troyans then, God send Hermiona
And would God to her husband so* restoard were Helena.
Fear mas^ each part, but Polixe^ne her bashful look down cast:
And more then erst her glittering eyes and beauty shyn'd at last.
As sweetest seems then Phoebus light, when down his beams do sway,
When stars again with night at hand oppressed the doubtful day.
Astonnted much the people were, and all they her commend,
And now much more then ever erst, they prays'd her at her end.
Some with her beauty moved were, some with her tender years:
Some to behold the turns of chance, and how each thing thus wears
But most them moves her valiant mind, and lofty stomach hie,
So strong, so stout, so ready of hart and well prepared to dye.
Thus pass they forth an^ bold before King Pirrhus goes the maid,
They pity her, they marvel her, their hearts were all afraid.
As soon as then the hard hill top (where die she should) they trod,
And hie upon his fathers tomb the youthful Pyrrhus stood.
The manly maid she never shronke one foot, nor backward drew,
But boldly turns to meet the stroke, with sloute unchanged hew,
Her courage moves each one, and lo a strange thing monstrous like.
That Pyrbus even himself stood still, or dread, and dur^st not strike.
But as he had, his glittering sword in her to hills up done,
The purple blood, at mortal wound, then gushing ou^ (...) spoon.
No yet her courage her forsook, when dieng in that ^ounde,
She fell as the'rth should her revenge with lieful rage to ground.
Each people wept the Troyans first with privy fearful cry,
The Grectans eake, each one bewayld her death apparently.
This order had the sacrifyce, her blood the tomb up drunk,
No drop remaynth above the ground, but down forthwith it sonke.

Now go, now go ye Greekes, and now repair ye safely home.
With careless ships and hoised sails now cut the salt sea some.
The Child and Virgin both be slain, your battles finished are.
Alas where shall I end my age? or whether bear my care?
Shall I my daughter, or my nephew, or my husband moan?
My country else, or all at once? or else my self alone?
My wish is death that children both and virgins fiercely takes
Where ever cruel death doth hast to strike, it me forsakes,
Amid the enmies weapons all, amid both sword and fire,
All night sought for, thou fleest from me, that do thee most desire.
Not flame of fire, not fall of tower, not cruel enmies hand
Hath rid my life, how near (alas) could death to Priam stand?

Now captives all with swift recourse repair ye to the says,
Now spread the ships their sails abroad, forth they seek their ways.


