THis sixtenth year of mine age (right honourable) renews a grateful memory
of your great goodness towards me: (for at Baptism your honour vouchsafed to
answer for me): and causes me thus boldly to present these green and
vnmelowed fruicts of my first truailes unto you: as signs and testimonies of a
well disposed mind unto your honour. Albeit when first I vndertoke the
translation of this present Tragoedy, I minded nothing less, than that at any
time thus rudely transformed it should come into the Printers hands. For I to
none other end removed him, from his natural and lofty style, to our corrupt
and base, or as some men (but untruly) affirm it, most barbarous Language: but
only to satisfy the instant requests of a few my familiar friends, who thought
to have put it to the very same use, that SENECA himself in his Invention
pretended: Which was by the tragical and Pompous show upon Stage, to
admonish all men of their fickle Estates, to declare the inconstant head of
wavering Fortune, her sudden interchanged and soon altered Face: and lively
to express the just revenge, and fearful punishmets of horrible Crimes,
wherewith the wretched world in these our miserable days piteously swarmeth.
This caused me not to be precise in following the Author, word for word: but
sometimes by addition, sometimes by subtraction, to use the aptest Phrases in
giving the Sese that I could invent. Whereat a great number (I know) will be
more offended than Reason or VVysedome would they should be. Thus as I framed
it to one purpose: so have my friends (to whom I can not well deny any thing
that Frendshyps right may seem justly to require) wrested it to another
effect: and by this means blown it abroad, by ouerrash and unadvised
printing. By which fond deed I know undoubtedly I shall receive the poisoned
infamies, of a number of venomous tongues, Wherefore (right honourable) as I
give these the first Fruicts of my travail unto you: declaring therein the
great goodwyll and duty that I owe unto your Honour, for the noble disposition
of your virtuous mind: so am I driven humbly to require your strong aid, and
assured defence against the sclaunderous assaults of such malicious mouths,
which obtained: I shall be the better encouraged against an other time, to bestow
my travail in matters of far greater weighte and importance. In the mean
season (desiring your Honour to take these simple Attempts of mine in good
part:) I leave you to the tuitio of the right high and mighty God: Who keep
you long in health, grant you many happy years: with increase of Honour.

All your Honours to command. Alexander Neuile.
BEHOLD HERE BEFORE THY Face (good Reader) the most lamentable Tragedy of that
most Unfortunate Prince O Edipus, for thy profit rudely translated. Wonder not
at the grosenesse of the Style: neither yet account the Inuentours Dylygence
dysgraced by the Translators Neglygence: Who though that he hath sometimes
boldly presumed to err from his Author, roving at random where he list:
adding and subtracting at pleasure: yet let not that engender disdainful
suspicion with in thy learned breast. Mark thou rather what is meant by the
whole course of the History: and frame thy life free from such mischiefs,
wherewith the World at this present is universally ouervvhelmed, The
vvrathfull vengeance of God provoked, the Body plagued, the mind and
Conscience in midst of deep devouring dangers most terribly assaulted. In such
sort that I abhor to write: and even at the thought thereof I tremble and
quake for very inward grief and fear of mind: assuredly persuading my self
that the right high and immortal God, will never leave such horrible and
detestable crimes unpunished. As in this present Tragoedy, and so forth in the
process of the whole history, thou may right well perceive. Wherein thou
shalt see, a very express and lively Image of the inconstant change of fickle
Fortune in the person of a Prince of passing Fame and Renown, midst whole fluds
of earthly bliss: by mere misfortune (nay rather by the deep hidden secret
Iudgemets of God) piteously plunged in most extreme miseries. The whole Realm
for his sake in strangest guise grievously plagued: besides the apparent
destruction of the Nobility: the general death and spoil of the Cominalty:
the miserable transformed Face of the City, with an infinite number of
mischiefs more, which I pass over vnrehersed. Only wish I all men by this
Tragical history (for to that intent was it written) to beware of Sin: the
end whereof is shameful and miserable. As in the most unfortunate fall of
this unhappy Prince right plainly appears. Who by inward gripe of fearful
cosuming Conscience wretchedly tormented: beholding the lamentable state of his
vile infected Realms, wasted by the burning rage of privy spoiling Pestilence,
finds himself in tract of time, to be th'onely plague misery of the almost
quite destroyed City. Whereupon calling together his Priests and Prophets,
asking cousaile of the Gods by them, for present remedy in those evils,
wherewith the Realm was than universally ouerflowen: answer was made that the
Plague should never cease, till king LAIVS death were thoroughly revenged: and
the bloody Murderer driven into perpetual exile. Which answer received,
OEDIPVS, far more curious in bowlting out the truth, than careful of his own
Estate: suddenly slides into an innumerable company of dredfull miseries. For
as soon as he had once the perfect view of his own detestable deeds, and
wicked misdemeanour cast before his eyes, together with the unnatural killing
of his Father LAIVS, the incestuous Marriage of his Mother IOCASTA, the
preposterous order of his ill misguyded life, with a hundred more like
mischiefs, which chaste undefiled ears abhor to hear: fretting Fury common
enemy tormetor to corrupted coscieces pricking him forward, all inflamed with
Frenzy and boiling in invvard heate of vile infected mind, he roots out
his wretched eyes unnaturally, bereaves his Mother her life (though earnestly
requested thereto) beastly, in the end in most basest kind of slavery,
banished, dies miserably. Leaving behind him unto all posterities, a dredfull
Example of Gods horrible vengeance for sin. Such like terrors as these
requires this our present Age, wherein Vice hath chiefest place, Virtue put to
flight, lies as an abject, languishing in great extremity. For the which
cause, so much the rather have I suffered this my base traslated Tragoedy to be
published: fro his Author in word verse somewhat transformed, though in Sense
little altered: and yet oftentimes rudely increased with mine own simple
invention: more rashly (I confess) than wisely, wishing to please all: to
offend none. But whereas no man lives so uprightly, whom slaundring tongues
leave vndiffamed, I refer my self to the Judgment of the wisest, little
esteeming the prejudicial mouths of such carping Marchauts, vvhych suffer no
men's doings almost to escape undefiled. In fine, I beseech all to gether (if so
it might be) to bear with my rudeness, consider the grosenes of our own
Country language, which ca by no means aspire to the high lofty Latinists
stile. Mine only intent was to exhort men to embrace Virtue and shun Vice,
according to that of the right famous excellent Poet Virgil

Discite insticiam moniti, non temnere diuos. This obtained: I hold my self
thoroughly contented: In the mean season I end: wishing all men to shun Sin,
the plain (but most perilous) pathway to perfect infelicity.

THe Night is gon: and dredfull day
begins at length t'appeere:
And Phoebus all bedim'^e with Clouds,
himself aloft doth reere.
And gliding forth with deadly hue,
a doleful blase in Skies
Doth bear: Great terror dismay
to the beholders Eyes.
Now shall the houses void be seen, with Plague devoured quite?
And slaughter that the night hath made, shall day bring forth to light.
Doth any man in Princely throne rejoice? O brittle Joy,
How many ills? how fair a Face? and yet how much annoy
In thee doth lurk, and hidden lies? what heaps of endless strife?
They judge amiss, that deem the Prince to have the happy life.
For as the Mountains huge and by, the blustering wiudes withstand.
And craggy Rocks, the belching fluds do dash, and drive fro land:
Though that the Seas in quiet are, and calm on every side:
So kingdoms great all Winds and Waives of Fortune must abide.
How well shunned I my Father dear Polybius Scepters late?
Exil'de, bereft of careful fear, in Pilgrims happy state:
I call the Gods to witness this, and Stars that glyde in Skies.
A Kingdom is befauln to me. I frare least thereof rise
A mischief, (mighty Jove,) to great I fear, alas I fear
Least these my hands have re^t the life, or thee my Father dear.
Apollo bids me this beware, and yet a mischief more Foretells.
Can any greater be than that you told before?
Of Father slain by sons own hand?

(O thrice unhappy state.)
With horror all dismayed I stand in dred of threatened fate.
I am ashamed my destinies foul (O Queen) to thunder out,
And openly to blase my fear my trembling mind doth dout:
Yet out it goes. Phoebus me bids my Mothers Bed to fly.
As though that I her Son, with her incestuously should lie.
This fear, and only this me caused my fathers kingdom great
For to forsake. I fled not thence when fear the mind doth beat.
The restless thought still dreds the thing, it knows can never chance.
Such fancies now torment my heart, my safety to advance,
And eke thine ever sacred laws (O Nature) for to keep
A stately Sceptre I forsook, yet secret fear doth creep
Within my breast: and frets it still with doubt and discontent,
And inward pangs which secretly my thoughts a sunder rent.
So though no cause of dred I see, yet fear and dred I all,
And scant in credit with my self, my thoughts my mind appall
That I cannot persuaded be though reason tell me no,
But that the Web is weaving still of my decreed wo.
For what should I suppose the cause? a Plague that is so general,
And Cadmus country wholly spoils, and spreds it self through all?
Should me, amongst so huge a heap of plagued Bodies spare?
And we alone amongst the rest reserude to mischiefs are?
O heavy hap. And bide I still alone the spoil to see?
Of Cities great, of men, of beasts, by plague that wasted be?
And thou amongst so many ils, a happy life to lead,
Could once persuade thy self (O wretch) without all fear or dread.
Of Phoebus secret Judgements to, and that in Kings estate?
Thou, thou, infected hast the air, in such a filthy rate.
Thou art the only cause of woe: by thee these evils rise,
By thee to grave on such a sort, this wretched people plies.
The fiery flaming frying heate, afflicted hearts that wastes,
Is not relieude as wont it was by cold and pleasant blasts.
The gentle western winds have left with healthful puffs to blow,
And now the fiery Dog with blase of boiling heate doth glow.
The Sun in Leo burns so hoate, and so the earth doth broil,
That fluds and herbs are dried up, and nought remaynes but soil,
So thoroughly schorcht and stewed with heate, that moisture all is gone,
And now amongst so many fluds, remaynes alas not one.
The places dry are only seen the streams are drunken up.
And water that doth yet remain: the soaking Earth doth sup.
The Moon with clouds quite over cast, all sadly (...) she glides,
And doleful darksome shades of night the who^ world over hides.
No Star on high at all doth shine, but black and (...) hue
Hath ouershaded all the Skies, whence deadly mists ensue.
The corn that wonted was to grow and fruitfully to spring,
Now to the voided Barnes nought else, but empty stalks doth bring.
No part of all our kingdom is free from destruction:
But all together run and rush, to utter confusion.
The old men with the young (alas:) the (...) with the child
The plague consumes. Both man wife, all beasts both tame wild
Are spoiled by the Pestilence. No pomp at all remaynes,
That wonted was in Funerals, to ease the mourners pains.
Alas this spoil of people made, by plague hath dryde mine eyes:
And secretly within my breast, the grief it boiling fryes.
And that, that wonted is to hap, in most extremest ills:
My tearees are dry and glutting grief my wretched breast it fills.
The crazed father bears the son, unto their dampish graves:
And after him with burden like, the Mother comes and raves:
And even lamenting as they stand, ^ both they fall,
And mourners new in like estate, for them ^ they call.
Who likewise in the midst of all their ^oyle and painful payne
Do drop into the grave they digd, and so the place do gain
That was prepar' de for others erst. A hell it were to here
The horror, and the miseries that every where appe^re.
A Tomb is made for noble men, fast on the people die,
And in, their burdens fling. Great Pieres all unregarded lye.
For lack of Graves, to Ashes clean their bodies some do wast*
And some half burnt do leave them there, and home away for hast
They run, more they fetch, and then wood, fire, grave, and all
Doth want. And down for very grief the wretched misers fall.
No prayers avail. No Art can help this raging Plague t'appease:
For none almost is left alive each others woe to ease.
Before thine aulters here O God my feeble hands I hold,
Requiring all my destinies, at once with courage bold.
And that by death I may prevent, my Country pressed to fall.
For this, and only this (O God) upon thy name I call.
Let me not be the last that dies: The last that goes to Grave.
Grant this, and then (O mighty Jove) my full request I have.
O cruel Gods unkind: O more than thrice unhappy Fates:
That only me denied is, that lights on all Estates.
I mean a speedy death (alas) these evils to prevent
And deadly woe ^ rage itorment.
Leave of thy blubb^ring ^ kingdoms foiled
With rotten plagues (...) bile, and graves each where dispoylde.
All which diseases thou unhappy guest did bring with thee
Dispatch. Away. Gpe hence. At least, unto thy parents flee.

What boots it ^, great with piteous plaints to aggre^ate.
Stoutly to bear aduers^, ^ estate.
When dred and danger most assay^* when cruel Cares do crush
Thy princely breast, ^spant thou most to bear and bide the push.
It is no poin^ of courage slout to yield to fortunes frown.

Nay, Fear^ could n^u^ cause me sloupe nor Fortune cast me down.
My manly winds was never thraule to vain and peau^h fears,
But evermore in each ^ courage bears.
No not a thousand glister^g swords, nor Mars himself in field.
Can once dismay my Countenuance, or cause my heart to yield.
The very Giants fierce and huge in fight withstand I dare.
That Monster Sohinx whose riddels through the world renowned are*
Could not dismay my deedles heart, nor cause my courage slide
For all the terrors I behold. I did that Fury bide.
I saw him belching G^bs of blood, I v^wde full well the field
That all to (...) lay with blood, and bones quite ouerheelde.
And when y^ he on Mountains top with mouth full huge to see.
Stood gaping all with greedy Jaws to feed and pray on me,
Oft fluttering with his fearful wings and shaking oft his raise,
Began full like a Lyon (...) with threats me to assail.
Of whom straight way the Riddell I, it rush^ into mine ^ares
With roaring sound His wings he claps, the Rock for hast he tears.
Destring with my Bowels still his greedy Jaws to glu^:
But I full soon assoyled had the question that he put.
And all the subtle poincts there of, and twisted kno^s vntwinde.

What makes you wish for death to late, and wave your words in wind.
You might have died than (you know) for Sphinx so nobly slain.
This kingdom unto you, and yours for ever shall remain.

The ashes of that Monster vile, against us doth rebel.
That vile misshapen loathsome Beast, that raging Feend of Hell.
Is cause of all the plague that doth this mournfu City smight.
Now only this remaynes alone, if Phoebus heavenly might,
Can any means invent for us, or way of mercy make:
Whereby these burning Plagues at length may happily chasice to slake.

O More then thrice renow^ied Stock
of ancient Cadmus Race.
O mighty Thebes City grear,
O heavy ruthful Case.
Lo now you lye all desolate,
with Plague devoured quite.
Both you and all your Husbandmen.
(Oh miserable sight.)
O foul and fearful Fate (alas) what causes all this aid?
O God whence springs this Pestylence that us (...) so?
No age, no shape, no form is spared, but all confounded lye.
Thus happiest now y^ man I count, whose chance was first to dye.
For he hath shunned a thousand ^ils, which wretched Eyes have seen:
And mischiefs great that us do pr^sse from him are taken clean.
O God withhold thy fury great, thy Plagues from us re^du^.
Cease of afflicted Souls to scourge, who thee, (...) ^nd ^oue.
Power down on them diseases foul, that them deserved have.
A Guerdon just for sin (Oh God) this this of thee we ^aue,
And only this. We ask no more, the cause and all is thine,
A thing not used of Gods it is, from pity to decline.
My heart doth vant, and trembling cold through all my limbs doth run,
As oft as I remembering, count the noble Stocks v^un,
By death and dolfull destinies that overwhelmed lye,
And yet alas the people still to Grave do faster hye.
In long Array all in a rank by thousands on a^o^,
On every side, in every streate to burial fast, they go.
The seven broad wide open Gates, are not (...) forway,
But thronged the people pestered stand still in a fearful stay,
And in the midst of all their toil with corses on their backs,
The number that before doth post the hinder number slackes*
The corses in the streets do lye and Grave on Grave is made.
But all in vain. For nought it boots the plague (...) bestayde.
The sacrifices don to Gods ha^e to to ill success.
And such strange sights signs do rise that nought else I can guess,
But that at hand with ghastly paws, is utter destruction,
With thousand ills accompanied and extreme confusion.
The sheep of rot by heaps as thick, as dogs do fall and d^e*
And belching out their wasted lunges, on ground do sprawling lye.
And I my self of late did see: (a sight unseen before,)
As our high priest stood sacrificing at the Temple door,
And struck with grievous bloody wound the golden horned Bull
When down with liveless lump he drop^ and members made full dull.
And all the woude wide bleeding gapes black goars blood out spues.
And yet the blade vnsprinckled was. The blood it buying (...)
And bubbles on the ground. Alas what do these things por^end?
Oh mighty Jove at length vouchsafe some good and ha^y end.
At length withhold thy h^d (O God) and health unto us send.
Nothing (alas) remaynes at all, in wo^ed old estate,
But all are tu^ed to p^t down, quite void and desolate
The famting horse for ^ bank his burden tats.
And after on ^:
Who cries for help ^ that bide
Unkept: unknown ways and path do range and ouerstride.
The Bull ^ and me a^e in field all fainting lies.
And, all his flock ^, fely Shepherd dyes.
The ^ his zatal breath expiers
And to the ^ hisfast ^esters.
The ^ do live in aretched peace.
The rage, and wrathful (...) founds of ramping Lions cease.
The vengeance ^ Bears are now as ^ame as sheep
The ugly Serpent that was wont* the Rocky Den^es to keep.
Oft quaffing poisoned ^ in inward hea^. she boils,
^ for longer ly^e she toils.
The woods are ^ withfresh and lively hue*
The wonted shades are gon. All things are quite out of their Que:
No greenish grass on ground doth grow, the earth no moisture soupes.
The Vine withoute^ (...) ^ap, his drowsy head down drowpes.
What shall I say? all ^ but of course,
And as they ^ worse and worse.
O mighty ^ yls?
When cease ^ ^loud thus fierce and raging spils?
I think but we almost alive, there do no men remain:
Whom (...) Darrs ^ on earth have left vnslayne.
I think ^ shades of hell where filthy fluds do flow,
Where plages and vile diseases too, where dredfull horrors grow,
And ^ mischiefs on us throw,
With Botch bla^e of sundry kinds which sother^ blasts do blow,
And wrekful vexed hags of hell do dreath and on us bring:
The angry feddes of hell I think their vengea^ce, on us fling
And out their mortal poison spue which they against us bear.
Lo see how greedy death on us with scowling eyes doth lear.
See, see. Oh Jove how fast he throws his Darts. Not one he spares
But all confounds. His thretning force, withstand no Creature dares.
No doubt the lothsom Feryman the sinful souls that traynes
Through stinking fluds, his labour loths that he for us sustaynes.
Such press by plups to him is made which still renews his pains.
But hark yet mosters more the these, the Fame abroad doth fly
That hellish Dogs with bawling sound were heard to howl and cry,
And y^ the ground with trembling shook, and under feel did move.
And dreadful blazing Comets bright were seen in Skies above.
And ghastly shapes of men besides, to wander on the ground.
And wood, and trees on every side, did fearfully resound.
Besides all this straug Ghosts were seen in places where they stood.
And Ryuers more then one or two, that ran all black goorb blood.
O cruel plague, O vile discase, far worse then speedy death.
O we unhappy thrice and more, who do prolong our breath.
In these accursed days and times. But hark to me a while.
When first this Iothsome plague begins these Misers to defile,
It takes them thus. A fearful Cold through al their bones doth r^n,]
And Cold and Heate together mixed, their se^es all benome.
Than little loathsome marks appear, and all their bodies spot.
And all their members slaming glow, and burning fast do rot.
The Lights, the Lungs, the heart, the Guts, and all that inward lies.
And all the secret parts iscorcht, with deadly, I fire fries.
The blood all clotterd in their Cheeks, in cluster lies by lumps.
And it and heate together makes, great, strange, and ruddy bumps.
And blood and flesh congeled stands, in Face as stiff as stake.
And Eyes in head fast fixed set, and often trickling make.
And down apace whole fluds they steam, and clots drops do trill,
And all the skin from of their Face, by flakes and scales doth pill.
A thousand fearful sounds at once, into their ears do rush.
And loathsome blood out of their Nose, by stilling streams doth gush.
The very anguish of their heart doth cause them for to shake.
And what with payne heal, and fear, their wearied limbs do quake.
Then some the running Ryuers haunt, and some on gro^nd ^ce (...).
And some again their thirst to slake, cold water gulping (...).
Thus all our country ^ost with plague in Griefy it waltering (...).
And still desiring for to dye, a thousand deaths it dyes.
But God to hear them then is pressed: and death to none (...).
Besides al this, the church some do frequent: but not to pray,
But only for to glut the Gods, with that that they do say.
But who is this that comes to Court in hast with posting pace?
What? is't Creon that noble Prince (for deeds and stately race?)
Or doth my mind oppressed with care things false for true contrive?
Creon it is long looked for, his sight doth me reuyue.

FOr fear my body chilles, alas,
and trembling all I stand
In quakinge dread. I seek and toil,
these mischiefs to withstand.
But al in vain I spend my thoughts
it will not be, I see,
As long as all my senses thus
by cares distracted be.
My mind desirous still (Oh God,) the truth for to unfold,
With doubtful Dread is daunted so, that it can scant uphold
It self. O Brother bear, if way or mean of health thou know,
Declare it out and stick not all the truth to me to show.
The Oracle (most noble king) is dark, and hidden lies.

Who doubtful health to sick men brings, all health to the denies.

Apolloes use yt is the troth in darksome dens to hold.

And Oedipus of Gods it hath things hidden to unfold:
Speak out, tell all, and spare not man: all doubts I can discus.

Apollo then (most noble King) himself commands thus.
By exile purge the Princes seat, and plague with vengeance due
That hapless vvretch, whose bloody hands of late King Laius slue:
Before that this performed be, no hope of milder air:
Wherefore do this (O King) or else All hope of help despair.

Durst any man on earth attem pte, that noble Prince to slay?
Show me the man that I may him dispatch out of the way.

God grant I may it safely tel: the hearing was to terrible,
My senses all amassed are: it is a thing so horrible,
That I abhor to utter it (oh God) for fear I quake
And even at the very thought my limbs begin to shake.
As soon as I Appollos Church, had entered in afraid,
Upon my face flat down I fell, and thus to him I prayed.
Oh God if ever thou did rue, on wretched misers state,
If ever men oppressed thou easd, or did their cares abate,
If ever thou in present need did present help declare,
If ever thou afflicted Hearts with cares consumd did spare:
Show now thy wonted elemency and pity known of yore.
Scant had I said: Refounding all the mountains thondring roar:
And filthy feendes spout out their flames out of their darksome caves.
And woods do quake, and hills do move, and up the surging waives
Do mount unto the skies aloft, and I amassed stand.
Still looking for an answer at Apollos sacred hand.
When out with ruffled hair disguisd^th: Prophet comes at last:
And when that she had felt the heate of mighty Phoebus blast.
All puffyng out she swells in rage, and pattring still she raves,
And scant she entered had into Apollos shining caves,
When out a thundering voice doth burst that's far above mans reach.
So dreadful seemed then to me the mighty Phoebus speech.
Than thus he spake and thus at length into mine cares he rushed
While sprawling still the Prophet lay before the doors in dust.
The Thebane City never shall be free fro plagues (quoth he,)
Except from thence the Kingkiller forthwith expulsed be:
Unto Apollo known he was, or ever he was borne.
Do this: or else no hope of health, to this, the gods have sworn.
And as for thee, thou shalt not long in quiet state endure,
But with thy self wage war thou shalt war thou shalt procure
Unto thy children dear: crepe again thou shalt into thy mothers womb.

Loke what the Gods commanded have accomplished shall be.
Nor never shall these eyes of mine abide the day to see,
A King of kingdom spoiled by force, by guile or crast suppressed.
A king to kings the prop ought be, and chiefest cause of rest:
No man regards his death at all whom living he doth fear,

Great cause makes me my Princes death conceal and closiy bear

Ought any cause of fear or grief, the duty for to let?

The threatening of the prophesyes, do still my breast beset.

Let us (since God comaunds) forthwith some good atonement make
If any way, or means there be their wrathful rage to slake.
Thou God that sits on seat on high, and al the world dost guide,
And thou by whose commandment the Stars in Skies do glide:
Thou, thou that only ruler art of Seas, of Floods, and all.
On thee and on thy Godhead great, for these requests I call.
Who so hath slain king Laius, oh Jove I do thee pray.
Let thousand ils upon him fall, before his dying day.
Let him no health no comfort have, but al to crushed with cares,
Consume his wretched years in grief, though that death him spares
Awhyle. Yet mischiefs all, at length upon him light.
With all the evils under Sun, that ugly monster smight.
In exile let him live a Slave, the rated course of life.
In shame, in care, in peuury in danger and in strife.
Let no man on him pity take, let all men him reuyle.
Let him his Mothers sacred Bed incestuously defile.
Limb him his father kill. And yet let him do mischiefs more.
What thing more heinous can I wish then that I wished before?
Let him do all those ills I say, that I have shunned and past.
All those and more (if more may be) oh God upon him cast.
Let him no hope of pardon have: but sue and all in vain.
All hellish Furies on him light, for to increase his payne.
O Jove power down thy fury great, thy thundering thumps out throw
Let Boreas boisterous blasts and stormy plagues upon him blow
Consume him quite. Fre^ out his guts with pockes and botches vile
Let all diseases on him light that wretched bodies fyle.
Let these and more (if more may be) upon that Monster fall.
Let Harpies paws and greedy paunch deu^ure his members all.
Let no man him regard: or seek his limbs in grade to lay:
But let him dye ten thousand deaths before his dying day.
By this my Kingdom I do swear, and Kingdom that I left
By al my Country Gods that been in Temples closely kept,
I swear, I vow, I do protest, and thereto witness take:
The Stars, the Seas, the Earth and all that ere thy hand did make.
Except that I my self forthwith this bloody monster find,
To wreak the wrath of God some way with solemyne oath I bind.
And so my father, Polybius his happy days out live.
And so my mother Merope, no marriage new contrive:
As he shall dye that did this deed, and none shall him excuse.
Whosoever he be here I protest for that he shortly rues:
But where this wicked deed was don Creon now tell me plain:
Both by what means? where: and how Ring Laius was slain.
Creon. Passing through Castalia woods mountayns heaped with suoe
Where groves and scrubs, and bushes thick brambles sharp do groe.
A threepathd crooked way there is that diversely doth go.
One unto Bacchus city bends that Phoce doth hight,
The other to Olenius, forth stretches out aright:
The third that reaches through the vales and by the rivers lies
Tends down unto the Banks whereby Ele^a, water plies
There unawares (O piteous chance) a troup of thieves entraps
The noble prince, and murders him hence spring these great mishaps
which heap you realms with hideous woes and plagues on every side,
By just decree of heavenly powers which can no murder bide.
But see Tiresias where he coms with old and trembling pace.
I think Apolloes heavenly might have brought him to this place.
See where he comes* and Manto too, his steps directing stays
Tis he who for your grace (O king) and for your country prays

COme holy priest (to Phoebus next)
these doubtful answers Iose:
And whom that destnies will to dye,
Straightwayes to me disclose.
Renowned Prince, though still I stand
in silence dume dismayed:
And though by inward fear of mind
my lingering tongue is stayde:
Yet pardon me (O noble Prince,) and give me leave a while.
From lack of sight springs Ignorance which power hath to exile
Unspotted Truth fro doubtful breasts. This thing full well you knows,
But whither God and Country calls, with willing mind I go.
Let deadly fatal destentes, be bolted out at length.
O King if I of greener years had now my wonted strength:
This matter soon discust should be, and I would take in hand,
My self in presence of the Gods, in temple for to stand.
A mighty Ox all coulourd white, up on the Aulters rear,
Which never yet on wearied neck, the crooked yoke did bear.
And Manto thou, O daughter mine, mine only prop and stay:
The secret hidden mysteries, and sacred signs out say.
M A. The beast before the Alter stands.

To Gods a prayer make,
And on the holy Aulters cke, some pleasant odors shake.

Tis done. And all the fierce fieice, with licence bright do flame.

O Manto now what signs see thou? how do thy matters frame?
What? doth the fire, the Sacrifice encompas round about?

Not so. But first it mounts alost, and straight it flashes out.

Well Yet, how doth the sacred flame all shining bright and clear
It self on high unto the Sktes, with sparkelting flakes v^reare?
Or doeh it oft rebounding back, it self, from Skies vnfould?
Or all with rumbling roaring noise, about the place is't rolled?
Or dim'd with smoke, is't tossed from place, to place, now here, now theare?

Not one. But diverse, colours mixed the flame doth with it bear.
Much like unto the Rainbow, which with sundry painted hues
Foreshewes unto the husbandmen the weather that ensues.
What colour it wants, or what it hath, to me is like uncertain.
Now is it black, now blue, now red, and even now again
Quite out it is. Yet once again, all fierce it flashing flames:
But lo, yet mischiefs more then this, unluckily it frames.
The fire quite a sunder parts, and flame with flame doth fight.
O father I abhor to see, this ugly loathsome sight.
The Wine to blud is turned quite, and all the Princes head,
With thick black clouds encopast is, with smoke all overspread.
O father tell what this portends?

What should I tell alas?
My mind for fear astonished stands, and trembling cold doth pas
Through all my limbs. What shall I say? or where shall I begin?
O cruel Plagues, O wrekfull Gods, O vengeance due for sin.
Some dire and bloody deed (Alas) these hideous signs declare.
Whats that the Gods would have reuealde, and yet do bid beware
To utter it? By certain signs their wrath is oft descried:
Such signs appear, and yet they seem their fury great to hide.
They are ashamed: I wot ne'er what. Come hither, quickly bring
Some salt with thee, and it upon the sacrifice go fling.
What? are their looks pleasant and mild, and do they gently bide
The touching of thy sacred hands?

What may this thing betide?
The Bull (a wonder great to see) his head on hie he lifts
And turned still unto the East, from thence it always shifts,
Still loathing as he seems to me, of heaven to see the light,
Oft scowling with his blearing eyes with gastely ruthful sight.

But doth one blow the drive to ground, or more the one they have?

The Heifer as it seemed, enflamd with courage stout and brave
Upon the mortal Blade did rush, and there herself destries:
When out the blood it foaming spouts, and mounts unto the Skies.
The brawny Bull twice stroke or thrice, with groueling groaning tyres,
And toiling up and down he moyles. And still to live desires.
And yet at length with much ado, his brutish breath expiers.

What? doth the wound wide open gape, or is it closed up?
Or doth the deepnes of the hole, the blood in soking sup?

Out of the wounded Heifers breast Black bluish waters rush.
As for the Bull, but little blood, out of his wounds doth gush.
^t back rebounds, and from his Mouth Eyes by streams ^oth flow.
But what these dreadful signs portend the Gods aloane doc know.

By this unhappy Sacrifice, great fears within me rise.
But tell me now: In the inner parts, what secret hidden lies?

O Father what means this (alas) that more then wonted guise
The Inwards stir? and shake my hands, and heaving oft arise,
The blood by streams out of the veins, full straungly skips aloft.
The heart all schorcht and hidden lies, and strykes are seen full oft,
Of Colour very wan and pale: The chiefest parts do want.
The Liver bla^kish gall out spurts, and somewhat rising pants.
And that, that mischiefs great, to kingdoms doth foreshow:
Tw^ heads are seen, and yet both heads one skin doth ouerg^ow
And ouerheales them quite, But yet the skin, it is so thin
That easily one may discern what lies hid therein.
And that which horror doth increase, a man may plainly see
How both the heart, the Lights, and Lungs, and all disturbed be.
The fearful noise and sound you here is not of beasts, but fire
That roaring on the Alters makes, presaging wrekefull ire
Of angry Gods who do foretell some purpose that they have,
For to revenge some foul misdeed that vengeance just doth crave.
No part his proper place observes, nor keeps his order due:
But altogether quite disguised, with an unwonted hue.
Misshapen, out of frame, transformed, displaced quite (alas)
What thing is that the Gods entend ere long to br^ng to pas?

Why than declare from whence, and why these deadly signs arise,
With courage stout I will it hear, it shall not once aggrise
By valiant mind. Extremest ils have power to banish fear.

You will wish that vnhard which you so much desire to hear.

Yet sense the Gods will have him known tell me (I say) his name
That sieve your King.

Nor wing, nor womb of Bird or beast ye same
Can tell (O king) new sacrifice, new means we must invent.
From dredfull dark infernal damps some Fury must be sent
These mischifes great for to unfold. Or else King Ditis he,
That Empire keeps on gri^sly Ghosts, entreated needs must be
These things forthwith for to disclose. Tell who shall have the charge,
A King thou art, than may not thou go through those kingdoms large.

Than noble Creon thou shalt go, this payne is first for thee:
Who must this crown and kingdom great enjoy after me.

THough that thy Face where sadness sits
in heavy mourning guise,
Nought else portend, but dedly griefs,
and mischiefs still to rise:
Yet tel some means whereby at length
the Gods we may appease,
And purchase to our Kingdoms wast,
some hope of health and ease.
Alas you bid me that disclose which fear doth bid me hyde.

It that the Thebane Cities great, by doleful plagues destryde.
Pierce not thy hart a: et ought thou* these Kingdoms for to rue,
Which were unto thy brothers house, of ancient title due.

You wish y^ thing to know, which you will wish unknown at length.

Why so? a simple remedy of little force and strength
Is ignorance of our estate when dangers us betide.
But what? wi^t thou so great a good for common safety hide?

Irksome Medcines and perilous in s^cknes I abhor*

And I likewyse at Subjects hands disdain to take a door,
Speak out with speed, or else by proof of torment thou shalt find
How dangerous a case it is to gawle a Princes mind.

Kings often use to wish vntolde, which they bad tel before.

Go to, dispatch and cease in time to vex me any more.
Except that thou forthwith to me this ^einous deed ^isclose:
The gods I do protest, to death for al thou only goes.

O pardon me most noble king. O let me hold my pes,
Of al the gracis Princes grant, what favour may be less?

As though y^ silence hurts not more both king and countries weal:
Then speech oft times: which subjects thoughts to Prices both reveal?
Dispatch at once, stir me no more thou know my guise of old.

Silence denied, what priuileage may s^lly Subject hold?

A iraytor he is, who stlece keeps, when king comaunds to speak.

Then pardon my constrained speech, slth silence for to break
You me compel. A doleful tale (O king) my tongue must tell,
And which I fear your majesty will not interpret well.

Was ever man rebukt for that, that he was bid to say?

Well than since needs I must: I am contented to obey.
A wood there is from City far, enhaunst with stately trees:
Where many a plant, and her be doth grow, which Phoebus never sees:
With ever during bushes green, the Typresse there doth rise,
And puts his alde and leffty had withing the cloud Skies.
The ancient Time eaten Oak with crooked be^ded limbs.
The Te^l tree flue: The Alder which in Neptunes kingdoms swims,
The Baize with bitter beries eke the Elms dear f^iends to Vyn^
And many a noble tree besides, as M^rtels, ^
Amidst them all, one tree there is with large out ^
Whose roaring sound, craking noise the lesser woods ^
And ouershades them all: a Tree of monstrous huge (...),
Beset with fearful woods: there is that dire, and dreadful gate,
That leads to loathsome Lymbo Lake, and pyts that ever flow.
Where choked miry mud doth stream with slimy course full flow.
Here when the priest was entered in with comely (...) pace,
He stayed not: No need there was, for night was still in place.
Than all the ground wide open gapes, smouthe ring ^apours rise,
And fire and smoke, styfling stink, mounts up unto the Shyes.
The Priest with wailing werde ^clad, his fatal red out ^ooke:
And entering in, in black Array, full often times it shook.
With heavy cheer and dolful pace: his hoary ha^re was twynde
With bows of mortal Ewe. A tree wherewith the mourners wind,
Their mourning heads, Garlands make. In this guise all arayde,
The sacred Priest doth enter in, with trembling limbs dismayed:
Than in the Sheep and Oxen black, by backward course are drawn*
And odours sweet, Frankencence, on flaming fires are thrown.
The beasts on burning, Altars cast, do quake with schorched limbs:
And bloody streams with fire mixed, about the Aultars (...).
Than on the dark internal Gods, and him that rules them all:
With deadly shrieking voice aloud, the Prophet gins to call.
And rolls the Magic verse in mouth, and hidden Arts doth prove:
Which either power have to appease or else the Gods to move,
Thair bloody streaming Lycours black, with broiling heate do boyle:
And all the Beasts consume and burn. The Prophet than to toil
Begins* And mixed wine and Milk upon the Aultars throws.
And all the Dungeon dark, and wide with streamin^ bl^od it flows.
Than out with thundering voice again the Prophet calls and cries.
And straight as much with mumbling mouth he champs in secret wise
The trees do turn* The Rivers s^a^. The ground with roaring shakes.
And all the world as seems to me, with fearful trembling quakes.
I am heard, I am heard, than out aloud the Priest began to cry:
When all the damp^ed fo^les by heaps abroad outrushing fly.
Then woods with rumbling noise, do oft resounding make.
And Heaven, and Earth together go. And bows and trees do crake.
And Thuders roore. And Lightnings flash. And waives aloft do fly.
And ground retires: and Dogs do bawl: and Beasts are heard to cry.
And wither long of Acheron, that lothsom Flood that ^lowes
All stinking streams: or of the earth, that out her Bowels throws,
Free place to Sprights to give: or of that fierce infernal Hound,
That at such times doth bustling make with chayns, railing sound.
The Earth al wide it open ga^es. And I did see on ground,
The Gods with colour pale and wan, that those dark kingdoms keep.
And very night I saw in deed, and thousand shapes to creep,
From out those filthy stinking Lakes, and lothsom pits of Hell.
Where all the evils under Son, in darksome shades do dwell.
So quaking all for fear I stood with mind right sore apalde,
Whilst on those Gods with trembling mouth the Priest full often called.
Who all at once, out of their dens did skip with grie^ly Face.
And Monsters grim, and stinging Snakes seemd wander in that place.
And all the foulest Feendes of Hell, and Furies all were theare.
And all transformed Ghosts sprights, that ever Hell did bear.
With Cares, and all Diseases vile, that mortal minds do crush,
All those, and more I saw out of those Dangeons deep to rush,
And Age I saw, with rivaled Fa^e, and Need, Fear, and Death.
And Fire, and flames, thousand ills out fro those Pits to breath.
Then I was gon: and quite amazd. The wench in worser case.
And yet of old, acquainted with her Fathers Arts she was.
The Priest himself vnmooued stood, and boldly cited owt:
Whole Armies of king Ditis men, who clustering in a Rowt:
All flittring thin like Clouds, dispersed abroad in Air do fly.
And bearing sundry shapes and forms do sc^d abou^ in Sky,
A thousand woods I think have not so many leaves on trees.
Ten thousand meadows fresh have not so many flowers for bees.
Ten hundred thousand rivers not so many Foul can show:
Nor all the drops and streams, and gulphes that in the Seas do flow*
If that they might be weighed, can sure so great a number make
As could those shapes and forms that flew from out of Limbo lake.
Both Tantalus and Zetus too, and pale Amphions Ghost:
And A gave, and after her ten thousand Sprightes do post.
Than Pentheus, and more and more, in like estate ensue:
Till out at length comes Laius with foul and grisly hue:
Vncomly breast in wretched plight with filth all overgrown:
All perst with wounds, (I loath to speak) with blood quite ouerflown
A Miser right as seemd to me, and most of Misers all:
Thus in this case, at length he spake, and thus began to call.
O Cadmus cruel City v^le, that still delightste in blood,
O Cadmus thou, which kinsmens death, accountst as chiefest good*
Tear out the bloody Bowels of your Children, learn of me,
Do that, and rather more, then you would bide the day to see
Like ills as late on me are light. Lo mothers love (alas)
Hath caused the greatest misery that ere in Theba was.
The Country with the wrath of Gods at this time is not tossed.
Nor earth nor air infect is not the cause that all been lost.
No No. A bloody King is cause of all these mischiefs great:
A bloody wretch: A wretched child that sits in Fathers Seat:
And Mothers bed defyles (O wretch) and enters in again,
In places whence he came from once and doubles so her payne,
Whilst that he ^ils the hapless womb where in himself did lie
With graceles seed and causes her twice childbirthes pangs to try:
Unhappy Son, but Father worse and most unhappy he,
By whom the laws of sacred shame so sore confounded be.
For that that very bestes (almost) do all abh^rre to do,
Even of his mothers body he hath brothers gotten two.
O mischief great: O dredful deed, then Sphinx, O moster more:
Example unto ages all of Gods foretold before.
But I thee, thee, that Sceptre boldst, thy Father will pursue,
And wreacke my self on thee and thine with plagues vengeance due.
All restless rage of spite and paiue I will upon thee blow,
And all the furies foul of hell upon thee I will throw.
I will subvert thy Houses clean, for this thy loathsome lust:
I will do this thou wretch: And thee, and thine consume to dust.
Wherefore dispatch at once (I say) into exile drive your King.
That ground y^ first of all he leaves, with fresh grene grass shall spring.
And sweet, and pleasant Air, and healthful blasts shall rise,
And all the evils under Sun, that mortal men surprise:
The Pocks, the Piles, the Botch, the blaine, death with him shall fly.
And with him mischiefs all shall pass, and Monsters under Sky.
And as for him I know he would depart with willing mind:
But I will clog his Fec^, and hands, hss way he shall not find.
But groping with his aged staff, shall pass from place to place.
This shall he do. And none shall rue upon his ruthful case.
Rid you the Monster from the Earth, for Heaven let me alone.
No sooner said, but straight away, his dreadful Ghost was gone.
And fast by thousands after him, the other Sprights in hyde:
Than Cold trembling fear began through all my bones to glyde.

The thing I always feared, I see upon me now is laid:
But slender props they are (God wot) whereby your Treason is stayde.
Meropa my Mother dear, shall me from this defend:
Polybius eke shall purge me quite, from Actions all, that tend
To murder, or to incest vile, they both shall me excuse.
In such a case no means at all of trial I refuse.
Lay what you can unto my charge. No fault in me remayns.
The Thebanes long or I came here, of Laius death complayns.
My Mother yet alive, my Father still in like estate.
No, no, this is some dol^ishe drift, of yo^ false Prophets pate.
Or else some mighty God above, doth bear me no good will,
And seeks by Plagues on me to wreke, his wrathful vengeance still.
Ah Sir I am glad at length I smell your drifts and fetches fine.
I know the whole confederacy your sleights I can vntwyne.
That beastly Priest, that blearayed wretch beelyes the Gods and me:
And thee thou Traitor in my place hath promised king to be.

Alas would I my Sister of, her lawful kingdom spoil?
Think you such treason may have place in brothers breast to boyle?
If that mine Oath could me not keep content with my degree:
But that contemning mean estate, I would cl^me aloft to be.
Yet should ill Fortune me deter, from such attempts I trow:
Whose guise it is on Princes heads, huge heaps of Ca^es to throw.
I would advise your grace betimes this charge from you to cast:
Least lingering long all unawares, you be oppressed at last.
Assure your self, in baser state, more safer you may live:
And shun a thousand Cares, G^ess: which Princes hearts do rive.

And dost thou me exhort thou ^laue my kingdom for to leave?
O saythlesse head. O shameless heart, y^ could such treasons weave?
Dare thou attempt thou villayae vile this thing, to me to break?
And fear thou not in such a cause so boldly for to speak.

I would persuade them so (O King) who freely might possess
Their Realms such piteous cares I see, do Princes hearts oppress:
But as for you of force you must your Fortunes chainge abide.

The surest way for them that gape for kingdoms large, wide,
Is first things mean, and rest, and peace, and base estate to praise:
And yet with Tooth and Nail, to toil to mount aloft always.
So often times, most restless beasts do chiefly rest commend.

Shall not my service long suffice my truth for to defend?

Time is the only means for such, as thou to work their will.

It is so sir, but as for me, of goods I have my fill.
A great resort. A pleasant life: from Princely cares exempt.
All these might (surely) me dissuade from such a foul attempt.
There is no day almost (O King) the whale year thorough out,
Where in some royal gifts are not from countries round about
Unto me sent, both Gold, and pearls, and things of greater cost,
Which I let pass, least I should seem but vainly for to bost.
Besides the life of many a man hath bin preserude by me.
In such a blis^ull state (O King) what can there wanting be?

(Good Fortune can no mean observe, but still she preaseth higher.)

Shall I than guiltless die (alas,) my cause and all vntryde?

Were unto you at any time my life, my deeds discride?
Did any man defend me yet? or else my causes plead?
And guiltless yet I am condemn'de to this you do me lead,
And me express example give, which I entend to take.
What measure you do meat to me, like measure must I make.

The mind which causeless dred appawls, true cause of fear bewrays
That cosciece is not guiltles sure, which every blast dismates.

He that in midst of perils deep, and dangers hath been cast,
Doth seek all means to shun like ills as he hath overpassed.

So hatreds rise.

He that to much doth use ill will to fear,
Unskilful is: and knows not how, he ought him self to bear
In kings estate. For fear alone doth Kingdoms chiefly keep.
Than he that thus doth arm himself from fear all free may sleep.

Who so the cruel tyrant plays, and guiltless men doth smight,
He dreads them that him do dread, so fear doth chiefly light
On causers chief. A just revenge for bloody minds at last.

Come take this traitor vile away, In dungeon deep him fast
Enclose. There for his due deserts, let him abide such payne
And scourge of mind (as meet it is) false traitors to sustain.

SEt, see, the miserable State,
of Princes careful life.
What raging storms? what bloody broils?
what toil? what endless strife
Do they endure? (O God) what plagues?
what grief do they sustain?
A Princely life: No. No. (No doubt)
an ever during payne.
A state en fit for men on whom Fortune would wreke her will.
A place for Cares to couch them in. A door wide open still
For griefs and dangers all that ben to enter when they list.
A king these Mates must ever have, it boots not to resist.
Whole fluds of privy pinching fear, great anguish of the mind:
Apparent plagues, daily griefs. These playfayres Princes find.
And other none, with whom they spend, and pass their wretched days.
Thus he that Princes lives, and base Estate together ways:
Shall find the one a very hell, a perfect infelicity:
The other eke a heaven right, exempted quite from mysery.
Let OEdipus example be of this unto you all,
A Mirror meet. A Pattern plain, of Princes careful thrall.
Who late in perfect Joy as seem'de, and everlasting blis,
Triumphantly his life out led, a Miser now he is,
And most of wretched Misers all, even at this present time,
With doubtful waives of fear Itost, subject to such a Crime
Whereat my tongue amassed stays, God grant that at the last,
It fall not out as Creon told. Not yet the worst is past,

MY mind with doubtful waives of dread,
is tossed to and fro,
I wot not what to say (Alas)
I am tormented so.
For all the Gods on me do cry,
for pains and vengeance due.
They say that these my guiltless hands.
king Laius lately slue.
But this my conscience void of crime
and mind from mischief free:
To Gods untried, to me well known denies it so to be:
Full well I do remember ^ce* by chance I did dispatch,
A man who sought by force with me presumptuously to match.
His purpose was (a fond attempt) my Chariot for to stay,
This I remember well enough, the strife was in the way.
And he a man well steeped in years, and I a lusty blood,
And yet of mere disdain and pride in vain he me withstood.
But this from, Thebes far was done, a crooked three pathd way,
That was the place in which we fought: it hard by Phocis lay.
Dear Wife resolve my doubts at once, and me expressly tell.
How old was Laius the King when this mischance befell?
Was he of fresh and lusty years? or stricken well in age
When he was kilde? O ease my thoughts of this tormenting rage.
Betwixt an old man an a young: but nearer to an old.

Were there great Bands of men with him his Person to uphold?

Some by the way deceived were, and some deterd by payne.
A few by toil and labour long, did with their Prince remain.

Were any slain in his defence?

Of one report is rife,
Who co^stant in his princes cause full stoutly lost his life.

It is enough, I know the man that hath this mischief done.
The number and the place agrees. The time untried alone
Remaynes: Than tell what time he died, and when that he was slain.

Tis ten years since: you now revive my chifest cares again.

THe Corinth people all (O King)
in Fathers place to rain
Do call your Grace: Polybius doth
eternal rest obtain.
O God what Fortune vile doth me
oppress on every side?
How do my sorrows still increase?
Tell how my Father did.

No sickness (sir) but very age did of his life him reeve.

And is he dead: in deed? not slain? what joy may I tonceaue?
How may I now triumph? the Gods to witness I do call,
To whom are known my hidden thoughts and secret workings al:
Now may I li^ to skies my hands, my hands from mischief free.
But yet the chiefest ^a^se of fear remains still to me.

Your Fathers kingdom ought al dred out of your mind to drive.

That I confess. But secret thoughts my trembling heart do rive
With inward doubt of deep distress, my Mother I do fear.
This grudge is that continually my heart doth rent and tear.

Do you your Mother fear? on your return that only slays.

I fear not her: but from her sight, a godly zeal me frayes.

What will you her a Widow leave?

Now, now, thou w^fi^st (...) heart.
This, this, and only this (alas,) is cause of all my smart.

Tell me (O king) what doubtful fear? doth press thy princely breast:
Kings coucels I can well coceale that ^en with Cares oppressed.

Least as Apollo hath forefolde, I should a Marriage make
With mine own Mother: only this foul fear doth make me quake.

Such vain peuysh fears, at length from out your breast exile.
Meropa your Mother is not in deed, you do your self beguil^.

What vauntage should it be to her adopted Sons to have?

A kingdom she shall gain thereby. Her Husband laid in grave.
The chiefest prop to s^ay her Realms from present confusion,
In children for to have: and hope of lawful succession.

What are the means whereby thou dost these secrets understand.

My self (your grace) an Infant gave into your fathers hand.

Did thou me to my Father give? Who than gave me to thee?

A Sheparde str; that w^nted on Cytheron Hills to be.

What made thee in those woods to rauge? what had thou there to do?

Upon those Hills my Beasts I kept, sometime a Sheepeherde to.

What nots, what privy marks hast thou, whereby thou dost me kno?

The holes y^ through your feet are board fro whence your name did gro.

Declare forthwith what was his name y^ gave me unto thee.

The kings chief Shepherd than that was, delivered you to me.

What was his name?

O king old men's remembrance soon doth fail:
Obliuton for the chietest part, doth boary heads assail.
And drowns their former memory of things long out of mind.

What? can thou know y^ man by sight?

Perhaps I should him find,
And know by Face. Things over whelmd by time, and quite oppressed.
A small mark oft to mind revokes, and fresh renues in breast.

Sirs bid the Herdmen forth with drive their Beasts to Aulters all.
Away with speed, make hast, the Master Sheepherds to me call.

Since that your des^ny this doth hyde, and Fortune it detayue
And closely keep* let it be so, from opening that refrain.
That long canceald hath hidden lain, that seek not to disclose*
Such things outsercht and found oftimes against the sercher goes.

Can any mischief greater be? than this that now I fear.

Advise you well remember first what weight this thing doth bear:
That thus you go about to scarch, and slit with Tooth and Nail,
Observe the golden mean: beware bear still and equal sail.
Your Coutreys wealth (O King) your life, and all upon this lies.
Though you stir not, be sure at length your Fortune you escryes.
A happy state for to disturb doth nought at all behove.

When things be at the worst, of them a man may safely move.

Can you have ought more excellent? than is a Princes state?
Beware least of your Parents found it you repent to late.

No (father) no I warrant that: repent not I (I trow.)
I seek it not to that intent. I have decreed to know,
The matter at the full. Wherefore I will it now pursus.
Lo Phorbas: where he trembling coms, with comely aged h^.
To whom of all the kings flack than, the care and charge was due.
Dost thou his name, his speech his Face, or yet his person know?

Me thinks I should have seen his Face, and yet I cannot show
The places where I have him seen, small time brings such a chainge,
As well acquainted Faces ost, to us appear still strange.
This look is neither thoroughly known, nor yet unknown to me,
I cannot tell: I doubt it much, and yet it may be he.
In Laius time long since when he these Kindomes great did keep?
Wast thou not on Citheron hills chief Shepard to his sheep?

SOmetime a charge of sheep I had,
unworthy though I weer.
And did upon those hills chief rule
on other Shepards bear.
Know thou not me.

I cannot tell.

Did thou once give this man
A Child. Speak out, why dost thou stay?
if so, declare it than.
Why dost thou blush and doubting stand,
troth seeks no delay?

Things out of mind you call again, almost quite worn away.

Confess thou slave, orels I swear, thou that constrained be

In deed I do remember once, an Infant young by me,
Delivered was unto this Man: but well I wot in vain,
I know he could not long endure, nor yet alive remain.
Long since he is dead (I know it well) he lives not at this day.

Eo? God sorbid, he lives no doubt, and long may live I pray.

Why dost thou say the child is dead, that thou this man did give?

With Irons sharp his feet were board, I know he could not live,
For of the sore a swelling rose, I saw the blood to gush
From out of both the wounds: and down by pouring streams to flush.

Now stay (O king) ^p farther now, you know almost the troth.

Whose child was ^tell ^e forthw.

I dare not for mine Other.

Thine Oath thou slave? Some fire here. I'll charm thine Other and thee,
With fire flames: except forthwith thou tell the troth to me.

O pardon me, though rade I seem, I seek nor to withstand name?
Your graces mind: (most noble king.) My life is in your hand.

Tell me y^ troth, what child, whose, What was his Mothers

Born of your wife.

O gaping earth devour my body quite:
Or else thou God that (...) art of houses void of light,
To Hell my Saule with thunder bolts to Hell my Soul down drive.
Where grisly Ghosts in dark ness deep, and endless payne do live.
For thee alone, these Plagues do rage. For thee these mischiefs rise.
For thee, the Earth lies desolate. For thee thou wretch the Skies
Infected are. For thee, for thee, and for the slithy lust,
A hundred thousand guiltless men, consumed are to dust.
O people throw: cast heaps of stones upon this hateful Head:
Bath all your swords within my breast: you furies ouershed
My restless thoughts, with raging woes and plungde in seas of pain.
Let me those horrors still endure, which damned souls sustain.
You citizens of Stately Thebes vex me with torments dile.
Let Father, Son, and Wife, and all with vengeance me ^rsue.
Let those that for my sake alone with plagues (...) be
Throw dar^s, cast stones, fling f^er* and slames, and tortures all on me.
O shame: O slander of the World: O hate of Gods above.
Confounder O of Nature thou to laws of sacred love,
Even from thy birth an open Foe. Thou did deserve to dye
As soon as thou wast born. Go, go, vnt^ the Court thee hye,
There with thy Mother (slave) triumph rejoice as thou may do.
Who hast thy house increased with unhappy children so.
Make haste with speed, away, some thing thy mischiefs worthy find.
And on thy self wreck all the spite of thy revenging mind.

FOrtune the guide of human life doth al things change at will.
And stirrig still, with restless thoughts our wretched midst doth fill.
In vayn men strive their stats to keep when hidrous tempests rise:
And blustering winds of dangers deep sets death before their eyis.
Who saith he doth her fawning feel? chaugeth not his mind,
When fickle fight of Fortunes wheel doth turn by course of kind.
These grievous plagues fro private house to princely Thrones do flow,
And oft their minds with cares they souse and thick upon the strew.
Whole heaps of grief and dire debate, a woeful thing to see:
A Princely life to misers state, converted for to be.
O OEdipus thy fatal fall, thy dreadful mischiefs right.
Thy dolfull state, thy mysery, thy thrice unhappy plight:
These things shall blase through all y^ world: what heart may the rejoice
At thy distress? I can no more: my tears do stop my voice.
But what is he that yonder stamps? and raging puffs and blows.
And often shakes his vexed head, some mischief great he knows.
Good sir your countnaunce doth import some great and fearful thing,
Tell us therefore (if that you may) what news from Court you bring.

When OEdipus accursed wretch,
his fatal falls had spied,
To hell be damned his wretched soul
and on the Gods he cried
For vengeance due. And posting fast
with frantic mood grisly hue,
Unto his dole full Court he went,
his thoughts for to pursue.
Much like a Lion ramping wild, his furtous head that shakes.
And roars with thundering mouth asowd, and often gnashing makes,
None otherwise this miser fared. A loathsome sight to see.
Besides himself for very rage, he still desires to dye.
And rolling round his wretched Eyes with visage pale and wan:
Ten thousand Cursers out he powers. Himself the unhappiest man
Of all that live, he doth account: as justly he may do.
A wretch, a slave, a cait^se vile. The cause of all our woe.
And in this case enflamd with spite he crtes, he stamps, he raves.
And boiling in his secret thoughts, he still desires to have
All torments under sun that may his Cares conceiude increase.
O wretched wight, what should he do? What man may him release?
Thus foaming all for rage at mouth, with sighs, and sobs, groans,
His damned head ten thousand times, as oft his wearied bones
He beats. And often puffing makes, and roars, and swells, sweats.
And on the Gods for death he calls, for Death he still entreats,
Three times he did begin to speak: and thryse his tong did stay.
At length he cried out aloud: O wretch. Away, away.
Away thou monstrous Beast (he said:) wilt thou prolong thy life?
Nay rather some man strike this breast with struck of bloody knife.
Or all you Gods above on me your flaming fierce outcast:
And dints of Thunderbolts down throw. This is my prayer last.
What greedy vile devouring Gripe, upon my guts will gnaw?
That Tiger fierce my hateful limbs will quite a lunder draw?
Lo, here I am you Gods: Lee, here, wreke now on me your will.
Now, now you fyry Feendes of Hell, of vengeance take your fill.
Send out some wild outrageous beast send Dogs me to devour.
Or else all ils you can devise, at once upon me power.
O woeful soul. O sinful wretch. Why dost thou fear to dye?
Death only rids fro woes thou know. Than stoutly Death defle.
With that his bloody fatal Blade, from out his sheath he draws.
And loud he rores, with thundering voice. Thou beast why dost thou pause?
Thy Father cursed caitiff thou, thy Father thou hast slain
And in thy Mothers bed hast left an euerduring slain.
And Brothers thou hast got: nay Sons thou lie: thy Brothers all
They are. Thus for thy monstrous lust thy Country down doth fall.
And think thou than for all these ils enough so short a payne?
Thynkst thou the Gods will be apeasde, if thou forth with be slain?
So many mischiefs don: and is't enough one stroke to bydt?
Account'ste thou it sufficient pains, that once thy sword should glide
Quite through thy guilty breast for all? why than dispatch and dye.
So may thou recompense thy Fathers death sufficiently.
Let it be so: what mends unto thy Mother will thou make ^
Unto thy children what? these plagues (O wretch) how wilt thou slake?
That thus for thee thy country mastes? Ohe push shall end them all.
A proper fetch. A fi^e devise. For thee a worthy fall.
Invent thou monstrous beast forthwith: a fall even worthy for
Thy self invent: whom all men hate and loath, and do abhor.
And as dame Natures lawful course is broke (O wretch) by thee.
So let to such a mischief great, thy Death agreeing be.
O that I might a thousand times, my wretched life renew.
O that I might reuyue and dye by course in order dew.
Ten hundred thousand times more: than should I vengeance take
Upon this wretched head. Than I perhaps in part should make
A meet amends in deed, for this my foul and lothsom Sin.
Than should the proof of payne reprove the life that I live in.
The choice is in thy hand thou wretch, than use thine own discretion.
And find a means, whereby thou may come to extreme confusion.
And that, that oft thou may not do, let it prolonged be.
Thus, thus, may thou procure at length an endless death to thee.
Search out a death whereby thou may perpetual shame obtain:
And yet not dye. But still to live in everlasting payne.
Why stayst thou man? Go to I say: what mean these blubbering tears?
Why weepst thou thus? Alas to late. Leave of thy foolish fears.
And is't enough to weep think thou? shall tears and wailing serve?
No wretch it shall not be. Thou dost ten thousand deaths deserve.
Mine ey^es do dally with me I see, and tears do still out power.
Shall tears suffice? No, no, not so I shall them better scour,
Out with thine Eyes (he said:) and than with fury fierce enflam'de.
Like to a bloody raging Feend and monstrous beast vntam, de.
With fiery flaming spotted Cheeks his breast he often beats.
And scratch, and tear his Face he doth and Skin a sunder freats.
That scarce his eyes in head could stand so sore he them besets.
With furious fierce outrageous mind he stamps and cries aloud:
And roars rails, with ramping rage. Thus in this case he stood,
Perplexed, and vexed sore in mind, with deadly sighs and tears.
When suddenly all franticklike himself from ground he reares.
And roots out his wretched Eyes, and sight a sunder tears.
Than gnasheth be his bloody Teeth, and bites, and gnawes, champs,
His Eyes all bathd and brude in blood, for fury fierce he stamps.
And raging more than needs (alas,) his Eyes quite rooted out:
The very holes in vain he scrapes so sore the wretch doth dout:
Least sight should chance for to remain he rents and mangels quite
His Face, his Nose, his Mouth, and all whereon his hands do light
He rygs and ryues. Thus fowly rayd (alas) in piteous plight:
At length his head aloft he lifts, and therewith geues a shright.
And when he sees that all is gone, both light, and sight, and all.
Than screeching out: he thus begins upon the Gods to call.
Now spare you Gods, now spare at length my country pressed to fall.
I have done that you did coma^nd: Your wraths revenged be.
This wretched look, this mangled face, is fittest now for me.
Thus speaking, down the blackish blood by streams doth gushing flow
Into his mouth. And clottred lumps of flesh the place doth strew
Wherein he stands.
Beware betimes, by him beware, I speak unto you all.
Learn Justice, truth, and fear of God by his unhappy fall.
MAns life with tumbling fatal course of fortunes wheel is rowld,
To it give place for it doth run all swifily vncontrowld.
And Cares tears are spent in vayn, for it cannot be slayed:
Sith hi^ decree of heavenly powers perforce must be obeyed.
What mankind byded or does on earth it comes from above,
Then wailing groans poured out in grief do nought at all behove.
Our life must have her pointed course, (alas) what shall I say.
As fates decree, so things do run, no man can make them stay.
For at our birth to Gods is known our latter dying day.
No Prayer, no Art, not God himself may fatal fates resist.
But fastened all in fixed court, vnchaunged they persist.
Such end them still ensues as they appointed were to have,
Than fly all fear of Fortunes c^ng, leek hot to live a slave
Enthrald in bondage vile to fear. For fear doth often bring
Destnies that dreaded ben and mischiefs feared upon us fling.
Yea many a man hath come unto his fatal end by fear.
Wherefore set peevish fear aside, and worthy courage bear.
And thou that subject art to death. Regard thy latter day.
Think no man blessed before his end. Advise thee well and stay.
Be sure his life, and death, and all, be quite exempt from mysery:
Ere thou do once presume to say: this man is blessed and happy.
But out alas, see where he coms: a wretch withouten Guide,
Bereft of sight. Half spoiled of life: without all Pomp, and Pride
(That unto Kings Estate belong.)
WEll, well, tis done: more yet? No, no,
no mischiefs more remaynee.
My Fathers Rytes performed are.
What God on Misers pains
That rues within this Cloud hath rolde,
and wrapped my wretched Pate.
Ah sir: this is a life alone.
This is a happy State.
This is a case en fit for thee,
for thee thou wretch, for thee.
From whose accursed sight the Sun, the Stars and all do flee.
Yet mischiefs more, who gives to do? The dreadful day I have
Escaped. Thou filthy Parricide: thou vile mischievous Slave.
Unto thy right hand nought thou owst, all things performed be.
O woe is me that ever I lived this luckless day to see.
Where am I now? Alas, alas, the light and all doth me
Abhor: O wretched OEdipus this look is first for thee.
See, see, where Iocasta coms, with fierce and furious mood,
Quite past her self. For very rage she frets and waxes wood.
Much like to Cadmus daughter mad, who late her Son did kill.
Fain would she speak her mind: for sear (alas) she dares not: still
She stays, and yet from out her breast these ills have quite exiled
All shame fastnes. See how she looks, with cou^'naunce fierce wild.

Fain would I speak, I am afraid. For what should I thee call
My Son? doubt not. Thou art my Son. My Son thou art for all
These mischiefs great: alas, alas I shame my Son to see.
O cruel Son. Where dost thou turn thy Face? Why dost thou slay
From me. From me thy Mother dear? Why dost thou shun my sight?
And leave me thus in misery, with Cares consumed quite.

Who troubles me? Let me alone. I thought not to be found:
Who now restores mine Eyes to me, Mother? or Mothers sound?
Our labour all is spent in vain, now may we meet no more.
The Seas divide those meetings vile that we have had before.
The gaping earth divide us both, th'one from the other quite.
Still let our feet repugnant be. So shall I shun the light
That most of all me grieves. So shall I space obtain to whale
These bleeding woes on every side, that do my thoughts assail.

The Destentes are in fault. Blame them, Alas, alas, not we.

Spare now. Leave of to speak in vain, spare now O Mother me,
By these Relics of my dismembered body I thee pray.
By mine unhappy Children pledges left. What shall I say?
By all the Gods I thee beseech. By all that in my name
Is good or bad, let me alone. Alas you are to blame
To trouble me. You see what hell my haplesse heart doth payne.
You see that in my Conscience ten thousand horrors rain.

O dying heart: O sindrownd soul. Why dost thou faint alas?
Why dost thou seek and toil in vain these ills to ouerpas?
What mean these sighs, scalding tears? why dost thou death refuse?
Thou mate of all his mischiefs thou, by whose means only rues
The law of nature all: by whom, Ah, Ah, confounded lies,
Both God, and man, and beast, and all that either lives or dies.
Die thou, dispatch at once thrust through thy vile incestuous breast:
Thou hast none other means (alas) to set thine heart at rest.
Not thou, if God him self, if he his flaming fierce should throw
On thee, or mischiefs all by heaps upon thy body strew
Could once for thy deserved ills due pains or vengeance pay:
Some means therefore to wreak Gods wrath upon thy self assay.
Death, death now best contents me, then seek a way to dye.
So may thou yet at length find end for all thy misery.
O Son lend me thy hand: since that thou art a Paracyde.
This labour last of all remaynes, this labour thee doth bide.
Dispatch rid me thy mother dear from all my deadly woe
It will not be: no prayers avail. Thy self this deed must do.
Take up this sword. Go to, with this thy husband late was slain.
Husband? thou term'st him false: he was thy syer: O deadly payne.
Shall I quite through my breast it drive? or through my throat it thrust?
Can thou not choose thy wound? away: die, die, (alas) thou must.
This hateful womb then would (O wretch) this, this with thine own hand
Strike, strike it hard: (O spare it not) since both a husband, and
(The same a Son it bare.)

Alas, alas, she is slain, she is slain, dispatched with a push:
Who ever saw the like to this: see how the blood doth gush.
O heavy doulfull case: who can this direful sight enduer
Which for the hideousness thereof might tears of stones procuer.

Thou God, thou teller out of Fates. On thee, on thee, I call,
My Father only I did owe, unto the Destnies all.
Now twice a Parricide, and worse than I did fear to be:
My Mother I have slain. (Alas) the fault is all in me.
O OEdipus accursed wretch, lament thine own Calamity,
Lament thy state, thy grief lament, thou Caitiff borne to misery.
Where wilt thou now become (alas?) thy Face where wilt thou hyde:
O miserable Slave, can thou such shameful torments bide?
Can thou which hast thy Parents slain? Can thou prolong thy life?
Wilt thou not dye? deserving Death: thou cause of all the grief,
And Plagues, and dreadful mischiefs all that Thebane City press.
Why dost thou seek by longer life, thy sorrows to increase?
Why dost thou toil and labour thus in vain? It will not be.
Both God, and man: and beast, and all abhor thy Face to see
O Earth why gapst thou not for me^ why do you not unfold
You gates of hell me to receive? why do you hence withhold?
The fierce Infernal Feends from me, from me so wretched wight?
Why break not all the Furies lose this hateful head to smight
With Plagues? which them deserved hath (alas) I am left alone,
Both light, and sight, and comfort all from me (O wretch) is gone.
O cursed head: O wicked wight, whom all men deadly hate.
O Beast, what meanst thou still to live in this unhappy state?
The Skies do blush and are ashamed, at these thy mischiefs great
The Earth laments, y^ Heavens weep, the Seas for rage do freat.
And blustering rise, and storms do stir, and all thou wretch for thee.
By whose incest, and bloody deeds all things disturbed be.
Quite out of course, displaced quite, O cursed fatal day.
O mischiefs great, O dreadful times, O wretch, away, away.
Exile thy self from all men's sight, thy life half spent in misery,
Go end consume it now outright in thrice as great calamity.
O lying Phoebe thine Oracles my sin, and sheme surmount:
My Mothers death amongst my deeds; thou never did recount.
A meet Exploict for me that a^ to Nature deadly Foe.
With trembling fearful pace go forth, thou wretched monster go,
Grope out thy ways on knees in dark thou miserable Slave.
So may thou yet in tract of time due pains, and vengeance have,
For thy mischievous life. Thus, thus, the Gods themselves decree.
Thus, thus, thy Fates: thus, thus, the skies appoint it for to be.
Then headlong hence, with a mischief hence, thou caitiff vile away.
Away, away, thou monstrous Beast. Go, Run. Stand, stay,
Least on thy Mother thou do fall.
All you that wearied bodies have, with stickenesse ouerprest.
Lo, now I fly: I fly away, the cause of your unrest.
Lift up your heads: a better state of Air shall straight ensewe
When I am gone: for whom alone, these dreadful myschiefs grew.
And you that now, half dead yet live in wretched misers case.
Help those who present torments press forth, hye you on apace.
For lo, with me I cary hence, all mischiefs under Skies.
All cruel Fates, Diseases all that for my sake did rise,
With me they go: with me both grief, Plague, Pocks, Botch, all
The ills that either now you press, or ever after shall.
With me they go, with me: these Mates bin meetst of all for me.
Who am the most unhappiest wretch that ever Sun did see.


