NOw that Aurore with glittering streams,
The glading stars from sky doth chase,
Sir Phoebus pert, with spouting beams,
From dewy nest doth mount apace:
And with his cheerful looks doth yield,
Unto the world a gladsome day.
Go to, O wretch, with ample Field
Of heavy cares oppressed aye,
Thy grievous wonted plaints recount:
Do not alone with sighs and howls,
The Seaysh Aloyones surmount,
But also pass the Pandyon fowls:
More irksome is thy state then theirs*
O Mother dear whose death by fits,
I nyll lament but still shed tears,
My ground of grief in thee it sits.
If that in shade of darksome den,
Perceiving sense at al remain,
Hear out at large, O mother then,
My great complaints, and grievous payne
O that immortal Clothos wrist,
Had torn in twain my vital thread:
Ere I unto my grief had wist
Thy wounds, and face of sanguine red.
O day which aye doth me annoy:
Since that time did I more desire,
The fearful darkness to enjoy,
Than Phoebus fresh with fair attire.
I have abode the bitter hest
Of stepdame dire, in mothers place,
I have abode her cruel breast,
Her stomach stout, and fighting face.
She, She, for spyte unto my case,
A doleful, and a grave Eryn,
To Bridegrooms chamber spousal space,
The Stygian flashing flames brought in.
And thee, (alas) most piteous Sire,
With traytrous traynes hath she bereft
Of breathing soul with poisoned mire:
To whom ere while, the world all left
Vnvanquisht from the Ocean Seas
By martial feats did freely yield:
And did subdue with wondrous ease,
The Brittayne brutes that fled the field:
Whom living at their propre swaye:
No Romayne power did erst invade.
Now lo (full well lament I may)
Thy Spouse deceypte thy prowes hath lade ^
And now thy court and child of yore,
With homage serve a Tyrants lore.
WHom so the glistering pomp of royal place,
With soden sight ynumd doth quite disgrace,
Who so at courtly fleeting ebbing blase,
Astonished sore, himself doth much amass:
Lo see of late the great and mighty stock,
By lurking Fortunes sudden forced knock,
Of Claudius quite subvert and clean extinct:
Tofore, who held the world in his precinct:
The Brittayne Ocean coast that long was free,
He ruled at will, and made it to agree,
Their Romaine Galleys great for to embrace.
Lo, he that Tanais people first did chase,
And Seas unknown to any Romayne wight
With lusty sheering ships did ouerdight,
And safe amid the savage freakes did fight,
And ruffling surging seas hath nothing dread,
By cruel spouses gilt doth lye all dead.
Her son likewyse more fiend then Tiger fierce,
Of natural mother makes a funeral her se,
Whose brother drenched deep with poisoned cup.
Pore Britannic, his senseless soul gave up
Octauia sister and unhappy make,
Doth sore lament her case for Britans sake,
No can her ruthful piteous sorrow slake,
Though Neros wrath do sore constrain her grace
She nil esteems the secrete closet place:
But boiling still with equal peysd disdain.
With mutual hate gaynst him doth burn again.
My true and trusty love that I do bear,
In vain I see doth strive to comfort her,
Revenging greedy grief doth straight reprive,
T'appease her smart the counsel that I give,
Nor flame of worthy breast doth once relent
But heaps of grief, her courage do augment.
Alas, what griesely deeds for to ensue
My fear foreseeth: God grant it be not true.
O Staggering state, O peerless ill:
With ease Electra I repeat,
And call to mind thy mourning will.
With watered eyes like smartig sweat
Thou might lament thy father slain,
Still hoping that thy brother might,
That deadly deed revenge again.
Whom thou O tender loving wight
Did safely shield from bloody foe,
And natural love did closely keep:
But Neroes dreaded visage lo,
Doth fear me that I dare not weep,
Nor whale my parents ruchful case,
By cruel lot this slaughter caught:
No suffers me this genial face,
To dash with tears to dearly bought
With brothers blood: who only was
Mine only hope in all my grief,
And of so many mischiefs, as
My comfort great, and sole relief.
Now lo reserud for greater care,
And to abide more lingering payne,
Of noble famous lineage bare,
A drooping shade I do remain.
My Ladies heavy voice me thought
Within my listening ears can sound,
And snaylish age in going soft,
Unto her thews in not ybounde.

O Nurse our dolours witness sure
By curroll cheeks distilling rain,
And heavy hearts complaint endure.

Alas, what day shall rid of payne,
With care your well-nigh wasted heart?

That sends this guiltles ghost to grave

This talk (good madame) set apart.

In rule my state their destinies have,
And not thy prayers, (O matron) just.

The down soft easy God shall give,
Your troubled mind a time I trust,
More sweet then ever you did live.
With feuell fair as one content,
And glosed face, but only please
Your man, and make, he will relent.

The Lyon fierce I shall appeal,
And sooner tame the Tiger stout,
Then mankynd Tyrants brutish breast,
He spytes the noble raced ^out,
Contemmes high powers, disdains the least:
No can well use that princely weed,
Which venomous parent wrapped him in
By huge unspeakable grisly deed.
Although that wight unthankful, grynne,
In Kingly throne that he doth raygne,
Through cruel cursed mothers aid:
Although he pay with Death again
So great a gift, it shall be said
And after fates in long spent age,
That woman wight shall have always,
This eloge yet and saying sage,
That he by her doth bear the sway,

Let not your ragious mind so walk,
But do compresse your moody talk.

THough much I bear that boiling breast do beat
And tolerably take diuor cements threat,
Deaths only deadly dart, I see an end,
Of al my broil and pinching payne can send,
What pleasant light to me (O wretch) is left,
My natural Mother slain, and Sire be reft,
Of breathing life, by treason, and by gilt:
Of Brother eake depriude: with miseries spilt:
And wailing overcome: kept down with care,
Envied of Make, which I dare not declare.
To maiden subject now, and now defied:
What pleasant light can me (O wretch) abide,
With fearful hart suspecting always ought:
Because I would no wicked deed were wrought:
Not that I fear Deaths grisly gyrning face,
God grant I do not so revenge my case,
A better deed to dye: for to behold
The Tyrants visage gri^e, with brows vprolde
And with soft tender lips my foe to kiss,
And stand in awe of beckes and noddes of his,
Whose will to please my grief with cares yfirde
Since brothers death by wicked while conspired,
Could never once vouchsafe for to sustain,
Less grief to die, then thus to live in payne.
His Empire Nero rules and joys in blood:
The cause and ground of death that Tyrant wood.
How oft (alas) doth Fancy fondly fain.
When slumber sweet in pensive parts doth reign,
And sleep in eyes, all tyrd with tears doth rest,
I apprehend dear Brittans lively breast:
Ere while me thinks his feeble shivering hands
He fenseth sure with deadly blazing brands,
And fiercely on his brother Neros face,
With sturdy stinging strokes he flies apace.
Ere while thilke wretch recoyleth back* again,
And to my thewes for aide retires amain:
Him foaming foe pursues with hast to have:
And while my brother I desire to save,
And in my clasped arms to shield him free,
His goary bloudied falchion keen I see.
The boisterous raumping fiend to ^ugge, hale
Through out my ^hiuering limbs, as ashes pale.
Forthwith a mighty trembling chattering quake
From weary limbs all souple sleep doth shake,
And makes me woeful wretch for to recount,
My wailing sobbing sorrows that surmount.
Hereto, put to that gorgeous stately (...) ouse,
All glistering bright, with spoils of Claudius house
His parent dear in bubbling boat did douse,
That wicked son, this fisking dame to please.
Whom yet escaping dangers great of Seas.
He fiercer freak than waives that scantly rest,
With bloody blade her bowels did vnbrest.
What hope of health, can me, O wretch, abide,
That after them thilke way I should not ride?
My special foe, triumphant wise doth weight,
With naked nates to press by lovers slight,
Our spousal, pure, and clean vnspotied bed:
Against whom, she burns, with deadly food blood red.
And, for a mead of filthy strumpets sport,
She causes Make from spouse for to diuort.
O ancient Sire, step forth from Limbo lake,
Thy daughters heavy troublous cares to slake:
Or your twygated hellysh porch unfold,
That down through gaping ground I may be rolde.
O piteous wretch, in vain, (alas) in vain
Thou call upon thy fathers senseless sprite:
In whom, God wot, there doth no care remain
Of mortal brood, that here doth take delight.
Shall he, think you, assuage your sorry cheer,
Or shape you forth some slight, t^ appall your pain,
That could prefer, before his Brittan dear,
Th'imperiall throne, a strange begotten swain?
And with incestiall love benumbed quyte
His brother Germanicks daughter that could plyght,
And join to him in solemn marriage rites,
With woeful, and unlucky lovers lights?
Here sprang the roale of hurly burly great,
Here beastly veuomous slaughter began to sweat,
Here wily treasons trains appeared first,
Here rules desire, and brutish bloody thirst.
Syllanus first Prince Claudius son in law,
A bloody mangled offering fall we saw,
That in our graces Hymaenea^ bed,
Ymatcht with you, he might not couch his head.
O monstrous slaughter, worthy endless blame^:
In stead of gift unto that wanton dame,
A Carcass cold pore soul, and cureless corse,
Sillane was given against his will perforce.
And falsely then attacht of traitors crime,
As one conspyring death in Claudius time,
With loathsome streakes spewde out upon the wall,
He all bedasht your fathers princely hall.
Left stepped into servile Palace stroke,
To filthy vices lore, one easly broke.
Of Devilish wicked with this Princocks proud:
By stepdames while prince Claudius Son auoude.
Whom deadly damme did bloody match ylight:
And thee, against thy will, for fear did plight.
Through which success this Dame of courage fine,
Durst venture, mighty Jove to undermine.
Who can so many cursed kinds report
Of wicked hopes, and acts in any sort,
Or such a woman's glosed guyles can name,
That raumpes at rule, by all degrees of shame?
Then holy sacred zeal put out of grace,
Her stagring steppes, directed forth apace,
And sterne Erinnis in with deadly steps,
To Claudius Court, all desert left yleps.
And with her dririe drakes of Stygian fort,
Hath quite distainde the sacred princely port.
And raging riuen in twain both natures lore,
And right to wrongs misshapen form hath tore.
That haughty minded dame first gave her make,
A deadly poisoned cup, his thyrst to slake.
Straight ways again through vise unkindly touch,
Her Nero caused with him in hell to couch.
And thee, unhappy Britt, in all that broil,
Till that of breath, and life he did despoil,
Thilk greedy bloody tyrant never stent:
Whose doleful death for aye we may lament.
Ere while, unto the world the star that shone,
And was the stay of princely court alone,
Now lo, light ashes easly puffed aforne,
And grisly goast to grave with torch yborne.
Whom blessed Babe, thy stepdame did lament:
Nor from her gushing tears, did scarce relent,
When as she gave each trim appointed part,
And goodly portraide limbs with natures art,
Of flaming stack to be devoured quite,
And saw the scorching fervent fire in sight
Thy naked joints to rauin up a pace
And like the flittring God thy comely face.

Dispatch he me least with this hand he fall.

That power you, nature granted not at all.

But wondrous dolor, great and wrathful ire,
And miseries will it grant without desire.

Nay rather cause your angry moody make,
With souple cheer his fury for to slake.

What, that he will by guilt once slain before,
Alive again my brother me restore?

Nay, safe that you may live and issue bear:
Your fathers ancient court for to repair.

That court doth wait another brood they say.
And poor Britts death tugs me another way.

Yet let the cities love unto your grace,
Your troubled mind confirm but for a space.

Their minds so pressed to pleasure me, I know
Great comfort brings: but do not slake my wo.

Of mighty power the people have been aye.

But princes force doth bear the greater sway.

He will respect his lawful wedded wife,

His minion brave can not so lead her life.

Of no man she esteemed.

But dear to make*

She can not truly yet of wifehood crake.

Ere lunge she shall a mother eke be made.
So far therein I dare most boldly wade.

His youthful heate at first in filthy love,
With lusty, crusty pangs doth boyle above:
Thylke courage quickly cold in lust apace
As vapour soon extinct in flame gives place.
But holy, loving, chaste unspotted spouse,
Her love endures aye with sacred vows.
That wanton first that there durst couch her head,
And tumbling stained quite your spousal bed,
And being but your maid hath ruled lunge,
Her sovereign Lord, with beauties grace bestong,
That pranked Paramour pert shall croutch with pain,
When she your grace shall see preferred again.
For Poppy subject is, and meek of spright,
And now begins her goastly tombs to dight:
Whereby she closely granting doth bewray,
Her secret hidden fear each other day.
That swift, inconstant, double winged lad
With clout, before his blinded eyes, yclad,
That fickle brained God, thunhappy boy,
Shall leave her in the midst of all her joy:
Although for beauty bright the bell she bear,
And goodly glistering garments new she wear,
And now do vaunt her self in gorgeous geere,
She shall not long enjoy this gladsome cheer.
Be not dismayed, Madame, for such like pain,
The queen of gods was forced to sustain,
When to each pleasant shape the heavenly guide,
And sire of Gods y^urnde, from skies did glyde.
The swans white wings, to se how they could fadge
He did on him, and ruckoldes bullysh badge,
That God shone bright in Golden rainy shower
To Danaes breast through top of fortred tower.
The twinkling stars the twins of Laeda bright,
Whom Pollux, some, and Castor, call aright,
In large and ample space of starry scope,
With crystal glimering faces shyne wide open.
And Semeles son, whom Bacchus we do call,
In heavenly byrthright doth himself ystall.
And Hercules that puissant Champion stout,
His sturdy brawns, his Hebe wyndes about.
Nor once regards how Goddess Iuno fare:
Whose lowering stepdame now she is yframde,
That while on earth his prowes he did declare,
Against that marriage, aye, was sore inflamd.
Yet lo her wise, and closly couched grief,
Debonair face, obeisance to her leefe,
Caused him at length his mind for to remove,
Through mortal feeres estraundge from Iunos love.
And now that mighty heavenly Goddess great,
No more adred of mortal strumpets feat,
Aloft alone in cloudy bower contents
The thundering Lord, which now to her relentes.
Nor now with earthly Ladies beauty bright
Yfyred, leaves his starry specked right.
Now madam since on earth your power is pight
And have on earth Queen Iunos princely place,
And sister are, and wife to Neroes grace,
Your wondrous restless dolours great appease.

Nay, sooner shall the roaring froathy seas,
And mounting flashing flaws ymatch the sky,
And smoking, stifling parching fire dry
With dank pooles agree and watery fen:
And grisly Plutoes filthy feltred den,
With starbright heaven shall sooner coupled be,
And shining light with glomy shades agree,
And with the clear dry day the dewy night,
Than unto servile lore of husband wight,
That brutish wise in blood takes his delight,
My heavy woeful mind can I address,
While brothers death my heart doth still possess.
O that of heavenly powers the prince and sire,
That shogges and shakes the earth with thundering fire,
And with his wondrous, fearful, cursed cracks,
And strange misshapen monsters which he makes,
Our fearful musing minds doth sore amass,
Would coin some cureless burning wildfyre blase,
To pelt and pash with thumping fire bright,
That devilish pate, that cruel cursed wight.
We saw from heaven, with beams forthshoting far
Doubtless a dreadful heary, blazing star:
That spouted out a mortal fiery flake,
Whose force a princes blood can only slake:
Even where that hayting carman sloe Boot
With chilling cold al starcke of frozen pole,
Doth guide aright Charles whirling running rote,
In stead of night that never away doth role.
Lo now the open air in every streate,
With doggish tyrants breath, is poisoned, quite,
And dreadful stars some sudden death do threat.
To people ruled, by wicked Neroes spright.
So sterne a freak, or mankynd tyrant stout,
Not Tellus with the Gods displeased brought out,
When mighty Jove neglected she vphorlde
Huge, ugly, monstrous Typhon to the world.
A sorer plague, a cleaner scouring scourge,
With bloody paws that cities bounds doth purge,
Is Nero dire, this cruel cursed wight.
That doth himself gaynst God and man ydyght:
And thrusts from sacred shrynes their quiet port,
And goodly temples gay ^he sancted sort:
That cittyes dwellers puts from countries fort:
That hath bereft his brother of his life,
And launcht his mothers sides with goary knife:
Yet doth this present lightsome day enjoy
And leads his life, that doth us sore annoy.
O Father of heaven, in vain why dost thou throw
Thy great vnuanquisht rattling thundering blow
Upon the whistling woods and ample seas,
With force of princely power thy wrath t'appease?
Ou such an hurtful and pernicious freak,
Thy due and just conceived ire to wreak.
Why stay thy mighty puissant braunds so long,
Ere thou fling down thy rattling cracking throng?
O Lord, that Nero once might pay the price,
Of all his devilish deeds, and every vice,
Th'whole wide worlds tyrant sterne where he a stroke
Doth bear: which he ouerlades with burdnous yoke
Of princely sire yborne, but doth defame,
With beastly manners vile his princely name:

Vnworth he is your spousal chamber place:
But yet your destnies force, you must embrace,
And well, abide your fortunes crooked race:
Nor move vnkyndly Neroes gauly ire.
One day perchance, there will as I desire,
Some God revenge your lamentable case:
And once I trust a gladsome day shall be,
When you shall joy a fresh in wonted place.

Ah. no, now, long this court (alas) we see
With heavy wrath of Gods displeased ire
Hath overcharged been: which Venus dire
With Messalinas monstrous ramping lust,
She first hath brought down into the dust.
Who madly married to prince Claudius grace,
But little mindful then of that same case,
And not regarding much thappoynted payne,
With cursed cressets married once again.
To which unlucky incestuall bridal bed,
That drosell dire that furious slut Erin,
With hanging hair about her hellish head,
And girt with snakes with deadly step went in.
And flaming brands from spousal chamber caught,
In both their bloods ybathd, hath quenched clean:
And hath incensed prince Claudius burning thought
In bloody thratling stroke to pass all mean.
My mother first of wretches all the most,
With stripe of deadly sword gave up her ghost.
And now extinguished quite, left me forlorn,
With dolours pining pangs and mourning worn.
And after her in hellish team doth hayle,
Unto the senseless souls of Plutoes jail
Her make, and Brittannick her son that way:
And first this ruinous court did she betray.

Let be, Madame, with tears your face to dight:
No so renew your bitter wailing just:
Cease troubling now your parents piteous spright,
That payed hath the price of raging lust.

God grant the talk we heard of late,
To rashly trusted every where,
And blown abroad through each estate,
No badge of truth that it may bear.
And that no fresh espoused dame,
Our Princes thewes do enter in,
But that OCTAVIA keep the same,
And that the seed of GLADIV Skin,
May once bringforth some pledge of peace:
That to the world rest may redowne,
And wrangling strife may easly cease,
And Rome retain her great renown.
The peerless Princess Iuno hight,
Her brothers wedlock yoke retaynes:
Why is AVGVSTVS sister bright,
Where like betrothed league remaynes,
From stately pomp of court reject,
What doth deuoutnes her avail?
To sayncted sire who hath respectt?
What doth her Virgins life prevail?
And CLAVDIV Snow in ground ylayed,
Even we to much vnmyndefull be:
Whose worthy steme we have betrayed
Throught fear that made us to agree.
In breast our elders did embrace,
The perfect Romayne puissance,
The true unstained worthy race,
And blood of Mars they did advance.
The proud and lofty stomached train
Of lusty hauty minded Kings,
They could not suffer to remain
Within this noble Cities wings.
And justly they reuengd thy death,
O Virgin chaste, VIRGINIA pure,
Depriude by sire of vital breath,
That bondage thou might not endure:
And that his shameless brutish lust,
So good a mead might not enjoy:
Although by filthy force unjust
Thy chastity he would annoy.
Thee likewyse whom thine own right hand,
With sword did pearce, LVCRETIA true,
Who tyrants rape could not withstand,
Did bloody broils and wars ensue*
ANd with her proud disdainful Make
Lord TARQVIN imp of cursed seed,
Correction due doth TVLLIA take
For her unkindly shameless deed,
Who on her Fathers mangled corse,
To mischief bent, and wicked bane,
The Carman she to drive did force,
His cruel bruising wombling wane.
And quite against all natures law,
Even from her own dismembered ^yre,
The sacred rytes she did withdraw,
Denaying wonted burial fire
This grief our woeful age doth feel,
Through monstrous act against all kind,
When as in deadely crafty keele,
To TYRRHEN seas, and wrestling wynd,
The proud presuming Prince did put,
His mother trapt in subtle sort*
The Mariners appointed cut,
The swelling Seas from pleasant port.
The clash resounds with stroke of Ores,
The Ship out launcht apace doth spin,
In surging froth aloof from shores,
And ample course of seas doth win.
Which glydyng forth with leusned planks,
In pressed streams with peysed weight,
The riftes do open closed cranks,
That hidden were with secrete slight:
And gulpeth up the leaking wave
The woeful roaring noise and cry,
With woman's shrikes themselves to save*
Do reach and beat the starry sky.
Then grie^ly present death doth dance
Before their eyes with pining Cheeks:
Whose deadly stroke and heavy chance
For to avoid, then each man seeks:
On ryuened ribs some naked lie,
And cut the beating waives in twain:
And some their skilful swimming try,
To get unto the shore again.
The greatest part that sailed there,
By destnies dire to men prefixed,
In whirling swallows drowned were,
The brinkes of Seas and ground betwixt.
Queen AGRIPPYNE her garments rends,
She tears her ruffled locks of hair
Abundant blubbering tears she spends,
Through deep distress of fainting fear.
Who when no hope of health she spies,
Enflamde with wrath, which woes appeasde,
O son, for so great gifts, she cries,
Hast thou with such reward me pleased?
This keele I have deserved sure,
That bare and brought thee first to light:
Who empire witless did procure,
And CAESARS title for thy right.
Show forth thy fearful spritish face,
O CLADIVS now from Limbo lake,
And of thy wife in wretched case,
Revenge and due correction take.
Thy death I causeles did conspyre,
Which now I rue with woeful heart:
I dressed eake a funeral fire
Unto thy son by deadly smart.
Lo now as I deserved have,
Vntombde go to thy guiltles Ghost,
Encloasd in seas in stead of grave,
And wrestling waives of Romayne coast.
The flashing flaws do flap her face,
And on her speaking mouth do beat,
Anon she sinks a certain space,
Depressed down with surges grea:
Anon she fleets on weltering brim,
And pattes them of with tender hands
Through fainting fear then taught to swim
Approaching death, and fates withstandes
At length on troubled Seas displayed
She giving over working vain
And tyrd with streams is weary laid,
Not able toiling strength to strain
In close and secrete silent breasts,
Of mates with her to sea that yode,
In whom no fear of death there rests
True faith unto their Queen abode.
Their Ladies weather beaten limbs
To help, some freely venture dare,
Some in the combrous waters swymmes
And desperate danger do not spare.
With cheerful voice they comfort her,
Though drawling dragling limbs she drew,
To lift her up with help they stir,
And numbed corpse to strength renew.
What bootesit thee the death to shone
Of roaring raging ravening waives.
From deadly sword of wicked son,
Alas pore wretch thee nothing saves?
Whose huge and heinous cursed rage,
Against all course of natures lore,
Our after slow believing age,
Will scarce beleene it done before,
The devilish man repynde with grief
When he is mother saved saw,
From swallowing seas have safe relief,
And that she vital breath did draw,
He grudgde with grief and in his heate,
He huger mischief heaps to this:
He doth not once delay his feat,
But headlong rashly carried is
Upon her death. A soldier sent,
Dispatches that he had in charge,
His Ladies breast his blade doth rent:
She yielding up her sold at large,
From wretched corpse for to entomb
Her slaughter man she then besought,
That bloody blade within her womb,
That first this woe to her had brought,
This, this accursed breast (quoth she)
Which this unkindly monster bare,
From pinching payne may not be free:
Dig, slash the same, no mischief spare.
When this with foltring tongue was said,
At last her sad and trembling ghost,
With latter sobbing sighs vnstayd,
Through goryd wounds leaves vital coast.
ON me with like consent why did thou smile,
With glosed looks deluding me a while,
O fortune much of might and princely power?
To lift aloft to noble royal bower?
To the'nde that I to honours court extolled,
From stately seat might have the greater fall,
And round about in every place behold,
Such dreadful, threating dangers to us all,
I safer lay aloof from enuyes knocks,
Removed among the craggy corsicke rocks:
Where as my mind there free at proper sway,
With leisure did repeat my studies aye.
A gladsome joy alone it was to view,
And earnestly to mark the heavens so blew:
And sacred Phoebus double wheeled wayne:
And eake the worlds swift whirling motion mayne.
The Sun so even his second course to keep:
And Phoebes gliding globe so swiftly sweep:
Whom wondrous starting stars encompass round.
And to behold that shynes in every stound,
The glistering beauty bright of welkin wide:
Than which in al the world nothing beside.
Of all this huge and endless work the guide,
More wondrous nature fram'de that Iespyde,
For all the bumping bigness it doth bear;
Yet waxing old is like again to wear,
And to be changed to an vnwyldy lump.
Now pressed at hand this worlds last day doth jump,
With boisterous fall, and tumbling rush of sky.
To squease and make this cursed kind aby.
That springing once again, it may yield out
An other strange renewed virtuous route,
As once before it did, new sprung again,
What time Saturnus held his golden raygne.
That blameless, chaste, unspotted Virgin clear
A goddess much of might clept Justice here,
With sacred sooth sent down from heavenly space,
At ease on earth did rule the mortal race.
That people plain knew not of warlike feats.
Nor trembling trumpets tunes that rends and beats*
The soldiers ears: nor chashing armont bright,
That warring wights defend in field and fight.
Nor wonted was with walls to rampart round,
Their open cities set in any stound.
To each man passage free lay open than:
Nothing there private was to any man.
And then the ground it self and fertile soil,
Her fruitful bosom baard all void of toil,
Into such bounden barnes a Matron good,
And peaceable unto so just a brood.
But then an other second race arose,
Perceived not to be so meek as those.
A third more wise and witty sort up startes,
Of nature forged fit, t'inuent new arts:
As yet unspotted quite with filthy vice.
Soon after thoe, they raung^d with new deuyce,
That boldly venture dare in scudding race,
Unwieldy beasts for to pursue apace.
And mighty weighing struggling fishes great,
With watery coats yclad with fishers feat,
With net in window wise draw forth, and streeke
With craft of quill, the nibbling fish cheek.
And silly birds begylde with pining train:
And light foot dear for life that flyng amain
Entangling gins entrapt, that safely hold.
And sturdy scowling visage bulls controld,
On fleshye fillet necks, make wear the yoke:
And earth ere that vngrubbed up that broke:
Which then turned up with Plowmans shining share,
In sacred bosom deep, her fruits kept their.
But now this age much worse then all the rest,
Hath leapt into her mothers broken breast:
And rusty lumpish iron and massye Gold,
Hath dug out, that was quite hid with mold.
And fighting fistes have armed without delay:
And drawing forth their bonds for rule to stay,
Have certain several jolly kingdoms made,
And cities new have raysde now ruled with blade,
And fenseth either with their proper force
Strange stoundes or them assaults the which is worse.
The Starry specked virgin flower of skies.
Which Justice hight, that guilty folk discries,
Now lightly esteemed of mortal people here,
Each earthly stound is fled, and comes not near
The savage mannerd route, and beastly rude,
With dabbed wristes in goary blood embrude.
The great desire of grisly war is sprung:
And raping thirst of gold, it is not young.
Throughout the world a mighty monstrous vice,
Foul, filthy, monstrous lust hath got the price,
A pleasant tickling plague, whom longer space,
And error deep have fostered up apace.
The heaps of vice rakte up in years long past,
Abounding flow in these our days at last.
And this same troublous time, and combrous age,
Oppresses all men sore, both young and sage.
Wherein those wicked ways that be do raygne,
And cruel, raumping woodnes boils again.
Lust strong in filthy touch, doth bear a sway.
And Princes, riot, now doth catch away
With greedy paws, to bring it to decay.
Th whole worlds uncredible wealth, without delay.
But lo, which staggring steppes where Nero flings,
And visage grymme, I fear what news he brynges.
DIspatch with speed that we commanded have:
Go, send forthwith some one or other slave,
That Plautius cropped scalp and Sillas eke,
May bring before our face: go some man seek.
I nill protract your noble graces hest:
But to their camps to go am ready pressed.

Gaynst lynage nought should rashly pointed be.

A light thing tis for to be just, I see
For him, whose heart is void of shrinking fear.

A sovereign salve for fear is for to bear
Your self debonair to your subjects all.

Our foes to slay, a cheftaynes virtue call.

A worthier virtue tis in countries sire,
His people to defend with sword and fire.

It well beseems such aged wights, to teach,
Unbridled springolles young, and not to preach,
Both to a man and prince of ryper years.

May, rather frolic youthful blood appears,
To have more need of counsel wise and grave

This age sufficient reason ought to have.

That heavenly powers your doings may allow.

A madness 'twere to Gods for me to bow,
When I my self can make such Gods to be:
As Claudius now ycounted is we see.

So much the more because so much you may.

Our power permittes us all without denay.

Give slender trust to Fortunes flattering face:
She topsy turuy turns her wheel apace.

A patch he is that knows not what he may.

A Princes praise I counted have always,
To do that same which with his honour stood,
Not that which frantic fancy counts good.

If that I were a meacock or a slouch,
Each stubborn, clubbish daw would make me couch.

And whom they hate, with force they ouerquell.

Then dynt of sword the prince defends well.

But faith more sure defence doth seem to me.

Full meet it is that Caesar dreaded be.

More meet of subjects for to be beloved

From subjects minds, fear must not be removed

What so by force of arms you do wring out,
A grievous work it is to bring about.

Well hardly then our will let them obey.

Will nothing then, but that which well you may.

We will decree what we shall best suppose.

What peoples voice doth jointly bind or lose.
Let that confirmed stand.

Swords bloody dynt,
Shall cause them else at me to take their hint.

God shield, and far that fact from you remove.

What then, why Senec do you that approve,
That we contemnde, despysde and set at nought,
With finger put in hole (full wisely wrought)
Our bodies blood to seek should them abide,
That they might us sometime destroy vnspyde?
Their native country bounds to banished be,
Nor Plautius breast nor Scillas eake we see
Hath broke or camd: whose cankered churlish ire,
Shapes bloody freakes to quench our bodies fire.
And chiefly when these traitorous absent clounes,
Such wondrous favour find in cities bownes,
Which those same exiles lingering hope doth feed:
Suspected foes with sword we will out weed.
And so Octauia shall that jolly dame,
Continue after them their bloody game.
And wend that way her nowne white brother went,
Such hye mistrusted things must needs be bent.

It is (O Prince) a worthy famous thing,
Amids redoubted Lords alone to ring:
And wisely work your countries praise to save:
And well your self to captive folk behave:
From cruel brutish slaughter to abstain,
And void of mood to wreak your angry payne:
And to the world a quiet calm to give,
That al your age in peace their lives may live.
This is a Princes praise without al crime:
This is the path to heaven whereby we climb.
So is Augustus prince and father called
Of country first in starbright throne ystald.
Whom as a God in minsters we adorn,
Yet troublous fortune tossed him beforne,
A great while long on lands and ruffling seas,
Until his fathers foes he could appease,
And throught wars diverse course could quel them quite.
To you did fortune yield her power, and might,
And raynes of rule without all blood, and fight.
And to your beck both land, and seas hath bent.
Grim deadly envy daunted doth relent.
The Senate Lords gave place with free consent:
The battaylous route of knights with willing hearts
(That same decree from sager sires departes)
Unto the lay men's choice do well agree.
Your grace the spring of peace they count to be.
And chosen Judge, and guide of mortal stock.
Your grace, your countries sacred sire, doth rock
And rule with princely gorgeous title bright,
The cyrcled world in rundel wise ydight.
Which mighty mounting name to keep so great,
This noble city Rome doth you entreat:
And doth commend unto your royal grace
Her lively limbs in charge for your lives ^pace.

The gift of Gods it is, as we discus,
That Rome with Senafe sort doth honour us,
And that the fear of our displeasure great,
From cankered enuyous stomachs makes sweat
Both humble talk and supplications meek.
And were not fear all these would be to seek.
Unwieldy, combrous cities, members ill,
That Prince and country both do seek to spill,
To leave alive (which swell, and puffed be,
Because of lynage great. and high degre)
What madness mere is it when as we may,
Even with a word, such freakes dispatch away*
Sir Brutus sterne, his brawns and arms did dight,
His soueraygne liege to slain by force and might,
That erst had helped him, and given him health,
And had endued him with princely wealth,
In brunt of raging war undaunted out,
That vanquished many people strong and stout,
Prince Caesar matched by great degrees of power
To love, in stately chair of starry bower,
By diu'lish citizens wicked while was slain.
What store of bloody stiffling streams on mould.
Did tatred Rome, of her own limbs, behold?
He by his noble virtues worthy praise,
Who peoples, common bruit to heave doth raise.
August among the Gods ysayncted well,
How many noble breasts did he compel,
How many springoldes young, and hoary heads,
Each where dispersed to lig in molded heads?
How many men did he bereave of breath
Tofore proscript that were condemned to death?
When for the grisly fear of deadly dart
From propre home they were constrained to part
And fly Octauius force, and Lepidus might,
And not abide sterne Mark Antonius sight,
Which then the ample world at once did guide,
That into kingdoms three they did deuyde,
To dumpish sadded syres, with heavy cheer,
Their childrens grie^ly cropped pates appear,
Hong out beforne the Senates judgment seat,
For each man to behold in open streate:
No durst they once lament their piteaus case,
Nor inward seem to morn to Claudius face,
The market stead with blood from bodies spued,
And loathsome mattrie streams, is all imbrued:
And quite throughout their faces foul arrayed,
The piteous gubbes of blood drop down vnstayd.
Nor here did this same slaughterous bloodshed stay.
Phillyps Pharsalia ghastly fields each day,
The cromming ravening fowls, and cruel beasts
Long fed, with gobbe^s big of manlye breasts,
Beside all this, the cost he scoured quite*
Of Sicill sea and ships to ware ydyght
With force of arms did win, and havoc made
Of proper snbiectes slain with his own blade.
The rundle round of lands with mighty mayne
Of noble Chieftaynes stroke reboyles again.
Antonius overcome in Naval fight,
To Egipt poastes in ships prepared to flight:
Not looking long to live nor hoping life.
Incesteous Egipt (through Antonius wife)
That worthy Romayne princes blood did suck*
And covered lye their ghosts with dirty muck.
Long wicked, waged civil war there stayed,
In Marcke Antonius grave with him ylayed.
Augustus at the last of conquest great
His dulled swords that wounded souls did beat,
In peaceable sheathes repos^d hath laid at rest:
And fear doth rule, and guide his kingdom best
By ready force of arms at all assays,
And Captains faith he shields him self always
Who now his sons most worthy virtuous praise,
To heaven a consecrated God doth raise,
And causes all, in Churches for to place
The sacred Picture of Prince Claudius grace,
And us the starry reign of Gods shall bide
If first with dreadful sword about us wide
We wipe away what so our person stain:
And found our court with worthy stem again.

Your noble spouse, sprung forth of saincted peer
Of Claudius stock, the starbright diamond clear,
That Goddess Iuno wise her brothers bed*
Partaking, pressed down with buttocks red,
Your graces princely court shall garnish gay,
With wondrous heavenly fair descended stay.

Incestuous married dames, from stock stem,
Detract all hope, that we should have of them.
Nor us, could she once love that we could see,
Nor with our person once at all agree

In tender budding years, when love suppressed
With blusshing hydes the flames of burning breast,
Scant plain appears the love they bare indeed.

Thus we our selves with hope in vain did feed:
Although undoubted signs, as body wryed,
And frowning looks, which we have oft espied,
Her spyteful hating stomach did bewray
Which she doth bear, whom duty byndes t'obaye.
Which yet at last, big, boiling, grievous payne,
With death determined hath t^auenge again,
We have found out, for birth and beauties grace.
A worthy make for such an Empress place:
To whom that lovely goddess Venus bright,
And mighty Jove his spouse that Iuno hight,
and goddess fierce in boisterous warlike arts,
Geues place for bodies seemly portrayed parts.

Faith, meeknes, manners mild, bashful shame*
Of spouse, those ought an husband to reclaim.
The perles of judging mind, alone remain,
Not subject once to any rulers raygne.
The passing pride of beauties numming grace
Each day appals, and bleamisheth apace.

What praises woman wights have in them closed*
All those in her alone hath God repo^de,
And such a peerless peer, the guydes of life,
The destnies would have borne to be our wife,

O noble prince such blind unlawful love,
(Do rashly credit nought) from you remove.

Whom Jove can not repell that rules the clouds,
And piercing raging floods, therein him shrouds,
And ranges through the reign of Plutoes pit,
And pulls down in welkin hie that sit
The mighty powers of heaven, the God of love?
And can I then his force from me remove?

Swift winged love, men's fancy fond, in vain
A mercy wanting God to be, doth fain:
And arms his hands with woundinge weapons keen
And bows with burning brondes, for lovers green:
Of Venus to be sprung they al accorde,
and blyndly forgde of thunders limping Lord.
Bland love the minds great torment sore appears,
And buddeth first in frolic youthful years.
Who while we drink of Fortunes pleasant cup,
With laysie pampring riot, is nes^led up:
Whom if to toster up you leave at length
It fleeting, falls away with broken strength.
This is in all our life (as I suppose)
The greatest cause how pleasure first arose.
Which since mankind by broodyng bids aye,
Through gladsom love y^ fierce wild beasts doth sway
It never can from manly breast depart.

This self same God I wish withal my hart
The wedlock lights to bear before our grace,
And fasten Poppy sure in our bed place.

The peoples grief might never yield to it:
Nor ver^ue can the same at all permit.

Shall I alone to do, forbidden be
That every patch may do? that grieves me

No tryfling toys the people looks to have
Of him, that ought to rule with wisdom grave.

It pleases us with daunted power to try,
If peoples rash conceived rage will fly.

Seek rather for to please and calm their mood.

Ill ruled is that raygne where people wood,
Their subject Pri^ce doth weld, as they think good

When nought that they require they can obtain,
They justly then aggrieved are again.

That gentle prayers cannot win with ease,
By force to wring it out, it doth us please.

An hard thing tis the people not to have
That of their Prince, which they do justly crave.

And horrible 'tis a Prince to be constraynd.

Let not your subjects then so sore be raynd.

Why then the common brute abroad will be.
How that the people have subdued me.

That no man trusts that is of credit light.

Be it so, yet many it marks with deadly spyghte.

With country peers to meddle it is afraid,

To quip and frump, 'tis nothing less dismayed.

Your grace may easly couch that budding bruit
Let Sayncted sires deserts with pliant suit,
Your graces mind remove: let spouses age,
And courteous bashful shame disrumpe your rage.

Leave off (I say) that we entend to grutch.
For now your talk our patience moves much:
I pray you let it lawful be to do,
That Senec gives not advise unto.
And we our peoples wishes do defer,
While Poppy feel in wombling womb to sterre,
The pledge of faithful love to me and her.
Why do we not appoint the morrow next,
When as our marriage pomp may be context?

THrough paunch of riuened earth, from Plutoes reign
With ghostly steps, I am returned again.
In writhled wristes, that blood do most desire,
Forguyding wedlock vile with Stygian fire.
Let Poppy, which these cressets coupled sure,
Unto my son be joined in marriage pure:
Whom mothers grief, and hand revenging wrackes,
Shall send with heave and hoe to funeral stackes
I always do remember well beneath
Where piteous, ghostly, crauling souls do breath,
Th'unkindly slaughterous deed, which to our spright
Yet unrevenged is grievous and of right:
And for the good I did a cruel prise,
That deadly framed ship in crafty wise:
And due reward that he gave me again,
For helping him to rule of Empyres raygne:
And eake that night, when as I did bewail,
Both loss of ship wherein we then did sail,
And mates unhappy death, and while I thought,
For this accursed deed to have besought
The Gods to trickling tears he gave scant time
But twice increased hath his devilish crime.
Quite slain with sword, thrust through my bodies bounds
And silthy laid through goary mattring wounds,
Delivered safe from seas, devouring sup,
In antique court my ghost I yielded up.
Nor yet his cankered, and unsatiate hate.
For all this blood doth Nero once abate.
That Tyrant dire doth rage at mothers name.
And seeks ways my deeds for to defame.
Who threating death to them that do withstand,
My shapes he dingeth down in every land:
My princely tytles large he scrapeth out
In every place, the whole wydeworld about,
Which my unlucky parents love did give,
To much unto my pain while I did live,
Unto a boy to guide, which now I rue.
My poisoned make, my Ghost doth oft pursue:
And in my face with burning brondes doth fly.
He stays a space with earnest talk hard by,
And threatens sore, and doth impute his death
And tomb he should have had to me beneath.
And now desires to have some factious wight,
That dare despayle my son of breathing spright.
Let be you shall have one to work this crime,
I do require no long delayed time.
Revenging spright Erin, a death doth coin,
Of life, that wicked tyrant to purloyne.
Sore smarting leaden strypes and shameful flight,
And pining pangs with thirst and hunger dight:
That Tantalus spungelike thursty mouth befurde,
And Sisyphus toil shall pass, and Tityus burde,
And Ixions painful wombling wheel about,
That tears all his bodies parts throughout.
Although that Tyrant proud and scornful wight,
His court with marble stone do strongly dyght,
And princelike garnish it with glistering gold:
Though troupes of soldiers shielded sure, uphold
Their chieftaynes princely porch: and though yet still
The world drawn dry with tasks even to his will,
Great heaps of riches yield themselves to save,
Although his bloody help the Parthians crave,
And Kingdoms bring, and goods al that they have,
The time and day shall come, when as he shall
Forlorn, and quite undone, and wanting all.
Unto his cursed deeds his life and more,
Unto his foes his bared throat restore.
Alas, unto what end is all my payne?
Or in what case do now my vows remain?
Where doth now thy rage and destnies spyte?
Draw thee O Son, with brain benumbed quite?
That to such monstrous heaps of ylles thy dame
(Whom thou with cursed mischief overcame)
Her wrath should yield? O that ere to the light
A sucking babe I brought thee forth in sight,
And fed thee fine with pap as princely borne,
The fierce, wild, savage beasts had rent and torn
My womb and bloody entrails all beforne.
Without all crime, and wanting reasons pride,
Mine own dear dadling child thou should have did.
And fastened sure to me should aye behold,
The quiet place, where Ghostly souls be rolde:
And see thy graundsyres great of worthy fame,
And sire Domitius eake of princely name,
Whom now both shame and wailing doth abide,
That while they dure, from them shall never slyde.
For which both thee, O cursed Barn, they may,
And me, that thee have borne geeue thanks for aye.
But why cease I, with hell to hyde my face,
Wife, stepdame, mother dire, in my life space?
DO not, alas, thus sore lament,
But rather yet your mourning stay,
Since that the city whole is bent
To celebrate this joyful day:
Least your great love and favour both,
Which I do count to be most sure,
The more cause Nero me to loath,
And eake his bitter wrath procure:
And I fall out to be the ground
To you of many mischiefs vile,
This same is not the first deep wound,
That I have felt now this good while:
Far worse then this have I abode:
But of these troublous cares this day
Shall make an end I trust in God,
Although with Death he do me pay,
No man to see shall me constrain
His bended brows knit furrowyse,
Nor step within the Chamber ragyne
Of maid dressed up in bridal guise
Augustus sister I will be,
And not his wife as wont I was:
But only pains remove from me,
And fear of death I will not pass.
Yet can thou piteous wreth once trust,
Thy cruel husbands father law,
Or these few things to have so lust
While mischiefs yet in mind are raw?
Now long reserud, until this day,
And these same marriage rytes be past,
Thou shalt poor wretch without delay,
A bloody offering dye at last.
Why thus with tears disfigured sore
Thy wonted home dost thou behold?
Make hast to shun this deadly shore
And leave this straughtrous Princes fold.
Lo see that day suspecttd long
And whispered Fame in all men's ears,
With glistering pomp of bridal throng,
To us pore wretches now appears.
And Claudius brood Octauias grace,
From Neroes wedlock place expelde,
Departed is, whose spousal space,
Hath Poppy conqueror long time held.
The while, our pyety couched lies
Kept down with heavy, combrous fear.
And slow revenging grief likewyse:
Where doth the peoples power appear,
That brake the force of Princes great,
That conquerous city laws hath framed,
That worthy men to honours ^eat
Preferred, that war and peace proclaymd,
That savage people strange did tame
That Kings and Princes caught in fight
Shut surely up in prison frame
To keep them close from all men's sight
Lo, which we cannot once abide,
To see where Poppies image trym,
Conjoined unto Neroes side
All glistering bright shynes very brim.
Let force of Arms pull down that frame
And match with ground that Ladies face
Too likely carved to his name,
And snatch her down from beddig place,
And let it forthwith fly with brands*
With Darts and Javelins fiercely flonge,
From pythy braunes and sturdy hands
Unto the princes courtly throng.

FRom out of spousal bower dismayed with fear,
Whither go you? what secrets daughter dear
Unknown, makes you to look so drousely?
Why spungelike looks your face with tears fro eye
That fell? of truth the time desired long,
And wished for by prayers, and vows among
Hath shined bright. Caesars wedlock are you:
Your golden grace, whereof he took the view.
Him prisoner caught, and did him surely bind,
So much the more, how much Senec his mind
Did seek to change, and wild from love to weeld.
And Venus chief in love hath made him yield.
O in beauty passing all, what beds then down
More soft, have borne thy weight when thou with crown
Did sit in midst of court the Senate all.
At thy great beauty aghast, thou did appall.
Whilst thou the Gods with perfume send fine,
And sacred alters drenched with thankful wine,
Thy head attyrd with veyle of yellow hew
By Caesars side thou went as princess new:
When he aloft extolled above the rest,
With hauty courage merrily went to feast.
Like as king Peleus went sometimes to take
Queen Tethis, whom salt seas some bred, his make.
Whose bridinge chambers, banquet wise ydrest,
The Gods vouchsafed to hallow with their hest,
Both they that rule in skies and eake in Seas.
But tel, O Lady, tell, if it you please,
What sudden chance doth shade your beauties light.
What means your colour change from red to white?
What moves those trickling tears, how stands your plight?
With dreams, and grisly sights, this last night, Nurse,
My mind was troubled sore, but frayd much worse.
For when sir Phoebe his weary course had rid,
While quiet resting night each thing shadid,
My senses weary fell in slumber deep,
While Nero me within his arms did cleepe.
Resolving limbs, at length began sleep discharge,
And long I rest not under quiets targe,
For lo, I saw a route that brought me fear,
Come to my chamber with dishevelled hair:
The Matrons sage of Latin land did morn,
And sounded shryking sighs as though forlorn
They were, the dolefulst wights that live on ground.
And oft among the warlike trumpets sound,
I saw my husbands mother teribly stand,
With threatening look berayed with b^oud in hand
A light fire brand she bare which oft she shook,
And made me go with her through fearful loke.
When down we came through op'ned earth she led
The way, I after went with bowing head,
And musing much thereat, mark what I say,
My bed, me thought I saw, wherein I lay,
When first espousde I was to Rufe Chrispyne*
And he me thought, with first son of his lyne,
With many following them against me fast
Did come, and me to cleepe did swift his hast,
And as he wonted was he ki^ me oft,
Then rushed into my house with pace not soft
Amassed Nero sore, in Chryspines breast
That hid his falchion ^ene: fear shook of re^t
From me: I trembling stood with quivering fear,
And breast dismayed to speak made me forbear.
Till now (O Nurse) I met with thee, wh^se trust,
And faith into these words have made me burst.
Alas, what threatens me each grisly spright?
What means of husbands blood that doleful ^ight?

^he hidden sacred vain that moves swift,
Which fantasy we call by secret drift,
When we do take our rest doth show again,
The things both good and bad that broil in brain:
You marvel that you saw your make, and bower,
His ghostly funeral stackes, at that same hour
Round clasped close in arms of husband new:
Hereto, the beaten breasts with hands moved you,
And maidens hair, on marriage day displayed:
Octauias friends with heavy hearts bewrayed,
Amids her brothers both and fathers hall
Their heavy cheer for her unlucky fall.
That dreadful blazing flame of fire forborne
In Agryppynas hand your grace beforne.
Which you did follow streigth declares renown
To you, though envy strive to keep it ^owne:
The seat you saw beneath doth promise you
Your sta^e to stand full sure not changing new:
That Nero prince in Crispins throat did hyde
His sword, it tells that he in peace shall bide,
Unknown to bloody ruthful war for aye.
Therefore (Madam) pluck up your hart I pray:
Receive both mirth and glee cast fear aside,
With joy, and ease you may in bower abide.

To temples hie where mighty Gods do dwell,
I will repair, and offringes to them fell
In humble wise their heavy wrath t'ppease,
And me of mighty sight, and dreams to ease.
My second wish shall be, that this fear all
Upon my foes as sudden chance may fall.
O Nurse pray thou for me some vows do make
To the Gods, that ghostly fear his flight my take.

IF stealth discloasde by blabbing fame,
And lusty, pleasant, thankful love,
Of JOVE be true: who form did frame
Of swan to come from skies above,
And did enjoy the sweet consent
Of Lady LEDAS loves delight:
Who like a Bull his labour spent,
Through flowing floods to cary quite,
EVROPA slily stolen away:
He will no doubt leave raygne of Sky
And POPPIES love disguisd assay*
If he her soueraygne beauty spy.
Which he might well prefer before
Fair LAEDAS sugared sweet delight:
And DANAE whom he won of yore,
Amazed with golden shower so bright:
Let SPARTE now for HELENS sake
Of beauty bragging fame vprayse:
Admit the TROJAN herdsman make
Of gained spoil triumphant praise:
Fair HELEN here is stained quite:
Whose beauty bred such boiling ire,
That earth was matched even in sight
With TROJAN towers consumed with fire.
But who is this that runs with fear oppressed?
Or else what news brings he in panting breast?
WHat sturdy champion stout doth joy with glee
Our chieftaynes royal bower safe to see,
Then to his court I counsel him to wend,
Against which the populus rout their force doth bend.
The rulers run amazed to fetch the guard,
And armed troupes of men, their town to ward.
Nor woodnes rashly caught through fear doth cease,
But more and more, their power doth increase.
What sudden rage doth beat their br^ling brain?

The garrisons great with fury astonde again,
And stirred up for Queen Octauias sake
With monstrous mischief vile, their rage to slake,
They rumbling rush into the Palace far.

What dare they do, their counsailers who are?

Advance their Empress old, suburt the new:
And grant her, brothers beds as is her due.

Which Poppy now, with hole consent doth hold?

Yea that unbridled rage in breast vprold,
Sets them agog, and makes them wondrous wood.
What ever image graven in marble stood,
If Poppies badge it bare, or if in sight,
It tended for to show her beauty bright,
Though it on heavenly altares brave did stand,
They break, or pull it down, with sword or hand.
Some parts with ropes sure tide, they trail the forth
Which spurnd with dirty feet, as though nought worth
With ^thy stinking mire, they it all beray.
And with their deeds their talk doth jump agree,
Which mine amassed mind, thinks true to be
For fiery flames they threat for to prepare,
Wherewith to waste, the princes Palace fair,
Unless, unto their furious mood he give
His second wife, and with Octauia live,
But he by me shall know in what hard stay
The City stands: the rulers I'll obey.

A lack, what made you cruel wars, in vain
To move, since prisoner love you can not gaine^
You can not him overcome, your fiery flame
He recks not: his sire ouercomes the same.
He darkened hath those thundering thumps that shake
Heaven, Earth, Hell, sea, al things y^ makes to quake.
Yea mighty Jove, in heaven that wears chief crown
His flames from welkin hie hath brought down.
And you, not victors now, but vanquished,
Shall rau^some pay, the price of hearts blood red.
Love, patient can not be, but hot in rage,
No easy thing it is, his wrath t'as^wage,
Achilles worthy ^ight, that was so stout,
To twang the Harp he made in Ladies rout,
Prince Agamemnon sterne that boy benund,
And rabble rude of Greekes with love bronds bumd.
King Priams reign he topsy tu^uie tossed,
And goodly Cities great he chiefly lost.
And now my mind ^ore frighted stands aghast,
What Cupids furious force brings us at last.

AH, ah, our captains sl^e dispatching coil,
And our long suffering y^e in such a broil,
That streams of blood yet do not ^ue^h their rage
Which they against our propre person wage
And that all Rome, with corses strewd about,
Those cruel villains blood, doth not sweat out.
But deeds already done, with death to pay.
A small thing it is, a greater slaughtrous day
The peoples cursed crime, and eke that dame,
Whom I did aye suspect, deserves the same.
whom, to yield those peasant would me make:
At last she shall, with life our sorrow slake,
And with her bodies blood shall quench our ire.
Then, shall their houses fall by force of fire:
What burning both, and buildings fair decay,
What beggarly want, and wailing hunger may
Those villains shall be sure, to have each day.
Ah, Proue^der pricks that vile rebellious race
No can they once our favour well embrace,
Nor be content, with peace in quiet state,
But broiling raumpe about with troubled gate.
Hereon with boldness straight, hereon they fly,
With harebraind rashness headlong by and by.
Well, they must tamed be with heavy stroke,
And down be kept with peise of weighty yoke:
That they, with like attempt, do not arise,
Nor once cast up their deadly peasant eyes,
Against our loving spouses golden looks:
First punish them sure, then fear shall be their books,
To teach them, at their Princes beck t'obay
But see at hand, whom faith, and virtue rare,
Lieutenant chief of camps, appointed their.
THe vulgar peoples rash unruly rage
The slaughter of a few did soon assuage,
Which long wtstode our valiant force in vain*
To tel your grace this news, I come again*
And is this then enough, dost thou so well*
O soldier mark what doth thy captain tell?
Hast thou with held thy hand frou bloody ire?
Is this the due revenge that we require?

The captain guides of treason paid their hire,
By desperate death of bloody sword in fight.
The route which sought with flaming fire to light,

Our royal Palace great, who would assign
Their Prince what he should do: and pull in fine
Our mate from us dissolving wedlock bands:
Whose hardy slanderous tongs, wicked hands,
Her princely grace reprochfully withstandes,
From due revenge, are they dismissed free?

Shall subjects payne, by grief assigned be?

It shall assign which time shall never wear.

Which neither wrath may end, nor yet your fear*

She shall appease our hie displeased mind,
Who fiyrst, our wrath deserved due to find.

Declare whose death your mood doth most require
Let not my hand be stayde from your desire.

It seeks our sisters death, and traitorous head.

Those words through all my luns, hath stifnessespred,
Oppressed with griesty fear.

Us to obey.
Stands thou in doubt:

On faith why do you lay
So great a fault?

Because thou sparedst our foe.

Deserves a woman to be termed so?

If treason she begin.

Is any man
So sure, that hit accuse of creason can:

The peoples rage:

Those mad vnweldye wights
Who order could?

Who could stir up their sprits?

No creature as I think.

A woman could,
In whom a mind Dame nature hath vpfould,
To mischief prone: she armed hath her heart,
To hurt by wiles: yet strength she set apart,
Least she undaunted force with her should bear:
But now her slender power with doubting fear,
Is quickly quaylde, or else with punishment,
Which her condenmed state to mischief bent
To late doth end: away with grave advise,
Us with entreating seek not to entyse.
Dispatch that we comm^und on shipboorde horne,
Far off to shore aloof with dashing worn,
Command she be: that tunlike swelling breast
At length in storming stomach may take rest.

ALack the peoples bitter love,
And dire good will to many one,
Which, when they hoisted sails above,
With pleasant blasts it made to groan,
And carried them from quiet shore,
That fainting, leaves them in the deep,
And tumbling, raging waters roar.
Cornelia piteous wretch did weep,
And sore bewail her sons estate:
The peoples love did undo them,
And wondrous favour, bred them hate:
Great worthy peers of noble stem:
Of high renown for virtues praise:
In faith and eloquence did pas
Their stomachs stout their fame did raise:
Ith laws each one most excellent was.
And Scipio, thee did Fortune yield
Unto like death, and cursed wrack,
Whom neither honours pomp could shield,
Nor fenced house thy foes keep back.
More to repeat, although I could,
Pure present grief forbids sore:
Ere while to whom the people would,
Her Fathers antique Court restore,
And Brothers wedlock once again,
Now weeping, wringing hands poor wretch,
Unto her cruel, deadly payne,
The armed soldiers do her fetch.
How safe doth poverty lye content,
In thetched house safe shrouded there?
High raised towers with blasts are bent,
Which often times them over bear.
Where pull you me poor wretch? alas,
Into what banished exiles place,
Would Nero have me for to pass,
Or Fortune bids, with frowning face?
If now with fainting strength quite cooled,
And with my broils all wearied cease,
And longer life she grant me woolde,
If that she work for to increase,
My sorrows great with deadly dart,
Why is she then so much my foe,
In country that I may not part,
And leave my life before I go?
But now no help of health I feel,
Alas I see my Brothers boat:
This is the same, whose vaulted keele,
His Mother once did set a clote.
And now his piteous Sister I,
Excluded clean from spousal place,
Shall be so carried by and by:
No force hath virtue in this case.
No Gods there be my woes to wreck.
The grisly, dreadful drab Eryn,
Doth weld the world at nod and beck,
Who can lament my state, wherein
I am, alas, sufficiently?
How can Aedon duly plain,
My smarting streams at bears that I
Do shed? whose wings I would be fame,
If destnies would them grant, to wear.
Then would I leave my mourning mates,
As swiftly fled, as wings could bear,
And so avoid these bloody pates.
Then sitting sole in shirwood shirle,
And hanging sure, by dandling twig
With plaintive pipe I might out twarle
My heavy tuned note so big.

The mortalt brood the destnies guide:
Themselves they nothing can assure,
That certainly doth steadfast bide:
Which our last day of life, procure,
(Where of we always should beware,)
Much dangerous chances for to try:
Unto your troubled mind with care,
Now many saumples do applies,
Which your accursed court hath brought,
To holden you in all your broil:
For what hath more your troubles wrought,
What doth against you sorer toil,
Than fortune doth? the first of all,
Agrippas child brought forth to life,
Whom we Tyberius daughter call,
By law, and eke Prince Caesars wife,
Of many sons a careful dame,
I cannot chose but now recount,
Whose worthy, glorious ample name,
Throughout the world doth much surmount.
So oft with belly bolne that bare
Desired fruicts, and peaces pledge,
Ere long thou suffered exiles care,
Strypes, chains, and bolts of iron wedge,
And mourning much, which so did frame,
That death they caused thee to abide.
So Liuia, Drusus lucky name
In male kind babes, did hedling slyde,
Into a cruel monstrous deed,
And death sore piercing deadly dart.
Her mothers fates doth Iulia speed,
To follow straight with all her heart,
Who after longer wasted time
With bloody fashion kene, was slain,
Although for no just cause or crime.
Your mother eke that once did reign,
Who then esteemed of Claudius well,
Did wisely weld his court at will,
And fruitful was, as you can tell,
What could not her desire fulfil:
She sometime subject to her slave,
To death was put with soldiers blade.
What she, that easly hope might have,
Toth skies, her reign to rise have made,
Prince Neroes lusty Parent great?
First tossed with shipman's boisterous force,
Then torn with sword in Princes heat,
Did she not lye a senseless corse,

Lo me the tyrant stern will send
To yrcksome shades and hellish sprits.
Why wretch do I the tyiue thus spend?
Draw me to death you to whose myghts,
False Fortune hath bequeathed me.
I witness now the heavenly power.
What dost thou bedlam? leave to flee,
With prayer to Gods, who on thee lower.
I call to witness Tartar deep,
And sprytes of Hell revenging freakes
Of heinous facts, in D^geon steep,
And Sire whom death deserved wreakes.
I do not now repyne to dye,
Deck up your Ship, and hoise your Sail,
On frothing seas to winds on hye:
Let him that guides the Helm not fail,
To seek the shore of Pharian Land.

O pippling puff of western wind,
Which sacrifice did once with stand,
Of Iphigen to death asfignde
And close in Cloud congealed clad,
Did cary her from smoking aa^es,
Which angry, cruel Virgin had:
This Prince also oppressed, with cares,
Save from this painful punishment,
To Dians temple safely horne:
The harbarous Moors toru^enesse bent,
Then Princes Courts in Rome forlorn,
Have far more Cyuile curt^sie:
For there doth strangers death appease
The angry Gods in heavens on hie,
But Romayne blood, our Rome must please.


