Our Authors Pen, loves not to swim in blood,
He dips no Ink, from out black Acheron:
Nor sucks invention, from the depth of hell,
Nor crosses Seas to get a foreign plot.
He taxes no Goddesses for foulest lust,
Nor doth disclose the secret scapes of Jove:
He rips not up the horrid maw of hell,
To show foul treasons hideous ugly face.
Nor doth he touch the falls of mighty Kings,
No ancient History, no Shepherds love.
No states-mans life, no power of death he shows.
He only strives with mirth to please each one,
Since laughter is peculiar unto man.
and being sure, freely to speak can be no sin,
If honest words have honest consturing.
Therefore to fly the least cause of offence,
He only finds but words, you find the sense:
Wherefore, if ought unto your ear taste tart,
Thank but your selves, which good to ill convert,
Yet this he ought, hath strictly charged me say:
That he's a slave, and of a base condition,
That doth but draw it to suspicion.
That here he privately taxes any man,
Since all the world yields vice to play upon.
What he intends, action shall make you know,
I should fore-stall the play, should I but show.
with feathered speed I pierced the Air,
The clouds a sunder I did tear,
And thus with wings and bow come I
Newly from Ioues hye Court in sky.
My mother kis'd me at our parting,
But did charge me leave my darting,
And with a strict command did say,
Boy, on a Whirligig go play.
But such a round i'll make him run,
As he shall end, where first begun.
My scourg-stickes shall be made of Darts,
Fethered with sighs of Lovers hearts.
Which made them fly with swiftest flight,
As lightning in tempestuous night.
My scourge it self, are golden tresses,
More richer far then chains of Esses.
With which i'll make some dance a Jig,
More rounder yet then ere did Gig.
But time doth call me to be gone,
Yet first to all you lookers on,
Before I part, I thus much tell,
That Gods can go invisibell.
And though you do not all times eye me,
Yet know at all times, I am by ye.
And be assured, and do not think
But that you stand full ne'er the brink
Of my displeasure: which if ye win,
In love i'll make ye sink or swim.
Thus farewell all, sit patient yet a while,
Least Cupid make your selves, your selves beguile.
MY Lord, you know your self and I have long lived friends, and shall we now
with firm affection knit? tie fast our friendship in our Of-springs love,
convey our cares in one, our goods together, and our loves in them, and whiles
the remnant of our aged days do last, lets do'ff all discontents, cast by the
worlds incombers, and leave the careful burden of keeping that, was care
enough to get upon the youthful hope of their more able strength.


O Neighbour Venture, do you not know that to marry a Child, is but to mar
a man? for he that cuts a tender twig in springing, both mars his length and
spoils his growing: my son shall first see twenty years of age, before my
condesent shall once be given to make him father of a son: Besides, your
daughter yet is very young: and though in Women's sex 'tis always seen, desire
to marriage rides always in post; yet in their Inn repentance is their host:
the fault of this is always known to be, through foolish husbands: or such as
are to young, for Children to their wives are like fruit half ripe, they
yield no taste, nor give no sweet delight.


Behold, here comes my young Lord, the very model of your self, the Vigour
of your youth, and strength of all your future hopes.


And he is welcome, what sudden gust (my Son) in hast hath blown thee
hither, and made thee leave the Court, where so many earth-treading stars
adorns the sky of state? or as the summers speckled flowery garment is spread
about the seat of Majesty? what is the rea^on thou hast left this earthly
Paradise, to visit us before our expectation?


My love dear Father (to your fair wife) hath made my hours of absence from
this place, seem tedious years, I could not but return from whence I came,
as like to man, the which of clay was framed, at first did walk a while upon
the earth, but in the end returned to dust; or like a River, which through the
earth doth draw his life and spring from out the sea. Thus I that from you
sprung, have run my course awhile, but now as to my sea, return to you
again.


Thy answer with thy wisdom hath enriched thy welcome: dear friends, I pray
you set your hands to this my deed.


I do my Lord, with all devoted love.


And I which hate my wife his mistress: his welcome home, will breed my ill at
home, I breed my horns as Children teeth, with sickness and with pain: and
yet I will with as smooth a face as my wife will give me leave, make show of
welcome. Sir, I much rejoice to see you, and doubt not, but ere long, youl'^
come see where my poor house doth stand.


Or else I were unworthy of your love if I neglect the visitation of so kind
friends as your self and my dear mistress.

Visitation! my wife's not sick, what visitation? Tis I am ill, tis the horne
plague I have, I am sure that's not Gods visitation, yet they are the Lords
tokens, for he hath sent them me: but marry when you will, i'll try and you
be a Chandler, i'll see if you'll take your own tokens again: well, but in the
mean time, I am marked for death, yet he will be in the pit before me. O that I
should be a Cuckold! a creature of the last edition, and yet of the old
print.


O sir, What make you here, when there's a gallant Gentleman newly come from
Court, talking within with my Lady.


Ye^ more Courtiers, more Gallants, more Gentlemen? now in a hundred thousand
horned diuils names, what makes a there? what is a gone to bed to your Lady?
doth a Cuckold me in mine own house, in mine own chamber? nay in mine own
Sheets? what he's come to visit her to, is a not, ha? But let me see, I have
now found out a trick to know if my wife make me a Cuckold, I will geld my
self, then if my wife be with child, I shall be sure I am a Cuckold, that will
do brave in faith, God a mer^ie brain.


Sir, I am sorry that I cannot with that free scope of friendly entertainment,
give welcome to your worth, because a jealous spirit haunts my husband, which
doth disturb us all, this devil hath long vexed h^m, and he as long vexed me,
were I not composed of more then of an ordinary female spirit, the burden of
his wrongs would tyre me quite.


Sir, this is my husband.

I cry ye mercy sir, I did not see ye.


A man would think ye saw me, for I am sure ye have hit me right enough.


I pray sir be not angry, I have not any way offended you, nor would --


Nay, nay, though I be, ye may be friends again with me in spite of my teeth,
for look ye sir: my wife and I are but one, and then though I fall out with
you, you may fall in with her.


Sir, I come not to offend you, nor --


Nay, nay, ye may, ye may in faith, ye may, my wife is charitable, and would be
glad by such a means to make us friends.


Sir, then know, I scorn my eyes should stand as witnesses unto your Ladies
wrongs, and let you go unpunished: slight see a sweet Lady abused!


Sir you shall not touch him, husband you are to blame, your madness makes you
much forget your manners, and wrongs my hi^ birth, to make me the only
cankerd, and worm eaten branch that sprung out of my fafathers noble stock.
No, no, know that the tree from which I grew, brought forth good fruit to
all, not bad to you: but hence forth i'll shake hands with mirth; and
entertain a careless humour: for look ye sir, the Devil gives this iellousie
to man, as nature doth a tail unto a Lyon, which thinks in heat to beat away
the Flies, when he doth most enrage himself with it: but come sir, will ye
be my servant, my cipher, my shadow, or indeed any thing?


Your shadow if you please, and you my substance.


With all my heart.


I, I warrant her with al her heart, and now must be do as all shadows do,
when night comes, creeps into the substance.


Say a do, do'y here husband, I hear do vow before all the watchful guard
of heaven, that I have lived as true unto thy bed, chaste unto thy love, as ere
was Turtle to her mate: but hence forrth cerimonious custom shall not curb me
of delight, let her be bridel'd by opinion, whose weak desires cannot break
her rain^s: for my part, i'll make you know my will is like a flint, smooth and
cold, but being hardly struck, sparkles forth fire even in the strikers
eyes: I am a shamed that I have sa^id thus much, yet I may lawfully speak, for
why? come sir, will ye walk? the proverb says, give losers leave to talk.


Owages, wages, O honest wages! what other Gallants come to your Lady in my
absence?


Truly sir, sometimes there comes a proper young Gentleman one Master Woodlie.


Would lie! with whom would he lie good Wages?


Why with my Lady sir, and he could get her good will: but he is a Gentleman I
can assure ye sir, for he walks always in boots, but in troth his gentility
is something decaying, his boots are on their death-bed, for their souls are
upon parting, and I think he be a Soldier too, for his sword and his hangers
are more worth then all his clothes, and a is a very proper man, for he is as
tall as one of the Guard, and he will come sometimes and take my Lady by the
hand, and pump for wit half an hour together.


How dost mean, pump, ha!


Why sir, thus he will take my Lady by the hand, and wring it half an hour
together, and say nothing.


Is that pumping for wit?


O sir I, for he that wrings a fair Lady by the hand, and says nothing, doth
but pump for wit, that's certain.


A most witty exposition, of what years.


Faith sir he's indeed a man of no ears, for a hath been on the Pillarie.


But what makes the cropeard stallion with my wife then?


Alas nothing but lies with her, and she lies with him, would you have any
more?


More! no, too much by heaven, nay then twa's past suspisition, past doubt,
past jealousy, is not my hairs turned all to horns? am I not a monstrous and
deformed Beast? my wife's a Goddess (though not Diana) she can transform: I
branch wages, I brach, do I not? am not I a goodly screen for men to hang
their hats upon.


Why sir? ye are no Cuckold:


No? no Cuckold? he lies with your Lady, and your Lady lies with him, yet I
am no cuckold.


Why no, give me but attention, and with a word i'll wipe away your horns.


No, no, words are to weak to wipe them off, when deed have put them on.


But hear me sir.


with open ears to swallow comfort.


I met my Lady and he fast by the Garden wall, asking for your jealous
worship, they both replied you were not jealous, this spoke they both
together: in this, you know they both did lie together, and yet made you no
cuckold.


Ha! mean so?


Even so indeed sir.


Nay, then I cry ye mercy wife, in faith she yet may chance be honest.


O sir, very honest as a pretty Semsteris, or a poor waiting Gentlewoman.


Well Wages, if I be a Cuckold --


Why sir, what will ye do if ye be?


What will I do? i'll make it known, for I will be a Citizen, and so be a
Subject for Poets, and a slave to my own wife, therefore follow me Wages, I
will do it.


O grief! how thou torment me, it dwells in mine eyes, feasts on my blood:
swims in my tears, and lodges in my heart. O heaven! have I deserved this
plague? O Husband! why should thou use me thus? was not my behaviour unto
thee as soft as Down, as smooth as polished crystal, I and my love as
clear? was I not like a hand-maide, even obedient to thy very thoughts? did
not my nuptial duty like a shadow follow the very turning of thine eye?
Oh! thou once did love me, but thy love was too hot, and like to self
consuming fire, it burnt out, and how soon, tis turned to cold ashes,
therefore henceforth i'll seem jealous of him: for since all endeavours fail,
i'll now try if Jealousy can drive out jealousy: and here is fit occasion for
to work upon: Why how now Husband, wooing of another wife before my death,
whence comes this? in my conscience tis a plague that Cupid hath lain upon
me for sleeping croslegd in your absence. What, are ye grown as weary of
your wife as of a foul shirt? must ye be changing?


Good madam be patient.


Patient! no, you are his patient, and he is your Physician, a ministers to ye
(with a Morbus Gallicus take ye both) I pray forsooth let me be your Butler,
and scrape your Trenchers, since I am already fain to live of your leauinges.


Woman, art Iellious?


I.


Why?


Because you give me cause: but man are you jealous?


I.


why?


Because thou gives me cause.


Tis false.


True, false, thou hast been false indeed, abused my bed, infected even my
very blood, and made it grow to hard impostumes on my brows: hast thou not
wantonly, changed naked embraces with strangers? abused thy nuptial vow?
hath notthy unsatiate womb, brought forth the bastardy of lust to call me
father? but i'll abandon thee, disclaim that, and hate ye both.


Do'y hear me sir, upon my conscience you do wrong your Lady.


If I wrong her, you'll do her right, I bear a blow of yours, the which I
never felt, you are like a mans Taylor that works with open shop for the
Husband, but if you chance to do any thing for the wife, you must do it
inwards, inwards! you are a good workman, I must needs say it: you have fitted
my wives body, how sa'y wife, has anot?


Not, but you can even in my sight cast amorous glances on others: you have
forsook my bed, abhorred my presence* and like a man past grace and shame,
strout like a pimp before a wanton feather waging minkes at hie noone:
besides, did not I find thee kissing of thy Maid?


Did not I find thee in private conference with my horsegroome?


Did thou not offer thy maid a new gown, for a nights lodging?


Did not thou give a Diamond to the Butler?


Did not thou send a bowed Angel to thy Landressse Daughter?


No tis false.


Yes, tis true, and then when I told thee on it, thou swarest twas out of
charity, because the Wench was poor, her Father a^ honest man, and her Mother
a painful woman: for these and these causes you were kind unto the Daughter,
great whilst I was contented to believe, because I was unwilling, like a faint
hearted Soldier to look of mine own wounds, until I saw thou daily woundst
my love a new, and slew thine one reputation.


Art mad?


No, but a little Jealous like you, I will no longer mantaine thy, sanguine
sin, sooth lust with patience, nor in broken singing language flatter thy
folly, as sweet hart do not wader: for I do love thee dear as doth a Goose
her Gander: a Goose indeed for if ought but a Goose, I should a sought revenge
for wrongs.


What art drunk?


No, for I have sufficient reason, too much knowledge, and sense enough to feel
my wrongs: why should we women be slaves to your imperfections? have we not
souls of one mettle, are we not as free borne as you? are we not all Adams
Of-spring? did not you fall as well with him as we, and shall we be still
kept down and you rise?


Dost hear? ye are a sort of uncertain giddy wavering, tottering tumbling
creatures, your affections are like your selves, and yourselves like your
affections, up down, like the tuckes on your Petticotes, which you let fall
and take up as occasion serves: I have seen of your sex fall in love with a
man, for wearing a handsome Rose on his shoe: another fall into the passion of
the heart, to see a man untie his point, to make water: a third fall into the
shaking Ague for eating a body cherry with two stones, and yet youl' be
fellows, even with the very image of your maker: but wilt let me alone, and
in faith i'll be quiet.


A lone! faith no.


Then i'll leave thee, since I know tis folly beyond madness, to make her
pleasure cause of my sadness.


Believe it Lady, this was well done, and like a Lady of a hie birth: make your
husband know his advancement.


O shadow, shadow, I would have you know I would not wrong him for all the
seas drowned riches: for if my heart of blood should do it as he supposes
it doth, even that blood would like a traitor write my faults with blushing
red upon my cheeks: but because I (as all women and Courtiers do) love good
clothes which his eyes wear, yet he abraides me, swearing tis to please the
multitude, and that I spread gay rags about me like a net to catch the
hearts of strangers: if I go poor, then he swears I am beastly, with a
loathed sluttishnesse: if I be sad, then I grieve he is so near: if merry,
and with a modest wantonising kiss Embrace his Love, then are my twistings
more dangerous then a Snakes, my lust more vn^atiate then was Messal^nas: Yet
this from Iealiousie doth always grow. What most they seek they loth'st of
all would know. But now to you dear Cousin, forgiveness let me ask, and
pardon for my ^ained Jealousy, and take but thus much of my counsel. Marry
not in hast, for she that takes the best of Husbands, puts but on a goulde
fetter, for husbands are but like to painted fruit, which promise much, but
still deceives us when we come to touch: if you match with a Courtier, heel
have a dozen mistresses at least, and repent his marriage within four and
twenty hours at most, swearing a wife is fit for none but an old Justice or
a country Gentleman. If ye marry a Citizen (though ye live never so honest)
yet ye shall be sure to have a Cuckold to your Husband. If a Lawyer, the
neatenesse of his Clarke will draw in question the good carriage of his wife.
If a Merchant, heel be venturing abroad, when a might deal a great deal more
safe at home: therefore come Cousin come, lets home, and this take of me, That
amongst the best there's none good, all ill: she's married best that's: wedded
to her will.


They say Cupid is a boy, yet I have known him confute the oppinon of all your
Phylosphers: for they hold every light thing tends dyrectlye up: but I think
all know he makes every light wench, fall directly down. Well I am sure a
hath knocked me with his bird bolt, for the which Venus give him correction;
for I do already love a Lady of an imcomparable delicacy, but she's
another mans, and will shut her ears as close to keep out charms, as great
men do their gates, to keep in alms. Yet I have no reason to despair, for I
have kis'd her, and the French proverb says, Fame baissee est demi ioyee, a
woman kis'd is half enjoyed: but I fear he means but the upper half.

I have here a Letter must work a strange thing, and yet no miracle, it must
make a La^ie love her friend better then her own husband.


Save ye my Lord.


O Wages! what Tennis-ball ha's fortune taken thee for, to toss thee thus into
my way?


I hope ye will not strike me into any hazard of my life though.


But what's the news my Lad, what's the news? how doth Sir Timothie
Troublesome, that iellious knight thy Master.


Why sir, a doth with his wife like a cowardly Captain in a town of Garrison,
fears every assault, trembles at the battery, and doubts most, least the
gates should be opened, and his enemy let in at midnight.


Now in the name of destiny who fears a?


O sir* next to you self, none so much as your Courtier, for even with vennum'd
Breath, a speaks of them: for saith he, have but a suite to one of the, they
are like Iourdaines, which though ye open the Fludgates of your bounty, and
fill them to the very brim, yet theile always stand gaping for more.


But dost thou think his Lady honest?


As woman's flesh may be.


But she ha's been a Courtier, and therefore knowing most good, me thinks
she would commit least ill.


O sir, I will not but with sanctified and halowed thoughts, touch Sinthias
brightest beams, whom all eyes do adore, and hearts do worship: where
purest chastity doth shine in spotless robes of splendent majesty, where
nature emulating heaven to make her even as fair as she is virtuous, but yet I
well could wish, you know y^in the sky of Court are many stars, the which at
midnight shoot and fall.


True, through most of the twelve signs, for they shoot from their Husbands
at Aries (which governs the head) and fall at Scorpio, and so indeed they
shoot from top to tail: but honest Wages, will ye bind me to 'y.


I think sir twill not be so much for your health, as if I should keep you
sollable.


I mean in courtesy good Wages.


O ^ the very name of good Wages, will make a Serningman do any courtesy.


Then be friend me thus, deliver this Letter to your Ladies own hand, with as
much secrecy as ye may, and take this for your employment.


As secret as she that sel's complexion: none but the chamber-Maide shall know
it.


YE have your eyes like Sunne-glasses, caught the heate of my beauty, cast it
on your own heart, and doth your sighs like bellows, make it more inflambe?
then spend your tears to quenchit, for my chaste bloods honour shall never do
it. Lust, it's like an ouer-swollen river, that breaks beyond all bounds:
it's a Devil bred in the blood, nurc'd in desire, like a Sallamander lives in
a continual fire: it sprouts larger then the Ivy, which embraces, twisteth
and intangleth every one within his reach, makes no choice betwixt the
goodliest Caeder the stinckingst Elder: it's a foul usurper on the name of
love, and reigns with greater domination then an Emperor: it's a very
leperous Itch, it staines, and leaves a fouler spot upon the soul then
tears can wash away: but my chaste thoughts shall watch mine honour: i'll
muster up my prayers to fight against temptation: shall I that have bin a
commander of my self, now prove a slave to sin? No, no, my mounting
thoughts do soar too high a pitch to stoop to any strangers lure. Say that a
pecuish Fly entangled were within my neuer-shorne tresses, should I to save
his life, cut and deform me of so rich an ornament? What though the Lord
Nonesuch within my love entangled be, must my honour now be clipped to set him
free? No, no, my saw is this and ever shall: he that on hope doth climb doth
often fall. But what shall I do? a writes here a will come: wit of a Woman
now assist me, O aperne strings be now auspicious, for here's my Husband,
something I must do: I have it.

Now fair mistress: this is strange to find you here alone:


Not alone, but environed and accompained.


With what?


With many heart-biting thoughts, which like Actteons hounds have almost
slain my self* yet now my constancy shall prove a glass, in which your
self shall see your own errors: the Lord Nonesuch which you have long suspected,
with vnrebated edge of lust, hath aways sought, (I must confess) to cut my
very reputations throat, this night --


This night?


I this night, but hear me husband:


No no, cuckold me, kill me with grief, do, do, when I am dead marry him: a
ha's made you a jointer already of Breech down: well wife well, I married you
out of the Country, but you have learned the City fashions already: I am a
Cuckold, I am, but ignorance that I was to marry thee so young, not being able
scarce to put thine own apparel on.


I was the fitter for a Husband, ye might then a bin sure to have taken me a
bed at all times,


True, so might other men too.


No, ye are deceived husband, other men never lie with a mans wife but when she
is ready for them, but to the purpose: this night have I promised the Lord
Nonesuch a shall enjoy my love, for which cause he will send a certain Pander
before, for fear you stand a rock in his way, on which all his hopes will
suffer ship-wracke. Now this same Panderlie Pylate shall be by you bribed to
stad sentinel, and give the watchword when a comes, that you may then punish
him, either with death or fear.


O snallowe and womanish invention, as if he wold betray his master.


Tut money often times corrupts a good, disposition and makes a knave ride
post to hell.


But is this true? art honest indeed? come hither, dost love me, dost? nay
but tell me true, dost?


Or else in hatred let me ever live.


Do not flatter me, I scarce believe thee, thou never kissest me but with such
an affection, as a young wife doth an old husband^ wringing her lips, and
making a mouth as if she were taking a Potion.


You distaste me much sir.


Dost not distats me too sometimes, tell me true?


Nothing but your Jealousy.


Well prithee forgive me and lets go, but i'll so swindge my Lord a h^r son
otter, i'll teach him fish in other men's ponds.


Did you deliver my Letter?


With secrecy.


To her self?


Her own hands.


Made she any answer?


Not any.


What other news then rides on the back of report?


Why they say sit that mistress Correction the Midwife is turned her Maphrodit.


Why Hermaphrodit?


Why sir, she is become a Midwife, for as your hermaphrodit hath two members
the one to beget, the other to bring forth, so hath your Mid ^ife too means,
the one to bring you to beget, the other to bring it forth when tis begotten:
and look you sir, hear she appears upon her Q.


O prithee do thou board her as she passes by.


Who I board her? by this light I dare not.


Then I will: fairly met fair Mistress.


Indeed forsooth I have bin, by my truth I see he is a fine spoken man.


Where abouts is your house fair Lady?


Here fast by sir, not above a couple of stones cast off.


What Gentlewomen have ye at home?


O Master Wages, how do'y? faith sir I have no body at home but mistress
Punckit, you know her well.


What's she?


Truly sir a very courteous Gentlewoman, she loves to act in as clean linen as
any Gentlewoman of her function about the town, and truly that's the reason
that your sincere puritanes cannot abide to wear a Surplice, because they say
tis made of the same thing that your villainous sin is committed in, as your
most profane holland.


Pra'y when was Master Wrestler of the Guard at your house?


Who he? in troth Mi. Punckit cannot abide him, she swears a looks for all
the world like the Dominicall Letter in his red Coat: no Master Wages no, I
can tell ye I have other manner of Guests come to my house then ^e: I have
Pensioners, and Gentlemen Ushers, Knights, Captains and Commanders,
Lieftennants, and Ancients, volluntary Gentlemen, I, men y^ wear their cloaks
lined through with velvet; I entertain no Mutto eating Innesa court men, no
half lined cloak Citizens: nor flat capt Prentices, no, the best come to my
house, Master Newcome the Courtier was there the other day, and truly he wold
have had some dealing with Mi. Punckit, but that he had no siller: and yet I
must needs say it, a would a put her in very good obscurity, for a brought a
Gentleman with him that wold a give his word in a consumption of twenty pound,
that a should a paid her at next meeting, and truly but that her trade
stands so much upon present payment, and partly for mortallities sake, I
think else she would a taken it, and yet before a went, I must needs say it, a
shewde himself like an honest Gentleman and a Courtier, for a left his
Perriwigge in pawn: but had you seen how a looked, for all the world like an
Ostriches egg, with a face drawn of the one side.


What other guests have ye?


There comes master Exhibition of the Innes a court very often, and Master
Angell-taker the counseller comes sometimes, but Mistress Punckit doth so jest
with him, she swe^res to him as she hopes to be saved, and I may tell you sir,
there's great hope on it, for truly she uses just and upright dealing with
every man, but as I said, as she hopes to be saved, she would not marry him
of all the men in the world.


No, why?


Because she says that Lawyers are like Trumpeters, they sell their breath.


She's a fool tell her, the Lawyers are the pillars of the Realm.


Yes forsooth so I said but she said they were not only the Pillars but the
Polers also, but I pray you sir of what profession are you?


Faith of none Gentlewoman, only a young gallant as you see.


A young Gallant, say you lisaith, i'll quickly try that by and by, do'y hear
sir, do'y hear?


What say you Gentlewoman?


I pray can you give me ten shillings for a piece of gold.


Yes that I can.


O sir, O sir, I perceive you are no gallantifaith, it would go deep my
friend, I may tell you for a young gallant to change three groats for a
shilling, twere great fish, I may tell you too, to Angle for in a gallants
great hose.


Hold mistress, spend that for my sake, and it shall not be long ere I will
come and visit your house.


I thank your worship, sir, i'll be so bold as to take my deliverance out of
your company.


Farewell.


God be with you mistress Correction.


The like to you good Master Wages, but do you hear sir, I hope if your
worship come to my house, if there be no body at home but my self, though I am
an old woman, yet I hope your worship will not despise age.


No, no, fear not that.


I thank ye heartily sir.


With all my heart, Wages farewell, and bring but an answer of my letter; and I
will be thy pay-maister, not thy debtor.


I understand so much by your name good Master Nuecome.


And I am in grace too Lady, what my souls sweet secretary! you are fairly
met indeed, how doth old Venture thy father?


O how perfumed your Courtiers phraisies are: I left him in health sir.


O I, they speak in print I can tell you, and though it be a sin, to rob a
man of his learning yet Courtiers are very seldom blamed for getting out of
any men's books.


Yet I have known them steal out of them ere now.


Nay then you'll make a Courtier a Thief:


I, such a one as the good thief was.


Mass I wonder what Country man that good thief was?


O, a was my countryman Lady, he was a borderer on North wales, I can assure
you.


Indeed and so I think, for not to flatter ye, many of your Country men have
proved good thieves ever since: but I pra'y tell me, is it the fashion of your
north wales, to suffer your beards to grow upwards thus, in spite of your nose?


Yes Lady, al of us that are Courtiers: marry before when we were poor
country fellows, we suffered our beards carelessly to grow downward, and
then they grow into our mouths in spite of our teeth, now you know hair is
but excrement, for mine own part, I had rather have my excrement in my nose,
then in my teeth.


I have heard most of your Country men are very active men.


O Lady, I have seen a youth of eighteen years in our Country, would a
capered ye, thus hye!


'T as bin in a string then.


Is it possible?


Nay, believe it, a would have done it with all his heart, but he could not.


They say to, most of your Countrymen are very valiant


O I, they terrify their enemies with patience.


O, we make the excellent'st Soldiers in the world.


I, but they say, they cannot press a man to the wars though, in all your
country.


yes Knights:


Why Knights?


To save our Landed men at home.


I have heard, most of ye are great Travellers.


I, for france Spain and England, and such neighbour countries, why I have
been as far as Winchester my self.


Indeed tis true, some of ye Travail so far abroad as ye come short home many
times.


I have heard ye are all Gentlemen.


Indeed I must confess Lady, we have few beggars, and those we have, we
reward according, for if he be a lusty Knave, we give him a Lawyers alms,
tell him of the stature: if a poor and decrepit fellow, we give him a
Citizens wives charity, cry God help him, God help him.


By your leave Master Nuecome, me thinks you have a pr^tie lace on your band


A pretty slight court lace, all show, all showe^


What's this, a shirt that ye wear? else tis a mock^begger with strips.


No, tis a shirt Lady.


What, did you make this Doublet new, or else ye new made it?


Yes I made it new Lady?


Believe me sir but the livings are old.


Fie, they are greasy.


I think they are something sweaty indeed with hunting.


Hunting: why a man need not hunt far for game, whats this?


O, a Sallamander Lady, tis a Sallamander bred with the continual heate of
sweating --


What's your breech made all of one stuff Master Nuecome?


Pray why do you ask?


Because me thinks the soil change's here behind


I, and so doth the air as well as the soil I warrant ye.


What are these hose made of the newest fashion ye have at Court?


Faith Lady for mine own part I am no mans Ape, this is my fashion, and
sometimes I stand in the presence with my cloak lined through, either with
velvet or with Taffeta, if with Velvet, I let him hang on my shoulder, making
the greatest show, carry my hat here.


Now by the soul of chastity I swear, a is a proper man.


If any man pass by and salute me, I salute him again, but if any Lady or
Gentlewoman glide through the presence, and cast her eye on me, as commonly
they use to do on men, that makes any show or glister as I always do.


Ye! always making glisters, I hold my life he is a Portecarie, do you never
make no suppositors sir?


I keep my place of standing, carry my body stiff and upright, blush not, am
impudent enough, when perchance the heate of the Ladies affection makes her
take ^place of standing, either against the hangings or one of the bay
windows, and therewith a greedy eye feeds on my exteryors, which perceiving,
I draw to her, kiss my hand, accorst her thus.


I pra'y accorst her anon sir, and lets stand close and trouble not true
iellousie in the picture of Hieronimo, in a little volume.


See, see how a looks, do you not perceive his heart beat hither?


I, for all the world like the Denmark Drummer.


Peace, hear what a says.


Forgiveness wife: O how have I wronged thee, O who would abuse your sex,
which truly knows ye?* O women were we not borne of ye? should we not then
honour you? nursed by ye, and not regard ye? begotten on ye, and not love ye?
made for ye, and not seek ye? and since we were made before ye, should we not
love and admire ye as the last? and therefore perfect'st work of nature, Ma was
made when nature was but an apprentice, but woman when she was a skilful
Mistress of her Art, therefore cursed is he that doth not admire those
Paragons, those Moddels of heaven, Angels on earth Goddesses in shape: by their
loves we live in double breath, even in our Offspring after death. Are not all
Vices masculine, and Virtues feminine? are not the Muses the loves of the
learned? do not all noble spi^rits follow the Graces because they are women,
there's but one Phoenix and she's a female: Is not the Princes and foundres of
good arts Miner^, borne of the brain of highest Jove, a woman? have not these
women, the face of love the tongue of persuasion, the body of delight? O divine
perfectio'd, women, whose praises no tongue can full express, for that the
matter doth exceed the labour, O if to be a Woman be so excellent, what is it
then to be a woman inritch'd by nature, made excellent by education, noble by
birth, chaste by virtue, adorned by beauty: A fair woman which is the
ornament of heaven, the grace of earth, the joy of life and the delight of all
sense, even the very summum bonum of mans life.


O monstrous herresie, he will be damb'd for that error.


Nay, let him alone, for he had like to been burnt for that opinion ere now,
had not a friend of mine plucked the fire from the stake.


Come, lets break out upon him.


O no good sir, though it be a thing much given to your name, yet let not us
break out, let us not show such childish parts.


Save ye Knight.


And bless ye Lady, O sir, are you there? come ye hither, what's that
strange Lady there?


I think it be mistress Babee sir, master Nuecome's Mistress, for she looks
like an Northern Lass, made of a strange fashion, something like a Lute, all
belly to the neck.


So, like a Lute, and you like a skilful mu^tian have bin fingering it.


How does your good Lady Knight, how doth she?


Well I praise H^me, and I adore my stars, she hath no acquaintance with such a
female fly as you are.


What means he by that?


Why I think a means you are but a light huswife, but come let's leave him.


Light Huswife, hang him dogged Cinicke.


Farewell Knight.


Forgiveness wife.


Now the plague of Egipt light upon you all, Lice devour yetcomeye hither
sir, what's the cause you keep such villainous company?


I keep their company most sir for good vittailes, for you keep such a
villainous house, as if tweare always Easter eve, we still hope for better:
and you know your Cooke is gone already sir, for fear a should forget his
occupation with you. Besides sir, if any man come to your house to dinner
though he hop upon one leg, yet every man saith a comes to fast, and for
mine own part sir, you have given me nothing since I came unto you.


O thou pampered lade! what would thou have? what would thou feed on
Quails? art thou not Fat? is not thy neck brawn, thy leg calfe? thy head
beef, yet thou wants meat.


No sir, but I would willingly have some wages.


Well, i'll think on it, and so go call your mistress.


Look you sir, here she comes without calling.


Save your honesty then, and be gone without bid ding.


Ivannish sir.


Do so: O my sweet wife, my selected spouse, the very vessel of chastity, filled
to the very btim with Hymen zeal nuptial duty: how have I abused thee? but I
have washed repentance even in tears, and in thy absence I have dedicated
sacred sighs unto thee to appease thy wrath: therefore tel me sweet wife, when
comes this pader, when comes he?


I muse he stays so long, he should a been by promise here an hour since,
and look here a comes?


O you are welcome Sir, welcome in faith, but when comes your Lord? is he at
hand, wi^ a come?


My Lord sir, what Lord?


Nay, come, come, make not the matter strange ma, my wife hath told me all, you
are an honest man, hold, hold, will ye but be friend me now, and watch
another door unto my h^use, and give me notice whe^ a comes, while I watch
this.


O now I see the trick on it, his wife hath gulled him with a lie made him believe
I am but a pore seruingma only to enjoy my love: O kind woman! O sweet Lady!
nay now I see she loves me.


O excellent wife, how true she told me, what a beast have I bin still to
wrong her with suspect.


Faith sir I see ye are a very worthy Gentleman, and for mine own part I
shall be glad to do you any pleasure, for to tell you true, I think my Lord
means to Cuckold you indeed.


Why that's well said, hold hear's one Angel more, and go but with my wife,
sheele show you the other door while I watch this: and if a come, knock him
down, kill him, and lay the fault on me, i'll please you for your pains,
look, here's a club will hold.


Give me, give me, come.


Go wife, go with him, see a stand stiffly too't, and if occasion serve.


I warrant ye husband, fear it not, but i'll do my part.


Why that's well said, and if a come to this door, i'll teach him come to tie
his mare in my ground, but what a slave have I bin still thus to suspect my
wife, I could never feel any horns I had, and yet I know my scull is so thin
that if my wife should a Cuckold me with the least thing in the world, yet my
horns would a grown through now am I for my Lord.


Now fair mistress, this far through the mouth of danger am I come made my
passage eve through her life. deuoring Jaws to feast mine eyes upon this
beauty, which makes me think all danger's but a sport, so you receive and
wrap me in your loves embraces, and take hold of this fair occasion, for
well you know your Husbands Jealousy will turn this proffered time like
fortunes wheel, and drown our fairest hopes even in despair, if you be
tedious in our loves effects, and therefore since your wi^te hath safely
plotted my arrival here; proceed even to the utmost lists of my desire, and
make me happy in the fruition of your long desired love.


O my Lord, shall a smile, a good word, a little kind behaviour, or the title of
dear servant, make your hopes to swell into so great a sea of lust, as
presently to euer-flow and drown the honour of your Mis^ris? O my Lord no,
your judgment much deceives you of my disposition: besides, I sent not for
ye, it was your lewd unbridled will, that made you thus come gallop heither:
yet by my means I must confess as yet you are unknown, and in some sort I
glad your being here, only to make you know, that neither fairest occasions
nor greatest persuasions shall ever make me violate my faith to him I owe my
love; No my Lord I know I durst to trust my self against the most of
opportunity and strength of all tempation, and though my husband watch you at
the door, yet know within, my conscience watches me though he be blinded
with a trick, yet the clear all-light^ givers eyes do see: therefore good my
Lord be gone, you see my husband is wilful bent, and if he chance to know you,
I much doubt your safety.


But is this my pains requital and my loves reward?


Alas my Lord, what would you have? my love is not mine own.


Well, farewell Lady, you may repent this yet ere log: yet peace fond breath,
least threats my plots beguile: vegence intended policy, must smile.


Are ye going sir, are ye going, what will not your Lord come^


I think not sir, his hour is past long since, some other business hinders
him.


Gods my passion, what do I see, this is he, I see his chain: nay but look
you sit, when will you come again? by this light I see his signet ring.


Assure your self sir, i'll bring you notice before my Lord come.


Nay, but will you sure? shall I trust to you? for look ye sir, and if you
should not come, pra'y stay a little, me thinks your band is torn.


It's no matter no matter.


No, tis not now I se^t, by this hand tis he, tis he, what should I do, now if
I should strike him, he would be to hard for me, for he is better armed then
I.


Well (...) i'll take my leave of you, till your occasion shall need my
presence.


Fare ye well sir, I hope that shall be never: but have not I spun a fair
thread think you, to be a very Bawd, an arrant withal, to give them
opportunity, put them together, Nay hold the door the whilst this is my wives
plot, by which I have sailed to Cuckolds haven yet my sail was but asmocke,
which she her self hoist up alas alas, Gentlemen do you not know the
Philosopher saith this world is but a stage: body mihi, cras tibi my part to
day, it may be some of yours to morrow ^hy tis but matrimonial chance, we
that are Cuckolds should be wissest men, for no men else do know their ends,
but we know ours, for we are forked at both O thou powerful and celestial
Jove! strike down from heaven some congealed bolts of thunder, that it may
pierce the womb of earth, and through it send thy lightning flames to make
hell hotter then it is, or with Egiptian dampes and rotten jaws renouate thy
eating plague of life, dissolve nature, consume earth, destroy hell, and dambe
woman I beseech thee into a deeper dungeon then the Devil. They fill men with
diseases, and give the wane-eyde Sun of Heaven cause to smile to see our
pains: shall the gaping of graves, the scratching of Ghosts, and cries of
damned souls, yet longer be deferred? shall time incorporate with sin, and
beget more mischief? shall hell be better furnished with women then with
Devils? infernal Lucifer will muster up his female souls against thy deity,
unless thou do abridge the course of sin by cutting off the increase of
women, and then we shall have no more cuckolds. Come ye hither wife, come ye
hither, pra'y tell me one thing true.


True: why husband, i'll lye for no mans pleasure.


Yes, for his pleasure that is gone.


For his pleasure, why for his pleasure?


Because you are a Puncke wife, a puncke.


Now Jove bless me.


You are a Cockatrice wife, a cockatrice


Now heavens defend me.


You are a whore wife, a whore.


Sir, the man is mad.


I, horne mad, ah thou vile perfidious, detestable, lascivious, unsatiable,
Luxurious and abominable strumpet, was it not enough to be an Acteon, a
cornuto, a cuckold, but to make me a Bawd, a Pimp, a Pander?


What Pimp? what Pander?


What Pimp? what Pander? why was not this the Lord Nonesuch? did I not see his
chain, nay prithee say twa's not he, nay swear it too: over shoes over
boots, since ye have waded to the belly in sin, nay now go deeper even to
the breast and heart.


Pra'y hear me husband.


What vile excuses can make, how can thou hide thy lust? would wrap thy
sin in perjury to muffell up thy villainy?


Nay good Husband for pity sake hear me.


Talk not of pity, pity is deaf and cannot hear the poor mans cry, much
less a strumpets.


For charity hear me.


Charity is frozen and benumbed with cold, it cannot help thee, dost kneel?
dost kneel? to the heauen's not to me yet they look thy heart should stoop,
and not the knee. Dost weep dost? Rise, rise thou stumpet, go out of my
sight, in, in.


I go, Yet this my comfort, in the gall of life, Suspicion never wronged a
truer wife.


Hoe, Wages!


Here sir.


Come heather Wages, my olderesolution is come on me again, and it shall make
me do much, for I will geld my self.


Alas sir that's the only way to make you do little.


Therefore go fetch me the Opperator.


What's he sir?


The stone-Cutter.


O you mean the Sow-gelder.


O ^he's an excellent fellow, he takes away the cause of a mans beastly
desires.


I, and of their manly performance too.


He makes a man not care a rush for a woman.


No, nor a Woman care a straw for a man.


Doth not such a fellow deserve commendations?


Yes as a hangman doth, for cutting off the traitors that makes the flesh
rebel.


Wages I do now more doubt my wives honesty then ever, therefore i'll make him
the touchstone of her reputation.


Faith sir ye might get easier touchstones then he a great deal, there's many
a Goldsmiths wife in Cheapside could help you to a better.


He deserue's much praise.


I, as your cockatrice doth for the dismembering of men.


If she be a punckit i'll not be diuorc'd.


Why should ye? why ye cannot keep more Gentlema^ ^ike company: besides, your
puncke: is like your pollitition, for they both consume themselves, for the
common people. And your punck of the two, is the better member, for she like a
candle to light others's, burns her self.


Well wages, come follow me, for I am resoul'd to try my wives honesty.


Venus lay where Mars had found her,
And in warlike arms he bound her,
Cupid cried, and Vulcane spied:
And thereon threw the Sciclops,
But his horne, begat his scorn,
With all the little Gods mocks.
Now some honest Gentleman pass by that I might sell him the maiden-head of my
occupation for a half penny mass, here a comes, a shall have it, ye faith.

Worshipful Gentleman, look with your eye, and pity with your heart the
distress of a martial ma, I have been a man in my days, and acquainted with
better fortunes then I now see^ time hath been I have borne arms, but now
one's gone, and I can no longer write Gentleman: wherefore if you please to
bestow but one poor thistle of your bounty to prick the blister of my
poverty, it would set my slender fortunes a flote, where they now lie beating
on the goodwins of famine, I am none of these Lu^gations that beg for
fourscore and ten poor men: my suite is only for my self.


Whom hast thou served friend?


First I served in Ireland, then in Holland, Braband, Zealand, Gelderland,
Friesland and most of the seauenteen Provinces, I was at the siege of Bargon
up soon, carried a pike at the entrance of Sluice, and was hurt in the gro^e
entering the breche.


Who was thy Captain?


I served under the command of Captain pipe.


Who, captain Gregorie Pipe?


No sir, Captain Tobacco Pipe.


O, I know him well indeed, he is on the English nation, hath much
imploiments.


I can assure your worship sir, I have seen him in very hot service, and when
some of us his followers have smok'd for it too: wherefore I beseech you sir,
bestow^ something on me, for the knowledge you had of my good Captain.


Go to sir, I fear ye are a counterf^ite Rogue.


How Rogue sir^ though none of fortunes favourites, nor great men's minions, yet
perchances as good a man as your self: swoundes Roguel


Nay be not a^grie good friend for yf^ith I love a Soldier with all my heart,
for indeed I have a Co^ssen is one, would give thee something, but in faith I
have no siller, yet I give thee eighteen pence in conceit, and so farewell.


Well sir, in conceit I thank ye then.

Ye Wages, come ye after like a Clog to the heals of the old Ape your
Master?


Wages, how many pounds go to a stone of beef?


Eight sir.


Then I am lighter by sixeteen pound now then I was, I may now lie with any
Lady in Europe for any hurt I can do her.


True sir, or good either.


I can cuckold no man,


Yet any man may cuckold you.


What's he VVages?


Some poor Soldier sir, lately come out of the low countries.


I must not now beg lame, for fear I loose his service by it: I beseech ye
good black Captain bestow something of a poor Sould^r, that hath served his
Prince both by Sea and land: if you bestow but one poor penny of your
liberality, when the wheel off^te, turn^s, if ^he bit^er frosts of pouer^e
^oe not in the mean time nip my fortunes in the blossoms, I doubt not but to
reciprocrate your curres^.


Hyda, what an excellent fellow this would make to d^ell in the exchange, ^ow
the R^gue prates?


What (...) a Sol^ier?


I have bin one some few ye^es.


Why then thou art a Gen^leman by profession, and tis a (...) Gentleman to beg.


So I think, for I have Ge^tleman like qualiti^s enough: for I had rather
drink drunk to purge, then take Physic: but will you give me any thing sir?


No sir my (...) do^h ^ to give Gentlem^n money, for fear of (...) them.


O, I cry you mercy good Master Must^rd-Pot.


Mustard pot! Gods light, mustard Pot! and why Mustard pot?


Because thou art a sawce-box.


Sauce box?


Go to, be quiet Wages.


But will ye give me any thing sir?


No not ^ penny.


Come th^n sir, will ye walk a turn or too?


(...) with th^e, why, art not lousy?


I need not, I ha^e change enough, for I have two pair of (...)


We^ never in better fashion?


Yes, I have borne the badge of honour in my days.


I a ^ath bin some Nobleman's Footman sure.


Was thy Father an Alcumist that thou art so poor?


Why do you not know poverty hath a Gentleman Ushers place, it goes bear
before death.


Thy name,


Slack.


Of what Religion art?


Faith I am yet clean paper, ye may write on me what ye will, either
Puritan or Protestant.


Wilt thou serve me?


So you will give me wages.


Yes that I will, and thou shalt wear my livery too, i'll give it thee, thou
shalt not buy't thy self.


I thank ye sir.


O Mistress Correction ^how do you?


I thank ye good Master Wages, and how doth that goodly Gelding your Master?


Why Gelding?


Because he hath both abused and accus'de one of the most virtuous Ladies that
ever frisseld her hair.


Peace, speak soft, that's he.


Is that he?


The very same.


Now by my troth I am glad to see your worship in good health* and how doth
your good Worship: Lord you look ill, a body may see what grief will do: O
had you had a good wife, your worship would look twenty years younger then
you do, tis even pity of her life that would wrong such a sweet man: what
an excellent complexion your beard's off, and by my troth a keeps his colour
very well.

What now you sawfie Companion you, what aisle you trow?


You had an ill Midwife Mistress, she hath not closed your mould well behind.


Marry come up Jack an Apes father-in law, what can you tell?


I felt it by giving my hand to bid it farewell.


O sir, that's sign ye are a clown, if ye had bin a Gentleman ye would a kissed
it, and a taken your leave on it, I pray master Wages what's this fellow?


A new man of my masters, and I can assure you a tall Soldier too.


A tall Soldier say you? so me thinks, his clothes have been in shrode
services, for they are very dangerously wounded. Sir, and like your worship,
this that you have entertained is no man, tis some Scar-crowe, and you have
done very ill to take him away: the Crows will eat up the Corn now out of
all measure, pray God we have not a dear year after it.


I know your husband well Mistress Correction, and Mistress Punckit too, I hear
she keeps her bed much, what is she not in health?


Have you such a Gentlewoman lies at your house?


Yes indeed sir, a younger Brothers Daughter, a kins-woman of my Husbands.


It seems he hath been acquainted with her.


Who he? no sir, she scorns to speak with him, unless tweare by an
Attorney.


Pra'y how doth your Husband good Mistress Correction.


The better your asking good Master Wages.


Indeed her Husband is a very honest painful man sir.


O master Wages, no, no, master Wages, you are deceived in him, there's never
a morning but I am ready and abroad, an hour before he's up: and when he is
up, as I am a living woman* I can make him do nothing for my life.


No, doth he not study?


Yes, like the Clarke of a great mans kitchen, what meat he shall have for
dinner.


Believe it but he is a good Scholar though* O he hath a passing head of his
own.


Hath he, I he hath indeed, if ^e knew al, I can tel ye he may thank me for it
too, for he went to school to (...) in my first husbands time


Pra'y what was your first husband


M. Seldom the preacher an't like your worship, he preached in two of his
benefices in one day, sure t'was the death of him, he never joyed himself
after he so ouerstrained his voice.


And then you married this man?


Yes forsooth, truly afterwards bought him a benefice, but he hath sold it
again, I may tell you though I am no Lady, yethe's called sir Iohn every word,
for all this now he makes no more account of me then your man My. Wages doth
of an old shoe-clout which a never thinks off, but when a needs, and if he
cannot find it, why any other thing serves his turn, and so he deals by me,
truly M. Wages I may tell you, I mean to put him away.


Away I why ye cannot put him away for this.


Yes I warrat ye, if you can find in your heart to love marry me, let me alone
for y^? i'll keep ye like a ma al days of your life^ besides, if the stones of
the street in y^ ciue should be too hot, for ye, that ye dare not walk on them
for fear the wicked vanities of the world should catch hold of ye, as they have
done to the utter overthrow undoing of many a good ma, yet I can get my living
in the Suburbs, what trade so ever go down, I doubt not but mine will hold up
as long as the kingdom yields either soldiers or younger brothers, which
wants maintenance to keep wives of their own No M. Wages, my trade is a sweet
trade, little doth any body know what comings in I have daily, I keep 3. as
good fetherbeds going winter sumer, as any sinner in the suburbs: besides, I
warrant ye, I get above 20 poud a year in Rennish wine, at the second hand.


Well, ask my Ma^if he be willing, ye^ shall find me forward


And that's as much as any woman can ask truly: and please your worship I have
a suite to you.


Whatist Mi. Cor^ for you are very like to speed?


That I may have your good will to marry M. Wages.


Why you have a husband alive?


I, but I can be deuorc'd from him, and like your worship for three several
causes which I know well ennough, I warrant ye.


If he be willing, with all my hart.


I thank your worship.


Hise fellow Wages, pray a word we, dost mean to have her?


I.


Well, goethy ways, I warrant thee a sound piece of her.


A piece, why a piece? did thou ever shoot in her?


Who I, no: she recoiles too much in the discharging for me to meddle with, but
dost hear, put her away again as soon as thou can: if thou ke^pe her
long, if she prove not like a commodity of wood, and s^ink in thy hands then
hang me.


Well Mistress Correction, I could wish you go about this your affairs as soon
as you may, Slack, Wages do you two follow me.


Now by my chaste thoughts which I was mother of at nine years old, I here
swear, never to be in love: yet Master Nuecome the Courtier thinks with the
wearing of a neat boot, and a clean band, to catch my love napping as Morse
catch this Mare, but Venus be my good speed, and Cupid send me good luck, for
my heart is very light, and I fear tis but like a Candle, burnt into the
Socket, which lightens a litt^ before it goes out.


I most fear tis like lightning before thunder, I pray have a careyehold
fast.


Come, thou hast such a running wit, tis like an Irish foot boy^ I fear twill
rob thee of all thy (...) and then run from thee and leave thee.

But I pray thee tell me one thing,


I will an't be a good thing?


Hast thou thy Maiden head yet?


My maiden-dead! faith^.


Come, prithee do not lye, for they say tis lost lying and by the strength of
my little virtue, I wonder (for mine own part) to see how this foolish
virginity is esteemed when there is such danger in the keeping it, for who
doth not know that the barren womb^ is cursed? and al know virgins have no
children: besides, Women shall be saved by ^he bearing of Children, how
think thou, are they?


Nay, I cannot tell, you were best try.


Indeed they say tis good to try before one trust.


But I pray thee tell me one thing now,


And what's that?


The reason why thou art come run away from thy Father, considering the
forman of your Shop, me thought was a good handsome fellow.


Tis true, so he was, but he had no leisure to keep me comp^y a workie days
for crying what do you lack, and a Holy days he would be at stoole-ball
amongst the boys when I had most need of him: but to tell thee the true
cause of my coming away; I should have married a young unthrifty Lord, one
that will give his verrye soul to a fair woman, and faith sometimes though
she be never so foul, yet he will lend her his body: he had never a hair on
his beard this th^ee or four (...), but might a bin an utter barrester, for
they have moulted all five or six times: he's like death, he spares none, young
nor old, rich nor poor, fair nor foul, he takes all.


Well Nan w^ll, thou art happy, thou were it borne under a good Planet, thou hast
store of suits, but prithee look, is there none heare's our counsel?


No none, speak boldly lass.


I think an ill star reigned when I was borne, I cannot have as much as
suitor, this Master Nuecome that you for sooth so much scorn: I could find
in my heart to pray ^ine times to the Moon, and fost three Saint Annes eves,
so that I might be sure to have him to my husband.


I, thou would have him dreaming but not waking I am sure.


Not waking yea a (...) too, for here I vow even by the chastest thoughts that
ere was nur^'d within Dianaes breast and by those purple drops chaste Lucres
spilt, and by the vnstainde coulloar of a maidens blush, that I will prove as
true unto his bed, as ere did she that did Vlisses wed.


Nay, since I have refused a Lord, by this light I scorn to marry any under
the degree of a Knight.


No, I would not have a Knight if I might, for there are so many, as they are
forgotten what they be.


Nay I then ^ see you are deceu'd, why woman, they have most of them taken an
order that they will never be forgotten, for they have booked themselves down a
purpose, I know above three twenty in one Mercers books in Cheap side: th^n
judge thou how many are in al their books, and there is that will be a
witness I warrant you to after ages, what their fore^athers have been.


I, but that's but their faults, yet you know their calling is honourable
though.


Faith thou says true, I must needs say, Knighthood is like marriage know a
days, which thought be honoarable amongst al men, yet it begg^lie with a great
many: but come shal's go to dinner and see what stomach I have to my
vittailes, for y faith i have none to a husband: I would not taste a morsel of
a men for any money.


O that's because thou art not hungry.


Tis true indeed, a little bit would (...) my belly.


O my unkind husband, why dost reject me? if not on thee, where should I fix
my love to have reward*


Here where you are, in dear and hie regard.


Alas thou art a man of mean condition.

Your love to me, will breed the less suspicion.
Fortune denie's me wealth: all ill upon her,
Yet I have courage to defend your honour,
Madam, you reason have to be unjust:
A wicked husband makes an unkind wife.
Men brag, that women weaker creatures be,
Yet you must suffer all gross Injury,
with silence too, and low linesse of spirit,
And then forsooth a good wives name your merit.
A goodly purchase sure to be a slave,
Unto a slave, till you go to the grave.
Eve had a soul as well as Adam,
All souls are masculine, hold freedom Madam.
If strength of body make the noblest creature,
Why should not Lyons be the Kings of nature?
The strongest creatures governed are by sense,
And there thy soul hath little residence.
Philosophers say, the Element of fire,
Is active, purest, aptest to aspire:
Of which you women have the lesser portion,
Which makes your brains beget cold Notion.
I grant that Adam was created so,
But since his fall, all thinks do backward go.
Now active heart, gets murder, theft and rapine:
Tis thy chariot which all vice doth ride in.
Against whose ille's women could temper spurns,
Give me the heart which warmes not that which burns.
O hateful is the state you now do hold,
Worse then the slave, that is for money sold.
For you must money give to buy your evils,
and bind your selves, to some incarnate devils.
Be but chief steward in their drudgery,
Bring forth their brats with your lives jeopardy.
Scarce dare you give, an old sleeve from your arm,
But they cry out, you're under Couertbaren.

Presumptuous slave whose flesh upon thy boa^e,
Thy Master just, may challenge as his own:
Which by the dead scrapes from his trencher got,
Is quickened now, to cut thy geuers throat:
Thou venem'd Snake, frozen with beggary,
Now being thawed by thy masters boun^ie.
Would sting the bosom that did revive thee,
and like a viper gnaw, who first conceived thee.
Full argument of a servile spirit,
For noble hearts will gratify each merit.

Yea, are ye vanished?


Why how now fellow Slack, what is she gone?


S'life what should I do now to stop this slaves vennomed breath, for fear it
infect my reputation with my new master? this time was ill taken, yet
something I must do fellow Wages, how long hast thou been here?


Ever since fortune denied thee wealth: all ill upon h^r: but thou hast
courage to defend her honour.


Slight he hath heard all.

Why man twa's my master set me only to try her.


Nay, like enough, for I see he would willingly prove an accessory to the
stealing of his own goods.


True, and look here he comes, but I pray thee say nothing, let me tell him
of it.


Who I? not a word, my mouth is as close as a faulconers pouch, or a country
wenches placket.


She would never ^nckold me, but that she hath some reason for it


True sir, there is nothing done, but there's reason for it, (if a man could
find it) for whats the reason your Citizens wives continually wear hats, but
to show the desire they have always to be covered. Or why do your Semsters
spend their time in pricking, and your Ladies in poking of roughs; but only to
show they do as they would be don unto? or why do your Innes of court men lie
with his Laundress in a long vacation, but because he hath no money to go
abroad? Or why do your old judges widows always marry young Gen^lemen, but
to show that they love execution better then judgment.


O, but I wonder much she would not give me leave to make my first child my
self.


Foe: she knew you were but a prentice to the occupation, and commonly
Prentices spoil their first work, and being unskilful, she was loath you
should practise in a good Shop, and therefore she befriended you, because she
would have it well done: she ga^a better workema to do it for you. For whats
the reason the younger brothers (according to the old wives tails) always
proved the wisest men, but because the Fathers grew more skilful at last
then they were at the first? but I think your wives eldest Son will prove an
excellent fellow, because she had the help of so many in the making of it. For
commonly if one have a thing to be done, as a conveyance to be drawn, or a case
in the law to be argued, a man would have the help of as many good Lawyers as
he could get: now this case of making of children, and a case in the law, is
something like, for as one Lawyer takes his fee, and deals in it, another
Lawyer comes and argues the case more profoundly: but in the end wh^n all is
done, leaves it to be tried by the Jury, in whom the right is, and so must
you: when they and you and al have done your best, yet in the end, must leave
it to be tried by your wife, whose the child is, for a woman's knowledge in
this case, is better then twelve men's.


O Slack, I hate worse then the worst sin that is.


And I p^a'y which sin do you most hate?


That which is most like her, which if thou wilt repeat --


I'll tell their conditions.


And I, which is most like her.


Then the first is pride.


I would have that sin burnt for a witch, it changes men into so many shape.


The next is murder.


O! that's a thirsty sin, for nought can quench it but blood.


What is Theft?


Faith the greatest fault that I can find in that is, it cousins the
Scriuners, for it borrows money without giving any obligation.


Covetousness.


O! that's an excellent sin, for to deal with, a that hath a loose belly,
for twill bind any man for ten grotes.


What is sloth then?


Faith Sloth is a good Maidenly Greenesicknesse sin.


But lechery my Lady?


O that's the suckingst sin that a man can be acqainted withal, it cannot
endure to be in company, it creeps into corners, and hides it self in the
dark still.


What say then to drunkenness?


O that's a most gentleman like sin, it scorns to be beholding for what it
receives in a mans house, it commonly leaves it again at his door.


Nay, then lea^cherie scorns to be bebolding too, for I have known what it
hath received in a mans house, it hath sent home again nine months after, and
lain at his door, and therefore the more Gentleman like sin a great deal,
because it takes the longer time of repaiment, but I pray sit now, which of all
this is most like your wife.


Murder, for nought can quench her thirst of lust, but now I soon shall find
her villainy, praised be my vigilant care: which if I do epsy, i'll turn her
off.


Alas, alas sir, you have no reason to be angry, much less to de divorced,
although she do transgress, are you not cut? have ye not given her cause, is
it not out of mere necessity she doth it? therefore if you follow my
counsel, mak^ her amends with kindness, and put not her away.


Believe me he speaks wisely, and good counsel, like a Lady, is to be
embraced.


Not put her away, and if she wrong him. If he do not, I say he is one of the
aranst blocks yt ever ma spurned on: why is he not a Gentleman, a Knight, hath
a not seen fashion: sir, I would have you bear a noble mind, put he^ away
and you list, tis no matter for cause, if she change but a treneher with the
Groom of your stable, tis dealing e^ough to be divorced, Therefore put her
away, and then you may have another wife.


Another wife?


True, a gallant, and yet a modest Lady too, one that shall nourish no blood
but your own, tender your reputation as the apple of her eye, honour even your
very footsteps.


She shall go, i'll make her truss up her trinkets, oh faith she shall away.


Shall she away? if she do, you do you know not what, you draw a thousand
thousand enemies about your ears, her kindred theill exclaim, no friends will
seek revenge, and your enemies will grow even fat with laughter at your
folly. Besides: what Woman then will have you, are you not gelded? assure your
self that now there is none will love you, most will hate you* but all will
scorn you, therefore by my advice make much of her, and keep her while you
have her.


Hah! now by the virtue of my hearing, he speaks but reason.


So, tis good to keep her still: dwell in the Subburbs to break down your own
glass windows, set some pickes upon your hatch, and I pray profess to keep
a Baudy-house.


A Bawdie-house? no, i'll die first, and if I see but any apparent show of her
disloyalty, i'll even be divorced immediately.


Well, I see the substance of this slave is villainy.

But i'll prevent him even what I can,

Since none is worse then a Serving honest man,


Why had I not a good leg? did I not always wear clean lining? was not my
hand washed, my beard combed, my cloak brushed, and my shoes blacked, every
morning.


True, why the more viler strumpet she to cuckold you.


But how dost know she is with child.


Know it, why she's daily troubled with water pangs, and quakings over her
stomach.


Indeed I must needs say that's a great proof, she hath filled her belly
with something that stood against her stomach, but dost not think tis my
child.


Yours! why how can't be yours: are you not circumcised to the quick?


Yes, and the remembrance of it galls me.


That's a sign ye are too patient, and like an Ass eindure all without
resistance.


Ha, ha, ha.


But why do you laugh sir?


To think who the child will be like.


Why you, who should it be like ^lse?


Why tis none of mine man.


Why the more like you for that: why do you not not know the Philosophers
hold the child is always like the party which the mother thinks off in the
conception: now she thought most of you, for fear you should a come the
whiles, and that's the reason so many Gentlemen's sons are like your Citizens,
and calls them fathers too, for otherwise how could it be that a young
Cockney being left forty or fiftiie thousand pounds: spends all within so many
months, but that some young gallant begat him, for you know the prouer be,
Cat will after kind. No, had the old Citizen begotten him, he would a bit a
Fig in two, to have made just weight, have had a pot wi^h a false bottom,
rather then a sold too much measure, he would have done al things within
meas^re as your old Citizen did, and not a spend al beyond measure, as your
young Gallants do.


But were not I best go home and use her well, till the child be borne, to
see if it be like me, that I may be sure tis none of mine.


O no, that were base, and as deceitful as the Colic when it breaks out in
wind, which levels at a mans heel, and it strikes him in the nose, therefore
never make a show of one thing, and do an other, but put her away, rid your
hands of h^r, and there's an end.


I think whoe's the father of the bastard?


Why who's the Father of a Punckes child? is't not filius populi, it may have
two Fathers for any thing we know.


Well Slack, I do very much mistrust Wages too, for he is grown very
familiar of late.


True sir, and takes her part too, and ye mark him


I mark him: no Slack, no pray heaven a mark not me, but i'll instantly sue
out a di^orce, hap what hap shall, but ill's his hap whose wife lies down to
all.


Of all honest aminall's your Cuckold is the best,
For he is sure a Gentleman, and known by his crest.

Of all occupations, that ever man professed,
In my opinion still doth hold, the Cutpursse is the best.

And why the Cutpursse?


Because he will trust no man, foe as soon as he hath lone his work, he is
sure to have his money in his ^and.


Nay then a lawyer is a better trade then that, for he is sure of his money
before he doth his work.


But I pray thee what's the news ab^oad now?


Why they say the world is like a Bias bowl, and it runs all on the rich
men's sides: others say, tis like a Tennis-ball, and fortune keeps such a
Racket with it, as it tosses it in to times hazard, and that devours all, and
for my part they say, twill shortly run upon wheels with me, for my Master
swears a will have me car^ed, because a thinks I have lain with my Lady.


Nay then twill run upon wheels with thee indeed, but peace fool peace,
when thou art once married, that suspect will die.


Peace fool peace, say thou when I am married? dost hear? I tell thee,
there is no piece in marriage, unless it be with a dumb woman, no nor but
little comfort neither.


No way? why doth the Ballad say then, So sweet a thing is Love, that rules
both heart and mind, there is no comfort in the world, to women that are
blind.


Kind (man) the Ballet says.


Mass I think a be kind indeed, yet blind's the better of the two I think,
for as thou say, if she be dumb, I am sure sheele say nothing that shall
offend her Husband: if blind, sheele see nothing that shall offend her, and
where he nor she's offended, there must needs be a peace: but besides this is
there no peace think thou in the marriage of a wife.


Yes by the mans, side like a Gentleman only by the fathers side, but twill
ne'er be any perfect peace.


Why, why wilt thou marry then?


Because I hope to have some good behauio^r of my wife, for the peace I never
look for: but soft ye fellow Slack, me thinks your suit is like a hard
hearted Landlord, it begins to receive great rents.


I, I would, my Master had given me a suite of Buff when he gave me this.


Phoe, buff is nought man, that hath bin out of request quest ever since
Soldiers have bin out of date, and they poor men are now used like Almanacs
of the last year, either clap-vp behind the door, or thrust clean out of
door: but if thou wilt have a suite that shall last indeed (lad) get thee a
suite of law.


O, I do not like such suites, for commonly they that have many of them go
almost naked for want of clothes, yet I cannot deny but they are very
lasting, but they are subject to many discommodities: so if there be any
goodness in one of them, your Lawyers like moths, eat shroad holes to it, but
your Country Attorneys like l^ce neue^ leave wrighting and wrangling till
they have crep't into it, but when it hath bin well worn and grown third
bare, they even like Lice drop off, and leave it.


What say thou by a suite at Courtthen?


I marry sir, I like that well, for commonly he that hath but one suite when
he comes there, hath two erehe come away, for if he sue by Petition, it lies
so long in your Courtiers pocket, that it is another suite to get his Petition
back again. There is none suddenly dispatched of his suite there but a
Taylor, marry he stays not at all, unless his suite be to have mo^eye for
his suite, and so he makes his suit two suits too ere he go. But come, shall
we go see what follows after our Masters new divorce.


Why is a diuor'd?


I, I think by this time, for he swore he would be presently. By my troth,
I am sorry for it, for in my conscience it is without cause, it grieves me to
see him in these humours, for I thank his Worship he hath ever used me
well, I am bound to pray for his life.


And me thinks that's a strange thing, I see no reason for it that any
serving-man should pray for his Masters life, considering all that he have, is
in reuertion of him: but come, lets follow him, for if he miss us, heel
fret like a grogram I, and fume like a stue pot.


And let him fume, O would his gal would burst with indignation, then should
his tempe pr^create my bliss, and I (...) that Saint incarnat: but what shall
I do, since base nor noble shape can win, a third i'll try.

And if that fail knight, go to church and pray,
For vengeance wings brings on thy lethal day.

He that a long way voyage takes in hand, fears dangerous gusts at sea, and
storms:

At land conquering cold that cripels cursed age, and doubts least every
cloud should prove a storm, beat his wearied carcass to the earth. But O, I
wold to God my longest Journey unto death were to be taken, for I d^e cast no
doubts, having lost all comfort, My Son, I fear, is dead, The loss of him
makes life to me but like a blister on my flesh, which grieves me much, and
nought can ease, unless it breaks. O whilst he lived his presence was a force
unto my age, gave it such a luster as did enrich my ring of Life: for life is
but a ring beginning in our weakness, going round, till unto weakness we
return again, then to the ground. The world it self is but a skilful game at
chesses, which being ended, Kings and Queenes, Bishops and Knights into one
bags are thrown at last: So all of us both poor and rich, shall in the end
into the earth, as into a Bag be cast-Mans ^ife is like unto a ship that crossed
by tempests and by tides, some thoughts of his like billows swell him up a
loft, another strikes him down, Thus man as on a sea is ^oste, infa^est
weather fears a sto^me, and in a storm the event, but in the end he
sinckes, when life is spent: grief hath no bounds in tears, it ebbes and
flows.

Till it have drowned life, and ended woes.


But Wages, is there no means (think thou) to turn by it, nor to force
back his stream of wrath.


Yes i'll warrant ye Madam, if you'll be ruled by me, you shall see i'll make him
seek to be friends with you, entreat me to speak for him too, but then I
would have you seem a little strange: but you shall directly rail on him.
Therefore I wold have ye hide your selves here behind the hangings, for twill
not be long ere he come this way, and then you shall come forth and frame
your behaviour according as our discourse shall require.


Mass here he come^, lets stand close.


We will, and heaven assist thy proiects.


Now Wages, what news with you?


That which I think will help you from being diuorc'd.


What's that?


Why your Lady is not with child.


I'st possible?


Why how should she, unless some Hobgoblin, some Incubus or spirit of the
buttery should beget it? why she, since you were gelded, never saw a man but
through a window: she hath never trod her foot awry, for fear some ill
construction should attend her steps, which like a boundless Ocean deep
enraged, would drown her reputation.


Not with child say thou?


Not of my word sir.


Wages I would thou would but do some charitable offices^


What? make ye friends again?


True.


But you'll prove fal^e, and break that friendship?


Never, as I hope to be reconciled, therefore tell me, wil^ thou do it?


Hum: truly I would do my good will, but I fear twill be but labour lost.


I pray thee do but try: I faith thou shalt not loose thy pains.


O lass sir, you know I must feed on Quails.


That was in my fury man, but wilt thou not do it?


Pray sir, if you can get some other friend to speak in 't, do.


Well, thou wilt leave me now then?


Alas Sir, what would you have me do? by my troth sir, I am ashamed to speak
in it: have ye not gelded and cut off al the content of marriage? why they that
have the full performance of it, tis as much as they can do to please their
Wives, and you that want all ability, must not only please her now, but make
her amends for the wrong you have done her heretofore, and how have I the face
to promise that which I know you have no means to perform it?


Alas man, i'll do my good will.


Do your good will, and that's much worth sure, yet since you have been my
master, the world shall not say but i'll do ^hat I can, i'll persuade what I may,
ye shall see there shall be no fault in me.


O^ i'll hide me here, and so I shall hear all what she says.


O this is excellent, come, come, come, and stand close, ye shall hear how i'll
speak for ye: and if ye hear your pardon granted, come forth.


I warrant ye.


Morrow Madam.


Morrow Wages.


Morrow Mistress Nan.


Morrow Wages.


The Fox is caught, his head is in the ^ouse.


peace, speak soft, persuade, persuade.


Faith Madam I have a suit unto you, but I am half a shamed to speed in it.


Slight, the rogue says he is a shamed to speak for me, hist Wages, hist
wages.


Madam, your man would make an ill suitor, that is ashamed to speak in his
suit.


What the Devil ail you, what are you made you'll be spied anon.


A pox on thee, art not ashamed to tell her that thou art a shamde to speak
for me? hist, hist, Wages.


I think the Fool rides you, what will you have?


Dost hear Wages, speak for me, and by this light i'll mend thy Wages.


By how much?


Forty shillings.


Forty shillings?


Three pound, three pound.


Give me your hand, i'll do it


But what's your suit Wages?


That you would forgive your Husband,


What and receive his love again, you mean?


I Madam.


Marry there were aiest indeed, being as he is now, a Woman would be loath to
turn him amongst her ducks: truly Wages I am ashamed in your behalf, that a
man of your discretion would urge it, therefore prethe speak no more on it, i'll
tell thee what, I could finde^ in my heart to speak for him my self, but that
tis such a jealous fool, that if he catch but a Flea in her bed, he will be
searching to see if it be a male or a female, for fear a comes to Cuckold
him.


Well Wages well: to tell thee truly, I bear no malice, and if I wist he
would amend, I should forgive and love him with my heart again.


Ye faith I will wife.


Why how now Wages, have you betrayed us?


I, Madam, but tis into the hands of those that love ye.


Well Wages well, I did not think you would have used us thus.


Is there honesty in this, to set a man behind the hangings to euise-drop our
words.


Be not angry sweet wife, in faith it was my plot, but you have been a heavy
enemy of mine.


Twas more for my credit then to have been your light friend.


Be friends with me good wife, for here I do conf^sse.


Your Jealousy sprung from your own unworthiness.


Tis true.


Then in hope you'll kinder prove, I am content, For this know, a Woman's
heart will soon relent.


Then, come sweet wife, letsin,
And Wages, thy pains deserves to be requited,
For separated hearts, hast thou united.

La, la, la, la, la, they marched out manly by three, and by three, and the
formoste in Battle, was Mary Hanbrie. Will you hear of a Spanish Lady, how
she woed an Englishman: hum, hum, hum.


Here sir.


Is the Taylor gone?


Gone, sir.


Go fetch me my doublet their,


I go sir,


Hum, hum, hum, by the greatest terror to Gentility, which indeed is Creditors
and Sergeants, this Roaguie Taylor came upon me with such a bill as a man were
better have ten Constables and their Watches come vp^pon him with their bills:
why good words, or a dozen of ale will please them, but nothing will stop this
rogues mouths but money: and yet in faith I am greatly in his books, for
though I misuse him never so much, yet the Rogue durst not cross me.


The Taylor sir, entreats you to remember your day.


My day* Gods light, my day? why what doth ^ take me for, I think?


A takes you for a Gentleman sir, I think.


A Gentleman, and remember my day, no, i'll hold my life he takes me for some
Merchant or Citizen, but i'll make him know my strength, e^e I leave him, he
shall find a second Sampson of me. I can break my bonds boy, I can, I can.


But come sir, will you try your doublet first.


O I, come, come pluck, but take heed of my ruff I pray thee^ this doublet
is too little, a pox in him.


Not now, he is on sir.


No when he is off, I mean boy.


Believe it sir, but it becomes ye well though.


Doth it indeed? mass I think it do, me thinks I have a reasonable good
leg in it.


So you have sir, but your heel is a little too short.


Yea, why too short?


Because your long heel sir doth always best b^come your great Calfe.


Why? my Calfe is not very great.


O sir yes, why a man shall not see a greater Calfe of your age, for I think
you are not above twenty.


Not so much, but come help off my doublet now.


I will sir.


Come, i'll see how twill look here, and go thou and watch the door, that no
body come the whilst, hum, hum, hum, if I had a band for it.


Why that about your neck sir.


But what if any body should come the whilst?


Why do not I keep the door?


Mass that's true: hum, hum, hum.

O tis Master Nuecome, I know him, a fine Gentleman in faith i'll salute him by
and by as I pass. Master Nuecome I take it, I cry ye heartily mercy good
Master Nuecome, I am glad to see you in good health sir, I shall entreat you
to pardon me, I protest I did not know you in that suite, you have a very
fair doubl^ton, the Gods give you joy sir: There is never a Lord in the Land
may be ashamed to wear it sir, rap, rap, rap, rap.

Gods light carry away my Doublet quickly, quickly, quickly.


I warrant ye sir.


Gods precious my Band, what shall I do now?


By yeur leave sir, my ^istris, mistress Peg sent to see how your worship doth.


I thank her very heartily, I pray commend me to her.


I'll do your commendations sir, but I pray you be covered sir, I pray yon be
covered.


I thank ye heartily, tis for mine ease, the weather is hot, hot, very hot.


So it is indeed sir, well sir, by your leave sir, i'll be so bold sir as to
carry your commendations sir.


Do so good friend, farewell, farewell.

What a beast was I to put off my band, yet the greiefs the less, because he
came from Peg, which is a Wench I must confess dotes on my exterior virtues,
but I can by no means affect her: only, because the poor Wretch, in heate of
her passion shall not melt her self away in tears, she sometimes enforces
me to swear and protest I affect her, marry always with mental reseruations
for my souls health, for you know that sometimes it is policy Courtiers and
Statesmen should use fallacy.


Give charge unto the cooke a make not too much haste with supper, for I hope
your master will be here to night, and look you keep fast the door, let no
man trouble me.


I will Madam.


Now thanks gentle heavens, O be you smiling still on my designs, and let
your influence pour down good fortunes, and be not angry, nor no more
malevolent, but make my husbands reconcilement irrevocable.


Sir, I shall be shent for letting of you in.


Sblood I tell thee I will speak with her, what would thou bar my chance
when my whole fortunes lies on y^ cast.


O heavens, stars, fates, Gods smile not like Sumer on these Wasps no longer,
that daly bussing come to sting my honnour.


Save thee sweet Lady, I hear thy husband is from home, which makes me come to
tender thee my persons love.


Your parsons Love (sir) is most commonly a benefice, O that I should be
troubled with this Ass now, do you hear ^ir, if my husband should come and
find you here we were both undone.


Your husband, your husband is an ass, by this light and he should offer you
but an ill look in my sight, tweare better he had no eyes: but tis your own
fault that would not ere now accept of the love of a Souldiar, to have kept the
slave in some awe.


O! how reprochfully the Captain swaggers, i'll away, for fear he grow
furious.


But dost hear me sweet Lady, I have loved thee long, and must now enjoy
thee. Fear nothing: this warlike sword of mine shall defend thine honour, this
Martial blade shall do'^: life it shall in faith.


Hark, hark, my husband is come.


Your Husband, ha! where, where?


Tis not he? but i'll try my Captains valour now. O sir, my husband, what
shall I do now, he hath a Pistol in his hand too, he will kill us both.


A pistol? cods my life, what shall I do then? I pray hide me some where.


O no! as ye love me, must enjoy me, and will defend my honour, draw forth
this warlike sword: this is the martial blade must do it, therefore I beseech
you good Captain now or never.


Gods precious woman, he hath a pistol, a sword no shield against a bullet.
receive, then to have, hold, manure occupy in statu quo pri^s, that is in the
state before I do not doubt but your grant in this case will be good, for there
is a case that proves this in quinto of Rich the th^rd: a patro was seisd of an
aduowsio in fee, with two nuns appedat, theruto presented a parso, with a
proviso, y^ if the incubent should alien grant, demise, let, set, or otherwise
put away the premises, or any part or parcel thereof* that then it should be
lawful for the patron (or his assigns) in and upon the whole to reenter. The
incumbent aliend, the Patron entered, the Quare was, whether those two Nuns were
any part of the premises, by virtue of the proviso subject to y^ reentrie:
after long dispute it was agreed by all the Court, that the entry was good, as
well in the two Nus, as in the rest of the premises. The much more in this case,
where we are both lay me.


Sure this fellow thinks he hath some right to me, he hopes to win me by law,
but what think ye: if my husband should come and enter now upon us two, in
what case were you?


Why well enough, perchance he would complain of me to the bench, and then I
should be put out of commons: that's the worst he could do, y^'s nothing; for I
was once put out of commons before, for beating of the panyard man: and in
again within three days after.


O Madam, madam, what will you do? my master is come as I am a living man.


O lass sir, what shall I do with you?


Why hide me some where, cannot ye hide me here?


O no, no, no, he doth use to search all the house still, to see if he can
find any body here, but i'll tell ye what ye shall do, draw out your rapier
and go out against him, whatsoever question he ask you* make him no answer,
but only say, ye doubt not for all this, but you shall meet him and be
revenged well enough in an other place, and leave the rest to me.


I warrant ye.


Come out, come out man.


Slight woman your husband will see me.


Spretious man, that's all one, come out, come out, draw your sword, hold it in
your hand, make some show of resistance.


Sblood woman he hath a pistol.


He hath none, he hath none, by this hand I did but ^est.


Nor no other weapon?


Nor no other weapon?


In faith.


Why will ye not believe me* in faith he hath not.


Well then, well, nay I care not if he had.


Why how now Wife, whats the matter? what stir have we here?


Why husband did you not meet a man with a rapier drawn in his hand?


Yes, and here's another.


Alas husband, he would a killed this poor Gentleman, but that he came and ran
in here for shelter, and because I would not suffer him spoil him here in
your house, he is gone in such a rage as you never saw.


My faith, and he swore indeed he would be revenged in an other place: did he
not Wages?


he did indeed sir.


Believe me, and he might easily have slain you sir, for he had a very long
^apier.


True, I know my self he had the better weapon, or else I would ^ere a stood
so against him.


I, had I such a rapier, I would a made him run like an Irish Lackey.


I, to have overtaken ye.


Well wife, believe me, I thank ye for this: for I w^ld not for the wealth of all
this town he should a hurt him in my house, well sir you shall sup with me:
and after supper i'll conduct you to your lodging my self, but fear nothing.


I thank you sir.


Why did you not perceive it?


Not, I protest.


O monstrous! why did she not say herself, she knew he had the better weapo,
for which cause she stood against him, meaning Bauderie, flat baudery, and yet
you could not perceive it: now by this light, had you slept but one foot
lighter, ye had taken them in the very fact, but you go dreaming hanging
down your head, that tis no ma^uell your wife makes you a Cuckold: for the
husband being the wives head, why when the head goes down thus* the heals
must needs mount up.


I'll never more hear of rcconcilement, but be di^orced immediately.


Straight put her away, why you may have (...) enough.


O wi^es too (...)


There's your ^ Peg, she is fair, modest, honest, ^ discreet and honourable.


And would a be acquainted with me fal'st?


Who?


The man thou speak of.


Why I speak of none, I talk of a woman,


And have all these good conditions.


I, why not?


Dost know her.


I.


Hark then, rent a chamber, hang out her picture, take twelve pence a piece at
the least,

For enough will come I know:
To see that which none else can show.

Slight I think the man be mad, but (...) ye not have her sir?


Yes, if thou tell true, who would not have her: but first make winged speed
to purchase my divorce, hold here's money, make hast, use no delay,

For all men must for expedition pay.

I go, and you shall be diuorc'd or else my braine^ shall swe^: for what your
folly loses, my wit shall get.


O Wages, i'll tell thee news, I have sent for a divorce, and what wilt thou
say when I am married to a new wife?


Then sir will I say as the proverb says, marriage and hanging comes by
destiny: but if ye be divorced, will follow my counsel you shall hang your
self, rather then marry again.


No Wages, I do not hold that so good: for sure, marriage is better then
hanging in some.


True, in some respect, and that only because you have a longer time of
repentance, but I pray sir, is't a christian that you mean to marry?


A Christian! I, why dost think I would marry a (...)?


I do not (...) that so well sir, because it is the fashion amongst them to
send Capons to their Godfathers for New years gifts, and upon my life sir,
sheele one time or other clap you up in a basket, and send you away for good
handsel: but I pray sir who is it?


Peg, is she not a fine Gentlewoman?


Beyond p^aise.


Hath she not a piercing eye?


And twere a Ferrit.


A delicate nose.


And it were a Mulberry.


Teeth like two rows of orient pearl.


But the string is broken many of them are fallen out.


Hands as white as Pelops shoulder.


I, and as thick too.


Wages.


Sir.


Go to her, and measure by thy protestations the depth of my affections: tell
her what I will be to her, not what I have bin to others: if she allege to
thee her cousins presupposed wrongs, tell ^i^, I well could have been
hoodwinck'd to her cousins faults, so I had never seen her face.


But what shall I tell her if she say you are gelded?


I there's it indeed, there is no excuse for that: yet thou may tel her, I
did it only to preserve my voice. Deliver this Jewel to her hand, and with it
even my hearts affection.


I will sir, and if the Wenches close my proiectes carry, spite of mschan^ce
you shall your own wife marry.


Now must I be frolic, learn to speak well, and woo with a good garb: and
now I think on it, I have a pretty conce^e of mine own, I will tell her that
the wooing of a young wench, is the felling of a tree, and the getting of her
friends good will, like the lopping of the tree, therefore first it behooves me
to hew down the tree then i'll climb with ease: but if at first to fell it I be
not able, to assay to climb it shall be in vain. Welcome, hast thou brought
the divorce.


Tis here sir.


Come then, lets in, it joys me much that thou so scone hast sped,

For hours seem years, till it be published.


But tell me good Madam, why are you so melancholy?


To think upon the sawsie importunity of my Ser^ant Slack: he is like a
badge on a coat, he is never off, off my sleeu^, and yet I shun him like the
pest.


And he follows you like infection.


Nay I would he did so by me, for I protest I love him beyond my thoughts, I
covet nothing like his company, and yet he hates me, lothes my sight, but then
comes the welshman your love, and he hanges on my lips like a Padlocke on a
Peddlers Budget.


And hates me as much, for if I come but near him, he swears I am like a
Kybe, always at his heals.


Come Madam, do not grieve at that which grief can no way mend.


I would not, if I could mend that which doth cause my grief.


News, news.


What news.


You are divorced.


Why ^uorced, why? ha, speak.


Nay, I cannot speak the cause Madam? but questionles tis true, and mistress
Peg, my master now makes love to you.


To me?


To thee, I to thee, go thy ways, thou shalt be a Lady, I ever thought thou
would come to some promotion, as the boy did that had a bag and a staff and
begged for himself, but how dost thou know he is in love with her.


Know it why I have seen him stand an hour together behind an Oaken tree,
calling it sweet mistress, kind Peg and making speeches to it.


As how? as how? prithee how?


Stand you for the tree, and i'll speak for my Master.


I will, and that most stiffly in faith.


Then thus he begins: Dear mistress Peg I must conf^sse.


Nay then he is a dead man already.


Why?


Why confess and be hanged ever.


O ho, but I mean he doth confess she's (...)*


That's all one, he's but one man, and one witness can never prove her ^act,
but prithee on with thy speech.


Why then this fair Mistress I must confess.


But he will not confess before witness will he?


Push, did not I tell you he would speak to an Oak.


Nay, then that will be a strong proof indeed.


Proof, Nay, if that be not proof, how say by this token.


I marry sir, would we had more such tokens of his love.


This Mistress he hath sent to you.


Look you Madam, your husband now makes love to me.


Sir how peart thou art, why look woman, your love a^ mad woes me, and to me
sent this ring.


And my man the man you so esteem, spite of refusal left with me this cha^e.


This chain: for ever may he linked be to woe, that hates my love, and woes
another so.


Well, lets in, and be but patient all a while, for if the worst do fall, that
ever did fall,

A plots in chase that shall out strip them al


Now if she should refuse my Jewel and contemn my love, or contemn my love,
and take my Jewel: what a ^oole was I to send her a token till I had some
token of her affection, as if women might be woed with gifts, for when we give
them those things which most we love, they do esteem we love them better
then those things we give, when they poor fools do but deceive themselves,
for we do ^iue as Merchants venture, for a ^eble; again we send them ^okens
only to get the and their portions. But there comes my persecutor.


Why dost thou haun^ me like a Ghost, thou female inner: thou hast not holy
church in thy power with all hit commandments, to keep me from thy
unhallowed presence: how durst thou break the Edict pronounced by the mouth of
holy Church Man? art thou not Divorced? is not our separation blown into the
peoples ears, even by Ieho^ahs chosen Trumpeter? First, thou did break thy
vow to me, and made of every Priapus a Trumpet; on which thou blowedst thine
own infamy: therefore avoid, thou leauend lump of sinfulnes, avoid.

O my still beloved Husband, like filth or dirt, do not flea me like a
Serpent, which comes to sting thy bosom; I come to kiss; Sweet let not
suspect divorce me from thy presence, though from thy bed: For if you will
trust this masked face, I know:
No fountain purer than my Love would show.



I fly, and hate thee like a Serpents hissing, which comes to sting me with
pretence of kissing.

O faintie tears, and feeb^e hands, ^or ever may you close, and never part
till sharpest grief have cut the heartstrings of my life. Or else let this
same brain of mine dissolve to tea^es, and drop it self even drop by drop,
until it make a Sea of woes, that therein I may drown my w^ched life.


Alas poor Lady, I pity your calamity, and grieve to see you bruised by my
Masters injury, which makes your eyes like spunges drop these brinish tears,
and spoils a Face, such as was never better one framed by the skilful hand of
Nature.


Avoid thou slave, how durst thou woe me? I am like a star to thee; my O^b's
above thee.


O! then my Love is a most clear and brightest star: look not with a
malevolent Aspect upon me, but let your eyes bright raise up my life, and so
extol my thoughts


Perish may thy self and love together:
Heavens grant again, I ne'er may hear of either.

What shall I do?


Respect her most, that most of all loves you.
O! do not turn away those Eyes, whose radiant beams first nursd my flame.


Avoid thou unresistable Torteror, more ^retting to my thoughts then Cankars
are to Mettalls. How often have I told thee of my ha^red? For of this be thou
sure and still remembered: deep hate (like love) can hardly be dissembled.


I, doest thou hate me then? O brightest Venus,
Now or never make thy blind Son see; and (...) his heart, whose hate hath
wounded me.

Oh here she is; pray God my Band sit well. Fair Lady, may I presume with the
Be to suck Honey from thy lips, for I dreamed the last night.


Nay, I thought he would woo me dreaming ^ike a Welshman.


That I was transfigured, metamorphosd, or transformed into a flea in thy Bed.


But did I not kill ye then?


Me thought you did did, but first I dream't I flung you.


Yet again dreaming, i'll talk no more, but be gon; for fear I wake him.


And then me thought, as I was skipping from your knee unto your thigh, so
forth; you told a Gentleman of it, a friend of yours; who most courtly and
softly putting in his hand to catch me. Spretious she's gone, sure it is the
acutenes of my ingenuity, which makes my ieasts so stinging, as she cannot
endure them: I must needs eat some of your new court-water-gruell, to qualify
my my invention.


Thou need not love, speak what thou wilt, if gently thou do speak, thy
words to me are much more Musical then is a Sirens voice. Orpheus himself
could never strain his high stretched strings to such Melodious sounds, as
when thy voice doth pierce the ^are.


It is but for my wit she loves me: I sent her tricks already: for Courtiers
must as well thriving be, Have Noses to smell out, as Eyes to see.


Despis'de, and left alone, filed brim full of grief, and no way to unload
me of my cares.

But through these running eyes, in streams of tears.


Whose tears like to a clear, yet poisoned source, have with their vapours
through these eyes (the windows to my heart) infected all my thoughts. Thy
eyes do shoot forth glances like to stars, though seated in a moyste and
rainy Sky, the which hath wounded even my heart, and I must die; Lest
Achilles launce-like, healed by your eye.


I pray you seek some-where else, if you be ill,
For I in Surgerie-haue little skill.

I'll follow my suit, not ceasing till the most of trial,
For he's a fool in Love that makes denial.

Here hath been a Maze, a Round, a Whyrling in Love,

How like the spoakes of a Ladies Coach-wheeles
They run one after another:
And as of them you see neither,
So none of these can overtake either.
And though you see them thus forsaken,
They shall be married, but mistaken:
Which for performance yet a while,
I must be labouring to beguile.
Only the men, and make them venture,
To run a Circle far from Center
Of their hopes; yet for their good,
Where blinded each like Hawke in hood,
Shall Marry better then they Wooed.

Nay Madame, it must needs be so, or else the Priest will never Marry me.


And so you would have us all be Married masked.


True, to which you all may easily persuade your Lovers, telling them with my
Marriage, will be with much the less suspect effected.


But say, who shall know us, when our Faces ^e not seen?


The better; for then you shall appoint each one of them, to choose you by their
own Tokens, which you within your selves shall change: Mistress Peg shall
wear Mistress Nans Ring, Mistress Nan your Chain, and you Mistress Pegs jewel.


But shall they need to come naked too?


O I, by any means, only for some private reasons unto me, in which
persuasion if you will practise that you know, you will preuaile.


I'll do my best most willingly.


Then come Madam, let's in: I know it will do.
For this is held a principle in Schools,
Love makes not fools wise men, but wise men fools.

Nominatiuo, hic, haec, hoc.


A Nowne is the name of a thing.


Amo, amas, amaui, amare.


In speech be these eight parts.


I promise you sir, I had Dined forth to day, but that you see the weather is
Cloudy, and the Heavens lower on my delights.


I pray you sir, whose Son is that bigger Boy?


It is Master Parmisins son the Cheese-monger, and the next to him is
Master Cauetas son the Ferryman, two very pretty sparks i'll assure you.
Tobias Parmasin, come hither Tobias, hold up your head Tobias, and look and
you can see a penny in my brow: So, it is well done; What part of speech is
Mentula?


A nowne Adiectiue.


And why a nowne adiectiue?


Because it stands not by himself, but it requires an other word to be joined
with it.


Mark you Sir, I teach both substance and meaning; I do not teach as your
common people, d, o, b, a, b, b, bottles; Go sit you down again Tobyas,
Timothie, come ye hither Timothie: How construe you this verse Timothie? I am,
jam, Tacturus, Sidera summa putes.


I am, jam, O Iohn, Iohn, putes, do thou put, Sidera, summa, Cider in Summer,
Tacturus, in Tankerds.


A very forward child, I promise ye.


Go sit you down again: Will you hear them all examined Sir?


Moss willingly good good Master Correction.


Ye shall sir; Sir, I have taken as much pains with them, as any Poet
whatsoever could have done, to make them answer upon their Q. with good action,
distinction, deliberation: ha, ha, ha, how many devils are there?


Number infinite.


Look you Sir, there are an infinite number of Devils: What is the Devil?


A wicked Spirit.


What is the nature of that wicked spirit?


To work mischief.


On whom doth it work mischief?


On all mankind.


When hath he most power to work mischief?


When Man hath taken his liquor.


With what visitations then deludes he mankind?


With strange Earthquakes.


What is the mans best comfort?


To sleep and slumber.


Look ye now sir, are they not pretty children?


Very pretty, and well taught, i'll assu^e you sir.


Sir, I will tell you, notwithstanding all these pains I take with them, yet
how unkindly their Parents use me: they suffer their younger Children to beray
the Churchporch: And no longer since then Monday last, came the Official, and
there being angry with me about other matters, he threw that in my dish,
as if I could have helped it: but I answered him sufficiently: For I told him,
they that did it, were but the Children and the youth, and youth would break
out in despite of his Nose; or the best mans Nose in the parish.


I think ye spend most of your time with your Schollers here: ye keep
little other company.


Yes sometimes sir, here was yesterday Master Nucome the Courtier, do you not
know him sir?


O very well sir.


He is a fine Gentleman, a good Scholar, and an excellent Naturalist: and
truly fell into a great disputation, (peace these Boys there) and our Argument
was, whether a Fool or a wiseman made the best Lawyer. He stood for the Wise
man, and I most Scholastically, stood for the Fool: and thus I began my
Syllogisme, (peace these Boys when I bid ye) your wiseman (said I) uses few
words, your Fool, much babbling; your best Lawyers use much babbling. Ergo, your
Fools makes the best Lawyers.


And believe me sir, t'was well proved.


A flash, a flash, a foolish Schoole-point, a foolish Schole-point.


O I, and confuted me too, only by reason of a scurvy old Proverb which
says, Children and Fools do always tell true: but your best Lawyers do not
always tell true: Ergo, your Fools make not your best Lawyers, a most strong
and strange Argument.


I pray Master Correction, let me entreat a Playday for your Schollers.


O Master Wages, they do nothing else, they do nothing but play, nothing but
play.


Nay good sir, do not deny me, for I have some private business with you of
(...) importance.


Nay then sir you ^hall preuaile indeed: you shall, yet I remember; Dyonisius
ille Tyranus, Scyciliae crudelissimus, crudelissimus Scici^iae Tyrannus ille
Dyonisius: says to one of his Pupils: Hue ades, haec animo, concipe dictatuo.
So I say unto you all my Masters, reuerere Maiores: pluck off your Hats to
your betters, and look ye give the Woman the wall, and so go your ways.


Morrow Mistress Correction.


Morrow good Wages.


Morrow sweet Wife, sweet Frisset, sweet Nuptial.


O Master Wages! how doth your good Master, sir Timothie Troublesome? what,
doth he think he is a Cuckold still?


An arrant Cuckold (Wife) believe it.


Come, come, Husband, you are such another; why do you say so?


Because it is true, Wife.


Sir, Master Correction you are mistaken, I think he be no Cuckold.


Good Master Wages talk no more of Cuckolds; I would they were all in the Sea
for my part.


Husband, can you swim?


No Wife, nor I desire not to learn.


I would have you in any case appoint with my Husband that I may come masked.


Peace, that plot is already drawn, Master Correction, I am sent unto you
from my master, who comends his Love unto you, entreating you will give your
diligent attendance this Evening at the Church, because himself upon his
Divorce, is privately to be married to a new wife: three other couples he
brings with him, they all come masked, yet I will give you private notice what
each one is: only I must desire you not to sail.


Master Wages, your Master is the helm by which my labours are governed: and
tell him I will steer all the navy of my actions by his directions: And so
pray commend me back to him.

Well sir then, till then Farewell.


The like to you sir. Come Wise, I hope that thou shalt thrive, for as all your
Cockatrices maintain surgeons by their issues: So doth the Priest and Midwife
agree: I set them together, they make work for thee.


And truly Husband, i'll come to their labours, be it at midnight, if they send
for me.


Doth my Tyre sit well Nan?


Passing well, i'll assure you Madame.


Prithee tell me too, how am I dressed?


Why thou art very well dressed too, but basted admirably: for the threedes sit
in thy Gown, Marry thou want a little Cramming.


And that's pity; for I can tell you, I am of my self a rare bit.


Nay then thou art for the Serving-men, for your Gallants (I can assure you)
ride altogether with a snaffle.


Come, thou hast such a deal of wit.


Indeed I had, before I spent it amongst such unthankful persons as you are
Peg; but I prithee pin, my Gown close before: for it.


That I will, but why then doest thou obscure thy Bravery? this thy Petticoat
is a great deal richer the^ thy Gown.


Faith I, I wear my clothes as your Gallants we are their wits, the best side
inwards, I scorn to show it.


But for all this Idle talk, I would we had appointed our marriage to morrow
morning.


Then the people would a stood gazing on us, and besides, we should have bin
like thee in dutch, subject to every Cobblers interpretation, but now being
mar^yed in the evening, presentely bed time follows.


Phoe, but tis not the fashion.


Tut, hang fashion, I love it in nothing but my clothes.


Why, thou know tis not the fashion in all places to lie with ones own
husband every night. Slight I had rather lie with a man, and never marry him,
then marry a ma and never lie with him, come, come, I speak my mind freely,
I am none of these simpering wenches that come at every, word says I
forsooth, no forsooth, blushes at the sight of a child, it puts her in mind
how twas made cries faugh at a wanton lest in a play, and harkens to a bawdy
tale in her ear.


I, tis but dishonourable to marry thus in hugger mugger, men will say we are
with child, and are ashamed to show our faces.


Our faces! why our faces I hope do: not show us to be with child, tis out
bellies shows that, and I hope thou art quick flesh and not dead fish, thou
wilt not turn up the white of thy belly, woo't? but prithee tell me, was I not
married yesterday?


Yesterday, why dost ask?


Because, like a young married woman that's poisoned before she is baud, I
begin to long already.


For what I pray thee?


Faith to be a bed with my husband.


^alas woman, those that are past child bearing, use to long for that too.


Nay, but my longing yet me thinks st^etches a great deal longer, for I long
to be a Widow, that I might have a new Husband: yet not for any concupis^ent
desires, that I have in the world.


No, I think so too, but only a desire thou hast to try the difference of
men, and therefore I think thou were best next to marry an old man with a
white head, because thou may sleep quiet not be troubl^d a nights.


By this light I had as live mar^e a Saint Dauis Leek, no, no, take this of
me, where ever thou see the Snow lye on the Mountains, be assured there's
no great heate in the valley.


Let me see, I would be a --


A Priests wife I warrant ye, because thou would fare costly, and live
lasily.


No Nan, then marry a Londoner, for then thou shalt live a life twere a Lady,
wear thy gold necklace, and go in thy Velvet cap every day.


True, and then when thy husband is a broad in traffic for commodities, in
other countries, why thou may deal at home for ready money


No not a Londoner by no means.


No, why?


Why if they have but a plague amongst them one week they all cry out of a
dead time straight, besides, if they receive but a little loss at sea, they
break straight, and where the husband breaks, you know the wife can no
longer hold out, she must down too for want of maintenance.


Nay then marry a Soldier, for questionless most of them will use their
wives well, for they love their punkes exceedingly.


O but they have a vile fault too, for they always beget their children by
day, and then they be squint eyed, for when the Father looks one way, and the
mother another, ^o see if any body come the whilst, how can the child look
right?


What say thou by a Civilian Nan.


O no, by no means, for most of their posterity have ill luck, for what
their fathers get by bawdy courts, they commonly spend it all again in bawdy
houses, No and ever ^ marry again, i'll marry an Irish Merchant, because they
all speak latin, and indeed are most of them Philosophers by fortune: Omnia
mea mecum porto, for they carry all their ware in their breech: but come, let
us make hast away, I fear out lovers do our coming stay.


You see master Venture, the greatest comfort that is left me now, is only in
my neighbours loves, where are these knaves there?


My Lord.


What have they supped within.


Not yet my Lord.


Why so, thou art an honest knave, go see that none want wine.


I will my Lord.


I would not have the worst complain of scarcity or want of any thing, for
Master Venture we shall carry nothing with us, for naked we into the world
came, without that which we now possess and have, and without it we must unto
the grave.


I would desire a word in private with your honou.


With all my heart:

Hark you neighbour, Sir Iohn tells me that to honnour me in this my
predecessors still accustomed feast, four new married couples are heather come
in a ma^ke, newlle from the church, their feet not yet since their nuptial,
have kisd their own thresholds.


Tis Sign ye are well beloved my Lord.


I am indeed Master Venture, I am indeed.

Gentlemen and Women, ye are all welcome even with my heart, I with my heart
in faith. O neighbour Venture my Son and your Daughter now be married, what a
joyful mask would this have bin.


Tis true my Lord, but they are fled beyond all hope of ever seeing them
again.


Tis true, tis true, yet though the fruit gone be, my grief you see, like
leaves stick (...) upon this tree. but come neighbour come, lets sit look
upon this youthful dancing mirth, for youth and mirth have danced themselves
out at heals with me.

Nay, pray Gentlemen unmask, that we may know to whom we shall be thankful
for this honour, how now my Son?


My Daughter.


Now may my blessiug raise thee from the ground.


And mine make thee both fruitful, and a faithful wife.


Why what are you?


Mistook of you, but such is woman's fantasy,
Constant in nothing but inconstancy:
For I that first you most abhord,
Loved you a slave, and hated you a Lord.

Well, woodcock like by thy bill, tis my hap,
Thus fast to be catched in a woman's trap.

Now by my conscience I am deceived.


No, not a whit, for I will love you ever.


Well, give me your hand then, since ^s my fate,
What marriage (...), i'll never separate.
^


O! I repent it not, this match is double made, and twice hath holy Hymens ^


Well, since tis thus hence forth i'll love thee ever, for que sera, sera,
against what plots so ever, but who is this, master Correction?


A friend of yours.


O then sir tis a friend of yours.


Come ye away huswife, come ye from him, come.


Faith ^ir no, why is he not my husband? did not you your self marry me to
him? but do you hear, you were best be quiet and let me alone, if not, in faith
i'll tell all.


Tell what thou can, justice my Lord Justice, I beseech ye for Justice.


Nay, I beseech your Lordship too, though I am but a weak vessel called a
Woman, therefore by reason of my bashfulness unable sir to set forth mine own
tale, yet I doubt not, but I shall find good hearing at your Lord ships had, if
ye will but give me leave to open mine own case.


Speak, what are your greeuances.


May it please your honour in few words, my husband hath four wives, and then
I hope tis as lawful for me to have two husbands.


How do you answer this Sir Iohn?


And like your honour, I think tis as lawful for me to have four wives, as
tis for my parson to have four benefices, con^idering I use them as he doth
his benefices, for I protest to your honour, I near came near none of them.


Will not this do it Master Wages?


No, you see he hath answered it.


Nay then and it like your Lordship, I may be diuorc'd for another thing, but
that I am ashamed to speak on it.


Nay, you must tell what tis.


Truly I am half ashamed.


Come, come woman, never be a shamde to tell (true.


And I may be so bold to tell your honour in private.


With all my heart.


Truly and like your honour, he hath not that a man should have.


No, why what doth he want.


Nay pray your Lordship to spare me now, faith I am ashamed.


Nay good Mistress Correction, I must know what it is.


Why then sir I must needs tell: truly a hath never a beard.


Indeed a man should have a beard.
Well mistress correction, your husband must have you back again:
And thus in friendship ends long Jealous strife,
With all things well, save Wages wants a wife.

But Gentlemen, whose judgements sit
in str^ct commission on the wit:
Which from the Authors pen did flow
He wishes at all but this to know.
that if you well do censure him,
He ready is with brains and pen^
Another time to pleasure you,
If not, he bids you all adieu.
For well he knows he hath done wels
And so he boldly dares to tell.
Yet for the children ere I go,
Your censure I would willing know.
For if you do the Action blame.
They ready are with pardon drawn
And each of them here hoping stands
That you will sign it with your hands.


