Dear Lord, I know it well becomes not me to counsel him that best can
counsel me: yet if it please you but to lend your ears, hear my love if not
my counsel.


No more, I know thy love tends to the stopping of my longing and my
resolution: thou know that I no longer now am Signior: Florece hath got an
other governor, and one step back in state of Majesty, is a greater fall then
to a meaner man that loses all: Besides, thou know our Daughters they are
fled, the true inheritors of Florence right, and mighty Piso now usurps our
regal seat: puissant in power and mighty in his wrong, hath mounted
Faulcon-like into the sky of state, seized on our feeblenes, and beat our
weakness down. And therefore now I am resolved to find my two lost Children
out, or like as Phaeton in pride did ride, so I in grief will pace the world
about.


Unto your celsitude I wish, till their effects your hopes may never fail.


Farewell, some strange disguise I needs must take both for my stelth away, as
for my passage on the way: and yet my fortunes fall, disguisement is to great
if pleased the heavens, but their wills still are laws, all is but Justice our
sins the cause: cuor forterompe catiua sort.


With draw, leave us, we would be private:
Sister what think you of this trade of ours?

Tis base to be a whore.


Tis base to abuse great place, or baseness to deceive great trust.


And is't not baseness to abuse great birth?


Yes if great birth abused not us: if Piso had not proved the theife and robbed
us of our right, to had bin worse then theft in us to rob our selves of honour:
you'll say we are forbid to live by sin, and yet we are commanded seek to
live: the letter law express forbids to kill, and yet the sense permits it
rather then be killed: since of two extremities the least is to be chosen, you
know we have no other means to live, but had we, yet we are fair by
nature, scorning Art, and was not beauty made to be enjoyed? do we not
exclaim on those who have abundant store of Coin, and yet for want suffer
the needy perish at their door? so might all do on us, having so much
beauty, if we should suffer men for love of us to die; shall we in whom
beauty keeps her court be curbed and tide to one mans benevolence? no, no,
not I: rather then in virtue to live poor, in sin I'll dye.


Your resolutions hath confirmed my doubts, and since tis hateful to live
poor, to maintain our state I am content: but these obseruances let us keep,
strangely amongst strangers let us hold our state, and let our Servants
seldom know, how familiar with our friends we be, and though Englands
wealth do now adorn us; lets keep the fashion still of Florence.

Content, let's in, who's near? attend us, ho!


This is the street, and as I remember this is the door.

I'll ask this ancient Gentlewoman: health and beauty dwell with you Lady.


I thank you sir, a has a courtly phrase in faith.


Do the Florentine Ladies dwell here?


Yes forsooth sir, I am a poor Gentlewoman that follows 'am.


I am sent to 'am by a Knight, who promised me he had procurd me the place of a
Gentleman Usher to them.


Sir Iohn Haue-little I think.


Yes indeed the same.


By my troth he's an honest Knight, a has no fault but that hes poor, and
that's a small fault now adays: but let me see sir I pray, were you never a
Gentleman Usher before?


No truly never yet.


Then you must be instructed sir.


I shall be glad to learn.


I hope you and I shall be more inward sir, and for your instruction I shall
be glad to lay open any secrets that I have; therefore first you must observe:
ha you any Tables?


Yes, sure I never go without Tables.


Pluck out your pin and write down as I shall utter: to be always ready,
standing bare, to be employed, when, where, and howsoever your Ladies please.
You must never be without money of your own, to lay out when your Ladies bid
you, as eighteen pence to the Porter, half a Crown to the Coachman, or twelve
pence for a torch if their Ladyships come home late at night. If you be sent by
your Lady to another Lady, to know what rest she took in the night, you shall
deliver your answer just as it came from the Lady: you must always be in a
clean band, and clean cuffs, how foul so ere your shirt be.


I will observe all this.


You may by virtue of your office were a Perewig, provided, it be just of the
colour of your beard: let me see, you have a hatched sword of your own there,
have ye not?


Yes for sooth, I bought it for his Ladyships service.


T'was well done, you may wear it by your office, what, is your Cloak lined
through?


No, but tis of a good depth in.


Tis well done too, your Ladies love to have it
Lined a good depth in, tis for their credit.
What, are these silver hangers of your own?

No, I borrowed these, but I have a pair of mine own.


They are in trouble, are they?


No truly they are at mending.


Nay though they be, tis no shame, you have been long out of service
perchance.


Some three months.


Byr'lady tis a long time, but can you endure to walk some half a day in the
Hall or the great Chamber, while some great Lord is busy with your Lady in an
inner room? you may sleep an honre or two as your Citizens wives do at a
Sermon to pass away the time, but you must have a care to wake at the rushing
of a Satin gown, or the creaking of a door, that if your Lady come, you may
be presently up and bare.


Yes sure, I could do it well.


You must stand stiff up, and hold up your head, tis the chiefest thing
belongs to your place, look here comes the elder Lady: Madam here's the
Gentleman that Sir Iohn Haue-little commended to your Ladyship for a
Gentleman Usher.


Let him draw near us.


The Knight commends his dear affection, and by me makes tender of his humble
service to your Ladyship.


Kiss your hand and go forward upon her.


We accept it, have red it, you are beholding to the knight, and he hath spared
no pains to make your worthy parts well known to us: draw near us, hence
forth we accept you as our own, and so we bid you welcome: are you a
Gentleman?


Yes sure Madam, for I was both borne begotten in an Innes Court.


Sure Madam then hes a Gentleman, for he that's but admitted to the house is a
Gent. much more he that's begotten in the house.


You are the more welcome, and our bounty shall deserve your industry.


Is the Lady a Princess that she speaks us and we so much?


No, she says so meaning her self and her Sister, for they are both one, and
such things as they have, they use in common, and must stand bare before them
both: look here comes the the other Lady.


Madam here's the Gentleman that Sir Iohn Haue-little commended to your
Ladyship for a Gentleman Usher.

We like him he's welcome, what good parts have you? have you the tongues?


Not very well Madam.


Yes Madam, a has the Scottish tongue very perfectly, a has some skill in the
Irish tongue too.


That's a wild speech.


Nay i'll warrant your Ladyship heel not run away, has travelled Madam too a
says, for a has been in Wales.


Has a no skill in the French tongue?


Some little skill Madam.


No sure Madam, I think your Ladyship hath more knowledge of the French then
he.


Well, we will at more leisure survey your good parts, and make thereof the
best for our own use.


I pra'y what wages do these Ladies give?


Faith your wages will be much about the nature of your office, very bare
standing wages: I think some forty shillings a year.


Why, how mean they I shall live in their service?


Why, by their countenance: I ha known a Lord hath given his fool nothing but
his countenance to live by, and I can tell you, t'as proved a good
Court-maintenance too.


Countenance? I hope I have a countenance good enough of mine own, I need not
serve for one.


In troth and so a has for a Gentleman-vsher, I must needs say a very
harmless silly countenance.


Yet faith I mean to try their bounty.


Come will you walk in sir? I'll follow you.


Very willingly.


This is brave in faith, a shall go bare before me too, a will serve us all
three when we are abroad.


Come sister, come, we were not borne to stand, it is against the nature of our
sexes kind: come, sit, and tell me, how many suitors you have, and which you
most do love? and I will tell you all mine, and which I most respect.


Faith I have a dozen at the least, and their deserts are all so good, I know
not which I should love most: and one last day did court me thus: O had my
tongue the influence to lead thy fair thoughts as thy fair looks do mine:
then should thou be his prisoner who is thine. I seeing my poor Gentleman
likely to be drowned in the depth of Hellespont, delivered him this verse to
catch hold of: O be not fair, and so unkind: misshapen stuff, is of
behaviour boisterous and rough.


But come, what was a for a man?


What was a for a man? Why, a was a man for a woman, what should a be? and
in faith he was a neat lad too, for his beard was newly cut bare; marry it
showed something like a Meadow newly mowed: stubble, stubble.


Well I have a suitor too, if he had as much wit as living, it may be I
should find in my heart to love him.


What, i'st Sir Iohn Haue-little that gallant Knight that Courts delicate
Ladies? spare not the sweat of my body, man was made to labour, use my
creation, women to bear, i'll use yours: Birds to fly, Fish to swim, c. And
then swears by my conscience Lady, I esteem you as I do money, which buys
every thing, and that's but like a Puncke, for every man has to do with it.


No Sister no, tis not he, for I think his wit cannot cal his wealth Master,
nor his wealth his wit, and yet they are both Servants to a fool.


Faith who is't Sister, i'st a proper man? hath he a good face?


Tis the person and conditions I respect, and not face, for every Boy has a
good face, and its not worth a hair. No Sister no, my love is more worthier
then words canne utter: I cannot simpathize his rare perfections with any
earthye substance: this Globe of dirt produces nothing worthy of his
comparison, so souls perfection so refines his body, as you would think an
Angel were his sire: his discourse, behaviour, and humanity, attracts to him
my souls felicity.


Pray heaven it be not mine: nay come who is your love? tell me?


Nay who is yours? speak first.


Yet again!


If it be mine, my heart will break: mine is Master


Who, who, who?


Ruffell.


Pray God 't be true.


In troth tis he.


And mine is Master Spark, and look here they come.


Faith Ladies, youth and beauty always be your handmaids.


Best fortunes your attendants.


Good clothes your companions.


We all of us your servants.


And let Tobacco be your perfumes.


Lord Gentlemen how your wits Caper! me thinks 'twould become you well at first
entrance, your discretions came in with a sober measure.


Ladies we are come to make a Gentleman of your acquaintance here.


His name good Master Spark? he's very welcome.


His name is Sig. Petoune a Traveller and a great Tobaconist.


Faith Ladies I take it now and then fasting for the purification of my wit.


Purification? why has your wit lain in child-bed sir?


Yes indeed Lady, brought to bed of a Moone-calfe.


Faith Ladies if you used but mornings when ye rise, the divine smoke of this
Celestial herb, it will more purify, cleanse and mundifie your complexions,
by ten parts then your dissolved Mercury, your juice of Lemmons, your
distilled snails, your gourd waters, your oil of rartar, or a thousand such
toys.


Sure Ladies I must needs say the instinct of this herb hath wrought in this
Gentleman such a divine influence of good words, excellent discourse, admirable
invention, incomparable wit: why I tel ye, when he talks, wisdom stands a mile
off and dares not come near him, for fear a should shame her: but before a
did use this Tobacco, a was the arrantst Woodcock that ever I saw.


Indeed I was a very silly fellow.


Nay you were an arrant ass.


Sure I was a fool.


Nay, you were a most monstrous puppy.


Indeed I was an Idiot, a very Idiot.


By this light thou were a most egregious coxcomb.


Indeed I was, indeed I was.


But since, it hath imbellisht his good parts, perfected his ill parts, and
made his secrete actions correspondent to his outward wisdom, as you may well
perceive.


Faith Lady these Gentlewomen have not long used my company, yet you see how
Tobacco hath already refined their spirits.


Petoune I wonder Tobacco hath not purifyed the complexion of thy nose?


Why, what ails my nose?


Nay, be not angry, I do not touch thy nose, to th'end a should take any thing
in snuff.


Why doy' play so about my nose?


It is a good turn hes no Fly signeur: if a were, a would burn his wings.


O signeur, these Gentlewomen have not long used your company, yet you see how
Tobacco hath already refined their spirits.


Faith Lady, would you bestow but one favour of me.


Truly signeur if you should have as much favour as you have complexion, you
would be highly favoured.


Dear Lady, now by this day I love you.


Cheap signeur, now by the light of this day, I cannot love you.


Now Lady, what drugs of wit has this Apothecary of Tobacco sold you?


Faith a sold me none sir, only a gave me a taste of his good meaning.


Faith Lady I must enquire your name.


I pra'y do sir, yond Gentlewoman knows it.


O, I know tit well enough.


Why do you enquire it then?


Come, come, Lady can you love?


I.


And can you love me?


No.


Every fool can say, I, and no,


And I always answer every fool so.


Doy' think I want wit?


If you do, it is a shame you do not learn it.


Will you teach me? I'll come to you to school.


It is not my profession sir, to teach a fool.


Look, look, this fellow is like your upright shoo, he will serve either
foot.


Good Lady, have a better regard of me, do but think me made of the same
mettle other men are.


If others were of the same mettle you are, and all mine, I should quickelie
sell them to the Bel-makers.


Why, what mettle do you think me?


Copper sir, copper, for I take your body to be of the same mettle your nose
is.


Dear Lady, now by this day I love you.


Why, how now signeur, what says the Lady will she love thee man?


Faith I can get but a cold comfort of her:


Well thank her for it:


For what?


Why, for her cold comfort, she gave it thee to cool the heate of thy nose
man?


Signeur, you see these Gentlewomen have not long used your company; yet you
see how Tobacco hath already refined their spirits:


Why, how now signeur? at blind-man-buffe? bobbed on either side?


Prethe peace: dear Lady, please you take a pipe of Tobacco?


I, come: I'll begin to her ( tab) why, what a rogue art thou to offer a fair
Lady an empty pipe?


Why signeur? do you make a fool of me?


Had you no body signeur to have bobbed with an empty Pipe but her?


Why howe now signeur, could you find never a fitter block to whet your wit
on, but my sister?


By the divine smoke of Tobacco signeur, you have shamed us all.


Swear not good sir, swear not, profane not the Indian plant.


Had you no body else signeur, to break an empty ieast on but this Lady?


No, no, a thinks any thing is good enough for me.


Sir, would you make my Lady and me friends?


Nay signeur, I have no face to speak, now you have abused her in your own
Element: if it had been in any thing but Tobacco, I would have done my best.


Hark you sig you were best to ask her forgiveness on your knees, there's no
way to get her friendship else.


But will she forgive me think you if I ask eher mercy on my knees?


Why, prove signeur, you can but try, we'll al speak for you.


Good Lady will you forgive this signeur? you see his penitent, grief hath
brought him very low, for hes on's knees; besides he weeps; speak signeur
speak for your self.


Lady, I must confess I have offred you an empty pipe, which me thinks hath
small reason to be take in snuff.


And you are sorry for it signeur, are you not?


I with all my heart.


Forgive him good Lady, pra'y forgive him,


I am content Gent at your entreaties upon conditions.


Upon any conditions.


But you shall be sworn to them.


Nost willingly.


Come, a shall be sworn on's own Tobacco pipe.


Look you signeur, he told you there was no way to get her good will but by
kneeling; for he that will have a woman's love must stoop.


Come master


you shall take his oath, and I'll minister't.


Come signeur, put your hand to the pipe.


First you shall never while you live offer Lady or Gentlewoman an empty
pipe.


Never.


Secondly, you shall never make Tobacco your Idol, taking it in a morning
before you say your prayers.


Never


Thirdly, you shall never in the praise of Tobacco disclose or dispraise by the
way of making comparisons, the secrets of Ladies, or Gentlewomen, as repeating
their distilled waters, their censing oils, or their smoothing unguents.


To this you swear.


Most willingly.


Fourthly, you shall never come with your squibs smoke-squirts amongst Ladies
and Gentlewomen, flinging out fume at your Nostrils, as a whale doth salt-water,
unless you be entreated by them.


Never.


Fiftly, you shall presently convey your self out of our company, never to
come more near us, unless you be sent for.


Never?


No never: so, let him kiss the pipe.


Come Signior, you have kneeled to a fair end, to get you a Mistress, and here
you have for sworn her.


I'm in a fair case now.


I faith now thar't a comb for any case.


Well, i'll keep my oath, farewell Gentlemen.


Farewell Signior.


Adieu Signior.


God bewe Signior.


Well, some shall smoke for this.


Let it be your nose then good Signior in any case:

Its a good soil, a whole some air, a pretty Town, handsome slight
buildings, well proportioned people, very fair women.


Hayda, this is like a Lawyers study in the latter end of a Term, one's no
sooner thrung'd out, but another thrust in, you're welcome sir.


But I am not sir, for I am sick.


Would you speak with any man here?


I care not greatly sir, if I spoke with every man here.


He's a mad fellow.


What art?


Poor.


Dost mean to live in this town?


I'd be loath to die in it.


In what country were borne?


In none.


Where then?


In a Town.


What nation art?


An Italian:


O then thou can make glasses.


I, and as wisemen as you Asses too, O are you there

Piso? your father is my good Lord, but no more of that yet.


Why Signior, I hope you wonnot swagger?


No, nor I care not greatly for them that do, for your swaggerer is but like
your walking spur, a gingles much but heel neu'r prick.


Why art so melancholy?


I'll hold my life he is in love with some waiting Gentlewoman.


He's a mad fellow will love any of you all, longer then a pissing while.


Why came thou out of Italy into England?


Because England would not come into Italy to me?


Why art sad?


Because I have cause.


Who dost follow?


My nose.


Who dost serve?


God.


Who art towards?


He that's before me.


What dost want?


Money.


Nothing else?


Yes.


What?


A good service.


Shall I prefer thee?


I cannot tell, tis as I like the man.


Nai't shall be to a couple of Gentlewomen of thine own Country.


I shall have enough to do then I hope, I have heard of one woman hath served
ten men, but I never heard that one man should be preferred to serve two women
before: you're an Englishman.


I.


So I thought indeed, you cannot poison so well as we Italians, but you'll
find a means to bring a man out of his life as soon. Gods light serve two
women quoth you?


Why thou shalt serve but one, yet take thy choice of both.


I marry Sir, I like when 't comes to choosing.


Whats thy name?


Fleire.


Whats thy profession?


I have ever been a Courtier.


A Courtier! come Gentlemen, I like this fellow so well that i'll prefer him
strait.


Do so, you shall do a deed of charity in it.


Fair Ladies you'll excuse us.


You have bin very welcome Gentlemen.


Come sister, there rests nothing for us now but this: wele get us men's
apparel, and serve them as Pages so shall we hinder them in their marriages,
and in the end prefer our selves to be their wives.


I like it well, come lets about it presently.


I have not yet bin seven days here, and yet I see that grieves my very
soul: my Daughters, my Ladies I must say now, make lust, labour for their
maintenance, this foolish natio will sell their goods, their lands, nay their
very souls for nights delights and momentary sports, which like to lightning
appears, and vanishes ere one can say tis come: but then repentance sticks
close. There was a fellow with one of my Ladies this morning, and the poor
slave has but seven shillings a week board wages, and yet he has given six
on it for a bit of extraordinary flesh, well: God give him the grace to pray,
for a must fast. I asked the hot slave why a did not marry since a could not
bridle his lust? and a told me a had rather fall into the Surgeons mercy, then
the worlds beggary; well, I see it cannot be denied, mercenary women are
necessary members: they pluck down the pride of the flesh, yet are not proud
themselves, for thei'le be as familiar with the men as with the Master: they
do as many good deeds as some Fryers that puts one to penance for his
sins, they put twenty to pains: he out of charity sends one to the
Hospital once a year, they send twenty to the Surgeons once a month. Say he
bids men repent, they make a'm repent, yet for all this some will call a'm
damned Puncks: well, if they be damned, theile not be damned gratis like your
young country Gentlemen, nor in hugger mugger like your Citizens wife with her
Prentice. They can practise without an overseer: they scorn to have a
Suburban Bawed lend am a Taffeta gown, they (like your common Players) let men
come in for two pence a piece, and yet themselves to have but the tenth penny,
like the tenth Pig, yet faith the trade is a good trade: They for swear not
themselves, in commendation of their wares, as your common Tradesmen do,
swearing they cannot afford it at the price. They are no proverb breakers:
beware the buyer say they, you shall have enough for your money, if half will
not serve your turn take the whole, measure by your own yard, you shall have
Winchester measure. I was somewhat bold with one of their Ladyships this
morning, asked her why women went to the generating sport al the year, since
beasts themselves went too't but once? And she answered me, because they were
women, had reason to know what was good for themselves, and so had not beasts:
but soft, here comes Signior Petoune.


O Fleire, how dost Fleire?


O Signior, you may snuff out your smoke here Signior, and save your oath too,
here are no Cuckold makers.


What are they Fleire?


Women Signior, women: I heard what a rash Gentleman you are to forswear your
Mistress company in the very heat of your affection.


Hang her, hang her, she's a very crickee, she hath written for me three or
four times, but i'll see her damned ere i'll come to her, woot take any Tobacco
Fleire?


No, not I; i'll not make my nose a red Herring, i'll not hang him in the smoke.


Thou art a good Courtier Fleire, tha'st got a suit already.


Nay, I have two or three Offices too.


Prithe what are they?


Why I am Yeaman ath' Iurden, Gentleman ath' smock and Squire of entertainment:
for when your Gallants approach, I take their in comb, for if I stay till their
out come, the devil a bit of any silver sir can I get: for your new made
Gallants lay all on the back and spend all ath belly.


How do thy two Ladies live Fleire?


Like two musk-cast in a Coop.


Why? I here say they live gallantly.


Pheu, they? why they keep a little court.


And what art thou? a Sumner?


A Sumner, why?


Because thou art one of the; hark in thine ear.


Well said Caulfe, hast bin a sucking all this while for that jest? no, I have
an honourable place, I am one of their leaders, for their shoes are so hie, and
their heals so short if they should not beled, thei'd play domestic tricks
abroad, and show all.


Thou their leader! why do they mean to go to the wars?


I think so, for I am sure here were a couple of gentlemen last night that
scoured their pieces.


I think Fleir thy Ladies are not we rich.


How can they? they spend when others get.


Dost hear Fleir? woot prefer me to their service?


What! shall we embrace? shall we have red-nos'd Corporals here: what you
rogue? will you turn Sumner? away you whale-nosd rogue away, go, snufle,
snufle in the Ocean, away you slave.


Is thy name Fleir? tha'rt a flattering, fleering, cogging knave.


His mansred hose, were the colour of his nose,
and his breech was made of blue,
And he in shape, but a French-mans Ape,
And so sweet sir adieu.
" Holla, holla ye pampered Jade of Asia,
" And can you draw but twenty miles a day?

Give me a bow, I'll hit the Sun.


Why tis impossible.


No more can thou hit true felicity.


O I am in an excellent humour, now I could laugh, dance, leap, or do any
light tricks that belongs to a light wench.


But look who's here?


O signeur Fleir, how dost, how dost man? we may be merry before thee,
thoul't be secret, wo't not?


As your Midwife, or Barber Surgeon Madam;


How lik'st the City Fleir, ha, how lik'st it?


Faith well Madam, were not your Citizens, such heavy head fellows:


That's a sign they are no drunkards.


Indeed Madam, drink lightens the head, the heart, the heals, the pot, the
purse; but it makes heavy chamberpots, full bowels, and foul rooms enough.


Howe dost like the Gentlemen of this Country?


I can compare your Gentleman, and your Merchant, to nothing so fitly as your
Flea and your Louse: I had rather trust your louse with a hundred pound, then
your Flea with for tie; for your Louse, like the Merchant, stands too't, you
shall know where to find him, but your Flea, like the Gentleman, if you take
him not at first sight a slips from you.


Me thinks they have a strange fashion here, they take money with their wives,
and give money to their wenches.


And good reason too (Madam) would you have a man be troubled with a wife, as
long as he lives for nothing? A gives money to his wench, to be as soon rid of
her as he has done with her.


Whats the reason Fleir, the Citizens wives wear all Corks in their shoes?


O Madam, to keep the custom of the City, only to be light held. The
City is like a Commodie, both in parts and in apparel, and your Gallants
are the Actors: for he that yesterday played the Gentleman, now plays the
Beggar; she that played the Wayting-woman, now plays the Queen; he that
played the married-man, now plays the Cuckold; and she that played the
Lady, now plays the Painter. Then for their apparel, they have change too:
for she that wore the Petticoat, now wears the Breech; he that wore the
Coxcomb, now wears the feather; the Gentleman that wore the long Sword, now
wears the short Hanger; and he that could scarce get Velvet for his Cape, has
now lined his Cloak throughout with it.


But how dost like the Court Fleir?


Well enough, if they did not catch their meat so; it comes no sooner from
Table, but tone fellow has a fat Duck by the rump, tother a slippery Eel
by the tail, and an old Courtier that best knew the tricks on it, was mumbling
of a Cunnie in a corner alone by himself.


What good cheer did see there?


Faith there was much good meat, but me thought your fair Lady was your
only dish.


I, but that's a costly dish, and will ask rich sawcing.


Faith for mine own part when I had a stomach, I should like it best in it
own naked kind, without any sauce at all.


Whats the news now at Court Fleir?


Faith they say your Ladies cannot endure the old fashion Spur, they say it
hanges to a mans heel like a Wheele-barrow, but they love the fine little
Scottes Spur, it makes the Court Jennet curuet, curuet gallantly.


I prethe Fleir, howe goes the report of us two abroad?


If I should tell you, I fear your Ladyships would be angry.


No not a whit.


But alas they are your common people, they are like your Slippers, they are
always gaping, their mouths are never shut.


But what say they of us?


Alas Madam, their tongues are like your dry leather shoes, always creaking:


But I prethe tell us, what do they say of us?


I shall offend your Ladyships.


I tell thee no.


But alas Madam, I do not believe them, because I know the conditions of the
slaves; why I'll tell you, their tongues are like the Jack of a Clock, still
in labour.


I think tha'rt mad, I prithee tell us what they say.


I would be loath to displease you.


I tell thee thou shalt not.


Faith they say your Ladyships are a couple of stately Courtesans.


Faith that was not much amiss said they no worse?


You'll not be angry with me.


No a'my word.


By my troth they said stately whores.


What pagan rogues be these? were they but roasted Larks for my sake, I would
crush em bones and all.


Why? are you so angry sister? you know they speak truth.


Why are we whores?


What are we else?


Why we are Courtesans.


And what difference pra'y?


O great great madam, your whore is for every rascal but your Courtesan is for
your Courtier.


He has given you a difference now.


And indeed Mada I said so, for in truth I was very agry with 'am, but they
said you were for every seruingma too.


Did they say so?


Yes indeed Madam, I hope I have touched you now.


He hold my life this slave the Serving-man, that was with me this morning, has
bragged of my kindness to him.


Nay, that's like lie, never trust a fellow that will flatter, fleire, and fawn
for four nobles a year.


Well, i'll ne'er have Serving-man touch any linnin of mine again.


Yes Madam, a may touched when tis at the Laundresses.


I, at my Laundresses, or else not: but what a rascal's this? by this light,
i'll never suffer serving-man come near me again.


Yes Madame, to deliver you a letter or so.


By this hand, not unless the Rogue kiss his hand first.


O Madam! why? since blew coats were left oft, the kissing of the hand is the
serving mans badge, you shall know him by it: but Madam, I speak something
boldly of you now and then, when I am out of your hearing, to hear what the
world will say of you, for you know that's the way to pump filthy words out of
their mouths, if there be any in them.


And do so still, we allow thee to say any thing, for thereby we shall know
our friends from our foes.


I assure your Ladyships, I love you, and am sorry for you from my soul,
although you know it not.


We doubt it not.


Come sister will you in?


I prithee Fleire inform us how the tide of opinion runs on us, least we be
drowned in the slanderous imaginations of the world.


I shall be very vigilant of your reputations.


Be so.


Who comes here a Gods-name? O, my gallant ruffles it out in silk, where
have you bin all this while?


Faith at Court Fleire, when were thou there?


Faith but yesterday, where I saw a Farmers Son sit newly made a courtier, that
sat in the presence at cards, as familiar as if the chair of state had bin
made of a piece of his fathers Barne-doore: O tis a shame: I would have state
be state in earnest and in game, I like your Courtier for nothing but often
saying his prayers.


What, I think thou feldome faist thy prayers, since thou hast almost forgot
thy Pater-noster.


Faith I pray once a week dost thou pray oftner?


I did pray oftner when I was an Englishman, but I have not praid often, I must
confess since I was a Britain: but dost hear Fleire? can tell me if an
Englishman were in debt, whether a Britain must pay it or no?


No, questionless no.


I'm glad of that, I hope some honest statute will come shortly, and wipe out
all my scores.


But whats the news now abroad Master Ruffell?


Why they say the Courtiers shall make the Citizens no more Cuckolds.


Excellent news in faith, excellent news, then the Court will grow rich.


Rich? Why man why?


Why then your Courtier will not bestow his money in buying the Merchants idle
commodities to lie with his wife.


Fleire I did but to try thee, the tide of the flood is turned man.


Then let them sweat for it.


For what?


If they strive against the stream.


No, but I mean the Citizens must cuckold the courtiers


Excellent news y faith, excellent news, then the court will grow rich.


What, like your weavers shuttle? make cloth forward and backward, but how I
prithe? but hark you Fleire, are you capable of a secret?


As your common Cockatrice, that receives the secrets of every man.


Then I must entreat, I may trust thee.


That's because I am no Taylor, for if I were, thou would entreat me to
trust thee.


Sir, they say your Ladies are a couple of common Punckes, I hope I may trust
you with a secret?


Sir, sir, doy' hear, doy' think they are no worse?


VVorse! why can they be worse?


O sir, I they may be private Puncks: why I tell you he that takes up his
private Punckes linnin, were better take up any commodity about the Town: if
twere a commodity of Mousetrappes, a should not loose much by the bargain.


But hark you Fleire hark you, tis supposed I can tell you they are a couple of
private Puncks.


Nay, then there's some hope theile prove honest women.


Yea, how Fleire how?


Why your private punck would leave being a punck, rather then be private to
one man for nothing, and then if al men were like thee, they would be honest,
for thou hast nothing to give am.


What a cogging fleiring Rogue is this, nothing will anger him: but doy' hear
Fleire; art thou a procurer, or a knave? for one of them I am sure thou art.


A procurer! whats that?


One that procures means for procreation, vulgarly called a Pander.


By this light now, were I a notable Rogue, should I deny my profession, why,
I am a procurer sir.


Nay, then thou art a Knave too that's certain, for there is such a sympathy
between a Procurer and a knave, as there is betwixt an Alcumist and a Beggar.


But look you sir, pra'y will you tel me one thing now.


VVhats that?


Are you a VVhoremaster or a Theife, for one of them ime sure you are.


By this light now a comes near me too, why I am a whoremaster.


Nay, then you are a thief too, that's certain, for your whoremaster always
filcheth for victuals, for you know flesh is mans food, mary sir you cannot
be hanged for it, tis but pettilassarie at most, but you may chance be whipped
for it and burned too; but not in the hand Signior, not in the hand.


Save ye Gentles.


Then we are enemies to the Iewes.


O my good preferrer, how does your worship, you are a stranger here.


Faith I have been with two Gentlewomen, in whose company thou first saw us,
and there the Knight, Sir Iohn Haue-little is so in love with the younger, as a
knows not whether a should rejoice, she had so much beauty: or lament,
because he is like to enjoy none on it.


By my troth I took him for a Conjurer, when I first saw him, a talked so much
of his soul and the Devil.


Why a sold his soul to the Deuillman, for the velvet that lines his cloak.


And when will he give the Devil his dew?


Nay, a deals with him, as a does with his Tailor, goes upon trust and means
to pay them both at the latter day.


But does not the Gentlemen jest at him?


Yes, one of them asked if he were a celestriall or a terrestrial Knight, he
very ignorant lie asked what Knights they were? your terrestrial Knight quoth
she, is of a gross element, and lives upon lands of his own, but your
celestrial Knight, he lives by the Heir, that is, by his elder Brother. He it
was, was Knighted, when so few escaped the sword, and he it is that now lives by
the sword.


And what said the Knight, what said he?


Faith as some Courtiers do, laugh at that he did not understand, and swore an
oath or two of the new fashion, as, by my conscience Lady you have a very
good spirit, so after two or three Court complements, beseeched the Ladies
retain him still in their good graces, kissed his hand and went his way.


Faith me thinks your English Ladies were very gallant Creatures, had they
not one fault.


What's that?


I have hend say, they will rise sooner, and go with more devotion to see an
extraordinary execution, then to hear a Sermon.


O signor, condemn not all for some, indeed I must confess there have been
Ladies at executions.


I, and they sat bare faced too, for fear the little fleet holes of their
masks should not give their eyes room enough for such a prospect: one Lady
thrust her head so far out at a window, with greedy desire to see all, that
the whole body was like to follow, making a forked tree with her head down,
had another Gentleman Usher, contrary to the nature of his office, caught hold
of her behind.


A forked tree, why what tree dost thou think she would have made?


O sir, a Medler-tree, a Medler-tree.


But Fleire, how does the Gentleman Usher live with thy Ladies?


Faith sir in the nature of a Munkie, that flatters and fawns, and shakes his
tail in his Mistres lap: but in faith Gallants, whether are you two bound now?


We are even ready for your two Ladies Signeur;


Faith and you shall find my two Ladies as ready for you two: Come, come, I'll
put you in the way of all flesh, I'll send you to Graues-ende, I'll see you in
the Tilt-boat, When you are there, ship your selves: in, in, in.


How is't Fleir?


O my Lord, you are a welcome man.


Save you O signeur.


O my gracious knight, and whither are you two bound now?


Faith even to your two Ladies signeur,


Yea? and will you to the South-ward in faith? will you to the confines of Italie
my Gallants? take heed how ye go Northwardes, tis a dangerous Coast, ieast
not with it in Winter, therefore go Southwardes my Gallants, South-wards hoe: I
have shipped two Gallants in a storm, I fear they have spent their maine Mastes
by this time, and are coming home again: but if you will Southwards, my hearts
of gold, I'll ship you in pomp, I'll send ye under the very line, where
the Sunn's at hottest.


But come, shall we go see thy Ladies, Fleir?


I, I, I, Come: but my good Lord you'll be a welcome man, for I have heard her
often swear, that had she such a Husband, a man so richly decked in virtuous
ornaments, she would forsake this life, her-selfe, nay, her very being, to
be yours; O my good Lord, she loves you dearly.


Pheu, but I cannot requite it,


Why my good Lord?


She's a common thing.


But say she may turn my Lord.


She has been so much worn, she's not worth the turning now.


O my Lord, penitence doth purge a spotted soul, and better leave sin late
then not at all: and I do know my Lord, that for your love from her immodest
life she'll turn.


I, I, I doubt not but sheele turn: but 'twill be like a Buzzard Hawke that
turns her tail to her game.


Fleir, is the gentleman usher that I preferred to your Ladies in any favour with
them?


Great, great: a kisses his hand with an excellent grace, and a will leire and
fleire upon am, he's partly their Physician, a makes am Suppositories, and
gives am Glisters.


And how lives he with am.


Faith like Thisbe in the play, a has almost killed himself with the scabberd:
but hark you Knight, you'll be a welcome man to my younger Lady, I protest
she thinks worthily of you.


Signeur, I must confess, I am beholding to your Lady; and to tell you truly,
I have much affected her since I first saw her.


Upon my word sir, to my knowledge she is an honest Gentlewoman, yet the
world may chance speak ill of her. Why I have heard some say Penelope was a
Puncke, having no reason to suspect her, but because she set up late a
nights, when t'was but to undo that which she did by day. I have heard some
say Hercules was a coward because he did not fight at single Rapier like a
gallant, but with a Club.


Nay, I have no reason to think the worse of her for the report of the world;
for the world signeur perchance speaks ill of you, or me.


Why, you're inth' right, I have heard some say, you were a very needy Knight,
and that you had but one shirt to your back when you came first to this town;
Nay more, when your Lackey carried it to the Laundress, it was found to be a
woman's smock, that you had borrowed: but what? should my Lady, or I believe
this now?


I hope she doth not,


No, no, no.


Come Fleir shall we see thy Ladies?


I, I, hoe, whose within there?


What would you have master Fleir?


Prethe show these Gentlemen up into the great Chamber, and give my Ladies
notice of their being here, have a little business my Lords, Heel conduct
ye, ye shall find a couple of your acquaintance there. Piso, and my eldest
daughter, to make am both affect and love each other, that marriage might unite
their hearts together: O then there were assured hope we might redeem our
honours lost, and regain our right in Florence. And for this Knight though he
be poor, yet would he married were unto Feli^ia*

For of a loving husbands awful eye,
Sets right the woman's steps that went awry.
Heaven I know has grace enough in store,
To make most chaste, a most lascivious whore.
How now? who have we there? a couple of footmen?

You see sir, we are not a horseback.


Howe now my little fire-workes of wit? what? flashes and flames? tell me
true, were you never Ushers to some great mans Coach-mares? did you never run
bare before them?


Never we sir:


Whither are you going?


Sir we want a serrice, end are going to get a Master.


Come, come* I'll prefer you both, thou shalt serve a Countrey-man of mine,
hes going to travail: shalt go with him, thou shalt serve one of my Ladies.


We would willingly serve two ne'er friends, because we are brothers, and
indeed two twins, and therefore are loath to be parted.


Two twins? that's all one, come, come, you shall serue'am.


You shall pardon us sir.


I hope you'll not condemn me for my love.


I have no reason Lady.


I offered you vnaskt.


That with a number oft hath bought.


Partly they have, and partly not, for I would have you know, my function
seldom sells affection: what though I have evil lived? repentant tears can
wash away my sin, which i'll poor forth like drops of winter rain, and now
henceforth, ever I'll this life abhor, and to the earth my knees i'll daily bow,
to get mercy from heaven, love from you.


O the devil take impudency she courts him.


Madam, the love that I may give you, fully do enjoy, but I have sworn with
other love then as a Brother doth a sister never to love any.


O sir, my fortunes are not fellows with my birth, they make me stoop to base
dejected courses, but would you love me, I would as swift as thought fly this
life, and leave lusts foulest sin, for fleshly beasts to sleep and wallow
in.


Shame to thy sex, no more.


Lady, in all the honest offices that friendship may command, command me
still, but yet I have not seen the face to which I owe so much of love, as may
justly arrest my affections, and when I do, i'll pay so due a debt without
imprisonment.


Methinkes yond Lady grows fairer much then she was wont, me thinks her
feature mends, her comely gesture, much hath drawn my heart to love her, O
but she's a whore.


Gentlemen do you lack a Boy?


No,


O God, I am undone.


Sir do'y want a Servant?


No.


O Lord what shall I do?


What can do?


Any thing that a Boy should do.


Woot dwell with me?


Tis partly as you'll use me.


I'll use thee well.


Well.


Tell me, are you both content to dwell with us two?


As please you two.


Then thou shalt live with me.


And thou with me.


Come Gentlemen will you be going?


We attend you sir.


Ladies our occasions calls us hence, and I am sorry we must leave you.


Gentlemen you all both have, and ever shall be welcome.


Lady I will leave you much affection more then I thought to lend you, but I
deal on use, and have much interest.


Caught I hope: hold hooke and line, he's fast by heaven.


My Lord, what you lend me, with much interest shall be repaid.


Adieu.


Fare you well; refused.


Contemned.


Disdained.


Abused.


Adyes.


A shall not live:


Disdain the Daughter of such a Signior.


Condemn a Lady borne? sister we are wronged.


But if you'll consent I have a project laid, that in requital both of them
shall die.


You make my soul sweet harmony, come lets about it then.


Are we in private?


We are?


Pray Sister what moving lines of love has your Knight touched your affection
with?


Faith his stile is plain, only a little courtlike silken phrase it has, but
I hope your lord hath sent rich words like jewels, for your ears against your
nuptial day.


Faith a woes with lines that might persuade another thought, not me, which
i'll lend your eyes, upon the like received courtesy from you.


With all my heart.


What have we here?

Lady I know the nobleness of your disposition defends you from the least Spark
of baseness, wherefore I invoke every particular virtue of yours to be
mediators to your best judgment for my better estimation in your love, my
affection is zealous, my intent honourable, my desire marriage: thus desiring
your resolved answer, I rest.

Ever at your disposure: lack Haue-little Knight.



Upon my life some friend did pen it for the fool.


Let me see what's this?

You the understanding spirit of a woman, let the splender of your Beauty,
with some heate of your affection shine upon the creature that adores ye, and
with the heavenly comfort of your love, melt and thaw despair from in dying
heart which if it live, it lives to love, it dye if it dyes in love, but
howsoever, tis yours, twas made for you, lives by you, and dies without you.

Yours in the most affectionate degree of affection. Don Piso De Florence.



Sister upon my life this is son and heir to Duke Piso that now is.


O would he were! but whosoere he be, a must be made a match to give fire to
the hell black powder of our revenge, yet your love: the wise Knight and he,
are two in one, there are no such friends as they.


Then let them march both hand in hand in one way.


Then shall be thus: these two being earnest suitors for our loves, we'll grant
upon condition, that suddenly they murder Spark and Ruffell, but first to
take the Sacrament if ever it be known, os known 'twill be, to keep our names
unspotted in the action; this being done,


Let them challenge us, we and our loves are won. but say they should reveal
us.


O none will break a Sacrament to heap up perjury on other sins, when death
hell stands gaping for their souls.


But say they rail on us.


If they do, tis known, we loved Spark, and Ruffel, and men will think they
killed a'm for our loves, since they lived in our favour these in disgrace.


I like it well, come lets hasten it,
For this is even as true as ever was text,
Plots are but dreams until they take effects.

O God, I think the path to hell that women tread is brother then the way men
go: how they walk by couples to the Devil?


O that I should love a whore, a very common Cocatrise, my thoughts are drowned
in a gulf of sin, she's a very Cannibal, which doth devour mans flesh, and
a Horse-leach that sucks out men's best bloods perfection: a very prisoners box,
that's open for every mans beneuolece: and I am Heir unto a Duke, yet love her:
doth any man here love a whore? I, who? I, I, I, tis I, an arrant puncke
common hired Hackney, and yet I love her; I adore her, I dote on her, I
worship her, O would some goodman would cut my throat, and put me out of
pain -- of pain, O that nature would not make an honest woman!


She did, she did my Lord.


Ar't there? speak, who was't?


Eve, Eve my Lord, she was honest.


Art sure on it?


I sure my Lord, for there was no man to tempt her but her husband.


I thought twas some such country Gentlewoman, O Fleire. Fleire I love a
whore.


Why my Lord, were you never a Soldier?


Yes. yes,


Why then tis your profession, you need not be ashamed of your trade.


But Fleire woot help me, woot help me man?


I, I, who i'st?


Thy Lady, thy elder Lady.


O my Lord, love her? why she's a whore.


I Fleire, but she may turn.


But she is so much worn my Lord, she's not worth turning now.


Do not vex me, do not torment me: do not torture me upon the rack of
ieastes, I tell thee if she please, she may turn.


I my Lord, tail to her game, like a buzzard hauk, or so:


Yet again, now the Devil take thy body, and damnation light upon thy soul,
destruction on thy bones, confusion in thy marrow, dost scorn me, mock me,
vex me, torment me? dost? dost? I'll hang my self, nay, I'll damn my self
rather then love thy Lady, and be abused by thee: I will, I will.


O Fleir how does thy Lady?


I delivered your letter sir, and she thanks you for it:


And how does she? ha, how does she?


Faith not well, she has taken physic, and your gentleman usher there
ministers to her: she's very great, and she says she feels much stirring in
her belly.


Sure then Fleir she has eaten too much raw fruit.


Upon my life then, they be plums, and the stones make her swell.


Sure there. it is so, I should send her something to comfort her now being
sick: what doest think were best Fleir?


Send her an Oaten cake, it is a good Northern token: sir Raph Shave sent his
Mistress one, but I think a meant to ride a journey on her, and thought Otes
would make her travel well.


No, Oats is too great a binder after her Physic, I care not if I go and
visit her, and carry her a Woodcock.


You'll go alone sir.


I, I mean so, but how should I carry him Fleir?


Under your Cloak sir, under your Cloak.


Mas, and thou says true, I'll go buy one straight, and yet now I remember
me, it is no great matter if I defer it till she be well, it shall be so Fleir,
I will.


O you're of a French humour sir, as inconstant as impatient: I think you have
scarce the patience to tell the clock when it strikes.


Tush, I keep a boy for such uses.


For nothing else?


Yes, to wear a guarded Cloak.


Not till you be richly married.


No, not till I be richly married: he should wear one now, if my money were
come out o'th Country.


I wonder you would be knighted sir, since your money is so long a coming,
that you cannot maintain your knighthood gallantly.


Faith I was knighted to get me a good wife Fleir.


Get you a good wife? Why look you sir, speak but the Golden tongue very
perfectly, marry you must speak it well, and call some great Lord cousin:
'twill get you a better wife then three hundred pound jointer. You may report
you have Colepits too,, it is a warm commodity I can tell you: they may be
sent about by water; if they ne'er come, as your money doth not, you may curse
the winds, or complain of Shipwreck: and then though't be a lie it is
drowned.


I, but say it should be proved afterwards t'was not true.


True? Gods my life, she's a wise woman that will go as far as new Castle to
search the depth of a Cole-pit for your truth.


I would be loath to leave my truth so far hence.


But I am sure heel bring his honesty no nearer hither; but that comes about
by water too as his money does.


But Fleir is not thy Lady a virtuous Gentlewoman?


O yes sir, I often find her in deep contemplation.


Of what I prethe?


Of Aratines pictures.


I, I warrant her, O she can endure no bawdry, she spits when she hears one
speak on it.


That's because her mouth waters at it.


She's wondrous musical too.


Very true, she every day sings Iohn for the King, and at Up tails all,
she's perfect.


Be these good tunes Fleir?


Excellent, excellent sir, far better then your Scottish Jigs.


Yet many of our Ladies delight much in the Scottish Music.


I, with their Instruments.


Thou hast a good wit Fleir: if I were a greatman thou should be my
Secretary.


And I hope I should discharge the place sufficiently: for I have learning
enough to take a bribe, and wit enough to be proud: but whither are you going
now sir?


Faith I am going to thy Ladies Fleir.


You will not speak with am now; for my Ladies will speak with none but
Gentlemen.


Why sir, I hope I am a Knight, and Knights are before Gentlemen.


What Knights before Gentlemen, say ye?


Faith I.


That's strange, they were wont to be Gentlemen fore they were knighted: but
for this news I'll follow you.


Do, and as occasion serves I'll prefer thee.


Why should I love her? because shes fair, because she's fair; because she's
a whore: for if she wore not fair, she would not be a whore; if she were not
fair, I should not love her: Ergo, if she were not a whore I should not love
her: well concluded wit, well concluded wit; there is no man breathing could
love her but I, she's a whore, yet her beauty haunts me like a Ghost, I
cannot sleep for it, her remembrance rides me like the Mare a nights, I cannot
rest for it, what shall I do? I shall burst boy.


My Lord.


Will thy tongue be secret?


As the clapper of a Mill, my Lord.


Is not that always going?


I my Lord, but I hope it says nothing.


O thou hast wit I see I am in love boy, I am, I am.


With whom my Lord?


With a very Wagtail an'arrant woman, a very Peace whose pride is maintained
by her tail.


The it is maintained by the worthiest part of her body


Come, your wit boy, your proof.


If a hundred men in a company, mee't doth not the worthiest man amongst them,
first take his place, and sit down?


I grant it.


And I am sure my Lord, where ere the body comes the tail first takes his
place, and sits down, and therefore I hope tis the worthiest part of the body.


O that I had the reason of a Sailor to know her like a rock, that I might
sail from her and avoid her: or as a virtuous man knows sin, to loath and
leave it. And yet she's wondrous fair, I would she were as honest: kind
usage may reclaim her from her sin, and make her stoup unto her Husbands
will, as doth a wel-mand Hawk unto the lure.


O I, she has bin manned already, she knows the lure and will come to any
call.


O but her beauty may excuse the folly of her youth, tis want of maintenance
hath overthrown her, want and pride are two notorious bawds: want makes the
noblest creature sell her soul for gold, and pride doth make the gallants
stoop to lust.


And often sells pure honesty, to clad her tail in glittering bravery.


And tis well done, let every member wear that which it won: why should the
head study to maintain the foot?


Or the foot trot to maintain the head?


Why should not every member like a mechanic man in a common-wealth, labour
in his own trade to maintain it self? then since every thing must live, I will
no more condemn beauty for being clad in luxurye, but henceforth I will love
her, and let my passion smoothly swim along the stream of loves affection:
henceforth I will no more with foul and hated thoughts, abuse so rare a
creature, whose behaviour and discourse, inchantes the ears of men, and drives
the world into a wonder -- ay me!


Faith my Lord you'll ne'er win a woman by sighing, crossing your arms, and
crying aye me! the only way to wiN them* is to care little for am: when they
are sad do ye sing: when they sing and are merry, then take your time put am
too't: if they will, so: if not, let them snick up, if you will walk in my
Lord, i'll show ye many principles I learned of my Mother, they may do your
lordship good.


Go go, I will: but O unhappy fate,
When youth and weakness must support our state.

How now Fleire?


Save you Fleire.


Save ye Gallants: O Signior Petoune, shall you and I be friends again?


Why are ye enemies?


No great enemies, a quarrel rose between us.


I do not like such quarrels, a struck me sir, and I protest and swear to
you sir by this Trinidado, had I not taken the box on my cheek, a had broke my
Pipe.


Why did not strike him again?


O no, his Father's a Justice.


Nay if the Father be of the peace, I see no reason the Son should fight.


What, a Coward Signior? fie, a coward?


A Coward? why that's his only virtue, for a Coward abuses no man, but a makes
him satisfaction: for if a wrong all men, a gives al men leave to beat him,
he's like a whetstone, he sets an edge on another, yet a will not cut himself.


Come, come, we must needs have you friends, thou'st do him some good
offices.


Who? I? with all my heart, but what i'st sir? what i'st?


Thou shalt commend his love to Mada Fromaga.


His love to her? what Signior, in love with my Ladies Ancient?


Why her Ancient?


Because she carries her colours for her, but tis in a box: but signior you
shall have a good match on it, though she be not rich, yet she's an ancient
woman, and is able to get her living, by midwiferie, and I can tell ye tis not
the worst trade going, considering how young and old, and all do their good
wills to set them a work, and tis a good hearing, better they get then the
Lawyers, for your midwives live by the agreement between party and party,
the falling in of lovers, but the Lawyers live by the falling out of friends.


I pray sir what may she be worth?


Worth? let me see, she hath three yellow perewigs of her own: she hath a Fan
with a short silver handle about the length of a Barbors siringe; she has a
Looking-glasse too, but that has plaid the prodigal Citizen with her, tis
broken, and much other goods of the same nature.


But come Signior, how will you woe her?


I will tell her she is so wise, that neither age nor time could cousin her of
beauty.


And by my faith that will do well.


I will tell her that I love her most for the whiteness of her skin.


But you may not say the sweetness of her breath, for that stinks.


I will praise the smalnes of her fingars.


But I assure you, you may better praise the length of her nailes.


I am afraid that being old she has a dry hand.


That's certain, but she has a very moist nose, you may praise her for that:
but my Gallants why are ye such strangers at our little Court?


Because thy Ladies live like the Beadles of Bridewell.


How's that sir?


By the sins of the people.


They say the Lord Piso, hath bin a good Client to thy elder Lady of late.


The more fool he? why your good Client is but like your study gown, sits
in the cold himself, to keep the Lawyer warm.


And what fees hast thou out of their trade?


Faith my fee's are like a puny Clarks, a penny a sheet.


How a penny a sheet?


Why, if any lie with them a whole night, I make the bed in the morning, and for
that I have two pence, and that's a penny a sheet.


What Gallants use to come to your house?


All sorts, all nations, and all trades: there is first Master Gallant your
Britain, Master Metheglins your Welshman, Mounsieur Mustroome the Frenchman:
Signior Fumada the Spaniard, Master Oscabath the Irishman: and Master
Shamrough his Lackey, O and Master Slopdragon the Dutchman. Then for your
Trades-men, there comes first Master Saluberrimum the Physician, Master
Smooth the Silk-man, Master Thimble the Taylor, Master Blade the Cutler, and
Master Rowell the Spurrier: but Master Match the Gunner of Tower-hill comes
often; he has taught my Ladies to make fire-workes, they canne deal in
Chambers already, as well as all the Gunners that make am fly off with a
train at Lambeth, when the Mayor and Aldermen land at Westminster: but come
Signior, you have Tobacco, and i'll give you a Cup of Muld-sacke and we'll en
go drink a health to our Mistresses.


Health to our best esteemed friends, Master Spark and Master Ruffell.


Our, good wishes ever wait upon our best beloved friends Master Ruffell,
and Master Spark.


We both are much indebted to your Ladyships.


Look ye signior, that's she: whose love means to assault your brains, since
you have blown up your own sconce with Tobacco.


As I am truly generous, she's modest. Fair Mistress, you are so wise, that
neither time nor age could ever cousin you of beauty, and I swear even by the
Alps high heauen-touching tops, the trauelers narrow passage, and by the
towering head of high mount Chiego, the Sea-mas southward mark: by these the
witnesses unto my travel, I do vow that you are passing fair.


If I be not fair sir, I must be foul.


A Foul Lady? what bird might that be?


A foul Lady? you're a saucy Jack to call me so, that you are.


O be not angry, for I protest I cannot but commend the whiteness of your skin.


Mary muffe, I think a be a Tanner, and means to buy me for my skin.


Gods me; she's angry, what shall I do now Signior?


To her again man, do not leave her, the Moon is now upon change, she will
turn.


I pray you Lady know me by the title of some kindness.


Kindness; faith sir you are mistaken in me, you must seek your flurts some
other where, and I pra'y come not to make a fool of me: alas man though I am a
waitingwoman* do not think I spend my time in nothing but tempering of colours,
working of drawn-worke, warming of Smocks, and pinning in of roughs, faith
yes.


And you come to her Signior you must come to her as country Gentlewomen do
into the fashion, that is: in the tail and latter end on it.


Faith I, and ye come to begin your knavery on me, i'll take you down: I am
none of your young simpering waiting-women, that are ashamed to be counted
proud, therefore suffer every Serving-man to use them at their pleasure.


Now on my conscience Mistress, my love is honest, and I desire marriage.


Indeed if you mean marriage, I am content to bear the more with you: but I
pra'y sir, when shall we be married? by my troth I ask you, because I have been
so often deceived, I warrant you I have bin promised dealt upon promises in the
way of marriage above an hundred times.


At our next meeting we will set down a day for the effecting of it.


Gentlemen, we have some small discourse which a little requires secrecy,
therefore if it please ye to walk in, and make use of our better rooms, we
will not long be absent from you.


With all our hearts.

Worthy Lord, do not think immodesty in me though contrary to the bashful
habit of my sex, I am enforced by loves almighty power, to reveal the
secretes of my heart. Your Letters have so much prevailed with me, that in a
word I must confess I love you.


Worthy Knight, I would my words had but the power so work in you, that
which your lines have done in me, then should the happy consolation of my life
dwell ever in your loves embraces.


Assure ye Lady, your gift of love to me shall be deserved, though nothing
but my lives dear breath requite its.


And I will rather die a shameful death, then live a hateful life, which I
must do unless I find a means that may deserve your love.


No we your tongue goes like a well tuned Instrument, and makes my heart within
my bosom dance with joy to hear such large requital of my love: but duist
you to maintain this your affection, although it were with some danger of
your life?


Durst I? I vow, even by my souls eternity, I durst.


Alas, if you knew all, it is your own good, not mine: and yet I lie, it is my
good too, since my life depends upon your safety.


What is't dear Lady? although it be the death of man, if it be pleasing unto
you I'll do it.


O let me embrace so dear a spirit in so dear a bosom: and since you have
bound your self by promise, I will be plain, there are two that hate you two,
because we love you, and often have persuaded us by gifts and large
protestations to have us love them if they killed you.


What us?


Who we?


Nay it is too true; for while you lived, they said there was no hope for them
to look for any love from us: now we poor silly women, fearing least they
without consent of us, should do that which their hatred doth intend, we
think it fit prevention first be used, by giving them to drink of what
themselves have brude.


First murder them.


True, so shall ye then be sure,
T'inioy our loves, we yours, and live secure.

But what are they Ladies?


Spark.


And Ruffell.


They die for it though they were my fathers sons.


They shall not live.


Let little children fear the shallow Brookes, for I can swim though't be
through Seas of blood; let foolish fear go dwell with women, for bloody
resolution shall not part from me, I'll kill them both even with mine own
hands, I'll do it.


O no* I'll reveal it then, unless you first do swear and take a Sacrament,
what ever hap to keep our names untouched.


Untouched? we'll do it.


Then for the means:


We'll stab them.


We'll fight with them.


No, so you may miss them, and they kill you.


Give them a Figg.


Make them drink their last.


Poison them:


But for the means.


You two shall make a banquet, and in a cup of Wine a health shall pass.


In which i'll mingle mingle such a dram, as they shall ride to heaven in post,
unless they miss the way.


But where shall we get the poison? because you know it is dangerous, and will
breed suspect where ere we buy it.


I have a Countrey-man in town an Apothecary, one Signeur Aluino, a fellow
that is well stored, and will sell me of the best.


If a were of my mind, a would think no poison too good for you.


Come then, I would have you go about the preparation of the feast.


Now boys, you have a couple of goodly masters,


I Fleir, and thou hast a couple of virtuous Mistresses, O they are a couple of
damned pieces, that will plot or counsel the death of two such worthy
Gentlemen.


For one of them the earth did never bear a worthier creature.


Which is that?


Which is that? Why sister, have you so oft confessed that his all perfection'd
spirit points him out for virtue herself to imitate, and yet doy' ask now
which is that?


Howe? sister, nay now I smell you in faith, doy' hear, doy' hear, whose
Fiddlers are you two? what Instruments do you bear I pra'y?


You have told a wise tale, faith fir we carry none.


It is true my little musicians, you carry but the cases my little curtals,
in faith I smell a smock here too, and are you two wenches in faith?


If we were, I hope thou would not wrong us.


No, as I am true Italian borne.


Then tis true, we confess to thee we are both wenches, and the love of
these two Gentlemen, Spark and Ruffel hath made us leave our selves to wait
on them which by misfortune we did miss.


But believe me my little Gallants, ye play the Boys well.


Well? why i'll tell thee, I have plaid the boy so long as I am changed into the
nature of a boy, i'll go to spancounter with any page in Europe, for his best
garters I can tell bawdy tales, drink drunk, brag, swear, and lye with any
Lackey in the town.


I can man a punck to a play, or slander any Gentlewoman as well as any Innes
a Court puny, I can as well as he, swear such a Lady is in love with me, and
such a Citizens Daughter would have come to bed to me, when all shall be as
true as thy Ladies are honest.


I wonder thoult live in such a sinful place.


Thy Ladies are as common as any Tavern door.


Good comparisons, for a man comes no sooner into a Tavern, but hes welcome,
and the operation of the pot makes him not able to stand when he comes out.


But what shall we do in this matter?


Do? Why complain them to the Magistrates, and prevent the murder.


No, not so, i'll tell you how't shall be, hark in your ears.


Do it and we shall ever thank thee.
Come lets about it then.

Whats this? O this is Arringus; this makes the old man able, and the young man
lusty, strengthens the nerues doth concoct the blood, and her name is written
on the box, because my wife should know it in my absence: this is Civet, this
comes from the Cats tail, I would my were such a Cat: this perfumes your
Ladies, and not without cause, for some, I mean whose sweet breath is dead,
and teeth morn in black for the loss on it this makes your young Gallants
smell them nine days before they see them, like young poops: this drug is
precious dear; whats this? O this is the sptrit of roses, nineteen bushels
and a half of Roses make but an ounce, a dram on it, tis made of the
Quinressence of the water after the fifteenth distillation: none may kiss a
Lady after she hath anointed her lips with this, under the degree of a Lord
at least, tis worth nine pounds an ounce, yet I could never still it so.


Save you Signior.


Y`are welcome sir, what do ye lack?


I want a service, and am by my profession an Apothecary, and shall be glad to
be entertained by you.


What country man art thou?


I am a Florentine borne.


Thou art my Country man, and therefore welcome and in happy time, for I am
bound for Italy, and want a man to take charge of my Shop, only this is all: I
shall require of you, be careful of your cares, and obedient to your
Mistress.


I shall remember still not to forget what you give me in charge.


What is thy name?


Iacomo.


Well Iacomo, if I find thee honest thou shalt find me liberal.


I would be loath to be found otherwise.


Continue so, I prithee, and so farewell Iaques, but i'll inform my wife before
I go to respect thee according to thy merit.


Now come away my Customers, I hope I am fitted for an Apothecary* s'hart I
think ime turned conjurer, for I have no sooner called* but the Devils are
appeared, what do ye lack Gentlemen?


Where's your Master fellow?


My Master is gone into Italie sir, but if you want any thing, i'll use you
well, if you want any drugs to make Lotiums, any Restringent Powders, any Aqua
Mirabilis, any Cordial receipts, or any Precious poisons?


What poisons have you?


Excellent good sir, as ever was tasted, look you sir, this poisons by the
smell, this by the sight, and this by the tastes.


Come give me some of this that poisons by the taste, but how must I use it?


Put it into a little wine, and drink it, twill bring you into a long sleep.


But art sure twill poison a man?


Am I sure on it? why tak't upon my credit, twil poison any vermin, except it
be a woman, for twill poison a Cat sir.


Why a Cat hath nine lives sir, and wilt not poison a woman, seeing twill
poison a Cat?


O no, why a woman hath nine Cats lives, a woman hath more lives then a horse
hath diseases, and she will be sometimes in as many minds in an hour, as she
has lives.


What times are those?


When she's left a rich Merchants Widow, commonly, and hath many suitors, she
will in her mind marry three or four and fifty of a'm in an afternoon, and
threescore more, when she goes to bed, yet in the morning sheele have none of
them all, but go to Church before day, and marry her Prentice for the good
service a did her in her Husbands time.


Well, but whats the price of your poison?


There's an ounce will cost you a French crown sir.


Tis very dear.


O sir tis very cheap, considering the goodness on it.


Yea? is there good in ill?


O sir, I, in many things the better the worser.


As how?


As in poison, or in a punck, for the better whore the worser woman ever.


Well honest fellow, there's thy money and farewell.


I thank you sir, I have sold you a poison my old elders, twil make an^ sleep
indeed, and I thank God that's the worst twill do, well, farewell Master
Apothecary. I must now like a friend entreat your shop to have a special care
of it self.


And shall we dine with this Honourable Lord, Knight to day?


Theile take it unkindly else.


Signior will you go?


Not I, I was not bid.


That's all one, shalt be my guest.


Come, a shall go, for there will be his Mistress Madam Fromaga.


Nay then I know the Jet of her complexion will draw the straw of his love
thither.


Faith I, poor Signior, I see the Springle of her beauty hath already caught
the Woodcock of his affections.


Well, I see he that will have the commodity of good wits in his company, must
endure the discommodity of ieastes, wit is like the heate of blood in youth
'twil break out.


True Signior, though it be but on a Scab, but come shall we go?


I my Heroic spirits, i'll follow ye.


O Signior Petoune, what news?


Faith ill news, the two Florentine Ladies, with Master Spark and Master
Ruffell were all poisoned yesterday at a feast by your Lord Piso and the
Knight, but the Ladies have recovered their health, but Spark and Ruffell are
dead, and their burial is committed to Fleire: your Lord the Knight are
committed to prison, shall to morrow be arraigned for the murder, and tried by
the Ciuill-lawe, because your Lord is a stranger, and claims to be tried by
the law of nations.


Faith Signior I am very sorry for my Lord.


I protest sir so am I for them both.


Well Signior i'll commit you to God.


Let the whole band of Angels be centinells to your safety sweet sir.


I pray sir doth Justice Ferrio dwell here?


Yes sir a dwells here.


Are you towards him sir?


I am a poor Gentleman, whose fortunes much depend upon his favours, and
indeed sir I am his Clarke.


I pray sir your name.


My name is Mittimus sir.


Good Master Mittimus I would very willingly speak with your Master.


Indeed sir he's not well, but if you please to send by me the substance of
your business I shall very carefully deliver it.


Truly Master Mittimus my business is but this: to morrow the Italian Lord,
and Sir Iohn Haue-little are to be araign'd, and your master being the chief
Judge of the Court, without this presence or licence, the rest can do nothing:
wherefore Doctor Caius entreats to know his pleasure in this business.


Sir I shall deliver your message, and will return his answer to you
presently.


Good master Mittimus therein shall you much obleige me to be thankful.

O all-directing power yield good aspect,
And to my purpose give a blessed end,
My intent is good, O let it so succeed,
And be auspicious still to each good deed.

Sir my master hath received your message, hath sent this Ring as a token to
Doctor Caius, desiring him, since my masters health will not permit him to be
present, to proceed alone to judgment, and so commends his love to him.


Good master Mittimus, I shall both deliver your masters commendations, and
the Ring.


Still tongueless night put off thy sable robe,
Thou needs not morn, my villainies were done
By day, thou had no hand in them, O I am great, as is a woman that is near
her time:

And life's the burden that I bear.
But it is a bastard for that I am asha'md on it.
The Law I hope is a skilful midwife, and will soon deliver me; grim Justice
do thy worst,

Thy cruelty shall prove a courtesy,
And bail me out of prison.
Lie there thou selfe-consuming Taper, true pattern of my life, I have consumed
my self for others, as thou hast done for me, and now she has extinguished
my life as I this light.

O how obedient was my bounty, still
To her command? my liberality
Did fatten mischief, and hath made her proud:
O that too much of any thing should be so ill in every thing
The Suns all seeng eye, with too much intemperate heate makes wither what it
made to flourish.
The earth being mother to all wholesome herbs,
With too much fatness oft produces weeds.
A suit of cloth doth keep the body warm,
When richer garments makes the wearer proud.
O, the means the sweetest Music;
Contentment revels when that string is touched;
But O, the time will come she will repent
My death: for when she looks on vices face
Unmask like mine; she will detest and loath it.
For this is truth and evermore hath bin,
None can forsake before he knows his sin.

Come, come, thou did but dream thou were in hell.


I tell thee I was in hell.


And so was I too, I'll be sworn.


And how long was't ere thou came thither?


Me thought t'was long, as long as a suit hangs here in the Law ere it be
ended.


But I prithee how broad was the way to hell?


As broad as the space between two lines in a Chauncerie bill.


O sir, there's the conscience on it, say the Plaintiff be in one line, and the
defendant in an other, they being enemies, were it either conscience or honesty
in the Clerk to thrust them no near together, that they might go together
by th'eares? but in faith what good fellowship was there in hell?


O the devils are excellent companions, theile drink your Dutch captains, or
Court Ladies spunges.


Who did see there?


Faith I saw the four sons of Aymon, and they were Porters ever since there
was a company made of am.


Why are there a company of Porters in hell?


O I, the Devils are but our Apes man.


But did thou see more of them that were damned*


Yes, I saw a Citizen damned for refusing a desperate debt, because t'was
tendered him on a Sabboth.


I hope we shall have no more Citizens damned for that fault.


There was a poor mercenary woman damned because she forsook her Trade, and
turned Puritan.


And good reason, why could not she have kept her Trade, and been a
Puritan, as well as a Puritan keep her Religion, and yet be of her Trade?


There was a Lady damned because she never painted: a Puritan for saying
Grace without turning up the white of his eyes: A Tailor for never having
scabbie fingers: A Vintner for making great two pennie-woorths of Sugar. But
there was a Innes of Court man damned, and I was sorry for him.


Why was he damned?


Alas for a small fault.


I prethe what wast?


For having always money in his purse.


Were there no Lawyers in hell?


There were none of your great Lawyers as your Sergeants, and Benchers, for
they take counsel of too many good Angels to come there: but your young
puny Lawyers, they were in swarms like Gnats in Summer.


Why are there so many of them there?


Alas man they seldom converse with a good Angel scarce once in a whole
Michaelmasse Term, and if a come a stays not long with am to feed these
souls, for they are fain to send am away straight to pay for the feeding of
their Horses, there was a Chambermaid damb'd for keeping her virginity till
she was married, and there were many Soldiers damb'd for saying their prayers
when they were drunk.


But what did thou see in hell?


O, I saw a Scrivener damb'd for procuring a Gentleman money Gratis, but I
came in an excellent time.


What time wa'st?


In a gossipping time, for Proserpina was newllie brought a bed of two twins.


Two twins! what were they?


A Sergeant and a Yeoman, but she has put them out to nurse.


I prithee where?


Faith at the Counter in Wood-street, and the slaves will suck already like
little Horsleaches.


But when will she have am home, that she may be rid of am.


Faith she's an unnatural Mother, she cares not greatly if they never come
home, but the devil their Father he loves am well, heel have am home again
ere long.


Which is the elder Brother?


O the Sergeant, the Devil allows him the better maintenance, for he has
more to the dressing of his meat.


Well, Gentlemen, since by the heavens pleasure I have bin appointed to save
your lives, let me entreat you to keep your selves secret till the sequel
of this action shall need your presence.


Come lets go, we'll only follow your directions.


VVil't please ye have the prisoners brought forth?


VVee can do nothing till we hear from Doctor Ferrio, to know his pleasure
in these proceedings.


Was any man sent to him?


Yes, Fleire, the Lady Floridaes man, which is not yet returned.


Reverend Judges: here's a Doctor at door desires admittance.


Entreat him to come in.


Learned Doctors, Doctor Ferrio commends him to you, and because sickness hath
laid so strong a hand upon his weak decrepit body, which doth detain his
presence, he entreats you to accept of me in his place, and as assurance of
his earnest desire thereof, he has sent this well known ring as a token to
you.


Sir, we know the ring and you are very welcome, and so I pra'y assume his
place.


Is it your pleasure the Prisoners be brought footh.


I, both of them.


My Lord, you are here indicted of a hateful crime, I am very sorry to see
you in this sort stand here.


Thrice Reverend Judges, and therefore honoured Lords, I must confess, that
like a skilful dancer, I have truly footed folly, yet like a learner in my
course of life, trod much out of measure, I have lived like an vnbackt colt
proud and wanton, my tree of life hath borne more leaves then fruit, I never
was deboash'd steard away my days enen in a sea of sin.


And in, that sea my Lord, you bore so great a sail as you have over set your
bark of life, and here you are accused my Lord, even of a hateful crime, so
is the Knight there for poisoning two Gentlemen, Spark and Ruffell, how do
you answer this my Lord?


Alas my Lord, this is soon answered, for though that I have surfeited on
sin, yet have I not bin drunk with blood.


What say you Knight?


The crime is great I must confess my Lord, but I am sure the proof can be
but little.


Ladies you know most, and therefore tis fittest most you speak.


Why then my Lord, this is all we can say, this Lord and knight feasted diverse
of us their friends, but four of us he drenched with such a dram which
soon made two discharge the debt they owd to nature.


O conscience wonldst thou give me leave!


And we no doubt my Lords, had long ere this breathed out our lives like
them, but that we had the lesser quantisie, for being esteemed the weaker
vessels, they thought the lesser blow would break us.


O had not death arrested me.


Why then my Lord, we thus must now proceed, they that spilt innocent blood
themselves must bleed; but Ladies I have heard you had a man called Fleire,
what's become of him?


He was sent to Doctor Ferrio, and we never saw him since.


Do you know his hand Ladies?


Very well.


I pray look here then.


This is his hand indeed.


I very perfectly do know it to be his.


Why then upon this hand I hear arrest you both, upon your lives.


Who, we?


I, you Ladies, my Lord I pray you, read this letter.


Reverend Judges, God will by some means punish every sin, and though
against my will, yet by my conscience I am enforced to unmask my Ladies
vilianies, the murder for which the Lord and Knight are like to die, was first
plotted by them: the two Pages with my self did hear it: the Prisoners in
this action, are enforced by Sacrament to be secret, and thus entreating heaven
in Justice, still to aid you.

Yours Fleer a Florentine.




Is this true my Lord?


They are sworn not to reveal it,


But being reueald they may affirm it.


Tis too true my Lord.


Where are the Pages?


Here my Lord.


How say you boys to this letter?


The letter speaks nothing but the truth.


Well Ladies, then we here pronounce this sentence that you must die among the
rest.


You powers divine, I know do plainly see,
Heavens starry eyes sees all our villainy:
And God in Justice murder will reveal,
But were I now, my life for to begin,
I'd be an honest wife to you, wherefore forgive me dearest Lord.


Lady, I do even as I hope to be forgiven.

Show mercy heaven, my sins do thee offend,
There's none can say he's happy till his end;
Forgiveness Knight, and since the law on us,
Hath laid so strict a hand, O let me be
Thy wife before I die, and were I now
A thousand years to live, I would be honest
Loving none but thee.

I do forgive you Lady with my soul.


Long live my honoured Lord and mighty Duke of Florence.


So a will, as long as't please the Hang-man.


My honoured Lord, your Father is deceased, and the state of Florence by me hath
sent their Letters and allegiance.


Let them call back the banished Signior Antifront whom they we, and al have
wronged: O could I live but to inquire him out, in satisfaction of his wrongs,
i'd marry his eldest Daughter, and whilst a lived a should be restored to his
estate, but O he's --


Here my Lord.
I tax you to your word, Signior Antifront yet lives,
And here's his elder Daughter whom himself
But now condemned to die: and here's the younger
Left for you, the poisoned men are here a live again,
Who did but dream of death, but yet do
Live to enrich a nuptial bed to you two,
And now since every thing so well doth sort,
Let all be pleased in this our comic sport,
Where's Petoune? he shall have his Mistress too,
He most deserves, for he did hotly woe,
If we part friends, your hands unto us lend,
What was not well, we'll next strive to amend.


