HE does not mean this building for a College, I hope?


That were an ill Foundation, there are more Scholars then can live one by
another already; 'tis pity we should have more plenty of learned Beggars.


'Tis past all my conjecture, why he built it.


Signior Per^otto, Captain of the Guard
Is of Counsel only with the Duke in it.

Signior Orpiano, and Fulvi^.


My Spark? Whither in such hast? Let us change Ay^e a little*


You are travailing to your Mistress*


Madam Donella is newly returned to Court.


With the Princess?


She was but late retired into the Country:
What's the matter?

Your Lordships I hope have heard, the Duke sent
Post for them, as they say, there is something in it.

What?


Does not your Lordship know?


Not I.


Your Lordships wisdom and mine is much about a scantling then, yet for ought
I hear, there be others of the Court as ignorant as we -- your Honours pardon I
beseech you, I must in all haste to the Princesses Lodging.


Farewell Signior.
Your amorous locke has a hair out of order.

Um? what an oversight was this of my Barber, I must return now and have it
corrected, dear Sign.


Here's a Courtier that will not miss a hair of his Complement, when he is to
appear before his Mistress: every morning does this fellow put himself upon
the Rack, with putting on's apparel, and manfully endures his Taylor, when he
skrewes and wrests his body into the fashion of his doublet -- but that the
Court cannot subsist without a Fool, I should marvel what this fellow does
to follow it.


There are more have much about his parcel of Brains, the benefit of youth
and good clothes procured their places, and ignorance and impudence have since
maintained em.


Two great helps as the world goes.


Clear the presence, the Duke is entering.


I ever was obed ient --


'Tis for thy Honour, which I know*
Is to thy self a precious sound -- that Building
I late erected, then shall be thy Palace.

Or my Prison Sir, if I do rightly understand.


That name
Is too unworthy of it, my Eugenia,
Nor will it seem restraint to my loved daughter,
Since free to all delights, thy mind shall be
It's own Commander, every day shall strive
To bring thee in fresh rarities, Time shall be.
Delighted with thy pleasures, and stay with thee.

Indeed I shall think Time has lost his wings
When I am thus Cag'd up.

Thou shalt give
To him feathers when thou please. Mantua
Shall power her raptur^ on thee -- why have I
A Crown, but to command what thou can wish for,
My dear Eugenia.

A Dear it seems,
For as you had suspicion of my wildness,
You'll measure out my walk.

I am thy Father,
Who by example of the wisest Kings,
But build a place to lay my Treasure in,
Safe from the Robber, where I'll place a Guard --

Do you suspect I shall break Prison?


To keep off violence, and soliciting
Which may disturb thy pleasures, until we
Shall find out one to match thy Birth and Virtues,
My Dukedom is too poor that way, maintain
Thy Fathers Soul: thou hast no blood to mix
With any beneath Prince -- forget as I shall
Thy Love was ever falling from thy Greatness,
Into the Arms of one carries but stile of Honour.

Sir, I am your Daughter.


You have deserve*d my blessing, and thy obedience
In this, new Crowns thy Father: I see I need not
Urge what I am to move thee, and lay force,
Thy understanding does appear convinced,
And loving duty teaches thee to more,
Then the Command -- Perenotto --

What narrow ground I tread? I know he is
Too passionate to be denied his will,
And yet to yield will make me miserable;
'Tis my misfortune to be borne so great.
Each common man and woman can i^ioy
The air, when the condition of a Princess
Makes me a Prisoner. But I must obey
In hope it will not last -- I have a Soul
Is full of grateful duty, nor will suffer me
Further dispute your precept: you have power
To steer me as you please.

All the Graces
Speak in my Girl -- Each syllable doth carry
A Volume of thy Goodness: all my Cares
So well rewarded do convert to sweetness
I thank thy filial piety: know my Girl
That place wherein I look so rich a Jewel,
I do pronounce again, shall be thy Paradise:
Thy Paradise my Eugenia, saving that
In this man only finds no being -- other
Delights shall stream themselves into thy Bosom,
And those that pass, shall flow again t'invite
Thy sense to tasting -- Perenotto.

Your Graces pleasure?


Admit those Ladies that attend --


The Duke shows much Indulgence.


Observe the issue.


We will not limit thy companions,
Elect what Mantuan Beauties thou can best
Delight in, they shall serve thee: or if some
Of your own Train, whom we have thought most proper
To be your personal Guard, affect you, they
Attend our pleasures: see, they are ignorant
Yet of our purpose, if to any, thy
Affection be not free, thy Breath discharge them,
And point thy own Attendants.

I shall be pleased with your appointment,
Ladies, I know you love me.

Doth your Grace hold suspicion, any of us
Serve you not with our heart?

I do not doubt,
Or if I did, you now approach a Trial,
For my sa^e can you be content to be
All Prisoners.

Prisoners?


Yes, shut up close Prisoners, and be bard
The (...), nay the sight of men.

Marry Heaven defend, wherein have we offended
That we must loose the sweet society
Of Men.

How have we for feyted our freedom?


No man argue -- 'tis our pleasure.


Alas Madam, I am new contracted to a handsome Signior.


I have but newly entertained a Servant, that gave me these Gloves, they smell
of him still, a sweet Courtier.


Not one man among so many Ladies?
Not a Gentleman-Vsher? Nor a Page?
How shall we do Madam?

I beseech your Grace let me be exempted,
If I have committed an offence, deserves your Anger,
Let one of your Lords cut off my head rather, Sign. Dondalo.

Shall we express,
So cold a duty to her highness? Fie Ladies.

You shall but suffer with me: I partake
As much Severity, as any of you shall.

I will expect your duties Lords in silence,
Orpiano, you shall to Ferrara, with
Our daughters picture, your Commissions sealed --
Now fair Ladies,
I hope you're fixd to wait upon Eugenia.
If your restraint be a Burden, it shall be
In her power to enlarge you, and elect
New Friends into your places.

'Tis our Duties
To obey your Grace and her.

Perenott -- Are all things prepared?


They are my Lord.


For once theu let us usher you.


Whether do we go?


I'll tell you.


Whither?


To take Physic Madam.
The Duke has prepared to stay all looseness in your bodies
You must be all fast: stone walls and mortar will bind.

Come follow with a Courage.


I hope we shall be allowed our little Dogs and Monkeyes.


Sweet Madam.


Madam Katherina, they are gone Signior.


Would I had known this before?


The Duke will be censured for this Act.


'Tis very strange, good Lady,
I read a forced obedience in her Eye,
Which hardly held up Rain.

Save you dear Sign. which way went the Ladies?


News, Signior News.


I beseech you I may partake.


Have you forgot there was suspicion
She affected Signior Philenzo the Cardinals Nephew?

Alas poor Gentleman, he suffers for it.


By this restraint he would make her sure, his jealo^
Is not yet over -- Signior Morello, is your locke rectified,
You have mist your Lady but a hairs breadth.

Nay, but my Lords and Gentlemen, where are the
Ladies gone indeed?

We have told you.


What, committed to New Prison:


Very true, Signior.


Our dancing days are done, shut up close, not
A man must enter.

Would I were a Mouse then -- why, but is the Duke mad*


Take heed what you say Signior: though we be no Informers, yet walls have
Ears.


Ears? Would I had left mine behind me, here's
News indeed!

And y*ad come a little sooner, you might ha taken your leave, but 'twas your
Barbers fault.


Would he had left me in the suds an hour ago! What shall we do Gentlemen,
'tis a hard case, when a man that has an intention to marry and live honest --

How now, what art thou?


Any thing, nothing: yet a man, yet no man for I want.


What? You are no Capon I hope.


Money sir, will you spare any from your precious sins.


You are very free.


Yet Sir I am in debt.


What dost owe?


Nobody harm.


Whence came --


I dropped from the Moon.


So me thinks, thou talk very madly --
You have much humour in thee.

Ha ye any thing to do that ye account impossible Gentlemen.


Why, wilt thou do it?


And you'll pay for it. Let me have money enough and I'll do any thing.


Hold, hold.


Yes I will hold.


I'll lay with thee, what wilt hold --


Why Paradoxes.


Paradoxes!


I hold you a Paradoxe.


Let's hear some.


There are no beasts but Cuckolds and Flatterers; no cold weather but in the
Dog-dayes; no Physic to a whore, no fool to an Alderman, no Scholar to a
Justice of Peace, nor no Soldier to a Belt and Buff Jerkin.


A smart fellow.


The Duke.


So my fears are over, in her restraint I b^ry all my
Jealousies: -- How now? What fellows this?

Such an Humorist as I never before converst withal: it seems he makes
himself free of all places.


What would he have?


Thy pardon mighty man, if it be no Treason to pray for thee, save thee, wilt
employ me? 'Tis Vacation, and I want work, ask me not what I can do, let me
have money enough, and I'll do any thing.


You have your Senses?


Five, the small Birds dare not peep for him, I take it: I can see greatness
big with an Impostume, yet towering in the Air like a Falcon: I can hear a
man swear I am thy Eternal Slave, and will serve thee: when if opportunity
were offered, for price of a Plush Cloak, he will be the first shall strip thee
to the very Soul: I can taste wine that another man pays for, and relish any
thing that comes of free cost: I can smell a Knave through a Bared Gown, a
Politician, through a Surplace; a Fool, through a Scarlet out-side: I can
touch a Wench better then a Lute, and tell money with a Secretary, to show I ha
lost my ^eeling: tush, all's nothing, I have a humour to do some thing to be
talked on, nothing can come amiss to me, let me have money enough, and my life
to a cheese payring, I'll do any thing.


You'll except somewhat.


Not to do over the Seven Wonders of the World, and demolish 'em when I ha
done, let me have money enough, what star so high, but I will measure by this
^acobs staff: Divine money, the Soul of all things Sublunary, what Lawyers
tongue will not be tipped with silver, and will not money with a Judge make it a
plain Case, does not gowty Greatness find ease with Aurum palpabile, and he's
a slight Physician cannot give a Golden Glister at a dead lift: -- Money, I
adore thee, it comes near the nature of a Spirit, and is so subtle it can
creep in at a Cranny, be present at the most inward Councels, and betray em:
Money, ^t opens locks, draws Curtains, buys wit, sells Honesty, keeps
Courts, sights Quarrels, pulls down Churches, and builds Almeshouses.


A wild fellow.


Will your Grace have him punished for this insolence?


No, his humour is good mirth to us; whence art?


I am of no Country.


How?


I was borne upon the Sea.


When?


In a Tempest I was told --


A blustering fellow.


Thy Name.


Rolliardo.


And how long hast thou been mad thus?


Your Highness may be merry-and if you have no
Employment for me, I am gone.

Stay we command you, and bethink again,
What to except in your bold undertaking.

I except nothing, nothing Duke, it were no glory
Not to be general, active in all, let me have Money
Enough and I'll do any thing.

You shall.


Will your Grace set him aworke?


Name the Action.


What say you to a Lady?


I will fall upon her, as Iupiter on Danae, let me have a shower of Gold,
Acrisius brazen Tower shall melt again, were there an Army about it, I would
compass her in a Month or dye for it.


Ha? -- A Lady without guard would try your wit, and money to get her Love.


A toy, a toy.


Through a Credulity, you may too much
Traduce the Sex, and merit such a Justice
No Money will buy off: -- admit some Branches
Grow not so straight and beautiful, as Nature
Intended them, will you disgrace the stem
Or for some woman's Le^ity, accuse
That fair Creation? Money buy their Love
Promise a Salary of that sacred flame
Themselves cannot direct, as guided by
Divine intelligence.

Your Highness Pardon; if you prohibit I must not undertake, but let me have
freedom, and Money enough (for that's the Ci^cle I walk in) and if I do not
conjure up a spirit hot enough to inflame a frozen Lucrec^ bosom: make Mummy
of my flesh, and sell me to the Apothecaries: try me with some Master piece; A
woman's Love is as easy as to eat dinner without saying Grace, getting of
Children, or going to bed drunk: Let me have Money enough, and tax me to the
purpose.


He's constant.


Admit there be a Lady, whom a Prince
Might Court for her Affection; Of a Beauty,
Great as her Virtue, add unto them Birth,
Equal to both, and all three but in her
Not to be matched -- Suppose this Miracle
(Too precious for mans Eye) were shut up, where
A Guard more watch ull then the Dragons; did
F^rbid access to mankind: -- Men picked out
Betwee^e whose Souls and Money were Antipathy
(...) that which we know; and you as soon
M^ght bribe to be a Saint: -- what would you do
With your enough of money, were your life
Engaged to win her Love?

The sky may fall, and Aldermen cry Larks
About the City.

The fellow's impudent: Sirrah, thou hast landed thy self upon a Rock, you
shall have sense of what you would contemn, a Life: put on a most fortified
resolution, you shall need it; we have a daughter thus locked up --


What does the Duke mean?


A Virgin.


He is in Passion.


Shalt not engage thee on a work so much
Impossible as procurement of her Love,
Make it appear with all the Art thou can
Get but access to her; a Month we limit
But take heed Boaster, if you fail; your Life
Shall only satisfy our charge, and teach
All other Mountibanks to be at distance,
With such bold undertakings: you shall expect
A severe Justice:
By this, I shall try the Fidelity of those are trusted.

'Tis a match, I shall have money enough?


You shall. What d'yee call enough, yet it shall be under 20. thousand Crowns:
I will not leave the Pawn here, for twice so much.


I will not be particular and agree of the Sum, you look I should dye if I
perform not, and I'll look to be merry and want nothing while I live, I'll not
take the Advantage on you, because I hope to receive credit by it: if I use now
and then a round sum set me up of the Ticket for it, but who shall pass his
word if I do this feat, you'll let me keep my head a my shoulders.


Our royal word secure thee.


'Tis enough.


What security can your Grace expect for his foorthcomming, if he fail.


We ha studied that,
'Tis but the loss of some superfluous Crowns,
Let the end carry what success Fate please,
All the expense will not be lost, to try
The faith of those we shall employ in this;
Our Citie's strong, the River that invirons
On three parts, shall be carefully attended,
A wall makes safe the fourth, which shall be guarded
Our Vigils shall be so exact, he shall
Deserve his liberty, if he escape us,
We are constant Sir.

Would he might pay for his curiosity.


I'll wait upon your Highness for some earnest: I have a Month good, let me
have fair play and my bargain Money enough, if I do come short, let my head
be too heavy for my shoulders; if I do more then is expected, you'll believe
it possible hereafter: when a man has money enough he may do any thing.


Maintain your humour still -- attend us.


Here's a mad fellow, does he mean to get into the Ladies?


It seems so.


Or I wud not be in his taking when the Moon chages.


Our best course then is to observe and humour him, he may have a trick more
then we know; he seems to be a good Fellow, let's be drunk together, and get
him to confess it -- ha?


A match.


Like orrand Knights our valiant wits must wrestle
To free our Ladies from the enchanted Castle.

D'Yee think this Hair
And habit will sufficiently disguise you,
From your inquiring Creditors?

No question,
Have you dispersed my Bills about the City,
Does every public place carry the scroll,
As I commanded?

I have been careful.


What do they say abroad, do they not wonder?


They are stricken dumb at reading, he that has
The use of tongue, employs it to express
His admiration of your Art, your deep,
Invisible Art.

There's hope then we shall prosper,
In this believing Age, Jtaly is full
Of Juggling Mountibanks, that show tricks with oils,
And powders, here an Emperick dares boast
Himself a Paracelsian, and dawbe
Each Post with printed follies, when he went
A'th ticket with some Midwife, or old woman
For his whole stock of Physic, here a fellow
Only has skill to make a handsome perewig,
Or to sow teeth in the gummes of some state Madam,
Which she coughs out again, when so much phlegm
As would not strangle a poor flea, provokes her,
Proclaims himself a rectifier of Nature,
And is believed so, gets more by keeping
Mouths in their quarterly reparations,
Then knowing men for all their Art, and pains
In the cure of the whole body -- shall we doubt
To be made rich, rich Carlo, by our Art
Whereof I am the first and bold Professor
In Jtaly, we shall grow fat and purchase,
Dost not think so?

To go invisible
Who will not learn at any rate.

True Carlo.
There may be in the throng of our admirers,
Some will presume't above the power of Art
To make men walk and talk invisible.
But we can clear the mystery, and make
Mantua in the proof acknowledge it
A matter feasible -- here's some Customer
Ha? 'Tis the Humorist, the Vndertaker,
The Bird I spread my Art for, he has money
Enough, and's apt to prove a fortune to me.

So the Covenants are sealed, I am like a famous Cathedral with two ring of
Bells, a sweet Chime a both sides, now 'tis noys'd I ha money enough, how many
Gallants of all sorts and Sexes court me, here's a Gentleman ready to run
himself in the Kennel, for hast to give me the Wall, this Cavalier will kiss
my hand, while the other Signior c^inckles in the hams, as he were studying new
Postures against his turn comes to salute me. As I walk, every Window is
glazed with eyes, as some triumph were in the street; this Madova invites me to
a Banquet for my discourse, the other Bona roba sends me a Spark, a third a
Ruby, a fourth an Emerald, and all but in hope to put their Jewels to usury,
that they may return again with precious Interest -- Thus far it goes well,
very well, what's next-


Save you Signior.


What art thou?


One appointed by fate to do you service Sir.


But I gave fate no Commission to take you up for me, I ha more followers then
the Duke already, prithee have me commended to the Lady Destinies, and tell 'em
I am provided.


Mistake me not, he speaks to you, has power
To make you happy.

Prithee make thy self happy with a warm suite first, thy house is but
poorly thatched, and thou be so good at making happy, why hast no better
clothes.


'Tis no felicity, or admit: the Sun
Dispenses a rich warmth about the World
Yet hath no heate it self.

Philosophie.


To omit circumstance, I know what you
Have undertaken to the general
Amazement: upon penalty of death,
You must procure access to the fair Princess,
'Tis in my Art to help -- to perfect what
The Duke holds so imposible.

How can thou assist me.


Although my outside promise not, my brain
Is better furnished, I ha gained by study
A secret, will advance the work you labour with,
I'll teach you Sir to go invisible --

How? t'hast no cloven foot, I sent brimstone, and thou be a Devil tell
me.


I trifle not, I am a man, whose fame
Shall out-liue time, in teaching you this Mystery
For which I must expect reward -- you are,
(Loud noise procla^mes it) able, can pay me
Out of the Dukes Exchequer, being your self
His walking treasury.

You'll teach me to go invisible you say.


I can, and with your safety, for I deal not
With magic, to betray you to a Faith
Black and Satannicall, I abhor the Devil.

Very like so.


Which some have conjured into a Ring,
To effect the wonder, I admit of no
Suffumigation, incense offered to
Infernal Spirits, but by Art, whose Rules
Are lawful and Demonstrative --

You think I admire you all this while -- Hark, when did you eat? or do you
hope again, that you are put to this pitiful and desperate exigent. I see you
my would be Invisible, fine Knave.


Do ye mock me, Sir?


I'll tell you a better project, wherein no Courtier has prefool'd you. Stick
your skin with feathers, and draw the rabble of the City for pence a piece to
see a monstrous Bird brought from Peru, Baboons have past for men already,
been taken for Usurers, i'their furred Gowns and Night-caps, keep a fool in
pay, to tell the multitude of a Gentle faith, that you were caught in a
Wilderness, and thou may be taken for some far Country Howlet.


Do you despise my Art?


Art? but such another word, and I shall mar the whole expecta^ion of your
invisible tra^ique, in, to your nest; and leave me, distinguish men before you
practise on 'em, 'tis wholesome caution.


I leave you to the misery of your unbeleefe, when you hear of me hereafter,
you will curse your fortune to have thus neglected me, fare you well, Sir.


This is Perenotto Captain of the Guard.


Not yet attempted you?


We have not seen him my Lord.


He's here.


Is that he that has gold enough? would I had some of his yellow hammers.


D^ee hear, you are one of the List.


A poor Halberd man Sir.


Poor? hold thee, there's gold for thee: -- thou woo't be honest now?


O yes Sir.


Not a penny, and thou had not been a fool, thou would ha bin a Knave, so
thou might have got by me, yet by those scurvy legs there's ^oe hope thou't
be coverted at all adventures take it.


I will be what you please Sir.


Tell me what condition is that Sign. of? is he rich?


He loves money.


Come? Shalt be my Pensioner -- here's more gold for ^


D'yee make question of that Sir? he bought his Office, therefore may sell his
Conscience, he has sold 200. on's twice over, he was brought up at Court, and
knows what belongs to his place, I warrant you.


Good.


Am I not a Knave now Sir?


I like thee.


To your cost: -- I hope you wo'not tell him what I say: but if you do, and he
chance to turn me out of my office, your gold is restorative.


To your stations, and be circumspect.


Noble Sir, you are the only man I have Ambition to honour.


I should be proud to merit such a Phrase.


'Tis in your power to oblige my Soul -- we're private,
I am jealous of the Wind lest it convey
Our noise too far: This Morn I had some traffic
With a Jeweller, and if my Judgment err not,
He has richly furnished me.
What says your Lordship to this Diamond?

'Tis a glorious one.


Does it not sparkle most divinely Signior,
A row of these stuck in a Ladies Forehead,
Would make a Persian stagger in his Faith,
And give more Ado^ation to this Light
Then to the Sun beam: I ha fellows to 'em
A Nest of bright ones.

This Box is studded like a frosty Night with stars
You have out bid their Value, make me a gainer
In changing them for your commends.

How Sir.


I'm serious.


I never shall deserve this Bounty, if
You'd point me out some service to begin my gratitude --

You have a Noble Soul
I'll teach you how to merit more.

I am Covetous of such a knowledge.


Make but my path a smooth one to the Princess,
I am brief, you know my undertaking.

So I should be a Traitor.


It comes not near the question of a life: do it I'll enable you, to buy another
Dukedom, State, and Title.


Although 'twere necessary in the Affairs
Of such high consequence to deliberate,
Yet for this once, I'll be as brief as you,
I wo'not do it.

How?


No indeed Signior, you shall pardon me
At this time, and I'll keep your Jewels too
For they are gifts: hereafter you will know me
So fare you well Sir.

Was I not told this Officer was corrupt?
I want Faith to believe the Miracle.
Sure he does but jest with me, ha?

The Guard will accept no money.


What an ago do we live in, when officers will take no bribes.


Not the Golden one.


Here's Rolliardo.


I'm quite lost.


'Tis he.


Yet he keeps my jewels, there may be some hope
I'll to him again, 'tis but his modesty
At first not to see me easy, he must be courted
Statesmen like Virgins first, should give denial,
Experience and opportunity make the trial.
Save you Gallants.

And you go thereto: save your self, you are in a worse pickle then we are.


And how i'st we Seignior?


Do you thrive in your hopes?


I do not despair Gentlemen, you see I do not wear my hat in my eyes,
crucify my arms, or entreat your Lordships brain to melt in a Petition for
me.


I did but jest, I know you have a way to the wood in your Pericranium, what
is't we are honest simple minded Lords.


I think so.


Nay nay, impart.


We tell no tales.


Wooed we were whipped and we do.


Why shall I tell you -- you are three.


Very secret --


Co^ecombes.


How?


A miserable leash of Court Mimics.


Mimics? what's that.


You perfumd Goats.


Oh is that it, I never heard what a Mimic was before.


Dee think I am so wretched in a point that concerns my life and honour, to
trust my ways and purposes to you that have no souls.


No souls.


Peace how comes he to know that?


Why hast thou none?


'Twas more then ever I could see in my self yet.


Things that have forfeited their Creation, and had not your Tailors took
compassion on you, you had died to all men's thoughts, who long since wod ha
forgotten that ever there were such things in Nature.


Shall we suffer this?


Yes, and make legs, in token of your thankefullnesse, if I were at leisure, I
would make you show tricks now.


Do I look like a Johnanapes?


But I wonot.


It were not your best course.


How?


Alas Sir I should but shame my self, and be laughed at before all this
Company.


When you see me next avoid me, as you would do your poor kindred when
they come to Court. Get you home, say your Prayers, and wonder that you come
off without beating, for 'tis one of my Miracles.


Had we not better a gone to Tavern, as I plotted at first, he could not ha
been more valiant in his drink.


Im'e glad hes gone.


I know not what to make on him.


Make on him quotha, he made little reckoning of us, but and he had not gone as
he did, I should ha made


What?


Urine in my breeches -- he sqeezed me, I think I was ready to melt'o, both
sides.


But hark you Signior, we forget the Ladies still


Well remembered.


Lets consult to purpose about that -- shall we?


No, every one think what he can by himself, my thoughts shall be private,
and not free at this time; every one scratch his own head.


And he that gets the first hint, communicate --


A match.


Let me see -- umh.


What if I did -- nothing, my brains are dull.


Ten to one, but if I did -- let it alone, a pox on it, I were best drink some
Sack, they say it helps invention.


O rare.


Rub rub, out with it.


No, 'tis gone back again, I drunk buttered Sack this Morning and it slipped
back when 'twas almost at my tongues end -- but it was a delicate project,
whatsoever it was.


Recover it with thy finger.


Follow it Morello.


Now, now, now, let me alone -- make no noise, 'tis coming again, I have it, I
have it --


Hold it fast now.


Loose it not, thou art great with wit, let us deliver thee, what, is't?


Some wiser then some.


Wilt not tell us?


Did not promise.


No hast -- as occasion serves -- it cost more then so yet you may know it.


Well said.


Hereafter, but not now -- away, do not tempt me I will eat the sweat of my
own brain, O rare! never was such a strain of wit invented. -- Dee hear,
Gentlemen; if you will command me any service to the Ladies, I do purpose to
visit em -- with quirk -- hey.


How?


Marry do I.


Nay Morelle.


Gentlemen, as I told you, if you have any thing to the Ladies, before I go I
am the messenger, -- there is a crotchet and so forth -- a carwhichet is found
out - your ears -- I will do such a stratagem as never the like was heard of
in the world. -- Oh rare. --


Hes mad.


So am I, that he is so reserved
What shall's do.

Save you Signiors, pray where abouts is the sign of the invisible man.


The invisible man.


Cry ye mercy now I see it.


See it he does more then we can, the Gentleman's mistaken, here's no such
sign, yet he went in there.


He has better eyes then we to distinguish it.


This, It his is it.


What is it pray?


Whats that to you?


In courtesy we ask:


Then by the sign this is the house, whether I am going to enquire for a
Gentleman that teaches men to walk invisible.


That wo'd be seen, this is news.


News, either you have slept long, or you are Gentlemen of very small
intelligence, examine the next paper you see advanced, and inform your selves,
farewell Gallants.


He's entered there to.


Teach men to walk invisible, a very fine trade.


Would 'twere true, we should desire no other device to get into the Ladies.


'Tis impossible -- see, see, more Gentlemen, prithee lets to him, this will
be a trick worth our learning.


Stay, we are not acquainted, lets knock first.


Your pleasures Gentlemen.


Pray Sir, what signs is this?


The invisible man Sir.


Man, I see no man.


Here's nothing but a cloud.


Right Sir, and he's behind it, the mans invisible.


Pretty faith, It may be the man in the Moon for ought weeknow.


Would ye any thing with my Master.


He does teach to walk invisible they say.


He is the only Professor of the miraculous invisible Art.


May we change a little discourse with him.


There are some Gentlemen with him -- but i'll tell him, I am prevented, he's
coming forth himself.


Signior Altomaro I take it.


'Tis my name Sir, a poor Artist, not warm in these parts of Italy.


And you were not too busy Sir --


Please you walk in, I am now alone, your persons will grace my poor
habitation.


We saw 4. or 5. enter but now.


I ha dispatch 'em they are fresh departed.


Which way.


Here's not a man, are they not sunk, came they out here?


Upon my credit Sir no other way.


Then they went invisible.


Right Sir, they came hither to that purpose, their designs required hast.


This man can do it I see already.


Sir if you can assure us this invisible walking, for we are not so ignorant
as we seem, we ha seen the Play of the Invisible Knight, and --


That of the Ring too, ha ye not.


Yes.


The one was Magic, and the other an imposture, what I do is by Art fair and
natural, are you in debt and fear arresting, you shall save your money in
protections, come up to the face of a Sergiant, nay walk by a Shoal of these
mankind horse-leaches, and be mace proof. If you have a mind to rail at 'em,
or kick some a their loose flesh out, they shannot say blacks your eye, nor
with all their linces eyes discover you: would you see when the Mercers abroad,
how his man plays the Merchant at home with his Mistress silkeworme, and deals
underhand for commodity -- would your self talk with a Lady in secret, sit
down, play with her, ravish a Diamond from her finger, and bind her soft wrist
with a bracelet, kiss her abroad, at home, before her servants, in the
presence of her jealous husband, nay truss her up, when the tame Lord is a bed
with her, and to his eyes be vndiscovered as the wind Signior -- do you
suspect your Mistress plays double? would you hear how she entertains the
t'others love, and know what she does in the closet with the smooth Page --
would you be present at secret Counsels, betray letters, see how such a Lord
paints his thighs, this perfume his breath, the other marshall his fine French
teeth, see this Statesmans eyes put out with a bribe, how that officer cozens
the Duke, and his Secretary abuses 'em both, this Lawyer takes fees a both
sides; while the Judge examines the fertility, and price of the Manor, before
the witnesses and then decrees who shall have the Land? would you see justice
employ her scales to weigh light Gold, that comes in for fees or corruption,
and flourish with her sword like a Fencer to make more room for causes 'ithe
Court.


All this and more may be done, if we can but go invisible, but how can you
assure us of that. I would fain see any man go invisible once.


See him Sir?


Video pro intelligo I mean Sir.


Nay Sir you need not distinguish, for it is possible to see a man invisible
observe me, you see me now perfectly, in every part, if I should walk before
you without a body.


How?


My head only visible and hanging in the Air like a Comet.


That were a strange sight?


Sometimes nothing shall be seen but my arm, another while one of my legs,
hopping without a body.


This is admirable.


When I please I will have nothing conspicuous, but my hand, nay, perhaps my
little finger.


Do not you conjure then?


Come you will cast a mist before our eyes.


'Tis a Mystery indeed but a safe one Signiors.


Why look you Sir, if you will be pleased that we may see you first walk
invisible, we shall not only credit your Art, but at any rate be ambitious to
be your Disciples.


Why Gentlemen, you speak but Justice, you shall have experiment. I will be
invisible first, but as to other in this kind, I will not demonstrate without
half in hand, let me have 50. Crowns apiece, ^le point you a day when I will
be invisible*


Can you not do it presently.


I can be invisible in a twinkling, but what assurance can you have, that I am
here at the same instant, when you see no part of me, I may deceive you.


He says true.


I do purpose therefore to give you reality and proof, for I will walk
invisible, all but -- my hand.


Your hand?


Only my hand, you shall touch it, see every line in it, and the rest of my
body be to you invisible, this will require a little time for preparation, and
when with the consent of your eyes and understandings, I keep my promise in
this point, you will think your monies well expended to be taught the Mystery.


This is very fair.


The crown shall be ready Sir.


Expect'em within this hour.


At your own pleasures, ha Rolliardo? I must not be seen Gentlemen.


Farewell incomparable Signior -- what luck had we to light upon this Artist,
he shanot publish it, we'll buy the whole secret at any value, and then get him
remove into some other Province, who's this.


Am not I mad, sure I am, though I do not know it, and all the World is but a
Bedlam, a house of correction to whip us into our senses, I ha known the time
when jewels and Gold had some virtue in'em, the generation of men now are not
subject to corruption; Democritus the Worlds refined.


'Tis Rolliardo, he looks Melancholy, lets have a fling at him, give you joy
of the great Lady Sir, which is the next way to the Moon pray?


Bolt upright Mnskat, and if you make hast you may be one of her Calves, next
time she appears, you shall see her beckento you, with a pair of horns, just
a'the size of those are preparing for your forehead, my precious animal.


Ha, ha, ha, the fellows mad.


Can you tell Sir, what became of all the Swallows, Cuckoos, and small birds,
we had here last Summer?


Marry Sir they went to Sea, to aide the Cranes, and there have bin mustering
ever since, but for want of a Woodcock they ha left behind 'em, they dare not
venture upon the Pigmies, you may do well to overtake the Buzzard and relieve
the Army Sir.


Ha, ha, ha.


I shall be grinnde to death as I walk the streets, 'tis no policy to be dull
and modest -- but let me see, which way to compass my work, and put my self
out of the common laughter the very children will ieere me shortly I think,
and point me out with stones, the precious vndertaker. I might have had more
wit then to run my self into this calamity whom have we next.

The Duke? what stranger's that? I must not seem dejected.


Is this he your Highness discoursed of?


This is the piece made up of all performance
The man of any thing without exception,
Give him but Gold, Kings daughters and their heirs
Though locked in towers of Brass, are not safe from him.
Nay though I play the chimist with my trust
And from a Million of sure confidences
I draw the spirit of honesty into a few,
He can corrupt 'em.

You are my Prince great Sir, and you have spoke
Not much unlike a brave one.

Heel jeer the Duke too


If my head
Come to be paid to you, before Sunne-set
That day when it is forfeit, I ha cleared with you,
And shall depart out of your Royal debt
There's all you can demand, a good sharpe sword
Will make an even reckoning.

He seems confident.


With your Graces leave, let me come to him.


Now a fierce dog.


What came into thy mind, thou daring madman, fool is a word of favour to
thee.


So Sir.


To undertake such an impossible task.


Mushroumpe -- I'll cast away a few words on thee
Had I another life, I'd undertake yet
Though I below in all opinion,
To venture it, with the riches I have spread
To corrupt others, to make thee my parasite,
I would engage my life to wear no steps
To thy white daughter, thou and thy grave Matron
Most humbly should present her, when I was pleased too
For fear I should refuse the sport you brought me.

I never knew man bear his scorn so high, too him some other.


Not I Sir, you shall excuse me, 'twas the last thing I did.


In the position general, i'll not touch him
For money may be said to purchase all things
But to aspire to my good Sovereigns daughter
Of blessed memory.

She's not dead I hope.


There Gold and trash was impudently inferred,
And 'twas a task too insolent, in that point
You'd willingly give a pound of your proud flesh,
To be releast.

I heard a pound of flesh, a Iewes demand once
Twas gravely now remembered of your Lordship -- releast?
Fortune, and courtesy of opinion
Gives many men Nobility of Birth,
That never durst do nobly, nor attempt
Any design, but fell below their Honours.
Cased up in Chambers, scarcely air themselves
But at a Horse-race, or in the Park with Puppets,
That for which I'm your laughter, I speak to
You flattering tribe of Courtiers, to you Glowormes
Is my chief glory, that perhaps being sprung
From humble Parentage, dare yet attempt
A deed so far above me, that sets all
Your Wisdoms in Combustion, you may think
I've made a sorry bargain for my life,
Let Scorners know in aiming at her only
My memory after death, receives more honour
Then all your marble Pinnacles can raise you,
Or alabaster figures, whiter far
Then ere your souls were, and that hour I dye
If you dare look upon me, without fainting
(Which I much fear) you shall see death so scorned,
I mean for any terror, you shall think him
My slave to take my upper Garment off.

I told your Highness -- How you should find him.


A brave Resolution.


Be this the Prologue to the mirth, my Lord
Attends to entertain you; set on, we'll leave him. Ha, ha, ha.

Sir, I observed you Noble, and not apt
To throw derision on me with the rest,
Which does encourage me, to ask you a question.

Name it Sir.


Pray what strange'rs that walked with the Duke?


'Tis an Ambassador from Florence Sir.


An Ambassador, his design I pray?


To treat of Marriage betwixt our Princess
And the great Dukes son, desired much by our'Master
Who has some hope,,t'wilbe effected too.
Has brought rich presents to her.

This is all.


You have it freely.


Y'aue honoured me, married to Tuscany? so, if my ambition had been fortunate,
I might have been his taster, but my stars want influence, they are too
dull, and weary of my fate, Rolliardo then must forfeit, why that's the worst
on it, I will make a glorious blaze in death, and while I live, make the Dukes
treasure pay for it, nor shall he accuse me, I exhaust him poorly, i'll study
out some noble way to build me a remembrance. ha. -- a Church or College?
Tedious, my glass has but few sands, I must do some thing I may live to
finish: I have it, I will send to all the prisons ith City, and pay the poor
men's debts for 'em: the world wants such a President: I ha money enough since I
fail in my other ends, I will do some good deeds before I dye, so shall I be
more sure of Prayers, then if I built a Church, for they are not certain to
continue their foundation, fate I despise thee, I sink under no cheap and
common action, but sell my life too Fame, in catching my death by so brave an
aspiring.

If I obtain a Monument, be this all
Write on my grave. This man climbe'd high to fall.

Come Gentlemen, we must watch still, that none run away with the Princess.


He must have an excellent stomach, that can break these stone walls to come
to her.


Beside this moveable wall of flesh which we carry.


One makes toward us, -- 'tis a Lady.


So, now am I as valiant as Hercules, when he turned spnister, great Iupiter,
the patron of scapes, assist my petticoat, and at my return, I will sacrifice
my linnen-breeches to thee, -- here be the men, the men of mettle, now Venus I
beseech thee, and they be men they will let a Lady enter without many
questions.


Save you sweet Lady, your affairs this way?


I go but in to the Princess.


From whom?


From the Dukes Grace.


What may be your Ladyships name?


I never thought to give my self a name -- my name is Madam -- um. My name is
something an odd name, but -- I do not stand upon it -- my name's Thorne.


Indeed Madam Thorne, if his Grace have sent you to such a purpose, you must
show something for our discharge.


Why hark you it was but forgotten, of the Duke to send his signet -- but I
ha brought some of his Highness deputies wo'mee, I hope that will satisfy.


By this gold, breeches


No, they are but silk -- here will be sport, I have a hint already.


Say you so? 'Tis very well -- but Madam, we are many, and we would be loath to
venture -- deal ingeniously sweet Lady, have you no more gold in your
breeches?


Not a doyt, as I am virtuous and sinful.


Pass -- but do ye hear -- and you should not be secret now.


As I am a Gentleman.


A Gentleman? dost hear him? i'll put him to it.


I have left some Crowns with your fellow.


Tush, that wo'not satisfy me.


Indeed, I ha no more money.


You have commodity, hang this transitory gold -- give me -- what's this?


Nothing but a wart a'my little finger.


A wart, let me see it.


'Tis a Diamond, 'twas my Mothers Legacy -- or else


Is it your will I should have it?


It was my Mothers will I should wear it, her Ghost will haunt me, and I
should give it away.


You know the way back Lady.


You will give me my gold again.


Not a doyt, as I am virtuous and sinful, stand with him for a toy, and know
you've no warrant from the Duke, 'tis in our power.


Do ye hear Sir, and it were a Diamond of gold you should have it.


Lady, I kiss your hand.


You've kissed the Ring of a my finger Ime sure.


Use your fortune, pass.


If I get to the Ladies, some body shall pay for this, that's my comfort.


Can you wrestle Madam.


Ah -- wrestle Sir, Ladies do not use to wrestle.


They are thrown down with their good wills then, come you and I will have a
bout, I must hug your little body.


Humour him, and you're past danger.


Wod you ha me tear my clothes?


I'll persuade him.


To tell you true Madam, this fellow is an abominable Lecher, there is no
scaping him without a fall, a very Satire, he leaps all comes near him, if
your Ladyships modesty can dispense with a private favour -- you understand;
for our parts, we are satisfied otherwise, and our lips are sowed up, take him
a 'toside, and see how you can mollify him, he's a Cock a the Game, and will
tread you and you were ten Thorns.


Mollify him, doth he use Ladies so, he will mollify me.


And you were his sister, all's one to him, the Devil is not more hot and
Robustious, where he finds opposition to the sport; therefore the Duke made
choice of him, as suspecting some Lord might come disguised a this fashion, to
prevent dishonour to the Princess and Ladies -- use your own discretion.


What will become of me, if he be such a Wencher he'll ravish me, and discover
all, what a Rascal was I to venture thus, i'll give thee my Fan to persuade him
-- help, help.


Nay then.
Why how now? Breeches?

This is a man.


Sure 'tis a woman.


To tell you true Gentlemen, I am neither a man nor a woman, I am an
Hermaphrodite.


How? an Hermaphrodite? What would you do among the Ladies then.


An Hermaphrodite.


Let's search him.


Ah.


Stay let's be advised, if he be such a Monster, our best way is to carry him
to the Duke.


Agreed.


I shall be undone -- d'yee hear Noble friends 'tis but a folly to dissemble,
I am no such thing, I am no Hermaphrodite, I am a friend of yours.


Of ours.


Your Name, I beseech you.


I did but jest all this while, the Duke himself put me upon it, to see whether
I could cozen you, my Name's Morello.


Signior Morello, 'tis not possible.


As I am virtuous, I am, I am no Hermaphrodite, no matter for the Gold or
Diamonds tis your own -- i'll acquaint his Grace how careful I found you, and
if he do not reward you beside, i'll say he's the poorest Duke in
Christendom: I'll tell him presently.


Noble Signior wee'le wait upon you to him.


No, no, 'tis better for me to go alone.


Your pardon, you shall tell him how careful you found us wee'le relate to him
how cunningly you carried the business.


Nay d'yee hear Gentlemen.


It must be so Sir, come sweet effeminate Signior.


Y'aue done me a noble office Signior in this
Discovery, where now lives her banished Lover?

My kinsman lives in Florence, but 2. days since
I received letters from him.

In Florence too?


Sir you may censure me,
But my affection to the iniurd Lord,
And not without respect unto the Honour,
Of your Master too, hath bin the cause of
My free Language.

Trust me Signior
We are all engaged to study you a recompense,
But Mantua was unjust to banish him,
For being too much a Servant.

Sir, when Princes resolve to punish.


Virtue shall be Treason
'Twas tyranny, -- why now is she thus cag'd?

I can conjecture nothing but his jealousy
Which will be ever active, by that Love
We enterchang'd at Pisa, when we grew
Together in our studies -- I conjure
Your Nobleness to silence me.

You will dishonour me by suspicion: -- I am charmed.


My honoured Lord.


Signior Perenotto.


My gentile sparks.


Your servants.


You are all Courtship.


Is your Lordship for this wonder?


What wonder my Lord?


These pair of Gentlemen have discoursed me into admiration, there's one has
undertaken to go invisible.


Invisible?


This hour expected, and in this place.


How?


With a trick that he has.


Do you believe him, Gentlemen.


You shall see it.


We were heretickes in that point, but our understandings are convinced, he
did demonstrate.


And because you shall know the truth of his Art, he will be invisible all but
his hand, what think you of that? the rarest fellow in Christendom.


Nothing visible but his hand.


As sure as we have given him a 100. Crowns in hand.


Why is not the Duke presented with this novelty.


He's travailing to the Emperor first, only as he goes for our sake, he will
show us a figgary of his Art.

Here's Rolliardo, he's somewhat costive a the other side wants Faith.


Save you nest of Courtiers, smooth faces, rich clothes, and sublime
complements, make you amorous in sight of your Ladies. Donzell del Ph^bo, and
Rosiclee^ are you there? what pestilent diseases have you got, that you wear
so much musk and civet about you. Oh for a Priest of Cupid to sacrifice you
now, how your breeches would burn like incense, your hair disguised in sweet
powder, leave your bodies in a mist, while your bones were inwardly consuming
with the fire of Dame Venus altar.


The same humorist still.


I heard say, we shall have strange apparitions in the air and yet invisible
wonders, a hand must appear as fatal to some as that hung over the Capital;
for there is a suspicion some ^ses will be iugled empty, and as silent as the
Moon, no bright Sol appearing, nor a piece of pale faced silver in your silken
Hemispheres.


He is an Infidel.


Right Iehochanan, right, my precious Jew, we are all In fidell that wonot
believe the Court catechism - my Lord Ambassador you are welcome from
Florence, does the great Duke pick sallats still, I mean continue his assize,
return into his Exchequer once in seven years the wealth of Tuscany.
Vespasian was held covetous for ordaining vessels to receive the beneficial
public urine, but 'tis Heathenisme among Christians not to hold Dulcis odor
Lucri e re qualib^t.


He's mad.


Signior Perenotto, it has puzzled my understanding, how you can subsist at
Court without making use of the common sins, flattery, and corruption; take
heed, you're a great man, and 'tis ominous to dye in your bed, a sign your
children are like to in herite but weak brains, thou may go to Heaven, but
thy heir had rather thou shouldest make a journey to Erebus, for the proverb
sake, happy is that Son, whose Father goes to the Devil. -- Why when comes
out my Don invisible, may be, he's here already for we cannot see him, what
says my squirrill? thou look dull and Physical me thinks, the crowns will
return again invisibly, never fear it, and how does my grave Gymnosophist
whose ambition is to be registered an honest Lord, though thou be buried upon
alms, carried to Church with four torches, and have an inscription on thy
marble worse then the ballad of the Devil and the Baker, and might be sung to
as wild a tune too. -- Gentlemen, i'll invite you shortly to see my head cut
off, and do only entreat, you would not laugh at me when I am dead, 'twill
show but poorly in you, and I shall revenge it with my Ghost walking.


Either he is very confident to achieve his design or late grown desperate,
he talks so wildly.


I wonder, Signior Altomaro forgets us. Now, now, ye shall hear, this is his
servant I know he is not far off, where is thy Master?


He is invisible -- this Letter is directed to you.


GEntlemen, that you may perceive I deal plainly with you, I am now
invisible; all but my hand, and here it is, you may with ease read every line,
as I promised upon the receipt of your Crowns. -- his hand.


I Sir, 'tis his own hand I can assure you.


Ha, ha, ha.


He does not mean to serve us so, thou dost but jest, where is he invisible.


Here I think, for I cannot see him, nor do I know when I shall, or where he
will be visible again, upon diligent search I found this paper, but my Master is
not to be found.


Then he is invisible indeed.


All but his hand. Ha, ha.


I do incline to believe, that we are cheated.


With a trick that he has. Ha, ha, ha.


You were Heretickes in that point, till he did demonstrate. Ha, ha, ha.


I cannot contain my merry spleen. Ha, ha.


Come my Lord, lets leave them now, to be their own derision.


Signior Morello, ha, ha, ha. How came he in a Petticoat.


Carry me away quickly, they will laugh me out of my little wit.


No, no, do not Gentlemen, remember your selves.


We wonot then.


Morello? I'll wait upon him to the Duke my self.


What wise man in Italy would be in my coat now.


I was costive, and an Infidel, you are Christian coxcombs, and so, while I
see what will become of the mirth, that is gone before, I leave your wise
Signiorships to the mercy of your Garters, which is a speedy way, after a
little time, to make your selves invisible indeed. Fare you well.


Signior Grutti we are gulled.


I always thought he would cheat us, what shall's do, to prevent more
laughter?


I am resolved -- I shall get no more money by him, Gentlemen be not head-hung,
droop not, 'tis in this Sconce, to revenge your selves, and it may be,
recover your Crowns too.


How prithee?


My Master --


Is invisible, we know it too well.


What will you give me, if I discover him to your eyes again, nay give him to
your possession. Give him m^ny.


This.


And this -- oh quickly.


Then first know, my Master is not that man you took him for, no Altomaro he,
but Bonamico the decayed Artist, he that made Properties, and grew poor for
want of Pictures, who for fear of ^is Creditors left his dwelling, and in this
quaint disguise, set up the Trade of cozening such wise Gentlemen as you are.


Bonamico!


The same.


Oh that we could reach him again.


Follow me close, and I will bring you within an hairs breadth of his false
Beard immediately.


That will be excellent.


Nimbly good Mercury, nimbly.


Madam you are too passive, if you be dejected what must we, whose hopes and
blisses depend upon your Fortune.


Oh liberty, liberty; are all the Roman spirits extinct? Never a Brutus in
Nature, to deliver poor Ladies from this Captivity.


Since there is no probability of our enlargement, let's be merry, and despise
our Sufferings, laugh, tell Tales, sing, dance, any thing to cozen our
melancholy.


There are some thoughts that stick upon my memory, I would fain discharge.


Shall we try our Lutes Madam?


And voices if you please.


Yes you may try, they say Music built the walls of Thebes, it were a greater
miracle if you could charm these to fall, I shall never endure to live an
Anchorite thus, and it were not for the happiness that I do sometimes dream
of a man, I should leap the Battlement. Now would I give all my jewels for the
sight of a pair of Breeches, though there were nothing in em.

This but feeds our dullness, shall we dance Madam and stir our selves.


I am for that Music, we shall grow to the ground and we use no more
activity.


With all my heart.


None a your dull measures, there's no sport but in your Country Figures, a
nimble dance will heate, and and make us merry.


Hark, the Bell.


Some news from the Duke.
A Letter Madam and these jewels.

Ha! whence -- from Florence?
This is my fathers practise, i'll peruse the Paper.

I have an excellent hint Ladies of a mirth,
Cannot but please the Princess.

What is't?


It will require every ones endeavour,
What if we play some pretty Commick Story,

A Play?


Shall we?


We? Do not distrust your own performance, I ha known men ha bin
insufficient, but women can play their parts.


I like it, t'wilbe new.


We will not present it to the Princess
But engage her person in the action,
We shall be too few else, some pretty Enterlude
To square with our number -- d'yee allow it.

Willingly.


Come i'll acquaint you with a plot, then instantly: refer your selves to me
for your parts, we can receive no disparagement, our spectators cannot jeer
us, for we'll speak but to the people in the hangings, and they have as much
Judgment, as some men that are but Clothes, at most, but walking pictures.


I shall be ont.


What part will you give me, I'll be a King.


Thou't play a Tyrant bravely.


Let me alone, I'll fit you all I warrant you.


Now our invisible Merchant is cag'd, we may redeem our opinion and pass
again in the rank of discrete Courtiers.


I think now to most of the beholders, he is invisible all but his head, for
he has but a small grate to look out at.


He shall gull no more with his art I warrant him.


Nay, he is like to lye by it, for I hear since, all his Creditors, like so
many Crows have light upon him, and they will leave him but a thin Carcass.


Let 'em pick out his Eyes, what care we.


He sent me an Epistle to take pity on him.


But I hope thou hast more wit then to show thy self a Christian to such a
Rascal as he is.


I returned him my Court complement, that I was sorry I could not serve him: I
would do him any office that strecth'd not to mine own prejudice, that we
had taken order with his Keeper; upon payment of our sums disbursed, he might
be enlarged.


Which is impossible.

Prithee let me see his Letter, in what submissive language the Rogue does
beseech us, -- Most h^oique Signiors, -- good -- I throw my self at the feet
of your mercy, for to your Justice, I beg I may not be made a Sacrifice -- nay,
we'll make him begere we h'adone.


At the grate.


I confess I have done you wrong -- does he so? it shall not serve the turn --
there is no hope I shall ever satisfy you, -- all the better, lye and rot --
if I be known a Prisoner to my Creditors, I am irrecoverably lost, oh
compassionate, a miserable man, who otherwise must soon forfeit his day
light, and dye in a dungeon. Ha, ha, ha.


Save you noble Signiors. --


-- Ha.


*Tis he.


Did he not dye in prison, and his Ghost haunts us, brave! -- 'Tis not he.


When this eternal substance of my Soul, did live inprison'd in my wanton
flesh, and so forth? and how d'yee like Don Andrea Gentlemen; poor snake, but
he has cast his skin, and recovered a new coat of the destinies spinning. The
Bird is flown again.


How the Devil came he at liberty.


And thus Gallant.


The slave does not beg of your Heroic Signiorship, a Court* compassion,
debts must be paid, there is no danger of the grate as the case goes, nor of
forfeiting his daylight in a dungeon, if I mistake not, my illustrious pair of
widgens, my serene smooth-fac'd Coxcombs, whose brains are curdled this hot
weather: will your neat worship sell your cloak, ha? or you that superfluous
double hatched Rapier, there be sommes in Nature to lend you, upon security
that I shall like of.


He jeeres us.


Would we durst beat him.


You see me now Gentlemen perfectly, what if I should walk before you without
a body, my head hanging in the air like a comet.


Would thou were it hanged any way.


Here's Rolliardo too.
Let's be gone.

Or shall I appoint you a day when I will be invisible all but my hand?


No, I thank you Sir, we have some business at this present.


Let's to the prison, and know the wonder better -- Noble Signior.


For your Crowns.


We are glad we had 'em for you, dear Signior talk no more on 'em,


Farewell Phantasmas then -- ha? 'tis he, Sir.


Keep your way.


You do not know me
But I ha brought a life which by your means
Has bin preserved from wretchedness, your Bounty,
Deserves you should dispose it.

What are you.


I was the object of a charity
We seldom meet in Mankind, from a prison
You sent a sum to free me.

Prithee friend, if you have received a benefit, go home, and say thy prayers:
-- I would forget it.


Among many whom your Nobleness enlarged,
I came to make you tender of my service:
Despise not Sir my gratitude.

D'yee mock me?


May my soul want Heavens mercy then: to you,
Next my Creator, I do owe my this Being
I have a Soul is full of thanks, but name
Employment to assure you, and you make me twice happy.

I ha nothing to say to you.


Then I ha something to say to you.


How.


And you shall hear it too, and give me thanks
You've sowed your Charity in a fruitful ground,
Which shall return it tenfold; nay one hundred.
What you have done for me you shall acknowledge
I will deserve to the height.

You are liberal in language.


I'll be active -- off with thissullen face,
It seurvily 'ecomes you, d'yee hear.
I studied for you, since you paid my debts,
Il^ do you a courtesy and save your life,
Which your attempt upon the Princess has
Left desperate, a happy fancy Sir,
If Heaven will please to prosper it, and you
Not be your own enemy to refuse it.

Ha, ha, ha, what mean?


Nay you shall laugh and heartily ere I ha done (...)
The Duke does love his Daughter, sends her all
Rarities are presented to him.

His soule's not dearer to him -- what of that?


Why then you shall be admitted into the Castle of comfort, that's all; the
conceit is in my brain, and would you could as probably get her consent, to
untie her Virgin Zone, as I dispose your access to her: it shall not cost you
much, if I fail, instead of saying of my prayers, I'll curse the Destinies and
dye with you.


D'yee hear, I ha bestowed 300. Crowns already to set your heals at Liberty,
if you do mock me, it shall cost me 500. but I'll ha*you clapped up again, where
you shall howl all day at the Grate, for a meal at Night from the Basket.


You are in earnest now?


Yes.


By all that you have threatened, so am I, have but the patience to walk and
hear me.


Can thy Art procure this?


My Art? Why look you, I made this Watch. I'll bestow it on you.


What to do? to reckon the hours I ha to live.


It sha' not cost me so much trouble as that Toy did to make you master of your
wishes, still if Heaven prosper it: come let's talk privately, you shall ha
the plot.

He that doth many good deeds it may fall,
Among the rest, one may reward them all.
I long to be discoursing it, pray lead the way.

Provide again you mock me not -- come on Sir.


ROllyardo pay his debts? Sure the fellow that never saw much money in's life,
now by the Duke made Master of so many sums, is grown mad with 'em.


Many other he hath discharged they say.


He'll undo the Exchequer, and he hold on, he shall be Chronicl'd for it.


He has some cause to imagine himself short lived, and that makes him so
desperately charitable, toward his end. Signior Perenotto.


Dondolo and Grutti, News, News for ye.


What we beseech you.


You have lost the best mirth in Italy in your absence, your Companion Morello
--


Was carried to the Duke in a Petticoat, in which he attempted a passage to the
sequestered Ladies -- what's the issue.


Mirth in Abundance.


How came he off?


Nay 'tis on still, the Duke to make himself sport, would call a Counsel,
before whom the poor Signior must be arraigned; not to hold you in
circumstance, the Business was merrily discust, the pitiful proiector was
judged --


How, how?


To wear the petticoat for a Month, if he appear without it during the Term,
he incurres his perpetual exile from Court.


Ha, ha, ha.


You may imagine with what variety of lamentable faces, the Courtier heard his
unexpected sentence, some would have pleaded for him but for laughter, which
continued so long and so high, ^hat he had time to collect his scattered
senses, and instead of swooning, which was expected, he grew fortified, and most
humbly besought the Duke, since his sentence had past so definitive, he would
be so merciful, to admit him that course of a Moon to be his Ieaster, that
since he could not shake off the Fools Coat, that he might have that
favourable pretence to keep it on.


Very good --


'Twas easily granted, but ever since, to the astonishment of the hearers, he
is grown so* jocund and airy, nay as if he had been borne with a Song in's
head, he talks everlasting Ballad, no man laughs at him but he lashes him in
Rime worse then a Satyr, the Duke has privileged his mirth, made him
foole-free, and now he plays the Tyrant -- he's here already.


Oyes, o yes, o yes,
If there be any one in City or in Town
Can show me a wise man I'll please him for his pain.

Disgrace has made him witty.


What will you say to him, will show you a wise man?


Marry if he go far, he is not so wise as he should be. Dondolo, Grutti!
Old acquaintance how is't? How is't?


The case is altered with you.


It does appear so, but nothing can make me proud, I'll know my Fellows.


How do you mean Morello?


Your Lordship may make one at Football,
*Tis all the sport now a days.
What other is the world then a Ball,
Which we run after with whoop and with hollow,
He that doth catch it is sure of a fall,
His heals tripped up by him that doth follow.

Do not women play too?


They are too light, quickly down.


Oyes, they are the best Gamesters of all,
For though they often lye on the ground,
Not one amongst a hundred will fall,
But under her coats the Ball will found.
But we be three of old, without exception to your Lordship, only with this
difference, Jam the wisest Fool, for you play the fool in your old clothes,
and I have a new Coat on.


Does it not become him.


Rarely well, do you ever mean to resign it.


'Twere pity but he should have a patent for it, to him and his posterity.


Hark you Gentlemen, d'yee hear the News?


News! what news?


Dee not hear on it yet, why 'tis in a Ballad already.


And thou can sing it?


'Twas well guest, and I can but hit of the Tune.

There was an Invisible Fox by chance,
Did meet with two invisible Geese,
He led e^ a fine invisible dance,
For a hundred crowns a piece.
Invisible all but his hand he would go,
But when it came to be tried,
Not only his hand which was left he did show,
But a fair pair of heals beside.
Invisible since their wits have been,
But yet there is hope of either,
Their wit and their Crowns may return again,
Invisible altogether.

And he continue thus but a Moon, he'll make the Court mad.


Oh 'twill be excellent, since it is not safe for a wise man to speak truth,
'twere pity fools should loose their privilege. -- The Duke.


My Lord.


What is't?


Here's an important Suitor calls himself
An Artist, humbly craves admittance with
A present which he'd tender to your Acceptance,
And if my judgment err not, a most pleasing one.

Let us see him, and his present
It will reward my Daughters patience
Love and Obedience: -- All the Rarities
Ten Kingdoms yield, shall not be thought too weighty,
That she may shift each solitary hour
With a fresh Object.

Bonamico?


Tis he.


By my Love to goodness
It is a Master-piece, 'twill feed the Eye
With plenty of delight.

I am as jocund since I am admitted, I talk as glib
Me thinks, as he that farms the Monuments.

Is't not Sirs?


My Lord, I ha not seen so much delight
In any piece these 7. years.

Where's the Master of this Work?


My Lord,

I am the Constable, that put all these in the Cage, and you may call it a
point of Injustice, for they never kept late hours, though they all wear
feathers, there's not a Rorer amongst em, and yet were they suffered, they'd
fly high, for some of 'em are very lofty minded.


A pleasant fellow too.


Oh my Lord, we're all borne in our degrees to make one another merry, the
Birds make me merry, I make my wife merry, the Fool makes your Courtiers
merry, and the Courtiers make your Grace merry.


And whom do I make merry?


The whole Common-wealth if you govern handsomely.


There's salt in's mirth: --
I'll ha this fellow wait in the Court.

I shall be kicked out by the Pages.


Why so?


Because I cannot flatter.


A conoeyted Thing,
We lack the Humourist Rollyardo here.

We see him in the Court ere while my Lord.


This humour would habin a gadflie to him
And stung him to the quick.

Not altogether so Duke?


Fellow, what Bird is that?


Fellow? -- Cry mercy, I'd forgot you, fellow I'll tell thee, do ye not know
him, tis an Arabian Woodcock, the same that carried a Bunch of Grapes in
January last to Bethiem Gabor.


And what call you this?


This was the Duke of Venice his own Bulfinch,
And taken by the ^urkes.

By the ^urkes say thou? He droopes indeed.


Since his Captivity the Wretch endured
Much misery by the infidel, it had nothing
But bread and water for three Months.

A shrewd Calamity.


I do affect this Fellows prate.


What's this?


This is the Blackbird, which was hatched that day
Gondamoure dyed* and which was ominous
About that time Spinola's Thrush forsook him.

Was this he --


Yes.


And what was this?


This was the Pigeon was so shrewdly handled
For carrying Letters at the siege of Bergen.

Alas pretty Bird --


This a Wagtayle of the City, which a Silkeman
So dearly loved, he called it wife, but could not
(Though in much Jealousy he had cag'd her up)
Keep her from flying out: This was a Rail,
Bred*up by a zealous Brother in Amsterdam
Which being sent unto an English Lady,
Was taken at Sea by Dunkirks -- Name but Rome,
And straight she gapes as she would eat the Pope*
A Bird to be made much on: She and the Horse
That snorts at Spain, by an instinct of Nature
Should ha shown tricks together: I could run over --
But your gracious pardon.

How, our pardon?


I'm now another man, and know my distance.


This man is good at all.


My Buffoone face is off, I did but show
The impudent condition of a Mountebank
That sets off base Toys with miraculous Lies
Thus far I'll boast: they are the only choice
Italy and other parts of Europe yield
For the work if it prove so fortunate
To receive Grace from your divine acceptance
The workeman-ship (so duty suffer not)
I freely tender --

No, that were to quench
The fire in all Deservers -- Fulvio.

My Lord.


Pay the cost double, I'll send it to my daughter.


It takes, as Art could wish it.


I know it is a present, the sweet soul
Will raise much joy in: -- Signior Perenotto --

My Lord.


There are two Birds I ha not ^m'd.


What are they*


A pair of Gulls, which you may share between you.


It shall my Lord.


If Florence now keep touch, we shortly shall,
Conclude all fear, with a glad Nuptial.

Ye like this Story best then?


That of Jupiter and Danae comes near our own.


Be it so, we are all perfect in the plot I think.


You shall dispose the rest.


You will not be ambitious then, and quarrel About the parts, like your spruce
Actor, that will not play out of the best Clothes, and the fine young Prince,
who if he fight, 'tis six to four he kills all and gets the Lady.


We are constant, you shall appoint 'em.


Then Madam without Ceremony, you shall ply Danae, that is shut up in the
Brazen Tower.


Well I'm contented, 'twill suit with my present fortun*


I need not to instruct you in the Character: you shall be the King Acrisius
her father, a jealous, harsh, crabbed man, who in fear of the Oracle, commands
her to be thus enclosed.


So: -- I'll fit you for a Vinegar King.


No matter for Properties --
We will imagi^e Madam you have a ^eard.

What shall I play?


You must be Ladies whom the King leaves to keep her Company, entertain what
humour you please.


This is our own parts indeed.


Ye will play it the more naturally, and let me alone to play the Thunderer,
I'll wanton love it: -- now wh^t your inventions and about it, imagine our Scene
expressed, and the New Prison the Title advanced in form.


The new Prison! why?


O 'tis an excellent Name, where Spectators throng ^ogether; as ours do me
thinks in the Arras already: the Musique ha their part, dispose your selves
for your en^rances, while I speak the Prologue to our mixed audience of Silk
and Cruel Gentlemen in the hangings -- hem.


Let it be a confident Prologue howsoever.


You're welcome to new Prison, we have still,
Our ancient Keeper, and we fear he will
Speak in his old Key too, but do not look for
Choice diet, for alas, we play the Cooke for
All you are like to feed on, let your Palate
Expect at most then, but a Root or Sallat.
Picked from the Prison Garden, we know you are
Indicious Hangings, and well seen, nor dare,
We lift you up (too bold) le^t we incense
Your green and spreading wits with impudence.
As I began, let me conclude in Rime.
Hang Still you learned Critics of the Time.
Now Danae and the Ladies.


Was ever Father to his Child
So unkind, it makes me wild.
When to beguile a tedious hour,
From the top of this high Tower,
I see every other Creature,
Enjoy a Liberty by Nature.
Can the silver running Fountains.
And the Cloud aspiring Mountains.
(...) very Grove, and flowery field,
^ut a new Affliction yield.

This is excellent, she has plaid the part before.


Waste not your self in woeful plaint,
^orrow will not help Restraint.
Think Madam all is but a dream,
That we are in -- Now I am out -- beam, cream.
Help me Katerina, I can make no sense rime to it.

Cream is as good a Rime as your mouth can wi^h, (...), ha, ha.


Does not the Arras laugh at me? it shakes me thinks*


It cannot choose, there's one behind does tickle it.


A dream! Alas 'tis no relief
For us to flatter so much grief.
Fancy wants power to delight,
Or if we could think it might,
Such a dream so sad would make us,
That it could ^ot choose but wake us.

My Lady has helped her pretty well out of her dream.


The Sun with glittering golden Rays,
May appear one of these days.
You know always after Winter,
Comes the Spring and pleasant Summer.

Winter and Summer, ha, ha, ha.


Winter and Summer? By my faith that's w^ll, there's but half a year
between, there be some call themselves Poets, make their Rimes straddle so
wide, a 12. Month will hardly reconcile 'em, and I hope, a Lady may stradle a
little by Poetical Licence.


Madam your father King Acrisius.


Must I enter already -- h^m.


This is his hour to visit us.


How fares our daughter?


What voice is that?


The King speaks through a Trun^e.


How is't heroic Birth, what dullness cold
As Saturnes, dwells on thy forehead, be bold
To give thy grief a Tongue, instruct, child
My paternal Nature, left I grow wild
As the rude North: -- thought of the^ makes my hairs*
Silver, my blood is curdled with my cares.

Most high and mighty Nonsense, sure the King has swallowed Pills, and his
stomach not able to digest 'em, does vomit 'em up again.


Is thy Organ dumb
Or am I grown cheap in Majesty, trivial Fool
Shall I reap crabbed Thistles in neglect for rich Love?

Crabbed Language I am sure.


Sure my Lady does not understand him.


If my brow so sad appear
My Fortunes Livery I wear,

Weep no more, thy eyes pave the ground with pearl.
My power is raced, My Crown thy Tribute Girl*
Here is nothing to want.

Nothing to want indeed: to be
A Prisoner speaks all Misery.

Curse not thy soft Stars, but take thy fair Bliss
With comfort, free from loud noise and Fear, is
Thy gaudy Station, when I have unskrew'd
Mistique Oracles, which not understood,
Do perplex with involved sense,- I shall then
Enlarge thy person Danae, till when
If ought else do clog thy Thoughts, with unkind
Thoughts, unload the dark burden of thy mind.
Pronounce thy grief aloud my amorous Darling
And I will --

Let him choose his Rime I beseech you Madam.


Vh, uh -- cold phlegm obstructs my Language -- barling, carling.


Ha, ha, 'tis time to make an end,
He was almost choked with his own phrase.

And you get me to play an old man again. --


We will have a young one for thee, 21. and a Coat, is a double game: -- my turn
comes next.


He's gone and leaves us behind
To tell our passions to the wind.
Ha? what of the sudden doth surprise
My active motion? On my eyes
What dark and heavy Cloud doth sit,
To persuade me it is Night,
It is some Charm, I cannot keep
These windows open, I must sleep.

This was well passionated, now comes Jupiter To take my Lady napping, we will
sleep too, let the wanton have her swinge, would she were a man for h^r sake.


Let the Musique of the Spheres,
Captivate these Mortal Ears;
While Jove descends into this Tower,
In a golden streaming shower.
To disguise him from the Eye
Of Juno, who is apt to pry
Into my pleasures, I to day
Have bid Ganimed go play,
And thus stole from Heaven to be
Welcome on Earth to Danae.
And see where the Princely Maid,
On her easy Couch is laid.
Fairer then the Queen of Loves,
Drawn about with milky Doves.
To thee let Paphian Altars smoke,
Priests thy better Name invoke.
When Hymen lights his holy fires
Thou that can infuse desires
In the Gods, from thy Lip
Let Jove heavenly Nectar sip.
And translate by kissing thee
Into thy breast his Deity:
But I rob my self of Treasure,
This is but the Gate of Pleasure.
To dwell here, it were a sin,
When Elizium is within.
Leave off then this flattering Kisses,
To rifle other greater Blisses.

The Bell -- News from my Father.


Then your play is interrupted Iove-Madam I'll see.


Beshrew the Belman, and you had not waked as you did Madam, I should have
forgot my self and played Iupiter indeed with you, my imaginations were strong
upon me; and you lay so sweetly -- how now?


A present Madam from the Duke: one of the fin^st pieces of Pageantry that ere
you saw: 'tis a Cage with variety of Birds in it: it mooves on wheels: your
Assistance Ladies to bring it in.


A Cage -- if from Florence it shall to the fire,
Or whences^'re it cannot be intended
But as a Mockery of my Restraint
I'm very sad of the sudden: ha? tis so
Break it to pieces.

'Twere pity Madam to destroy so much Art.


Yet spare the Workmanship, in the perufall
Ther^'s something pleads for Mercy: -- I feel within
Some alteration, I know not what
Let me entreat your absence for some Minutes,
I am in earnest, pray do without Reply.
Your eyes shell feed with plenteous satisfaction
On this gay object, when I call you.

We obey you.


Yet can't I say I am alone, that have
So many Partners in Captivity?
Sweet fellow Prisoners, 'twas a cruel Art,
The first Invention to restrain the wing.
To keep th'Inhabitants of the air close Captive
That were created to Sky freedom: Surely
The merciless Creditor took his first Light
And Prisons their first Models from such Bird Loopes;
I know yo^ Nightingale is not long lived,
See how that Turtle mourns wanting her Mate.
And doth the Duke my Father, think I'can,
Take Comfort either in restraint, or in
The sight of these that every moment do
Present it to me, were these tendered me?
They shall no more be Prisoners to please me,
Nor shall the woods be robbed of so much Musique:

I take you at your word fair Princess,
I am the truest Prisoner, tremble not,
Fear flies the Noble mind, for injury dares not come near.

Sir, what are you?


The humblest of your Servants.


You are not mine, for in this bold Attempt
You have undone me.

You see I keep at distance.


You're too near, I will discover you, th^
I fall my self by your presumption.

Hold, be counselled rather
But to calm Silence for a pair of minutes
And none shall perish, you shall save him too
That would for your sake loose himself for ever.

For my sake? What Relation has my Birth
Or any passion I call mine to you.

Nor doom me unto scorn, I am a Gentleman*
And when my inimitable Resolution
In those Attempts whose very sounds breeds Earthquakes
In other hearers, shall your knowledge fill,
With wonder and amaze; you will at least
Think I fall too low, if I love beneath you.

Ha? this is a strange accident.


Was it less
Then death dear Princess to adventure hither.

It will be death how ever.


You're deceived Lady.


How I'm perplexed.


It had been death
Your sight gives me a Lease of longer life,
My head stands fast.

He speaks all mystery, I shannot get him off I fear without some stain.


The truth is Princess, if you now discover me,
(Tho I made nice at first to put your fright by)
You cannot harm me much, I have done my task,
Do you fear me still? why is there such a space
Betwixt us Lady? -- Can you keep that man
At so unkind a distance, that for your sake
Has in his undertaking swallowed danger
Robbed death, of all his fears.

For my sake.


Yours -- fair Princess, dare you so far trust me yet
To let me (...) your hand.

Audacious Sir,
I shall grow loud if you forget your distance
Nor that you may hold long -- --
I'm studying how I should be rid of him without their
Knowledge: yet that's dangerous too, and might
Show guilt in me, for he will boast on it.

Such was the Duke your gracious fathers care
He would put confidence in none about him,
But saw me brought himself.

This is a fine Paradoxe.


Which must be to high purpose: come be wise
And keep me while you have me, 'tis but reaping
This fruitless Harvest, from my cheek and chin
And you can form the rest, you're young and beautiful
Loose not the blessing of your Youth sweet Princess
Fair opportunity waytes upon your pleasure,
You want but the first knowledge of your joy.
Your Blood is ripe, come I am confident
Your will is but controlled by upstart Fears,
Like advanced Beggars, that will check their Princes,
My safest way is yours, now to conceal me,
It may be thought I have enjoyed you else,
Ill Censure soon takes fire, nay perhaps
To be revenged of your sterne cruelty,
I'll swear my self I have possessed you freely,
Play your game wisely then, your honour lies
Full at my mercy, come, 'tis in your love,
To lead me to a secret Couch.

Bold Villain
For these uncivil most unhallowed words,
I'll dye but I'll undo thee.

Stay and let me circle in mine Arms
All happiness at once, I have not Soul
Enough to apprehend my joy, it spreads
Too mighty for me: know excellent Eugenia
I am the Prince of Florence, that owe Heaven
More for thy virtues, then his own Creation.
I was borne with guilt enough to canc^ll,
My first purity, but so chaste a Love
As thine, will so refine my second being
When holy marriage frames us in one piece,
Angels will envy me.

Ha? the Prince of Florence.


I ha made no travail for so rich a Blessing,
Turn me to Pilgrimage, divinest Beauty,
And when I have put a girdle about the World,
This Purchase will reward me.

Purchase? -- I am not bought and sold I hope?


Give it what name you will, you're mine Eugenia.


Yours Prince? I do not know by what Title you pretend this claim; I never
yet remember that I saw you,

And if I had any interest in my self,
Produce your witness, when I gave it you,
I have possession yet, ere I deliver it,
You must show stronger evidence.

Are we not Contracted?


Contracted? when? where? -- Good Prince I pity your abuse.


'Tis firm between our Fathers.


Mine cannot give away my heart.


Cannot?


Shall not Prince, your travail and your trouble
With this Conceit to boot, were it your own
Invention, withal your Birds about you
That can take me.

Is it my person Madam
You hold unworthy? For my birth and Fortune
Cannot deserve your scorn.

It takes not from
The greatness of your State, or blood my Lord
To say I cannot Love you, since Affection
Flows uncompel'd, and rests in the clear object,
Nor do I rob your person of just value,
If to me other seem as fair, and comely*
For^e may apparel, and become what we
Affect, not cause true Love, you have enough
To promise you a happier choice, attempt
A Nobler Fate, and leave me to my self
And humble Destiny, for know Florentine
I have but one Faith, one Love, and though my Father
Locke up my person, 'tis beyond his Will
To make me false to him I gave my faith to.
And you're not Noble now if you proceed,
Be then what you were borne, and do not tempt
A woman to commit a Sacrilege:
For when I give my heart to any other
Then my Philenzo, I commit that sin.

If you'll not pardon, I'll deliver up.
Philenzo to be punished for this trial -- See Lady.

My dear banished Philenzo!


O let not such a glorious building stoop
It is my duty,

I will make it mine.


I have a double duty, for I owe
Your Constancy as much respect and Reverence*
As your most Princely person.

What for our safety?


Oh with what willingness could I be lost
In this distracted Wilderness of Joy.
To morrow Madam, I go to my Arraignment.

How?


Spend no fear upon it
Your Story shall be pleasing: -- I have much
To tell you -- for your Ladies.

They are mine, what should our innocence
Fear in their knowledge, I desire to hear
The Circumstance of this wonder

It attends,
The Story past; we must some Counsel find,
The puzzle of our Fate, is still behind.

WE are sorry, we gave thee distaste, come let's be friends, you did apprehend
too nicely.


Nicely? it might ha been your own case.


Come, you were unkind to rub us before the Duke so.


Be wise hereafter, and make the Fool your friend, 'tis many an honest mans
case at Court. It is safer to displease the Duke then his Jester, every
sentence the one speaks, (...) (...) make an (...), but let the impudent fool
bark never so absurdly, other men ha the wit to make a Ieast on it, 'tis
policy in State, to maintain a Fool at Court, to reach great men discretion.


Great men, we are none.


No but you may be, by the length of your wit and shortness of your memory,
for if you have but wit enough to do mischief* and oblivion enough to forget
good turns, you may come to great places in time, keep a fool a'your own,
and then you are made --


Made? What?


Cuckolds, if my Lady take ^ liking to the innocent, O your Fool is an
excellent fellow upon all occasions.

Among all sorts of people the matter if we look well in,
The Fool is the best, he from the rest* will carry away the Bell too.
All places he (...) free of* and fools it without blushing
At Masks and Plays, is not the Baize thrust out, to let the plashin*
Your fool is fine, he's merry, and of all men doth fear least,
At every word he Jests with my Lord, and tickles my Lady in earnest:
The fool doth pass the Guard now, he'll kiss his hand and leg it,
When wisemen prate, and forfeit their state, who but the fine fool will beg
it.
He without fear can walk in, the streets that are so stony,
Your Gallant sneaks, your Merchant breaks, he's a Fool that does owe no
money.

The Duke, where is the Duke?


He's forthcomming, there's no more money ith* Exchequer.


I come to give up my accounts and reckon with him, some body tell him so.


And you do not reckon well with him, he'll be even with you, I'll do your
Message.


Do, and say I sent a Fool a my errand prithee, cry mercy, such an Office
would have become either of you Gentlemen.


His tongue moves circular in abuses.


The Duke.


How now, what day is't?


'Tis Holiday.


How?


Therefore we are preparing a Morris to make your grace merry, they have
chosen me for the Hobbyhorse, and if do not deceive their expectation, they
will laugh at me extremely before I dye.


Do you come like one prepared for death?


Not so well I hope, as I may be hereafter, unless you will be uniust* and
have a desire to be clapped into the Chronicles with some^ your Predecessors, for
cutting off heads, when you do not like their complexion, tis but laying one
block upon another, and I am quickly sent of a headless errand.


Unjust do you remember what sommes you owe for, do not jest away your life.


I crave no longer day for it, and I prove not my self free from my
engagements.


How?


For although I had not the art to go invisible as these wise Courtiers nor
could counterfeit another sex so becommingly as the other gaudy Signior, to
introduce me to the Ladies, yet with your Princely licence I may say, 'tis*
done.


Done? what is done.


He's mad sir.


I come not to Petition for a mercy
But to cry up my merit, for a deed
Shall drown all story, and posterity
When it shall find in her large Chronicle
My glorious undertaking, shall admire it
More then a Sybils leaf, and loose it self
In wonder of the action, Poets shall
With this make proud their Muses, and apparel it*
In ravishing numbers, which the soft haird Virgin
Forgetting all their legends, and Love tales
Of Venus, Cupid, and the scapes of Jove
Shall make their only song and in full quire
Chant it at Hymens feast.

What means this boasting?


Rolliardo.


You think I am a lost man; and your gay things
That echo to your passions, and see through
Your eyes all that's presented, do already
Tickle their very souls, with expectation
To see me beg most miserably for life
But you are all deceived -- here I pronounce
The great work done that cancels all my debts
I have had access unto the fair Eugenia
Your Princely daughter, staid, discoursed with her*
More, she has entertained me for her servant.

Sir do you believe him.


Thou hast prophaind a name will strike thee dead,


It cannot be, for if you mean your daughter
'Tis that is my preserver, blessed Eugenia
To whose memory, my heart does dedicate
It self an altar, in whose very mention
My lips are hallowed, and the place a temple
Whence the divine sound came, it is a voice
Which should our holy Churchmen use, it might
Without addition of more exorcisme
Disinchant houses, tie up nightly spirits
Which fright the solitary groves, Eugenia
When I have named, I needs must love my breath
The better after it.

Thou hast undone.
Thy self in the repetition, and in this
Wherein thou cunningly would beg our pity
Thou hast destroyed it, and not left a thought
To plead against our anger, where before
Thy life should have been gently invited forth
Now with a horrid circumstance death shall
Make thy soul tremble, and forsaking all
The noble parts, it shall retire into
Some angle of thy body, and be afraid
To inform thy eyes, least they let in a horror
They would not look on.

I am still the same, and let me be so bold
To plead your royal word, 'twas my security
Nor shall you take mine to induce your faith
To what is done I have more pregnant evidence,
Your highness knows that character.

Ha? 'tis not so, I'll not believe my eyes
Come hither Fulvio, Perenotto read
But not too loud, does she not write to me
It is unjust you let Rolliardo die
Unless Eugenia bear him company.
Give me the Paper.

'Tis counterfeit my Lord, cut off my head
If this be not a Iygge of his invention.

My soul is in asweat. I feel my blood
Heave in my Veins -- he looks as he had seen her.
More my Prophetic thoughts do whisper to me --

Believe it not Sir.


I wonnot -- Perenotto --


I know not what to think.


The Duk's perplexed, observe.


Will either of you speak for me Gentlemen, if the Justice of my cause should
fail me, I'll pay you for it, I know Courtiers that live upon countenance, must
sell their tongues, what is the price of yours pray?


Humble your self you Coxcomb.


Away, and let not him stir I charge you.
This does entrench too much upon her person,
Have my endeavours to preserve Eugenia
Of whom I thought so many men unworthy
Ruined themselves? Humane invention
Could not instruct me to dispose her where
She could be more defenc'd from all men's eyes
An Anchorite lives not prison'd in a wall
With more security. 'Tis not possible
Why am I troubled thus? My fear abuses me,
In such a cause I would check an Oracle.
And shall his dexterous forgery, unsettle
My confidence, I wonot show a guilt,
Of so much weakness in me, Fulvio --
And Gentlemen -- we'll speak to you anon.

I ha spoke too much already it seems, sure he has sent for her, I dare repose
my life on her, to whose trust I gave my heart, she is a tbousand witnesses in
her self.


It will be mirth Sir.


I like not this consulting, they break of pleasantly now in the name of
Mercury what crotchet.


I see it is in vain
To interrupt our fate, what is decreed
Above, becomes not mortals to dispute
Sit there, -- nay be not modest, you were borne to it
And therefore take your place, nay nay, be covered
Imagine that a Crown, and these your Subjects
As when I dye, you know 'twill come to that.
In right of my sole daughter -- so, does he not
Look like a Prince indeed, appears he not
A pretty lump of Majesty.

He's studying some speech I'll lay my life --


Against his Coronation, to thank all
His loving Subjects, that as low as earth
Thus offer him their duties.

Hold I beseech you
Let not my duty suffer misconstruction
If while my knee doth beg your blessing, here
I throw my arms, and circle next to Heaven
What must be dearest to me.

Ha?


My joy of life.


Destroy me not?


Alas-I would preserve all, am so far from killing,
That I would dye my self, rather than see
One drop of blood forced frow his crimson Fountain,
Or but one tear racked from your eye, oh hear me
And after let your anger strike two dead.
So you would let us dwell both in one Grave;
And did you know how near we were in life
You would not think it fitting that in death
Our ashes were divided, you have heard
When the poor Turtle's ravished from her Mate
The Orphan Dove doth groan away her life
In Widows solitude, let me call him husband
And tell your self the rest.

Kill not thy Father with one word Eugenia,
Thy Husband?

I do beseech you hear me.


Beg thou may be forgotten, 'tis sin
'Bove my forgiveness, this a match for thee?
What man can bring me a certificate
He had a father, or was christened? He?
We all are in a dream, awake me thunder.

Temper your passion Sir.


Some tortures to enforce confession from him
How he procured access.

They shannot need, you sent me Sir your self.


We?


The Cage was my conveyance.


That was presented lately with the Birds, you gave command.


Be dumb, I dare not hear you.


This was a Bird in a Cage indeed.


Search for the Traitor Bonamico presently
He has betrayed me, they shall suffer both
Before the noise be spread to our dishonour.

Yet will you hear me.


I hear too much, thou haft forgot thy birth,
Thy Fortunes, and thy Father, were my cares
So wondered at abroad, censured at home
Worthy of nothing but contempt from thee
For whom they were begotten? thou hast ploughed
Upon my Face, can^t thou undo a wrinkle
Or change but the complexion of one Hair.
Yet thou hast gray'd a thousand, taken from me,
Not added to my comforts, more then what
Like an indulgent Parent I have flattered
My self into.

Here is the other Traitor Sir.


Away with 'em to death.


Let me go too.


It needs not, thou art dead already Girl,
And in thy shame. I and the Dukedom suffer,
Thou may remember (false to thy own vow)
Philenze whom I banished, for thy sake.
The title of my Subject, and thy Love
To him, pulled our displeasure on him, since
We studying to add more height to thee,
Thou hast made thy self less, and for ought we know,
Clasped with the son of Earth to cool the Fever
Of hot sin in thy veins, ungrateful to
Philenzo, cold already in thy memory.

'Tis happiness enough that you have mentioned him,
And whither to your Mercy, or your justice,
See that Philenzo kneel.

Lord Philenzo.


My Noble cozen so near me, and concealed.


Your daughters knees join with his bended hear^
To beg your pardon.

Philenzo? were not you banished Sir.


It was your sentence.


In pain of death not to return, blessed Fate
Thou hast relieved me, had thou died before
By our command, it would have been thought Tyranny
Though none durst tell us so, now we have argument
Of justice, and our every breath is Law
To speak thee dead at once, we shannot need
To study a di^orce, thy second exile
Shall be Eternal, Death.

You do me honour.


Be it your punishment, as you preferred him
By Art to her, now by another Art
For ever to divide 'em, be's Executioner,
And after make him higher by the head,
To cure's ambition, see it advanced.

Ere I go, dread Sir,
I have an humble suite, it is not life
I'll ask, for that I give up willingly
And call it Mercy in you to immortalize
The affection I shall owe Eugenia,
Your other banishment is only Death,
You new create me now, it was my aim
And my attempt you thought so bold, I made
To serve this end, that since I could not live
I might dye for her; pray reprieve my breath
But till I take my leave, one minute does it
It shall be a very short, and silent farewell.

'Tis granted.


My Lord Ambassador.


Not the least whisper of Philenzo, as you value our regard -- O my good Lord
welcome.


Letters to your Grace.


They ^re grateful as my comfort -- Perenotto, let them withdraw; Her vain
will be discovered -- Fuluio follow and part 'em, give order for his execution,
off with his head instantly -- I can read no more for joy, Perenotto use your
b^st oratory on my daughter to forget that Traitor, and prepare to marry
Florence, 'tis concluded to be solemnised by proxy.


I'll see the execution.


Now to the rest,

Your last letters were acceptable; and our son before had intention to
finish the marriage in his person, but lately receluing intelligence, that one
(...) of Noble birth, now in exile, though without your consent, had long since
interest in your daughters affection, we thought meet rather to advise for his
repeal then (...) to our dishonour; where the hearts meet, there only
marriages are sacred, and Princes should be exemplary in all Justice, although
we disclaim in this design, on our parts, we will continue all other Princely
correspondence.

I am justly punished and have run my self
Into a labyrinth, from whence no art
Can bring me of with safety -- my Lord you may
Please to retire your self, a thousand wheels
Do move preposterous in my brain, what c^re?
I loose my self, run with a hast thou wod'^
Preserve my life, and stay the execution.
I will not have a drop of blood f^ll from
Philenzo for my Dukedom, fly I say
Thou should be there already.
How now, has Philenzo still a head on?


Yes my Lord.


Follow him, and with that Nimbleness thou would
Leap from thy Chamber when the Roofe's a fire
Proclaim aloud our pardon to Philenzo.
And bring him back to us.

'Tis too late Sir, Philenzo's dead already
He saved the Executioner that trouble.
The voice is, he is poisoned.

Poisoned, how --
Where is Philenzo?
This fool reports him poisoned, what circumstance?

He had no sooner parted from Eugenia,
But suddenly he fainted, at which fall
Of his own spirit, he seemed grieved with shame
To show so little courage near his death,
Which he called Martyrdom, and presently
Whither supplied by other, or prepared
By himself we know not, he had a Viol
Of water sovereign as was pretended
To inlifne his dull heart, he drank it up
And soon showed cheerful in his eyes, we led
Him smiling forward, but before we could
Approach the place of death, he sunk again
But irrecoverably, for in vain we applied
Our help, by which we did concludo he had
Drunk poison.

All this talk is such, and through
My ear I take it in, with as much danger,
I feel it active in my Brain already.
Call our Physicians I will hang em all
Unless they can recover him, it shall be
Death to save any man hereafter, if
They suffer him to perish.

Sir your Daughter
It seems the accident has arrived at her.

Arrived at her? Fame will soon spread it Fulvio,
About the world, and we shall be their mockery.
He's dead they tell me Girl, poisoned they say, too.

Oh my Philenzo.


Eugenia 'shat not marry Florence now,
Nor any other since Philenzoes dead,
But thou wo't not believe me, had he lived
He had been thine, that minute took him hence,
Wherein I first resolved to ha given thee to him.

Oh do not mock me Sir, to add to my
Affliction, you ne'er would give me to him.

May Heaven forgive me never then, but what
Availes too late compunction? Noble Gentleman
Thou shalt have Princely Funeral, and carry
On thy cold marble the Inscription of
Our son in death, and my Eugenias Husband.

Madam, this sorrow for his loss is Real.
We met the Florentine Ambassador
Who told me the Expectation of that Prince
Was now dissolved, and Messengers were sent
To stay the Execution.

Who now
Shall marry my Eugeniae, I have undone
The hope of our posterity.

Not so Sir,
If yet you'll give me leave to make my choice
I'll not despair to find a Husband.

Where?


Here Royal Sir, Philenzo is not dead
But made by Virtue of a drink to seem so
Thus to prevent his suffering, that I might
Or other friend by my confederacy*
By begging of his body fit for burial,
Preserve him from your anger.

Dost not mock me ^


Let me beg your pardon,
Confident of your change to mercy, I have
Confessed what terror could not force me to.

This is pretty Dondolo.


Blessings fall doubly on thee.


He expects
Not such a full stream of happiness, heaven dispose him
To meet it quickly,

Here are strange turnings, see he stirs.


Where am I now? no matter where I be
*Tis Heaven if my Eugenia meet me here
She made some promise sure to such a purpose.
This Music sounds divinely, ha Eugenia
'Tis so, let's dwell here for Eternity
If I be dead, I wonot live again
If living -- ha! I'm lost, lost for ever.

Not found till now, take her a gift from me
And call me father.

I am not yet awake.


Thou art Philenzo, and all this is truth,
My Father is Converted.

'Tis a Miracle.


You must believe it,
In sign how we are pleased proclaim this day
Through Mantua a pardon to all offenders
As amply as when we took our Crown.

Then my Petticoat is discharged.


Now Lady you are free*


Make me happy to renew my suit.


And mine, shall's to Barlibreake
I was in Hell last, *tis little less to be in a Petticoat sometimes.

Madam vouchsafe him kiss your hand
We owe him much.

We'll take him to our Service.


I am too much honoured.


And you into our bosom, this day shall
Be consecrate to triumph, and may time
When 'tis decreed, the world shall have an end
By Revolution of the year make this
The day that shall conclude all memories.

GEntle Reader, let me desire thy favourable correction of these places. viz.

Act. 1. Page the fifth, for Ferrara read Florence. Page the tenth leave, out
these words. Yet it shall be under 20. thousand Crowns, I will not leave the
pawn for twice so much.

Act. 4. in a Song for ( two invisible) read ( two visible many other Errors,
(though for the most part literal,) thou shalt meet, which thou can not
with safety of thy own, interpret a defect in the Authors Judgment, since all
books are subject to these misfortunes.


