SInce tis become the Title of our Play,
A woman once in a Coronation may
With pardon, speak the Prologue, give as free
A welcome to the Theater, as he
That with a little beard, a long black clok^,
With a starched face, and supple leg hath spoke
Before the Plays the twelvemonth, let me the^*
Present a welcome to these Gentlemen,
If you be kind, and noble, you will not
Think the worse of ^e for my petticoat.
But to the Play, the Poet bad me tell
His fears first in the title, lest it swell
Some thoughts with expectation of a strain,
That but once could be seen in a Kings reign,
This Coronation, ^e hopes you may
See often, while the (...) of his Play,
Doth proph^sit the Conduits may run wine,
When the days triumph's ended, and divine
Brisk Nectar swell his temples to a rage,
With something of more price to invest the stage*
There rests but to prepare you, that although
It b^ a Coronation, there doth flow
No undermirth, such as doth lar'^ the scene
For course delight, the language here is clear.
And confident our Poet bad me say,
Heel bate you but the folly of a Play.
For which although dull souls his pen despise,
Who thinks it yet too early to be wise.
The nobler will thank his muse, at least
Excuse him, cause his thought aimed at the best,
But we conclude not, it dost rest in you.
To c^nsure Poet, Play, and Prologue too.
But what have I omitted? is there not
A blush upon my cheeks that I forg^t
The Ladies, and a Female Prologue too?
Your pardon noble Gentlewomen, you
Were first within my thoughts, I know you sit
As free, and high Commissioners of wit,
Have clear, and active souls, nay though the men
Were lost in your eyes, they'll be found again,
You are the bright intelligences move,
And make a harmony this sphere of Love,
Be you propitious then, our Poet says,
Our wreath from you, is worth their grove of Baize:

MAke way for my Lord Protector.


Your graces servants.


I like your diligent waiting, where's Lisimachus?


I wait upon you sir.


The Queen looks pleasant
This morning, does she not?

I ever found
Her gracious smiles on me.

She does consult
Her safety in it, for I must tell thee boy,
But in the assurance of her love to thee,
I should advance thy hopes another way,
And use the power I have in Epire, to
Settle our own, and uncontrolled greatness;
But since she carries her self so fairly,
I am content to expect, and by her marriage
Secure thy fortune, that's all my ambition
Now, be still careful in thy applications
To her, I must attend other affairs,
Return, and use what art thou can to lay
More charms of love upon her.

I presume
She always speaks the language of her heart,
And I can be ambitious for no more
Happiness on earth then she encourages
Me to expect.

It was an act becoming
The wisdom of her Father to engage
A tie between our families, and she
Hath played her best discretion to allow it;
But we lose time in conference, wait on her,
And be what thou were borne for, King of Epire,
I must away.

Success ever attend you.
Is not the Queen yet coming forth?

Your servant,
You may command our duties,
This is the Court star Philocles.

The star that we must sail by.


All must borrow
A light from him, the young Queen directs all
Her favours that way.

Hes a noble Gentleman
And worthy of his expectations:
Too good to be the son of such a Father.

Peace, remember he is Lord Protector.


We have more need of Heavens protection
In the mean time, I wonder the old King
Did in his life design him for the office.

He might suspect his faith, I have heard when
The King who was no Epirote advanced
His claim, Cassandra, our Protector now,
Young then, opposed him toughly with his faction,
But forced to yield had fair conditions,
And was declared by the whole state next heir
If the King wanted issue; our hopes only
Thrived in this daughter.

Whom but for her smiles
And hope of marriage with Lasimachus,
His Father by some cunning had removed
Ere this.

Take heed, the Arras may have ears
I should not weep much if his grace would hence
Remove to Heaven.

I prithee what should he do there?


Some Offices will fall.


And the sky too, ere I get one stair higher
While hee^ in place.

Lisander, Philocles,
How looks the day upon us? where's the Queen?

In her bed-chamber.


Who was with her?


None but the young Lord Lisimachus.


Tis no treason
If a man wish himself a Courtier
Of such a possibility: he has
The mounting fate.

I would his Father were
Mounted to the gallows.

He has a path fair enough,
If he survive by title of his Father.

The Queen will hasten his ascent.


Would I wore Queen.


Thou wod'st become rarely the petticoat,
What wod'st thou do?

Why, I wod marry
My Gentleman usher, and trust all the strength
And burden of my state upon his legs,
Rather then be called wife by any son
Of such a Father.

Come lets leave this subject,
We may find more secure discourse; when saw
You young Arcadius, Lord Macarius Nephew?

There's a spark, a youth moulded for a favourite,
The Queen might do him honour.

Favourite, tis too cheap a name, there were a match
Now for her Virgin blood.

Must every man
That has a hansom^ face or leg feed such
Ambition: I confess I honour him,
He has a nimble soul, and gives great hope
To be no woman-hater, dances handsomely,
Can court a Lady powerfully, but more goes
To the making of a Prince? hes here
Ands Uncle.

Save you Gentlemen, who can direct me
To find my Lord Protector?

He was here
Within this half hour, young Li^machus
His son is with the Queen.

There let him complement,
I have other business, ha? Arcadius!

Observed you with what eyes Arcadius
And he saluted, their two families
Will hardly reconcile.

Seleucus carries
Himself too roughly, with what pride and scorn
He past by em.

The the other with less show
Of anger carries pride enough in's soul,
I wish em all at peace, Macarius looks
Are without civil war, a good old man,
The old King loved him well, Seleucus Father
Was as dear to him, and maintained the character
Of an honest Lord through Epire: that two men
So loved of others, should be so unwell-come
To one another.

The Queen was not wont to send for me.


The reason's to her self,
It will become your duty to attend her.

Save you Gentlemen, what novelty
Does the Court breath to day?

None sir, the news
That took the last impression is, that you
Purpose to leave the Kingdom, and those men,
That honour you, take no delight to hear it.

I have ambition to see the difference
Of Courts, and this may spare; the delights
At home do surfeit, and the mistress whom
We all do serve is fixed upon one object,
Her beams are too much pointed, but no Country
Shall make me lose your memories.

Arcadius.


Your Lordship honoured me,
I have no blessing in his absence.

Tis done like a pious Uncle.


We must not
Give any licence.

If your Majesty
Would please.

We are not pleased, it had become your duty,
To have first acquainted us, ere you declared
Your resolution public, is our Court
Not worth your stay?

I humbly beg your pardon.


Where's Lisimachus?


Your humble servant Madam.


We shall find
Employment at home for you, do not lose us.

Madam I then write my self blessed on earth
When I may do you service.

We would be private Macarius.


Madam you have blessed me,
Nothing but your command could interpose to
Stay him.

Lisimachus
You must not leave us.

Nothing but Lisimachus? has she not
Taine a philter?

Nay pray be covered, Ceremony from you.
Must be excused,

It will become my duty.


Not your love?
I know you would not have me look upon
Your person as a Courtier, not as favourite,
That title were too narrow to express
How we esteem you.

The least of all
These names from you Madam, is grace enough.

Yet here you wod not rest.


Not if you please?
To say there is a happiness beyond,
And teach my ambition how to make it mine,
Although the honours you already have
Let fall upon your servant, exceed all
My merit; I have a heart is studious
To reach it with desert, and make if possible
Your favours mine by justice, with your pardon.

We are confident this needs no pardon sir,
But a reward to cherish your opinion,
And that you may keep warm your passion,
Know we resolve for marriage, and if
I had another gift, beside my self,
Greater, in that you should discern, how much
My heart is fixed.

Let me digest my blessing.


But I cannot resolve when this shall be,


How Madam? do not make me dream of Heaven
And wake me into misery, if your purpose
Be, to immortalize your humble servant,
Your power on earth's divine, Princes are here
The Copies of eternity, and create
When they but will our happiness.

I shall
Believe you mock me in this argument,
I have no power.

How no power.


Not as a Queen.


I understand you not.


I must obey, your Fathers my Protector.


How?


When I am absolute, Lisimachus,
Our power and titles meet, before, we are but
A shadow, and to give you that were nothing,

Excellent Queen,
My love took no original from state,
Or the desire of other greatness,
Above what my birth may challenge modestly,
I love your virtues; mercenary souls
Are taken with advancement, yo've an Empire
Within you, better then the worlds, to that
Looks my ambition.

The other is not sit
To be despisd, Cosmography allowe^
Epire a place in the map, and know till I
Possess what I was borne to, and alone
Do grasp the Kingdoms Sceptre, I account
My self divided, he that marries me
Shall take an absolute Queen to his warm bosom,
My temples yet are naked, until then
Our loves can be but complements, and wishes,
Yet very hearty ones.

I apprehend.


Your Father.


Madam, a Gentleman has an humble suit,


Tis in your power to grant, you are Protector,
I am not yet a Queen.

Hows this?


I shall expound her meaning.


Why kneel you sir?


Madam to reconcile two families
That may unite, both counsels and their blood
To serve your Crown.

Macarius, and Eubulus
That by are inveterate malice to each other.
It grew, as I have heard* upon the question
Which some of either family had made,
Which of their Fathers was the best commander:
If we believe our stories, they have both
Deserved well of our state, and yet this quarrel
Has cost too many lives, a severe faction.

But I'll propound a way to plant a quiet
And peace in both our houses, which are torn
With their dissentions, and lose th^ glory
Of their great names, my blood speaks my relation
To Eubulus, and I wish my veins were emptied
To appease their war.

Thou hast a noble soul,
This is a charity above thy youth,
And it flows bravely from thee, name the way.

In such a desperate cause, a little stream
Of blood might purge the foulness of their hearts
If you'll prevent a deluge.

Be particular.


Let but your Majesty consent, that two
May with their personal valour undertake
The honour of their family, and determine
Their diff^rence.

This rather will enlarge
Their hate, and be a means to call more blood
Into the stream.

Not if both families
Agree, and swear --

And who shall be the Champions.


I beg the honour, for Eubulus cause
To be engaged, if any for Macarius,
Worthy to wager heart with mine, accept it,
I am confident, Arcadius
For honour would direct (...) to his sword,
Will not deny, to stake against my life
His own, if you vouchsafe us privilege.

You are the expectation and top boughs
Of both your houses, it would seem injustice,
To allow a civil war to cut you off,
And your selves the instruments, besides
You appear a soldier, Arcadius
Hath no acquaintance yet with rugged war,
More fit to drill a Lady then expose
His body to such dangers: a small wound
In the head may spoil the method of his hair*
Whose curiosity exacts more time
Than his devotion, and who knows but he
May lose his riban by it in his locke,
Dear as his Saint, with whom he would exchange
His head, for her gay colours; then his band
May be disordered, and transformed from Lace
To Cutworke, his rich clothes be discomplexioned
With blood, beside the infashionable slashes,
And at the next festival take physic,
Or put on bla^ke, and morn for his slain breeches:
His hands cased up in gloves all night, and sweat
Pomatum, the next day may be endangered
To blisters with a sword, how can he stand
Upon his guard, who hath fid^ers in his head,
To which, his feet must ever be a dancing.
Beside a fal^fy may spoil his cringe,
Or making of a leg, in which cons^sts
Much of his Court perfection.

Is this Character
Bestowed on him?

It something may concern the Gentleman,
Whom if you please to challenge
To dance, play on the Lute, or sing.

Some catch?


He shall not want those will maintain him
For any sum.

You are my Sovereign,
I dare not think, yet I must speak somewhat,
I shall burst else, I have no skill in jigges,
Nor (...).

How sir?


Nor was I borne a Minstrel, and in this you have
So infinitely disgraced Arcadius,
But that I have heard another Character,
And with your royal licence do believe it,
I should not think him worth my killing.

Your killing?


Does she not jeer me;
I shall talk treason presently, I find it
At my tongues end already, this is an
Affront, I'll leave her.

Come back, do you know Arcadius?


I ha changed but little breath with him, our persons
Admit no familiarity, we were
Borne to live both at distance, yet I ha seen him
Fight, and fight bravely.

When the spirit of Wine
Made his brain valiant he fought bravely.

Although he be my enemy, should any
Of the gay flies that buzz about the Court,
Sit to catch trouts ith* summer, tell me so,
I durst in any presence but your own.

What?


Tell him he were not honest.


I see Seleucus thou art ^esolute,
And I but wronged Arcadius, your first
Request is granted, you shall fight, and he
That conquers be rewarded to confirm
First place and honour to his family:
Is it not this you plead for?

You are gracious.


Lisimachus.


Madam.


She has granted then?


With much ado^.


I wish thy sword may open
His wanton veins, Macarius is too popular,
And has taught him to in^uate.

It shall
But haste the confirmation of our loves,
And ripen the delights of marriage, Seleucus.

As I guest,
It cannot be too soon.

To morrow then we crown her, and invest
My son with Majesty, tis to my wishes,
Beget a race of Princes my Lisimachus.

First let us marry sir.


Thy brow was made
To wear a golden circle, ^'me transported,
Thou shalt rule her, and I will govern thee.

Although you be my Father, that will not
Concern my obedience, as I take it.
Gentlemen,
Prepare your selves for a solemnity
Will turn the Kingdom into triumph, Epire
Look fresh to morrow, (...) become your duties
In all your glory to attend the Queen
At her Coronation, she is pleased to make
The next day happy in our Callender,
My Office doth expire, and my old blood
Renews with thought on it.

Hows this?


Crowned to morrow.


And he so jo^full to resign his regency,
There's some trick in it, I do not like these hasty
Proceedings, and whirls of state, they have commonly
As strange and violent effect^; well, heaven* save the Queen.

Heaven save the Queen say I, and send her a sprightly
Bed-fellow for the Protector, let him pray for
Himself, he is like to have no benefit of my devotion.

But this doth quicken my old heart Lisimachus,
There is not any step into her throne,
But is the same degree of thy own state;
Come Gentlemen.

We attend your grace.


Lisimachus.


What heretofore could happen to mankind
Was with much pain to clime to heaven, but in
Sophias marriage of all Queenes the best,
Heaven will come down to earth* to make me blessed.

Indeed you shall not go.


Whether?


To travel,
I know you see me, but to take your leave,
But I must never yield to such an absence.

I prithee leave thy fears, I am commanded
To the contrary, I wonot leave thee now.

Commanded? by whom?


The Queen.


I am very glad, for trust me, I could think
Of thy departure with no comfort, thou
Art all the joy I have, half of my soul;
But I must thank the Queen now for thy company,
I prithee what could make thee so desirous
To be abroad?

Only to get an appetite
To thee Polidora.

Then you must provoke it.


Nay, prithee do not so mistake thy servant.


Perhaps you surfeit with my love.


Thy love?


Although I have no beauty to compare
With the best faces, I have a heart above
All competition.

Thou art jealous now;
Come, let me take the kiss I gave thee last,
I am so confident of thee, no lip
Has ravished it from thine; I prithee come
To Court.

For what?


There is the throne for beauty.


Tis safer dwelling here.


There's none will hurt,
Or dare but think an ill to Polidora,
The greatest will be proud to honour thee.
Thy luster wants the admiration here:
There thou wot shine indeed, and strike a reverence
Into the gazer.

You can flatter too.


No praise of thee can be thought so, thy virtue
Will deserve all, I must confess, we Courtiers
Do oftentimes commend to show our art,
There is necessity sometimes to say,
This Madam breaths Arabian Gummes,
Amber and Cassia; though while we are praising,
We wish we had no nostriles to take in
The offensive steam of her corrupted lungs.
Nay, some will swear they love their Mistress,
Would hazard lives and fortunes, to preserve
One of her hairs brighter then Berinices;
Or young Apollos, and yet after this,
A favour from another toy would tempt him
To laugh, while the Officious hangman whips
Her head off.

Fine men.


I am none of these,
Nay, there are women Polidora too
That can do pretty well at flatteries;
Make men believe they dote, will languish for em,
Can kiss a Jewel out of one, and dally
A carcanet of Diamonds from another,
Weep intoth' bosom of a third, and make
Him drop as many pearls; they count it nothing
To talk a reasonable heir within ten days
Out of his whole estate, and make him mad
He has no more wealth to consume.

You'll teach me
To think I may be flattered in your promises,
Since you live where this art is most professed.

I dare not be so wicked Polidora,
The Infant errors of the Court I may
Be guilty off, but never to abuse
So rare a goodness, nor indeed did ever
Converse with any of those shames of Court,
To practise for base ends; be confident
My heart is full of thine, and I so deeply
Carry the figure of my Polidora,
It is not in the power of time or distance*
To cancel it, by all that's blessed I love thee:
Love thee above all women, dare invoke
A curse when I forsake thee.

Let it be some
Gentle one.

Teach me an oath I prithee,
One strong enough to bind, if thou dost find
Any suspicion of my faith, or else
Direct me in some horrid imprecation
When I forsake thee, for the love of other
Woman, may heaven reward my apostasy
To blast my greatest happiness on earth,
And make all joys abortive.

Revoke these hasty syllables, they carry
To great a penalty for breach of Love
To me, I am not worth thy suffering,
You do not know what beauty may invite
Your change, what happiness may tempt your eye
And heart together.

Should all the graces of your sex conspire
In one, and she should court me, with a dower
Able to buy a Kingdom when I give
My heart from Polidora.

I suspect not,
And to requite thy constancy I swear.

Twere sin to let thee waste thy breath
I have assurance of thy noble thoughts.

My Lord, your Uncle hath been every where
Ith Court inquiring for you, his looks speak
Some earnest cause.

I am more acquainted with
Thy virtue then to imagine thou wilt not
Excuse me now, one kiss dismisses him
Whose heart shall wait on Polidora, prithee
Let me not wish for thy return too often,
My Father.

I met Arcadius in strange haste, he told me
He had been with thee.

Some affair too soon
Ravished him hence, his Uncle sent for him
You came now from Court: how looks the Queen
This golden morning?

Like a bride, her soul
Is all on mirth, her eyes have quickening fires,
Able to strike a spring into the earth
In Winter.

Then Lisimachus can have
No frost in's blood, that lives so near her beams.

His politic Father, the Protector smiles too,
Resolve to see the Ceremony of the Queen
Twill be a day of state,

I am not well.


How* not well? retire then, I must return
My attendance is expected, Polidora,
Be careful of thy health.

It will concern me.


You amaze me sir.


Dear Nephew, if thou respect thy safety,
My honour, or my age, remove thy self,
Thy lifes in danger.

Mine? who's my enemy?


Take horse, and instantly forsake the City,
Or else within some unsuspected dwelling,
Obscure thy self, stay not to know the reason.

Sir, I beseech your pardon, which ith* number
Of my offences unto any, should
Provoke this dishonourable flight?

I would when I petitioned for thy stay,
I had pleaded for thy banishment, thou know not
What threatens thee:

I would desire to know it,
I am in no conspiracy of treason,
Have ravished no mans Mistress, not so much
As given the lye to any, what should mean
Your strange and violent fears, I will not stir
Until you make me sensible I have lost
My innocence.

I must not live to see
Thy body full of wounds, it were less sin
To rip thy Fathers marble, and fetch from
The reverend vault his ashes, and disperse them
By some rude winds where none should ever find
The sacred dust, it was his legacy,
The breath he mingled with his prayers to Heaven
I should preserve Arcadius, whose fate
He prophesied in death, would need protection,
Thou wot disturb his ghost, and call it to
Aff^ight my dreams, if thou refuse to obey me.

You more inflame me to inquire the cause
Of your d^straction, and you'll arm me better
Then any coward flight by acquainting me
Whose malice aims to kill me, good sir tell me,

Then prayers and tears assist me.


Sir*


Arcadius,
Thou art a rash young man, witness the spirit
Of him that trusted me so much, I bleed,
Till I prevent this mischief.

Ha, keep off.


What mean you sir?


We are your friends.


I know your faces, but
Am not secure, I would not be betrayed.

You wrong our hearts, who truly honour you.


They say I must be killed.


By whom?


I know not, nor wod I part with life so tamely.


We dare engage ours in your quarrel, hide
Your sword, it may beget suspicion,
It's enough to question you.

I am confident,
Pray pardon me, come I despise all danger:
Yet a dear friend of mine, my Uncle told me
He would not see my body full of wounds.

Your Uncle ^his is strange.


Yes, my honest Uncle,
If my unlucky stars have pointed me
So dire a fate.

There is some strange mistake in'^.


Arcadius, the Queen would speak with you,
You must make haste.

Though to my death, I fly
Upon her summons, I give up my breath
Then willingly, if she command it from me.

This does a little trouble me.


I know not
What to imagine, something is the ground
Of this perplexity, but I hope there is not
Any such danger as he apprehends.

We have already granted to Seleucus
And they shall try their valour if Arcadius
Have spirit in him to accept the challenge,
Our royal word is past.

This is strange.


Madam my son knew not what he asked,
And you were cruel to consent so soon.

Wherein have I offended, to be robbed
At once of all the wealth I have, Arcadius
Is part of me.

Seleucus life and mine
Are twisted on one thre^d, both stand or fall
Together, hath the service for my Country
Deserved but this reward, to be sent weeping
To my eternal home? Wast not enough
When I was young, to lose my blood in wars,
But the poor remnant that is scarcely warm
And faintly creeping through my withered veins
Must be let out to make you sport.

How can
We that shall this morn see the sacred oil
Fall on your virgin tresses* hope for any
Protection hereafter, when this day
You sacrifice the blood of them that pray for you.
Arcadius I prithee speak thy self,
It is for thee I plead.

Seleucus, kneel
And say thou haste repented thy rash suite;
If ere I see thee fight, I be thus wounded,
How will the least drop forced from thy veins,
Afflict my heart.

Why, that's good;
Arcadius speak to her; hear him Madam.

If you call back this honour you have done me
I shall repent I live, do not persuade me
Seleucus thou art a noble enemy,
And I will love thy soul though I despair
Our bodies friendly conversation:
I would we were to tug upon some cliffe,
Or like two prodigies ith air, our conflict
Might generally be gazed at, and our blood
Appease our grandsires ashes.

I am undone.


Madam, my father says I have offended,
If so, I beg your pardon, but beseech you
For your own glory call not back your word.

They are both mad.


No more, we have resolved,
And since their courage is so nobly flamed,
This morning we'll behold the Champions
Within the list, be not afraid, their strife
Will stretch so far as death, so soon as we
Are Crowned prepare your selves, Sel^ucus.

I have received another life in this high favour,
And may lose what nature gave me.

Arcadius to encourage thy young valour,
We give thee our Fathers sword.
Command it from our Armoury; Lisimachus,
To our Coronation.

I'll forfeit
My head for a rebellion then suffer it.

I am circled with confusions I'll do somewhat
My brains and friends assist me.

But do you think they le fight indeed?


Perhaps
Her Majesty will see about or two.
And yet tis wondrous strange, such spectacles
Are rare in the Court, and they were to skirmish naked
Before her, then there might be some excuse.
There is some gimcrackes in it, the Queen is wise
Above her years.

Macarius is perplexed.


I cannot blame him, but my Lord (...)
Returne^, they are both troubled, las good men,
But our duties are expected, we forget.

I must resolve, and yet things are not ripe,
My brains upon the torture.

This may quit
The hazard of his person, whose least drop
Of blood is worth more then our families.
My Lord Eubulus, I have thought a way
To stay the young men's desperate proceedings,
It is our cause they fight, let us beseech
The Queen, to grant us two the privilege
Of duel* rather then expose their lives
To eithers fury; it were pity they
Should run upon so black a destiny,
We are both old, and may be spared, a pair
Of fruitless trees, mossy and withered trunckes,
That fill up too much room.

Most willingly,
And I will praise her charity to allow it;
I have not yet forgot to use a sword,
Lets lose no time, by this act, she will licence
Our souls to leave our bodies but a day,
Perhaps an hour the sooner; they may live
To do her better service, and be friends
When we are dead, and yet I have no hope
This will be granted, curse upon our faction.

If she deny us --


What?


I wod do somewhat --


There's something of the sudden struck upon
My imagination, that may secure us.

Name it, if no dishonour wait upon it
To preserve them, I'll accept any danger.

There is no other way, and yet my heart
Would be excus*d but tis to save his life.

Speak it Eubulus.


In your ear I shall,
It shanot make a noise if you refuse it.

Hum? though it stir my blood, I'll meet Arcadius,
If this preserve thee not, I must unseale
Another mystery.

We owe to all your loves and will deserve
At least by our endeavours that none may
This day repent their prayers, my Lord Protector.

Madam I have no
Such title now, and am blessed to lose
That name so happily, I was but trusted
With a glorious burden.

You have proved
Your self our faithful counsellor, and must still
Protect our growing state, a Kingdoms Sceptre
Weighs down a woman's arm, this crown sits heavy
Upon my brow already, and we know
There's something more then mettle in this wreath,
Of shining glory, but your faith, and counsel,
That are familiar with mysteries,
And depths of state* have power to make us fit
For such a bearing, in which both you shall
Do loyal service, and reward your duties.

Heaven preserve your Highness.


But yet my Lords and Gentlemen let none
Mistake me, that because I urge your wisdoms,
I shall grow careless, and impose on you
The managing of this great Province, no,
We will be active too, and as we are
In dignity above your persons, so,
The greatest portion of the difficulties
We call to us, you in your several places
Relieving us with your experience,
Observing in your best directions
All modesty, and distance, for although
We are but young, no action shall forfeit
Our royal privilege, or encourage any
Too unreverent boldness, as it will become
Our honour to consult, ere we determine
Of the most necessary things of state,
So we are sensible of a check,
But in a brow, that saucily controls
Our action, presuming on our years
As few, or frailty of our sex, that head
Is not secure that dares our power or justice.

She has a brave spirit, look how the Protector
Grows pale already.

But I speak to you
Are perfect in obedience, and may spare
This theme, yet 'twas no immaterial
Part of our character, since I desire
All should take notice, I have studied
The knowledge of my self, by which I shall
Better distinguish of your worth and persons
In your relations to us.

This language
Is but a threatening to some body

But we miss some, that use not to absent
Their duties from us, where's Macarius?

Retired to grieve, your Majesty hath given*
Consent Arcadius should enter List
To day with young Seleucus.

We purpose
They shall proceed, whats he?

A Gentleman belonging to Seleucus, that gives notice
He is prepared, and waits your royal pleasure,

He was composed for action, give notice
To Arcadius, and admit the challenger,
Let other Princes boast their gaudy tilting,
And mockery of battles, but our triumph
Is celebrated with true noble valour.
Two young men spirited enough to have
Two Kingdoms staked upon their swords, Lisimachus
Do not they excellently become their arms,
Twere pity but they should do something more
Then wave their plumes.
What noise is that?

The peoples joy to know us reconcild,
Is added to the Iubile of the day,
We have no more a faction but one heart,
Peace flow in every bosom.

Throw away
These instruments of death, and like two friends
Embrace by our example.

This unfain'd?


By our duties to your self dear Madam
Command them not advance, our houses from
This minute are incorporated, happy day
Our eyes at which before revenge look forth,
May clear suspicion, oh my Arcadius!

We have found a nearer way to friendship Madam,
Then by exposing them to fight for us.

If this be faithful our desires are blessed,
We had no thought to waste, but reconcile
Your blood this was and we did prophecy
This happy chance, spring into eithers bosom,
Arcadius and Seleucus, what can now
Be added to this days felicity;
Yes, there is something, is there not my Lord?
While we are Virgin Queen.

Ha, that string
Doth promise music.

I am yet my Lords
Your single joy, and when I look upon,
What I have took, to manage the great care
Of this most flowrishing Kingdom, I incline
To think, I shall do justice to my self,
If I chose one, whose strength and virtue may
Assist my undertaking, think you Lords,
A husband would not help?

No question Madam,
And he that you purpose to make so blessed
Must needs be worthy of our humblest duty,
It is the general vote.

We will not then
Trouble Ambassadors to treat with any
Princes abroad, within our own dominion,
Fruitful in honour, we shall make our choice;
And that we may not keep you over long
In the imagination, from this circle, we
Have purpose to elect one, whom I shall
Salute a King and Husband.

Now my Lord Lifimachus.


Nor shall we in this action be accused
Of rashness, since the man we shall declare
Deserving our affection, hath been early
In our opinion, which had reason first
To guide it, and his known nobility
Long married to our thoughts, will justify
Our fair election.

Lifimachus blushes.


Direct our duties Madam to pray for him.


Arcadius you see from whence we come,
Pray lead us back, you may ascend.

Hows this? over reached?


Madam be charitab^e to your humblest creature,
Do not ^eward the heart, that falls in duty
Beneath your feet, with making me the burden
Of the Court mirth, a mockery for Pages,
Twere treason in me but to think you mean thus.

Arcadius you must refuse my love,
Or shame this Kingdom.

Is the wind in that corner?


I shall run mad Lisimachus.


Sir, contain your self.


Is this to be believed?


What dream is this?


He kisses her, now by this day I am glad on it.


Mark the Protector.


Let him fret his heart strings.


Is the day cloudy on the sudden?


Gentlemen
It was not my ambition, I durst never
Aspire so high in thought, but since her Majesty
Hath pleased to call me to this honour, I
Will study to be worthy of her grace,
By whom I live.

The Church to morrow shall
Confirm our marriage, noble Lisimachus
We'll find out other ways to recompense
Your love to us, set forward, come Arcadius.

It must be so, and yet let me consider,


He insults already, policy assist me.
To break his neck.

Who would trust woman?
Lost in a pair of minutes, lost, how bright
A morning rose, but now, and now tis night?

Oh where shall Virgins look for faith hereafter?
If he prove false, after so many vows?
And yet if I consider, he was tempted
Above the strength of a young Lover, two
Such glorious courting his acceptance, were
Able to make disloyalty no sin,
At least not seem a fault, a Lady first,
Whose very looks would thaw a man more fro^
Then the Alps, quicken a soul more dead then Winter.
Add to her beauty and perfection,
That she's a Queen, and brings with her a Kingdom
Able to make a great mind forfeit heaven.
What could the frailety of Arcadius
Suggest to unspirit him so much, as not
To fly to her embraces, you were present
When she declared her self.

Yes Madam.


Tell me,
Did not he make a pause, when the fair Queen
A full temptation stood him?

Very little
My judgement could distinguish, she did no sooner
Propound, but he accepted.

That was ill,
He might with honour stand one or two minutes,
Me thinks it should have startled him a little,
To have rememberd me, I have deserved
At least a cold thought, well pray give it him.

I shall.


Instantly.


When?


Not so,
But take a time when his joy swells him most,
When his delights are high and ravishing,
When you perceive his soul dance in his eyes,
When she that must be his, hath dressed her beanty
With all her pride, and sends a thousand Cupids
To call him to the tasting of her lip;
Then give him this, and tell him while I live,
I'll pray for him.

I shall.


There is no way but death.


That's black and horrid,
Consider sir it was her sin, not his;
I cannot accuse him, what man could carry
A heart so frozen, not to melt at such
A glorious flame^? who could not fly to such
A happiness?

Have you ambition
To be a tame foole^ fee so vast an injury
And not revenge it? (...) me not suspect
Thy Mother for this sufferance, my Son.

Pray hear me sir*


Hear a patient gull,
A property, thou hast no blood of mine,
If this affront provoke thee not, how can
Be charitable to thy self, and let him live
To glory in thy shame? Nor is he innocent;
He had before crept slily into her bosom
And practised thy dishonour.

You begin to (...) me sir.


How else could she be guilty
Of such contempt of thee? and in the eye
Of all the Kingdom, they conspired this stain,
When they had cunning meetings, shall thy love
And blooming hopes be scattered thus, and Lisimachus
Stand idle gazer?

What sir will his death
Advantage us, if she be false to me?
So irreligious, and to touch her person --
Pause we may be observed.

'Tis the Protector
And his son.

Alas poor Gentleman, I pity
His neglect, but am not sorry for his Father.

Tis a strange turn.


The whirligigs of women.


Your graces servant.


I am yours Gentlemen,
And should be happy to deserve your loves.

Now he can flatter.


In it sir, to enlarge your sufferings, J have
A heart doth wish
The Queen had known better to reward
Your love and merit.

If you would express
Your love to me; pray do not mention it,
I must obey my fate.

She will be married
To the other Gentleman for certain then?

I hope you'll wish em joy.


Indeed I will sir.


Your graces servant.


We are grown
Ridiculous, the pastime of the Court:
Here comes another.

Wheres your son my Lord?


Like a neglected servant of his Mistress.


I would ask him a question.


What?


Whether the Queen
As tis reported, loved him, he can tell
Whether she promised what they talk of, marriage,

I can resolve you that sir.


She did promise?


Yes.


Then she's a woman, and your son;


What?


Not worthy his blood, and expectation,
If he be calm.

Th^res no opposing destiny.


I would cut the throat.


Whose throat?


The destinies, that's all your pardon sir,
I am Seleucus still, a poor shadow
Of the world, a walking picture, it concerns
Not me, I am forgotten by my stars.

The Queen with more discretion might ha chosen
Thee.

Whom?


Thee Seleucus.


Me? I cannot dance, and fri^ke with due activity,
My body is le^d, I have too much phleame, what should
I do with a Kingdom? no Arcadius
Becomes the cushion, and can please, yet setting
Aside the trick that Ladies of blood look at,
Another man might ma^e a shift to wear
Rich clothes, sit in the cha^re of state, and nod,
Dare venture on discourse, that does not trench
On complement, and think the study of arms
And arts, more commendable in a Gentleman
Than any galliard.

Arcadius,
And you were reconciled.

We? yes, oh yes,
But tis not manners now to say we are friends,
At our equality there had been reason,
But now, subjection is the word.

They are not
Yet married.

(...) make no oath upont,
My Lord Lisimachus,
A word. you^e not be angry if I love you,
May not a bachelor be made a cuckold?

How sir?


Lisimachus, this (...)
Is worth our embrace, hes spiritted,
And may be useful.

Hark you, can you tell
Where's the best Dancing-master? and you mean
To rise at Court, practise to caper, farewell
The noble science, that makes work for cutlers,
It will be out of fashion to wear swords,
Masques, and devices welcome, I salute you.
Is it not pity any division
Should be heard ou^ of Music? Oh twill be
An excellent age of crotchets; and of Canters.
Buy Captains that like fools will spend your blood
Out of your Country, you will be of less
Use then your feathers, if you return unmanned
You shall be beaten soon to a new march,
When you shall think it a discretion
To sell your glorious buffes to buy fine pumps,
And pantables, this is I hope no treason.

Wot stay Lisimachus?


Yes sir,
And show a patience above her injury.

This honour is too much, Madam assume
Your place, and let Arcadius wait still:
Tis happiness enough to be your servant.

Now he dissembles.


Sir you must sit.


I am obedient.


This is not music
Sprightly enough, it feeds the soul with melancholy.
How says Arcadius?

Give me leave to think
There is no harmony but in your voice,
And not an accent of your heavenly tongue,
But strikes me into rapture, I incline
To think the tale of Orphe^ no fable,
Tis possible he might enchant the Rocks,
And charm the Forest, soften hell, hell it self
With his commanding Lute, it is no miracle
To what you work, whose very breath conveys
The hearer into heaven, how at your lips,
Day winds gather perfumes, proudly glide away,
To disperse sweetness round about the world.

Fine stuff.


You cannot flatter.


Not if I should say
Nature had placed you here the creatures wonder,
And her own spring, from which all excellence
On earths derived, and copied forth, and when
The character of fair, and good in others
Is quite worn out, and lost, looking on you
It is supplied, and you alone made mortal
To feed and keep alive all beauty.

Ha, ha, can you endure it Gentlemen?


What do you mean?


Nay ask him what he means, mine is a down
Right laugh.

Well sir proceed.


At such bright eyes the stars do light themselves,
At such a forehead Swans renew their white,
From such a lip the morning gathers blushes.

The morning is more modest then thy praises,
What a thing does he make her?

And when you fly to heaven leave this world
No longer maintenance of goodness from you,
Then Poetry shall lose all use with us,
And be no more, since nothing in your absence
Is left, that can be worthy of a Verse.

Ha, ha.


Whose that?


Twas I Madam.


Seleucus?


Ha?


Yes sir, 'twas I that laughed.


At what?


At nothing.


Contain your self Seleucus.


Are you mad?


Have you ambition to be punishd sir?


I need not, twas punishment
Enough to hear him make an Idol of you, he left
Out the commendation of your patience, I was a little
Moved in my nature to hear his codomontados, and
Make a monster of his Mistress, which I pitied first,
But seeing him proceed, I guest he brought you
Mirth with his inventions, and so made bold to laugh at it.

You are saucy,
We'll place you where you shannot be so merry,
Take him away.

Submit your self


Let me plead for his pardon.


I wod not owe my life so poorly, beg thy own
When you are King you cannot bribe your destiny.

Good Madam hear me, I fear he is distracted,
Brave boy, thou should be master of a soul
Like his: thy honours more concerned.

'Tis charity,
A way wo' me, 'boy Madam?

He has a daring spirit.


These and a thousand more affronts I must
Expect: your favours draw them all upon me;
In my first state I had no enemies,
I was secure while I did grow beneath
This expectation, humble valleys thrive with
Their bosoms full of flowers, when the hills melt
With lightning, and rough anger of the clouds,
Let me retire.

And can Arcadius
A^ such a breath be moved, I had opinion
Your courage durst have stood a tempest for
Our love, can you for this incline to leave
What other Princes should in vain have sued for?
How many Lovers are in Epire now
Would throw themselves on danger, not expect
O^e enemy, but empty their own veins,
And think the loss of all their blood rewarded,
To have one smile of us when they are dying?
And shall this murmure shake you?

Not dear Madam,
My life is such a poor despised thing,
In value your least graces, that
To lose it were to make my self a victory,
It is not for my self I fear: the envy
Of others cannot fasten wound in me
Greater, then that your goodness should be checked
So daringly.

Let not those thoughts afflict thee
While we have power to correct the offences
Arcadius be mine, this shall confirm it.

I shall forget
And lose my way to heaven, that touch had been
Enough to have restored me, and infused
A spirit of a more celestial nature,
After the tedious absence of my soul,
Oh bless me not too much, one smile a day
Would stretch my life to mortality,
Poets that wrap divinity in tales,
Look here, and give your copies forth of angels,
What blessing can remain?

Our Marriage.


Place then some horrors in the way
For me, not you to pass, the journeys end
Holds out such glories to me, I should think
Hell but a poor degree of suffering for it,
Whats that some petition, a Letter to me.
In the minute when my vessels new lanch'd forth,
With all my pride and silken wings about me
I strike upon a Rock: what power can save me?
You had a Polidora; there's a name
Killed with grief I can so soon forget her

She did impose on me this service sir,
And while she lives she says sheele pray for you.

She lives
That's well, and yet twere better, for my fame,
And honour she were dead, what fate hath placed me
Upon this fearful precipice?

Hes troubled.


I must resolve, my faith is violated
Already, yet poor loving Polidora
Will pray for me, she says, to think she can
Render me hated to my self, and every
Thought's a tormentor, let me then be just.

Arcadius.


That voice prevails again, oh Poledora,
Thou must forgive Arcadius, I dare not
Turn rebel to a Princess, I shall love
Thy virtue, but a Kingdom has a charm
To excuse our frailty, dearest Madam.

Now set forward.


To perfect all our joys.


I'll fright their glories.


By what means?


Observe.


Our good Uncle, welcome.


My Lord Macarius we did want your person,
There's something in our joys wherein you share.

This you intend your highness wedding day.


We are going.


Save you labour
I have brought a Priest to meet you.

Reverend Father.


Meet us, why?


To tell you that you must not marry.


Did thou hear that Lisimachus?


And wonder what will follow.


We must not marry.


Madam tis a rule
First made in heaven, and I muh needs declare
You and Arcadius must tie no knot
Of man and wife.

Is my Uncle mad?


Joy has transported him,
Or age has made him dote, Macarius
Provoke us not too much, you will presume
Above our mercy.

I'll discharge my duty,
Could your frown strike me dead, my Lord you know
Whose character this is.

It is Thedosius.
Your graces Father.

I am subscribed a witness.


Upon my life 'tis his.


Fear not, I'll cross this match.


I'll bless thee for it.


Uncle dee know what you do, or what we are
Going to finish, you will not break the neck of my glorious
Fortune, now my footes in the stirrups and mounting,
Throw me over the saddle, I hope you'll let one
Be a King, Madam 'tis as you say,
My Uncle is something crazed, there is a worm
In's brain, but I beseech you pardon him, he is
Not the first of your counsel, that has talked
Idly, dee hear my Lord Bishop, I hope
You have more religion then to join with him
To undo me.

Not I sir, but I am commanded by oath,
And conscience to speak truth.

If your truth should do me any harm, I shall never
Be in charity with a Croziers staff, look too't.

My youngest Brother,


Worse and worse, my brains.


Deliver to me an Infant with this writing,
To which this reverend Father is a witness.

This he whom we so long thought dead, a child.


But what should make my father to trust him
To your concealment? give abroad his death, and bury
An empty coffin?

A jealousy he had
Upon Cassandra, whose ambitious brain
He feared would make no conscience to depose
His son, to make Lisimachus King of Epire.

He made no scruple to expose me then
To any danger?

He secured you Madam
By an early engagement of your affection
To Lisimachus, exempt this testimony,
Had he been Arcadius, and my Nephew
I needed not obtrude him on the state,
Your Love and marriage had made him King
Without my trouble, and saved that ambition
There was necessity to open now
His birth, and title.

Demetrius alive.


What riddles are these, whom do they talk of?


Congratulate your return to life, and honour,
And as becomes us, with one voice salute you
Demetrius King of Epire.

I am no Uncle, sir, this is your sister,
I should have suffered incest to have kept you
Longer in the dark, love, and be happy both,
My trust is now discharged.

And we rejoice.


But do not mooke me Gentlemen,
May I be bold upon your words to say
I am Prince Thedosius son.

The King.


You'll justify it?
Sister I am very glad to see you.

I am to find a brother, and refigne my glory,
My triumph is my shame.

Thine ear Lisimachus.


Gentlemen I owe
Unto your loves, as large acknowledgement
As to my birth for this greath onour, and
My study shall be equal to be thought
Worthy of both.

Thou art turned Marble.


There will be the less charge for my monument.


This must not be, fit fast young King.


Your fister sir is gone.


My sister should have been my Bride, that name
(...) me in mind of Polidora, ha?
Lisander, Philocles, Gentlemen,
If you will have me think your hearts allow me
Thedosius son, oh quickly snatch some wings,
Express it in your haste to Polidora,
Tell her what title is new dropped from Heaven
To make her rich; only created for me,
Give her the ceremony of my Queen,
With all the state that may become our Bride
Attend her to this throne; are you not there?
Yet stay, tis too much pride to send for her,
We'll go our self, no honour is enough
For Polidora, to redeem our fault
Salute her gently from me, and upon
Your knee, present her with this Diadem,
Tis our first gift, tell her Demetrius follows
To be her guest, and give himself a servant
To her chaste bosom, bid her stretch her heart
To meet me, I am lost in joy and wonder.

VVHeres the Captain of the Castle?


Heel attend your honours presently.


Give him knowledge we expect him.


I shall my Lord.


He is my creature, fear not,
And shall run any c^urse that we propo^d.

My Lord, I like the substance of your plot,
Tis promising, but matters of this consequence
Are not so easily perfect, and it does
Concern our heads to build upon secure
Principles, though Sel^eus, I confess,
Carry a high, and daring spirit in him,
Tis hard to thrust upon the state new settled
Any impostor, and we know not yet
Whether heel undertake to play the Prince;
Or if he should accept it, with what cunning
He can behave himself.

My Lord, affairs
Of such a glorious nature, are half finished
When they begin with confidence.

Admit
He want no art, nor courage, it must rest
Upon the people to receive his title,
And with what danger their uncertain breath
May flatter ours, Demetrius scarcely warm
In the Kings seat, I may suspect.

That reason
Makes for our part, for if it be so probable,
That young Demetrius should be living, why
May not we work them to believe Leo^atus
The eldest son was by some trick preserved
And now would claim his own: there were two sons,
Who in their Fathers life we supposed dead,
May not we find a circumstance to make
This seem as clear as the other, let the vulgar
Be once possessed, we'll carry Epire from*
Demetrius, and the world.

I could be pleased
To see my son a King.
The Captaiues here.

I wait your Lordships pleasure.


We come to visit your late prisoner^*
I will not doubt, but you entreat him fairly
He will deserve I^ for himself, and you
Be fortunate in any occasion
To have expressed your service.

Sir, the knowledge
Of my honourable Lord his Father, will
Instruct me to behave my self with all
Respects becoming me, to such a son.

These things will least
Obleige you, but how bears he his restraint?

As one whose soule's above it.


Patiently?


With contempt rather of the great command
Which made him prisoner, he will talk sometimes
So strangely to himself.

He's here.


Why was I borne to be a subject? 'tis
Soon answered, sure my Father was no Prince,
That's all, the same ingredience use to make
A man, as active, though not royal blood
Went to my composition, and I
Was gotten with as good a will perhaps,
And my birth cost my mother as much sorrow,
As I had been borne an Emperor.

While I look
Upon him, something in his face presents
A King indeed.

He does resemble much
Thedosius too.

Whose son we would pretend him,
This will advance our plot,

Tis but a name,
And mere opinion, that prefers one man
Above another, I'll imagine th^n
I am a P rince, or some brave thing on earth,
And see what follows, but it must not be
My fingle voice will carry it, the name
Of King must be attended with a troop
Of acclamations, on whose airy Wings
He mounts, and once exalted threatens Heaven,
And all the stars: how to acquire this noise,
And be the thing I talk of, men have rise
From a more cheap nobility to Empires,
From dark originals, and sordid blood,
Nay some that had no fathers, sons of the earth,
And flying people, have aspired to Kingdoms,
Made nations tremble, any have practised frowns
To awe the world, their memory is glorious,
And I would hug them in their shades, but whats
All this to me; that am I know not what,
And less in expectation?

Are you serious?


Will you assist, and run a fate with us.


Command my life, I owe it to your favour.


Arcadius was once as far from being
As I, and had we not so cunningly
Been reconciled, or one, or both had gone
To seek our fortunes in another world;
What's the devi^e now? If my death be next,
The summons shall not make me once look pale.

Chide your too vain suspicions, we bring
A life, and liberty, with what else can make
Thy ambi^ion happy, you have a glorious flame
We come to advance it.

How?


Have but a will,
And be what thy own thoughts dare prompt thee to,
A King.

You do not mo^ke me Gentlemen,
You are my father sir.

This minute ^hall
Declare it my Sel^ucus, our hearts swel'd
With joy, with duty rather, oh my boy*

What's the mystery?


You must be a King.


Sel^ucus, ^tay thou art too incredulous,
Let not our faith, and study to exalt thee,
Be so rewarded.

I pronounce thee King
Unless thy spirit be turned coward, and
Thou faint to accept it.

King of what?


Of Epire.


Although the Queen since she sent me hither
Were gone to Heaven I know not how
That title could devolve to me.

We have
No Queen, since he that should have married her,
Is proved her youngest brother, and now King
In his own title.

Thank you Gentlemen,
There's hope for me.

Why, you dare fight with*him
And need be, for the Kingdom.

With Arcadius,
If you'll make stakes, my life against his crown,
I'll fight with him, and you, and your fine son,
And all the Courtiers one after another.

'Twonot come to that.


I am of your Lordships mind, so fare you well


Yet stay and heare-


What? that you have betrayed me,
Do, tell your King, my life is grown a burden,
And I'll confess, and make your souls look pale,
To see how nimble mine shall leap this battlement
Of flesh, and dying, laugh at your poor malice.

No more, long* live Leonatus King of Epire.


Leonatus, who's that?


Be bold and be a King, our brains have been
Working to raise you to this height, here are
None but friends, dare you but call your self
Leonatus, and but justify with considence
What we'll proclaim you, if we do not bring
The Crown to your head, we will forfeit ours.

The state is in distraction, Arcadiu^
Is proved a King, there was an elder brother,
If you dare but pronounce, you are the same,
Forget you are my son.

These are no trifles, sir, all is plotted
To assure your greatness, if you will be wise,
And take the fair occasion that's presented.

Arcadius, you say, is lawful King,
And now to depose him, you would make me
An elder brother, is't not so?

Most right.


Nay, right or wrong, if this be your true meaning.


Upon our lives.


I'll venture mine, but with your pardon,
Whose brain was this? from whom took this plot life?

My Lord Cassandra.


And you are of his mind? and you? and think
This may be done?

The destinies shall not cross us, if you have
Spirit to undertake it.

Undertake it?
I am not used to complement, I'll owe
My life to you, my fortunes to your Lordship,
Compose me as you please, and when you've made
Me what you promise, you shall both divide
Me equally, one word my Lord, I had rather
Live in the prison still, then be a propency
To advance his politic ends.

Have no suspicion.


So, so, I see Demetrius heals already
Tripped up, and I'll dispatch him out of the way,
Which gone, I can depose this at my leisure
Being an Impostor, then my son stands fair,
And may piece with the Princess, we lose time,
What think you, if we first surprise the Court,
While you command the Castle, we shall curb
All opposition.

Let's proclaim him first.
I have some faction, the people love me,
They gained to us, we'll ^all upon the Court.

Unless Demetrius yield himself he bleeds.


Who dares call treason sin, when it sueceeds?


Madam, you are too passionate, and lose
The greatness of your soul, with the expense
Of too much grief, sor that which providence
Hath eased you of, the burden of a state
Above your tender bearing.

Thar't a fool,
And can not reach the spirit of a Lady,
Borne great as I was, and made only less
By a too cruel destiny, above
Our tender bearing? what goes richer to
The composition of man, then ours?
Our soul as free, and spacious, our heart's
As great, our will as large, each thought as active,
And in this only man more proud then we,
That would have us less capable of Empire,
But search the stories, and the name of Queen
Shines bright with glory, and some precedents
Above mans imitation.

I grant it
For the honour of our sex, nor have you, Madam,
By any weakness forfeited command,
He that succeeds, in justice, was before you,
And you have gained more in a royal brother
Then you could lose by your refigne of Epire.

This I allow Charilla, I ha done;
Tis not the thought I am deposd afflicts me,
At the same time I feel a joy to know
My Brother living: no, there is another
Wound in me above cure.

Virtue forbid.


Can find me out a Surgeon for that?


For what?


My bleeding fame.


Oh do not injure
Your own clear innocence.

Do not flatter me,
I have been guilty of an act, will make
All love in women questioned, is not that
A blot upon a Virgins name? my birth
Cannot extenuate my shame, I am
Become the stain of Epire.

Tis but
Your own opinion, Madam, which presents
Something ^o fright your self, which cannot
Be in the same shape so horrid to our sense.

Thou wod'st but can not appear ignorant,
Did not the Court, nay, the whole Kingdom, take
Notice I loved Lisimachus?

True Madam.


No. I was false
Though counseld by my Father to affect him,
I had my politic ends upon Cassandra,
To be absolute Queen, flattering his son with hopes
Of love and marriage, when that very day
I blush to think I wronged Lisimachus,
That noble Gentleman, but heaven punished me;
For though to know Demetrius was a blessing,
Yet who will not impute it my dishonour.

Madam, you yet may recompense Lisimachus,
If you affect him now, you were not false
To him whom then you loved not, if you can
Find any gentle passion in your soul
To entertain his thought, no doubt his heart,
Though sad, retains a noble will to meet it,
His love was firm to you, and cannot be
Vnrooted with one storm.

He will not sure
Trust any language from her tongue that mocked him,
Although my soul doth weep for it, and is punished
To love him above the world.

Hes here
As fate would have him reconcild, be free,
And speak your thoughts.

If Madam I appear
Too bold, your charity will sign my pardon:
I heard you were not well, which made me haste
To pay the duty of an humble visit.

You do not mock me sir.


I am confident
You think me not so lost to manners, in
The knowledge of your person, to bring with me
Such rudeness, I have nothing to present,
But a heart full of wishes for your health,
And what else may be added to your happiness.

I thought you had been sensible.


How Madam?


A man of understanding, can you spend
One prayer for me, remembering the dishonour
I have done Lisimachus?

Nothing can deface that part of my
Religion in me, not to pray for you.

It is not then impossible you may
Forgive me too, indeed I have a soul
Is full of penitence, and something else,
If blushing would allow to give it a name.

What Madam?


Love, a love that should redeem
My past offence, and make me white again.

I hope no sadness can possess your thoughts
For me, I am not worthy of this sorrow,
But if you mean it any satisfaction
For what your will hath made me suffer, 'tis
But a strange overflow of charity,
To keep me still alive, be your self Madam,
And let no cause of mine, be guilty of
This rape upon your eyes, my name's not worth
The least of all your tears.

You think em co^nterfeit.


Although I may
Suspect a woman's smile hereafter, yet
I would believe their wet eyes, and if this
Be what you promise, for my sake, I have
But one reply.

I wait it.


I have now
Another Mistress.

Stay.


To whom I have made
Since your revolt from me, a new chaste vow,
Which not the second malice of my fate
Shall violate, and she deserves it Madam,
Even for that wherein you are excellent,
Beauty, in which she shines equal to you
Her virtue, if ^he but maintain what now
She is Mistress of, beyond all competition,
So rich it cannot know to be improved,
At least in my esteem, I may offend,
But truth shall justify, I have not ^latterd her,
I beg your pardon, and to leave my duty
Upon your hand, all that is good flow in you.

Did he not say Charilla, that he had
Another Mistress?

Such a sound me thought
Came from him.

Let's remove, here's too much air,
The sad note multiplies.

Take courage Madam,
And my advice, he has another Mistress,
If he have twenty, be you wise, and cross him
With entertaining twice as many servants,
And when he sees your humour heel return,
And sue for any Livery, grieve for this,
It must be she, 'tis Polidora has
Taken his heart, she live my rival,
How does the thought inflame me.

Polidora?


And yet she does but justly, and he too;
I would have robbed her of Areadius heart,
And they will both have this revenge on me,
But something will rebel.

The house is desolate, none comes forth to meet us,
She's slow to entertain us, Philocles,
I prithee tell me, did she wear no cloud
Upon her brow, wast freely that she said
We should be welcome.

To my apprehension,
Yet tis my wonder she appears not.

She nor any other,
Sure there's some conceit
To excuse it.

Stay, who's this? observe what follows?


Fortune? some mask to entertain you sir.


Not yet? what silence doth inhabit here?
No preparation to bid Fortune welcome!
Fortune the genius of the world, have we
Descended from our pride, and state to come
So far attended with our darlings, Youth
Pleasure, and Health, to be neglected thus?
Sure this is not the place? call hither Fame.

What would great Fortune?


Know,
Who dwells here.

Once more I report great Queen,
This is the house of Love.

It cannot be,
This place has too much shade, and looks as if
It had been quite forgotten of the Spring,
And sun beams Love, affect society
And heate, here all is cold as the hairs of Winter,
No harmony to catch the busy ear
Of passengers, no object of delight,
To take the wandering eyes, no song, no groan
Of Lovers, no complaint of Willow garlands,
Love has a Beacon upon his palace top
Of flaming hearts, to call the weary pilgrim
To rest, and dwell with him, I see no fire
To threaten, or to warm, can Love dwell here?

If there be noble love upon the world,
Trust Fame, and find it here.

Make good your boast
and bring him to us.

What does mean all this?


I told you sir we should have some device,
There's Cupid now, that little Gentleman,
Has troubled every masque at Court this seven year.

No more.


Welcome to Love, how much you honour me!
It had become me, that upon your summons
I should have waited upon mighty Fortune,
But since you have vouchsafed to visit me;
All the delights Love can invent, shall flow
To entertain you, Music through the air
Shoot your enticing harmony.

We came to dance and revel with you


I am poor
In my ambition, and want thought to reach
How much you honour Love.

What intrusion's this?
Whom do you seek here.

Tis Honour.


He'e my servant.


Fortune is come to visit us.


And has
Corrupted Love, is this thy faith to her,
On whom we both wait, to betray her thus
To Fortunes triumph, take her giddy wheel,
And be no more companion to honour
I blush to know thee, whole believe there can
Be truth in Love hereafter?

I have found
My eyes, and see my shame, and with it, this
Proud sorceress, from whom, and all her charms,
I fly again to Honour, be my guard,
Without thee I am lost and cannot boast,
The merit of a name.

Despised? I shall
Remember this affront.

What morral's this?
What melancholy object strikes a sudden
Chillnesse through all my veins, and turns me Ice?
It is the same I sent, the very same,
As the first pledge of her ensuing greatness,
Why in this mourning livery, if she live
To whom I sent it? ha, what shape of sorrow?
It is not Polidora, she was fair
Enough, and wanted not the setting off
With such a black, if thou be Polidora,
Why mourns my love? it neither does become
Thy fortune nor my joys.

But it becomes
My griefs, this habit fits a funeral,
And it were sin, my Lord, not to lament
A fry ndnew dead.

And I yet living? can
A sorrow enter but upon thy garment,
Or discomplexion thy attire, whilst I
Enjoy a life for thee? who can deserve
Weighed with thy living comforts, but a peace
Of all this Ceremony? give him a name

He was Arcadius.


Arcadius?


A Gentleman that loved me dearly once,
And does compel these poor, and fruitless drops,
Which willingly would fall upon his hearse,
To imbalme him twice.

And are you sure hes dead?


As sure as you're living sir, and yet
I did not close his eyes, but he is dead,
And I shall never see the same Arcadius,
He was a man so rich in all that's good,
At least J thought him so, so perfect in
The rules of honour, whom alone to imitate
Were glory in a Prince, Nature her self
Till his creation wrought imperfectly,
As she had made but trial of the rest,
To mould him excellent.

And is he dead?
Come, shame him not with praises, recollect
Thy scattered hopes, and let me tell my best,
And dearest ^olidora, that he lives,
Still lives to honour thee.

Lives, where?


Look here.
Am not I worth your knowledge?

And my duty,
You are Demetrius King of Epire, sir.
I could not easily mistake him so,
To whom I gave my heart.

Mine is not changed,
But still hath fed upon thy memory,
These honours, and additions of state
Are lent me for thy sake, be not so strange,
Let me not lose my entertainment now
I am improved, a^d raised unto the height,
Beneath which, I did blush to ask thy love.

Give me your pardon sir, Arcadius,
At our last meeting without argument
To move him more then his affection to me,
Vowed he did love me; love me bove all women,
And to confirm his heart was truly mine,
He wished, I tremble to remember it,
When he forsook his Polidora's love,
That Heaven might kill his happiness on earth:
Was not this nobly said, did not this promise
A truth to shame the Turtles?

And his heart
Is still the same, and I thy coustant Lover.

Give me your leave I pray, I would not say
Arcad^us was perjured, but the same day
Forgetting all his promises, and oaths,
While yet they hung upon his lips, for sooke me,
Dee not remember this too, gave his faith
From me, transported with the noise of greatness,
And would be married to a Kingdom.

But heaven permitted not I should dispose
What was ordained for thee.

It was not virtue
In him, for sure he found no check, no sting
In his own bosom, but gave freely all
The reins to blind ambition.

I am wounded,
The thought of thee in the throng of all my ^yes,
Like poison powered in Nectar, turns me frantic,
Dear, if Arcadius have made a fault,
Let not Demetrius be punishd for it,
He pleads that ever will be constant to thee.

Shall I believe mans flatteries again,
Lose my sweet rest, and peace of thought again,
Be drawn by you, from the straight paths of virtue
Into the maze of Love.

I see compassion in thy eye, that chides me
If I have either soul, but what's containd
Within these words* or if one syllable
Of their full force, ^e not made good by me,
May all relenting thoughts in you take end,
And thy disdain be doubled, from thy pardon,
I'll count my Coronation, and that hour
Fix with a rubricke in my Calender,
As an auspicious time to entertain
Affairs of weight with Princes, think who now
Entreats thy mercy, come thou shall it be kind,
And divide titles with me

Hear me sir,
I loved you once for virtue, and have not
A thought so much unguarded as to be won
From my truth, and innocence with any
Motives of state to affect you,
Your bright temptation mourns while it stays here
Nor can the triumph of glory, which made you
Forget me, so court my opinion back,
Were you no King, I should be sooner drawn
Again to love you, but tis now too late,
A low obedience shall become me best*
May all the joys I want
Still wait on you, if time hereafter tell you
That sorrow for your fault hath struck me dead,
May one soft tear drop from your eye, in ^ty
Bedew my hearse, and I shall sleep secu^ely
I have but one word more for goodness sake,
For your own honour sir correct your passion
To her you shall love next, and I forgive you.

Her heart is frozen up, nor can warm prayers
Thaw it to any softness.

I'll fetch her sir again.


Persuade her not.


You give your passion too much leave to triumph.
Seek in another what she denies.

Where's the King? oh sir, you are undone,
A dangerous treason is a foot.

What treason?


Cassandra, and Eubulus have proclaimed
Another King, whom they pretend to be
Leonatus your elder brother, he that was,
But this morning prisoner in the Castle.

Ha?


The easy Epirotes
Gather in multitudes to advance his title,
They have seized upon the Court, secure your person
Whilst we raise power to curb this insurrection.

Lose no time then.


We will not arm one man,
Speak it again, have I a brother living?
And must be no King.

What means your grace?


This news doth speak me happy, it exalts
My heart, and makes me capable of more
Then twenty Kingdoms.

Will you not sir, stand
Upon your guard?

I'll stand upon my honour,
Mercy releives me.

Will you lose the Kingdom?


The worlds too poor to bribe me, leave
Me all, lest you extenuate my fame, and I
Be thought to have redeemed it by your counsel,
You shall not share one scruple in the honour;
Titles may set a gloss upon our name,
But virtue only is the soul of Fame.

He's strangely possessed Gentlemen.


Here's a strange turn, Lisander.


Tis a Kingdom
Easily purchasd, who will trust the faith
Of multitudes?

It was his fault, that would
So tamely give hi^ title to their mercy,
The new King has possession.

And is like
To keep't, we are alone, what doft think of
This innovation? ift not a fine lig?
A precious cunning in the late Protector
To shuffle a new Prince into the state.

I know not how they have shuffled, but my head on it
A false card is turned up trump, but fates look too't.

Does he not carry it bravely.


Excellently.
Philocles Lisander.

Your Lordships servants,
Are we not bound to heaven, for multiplying
These blessings on the Kingdom.

Heaven alone
Works miracles my Lord.

I think your Lordship
Had as little hope once, to see these Princes
Revive.

Here we must place our thanks,
Next providence, for preserving
So dear a pledge.

The King.


It is our pleasure
The number of our guard be doubled, give
A Largess to the Soldiers; but dismiss not
The troops till we command.

May it please.


It will not please us otherwise, my Lord,
We have tried your faith,

Does he not speak with confidence?


My Lords, and Gentlemen, to whose faith we must
Owe next to heaven our fortune, and our safety,
After a tedious eclipse, the day
Is bright, and we invested in those honours,
Our blood, and birth did challenge.

May no time
Be registered in our annalls, that shall mention
One that had life to oppose your sacred person,

Let them whose titles forged and flaw'd suspect
Their states security, our right to Epire,
Heaven is obliged to prosper, t^eason has
No face so black to fright it, all my cares
Levell to this, that I may worthily
Manage the province, and advance the honour
Of our dear Country, and be confident,
If an expense of blood, may give addition
Of any happiness to you, I shall
Offer my heart the sacrifice, and rejo^e
To make my self a ghost, to have inscribed
Upon my marble, but whose cause I dyed for.

May Heaven avert such danger.


Excellent Prince,
In whom we see the Copy of his Father
None but the son of Theodosius,
Could have spoke thus.

You are pleased to interpret well,
Yet give me leave to say in my own justice,
I have but expressed the promptness of my soul
To serve you all, but tis not empty wishes
Can satisfy our mighty charge, a weight
Would make an Atlas double, a Kings name
Doth sound harmoniously to men at distance,
And those who cannot penetrate beyond
The bark, and outskinne of a common wealth,
Or state, have eyes but ravished with the Ceremony
That must attend a Prince, and understand not
What cares allay the glories of a Crown,
But good Kings find and feel the contrary,
You have tried, my Lord* the burden, and can tell
It would require a Pilot of more years
To steer this Kingdom, now imposed on me,
By justice of my birth.

I wish not life,
But to partake those happy days, which must
Succeed these fair proceedings, we are blessed,
But sir be sparing to your self, we shall
Hazard our joys in you too soon, the burden
Of state affairs impose upon your counsel.
Tis fitter that we waste our lives then you,
Call age too soon upon you with the trouble,
And cares that threaten such an undertaking,
Preserve your youth.

And choose you our protector,
Is't that you would conclude my Lord? We will
Deserve our subjects faith for our own sake,
Not sit an idle gazer at the helm

How observed you that,
Mark how Cassander's planet struck.

He might have looked more calmly for all that
I begin to fear; but do not yet seem troubled.

With what news travails his hast? I must secure
My self betimes, not be a King in jest,
And wear my crown a tenant to their breath.

Demetrius sir, your brother,
With other traitors that oppose your claims
Are fled to the Castle of Nestorius
And fortify.

I said not so my Lord.


I'll have it thought so, hence.


Plant forces to batter
The walls, and in their ruin bring us word
They live not.

Good sir hear me.


Let it work,
Were Demetrius dead, we easily might uncrowne
This swollen impostor, and my son be fair
To peace with young Sophia, who I hear
Repents her late affront.

Their lives may do
You service, let not blood stain your beginnings
The people not yet warm in their allegiance,
May think it worth their tumult to revenge it
With hazard of your self.

Who dares but think it?
Yet offer first our mercy, if they yield,
Demetrius must not live, my Lord your counsel,
What if he were in heaven?

You have my consent,
You shannot stay long after him.

Sophia is
Not my sister,
To prevent al that may endanger us, we'll marry her
That done no matter though we stand discovered,
For in her title then we are King of Epire,
Without dispute.

Hum? in my judgement sir,
That wonot do so well.

Whats your opinion?


He countermines my plot: are you so cunning


Whats that you mutter sir?


I mutter sir?


Best say I am no King, but some impostor
Raised up to gull the state.

Very fine to have said within
Few hours you'd been no King, nor like to be,
Was not in the compass of high treason
I take it.

Restrain your anger, the Kings moved, speak not*


I will speak louder, do I not know him?
That self same hand that raised him to the throne
Shall plu ke him from it, is this my reward?

Our guard, to prison with him,


Me to prison?


Off with his head.


My head?


Vouchsafe to hear me, great sir.


How dares he be so insolent?
Jha wrought my self into a fine condition,
Dee know me Gentlemen?

Very well my Lord;
How are we bound to heaven for multiplying
These blessings on the Kingdom.

We allow it.


Counsel did never blast a Princes ear.


Convey him to the sanctuary of rebels,
Nestorius house, where our proud brother has
Enscon^d himself, they'll entertain him lovingly,
He will be a good addition to the traitors,
Obey me or you dye for it, what are Kings
When subjects dare affrout em.

I shall vex
Thy soul for this.

Away with him, when Kings
Frown, let offenders tremble, this flows not
From any cruelty in my nature, but
The fate of an usurper, he that will
Be confirmed great without just title to it,
Must lose compassion, know whats good, not do it.

Madam, the Princess Sophia.


I attend her highness.
How much your grace honours your humble servant

I hope my brother's well.


I hope so too Madam.


Do you but hope? he came to be your guest.


We are all his whilst he is pleased to honour
This poor roof with his royal presence Madam.

I came to ask your pardon Polidora,


You never Madam trespas'd upon me,
Wrong not your goodness.

I can be but penitent,
Unless you point me out some other way
To satisfy.

Dear Madam do not mock me.


there is no injury like that to love,
I find it now in my own sufferings,
But though I would have robbed thee of Arcadius
Heaven knew a way to reconcile your hearts,
And punishd me in those joys you have found,
I read the story of my loss of honour,
Yet can rejoice, and heartily, that you
Have met your own again.

Whom do you mean?


My brother.


He is found to himself and honour,
He is my King, and though I must acknowledge
He was the glory of my thoughts, and I
Loved him as you did Madam, with desire
To be made his, reason, and duty since,
Formed me to other knowledge, and I now
Look on him without any wish of more
Then to be called his subject.

Has he made
Himself less capable by being King.

Of what?


Of your affection.


With your pardon Madam.
Love in that sense you mean, lest Polidora
When he forsook Arcadius, I disclaim
All ties between us, more then what a name
Of King must challenge from my obedience.

This does confirm my jealousy, my heart,
For my sake Madam, has h^ lost his value?

Let me beseech your grace, I may have leave
To answer in some other cause, or person,
This argument but opens a sad wound
To make it bleed a fr^sh, we may change this
Discourse, I would elect some subject, whose
Praises may more delight your care then this
Can mine; let's talk of young Lisimachus.

Ha? my presaging fear^s.


How does you^ grace?


Well, you were talking of Lisimachus,
Pray give me your opinion of him.

Mine?
It will be much short of his worth, J think him
A gentleman so perfect in all goodness,
That if there be one in the world deserves
The best of women, heaven created him,
To make her happy.

You have in a little, Madam,
Expressed a Volume of mankind, a miracle,
But all have not the same degree of faith,
He is but young.

What mistress would desire
Her servant old? he has both Spring to please
Her eye, and Summer to return a harvest.

He is black.


He sets a beauty off more rich,
And she that's fair will love him, faint complexions
Betray effeminate minds, and love of change,
Two beauties in a bed, compound few men,
He's not so fair to counterfeit a woman,
Nor yet so black, but blushes may betray
His modesty.

His proportion exceeds not.


That praises him, and well compacted frame
Speaks temper, and sweet flow of elements,
Vast buildings are more of^ for show then use,
I would not have my eyes put to the travel
Of many acres, ere I could examine
A man from head to foot, he has no great,
But he may boast, an eligant composition.

I'll hear no more, you have so far outdone
My injuries to you, that I call back
My penitence, and must tell Polidora,
This revenge ill becomes her. Am I thought
So lost in soul to hear, and forgive this?
In what shade do I live? or shall I think
I have not at the lowest enough merit,
Setting aside my birth, to poyze with yours,
Forgive my modest thoughts, if I rise up
My own defence, and tell this unjust Lady
So great a Winter hath not frozen yet
My cheek, but there is something nature planted,
That carries as much bloom, and spring upon it
As yours, what flame is in your eye, but may
Find competition here (forgive again
My Virgin honour,) what is in your lip,
To tice the enamoured soul, to dwell with more
Ambition then the yet unwithered blush
That speaks the innocence of mine.
Oh brother?

I'll talk with you anon, my Polidora,
Allow thy patience till my breath recover
Which now comes lade^ with the richest news
Thy ear was ever blessed with.

Both your looks,
And voice express some welcome accident.

Guess what in wish could make me fortunate
And heaven hath dropped that on Demetrius.

What means this ecstasy?


Twere sin to busy
Thy thoughts upon it, I'll tell thee that I could
Retain some part, tis too wide a joy
To be expressed so soon, and yet it falls
In a few syllables, thou wot scarce believe me,
I am no King.

Hows that!


Good heaven forbid.


Forbid? Heaven has relieved me with a mercy
I knew not how to ask, I have they say
An elder brother living, crowned already,
I only keep my name Demetrius,
Without desire of more addition,
Then to return thy servant.

You amaze me,
Can you rejoice to be deposd:

It but
Translates me to a fairer and better Kingdom
In Polidora.

Me?


Did you not say,
Were I no King you could be drawn to love
Me again, that was consented to in Heaven,
A Kingdom first betrayed my ambitious soul
To forget thee, that, and the flattering glories,
How willingly Demetrius do resign,
The Angels know, thus naked without titles
I throw me on thy charity, and shall
Boast greater Empire to be thine again, then
To wear the triumphs of the world upon me.

Be not so careless of your self, the people
Gather in multitudes, to your protection
Offering their lives, and fortunes, if they may
But see you sir, and hear you speak to em,
Accept their duties, and in time prevent
Your ruin.

Be not desperate, tis counsel.


You trouble me with noise, speak Polidora


For your own sake preserve your self,
My fears distract my reason.

Lord Lisimachus
With something that concerns your safety, is
Fled hither, and desires a present hearing.

His soul is honest, be not sir a mad man,
And for a Lady give up all our freedoms.

I'll say any thing here Lisimachus.


Dear brother hear him.


Sir, I come to yield
My self your prisoner, if my father have
Raised an Impostor to supplant your title
Which I suspect and inwardly do bleed for.
I shall not only by the tender of
My self declare my innocence, but either
By my unworthy life secure your person,
Or by what death you shall impose, reward
The unexpected treason.

Brave young man,
Did you not hear him brother?

I am not minded.


Be witness Madam, I resign my heart
It never was another, you declare
Too great a satisfaction, I hope
This will destroy your jealousy,
Remember now your danger.

I despise it,
What fate dares injure me?

Yet hear me sir.


Forgive me Polidora, you are happy,
My hopes are removed farther, I had thought
Lisimachus had meant you for his mistress,
Tis misery to feed, and not know where
To place my jealousy.

Now tis too late,
You may be deaf, until the Cannon make,
You find your sense, we are shut up now by
A troupe of Horse, thank your self.

They will
Admit conditions.

And allow us q^arter.


We are all lost.


Be comforted.


News my Lord Cassandra sent by the new King.
To bear us company.

Not as prisoner?


It does appear no otherwise, the soldiers
Declare how much they love him, by their noise
Of scorn, and joy to see him so rewarded.

It cannot be.


You'll find it presently,
He curses the new King, talks treason against him
As nimble as he were in's shirt, he's here,

Oh let me beg until my knees take root
In the earth, sir, can you pardon me?

For what?


For Treason, desperate, most malicious treason
I have undone you sir*

It does appear
You had a will.

I'll make you all the recompense I can,
But ere you kill me hear me, know the man,
Whom I to serve my unjust ends, advanced
To your throne, is an impostor, a mere counter^eit,
Eubulus son.

It is not then our brother?


An insolent usurper, proud, and bloody
Seleucus, is no leprosy upon me?
There is not punishment enough in nature
To quit my horrid act, I have not in
My stock of blood to satisfy with weeping,
Nor could my soul though melted to a flood
Within me, gus^ out tears to wash my stain off.

How? an Impostor, what will become on's now?
We are at his mercy.

Sir, the peoples hearts
Will come to their own dwelling, when they see
I dare accuse my self, and suffer for it,
Have courage then young King, thy ^ate cannot
Be long compelled.

Rise, our misfortune
Carries this good, although it lose our hopes,
It makes you friend with virtue, we'll expect
What providence will do.

You are too merciful.


Our duties shall beg heaven still to preserve you.


Our enemy desires some parley sir.


'Tis not amiss to hear their proposition.


I'll wait upon you.


Thou art my angel, and can best instruct me,
Boldly present our selves, you'll with Cassandra.

And in death be blessed
To find your charity.

Lisimachus,


Madam.


They will not miss your presence, the small time
Is spent in asking of a question.

I wait your pleasure.


Sit I have a suite to you.


To me? it must be granted.


If you have
Cancelled your kind opinion of me,
Deny me not to know, who hath succeeded
Sophia in your heart. I beg the name
Of your new Mistress.

You shall know her Madam,
If but these tumults cease* and fate allow us
To see the Court again, I hope you'll bring
No mutiny against her, but this is
No time to talk of Love, let me attend you.

I must expect, till you are pleased to satisfy
My poor* request* conduct me at your pleasure*

They are too slow, dispatch new messengers,
To entreatem fairly hither, I am extasied,
Were you witness for me too, is it possible
I am what this affirms* true Leonatus*
And were you not my father, was I given
In trust to you an Infant?

Tis a truth,
Our soule's bound to acknowledge* you supplied
The absence and opinion of my son,
Who dyed but to make you my greater care
I know not of Demetrius, but supposed
Him dead indeed, as Epire thought you were,
Your Fathers character doth want no testimony,
Which but compared with what concerns Demetrius
Will prove it self King Theodosius act,
Your royal Father.

I am subscribed to both his Legacies
By oath obliged to secrecy, until
Thus fairly summoned to reveal the trust.

Cassandra had no thought you would prove thus.
To whose policy I gave this aim, although
He wrought you up to serve but as his engine
To batter young Demetrius, for it was
Your Fathers prudent jealousy, that made him
Give out your early deaths, as if his soul
Prophesied his own first, and feared to leave
Either of you to the unsafe protection,
Of one whose study would be to supplant
Your right, and make himself the King of Epire.

Your sister fair Sophia in your Fathers
Life, was designed to marry with Lisimachus
That guarded her, although she used some art
To quit her pupillage, and being abso'ute,
Declared love to Demetrius, which enforced
Macarius to discover first your brother.

No more, least you destroy again Leonatus*
With wonder of his fate, are they not come yet?
Something it was, I felt within my envy
Of young Demetrius fortune, there were seeds
Scattered upon my heart, that made it swell
With thought of Empire, Princes I see cannot
Be totally eclipsed, but wherefore stays
Demetrius, and Sophia, at whose names
A gentle spirit walked upon my blood.

They are here,


Then thus I fly into their bosoms,
Nature has rectifi'd in me Demetrius,
The wanderings of ambition, our dear sister
You are amazed, I did expect it, read
Assurance there, the day is big with wonder,

What means all this?


Lisimachus, be dear to us,
Cassandra, you are welcome too.

Not I,
I do not look for it, all this shannot bribe
My conscience to your ^action, and make
Me false again, Seleueus is no son
Of Theodosius, my dear Countrymen
Correct your erring duties, and to that,
Your lawful King, prostrate your selves, De^rius
Doth challenge all your knees.

All love and duty,
Flow from me to my royal King, and brother
I am confirmed.

You are too credulous,
What can betray your faith so much?

Sophia, you appear sad, as if your will
Gave no consent to this days happiness.

No joy exceeds Sophia's for your self.


With your pardon sir, I apprehend
A cause that makes her troubled, she desires
To know what other mistress since her late
Unkindness, I have chosen to direct
My faith and service.

Another Mistress.


Yes sir.


And does our sister love Lisimachus?


Here's something would confess.


He must not dare
To affront Sophia.

How my shame confounds me,
I beg your justice, without pity on
My age.

Your penance shall be, to be faithful
To our state hereafter.

May you live long and happy,
Leonatus King of Epire.

But where's your other Mistress?


Even here sir.


Our sister? is this another Mistress sir?


It holds
To prove my thoughts were so when she began
Her sorrow for (...) (...), that sweetness
Deserved I should est (...) her another mistress,
Then when she cruelly forsook Lisimacus,
Your pardon Madam, and receive a heart
Proud with my first devotio^ to serve you

In this I am crowned again, now mine for ever.


You have deceived her happily,
Joy to you both.

We are ripe for the same wishes,
Polidora's part of me.

He all my blessing.


Heaven power full joys upon you.


We are all blessed,
There wants but one to fill your arms.

My mistress,
And wife shall be my Country, to which I
Was in my birth contracted, your love since
Hath played the Priest to perfect what was Ceremony
Though Kingdoms, by just^tkes prove our own,
The subjects hearts do (...) secure a Crown.

THere is no Coronation to day.
Unless your gentle votes do crown our Play,
If smiles appear within each Ladies eye,
Which are the leading stars in this fair sky,
Our solemn day sets glorious, for then
We hope by their soft influence, the men
Will grace what they first shined on, maked appear,
(Both) how we please, and bless our co^tous ^are
With your applause, more welcome then the Bell^,
Upon a triumph, Bonfires, or what else
Can speak a Coronation. And though I
Were late disposed and spoiled of Majesty*
By the kindayde of your hands, Gentlemen,
I quickly may be Crowned a Queen (...)*

