IT is a principle by Nature wrote
In all our understanding, there is not end.
One Art or action, but it must tend
And move from some beginning to its
The Soldiers that wear the honoured baize
Upon their brows, and glorious Trophies raise
To fame on pile of wounds, knew a time when
They sucked at war. Your Muse inspired men
And of diviner earth, sacred for wit,
Crept out of their first elements to it:
The goodliest Harvest had first seed and hope,
Ere it could lade with an enriching crop
The rural Team, th'exactest building first
Grew from a stone, though afterward it durst
Wrap his fair head in clouds: nothing so true,
As all things have beginning: upon you
Dwell candid application; this Play is
The first fruits of a Muse, that before this
Never saluted Audience, nor doth mean,
To swear himself a Factor for the Scene.
Though he employ some hours he only prays
You take it as first borne, although he says,
He meant it not his heir, since tis unjust
One should have all, as in the Law it must.
Accept then a beginning; all men know,
He first kissed baize, that wore them on his brow.

Sir, this Welshman is in love with my sister Selina, and hath chosen me for
his Prolocutor.


O! this Love will make us all mad, thou know I loved a ^ifter of thine
once, but heaven knows where she is, I think she loved me too, dost think
she did not?


Well, thy father has reason to curse himself, beside some that she and I
have.


Nay, nay, thou't fall into passion again, when things are past recovery,
'twas a good wench, but come, prithee leave to think on her.


Nay, I ha done, what shal's do?


Any thing but talk of State matters: thou hast much intelligence in the
world, prithee whats the news abroad? I come forth a purpose to hear some,
and this is an age of novelties.


News? O excellent news!


Prithee what is't? I long to hear some.


There is no news at all.


Call you that excellent news?


Is it not good news, that there is no bad news? the truth is, the
newes-maker Master Money-lacke is sick of a consumption of the wit.


The newes-maker? why, is there any newes-maker?


Oh sir, how should younger brothers have maintained themselves, that have
travelled, and have the names of Countries, and Captains without book, as
perfect as their prayers, I and perfecter too? for I think there is more
probability of forgetting their prayers, they say them so seldom; I tell you
sir, I have known a Gentleman that has spent the best part of a thousand
pound, while he was prentice to the trade in Holland, and out of three sheets
of paper, which was his whole stock, a pen and inke-horne he borrowed, he set
up shop, and spent a hundred pound a year upon his whore, and found sheets
for them both to lye in too: it has been a great profession; mary most
commonly they are Soldiers: a peace concluded, is a great plague unto 'em, and
if the wars hold, we shall have store of them; O, they are men worthy of
commendations, they speak in print.


Are they Soldiers?


Faith so they would be thought, though indeed they are but mungrels, not
worthy of that noble attribute; they are indeed bastards, not sons of war
and true Soldiers, whose divine souls I honour, yet they may be called great
spirits too, for their valour is invisible, these I say will write you a
battle in any part of Europe at an hours warning, and yet never set foot out
of a Tavern, describe you Towns, Fortifications, Leaders, the strength a'th
enemies, what Confederates, every days march, not a Soldier shall lose a
hair* or have a bullet fly between his Arms, but he shall have a Page to
wait on him in quarto, nothing destroys 'em but want of a good memory, for if
they escape contradiction, they may be chronicled.


Why, thou art wise enough to be an Informer.


I mary, now you speak of a Trade indeed, the very Atlas of a State Politic,
the Common-shore of a City, nothing falls amiss unto 'em, and if there be no
filth in the Common-wealth can live by honesty, and yet be knaves by their
privilege, there is not an oath but they will have money for it!


Oh brave Trade.


They can eat men alive and digest 'em, they have their conscience in a string,
and can stifle it at their pleasure, the Devils journeymen, set up for
themselves, and keep a damnation house of their own; indeed they seldom
prove Aldermen, yet they are taken for Knights every day a'th week, when they
ride post, they have the art of insinuation, and speak writs familiarly, they
are Agents as I have heard for the Devil in their life time, and if they dye
in their bed, have this privilege, to be sons of hell by adoption, and take
place of Seriants.


Stay. Who's there? thy sister and Infortunio: let's observe.


I must have other answer, for I must love you.


Must? but I do not see any necessity that I should love you, I do confess
you are a proper man.


O do not mock Selina, let not excellence
Which you are full of, make you proud and scornful,
I am a Gentleman, though my outward part
Cannot attract affection, yet some have told me,
Nature hath made me what she need not shame,
Yet look into my heart, there you shall see
What you cannot despise, for there you are
With all your graces waiting on you, there
Love hath made you a Throne to sit, and rule
Ore (...), all my thoughts obeying
And honouring you as Queen, pass by my outside:
My br^st I dare compare with any man.

^ can see this br^st you (...) of so?

Oh ^'tis an easy work, for though it be
Not to be pierced by the dull (...) who^ beam
Is spent on outward shapes, th^r^ is a way
To make a search into hiddenst passage.
I know you would not love to please your sense:
A Tree that bears a ragged vnleau'd top
In depth of Winter, may when Summer comes
Speak by his fruit, he is not dead but youthful,
Though once he showed no sap: my heart's a plant
Kept down by colder thoughts, and doubtful fears,
Your frowns like Winter storms make it seem dead,
But yet it is not so, make it but yours,
And you shall see it spring, and shoot forth leaves
Worthy your eye, and the oppressed sap
Ascend to every part to make it green,
And pay your love with fruit when Harvest comes.
If my affection be suspected, make
Experience of my loyalty, by some service
Though full of danger, you shall know me better,
And so discern the truth of what you see not.

Then you confess your love is cold as yet,
And Winter's in you heart.

Mistake me not, Silena, for I say
My heart is cold, not love.

And yet your love is from your heart I'll warrant.

Oh you are nimble to mistake,
My heart is cold in your displeasures only,
And yet my love is fervent, for your eye
Casting out beams, maintains the flame it burns in.
Again, sweet Love,
My heart is not mine own, 'tis yours, you have it,
And while it naked lies, not deigned your bosom
To keep it warm, how can it be but cold,
In danger to be frozen? blame not it,
You only are in fault it hath no heate.

Well sir, I know you have Rhetoric, but I
Can without art give you a final answer.

Oh stay, and think a while, I cannot relish
You should say final, sweet, deliberate,
It doth concern all the estate I have,
I mean not dunghill treasure, but my life
Doth stand or fall to it, if your answer be
That you can love me, be it swift as lightning,
But if you mean to kill me, and reject
My so long loue-deuotions, which I have paid
As to an Altar, stay a little longer,
And let me count the riches I shall lose*
By one poor aerie word, first give me back
That part of Infortunio that is lost
Within your love, play not the Tyrant with me.

You're ouer-weake to let your passions sway you:
If I knew any thing I had of yours,
I would not do you that injustice, sir,
To let it stay with me, and for your love
I cannot pay it back again with mine,
Either release the debt, or I shall dye in it,
Your suite is fruitless, hopeless, pardon me, farewell.

Now by all my hopes you are to blame, sister, come, this Gentleman deserves
your love, Infortunio.


Brother, you forget your self.


Why, I do remember I am your brother, I say you must love him.


Must?


What, does that move your spirit? what are you, but you may love? be not
petulant, you're a baggage and not worthy of a man, by heaven I now could kick
her.


Thy the other sister was of calmer temper, this a true woman.


Sir, had not nature made you brother to her, I should be angry.


Alas poor Gentleman, I do not feel my self in such an humour for Hilaria,
and yet by this hand I love her well enough, and now I think on it, I promised
her my company, she has a damnable vsurious stinking wretch to her father, that
cannot abide me, but 'tis no matter, this wench and I may find a place to meet
in, in spite of his eyes and spectacles. How now Gorgon, what says she?


Sir, I have done your remembrances to Mistress Hilaria, and told her you should
find her coming by and by, but you were best pass in some obscurity, for her
father Rufaldo is hard by sir. Lupus in Fabula.


Gasparo, and thou love me, show thy wit to entertain this piece of black
Damask and Velvet guards, while I go in to Hilaria.


Old men are the truest lovers, young men are inconstant and wag with every
wind, we never move, but are as true as steel.


But in women's matters as weak as water, as weak as water.


Besides, sweet Love, but do I court a shadow? to see whither love will carry
a man: let me see, I could find in my heart to bestow a ring upon my
Sweet-heart, but that I am loath to part with it: hem, I will get but one
child, and that shall be a boy, lest having too many children, I undo my
heir, and my goods be divided. O sweet Selina, O amiable Selina; sure I am not
old.


I have it, Signior Gasparo, pray let me begin with my Merchant if you love me,
and if yo^ (...) it, second me.


Go to Gorg^n, let's see thy w^ow.


Old men walk with a staff, and creep along the streets, hold their heads
below their girdle, falter in their speech, foam at mouth, and breathe ten
times in a furlong, and are ready to spit their lungs on every mans threshold.


God save you sir.


God a mercy honest Gorgon.


I cry you mercy sir, I'll assure you sir, I took you for Master Rufaldo the
old Merchant.


Why, and^am not I? is not the fellow drunk? I am Rufaldo.


It may be some kin to him, but not that Rufaldo I mean, you are younger a
fair deal.


I am that Rufaldo, the Merchant, that buried my wife lately, and have one
daughter Hilaria, ancient acquaintance with Cornelio and your Master Antonio.


Oh sir, you must excuse me for that.


Is thy name Gorgon?


What else sir, honest Gorgon I?


Do I know thee to be Gorgon? what, shall I be faced out of my self? why thou
varlet, who am I, if not Rufaldo?


Why sir, 'tis plain, you have no gray hairs in your head, your cheek is
scarlet, a wanton youthful eye; Rufaldo had a head like frost, his eyes sunk
into his hollows, a rugged brow, a hoary beard, and all his body not worth a
drop of blood, a very crazie old meale-mouth'd Gentleman, you are younger at
least by thirty years.


I'll assure thee I was Rufaldo, when I rose in the morning.


You have not slept since, have you?


No.


'Tis the more strange. I have heard of some that have been changed in a
dream, but never waking before: this is strange, nay admirable!


Young, changed, art sure thou dost not mock?


I were a very knave then, if you be Rufaldo, I hope your worship knows I have
been bound to my good behaviour.


Altered young, ha! I would I were; and yet me thinks I am livelier then I was,
I feel my joints pliable as wax, and my voice is stronger too. But tell me,
honest Gorgon, is it possible for an old man to be young again?


Nay, I see you'll not believe me: well sir, I will be bold to report the wonder
abroad, and astonish all your friends.


Nay, stay, honest Gorgon, ha! young, no gray hairs? stay, who's here?


Ha! 'tis not he, I'll speak to him, no 'tis in vain, I'll see if he knows me.
-- He passes by.


Gasparo! what, does not he know me too?


Sir, I should know you, are you not Signior Petrucchio, the dancing Master?


Tricks, passages, I am Rufaldo, old Rufaldo.


Rufaldo indeed is old, but you are young, you do retain his countenance, I
would swear you were he, but you are younger far.


'Tis so, I am changed, I am younger then I was, I am that Rufaldo, believe, I
know you to be a learned Gentleman, named Gasparo, I was told before I was
altered, but not to trouble you with many questions, only one, Gasparo, is it
a thing possible for an old man to be young again? I know 'tis admirable, but
is it possible? you are a Scholar.


Possible? oh yes, ^theres no question, for we see by experience, Stags cast
their old horns, and prove vigorous, Snakes cast off their old coats, Eagles
renew their age, your plants do it familiarly, the Phoenix when she is old,
burns herself to ashes, from thence revives a young Phoenix again. Possible?
I have heard some old men have been twice children sir, -- therefore' this not
impossible.


Tis very strange: I am not yet confident.


There be receipts in Physic, sir, to keep them young, saving that time
runs on a little beforehand with em: yes, and to make young, since it is
harder to make alive when they are dead, then to make young when they are
alive, and Physic doth revive some out of all question, though not so
familiarly as kill, for that they do with a little study; mary I think, if it
were as gainful to the Phisicion to restore as to destroy, he would practise
the Art of recovery very faithfully.


Why, do you think it would not prove as gainful?


Oh! by no means, for where an old man would give a hundred pound, to have
forty or fifty years wiped off the old score of his life, his wife or next
heir would join rather then fail, to out-bid him half on it, to put him out
of debt quite, and to send his old leaking vessel into mare mortuum.


Well, well, but if I be young, I have took no Physic for it.


If nay, 'tis past if, and, and too, you are certainly restored, let me see,
you look like one of four, or six and thirty, not a minute above, and so
much a man may take you for.


Well, I know not what to say too't, there is some power in love has blessed me:
now Selina, be thou gracious.


Are you in love? nay, the w^der is not so great; who can express the power of
Love? I have read of a Painter named Pigmalion, that made the Picture of a woman
so to the life, that he fell in love with it, courted it, lay in bed with it,
and by power of Love, it became a soft-natur'd wench indeed, and he begot I
know not how many children of her. Well sir, Selina cannot choose but be mad
for you.


Not mad, Gasparo, I would be loath to be troubled with her and she be mad.


Yes, and she be mad in love, there is no harm in it, she cannot be too mad in
love, your Cornucopia may be ^bated at pleasure, besides sir, the best moral
men say, Love it self is a madness, and the madder your wife is, the more
sure you may be she loves you.


No, no, I love no madness on any condition, for fear of being horne-mad.


Why sir, madness is not such a discredit, as the age goes: you know there are
many mad fashions, and what man but some times may be mad? are not your great
men mad, that when they have enough, will pawn their soul for a Monopoly?
besides mad Lords, what do you think of Ladies at some time of the Moon, you
may spell em in their names, Maddame? you have mad Courtiers, that run madding
after Citizens wi^es: the Citizens are mad too, to trust em with their wares,
who have been so deep in their wives books before: your Justice of Peace is
some times mad too, for when he may see well enough, he will suffer any man to
put out his eye with a bribe: some Lawyers are often starke-mad, and talk
wildly, no man is able to endure their Terms.


Prithee mad-cap leave, I am almost mad to hear thee.


Well, my old young Rufaldo, if you marry Selina, I shall have a pair of
gloves, I hope, and you'll let me dance at your wedding.


That thou shalt, boy, and I'll dance my self too, hey, --


Farewell credulity; ha, ha, with what a greediness do old men run out of
their wits? 'Twas a good recreation to see with what pleasure he suffered
himself to be gulled: faith Gasparo, play out thy hand, now thou art in: me
thinks I have an excellent appetite to make my self merry with the simplicity
of this age: let me see, 'tis Spring and, I mean to give my head a purgation,
it may beat off the remembrance of my lost Love Felice: a pox of Melancholy, I
will act two or three parts if I live in spite of it, and if I die then


Seignior Gasparo, my Master would speak with you: the project too* I met the
Youth strutting like a Gentleman Usher, 'twas my invention.


But I gave it polish, Gorgon.


I confess, you took off the rough-cast, but 'twas Gorgons head brought forth
the project, from my Ioues brain came this Minerua.


I think thou art a wit.


Who, I a wit? I thought you ^ad 'more wit, then to make such a question, all
the Town takes me for a wit, here's a pate hath crakers in it and flashes.


And thou say the word, we'll join in a project of wit, to make an Ass of
the world a little, it shall make us merry, if it take no other ways, wo't
join?


By this hand, any project of wit, what is't, good Gasparo? the project.


Can be close?


As mid-night to a Bawd, or a pair of Trusses to an Irish mans buttocks.


Go to, thou shalt now then excuse me to thy Master, I will presently furnish
my self with new lodgings, and expect to hear from me shortly my bran
Delphic, I have it in Embryo, and I shall soon be delivered.


If I fail, call me Spider-catcher.


Mum, not a word, if all hit right, we may Laugh all our melancholy thoughts
away.


If I were a woman, now could I fall in love with my self: every body tells me
I am the proprest Gentleman in the Town, and I put it up, for the truth is, I
dare not give any one the lye, a pox a fighting, I can look as big as another,
but shall I be such an Ass, to venture my self with beasts? for they say,
your swords most commonly are Foxes, and have notable mettle in'em; let me
see, I am now at Rufaldoes my father in Law that must be, here he is.


Master Rufaldo, if you had been my own father, as you are but like to be my
father in Law, I should have proved my self a fool, by this hand I should not
have known you, why, how brisk and neat, and youthful he is!

I am something altered I confess, since I saw you.


By this flesh that shines, a man would not take you to be above five or six
and thirty at most, how came this?


Just as Gasparo told me, 'tis apparent, nay, nay, son, forbear to be
inquisitive, I confess I am abated of my age, the power of Love, and so forth,
but I see your fire of love is not out too.


No, mine was but raked up in the embers.


Why, this Love does make us all ingenious too: come sit down, saving your
tail sir, a cushion, we may discourse with the more case.


Pray, how does my Sweet-heart Mistress Hillaria.


She is very well, ha son, I am in love too: son I call you, I hope you will
get my daughters good-will, but you'll find her peevish.


No matter, sir, for that, I would not have her easily, I would sweat for her,
I'll warrant, I'll make her love me.


Look you can you read, I made a ditty to send to my Mistress, and my Musician
that I keep in my house, to teach my daughter, hath set it to a very good
air, he tells me: you shall hear and judge of it, I hear him tuning his
Instrument.

God of War to Cupid yield,
He is Master of the field,
He with Arrow hits the heart,
Thou with Lance the worser part.
Cupid greater is then Jove,
Since he wounded was with love,
Nay, in power by much ods
He excels the other gods.
Love transformed Jove to a Swan,
Made Vlysses a mad man,
But Rufaldo it does make
Young for his Selinas sake.

How do you relish it, ha?


Itroth the Ditty is as pretty an air as ere I saw, 'tis divided into three
regions too, I warrant you, can make Ballads easily.


Oh fie, they are barbarous and ignoble, that's beggarly.


But for all that, I have read good stuff sometimes, especially in your
fighting Ballads, When Cannons are roaring, and bullets are flying, c.


Fie, a whipping post, tinkerly stuff; how did you like the air?


As sweet an air as a man would wish to live in, but 'tis some-what backward.


Oh Music, the life of the soul.


I should have learned Music once too, but my Master had so many crochets, I
could ne'er away with it: but where is your daughter, sir? there is no Music
without her, she is the best Instrument to play upon.


And you shall have her between your legs presently.


I had as lief be betwixt hers, for all that.


Hilaria, where is this girl? I'll fetch her to you, and leave her with you,
for I have a Love of mine own, to whom I mean in person to present this
Ditty, I'll fetch her.


I do not see what fault shee'can find with me, and if I had some good word
to come over her: but I must help it out and need be, with swearing; but here
she is.


Still Antonio with you? you are a foolish girl: do I take care to provide a
husband for you? and will you cast away your self upon a Prodigal? but that I
would not discontent his sister, whom I hope to make my wife, I would forbid
him my house; therefore be wise, and take heed of him, he's giddy-headed, and
loose-bodied. The Be may buzz, but he will leave a sting: plant your love
there: upon my blessing, he has many Lordships.


Pray heaven he have good manners.


I have set open the gate of opportunity; Cupid speed us both.


Let me alone to enter my man, now the point is open: hum, stay, there's a man
in her Tables more then I looked for: foot, he kisses her, I'll call Rufaldo
back, hes out of sight, it were but a cowardly trick, for me to runaway.


Be Buzzard now, the sting of conscience eat up his gut, fry his suet, and
leave him at his death not able to weigh down a pound of candle.


He talks of suet, I do melt already.


Look, do you see that man of clothes? upon my fathers blessing he must be my
husband. What will you do?


Fight with him, his clothes are too big for him, I'll beat him till he swell
to 'em.


No, as you love me, do not strike him.


I will set a good face whatsoever come. Hilaria, how does my Love, come kiss:
why so: this comes of valour, we fall to, and he falls off, he's some coward, I
hope, and how doest Hilaria? 'tis an age since I saw thee: what Springals is
that? ha.


One that desires to be of your acquaintance, sir.


My acquaintance, who is he? none but Knights, and Knights fellows, are of my
acquaintance, I scorn Gentlemen.


But for my sake, pray be acquainted with him.


Thou shalt do much with me, sir, I am content for her sake whom I love, to
be acquainted with you, wo't borrow any money? for so do all that begin their
acquaintance with me, 'tis the fashion, he is a coward, is he not? here: nay,
and you scorn my money, I scorn your acquaintance.


Pray for my sake.


Why, he will borrow no money of me, I had never such a trick put upon me,
since I knew what acquaintance was: Ime sure there have been forty acquainted
with me, since I came to Town, and not one had not so little breeding, to let
me ask 'em the question, we could no sooner shake hands, but the other was in
my pocket: It may be 'tis his modesty. Sir, this is my Love Hilaria, and if you
will not borrow money of me, by this hand, there lies my sword, he is a coward.


It appears.


Hilaria is my Mistress, and if any man dare be so venturous, as to blast her
reputation with a foul breath, he shall breathe his last.


'Tis very sure, he shall not be immortal.


Or if you shall offer in my presence to defile her lip, or touch her hand, or
kiss but the nether part of her vesture, you had better kiss her in another
place; nay do but blow on her.


You forget your self, this is my friend.


Or wink at her, or speak to her, or make signs, or think on her to my
face, and you had better keep your thoughts to your self: now to conclude,
and if you be agrieu'd, my name is Bubulcus, and you lye.


And you lye there ath ground: why should not I knock his brains out with his
own hilts, or stake him to the ground, like a man that had hanged himself?
Sir clothes, Rat of Nilus fiction, monster, golden Calfe, oh, I would kick
thee till thou hast no more brains, then thy cousin Woodcock: I will not
dishonour my self to kill thee, half a dozen kicks will be as good as a
house of correction, out you Monkey.


Oh, that I could run thee thorough body and soul, I will challenge thee, a pox
on your toes, would I had the paring of your nails, were you dumb so long for
this?


Hence.


Who looked for you? when will you be here again? look for a challenge, the
time may come, when I will beat thee.


Has thy father left a multitude of men, to make choice of this piece of folly
to be thy husband? oh, the blindness of a covetous wretched father, that is
led only by the ears, and in love with sounds! Nature had done well to have
thrust him into the world without an eye, that like a Mole is so affected to
base earth, and there means to dig for Paradise: but come, Hilaria. Fathers
their children, and themselves abuse, That wealth a husband for their daughter
choose.


I did not think, Rufaldo, pardon me,
You could have so prevailed, but if she can
Plant her affection on ye, I'll not be
Backward to call you son.

He does appear
With all the charms of love upon his eye,
And not rough drawn, but polished, he assumes
A power above all resistance.

An old mans Darling, is a petty Queen
Above all her desires.

Nay, she shall wat nothing my wealth can purchase,
O my sweet Selina.

Rufaldo, with your patience, I would have
A word or two in private, you need not
Prejudicate me.

With all my heart.

Selina, thou know I am thy father.

My duty, sir, shall speak it.

And you know whom you have rejected.

Young Infortunio.

And you know what man he is, with whom
You mean to tie that knot, nothing but
Death is able to undo.

Rufaldo, sir, an old man.

Oh Selina, Felice thy poor sister thou recalst
To sad remembrance, but heaven alas
Knows only where she is.

Sir, I have often heard you talk of her,
But never knew that sister well.

Thou with thy uncles tenderness wast kept
Always ith Country, not until her loss
At home with me, her fate taught me to give
A liberty to thee, her I restrained
Poor wench in love with Gasparo, till betwixt
Obedience to a father, and the love
To him, she left us both, father and friend,
Now to avoid the like affliction,
I vowed thy freedom, and thou see I do
Not encounter thy affection with the bonds
A father might enforce upon his child.

I humbly thank you.

But yet Selina,
Take heed, be not too rash, I have observed
You want no common judgment, O do not
Precipitate thy self into a sorrow,
Shall waste thee with repentance, let me tell you,
There is a methode, when your passion's young
To keep it in obedience: you love Rufaldo,
Art thou not young? How will the Rose agree
With a dead Hyacinth? or the Honey Wood-bind,
Circling a withered Brier?
You can apply, can you submit your body
To bed with Ice and Snow, your blood to mingle?
Would you be deaf'd with coughing, teach your eye
How to be rheumatic? Breathes he not out
His body in diseases, and like dust
Falling all into pieces, as if Nature
Would make him his old grave: I say too much.
O what are all the riches of the world,
To an oppressed mind? which then must be
Fed with despair of change, or will gold
Buy off the imprisonment? nay, will it not
Compose the chains, that bind you to endure it?
Well I have said enough, keep still your freedom,
And loose it where you will, you shall not blame
Me for your fate, nor grieve me with your shame.

Dear father, low as earth I tender you
The duty of a daughter, I have heard you
Not with a careless ear, that liberty
You have bestowed on me, for which I owe
All that I am, doth make me confident
You will not be offended, if I tell you
My love is virtuous, were it otherwise,
I should elect as you premonish youth,
And prodigal blood: And father, I think here
I show my self your daughter, nor am I
Without good president too: how many fine
Young noble Ladies, in this Faiery I'll,
Have matched with reverend age? and live as they
Were borne from Natures purity, free from stain
Of sensual imputation, by their Loves,
Deriving heavenly honours to themselves
Above merit of equality.

No more, heavens blessing and mine
Light on thee, shall it have Rufaldo.

I would not leave Rufaldo for a world
Of rash intemperate youth, believe it sir.

Rufaldo, heard you that? she says she would not
Leave you for a world of other men.

Nor I for thousand worlds forsake my Love.
Come seal it with a kiss, another, another, another.

As close as Cockles.

Oh, that we were married! 'tis death to stay the
Ceremonies, would we were a bed together.

'Twere time I see we were at conference,
To confirm all things for the marriage,
You being agreed, I think we shall not differ
In other circumstance, and 'twere sin to let
That keep your joys asunder by delay:
Please you we'll have some treaties.

Most willingly, O my bird, my Chic, my Dove,
My America, my new-found world, I shall shortly
Run back into one and twenty again.

With what agility he moves himself,
As he were made of air? let weakness tax
Our inequality, I have a mind
Can easily contemn what the worlds malice
Out of its own first guiltiness can throw
Upon our loves, 't shall be enough for me
Thus to convince the world of so much baseness,
Lodged in luxurious thoughts, by my chaste thoughts.
Rufaldo, thou art mine, all time, me thinks
Is slow, till we be actually possessed
Of mutual enjoying. Stay, who's this
The Welshman that delivers his affection
At second hand to me.

Look you Pages, where our Sweet-hearts and Pigsnies be, her could tell what
to say to her now, know her heart very well, but pogs upon her, cannot aule her
knowledge speak Rethoricks, and Oratories, and fine words to her? look you
kanow better to fight, and cut doublets with her Welsh glaues, mark you.


Sir will you loose this opportunity, you'll curse your self in Welsh, two or
three days together for it.


Sentilwoman, if her know not her name, was Ienkin, borne in Wales, came of pig
houses, prittish bloods was have great hills and mountains aule her own, when
was get 'em again, any was her cousins, and our Countryman was never
conquered, but always have the victories prauely, have her Arms and
scushrins, to know that say you, was give in her crests great deal of
monsters, and Dragons, kille 'em with their hooks very valiantly, as any
Sentelman in the whole world: pray you now was please you place her affections
and goodwils upon her, in ways of makemoney, mark you teale plainly, lenkin
was love her very honestly, else pox upon her, and her will fight in her cause,
and quarrels, long as have any plood in her bellies and backs too, mark you.


Sir, I am bound to you for the affection
You cast on me, 'tis far above my merit.

Merits say you? awte merits are awl banished our Countries and Nations, you
know dat: pray you was her love lenkin?


Love you, sir? I know not
How to be so inhumane, not to love you,
Your parts deserve a nobler object, I am not
Worthy so much opinion of your love,
But wherein I may do you service sir,
You shall command Selina.

Shall her, was make her means and satisfactions warrant her, or say Senkin
was Sentleman of Wales, say you now Pages, was have her matrimonies wedlocks
very fast, look you, and when was get her awse her cousins, was make joys and
gratulation for her good fortunes upon her walsh Harps, know you dat very well
Pages? her fear her shall be Knighted one days, and have great cumulations of
vrships, honours, and dignities too, a great while ago.


And great Castles in the air.


Was give awl our lands, and craggy Tenements in Wales away to our cousin up
Iohn, and live her self here upon very good fashions, with our monies and
mighty riches, when her can get 'em.


How now, whither so fast, man? thou may get to hell by night, and thou go
but an Aldermans pace.


By Cats blood, her will go to the Devil and her list, what is that to her?


Cry you mercy, your name is Master lenkin.


And what have her to say to Master lenkin? lenkin is as good names as her
own, pray you was good Sentle man as her self, know very well, say you now?


Godboy, sir.


Boys, does her call her boys? hark you her? her name is lenkin, her be no
boys, no shildren.


I will not be used so.


Her shall be used worse, and her call lenkin boys, was knock as tall a man
as herself, an welsh plood be up, look you.


Can she love Rufaldo? 'tis impossible.


Piple pables, 'tis very possible.


His body has more diseases then an Hospital, an hunger-staru'd Rascal.


Raskals? sheshu! was never such names and appellations put upon her, awl her
days, Becar her will make you eat up awl her words and ignominies, or her
plade shall make holes in your bellies diggon.


A very puff, a weak Cannibal.


Hey, puff, and Cannibals, if the Devil be in your mouths, her will pick
your teeth with her welsh plade, and pay you for all your puffs, Cannibals,
warrant her.


But 'tis her fault, aloue impudent woman.
Oh, may you like Narcissus perish by
Your face, the fall of others, or vnpityed
Of heaven and earth, dye loathsome! I could curse.

Her can curse, and swear too, look you now.

Pardon divinest sex, passions do force
My reason from me, I do submit,
Crave pardon, as your creature.

Nay, and her crave pardons, and make submissions, lenkin was put up awl her
angers and indignations, farewell.


Oh, Selina!
Thou art too much an Adamant
To draw my soul unto thee, either be
Softer, or less attractive: but Rufaldo,
'Tis depth of witchcraft, oh, I could be mad,
Beyond all patience mad, it is some malice
Hath laid this poison on her.

Here's Infortunio. Alas, poor Gentleman, little does he think what black
and white is here, a bitter handful of commendations to him, my young Mistress
is mad of the old Cockscombe, and will marry him almost without asking, I
cannot tell but if she do not cuckold him, and make him cry corns on his
toes ere he dye, he has fools fortune, for a wise man would be out of hope to
avoid it, he spies me.


Whither running, Gorgon?


Not out of my wit, Sir, I have a Letter from my young Mistress Selina, must in
all haste have cleanly conveyance to old Rufaldo.


Let me but see the directions. To my beloved friend Master Rufaldo: 'tis a
lye, she was mistaken, it was I should owe this appellation, I'll not believe
the superscription, 'tis a painted face, I'd see the heart on it.


I hope, sir, you will not throw open the sheet, and discover my Mistress
secrets? How he stares!


If you love me, and wish me constant, be your own friend, and let our
marriage day begin with the next morning: thine, mine. Oh Selina, she's mad.
All womankind is mad; and I am mad: whom shall I rend in pieces for my wrongs,
and as with Atoms fill this poysned air, Rufaldo? Stay, is not she a creature
rational? oh no, there is no spark of nature in her, all is sunk, lost for
ever: stay, stay, see.


He has made a Taylors bill on it, torn't apiece ere it be discharged: What
shall I do?


This is Medias brother torn in pieces,
And this the way where she with Iason flies,
Tom Colchos, come not near 'em, see, look,
That's an arm rent off.

This?

And the hand beckons us
To cry out murder.

I'll but hold it by the hand.

That's a leg o'th boy.

This sir, a leg, it shall go with me then.

There, there 'tis, head and yellow curled locks,
His eyes are full of tears, now they do stare,
To see where all his other members lye.

So I have all his quarters, I'll presently, sir, get poles for 'em, and hang
'em upon the Gates in their postures for you.


But she and Iason are both slipped, and Argos is
Sailing home to Greece, see how the waives
Do toss the Vessel, and the winds conspire
To dash it against a Rock, it rides upon
A watery mountain, and is hid in clouds,
It cannot stay there, now, now, it tumbles,
Three fathom beneath Hell, let 'em go,
Here comes the Father of Medea now,
Calling in vain unto the gods, and spies
His Sons limbs thrown about, in stead of flowers,
To his Daughters nuptials he does take 'em up,
He knows the face, and now he tears his hair,
And raves, and cries Medea, poor old man,
Command a funeral pile for thy young Child,
And lay the pretty limbs on, from whose ashes
Shalt have another Son in the shape of Phoenix.
Shall I? excellent! Prepare a fire
All of sweet wood for my sweet boy, a fire, a fire.

'Tis now early day: fie, what a long night hath this been? the Sun went
drunk to bed the last night, and could not see to rise this morning: I could
hardly wink, I am sure, love kept me waking, and the expectation of this my
wedding day did so caper in my brains, I thought of nothing but dancing the
shaking of the sheets with my sweet-heart. It is certain, I am young every body
now tells me, so it did appear by Selina's consenting so soon to love, for
when I had but broke the Ice of my affection, she fell over head and ears in
love with me; was ever man so happy as I am? I do feel, I do feel my years
fall off, as the rain from a man that comes dropping in, I do feel my self
every day grow younger and younger still: let me see, an hundred years hence, if
I live to 't, I shall be new out of my teenes, and running into years of
discretion again: Well, I will now to Master Cornelios, and bid 'em good morrow
with a noise of Musicions, and to see the very talking of music, how my heart
leaps and dances, at my wedding already! I have bespoke the Parson to marry
us, and have promised a double fee for expedition. O now I am so proud of my
Joy, my feet do not know what ground they stand on.


Ienkin has risen very early this mornings, and been in studies and
contemplations, to make ditties and ferses upon her Mistress beauties and
pulchritudes, but the Deuil's sure in these Poetries, they call it Furies and
Raptures, look you, but Ienkins pate is almost mad, and yet her cannot awl her
inventions meet with these Furies and Raptures.


Thus far I have past without discovery: the morning is auspicious to my
flight. Selina, what an alteration hath a day made in thee, that to prevent thy
so desired marriage, thou art thus lost in a masculine habit, and dost fly
him? thou did so much love aged Rufaldo, in what a Lethargy were thou fallen,
Selina?


Iocarello, does her not name Selina? 'tis no very good manners to make
interruptions, her will hear more, look you.


Whither had reason so withdrawn it self?
I could not make distinction of a man,
From such a heap of age, aches and rheum:
Sure I was mad, and doth increase my fury,
To think with what a violence I ran
To embrace such rottenness. O, my guilty soul
Doth feel the punishment of the injury
I did to Infortunio of late,
Of whom as I despair, so shall the world,
Ever to know again haplesse Selina.
This is the morn the sacred Rites should tie
Me to Rufaldo, ripe in expectation,
But like Ixion he shall grasp a Cloud,
My empty clothes at home, Selina thus
Is turned a Shepherd, and will try her fortune;
Hard by the Shepherds have their shady dwellings,
There let Selina end her haplesse days,
Father and all farewell. Thus as Felice
My other Sister, I'll wear out my life,
Far from your knowledge: sacred love commands
Revenge and justice for my cruelty,
And reason now awaked shall lead me to it,
Thus I am safe, I go to find out that,
Will meet me every where, a just sad fate.

Pages, have her seen treames and apparitions: hark you, was Selina turned
Shepherdess, pray you?


Either we dream, or this was Selina, your Mistress, that is turned into
breeches, and become a Shepherd; the case is altered.


What a teuill is in the matters businesses, pray you? cases never was known
such cases and alterations in awl her life, woman's never wear breeches in
Wales, 'tis not possible, we are awl in treames and visions, very treames and
visions.


Sure we are awl awaked, sir, and it was Selina, did she not say she would
obscure her self from her Fathers knowledge, and live among the Shepherds
hard by?


It may be, but it is very impossible.


I am amazed, when was she seen?


Not to day, sir, I have searched her Chamber, and almost turned it out ath'
window, but no Selina.


It is very strange, is not your man Gorgon come back?


What should this mean, it is a strange absence, ath' wedding day too.


That angers me most, sir.


My heart misgives me, some fatal accident upon my life, is happened to her.


Hast thou happy news?


I have travailed all the Town over, and can meet no intelligence of her.


Be dumb, night-Rauen, she's lost, she's lost,
The Fates sure make conspiracy to take
My Daughters from me: one I lost because
I would not give her, and I have repented
Full justice for it, and am I so unhappy
To lose Selina too? but I'll not sleep,
Until I find her either alive or dead.
Rufaldo, you have interest in this sorrow,
Join in the inquisition. Oh my Girl Selina.

Have I been young for this? if I find her not, I will run, I will run, I will
run mad, mad.


No more, I know where her clothes be: if it take, applaud my invention: I have
coozned my own Father before now, and I will try new conclusions, but I must
have thy assistance and secrecy: if my Sister have a conceit of mirth to put
upon us, I may chance put her to prove her self Selina, or remove her with a
Habeas corpus.


Iocarelloes, awl is true, Selina is gone in Shepherds vestiments to the
woods Forests, but her will make travels and ambulations after her: never was
Sentilman in the hole world love as Ienkin now, to make journeys peregrinations
for a woman's, look you: but if her find her, as know her very well, her will
there make awl sure works and performances, warrant you Pages, here is
monies, pray you make provisions of breads and victuals too, know vds are very
bare places, and Shenkin was always have cud stomachs and appetites, look
you, pray you, do, pray you, do.


Be the hangings up, Curculio, and all the Chairs and Stools put into
methode? the day is old, me thinks, time runs fast, me thinks, upon the
minute, brings my disciples. Do my bills of complement still relish, Curculio,
do they please the palate, ha?


My most ingenious and noble Criticotaster, bravely bills, pills you should say,
not faced, but lined, with gold they swallow 'em greedily, and still flock to
'em, and conglomerate my son and heir of the Muses: a proclamation is as
quiet as the poor mans box, no man looks after it, not a Balladmonger has any
audience: but happy is the man that rides first post to your papers cries
admirable: your old men look upon 'em with their spectacles, as they would eye
an obligation within a minute of forfeiture.


Thou hast eaten up the furies already, and speak all buskins, but close
walk in the clouds, yet I have not heard of any Mountebank of wit durst ever
attempt to set up shop ath' trade yet: but whist, Usher, take your place.


Foot, 'tis Bubulcus.


This is the Complement-Schoole.


Three cuts and a half, hey. I give you, sir, generous salutation, and wish a
fair morn descend upon you: thrice Noble Spirit, welcome, does your worship
desire to be sprinkled with the drops of Hellicon, to gather the Pippins of
Pernassus, and have your forehead fillited with Apollinean Baize, or Laurel?


Troth, sir, I do not know how to construe what you say, although I know it be
Latin, sir: the cause of my coming to you, is to let you understand, that
here is a Complement-Schoole, and I have great desire to be taught some of your
figures, and brave words, I do mean to pay for it soundly too, sir: I thank
my stars, as they say, I have ready money about me.


You shall be verberated, and reuerberated, my exact piece of stollidity:
please you draw near, there is the star of Eloquence, under whom I am an
Hypodidascall, in English, his Usher.


A Gentleman Usher at least.


Approach without fear: here is a Pupil, sir, desires to suck the honey of
your eloquence, he is a Gentleman in Foli^.


Your accession is grateful, my most gentile lump of insipience: what
complement doth arride the palate of your generosity?


What says he pray, in English?


He asks what kind of verbosity you would be practised in? because I perceive
you are raw, I will descend to your capacity, he asks what complement you
would learn?


Why look you, sir, I would have two kinds of complements: for, sir, I am in
love, and I am in hate.


How? in love, and hate too?


Yes, I am in love with a Wench, and would have a delicate speech for her, and
I am in hate with a Gentleman, a young Animal, and I would kill him now without
danger of the Law: to tell you true, he did abuse me in the presence of my
sweet-heart, and did (saving this good company) kiss my backside.


How?


But it was with his foot, sir: now in regard I have not the heart to kill him
with my sword, I would cut him in pieces, and murder him with mouth-guns: look
you, sir, here's money, please your self: but I pray you give me a powdering
speech, for I would blow him up: I beseech you, if ever you put gall into your
Ink, make it a bitter speech.


Sir, I will draw you a sublime speech shall conjure him.


Pray do, for he has a great spirit in him.


Usher, in the mean time entertain him with some copy of amorous complement.


There is an Ushers fee belongs to my place.


Here's gold for your fee, I received it for good fee simple, I am sure.


Simple, I am sure: so, sir, look you, I should teach
you to make a leg first, but these postures anon.
Resplendent Mistress, for thy face doth far
Excel all other, like a blazing Star
We mortals wonder at, vouchsafe to cast
Out of those sparkling Diamond eyes thou hast,
A sacred Influence on thy vowed creature,
That is confounded with thy form and feature.

Admirable!


Goddess of Cyprus.


Stay, I do not like that word Cypres, for she'll think I mean to make
Hatbands on her, cannot you call her Taffeta Goddess, or if you go to stuff,
cloth a Gold were richer.


Oh, there's a conceit, Cyprus is the emblem of morning, and here by Cyprus
you declare how much you pine and morn after her, sir.


Very good, pray you go on.


Goddess of Cyprus, Venus is a slut.


Stay, who do I call slut now? the Goddess of Cyprus, Venus, or my Love?


You do tell the Goddess, that Venus is a slut.


I do so.


For thou art Venus fair, and she is not.


How is she Venus fair, when then I call her slut to her face?


No, sir, your Love is Venus fair, and she is not:
That makes plain the other, that she is a slut.
O that I were a flea upon thy lip,
There would I suck for ever, and not skip.

Suck?

That is, you would not bite her by the lip.
Or if thou think I there too high am placed,
I'll be content to suck below thy waste.

Which side she please.

Thy foot I'd willing kiss, but that I know,
Thou would not have thy servant stoop so low.
She will give you leave to kiss higher.
Oh speak thou, wilt be mine? and I will be
The truest Worm e're trod on shoo to thee.

Worm?


By Worm you do insinuate and wriggle your self into your affection, and
she by shoo will conceive your desire the length of her foot: how do you
like it, sir?


I would not for forty pounds but I had come to complement: why, I shall be
able in a small time to put down a reasonable Gentlewoman.


Oh, any ordinary Lady, you must get it without Book. Now to make your legs.


I have two made to my hands.


Oh, by no means, your legs are made to your feet.


Beauty and graces dwell upon the face
Of my disciple Delia.

Muses inspire you: what, at study?

Negotiating a little with the Muses.

See me salute her.
As many happinesses wait on Delia,
As beams shoot from the Sun this pleasant morn.

As many thanks requite you, as that Sun
Is old in minutes since the day begun.

What's she, Curculio?


Her Mistresses best moveable, a Chamber-maide.


She is an early riser: at School so soon?


She is an early riser, and yet sometime as soon down as up, she cannot be
quiet for the Serving-men, 'tis her hour between eight a clock and her
Mistress rising, to come to discipline.


'Tis a pretty smug Wench, is her name Delia? she has a pretty name too.


Oh, sir, all her credit is in her good name: it was Diana's the Goddess of
chastity, and therefore when she marries, she may cuckold her Husband by a
privilege, for Diana gave horns to Actaeon.


Where's Master Criticotaster?


Who's that?


Sir, my Master has sent you a little gold, he desires you send him the speech
he should speak at Sessions in the Country, he's now riding down.


Sir Valentine Wantbraine, that has never a Clarke?


The same, Sir.


Newly put into Commission for the peace, being puisne, it falls to him to give
the charge. I have drawn it, let me see in Comitatu, c. here, read it,
Curculio, he may the better instruct his Master, a touch, a touch.


Good men of the Jury for this Session, I will not implicate you with ambages
and circumstances, I am unwilling to confound your little wits with affected
divisions of my narration, into quis, quid, quomodo, and quandoes: I will
neither utter by gross, nor part my speech into a dozen of long points,
knotted often in the middle, and vntagd in the end; your are to present
Malefactors, whereof you are the chief -- Reformers, and seeing you stand
ready for your charge, I will give fire to this great piece of service, send
you all off with a powder, that in any case we may go to dinner betimes, c.


So, 'tis enough: bear my respects to your Master, tell him 'tis a speech will
do him credit, bid him learn it perfectly without Book.


And do you hear, if he chance to be at a nonplus, he may help himself with
his beard and handkercher, or it will be a good posture for his hand now and
then to be fumbling with his bandstrings. Farewell.


Mistress Medulla, the Sun of honour shine upon your hopes, till it sublime you
to a Ladyship: I will attend you presently.


Sir, bid your fellow make ready the Caroch, and attend me here about an
hour hence, I will ride home.


What Gentlewoman is that?


An old Country Gentlewoman, that hath buried her Husband lately, and comes up
to be a Lady, for she swears she will not marry any more Gentlemen: she is
fallen out with a Justice of Peaces wife in the Country, and she will have a
Knight, though she pay for his Horse-hier, to spite her neighbours.


A word with you, sir.


Your friend and Master Bubulcus. Ha you done, sir?


The Cupidinaean fires burn in my breast,
And like the Oven Etna, I am full
Of Squibs and Crackers.

This will powder him.


Lady, wounded by your beauty, I will acknowledge mercy if you kill me not, yet
rather murder me, then vulnerate still your creature, unless you mean to
medicine where you have hurt, and I implore no better remedy then I may derive
from the instrument wherewith you pierced me, like Achilles Spear, your eye
having shot lightning into my breast, hath power with a smile to fetch out the
consuming fire, and yet leave my heart inflamed.


Sir, although where I am not guilty of offence, I might deny justly, to
descend to a satisfaction: yet rather then I would be counted a murderer, I
would study to preserve so sweet a model as your self; and since you desire
my eye which inflamed you, should with the virtue of a gracious smile make you
happy in your fire, it shall shine as you would have it, and disclaim that
beam shall shine upon another object.


So, very well, this is your cunning lesson.

Some strangers, Curoutio.

Sir, the Country comes in upon us.

Is not here a Complement-Schoole?

A School of generous education, sir.

I have brought my Son to be a Scholar, I do mean to make him a Courtier,
I have an offer of five or six Offices for my money, and I would have him
first taught to speak.


He is a great child, cannot he speak yet?


In what kind of complement, please you, venerable Sir, to be edoctrinated?
But we will withdraw.


Come, for another lesson, my brave Mars,
Now I am fit to quarrel with the Stars,
And catch at Jove.

What's he?

Orlando Furioso.

By the blood-staind fashion of Mauors I will carbonado thee, keep off, or in
my fury I will cut thee into Atoms, and blow thee about the world.


I hope he does but complement.

I will out-labour Ioue-borne Hercules,
And in a greater fury ransack Hell:
Tear from the Sisters their contorted curls,
And wrack the Destinies on Ixions Wheel,
Brain Proserpine with Sisiphs rolling stone,
And in a brazen Cauldron choked with Lead,
Boyle Minos, Eacus, and Radamant,
Throw Pluto headlong into moorish Fens,
And sooty Regions.
Dam up Cocitus with tormented soul,
And batter down the brazen gates of Hell,
Make the Infernal three-chapt Band-dog roar.
Cram Tantalus with Apples, lash the Fiends
With Whips of Snakes, and poisoned Scorpions,
Snatch chained Prometheus from the Vultures maw,
And feed him with her liver, make old Charon
Waft back again the souls, or buffet him
With his own Oars to death.

So, so, 'tis well, you shall take forth a new lesson, sit down and breathe.


'Twas a devilish good speech.

Oh, why did nature make thee fair and cruel?

What spruce fellow's this?

He is an hundred fifty pounds a yard in potentia, a Yeomans son, and Justice
of Peaces Clarke, he is in love with a Farmers daughter, and thus he speaks
his passion in blank Verse.


Thou art some Goddess, that to amaze the earth
With thy celestial presence, hath put on
The habit of a mortal, gods sometimes
Would visit Country houses, and guild ore
A sublunary habitation
With glory of their presence, and make heaven
Descend into an Hermitage: Sure thy father
Was Maias son, disguised in Shepherds weeds,
And thou dost come from Jove, no marvel then
We Swains do wonder at thee, and adore,
Venus her self the Queen of Cytheron,
When she is riding through the milky way,
Drawn with white Doves, is but a blowze, and must,
When thou appear, leave her Bird-drawne Coach,
And give the reins to thee, and trudge afoot
Along the heavenly plains, paved with stars,
In duty of thy excellence, while the gods
Looking amazed from their crystal windows,
Wonder what new-come Deity doth call
Them to thy adoration.

O, heavenly Farmers daughter!

I'll call him in; Ingeniolo!

Your servant, sir. Lady, I kiss your hand, and reverence the antiquity of
your vestment, Delia. Fortune let fall her riches on thy head, that thou may
fill thy apron. I am your humble obseruicer, and wish you all cumulations of
prosperity.


Sir, I desire to suck below your waste.


I do euaculate my self to be your shadows, my generous condisciples.


This is Scholler-like.

He's one of the head form, I warrant.

Sir, I receive your son, and will wind up his ingeny, fear it not, but
first he must be under my Usher, who must teach him the postures of his body,
how to make legs and cringes, and then he shall be advanced to a higher
Class. Curculio, like him with your method into some proportion, take off the
roughness of his behaviour, and then give him the principles of salutation.


Law you there, boy, he will teach you the principles of saltation. Well,
good-morrow, sir, I'll leave my Jewel.


Your Jewel may have the grace to be hanged one day.


Bless you Sentlemen awl, and your studies and contemplations: is here a
School of Complements, pray you?


A place of generous breeding.


Generous preeding, hark you, her name was Ienkin, a good Sentleman, 'tis
known, her take no pleasures and delectations in vrds and phrases of
Rhetricks; Welsemen have awl hearts fidelities, mark you, her was going along
pout creat business, but casting her eyes visions upon your Pills and
significations of your skils professions, look you, her come in, to see the
fashions and manners of your exercises, and yet if your vrships has any
Madrigals and Pastoral Canticles, look you, for in truths and verities was
going now to the Vds and Forests, and mean to turn Shepherds goddillings,
her will give you good payments of awl your inventions, and Muses, pray you
now.


Amorous Pastorals? I can furnish you, venerable sir.

Turn, Amarilsis, to thy Swane,
Thy Damon calls thee back again,
Here is a pretty Arbor by,
Where Apollo cannot pry,
Here let's sit, and while I play
Sing to my Pipe a Roundelay.
How like you it, sir?


Roundelays very good, here is monies and considerations, look you.


We acknowledge your bounty, my Tenth-worthy.

So Mistress, I have trespassed on your patience, now I will take occasion by
the fore-locke. You can say your lecture: have you your hand-kercher ready,
that when a Suitor comes, you may put him off with wiping your eyes, as if
tears stood in 'em ever since your husband was buried; well, suppose I have had
access to your chamber, I begin, Lady, think it not strange, if Love which is
active in my bosom, force me to turn petitioner, that I may be reckened
amongst your servants; all my ambition, sweetest, is to be made happy in your
affection, which I will study to deserve in my utmost possibilities.


Alas, alas, I had a husband.


Very well counterfeited, nay weep not, those eyes were made to shine, not
waste with dew: if it be for the remembrance of him you have lost, recover him
again, by placing your good opinion on a man shall sweat to do you services.


It doth not, sir, become our modesty
To talk of love so soon, you will renew
My passion for his loss, and draw down tears
Afresh upon his Hearse: you do not well
To oppress a widow thus, I pray, sir, leave me,
At least I will enjoin you, if you stay,
To speak no more of love, it is unwelcome.
What, am I perfect?

So 'twas very well, at the next lesson you shall learn to be more cunning.


Wilt please you hear the Novice?


Good boy, speak out.


God save you, sir, felicities be accumulated upon you, sir, I thank you
generous sir, you oblige me to be your servant, sir, in all my -- p -- o -- s
-- possibility, sir, I honour your remembrance, sir, and shall be proud to
do you my observance, sir, most noble sir.


Very hopeful now: a repetition all together, the more, the merrier.


What, at Barley-breake? which couple are in hell? are not you Hellen, whose
insatiate lust ruined fair Illium? and you sir Paris with a golden nose? hark
you, Rufaldo is married to Selina.


Who? that's my father in Law.


How, your father? look, he has cloven feet, I am glad I have found you,
what are you in hell for?


Insinuate to 'em all for their own safeties, he's desperate mad, bid none
stir hence.


Hey, how came you all thus damned?

Damned, who's damned? is Ienkin damned?

I beseech you, sir, to maintain the credit of my School, I shall be undone
else, humour him a little.


Will you have her be damned? when hear you pray a Welshman was damned? of
all things in the vrld, her cannot abide to be damned.


See if you can roar him away.

Keep off, I am Hercules, son of Alcmena,
Compressed by Jove, I'll carbonado thee.

How, art thou Hercules?
Lye there, usurper of Alcides name,
Bold Centaur: so he's dead, by this I prove
I am Jove borne.

Well, for your credits and reputations, her care not to be damned for
companies and fellowships, look you, has he knocked him down? would he had
knocked Ienkin down.


Now, on with your relations, and tell me all the stories of your fortunes.

'Tis I am Hercules, sent to free you all.
What are you damned for? In this Club behold
All your releasements. What are you?

Stand in order and be damned.

I am the conscience of an Usurer,
Who have been damned these two and twenty years,
For lending money gratis.

How, a Usurer? why did not
Corrupt the Devil to fetch thy soul away?
Heel take a bribe for lending money gratis.

Yes, sir, for thanks: I took no interest,
For at the lending of each hundred pound*
They brought my home some twenty or thirty thanks,
Indeed 'twas paid in gold.

Oh golden thanks I well, go to, I'll release you,
Upon condition you shall build an Hospital,
And die a beggar. What are you?

The soul of a Watchman.

How came you damned? could not you watch the Devil?


He took me napping on Midsummer Eve, and I never dream 't on him.


Your wife had given you Opium over night.


No sir, I had watched three nights before, and because I would not wink at
two or three drunkards as they went reeling home at twelve a clock at night,
the Devil owed me a spite.


Well, you shall be prentice to an Alcumist, and watch his Stills night, by
night, not sleep till he get the Philosophers-stone. What are you?


Sir, I am a Chamber-maid.


What are you damned for?


Not for revealing my Mistress secrets, for I kept them better then mine own,
but keeping my maiden-head till it was stale, I am condemned to lead Apes in
hell.


Alas, poor wench, upon condition you will be wise hereafter, and not refuse
Gentlemen's proffers, learn pride every day, and painting, bestow a courtesy
now and then upon the Apparitor to keep counsel, I release you, take your
Apes, and Monkeys away with you, and bestow them on Gentlewomen, and Ladies,
that want plai-fellowes. What are you?


I am an Vndersheriffe, sir, damned because I told the debtors, writs were out
against 'em, brought 'em to composition without arrests, favoured poor men for
a whole year together, was very good in my Office, gave up a just account at
the years end, and broke.


Oh, miracle! an honest man! thou shalt be Church-warden to a Parish, draw the
(...), and keep the poor men's box for seven years together, 'tis pity, but
thou the ^ldest have fifty writer, to propagate honest generation. What are
you?


A Justices wife in the the Country, sir.


And who drew your (...) hither? what are you damned for?


For refusing Satin gowns, and veluer petticots, turning back Capons at
Christinas, and Sessions times, and making much of one of my husbands servants,
merely for his honesty and good service towards me.


'Tis injustice, you shall bury your husband quickly, wear some blacks a
while for fashion sake, within a month be married to his Clarke, unless you
will be divided among the Serving-men. What are you?


A younger brother, sir, borne at the latter end of the week, and wane of the
Moon, put into the world to seek my own fortune, got a great estate of
wealth by gaming and wenching, and so purchased unhappily this state of
damnation you see me in.


Came you in it by purchase? then you do not claim it by yours fathers
interest as an heir: well, I will ease you of the estate, because it is
litigious, and you shall make presently a bargain and sale of it to a
Scrivener, that shall buy it of you, and pay you both his ears down upon the
nail for it. What are you?


I am a Horse-courser.


And could not thou out-ride the Devil?


I had not the grace to mend my pace, I was an honest Horse-courser, and
suffered every fool to ride me, I knew not what belonged to horse-play, let
the world kick at me, I never winch'd, all that I am damned for, is, that
desiring to thrine in the world, and to have good-lucke to horse-flesh, I
ambled to the bed of a Parsons wife that was coltish once, and gave her husband
a Horse for it in good fashion, he nener gave me godamercie for it, indeed it
proved afterwards to have the Yellows.


There was some colour for it: well, since your occupation is foundered, you
shall trot every day afoot, and walk a knave in the Horse-faire. What are you?


Her have no mind at all to be damned, becar her will fight with her kill
awl the Devils in hell: diggon.


Sfoot, here's more ado to get one Welshman damned, then a whole Nation. Sir,
'tis but in jest.


In jests, is it in jests? well, look you, her will be contented to be damned
in jests and merriments for you.


You will tell me what you are damned for?


And her be so hot, was get some bodies else to be damned for Ienkin, her will
tell her in patiences, look you, her was damned for her valour, and ridding
the vrld of Monsters, look you, Dragons with seven heads, and Serpents with
tails a mile long, pray you.


Oh, let me embrace thee, worthy in my arms, I'll charm the Destinies for
their bold attempt, for cutting off thy thread, thou shalt cut their throats,
and be instald Lord in Elisium, Oh, let me hug thee, Owen Glandower.


Owen Glandower was her cousin, pray you.


Go your ways all: stay, take hence Prometheus and bury him, if you come
into hell again, there's no releasement.


So, farewell Sentlemen, now her mean to make travels and peregrinations, to
the vds and plains, look you, very fast. Good speed to awl.


We thank thee Jovial Hercules.


Live long thou King of hell. So, so, well done of all sides, here our School
breaks up, I might have run mad like, had I not taken off the edge of
melancholy. Thus poor Gentleman. O Love thou art a madness, Drawing our
souls with joy, to kill with sadness.


So, so, poor souls, how glad they are of liberty. This is a hot house, I do
scorch and broil: I'll seek the Elisian fields out, and dye there.


Have I not done my part, wench, with confidence to proceed thus far with thy
father? either I am infinitely like my sister, or they are all mad with
credulity: but our good fathers are blinded with their passions, and that
helps me much: well, I do but think upon the nights work, there lies my
master-piece, I have it, 'tis for thy sake Hillaria, I have assumed this habit,
the end will speak it.


But what will you do? Antonio is lost now.


Well enough, is supposed to go after Selina, and is not returned yet, out of
my brotherly love, they will imagine I have but taken a journey in quest of a
sister, time enough to return again, and he goes far, that never does wench
by Story. Bubulcus.


Antonio is gone, no news of him: I am glad of that, I hope he will come no
more.


How now? what means this? what! sword drawn?


And he is whetting it.


For heavens sake, whats the matter?


Nay, nothing, nothing, I do but -- a --


By my virginity you make me afraid, whats the matter?


He means to fight with some body on my life.


Heaven defend it, good sir, tell me.


Be not afraid, Gentlewomen, for I do but, you see.


But what?


Whet my long knife, somebody shall smart for it, but --


He does mean to challenge somebody.

I charge you, if you love, tell me who's your enemy.


Nay, no body, I do not mean to fight, if I live.

What?

Nay, nothing, sweet Ladies, be not troubled, I do but sharpen my sword.


Tell me the truth, why?

I was eating Oysters the other day, and I had never a knife, and so --


Come, come, there is some other matter in it, pray tell me.


Welll, you are my friends, if you chance to hear of any mans death shortly,
then say Bubulens.


I hope you do not mean to kill any man in the field, you do make me tremble,
I'll assure you.


No, no, sweet-heart, do not tremble, I will but --
Lose my honour? I'll be carved first.

What a Capon's this? pray let me persuade you.

And me.

No, no, 'tis but in vain to persuade me, I'm resolved, if you love me, do
not use any arguments:
The Cupidinaean fires burn in my breast,
And like the Oven Etna I am full
Of squibs and crackers. I had almost forgot --

The Oven Etna I'll be baked then: what a fury are you in? he looks like the
god of War.


The god of War? I think I have reason. Hillaria, I must, and I will, and
all the world shall not hold me.


But you shall not go away thus, till you be calmer.

O that I were a flea upon his lip,
There would I suck for ever, and not skip.
I will carbonado him, his face doth far
Excel all other like a blazing star
We mortals wonder at. Vouchsafe to cast
Off the sparkling diamond eyes thou hast:
O let me go on, me thy vowed creature,
That is confounded with thy form and feature.

Is the fool mad?

He has something in his head, and it were out: but here comes our Fathers.


Antonio not heard of yet?

This morning we wanted a Bride too, but she was found, mary I cried for her
first. Father, come, my Brother Antonio is but gone to look his Sister: ha, my
sweet Wench, when shal's to bed.


I hope 'tis so, and yet he stays too long. Here's Gorgon: Sir, where have
you been all this day?


Indeed, sir, I have made inquisition, both my tongue and my feet have walked,
but my Mistress is not to be found or heard of, I'll assure you.


Gorgon, hast lost thy senses? here's Selina.

Mistress, then we are all made. -- He capers.

But sir, your Master Antonio's gon.

Gon in wine, sir, for joy of his sisters finding again.

Go your ways, sir, and either bring me news of him, or look me in the
face no more, you'll find we jest not.


Pray, sir, let me take my journey in the morning, the wedding night is
fatal: I hope your worship does but jest, I may be drunk too night, and wake
early enough to be gon before day too, I beseech you sir.


Pray, sir, let him stay to night.


By this hand there he is, where? did not I hear his voice?


Away sir.


I have been mad all this while, and now am like to be my own man again:
since there is no remedy, Gentiles all, good night. Gorgon begins to be a
wandering Knight.


I cannot be heartily merry: well, let's leave these two without any more
ceremonies, 'tis late, all joys be multiplied on my Son and Daughter: good
night, I do comfort my self with hope of Antonio's return, and yet fears
are great.


Lights there: so, so, welcome thou much expected night, I do salute thy
black brows: come, my Selina, shalt find I have young blood: Hillaria, do
service to your Mother, make her unready.


'Tis time enough.

And why should we lose any? I pray thee let her come. I know 'tis your Virgin
modesty, loath to part with a Maidenhead, but it must off: come, prithee be not
idle: why, thou know I married thee, Selina, as thou love me --


Sir, by that love I must entreat you one thing.

Any thing, sweet-heart.

To ratify an ancient vow I made.

Any vows, what is't?

I vowed when ever I married, my husband should not lie with me the first
night.


Should any body else?

Not any man.

Come, 'twas a foolish vow, and must be broke. Not lie with me the first
night? 'twere a sin beyond incontinency. I had rather lose half my estate,
then miss thee but an hour out of mine arms this night.


'Tis but one night.

Oh, 'tis an age, a world of time to me: why I have fed of Oister-pyes, and
rumps of Sparrows a whole month, in expectation of the first night, and leave
it for a vow?


Indeed you must.

How? must, come? I know you do but jest, this is but your device to whet me
on, and heighten me, as if old age at once hath soakt up all my marrow. Hark
you, how old do ye think I am?


Some threescore and seventeen.

Out upon thy judgment: why I am not above, by all computation, six or seven
and thirty: I am restord, renewd, when first I loved thee, by this hand I was.


I see then you would tire me, by this beard you must not lie with me to night.


How? nay then I see you'll try my strength: thus I could force you. Gasparo, a
my conscience I am an old fool: ha? I will see more, and set a good face on it,
you know who I am?


Yes, old Rufaldo.

Ha, old? 'tis so, my spirits faint again: what did you marry for?


To make an ass of you.

How?

Thou credulous fool,
Did thou imagine I should ever love thee,
Or lie with thee? but when I have a child
Would shame the Father: Oh the power of dotage,
That like an inundation doth overcome
The little world of man, drown all his reason,
And leave him spoiled, even of his common sense.
Did think I was a piece of stone sawne out
By Carvers art, so cold, so out of soul,
So empty of all fire to warm my blood,
I'd lie with thee, worse then the frigid Zone,
Or Isicles that hang on beard of winter?
Have I with wearied patience looked to see,
When you would lay violent hands upon thy self;
For being so mad, so impudent to love me,
And would thou bed me too? did thou not tremble
To dare the holy Rites and nuptial Tapers?
Oh impious sacrilege! hence, go waste
Thy self with sorrow, pine that halfe-staru'd body,
Until thy bones break thy skin, and fall
To dust before thy face: nay, you shall endure me:
For since y'aue tied me to you, I will be
Thy constant Fury, worse then Hags or Night-mare,
If thou dost talk of Love, or seek to be
At reconcilement.

Selina, sweet Selina, hear me.

Sweet? oh villainous presumption!

What will you do?

Save a disease, a labour, make an end of you, come sir, swear to observe
what I shall impose upon you.


Oh, any thing, bitter Selina.

First, you shall never solicit me to lye with you.

Never by this hand, and thank you too.

Stand bare in my presence.

Starke-naked.

Run of my arrands.

To the worlds end.

And keep a whore under my nose, nay, I will allow it.

If you will have it so, I am content.

Swear, sir.

Flesh, and blood, I do swear.

So, rise. In hope of your conformity, I forbear to let the punishment be
equal with your deserts.


Oh, I have married a Devil, I shall be utterly disgraced, if this be known:
Pray sweet wife, let me beg one request of you, that you would not discredit
me, I will be content to endure your pleasure, do not forsake my house, I
beseech you that you would lye with my daughter.


Shall you appoint my lodging?

Oh no, I do but humbly entreat you will be pleased to lie with my daughter.


Well, since you submit so respectively, I will tender your credit in that
point upon your good behaviour, are you not well?


I am the worse for you by forty marks. One thing more, virtuous wife, that
you would not tell your father, nor any body else, how you have beaten me:
Goodnight, sweet virtuous wife.


Ha, ha, Hillaria, my way to thee is free, I have beat my passage, and I come
to thee.


I had thought the woods and such wild groves as these,
Had been the house of rapine, and could not
Afford humanity, beasts, and men like them,
Are wont to make such places desolate:
Did Nature make you thus at first, and are
We that have Cities, house, and Civil Laws
More rude then you? or hath all virtue chose
You as divine earth to dwell upon?
Shepherdess, indeed I am in love
With your wild Kingdom here, and would not be
A King abroad, if I might be a subject
With such fair Nymphs as you.

Oh son, you would say so,
When our pleasures all you know:
We are not oppressed with care,
With which you in Cities are,
A Shepherd is a King, whose Throne
Is a mossy Mountain, on
Whose top we sit, our crook in hand,
Like a Sceptre of command,
Our subjects, sheep grazing below,
Wanton frisking to and fro.

We nothing fear, awake nor sleep,
But the Woolfe goddild our sheep,
On a Country Quill each plays
Madrigals, and pretty Lays
Of passions, and the force of Love,
And with Ditties heaven move.
Birds will listen to our song,
And to levy Arbours throng,
To learn our notes, and Mistress name,
Valleys echoing with the same.

When we hunt, as there is store
Of Dear, the trembling Hare, and Bore,
You would think that you had seen
Gods in Shepherds weeds again.
A hundred pretty Nymphs apace
Tripping ore the lands, and chase,
As many Lads, the gentle air
Playing with their dangling hair.

Sometimes we dance a Feary round,
Hand in hand upon the ground,
Shepherds piping, Garlands crowning,
With our harmless bosoms drowning.

Walk unto the silver brooke,
You shall need no other hooke,
To catch the dancing fish withal,
But a song, or Madrigal.

When the clouds let fall their showers,
We have at hand a hundred bowers,
Where under Sweet-bryer, safe are we
And honey-dropping Woodbind tree,
Here in spite of storms we tell
Stories of love, of Philomell,
Of Paris, and the Golden ball,
Of Echo, and Narcissus fall.

Here no false-loue brings despair,
Jealousy, or suspicion, care,
Always happy most of all
On Siluanus festival.

No more, good Shepherds, you undo a boy
With the opinion of his happiness:
If a few Jewels I have brought with me,
May find acceptance here, I shall bestow them
As freely as your loves have fallen on me.
Nay then, I'll force 'em on you, I have left
To purchase a Flock with you.

We thank you, gentle boy, gooden,
We must to our Flocks again.

But Shepherdess, or sister if thou wilt,
Oh would thou were, I preethee call me brother,
Hath Love a part among you, tell me pray,
What punishment inflict you on false love?
But sure you are exempt from such
A misery: what then
Is her reward, that out of peevishness
Contemns the honest passion of her Lover,
Insults upon his virtue, and doth place
Unworthily her affection?

Though such a woman need no curse,
Being one her self, or worse,
Yet we Shepherds use to say,
May she love another day,
And not be loved, dye in despair,
And have no other Tomb but air.

A prey, a prey!
Where did you get that face?
That goddess face? it was Selina's once:
How came you by it? did she on her death-bed
Bequeath her beauty as a legacy,
Not willing it should die, but live and be
A lasting death to Infortunio?
Oh she was cruel, not to bury it with her!
But I am a fool, 'tis Venus and her Son,
Where be your Bow and Arrows, little Cupid?
Did thou maliciously spend all thy Quiver
Upon my heart, and not reserve one shaft
To make Selina love me? Tell me, Venus,
Why did you use me so? you shall no more
Be Queen of Love. Stay, stay, Cupid was blind,
How comes he now to see? yes, he did see,
He never could have wounded me so right else.
Why then let Fortune have her eyes again,
And all things see how wretched I am made.

Oh, is there not within the power of Art,
How to restore this Gentleman?

There is, and out of that experience we
Have in these woods, of simples, I doubt not,
But to apply a remedy.

He will be worthy of your care herein,
And should he be, which I cannot imagine,
Ungrateful to your skill, I would reward it,
And call you mother, or my sister for it.

It seems you have some relation to him.

Indeed he is the dearest friend I had:
And if my blood were powerful to restore him,
I'd spend it like a prodigal. I know Selina.

Ha, do you know Selina? she's married to Rufaldo,
the old Usurer, that went to bed before to his money, and begat forty in the
hundred: now he beds Selina,
And lays his rude hand over her sacred breast,
Embraces her fair body, now he dares
Kiss her, and suck Ambrosia from her lip.
Those eyes that grace the day, now shine on him,
He her Endimion, she his silver Moon,
The tongue that's able to rock Heaven asleep,
And make the music of the Spheres stand still,
To listen to the happier aires it makes,
And mend their tunes by it: that voice is now
Devoted to his ears, those cheeks, those hands,
Would make gods proud to touch, are by his touch
Profaned ^uery hour: oh, this makes me mad,
But I will fit 'em for it, for I'll die,
It may be then she'll weep, and let fall tears
Upon my graue-stone, which shall be of marble,
And hard like her, that if she power out floods,
No drops shall sink thorough it to soften me,
I will be wrapped in Lead to keep out prayers,
For then I know, she'll beg I would be friends:
But then I will be just, and hate her love,
As she did mine, and laugh to see her grieve.

Come, I will fetch Selina to you, if you will sleep.

Will you then? I will live, you shall be my best boy.
Come, I scorn to weep, or shed another tear:
Sit down, I'll have a Garland for my Boy,
Of Phoenix feathers: Flowers are too mean
To sit upon thy temples; in thy face
Are many Gardens, Spring had never such:
The Roses and the Lillies of thy cheeks
Are slips of Paradise, not to be gathered,
But wondered at.

But you said you would sleep: when slept you last?

I remember, before I loved, but that I know not when
I slept soundly, and dreamt of gathering Nosegays.
'Tis unlucky to dream of herbs and flowers.

For Selina's sake I'll try my best skill on him, Get him to sleep, your
presence I see is powerful, yonder's a pleasant Arbour, procure him thither
while I prepare the herbs, whose precious juice may with Heavens blessing make
him well again.


A thousand blessings on you. Come, sir, go with me, and when you have slept,
I'll fetch Salina to you.


Prithee do, I am very drowsy: come, I'll dream of some thing, my eyes are
going to bed, and leaden sleep doth draw the curtains over them.


Will you go with me?

Yes, and we will pick a dish of Strawberies.

Has almost lost her self in these woods and wildernesses, was very weary of
these journeys and travels in foote-backs: have not since her comings beheld
any reasonable creatures: bless us awl, Iocarello is loft too, cannot tell
where, in these mazes and labyrinths. Iocarello, so ho.


So ho.


Ha, there's some bodies yet, hark you tere, here is a sentilman of Wales,
look you, desires very much to have speeches and confabulations with you:
where is her?


Here is her.


Here is her? know not which ways to come to her: pray you tell Ienkin where
you be?


Boobie.


Poobies? was her call her poobies? 'tis very saucy travels, her will teach her
better manners and moralities, if her get her in reaches and circumferences of
her Walsh blades truly.


You lie.


How, lies and poobies too? hark you, Ienkin was give you mawles and knocks,
for your poobies, and lies, and indignities, look for your pates now.


So ho, ho.


Her am very much deceived, now it comes into our minds if these voices be not
Echoes, Echo.


Echo.


'Tis very true, but her marvel much, have her Echoes in these Countries pray
you?


Yes pray you.


Warrant her 'tis a Welsh Echo, was follow Ienkin in loves out of Wales.


Out of Wales.


'Tis very true, bless us awl now, her call to remembrances and memories, her
had communications and talkings with this very Echoes in Clamorgan-shire, in
de valleys and Tales there look you, her am very glad her hath met with
Echoes, was borne in her own Countries, hark you, Ienkin was travel hither
out of loves and affections to Selina.


Nay.


Nay, yes very true, pray you tell her, be Selina in these woods, or no?


No.


No, where is her den, have her taken awl these labours and ambulations in
vanities? say you, shall Ienkin then go back as he came?


Ass he came.


Gone? it is not possible, hit may be Selina was turn spirits and be
invisible rather, she is not gone verily.


There you lye.


Lye, very well, you have privileges to give lies and awl things in the
world, but her will not leave these woods for awl dat, her will be Pilgrims
all tayes of her lifes, ere her go without her.


Go without her.


How, not love Ienkin? then there is a Devil in awl female sexes: know very
well she promise loves and good wills in times, great while ago, pray you now,
her will talk no longer with you. Fare you well Echo, pray if you meet her
Pages, bid her make hastes and expeditions after her. Fare you well.


Fare you well.


I think Iupiter has snatched up my Master Antonio, to make a Ganimede on him,
he is not to be found yet, I have search 't all the Taverns ith Town, I am
sure, and that method my nose led me to, hoping he had been a good fellow,
but, non est inuentus, well, my stock is spent, but with this terrible face a
buff Jerkin, and a roaring basket-hilt, Gorgon will have a trick of wit to
bear his own charges: but here comes a Gentleman, to my postures now.


I am resolved.


Good your worship bestow a small piece of silver upon a poor Soldier,
new-come out of the Low-Countries, that have been in many hot services,
against the Spaniard, the French, and great Turk. I have been shot seven
times thorough the body, my eyes blown up with gun-powder, half my skull seard
off with a Canon, and had my throat cut twice in the open field: good your
worship take compassion upon the caterwaking fortunes of a forlorn Gentleman,
that have lost the use of my veins: good your generous nature take compassion
upon me, I have but four fingers and a thumb upon one hand: can work, and
woonnot: one small piece of grateful silver, to for my lodging, I beseech you
venerable sir.


Can not see?


Only a little glimmering, sir, the beams of your gentility have radiated,
and infused light into my poor lanternes, sir.


Can you feel then?


Oh, sir, that faculty alone, fortune and nature have left inviolated.


Here's somewhat for thee.
What, can you see now?

Gasparo, is it you? Pox on your benevolence.

Whence came this project of wit?

From the old predicament. Faith, necessity that has no Law, put me into this
habit: my Master is turned coward, and ran away from me.


And thou art turned Soldier, to fight with him when you meet again: then thou
want a Master? hark sir, what says thou to another project?


Oh, I could caper for it.


I am now leaving the world, and going into the Country, woot turn Gypsy, or
Shepherd? I am for the woods, can Madrigals yet?


Phillis fair, do not disdaeine
The love of Coridon thy Swain.

Excellent I we'll turn Shepherds presently, thou shalt be Phillis, and I'll
be Coridon: let me alone to provide Russets, Crook, and Tarbox: they say
there's good hospitality in the Woods, and Songs and pastimes upon Siluaum day.


But that were pretty, shall I be a woman?


By any means, thou hast a good face already, a little simpering will do it,
I'll accommodate thee early, keep thy own counsel, and I'll warrant thee for a
Maide-marrian.


Foot! shall I run into my coats again? go to, put me into what shape you
will, I'll play my part: me thinks I do feel an hundred rural animals
taking up my petticoat already.


Pray forward with your relation.


As I was saying, having challenged Antonio for the affront he did me before
Hillaria, here by heaven, you must say nothing.


Not a syllable.


He did accept the challenge, and the weapons were soon agreed upon, and we
met: but not a word of fighting, if you love me.


You are not come to fighting yet your self, but by the way, what were your
weapons?


A long sword.


Twas long ere you could remember it, me thinks.


Soon as we came into the place appointed, we looked about, and saw all
clear.


As clear as day on your side.


We drew, but not a word of fighting, by this hand.


Not by that hand.


We threw our doublets off, to show we had no Coat of maile, or privy shirt
upon us, against the laws of duelling, in fine, I bid him say his prayers.


Twas well thought upon, and what did you?


I let 'em alone, for I knew I should kill him, and have time enough to say 'em
afterwards at my leisure.


When he had prayed, what then?


When he had said his prayers, he thought upon it, and let fall words tending
to reconcilement: a my conscience, he would have asked me forgiveness, but I
stood upon my honour, and would fight with him, and so we stood upon our
guard: but not a word of fighting, if you love me.


Oh, by no means, but when did you fight?


I'll tell you, Antonio when he saw no remedy, but that I would needs fight
with him, and so consequently kill him, made a desperate blow at my head, which
I warded with my dagger, better then he looked for, and in return, I cut off
his left hand, whereat amazed and fainting, I nimbly seconded it, as you know I
am very nimble, and run my Rapier into his right thigh, two yards.


Then you were on both sides of him?


Your Rapier, did you not say your weapons were long swords?


But mine was both a sword and Rapier, there's it, but not a word of fighting,
as you love me: well, not to weary you with the narration of the innumerable
wounds I gave him, I cut off every joint from his toe upwards, to his middle,
by these hilts, now you may believe me, there ended Antonio my rival, judge,
judge now, whether Bubulcus be valiant or not, but not a word of sighting, as
you love me, let it dye.


Twas very valiantly done.


Hark you, Sweet-heart, do you not remember who this is, that you have
discovered this business too? this is Selina, his own sister.


What a rogue was I, not to remember that?


Do not you know that she is my mother in Law? nay, nay, pluck up a good
heart, what will you do? there's no running away.


Have you never an empty chest?


What, to hide your self? that I know you would not do for your credit: draw
your sword, and stand upon your guard, we know your are valiant, that could
kill Antonio so bravely.


Hillaria, if ever you loved me, oh, I have made a fair piece of work, would
you not tell me it was his sister? oh, here they come.


He hath confessed it, sir, your Daughter heard it, sir, I charge you lay hands
upon that murderer, he hath slain my Brother Antonio.


Did you hear him confess it?


Here's right, confess and be hanged now.


I must confess I did.


Bubulcus kill Antonio?


By this hand I do not know how to deny it for my credit.


Nay then lay hands on him.


Yes Father, Rufaldo, Selina, oh, a plague of all coxcombs, what a rogue was
I?


I will have Justice, away with him.


I am a lying rascal by this hand.


We must require Antonio from you, sir, or your blood answer his. Away with
him, Hillaria.


I'll be hanged then, Father. Hillaria, will you see me hanged?


There is no remedy: would thou had killed his Sister; I am plagued with her,
and dare not speak it for shame, I'll do what I can to get a Repriefe for you;
nay, and you kill folks, you must even take your fortune.


A curse of all ill fortune, I killed no body.


Away, I say, out villain, hence, for I
Do hear my brothers blood for justice cry.

I do not know this place, nor who you are,
Nor know I yet my self.

Infortunio?

That name I once did answer to, but then
I was not banished to a wilderness,
Nor slept on such a bed. Oh, if I be
He, whom you call Infortunio.
Tell me how I came hither, dost thou weep?
I prithee tell me, boy, why do those tears
Drown thy fair cheeks? but that they will not show
Manly in me, I'd force my eyes to weep too,
And we would sit upon a bank, and play
Drop-teare, till one were bankrupt. You amaze me:
I ask how I came hither? answer me
With other language, if you do not mean
I came by water, which you might express too
In words as well, nay, better, for you now
Are cruel to your selves, and murder me:
Tell me, or I shall be mad.

Oh, stay: that brought Infortunio hither,
You have now told your self, distraction brought you.

Ha distraction? now you increase my wonder:
Was I mad, or do not you by answering,
Study to make me so? why should I be mad,
Or being so, how came I well again?
For if I dream not, I am well and calm.

You owe this Shepherdess for your restore,
Whose skill heaven made so happy.

Did you, fair Shepherdess restore me then,
And by your art recover natures loss?
All my wel-beings yours: but yet if you
Could so Physicion-like cure the disease
Which is but the effect of some distemper,
You then should know the cause: for else you are
Uncertain in your applications.
Pray tell me then, why was I mad?

This Lad can tell you that, better then I,
But if his sorrow will not let his tongue
Deliver it, I'll tell you sir; you were in love.

With whom, I pray?


One whom they call Selina.


Ha, Selina? in what a depth of black forgetfulness
Is Infortunio fallen into? Selina,
Could I forget Selina? oh Shepherdess,
I was not mad till now: for can I be
My self, and forget her? oh, in this question
I am undone: for I do hold my self
And all my understanding by her name,
I am a beggar, she hath purchased all,
Nor am I master of one thought of comfort
I borrow not from her: what curse was fallen
Upon my memory, to forget Selina?

Sir, you remember her too well, unless
She would deserve it better.

It is not in her power to deserve, boy,
For she is now beholding for her self
Unto another. Oh, this tears my soul,
You did not well to release me of my furies,
And make me sensible again of that
Was my first corrosive, it was unfriendly:
Oh, twas a happiness to be mad, stark mad,
For she being lost, what have I else to lose?
I was all hers, I gave my self away:
And deeds of gift should hold.

Why should you be so passionate? let once reason so late recovered, teach you
love your self, reserved for nobler fortune.


It is true, I am a very fool in doing so,
And will you be a Mistress then, and teach me
How to forget my self? what say boy?
Shall I be Shepherd too? I will live here
And have thy company, thou art like my Love,
Shall we Shepherdess?

With all my heart.


Come let's sit down awhile, nature hath spread
Her Carpets for us here, this is the lowest,
And yet 'tis higher then a Palace: pray
Teach me your Shepherds life, now I do long
To be a wood-man too, and you shall do
A double cure upon me.

Stay, yonder are some Shepherds, lets on this bank sit down and prattle.
And how long is't, since your Sweet-heart forsook you?


It will be a quarter of a year next grass.


Alas, poor Mopsa, but come, put him out of thy mind, sing him away.


Laugh, and sing him to his grave shall I?


And never love him more.


Oh no, his love like a canker hath eat such a great hole into my heart, I
cannot forget him, but I'll sing a song of him.


Prithee do.


Here's innocence of all sides, who would live
Out of this Common-wealth, where honest Swains
Are Lords and subjects? Here is no acquaintance
With craft and falsehood, all their souls are clad
In true simplicity: I will take a truce
With care a while, to talk with this poor wench.
Mopsa I heard you named, pray tell me,
Were you in love?

Yes forsooth.


With whom, forsooth?


With a Gentleman that has proved unkind, forsooth, broken his vows, and
oaths, forsooth, he made much of me, time was, before his father dyed,
forsooth, who was a good Yeoman, then he kissed me, forsooth, and coll'd
surreuerence, but now he scorns Mopsa: I was his equal once, and have danced
with him upon our Church green in a Morris ere now.


Alas, alas, has forsaken thee?


He is now about to commit makrimoniall business with a young girl I wisse.


'Tis she. I'll have a trick to know it.
Blessings on you Shepherdess,
Yet by this hand, you are no less,
You were in love with a fair man,
Crossed by a father, began
This Shepherds life, russet weed,
Is it not the truth, I reed? ha, ha.

Sir, are you a Fortune-teller?


No, I am fool, and yet I know
Something, though you think not so.

Do you see all this here?


That and more in this table

Lies your story: 'tis no fable,
Not a line within your hand,
But I easily understand:
Your line of life is fair, hard by
Ascends that of prosperity,
But broken in the midst to the Mount
Of Saturne here, which ill we count,
Ha, Triangle and Mercuriall line?
But Venus is no friend of thine.

How now, Palmistry? believe him not.


In your face your fate is wrote,
You loved a woman, she not you,
You know whether I say true,
Her name began with S. but she,
Shall never be enjoyed by thee,
She's married now to one that's old,
But very rich: your fortune's told.

Beshrew me he has cunning.


Do you believe him sir?


Believe him? nay, you may believe him, he's abomination cunning man, he told
me my fortune as right as if he had been in my belly.


Does thy fortune lie in thy belly then, Sweet-heart?


Partly, sir, as other women's fortunes do.


Damsel, you have yet a fate
Will make you wonder more thereat,
By collection, I dare prove,
That his name, whom you did love,
Began with G. but 'tis too true,
He hath slain himself for you.
Felice, come again, do not believe me, I told thee false, I did but try to
gain a knowledge of thee: thy stars owe thee more happiness, Felice, look
up, see thy friend alive, I am Gasparo. Foot, I ha made fair work.


Ha, 'tis Gasparo.

Have I found thee, O wench, thou were unjust,
Too much unjust, thus to absent thy self
From Gasparo, thy cruel father since
Hath wept enough to wash away his error.
Fates, I do thank you, for this blessed direction.
But Infortunio, I am sorry now,
I read the truth of thy unhappiness,
It is too true, Selina is beyond
Your sphere of hope, pardon, worthy sir,
The shape I took, was not to mock your fortunes,
But try mine own. And have I found the wench?

Oh, no, no, your suite is in vain, hands off, Shepherds.


I will make thee amends and marry, prithee sweet Mopsa, beautiful Mopsa.


Beauty! I do confess I have reasonable beauty, for black and white, for all
other colours are but compounded of them: but the truth is, I cannot so soon
forget my old love; though he hath proved false unto me, Mopsa will prove true
unto him: oh, and it were not for shame, now I would die for love.


Be not dejected, sir, you have a fate
Doth smile upon you, I have a little skill.
In that this Gentleman seemed to have some knowledge,
I must needs cross his judgment, and pronounce
You are more happy.
Let not ought your soul annoy,
You that virgin shall emoy,
That you first loved, who doth wait
To make your wishes fortunate,
And ere Sun twice declines to West,
You may be with marriage blessed.

The boy is mad.

Do not undo, sweet boy, the benefit
Thou hast already done me, thou dost utter impossibilities.

Then with one Argument I can easily
Take off your wonders, look on thy Selina,
That on the wedding morn, forsook Rufaldo,
Touched with a sense of thy indignities,
Thus to obscure me from all curious search
And inquisition, but not hoping ever
To be made thine, now if true love maintain
The opinion you pretend, thus in your arms
I power my self.

It is Selina. Oh, I am rent in pieces
With joy and wonder.

Hark you, sir, do not believe him,
Let not passion make you a mockery.
Is not Selina married to Rufaldo? then am I goose-giblet: I should have bin at
Church with 'em, but for a crotchet that I had in my pate all the morning: I
spake with her father yesterday, and from his mouth I heard, Selina was very
well, I think I do not dream, indeed now I call to memory, he said Selina
was mist two or three hours ath' wedding morn; some figarie, I know not what:
and Antonio, as I supposed, gone in quest of her, not heard of since: but
Selina is sure Rufaldoes wife, or some Devil in her likeness has abused them
all with credulity. This is true, sir, therefore be not easy, do not deserve
more pity, this boy is mad, a juggling boy.


Shall I not be believed then for my self? am I refused now?


It cannot be she: troth boy, thy conceit took me at first with much
credulity: but here's our natures weakness, apt to credit what we affect:
were there not too much against it, thou might deceive me: oh no, Infortunio
is given up, lost to all felicity.


Since then you put me, sir, to prove my self, let me not be lost, I will not
call you what I desire, nor name you sister: give me leave to find my self, I
know not where I am yet: my brother Antonio gon? what fury hath assumed
Selina's shape?


Come, put on a mans spirit, Mopsa.


Well, sir, in regard you are so


I have it, my Bother's lost:
I'll send a shepherd in Antonio's name,
To inuit my Father hither, and that Incubus.
I vow not to forsake these Plains, till I
Possess my self, or be rejected quite,
Suspend thy passions then awhile, Selina,
To morrow is the Shepherds Holiday,
Which they solemnize with rural pleasures,
'Twill draw them sooner: ha, are they gone?
I will not leave 'em, with this thread I shall
Tread over the Labyrinth, and discover all.

Antonio slain? haplesse Cornelio,
My hopes were treasured up in him, the staff
And comfort of my age, and is he gone?

Hast sent for Bubulcus?


I have,
Father, let not too much passion soil that temper
Hath been observed in old Cornelio.

Why, was not he thy Brother? can thou
Thou hast so little share in young Antonio,
That thou dare speak of comfort?

Sir, on my life Antonio is not dead.


No, no, 'tis impossible.


Bubulcus, on my soule's a very coward,
And durst as well attempt to take a prey
Out of a Tigers jaws, as see a sword
With patience bent against him.

But cowards in despair prove desperate, and most unhappy.


A my conscience I could beat him into a mousehole.


Nay, I could beat him, and I am sure you can beat me, wooed I were well rid
of you: 'tis a double misery to be abused, and dare not speak out.


Here's Bubulcus.


Not guilty, not guilty, and please your Worships, let me not be hanged for a
lie of mine own making: 'tis well known I am a stinking coward: not guilty, I
beseech you; I never drew sword in anger in my life: if you hang me, you undo
me for ever.


Look you, sir, 'tis clear.


My conscience is as clear as Crystal: not guilty, my Lord, I beseech you --



Did not thou kill Antonio then?


Let me be hanged if I did.


Stay, he will confess.


I confess I told a lie, thinking to have got some credit: but if ever I saw
Antonio, since he gave me two or three kicks, which I deserved well enough,
broil me ath' coals. Mercy, oh mercy: do not cast me away upon the Hangman
now, in the pride of my youth: not guilty, my Lord.


Howsoever fear of death possess him so, I see the murder in his eyes.


My eyes? wooed they were out then: do you see murder in my eyes? are my eyes
blood-shot?


His very hand doth show a guiltiness, look how it trembles.


The fear of hanging hath put my whole body into palsy: My hands gui^ty? I
can wash my hands clean of it, I never killed a Fly. By this hand, not guilty.


Which is Cornelio?


This: what's the matter? what makes this Shepherd here?


I am Cornelio: is it with me thou woo'dst?


If your name Cornelio be,
Contentment and felicity
I bring you: I am sent from one
That doth call himself your son,
Young Antonio, who thus low
Would beg your blessing, prays that no
Affliction too much you dismay
For his absence, bad me say,
If you deign suspend your care,
A few hours, and repair
Unto the place of Shepherds by,
To grace their pleasures with your eye,
Antonio will himself declare,
Faithfully what causes were
Of his absence, and requite
These dolours with a fresh delight:
And so farewell. This is all:
Back again I hear them call.

Oh stay awhile.


He's gon, sir: did I not tell you, Antonio was not dead? but this is strange.


Do I not dream?


Antonio among the Shepherds? if he be there, I am dressed In faith: By any
means, go sir.


Is Antonio alive again?


Yes verily, alive again, let not the Hangman fright away your wits any
longer.


I hope I shall choose my own Gallows then. Hillaria, you would not believe
me: did I look as I had killed any body? now I hope you will hold me for an
innocent hereafter.


Babulcus, pray let us have your company,
It doth concern your freedom. Antonio living?
Rufaldo, let us make a merry day on it,
If it be true. If? I do sin against
Discretion to distrust it. O my stars,
I do acquit you all your injuries,
If you possess me of Antonio.
Never did man to bliss more willing go.

I am glad I am reprieu'd: come Hillaria.


'Twere pretty if Antonio be multiplied: here's tricks indeed, I am resolved
to see what will the end of this confusion be.


Never was Ienkin in such Wilderness, her have walked and travelled creat
deal of miles in these Woods: but her can find no end nor evasions, look
you: her have read in Histories, and Relations, and Kernicles, very famous
Knights, and praue Sentilmen of valours and shiualries have been enchanted,
look you, in Castles and very strange dwellings, and Towers, and solitary
places, now was have creat fears and supicions, lest Ienkin was fallen into
some Wisheries and Conjurations, and was enchanted, bless us awl in these
Deserts and Wildernesses for her valours and magnanimities.


So ho, ho, Master Ienkin.


It is our Pages again. Iocarello, where have you been? you are very tilligent
Poyes, to lose your Master thus.


I was lost my self, had not a Shepherd by chance found me, and carried me
into his house under the ground, where with a great many of Shepherdesses we
sate up all night in making Garlands for some show and pastimes to be done this
day, which they call their Festival: pray, sir, since we have run a wildgoose
chase so long, let's stay one day to see these sports and dancings.


Sports and dances, say you? take pleasures and delectations in dances? Very
well, Ienkin was know how to dance her self, was bred in awl Sentilmans
qualities, look you, her will make no peregrinations back till awl be done,
and it may be, was shake her legs in capers too, look you now.


Master Ienkin, you are well met in these parts, I perceive you are early this
morning, to partake the pastimes of our Shepherds.


Good tayes and salutations, and cret deal of felities come to awl your
vrships.


Sir, my name is Master Bubulcus, and I am as good a Gentleman.


As who pray you? do you make comparisons?


I do embrace your familiarities, and remain your truest worm.


Not too much worms, nor familiarities pray you: ha Pages, here is Selinaes in
her own apparels and vestiments, awl was very true as our Countrey-woman
Echoes was make reports: Selina was gone back again: very well: Mistress
Selina's was very full of joys and exhillarations, to see you in these places,
you know how creatly and ardently Ienkin was taken with your peauties, and
pulchritudes, cret while ago: pray when did you make returns out of these
woods? Ienkin had knowledge, and saw you in your Shepherd apparels, and was
make ambulations after you hither, out of mere amors and affections as her was
true Sentilman.


I make return out of these woods? I entered them but now.


Well, you desire not to have things declared, and puplished, her was keep
awl silences.


Upon my life you are mistaken quite in this, Master Ienkin.


Oh, pray you make not Ienkin ridicles, and derisions, look you, shall hear
no more of that matters, call you only to memories you promised loves to
Ienkin, pray you in matrimonies creat while ago.


I deny not that, sir, but I know not why you have long neglected me, and I am
now married to Rufaldo.


Rufaldoes? hit is not possible.


Father, he says it is impossible Selina should be your wife.


How, not my wife? I would fain see that.


Is Selina your wives in truths and verities pray you?


Do you make question? My wife? I think there is some reason, she is my very
dear wife, I will assure you sir.


He has got a boy by this time.


A boy? well, I have got something, a pox a your fingers. How say? is not
something, done Sweet-heart?


Yes, in my conscience something is done.


Ienkin was never awl his days have such injuries and contumelies put upon
her: was ever Sentilman thus abused? have her made repetitions and genealogies
of her plood, for no matrimonies? Ienkin has peat the pushes, and Rufaldoes has
get the pirds. Hum! her love not to make quarrels prabbles, but Ienkin could
fight with any podies in the whole vrld, awl weapons, from the long Pikes to
the Welsh-hookes, look you now, no matrimonies? her Welsh-blood is up, look
you.


Master Bubulcus.


Master Blew-pottles, have you any stomachs or appetites to have any plowes or
knogs upon your costards, look you?


No great stomach at this time, sir, I thank you: alas, I have 'em every day,
they are no novelties with me.


Come, Master Ienkin, I now perceive you loved my daughter, if you had
acquainted me in time, I should not have been unwilling to have called you
son, but since 'tis too late, let your wisdom check impatience: I know you
are of a noble temper, howsoever passion may a little cloud your virtues, lets
be all friends I pray.


Here is very cood honest words, yes, look you, Ienkin is in awl amities and
friendships, but --


Oh, no more shooting at that but: hark, I hear the Shepherds music, and
voice too, lets sit down I pray, Antonio keep thy word.


Wood-men Shepherds, come away,
This is Pans great holy-day,
Throw off cares,
With your heaven aspiring aires
Help us to sing
While valleys with your Echoes ring.
Nymphs that dwell within these groves,
Leave your Arbours, bring your loves,
gather poesies,
Crown your golden hair with Roses,
As you pass
Foot like Fairies on the grass.
Joy drown our bowers, Philomell,
Leave of Tereus rape to tell,
Let trees dance,
As they at Thracian Lire did once,
Mountains play,
This is the Shepherds holiday.
Post hence Satyrs and give way,
For fairer souls to grace the day,
And this presence, whip the air
With new rauishings, hence with care,
By the forelock hold Time fast,
Lest occasion slip too fast
Away from us, joys here distill.
Pleasures all your bosoms fill.

Fair Nymph, vouchsafe the honour to dance with me.


Troth, sir, I cannot dance.


We know you are Selina.


Your hand, fairest.


Disdain not, gentle sir.


Pible pables, with awl her hearts, look you.


Noble sir.


Fair Lady, at your service.


I will not change.


Nor I.


Which is Antonio?


It will break out anon.


You are a thief.


Ha?


You have robbed Selina.


Then I'll make restitution, what are you?


Antonio.


The Devil you are! faith, deal honestly with me, and I'll be true to thee:
who art?


I am Selina by my hopes of heaven.


Ha, sister then!


I have no brother but Antonio.


And I am he. Oh happiness!


If thou be Antonio, what made thee assume my habit?


Of that anon. Lives Infortunio?


Hes here, and with him Gasparo and my sister the lost Felice.


I am ravished with this wonder.


Keep your face constant: the Music calls.


Ha, what means this?


Selina.


Your blessing, sir, we are your children.


Who's this?


I am Selina, sir.


And I am Antonio.


Amazement: thou Antonio? he Selina?


Ha, how's this, my wife become a man? I confess^ she plaid the man with me.


But who is this?


I am Felice, sir, your long lost Daughter,
Found out by Gasparo, unto whom my vows
In Heaven were long since sacred, and I beg
Once more he may be mine.

As I to be possessed
By Infortunio here.

Stay children, stay: take heed, you do not know
What strength of joy my fainting age can bear:
You fall in too full showers, like swelling Nile
These comforts will exceed the narrow banks
Of my poor frailty: rise, enjoy your wishes,
And my blessings be multiplied upon you. Ha!
Rufaldo, here's Felice my lost Girl,
Take her, take her, Gasparo. Selina,
Art not thou Rufaldo's Wife?

No, sir, I ventured that, he knows me well,
Hillaria and I were bed fellows, at his request.

How? Hillaria and you bedfellows? I'd laugh at that.


I am abused, disgraced, undone.


Nay, Rufaldo.


Why then, it seems you were Antonio, that I killed so, and you have, as a man
should say, line with Hillaria beforehand.


I am not behind hand.


Nay, and you have tickled her before and behind, tickle her all over for
Bubulcus.


Hark you, is there another Selina's? bless us awl, here is very praue
loue-trickes, look you.


Blessing on him: why he hath made Stockfish on me, he has beaten away all my
inclination to give my blessing.


Come, upon recollection, you must make it a bargain: they have, it seems,
bought and sold already, 'tis past recovery, he shall be worthy of her.


Sir, that you may with more alacrity let fall your blessings: know, our bloods
are pure, Antonio and your Daughter are as chaste from any sinful act, as when
we were first mantled after birth.


Ha, say so?


'Twas none of my fault, I am sure.


Then my blessings to you: come, you're both my Children.


How?


Amen, and mine: Why I am rapt beyond my self with joys. Infortunio, Fate
hath effected that I begged of Heaven in many prayers for you, oh my blisses.


So, so, I am gulled, my house taken over my head?


Sir, you know who I am, I am yet walking Terra la, I have a great mind
to Bubulcus, you know what I have suffered for him, and so forth.


Let me alone, so, so: then pleasures run with a stream upon us, but if we
shall make a full day on it, here's one more to meet with her match, this poor
Virgin hath been long in love with Bubulcus: troth, sir, look upon her at
length pitifully complaining: alas good soul, be honest at length: prithee
do, and marry her, you know what has past between you, 'tis a handsome Wench.


Vmh, I do remember she was in love with me, and so was twenty more: what's
that to me? Alas, would you have me descend so low?


Oh, sir, you sung another song in my Mothers Dairy, when we sate up all night
together, and had a Sack posset.


I do remember such a thing, but what's that? I'll take it upon me.


I beseech you, Gentlemen, speak for me, for I will have him, I am ashamed to
show my reasons.


Very small ones: away you dirty queen.


What, has he got thee with child?


More then that, sir.


Has he had any Bastards?


Indeed Mistress, I'll tell you; he hath begot thr^ children of my body.


Fie upon it, no less then three Bastards.


How? nay, she lies falsely, I got but two, so man^ I will acknowledge, because
they shall not doubt my sufficiency, had I any more then two? speak you lying
whore


Sir, I tender your credit, there is but two ways either you must marry her,
or give her a piece of money that's the easiest way, she is poor: for your
reputation --


What do you think will content the Whore?


Hark you, best for you, make some satisfactions to this Sentilwoman, or
Senkin was learn you more ho nesties and behaviours towards these vmans,
warrant you Master blew pottles.


A matter of twenty or thirty pieces, you can spare them.


You Strumpet, here's twenty pieces for you: do you hear? keep well the
boys then: but you shall swear, before these Gentlemen, you will never claim
marriage: there, be an honest woman hereafter.


Yes, bear witness, Gentlemen, I do accept his wise benevolence, and will
never trouble him with marriage -- while Gorgon lives.


Gorgon?


Your servant, and your pardons: nay, Gorgon has had his devices and
vagabunduloes as well as the best on ye: give you all joy, I wish you wit,
sir.


I am foold of all sides, was I borne a fool?


Ha, ha.


Stay you, Master double colours, there be more* fools in the business as your
self: well Ienkin, were even best make shurneyes back into her own
Countries, and never put credits or conferences in any woman's in the whole
vrld: they all lie and coozen, and make derisions out awl measures.


Nay, nay, Gentlemen, let's all toget^
Wee'le drown all discontents this day with (...)*
Let's take up all our Fates then, and proclaim
This (...) new Festivals in Hymens name.

Stay a little, and I'll along with you. Since I have mist my Wench, I'll ask
these Gentlemen's good wills to a second match, in stead of an Epilogue.


Why, how now? what, are you mad? will you speak the Epilogue? though you have
plaid a fool in the Play, you will not show your self an Ass before all this
company. The Epilogue? I hope I am the wiser ath' two, and the better read in
complement.


Hark you, Master double-colours, and you good^ Gorgons, here is one wiser,
Asses you both, to pronounce the Epilogue, warrant you, and one, that knawes --
to speak in as good English, Gentlemen, now sans Complement.


Our Loue-^kes have been shown, and we attend
To kno^ ^ acceptance crown the end,
The world is full of (...) but it will be
^
To these of ^ contentment dwell
On you we ^ Play ^ well,
Which ^ call, that we might prove
^ your love.

