TWill be a great Assize, how things will hit
For us appearing at this bar of wit.
Is most uncertain, we have named our Play
The Example, and for ought we know it may
Be made one, for at no time did the laws
However understood, more fright the cause
Of unbefriended posy, since the praise
Of wit, and judgement is not now adays
Owing to them that write, but he that can
Talk loud, and high, is held the witty man,
And censures finely, rules the Box, and strikes
With his court nod consent to what he likes;
But this must be, nor is't our parts to grudge
Any that by their place should be a judge;
Nay, he that in the Parish never was
Thought fit to be o'th jury, has a place
Here, on the Bench for six pence, and dares sit,
And boast himself commissioner of wit,
Which though he want he can condemn with oaths,
As much as they that we are the purple clothes,
Robes I should say, or whom in the Roman state
Some ill-look'd stage-keepers, like Lictors wait
With Pipes for fasces, while another bears
Three-footed stools in stead of Juory chairs,
This is a destiny, to which we bow,
For all are innocent but the Poets now,
Who suffer for their guilt of truth, and arts,
And we for only speaking of their parts.
But be it so, be judges all, and be
With our consent, but thus far take^ me w'ee
If any meet here, as some men in the age
Who understand no sense, but from one stage,
And over partial will entaile like land
Upon heirs male all action, and command
Of voice and gesture, upon whom they love,
These, though called Judges, may delinquent's prove.
But few such we hope here, to'th rest we say
Hear patiently ere you condemn the Play.
Tis not the authors Confidence, to dare
Your judgements, but your calm ears to prepare,
That if for mercy you can find no room,
He prays that mildly, you pronounce his doom.

Dormant, why Dormant, thou eternal sleeper!
Who would be troubled with these lethargies about him?
Dormant, are you come Dreamer.

Would I were so happy, there's less noise in a Steeple upon a Coronation,
ohsleepe, sleep, though it were a dead one, would be comfortable; your worship
might please to let my fellow Oldrat watch, as well as I.


Oldrat? that fellow is a drone.


He has slept this half hour, on the Iron Chest, would I were in my grave to
take an nap, Death would do me a courtesy, I should be at rest, and hear
no noise of Dormant.


Ha? Whats the matter?


Nothing but a yawn sir, I do all that I can to keep my self waking.


Tis done consideratelie, this heavy dullness,
Is the disease of souls, sleep in the night,?

Shall I wake my fellow Oldrat, he is refreshed

Do, but return you with him, I have business with both.

To hear us join in our opinion, of what's a clock, they talk of Endimion,
now could I sleep three lives.


When other men measure the hours with sleep,
Careless of what they are, and whom they trust,
Exposing their condition to danger
Of plotts, I wake, and wisely think prevention,
Night was not made to snore in, but so calm
For our imaginations, to be stirring
About the world, this subtle world, this world
Of plotts, and close conspiracy, there is
No faith in man, nor woman, wher's this Dormant?

Here is the sleepy vermin.

Oh come hither; surra, wher's your Lady?

Out all this night at play sir,

All night, there's some plot, but I am safe
At home, your gaming Ladies are strange Whirligigs,
But while she plays, and revels with the gallants,
Here I am cabled up, above their shot,
And see in my imagination all there plotts,
Nay, we are the quietest couple, never meet,
No* not a bed, there may be plotts in that,
This part o'th house is mine, and here I walk
And see the soul, the very soul o'th world.

It has bin Day this two hours.

Then tis time for me to go to bed.

Would my hour were come once.

Keep out day light, and set up a fresh taper,

By that time we have dined, he will have slept his first sleep.

And after supper call for his breake-fast.

Yo're sure 'tis morning?

As sure as I am sleepy --

And that your Ladies not come in?

As sure as I have the Key.

Is my Niece ready?

Two hours ago sir.

So early? there may be a plot in that, say
Her uncle would speak with her, I use every morning,
Before I go to bed, to give her counsel,
In her husbands absence, she is young, and handsome,
And there be plottsith world. Dormant, come hither.
What Gentlemen do frequentlie come hither?
Who does visit her most?

My Lady sir?

My Niece Ia^intha sir, for my wife
I will let her alone of purpose yet,
To mind her game, shuffle, and cut, and dice,
And dance the brawls, they cannot cousin me.
Say my intelligence, who does visit most
My Kins-woman?

The gay Lords often with her.

Who?

He that comes every morning like S. George.

Ha!

I do not say to mount her, the Lord --

Fitzaverice.

The same, sir he's the most bountiful Gentleman and makes us all so pray
for him.


More plotts, he has a vast estate, and though
Fame speak him noble, I suspect he loves her.
He has my Nephews Land is mortgage too.
A mere device, I ^adome it, come hither,
Let not the arras hear us, say what prank
Of mischief, has he done, he should be bountiful
To thee? on what suspicion can deserve it?
Come be ingenious, and confess.

Who I be ingenious? alas you are deceived.

Be free, this grome conspires.

Do I look like one that would be ingenjous?

What noise is tha^? more plotts, let me enter,
They are saucy with my doors, tis well they are
All hart of Oak, and sound to endure the Knocking.

I hear my Ladies foot-man call the Porter.

I'll keep no Gate that will be knocked o'this fashion
I think it were a special policy
To have a kind of a wheel; or turning Engine
Advanced before my door, and admit none
Without a Ticket.

My Lady is come sir,

Is she alone?

The Gentleman that complements with my Lady,
And is here half an howre before my Lord still --

Master Confident?

The same, he manns her Ladyship, and she is coming this way through the
Gallery.


Was ever such an impudence? she wonot carry
Him to her Chamber? new Plotts, obscure me hangings.

I shall report how much his Lordship owes
For this most noble favour,

He deserves,
By many bounties ever to command me,
And I must thank your pains, but in my Chamber,
We may discourse more freely.

You much honour me.

Bounty, and Lordships, and discourse in Chambers?
This fellow is a rascal, new new Plotts,

If your worship mean to lie with her Ladyship --

By no means.
How happy am I, that we keep several quarters,
Some husband would torment himself with watching,
Screw his Nose in at a Key-hole, or in some cranny
Wedge his long ear, let'em alone, it makes,
It makes, and my lascivious Gamester find his plotts discovered,
All his wit, gleand from Italian Sonetts? and loose times;
His bouncing, and his braves shall not disguise
His hart from me, I see it, I see it already,
And laugh that I am alone, and have my humour.
Oh, tis my Niece, away and dress my Pillow.

Good morrow sir.

Morrow? 'tis now my bed time.

You were pleas^d.
To send for me.

I did dear Niece.
Before I go to sleep, I must commend
Advices to thee, 'tis part of my devotion,
In brief, because the Day comes fast upon me,
Have a great care you be not seen too public,
Your Chamber's spacious enough to walk in,
There's danger in society, and the World
Is full of plotts,

What plotts?

I know not, but
Be solitary as I am, and be safe.
Your husbands debt's have made him quit his Country,
He was an unthrift, nay I spare him not
Although he were my kins-man, 'twas ill done,
Whose plot so ere it were, to loose your Jointure,
Times are necessitous, but while he drills
His men abroad, take heed you meet not hotter
Service at home, there be fine Lords ith World,
And Gentlemen that run, and carry messages,
And Pages, that bring Jewels, and can whisper
The bawdy poesies, and soe-forth.

You are not; Jealous of me

Nor of my wife, I lie
Alone discreetlie, let my Madam play,
Sit up a nights and gambol,

And dee love her?

At distance, as becomes a politic man,
That would not sell his state to buy an heir,
Our looks so seldom do converse, that if
We should engender at the eyes, she wod
Not teem so often as an Elephant, fools diet with
There wives and be in danger of provocatives
To frisk, and mount the table, precious pastime!
Come thou art happy; that thy husbands absence
Hath given thee occasion to be solitary,
Trust not the ai^e abroad by my example.
Take heed of plotts, and so good-night.

Good morrow.
I thank you for your counsel but it needs not,
I pity the condition of this Gentleman,
That makes his life a penance to seem wise,
He talks of plotts, and is the greatest enemy
To himself with his vain fears, but why do I
Discourse of misery without my self,
That carry in my bosom every minute,
All that can make a woman miserable?
Thought of my husband wounds me, yet I cannot
Be suffered to enjoy it, like a Dear
I am chased by foreign Hunters, and not left
To think what cruelty at home pursues me.
You might have known my pleasure, in good manners,
Ere you admitted any.

Tis but a Page Madam, the poor child
Wants years to offend.

He serves the Lord Fitzamorous
Beshrew your diligence.

Who commends to your
Fair hand these Jewels Madam.

I prithee carry 'em back, their insid's poison,

I would not be corrupted with the one,
To betray the other so, they cannot fright
When you examine, if you knew his Lordship
So well, as I would wish, you would accept
And cherish these presentiments, you're the first
Lady within my observation,
That has took time, to ask her conscience
The meaning of a Jewell, sent by a Lord,
A young and handsome Lord too; 'tis a thing
At Court, is not in fashion, and 'twere pity
One with so good a face, should be the presedent,
Of such superfluous modesty.

Does your Lord
Instruct you thus?

We take it of our selves,
Pages and waiting women are apt by nature
To understand their office, you may be confident,
My Lord means honourably, and as becomes
A Gentleman of high blood, he will visit
Your Lady-ship.

I shall not need, return him then my thanks,
By messenger.

I apprehend,
And wish you a morning fair as your own beauty,
My humblest duty.

How black sin doth scatter
Her seed betimes, and every ground is fruitful.

Has she the Paper?

And the jewell too.

I know sheele chide me, but his Lordships
Bounty commands I should be serviseable.

Away, and wantonness inspire me, Lady.

More rude intrusions?

Patience noble Madam,
The message that I bring, is more calm and gentle
Then the cool wind, that breathes upon the Flowers
Soft kisses in the Spring, the woollen feet
Of time do move with a less noise, then mine
Beneath this happy Roof, vouchsafe your ear,
And words shall meet your sense, and Court it with
Swifter delight then apprehension
Knows how to reach, and when I have let fall
Love, which doth make all language rich, and told you
His name that gives his life up in my breath,
To be made blessed by being yours, you'll wish
I were all voice, and to that harmony,
Chain your own soul for ever.

What do you mean
By this strange language? pray be clearer, sir,
If you direct it to my understanding.
What is your business?

I have tol'd you, Madam.
Love.

What love I beseech you sir?

A love that doth include in his own flame
What Poets made but fiction in the gods,
When Earthly beauties tempted them from Heaven,
A fire which from the bosom of loves priest
Shoots up religion and a sacrifice
To what his soul adores, a glorious love,
And love of you.

Of me? it will concern
That I should know him.

Had his person bin
A stranger, so much worth, and fame preferrs him
To every noble knowledge, that you cannot
Be ignorant, what wonder of mankind
I point at, hath report brought to your ear
In the stack of men, one that hath had the praise
Of wit, of valour, bounty, a fair presence,
A tongue to enchant heaven? these wait one him,
As he, to be your servant: he is a man
(What pity it is I cannot call him more)
The pride, and darling both of war, and peace,
The Lord of many Worlds.

How sir! He may be bountiful indeed then.

With your pardon,
Shall we allow to every common man
A little world, and not think him worth many,
Who hath the price of thousands in himself?

What miracle is this?

He is a man
So full of all, that thought, or love can be
Ambitious of, that nothing can deserve him,
But she alone that hath in her own frame
Of woman, all that ever praised the sex,
And these are all your own, make him so too,
And from your loves, the decayed world shall hope
To see a race of Demi-gods.

I find not
By all these marks of honour and of goodness
What person you commend thus

Can there be any beside my Lord?

Your Lord may be
Besides himself after so great a Character.

The Lord Fitzavarice.

Cry mercy sir,
I know him, and you might with half the expense
Of so much wit in blank verse, have expressed
His purpose, and himself, I thank him heartily,
But am not so much worth, pray tell him so.

Lady, I do not use to thrive so ill
In my love-undertakings.

I'st your Trade?
It seems so, by your prompt and elegant way,
Are you solicitor general for other's,
In love, ti'd by your place, never to move
Conditions for your self? he is but a Lord
Whose fame you have advanced thus.

You're right, Lady.

And I was never taught, that wit or handsomeness are assured by patent, dee
think this Lord

May not find his peers?

No question, Madam.

This would well be a double Knave.

There may be Gentlemen,
That owe no high and mighty titles, Madam.

As gracious with a Lady;

And as active;

With wit, with valour, bounty, a fair presence,
And tongue to enchant heaven.

As I would wish,
I only was ambitious to enjoy her
After my Lord, if once she were corrupted?
Venus send me good luck, and I be
His taster, but he's here.
Trust me an other time.

Hast prevailed?

I have taken off the impossibility,
Or she deceives me much: To her your self,
I^le take my opportunity.

Still Melancholy?
What dee mean Lady?

I have kept a Jewell for your Lordship.

Will she come too't already?

And because
I would not be held guilty of ingratitude,
Not furnished with a gift worth your acceptance,
I must present your own again.

Why this
I sent you, Madam, do not so dishonour me,
I have plenty of these trifles shall it have more,
Richer and brighter to attend thy beauty,
Here they will shine in their own place.

I dare not accept of any, they are dangerous.

They are not poisoned.

Yes more killing then
The teeth of Serpents, or the Vipers blood,
Without a charm, they had ere this undone me.

Pray make your sense familiar to me.

Can you seem ignorant, by whose direction
They were sent hither, oh my Lord, but think,
What honour you can gain out of my ruins.
Why do you still pursue me with this heate
Of sensual f^ame, and send these tempters to me,
After so many vows, to keep my faith,
And name unstain'd?

Still in these foolish humours?
What did you marry for?

To enjoy my husband.

Enjoy him in his absence then by proxy.

When he is absent from my hart, may
Consent to be as black, as you would make me;
But while he hath a constant dwelling here,
I must loose both at once, if I forsake him.
Oh think upon your self my Lord, and make
Your title good, and justify, that honour
By our selves acquired, is richer, then what blood,
And birth can throw upon us, send no more
Agents to plead your shame, their errand is
So foul, it must infect 'em, to be false,
Even to your self, my husband is abroad
To far from home.

He's fighting in the low-Countries,
By his example you may Skirmish here,
A little, if you please, I do not wish him
Returned, although I have his land in mortgage,
If you would be less cruel, you may pay
His debt in other property, and cancel
The payment in due time.

I'll hear no more.
You have a stained soul.

I do love this Lady,
As Gentlemen now call love, and that extremely.
She is all nunns flesh about her, but has the Divell^
No trick to thaw her chastity? I must have
Some way to enjoy her body for my credit,
The world takes notice I have courted her,
And if I mount her not, I loose my honour.

So, so, now we are furnished.

Our acts and deeds are to show for it.

Sigillatum et deliberatum in praesentia not ari^.
Publici. I thank you Gentlemen.

In the presence of the notorious Publican.
But dee hear, who shall pay back the money?

What money?

The money we ha taken up to go a wooing to
This Kick-shaw.

Share and share like, how ever, the security
Is good, and the Scrivener satisfied.

I have (...) great mind --

To pay it all, shat have my voice.

Upon condition the Lady would seal to
Covenants, you should find me reasonable.

For that we must take our fates, one of
Us is sure to carry her against the World.
He that has least wit, has five hundred
Pound a year, if that, good clothes, and a
Handsome man with appurtenances, cannot
Tempt an elder sister, would she were sent
To a Nunnery, le^ts loose no time, but advance to her instantly,

Stay I have it, and no unhappy invention,
A divice, if the worst come to the worst,
You will thank me sort.

What is't?
Mercury himself be the Doctor Mid-wife, and
Deliver thee.

The gentlewoman we aim at, has a great
Estate, a fortune for a Lord.

All this I know.

She has many Suitors,

So much the worse, proceed.

But none in grace, makes her self merry with'em,
And jeeres'em mainlie, cannot love.

What comfort is this for us?

Now I come too't, we two do love this Lady,

No matter for that, toth'poynt
We come a wooing to her.

Tis not possible
We should both draw the prise, but one can be
Her husband.

Of us two, right.

And yet in our particular,
There's none of us can say, he shall prevail,
And be the man, the man, that must be Lord
Of the estate, justle the noble-Men. And domineer.

What of all this?

Now mark me,
He that shall conquer this Virginian Island
And write himself Lord of the Golden-mines,
Will have a very fine time on it.

Very likely, what's the conclusion?

Nay tell me first, what will
Become of him that must
Sit down with a willow Garland, that has sealed
For a thousand pound; with what dear appetite
Shall he discharge the Scrivener?

One on's must loose, unless we could divide her.

Then I have thought a way to make us both
Gayners, in some proportion.

That were a trick worth our learning.

Play your Cards wisely, and 'tis done.

As how prethy?

Why thus
He that shall marry her of us two,
As one of us must speed, shall enter Bond
At's marriage, to give the other a thousand pound,
This composition may be allowed and sealed to,
If you consider, something will be requisite,
For them, that go without the maiden-head,
Debts and devises will grow due, and Sack
Will not be unnecessary, to forget her health in,
What think you on it? and who e're obtains the Lady
Will have no cause to grumble at this motion,
Is not this equal and a certainty for both?

Let the Articles be drawn, 'tis a safe bargain,
Hee^'s my hand too't.

A match, the writings,
Will quickly be prepared, for things must carry
Formality and law, we do but talk else,
Va Withal my hart, subscribe to night, who's this?

Tis Confident.

My two ingenious sparks, my Landed wits,
And therefore more miraculous, what makes
Your looks exalted, as if Venus were
Propitious now?

Thart right we are in love.

I knew't, I read thy Character in your brow,
I see the desperate Archer in each eye,
Prepared with golden Shafts to wound your mistresses,
Their harts must bleed, no destiny will help it,
You two are Cupids darlings, and he's bound
To bring you all the Ladies you can wish for,
Humble and suppliant for the Game.

Dost think we shall prevail then?

Have I ambition
To be your honorer, and o'th nuptial night
Light up my epi^halamy, to inflame
Your bosoms, and instruct your wanton limbs
The activity of love beyond fierce Aretine.

But dost hear! we are both suitors to one Lady;
Which dost think shall carry her?

To the same Lady!

Thou know her,
Jacintha, Lady Peregrines sister.

The glory of her sex, yau'e placed your thoughts,
With a discreet ambition.

Who shall have her dost think?
Speak thy opinion.

You, sir.

shall I?

Can you appear doubtful?
Be not so much ingrate to natures bounty,
Each part about you in silent oratory
May plead toth Queen of Love, yau'e to much excellence,
Were all your other graces worn in Clouds,
That eye, that very eye, would charm a Lucrece,
And by the golden unresisted Chains
Draw up her soul, and melt it in your bosom,
Your presence is a volume of inchantements,
But move, and every beauty falls before you,
But if you speak, which needs not to obtain,
You give a louder notice to the World,
Then when you list, you conquer, and create
One accent of your tongue, able to make
A Nyobe return from her cold Marble,
And spring more soft and active then the Air
To court your amorous breath.

Hum no more, if thou loust me, we are upon
A composition, he that wins the Lady
Shall give the other a thousand pound:
If you make him confident to be preferrd,
Hee'le never sign to'th' Covenant.

How preferred?
Under what misconstruction have I suffered?
Although I name it justice, he should challenge
The mistress of his thoughts, can you want merit
Who live the example of all wit, to boast
A victory in your love? were I a woman
(As nature only hudles into the world When she sends forth a man) give me
licence
To express my thoughts, and had all that invention
And truth could add, to advance me to opinion,
I should be hono'rd to be writ your servant,
And call obedience to you, greater triumph,
Then to be Empress of an other world,
You have so rich a wit, that dotage may
Be justified upon it, and nothing but
A soul purged from all dreggs, and quitted from
Mortality, can lay a worthy claim to^'t.
Yau'e put a question would afflict an Oracle
To understand, and answer, which of you
Should triumph over a Lady, I am mad
When I consider the necessity
Of fate, that one of you must be accepted,
And both so bounteoussie deserving. Then,
If I pronounce again that both must have her,
You'll pardon my ambition, Gentlemen,
Which levells with your wishes.

Could I speak thus,
I would not thank the Lady should run mad for me.

Jack prethe lett's fancy him,
He has spoke home and handsomelie.

Let it be five pieces, oh wit of wits!

You have, Gentlemen.
A care to enlarge my Library, I translate
These into books, whose title-page shall own
Your name in shining Capitalls.

Drink, drink Sack.
And divine the world with thine own wit, 'twill sell,
Hang other books, woot never switch a Play up?

Las the Comedians have no soul to speak.

Nay do not leave us.
We are going to this Lady, she randevou's
To day at Lady Plotts, we shall have music, and dancing
You'll meet my Lord there

I am his creature, and your humble servant.

Nay no distinction.

What brains some men have?
I would change all my acres for his Poetry.

Still peevish!

Most invinciblie, no temptation
Can fasten on her, wood I had ne'er laid seige to her,
The taking of her province, will not be
So much advantage to me, as the bare
Removing of my seige will loose me credit.
I would she were recoverable by Law,
There were some hope by vexing my estate,
And tiring Westminster, within few Terms
A gentleman might come to issue with her,
If all were of her mind, what would become on's?
Lent, everlasting lent would mortify
Our masculine concupiscence, and not leave
The strongest body worth an egg at Easter.

I am glad your Lordship yet is pleasant with
Her stubbornness, and were I worthy to
Advise you, it should never trouble your thoughts;
I know your Lordship is not barren of acquaintance.

There be more Ladies in the World,
And of the Game.

The Game my Lord? I hope,
You point not this at me, because I use
To pass the howrs at play with Ladies, and gentlemen.

At Dice and Cards? you have more charity,
Then to think I accuse your Ladyship,
Though there be some have dared to venture both ways
Upon record, yet seem stanch to the world,
I and are thought to pray sometimes, I wod-not
For the Indies tempt your Ladyship, I know
You are deaf to all leaud accents.

Tis your goodness --

Never to try thee, tis fit only such
As your cold kins-woman, wenches that have
No spirit should be tempted to those sports;
Nor is she otherwise considerable
To me, more then my charity may restore her,
I pity a handsome woman should eat chalk,
And die in the fullens, if she might be comforted, and cured.

With a Warm bed-fellow?

You're right, Madam,
But she's here, and her elder sister.
There is an other Lady I would not touch now,
I mean in the leaud way, she has life and fire,
And moves without an Engine, give me a wench,
That I must mould into a wanton shape,
And quicken her to air by my own Art,
A wench that must be purged, sublimed, calcined,
By the chemistry of Love, till she become
A glorified spirit, and acknowledge
She took her exaltation from me;
In that I glory more, then to have perfected
The Magisterium, and boast the Elixar.
But I waste time.

This I cannot help,
He wonot understand.

Can you work, Lady,
No cure upon your sister by the example
Of your free hart?

My Lord I chide her for it,
Tell her what folly 'tis, to wast her health
With feeding so much melancholy, I wish
She had my constitution; to laugh
At all the World.

You are satirical.

No matter what men think of me: my Lord,
I am no great admirer of their virtues.

You do not hate us, Lady?

But with pardon
Of your Lordship, it is possible, I may never
Run mad for Love.

You do converse with us.

Because I have
As yet, no resolution to be cloistred:
Sometimes men stir my pity, but most commonly
My laughter.

Y^ are a strange conditioned Gentlewoman.

I would be so my Lord, to all that love me,
And love my self the better, for that humour.

You'll never marry?

Certainly, not while I have any wit,
And can buy folly at a cheeper rate.
My sister has taught me; that Lady has
A precious husband too, shall I, my Lord,
Be bold to ask you, but one question,
What are men good for?

Pray, Lady, do not fear I come a wooing.

Your Lordships mirth offends not me in this.

Yet if I could love, I would marry thee
Of all women alive.

Your Lordship should
Have little cause, I hope, to wish so ill to me.

What says my Lady April here, all showrs?

My Lord is a great honorer of your sister.

Tis his fault in my conscience, but I hope
She'll have a care, poor soul.

Let me prepare you,
And when you see me close with Madam Plot,
You may advance.

Be brief.

Most noble Lady.
I have no time to enlarge my self; your fat's
In danger, if discretion sit not at
The Helm, with love; the Gentlemen, that next
Present themselves, are not to be admitted
Guests to your bosom, in the yet dark book
Of destiny, there is a name reserved,
To make you happy, your Stars guide you to
A husband, worthy of this blood, and beauty:
Think on the Prophet.

Now we may come in.

Bright Lady, make your humble servants proud
To kiss your white hand.

Not to fast, Gentlemen,
You do not mean to marry me; some air,
Or i'll go tak't abroad: two to one woman?

The lot gave me priority, you know,
Therefore obey your chance, I must first court her.

These are the guests he talked on sure.

What shall I do now?

Fall in with the chamber-woman, that is a way
To know the ebb, and flowing of her Mistress,
Sail by that wind I say.

The truth is, Lady,
I love you in the noble way of Marriage.

I am sorry for it.

Why my pretty Mistress?

I cannot love that way.

Are you in earnest?

Do you take me for a Jester?

Do but name
The way you have the most mind to be loved in;
The high way, or the by way, any way,
I am at your service.

What is that Gentleman?

One that would be in love too,
If he had an apprehension
You'd favour him, a thing has neither wit
Nor honesty, he would needs come along,
I could not shake him off, without a quarrel,
You'll quickelie find his barrenness, and dismiss him:
He has bin practising this fortnight, how
To make a leg, that learned Gentleman
Knows the inside of his soul, for my own part --

Methinks he is a very handsome man.

Should he but hear you, Lady, he would think
You jeered him fearefullie.

And he may have a generous mind. What's his estate?

How's this?

If you do love me, give him opportunity
To-tell me his poor mind alitlle.

I obey.
She's taken with him, and the worst come
To the worst, there will be a thousand pound good yet.

So resolute?

That man must have a powerful tongue must charm her,
Into consent of marriage, her estate
Is worth ten thousand pound.

A glorious sum,
Able to whet ambition, now the others
Turn is, to show himself ridiculous.

I tell you in three syllables, I love you.

That gentleman professes the same language,
Your friend.

My friend? he's none of mine, true we have bin
Acquainted, met, fell into conference of you,
And came together, Lady, he is no man
Of that clear fame, to engage my serious friend-ship,
A very puff-fist.

What's that I pray?

A Phantom, a mere Phantom.

Phantom, what's that?

A mental Tiphon, a windy capruch, I do grace him,
Or so, but he is the impudent'st fellow --

He speaks well
Of you, gave you a worthy Character.

He cannot choose.
He knows me well enough, and all the world,
Besides I have a temper must not be
Provoked with calumnies, tis true he has some
Pretty parts, is held an excellent scholar, can sing,
And dance, and manage a Horse well,
He's borne of a good family, can speak,
When he lists, to purpose too, I confess it,
But what's all this when a man will be a rascal?

What blessed pair of customers have I got?
These would make excellent husbands, and love me
To'th purpose.

Well, remember, you have promised,
Upon condition, I dismiss you now,
To give me an other answer.

My good Lord,
I have an humble suite to you, I should ask
First how your hopes thrive in that sullen Lady.

I must expect, but what's your business, to me?

In brief, to advance my service to
That Lady, by your Honours testimony
Of what I may deserve, I am confident
I shall reward it, by securing her
Fair sister to your wishes, she's your own,
Or if she prove too honest, I shall make
A recompense by offering to your pleasure,
The other, who by authority of your breath,
May make me Lord of her, and her full fortune,
You understand, my gracious Lord.

I do so.

Va. Your Lordships humble creatures.

I am your servant.
What shall we do, Ladies? but I forget,
I have something more to say to you.

To me, my Lord?

Your clients increase, Lady,
That gentleman tells me, he does love you, and would marry you.
Because I have observed his nature, I'll
Give him in brief, he is a fellow will
Undo thee in a fortnight, though not in
Thy estate, yet in thy mind, a greater mischief.
If thou dost marry him, it will be policy,
To turn witch betime, ere he sell thee over to shame,
And so much poverty, the Devil wonot
Trust thee with a familiar, now believe him,
We droop methinks --

So, so, here are an other couple, who shall trust
Mankind? it will be a miracle to find
One honest man i th bundle, sir, you are
Bound to my Lord.

His least favours to me
Are more then my whole life can satisfy,
Oh Lady, if you knew him but as I do,
You would be lost in wonder of his goodness.
Bove all, he is adorer of chaste truth,
And speaks religiously of any man.
He will not trust obscure traditions,
Or faith implicit, but concluds of things
Within his own clear knowledge what he says,
You may believe, and pawn your soul uppon't.
Vouchsafe me kiss your fair hand, whose least touch
Consented to though I were old and dying,
Would quicken me into a Spring.

You forget, my Lord, the music was prepared
To dance, and warm her blood.

Each take his Lady

Falstasse I will believe thee,
There is no faith in villainous man.

Begin there.

Follow her, my Lord, she is stolen to her chamber: thi^ will
Give you admittance through my Lodgings, I'll excuse
Your absence, there be more ways to'th wood, try all.

How much you bless me, she shall want no trial,
This opportunity is worth an Empire.

What shall I say? consent, dear Lady, to
Be mine, and thou shat taste more happiness,
Then woman's fierce ambition can pursue;
Shift more delights, then the warme-spring can boast
Variety of leaves, or wealthy harvest
Grain from the teeming earth. Joy shall dry all
Thy tears, and take his throne up, in thy eyes,
Where it shall sit, and bless what e're they shine on.
The night shall Sow her pleasures in thy bosom,
And morning shall rise only to salute thee.

Enough, too much. My Lord, I hoped when last
Your importunity enforced my promise
Of other answer, I should never see you,
If being a sad prisoner to my chamber,
Might have prevented your access: but since
I am betrayed to this discourse, receive
What the necessity of fate compels to.

Another answer?

Yes, but such an one
As must at least challenge affinity
With what I said before: not your estate,
Though multiplied to Kingdoms, and those wasted
With your invention, to serve my pleasures,
Have power to bribe my life away from him,
To whose use I am bid to wear it; be yet just,
And seek no further to pollute the stream
Of my chaste thoughts, I'll rather choose to die
Poor wife to Peregrine, then live a Kings
Inglorious strumpet, can you think my Lord,
Should I give up my freedom to your bend,
And for the pride of wealth, sell woman in me,
(For she must loose that name, that once turns whore)
Could I arrive at impudence enough
To come abroad, and not be moved to hear
My shame from every tongue, but scorn my infamy,
(As tis the nature of this sin to strengthen
It self still with a greater) could you think,
If no religion can correct your wildness,
Another price, or pleasure, would not buy me
Even from your arms? there is no faith in lust,
And she that dares be false to one she loves,
Will twine with all the world, and never blush for it,
Kiss, and betray as often. Think on this,
And call your self home,

Lady, I have heard you,
And do allow the excuse, I do not urge,
Although your husbands absence may plead for it,
You should be generally at my dispose,
Disclaim all place, and person, but what's mine,
I am not so ambitious, my desires
Are humble, and beg only so much favour
To admit me to one service, (you know what
To understand by it) and if you like not
My activity handsomelie, discharge me again.

Worse then infection, how dare you speak
This blasphemy to honour, or I hear it?

I'ts not to be avoided, I have secured
Your Chamber, Lady.

Innocence defend me.

Once more, and nature work,
You say you love your husband, and account
His absence the misfortune, that doth sit
Most heavy on your soul, this is increased
By the despair of his return; since all
Hop's f^ed, to satisfy his deep engagements,
Which threaten ruin here, I have a mortgage
Of his, for sums lent by my thriving father,
Your jointure, (but releast by you, I take it)
I am so much a servant to thy beauty,
The first night I embrace thy delicate body,
The Lands thy own again, a round encouragement.

What do I hear?

If Lords should pay so dear for every capering,
T'wou'd try the back of their estate: but mark me,
I ha not done, sum up his other debts,
They swell to thousands, be but fair conditioned,
For every time thou admitst me after, to thy
Pillow, I'll strike of an hundred pound,
Till all the debts be unravelled: In the mean time
Thy husband shall return, and walk the Town,
Free as an Alder-man, and be mace-proofe,
Shall live, and lie with thee, and love thee too,
And praise thee for this noble composition,
What say? I find thy wisdom coming to thee.
Should it be known, who'll think the worse of thee?
Alas, good soul, 'twas pure love to thy husband,
They must imagine, wrought with thee. What woman
But would to save a husbands life, and fortune,
Venture a trifle? nay they shall commend
Thy act, and read the story to their children*
And envy the example was not theirs,
I shall have all the blame, but i'll endur't
For thy sake, all the tyranny will be mine,
But to secure thy peace, and do thy husband
A courtesy, I'll run a thousand hazards.
Do I appear now?

Yes, a glorious monster.
Good Heaven!

Once more, will you consent?

Neveroh, never: let me tell you, sir,
You have so little prevailed upon my Love,
That almost I forget my charity
You're a bad man: I'll sooner meet a basilisk, and be one.

Nay then. -- He draws his Poynard.

What do you mean?

If soft entreaties
With all that man can promise, move you not
To the delight, I'll snatch it from your bosom,
Nay never shake, I'll change that modest paleness
Into a blush, shall speak thy blood as hot
As mine, or leave thy veins dry as the face
Of earth, when winter hath deflowered her cheek,
And sealed up all her beauties in a frost.
Ha, Madam, dead, help: I did but try thee,
My Lady Plot, a curse upon your Plotts.
Jacintha, Ladies, I am undone, no help?

Peace you'll wake my master.

Help here, the Lady Peregrine is dead.

If she be dead, she wonot make a noise,
Would al in the house were dead, we should be at quiet.
Carry your self civillie an i'll send somebody.

I shall be in for murder, oh my fate!

Alas my sister, what ha you done, my Lord?

I know not the extent of my offence,
But trust me, i le not fly past the next Chamber.
Show your best charity, oh my soul is wounded.

She returns, give her more air.

Oh my poor sister, welcome to life again.

I know you both, is no body else with you?

No Madam.

Not my Lord?

I'll carry him the news of her recovery.

Pray let me see him.

He's here too soon.

Plo. Cheer up your spirit my Lord, and speak to her,
She is alive, and likely.

You may come
A little nearer, if there be no change
In mind, there is in countenance, my Lord,
I have had a short, but pleasing vision,
My thought from a steep precipice, as you were falling
Into the Sea, an arm chained to a Cloud,
Caught hold, and drew you up to Heaven.

If you dare hear me speak
Again, I dare say more, but to your ear.

I feel a new, and secure confidence.
Will you vouchsafe us favour?

Wee'le not be
At to much distance.

Can there be a hope,
After so great a wrong, to find a mercy?
You must be more then woman, and you are so.
It was the error of my soul that drew
The heavy mist upon my eyes, they now
See, and admire your innocence, oh Madam,
I have two mighty passions within me;
Two, that are welcome, yet extremes, a Joy,
To see you live, and sorrow for my trespass
Against so bright a chastity, to which,
I kneel within my hart, and ask forgiveness.

If this be earnest, 'tis a heavenly language.

I feel a holy flame disperse rich heate,
About me, the corruption of my blood
Is fallen away, and of that virtue, which
A devil in me would have betrayed, I rise
A servant, and admirer, live, oh live,
Thou best of wives, and practise still new wonders
Upon the hart of lust transformed men,
Until time boast, the example of thy faith
Hath purged the world, and taught us how to count
Our hours by thy miracles: I am
In love now with thy goodness, by thy self
I am, and by some rare, and unknown act,
Must make a recompense to that fair honour,
I would ha blasted, once again forgive me,
And hide the shame, my soul does blush to think on.

This is an noble change, and speaks his nature
Not barren, when good seeds are trusted with it.

He's gone.

And did not mind us.

I am sorry,
I could have chained my ears to his discourse,
And willingly ha grown old to have heard him:
Madam, the Character of praise you gave him,
Is short of that true nobleness I find.

And yet you were not willing to believe it.
I think I know a man.

How is this sister?
I hope you're not in earnest, though he be
A Lord, as who can help, in my judgement
There are no mountains of such nobleness
As you commend his talk, if he speak not:
Another language to the ear, could never.
Ravish my understanding, though I must
Confess 'tis wild enough, I do begin
To fear you, sister.

Be more charitable,
I apprehend your trouble, and shall give you
A fair account of his, and my own honour,
I could be merry now.

Here are Gentlemen.

My customers.

Where is my Lord?

He's gone, sir.

I am sure he has left a hart behind with you,
Most excellent of beauties, in whose trust,
'Tis safer, and more warm, then in his bosom,
Do you not find him a brave Gentleman?
He has but one fault Lady, he's to modest:
But your discretion must helpe^ hat.

I honour him.

Tis well and wisely done.

Pray tell me, sir,
I have heard a little trial of your wit,
Are you honest too?

Honest too?
I never did suspect your Ladyships
Breeding, and yet this question in public,
Would stagger the opinion.

But you having a leading voice.

I ha not art to help you,
Though I confess, I might orerule some wits
O'th lower class, are you honest too?
Besides the freedom of my birth, and wealth
Of blood, I boast no over-swelling fortunes,
As to what purpose, should my wits be clogged
With heavy acres, when the Town's Exchequer
Is mine, and every Mercer is my Tenant,
If he pretend to wit, and hope to justify
His shop-booke, and orthographie of his bills:
I would not have the scandal on my name,
To be called honest, in the strict sense I mean,
And as it ties my blood up, for a Duke-dome:
But you are for my Lord, and I allow it.
How thrive my gallants here?

They cannot choose
But prosper, sir, and much the better for
Your commendations.

You may take his opinion Lady, tis authentic.

But a little of your patience: if I found
Within me, that strong appetite to marry,
Who shall protect me from the statute gentlemen?
If it be felony to have two husbands,
I will not marry above one for certain.

She s right for that, 'tis dangerous.

Cast lots.

And tie my love to chance, forbid discretion.

Choose whom you love best.

That's to be resolved
By your demonstration, who loves me best,
For if there be, mark what I tell you, Gentlemen,
But the hundred part of a grain difference,
In your affections, beshrew me, if
I choose the lightest.

How's this?

Wisdom Gentlemen,
And must be allow'd.

Let him be the judge,
He knows us both to a scruple.

Excuse me Gentlemen,
'Tis fit the Lady satisfy her judgment*
Although I hate partiality, it becomes not
I should be here definitive, to perplex
The freedom of her choice..

What think you to agree among our selves?

Sure he that dares
Do most for my sake will deserve me best.

Dee hear that resolution, be ruled
I'll open such a path to your ambition --

No more.

At our next visit, you shall know us Lady,

Nay Gentlemen letts to gleek.

Command us Madam.

You and my Cozen may
To the same exercise.

I would be excused
For some few minuites.

If it please you Lady,
We'll pass that time at sant: did you not find
My Character true of those rotten glo-wormes?

You did a high favour.

you consult
Your honour in the acknowledgment, I wait you.

When will you open, sir, the book of destiny
And read the name you talk on? I am confident,
He must be master of an active soul
Whom you prefer, if I mislike his person,
I'll marry his wit, but we loose time, you'll follow.

Methinkes I feel some new access of comfort,
Something that tells me, I am near a blessing,
Or else my poor hart flattets me.

My Lord commanded me present you his best service,
And with it, these: he bad me say, they are
Prologue to that reward he hath designed
Your virtue, I was glad to hear him say so,
And never went more nimbly on his message.

The mortgage? this confirms me, he is noble,
A wealthy Carkanet; though I cannot merit
This bounty from him, I am rich in thank's.
But prithee tell me boy, did not thou bring
Letters, and other Jewels to me?

Yes.

If I remember, you did speak an other
Meaning, then what you now deliver.

Madam,
Although the narrow tie of duty bind me,
To the discharge of his commands, which it
Becomes no servant to dispute, I meet
Honest employments with more cherefullnesse.

Thou hast a modest countenance, here's to buy the
Garters, and Roses.

When I go upon
Lascivious errands, Madam, I take money,
There is no other benefit belongs to 'em,
But good ones pay themselves, I am rewarded,
I shall have cause to thank you for my Lord,
If he preserve this temper.

A good boy: this is not the religion of all Pages.
They are a present worth acceptance,
The piety came with 'em more then doubles
Their value, if vice blush not at rewards,
There is no shame for virtue to receive them*
But What's all this to me, that am poor still
Without my Peregrine? who all this while
Treads the uneaven path of war, and danger,
This very minute, for ought I can tell,
Wounded upon some service, or engaged,
To stand the murdering Cannon, oh, my blood
Grows pale within me to imagine, what
Horror attends the Soldier

Madam, Madam.

Ha, my hart trembles.

Sir Walter Peregrine.

Thy looks speak comfort, what of him?

He is returned.

Landed?

He's marching up the stairs, with another soldade
Tough as his Jerkin, he has a tilting feather,
And looks so desperately, I fear they have
Brought home two regiments that wonot be
Casheer'd without a shift.
They are here already.

Oh! let me fly into his arms, my Peregrine.

My best of life!

Let tears of joy salute thee,
Welcome, ten thousand wellcomes.

I embrace
Millions of bliss in thee, but let not our
Joy make us unmannerlie, bestow
One welcome on my friend.

Your pardon, sir,
If after many years of absence, I
Dwell long upon a husbands entertainment,
And if you think I have expressed a truth
Of joy to see him, you will easily
Believe the man, whom he calls friend, is welcome.

Madam, you honour me, it were a sin
Not to be confident.

And are we met?

Never I hope to part again, 'tis time
We now should grow together.

You'll dispense
With me for some hours, I have friends expect
At my return a visit.

I shall not
Desire you to let fall no mention
Of me, the little stay I purpose here,
You may imagine, carries danger with it.

I Hope you know me better.

Noblest friend.

I heard some words sound most unkindly from you,
You named a little stay, have I scarce seen
My happiness, and must be sad again
To think it will so soon be ravished from me?

Alas my poor Bellamia, I have made
No purchase but of wounds, since my departure.
I have paid some debts of war, but cannot promise
To cancel one, that threatens me at home;
What we have more then to supply our wants,
Consumes on the Drum head, I was ambitious
To see thee, and this gentleman returning
With expectation to levy men
Gave me the opportunity, but I dare
Promise my self no dwelling here, scarce own
My face before a sun-beame, I must walk
In the dark to all the world but thee, Bellamia:
But trust me, when my body is called hence
By misery of my fate, it takes not all
The soul it brought, much stays to wait on thee:
I know it would afflict thee more, to see me
A prisoner, chained to heavy debts, and shame.

Thy state is not so lost, and miserable,
As 'tis presented in thy fears, look here,
And thank a providence, that smiles upon us,
This is recovered, we have some Land
Again, by whose revenue we may live,
And expect better fortunes, I have Jewels too,
Bright ones, and rich.

You have indeed.

Possess
What I enjoy, and let us live together.

It cannot, cannot be, alas Bellamia,
How flattering imagination would cozen us,
I am beyond sea still, in my cold Tent,
Where, though my sleeps be broken with the noise
Of war, I now securely dream of thee,
And of my coming home, and talking to thee,
That thou art rich in land again and Jewels,
Shadows, mere shadows: I am weary of
This dream, some charitable cannon wake me.

Sir you may trust your eyes, these are no forms, in aerie apprehension, but
the truth of things, that call you to believe, and use them as timely
benefits: yet I may allow you to wonder, there's a story will deserve it.


I know not what I fear, dee think 'tis true then?
I will have reason for this faith, pray tell me,
How came you by this wealth, certainly I left
No sums to purchase these, more my injustice
To thee, whose plentiful estate I ruined.

A friend, a noble friend.

That died, and gave thee
A swelling legacy, and thou hast made
This use on it to release thy desperate land,
Buy thee a Carkanet, and this proud blaze
Of other Jewels.

If you please to hear me,
I must declare, these are the bounty of
A living friend.

Living?

A Gentleman --

A Gentleman? forbear I am not well.

One you are bound to honour.

Tha'st undone me,
Do not, do not name him,
I know, and feel too much.

Believe me, sir,
My storie's full of innocence, and when
You have more knowledge of this friend, you'll quit
Your fears, and call him to your hart.

My hart*
Is very busy, yet you may tell me
His name, to whose strange bounty I am so obliged.

More to his virtue, though his title
Carry the shine of honour, he has a soul
More glorious; have patience but to hear me,
You will confess it, and reward his piety
With praise above a man, and be in love
With him your self.

In Love --

The Lord Fitzavarice.

Ha? the wanton Lord Fitzavarice.
Thou most undone of women, did my absence
So forfit me, or ebb of wealth corrupt
Thy giddy soul, thou could imagine, I
Would thank thy lust to piece up my wild ruins?
Transform me gentle Heaven,
For if I be a man, and hold the knowledge
Of this dishonour, I shall do an act
Equal to this, and murder this false woman.
Have I thought life not tedious for thy sake,
And in my poverty summed up wealth enough
But in my hopes to see thee, were my winters
Not cold, when I but thought I had Bellamia,
Were all the toils, and troubles of my spring,
Not valued for this harvest? curse upon
Thy Salary, were it a price to buy
All Kingdoms, that the Sun e're shed a beam on,
Earned from thy bodies infamy, I'd choose
To live in the galley first, and chained to'th oar,
Give up my breath through torture. I'll to prison,
And welcome all the stings, that want of liberty,
Disease, and famine, can let fall upon me,
And call thee yet more killing then all they,
Till my hard Creditors forgive me in pity,
And curse thee into all I have suffered,
Wives shall accuse thy perjury, whose act
Is able to make all the truth suspected,
And Virgins frighted at thy name, resolve
Never to marry, while the race of men
Curse thee, for whom they ne'er shall spring again.
But I let passion fool me, and my tamenesse
May prompt thee to more sin, I'll be revenged;
But first on him, that grafted shame upon me:
It shall be thy first punishment, to see
Him bleeding, where is he? come what fine conveiances
To keep your Goat close, till time play the baud,
And secure all your ruttings? I must find him,
Appear then stain to honour, Lordly devil:
Where art? Fitzavarice? Fitzavarice!
Whose reeking squire are you sir, ha my Lords?
Show me strait where this Fox doth Earth himself,
Or I'll --

I know not where my Lord is, but there's one a Bed.

A Bed, expecting her, where?

But he's asleep, you'll wake him.

Show me villain quickly.

Oh, this way, sir.

Has misery a name beyond my suffering?
Hath love, and fortune both conspired to drop
Their stings into my bosom?

Help Dormant.

A plot, a plot to murder me, hold, what art?
My Nephew; ha!

'Tis not he, Uncle you must
Excuse my complement, he shall not fly me.

Who goes about to fly? he did not wound me,
A naked man is soon undone, 'tis wisdom
To sleep hereafter in a shirt of Maile,
When came he hither, from the nether-lands?
He is sent upon some murdering design;
But why with his sword drawn, why not a knife?
Some great man is in danger; ha! my Niece weeping,
I'll sift her, Bellamia?

Oh my husband, sir.

Nay, then there is a plot, whom would he kill?

The Lord Fitzavarice.

I knew it was some great man mus^ be visited
Beneath the ribbs, men of such vast estates
Are not long lived.

I know not what to do, sir,

He's in the conspiracy, reveal the plot to me.

My fellow Oldrat met him, sir.

Ha, more traitors.
I did suspect that fools simplicity,
What man is to be trusted? if these men
Thrive in their first attempt, the stat's in danger.
This Oldrat is a politician.
I'll stand upon my guard, entrench, and dare
The Ghost of Tilly.

'Tis not very warm, sir.

Your cold considerations are best.
But I'll to bed again.

They are here, oh!

Away.
Shall we be never free from plotts?

Has he been gone this hour say?

Yes, and please your worship,
Would I were well gon too.

Yet will you hear me, sir.

And trust the language of your tears? they're false,
Your gamester shall weep blood: here we untwist
Our harts, set up o'th trade, the youth will join.
Thou may be still Bellamia, but not mine.

All's paid, and ye are welcome gentlemen.

So; so, this Tavern was well thought upon:
In my opinion, 'tis a great deal better
Then to have trusted your own passion
In such a cause, which easily might engage you
To danger, when your rage grew high, and loud.

I have obeyed your counsel: you will carry this?

I have promised you.

And yet you must acknowledge
The wrong is greater then to be contained
Within this narrow leaf, and till I have
Revenged, it swells each minute to a volume.

My Lord is noble this way, and be confident,
Will render you an account, worthy his person,
Though I am sorry to salute him first,
With a defiance.

Shall it not for all the World
Do thy self prejudice in his favour, i'll
Disengage thee again.

Now you dishonour me, though he has bin pleased
To use me nobly when we met at Bergen,
That must not bar the office of a gentleman
To his friend: he has been a Soldier himself,
And must grant this an act of my profession.
You are certain he has done the injury?
For 't is not safe to trust suspicion,
In things of this high nature; Life and Honour
Must not be questioned upon naked fears,
And windy suppositions, pardon me
This plainness, you imagine I dare fight.

Shall I believe 'tis day, when I behold
The Sun disperse his beams about the World?
Do I know cold, or heate, or when I thirst?
Shall I be confident we talk together?
My cause will ask the same degree of faith,
As built on equal certainty.

I urge it
No father:
Is not that he?

'Tis the same.

With-draw, be careful of your self, I'll meet you
At your Uncles house, and give you an account
Of this employment.

She is an excellent woman,
If it be no wrong to her goodness that I spend
My childish character.

You are right, she is
Indeed boy, and shows fairer for that goodness,
I have done nothing yet to cherish her
Rare piety, or to deserve my pardon.
I'll study both.

My Lord, an humble servant --

Captain you honour me,
Welcome to England, how do all our friends
In the low-Countries?

Happy in being your servants,

When Landed you?

But this morning, I am fortunate
In this opportunity, my Lord, to speak with you,
And to present --

Some letters, you oblige me,
How does sir Walter Peregrine?

Well,
If please you command your boy more distance:
This paper comes from him. My Lord, I should
Be guilty of much sin to your own honour,
Not to assure my self noble construction
From you, I had no thought within this hour,
To have brought more then my humble service
To your Lordship, which shall still be fairelie yours.

I do not like this soldads^ Embassage:
A challenge! some young Gentlemen that have
Strong purses and faint souls, do use to fine for it,
As Citizens do for Sheriffs: the Town swash-Bucklers
Practise these feats, and live by it; but my Lord
Hath beaten that opinion out of some,
It should appear, all are not yet converted.

How's this?

He appears noble, and not moved.

Are you acquainted with his discontents?

He has imparted some, but I have no
Commission to expostulate.

I thank you,
You show your self a Gentleman, and his friend.
He shall hear from me, I had ambition
To enjoy you longer: but the terms of honour
Threaten on both sides, know me for your servant.
Pray heaven he injure not the innocent Lady.
He has directed where to send to him,
And so again I thank you noble Captain.

Your Lordships honorer.

This came unlooked for, but I must not wave it,
O'th sudden whom shall I employ? I cannot
Want friends ambitious of these engagements:
The next I meet.

He has professed his soul was mine,
I'll try him for his body in this action.
Yet he that is not honest, dares not fight sure.

My honourable Lord.

Oh Master Confident,
Your hopes thrive in your mistress?

Your Lordship
Was pleased to advance 'em, she affects my wit,
And bold discourse, I turn and wind her soul,
She loves me infinitely.

I hope not, hark.
Be not too forward, I'm acquainted with
Her disposition, do not flatter her,
Nor seem to dote, she'll triumph then: if you
Would make all sure, be ruled by me, and slight her,
And she will court you, 'tis the trick of Ladies,
If you abuse her, 'twere not much amiss.
I would not have the wench undo her self
Upon this fellow. I advise the best
And speediest way, for I expect your promise,
When she is yours, to bring us more acquainted.

Be confident my Lord, good manners will
Instruct me to allow you the first fruits,
It was the fashion of our northern Princes:
And challenge it from your poor Homager.
I shall be as warm the first night with her Land,
And monie's. Then it seems you have no hope
To spring her sister.

Since our last salute,
Icicles hang upon my lip.

My wife, for I
Dare speak her so, with smiles shall chase
That winter* and shoot spring throughout your blood;
You shall not only from her lip taste Cherries,
But she shall plant 'em with her amorous kiss
Upon your own, and they shall grow from thence
To tempt the Queen of Love to Adonis garden:
It shall be happiness enough for me, to watch
The Hesperides, but in no Dragons shape,
That you may rifle with security
The golden Orchard, I shall boast enough
By having an Elysium to serve you;
Her eyes are wealth enough to me, above
A rock of Diamonds, her breath rich gummes
Sweeter then those the Phoenix makes her Altar,
When she is her own sacrifice, and fans
The glowing Pile with her gray wings; her voice
Enough for me, whose harmony would build
Up Thaebes again, and make it after move,
And follow her; one touch of her soft palm
Is health enough to me, and were I old
As Eson, would restore my active nerves,
And state my youth at thirty: I can gather
Warm Snow from her fair brow, her chin, her neck,
And at my eyes drink enough immortality:
Sated with these, I'll find new appetite,
And come a wanton strawberying to her cheeks.

No more, you have expressed in this your faith
To me, which I am bound in honour to
Acknowledge, and without more study, have
A fit occasion to requite, and show
How near I place your love, there is a difference
Between another gentleman, and my self,
Grown to a challenge, I must answer it,
You that are so well read in books, cannot
Be ignorant of man, I'll trust my life
And honour with no second, but your self.

My Lord I see you know me, and am blessed
The chosen man to serve you, from a troupe
Of lives at your command, I should have envied
His fate, on whom else you had thrown this honour.

Soresolute? you have not seen sir Walter Peregrine,
He's returned.

I hear some whisper --

I have named my enemy, the defiance comes from him.

He's jealous of his wife, good gentleman,
And wod be a cuckold upon record.

Call on me
An hour hence, I'll be at home, and use
Your friendship for the burden of an answer.

I shall think Time hath lost his wings till then.
He put me to it cunningly, but his
Discovery releev'd me, though I make
A noise in the Town, and am admired for bouncing,
I am cool enough in the dogge-days: my Lords Scrivener.
Fortune presents him to my with, the man
Of all World most useful to my purpose.

Master Confident, Rapture your most humble servant --

When saw you the squires Vayne-man, and Pumicestone?

Not since I procured 'em a thousand pound,

Now you put me in mind of debts, has not
Sir Walter Peregrine a name within
Some list of yours? has he no creditors
By your acquaintance?

I beseech you do not
Vex me with his remembrance. I have paid
Some monies for him, he has other friends
That would be glad to embrace him.

Sure he would not
Be such a traitor not to secure thee.

Would I could reach him.

Why he is returned,
Within this four and twenty hours, you may
Salute him too. Alas, a sum may be
The ruin of thy fortunes, could he have
So little charity?

I would show
As much to him, if I could set my fangs on him.

I have ever wished thee well, and if thou dare
Be secret, I'll direct thee to recover him,
I cannot say the deb't; may be, the Knight
Is poor still.

Hang him, Master Confident,
It will refresh my hart to be revenged;
Some say men's blood, I say their bones are sweetest.
I'd make him an example, I'll not tell
My shirt on it, how honest Master Confident?

Fate dotes upon thee, he, the very he,
Be art-full, j'le salute him, and delay
His pace with some discourse, whilst you
Fetch shoulder-clappers, noble Sir Walter Peregrine,
I feel a spring-tide in my hart of joy,
Swell to congratulate your safe return,
The Town has droup'd for your society.

You are still the eligant time wit, I am happy
To witness both your brain, and body flourish.

What news abroad? all expectation
Is fixed upon this summers war, we breath
Nothing but German air, allthough the chance
Of war be uncertain, you can tell which hand
Is fortunate, how ha the Dice run hitherto?

There's not much won, or lost.

No Towns of note
Taken? no convoys of provision
Cut off?

Sir you are inquisitive, as if
You would turn Gallobelgicus, I am
On some affairs now, that importune their
Dispatch, my stay being short I must attend them.

Nay prithee Knight be courteous, 'tis an age
Since we converst, i'st true what loved fame scatters
Of the great Generals revolt?

We have
But the relation.

He is slain for certain.

There was an execution.

And what treasure
Was taken by the enemy? they talk
Of Millions.

Enough to keep the Eagle
In a good diet. I beseech you pardon me,
We shall hereafter meet, and ha more freedom
To enlarge our selves, when you have my particulars,
I will be bold to inquire in the Exchange
Your news at home.

I observe trouble in you,
I hope you're in no danger.

If you'll give me
The liberty of a subject, and allow me
The Kings high way, I shall have less suspicion,
You wonot pay my debts.

I beg your pardon,
Pray do not wound my service to you with
A jealous thought, I wonot for the World
Engage you another minute.
Now for the blood-hounds.

Sir, we arrest you

Is the mischief fallen?

Your sword shall keep the peace.

'Tis at my suite.

Thine?

I do but lead the dance to twenty more.

Hear me, what's your demand? let me not go
To prison.

An action of a thousand pound more,
For the Lord Fitzavarice.

Ha? then I am betrayed, that Lord's a villain,
That I could reach his hart; release my body
But for two hours, my soul be forfeited
For ever, if I render not my self
Your honest Prisoner.

That were a pretty jest.
Look to your charge.

Here is a duel taken up discreetlie.

Black Jew, base Lord, damned villain.

They can tame you.

Why look you gentlemen, I'll not puzzle you
To find out dangers, famine, fire, and sword,
Or desperate things.

Trifles for thy sweet sake.

I would not wish you, upon easy terms.

To prevent these, I have thought a way my self,
And with less cost, to try you, I have made
A vow I wonot marry these six months,
During which time, if you dare for my sake
Visit me every day, and never speak to me,
Nor in my company to any other --

How Lady?
Shall I not answer any gentleman
Or Lady, that shall put a question to me?

By no means.

You will give me leave to answer you,
If you should ask me any thing.

Not a syllable,
Though I desired to know what a clock 'tis,
There's your obeydience, at six months end
I may reward your silence.

She'll make him the dumb Knight.

I wonot engage you to be a mute
So long, you shall be allow'd to speak, and see me.

You are noble Lady.

But with this condition,
That whatsoever I entreat you say
Or do, you put in act the contrary
The very contrary, you understand me.

How's this? if you command me to affect you,
What can I do?

I wonot be so cruel.
If these conditions please, you may proceed.

But hark you Lady, I may laugh before you,
And in your absence have the liberty
To use my tongue.

What else, sir.

And when must I begin to mum.

I'll tell you.

Another word,
If we be just to your commands, dear Lady,
At six months end, how shall we both be satisfied?
You have forgot the statute.

He that shall
Express most care to do his penance for me,
Must be the man, I say no more, imagine.
My Lord Fizavarice.
Now beginn's your trial.

How fares your virtuous sister Lady Peregrine?

That Gentleman can tell you.

He tell me?

Yes, he had a message to deliver you.

Sir you much honour me.

Nay, let him know it, here have been turns my Lord,
Since you were here.

Is she in health; you do not mock me?

If you love me, tell him the whole story, prithee,
For my sake.

How she Jeeres him.

Pox on your subtle shoulders, are you drunk?
If I shall think you Jeer me, be still silent,
I'll make you speak.

Ha, ha.

Ha, ha.

What do you laugh at?

At his folly my noble Lord.

'Tis well you do, sir, what's your meaning Lady?

You shall know presently, if you entreat
That Gentleman to stay.

He is not going.

But your commands upon him will make sure.

Let me entreat you not to leave me, sir.

I leave you my noble Lord? if every sand
Within my glass, were a long life, I should
Employ 'em all in waiting on your Lordship.
And think the time were poor, and short to serve you
I leave you my good Lord? i'm not about it.

Pray, sir, stay.

Your Lordships humble servant, some affairs
Press my departure.

You'll not mock me, sir?

You shall stay.

Lady I am gone, my Lord, I must beseech
Your pardon, for the world, I dare not slip
A minute:

Then go, you may go.

Not for a Kingdom Lady, I will stay,
And grow here for your service.

How came these gentlemen by these strange humours?

I'll tell you, sir.

Sir Solitary Plot, your husband and my worthy Lord and Master, commends his
service to your Lordship, and prays you would please to accommodate him, with
your Coach.


This fellow's infected too with serious folly.

Towards midnight he does purpose to take the air,
And make some visits.

Visits and air at midnight? pray return
My Lord imbassador to sir Solitary,
I will give order when I go to Bed,
To have the Coach made ready for his progress.
Stay, I have a great desire to see his worship,
Has he the same complexion still? I prithee
Leave of thy gravity, and answer me,
Is he in Bed?

No Madam, a most strange
Disaster broke his sleep, and we shall be
At counsel presently, do not I talk
Already like a states-man?

It shall be so, come nearer.

This your device: tis pleasant and pursue it,
Your sister --

Be you sure, and secure, Jacintha you must
with me.

Whether?

To my husbands Chamber.

Madam, your husband is returned I hear.

I hope you have not met.

Why noble Madam?
We shall be friends if you have mercy, to
Forgive what's past, my soul shall not deserve
His ill opinion, I hope all is well between you two.

No harts did ever meet
More loving lie, until he saw --

What, Madam?

The presents that you sent me.

It was my fear.

Servant.

Madam.

My dumb Knight too, we shall have the more mirth.

Would I had been poor still, although you bring
All innocent thoughts. My Lord, I must beseech you,
Never to see me again, oh never, sir,
It will be dangerous to express your virtue,
And every minute you stay here, is fatal,
Alas I fear he's come.

My Lord, I have been active,
And all my bodies in a bath to find you.

Walter Peregrine is arrested.

How?

Oh misery of miseries!

Look to your mistress.

Her Ladyships pardon, I observed not her
So near. 'tis very certain.

I suspect
This knave, alas poor gentleman, and yet
Tis no mis-fortune to me, things considered:
Now he is safe, and I may walk securely;
In Prison let him lie and cool his valour.
I shall be in charity with the tribe of varletts,
For this good turn, this taking him in the nick,
And owe the wretch a sum, for being so fortunate
To set the Mastives on him, I owe thee too,
For thy good news, come Confident.

To my ambition.
Dee hear my Lord, the good news is not all
You owe me for, I knew it would be grateful;
You owe me for the act, it was my wit
Betri'd him to the arrest, held him in prate
Whilst the honest Knave your Scrivener fetched the vultures
With fangs keen as the Devils.

How ^am bound to thee?

I knew t'was necessary. Every man
That vows his service, has not that extent
Of brain to bring about these fine things for you.
What think you of the mamoseile, his wife now?
You have no opportunity, no power
To humble her proud body, while her husband
Sets up a friperie with his gay wardrobe;
Grows into new acquaintance with diseases,
And comfortable vermin; breaks stone walls
To show the proverb, and his hunger mighty;
Curses his Stars, and learnes to cant, and praise
The steam of ale, with an unchristian tossed in it;
Doth reverence Barmudas, and the ghost
Of cheese, with the Egyptian Idol Onyous,
And crusts to break an Elephants tooth. All this
I ha done for you, my good Lord,

For which
I must pronounce thee a rascal; sordid wretch,
Was this your act for me? curse on thy soul for it,
My honour bleeds to death, see me no more.

My Lord.

You are come in a good time, sir.

Are you so cunning my young Lord, I must make my Lady
Sure, ere he talk, and tell her this; 'tis not'
The constitution of every Lord
To take unkindly when a man compounds
A duel for him, if I be driven too't
I can forswear it again. Let valiant fools
Brag of their souls no matter what they say,
A coward dares in ill, do more then they.

Tis all the favour I could show him, sir,
To make my house his Prison.

Tis but hell, one story higher.

You must arm your self
With noble fortitude, passion but unmans us,
And makes us less for bearing.

Dost think friend,
The sense of all my debts could shake me thus?
I knew 'twould come, and in my fears examined
The mischief they present, 'tis not their weight
Affrights me, let the vultures whet their Tallons,
And creditors, with harts more stubborn, then
The mettle they adore, double their malice,
Had I a pile of debts upon me, more
Heavy then all the World, it could, but with
The pressure keep this piece of earth beneath 'em,
My soul would be at large, and feel no burden;
That which I count my torture, exceeds all
That yet has been in mention. At a time,
Almost the very minute, when my hopes
Were ripe to punish him, and revenge had mounted
Her steely arm whose fall had crushed the soul
Of my fames ravisher, to be snatched up
By a wirle-wind thus, disarmed of all my hopes,
My hands bound up, not able to relieve
My bleeding honour: this, this murders me.
And that all this should be his cursed plot,
That gave me my first wound.

Dee think my Lord
Can show himself so dishonourable?

Can Lords
Be cowards? dost not appear, when I am pursued
By his own blood-hounds? has he not laid on me
(And what may not by this example follow
To sink me to a dungeon) all the debts
I owe him? nay is it not clear, he practises
Intelligence abroad, provoking others
To lay their sums upon me, that I may
Consume a Prisoner, and assure his lust
More scope to revel with my adulterous Madam,
My wife whose name is torment to my hart,
Bove all the engines meant to wound mankind*
Oh woman, that hast forfeited the glory*
Of thy creation, and become mans ruin.

This is a circumstance I confess, but yet
Cannot make me conclude my Lord so ignoble:
I know he had a wanton pile of flesh,
But a more noble soul, then to betray
His enemy so baselie.

Is't not mischife
Enough to feel the cruelty of a prisoner,
But that black fiend must presecute my eye-sight
Th'adopted son of Lucifer?

I have a letter from a noble friend of yours.

Carry it to hell.

Correct your passion,
And leave your understanding free, to know
Your happiness, this man how e're your rage
Let fly at him, will deserve better Character,
When he appears the means of your enlargement.

How Master Sheriff?

He means of my enlargement?
Take heed how you do mock me, sir.

Your Sword --
You're free again, each particle of a deb't discharged.

By whom?

Not a fee left unsatisfied.

I am in a Wilderness.

You may come out when you please, if your worship
Will be at leisure to peruse this paper,
There is his name, hath been at all this charge,
Who has commanded me to ask your pardon,
And on my knees I beg it, I am undone else,
For ever with his Lordship.

Lord Fitzavarice?

It was without his knowledge, Master Confident
Charmed me into it, the devil did assist.

The devil?

Yes, we three, I am sorry for it,
And if your worship have occasion
To use a hundred pieces more, I have'em
Ready at your service, pray entreat him to
Accept it, I expect no scribbling for it,
Nor use, nor principal, nor his word; but to
My Lord, that I may be the driver still of all his monies.

I was confident, and long since cleared his Lordship
In my thoughts.

Was there ever such a thing in nature?

You must take the mans benevolence,
He is undone else, come there is no harm in it.

If they be not weight, I'll change 'em.

No, no.

I humbly thank your worship.

I am all wonder.

You must pronounce him innocent, had he
Been coward, as you thought him, at les^e charge
He might ha saved his honour, and secured your absence.

I begin to be a shamed,
And my suspicion cowardly falls off;
Yet certainly all this proceeds not from
Devotion to me, it is a bounty
He looks my wife should thank him for, ha?

Now I see all are your empty jealousies,
But think and be convinced, were his thoughts foul
As you imagine to your Lady, it
Had been ridiculous to set you at liberty,
The only bar to his design, lust is not
So tame, and foolish, common policy
would have instructed him to have let you rather
Languish, and rot in Prison, be collected,
And think whom your false fears have injured,
A noble wife and friend.

I am too blame,
This act hath made me understand two souls.
I'll take 'em both to mine, and ask forgiveness.

Your Lady.

Forgive me my Bellamia,
Thou appearst white again, and only I
Black with my false suspicions of thy goodness,
My Lord has given me a satisfaction
Large as his virtue, welcome to my bosom,
My best, my chaste Bellamia.

This is joy
Able to drown my poor hart, but is all
This peace concluded?

Thus again confirmed.

Just heaven hath heard my prayers, happy Bellamia.
What riches I embrace, what worlds of treasures,
In every kiss, how many lives I take
From those sweet smiles?

Who could suspect this Lady?

But I am lost again, in what place am I?
I'st not a Prison? oh that sad thought shoots
A trembling through me.

All is cured again.

I am free too, out of debt,
Nay I did wonder at it.

You amaze me.

Wast not a brave Physician, that could cure
Two such distempers, when my soul, and fortune
Lay gasping, to recover both? 'tis done,
Done by thy friend, and mine, that honest Lord
Hath paid all, to the scruple of a fee,
What thanks shall we both pay him my Bellamia?
Can he hath done this miracle, allow
A place for lust within him? 'tis impossible.
But he is coming hither, stay not thou,
It will require more leisure to express
Thy gratitude, return, and tell thy friends
The wonder first, that when I shall present
His person next, they may have spacious souls,
To admire and entertain him.

I obey you,
Do not allay this unexpected joy
With a sad change good heaven.

You will expect him.

Religiously, an age I'll wait for him,
I prithee stay, and witness with what cheerfulness
I'll ask his pardon.

He is come.

My Lord,
As you have made me object of your mercy,
By such an act of bounty, as no times
Have gloried in, and in that shown the cleerenesse
Of your brave soul, incapable of stain,
Still let it shine with charity, and make
Me confident of pardon, for an injury
I blush, and dare bleed for, to show repentance.

Are you then satisfied?

I am my Lord.

I was bold, but with no purpose to disparage
Your credit, to discharge some trifling debts.

They were great, my Lord, and must enlarge my acknowledgment,
you have obliged two lives to pray for you.

And the whole age to admire.

You would encourage me.
One word, your honor's safe again.

And happy.

Mine suffers, 'tis but young and growing on me,
It bleeds by your suspicion, I was bound
To this expense, 'tis a malicious World,
And men are apt to imagine, I was glad
You were in prison, to preserve my skin
with some excuse, this brand must not come near
My forehead, though your sea be calm, I would not
Have my fame lost in the tempest of men's tongues,
I have made no reply, in point of man,
To your challenge, and the noise may be dispersed,
Nor will what you are pleased to accept, render
Me less unquestioned, but beget men's fears
At a high rate I have bribed your patience
Baselie, perhaps, their impudence will reach
To say, I have bought my passage to your Lady,
And your consent to'th shame,

I will proclaim you
Noble to all the World, and my preserver.

There's nothing but your sword can do me right,
We shall not trouble seconds, if you please
The Captain stand for both, he is a gentleman
Known truly valiant, which implies he cannot
Deceive where he is trusted, I'll expect,
You'll follow as you are a Gentlemen.

He seems troubled. What's the matter?

Did think it possible so fair a Sky
Should be delivered of a tempest?

How?

I'll tell thee as we walk, thou must not leave us.
That man is miserably compelled, that must,
To save his fame, be to himself unjust.

The Coach will be made ready.

So, so, lett's think and talk of something else:
Tim's precious, lett's talk wisely, 'twill concern us,
My brain is not in tune about my nephew,
Who knows upon what plot he is sent hither,
The Duch are grand projectors, letts examine
Where he is gon now.

My opinion is, to kill some body, or other.

That would be known, and yet I heard a buzz,
Some noble Man was aimed at, we were best
Say nothing, and discover him to the state,
We may be else in danger, and made accessaries
To the parricide, which is not as the vulgar
Interpret, killing of a father, but
Parem cedendo, killing of a Peer,
A Peer o'th land, mark that.

I understand a Procedendo
Well enough, but who shall serve the writ?

Under your pardon, how can
You prove he is a murderer, let him first kill
Some body, no matter who it be, and then you may
Discover him with a safe conscience.

Laughs.

What's the matter.

I am of an opinion under correction that if we
Should discover him, we should not carry it so
Privatelie, but it would be known, and then we shall
Be in as much danger o'th the other side for concealing it.

Laughs --

Who's that?

Now I think better on it, it cannot be concealed
Under your favour fellow Oldrat, for if we do not
Discover, the state will not be so wise, as we are,
And then 'twere pity o'their lives, besides
If he go on to kill whom he list, and no body hear on it
He may undo the Town by degrees in a moment,
And neither we nor any that is hurt, the wiser for it.

Laughs again.

Who is it laughs?

Not I, sir, ha, ha.

Nor I, sir, ha, ha.

Stand both before me, is there not some spirit
In the room? has not some conjurer a plot upon me?
Cato was wise, and never laughed, but when
Out of his casement, he beheld an Ass
Eat Thistles, wher's the may-game? will none answer?
Sure they did laugh at me, but I'll prevent 'em,
And vex their spleens, away. I wonot trust
A laughing vizard, there's a killing face
Behind it, oh the juggling of the World!
Am I ridiculous at home? there is
Some plot in agitation. I smell a Rat.

If please you, sir, there is a dumb Ambassador desires to
Speak with you.

A dumb Ambassador?
When does he look for audience? of what nation?
Where in the Map is dumbe-land? I should much
Affect that Country, let him have access.
I understand you are a dumb Ambassador;
Your business pray with me: you are no Lawyer,
Nor no divine I take it, are there no women
Non Magpies in your Country?

This fellow must have a rare understanding,
For nature recompenseth the defects
Of one part, with redoundance in another:
Blind men have excellent memories, and the tongue
Thus indisposed, there's treasure in the intellect:
Yet there may be a plot, he's sent to observe me,
A state spy, but I'll cozen his intelligence,
And be as dumb as he.

What are you, sir?

I am his interpreter.

Oh then first answer me, how came he dumb?

With me lancholie, sir, he has a strange
Humour to cross the methode of the World.

As how, sir? pray be plain.

Why; sir, to make
The night his time for study, talk, or business,
And never go to bed but in the morning.
But keep this to your self, for 'tis a secret.

Study? what did he study pray o'th nights?

Why plotts, nothing but plotts: he did suspect
All mankind, nay their shadows in the hangings,
If they but laid their heads together, were
Dangerous, and talked treason, such a fool,
A serious fool was never before extant.

How does my Solitary Uncle?

Ha Cozen, forbear, we are engaged upon
Affairs of weight, that's an Ambassador.

What language does he speak?

None, none; but this is his interpreter.

Interpreter, and yet he speaks no language.

Hee'le over-heare you, 'tis a dumb Ambassador.
I pray be gone, you are a woman, go.

And can you get no other company
Then dumb and mad-folkes?

Who is mad?

That Gentleman.
Be you but master of some sense a while,
I'll maked appear he has none. Come forward, sir,
Do you observe his motion? I entreat
He should come forward, and he plays the crab.
Stand still, sir, I beseech you.

With your pardon
I must be in action, it does stir my blood,
Which would congeal through cold else in my veins.

If it be beneficial to your body
Practise this motion still.

'Tis very strange;
He now appears a statue:
Are they not both mad? do you think Jacintha
They have no plot in this, how came they thus distracted?

This grew mad with catching cold
A bed, and lying from his wife.

Cold causes are very dangerous.

You are something guilty on it.

What if my husband be asleep?

Wee'le wake him.

Good Madam be not troublesome, do not you know who I am? I charge you to
resist us, come your ways, where; where be these traitors? let me see, where
is sir Solitary? I thought he would ha shown more wit then to concele traitors
in his house.


Traitors?

Traitors, we look for, and traitors we will have,
And they be above ground.

I saw two suspicious persons come into the house with my
Own eyes, and they must out, there they are, I'll take
My oath Master Constable.

Master Vaineman, and Master Pumicestone you two suspected
For traitors, oh the rotten harts of men!

Reprehend them. Your good Knight must go too, go cheerfully 'twill be the
better for you, if you discharge an honest conscience, you may have the favour
to hang tell you be dead.


Did ever any man was sure o'th gallows, shake so?

This fright may work some good effect upon him,
Many men have been frighted from their wits,
Having none left, why is't not possible
He should be frighted back again into 'em?

One word I beseech you, 'tis time to speak.

I hope you did not mean this for his cure,
I am not so weary cozen of my freedom.
He that's full master of his reason, may
Be master of his wife too, which I like not.

My Uncle, sister, Madam. Sir Ha more plotts?

What's the news sister? you look pleasantly.

Your face is full of sunshine Madam.

bless me, but what are these?

We are subjects of command, she'll discover us.

Men? apprehended? what new fears invade me?

What shall we do now?

Even what you please.

Why this is Dormant your servant Uncle.

Who would ha thought it?

And your name Oldrat, what's the matter gentlemen?
Ha you an interlude?

If they be no officers, we can be no traitors.

Twas Mistress Jacintahs plot, we did but act it.

I was desirous of a scene of mirth,
How far we should ha driven it, I know not,
Just so ridiculous are all your plotts Uncle, ha, ha.
You had your parts my brace of learned gentlemen,
Whom I do discharge from fear and further penance.

Make not your self the general derision,
Your drudges mirth.

Nay, let him have his humour.

If you have still ambition to be laughed at,
And think it possible I can love such motleyes,
Come thus a wooing every day, I shall find
Some trick at last to make your worships famous.

What think you o'this?

One of us is sure to carry her, what think you o'th device, and the worst
come to the worst, for the thousand pound?


We must agree, pay it, and be revenged.

Do not you think you have undone us now,
And that we shall despair, and drown our selves,
Or slip out of the World in a clean halter?
No, we will live to vex thee, for my part
Because thou gave me liberty to speak,
To show I scorn to obey thee, and in malice
To thy injunction, I will never speak
Again, to any woman, in revenge,
I'll be more dumb then he was.

And because.
Thou did enjoin me silence, from henceforth
I'll practise talk to weary all thy sex.
I will be all, the everlasting talker,
And rail upon all women, till I have worn
My tongue to`th root, I'll study presently
A satire that shall eat thee through the bones,
And send thee first to an Hospital.

I see I am a fool, a melancholy
Suspicious fool, and all my plotts are nothing.

Lett's follow, and either make him mad outright,
Or bring it to a cure, your part's not done yet.

This will undo me, now must I to Prison.

What dost thou think they mean Oldrat?

I think? I hope they mean well.
And lovingly, and let us like honest servants
Into the cellar and pray for'em.

A match.

Then nothing will prevail but we must fight?

And no place more convenient, draw sir Walter,
And Captain, now indifferent friend to both,
For I have no suspicion thou can slain
Thy self by partiality, witness with
The hart I bring, I have no thought so black,
As murder, or revenge, but to preserve
My honour, which no balm can cure, if once
But the suspect of coward fall upon it.

I am not so unjust my Lord to doubt your courage.

you have given proof my Lord abroad,
That you dare fight.

Though I affect no glory
From actions of this nature, yet the World
At home must be convinced, our fame is lost else:
Had Peregrine been coward, or not known
For valour, I had run less hazard of
My fame, by being silent, but as I am
Beneath him in opinion, a young man
Circled with expectation of something,
That must declare me worthy of a name,
And love of men, I must attempt this danger:
But let me tell thee this, which perhaps may
Render thy sword more fatal to me, I
Did love thy Lady with a sinful purpose,
Pursued ever persecuted her chaste soul,
To satisfy my wantonness, but found
An innocence so rich in her, as may
Alone excuse the ill of all her sex,
Nor has the goodness only the effect
To preserve her, but it returned my eyes
With so much shame upon my self, that I
Threw off my lust, and doted on her virtue,
Heaven shut his mercy up if I dissemble,
This injust obligation to cherish,
I did reward with trifles, which perhaps
Gave fuel to your jealousy, but know
I have designed a larger recompense,
Which your sword may confirm to her in few minutes,
For if I chance fall by it, she is declared
The heir to my estate, and she deserves it,
Which sheele employ no question to assure
Your peace, and pardon for my death, come on, sir.

I am more lost then ever, let my wonder
Be past, or you will fight against a man
Whose soul's a great way off. Did hear this Captain?

With pardon of your Lordship, since you have
Declard so freely, what I think wins credit
With him too, your intentions to his Lady:
There is no cause, you should engage your bloods, To any loss

You are my preserver, sir,
Make me not so ungrateful to advance
My sword against your life, that gave me all
The benefit of mine, I have assurance
Enough of you, and my wives honour.

There's
A purse of gold is troublesome, it may
Be useful to'th survivor, come, sir, fight
By thy own Ladies virtue, I shall else provoke you rudely.

For her sake my Lord, we should be friends.

That wonot help my fame,
Nor yours, if you regard what threatens it,
I must not live upon the charity
Of peoples tongues, their justice shall acknowledge
I do not fear to bleed, let it be argument
To inflame thee, that thou majest be happier
Upon my loss, since my last minute gives
Thy wife possession of all my fortune.

That rather charms me from each violence.

This must compel you then, till now I never
Thought thee ungrateful, by thy fame I charge thee,
By thy Bellamias love, fight not with pity,
Let me be worthy at least to fall with honour,
Fight so, as howsoever fate determine,
I may get honour, though in death, and not
Suffer without a wound.
So her's some blood yet.

I did but imitate my Lord your Character,

Blood of both sides, nay then I interpose,
As you are gentlemen, for other titles
Weigh nothing here, be just to both your honours,
You have done well, exceeding well, unless
I shall conclude there's malice on one side,
Be your selves now, and on such noble terms
Be reconciled again, sir Walter is
No enemy at hart, and the World must
Be satisfied my Lord, in your just valor,
Think what blessed providence has marked you both
For noble ends.

I'll trust him with my sword,
Which rather shall make next impression here,
Then be his danger.

I am overcome, take me thy Captive.

My most honoured friend.

So, so, 'tis fair on both sides, but my Lord,
You bleed much, can you spare it.

Well enough, I'll wait upon you home.

First have a Surgeon.

What for a serath? let me present thee safe,
To thy Bellamia, she but with a smile
Can cure all wounds, come Captain.

We both wait on you.

You tell me wonders.

I shall much repent
My discourse to thee, if it did not raise
Thy admiration, 'tis a noble Lord,
Thou art bound to make him restitution.

Of what?

Of fame, you were jealous of our honours.

I have read the Chronicles, but never met
With a young Lord has done the like.

To what
Virtue in time will he grow to Jacintha?

Virtue? there's another thing, not usual
In men of his rank, I allow a Gentleman
To pay his own debts, but another mans,
Want's a record, besides all this, to love
Another mans wife, a handsome woman too,
And be at cost to keep her honest? miracles.

What joys flow in my hart. Thou art sad fister.

No sadness, but I have another passion, that troubles me.

You'll be in time converted,
And leave your wild invectives against men,
Tis possible you may marry, if you could
Find such another man to be your husband.

No, I wood not.

What?

Find such another man to be my husband.

Thou woodst have him, how now my witty sister?

It cannot be concealed.

Has little Cupid
Been practising with his bird-bolt, if thou be not,
I'll wish thee heartily in love, to punish
Thy want of charity against all men
And marriage, 'tis but justice, nay be not melancholy;
He will be here presently.

He shall be welcome.

He shall.

Be very welcome hither, he once said
If I remember well, could he but love,
He would marry me of all women alive.
My fortun's not to be dispisd, however
My hart is rich enough, but it shall languish
To death, ere I will tell him so.

But dost love him
Indeed? now but for pity I could laugh.

You may triumph sister, you have cause.

And thou can have no argument to despair,
Come shall I tell my Lord?

What?

That thou love him.

Do him not so much injury, my passion
Can still walk in disguise, though I confess
Since your relation, 'tis become more troublesome
To be confined, oh love! I never thought
To have felt thy sting, I dare not stay to see him;
I shall betray my self with many blushes:
Farewell my Lord Fitzavarice.

Not so
Hee'le rather meet a welcome to his bosomo,
Repent not Lady, you're but lovinglie
Betrayed, and 'tis my happiness, I should
Have pleaded at this bar, in this prevention
I am doubly blessed, be constant, and divide
With me both hart, and fortunes: thou must needs
Be excellently good in being her sister.

I must confess my Lord, I honour you.
But not for any titles, although some
Woman may be allow'd the ambition,
But for your noble nature.

I am confirmed.

But all is well again, and must exalt
Thy truer joys by finding us both live,
And knit into a peace no time can violate,

Let me salute The Example of chaste honour;
Sister I now must call thee, and shall glory
To own that title by Jacinthas love.

All blessings crown your wishes.

I have a hart to wish you joys.

They will be all a debt
To your noble care of us, Master Confident.

One of my servants but not yet discharged.

You come to turn and wind this Ladies fancy
With your wit now, but your devices fadge not,
It is three minutes since she was disposed of,
And though my stock of brain will not reach, to
Make a large jointure of so many hundred
Sonnets per annum, and rare Elegies,
Some fresh, and some that ha ^laine 7. years pickled,
In other languages: yet shee^le be content
With a less witty fortune, my estate sir.

Tis happiness enough for me
To snuff your marriage Taper, whose bright shine
Shall put out the Worlds eye.

Spare, spare your fancies.
But I'll not now arraign you, if you mean
To have me, know me again, chafer some wit
Away for honesty, I conceal your shame,

There's hope then of your pardon, when I rise
From what has iustiie forfeited my name,
To show the World your childing is not lost,
Your Lordship will not be ashamed again
To own me for your servant.

I shall be a glad witness and admirer.

Wilt please you gentlemen to have a Song.
Sir Solitary, and my Lady are at it, he is grown
The most Jovial gentleman -- hark.

Welcome welcome, again to thy wits.
This is a holy day.

I'll have no plotts, nor melancholy fits
But merrily pass the time away:
They are mad, that are sad.

Be ruled by me;
And none shall be so merry as we.

The kitchen shall catch cold no more.

I'll have no Key to the buttery door,

The Fiddlers shall sing,
The House shall ring,
And the World shall see.

What a merry couple.
Merry couple.
Couple, couple,
we will be.



We are new married Gentlemen, I must
Invite your Lordship for my guest. Your Tunes
Are melancholy. Welcome home my wandering nephew;
You shall be welcome too, sir.

I'm your servant.

When shall we dance Jacintha?

Sure this humour
Is very young, pray Madam is he serious?
Is there no plot in this?

Beyond my hope
He is recovered sir, and I must stand too't,
And turn a miracle, a Lady huswife.

No more, least with the joy I run into
A madness worse, then melancholy, you tell
Me wonders: bless my senses. And shall we dance?

I am for any mirth, the day requires it,
In which love too long blind hath found his eyes,
And leads the way to his own Paradise.

PRaise a fair day at night the Proverb says,
And 'tis the evening that must crown all Plays.
For although writers may be first allow^d,
To speak themselves, their judgements are too proud
That waving all authority beside
Think 'tis enough when they are satisfied,
We must appeal to you, unless you smile
We have but cherished vain hopes all this while,
But if you like, by this we shall best prove it,
You'll follow The Example, if you love it.
Imprimatur

Tho. Wykes.

