WEll done my Masters, ye bestir your selves, I see we shall feast to
morrow.


Your worship shall want no Wood-cocke^ at the Wedding.


Thou hast as many as thou can carry, and thirteen to the last dozen.


Isaac.


Sir.


Have you been careful, to inuit those friends, you had direction for?


Yes sir, I have been a continual motion ever sin^ I rise. I have not said my
prayers to day.


We shall want no guests then.


I have commanded most on'em.


How sir?


I ha'bid 'em sir, there's two in my list, will not fail to dine w'ee.


Who are they?


Master Rawbone, the young usurer.


Oh hes reported a good Trencher-man,
He has a tall stomach, he shall be welcome.

They say, he has made on Obligation to the Devil, if ever he eat a good
meal at his own charge, his soul is forfeit.


How does he live live?


Upon his money sir.


He does not eat it.


No the Devil choke him, it were a golden age, if all the Usurers in London
should ha'no other diet; he has a thingut waytes upon him, I think, one of
his bastards, be got upon a spider, I hope to live, to see 'em both drawn
through a ring.


Who is the other?


The other may be known too, the barrel at Heidelberg was the pattern of his
belly, Master Lodam sir.


He's a great man indeed.


Something given to the wast, for he lives within no reasonable compass I'm
sure.


They will be well met.


But very ill matched to draw a Coach, yet at pro^der, there will be scarce an
Oate between the lean ^ade, and the fa^ Gelding.


How lives he?


Religiously sir; for he that seeds well, must by consequence live well, he
holds none can be damned but lean men, for f^t men he says must needs be
saved by the faith of their body.


Mr. Beauford and Captain Landby: Isaac, call forth my Daughter.


Sir Iohn, I hope you make no stranger of me,
To morrow, I shall change my title for
Your son, soon as the holy rites shall make me
The happy husband to your daughter, in the mean time
It will become me wait on her.

I possess nothing but in trust for thee,
Gratiana makes all th^ne.

I shall presume to follow.

Your friendship noble Captain to Mr. Beauford,
Makes your person most welcome,
Had you no other merit, pray enter.
Heaven hath already crowned my gray hairs!
I live to see my daughter married
To a noble hu^band, the envy of our time,
And exact pattern of a Gentleman,
As hopeful as the Spring, I am grown proud,
Even in my age.

Dost hear firra?

I ^irra.

Is Master Beauford within?

No sir.

I was informed he came hither, is he not here?

Yes sir.

Thou say he's not within.

No sir, but tis very like he will be to morrow night sir.

How is this?

Would you have him be within before he is married.

Witty Groom, pret^ee inuit him forth; say here's a friend

Now you talk of inviting, I have two or three guests to inuit yet: let me
see.


Why dost not move?


And you make much ado, i'll inuit you: pray come to the* Wedding to morrow.


Tis he.


You were my happy prospect from the window, Coose you are a most welcome
guest.


Mr. Marwood, you have been a great stranger to the City, or my house for the
course entertainment you received, hath been unworthy of your visit.


Twas much abo^e my desert sir: Captain.


I congratulate your return.


Beauford, Gentlemen enter my house,
And perfect your embraces there: I lead the way.

Pray follow.

Your pardon.

We know you have other habit,
You were not wont to affect ceremony.

How?

I do not like his present countenance,
It does threaten somewhat; I wo'd not prophecy.

Good Captain,
Excuse my absence to our friends within,
I have affairs concerns me with my kinsman,
Which done, we both return to wait on 'em.

I shall sir.

Now proceed.

We are kinsmen.

More we are friends.

And shall I doubt to speak to Beauford any thing,
My love directs me to?

What needs this circumstance?
We were not wont to talk at such a distance,
You appear wild.

I have been wild indeed
In my vngouernd youth, but have reclaimd it,
And am to laden with the memory of former errors,
Tha^ I desire to be confessed.

Confessed? I am no Ghostly father.

But you must hear, you may absolve me too:

If thou hast any discontentments prithee take other time
For their discourse, I am in expectation of Marriage,
I would not interrupt my joys.

I must require your present hearing,
A concerns us both, as near as fame, or life.

Ha! what is it?

We shall have opportunity at your lodging,
The streets are populous and full noise,
So please you walk, I'll wait one you.

Ime your servant.

Milisent. Where's my daughter?

In complement with Mr. Rawbone, who is newly entered sir.

O there's a piece of folly.
A thing made up of parchment and his bonds
Are of more value then his soul and body,
Were any man the purchaser, only wise
In his hereditary trade of usury,
Understands nothing but a scrivener,
As if he were created for no use
But to grow rich with interest, to his ignorance,
He ha's the gift, of being impudent,
What will he grow to, if he live, that is
So young a monster?

With your favour sir
If you hold no better opinion of this Citizen
It puzles, me why you inuit him, to your house
And entertainment, he pretending affection to your daughter,
Pardon me sir if I seem bold.

As some men Milisent
Do suffer spiders in their Chamber, while
They count them profitable vermin.

But he's most like to scatter poison sir,
Your fame is precious, and your family
Not mingling with corrupted streams, hath like
An entire River, still maintained his current
Chaste, and delightful.

Shall it receive my bosom,
I'll sooner match her with an Ethiope,
Then give consent, she should disgrace our blood;
And herein I but try her strength of judgment
In giving him access; if she have lost
Remembrance of her birth, and generous thoughts*
She sucked from her dead mother, with my care
I'll strive to reinforce her native goodness,
Or quite diuorse her from my blood: and Milisent
I'll use your vigilance.

Sir command.

I will,
Not urge how I received you first a stranger,
Nor the condition of your life, with me,
Above the nature of a servant, to
Obliege your faith: I have observed thee honest.

You are full of noble thoughts.

Though I suspect not
The obedience of my daughter, yet her youth
Is apt to err, let me employ your eye
Upon her still, and receive knowledge from you,
How she dispenses favours, you shall bind
My love the stronger to you.

Sir, I shall be ambitions to deserve your favour
Withal the duties of a servant, and
I doubt not, but your Daughter is so full
Of conscience, and care in the conformity
Of her desires to your will, I shall
Enrich my sight with observation,
And make my intelligence happy.

How now: what's he?

Tis Mr. Rawbones squire.

Pray is not my Masters worship here?

Your Masters worship!
What's that, his Spaniel?

No sir, but a thing that does follow him.

In what likeness,
I hope he does not converse with spirits.

Heel not entertain an Angel,
But he will weigh him first, indeed
I am all the spirits that belong to him.

So I think, but none of his familiar.

What's thy name?

Chameleon.

Good; did ever eat?

Yes once.

And then thou caught'st a surfeit,
thou could ne'er endure meat since: were it ever christened.

Yes twice, first in my infancy,
And the last time about a year ago,
When I should have been prentice to an Anabaptist.

Does thy Master love thee?

Yes, for, and I would gold I might have it,
But my stomach would better digest beef, or mutton,
If there be any such things in nature.

Here is his Master sir, and Mistress Iane.

How now Chameleon, hast dined?


Yes sir,
I had a delicate fresh air to dinner.

And yet thou look as thou had eat nothing this se'night, here provide me
a Capon, and half a dozen of Pigeons to supper, and when will your worship
come home, and taste my Hospitality.


When you please sir,


Yet now I think on it,
I must feed more sparingly.

More liberally in my opinion.


Would not any body in the world think so? did you ever see two such
eare-wigges as my man and I: do we not look^ like.


I think the picture of either o'your faces in a ring, with a Memento mors,
would be as sufficient a mortification, as lying with an Anatomy.


The reason why we are so lean and consumed, is nothing, but eating too much:
Chameleon now I think on^t, let the Pygeons alone, the Capon will be enough
for thee and I.


The rump would last us a se'night.


I tell you forsooth, I ha brought my self so low, with a great diet, that I
must be temperate, or the Doctor says there's no way but one wo'me.


That's not the way of all flesh I'm sure.


It is a shame to say, what we eat every day.


I think so.


By this hand: if it would bear an oath: we have had nothing this two days
but half a Lark; which by a mis-chance the Cat had killed too, the Cage being
open: I will provide my belly another Master.


Now I'll interrupt em Master Rawbone.


I hope your Worship will repinie my boldness,
Tis out of love to your daughter.

Sir, I have a business to you, a friend of mine upon some necessity would
take up a hundred pounds.


I'll pawn some ounces to pleasure him.


It is more friendly said then I expected.


So he bring me good security, some three or
Four, or five sufficient and able Citizens, for
Mortalities sake, i'll lend it him.

Will you not take an honest mans word.


Few words to the wise, I will take any mans word to owe me a hundred pound,
but not a Lords to pay me fifty.


Well: tis courtesy.


He shall pay nothing to me but lawful confideration from time to time, beside
the charges of th'ensealing, because he is your friend.


This is extremity, can you require more?


More? whats eight in the hundred to me? my Scriuenes knows, I have taken
forty and fifty in the hundred vijs and mod^s of my own kins-men, when they
were in necessity.


I apprehend the favour.
How now Isaac?

My master commends his love to you sir, and does desire your presence together
with your Daughter and Nephew, at the arraignment of my young mistress to
morrow.


How knave?


She is to be married or arraigned, ith'morning, and at night to suffer
execution and loose her head.


Return our thanks, and say wee'le wait upon the Bride Iane.


Dear Master Rawbone, I do beseech you be at these Sessions.


Thou did inuit me before.


I know it, but our Cock has a great mind, that sentence should likewise
pass upon the roast, the boiled, and the baked, and he fears unless you be
a Commissioner, the meat will hardly be condemned to morrow, so that I can
never often enough desire your stomach to remember, you will come.


Dost think I won ^t keep my word?


Alas, we have nothing, but good cheer to entertain you, I beseech you sir
howsoever to feast with us, though you go away after dinner.


There's my hand --


I thank you.


Is master Justice gone, and mistress Iane too? follow me Chameleon. I'll take
my leave when I come again.


Is^ac.


My l^ttle wit, thou wo't come with thy master tomorrow, I'll reserve a bottle
of wine to warm thy sconce.


I cannot promise.


If I durst stay three minutes, I would venture a cup with thee irh'buttery,
but tis a busy time at home: Farewell M^l^sent.



Marriage as much joy wait upon the Bride,
As the remembrance of it brings me sorrow,
A woman has undone me, when I dye
A Coffin will enclose this misery.

You prepare me for some wonder.

I do:
And ere I come to the period of my Story,
Your understanding will admire.

Teach my soul the way.

I am not Cos ith'number of those friends
Come to congratulate your present marriage.

Ha?

I am no flatterer, the blood you carry
Doth warm my veins, yet could nature be
Forgetfu^l and remove it self, the love
I owe your merit, coth oblige me, to
Relation of a truth which else would fire
My by o^ne with concealment. I am come
To divide your s^u^e, ravish all your pleasures,
Poison the very air maintaynes your breathing,
You must not marry.

Must not? though as I
Am mortal I may be compelled within
A pair of minutes to turn ashes, yet
My soul already Bridegroom to her virtue,
Shall laugh at Death that would unmarry us,
And call her mine eternally.

Death is
A mockery to that divorce I bring,
Come you must not love her.

Did I hope thou could
Give me a reason, I would ask one.

Do not,
I will too soon arrive, and make you curse
Your knowledge, could exchan^e thy temper for
An angels* at the hearing of this reason,
'Twould make you passionate, and ^urne man again.

Can there be reason for a sin so great,
As changing my affection from Gratiana?
Namen, and reach me how to be a monster,
For I must loose humanity* oh Marwood,
Thou leadst me into a Wilderness, she is --

False, sinful, a black soul she has.

Thou hast a hell about thee, and thy language
Speaks thee a Devil, that to blast her innocence
Dost belch these vapours: to say thou lie,
Were to admit, thou hast but made in this
A humane error, when thy sin hath aimed
The fall of goodness. Gratiana false?
The snow shall turn a Salamander first
And dwell in fire; the air retreat, and leave
An emptiness in nature, angels be^
Corrupt, and bribed by mortals sell their charity
Her innocence is such, that were thou Marwood
For this offence condemned to lodge in flames,
It would for ever cure thy burning fever,
If with thy sorrow thou procure her shed
One tear upon thee, now, thou art lost for ever,
And armed thus, though with thousand furies guarded,
I reach thy heart.

Stay Beauford,
Since you dare be so confident of her chastity
Hear me conclude, I bring no idle fable
Patched up between suspicion, and report
Of scandalous tongues, my ears were no assurance
To convince me without my eyes.

What horror!
Be more particular:

I did prophecy,
That it would come to this, for I have had
A tedious struggling with my nature, but
The name of friend ore-ballanc'd the exception:
Forgive me Ladies, that my love to man
Hath power to make me guilty of such language,
As with it, must betray a woman's honour:

You torture me, be brief.

Then, though it carry shame to the reporters,
Forgive me heaven, and witness an unwelcome truth.

Stay, I am too hasty for the knowledge
Of something thou prepar'st for my destruction,
May I not think what tis, and kill my self?
Or at least by degrees, with apprehending
Some strange thing done, infect my fancy with
Opinion first, and so dispose my self
To death? I cannot, when I think of Gratiana
I enterrayne a heaven: the worst, I'll hear it.

It will enlarge it self too soon, receive it;
I have enjoyed her.

Whom?

Gratiana sinnefully, before your love
Made she and you acquainted.

Ha? you have kept thy word thou ca^st so poison all
My comfort*

Your friendship I ha^preferred
To my own fame, and but to save you from
A lasting shipwreck, noble Beauford, think
It should have rotted here, she that will part
With Virgin honour, ne'er should wed the heart.

Was ever woman good, and Gratiana
Vicious? lost to honour? at the instant
When I expected all my Harvest ripe.
The golden Summer tempting me to reap
The well grown ears, comes an impetuous storm
Destroys an ages hope in a short minute,
And lets me live, the copy of mans frailty:
Surely, some one of all the female sex,
Engrost the virtues, and fled hence to Heaven,
Left woman-kind dissemblers.

Sir, make use
Of reason, tis a knowledge should rejoice you,
Since it does teach you to preserve your self.

Enjoyed Gratiana sinnefully, tis a sound
Able to kill with horror; it infects
The very air, I see it like a mist
Dwell round about, that I could vncreate
My self, or be forgotten, no remembrance
That ever I loved woman: I have no
Genius left to instruct me -- it grows late:
Within --
Wait o'my kinsman to his Chamber,
I shall desire your rest, pray give me leave
To think a little --

Cousin: I repent
I have been so open breasted, since you make
This severe use on it, and afflict your mind
With womanish sorrow, I have but cautioned you
Against a danger, out of my true friendship:
Prosper me goodness as my ends are noble*
Good-night, collect your self, and be a man.

And why may not a kinsman be a Vilaine?
Perhaps he loves Gratiana, and envying
My happiness, doth now traduce her chastity
To find this out, time will allow but narrow
Limits: His last words bad me be a man.
A man? yes I have my soul, t'does not become
A manly resolution to be tame thus,
And give up the opinion of his mistress
For one mans accusat on; -- ha: ith'morning?
Proper. Y^s Marwood I will be a man:
His (...)d, shall either make past the sense
Of this affliction. or mine en^orce
A tru^h^f^on him, if thou be^st wronged Gratiana
Ile^ ye th^ Mar^yr, bu^ if false, in this
I gain to ^ye, not hue a sacrifice.

To the Taylors man, run.

To the Taylors man,
Why not to his master?

The Wedding clothes not brought
Home yet, fie, fie.

W'o would trust of woman's Taylor, take measure so long before of a
Gentle-woman, and not bring home his commodity, there's no conscience in it.


The arrant Shoe-maker too.


Master Hide, is not he, come yet I called upon him yester-day, to make hast of
my M^stress^s shoes, and he told me, he was about the upper leather, he would
be at her heals presently, I left his foot in the stirrup, I thought he would
have rid post after me.


Prithee Isa^c, make hast, how tedious you are, hast not thou been there yet.


Oh yes, and here again, de'e not see me, you are so light your self.


As thou go, call upon Cod the Persumer, tell him he uses us sweetly, has
not brought home the gloves yet. -- and dost hear? when you are at the Peacock
remember to call for the sprig, by the same token I left my fan to be mended:
-- and dost hear? when you are there, tis but a little out of the way, to run
to the Devil, and bid the V^tener make hast with the runlets of Claret, w^
shall ha no time to burn it.


You need not if it come from Devil, me-thinkes that Wine should burn it
self.


Run I prithee.


Taylors, Shoe-makers, Perfumers, Feather-makers, and the Devil and all, what
a many occupations does a woman run through, before she is married.


Fie upon it what a perplexity is about a Wedding, I might have been thus
troubled for a child of my own, if good luck had served.

-- Within. Cardona.

I come Lady-bird.


Was this your purpose.

This place of all the Park affords most privacy.
Nature has placed the trees to imitate
A Roman Amphitheater.

We must be the sword-players.

Draw, imagine all
These trees were Cypress, the companions of
Our funeral, for one or both must go
To a dark habitation, me-thinkes
We two, are like to some unguided men,
That having wandered all the day in a
Wild unknown path, at night walk down into
A hollow grot, a cave which never Star
Durst look into, made in contempt of light
By nature, which the Moon did never yet
Be-friend with an^ melancholy beam:
Oh Cousin thou hastled me, where I neue^
Shall see day mo^e.

This is the way to make it
A night indeed, but if you recollect
Your self, I brought you beams to let you see
The horror of that darkness you are going to,
By marrying with Gratiana.

That name
Awakes my resolution, consume not
Thy breath ^oo idly, you have but a small time
For th'use om't, either employ it in the vnsaying
Thy wrong to Gratiana, or thou hastens
Thy last minute.

I must tell Beauford them,
He is ungrateful to return so ill
My friendship, have I vnder-va'ued
My shame in the relation of a truth,
To make the man I wooed preserve, my enemy:
Why dost thou tempt thy destiny with so
Much sin? dost thi^ke I were a sword I dare
Not manage? or that I can be enforced
To a revolt? I am no Rebel Beauford:
Again^ I must confirm Gratianaes honour
Stained, the treasures of her chastity
Rifled, and lost, twas my unhappiness
To have added that, unto my other sins
Ith'wildnesse of my blood, which thou may punish.

Thou hast repeated, but the same in
Substance touching Gratiana.

Truth is ever constant
R^maines upon her square, firm, and unshaken.

If what thou hast affirmed be true, why should
We fight, be cruel ^o our selves, endanger
Our e^ernity, for the enou^ of
One frail woman^ let our swords exp^ct
A nobler cause. What man hath such assurance
In any woman's faith, that he should run
A desperate hazard of his soul? I know
Women are not borne angels, but created
With passion and temper like to us,
And men are apt to err, and louse themselves
Caught with the soul of wanton beauty, fetterd
Even ^ith their mist^sses hair

I like this well.

He has a handsome presence and discourse,
Two subtle charms to tempt a woman's frailty,
Who must be governed by their eye or ear
To love, beside my kinsman hath been taxed.
F^r being ^oo prompt in wantonness, this confirms it
Then farwe^l woman kind.

This d^es become you.

Why should we fight, our letting blood wo'no^
Cure her, and make her honour white again:
We are friends, ^epen^ thy sin, and marry her.

Whom?

Gratiana.

How Sir, marry her?

Why can tho add to it another crime,
By a refusing to repair the ruins
Of that chaste temple, thou had violated?
Her Virgin tapers are by thee extinct,
No odour of her chastity, which once
Gave a perfume to Heaven, and and did refresh
Her innocent soul, they that have spoiled virginity,
Do half restore the treasures they took thence
By sacred marriage.

Marriage, with whom?

Gratiana.

Should I marry a whore?

Thou lie, and with a guilt upon thy soul,
Able to sink thee to damnation,
I'll send thee hence; a whore? what woman
Was ever bad enough to deserve that name?
Salute some native fury, or a wretch
Condemned already to hells tortures by it,
Not Gratiana; you have awakened justice,
And given it eyes to see thy treachery,
The depth of thy malicious heart, that word, hath
Dis-inchanted me.

Are you serious?

How have I find in my credulity
Against virtue, all this while? what charm bound up
My understanding part, I should admit
A possibility, for her to carry
So black a soul; though all her sex beside
Had fallen from their creation? thou hast
Not life enough to forfeit, what an advantage
To fame and goodness had been lost.

Will you fight?

Were thou defen^'d with circular fire, more
Subtle then the lightning, that I knew would ravish
My heart, and marrow from me, yet I should
Neglect the danger, and but singly armed,
Fly to revenge thy calumny: a whore -- come on sir.
You are wounded: ha?

Mortally, fly Beauford, save thy self, I hasten to the dead.

Oh stay a while, or thou wilt loose us both,
Thy wound I cannot call back, now there is
No dallying with heaven, but thou pulst on thee
Double confusion, leave a truth behind thee,
As thou would hope rest to thy parting soul,
Hast thou not wronged Gratiana?

Yes, in my lust, but not in my report,
Take my last breath, I sinfully enjoyed her,
Gratiana is a blotted piece of alabaster:
Farewell least some betray thee, heaven forgive
My offence, as I do freely pardon thine.

I cannot long survive, --
Is there no hope thou may recover?

Oh!

Farewell for ever then, with thy short breath
M^y all thy ills conclude, mine but begin
To muster, life and I shall quickly part,
I feel a sorrow will break Beaufords heart.

There are Cony-stealers abroad sir.

These whoreson Rabbit suckers
Will ne'er leave the ground.

In my walk last night, I frighted some on em.
Pox a these vermin, would they were all destroyed.

So we may chance to keep no Dear.

Why so?

An old Cony stops a knaves mouth sometimes.
That else would be gaping for Venison.

Oh.

Whose that?

Here's a Gentle-man wounded.

Ha?

He has bled much.

How cam^ you hurt si^? no,
Not speak? if he be not past h^pe, let us
Cany him to my lodge* my wife is a
Pe^ce of a Su^g^on, has been fortunate
In some cures: tear a piece of thy shirt Raph,
To bind his wound quickly: -- so, so, alas
Poor Gentle-man, he may hue to be dressed, and tell
Who has done this mis-fortune: gently
Honest Raph, he has some breath yet:
Would ^ had my blood-hound here.

You're welcome Mr Landby, and mistress Iane.
Where's the young Captain si^ your Nephew?

He went betimes to wait upon the Bridgroome.

They are inseparable friends, as they had
Divided hearts, they both are glad, when either
Mee^e a good fortune.

I'll be bold to see your daughter.

Do mistress Iane, she has
Her maids blush yet, she'll make you amends for this,
And ere't be long I hope 'dance at your wedding.

I wish you many joys sir by this marriage:
Your daughter ha made discreet election,
She'll h^ue a hopeful Gentle-man.

Master Lan^by,
It would refresh my age to see her fruitful to him,
I should find a blessing for a young
^eaufor^, and be glad to d^ndle him, the
First news of a boy borne by my daughter
Would set me back seven years: O Master Landby,
Old men do never truly dote, until
Their children bring em babies.

Master Rawbone* i'll be bold to present you
With a piece of Rose-mary, we ha such cheer.

Honest Isaac.

Pray do you belong to Master Rawbone?

Yes sir.

You have eat something in your days.

Why prithee?

Nothing, nothing,
Do ye understand nothing, you shall eat nothing:
Unless some Benefactors like my master,
In pity of your bellies once a year
Do warm it with a dinner, you must never
Hope to see roast, of sod; he has within
This twelve month to my knowledge
Made seven men immortal.

How?

Yes, he has made spirits on em,
And they haunt such men's houses as my masters,
Spirits ath'buttery, let me counsel ye
To cram your corpse to day, for by his Almanac
There's a long Lent a coming.

Never see me,
But when you are invited.

Alas I h^d
Rather eat a piece of cold Capon at home,
Th^n be troublesome abroad. I hope forsooth
Mist^sse Iane is as she should be.

She is ^n ^ealth:

Y'aue a fresh servant master Rawbone,
A proper fellow, and maintains himself
Handsomely.

And he wod not ha maintained
Himself, I had never entertained him.

Where's Chameleon?

I ha preferred him Isaac.

How?

Turned him away last night,
And took this stripling.

Morrow sir Iohn, where is the early Bridegroom?

Came not you from him?

We expect him sir, every minute.

Not yet come? his servants* told me
He went abroad before the morning blushed.

We ha not seen him, pray heaven
He be in health.

I wonder at his absence.

Captain Landby, young man of war, I do
Salute thee with a broad-side.

Do ye hear, they
Say you come a wooing to my Cousin,
That day you marry her, i'll cut your throat,
Keep't to your self.

Thou art a noble fellow; things may prosper.

You come hither to wish C^n give em joy now.

Yes marry do I.

You do lye, you come to
Scour your dirty maw with the good cheer,
Which will be damned in your lean Barathruw,
That kitchen stuff devourer.

Why should you
Say so Captain? my belly did ne'er think
You any harm.

When it does vomit up thy heart
I'll praise it, in the mean time would
Every bit thou catst to day, were steeped
In Aqua fortis.

What is that Jasper?

It is strong water.

Noble Captain, thanks in faith heartily:
I was afraid you had been angry.

I'll ha thee sowed up in a
Mony-bagge, and boiled to ielly.

You shall ha me at your service,
And my bags too, upon good security:
Is not this better then quarrelling, Jasper, --

Is not the Bridegroom come yet, sure he has over slept himself, there is
nothing but wondering within, all the maids are in uproar, one says he is a
slow thing, another says, she knows not what to say, but they all conclude,
if ever they marry, they will make it in their bargain to be sure of all things
before matrimony, fie upon him, if I were to be his wife, i'd show him a
trick for it, ere a year came about, or it should cost me a fall, I warrant
him.


Sir Iohn you're troubled.

Can you blame me sir:
I would not have our mornings expectation
Frustrate -- I know not what to think.

Sir, fear not.

The morn grows old.

Himen has long tapers.

What should procure his absence; he departed
But oddly yester-day.

Marwood had engaged him,
They promised to return.

But we see neither.

They will come together, make it not your fear,
Beauford^ a Gentle-man, and cannot be
Guilty of doing such affront, unless
Some mis-fortune --

That's another jealousy.

Where is Sir Iohn Belfare?

Ha? Master Lodam,
W^lcome.

I congratulate. --

Saw you master Beauford sir.

Yes I saw him, but --

But what?

I kn^w not how he does,
Where is the Lady that must be undone to night,
Your daughter?

My daughter undone, name what unhappiness,
My heart already doth begin to prophecy
How ^, name what disaster, give it
Expression pray, what is the news?

The news?
Why wo'd ye know the news? tis none a'ch best.

Be temperate then in your relation.

What is't?

They say for certain,
There were fou^e and twenty Colliers cast away,
Coming from New-Castle tis cold news in the City,
But there is worse news ^broad.

Doth it concern my knowledge? trifle not.

They say that Canary sack, m^st dance
Again to the Apothecaries, and be sold for
Physic, in hum-glasses, and thin bless* that the
Spaw-water must be transported hither, and
Be drunk instead of French wines:
For my part, I am but one.

Big enough for two.

This citadel may endure as long a siege
As another, if the pride of my flesh must be
Pulled down, farewell it t'has done me
Service this forty year: let it go.

Saw you master Beauford?

Yes Sir Iohn,
I saw him but -- twas three days ago.

He is ridiculous.

Do not afflict your self,
He will give a fair account at his return.

Pray heaven he may:
My daughter.

Sir, I desire to be acquainted with you.

I have no stomach sir to your acquaintance,
You are a thought too lean.

And you a bit too fat.

Dost not wonder girl at Beaufords absence?

Not at all sir, I am not now to learn
Opinion of his nobleness; and I hope
Your judgements will not permit you sin so much
To censure him for this stay. Fair morning
To master Landby, noble Captain, master
Lodam, and the rest.

I am so little
She cannot see me, give you joy forsooth,
I hope it is your destiny to be married.

And yours to be hanged.

How sir.

No harm,
He wishes you long life.

A long halter he does,
What to be hanged.

Las sir he knows you ha no flesh to burden you,
Light at a feather, hanging will ne'er kill you,
If he had wished sir master Lodam hanged.

Then, i'll to him and thank him;
But here's mistress Iane.

You shall command me as your servant. -- sir.

I did but ask her how she did, I said
Never a word to her: Pox upon his bounsing
I am as fearful of him as of a Gun,
He does so powder me.

We have not seen
You sir, this great while, you fall away me-thinkes.

Loosing Lodam I.

You are not the least welcome sir.

I do give you great thank, and do mean to dance at your Wedding for it, I do
marvel Master Beauford is not earlier, I should ha been here with musique
Lady, and have fidled you too, before you were up, these lean Lovers, ha
nothing in em, slow men of London.


Gratiana.


Who's this? she has a mortal eye.


Chameleon? How now turned away your master.


No, I sold my place; as I was thinking to run away, comes this fellow, and
offered me a breake-fast for my good will to speak to my Master for him, I
took him at his word, and resigned my Office, and turned over my hunger to him
immediately; now I serve a man, Isaac.


Isaac. --


I do fore-see a fall of this tower already,
Love begins to vnder-mine it.
Mistress, a word in private.

Jasper has't a sword.

Yes sir.

That's well, let it alone:
Did see this paunch affront me?

He did it in love to the Gentle-woman.

In love? let me see the sword again.
Wo'd twere in his belly -- put it up,
Thou deserust a good blade, tis so well kept.

Master Beauford, master Beauford.

Where?

Hard by, within a stones cast a my
Mistress, here sit here.

My dearest Beauford, where hast bin so long?

Oh Gratiana.

Are you not in health?

Not well, tis then no time to chide:
How fare you sir?

I have a trouble at my heart: pardon
The trespass of your patience Gentle-men,
He publish the occasion of my absence,
So first, you give me leave, to unlade it here;
But with your favour, I desire I may
Exempt all ears, but Gratianaes, till
A short time ripen it for your knowledge.

Ha?

Lets leave 'em then a while.

Into the Garden Gentle-men.

Withal my heart:
In my conscience the i'll be honest together.

This begets my wonder, master Lodam.

Good sir Iohn, i'll wait upon you,
It is dinner time.

I have not time to dwell on circumstance,
I come to take my last leave, you and I
Must never meet again.

What language do I hear,
If Beauford it should strike me dead?

This day, I had designed for marriage, but I must
Pronounce we are eternally diuorc'd:
Oh Gratiana, thou hast made a wound
Beyond the cure of Surgery, why did nature
Empty her treasure in thy face, and leave thee
A black prodiglous soul?

Defend me goodness!

Call upon darkness, to obscure thee rather,
That never more thou may be seen by mortal,
Get thee some dwelling in a mist, or in
A wild forsaken earth, a Wilderness,
Where thou may hide thy self, and dye forgotten.

Where was I lost name what offence prouok'd
This heavy doom, dear Beauford, be not so
Unjust, to sentence me, before I know
What is my crime, or if you will not tell
What sin it is, I have committed, great,
And horrid, as your anger; let me study,
I'll count em all before you, never did
Penitent, in confession, strip the soul
More naked, i'll vnclaspe my book of conscience,
You shall read ore my heart, and if you find
In that great Volume, but one single thought
Which concerned you, and did not end with some
Good prayer for you: Oh be just and kill me.

Be just, and tell thy conscience, you have abused it
False woman, why dost thou increase thy horror?
By the obscuring a mis-deed, which wo'd
Were all thy other sins forgiven, undo thee
Oh Gratiana, thou art. --

What am I?

A thing I would not name, it sound so fearfully,
'Twould make a Devil blush, to be saluted
By that, which thou must answer to.

I fear --

That fear betrays thy guilt, tell me Gratiana
What did thou see in me to make thee think
I was not worthy of thee, at thy best
And richest value, when thou were as white
In soul, as beauty? for sure, once thou wer^ so:
Had thou so cheap opinion of my birth,
My breeding, or my fortunes, that none else
Could serve for property of your lust, but I?

Dear Beauford hear me.

A common father to thy sinne-got issue,
A patron of thy ^ifled, unchaste womb?
Oh tho^ were cruel, to reward so ill
The heart that truly honoured thee: thy name
Which sweetn'd once the breath of him that spake it,
And musically charmed the gentle ear;
Shall sound here-after like a Screech-owles note,
And fright the hea^er; Virgins shall lament
That thou hast shamed their chaste society,
And oft as Himen lights his tapers up,
At the remembrance of thy name, shed tears,
And blush for thy dishonour: from this minute,
Thy friends shall count thee desperately si^ke,
And whensoere thou go abroad, that day
The maids and matrons, thinking thou art dead,
And going to the grave, shall all come forth
And wait like mourners on thee.

Ha ye done?
Then hear me a few syllables, you have
Suspicion that I am dishonourd.

No,
By heaven I have not, I have too much knowledge
To suspect thee sinful, but in the assurance
Of it, I must disclayme thy heart for ever:
Gratiana my opinion of thy whiteness
Hath made my soul, as black as thine already;
Weep till thou wash away thy stain, and then,
I^h'other world, we two, may meet again.

Weep inward eyes, hither your streams impart,
For sure, I have tears enough, to drown my heart.

You amaze me Beauford, Gratiana false?
I shall suspect the truth of my conception,
And think all women monsters, though I never
Loved with that nearness of affection
To marry any, yet I morn they should
Fall from their virtue, why may not Marwood
Injure her goodness?

What, and damme his soul?
Shall I think any with his dying breath
Would shipwreck his last hope? he mixed it with
His prayers, when in the stream of his own blood,
His soul was launching forth.

That circumstance takes away al suspicion again,
Where left you Marwood?

In the Park.

Quite dead?

Hopeless, his weapon might have proved so happy,
To have released me of a burden too;
And but that man-hood, and the care of my
Eternity forbids, I would force out
That which but wearies me to carry it,
Unwelcome life?

Would he were buried,
My fears perplex me for you; though none see
You fight, the circumstance must needs
Betray you: what's he.

I would borrow your ear in private.

We are but one to hear, his love hath
Made him? to great a part of my affliction:
Speak it.

The body is taken thence.

Ha.

I cannot be deceived sir: I beheld
Too plain a demonstration of the place;
But he that suffered such a loss of blood,
Had not enough to maintain life till this time,
Which way so ere his body was conveyed:
I must conclude it short lived, I am sorry
I could not serve you.

Sir, -- I thank you,
You deserve I should be grateful:
It must be so --

What fellow's this?

A Surgeon.

Dare you trust him?

Yes, with my life.

You have done that already in your discovery.
Pray heaven he prove your friend.
You must resolve for flight, ye shall take ship --

Never.

Will you ruin your self? there's no security --

There is not Captain,
Therefore I'll not change my air.

How?

Unless thou can instruct me how to fly from
My self, for wheresoever else I wander,
I shall but carry my accuser with me.

Are you mad?

I have heard in Affrick^, is a tree, which tasted
By travellers, it breeds forgetfulness
Of their Country, can direct me thither?
Yet 'twere in vain, unless it can extinguish,
And drown the remembrance I am Beauford:
No -- I'll not move, let those poor things that dare not
Dye, obey their fears, I will expect my fate here.

This is wildness,
A desperate folly, pray be sensible: --
Whose this, tis Gratiana.

Ha, farewell.

You shall stay now a little.

I will not hear an accent, I shall loose
My memory, be charmed into belief
That she is honest with her voice, I dare not
Trust my frailty with her.

She speaks nothing,
Is all a weeping Nyobe, a st^tue,
Or in this posture, doth she not present
A water Nymph* placed in the midst of some
Fair Garden, like a Fountain to dispense
Her Crystal streams upon the flowers? which cannot
But so refreshed, look up, and seem to smile
Upon the eyes that feed em:
Will she speak?

Though by the effusion of my tears, you may
Conclude, I bring nothing but sorrow with me,
Yet hear me speak, I come not to disturb
Your thoughts, or with one bold and daring language
Say how unjust you make my sufferings:
I know not what
Hath raised this mighty storm to my destruction,
But I obey your doom, and after this,
Will never see you more. First I release
And give you back your vows; with them, your har^*
Which I had locked up in my own, and cherished
Better, mine I'm sure does bleed to part with it,
All that is left of yours, this Cabinet
Delivers back to your possession,
There's every jewel you bestowed ^pon me,
The pledges once of love.

Pray keep em.

They are not mine, since I have lost the opinion
Of what I was, indeed I have nothing else,
I would not keep the kisses, once you gave me,
If you would let me pay them back again.

All women is a labyrinth, we can,
Measure the height of any star, point out
All the dimensions of the earth, examine
The Seas large womb, and sounds its subtle depth,
But art will ne'er be able to find out,
A demonstration of a woman's heart,
Thou hast enough undone me, make me not
More miserable, to believe thou can be virtuous:
Farewell, enjoy you this, I shall find out
Another room to weep in.

Lady I would ask you a rude question:
Are you a maid?

Do I appear so Monstrous? no man will
Believe my iuiury: has heaven forgot
To protect innocence, that all this while
It hath vouchsafed no miracle, to confirm
A Virgins honour?

I am answered:
I do believe she's honest; Oh that I could
But speak with Marwoods ghost now, and thou be
In hell, I'd meet thee half way, to converse
One quarter of an hour with thee, to know
The truth of all things, thy Devil Iaylour
May trust thee without a waiter, he has security
For thy damnation in this sin alone,
I me f^ll of pity now, and spite of man-hood
Cannot forbear, come Lady, I am confident,
I know not which way -- that you're virtuous --
Pray walk with me, i'll tell you the whole story;
For yet you know not your accuser.

I am an exile hence, and cannot walk
Out of my way, Beauford farewell, may Angels
Dwell round ^bout thee, live vn^ill thou find,
When I am dead, thou hast bin too unkind.

May I believe thee Milisent, that my father
Though he give such respect to him I hate,
Inten^s no marriage? thou hast releast
My heart of many fears, that I was destined
To be a sacrifice.

It had been sin
That Milisent should suffer you perplex
Your noble soul, when it did consist in
His discovery, to give a freedom
To your labouring thoughts, tis now no more a secret,
Y^ur father makes a trial of your nature,
By giving him such countenance.

What thanks shall I give?

Your virtue hath both unsealed
My bosom, and rewarded me.

Oh Milisent:
Thou hast deserved my gratitude; and I cannot
But in exchange of thy discovery
Give to thy knowledge, what I should tremble
To let another hear; for I dare trust thee with it.

If I have any skill
In my own nature, shall ne'er deceive
Your confidence, and think my self much honoured,
So to be made your treasurer.

Tis a treasure,
And all the wealth I have, my life, the sum
Of all my joys on earth, and the expectation
Of future blessings too depend upon it.

Can I be worthy of so great a trust?

Thou art, and shalt receive it, for my hear^
Is willing to discharge it self into thee:
Oh Milisent! though my father would ha been
So cruel to his own, to have wished me marry
Him, twas not in the power of me obedience
To give consent to it, for my love already
Is dedicate to one, whose worth hath made
Me, but his steward of it, and although
His present fortune doth eclipse his lustre,
With seeming condition of a servant,
He has a mind derived from honour, and
May boast himself a Gentle-man: is not
Thy understanding guilty of the person
I point at? ^ure thou can not choose but know him.

Not I.

Then look upon him Milisent.

Ha?

My master, mistress Iaue sent me before,
To say, be comes to visit you.

But thou art before him in acceptance, nay
You stand discovered here, in Milisent you may
Repose sa^e trust.

Her language makes me confident,
You are a friend.

To both a feruant.

I shall desire your love.

But where's this man of mortgages?
We shall be troubled now

I left him chawing the cud, ruminating
Some speech or other, with which, he means to
Arrest you.

He is entered.

I have prepared her.


Fortune be my guide then.


And she's a blind one.


Mistress Iane, I would talk with you in private, I have fancied a business,
I know you are witty, and love invention, tis my own, and no-body else must
hear it -- Be it known to all men by these presents.



This is like to be a secret.


That I Jasper Rawbone Citizen, and House-keeper of London.


A very poor one I'm sure.


Do owe to mistress Iane, Lady of my thoughts, late of London Gentle-woman.


Is she not still a Gentle-woman?


Still a Gentle-woman good-man Coxe-combe? did I not say she was Lady of my
thoughts? where was I now?


At good-man Coxe-combe sir.


-- Do owe to mistress Iane, Lady of my thoughts, late of London Gentle-woman,
my true and lawful heart of England -- to be paid to his said mistress, her
executors, or assigns.


To her executors? what will you pay your heart, when she is dead?


Tis none of my fault, and she will dye, who can help it? thou dost nothing
but interrupt me: I say to be paid, to his said mistress, her executors, or
assigns, whenever she demand it, at the font-stone of the Temple --


Put it, the top of Paules and please you; your conceit will be the higher.


Which payment to be truly made and performed, I bind, not my heirs, but my
body and soul for ever.


How your soul sir?


Peace fool, my soul will shift for it self, when I am dead that will be sure
enough: -- In witness whereof, I have here-vnto put my hand and seal, which
is a handsome spiny youth, with a bag of money in one hand, a bond in the
the other, an Indenture between his legs, the last of the first merry month,
and in the second year of the reign of King Cupid.


Excellent! but in my opinion, you had better give her possession of your
heart, I do not like this owing: faith pluck it out, and deliver it in the
presence of us.


Thou talk like a puisne, I can give her possession of i^, by delivery of
two-pence wrapped up in the wax, twill hold in Law man; -- and how, and how do ye
like it? I could have come over you with Verse, but hang Ballads, give me
Poetical prose, every Mounte-banke can time, and make his lines cry twang,
though there be no reason in em.


What Musique have I heard?


Musique? Oh rare!


He has Medusaes noble countenance,
His hairs do curl like soft and gentle Snakes:
Did ever puppy smile so? or the Ass
Better become his ears? oh generous beast
Of sober carriage, sure he's valiant too,
Those blood-shot eyes betray him, but his nose
Fishes for commendation.

What does she mean Jasper?


Do ye not see her love sir? why she does dote upon you, Which makes her talk
so madly.


Forsooth I know you are taken with me, alas these things are natural with me,
when shall we be married forsooth?


With your licence sir --


Do ye not observe her? you must first procure a Licence.


You shall hear more from me, when I come again -- Jasper --


My heart doth breath it self upon your hand --


Your father and Master Lodam* --


Sir I do love your daughter: -- I thought it necessary to acquaint you first,
because I would go about the business judicially.


You obliege us both.


I'll promise you one thing.


What*s that?


I'll bring your daughter no wealth.


Say you so: what then you promise her nothing.


But I will bring her that which is greater then wealth.


What's that?


My self.


A fair jointure.


Nay, i'll bring her more.


It shu'not need, no woman can desire mo^e of a man.


I can bring her good qualities, if sh^ want any: I ha trauail'd for em.


What are they?


The Langu^ges.


You susp^ct she will want tongue: -- let me see -- Parlez franzois monsieur.


Diggon a cam^ag.


That's We^ch.


Pocas palabras.


That's Spanish.


Troth I have such a confusion of languages in my head, you must even take em
as they come.


You may speak that more exactly -- Hauelar spagni^l Signior?


Serge-dubois, -- Calli-mancho, et Perpetu-ana.


There's stuff indeed, since you are so perfect, I'll trust you for the rest.
I must refer you sir unto my daughter, if you can win her fair opinion, my
consent my happily follow: so She is in presence --


Me^cie Madame --


This fellow looks like the principal in Usury, and this Rat follows him
like a pitiful eight in the hundred: -- come hither s^ra, your name is
Chameleon.


It is too true sir.


You did live with master Rawbone.


No sir, I did starve with him, and please you:
I could not live with him.

How do you like your change?


Never worse.


Master Lodam wants no flesh.


But I do: -- I ha no Justice sir, my lean master would eat no mea^e, and my
fat master eats up all -- is your Worships house troubled with Vermin?


Something at this time.


Peace and i'll catch a mouse then. --


My nephew turned Gentle-man Usher.


Sir Iohn Belfares daughter.


Alas poor Gentle-woman,
I compassionate her unkind destiny.

Let us entreat a word in private sir --


I cannot tell how you stand affected, but if you can love a man, I know not
what is wanting, greatness is a thing that your wisest Ladies have an itch
after: for my own part I was never in love before, and if you have me not,
never wilbee again. Think on it between this and after dinner, I will stay
o'purpose for your answer.


You're very short.


I wod not be kept in expectation above an hour, for love is worse then a Lent
to me, and fasting is a thing my flesh abhors, if my do^blet be not fi^'d, I
know who fa^es the worse for it. I would keep my flesh to swear by, and if you
and I cannot agree upon the matter, I would loose nothing by you.


You're very resolute.


Ever while you live, a fat man, and a man of resolution go together: I do
not commend my self, but there are no such fiery things in nature.


Fiery?


Tis proved, put em to my action, and see, if they do not smoke it, they are
men of mettle, and the greatest melters in the World, one hot service makes em
roast, and they have enough in em to bast a hundred -- you may take a lean man,
marry your self to famine, and beg for a great belly, you see what became of
sir Iohns daughter: -- come I would wish you be well advised, there are more
commodities in me, then you are aware of, if you and I couple, you shall fare
like an Empress.


That will be somewhat costly.


Not a token. I have a privilege: -- I was at the Tavern the other day, in the
next room I smelt hot Venison, I sent but a D^awer to tell the Company, one in
the house with a great belly, longed for a corner, and I had half a pasty sent
me immediately: I will hold intelligence with all the Cooks in the Town, and
what dainty, but I have greatness enough to command?


I like it well: -- be as wel-come here, as at your Fathers. Milisent -- make
it your care to wait upon this Gentlewoman, but conceal she is our guest. I
should rejoice to see this storm blown over. -- Nephew attend her to her
Chamber.


I ha bin about it --


Next time you ride post, wind your horne, that one may get out a'the way.


What's the matter Iane.


Tis guts, if I durst, my teeth waters to strike him.


What ha you done?


Let him take heed another time.


Take such an affront before your mistress.


I have a good stomach --


That's well said.


I could eat him.


Oh is it that?


Let me alone, no-body hold me.


I'll have an action of battery.


Whoreson mole-catcher --
Come not near me Weezel.

Prithee Jasper do not thrust me upon him --
I do not fear you sit.

Again shall I kick thee to pieces.


Let him b^ffu^ly^e -- to him --


I do not fear you.


Iane remove your self.


Master Rawbone, I am sorry for your hurt.


She jeeres you.


For this time I am content with kicking of thee.


My master desires another word w'ee sir. --
You must fight with him --

Who I fight?


You spider catcher, ha you not enough? you see I do not draw.


Very well.


By this hand, you shall challenge him then, if he dare accep^t, i'll meet him
in your clothes.


Will ye. Hum -- I do not fear you -- satisfaction --


That's the word.


That's the word -- you'll meet me guts.


Meet thee by this flesh, if thou dost but provoke me: -- you do not challenge
me -- do not -- do ye long to be minced?


At Finsbury --


At Finsbury.


To morrow morning --


To morrow morning -- you shall find I dare fight.


Say but such another word.


Finsbury, to morrow morning, there tis again --


I cannot contain my laughter, ha, ha, ha.


So, lets begon^ quickly, before he threaten me, yo^ made me challenge him,
look to it.


Fear not, I warrant you.


Sir Nouerint, if I can but prove, thou dost come with in three furlongs of
a wind-mill, i'll set one a top of Paules to watch thee -- shall it forfeit thy
soul, and i'll cancel thy body worse then any debtor of thine did his
obligation -- he's gone -- and now I think upon the matter, I have somewhat
the worst on it, for if I should kill him, I shall never be able to fly, and
he has left a piece of his scull, I think, in my shoulder -- whither am I
bound to meet him, or no? I will consult some of the sword men, and know whether
it be a competent challenge -- Chameleon.


Sir.


Has the Rat, your master that was, any spirit in him?


Spirit? the last time he was in the field, aboy of seven years old, beat
him with a Trap-sticke.


Say thou so? I will meet him then, and hew him to pieces.


I have an humble suite -- if it be so, that you kill him, let me beg his body
for an Anatomy, I have a great mind to eat a piece on him.


Tis granted, follow me, i'll cut him up I warrant thee.


I have a letter.


From whom?


Gratiana.


I would forget that name, speak it no more.


She is abused, and if you had not been
Transported from us, with your passion,
You would ha changed opinion, to have heard
How well she pleaded.

For her-selfe.


You might,
With little trouble gather from her tears
How clear she was, which more transparent, then
The morning dew, or crystal, fell neglected
Upon the ground: some cunning Jeweller
To ha seen em scattred, would a thought some Princess
Dropped em, and covetous to enrich himself,
Gathered them up for Dyamonds.

You are then converted.

Oh you were too credulous.
Marwood has played the Vilaine, and is damned for it*
Could but his soul be brought to hear her answer
The accusation, she wo'd make that blush,
And force it to confess a treason, to
Her honour, and your love.

You did believe her.

I did, and promised her to do this service,
She begged of me at parting, if she sent
A letter, to convey it to your hand,
Pray read, you know not what this paper carrie^.

Has she acquainted you?

Not me, I guess,
It is some secret, was not fit for my
Relation, it may be, worth your knowledge;
Do her that justice, since you would not hear
What she could say in person, to peruse
Her paper.

It can bring nothing to take off
The offence committed.

Sir you knew not
What satisfaction it contains*
Or what she may confess in it* for my sake --

To him that was -- what?
Confident of her Virtue
Once an admirer, now a maurner for
Her absent goodness: she has made the change.
From her that was, would (...) become this paper
Had she conseru'd her first immaculate whiteness,
It had been half profane, not to salute
Her letter with a kiss, and touch it, with
More veneration then a Sybil^ leaf^*
But now all Ceremony must be held
A superstition, to the blotted scroll,
O a more stained writer -- I'll not read:
If unprepared, she win with her Discourse,
What must she do, when she has time, and study,
To apparel her defence?

Deny her this.

Well, I will read it.

Here's Sir Iohn Belfare.

Say any thing t'excuse me, beet your care
That none approach the Chamber.

So, so, now unrip the seal.

Not speak with him, he must have stronger guard
To keep me out: where's Beauford?

Here.

Then there's a Villain.

That's course language.

I must not spin it finer, till you make me
Understand better, why my daughter, and
In her, my family is abused.

She has not then accused her self -- I'll tell you,
I did expect your daughter would have been
My Virgin bride; but she reserved for me
The ruins of her honour, I wod not speak
In the rude dialect, you may sooner collect,
An English.

Is she not honest, will you
Make her then a whore?

No^ I, her own sin made her.

Thou lie, nor can my age make me appear
Unworthy a satisfactio^ from thy sword.

Does not he call my young mistress whore?

Keep me not from him Captain he has in this
Given a fresh wound, I came t'expostulate,
The reason of a former suffering,
Which unto this was charity, as thou art
A Gentle-man, I dare thee to the Combat:
Contemn not Beauford my gray hairs, if t'has^
A Noble soul, keep not this distance; meet me,
Thou art a Soldier: for heavens sake, permit me
Chastise the most uncharitable slander
Of this bad man.

I never injured you.

Not injured me? what is there then in nature,
Left, to be called an injury? did not mock
Me, and m^ poor fond girl with marriage?
Till all things were designed, the very day
When Hymen should have worn his saffron robe:
My friends invited, and prepared to call
Her Bride; and yet, as if all this could not
(Summed up together) make an injury:
Does thy corrupted soul at last conspire
To take her white name from her? -- give me leave
To express a Father, in a tear, or two,
For my wronged child. O Beauford! thou hast rob^
A father, and a daughter -- but I wo not
Usurp heavens justice, which shall punish thee
Above my weak arm; may thou live, to have
Thy heart as ill rewarded, to be a father
At my years, have one daughter, and no more
Beloved as mine, so mocked, and then called Whore.

Alas good old man.

My afflictions
Are not yet numbered in my fate, nor I
Held ripe for Death.

Now read the Letter.

Yes, it cannot make me know more misery.

Beauford, I dare not call thoe mine, though I could not hope, (while I was
living,) thou would believe my innocence, deny me^ no^ this favour after
Death, to say I once loved thee -- H^ death? Captain is she dead?


I hope she employed not me, to bring this news.


Yes, Death -- ha?
Prithee read the rest: there's something
In my eyes, I cannot well distinguish
Her small Characters.

My Accuser by this time, knows the reward of my iniury^ Farewell, I am
carrying my Prayers for thee to another World -- her own Martyr, drowned
Gratiana.


Read all.

I have.

It cannot be, for when thou make an end,
My heart should give a tragic period,
And with a loud sigh break: drown'd^
Twas no sin above heavens pardon*
Though thou had been false,
To thy first vow, and me, I wod not had
Thee dyed so soon* or if thou had affected
That death, I could ha drowned thee with my tears,
Now they shall never find thee, but be lost
Within thy watery Sepulcher.

Take comfort.

Art dead?
Then here i'll Coffin up my self, until
The Law vnbury me for Marwoods death,
I wo^t hope for life, mercy sha' not save
Him, that hath now a patent for his Grave.

Tis his command to whom I owe all service,
I should attend you.

You are too diligent:
I prithee leave me.

I should be unhappy
To be offensive in my duty; yet
Had I no charge upon me, I should much
Desire to wait.

On me?

I know not why,
Your sorrow does inuit me.

You are too young,
To be acquainted wo't.

I know, it wod not
Become my distance, to dispute with you,
At what age, we are fittest to receive
Our griefs impression.

Leave me to my self --

I must, if you will have it so.

Me thought
I saw him drop a tear, come back again:
What should he mean by this unwillingness
To part; he looks, as he would make me leave
My own mis-fortune to pity his:
Thy name?

I am called Milisent.

Dost thou put on that countenance to imitate
Mine? or hast a sorrow of thy own, thou
Would express by it.

Mine does become my fortune.
Yet yours does so exactly paint out misery
That he, that wanted of his own, would morn
To see your picture.

Mine is above
The common level of affliction.

Mine had no example to be drawn by,
I would they were a kin, so I might make
Your burden less by mine own suffering.

I thank thy love.

And yet I prophecy,
There's something would make mine a part of yours,
Were they examined.

Passion makes thee wild now.

You have encouraged me to boldness, pardon
My ruder language.

Did thou ever love?

Too soon^, from thence sprung my unhappiness.

And mine.

My affliction riper then my years,
Hath brought me so much sorrow, I do not think
That I shall live, to be a man.

I like thy sad expression, we'll converse
And mingle stories.

I shall be too bold.

We lay aside distinctions, if our fates
Make us alike in our mis-fortunes; yet
Mine will admit no parallel: ha! we are interrupted:
Lets with-draw, and i'll begin.

You may command, and when
Your stories done, mine shall maintain the Scene.

To maintain such bliss I will,
Wish to be trans-formed still:
Nor wilt be a shame in love,
Since I imitate but Jove;
Who from heaven hath strayd, and in
A thousand figures worse then mine,
Woed a Virgin, may not I,
Then for thee a servant try:
Yes for such a maid as thee,
Vary as many shapes as he;
Rawbone clothes my out-ward part,
But thy livery my heart:
Hauer, ha: young Hauer?
This Letter I found in my Daughters prayer Book, is this your Saint? how long
ha they conspired thus? Report gave out, he was gone to travail: It seems he
stays here for a Wind, and in the mean time would rigge up my Daughter: he
is a Gentleman well educated; but his Fortune was consumed by a prodigal
father, ere he was ripe, which makes him I suspect; borrow this shape to court
my Daughter; little does Rawbone think his seruaunt is his rival: I find the
juggling, and will take order they shanot steal a marriage.

Nephew, I ha news for you.

For me sir.

You are a Soldier, there's a duel to
Be fought this morning, will you see it?

It does not sir become a Gentle-man
To be spectator of a fight, in which
He's not engaged.

You may behold it Cousin,
Without disparagement to your honour; Rawbone
Has challenged Mr. Lodam, the place Fins^ury --

They fight? a doublet, stuffed with straw, advancing
A bull-rush, were able to fright em both
Out a'their senses, tha'not soul enough
To skirmish with a field-mouse; they point a duel?
At Hogs-don, to show fencing upon Cream
And cake-bread, murder a quaking Custard,
Or some such daring enemy.

Did not
Affairs of weight compel me to be absent,
I would not miss the sight, on it; for the Usurer
Hath got his man Jasper t^appeare for him
In his apparel.

Jasper.

For mirths sake
You may behold it, and let me entreat,
At your return, perfect relation
Of both their valours.

You shall Sir.

And Coze --
If it be possible, procure em hither
Before they shift, I much desire to see em.

Promise your self they shall: I will defer
My conference with Gratiana, and
Intertayne this recreation.

So: I have a fancy,
This opportunity will give it birth,
If all hit right, it may occasion mirth.

Which part of my discourse compels thee to
This suffering?

Your pardon Lady, I
Did prophecy what now I find, our stories
Have dependanc^

How prithee?

That Marwood
Whom you report thus wounded had a near
Relation to me, and twas my fortune
To come to close his eyes up, and receive
His last breath.

Ha?

I know more then Beauford,
And dying he oblieg'd my love to tell t'him
When ere we met.

You beget wonder in me:
Did he survive his slander? there is hop^
He did reca^t the injury he did me.

He did confirm, he had enjoyed your person,
And bad me tell Beauford he left behind
A living witness of the truth he dyed for:
Naming a Gentle-woman Cardona,
That bred you in your fathers house, whom he
Affirmed, betrayed your body to his lust.

Cardona?
Piety has forsaken earth:
Was ever woman thus betrayed to sin,
Without her knowledge?

W^'d he had not been
My kinsman, I begin to fear him:

Wherein had I offended Marwood,
He should alive, and dead so persecute
My fame? Cardona too in the Conspiracy,
Tis time to dye then.

My heart mourns for you
In the assurance of your innocence,
And were I worthy to direct you --

Has, mali^e
Found out another murderer?

Would you be pleased to hear me, I could point
You out a path, would bring you no repentance
To walk in, if (as I am confident)
Your goodness fears not, what Cardona can
Accuse your honour with, let her be
Examined, the^ her knowledge will quit you,
Or make yo^r s^ffe^ing appear iu^t, this is
An easy trial, and since Marwood had
A stubborn soul, for though he were ^y kins-man
I prefer justice, and held ^ham to check
His own report, women have softer natures,
And things may be so managed, if there be
A treason, to enfo^ce confession from her:
Would you please t'imploy me in this ^eruice,
And though unworthy be directed by me,
I beg it from you, i'll engage my being
You shall find com^ort in it.

Do any thing;
But I am lost already.

You much honour me.

Cam, see and if he be come yet, bring me word hither.


I see one lying of the ground --


Is there so? lets steal way before we be discovered, I do not like when m^n
lye p^rdue, beside, there may be three or four of a heap, for ought we know:
lets back I say.


Tis a horse.


Hang him jade, I knew it could be nothing else: is the coast clear Chameleon?


I see nothing but five or six.


Five or six: treachery! an ambush, tis valour to run.


They be Wind-mill^.


And yet, thou wo^'st persuade me, twas an ambush for me.


I?


Come thou were afraid, and the truth were known; but be valiant: I have a
sword; and if I do draw* it shall -- be against my will: is he not come yet?


And he were between this and More-gate, you might sent him.


If he come, some body sha^l smell ^ll ^auouredly, ^re he and I part: -- ha! by
this ^sh tis he; Cam, go ^ell him I am sick.


Master Lodam.


A brace of bullets to my hear.


Here can I stand and behold the Champions.


I have expected you this two hour^s, which is more then I had one to all the
men I ha fought withal, since I slew the high Germaine in Tutle.


Wh^rson, moale-cather.


Draw Spider.


Wel^ ^y^ toad.


Let us c^nferre a little.


Con^erie me no conferrings: I will have no more mercy on thee, then an
Infidel: and t'hadst been wise, thou might ha kept thee at home, with thy
melanchol^y Cat, that keeps thy Study, with whom thou art in Commons, and
doest feed on Rats a Sundays; then perhaps a leg or an arm, with thy Iewes
ears had satisfied me, when I met thee next: draw I say, why doest not draw?


I come to give you satisfaction.


What with words?

Sir Tartar, my Fox shall scratch thy guts out, which I will send to the
bear-garden: Doest hear Vsuring dog, i'll tell thee my resolution. I do mean
to give thee as many Wounds before I kill thee, as a Surgeons sign has; and
when I am weary of skarrifying thy flesh, i'll bore thy heart -- which done:
mark what I say; I will divide thy quarters: observe and tremble; then will I
ha thee put into a tub or Barrel, and powder thee, and after three days in
pickle, this thing that was thy servant, this Cacodemon whom thou did statue
once, Chameleon, shall in revenge of his pitiful famine, eat thee up, devour
thee, and grow fat in the ribs again with thy flesh. Mammon --


I hungrily thank your Worship.


What have I s^apt?


Which is more, after thou art dead, I wonot leave thy soul quiet, i'll torment
thy Ghost: for I will straight to thy house where I will break open thy
Chests, lined with white and yellow mettle, which I will cast away on pious
uses: then summon all thy debrors by a Drum, and give em in, all their Bills,
Bonds, Evidences, Indentures, Defesances, Mortgages, Statutes.


I shall be undone. --


And there were a million on em.


I'll home, and shut up my doors, for fear he kill Jasper and use me so
indeed.


If thou doest offer to look home again, till they ha done, i'll cut thee off at
thigh.


Ah --


Draw I say.


Since there is no remedy.


His sword appears Cam.


If he were a coward you were able to conjure a spirit into him, with those
threatenings.


Pox a'my dulues: dost hear scoundrell, if I should incline to mercy, what
submission? ha? let me see -- I, I, live, thou shalt upon thy knees confess
thy rascality, and ask me forgiveness in private, in the presence of
mistress Iane, and the twelve Companies which at thy charge shall be feasted
that day, in More-fields.


That must not be.


Then say when thou art dead, thou wer^ offred conditions for thy life: Cam,
thou shalt feed, and feed high Chameleon, -- let me see; -- come tis my foolish
nature to ha compassion o'thee, I know you are sorry, shat only confess thy
self a rascal under thy hand then, and stay my in ended revenge which else
would ha been immortal.


Let me consider.


Oh^ Cam. --


Both cowards, we shall have no skirmish.


Now I think on it, what if my man Jasper, should be valiant and kill Lodam --
umh? what pickle were I in: worse-worse, hee'le run away, I shall be taken
and hanged for the Conspiracy. Ah -- Jasper, ^ogue that I was, where were my
brains to challenge him -- he wonot hear -- a stubborn knave, he looks as
if he meant to kill: ah Jasper.


I ha seen a dog look like him, that has drawn a Wicker bottle, rattling
about the streets, and leering on both sides, where to get a quiet corner to
bite his tail off.


I do imagine my self apprehended already: now the Constable is carrying me
to New-gate -- now, now* I me at the Sessions house, in the Dock: -- now I'm
called -- not guilty my Lord: -- the Jury has found the indicement Bill vera --
now, now comes my sentence.


I am resolved sir.


Ha. --


You shall have what acknowledgement, this pen of steel will draw out in your
flesh, with red ink, and no other, dear master Lodam.


How?


So, so.


Now I'm in the Cart, riding up Holborn in a two wheeled Chariot, with a guard
of Halberdiers: there goes a proper fellow says one: good people pray for me:
now I am at the three Wooden stilts. --


Is this Rawbone the Coward?

Doest hear thing -- consider what thou doest, come among friends, thy word
shall be as good as a note under thy ^nd, (...) not my fury -- wod I were off,
with asking him forgiveness.


Hey! now I feel my toes hang in the Cart:
Now tis drawn away, now, now, now,
I am gone --

You must show your fencing.


Hold: I demand a par^e.


How?


Tis not for your reputation to deal with a
Gentle-man upon unequal terms.

Where lye the odds?


Howes this?


Examine our bodies:

I take it I am the fairer mark, tis a disadvantage: feed till you be as fat
as I, and i'll fight w'ee as I am a Gentle-man.


It sha not serve your turn.


Hold, murder, murder.


I'm dead, I'm dead.


Whoreson puffe-paste, how he winks and barks: How now Gentle-men, master
Lodam.


Captain, should a come but a little sooner, and ha seen good sport, by this
flesh he came up handsomely to me; a pretty spark faith Captay^e.


How sir?


But if you be his friend, run for a Surgeon for him, I have hurt him under
the short ribs, beside a cut or two ith'shoulder: would I were in a Millars
sack yonder, though I were ground for it, to be quit onem.


You wonot use me thus?


I were best deliver my sword ere I be compelled too't -- a pretty fellow, and
one that will make a soldier, because I see you have a spirit, and c^nst use thy
Weapon, i'll bestow a dull blade upon thee Squirrel.


Deliver up your Weapon:


In love in love Captain, hea's a spark a my reputation, and worthy your
acquaintance.


Thou mully-puffe, were it not justice to kick thy guts out.


When I am dis-arm'd.


Take it, again you sponge --


What? when I have geent thee: tis at thy service, and it were a whole Cutlers
shop: be confident.


My Agu^ has not left me yet* there's a grudging a'the halter still:


Master Rawbon^, I repent my opinion of your Cowardice.
I see you dare fight, and shall report it to my Cousin:
You shall walk home, she'll take it as an honour,
And present your prisoner.

Jasper, lets go home and shift, do not go -- honest Jasper.


You will be prattling sir -- I'll wait upon you Captain: Master Lodam --


I will accompany thee, you are noble, and fit for my conversation, honest
master Rawbone -- a pox upon you.


Nay, you shall wait a your master with his leave, good Jasper


How now Jasper?


Are these the herbs you strew at Funerals.

Yes sir.

Tis well, I commend your care,
And thank ye; ye have expressed more duty
Im not enquiring wherefore I command
This strange employment, there in the very
Act of your obedience: my chamber
Looks like the Spring now? ha'yee not art enough
To make this Ewe ^ee grow here, or this Baize?
The emblem of our victory in Death?
But they present that best when they are withered:
Have you been careful that no day break in
At any Window, I would dwell in night,
And have no other star-light but these tapers:

If any ask to speak with you,
Shall I say, you are abroad.

No, to all do enquire with busy faces
Pale or disturbed, give free access.
What do I differ from the dead? would not
Some fearful man or woman seeing me,
Call this a Church-yard, and imagine me
Some wakeful apparition among the graves;
That for some treasures buried in my life,
Walk up and down thus? buried? no twas drowned,
I cannot therefore say, it was a chest,
Gratiana had ne'er a Coffin, I have one
Spacious enough for both on's, but the waives
Will never yield too't, for it may be they
Soon as the northern Wind blows cold upon em,
Will freeze themselves to marble over her,
Least she should want a tomb:
Thy business.

He dyed this morning:
A friend of his and yours did practise on him
A little Surgery, but in vain; his last
Breath did forgive you: but you must expect
No safety from the Law: my service sir.

I have left direction, that it cannot miss me:
And had thou come to apprehend me for it?
With as much ease thou might; I am no states-man
Officious, servants makes no suitors wait
My doors unguarded; tis no labyrinth
I dwell in; but I thank thy love, there's something
To reward it: justice cannot put on
A shape to fright me.

I am sorry sir,
Your resolution carries so much danger.

What can life bring to me, that I should court it:
There is a period in nature, is't not
Better to dye and not be sick; worn in
Our bodies, which in imitation
Of ghosts, grow lean, as if they wooed at last
Be immaterial too; our blood turn ielly
And freeze in their cold channel, let me expire
While I have heat and strength to tug with death
For Victory.

You may disburden there,
But gently, tis a chest of value, mistress --
I'll give him notice, where is Beauford?

Here.

What place do ye call this?

Tis a Bridal chamber.

It presents horror.

Ha you anything
To say to me?

Yes.

Proceed.

I come to visit you.

You are not welcome then.

I did suspect it, and have therefore brought
My assurance wo'me, I must require
Satisfaction for a kinsmans death,
One Marwood.

Ha?

Your valour was not noble,
It was a course reward to kill him for
His friendship: I come not with a guard of
Officers to attach your person, it
Were too poor and formal, the instrument
That sluc'd his soul out, I had rather should
Sacrifice to his ashes, and my sword
Shall do it, or yours be guilty of another,
To wait upon his ghost.

Young man be not
Too rash without the knowledge how our quarrel
Rise to procure thy self a danger.

Make it
Not your fear, I have heard the perfect story,
And ere I fight with thee shat see thy error;
Acknowledge thou hast killed a friend, I bring
A perspective to make those things that lye
Remote from sense, familiar to thee, nay
Thou shat confess thou know the truth of what
Concerns him, or Gratiana.

When my soul
Throws off this upper Garment, I shall know all.

Thou shat not number many minutes, know
`Twas my mis-fortune to close up the eyes
Of Marwood, whose body I vowed never
Should to the earth without revenge; or me
Companion to his grave: I ha therefore brought it
Hither, tis in this house.

Ha?

His pale corpse
Shall witness my affection.

Thou did promise
To inform me of Gratiana.

And thus briefly:
Marwood reueal'd at death another witness
Of his truth, for Cardona he corrupted
To betray Gratiana to him.

Ha Cardona!
Heaven continue her among the living,
But half an hour.

I ha saved ye trouble,
She waits without, in your name I procured
Her presence, as you had affairs with her
She's unprepared, a little terror will
Enforce her to confess the truth of all things.

Thou doest direct well.

Still remember Beauford
I am thy lenemy, and in this do but
Prepare thy conscience of misdeed to
Meet my just anger.

I am all wonder.

He's now at opportunity.

Sir you sent
To speak with me.

Come nearer, I hear say
You are Baud; tell me how go Virgins
In the sinful market; nay I must know hell-ca^
What was the price you took for Gratiana^s:
Did Marwood come off roundly with his wages*
Tell me the truth, or by my fathers soul
I'll dig thy heart out.

Help.

Let me not hear
A syllable that has not referrence
To my question -- or --

I'll tell you sir:
Marwood --

So.

Did viciously affect her:
Won with hi^ gifts and flatteries, I promised
My assistance, but I knew her virtue was not
To be corrupted in a thought.

Ha.

Therefore --

What do ye study --

Hold -- I would deliver
The rest into your ear, it is too shameful
To express it louder then a whisper --

With what vnwillingnes, we discover things
We are ashamed to own: Cardona shudst
Ha used but half this fear in thy consent.
And thou had ne'er been guilty of a sin
Thou art so loath to part with though it be
A burden to thy soul: how boldly would
Out innocence plead for us; but sha^ done.

Then was Gratiana^s honour saved.

Untouched.

Where am I lost: this story is more killing
Then all my jealousies: Oh Cardona
Go safe from hence, but when thou come at home,
Locke thy self up and languish, till thou dye
Thou shalt meet Marwood, in a gloomy shade,
Give back this salary,

Have I made good
My promise, do you find your error.

No I ha found my horror -- has the chaste
And innocent Gratiana drowned her self?
What satisfaction can I pay thy ghost?

Now do me right sir.

She's gone for ever,
And can the earth still dwell a quiet neighbour
To the rough Sea, and not it self be thawed
Into a river; let it melt to waives
From hence-forth, that beside th'inhabitants,
The very Genius of the World may drown,
And not accuse me for her: Oh Gratiana.

Reserve your passion, and remember what
I come for.

How shall I punish my unjust suspicion?
Death is too poor a thing to suffer for her*
Some spirit guide me where her body lies
Within her watery urn, although feal'd up
With frost, my tears are warm and can dissolve it,
To let in me, and my repentance to her.
I would kiss her cold face into life again
Renew her breath with mine, on her pale lip
I do not think, but if some artery
Of mine were opened, and the c^im^o^ flood
Conveyed in^o her v^ines, it would agree
And with a gentle gliding steal it self
Into her heart, in li^'no her dead faculties,
And with a flat^ery, tice her soul again,
To dwell in her fair tenement.

You loose
Your sel^e in these wild fancies; recollect
And do me justice.

I am lost indeed,
With fruitless passion: I remember thee
And thy design again; I must account
For Marwoods death is't not? alas thou art
Too young, and can not fight, I wish thou were
A man of tough and active sinews, for
Thy own revenge sake, I would praise thee for
My death, so I might fall but nobly by thee:
For I am burdened with a weight of life --
Stay, did not tell me thou had brought hither
The body of young Marwood --

Yes.

Since a mistake, not malice did procure
His ill fate, I will but drop one funeral
Tear upon his wound, and soon finish
To do thee right.

Ye shall.

Does this enclose his corpse? how little room
Do we take up in death, that living, know
No bounds? here without murmurring we can
Be circumscribed, it is the soul, that makes us
Affect such wanton, and irregular paths;
When that's gone, we are quiet as the earth,
And think no more of wandering: oh Marwood
Forgive my anger, thy confession did
Inuit thy ruin from me, yet upon --
My memory forsake me, tis Gratiana's
Spirit, hast thou left thy Heavenly dwelling
To call me hence? I was now coming to thee:
Or but command more hast, and I will count it
No sin to strike my self, and in the stream
Of my own blood to imitate how thou
Did drown thy self.

I am living Beauford.

I know thou art immortal.

Living as thou art.

Good angels do not mock mortality.

And came --

To call me to my answer how I durst
Suspect thy chastity, i'll accuse my self
And to thy injured innocence give me up
A willing sacrifice.

Oh my Beauford, now
I am ouer-blest for my late sufferings;
I have solicited my Death with prayers:
Now I would live to see my Beauford love me.
It was thy friend induced me to that letter,
To find if thy suspicion had destroyed
All seeds of love.

Art thou not dead indeed,
May I believe? her hands is warm, -- she breathes
Again -- and kisses as she wont to do
Her Beauford, art Gratiana? Heaven
Let me dwell here until my soul exhale.

One sorrow's cured Milisent begone,
Thou hast bin too long absent from thy own.

Oh my joy ravished soul, but where's the youth
Brought me this blessing? vanished Gratiana
Where is he? I would hang about his neck
And kiss his cheek, he we not leave me so:
Gone? sure it was some angel, was he not,
Or do I dream this happiness, wot not thou
Forsake me to?

Oh never.

Within there --
Bid the young man return, and quickly, least
My joy above the strength of natures sufferance,
Kill me before I can express my gratitude:
Ha ye brought him?

Mr. Beauford, I am sorry we are
Commanded to apprehend your person.

Officers ha?

You are suspected to have slain a
Gentle-man, one Marwood.

Have I still my essence ha?
I had a joy was able to make man
Forget he could be miserable.

Come sir.

If ere extremities did kill, we hath
Shall dye this very minute.

You shanot go.

Our authority will force him.

You're villains, murderers:
Oh my Beauford!

Leave me Gratiana.

Never, i'll dye with thee.

What can we say unto our misery,
Saved in a tempest that did threaten most,
Arrived the harbour, ship, and all are lost.

To the next Justice.

Whether art fled Gratiana? that I can
Converse with none to tell me thou art still
A mortal? taken hence by miracle?
Though angels should entice her hence, to heaven,
She was so full of piety, to her father,
She would first take her leave.

There he is sir, he cannot choose but talk idly,
For he has ^o^ slept since the last great mist.

M^st?

I sir* his daughter, my young mistress went away in it, and we can hear no
tale nor tidings of her, to tell you true, I w^uld not disgrace my old master,
but he is little better then mad.


Unhappy Gentle-man.

Tis so, he murdered her;
For he that first would rob her of her honour,
W^uld or fear after-ward to kill Gratiana,
He shall be arrangn'd for it; -- but where shall we
Get honest men enough to make a Jury?
That dare be conscionable, when the Judge
Looks on, and frowns upon the Verdict, men
That will not be corrupted, to favour
A great man evidence, but prefer justice
To ready money? ^h this age is barren --

Master Beauford's newly
Apprehended for some fact, and carried
Fore Justice Landby, in my passage hither
I met him guarded.

Guarded for what?

Some did whisper he had killed --

Gratiana.
Oh my girl, my Gratiana, -- Isaac, Beauford is taken, tis apparent he hath
slain my daughter, and shanot I revenge her Death? I'll prosecute the Law with
violence against him, not leave the Judge, till he pronounce his sentence,
then I'll dye, and carry Gratiana the news before him. Follow me*


I expect Iane thou wot reward my care
With thy obedience, he's young and Wealthy,
No matter for those idle ceremonies
Of wit and court-ship.

Do I hear my father?

He will maintain thee gallant, City wives
Are fortunes darlings, govern al, their husband^
Variety of pleasure, and apparel
When some of higher title are oft fain
To pawn a Lady-ship: thou shat have Rawbone.

Virtue forbid it, you are my father sir,
And lower then the earth I have a heart
Prostrates it self, I had my being from you,
But I beseech you, take it not away
Again, by your severity.

How's this? I like it well.

You have read many lectures to me, which
My duty hath received, and practised, as
Prec^pts from heaven, but never did I hear
You preach so ill, you heretofore directed
My study to be careful of my fame,
Cherish desert, plant my affection on
Nobleness, which canonely be sufficient
To make it fruitful, and d'ce counsel now
To marry a disease?

Good! my own girls --
What is't you said? ha?

For the man himself
Is such a poor and miserable thing --

But (...) another word, and I take off
My blessing: how now Iane?

(...), I fear
He is in earnest, marry me to my grave,
^o that you shall have my consent, oh do not
Enforce me to be guilty of a fal^e
Vow, both to Heaven and Angels; on my knees --

Humble your heart, (...) and correct your sullenness,
I am resolved, would you be sacrificed
To an unthrift, that will (...) away his skin,
Rather then want to stake at Ord^aries?
Consume what I have gathered at a breake-fast,
Or mornings draugh? and when you ha teem'd for him
Turn Semptr^le to find milk and clouts for babies:
Foot stockings, to maintain him in the Counter?
Or if this ^ayle, erect a bandy Citadel,
Well manned, which fortified with ^my-Cannon
Tobacco pipes, may raise you to a fortune,
Together with the trail --

Oh my cruel stars!

S^rre me no stars, i'll have my will --

One minute hath ruined all my hope, Milisent
Was cruel thus to mock me.

Vnde --

You hear, now he talks.

But I ha found the way, tis but procuring
Acquaintance with the fore-man of the Jury,
The Sessions bell-weather, he leads the rest
Like sheep when he makes a gap, they follow
In huddle to his sentence.

Speak to him sir.

God save you sir Iohn Belfare.

I am a little serious -- do not trouble me.

Do ye not know me?

I n^yther know, nor care for you, unless
You can be silent.

I me your neighbour --

Master Doctor --

Away fool.

No sir, a Physician.

A Physician? can you cure my daughter?

I sir, where is she?

Cannot you find her out by art? a good
Physician, should be acquainted with the Stars:
Prithee erect a figure, grave Astronomer,
Sh'at ha the minute she departed; turn
Thy Ephemerids a little, i'll lend
Thee Ptolomy, and a nest of learned Rabbis
To judge by: te^l me whither she be a live,
Or dead, and thou shalt be my Doctor, i'll
Give thee a round per Annum pension,
And thou shalt kill me for it.

He has a strange De lyrium.

I sir.

A Vertigo in's head.

In his head.

What says the Raven?

He says, you have two hard words in your head sir.

Have you forgot me sir, I was but late
Familiar to your knowledge.

Ha'your pardon gentle sir I know you now,
Impute it to my grief, t'hath almost made me
Forget my self.

I come to visit you.
And cannot but be sorry, to behold
You thus afflicted.

Doctor I am sick,
I'm very sick at heart loss of my daughter
I fear, will make me mad, how long do ye think
Mans nature able to resist it, can
Your love or art prescribe your friend a Cordial?
No, no, you cannot.

Sir, be comforted.
We have our manly virtue given us,
To exercise in such extremes as these.

As these? why do you know what tis to
Loose a daughter? you converse with men, that
Are diseased in body; punished with a gout
Or fever: yet some of these are held
The shames of physic, but to th'mind you can
Apply no salutary medicine:
My daughter sir, my daughter --

Was too blame
To leave you so, loose not your wisdom for
Your daughters want of piety.

Speak well
A'th dead, for living she would not be absent
Thus from me, she was ever dutiful
Took pleasure in obedience: oh my child,
But I have strong suspicion, by whom
She's made away. Beauford --

How?

He that pretended marriage -- he gave her
A wound before.

Jasper? what case am I in?

Be wise a^d keep your counsel, is not all for your honour?

Lady ^ by this time, you are able to distinguish
A difference (...) Ra^bone and my self.

I fi^d^ (...).

You shall do n^ble sir.

Mr. Rawbone, the only man in my wishes:
My nephew gives you valiant, your merit
O^e-ioyes me, and to show how much I value
Your worth my daughter yours, i'll see you
Married this morning ere we part, receive him
Into your bosom Ian^, or loose me ever.

I obey sir: will my father cozen himself?

Ha, do I dream?

Dream quotha, this is a pretty dream.

Master Lodam, I hope you'll not repine at his fortune.

But Rawbone will pine, and repine if this be not a dream?

I allow it* and will dine with you.

And I.

Jasper: no, will no body know me?

Let's loose no time, I have no quiet tell
I call him son.

Master Justice, do me right,
You do not know who I am -- I am --

An ass sir, Are you not? what make you prattling?

Sir, --
Noble Captain, a word, I am --

A Coxcomb.
Your man is fancy sir.

Then I am a -- sleep.

I forget Gratiana

Cousin, you shall supply my place at Church, while I pr^pare for your return,
some guests we must have -- nay, nay haste, the mo^e grows old, wee'le have it a
Wedding day.


Here's a blessing beyond hope.


Sure I am sleep, I will cene walk with 'em till my dream be out.


Mr. Beauford, welcome and Gratiana --

You will repent your courtesy, I am
Presented an offender to you.

Yes, and please your worship, he is accused.

How?

Sir, you have charity, believe em not,
They do conspire to take away his life.

May it please you understand, he has killed
A Gentle-man, one Marwood, in our Park,
I found him wounded mortally, though before
He dyed, he did confess.

Urge it no farther,
I'll save the trouble of examination,
And yield my self up guilty.

For heavens sake
Believe him not, he is an enemy
To his own life; dear Beauford, what do ye mean
To cast your self away, you're more unmerciful
Then those that do accuse you, then the Law
It self, for at the worst, that can but find
You guilty at the last, too soon for me
To be divided from you.

Oh Gratiana, I call heaven to witness,
Though my mis-fortune made me think before,
My life a tedious and painful trouble,
My very soul a luggage, and too heavy
For me to carry, now I wish to live,
To live for thy sake, till my hair were siluer'd
With age; to live till thou wodst ha me dye,
And were a weary of me: For I never
Could by the service of one life, reward
Enough thy love, nor by the suffering
The punishment of age and time, do penance
Sufficient for my injury, but my fate
Hurries me from thee, then accept my death
A satisfaction for that sin, I could not
Redeem alive, I cannot but confess
The accusation.

Justice, justice, I will have justice:
Ha Gratiana!

Oh my dear father --

Art a live, oh my joy, it grows
To mighty for me, I must weep a little
To save my heart --

My young mistress alive.

If ever you loved Gratiana, plead for Beauford,
He has been abused, by a villain, alls discovered,
W'aue renewed hearts, and now I fear, I shall
Loose him again, accused here for the death
Of Marwood, that was cause of all our suffering.

I ha not wept enough for joy Gratiana
That you are alive yet -- I understand nothing
Beside this comfort.

Dear sir recollect,
And second me.

The fact confessed, all hope
Will be a pardon sir may be procured:
Sir Iohn -- you're come in a sad time.

What is the worst you charge him with?

He has slain a Gentle-man.

No common trespass.

He has done justice.

How?

A public benefit to his Country in it.

Killing a man? her sorrow ouer-throwes
Her reason.

Hear me, Marwood was a Villain,
A rebel unto virtue, a profaner
Of friendships sacred laws, a murderer
Of virgin chastity, against whose malice
No innocence could hope protection;
But like a ^ by an Eagles talent,
It grow^ng dyes.
What punishment can you inflict on him,
That in contemp of nature, and religion,
Enforces breach of love, of holy vows?
Sets them at war^e whose hearts were married
In a (...) congregation of Angel^:
I know you will no^ say, but such deserve
To dye yet Marwood being dead, you reach
Your fury to his hea^t, that did this benefit.

Oh G^ati^ if I m^y not live
To (...) thee here, Il would thou had been dead
Indeed so in a little time, we shu'd
^ each other in a better World?
But since I go before thee, I will carry
Thy (...) along, and if my soul forget not,
What it hath (...), when it conversed with men,
I will so talk of thee among the blessed.
That they shall be in love with thee, and descend
In holy shapes, to woe thee to come thither,
And be of their society do not (...) thy beauty
With such a shower, keep this soft rain,
To water some more lost, and ba^ren garden,
Least thou destroy the spring, which na^ure made
To be a wonder in thy cheek

Where is Marwoods body?

Here sir.

A live!

Ha Marwood?

A live, as glad to s^e thee, as thou art
To know thy self (...) for my (...);
Which I of purpose by this honest friend,
To whose cure, I owe my life, made you believe,
I increase our joy at meeting: for you Lady,
You are a woman, -- yet you might ha been
Less violent in your p^eading, do not
Eng^ge me past respects of mi^e, or your own honour.

Mine is above thy malice, I ha^e a breast
Impenetrable, against which, thou ^ndly aiming,
Thy arrows, but recoil into thy bosom,
And leave a wound.

Fri^nd we have found thy error --

L^t it be mine, we have had sto^mes already.

Tel^ me injurious man for in this presence
You must acquit the honour you accus^d,
Discharge thy poison here, in humane Traitor --

Thou wo^t a^ke her now so giuene^, she's al chastity.

Why do ye tempt me t^us?

It was ill done sir --

Accuse her to her face.

So so, you see, I am silent still.

You are t^o f^l of guilt to excuse your treachery.

Then farewell all respect, and hear me tell
This bold and insolent woman, that so late
Made triumph in my death.

Oh sir proceed not,
You do not declare your self of generous birth,
Thus openly to accuse a Gentle-woman,
Were it a truth.

He may throw soil at heaven,
And as soon stain it.

Sir boy, who made you so peremptory
He would be whipped.

With what? I am not armed
You see, but your b^g language would not fright
My youth, were it be friended with a sword;
You should find then I would dare to prove it
A fals^ hood, on your person.

How now Milisent?

Hath my love made me thus ridiculous?
Beauford, that you will suffer such a boy
To affront me? then against all the world
I rise an enemy, and defy his valour
Dares justify Gratiana virtuous.

Believe your eyes.

My daughter alive?
Oh my dear heart.

You are come oppor^unely,
Cardona speak the truth, as thou would not
Eat my p^nard, is not Gratiana
A sinful woman.

What means Marwood, ha?

I am in a labyrinth?

H^ld, I confess --
Y^u never did enjoy Gratiana.

Ha?

Let not our sh^m^ be pub^icke, sir, you shall
Have the whole truth, oh that my tears were able
To wash my sin away -- won wi^h your promises,
I did, in hope to mark my self a fortune,
And get a husband for my child, with much
B^acke oratoury, woe my daughter to
Supply Gratianaes bed, whom with ^hat
Circumstance, you enioy^d, tha^ you b^leeu'd
It was the virgin you desired.

Is't possible?

I am ^t a confasion, where's this daughter?

She with the fear (as I conceive) of her
Dishonour, taking a few jewels with her,
Went from me, I know not whither, by this time
Dead if not more unhappy in her fortune.

Into how many sins h^th lust engaged me?
Is there a hope you can forgive, ^nd you,
And she whom I have most dishonoured
I never had a conscience till now,
To be grieved for her, I will hide my self
From all the World.

Stay sir --

You hear this Beauford, father --

This she co^fest to me, though I concealed
From thee the error, Marwood dead, their shame
Would not ha given my life advantage, now
We have ore-come the malice of our fate:
I hope you'll call me son.

Both my loved children.

I congratulate your joy.

Beauford, Gentle-men,
This is a woman, Lucibol your daughter,
The too much injured maid: oh pardon me,
Welcome both to my knowledge, and my heart.

Oh my child.

My servant prove a woman?

You le marry her.

I shall begin my recompense:
Lea^ you to Church we will find the P^iest more work.

He has do^e some already, for by this time
I have a daughter married to young Hauer.
That walked in Rawbones li^e^y, -- they are returned.

Father your pardon, though you meant me not
Your son, yet I must call your daughter, wife:
Here I resign my Citizen.

Young Hauer.

My blessing on you both,
I meant it so: a letter took off this
Dis^uise before; nay here are more couples,
Enoug^ to play at Barly-break*

Ma^e^ Lodam, you and I are in Hell,

How?

You and I are friends.

I knew, by instinct, I had no quarrel to thee:
Art thou Rawbone?

I am not ^runke --

No, but thou art disguised shrewdly.

I wonot believe, I am awake:
This is not possible.

Leave off to wonder Captain.

Sur^ this is a dream.

As sure, as you are there Captain, alas we do but walk and talk in ou^
sl^epe, all this while.


Away, away.


I to dinner bullies.


Do ye hear Gentle-men, before you go, does no-body know me? who am I? who am
I?


You are master Rawbone fit, that would have married my daughter, that is now
wise, I take it, to this Gentle-man, your seeming servant.


Dream on, dream on: Jasper, make much a'the wench now you have got her, am not
I finely gulled?


I think so.


Dream on together, a good jest in faith, he thinks all this is true now.


Are not you then, awake fit?


No marry am I not sir.


What do ye think a'tha^ sir.


That sir? now do I dream that I am kicked.


You do not feel it then.


Kick, kick your hearts out.


Say you so, let my foo^e be in too then.


Sure I shall cry out in my sleep -- what a long night tis.


Set on.


I, I, we may come back, and take him napping.


Come Gratiana,
My soul best half, lets tie the sacred knot,
So long deferred, never did two lovers,
Meet in so little time so many changes;
Our Wedding day is come, the s^rrowes past
Shall give our present joy more heavenly taste.

GEntle-men: Pray he favourable to wake a Fool Dormant I ^on^st ye; ^ ha
been kicked, and kick^ to that purpose, may be, they knocked at the wrong door,
my brains are a sleep in the Garret* I must appeal from their feet to your
hands, there is no way but one, you must clap me, and clap me soon^ly d^e^
hear* I shall hardly come to my self else.

Oh since my case without you desperate stands,
Wake me with the loud Music of your hands.


