My Lord y're sad.


I am thinking, Alberto,
Of many things, have I not cause?

You may
Think on em with less trouble.

But of all
What dost imagine most afflicts me? i'll
Prevent thy answer, I am not troubled
With the present threatenings of the Enemy,
With all his preparations to invade us.

You have more confidence in Vittori, sent
To meet the insulting King, he has heene fortunate
In many wars.

The wars consume Vittori,
He has been too fortunate.

Your wishes ere
Against the common peace, if he prove not
A happy Admiral we are lost.

Be thou
And all thy name lost, and may no age
Find it again: how dare you interrupt us?
When we do want your Council, wel'e call for you.

I am gone sir.


My Iulio welcome,
What speaks Cassandra yet?

Nothing to encourage you, the same obstinate thing
Victory has her heart, she much condemns
The roughness which you mixed with your last courtship,
She says your Father may command her life,
But you must be a stranger to her bosom.

I was too rude at my last visit.


Rather sir too tame.


Have I for this drawn war upon my country,
Neglected Sicilies Daughter, left a stain
Upon his Court, and paid his Entertainment
With wounding one he loved?

His favourite
You had been less sir, then your self to have suffered
His insolence, nor was't an act becoming
His Master, to send hither to negotiate
A marriage for his Daughter, and when you
So far engaged your self upon a visit,
To permit any of his gaudy upstarts
Affront your person.

I acquit the King,
Twas no state quarrel, high with wine he did
Throw some disgrace on our Italian Ladies,
Whilst he would magnify some beauties there,
This he did second with a pride, and rudeness,
My patience was not tame enough to suffer,
And careless of all danger I did punish him.

Twas home and handsome.


I must owe to fortune.


For your return, she did but do her duty,
To make it swift and happy.

I confess the princess used me nobly, though my fancy
Was not surprised, for here I kept the image
Of fair Cassandra, whose divine beauty
Doth scorn all competition.

Did you love Cassandra before you went to Sicily?


Yes but with too much silence, and that love
Did make me apprehend more fiercely the
Occasion to break off all foreign treaty,
Horatio's fall, and my quitting the Country,
Upon it the king interprets a disgrace
To his daughter and himself, and in revenge
Hath added this new tempest to the Sea,
Meaned to our ruin Iulio.

All their fury
May soon be interrupted, if Vittory
Manage his business well.

That's all my trouble.


What?


Vittory there's the devil on it, he may
Be fortunate and overcome.

Can there
Be ill in that?

Ill? thou art shallow, I
Made him not Admiral, but to engage
His youth and spirit, apt to fly on dangers,
To perish in his hot pursuit of honour,
If he come home with victory, my Father
And his wise state must give him thanks, the people
Giddily run, to meet the Conqueror,
And owe their lives, and safety to his triumph.
But where am I? what peace brings it to me?
What blessing i'st to hear the general voice
Shoot their wild joys to heaven, and I in torment
Certain to lose my hopes in fair Cassandra?

There may be ways at home to remove him,
And plant you in your wishes.

It would be
Most happiness to hear his death.

That may
Ruin a Kingdom.

Ruin twenty more,
So I enjoy her first, nothing can be
Too precious to forfeit, I am mad,
And my desires by opposition grow
More violent.

I thought your masculine soul
Less capable of vexation, shall a subject
Whom with your breath you may blow out o'th'world
Raise su h a storm within you?

No he sha'not,
I ha found my self again, come i'll be merry,
But I will have Cassandra spite of fate?

Resolve and have her.


Stay, it were convenient
We did know how to do this Iulio.

You're in the right sir, it were first indeed
Convenient to know how.

Thou know his Father.


Sighnior Alphonso.


A bold and daring Gentleman, all flame
When he is moved, and careless of a danger
To vindicate his honour.

What of this?


He shall bear the foundation of a plot,
To make me Lord of my desires.

Heel rather
Meet torture^ then consent, his arm is not
Yet withered, and while he can lift a sword,
He will employ it to revenge Vittori.

Thou art no Politician Iulio.
How now? what news with you?

And please your grace
An humble creature of yours, proud of the least
Occasion to express how faithfully
My heart is fixed to serve you.

Whats your business?


I have business of some consequence,
I had not been so bold else to disturb
Your Princely conference, for I durst never
Assume that impudent garb, that other courtiers
Are known by, my devotion has been still
To appear in modest services.

To'th point.


It were a point of deep neglect to keep
Your (...) in expectation, yet delays
Make joys the sweeter, arrows that fly compass,
Arrive with as much happiness to the mark,
As those are shot pointblanke?

This Courtier loves
To hear himself talk, be not so impertinent,
We know your care.

And cost my Lord sometimes,
For they that hold intelligence abroad
To benefit their country, must not make
Idolls of their estates, and tis a happiness
To sell their fortunes for their Princes smile,
Which I am confident you will vouchsafe,
When you have heard my news.

Would you would vouchsafe
To let us hear?

Vouchsafe my Lord, alas!
You may command my tongue, my hands, my feet,
My head, I should account that limb superfluous
That would not be cut off to do you service.

I do command thee silence, dost hear, silence,


It is a verture my good Lord I know,
But where the tongue has something to deliver,
That may delight a Princes care, and so forth.

Now there's some hope, he's come to his, and so forth.


The news concerns the Admiral Vittori.


What of him, is he slain?


The stars forbid, he is returned my Lord,
Triumphant, brave, and glorious --

Be dumb.
Another syllable, ^le ha thy tongue out,
And leave no root, lest there grow out another,
Was all your circumstance for this?

My Lord!
You are too open breasted, let this fellow
See into your heart, wisemen disguise their counsels
Till things are ripe.

Begone, pox o'your legs
And the curse haven't been before, yet stay,
Give order that no man go forth to meet him
Until our pleasure further known, command
The Governor oath City place a guard
About the gates, let no mans face appear
Without the walls, the King our father means
To salute him first in person, dee stand.

Give order that no man go forth to meet him,
I shall my Lord.

He shall be entertained,
I feel new armies in my breast,
His father
Thine care Iulio.

I shall attend you straight
My honourable Lord.

Your servant Iulio
Where is the Prince? I beg your graces pardon.

Oh my good Lord, your son I heare's returned
With honour, has defeated the Sicilian
Bravely.

He has and please your highness, heaven
Has smiled upon his undertaking, it
renews my youth to hear it.

He had good soldiers,
But all their valour still conspires to make
The general a garland, he must wear
The conquering baize, whose blood soever pay's for it.

My Lord.


Nay, nay I envy not his victory.


You envy him, it was your cause he fought,
And for his Country.

Right, and tis the cause
That often prospers, that without his valour
Would ha defen^'d it self.

If all virtue
Were left to her own protection, my Lord,
Unarmed with strength and policy, best states
Would find shrewd innovations.

You had best
Tell me I lie.

I dare not think so foully.


You're a traitor,
Lay hands on him.

He that shall dare to say Alphonso is
A traitor, let his veins partake no blood
Of yours, and he shall curse he had a tongue.

Disarm the rebel, and to prison with him.


Ungrateful Prince.


I'll tame your ruffian spirit.
So, so, i'll now acquaint my father Iulio,
Who must allow my act, diseases that
Are desperate require a rugged handling,
This is for thee Cassandra!

Stand.

1. Stand. 2 Stand. 3 Stand.


The King received intelligence!


Our ships
Must needs report that loud enough.

Tis strange,
Is it not possible we have mistook
The shore, transported with our naval victory,
Speak gentlemen! or do we dream?

Those walls
Are certainly the same, and that the City
Peopled when we launched forth, and full of prayers
For our success.

It may be they reserve
Their welcome till we march into the City.

They may have some conceit.


A general silence
Like night dwells round about us, and no sign
That men inhabit, have we won at Sea
To lose our selves upon the Land? or in
Our absence hath some monster landed here
And made it desolate, devoured the Natives,
And made em creep into the earth again?

They might salute us with one piece of ordnance.


They cannot take us for their enemies,
Captain enquire the cause, let none else move;
Yet stay, unless it be some strange mortality,
And yet that cannot be, have we brought home
Their safety purchased through so many horrors,
And is this all the payment for our conquest?
To shut the gates upon us.

Force them open
With the Canon, shake their walls about their ears,
They are asleep.

For such another rashness
Thy head shall be the bullet of that Canon,
And shot into the town; go to! be temperate,
As I grudge none the merit of their valour,
I must hear none so bold.

I ha done sir.


Subjects are bound to fight for princes, they
Not bound to the reward of every service,
I look upon thee now fighting at sea,
And have forgot this error, give no breath
To such a thought hereafter* Honour pays
Double where Kings neglect, and he is valiant
Truly that dares forget to be rewarded.

This is but cold comfort for a knapsack man.


And yet tis strange the King should thus neglect us,
This is cheap entertainment for a conqueror
Is't not Mauritio? misery of Soldiers
When they have sweat blood for their Countries honour,
They stand at others mercy.

They have slept since
And dream't not of our sufferings.

Is the Prince
Alive, to whom we owe our Countries quarrel
The difference of both Kingdoms?
Our war and fortunes justify his act
Can he be guilty of this shame? no more,
There's something would fain mutiny within me,
Strangle the snakes betime Vittori -- so
This was a way to forfeit all our fames;
Fold up your Ensigns throw off all the pride
That may express a triumph, well march on
As we had over bought our victory.

The gates are opend now, and we discover
A woman by her veil, in mourning habit,
Coming this way

Alone? more strange and fatal,
It may be tis my genius come to give
A melancholy warning of my death,
As Brutus had from his, I'll stand my destiny,
Yet bearing the resemblance of a woman
It will less terrify, who should this be?
Lady your garment speaks you a sad woman,
Griefs should salute no nearer, if it were
In poor Vittories power to dispossess you
Of any sorrow.

Oh my dear Vittori^
My wishes aim at none beside.

Cassandra?
We are rewarded, had Vittori taken
Into his body a thousand wounds, this kiss
Had made me well again, or but one drop
Of this rich balsam, for I know thy tears
Are joy to see Vittori safe, the King
With all the glories of his Province cannot
Do half this honour to his Admiral,
I have a place above all happiness,
And meet a greater empire in thy love
Then fame or victory hath ever boasted,
My own my best Cassandra!

Call again
That temper, which hath made Vittori honoured
And if my tears which carry something more
Then joy to welcome home, my best loved Lord
Affect you with no sadness, which I wish not,
Yet look upon this mourning not put on
To counterfeit a grief, and that will tell you
There is necessity for you to know
Somewhat to check the current of your triumph.

What prodigies are these?


I was too careless
Of this sad habit, joy to see thy face
Made me distinguish nothing else, proceed
And punish my too prodigal embraces,
It is not fit I be in one thought blessed
And thou in such a Livery.

When you say
You have strength enough to entertain the knowledge
Of such an injury.

If it only point
At me, speak it at once, I am collected,
Shat see I will be conqueror at home,
If it concern thy self, let it not flow
Too fast, but rather let my ear receive it
By such degrees as may not kill too soon,
But leave me some life only to revenge it.

The Prince whose cause engaged your war abroad,
Hath ill rewarded you at home.

He cannot!


Sir in your absence I have suffered for you,
Hourly solicited to my dishonour.

Ha!


For though he called it love; I might suspect it,
His personal visits, messengers, rich presents
Left me not quiet to enjoy my self.
I told him I had given my faith already,
Contracted yours, impatient of my answers,
He urged his greatness, swear he would enjoy me,
Or be no Prince in Naples, I am yet
Preserved, and welcome home my dearest safety.

The Prince do this!


This is but half the story,
By his command none dare salute your victory,
Or power their glad hearts forth at your return,
To these he hath newly added the dishonour of
Your father, whom he hath commanded close
Prisoner ith Castle, upon some pretence
Of treason, in my eyes you may behold
How people shed their sorrow, as the guard
Led him to prison, none so bold to ask
The cause that made him suffer in his misery.

Will the King suffer this?


Alas his age
Hath made him tame, a too indulgent father
To such a son, whose will is all the law,
Controlling what he pleases in this fall
Of justice; which way will Vittori take?

Mauricio did hear this? we must ask
Forgiveness that we have been valiant,
Repent our duties, and that victory
We bought so dear, we should have dyed at sea,
And then perhaps been talked on in the crowd
Of honest men, for giving up our lives,
Which for our service they may now take from us,
We are not yet i*th snare, and we have power
To stis^e their designs, and prevent our
Dishonourable fall.

The soldiers hearts
Are yours.

No Mauricio let em be the Kings,
If such as they forget their office, we
Must keep our thoughts unstain'd, i'll to the King,
But without any train.

In this you do not
Consult your safety.

Safety is a lecture
To be read to Children, I do always carry
My own security within, Mauricio,
Yet do not think I am desperate, i'll take
No knowledge of the Princes action
But give account of my engagement, that's
Not much amiss, the King I know is gracious
And the Prince too, how ever passion play
This rebel in our soul.

You shannot need sir,
The King is coming hither,

And the Prince,
Lets all look smooth, the King is come himself
To gratulate our success.
You too much honour
The poor Vittori, who at your feet lays
His heart and victory, and that which gave
Him power to do you service.

We receive it,
And here discharge your soldiers, who shall taste
Of our particular bounty.

Heaven preserve the King.


Sir did not I give strict charge
That none should pass the gates, how came she hither?

No man and like your grace, I did remember
And durst not prevaricate in one syllable
Of my Commission, she is a Lady sir.

You wood be an officious hangman I perceive,
I'll find you understanding.

Let me prostrate
My duty to your highness, and be honoured
To kiss your hand.

Vittori i'll not flatter
I have no grace for him, whose father durst
Attempt an insolence upon my person,
Which the son may be guilty of in his blood.

My father insolent, and I guilty sir,
Because I share his blood? oh that I knew
In what part of my veins to find those drops,
That I might sacrifice to your anger*
And expiate my Fathers sin!

I came not to expostulate.


Is this all my reward?


Your valour has
Been paid in the success, what you have done
Was duty, if you have not mixed our cause
With private and particular revenge.

You speak not this to me sir.


Yes to you,
We do not fear the bugbeares in your forehead,
You will hear more.

Sir you have mercy in you.


You have displeased our son Vittori.


I? witness the Angels.


I must tell you too,
Your father has transgressed beyond example.

Good heaven forgive him, is this all,
All my reward?

What would you ask.


Ask -- why -- I ask my father.


Your father?


Goodness leave me not the wonder
Of all mankind; gentlemen all gone.

Alas Vittori.


I that commanded thousands
This morning am not owner of one servant.
Dost thou stay with me?

My prophetic soul
Knew this before.

The King returns, Cassandra.


We ha thought upon it Vittori, and without
The Council of our son, will condescend
To your Fathers liberty, he is yours upon
Condition, you and he, and this your Mistress
Go into present banishment.

How ^ banishment?


I run my sons distaste
There is no time for study, he affects
That Lady, if you stay something may follow,
To *th general repentance, troth I pity thee,
Here take our signet, time and absence may
Correct all.

Oh embrace it dear Vittori,
We shall meet safely every where but here,
Enlarge your Father, and we cannot miss
A happier fate.

Can my Cassandra think so?
That word shall*make me live a little longer,
But these are strange turns Madam, Naples hath
No dwellings for us, when we are quit of these,
Wee'le with our grief make tame some wilderness.

Whats to be done?


Done, you're undone all,
Betrayed the Crown you wear, I see it tremble
Upon your head, give such a licence to
A Rebel, trust him abroad to gather
Strength to the Kingdoms ruin.

What can such
A naked man attempt to make us fear?

He carries with him a whole army sir
The peoples love, who want no giddiness
Had they but opportunity, and such
A master Rebel as Vittori, to
Make spoil of all, who counceld him to this.

Not I and please your grace, I wish it heartily
Undone.

You wish it sir, are wishes now
The remedy for such a mischief, you
When the state bleeds, will wish it well again;
You're fine court Surgeons, had you staide his Father
It might have checked his treason, or Cassandra.

That's his torment.


We had been secure,
Exasperated now with his affront,
As never traitor wanted impudence
To blanch ore his rebellion, he may inflame
The Neighbour Princes, to conspire some war
For his revenge.

his grace says right, there may
Be a consequence of much danger, and Vittori
Has fame abroad.

I did it for the best,
By his absence thinking to remo^ his anger,
I could have been content, to have honoured him,
For to say truth, his services did challenge
More friendly payment.

To say truth, he was
A noble valiant gentleman, and deserved

What deserved he?


A halter, and shall please
Your Highness, I did wonder at your patience
He was not put to death.

I must acknowledge,
Vittori has deserved for many services,
The love and honour of his country, fought
Their battles, and brought conquest home, made tame
The Seas that threatened us, secured the Land,
And Rome allowed some Consuls for less Victories,
Triumphs, and Statues.

Most excellent Prince
How just he is.

But when opinion.
Of their own merit swells em into pride,
Which sets a price of that, which modesty
Should count an act of their obedience,
They forfeit the reward of thanks and honour,
And betray poor and most vaine-glorious souls,
Scipio, and Antony, and other Romanes,
Deserved well of the Senate, and were honoured,
But when they ran to faction, and pursued
Ambitious ends to undo their Countries peace,
They were no longer Patriots, but declared
Romes poison, and like gangrenes on the state
To be cut off, lest they corrupt the body.

Was ever Prince so wise!


But son, son, how
Can these staines reach Vittori? he hath given
No argument to suspect his fall from Loyalty.

I do not sir accuse him, nor did I
More then became the spirit of a Prince,
Show I was sensible of his Fathers impudence,
If you remember, when I urged what trespass
His Father had committed, he urged aloud,
Was this all his reward, as if his service
Were obligation to make us suffer,
And justify their affronts, but I waste breath
Since you are so well pleased, my duty sir
Shall speak me still your Son, but let me take
Boldness to prophecy their insolence
Struck at my person first, but you will find
Their pride reach higher, I am but a branch
Superfluous, and may be prund away,
You have you say no argument to suspect
His fall from Loyalty, if whats done to me
Be dead within you, yet remember now
You have disengaged by exile his relation
And tie of subject, he owes now no faith to you,
What that, and his disgrace and opportunity
Abroad may frame him to, I leave, to imagine.

Nay prithee come back, thou hast awaked me,
I find my rashness, I did never think
There had been so much danger, we will study
Timely prevention, let em be called back,
Fly after em, and in our name command.

You shanot need.


How shanot need?


Your pardon,
In hope your wisdom would allow it, after
I have made that my act, Iulio is gone
With strict commission for that purpose.

Iulio?
I thank thy care.

I was most divinely thought on, most maturely.
Now all your jealousies are laid.

I shall
Compose my self at his return, to wear
What countenance you will direct.

Cassandra
You've sent for too.

By any means, she is
So precious to Vittori, had she sinned
Alone to merit banishment, he would follow her
Through all the world.

Women are strangely attractive,
Fame speaks her virtuous too.

Some virtue she has --
Julio has prospered,
Tha'st done good service,
Alphonso though your late affront to us
Be foul in its own nature, and may encourage
Others by your impunity, yet we have
With the remembrance of your former actions
Lost your offence, Vittori too shall find
The honour he deserves.

How's this?


Where is he?
He does not scorn our mercy; Iulio,
Where is Cassandra?

Shipped with Vittori, thank Alphonso fort
Whom you have pardoned, they are both at Sea.

Whirl, winds pursue em.


Where's your son Alphonso?


Embarked with his fair Mistress, I observe
My Lord which way your anger moves, in vain
You vex your soul for them, the Sea's no part
Of your command, the winds are masters there,
Which cannot raise a storm so black and ominons,
As their own country.

By what means escaped they?


Take it from me, and after cut my head off,
I charged him as his heart wished to enjoy
A Fathers blessing, as he loved the honour
Of his Cassandra, fearing some new plot
To hire a Bark, and quickly put to Sea,
Whilst I made some stay to dispose affairs,
That might befriend us in another country,
He did obey and had my prayers, the winds
Conveyed him swiftly from the shore, and had
Your creature Iulio not made such haste,
I had dispatch'd, and in another vessel
Followed his ship, but heaven determined I
Should be again your prisoner, use your power
But look to give account for every hair
Of this old head, now withered in your service.

To the Castle with him.


I, there's the King,
Let me use one word more Royal sir, to you.

You'll hear him.


Fear not Prince, my soule's not fallen
So low to beg compassion.

Speak Alphonso?


My duty still preserved, I would advise
Your age to quit the trouble of your Kingdom,
And ask the Princes leave to turn a Capuchin,
Why should you stoups with burden of such a state,
And have a son so active, turn Fryer, my Lord,
And make the young man King.

I must endure.


Away with him.


I'll see him safe my Lord.


What hasty news with you.


To Arms great sir for your defence, there are
New dangers from the Sea.

Another Fleet?


And sailing this way, we suspect they are
Sicilians.

Vittori gave ablow to their defigne.


Dee but suspect it vilaine?


It may be
Some scattered ships.

Has not Vittori mocked us,
And plaide the vilaine with your trust.

They could not be reinforcd so soon, what number?


They cover sir the seas.


Gather up forces to
Prevent the landing.

Tis impossible?
They touch our shore by this time.

Then make safe
The City.

It may be another ^leet, meant to relieve
The first, and came not forth so soon.

Now we want Vittori.


All the diseases Naples ever gron'd with
Ore take Vittori, but Alphonso shall
Pay dee^ely for this mischief.

Be not sir
Dejected, tis more easy to defend
At home, then thrive in foreign war, these men
Will find as proud resistance.

Can thou think
I do look pale for this * no Iulio,
Although the sudden news might move me somewhat
I have a heart above all fear, and can
Know no distraction but Cassandra's absence,
That makes me look so wild, and tears my brain
With the imagination.

But the state
We are in requires you should be active sir.

Ah Iulio, the armies which I fear
Are not abroad, they have made entrenchment here.

Though Naples do not bid you welcome sir
A shore, the joys and duties of your subjects*
Cannot be silent.

We do thank you all,
The seas were kind, and the winds kissd our sails.
All things conspired to our revenge.

Your Justice
Our very enemies acknowledge it,
And conscious of their injury, are afraid
To look upon us.

Marshall of the field
Give present order for entrenchments.
We'll quarter here, you shall make good that part
With your horse troupes, and plant Canons on that hill,
To play upon the town, Naples shall find
We did not venture all upon one stake,
That petty loss at sea which made them triumph,
And perhaps careless of more opposition
Shall dearly be accounted for, beside
Dishonouring our Daughter, and our Court
By such a rude departure.

As they had
Scorned your alliance.

Thy particular*
Sufferings Horatio, and wounds are put
Into the scale.

They are not worthy sir,
Had his sword reached my heart, my death had been^
No sin compared to that affront he threw,
Upon your self and Daughter, I was bound
To engage that blood was given me to serve you,
And I do love those drops that in a cause
So just made haste to show their duty to you
Better than those that dwell within my heart.

We are confident of thy loyalty.


The Princess.


Alas Rosinda thou were not bred to these
Tumults and noise of war, has not the sea
Impaired thy health, I was too rash to allow
Thy travail, and expose thy tenderness
To this rude voyage.

It appears to me
A pleasant change of air, I have heard men talk
Of many horrors that attend the seas
Of tempests, and of dangers, I have seen
Nothing to fright me, if the waves put on
No other shape, I could exchange me thinks
My dwelling on the land.

We owe this happiness
To you fair Princess, for whose safer passage
The breath of heaven did gently swell our sails,
The waves were proud to bear so rich a lading,
And danced to the music of the winds.

You show
Your complement my Lord, call you this Naples?

The kingdom of our enemy which shall groan for the inhabitants. Are all our
forces. Landed?


Safe to your wishes, and expect
What they shall be commanded.

We must first
Secure the ground we have, being defenc'd
With works, we may prevent their sallies, and
Assault to our best advantage, still preserve
Thy courage my Rosinda, tis for thee
We have adventurd hither.

And you have
Been kind to the petition of your daughter,
Who can in duty wait upon your fortune
At home, I should have withered in your absence,
I shall grow valiant here.

My dearest child,
Whose very eyes do kindle flames of courage
In every soldier, be still safe, and promise
Thy self a brave revenge.

What will become of us Madam?


We must take our fortunes, I am sorry
For thee*

You have some reason for your self, if any danger follow I know where to
place the cause, but I dare suffer with your grace,

Passerello Madam, and the Page


He's come in good time to relieve our thoughts.


Madam.


Come pluck up a good heart.


Tis coming out as fast as it can, sweet Didimo hold my head.


Come, tis but a little sea sickness.


Seasicke quotha -- a vengeance of all drunken voyages,
I can do nothing but --

How now Pazzorello?


Oh Madam, never did man cast up so much, and had so little skill in
Arithmetic, nothing grieves me, but I have not drunk for it. I have a
perpetual motion in my belly, the four winds are together by the ears in my
small guts, would I had never known the Sea, little did I think -- oh --


Thou art a fresh water soldier.


Fresh water? I know not, be judge by the whole ship,
If I was not in a sweet pickle.

The worst is past; this is but physic.


If I had thought the sea would have given me so many vomits, I would have
seen it burned, ere I would ha ventured so far, I ha purged both ways, and
the enemy had met us before we landed, I should have scoured some on em.


How do you now?


The fit is not so violent altogether, a shipboard I run a tilt, howsoever I
beseech your grace, that I may go home again.


There is no way by land.


And a little more jogging at sea --


The very word Sea, boils in my stomach, and will make my mouth run over
presently -- ho it comes, it comes.


Madam I have a great desire to attend him,
I have cast a plot to make your, highness merry.

You'll play the wag with him, wee'le trust you to pursue it


I humbly thank your grace.


Flavia does not the day look black o'th sudden,


It has not the same complexion, I hear
A noise too.

From the sea it grows loud.


Tis well we are a shore, oh me I tremble
To think what would be come on's, and we had
Not been before this tempest, I thank providence
I was upon the Sea once in a storm,
But they use to clap the women under hatches,
I never prayed so in my life; the King!

I know not what to think, no sooner Landed,
But such a storm pursue us, does not this
Affright Rosinda into paleness? dost
Not feel an ague?

I have rather cause
Sir to rejoice, it overtook us not
Upon the sea, the fury of it there
Might have been fatal.

Be not troubled sir,
My soul doth from this omen prophecy
The victory you wish upon this kingdom,
Nor is it superstition to believe*
That heaven doth point us out the scourge to Naples,
By seconding our coming with a tempest;
The waves were proud to entertain our Navy:
The fish in amorous courtship-dane'd about
Our ship, and no rude gale from any coast
Was sent to hang upon our linen wings,
To interrupt our wishes, not a *star
Muffled his brightness in a sullen cloud,
Till we arrived, and t en observe how heaven
Threatens the fall of this proud enemy,
By this prodigious tempest, which but gives
Them warning of a greater.

We are confident
Thou hast happily expounded, what lightning
Darts from those angry exhalations.

It speaks the flame of our revenge.


What thunder?


The loudness of our canon, let their fears
Apply it, and run mad with apprehension.

Our ships must needs fall foul on one another,
Riding ith haven.

Let em crack their ribs,
We have the more necessity to tug for it.

Yet would thou were at home.


Fear not for me sir,
Your absence would present my imagination
With more affliction, I suffer less
In knowledge* and shall rise by brave examples,
Valiant above my sex, these horrors fright
Not me.

This fire will quicken the whole army.
What mutiny is here?

Base villains, to take part
With all the malice of the world against me.

What are you?


I am a Gentleman, and dare
Rather than* suffer a rude hand divorce
This burden from my arms, defy you all.
Alas she will be gone, oh my Cassandra
Thy ^oule shannot forsake thee thus, i'll take it
In with a kiss.

Some whom the wrack has cast
Upon the shore.

Pity the gentlewoman.


Come not too near, the man that first attempts
This Lady, had better rip his mothers womb.

Whence are you?


You are strangers I perceive,
Then I presume to tell you, I have more justice,
To tread upon this earth, then you, or any
The proudest, it once gave us birth, and fate
Ungentle fate, hath sent us back to dye here,
But I will not outlive my dear Cassandra.

Do you delight in wounds, resign that Lady.


Not while my hand can manage this, the blood
You take, will make us walk on even pace
To death, and when my soul can stay no longer,
I'll leave a curse to blast you, but if you
Bear hearts of flesh about you, and will promise
A pity to this poor departing Spirit
I will not use a sword, but give my life
To be commanded from me at your pleasure,
Your care will come too late.

I promise by
The word and honour of a King, she shall
Be carefully attended.

Though that name
Breed wonder in me, it secures all thoughts
That may concern her safety.

See Rosinda
With as much diligence to this Ladies health,
As you'd preserve your own.

An excellent creature!


My faith is past,
Now if you please you may acquaint us with
Your name and quality,

Something on the sudden
Weighs my hart lower, I ha not power to thank him.

Already you have expressed your self this Country man,
Be more particular.

My name's Vittori.


The Admiral of Naples?


It was a title!
I had too late, and lost it for my service;
I cannot conjure up the dead to witness,
There be some living that remember me,
It was my chance to have the best at sea,
Against the bold Sicilian.

A chance say?


Few victories can boast mo^e, all is but
The dye of War, which valour must obey,
My lot was to bring peace, and triumph home,
And my reward was banishment, the sea
Held me a sinful burden to the waves,
Or else the blood I shed to mix with em,
In anger and revenge conspired to throw
Our Bark, with the distressed lading back^
Upon this flinty bosom of your Country,
You have at full my misery, be just
To that poor Lady, whatsoever I suffer.

Your fame was with us earlier, entertain him,
You are welcome man, there's cause we should
Be kind to you.

Will a King stain his honour?


Know miserable man, thy destinies
Have made thee his, that will exact severe
Account for many lives, most happy storm,
Thy master too shall find a punishment
Great as his pride, how fortunate we are!

I ask no mercy for my self, be kind
To that poor Lady, as you're a Prince, and I
Will kiss my fate.

We violate no promise made to her,
Though torment make thee curse thy self, blessed heavens?
You shall pay dear for all.

Oh my Cassandra,
When at the expense of all my blood, I have bought
Thy precious life from these hard hearted men,
Shed one tear on me; and I am paid again.

You should have thought of this before.


I did think, and think on it again, but there was necesity of going with the
princess, or losing my place at court, when she came back, prithee sweet
Didimo council me, I shall ne'er endure these bounsing of gunnes, happy are
they that can destroy gunpowder, without offence in their musterings, soldiers
may talk, but there's neither wit nor honesty in making so many cripples, yet
I would give one of my legs to have the the other secured, I care not which,
cowards are commonly creatures of understanding, would I had purged away my
soul at sea, there had been peace among the Haddocks.


Come, I have a trick to save thee harmless, thou shat entreat to be
gentleman of a company.


Shall I? whats that?


A singular privilege I can tell you, oh the right hand file, do not you
know it.


A right handed file.


There's no honour like it, I'll not give a rush to be an officer, your
Gentleman of a company marches in the vanne.


Vanne what's that?


The bullets first salute him, he goes up to the mouth of a Canon, he lies
perdue.


Perdue?


More glory than to command an army, to lye two hours upon his belly in the
field, and dig a hole for his chin, when the bullets whisper in both his
ears, whize; to be trod upon by horses, and scorn to reveal himself,
sometimes to be snatched up by a party of firelockes, or if he fight to be cut
into honourable collups, or his limbs strewed about the field, which found by
a subtlers wife, is sod for the knapsack men, and goes currant for camp
mutton, my father was a Captain, and I have heard him tell brave stories of
these gentlemen of companies.


And thou wodst ha me one of these gentlemen.


By any means.


Have the bullets first salute me lye perdue as you call it, and be cut into
honourable collups, or have my haunches sod by a subtlers wife, and pass for
Camp mutton, this is the preferment you wish me to M. Didimo.


You shall be in no danger, I have but told you what fortunes other men have
met withal, you shall be secure and march in the vanne.


and come up to the mouth of a Canon.


Tis my meaning.


Which if I do, I'll give the Canon leave to eat me.


Dost thou think I would advise thee any thing for thy hurt.


Hurt, no no, these are but ^leabitings, to have my limbs strewed about the
field, or so.


Come, I love thee, and will give thee proof, thou hast got money in thy
service, put thy body in equipage, and beg of the princess to be one of these
brave fellows, I will put thee into a way, to get everlasting fame, and not a
hair of thy head shall be the worse fort, thou shat come off.


My head shall come off.


Thy whole body triumphant, my Rosiecleere, and live to make Nations stand a
tiptoe to hear thy brave adventures, thy head shall be enchanted and have a
proof beyond the musty murrian, did never hear of men that have been sick
and shot free, with bodies no bullets could pierce.


That's by witchcraft.


Tha'st hit the nail boy, I will procure this feat done for thee, fear
nothing, but be very secret, thy head shall be an anvil, and break all the
swords that light upon it* and for the shot, thy breath shall damp a Cano^, it
shall fall off like one of thy buttons.


If this could be compased, I should love witch^s the better while I live.


Here's my hand, something shall be done, but put on a brave outside of
resolution for the credit on it, that the world may believe tis thy valour puts
thee upon desperate actions from which a charm shall bring thee off, or the
devil shall nay to some body, here's the Princess.

Look high and let me hear how you'll deserve the benefit.


Madam I know not in what language to
Express those humble thanks my soul is full of,
It shall be justice, you command this life
You have preserv*d.

We should have forfeited
Humanity, not to have releev*d you
In such distress.

Shall I not trespass madam
Beyond your mercy, by this bold
Intrusion?

My Lord you're welcome.


Your grace honours me, but to you lady
I am directed.

To me noble sir.


We shall be rusty here for want of use,
Oh for an action of battery, I long
To fight pell mell with some body.

Pazzor^llo.


He*s grown most strangely valiant.


How he looks?


Madam I have an humble suit to your highness.


To me? yare like to prosper in it.


I beseech you I may not be a Common Soldier, I would cross the seas for
something, let me be gentleman of a company, and let the bul^ets fly as fast
as they can.


I must confess you ask a place of honour, but of danger.


Danger's an Ass, oh that I were to fight
With the General now for two crowns!

A mighty wager!


He means both th^ kingdoms.


I would desire no more then my finger against his musket. If we make no
assault presently against the walls, I shall go near to mutiny, and kill
two or three of our own Captains.


This he that was sea-sicke?


Oh there is no honour, like to marching in the vanne! I'll not give a rush for
a man that wonot lie Perdue half a year together, and come up to the teeth of
a Canon.


To the Canons mouth, I speak by a figure.


Now you talk of the mouth; ^ will eat every day this leaguer four and
twenty Canon bullets butterd, and as many Spanish Pikes for sparagrasse: their
steel points will fortify my stomach; I will kill my hundred men an hour
for a twelvemoneth together.


You'll not have m^n enough to conquer.


When the men are all dead in the town, heel lie with all the women, and get as
many more, rather then want enemies.


Oh how I could demolish man woman and child now!


I see your spirit, and must cherish it; i'll speak to my Lord; you may have
your desire, but be not seen in it for your honour.


He's here indeed, Didimo when shall I be bewitched, and the devil do not put
me in good security?


Trust me for that, lets leave em about it.


^an you be cruel Lady to that man,
That offers you his heart?

Alas my Lord
You ask mine in exchange, and I have made it
A gift already to Vittori, while
He lives he must possess it, as you're noble
Prosecute this no further.

I have done,
Vittori then must die.

Horatio,
Command your prisoner be brought to us presently.

I shall sir.


As you are a King, I beg your mercy
To poor Vittori.

I petition too
For her desires.

Unless he will be cruel to himself,
His fate smiles on him, does he love you Lady.

Great sir, we are one soul, life cannot be
So precious as our loves.

You shall preserve him, Rosinda.


I obey.


Leave, as thy health
Is but a prologue to his blessing, that
Paper speaks our intention, you shall
Present it, if he be wise his judgement
Will meet our purpose, what we lost at sea,
We enable him to satisfy by a second
Proof of his courage, and propound not only
Life, and his liberty, but so great an honour
As next our title, there is left no glory
To equal it.

You're all bounty.


There are some
Conditions, if you find him cool, you may
Apply what argument you find to warm
His resolutions, here he is, I leave you.

I wait sir your command.


She will instruct you


Enjoys my best Cassandra perfect health,
The King is just, and I have not enough
With this poor life to satisfy.

Vittori
We now begin our happiness, the King
Has been so gracious.

All that's good reward him,
To see thee safe and smile, I writ my ambition.

When you peruse that paper, you will find
How much we owe to providence, it was
The Kings command I should deliver it,
The words were of s^ch comfort that came with it,
I must be confident you'll thank him for it.

What should this be?
Sure I have lost my understanding ha?
Does it not bid me to fight against my Country?
I prithee read Cassandra, and repent,
Thou hast thought him merciful.

We have pledge for this trust in Cassandra, whose head shall be the price of
your disobedience.

The language is too clear.


It carries more
Darkness then ever the night was guilty of,
And I look black already to have read it,
Does he call treason justice, such a treason
As heathens blush at, Nature, and Religion
Tremble to hear, to fight against my country,
Tis a less sin to kill my Father, there,
Or stab my own heart, these are private mischiefs,
And may in time be wept for, but the least
Wouud I can fasten on my Country makes
A Nation bleed, and my self too, blasts all
The memory of former actions,
And kills the name we live by, oh Cassand^a
Thou did not well to praise the King for this.

His words did sound more comfort.


Prithee tell me?
How can thou hope I should preserve my faith
Unstained to thee, and break to all the world?

Naples has been injurious, and we made
No solemn vow to love what hath betrayed us.

Take heed, and do not greeve the Saints to hear thee,
If Naples have forgot Vittories service,
I must not make a desperate shipwreck of
My piety, what greater vow? It was
Articled in the creation of my soul
I should obey, and serve my Country with it
Above my self, death is a brave excuse for it,
No he shall see, I am a Soldier
And dare be just, say he should torture me,
Shall wickedness be strong in punishment,
And we not be as valiant in our suffering?

Can then Vittori be content to leave his
Cassandra to the misery of life
Alone? for in the number of mankind
I ne'er shall find, another in whose love
I can place any comfort.

Do not say so?
Princes will court thee then, and at thy feet
Humble their Crowns, and purchase smiles with Provinces,
When I am dead the world shall dote on thee
And pay thy beauty tribute, I am thy
Affliction, and when thou art discharged
From loving me, thy eyes shall be at peace,
A Sun more glorious shall draw up thy tears
Which gracing heaven in some new form, shall make
The Constellations blush, and envy em;
Or if thy love of me be so great, that when I am sacrificed
Thou wot think of me, let this comfort thee,
I die my Countries Martyr, and ascend
Rich in my scarlet robe of blood, my name
Shall stain no Chronicle, and my Tomb be blessed
With such a garland time shall never wither:
Thou with a troupe of Wives as chaste as thee,
Shall visit my cold Sepulcher, and glory
To say, this doth enclose Vittories dust,
That died true to his honour, and his country,
Methinkes I am taking of my leave already,
And kissing the wet sorrrowes from thy cheek,
Bid thee rejoice, Vittori is a conqueror,
And death his way to triumph.

This is all,
A new disguise for grief, to make it show well.

To make it show indeed, I have talked idly,
And miserably forgot my self, I am ch^ck'd,
This tells me another tale, if I refuse
To obey the Kings directions, he is not
So kind to take the forfeit of my life,
But he will make the price of my neglect,
Cassandra's innocent blood, if I obey not
To do an act injurious to virtue,
Thy soul must be divorced.

Sir I have read it,
And were not worthy of Vittories love
To value this poor life above his honour,
Keep your high thoughts, p^eserve all peace within you,
You shall not buy my breath with your own shame,
I'll die with that de^otion, I ha praid for you,
Which trust me was most heartily, and i'll shed
No tears for my own funeral, if any
Unruly drop break forth, when we are parting,
Tis more to leave Vittori then the world,
Yet if thou wot give me leave, I'll confess to the^
Before my head fall from this other piece,
I would deceive the hangman, for ere thou
Go from me, with a sigh into thy bosom,
I would convey my spirit, and leave him
But a pale ghost, to mock his execution.

I cannot hold, this conflict is more fierce
Then many thousand battles, can thou die?

If you will have it so, you have taught me
To be in love with noble thoughts, I shall
Have some weep ore my hearse, and when Im'e gone
Sealed by my blood, a Martyr for thy love,
The world shall praise me for it, and the Virgins
And Wives, if I obtain no other monument,
Build me a tomb within their hearts, and pay
Their yearly songs and garlands, to my memory,
That died, to save Vittories life and honour.

How should Cassandra die to save Vittori?


Allow it
So you be happy, and although my wishes
Are rather for the punishment of Naples,
More cruel then our enemies, yet if you
Think it dishonour to oppose that country,
I have a heart most willing to preserve
By any death your fame, lose not a scruple
Of your self for me, I carry thy love with me,
And prophecy my story shall throw more
Disgrace on Naples, then all thy revolt
Can bring upon thy name.

I am in a tempest
And know not how to steer, destruction dwells
On both sides.

Come, resolve.


I must -- to let
Thee live, I will take arms, forgive me then
Great Genius of my Country, that to save
Her life, I bring my honour to the grave.

I know not what to say to these garboils, there*s a hot Naples toward, and
the Prince is so humerous a tother side, I dare not come near him, Captain
Mauricio.


Signior Fabio you dishonour your body, by straining so much Complement.


Your humble servant Captain.


A court instrument, and so deep a base, you forget your self, have the
Wars made this alteration? keep your garb and be staunch Signior, a
Captain is a thing too course for your acquantance, you wonot know Soldiers
in peace.


Alas sir, the necessity of my affairs at Court, and place so devours my
attendance, that I cannot give that respect which is due to a Gentleman of your
quality, no neglect I beseech you Sir.


I am glad tis come about, what do you think now of a Musket bullet next your
heart, tis very provocative, come b^ not sad, thou may live a day or two
longer.


I hope Captain the state of the City is not so desperate.


We expect a battle every hour, the walls to fly about Our ears, if they
should be patient, we ha not provision to endure a siege, what will become of
your pumps signior, your wrought shirts, and rich nightcaps, I say nothing of
your wardrobe, jewels and other trinkets.


I stand not upon them, my life is more precious to me then all these.


What pity it is so profound a gentleman should dye by gunpowder, what would
you give to be saved now?


How dee mean Captain?


For your soul let it ^hift, I think thou hast little care on it thy self,
the^e be many would give all their estate to outlive these combustions.


I would I were sure on it, condition I lost half my land.


A match* my life against half your land to secure you, And make an
indifferent bargain presently.


Your life? how are you sure to live?


If I dye, you have half your land by it, if you live, tis worthy dividing
transitory fortunes, I shall ha the worst match on it.


But how will you assure me Captain?


Thou art not senseless, why your venture is but land against my life, which is
more precious I hope than thousand acres, is this to be considered* clap hands,
and we will have articles drawn for mutual assurances, I do not this to
every man, but I hope to have good on thee hereafter; the King!


And Prince.


Lets withdraw then, and conclude tis a safe bargain for you sir, if you
fail, what would all your estate do you good, and then I forfeit my life, if
you escape, I have but half your land.


I understand, and thank you noble Captain.


Alphonso must be sent for out of prison,
He's an experienced soldier.

To betray us.


Now we are punished for Vittories banishment.


Your fear will make us cowards.


Shall we make A sally forth?


Alberto.


We'll expect more
Advantage first, they have ^inisht their redoubt,
Is our river guarded with a sconce?

On that part
No enemy can endanger us.

What if you
Tasted Alphonso, he has been ever faithful,
And we too rash.

Keep prudent watches Iulio,
Something ith evening may be attempted,
Death is the worst, and better fall with honour
Then owe our life to fears, I would Cassandra
Were in their Camp, oh Iulio.

Twere better
She were at home in your possession.
A Herald sir.

Admit him.


Alberto, Iulio.


Whats the complement now.


Thus Naples is saluted from my Master,
Provoked by injuries above the patience
Of kings to suffer, without thirst of blood
Or pride of conquest, he is come in arms
To ask a satisfaction, if you would
Not know the fury of a war, which acts,
Such horrid ruins against men and nature, that
Repentance cannot easily absolve
The guilt in them that caused it, meet conditions,
And deserve timely my great masters friendship,
With mercy on your selves.

Mercy!


Be temperate.


Remember wounds are made more easily
Then curd, and now arrived within your country,
Revenge may spread a wild destruction,
Let mothers still enjoy their sleep, and dwell
Within their husbands bosom, let their children
Live to requite the parents groan, and prosper,
Let old men pay their debt only to nature,
And virgins dedicate their yet chaste womb
To Hymens holy use, or at their quires
With freedom of their souls, sing holy prayers
For the sweet peace you lend em, to serve heaven.

This fellow's sent to mock us in my heart
I repent all the tie of arms and nations.
That gives such saucy freedom to a Herald.

I claim my privilege, and dare say more.


What more?


Vittori is our general.


Vittori? dares that traitor.


When Kings leave
Their justice, and throw shame upon deservers,
Patience so wounded turns a fury.

How dares Scicily trust him?


Yes he has good pledge;
Too great a pawn.

This, this v^xation
I did expect, but we must not be frighted,
Tell your insulting master, he shall find
Men that both dare, and can resist this fury;
Conditions we despise, nor let him magnify
His purchase in that rebel, every soldier
With us hath equal courage to Vittori,
But a soul far more honest.

Honest?


So sir,
This, war shall justify upon his heart.

I dare not stay to hear more; least my passions
Betray me, what a fire this language has
Shot through my blood, the poor old king says nothing,
But fills a place like a state cipher.

Herald.
Return this to that Giant of your war,
Vittori, in his absence, we shall find
A punishment for his treason, and to cool
His hot veins, say the first attempt he makes
Against us, shall as valiantly be answered
With his fathers head.

Ha?


By thy masters soul
It shall, and this is all our answer, see
Him safe without the walls.

Thunder has struck me,
I feel new sti^gs about my heart, my father?
Was ever man ^o miserably thrown
Upon despair, if I refuse their war
I lose my wife Cassandra, if I fight
My father bleeds, some divine arm sustain^
My feeble soul, instruct it how I should
Distinguish sorrow, and which blessing rath^r
I should now part with, a dear wife, or father.

But did the Prince affect thee so Cassandra?


I have told you Madam every circumstance,
I should but flatter my own misery
To speak it less, misfortune had not made me
Your prisoner now, if he had been more temperate.

But did thy heart allow him no affection?
Thou were much unkind.

He had my duty Madam,
Which still I owe him, as my prince, but I
Had but one faith, and that was given Vittori,
I fear I have displeased you.

No thou hast not,
Dost think he loves thee still?

I know not Madam, but I hope not.


Would I could hope so too;
Thou hast deserved my confidence, and although
Thou can not help me, I must tell thee all,
I love that Prince, loved when I first saw him,
And when he courted me, I thought twas necessary
To show I had a soft heart, but he flattered
And took too soon occasion of his absence,
The wounds he left upon Horatio
Were not so deep as mine, which howsoever
I have disguised yet from my fathers eye,
Can find no cure without his surgery
That left them in my bosom, to this end
I urged my father to this war, and begged
With many prayers to witness his reveng^.

That was a desperate remedy, how if
Your father be overcome, and you made prisoners.

We shall find death or ransom, the first would
Conclude my sufferings, the other not much harm us,
Perhaps advance my ends, but if the victory
Should crown our army, I should interpose
To make conditions for the Prince, fate must
Decide one of these ways.

Madam I pity you,
Sure if the Prince knew with what constancy
Your love breathes after him, he would find a passion
To meet your Noble flame.

I know not whether
To pray for victory, or to be conquered,
For till the wars conclude, I must despair
To see whom my desires pursue.

Tis possible
That you may see him Madam.

When?


This night,
And speak with him, without exposing your
Person to any danger.

Prithee do not
Mock me sweet friend.

You were compassionate
Of me, and tis but duty I should answer it
With my desires to serve you, not to hold
Your thoughts in expectation, is there any
Gentleman near, whom you dare trust?

With what?


With carriage of a paper, I shall run
Some hazard, but there's nothing can weigh down
That goodness you have showed me, being a stranger,
I'll frame a letter Madam in my name,
And by some charm of love invite him to
Your tent, if he retain part of that flame
Which did so command in him, be assured
The Prince will come.

Thou were create to make
Me blessed, but with what safety can he reach
Thus far and not be known.

He to whose trust
You give this secret, shall remove that fear.

There is a Captain.


Best of all.


Fabrichio.


Send for him strait, if you allow this device
I'll presently dispatch the amorous summons.

I'll call thee sister.


Call me servant Madam,
In that I am honoured

Are you ready Madam?


For what?


To laugh, I am turned enchantress, and now tis upon the minute, Pazzorella by
the boys directions comes for his magical armour.


I have something of more consequence to finish,
But I may be at the end of your mirth.

Prosper in all your wishes.


Flavia That's excellent, Herald never
Looked so dreadfully, where's the Princess?

She commanded not to expect her, but she le not be long absent, where's t^e
gamest^r?


Almost within reach of your voice, you'll remember the circumstance, that he
may be capable of the charm, he's mad to be enchanted.


I warrant you, I have some furies to assist me too. Conduct him hither, if the
fool after this conceiving himself bewitched, should grow valiant, and do
wonders, who can help it? if he have but the wit to keep his own counsel,
let him take his course, but he approaches.


That is she.


That old hag.


Good words, she has come two hundred mile to day upon a distaff, salute her,
she expects it.


Would you have me kiss the devil?


Do I say -- This is the gentleman my loving Aunt,
For whom I do beseech your powerful spells.

To make him slick, and shot free.


Right dear Aunt,
He is a precious friend of mine, and one
That will be ready servant to your pleasures
At midnight, or what hour you please to call him.

Thou wodst not ha me lye with the old witch, what a generation of hobgoblins
should we have together.


Nor for this benefit, shall you find him only
Obedient to your self, ^ut very dutiful
To any devil you have.

He is welcome child.


What a salt peeter breath she has.


Where is Mephestophiles.


No more devils if you love me.


I must have some to search him.


Search me? where? for what?


How much was I overseene not to give you warning,
Be not afraid what have you about you?

About me where in my breeches, what do you mean
I shall be cut for the stone.

Have you any money about you!


Yes I have money of all complexions in my pocket.


Away with it, as you love your self, not for your right hand, have one piece
of gold or silver about you, no charms can fasten on you then, her spells can
have no power, if you do not throw it away instantly -- give me*t, i'll keep
it from her knowledge, this were a trick indeed -- have you no goldfinches in
your fob?


I defy him that has any thing in the likeness of coin.


This is all money in your pocket; and come to be made shot free.


What must I do now?


Kneel down, and expect with obedience and admiration what will become on you
-- Great Aunt the gentleman is clear and ready, you are sure you have no more
impediment of this nature, if you dissemble, and be killed afterward, thank your
self.


Where be my spirits?


He humbly desires you would finish him as privately as might be, he does not
know the constitution of every devil, and to make too many acquainted, if he
could be finished otherwise, your Art may di^pence.


He must cut off his little finger then.


How cut off my finger!


What did you mean? here's a ring, a diamond.


I had forgot it.


No more, off wee't, if you love your hand, here*s a jest to fool away your
life quickly, not for the world, present it to her, great Lady of the
Laplanders, this gentleman implores his mercy to his joints, and offering this
trifle, humbly prays, you would honour him to wear it for his sake.


Comes it freely off.


It came off very hard, but I beseech your learned beldamship, to accept it as
a token of my duty.


I do and thus prepared, delay
My charms no longer, come away
You spirits that attend upon,
This powerful incantation,
Have you brought that sacred juice,
Which at such a time we use;
Distill it gently I command,
Holding his ears with other hand.

Oh my ears.


The more pain she puts you to now, the less you'll feel hereafter sir.


Now rub his temples, forehead eke,
Give his nose a gentle tweake.
Strike of paleness, and bestow
On either cheek a lusty blow;
Take him by the hair and pull it,
Now his heads free from sword and bullet.

What will they do with the rest of my body?


Gra^pe his neck till he groan twice,


Oh, oh.


Enough, now let the young man rise;
Thus on his shoulders I dispense
My wand to keep all bullets thence;
And other weapons that would harm,
Pinch him now on either arm, fairy-like.

Oh, pox other devil oh,


On his breast give him a thumpe,
And two kicks upon the rump.
No circumstance must be forgot,
To make him free from stick and shot;
And now my potent charms are done,
This man is free from sword and gun.

Bounce, You're made for ever.


Farewell to both, for now must I
On my winged Jennet fly.
Suckle and Hoppo fetch long strides,
By your mistress as she rides.

Whether is she gone now?


Home to a witches upsetting, she's there
By this time.

Where?


In Lapland, she will cross the sea in an eggeshell, and upon land hath a
thousand ways to convey her self in a minute, I did but whistle and she came
to me.


She knows your whistle belike, well art thou sure I am enchanted now?


It concerns you to be sure on*t, and I must tell you one thing, if you make
the least doubt on it, you'll endanger all, charms in this kind are nothing
without the imagination, believe it, and if any sword or bullet have power to
hurt you, ne'er trust your granam again.


Nay nay, I do believe it, and will be valiant accordingly, they pinched and
kicked me devillishly for all that.


Y*are the better proof fort, you cannot be pinched or kickd too much in such
a cause, what to be made slick and shotfree? now do I foresee you'll be
Captain within these three days, you cannot avoid it sir, who will not
honour that man whom the bullets are afraid of? The Princess.


Repent your grace thought me a gentleman,
If I fail in this duty.

Not a syllable
Of me.

I am charmed.


Happy success attend you.


Your highness has much honoured me, and Lady
I kiss your fair ^and.

Captain, Captain, a word.


I am in haste now.


Sure the Captain's afraid of me, he knows by instinct
What I am.

Your grace mist excellent mirth.


Tis done then, bid him follow us.


The Princess desires to speak with you


Desires to speak with me! -- you have not told her?


Dee think I would betray you.


Would somebody would challenge me to fight before her, if the Ladies knew I
were stick free they would tear me in pieces for my company.


You do not know, what you may get by your body that way, I attend you.


Knives, daggers, swords, pikes, gunnes both great small
Now Pazzarello doth defy you all.

You tell me wonders, my son General
Of all the enemies Forces, can Vittori
Lay such a stain upon our family,
Speak it my Lord no more, no private injury
Can so corrupt his nature; come, I know
He dares not fight their cause!

I think so too;
The Prince hath coold his resolution
By this time.

Ha? you are mystical.


He has sent
Him word, the first attempt he makes against
The town your head must answer it, and I cannot
Believe how ere particular wrongs inflame him
To a revenge, but he retains that piety
Which nature printed in him toward a Father.

Is obligation to a parent more
Then that we owe our Country, oh Vittori,
My life were profitably spent to save
Thy honour, which is great in the worlds eye,
Time shall be grieved to have preserved thy name
So long, and when this blot shall be observed
Upon the last leaf of thy Chronicle,
It shall unsettle quite the readers faith
To all the former story.

Iulio.


My Lord?


It was the Kings command I should deliver.


What?


What must displease you,
You must prepare for death.

Has my son put
Rebellion into act already? that
Will save my executioner a labour,
He has, I read it, look into the tombs
Of all our ancestors, and see their ashes
Look paler then before, the Marble sweates,
The Eboine pillars that so many years
Sustained our titles shake, and sink beneath em,
The Genius of our house groans at this treason,
I will not live for any man to tell me
I am Vittories Father.

Here the Prince!


Forgive me sir my passions, I have guilt
Enough without em to deserve your anger,
He was my son, and that must needs condemn me;
But I will loose him from my blood, and cut
His name from that fair list, that numbers up
Our family, but I forget my self,
I have no minutes at command, my life
Is at the last sand, and I cannot stay,
Be just, and purge Vittories sin with his
Old Fathers blood, I do obey your doom.

What doom? you talk as you were destined
To some black execution, I have
Been too unkind already, and must ask
Your gentle pardon fort, by goodness self
I mock not, I bring life Alphonso to thee,
And but prepared by Iulio, thy heart
With sorrow, to meet honour with more taste.

Good my Lord distract me not, let me die
In my right wits.

Alphonso you may trust
The Prince, my message was but counterfeit.

You are a brave man, and can not be provoked
I see to wound thy honest fame, so just
To virtue, that thou dare prefer her cause
To thy own life, and rather violate
The laws of nature to thy son, then leave
The privilege of honour undefenc'd,
Thus we embrace thee, do not kneel Alphonso
Unless You'll bring us lower, thus as a friend
We circle thee, and next as a Soldier
Able in spite of age, and active still
We give these arms, this sword, the best in all,
My Fathers armoury, and used to conquest,
Take from thy Prince, and fight, fight for thy Country,
And purchase new wreathes to thy honoured brows,
Before the old be withered, I do see thee
Already mounted as a challenger,
The proud steed taking fire and mettle from
the rider, all bedewd with his white foam,
Flying to meet thy son, whose (once fair) plume
Is stained with blood of his own countrymen.

I reach your sense in part my Lord, but cannot
Gather your words into a sum, beside
The honour is so great I dare not with
The safety of my understanding, think
One so unworthy as Alphonso.

What?
Dares fight against a Traitor, for his Country?

Against all the world I dare.


Be valiant;
And breath defiance against one.

A glory I
My soule's ambitious of.

Vittori Is
That traitor whose offence, whom dost become
More nobly to chastise then his own Father,
Which title if you should forget to encourage you,
Think whose defence you undertake, for Whom
You punish, and what consequence of fame
Waits on this pious action.

My Lord
A Captain of the other side hath boldly offered
Himself a prisoner, and desirees access
To your highness, to whom only he must impart
Something he says, that will be acceptable,
We have searched him, and find nothing but a letter
Directed to your self.

To me? admit him,
Mean time you may consider,
Is it with us, Captain.

Please you peruse this paper.


Ha? from Cassandra?


Oh Alberto I
Could wish Vittori dead, but two not satisfy
Unless we murder one another too,
And I must challenge him, he is my son
Although he be a Rebel.

Iulio,
Thy bosom is my own? Captain a word.

I am astonishd, ha? I like not this -- my Lord.


The Prince is troubled, something like
Excess of joy transports him.

Th*art a fool.


This may be a plot, how dare you trust yourself upon this invitation.


Not on this, be coward then for ever.


Are you sure, this is her character.


Perfectly, beside she has confirmed me by this Ring,
Vittori gave it her, I know it and woed her
Once to exchange.

Yet think upon the danger.


I would run through flames to meet her, use no argumets,
I can be at the worst a prisoner,
And shall be ransomed, keep you council sir,
Captain -- the word? -- Enough,
Kiss her white hand, and say,
I come this night, wait on him to the gates,
Let his return be safe, Alphonso how
Stands your resolve? dare you be Naples Champion
Against the enemy proposd?

My son --
Will both the Kings trust to our swords their cause?

I cannot promise that?


What profit brings
My valour then if I overcome.

Addition
To your own fame, to have cut off a Rebel.

So I must kill my son, or he must be
A Parricide.

Nay if you be so scrupulous,
I looked you have thanked me, and have run too*t.

Except Vittori sir, and I dare challenge
The proudest in their Army.

You are afraid
Of him belike, tis such a kill-cowe gentleman,
But I court you to nothing, you may think on*t,
Yare, now no more a prisoner ^ulio.

I am worse?
I had some room before, now l'me confined
To such a strait, my heart must of necessity
Contract it self, my own thoughts stifle me,
Vittori is lost already, I must go
Another way to find out my own ruin.

Lady you think not what I am, how near
The bosom of a King.

You cannot be
So near as I am to Vittori sir,
And you increase my wonder, that you can
Nourish the least'hope, that I should forget
My own tie, by remenbring what relation
You have to any other, if the King
Did know this, he would chide you.

Come I see
You must be courted otherwise, with action.

How sir?


And if you will not be so civil.
To change one kindness for another, I
Have skill to prompt you thus.

You are not noble.


Tush this is nothing, I have been too tame,
And howsoever you wittily compose
Your countenance, you cannot choose but laugh at me,
That I have been so modest all this while;
Come, I have another inside, and do know
You are a woman, and should know your self
And to what end we love you, what are you
The worse by private favours to a gentleman,
That have at home been sued too, with petitions
And great ones of both sexes, to accept
Wives, Daughters, any thing, and think themselves
Honoured to take the first fruits, I could have
The virgins of whole families entaild
Upon me, and be brought as duly to
My bed, as they grow ripe, and fit for coupling,
As men whose'lands are mortgaged would observe
Their covenants and the day.

I'll hear no more.


So peremptory Lady? take your course,
The time may come you will repent this forcivenes.
Whither in haste Fabrichio?

My good Lord
I have brought news, where the Princess sir?

Thou art almost out of breath, what news I prithee?


News, that will please my Lord.


You ask for the Princess, will they please my Lady.


Yes, and the the other Lady too, Cassandra.


Will it spread joy no farther?


Yes it will please you,
And please the King, and the whole army.

Strange, you may impart it then.


My duty sir, did aim it first to you, I was engaged
To deliver a letter in Cassandra's name
To the Prince of Naples, to invite his person
Privately this night.

Whither?


To the Princesses tent.


And hast thou don't?


Don't, and bring back his word to visit 'em.


Art sure the Prince?


As sure as I am your creature,
This will be welcome to the Ladies, what use
You are to make of this, becomes not my
Instruction, if it be of any consequence,
To make his person sure, when he arrives.

This service will be grateful, I'll acquaint
The King, return the Ladies to expect him.

I have directed him how he shall pass.


And make it good, away, this makes thee happy,
The King shall know it instantly, thei'r here,
I'll give you scope.

He is returned.


What answer?


To your desires.


Where's Pazzorello now.


He's quarrelling with some body, he is so confident
And domineers, ha? tis he,
He Bleeds too.

A pox a your enchantments, I had like to have my brains beaten out, what will
become of me*


Why this is nothing sir.


Nothing sir, would thou had it.


Let me ask you a question, what weapon did it?


I gave but the lye to an old soldier, as we were drinking together, and he
presently claps me ore the pate with the rest of his musket.


That may be, but no sword or gun shall endanger you, as for truncheon,
batoone, and such wooden batteries you must fortify your self as well as you
can against em, beside sir, there is no breach of conditions in losing a little
blood, you may have you head broken in twenty places, nay you may be beaten,
and bruised in every part of your body, but all this while you are slick and
shot free, your life is your own, and then what need you care sir?


This is some satisfaction.


Should you challenge him at rapier, you should quickly find who will have the
worst on it.


This service shall be otherwise rewarded,
I'll trust your secrecy, he will be a fit man to engage, beside ti^
His desire.

You may command me.


Wait upon
This gentleman Pazzorello, he
Will use you nobly for my sake.

Must I
Be a perdue now? Madam I humbly thank you.

The night comes fast upon us.


It cannot come
Too swiftly, that brings so much happiness.
But tis an argument of much love to thee,
That can at such a time invite him hither.

I hope you feed no jealonsie of me,
I did all for your service, and shall then
Think I am happy, when he knows your love
And values it.

I have no fears of thee?


Have none at all.


Flavia?


Madam.


You must keep watch to night.


My duty Madam.


Come let us tell some stories, to pass over
The tedious hours.

I wait your pleasure.


Come Didino, we shall have your tale too?


Mines short and sweet, still at a Ladies service.


Follow me close, I hope you have made your Will.


My Will? why Sergeant I am not sick.


For all that you may be a dead man ere morning, whize.


What's that?


These bullets will keep you waking, here lie down close, within two hours
you shall be releeved.


Dost hear Sergeant, whize -- do the enemies shoot any
Sugar plummes?

Be not too loud in your mirth, I see another give fire, farewell Signior
Perdue.


So, now I am a Perdue, this will be news when I come home again, the poor
fellows will fall down and worship me, I always wondered, why we had so
many brave Soldiers, and quarrelling spirits, if they be shot free, I cannot
blame em to roar so much in Taverns -- whize -- again, I would fain have one of
these bullets hit me, that I might know certainly the toughness of my new
constitution, and yet I shall hardly be sensible of it, ah my conscience if I
were crammed into a Canon, and shot into the town, like a Cat I should light
upon my legs, and run home again.


Love be propitious still, and guide my steps,
Thou hast engaged me thus far.

Vh, uh.


Whose that?


There's somebody, now I begin for all this to be afraid, flesh will be flesh,
and tremble in spite of the devil, what were I best to do?


Tis some perdue.


Though I be stick and shotfree, I may be beaten, and bruised as I remember,
more, I may be taken prisoner by the enemy, and be hanged afterward, and then
what am I the better for my enchantment, what a dull rogue was I not to except
the gallows in my conditions, but it may be there is but one, qui vala -- the
word.


Rosinda.


Oh are you there, tis my Lady the Princesses name.


Thy Lady, pre^hee show me the way to her tent.


I had almost forgot, such a gentleman is expected,


Here's gold prithee make haste.


Now by your favour you shall first go to my Captain


His Name.


Fabrichio.


The same, withal my heart, here's more gold.


I will make the more haste.


Thy news does take me infinitely, if he
Keep touch we may propound what Articles
We please.

Fabrichio is confident heel come.


He will deserve our favour, keep at distance,
Sent for in Cassandras name? belike
He loves that Lady, let him, tis a strange
Adventure, sure my daughter is of counsel
With her, she had some bend that way, till he
Became ungrateful to us.

When you have
Him in possession, you may throw off
Vittori, one whose honesty I fear,
Under your princely favour, you have built
Too much, but heaven has sent the young Prince hither
To disengage your trust, he that dares prove
A rebel to his Country, dares be guilty
Of any other treason.

What shall we
Do with Cassandra?

Keep her still to wait
Upon the Princess, and expect the first
Opportunity for your kingdom, Naples will
Attend your leisure then, and court your mercy.

Be silent.


Lose no time.


For this embrace, I dare again neglect my life -- villains


We are betrayed, my father.


Oh misfortune.


What will become of me?


You're welcome prince of Naples.


Am I betrayed? false woman.


And please your majesty I am innocent, I brought him hither I confess.


Reward him.


^ome hither sir.


Howe's this? are you in earnest? my Lord aword -- but is this the Prince of
Naples?


The very same sir.


Take your gold again, I will have more for taking a
Prince, I crave the law of arms, I will have his ransom.

Away with the fool.


Give me my prisoner again then.


Sir hear me.


Another time Rosinda -- by thy duty --


Hear me great sir.


We'll hear and thank thee at more leisure too, attend our daughter*


Oh my Lord, be you
But master of so much charity.

Away,
Never was such a black and fatal hour,
As that when I first saw thy cozening face.

The Prince? I dare not trust my senses, ha?
How came he hither? wonder circles me,
Cassandra busy with him too? she courts him,
The Basilisk is not more killing than
This object.

Strumpet hence.


Ha?


My Lord Vittori?


What name was that the Prince bestowed upon you,
Yet do not answer me, away, new tortures.

Vittori, ha, ha, ha!


Your grace is mighty merry, I could wish
You had more cause.

Vittori I see trouble in thy face,
Perhaps tis wonder, upon what invitation
I am a guest here.

Are you not a prisoner?


You are no stranger to the plot, it seems,
Base villain to betray thy Prince.

My Lord
You are too rash in censure, I betray you?
I am so far from the conspiracy
That yet I cannot reach it in my thought,
Much less with guilty knowledge, I dare tell you
The Devil shannot tempt me too't, nor more
Wrongs then your hate can throw upon me.

Juggling!
Can he that dares take arms against his Country,
Make conscience to betray a part of it,
His Prince, degenerate rebel!

Heaven and this King
Know upon what severe necessity
I am engaged to war.

As things fall out
Your valour may be useless, we acknowledge
This happiness, from Cassandra, though she meant
Other success.

Cassandra?


Yes that piece
Of frailety, rather impudence, by the witchcraft
Of her letter tempted me thus far, a curse
Upon her lust.

Indeed you called her strumpet,
She may deserve it by this story, tis
Her character, my eyes, take in new horror.
And all this while I live, and have my senses,
O woma^ woman! sir if you remember
Twas your conclusion, if I refused
To be your General against my Country,
Cassandras head should off, be constant King,
I wonot.

What?


Not fight, nor for your Kingdom,
She cannot bleed too much, as for you sir.

What of me?


You're still my Prince, thank heaven for that,
Did you else grasp an Empire, and your person
Guarded with thunder, I would reach and kill you,
By my just rage I would, stay I will fight.

With whom?


With you or all the world, that dare maintain
There is a woman virtuous.

Neglect him.


How he breaks out at forehead, this is some
Revenge yet.

Come my Lord, you must with us,
Here your command determines, we shall have
No further use of your great valour sir.

You may with as much ease, discharge me of
A life too, your breath does it, for I dare
Not kill my self, in that I am a Coward.
Oh my hearts grief, preserve my right wits heaven;
The wickedness of other women could
But shame themselves, which like wild branches, being
Cut off, the tree is beautiful again,
But this spreads an infection, and all
The sex is wounded in Cassandr'as fall:

Away, your mirth displeases.


Madam I hope
I have not offended.

Let the boy begone.


Good Madam laugh a little, tis my duty
To drive away your sadness, tis all the
Use, Ladies have for Pages, now and then
To purge their melancholy.

Do not tempt my anger.


Then i'll go seek out Pazzorello
He's better company, and will make me laugh,
If his fit of immortality hold, my duty Madam.

Oh Flavia I am undone.


Not so dear Madam.


Though I be innocent, I want the courage
To tell the Prince Cesario, I love,
Were I allow'd access, he must imagine
Me guilty of his dishonour, nor can I
Be happy while he thinks himself so miserable,
Art thou so wise to counsel me? Vittori.

Madam I have an humble suite to you.


To me Vittori, for Cassandra's sake
I must deny you nothing.

For her sake I beg it.


Pray be plain.


That you would speak to the King.


For what?


To cut my head off.


How?


With sword or axe, or by what other engine
He please, I know you'll easily obtain it,
Tis for Cassandra's sake, I would be fain
Despatch'd, sheele thank you too, and then the prince
And she may revel.

I do find his jealousy,
Alas poor gentleman! but I hope
You do not mean so desperately.

As you
Love virtue do this favour -- if you make
Scruple, there is a King a little further
Will take my life away at the first word,
For I am resolved to die.

Shall I obtain
A small request from you.

These are delays.


If you be weary of your life, you'll meet it,
For there is danger in it.

And thank you too,
I'll do it by your fair self, now, now, you bless me?
Without exception, I'll obey you Madam.

Tis this.


Do you not mock me.


No suspicion.


Instantly.


This minute we'll begin it, and I'll promise
Something beside that you will thank me for,
But things are not yet ripe, will you do me
This honour.

Come I wait you, but tis strange
Why you should thus engage your self?

When you know,
You will allow my reasons.

I attend you, now farewell false Cassandra.


The Prince not to be found.


I did suspect
That letter might betray him, now Alberto,
How is the King?

Imagine how a father
Can apprehend the absence of a son
He loved so dearly, but he's justly punished
For his indulgence, though we dare not say so.

Tis very strange.


He was merry the last night.


What letter wast Iulio, the Captain brought?
I could distinguish it did strangely move him.

Letter?


Can you forget it.


Pox upon the witch
That sent, now shall I be examined, and
If he return not, lose my head, that letter
Was a discovery of some plot, the enemy
Purposed that very night.

Perhaps this mischief,
Why was it not prevented?

I shall make fine work,
I know not how to shadow it, would he had
Lain with my sister, rather than engaged
Himself so far for Venison.

Peace, the King.


And old Alphonso! I am glad to see
His change of fortune.

The King ever loved him.


Sir have comfort,
Your sorrow will discourage all.

Dost think
He is not taken by the enemy,
And put to death?

They dare not, tis against
The rules of war.

What dare not men that hate us,
And yet conceal the murder?

Where's the king.


Here, what portends thy haste, and busy countenance?


Oh great sir.


Has thy intelligence brought us knowledge of Our son?


The news I bring my gracious Lord
Concerns the Prince, and how my heart flows over,
That I am pointed out by heaven the first
And happy messenger.

Proceed, and we'll reward thee.


All my ambition aims but at your favour,
My soul was never mercenary, tis
My duty to wear out my life in services
For you, and the whole state, whereof although
I am no able member, yet --

He's mad.


It is with joy then, my good Lord Alphonso,
And by the way I must congratulate
Your present favour with the king, I knew
The noble faculties of your soul, at last
Would find their merit.

Villain ^ what dost rack
My expectation? speak, what of my son?
Answer me without circumstance, where is
The Prince? be brief or --

I know not my good Lord.


Traitor, did not prepare me to expect
News of my son, pronouncing thy self happy
In being the messenger? is he in health?
Answer to that.

I know not my good Lord.


Cut off his head, I shall become the scorn
Of my own subject.

Mercy Royal sir,
And i'll discharge my knowledge.

Tell me then,
And i'll have patience for the rest, but be not
Tedious, is my son alive or dead?

Alas I know not my good Lord.


Confusion!


But with your Royal licence, I am able
To produce those can satisfy you in every
Particular.

Where? whom? and quickly save thy life.


They wait sir.


This fellow was made for court dispatch,
An Elephant will sooner be delivered
Than his head when tis stuffed with any business.

A Lady.


And a fair one, what's the mystery.


She's not of Naples sure.


Fabio what is she?


Sir, you may justly wonder that a woman,
A stranger, and an enemy, although
My sex present you with no fears, should thus
Adventure to your presence, had I doubted
My self first, since suspicion of another
Defect, ^oth rise from our own want of goodness,
I had not used this boldness, but safe here
And armed with innocence, I gave up my freedom,
And dare not feed one jealousy, my honour
Can suffer with a king.

An excellent presence.


Her bearing is above the common sp^rit.


Fair Lady, make me more acquainted with
Your purpose, nothing can proceed from you,
That will not charm us to attention.

Your son great sir.


Where? speak, you do not look
As you delighted to report a Tragedy,
Lives my Cesario?

He does live my Lord.


Support me good Alphonso, I shall faint
Under my joy.

But lives a prisoner
To his enemy, the King of Cicily,
Who wished no greater triumph, then to boast
His person Captive, how he means to deal with him,
May admit some fear, Kings that prescribe to others
In peace, have great prerogatives, but in war
Allow no Laws, above what anger dictates
To their revenge, which blood doth often satisfy.

He dares not be so cruel.


I conclude not,
But yet tis worth some fear, when he that was
The root of all this war, stands at their mercy
That could not wish his safety, and their own
Together, I have told you sir the worst.

Alas, thou hast undone me.


Sir, my Lord?
Lady you were too-blame -- my Lord.

Your son
Shall live, and bless your age, to see him live,
If you will be so kind to allow your self
But eyes to witness it.

Flatter not my soul,
That is already weary of her burden,
And would begone to rest.

Gather your spirits.


What hopes?


Assurance sir, if you but please
To entertain it, I came hither on
No empty motive, but to offer you
A pledge for young Cesario.

Where? what pledge?


A pledge of as full value to the owner,
As your sons life to you.

Such security were welcome.


Make me blessed.


Receive me then your prisoner, and you make your balance even,
Lose not your thought in wonder, when you know
The price of what I have presented you;
Your reason shanot think him undervalued,
I am Rosinda, Daughter to that King,
Whose Soldiers threaten Naples, equally
As precious to my Father, and a Kingdom
And to your power, thus I expose my self,
If young Cesario meet unkind conditions,
'Ith same proportion let Rosinda suffer,
Erect a Scaffold quickly ore the walls,
And fright their jealous eyes, when they behold
Who is prepared for death, to equal their
Revenge upon Cesario, whom thei'le threaten
To make you stoop, but lose no part of honour,
As you are a King, their trembling hangman
Shall think himself mocked, and let fall his sword,
Or both our heads take their farewell together.

Alphonso is't a woman?


And a brave one!


I admire her nobleness.


You are slow to ask
The cause that hath engaged me to all this,
And yet you cannot choose but read it plainly,
In my guilty blushes, I do love the Prince
Perhaps tis more then he imagines, and
Since I first saw him in my Fathers court,
Without dishonour, I dare justify
My heart was his, and to this love you owe
The sorrow of his absence, for Cssaandra
That noble Lady, to whose breast I gave
My secret'st thought, for my sake by a letter
In her own name, by tie of former love
To her, engaged his meeting at my tent,
Whither no sooner privately arrived,
But by a vilaine that deceive our trust,
My Father was brought in, and he made prisoner,
You have the story, and my resolution
To be companion of his fate.

Again.
Those words dear Lady, that concerned Cassandra.

Alp. Vittori!


All your pardon I must hear this first.


Cassandra is innocent, and but framed that letter
To bring us two acquainted, the earth has not
A purer chastity.

You have kept your word, heaven reward your soul for it,
My duty sir to you, and to my Father.

He hath deserved his welcome for my sake.


We thus confirm it.


My poor son Vittori!


But tears of joy salute thee, best of Ladies!
Alphonso she is fair, well shaped, my son
Gave her deformed, with what eyes could he look
Upon this beauty, and not love it.

This beauty is her least perfection,
It speaks her woman, but her soul an Angel,
But I forget Cassandra all this while.

Welcome again fair Princess, my Cesario
Is here supplied -- -- Alphonso.

This may bring the peace about.


May it so? what think you of half your Land?
Do not your acres melt apace?

Away --
Never did Lady such an act of Nobleness,
And what we cannot reach in honouring thee,
Ages to come shall pay thy memory.

S. May I believe Rosinda loves the Prince,
And yet so cunningly disguise it from me?

It was my plot I must confess, but her
Affection bid me too't, I did expect
Another consequence.

I'll to my Daughter.


The Prince now in your power, I hope great sir.
You'll look more gently on Vittori.

We shall think on him. The Prince, excuse my absence.


Can those deceiving eyes look still upon me?
Is not thy soul ashamed, have I for thee
Neglected my own Fortune and my Father,
All the delights that wait upon a Kingdom,
For thy sake drawn this war upon my Country,
And done such things, I did forget I was
A Prince in the acting, and is all my love
Rewarded thus, no devil to betray me
But she to whom I durst have given my soul,
Degenerate woman.

Sir throw of your passion,
And when you have heard me speak but a few minutes,
You'll change opinion, and if you do not
Accuse your self, you will at least acquit
Me from the guilt of your dishonour.

Did not
The magic of your letter bring me hither?

I must not sir deny, I used what motive*
I could to gain your presence, but no magic.

Twas worse, and shows more black for thy intention*
Hast thou a Conscience? and can deny
Thou did not mean this treachery.

May heaven
Then shoot his anger at me, I sent for you,
But as I have a life not to betray you.

What could induce thee then?


Love, love my Lord.


Ha? pardon my rashness and my error,
Do I hear thee pronounce, twas love sent for me,
What streams of joy run through me, I am free,
Have suffered nothing, nothing worthy of
So rich a satisfaction, I forget
Naples with as much ease as I can kiss thee,
Have you no more vexation? Oh my stars I
Your influence is too merciful.

Mistake not,
Twas love I must confess, but not that love
Your wild imagination prompts you too,
And yet it was my love to wish you happy.

You are in Paradoxes Lady, twas love, it was not*


Love with another Lady
In birth; and all that's good above Cassandra,
Had toward your person, did command my service
In that rude letter, my ambition
Reached at no greater honour, then to bring
Her passions to your knowledge, think my Lord
Ypon Rosinda.

Ha?


And prison all
Your wanton thoughts, Rosinda was by heaven
Designed for you, as I was for Vittori.

Tis treason to be ignorant, search every where,
I'll hang ye all, unless you find my Daughter,
Prince wheres Rosinda? I will have her, or
Your head shall off.

My head?


I cannot take
Too great revenge, no punishment can fall
Severe enough upon his head was guilty
Of all these tumults.

Is the Princess lost?


Not without some conspiracy, ya're all
Traitors, if I recover not my Child,
I will sacrifice the lives of my whole army.

How ill this violence sits upon a King -- Alphonso.


What are you sir?


One from the King of Naples.


I'll hear nothing unles Rosinda be concerned ith message*


She is.


Ha, where?


Safe in the City sir.


A prisoner.


Guarded with love and honour, which he hopes
Is not here wanting to Cesario.

How came she thither?


With Vittori sir.


Ha Vittori?


That double renegade, where is Cassandra?
Off with her head, and his. --

My humblest duty. --
Take council to your action -- Rosinda
is in the same condition, my Lord
Vouchsafe me hearing.

Sir, if I were worthy
To advise you, let your passions cool, you but
Provoke their fury to your Daughter, by threatening the prince.

You're now on even terms,
What if you met and parleyed?

Every praise
Thou givst her makes me see my own deformity,
Madam you first awakd me.

Please you sir,
The King would have some further conference.

Direct their counsels heaven.


Thy pardon dear Cassandra,
When I have leave, I'll ask Vittori's too,
And all the worlds.

For further pledge on both sides,
Horatio we'll exchange to invite Naples
To give us meeting.

Tis desired already.


We follow, come my Lord old men have passions.


They were not men else.


My sons life Cassandra.


But this is strange news Didimo, is my Lady and mistress a Prisoner? I took
the Prince.


Twas valiantly done.


Why may not I with my armour of magic bustle among the enemies, and get
honour now?


It were your only time, get but a brave horse --


That would carry double, and I might bring home the Princess behind me to the
Camp; Say no more; stay, th^u art sure I am sufficiently enchanted.


No infidelity, as sure as you had no money in your pockets.


Well remembered, if it be so sure my little Didimo you shall now give me
account of all that gold and silver.


Such another word, and my Aunt shall take off her ^urse again.


There's it, this urchin has me oath hip, beside in my conscience, my granam has
given thee a spell too, so that we might fight our ^earts out, before we kill
one another.


You my be sure of that.


Prithee let me try, for my own satisfaction, whether my sword will run thee
through or no.


It has been attempted a hundred times, you may as soon prick me with the
pummel; but if thou hast any doubt thy own body is not steel proof, my
rapier shall demonstate.


Wo't? now tha'rt honest.


Tis to no purpose.


For my satisfaction, if thou love me.


Come on your waye^.


Stay, tis pointed -- I have a great mind, but if -- but if -- I should -- I am
enchanted; doot, stay, I wonot see it: now --


Never fear.


Oh!
He has run me through body and soul,
hum ^ I see no point, nor blood, nor pain, ha?
Tis so, god a mercy Didimo, I am right, I see it.
I will dispatch these wars presently.

Your charm will last no longer.


Tell not me, I will then go seek adventures,
Wee'le wander to relieve distressed damsels,
Through woods with monsters, and with Giants haunted,
And kill the Devil like a knight enchanted.

Lets hear our daughter speak.


First with an humbleness
Thus low, I beg your pardon, and beseech
You would interpret no defect of duty,
That I forsook my tent, and your protection
There is another, stronger tie than natures
Love, whose impulsion you have felt, or I
Had never been your daughter, moved my flight
Love of that excellent prince, whom in your power
I had no way to gain but by this loss.
And if you had been cruel to Cesario,
I should have gloried under these to suffer.

No more, there's virtue in that excellent Princess
To stock two Kingdoms, pardon fair Rosinda,
Thou hast made me fit to know thee, taught by thy
Obedience, I return a son to Naples
Thus, but desire no life without possession
Of that religious treasure, as you're kings --

A chain of hands and hearts.


Oh my Cassandra.


Joy in all bosoms.


Thus our kingdoms knit.


Horatio we are friends too.


Own me your servant sir, I beg your pardon.


I cannot ask forgiveness oft enough
For injuries to thee noble Vittori,
Alphonso and Cassandra.

All your creatures.


Justice my Lord.


Mercy my Lord.


Whats this?


A deed of half his land, if he survived
These warre^, which are now happily determined,
My life was his security, which will
Be merrier with the moity of his Acres.

How if he had dyed?


His Land had gone to the ^ext heir, that's all
His ghost would hardly call upon my forfeit;
If I had dyed, his land had been discharged,
But we both living must part stakes, he has
Enough for two on s.

^heated by a soldade.


He must confirm his act.


But in such cases sir (...) (...) (...) estates --


Are too much sir, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) impertinent,
Go to, yare well.

But half well, and like your (...)*


Tis very well.


Our City spreads to entertain such guests.


Never was music of so many parts,
As friends to Naples now, we all jovne hearts.


