AWay, leave off your golden Flatteries,
I know I cannot live; there's one lies here
Brings me the news, my glories my greatness
Are come to nothing.

Be not your self the Bell
To toll you to the Grave; and the good Fates,
For ought we see, may wind upon your bottom
A thread of excellent length.

We hope the gods have not such rugged hands
To snatch ye from us.

Cosmo, Damianus, and Anthony; you upon whom
The Vandall State doth lean, for my back's too weak;
I tell you once again, that surly Monarch,
Who treads on all Kings throats, hath sent to me
His proud Ambassadors: I have given them Audience
Here in our Chamber Royal; nor could that move me
To meet Death face to face, were my great work
Once perfected in Africa by my son,
I mean that general sacrifice of Christians,
Whose blood would wash the Temples of our gods,
And win them bow down their immortal eyes
Upon our offerings: yet I talk not idly,
Yet Anthonie I may; for sleep I think
Is gone out of my Kingdom, it is else fled
To the poor; for sleep oft takes the harder bed,
And leaves the downy pillow of a King.

Try Sir if Music can procure your rest.


Cosmo, 'tis sin to spend a thing so precious
On him that cannot wear it: No, no, no Music;
But if you needs will charm my o're-watcht eyes,
Now grown too monstrous for their lids to close:
If you so long to fill these Musick-roomes
With ravishing sounds indeed, unclaspe that book,
Turn over that Monument of Martyrdomes:
Read there how Genzerick he has served the gods,
And made their Altars drunk with Christians blood:
Whilst their loathed bodies, flung in funeral piles,
Like Incense burnt in Pyramids of fire,
And when their flesh and bones were all consumed,
Their ashes up in Whirle-winds flew in the Air,
To show that of four Elements, not one had care
Of them, dead or alive; Read Anthony.

'Tis swelld to a fair Volume.


Would I lived to add a second part too't, read, listen,
No Vandall ere writ such a Chronicle.

Five hundred broiled to death in Oil and Lead,
Seven hundred flayed alive, their Carcasses
Thrown to King Genzericks hounds.

Ha, ha, brave Hunting.


Upon the great day of Apollo's Feast,
The fourth Month of your Reign.

On, give me more,
Let me dye fat with laughing.

Thirty fair Mothers big with Christian brats,
Upon a scaffold in the Palace placed,
Had first their dugs seared off, their wombs ripped up,
About their miscreant heads their first borne Sons
Tossed as a Sacrifice to Iupiter
On his great day, and the Ninth Month of Genzerick.

A Play, a Comical Stage our Palace was:
Any more, oh let me surfeit.

Four hundred Virgins ravished.


Christian Whores; common, 'tis common.


And then their trembling bodies tossed on the Pikes
Of those that spoiled 'em, sacrificed to Pallas.

More, more, hang Mayden-heads, Christian Maidenheads.


This leaf is full of tortured Christians.
Some pauncht, some starved, some eyes and brains bored out,
Some whipped to death, some torn by Lyons.

Damianus, I cannot live to hear my service out,
Such haste the gods make to reward me.

Look to the King.


What shouts are these? see Cosmo.


Good news my Lord; here comes Hubert from the wars


Long life and health: wait ever on the King.


Hubert, thy wishes are come short of both:
Hast thou good news? be brief then, and speak quickly,
I must else hear thee in another World.

In brief then know, Henrick your valiant son,
With Bellizarius and my self, come laden
With spoils to lay them at your feet:
What lives the Sword spared, serve to grace your Triumph,
Till from your lips they have the doom of death.

What are they?


Christians, and their Chief a Church-man:
Fugenius, Bishop of Carthage, and with him
Seven hundred Captives (...), all Christians.

Hold Death, let me a little taste these joys,
Then take me ravished hence: glad mine eyes Hubert
With the victorious Boy.

Your Star comes shining.


Lift me a little higher, yet more:
Do the Immortal Powers power blessings down,
And shall I not return them?

See they come.


I have now lived my full time;
Tell me my Henricke thy brave success,
That my departing soul
May with the story bless another world,
And purchase me a passage.

Oh great Sir,
All we have done dyes here, if that you dye;
And heaven, before too prodigal to us,
Shedding beams over-glorious on our heads,
Is now full of Eclipses.

No boy, thy presence
Has fetched life home to hear thee*

Then, Royal Father, thus;
Before our Troops had reached the Africa bounds,
Wearied with tedious Marches, and those dangers
Which wait on glorious War: the Affricans
A far had heard our Thunder, whilst their earth
Did feel an earth-quake in the peoples fears,
Before our Drums came near them: yet spite of terror
They fortified their Towns, clothed all their fields
With wars best bravery, armed Soldiers:
At this we made a stand; for their bold troops
Affronted us with steel; dared us to come on,
And nobly fierd our resolution*

So hasten; there's in me a battle too,
Be quick, or I shall fall.

Fore-fend it heaven.
Now Bellizarius come; here stand, just here,
And on him I beseech you fix your eye;
For you have much to pay to this brave man.

Nothing to me?


I'll give you him in wonder.


Hang him out in a painted cloth for a monster.


My Lord, wrong not your self to throw on me
The honours which are all yours.

Is he the Devil? All.


Cast not your eyes on me Sir, but on him,
And seal this to your soul, never had King
A Son, that did to his Crown more honours bring.

Stay Bllezarius, I'm too true to honour,
To scant it in the blazing: though to thee
All that report can render leaves thee yet.

A brave man, you are so too, you both fought,
And I stood idle?

No Sir.


Here's your battle then, and here's your conquest;
What need such a coil?

Yet Hubert it craves more Arithmetic,
Than in one figure to be found.

Hubert, thou art too busy.


So was I in the battle.


Prithee peace.


The Almarado was on point to sound,
But then a Herald from their Tents flew forth,
Being sent to question us for what we came,
And which, I must confess, being all on fire,
We cried for war and death: Back rode the Herald
As lightning had pursued him: but the Captains
Thinking us tired with marching, did conceive
Rest would make difficult, what easy now
Quick charge might drive us too:
So, like a storm, beating upon a wood of lusty Pines,
Which though they shake, they keep their footing fast;
Our Pikes their horses stood: hot was the day,
In which, whole fields of men were swept away;
As by sharpe Sithes are cut the golden corn,
And in as short time: it was this mans sword
Hewed ways to danger; and when danger met him,
He charmed it thence, and when it grew again,
He drove it back again: till at the length
It lost the field; four long hours this did hold,
In which more work was done than can be told.

But let me tell your Father how the first feather,
That Victory her self plucked from her wings,
She stuck it in your Burgonet.

Brave still.


No Bellizarius, thou can guild thy honours
Horne from the reeking breasts of Affricans,
When I aloft stood wondering at those Acts
Thy sword writ in the battle, which were such,
Would make a man a soldier but to read 'em.

And what to read mine; is my book clasped up?


No, it lies open, where in Texed letters read
Each Pioner, that your unseason'd valour
Had thrice engaged our fortunes and our men
Beyond recovery, had not this arm redeemed you.

Yours?


For which your life was lost, for doing more
Than from the Generals mouth you had command.

You fill my praise with froth; as Tapsters fill
Their cut-throat Cans; where give me but my due,
I did as much as you, or you, or any.

Any?


Yes, none excepted.


The Prince was there.


And I was there, since you draw one another,
I will turn Painter too, and draw my self:
Was it not I, that when the maine Battalia
Tottered, and four great squadrons put to rout,
Then relieved them; and with this arm, this sword,
And this affronting brow put them to flight,
Chased 'em, slew thousands, took some few, and dragged 'em
As slaves, tied to my saddle bow with Halters.

Yes Sir, 'tis true, but as he says your fury
Left all our maine Battalia well-nigh lost:
For had the foe but re-inforc't again,
Our Courages had been seized, any Ambuskado
Cut you, and your rash troops off; if --

What if?
Envy not honour still inferres these ifs:
It thrived and I returned with victory.

You?


I Bellizarius, I, I found your troops
Reeling and pale, and ready to turn Cowards,
But you not in the head; when I (brave sir)
Charged in the Reere, and shook their battle so,
The Fever never left them till they fell;
I pulled the Wings up, drew the rascals on,
Clapped 'em, and cried follow, follow: this is the hand
First touched the Gates, this foot first took the City,
This Christian Church-man snatched I from the Altar,
And fired the Temple: 'twas this sword was sheathed
In panting bosoms, both of young and old,
Fathers, sons, mothers, virgins, wives, and widows,
Like death I havoc cried, so long, till I
Had left no monuments of life or buildings,
But these poor ruins; what these brave Spirits did
Was like to this, I must confess 'tis true,
But not beyond it.

You have done nobly all:
Nor let the General think I foil his worth,
In that I raise this forward youth so near
Those honours he deserves from Genzericke,
For he may live to serve my Henrick thus,
And growing virtue must not want reward:
You both allow these deeds he so much boasts of?

Yes, but not equal to the Generals.


The spoils they equally shall both divide;
The General choose, 'tis his prerogative:
Bellizarius be Vicegerent over all
Those conquered parts of Africa we call ours:
Hubert the Master of my Henricks Horse,
And President of what the Goths possess:
Let this our last will stand.

We are richly paid.


Who earnes it must have wages.


I'll see you embraced too.


With all my heart.


And Bellizarius
Make him thy Scholar.

His Scholar!


There's stuff in him,
Which tempered well, would make him a noble fellow.
Now for these Prisoners, 'tis my best sacrifice
My pious zeal can tender to the gods:
I censure thus; let all be naked stripped,
Then to the midst of the vast Wilderness
That stands 'twixt us and wealthy Persia
They shall be driven, and there wildly venture
As Famine, or the fury of the Beasts
Conspires to use them: which is that Bishop?

Stand forth; this is Eugenius.


I stand forth,
Daring all tortures, kissing Racks and Wheels,
And Flames, to whom I offer up this body.
You keep us from our Crowns of Martyrdomes
By this delaying; dispatch us hence.

Not yet Sir;
Away with them, stay him, and if our gods
Can win this Christian Champion now so stout
To fight upon their sides, give him reward,
Our gods will reach him praise.

Your gods, wretched souls.


My work is done, and Henrick as, thou love
Thy Fathers soul, see every thing performed;
This last injunction ties thee, so farewell:
Let those I hated, in thy hate still dwell,
I mean the Christians.

Oh what a deal of greatness is
Struck down at one blow!

Give me a battle,
'Tis brave being struck down there.

Henrick my Lord,
And now my Sovereign; I am by office bound
To offer to your Royal hands this Crown,
Which on my knees I tender, all being ready
To set it on your head.

Ascend your Throne:
Long live the King of Vandals
And of Goths, the mighty Henrick.

What mus^ now be done?


By me each Officer of State resignes
The Patten that he holds his office by,
To be disposed as best shall please your Grace.

And I return them back to all their trusts.
I rise in clouds, my Morning is begun
From the eternal set of a bright Sun.

My Lord returned, prepare a costly banquet
To gratulate his safe and wished Arrival:
Let Music with her sweet-tongu'd Rhetoric
Take out those horrors which the loud clamours
Of Wars harsh harmony hath long besieged
His tender senses with: your Father's come Bellina.

I feel the joy of it with you sweet Mother,
And am as ready to receive a blessing from him,
As you his chaste embraces.

So, so, bestir,
Let all our loves and duties be expressed
In our most diligent and active care.
Here comes my comfort-bringer,
My Bellizarius.

Dearest Victoria,
My second joy, take thou a Fathers blessing.

Not wounded Sir I hope?


No Victoria;
Those were Rewards that we bestowed on others:
We gave, but took none back; had we not you
At home to hear our noble Victories,
Our Fame should want her Crown, although she flew
As high as yonder Axle-tree above,
And spread in latitude throughout the world.
We have subdued those men of strange belief
Which Christians call themselves; a race of people,
This must I speak of them; as resolute
And full of courage in their bleeding falls,
As should they triumph for a Victory:
When the last groans of many thousand met,
And like commixed Whirlewindes filled our ears:
As it from us raised not a dust of pity,
So did it give no terror to the rest,
That did but live to see their fellows dye.
In all our rigours and afflicting tortures,
We cannot say that we the men subdued,
Because their joy was louder than our conquest,
And still more work of blood we must expect,
Like Hydra's Heads, by cutting off they double,
As seed that multiplies, such are their dead,
Next Moon a sheaf of Christians in ones stead.

This is a bloody Trade my Bellizarius,
Would thou would give it over.

'Tis work Victoria that must be done,
These are the battles of our blessing,
Pleasing gods and goddesses, who for our service
Render us these Conquests.
Our selves and our affairs we may neglect,
But not our Deities, which these Christians profane,
Deride, and scoff at; would new Laws
Bring in, and a new god make.

No my Lord;
I have heard say, they never make their gods*
But they serve 'em they say, that did make them:
All made-gods they despise.

Tush, tush Victoria, let not thy pity
Turn to passions, they will not deserve thy sorrow.
How now, what's the news?

Strange my Lord, beyond a wonder;
For 'tis miraculous: Since you forsook
The bloody fight, and horror of the Christians,
One tortured wretch, whose sight was quite extinct,
His eyes no farther seeing than his hands,
Is now by that Eugenius, whom they call
Their holy Bishop, clearly restored again,
To the astonishment of all your Army,
Who faintly now recoil with fear and terror,
Not daring to offen'd so great a power.

Ha? 'tis strange thou tell me.


Oh take heed my Lord,
It is no warring against heavenly Powers,
Who can command their Conquest when they please:
They can forbear the Giants that throw stones,
And smile upon their follies; but when they frown,
Their angers fall down perpendicular,
And strike their weak Opposer into nothing;
The Thunder tells us so.

Pray leave me all, I shall have company
When you are gone, enough to fill the room.

The holiest powers
Give thee their best direction.

What power is that can fortify a man
To joy in death, since all that we expect,
Is but fruition of the joys of life.
If Christians hoped not to become immortal,
Why should they seek for death?
Oh then instruct me some Divine power,
Thou that can give the sight unto the blind,
Open my blind judgement,
That I may see a way to happiness.
Ha, this is a dreadful answer; this may chide
The relapse in my blood, that 'gins to faint,
The further persecution of these people:
Or shall I back, and double tyranny?
A louder threatening; oh mould these voices
Into articulate words, that I may know
Thy meaning better: shall I quench the flames
Of blood and vengeance, and my self become
A penetrable Christian, my life lay down
Amongst their sufferings?
Ha, these are sweet tunes.

Bellizarius?


It names me too.


Sheath up thy cruelty; no more pursue
In bloody forage these oppressed Christians;
For now the Thunder will take their part,
Remain in peace, and Music is thy banquet;
Or thy self number amongst their martyring groans,
And thou art numbered with these blessed ones.

What heavenly voice is this? shall my ears only
Bell le^t with raptures, not mine eyes enjoy
The sight of that Celestial presence
From whence these sweet sounds come?

Yes, thou shalt see: Nay then 'tis lost again.
Rise, this is enough: be constant Soldier,
Thy heart's a Christian; to death persevere,
And then enjoy the sight of Angels ever.

Oh let me fly into that happy place:
Prepare your tortures now, you scourge of Christians,
For Bellizarius the Christians torturer,
Centuple all that ever I have done,
Kindle the fire, and hack at once with swords,
Tear me by piece-meales, strangle, and extend
My every limb and joint; nay, devise more
Than ever did my bloody Tyrannies:
Oh let me ever lose the sight of men,
That I may see an Angel once again.

For look you Damianus, though Henricke, now King,
Did in the battle well and Bellizarius enough for
A General, did not I tell 'em home?

I heard it.


They shall not make bone-fires of their own glories,
And set up for me a poor wax Candle:
To show mine I am full of gold now;
What shall I do with it Damianus?

What do Mariners after boon voyages?
But let all fly:
And what Soldiers, when wars are done?
But fatten peace.

Pox of Peace, she has churls enough to fatten her:
I'll make me a Shamoyes Doublet, embroidered
All over with flowers of gold: in these days
A woman will not look upon a man
If he be not brave: over my Doublet a
Soldado Cassacke of Scarlet, larded thick with
Gold Lace, Hose of the same Cloak of the same too,
Lashed up this high, and richly lined:
There was a Lady before I went, was working
With her needle a Scarf for me,
But the Wagtail has left her nest.

No matter, there's enough such birds every where.


Yes, women are as common as glasses in Taverns,
And often drunk in, and more often cracked;
I shall grow lazy if I fight not:
I would fain play with half a dozen Fencers;
But it should be at sharpe.

And they are all for foils.


Foiled let 'em be then.


You had fencing enough in the field, and for women,
The Christians field your markets.

Yes, and those markets were our Shambles, flesh enough,
It made me weary of it: Since I came home
I have been wondrous troubled in my sleeps,
And often heard to sigh in dead of night,
As if my heart would crack; you talk of Christians,
I'll tell you a strange thing; a kind of melting in
My soul, as 'twere before some heavenly fire,
When in their deaths (whom they themselves call Martyrs)
It was all rocky: nothing they say can soften
A Diamond but Goats blood, they perhaps wet Lambs,
In whose blood I was softened.

Pray tell how.


I will: after some three hours being in Carthage,
I rushed into a Temple, Starred all with lights;
Which with my drawn sword, rifling in a room,
Hung full of Pictures, drawn so full of sweetness,
They struck a reverence in me; found I a woman,
A Lady all in white; the very Candles
Took brightness from her eyes, and those clear Pearls,
Which in abundance falling on her cheeks,
Gave them a lovely bravery; at my rough entrance
She shrieked, and kneeled, and holding up a pair
Of Ivory fingered hands, begged that I would not
(Though I did kill) dishonour her, and told me
She would pray for me: never did Christian
So near come to my heart-strings; I let my Sword
Fall from me, stood astonished, and not only
Saved her my self, but guarded her from others.

Done like a Soldier.


Blood is not ever
The wholsom'st Wine to drink; doubtless these Christians
Serve some strange Master, and it needs must be
A wonderful sweet wages which he pays them:
And though men murmour, get they once here footing,
Then down goes our Religion, down our Altars,
And strange things be set up -- I cannot tell,
We held so pure, find ways enough to hell:
Fall out what can, I care not, I'll to Bellizarius.

Will you? pray carry to him my best wishes.


I can carry any thing but Blows, Coals, my Drink, and that clapper of the
Devil, the tongue of a Scold: Farewell.


They swarm like Bees about us: insomuch
Our People cannot sacrifice, nor give Incense,
But with interruptions, they still are buzzing thus,
Saying, Their Gods delight not in vain shows,
But intellectual thoughts, pure and unstain'd:
Therefore reduce them from their heresies,
Or build our Prison walls with Christians bones.
What thinks our Bellizarius? he that was wont
To be more swift to execute, than we to command:
Why sits not Bellizarius?

I dare not.


Protect me Jove,
Who dare gain say it?

I must not.


Say we command it.


Truth is, I neither can, nor will.


He's mad.


Yes I am mad,
To see such Wolvish Tyrants, as you are,
Pretend a Justice, and condemn the just:
Oh you white souls that hover in the air,
Who through my blindness were made deaths prey:
Be but appeased, you spotless Innocents,
Till with my blood I have made a true atonement,
And through those tortures, by this brain devised,
In which you perished, I may fall as you,
To satisfy your yet fresh bleeding memories,
And meet you in that garden, where content
Dwells only; that in blood did glory,
Will now spend blood to heighten out your story.

Why Bellizarius --:


Hinder me not,
I'm in a h^ppy progress, would not change my guest,
Nor be deterred by Moles and Worms that cannot see,
Such as you are: alas I pity you.

The King's in presence.


I talk of one that's altitude's 'bove him,
That owes all Principalities: he is no King
That keeps not his decrees; nor am I bound
In duty to obey him in unjust acts.

All leave the room.


We obey your highness.


Sir, nay sir good Bellizarius.


In that I do obey.


Do you make scruple then of our command?


Yes Sir, where the act's unjust and impure.


Why then are we a King, if not obeyed?


You are placed on earth, but as a Substitute
To a Diviner being, as subjects are to you,
And are so long a King to be obeyed,
As you are just

Good Bellizarius, wherein do I digress?
Have not I made thee great? given thee authority
To scourge those mis-beleevers, those wild Locusts,
That thus infect our Empire with their Scismes?
The World is full of Bellizarius deeds:
Succeeding times will Canonize thy Acts,
When they shall read what great ones thou hast done
In honour of us, and our sacred gods,
For which next unto ^ove they gave a Laurel
To Bellizarius; whose studious brain
Framed all these wracks and tortures for these Christians.
Hast thou not all our Treasure in thy power?
Who but your self commands as Bellizarius?
Then whence my Bellizarius comes this change?

Poor King, I sorrow for thy weakened sense,
Wishing thy eye-sight clear, that Eagle-like,
As I do now, thou might gaze on the Sun,
The Sun of brightness, Sun of peace, of plenty:
Made you me great? in that you made me miserable,
Thy self more wretched far, in that thy hand
The Engine was to make me persecute
Those Christian souls, whom I have sent to death;
For which I ever, ever shall lament.

Ha? what's this, within there?


Nay, hear me Henrick, and when thou hast heard me out,
With Bellizarius, think that thou art blessed,
If that with me thou can participate.

Thou art mad.


No; 'tis thou art mad,
And with thy frenzy makes this Kingdom frantic.
Forgive me thou great Power, in whom I trust,
Forgive me World, and blot out all my deeds
From these black Kalends: else, when I lye dead,
My Name will ever lie in obliquie.
Is it a Sin that can make great men good?
Is profanation turned to sanctity?
Vices to Virtues? if such disorder stand,
Then Bellizarius Acts may be held just:
Otherwise nothing.

Some Fury hath possessed my Bellizarius
That thus he rails: Oh my dearest,
Call on great Iupiter.

Alas poor Idol,
On him! on him that is not, unless made:
Had I your Jove, I'd toss him in the Air,
Or sacrifice him to his fellow-gods,
And see what he could do to save himself.
You call him Thunderer, shaker of Olympus,
The only and dear Father of all gods:
When silly Jove is shook with every wind,
A fingers touch can hurl him from his Throne:
Is this a thing to be adored, or prayed too?

My love turns now to rage: Attendance there,
And help to bind this mad man, that's possessed:
By the powers that we adore, thou die.

Here me thou ignorant King, you dull-braind Lords,
Oh hear me for your own sakes, for your souls sake,
Had you as many gods as you have days,
As once the Assyrians had, yet have ye nothing:
Such service as they gave, such you may give,
And have reward, as had the blind Moloffians.
A Toad one day they worship: one of them drunk
A health with's god, and poisoned so himself:
Therefore with me, look up, and as regenerate souls --

Can you suffer this?
This his affront will sear up the devotion
Of all your people: he that persecuted,
Become a convertite!

'Tis joy above my joy: oh had you seen
What these eyes saw, you would not then
Dissuade me from it; nor will I leave that power
By whom I find such infinite contentments.

Epidophorus, your ear: see it done.


It shall my Lord.


Then by the gods,
And all the powers the Vandals do adore,
Thou hast not been more terrible to the world,
Than to thy self I now will make thee.

I, dare thy worst; I have a Christians armour
To protect me.
You cannot act so much as I can suffer.

I'll try your patience.


'Tis done my Lord as you directed.


They are come:
Make signs you'll yet deny your Christianity,
And kneel with us to sacred Iupiter:
No; make them then a Sacrifice to Iupiter,
For all the wrongs by Bellizarius done:
Dispatch I say, to the fire with them.

Alas good men, Tongueless? you'll yet be heard;
The sighs of your tuned souls are musical;
And whilst I breath, as now my tears I shed,
My prayers I'll send up for you: 'twas I that mangled you.
How soon the bodies Organ leaves the sound!
The Life's next too't, a Needles point ends that,
A small thing does it; now you have quiet rooms,
No wrangling, all husht: now make me a fellow
In this most patient suffering.

Bear them unto the fire, and place him near,
To fright him.

On fellow Soldiers,
Your fires will soon be quenched: and for your wrongs,
You shall above, all speak with Angels tongues.

You that are borne Pagans both by father mother,
The true sons of Infidelity, sit down by me your Official:
Or to come nearer to the efficacy of the word,
Your undermost Jailer, or staller;
The word is Lordly and significant.

Oh brave Master y'faith.


Therefore sit down,
And as by virtue of our place, we have Authority given,
So let us as Officers do, knaves of our function,
As of others; let us I say, be unbounded in our Authority,
Having the Laws, I mean the Keys, in our own hands.

Friend, friend, you are two forward in your Authority,
Your command is limited where I am in place:
For though you are the Lieutenants man, know sit that I
Am Master of the work, and Constable Royal
Under the Kings Majesty.

Marry is he.


If their testimony will not satisfy here my Title
At this place, in this time, and upon this occasion,
I am Prince over those Publicans, Lord over these Larroones,
Regent of these Rugs, Viceroy over these Vagabonds,
King of these Caterpillars; and indeed, being a Constable,
Directly Sovereign over these my Subjects.

If all these stiles, so hard to climb over, belong
To the Office of a Constable, what kin is he to the Devil?

Why to the Devil my friend?


I'll tell you; because a Constable is King of Nights,
And the other is Prince of Darkness.

Dark as it is, by the twilight of my Lantern,
Methinks I see a company of Woodcocks.

How can you discern them?


Oh excellent well
By their bills: see, see, here comes the Lieutenant.

Well said my friends, you keep good watch I see.


Yes Sir, we Officers have breath as strong as Garlic
No Christian by their good wills dare come near us.

'Tis well, for bear:
Oh Madam. had you seen with what a vehemence
He did blaspheme the Gods,
Like to a man pearcht on some lofty Spire,
Amazed which way to relieve himself,
You would have stood as did the King, amazed.

God grant him liberty,
And with that give us privacy:
I doubt not, but our sweet conference
Shall work much on him.

Jove grant it: I'll leave the room.


A Jailer seldom looks for a bribe,
But he's prevented.

My Lord, your Lady,
And her most beauteous daughter,
Are come to visit you, and here attend.

My Wife and Daughter, oh welcome love;
And blessing Crown thee, my beloved Bellina.

My Lord pray leave us.


Your will be your own Law.


Why study you my Lord, why is your eye fixed
On your Bellina, more than on me?

Good, excellent good:
What pretty shows our fancies represents us:
My fair Bellina shines like to an Angel,
Has such a brightness in her Crystal eyes,
That even the radiancy dulls my sight.
See, my Victoria, looks she not sweetly?

She does my Lord; but not much better than she was wont.


Oh she but begins to shine as yet,
But will I hope ere long be stellified:
Alas, my Victoria, thou look nothing like her.

Not like her? why my Lord?


Mark, and I'll tell thee how:
Thou art too much over grown with sin and shame,
Hast prayed too much, offered too much devotion
To him and those that can nor help, nor hurt,
Which my Bellina has not:
Her years in sin are not as thine are, old:
Therefore me thinks she's fairer far than thou.

I my Lord, guided by you, and by your precepts
Have often called on Iupiter.

I, there's the point:
My sins like Pullies still drew me downwards:
'Twas I that taught thee first to Idolize,
And unless that I can with-draw thy mind
From following that, I did with tears entreat,
I'm lost, for ever lost, lost in my self and thee:
Oh my Bellina.

Why Sir, shall we not call on Jove that gives us food,
By whom we see the heavens have all their Motions?

She's almost lost too, alas my Girl,
There is a higher Jove that rules 'bove him:
Sit my Victoria, sit my fair Bellina,
And with attention hearken to my dream:
Me thought one evening, sitting on a fragrant Virge,
Close by there ran a silver gliding stream;
I past the Rivulet, and came to a Garden,
A Paradise, I should say, for less it could not be;
Such sweetness the world contains not, as I saw;
Indian, Aramaticks, nor Arabian Gummes,
Were nothing scented unto this sweet bower:
I gazed about, and there me thought I saw
Conquerours and Captives, Kings and mean men,
I saw no inequality in their places:
Casting mine eye on the other side the Palace,
Thousands I saw my self had sent to death;
At which, I sighed, and sobbed, I grieved, and groaned,
Ingirt with Angels, where those glorious Martyrs,
Whom this ungentle hand untimely ended;
And beckoned to me, as if heaven had said,
Believe as they, and be thou one of them;
At which my heart leapt, for there me thought I saw,
As I supposed, you two, like to the rest:
With that I waked, and resolutely vowed
To prosecute, what I in thought had seen.

'Twas a sweet dream, good Sir make use of it.


And, with Bellizarius, am resolved
To undergo the worst of all afflictions,
Where such a glory bids us to perform.

Now blessings crown ye both,
The first stout Martyr has his glorious death,
Though stony-hard, yet speedy; when ours comes,
I shall triumph in our affliction.
This adds some comfort to my troubled soul,
I that so many have deprived of breath,
Shall win two souls to accompany me in death.

Ho, rise sluggards: so, so, ho; so, ho.


So, ho, ho, we come.


Morrow jolly Wood-men.


Morrow, morrow.


Oh here*s a Morning, like a grey eyed Wench,
Able to entice a man to leap out of his bed,
If he love Hunting: had he as many corns on his toes
As there are Cuckolds in the City.

And that's enough in conscience to keep men from going
Were his Boots as wide as the black Jacks,
Or Bombards tossed by the Kings Guard.

Are the swift Horses ready?


Yes, and better fed than taught;
For one of'em had like to have kick't
My jigumbobs as I came by him.

Where are the Dogs?


All coupled as Thieves going to a Sessions,
And are to be hanged if they be found faulty.

What Dogs are they?


A pack of the bravest Spartan Dogs in the world,
If they do but once open, and spend there
Gabble, gabble, gabble, it will make the Forest ecchoo
As if a Ring of Bells were in it; admirably flewd by their ears,
You would take 'em to be singing boys;
And for Dewlaps, they are as big as Vintners bags,
In which they strain Ipocras.

There boy.


And hunt so close and so round together,
That you may cover 'em all with a sheet.

If it be wide enough.


Why as wide as some four or five Acres that's all,


And what's the game to day?


The wild Boar.


Which of'em, the greatest? I have not seen him.


Not seen him? he is as big as an Elephant.


Now will he build a whole Castle full of lies.


Not seen him? I have.


No, no; seen him; as big as an Elephant.


The back of him is as broad, let me see,
As a pretty Lighter.

A Lighter!


Yes: and what do you think the Brisells are worth?


Nothing.


Nothing? one Shoemaker offered to find me and the Heire-male of my body, 22.
years, but to have them for his own ends.


He would put Sparabiles into the soales then?


Not a Bill, not a Sparrow;

This Boars head is so huge, that a Vintner but drawing that picture, and
hanging it up for a Sign, it fell down, and broke him,


Oh horrible!


He has two stones so big: let me see, (a Pox) thy head is but a
Cherry-stone to the least of'em.


How long are his Tusks?


Each of them as crooked, and as long as a Mowers since.


There's a Cutler.


And when he whets his Tusks, you would swear there were a sea in's belly,
and that his chops were the shore, to which the Foam was beaten: if his Foam
were frothy Yest, 'twere worth ten groats a pail for Bakers.


What will the King do with him if he kill him?


Bake him; and if they put him in one Pasty, a new Oven must be made, with a
mouth as wide as the gates of the City.


There boy, there boy.


Cosmo had like been killed, the Boar recovering,
A Spear full in the Flank from Cosmo's hand,
Foaming with rage, he ran at him, unhorst him;
And had, but that he fell behind an Oak of admirable
Greatness, torn out his bowels,
His very Tusks striking into the tree.
Made the old Champion shake.

Where are the Dogs?


No matter for the Cures:
I escaped well, but
Cannot find the King.

When did you see him?


Not since the Boar tos'd up
Both horse and rider.

A Liter for the King; the King is hurt.


How?


No man knows; some say stung by an Adder,
As from his horse he fell; some cry by the Boar.

The Boar never came near him.


The Kings Physicians.


Run for the Kings Physicians.


Conduct us to him.


A fatal hunting when a King doth fall:
All earthly pleasures are thus washed in gall.

Is this my diet?


Yes marry is it; though it be not Diet bread, 'tis bread, 'tis your dinner:
and though this be not the root of all mischief, yet 'tis a Carret, and
excellent good meat, if you had powderd Beef to it.


I am content with this.


If you be not I cannot help it; for I am threatened to be hanged if I set but
a Tripe before you, or give you a bone to gnaw.


For me thou shalt not suffer.


I thank you, but were not you better be no good Christian, as I am, and so
fill your belly, as to lie here and starve, and be hanged thus in Chains?


No, 'tis my triumph, all these Chains to me
Are silken Ribbons; this course bread a banquet:
This gloomy Dungeon is to me more pleasing
Than the Kings Palace; and could I win thy soul
To shake off her black ignorance, thou, as I do,
Would feel thirst, hunger, stripes, and Irons, nothing,
Nay, count death nothing; let me win thee to me.

Thank ye for that; win me from a Table full of good meat to leap at a
crust; I am no Scholar, and you they say are a great one; and schollers must
eat little, so shall you: what a fine thing is it for me to report abroad of
you, that you are no great feeder, no Cormorant? what a quiet life is it when a
woman's tongue lies still? and is't not as good when a mans teeth lies still.


Perform what thou art bidden:
If thou art charged to starve me, I'll not
Blame thee, but bless heaven.

If you were starved, what hurt were that to you?


Not any, no not any.


Here would be your praise when you should lie dead, they would say, he was a
very good man, but alas had little or nothing in him.


I am a slave to any misery
My Judges doom me too.

If you be a slave, there's more slaves in the world than you.


Yes, thousands of brave fellows, slaves to their vices,
The Usurer to his gold, drunkards to Wine,
Adulterers to their lust.

Right Sir, so in Trades, the Smith is a slave to the Ironmonger, the itchy
silke-weaver to the Silke-man, the Clothworker to the Draper, the Whore to the
Bawd, the Bawd to the Constable, and the Constable to a bribe.


Is it the Kings will I should be thus chained?


Yes indeed Sir: I can tell you in some countries they are held no small fools
that go in Chains.


I am heavy.


Heavy, how can you choose having so much Iron upon you.


Deaths brother and I would have a little talk,
So thou would leave us.

With all my heart, let deaths sister talk with you too, and she will, but
let not me see her, for I am charged to let no body come into you: if you want
any water, give me your Chamber pot I'll fill it.


No, I want none, I thank thee:
Oh sweet affliction, thou blessed book being written
By Divine fingers: you Chains that bind my body,
To free my soul: you Wheels that wind me up
To an eternity of happiness, mustre my holy thoughts, and as I
Write, Organ of heavenly Music to mine ears,
Haven to my shipwreck, balm to my wounds,
Sunne-beames which on me comfortably shine,
When Clouds of death are covering me; so gold,
As I by thee, by fire is purified; so showers
Quicken the Spring; so rough Seas
Bring Mariners home, giving them gains and ease:
Imprisonment, gyves, famine, buffettings,
The Gibbet and the Rack, Flint stones the Cushions
On which I kneel; a heap of Thorns and Briers
The Pillow to my head, a nasty prison,
Able to kill mankind even with the smell:
All these to me are welcome, you are deaths servants,
When comes your Master to me? now I am armed for him:
Strengthen me that Divinity that enlightens
The darkness of my soul; strengthen this hand
That it may write my challenge to the world,
Whom I defy, that I may on this paper
The picture draw of my confession:
Here do I fix my Standard; here bid Battle
To Paganism and infidelity:
Mustre my holy thoughts, and as I write,
In this brave quarrel teach me how to fight.
This is no common Alms to prisoners.
I never heard such sweetness -- O mine eyes,
I that am shut from light, have all the light
Which the world sees by; here some heavenly
Fire is thrown about the room,
And burns so clearly, mine eye-bals
Drop out blasted at the sight.

What are earthly honours,
But sins glorious banners?
Let not golden gifts delight thee,
Let not death nor torments fright thee
From thy place thy Captain gives thee;
When thou faintest he relieves thee.
Hark how the Lark
Is to the Morning singing,
Hark how the Bells are ringing,
It is for joy that thou to Heaven art flying:
This is not life, true life is got by dying.
The light and sound are vanished, but my fear
Sticks still upon my forehead: what's written here?
Go, and the bold Physician play,
But touch the King, and drive away
The pain he feels: but first assay
To free the Christians; if the King pay
Thy service ill, expect a day
When for reward thou shalt not stay.

All writ in golden Letters, and cut so even,
As if some hand had hither reached from Heaven
To print this Paper.

Come, you must to the King.


I am so laden with Irons,
I scarce can go.

Wyer-whips shall drive you.
The King is counselled for his health, to bath him
In the warm blood of Christians, and you I think,
Must give him ease.

Willingly; my fetters
Hang now methinks like feathers at my heals;
On, any whither I can run sir.

Can you? Not very far I fear.


No winds my Faith shake, nor rock split in sunder;
The poor ship's tossed here, my strong Anchor's yonder.

My Lord.


Ha?


Afraid in a close room, where no foe comes,
Unless it be a Weezle or a Rat,
And those besiege your Larder, or your Pantry:
Whom the armed Foe never frighted in the field.

'Tis true my Lord, there danger was a safety; here
To be secure, I think most dangerous.
Or what could famine, wounds, or all th'extreames
That still attend a Soldiers actions,
Could not destroy one syllable from a Kings breath,
Can thus, thus easily win.

Oh, 'tis their long observed policy,
To turn away these roaring boys,
When they intend to rock licentious thoughts
In a soft room, where every long Cushion is
Embroidered with old Histories of peace,
And all the Hangings of War thrust into the Wardrobe,
Till they grow musty or moth-eaten.

One of those rusty Monuments am I.


A little oil of favour will scour thee again,
And make thee shine as bright as in that day
We won the famous battle against the Christians.

Never Hubert, never.
What news now Girl,
Thy heart so great it cannot tell me?

Sfoot why should thou be troubled,
That art thus visited?
Let the King put me into any room,
The closer, the better, and turn but such a Keeper to me,
And if ever I strive to run away, though the doors be open,
May the Virgins curse destroy me,
And let me lamentably and most unmanly
Dye of the Greene-sicknesse.

My blessing bring thee patience gentle Girl;
It is the best thy wronged Father can
Invoke for thee: 'tis my Bellina, Hubert,
Know her honoured Sir, and pity her.

How sweetly she becomes the face of woe!
She teaches misery to court her beauty,
And to affliction lends a lovely look: happy folks
Would sell their blessings for her griefs
But to be sure to meet them thus.

My honoured Father, your grieved Daughter thus
Thrice every day to Heaven lifts her poor hand,
And pays her vows to the incensed Powers
For your release and happy patience,
And will grow old in vows unto those Powers,
Till they fall on me laden with my wishes.

Thou art the comfort of my Treasure Girl;
Wee'le live together if it please the King,
And tell sad Stories of thy wretc'ed Mother:
Give equal sighs to one another grief*
And by discourse of happiness to come*
Trample upon our present miseries.

There is a violent fire runs round about me,
Which my sighs blow to a consuming flame.
To be her Martyr is a happiness,
The sainted souls would change their merit for it.
Methinkes grief dwells about her purest eyes,
As if it begged a pardon for those tears
Exhausted hence, and only due to love:
Her Veil hangs like a Cloud over her face,
Through which her beauty, like a glimmering Star,
Gives a transparent lustre to the night,
As if no sorrow could Eclipse her light.
Her lips* as they discourse, methinks look pale,
For fear they should not kiss again; but met,
They blush for joy as happy Lovers do,
After along divorce when they encounter.

Noble Lord, if you dare lose so much precious time,
As to be companion to my misery but one poor hour,
And not esteem your self too prodigal
For that expense, this wretched Maid my Child,
Shall wait upon you with her sorrows stories,
Vouchsafe but you to hear it.

Yes, with full ear.


To your best thoughts I leave you.
I will but read, and answer this my Letter.

Why do you seem to loose your eyes on me?
Here's nothing but a pile of wretchedness,
A branch that every way is shook at root,
And would (I think) even fall before you now,
But that Divinity, which props it up,
Inspires it full of comfort, since the Cause
My Father suffers for, gives a full glory
To his base fetters of Captivity:
And I beseech you Sir, if there but dwell
So much of virtue in you, as your looks
Seem to express, possess your honoured thoughts,
Bestow your pity on us, not your scorn,
And wish for goodness sake, and your souls weal,
You were a sharer in these sufferings,
So the same Cause exposed your fortunes too't.

Oh happy woman, know I suffer more,
And for a cause as just.

Be proud then of that triumph; but I am yet
A stranger to the Character of what
You say you suffer for:
Is it for Conscience?

For love divine perfection.


If of Heavens love, how rich is your reward!


Of Heavens best blessing, your most perfect self.


Alas sir, here perfection keeps no Court,
Love dresses here no wanton amorous bowers,
Sorrow has made perpetual winter here,
And all my thoughts are Icy, past the reach
Of what Loves fires can thaw.

Oh do but take away a part of that
My breast is full of, of that holy fire,
The Queen of Loves fair Altar holds not purer,
Nor more effectual, and sweet: if then
You melt not into passion for my wounds,
Effuse your Virgin vows to chain mine ears,
Weep on my neck, and with your fervent sighs
Infuse a soul of comfort into me:
I'll break the Altar of the foolish god,
Proclaim them guilty of Idolatry,
That sacrifice to Cythereas son.

Did not my present fortunes and my vows
Registered in the Records of Heaven,
Tie me too strictly from such thoughts as these,
I fear me I should softly yield to what
My yet condition has been stranger to:
To love my Lord, is to be miserable.

Oh to thy sweetness Envy would prove kind,
Tormentor humble, no pale Murderer;
And the Page of death a smiling Courtier.
Venus must then, to give thee noble welcome,
Perfume her Temple with the breath of Nuns,
Not Vesta's, but her own, with Roses strew
The paths that bring thee to her blessed shrine:
Cloth all her Altars in her richest Robes,
And hang her walls with stories of such loves
Have raised her Triumphs, and 'bove all at last
Record this day, the happy day, in which
Bellina proved to love a Convertite:
Be merciful, and save me.

You are defiled with Seas of Christians blood,
An enemy to Heaven, and which is good,
And cannot be a loving friend to me.

If I have sinned, forgive me you just powers,
My ignorance, not cruelty has don't:
And here I vow my self to be hereafter
What e're Bellina shall instruct me in.
For she was never made but to possess
The highest Mansion amongst your dignities,
Nor can Heaven let her err.

On that condition thus I spread my arms,
Whose chaste embraces ne'er touched man before,
And will to Hubert all the favour show
His virtuous love can covet;
I will be ever his: go thou to War,
These hands shall arm thee, and I'll watch thy Tent,
Till from the battle thou bring victory.
In peace I'll sit by thee, and read, or sing
Stanzaes of chaste love, of love purifi'd
From desires drossy blackness: nay, when our clouds
Of ignorance are quite vanished, and that a holy
Religious knot between us may be tied,
Bellina here vows to be Huberts Bride,
Else do I swear perpetual chastity.

Thy vows I seal, be thou my ghostly Tutor,
And all my actions levelled to thy thoughts,
I am thy Creature.

Let Heaven too but now propitious prove,
And for thy soul thou hast won a happy love.
Come, shall we to my Father?

Are you Physicians?
Are you those men that proudly call your selves
The helps of Nature?

Oh my good Lord, have patience.


What should I do? lye like a patient Ass,
Feel my self tortured by this diffused poison,
But tortured more by these unsavoury drugs.

Come one of you yourselves, and speak to him.


How fares your Highness?


Never worse: what's he?


One of your Highnesse-Doctors.


Come sit near me,
Feel my pulse once again, and tell me Doctor,
Tell me in terms that I may understand:
I do not love your gibberish; tell me honestly
Where the Cause lies, and give a Remedy,
And that with speed; or in despite of Art
Of Nature, you, and all your heavenly motions,
I'll recollect so much of life into me,
As shall give space to see you tortured.
Some body told me that a Bath of mans blood
Would restore me; Christians shall pay for it:
Fetch the Bishop hither, he shall begin.

He's gone for.


What's my disease?


My Lord, you are poisoned.


I told thee so my self, and told thee how:
But what's the reason that I have no help?
The Coffers of my Treasury are full,
Or if they were not, tributary Christians
Bring in sufficient store to pay your fees,
If that you gape at.

Wilt please your Highness then to take this Cordial?
Gold never truly did you good till now.

'Tis gone.


My Lord, it was the perfectst tincture
Of Gold that ever any Art produced:
With it was mixed a true rare Quintessence,
Extracted out of Oriental Bezar,
And with it was dissolved the Magisteriall,
Made of the Horne Armenia so much boasts of:
Which though dull Death had usurped Natures right,
Is able to create new life again.

Why does it good on men, and not on Kings?
We have the selfe-same passages for Nature
With mortal men, our pulses beat like theirs:
We are subject unto passions as they are.
I find it now, but to my grief I find,
Life stands not with us on such ticklish points.
What is't because we are Kings, Life takes it leave
With greater state? No, no; the envious gods
Maligne our happiness: Oh that my breath had power
With my last words to blast their Deities.

The Cordial that you took requires rest:
For healths sake good my Lord, repose your self.

Yes, any thing for health; draw round the Curtains:


Wee'le watch by him, whilst you two do consult.


What guess you by that Urine?


Surely death.


Death certain, without contradiction:
For though the Vrin be a whore, and lies,
Yet where I find her in all parts agree
With other Symptoms of apparent death,
I'll give her faith: Pray Sir, do but mark
These black Hypostacies, it plainly shows
Mortification generally through the spirits,
And you may find the Pulse to show as much
By his uncertainty of time and strength.

We find the spirits often suffisticated
By many accidents, but yet not mortified;
A sudden fear will do it.

Very right;
But there's no malicious humour mixed
As in the King sir, you must understand:
A Scorpion stung him; now a Scorpion is
A small compacted creature, in whom Earth
Hath the predominance, but mixed with fire,
So that in him Saturne and Mars do meet.
This little Creature hath his several humours,
And these their excrements, these met together,
Inflamed by anger, made a deadly poison:
And by how much the creatures body's less,
By so much is the force of venom more:
As Lightning through a windows Casement
Hurts more than that which enters at the door.

But for the way to cure it.


Know none:
Yet Ancient Writers have prescribed us many,
As Theophrastus holds most excellent.
Diophoratick Medicines to expel
Ill vapours from the noble parts by sweat:
But Avices and also Rabby Roses
Do think it better by provoking Vrin,
Since by the Urine blood may well be purged,
And spirits from the blood have nutriment;
But for my part, I ever held opinion,
In such a case the ventosies are best.

They are indeed, and they do far exceed.


All the great curious Cataphlasmes,
Or the live tail of a deplumed Hen,
Or your hot Pige ons, or your quartered Whelps,
For they by a mere forced attractive power,
Retain that safely which by force was drawn;
Whereas the other things I named before,
Do lose their virtue, as they lose their heat.

The ventosies shall be our next intentions.


Pray Gentlemen attend his Highness.


Your next intentions be to drown your selves,
Dogge-leaches all; I see I am not mortal,
For I with patience have thus long endured,
Beyond the strength of all mortality;
But now the thrice heate furnace of my bosom
Disdains bounds: do not I scorch you all?
Go, go, you are all but prating Mountebankes,
Quacksalvers, and Imposures; get you all from me.

These Ventosies my Lord will give you ease.


A vengeance on thy Ventosies and thee.


The Bishop Sir is come.


Christian thy blood
Must give me ease and help.

Drink then thy fill;
None of the Fathers that begot sweet Physic,
That Divine Lady, comforter to man,
Invented such a medicine as mans blood,
A drink so precious should not be so spilt;
Take mine, and heaven pardon you the guilt.

A Butcher; see his throat cut.


I am so far from shrinking, that mine own hands
Sall bare my throat; and am so far from wishing
Ill to you, that mangle me, that before
My blood shall wash these Rushes,
King, I will cure thee.

You cure him.


Speak on fellow.


If I do not
Restore your limbs to soundness, drive the poison
From the infected part, study your tortures,
To tear me peece-meale, yet be kept alive.

Oh reverent man come near me, work this wonder,
Ask gold, honours, any, any thing,
The sublunary treasures of this world
Can yield, and they are thine.

I will do nothing without a recompense.


A royal one.


Name what you would desire.


Stand by, you trouble him,
A recompense can my Crown buy thee, take it;
Reach him my Crown, and plant it on his head.

No, here's my bargain.


Quickly, oh speak quickly --
Off with the good-mans Irons.

Free all those Christians, which are now thy slaves,
In all thy Cittadels, Castles, Fortresses,
Those in Bellanna, and Mersaganna,
Those in Alempha, and in Hazaneth,
Those in thy Galleys, those in thy Iayles and Dungeons.

Those, any where; my Signet, take my Signet,
And free all on your lives, free all the Christians.
What dost thou else desire?

This: that thy self trample upon thy Pagan gods.


Sir.


Away.


Wash your soul white by wading in the stream
Of Christian gore.

I will turn Christian.


Better wolves worry this accursed --


Better
Have Bandogs worry all of you, than I
To languish in a torment, that feeds on me,
As if the Furies bit me: I'll turn Christian,
And if I do not, let the Thunder pay
My breach of promise; cure me, good old man,
And I will call thee father; thou shalt have
A King come kneeling to thee every Morning,
To take a blessing from thee, and to hear thee
Salute him as a Son:
When, when is this wonder?

Now; you are well Sir?


Ha!


Has your pain left you?


Yes, see else Damianus, Antony,
Cosmo, I am well.

He does it by enchantment.


By mere Witch-craft.


Thy payment for my cure?


What?


To turn Christian,
And set all Christian slaves at liberty.

I'll hang and torture all;
Call back the Messenger sent with our Signet;
For thy self, thou fool, should I allow
Thee life, thou would be poisoned by our
College of Physicians; let him not touch me,
Nor ever more come near me; and to be sure
Thy sorceries shall not strike me, stone him to death.

When?


Now, here presently.


Ungrateful man.


Dispatch, his voice is horrid in our ears,
Kill him, hurl all, and in him kill my fears.

I would thy fears were ended.


Why thus delay you?


The stones are soft as spunges.


Not any stone here
Can raze his skin.

See Sir.


More Conjuring?


Thanks havenly preservation.


Mocked by a hell-hound?


This must not be endured Sir.


Unbinde the wretch;
Nail him to the earth with Irons: Cannot death strike him?
New studied tortures shall.

New tortures bring,
They all to me are but a banqueting.

But are you well indeed Sir?


Passing well,
Though my Physician fetched the cure from hell:
All's one, I am glad I have it.

You noble Hubert, are the men chosen out
From all our Vandal Leaders to be chief
Over a new Army, which the King will raise,
To root out from our land these Christians,
That over-runne us?

'Tis a glory Hubert,
Will raise your fame, and make you like our gods.
To please whom, you must do this.

And in doing,
Be active as the fire, and merciless
As is the boundless Ocean, when it swallows
Whole Towns, and of them leaves no Monument.

When shall mine eyes be happy in the sight
Of this brave Pagentry?

The King says, instantly.


And must I be the General?


Only you.


I shall not then at my returning home
Have sharers in my great acts: to the Volume
My Sword in bloody Letters shall text down,
No Name must stand but mine, no leaf turned over
But Huberts works are ^ead, and none but mine.
Bellizarius shall not on his Clouds of fire
Fly flaming round about the staring World,
Whilst I creep on the earth. Flatter me not,
Am I to go indeed?

The King so swears.


A Kings word is a Statute graven in Brass,
And if he breaks that Law, I will in Thunder
Rouse his cold spirit: I long to ride in Armour,
And looking round about me, to see nothing
But Seas and shores, the Seas of Christians blood,
The shores tough Soldiers: Here a wing flies out
Soaring at Victory, here the maine Battalia
Comes up with as much horror, and hotter terror,
As if a thick-growne Forest by enchantment
Were made to move, and all the Trees should meet
Pell mell, and rive their beaten bulks in sunder,
As petty Towers do, being flung down by Thunder.
Pray thank the King, and tell him I am ready
To cry a Charge; tell him I shall not sleep,
Till that which wakens Cowards, trembling with fear,
Startles me, and sends brave Music to mine ear,
And that's the Drum and Trumpet.

This shall be told him.


And all the Goths and Vandalls shall strike Heaven
With repercussive Echoes of your name,
Crying a Hubert.

Deaf me with that sound,
A Soldier though he falls in the Field, lives crowned.

Wee'le to the King, and tell him this.


Do: Oh my Bellina,
If ever, make me happy now; now tie
Strong charms about my full-plum'd Burgonet
To bring me safe home: I must to the Wars.

What wars? we have no wars but in our selves:
We fighting with our sins, our sins with us,
Yet they still get the victory: who are in Arms
That you must to the Field?

The Kings Royal thoughts
Are in a mutiny amongst themselves,
And nothing can allay them but a slaughter,
A general massacre of all the Christians
That breath in his Dominion: I am the Engine
To work this glorious wonder.

Fore-fend it Heaven:
Last time you sate by me within my bower,
I told you of a Palace walled with gold.

I do remember it.


The floor of sparkling Diamonds, and the roof
Studded with Stars shining as bright as fire.

True.


And I told you one day I would show you
A path should bring you thither.

You did indeed.


And will you now neglect a lease of this,
To lye in a cold field, a field of murder?
Say thou should kill ten thousand Christians,
They go but as Ambassadors to Heaven
To tell thy cruelties, and on you Battlements
They all will stand on rows, laughing to see
Thee fall into a pit as bottomless,
As the Heavens are in extension infinite,

More, prithee more; I had forgot this Music.


Say thou should win the day, yet art thou lost,
For ever lost; an everlasting slave,
Though thou come home a laure'ld Conqueror.
You courted me to love you, now I woe thee
To love thy self, to love a thing within thee
More curious than the frame of all this world,
More lasting than this Engine over our heads,
Whose wheels have moved so many thousand years:
This thing is thy soul,
For which I woe thee.

Thou-woest, I yield, and in that yielding love thee,
And for that love I'll be the Christians guide:
I am their Captain, come both Goth and Vandall,
Nay, come the King, I am the Christians General.

Not yet, till your Commission be fair drawn,
Not yet, till on your brow you bear the Print
Of a rich golden seal.

Get me that seal then.


There is an Aqua fortis, (an eating water)
Must first wash off thine infidelity,
And then you are armed.

O let me then be armed.


Thou shalt:
But on thy knees thou gently first shalt swear
To put no Armour on but what I bear.

By this chaste clasping of our hands I swear --


We then thus hand in hand will fight a battle
Worth all the pitch-fields, all the bloody banquets,
The slaughter and the massacre of Christians,
Of whom such heaps so quickly never fell,
Brave on set be thy end not terrible.

This kindled fire burn in us, till as deaths slaves
Our bodies pay their tributes to their graves.

Come fellow Pagans, death means to fare well to day, for he is like to have
rost-meate to his supper, two principal dishes; many a Knight keeps a worse
Table. First, a brave General Carbonadoed, then a fat Bishop broiled, whose
Rochet comes in fried for the second course, according to the old saying, A
plump greazie Prelate fries a faggot daintily.


Oh the General Bellizarius for my money: he has a fiery spirit too, he will
roast soakingly within and without.


Methinks Christians make the bravest Bonfires of any people in the Universe;
as a Jew burns pretty-well, but if you mark him, he burns upward: the fire
takes him by the Nose first.


I know some Vintners then are Iewes.


Now as your Jew burns upward, your French-man burns downward like a Candle,
and commonly goes out with a stink like a snuff, and what socket soever it
light in, it must be well cleansed and picked before it can be used again: But
Bellizarius, the brave General, will flame high and clear like a Beacon, but
your Puritan Eugenius will burn blew, blew* like a white-bread sop in Aqua
vitae. Fellow Pagans, I pray let us agree among our selves about the sharing of
those two.


I, 'tis fit.


You know I am worshipful by my place, the underkeeper may write Squire if he
list, at the bottom of the paper: I do cry first the Generals great Scarf
to make me a short Summer-cloake, and the Bishops wide sleeves to make me a
Holy-dayes shirt.


Having a double voice we cannot abridge you of a double share.


You that so well know what belongs to reverence, the Breeches by yours,
whether Bishops or Generals: but with this Proviso, because we will all share
of both parties, as I have lead the way, I claiming the Generals and the
Bishops sleeves, so he that chooses the Generals Doublet, shall wear the
Generals Breeches.


A match.


Nay, 'twill be far from a match that's certain, but it will make us to be
taken for men of note, what company soever we come in:

The Soldier and the Scholar peekt up so,
Will make tam Marti, quam Mercurio.

As you are Vice-gerent to that Majesty,
By whom Kings reign on earth, as you would wish
Your heirs should sit upon your Throne, your name
Be mentioned in the Chronicle of glory,
Great King vouchsafe me hearing.

Speak.


My husband;
The much, too much wronged Bellizarius,
Hath not deserved the measure of such misery
Which is thrown on him; call, oh call to mind
His service, how often he hath fought,
And toiled in wars to give his Country peace:
He has not been a flatterer of the Time,
Nor Courted great ones for their glorious Vices;
He hath not soothed blind dotage in the World,
Nor capered on the Commonwealths dishonour;
He has not peeld the rich, nor flayed the poor,
Nor from the heart-strings of the Commons drawn
Profit to his own Coffers; he never bribed
The white intents of mercy, never sold
Justice for money, to set up his own,
And utterly undo whole families:
Yet some such men there are that have done thus,
The mores the pity.

To the point.


Oh Sir, Bellizarius has his wounds emptied of blood,
Both for his Prince and Country; to repeat
Particulars, were to do injury
To your yet mindful gratitude -- His Life,
His liberty, 'tis that I plead for -- that:
And since your enemies and his could never
Captive the one, and triumph in the other,
Let not his friends,
His King commend a cruelty,
Strange to be talked of, cursed to be acted;
My Husband, oh my husband Bellizarius,
For him I beg.

Lady rise up, we will be gracious
To thy suit: cause Bellizarius
And the Bishop be brought hither instantly.

Now all the blessings due to a good King
Crown you with lasting honours.

If thou can
Persuade thy husband to recant his errors,
He shall not only live, but in our favours
Be chief; wilt undertake it?

Undertake it Sir,
On these conditions, you shall your self
Be witness with what instance I will urge him
To pity his own self, recant his errors.

So doing he will purchase many friends.


Life, love, and liberty.


But tell me, pray Sir,
What are those errors which he must recant?

His hatred to those powers to which we bow,
On whom we all depend; he has kneeled to them,
Let him his base Apostasy recant,
Recant his being a Christian, and recant
The love he bears to Christians.

If he deny to do all this,
Or any point of this,
Is there no mercy for him?

Could thou shed
A Sea of tears, to drown my resolution,
He dyes; could the fond man lay at my foot
The Kingdoms of the earth, he dyes; he dyes
Were he my son, my father, bid him recant,
Else all the Torments cruelty can invent
shall fall on him.

No spark of pity?


None.


Well then, but mark what pains I'll take to win him:
To win him home; I'll set him in a way,
The Clouds shall clap to find what went astray.

Do this, and we are all his.


Do this, I swear to jewell him in my bosom.
See where he comes.

And whither now, is Tyranny grown ripe,
To blow us to our graves yet?

Bellizarius,
Thy wife has sued for mercy, and has found it:
Speak Lady tell him how.

Victoria too:
Oh then I fear the striving to express
The virtue of a good wife, hath begot
An utter ruin of all goodness in thee:
What would thou say, poor woman?

My Lord the King,
Nothing can alter your incensed rage,
But recantation.

Nothing.


Recantation, sweet
Music; Bellizarius thou may live;
The King is full of royal bounty -- like
The ambition of mortality -- examine
What recantation is -- a toy.

None hinder her: now ply him.


To lose the portage in these sacred pleasures,
That knows no end; to lose the fellowship
Of Angels, lose the harmony of blessings,
Which crown all Martyrs with eternity:
Wilt thou not recant?

I understand her not.


Nor I.


Thy life hath hitherto been, my dear husband,
But a disease to thee; thou hast indeed,
Moved on the earth, like other creeping worms,
Who take delight in worldly surfeits, heate
Their blood with lusts, their limbs with proud attires;
Fed on their change of sins; that do not use
Their pleasure, but enjoy them; enjoy them fully,
In streams that are most sensual, and persevere
To live so till they dye, and to dye never.

What means all this?


Art in thy right wits woman?


Such beasts are those about thee; take then courage,
If ever in thy youth thy soul hath set
By the Worlds tempting fires, as these men do,
Recant that error.

Ha?


Hast thou in battle taken a pride in blood?
Recant that error: hast thou constant stood
In a bad cause? clap a new armour on,
And sight now in a good: oh lose not heaven
For a few minutes in a Tyrants eye;
Be valiant, and meet death; if thou now lose
Thy portion laid up for thee yonder, yonder,
For breath or honours here, oh thou dost sell
Thy soul for nothing:
Recant all this,
And then be raised up to a Throne of blis.

We are abused, stop her mouth.


Victoria,
Thou nobly dost confirm me* hast new armed
My resolution, excellent Victoria.

Oh happy daughter, thou in this dost bring,
That Requiem to our souls, which Angels sing.

Can you endure this wrong Sir?


Be out-brav'd by a seducing Strumpet?


Bind her fast;
We'll try what recantation you can make,
Hag, in the presence of of your brave holy Champion,
And thy Husband,
One of my Cammell drivers shall take from thee
The glory of thy honesty and honour:
Call in the Peasant.

Bellizarius,
Eugenius, is there no guard above us,
That will protect me from a rape? 'tis worse
Than worlds of tortures.

Fear not, Victoria, be
Thou a chaste one in thy mind, thy body
May, like a Temple of well tempered steel,
Be battered, not demolished.

Tyrant be merciful,
And if thou hast no other virtue in thee,
Deserving memory to succeeding ages,
Yet only thy not suffering such an out-rage,
Shall add praise to thy name.

Where is the Groom?


Oh sure the Sun will darken,
And not behold a deed so soul and monstrous.

Here is a Cammell driver.


Stand forth sirrah.


Be bold, and shrink not, this is she.


And I am he:
Is't the Kings pleasure I should mouse her, and before all these people?

No, 'tis considered better; unbinde the fury.
And drag her to some corner, 'tis our pleasure,
Fall to thy business freely.

Not too freely neither; I save hard, and drink water, so do the Indians; yet
who fuller of Bastards? so do the Turks, yet who gets greater Logger-heads?
come wench, I'll teach thee how to cut up wild foul.


Guard me you heavens.


Be mine eyes lost for ever?


Is that her husband?


Yes.


No matter; some husbands are so base, they keep the door whilst they are
Cuckolded; but this is after a more manlier way, for he stands bound to see it
done.


Hail her away.


Come Pusse: hail her away, which way? you way? my Cammells backs cannot
climb it.


The fellow is struck mad.


That way, it looks into a Mill-pond; whirre, how the Wheels go, and the
Devil grindes? no this way.


Keep the slave back.


Back, keep me back; there sits my wife kombing her hair, which curls like
a witches feltlocks, all the Neets in it are Spiders, and all the Dandruffe the
sand of a Scriveners Sand-boxe: Stand away, my whore shall not be lousy, let
me come noynt her with Stavesucre.


Defend me, lop his hands off.


Hew him in pieces.


What has he done?


Sir, beat out his own brains.


You for his soul must answer.


Fetch another.


Tempt not the wrath superhall to fall down,
And crush thee in thy Throne.

Peace sorceress slave:
Sir, take hence this Witch and ravish her.

A Witch, VVitches are the Devils sweetehearts.


Do it, be thou Master of much gold.


Shall I have gold to do it? in some Countries I hear whole Lordships are
spent upon a fleshly device, yet the buyer in the end had nothing but French
Repentance, and the curse of Surgery for his money; let me finger my Gold;
I'll venture on, but not give her a penny; woman's flesh was never cheaper, a man
may eat it without bread, all Trades fall, so do they.


Look you Sir, there's your gold.


I'll tell money after my Father: oh I am struck blind!


The fellow is bewitched Sir.


Great King, impute not
This most miraculous delivery
To witch-craft; 'tis a gentle admonition
To teach thy heart obey it.

Lift up the slave,
Though he has lost his sight, his feeling is not:
He dyes unless he ravish her.

Force her into thy arms, or else thou die.


I have lost my hearing too.


Fetch other slaves.


Thou must force her.


Truly I am hoarse often with driving my Cammells, and nothing does me good
but syrup of Horehound.


Here are two slaves will do it indeed.


Which is she?


This creature, she has beauty to entice you,
And enough to feast you all: seize her all three,
And ravish her by turns.

A match.


Hang up these slaves,
I am mock't by her and them:
They dance me into anger:
Heard you not music?

Yes sure, and most sweet melody.


'Tis the heavens play,
And the Clouds dance for joy thy cruelty
Has not taken hold upon me.

Hunger then shall:
Lead them away, drag her to some loathed dungeon,
And for three days give her no food;
Load them with Irons.

They shall.


Come fellow soldiers, half the fight is past,
The bloodiest battle comes to an end at last.

Have any Christian soul broke from my Jail
This night, and gone in the dark to find out heaven?
Are any of my hated prisoners dead?

Dead, yes,
And five more come into the world, in stead of one;
These Christians are like Artichoaks of Jerusalem,
They over-runne any ground they grow in.

Are they so fruitful?


Fruitful?

A He Christian told me, that amongst them the young fellows are such Earing
rioted Rascals, that they will run into the park of Matrimony at sixteen:
are Bucks of the first head at eighteen, and by twenty carry in some places
their horns on their backs.


On their backs?
What kind of Christians are they?

Marry these are Christian Butchers, who when their Oxen are flayed, throw their
skins on their shoulders.


I thought they had been Cuckolds.


Amongst them, no, there's no woman, that's a true Christian, will horne her
husband: there dyed to night no less than six and a half in our Jail.


How? six and a half?


One was a girl of thirteen with child.


Thy tidings fats me.


You may have one or two of' em dressed to your Dinner to make you more fat.


Unhallowed slave, let a Jew eat Pork,
When I but touch a Christian.

You are not of my diet: would I had a young Loyne of Pork to my Supper, and
two Loins of a pretty sweet Christian after Supper.


Would thou might eat and choke.


Never at such meat; it goes down without chawing.


We have a task in hand to kill a Serpent,
Which spits her poison in our Kingdoms face,
And that we speak not of: lives still
That Witch Victoria, wife to Bellizarius?
Is Death afraid to touch the Hag? does hunger
Tremble to gnaw her flesh off, dry up her blood,
And make her eat herself in Curses, ha?

Ha? your mouth gapes as if you would eat me: the King commanded she should be
laden with Irons; I have laid two load upon her, then to pop her into the
Dungeon, I thrust down as deep as I could: then to give her no meat; Alas my
cheeks cry out, I have meat little enough for my self: Three days and three
nights has her Cubbard had no victuals in it: I saw no less than Fifty six
Mice run out of the hole she lies in, and not a crumb of bread or bit of
cheese amongst them.


'Tis the better.


I heard her one morning cough pitifully, upon which I gave her a mess of
Porridge piping-hot.


Thou Dog, 'tis death.


Nay but sir, I powered 'em down scalding as they were on her head, because
they say, they are good for a cold, and I think that killed her: for to try if
she were alive or no, I did but even now tie a Crust to a packe-threed on a
pin, but she leapt not at it; so that I am sure she's worms meat by this.


Rewards in golden showers shall rain upon us:
Be thy words true? fall down and kiss the earth.

Kiss earth, why? and so many wenches come to the Jail?


Slave down, and clap thy ear to the caves mouth,
And make me glad or heavy;
If she speak not, I shall crack
My ribs, and spend my spleen in laughter;
But if thou hear her pant, I am gon.

Farewell then.


Breaths she?


No sir; her wind instrument is out of tune.


Call, cal.


Do you hear, you low woman, hold not down your head so for shame, creep
not thus into a corner, no honest woman loves to be fumbling thus in the dark:
hang her she has no tongue.


Would twenty thousand of their sex had none.


Fox, Fox, come out of your hole.


Horror, what's this?


Alas I know not what my self am.
Fly darnesse fly, in spite of Caves,
Truth can thrust her arms through Graves,
No Tyrant shalt confine
A white soul that's divine,
And does more brightly shine
Than Moon or Sun,
She lasts when they are done.

I am bewitched;
Mine Eyes fail me; lead me to King.

And tell, we heard a Mermaid sing.
Go fools, and let your fears
Glow as your sins and cares,
The goodhowe're trod under,
Are Lawreld safe in thunder:
Though locked up in a den,
One Angel frees you from an host of men.

Where is this piece of witchcraft?


'Tis vanished Sir.


'Twas here, just at the Caves mouth, where she lies.


What manner of thing was it?


An admirable face, and when it sung
All the Clouds danced methought above our heads.

And all the ground under my heals quak't like a Bog.


Deluded slaves, these are turned Christians too.


The prisoners in my Jail will not say so.


Turned Christians? it has ever been my profession to fang and clutch, and to
squeeze: I was first a Varlet, then a Bumbaily, now an under Jailer turned
Christian?


Break up the Iron passage of the Cave,
And if the forceresse lives, tear her in pieces.

See, 'tis come again.


It staggers me.


Amazement; look to the King.
She comes, she comes, she comes:
No banquets are so sweet as Martyrdomes:
She comes.

'Tis vanished Sir again.


Mere Necromancy.


This is the apparition of some devil,
Stealing a glorious shape, and cries, she comes.

If all devils were no worse, would I were amongst 'em.


Our power is mocked by magical impostures,
They shall not mock our tortures: let Eugenius
And Bellizarius fright away these shadows,
Rung from sharpe tortures; drag them hither.

To the stake?


As Bears are?


And upon your lives,
My longings feast with her, though her base limbs
Be in a thousand pieces.

She shall be gathred up.


What's the Kings will? I am here
Are your tormentors ready to give battle?
I am ready for them, and though I lose
My life, hope to win the day.

What art thou?


An armed Christian.


What's thy name?


Victoria;
In my name there's conquest writ;
I therefore fear no threatenings; but pray,
That thou may dye a good King.

This is not she Sir.


It is; but on her brow some Deity sits:
What are those Fairies dressing up her hair,
Whilst sweeter spirits dancing in her eyes,
Bewitches me to them?
Oh Victoria, love me,
And see thy Husband, now a slave, whose life
Hangs at a needles point, shall live, so thou
Breath but the doom.
Trayters, what forcerous hand
Has built upon this enchantment of a Christian,
To make me dote upon the beauty of it?
How comes she to this habit?
Went she thus in?

No Sir, mine own hands stripped her into rags.


For any meat she has eaten, her face needs not make you dote, and for
clean linen, I'll swear, it was not brought into the Jail, for there they
scorn to shift once a week.


Bellizarius,
Woe thy wife that she would love me,
And thou shalt live.

I will -- Victoria,
By all those chaste fires kindled in our bosoms,
Through which pure love shined on our marriage night;
Nay with a holier conjuration:
By all those thorns and briars which thy soft feet
Tread boldly on, to find a path to heaven,
I beg of thee, even on my knee I beg,
That thou would love this King, take him byth' hand,
Warm his in thine, and hang about his neck,
And seal ten thousand kisses on his cheek,
So he will tread his false gods under foot.

Oh horrible!


Bring tortures.


So he will wash his soul white as we do,
And fight under our Banner, (bloody red)
And hand in hand with us walk martyred.

They mock you.


Stretch his body up byth' arms,
And at his feet hang plummets,

He shall be well shod for stroveling I warrant you.


Eugenius, bow thy knee before our Jove,
And the King gives thee mercy.

Else stripes and death.


We come into the world but at one door,
But twenty thousand gates stand open wide,
To give us passage hence: death then is easy,
And I defy all tortures.

There fasten the Cative;
I care not for thy wife:
Get from mine eye, thou tempting Lamia:
But Bellizarius, before thy bodies
Frame be pulled in pieces, and every
Limb dis-joynted, wilt thou forsake
The errors thou art drenched in?

Errors?
Thou blasphemous and god less man,
From the great Axis may thou as easy, with one arm,
Pluck the Universal Globe,
As from my Center move me --
There's my figure, they are waves
That beat a rock insensible,
With an infatigable patience
My breast dares all your arrows; shoot -- shot all;
Your tortures are but struck against the wall;
Which, back rebounding, hit your selves.

Up with him.


Lay on more weights:
That hangman which more brings,
Adds active feathers to my soaring wings,

Victoria yet save him.


Keep on thy flight,
And be a bird of Paradise.

Give him more Irons.


More, more.


Let him then go:
Live thou, and be my Queen.
Deign but to love me.

I am going to live with a far greater King.


Bind the coy strumpet, she dyes too.
Let her brains be beaten on an Anvil:
For some new plagues for her.

Vex him.


Do more.


Heaven pardon you.


And strengthen him in all his sufferings.


Come, oh come, oh come away,
A Quire of Angels for thee stay:
A Rome where Diamonds borrow light,
Open stands for thee this night.
Night, no, no, here is ever day,
Come, oh come, oh come, oh come away.
This battle is thy last, fight well, and win
A Crown set full of Stars.

I spy an arm plucking up to heaven:
More weights you are best,
I shall be gone else.

Do, I'll follow thee.


Is he not yet dispatcht?


Yes King, I thank thee;
I have all my life time trod on rotten ground,
And still so deep been sinking,
That my soul was oft like to be lost;
But now I see a guide, sweet guide,
A blessed messenger, who having
Brought me up a little way
Up yonder hill, I there am sure to buy,
For a few stripes here, rich eternity.

Victory, victory, hell is beaten down,
The Martyr has put on a golden Crown;
Ring Bells of Heaven, him welcome hither,
Circle him Angels round together.
Follow.


I will:
What sacred voice cries follow?
I am ready: Oh send me after him.

Thou shalt not,
Till thou hast fed my lust.

Thou fool thou can not;
All my mortality is shaken off,
My heart of flesh and blood is gone,
My body is changed, this face
Is not that once was mine;
I am a Spirit, and no rack of thine
Can touch me.

Not a rack of mine shall touch thee:
Why should the world loose such
A pair of Suns as shine out from
Thine eyes: why art thou cruel to make away
Thy self, and murder me?
Since whirle-winds cannot shake thee,
Thou shalt live, and I'll fan gentle
Gales upon thy face: fetch me a day bed,
Rob the earths perfumes of all
The ravishing sweets, to feast her fence;
Pillows of roses shall bear up her head*
O would a thousand springs might grow in one,
To weave a flowery mantle over her limbs,
As she lies down.

Oh that some rock of Ice,
Might fall on me, and freeze me into nothing.

Enchant our ears with Music:
Would I had skill to call the winged
Musicians of the air into these rooms,
They all should play to thee,
Till golden slumbers danced upon thy brows,
Watching to close thine eye-lids.

These Stars must shine no more; soul fly away:
Tyrant enjoy but a cold lump of clay.

My charms work,
She sleeps, and looks more lovely
Now she sleeps, against she wakes:
Invention grow thou poor, studying
To find a banquet, which the gods might
Be invited to: I need not court her now
For a poor kiss; her lips are friendly now,
And with the warm breath sweeting
All the Air draw me thus to them -- ha!
The lips of Winter
Are not so cold.

She's dead Sir.


Dead?


As frozen as if the North-winde had in spite
Snatched her hence from you.

Oh I have murdered her:
Perfumes, some creature kill:
She has so long in that dark Dungeon
Sucked pestiferous breath, the sweet has
Stflled her: take hence the body;
Since me it hated, it shall feel my hate:
Cast her into the fire, I have lost her,
And for her sake all Christians shall be lost,
That subjects are to me: massacre all:
But thou, Eugenius, art the last shall fall
This day: and in mine eye, though it ne'er see more,
Call on thy helper which thou dost adore.

The King is struck with thunder.


Thanks Divine Powers,
Yours be the triumph, and the wonder ours.

Unbinde him, till a new King fill the Throne;
And he shall doom him.
A Hubert, a Hubert, a Hubert.

What means this cry, a Hubert?
Where's your King?

Struck dead by thunder.


So I hear:
You see then there is an arm more
Rigorous than your love; an arm
Stretched from above to beat down Giants,
The mightiest Kings on earth, for all their
Shoulders carry Colossi heads:
The memory of Genzericks name dyes here:
Henricke, gives burial to the
Successive glory of that race,
Who had both voice and title to the Crown,
And means to guard it: who must now be King?

We know not, till we call the Lords together*


What Lords?


Our selves and others.


Who makes you Lords?
The Tree upon whose boughs your honours grew;
Your Lord ships and your lives
Is fallen to the ground.

We stand on our own strength.


Who must be King?
Hubert, a Hubert, a Hubert.

Deliver to my hand that reverent man.


Take him, and torture him,
For he called down vengeance
On Henricks head.

'Twas his own black soul that called it;
'Twas thou that caldst it.

Good Eugenius, lift thy hands up,
For thou art saved from Henricke,
And from these: you hear what echoes
Rebound from earth to heaven, from heaven to earth,
Casting the name of King only on me.
This golden Apple is a tempting fruit;
It is within my reach: this sword can touch it,
And lop the weak branch off, on which it hangs:
Which of you all would spurn at such a Star,
Lay it in the dust, when 'tis let down from heaven?
For him to wear?

Who then must wear that Star?


The Oracle tells you;
Oracle, 'tis a voice from above
Tells you; for the peoples tongues,
When they pronounce good things, are tied to chains
Of twenty thousand links; which chains are held
By one supernal hand, and cannot speak,
But what that hand will suffer: I have then
The people on my side, I have the soldiers,
I have that army which your rash young King
Had bent against the Christians, they now are mine:
I am the Center, and they all are lines
Meeting in me; if therefore these strong sinews,
The Soldiers and the Commons have a virtue
To lift me into the Throne, I'll leap into it:
Will you consent, or no; be quick in answer;
I must be swift in execution else.

Let us consult.


Do, and do it quickly.


O noble Sir, if you be King, shoot forth
Bright as a Sunne-beame, and dry up these vapours
That choke this kingdom; dry the seas of blood,
Flowing from Christians, and drink up the tears
Of those alive, half slaughtered in their fears.

Father I'll not offend you; have you done?
So long choosing one Crown?

Let Drums and Trumpets proclaim
Hubert our King.

Sound Drums and Trumpets.


I have it then as well by voice as sword;
For should you hold it back it would be mine:
I claim it then by conquest, fields are won
By yielding, as by strokes; yet noble Vandals,
I will lay by the Conquest, and acknowledge,
That your hands and your hearts the pinnacles are,
On which my greatness mounts unto this height;
And now in sight of you and heaven I swear,
By those new sacred fires kindled within me,
'Tis not your hope of Gold my brow desires;
A thronging Court to me is but a Cell:
These popular acclamations, which thus dance
In the Air, should pass by me, as whistling winds
Playing with leaves of trees: I'm not ambitious
Of Titles glorious, and majestic:
But what I do is to save blood, save you:
I mean to be a husband for you all,
And fill you all with riches.

'Tis that we thirst for,
For all our bags are emptied in these wars,
Raised by seditious Christians.

Peace thou fool;
They are not bags of gold, that mel^ in fire,
Which I will fill your coffers with, my treasury
Are riches for your souls, my arms are spread,
Like wings, to protect Christians* what have you done?
Proclaimed a Christian King? and Christian Kings
Should not be bloody.

How? turned Christian?


O blessed King, happy day.


Must we forsake our gods then?


Violent streams
Must not be stopped by violence; there's an art
To meet, and put by the most boisterous wave:
'Tis now no policy for you to murmure,
Nor will I threaten: a great counsel by you
Shall straight be called, to set this frame in order
Of this great state.

To that we all are willing.


Are you then willing this noble maid
Shall be me Queen?

With all our hearts.


By no hand but by thine will we be Crowned:
Come my Bellina.

Your vow is past to me, that I should ever
Preserve my Virgin honour, that you would never
Tempt me unto your bed.

That vow I keep:
I vowed so long as my knees bowed to Jove,
To let you be your self: But excellent Lady,
I now am sealed a Christian, as you are;
And you have sworn oft, that when upon my fore-head
That glorious Star was stuck you would be mine
In holy wedlock; come sweet, you and I
Shall from our loins produce a race of Kings,
And ploughing up ^a^e gods ^et up one true*
Christians unborn, crowning both me and you
With praise, as now with gold.

A fortunate day;
A great power prompts me on, and I obey.

Long live Hubert and Bellina, King and Queen
Of Goths and Vandals.

Two royal Jewels you give me, this, and this.
Father your hand is lucky, I am covetous
Of one Gift more; after your sacred way
Make you this Queen a wife; our Coronation
Is turned into a bridal.

All joy and happiness.


To guard your lives will I lay out mine own,
And like Vines plant you round about my throne.

THat this play's old, 'tis true; but now if any
Should for that cause despise it, we have many
Reasons, both just and pregnant, to maintain
Antiquity, and those too, not all vain.
We know (and not long since) there was a time,
Strong lines were not looked after; but if Rime,
O then 'twas excellent: who but believes,
That Doublets with stuffed bellies, and big sleeves,
And those Trunck-hose, which now our Age doth scorn,
Were all in fashion, and with custom worn:
And what's now out of date, who is't can tell,
But it may come in fashion, and suit well?
With rigour therefore judge not, but with reason,
Since what you read was fitted to that season.
AS in a Feast, so in a Comedy,
Two Senses must be pleased, in both the Eye.
In Feasts, the Eye and Taste must be invited,
In Comedies, the Eye and Ear delighted:
And he that only seeks to please but either,
While both he doth not please, he pleases neither:
What ever Feast, could every guest content:
When as t'each man, each Taste is different?
But less a Scene, where nought, but as 'tis newer,
Can please, where Guests are more, and Dishes fewer:
Yet in this thought, this thought the Author eased;
Who once made all, all ^ul^s all never pleased:
Fain would we please the best, if not the many,
And sooner will the best be pleased, then any:
Our rest we set in pleasing of the best:
So we wish you, what you may give us: Rest.



