WHat, Death and Fortune cross the way of Love?

Why, what is Love, but Fortunes tenis-ball?

Nay, what are you both, but subjects unto Death?
And I command you to forbear this place:
For here the mouth of sad Melpomene,
Is wholly bent to tragedies discourse;
And what are Tragedies but acts of death?
Here means the wrathful muse in seas of tears,
And loud laments to tell a dismal tale:
A tale wherein she lately hath bestowed,
The huskie humour of her bloody quill,
And now for tables takes her to her tongue.

Why thinks Death, Love knows not the history?
Of brave Erastus and his Rodian dame:
Twas I that made their harts consent to love,
And therefore come I now as fittest person,
To serve for chorus to this Tragedy.
Had not I been, they had not dyed so soon.

Had I not been, they had not dyed so soon.

Nay then it seems you both do miss the mark,
Did not I change long love to sudden hate?
And then rechange their hatred into love:
And then from love deliver them to death?
Fortune is chorus. Love and death be gone.

I tell thee Fortune, and thee wanton Love,
I will not down to everlasting night,
Till I have moralliz'd this Tragedy,
Whose chiefest actor was my sable dart.

Nor will I up into the brightsome sphere,
From whence I sprung, till in the chorus place,
I make it known to you and to the world,
What interest Love hath in Tragedies.

Nay then though Fortune have delight in change,
I'll stay my flight, and cease to turn my wheel,
Till I have shown by demonstration,
What interest I have in a Tragedy.
Tush, Fortune can do more then Love or Death.

Why stay we then, lets give the Actors leave.
And as occasion serves, make our return.

Why when Perseda wilt thou not assure me?
But shall I like a mastlesse ship at sea,
Go every way and not the way I would:
My love hath lasted from mine infancy,
And still increased as I grew my self,
When did Perseda pastime in the streets,
But her Erastus ouer-eied her sporte:
When did thou with thy sampler in the Sun,
Sit sowing with thy feres, but I was by
Marking thy lilly hands dexterity:
Comparing it to twenty gracious things.
When did thou sing a note that I could hear,
But I have framed a ditty to the tune,
Figuring Perseda twenty kind of ways.
When did thou go to Church on hollidaies,
But I have waited on thee too and fro:
Marking my times as Falcons watch their flight.
When I have mist thee how have I lamented,
As if my thoughts had been assured true.
Thus in my youth, now since I grew a man,
I have persevered to let thee know,
The meaning of my true harts constancy:
Then be not nice Perseda as women wont,
To hasty lovers whose fancy soon is fled:
My love is of a long continuance,
And merits not a strangers recompense.

Enough Erastus thy Perseda knows,
She whom thou would have thine, Erastus knows,

Nay my Perseda knows, and then tis well.

I watch you vauntages, thine be it then,
I have forgot the rest, but that's the effect:
Which to effect, accept this carkanet,
My Grandam on her death bed gave it me,
And there, even there I vowed unto my self,
To keep the same until my wandering eye,
Should find a harbour for my hart to dwell.
Even in thy breast do I elect my rest,
Let in my hart to keep thine company.

And sweet Perseda accept this ring,
To equal it, receive my hart to boot,
It is no boot, for that was thine before?
And far more welcome is this change to me.
Then sunny days to naked Savages,
Or news of pardon to a wretch condemde,
That waits for the fearful stroke of death.
As careful will I be to keep this chain,
As doth the mother keep her children,
From waterpits, or falling in the fire.
Over mine armour will I hang this chain,
And when long combat makes my body faint,
The sight of this shall show Persedas name,
And ad fresh courage to my fainting limbs.
This day the eager Turk of Tripolis,
The Knight of Malta, hououred for his worth,
And he that's titled by the golden spur.
The Moore upon his hot barbarian horse,
The fiery Spaniard bearing in his face,
The empress of a noble warrior.
The sudden Frenchman, and the bigbound Dane,
And English Arthers hardy men at arms,
Eclipped Lyons of the western world:
Each one of these approved combatants,
Assembled from several corners of the world,
Are hither come to try their force in arms,
In honour of the Prince of Cipris nuptials.
Amongst these worthies will Erastus troupe,
Though like a Gnatamongst a hive of Bees:
Know me by this thy precious carkanet,
And if I thrive, in valour as the glass
That takes the Sun-beames burning with his force:
I'll be the glass, and thou that heavenly Sun,
From whence I'll borrow what I do at chieue.
And sweet Perseda unnoted though I be,
Thy beauty yet shall make me known ere night.

Young slips are never graft in windy days,
Young schollers never entered with the rod,
Ah my Erastus there are Europes Knights,
That carryhonour graven in their helmes,
And they must win it dear that win it thence.
Let not my beauty prick thee to thy bane,
Better sit still then rise and ouer-tane.

Counsel me not, for my intent is sworn,
And be my fortune as my love deserves.

So be thy fortune as thy features serves.
And then Erastus lives without compare.
Here comes a Messenger to haste me hence,
I know your message, hath the Princess sent for me?

She hath, and desires you to consort her to the triumphs.

Who saw my Master?
O sir, are you heeere?
The Prince and all the outlandish Gentlemen,
Are ready to go to the triumphs, they stay for you.

Go sir, bid my men bring my horse, and a dozen slaves.

You shall have your horses and two dozen of slaves.

Wish me good hap Perseda and I'll win
Such glory, as no time shall ere race out,
Or end the period of my youth in blood.

Such fortune as the good Andromache,
Wished valiant Hector wounded with the Greekes,
I wish Erastus in his maiden wars.
Overcome with valour these high minded Knights,
As with thy virtue thou hast conquered me,
Heavens hear my hearty prayer and it effect.

Brave knights of Christendom, and turkish both,
Assembled he ere in thirsty honours cause,
To be enrolled in the brass leaved book,
Of never wasting perpetuity.
Put Lambe-like mildenes to your Lyons strength,
And be our tilting like two brothers sports,
That exercise their war with friendly blows.
Brave Prince of Cipris, and our son in law,
Welcome these worthies by their several countries,
For in thy honour hither are they come,
To grace thy nuptials with their deeds at arms.

First welcome thrice renowned Englishman,
Graced by thy country, but ten times more
By thy approved valour in the field,
Upon the onset of the enemy,
What is thy motto when thou spurs thy horse.

In Scotland was I made a Knight at arms,
Where for my countries cause I charged my Lance:
In France I took the Standard from the King,
And give the flower of Gallia in my crest.
Against the light foot Irish have I served,
And in my skin bear tokens of their skenes:
Our word of courage all the world hath heard,
Saint George for England, and saint George for me.

Like welcome unto thee fair Knight of France,
Well famed thou art for discipline in war,
Upon the encounter of thine enemy,
What is thy mot renowned Knight of France.

In Italie I put my knighthood on,
Where in my shirt but with my single Rapier,
I combated a Roman much renownd,
His weapons point impoysoned for my bane,
And yet my stars did bode my victory,
Saint Denis is for France and that for me.

Welcome Castilian too amongst the rest,
Forfame doth sound thy valour with the rest:
Upon thy first encounter of thy foe,
What is thy word of courage brave man of Spain?

At fourteen years of age was I made Knight,
When twenty thousand Spaniards were in field,
What time a daring Rutter made a challenge
To change a bullet with our swift flight shot,
And I with single heed and level hit,
The haughty challenger and struck him dead.
The golden Fleece is that we cry upon,
And Iaques, Iaques, is the Spaniards choice.

Next, welcome unto thee renowned Turk,
Not for thy lay, but for thy worth in arms:
Upon the first brave of thine enemy,
What is thy noted word of charge, brave Turk?

Against the Sophy in three pitched fields,
Under the conduct of great Soliman,
Have I been chief commander of an host,
And put the flint heart Perseans to the sword.
The desert plains of Affricke have I stained,
With blood of Moors, and there in three set battles fough^,
Marched conqueror through Asia,
Along the coasts held by the Portinguze,
Even to the verge of gold, aboording Spain
Hath Brusor led a valiant troop of Turks,
And made some Christians kneel to Mahomet:
Him we adore, and in his name I cry,
Mahomet for me and Solyman.

Now Signeur Basilisco you we know,
And therefore give not you a strangers welcome,
You are a Rutter borne in Germanie,
Upon the first encounter of your foe:
What is your brave upon the enemy?

I fight not with my tongue, this is my Oratrix.
Laying his hand upon his sword.

Why Signeur Basilisco is ita she sword?

I, and so are all blades with me: behold my instance
Perdie, each female is the weaker vessel,
And the vigour of this arm infringes,
The temper of any blade, quoth my assertion,
And thereby gather, that this blade being arprooued weaker than this limb, may
very well bear a feminine Epitheton.

Tis well proved, but whats the word that glories your Country?

Sooth to say, the earth is my Country,
As the air to the foul, or the marine moisture,
To the red guild fish: I repute my self no coward:
For humility shall mount. I keep no table
To character my fore-passed conflicts.
As I remember, there happened a sore drought
In some part of Belgia, that the iucie grass,
Was seared with the Sun Gods Element.
I held it policy, to put the men children
Of that climate to the sword,
That the mothers tears might relieve the pearched earth.
The men died, the women wept, and the grass grew,
Else had my Frize-land horse perished,
Whose loss would have more grieved me,
Than the ruin of that whole Country.
Upon a time in Ireland I fought,
On horseback with an hundred Kernes,
From Titans Eastern uprise, to his Western downfall:
Insomuch that my Steed began to faint:
I conjecturing the cause to be want of water, dismounted:
In which place there was no such Element,
Enraged therefore with this Semitor,
All on foot like an Herculean offspring,
Endured some three or four hours combat,
In which process, my body distilled such dewy showers of sweat,
That from the warlike wrinkles of my front,
My Palfrey coold his thirst.
My mercy in conquest, is equal with my manhood in fight,
The tear of an infant, hath bin the ransom of a conquered city,
Whereby I purchased the surname of Pities adomant.
Rough words blow my choler,
As the wind doth Mulcibers work house,
I have no word, because no country,
Each place is my habitation,
Therefore each countries word mine to pronounce.
Princes, what would you?
I have seen much, heard more, but done most,
To be brief, he that will try me, let him waft me with his arm.
I am his, for some five lances.
Although it go against my stars to jest,
Yet to gratulate this beninge Prince,
I will suppress my condition.

He is beholding to you greatly sir:
Mount ye brave Lordings, forwards to the tilt,
My self will censure of your chivalry,
And with impartial eyes behold your deeds,
Forward brave Ladies, place you to behold
The fair demeanour of these warlike Knights.

I am melancholy: an humour of Venus belegereth me.
I have rejected with contemptible frowns,
The sweet glances of many amorous girls, or rather ladies:
But certes, I am now captivated with the reflecting eye
Of that admirable comet Perseda.
I will place her to behold my triumphs,
And do woonders in her sight,
O heavens, she comes, accompanied with a child,
Whose chin bears no impression of manhood,
Not an hair, not an excrement.

My sweet Perseda.

Peace Infant thou blasphemest.

You are deceived sir, he swore not,

I tell thee Jester he did worse, he called that Lady his,

Jester: O extempore, o flores!

O harsh vnedicate, illiterate peasant,
Thou abuse the phrase of the Latin.

By gods fish friend, take you the Latins part, i'll abuse you to.

What saunce dread of our indignation?

Saunce: what languidge is that?
I think thou art a word maker by thine occupation.

I, terms thou me of an occupation,
Nay then this fiery humour of choler is suppressed,
By the thought of love. Fair Lady,

Now by my troth she is gon.

I, hath the Infant transported her hence,
He saw my anger figured in my brow,
And at his best advantage stole away,
But I will follow for revenge.

Nay, but here you sir,
I must talk with you before you go.

O if thou be magnanimous, come before me.

Nay, if thou be a right warrior, get fro under me.

What would thou have me a Typhon,
To bear up Peleon or Ossa?

Typhon me no Typhons,
But swear upon my Dudgeon dagger,
Not to go till I give thee leave,
But stay with me, and look upon the tilters.

O thou seekst thereby to dim my glory.

I care not for that, wilt thou not swear?

O I swear, I swear.

By the contents of this blade,

By the contents of this blade,

I the aforesaid Basilisco,

I the aforesaid Basilisco,
Knight good fellow, knight, knight.

Knave good fellow, knave, knave.
Will not offer to go from the side of Piston.

Will not offer to go from the side of Pyston,

Without the leave of the said Piston obtained,

Without the leave of the said Piston,
Licensed, obtained and granted.

Enjoy thy life and live, I give it thee.

I enjoy my life at thy hands, I confess it,
I am up, but that I am religious in mine oath,

What would you do sir, what would you do,
Will you up the ladder sir, and see the tilting.

Better a Dog fawn on me, then bark,

Now sir, how likes thou this course.

Their Lances were couched to hie,
And their Steeds ill borne.

It may be so, it may be so,
Now sir, how like you this course.

Pretty, pretty, but not famous,
Well for a learner, but not for a warrior.

By my faith, me thought it was excellent.

I in the eye of an infant, a Peacocks tail is glorious.

O well run, the bay horse with the blew tail,
And the silver knight, are both down,
By Cock and Pie, and Mouse foot,
The English man is a fine Knight.

Now by the marble face of the Welkin,
He is a brave warrior.

What an oath is there, fie upon thee extortioner.

Now comes in the infant that courts my mistress,
Oh that my lance were in my rest,
And my Beaver closed for this encounter.

O well ran, my master hath overthrown the Turk.

Now fie upon the Turk,
To be dismounted by a Child it vexes me.

O well run Master, he hath overthrown the Frenchman.

It is the fury of his horse, not the strength of his arm
I would thou would remit my oath,
That I might assail thy master.

I give thee leave, go to thy destruction,
But syrra wheres thy horse?

Why my Page stands holding him by the bridle.

Well go mount thee, go.

I go, and Fortune guide my Lance.

Take the braginst knave in christendom with thee:
Truly I am sorry for him,
He just like a knight, heel jostle like a Jade.
It it a world to here the fool prate and brag,
He will jet as if it were a Goose on a green:
He goes many times supperles to bed,
And yet he takes Physic to make him lean.
Last night he was bidden to a Gentlewoman's to supper,
And because he would not be put to carve,
He wore his hand in a scarf, and said he was wounded:
He wears a coloured lath in his scabberd,
And when twas found upon him, he said he was wrathful,
He might not wear no iron. He weres Civet,
And when it was asked him, where he had that musk,
He said, all his kindred smelt so:
Is not this a counterfeit fool?
Well i'll up and see how he speeds.
Now by the faith of a squire, he is a very faint knight,
Why my master hath overthrown him
And his Curtal, both to the ground,
I shall have old laughing,
It will be better then the Fox in the hole for me.

Brave Gentlemen, by all your free consents,
This Knight unknown, hath best demeand himself,
According to the proclimation made,
The prize and honour of the day is his,
But now unmask thy self, that we may see,
What warlike wrinkles time hath charactered,
With ages print upon thy warlike face.

Accord to his request, brave man at arms,
And let me see the face that vanquished me.

Unmask thy self, thou well approved knight.

I long to see thy face brave warrior.

Nay valiant sir, we may not be denied,
Fair Ladies should be coy to show their faces,
Least that the sun should tan them with his beams,
I'll be your page this once, for to disarm you.

That's the reason, that he shall help
Your husband to arm his head,
Oh the policy of this age is wonderful.

What young Erastus, is it possible?

Erastus be thou honoured for this deed.

So young, and of such good accomplishment,
Thrive fair beginner as this time doth promise,
In virtue, valour, and all worthiness:
Give me thy hand, I vow my self thy friend.

Thanks worthy sir, whose favourable hand,
Hath entered such a youngling in the war,
And thanks unto you all, brave worthy sirs,
Impose me task, how I may do you good,
Erastus will be dutiful in all.

Leave protestations now, and let us hie,
To tread lauolto, that is women's walk,
There spend we the remainder of the day,

Though overborne, and foiled in my course,
Yet have I partners in mine infamy.
Tis wondrous, that so young a toward warrior,
Should bide the shock of such approved knights,
As he this day hath matched and mated too,
But virtue should not envy good desert,
Therefore Erastus happy, and thy fortune,
But my Lucina, how she changed her colour,
When at the encounter I did loose a stirrup,
Hanging her head as partner of my shame,
Therefore will I now go visit her,
And please her with this Carcanet of worth,
Which by good fortune I have found to day,
When valour fails, then gould must make the way.

O cursed Fortune enemy to Fame,
Thus to disgrace thy honoured name,
By overthrowing him that far hath spread thy praise,
Beyond the course of Titans burning rays,
Page set a side the gesture of my enemy,
Give him a Fiddlers fee, and send him packing.

Ho, God save you sir, have you burst your shin,

I villain, I have broke my shin bone,
My back bone, my channel bone, and my thigh bone,
Beside two dossen small inferior bones.

A shrewd loss by my faith sir,
But wheres your coursers tail.

He lost the same in service.

There was a hot piece of service, where he lost his tail
But how chance his nose is slit.

For presumption, for covering the Emperors Mare.

Marry a foul fault, but why are his ears cut?

For neighing in the Emperors Court.

Why then thy Horse hath bin a Colt in his time,

True, thou hast said.
O touch not the cheek of my Palphrey,
Least he dismount me while my wounds are green,
Page, run, bid the surgeon bring his incision.
Yet stay i'll ride along with thee my self.

And i'll bear you company,

Come sir, let me see how finely you'll cry this chain

Why what was it worth?

It was worth more, then thou and all thy kin are worth,

It may be so, but what must he have that finds it?

Why a hundred Crowns.

Why then i'll have ten for the crying it.

Ten Crowns, and had but six pence,
For crying a little wench of thirty years old upwards,
That had lost her self betwixt a tavern a baw die house.

I that was a wench, but this is Gold,
She was poor, but this is rich.

Why then by this reckoning, a Hackneyman
Should have ten shillings for horsing a Gentlewoman,
Where he hath but ten pence of a beggar.

Why and reason good,
Let them pay, that best may,
As the Lawyers use their rich Clients,
When they let the poor go under Forma pauperis.

Why then I pray thee cry the Chain for me,
Sub forma pauperis,
For money goes very low with me at this time.

I sir, but your master is, though you be not.

I but he must not know
That thou cry est the Chain for me,
I do but use thee to save me a labour,
That am to make inquiry after it,

Well sir, you'll see me considered, will you not?

I marry will I, why what lighter payment can there be, then consideration.


O yes.

How now sir, what are you crying?

A chain sir, a chain, that your man bad me cry.

Get you away sir, I advise you
Meddle with no Chains of mine,
You paltry knave, how durst thou be so bold,
To cry the chain, when I bid thou should not,
Did I not bid thee only underhand,
Make privy inquiry for it through the town,
Least public rumour might advertise her,
Whose knowledge were to me a second death?

Why would you have me run up and down the town? and my shoes are done.


What you want in shoes, i'll give ye in blows.

I pray you sir hold your hands,
And as I am an honest man,
I'll do the best I can to find your chain.

Ah treacherous Fortune, enemy to Love,
Did thou advance me for my greater fall,
In dalying war, I lost my chiefest peace,
In hunting after praise, I lost my love,
And in loves shipwreck will my life miscarry,
Take thou the honour, and give me the chain,
Wherein was linked the sum of my delight.
When she delivered me the Carkanet,
Keep it quoth she, as thou would keep my self:
I kept it not, and therefore she is lost,
And lost with her is all my happiness,
And loss of happiness is worse then death.
Come therefore gentle death and ease my grief,
Cut short what malice Fortune misintends,
But stay a while good Death, and let me live,
Time may restore what Fortune took from me:
Ah no, great losses seldom are restord.
What if my Chain shall never be restord,
My innocence shall clear my negligence.
Ah! but my love is cerimonious,
And looks for justice at her lovers hand,
Within forced furrows of her clowding brow,
As storms that fall amid a sun shine day,
I read her just desires, and my decay.

I long till Brusor be returned from Rhodes,
To know how he hath borne him against the Christians,
That are assembled there to try their valour,
But more to be well assured by him,
How Rhodes is fenced, and how I best may lay,
My never failing siege to win that plot,
For by the holy Alcaron I swear,
I'll call my Soldiers home from Persia,
And let the Sophie breath, and from the Russian broils
Call home my hardy, dauntless Ianisaries,
And from the other skirts of Christendom,
Call home my Bassowes and my men of war,
And so beleager Rhodes by sea and land.
That Key will serve to open all the gates,
Through which our passage cannot find a stop,
Till it have pricked the hart of Christendom,
Which now that paltry Island keeps from scath.
Say brother Amurath, and Haleb, say,
What think you of our resolution?

Great Soliman, heavens only substitute,
And earths commander under Mahomet:
So counsel I, as thou thy self hast said.

Pardon me dread Sovereign, I hold it not
Good policy, to call your forces home
From Persea and Polonia, bending them
Upon a paltry I'll of small defence.
A common press of base superfluous Turks,
May soon beleuied for so slight a task.
Ah Soliman, whose name hath shook thy foes,
As withered leaves with Autume thrown down,
Fog not thy glory with so foul eclipse,
Let not thy Soldiers sound a base retire,
Till Persea stoop, and thou be conqueror.
What scandal were it to thy mightiness,
After so many valiant Bassowes slain,
Whose blood hath bin manured to their earth,
Whose bones hath made their deep ways passable.
To sound a homeward, dull, and harsh retreat,
Without a conquest, or a mean revenge,
Strive not for Rhodes, by letting Persea slip,
The ones a Lyon almost brought to death,
Whose skin will countervail the hunters toil;
The other is a Wasp with threatening sting.
Whose Honey is not worth the taking up.

Why Haleb did thou not hear our brother swear
Upon the Alcaron religiously:
That: he would make an universal Camp
Of all his scattered laegions: and dare thou
Infer a reason why it is not meet,
After his Highness swears it shall be so,
Were it not thou art my fathers son,
And striving kindness wrestled not with ire,
I would not hence, till I had let thee know,
What twere to thwart a Monarchs holy oath.

Why, his highness gave me leave to speak my will,
And far from flattery I spoke my mind,
And did discharge a faithful subjects love,
Thou Aristippus like did flatter him,
Not like my brother, or a man of worth,
And for his highness vow I crossed it not,
But gave my censure, as his highness bad,
Now for thy chastisement, know Amurath,
I scorn them as a rechlesse Lion scorns,
The humming of a gnat in Summers night,

I take it Haleb thou art friend to Rhodes.

Not half so much am I a friend to Rhodes,
As thou art enemy to thy Sovereign.

I charge thee say wherein, or else by Mahomet,
I'll hazard duty in my Sovereigns presence.

Not for thy threats, but for my self I say,
It is not meet, that one so base as thou,
Should come about the person of a King.

Must I give aim to this presumption?

Your Highness knows, I speak in duteous love.

Your Highness knows I spake at your command,
And to the purpose, far from flattery.

Thinks thou I flatter, now I flatter not,

What dismal Planets guides this fatal hour,
Villain, thy brothers groans do call for thee.
To wander with them through eternal night.

Oh Soliman for loving thee I die,

No Amurath, for murthering him thou die:
Oh Haleb how shall I begin to morn,
Or how shall I begin to shed salt tears.
For whom no words nor tears can well suffice.
Ah that my rich imperial Diadem,
Could satisfy thy cruel destiny:
Or that a thousand of our Turkish souls,
Or twenty thousand millious of our foes,
Could ransom thee from fell deaths tyranny,
To winthy life would Soliman be poor,
And live in servile bondage all my days,
Accursed Amurath, that for a worthless cause,
In blood hath shortened our sweet Halebs days,
Ah what is dearer bond then brotherhood,
Yet Amurath thou were my brother too,
If wilful folly did not blind mine eyes,
I, I, and thou as virtuous as Haleb,
And I as dear to thee as unto Haleb,
And thou as near to me as Haleb was,
Ah Amurath: why were thou so unkind to him
For uttering but a th warting word?
And Haleb, why did not thy harts counsel,
Bridle the fond intemperance of thy tongue?
Nay wretched Solyman, why did not thou
Withhould thy hand, from heaping blood on blood,
Might I not better spare one joy then both,
If love of Haleb forced me on to wrath,
Cursed be that wrath that is the way to death,
If justice forced me on, cursed be that justice
That makes the brother, Butcher of his brother,
Come Ianisaries, and help me to lament,
And bear my joys on either side of me:
I, late my joys, but now my lasting sorrow,
Thus, thus, let Soliman pass on his way,
Bearing in either hand his hearts decay.

Now Death and Fortune which of all us three,
Hath in the Actors shown the greatest power.
Have not I taught Erastus and Perseda,
By mutual tokens to seal up their loves?

I but those tokens, the Ring and Carkanet,
Were Fortunes gifts, Love gives no gould or jewels.

Why what is jewels, or what is gould but earth,
An humour knit together by compression,
And by the worlds bright eye, first brought to light,
Only to feed men's eyes with vain delight.
Loves works are more then of a mortal temper,
I couple minds together by consent.
Who gave Rhodes Princes to the Ciprian Prince: but Love.

Fortune that first by chance brought them together,
For till by Fortune persons meet each other,
Thou can not teach their eyes to wound their hearts.

I made those Knights of several sect and countries
Each one by arms to honour his beloved,

Nay onealone to honour his beloved,
The rest by turning of my tickle wheel,
Came short in reaching of fair honours mark:
I gave Erastus only that days prize,
A sweet renown, but mixed with bitter sorrow:
For in conclusion of his happiness,
I made him loose the precious Carcanet,
Whereon depended all his hope and joy.

And more then so: for he that found the chain,
Even for that Chain shall be depriued of life.

Besides, Love hath enforced a fool,
The fond Bragardo to presume to arms.

I but thou see how he was overthrown.
By Fortunes high displeasure:

I and by Death had been surprisd,
If Fates had given me leave:
But what I mist in him and in the rest,
I did accomplish on Haleb and Amurath,
The worthy brethren of great Soliman,
But wherefore stay we, let the sequel prove,
Who is greatest, Fortune, Death, or Love.

As fits the time, so now well fits the place,
To cool affection with our words and looks.
If in our thoughts be semblance sympathy.

My words, my looks, my thoughts are all on thee.
Ferdinando is Lucinaes only joy.

What pledge thereof?

An oath, a hand, a kiss.

O holy oath, fair hand, and sugared kiss:
Oh never may Fernando lack such bliss,
But say my dear, when shall the gates of heaven?
Stand all wide open for celestial Gods,
With gladsome looks to case at Hymens robes.
When shall the graces, or Lucinas hand,
With Rosie chaplets deck thy golden tresses,
And Cupid bring me to thy nuptial bed,
Where thou in joy and pleasure must attend.
A bliffull war with me thy chiefest friend.

Full fraught with love, and burning with desire,
I long have longd for light of Hymens lights.

Then that same day, whose warm pleasant sight,
Brings in the spring, with many gladsome flowers,
Be our first day of joy and perfect peace:
Till when, receive this precious Carcanet,
In sign, that as these links are interlaced,
So both our hearts are still combind in one,
Which never can be parted but by death.

And if I live this shall not be forgot:
But see Ferdinando where Perseda comes,
Whom women love for virtue, men for beauty,
All the world loves, none hates but envy.

All hail brave Cauelere: God morrow Madam,
The fairest shine that shall this day be seen.
Except Persedas beauteous excelence,
Shame to loves Queen, and Empress of my thoughts.

Marry thrice happy is Persedas chance,
To have so brave a champion to her Squire.

Her Squire: her Knight, and who so else denies,
Shall fe eel the rigour of my Sword and Lance.

O Sir, not I.

Here's none but friends, yet let me challenge you,
For gracing me with a malignant stile,
That I was fairest, and yet Perseda fairer.
We Ladies stand upon our beauties much.

Herein Lucina let me buckler him.

Not Mars himself had ear so fair a Buckler.

Love makes him blind,
And blind can judge no colours.

Why then the mends is made, and we still friends,

Still friends, still foes, she wears my Carcanet,
Ah false Erastus, how am I betrayed.

What ails you madam, that your coulor changes.

A sudden qualm, I therefore take my leave.

We'll bring you home,

No, I shall soon get home.

Why then farewell: Fernando lets away.

Say worlds bright star,
Whence springs this sudden change,
Is it unkindness at the little praise
I gave Lucina with my glossing stile?

No, no, her beauty far surpasses mine,
And from my neck, her neck hath won the praise.

What is it then, if love of this my person,
By favour and by justice of the heavens,
At last have percst through thy tralucent breast,
And thou misdoubts, perhaps that i'll prove coy,
Oh be assured tis far from noble thoughts,
To tyrannise over a yielding foe.
Therefore be blithe, sweet love abandon fear,
I will forget thy former cruelty.

Ah false Erastus full of treachrie.

I always told you that such coward knights,
Were faithless swains and worthy no respect,
But tell me sweet love, what is his offence?
That I with words and stripes may chastise him,
And bring him bound for thee to tread upon.

Now must I find the means to rid him hence,
Go thou forthwith arm thee from top to toe,
And come an hour hence unto my lodging,
Then will I tell thee this offence at large,
And thou in my behalf shalt work revenge.

I thus should men of valour be employed,
This is good argument of thy true love,
I go, make reconing that Erastus dyes,
Unless forewarnd, the weakoning coward flies,

Thou foolish coward flies. Erastus lives,
The fairest shape, but foulest minded man,
That ere sun saw within our hemyspheare,
My tongue to tell my woes is all to weak,
I must vnclaspe me, or my heart will break:
But inward cares are most pent in with grief,
Vnclasping therefore yields me no relief.
Ah that my moist and cloud compacted brain,
Could spend my cares in showers of weeping rain.
But scalding sighs like blasts of boisterous winds,
Hinder my tears from falling on the ground,
And I must die by closure of my wound.
Ah false Erastus, how had I misdoone,
That thou should quit my love with such a scorn.
Here comes the Synon to my simple hart,
I'll frame my self to his dissembling art.

Desire persuades me on, fear pulls me back.
Tush I will to her, innocence is bold,
How fares Perseda my sweet second self?

Well, now Erastus my hearts only joy
Is come to join both hearts in union.

And till I came whereas my love did dwell,
My pleasure was but pain, my solace woe.

What love means my Erastus, pray thee tell?

Matchless Perseda, she that gave me strength,
To win late conquest from many victors hands,
Thy name was conqueror, not my chivalry:
Thy looks did arm me, not my coat of steel,
Thy beauty did defend me, not my force.
Thy favours bore me, not my light foot Steed,
Therefore to thee I owe both love and life.
But wherefore makes Perseda such a doubt,
As if Erastus could forget himself:
Which if I do, all vengeance light on me.

Aye me, how graceless are these wicked men?
I can no longer hold my patience.
Ah how thine eyes can forge alluring looks,
And fain deep oaths to wound poor silly maids,
Are there no honest drops in all thy cheeks,
To check thy fraudful countenance with a blush:
Call thou me love, and love another better,
If heavens were just, thy teeth would tear thy tongue,
For this thy periurde false disloyalty.
If heavens were just, men should have open breasts,
That we therein might read their guileful thoughts.
If heavens were just, that power that forces love,
Would never couple Wolves and Lambs together.
Yes, heavens are just, but thou art so corrupt,
That in thee, all their influence doth change.
As in the Spider good things turn to poison.
Ah false Erastus, how had I misdone?
That thou should pawn my true affections pledge,
To her whose worth will never equal mine.
What, is Lucinaes wealth exceeding mine?
Yet mine sufficient to encounter thine.
Is she more fair then I? that's not my fault,
Nor her desert: whats beauty but a blast?
Soon cropped with age, or with infirmities.
Is she more wise? her years are more then mine,
What ere she be? my love was more then hers,
And for her chastity let others judge.
But what talk I of her? the fault is thine,
If I were so disgratious in thine eye,
That she must needs enjoy my interest,
Why did thou deck her with my ornament?
Could nothing serve her but the Carcanet?
Which as my life I gave to thee in charge,
Could thou abuse my true simplicity?
Whose greatest fault was over loving thee,
I'll keep no tokens of thy perjury.
Here give her this, Perseda now is free,
And all my former love is turned to hate.

Ah stay my sweet Perseda hear me speak.

What are thy words? but Sirens guileful songs:
That please the ear, but seek to spoil the heart.

Then view my tears, that plead for innocence,

What are thy tears? but Circes magic seas,
Where none escape wracked, but blindfould Mariners.

If words tears displease, then view my looks,
That plead for mercy at thy rigorous hands.

What are thy looks? but like the Cockatrice,
That seeks to wound poor silly passengers.

If words, nor tears, nor looks, may win remorse,
What then remains for my perplexed heart?
Hath no interpreters but words, or tears, or looks.

And they are all as false as thou thy self.

Hard doom of death before my case be known,
My judge unjust, and yet I cannot blame her,
Since Love and jealousy missead her thus.
My self in fault, and yet not worthy blame,
Because that Fortune made the fault, not Love.
The ground of her unkindness grows, because I lost
The precious Carcanet she gave to me:
Lucina hath it, as her words import,
But how she got it, heavens knows, not I,
Yet this is some aleagement to my sorrow,
That if I can but get the Chain again,
I boldly then shall let Perseda know,
That she hath wronged Erastus and her friend:
Ah Love, and if thou be of heavenly power,
Inspire me with some present stratagem,
It must be so, Lucinas a frank Gaimster,
And like it is, in play sheele hazard it,
For if report but blasen her aright,
She's a frank gaimster, and inclined to play, Ho Piston?

Here sir, what would you with me,

Desire Guelpio signior Iulio come speak with me
And bid them bring some store of crowns with them,
And sir, provide me four Visards,
Four Gowns, a box, and a Drum,
For I intend to go in mummery,

I will sir.

Ah virtuous Lamps of ever turning heavens,
Incline her mind to play, and mine to win,
Nor do I covet but what is mine own,
Then shall I let Perseda understand,
How jealousy had armed her tongue with malice,
Ah were she not Perseda whom my heart,
No more can fly, then iron can Adamant,
Her late unkindness would have changed my mind.

How now Erastus, wherein may we pleasure thee?

Sirs thus it is, we must in mummery,
Unto Lucina, neither for love nor hate,
But if we can, to win the chain she wears,
For though I have some interest therein,
Fortune may make me master of mine own,
Rather then i'll seek justice against the Dame,
But this assure your selves it must be mine,
By game, or change, by one devise or other.
The rest i'll tell you when our sport is done.

Why then lets make us ready and about it,

What store of Crowns have you brought?

Fear not for money man, i'll bear the Box,

I have some little reply, if need require.

I but hear you Master, was not he a fool?
That went to shoot, and left his arrows behind him.

Yes, but what of that?

Mary that you may loose your money,
And go without the chain, unless you carry false dice.

Mas the fool says true, lets have some got.

Nay I use not to go without a pair of false Dice.
Here are tall men and little men.

Hie men and low men, thou would say.

Come sirs lets go, Drumsler pray for me,
And i'll reward thee: and sir Pistrn,
Mar not our sport with your foolery.

I warrant you sir, they get not one wise word of me,

I marry, this shows that Charleman is come,
What shall we play here? content,
Since Signior Ferdinand will have it so.
I were it Cleopatraes union:
Signior Fernando, I am sure tis you,
And Gentlemen, unmask ere you depart,
That I may know to whom my thanks is due,
For this so courteous and unlooked for sport:
No wilt not be, then sup with me tomorrow,
Well then i'll look for you, till then farewell.

Gentlemen, each thing hath sorted to our wish,
She took me for Fernando, marked you that:
Your gould shall be repairde with double thanks,
And fellow Drumsler, i'll reward you well.

But is there no reward for my false dice?

Yes sir, a guarded suit from top to toe.

Dasell mine eyes, or is't Lucinas chain,
False treacher, lay down the chain that thou hast stole,

He lewdly lies that calls me treacherous.

That lye my weapon shall put down thy throat:

Fly Erastus, ere the Governor have any news,
Whose near alye he was, and chief delight,

Nay Gentlemen, fly you and save yourselves,
Least you partake the hardness of my fortune.
Ah fickle and blind guidresse of the world,
What pleasure hast thou in my misery?
Wast not enough when I had lost the Chain,
Thou did bereave me of my dearest love,
But now when I should reposesse the same,
To cross me with this haplesse accedent:
Ah if but time and place would give me leave,
Great ease it were for me to purge my self,
And to acuse fell Fortune, Love and Death.
For all these three conspire my tragedy,
But danger waits upon my words and steps,
I dare not stay, for if the Governor
Surprise me here, I die by marshall law,
Therefore I go. But whether shall I go?
Ifinto any stay a dioyning Rhodes,
They will betray me to Phyllippos hands,
Forloue, or gain, or flattery.
To Turkie must I go, the passage short,
The people warlike, and the king renownd,
For all heroyicall and kingly virtues,
Ah hard attempt, to tempt a foe for aid,
Necessity yet says it must be so,
Or suffer death for Ferdinandos death,
Whom honours title forced me to misdoe,
By checking his outrageous insolence.
Piston, here take this chain, and give it to Perseda,
And let her know what hath befallen me,
When thou hast delivered it, take ship and follow me,
I will be in Constantinople.
Farewell my country dearer then my life;
Farewell sweet friends, dearer then country soil,
Farewell Perseda, dearest of them all,
Dearer to me, then all the world besides.

Now am I growing into a doubtful agony
What I were best to do, to run away with this Chain,
Or deliver it, and follow my master.
If I deliver it and follow my master, I shall have thanks.
But they will make me never the fatter,
If I run away with it, I may live upon credit
All the while I wear this chain,
Or dominere with the money when I have sold it,
Hitherto all goes well, but if I be taken,
I marry sir, then the case is altered, I and haltered to,
Of all things I do not love to preach
With a haulter about my neck,
Therefore for this once, i'll be honest against my will,
Perseda shall have it, but before I go, i'll be so bold
As to dive into this Gentleman's pocket, for good luck sake.
If he deny me not: how say you sir, are you content?
A plain case, Quitacet consitiri videtur.

See where his body lies.

I, I, I see his body all to soon,
What barbarous villain is't that rifles him.
Ah Ferdinand, the stay of my old age,
And chief remainder of our progeny,
Ah loving cousin how art thou misdone,
By false Erastus, ah no by treachery,
For well thy valour hath been often tried,
But whilst I stand and weep, and spend the time
In fruitless plaints, the murderer will escape,
Without revenge, sole salve for such a sore,
Say villain, wherefore did thou rifle him?

Faith sir for pure good will,
Seeing he was going towards heaven,
I thought to see, if he had a passport to S. Nicholas or no,

Some sot he seems to be, twere pity to hurt him:
Sir can thou tell who slew this man?

I sir very well, it was my master Erastus.

Thy master, and whether is he gone now?

To fetch the Sixteen to bury him I think.

Twere pity to imprison such a sot,

Now it fits my wisdom to counterfeit the fool.

Come hither sir, thou know me
For the Governor of the city, dost thou not?

I forsooth sir.

Thou art a bondsman, and would fain be free?

I forsooth sir.

Then do but this, and I will make thee free,
And rich wiihall, learn where Erastus is,
And bring me word, and i'll reward thee well.

That I will sir, I shall find you at the Castle, shall I not?

Yes.

Why i'll be here, as soon as ever I come again.

But for assurance that he may not escape,
VVeele lay the ports and havens round about,
And let a proclamation straight be made,
That he that can bring forth the murderer,
Shall have three thousand Ducats for his pains,
My self will see the body borne from hence,
And honoured with Balm and funeral.

God sends fortune to fools.
Did you ever see wise man escape as I have done,
I must betray my master: I but when can you tell?
See where Perseda comes, to save me a labour.
After my most hearty commendations,
This is to let you understand,
That my master was in good health at the sending hereof,
Yours for ever and ever and ever.
In most humble wise Piston.

This makes me think that I have been to cruel,
How got he this from of Lucinas arm?

Faith in a mummery, and a pair of false dice,
I was one of the mummers my self, simple as I stand here.

I rather think it cost him very dear.

I so it did, for it cost Ferdinando his life.

How so?

After we had got the chain in mummery,
And lost our box in counter cambio,
My master wore the chain about his neck,
Then Ferdinando met us on the way,
And reuild my master, saying he stole the chain,
With that they drew, there Ferdinando had the prickado.

And whether fled my poor Erastus then?

To Constantinople whether I must follow him,
But ere he went, with many sighs and tears,
He delivered me the chain, and bad me give it you,
For perfect argument that he was true,
And you too credulous.

Ah stay, no more, for I can here no more.

And I can sing no more.

My hart had armed my tongue with injury,
To wrong my friend, whose thoughts were ever true,
An poor Erastus how thy stars maling:
Thou great commander of the swift winged winds,
And dreadful Neptune bring him back again,
But Eolus and Neptune let him go,
For here is nothing but revenge and death,
Then let him go, i'll shortly follow him,
Not with slow sails, but with loves golden wings,
My ship shall be borne with tears, and blown with sighs
So will I soar about the Turkish land,
Until I meet Erastus my sweet friend.
And then and there, fall down amid his arms,
And in his bosom there power forth my soul,
For satisfaction of my trespass past.

Fair Love, according unto thy command,
I seek Erastus and will combat him.

I seek him, find him, bring him to my sight,
For till we meet, my hart shall want delight.

My petty fellow, where hast thou hid thy master,

Marry sir in an Armorours shop,
Where you had not best go to him.

Why so, I am in honour bound to combat him,

I sir, but he knowing your fierce conditions,
Hath planted a double cannon in the door,
Ready to discharge it upon you, when you go by,
I tell you for pure good will.

In Knightly courtesy, I thank thee,
But hopes the coistrel to escape me so,
Thinks he bare cannon shot can keep me back:
Why wherefore serves my targe of proof, but for the bullet
That once put by, I roughly come upon him,
Like to the wings of lightning from above,
I with a martial look astonish him,
Then falls he down poor wretch upon his knee,
And all to late, repents his surquedry.
Then do I take him on my fingers point,
And thus I bear him thorough every street,
To be a laughing stock to all the town.
That done, I lay him at my mistres feet,
For her to give him doom of life or death.

I but here you sir, I am bound
In pain of my masters displeasure,
To have about at cuffs, before you and I part,

Ha, ha, ha, Eagles are challenged by paltry flies,
Thy folly gives thee privilege, begone, begone,

No, no sir, I must have about with you sir that's flat,
That for retaining one so virtuous,
Least my master turn me out of service.

Why, art thou weary of thy life?

No by my faith sir.

Then fetch thy weapons, and with my single fist,
I'll combat thee, my body all unarmed.

Why lend me thine, and save me a labour.

I tell thee, if Alcides lived this day,
He could not wield my weapons.

Why wilt thou stay till I come again?

I upon my honour.

That shall be when I come from Turkey.

Is this little desperate fellow gon,
Doubtless he is a very tall fellow,
And yet it were disgrace to all my chivalry,
To combat one so base:
I'll send some Crane to combat with the Pigmew,
Not that I fear, but that I scorn to fight.

Fortune thou made Fernando find the chain,
But yet by Loves instruction he was taught,
To make a present of it to his Mistress,

But Fortune would not let her keep it long,

Nay rather Love, by whose suggisted power,
Erastus used such dice, as being false,
Ran not by Fortune, but necessity.

Mean time I brought Fernando on the way,
To see and challenge what Lucina lost.

And by that challenge I abridgde his life,
And forced Erastus into banishment,
Parting him from his love, in spite of Love,

But with my golden wings i'll follow him,
And give him aide and succour in distress.

And doubt not to, but Fortune will be there,
And cross him too, and sometimes flatter him,
And lift him up, and throw him down again.

And here and there in ambush Death will stand,
To mar what Love or Fortune takes in hand.

How long shall Soliman spend his time,
And waste his days in fruitless obsequies,
Ads but a trouble to my brothers ghost:
Perhaps my grief and long continual moan,
Which but for me would now have took their rest,
Then farewell sorrow, and now revenge draw near.
In controversy touching the I'll of Rhodes,
My brothers died, on Rhodes i'll he reuengd,
Now tell me Brusor whats the news at Rhodes?
Hath the young prince of Cipris married
Cornelia, daughter to the Governor.

He hath my Lord, with the greatest pomp,
That ere I saw at such a festival.

What greater then at our coronation?

Inferior to that only.

At tilt, who won the honour of the day?

A worthy Knight of Rhodes, a matchless man,
His name Erastus, not twenty years of age,
Not tall, but well proportioned in his limbs,
I never saw, except your excellence,
A man whose presence more delighted me,
And had he worshipped Mahomet for Christ,
He might have borne me through out all the world,
So well I loved and honoured the man.

These praises Brusor touch me to the heart,
And makes me wish that I had been at Rhodes,
Under the habit of some errant knight,
Both to have seen and tried his valour.

You should have seen him foil and overthrow,
All the Knights that there encountered him.

What ere he be, even for his virtues sake,
I wish that fortune of our holy wars,
Would yield him prisoner unto Soliman:
We may our selves be famd for virtues.
But let him pass, and Brusor tell me now,
How did the Christians use our Knights?

As if that we and they had been on sect,

What think thou of their valour and demeanour?

Brave men at arms, and friendly out of arms,
Courteous in peace, in battle dangerous,
Kind to their foes, and liberal to their friends,
And all in all, their deeds heroical.

Then tell me Brusor, how is Rhodes fenst,
For either Rhodes shall be brave Solymans,
Or cost me more brave Soldiers
Then all that I'll will bear.

Their fleet is weak:
Their horse, I deem them fifty thousand strong,
Their footmen more, well exercised in war,
And as it seems, they want no needful vittaile.

How ever Rhodes be fencd by sea or land,
It either shall be mine, or bury me:
Whats he that thus boldly enters in?
His habit argues him a Christian,

I worthy Lord a forlorn Christian.

Tell me man, what madness brought thee hither?

Thy virtuous fame, and mine own misery.

What misery? speak, for though you Christians,
Account our Turkish race but barbarous,
Yet have we ears to hear a just complaint,
And justice to defend the innocent,
And pity, to such as are in poverty,
And liberal hands to such as merit bounty,

My gracious Sovereign, as this Knight,
Seems by grief tied to silence,
So his deserts binds me to speak for him.
This is Erastus the Rhodian worthy,
The flower of chivalry and courtesy,

Is this the man that thou hast so described?
Stand up fair knight, that what my heart desires,
Mine eyes may view with pleasure and delight,
This face of thine should harbour no deceit.
Erastus i'll not yet urge to know the cause,
That brought thee hither,
Least with the discourse, thou should afflict thy self,
And cross the fulness of my joyful passion,
But that we are assured,
Heavens brought thee hither for our benefit,
Know thou that Rhodes, nor all that Rhodes contains,
Shall win thee from the side of Soliman,
If we but find thee well inclind to us.

If any ignoble or dishonourable thoughts,
Should dare attempt, or but creep near my heart:
Honour should force disdain to root it out,
As air bred Eagles, if they once perceive,
That any of their brood but close their sight,
When they should case against the glorious Sun,
They straight way seas upon him with their talents,
That on the earth it may untimely die,
For looking but a scue at heavens bright eye.

Erastus, to make thee well assured,
How well thy speech and presents likes us,
Ask what thou wilt, it shall be granted thee.

Then this my gracious Lord is all I crave,
That being banished from my native soil,
I may have liberty to live a Christian.

I that, or any thing thou shalt desire,
Thou shalt be Captain of our Ianisaries,
And in our counsel shalt thou sit with us,
And be great Solimans adopted friend.

The least of these surpass my best desert,
Unless true loyalty may seem desert.

Erastus, now thou hast obtained thy boon,
Deny not Soliman this own request;
A virtuous envy pricks me with desire,
To try thy valour, say art thou content?

I, if my Sovereign say content, I yield.

Then give us Swords and Targets,
And now Erastus think me thine enemy,
But ever after thy continual friend,
And spare me not, for then thou wrongst my honour.
Nay, nay Erastus, throw not down thy weapons,
As if thy force did fail, it is enough
That thou hast conquered Soliman by strength,
By courtesy let Soliman conquer thee.
And now from arms to counsel sir thee down:
Before thy coming I vowed to conquer Rhodes,
Say wilt thou be our Lieutenant there,
And further us in manage of these wars?

My gracious Sovereign, without presumption,
If poor Erastus may once more entreat,
Let not great Solimans command,
To whose behest I vow obedience,
Enforce me sheath my slaughtering blade,
In the dear bowels of my countrymen:
And were it not that Soliman hath sworn,
My tears should plead for pardon to that place:
I speak not this to shrink away for fear,
Or hide my head in time of dangerous storms,
Employ me else where in thy foreign wars,
Against the Persians or the barbarous Moore,
Erastus will be foremost in the battle.

Why fauourst thou thy countrymen so much,
By whose cruelty thou art exylde?

Tis not my country, but Phylippos wrath,
It must be told, for Ferdinandos death,
Whom I in honours cause have reft of life,

Nor suffer this or that to trouble thee,
Thou shalt not need Phylippo nor his I'll,
Nor shalt thou war against thy Countrymen,
I like thy virtue in refusing it,
But that our oath may have his currant course,
Brusor, go levy men,
Prepare a fleet, to assault and conquer Rhodes,
Mean time Erastus and I will strive,
By mutual kindness to excel each other.
Brusor be gon, and see not Soliman,
Till thou hast brought Rhodes in subjection.
And now Erastus come and follow me.
Where thou shalt see what pleasures and what sports,
My Minions and my Euenukes can devise,
To drive away this melancholy mood.

Oh master, see where I am,

Say Piston whats the news at Rhodes,

Cold and comfortless for you,
Will you have them all at once?

I.

Why the Governor will hang you he catch you.
Ferdinando is buried, your friends commend them to you:
Perseda hath the chain, and is like to die for sorrow.

I that's the grief, that we are parted thus.
Come follow me and I will hear the rest,
For now I must attend the Emperor.

Accursed Chain, unfortunate Perseda.

Accursed Chain, vnforrunate Lucina,
My friend is gone, and I am desolate.

My friend is gone, and I am desolate,
Return him back fair stars or let me die.

Return him back fair heavens, or let me die,
For what was he but comfort of my life?

For what was he but comfort of my life?
But why was I so careful of the Chain.

But why was I so careless of the chain,
Had I not lost it, my friend had not been slain.

Had I not asked it, my friend had not departed,
His parting is my death.

His deaths my lives departing,
And here my tongue doth stay, with swollen harts grief,

And here my swollen harts grief doth stay my tongue.

For whom weep you?

Ah, for Fernandos dying.

For whom morn you?

Ah, for Erastus flying,

Why Lady is not Basilisco here?
Why Lady doth not Basilisco live?
Am not I worth both these for whom you morn:
Then take one half of me, and cease to weep,
Orif you gladly would enjoy me both,
I'll serve the one by day, the other by night,
And I will pay you both your sound delight.

Ah how unpleasant is mirth to melancholy.

My heart is full, I cannot laugh at folly.

See, see, Lucinae hates me like a Toad,
Because that when Erastus spake my name,
Her love Fernando died at the same,
So dreadful is our name to cowerdice.
On the otherside, Perseda takes it unkindly,
That ere he went I brought not bound unto her,
Erastus that faint hearted run away:
Alas how could I, for his man no sooner
Informd him, that I sought him up and down,
But he was gon in twinkling of an eye:
But I will after my delicious love,
For well I wot, though she desemble thus,
And cloak affection with her modesty,
With love of me her thoughts are over gone,
More then was Phillis with her Demophon.

Brave prince of Cipris, and our son in law,
Now there is little time to stand and talk,
The Turks have past our Galleys and are landed,
You with some men at arms shall take the Tower,
I with the rest will down unto the strane:
If we be beaten back we'll come to you,
And here in spite of damned Turks, we'll gain
A glorious death or famous victory.

About it then.

Drum sound a parle to the Citttzens.

What parle craves the Turkish at our hands.

We come with mighty Solimans command,
Monarch and mighty Emperor of the world,
From East to Weast, from South, to Septentrion,
If you resist, expect what war affords,
Mischief, murder, blood, and extremity,
What wilt thou yield and try our clemency?
Say I, or no; for we are peremptory.

Your Lord usurps in all that he posesseth,
And that great God which we do truly worship,
Shall strengthen us against your insolence.

Now if thou plead for mercy, tis to late:
Come fellow Soldiers, let us to the breach,
That's made already on the other side.

Now Rhodes is yoked, and stoops to Soliman,
There lies the Governor, and there his son:
Now let their souls tell sorry tidings to their ancestors,
What millions of men oppressed with ruin and scath,
The Turkish armies did in Christendom,
What say these prisoners, will they turn Turk, or no?

First Iulio will die ten thousand deaths.

And Guelpio, rather then deny his Christ.

Then stab the slaves, and send their souls to hell.

I turn, I turn, oh save my life I turn.

For bear to hurt him: when we land in Turkie
He shall be circumcised and have his rites.

Think you I turn Turque,
For fear of servile death that's but a sport,
I faith sirno:
Tis for Perseda whom I love so well,
That I would follow her, though she went to hell.

Now for these Ladies: their lives privilege
Hangs on their beauty, they shall be preserved,
To be presented to great Soliman,
The greatest honour Fortune could affoord.

The most dishonour that could ere befall.

Now Fortune, what hast thou done in this later passage

I placed Erastus in the favour,
Of Solyman the Turkish Emperor.

Nay that was Love, for I couched my self
In poor Erastus eyes, and with a look
Orespred with tears, bewitched Solyman,
Beside I sat on valiant Brusors tongue,
To guide the praises of the herodian knight.
Then in the Ladies passions, I showed my power,
And lastly Love made Basiliscos tougue,
To counter check his hart by turning Turk,
And save his life, in spite of deaths despite.

How chance it then, that Love and Fortunes power
Could neither save Philippo nor his son,
Nor Guelpio, nor signior Iulio,
Nor rescue Rhodes from out the hands of Death.

Why Brusors victory was Fortunes gift.

But had I slept, his conquest had been small.

Wherefore stay we, theirs more behind, which proves
That though Love wink, Loves not stark blind.

Faith master, me thinks you are unwise.
That you wear not the high Sugerloafe hat,
And the gilded gown the Emperor gave you,

Peace fool, a sable weed fits discontent, Away, be gon.

I'll go provide your supper,
A shoulder of mutton, and never a Sallet.

I must confess that Solyman is kind,
Past all compare, and more then my desert,
But what helps gay garments, when the minds oprest,
What pleases the eye, when the sense is altered,
My heart is over whelmd with thousand woes,
And melancholy leads my soul in triumph,
No marvel then if I have little mind,
Of rich imbroderie or costly ornaments,
Of honours titles, or of wealth, or gain,
Of music, viands, or of dainty dames,
No, no, my hope full long ago was lost,
And Rhodes it self is lost, or else destroyed,
If not destroide, yet bound and captivate,
If captivate, then forced from holy faith:
If forced from faith, for ever miserable,
For what is misery, but want of God,
And God is lost, if faith be overthrown.

Why how now Erastus, always in thy dumps?
Still in black habit fitting funeral?
Cannot my love persuade thee from this mood,
Nor all my fair entreats and blandishments,
Were thou my friend, thy mind would jump with mine,
For what are friends, but one mind in two bodies.
Perhaps thou doubts my friendships constancy,
Then dost thou wrong the measure of my love,
Which hath no measure, and shall never end,
Come Erastus sit thee down by me,
And i'll impart to thee our Brusors news,
News to our honour, and to thy content:
The Governor is slain that sought thy death.

A worthy man though not Erastus friend,

The Prince of Cipris to, is likewise slain.

Fair blossom, likely to have proved good fruit.

Rhodes is taken, and all the men are slain.
Except some few that turn to Mahomet.

I there it is, now all my friends are slain,
And fair Perseda murdered or deflowerd.
Ah gracious Solyman now show thy love,
In not denying thy poor supplyant:
Suffer me not to stay here in thy presence,
But by my self lament me once for all,
Here if I stay, I must suppress my tears,
And tears suppressed will but increase my sorrow.

Go then, go spend thy mournings all at once,
That in thy presence Soliman may joy.
For hitherto have I reaped little pleasure,
Well well Erastus, Rhodes may bless thy birth,
For his sake only will I spare them more,
From spoil, pillage, and oppression,
Then Alexander spared warlike Thebes
For Pindarus: or then Augustus
Spared rich Alexandria for Arias sake.

My gracious Lord, rejoice in happiness:
All Rhodes is yoked, and stoops to Solyman.

First thanks to heaven, and next to Brusors valour,
Which i'll not guerdon with large promises,
But straight reward thee with a bounteous largess:
But what two Christian Virgins have we here?

Part of the spoil of Rhodes, which were preserved
To be presented to your mightiness.

This present pleases more then all the rest,
And were their garments turned from black to white,
I should have deemed them Junoes goodly Swans,
Or Venus milk white Doves, so mild they are,
And so adorned with beauties miracle.
Here Brusor this kind Turtle shall be thine,
Take her and use her at thy pleasure:
But this kind Turtle is for Soliman,
That her captivity may turn to bliss.
Fair looks resembling Phoebus radiant beams,
Smooth forehead like the table of high Jove,
Small pensild eye brows, like to glorious rainbowes,
Quick lampelike eyes, like heavens two brightest orbs,
Lips of pure Coral breathing Ambrosie,
Cheeks, where the Rose and Lilly are incombate,
Neck whiter then the Snowy Apenines,
Breasts like two overflowing Fountains,
Twixt which a vale leads to the Elisian shades,
Where under covert lies the fount of pleasure,
Which thoughts may guess, but tongue must not profane.
A sweeter creature nature never made,
Love never rainted Solyman till now,
Now fair Virgin let me hear thee speak.

What can my tongue utter, but grief and death.

The sound is hunnie, but the sense is gall:
The sweeting bless me with a cheerful look.

How can mine eyes dart forth a pleasant look,
When they are stopped with floods of flowing tears.

If tongue with grief, and eyes with tears be filled,
Say Virgin, how doth thy heart admit,
The pure affection of great Soliman?

My thoughts are like pillars of Adamant,
Too hard to take an new impression.

Nay then I see my stooping makes her proud,
She is my vassal, and I will command,
Coy Virgin know thou what offence it is,
To thwart the will and pleasure of a king?
Why thy life is done, if I but say the word.

Why that's the period that my heart desires.

And die thou shalt, unless thou change thy mind.

Nay then Perseda grows resolute,
Solimans thoughts and mine resemble,
Lives paralise that never can be joined.

Then kneel thou down,
And army hands receive the stroke of death,
Domde to thy self by thine own wilfulnes.

Strike, strike, thy words pierce deeper then thy blows.

Brusor hide her, for her looks withhould me,
O Brusor thou hast not hid her lips,
For there sits Venus with Cupid on her knee,
And all the Graces smiling round about her,
So craving pardon that I cannot strike.

Her face is covered over quite my Lord.

Why, so.
O Brusor, see thou not her milk white neck,
That Alabaster tower,
Twill break the edge of my keen Semitor,
And pieces flying back will wound my self.

Now she is all covered my Lord.

Why now at last she dyes.

O Christ receive my soul.

Hark Brusor she calls on Christ,
I will not send her to him,
Her words are music,
The self same music that in ancient days,
Brought Alexander from war to banqueting,
And made him fall from skirmishing to kissing.
No my dear Love would not let me kill thee,
Though Majesty would turn desire to wrath,
There lies my sword, humbled at thy feet,
And I my self that govern many kings,
Entreat a pardon for my rash misdeed.

Now Soliman wrongs his imperial state,
But if thou love me, and have hope to win,
Grant me one boon that I shall crave of thee,

What ere it be, Perseda I grant it thee,

Then let me live a Christian Virgin still,
Unless my state shall alter by my will,

My word is past, and I recall my passions,
What should he do with crown and Empery,
That cannot govern private fond affections,
Yet give me leave in honest sort to court thee,
To ease, though not to cure, my malady:
Come sit thee down upon my right hand here,
This seat I keepevoide for another friend:
Go Ianisaries call in your Governor,
So shall I joy between two captive friends,
And yet my self becaptiue to them both,
If friendships yoke were not at liberty:
See where he comes my other best beloved.

My sweet and best beloved.

My sweet and best beloved:

For thee my dear Erastus have I lived.

And I for thee, or else I had not lived.

What words in affection do I see?

Ah pardon me great Soliman, for this is she,
For whom I mourned more then for all Rhodes,
And from whose absence I derived my sorrow.

And pardon me my Lord, for this is he,
For whom I thwarted Solimans entreats,
And for whose exile I lamented thus.

Even from my childhood have I tendered thee,
Witness the heavens of my vnfeined love.

By this one accedent I well perceive,
That heavens and heavenly powers do manage love,
I love them both, I know not which the better,
They love each other best, what then should follow,
But that I conquer both by my deserts,
And join their hands, whose hearts are knit already,
Erastus and Perseda come you hither,
And both give me your hands,
Erastus, none but thou could win Perseda,
Perseda, none but thou could win Erastus
From great Soliman, so well I love you both:
And now to turn late promises to good effect,
Be thou Erastus Governor of Rhodes,
By this thou shalt dismiss my garrison.

Must he reap that for which I took the toil?
Come envy then and sit in friendships seat,
How can I love him that enjoys my right.

Give me a crown, to crown the bride withal,
Perseda, for my sake wear this crown:
Now is she fairer then she was before,
This title so augments her beauty as the fire,
That lay with honours hand racked up in ashes,
Reuies again to flames, the force is such,
Remove the cause, and then the effect will die,
They must depart, or I shall not be quiet,
Erastus and Perseda, marvel not,
That all in hast I wish you to depart,
There is an urgent cause, but privy to my self,
Command my shipping for to waft you over.

My gracious Lord, when Erastus doth forget this favour,
Then let him live abandoned and forlorn.

Nor will Perseda slack even in her prayers
And still solicit God for Soliman,
Whose mind hath proved so good and gracious.

Farewell Erastus, Perseda farewell to.
Me thinks I should not part with two such friends,
The one so renownd for arms and courtesy,
The other so adorned with grace and modesty:
Yet of the two Perseda moves me most,
I and so moves me, that I now repent,
That ere I gave away my hearts desire,
What was it but abuse of Fortunes gift,
And therefore Fortune now will be revenged.
What was it but abuse of loves command,
And therefore mighty Love will be reuengd:
What was it but abuse of heavens that gave her me,
And therefore angry heavens will be reuengd:
Heavens, Love, and Fortune, all three have decreed,
That I shall love her still, and lack her still,
Like ever thirsting wretched Tantalus:
Foolish Soliman, why did I strive,
To do him kindness, and undo my self?
Well governed friends do first regard themselves.

I now occasion serves to stumble him,
That thrust his sickle in my harvest corn,
Pleases your Majesty to hear Brusor speak.

To one past cure, good counsel comes too late,
Yet say thy mind.

With secret letters woe her, and with gifts,

My lines and gifts will but return my shame.

Here me my Lord, let me go over to Rhodes,
That I may plead in your affections cause,
One woman may do much to win another.

Indeed Lucina were her husband from her,
She happily might be won by thy persuades,
But whilst he lives there is no hope in her.

Why lives he then to grieve great Soliman,
This only remains, that you consider,
In two extremes the least is to be chosen,
If so your life depend upon her love,
And that her love depends upon his life,
Is it not better that Erastus die
Ten thousand deaths, then Soliman should perish?

I say thou so? why then it shall be so,
But by what means shall poor Erastus die?

This shall be the means,
I'll fetch him back again,
Under colour of great consequence,
No sooner shall he land upon our shore,
But witness shall be ready to accuse him,
Oftreason done against your mightiness,
And then he shall be doomed by marshall law,

Oh fine devise, Brusor get thee gone,
Come thou again, but let the lady stay,
To win Perseda to my will, mean while,
Will I prepare the judge and witnesses,
And if this take effect, thou shalt be Viceroy,
And fair Lucina Queen of Tripolie,
Brusor be gone, for till thou come I languish.
And now to ease my troubled thoughts at last,
I will go sit among my learned Euenukes,
And here them play, and see my minions dance,
For till that Brusor bring me my desire,
I may assuage, but never quench loves fire.

Since the expugnation of the Rhodian I'll,
Me thinks a thousand years are overpassed,
More for the lack of my Persedas presence,
Then for the loss of Rhodes that paltry I'll,
Or for my friends that there were murdered,
My valour every where shall purchase friends,
And where a man lives well, there is his country.
Alas the Christians are but very shallow,
In giving judgment of a man at arms,
A man of my desert and excellence.
The Turks whom they account for barbarous,
Having forehard of Basiliscoes worth,
A number under prop me with their shoulders,
And in procession bare me to the Church,
As I had been a second Mahomet,
I fearing they would adore me for a God,
Wisely informd them that I was but man,
Although in time perhaps I might aspire,
To purchase Godhead, as did Hercules,
I mean by doing wonders in the world:
A midst their Church they bound me to a pillar,
And to make trial of my valiancy,
They lopped a collop of my tendrest member.
But think you Basilisco squicht for that,
Even as a Cow for tickling in the horne,
That done, they set me on a milk white Ass,
Compassing me with goodly ceremonies,
That day me thought, I sat in Pompeyes Chair,
And viewed the Capital, and was Romes greatest glory.

I would my master had left
Some other to be his agent here:
Faith I am weary of the office already,
What Seignior Tremomundo,
That rid a pilgrimage to beg cakebread.

O take me not unprovided, let me fetch my weapons.

Why I meant nothing but a Basolus Manus.

No, did thou not mean to give me the privy stab?

No by my troth sir.

Nay if thou had, I had not feared thee I,
I tell thee my skin holds out Pistol proof.

Pistol proof? i'll try if it will hold out pin prove,

O shoot no more great God I yield to thee.

I see his skin is but pistol proof from the girdle upward
What sud deign agony was that?

Why saw thou not, how Cupid God of love,
Not daring look me in the marshall face,
Came like a coward stealing after me,
And with his pointed dart pricked my posteriors.

Then here my opinion concerning that point,
The Ladies of Rhodes hearing that you have lost,
A capital part of your Lady ware,
Have made their petition to Cupid,
To plague you above all other,
As one preiuditiall to their muliebritie,
Now sir, Cupid seeing you already hurt before,
Thinks it a greater punishment to hurt you behind,
Therefore I would wish you to have an eye to the back door

Sooth thou says, I must be fencd behind,
I'll hang my target there.

Indeed that will serve to bear of some blows,
When you run away in a fray.

Sir, sir, what art thou?
That thus incrochest upon my familiarity,
Without special admittance.

Why do you not know me? I am Erastus man.

What art thou that petty pygmy,
That chalneged me at Rhode;:
Whom I refused to combat for his minority,
Where is Erastus I owe him chastisement in Persedas quarrel.

Do not you know that they are all friends,
And Erastus married to Perseda,
And Erastus made governor of Rhodes,
And I left here to be their agent?

O coelum, O terra, O maria Neptune,
Did I turn Turk to follow her so far,

The more shame for you.

And is she linked in liking with my foe?

That's because you were out of the way.

O wicked Turque for to steal her hence.

O wicked turn coat that would have her staye.

The truth is, i'll be a Turk no more.

And I fear thou wilt never prove good christian.

I will after to take revenge.

And i'll stay here about my masters business.

Farewell Constantinople, I will to Rhodes.

Farewell counterfeit fool,
God send him good shipping:
Tis noisd about, that Brusor is sent,
To fetch my master back again,
I cannot be well till I hear the rest of the news,
Therefore I'll about it straight.

Now Fortune what hast thou done in this latter act?

I brought Perseda to the presence,
Of Soliman the Turkish Emperor,
And gave Lucina into Brusors hands.

And first I stung them with consenting love,
And made great Soliman sweet beauties thrall,
Humble himself at fair Persedas feet,
And made him praise love and captives beauty:
Again, I made him to recall his passions,
And give Perseda to Erastus hands,
And after make repentance of the deed.

Mean time I filled Erastus sails with wind,
And brought him home unto his native land.

And I subornd Brusor with envious rage,
To counsel Soliman to slay his friend,
Brusor is sent to fetch him back again,
Mark well what follows, for the history
Proves me chief actor in this tragedy.

Perseda, these days are our days of joy.
What could I more desire then thee to wife,
And that I have: or then to govern Rhodes,
And that I do, thanks to great Soliman,

And thanks to gracious heavens, that so
Brought Soliman from worse to better,
For though I never told it thee till now,
His heart was purposd once to do thee wrong.

I that was before he knew thee to be mine,
But now Perseda, lets forget old griefs,
And let our studies wholly be employed,
To work each others bliss and hearts delight.

Our present joys will be so much the greater,
When as we call to mind fore passed griefs,
So singes the Mariner upon the shore,
When he hath past the dangerous time of storms:
But if my Love will have old griefs forgot,
They shall lie buried in Persedas breast.

Welcome Lord Brusor.

And Lucina to.

Thanks Lord governor.

And thanks to you Madame.

What hasty news brings you so soon to Rhodes?
Although to me you never come to soon.

So it is my Lord, that upon great affairs,
Importuning health and wealth of Soliman,
His highness by me entreats you,
As ever you respect his future love,
Or have regard unto his courtesy,
To come your self in person and visit him,
Without inquiry what should be the cause.

Were there no ships to cross the Seas withal,
My arms should frame mine oars to cross the seas,
And should the seas turn tide to force me back.
Desire should frame me wings to fly to him,
I go Perseda thou must give me leave.

Though loath, yet Solimans command prevails,

And sweet Perseda I will stay with you,
From Brusor my beloved, and I'll want him,
Till he bring back Erastus unto you.

Lord Brusor come tis time that we were gon.

Perseda farewell, be not angry,
For that I carry thy beloved from thee,
We will return with all speed possible,
And thou Lucina, use Perseda so,
That for my carrying of Erastus hence,
She curse me not, and so farewell to both.

Come Lucina lets in, my heart is full.

Lord marshall, see you handle it cunningly,
And when Erastus comes our periurd friend,
See he be condemned by marshall law,
Here will I stand to see and not be seen.

Come fellows see when this matter comes in question,
You stagger not: and Ianisaries,
See that your strangling cords be ready.

Ah that Perseda were not half so fair,
Or that Soliman were not so fond,
Or that Perseda had some other love,
Whose death might save my poor Erastus life,
See where he comes, whom though I dearly love,
Yet must his blood be spilt for my behoof,
Such is the force of morrow burning love.

Erastus, Lord Governor of Rhodes,
I arrest you in the Kings name.

What thinks Lord Brusor of this strange arrest,
Hast thou entrapped me to this treachery:
Intended well I wot without the leave
Or licence of my Lord great Soliman.

Why then appeal to him, where thou shalt know
And be assured that I betray thee not.

Yes, thou, and I, and all of us betray him.

No, no, in this case no appeal shall serve.

Why then to thee, or unto any else,
I here protest by heavens unto you all,
That never was there man more true or just,
Or in his deeds more loyal and upright,
Or more loving, or more innocent,
Than I have been to gracious Soliman,
Since first I set my feet on Turkish land.

My self would be his witness if I durst,
But bright Persedaes beauty stops my tongue.

Why sirs, why face to face express you not,
The treasons you reueald to Soliman?

That very day Erastus went from hence,
He sent for me into his Cabinet,
And for that man that is of my profession.

I never saw them I until this day.

His Cabin door fast shut, he first began
To question us of all sorts of fire-workes,
Wherein, when we had fully resolved him,
What might be done, he spredding on the board,
A huge heap of our imperial coin,
All this is yours quoth he, if you consent,
To leave great Soliman and serve in Rhodes.

Why that was treason, but onwards with the rest.

What have we heer, my master before the marshall?

We said not I, nor durst we say him nay,
Because we were already in his galleys,
But seemd content to fly with him to Rhodes,
With that he purst the gould, and gave it us.
The rest I dare not speak it is so bad.

Heavens heer you this, and drops not vengeance on them
The other wit. The rest, and worst, will I discourse in brief,
Will you consent quoth he to fire the fleet,
That lies hard by us here in Bosphoron,
For be it spoke in secret here quoth he,
Rhodes must no longer bear the turkish yoke,
We said the task might easily be performed,
But that we lacked such drugs to mix with powder,
As were not in his galleys to be got,
At this he leapt for joy, swearing and promisiug,
That our reward should be redoubled:
We came aland not minding for to return,
And as our duty and aleageance bound us,
We made all known unto great Soliman,
But ere we could summon him a land,
His ships were past a kenning from the shore,
Belike he thought we had bewrayd his treasons.

That all is true that here you have declard.
Both lay your hands upon the Alcaron.

Foul death betide me if I swear not true,

And mischief light on me, if I swear false.

Mischief and death shall light upon you both.

Erastus thou see what witness hath produced against thee,
What answer thou unto their accusations?

That these are Synons and my self poor Troy.

Now it rests, I appoint thy death,
Wherein thou shalt confess i'll favour thee,
For that thou were beloved of Soliman,
Thou shalt forthwith be bound unto that post,
And strangled as our Turkish order is.

Such favour send all Turks I pray God.

I see this train was plotted ere I came,
What boots complaining wheres no remedy:
Yet give me leave before my life shall end,
To moan Perseda, and accuse my friend.

O unjust Soliman, O wicked time,
Where filthy lust must murder honest love.

Dispatch, for our time limited is past.

Alas, how can he but be short, whose tongue
Is fast tide with galling sorrow.
Farewell Perseda, no more but that for her:
Inconstant Soliman, no more but that for him,
Unfortunate Erastus, no more but that for me:
Lo this is al, thus I leave to speak.

Marie sir this is a fair warning for me to get me gon.

O save his life, if it be possible,
I will not loose him for my kingdoms worth,
Ah poor Erastus art thou dead already,
What bold presumer durst be so resolved,
For to bereave Erastus life from him,
Whose life to me was dearer then mine own,
Wast thou and thou, Lord marshall bring them het her,
And at Erastus hand let them receive,
The stroke of death, whom they have spoiled of life:
What is thy hand to weak? then mine shall help,
To send them down to everlasting night,
To wait upon thee through eternal shade,
Thy soul shall not go mourning hence alone:
Thus die and thus, for thus you murdered him,
But soft me thinks he is not satisfied,
The breath doth murmure softly from his lips,
And bids me kill those bloody witnesses,
By whose treachery Erastus dyed:
Lord Marshall, hale them to the towers top,
And throw them headlong down into the valley,
So let their treasons with their lives have end.

Your self procured us.

Is this our hier?

Speak not a word, least in my wrathful surie,
I doom you to ten thousand direful torments:
And Brusor see Erastus be interd,
With honour in a kingly sepulcher,
Why when Lord marshall? great Hectors son,
Although his age did plead for innocence:
Was sooner tumbled from the fatal tower.
Then are those periurde wicked witnesses.
Why now Erastus Ghost is satisfied:
I, but yet the wicked Judge survives,
By whom Erastus was condemned to die,
Brusor, as thou love me stab in the marshall,
Least he detect us unto the world,
By making known our bloody practises,
And then will thou and I hoist sail to Rhodes,
Where thy Lucina and my Perseda lives.

I will my lord: lord Marshal, it is his highness pleasure
That you commend him to Erastus soul.

Here ends my dear Erastus tragedy,
And now begins my pleasant Comedy,
But if Perseda understand these news,
Our seane will prove but tragicomical.

Fear not my Lord, Lucina plays her part,
And woos apace in Solimans behalf.

Then Brusor come, and with some few men,
Lets sail to Rhodes with all convenient speed,
For till I fouled Perseda in mine arms,
My troubled ears are deft with loves alarms.

Now signior Basilisco, which like you,
The Turkish or our nation best.

That which your ladyship will have me like,

I am deceived but you were circumcised,

Indeed I was a littlc cut in the porpuse.

What means made you to steal back to Rhodes*

The mighty pinckanied brand bearing God,
To whom I am so long true servitor,
When he espy de my weeping floods of tears,
For your depart, he bad me follow him:
I followed him, he with his fire brand,
Parted the seas, and we came over drieshod.

A matter not unlikely: but how chance,
Your turkish bonet is not on your head?

Because I now am Christian again,
And that by natural means, for as
The old Cannon says very prettily,
Nihill est tam naturali, quod eo modo colligatum est.
And so forth: so I became a Turk to follow her,
To follow her, am now returned a Christian.

O Lady and mistress, weep and lament,
And wring your hands, for my Master
Is condemned and executed.

Be patient sweet Perseda, the fool but jests,

Ah ho, my nightly dreams foretould me this,
Which foolish woman fondly I neglected,
But say what death dyed my poor Erastus?

Nay, God be praisd, his death was reasonable,
He was but strangled,

But strangled, ah double death to me,
But say, wherefore was he condemned to die?

For nothing but hie treason.

What treason, or by whom was he condemned?

Faith two great knights of the post, swore upon the
Alcaron, that he would have fired the Turks Fleet.

Was Brusor by?

I.

And Soliman?

No but I saw where he stood,
To here and see the matter well conveyed.

Accursed Soliman, profane Alcaron,
Lucina, came thy husband to this end?
To lead a Lamb unto the slaughterhouse,
Hast thou for this, in Solimans behalf?
With cunning words tempted my chastity,
Thou shalt aby for both your trecheries,
It must be so, Basilisco do thou love me, speak,

I more then I love either life or soul,
What shall I stab the Emperout for thy sake.

No, but Lucina if thou love me, kill her,

The point will mar her skin.

What dare thou not, give me the dagger then,
There's a reward for all thy treasons past,

Yet dare I bear her hence, to do thee good.

No let her lie, a pray to ravening birds:
Nor shall her death alone suffice for his,
Rhodes now shall be no longer Solimans,
VVeele fortify our walls, and keep the town,
In spite of proud insulting Soliman,
I know the lecher hopes to have my love,
And first Perseda, shall with this hand die,
Then yield to him and live in infamy.

I will ruminate. Death which the poets
Fain to be pale and meager;
Hath depriued Erastus trunk from breathing vitalitie,
A brave Cauelere, but my aprooued foeman:
Let me see: where is that Alcides, surnamed Hercules?
The only Club man of his time: dead.
Where is the eldest son of Pryam?
That abraham coloured Troion: dead.
Where is the leader of the Mirmidons,
That well knit Accill: dead.
Where is that furious Aiax, the son of Telamon,
Or that fraudful squire of Ithaca, Iclipt Vlisses? dead,
Where is tipsy Alexander, that great cup conqueror,
Or Pompey that brave warrior? dead:
I am my self strong, but I confess death to be stronger,
I am valiant, but mortal,
I am a dorned with natures gifs,
A giddy goddess, that now gives and anon takes,
I am wise, but quiddits will not answer death:
To conclude in a word, to be captious virtuous, ingenious,
Or to be nothing when it pleases death to be envious.
The great Turque, whose seat is Constantinople,
Hath beleagred Rhodes, whose chieftain is a woman.
I could take the rule upon me,
But the shrub is safe when the Cedar shakes:
I love Perseda as one worthy,
But I love Basilisco as one I hold more worthy.
My fathers son, my mothers solace, my proper self.
Faith he can do little that cannot speak,
And he can do less that cannot run away.
Then since mans life is as a glass, and a phillip may crack it,
Mine is no more and a bullet may pearce it:
Therefore I will play least in sight.

The gates are shut, which proves that Rhodes reuolts,
And that Perseda is not Solimans.
Ah Brusor see where thy Lucina lies
Butcherd dispightfullie without the walls.

Unkind Perseda, could thou use her so?
And yet we used Perseda little better.

Nay gentle Brusor stay thy tears a while,
Least with thy woes thou spoil my commedie,
And all to soon be turned to Tragedies.
Go Brusor, bear her to thy priuatetent,
Where we at leisure will lament her death,
And with our tears be wail her obsequies:
For yet Perseda lives for Soliman.
Drum sounda parle, were it not for her,
I would sack the town ere I would sound a parle.

At whose entreaty is this parle sounded?

At our entreaty, therefore yield the town.

Why what art thou that boldly bids us yield?

Great Soliman, Lord of all the world.

Thou art not Lord of all, Rhodes is not thine.

It was, and shall be maugre who says no.

I that say no will never see it thine.

Why what art thou that dares resist my force?

A Gentleman and thy mortal enemy,
And one that dares thee to the single combat:

First tell me, doth Perseda live or no?

She lives to see the wrack of Soliman,

Then i'll combat thee what ere thou art.

And in Erastus name i'll combat thee,
And here I promise thee on my Christian faith,
Then will I yield Perseda to thy hands.
That if thy strength shall over match my right,
To use, as to thy liking shall seem best,
But ere I come to enter single fight,
First let my tongue utter my hearts despite,
And thus my tale begins: thou wicked tyrant,
Thou murderer, accursed homicide,
For whom hell gapes, and all the ugly feends
Do wait for to receive thee in their jaws:
Ah perjured and in human Soliman,
How could thy heart harbour a wicked thought?
Against the spotless life of poor Erastus?
Was he not true? would thou had been as just,
Was he not valiant? would thou had bin as virtuous,
Was he not loyal? would thou had been as loving:
Ah wicked tyrant in that one mans death,
Thou hast betrayed the flower of Christen dome,
Dyed he because his worth obscured thine,
In slaughtering him thy virtues are defamed,
Did thou misdoe him, in hope to win Perseda,
Ah foolish man, therein thou art deceived,
For though she live, yet will she near live thine,
Which to approve, i'll come to combat thee.

Injurious foul mouthd knight, my wrathful arm
Shall chastise and rebuke these injuries.

I but here you, are you so foolish to fight with him?

I sir, why not, as long as I stand by?

I'll not defend Erastus innocence,
But thee, maintianing of Persedas beauty,

I now I lay Perseda at thy feet,
But with thy hand first wounded to the death,
Now shall the world report that Soliman,
Slew Erastus in hope to win Perseda,
And murdered her for loving of her husband.

What my Perseda, ah what have I done,
Yet kiss me gentle love before thou die.

A kiss I grant thee, though I hate thee deadly,

I loved thee dearly and accept thy kiss,
Why did thou love Erastus more then me,
Or why did not give Soliman a kiss
Ere this unhappy time, then had thou lived:

Ah let me kiss thee too before I die,

Nay die thou shalt for thy presumption,
For kissing her whom I do hold so dear,

I will not kiss her sir, but give me leave
To weep over her, for while she lived,
Sheeloued me dearly, and I loved her.

If thou did love her villain as thou said,
Then wait on her thorough eternal night.
Ah Perseda, how shall I morn for thee?
Fair springing rose, ill plucked before thy time.
Ah heavens that hitherto have smiled on me,
Why do you unkindly lower on Soliman?
The loss of half my Realms, nay crowns decay,
Could not have pricked so near unto my heart,
As doth the loss of my Persedaes life:
And with her life, I likewise loose my love,
And with her love my hearts felicity,
Even for Erastus death, the heavens have plagued me.
Ah no the heavens did never more accurse me,
Then when they made me Butcher of my love,
Yet justly how can I condemn my self,
When Brusor lives that was the cause of all.
Come Brusor, help to lift her body up,
Is she not fair?

Even in the hour of death.

Was she not constant?

As firm as are the poles whereon heaven lies.

Was she not chaste?

As is Pandora or Dianaes thoughts.

Then tell me? his treasons set aside,
What was Erastus in thy opinion?

Fair spoken, wise, courteous, and liberal:
Kind, even to his foes, gentle and affable,
And all, in all, his deeds heroyacall.

Ah, was he so? how durst thou then ungracious Counseller,
First cause me murder such a worthy man,
And after tempt so virtuous a woman,
Be this therefore the last that ere thou speak:
Ianisaries, take him straight unto the block,
Off with his head, and suffer him not to speak.
And now Perseda here I lay me down,
And on thy beauty still contemplate,
Until mine eyes shall surfeit by my gazing:
But stay let me see what paper is this.
Tyrant my lips were saw with deadly poison,
To plague thy hart that is so full of poison.
What am I poisoned? then Ianisaries,
Let me see Rhodes recovered ere I die,
Soldiers, assault the town on every side,
Spoil all, kill all, let none escape your fury,
Say Captain, is Rhodes recovered again.

It is my Lord, and stoops to Soliman.

Yet that alayes the fury of my pain,
Before I die, for doubtless die I must,
I fates, injurious fates, have so decreed,
For now I feel the poison gins to work,
And I am weak even to the very death,
Yet some thing more contentedly I die,
For that my death was wrought by her devise,
Who living was my joy, whose death my woe.
Ah Ianisaries now dyes your Emperor,
Before his age hath seen his mellowed years,
And if you ever loved your Emperor,
Affright me not with sorrows and laments,
And when my soul from body shall depart,
Trouble me not but let me pass in peace,
And in your silence let your love be shown:
My last request for I command no more,
Is that my body, with Persedas be,
Interd, where my Erastus lies entombed,
And let one Epitaph contain us all:
Ah now I feel the paper told me true,
The poison is dispersed through every vain,
And boils like Etna in my frying guts,
Forgive me dear Erastus my unkindness:
I have reuengd thy deaths with many deaths,
And sweet Perseda fly not Soliman,
When as my gliding ghost shall follow thee,
With eager mood, thorough eternal night:
And now pale Death sits on my panting soul,
And with revenging ire doth tyrannise:
And says for Solimans too much amiss,
This day shall be the peryod of my bliss.

I gave Erastus woe and misery,
Amidst his greatest joy and jollity.

But I that have power in earth and heaven above,
Stung them both with never failing love.

But I bereft them both of love and life.

Of life, but not of love, for even in death,
Their souls are knit, though bodies be disioynd,
Thou did but wound their flesh, their minds are free,
Their bodies buried, yet they honour me.

Hence foolish Fortune, and thou wanton Love,
Your deeds are trifles, mine of consequence,

I give worlds happiness, and woes increase.

By joining persons, I increase the world.

By wastning all, I conquer all the world,
And now to end our difference at last,
In this last act, note but the deeds of death,
Where is Erastus now but in my triumph?
Where are the murderers but in my triumph?
VVheres judge and witness but in my triumph?
Wheres falce Lucina but in my triumph?
Wheres fair Perseda but in my triumph?
VVheres Basilisco but in my triumph?
VVheres faithful Piston but in my triumph?
VVheres valiant Brusor but in my triumph?
And wheres great Soliman but in my triumph?
Their loves and fortunes ended with their lives,
And they must wait upon the Carre of death:
Pack Love and Fortune, play in Commedies,
For powerful death best fitteth Tragedies.

I go, yet Love shall never yield to Death.

But Fortune shall, for when I waste the world,
Then times and kingdoms Fortunes shall decay.

Mean time will Fortune govern as she may.

I now will Death in his most haughty pride,
Fetch his imperial Carre from deepest hell,
And ride in triumph through the wicked world,
Sparing none but sacred Cynthias friend,
Whom Death did fear before her life began,
For holy fates have graven it in their tables,
That Death shall die if he attempt her end,
Whose life is heavens delight and Cynthias friend.

Imprinted at London for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
little North door of S. Paules Church at the sign of the Gun.


