OUr Author for himself, this bad me say,
Although the Palsgraue be the name of the Play,
Tis not that Prince, which in this Kingdom late,
Married the Mayden-glory of our state:
What Pen dares be so bold in this strict age,
To bring him while he lives upon the Stage?
And though he would, Authorities sternebrow
Such a presumptuous deed will not allow:
And he must not offend Authority,
Tis of a Palsgraue generous and high,
Of an undaunted heart, an Hectors spirit,
For his great valour, worthy royal merit;
Whose fair achieuements, and victorious glory,
Is the mayne subject of our warlike Story.
Mars governs here, his influence rules the day,
And should by right be Prologue to the Play:
But that besides the subject, Mercury
Sent me to excuse our insufficiency.
If you should ask us, being men of Trade,
Wherefore the Players faculty we invade?
Our answer is, No ambition to compare
With any, in that quality held are;
Nor with a thought for any grace you give
To our weak action, by their course to live:
But as in Camps, and Nurseries of Art,
Learning and valour have assumed a part,
In a Cathurnall Scene their wits to try,
Such is our purpose in this History.
Emperors have played, and their Associates to,
Soldiers and Schollers; tis to speak and do.
If Citizens come short of their high fame,
Let Citizens bear with us for the name.
And Gentlemen, we hope what is well meant,
Will grace the weak deed for the good intent.
Our best we promise with a dauntless cheek;
And so we gain your love, tis all we seek.
Sick at this instant now to be infirm,
When the English King hath his kind Letter sent:
For me to place this honourable prince,
The Duke of Sauoy in the Empires rule:
That Nation my great Grandfather did love.
And since I came to understand their valour,
I held them the Prime Soldiers of the world:
And think no Martial Tutor fits a prince,
But he that is a true borne Englishman.
Ill comes this Letter, and your Grace at once,
A worser time then this you could not choose.
Though I am chief Elector of the seven,
And a mere Caesar now the Chair is void:
Sickness hath weakened all my powers so much,
I shall be slighted as a worthless thing.

Why should the Palsgraue so mistrust his Friends?

Sauoy, because I know them factious.
And though Bohemia love me as his life,
And Vmpeare-like, should pacify our iars,
What is his voice when Saxon draws his sword?
Mentz of a Cleargie-man is stout and proud,
Trier his like, in nature and in vice.
And the bold Bastard, late expulst from Spain,
Has a blood-thirsty hart, a vengeful spleen.
Misfortune cannot daunt him though he fled
Out of his own Realm, and has lost his Crown.
His impudency yet aims at Caesars Throne,
I'd freely part with mine inheritance,
If it could purchase health to tame his pride,
But in you only I repose my trust.
Reserve your voices for this Noble Duke,
Who were I well should be an Emperor:
Sickness will be obeyde, I must decline,
For my speech fails me to urge more discourse,
Pray for me all, if that they chance to win,
And I recover I'll help all by War.

The strength of Germanie is sick in him,
And should he die now in his prime of life,
Like Troy we loose the Hector of our Age:
For he alone, when he was strong and well,
Curbed all their pride, and kept the worst in awe.

We must expect war: prepare our selves
With expedition to resist their force:
For a more dangerous Foe for Treachery,
Then is the Bastastard, lives not in these parts.

I am sorry, that presuming on the health
Of the most valiant Palsgraue now fallen sick,
I came so ill provided for the Wars.

We are strong enough to meet them in the field

Prepare for War, the Bastard is in arms,
With him the fiery Saxon, Mentz, and Trier:
And they will besiege this Castle, to constrain
The Palsgraue, to elect him Emperor.

Shame to us all, if we give aim to that.

Begyrt this Castle, and disturb the health
Of our dear friends, it is insufferable.

Let us convey him lower down the river,
Unto a stronger Castle of his own:
And with such Forces as we have prepared,
Give battle to the Bastard and his crew.

You have a Caesar of your own Election,
To lead the Vangard, do but follow me,
I'll guide you where the greatest danger dwells:
And like an Emperor fright it from the field:
The Bastards but a Coward; and a Spanyard,
Coward and Spanyard oft-times go together.
Their greatest valour does consist in Braves,
And once repulsed, theyl run away like Slanes.

This Land of Germanie yields valiant men,
Haughty in heart as they in stature are:
Ten thousand such had I been Leader of
When the Blacke-Prince, lately my greatest Foe,
Opposde me at Mazieres, and won the day,
I had been Lord of that most noble Field,
And where an Hermit now tells ore his Beads,
Had sat a Soldier and a Conqueror.

That Hermit is too bookish to reign long.

When th'Imperiall Sceptre fills my hand,
And I have Caesars wreath upon my brow,
As had my Grandsire, and his royal Father,
I'll make Iberia wreak with my foes blood,
And force the Dotard to his Hermitage.

Such thoughts becomes the Germaine Emperor,
Has courage to wage War with all the world.

Harry, a word in private in your ear,
When you are Emperor, as in time you shall,
I must rule all, although you wear the Crown:
The Edicts I propose you must enact,
And call them your own Laws, not being vexed
At what I do, although I mince your honour.

How Saxon?

Harry, Darst' thou wreath thy brow,
In any contumelious form against me?
It is by my favour that thou art alive.
My greater greatness has repaird thy fame,
And being but my creature, it is fit
I should be known to be the worthier man.

Between our selves in private.

Publicly, and in the view of all, you'll swear.

I must.
But being installed in the dignity,
I'll alter what I swea^e.

Come, Come, your Oa^h,
Being an Elector, I am bard the only Throne,
And therefore will rule by a Deputy.

This is the Castle, shall we summon it?

Emperor elect, and princes of the State,
In vain you labour to begyrt this hold
With hostile Arms, for Sauoy is yth field,
The Bishop of Cullen, and stout Brandenburgh,
With the Bohemian King, are already pressed,
To give you battle ere you stir your foot.

Are they so brave, so hot, full of courage?

The Palsgraue has breathed spirit into them all.
Though sickness make him droop, weel meet the straight
Battles are governed by the will of Fate.

So moves the Sun in glory through the sky,
Having outpast the clouds that shadow him.

Now Spanish Henry, thou hast proved thy self
Worthy the Germane sceptre, by thy valour,
And he that says not Aue Caesar, dyes.

Swell not too high thou bubble, least thou

I'll break thy heart first.

Ere my tongue pronounce
Aue to any that's my enemy;
I'll bare my breast to meet thy conquering sword,
And make it crimson with an Emperors blood.

There must be but one Emperor, that's our self,
Therefore to prison with the counterfeit,
Whence neither County Pallatine, nor King,
Shall with their Forces if they were co^ioynd,
Have power to set thee free.

For you my Lords, that are Electors like unto my self,
Give but your free consents that he shall govern,
And that shall serve as ransom for you all.

Never while life lastes.

Or I breath this air.

Then let them share like fortune in his doom
As they have done this happy day ith field.

To prison with them all.

Not till you are Crowned.
That sight shall serve in steed of a Tormentor,
And I rejoice to vex mine enemy.

Give us our rights.

Rex Romanorum, magnus Imperator GerViue Caesar.

Viue Caesar.

Enough those Viues, take away my life,
In the delicious wrapture of my soul,
For there's no heaven me thinks like royal thoughts,
The Palsgraues Castles raste unto the ground,
And peace established, we mean once again
To try our Fortune for the Realm of Spain.

Since the decease of Englands royal Son,
That placed me lately in Spaynes government,

Those that did fear me for his valor sake,
Are by the traynes and falsehood of my brother,
Revolted from me, and to save my life
I was constrained put on this disguise,
To go to England for a new supply
Of men and Soldiers would but weary them.
I have therefore been in France, and failing there,
Am come to Germanie, to implore the aid
Of the Ele^ctors, but by ill success,
Bohemia, Brandenburgh, and Sauoyes taken:
The Bastard has bewitched the other Peers.
So that my Foe is now an Emperor,
And all the hope I have to get mine own
Lies in the Palsgraue sick I hear to death,
Hear I expect his answer to my Letter.
Are you the Hermit that did bring this letter?


And personate him that sent it.


What Spaynes King?
Oh that I were as I was wont to be,
Before this dangerous sickness was my Foe,
No Christian King that came to me for aid
But he should speed.

In time you may recover.


Mean time be welcome, sit, take your rest,
And now my Lord of Cullen I me prepared,
To hear the woeful tidings you have brought.
Comes noble Sauoy, and Bohem^as King,
With the stout Marquess Brandenburgh in triumph
And is proud Saxon taken, with the Bastard,
Trier and Mentz made subject to your sword?
Oh if they be speak it, and make me well.

Alls lost, We are conquered, Sauoy is surprised,
And our best Friends in bondage to our Foes:
Heaven has forgot the Justice of our cause.
And only I escaped to tell the news.

This were enough to kill some man in health,
But in me the effect is contrary.
All lost, all conquered, Sauoy made a Slave:
My Friends in prison, and none escaped but you,
He that can hear such ill news and be sick,
Deserves ne'er to recover, in my blood,
I feel an inflammation of revenge:
There's greater strength gathered into my nerues,
Then ere before, since that I grew infirm:
They will not rest thus, and stay only there,
But having conquered them, assume the Crown,
And make the Bastard Emperor.

He is Crowned.


More blood increases, some more ill news
Would make me cast my Night-cap on the ground,
And call my Groom to fetch me a Warre-horse,
That I may ride before an Army royal,
And pluck the Crown from off the Bastards head,
That is another right.

Tis thought my Lord,
Your Castle which you left to save your life
Is beaten to the ground, and your goods theirs:
And further, that they will pursue you hither,
As if you fled before their conquering swords.

Be sick who will, mine Ague does retire.
And Cullen thou hast cured me with ill news.
Come valiant Soldiers show your selves like men,
And be assured we'll ^inne the victory.
Hark how they shout as they applauded me:
And see how bravely every Leader rides,
Plumed from the Beaver to the Saddle bow,
Whilst the bold Soldier makes his lofty pike
Stretch in the Air with tossing it aloft.
Bravely done fellow: that trick once again,
And there's gold for thy pains, he fights like Hector.
Whilst at his seete the amazed Grecians fall,
And though Achilles would renew the Field,
He dares not do it, the enemies so strong,
Me thinks I hear a peal of Ordinance play,
They are the Bastards Cannons, planted high,
To overthrow my Castle to the ground.
Now they shoot off, Death, all my foes are come.
Marshall my Troops, and let Drum answer Drum.
My self in person will be general.
But I faint, and am not what I woul^ be.
My spirit is stronger then my feeble lyms,
Lead me once more with grief unto my bed,
Few know the sorrows of a troubled head.

How fain would valour sickness overcome?
But his infirmity denies such power.
And I am more grieved for his weak estate,
Then for our late great loss.

Palsgraue may help him.

And as I lived a fellow amongst Hermits,
I learnt some skill that has curd many a Prince.
See him safe guarded from his enemies.
And on my life I will recover him.

We are strong enough to waste him to his Fleet,
And when the Enemy shall miss him here,
They'll turn their conquering Force another way,
And go for Spain.

My Kingdom.


To subdue it.


Let them proceed, but when he has got his strength, they'll rue their
boldness; Mean time trust to me. For next to Heaven I'll cure his malady.


Thou art his hand, the agent of his thoughts,
And only enginor, by which he works
Some dangerous plot to blow his Honour up:
Is't possible my Son should be from Court
So often, and the cause unknown to thee,
That art his bosome-friend, his Counseller?

I know no cause except to take the air.


My wrath shall find another in thy breast.
Know that thou tread on thy last foot of earth,
From whence is no remove, but to the grave:
Fly me thou can not, and to make resistance,
Will draw upon thee for one Lyons rage,
All the whole den.

Hold, and I'll tell your Honour.
Know that his usual haunt is to the house
Of the Lord Clynton, whither he is gone
To see his Daughter, whom he does affect.

Dotes he on my betrothed, my Love, my wife?
Had he the lives of many hopeful sons
Incorporate with his own, my rate is such
I should destroy them all, ere lose my Love.
But how does she affect him?

As her life:
Alleging, that the Contract made to you,
Was by constraint to please her honoured Father:
But he was precontracted, first made sure.
And this I heard her speak, with pearled tears;
Then Love, no passion ought to be more free,
Nor any agreement like that sympathy.

I have put on Dianiras poisoned shirt
In the discourse, and every word cleaves to me
As deadly in the apprehension,
As that which killed the Iew-borne Hercules.
But wherefore do I combat with my self,
That have a greater enemy to curb?
Oh, but he is my son! What is a son?
The effect of a sweet minute, he shall dye,
Being my pleasure to effect my pleasure:
Attend me where he is, I may destroy him.

I have a sweet Office, to be Gentleman Porter to a back door; but tis for a
Lady, the best beauty in England: and if there be any Pandering in the
business, though I am accessory in the fee, because I live by it, I have no
knowledge in the fault. Many a Courtier would be glad of my place, yet I hold
it not by patent, for term of life, nor for years: but as young Gentlemen
get Venison upon sufferance or by stealth. If the Lord Clynton should have
notice of this Key or evidence, by which the young Lord Fythwaters is conueyed
to his Daughter against his will, though she be his Wife by a pre-contract, I
might be conueyed to the porters-lodge. But if all Court-secrets come to
light, what will become of the Farthingales think you that cover them? No,
since Ladies wear Whale-bones, many have been swallowed, and so may this.
Here comes the Young Lord.


Always at hand, thy carefulness is great: Where is thy Lady?


Walking in the Garden.


So early, then I see loves the best lark;
For the Corn builder has not warbled yet
His mornings Carroll to the rising Sun.
There's for thy pains.

I thank your Lordship. And now like the Keeper of a prison, having my fee,
tis fit I should turn the Key. You know the way to my Ladies chamber.


I do.


Sure liberallitie was a lover, or he would ne'er be so bountiful: some think
it a chargeable thing to keep a Woman of any eminent fashion, and so tis, but
to keep them as I do under locke and key, and suffer none to enter but such
liberal Gentlemen, is the only way to make a rich Keeper. I must walk still
to watch his coming forth.


You have been with the Lord Clynton?


And he promised to meet you in the Garden covertly.


Is this the place?


And this is the Ladies Page that lets him in.


Help, help.


If you bellow here, you breath your last; by ways,
Back doors, come sir along with me.
If that her father meet, as I desire,
Whats but a spark, will prove a mount of fire.
Locke the door after us.

My Lord I will.


The delian Lute is not more Musical
Then thy sweere voice, Oh my Apollo speak,
That with the wrapture of thy words, my soul
May be intranst, and wish no other joys:
That by the discord of two Broken harps,
(Old and unfit for Lovers harmony)
Our joys should suffer a distate of fear;
And in our most delights a qualm of grief
Run like a vain of Lead through a Gold-mine.

We grow too jealous of our prosperous days,
Making an evil, where no ill is meant:
Like hallowed ground, love sanctifies this place,
And will not suffer danger to intrude.
Here we are ringd in earthly Paradise,
And may have all the heaven to our selves:
Be then Mistrust an exile from my breast,
Where lives no jealousy, dwells present rest.

But we'll disturb it, your amorous joys.


Our Fathers present; Sweet, we are betrayed.


Betrayed to death: why do you hold my Sword?
There's greater fury kindled in my breast,
Then can be quenched by any thing but blood:
I shall turn frantic if you brand the Sea
Of my displeasure in such narrow bounds,
And with a Deluge, equal to the first,
That ouer-spred the world, swell up so high,
Till not a Mountain ouer-looke the stream,
Nor heaven be seen for Rivers of the Land.

If I could fear the waving of a Sword,
Mine enemies had frighted me ere now;
But I'm invaluable, like my mind,
Not to be wounded but with darts of love;
And I as little estimate a Father
In these Pathaires, as he esteems my grief.
There's no preoritie in loves high Court
Granted unto the Fathers fore the Son;
But like the purest government of all,
Every mans mind is his own Monarchy:
Where reason ne'er set foot to make a law,
Shall common sense keep one, that were absurd.

Would fight with me?


Not if you will forbear me;
But in a war defensive I will stand
Against an Army of my Ancestors,
Did their enfranchiz'd souls break open their tombs,
And reassumed their bodies as they lived,
In their full pride and youthful jollity.

Let Ravens perch upon these blossomd trees,
Night Owls their stations in this Garden keep,
And every ominons portence draw near:
For here I'll offer unto Hecare,
A hellish sacrifice in a sons blood.

I feel an Earth-quake in my trembling flesh,
And my well boding Gems bids me draw
A sword of vengeance on this hasty Lord,
Ere suffer him to be a pariside.

Will the Lord Clynton buckler out my foe?


No, but restrain you from a wilful murder.


And like the best oblation for your wrath,
Lo, I the subject of this variance fall
prostrate on my knee, to suffer death,
Ere such a rude act, most vnfather-like,
Be put in practice on so good a son.

Good to deceive me.


The deceit is yours.


Forswear him, and I shall rest satisfied.


Never.


Nor I.


Give way.


I need no buckler.


I stand not here to offend, but to defend
Your lives and honour against so vile and act
Would blur the Conquerors fame perpetually,
Making your swords the furies fire-brands,
Bathed so unnaturally in others blood.
Where neither Honour, nor Religion springs,
Tis better far such combats be unsought:
I know your pleas, her father has my grant,
You her affection got against my will:
The place whereon you stand is our own ground,
And here tis fit I abritrate the cause.
Amongst reasonable men peace is held good:
None love dissention, but they thirst for blood.

Counsel prevails, I am glad he is not slain.


I live with joy, that I'm no Father-killer.


Will you subscribe to what we shall enjoin?


We do.


In brief tis this. You must forbear my house,
And never more be seen within my gates.

This is extreme.


I have a heavier doom,
Which on my curse I charge thee to observe:
Which is, That instantly thou leave the Land,
And trouble me no more to get her love.

How am I crossed!


How is my heart tormented!


Yet I have all the world to traffic in,
Except in England, and your Honoues house:
But as the dissolution of the soul
From such a body as desires to love,
Is burdensome and grievous to the man;
Such is my heart dissevered from my Love.

And such is mine to lose thy company.


You are cruel to impose a curse upon me,
That sentence is extreme, I feel it work.
More deadly on my grieved faculties,
Then to have dyed upon my fathers sword:
For now mine own woes must destroy my self.
And that's a murder worse then parricide.

My knife shall end me.


Hold thy desperate hand,
Would make our Nuptials prove a Tragedy?

I would, and be inhum'd within the ground,
Rather then measure out a hated bed.

Never regard the passions of a woman,
They are wily creatures, and have learnt this wit,
Where they love most, best to dissemble it.

If that prove so, my heart will be the lighter.


I have done an act will make me odious
To all succeeding times, betrayed my friend:
But here he comes, I'll stay and speak with him.

Careless of foes, of father, or his curse,
Come I again to challenge Floramell,
Which I suspect the Steward has betrayed.

Within my breast bathe a revengeful sword,
Lo, I oppose it to your greatest wrath:
Yet if you saw the counsels of my heart,
There you may read, twas not I but fear
That was the Author of your loves betraying;
Your angry father threatened me with death,
And I had no evasion but to tell it:
But if your Lordship please to pardon me,
I'll lay a plot to help you to your Love.

He that is once false, will be never true.


Then wherefore serves repentance?


Well, proecede.


Set down the place where I shall find your Honour,
And if I bring not thither Floramell,
At our next meeting take away my life.

Meet me at York house.


I'll be there ere long.
I have done amiss, and will amend the wrong.

The Bride not up, and the Archbishop come,
Some call her down.

Welcome my reverend Lord.
Do not you Bishops use sometimes to dream?

We have the same incitements of the blood
That others have, and in our fantasies
We see strange shapes, and diverse things to follow.

What was your dream to night?

As I remember,
Himen was turned into a Mercury,
And he's the Patron of all sly deceits.
But whats my dream to your affairs my Lord?

That such another dream I had last night:
And if I should be cheated of my Bride,
Twere a strange premonition.

Fear it not, see where she comes.

March forward to the Church.

So, whilst he takes your place, we are for Yorkhouse.

I come Fythwaters flying.

Let's away.

The stay of my fair Mistress makes me wild,
Sure I shall never more behold her face;
The Stewards false, and Floramell may change.
I'll therefore give a period to my grief,
And in despair finish what life denies:
Yet ere I dye, let all the World this know,
A Woman's love procured my overthrow.

My Floramell, to Sea.

Oh my distracted soul, this is extreme,
Gulled with a Boy, dressed in your Daughters gown:
This is a cross that patience cannot bear.

Who was the cause of this, speak;
Wheres my Daughter?

Fled to your Son.
The Steward laid the plot; What I have done
Was for my Ladies sake.

That Steward is a Villain.

Lets go seek him.
Take several streets, but let your meeting be
At the Water-side, least they should flee to Sea.

To the water side; Lord Bishop keep the boy.

I will.
My Dream is fallen out right, Hymen is changed
Into a sly deceyuing Mercurie:
But tis most requisite, they that do wrong
Should feel the penalty by suffering it.
I witness can the Young Lords pre-contract,
Bad Fathers that infringe a holy act.

This day I think I promised the Lord Clinton
To be his Guest.

It was my Liege this Day.

I have dismissed my Train to steal upon him,
But whats the season all things are so quiet?
A Lords house at so great a Cerimonie
As is a Marriage, should be like a Court:
Multitudes thronging up and down like waives;
And the Gate kept with an Officious porter,
To give kind entertainment to all Comers;
Here's no such a matter.

Here Old Fitzwater: comes.

Some Pegasus has borne her from my sight
For ne'er a horse I keep can overtake them:
By all conjectures they are gone to Sea,
And Shipped by this.

His Bride.

Belike tis so.

Some whirle-winde follow them;
And making the Ocean rougher then my brow,
Ye dancing Porpoises caper aloft,
And mud the white foam with your jetty backs;
A perfect sign a tempest is at hand.
Rise from the bottom of the deep ye Whales,
And overturn the Ship that carries them:
But let a Dolphin save my Floramell,
And back unto the haven guide her safe.
As for the boy, make him your watery pray,
Eat him alive, that he may hear his bones
Crash in the jaws of the Leuiathan:
But save his head for me to know him by,
Author of all my grief and misery.

I'll interrupt his passion.

Stay my Liege.
You shall hear more, here comes the other Father.

How now my Lord, have you surprised your Bride?

I think thy treachery conveyed her hence,
And by thy means another was attired
In her habilaments to vex me thus.

You highly wrong me.

I would right you better,
Were I assured of your close tretchery.

Threaten me?

With no more then I'll perform.

Not in cold blood.

No, but in blood like fire.

In choler, passion and a crazed brain,
But when you have slept upon your menaces,
You will not then make good a noble challenge,
And enter single combat like a Lord.

There lie my gage I dare thee to the field,
And will aver without the advice of sleep,
That thou were privy to the Stewards blot.

I'll take your gage, and meet you when you dare.

But we will not suffer it, that love the lives
Of every subject, much more of our Peers:
And as for you Fitz-waters, that are grown
Hotter then I exspected from your age,
Except you can produce good witnesses,
That Clinton has deceived you of your Bride,
I'll stay the combat or imprison you.

I cannot prove it, but I think tis so.

Correct such thoughts, and give him back his gage.

Withal my heart.

Clinton I am satisfied.

How now, what news bring you?

Letters my Liege from the Count Palatine

Our noble friend Bauaria's valiant Duke.

From him my Liege.

We'll read them instantly.

Ill news, not suddenly to be amended,
The Palsgraues sickness was the greatest loss.
The Bastard Crowned, vncrowne him if thou can,
Thou that art matchless for thy Chivalry.
Send but his head from Spain, to tread upon,
And I should count it an vnvalued gift.
As for good Sauoy, and his Germaine Friends,
Ere long I'll set them free, or make the soil
That holds them prisoners a Marsh-ground for blood,
Till I hear news from Spain of good success.
Each day I live will be a year of grief.
Pleases my Liege to lay aside your sorrow,
And with your Royal person grace my house,
Clynton will hold it an exceeding favour.

So will Fitzwaters gracious sovereign.
And though this day look black with my disgrace,
Your Royal presence whites an Aethyops face.

I accept your kindness, will be your Guest.

Next unto heaven to you, we give the praise,
Most zealous King for our recovery,
And now my Lord of Cullen show your self,
As good a Soldier as a Clergy man.
In stead of Beads now use a Martial sword.
For here in Spain where the Black Prince incampte,
And made the Bastard fly, our Tents are pitched,
And the proud Foe comes with a Spleen inrag'de,
To drive us from Mazieres; Harry shall know,
As he has Kingly blood within his veins,
And is a Caesar, he shall meet with Caesars.

I hear their Drums.

And I rejoice to hear them,

The Palsgraue here, now we shall have
Your voice to our Election, or for that your life.

You were sick in Germanie.

But now recovered.
And hither come to beat you out of Spain.

He bears himself, as he were sure to coquer.

And looks more like a Jove then like a man.

I hold my thunder here, my right arm
Has vigour in it, when you feel my blows
To give you cause to call them Thunderbolts,
If there be any in this Martial Troop
That with a Soldiers face, has a bold heart,
And dares aver that this religious prince
Is not the lawful and true King of Spain,
I will make good his Title by the sword,
And against that proud combattant oppose
My self as challenger to fight for him.

I dare take up your gage, and answer you.
But that I should impair this days renown,
By giving desperate men such means to dye,
Who for you know your Army weak, and few
Would hazard that upon a single fight.
Which in the Battle you are sure to loose,
No Foxlike policy shall blind my sight,
But that I'll see the ruin of you all.
This day ith Field, thine Palsgraue and the rest,
He combats well rips up an Armies breast.

I'll answer his proud challenge.

We forbid it, that are your Emperor, both in stile

In stile, but not in power, that strength is mine,
Except you'll be forsworn.

This for an Oath,
You are but the step by which I did ascend,
And being up, rest there till I descend.

You'll answer this anon.

Here, or else-where.
Did ever know a Caesar that could fear.

I'll stab the Bastard.

Worthy Duke desist.

No Combat then will be accepted of.

In general, with our powers in the open field,
But not betwixt the Generals privately.

Then you are Cowards al^.
I'll so proclaim you in my thundering Drums,
And by the glories that I hope to win,
Prove it this day to thy perpetual shame:
But to a hartlesse foe words are but vain.
Alarm Drum, that showers of blood may reign.

It shall be treason to my Fame to day,
If I encounter any Foe ith-field,
Till I have combatted this drunken Saxon.

How Bastard, how?

Bastard!

What else?
Thou were twice misbegotten, once in Nature,
And secondly, in being any prides defalt,
By which thou art a Bastard Emperor.

Stand from about me, or I'll strike you dead

Remember where you are amongst your foes
Who by your discord may destroy us all.
And this advantage of your variance
Gives them the victory with easiness.
If not for your own Honours and your lives,
Forbear for ours.

They shall not combat here:
I'll make my Rotchet crimson like your Colours,
Ere I stand by and suffer such a wrong.

How these brave Churchmen talk.

Are you in your Pulpits?

Here's those will strike you.

What, the Palsgraue come?

Emperor be wise, join thy force to mine,
Till we have driven away the enemy,
And then return to our old variance.

I am Saxons till the Palsgraue dye or fly.

You should have fought still, 'twould have bin my glory,
To have given aim, then the conqueror conquered:
But what your variance leaves vnfinish here,
I'll end with the destruction of you both.

We fear you not.

Upon them valiant friends.
Saxon is fled, Caesar my captive is,
I must not lose him; guard the Emperor sure,
Whilst I pursue the Duke.

We will.

Am I your prisoner?

Not so good, my slave.

To trample on, or use as he likes best.

We are Brothers.

Now: but in your high estate,
No greater enemy then you had I.

Best that we guide him to the Palsgraues. Tent.

Although he be Ambitious, and my Foe,
Honour commands me that I reskew him.
That I may have the honour of his death.
When we (...) Masteries in a single fight.

Tis Saxon, Guarde him sure.

To our best power.

No further, if you mean to save your lives.
The Palsgraues slain, ^is blood wreakes on my sword,
And I advise you for your own discharge,
To give this valiant Emperor liberty.

Not whilst we live.

Help to release your self.

Most willingly.
Thanks for your pains, but yet we will be Foes.

To horse, to horse, and talk of that elsewhere.

This was the most ill chance that ever happened.

He said he had slain the Palsgraue,

Twas his cunning to astonish us with fear, but
If he live, how shall we answer him for this mischance.

See where he comes, I would the storm were past.

I lost him in the preasse, his snowy steed
Was crimsond over with the blood of men,
And Lyon-like he fought with all his strength,
But since the Emperor is my prisoner,
I shall die less regard the Dukes escape.

Oh Noble Sir, we have deceived your trust,
And lost the Jewell you had us keep.
Caesar by Saxon is rede^end and fleed,
And we ^ for his escape.

When fortune is disposed? ^ a man.
Valour and foresight are of no effect:
Releast by Saxon, and his Keepers live;
You are not as I thought you, valiant men;
But worse then these that run away for fear.
He should have made passage through my heart,
Ere escaped from me by Saxon or his plots:
But now it is too late to follow him;
And the whole Field is made a liquid Sea,
Sink may they both into the crimson fen.
But why should they sink, you deserve it best:
From henceforth I'll ne'er take a Spaniards part,
Except he had a far more valiant heart,

Let my blood speak for me; fair words displease.

Well, since I think twas weakness and not will,
By which they are escaped, I calm my spleen,
And rest content that we have won the field.
After you are establish in your Throne,
I'll sail to England to regreete the King:
And then to Germany, where if we meet
Bauaria's, air shall be his winding sheet.
Retreat, retreat, and thank heaven for the day.

At your requests my Lords, I am contented
To receive this Emperor into grace and favour.

He floue^ me, would you have me suffer this?
At their requests they have requested me
To allay my spleen, and take thee into favour.

They'll ne'er be friends.

Lets leave them both to fight.

Away.

We'll force you else.

We are a going.

So, now I will imagine that this ground
Is all the Empire that my greatness swayles^:
And that the heads of many rebel Subjects
Are plaste on thee; that striking off thy head,
I cut off half a Nation at a blow.

And I the Emperors of a Nation.

Why dost not kill me, since tis in thy power?

Thou sau'dst my life, for that I'll set the free.


Caesar, thou art a Noble enemy;
Henceforth I vow to relinquish every ill
That may displease thee, and obey thy will.

Such be my conquests over those I love.


So, they are friends, they have fought away their anger.


Has conquered me with courtesy and valour.


Then now to counsel how we shall proceed
In this most dangerous war against the Palsgraue,
Who as I hear by firm intelligence.
Means with his Fleet to touch the English Shore,
And draw the valiant Edward to his part.

If such a day come, twill be black to us:
For of all Nations in the world, I hate
To deal with Englishmen they conquer so.

Follow his example and lets get a King
To take our part, as well as they have done:
France has been wasted by their cruelty,
And cannot but in spleen desire revenge,
Were he solicited to be our friend,
We should with the more ease be conquerors.

Send thither.


Or fail thither.


That's the best:
But shall we only build our hopes on strength;
I think twere good to piece the Lyons skin
Where it too short falls, with the Foxes skin,
A couple of Protean villains I have ^eady,
For any dangerous attempt in peace,
And they can poison, stab, and lye in wait
Like Serpents, to entrap and cease their prey,
Mendoza and Vandome, those are the men:
Let them be called in.

They are hear, great Caesa^.


Most mighty Emperor, whats your Highness will?


That unto England presently you sail,
And there consort you with the Earl of Artoyes,
A Frenchman borne, but one that loves us well;
Let him and you send us intelligence
Of the proceedings of the English King,
With the haughty Palsgraue, give the Earl this Letter,
By which ye may win credit in his trust:
And er't be long I will devise a plot,
Which you shall manage, for the general good.
Be careful; as you do respect our love,
And hope for gold in showers, mean time take this.

Your will shall be obeyed.


It shall be done.


Great Jove can say no more:
That State thrives best that has such Slaves in store.

See our Fleet ready: and ye swelling gales,
That blow the good hours, fill our empty sails.

My Lord of Poytieres, as you are informed,
Where means the Emperor and his ^ray^e to land?

Here at this (...) of Bolleigne, the news

Is certain that his Mightiness is near.

How angry has the heavens as bin with the sea,
That it hath boiled so much, and cast the sands
Into such mountains that they ouer-looke
The bounds that held them in.

Well may our friends
Escape the danger of this heavy storm:
Small gusts at Land, sink a whole Fleet at sea;
And whilst our Cities keep us from their rage,
The Rocks bea^e them, ^s Tennis-Courts do balls.
I'd have an Atheist travel through the deep,
And he shall see such wonders, that his soul
Would make him soon believe there is a God.
But what sayre Gemle woman have we here,
Which is a Shipwrecked creature, comes a shore?

All wet and weary with a boisterous storm,
At last I have set my foot upon the Land;
I tremble as a Fever shook my ^oynes,
But tis the Ocean that has frozen me:
Drop there thou moisture of a swelling Flood.
And let me see, no Fisher-man at hand,
To tell me in what Coast I am arrived:
Alas I see none, I shall dye with cold.

Speak to her, give the woman comfort.


How is it with pretty Gentlewoman?


Sir, I am very cold, and we, and ^,
Would you could help me to a little fire
To dry my self, and I would pray for you.

Tis now no time to reason of your state:
Here take my Cloak.

Alas Sir, tis but thin,
And makes (...) the more to ^
I would be shifted into warmer Roa^es,
If I could meet with some kind Gentlewoman.

Make use of me, you ^all not want for help.


You seem to be of a Ma^e^que state,
What should a poor distressed Gentlewoman,
Trouble a person of such eminence?

Thy state wants present pity, women take it


I have seen a King ere now,
And by your Diadem you should be one:
Pray, rather let me dye then trouble you.

Tis perfect charity to help the poor:
Yet by these Jewels, you should bear a place,
If not amongst the Royal, with the Noble.

Indeed I am but a poor Gentlewoman,
Punished for wearing Jewels in a storm:
But I have lost a husband whom I loved,
For marrying whom, I have endured this cross;
And now his friends, if they should find me out,
Would finish what the storm has left undone.

His name?


Twas Infortunio, as mine is,
With the alteration of a letter only.

Good Infortuna go along with me,
I'll find some help for this thy misery.

May the Sea never use you of this fashion;
I take your courtesy, and will attend.

Young, sayre, and lovely, is she not Poytiers?


She is a comely, and a sweet Gentlewoman.


In my opinion she's the sayrest creature
Nature ere made.

In love my gracious Liege?


What and my Queen alive, that would seem strange.


Love does regard no person, nor the time.


Love is a power will ouer-rule a King.


Finding her honest, though of mean estate,
You may do well to raise poor virtue up,
And marry her to some great Nobleman.

I'll think of that hereafter: now, the news?


The Emperor and the Electors are arrived.


Health to the Majesty and Seat of France.


As welcome hither is your Mightiness,
As if you were arrived in Germany.

I thank King Iohn.


Saxon, with Mentz, and Trier.


We rest your loving friend for War.


For Counsel.


And Counsel is as great a friend as War.


It hath prevailed as much.


Thrice welcome all.


The storm has kept us overlong at Sea:
But Mighty King of France, worse storms then these
Have and will shake us, if you help us not:
All things go Backwards, that should bode us good;
And he that is Conqueror already,
The haughty palsgraue, is to England sailed,
To join with Edward in our overthrow.

We have felt the valour of the English King,
And of his son, the Black Prince now deceased:
Witness Poytiers and Cressey, where our blood
Royal, although it be saved to make clay
Moist with the showers, and temper the dry earth:
When I and all my sons were prisoners taken,
And had to England to be wondered at:
Ransomed although I was, it grieves me much
I cannot do the like unto my foe.

Let your French Soldiers join themselves with ours,
And we'll invade his Kingdom.

And constrain him the Palsgraue to the like disgrace.


Fortune was never steadfast unto any.
But like the Ocean that bounds in the Land,
Both ebbs and flows according to the Moon.

But if I might advise your Majesty,
By former losses you should be more wise,
Then hazard France again to the like snoyle:
Edward is fortunate in all his wars;
And wise men will not strive against the streame^
Therefore be circumspect, and keep your own.

This theme our counsel shall at large discuss,
Till when, to England we'll Embassage send,
To advise King Edward not to be our foe,
Left it offend us, that are friends to both:
If the Dove speed not, we'll the Serpent prove.

And win by craft, what may not be by love.
Who shall have that employment?

Not your Honour, because your spirit is rough and turbulent.


No, if I might entreat these reverend Bishops,
By them I would direct this Embassy:
Since it concerns them, it behooves they stir,
Who know the sweets, will cause no war.

We'll undertake it, if the Emperor please.


When I send thither, it shall be in thunder:
Yet as the French King orders it proceed.

You know your charge, be mild, but yet not base,
Though we give ground, we will not lose our place.

Even now a bold conceit hath entered me,
And that's to visit England in disguise:
As well to further our conspiracy
Against the Palsgraue and King Edwards life,
As to surueigh the Country, and observe
What Havens best to entertain a Fleet:
The English Nation with my soul I hate,
And would do any thing to win the State.

Not possible my Lords to find those men?
Are they so wily to deceive us all?
Sure they are harboured by some near about,
That does affect the English Diadem:
He's worse then mad would aim at Englands Crown,
Though the Black Prince be dead, so many sons
I have left to govern, which mars their rule.
Edward himself has left a hopeful heir,
The Princely Richard to inherit it.
Plots yet, tricks yet, well we must hope the best.

I rather think the ill was aymd at me,
Because I came to move your Majesty.
For the deposing of the Emperor:
And it is known the Bastard is my foe,
Witness the Wars in Germany and Spain:
Treason by him is evermore in act,
His brain coins faster then the English Mynt;
Tretcherous proceedings, gold has many friends:
And he must be a man of excellent virtue
Whom it corrupts not. Howsoever, I am sorry
The Sailors did escape.

Here are their cases.
Under the which I think were better clothes,
And for their Steeds, thought could not be more quick,
Or we had took them.

They were swift indeed.

As swiftly with their flight vanish our fears.
And now most Noble Palsgraue of the Rheine,
Think your self welcome to the English Court:
And reverend Cullen.

I do thank your Grace.


Your Father loved me well, and for his sake,
As well as for your own, I'll honour you:
And after feasting we will try your force
In friendly manner at a Tournament,
Which as I think, you have prepared my Lords.

We have my Liege, the most youthful blood
That the Court yields will show their Chiualdry,
In honour of Bauaria's Royal Duke.

Let him sit fast that shall contend with me,
Or I shall shake him, be he ne'er so Royal:
I show no favour when I am in Arms,
Nor look for any from my Opposites.
But Tournaments are revels made for sport,
And he runs well, that gets a good report.

We'll try your valour, perchance run with you.
Lead on.

The discontented English like to me,
Hates all delight, I and the Court it self:
To lead a private life, where they may plot
Revenge on those that are their opposites;
Not many years past, who but I esteemed,
King Edward has upon my shoulder leand,
And thanked me in mine ear many a time,
For making France his, I betrayed Valoys
My sovereign King, in England to get grace:
And now I looked to be a Duke at least:
Artoise is slighted as a thing forgot,
But I have sent my Attendant to the Court,
And if he speed not, I shall prove as false
Edward to thee, as to my Native French.

The King is not at leisure
To listen to your suit; All his thoughts now
Are taken up to give the Palsgraue grace,
Who is come to Court, and means to Turney there

Treason run with them, or some dangerous plot,
Take life and being to destroy them both;
Must my affairs give place unto a Palgraue?
T'was I that quartered with the English Lyons,
The Arms of France, in opening Edwards Title,
Which but for me had in oblivion slept,
Then I was as the Palsgraue in his breast,
My sight his food, my saying his harts rest.
Who's that, that knock's look forth, bring us word?

A couple of Gen^l^me would speak with you.


Let them com in, were they a pair of mischiefs,
They are welcome now. For I have thoughts like Held,
Black and confused.

These are the Gentlemen.


Our business is to you most noble Artoise,
The Emperor does salute you in this Letter,
And prays you by the Honour of an Earl,
You fail not to conjoin your aid with ours,
About some plot against his Enemies.

The Letter speaks the words, but names no plot.

Tis not deuisd as yet, but ere log great Caesar.
Will set it down, and send it to us all.
Now as his Mightiness desires is this,
That you give shelter to us while we stay
For his Affairs in England, and your pension
Which every year you have received from him,
Shall from henceforth be doubled with his love.

Caesar is gracious, and has my hart:
But were not you the Servants that attended
On the last Emperor that was made away,
And helped to send him to a timeless grave?

We were my Lord.


Let me embrace you in mine arms for that.


But that ill speed followed our hopes to day,
We had given a period to King Edwards life,
And to the Palsgraues.

We attempted it.
Habited like Sailors, but our pistols failed,
And after long pursuit, our Robes thrown off,
We escapte with life.

And come to live with you.


Live here as safe as in a Fort of brass.
Such men I wished for to a sit my spleen,
Unto one mark all our affections tend.
And they both dye if that the Emperor send.

Did you ere see a better Tournament,
Or braver Runners then this day appeared
In the Tilt-yard?

The best that ere I saw.
What a brave Horse the Palsgraue rid upon,
And with what courage, nimbleness, and strength,
Did he unhorse his valiant opposites?
Spears flew in splinters, half the way to heaven,
And none that ran against him kept this saddle,
Except the King, and he demeand him well:
It joys my soul, that he has yet in store
Such manly vigour; and the peoples hearts
Were not a little glad.

Here they come all.


I fear you are ouer-wearied with our sports,
To speak the truth. I feel them troublesome,
Whether it be by discontinuancce or age, I know not,
But my breath grows short.

What Oak is ever strong? age makes Ioues tree,
The fairest King, and Emperor of the wood,
To bend it self, and bow his lofty arms
Downwards unto the earth that softred it.
No Caeder grows straight till his latest day:
As there's a weakness in their springing up,
So is there in their declination.
The middle age the luffy does express,
And there flows vigour, like a sea of strength,
Able to bear down what doth stand the stream:
Such is mine now, but as my years do flow,
Like Oaks and Caeder^ they must straight bow low.

Sit by our side, and wear a Caesars wreath.

Victorious Edward keep it as your right,
And let it mingle with your Royal Crown,
That have deserved it in a field of war,
Not as tis mine, given for a Tournament.

It is our gift, and you shall wear it still,
Bring forth the other honour we intend
Unto this thrice renowned Gentleman.

My gracious Liege here is the Garter ready.

Which to the Palsgraue we command you bear,
Garter and Herald here presents your Honour
With the Order of the Garter, whence he takes
His Office and his Name, by our Decree:
This is a favour which no Foreign Prince
Ever enjoyed yet, but the time may come
When Kings in seeking it may be instald,
It was my Institution, and is worn
By none but the most Noble, and those few
Hereafter I will tell your Excellence
The Motive why the Order was deuisd':
Mean time his hand shall clasp it to your Leg,
For tis a custom which you must not break.

Your Highness honours me exceedingly.

You are now my Fellow-Knight, and you must swear,
To fight for Ladies, their Fames preserve,
But that we leave to Deputation,
It shall suffice now, say on, paffe your word.
My Word and Oath, so please your Majesty,
The Motto, as I red it was in French,
Ho^y, soit qui Mal y p^ns^:
Ill be his mead makes goodness an offence:
Or, Evil be to him that evil thinks.
I have learnt the sense, the Order I will keep
Inviolate, by Hand and by my Sword;
And hope in time it shall as famous prove,
As that of Malta or Ierusalems.

The Bishops, Mentz, Trier, sent fro France,
By the French King desire to be admitted.
With them associate comes the bold Poytiers,
But as I think he's no Ambassador.

Give them admittance.
We could not wish for a more brave assembly,
Then at this instant to give Audience.

Because the matter does concern our selves
Most mighty King of England, we have taken
This Embassy in hand, not sent by Caesar,
But from your Neighbour, the great King of France:
Who by us first entreats, after enioynes
You take good heed how you the Palsgraue aide,
For that he says, and will maintain as much,
It were unjust now Caesar to depose,
Who by his valour, if all Titles fail,
Merits the honour of an Emperor.

And that he is peerless for his mind,
And haughty resolution through the world,
That none so well as he deserves the stile,
And being invested in the dignity,
Twere a dishonour great and Capital,
Now to constrain him to a lower place:
Which if you seek, heel shield from such disgrace.

Has France forgot our former victories,
That his Commission is so peremptory?
Or is it but the Stratagem of Caesar.
To blind us with the Name of the French King?
And Iohn of France be ignorant of this,
Before we answer your proud Embassy,
Weel send Ambassadors to know the truth:
And if we be deceived by a trick,
Caesar shall know he has dishonourd us.

I am a Frenchman, and a Peer of France,
My name Poyctiers,but no Ambassador.
Yet by the Honours that my sword hath won,
King Iohn of France delivered what they spake.

Being no Ambassador, why came you hither
To be a Spy, and to surueigh my Land?

A Spy, one of my blood without disguise,
Being the first Revealer of my self,
How can this hold King Edward to be true?
I use no Intelligence but with my sword:
Nor seek for other corners then deep wounds.
So if I come by any great mans hart
In honourable difference I surueigh it.

At whose hart aim you now, that you are come?
To justify an Embassage against me?

I say who wears the Germaine Diadem
Deserves it better then the best that's here;
Or any whom the English King, or thou
For private reasons would prefer to wear it,
And that it is not honour prompts you to it;
But secret pride, to have a person govern,
Which Palsgraue, thou might rule ambitiously.

Thou fowl-mouth'd sladerer eat thy proud words up,
Wherewith thou hast asperst me; or my fury
Shall make thee curse this bold-fac'te impudence.

Come, Come, you cannot do it.

Cannot.

Nor dare. I'll stand the fury of thy proudest shock,
Not fearing danger in so slight a Foe:
Should I put off these Masks,my wounds would fright,
And these wide mouths which I have got in war
Not half heald up, pronounce it in thy blood.
Thou art too weak to enter Arms with me.

Since mildness cannot temper your stern wrath,
But that your spleen must vomit upon me.
I'll teach you Sir to have your tongue locked up.
By taking off your locke.

My hair torn off.

Who have we here? This is the hauty Saxon.

Grant me the cobalt Edward, of this Palsgraue.

He is a prince himself, knows his power.

Now by the honour of my Fathers house,
Saxon I'll meet thee in the Realm of France,
In the Kings Court, or place where thou were borne,
So I may have good Hostage, and fair play.

Now by my gage thou shalt.

This shall suffice.
I have your locke to me a better pledge.

I would I had thy head to counteruayle it.
A whyrl-winde be thy guide, and a rough Sea
Plague thee before thou come for my hairs loss,
Hell some Devil was author of this cross Exit Saxo.

You have paid him soundly and deservedly.
But now to answer you in brief, tis thus,
The Palsgraue and our self will see the King
With expedition, where (if he make good
The proud Injunction you have charged us with,
We will lay wast his Country, and once more
Put France in hazard of a sound loss.

This Saxons brave, gives courage to us all.
But I'll requite it with a Germaine brawl.

You are the cause next to disgrace the Palsgraue
For which I came. The Emperor greetes you well,
And would have noble Artoise lend his hand,
Both to cut off Bauaria and the King.

Where?

Here in England.

Or what place you will.

France is the safer for the Stratagem.

And Edward is determined to sail thither.

In France then give it birth.
Where if it sail I'll be the Palsgraues death.

The care of Kingdoms is a weighty charge
So is the care of children. But Loves care
Exceeds them all: That dries the blood of life
More then the Fever, though they burn like Fire:
And to submit it to the law of reason,
Makes reason folly, and discourse a Fool.
Then irresistible all ruling power
Revel in young men's hearts, and leave the old,
Or meddle with inferiors, not with Kings;
We should be privileged, because most high,
But what's a King unto a Deity?

Your Majesty called for a cup of wine.

I did fair creature, I thank your pains.
But when I view the colour of your lip.
And look on this, the wine me thinks looks pale:
You have a better luster in your eye,
Then any sparkel that can rise from hence:
The silver whiteness that adorns thy neck,
Sullyes the plate, and makes the Napkin black.
Thy looking well, makes all things else look foul,
Being so fair in body, what's thy soul?

My soul and body are the gift of heave,
And I will use them to my Makers praise:
If other service (great King)you require,
I am ready, attend your hearts desire.

I think sweet creature, what thy tongue has vtterd
Is distant many paces from thy heart.
My hearts desire, tis not in bending low,
After the afficious custom of a Court:
Nor lies it in the use of common things,
To bring and take away; my hearts desire
Is to enjoy thee in another sort,
Which if thou yield unto, thou shalt be great,
Greatest in France, next, nay before my Queen:
For I'll find means to to take away her life,
So I may have thee as a second wife.

The Saint of France forbid it, all powers,
That have continued both so long together
In sacred rites of Marriage, heaven deny
I should be Author of her Tragedy:
Or give content where murder is opposed.
If I should yield, and your Queen made away,
Might you not use me so another day?
Tis fearful building upon any sin,
One mischief entered, brings another in:
The second pulls a third, the third draws more,
And they for all the rest set open the door:
Till custom take away the judging sense,
That to offend we think it no offence.
Wherefore my Lord, kill mischief while tis small,
So by degrees you may destroy it all.

Diui^e is thy discourse, like to thy beauty.

Does not Idolatrize, beauties a flower,
Which springs and withers almost in an hour:
Sickness impayres it, but death kills it quite,
It vades as fast as shadows in the night.
Why should your Grace call it Divinity?
There's nought divine, but that which cannot dye.
Least I offend by staying here too long,
I'll take my leave, and so curb in my tongue.

Speak still, I'll hear thee.

To our Sex tis bard,
We should be twice seen, ere we be once heard.

Shee'll never yield! why do I woo her then?
Because I cannot bridle my desires,
Nor sleep, nor cate, but as I dream of her:
She's to me as my Genius, or my soul,
And more then they, because she governs them.
Some way I'll take, my freedom to recover:
That there's no physic made to cure a Lover!

My Lord.

My Love.

Yes.

Infortuna.

How! Infortuna?

I mistook thy name:
Yet now I think on it, I had busy thoughts
How I might raise that Virgin to some Honour,
And match her with some worthy Peer of France.

Your self my Lord in some Adulterate kind.

Nay then you wrong me, I meant virtuously;
Believe me Sweet I did, I love thee so,
No evil thought should make me wrong thy bed,
By this it shall not, this, and this, my Love. Kisses her.

You flatter me.

I love thee as I should:
What, we have lived together twenty years,
And never wronged each other, should I now
Be the first causer of the marriage breach?
Banish such thoughts, let all mistrust begone.
If she grow jealous, I am twice undone.

I'll have about with her, to find out all.
Within there.

Madame.

What Medea was't,
Of whom you learnt the Art of Sorcery,
To enchant a King, and draw him to your bed?
Think you, because you are my Maid of Honour,
I'll honour you so far, to have my Lord,
Thou shameless Callet? tis ingratitude,
Into my Husbands heart so to intrude.
I could have helped thee to a wealthy choice,
Had you spared mine; but now it cannot be,
For I must hate thee for thy tretchery.

I am accused, that ought to be excused,
And blamed as one unchaste, for being chaste.
I Enchant the King, and use Medeas Art?
Witch-craft I have always hated with my heart:
And except Modesty a Circe be,
I know no other kind of Sorcery.
Your Highness sent me with a Cup of Wine
Unto the King, the occasion of his wooing;
Was it my fault to do your Highness will?
Judge gracious Majesty but as you ought,
And do not blame me for a Virgins trial:
His love was answered with a strong denial;
And so denied for ever shall he be,
That seeks by such means to dishonour me.
Before I wrong a Queen so truly kind,
I'll mar my face, and make my sad eyes blind.

In.
We'll consider farther of your tears:
I'll hau^ her watched, if she proves false, she dyes;
But if continue constant to the end,
Never had Lady a more Royal friend.

Since I was cast upon this fatal Rock,
And saw my Love dissevered by the waives,
And my kind Steward in the Ocean drowned,
Here I have lived, fed only with raw Fish,
Such as the Sea yields: and each Ship I see,
(As daily there are some furrow this way)
I call unto for aid, but ne'er the near.
Once asked me, What I was? I answered him,
An Englishman. Quoth he, Stay there and starve.
To the next that past, I said I was a French-borne.
I'll aid no French quoth he. Unto a third,
That I a Spaniard was. He bad me hang:
So that I know not what I ought to say,
Nor whom to speak to: but in happy time,
From this high Rock, I see a tall Ship come,
Furnished with all his Sails; and as it ploughs
The Ocean up, it rayses hills of snow,
That fly on both sides as they did give way,
To make a valley for the Ship to pass.
Their Captain as I think looks upon me,
And has took notice of my waving hand.
Now the Ship turnesand this way ploughs amain,
As if it meant to run it self aground:
In happy time, now I shall be relieved.

Twas here abouts the Gallant beckoned me,
He seems a person of some eminence,
By the glittering of his Suite against the Sun,
Cast Anchor here, and let us question him.

Yonder he stands, mounted upon the rock.

The very same. What art thou, whats they name?
Thy place of birth, fortune, and parentage,
That thou art left upon this desolate shore?
And what require thou stranger at our hands?

As you are men, and therefore may be crossed,
Be favourable to a wretched man:
Know, that the Sea has cast me on this place,
Where I have led a discontented life,
Ere since the last storm, and no passenger
Has taken pity to remove me hence.
Though food I want not, cause the sea yields sish,
I woul'd be shifted to a better place.
My name's Fitzwaters, by my birth a Lord:
My natural residence in England was,
Some of your company I have often seen,
Set me aland where dwell inhabitants,
And thankfully I will require your love.

Tis young Fytzw^ers, pray f^r take him in.

You know my li^ (...) all Englishmen.
Since my disgrace, and shall I pity him?

But he's descended of a Noble house.

The more should I rejoice to see him dye.

Has valour.

Let him use it on the Rocks.

But every (...) bears not your mind,
Some have been favourable to their foes.

And tis an honour in an enemy
To save where he may ^ill.

Your answer there?

You speak as you'd compel it.

In the honourable intercourse of men
I should do so, and were you in my case,
You would enforce your own necessity.

What wold this Stranger be in prosperous state,
That bears so high a mind in his distress?

I would be as thou art, proud of nothing.

Is a Ship nothing?

As it anchors here
It bears a goodly show; but launcht again,
And a stormerise, it may be cast aland
As I have been: nay worse, it may may be sunk,
And then what is't, but a fair something, nothing?
What is, and now is not; mans life, or a dream,
Now swimming, and then swallowed in the stream.

His words are piercing, some go take him in:
Come down, and be received into our Boat.

That shall be my charge.

Could we draw this spirit
Into our plot, he would help to manage it
Unto the life, and I should take it better
Then yet I do.

Persuasion may corrupt.


But be adjust'd how you persuade him to it.


And take his Oath at first for sacrifice,

We are no puny Pollititians,
To be instructed in the rules of evil;
Here comes Fitzwaters.

Your hand.

And sword but that the Sea devoured it.

Know sir, we have business of import in hand,
Wherein our purpose is to crave your aid,
And as we sail to France we'll open it.

I am yours in all things that are honourable.

Honourable be not, your shall do what we list.
Launch forth into the deep.

We did not think to have footed the French ground
A second time in such Hostility;
But when the conquered bears so proud a head,
Tis fit we make him stoop: yet least, the King
Be not himself, or be abused by any,
My Lord of Cullen, we entreat your pains
To enquire it out by our Ambassador,
as Mentz and Trier his a say that our force
Might spoil his country, and make waste his land;
But that with French blood we have surfeited,
And therefore care not greatly to shed more.
Say, We will meet him at an interview,
There to discourse our griefs before we fight,
Where if he have wronged me, he shall do me right.

I shall delat your Highness Embassy.

But say from me my sword ne'er drunk French
And therefore it is thirsty for their lives:
That are I leave the Continent of France,
Without good satisfaction from the King,
None of his Caualieres shall were a locke,
I'll have them all cut off, and every year
Be paid in such a tribute for my wrongs.
As for proud Saxon, Say my word is kept,
And bid him warily respect his own:
The French Kings Palace shall not save his life,
Nor the best rampierd Bulwark in the Land,
Except he answer me as fits a Pee^e.

But to the Emperor, whats your will to him?

That as he run from Spain, he shall run hence,
Or I shall make him a poor Emperor.
His Bastard bravery tell him must go down,
And the legitimate wear Caesars Crown.

Fail not to utter every syllable
Both of the Palsgraues sending a^d our own.

I shall deliver both.

Tak't how they please,
If they fly hence, we'll follow through the Seas.

I go.

High is this Embassy, like to your valour,
Which I admire, and love ardently;
That I could wish your presence all my days,
And think your company to me more sweet
Then mine own Kingdom, or my Crown besides.

Your love and Royal presence I desire.

and bold Fytzwaters, be it your charge,
Provided well of our best ships and Soldiers,
To sail to Germanie, and free our friends,
Kept as we hear there with a slender guard,
In a weak Castle.

Which we'll soon beats down.

And bring them hither.

Or return no more.


March forwards to the place where weel encamp

What should the reason be of this dissention
And why is young Fitz-waters froward thus?

His arguments are strong and forcible.

Single us hither to the forest side,
Under pretense to plot more privately,
And now not only to mislike! our drifts,
But call us punies, and unskilful men,
If shows a spleenful hatred to us all.

Not unto all, but only to you two:
Why should the Earl and I borne a Lords son,
Join with a pair of base companions,
In such a weighty cause as a Kings death:
I know you'll say you have been physicians,
Sailor, and Soldiers, ^ and in such disguise,
Done some exploit that have deserved respect,
I grant as much, but yet your births are mean.
No gentry in your bloold was ever known
By natural Heraldry, your low descents
Disables us, and we must seek to rise,
With others of our own condition.

Come Vandome, of our selves we'll do the deed

That were the engrossing of the same from us
And so you would have all the thanks your selves:
Neither comixed with us, nor yet alone,
Shall it be acted, but as we are the best
In birth, and ablity to do it,
We'll have the privilege of doing it:

And we should give it over.

To your betters.
Or having fit place, Artoise and my self,
Will kill you first, then cast you in the River.

Heespeakes what we intend.

Intend your worse?
Caesar has promisde him the Palsgraues place,
And I shall be the Marquess Brandenburgh:
Think you such Titles shall be lost by fear.
Our valour has been tried with worthy men,
And ere we loose the glory of the Act,
Vandome and I do mean to use you so.

They'll ne'er be honest.

Come Sir, are you ready?

Most resolute villains, how they would outbrave us?

But noble Artoise, now the fire is giuea
The Cannon must go off.

Unto their deaths.
So they are dead, and now the Fame remains
Only to us, that will accomplish it.

Only to me, that will perform't alone.
Thinks Artoise those were slain cause they are base?
Or that I wrought you to assist my plot,
Because you are of the Nobility?
No, I have still this Maxim in my thoughts,
That a Competitor, though ne'er so Noble,
Takes away half the same in every thing:
I could have opend this unto you all,
But that I thought my self too weak for three:
And therefore providently used thy strength,
To kill them first, that I might slay thee after.
Now they are dead, thy life must follow theirs,
And so I share the honour to my self:
I will be Palsgraue, Marquess Brandenburgh,
And the Bohemian King in me alone,
Caesar shall write himself three Friends in one.

I do not think thou meanst to be a traitor.

Now you come near me, but that secrets mine,
And seeking i^ you must dig through my heart,
Or it will ne'er ^e found, it lies so close.

I'll know it, or a reason in your blood.

Wilt thou turn honest?

Do not torture me,
With repetition of that Beggars name:
Whom none but Idiots, Innocents, or blocks
Will entertain.

I would change your mind
From this erroneous and ill boding thought,
Because of late you freed me from the rock,
But if it be so hurtful to your sight
Be your own death, I'll not reveal my mind.

If that I cannot force it with my sword,
I'll let it alone.
So lye together, three a pair Royal makes,
And here's a pair Royal of excellent Villains;
These have slain princes by their own confession,
These made a Nation swim in her own blood,
The stream is turned with you, it is now high flood:
But I must cast you all into the River.
Yea, swords and all, to clear me from suspect;
Suspect? by whom this place yields no such eye,
Tis well the worlds rid of their villainy.

His Highness here, then Floramell give back.

Tis she, a word; there's no retiring hence.
In vain you strive, my force opposde against yours,
Will easily subdue your woman's strength,
But there's a power included in your eye
That conquers Kings, subdues a Deity.
And he that had the strength to rule those graces,
Might ne'er be caught, yet view the brightest faces:
One kiss, and I'll no more importune you.

On that condition, I will grant you one.


But you must give it me.


Dian forbid, that were immodesty.


It must be so.


Upon your Kingly Oath,
Never hereafter to renew your suit.

Now by my crown I swear.


Take it.


Tis done:
And with this kiss, a second Fire begun,
More ardent are my thoughts now then before:
Ilou'd thee well, but now I love thee more.
Thou shalt not leave me, but for ever dwell,
Where I abide, thy absence is my hell.

Think on your Oath.


At Lovers perjury, the Gods themselves do wink.

A king say so, pardon me sir, your will I'll not obey.
But your oath broken mainly run a away.

So, so, so: This is the affection that you bear to me?
Thinks the French King I'll not revenge this wrong?
As I am Queen of France, I'll make her know,
What tis to be corival in my Love:
She dyes by Heaven.

If thou but spoil a hair,
Or shed one drop of her celestial blood
For any courtesy I have offered her,
My wrath shall: as a fury haunt the deed.
And I'll torment thee for such cruelty,
Worse then the damned in the world below.
I seeldome threaten, but I do it straight,
Her death thy Hell, look too't, tis a shrewd fate.

He ever yet was sovereign of his word,
What shall I do, brooke this corri^alship?
No, since I cannot in the Realm of France,
Have the revenge my longing heart desires,
Else-where I'll seek it, I of late behold
An English Lord in favour at the Court,
His Name Fitzwaters, and I love him well:
By his procurement I will lay a plot,
To yield King Iohn unto his enemies,
So to obtain my purpose, if it take
How ever Fools may think to project ill,
It likes me well, because I have my will.

What are you?


An Englishman a traveller; what are you?


A Frenchman, and no traveller.


Then give way; For I am the better man.


The better man?


I, the better man, by the porambulation of 2. or 3. thousand miles, I have
seen the great Turk borrow Money, and never mind the repayment ont.


Peuh, is that all? we have a number of great Christians that will do so, and
when a man comes to demand his own somewhat holdly, he shall be committed to
prison, or made a Fool, to stand weighting at the foredore where the Coach
stands, whiles the Lord steals out at the backe-dore by water.


Is't possible?


That our Tradesmen can tell, to their great hindrance, I my self know this,
that being in poverty, a Lord called me by my name thrice, but he would not
remember it once, when he came to his Lands.


The reason is, least thou should beg some of his New-liuing.


Nay rather for fear of paying the old score.


Sure thou art some N^k^emans bastard, thou can tell their tricks so right.


And by some great woman: For I can tell you their tricks too.


As how?


Your only fine Lady is wantonness, new Fashions, your Citizens wife gallops
after. But she is not so well horste to overtake her.


Now we are in the discourse of women, What Countrey-women doest thou love
best?


I love none.


I love all, and to kiss them after the fashion of all Nations.


Why I pray sir, do not all Nations kiss alike?


You are no Traveller, and therefore I'll bear with your ignorance: but know
this, your Spanyard, as he is proud, he kisses prowdly, as if he scorned
the touch of a Ladies lip; marry you Frenchmen draw it in, as if he would
swallow her alive: Now the Italian has soon done with the upper parts, to be
tickling of the lower: and we Englishmen can never take enough at both ends.


Is not your name Master do much?


It is, and yours (I think should be Monsieur do little.


We ere somewhat a kin in the first part of our names, and I pray heartily
let us be better acquainted together.


You must do as I do then, and since we were both appointed, to wait here
for the French Queenes coming, lets take her gold, and forswear our selves.


Here comes her Majesty.


Are you resolu'de to undergo this charge? Tis but an Oath, which I will guild
with Crowns, And bear you out against the Law.


I can do little being so animated, if I should not forswear my self, for
so fair a Queen.


And I'll do as much as your Majesty will have me do.


Take this in earnest, and when tis done, you shall have more.


We will.


And from this time forwards, let us be forsworn brothers.


Content.

I'll instruct you: Here comes Fitzwaters.

According to your Majesties command,
I come to know your pleasure for the Letter
I should deliver to the English King,
With that base strumpet that has Injured you.

There is the Letter, which I charge you bear unto King Edward, and assure his
Grace I will perform what I have promis'de in it, I'll send the strumpet to you
instantly.


I know not by what influence I am fallen
Into the affection of this potent Queen:
But she has sworn she loves me as her soul:
And to enjoy me in her amorous Bed,
Would spend the revenues of the Crown of France
Were it her own: I'll temporize with her,
To effect some plot upon my Sovereigns foes,
But she shall know, Although she love me well,
My hearts desires were drowned with Floramell.

By all descriptions this should be the man,
To whom I am directed by the Queen;
But whom do I behold the young Fytzwaters?

Tis she, Oh no, she's in the Ocean drowned,
No; She escaped it seems as well as I.
But I will take no acquaintance of my Love,
Till she has cleared her from the Queenes suspect.

It is not meet I take acquaintance first,
Nor will I till I know a just cause why,
Of his Familiar dealings with the Queen,
Here is the key her Highness promiz'd you.

And you the prisoner to be safe locked up,
For your incontinence and wanton life.

You do me wrong, I hate incontinence,
Nor did I ever love a wanton life:
I am a desolate Lady, shipwrecked here,
And had a Husband once, too like thy looks,
But not of such a rude condition.
Oh were he present, and should hear thee speak
Such boisterous terms against his honoured wife,
He would out of the virtue of his mind
Knowing my conversation to be good,
Write this base slander in thy villains blood.

So confident, her innocence is great,
That can do this sincerely without tricks:
But if you be the same that you would seem,
How comes that your reputations grown,
Into such scandal, and your name the theme,
Of every idle fellow in the Court?
That Grooms report, fair Unfortunate is:
The French Kings love; Nay worse his concubine.
The voice of men is held the voice of God:
And where an evil is so far proclaimde,
The generality approves the guilt,
And she's unworthy to survive a minute,
To be the separation of two hearts,
Made one by Marriage.

Kill me, kill me then.
Having my sentence, wherefore am I spared?
Or do you take delight to torture me?
Before you serve the Execution^
The Law requires no more but death for L^st.
The lingering is a no^ of Tyranny.
It is sufficient that the wretch must die,
The sooner done, the lesser cruelty.
But if your conscience urge you to forbear,
I shall confute your worthless Arguments,
And tell you in the pureness of my soul,
Report's a liar, common talk a Fool.
Wayters Grooms, light-headed like their plumes,
And those that do attend in Princes Courts,
Too active and quicke-witted to deprave
A Courting they proclaim for a consent,
A favour for the deed, believe them not:
It is too common, this they hourly do,
And think none chaste, but her whom none did wo^,

But you did kiss the King.

The Queen did see it,
Vrg'de by constraint, and Kingly violence.
Upon condition he should woo no more:
And for that kiss I am esteemed a whore:
If you believe I am, I pray proceed,
I kissed the King, do you a murderous deed.

Rise, rise, hereafter the discourse I'll tell,
Mean time Fytzwaters welcomes Floramell.

So then I am honest by your own confession,
But ere I entertain you as a Husband,
I'll be resolved what Love has past between
The Queen and you, that you her Agent are,
In such a weighty cause as is my life.

Runs the stream this way, is the wind turned thus?

I must know all.

In sight of Heaven I vow
She is as chaste for any lust from me,
As unborn Infants, and I use her love,
But to acuance my soueraig^e and his Realm.
No other case by honour I p^o^e^t,
In sign whereof I oppose ^n innocent breast
Against the sword: if you believe not, kill,
But never man died for a lesser ill.

I am satisfied, rise love, and let us go,
There's no true joy without some taste of woe.

Prosperity I think was borne in France,
Tis so ^ipuious unto all our act^;
And like ^ subject waits upon our will:
To morrow is this happy interview,
In which Fitz-waters and the Earl of Art^ise,
Have promisde to surprise the English King,
And the ambitious Palsgraue.

If it take,
We shall have cause to praise our happiness.

Take, out of all surmise: and in my thoughts
It is as good already as perform'de.

I think no less.

It is most probable.

Where is the Queen she promisde us a mask?

The ^.

Be Jovial Caesar: mitrth began the night:
And we will end it with the like delight.

We are beholding to you Gentlemen,
For this your Court-ship, pray discover now.

We will, and make you all die prisoners.

King Edward here?

The Palsgraue.

All our foes.

Whose plot was this?

Or is it not a Dream?

Tis such a Dream you'll never wake from?
To talk of this strange admiration,
Which like the night hovers on every eye:
Know that I have deluded you with hopes
Vain, like those villains, which my sword did kill,
And by a Letter to the King delivered,
Sent by your Queen, to be revenged for lust,
I caused his Majesty to enter thus.

I received them in at the back G^te.

Wheres the Lady that has wronged the Queen^

Here is my tro^h-plight wi^e,
Freer from that soul imputation,
Then is her Majesty from jealousy.

Is she then chaste?

I'll answer for the Virgin,
By my good Fortunes once, now by my beard,
She is as nobly virtuous of a stranger,
As ere I knew, and though I sought her love,
I ne'er obtained it.

No, where is my witness?

Son, c^ll them in.

What can you swear?

What must he swear?

I'll swear that the Lady is a good Lady,
The Queen a good Queen^ th^rs an end of swearing.

Is this all?

And more then you should get of me, but that the Queen gave us gold to say
something: but who have we here s^rr^h?


Players, by this light players: Oh I love a play with all my heart.


Begin, begin, we are set.

That's a brave King.

That's a brave boy that plays the Queenes part.

He shall be my Juggler.

And when the play's don, I'll be at charges
To bid them all to supper.

Away with them.

I am very sleepy.

Would I were a bed,

I'll lead you thither.

God a mercy good Chamberlaine.

The play's done, and now we must go home. Farewell.


But shall the stream turn, this way is my plot
Become so weak? you will believe a Subject
Before a Queen? I have out-shot my self,
In seeking Justice at an enemies hand:
This is a cross beyond the strength of brain;
Sure I shall end my days in Lunacy,
Like one to whom due vengeance is denied,
Because of weakness, on my self I'll turn
The fury that should light upon my foe,
Scatter my hair, like chafe before the wind,
Hell in this world dwells in a jealous mind,

Our revelling has struck day out of night,
And bright Aurora ushers forth the Sun
To his diurnal course; yet neither night,
Day, nor the morning, with her flaring beams,
Can stir up valour in this Saxons breast:
What, is thy mind made captive with thy body?
Or think thou that I take advantages
Where honour should be showed, Ime still my self
Ready to give an answer to thy challenge
As at the first, and if thou conquerst me,
By my Achievements I will set thee free.

You show your self in this a Noble foe,
And I receive more honour then I hoped:
I thought, because I was your prisoner,
You had esteemed captiui^e ^ cong^st.
But since you have awa^ed ^eeping valour,
And given your Captive such a privilege?
I am the same bold combattant to dare,
And do as much as erst I did intend.

Choose your own Weapons, and I'll meet you straight.


My Armour there.

Clinton and bold Fitz^ters are arrived,
And bring with them releast from servitude
Brandenberg, Sa^y, and Bohemia.

Guide them in.

Those with our selves, we humbly do present unto your Majesty.


Such as our Swords by a glorious victory set free.


When Heaven is pleased to give prosperity, How it flows in ^ welcome my
honoured Friends: I am glad your thraldomes prove your liberty.


The King of England has been always kind.

I have ever found it so.

And so have I.

Whom do I fee? my Son that stole my Bride? As you respect my service
(gracious King) Let me have Justice.


Clinton kneeles with him.

To their great service, greater I oppose,
And do beseech your Highness wrong me not.

Wrong thee?

I wrong me, may not King^ do wrong? Or dare you think because you are my
Father, I'll loose my wife.


Daughter come from him, least I force you hither.

Father I may not.

Fathers both she shall not.

We'll heate no^ie^e of these bold menaces
On pain of death I charge you both forbear:
And let my censure sway this difference.
In England as your house the Bishop told me
That Clintons Daughter by a pre-contract,
Was young Fytzwaters wife, and that some trick
Betwixt the Fathers to preserve their wealth,
Broke off the match, to have him wed the old.
This being true; I charge you on your lives
Urge him no further in his lawful choice,
But as twas wrong enough to hinder it,
Make him amends, by being reconcilde,

Which I entreat upon a du^ious knee.

And so do I.

Rise, rise, I am friends with you both, and
When my Angers over you shall find me a kind Father.

So shall you.

All lets are now removed, I am truly happy.

The Combatants are ready.

Guide them in.

Idle are words where we must use our swords,
Yet that it may appear what minds we bear,
Now we are marched into this dreadful Lists,
Know that this day my Honour shall exceed.
Or I lye breathless where I set my foot.

Were thy breast Marble, thy ribbs of brass,
Saxon will have the superiority,
Or in this dreadful place, his life expires.

Sound trumpets, the destinies guide all.

The Palsgraue is invincible I think.

Not to be overcome.

Nor to be ta^ide by any.

Matchless, and far beyond the praise of words, are all thy actions, let me
honour thee.


Our Friends returned in safety cheers more

Caesar resign your Title vntyo S^y, and Sauoy, fit you up, whilst the doctors
hear join all their hands to make thee Emperor.


(...) as the first.

And to get your love,
We will disgrace our selves to honour him.

Receive the Crown, but as he weare^ the same may it crush out his brains.


Long live and happily the (...) Caesar.

As happily as your kinded loves have made me.
And long as please the Heauend.

Your fare^ rights (...) perf^t ^ with State in Germani^, whither I make the
Majesty of England, and all our F^ie^ds.

I'll bear you company.

Fair winds and prosperous ^ our several
Realms, we wish and pray for, tis not our least good
To be the Favourites of the wa^ng Flood.

W. S^yth.

