YOu stars of Honour, brighter than the day,
Or new raised Phoebus in his morning Ray;
A^ rich in Wisdom as in Virtues rare;
Accept the choicest dish our wits prepare,
As a third course to please your eye, which still
Covets to have of novelties its fill.
We have not bundled up some Kickshaws here
To bid you welcome; We do hate such geere.
Our braine's the Kitchen, and our wit's the meat,
Preparitive to which, we bid you eat,
If liked, if not refrain't; you Judges sit
To damn or save our not yet ripened wit:
So rest upon your goodness; if you frown,
Our poor endeavours then are trodden down.
HOW still the morning is, as if it meant
To steal upon us without Times consent,
And pry into our errors. I have been
Searching in every Thicket, Wood, and Green
To find my Lamb, and many doleful cries
Entered my ears e're day. What's this that lies
In such an obscure place, where none scarce tread,
Unless the Ghosts of the disturbed dead?
Bless me great Pan, I see it's Clitons face
With a sword drawn; how happy was my chase
This way! I hope his folly has not made
Himself a Beast, as butchered with this Blade;
'T may be he sleeps: I'll speak to him, and try;
Yet I half doubt him because he here doth lye.
Cliton, awake, the Night's dislodged, and now
Bright Morn is trimming of her Virgin brow,
To court the Sun, when from the Western deep
And Thetis lap his glimmering beams do peep
T'ascend his glorious Carre. Cliton -- awake,
And with thy sleep all dreams of horror shake
That may affright thee.

Kind Alexis, thanks,
How found you me?

Walking those flowery banks,
'Twixt the green valley, and the place which we
Have consecrated to Loves Deity:
Seeking a strayed Lamb, I did hear sad moans
Proceed from some like peals of parting groans,
Which I pursued, but in my search I found
None but your self: you resting on this ground
I wondered much to see you!

So you might.
But when you've heard the cause on it, 'twill affright
Your easy breast. Do you observe this Hand,
This fatal Hand, at my unjust command
Did: -- Oh, I could destroy't!

For what offence?


This hand has spilt the blood of Innocence,
My Florida's.

How?


And when I'd done
(As I might well) did hide me from the Sun,
Fearing his eye would be the only cause
To find me out; and here from men and laws
I have obscured my self, and could not say
'Twas justly night, when night: Nor day when day;
My fact had sulled both.

What urged thee to such inhumanity?


Only suspicion of her loyalty,
Dreaming Lysander had enjoyed her love,
My jealousy to cruelty did move:
I slew her three days since, and since have bin
Each night at that place I stained with my sin,
To seek the body, but some sacred Power,
For none else durst approach her purity,
Has certainly made her immortal, and
Conveyed the body to some holier land.

Is the body gone then?


Or else my eyes do fail me as an* abject not worth their help.


Thy crime requires contrition; to that end,
Thou shalt with me. Thy days to come shalt spend
In holy uses; I'll prepare for thee,
In the best form I can, each property
Belonging to a pensive man. You must
Forget all youthful pleasures, think on dust,
And penitence the only means to bring
Thy soul to rest after this wandering.
Will you with me?

To death, or otherwise, since Florida is dead.


^tay my darling, do not fly,
This place is private, here's none nigh.
Fear not Wench, I'll do no harm,
But embrace thee in my arm;
Cull and kiss, and do the thing
Shepherds do at wrasteling,

Oh help, if any Shepherds, near,
Hear my laments.

Yet creature, do not fear:
But if you with coy disdain,
Do think to leave me in my flame,
I'll force those golden locks of thine
To lye beneath these feet of mine;
Then yield and here enjoy such sweet
As with our embraces meet.

Oh haplesse Maid, no aid will come.


Fear not Virgin; here is some
Natures monster; Villain, why
Does thy flame now burn so high?
Will no other serve thy turn
To quench the heats that in thee burn,
But so fair a soul as she?
Villain hence, or else I'll be
Thy Butcher.

Kind Youth, to whom am I
Bound for this fair courtesy?

First unto Heaven fair Creature; next to me
A poor unworthy Shepherd.

May your Sweetest whom you love,
Ever constant to you prove.
Be she brighter than the Sun,
Pleasing as our day at noone;
Fresher than the morning dew:
Sweeter than a new killed Ewe;
Like Aurora decked with flowers,
Or the welcome April showers.
May she love you, and you be
The mirror for true Constancy;
Go gentle Youth, and this day prosperous be
Amongst our Swains in your Activity.

A thousand thanks reward you
Pan be my guide, and thou fair Gloriana,
Whose beauty has encinder'd my poor heart
Almost to nothing this day; thou shalt find
Thou hast a power above our humane kind.

Bright sun, why dost thou shine on me?
Is it to mock me? keep thy light; for I
Had rather live in darkness, and so dye.
Or dost thou show thy lustre in disdain,
Because I have so oft with speech profane
Blasphemed against thy goodness, And in praise
Of a poor earthly creature spent my days?
Dost thou yet smile? forgive me, and I'll be
No more her servant, but will honour thee.
Keep thou thy brightness Phoebus, and this day
From all our Swains I'll bring the prize away.

Fairest, this day, be pleased to smile on me,
And let those hidden favours yet unshewne,
Flow in abundance, that Swains may see
None e're can conquer me, but you alone.

My favours friend is past, and you have tasted
So much of my poor bounty, that it's wasted.

We stay too long son, pray make haste,
Let us not spend time in waste.
Daughter, you shall go with me,
Where their pastime we may see.
Hark, I hear 'em make a noise;
Oh my hearts my bonny boys,
Play your parts; when I was young
I was full as stout and strong.

Dearest, I must part; this calls me hence.
Father, I leave you.

For ever I hope, would I could prophecy,
And be effectual; it should be so.

Daughter, this way let us high;
I am old, I'll not come nigh:
Nor shalt thou my dapper Girl,
Lest those staves that often whirl
Hit thy face. What again!
Nay then I fear we go in vain.

Yet Father let us go, that w^
May know who gained the victory.
Because Dame Nature, pox of all her tricks,
Has not dealt so well with me as she ought,
Making me but a lump of rough-hew'n stuff,
The pettish Wenches will not play with me,
Nor tick nor toy, and cause I'm apt for sport:
How e're I'm formed, I've put on this disguise,
To fright the baggages, when getting some
'Twixt these my arms, ^'le force 'em to my will,
Yet pass unknown. Thus I my senses fill.
What noise is yon?

Through the Woods, and through the Woods have I run after the Run-away my
Master. -- What art thou in the devils name?


Sirrah, I am --

A devil, I knew't before: Thou should be a lecherous devil by thy hayrie
hide: but I am no Succubus goodman devil.


Dost thou fear me?


Oh Lord, me Sir. I have met such another devil as thou art, in my Porridge
dish.


And did thou know him?


Know him? how do you mean know him? I should be loath to know him or thee, or
he thee, or thy grand-Master me for any ill; for I have defied the devil and
his works ever since the general Earthquake, and that my Mothers Cat
miscarried in the horse Pond.


Was thy Mother a Witch?


How a Witch you devil -- I'll witch you.


Hold man: she was an honest woman.


Nay, now thou lie, and thou be the devils devil:
For I have heard her soberly say, she had six --
Bastards by a Sowgelder before she pigg'd me.

Hold, hold man.


The devil afraid of blows! I'll make you spent fire.


Friendly Swain, the day is yours; you see
My prayer it seems successful was to thee.
Pity my maiden tears; till now, I ne'er
Sued to a shepherd, but the shepherds were
My suitors.
Nor deem me light* because my love is such;
I love indeed, and fear I love too much.
You saved my life, my chastity, what more?
Take me as one that was your own before.

How much I grieve fair Shepherdess, my Fa^
Will not allow me such a just proportion,
To render thee, as thy deserts have merited
From me.

Oh friend!
I^le be your servant, and your flocks will keep.
I'll nightly watch while you do sweetly sleep*
And in the morn I'll willingly to field,
While you do taste the sweets Loves valleys yield,
And with industrious labour against noone,
Will get your dinner ready, so you will
But smile on me, and say well done.

To starve your hopes from further prosecution in this suit.
Know I've already fixed my resolution
To love none but fair Gloriana, she
Is the Commandress of my life, and fortunes:
So much I pity you, that I could wish
I had two hearts, that you might share in one
As a just recompense for your love, but why do I
Entertain such frivolous unnecessary talk.
May you live happy, and enjoy as rare,
And constant Shepherd as your self is fair.

Is my face withered? or has Nature so
Deformed me lately that I am not Cloe?
For thee poor Cloe Shepherds have pitched the Bar,
Wrastl'd, and leaped, and shown the feats of War.
For thee each strove to gain thee as his Dove;
But thou did slight and scorn their simple love.
How many Verses have the Shepherds made,
In praising of thy Beauty, whilst thou laid
Thy heart on him that hates to hear thee named,
And thy delight is still to have him famed?
How many Rings and Gloves hast thou received
From the poor Swains thou often times deceived?
For thee on Holy days they often would
Meet on the Heath next to the Pinders fold,
Where they with Music, and such sweet content,
Would spend their time to make thee merriment.
Since then my love is not one mite rewarded,
And that my Beauty is no more regarded:
I'll tear these golden locks, that shepherds may
Leave off their sport, and make no Holy-day.
I will follow through yon Grove,
Where I soon shall meet my Love;
Then with sweet embraces we
Will clip, and cull, and none shall see.
A willow Garland I will make,
And sweetly wear it for his sake.
Then through Thickets, Woods, and Plains,
I will hide me from the Swains?
Hy da, hy da, what art thou?

You were not wont to question that; how fares my dearest Love?


Hence thou coward, hence from me:
Blush at thy disloyal^y.
Did not tell me thou would gain
Me reputation by thy fame;
And suffer now a stranger bear
The prize, and thou to have no share?

Your frowns my Fairest, and not he,
Gained from me the victory.
Had you smiled as you did frown,
All his strength I'd mauger'd down.
What has disturbed my Love? who has committed
This injury to thy person?

Ha, ha, ha; fool, fool! see you now fool?
Fool! kiss -- kiss -- kiss --

What fickle things are women? yet they are such men cannot be without; our too
much doting on 'em makes 'em proud; for loving them, they'd make us hate our
selves. I do suspect this bad distemper in her proceeds from some denial
Lysander has given her to her unlawful suit, knowing my love to her. 'Tis so.
I must not let her suffer in too high a nature.


Dearest Love, fair as the Eastern morn,
When with her Summers robe she decks the Plains,
And hangs on every bush a liquid pearl,
In Mayes triumphing month* sweet as the air,
The Phoenix does expire in, sit while I play
The cunning Thief, and steal thy heart away,
And thou shalt stand as Judge to censure me,
To recompense thy loss I must agree;
To give my heart, which being understood,
'Tis but exchange, I keep your heart, you mine.

Content my Love thus, she would court thee,
And thus and thus she would play a Wantons part:
Do I not blush Adonis.

Oh, you must not blush! you spoil the jest on it,
I'll span thy Waste, and do as Wantons use;
I'll be Adonis, but will not refuse.

Nay fie, you stray beyond your limits.


Modesty allows such undefiled mixtures.

Ah! where are my eyes? what cursed unruly winds Have blown 'em out, and in
their stead placed these base counterfeits! Oh you Deities? you are unjust to
suffer this? If these eyes be my own may they be blasted, that without my
License Durst see this object: but yet let reason
Sway my passion.
Why do I wish a mischief on my self
That must see their destruction? I have long
Suspected him by reason of her Necios,
And the continual scorn dwelt on her brow
When I did proffer love, were I provided
I'd rush upon 'em, and from his base arms
Snatch the false Girl, but I'll stand secure
A while and over-heare 'em.



'Tis time to part, w'ave dallied Time too long.
Lysander, will you walk?

Thinks Gloriana
That Time is lost that's spent with her Lysander

Deluding devil

I could Lysander.
(Might it not stain my Mayden-yeares) live only
By gazing on thy Beauty.

Nay, now you mock me; but I hope e're long
We shall with more security enjoy
What our hearts wish for. Where shall we next meet?

In this very place to morrow be sure you meet.


I will not fail.

Nor I to meet you both. Oh my best stars!
How I shall weave my self into revenge just, just Gods
you've stamped my brain for mischief* which on them
I'll execute.
And none shall pry into my faults within.
Revenge has Coverts, fit to hide his sin.

Hey down a down derry,
And shall not we be merry?
A fire on thy hole,
'Tis as black as a cole,
And thy nose is as browne as a berry.
Hi ho. What a thing this love is?
When Love did act a woman's part,

It swelled her so in every part;
She swore 'twas wind, and then did --
Hi, hi, hi, hi,
Nymphs to her
Sing about her.
Love cannot choose but pity yield,
He never lived in tented field,
Amongst iron hearted men,
He knows both how, and when
Thee to restore
To what thou were before.
He has a tender breast, which knows
Your wants by the tormenting woes
He's subject to himself.
Then do not you despair,
That are both young and fair.
Thus we convey you hence.

Where do you lead me?


How blessed are we, that Fortune hath
So much befriended us in this happy?
Convenient opportunity?

'Tis an unaccustomed favour,
And we ought in duty to acknowledge
A thankfulness for it.

So sits the pride of Nature to out-vye
Each glorious Beauty of the chequered field,
And Flora's richest Wardrobe.

I perceive
You've practised long in th'flattering Rules of love.
What will reward you?

A kiss is more than I can merit.
Will you sing.

And you'll give me another for my pains.


Put it to the trial,
You shall not loose your labour.

Sit while I do gather flowers,
And depopulate the Bowers.
Here's a kiss will come to thee;

Give me one, I'll give thee three.
Thus in harmless sport we may,
Pass all idle hours away.

Hark, hark how fine
The Birds do chime,
And pretty Philomel
Her moan doth tell.
Then pity, pity love, and all is well.

Here's the Violet, Pink, and Rose,
The sweetest breathings for the nose.

Yet thy breath to me doth yield
More fragrant scents than all the field.

Love cares not for flowers or toys,
Play games for your apish Boys.
Nor superstition
For his condition
Is for to know

-- if you love or no?


Then answer, love I or no.
But yet me thinks that face should be
The Model of true constancy:
Therefore no reason have I,
To suspect thy loyalty,
Here's another kiss for thee.

Give me one, I'll give thee three.
Thus in harmless sport we may,
Pass all idle hours away.

Hark, hark how fine
The Birds do chime,
And pretty Philomel,
Her moan doth tell*
Then pity, pity Love, and all is well.

You've sung me most a sleep, my eyes are dull and heavy,
Faith I must make thy lap my pillow.

Repose thy gentle head on it. Alas!
I'm heavy too, and must obey my destiny.
Sleep on, sleep on,
For we have so decreed,
That thou must bleed:
Sleep on, sleep on,
And may thou never rise,
For blood the shepherd cries.
Sleep on, sleep on.

Rise, rise Lysander to prevent
What the Destinies decreed.
Thou art constant, permanent,
And must not bleed*
Thy constant seed
Shall be the shepherds joy,
No annoy
Shall attend
Such a friend
As the Lasses need.
Rise, rise, awake!
And sleep off shake;
The Heavens are pleased thy part to take,
For thy Love's sake.
Lysander, where ar't? Lord how my fancie's troubled!

How fares my Gloriana? I have had
Strange thoughts that would have dispossessed
Me of my rest, had I not took it here
On your sacred lap.

That is the man: upon him instantly
While I attach his Mistress.

Ah me Lysander, what means these sad spectacles*


We must have life and death.


Both life and death: how can that be?


Thy life, and thy Lysanders death.


I've heard that voice e're now
Afford more milder language.

Stop her mouth lest she does charm me
Unto pity.

Are you but men, and dare do this?


Oh spare Lysander, sheath your swords in me.


We'll not expostulate: take that.


And that.


Oh Lysander!
Stay, stay, let me but breath my last
Upon her lips, and I'll forgive this Butchery.
Cowards, Villains, Miscreants, have you left me?
But oh my fairest, whether art thou fled?
Fear has made pale those cheeks that were so red.
I'll follow thee: they shall not dare to touch
The least hem of thy garments. But oh, I faint;
And must surrender up to earth that part
I took from her. Gloriana, oh Gloriana!

We may for recreation walk,
And use some pretty harmless talk.
Religion does not tie us to
A stricter course than we can do.

Tis dangerous walking, every field
Doth nought but sounds of horror yield,
And to my fancy doth appear
Poor slaughtered Maids; the Butchers bear
The name of Lovers, and can find
A way in killing to be kind.
Ah me, whence came that groan?

It is a Shepherd wounded sore.


Sure I've seen this face before!
Oh 'tis Lysander the truest Swain,
That ever breathed on Grove or Plain.

What, is he marked for present death?


No, there is hopes of life: his breath
I feel come coldly.

Help him in.
Pan be just, reward this sin.

The devil and his dam I think have carried away my Master; I cannot find him
in never a Wenches placuit, (pocket I should say) and yet I have been in a
simple many since I came among these Mutton-Mongers, these sheepe-eaters,
unless they have hid him amongst their wool, I cannot imagine where he
should be I will wear my shoes to pieces but I'll find him.


Religious Matron, from your divine hand
I have received my life next to heavens providence:
Sure my wounds were not desperate, or else
Some Angel did afford a sovereign Balsam
To cure 'em in such an instant: but howsoever,
I must ascribe it to your pious care:
For which I owe you more than I can pay,
Unless it be my life.

The Surgery I use is sent from Heaven,
And you owe them your life, not me.

But Florida,
Did you ne'er hear of your Cliton since?

Never.
Yet I would gladly see him, did I know
By what means to achieve it?

Dear friend, the stories of us both if weighed
In an equal balance, would poise each other
Yet to put her love to the Test, I'll undertake your message.

Thou wilt endear me to thee then, about it.


You heard how Cloe came to our happy Cure.


Never.


The Wood Nymphs brought her to our Cell, finding
Her strayed where ever since sh'as bin.

If you will with me, I'll promise you, you shall see your Cliton:

On those conditions I will.


Whether now?


No farther than with your consent, and if you please, yo^ may go with us.


I am contented.

I know Lysander's dead,
Then farewell maidenhead;
Thou art but one:
When I am gone:
It never shall be said -- hy ho, ho.
Oh Lysander.

Save you fair Maid, I wish you joy,
Free from ought that may annoy
Your quiet, or disturb your sense;
Send you health and penitence.

Ha, ha, ha, what, are you Lysander? what, with that beard there's a great
beard indeed: hark you Fryer Tuck, do you see you handsome shepherd
Lysander?

Why did you say he was dead?

You are mistaken, I'm a Hermit that can cure
All wounds, but what sin makes impure;
And those are cured by one above:
I can help those ills that move
Man to distraction, jealous fears,
In man or woman. I have years
Has gained experience to apply
For all sorts a safe remedy.

Do you see where he doth stand,
With a Crosse-Bow in his hand.
I will follow thee my Dear,
Though the Goblins keeps there.

Stay pure Maid.


Why do you hold me old man? insooth you shall not.

^f you will be ruled by me,
You shall your Lysander see.

^hall I indeed now?

^ome with me and you shall know
More, if you will but patient grow.

Good Father, be patient.


(...) not my daughter lost, my only daughter,
^he only staff whereon my age did rest,
And only comfort which I had on earth?
Oh! I am miserable.

^here's hopes yet left to find her.


^ever. Some rude and savage hand has killed my Girl,
^aving deflowr'd her of her virgin honour.
Talk not of patience, 'tis the only means
To cure a bad distemper, to grow worse,
And fire it out of him. Oh my Alexis!

I'm lost in loosing her.
Let us endeavour to find her,

I'll take thy counsel, goodness guide me still,
Sometimes are Parents cross against their will.

We're almost at his Cell, where he does waste
Himself away with grief, thinking you are
A Citizen in Heaven, and that wrong
He did you, has so defiled his soul,
It cannot be purged off but by such penitence.

You've moved my heart that it dissolves to tears,
Of blood, and water, for the strictness he
Has undergone for me.

I'm glad I've found you; do you see we're coupl'd as
Lovers ought to do: but your Gloriana is lost beyond
Recovery.

How?


She hearing of your death fell frantic, and
Since I have not seen her ne'er our Groves.

Let us put wings to our pursuit to find her;
And first we'll search his Cell.

Great Pan send all things well.


Oh Conscience, how thou dost buzz into my ears; despair
The thing attends my guilt, Gloriana lost:
For whose sweet sake I heap't new sins upon me?
What has my fury purchased nothing? Yes!
Hell, and destruction, which only by a hair hangs over my head, which blown
by the least wind, falls down and sinks me.


You sirrah, madcap, that creeps like a Crab there: Hark you, do not you know
one Francisco and Pisander, two vagabonds, that cannot live in peace with
Poultry, but they must fly after sheep?


I owe that wretched name Francisco.


Who? you with that face! pray where's Pisander then?


I left him at the Court when I came thence.


I see you shepherds will lye abominably, he has been from the Court ever
since seven years before he was borne.


Friends, we are happy made, Fortune and Love reserved these blisses to crown
the end of things.


The story you related Florida.
How this divine Matron did take your body,
Finding it warm, and did apply such Balsames
As hath preserved your life, makes me most happy.

I'm blessed in my Gloriana.


I in my Cloe.


And I in Florida.
And we to see you possess such bliss.

Ah! Protect me some blessed power: keep farther off. I am yet reconciled with
heaven. I do confess I killed you! Oh be merciful for their sweet sakes,
whose innocence cannot see, or be disturbed by thee. There they are by thee;
thy once dear Gloriana.


What a distemper's this?


What will appease thy Ghost? give me but time to ask forgiveness of those
sacred powers I've most offended, by depriving thee of life and being, and thou
shalt have my life for thy just sacrifice.


I apprehend his guilt: shepherd, fear not; your hate grew not to such
desperate effects as you expected. Feel, I live and breath!


Delude me not, 'tis impossible.


These shall witness it.


We do.


Can you forgive then my attempt?


With a true heart.


Lysander's still himself, noble and wise.


And can you Fairest wipe that Ignominy off, I deserved from you?


My Lysanders word suffices for us both.


Then may you both live happy many years:
May your joys, never be disturbed by fears.

Hark you sir, now all your talk is over, I would know one thing of you?


And what's that?


Have you met with one Pisander, Leon, and Francisco in your Travails?

The Duke is dead that banished good old Leon, and could I find him; his lands
shall be restored.


I am that Leon that with my son and daughter here have lived e're since in
this Rural way.


Blessings do follow blessings.


Then I am that Pisander that left the Court, to gain thy Daughters love by
the name of Lysander. Scrub, dost thou know me now?


A pestlence on it, you are he indeed.


Pisander, embrace thy friend Francisco.


Francisco! thou cloy me with joy.


I left the Court for the same end you did.


She's mine now Sir, is she not?


As fast as the Priest can make her,
Fortune has made all happy: Yet 'tis fit
If they will wed, your hands should licence it.


