Our Muse describes no Lovers passion,
No wretched Father, no unthrifty Son:
No craving subtle Whore, or shameless Bawd,
Nor stubborn Clown, or daring Parasite,
No lying Servant, or bold Sycophant.
We are not wanton, or Satirical.
These have their time and places fit, but we
Sad hours, and serious studies, to reprive,
Have taught severe Philosophy to smile.
The Senses rash contentions we compose,
And give displeased ambitious TONGVE her due:
Here's all Judicious friends; accept what is not ill,
Who are not such, let them do what they will.
NAy good Auditus do but hear me speak.

Lingua thou strik'st too much upon one string,
Thy tedious plaine-song grates my tender ears.

'Tis plain indeed, for Truth no descant needs,
Vna's her name, she cannot be divided.

O but the ground it self is nought, from whence
Thou can not relish out a good division:
Therefore at length sur-cease, prove not stark mad,
Hopeless to prosecute a haplesse suit:
For though (perchance) thy first strains pleasing are,
I dare engage mine ears, the close will jar.

If then your confidence esteem my cause,
To be so frivolous and weakly wrought.
Why do you daily subtle plots devise,
To stop me from the ears of common Sense,
Whom since our great Queen (...) hath ordained,
For his souod wisdom, our Vice-gouernour,
To him, and to his two so wise assistants,
Nimble Phantastes, and firm Memor^e:
My self and cause, I humbly do commit,
Let them but hear and ^udge, I wish no more.

Should they but know thy rash presumption,
They would correct it in the sharpest sort:
Good low what Sense hast thou to be a Sense;
Since from the first foundation of the world,
We never were accounted more then five;
Yet you forsooth, an idle prating Dame,
Would fain increase the number, and vp-start
To our high seats, decking your babbling self
With vsurpt titles of our dignity.

An idle p^ating dame: know fond Auditus,
Records affirm my title full as good,
As his amongst the sieve is counted best.

Lingua confess the truth, you are wont to lie.

I say so too, therefore I do not lye,
But now spite of you all I speak the truth.
You five among us subjects tyrannize,
Making the sacred name of common sense,
A cloak to cover your enormities:
He bears the rule, he's judge but judges still,
As he's informed by your false evidence:
So that a plaintiff cannot have access,
But through your gates he hears but what, nought else
But that thy crafty ears to him conuaies,
And all he sees is by proud Visus showed him:
And what he touches is by Tactus hand,
And smells I know but through Olfactus nose,
Gustus beginns to him what ere he tastes:
By these quaint tricks free passage hath been bard
That I could never equally be heard,
But well tis well.

Lingua thy feeble sex,
Hath hither-to with-held my ready hands
That longd to pluck that nimble instrument,

O horrible ingratitude? that thou,
That thou of all the rest should threaten me:
Who by my means conceiust as many tongues,
As Neptune closes lands betwixt his arms;
The ancient Hebrewe clad with mysteries,
The learned Greek rich in fit Epithets.
Blessed in the lovely marriage of pure words,
The Caldy wise, the Arabian Physical,
The Romaine Eloquent, and Tuscane grave,
The Braving Spanish and the smooth-tongd French,
These precious Jewels that adorn thine ears.
All from my mouths rich Cabinet are stolen,
How ost hast thou been chaind unto my tongue.
Hanged at my lips and ravished with my words,
So that a speech fair fetherd could not fly:
But thy ea^es pit-fall caught it instantly,
But now O Heavens.

O heavens thou wrongst me much,
Thou wrongst me much thus falsely to upbraid me:
Had not I g^anted thee the use of hearing,
That sharpe edged tongue whetted against her master,
Those pussing lungs, those teeth those dropsy lips,
That scal^ing throat those nosthril^s full of ire*
Thy palate proper instruments of speech,
Like to the winged chanters of the wood,
Uttering nought else but idle siflements,
Tunes without sense, words inarticulate:
Had near been able to 'haue abused me thus.
Words are thy Children but of my begetting.

Perfidious Liar how can I endu^e thee,
Call my unspotted chastity in Question:
O could I use t^e B^eath mine anger spends,
I^de make thee know.

Heavens look on my distress,
Desend me from this railing viperesle:
For if I stay her words sharpe vinigar,
Will feet me through, Lingua I must be gone:
I hear one cal me more then earnestly.

Nay the loud cannoning of thunder-boults,
Screeking of Wolves, howling of tortured Ghos^s
Pursue thee still and fill thy amazed ea^es
With cold astonishment and horrid fears:
O how these senses mufftle common sense:
And (...), and more with pleasing objects strive,
To dull his judgment and preuert his will
To their be-hests, who were he not so wrapped
In the dus^kie clouds of their dark policies,
Would never suffer right to suffer wrong,
Fie Lingua wilt thou now degenerate:
Art not a woman, dost not love revenge,
Delightful speeches, sweet persuasions
I have this long time used to get my right,
My right that is to make the Senses six;
And have both name and power with the rest.
Oft have I seasoned savoury periods,
With sugared words, to delude Gustus taste,
And oft embelisht my entreatiue phrase
With smelling flowers of vernant Rhetoric,
Limning and flashing it with various Dyes,
To draw proud Visus to me by the eyes:
And oft perfumed my petitory stile,
With Ciuet-speach, t'entrap Olfactus Nose,
And clad my sel^e in Silken Eloquence,
To allure the nicer touch of Tactus hand,
But all's become lost labour, and my cause
Is still procrastinated; therefore now,
Hence ye base off-spring of a broken mind,
Supple entreaties and smooth flatteries:
Go kiss the loue-^ick lips of puling Gulls,
That still their Brain to quench their loves disdain,
Go guild the tongues of Bawds and Parasites,
Come not within my thoughts. But thou Deceit,
Break up the pleasure of my Brim-full breast,
Enrich my mind with subtle policies.
Well then I'll go, whither? nay what know I?
And do, in faith I will, the devil knows what,
What if I set them, all at variance,
And so obtain to speak, it must be so,
It must be so, but how? there lies the point:
How? thus: cut the devise will never prove,
Augment it so, 'twill be too soon descried,
Or so, nor so, 'tis too too dangerous,
Pish, none of these, what if I take this course? ha?
Why there it goes, good, good most excellent,
He that will catch Eels must disturb the flood,
The Chickin's hatched in faith, for they are proud,
And soon will take a cause of disagreement.

I see the heavens nurse my new-borne devise,
For lo my page Mendacio comes already,
To file and Bu^ish that I hammerd out,
Never in better time Mendacio,
What hast thou done?

Done, yes long ago.

Is't possible thous should dispatch so soon?

Madame, I had no sooner told
Tactus, that Gustus would fain speak with him:
But I spied Visus, Gustus and the rest,
And se^ued them all with sauce of several lies,
Now the last Sense I spake with was Olfactus,
Who having smelt the meaning of my message,
Straight blew his nose, and quickly puffed me hither,
But in the whirle-winde of his furious blast,
Had not by chance a Cobweb held me fast,
Mendacio had been with you long ere this,

Witness this lye, Mendacio's with me now,
But sir out of jesting will they come?

Yes and it like your Ladyship presently:
Here may you have me pressed to flatter them.

I'll slatter no such proud Companions,
'Twill do no good, therefore I am determined
To leave such baseness.

Then shall I turn and bid them stay at home.

No, for their coming hither to this grove,
Shall be a means to further my devise,
Therefore I pray thee Mendacio go presently,
Run you vile Ape.

Whether?

What dost thou stand?

Till I know what to do.

S'pretious 'tis true,
So might thou finely ore-run thine errand.
Hast to my Chest.

I, I,

There shalt-thou find,
A gorgeous Robe, and golden Coronet,
Convey them hither nimbly, let none see them.

Madam, I fly, I fly.

But here you sir?
Lock up your fellow Servant, Veritas,

I warrant you,
You need not fear so long as I am with you.
What colour is the Robe?

There is but one.

The Key Madam, the Key.

By ^uno how forgetful is sudden speed.
Here take it, run.

I'll be here instantly.

Meanwhile this Crown and gorgeous ornament,
Were the great prize, for which five Orators,
With the sharpe weapons of their tongues contended:
But all their speeches were so equal wrought,
And a-like gracious, that if his were witty
His was as wise; the thirds fair eloquence
Did pararell the fourths fi^me g^auitie,
The lasts good gesture kept the Balance even
With all the rest so that the sharpest eye,
And most judicious censor could not judge
To whom the hanging victory should fall,
Therefore with one consent they all agreed,
To offer up both Crown and Robe to me,
As the chief patroness of their profession,
Which heretofore I holily have kept,
Like to amisers gold, to look on only.
But now I'll put them to a better use,
And venture both, in hope to --

Have I not hied me Madam? look you here,
What shall be done with these temptations?

They say a golden Ball,
Bred enmity betwixt three Goddesses,
So shall this Crown be author of debate,
Betwixt five Senses.

Where shall it be laid?

There, there, there, 'tis well, so, so, so,

A Crown's a pleasing bait to look upon,
The craftiest Fox will hardly escape this trap.

Come lets us away, and leave it to the chance.

Nay rather let me stand close here-abouts,
And see the event.

Do so, and if they doubt
How it came there, fain them some pretty fable,
How that some God --

Tut, tut, tut, let me alone,
I that have fained so many hundred Gods,
Can easily forge some fable for the turn:
Whist Madame, away, away, you fright the Foul,
Tactus comes hard by, look you.

Is't he for certain?

Yes, yes, yes, 'tis he.

'Tis he indeed.

Now chaste Diana grant my nets to hold.

The blasting Child-hood of the cheerful morn
Is almost grown a youth and ouer-climbes
Yonder gilt Eastern hills, about which time,
Gustus most earnestly importund me,
To meet him here abouts, what cause I know not.

You shall do shortly to your cost I hope.

Sure by the Sun it should be nine a clock.

What a star-gazer, will you near look down?

Clear is the Sun and blew the Fi^mament,
Me thinks the heavens do smile.

At thy nishap.
To look so high and stumble in a trap.

High thoughts have slippry feet, I had well ni^ fallen.

Well doth he fall that rises with a fall.

Whats this?

O are you taken, tis in vain to strive.

How now?

You'll be so entangled straight.

A Crown?

That it will be heard.

And a Robe.

To loose your self.

A Crown and a Robe.

It had been fitter for you, to have found a fools
coat and a Babble, hey, hey.

Iupiter, Iupiter how came this here?

O Sir Iupiter is making Thunder he here's you not,
here's one knows better.

Tis wondrous rich, ha, but sure it is not so, ho,
Do I not sleep and dream of this good luck, ha.
No I am awake and feel it now
Whose should it be?

Set up a Si quis for it.

Mercury alls mine own, here's none to cry halfes
mine.

When I am gone,

Tactus thy sneezing somewhat did pottend,
Was ever man so fortunate as I?
To break his shins at such a stumbling Block,
Roses and Bays pack hence: this Crown and Robe,
My Brows and Body circles and inuests.
How gallantly it fits me, sure the slave,
Measurd my head that wrought this Coronet.
They lie that say Complexions cannot change:
My Bloud's (...), and I am transformed,
Unto the sacred temper of a King,
Me think I here my noble Parasites
Stiling me Caesar, or great Alexander,
Licking my feet and wondering where I got
This precious ointment; how my pace is mended,
How princely do I speak, how sharpe I threaten:
Peasants I'll curb your head strong impudence:
And make you tremble when the Lyon roates,
Yea earth-bred wo^mes. O for a looking glass:
Poets will w^ite whole volumes of this scarre,
VVhere's my attendants? Come hither Sir quickly.
Or by the wings of Her^es. --

Ay me Olfactus comes, I called too soon,
Heel have half part I fear what shall I do!
Where shall I run? how shall I shift him of!

This is the time this the place appointed,
Where Visiu promised to confer with me,
I think he's there -- No, no, tis Tactus sure.
How now? What makes you sit so nicely?

Its past imagination, its so indeed.

How fast his deeds are fixed and how melancholy he
looks. Tactus, Tactus.

For this is true, Mans life is wondrous brittle.

He's mad I think he talks so Idly, so ho, Tactus.

And many have been metamorphosed,
To stranger matters and more uncouth fonnes,

I must go nearer him he doth not hear.

And yet me thinks, I speak as I was wont
And --

Tactus, Tactus.

Olfactus as thou love come not near me,

Why art thou hatching eggs you are feared to break them

Touch me not least thou chance to break my life.

Whats this under thee?

If thou meddle with me I am utterly undone,

Why man what ails thee?

Let me alone and I'll tell thee,
Lately I came from fine Fantastes house.

So I be^eeue for thar't very foolish.

No sooner had I parted out of doors,
But up I held my hands before my face:
To shield mine eyes from the lights piercing beams,
When I protest I saw the Sun as clear,
Through these my palms as through a perspective*
No marvel, for when I beheld my fingers:
I saw my fingers near transformed to glass,
Opening my breast, my Breast was like a window,
Through which I plainly did perceive my heart:
In whose two Concaues I discerned my thoughts,
Confus^dly lodged in great multitudes.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, why this is excellent,
Momus himself can find no fault with thee
Thou'st make a passing live* Anatom^.
And decide the Question much disputed:
Betwixt the Galenists and Aristotle.

But when I had arrived and set me down,
Viewing my self, my self ay me was changed.
As thou now see to a perfect urinal.

To a perfect vrinal, O monstrous monstrous, art not mad to think so?


I do not think so, but I say I am so,
Therefore Olfactus come not near I advise you:

See the strange working of dull mellanchollie.
Whose drossy drying the feeble Brain,
Corrupts the sense, deludes the Intellect.
And in the souls fair table falsely graves,
Whole squadrons of fantastical Chimeras
And thousand vain imaginations:
Making some think their heads as big as ho^ses,
Some that th'ar dead, some that th'ar turned to Wolves:
As now it makes him think himself all glass,
Tactus dissuade thy self, thou doest but think so.

Olfactus if thou love me get thee gone,
I am an urinal I dare not stir.
For fear of cracking in the Bottom.

Wilt thou sit thus all day?

Unless thou help me.

Bedlam must help thee, what would have me do!

Go to the City make a Case fit for me.
Stuff it with wool, then come again and fetch.

Ha, ha, ha, thou'lt be laughed out of case countenance.

I care not, so it must be, or I cannot stir.

I had best leave troubling him he's obstinate, (Urinal I leave you) but above
all things take heed Iupiter sees you not, for if he do heel ne'er make water
in a sieve: again thoult serve his turn so sit to carry his water unto
Aesculapius, Farewell Urinal, Farewell.


Speak not so loud, the sounds enough to crack me, What is he gone? I an
Urinal, ha, ha, ha, I protest I might have had my face washed finely, if he had
meant to abuse me: I an Urinal, ha, ha, ha, go to* Urinal you have escaped a
fair scou^ing, well I'll away, and get me to mine own house, there I'll lock up
my self fast, playing the Chimick, augmenting this one Crown to troops of
Angels, with which gold-winged messengers, I mean,

To work great wonders, as to build and purchase,
Fare daintily, tie up men's tongues, and loose them,
Command their lives, their goods, their liberties,
And captive all the world with chains of gold,
Hey, hey, tery linkum tinkum.
O Hercules!
Fortune the Queen, delights to play with me,
Stopping my passage with the sight of Visus,
But as he makes hither. I'll make hence,
There's more ways to the wood then one.
What more Diuils to affright me?
O Diabolo, Gustus comes here to vex me.
So that I poor wretch, am like a Shittle-cock betwixt two
Battledores* If I run there, Visus beats me to Scilla, If here,
then Gustus blows me to Carybdi^.
Neptune hath sworn my hope shall suffer shipwreck.
What shall I say?
Mine Vrinal's too thin to bide the fury of such stormcs as these.

Gustus good day.

I cannot have a bad,
Meeting so fair an omen as your self.

Shall I? wilt prove? ha? well 'tis best to venture.

Saw you not Tactus, I should speak with him.

Perchance so, a sudden lye hath best luck.

That face is his, or else mine eye's deceived,
Why how now Tactu^, what so gorgeous?

Where did thou get these fair habiliments?

Stand back I charge you as you love your lives,
By Styx, the first that touches me shall dye.

I can discern no weapons, will he kill us?

Kill you? not I, but come not near me you had best.

Why, art thou mad?

Friends as you love your lives,
Venture not once to come within my reach.

Why dost threaten so?

I do not threaten, but in pure love advise you for the best,
Dare no to to touch me but hence fly a pace,
Add wings unto your feet and save your lives.

Why what's the matter Tactus prethe tell me?

If you will needs ieopard your live; so long,
As hear the* round of my amazedness,
Then for your better safety stand aside.

How full of ceremonies* sure he will conjure,
For such like Robes Magicians use to wear.

I'll see the end* though he should unlock Hell:
And set the infernal hags at liberty,

How rash is man on bidden arms to rush.
It was my chance, O chance most miserable,
To walk that way that to Crumena leads.

You mean Cremona a little Town hard by.

I say Crumena, called Vacua,
A Town which doth, and always hath belongd,
Chiefly to Schollers: from Crumena walls,
I saw a man came stealing craftily,
Apparelled in this vesture which I wear,
But seeing me eft-soones, he took his heals,
And threw his garment from him all in hast,
Which I perceiving to be richly wrought,
Took it me up: But good now get you gone,
Warned by my harms, and escape my misery.

I know no dange^, leave these circumstances.

No sooner had I put it on my back,
But suddenly mine eyes began to dim,
My joints wa^e sore, and all my body burn
With most intestiue torture, and at length,
It was too evident, I had caught the plague.

The plague, away good Gustus lets be gone,
I doubt 'tis true, now I remember me,
Crumena Vacua never wants the plague.

Tactus I'll put my self in jeopardy to pleasure thee.

No gentle Gustus, your absence is the only thing I wish,
Least I infect you with my company.

Farewell.

I willingly would stay to do thee good.

A thousand thanks, but since I needs must die,
Let it suffice, death only murders me,
Oh 'twould augment the dolor of my death,
To know my self the most unhappy Bow,
Through which pale death should aim his shafts at you.

Tactus farewell, yet die with this good hope,
Thy corps shall be interred as they ought.

Go make my Tomb, provide my funerals, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Excellent Asses thus to be deluded,
Bewail his death and cruel destinies,
That lives, and laughs your fooleries to scorn,
But wher's my Crown, oh here: I well deserve,
Thus to be crowned for two great victories* ha, ha, ha,
Visus take care my corps be well interred:
Go make my tomb, and write upon the stone.
Here lies the Sense, that lying gulled them all,
With a false plague, and fained Urinal.

Tactus, Tactus.


O Iupiter, 'tis Auditus all's mard, I doubt the sly knave here's so far, but
yet I'll grope him: how now Ea^es, what make you here, ha?


Nay, what make you here, I pray what were you talking even now, of an Ass, a
Crown, an Urinal a plague?


A plague on you what I?


Oh, what you.


O I had well nigh forgot nothing, but I say --


What?


That if a man (do you mark sir) being sick of the plague (do you see sir) had
a a, a, hem, hem, (this cold troubles me, It makes me cough sometimes
extremely,) had a French Crown, (sir you understand me) lying by him, and
(come hither, come hither) would not bestow 2. pence (do you hear) to buy an
urinal (do you mark me) to cary his water to the Phisitia, (hem)


What of all this?


I say such a one was a very Ass, this was al I use to speak to my self, when
I am alone; but Auditus, when shall we hear a new set of singing-books, or
th'viols, or the co^ort of Instruments.


This was not al, for I heard metio of a tomb, an epitaph.


True, true, I made my self merry with this Epitaph, upon such a fools tomb
thus a, thus, thus, plague brought this man, (foh I have forgotten) o thus,
plague brought this man (so, so, so) unto his burial, because, because,
because, (hem, hem) because he would not buy an urinal, come, come Auditus
shall we here thee play, the Lyeroway, or the Lut^-wa^ shall we, or the Cornet,
or any Music, I am greatly revived when I hear.


Tactus, Tactus, this will not serve, I heard all, you have not found a Crown:
you, no, you have not.


Peace, peace, faith peace, come hither, hark thee good now.


I cannot hold I must needs tell,


O do not, do not, do not, come hither, will you be a fool?


Had he not wings upon his feet and shoulders?


Yes, yes and a fine wand in his hand,
Curiously wrapped with a pair of snakes.

Will half content you, pish twil ne'er be known.

My life, twas Mercury.

I do not know his name but this I am sure his hat had wings vp'ont.


Doubtless twas he, but say my Boy what did he?

First I beheld him hovering in the air,
And then down stouping, with a hundred gires:
His feet he fixed on Mount Ch^phal^n,
From whence he flew and lighted on that plain,
And with disdainful steps soon glided thither:
Whether arrived, he suddenly vnfoulds
A gorgeous Robe, and glittering ornament,
And lay them all, upon that hillock:
This done he wafts his wand, took wing again,
And in a moment vanished out of sight,
With that mine eyes began stare, and heart grew cold,
And all my quivering joints with sweat bedewd:
My heals my thought had wings as well as his,
And so away I run, but by the way:
I met a man as I thought coming thither,

What marks had he?

He had a great -- what this is he, this is he,

What Tactus?

This was the plauge vexed him so,
Tactus your Grave gapes, for you are you ready:

Since you must needs die, do as others do,
Leave all your goods behind you; bequeath the
Crown and Robe, to your executo^s.

No such matter I like the Egiptian Knights,
For the more state, will be buried in them.

Come, come deliver:

What will you take my purse from me?

No but a Crown, that's just more then your own.
Ha, whats this? tis a very small hand,
What Inscription is this?
He of the five that proves himself the best,
Shall have his Temples with this Coronet blessed.
This Crown is mine, and mine this garment is,
For I have always been accounted best.

Next after me, I as your self at any time: besides I found it first,
therefore tis mine.


Neither of yours, but mine as much as both,

And mine the most of any of you all,

Give me it or else --

I'll make you late repent it --

Presumptuous as you are --

Spite of your teeth --

Never till now a ha it works a pace,
Visus I know tis yours and yet me thinks:
Auditus you should have some challenge to it,
But that your title Tactus is so good:
Gustus I would swear the Coronet were yours,
What will you all go brawl about a trifle:
View but the pleasant coast of Mycrocosme,
Is't not great pity to be rent with wars,
Is't not a shame, to stain with brinish tears,
The smiling cheeks of euer-cheer^full peace,
Is't not far better to live quietly:
Then broil in fury of dissention,
Give me the Crown ye shall not disagree,
If I can please you; I'll play Paris part,
And most unpartial judge the controversy:

Sauce-box go meddle with your Ladies fa^ne, and prate not here.


I speak not for my self, but for my Countries safe commodity.

Sir be still.

Nay and you be so hot the devil part you,
I'll to Olfactus and send him amongst you.
O that I were* Alecto for your sakes:
How liberally would I bestow my snakes.

Tactus upon thine honour,
I challenge thee to meet me here,
Strong as thou can provide in tha^flernoone.

I vnder-take the Challenge, and here's my hand,
In sign thou shalt be answered.

Tactus I'll join with thee, on this condition,
That if we win, he that fought best of us,
Shall have the Crown, the other wear the Robe.

Give me your hand I like the motion.

Auditus shall we make our forces double,
Upon the same te^mes.

Very willingly,

Come lets away fear not the victory.
Rights more advantage, then an host of soldiars.

I long to see those hot-spur senses at it, they say they have gallant
preparations, and not unlikely, for most of the soldiers are ready in Aames
since the last field fought against their yearly enemy Meleager, his wife
Acr^sia; that Conquest hath so fleshed them that no peace can hold them. But had
not Meleager been sick, and Acrasia drunk, the senses might have whistled
for the victory.


Foh, what a stincke of gunpouder is yonder?


Whoes this! oh oh tis Appetitus, Gustus his hungry Parasite.


I cannot endure the smoking of Gunnes, the thunde^ng of drums, I had rather
here the merry hacking of pothearbs, and see the reeking of a hot capon. If
they would use no other Bucklers in war, but shields of Brawn, brandish no
swords but sweards of Bacon, trail no spears, but spar^ibs of Pork, and
instead of Hargebush pieces discharge Hartichockpies, toss no pikes but boiled
pickrills, then Appetitus would rouse up his crest, and bear up him self with
the proudest.


Ah here's a youth stark nought at a trench, but old dog at a trencher, at tall
squire at a square table.


But now my good masters must pardon me, I am not for their service, for their
service is without service, and indeed their service is too hot for my diet.
But what. If I be not my self* but only this be my spirit that wanders up and
down, and Appetitus be killed in the Camp, the Devil he is as soon, howes that
possible? tut tut I know I am, ^, I am ^, and alive too, by this Infallible
token, that I feel my self hungry.


Thou might have taken a bette^ token of thy self, by knowing thou a^t a
fool.


Well the though I made my fellow soldiers admire the beauty of my back wonder
at the nimbleness of my hee'es, yet now will I at safety at home, tell in what
dangers they are abroad, ^le speak nothing but guns, and glau^s, and sta^es,
and phalanges, squadrons, and barracadoe, ambus^adoes, palmedoes blank point
dept, counterpoint, counter sc^ate, ^allies and lies, saladoes, tarantan^aras,
ranta, ta^a tara, hey


I must take the fife out of his mouth or he will ne'er adone.

But above all I'll be sure on my knees to thank the great --


Who am I, who am I, who I?

By the bloud-staind fashion of Mauors -- I am on your side.

Why, who am I?

Are you a soldier?

No.

Then you are master Hell^ the Bear-heard,

No, no, he's dead.

Or Gulono the gutty Seriant, or Delphino the Vinter, or else I know you not,
for these are all my acquaintance.


Would I were hanged if I be any of these.


What Mend^cio, by the faith of a Knight thou art welcome, I must borrow thy
Whetstone to sharpen the edges of my martial complements.


By the faith of a Knight, what a pox, where are thy Spurs?


I need no spurs, I ride like Pegasus on a winged horse, on a swift Jennet,
my Boy, called fear.


What should thou fear in the wars? he's not a good soldier that hath
not a good stomach.


O, but the stink of powder spoils Appetitus stomach, and then thou know
when 'tis gone, Appetitus is dead, therefore I very manfully drew my sword, and
flourished it bravely about mine ears, kissed, and finding my self hurr, most
manfully ran away.


All heart indeed, for thou ran like a Hart out of the field, It seems then
the Senses mean to sight it out.


I and out-fight themselves I think, and all about a trifle, a paltry babble,
found I know not where.


Thou art deceived, they fight for more then that, a thing called superiority,
of which the Crown is but an Emblem.


Mendacio hang this superiority, Crown me no Crown but Bacchus Crown of
Roses, give me no Sceptre, but a fat Capons leg, to show that I am the great
King of Hungarie, therefore I prithee talk no more of state-matters, but in
brief, tell me my little rascal, how thou hast spent thy time this many a
day?


Faith in some credit since thou saw me last.


How so, where?


Every where; in the Court your Gentlewomen hang me at their Apron strings, and
that makes them answer so readily. In the City I am honoured like a God, none
so well acquainted with your tradesmen: your Lawyers all the Term time hire me
of my Lady, your Gallants if they hear my name abused, they stab for my sake:
your Travellers so dote upon me as passes, O they have good reason, for I have
carried them to many a good meal, under the Countenance of my familiarity: nay
your States-men have oftentimes closely coueied me under their tongues, to make
their policies more currant, As for oldmen they challenge my Company by
authority.


I am exceeding glad of your great promotion.


Now when I am disposed I can Philophy it in the University, with the
subtilest of them all.


I cannot be persuaded that to art acquainted with Schollers ever since thou
were pressed to death in a Print-house.


No, why I was the first founder of the 3. sects of Philosophy except on of the
Peripatetticks who accknowledge Aristotle (I confess) their great
Grand-father.


Thou Boy, how is this possible? thou art but a Child and there were sects of
Philosophy before thou were borne.


Appetitus, thou mistake me, I tell thee, 3000 years ago was Mendacio borne
in Greece, nursed in Creete and ever since honoured every where: I'll be sworn
I held old Homers pen when he write his Illiads, and his Odisses.


Thou had need, for I hear say he was blind.


I helped Herodotus to pen some part of his muses, lent Pli^y ink to write his
history, rounded Rabalais in the ear when he historified Pantagruell, as for
Lucian I was his Genius, O those two Books De Vera historia howsoever they go
under his name, I'll be sworn I writ them every title.


Sure as I am Hungry thou'st have it for lying. But hast thou rusted this
latter time for want of exercise?


Nothing less* I must confess I would fain have ^ogged Stow and great
Hollings-head on their elbows, when they were about their Chronicles, and as I
remember Sir Iohn Mandeuills travels, and a great part of the Decades were of
my doing. But for the mirror of Knight-hood, Beuis of Southampton, Palmerin of
England, Amadis of Gaul, Huon de Bordeaux, Sir Guy of Warwick Martin
marprellate, Robin-hood, Garragantua, Gerilion and a thousand such exquisite
monuments as these, no doubt but they breath on my breath up and down.


Downwards I'll swear for the'rs stinking lies in them.


But what should I light a Candle to the bright Sunneshine of my glorious
renown, the whole world is full of Mendacios fame.


And so it will be so long as the world is full of fame.


But Sir how hast thou done this long time?


In as much request as thy self. To begin with the Court as thou did, I lie
with the Ladies all night, and that's the reason they call for Cullies, and
Gruellies, so early before their praie^s, your gallats never sup, break-fast,
or Beaver without me.


That's false for I have seen them eat with a full stomach.


True, but because they know a little thing drives me from them, therefore in
midst of meat they present me with some sharpe sauce or a dish of delicate
Anchoues, or a Cauiare, to entice me back again, nay more your old Sirs that
hardly go without a propp, will walk a mile or two every day to renew their
acquaintance with me, as for the Academy it is beholding to me, for adding
the eight province unto noble Heptarchie of the liberal sciences.


Whats that I prithee.


The most desired and honourable art of Cookery.
Now Sir in the City I am -- st, st.
O the body of a Louse.

What art a louse in the City?


Not a word more for yonder comes Phantastes, and some body else.


What a pox can Phantastes do?


Work a miracle if he would prove wise.


Tis he indeed, the vilest nup: yet the fool loves me exceedingly but I
care not for his company for if he once catch me, I shall never be r^d of him.


Sir Boy He^resi^boy how now biting your nailes?


Three things have troubled my brain this many a day, and just now, when I was
laying hold on the Invention of the, your sudden call, made them like
Tantalus apples, fly from my ^ingers.


Some great matters questionles, what were they?


The quadrature of a circle, the Philosophers stone and the next way to the
Indies;


Thou dost well to meditate on these three things at once for th^ile be found
out altogether, ad gra^cas calendas, but let them pass and cary the conceit,
I told you this morning to the party you wot of. In my imagination tis
Capritious, 'twill take I warrant thee.


I will Sir* But what say you to the gentleman that was with you yesterday?


O I think thou meanest him that made 19. sonnets of his mistress Busk-point;


The same, the same, Sir. You promised to help him out with the twentieth.


By Iupiters cloven pate tis true. But we witty fellows are so forgetful,
but stay, hue, hue, cary him this.

The gordian knot which Alexander great,
Did meanwhile cut with his all conquering sword:
Was nothing like thy Busk-point pretty Peat,
Nor could so fair an a^gury afford.
Then to conclude let him pervert Catullus his zonam soluit diu ligatam thus,
thus.

Which if I cha^nce to cut or else untie,
Thy little world I'll conquer presently.
Tis pretty, pretty, tell him twas extemporal,

Well Sir, but now for Master Inameratos loue-letter.


Some netling stuff in faith; let him write thus* Most heart commanding faced
Gentlewoman, ^uen as the stone in India called Basaliscus, hurts all that
looks on it: and as the Serpent in Arabia called Smaragdu^ delights the
sight, so does thy celestial orb assimilating eyes, both please, and in
pleasing wound my loue-darted heart.


But what trick shall I invent for the conclusion?


Pish any thing Love will minister Ink for the rest, He that once begun well,
hath half done, let him begin again and there's all.


Master Gullio spoke for a new fashion, what for him?


A fashion for his suit -- let him button it down the sleeve with four
elbows, and so make it the pure heiroglyphick of a fool.


Nay then let me request one thing of you.


What's that Boy? by this fair hand thou shalt have i^.


Mistress Superbia a Gentlewoman of my acqua^ntance wished me to devise her a
new set for her Ruff, and an odd tire, I pray sir help me out with it.


Ah Boy in my conceit it's a heard matter to perform, these women have well
nigh tired me, with devising tires for them, and ferme at an non plus for new
sets, their heads are so light, their eyes so coy, that I know not how to
please them.


I pray Sir, she hath a bad face, and fain would have suitors, Fantastical and
odd apparel, would perchance draw some body to look on her.


If her face be nought, in my opinion, the more view it, the worse, bid her
wear the mu^titude of her deformities under a mask, till my leisure will
serve to devise some durable, and unstained blush of painting.


Very good Sir.


Away then, hye thee again, meet me at the Court within this hour at the
farthest. Phantastes. But these puling Lovers, I cannot but laugh at them and
their Encomions of their Mistresses. They make forsooth her hair of Gold, her
eyes of Diamond, her cheeks of Roses, her lips of Rubies, her teeth of
Pearl, and her whole body of Ivory: and when they have thus Idold' her like
Pigmalion, they f^ll down and worship her. Psyche, thou hast laid a hard task
upon my shoulders, to invent at ^uery ones ask, were it not that I refresh my
dullness once a day with my most Angelical presence, 'twere unpossible for me
to undergo it.


I cannot stay, I tell you 'tis more then time I were at Court, I know my
sovereign Psyche hath expected me this hour


In good time, yonder comes Common-sense, I imagine it should be he by his
voice.


Crave my counsel, tell me what manner of man he is? can he entertain a man
into his house, can he hold his Velvet Cap in one hand, and vale his bonnet
with the other? knows he how to become a Scarlet gown, hath he a pair of
fresh posts at his door?


He's about some hasty State-matters, he talks of posts me thinks.


Can he part a couple of Dogs brawling in the street? why then choose him
Mayor^vpon my credit, heel prove a wise officer.


Save you my Lord, I have attended your leisure this hour.


Fie upon it what a toil have I had to choose them a Mayor yonder? there's a
fusty Currier will have this man: the^e's a Chandlor wipes his nose on his
sleeve, and swears it shall not be so. There's a Musterd-maker looks as
keen as Vinegar will have another: O this many headed multitude, it's a hard
matter to please them.


Especially where the multitude is so well headed. But I pray you where's
Master Memory? hath he forgotten himself that he is not here.


'Tis high time he were at Court, I would he would come.


How soon a wise man shall have his wish.


Memory the season of your coming is very ripe.


Had you staid a little longer 'twould have bin stark rot.


I am glad I saved it from the Swine -- Spretious I have forgot something. O my
purse, my purse, why Anamnestes? Remembrance where art thou Anamnestes
Remembrance, that wild Boy is always gadding, I remember he was at my heals,
eue^ now and now the wild Rascal is vanished.


Is he not here? why then in my imagination he's left behind, o la* Anamnestes
remembrance.





Ha sir, what a brawling's here?


I do but give you an answer with anon Sir.


You answer sweetly, I have called you three or four times one after another.


Sir, I hope I answered you 3. or 4. times, one in the neck of another. But if
your good worship have lent me any more calls, tell me, and I'll repay them as I
am a Gentleman.


Leave your tattle* had you come at first I had not spent so much breath in
vain.


The truth is Sir, the first time you called, I heard you not, the second I
understood you not, the third I knew not whether it were you or no: the fourth
I could not tell where you were, and that's the reason I answered so suddenly.


G^e sir, run, seek every where, I have lost my purse some where.


I go sir; Go sir, seek, run, I have lost, bring, here's a Dogs life
with a pox, shall I be always used like a water-Spanniell.


Come good Master Register, I wonder you be so late now-adayes.


My good Lord, I remember that I knew your Grand-father in this your place, and
I remember your Grand-fathers great Grand-fathers, Grand-fathers Fathers,
Father, yet in those days I never remember that any of them could say, that
Register Memory ever broke one minute of his appointment.


Why good Father, why are you so late now a days?


Thus 'tis, the most customers I remember my self to have, are (as your
Lordship knows) Schollers, and now a days the most of them are become
Critics, bringing me home such paltry things to lay up for them, that I can
hardly find them again.


Iupiter, Iupiter, I had thought these Flies had bit none but my self, do
Critics tickle you in faith?


Very familiarly: for they must know of me forsooth how every idle word is
written in all the musty moath-eaten Manusripts, kept in all the old Libraties
in every City betwixt England and Peru.


Indeed I have noted these times to affect Antiquities, more then is requisite.


I remember in the age of Assaracus and Ninus, and about the wars of Thebes,
and the siege of Troy, the^e was few things committed to my charge, but those
that were well worthy the preserving, but now every trifle must be wrapped up
in the volume of eternity. A rich pudding-wife, or a Cobbler cannot die but I
must immortalize his name with an ^pitaph: A dog cannot peace in a Nobleman's
she, but it must be sp^inkled into the Chronicles, so that I (...) could
remember my Treasure more full, never emptier of honourable, and true heroical
actions.


By your leave Memory you are not alone troubled, Chronologers many of them are
so so Fantastic, as when they bring a Captain to the Combat, lifting up
his revengeful arm to dispart the head of his enemy, they will hold up his
arms so long till they have bestowed three or four pages in describing the
gold hilts of his threating Fashion. So that in my Fancy the reader may well
wonder his adversary stabs him not, before he strikes, moreover they are become
most palpable flatterers always begging at my gates for Invention.


This is a great fault in a Chronologer to turn Parasite: An absolute history
should be in fear of none, neither should he write any thing more then truth
for friend-ship, or less for hate, but keep himself equal and constant in
all his discourses, but for us we must be contented, for as our honours
increase, so must the burden of the cares of our offices urge us to waxeheauy.


But not till our backs break, ^lud there was never any so haunted as I am,
this da^e there comes a Sophister to my house, knocks at my door, his errand
being asked, forsooth his answer was to borrow a fair suit of conceits out of
my wardrop, to apparraile a show he had in hand, and what think you is the
plot?


Nay I know not, for I am little acquainted with such toys.


Meane-while he's somewhat acquainted with you, for he's bold to bring your
person upon the stage.


What me? I cannot remember, that I was ever brought upon the stage before.


Yes you and you, and my self with all my Phantisticall tricks and humours* but
I trow I have fitted him with Fooleries I trust heel never troble me again.


O times, O manners, when Boys dare to traduce men in authority was ever such
an attempt heard?


I remember there was* For (to say the truth) at my ^ast being at others (It is
now, let me see, about 1800. years a go) I was at a Commedie of Aristophanes
making, (I shall never forget it) The Arch-gouernor of Athens took me by the
had and placed me, and there I say, I saw Socrates abused most grossly, himself
being then a present spectator: I remember he sate full against me, and did not
so much as show the least countenance of discontent.


In those days it was lawful, but now the abuse of such liberty is
vnsuf^erable.


Think what you will of it, I think 'tis done, and I think it is acting by
this time; ha^ke ha^ke, what drummings yonder, I'll lay my life they are com^
to present the show I spake off.


It may be so; stay we'll see what 'tis.


Fain thy self in great hast.


I warrant you Madam: I doubt 'tis in vain to run, by this they are all past
ouer-taking.


Is not this Lingua that is in such hast?


Yes, yes stand still.


I must speak with him.


With whom?


Assu^e your self they are all at Court ere this.


Run after them, for unless he know it --


Lingua.


O is't your Lordship: I beseech you pardon me hast, and fear, I protest put
out mine eyes: I looked so long for you, that I knew not when I had found you.


In my conceit, that^s like the man that inquired, who saw his Ass, when
himse^fe rid on him.


O my heart beats so, fie, fie, fie, fie,


I am so weary* fo, fo, fo, fo.


I prithee Lingua make an end.


Let me begin fi^st I beseech you, but if you will needs have the end first,
thus 'tis. The common-wealth of M^crosme at this instant, suffers the pangs of
death, 'tis gasping for breath. Will you have all? 'tis poisne^.


What Pothecary durst be so bold as make such a confection: ha what poison is't?


A golden Crown.


I mistake, or else Galen in his book De sanitate tuenda, commends gold as
restorative.


Lingua express your self.


Madam if you want breath, let me help you out.


I prithee do, do.


My Lord, the report is, that Mercurie coming late into this country, in this
very place, left a Coronet with this inscription, that the best of the five
should have it, which the Senses thinking to belong unto them --


Challenge each other, and are now in arms, and 'tlike your Lordship.


I protest it likes not me.


Their battles are not far hence ready ranged.


O monstrous presumption? what shall we do?


My Lord, in your great Grand-fathers time, there was I remember such a breach
amongst them, therefore my Counsel is, that after his example by the strength
of your authority you convent them before you.


Lingua go presently, command the Senses upon their allegiance to our dread
Sovereign Queen Psyche, to dismiss their companies, and personally to
appear before me without any pretence of excuse.


I go my Lord.


But here you Madam, I pray you let your Pages tongue walk with us a little,
till you return again.


With all my heart.


Hot youths I protest, saw you those warlike preparations?

Lately my Lords, I spied into the Army,
But oh, 'tis far beyond my reach of wit.
Or strength of utterance to describe their forces.

Go to, speak what thou can.

Upon the right hand of a spacious Hill,
Proud Visus marshalleth a puissant army,
Three thousand Egles strong, whose valiant Captain,
Is Ioues swift Thunder-bearer, that same Bird,
That hoist up Ganimede from the Troyan plains:
The vant-gard strengthened with a wondrous flight.
Of Falcons, Haggards, Hobbies, Terselets,
Lanards and Goshaukes, Sparhaukes, and Ravenous Birds.
The rereward granted to Auditus charge.
Is stoutly follow'd with an impetuous heard
Of stif-neckt Bulls, and many home-mad stags,
Of the best head the Forest can afford.

I promise you a fearful troupe of Soldiers.

Right opposite stands, Tactus strongly mand,
With three thousand bristled Vrchens fo his Pikemen;
Four hundredth Tortesses for Elephants.
Besides a monstrous troupe of ugly spiders,
Within an ambushment he hath commanded,
Of their own guts to spin a cordage fine,
Whereof t'haue framed a net (O wondrous work)
That fastened by the Concave of the Moon,
Spreds down it self toth'earths circumference.

Tis very strange, I can not remember the like Engine at any time.

Nay more my Lord, the masks are made so strong,
That I my self upon them scal^d the heavens,
And boldly walked about the middle region,
Where in the province of the Meteors,
I saw the cloudy shops of Hail and Rain,
Garners of Snow, and Christals full of dew,
Rivers of burning Arrows, Dens of Dragons,
Huge beams of flames, and Spears like fire-brands,
Where I beheld hot Mars and Mercurie,
With Rackets made of Spheres, and Balls of Stars,
Playing at Tennis for a Tun of Nectar.
And that vast gaping of the Firmament,
Under the Southern pole is nothing else,
But the great hazard of their Tennis Court,
The Zodiac is the line. The shooting Stars,
Which in an eye-bright evening seemed to fall,
Are nothing but the Balls they loose at Bandy,
Thus having took my pleasure with those sights,
By the same net I went up, I descend.

Well S^rra to what purpose tends this Stratage^e?

None know directly, but I think it is,
T'intrappe the Eagles, when the Battles join.

Who ^akes Tactus his part?

Under the standard of thrice hardy Tactus,
Thrice valiant Gust^s, leads his warlike forces,
An-endles multitude of desperate Apes,
Five hundred Marmose^ts and long-ta^ Monkees:
All trained to the field, and nimble Gunners.

Ima^gine there's old moving amongst them: me thinks a handful of nuts would
turn them all out of their Soldiers coats.


Ramparts of Pastie-crust and fortes of pies,
Entrenched wi^h dishes full of Custard stuff:
Hath Gustus made; and planted ordinance,
Strange ordinance: Cannons of hollow canes:
Whose pouder's Rape-seed, charged with Turnip shot.

I Remember in the Country of Utopia, they use no other kind of Artille^y.


But whats become of O^factus?

He pollitickly leane^ to neither part,
But stands betwixt the camps as at receipt:
Having great wine his Pioners to entrench them.

In my foolish imagination Olfactus is very like the Goddess of victory that
never takes any part but the Conquerors.


And in the woods he placed secretly.
Two hundred couple of hounds and hungry Mastiffs:
And ore his head hover at his command,
A cloud of Vul^u^es* which over spread the light,
Making a night before the day be done:
But to what end not known but feared of all.

I conjecture he intends to see ^he^ ^ight and after the ba^taile to feed his
Dogs, Hogs and Vultures upon the murdered ^cases.


My L. I think the fury of their Anger will not be obedient to the Message
of Li^gua, for otherwise in my conceit the^ should have been here er this:
with your L. good liking wee'le attend upon you to see the field for more
certainty. It shall be so; Come Master Register lets walk.


Forsooth Obliuio shut the door upon me I could come no sooner, ha? is he not
here? O excellent. Would I were hanged but I looked for a sound rap on the pate
and that made me before hand to lift up this excuse for a Buckler, I know he's
not at court, for here is his purse without which warrant there's no c^ming
thither, wherefore now Anamnestes sport thy self a little, while thou art out
of the prison of his company. What shall I do? by my troth anatomize his purse
in his absence. Plutus send there be Jewels in it, that I may finely geld it
of the stones -- The best sure lies in the bottom -- poxt o^t here's nothing
but a company of worm eat^n papers; whats this? Memorandum that Master
Prodigo owes me four thousand pounds and that his lands are in pawn for it:
Memorandum that I owe; that he owes? tis well the old slave hath some care of
his credit, to whom owes he trow I? that I owe Anamnestes? What me? I never
lent him any think; ha this is good, theirs som-thing coming to me, more then
I looked for. Come on, what is't, Memorandum that I owe Anamnestes -- a
breeching; I faith Sir I will ease you of that payment ( He rends the bill)
Memorandum that when I was a child Robusto tripped up my heals at foot-bale:
what a Revengeful dizard's this?


No-thing but lay you upon the Cushion Sir, how so?


Nothing but lay the Cushion upon you Sir?


What my litt^e N^m? by this foot I am sorry I mistook thee.


What my little Men? by this hand it grieves me I took thee so right, But
Sir whither with these Cushions?


To lay them here that the Judges may sit softly least my Lady L^ngua's cause
go hard with her.


They should have been wrought with gold; these will do nothing; But what
makes thy Lady with the Judges?


Pish, know not? she sues for the title of a Sense, as well as the rest
that beat the name of the Pentarchy.


Will Common sense and my Master, leave their affairs to detennine that
Controversy?


Then thou hearst nothing,


What should I hear!


All the senses fell out about a Crown fallen fro heaven and pitched a field for
it, but Vicegerent Common sense hearing of it took upon him, to umpire the
contention, in which regard he hath appointed them (their arms dismissed) to
appear before him, charging every on to bring as it were in a show, their
proper objects, that by them he may determine of their several excellencies.


When is all this?


As soon as they can possibly provide.


But can he tell which diserues best by their objects?


No not only; for every sense must describe his Instrument, that is his house,
where he performs his daily duty, so that by the Object and the Instrument,
my Lord can with great ^ase discern their place and dignities.


His Lord-ships very wise.


I thou shalt hear all anon, fine master Phantastes, and thy master will be
here shortly. But how is't my little Rogue? me thinks thou look lean
upon it?


Alas how should I do otherwise that lie all night with such a Rawbo^d Skeleton
as Memory and run all day on his Ertands* The Chur^e's grown so old and
forgetful, that every hour he's calling Anamnestes, remembrance, where art
Anamnestes? Then presently some thing's lost, poor I must run for it, and
these words, run Boy. Come Sir quick, quick, quick, are as familiar with
him as the Cough, never out ons mouth.


Alack* alack poor Rogue, I see my fortunes are better. My Lady loves me
exceedingly; she's always kissing me, so that (I tell thee Nam) Mendacios
never from betwixt her lips.


Nor out of Memories mouth; but in a worse sort, always excercising my stumps
and which is more, when he favours best then I am in the worst taking.


How so.


Thus when we are friends, then must I come and be dandled upon his
palsie-quaking knees, and he will tell me a long story of his acquaintance with
King Priamus and his familiarity with Nester and how he plaid at blowe-point
with Iupiter when he was in his side-coates and how he went to look
Birds-nests with Athotis, and where he was at Deucal^ons sloud 20. such old
wives tales.


I wonder he being so old can talk so much.


Nature thou know, (knowing what an vn^uly Engine the tongue is) hath set
teeth round about for watchmen, Now Sir, my Maister's old age hath caught our
all his teeth that's the cause it runs so much at liberty


Philosopicall;


O but there's one-thing stings me to the very heart, to see an ugly foul
idle, fat, dusty clog-head, called Obliuio preserred before, me dost know him?


Who I, I; But care not for his acquaintance, hang himblockhead I could never
abide him? Thou Remembrance art the only friend that the arms of my friendship
shall embrace. Thou hast heard Oportet mendacem esse memorem. But what of
Obliu^o.


The very naming of him hath made me forget my self. O, O, O, O, that Rascal
is so made-of every where.


Who Obliuio?


I, for our Courtiers hug him continually in their vngrate-ful bosoms, your
smoth-belly fat back, barrel-pauncht, tu-gutted drones are ever without him,
as for Memory he's a false hearted fellow, he always deceives th^, they
respect not him, except it be to play a game at Chests, Primero, Saunt, Maw, or
such like.


I cannot think such fellows have to do with Obliuio since they never got any
thing to forget.


Again, there prodig all swagerers that are so much bound to their Creditors,
if they have but one Cross about them, they will spend it in Wine upon Obliui^.


To what purpose I prithee?


Only in hope heel wash them in the Lethe of their cares.


Why then no man cares forthee.


Yes a company of studious Paper-wormes and lean Schollers, and niggardly
scraping Usurers, a troupe of hearteating envious persons, and those
cancker-stomackt spiteful creatures, that furnish up common place-bookes with
other men's faults^* The time hath been in those golden days, when Saturne
reigned, that if a man received a benefit of another, I was presently sent for
to put him in mind of it, but now in these Iron after-noones, save your
friends life, and Obliuio Will be more familiar with him then you.


Phantastes not at Court? is't possible 'tis the strangest accident that ever
was heard oft, I had thought the Ladies and Gallants would never lye without
him.


Hist, hist, Mendaicio I prithee observe Heuresis, it seems he cannot find
his Master, that's able to find out all things; and art thou now at a fault,
can not find out thine own master? nor? I'll try one more way. O yes.


What a Proclamation for him?


I, I, his nimble head is always full of proclamations*


O yes.


But doth he cry him in the wood?


O good sir, and good reason, for every beast hath Fantasy at his pleasure.


O yes^ if any man can tell any tidings, of a spruce, neat, apish, nimle,
finbe, foolish, absurd, humerous, conceited, Phantastique Gallant, with hollow
eyes, sharpe look, swart complexion, ^e^ger face, wearing as many toys in his
apparel, as fooleries in his looks and gesture, let him come ^orth certify
me thereof, and shall have for his reward. --


I can tell you where he is, what shall he have?


A box of the ear sura, (snap)


How now Invention, are you so quick fingered? in faith, there's your principal
sir, (snap) and here's the interest ready in my hand (snap)


Do you bite you Rascal?


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, here's the lively picture of this axiom, A quick
Invention and a good Memory can never agree. Fie fie, fie Heuresis, beat him
when he's down?


Prithee lets alone proud Iack-an-Apes, I'll --


What will you do?


Untruss thy points, and whip thee, thou paltry --

Let me go Mendacio if thou love me, shall I put up the --


Come, come, come you shall fight no more in good faith: Heuresis, your Master
will catch you anon.


My Master, where is he?


I'll bring you to him, come away.


Anamnestes, I scorn that thou should think I go away for fear of any
thing thou can do unto me; here's my hand as soon as thou can pick the
least occasion, put up thy finger I am for thee.


When thou dare Heuresis, when thou dare, I'll be as ready as thy self at
any time.

This Heuresis, this Invention, is the proudest Iack-a-napes, the peartest
self conceited Boy that eue^ breathed, because forsooth some odd Poet, or
some such Phantastique fellows, make much on him, there's no ho with him, the
vile dandi-pra^te will ore-looke the proudest of his acquaintance: but well I
remember me, I learnt a trick the other day, to bring a Boy ore the thigh finely,
if he come, in faith I'll tickle him with it.


As I am a Rascal Nam, they are all coming, I see Master Register trudging
hither, as fast as his three fee^e will carry up his four Ages.


Ah you le^den held Rascal.


He^e 'tis Sir, I have it, I have it,


Is this all the hast you make.


A^t like your worship your Clog-head Obliuio went before me, and foiled the
trail of your foote-steps, that I could hardly undertake the quest of your
purse forsooth.


You might have bee^e here long ere this: Come hither sir, come ^ither, what
must you go round about, goodly, goodly, you are so full of circumstances.


In t^uth Sir, I was here before, and missing you, went back into the City,
sought you in every Ale-house, Inn, Taue^ne, Dicing-house, Tennis-court,
Stews, and such like places, likely to find your worship in.


Havillaine, am I a man likely to be found in such places, ha?


No, no sir, sir but I was told by my Lady Lingua's page that your Worship was
seeking me, therefore I inquired for you in those places where I knew you would
ask for me, and it please your worship.


I remember an other quarrel sir, but well, well, I have no leisure.


Lin^ua, the Senses by our appointment anon are to present their objects before
us; seeing therefore they be not in readiness, we lice^se you in the mean
while, either in your own person, or by your Advocate, to speak what you can
for your self.


My Lord if I should bring before your honour all my friends ready to importune
you in my behalf, I should have so many Retoricians, Logitians, Lawyers and
which is more, so many Women to attend me, that this Groa^e would hardly
contain the Company, whe^e^o^e to avoid the tediousness I willay the whole
cause upon the tip of mine own tongue.


Be as brief as the necessity of our short time requires.


My Lord, though the Imb^ill tas of my fe^ble sex, might! d^awe me back,
^rom t^is T^bunall, with the habenis to wit Timorss and the Catenis Pudori^,
notwithstanding being so fairly led on with the gracious (...) of your
iustissimae. (...) Especially so aspremente spurd' con gli sproni di necess^a
mia pungente, I will without the help of Orators, commit the tot^m sal^tem of
my action to the Volutabilitati (...), which (aucc vos^r^ bonn^ playscur) I
will finish with more then Laconic^ bre^itate.


Whats this? here's a Gallemaufry of speech indeed.


I remember about the year 1602. many used this skew kind of language. Which
in my opinion is not much unlike the man Pla^ny the Son of Lagus, King of
Egypt, brought for a spectacle hal^e white half black.


I am persuaded these same language makers have the very quality o^ cold in
their wi^, that freezes all Heterog^n^ll languages together, congealing
English Tynne, Grecian Gold, Romaine Latin all in a l^mpe.


Or rather in my imagination like your Fantastical Gulls Apparel, wearing a
Spanish Felt, a French Doblet, a Granado Stocking, a Dutch Slop, an Italian
Cloak, with a Welch frise Jerkin.


Well, leave your toying, we cannot pluck the least feather from the soft wing
of time. Therefore Lingua go on but in a more formal manner, you know an
ingenio^s Oration must neither swell abou^ the Banks with insolent words, nor
cre^pe too shallow in the ford, with vulger terms, but run equally, smooth,
cheerful, through the clean current of a pure stile.


My Lord, this one thing is sufficient to confirm my worth to be equ^ll o^
better then the seases, whose best operations are nothing till I polish them
with perfection; for their knowledge is only of things present, quickly
subluned with the deft file of time; whereas the tongue is able to recount
things past, and often pronounce things to come by this means re-edifying
such Excellencies, as Time and Age do easily depopulate.


But what profitable service, do you undertake for our d^ead Q^ene Psych^?


O how I am ravished to think how infinitely she hath grace^ me with her most
acceptable service. But above all (which you Master Register may well
remember) when her highness taking my m^uch for her instrument, with the Bow
of my tongue st^ooke so heavenly a touch upon my teeth, that she cha^med ^he
very Tigers a sleep, the lystning Bears and Lions, to couch at her fee^,
while the Hills leaped, and the woods d^nced, to the sweet harmony of her
most Angelical accents.


I remember it very well, Orpheus played upon the Harp, while she sang about
some four yea^es after the Co^tention betwixt Apollo and P^, and a little
before the excoriation of M^syas.


By the same token the River Alpheus, at that time pursuing his beloved. (...),
dischanel'd himself of his former course to be partaker of their admirable
consort, and the music being ended, thrust himself h^ad-long into earth,
the next way to follow his amorous Chase; if you go to A^cadi^ you shall see
his coming up again.


Forward Li^gua with your reason.


How oft hath her Excellency employed me as Imbassador in her most urgent
aff^ire^ to foreign Kings and Emperors I may say to the Gods themselves.
How many bloodless Battles have my persuasions attained, when the senses
forces have been (...). Howe many Rebels have I reclaimed when her s^cred
authority, was little regarded (her Laws without exprobation be it spoken) had
been altogether vnpubli^hed, her will unperformed, her illustrio^s deeds
vnrenoumed had not the silver sound of my trumpet ^illed the whole circuit of
the Vniuerse with her deserved fame. Her Cities would dissolve, tra^ique would
decay friendshippes be broken, were not my speech the knot* Mercury, and
M^tique, to bind, defend, and glewe them together. What should I say more; I
can never speak enough of the unspeakable praise of speech, wherein I can
find no other impe^fection at all, but that the most exquisite power excellency
of speech cannot sufficiently express the exquisite power, and excellency of
speaking.


Lingua your service and dignity we confess to be great, nertheles these
reasons prove you not to have the nature of a sense.


By your L. ships favour I can soon prove that a sense is a faculty, by which
our Queen sitting in her privy Chamber hath intelligence of exterior
occurrents. That I am of this nature, I prove thus. The object which I
challenge is --


Stay, stay my Lo. defer I beseech, defer the Judgment.


Who's this that boldly interrupts us this, hum.


My name is Appetitus, Common servant to the Pentarchy of the senses, who
understanding that your Honour was handling this Action of Lin^uae^ sent me
hither thus hastily, most humbly requesting the Bench to cons^der these A
ticles they allege against her before you proc^ede to judgment.


Hum, here's good stuff, Master Register read the Appetitus you may depart
and bid your Mistress make convenient speed


At your Lordships pleasure.


I Remember that I forgot my spectacles, I left them in the 349. page of H^lls
Chronicles, where he tells a great wonder of a multitude of Mise which had
almost destroyed the Country, but that there resorted a great mighty slight of
Owls, that destroyed them, ^n^mn^stes ^eade these: ^ticles distinctly.


AN Inprimis we accuse Lingu^ of high t^eason, and (...), against the most
honourable Com^on-^e lth of lette^s, fo^ vn^ler prete^ce of pro^iting the people
with translations, she hath most vilye prostituted the ha^d mysteries of
unknown Languages to the profane ears of the vulga^.


This is as much as to make a new hell in the upper world, for in Hell they say
Alexander is no better th^n a Cobbler, and now by these translations every
Cobbler is as familiar with Alexander as he that wrote his life.


ANAM. Item that she hath wrong^ully imprisoned a Lady called ^cr^tas.


Item that she's a wi^ch and exce^ciseth her tongue in exorcisms.


Item that she's a common whote and lets every one lie with her.


art. Item that she rails on men in Authority deprauing their Honours, with
bitter Jests and taunts and that she's a Backbyter setting strife betwixt
Bosom friends.


Item that she lends wives weapons to fight against their husbands.


Item that she maintains a train of prating petty foggers, prouling Sumners,
smooth tongued bawds, artless Empericks, hungry Parasites, Newes-carriers,
Ianglers, and such like idle Companions, that delude the Commanalty.


Item that she made Rhetoric wanton, Logic to babble, Astronomy to lie.


Item that she is an incontinent Tel-tale.


Item (which is the last and worst) that she's a Woman in every respect and
for these causes not to be admitted to the dignity of a Sense. That these
Articles be true we pawn our honours, and subcribe our names.


Lingua these be shrewd allegations, and as I think vn-answerable, I will
defer the judgment of your cause till I have finished the contention of the
Senses.


Your Lordships must be obeyed, but as for them most ungrateful, and
perfidious wretches.


Good words become you better, you may depart if you will, till we send for
you, Anam^stes run, remember Visus, tis time he were ready.


I go.


Lo here the object that delights the sight,
The goodliest objects that ma^s hea^t can wish,
For a^l things that the Orb first moveable,
Wrappes in the circuit of his large-stretcht arms,
Are subject to the power of (...) eyes,
That you may know what profit light doth bring,
Note Lumcu^ words that speaks next following.

Ligh^ the fair Grand-child to the glorious Sun,
Opening the casements of the Rosie morn,
Makes the abashed heavens soon to shun,
The ugly darkness it emb^ac'd beforne,
And at his first appearance puts to fl^ght,
The utmost relics of the Hell-borne night,
This heavenly shield soon as it is displayed,
D^smayes the vices tha^ abhor the light,
To wanderers by Sea and Land gives aide,
Conquers display, ^ecomforteth astright,
Rowseth dull Idleness, and starts soft sleep.
And all the world to daily labour keeps,
This a true looking glass impartial,
Where Beauties self, her self doth beautify,
With native hue, not artificial,
Discovering falsehood, opening verity,
The days bright eye colours distinction,
Just judge of measure and proportion.
The only means by which each mortal eye,
Sends messengers to the wide firmament,
That to the longing soul brings presently
High contemplation and deep wonderment.
By which aspitement she her wings displays,
And her self thither whence she came vpraisd.

What blew thing's that, that's dappled so with Stars.

He represents the heaven.

In my conceit it were pretty, if he thundered when he speaks.

Then none could understand him.

Tropic colours the Equinoctial,
The Zodiac poles, and line Eclipticall,
The Nadaz, Zenith, and Anomalie^,
The Azimeth and Ephimerides,
Stars, Orbs, and Planets, with their motions,
The Oriental Regradations,
Excentricks, Epicyctes, and -- and -- and --

How now Visus is your heaven at a stay?
Or is it his Motus trepidationis that makes him stammer:
I pray you Memory set him ag^e again.

I remember when Iupiter made Amphitrio Cuckold, and lay with his wife Alcmena,
Coelum was in this taking for three days space, and stood still just like him
at a non plus.


Leave jesting, you'll put the fresh Actor out of ^ountenance.


Excentricks, Epicyctes, and Aspects,
In Sextile, Trine, and Quadrate which effects
Wonders on earth: also the Oblique part
Of signs, that make the day both long and short,
The Constellations, rising Cosmicall,
Setting of Stars, Chronicke, and Heliacall,
In the Orizon or Meridionall,
And all the skill in deep Astronomy,
Is to the soul de^iued by the eye.

Visus you have made Coelum a heavenly speech, past earthly capacity, it had
been as good for him he had thundered. But I pray you who taught him speak
and use no action, me think it had been excellent to have turned round about
in his speech.


He hath so many motions he knows not which to begin withal.


Nay rather it seems he's of Copernicus opinion, and that makes him stand
still.


Lets hear what Terra can say -- just nothing.

And't like your Lordship, 'twere an indecorum Terra should speak.


You are deceived, for I remember when Pha^ton ruled the Sun, I shall never
forget him, he was a very pretty youth, the earth opened her mouth wide, and
spoke a very good speech to Iupiter.


By the same token Nylus hid his head then, he could never find it since.


You know Memory that was an extreme hot day, 'tis likely Terra sweat much,
and so took cold presently after, that ever since she hath lost her voice.


A C^uton Ermines added to the field, is a sure sign the man that bore these
Arms, was to his Prince as a defensive shield, saving him from the force of
present Arms.


I know this fellow of old, 'tis a Herald, many a Centaur, Chimera, Barnacle,
Crocodile, Hippotame, and such like toys, hath he stolen out of the shop of my
Invention, to shape new coats for his upstart Gentlemen. Either Africa must
breed more monsters, or you make fewer Gentlemen M. Herald, for you have spent
all my devises already, but since you are here, let me ask you a question, in
your own profession, how comes it to pas^e that the victorious Arms of
England, quartred with the conquered Coat of France are not placed on the
dexter side, but give the flower deluce the better hand?


Because that the three Lyons are one coat made of two French Duke-domes,
Normandy and Aquitaine: but I pray you Visus, what Jay is that, that follows
him?


'Tis Color an object of mine, subject to his comandment.


Why speaks he not?


He is so bashful, he dares not speak for blushing: What thing is that, tell
me without delay.


That's nothing of it self, yet every way,
As like a Man, as a thing, like may be,
And yet so unlike, as clean contrary,
For in one point it every way doth miss,
The right side of it a mans left side is
Tis lighter then a Feather, and withal
It filles no place, nor room it is so small.

How now Visus, have you brought a boy with a riddle to pose us all.


Pose us all? and I here; that were a jest indeed: My Lord, if he have a
Sphinx, I have an Oedipus assure your self, lets hear it once again.


What thing is that Sir.


This such a knotty Enigma? why my Lord, I think it's a Woman, for first a
Woman is nothing of her self, and again she is likest a man of any thing.


But wherein is she unlike?


In every thing, in pecuisnnes, in folly. -- 'st Boy.


In Pride, Decei^, Prating, Lying, Cogging, Coins, Spite, Hate Sir.


And in many mo such vices: Now he may well say, the left side a mans right
side is, for a cros^e wife, is always contrary to her husband, ever
contradicting what he wishes for, like to the verse in Martial, Velle tuum.


Velle tuvm ^olo. Dindine nolle volo.


Lighter then a feather, doth any man, make question of that?


They need not, for I remember I saw a Cardinal weigh the once, the Woman was
found 3. grains lighter.


Tis strange, for I have seen Gentlewomen wear feathers oftentime^, can they
carry heavier things then themselves?


O sir, I remember, tis their only delight to do so.


But how apply you the last verse, it fills no place Sir?


By my faith, that spoils all the former, for these fardingalles take up all
the room now a days, tis not a woman questionless, shall I be put down with
a Riddle sirrah, Heur^si^ search the corners of your conceit, and find it me
quickly.


Hay (...). I have it, tis a mans face in a looking Glass.


My Lord, tis so indeed, Sirrha lets see it, for do you see my right eye here?


Wh^t of your eye?


O Lord, sir, this kind of frown is excellent, especially when tis sweetened
with such a pleasing smile.


Phantastes.


O Sir my left eye is my right in the glass, do you see? by these lips my
garters hang so neatly, my Gloves shoes become my hands and fee^e so well:
Heuresis tie my shoes strings with a new knot; -- this point was scarce well
trust, -- so, tis excellent. -- Looking-glas^es were a passing inuentio, I
protest the fittest books for Ladies to study on --


Take heed you fall not in love with your self Phantastes, as I remember:
Anamnestes who wast that died of the looking disease?


Forsooth Narcissus, by the same t^ken he was turned to a Daffadill, as he died
for love of himself, so if you remember there was an old ill-fauoured, precious
nosed, babber-lipt, beetle-browed, Bleere-eyd, slouch-eard slave that looking
himself by chance in a Glass, died for pure hate.


By the lip of my-I could live and die with this face.


Fie fie Phantastes, so effeminate for shame leave off. Visus your objects I
must needs say are admirable if the house instrument be answerable, letts here
therefore in brief your description --


Under the fore-head of mount Cephalon,
That ouer-peeres the coast of Microco^me,
All in the shadow of two pleasant groves,
Stand my two mansion houses, both as round
As the clear heavens, both twins as like each other*
As star to star, which by the vulger sort,
For their resplendent composition,
Are named the bright eyes of mount Cephalon:
With four fair rooms those lodgings are contrived.
Four goodly rooms in form most spherical,
Closing each other like the heavenly orbs:
The first whereof, of Natures substance wrought,
As a strange moat the other to defend,
Is trained moveable by Art divine:
Stirring the whole compacture of the rest,
The second chamber is most curiously
Composed of burnished, and transparent horne.

That's a matter of nothing, I have known many have such bed-chambers.


It may be so, for I remember being once in the towns Library, I read such a
thing, in their great book of monuments called, Cornucopia, or rather their
copia-Cornu*


The third's a lesser room of purest glass,
The fourth's smallest, but passes all the former,
In worth of matter built most sumptuously;
With walls transparent of pure Crystalline.
This the souls mirror and the bodies guide,
Loves Cabinet bright beacons of the Realm,
Casements of light quiver of Cupids shafts:
Wherein I sit and immediately receive,
The species of things corporeal,
Keeping continual watch and sentinel;
Least foreign hurt invade our Microcosm,
And warning give, (if pleasant things approach)
To entertain them, from this coastly room:
Leads my Lord an entry to your house,
Through which I hourly to your self convey
Matters of wisdom by experience bred:
Arts first invention, pleasant vision,
Deep contemplation, that attires the soul,
In gorgeous robes of flowering literature:
Then if that Visus have deserved best,
Let his victorious brow, with Crown be blessed.

Anamnestes, see who's to come next.

Presently my Lord.

Visus, I wonder that amongst all your objects, you presented us not with
Platoes Idea, or the sight of Niniuie, Babtlon, London, or some Sturbridge
faire-monsters, they would have done passing well, those motions in my
imagination are very delightful.


I was loath to trouble your honours with such toys,

neither could I provide them in so short a time.


We will consider your worth, mean while we dismiss you.


Hark, hark, hark, hark, peace, peace, O peace: O sweet, admirable,
Swanlike heavenly, hark, O most melli^uous strain, O what a pleasant close
was there, O full, most delicate.


How now Phantast^s, is Auditus mad?


Let him alone, his musical head is always full of od ^rotchets.


Did you mark the dainty driving of the last point, an excellent maintaining
of the songe, by the choice timpan of mine ear, I never ^eard a better, hist,
st* st, hark, why there's a caden^eable to ^auish the dullest Stoicke.


I know not, what to think on him.


There how sweetly the plane-song was dissolved into descant, and how easily
they came of with the last rest, hark, hark* the ^itter sweetest
Achromaticke.


Audatus.


Thanks good Apollo for this timely grace, never could thou in fit^er: O
more then most musical narmony, O most admirable consort, have you no ea^es?
do you not hear this music?


It may be good, but in my opinion, they rest too long in the beginning.


Are you then deaf? do you not yet perceive the wondrous sound the heavenly
orbs do make with their continual motion, hark, hark, O honey sweet.


What tune do they play?


Why such a tune as never was, nor ever shall be heard, mark now, now mark,
now, now. PHAN. List, list* list.


Hark O, sweet, sweet sweet.


List how my heart envies my happy ears, hisht, by the gold strung harp of
Apollo, I hear the celestial music of the spheres, as plainly as ever
Pithagoras did, O most excellent diapason good, good, good, It plays fortune
my ^oe, as distinctly as may be.


As the fool thinks, so the bell clinketh I protest I hear no more then a
post.


What, the Laualta hay? nay if the heavens fiddle, Phansy must needs dance.


Prethe sit still, thou must dance nothing but the passing measures. Memory do
you hear this harmony of the spheres?


Not now my Lord, but I remember about some 4000. years ago, when the Sky was
first made, we heard very perfectly.


By the same token the first tune the planets played, I remeeber Venus the
treble ran sweet diusion upon Saturne the base. The first tune they played was
Sellengers roud, in memory whereof ever since, it hath been called the
beginning of the world.


How comes it we cannot hear it now.


Our ears are so well acquainted with the sound, that we never mark it. As I
remember the Egiptian Catadupes never heard the ro^nge of the fall of Nilus,
because the noise is so familiar unto them.


Have you no other objects to judge by, then these Auditu^?


This is the rarest and most exquisite,
Most spherical, divine, angelical,
But since your duller ears cannot perceive it:
May it please your Lordship to with draw your self,
Unto this neigh-boring grove, there shall you see:
How the sweet treble, of the chirp^ng birds,
And the soft stirring of the moved leaves.
Running delightful descant to the sound,
Of the base murmuring of the bubbling brooke,
Becomes a consort of good instruments.
While twenty babbling echoes round about,
Out of the stony concave of their mouth:
Restore the vanished music of each close,
And fill your ears full with redoubled pleasure*

I will walk with you very willingly, for I grow weary of sitting. Come
Master R^gister, and Master Phantastes,


Prithee Nam, be persuaded, is't nor better go to a feast then stay here for a
fray?


A feast? d^est think Auditus will make the Judges a feast?


Faith I, why should he carry them to his house else?


Why sir^ a to hear a set or two of songs, slid his banquets are nothing but
fish all soll, soll? soll? I'll teach thee wit boy, never go me to a musicians
house for lunkets, vn^esse thy ^omake lies in thine ea^es; for there is nothing
but commending this songs delicate air, that motects dainty air, this sonnets
sweet air, that madrialls melting air, this dirgesse mournfu air, this
Church air that Chamber air, French air, English air, Italian air, why
Lad, they be pure Chamaelions, they seed only upon the air.


Cham^elions? I'll be sworn some of your Fiddlers be rather Ca^els, for by their
good-wills they will never leave eating.


True, and good reason, for they do nothing all the day but stretch and grate
their small guts; but o, yonders the Ape Heuresis: let me go I prithee.


Nay good-now stay a little, let's see his humour.


I see no reason to the contrary, for we see the quintessence of Wine will
convert Water into Wine; why therefore should not the Elixar of gold turn lead
into pure gold?


Ha, ha, ha, ha, he is turned Chimick sir, it seems so by his talk.


But how shall I devise to blow the fire of Beechecoales, with a continual and
equal blast? ha? I will have my bellows driven with a wheel, which wheel
shall be a self mover.


Here's old turning, these Chimicks seeking to turn Lead into Gold, turn away
all their own Silver.


And my wheel shall be Geometrically proportioned into 7. or 9. concave
encircled arms, wherein I will put equal poises, hai, hai, hai, (...), I have
it, I have it, I have it.


Heuresis?


But what's best to contain the Quick-siluer? ha?


Do you remember your promise Heuresis?


It must not be Iron, for Quick-siluer is the tyrant of Mettles, and will soon
fret it.


Heuresis? Heuresis?


Nor Brass, nor Copper, nor Mastlin, nor Mineral, (...), I have it, I have
it, it must be.


You have indeed sir, and thus much more then you looked for. ( snap.)


You shall not fight, but if you will always disagree, let us have words and
no blows; Heuresis, what reason have you to fall out with him?


Because he is always abusing me, and takes the upper hand of me every where.


And why no^ sir? I am thy better in any place.


Have I been the Author of the seven liberal Sciences, and consequently of
all learning? have I been the patron of all Mechanical devises, to be thy
inferior? I tell thee Anamnes^es thou hast not so, much as a point but thou
art beholding to me for it.


Good, good* but what had your invention been, but for my remembrance: I can
prove that thou belly-sprung invention, art t^e most improfitable member in the
world, for euersince thou we^t bor^e thou hast been a bloody murderer, and
thus I prove it: In the quiet years of Saturne (I remember Iupiter was then
but in his swath-bands) thou rentest the bowels of the earth, broughts gold to
light, whose beauty (like Hellen) set al the world by the ears, then upon that
thou found out Iron, and put weapons in their hands, and now in the last
populous age, thou taugh'st a scab-shin friar, the hellish invention of powder
and gunnes.


Call it hellish? thou lie it is the admirable'st invention of all others,
for whereas others imitate nature, this excells nature her self.


True for a Cannon will kill as many at one shot, as Thunder doth commonly at
twenty.


Therefore more murthering art thou then the light bolt.


But to show the strength of my conceit, I have found out a means to
withstand the stroke of the most violent culuering: Mendatio thou saw it
when I demonstrated invention.


What some wool-packes? or mudwalls? or such like?


Mendatio I prithee tell it him for I love not to be a trumpeter of mine own
praises.


I must needs confess, this devise to pass all that ever I heard or saw, and
thus it was, first he takes a Falcon, and charges it without all deceiptes,
with dry powlder well canphred, then did he put in a single bullet, and a
great quantity of drop shot both round and lach^imall, this done he sets me a
boy 60. paces off, just point blank over against the mouth of the piece, now
in the very midst of the direct line he fastens a post, upon which he hangs me
in a corde a Siderits, of Herculean stone.


Well, well, I know it well, it was found out in Ida, in the year of the world
-- by one Magnes, whose name it retains, though vulgarly they call it an
Adamant.


When he had hanged this Adamant in a corde, he comes back, and gives fire to
the tutch-hole, now the powder consumed to a void vacuvm.


Which is intolerable in Nature, for first shall the whole Machine of the
world, heaven, earth, sea, and air, return to the misshapen house of Chaos,
then the least vacuvm be found in the vniuerse.


The bullet and drop-shot most impetuously from the ^ierie throat of the
Culuering, (but ^ strange) no sooner ^ame they near the Adamant in the corde,
but they were all arrested by the Sargent of Nature, and hovered in the air
round about it, till they had lost the force of their motion, clasping
themselves close to the Stone in most lovely manner, and not any one flew to
endanger the mark, so much did they remember their duty to nature, that they
forgot the errand they were sent of.


This is a very artificial lye.


Nam believe it, for I saw it, and which is more, I have practised this devise
often: once when I had a quarrel with one of my Lady Veritas naked knaves, and
had pointed him the field, I conveyed into the heart of my Buckler an Adamant,
and when we met, I drew, all the foins of his Rapier, whether so ever he
intended them, or howsoever I guided mine arm, pointed still to the midst of
my buckler, so that by this means, I haut the Knave mortally, and my self
came away untouched, to the wonder of all the beholders.


Sir you speak Metaphorically, because thy wit Mend^cio always draws
men's objections to thy forethought excuses.


Anamnestes 'tis true, and I have an addition to this, which is to make the
bullet, shot from the enemy, to return immediately upon the Gunner: but let all
these pass, and say the worst thou can against me.


I say Gunnes were found out for the quick dispatch of mortallity, and when
thou saw men grow wise, and beget so fair a child as Peace, of so foul
and deformed a mother as War, least there should be no murder, thou
deuisest poison.


Nayfie Nam, urge him not too far.


And last and worst, thou found out cookery, that kills more then weapons,
gunnes, wars or poisons, and would destroy all, but that thou inuentedst
Physic, that helps to make away some.


But sir, besides all this, I devised Pillories for such forging villains as
thy self.


Call me villain?


You shall not fight as long as I am here, give over I say.


Mendatio you offer me great wrong to hold me, in good-faith I shall fall out
with you.


Away, away, away, you are Invention, are you not.


Yes Sir, what then?


And you remembrance?


Well sir, well.


Then I will be Iudicium, the moderator betwixt you, and make you both friends,
come, come, shake hands, shake hands.


Well, well, if you will needs have it so?


I am in some sore content.


Why this is as it should be, when Mendatio hath Invention on the one hand, and
Remembrance on the other, as heel be sure never to be found with Truth in his
mouth: so he scorns to be taken in a lye, hai, hai, hai, my fine wags
whist?


Whist.


Whist.


They had some reason that held the soul a harmony, for it is greatly
delighted with music, howe fast we wear tied by the ears to the consort
of voices powder; but all is but a little pleasure, what profitable objects
hath he?


Your ears will teach you presently, for now he is com^ing, that fellow in
the baize me thinks I should have known him; o tis Comedus, tis so but he is
become now a days something humerous, and too too, Satirical, up and down,
like his great grand-father A ^istophanes.


These two my Lord Comaedus and Tragedus,
My fellows both, both, twins, but so unlike,
As birth to death, wedding to funeral:
For this that rears him self in bus kins quainte,
Is pleasant at the first, proud in the midst:
Stately in all, and bitter death at end.
That in the pumps doth frown at first acquaintance*
Troble the midst, but in the end concludes,
Closing up all with a sweet catastrophe?
This grave and sad disdain with btinish tears,
That light and quick with wrinkled laughter painted;
This deals with Nobles, Kings, and Emperors:
Full of great fears, great Hopes, great enterprises,
This other trades with men of mean condition:
His proiects small, small Hopes and dangers little,
This gorgeous embroidered with rich sentences:
That fair and pursled round with merriments*
Both vice detect, and virtue beautify:
By being deaths mirror, and lifes looking glass.

Salutem jam primum a la propitiam. Mihi atque Vobis spectatores nuntio.


Pish, pish this is a speech with no action, lets here TERENCE, quid ig^tur
faciam. c.


Quid igitur faciam? non eam no nunc quidem cum accusorvliro?


Phy, phy, phy, no more action, lend me your bays, do it thus. Quid igitur.
c. (he acts it after the old kind of Pantomimick action.)


I should judge this action Phantastes most absurd, unless we should come to a
Commedy, as gentlewomen to the comencement, only to see men speak.


In my imagination it's excellent, for in this kind the hand (you know) is
ha^bingerto the tongue and prou^des the words a lodging in the ears of the
Auditors.


Auditus it is now time you make us acquainted with the quality of the house
you keep in, for our better healpe in judgment.


Upon the sides of fair mount Cephalor,
Have I two houses passing human skill:
Of finest matter by dame nature wrought,
Whose learned fingers have adorned the same
With gorgeous porches of so strange a form,
That they command the passengers to stay:
The doors whereof in hospitality,
Nor day, nor night, are shut, but open wide,
Gently inuit all comers; whereupon,
They are named the open ears of Cephal^n.
But least some boulder sound should boldly rush,
And break the nise composture of the work,
The skilful builder wisely hath inrangd,
An eatry from each port with curious twines,
And crookt Meanders, like the labyrinth,
That Dedalus framed to enclose the Minotaure;
At end whereof is placed a costly portal:
Resembling much the figure of a drum,
Granting slow entrance to a private closet:
Where daily with a mallet in my hand,
I set and frame all words and sounds that come,
Upon an Anvil and so make them fit:
For the pere: vinckling poor; that winding leads,
From my close chamber to your Lordships cell.
Thither do I chief Justice of all accents,
Psyches next porter, Microcosmes front:
Learnings rich treas^re, bring discipline,
Reasons discourse, knowledge of foraigne states,
Loud fame of great Heroes virtuous deeds:
The marrow of grave speeches and the flowers:
Of quickest Wits, neat Jests, and pure Conceits,
And often times to ease the heavy burden,
Of government, your Lordships shoulder bear,
I thither do conduce the pleasing Nuptials:
Of sweetest iustruments with heavenly noise.
If then A^ditus, have deserved the best:
Let him be dignified before the rest.

Auditus I am almost a Skepticke in this matter, scarce knowing which way the
balance of the cause will decline, when I have heard the rest, I will dispatch
judgment, mean while you may depart.


Your only way to make a good pomander, is this, take an ownce of the purest
garden mould, cleansed and steeped seven days in change of motherless rose
water, then take the best Labdanum, Benioine, both Storaxes, amber greece, and
Civet, and mus ke, incorporate them together, and work them into what form you
please, this if your breath be not to valiant, will make you smell as sweet
as my Ladies dog.


This Boy it should seem represents Odor, he is so perfect a persumer.


I do my Lord, and have at my command,
The smell of flowers, and Odoriferous drugs,
Of ointments sweet, and excellent perfumes,
And Court-like waters, which if once you smell,
You in your heart would wish as I suppose:
That all your Body were transsformed to Nose.

Olfactus of all the Senses, your objects have the worst luck, they are always
jarring with their contraries, for none can wear Civet, but they are suspected
of a proper bad sent, where the proverb springs, he smells best, that
doth of nothing smell.


Foh, foh, what a smell is hear? is this one of your delightful objects?


It is your only sent in request Sir.


What fiery fellow is that, which smokes so much in the mouth?


It is the great and puissant God of Tobacco.


L^doch guevarroh pufuer shelvaro baggon, Oisia di quanon, Indi cortilo
vraggon.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, this in my opinion is the tongue of the Antipodes.


No I remember it very well, it was the language the
Arcadians spake, that siued long before the Moon.

What signifies it Olfactus?

This is the mighty Emperor Toba^co, King of Trinidado, that in being
conquered, conquered all Europe, in making them pay tribute for their smoke.


Erfronge inglues conde hisingo,
Deuelin sloscoth ma pu cocthinge.

Expeller of Catarhes, banisher of all agues, your guts only salve for the
green wounds of a non plus.


Alvulcam vercu, I parda poraside gratam, kafamala mara, che Bau^o respartera,
quirara?


Son to the God Vulcan, and Tellus, kin to the father of Mirth, called
Bacchiu?


Viscardonok, pillostuphe, pascano ^inaromagas,
Pagidagon stollisinfe, carociba^o scribas.

Genius of all Swaggerers, professed enemy to Physicians, sweet ointment for
sour teeth, firm knot of good fellowship, Adamant of Company, switt wind, to
spread the wings of Time, hated of none, but those that know him not, and of so
great deserts, that who so is acquainted with him, can hardly forsake him.


It seems these last words were very significant, I promise you a God of great
denominatio, he may be my Lord Tappes for his large Ti^les.


But forward Olfactus, as they have done before you, with your description?


lust in the midst of Cephalons round face
As 'twere a fron^is-spice unto the hill,
Olfactus lodging built in figure long,
Doubly dis-parted with two precious vaults,
The roots whereof most richly are enclosed,
With Orient Pearls, and sparkling Diamonds:
Beset at the end with Emerauds and Turchois,
And Rubies red, and flaming Crisolits,
At upper end whereof in costly manner,
I lay my head between two spungeous pillows,
Like fair Adonis twixt the paps of Venus,
Where I conducting in and out the wind,
Daily examine all the air inspired.
By my pure searching, if it be pure,
And sit to serve the lungs with lively breath:
Hence do I likewise minister perfume
Unto the neighbour brain, perfumes of force
To cleanse your head, and make your fanta^ie
To refine wit, and sharpe invention
And strengthen memory, from whence it came,
That old devotion, ^ncence did ordain
To make mans spirits more apt for things divine,
Besides a thousand more commodities,
In leiw whereof your Lordships I request,
Give me the crown if I deserve it best.

In good time Gustus, have you brought your objects?


My servant Appetitus follows with them.


Come come Bacchus, you are so fat; enter enter.


Fie, fie Gustus this is a great indecorum to bring Bacchus alone, you should
have made Thirst ^ed him by the hand.


Right Sir, but Men now a days drink often when they be not dry, besides I
could not get red hearings and dried neates tongues enough to apparel him in.


What never a speech of him.


I put an Octave of lambicks in his mouth, and he hath drunk it down.


Well done, M^scadine and Eggs stand hot; what buttered Claret? go thy way thou
had best, for blind man that cannot see how wickedly thou look ^ how now,
what small thin fellow, are you here? ha?


Beer forsooth, beer forsooth.


Beer forsooth? get you gone to the buttery, till I call for you, you are none
of Bacchus attendants, I am sure, he cannot indare the smell of Malt. Whereas
Ceres? o well, well, is the March-pa^e broken? ill luck, ill luck, come hanged,
never stand to set it together again; serve out fruit there; ( Enter Boys
with a Ba^ket, M^rmolet, sweet c. deliver it round among the Gentlewomen, and
go out) what do you come with rostemeat after Apples, away with it. Digestion
serve out cheese; what, but a penny-worth, it is just the measure of his nose
that sold it? lambs wool; the meekest meat in the world, 'twill let any man
fleece it. Snap-dragon there.


O I remember this dish well, it was first invented by Pluto to entertain
Proserpina with all.


I think not so Memory, for when Hercules had killed the flaming Dragon of
Hesperdia, with the Apples of that Orchard, he made this siery meat, in memory
whereof he named it Snap-dragon.


Gust^s, lets here your description?

Near to the lowly base of Cehalon,
My house is placed, not much unlike a Cave.
Yet arched above by wondrous workmanship
With hewn stones wrought smoother and more fine
Then Jet or Marble fair from Island brought.
Over the door directly doth incline
A fair Percullis of compacture strong,
To shut out all that may annoy the state,
Or health of Microcosm; and within
Is spread along board like a pliant tongue,
At which I hourly sit, and trial take,
Of meats and drinks needful and delectable:
Twice every day do I provision m^ke
For the sumptious kitchen of the common wealth,
which once well boiled, is soon distributed,
To all the members, well refreshing them
With good supply of strength-renewing food,
Should I neglect this musing diligence
The body of the Realm would ruinate:
Your self my Lord with all your policies
And wondi^ous wit, could not preserve your self,
Nor you Phantastes, not you Memory;
Psyche her self, were it not that I repair
Her crazie house with props of nourishment,
Would soon forsake us: for whose dearest sake
Many a grievous pain have I sustained,
By bitter pills, and sour purgations,
Which if I had not valiantly abidden,
She had been long ere this departed,
Since the whole Microcosm I maintain,
Let me as Prince, above the Senses ra^gne.

The reasons you urge Gustus breed a new doubt whether it be better to be
commodious or necessary, the resolution whereof I refer to your judgment,
licensing you mean while to depart. ( Gustus leads his show about the stage,
goes out)


Ready anon forsooth? the Devil she will,
Who would be toiled with wenches in a show.

What in such anger Tactus? whats the matter?

My Lord I had thought as other Senses did,
By sight of objects to have proved my worth;
Wherefore considering that of all the things,
That please me most, women are counted chief.
I had thought to have represented in my show,
The Queen of pleasure, Venus and her Son,
Leading a Gentleman enamoured,
With his sweet touching of his Mistress lips,
And gentle griping of her tender hands,
And ^uers pleasant relishes of touch,
Yet all contained in the bounds of chastity.

(...), of all I long to see your objects,
How comes it we have lost those pretty sports.

Thus 'tis, ^iue hours ago I set a dozen maids to attire a boy like a nize
Gentlewoman: but there is such doing with their looking-glasses, pinning,
vnpinning, setting, vnseting, formings and conformings painting blew veins,
and cheeks, such st^rre with Sticks and Combs, Cascanets, Dressings, Purles,
Falls, Squares, Busks, Bodies, Scarves, Neck laces, Carcanets, Rebatoes,
Borders, Tires, Fans, Palizadoes, Puffs, Roughs, Cuffs, Muffes, Pussles,
Fussles, Partsets, Frislets, Bandlets, F^lets, Croslets, Pendulets, Amulets,
Annulets, Bracelets, and so many lets, that ye: she is scarce dressed to the
girdle: and now there's such calling for Fardingales, Kirtlets, Busk-points,
shootyes c. that seven Peddlers shops, nay all Sturbridge Fair will scarce
furnish her: a Ship is sooner rigd by far, then a Gentlewoman made ready.


Tis strange, that women being so mutable,
Will never change in changing their apparel?

Well let them pass; Tactus we are content,
^o know your dignity by relation.

The instrument of instruments, the hand,
Courtesies index, Chamberlane to Nature,
The bodies Soldier, and mouths Caterer,
Psyches great Secretary, the dumbes eloquence,
The blindmans Candle, and his forheads Buckler,
The minister of wrath, and friendships sign,
This is my instrument: nevertheless my power
Extends it self, far as our Q^eene commands,
Through all the parts and climes of Microcosm.
I am the root of life, spreading my virtue
By sinews that extend from head to foot,
To every living part.
For as a subtle Spider closely sitting,
In center of her web that spreddeth round:
If the least Fly but touch the smallest thread,
She feels it instantly; so doth my self,
Casting my slender nerve and sundry nets,
Over ^uery particle of all the body,
By proper I kill perceive the difference,
Of several qualities, hot, cold, moist and dry;
Hard, soft, rough, smooth, clammy and slippery.
Sweet pleasure, and sharp pain profitable,
That makes us wounded seek for remedy:
By these means do I teach the Body fly,
From such bad things as may endanger it:
A wall of brasle can be no more defence,
Unto a town then I to Microcosm?
Tell me what sense is not beholding to me,
The nose is hot or cold, the cies do weep:
The ears do feel, the tast's a kind of touching,
That when I please, I can command them all,
And make them tremble when I threaten them:
I am the eldest, and biggest of all the rest,
The chiesest note, and first destinction,
Betwixt a living tree and living beast;
For though one hear, and see: and smell: and taste
If he wants touch, he is counted but a block?
Therefore my Lord grant me the royalty:
Of whom there is such great necessity.

Tactus stand aside; you sir Anamnestes tell the
Senses we expect their appearance

At your Lordships pleasure^

Though you deserve no small punishment for these vp-rores, yet at the request
of these my asistants I remit it, by the power of Judgment our gracious
souera^gne Psuche hath given me. Thus I determine of your controversies: hum?
By your former objects, instruments and reasons, I conceive the state of (...)
to be divided into two parts, one of commodity, the other of necessity, both
which are either for our Queen or for our country, but as the Soul is more
excellent then the Body, so are the Senses that proffit the Soul to be
estimated before those that are needful for the Body; visus and Auditus serve
your selves, Master Register give me the crown; because it is better to be
well, then simply to be, therefore I judge the crown by right to belong to your
of the Commodities part the robe to you of the Necessities side; and since you
Visus are the author of invention, you Auditus of increase and additio to the
same, seeing it is more excellent to invent, then to augment, I establish you
Visus the better of the two, and chief of all the rest, in token whereof, I
bestow upon you this crown to wear at your liberty.


I most humbly thank your Lordships.


But least I should seem to neglect you Auditus, I hear choose you to be the
Lords intelligencer to Psuche^ her Majesty, and you Olfactus, we bestow upon
you the chief Preisthood of Microcosin^, perpetually to offer ince^se in her
majesties temple. As for you Tactus upon your reasons aleaged, I bestow upon
you the robes.


I accept it most gratefully at your just hands, and will wear it in the dear
remembrance of your good Lordship.


And lastly, Gustus we elect you P^uche her only taster, and great purueior
for all her dominions, both by sea and land, in her realm of Microco^.


We thank your Lordship, and rest well content with equal arbitrament.


Now for you Lingua.


I beseech your honour let me speak, I will neither troble the company nor
offend your patience.


I cannot stay so long; we have consulted about you, and find your cause to
stand upon these terms, and conditions. The number of the Senses in this
little world, is answerable to the first bodies in the great world: now since
there be but five in the Vniuerse, the four elements and the pure substance
of the heavens, therefore the^e can be but five senses in our Microc^sme,
correspondent to those, as the sight to the heavens, hearing to the air,
touching to the earth, smelling to the ^e, tasting to the water, by which ^e
means only the understanding is able to apprehend the knowledge of all
Corporeal substances? wherefore we judge you to be no Sense simply, only
thus much we from hence forth pronounce, that all women for your sake shall
have six (...), that is seeing, heating, tasting, smelling, touching, and the
last and feminine sense, the sense of speaking.


I beseech your Lordships and your asistants, (the only cause of our
friendship,) to grace my table with your most welcome presence this night at
supper.


I am sorry I cannot stay with you, you know we may by no means omit our
daily attendance at the Court, therefore I pray you pardon us.


I hope I shall not have the denial at your hands my Masters, and you my
Lady Lingua, come let us drown all our anger in a bowl of hippocras.


Come Master Registe^ shall we walk?


I pray you stay a little? let me see? ha, ha, ha, ha ha,


How now Memory so merry? what do you trouble your self with two palsies at
once? shaking, and laughing.


Tis a strange thing that men will so confidently oppose themselves against
Plato^ great year.


Why not.


Tis as true an opinion as need be; for I remember it very readily now, that
this time 49000. years ago all we wear in this very place and your
Lordship judged the very same controversy, after the very same manner, in
all respects, and cercumstances alike.


Tis wondrous strange.


By the same token you held your Staff in your right hand, just as you do now,
and Mr. Phantastes stood wondering at you, gaping as wide as you see him.


I but I did not give you a box on the ^are sirrah 49000. years ago, did I?
(snap)


I do not remember that Sir.


This time Platoes twesue month to come, look you save your cheeks better.


But what entertainment had we at Court for our long staying?


Lets go, I'll tell you as we walk.


If I do not seem pranker now, then I did in those days, I'll be hanged?


Why this is good by common Senses means,
Lingua thou hast framed a perfect comoedy
They are all good friends, whom thou made enemies,
And I am half a Sense: a sweet piece of service,
I promise you a fair step to preferment.
Was this the care and labour thou hast taken,
To bring thy foes together to a banquet,
To loose thy Crown, and be deluded thus,
Well now I see my cause is desperate,
The judgements past, sentence irrevocable,
Therefore I'll be content and clap my hands,
And give a Plaudit to their proceedings:
What shall I leave my hate begun imperfect?
So fowly vanquished by the spiteful Senses?
Shall I the Embassadress of Gods and Men
That pulled proud Phoebe from her brightsome sphere
And darkt Apollo's countenance with a word
Raising at pleasure storms, and winds, and earth-quakes
Be ouercrowed? and breath without revenge?
Yet they forsooth base slaves must be preferred,
And deck themselves with my ^ight ornaments:
Doth the all-knowing (...) see this shame
Without redress? will not Hea^ens help me?
Then shall Hell do it, my enchanting tongue
Can mount the skies, and in a moment fall,
From the Pole Arctic to dark Acheton.
I'll make them know mine anger is not spent,
L^ngua hath power to hurt, and will to do it.
Mend^io, come hither quickly sir.

Madame.

Hark hither in thine ^are.

Why do you whish thus? here's none to hear you.

I dare not trust these secrets to the Earth, ^re since she brought forth
Reeds, whose babbling noise told all the world of Midas Asses ea^es, ( She
whispers him in the ear^) Dost understand me?


I, I, I -- never fear that -- there's a jest indeed -- pish, pish, -- Madam
-- do you think me so foolish? -- tut, tut, doubt not.


Tell her if she do not.


Why do you make any question of it -- what a stir is here -- I warrant you
-- presently?


Well, I'll to supper, and so closely cover,
The rusty cancker of mine Y^on spite,
With golden foil of goodly semblances,
But if I do not t^ounce them --

My Lady (...) is just like one of these ^eane-witted Comedians, who disturbing
all to the fist Act, (...) cowne some Mercuri^ or (...) in an Eng^e to mak^ ^.
So she, but in a contrary man^er, seeing her (...) plots dispur^osed, sends me
to an old Witch called ^ to w^eake (...) spite upon the Senses: the old ^ag
after many an incricled circumstance, and often naminge of the direful
Hecate, and Demogorgon, gives me this bottle of wine mingled with such hellish
drugs and forcible words, that whosoever drinks of it shall be presentile
possessed with an enraged and mad kind of anger.


What's this Crapula beating Appetitus out of doors? ha!


You filthy long Crane, you meager slave, will you kill our guests with blowing
continual hunger in them? (tiffe, toffe, tiffe, toffe) the Senses have
overcharged their stomachs already, and you Sir serve them up a fresh
appetite with every new dish, they had burst their guts if thou hadd'st
stayed but a thought longer? (tiffe, toffe, tiffe, toffe,) be gon or i'll set
thee away, begone ye gnawe-bone, raw-bone, rascal.


Then my devise is clean spoiled. Appctitus should have been as the bowl to
present this medecin to the Senses, and now Crapula hath beaten him out of
doors? what shall I do?


Away Sir, (tiff toff, tiff. c.


Well Crapula, well, I have deserved better at your hands then so, I was the
man you know first brought you into Gustus his service, I lined your guts
there, and you use me thus? but grease a fat sow. c.


Dost thou talk (tiff, toff) hence, hence tiff, tiff, hence avaunt cur,
avaunt you dog!


The belching gor-bellie hath well-nigh killed me; I am shut out of doors
finely, well this is my comfort, I may walk now in liberty at my own
pleasure.


Appetitus, Appetitus^


Ah Mendaci^, Mendaci^,


Why how now man, how now? how is't (can not speak.


Faith I am like a bag-pipe, that never sound's but when the belly is full.


Thou empty, and come from a feast.


From a sray I tell thee Mendaci^. I am now just like the Ewe that gave suck
to a wolfes whelp. I have must up my fellow Crapula so lunge, that he's
grown strong enough to beat me.


And whither wilt thou go, now thou at banished out of service?


Faith I'll travel to some College or other in an University.


Why so?


Because Appetit^ is well beloved amongst Schollers, for there I can dine and
sup with them rise again as good friends as we sate down, I'll thither
questionles.


Hear thou? give me thy hand; by this hand I love thee; go too then, thou
shalt not forsake thy mai^ers thus, I say thou shalt not.


Alas I am very loath; but how should I help it?


Why take this bottle of wine, come on, go thy ways to them again.


Ha, ha, ha, what good will this do^?


This is the N^p^nth^ that reconciles the God's: do^ but let the Senses taste of
it, and sear not, the^e love thee as well as ever they did.


I pray thee where had it?


My Lady gave it me to bring her: (...) stale it from H^ for her: thou know
there were some ia^res betwixt her and thy masters, with this drink she would
gladly wash out all the relics of their disagreement: Now because I lowe
thee, thou shalt have the grace of presenting it to them and so come in favour
again.


It smel^es well I would sane begin to them;


Nay stay no longer least they heue supp't before thou come.


M^ndacio, howe shall I requite thy infinite (...).


Nay pray thee leave, go catch occasion by the ^etop, but hearst thou? as
soon as it is presented, round my Lady Lingua in the ear, and tell her of it.


I will, I will, I will, Adieu, adieu, adieu,


Why this is better then I could have wished it,
Fortune I think is fallen in love with me,
Answering so right mine expectation.
By this time Appetite is at the Table.
And with a lowly Cringe presents the Wine,
To his old Master Gustus, now he takes it,
And drinks perchance to Lingua, she craftily
Kisles the Cup, but lets not down a drop,
And gives it to the rest; 'tis sweet, theile swallow it,
But when 'tis once descended to the stomach,
And sends up noisome vapours to the brain,
Twill make them swagger gallantly, the^e rage
Most strangely, or (...) Art deceives her,
When if my Lady stir her nimble tongue,
And closely sow contentious words amongst them,
O what a stabbing there will be? what bleeding?

What art thou there M^ndacio? pretty rascal,
Come let me kiss thee for thy good deserts.

Madame dost take? have they all tasted it?

All, all, and all are well nigh mad already:
Oh how they stare, and swear, and fume, and brawl,
W^ath gives them weapons; Pots and Candle-sticks,
Joined stools and Trenchers fly about the room,
Like to the bloody banquet of the C^utaure^,
But all the sport is to see what several thoughts
The potions works in their Imaginations.
For Visus thinks himself; a ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

So-hoe Mendatio! so-hoe, so-hoe!


Madame I doubt they come, yonder is Appetitus, you had best begone, least in
their outrage they should injure you. Hunger? how dost thou my fine may-pole,
ha?


I may well be called a may-pole: for the Senses do nothing but dance a morice
about me.


Why? what ails them? are they not (as I promised thee) friends with thee.


Friends with me? nay rather frenzy: I never knew them in such a case, in all
my life.


Sure they drank too much, and are mad for love of thee.


They want common Sense amongst them: there's such a hurly burly Auditus is
stark deaf, and wonders why Men speak so so^tly that he cannot here them:
Visiu hath drunk himsel^e ^a^ke blind, and therefore imagines himsel^e to be
Polyphemu^: Tactus is raging mad, and cannot be otherwise persuaded, but he
is Hercules furens; there's such conceits amongst them.


O that I could but find the villain Outis,
Outis the v^llaine, that thus blinded me.

Who is this? Visus?

I, I, I, otherwise called Polyphemus.

By heavens bright Sun, the days most glorious eye,
That lightneth all the world but Polypheme,
And by mine eye that once was answerable
Unto that Sun, but now's extinguished.

He can see to swear me thinks?

I^ I but once lay hands upon the slave,
That thus hath robbed me of my dearest tewell,
I'll rend the Milcreant into a thousand pieces.
And gnash his trembling members 'twixt my teeth,
Drinking his liue-warme blood to satissie,
The boiling thirst of pain and surio^snesse,
That thus exasperates great Pol^pheme.

'Pray thee Appetitus see how he graspes for that he would be loath to ^inde.


What's that? a stumbling block?

T^ese hands, that wh^lom tote up sturdy Oaks,
And rent the rock that dashed out Acis brains,
Both in the stole-blisse of my Galate^,
Serve now (o misery) to no better use,
But for bad guides to my unskilful feet.
Never accustomed thus to be directed.

As I am a rogue, he wants nothing but a wheel, to make him the true picture
of Fortune; how say? what shall we play at blind-man-buffe with him?


I if thou wilt, but first i'll try whether he can see!

Find me out Outis, search the rocks, and woods,
The hil^es and dales, and all the Coast's adjoining.
That I may have him, and revenge my wrong,

Visus me thinks your eyes are well enough.

What's he that calls me Visus? dost not know.

To him Mendatio, to him, to h^n.

There, there Appetitus, he comes, he comes; ware wa^e, he comes, ha, ha, ha,
ha,


Is this he that thinks himself Hercules?

I, willt see me out-swagger him?

I do, do, I love not to sport with such mad play-fellowes; tickle him
Appetitus, tickle him, tickle him.


Have I not here the great and puissant Club,
Where with I conquered three Chopped Cerberus.

Have I not here the sharpe, and warlike teeth,
That at one break-fast quaild thrice three hogg's faces?

And are not these Alcides brawny arms,
That rent the Lyons jaws and killed the boar?

And is not this the Stomach that defeated
Nyne yards of pudding, and a rank of pies?

Did nor I crop the seauen-fold Hydras crest,
And with a river cleansed Augeas stable?

Did not I crush a seven-fold Custards crust,
And with my tongue, swept a well furnished table?

Did not these feet and hands oretake and slay,
The nimble Stag, and fierce impetuous bull?

Did not this throat at one good meal devour,
That Stags sweet venison, and that strong Bulls beef?

^hall Hercules be thus difparaged?
I^no! you pouting. Queen, you low^ng trull?
Take heed I take you not; for by Ioues thunder
I le be revenged

Why Visus, Visus. will you be killed? away, away.

Who have we here, see, see the Giant Cacus,
Draws an Ox backward to his thievish den,
Hath this devise so long deluded me?
Monster of men Cacus restore my cattle,
Or instantly I'll crush thy idle Cox-combe.
And dash thy doltish brains against thy Cave.

Cacus, I Cacus? ha, ha, ha. Tactus you mistake me.
I am yours to command. App^titus.

Art Appetitus? You are so; run quickly villain.
Fetch a whole Ox to satissie my stomach.

Fetch an Alle to keep you company.

Then down to Hell, tell Pluto Prince of Devils,
That great Al^des want's a kitchen wench.
To turn his spit, command h^m from my self!
To send up Proserpine shee'^ serve the turn.

I must find you meat and the Devil find you cooks
Which is the next way?

Follow the beaten path thou can not miss it
Tis a wide Causie that conducts thither,
An easy tract and down hill all the way,
But ^f the black Prince will not send her quickly,
But still detain her for his bed-fellow,
Tell him I'll drag him from his iron chair,
By the steel tres^es, and then sow him fast,
With the three furies in a leathern bag.
And thus will drown them in the Ocean.

You had better keep him alive to light Tobacco-pipes* or to sweep chimneys.


Act thou not gone, nay then i'll send thy soul,
Before thee, 'twill do thy message sooner (tiffe, tiffe.)

Hercules, Hercules, Hercules? do not you hear Omphal^
Hark how she calls you, hark?

Tis she indeed I know her sug^ed voice?
Omphale dear Command resse of my life
My thoughts repose, sweet Center of my cares
Where all my hopes, and best desires take rest.
Lo! where the mighty Son of Iupiter
Throws himself Capture at your conquering feet
Do not disdain my voluntary humbleness.
Accept my service, bless me with commanding,
I will perform the hardest imposition
And run through twelve new labours for thy sake,
Omphale dear* ommandresse of my life.

Do you not see how she beckons to you to follow her?
Look how she (...) her distaff, look you?

Where is she gone, that I may follow her?
Omphal^ stay, stay, take thy Hercules!

There there man, you are right.

What a strange temper are the Senses in?
How come their wits thus topsy turme turned?
Hercules Tactus, Visus Polypheme,
Two goodly surnames have they purchased:
By the rare Ambrosian of an Oyste ^ie;
They have got such proud imaginatious,
That I could wish I were mad for company:
But since my fortunes cannot stretch so high,
I'll rest contented with this wise estate.

What more anger? Auditus got abroad too.

Take this abuse at base Olfactus hands?
What did he challenge me to meet me here,
And is not come? well I'll proclaim the slave,
The vilest dastard that ere broke his word;
But stay yonder's Appetitus.

I pray you Auditus, what ails you?

Ha, ha!

What ails you?

Ha! what say thou?

Who hath abused you thus?

Why dost thou whisper thus? Can not speak out?

Sa^e me I had clean forgotten; why are you so angry Auditus^


Bite us, who dare bite us?

I talk of no bitting, I say whats the matter between Olfactus and you?


Will Olsactus bite me? do if he dares, would he would meet me here according
to his promise: Mine ears are somewhat thick of late, I pray thee speak out
louder.


Ha ha ha ha this is sine i'faith: ha, ha, ha. Hear you, have you lost your
ears at supper.


Excellent cheer at supper I confess it:
But when 'tis sauced with sour contentions,
And breeds such quarrels 'tis intolerable,

Pish, pish this is my question. Hath your supper spoiled your hearing?


Hearing at supper, tell not me of hearing:
But if thou saw Olfactus, bring me to him.

I ask you whether you have lost your hearing?

O dost thou hear them ring? what a grief is this
Thus to be deaf, and loose such harmony?
Wretched Auditus now shalt thou never here
The pleasing changes that a well tuned Corde,
Of trowling bells, will make, when they are true rung.

Here's a do indeed, I think he is mad, as well as drunk or deaf.


Ha. What's that.

I say you have made me hoarse with speaking so loud.

Ha, what say thou of a creaking Crou'd?

I am hoarce I tell you, and my head aches.

Oh I understand thee! the first crowd was made of a horse-head
Tis true, the sinding of a dead horse-head,
Was the first invention of string instruments,
Whence rose the Gitterme, Vial, and the Lute:
Though others think the Lute was first deuis'd,
In imitation of a Tortesse back
Whose sinews parched by Apollo's beams,
Echoed about the concave of the shell,
And seeing the shortest and smallest gave shrillest sound,
They found out frets whole sweet diversity
(Well couched by the skill-full learned fingers)
Raises so strange a multitude of Cords,
Which their opinion many do con^irme,
Because Testudo signifies a Lute.
But if I by no means. --

Nay if you begin to critic once, we shall never have done.


Somnus, good Somnus, sweet Somnus, come a pace!

Hei-oh, oh, are you sure they be so? oho, ho, oho, hei, waw?

What good can I do? ou, ho, haw.

Why I tell you unless you help
Soft son of night, right heir to Quietness,
Labours repose, lifes best restorative,
Digestions careful Nurse, bloods Comforter,
Wi^s help, thoughts charm, the stay of Microcosm,
Sweet Somnus chiefest enemy to Care:
My dearest friend, liftvp thy lumpish head,
Open thy dull eyes, shake of this drowsiness,
Rouse up thy self.

O Crapula, how now, how now, oh oh howe whose there?

Crapula speak quickly what's the matter?

As I told you, the noble Senses peers of Microcosm;
Will left soon fall to ruin perpetual,
Unless your ready helping hand recure them:
Lately they banqueted at Gustus table.
And there fell mad, or drunk, I know not whether,
So that it's doubtful in these outrageous fits,
That the^e murder one another.

Fear it not if they have escaped already,
Bring me to them, or them to me,
I^e quickly make them know the power,
Of my la^ge stretched authority,
These co^es of sleep wherewith I wont to bind,
The strongest arms that ere resisted me,
Shall be the means, whereby I will correct
The Senses outrage, and distemperature.

Thanks gentle Somnus, I'll go seek them out,
And bring then to you soon as possible.

Dispatch it quickly, least I fall a sleep for want of work.

Stand still, stand still? Visus I think comes yonder.
If you think good, begin and bind him first:
For he made fast, the rest will soon be quiet.

Sage Telemus, I now too late admire,
Thy deep fore-sight and skill in Prophecy,
Who meanwhile toldst me, that in time to come
Vlisses should deprive me of my sight.
And now the slave that marched in Outis name,
Is proved V^sses, and by this device,
Hath escaped my hands, and fled away by Sea,
Leaving me desolate in eternal night.
Ah wretched Polypheme, where's all thy hope,
And longing for thy beauteous Galatea?
She scorned thee once, but now she will detest,
And loath to look upon thy darkened face:
Aye me most miserable Polphemus.
But as for (...), heaven and earth
Send vengeance ever on thy damned head.
In just re^enge of my great injury.
Who is he that dares to touch me? Cyclops come?
Come all ye Cyclop's help to rescue me.

There rest thy self and let thy quiet sleep,
Restore thy weak imaginations.

Ha, ha, ha: oh how my spleen is tickled with this sporte.
The madding Senses make about the woods,
It cheers my soul and makes my body fat:
To laugh at their mischances, ha, ha* ha, ha,
Heigh ho, the stitch hath caught me, oh my heart!
Would I had one to hold my sides a while,
That I might laugh a fresh: oh how they run,
And chafe, and swear, and threaten one another,
Ay me, out alas, ay me help, help, who's this that bind's me?
Help Mendatio, Mendatio help, here's one will ravish me.

Lingua content your self you must be bound.

What a spight's this? are my nailes par'd so near? Can I not scratch his eyes
out? What have I done? what? do you mean to kill me? murder, murder, murder,


Who cries out murder! What a woman slain?
My Lady ^ing^a dead? oh Heavens unjust
Can you behold this fact, this bloody fact!
And shower not fire upon the murderer?
Ah peerless Lingua mistress of heavenly words,
Sweet tongue of eloquence, the life of fame,
Heart's dea^e enchantress* what disaster fates
Have reft this Jewel from our common-wealth.
Gustus the ruby that adorns thy ringe,
Lo here defect, how shalt thou lead thy days,
Wanting the sweet Companion of thy life.
But in dark sorrow and dull melancholy,
But ^taie? whose this? inhumane wretch:
Blou^-^hi^stie miscreant, is this thy handy work?
To kill a woman, a harmless Lady?
Villain prepare thy self draw, or i'll sheath my faucheon in thy sides.
There take the guerdon fit sor murderers.

Here's such a stir I never knew the Senses in such disorder.


Ha, ha, ha; M^nd^cio, Mendicio? See how Visus hath broke his fore-head against
the oak yonder, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Howe now? Is not Lingu^ bound sufficiently? I have more trouble to make one
women in sleep, then all the world besides they be so full of tattle.


Oh mine ears, mine ears, mine ears.

Oh my nose, my nose, my nose,

Leave, leave at length these base contentions, Olfactus let him go?


Let him first loose my nose?

Good ^u litus give over?

IIe have his life that sought to kill me.

Come, come I'll end this quarrel, bind him Crapula!

Thanks Dei^neira for thy kind remembrance,
Tis a fair shirt I'll wear it for thy sake.

Somnus here's (...) worse then all his sellowes
Stay but a while and you shall see him rage!

What will he do? see that he scapes us not!

Tis a good shirt, it fitt's me passing well,
Tis very warm indeed, but whats the matter.
Me thinks I am some-what hotter then I was,
My heart beats faster then twas wont to do
My brains inflamed, my temples ache extremely, oh, oh,
Oh what a wild-fire creeps among my bowels:
A^tna's with in my breast, my marrow f^ies,
And ^unes about my bones, oh my sides:
My sides, my rains, my head my rains, my head;
My heart, my heart, my liver, my liver, oh,
I burn, I burn, I burn oh how I burn:
With scorching heate of implacable fire,
I burn extreme with flames unsufferable,

Sure he doth but try how to act Her^ules:

Is it this shirt that boils me thus? oh heavens,
It fires me worse, and heates more furiously
Then loves dire thunderbolts; oh miserable,
They bide less pain that bathe in Phlegeton;
Could not the triple kingdom of the world,
Heaven, earth and hell destroy great Hercul^?
Could not the damned sprights of hateful Inno?
Nor the great dangers of my labours kill me?
Am I the mighty son of inp^er?
And shall this poisned linen thus consume me?
Shall I be burnt? villains s^ie up to heaven,
Bid (...) m^ster up a troupe of clouds,
And shower down cata^acts of rain to cool me?
Or elce I'll break her speckled bo^e in pieces?
Will ^e not? no she hates me like her mistress;
Why then descend you rogues to the vile deep,
F^ch. (...) hither charge him bring the sea,
To quenc^ these flames, or else the worlds fair frame:
Will be in greater danger to be burnt,
Then when proud Phaeton ruled the Suns rich Chariot.

I'll take that care the world shall not be burnt:
If Somnus cords can hold you.

What Vulcan's this that offers to enchain,
A greater soldier then the God of Mars.

He that each night with bloodless battle conquers,
The proudest conqueror that triumphs by wars:

Now Somnus there's but only one remaining,
That was the author of these outrages.

Who's that? is he under my Command?

Yes, yes, yes, tis Appetitus; if you go that way, and look about those
thickets, i'll go hither, and search this grove, I doubt not but to find him?


Content.

So now's the time that I would gladly meet,
These madding Senses that abused me thus;
What? haunt me like an owl? make an Ass of me?
No they shall know, ^I scorn to serve such masters,
As cannot master their affections,
Their iniurie^ have changed my nature,
Now I ^le be no more called hungry parasite:
But he^ceforth answer to the wrathful name
Of angry Appetite, my choller's up:
(...) cool me quickly with thy fan,
Ore^ce I le cut thy cheeks, why this is brave:
Fa^e better then to fane at Gustus table,
For a few scraps, no, no, such words as these,
By Pluto stab the villain, kill the slave:
By the infernal hags, I'll hough the rogue,
And paunch the rascal that abused me thus,
Such words as these fit angry Appetite.

Somnus, Somnus, come hither, come hither quickly, he's here, he's here.


I marry is he sir, what of that? base miscreant Cra^ pula.

O gentle Appetitus.

You muddy gulche, dare look me in the face, while mine eyes sparkle, with
revengeful fire? (tiff, toff, tiff, toff,)


Good Appetitus.

Peace you fat bawson, peace, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff,)
See not this fatal engine of my wrath?
Villain I'll maule thee for thine old offences,
And grind thy bones to powder with this pestle:
You when I had no weapons to defend me,
Could beat me out of doors; but now prepare,
Make thy self ready, for thou shalt not escape.
Thus doth the great revengeful Appetite,
Upon his fat foe, wreak his wrathful spite.

Why how now Crapula?

Am I not dead? is not my soul departed?

No, no, see where he lies, that would have ^iurt thee? fear nothing?

So rest you all in silent quietness,
Let nothing wake you till the power of sleep,
With his sweet dew, cooling your brains inflamed,
Hath rectified the vain and idle thoughts,
Bred by your surfeit, and distemperature:
Lo here the Senses late outrageous,
All in a round together sleep like friends,
For there's no difference twixt the King and Clown,
The poor and rich, the beauteous and deformed,
Wrapped in the veil of night, and bonds of sleep,
Without whose power, and sweet dominion,
Our life were Hell, and pleasure painfulnesse,
The sting of envy, and the dart of love,
A^arice talons, and the fire of hate:
Would poison, wound, distract, and soon consume,
The heart, the liver life and mind of man;
The (...) Mower, that with ^rawnie arms,
Wi^deth the crooked sith, in many a swathe,
Cutting the flowery pride on the velvet plain,
Lies down at night, and in the weaty folds
Of his wives arms, forgets his labour past,
The painful Mariner, and careful Smith,
The toiling Plowman, all Artificers,
Most humbly yceld to my dominion,
Without due rest, nothing is durable.
Lo thus doth Somnus conquer all the world
With his most awful waud, and half the year
Reigns over the best and proudest Emperors.
Only the nurslings of the Sisters nine,
Rebels against me scorn my great command:
And when dark night from her bedewy wings,
Drops sleepy silence to the eyes of all,
They only wake, and with vnwearied toil,
Labour to find the Via lac^ea,
That leads to the heaven of immortallitie,
And by the lofty to towering of their mind,
Fledgd with the feathers of a learned muse,
They raise themselves unto the highest pitch,
Marrying base earth and heaven in a thought;
But thus I punish their rebellion,
Their industry was never yet rewarded,
Better to sleep then wake, and toil for nothing.

So' ho Rocwood, so ho Rocwood, Rocwood, your Organ, hay Chanter, Chanter, by
(...) hed-tyre it's a very deep mouthed dog, a most admirable cry of
hounds, look here, again, again, there, there, ah wa^e counter.


Do you see the full Moon yonder, and not the man in it, why me thinks 'tis
too, too evident, I see his dog very plain, and look you, just under his
tail is a Thorne bush of Furs.


'Twill make a fine tooth-pick: that Larks heel there, o do not burn it.


Boy, Heuresis, what think thou I think, when I think nothing?


And it please you sir, I think you are devising how to answer a man that
asks you nothing.


Well gest boy, but yet thou mistookst it, for I was thinking of the constancy
of women,


Oh, oh, oh, I am stabbed, I am stabbed, hold your hand, oh, oh, oh.


How now? do they talk in their sleep? are they not awake Heuresis?


No questionless, they be all fast a sleep.


Eat not too many of those Apples, they be very sl^tiue?


Foh, foh, beat out this Dog hear, foh, was it you Appetitus?


In faith it was most sweetly winded, whosoever it was, the warble is very
good, and the horne is excellent?


Put on man, put on, keep your head warm, 'tis cold.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, st, Heuresis, stir not sir.


Shut the door, the pot runs over, sir Cooke that will be a sweet
Pastie, if you nibble the venison so?


Say you so, is a Marrow Pie the Helena of meates? give meet, if I play not
Paris hang me, Boy a clean Trencher?


Serve up, serve up, this is a fat Rabbit, would I might have the maiden-head
of it, come give me the ^ish there, who hath meddled with these maids? ha?


Fie, shut your Snuffers doser for shame, 'tis the worst smell that can be.


O the cramp, the cramp, the cramp, my leg, my leg.


I must abroad presently, reach me my best Necklace

presently.


Ah Lingua are you there?


Here take this Rope, and I'll help the leader close with the second Bell: Fie,
fie, there is a goodly peal clean spoiled.


I'll lay my life that Gentlewoman is painted: well. well I know it, mark but
her nose, do you not see the complexion crack out, I must confess 'tis a
good picture.


Ha, ha, ha, fie, I pray you leave, you tickle me so, oh, ah, ha, ha, take away
your hands I cannot endure, ah you tickle me, ah, ha, ha, ha, ah.


Hai, rett, rett, rett, now bird, now, -- look about that bush, she trust her
thereabout, -- here she is, ware wing Cater, ware wing, avaunt.


Mum, mum, mum, mum.


st, sir take heed you wake her not.


I know sir she is fast a sleep, for her mouth is shut.


This 'tis, to venture upon such uncertainties, to loose so rich a Crown to no
end, well, well.


Ha, ha, ha, we shall here avon, where she lost her maiden-head, st, boy, my
Lord Vicegerent, and Master Register are hard by, run quickly, tell them of
this accident, wish them come softly.


Mendatio never talk farther, I doubt'tis past recovery, and my Robe likewise,
I shall never have them again, well, well.


How? her Crown, and her Robe, never recover them? hum, wast not said to be
left by Memory? ha? I conjecture here's some knauery-fast locked with sleep, in
good faith. Was that Crown and Garment yours L^ngua?


I marry were they, and that some body hath felt, and shall feel more, if I
live.


O strange, she answers in her sleep to my question, but how come the Senses
to strive for it?


Why, I laid upon purpose in their way, that they might fall together by the
ears.


What a strange thing is this?


st, my Lord, softly, softly, here's the notablest piece of treason discovered,
how say you Lingu. set all the Senses at ods, she hath confessed it to me in her
sleep.


Is't possible Master Register? did you ever know any talk in their sleep?


I remember my Lord many have done so very oft, but women are troubled,
especially with this talking disease, many of them have I heard answer in their
dreams, and tell what they did all day awake.


By the same token, there was a wanton maid, that being asked by her Mother,
what such a one did with her so late one night in such a room, she presently
said, that --


Peace you wild rake hell, is such a jest fit for this company, no more I
say sir.


My Lord will you believe your own ears, you shall hear her answer me, as
directly and truly as my be. Lingua, what did you with the Crown and
garments.


I'll tell thee Mendac^.


She thinks Mendacio speaks to her, mark now, mark howe truly she will
answer: what say you Madame?


I say Phantastes is a foolish transparent gull; a mere fanatic nupson in my
imagination not worthy to ^it as a Judges assistant.


Ha, ha, ha, howe truly and directly she answers.


Faw, faw, she dreams now she knows not what she says, I try her once
again: Madame? what remedy can you have for your great losses?


O are you come Acrasia? welcome, welcome, boy reach a Cushion sit down good
(...)? I am so beholding to you, your potion wrought exceedingly, the senses
were so mad, did not you see how they raged about the woods?


Hum, Acra^? is Acrasia her confederate? my life that witch hath wrought some
villainy, --


It is a very common thing, I have seen many sick of the Peripatetic
disease.


By the same token my Lord, I knew one that went abroad in his sleep, bent
his bow, shot at a Magpie, killed her, fetched his arrow, came home, locked the
doors, and went to bed again.


What should be the reason of it?


I remember (...) told me the reason once, as I think thus: The nerues that
carry the moving faculty, from the brains, to the thighs, legs, feet, and
arms, are wider far then the other nerues, wher^ore they are not so easily
stopped with the vapours of sleep, but are night and day ready to perform what
fancy shall command them.


It may be so, but Phantastes enquire more of Acrasia.


What did you with the potion Acrasia made you:


Gave it to the Senses, and made them as mad as -- well, If I cannot recover
it -- let it go, I'll not leave them thus.


Boy a wake the Senses there.


Hoe, hoe, Auditus, up, up, so hoe, Olfactus have at your nose, up Visus,
Gustus, Tactus, up: What can you not feel a pinch? have at you with a pin.


Oh, you stab me, oh,

Tactus, know you how you came hither:

No my Lord, not I, this I remember,
We sup't with Gustus, and had wine good store,
Where of I think I tasted liberally.
Amongst the rest, we drunk a composition,
Of a most dellicate, and pleasant relish,
That made our brains, somewhat irregular.

My Lord, here's a fat rascal was lurking in a bush very suspitiously, his
name he says is Crapula.


Sirrah, speak quickly what you know of these troubles,


Nothing my Lord, but that the Senses were mad, and that Somnus at my request
laid them asleep, in hope to recover them.


Why then tis too evident, Acrasia at Lingua's request, bewitched the Senses,
wake her quickly Heuresis.


Heigh ho, out alas, aye me, where am I? how came I here? where am I? ah.


Li^gua look not so strangely upon the matter, you have confessed in your
sleep, that with a Crown, and a Robe, you have disturbed t^e Senses, using a
crafty help to enrage them, can you deny it?


Aye me, most miserable wretch, I beseech your Lordship forgive me.


No, no, tis a fault unpardonable,


In my conceit Lingua, you should seal up your lips, when you go to bed,
these Feminine tongues be so glibbe.


Visus, Tactus, and the rest, our former sentence concerning you, we confirm
as irrevocable, and establish the Crown to you Visus, and the Robe to you
Tactus, but as for you Lingua --


Let me have mine own, howsoever you determine, I beseech you.


That may not be, your goods are fallen into our hands, my sentence cannot be
recalled, you may see, those that seek what is not theirs, oftentimes loose
what's their own: Therefore Lingua granting you your life, I commit you to
close prison, in Gustus his house, and charge you Gustus, to keep her under
the custody of two strong doors, and every day till she come to 80. years of
age, see she be well guarded with 30. tall watchmen, without whose licence she
shall by no means wag abroad, nevertheless use her Lady-like, according to
her estate.


I pray you my Lord add this to the judgment that whenever she obtayneth
licence to walk abroad, in token the Tongue was the cause of her offence, let
her wear a velvet hood, made just in the fashion of a great Tongue, in my
conceit 'tis a very pretty Emblem of a Woman,


My Lord, she hath a wild boy to her page, a chief agent in this treason, his
name's Mendatio.


Ha? well, I will inflict this punishment on him for this time, let him be
soundly whipped, and ever after though he shall strengthen his speeches with the
sinews of Truth, yet none shall believe him.


In my imagination my Lord, the Day is dead to the great toe, and in my conceit
it grows dark, by which I conjecture it will be cold, and therefore in my
fa^cie, and opinion, 'tis best to repair to our lodgings.


What's this? a fellow whispering so closely with the Earth? so, ho, so, ho:
Appetitus? faith now I think Morpheus himself hath been here, up with a pox
to you, up you luske, I have such news to tell thee sirta: all the Senses are
well, and Lingua is proved guilty, up, up, up, I never knew him so fast a
sleep in my life.

Nay then have at you a fresh, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)

Jog me once again, and I'll throw this whole mess of pottage in your face,
cannot one stand quiet at the dresser for you?


Ha, ha, ha, I think it's impossible for him to sleep longer then he dreams
of his victuals. What Appetitus, up quickly, quickly up, Appetitus, quickly
sir, (toff, toff, toff, toff,)


I'll come presently, but I hope you'll stay till they be roasted, will you eat
them raw?


Roasted? ha, ha, ha, ha, up, up, up, away,


Reach the sauce quickly, here's no Sugar, whaw, wam, oh, ou, oh.


What never wake? (Tiffe, toff, tiff, toff,) wilt never be? Then I must try
another way I see.


IVdicious friends, it is so late at night,
I cannot waken hungry Appetite:
Then since the close upon his rising stands,
Let me obtain this at your courteous hands,
Try if the friendly opportunity,
Of your good will, and gra^ious Plauditie,
With the thrice welcome mumure it shall keep,
Can beg this prisoner from the bands of sleep.
Upon the Plaudit, APPETITVS awakes, and runs in after ANAMNESTES.


