CIrce by her allurements enamoured a young Gent. on her person, who a while
lived with her in all sensual delights until upon some jealousy conceived,
she gave him to drink of an enchanted Cup, and touching him with her golden
wand transformed him into a Lyon. After some time she remembering her former
love, retransformed him into his former shape. Which he reasuming took the
first occasion by flight to quit the place and coming into the presence of
his Majesty, whose sight frees him from all fear he relates the story of his
fortune.

When Circe had notice of her Lovers escape it, put her into a furious anger
and then into a lamentation or love passion. But being consolated by her
Nymphs; she commands that all such delights be prepared as may sweeten her
sorrow: and presently all the voluntary beasts under her subjection are
introduced to make her sport. After which the way being first prepared by
Harmony, and the Influences; divine Beauty accompanied with fourteen stars
of a happy constellation, descends to the Music of the Spheres and joins
with heroic virtue, where in presence of love Cupid, Circe knowing the
design of the destinies on this glorious Interview, voluntarily delivers her
golden rod to MINERVA. So all the enchantments being dissolved. TEMPE which for
a time had been possessed by the voluntary beasts of CIRCES Court; is restored
to the true followers of the MVSES.

IN the upper part of the border serving for ornament to the SCENE, was painted
a fair compartment of scrolls and quadratures, in which was written TEMPE
RESTAVRATVM. On each side of this, lay a figure bigger then the life, the one a
woman with wings on her head like MERCVRIE and a pen in her hand: the other a
man looking down in a book lying open before him, and a torch lighted in his
hand: that figured Invention; this Knowledge. Near to these were children
holding ugly Masks before their faces in action as if they would affright
them; others riding on tame beasts and some blowing such wrethen Trumps as m^ke
confused noise, in the corners sat other Children hardening of darts in Lamps.
But Invention Knowledge seem not to be diverted from their study by these
childish bugbears. In the midst of the two sides of this border in short nieces
sat two ugly figures, the one a woman with a forked tongue, and snaky locks,
and the under part of a Satire, this Hag held in her hand a smiling vizard
crowned with Roses, and was figured for Envy, under the Mask of friendship.
On the other side was sitting as horrid a man Satire with a wreath of poppy on
his head, and a Frog sitting on the fore part thereof; and above a Batt flying,
this represented curions Ignorance. The rest of the Border was filled up with
several fancies, which lest I should be too long in the description of the
frame, I will go to the picture it self, and indeed these shows are nothing
else but pictures with Light and Motion.

A Curtain being drawn up, the Lightsome Scene appeared, showing a delicious
place by nature and art; where in a Valley environed with Hills a far off was
seated, a prospect of curious Arbours of various forms. The first order of
marble Pilasters. Between which were nieces of rock work and Statues; some
spurting water received into vazes beneath them, and others standing on
Pedestals. On the returns of these Pilasters run slender Cornishments. From
which was raised a second order of gracious terms with women's faces which
bear up the ornaments. Under this to a leaning height was a Ballestrata
enriched. All this second story seemed of silver work mixed with fresh Verdures
which on the tops of these arbours covered some of the returns, in the form
of tips with tender branches dangling down: others were covered flatt and had
flower pots of gold for finishing: behind these appeared the tops of slender
trees, whose leaves seem'de to move with a gentle breath coming from the far
off Hills.

Out of this pleasant place comes in hast, a young Gentleman, looking often
back, as if he feared a pursuit; and being come into the midst of the room,
looking still distractedly about him, he wipes his face with an handkercher,
and then advances towards the State, and speaks.

Was I a Lyon! that am now afraid!
I fear no danger; nor I fear no Death;
But to be Retransform'd, into a Beast:
Which while I was, although I must confess,
I was the Bravest: What could she do less,
That saw me Subject, to no base desire:
Yet was there in me, a Promethean fire,
That made me covet to be man again,
Governed by Reason, and not ruled by Sense.
Therefore I shun this place of Residence,
And fly to Virtue: in whose awful sight,
She dares not come, but in a Mask, and crouch,
As low as I did, for my liberty.
Her Bower is pleasant, and her Palace Rich;
Her Fare Delicious; and her Language fine;
But shall the Soul, the Minion of the Gods,
Stoop to her Vassalls? Or stand by and starve,
While they sit swelling, in her Chair of State?
Tis not her Rod, her Philters, nor her Herbs,
(Though strong in Magic) that can bound men's minds;
And make them Prisoners, where there is no wall.
It is consent that makes a perfect Slave:
And Sloth that binds us to Lusts easy Trades,
Wherein we serve out our youths Prentiship,
Thinking at last, Love should enfranchize us,
Whom we have never, either served or known:
He finds no help, that uses not his own.
The further part of the Scene opening, there appears seated on the side of a
fruitful hill, a sumptuous Palace, with an open Terrace before there appears
seated on the side of a fruitful hill, a sumptuous Palace, with an open Terrace
before it, and a great stair of return, descending into the lower grounds;
the upper part environed with walls of Marble, along which were planted,
Cypress trees. From the foot of the hill, Ciece attended by the Nayades, and
Dryads comes forth in fury, for the escape of the young Gentleman, her Lover;
and having traverst the stage with an angry look, sings to her Lute.

Dissembling Traitor, now I see the cause,
Of all thy fawning, was but to be free:
T'was not for nothing, thou had teeth and claws,
For thou hast made a cruel prey of me.

Ingratitude is apt, to slink away,
And shun that bounty which it cannot pay.
And he is gone (aye me) is stolen from hence,
And this poor Casket of my breast, hath left
Without a Hart: that should for recompense,
Have locked in two: O most inhumane theft!

Send not your sighs, after a fickle mind,
That Sails the faster for such Gales of wind.
Then take my keys! and show me al my wealth.
Lead me abroad! Let me my subjects view!
Bring me some Physic! though that bring no health!
And feyne me pleasures, since I find none true.

Ye willing servants! And ye Souls confined
To several shapes, by powerful Herbs and Art,
Appear, transformed each in your sever all kind,
And strive to temper the distempered Heart,
Of sullen Circe, stung with Cupids dart.
Her song ended, she sits, and before her are presented all the Antimasques,
consisting of Indians, and Barbarians, who naturally are bestial, and others
which are voluntaries, and but half transformed into beasts.

The Anti Masques being past; Circe and her Nymphs retire towards the palace
from whence she came, and the Scene returning into the vale of TEMPE.

Harmony comes forth attended by a Chorus of Musique, and under her conduct^
fourteen Influences of the stars, which are to come. She with the Chorus goes
up to the State and sings.

Not as my self, but as the brightest Star,
That shines in Heaven, come to Reign this day.
And these the Beams and Influences are
Of Constellations, whose Planeticke sway,
Though some foresee, all must alike obey.
Such a Conjunction, of auspicious lights,
Meet but in Honour, of some Regal rights.
Ladies! lend us your ears.
And let no Lovers sigh be heard!
Or Suite, (though just) be now preferred
A consort of the Spheres,
Admits no whisper, nor no sound,
But what is descant, to their ground:
Nor can we hold ye long,
For there are Stars to rise,
That far above, our song
Are Music to all eyes.
If any Beauty here,
In her own glass appear
Or Lovers eye, most clear?
Looking but up, she may with sma^l ado
Perceive that flatters, and her servant too.
Her Song ended they retire with a Sarabant and the fourteen Influences fall
into their dance. Which being past they are placed on the degrees by the Lords
and Ladies where they sit to see the Masque.

When Divine Beauty, will vouchsafe to stoop,
And move to Earth: 'tis fit the Heavenly Spheres,
Should be her Music: And the Starry Troop,
Shine round about her, like the Crown she wears.
No mortal Breast,
Can entertain:
So great a Guest,
And such a Train.
I cannot blame ye if ye gaze,
And give small ear to what I say:
For such a presence will amaze,
And send the Senses all one way.

The Music that ye hear, is dull,
But that y^ see, is sweet indeed:
In every Part exact, and full,
From whence there doth an Air proceed,
On which the Intelligences feed,
Where fair and good, inseparably conioynd,
Create a Cupid, that is never blind.
Then the Scene is changed into an oriental sky, such as appears at the
Sun rising, and a far off a Landscipt and a calm Sea which did terminate
the Horizon; in the hither part was a Heaven with a Citadel, and opposite to
that, were broken grounds and craggey rocks.

In the midst of the air the eight Spheres in rich habits were seated on a
Cloud, which in a circular form was on each side continued unto the highest
part of the Heaven, and seemed to have let them down as in a Chain.

To the Music of these Spheres there appeared two other Clouds descending,
in them were discovered eight Stars; these being come to the middle Region of
the sky, another greater Cloud came down above them; Which by little and
little descending, discovered other glistering Stars to the number of six: and
above all in a Chariot of gold-smithes works richly adorned with precious
lemmes, sat divine Beauty, over whose head, appeared a brightness, full of
small stars that environed the top of the Chariot, striking a light round
about it.

The eight Stars that first descended being by this time past the Spheres came
forth, and the Clouds on which they sat with a swift morion returning up
again, and the other still descending showed a pleasing contention between
them as they past. When divine Beauty and her attendants were lighted, that
great Cloud that bare them flies up again, leaving the Chariot standing on the
Earth.

This sight altogether was for the difficulty of the Ingining and number of the
persons the greatest that hath been seen here in our time. For the
apparitions of such as came down in the air, and the Chorus standing beneath
arrived to the number of fifty persons all richly attired, showing the
magnificence of the court of England. In the description of the several
habits of the maine Masques and Masquers and Chorus with all the persons
employed, would make a book alone as big as this, and ask more time in setting
down then can be now spared; only thus much the Queenes Majesties was in a
garment of watchet Sattine with Stars of silver embroidered and embossed from the
ground, and on her head a Crown of Stars mixed with some small falls of white
Feathers. And the Ladies were in the same manner. The stuff was rich and the
form Noble, and all suiting to the Magnificence of so great a Queen.

The Queen and the Ladies dance their Entry; after which Harmony, and the
highest Sphere sing, assisted by all the Chorus together.

How rich is earth? and poor the skies?
Deprived of heavenly Beauties eyes?
Whose Image men adore.

Heroic Virtue, is that kind
Of Beauty, that attracts the mind,
And men should most implore.

Ianus was happy that could see,
Two ways at once: And happier he
That round about him kept
Watches, that never slept.

But we most happy, that behold,
Two that have turned this Age to Gold,
Making old Saturns Reign,
In theirs, come back again.
And since more, th'obiect, then the sight,
Makes every seer Blessed;
How are we ravished with delight,
That see the best.

The Maskers dance their maine Dance, which done, and the Queen seated under
the state by his Majesty, the Scene is again chang^d into a shady wood, and a
new Heaven appears differing in shape and colour from the other. In the midst
of which Jove sitting on an Eagle is seen hovering in the air with a glory
beyond him. And at that instant Cupid from another part of the Heaven comes
flying forth, and having past the Scene, turns soaring about like a bird, and
at the same time Pallas, Circe and her four Nymphs appear on the Stage: the
great Chorus consisting of five and thirty Musicians standing below to assist
them.

It is but Justice, to torment a heart,
That tortured thousands: And my gentle reign,
So wronged with acting of a Tyrants part,
I must Restreyne,
My power abused; And right my iniurd Treyne.

Thou claim'st her Subjects: And I claim the Soil,
As Sovereign Lord: The Hecatomes she brings,
Though great Oblations, yet deduced from Spoil,
Are sordid Things:
And sent of Earth: Virtue pure Incense brings.

The Gods, more freedom did allow,
when Jove turned Io to a Cow.

Are mortal Creatures, grown so proud
To tax the Sky, for every Cloud:

Man-Maide, be gone!

Though I could turn thee, to a Stone
I'll beg thy peace:

Dear Daughter cease!

Cease Dreadful Jove! Finding thy Drift,
My Bounty, shall prevent thy Gift:
This Machles Pair,
I make, my Heir:
All I possess, I here, Resign,
Thou hast ^ And I have Mine.

She gives but what she can not keep.

Then was the wound I gave her deep.

T'was I whose power none can withstand,
That opened both her heart, and hand.

How would they morn, to loose ye quite!
That are so loath, to say, Goodnight.
Yet we may plead, in our Excuse,
Should you, these Loanes of Love forsake
The Gods themselves, such Sommes would take
And pay us, use.
When this was past, the Eagle with love flew up, and Cupid took his flight
through the Air, after which the Heavens close. Palas and Circe returns into
the Scene with the Nymphs, and Chorus; and so concluded the last Intermedium.
After which the Queen and her Ladies began the Revels, with the King and his
Lords, which continued all the night.

In the young Gentleman, who Circe had first enamoured on her Person, and after,
through Jealousy conceived, Transformed into a Lyon. And again remembering her
former Love, retransform'd into his former shape, is figured an incontinent
man, that striving with his affections, is at last by the power of reason
persuaded to fly from those Sensual desires, which had formerly corrupted his
Judgment.

Circe here signifies desire in general, the which hath power on all living
Creatures, and being mixed of the Divine and Sensible, hath divers effects,
Leading some to Virtue, and others to Vice. She is described as a Queen,
having in her service, and subjection, the Nymphs, which participate of
Divinity, figuring the Virtues, and the bruit Beasts, denoting the Vices. The
description of her person, of extraordinary Beauty, and sweetness of her
voice, shows that desire is moved either by sight or hearing, to love Virtue,
or the contrary, and the Beautiful aspect of her enchanted Palace, glistering
with gold, and Precious Ornaments, that desire cannot be moved without
appearance of Beauty, either true of false.

The Dryads, and Nayades, Nymphs of the Woods, and Waters, that is to say;
the good spirits defused through all the Universe, are servants to this Queen,
and live with her in all Liberty and pleasure whose employment is to gather the
most exquisite Herbs, and Flowers of the earth for the service of their
Mistres; Figuring the Virtues and Sciences, by which the desire of Mans Spirits
are prepared and disposed to good, the beasts, in part transformed, who
contrary to their Natures, make her sport, represents unto us that Sensual
desire makes men loose their Virtue and Valour, turning Parasites and Slaves to
their Brutish affections. That these Intemperate Beasts of Circes Court,
should for a time possess TEMPE. The happy retreat of the Muses and their
followers, is meant, the enchantments of vicious impostures, that by false
means, seek to extirpate the true Lovers of Science and Virtue, to whom of
right only that place belongs.

That divine Beauty accompan'ed with a troop of Stars of a happy Constellation
joining with Heiroicke virtue should dissolve the enchantments, and Circe
voluntarily deliver her golden rod to Minerva, is meant that a divine Beam
coming from above, with a good inclination, and a perfect habit of virtue
made, by the Harmony of the Irascible and concupiscible parts obedient to the
rational and highest part of the soul. Making man only a mind using the body
and affections as instruments; which being his true perfection, brings him to
all the happiness which can be enjoyed here below.

In Heiroicke virtue is figured the Kings Majesty, who therein transcends as
far common men, as they are above Beasts, he truly being the prototipe to all
the Kingdoms under his Monarchy, of Religion, Justice, and all the Virtues
joined together.

So that Corporeal Beauty, consisting in simetry, colour, and certain
unexpressible Graces, shining in the Queenes Majesty, may draw us to the
contemplation of the Beauty of the soul, unto which it hath Analogy.

All the Verses were written by Mr. Aurelian Townesend.

The subject and Allegory of the Masque, with the descriptions, and Apparatus
of the Sceanes were invented by Inigo Iones, Surveyor of his Majesties work.


