The first thing that presented it self to the eye, was the Ornament that went
about the Scene: in the midst of which, was placed a great Arms of the
Kings, with Angels holding an Imperial Crown, from which hung a Drapery, of
crimson Velvet, fringed with gold, tacked in several knots, that on each-side,
with many folds, was wound about a Pillaster; in the freeze, were festones of
several fruits in their natural colours, on which, in gracious postures lay
Children sleeping; at each end was a double shield, with a Gorgons head, and at
the foot of the pilasters, on each side, stood two Women, the one young, in a
watchet Robe looking upwards, and on her head, a pair of Compasses of gold,
the points standing towards Heaven: the other more ancient, and of a venerable
aspect, apparreled in tawny, looking downwards; in the one hand a long ruler,
and in the other, a great pair of iron Compasses, one point whereof, stood on
the ground, and the other touched part of the ruler. Above their heads, were
fixed, compertiments of a new composition, and in that over the first, was
written Theorica, and over the second Practica, showing that by these two, all
works of Architecture, and Ingining have their perfection. The Curtain being
suddenly drawn up, the first Scene appeared, which represented a Roman
Atrium, with high Collombs of white Marble, and ornaments of Architecture of a
composed manner of great proiecture, enriched with carving, and between every
return of these Collombs, stood Statues of gold on round pedestalls, and
beyond these, were other pieces of Architecture of a Palace royal.

Over all was a serene sky, out of which a cloud began to break forth, and
as it descend, a person was discovered, sitting in it, which by his Petasus
and Caduceus, was known to be Mercury, the messenger of Jove.

Behold! I come not from above,
To hyde, or hunt out wanton Love,
Or do what Man can do:
But to spread all my nimble wings,
And like a God, do Godlike things
Grateful, and Gracious too.
Observe! But see ye be not nice,
Prepare to give, and take advice,
As wise-Men ought to do:
Lest when your subtle wits have done,
Your Notes, like Motes, thought in the Sun
Prove far beneath us too.
Admire! but censure not their Powers,
That sink not with Times sandy hours,
As mortal Creatures do.
And since the Shaft that is addressed,
At Heaven may hurt the Shooters breast,
Be pleas'a and please us too.
Happy, thrice happy is that hour
Wherein a God descends,
Either in person, or in power
And Mans poor state befriends.
Olimpian JOVE to the bright ALBA sends
No vulgar God to bear his dear Commends.
And with pure eyes, and a paternal hand,
This Universe having surveyed, and span'd,
In Counc^ll with himself, he hath decreed,
From fair ALBIPOLIS shall soon proceed
A Triumph: Mighty, as the Man designed
To wear those Baize; Heroic, as his mind;
Just, as his actions; Glorious, as his Reign.
And like his Virtues, Infinite in Treyne.
The Immort all Swans, contending for his Name,
Shall bear it singing, to the House of Fame.
And though at distance yet High JOVE is plea'd
Your laboring eyes shall with his sight be eased,
This from a God, unto a Goddess sent,
A God Relates, that could use Complement:
But when such States, negotiate by such means
We speak in Acts, and scorn words trifling Scenes.
Ye Powers Divine make room, prepare a Seat
On the Northside, for ALBANACT the Great,
Earth is not fruitless: nor your nombers full,
There's One to come will make some Stars look dull.
What mak's me so vnnimbly rise,
That did descend so fleet?
There is no vp-hill in the skies;
Clouds stay not feathered feet.

Thy wings are singed: and thou can fly
But slowly now, swift MERCVRY.

Some Lady here, is sure too blame
That from Loves starry skies,
Hath shot some Beam, or sent some flame,
Like Lghtning, from her Eyes.

Tax not the Stars, with what the Sun,
Too near aproch't (insens't) hath done.

I'll roll me in Auroras Dew,
Or lye in Tethis bed;
Or from cool Iris beg a few,
Pure Opale shewrs new shed.

Nor Dew, nor showers, nor sea can slake
Thy quenchless heate, but Lethes lake.



When MERCVRY is Re-assum'd into Heaven in Pomp. Here the Scene is changed
into the Forum of the City of Albipolis, and Albanactus triumphing, attended
like a Roman Emperor is seen a far off to pass in pomp.

The Scene is turned into an Amphitheater, with people sitting in it, a
Patrician and a Plebeian come forth, c.

Though I have earned it with the sweat of my brows in January, yet I am glad
I saw it, for there never was such a sight seen.


What sight Publius?

The Triumph.

Whose Triumph?

The Triumph of ALBANACTVS.

Did thou see it?

See it, yes, and feel it too. Every one there (I can assure you) went not
upon his own feet.


No, I think, some rid.

They did so, for some rid me. Some trod on my toes. Some cried, some kept it
in; for my part, I confessed all, for fear I should have been p^est to death.


Though thy body was pinched, thine eyes were feasted.


Were not yours so too?

Yes.

Where stood you?

I stood not,

You had the better friends sir, I pray where sate you?


In my study.

Is not your study backward? with a shop-light in it, where one can see
nothing but the sky?


I confess it, what of that?

Why then you saw no Triumph.

But I did, and a true one, thine was but a show.

If what I saw was but a show, what you saw was but a shadow, or at the most a
Vision. For it seems your body kept home, though your spirit walked.


It did so. And travelled to better purpose then most men do, that go, and
see, and say, but know nothing.


To confute that Heresy of yours, I have gone, and seen, and know, but I will
say nothing.


That's impossible; The meat thou hast lately fed upon, is so windy, out it
must, thou wilt burst else.


Faith sir, I am very full indeed.

Purge then, and tell thy Doctor all.

ALBANACTVS CAESAR from his sumptuous Palace, through the high-streets of
ALBIPOLIS rid Triumphing, on a Chariot, made --


Of wood, perhaps guilt, perhaps gold. But I will save you all those charges,
if you will go on to the Persons, and let the Pagents alone.


Sir I saw him not as he was borne, naked, but since you affect such brevity, I
saw the King and a great deal more, and so I turned my back, and went away.


Nay good Publius, now thou art too brief.

When you begin to tell your dreams, I'll not jog you, till you wake of
your self.


Nay prithee be not angry.

I am not angry, but a little short-winded upon occasion. Yet to give you some
satisfaction because you have done me wrong. Before CAESAR Marched Captive
Kings, with their hands bound. And Ladies, with their Arms across, furious
wild Beasts, great Giants, and little Dwarfs with Lictors, and Pictors, and a
number of Prie^ts that were as you would have them, In their shirts. These with
certain Princes that were behind him: made up a Triumph too great to come out
of any mortal mans mouth.


That's most certain.

I mean in words. But as you hunt me you would hunt a Hare off her legs.


I confess thou hast made more haste, then good speed: But for a supplement
to thy lame Story, Know, I have seen this brave ALBANACIVS CAESAR, seen him
with the eyes of understanding, vew'd all his Actions; looked into his Mind:
which I find armed with so many moral virtues that he daily Conquers a world
of Vices, which are wild Beasts indeed.

For example Ambition, is a Lyon; Cruelty, a Bear; Avarice, a Wolf. Yet He
subdues them all. To be short, no Vice is so small, to escape him: Nor so great,
but he overcomes it: And in that fashion he Triumphs overall the Kings, and
Queenes that went before him. All his Passions, are his true Subjects: And
Knowledge, Judgment, Merit, Bounty and the like, are fit Comma ders, for such a
General, Th^se Triumph with him, And these are the Princes you saw about him.
And this Publius, is more then you can find in the street.


I grant it, But yet grant me one Request dear
Platonicus?

What's that?

Go but with me to the Amphitheater.

To Gaze.

Yes.

Why beforehand I know there will be Gladiators, Saltators, and sights to
please the People. Were not thou better stay here, and see CAESAR present
himself to this fair Goddess, seeking sweet rest, after all his labours.


I should sleep at such a sight.

Then after a Play, thou art all for a Pryze.

All together, and so (I hope) are you

At this time, I am. For I will go with thee, if it be but to teach thee to
Read in thy own Book. Outsides, have Insides, Shells, have Kernells in them.
And under every Fable, nay (almost) under every thing, lies a Moral.

What art thou doing Publius.


Lifting up the stone I stumbled at.

To what end?

To see what lies under it.

What should lye under a stone, but a Worm, or a
Hoglouse.

If there lye not a Moral under it, then have you taught me false Doctrine.


Such thanks have they that teach such Sch^llers. Come away Fool, they
begin to throng to the Theater.


Such kind of pastimes as Victorious Emperors were wont to present as
Spectacles to the People, are h^e produced for Anti-Maskes upon the s^age.

The Scene is changed into a pleasant Grove of straight Trees, which rising by
degrees to a high place, opens it self to discover the aspect of a stately
Temple; All which, was sacred to JOVE; In this grove, sat the Emperor
ALBANACTVS, attended by fourteen Consuls, who stood about him, not set in
ranks, but in several gracious postures, attending his commands: his habit,
like a Roman Emperor in a Curase of yellow Satin embroidered with silver, his
gorget clincant, cut round, and on his breast an Angels head embossed of gold,
the Labells of the sleeves, and short Bases of watchet embroidered with the
same, the under sleeves, and long stockings of white, on his head a Burgonet
richly enchast with silver, turned up before in a serowle, with an artificial
wreath of Laurel, out of which, sprang rays like a piked Crown, the habit
of the Consuls were after the same manner, excepting the rays of gold, issuing
from his Laurel wreath.

Sit not secure, nor think in ease
Still vndispleas'd, your selves to please:
Diana, Chaste Diana stoop,
And help to wound this war like troop.

Wants Love a Bow, or shaft of mine?
This suit will make my Crescent shine.

Love is grown wise, and means to bring
To his smart Bow, a double string.
Behold our Mark? taks't thou not pride
In such a Glory to divide?

I do, I do, since I am sure,
When we two join, our flames are pure.

As pure, and Clear, as ALBAS skin,
As her fair Fame, or thoughts within:
Pure as my self; nay pure like Thee,
Now Love is that which Love should be.

Bow bearing Gods, shoot, shoot, and hit,
And make our CAESAR greater yet:
Yet leave him with us, Let him shine
Still here; And make him all Divine
Ye Worthies of this I'll,
That led by your brave Chief,
In an Heroic style,
Have over done Belief:
Subdued by ALBAS eyes
Come down, Loves Sacrifice!
It is no shame to yield,
Where it is in vein to strive:
The Gods would quit the field,
Should they these wars revive
Or Conquered, by her Eyes,
Come down Loves Sacrifice.
Straight Cedar, that hast stood,
The shock of many a wind:
The top of this Tall wood,
By a high hand designed
Subdued by ALBAS Eyes,
Come down Loves Sacrifice!
Great ALBA though each Grande here,
At this High Court of thine,
Like a true Liege Man doth appear,
And offers at thy Shrine:
It is no Conquest for thine Eyes,
When petty Princes fall,
That are some single Beauties pryse,
Or a lone Virtues Thrall:
Here comes the Trophe of thy praise,
The Monarch of these Isles,
The Mirror of thy Cheerful Rays,
And Glory of thy Smyles:
The Virtues and the Graces all,
Must meet in one, when such Stars full.
Afterward taking his seat by the Queen. The Scene is varied into a Landscipt,
in which was a prospect of the Kings Palace of Whitehall, and part of the
City of London, seen a far off, and presently the whole heaven opened, and
in a bright cloud were seen sitting five persons, representing Innocence,
Justice, Religion, affection to the Country, Concord, being all Companions of
Peace, and thus attired. Innocence, a woman in a pure white robe, with a
garland of flowers on her head: Justice, a woman in a yellow garment richly
adorned, her mantle white, and on her head golden rays, in her right hand a
sword, and in the midst thereof an Imperial Crown: Religion, a woman in a
short Surplusse of lavvne full gathered about the neck, and under it a garment
of watchet, with a short vale of silver and about her head, beams of gold like
the Sun, and in her left hand, she held a book open: Affection to the
Country, a young man in a Coat armour of yellow, with a purple Mantle, his
buskins adorned, his plumed Helm of silver, and in his hand a Garland of long
grass: Concord, a man in a sky coloured Robe, and a yellow Mantle; on his
head a Garland of wheat, and in his hand a bunch of arrows tied together with
a white band, these moving towards the earth sing together as follows.
Praising their Piety, and wishing they may perpetuate themselves by a Royal
Posterity, Present them with several Gifts.

Bles't Pair whose prayers like Licence rise,
Opening, and pulling down the Skies
Take your Reward! Just as ye met,
So hand in hand live many a Day,
And may your Virtuous minds beget
Issue that never shall decay,
And so be fruitful every way.
May Plenty Proteus like appear,
Varying your Pleasures every year:
We five come freely to impart,
Such favours as we can afford:
One gives hisa Hand, the next hisb Heart,
The third herc Robe, the fourth herd Sword,
The fifth full many ae Suppliant Word.
And to fulfil your future Bliss,
Sweet Peace salutes you with a Kiss.
Frighted by Day; And in the Night diseased,
I fled to Heaven, and left the World displeased.
F^nd Men that strive more for a Province there,
Then looking upward to possess a Sphere.
Yet vanquished and Victorious, both at last,
Their weary Limbs, on my soft Bed would cast.

Lyons, and Lambs together lye,
When Lovely Peace stands smiling by

Temples and Towns by thy stayed hand,
First learn to Rise, And then to Stand.

'Tis not the Laurel Tree that brings,
Anointing Oil for sacred Kings:
Those Princes see the happiest Days,
Whose Olive Branches stand for Baize.

Arms are laid by: Early and late,
The Traveller goes safe to Bed:
Men eat and Drink in Massy Plate,
And are with Deinties daily fed.
Why should this I'll above the rest,
Be made (great Gods) the Halcions nest?
Imperious Peace her self Descends

Then here our search, and wonder ends,
We'll steal away

Earths Rulers, stay!

Doth soft Peace call?

Yes: and will straight employ ye All.

How, and wherein?

Give ear, your Charge doth now begin.

N^ptune to Sea, And let no Sail,
Meet ALBIONS Fleet, But make it veil.
Bellona Arm, That Foes may see,
Their Lillies kept by Lyons be.
Their fruitful fields (Cebele) make
Pay Centupl^ for all they take.
And let Both Indies (Pluto) meet,
And lay their wealth at ALBAS feet.

When Peace commands such pleasing things,
From Love and Time we'll steal their wings.

Laden with Wealth and Honour may,
These Gods return to crown this Day,
And MARY-CHARLES whose minds within,
And Bodies make but Hymens Twin,
Long live they so, And Breast, to Breast,
May Angels sing them to their Rest.
Those that will praise the structure and changes of the Scene. The sweetness
and variety of the Music. Or the Beauty of the Figures, and Paces, I think
may do it with cause enough.

But for the Invention and writing of the Mask, I was as loath to be brought
upon the Stage as an vnhansom Man is to see himself in a great Glass. But my
Excuse, and Glory is, The King commanded, and I obeyed.

AVRELIAN TOVNSHEND.

