Duke: royal lecher; go, gray hayrde adultery,
And thou his son as impious steeped as he:
And thou his bastard true-begott in evil:
And thou his Duchess that will do with Devil,
Four exlent Characters -- O that marrow-lesse age,
Would stuff the hollow Bones with damned desires,
And stead of heate kindle infernal fires,
Within the spend-thrift veins of a dry Duke,
A parcht and iuicelesse luxur. O God! one
That has scarce blood enough to live upon.
And he to ryct it like a son and heir?
O the thought of that
Turns my abused heart-strings into fret.
Thou sallow picture of my poisoned lcue,
My studies ornament, thou shell of Death,
Once the bright face of my betrothed Lady,
When life and beauty naturally filled out
These ragged imperfections;
When two-heauen-pointed Diamonds were set
In those unsightly Rings; -- then 'twas a face
So far beyond the artificial shine
Of any woman's bought complexion
That the vprightest man, (if such there be,
That sin but seven times a day) broke custom
And made up eight with looking after her,
Oh she was able to ha made a Usurers son
Melt all his patrimony in a kiss,
And what his father fifty years told
To have consumed, and yet his suit been cold:
But oh accursed Palace!
Thee when thou were appareled in thy flesh,
The old Duke poisoned,
Because thy purer part would not consent
Unto his palsey-lust, for old men lust-full
Do show like young men angry, eager violent,
Out-bid like their limited performances
O ware an old man hot, and vicious
Age as in gold in lust is covetous.
Vengence thou murders Quit-rent, and whereby
Thou shoust thy self Tenant to Tragedy,
Oh keep thy day, hour, minute, I beseech,
For those thou hast determined: hum: who ere knew
Murder vnpayd, faith give Revenge her due
Sha's kept touch hitherto -- be merry, merry,
Advance thee, O thou terror to fat folks
To have their Costly three-pilde flesh worn of
As bare as this -- for banquets: ease and laughter,
Can make great men as greatness goes by clay,
But wise men little are more great then they?

Still sighing ore deaths vizard.

Brother welcome,
What comfort bring thou? how go things at Court?

In silk and silver brother: never braver.

Puh,
Thou playst upon my meaning pree-thee say
Has that bald Madam, Opportunity?
Yet thought vpon's, speak are we happy yet?
Thy wrongs and mine are for one scabberd fit.

It may prove happiness?

What is't may prove?
Give me to taste.

Give me your hearing then,
You know my place at Court.

I; the Dukes Chamber
But tis a marvel thourt not turned out yet!

Faith I have been shooud at, but twas still my hap
To hold by the Duchess skirt, you guess at that,
Whom such a Coat keeps up can ne'er fall flat,
But to the purpose.
Last evening predecessor unto this,
The Dukes son warily enquird for me,
Whose pleasure I attended: he began,
By policy to open and vnhuske me
About the time and common rumour:
But I had so much wit to keep my thoughts
Up in their built houses, yet afforded him
An idle satifaction without danger,
But the whole aim, and scope of his intent
Ended in this, conjuring me in private,
To seek some strange digested fellow forth:
Of ill-contented nature, either disgracst
In formertimes, or by new grooms displacst,
Since his Step-mothers nuptials, such a blood
A man that were for evil only good;
To give you the true word some base coynd Pander?

I reach you, for I know his heate is such,
Were there as many Concubines as Ladies
He would not be contaynd, he must fly out:
I wonder how ill featured, wild proportiond.
That one should be: if she were made for woman,
Whom at the Insurrection of his lust
He would refuse for once, heart, I think none,
Next to a skull, tho more unsound then one
Each face he meets he strongly doates upon.

Brother y'aue truly spoke him?
He knows not you, but I'll swear you know him.

And therefore i'll put on that knave for once,
And be a right man then, a man a'th Time,
For to be honest is not to be ith world,
Brother i'll be that strange composed fellow.

And i'll prefer you brother.

Go too then,
The smallst advantage fattens wronged men
It may point out, occasion, if I meet her,
I'll hold her by the fore-top fast enough;
Or like the French Moale heave up hair and all,
I have a habit that will fit it quaintly,
Here comes our Mother.

And Sister.

We must quoyne.
Women are apt you know to take false money,
But I dare stake my soul for these two creatures
Only excuse excepted that they will swallow,
Because their sex is easy in beleese.

What news from Cour son Carlo?

Faith Mother,
Tis whispered there the Duchess youngest son
Has played a Rape on Lord Antonios wife.

On that relligious Lady!

Royal blood: monster he deserves to die,
If Italy had no more hopes but he.

Sister y'aue sentenced most direct, and true,
The Laws a woman, and would she were you:
Mother I must take leave of you.

Leave for what?

I Intend speedy travail.

That he does Madam.

Speedy indeed!

For since my worthy fathers funeral,
My life's unnaturally to me, even compelled
As if I hu'd now when I should be dead.

Indeed he was a worthy Gentleman
Had his estate been fellow to his mind.

The Duke did much deject him.

Much?

To much.
And through disgrace oft smothered in his spirit,
When it would mount, surely I think he dyed
Of discontent: the Nobleman's consumption.

Most sure he did!

Did he? lack, -- you know all
You were his mid-night secretary.

No.
He was to wise to trust me with his thoughts.

In faith then father thou wast wise indeed,
Wives are but made to go to bed and feed.
Come mother, sister: you'll bring me onward brother?

I will.

I'll quickly turn into another.

Duchess it is your youngest son, we're sorry,
His violent Act has even drawn blood of honour
And stained ou^ honours,
Thrown inck upon the for-head of our state
Which envious spirits will dip their pens into
After our death; and blot us in our Tombs.
For that which would seem treason in our lives
Is laughter when we're dead, who dares now whisper
That dares not then speak out, and even proclaim,
With loud words and broad pens our closest shame.

Your grace hath spoke like to your silver years
Full of confirmed gravity; -- for what is it to have,
A flattering false insculption on a Tomb:
And in men's hearts reproach, the boweld Corps,
May be seard in, but with free tongue I speak,
The faults of great men through their fearce clothes break,

They do, we're sorry for it, it is our fate,
To live in fear and die to live in hate,
I leave him to your sentance dome him Lords
The fact is great; whilst I sit by and sigh.

My gracious Lord I pray be merciful,
Although his trespass far exceed his years,
Think him to be your own as I am yours,
Call him not son in law: the law I fear
Will fall too soon upon his name and him:
Temper his fault with pity?

Good my Lord.
Then twill not taste so bitter and unpleasant
Upon the Judges palate, for offences
Gilt ore with mercy, show like fairest women,
Good only for their beauties, which washed of: no sin is ouglies Ambitis I
beseech your grace,
Be soft and mild, let not Relentless Law,
Look with an iron for-head on our brother.

He yields small comfort yet, hope he shall die,
And if a bastards wish might stand in force,
Would all the court were turn de into a coarse,

No pity yet? must I rise fruitless then,
A wonder in a woman; are my knees,
Of such lowe -- mettle -- that without Respect --

Let the offender stand forth,
Tis the Dukes pleasure that Impartial Doom,
Shall take first hold of his unclean attempt,
A Rape! why tis the very core of lust,
Double Adultery.

So Sir.

And which was worse,
Committed on the Lord Antonioes wife,
That General honest Lady, confess my Lord!
What moved you toot?

why flesh and blood my Lord.
What should move men unto a woman else,

O do not jest thy doom, trust not an axe
Or sword too far; the Law is a wise serpent
And quickly can beguile thee of thy life,
Tho marriage only has made thee my brother,
I love thee so far, play not with thy Death,

I thank you troth, good admonitions faith,
Ifide the grace now to make use of them,

That Ladies name has spread such a fair wing
Over all Italy; that if our Tongs,
Were sparing toward the Fact, Judgment it self,
Would be condemned and suffer in men's thoughts,

Well then tis done, and it would please me well
Were it to do again: sure she's a Goddess,
For i'd no power to see her, and to live,
It falls out true in this for I must die,
Her beauty was ordaynd to be my scaffold,
And yet my thinks I might be easier ceased,
My fault being sport, let me but die in jest,

This be the sentence,

O kept upon your Tongue, let it not slip,
Death too soon steals out of a Lawyers lip,
Be not so cruell-wise?

Your Grace must pardon us,
'Tis but the Justice of the Law.

The Law,
Is grown more subtle then a woman should be.

Now, now he dyes, rid 'em away.

O what it is to have an old-coole Duke,
To be as slack in tongue, as in performance.

Confirmed, this be the doom irrevocable.

Oh!

Tomorrow early.

Pray be a bed my Lord.

Your Grace much wrongs your self.

No 'tis that tongue,
Your too much right, dos do us too much wrong.

Let that offender --

Live, and be in health.

Be on a Scaffold

Hold, hold, my Lord.

Pax ont,
What makes my Dad speak now?

We will defer the judgment till next sitting,
In the mean time let him be kept close prisoner:
Guard bear him hence.

Brother, this makes for thee,
Fear not, we'll have a trick to set thee free.

Brother, I will expect it from you both; and in that hope I rest.

Farewell, be mesry.

Delayed, deferd nay then if judgment have cold blood,
Flattery and bribes will kill it.

About it then my Lords with your best powers,
More serious business calls upon our homes.

Wast ever known step-Dutchesse was so mild,
And calm as I? some now would plot his death,
With easy Doctors, those loose living men,
And make his witherd Grace fall to his Grave,
And keep Church better?
Some second wife would do this, and dispatch
Her double loathd Lord at meat and sleep,
Indeed 'tis true an old mans twice a child,
Mine cannot speak, one of his single words,
Would quite have freed my youngest dearest son
From death or durance, and have made him walk
With a bold foot upon the thorny law,
Whose Prickles should bow under him, but 'tis not,
And therefore wedlock faith shall be forgot,
I'll kill him in his fore-head, hate there feed,
That wound is deepest tho it never bleed:
And here comes he whom my heart points unto,
His bastard son, but my loves true-begot,
Many a wealthy letter have I sent him,
Swelled up with Jewels, and the timorous man
Is yet but coldly kind,
That Iewel's mine that quivers in his ear,
Mocking his Masters chillness and vain fear,
Ha's spied me now.

Madame? your Grace so private.
My duty on your hand.

Upon my hand sir, troth I think youde fear,
To kiss my hand too if my lip stood there,

Witness I would not Madam.

Tis a wonder,
For ceremony ha's made many fools,
It is as easy way unto a Duchess,
As to a Hatted-dame, (if her love answer)
But that by timorous honours, pale respects,
Idle degrees of fear, men make their ways
Hard of themselves -- what have you thought of me?

Madam I ever think of you, in duty,
Regard and --

Puh, upon my love I mean.

I would 'twere love, but 'tus a fowler name
Then lust; you are my fathers wife, your Grace may guess now,
What I could call it.

Why you are his son but falsely,
Tis a hard question whether he begot thee.

In faith 'tis true too; Ime an uncertain man,
Of more uncertain woman; may be his groom 'ath stable begot me, you know I
know not, he could ride a horse well, a shroud suspicion marry -- he was
wondrous tall, he had his length in faith, for peeping over half shut holy-day
windows,

Men would desire him light, when he was a foot,
He made a goodly show under a Pent-house,
And when he rid, his Hat would check the signs, and clatter
Barbers Basins.

Nay set you a horse back once,
You'll ne'er light off.

Indeed I am a beggar.

That's more the sign thou'art Great -- but to our love.
Let it stand firm both in thought and mind,
That the Duke was thy Father, as no doubt then
He bid fair fort, thy injury is the more,
For had he cut thee a right Diamond,
Thou had been next set in the Duke-doomes Ring,
When his worn self like Ages easy slave,
Had dropped out of the Collet into the Grave;
What wrong can equal this? can thou be tame
And think vppon't.

No mad and think upon it.

Who would not be reuengd of such a father,
Even in the worst way? I would thank that sin,
That could most injury him, and be in league with it,
Oh what a grief 'tis, that a man should live
But once ith world, and then to live a Bastard,
The curse a'the womb, the thief of Nature,
Begot against the seventh commandment,
Half damned in the conception, by the justice
Of that vnbribed everlasting law.

Oh I'd a hot-backt Devil to my father.

Would not this mad even patience, make blood rough?
Who but an Eunuch would not sin? his bed
By one false minute disinherited.

I, there's the vengeance that my birth was wrapped in,
I'll be reuengd for all, now hate begin,
I'll call foul Incest but a Venial sin.

Cold still: in vain then must a Duchess woo?

Madam I blush to say what I will do.

Thence flew sweet comfort, earnest and farewell.

Oh one incestuous kiss picks open hell.

Faith now old Duke; my vengeance shall reach high,
I'll arm thy brow with woman's Herauldrie.

Duke, thou did do me wrong, and by thy Act
Adultery is my nature;
Faith if the truth were known, I was begot
After some gluttonous dinner, some stirring dish
Was my first father; when deep healths went round,
And Ladies cheeks were painted red with Wine,
Their tongues as short and nimble as their heals
Uttering words sweet and thick; and when they rise,
Were merrily disposed to fall again,
In such a whispring and with-drawing hour,
When base-male-Bawds kept Sentinel at staire-head
Was I stolen softly; oh -- damnation met
The sin of feasts, drunken adultery.
I feel it swell me; my revenge is just,
I was begot in impudent Wine and Lust:
Step-mother I consent to thy desires,
I love thy mischief well, but I hate thee,
And those three Cubs thy sons, wishing confusion
Death and disgrace may be their Epitaphs,
As for my brother the Dukes only son,
Whose birth is more beholding to report
Then mine, and yet perhaps as falsely sown.
(Women must not be trusted with their own)
I'll loose my days upon him hate all I,
Duke on thy brow I'll draw my Bastardy.
For indeed a bastard by nature should make Cuckolds,
Because he is the son of a Cuckold-maker.

What brother? am I far enough from my self?

As if another man had been sent whole
Into the world, and none wist how he came.

It will confirm me bold: the child a th Court,
Let blushes dwelli'th Country impudence!
Thou Goddess of the palace, Mistrs of Mistesses
To whom the costly perfumd-people pray,
Strike thou my fore-head into dauntless Marble;
Mine eyes to steady Sapphires: turn my visage,
And if I must needs glow, let me blush inward
That this immodest season may not spy,
That scholar in my cheeks, fool bashfullnes.
That Maid in the old time, whose flush of Grace
Would never suffer her to get good clothes;
Our maids are wiser; and are less ashamed,
Save Grace the bawd I seldom hear Grace named!

Nay brother you reach out a'th Verge now, -- Sfoote the Dukes son, settle
your looks.


Pray let me not be doubted.

My Lord --

Hipolito? -- be absent leave us.

My Lord after long search, wary inquiryes
And politic siftings, I made choice of yon fellow,
Whom I guess rare for many deep employments;
This our age swims within him: and if Time
Had so much hair, I should take him for Time,
He is so near kin to this present minute?

Tis enough.
We thank thee: yet words are but great-mens blanckes
Gold tho it be dum does utter the best thanks.

Your plenteons honour -- an exlent fellow my Lord.

So, give us leave -- welcome, be not far off, we must be better acquainted,
push, be bold with us, thy hand:


With all my heart in faith how dost sweet Musk-cat.
When shall we lie together?

Wondrous knave!
Gather him into boldness, Sfoote the slaue's
Already as familiar as an Ague,
And shakes me at his pleasure, friend I can
Forget my self in private, but else where,
I pray do you remember me.

Oh very well sir -- I construe my self saucy!

What hast been,
Of what profession.

A bone-setter!

A bone-setter!

A bawd my Lord,
One that sets bones together.

Notable bluntness?
Fit, fit for me, even trained up to my hand
Thou hast been Scrivener to much knavery then.

Fool, to abundance sir; I have been witness
To the surrenders of a thousand virgins,
And not so little,
I have seen Patrimonyes washed a pieces
Fruit-feilds turned into bastards,
And in a world of Acres,
Not so much dust due to the heir t'was left too
As would well gravel a petition

Fine villain? troth I like him wondrously
Hes even shaped for my purpose, then thou know
Ith world strange lust.

O Dutch lust! fulsome lust!
Druncken procrearion, which begets, so many drunckards;
Some father dreads not (gone to bed in wine) to slide from the mother,
And cling the daughter-in-law,
Some Uncles are adulterous with their Nieces,
Brothers with brothers wives, O howre of Incest!
Any kin now next to the Rim ath sister
Is mans meat in these days, and in the morning
When they are up and dressed, and their mask on,
Who can perceive this? save that eternal eye
That see's through flesh and all, well: -- If any thing be damned?
It will be twelve a clock at night; that twelve
Will never escape;
It is the Iudas of the hours; wherein,
Honest salvation is betrayed to sin,

In truth it is too? but let this talk glide
It is our blood to err, tho hell gapte load
Ladies know Lucifer fell, yet still are proud!
Now sir? were thou as secret as you're subtle,
And deeply fadomd into all estates
I would embrace thee for a near employment,
And thou should swell in money, and be able
To make lame beggars crouch to thee.

My Lord?
Secret? I ne'er had that disease ath mother
I praise my father: why are men made close?
But to keep thoughts in best, I grant you this
Tell but some woman a secret over night,
Your doctor may find it in the urinal ith morning,
But my Lord.

So, you're confirmed in me
And thus I enter thee.

This Indian devil,
Will quickly enter any man: but a Usurer,
He prevents that, by entering the devil first.

Attend me, I am past my depht in lust
And I must swim or drown, all my desires
Are leveled at a Virgin not far from Court,
To whom I have conuayde by Messenger
Many waxed Lines, full of my neatest spirit,
And jewels that were able to ^auish her
Without the help of man; all which and more
She foolish chaste sent back, the messengers,
Receiving frowns for answers.

Possible!
Tis a rare Phaenix who ere she be,
If your desires be such, she so repugnant,
In troth my Lord i'd be revenged and marry her.

Push; the dowry of her blood of her fortunes,
Are both too mean, -- good enough to be bad withal
Ime one of that number can defend
Marriage is good: yet rather keep a friend,
Give me my bed by stealth -- there's true delight
What breeds a loathing in it, but night by night.

A very fine relligion?

Therefore thus,
He trust thee in the business of my heart
Because I see thee well experienc'st
In this Luxurious day wherein we breath,
Go thou, and with a smooth enchanting tongue
Bewitch her ears, and Cousin her of all Grace
Enter upon the portion of her soul,
Her honour, which she calls her chastity
And bring it into expense, for honesty
Is like a stock of money laid to sleep,
Which ne'er so little broke, does never keep:

You have gint the Tang in faith my Lord
Make known the Lady to me, and my brain,
Shall swell with strange Invention: I will move it
Till I expire with speaking, and drop down
Without a word to save me; -- but i'll work --

We thank thee, and will raise thee: -- receive her name, it is the only
daughter, to Madame Gratiana the late widow


Oh, my sister, my sister? --

Why dost walk aside?

My Lord, I was thinking how I might begin
As thus, oh Lady -- or twenty hundred devices,
Her very bodkin will put a man in.

I, or the wagging of her hair.

No, that shall put you in my Lord.

Shall it? why content, dost know the daughter then?

O exlent well by sight.

That was her brother
That did prefer thee to us.

My Lord I think so,
I knew I had seen him some where --

And therefore pree-thee let thy heart to him,
Be as a Virgin, close.

Oh me good Lord.

We may laugh at that simple age within him;

Ha, ha, ha.

Himself being made the subtle instrument,
To wind up a good fellow.

That's I my Lord.

That's thou.
To entice and work his sister.

A pure novice?

T'was finely managed.

Gallantly carried;
A prety-perfumde villain.

I'ue bethought me
If she prove chaste still and immovable,
Venture upon the Mother, and with gifts
As I will furnish thee, begin with her.

Oh fie, fie, that's the wrong end my Lord. Tis mere impossible that a mother
by any gifts should become a bawd to her own Daughter!


Nay then I see you're but a puny in the subtle Mystery of a woman: -- why
tis held now no dainty dish: The name

Is so in league with age, that now adays
It does Eclipse three quarters of a Mother;

Dost so my Lord?
Let me alone then to Eclipse the fourth.

Why well said, come i'll furnish thee, but first swear to be true in all.


True?

Nay but swear!

Swear? -- I hope your honour little doubts my faith.

Yet for my humours sake cause I love swearing.

Cause you love swearing, slud I will.

Why enough,
Erelong look to be made of better stuff.

That will do well indeed my Lord.

Attend me?

Oh.
Now let me burst, I'ue eaten Noble poison,
We are made strange fellows, brother, innocent villains,
Wilt not be angry when thou hearst on it, think thou?
Ifayth thou shalt; swear me to foul my sister.
Sword I durst make a promise of him to thee,
Thou shalt dis-heire him, it shall be thine honour,
And yet now angry froth is down in me,
It would not prove the meanest policy
In this disguise to try the faith of both,
Another might have had the self same office,
Some slave, that would have wrought effectually,
I and perhaps ore-wrought em, therefore I,
Being thought trauayld, will apply my self,
Unto the self same form, forget my nature,
As if no part about me were kin to em,
So touch' em, -- tho I durst a most for good,
Venture my lands in heaven upon their good.

Draw nearer Lords and be sad witnesses
Of a fair comely building newly fallen,
Being falsely undermined: violent rape
Has played a glorious act, behold my Lords
A sight that strikes man out of me:

That virtuous Lady

President for wives?

The blush of many women, whose chaste presence,
Would en call shame up to their cheeks,
And make pale wanton sinners have good colours. --

Dead!
Her honour first drunk poison, and her life,
Being fellows in one house did pledge her honour,

O grief of many!

I marked not this before.
A prayer Book the pillow to her cheek,
This was her rich confection, and another
Plast^d in her right hand, with a leaf tuckt up,
Pointing to these words.
Melius virtute mori, Quam per Dedecus viuere.
True and effectual it is indeed.

My Lord since you enuite us to your sorrows,
Lets truly tast'em, that with equal comfort,
As to our selves we may releiue your wrongs,
We have grief too, that yet walks without Tong,
Curaeleues l^quuntur, Maiores stupent.

You deal with truth my Lord.
Lend me but your Attentions, and I'll cut
Long grief into short words: last revelling night.
When Torch-light made an artificial noone
About the Court, some Courtiers in the mask,
Putting on better faces then their own,
Being full of frawde and flattery: amongst whom,
The Ducheses youngest son (that moth to honour)
Filled up a Room; and with long lust to eat,
Into my wearing; amongst all the Ladies,
Singled out that dear form; who ever lived,
As cold in Lust as she is now in death;
(Which that step Duchess -- Monster knew to well;)
And therefore in the height of all the revels,
When Music was hard lowdest, Courtiers busiest,
And Ladies great with laughter; -- O Vicious minute!
Unfit but for relation to be spoke of,
Then with a face more impudent then his vizard
He harried her amidst a throng of Panders,
That live upon damnation of both kinds,
And fed the ravenous vulture of his lust,
(O death to think ont) she her honour forest,
Deemed it a nobler dowry for her name,
To die with poison then to live with shame.

A wondrous Lady; of rare fire compact,
Sh'as made her name an Empress by that act,

My Lord what judgment follows the offender?

Faith none my Lord it cools and is deferd,

Delay the doom for rape?

O you must note who tis should die,
The Duchess son, sheele look to be a saver,
Judgment in this age is ne'er kin to favour.

Nay then step forth thou Bribelesse officer;
I bind you all in steel to bind you surely,
Heer let your oths meet, to be kept and paid,
Which else will stick like rust, and shame the blade,
Strengthen my vow, that if at the next sitting,
Judgment speak all in gold, and spare the blood
Of such a serpent, even before their seats,
To let his soul out, which long since was found,
Guilty in heaven.

We swear it and will act it,

Kind Gentlemen, I thank you in minelre,

Twere pity?
The ruins of so fair a Monument,
Sold not be dipped in the defacers blood,

Her funeral shall be wealthy, for her name,
Merits a tomb of pearl; my Lord Antonio,
For this time wipe your Lady from your eyes,
No doubt our grief and yours may one day court it,
When we are more familiar with Revenge,

That is my comfort Gentlemen, and I ^oy,
In this one happiness above the rest,
Which will be called a miralce at last,
That being an old -- man i'd a wife so chaste.

How hardly shall that maiden be beset,
Whose only fortunes, are her constant thoughts,
That has no other childes-part but her honour,
That Keeps her lowe; and empty in estate.
Maids and their honours are like poor beginners,
Were not sin rich there would be fewer sinners;
Why had not virtue a reuennewe? well,
I know the cause, twold have impouerish'd hell.
How now Dondolo.

there is one as they say a thing of flesh and blood, a man I take him by his
beard that would very desireously month to mouth with you.


Whats that?


Show his teeth in your company,


I understand thee not;


Why speak with you Madonna!


Why say so mad-man, and cut of a great deal of dirty way; had it not been
better spoke in ordinary words that one would speak with me.


Ha, ha, that's as ordinary as two shillings, I would strive alitlle to show my
self in my place, a Gentleman-vsher scorns to use the Phrase and fanzye of a
serving-man.


Yours be your one sir, go direct him hither,
I hope some happy tidings from my brother,
That lately trauayld, whom my soul affects.
Here he comes.

Lady the best of wishes to your sex.
Fair skins and new gowns,

Oh they shall thank you sir,
Whence this,

Oh from a dear and worthy friend, mighty!

From whom?

The Dukes son!

Receive that!
I swore I'd put anger in my hand,
And pass the Virgin limits of my self,
To him that next appeared in that base office,
To be his sins Attorney, bear to him,
That figure of my hate upon thy check
Whilst tis yet hot, and I'll reward thee fort,
Tell him my honour shall have a rich name,
When several harlots shall share his with shame,
Farewell commend me to him in my hate!

It is the sweetest Box,
That ere my nose came ny,
The finest drawne-worke cuffe that ere was worn,
I'll love this blow for ever, and this cheek
Shall still hence forward take the wall of this.
Oh Ime a above my tong: most constant sister,
In this thou hast right honourable shown,
Many are called by their honour that have none,
Thou art approved for ever in my thoughts.
It is not in the power of words to taint thee,
And yet for the salvation of my oath,
As my resolve in that point; I will lay,
Hard seige unto my Mother, tho I know,
A Sirens tongue could not bewitch her so.
Mass fitly here she comes, thanks my disguise,
Madame good af^ernoone.

Y' are welcome sir?

The Next of Italy commends him to you,
Our mighty expectation, the Dukes son.

I think my self much honoured, that he pleases,
To tanck me in his thoughts.

So may you Lady:
One that is like to be our sudden Duke,
The Crown gapes for him every tide, and then
Commander ore us all, do but think on him,
How blessed were they now that could pleasure him
Even with any thing almost.

I, save their honour?

Tut, one would let a little of that go too
And ne'er be seen in it: ne'er be seen it, mark you,
I'd winck and let it go --

Marry but I would not.

Marry but I would I hope, I know you would too,
If youd that blood now which you gave your daughter,
To her indeed tis, this wheel comes about,
That man that must be all this, perhaps ere morning
(For his white father does but mold away)
Has long desired your daughter.

Desired?

Nay but he are me,
He desires now that will command hereafter,
There fore be wise, I speak as more a friend
To you then him; Madam, I know you're poor,
And lack the day, there are too many poor Ladies already
Why should you vex the number? tis despisd,
Live wealthy, rightly understand the world,
And chide away that foolish -- Country girl
Keeps company with your daughter, chastity,

Oh fie, fie, the riches of the world cannot hire a mother to such a most
unnatural task.

No, but a thousand Angels can,
Men have no power, Angels must work you too't,
The world descends into such base-borne evils
That forty Angels can make fourscore diuills,
There will be fools still I perceive, still fool.
Would I be poor dejected, scorned of greatness,
Swept from the Palace, and see other daughters
Spring with the dew ath Court, having mine own
So much desired and loved -- by the Dukes son,
No, I would raise my state upon her breast
And call her eyes my Tennants, I would count
My yearly maintenance upon her cheeks:
Take Coach upon her lip, and all, her parts
Should keep men after men, and I would ride,
In pleasure upon pleasure:
You took great pains for her, once when it was,
Let her requite it now, tho it be but some
You brought her forth, she may well bring you home,

O heavens! this ouer-comes me?

Not I hope, already?

It is too strong for me, men know that know us,
We are so weak their words can overthrow us,
He touched me nearly made my virtues bate
When his tongue struck upon my poor estate.

Ie'en quake to proceed, my spirit turns edge?
I fear me she's vnmotherd, yet i'll venture,
That woman is all male, whom none can Enter?
What think you now Lady, speak are you wiser?
What said advancement to you: thus it said!
The daughters f^l lifts up the mothers head:
Did it not Madame? but i'll swear it does
In many places, tut, this age fears no man,
Tis no shame to be bad, because tis common.

I that's the comfort on it.

The comfort on it!
I keep the best for last, can these persuade you
To forget heaven -- and --

I these are they?

Oh!

That enchant our sex,
These are the means that govern our affections, -- that woman
Will not be troubled with the mother long,
That sees the comfortable shine of you,
I blush to think what for your sakes I'll do!

O suffering heaven with thy invisible finger,
En at this Instant turn the precious side
Of both mine eye-balls inward, not to see my self,

Look you sir.

Holla.

Let this thank your pains.

O you're a kind Mad-man;

I'll see how I can move,

Your words will sting,

If she be still chaste I'll ne'er call her mine,

Spoke truer then you meant it,

Daughter Castiza.

Madam,

O she's yonder.
Meet her: troupes of celestial Soldiers guard her heart.
Yon dam has devils enough to take her part,

Madam what makes yon evil offic'd man,
In presence of you;

Why?

He lately brought
Immodest writing sent from the Dukes son
To tempt me to dishonourable Act,

Dishonourable Act? -- good honourable fool,
That would be honest cause thou would be so,
Producing no one reason but thy will.
And t'as a good report, prettily commended,
But pray by whom; mean people; ignorant people,
The better sort Ime sure cannot abide it,
And by what rule should we square out our lives,
But by our betters actions? oh if thou knew
What 'twere to loose it, thou would never keep it:
But there's a cold curse laid upon all Maids,
Whilst other clip the Sun they clasp the shades!
Virginity is paradise, locked up.
You cannot come by your selves without fee.
And twas decreed that man should keep the key!
Deny advancement, treasure, the Dukes son,

I cry you mercy. Lady I mistook you,
Pray did you see my Mother; which way went you?
Pray God I have not lost her.

Prettily put by.

Are you as proud to me as coy to him?
Do you not know me now?

Why are you she?
The worlds so changed, one shape into another,
It is a wise child now that knows her mother?

Most right in faith.

I owe your cheek my hand,
For that presumption now, but I'll forget it,
Come you shall leave those childish hauiours,
And understand your Time, Fortunes flow to you,
What will you be a Girl?
If all feared drowning, that spy waives a shore,
Gold would grow rich, and all the Merchants poor.

It is a pretty saying of a wicked one, but me thinks now
It dos not show so well out of your mouth,
Better in his.

Faith bad enough in both,
Were I in earnest as I'll seem no less?
I wonder Lady your own mothers words,
Cannot be taken, nor stand in full force.
'Tis honestic you urge; what's honesty?
'Tis but heavens beggar; and what woman is so foolish to keep honesty,
And be not able to keep her-selfe? No,
Times are grown wiser and will keep less charge,
A Maid that he has small portion now entends,
To break up house, and live upon her friends
How blessed are you, you have happiness alone,
Others must fall to thousands, you to one,
Sufficient in him-selfe to make your fore-head
Dazzle the world with Jewels, and petitionary people
Start at your presence.

Oh if I were young, I should be ravished.

I to loose your honour.

Slid how can you loose your honour?
To deal with my Lords Grace,
Heel add more honour to it by his Title,
Your Mother will tell you how.

That I will.

O think upon the pleasure of the Palace,
Secured ease and state; the stirring meates,
Ready to move out of the dishes, that even now quicken when their eaten,
Banquets abroad by Torch-light, Musics, sports,
Bare-headed vassailes, that had ne'er the fortune
To keep on their own Hats, but let horns were em,
Nine Coaches waiting -- hurry, hurry, hurry.

I to the Devil.

I to the Devil, to the Duke by my faith.

I to the Duke: daughter youde scorn to think ath'
Devil and you were there once.

True, for most there are as proud as he for his heart in faith
Who'de sit at home in a neglected room,
Dealing her short-liu'de beauty to the pictures,
That are as vse-lesse as old men, when those
Poorer in face and fortune then her-selfe,
Walk with a hundred Acres on their backs,
Fair Meadows cut into Green fore-parts -- oh
It was the greatest blessing ever happened to women;
When Farmers sons agreed, and met again,
To wash their hands, and come up Gentlemen;
The common-wealth has flourished ever since,
Lands that were meat by the Rod, that labours spared,
Taylors ride down, and measure em by the yard;
Fair trees, those comely fore-tops of the Field,
Are cut to maintain head-tires -- much untold,
All thrives but Chastity, she lies a cold,
nay shall I come nearer to you, mark but this:
Why are there so few honest women, but because 'tis the poorer profession,
that's accounted best, that's best followed, least in trade, least in fashion,
and that's not honesty believe it, and do but note the love and dejected price
of it: Loose but a Pearl, we search and cannot brooke it.
But that once gone, who is so mad to look it.



Troth he says true.

False, I defy you both:
I have endured you with an ear of fire,
Your Tongues have struck hot irons on my face;
Mother, come from that poisonous woman there.

Where?

Do you not see her, she's too inward then:
Slave perish in thy office: you heavens please,
Hence-forth to make the Mother a disease,
Which first begins with me, yet I'ue out-gon you.

O Angels clap your wings upon the skies,
And give this Virgin Crystal plaudities?

Peevish, coy, foolish, but return this answer,
My Lord shall be most welcome, when his pleasure
Conducts him this way, I will sway mine own,
Women with women can work best alone.

Indeed I'll tell him so;
O more uncivil, more unnatural,
Then those base-titled creatures that look downe-ward,
Why does not heaven tnrne black, or with a frown
Undo the world -- why does not earth start up,
And strike the sins that tread vppon't -- oh;
Were not for gold and women; there would be no damnation,
Hell would look like a Lords Great Kitchen without fire in it;
But 'twas decreed before the world began,
That they should be the hooks to catch, at man.

I much applaud thy judgment, thou art well read in a fellow,
And 'tis the deepest Art to study man;
I know this, which I never learnt in schools,
The world's divided into knaves and fools.

Knave in your face my Lord, behind your back.

And I much thank thee, that thou hast preferred,
A fellow of discourse -- well mingled,
And whose brain Time hath seasond.

True my Lord,
We shall find season once I hope; -- O villain!
To make such an unnatural slave of me; -- but --

Mass here he comes.

And now shall I have free leave to depart.

Your absence, leave us.

Are not my thoughts true?
I must remove; but brother you may stay,
Heart, we are both made Bawds a new-found way?

Now, we're an even number? a third mans dangerous,
Especially her brother, say, be free,
Have I a pleasure toward.

Oh my Lord.

Ravish me in thine answer, art thou rare,
Hast thou beguiled her of salvation,
And rubbed hell ore with honey; is she a woman?

In all but in Desire.

Then she's in nothing, -- I bate in courage now.

The words I brought,
Might well have made indifferent honest, nought,
A right good woman in these days in changed,
Into white money with less labour far,
Many a Maid has turned to Mahomet,
With easier working; I durst undertake
Upon the pawn and forfeit of my life.
With half those words to flat a Puritanes wife,
But she is close and good; -- yet 'tis a doubt by this time; oh the mother,
the mother?

I never thought their sex had been a wonder,
Until this minute? what fruit from the Mother?

Now must I blister my soul, be forsworn,
Or shame the woman that received me first,
I will be true, thou liu'st not to proclaim,
Spoke to a dying man, shame ha's no shame.
My Lord.

Whose that?

Here's none but I my Lord.

What would thy hast utter?

Comfort.

Welcome.

The Maid being dull, having no mind to travel,
Into unknown lands, what did me I straight,
But set spurs to the Mother; golden spurs,
Will put her to a false gallop in a trice,

Is't possible that in this.
The Mother should be damned before the daughter?

Oh, that's good manners my Lord, the Mother for her age must go foremost you
know.


Thou'st spoke that true but where comes in this comfort.

In a fine place my Lord -- the unnatural mother,
Did with her tong so hard be set her honour,
That the poor fool was struck to silent wonder,
Yet still the maid like an unlighted Taper,
Was cold and chaste, save that her Mothers breath,
Did blow fire on her checks, the girl departed,
But the good ancient Madam half mad, threw me
These promising words, which I took deeply note of;
My Lord shall be most welcome,

Faith I thank her,

When his pleasure conducts him this way.

That shall be soon ifath,

I will sway mine own,

She does the wiser I commend her fort,

Women with women can work best alone,

By this light and so they can, give 'em their due, men are not comparable to
'em.


No that's true, for you shall have one woman knit more in a hour then any man
can Rauell again in seven and twenty year.


Now my desires are happy, I'll make 'em free-men now,
Thou art a precious fellow, faith I love thee,
Be wise and make it thy revenue, beg, leg,
What office could thou be Ambitious for?

Office my Lord marry if I might have my wish I would have one that was never
begged yet,


Nay then thou can have none.

Yes my Lord I could pick out another office yet, nay and keep a horse and
drab vppont,


Prithee good bluntnes tell me.

Why I would desire but this my Lord, to have all the fees behind the Arras;
and all the farthingales that fall plump about twelve a clock at night upon the
Rushes.


You're a mad apprehensive knave, dost think to make any great purchase of
that.


Oh tis an unknown thing my Lord, I wonder ta's been mist so long?


Well, this night i'll visit her, and tis till then
A year in my desires-farwell, attend,
Trust me with thy preferment.

My loved Lord;
Oh shall I kill him ath wrong-side now, no!
Sword thou wast never a back-biter yet,
I'll pierce him to his face, he shall die, looking upon me,
Thy veins are swelled with lust, this shall vnfill em,
Great men were Gods, if beggars could not kill em,
Forgive me heaven, to call my mother wicked,
Oh lessen not my days upon the earth
I cannot honour her, by this I fear me
Her tongue has turned my sister into use.
I was a villain not to be forsworn:
To this our lecherous hope, the Dukes son,
For Lawyers, Merchants, some divines and all,
Count beneficial perjury a sin small,
It shall go hard yet, butile guard her honour
And keep the ports sure?

Brother how goes the world? I would know news of you
But I have news to tell you.

What in the name of knavery?

Knavery faith,
This vicious old Duke's worthily abused
The pen of his bastard writes him Cuckold!

His bastard?

Pray believe it, he and the Duchess,
By night meet in their linen, they have been seen
By staire-foote pandars!

Oh sin foul and deep,
Great faults are winckt at when the Duke's a sleep,
See, see, here comes the Spurio.

Monstrous Luxur?

Vnbrac'd: two of his valiant bawds with him.
O There's a wicked whisper; hell is in his care
Stay let's observe his passage --

Oh but are you sure on it.

My Lord most sure on it, for twas spoke by one,
That is most inward with the Dukes sons lust:
That he intends within this hour to steal,
Unto Hippolitoes sister, whose chaste life
The mother has corrupted for his use.

Sweet word, sweet occasion, faith then brother
I'll disinherit you in as short time,
As I was when I was begot in hast:
I'll dam you at your pleasure: precious deed
After your lust, oh twill be fine to bleed,
Come let our passing out be soft wary.

Mark, there, there, that step, now to the Duchess,
This their second meeting, writes the Duke Cuckold
With new additions, his horns newly reuiu'd:
Night! thou that look like sunerall Heralds fees
Torn down betimes ith morning, thou hangst fittly
To Grace those sins that have no grace at all,
Now tis full sea a bed over the world,
There's juggling of all sides, some that were Maids
Even at Sun set are now perhaps ith Toale-booke,
This woman in immodest thin apparel:
Lets in her friend by water, here a Dame
Cunning, nails lether-hindges to a door,
To avoid proclamation,
Now Cuckolds are a quoyning, apace, apace, apace, apace?
And careful sisters spin that thread ith night,
That does maintain them and their bawds ith day!

You flow well brother?

Puh I'm shallow vet,
Too sparing and too modest, shall I tell thee,
If every trick were told that's dealt by night
There are few here that would not blush out right.

I am of that belief too.

Whose this comes,

The Dukes son up so late, -- brother fall back,
And you shall learn, some mischief, -- my good Lord.

Piato, why the man I wished for, come,
I do embrace this season for the fittest
To taste of that young Lady?

Heart, and hell.

Damned villain.

I ha no way now to cross it, but to kill him.

Come only thou and I.

My Lord my Lord.

Why dost thou start us?

I'd almost forgot -- the bastard!

What of him?

This night, this hour -- this minute, now.

What? what?

Shadows the Duchess --

Horrible word.

And like strong poison eats,
Into the Duke your fathers fore-head.

Oh.

He makes horne royal.

Most ignoble slave?

This is the fruit of two beds.

I am mad.

That passage he trod warily:

He did!

And husht his villains every step he took.

His villains? i'll confound them.

Take em finely, finely, now.

The Duchess Chamber-doore shall not control me.

Good, happy, swift, there's gunpowder ith Court,
Wild fire at mid-night, in this heedless fury
He may show violence to cross himself,
I'll follow the Event.

Where is that villain?

Sofly my Lord and you may take em twisted.

I care not how!

Oh twill be glorious,
To kill em doubled, when their heaped, be soft my Lord.

Away my spleen is not so lazy, thus and thus,
I'll shake their eye-lids open, and with my sword
Shut em again for ever; -- villain, strumpet --

You upper Guard defend us.

Treason, treason.

Oh take me not in sleep, I have great sins, I must have days,
Nay months dear son, with penitential heaves,
To lift 'em out, and not to die vncleere,
O thou wilt kill me both in heaven and here.

I am amazed to death.

Nay villain traitor,
Worse then the foulest Epithet, now I'll gripe thee
Ee'n with the Nerues of wrath, and throw thy head
Amongst the Lawyers guard.

How comes the quiet of your Grace disturbed?

This boy that should be my self after me,
Would be my self before me, and in heate
Of that ambition bloodily rushed in
Intending to depose me in my bed?

Duty and naturall-loyalty for-fend.

He called his Father villain; and me strumpet,
A word that I abhor to file my lips with.

That was not so well done Brother?

I am abused -- I know there's no excuse can do me good.

Tis now good policy to be from sight,
His vicious purpose to our sisters honour,
Is crossed beyond our thought.

You little dreamt his Father slept here.

Oh 'twas far beyond me.
But since it fell so; -- without fright-full word,
Would he had killed him, 'twould have eased our swords.

Be comforted our Duchess, he shall dye.

Where's this slaue-pander now? out of mine eye,
Guilty of this abuse.

You're villains, Fablers,
You have knaves chins, and harlots tongues, you lie,
And I will dam you with one meal a day.

O good my Lord!

Sbloud you shall never sup.

O I beseech you sir.

To let my sword -- Catch cold so long and miss him.

Troth my Lord -- Twas his intent to meet there.

Heart he's yonder?
Ha? what news here? is the day out ath-socket,
That it is Noone at Mid-night; the Court up,
How comes the Guard so saucy with his elbows?

The Bastard here?
Nay then the truth of my intent shall out,
My Lord and Father hear me.

Bear him hence.

I can with loyalty excuse.

Excuse? to prison with the Villain,
Death shall not long lag after him.

Good in faith, then 'tis not much amiss,

Brothers, my best release lies on your tongues,
I pray persuade for me.

It is our duties: make your self sure of us.

We'll sweat in pleading.

And I may live to thank you.

No, thy death shall thank me better.

He's gon: I'll after him,
And know his trespass, seem to bear a part
In all his ills, but with a Puritan heart.

Now brother, let our hate and love be woven
So subtly together, that in speaking one word for his life,
We may make three for his death,
The craftiest pleader gets most gold for breath.

Set on, I'll not be far behind you brother.

Is't possible a son should be disobedient as far as
the sword: it is the highest he can go no farther.

My gracious Lord, take pity, --

Pity boys?

Nay weed be loath to move your Grace too much,
We know the tre'passe is unpardonable,
Black, wicked, and unnatural,

In a Son, oh Monstrous.

Yet my Lord,
A Dukes soft hand strokes the rough head of law,
And makes it lye smooth.

But my hand shall ne'er doot.

That as you please my Lord.

We must needs confess,
Some father would have entered into hate,
So deadly pointed, that before his eyes,
He would ha seen the execution sound,
Without corrupted favour?

But my Lord,
Your Grace may live the wonder of all times,
In pardning that offence which never yet
Had face to beg a pardon.

Honey, how's this?

Forgive him good my Lord, he s your own son,
And I must needs say 'twas the vildlier done.

He's the next heir -- yet this true reason gathers,
None can possess that dispossess their fathers:
Be merciful; --

Here's no Step-mothers-wit,
I'll try 'em both upon their love and hate.

Be merciful -- although --

You have prevailed,
My wrath like flaming wax hath spent it self,
I know 'twas but some peevish Moon in him: go, let him be releasd.

Sfoote how now Brother?

Your Grace doth please to speak beside your spleen,
I would it were so happy?

Why go, release him.

O my good Lord, I know the fault's too weighty,
And full of general loathing; too inhumaine,
Rather by all men's voices worthy death.

Tis true too; here then, receive this signet, doom shall pass,
Direct it to the Judges, he shall dye
Ere many days, make hast.

All speed that may be,
We could have wished his burden not so sore,
We knew your Grace did but delay before.

Here's Envy with a poor thin cover or't,
Like Scarlet hid in lawn, easily spied through,
This their ambition by the Mothers side,
Is dangerous, and for safety must be purgd,
I will prevent their envies, sure it was
But some mistaken fury in our son,
Which these aspiring boys would climb upon:
He shall be releasde suddenly.

Good morning to your Grace.

Welcome my Lords.

Our knees shall take away the office of our feet for ever,
Unless your Grace bestow a fathers eye,
Upon the Clouded fortunes of your son,
And in compassionate virtue grant him that,
Which makes even mean men happy; liberty

How seriously their loves and honours woo
For that, which I am about to pray them do
Which, rise my Lords, your knees sign his release,
We freely pardon him.

We owe your Grace much thanks, and he much duty.

It well becomes that Judge to nod at crimes,
That dos commit greater himself and lives:
I may forgive a disobedient error,
That expect pardon for adultery
And in my old days am a youth in lust:
Many a beauty have I turned to poison
In the denial, covetous of all,
Age hot, is like a Monster to be seen:
My hairs are white, and yet my sins are Green.

Brother, let my opinion sway you once,
I speak it for the best, to have him die:
Surest and soonest, if the signet come,
Unto the judges hands, why then his doom,
Will be deferd till sittings and Court-daies:
Juries and further, -- Fayths are bought and sold,
Oths in these days are but the skin of gold.

In troth tis true too!

Then lets set by the Judges
And fall to the Officers, tis but mistaking
The Duke our fathers meaning, and where he named,
Ere many days, tis but forgetting that
And, have him die in the morning.

Excellent,
Then am I heir -- Duke in a minute.

Nay,
And he were once puff out, here is a pin.
Should quickly prick your bladder.

Blast occasion,
He being packed, we'll have some trick and wile,
To wind our younger brother out of prison,
That lies in for the Rape, the Ladies dead,
And peoples thoughts will soon be buried.

We may with safety do it, and live and feed,
The Duchesse-sonnes are too proud to bleed,

We are in faith to say true. -- come let's not linger
I'll to the Officers, go you before,
And set an edge upon the Executioner.

Let me alone to grind him.

Meet; farewell,
I am next now, Irise just in that place,
Where you're cut of, upon thy Neck kind brother,
The falling of one head, lifts up another.

My Lords? I am so much indebted to your loves,
For this, O this delivery.

But our duties, my Lord, unto the hopes that grow in you,

If ere I live to be my self i'll thank you,
O liberty thou sweet and heavenly Dame;
But hell for prison is too mild a name.

Officers? here's the Dukes signet, your firm warrant,
Brings the command of present death a long with it
Unto our brother, the Dukes son; we are sorry,
That we are so unnaturally employde
In such an unkind Office, fitter far
For enemies then brothers.

But you know,
The Dukes command must be obayde.

It must and shall my Lord -- this morning then,
So suddenly?

I alas poore-good-soule,
He must break fast betimes, the executioner
Stands ready to put forth his cowardly valour.

Already?

Already ifath, O sir, destruction hies,
And that is least Impudent, soonest dyes,

Troth you say true my Lord we take our leaves,
Our Office shall be sound, we'll not delay,
The third part of a minute.

I herein you show.
Your selves good men, and upright officers,
Pray let him die as private as he may,
Do him that favour, for the gaping people.
Will but trouble him at his prayers,
And make him curse, and swear, and so die black.
Will you be so far Kind?

It shall be done my Lord.

Why we do thank you, if we live to be,
You shall have a better office,

Your good Lord-shippe,

Commend us to the scaffold in our tears.

We'll weep and do your commendations,

Fine fools in office!

Things fall our so fit.

So happily, come brother ere next clock,
His head will be made serve a bigger block.

Keeper.

My Lord.

No news lately from our brothers?
Are they unmindful of us?

My Lord a messenger came newly in and brought this from 'em,

Nothing but paper comforts?
I looked for my delivery before this,
Had they been worth their oths -- prithee be from us.
Now what say you forsooth, speak out I pray,
Letter. Brother be of good cheer,
Slud it begins like a whore with good cheer,
Thou shalt not be long a prisoner.
Not five and thirty year like a banqrout, I think so,
We have thought upon a device to get thee out by a trick!
By a trick, pox a your trick and it be so long a playing.
And so rest comforted, be merry and expect it suddaynely!
Be merry, hang merry, draw and quarter merry, I'll be mad.
Is't not strange that a man should lie in a whole month for a woman, well, we
shall see how sudden our brothers: will be in their promise, I must expect
still a trick! I shall not be long a prisoner, how now, what news?


Bad news my Lord I am discharged of you.

Slave call thou that bad news, I thank you brothers.

My Lord twill prove so, here come the Officers,
Into whose hands I must commit you.

Ha, Officers what, why?

You must pardon us my Lord,
Our Office must be sound, here is our warrant
The signet from the Duke, you must straight suffer.

Suffer? i'll suffer you to be gon, i'll suffer you,
To come no more, what would you have me suffer?

My Lord those words were better changed to prayers,
The times but brief with you, prepare to die.

Sure tis not so.

It is too true my Lord.

I tell you tis not, for the Duke my father,
Defend me till next sitting, and I look
Even every minute threescore times an hour,
For a release, a trick wrought by my brothers.

A trick my Lord? if you expect such comfort,
Your hopes as fruitless as a barren woman:
Your brothers were the unhappy messengers,
That brought this powerful token for your death.

My brothers, no, no.

Tis most true my Lord.

My brothers to bring a warrant for my death
How strange this shows?

There's no delaying time.

Desire em hither, call em up, my brothers?
They shall deny it to your faces.

My Lord,
They're far enough by this, at least at Court,
And this most strict command they left behind em,
When grief swum in their eyes, they showed like brothers,
Brim-full of heavy sorrow: but the Duke
Must have his pleasure.

His pleasure?

These were their last words which my memory bears,
Commend us to the Scaffold in our tears.

Pox dry their tears, what should I do with tears?
I hate em worse then any Citizens son
Can hate salt water; here came a letter now,
New-bleeding from their Pens, scarce stinted yet,
Would lde been torn in pieces when I tore it,
Look you officious whoresons words of comfort,
Not long a Prisoner.

It says true in that sir, for you must suffer presently.

A villainous Duns, upon the letter knavish exposition,
Look you then here sir: We'll get thee out by a trick says he.

That may hold too sir, for you know a Trick is commonly
four Cards, which was meant by us four officers.

Worse and worse dealing.

The hour beckons us,
The heads-man waits, lift up your eyes to heaven.

I thank you faith; good pritty-holsome counsel,
I should look up to heaven as you sedd,
Whilst he behind me cozens me of my head,
I that's the Trick.

You delay too long my Lord.

Stay good Authorities Bastards, since I must
Through Brothers perjury dye, O let me venom
Their souls with curses.

Come tis no time to curse.

Must I bleed then, without respect of sign? well --
My fault was sweet sport, which the world approoues,
I dye for that which every woman loves.

O sweet, delectable, rare, happy, ravishing,

Why what's the matter brother?

O tis able, to make a man spring up, knock his for-head
Against yon siluar seeling.

Pre-thee tell me,
Why may not I partake with you? you vowed once
To give me share to every tragic thought.

Byth' Mass I think I did too,
Then I'll divide it to thee, -- the old Duke
Thinking my outward shape, and inward heart
Are cut out of one peace; (for he that prates his secrets,
His heart stands ath out side) hires me by price:
To greet him with a Lady,
In some fit place veiled from the eyes ath Court,
Some darkened blushless Angle, that is guilty
Of his fore-fathers lusts, and great-folkes riots,
To which (I easily to maintain my shape)
Consented, and did wish his impudent grace
To meet her here in this vn-sunned-lodge,
Where-in tis night at noone, and here the rather,
Because unto the torturing of his soul,
The Bastard and the Duchess have appointed
Their meeting too in this luxurious circle,
Which most afflicting sight will kill his eyes
Before we kill the rest of him.

Twill in faith, most dreadfully digested,
I see not how you could have mist me brother.

True, but the violence of my joy forgot it.

I, but where's that Lady now?

Oh at that word,
I'm lost again, you cannot find me yet
I'm in a throng of happy Apprehensions.
He's suited for a Lady, I have took care
For a delicious lip, a sparkling eye,
You shall be witness brother;
Be ready stand with your hat off.

Troth I wonder what Lady it should be?
Yet tis no wonder, now I think again,
To have a Lady stoop to a Duke, that stoops unto his men,
Tis common to be common, through the world:
And there's more private common shadowing vices,
Then those who are known both by their names and prices
Tis part of my alleagance to stand bare,
To the Dukes Concubine, -- and here she comes.

Madame his grace will not be absent long.
Secret? ne'er doubt us Madame? twill be worth
Three velvet gowns to your Ladyship -- known?
Few Ladies respect that? disgrace, a poor thin shell,
Tis the best grace you have to do it well,
I'll save your hand that labour, i'll unmask you?

Why brother, brother.

Art thou beguiled now? tut, a Lady can,
At such all hid, beguile a wiser man,
Have I not fitted the old surfetter
With a quaint peace of beauty, age and bare bone
Are ere allied in action; here's an eye,
Able to tempt a greatman -- to serve God,
A pretty hanging lip, that has for got now to dissemble
Me thinks this mouth should make a swearer tremble.
A drunckard clasp his teeth, and not undo em,
To suffer wet damnation to run through em.
Here's a cheek keeps her colour let the wind go whistle,
Spout Rain, we fear thee not, be hot or cold
Alls one with us; and is not he absurd,
Whose fortunes are upon their faces set,
That fear no other God but wind and wet.

Brother y'aue spoke that right,
Is this the form that living shone so bright?

The very same,
And now me thinks I cold even chide my self,
For doting on her beauty, tho her death
Shall be reuengd after no common action;
Does the Silke-worme expend her yellow labours
For thee? for thee dos she undo herself?
Are Lord-ships sold to maintain Lady-ships
For the poor benefit of a bewitching minute?
Why dos yon fellow falsify hie-waies
And put his life between the Judges lips,
To refine such a thing keeps horse and men
To beat their valours for her?
Surely wee're all mad people, and they
Whom we think are, are not, we mistake those,
Tis we are mad in sense, they but in clothes.

Faith and in clothes too we, give us our due.

Dos every proud and selfe-affecting Dame
Camphor her face for this? an dgrieue her Maker
In sinful baths of milk, -- when many an infant starves,
For her superfluous out-side, all for this?
Who now bids twenty pound a night, prepares
Music, perfumes, and sweete-meates, all are husht,
Thou may lie chaste now! it were fine me thinks:
To have thee seen at Revels, forgetful feasts,
And unclean Brothells; sure 'twould fright the sinner
And make him a good coward, put a Reveller,
Out off his Antic amble
And cloy an Epicure with empty dishes?
Here might a scornesull and ambitious woman,
Look through and through her self, -- see Ladies, with false forms,
You deceive men, but cannot deceive worms.
Now to my tragic business, look you brother,
I have not fashioned this only -- for show
And useless property, no, it shall bear a part
Even in it own Revenge. This very skull,
Whose Mistress the Duke poisoned, with this drug
The mortal curse of the earth; shall be reuengd
In the like strain, and kiss his lips to death,
As much as the dumb thing can, he shall feel:
What fails in poison, we'll supply in steel.

Brother I do applaud thy constant vengeance,
The quaintness of thy malice above thought.

So tis laid on: now come and welcome Duke,
I have her for thee, I protest it brother:
Me thinks she makes almost as fair a sine
As some old gentlewoman in a Periwig?
Hide thy face now for shame, thou had need have a Mask now
Tis vain when beauty flows, but when it fleets
This would become graves better then the streets.

You have my voice in that; hark, the Duke's come.

Peace, let's observe what company he brings,
And how he dos absent em, for you know
Heel wish all private, -- brother fall you back a little,
With the bony Lady.

That I will.

So, so, -- now 9. years vengeance crowd into a minute!

You shall have leave to leave us, with this charge,
Upon your lives, if we be mist by the Duchess
Or any of the Nobles, to give out,
We're privately rid forth.

Oh happiness!

With some few honourable gentlemen you may say,
You may name those that are away from Court.

Your will and pleasure shall be done my Lord.

Privately rid forth,
He strives to make sure work on it -- your good grace?

Piato, well done hast brought her, what Ladyist?

Faith my Lord a Country Lady, a little bashful at first as most of them are,
but after the first kiss my Lord the worst is past with them, your grace
knows now what you have to do; sha's some-what a grave look with her -- but
--


I love that best, conduct her.

Have at all.

In gravest looks the Greatest faults seem less
Give me that sin that's robbed in Holiness.

Back with the Torch; brother raise the perfumes.

How sweet can a Duke breath? age has no fault,
Pleasure should meet in a perfumed mist,
Lady sweetly encountered, I came from Court I must be bold with you, oh,
what's this, oh!

royal villain, white devil;

Oh.

Brother -- place the Torch here, that his affrighted eyeballs
May start into those hollowes, Duke; dost know
Yon dreadful vizard, view it well, tis the skull
Of Gloriana, whom thou poysonedst last.

Oh, tas poisoned me.

Did not know that till now?

What are you two?

Villains all three? -- the very ragged bone,
Has been sufficiently reuengd.

Oh Hippolito? call treason.

Yes my good Lord, treason, treason, treason.

Then I'm betrayed.

Alas poor Lecher in the hands of knaves,
A slavish Duke is baser then his slaves.

My teeth are eaten out.

Had any lest.

I think but few.

Then those that did eat are eaten.

O my tongue.

Your tongue? twill teach you to kiss closer,
Not like a Flobbering Dutchman, you have eyes still:
Look monster, what a Lady hast thou made me,
My once bethrothed wife.

Is it thou villain, nay then --

It is I, 'tis Vindici, tis I.

And let this comfort thee: our Lord and Father
Fell sick upon the infection of thy frowns,
And dyed in sadness; be that thy hope of life.

Oh?

He had his tongue, yet grief made him die speechless.
Puh, tis but early yet, now i'll begin
To stick thy soul with Ulcers, I will make
Thy spirit grievous sore, it shall not rest,
But like some pestilent man toss in thy brest-(mark me duke)
You're a renowned, high, and mighty Cuckold.

Oh!

Thy Bastard, thy bastard rides a hunting in thy brow.

Millions of deaths.

Nay to afflict thee more,
Here in this lodge they meet for damned clips,
Those eyes shall see the in cest of their lips.

Is there a hell besides this, villains?

Villain?
Nay heaven is just, scorns are the hires of scorns,
I ne'er knew yet Adulterer with-out horns.

Once ere they dye 'tis quitted.

Hark the music,
Their banquet is prepared, they're coming --

Oh, kill me not with that sight.

Thou shalt not loose that sight for all thy Duke-doome.

Traitors, murderers?

What? is not thy tongue eaten out yet?
Then we'll invent a silence? brother stifle the Torch,

Treason, murder?

Nay faith, we'll have you husht now with thy dagger
Nail down his tongue, and mine shall keep possession
About his heart, if he but gasp he dyes,
We dread not death to quittance injuries; -- Brother,
If he but winck, not brooking the foul object,
Let our two other hands tear up his lids,
And make his eyes like Comets shine through blood,
When the bad bleeds, then is the Tragedy good,

Whist, brother, musick's at our ear, they come.

Had not that kiss a taste of sin 'twere sweet.

Why there's no pleasure sweet but it is sinful.

True, such a bitter sweetness fate hath given,
Best side to us, is the worst side to heaven.

Push, come: 'tis the old Duke thy doubtful Father,
The thought of him rubs heaven in thy way,
But I protest by yonder waxen fire,
Forget him, or i'll poison him.

Madam, you urge a thought which ne'er had life,
So deadly do I loath him for my birth,
That if he took me haspt within his bed,
I would add murder to adultery,
And with my sword give up his years to death.

Why now you're sociable, lets in and feast,
Lowdst Music sound: pleasure is Banquests guest.

I cannot brooke --

The Brooke is turned to blood.

Thanks to loud Music.

Twas our friend indeed,
'Tis state in Music for a Duke to bleed:
The Duke-dome wants a head, tho yet unknown,
As fast as they peep up, lets cut 'em down.

Was not his execution rarely plotted?
We are the Dukes sons now.

I you may thank my policy for that.

Your policy, for what?

Why wast not my invention brother,
To slip the Judges, and in lesser compass,
Did not I draw the model of his death,
Aduizing you to sudden officers,
And even extemporal execution.

Heart, twas a thing I thought on too.

You thought ont too, ssoote slander not your thoughts
With glorious untruth, I know twas from you.

Sir I say, twas in my head.

I, like your brains then,
Ne'er to come out as long as you lived.

You'd have the honour on it forsooth, that your wit
Lead him to the scaffold,

Since it is my due,
I'll published, but I'll have it in spite of you.

Me thinks you're much too bold, you should a little
Remember us brother, next to be honest Duke.

I, it shall be as easy for you to be Duke,
As to be honest, and that's never in faith.

Well, cold he is by this time, and because
Wee're both ambitious, be it our amity,
And let the glory be shard equally.

I am content to that.

This night out younger brother shall out of prison,
I have a trick.

A trick, pre-thee what is't?

We'll get him out by a wile.

Pre-thee what wile?

No sir, you shall not know it, till't be done,
For then you'd swear twere yours.

How now, whats he?

One of the officers.

Desired news.

How now my friend?

My Lords, under your pardon, I am allotted
To that desertlesse office, to present you
With the yet bleeding head.

Ha, ha, excellent.

All's sure our own: Brother, can weep think thou?
'twould grace our Flattery much; think of some Dame,
Twill teach thee to dissemble.

I have thought, -- Now for your self.

Our sorrows are so fluent,
Our eyes ore-flow our tongues, words spoke in tears,
Are like the murmurs of the waters, the sound
Is loudly heard, but cannot be distinguisht.

How dyed he pray?

O full of rage and spleen.

He dyed most valiantly then, we're glad to hear it.

We could not woe him once to pray.

He showd himself a Gentleman in that: give him his due.

But in the steed of prayer, he drew forth oaths.

Then did he pray dear heart,
Although you understood him not.

My Lords,
Even at his last, with pardon be it spoke,
He cursed you both.

He cursed us? lass good soul.

It was not in our powers, but the Dukes pleasure,
Finely dissembled a both-sides, sweet fate,
O happy opportunity.

Now my Lords.

Oh! --

Why do you shun me Brothers?
You may come nearer now;
The savor of the prison has for-sooke me,
I thank such kind Lords as your selves, Ime free.

Alive!

In health!

Releasd?
We were both ee'n amazd with joy to see it,

I am much to thank you.

Faith we spared no tongue, unto my Lord the Duke.

I know your delivery brother
Had not been half so sudden but for us.

O how we pleaded.

Most deserving brothers,
In my best studies I will think of it?

O death and vengeance.

Hell and torments.

Slave came thou to delude us.

Delude you my Lords?

I villain, where's this head now?

Why here my Lord,
Just after his delivery, you both came
With warrant from the Duke to be-head your brother.

I, our brother, the Dukes son.

The Dukes son my Lord, had his release before you came.

Whose head's that then?

His whom you left command for, your own brothers?

Our brothers? oh furies --

Plagues.

Confusions.

Darkness.

Diuils.

Fell it out so accursedly?

So damnedly.

Villain I'll brain thee with it,

O my good Lord!

The Devil ouer-take thee?

O fatal.

O prodigious to our bloods.

Did we dissemble?

Did we make our tears women for thee?

Laugh and rejoice for thee.

Bring warrant for thy death.

Mock off thy head

You had a trick, you had a wile forsooth.

A murren meet 'em, there's none of these wiles that ever come to good: I see
now, there is nothing sure in mortality, but mortality, well, no more words
shalt be reuengd in faith.

Come, throw off clouds now brother, think of vengeance,
And deeper settled hate, sirrah sit fast,
We'll pull down all, but thou shalt down at last.

Hippolito.

My Lord:
Has your good Lordship ought to command me in?

I pre-thee leave us.

How's this? come and leave us?

Hippolito.

Your honour -- I stand ready for any duteous employment.

Heart, what makst thou here?

A pretty Lordly humour:
He bids me to be present, to depart; some-thing has stung his honour?

Be nearer, draw nearer:
Ye'are not so good me thinks, Ime angry with you.

With me my Lord? Ime angry with my self fort.

You did prefer a goodly fellow to me,
Twas wittily elected, twas, I thought
Had been a villain, and he proves a Knave?
To me a Knave.

I chose him for the best my Lord,
Tis much my sorrow, if neglect in him, breed discontent in you.

Neglect, twas will: Judge of it,
Firmly to tell of an incredible Act,
Not to be thought, less to be spoken of,
Twixt my Step-mother and the Bastard, oh,
Incestuous sweets between 'em.

Fie my Lord.

I in kind loyalty to my fathers fore-head,
Made this a desperare arm, and in that fury,
Committed treason on the lawful bed,
And with my sword even raced my fathers bosom,
For which I was within a stroke of death.

Alack, Ime sorry; ssoote just upon the stroke,
Iars in my brother, twill be villainous Music.

My honoured Lord.

Away pre-thee forsake us, hereafter we'll not know thee.

Not know me my Lord, your Lordship cannot choose.

Begone I say, thou art a false knave.

Why the easier to be known, my Lord.

Push, I shall prove too bitter with a word,
Make thee a perpetual prisoner,
And lay this yron-age upon thee,

Mum, for there's a doom would make a woman dum,
Missing the bastard next him, the winde's comes about,
Now tis my brothers turn to stay mine to go out.

Has greatly moved me.

Much to blame in faith.

But i'll recover, to his ruin: twas told me lately,
I know not whether falsely, that you'd a brother,

Who I, yes my good Lord, I have a brother

How chance the Court near saw him? of what nature?
How does he apply his hours?

Faith to curse Fates,
Who, as he thinks, ordained him to be poor,
Keeps at home full of want and discontent.

There's hope in him, sor discontent and want
Is the best clay to mould, a villain off;
Hippolito, wish him repair to us,
If there be ought in him to please our blood,
For thy sake we'll advance him, and build fair
His meanest fortunes: for it is in us
To rear up Towers from cottages.

It is so my Lord, he will attend your honour,
But hes a man, in whom much melancholy dwells.

Why the better: bring him to Court.

With willingness and speed,
Whom he cast off even now, must now succeed,
Brother disguise must off,
In thine own shape now, i'll prefer thee to him:
How strangely does himself work to undo him.

This fellow will come fitly, he shall kill,
That other slave, that did abuse my spleen,
And made it swell to Treason, I have put
Much of my heart into him, he must dye.
He that knows great men's secrets and proves slight,
That man ne'er lives to see his Beard turn white:
I he shall speed him: I'll employ thee brother,
Slaves are but Nails, to drive out one another?
He being of black condition, suitable
To want and ill content, hope of preferment
Will grind him to an Edge -- The Nobles enter.

Good days unto your honour.

My kind Lords, I do return the like,

Saw you my Lord the Duke?

My Lord and Father, is he from Court?

Hes sure from Court,
But where, which way, his pleasure took we know not,
Nor can we heareont.

Here come those should tell,
Saw you my Lord and Father?

Not since two hours before noone my Lord,
And then he privately rid forth.

Oh hes rod forth.

Twas wondrous privately,

There's none ith Court had any knowledge ont.

His Grace is old, and sudden, tis no treason
To say, the Duke my Father has a humour,
Or such a Toy about him; what in us
Would appear light, in him seems virtuous.

Tis Oracle my Lord.

So, so, all's as it should be, you're your self.

How that great-villaine puts me to my shifts.

He that did lately, in disguise reject thee;
Shall now thou art thy self, as much respect thee.

Twill be the quainter fallacy; but brother,
Sfoote what use will he put me to now think thou?

Nay you must pardon me in that, I know not:
Has some employment for you: but what tis
He and his Secretary the Devil knows best.

Well I must suite my tongue to his desires,
What colour so ere they be; hoping at last
To pile up all my wishes on his breast,

Faith Brother he himself shows the way.

Now the Duke is dead, the realm is clad in clay:
His death being not yet known, under his name
The people still are governed; well, thou his son
Art not long-liu'd, thou shalt not joy his death:
To kill thee then, I should most honour thee;
For 'twould stand firm in every mans belief,
Thou'st a kind child, and only dyedst with grief.

You fetch about well, but lets talk in present,
How will you appear in fashion different,
As well as in apparel, to make all things possible:
If you be but once tripped, we fall for ever.
It is not the least policy to be doubtful,
You must change tongue: -- familiar was your first.

Why I'll bear me in some strain of melancholy,
And string my self with heavy -- sounding Wyre,
Like such an Instrument, that speaks merry things sadly.

Then tis as I meant,
I gave you out at first in discontent.

I'll turn my self, and then --

Sfoote here he comes: hast thought vppont.

Salute him, fear not me.

Hippolito.

Your Lordship.

What's he yonder?

Tis Vindici, my discontented Brother,
Whom, cording to your will l'aue brought to Court.

Is that thy brother? beshrew me, a good presence,
I wonder he has been from the Court so long?
Come nearer.

Brother, Lord Lussurioso the Duke son.

Be more near to us, welcome, nearer yet.

How don you? god you god den.

We thank thee?
How strangely such a course-homely salute,
Shows in the Palace, where we greet in fire:
Nimble and desperate tongues, should we name,
God in a salutation, 'twould near be stood on it,-heauen!
Tell me, what has made thee so melancholy.

Why, going to Law.

Why will that make a man melancholy?

Yes, to look long upon inck and black buckrom -- I went me to law in Anno
Quadragesimo secundo, and I waded out of it, in Anno sextagesimo tertio.


What, three and twenty years in law?

I have known those that have been five and fifty and all about Pullin and
Pigs.


May it be possible such men should breath,
To vex the Terms so much.

Tis food to some my Lord. There are old men at the present, that are so
poisoned with the affectatio of law-words, (having had many suites canuast,)
that their common talk is nothing but Barbery latin: they cannot so much as
pray, but in law, that their sins may be removed, with a writ of Error, and
their souls fetched up to heaven, with a sasarara.


It seems most strange to me,
Yet all the world meets round in the same bent:
Where the hearts set, there goes the tongues consent,
How dost apply thy studies fellow?

Study why to think how a great rich man lies a dying, and a poor Cobbler
toales the bell for him? how he cannot depart the world, and see the great
chest-stand before him, when he lies speechless, how he will point you
readily to all the boxes, and when he is past all memory, as the gosseps
guess, then thinks he of forffetures and obligations, nay when to all men's
hearings he whurles and rotles in the throat he's bussie threatening his poor
Tennants? and this would last me now some seven years thinking or there
abouts? but, I have a Conceit a coming in picture upon this, I draw it my
self, which in faith la I'll present to your honour, you shall not chose but like
it for your Lordship shall give me nothing for it,


Nay you misstake me then,
For I am published bountiful enough,
Lets taste of your conceit.

In picture my Lord.

I in picture,

Marry this it is -- A vsuring Father to be boiling in hell, and his son and
Heir with a Whore dancing over him.


Has par'd him to the quick.

The conceit's pretty in faith,
But tak't upon my life twill ne'er be likt.

No, why Ime sure the whore will be likt well enough.

I if she were out ath picture heed like her then himself.

And as for the son and heir, he shall be an eyefore to no young Revellers,
for he shall be drawn in cloth of gold breeches.


And thou hast put my meaning in the pock,
And can not draw that out, my thought was this, ets
To see the picture of a vsuring father
Boiling in hell, our richmen would ne'er like it,

O true I cry you heartly mercy I hnow the reason, for some of'em had rather be
damned indeed, the damned in colours.


A parlous melancholy, has wit enough,
To murder any man, and I'll give him means,
I think thou art ill monied;

Money, ho, ho,
Tas been my want so long, tis now my scoff.
Iue en forgot what colour siluers off,

It hits as I could wish,

I get good cloths,
Of those that dread my humour, and for table-roome,
I feed on those that cannot be rid of me,

Somewhat to set thee up withal,

O mine eyes,

How now man.

Almost struck blind,
This bright unusual shine, to me seems proud,
I dare not look till the sun be in a cloud,

I think I shall afecte his melancholy,
How are they now.

The better for you rasking.

You shall be better yet if you but fasten,
Truly on my intent, now yare both present
I will unbrace such a close private villain,
Unto your vengfull swords, the like ne'er heard of,
Who hath disgraced you much and injured us,

Disgraced us my Lord?

I Hippolito.
I kept it here till now that both your angers,
Might meet him at once,

Ime couetuous,
To know the villain,

You know him that slave Pandar,
Piato whom we threatened last
With irons in perpetual prisonment;

All this is I.

Is't he my Lord?

I'll tell you, you first preferred him to me.

Did you brother.

I did indeed?

And the ingreatfull villain,
To quit that kindness, strongly wrought with me,
Being as you see a likely man for pleasure,
With jewels to corrupt your virgin sister.

Oh villain,

He shall furely die that did it.

I far from thinking any Virgin harm.
Especially knowing her to be as chaste
As that part which scarce suffers to be touched,
The eye would not endure him,

Would you not my Lord,
Twas wondrous honourably donne,

But with some five frowns kept him out,

Out slave.

What did me he but in revenge of that,
Went of his own free will to make infirm,
Your sisters honour, whom I honour with my soul,
For chaste respect, and not prevailing there,
(As twas but desperate folly to attempt it,)
In mere spleen, by the way, way lays your mother,
Whose honour being a coward as it seems.
Yielded by little force.

Coward indeed.

He proud of their advantage, (as he thought)
Brought me these news for happy, but I, heaven forgive me for it.

What did your honour.

In rage pushed him from me.
Trampled beneath his throat, spurnd him, and bruizd:
Indeed I was too cruel to say troth.

Most Nobly managde.

Has not heaven an ear? Is all the lightning wasted?

If I now were so impatient in a modest cause,
What should you be?

Full mad, he shall not live
To see the Moon change.

He's about the Palace,
Hippolito entice him this way, that thy brother
May take full mark of him.

Heart? -- that shall not need my Lord,
I can direct him so far.

Yet for my hates sake,
Go, wind him this way? i'll see him bleed my self.

What now brother?

Nay even what you will -- you're put to it brother?

An impossible task, I'll swear,
To bring him hither, that's already here.

Thy name, I have forgot it?

Vindice my Lord.

Tis a good name that.

I, a Revenger.

It dos betoken courage, thou should be valiant,
And kill thine enemies.

That's my hope my Lord.

This slave is one.

I'll doom him.

Then i'll praise thee?
Do thou observe me best, and I'll best raise thee.

Indeed, I thank you.

Now Hippolito, where's the slave Pandar?

Your good Lordship,
Would have a loathsome sight of him, much offensive?
He's not in case now to be seen my Lord,
The worst of all the deadly sins is in him:
That beggarly damnation, drunkenness.

Then he's a double-slaue.

Twas well conveyed, upon a sudden wit.

What, are you both,
Firmly resolved, i'll see him dead my self.

Or else, let not us live.

You may direct your brother to take note of him.

I shall.

Rise but in this, and you shall never fall.

Your honours Vassayles.

This was wisely carried,
Deep policy in us, makes fools of such:
Then must a slave die, when he knows too much.

O thou almighty patience, tis my wonder,
That such a fellow, impudent and wicked,
Should not be cloven as he stood:
Or with a secret wind burst open!
Is there no thunder left, or is't kept up
In stock for heavier vengeance, there it goes!

Brother we loose our selves?

But I have found it,
Twill hold, tis sure, thanks, thanks to any spirit,
That mingled it amongst my inventions.

What is't?

Tis sound, and good, thou shalt partake it,
I'm hired to kill my self.

True.

Pree-thee mark it,
And the old Duke being dead, but not conveyed,
For he's already mist too, and you know:
Murder will peep out of the closest husk.

Most true?

What say you then to this device,
If we dressed up the body of the Duke.

In that disguise of yours.

You're quick, y' aue reached it.

I like it wondrously.

And being in drink, as you have published him,
To lean him on his elbow, as if sleep had caught him:
Which claims most interest in such sluggy men.

Good yet, but here's a doubt,
Me thought by the Dukes son to kill that pandar,
Shall when he is known be thought to kill the Duke.

Neither, O thanks, it is substantial
For that disguise being on him, which I wore,
It will be thought I, which he calls the Pandar, did kill the Duke, fled away in
his apparel, leaving him so disguiz'd, to avoid swift pursuit.


Firmer, and firmer.

Nay doubt not tis in grain, I warrant it hold colour.

Lets about it.

But by the way too, now I think on it, brother,
Let's conjure that base devil out of our Mother.

Madam, unlock your self, should it be seen,
Your arm would be suspected.

Who its that dares suspect, or this, or these?
May not we deal our favours where we please?

I'm confident, you may.

Sfoot brother hold.

Woult let the Bastard shame us?

Hold, hold, brother? there's fitter time then now.

Now when I see it.

Tis too much seen already.

Seen and known,
The Nobler she's, the baser is she grown.

If she were bent lasciviously, the fault
Of mighty women, that sleep soft, -- O death,
Must she needs choose such an unequal sinner:
To make all worse.

A Bastard, the Dukes Bastard, Shame heaped on shame.

O our disgrace.
Most women have small waste the world through-out,
But there desires are thousand miles about.

Come stay not here, lets after, and prevent,
Or else the i'll sin faster then we'll repent.

O thou? for whom no name is bad enough.

What means my sons what will you murder me?

Wicked unnatural Parents.

^eend of women.

Ohlare sons turned monsters? help.

In vain.

Are you so barbarous to set Iron nipples
Upon the breast that gave you suck.

That breast,
Is turned to Quarled poison.

Cut not your days for it, am not I your mother?

I thou dost usurp that title now by fraud
For in that shell of mother breeds a bawd.

A bawd? O name far oathsomer then hell.

It should be so knew thou thy Office well.

I hate it.

Ah is't possible, Thou only, you powers on hie,
That women should dissemble when they die.

Dissemble.

Did not the Dukes son direct
A fellow, of the worlds condition, hither,
That did corrupt all that was good in thee:
Made thee uncivilly forget thy self,
And work our sister to his lust.

Who I,
That had been monstrous? I defy that man:
For any such intent, none lives so pure,
But shall be soild with slander, -- good son believe it not,

Oh I'm in doubt,
Whether I'm my self, or no,
Stay, let me look again upon this face.
Who shall be saved when mothers have no grace.

'twould make one half despair.

I was the man,
Defy me, now? lets see, do it modestly.

O hell unto my soul.

In that disguise, I sent from the Dukes son,
Tried you, and found you base mettell,
As any villain might have donne.

One, no tongue but yours could have bewitched me so.

O nimble in damnation, quick in tune,
There is no devil could strike fire so soon:
I am confuted in a word.

Oh sons, forgive me, to my self i'll prove more true,
You that should honour me, I kneel to you.

A mother to give aim to her own daughter.

True brother, how far beyond nature 'tis,
Tho many Mothers do it.

Nay and you draw tears once, go you to bed,
Wet will make iron blush and change to red:
Brother it rains, twill spoil your dagger, house it.

Tis done.

In faith tis a sweet shower, it dos much good,
The fruitful grounds, and meadows of her soul,
Has been long dry: power down thou blessed dew,
Rise Mother, troth this shower has made you higher.

O you heavens? take this infectious spot out of my soul,
I'll renc it in seven waters of mine eyes?
Make my tears salt enough to taste of grace,
To weep, is to our sex: naturally given:
But to weep truly that's a gift from heaven?

Nay I'll kiss you now: kiss her brother?
Lets marry her to our souls, wherein's no lust,
And honourably love her.

Let it be.

For honest women are so sild and rare,
Tis good to cherish those poor few that are.
Oh you of easy wax, do but imagine
Now the disease has left you, how leprously
That Office would have clung unto your forehead,
All mothers that had any graceful hue,
Would have worn masks to hide their face at you:
It would have grown to this, at your foul name;
Greene-collour'd maids would have turned red with shame?

And then our sister full of hire, and bassenesse.

There had been boiling lead again,
The dukes sons great Concubine:
A drab of State, a cloth a silver slut,
To have her train borne up, and her soul trail in the dirt; great.

To be miserably great, rich to be eternally wretched.

O common madness:
Ask but the thriuingst harlot in cold blood,
Shed give the world to make her honour good,
Perhaps you'll say but only to'th Dukes son,
In private; why, she first begins with one,
Who afterward to thousand proves a whore:
Break Ice in one place, it will crack in more.

Most certainly applied?

Oh Brother, you forget our business.

And well remembered, ioye's a subtle elf,
I think man's happiest, when he forgets himself:
Farewell once dried, now holy-watred Mead,
Our hearts wear Feathers, that before wore Lead.

I'll give you this, that one I never knew
Plead better, for, and against the Devil, then you.

You make me proud ont.

Commend us in all virtue to our Sister.

I for the love of heaven, to that true maid.

With my best words.

Why that was motherly said.

I wonder now what fury did transport me?
I feel good thoughts begin to settle in me.
Oh with what fore-head can I look on her?
Whose honour I'ue so impiouslie beset,
And here she comes,

Now mother, you have wrought with me so strongly,
That what for my advancement, as to calm
The trouble of your tongue: I am content.

Content, to what?

To do as you have wished me,
To prostitute my breast to the Dukes son:
And put my self to common Usury.

I hope you will not so.

Hope you I will not?
That's not the hope you look to be saved in.

Truth but it is.

Do not deceive your self,
I am, as you even out of Marble wrought,
What would you now, are ye not pleased yet with me,
You shall not wish me to be more lascivious
Then I intend to be.

Strike not me cold,

How often have you charged me on your blessing
To be a cursed woman -- when you knew,
Your blessing had no force to make me lewd,
You laid your curse upon me, that did more,
The mothers curse is heavy, where that fights,
Sons set in storm, and daughters loose their lights?

Good child, dear maid, if there be any spark
Of heavenly intellectual fire within thee, oh let my breath,
Revive it to a flame:
Put not all out, with woman's wilful follies,
I am recovered of that foul disease
That haunts too many mothers, kind forgive me,
Make me not sick in health? -- if then
My words prevailed when they were wickedness,
How much more now when they are just and good?

I wonder what you mean, are not you she
For whose infect persuasions I could scarce
Kneel out my prayers, and had much ado
In three hours reading, to vntwist so much
Of the black serpent, as you wound about me.

Tis unfruitful, held tedious to repeat whats past,
Ime now your present Mother.

Push, now 'tis too late,

Bethink again, thou know not what thou say.

No, deny advancement, treasure, the Dukes son.

O see, I spoke those words, and now they poison me:
What will the deed do then?
Advancement, true: as high as shame can pitch,
For Treasure; who ere knew a harlot rich?
Or could build by the purchase of her sin,
An hospital to keep their bastards in: The Dukes son,
Oh when women are young Courtiers, they are sure to be old beggars,
To know the miseries most harlots taste,
Thoudst wish thy self unborn, when thou art unchaste.

O mother let me twine about your neck,
And kiss you till my soul melt on your lips,
I did but this to try you.

O speak truth.

Indeed I did not, for no tong has force to alter me from honest
If maidens would, men's words could have no power,
A vergin honour is a crystal Tower.
Which being weak is guarded with good spirits,
Until she basely yields no ill inherits.

O happy child! faith and thy birth hath saved me,
Amongst thousand daughters happiest of all others,
Buy thou a glass for maids and I for mothers.

So, so, he leanes well, take heed you wake him not brother

I warrant you my life for yours.

That's a good lay, for I must kill my self?
Brother that's I: that sits for me: do you mark it,
And I must stand ready here to make away my self yonder -- I must sit to be
killed, and stand to kill my self, I could varry it not so little as thrice over
again, tas some eight returns like Michelmas Term.


That's enough a conscience.

But sirrah dos the Dukes son come single?

No, there's the hell on it, his faith's too feeble to go alone? he brings
flesh-flies after him, that will buzz against supper time, and hum for his
coming out.


Ah the fly-flop of vengeance beat 'em to pieces? here was the sweetest
occasion, the fittest hour, to have made my revenge familiar with him, show him
the body of the Duke his father, and how quaintly he died like a Politician in
huggermugger, made no man acquainted with it, and in Catastrophe slain him
over his fathers breast, and oh I'm mad to loose such a sweet opportunity.


Nay push, pree-thee be content! there's no remedy present, may not hereafter
times open in as fair faces as this.


They may if they can paint so well?

Come, now to avoid al suspicion, lets forsake this room, and be going to
meet the Dukes son.


Content, I'm for any whether? heart step close, here he comes?

My honoured Lord?

Oh me; you both present.

Even newly my Lord, just as your Lordship entered now? about this place we had
notice given he should be, but in some


Came your honour private?

Private enough for this: only a few
Attend my coming out.

Death rot those few.

Stay yonder's the slave.

Mass there's the slave indeed my Lord;
Tis a good child, he calls his Father slave.

I, that's the villain, the damned villain: softly,
Tread easy.

Puh, I warrant you my Lord, we'll stiflle in our breaths.

That will do well:
Base rogue, thou sleep thy last, tis policy,
To have him killed in's sleep, for if he waked
He would betray all to them.

But my Lord.

Ha, what say?

Shall we kill him now hes drunk?

I best of all.

Why then he will ne'er live to be sober?

No matter, let him reel to hell.

But being so full of liquor, I fear he will put out all the fire,

Thou art a mad breast.

And leave none to warm your Lordships Gols withal; For he that dyes drunk,
falls into hell fire like a Bucket a water, qush qush.


Come be ready, nake your swords, think of your wrongs
This slave has injured you.

Troth so he has, and he has paid well fort.

Meet with him now.

You'll bear us out my Lord?

Puh, am I a Lord for nothing think you, quickly, now.

Sa, sa, sa: thumpe, there he lies.

Nimbly done, ha? oh, villains, murderers,
Tis the old Duke my father.

That's a jest.

What stiff and cold already?
O pardon me to call you from your names:
Tis none of your deed, -- that villain Piato
Whom you thought now to kill, has murderd him,
And left him thus disguizd.

And no unlikely.

O ^ascall was he not ashamed,
To put the Duke into a greasy doublet.

He has been cold and stiff who knows, how long?

Marry that do I.

No words I pray, off any thing intended:

Oh my Lord.

I would same have your Lordship think that we have small reason to prate.


Faith thou say true? i'll forth-with send to Court,
For all the Nobles, Bastard, Duchess, all?
How here by miracle we found him dead,
And in his raiment that foul villain fled.

That will be the best way my Lord, to clear us all: lets cast about to be
clear.


Ho, Nencio, Sordido, and the rest.

My Lord.

My Lord.

Be witnesses of a strange spectacle:
Choosing for private conference that sad room
We found the Duke my father gealde in blood.

My Lord the Duke -- run hiethee Nencio,
Startle the Court by signifying so much.

Thus much by wit a deep Revenger can:
When murders known to be the clearest man
We're fordest off, and with as bold an eye,
Survey his body as the standers by.

My royal father, too basely let blood,
By a malevolent slave.

Hark? he calls thee slave again.

Ha's lost, he may.

Oh sight, look hither, see, his lips are gnawn with poyso.

How -- his lips by the mass they be.

O villain -- O rogue -- O slave -- O rascal:

O good deceit, he quits him with like terms.

Where.

Which way.

Over what roof hangs this prodigious Comet,
In deadly fire.

Behold, behold my Lords the Duke my fathers murderd by a vassal, that owes
this habit, and here left disguised.


My Lord and husband.

Reverend Majesty.

I have seen these cloths, often attending on him.

That Nobleman, has bin ith Country, for he dos not lie?

Learn of our mother lets dissemble to,
I am glad he's vanished; so I hope are you?

I you may take my word fort.

Old Dad, dead?
I, one of his cast sins will send the Fates
Most hearty commendations by his own son,
I'll tug in the new strcame, till strength be done.

Where be those two, that did affirm to us?
My Lord the Duke was privately rid forth?

O pardon us my Lords, he gave that charge
Upon our lives if he were mist at Court,
To answer so; he rode not any where,
We left him private with that fellow here?

Confirmed.

O heavens, that false charge was his death,
Impudent Beggars, durst you to our face,
Maintain such a false answer? bear him straight to execution.

My Lord?

Urge me no more.
In this the excuse, may be called half the murder?

Yo'ue sentencde well.

Away see it be done.

Could you not stick: see what confession doth?
Who would not lie when men are hanged for truth?

Brother how happy is our vengeance.

Why it hits, past the apprehension of indifferent wits.

My Lord let post horse be sent,
Into all places to entrap the villain,

Post-horse ha ha.

My Lord, we're som-thing bold to know our duty?
Your fathers accidentally departed,
The titles that were due to him, meet you.

Meet me? I'm not at leisure my good Lord,
I'ue many griefs to dispatch out ath way:
Welcome sweet titles, -- talk to me my Lords,
Offepulchers, and mighty Emperors bones,
That's thought for me.

So, one may see by this,
How foreign markets go:
Courtiers have feet ath nines, and tongues ath twellues,
They flatter Dukes and Dukes flatter them-selues.

My Lord it is your shine must comfort us.

Alas I shine in tears like the Sun in April.

Your now my Lords grace?

My Lords grace? I perceive you'll have it so.

Tis but your own.

Then heavens give me grace to be so?

He prays well for him-selfe.

Madame all sorrows,
Must run their circles into joys, no doubt but time,
Will make the murderer bring forth him-selfe.

He were an Ass then in faith?

In the mean season,
Let us bethink the latest-funerall honours:
Due to the Dukes cold body, -- and withal,
Calling to memory our new happiness,
Spread in his royal son, -- Lords Gentlemen,
Prepare for Revels.

Revels.

Time hath seurall falls,
Griefs lift up joys, feasts put down funerals.

Come then my Lords, my favours to you all,
The Duchess is suspected, fowly bent,
I'll begin Dukedom with her banishment?

Revels.

I, that's the word, we are firm yet,
Strike one strain more, and then we crown our wit.

Well, have the fairest mark, -- (so said the Duke when he begot me,)

And if I miss his heart or near about,
Then have at any a Bastard scorns to be out.

Not'st thou that Spurio brother.

Yes I note him to our shame.

He shall not live, his hair shall not grow much longer? in this time of
Revels tricks may be set a foot, see thou yon new Moon, it shall out-liue
the new Duke by much, this hand shall dispossess him, then we're mighty.

A mask is treasons licence, that build upon?
Tis murders best face when a vizard's on.

Is't so, 'ts very good,
And do you think to be Duke then, kind brother:
I'll see fair play, drop one, and there lies the other.

My Lords; be all of Music, strike old gricfes into other countries
That flow in too much milk, and have faint livers,
Not daring to stab home their discontents:
Let our hid flames break out, as fire, as lightning,
To blast this villainous Dukedom: vexed with sin;
Wind up your souls to their full height again.

How?

Which way?

Any way: our wrongs are such,
We cannot justly be revenge de too much.

You shall have all enough: -- Revels are toward,
And those few Nobles that have long suppressd you,
Are busied to the furnishing of a Mask:
And do affect to make a pleasant tail ont,
The Masking suites are fashioning, now comes in
That which must glad us all -- we to take pattern
Of all those suites, the colour, trimming, fashion,
Even to an vndistinguisht hair almost:
Then entering first, observing the true form,
Within a strain or two we shall find leisure,
To steal our swords out handsomely,
And when they think their pleasure sweet and good,
In midst of all their joys, they shall sigh blood.

Weightily, effectually, 3. before the the other Maskers come.

We're gone, all done and past.

But how for the Dukes guard?

Let that alone,
By one and one their strengths shall be drunk down,

There are five hundred Gentlemen in the action,
That will apply them-selues, and not stand idle.

Oh let us hug your bosoms.

Come my Lords,
Prepare for deeds, let other times have words.

Many harmonious hours, and choicest pleasures,
Fill up the royal numbers of your years.

My Lords we're pleased to thank you? -- tho we know,
Tis but your duty now to wish it so.

That shine makes us all happy.

His Grace frounes?

Yet we must say he smiles.

I think we must.

That foule-Incontinent Duchess we have banished,
The Bastard shall not live: after these Revels
I'll begin strange ones; he and the stepsonnes,
Shall pay their lives for the first subsidies,
We must not frown so soon, else t'ad been now?

My gracious Lord please you prepare for pleasure,
The mask is not far off.

We are for pleasure,
Beshrew thee, what art thou? madst me start?
Thou hast committed treason, -- A blazing star.

A blazing star, O where my Lord.

Spy out.

See, see, my Lords, a wondrous-dreadful one.

I am not pleased at that ill-knotted fire,
That bushing-flaring star, -- am not I Duke?
It should not quake me now: had it appeared,
Before it, I might then have justly feared,
But yet they say, whom art and learning Weds:
When stars were locks, they threaten great-mens heads,
Is it so? you are read my Lords.

May it please your Grace,
It shows great anger.

That dos not please our Grace.

Yet here's the comfort my Lord, many times.
When it seems most it threatnes fardest off.

Faith and I think so too.

Beside my Lord,
You're gracefully established with the loves
Of all your subjects: and for natural death,
I hope it will be threescore years a coming.

True, no more but threescore years.

Fourscore I hope my Lord:

And fiuescore, I,

But tis my hope my Lord, you shall ne'er die.

Give me thy hand, these others I rebuke,
He that hopes so, is sit for a Duke:
Thou shalt sit next me, take your places Lords,
We're ready now for sports, let 'em set on.
You thing? we shall forget you quite anon!

I hear 'em coming my Lord.

Ah tis well,
Brothers, and Bastard, you dance next in hell?

Mark, Thunder?
Dost know thy kue, thou big-voyc'st crier?
Dukes groans, are thunders watch-words,

So my Lords, You have enough.

Come lets away, no lingering.

Follow, go?

No power is angry when the lust-ful die,
When thunder-claps, heaven likes the tragedy.

Oh, oh.

Whose groan was that?

Treason, a guard.

How now? all murderd!

Murderd!

And those his Nobles?

Here's a labour saved,
I thought to have sped him, Sbloud how came this.

Then I proclaim my self, now I am Duke.

Thou Duke,! brother thou lie.

Slave so dost thou?

Base villain hast thou slain my Lord and Master.

Pistols, treason, murder, help, guard my Lord the Duke.

Lay hold upon this Traitors?

Oh.

Alas, the Duke is murderd.

And the Nobles.

Surgeons, Surgeons, -- heart dos he breath so long.

A piteous tragaedy, able to wake,
An old-mans eyes bloud-shot;

Oh.

Look to my Lord the Duke-a vengeance throttle him.
Confess thou murdrous and vnhollowed man,
Did thou kill all these?

None but the Bastard I,

How came the Duke slain then;

We found him so,

O villain,

Hark.

Those in the mask did murder us,

Law you now sir.
O marble impudence! will you confess now?

Sloud tis all false,

Away with that foul monster,
Dipped in a Princes blood.

Heart tis a lye,

Let him have bitter execution,

New marrow no I cannot be expressed,
How fairs my Lord the Duke.

Farewell to al,
He that climes highest has the greatest fall,
My tong is out of office.

Air Gentlemen, air,
Now thoult not prate ont, twas Vindice murdered thee,

Oh.

Murdered thy Father.

Oh.

And I am he-tell no-body, so so, the Dukes departed,

It was a deadly hand that wounded him,
The rest, ambitious who should rule and sway,
After his death were so made all away,

My Lord was unlikely,

Now the hope,
Of Italy lies in your reverend years?

Your hair, will make the silver age again,
When there was fewer but more honest men,

The burdens weighty and will press age down,
May I so rule that heaven nay keep the crown,

The rape of your good Lady has been quited,
With death on death.

Just is the Law above
^
^

It was ^, I not hard of the like,

Twas all donne for the best my Lord,

All for your graces good ^ we may be bold to speak it now,
Twas some-what witty carried tho we say it.
Twas we two murdered him,

You two?

None else in faith my Lord nay twas well managde,

Lay hands upon those villains.

How? on us?

Bear 'em two speedy execution,

Heart wast not for your good my Lord?

My good away with 'em such an old man as he,
You that would murder him would murder me,

I^t come about;

Sfoote brother you begun,

May not we set as well as the Dukes son,
Thou hast no conscience, are we not revenged?
Is there one enemy left alive amongst those?
Tis time to die, when we are our selves our foes.
When murders shut deeds close, this curse does seal 'em,
If none disclose' em they them selves reveal 'em!
This murder might have slept in tonglesse brass,
But for our selves, and the world dyed an ass;
Now I remember too, here was Piato.
Brought forth a knavish sentance once, no doubt (said he) but time
Will make the murderer bring forth himself?
Tis well he died, he was a witch,
And now my Lord, since we are in for ever:
This work was ours which else might have been slipped,
And if we list we could have Nobles clipped,
And go for ^ beggars, but we hate
^we have enough,
^ Mother turned our Sister true,
(...) after a nest of (...) (...)

How subtly was that murder elosde, bear up,
These tragic bodies, tis a heavy season:
(...) (...) their blood may wash away all treason.


