DIogenes which used a barrel for his house,
Being fled fro his father to ye city of Athes,
Comforted him self much in beholding ye mouse
which desired neither castle nor hold for her defece
Cocerning sustentatio, she made no difference,
But eat what soever to her did befall,
And touching her apparel, she had least care of all.
This poor mouses property noted Diogenes,
Which oftentimes also, he would have in sight,
And though he ware disciple unto Antisthenes,
yet he learned of the mouse as much as he might
In the science of Sophy he had great delight,
But concerning his state, and outward condition
The most can declare, if you make inquisition.
On a time he chaunsed accumpanied to be
With Alexader, which stood between him the son
What require thou to have Diogenes (quod he?)
Is there any thing that by me may be done?
I pray thee stand aside, and make a little room
(quod Diogenes) that the sun upon me may shine,
Nought else require I of that that is thine.
He used to say, that as servants be obedient
To their bodily masters being in subjection,
Even so evil men that are not content,
Are subjects and slaves to their lusts and affection,
This lesson unto us may be a direction,
Which way our inclination to bridle and subdue,
Namely if we labour the same to eschew.
Thus see you howe little this Philosopher esteemed
the abundant possessions of this mudaine treasure
Which yet notwithstanding at these days is deemed
to be the original and fountain of pleasure,
this causes lust to reign without measure,
to the which men are subjects, Diogenes doth say,
yet both lost and treasure in time wears away.
A Philosopher is he that wisdom doth love,
Which before Pithagoras, wise men ware named
Now Diogenes being wise, this doth approve
that some me of this age, ought as fools to be blamed
For where the one with treasure lack, his life framed
the other travail, care, and labour with gredines,
the same by all means, to enjoy and possess.
But as Lust with the luster, converts to dust
And leaves of force, his pleasant prosperity,
So treasure in time, is turned to rust:
As S. Iames in his epistle shows the verity
Hereof we purpose to speak without temerite,
Therefore our matter is named, ye trial of Treasure,
Which time doth expel, with all mundaine pleasure.
Both merry and short we purpose to be,
And therefore require your pardon and patience,
We trust in our matter nothing you shall see,
That to the godly may give any offence,
Though ye style be barbarous, not fined with eloquece
Yet our Author desires your gentle acceptance,
And we the players likewyse, with all humiliation.
HEy howe care away let the world pass
For I am as lusty as ever I was,
In flowers I flourish as blosomes in May,
Hey howe care away: hay howe care away.
What the Devil ailed me to singe thus,
I cry you mercy by my faith for entering,
Most like I have ridden on the fliyng Pegasus,
Or in Cock Lorrels barge I have been a ventringe,
Sing* why I would singe if it were to do again.
With Orpheus and Amphion I went to school,
What, lads must be lively attending on the train
Of lady Delectation, which is no small fool.
Hey rouse* fill all the pots in the house,
Tush man, in good fellowship let us be merry,
Look up like a man or it is not worth a louse.
Hey how troly lowe, hey dairy dairy,
Ha pleasant youth and lusty Iuuentus,
In faith it is good to be merry this may,
For of mans living here, there is no point endentus.
Therefore a little mirth is worth much sorrow some say.
But remember ye not the wise mans sentence,
It is better in the house of mourning to be
The in the house of laughter where folly hath residece,
For lightness with wisdom can not agree
Though many have pleasure in foolish fantasy.
Ensuing their inclination and lust,
Yet much better is the life of one that is just.

Sir, in this you seem against me to inveigh,

Nothing but reason I think I do say.


Mary you shall have a night cap for making ye reason,
Friend have you not a piece of stockefishe to sell,
I would you had a dish of butterd peason,
By my faith your communication likes me well,
But I beseech you tell me is not your name Just:

Yes forsothe.


And my name thou shalt understand is lust,
And according thereto I am lusty in deed,
But I think thou haste drunk of Morpheus seed,
Thou go like a Dromeldory dreaming drowsy,
I hold twenty pound the knave is lousy.

Mine apparel is not like unto thine,
Disguised and jagged of sundry fashion,
Howe be it, it is not gold always that doth shine,
But corrupting Copper of small valuation
To horrible besides is thy operation,
Nothing more odious unto the Just,
Then the beastly desires of inordinate lust.

It is a shameful thing as Cicero doth say
That a man his own acts should praise comende,
Hypocrites accustom thee like day by day
Checking other men, when they do offend.

Yea but it is an harde thing says the Philosopher,
For a foolish man to have his manners reprehended,
And even at this day it is come so far,
God grant for his mercy it may be amended.
For tell a man friendly now of his fault
Being blasphemy, pride, or vile fornication,
He will be as presumptuous as Haman the haulte
And repay with revenge or else defamation.
Thus few men a friendly monition will bear,
But stoutly persist and maintain their ill,
And in noble men's houses truly I do fear
There are to many have such froward will.

Wounds and hearts who can abide this,
Nay ye vile vylayne I will dress you therefore,
your lasy bones I pretend so to bliss,
That you shall have small lust to prate any more.

Behold the Image of insipient fools,
There are not a few even now of thy property,
Until you be put into poverties schools:
ye will not forsake this foolish insolency.

Nay soft, with thee I have not made an end.


The Just against lust must always contend,
Therefore I purpose to wrestle with thee,
Who shall have the victory, streightwaye we shall see.

When thou wilt by his flesh: I shall hold the wag

I know that lust uses not little to brag:

Thou shalt find me as mighty as Sampson ye strong

yea the battle of lust endures long.


Wounds and flesh, I was almost down on my back,
But yet I will wrestle till my bones crack.

The end of thy presumption now doth appear,

yet do what thou can I will not lie here,
No by his wounds you old doting knave,
think thou that lust will be made a slave,
I shall mete you in Smithfield or else other where,
By his flesh and blood, I will thee not forbear.

Not of my power I do thee expel
But by the might of his spirit that dwells in me,
Inordinate lust with the just may not dwell,
And therefore may not I accompany thee.

Well goodman Just, it is no matter,
But in faith I pretend not with thee to flatter,

I shall live in as much welthynes I trust.

Where most wealth is and most dilectation,
There Lust is commonly of most estimation:
For where as wealth wants idleness doth sla
But where idleness is Lust parts the slake.

Which all good men ought to use and frequent
For horrible are the fruits of inordinate lust,
Which in some case resemble Hybra the serpent,
Whose head being cut of an other rises incontinent.
So one of Lusts cogitations being cut away
There rises up an other, yea many we may say:
It is requisite therefore that every degree
Against this his lust, both strive and contend,
And though at the first he seem sturdy to be,
The Lord will convince him for you in the end.
Your cause unto him therefore holy commend,
Labouring to avoid all inordinate lust,

I can remember since Noes ship
Was made and builded on Salisbury plain,
The same year ye weathercock of Paules caught ye pip
So that Bow bell was like much woe to sustain,
I can remember I am so old.
Since Paradise gates were watched by night,
And when that Vvlcanus was made a cuckold
Among the great Gods I appeared in sight.
Nay for all your smiling I tell you true,
No no* ye will not know me now,
The might on the earth I do subdue,
tush, if you will give me leave yle tell ye howe,
Howe, in good faith I carenot greatly,
Although I declare my daily increase
But then these gentle women will be angry,
therefore I think best to hold my peace:
Nay I beseech you let the matter staye,
For I would not for twenty poude come in their hades
For if there should chance to be but one dalila,
By the mas they would bind me in Samsons bands
But what mean I first with them to begin,
Seeing that in all men I do remain,
Because that first I remained even within,
And after her Adam and so forth to Caine,
I perceive by your looks my name ye would know,
Why you are not ignorant of that I dare say,
It is I that do guide the bent of your bow,
And rules your actions also day by day,
Forsothe I am called Natural inclination
Which bred in old Adams fostered bones,
So that I am proper to his generation
I will not away with casting of stones,
I make the stoutest to bow and bend:
Again when I lust I make men stand upright
From the lowest to the highest I do ascend,
Drawing them to things of natural might.
Where is the knave, that so did rave:
O that we could him find,
We would him make, for fear to quake
That lout of lobbishe kind.
My name is lust, let him trust
That I will have redress,
For thou and I, will make him fly,
Mine old friend Sturdines.

Where is now that valiant Hercules,
For all his brags he is now run away:

By the guts of Golya, it is best for his ease,


Cocks soul: what bragging knaves have we here,
Come ye to convince the mightiest conqueror,
It was I that before you now doth appear,
Which brought to confusion both Hector Alexander:
Look on this leg ye prating slaves,
I remember since it was no greater then a tree,
At that time I had a couple of knaves
Much like unto you that wayghted on me.

Cocks precious soul, let us conquer the knave,

By his flesh and sides, a good courage I have,
Stand you therefore a little aside
And ye shall see me quickly abate the fools pride.

Nay I dare not I if thou look so big,
What should such a Bore fight with a pig.
Put up thy sword man we will agree,
So lo: do so much as bear that for me.

Nay by his heart, then I will you dress.


Be Good in thine office gentle friend Sturnines,
For though thou and I do seem to contend,
yet we are, and must be friends till the end.

Come give me thy hand I beshrowe thy heart.


Nay you must take all things in good part,
Who stands yender captain Lust?

Yea mary.


No remedy then to him go I must,
you have forgot I dare say your old friend Inclination
But let us renew acquaintance again for cocks passio

Why man our acquaintance hath been of old,
I am yours at commandment therefore be bold,
For Lust can do nothing without Inclination,
Chiefly in matters concerning a pleasant vocation.

In dede Lust may be taken for a thing indifferent
Except Inclination be joined thereunto*
But when that I once have reaueled my intent,
As I will men to work so commonly they do,

Ye have harde of the combat between me Just.


ye mary, I harde say that you lay in the dust.


What say ye.


Neither one word nor other ye may me trust.


Of mine honesty my company he utterly refused,
And in wrestling with me he gave me the foil,
Saying: that I had my self and other abused.
Leading men in perplexity marvelous toil.

By gogs wounds if we had found him here,
We should by his flesh have abated his chere.

I perceive Sturdines thou art no fool,
Tell me of fellowship where went thou to school,

What to read or wrighte.


Nay to swear and fight.
For I think thou can neither write, read, nor spell,
But in swearing and fighting thou doest excel.

Thou know that I am joined with Lust,
And Sturdy by nature I am in like case,
What let the world wag, all can not be Just,
Some must Natural inclination embrace.

All men Just: no, I remember the sentence of Tully
That no man is Just, that fears death poverty or pain,
which I do fear all that marvelously,
For fortune is variable I do perceive plain,
And notwithstanding that Flix possessed great gain,
yet when Paule preached of the judgment day,
He trembled for fear and bad him go away.

Doth such passions often trouble your mind?


Nay not often, but sometime I do them find,
But then to the intent to drive them away,
I either go to sleep, or else to some play.

By gogs precious heart, even so do I,
But sometime they cumber me pestilently.

Well master Lust, such dumps to eschew
My advise and request you must needs ensue,
That is to become disciple to doctor Epicurus,
And then you shall have mirth by measure overplus
Tush, I know a couple companions in store
That ware marvelous mete for you evermore.
I wish you unto them.

Well then call them in.


Here they come each of them in a knaves skin.
With lust to live is our delight,
In high estate and dignity,
Seeing that the Just put us to flight,
Let them alone in misery.

Nay, they be lusty lads I tell ye.


What Inclination, me thought I did smell thee,
Give me thy hand or we forther go.

Now welcome in faith, and Greedy gut also,
But sirs* are none of you both acquainted with Lust.

Yes that they have been both of them I trust,
welcome sirs in faith welcome unto me.

By my troth I am glad your maistership to see
In health and prosperity, as presently you be.

Bom fay so am I wod all my heart,

This cow bellied knave doth come from the carte,
Ise teach you to speak I hold you a pound,
Curchy Lob curchy, down to the ground.

Che can make curchy well enough.


Lower old knave or yle make ye to bow,
The great bellied lout me think can not bend,
yes so lo, he begins now to amend.

Well sirs, now I remember Esopes advise
which he gave to the Samies against king Crassus,
Therefore it is good to be witty and wise,
And being in liberty to keep me still thus:
I can not abide a life that is dolorous,
And seeing that my name is properly Lust,
I hate the conversation also of the Just.

Well master Lust, first join you to me Inclination
Next here with Sturdines you must you acquaint
Turn you about and embrace Elation,
And that wealth may increase without any restraint
Join you with Greedy gut here in our presence,
That all these in you may have prosperous influence.

Out alas, what a sudden passion is this,
I am so taken that I can not stand,
The cramp, the cramp, hath touched me iwis,
I shall die without remedy now out of hand.

By my matens chese, our master is sick.


Stand back Nycoll nody with the pudding prick,
More brains in thy skin then wit in thy brain,
Such Greedy guts in faith would be flayne,
This cramp doth signify nothing in effect
But howe he is bowed by me Inclination,
None of all your councels he will now reject,
And therefore fear not to make full declaration.

Then fear not the force of these that be just,
But labour your self to advance and augment,
Be iocound and lively sith your name is lust,
And then you shall easily obtain your entente.

Esteem your self always equal with the best,
And seek for promotion, power, and dignity:
It is good when men may live as they lust,
And unto the just bear hate and malignity.

O sir ye must be greedy to catch and to claw.


Well said Greedy gut, as wise as a dawe,

Eat up at a mouthful, houses and lands.


There's a vengeable mouth to,

Never fear God nor the governors law,
But gripe gripe gredely all that comes in your hands.
By the Mass but Hew Howlet is pestilens witty,
What guttishe gredinesse the horeson can teach
That thou art not erected in faith it is pity,
As hie as three trees, and a halter will reach.

Mary sirs, but your councels hath set me on fire.
Hey lusty lad, how fresh am I now,
Lead me Inclination to have my desire,
And then at thy request I will ever bend bow.

He that bends to follow his own inclination,
Must needs live a wicked and vile conversation,
But go master Lust, I will lead you to a place
Where you shall have pleasure enough in short space.

yea, but shall not this company go thither.


yes mary we four will all go together,
But Sturdines shall tarry to face out the matter,
If Just peradventure against you should clatter.

By the mass, and well said, but first let us sing,

I must tune my pipes first of all with drinking.


Tush what then, I pray thee help us bear a part.


yes I will sing the trouble with all my heart.
Lust shall be led by inclination
To carnal cogitation,
Where lust is led wholly by me,
He must fall to Cupidite,
For carnal cares shall him assail,
And speedily they shall preuaile.
I Sturdines will face it out,
In his cause, sturdy stiff and stout,
Then Greedy gut shall make him eat,
Both house lands, like bread meat.
Elation shall puff him hie
For to aspier above the sky,
Then natural and lordly lust,
Shall with his pour despise the Just.

Our songe is ended haste thou other in store,

I shall not have done this half hour and more,
yet I will now I remember, come in Lust
That I go before is but needful and just,

to reason and talk with Carnal cogitation.

Is there more vanity under neath the son,
Then to be inclined after this sort,
well Lust doth now as other have done,
yea, and do day by day, esteming it a sporte,
this Lust is the Image of all wicked men,
which in seeking the world, have all delectation,
they regard not God nor his comaundementes ten
But are wholly led by their own Inclination,
First to inculcate with Carnal cogitation,
And after to the desire of all worldly treasure,
which alone they esteem the fulness of pleasure
with Elation or Pride he is also assotiate,
which puffs up his senses with presumption pestilet
then Greedy gut makes them continually to grate
On ye mock of this world which he thiketh permanent,
I sturdines to bear out all things, am bent:
thus see you howe men that are led by their lust,
Dissent from the virtuous godly and Just.

The advise of Aristippus have in your mind,
which willed me to seek such things as be permanent
And not such as are of a vanishing kind
For the one with the other is not equiualent,
Be circumspect therefore, forseing and Sapient,
For treasures here gotten are uncertain and vain,
But treasures of the mind do continually remain.

This is the mind of Musonus also I remember,
Like as presently you have advertised me,
For the which I can not but thankfully render,
Such commendations as is requisite to be,
And as your name is Sapience, thus much I see,
That on heavenly wisdom you do depend,
And not on as time doth bring to an end.

Truth in deed, therefore your name being Just,
With me and my documents must be assotiate,
Where contrary such as are led by their lust,
To incline evil are always appropriate,
They have not as you have, battle combat,
Against the cogitations that inwardly spring,
But rather are obedient unto the same thing,
And this is the occasion that men are so ambitious,
And so foolish led by the lust of their brain,
Sometime to covet, sometime to be vicious,
Sometime the council of the wise to disdain,
Sometime to clime till they fall down again,
Sometime to usurp the possessions of other,
Sometime to disobeye both father and mother.

Alas what avails it riches to enjoy,
Though as much in comparison as Cressus the king,
What helps it to have Helene in Troye,
If the conscience of man continually sting,
Elation and Pride, no commodity doth bring,
But is often known the forerunner of shame,
And the blot of immortal memory and fame.
Now by my hallydome it is alone a,
Better sporte in my life I never saw,
It is trim I tel you to dance with Iohn Ione a:
We pass not a point for God nor his law,
But Lust is lusty and full of porridge,
Cogitation and he, in one Bed doth lie
When: here is master Just with his cankered courage,
What an old doting, Sapience then I am dressed I,
So often already Just hath me restrained,
That I dare not entice him any more,
For through Sapience he hath me clearly disdained
That my courage is spent, and I have no more.

Nay soft sir we must talk with you or ye go.


I can not tarry at this time the truth is so.


Nay, there is no remedy with you we must talk.


By the body of me, I hold best that I walk,
Or else learn to speak language another while,
And so I may happen the knaves to beguile.

Turn back or you go, we have somewhat to say.


Non point parla fransois, nonne par ma foy.


To deceive us now him self he doth prepare.


Ick en can ghene english spreken vorwaer,
Body of me let me go, or else I shall peace,
Iwis master Just, you have loved me or this,
Therefore now be ruled after my council,
And godly things for your commodity I shall you tel

Let him that is Just not lightly ensue,
His vile inclination and carnal concupicence,
But let him rather contend the same to subdue,
And chiefly those that have knowledge of Sapience,
Therefore to bridle this lust do your diligence,
His crafty provocations utterly to restrain,
That Just may live while life doth remain.

Godd man hoball speak you in earnest:
What doest thou say, shall the Just bridle me,
No, no, brother snappes, do the worst and thy best,
I will not be bridled of him nor of thee.

Seeing Sapience consists in heavenly document,
And that heavenly document consists in sapience
To bridle this wretch I can not but consent,
Sith I of his purpose have had oft intelligence.

Yet again bridle, it doth not prevail,
I will not be bridled of the best of you both,
See you this ger here's one will make you to quail,
Stand back, to kill you master just I would be loath
you have been so burned and fried of late,
That it were pity to hurt you any more,
Back I say, or my dagger shall about your pate,
By the mass but I will sir, yle make your bones sore.

I will bridle thee beast for all thy bragging.


In faith good man Just, yle hold ye wagging,
Nay brother, ye shall find me a cursed colt to bridle,
Nay in faith, better yet I will make thee to struggle.

Never leave him but ensue the council of sapience.


Lo now I have brought him under obedience.


Not so obedient as thou think me to have,
Nay brother, ye shall find me a coltishe knave,
We he, he, it is good for you to hold fast,
For I will kick and winche while thy life doth last*

Thou shalt kick in deed but no victory win,
Neither to conquer the Just to vngodlines nor sin,

O yes, O yes, I will make a proclamation.


What shall that be?


If ye will give me leave then you shall see,
O yes, is there any man or woman that hath lost,
A gambolling gelding with a gray tail,
Let him come to the Crier and pay for his cost,
And he will tell him tidings without any fail.

To the intent that you may him sharply restrain,
Let him not enjoy so much of the rain.

Cocks soul, now the snaff^e cutteth my lip,
I would this suberly knave had the pip,
I shall leap no hedges while this bridle is on,
Out alas, I think it will fret me to the bone.

Thus should every man that will be called Just,
Bridle and subdue his beastly inclination,
That he in the end may obtain perfect trust,
The messenger of God to give sight to salvation.

That trust to obtain with him I have struggled,

Then let us depart and leave this beast bridled.


Mary the devil go with you and his dun dame,
Such horse masters will make a colt quickly tame,
I would he were hanged that this snaffell did make,
It makes my chappes so shamefully to ache*
ye have no pity on me you I se by your laughing,
I care not greatly if I fall to gambolling,
We he, he, he, he, he, come aloft I say,
Beware the horse heles I auise you, stand away,
The rain of my bridle is tied so short,
That I can not make you any more sporte,
But though I be bridled now of the Just,
I doubt not but I shall be unbridled by Lust,
And let not Just think but I will rebel,
Although he bridle me ten times all well,
Though nature saith one dome with a croche,
It will not lie long but incontinent approach,
Eeuen so, though that I be bridled a while,
The Colt will at length the Curser beguile,

Chill run I as fast as I can,
zures did none of you see a man,
Cham zent in haste from my master Lust,
So that Inclination needs come to him must.

Where is he now I pray thee tell me.


Why what have we here Iesus benedicite,
I hold twenty pound it is Baalams Ass,
Nay tis a Colt, I see his tail by the mass.

Am I a Colt, nay thou lie like a knave,
Somewhat for thy labour now shalt thou have.

Ho ball ho, lousy Jade must ye kick.


Who ever saw such a desperate Dicke,
Why Greedy gut, doest thou not know Inclination?

Body O me, who hath dressed thee of that fashion,
Thou art bridled for biting now in deed,
Syra, master Lust would have thee make speed.

I am bridled I* even as thou doest see,
Therefore desire him to come and help me,
But what is the matter that he for me sent.

Mary to gather with Gredines, now he is bent,
He hath had long talk with Carnal cogitation,
And is set on fire by the means of Elation,
So that he is so lusty he can not abide.
Therefore one or other for him must be spied.

Well Greedy gut, I pray thee go and make haste.


Tush fear not, chill spend no time in waste.


I had rather then.xl. pence that he ware come,
If I be bridled long I shall be undone,
So sharpe is this snaffell called restraint,
That it makes me sweat I am so faint:
Hark, I hear the voice of my master Lust,
Now I shall be unbridled shortly I trust.

Cocks precious wounds, here hath been villainy*

Ye, ye they have used me with to much villainy,
That old knave Sapience so counselled Just,
Bu let me be unbridled good master Lust.

Lo now thou art unbridled, be of good chere*
By lady I am glad I have gotten thus clear,
But hark you master Lust, if I may do you pleasure


O my heart is on fire till she come in place.


O master Lust, she hath an amiable face,
A tricker* a trimmer, in faith that she is,
The gods of wealth, prosperity and bliss.

But think you that this minion long endure shall.


For ever and ever man, she is immortal:
There be many other, but she exceadeth them all.

What be they, have you their names in store,

Yea hark in your ear.

Sith that the apple of Paris before me is cast,
And that I may deliver the same where I will,
I would Prometheus were here to help me hold fast
That I might have a fore wit with me ever still,
Pallas I consider in science hath skill,
But Iuno and Venus, good will do I bear,
Therefore to give the Appull I know not where.

Be conciled by me and give it lady Treasure,
It shall be for your commodity in ye end without measur
For having the company of this minion lass,
you shall never want the society of Pallas,
Iuno, nor yet the armipotent Mars,
Can not resist your strength be they never so fearce
And as for Venus, you shall have at pleasure,
For she is bought and sold always with Treasure,
She of her power hath whole countries conquered
The most noble chapions by her hath ben murdered
Acon for her sake was stoned to death,
Tush, innumerable at this day spend their breath,
Sum hang or be hanged, they love her so well,
She is the great goddess, it is true that I tell.

Which way should I work of her to have a sight.


I Inclination will lead you thither right,
But we must have Greedy gut and also Elation.

They are at the house of carnal Cogitation.


Whether I would wish that we might depart.
I will lead you thither with all my heart.
So happy is the state of those*
That walk upright and just,
That thou Lord doest thy face disclose
By perfect hope and trust.
Their Inclination thou doest stay,
And send them Sapience,
That they should serve and eke obey,
Thy high magnificence.
Thou send contentation,
That we in thee may rest,
Therefore all adoration,
To thee perteineth best.

God cares for his as the Prophet doth say,
And preserves them under his merciful wings,
Namely the Just that his will do obey,
Observing his holy commandment in all things,
Not for our sake, or for our deservinges,
But for his own sake openly to declare,
That all men on earth ought to live in his fear.

Howe God hath blissed you all men may see,
For first at your entrance you conquered Lust,
Not by your power, but by might of the deity,
As all persons ought to do that be Just,
Then through Sapience which God did you send,
You bridled that brutish beast Inclination,
And also ordered you with Contentation.

Those that are contented with their vocation,
Be thankful to God, this is a true consequent,
And those that be thankful in their conversation,
Can not but please the Lord God omnipotent,
But those that be sturdy, proud, and disobediente,
The Ruler of all Rulers will them confound,
And rote their remembrance of from the ground.

When Solon was asked of Cressus the king,
What man was most happy in this vale terrestrial,
To the end he seems to attriqute that thing,
When men be asociate with treasures celestial,
Before the end can no man judge he doth say,
That any man is happy that here bears breath,
But then by his end prettily judge we may,
Thus true happiness coesisteth saith he after death.
If this be a truth as undoubtedly it is,
What men are more foolish, wretched and miserable,
The those ye in these treasures account their whole blys
Being infect with amdition that sickness uncurable,
A wicked Adrastia, thou gods deceivable,
Thus to pluck from men the sense of their mind,
So that no contentation, therein they can find.

The treasure of this world we may well compare
To Circes the witche, with her crafty cautilitie,
Where with many men's minds so poisoned are,
That quite they are carried into all fidelity,
They are conjured in deed, and bewitched so sore,
That treasure is their trust, joy and delight,
True trust is expelled they pass not therefore*
And against contentation, they continually fight*
But though wicked men follow their lust,
Crying, on earth is our felicity and pleasure,
yet God doth so guide the hearts of the just,
That they respect chiefly the celestial treasure.

Alas should we not have that estimation,
Which God hath prepared for his dere elect,
Should not our minds rest in full contentation,
Having trust in this treasure, most high in respect:
S* Paule, when the Lord so high did erecte,
Saith: it passes the sense of our memory and mind,
Much less can our outward eyes the same find.
And as for treasures which men possess here
Through fickelnes of fortune, soon fades away*
The greatest of renown and most worthy pere,
Sometime falls, in the end to mysery and decay,
Record of Dionisius, a king of much fame,
Of the valiant Alexander, and Caesar the strong,
Record of Tarquini{us}, which Superbus had to name,
And of Heliogabolos that ministered with wrong,
If I should recite all, I should stand very long.
But these be sufficient plainly to approve,
Howe soon by vncertentie, this treasure doth remove.

It is true, therefore a mind well content,
Is great riches as the wise king Salomon doth say:
We have seen of late days this cancar pestilent
Corrupting our realm, to our great decay,
Ambition I mean, which chiefly did reign
Among those that should be examples to other,
We saw howe their brethren they did disdain,
And burned with fire the child with the mother,
It is often seen that such monsters ambitious,
As spare not to spill the blood of the innocent,
Will not greatly stick to become seditious,
The determination of God thereby to prevent:
God grant every one of us earnestly to repent,
And not to set our minds on this fading treasure,
But rather wish and will, to do the Lords pleasure.

O ye Emperors, Potetates, Princes of renown,
Learn of Just with trust your selves to associate,
That like as your vocation, by right doth ask ye crown
And also due obedience, being ye appointed magistrate,
So rule that at the last you may be resuscitate,
And reign with ye almighty with perfect cotinuace,
Receiving double crowns for your godly gouernauce
ye noble men, whom God hath furnished with fame,
Be myndefull to walk in the ways of the Just,
Add virtue evermore to your honourable name,
And be not overcome of concupicence or lust,
Fl from love of Treasure, catch hold of me Trust.
And then double felicity, at the last you shall possess,
And in al earthly doings, God shall give good success.
ye poor men commons, walk well in your vocation
Banish lust and desire, which is not convenient,
Let trust work in you a full contentation,
Considering that it leads to treasures more excellent
For these are uncertain, but they are most permanent:
your necessity supply with virtue and trust,
And then shall you enjoy your crown among ye Just.

As I being properly nominate Just,
Am here associate with contentation,
So have I my whole felicity in Trust,
Who ilumineth mine eyes to see my salvation.

Fear ye not, shortly you shall have consolation,
If I were once grown in you to perfection,
Even thus goes it always with ye children of electio

I will depart now, will ye go with me trust.


yea I must always associate the Just.


A psalme of thankesgeuing first let us sing,
To the laud and praise of the immortal king.
Here if you will: sing the man is blessed
that fears God. c.

Lust (quod he) now in faith he is lusty,
Lady Treasure and he hath made a match,
He thinks that I wax marvelous trusty,
Because I teach him to claw and to catch,
And now a days amity doth therein consiste,
He that can flatter shall be well beloved,
But he that says, thus and thus says Christ,
Shall as an enemy be openly reproved.
Friendship, yea, friendship consists now in adulatio,
Speak fair and please the lust of thy Lord,
I warrant thee be had in great estimation,
When those that tell truth, shall be abhorde,
A unhappy lingua, whether wilt thou ren,
Take heed I advise thee, least thou be shent,
If ye chance to tell any tales of these gentlewomen,
With flesh hokes and nails, you are like to be rent,
Nay for the passion of me, be not so moved,
And I will please you incontinent again,
Above all treasures you are worthy to be loved,
Because you do no men deride nor disdain,
You do not contempt the simple and poor,
you be not his minded, proud and presumptuous,
Neither wanton nor wyly you be never more,
But gentle, loving, modesty, and virtuous,
Behold howe a lie can please some folks diet,
O pacify their minds marvelous well,
All whyste I warrant ye, so they in quiet,
Howe to please you hereafter now I can tell,
Hark, I hear Lust and my lady Treasure.
They are given to solace singing and pleasure.

Ah Amorous Lady of beautiful face,
Thou art heartily welcome into this place,
My heart is inclined to thee lady Treasure,
My love is insatiate, it kepeth no measure.

It is I master Lust that will you advance,
Treasure, it is that things doth enhance
Upon me set your whole affection and lust,
And pass not a point for the ways of the Just,
Treasure is a pleasure, bear that in mind,
Both trusty and true ye shall me always find.

As trusty as is a quick eel by the tail,
What Lady Treasure welcome without fail,
To be better acquainted with you once I trust,
But I dare not in the presence of my master Lust,
ye are welcome sir heartily, what be of good courage:
Drawer, let us have a pynte of white wine borage.

Wherefore I pray thee tell,

Mary me think you are not well.


Not well, who can a better life crave,
Then to possess such a lady as I have:
Is there any wealth not contained in treasure,
Ah lady, I love thee in faith out of measure,

It is out of measure in deed as you say,
And even so most men love her at this day:
Oh she is a minion of amorous hew,
Her pere in my days yet I never knew,
(Old quod you) I am an old knave I tell ye,
Nay, never laugh at ye matter, for doubtless I smell ye
She passes Iuno, Ceres, and Pallas,
More beautiful then ever dame Venus was*
Othea in sapience she doth exceed,
And Diana in dignity, of whom we do read.
What should fair Helene once named be,
She excells all these master Lust believe me.

Howe say you, is not this an eloquent lad?

That you have such a seruaunt, truly I am glad.


Ha, ha, now in deed I can you not blame,
For women of all degrees are glad of the same,
They that flatter and speak them fair,
Shall be their sons, and peradventure their air.

You told me of a brother you had lady Treasure.


Yea sir that I have, his name is called Pleasure,
And seeing you enyoye me now at your will,
Right soon I am sure he will come you until*

Truly of him I would fain have a sight,
For because yt in pleasure. I have marvelous delight.

Then honesty and profit you may bid good night

What says thou?


I say he will shortly appear in sight,
I know by his singing, the same is he,
The misbegotten orpheus, I think that he be.
O happy eaies, and pleasant plays,
Wherein I do delight a
I do pretend, till my lives end
To live still in such plight a*

Master pleasure I perceive you be of good chere.


What Inclination old lad, art thou here.


Yea sir, and lady Treasure your sister also.


Body of me, then unto her I will go,
What sister, I am glad to mete with you here.

Welcome unto me mine own brother dere.
Master Lust, this is my brother of whom I told,
He is pleasant and lusty, as you may behold.

Gentleman (I pray you) is your name master Pleasure

yea sir, and I am brother to lady Treasure.


And are you concented to accompany me.


Where as she is resident I must needs be,
Treasure doth Pleasure commonly proceade,
But the one is with ye other, they have both so decreed

Mary now you are well in deed master Lust,
This is better I trow then the life of the Just,
They be compelled to possess contentation,
Having no treasure but trust of salvation,
But my lady your mistress, my mistress I would say,
She works you may see to keep you from decay.

O madame, in you is all my delight,
And in your brother Pleasure, both day and night,
The trial of treasure this is in deed,
I perceive that she is a true friend at need.
For I have proved her according as Thales doth say
And I perceive that her beauty can not decay.

Always with you I will be resident,
So that your life shall be most excellent.

yea sir and me Pleasure also you shall have,
So that none other thing there needs to crave,
I will replenishe your heart with delight,
And I will be always with treasure in sight,
But if you desire to enjoy me at your will,
My sister you must have in reputation still,
And then as her treasure is certain and excellent,
My pleasure shall be both perfect and permanent,
Credit not those sir that talk that and this,
Saying, that in us two consists no bliss,
But let experience your mind ever move,
And see if all men us two do not love.

Love, yes they love you in deed without doubt,
Which shutteth some of the Gods kingdom without:
They love you so well that their God they do hate,
As time hath declared to us even of late,
But he that on such things his study doth caste,
Shall be sure to be deceived at the last.

What doest thou say,

Of treasure forsooth ye must ever hold fast,
For if you should chance to lose lady Treasure,
Then fare well in post this gentleman Pleasure.

My love to them both can not be expressed,
And especially my Lady you I love best.

If ye love me as you do profess,
Be ye sure you shall want no kind of welthines.

And if you have welthines at your own will,
Then will I pleasure remain with you still.

You are both as constant as snow in the sun.
Which from snow to water through melting doth run
But worldly wise men can not conceive that*
To honte for such myse they learn of the cat.

My Lady is amorous and full of favour.


I may say to you she hath an ill-favoured savour.


What says thou?


I say she is loving and of gentle behaviour.


And so I will continue still be you sure.


And I in like case while your life doth endure,

Ah trust treasure, ah pleasant pleasure,
All wealth I possess now without measure,
And seeing that the same shall firmly remain,
To help me singe a songe, will you take the pain.

Even with all my heart begin when ye will.


To it, and I will either help or stand still.
Am not I in blissed case
Treasure and pleasure to possess,
I would not wish no better place,
If I may still have welthines,
And to enjoy in perfect peace,
My lady lady.
My pleasant pleasure shall increase
My dear lady.
Helene may not compared be,
Nor Creseda that was so bright,
These can not stain the shine of thee
Nor yet Minerua of great might,
Thou pass Venus far away,
Lady lady,
Love thee I will both night and day
My dere lady.
My mouse my nobs and cony sweet
My hope and joy my whole delight,
Dame nature may fall at thy feet,
And may yield to thee her crown of right
I will thy body now embrace,
Lady, lady
And kiss thy sweet and pleasant face,
My dere lady.

I am Gods minister called Visitation,
Which diverse and many ways you may understand
Sometime I bring sickness, sometime perturbation,
Sometime trouble and misery throughout the land,
Sometime I signify gods wrath to be at hand,
Sometime a foreronner of destruction imminent,
But an exectuter of pain I am at this present,
Thou insipient fool that hast followed thy lust,
Disdaining the doctrine declared by Sapience,
In treasure and pleasure hath been thy trust,
Which you thought should remain ever in thy presence
Thou never remember Thales his sentence,
Who wills men in all things to keep a measure,
Especially in love to incertainty of treasure,
Even now I am come from visiting the Just,
Because God begins first with his elect,
But he is so associate and comforted with trust,
That no kind of impacience his soul can infect,
Contentation in such sort his race doth direct,
That he is contented with Gods operation,
Comfortably embracing me his visitation.
But now I am come to vex thee with pain,
Which make treasure thy castle and rock,
Thou shalt know that both she and pleasure is vain,
And that the almighty thou can not mock,
Anguish and grief into thee I do caste,
With pain in thy members continually,
Now thou hast pain thy pleasure can not last,
But I will expelle him incontinently.

O cocks heart, what a pestilence is this,
Depart from me I say, hence gods Visitation,
Help, help, lady treasure thou gods of blis,
At thy hands let me have some consolation.

I will remain with you be out of doubt.


Will ye be packing you ill-favoured lowte.


Presently in dede from him thou shalt not go,
And why? because Gods will hath not determined so.
But in time thou treasure shalt be turned to rust,
And as for pleasure he shall now attend on the Just.

Gogs wounds these pangs increase ever more.


And my little finger is spitefully sore,
you will not believe how my heal doth ache,

Nay let me alone your part I will take,

Be of good comfort while I here remain.
For pleasure and he shall be parted in twain,
It is not mete that he should be participate with lust
But rather with the virtuous godly and Just.

Remain with me still master pleasure I say.


Nay there is no remedy I must away,
For where God doth send punition and pain,
I pleasure in no case can not remain.

I could in like case separate thy treasure.
But God doth admonish thee by losing thy pleasure.

Fare well in the devils name old lousy lout,
That my master will die I stand in great doubt,
Ho, ho, ho, howe is it with you master Lust,

By the flesh of Goliath, yet Treasure is my trust,
Though pleasure be gone, and I live in pain,
I doubt not but Treasure will fetch him again.

Yea, that I will fear not with you remain.


The property of rich men undoubtedly he hath,
Which think with money to pacify Gods wrath,
And health at their pleasure to bye and to sell,
Howe is it master Lust, are you any thing well.

Against this Visitation my heart doth rebel,
Gogs wounds, shall I still in these pangs remain.

Fear you not master Lust, I will help you again
Treasure in physic exceadeth Gallenus,
Tush there is no physician but we shall have with us.
To the ease of your body they will you bring,
And therefore I pray you despair in nothing,
Put your trust always in me lady treasure,
And I will restore you again unto pleasure,
For I am the Gods that therein hath power,
Which shall remain perfect unto the last hour.

Yea, yea, master Lust, be as merry as you may,
Let Treasure be your trust who so ever say nay.

The ancient Greeks have called me Chronos*
Which in our vulgar tongue signifies time.
I am entered in presently for a certainly purpose,
Even to turn treasure to rust and to slime,
And Lust which hath long disdained the Just,
Ensuing his filthy and vile inclination,
Shall immediately be turned to dust,
To the example of all the whole congregation,
For time brings both these matters to pass,
As experience hath taught in every age,
And you shall behold the same in this glass,
As a document both profitable and sage,
Both Lust and treasure come forth with speed
Into the shop of the most mighty God,
There shall you be beaten to powder in dede,
And for your abusion, feel his scourge and rod.

By saint Mary, then they have made a wise match,
I pretend therefore to leap over the hatche,
Nay let me depart, sirs stop me not I say,
For I must remain though both these decay.

Lust from the beginning frequented hath been
And shall I now turn to nothing for thee.

Treasure in all ages hath been beloved,
And shall she from the earth by thee be removed.

You know that all such things are subject to time
Therefore me to withstand is no reason nor rhyme,
For like as all things in time their beginning had,
So must all things in time vanish and fade.

Gogs wounds, let Treasure remain still with me,

Yea let me continue still in my dignity.


Nay, I must cary you into Vulcans fire,
Where you shall be tried unto the uttermost,
Seeing Lust against Just did daily conspier,
To dust he shall turn for all his great boast,
Both of you shall have one rigorous hoaste,
Come therefore with speed time can not tarry,
To the end of your felicity I will you carry.

If there be no remedy then there is no shift,

He must needs go that is driven by the Devils drift,
A cocks precious sides, what fortune is this,
Whether go I now, to misery or blis.

We, he, he, he, he, ware the horse heles I say,
I would the rain ware lose that I might run away.

Nay fithe thou wilt not spare against me to rebel,
I will not spare by Gods grace thee to brydell,
All men may see howe vile Inclination,
Spares not to put the Just to vexation,
Even so may all men learn of me again,
Thy beastly desiers to bridle and restrain*

Mary sir I am bridled in deed as you say,
And shakled I think for running away,
This snafle is sharpe indeed for the nones,
And these shakkels do chafe my legs to the bones,
And yet will I provoke spurn and prick,
Rebel repugn lash out and kick,
We he, in the Jade name are ye so fresh,
This ger I suppose will pluck down your flesh.

Nay soft, thou shalt have a little more pain,
For somewhat shorter now I will tie thy rain.

Most blissed and happy I say are the Just,
Even because they restrain their own Inclination,
Thou therefore that hast made thy treasure of trust,
Behold, I have brought thee here consolation.

Now blyssed be God of his mercy and grace,
With all my heart and soul I do you embrace.

Consolation is my name even as Trust hath said,
Which is joy or comfort in this life transitory,
He that possesses me, is of nothing afraid,
But hath a most quiet and peaciable memory,
For I through trust doth show thee the glory,
That God hath prepared for them before hand,
Wherein at the last they shall perfectly stand.

Receive this croune of felicity now at this space,
Which shall be made richer in the celestial place.

Byr lady, I would I had such a gay croune.


Now praised be God for this riches of renoune
Felicity in this world the Just do enjoy,
Namely when the Devil can them not annoy,
The Lords work this is, who be praised for ever,
who grant us in his laws still to persevere.

Amen, amen, God give us delight,
In his holy covenaunt both day and night.

Our matter is almost brought to an end,
Saving that Inclination in prison must be shut,
Just carry him forth that uses to contend,
And see that surely enough he be put.

That shall be done shortly by gods grace.


What soft I say, me think ye go a shameful pace,
Was there ever poor colt thus handled before,
Fie upon it, my legs be onreasonablye sore,
Well yet I will rebel, yea, and rebel again,
And though a thousand times, you shouldest me restrain.

Behold here howe Lust is converted to dust,
This is his Image, his wealth and prosperity,
And Treasure in like case is turned to rust,
Whereof this example shows the verity.
The trial of Treasure this is no doubt,
Let all men take heed that trust in the same,
Considering what things I time bring about,
And quench out the ungodly their memory and fame.

Why, and is Lust and treasure converted to this.


yea forsothe.


What foolish man in them would put trust,
If this be the final end of their bliss,
Much better I commend the life of the Just.

So it is no doubt, for they have consolation,
Possessing felicity even in this place,
I mean through Crust and hope of salvation,
Which sets out unto us gods mercy and grace.

Let all men consider this good erudition,
And not to put confidence in Lust nor Treasure,
By these two examples receive admonition,
And also of the sudden vanishement of pleasure.

Remember that time turns all things about*
Time is the touchestone the Just for to try,
But where as lust treasur in time is come to nought
Just possessing Trust, remains constantly,
So that as I Time hath revealed their infamy,
So have I showed the Consolation and gain,
That the Just shall receive that justly do reign.

We will now no longer trouble this audience,
Since some what tedious to you we have been,
Beseeching you to bear all things with patience,
And remember the examples that you have seen,
God grant them to flourish lively and grene,
That some of us the better therefore may be.
Amen, Amen, I beseech the blyssed trinity.


