WHat Creat^re is in health, either young or old,
But some mirth with modesty will be glad to use
As we in this Enterlude shall now unfold,
Wherein all scuri^itie we utterly refuse,
Avoiding such mirth wherein is abuse:
Knowing nothing more comedable for a mas recreation
Than Mirth which is used in an honest fashion:
For Mirth prolongs life, and causes health.
Mirth recreates our spirits and voydeth pensiveness,
Mirth increases amity, not hindering our wealth,
Mirth is to be used both of more and less,
Being mixed with virtue in decent comly^esse.
As we trust no good nature can gainsay the ^ame:
Which mirth we intende to use, avoiding all blame.
The wise Poets long time heretofore,
Under merry Comedies secretes did declare,
Wherein was contained very virtuous ^ore,
With mysteries and forewarnings very rare.
Such to write neither Plautus nor Terence did spare,
Which among the learned at this day bears the bell:
These with such other therein did excel.
Our Comedy or Enterlude which we intende to play.
Is named Royster Doyster in deed.
Which against the vain glorious doth inuey,
Whose humour the roysting sort continually doth feed.
Thus by your patience we intende to proceed
In this our Enterlude by Gods leave and grace,
And here I take my leave for a certain space.

AS long lives the merry man (they say)
As doth the sorry man, and longer by a day.
Yet the Grassehopper for all his Somer pipyng,
Sterueth in Winter with hungry griping,
Therefore an other said saw doth men advise,
That they be together both merry and wise.
This Lesson must I practise, or else ere long,
With me Matthew Merygreeke it will be wrong.
In deed men so call me, for by him that us bought,
What ever chance betide, I can take no thought,
Yet wisdom would that I did my self bethink
Where to be provided this day of meat and drink:
For know ye, that for all this merry note of mine,
He might appose me now that should ask where I dine.
My living lies here and there, of Gods grace,
Sometime with this good man, sometime in that place,
Sometime Lewis Loytrer bids me come near,
Somewhyles Watkin Waster makes us good cheer,
Sometime Dauy Diceplayer when he hath well cast
Keeps revel route as long as it will last.
Sometime Tom Titiuile makes us a feast,
Sometime with sir Hugh Pie I am a bidden gueast,
Sometime at Nichol Neuerthriues I get a sop,
Sometime I am feasted with Bryan Blinkinsoppe,
Sometime I hang on Hankyn Hoddydodies sleeve,
But this day on Ralph Royster Doysters by his leeue.
For truly of all men he is my chief banker
Both for meat and money, and my chief shootanker.
For, sooth Roister Doister in that he doth say,
And require what ye will ye shall have no nay,
But now of Roister Doister somewhat to express,
That ye may esteem him after his worthiness,
In these twenty towns and seek them throughout,
Is not the like stock, whereon to graffe a lout.
All the day long is he facing and craking
Of his great acts in fighting and fraymaking:
But when Roister Doister is put to his proof,
To keep the Queenes peace is more for his behoof.
If any woman smile or cast on him an eye,
Up is he to the harde ears in love by and by,
And in all the hot haste must she be his wife,
Else farewell his good days, and farewell his life,
Master ^aufe Royster Doister is but dead and gon
Except she on him take some compassion,
Then chief of counsel, must be Matthew Merygreeke,
What if I for marriage to such an one seek?
Then must I sooth it, what ever it is:
For what he saith or doth can not be amiss,
Hold up his yea and nay, be his nowne white son,
Praise and rouse him well, and ye have his heart won,
For so well likes he his own fond fashions
That he takes pride of false commendations.
But such sporte have I with him as I would not leese,
Though I should be bound to live with bread and cheese.
For e^alt him, and have him as ye lust in deed:
Yea to hold his finger in a hole for a need.
I can with a word make him fain or loath,
I can with as much make him pleased or wroth,
I can when I will make him merry and glad,
I can when me lust make him sorry and sad,
I can set him in hope and eke in despair,
I can make him speak rough, and make him speak fair^.
But I marvel I see him not all this same day,
I will seek him out: But lo he comes this way,
I have yond espied him sadly coming,
And in love for twenty (...), by his glommyng.

COme death when thou wilt, I am weary of my life.

I told you I, we should wow an other wife.

Why did God make me such a goodly person?

He is in by the weke, we shall have sport anon.

And where is my trusty friend Matthew Merygreeke?

I will make as I saw him not, he doth me seek.

I have him espied me thinks, yond is he,
Hough Matthew Merygreeke my friend, a word with thee.

I will not hear him, but make as I had haste,
Farewell all my good friends, the time away doth waste,
And the tide they say, tarries for no man.

Thou must with thy good counsel help me if thou can.

God keep thee worshipful Master Roister Doister,
And fare well the lusty Master Roister Doister.

I must needs speak with thee a word or twain.

Within a month or two I will be here again,
Negligence in great affairs ye know may mar all.

Attend upon me now, and well reward thee I shall.

I have take my leave, and the tide is well spent.

I die except thou help, I pray thee be content,
Do thy part well now, and ask what thou wilt,
For without thy aide my matter is all spilt.

Then to serve your turn I will some pains take,
And let all mine own affairs alone for your sake.

My whole hope and trust rests only in thee,

Then can ye not do amiss what ever it be.

Gramercies Merygreeke, most bound to thee I am.

But up with that heart, and speak out like a ram,
Ye speak like a Capon that had the cough now:
Be of good cheer, anon ye shall do well ynow.

Upon thy comfort, I will all things well handle.

So lo, that is a breast to blow out a candle.
But what is this great matter I would fain know,
We shall find remedy therefore I trow.
Do ye lack money? ye know mine old offers,
Ye have always a key to my purse and coffers.

I thank thee: had ever man such a friend?

Ye give unto me: I must needs to you lend.

Nay I have money plenty all things to discharge.

That knew I right well when I made offer so large.
But it is no such matter.

What is it than?
Are ye in danger of debt to any man?
If ye be, take no thought nor be not afraid,
Let them hardly take thought how they shall be paid.

Tut I owe nought.

What the? fear ye imprisonment?

No

No I wist ye offend, not so to be shent.
But if he had, the Tour could not you so hold,
But to break out at all times ye would be bold.
What is it? hath any man threatened you to beat?

What is he that durst have put me in that heate?
He that beats me by his arms shall well find,
That I will not be far from him nor run behind.

That thing know all men ever since ye overthrew,
The fellow of the Lion which Hercules slew.
But what is it than?

Of love I make my moan.

Ah this foolish a love, wilt near let us alone?
But because ye were refused the last day,
Ye said ye would ne'er more be entangled that way.
I would meddle no more, since I find all so unkind.

Yea, but I can not so put love out of my mind.

But is your love tell me first, in any wise,
In the way of Marriage, or of Merchandise?
If it may otherwise than lawful be found,
Ye get none of my help for an hundred pound.

No by my troth I would have her to my Wife.

Then are ye a good man, and God save your life,
And what or who is she, with whom ye are in love?

A woman whom I know not by what means to move.

Who is it?

A woman yond.

What is her name?

Her yoder.

Who?

Mistress ah.

Fie fie for shame
Love ye, and know not whom? but her yond, a Woman,
We shall then get you a Wife, I can not tell when.

The fair Woman, that supped with us yest ernyght,
And I heard her name twice or thrice, and had it right.

Yea, ye may see ye ne'er take me to good cheer with you,
If ye had, I could have told you her name now.

I was to blame in deed, but the next time perchance:
And she dwells in this house.

What Christia Custance.

Except I have her to my Wife, I shall run mad.

Nay unwise perhaps, but I warrant (...) for mad.

I am utterly dead unless I have my desire.

Where be the bellows that blew this sudden fire?

I hear she is worth a thousand pound and more.

Yea, but learn this one lesson of me before,
An hundred pound of Marriage money doubtless,
Is ever thirty pound sterling, or somewhat less,
So that her Thousand pound if she be thrifty,
Is much near about two hundred and fifty,
How be it wowers and Widows are never poor.

Is she a Widow? I love her better therefore.

But I hear she hath made promise to another.

He shall go without her, and he were my brother.

I have heard say, I am right well advised,
That she hath to Gawyn Goodlucke promised.

What is that Gawyn Goodlucke?

a Merchant man.

Shall he speed before me? nay sir by sweet Saint Anne.
Ah sir, Backare quod Mortimer to his sow,
I will have her mine own self I make God a vow.

For I tell thee, she is worth a thousand pound.
Yet a fitter wife for your maship might be found:
Such a goodly man as you, might get one with land,
Besides pounds of gold a thousand and a thousand,
And a thousand, and a thousand, and a thousand,
And so to the sum of twenty hundred thousand,
Your most goodly personage is worthy of no less.

I am sorry God made me so comely doubtless.
For that makes me each where so highly favoured,
And all women on me so enamoured.

Enamoured quod you? have ye spied out that?
Ah sir, mary now I see you know wh^t is what.
Enamoured call? mary sir say that again,
But I thought not ye had marked it so plain.

Yes, each where they gaze all upon me and stare.

Yea malky^* I warrant you as much as they dar^.
And ye will not believe what they say in the street,
When your mashyp passes by all such as I meet,
That sometimes I can scarce find what answer to make.
Who is this (saith one) sir Launcelot du lake?
Who is this, great Cuy of Warwike, saith an other?
No (say I) it is the thirtenth Hercules brother.
Who is this? noble Hector of Troy, saith the third?
No, but of the same nest (say I) it is a bird.
Who is this? great Goliath, Sampson, or Colbrande?
No (say I) but it is a brute of the Ally land.
Who is this? great Alexander? or Charle le Maigne?
No, it is the tenth Worthy, say I to them again:
I know not if I said well.

Yes for so I am.

Yea, for there were but nine worthies before ye came.
To some others, the third Cato I do you call.
And so as well as I can I answer them all.
Sir I pray you, what lord or great gentleman is this?
Master Ralph Roister Doister dame say I, iwis.
O Lord (saith she than) what a goodly man it is,
Would Christ I had such a husband as he is.
O Lord (say some) that the sight of his face we lack:
It is enough for you (say I) to see his back.
His face is for ladies of high and noble parages*
With whom he hardly escapes great marriages.
With much more than this, and much otherwise.

I can thee thank that thou can such answers devise:
But I perceive thou dost me thoroughly know.

I mark your manners for mine own learning I trow,
But such is your beauty, and such are your acts,
Such is your personage, and such are your facts,
That all women fair and foul, more and less,
They eye you, they lubbe you, they talk of you doubtless.
Your peasant look makes them all merry,
Ye pass not by, but they laugh till they be weary,
Yea and money could I have the truth to tell,
Of many, to bring you that way where they dwell.

Merygreeke for this thy reporting well of mee^:

What should I else sir, it is my duty pardee.

I promise thou shalt not lack, while I have a groat.

Faith sir, and I ne'er had more need of a new cote.

Thou shalt have one to morrow, and gold for to spend.

Then I trust to bring the day to a good end.
For as for mine own part having money inowe,
I could live only with the remembrance of you.
But now to your Widow whom you love so hot.

By cock thou say t^uthe, I had almost forgot.

What if Christian Custance will not have you what?

Have me? yes I warrant you, never doubt of that,
I know she loves me, but she dare not speak.

In deed meet it were some body should it break.

She looked on me twenty times yesternight,
And laughed so.

That she could not sit upright,

No faith could she not.

No even such a thing I cast.

But for wowyng thou know women are shamefast.
But and she knew my mind, I know she would be glad,
And think it the best chance that ever she had.

Too her then like a man, and be bold forth to start,
Wowers never speed well, that have a false heart.

What may I best do?

Sir remain ye a while,
Ere long one or other of her house will appear.
Ye know my mind.

Yea now hardly let me alone.

In the mean time sir, if you please, I will home,
And call your Musicians, for in this your case
It would set you forth, and all your wowyng grace,
Ye may not lack your instruments to play and sing.

Thou know I can do that.

As well as any thing.
Shall I go call your folks, that ye may show a cast?

Yea run I beseech thee in all possible haste.

I go. Exeat.

Yea for I love singing out of measure,
It comfort my spirits and doth me great pleasure.
But who comes forth yond from my sweet heart Custance?
My matter ^ameth well, this is a lucky chance.

IF this distaff were spoon Margerie Mumblecrust.

Where good stale ale is will drink no water I trust.

Dame Custance hath promised us g^d ale and white bread.

If she keep not promise, I will beshrew her head:
But it will be stark night before I shall have done.

I will stand here a while, and talk with them anon,
I hear them speak of Custance, which doth my heart good,
To hear her name spoken doth even comfort my blood.

Sit down to your work Tibet like a good girl.

Nurse meddle you with your spyndle and your whirl,
No haste but good, Madge Mumblecrust, for whip and whurre
The old proverb doth say, never made good fur.

Well, ye will sit down to your work anon, I trust.

Soft fire makes sweet malt, good Madge Mumblecrust.

And sweet malt makes jolly good ale for the nones.

Which will slide down the lane without any bones.

Old browne bread crusts must have much good mumblyng,
But good ale down your throat hath good easy tumbling.

The iolyest wench that ere I heard, little mouse,
May I not rejoice that she shall dwell in my house?

So ^irrha, now this gear begins for to frame.

Thanks to God, though your work stand still, your tog is not lame

And though your teeth be gone, both so sharpe so fine
Yet your tongue can run on patens as well as mine.

Ye were not for n^ught named Tyb Talk apace.

Doth my talk grieve you? Alack, God save your grace.

I hold a groat ye will drink anon for this gear.

And I will not pray you the stripes for me to bear.

I hold a penny, ye will drink without a cup.

Wherein so ere ye drink, I wot ye drink all up.

By Cock and well sowed, my good Tibet Talk apace.

And even as well knit my nowne Annot Alyface.

See what a sort she kepeth that must be my wife.
Shall not I when I have her, lead a merry life?

Welcome my good wench, and sit here by me just.

And howe doth our old beldam here, Mage Mumblecrust?

Chide, and find faults, and threaten to complain.

To make us poor girls shent to her is small gain.

I did neither chide, nor complain, nor threaten.

It would grieve my heart to see one of them beaten.

I did nothing but did her work and hold her peace.

So would I, if you could your clattering cease:
But the devil can not make old trot hold her tong.

Let all these matters pass, and we three sing a song,
So shall we pleasantly both the time beguile now,
And eke dispatch all our works ere we can tell how.

I shrew them that say nay, and that shall not be I.

And I am well content.

Sing on then by and by.

And I will not away, but listen to their song,
Yet Merygreeke and my folks tarry very long.
Pipe merry Annot. c.
Trilla, Trilla, Trillarie.
Work Tibet, work Annot, work Margerie.
Sew Tibet, knit Annot, spin Margeri^.
Let us see who shall win the victory.

This sleue is not willing to be sewed I trow.
A small thing might make me all in the ground to throw.
Pipe merry Annot. c.
Trilla. Trilla. Trillarie.
What Tibet, what Annot, what Margerie.
Ye sleep, but we do not, that shall we try.
Your fingers be nombde, our work will not lie.

If ye do so again, well I would advise you nay.
In good sooth one stop more, and I make holy day.
Pipe Merry Annot. c.
Trilla. Trilla. Trillarie.
Now Tibbet, now Annot, now Margerie.
Now whippet apace for the maystrie,
But it will not be, our mouth is so dry.

Ah, each ^inger is a thombe to day me think,
I care not to let all alone, choose it swim or sink.
Pipe Merry Annot. c.
Trilla. Trilla. Trillarie.
When Tibet,
I will not, I can not, no more can I.
Then give we all over, and there let it lye.

There it lies, the worst is but a curried cote,
Tut I am used thereto, I care not a gro^e.

Have we done singing since? then will I in again,
Here I found you, and here I leave both twain.

And I will not be long after: Tib Talk apace.

What is y^ matter?

Yond stood a man al this spac^
And hath heard all that ever we spake together.

Mary the more lout ^e for his coming hither.
And the less good he can to listen maidens talk.
I care not and I go bid him hence for to walk:
It were well done to know what he makes here away.

Now might I speak to them, if I wist what to say.

Nay we will go both off, and see what he is.

One that hath heard all your talk and singing iwis.

The more to blame you, a good thrifty husband
Would elsewhere have had some better matters in hand.

I did it for no harm, but for good l^ue I bear,
To your dame mistress Custance, I did your talk hear.
And Mistress nource I will kiss you for acquaintance.

I c^me anon sir.

Faith I would our dame Custanc^
Saw this gear.

I must first wipe al clean, yea I must.

Ill chieue it dotyng fool, but it must be cust.

God yield you sir, chad not so much ichotte not when,
^ere since chwas bore chwine, of such a gay gentleman.

I will kiss you too maiden for the good will I bear you.

No forsooth, by your leave ye shall not kiss me.

Yes be not afeared, I do not disdain you a whit.

Why should I fear you? I have not so little wit,
Ye are but a man I know very well.

Why then?

Forsooth for I will not, I use not to kiss men.

I would fa^e kiss you too good maiden, if I might.

What should that need?

But to honour you by this light.
I use to kiss all them that I love to God I vow.

Yea sir? I pray you when did ye last kiss your cow.

Ye might be proud to kiss me, if ye were wise.

What promotion were therein?

Nurse is not so nice.

Well I have not been taught to kissing and licking.

Yet I thank you mistress Nurse, ye made no sticking.

I will not stick for a kosse with such a man as you.

They that lust: I will again to my sewing now.

Tidings hough, tidings, dame Custance greets you well.

Whom me?

You sir? no sir? I do no such tale tell.

But and she knew me here.

Tybet Talk apace,
Your m^stresse Custance and mine, must speak with your grace

With me?

Ye must come in to her out of all doutes.

And my work not half done? A mischief on all louts.

Ah good sweet nurse.

A good sweet gentleman.

what?

Nay I can not tel sir, but what thing would you?

Now doth sweet Custance, my heart of gold, tell me how?

She doth very well sir, and command me to you.

To me?

Yea to you sir.

To me? nurse tel me plain
To me?

Ye.

That word makes me alive again.

She command me to one last day who ere it was.

That was even to me and none other by the Mass.

I can not tell you surely, but one it was.

It was I and none other: this comes to good pass.
I promise thee nurse I favour her.

Even so sir.

Bid her sue to me for marriage.

Even so sir.

And surely for thy sake she shall speed.

Even so sir.

I shall be contented to take her.

Even so sir.

But at thy request and for thy sake.

Even so sir.
And come hark in thine ear what to say.

Even so sir.

COme on sirs apace, and quite your selves like men,
Your pains shall be rewarded.

But I wot not when.

Do your master worship as ye have done in time past.

Speak to them: of mine office he shall have a cast.

Harpax, look that thou do well too, and thy fellow.

I warrant, if he will mine example follow.

Curtsy whooresons, douke you and crouch at every word,

Yes whether our master speak earnest or board.

For this lies upon his preferment in deed.

Oft is he a wower, but never doth he speed.

But with whom is he now so sadly roundyng yond?

With Nobs nicebecetur miserere fond.

God be at your wedding, be ye sped already?
I did not suppose that your love was so greedy,
I percei^e now ye have chose of devotion,
And joy have ye lady of your promotion.

Tush fool, thou art deceived, this is not she.

Well mock much of her, and keep her well I vise ye.
I will take no charge of such a fair piece keeping.

What ails this fellow? he drives me to weeping.

What weep on the wedding day? be merry woman,
Though I say it, ye have chose a good gentleman.

Kocks nouns what meanest thou man, tut a whis^le.

Ah sir, be good to her, she is but a gristle,
Ah sweet lamb and coney.

Tut thou art deceived.

Weep no more lady, ye shall be well received.
Up with some merry noise sirs, to bring home the bride.

Gogs arms knave, art thou (...) I tel thee thou art wide.

Then ye entende by night to have her (...) brought.

I tel thee no.

How the?

Tis neither met no thought.

What shall we then do with her?

Ah foolish harebraine,
This is not she.

No is? why then vnsayde again,
And what young girl is this with your mashyp so bold?

A girl?

Yea. I dare say, scarce yet three score year old.

This same is the fair widows nurse of whom ye wot.

Is she but a nurse of a house? hence home old trot,
Hence at once.

No no.

What an please your (...)
A nurse talk so homely with one of your worship?

I will have it so: it is my pleasure and will.

Then I am content. Nurse come again, tarry still.

What, she will help forward this my (...) for her part.

Then is't mine own pygs (...), and blessing on my hart.

This is our best friend (...).

Then (...) her what to say

I am taught already.

Then go, make no delay.

Yet hark one word in thine ear.

Back sirs fro his tail

Back vilaynes, will ye be privy of my (...)?

Back sirs, so: I told you before ye (...) be shent.

She shall have the first day a whole peck of argent.

A peck? Nomine patris, have ye so muc^ spare?

Yea and a carte lode thereto, or else were it bare,
Besides other movables, household stuff and (...).

Have ye lads too.

An hundred marks.

Yea a thousand

And have ye cattle too? and sheep too?

Yea a few.

He is ashamed the number of them to show.
Even round about him, as many thousand sheep goes,
As he and thou and I too, have fingers and toes.

And how many years old be you?

Forty at lest.

Yea and thrice forty to them.

Nay now thou dost jest.
I am not so old, thou misreckonest my years.

I know that: but my mind was on bullocks and steers.

And what shall I show her your masterships name is?

Nay she shall make su^e ere she know that iwis.

Yet let me somewhat know.

This is he understand,
That killed the blew Spider in Blanchepouder land.

Yea Iesus, William see law, did he so law?

Yea and the last Elephant that ever he saw,
As the beast passed by, he start out of a buske,
And even with pure strength of arms plucked out his great tusk.

Iesus, nomine patris, what a thing was that?

Yea but Merygreke one thing thou hast forgot.

What?

Of tother Elephant.

Oh him that fled away.

Yea.

Yea he knew that his match was in place that day
Tut, he bet the king of Crickets on Christmasse day,
That he crept in a hole, and not a word to say.

A sore man by (...).

Why, he wrong a club
Once in a fray out of the hand of Beelzebub.

And how when Mumfision?

Oh your coustrelyng
Bore the lantern a field so before the gozelyng.
Nay that is to long a matter now to be told:
Never ask his name Nurse, I warrant thee, be bold,
He conquered in one day from Rome, to Naples,
And won Towns nurse as fast as thou can make Apples.

O Lord, my heart quakes for fear: he is to sore.

Thou make her to much afeared, Merygreeke no more.
This tale would fear my sweet heart Custance right evil.

Nay let her take him Nurse, and fear not the devil.
But thus is our song dashed. Sirs ye may home again.

No shall they not. I charge you all here to remain:
The villain slaves a whole day ere they can be found.

Couch on your marybones whooresons, down to the ground.
Was it meet he should tarry so long in one place
Without harmony of Music, (...) some (...)?
Who so hath such bees as your master in his head,
Had need to have his spirits with Music to be fed.
By your maisterships licence.

What is that? a moat?

No it was a fools feather had light on your coat.

I was nigh no feathers since I came from my bed.

No sir, it was a hair that was fall from your head.

My me com when it please the.

By your leave..

What is that?

Your gown was foul spotted with the foot of a gnat.

Their master to offend they are nothing afeared.
What now?

A lousy hair from your masterships beard.
And sir for Nurses sake pardon this one offence.

We shall not after this show the like negligence.

I pardon you this once, and come sing ne'er the worse.

How like you the goodness of this gentleman nurse?

God save his maistership that so can his men forgive,
And I will hear them sing ere I go, by his leave.

Mary and thou shalt wench, come we two will dance.

Nay I will by mine own self foot the song perchance.

Go to it sirs lustily.

Pipe up a merry note,
Let me hear it played, I will foot it for a groat.

Now nurse take this same letter here to thy mistress.
And as my trust is in thee ply my business.

It shall be done.

Who made it?

I wrote it each whit

The needs it no meding.

No, no.

No I know your wit.

I warrant it well.

It shall be delivered.
But if ye speed, shall I be considered?

Whough, dost thou doubt of that?

What shall I have?

An hundred times more than thou can devise to crave.

Shall I have some new gear? for my old is all spent.

The worst kitchen wench shall go in ladies raiment.

Yea?

And the worst drudge in the house shall go better
Tha your mistress doth now.

The I trudge with your letter.

Now may I repose me: C^nce is mine own.
Let us sing and play(...) toward it may be known.

But are you sure, that your (...) is well enough?

I wrote it myself.

Then sing we to dinner.

WHo took thee this letter Margerie Mumblecrust?

A lusty gay bachelor took it me of trust,
And if ye seek to him he will lowe your doing.

Yea, but where learned he that manner of (...)?

If to sue to him, you will any pains take,
He will have you to his wife (he saith) for my sake.

Some wise gentleman belike. I am bespoken:
And I thought verily this had been some token
From my dere spouse Gawin Goodluck, whom when him please
God luckily send home to both our hearts ease.

A ioyly man it is I wot well by report,
And would have you to him for marriage re^t:
Best open the writing, and see what it doth speak.

At this time nurse I will neither read no break.

He promised to give you a whole peck of gold.

Perchance lack of a pyrite when it shall be all told.

I would take a gay rich husband, and I were you.

In good sooth Madge, ^en so would I, if I were thou.
But no more of this fond talk now, let us go in,
And see thou no more move me folly to begin.
Nor bring me no (...) letters for no mans pleasure,
But thou know from whom.

I warrant ye shall be sure.

WHere is the house I go to, before or behind?
I know not where nor when nor how I shall it find.
If I had ten men's bodies and legs and strength,
This trotting that I have must needs lame (...) at length.
And now that my master is new set on wowyng,
I trust there shall none of us find lack of doyng:
Two pair of shoes a day will now be too little
To serve me, I must trot to and fro so (...).
Go bear me this token, carry me this letter,
Now this is the best way, now that way is better.
Up before day sirs, I charge you, an hour ^,
Trudge, do me this message, and bring w^de quick again,
If one miss but a minute, then his arms and wounds,
I would not have slacked for ten thousa^d pounds.
Nay see I beseech you, if my most trusty page,
Go not now about to ^nder my marriage,
So ^eruent hot wowyng, and so far from wining,
I trow never was any creature living,
With every woman is he in some loves pang,
Then up to our lut^ at midnight, twangled (...) twang,
Then twang with our sonnets, and twang with our dumps,
And beyho^gh from our heart, as heavy as lead lumps:
Then to our recorder with toodleloodle p^pe
As the howlet out of an yuie (...) should h^pe.
Anon to our gitterne, thro^ple (...) thrumpledum thrum,
Thrumpledum, thrumpledu, thrumpledum, thrupledum thrum.
Of Songs and Balades also he is a maker,
And that can he as finely do as Jack Raker,
Yea and extempore will he dities compose,
Foolish Marsias ne'er made the like I suppose,
Yet must we sing them, as good stuff I undertake,
As for such a pen man is well sitting to make.
Ah for these long nights, hey how, when will it be day?
I fear ere I come she will be wowed away.
Then when answer is made that it may not be,
O death why (...) thou not? by and by (saith he)
But then, from his heart to put away sorrow,
He is as far in with some new love next morrow.
But in the mean season* we trudge and we trot,
From dayspring to midnight, I sit not, nor rest not.
And now am I sent to dame Christian Custance:
But I fear it will end with a mock for pastance.
I bring her a ring, with a token in aclo^te,
And by all guess, this san^ is her house out of d^ut^.
I know it now perfect* I am in my right way.
And lo yond the old nurse that was with us last day.

I Was ne'er so shoke up before since I was borne,
That our mistress could not have chid I wold have sworn:
And I pray God I die if I meant any harm,
But for my life tune this shall be to mea charm.

God you save and see nurse, and howe is it with you?

Mary a great deal the worse it is for such as thou.

For me? Why so?

Why were not thou one of the, say,
That song and played here with the gentleman last day?

Yes, and he would know if you have for him spoken.
And prays you to deliver this ring and t^ken.

Now by the token that God tokened brother,
I will deliver no token one nor other.
I have once ben so shent for your masters pleasure,
As I will not be again for all his treasure.

He will thank you woman.

I will none of his thake.

I wean I am a prophet, this gear will prove blank:
But what should I home again without answer go?
It were better go to Rome on my head than so.
I will tarry here this month, but some of the house
Shall take it of me, and then I care not a louse.
But yonder comes forth a w^nche or a lad,
If he have not one Lumbardes touche, my luck is bad.

I Am clean lost for lack of merry company,
We (...) not half well within, our (...) and I*
They will command like mistresses, they will (...).
If they be not served, Trupeny must be chid.
Let them be as merry now as ye can (...),
With turning of a hand, our mirth lies in the mire*
I can not skill of such changeable mettle*
There is nothing with them but in do^ke out ne^.

Whether is it better that I speak to him trust,
Or he first to me, it is good to cast the w^t.
If I begin first, he will smell all my purpose,
Otherwise I shall not need any ^ing to disclose*

What boy have we yonder? I will see what he is.

He comes to me* It is hereabout ^wis.

Would thou ought friend, that thou look so about?

Yea, but whether ye can help me or no, I don't.
I seek to one mistress Custance house here dwelling.

It is my mistress ye seek t^ by your telling.

Is there any of that name here but ^hee?

Not one in all the whole town that I know par dee.

A Widow she is ^ trow.

And what and she be?

But ensured to an husband.

Yea, so think we.

And I dwell with her husband that (...) to be.

In faith then must thou (...) be welcome to me,
Let us for acquaintance shak^ (...) is tog^ther,
And what ere thou be, hear^ welcome hither.

Well Trupenie never but ^nging.

and friking?

Well Tibet and Annot, (...) swingyng and whiskyng?

But yeroile abroad.

In the street euere where.

Where are ye twain, in chambers when ye mete me there?
But come h^ther f^les, I have one now by the hand,
Servant to him that must be our mistress husband,
Bid him welcome.

To me tr^ly is he welcome.

Forsooth and as I may say, heartily welcome.

I thak you mistress maids.

I hope we shall better (...)

And when will our new master come.

Shortly ^

I would (...) were tomorow: for till he resort
Our mistress being a Widow hath ^hall comfort,
And I heard our nurse speak of an husband to day
Ready for our mistress, a rich man and a gay.
And we shall go in our french (...) every day,
In our silk ^assocks (I warrant you) (...) and gay,
In our trick ^ of gold,
Brave in our suits of change seven double fold,
Then shall ye see Tibet (...) tread the moss so trim,
Nay, why said I tread? ye shall see her glide and (...)*
Not lumperdee ^sumperdee like our spaniel Rig.

Mary then (...) come toste me a fig,
Who shall then know our Tib Talk apare trow ye?

And why not Annot Alyface as (...) as she*

And what had Tom Trupeny, a ^ none?

Then our pretty new come man will look to be one.

We four I trust shall be a ioily merry kno^.
Shall we sing a fit to welcome our friend, Annot?

Perchance he can not sing.

I am at all assays.

By cock and the better welcome to us always.

A thing very fit
For them that have wit,
And are fellows knit
Servants in one house to be,
Is fast fast for to sit,
And not oft to ^itte,
Nor vary a white,
But lovingly to agree.
No man complaining,
Nor other disdaining,
For loss or for gaining,
But fellows or friends to be.
No gr^dge remaining,
No work retrainyng,
Nor help reffrainyng,
But lo^ingly to agree.
No man for despite,
By word or by write
His fellow to twite,
But further in honesty,
No good turns entwite,
Nor old fores recite,
But let all go quite,
And lovingly to agree.
After drudgery,
When they be weary,
Then to be merry,
To laugh and sing they be free
With chip and cherie
Heigh derie derie,
Trill on the berie,
And lovingly to agree.
Will you now in with us unto our mistress go?

I have first for my master an errand or two.
But I have here from him a taken and a ring,
They shall have most thank of her that first doth it bring

Mary that will I.

See and Tibet snatch not now.

And why may not I sir, get thanks as well as you?

Yet get ^e not all, we will go with you both.
And have part of your ^hanks be ye never so loath.

So my hands are rid of it: I care for no more.
I may now return home: so burst I not before.

NAy come forth all three: and come hither pretty maid:
Will not so many forewarnings make you afraid?

Yes forsooth.

But (...) be a runnner up down
Still be a bringer of tidings and tokens to town.

No forsooth mistress.

Is all your delight and joy
In whiskyng and ramping abroad like a Tomboy.

Forsooth these were there too, Annot and Trupenie.

Yea but ye alone took it, ye can not deny.

Yea that ye did.

But if I had not, ye twain would.

You great calfe ye should have more wit, so ye should:
But why should any of you take such things in hand?

Because it came from him that must be your husband.

How do ye know that?

Forsooth the boy did say so.

What was his name?

We asked not.

No did?

He is not far gone of likelyhod.

I will see.

If thou can find him in the street bring him to me.

Yes.

Well ye naughty girls, if ever I perceive
That henceforth you do letters or tokens receive,
To bring unto me from any person or place,
E^cept ye first show me the party face to face,
Either thou or thou, full truly aby thou shalt.

Pardon this, and the next time powder me in salt.

I shall make all girls by you twain to beware.

If I ever offend again do not me spare.
But if ever I see that false boy any more
By your mistreshyps licence I tell you before
I will rather have my cote twenty times swinged,
Than on the naughty wag not to be avenged.

Good wenches would not so ramp abroad ydelly,
But keep within doors, and ply their work earnestly,
If one would speak with me that is a man likely,
Ye shall have right good thank to bring me word quickly.
B^ otherwise with messages to come in post
From henceforth I promise you, shall be to your cost.
Get you in to your work.

Yes forsooth.

Hence both twain.
And let me see you play me such a part again.

Mistress, I have run past the far end of the street,
Yet can I not yonder crafty boy see nor meet.

No?

Yet I looked as far beyond the people.
As one may see out of the top of Paules steeple.

Hence in at doors, and let me no more be vexed.

Forgive me this one fault, and lay on for the next.

Now will I in too, for I think so God me mend,
This will prove some foolish matter in the end.

Now say this again: he hath somewhat to doing
Which follows the trace of one that is wowyng,
Specially that hath no more wit in his head,
Than my cou^n Roister Doister with all is led.
I am sent in all haste to epsy and to mark
How our letters and tokens are likely to warke.
Master Roister Doister must have answer in haste
For he loves not to spend much labour in waste.
Now as for Christian Custance by this light,
Though she had not her troth to Gawin Goodluck plight,
Yet rather than with such a loutishe dolt to marie,
I dare say would live a poor life solitary,
But fain would I speak with Custance if I wist how
To laugh at the matter, yond comes one forth now.

AH that I might but once in my life have a sight
Of him that made us all so ill shent by this light,
He should never escape if I had him by the ^are,
But even from his head, I would it bite or tear.
Yea and if one of them were not inowe,
I would bite them both off, I make God avow.

What is he, whom this little mouse doth so threaten?

I would teach him I trow, to make g^les shent or beaten.

I will call her: Maid, with whom are ye so hasty?

Not with you sir, but with a little wagnastie,
A deceiver of folks, by subtle craft and guile.

I know where she is: Dobinet hath wrought some wile.

We brought a ring and token which he said was sent
From our dames husband, but I wot well I was shent:
For it liked her as well to tell you no lies,
As water in her ship, or salt cast in her cies:
And yet whence it came neither we nor she can tell.

We shall have sporte anon: I like this very well.
And dwell ye here with mistress Custance fair maid?

Yea mary do I sir: what would ye have said?

A little message unto her by word of mouth.

No messages by your leave, nor tokens forsooth.

Then help me to speak with her.

With a good will that.
Here she comes forth. Now speak ye know best what.

None other life with you maid, but abroad to skip?

Forsooth here is one would speak with your mistresship.

Ah, have ye ben learning of mo messages now?

I would not hear his mind, but had him show it to you.

In at doors.

I am gon.

Dame Custace god ye save

Welcome friend Merygreeke: and what thing wold ye have?

I am come to you a little matter to break.

But see it be honest, else better not to speak.

Howe feel ye your self affected here of late?

I feel no manner change but after the old rate.
But whereby doye mean?

Concerning marriage.
Doth not love lade you?

I feel no such carriage.

Do ye f^ele no pangs of dotage? a^nswere me right.

I dote so, that I make but one sleep all the night.
But what need all these words?

Oh Iesus, will ye see
What dissembling creatures these same women be?
The gentleman ye wot of, whom ye do so love,
That ye would fain marry him, if ye durst it mou^,
Among other rich widows, which are of him glad,
Lest ye for lesing of him perchance might run mad,
Is now contented that upon your suit making,
Ye be as one in election of taking.

What a tale is this? that I wot of? whom I love?

Yea and he is as loving a worm again as a dove.
Even of very pity he is willing you to take,
Because ye shall not destroy your self for his sake.

Mary God yield his mashyp what ever he b^,
It is gentmanly spoken.

Is it not trow ye?
If ye have the grace now to offer your self, ye speed.

As much as though I did, this time it shall not need,
But what gentman is it, I pray you tell me plain,
That woweth so finely?

Lo where ye be again,
As though ye knew him not.

Tush ye sp^ake in jest.

Nay sure, the party is in good knacking earnest*
And have you he will (he saith) and have you he must.

I am promised during my life, that is just.

Mary so thinks he, unto him alone.

No creature hath my faith and troth but one,
That is Gawin Goodlucke: and if it be not he,
He hath no title this way what ever he be,
Nor I know none to whom I have such word spoken.

Ye know him not (...) by his letter and token.

In dede true it is, that a letter I have,
But I never read it yet as God me save.

Ye a woman? and your letter so long vnredde.

Ye may there by know what hast I ^aue to wed.
But now who it is, for my hand I know by guess.

Ah well I say.

It is Ro^ster Doister doubtless.

Will ye never leave this dissimulation?
Ye know him not.

But by imagination,
For no man there is but a very dolt and l^ute
That to wow a W^owe would so go about.
He shall never have me his wife while he do live.

Then will he have you if he may, so mote I thrive,
And he bids you send him word by me,
That ye humbly beseech him, ye may his wife be,
And that there shall be no let in you nor ^strust,
But to be wedded on sunday next if he lust,
And bids you to look for him.

Doth he bid s^?

When he comes, ask him whether he did or no?

Go^ say, that I bid him keep him warm at home
For if he come abroad, he shall cough me a mome.
My mind was vexed, I shrew his head sottish dolt.

He hath in his head.

As much brain as a burbolt.

Well dame Custance, if he hear you thus play choploge.

What will he?

Play the devil in the horologe.

I defy him lout.

Shall I tell him what ye say?

Yea and add what so ever thou can, I thee pray,
And I will avouch it what so ever it be.

Then let me alone we will l^ugh well ye shall see,
It will not be long ere he will hither resort.

Let him come when him lust, I wish no better sport.
Fare ye well, I will in, and read my great letter.
I shall to my wo^ make answer the better.

Now that the whole answer in my devise doth rest,
I shall paint out our wower in colours of the best.
And all that I say shall be on Custances mouth,
She is author of all that I shall speak forsooth.
But yond comes Roister Doister now in a trance.

Iuno send me this day good luck and good chance.
I can not but come see how Merygreeke doth speed.

I will not see him, but give him a i^tte in deed.
I cry your mastership mercy.

And whither now?

As fast as I could run sir in post against you.
But why speak ye so saintly, or why are ye so sad?

Thou know the proverb, because I can not be had.
Hast thou spoken with this woman?

Yea that I have.

And what will this gear be?

No so God me save.

Hast thou a flat answer?

Nay a sharp answer.

What

Ye shall not (she saith) by her will marry her cat.
Ye are such a calfe, such an ass, such a block,
Such a lilburne, such a h^ball, such a lobcocke,
And because ye should come to her at no season,
She despised your maship out of all reason.
Bawawe what ye say ((...) I) of such a i^ntman,
Nay I fear him not (^) do the best he can.
He vaunts him self for a man of prowess great,
Where as a good gander I dare say may him beat.
And where he is loute^ and laughed to scorn,
For the veriest dolt that ever was ^orne,
And veriest lubber, flouen and beast,
Living in this world from the west to the east:
Yet of himself hath he such opinion,
That in all the world is not the like minion.
He thinks each woman to be brought in dosage
With the only sight of his goodly personage:
Yet none that will have him: we do him lout and flock,
And make him among us, our common sporting stock,
And so would I now (ko she) save only because,
Better nay (ko I) I lust not meddle with daws.
Ye are happy (ko I) that ye are a woman,
This would cost you your life in case ye were a man.

Yea an hundred thousand pound should not save her life.

No but that ye wow her to have her to your wife,
But I could not stop her mouth.

Heigh how alas,

Be of good cheer man, and let the world pass.

What shall I do or say now that it will not be.

Ye shall have choice of a thousand as good as she,
And ye must pardon her, it is for lack of wit.

Yea, for were not I an husband for her fit?
Well what should I now do?

In faith I can not tell.

I will go home and die.

Then shall I bid toll the bell?

No.

God have mercy on your soul, ah good gentleman,
That er ye should ths dye for an unkind woman,
Will ye drink our ^ye go.

No, no, I will none.

How feel your soul to God.

I am nigh gone.

And shall we hence straight?

Yea.

Master Roister Doister will straight go home and die.

Heigh how, alas, the pangs of death my heart do break.

Hold your peace for shame sir, a dead man may not speak.
Nequando: What mourners and what torches shall we have?

None.

Dirige. He will go darklyng to his grave,
Neque lux, neque crux, neque mourners, neque clink,
He will steal to heaven, unknowing to God I think.
A porta inferi, who shall your goods possess?

Thou shalt be my sectour, and ha^e all more and less.

Requiem aeternam. Now God reward your mastership.
And I w^ll cry halfepenie doale for your worship.
Come forth sirs, hear the doleful news I shall you tell.
Our good master here will no longer with us dwell,
But in spite of Custance, which hath him wearied,
Let us see his mashyp solemnly buried.
And while some piece of his soul is yet him within,
Some part of his funerals let us here begin.
Audiui vocem, All men take heed by this one gentleman,
Howe you set your love upon an unkind woman.
For these women be all such mad pieuishe elves,
They will not be won except it please them selves.
But in faith Custance if ever ye come in hell,
Master Roister Doister shall serve you as well.
And will ye needs go from us thus in very deed?

Yea in good sadness?

Now Iesus Christ be your speed.
Good night Roger old knave, farewell Roger old knave,
Good night Roger old knave, knave knap. vt infra.
Pray for the late master Roister Doisters soul,
And come forth parish Clarke, let the passing bell toll.
Pray for your master sirs, and for him ring a peal.
He was your right good master while he was in heal.
Qui Lazarum.

Heigh how.

Dead men go not so fast
In Paradisum.

Hethow.

Soft, hear what I have cast

I will hear nothing, I am past.

Whough, wellaway.
Ye may tarry one hour, and hear what I shall say,
Ye were best sir for a while to revive again,
And quite the er ye go.

Trow thou so?

Ye plain.

How may I revive being now so far past?

I will rub your temples, and fette you again at last.

It will not be possible.

Yes for twenty pound.

Arms what dost thou?

Fet you again out of your soud
By this cross ye were nigh gone in deed, I might feel
Your soul departing within an inch of your heel.
Now follow my counsel.

What is it?

If I were you,
Custance should left seek to me, ere I would bow.

Well, as thou wilt have me, even so will I do.

Then shall ye revive again for an hour or two.

As thou wilt I am content for a little space.

Good hap is not hasty: yet in space comth grace,
To speak with Custance your self should be very well,
What good thereof may come, nor I, nor you can tell.
But now the matter stands upon your marriage,
Ye must now take unto you a lusty courage.
Ye may not speak with a faint heart to Custance,
But with a lusty breast and countenance,
That she may know she hath to answer to a man.

Yes I can do that as well as any can.

Then because ye must Custance face to face wow,
Let us see how to behave your self ye can do.
Ye must have a portely brag after your estate.

Tush, I can handle that after the best rate.

Well done, so lo, up man with your head and chin,
Up with that snout man: so lo, now ye begin,
So, that is somewhat like, but prankie cote, nay when,
That is a lusty brute, hands under your side man:
So lo, now is it even as it should be,
That is somewhat like, for a man of your degree.
Then must ye stately go, jetting up and down,
Tut, can ye no better shake the tail of your gown?
There lo, such a lusty brag it is ye must make.

To come behind, and make curtsy* thou m^st some pai^s take.

Else were I much to blame, I th^nke your mast^rshyp
The lord one day all to begrime you with worship,
Back sir sauce, let gentlefolkes have el^owe room,
Uoyde sirs, see ye not master Roister Doister come?
Make place my masters.

Thou iustlest now to nigh.

Back al rude louts.

Tush.

I cry your maship mercy
Hoighdagh. if fair fine mistress Custance saw you now,
Ralph Royster Doister were her own I warrant you.

Near an M by your girdle?

Your good mastershyps
Maistershyp, were her own Mistreshyps mistreshyps,
Ye were take up for hawk, ye were gone, ye were gone,
But now one other thing more yet I think upon.

Show what it is.

A wower be he never so poor
Must play and sing before his bestbeloues door,
How much more than you?

Thou speak well out of dout.

And perchance that would make her the sooner come out.

Go call my (...), bid them high apace.

I will be here with them ere ye can say trey ace.

This was well said of Merygreeke, I lowe his wit,
Before my sweet hearts door we will have a ^t.
That if my love came forth, that I may with her talk,
I doubt not but this gear shall on my side walk.
But lo, how well Merry gr^eke is returned sense.

There hath grown no grass on my heel since I went hence,
Lo here have I brought that shall make you pastance.

Come sirs let us sing to win my dear love Custance.

Lo where she comes, some countenance to her make
And ye shall hear me be plain with her for your sake.

WHat gaudyng and foolyng is this before my door?

May not folks be honest, pray you, though they be pore?

As that thing may be true, so rich folks may be fools,

Her talk is as ^e as she had learned in schools.

Look partly toward her, and draw a little ne'er.

Get ye home idle folks.

Why may not we be here?
Nay and ye will haze, haze: otherwise I tell you plain,
And ye will not haze, then give us our gear again.

In deed I have of yours much gay things God save all.

Speak gently unto her, and let her take all.

Ye are to tender hearted: shall she make us daws?
Nay dame, I will be plain with you in my friends cause.

Let all this pass sweet heart and accept my service.

I will not be served with a fool in no wise,
When I choose an husband I hope to take a man.

And where will ye find one which can do that he can?
Now this man toward you being so kind,
You not to make him an answer somewhat to his mind.

I sent him a full answer by you did I not?

And I reported it.

Nay I must speak it again.

No no, he told it all.

Was I not meetly plain?

Yes.

But I would not tell all, for faith if I had
With you dame Custance ere this hour it had ben bad,
And not without cause* for this goodly personage,
Meant no less than to join with you in marriage.

Let him wast no mor^ labour nor suit about me.

Ye know not where ^our pre^erment lies I s^,
He sending you such a token, ring and letter.

Mary here it is, ye n^er saw a better.

Let us see your letter.

Hold, read it if ye can.
And see what letter it is ^o win a woman.

To mine own dear ^oney bird, sweet heart, and pigs^
Good Mistress Custance present these by and by,
Of this superscription de ye blame the stile?

With the rest as good stuff as ye red a great while.

Sweet mistress wher^ as I love you nothing at all,
Regarding your substan^e and riches chief of all,
For your personage, be^tie, deem anour and wit,
I commend me unto you never a whit.
Sorry to hear report of your good welfare.
For (as I hear say) such your conditions are,
That ye be worthy favour of no living man,
To be abhorred of every honest man.
To be taken for a woman inclined to vice.
Nothing at all to Virtue giving her due price.
Wherefore concerning marriage, ye are thought
Such a fine Paragon, as ne'er honest man bought.
And now by these presents I do you advertise
That I am minded to marry you in no wise.
For your goods and substance, I could be content
To take you as ye are. If ye mind to be my wife,
Ye shall be assured for the time of my life,
I will keep ye right well, from good raiment and fare,
Ye shall not be kept but in sorrow and care.
Ye shall in no wise live at your own liberty,
Do and say what ye lust, ye shall never please me,
But when ye are merry, I will be all sad,
When ye are sorry, I will be very glad.
When ye seek your hearts ease, I will be unkind,
At no time, in me shall ye much gentleness find.
But all things contrary to your will and mind,
Shall be done: otherwise I will not be behind
To speak. And as for all them that would do you wrong
I will so help and maintain, ye shall not live long.
Nor any foolish dolt, shall cumbre you but I.
I, who ere say nay, will stick by you till I die.
Thus good mistress Custance, the lord you save and keep,
From me Raister Doister, whether I wake or sleep.
Who favours you (...) less, (ye may be bold)
Than this letter purporteth, which ye have vnfo^e.

Howe by this letter of love? is it not fine?

By the arms of Caleps it is none of mine.

Fie you are foul to blame this is your own hand.

Might not a woman be proud of such an husband?

Ah that ye would in a letter show such despite.

Oh I would I had him here, the which did it endite.

Why ye made it your self ye told me by this light.

Yea I meant I wrote it mine own self yesternight.

Iwis sir, I would not have ^ent you such a mock.

Ye may so take it, but I meant it not so by cock.

Who can blame this woman to (...) and fret and rage?
Tut, tut, your self now have marde your own marriage.
Well, yet mistress Custance, if ye can this remitte,
This gentleman other wise may your love requitte.

No God be with you both, and ^ke no more to me.

Wough, she is gone for ever, I shall her no more see.

What weep? sye for shame, and blubber? for manhods sake,
Never let your foe so much pleasure of you take.
Rather play the mans part, and do love refrain.
It she despise you even despise ye her again^.

By gosse and for thy sake I delye her in deed.

Yea and perchance that way ye shall much sooner speed,
For one mad propretie these women have in ^ey,
When ye will, they will not: Will not ye, then will they.
Ah foolish woman, ah most unlucky Custance,
Ah unfortunate woman, ah pieuishe Custance,
Art thou to thine harms so obstinately bent,
That thou can not see where lies thine high preferment?
Can thou not lub dis man, which could lub dee so well?
Art thou so much thine own foe.

Thou dost the truth tell.

Well I lament.

So do I.

Wherefore.

For this thing
Because she is gone.

I morn for an other thing.

What is it Merygreeke, wherefore thou dost grief take?

That I am not a woman my self for your sake,
I would have you my self, and a straw for yond Gill,
And mock much of you though it were against my will.
I would not I warrant you, fall in such a rage,
As so to refuse such a goodly personage.

In faith I heartily thank thee Merygreeke.

And I were a woman.

Thou would to me seek.

For though I say it, a goodly person ye be.

No, no.

Yes a goodly man as ere I did see.

No, I am a poor homely man as God made me.

By the faith that I owe to God sir, but ye be.
Would I might for your sake, spend a thousand pound land.

I dare say thou would have me to thy husband.

Yea: And I were the fairest lady in the shire,
And knew you as I know you, and see you now here,
Well I say no more.

Gramercies with all my hart.

But since that can not be, will ye play a wise part?

How should I?

Refrain from Custance a while now.
And I warrant her soon right glad to seek to you,
Ye shall see her anon come on her knees creeping,
And pray you to be good to her sal^e tears weeping.

But what and she come not?

In faith then farewell ^he.
Or else if ye be wroth, ye may avenged be.

By cocks precious p^tsticke, and even so I shall.
I will utterly destroy her, and house and all.
But I would be avenged in the mean space,
On that vi^e scribler, that did my wowyng disgrace.

Scribler (ko you) in deed he is worthy no less.
I will call him to you, and ye bid me doubtless.

Yes, for although he had as many lives,
As a thousand widows, and a thousand wives,
As a thousand ^yons, and a thou^nd rats,
A thousand wolves, and a thousand cattes,
A thousand bulls, and a thousand calves,
And a thou^nde ^gions divided in halues,
H^ shall never sca^e death on my swords point,
Though I should be torn therefore joint by joint.

Nay, if ye will kill him, I will not fette him,
I will not in so much extremity set him,
He may yet amend sir, and be an honest man,
Therefore pardon him good soul, as much as ye can.

Well, for thy sake, this once with his life he shall pass,
But I will hew him all to pieces by the Mass.

Nay faith ye shall promise that he shall no harm have,
Else I will not fet him.

I shall so God me save.
But I may chide him a good.

Yea that do hardly.

Go then.

I return, and bring him to you by by.

WHat is a gentleman but his word and his promise?
I must now save this villains life in any wise,
And yet at him already my hands do tickle,
I shall vneth hold them, they will be so fickle.
But ^o and Merygreeke have not brought him sens?

Nay I would I had of my purse paid forty pens.

So would I too: but it needed not that stounde,

But the ^entman had rather spent five thousand pound,
For it disgraced him at least five times so much.

He disgraced him self, his loutishnesse is such.

Howe long they stand prating? Why come thou not away?

Come now to himself, and hark what he will say.

I am not afraid in his presence to appear.

Art thou come fellow?

How think you? am I not here?

What hindrance hast thou done me, and what villainy?

It hath come of thy self, if thou hast had any.

All the stock thou come of later or rather,
From thy first fathers grandfathers fathers father,
Nor all that shall come of thee to the worlds end,
Though to three score generations they descend,
Can be able to make me a just recompense,
For this trespass of thine and this one offense.

Wherein?

Did not you make me a letter brother?

Pay the like hire* I will make you such an other.

Nay see and these whooreson Phariseys and Scribes
Do not get their living by polling and bribes.
If it were not for shame. Scrivener. Nay hold thy hands still.

Why did ye not promise that ye would not him spill?

Let him not spare me.

Why wilt thou strike me again?

Ye shall have as good as ye bring of me that is plain.

I can not blame him sir, though your blows wold (...) grieve.
For he knows present death to ensue of all ye give.

Well, this man for once hath purchased thy pardon.

And what say ye to me? or else I will be gon.

I say the letter thou made me was not good.

Then did ye wrong copy it of likelihood.

Yes, out of thy copy word for word I it wrote.

Then was it as ye prayed to have it I wot,
But in reading and pointing there was made some fault.

I wot not, but it made all my matter to haulte.

Howe say you, is this mine original or no?

The self same that I wrote out of, so mo^e I go.

Loke you on your own fist, and I will look on this,
And let this man be judge whether I read amiss.
To mine own dere coney bird, sweet heart, and pigsny,
Good mistress Custance, present these by and by.
How now? doth ^ot this superscription agree?

Read that is within, and there ye shall the fault see.

Sweet mistress, where as I love you, nothing at all
Regarding your riches and substance: chief of all
For your personage, beauty, demeanour and (...)
I commend me unto you: Never a white
Sorry to hear report of your good welfare.
For (as I hear say) such your conditions are,
That ye be worthy favour: Of no living man
To be abhorred: of every honest man
To be taken for a woman inclined to vice
Nothing at all: to virtue giving her due price.
Wherefore concerning marriage, ye are thought
Such a sine Paragon, as ne'er honest man bought.
And now by these presents I do you advertise,
That I am minded to marry you: In no wise
For your goods and substance: I can be content
To take you as you are: if ye will be my wife,
Ye shall be assured for the time of my life,
I will keep you right well: from good raiment and fare,
Ye shall not be kept: but in sorrow and care
Ye shall in no wise live: at your own liberty,
Do and say what ye lust: ye shall never please me
But when ye are merry: I will be all sad
When ye are sorry: I will be very glad
When ye seek your hearts ease: I will be unkind
At no time: in m^ shall ye much gentleness find.
But all things contrary to your will and mind
Shall be done otherwise: I will not be behind
To speak: And as for all they that would do you wrong,
(I will so help and maintain ye) shall not live long.
Nor any foolish doit shall cumber you, but I,
I, who ere say nay, will stick by you till I die.
Thus good mistress Custance, the lord you save and keep.
From me Roister Doister, whether I wake or sleep,
Who fauour^h you no less, (ye may be bold)
Than this letter purporteth, which ye have unfold.
Now sir, what default can ye find in this letter?

Of truth in my mind there can not be a better.

Then was the fault in reading, and not in writing,
No nor I dare say in the form of endityng,
But who read this letter, that it sonnded so nought?

I red it in deed.

Ye red it not as ye ought.

Why thou wretched villain was all this same fault in thee?

I knock your costarde if ye offer to strike me.

Strike thou in deed? and I offer but in jest?

Yea and rap you again except ye can sit in rest.
And I will no longer ^arie here me believe.

What wilt thou be angry, and I do thee forgive?
Fare thou well scribler, I cry thee mercy in deed.

Fare ye well bibbler, and worthily may ye speed.

If it were an other but thou, it were a knave.

Ye are an other your self sir, the lord us b^th save,
Albeit in this matter I must your pardon crave,
Alas would ye wish in m^ the wit that ye have?
But as for my fault I can quickly amend,
I will show Custance it was I that did offend.

By so doing her anger may be reformed.

But if by no entreaty she will be turned,
Then set light by her and be as testy as she,
And do your force upon her with extremity.

Come on therefore let us go home in sadness.

That if force shall need all may be in a readiness,
And as for this letter hardly let all go,
We will know where she refuse you for that or no.

IS there any man but I Sym Suresby alone,
That would have taken such an enterprise him upon,
In such an outrageous tempest as this was.
Such a dangerous gulf of the sea to pass.
I think verily Neptunes mighty godshyp,
Was angry with some that was in our ship,
And but for the honesty which in me he found,
I think for the others sake we had been drowned.
But ^ye on that servant which for his masters wealth
Will stick for to hazard both his life and his health.
My master Gawyn Goodlucke after me a day
Because of the weather, thought best his ship to stay,
And now that I have the rough sourges so well past,
God grant I may find all things safe here at last.
Then will I think all my travail well spent,
Now the first point wherefore my master hath me sent
Is to salute dame Christian Custance his wife,
Espoused: whom he tendreth no less than his life,
I must see how it is with her well or wreng,
And whether for him she doth not now think long:
Then to other friends I have a message or ^way,
And then so to return and mete him on the way.
Now will I go k^cke that I may dispatch with speed,
But lo forth comes her self happily in deed.

I Come to see if any more stirring be here,
But what stranger is this, which death to me appear*

I will speak to her: Dame the lord you save and see.

What friend Sym Suresby? Forsooth right welcome ye be,
Howe doth mine own Gawyn Goodlucke* I pray the tell?

When he knows of your health he will be perfect we^l.

If he have perfect health, I am as I would be.

Such news will please him well, this is as it should be.

I think now long for him.

And he as long for you.

When will he be at home?

His heart is here ^en now
His body comes after.

I would see that fain.

As fast as wind and sail can cary it a maine.
But what two men are yond coming hitherwarde?

Now I shrew their best Christmasse chekes both togetherward.

WHat mean these lewd fellows thus to trouble me still?
Sym Suresby here perchance shall thereof deem some ill,
And shall supect in me some point of naughtiness,
And they come hitherward.

What is their business?

I have nought to them, nor they to me in sadness.

Let us hearken them, somewhat there is I fear it.

I will speak out aloud best, that she may hear it.

Nay alas; ye may so fear her out of her wit.

By the cross of my sword, I will hurt her no whit.

Will ye do no harm in deed, shall I trust your word?

By Roister Doisters faith I will speak but in board.

Let us hearken them, somewhat there is I fears it.

I will speak out aloud, I care not who hear it:
Sirs, see that my harness, my tergat, and my shield,
Be made as bright now, as when I was last in field,
As white as I should to war again to morrow:
For sick shall I be, but I work some folk sorrow.
Therefore see that all shine as bright as saint G^orge,
Or as doth a key newly come from the Smi^s forge.
I would have my sword and harness to shine so bright,
That I might therewith dim mine enemies sight,
I would have it cast beams as ^ast I tell you plain,
As doth the glittryng grass after a shower of rain.
And see that in case I should need to come to arming,
All things may be ready at a minutes warning,
For such chance may chance in an hour, do ye hear?

As perchance shall not chance again in seven year.

Now draw we near to her, and here what shall be said.

But I would not have you make her too much afraid.

Well found sweet wife (I trust) for al this your sour look.

Wife? why cal ye me wife?

wife? this gear goth acr^k.

Nay mistress Custance, I warrant you, our letter
Is not as we red even now, but much better,
And where ye half stomaked this gentleman before,
For this same letter, ye will love him now therefore,
Nor it is not this letter though ye were a queen,
That should break marriage between you twain I wean.

I did not refuse him for the letters sake.

Then ye are content me for your husband to take.

You for my husband to take? nothing less truly.

Yea say so, sweet spouse, before strangers hardly.

And though I have here his letter of love with me,
Yet his ring and tokens he sent, keep safe with ye.

A mischief take his tokens, and him and thee too.
But what prate I with fools? have I nought else to do?
Come in with me Sym Suresby to take some repast.

I must ere I drink by your leave, go in all hast,
To a place or two, with earnest letters of his.

Then come drink here with me.

I thak you.

Do not miss
You shall have a token to your master with you.

No tokens this time gramercies, God be with you.

Surely this fellow misdeemeth some ill in me,
Which thing but God help, will go near to spill me.

Yea farewell fellow, and tell thy master Goodlucke
That he comes to late of this blossom to pluck.
Let him keep him there still, or at least wise make no hast,
As for his labour hither he shall spend in wast.
His betters be in place now.

As long as it will hold.

I will be even with thee thou beast, thou may be bold.

Will ye have us then?

I will never have thee.

Then will I have you?

No, the devil shall have thee.
I have gotten this hour more shame and harm by thee,
Than all thy life days thou can do me honesty.

Why now may ye see what it comth too in the end,
To make a deadly foe of your most loving friend:
And iwis this letter if ye would hear it now.

I will hear none of it.

In faith would ravish you.

He hath stained my name for ever this is clear.

I can make all as well in an hour.

As ten year.
How say ye, will ye have him?

No.

Will ye take him?

I defy him.

At my word?.

A shame take him.
Waste no more wind, for it will never be.

This one fault with twain shall be mended, ye shall see.
Gentie mistress Custance now, good mistress Custance,
Honey mistress Custance now, sweet mistress Custance,
Golden mistress Custance now, white mistress Custance,
Silken mistress Custance now, fair mistress Custance.

Faith rather than to mary with such a doltishe lout,
I would match my self with a beggar out of dout.

Then I can say no more, to speed we are not like,
Except ye rap out a rag of your Rhetoric.

Speak not of winning me: for it shall never be so.

Yes dame, I will have you whether ye will or no,
I command you to love me, wherefore should ye not?
Is not my love to you cha^ng and burning hot?

Too her, that is well said.

Shall I so break my brain
To dote upon you, and ye not love us again?

Well said yet.

Go to y^ goose.

I say ^it Custace,
In case ye will not haze, well, better yes perchance.

Avaunt lozell, pick thee hence.

Well sir, ye perceive,
For all your kind offer, she will not you receive.

Then a straw for her, and a straw for her again,
She shall not be my wife, would she never so fain,
No and though she would be at ten thousand pound cost.

Lo dame, ye may see what an husband ye have lost.

Yea, no force, a jewel much better lost than found.

Ah, ye will not believe how this doth my heart wound.
How should a marriage between you be toward,
If both parties draw back, and become so froward.

Nay dame, I will fire thee out of thy house,
And destroy thee and all thine, and that by and by.

Nay for the passion of God sir, do not so.

Yes, except she will ^say yea to that she said no.

And what, be there no officers trow we, in town
To check idle loytrers braggyng up and down?
Where be they, by whom vacabunds should be repressed?
That poor silly Widows might live in peace and rest.
Shall I never rid thee out of my company?
I will call for help, what hough, come forth Trupenie.

Anon. What is your will mistress? did ye call me?

Yea, go run apace, and as fast as may be,
Pray Tristram Trusty, my most assured friend,
To be here by and by, that he may me defend.

That message so quickly shall be done by Gods grace,
That at my return ye shall say, I went apace.

Then shall we see I trow, whe^ er ye shall do me harm,

Yes in faith Kitte, I shall thee and thine so charm,
That all women incarnate by thee may beware.

Nay, as for charming me, come hither if thou dare,
I shall clout thee till thou stink, both thee and thy train,
And coil thee mine own hands, and send thee home again.

Yea say thou me that dame? dost thou me threaten?
Go we, I will see whether I shall be beaten.

Nay for the pa^sh^ of God, let me now treat peace,
For bloodshed will there be in case this strife increace.
Ah good dame Custance, take better way with you.

Let him do his worst.

Yield in time.

Come hence thou.

SO sir, if I should not with him take this way,
I should not be rid of him I think till dooms day,
I will call forth my folks, that without any mocks
If he come again we may give him rappes and knocks.
Mage Mumblecrust, come forth, and Tibet Talk apace.
Yea and come forth too, mistress Annot Alyface.

I come.

I am here.

and I am here too at length.

Like warriors if need be, ye must show your strength
The man that this day hath thus begiled you,
Is Ralph Roister Doister, whom ye know well inowe,
The most lout and dastard that ever on ground trod.

I see all folk mock him when he goth abroad.

What pretty maid? will ye talk when I speak?

No forsooth good mistress.

Will ye my tale break?
He threatens to come hither with all his force to fight,
I charge you if he come, on him with all your might.

I with my distaff will reach him one rap.

And I with my new broom will sweep him one swappe,
And then with our great club I will reach him one rap.

And I with our skimmer will fling him one flap.

Then Trupenies fireforke will him shrewdly fray,
And you with the spit may drive him quite away.

Go make all ready, that it may be even so.

For my part I shrew them that last about it go.

TRupenie did promise me to run a great pace,
My friend Tristram Trusty to fet into this place.
In deed he dwells hence a good stert I cenfesse:
But yet a quick messanger might twice since as I guess,
Have gone and come again. Ah yond I spy him now.

Ye are a slow goer sir, I make God avow.
My mistress Custance will in me put all the blame,
Your legs be longer than mine: come apace for shame.

I can thee thank Trupenie, thou hast done right wele.

Mistress since I went no grass hath grown on my he^e,
But master Tristram Trusty here makes no speed.

That he came at all I thank him in very deed,
For now have I need of the help of some wise man.

Then may I be gone again, for none such I m.

Ye may be by your going: for no Alderman
Can go I dare say, a sadder pace than ye can.

Trupenie get thee in, thou shalt among them know,
How to use thy self, like a propre man I trow.

I go.

Now Tristra Trusty I thak you right much.
For at my first sending to come ye never grutch.

Dame Custance God ye save, and while my life shall last,
For my friend Goodlucks sake ye shall not send in wast.

He shall give you thanks.

I will do much for his sake

But alack, I fear, great displeasure shall be take.

Wherefore?

For a foolish matter.

What is your caus^

I am ill accombred with a couple of daws.

Nay weep not woman: but tell me what your cause is
As concerning my friend is any thing amiss?

No not on my part: but here was Sym Suresby.

He was with me and told me so.

And he stood by
While Ralph Roister Doister with help of Merygreeke,
For promise of marriage did unto me seek.

And had ye made any promise before them twain.

No I had rather be torn in pieces and flaine,
No man hath my faith and troth, but Gawyn Goodlucke,
And that before Suresby did I say, and there stuck,
But of certain letters there were such words spoken.

He told me that too.

And of a ring and token.
That Suresby I spied, did more than half suspect,
That I my faith to Gawyn Goodlucke did reject.

But there was no such matter dame Custance in deed?

If ever my head thought it, God send me ill speed.
Wherefore I beseech you, with me to be a witness,
That in all my life I never intended thing less,
And what a brainsick fool Ralph Roister Doister is,
Your self know well enough.

Ye say full true iwis.

Because to be his wife I no grant nor apply,
Hither will he com he swears by and by,
To kill both me and mine, and beat down my house flat.
Therefore I pray your aide.

I warrant you that.

Have I so many years lived a sobre life,
And showed my self honest, maid, widow, and wife,
And now to be abused in such a vile sort,
Ye see howe poor Widows live all void of comfort.

I warrant him do you no harm nor wrong at all.

No, but Matthew Merygreeke doth me most appall,
That he would join him self with such a wretched lout.

He doth it for a jest I know him out of doubt,
And here comes Merygreke.

Then shall we here his mind.

CUstance and Trusty both, I do you here well f^nde.

Ah Matthew Merygreeke, ye have used me well.

Now for altogether ye must your answer tell.
Will ye have this man, woman? or else will ye not?
Else will be come never bore so brymme nor tossed so hot.

But why join ye with him.

For mirth?

or else in sadness

The more fond of you both hardly y^ matter guess.

Lo how say ye dame?

Why do ye think dame Custac^
That in this wowyng I have meant ought but pastance?

Much things ye spake I wot, to maintain his dotage.

But well might ye judge I spake it all in mockage,
For why? Is Roister Doister a fit husband for you?

I dare say ye never thought it.

No to God I vow.
And did not I know before of the insurance
Between Gawyn Goodlucke, and Christian Custance?
And did not I for the nonce, by my conveyance,
Read his letter in a wrong sense for da^iance?
That if you could have take it up at the first bound,
We should thereat such a sporte and pastime have found,
That all the whole town should have ben the merier.

Ill ache your heads both, I was never werier,
Nor never more verte since the first day I was borne.

But very well I wist he here did all in scorn.

But I feared thereof to take dishonesty.

This should both have made sport, and showed your honesty
And Goodlucke I dare swear, your wit therein would low.

Yea, being no worse than we know it to be now.

And nothing yet to late, for when I come to him,
Hither wi^l he repair with a sheep look full grim,
^ force and violence to drive you to y^lde.

If ye two bid me, we will with him pitch a field,
I and my maids together.

Let us see, be bold.

Ye shall see womes war.

That fight will I behold

If occasion serve, taking his part full brim,
I will strike at you, but the rap shall light on him.
When we first appear.

Then will I run away
As though I were afraid.

Do y^u that part well play
And I will sue for peace.

And I will set him on.
Then will he look as fierce as a Cotssold lyon.

But when gost thou for him?

That do I very now.

Ye shall find us here.

Well god have mercy on you.

There is no cause of fear, the least boy in the street:

Nay, the least girl I have, will make him take his feet.
But hark, me think they make preparation.

No force, it will be a good recreation.

I will stand within, and steppe forth speedily,
And so make as though I ran away dreadfully.

Now sirs, keep your ray, and see your hearts be stout,
But where be these ca^tifes, me think they dare not route,
How say thou Merygreeke? What doth Kit Custace say?

I am loath to tell you.

Tush speak man* yea or nay?

Forsooth sir, I have spoken for you all that I can.
But if ye win her, ye must even play the man,
Even to fight it out, ye must a mans heart take.

Yes, they shall know, and thou know I have a stomach.
A stomach (quod you) yea, as good as ere man had.

I trow they shall find and feel that I am a lad.

By this cross I have seen you eat your meat as well,
As any that ere I have s^ene of or heard tell,
A stomach quod you? he that will that deny
I know was never at dinner in your company.

Nay, the stomach of a man i^ is that I mean.

Nay the stomach of an horse or a dog I wean.

Nay a mans stomach with a weapon mean I.

Ten men can scarce match you with a spoon in a pie.

Nay the stomach of a man to try in st^fe.

I never saw your stomach cloyed yet in my life.

Tush I mean in strife or fighting to try.

We shall see how ye will strike now being angry.

Have at thy pate then, and save thy head if thou may.

Nay then have at your pate again by this day,

Nay thou may not strike at me again in no wise.

I can not in fight make to you such warrantise:
But as for your foes here let them the bargain by.

Nay as for they, shall every mothers child die.
And in this my fume a little thing might make me,
To beat down house and all, and else the devil take me.

If I were as ye be, by gogs dear mother,
I would not leave one stone upon an other.
Though she would redeem it with twenty thousand pounds.

It shall be even so, by his lily wounds.

Be not at one with her upon any amends.

No though she make to me never so many friends.
Not if all the world for her would undertake,
No not God himself neither, shall not her peace make,
On therefore, marche forward, soft, stay a while yet.

On.

Tarry.

Forth.

Back.

On.

Soft. Now forwardset

What business have we here? out alas, alas.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Did thou see that Merygreeke? howe afraid she was?
Did thou see how she fled apace out of my sight?
Ah good sweet Custance I pity her by this light.

That tender heart of yours will mar altogether,
Thus will ye be turned with wagging of a feather.

On sirs, keep your ray.

On forth, while this gear is hot

Soft, the Arms of Caleys, I have one thing forgot.

What lack we now?

Retire, or else we be all slain.

Back for the pashe of God, back sirs, back again.
What is the great matter?

This hasty forth going
Had almost brought us all to utter undoing,
It made me forget a thing most necessary.

Well remembered of a captain by saint Marie.

It is a thing must be had.

Let us have it then.

But I wot not where nor how.

Then wot not I when.

But what is it?

Of a chief thing I am to seek.

Tut so will ye be, when ye have studied a weke.
But tell me what it is?

I lack yet an hedpiece.

The kitchen collocauit, the best hens to greece,
Run, fet it Dobinet, and come at once withal,
And bring with thee my potgunne, hanging by the wall,
I have seen your head with it full many a time,
Covered as safe as it had been with a skrine:
And I warrant it save your head from any stroke,
Except perchance to be amassed with the smoke:
I warrant your head therewith, except for the mist,
As safe as if it were fast locked up in a chist:
And lo here our Dobinet comes with it now.

It will cover me to the shoulders well ^now.

Let me see it on.

In sa^th it doth meetly well.

There can be no fitter thing. Now ye must us tell
What to do.

Now forth in ray sirs, and stop no more.

Now saint George to borrow, Drum dubbe a dubbe before.

What mean you to do sir, commit manslaughter.

To kill for^ie such, is a matter of laughter.

And who is it sir, whom ye intende thus to spill?

Foolish Custance here forces me against my will.

And is there no mean your extreme wrath to slake.
She shall some amends unto your good mashyp make.

I will none amends.

Is her offence so sore?

And he were a lout she could have done no more.
She hath called him fool, and dressed him like a fool.
Mocked him like a fool, used him like a fool.

Well yet the Sheriff, the Justice, or Constable,
Her misdemeanour to punish might be able.

No sir, I mine own self will in this present cause,
Be Sheriff, and Justice, and whole Judge of the laws,
This matter to amend, all officers be I shall,
Constable, Bailiff, Sergeant.

And hangman and all.

Yet a noble courage, and the heart of a man
Should more honour win by bearing with a woman.
Therefore take the law, and let her answer thereto.

Merygreeke, the best way were even so to do.
What honour should it be with a woman to fight?

And what then, will ye thus forgo and less your right?

Nay, I will take the law on her withouten grace.

Or if your mashyp could pardon this one trespace.
I pray you forgive her.

Ho?

Tush tush sir do not.
Be good master to her.

Ho?

Tush I say do not.

And what shall your people here return straight home?

Yea, levy the camp sirs, and hence again each one,

But be still in readiness if I hap to call,
I can not tell what sudden chance may befall.

Do not off your harness sirs I you advise,
At the least for this fortnight in no manner wise,
Perchance in an hour when all ye think least,
Our masters appetite to fight will be best.
But soft, ere ye go, have once at Custance house.

Soft, what wilt thou do?

Once discharge my harquebouse
And for my hearts ease, have once more with my p^tgoon.

Hold thy hands else is all our purpose clean fordoone.

And it cost me my life.

I say thou shalt not.

By the matte but I will. Have once more with hail shot
I will have some pennyworth, I will not l^ese all.

WHat caitifes are those that so shake my house wall?

Ah sirrha now Custance if ye had so much wit
I would see you ask pardon, and your selves submit.

Have I still this ado with a couple of fools?

Here ye what she saith?

Maids come forth with your tools

In a ray.

Dubba dub sirrha.

In a ray,
They come suddenly on us.

Dubbadub.

In a ray.
That ever I was borne, we are taken tardy.

Now sirs, quite our selves like tall men and hardy.

On before Trupenie, hold thine own Annot,
On toward them Tibet, for escape us they can not.
Come forth Madge Mumblecrust, (...) stand fast together.

God send us a fair day.

See they marche on hither.

But mistress.

What say y^?

Shall I go fet our goose?

What to do?

To yonder Captain I will turn her loose
And she gape and hiss at him, as she doth at me,
I durst ieoparde my hand she will make him flee.

On forward.

They com.

Stad.

Hold.

Keep.

There.

Strike.

Take heed.

Well said Trupeny.

Ah whooresons.

weldon in deed

Hold thine own Harpax, down with them Dobinet.

Now Madge, there Annot: now stick them Tibet.

All my chief quarrel is to this same little knave,
That b^gyled me last day, nothing shall him save.

Down with this little queen, that hath at me such spite,
Save you from her master, it is a very sprite.

I my self will mounsire grande captain undertake,

They win ground.

Save your self sir, for gods sake.

Out, alas, I am slain, help.

Save your self.

Alas.

Nay then, have at you m^st^esse.

Thou hittest me, alas.

I will strike at Custace here.

Thou hittest me.

so I will

Nay mistress Custance.

Alas, thou hittest me still.

Hold.

Save your self sir.

Help, out alas I am slain

Truce, hold your hands, truce for a pissing while or twain:
Now how say you Custance, for saving of your life,
Will ye yield and grant to be this gentmans wife?

Ye told me he loved me, call ye this love?

He loved a while even like a turtle dove.

Gay love God save it, so soon hot, so soon cold.

I am sorry for you: he could love you yet so he could.

Nay by cocks precious she shall be none of mine.

Why so?

Come away, by the matte she is mankine.
I durst adventure the loss of my right hand,
If she did not flee her other husband:
And see if she prepare not again to fight.

What then? saint George to borrow, our Ladies knight*

Slay else whom she will, by gog she shall not slay me.

How then?

Rather than to be slain, I will flee.

Too it again, my knightesses, down with them all.

Away, away, away, she will else kill us all.

Nay stick to it, like an hardy man and a tall.

Oh bones, thou bittest me. Away, or else die we shall.

Away for the pashe of our sweet Lord Iesus Christ.

Away lout and lubber, or I shall be thy priest.
So this field is ours we have driven them all away.

Thanks to God mistress, ye have had a fair day.

Well now go ye in, and make your self some good cheer.

We go.

Ah sir, what a field we have had here.

Friend Tristram, I pray you be a witness with me.

Dame Custance, I shall depose for your honesty,
And now fare ye well, except some thing else ye would.

Not now, but when I need to send I will be bold.
I thank you for thess pains. And now I will get me in,
Now Roister Doister will no more wowyng begin.

SYm Suresby my trusty man, now advise thee well,
And see that no false surmises thou me tell,
Was there such ad^e about Custance of a truth?
To report that I heard and saw, to me is ruth,
But both my duty and name and propretie,
Warns me to you to show fidelity.
It may be well enough, and I wish it so to be,
She may her self discharge and try her honesty,
Yet their claim to her me thought was very large,
For with letters rings and tokens, they did her charge.
Which when I heard and saw I would none to you bring.

No by saint Marie, I allow thee in that thing.
Ah si^ra, now I see truth in the proverb old,
All things that shines is not by and by pure gold,
If any do live a woman of honesty*
I would have sworn Christian Custance ^ad been she.

Sir, though I to you be a seru^nt true and ^ust.
Yet do not ye therefore your faithful spouse mystrust.
But examine the matter, and if ye shall it find,
To be all well, be not ye for my words unkind*

I shall do that is right, and as I s^e cause why.
But here comes Custance forth, we shall know by and by.

I Come forth to see and hearken for news good,
For about this hour is the time of likelihood,
That Gawyn Goodlucke by the sayings of Suresby,
Would be at home, and lo yond I see him I.
What Gawyn Goodluck, the only hope of my life,
Welcome home, and kiss me your true espoused wife.

Nay soft dame Custance, I must first by your licence,
See whether all things be clear in your conscience,
I hear of your doings to me very strange.

What fear ye that my faith towards you should chaunge^

I must needs mistrust ye be elsewhere entangled,
For I hear that certain men with you have wrangled
About the promise of marriage by you to them made.

Could any mans report your mind therein persuade?

Well, ye must therein declare your self to stand clear,
Else I and you dame Custance may not join this yer^*

Then would I were dead, and fair laid in my grave,
Ah Suresby, is this the honesty that ye have?
To hurt me with your report, not knowing the thing.

If ye be honest my words can hurt you nothing.
But what I heard and saw, I might not but report.

Ah Lord, help poor widows, destitute of comfort.
Truly most dear spouse, nought was done but for pastance.

But such kind of sporting is homely dalliance.

If ye knew the truth, ye would take all in good part.

By your leave I am not half well skilled in that art.

It was none but Roister Doister that foolish mome.

Yea Custance, better (they say) a bad scuse than none.

Why Tristram Trusty sir, your true and faithful friend,
Was privy both to the beginning and the end.
Let him be the Judge, and for me testify.

I will the more cr^dite that he shall verify,
And because I will the truth know even as it is,
I will to him my self, and know all without mi^e.
Come on Sym Suresby, that before my friend thou may
Avouch the same words, which thou did to me say.

O Lord, howe necessary it is now of days,
That each body live uprightly all manner ways,
For let never so little a gap be open,
And be sure of this, the worst shall be spoken
Howe innocent stand I in this for deed or thought?
And yet see what mistrust towards me it hath wrought
But thou Lord know all folks thoughts eke intents
And thou art the deliverer of all innocents.
Thou did help the aduoutresse that she might be amended,
Much more then help Lord, that never ill intended.
Thou did help Susanna, wrongfully accused,
And no less dost thou see Lord, how I am now abused,
Thou did help Hester, when she should have died,
Help also good Lord, that my truth may be tried.
Yet if Gawin Goodlucke with Tristram Trusty speak.
I trust of ill report the force shall be but weak,
And lo^ yond they come sadly talking together,
I will abide, and not shrink for their coming hither.

ANd was it none other than ye to me report?

No, and here were ye wished to have seen the sporte.

Would I had, rather than half of that in my purse.

And I do much rejoice the matter was no worse,
And like as to open it, I was to you faithful,
So of dame Custance honest truth I am joyful.
For God for^ende that I should hurt her by false report.

Well, I will no longer hold her in discomfort.

Now come they hitherwarde, I trust all shall be well.

Sweet Custance neither heart can think nor tongue tell,
Howe much I joy in your constant fidelity,
Come now kiss me the pearl of perfect honesty.

God let me no longer to continue in life,
Than I shall towards you continue a true wife.

Well now to make you for this some part of amends,
I shall desire first you, and then such of our friends,
As shall to you seem best, to sup at home with me,
Where at your fought field we shall laugh and merry be.

And mistress I beseech you, take with me no grief,
I did a true mans part, not wishing your r^pr^fe.

Though hasty reports through surmises growing,
May of poor innocents be utter ouerthrowyng,
Yet because to thy master thou hast a true hart,
And I know mine own truth, I forgive thee for my part.

Go we a^to my house, and of this gear no more.
Go prepare all things Sym Suresby, hence, run before.

I go.

But who comes yond, M. Merygreeke?

Roister Doisters champion, I shrew his best cheek.

Roister Doister self your wower is with him too.
Surely some thing there is with us they have to do.

YOnd I see Gawyn Goodlucke, to whom lies my message,
I will first salute him after his long voyage,
And then make all thing well concerning your behalf.

Yea for the pas^e of God.

Hence out of sight ye calfe,
Till I have spoke with them, and then I will you ^et,

In Gods name.

What master Gawin Goodluck well met
And from your long voyage I bid you right welcome home.

I thank you.

I come to you from an honest mome.

Who is that?

Roister Doister that doughty kite.

Fie, I can scarce abid^ ye should his name recite.

Ye must take him to favour, and pardon all past,
He hears of your return, and is full ill agas^.

I am right well content he have with us some chere.

Fie upon him beast, then will not I be there.

Why Custance do ye hate him more than ye love me?

But for your mind sir, where he were would I not be?

He would make us al laugh.

Ye ne'er had better sport.

I pray you sweet Custance* let him to us resort.

To your will I assent.

Why, such a fool it is,
As no man for good pastime would forgo or miss.

Fet him to go with us.

He will be a glad man.

We must to make us mirth, maintai^e him all we can.
And lo yond he comes and Merygreeke with him.

At his first entrance ye shall see I will him trim.
But first let us hearken the gentleman's wise talk.

I pray you mark if ever ye saw crane so stalk.

MAy I then be bold?

I warrant you on my word,
They say they shall be sick, but ye be at their board.

They were not angry then.

Yes at first, made strange
But when I said your anger to favour should change,
And therewith had commended you accordingly,
They were all in love with your mashyp by and by.
And cried you mercy that they had done you wrong.

For why, no man, woman, nor child can hate me long.

We fear (quod they) he will be avenged one day,
Then for a penny give all our lives we may.

Said they so in deed.

Did they? yea, even with one voice
He will forgive all (quod I) Oh how they did rejoice.

Ha, ha, ha.

Go fette him (say they) while he is in good mood,
For have his anger who lust, we will not by the Rood.

I pray God that it be all true, that thou hast me told,
And that she fight no more.

I warrant you, be bold.
Too them, and salute them.

Sirs, I greet you all well.

Your maistership is welcome.

Saving my quarrel.
For sure I will put you up into the Eschequer.

Why so? better nay: Wherefore?

For an usurer.

I am no usurer good mistress by his arms.

When took he gain of money to any mans harms?

Yes, a foul usurer he is, ye shall see else.

Diost not thou promise she would pick no mo quarrels?

He will lend no ^lowes, but he have in recompense
Fiftene for one, which is to much of conscience.

Ah dame, by the ancient law of arms, a man
Hath no honour to foil his hands on a woman.

And where other usurers take their gains yearly,
This man is angry but he have his by and by.

Sir, do not for her sake bear me your displeasure.

Well, he shall with you talk thereof more at leisure.
Upon your good usage, he will now shake your hand.

And much heartily welcome from a strange land.

Be not afeared Gawyn to let him shake your fist.

Oh the most honest gentleman that ere I wist.
I be seeche your mashyp to take payne to sup with us.

He shall not say you nay and I too, by Iesus.
Because ye shall be friends, and let all quarrels pass.

I will be as good friends with them as ere I was.

Then let me fet your queer that we may have a song.

Go.

I have heard no melody all this year long.

Come on sirs quickly.

Sing on sirs, for my friends sake.

Cal ye these your freds?

Sing on, no m^ words make.

The Lord preserve our most noble Queen of renown,
And her virtues reward with the heavenly crown.

The Lord strengthen her most excellent Majesty,
Long to reign over us in all prosperity.

That her godly proceedings the faith to defend,
He may stablishe and maintain through to the end.

God grant her as she doth, the Gospel to protect,
Learning and virtue to advance, and vice to correct.

God grant her loving subjects both the mind and grace,
Her most godly procedyngs worthily to embrace.

Her highness most worthy counsellers God prosper,
With honour and love of all men to minister.

God grant the nobility her to serve and love,
With all the whole commontie as doth them behove.

WHo so to marry a minion Wife,
Hath had good chance and hap,
Must love her and cherish her all his life,
And dandle her in his lap.
If she will fare well, if she will go gay,
A good husband ever styll,
What ever she lust to do, or to say,
Must let her have her own will.
About what affairs so ever he go,
He must show her all his mind,
None of his counsel she may be kept free,
Else is he a man unkind.
I Mun be married a Sunday
I mun be marieb a Sunday,
Who soever shall come that way,
I mun be married a Sunday.
Royster Doyster is my name,
Royster Doyster is my name,
A lusty brute I am the same,
I mun be married a Sunday.
Christian Custance have I found,
Christian Custance have I found,
A Widow worth a thousand pound,
I mun be married a sunday.
Custance is as sweet as honey,
Custance is as sweet as honey,
I her lamb and she my coney,
I mun be marieb a Sunday.
When we shall make our wedding feast,
When we shall make our wedding feast,
There shall be cheer for man and beast,
I mun be married a Sunday.
I mun be married a Sunday. c.
PLacebo dilexi,

Master Roister Doister will straight go home and die,
Our Lord Iesus Christ his soul have mercy upon:
Thus you see to day a man, to morrow Iohn.
Yet saving for a woman's extreme cruelty,
He might have lived yet a month or two or three,
But in spite of Custance which hath him wearied,
His m^shyp shall be worshipfully buried.
And while some piece of his soul is yet him within,
Some part of his funerals let us here begin.
Dirige.

He will go darklyng to his grave.
Neque lux, neque crux, nisi solum clink,
Never gentman so went toward heaven I think.
Yet sirs as ye will the bliss of heaven win,
When he comes to the grave ^ay him softly in,
And all men take heed by this one Gentleman,
How you set your love upon an unkind woman:
For these women be all such mad pi^uish elves,
They will not be won except it please them selves.
But in faith Custance if ever ye come in hell,
Master Roister Doister shall serve you as well.
Good night Roger old knave, Farewell Roger old knave.
Good night Roger old knave, knave, knap.
Nequando, Audi^ vocem. Requiem aeternam.

