
He that spares the rod, the child doth hate
He wold youth should be kept in awe always
By correction in time at reasonable rate,
To be taught to fear god and their parents obey
To get learning and qualities, thereby to maintain
An honest quiet life, correspondent always,
To gods law and the kings, for it is certain.
If children be noseled in idleness and ill,
And brought up therein, it is hard to restrain,
And draw them from natural wont evil,
As here in this Interlude, ye shall se plain.
By two children brought up wantonly in play,
Whom ye mother doth excuse, when she should chastise
They delyte in dalliance and mischief always,
At last they end their lives in miserable wise.
The mother persuaded by worldly shame,
That she was the cause of their wretched life,
So pensive, so sorrowful, for their death, she became,
That in despair she would ^lea her sel^ wi^h a kinfe
Then her son Barnabas, (by interpretacyon,
The son of comfort,) her ill purpose do stay,
By the scriptures he gives her godly consolation
And to conclud^th, all these parts will we play.
MY master in my lesson yesterday,
Did recite this text of Ecclesiasticus,
man is prone, to evil, fro his youth, did he say
Which sentence may well be verified in us
My self, my brother, and sister Dalila,
Whom our parents to their cost to scoole do find
I tarry for them here, time passes away,
I loose my learning, they ever loiter behind,
If I go before, they do me threat,
To complain to my mother, she for their sake,
Being her tender tidlynges, will me beat:
Lord, in this perplexit ye, what way shall I take?

What will become of them? grace god them send,
To apply their learning, and their manners amend.

Here we come, and here we louen,
And here we will abide abide ay.

Fie brother fie, specyally you sister Dalila,
Sobrenes becomes maids always

What ye dolt ye be ever in one songe,

yea sir it shall cost you blows ere it be lunge,

Be ye not ashamed the treauandes to play?
Losing your time learning, that every day
Lernyng brings knowledge of god, honest living to get

Yea mary, I warrant you, master hodypeke,

Learn a pace sister, and after to spyn and sow,
And other honest huswifely points to know.

Spyn quod ha, yea by ye mass, with your heles up wynd
For a good mouse hunt, is cat after king

Lewd speaking corrupts good manners s. Paule doth sai
Come, let us go, if ye will to scole this day
I shall be shent for taryng so lunge,

Go get the hence, thy mouth full of horse donge.
Now pretty sister, what sport shall we deuyse?
Thus paltyng to scole, I think us vnwyse
In summer dye for thryst, in winter for cold,
And still to live in fear of a churl, who would?

Not I by the mass, I had rather he hanged were
Then I would sit quaking like a mome for fear
I am son burned in summer, in winter the cold,
Makes my limbs gross, and my beauty decay,
If I should use it, as they would I should,
I should never be fair woman I dare say.

No sister no, but I can tell,
Where we shall have good chiere,
Lusty companions two or three,
At good wine, ale and bier.

Oh good brother let us go,
I will never go more to to scoole,
Shall I never know,
What pastime means?
yes, I will not be such a fool.

Have with the Dalila,
Fare well our scoole,

I will set my heart,
On a merry pynne,
What ever shall be fall.

Lord what folly is in youth?
Howe unhappy be children now a days?
And the more pity, to say the truth.
Their parents mainteyn them in evil ways:
Which is a great cause that the world decays,
For children brought up in ydlenes and play,
Unthrifty and desobedient, continue always,
A neighbor of mine hath children here by,
Idle, desobedyent, proud, wanton and nice.
As they come by, they do shrewed turns daily,
Their parents so to suffer them surely, be not wise
They laugh me to scorn, when I tel the mine advise,
I will speak with their elders warn the neighborly
Never in better time, their mother is here by,
God save you gossip, I am very fain,
That you chance now to come this way,
I lunge to talk with you a word or twain,
I pray you take it friendly that I shall say:
Ismael your son, and your daughter Dalila.
Do me shrewd turns, daily more and more,
Chide and beat my children, it grieves me sore.
They swear, curse scold, as they go by ye way,
Giving other ill ensample to do the same,
To gods displeasure, and their hurt an other day,
Chastyce them for it, or else ye be to blame:

Tusshe tusshe, if ye have no more then that to say,
Ye may hold your tongue and get ye a way,
Alas poor souls, they sit a scoole all day,
In fear of a churl, if a little they play,
He beats them like a devil: when they come home
Your mestresship would have me lay on,
If I should beat them so oft as men complain,
By ye mass with in this month, I should make the lame

Be not offended I pray you, I must say more,
your son is suspect, light fyngered to be.
your daughter hath nice tricks three or four,
Se to it in time, least worse ye do see,
He that spares the rod, hates the child truly,
yet Salomon sobre correction doth mean,
Not to beat and bounce them to make them lame:

God thank you mestres, I am well at ease
Such a fool to teach me, preaching as she please,
Dame ye belie them deadly I know plain,
Because they go handsomely ye disdain,

Then on the other as well would I complain,
But your other son is good, and no thank to you
These will ye make nought by sweet Iesu.

Eupliade, my children nought ye lye,
By your malice they shall not set a sly,
I have but one mome, in comparison of his brother
Him the fool praises, and despises the other.

Well Xantippe, better in time, then to late,
Seeing ye take it so, here my leave I take.

Mary good leave have ye, the great god be with you
My children or I be cursed I think,
They be complained on where ever they go,
That for their pleasure they might drink.
Nay by this the poor fowls be come fro ferle weary,
I will go get them meat to make them mercy,

Lo, lo, here I brynger

What is she now ye have her?

A lusty mynyon lover.

welcome my honey ay.

Oh my heart.
This wench can singe,
And play her part,

I am yours (and you mine) with all my hart.

By the mass it is well songe,
were ye not sorry ye were a maid so lunge?

Fie master iniquity fie, I am a maid yet,

No sister no, your maiden head is sick:

That knave your brother will be a blab still,
I wisse Dalila ye can say as much by him, if ye will.

By him quod ha, he hath whores two or three,
But iche tell your minion doll, by gogs body:
It skylleth not she doth hold you as much

ye lye falsely, she will play me no such touche,

Not she? yes to do your heart good
I could tell you who puts a bone in your hood.

Peace whore, or ye bear me a box an theare,

Here is mine ear knave, stryke and thou dare.
To suffer him thus ye be no man,
If ye will not revenge me, I will find one,
To set so little by me, ye were not wont,
Well, it is no matter.
Though ye do ceteri nolunt,

Peace Dalila, speak ye laten poor fool,

No no, but a proverb I learned at scoole.

yea sister, you went to scole till ye were past grace

yea, so did thou by thy knaves face.

Well, no more a do, let all this go,
We kinsfolk must be friends, it must be so.
Come on come on come on,
Here they be that will do us al good,

If ye use it long, your hear will grow throught your

Come on knave with christ's curse.
I must have some of the money,
Thou hast picked out of thy fathers purse,

He, by the mass if he can get his purse,
Now and then he makes it by half the worse.

I defy you both whore and knave

What ye pryncockes, begin ye to rave?
Come on.

Master Iniquity, by your leave,
I will play a crown or two here by your sleue

Then be ye seruaunt to a worshipful mon.
Master Iniquity, a right name by saint Iohn.

What can ye say by master Inquitie?
I love him and his name most heartily,

God a mercy Dalila, good luck, I warrant the,


Come on, but first let us have a songe,

I am content, so that it be not lunge.

Gold locks,
She must have knocks,
Or else I do her wrong,

When ye have your will,
Ye were best lye styll,
The winter nights be lunge

When I no may,
An other assay,
I will take it for no wrong:

Then by the rood,
A bone in your hood.
I shall put ere it be lunge.

She macheth you sira.

By gogs blood she is the best whore in England.

It is knavishly praised, give me your hand,

I would thou haddes such in other,

By the mass rather then.xl. pound brother.

Here sirs come on seven.
A leaven at all.

Do ye nycke us be knave your noly,

Ten mine
Sire mine,
Have at it, and it were for all my fathers kine,
It is lost by his wounds, and ten to one,

Take the dice Dalila, cast on.

Come on fy^e,
Thryue at fairest,

Gup whore, and I at rest,
Bigogs blood, I wene god the devil be against me

If the one forsake the, tother will take the,

Then is he a good fellow, I would not pass,
So that I might bear a rule in hell by the mass,
to toss fierbrandes at these penyfathers pates,
I would be porter and receive them at the gates,
In boiling lead brimston, I wold sethe the each one
The knaves have al ye money, good felows have none

Play brother, have ye lost all your money now?

yea, I thank that knave and such a whore as you,
Tis no marter, I will have money or I will sweet,
Bygogs blood I will rob the next I mete.
yea, and it be my father.

Thou boy, by the mass ye will climb the ladder,
Ah sira, I love a wench that can be wylye^
She perceived my mind, with a twinke of mine eye,
If we two play boody on any man,
We will make him as bare as Iob anon,
Well Dalila, let se what ye have won,

Sir, I had.x. shillings when I begone,
And here is all, every farryng,

ye lye like a whore, ye have won a pound,

Then the devil stryke me to the ground,

I will feel your pocket, by your leave mestres,

A way knave, not mine by the mass,

Yes bi god, give you this to boot,

Out horeson knave, I beshrew thy heart root
Wilt thou rob me breat me to?

In the way of correction but a blow or two,

Correct thy dogs thou shalt not beat me,
I will make your knaves flesh cut I warrant the,
Ye think I have no friends, yes I have in store,
A good fellow or two percaunce more.


A knave I found the, a knave I leave the here.
Gup whore, do ye hear this jade?
Loving when is pleased,
When she is angry thus shrewd,
Chief brother, sylter whore,
Two gra^ses of an ill tree,
I will tarry no longer here,
Fare well, god be with ye.

Alas wretched wretch that I am,

Full of payne and sorrow, crooked and loom.
Stuffed with diseases in this world forlorn.
My senowes be shronken, my flesh eaten with poc^s
My bones fin of ache, great payne,
My head is bald, that bare yelowe locks,
Crooked I crepe to the earth again,
Mine eye sigth is dim, my hands tremble shake
My stomach abhors all kind of meat:
For lack of clothes, great cold I take^
When appetide serves, I can get no meat.
Where I was fair and amiable of face,
Now am I foul and horrible to se,
Al this I have I deserved for lack of grace,
Justly for my sins god doth plague me.
My parents did tidle me, they were to blame,
In stead of correction, in ill did me maintain:
I fell no nought, and shall dye with shame
Yet all this is not half of my grief and payne.
The worm of my conscience yt shall never dye,
Accuses me daily more and more:
So oft have I sinned wilfully,
That I fear to be damned for evermore.

What woeful wight art thou? tell me,
That here most grievously doest lament,
Confess the truth, and I will comfort the,
By the word of god omnipotent:
Although your time ye have misspent,
Repent and amend while ye have space,
And god will restore you to heatlh and grace.

To tell you who I am I dare not for shame,
But my filthy living hath brought me in this case,
Full oft for my wantonness you did me blame,
yet to take your council I had not the grace,
To be restored to health, alas it is past,
Disea^e hath brought me into such decay,
Help me with your almose, while my life doth last
That like a wretch as I am, I may go my way.

Show me your name sister I you pray,
And I will help you now at your need,
Both body and soul will I fed.

your have named me already, if I dust be so bold
you sister Dalila, that wretch I am,
My wanton nice toys ye knew of old,
Alas brother they have brought me to this shame,
When you went to scole, my brother I wold play
Swear, chide, scodle weth man and woman,
To do shrewd turns, our delyte was always,
Yet were we tidled, and you beaten now than,
Thus our parents let us do what we would,
And you by correction they kepthe under awe:
When we grew big, we were sturdy and bold
By father and mother we set not a straw,
Small matter for me, I am past,
But your brother and mine is in gread ieoperdy:
In danger to come to shame at the last,
He frames his living so wyckedly.

Well siker, I ever feared ye would be nought,
your lewd behaviours sore grieve my hart:
to train you to goodness, al means have I sought,
But in vain, yet will I play a brotherly part.
For yt the soul is more precious, most dearly bought
with the blood of Christ, dying therefore:
To save it first, a mean must be sought,
At gods hand by Christ, man only saviour.
Consider Dalila, gods fatherly godnes,
Which for your good, hath brought you in this case.
Scourged you with his rod of pure love doubtless.
that ones knowing your self, ye might cal for grace,
Ye seem to repent, but I doubt whater,
For your sins, or for the misery ye be in:
Earnestly repent for your sin rather,
For these plagues be but the reward of sin,
But so repent that ye sin no more,
And then believe with steadfast faith:
That god will forgive you for evermore,
For Chrystes sake, as the scripture saith.
As for your body, if it be curable,
I will cause to be healed, or during your life:
I will clothe you, and fete you as I am able,
Come sister, go with me, ye have need of relief.

As a judge of the countrey^ here am I come,
Sent by the kings Majesty, Justice to do:
Chiefly to proceed in judgment of a Felon,
I tarry for the verdict of the quest ^re I go.
Go bailey, know whether they be all a greed or no
If they be so, bid them come away
And bring their prisoner, I wold hear what they say
I go my Lord, I go, to soon for one,
He is like to play a cast, will break his neck bone,
I beseech your lorshyp be good to him,
The man is come of good kynne^
If your Lordship would be so good to me,
As for my sake to set him free,
I could have.xx. pount in a purse,
Yea, and your Lordship a right fair horse,
Well worth ten pound.
Get the a way thou hell hound,
If ye were well examined and tried,
Perchance a false knave ye would be spied,
Bribes (saith Salomon) blind ye wise mans sight
That he can not se to give judgment right,
Should I be a bribar^ nay he shall have the law
As I owe to god and the king obedience and awe.

Ye be tied fair enough for running away
If ye do not after me, ye will be hanged I dare say
If thou tell no tales, but hold thy toungue,
I will ^e^the at lybertye ere it be lunge.
Though thou be judged to dye anon,

Come on firs, I pray you come on,
Be you all agreed in one?
yea my Lord, every chone,

Where Ismael was intided by.xii. men,
Of Felony, burglary, and murder,
As thinditement declares, howe, where, and when
ye heard it read to you lately in ordre:
you with the rest, I trust all true men,

Whether Ismael thereof be gilty or not gilty,

Gilty (my Lord) and most gilty,

Wilt thou hang my Lord, horeson noddy?

The lord have mercy upon the,

Tusshe, hold thy tongue and I warrant the
Thou shalt go to the place thou came fro,
Till to morrow.ix. of the clock, there to remain,
To the place of execution then shalt thou go^
There be hanged to death, and after again,
Being dead, for ensample, to be hanged in a chain^
Take him away, and se it be done,
At your peril that may fall thereupon.

Though I be judged to dye, I require respite,
For the kings advantage in things I can recite,

A way with him he will speak but of spyte,

well^ we will hear you say what you can.
But se that ye wrongfully accuse no man,

I will be lye no man, but this I may say,
Here stands he that brought me to this way:

My Lorde^ he lies like a dampned knave,
The fear of death doth make him rave,

His naughty company and play at dice,
Did me first to stealing entice.
He was with me at roberies, I say it to his face,
yet can I say more in time space,

Thou hast said to much, I beshrew thy horsons face
Hang him my Lord, out of the way,
The thief cares not what he doth say
Let me be hangman, I will teathe him a slight,
For fear of talking. I will strangle him straight,
Tarry here that list, for I will go.

No no my friend, not so,
I thought always ye should not be good,
And now it will prove, I se by the rood,
Take him and lay him in irons strong,
We will talk with you more ere it be lunge,

He that lays hands on me in this place,
Iche lay my brawlyng iron on his face:
By gogs blood I defy thy worst,
If thou shouldest hang me I were a cursed.
I have been at as low an ebb as this,
And quickly a loft again by gisse:
I have mo friends then ye think I have,
I am entertained of all men like no slave:
Yea, within this month I may say to you,
I will be your seruaunt, and your master to.
ye, crepe into your breast, will ye have it so?

A way with them both, lead them away,
At his death tell me what he doth say,
For then be like he will not lye,

I care not for you both, no not a sly:

If no man have here, more matter to say
I must go hence some other way.

Hah ha, though I come in rudely be not aghast,
I must work a feat in al the hast.
I have caught two birds, I will set for the dame,
If I catch her in my clutche, I will her tame.
Of all this while know ye not my name?
I am right worshipful master wordly shame,
The matter that I come now about,
Is even this, I put you out of dought.
There is none Xantippe, a cursed shrew,
I think al the world doth her know,
Such a jade she is, and so cursed a queen,
She would out scold the devils dame I wene.
Sirs this fine woman, had babes three,
Twain the derest darlings that might be,
Ismael and fair Dalila, these two,
With the lout Barnabas, I have nothing to do.
Always good, that these tidlynges do might,
Swear, lye, steal, scold or fight:
Cards, dice, kiss, clip and so furth,
All this our Mammy would take in good worth.
Now sir, Dalila my daughter is dead of y^ pockes
And my son hanged in chains, waueth his locks
These news will I tel her, and the matter so frame
That she shall be thine own master worldly shame,
Hah ha ha.

Peace, peace, she comweth hereby,
I spoke no word of her, no not I,
Oh Mestres Xantippe, I can tell you needs,
The fair wench your dere daughter Dalila,
Is dead of the pockes, taken at the stews,
And thy son Ismael, that preaty boy
Whom I dare say you loved very well,
Is hanged in chains, ever man can tell.
Every man saith thy daughter was a strong whore
And thy son a strong thief, a murderer to
It must needs grieve you wondrous s^ro,
That they died so shamefully both two:
Men will taunt you and mock you, for they say now
The cause of their death, was even very you^

I the cause of their death?

Will ye sown, the devil stop thy breath?
Thou shalt die (I trow) with more shame
I will get me hence out of the way,
If the whore should dye, men would me blame^
That I killed her, knaves should say.

Alas alas, and weal away^
I may curse the time that I was borne,
Never woman had such fortune, I dare say,
Alas two of my children be forlorn.
My fair daughter Dalila is dead of the pockes,
My dere son Ismael hanged up in chains,
Alas the wynd waueth his yelow locks,
It fleaeth my heart, and breaks my brains.
Why should god punish plague me so sore?
To se my children dye so shamefully,
I will never eat bread in this world more
with this knife will A sley my self by by^
Beware what ye do, fie mother fye^

Will ye spyl your self for your own offence
And seem for ever to exclude gods mercy,
God doth punysh you for your negligence:
Wherefore take his correction with patience,
And thank him heartily, that of his godnes
He brings you in knowledge of your trespass.
For when my brother sister were of yonge age,
You saw they were given to ydlenes and play,
Would apply no learning, but live in outrage,
And mencomplagned on them every day.
Ye winked at their faults, and tidled them always.
By maintenaun^e they grew to mischief and ill,
So at last gods Justice did them both spill.
In that god preseruerued me, small thank to you
If god had not given me special grace,
To avoid evil, and do good, this is true,
I had lived and dyed in as wretched case:
As they did, for I had both suffraunce and space,
But it is an old prouerke, you have herd it I think
That god will have se, shall not wynke.
Yet in this we may al take comfort,
They toke great repentance I heard say,
And as for my sister, I am able to report,
She lamented for her sins, to her dyng day:
To repent and believe I exorthed her always,
Before her death she believed that god of his mercy
For Christ's sake, would save her eternally.
If you do even so, ye need not despair,
For god will frely remitte your sins all,
Christ hath payed the ransom, why should ye fear.
To believe this and do well, to god for grace call.
All worldly cares let pass and fall,
And thus comfort my father, I pray you heartily,

Right gentle audience, by this Interlude ye mayse
How dangerous it is, for the frailty of youth,
Without good governance, to live at liberty,
Such chances as these, oft happen of truth
Many miscary, it is the more ruth,
By negligence of their elders, not taking payne.
In time good learning qualities to attain.
Therefore exhorting al parents to be diligent,
In bringing up their children, yea to be circumspect
Least they fall to evil, be not negligent,
But chastise them before they be sore infect:
Accept their well doing in ill them reject,
A yonge plant ye may plate bow as y^ will,
Where it grows strong, there will it abide styll
Even so by children, in their tender age,
Ye may work them like waxe^ to your own intent
But if ye suffer them lunge to live in outrage^
They will be sturdy and stiff, and will not relent:
O ye children, let your time he well spent,
Apply your learning and your elders obey,
It will be your profit an other day.
Now, for the Quenes Royal majesty let us pray,
That god (in whose hands is ye heart of al Quenes,)
May endue her highness with godly puissance always
that her grace may long reign prosper in al things
In gods word justice may give light to al Quenes
Let us pray for the honourable council nobility,
that they may always counsel in wisdo with traquility,
God save the Queen, the Realm and cominaltie.


But who cam me merry?
He that hath a pure conscience,
He may well be merry.
Who hath a pure conscience tel me?
No man of him self, I ensure the,
Then must it follow of necessity,
That no man can be merry.
Purity it self may purenes give,
you must ask it of God in true believe,
Then will he give it, and none repreue,
And so we may be merry.
What is the practice of a conscience pure?
To love and fear God, and other allure,
And for his sake, to help his neighbour,
Then may he well be merry.
What shall he have, that can and will do this
After this life, everlasting bliss,
yet not by desert, but by gift ywisse,
There god make us all merry.
Imprinted at London, in Paules Church yearde at the Sign of the Swane by
Iohn King.


