I Could in this my Preface (by as great light of Learning as any formerly
employed, in this service) can attain, to deliver to You the Original and
cause of all Tryumphes, their excessive cost in the Time of the Romans: I could
likewise with so Noble Amplification make a survey of the worth, and glory of
the Triumphs of the precedent times in this Honourable City of London: That were
my work of a bigger bulk, they should remain to all Posterity: but both my
Pen, and ability this way are confined in too narrow a Circle: Nor have I space
enough in this so short a Volume to express only with rough lines, and a
^aint shadow (as the Painters phrase is) First the great care and alacrity of
the right Worshipful the Master and Wardens, and the rest of the selected and
Industrious Commitees; both for the curious and judging election of the
Subject, for the present Spectacles; and next that the working or mechanic
part of it might be answerable to the Invention: Leaving therefore these worthy
Gentlemen to the embraces, and thanks of the right Honourable and worthy
Praetor; and my self under the shadow of their Crest, (which is a safe one)
for 'tis the Holy Lamb in the Sunne-beames: I do present to all modest and
indifferent Judges these my present endeavours.

I fashioned for the more amplefying the show upon the water two Eminent
Spectacles, in manner of a Sea-Triumph. The first furnished with four Persons;
In the front Oceanus and Thetis, behind them, Themesis and Medway: the two
rivers on whom the Lord Mayor extends his power, as far as from Stones to
Rochester. The other show is of a fair Terrestrial Globe, Circled about in
convenient Seats, with seven of our most famous Navigators: as, Sr. Francis
Drake, Sr. Iohn Haukins, Sr. Martine Furbisher, Sr. Humfery Gilbert, Captain
Thomas Cauendish, Captain Christopher Carlisle, and Captain Iohn Dauis. The
conceit of this Device to be, that in regard the two Rivers pay due Tribut of
waters to the Seas. Oceanus in grateful recompense returns the memory of
these seven worthy Captains, who have made England so famous in remotest
parts of the world. These two spectacles, at my Lord Majors taking water at
the Three Cranes, aproaching my Lords Barge: after a peal of Sea-thunder from
the other side the water; these speeches between Oceanus and Thetis follow.

WHat brave Sea Music bids us Welcome, hark!
Sure this is Venice, and the day Saint Mark,
In which the Duke and Senats, their course hold*
To wed our Empire with a Ring of Gold.

No Thetis you're mistaken, we are led
W^ infinite delight from the Lands h^ad:
In ken of goodly shipping and yo^ bridge,
Venice had near the like survey that ridge,
Of stately buildings which the river Hem,
And grace the silver stream, as the stream them:
That beauteous seat is London so much famed,
Where any Navigable Sea is named;
And in that bottom Eminent Merchants placed,
As rich, and venturous as ever graced,
Venice or Europe these two Rivers hear,
Our followers may tell you where we are;
This Thamesis, that Mid-way who are sent,
To you most worthy Praetor to present,
Acknowledgment of duty near shall err,
From Stones unto the Ancient Rochester;
And now to grace their Triumph in respect,
These pay us tribute, we are pleased to select
Seven worthy Navigators out by name,
Seated beneath* this Globe; whose ampl^ fame
In the remotest part a' the earth is found,
And some of them have circled the Globe round:
These you observe are living in your eye,
And so they ought, for worthy men near dye:
Drake, Hawkins, Furbisher, Gilbert, brave Knights,
That brought home gold, and honour from sea fights,
Candish, Carlisle, and Dauis, and to these,
So many worthies I could add at Seas,
Of this bold Nation, it would envy strike,
I the rest ath' World, who cannot show the like;
Tis action valews honour as the flint,
Look black and feels like ice, yet from within't,
Their ar^ struck sparks which to the darkest nights,
Yield quick and per^ing food for several lights.

You have quickened well my memory, and now
Of this your grateful Triumph I allow,
Honour looks clear and spreads her beams at large,
From the grave Senate seated in that Barge,
Rich Lading swell your bottoms, a blessed Gale*
Follow your ventures that they never fail;
And may you live successively to wear,
The Joy of this day, each man his whole year.

This Show having tendered this service to my Lord upon the Water, is after to
be conueyed a Shore, and in convenient place employed for adorning the rest of
the Triumph. After my Lord Majors landing, and coming past Paules Chain,
there first attends for his Honour in Paul's Church-yarde, a beautiful
Spectacle, called the Temple of Honour, the Pillars of which are bound about
with Roses, and other beautiful Flowers, which shoot up to the adorning of the
Kings Majesties Arms on the top of the Temple.

In the highest seat a Person representing Troynouant or the City, in throned
in rich Habilaments, beneath her as admiring her peace and felicity, sit five
eminent Cities, as Antwerpe, Paris, Rome, Venice and Constantinople: under
these sit five famous Schollers and Poets of this our Kingdom, as Sir Ieffery
Chaucer, the learned Gower, the excellent Iohn Lidgate, the sharpe witted Sr.
Thomas Moore, and last as worthy both Soldier and Scholar, Sir Phillip
Sidney, these being Celebrators of honour, and the perseruers both of the names
of men, and memories of Cities above, to posterity.

I present riding before this Temple, Henry de Royal, the first Pilgrim or
Gatherer of quartridge for this Company; and Iohn of Yeacksley, King Edward the
thirds Pavillion maker, who purchased our Hall in the sixth year of the
aforesaid Kings government: These lived in Edward the firsts time likewise, (in
the sixth of whose Reign, this Company was confirmed a Guild or Corporation by
the name of Taylors, and Linnin Armores, with power to choose a Master and
Wardens at Midsomer) these are decently habited and hooded according to the
ancient manner: My Lord is here saluted with two Speeches, first by Troynouant
in these lines following.

HIstory, Truth, and Virtue seek by name,
To celebrate the Merchant-Taylors fame*
That Henry de Royal, this we call
Worthy Iohn Yeacksley purchased first their Hall;
And thus from low beginnings their oft-springs
Societies claim Brother-hoods of Kings.
I Troynovant placed eminent in the eye
Of these admire at my felicity:
Five Cities, Antwerpe and the spacious Paris,
Rome, Venice, and the Turks Metropilis:
Beneath these, five learned Poets worthy men,
Who do eternize brave acts by their pen;
Chaucer, Gower, Lidgate, Moore and for our time
Sr. Phillip Sidney, glory of our clime,
These beyond death a fame to Monarckes give,
And these make Cities and Societies live.
TO Honour by our Wrightings Worthy men,
Flows as a duty from a judging pen,
And when we are emploid in such sweet praise,
Bees swarm and leave their honey on our baize:
Evermore Musically Verses run,
When the loth'd vain of flattery they shun.
Survey most Noble Praetor what succeeds,
Virtue low bred aspiring to high deeds.
These passing on, in the next place, my Lord is encountered with the person of
S. Iohn Hawkwood in complete Armour, his plume and Feath^r for his Horses
shafforne of the Companies colours, white and Wa^chet: this worthy Knight, did
most worthy service, in the time of Edward the third in France, after served as
General.

Diverse Princes of Italy, went to the Holy-land, and in his return back, dyed
at Florence, and there lies buried with a fair Monument over him: This worthy
Gentleman was Free of our Company; and thus I prepare him to give my Lord
entertainment.

MY birth was mean, yet my deservings grew
To eminence, and in France a high pitch flew,
From a poor common Soldier I attained,
The stile of Captain, and then Knight-hood gained;
S^rud the Black Prince in France in all his wars;
Then went t'the Holy-land, thence brought my scars.
And wearied body which no danger feared.
To Florence where it nobly lies Inteerd,
There Sir Iohn Hawkewoods memory doth live,
And to the Merchant-Taylors fame doth give.
After him follows a Triumphant Chariot with the Arms of the
Merchant-Taylors, coloured and guilt in several places of it, and over it, there
is supported for a Cannopy, a rich and very spacious Pavilion, coloured
Crimson, with a Lyon Passant: this is drawn with four horses, (for Porters
would have made it move tottering and Improperly.) In the Chariot I place for
the honour of the Company (of which Records remain in the Hall:) Eight Famous
Kings of this Land, that have bin free of this Worshipful Company.

First the Victorious Edward the Third, that first quartered the Arms of
France with England, next the Munificent Richard the Second, that kept
Ten-Thousand daily in his Court in Checkroult, By him the Grave and discreet
Henry the Fou^th, in the next Chairs the Scourge and Terror of France, Henry
the Fifth, and by him his religious, though unfortunate Son, Henry the sixth:
the two next Chairs are supplied with the Persons of the Amorous and
Personable Edward the Fourth (for so Phillip Commineus, and Sir Thomas Moore
describe him) the other with the bad man, but the good King, Richard the third,
for so the Laws he made in his short Government do Illustrate him; But lastly
in the most Eminent part of the Chariot I place the wise and politic Henry
the Seventh, houlding the Charter by which the Company was Improued from the
Title of Linin-Armorers into the name of Master and Wardens of Merchant-Taylors
of Saint Iohn Baptist. The Chairs of these Kings that were of the House of
Lancaster are garnished with artificial Red Roses, the rest with white, but the
Vniter of the division and houses, Henry the Seventh, both with White and Red,
from whence his Royal Majesty how reigning took his Motto: for one peace of
his Coin, Henricus rosas regna Iacobus.

The speaker in this Pageant is Edward the third, the last Line of his speech
is repeated by all the rest in the Chariot.

VIew whence the Merchanttaylors honour springs
From this most Royal Conventicle of Kings:
Eight that Successively wore Englands Crown
Held it a special honour, and renown:
(The Society was so worthy, and so good)
T'vnite themselves into their Brotherhood.
Thus Time, and Industry attain the prise,
As Seas from Brookes, as brookes from Hillocks rise*
Let all good men this sentence oft repeat,
By unity the smallest things grow great.

By unity the smallest things grow great.

And this repetition was proper, for it is the Companies Motto: Concordia
paruaeres crescunt.

After this Pageant rides Queen Anne, wife to Richard the second, free
likewise of this Company, nor let it seem strange, for besides her, there were
two Duchess, five Countesses, and two Barronnesses free of this Society,
s^uenteene Princes and Dukes, one Arch-bishop, one and thirty Earles, (besides
those made with Noble Prince) Henry, one Vicount, twenty four Bishops, sixty
six Barons, seven Abbotts, s^uen prior; or subprior, and with Prince Henry in
the year 1607. the Duke of Linox, the Earles of Nottingham, Suffolke, Arundel,
Oxford, Worcester, Pembrooke, Essex, Northampton, Salisbury, Montgomery, the
Earl of Perth, Vicount Cranborne: Barons, the Lord Euers, Hunsden, Hayes,
Borley, Mr. Howard, Mr. Sheffield, Sir Iohn Harrinton, Sir Thomas Chaliner,
besides States of the Low-Countries, and Sir Noel Caroone their Legier
Ambassador.

And in regard our Company are stild Brethren of the Fraternity of St. Iohn
Baptist, and that the ancient Knights of St. Iohn of Jerusalem, (to which now
demolisht House in St. Iohns Street, our Company then using to go to offer, it
is recorded Henry the seventh then accompanying them, gave our Mr. the upper
hand,) because these Knights, I say, were instituted to secure the way for
Pilgrims; in the desert, I present therefore two of the Worthiest Brothers of
this Society of St. Iohn Baptist I can find out in History. The first Amade le
Grande, by whose aid Rhodes was recovered from the Turks, and the order of
Anuntiade or Salutation instituted with that of four letters FERT, signifying,
Fortitudo Eius Rhodum Tenuit; and the other of Mounsieur Jean Valet, who
defended Malta from the Turks inuation, and expelled them from that impregnable
Key of Christendom this stild, Great Master of Malta, that Governor of
Rhodes.

Next I bring our two Sea Triumphs, and after that, the Ship called the
Holy-Lambe, which brings hanging in her Shrouds the Golden-Fleece, the
conceit of this being that God is the Guide and Protector of all Prosperous
Ventures.

To second this, follow the two beast, the Lyon and Cammell proper to the Arms
of the Company; on the Camel rides a Turk, such as use to Travail with
Caravans, and one the Lyon a Moore or wild Numidian.

The fourth eminent Pagiant, I call the Monument of Charity and Learning, this
fashioned like a beautiful Garden with all kind of flowers, at the sour
Corners, four artificial Bird Cages, with variety of Birds in them: this for
the beauty of the Flowers, and melody of the Birds, to represent a Spring in
Winter: in the midst of the Garden, under one Elme-tree, sits the famous and
worthy Patriot Sir Thomas White; who had a dream that he should build a
College where two bodies of an Elm sprang from one root, and being inspired
to it by God, first rod to Cambridge, to see if he could find any such, Failing
of it there, went to Oxford and surueighing all the grounds, in and near the
University, at last in Gloster-Hallgarden, he found one that somewhat resembled
it, upon which he resolved to endow it with larger reuenew, and to increase the
foundation, having set men at work upon it, and riding one day out at the
North-Gate at Oxford, he spied on his right hand the self same Elm had bin
figurd him in his dream, whereupon he gives over his former purpose, of so
amply enlarging Gloster-Hall (yet not without a large exhibition to it)
purchases the ground where the Elm stood: and in the same place built the
College of Saint Iohn Baptist, and to this day the Elm grows in the Garden,
carefully preserved; as being under God a motive to their worthy foundation.

This I have heard Fellows of the House of approved credit, and no way
superstitiously given, affirm to have bin delivered from man to man, since the
first building of it, and that Sir Thomas White inviting the Abbot of Osnye to
dinner in the aforesaid Hall, In the Abbots presence, and the hearing of diverse
other grave persons affirmed by Gods Inspiration in the former receited manner,
he built and endowed the College.

This relation is somewhat with the largest, only to give you better light of
the figure: the chief person in this is, Sir Thomas White, sitting in his
Eminent Habit of Lord Mayor, on the one hand sits Charity with a Pelican on
her head, on the other Learning with a book in one hand, and a Laurel Wreath
in the other, behind him is the College of St. Iohn Baptist in Oxford exactly
modeld, two Cornets which for more pleasure answer one and another
interchangeably, and round about the Pageant sit twelve of the four and twenty
Cities, (for more would have ouer-burthened it) to which this worthy Gentleman
hath been a charitable Benefactor* when my Lord approaches to the front of
this piece: Learning humbles her self to him in these ensuing verses.

TO express what happiness the Country yields,
The Poets feigned Heaven in th'Elizian fields;
We figure here a Garden, fresh and new,
In which the chiefest of our blessings grew:
This worthy Patriot here, Sr. Thomas White,
Whilst he was living had a dream one night,
He had built a College and given living too't,
Where two Elme-bodies sprang up from on root;
And as he dreamt, most certain tis he found,
The Elm near Oxford, and upon that Ground,
Built Saint Iohns College, Truth can testify
His merit, whilst his Faith and Charity
Was the true compass, measured every part,
And took the latitude of his Christian heart;
Faith kept the center, Charity walked this round,
Until a true circumference was found;
And may the Impression of this figure strike,
Each worthy Senator to do the like.

The last, I call the Monument of Gratitude, which thus dilates it self.

Upon an Artificial Rock, set with mother of Pearl* and such other precious
stones, as are found in quarries, are placed four curious Paramids charged
with the Princes Arms, the three Feathers, which by day yield a glorious show,
and by night a more goodly, for they have lights in them, that at such time as
my Lord Mayor returns from Paul's, shall make certain ouals and squares,
resemble precious stones, the Rock expresses the riches of the Kingdom Prince
Henry was borne Heir to, the Piramids, which are Monuments for the Dead, that
he is deceased: on the top of this rests half a Celestial Globe, in the
midst of this hangs the Holy Lamb in the Sun-beames, on either side of
these, an Angel, upon a pedestal of gold stands the figure of Prince Henry
with his Coronet, George and Garter; in his left hand he holds a Circklet or
Crimson Velvet, charged with four Holy Lambs, such as our Company choose
Masters with; in several Cants beneath sits, first Magistracy tending a Be
Hive, to express his Gravity in Youth, and forward industry to have proved an
ab^olute Governor: Next Liberality, by her a Dromedary showing his speed and
alacrety in gratifying his Followers: Navigation with a Iacobs Staff and
Compass, expressing that his desire that his reading that way, might in time
grow to the practicke building, to that purpose one of the goodliest Ships was
ever launcht in the River: in the next Unanimity with a Chaplet of Lyllies, in
her lap a sheaf of Arrows, showing he loved Nobility, and Communalty with an
entire* heart. Next Industry on a hill where Antes are whording up Corn,
expressing his forward inclination to all Noble exercise: Next Chastity, by her
a Unicorn, showing it is guide to all other virtues, and clears the Fountain
head from all poison: Justice with her properties: Then Obedience, by her an
Elephant the strongest Beast, but most observant to man of any Creature: Then
Peace sleeping upon a Canon, alluding to the eternal Peace he now possesses:
Fortitude a Pillar in one hand, a Serpent wreathed about the other, to expect
his height of mind, and the expectation of an undaunted resolution. These
twelve thus seated, I figure Loyalty as well sworn Servant to this City, as to
this Company, and at my Lord Majors coming from Paul's, and going down
Wood-streete, Amade le Grande delivers this Speech unto him.

OF all the Triumphs which your eye has viewed
This the fair Monument of Gratitud;
This chiefly should your eye, and ear Employ
That was of al your Brother-hood the Joy,
Worthy Prince Henry fames best president,
Called to a higher Court of Parliament,
In his full strength of Youth and height of blood,
And which Crowned all, when he was truly good:
On Virtue, and on Worth he still was throwing
Most bounteous showers, where ever he found them growing,
He never did disguise his ways by Art
But shooted his intents unto his hart,
And loved to do good, more for goodness sake,
Then any retribution man could make.
Such was this Prince, such are the noble hearts;
who when they dye, yet dye not in all parts:
But from the Integrety of a Brave mind,
Leave a most Clear and Eminent Fame behind.
Thus hath this Jewel not quite lost his Ray,
Only cased up against a more glorious day.
And be it rememberd that our Company
Have not forgot him who ought ner'e to dye:
Yet, wherefore should our sorrow give him dead,
When a new Phnaeix springs up in his stead:
That as he seconds him in every grace,
May second him in Brother-hood, and place.
Good rest my Lord, Integrity that keeps
The safest Watch and breeds the soundest sleeps.
Make the last day of this your houlding seat,
Joyful as this* or rather more complete.
I could, a more curious and Elaborate way have expressed my self in these my
endeavours, but to have bin rather too tedious in my Speeches, or too weighty,
might have troubled my Noble Lord, and pusled the understanding of the Common
People; suffice it* I hope 'tis well, and if it please his Lordship, and my
Wort^y Employers, I am amply sati^fied.


