An Enterlude called lusty Iuuentus.

Lively describing the frailty of youth: of natur, prove to vice: by grace and
good counsel, traynable to virtue.

The parsonages that speak.

Four may play it easily, taking such parts as they think best: so that
any one take of those parts that be not in place at once.

FOr as much as man is naturally prone.

It is necessary that he be speedily withdrawn,
Frome concupiscence of syn, his natural appetite,
And ordre to bring up youth, Ecclesiasticus doth writ*
An untamed horse, will be harde saith he,
And a wanton child wilful will be.
Give him no liberty in youth, nor his folly excuse,
Bow down his neck, and keep him in good awe,
Least he be stubburne: no labour refuse,
To train him to wisdom, and teach him Gods law*
For youth is frail and easy to draw
(By grace (to goodness: (by nature tayll:
That nature hath ingrafted, is harde to kill
Nevertheless in youth men may be best
Trained to virtue by godly mean
Vice may be so mortified and so suppressed
That it shall not break furth, yet ye root will remain:
As in this Enterlude by youth, you shall se plain:
From his lust by good counsel, brought to godly conversation
And shortly after to frail natures inclination
The enemy of mankind, Satan through Hypocrisy
Feigned or chosen holynes of mans blind intent
Forsakyn Gods word, that leads right way
Is brought to felowshyp and ungracious company:
To abominable living, till he be holy bent
And so to desperation, if good counsel were not sent
From God, that in trouble doth no man forsake
That doth call, and trust in him for Christ's sake.
Finally, youth by gods special grace,
Doth earnestly repent his abominable living
By the doctrine of good counsel, and to his solace
Gods mercy enters to him recitinge:
Gods merciful promises, as they be in writing
He believes and follows to his great consolation
All these parts ye shall se brefly played in their fas^hio

IN a herber grene, a slope where as I lay
The birds sang sweet in the midst of the day
I dreamed fast of mirth and play
In youth is pleasur, in youth is pleasure.
Me thought I walked still to and fro
And from her company I could not go
But when I waked it was not so,
In youth is pleasure, in youth is pleasure.
Therefore my heart is surely pyght.
Of her alone to have a sight.
Which is my joy and hearts delight,
In youth is pleasure, in youth is pleasure.
What how are they not here?
I am disapoynted by the blessed mass,
I had thought to have found them making good chere
But now they are gone to some secrte place.
Uel seeing they are gone, I do not greatly pass.
Another time I will hold them as much,
Saying they brake promise, and keep not the tweche.
What shall I do now to pass a way the day
Is there any man here that will go to game.
At what so ever ye will play
To make one, I am ready to the same:
youth full of pleasure is my propre name
To be a lone is not my appetite.
For of all things in th world I love merry company
Who knows where is ere a mynstrel,
By the mass I would fain go dance a fit
My compacions are at it I know right well
They do not all this while in a corner sit:
Against another time they have taught my wit
I beshrew their hearts for serving me this.

Well I met father, well I met,
Did you hear any minstrels play?
As you cam hitherwarde upon your way,
And if you did I pray you wish me theither
For I am going to seek the, in faith I know not whether

Sir I will ask you a question by your favour
what would you with the minstrel do?

Nothing but have a dance or two,
To pass the time away in pleasure,

If that be the matter, I promise you sure
I am the more soryer that it should so be,
For there is no such pasting, ye time a pointed in ye scrypture
Nor yet thereunto it doth not agree,
I wish that ye would so use your liberty,
To walk as you are bound to do,
According to the vocatio, which god hath called you to,

Why sir, are you angry because I have spoken so
By the mass it is alone for my apety

Show me your name I pray you heartily
And then I will my mind express

My name is called Iuuentus doutles
Say what you will I will give you the hearing.

For as much as god hath created you of nothing,
Unto his own lyknes, by spiritual illuminacion,
It is vnmete that ye should lead your living
Contrary to his godly determynacyon,
Saint Paul unto ye Ephesians gives good exhortation
Saying, walk circumspectly, redeming the time
That is to sped it well, not to wickedness enclyne

No, no, hardly none of mine,
If I wold live so straight, you might cout me a fool
Let them keep thouse rules, which are doctors divine
And have be brought up all their days in scole.

Moyses in the law exhorts his people,
As in the book of Deutronomye he doth plainly write,
That they should live obedyent and thankful,
For infect these words he doth resyte:
All ye this day stand before the Lords sight,
Both princes, rulers, elders and parents,
Chyldre wives, young old, therefore obey his commaudemets

I am to young to understand his documents,
Wherefore did all they stand before his presence?

To entre with God peace and alliance,
Promysing that they would him honour, fear serve
All kind of people were bound in those covenants,
That from his law they should never swerve,
For God uses no percialitie.

What? am I bound as well as the clergy,
To learn and follow his precepts and law?

Ye surely, or else God will withdraw
His mercy from you, promised in his covenant,
For except you live under his obedience and awe,
How can you receue the benyfites of his testament?
For he submetteth himself to be a seruaunt,
And his masters commaudemet will not fulfil nor regard
According as he hath done, is worthy his reward.

It is as true a sayng as ever I heard,
Therefore your name I pray now tell,
For by my truth your communication I like wondres well

My name is called good counsel,

Good counsel,
Now in faith I cry you mercy,
I am sorry that I have you thus offended,
But I pray you bear with me patiently,
And my miss behaueour shall be amended,
I know my time I have rudely spended,
Folowinge my awne lust, being led bi ignorance.
But now I hope of better knowledge through your aquayntaunce.

I pray God guide you with his gracious assistans
Unto ye knowledge of his truth, your ignorance to undo
That you may be one of those numbered christians
Which follows the lamb whether he doth go,
The lamb Iesus Christ, my meaning is so,
By sure faith confidence, in his bitter death passion,
The only price of our health and salvation.

Sir, I thank you for your hearty oration
And now I pray you show me your aduisemet
Howe I may live in this my vocation,
According to Gods will and commandment.

First of all it is most expedient.
That you exercise your self in continual prayer,
That it might please the Lord omnipotente,
To send unto you his holy spirit and comforter:
Which will lead you every day and hour
Unto the knowledge of his word and verytie
Where in you may learn to live most christianly.

O Lord grant me of thy infinite mercy,

And illumine my hart with spirit continually
That I way be apt thy holy precepts to fulfil:
Strengthen me, that I may parseuer still.
Thy commandments to obey.
And then shall I never slip nor fall away,

Full true be these words, which Christ him self did say
He that seeks shall surely find.
Be hold youth now rejoice we may
For I se knowledge of God, verite stand here behind
He is come now to satisfey your mind
In those things which you will desire,
Therefore together let us approach him ne'er.

A good counsyl, new it doth appear.
That god never rejects the humbles petycion,

Now ye Lord bless you al with his heavily benedyctyon,
And with his fyery love your harts inflame
That of his merciful promyses you may have ye fruityo
The subtlety, of the deuel, utterly to defame:
Now good christian audience, I will express mi name
The true knowledge of gods verity* thus mi name doth
Whom God hath appointed, to give ye blind their sight.

All prase be given to that Lord of might,
which hath appointed you hither at this present hour
For I trust you will so instruct youth a right,
That he shall live according to Gods pleasure

And I thank Iesus Christ my saviour,
That he is come to my company.

I thank you my friends most hartell
For your gentle salutation.

Sir, I will be so bold by your delyberation
To opyn my mind unto you now,
Trusting that bi your good exhortation,
I shall learn those things, which I never knew:
This one thing chiefly I would learn of you
How I may my life in these my vocation lead.
According as God hath ordained and decrede,

The prophet Dauid saith that the man is blessed,
Which doth excersise him self in the law of the Lord,
And doth not follow the way of the wickid,
As the first psalme doth plainly accorde:
The four score.xiii. psalmes thereunto doth accorde.
Blessed is the man whom thou teach, o Lord saith he
To learn the law, precepts, word or verytie
And Christ in the Gospel saith manifestly.
Blessed is he which hears ye word of god ad kepeth it,
That is to believe his word, live accordingly
Declaring the faith by the fruits of the spirit
Whose fruit are these, as s. Paul to ye Gal, doth wrighte
Love joy, peace, long suffering and faithfulness
Mekenes, goodness, temperance and gentilnes

Be these words which unto you he doth express
He teaches that you ought to have a steadfast faith
With out it is impossible doutlesse,
To please god, as saint Paul saith:
Where faith is not, godly living decays
For whatsoever is not of faith, saith. s. Paul, is sin,
But where a perfect faith is, there is good working

It seems to me that this your meaning,
That when I observe gods commaudemetes ye works of charity
They shall preuayl unto me nothing,
Except I believe to be saved thereby.

No, no, you are deceived very blyndly,
for faith in Christ's merits doth only iustyfy,
And make us righteous in gods sight

Why should I then in Good works delight?
Seeing I shall not be saved by them

Becausy they are required of al christian men,
As the necessary fruits of true repentance.

But the reward of the heauenli inheritance
Is given us through faith, for Christ's deservinges,
^s. s Paule declares in ye.iiii. chapter to the Romayns
therefore we ought not to work as hierlinges:
Seeing Christ hath purged us once from al our wicked living.
Let us no more wallow therein,
But persevere like good brauches, bearing fruit in him.

Now I know where about you have been.
My elders never taught me so before.

Though your elders were blind, dout not you therefore
For saint Peter saith, vain is the conversations,
Which ye receive by your elders traditions,

I will gladly receive your godly admonicions,
But yet I pray you show me the cause,
that they being men of great discretions
Did not instruct me in gods laws,
According to his will and ordinance

Because they the selfes were wrapped in ignorance
Being deceived by false preachers.

O Lord deliver me from wicked teachers,
That I be not deceived with their false doctrine.

to Gods word you must only incline,
Al other doctrine clean set a part.

Surely that I will from the bottom of my heart,
And I theke ye living God whyth hath given me ye knowledge
To know his doctryng fro the false peruarce
I being yet yonge and full tender of age:
And that he hath made me partaker of ye heavenly in heritage
Of his one mercy and not of my deseruynge
For hell I have decerued by my sinful working.
I know right well my elders and parents.
Have of a lunge time deceuid be,
With blind hypocrisy and superstitious ententes,
Trusting in their own works, which is nothing but vanyte
Their steppes shall not be followed for me,
Therefore I pray you show me a brief conclusion,
How I ought to live in christian religion,

The first begyning of wysdo, as saith ye wise Salomon
Is to fear God with al they heart and power
And the you must believe al his promise without any exception
And that he will perform the both constant sure
And then be cause he is thy only saviour
Thou must love him with all thy soul and mind
And thy neybour as thy self, because he hath so assyned,

To love my neybour as my self, I ca not be to kind
I pray you tell me, what mean you

My meaning is as Christ saith in ye.vi. chap. Math.
To do to him as you would be done to

I pray God give me grace so for to do
That unto his will I may be obedyent.

Here you shall reseaue Christ's testament
To comfort your consience when need shall require
To learn the contents there of, se that you be diligent
The which all christian men ought to desire
For it is the well, or fountain most clear
Out of the which doth spring sweet consolation
To all those that thyrst after eternal salvation.

There in shall you find most wholesome presaruacion
Both in troubles, percicucions, sickness ad aduersytye
And a sure defence in the time of temptation
Against whom ye deuel can not prevail with all his army:
And if you persevere therein vnfaynedly
It will set your hart at such quietness and rest
Which can not never be turned with storms nor tempest

With this thing you must neither flatter nor jest
But steadfastly believe it every day and hour
And let your conversation opily protest
That of your hart it is ye most precious treasure
And then your godly example shall other men procure
To learn and exercise the same also
I pray God strengthen you so for to do

Now for this godly knowledge, which you ha ^rought me to
I beseech the living God reward you again
From your company I will never depart nor go
So lunge as in this life I do remain:
For in this book I se manifest and plain
That he that follows his own lusts imagynacyon
Kepeth the ready path to euerlast dampnacyon.
And he that leadete a godly conversation
Shall be borught to such quietness, joy and peace
Which in comparison passes all worldly gloriation
Which can not endure, but shortly cease
Both the time and hour I may now bless
That I met with you father good council
to bring me to the knowledge of his heueuenly Gospel

This your profession I like very well
So that you entend to live according
I pray God your living do not rebel
But ever agree unto your sayng
That when ye shall make acountes or rekening
Of this talent, which you have received
you may be one of those, with whom ye Lord shall be pleased

For this conversation of youth, ye lords nam be prased
Let us now depart for a reason.

To give God the glori it is convenient and reason
if thou will depart, I will not tarry.

And I will never forsake your company
While I live in this world
Oh oh all to late
I trow this gear will come to nought
For I perceive my power doth a bate
For al the policy that ever I have wrought,
Many and sundry ways I have sought,
To have the word of god deluded utterly,
Oh for sorrow yet it will not be.
I have done the best that I can,
And my ministers also in every place,
to rote it clean from the hart of man,
And yet for all that it flourishes a pace:
I am sore in dread to show my face,
My auctoritie and works are so greatly dyspysed
My inventions, and all that ever I have devised
Oh oh, full well I know the cause,
that my estimation doth thus decay,
the old people would believe still in my laws,
But the younger sort lead them a contrary way
they will not believe they plainly say,
In old traditions and made by men,
But they will live as the scripture teaches the.
Out I cry upon them, they do me open wrong,
to bring up their children thus in knowlage,
For if they will not follow my ways when they are young
yt is harde turning them when they come to age:
I must needs find some means this matter to swag,
I mean to turn their hearts from the scripture quite,
that in carnal pleasurs they may have more delight.
Well I will go taste to enfect this youth
through the entisement of my son hypocrysie,
And work some proper feat to stope his mouth
that he may led his life carnally:
I had never more need my matters to apply,
Oh my child hypocrisy, where art thou?
I charge yt of my blessing, appear before me now
Oh oh quod he, keep again the sow,
I come as fast as I can, I warrant you,
Where is he that hath the sow to sell?
I will give him money if I like her well,
whether it be sow or hog, I do not greatly care
For by my occupation I am a bochare,

Oh my child, how doest thou fare?

Sancti amen, who have we there?
By the mass I will bye none of thy ware,
thou art a chapman for the deuell
What my son, can thou not tell?

Who is here, and what I am,
I am thine own father Satan.

Be you so sir? I cry you mercy than,
you may say I am homely, lack learning,
to lyken my fathers voice unto a sows groaning
But I pray you show me the cause, and why
that you called me hither so hastily,
A Hypocrisy, I am undone utterly

Utterly undone, nay stop there hardly,

For I my self do know the contrary,
By daily experience:
Do not I yet raygne a broad,
And as lunge as I am in the world,
you have some treasure and substance.
I suppose I have ben the flower
In setting forth thy laws and power,
Without any delay
By the mass if I had not been,
thou had not ben worth a flaunders pin,
At this present day.
the time were to long now to declare
How many and great the number are,
Which have deceived be:
And brought clean from Gods law,
Unto thy yoke and awe,
Through the intisement of me.
I have ben bused* since ye world began,
to graffe thy laws in the hart of man,
Where they ought to be refused:
And I have so mingled gods comaudemetes
with vain zeals, blind intents
that they be greatly abused.
I set up great ydolatry
With a kind of fylthy Sodometry,
to give mankynd a fall:
And I brought up such supersticion
Under the name of holynes and religyon,
that disceyued al most all.
As holy Cardinals* holy Popes,
Holy vestimentes, holy copes
Holy armytes and Fryers
Holy priests. holy bisshoppes
Holy monks, holy abbotes
yea, and all abstinate liars.
Holy pardons, holy beads,
Holy saints, holy images,
With holy, holy blood,
Holy stocks, holy stones:
Holy cloughtes, hole bones:
yea, and holy holy wood.
Holy skins, holy bulls:
Holy rochetts, and coules
Holy crouches and staves
Holy hoods, holy caps
Holy miters, holy hats
a good holy, holy knaves.
Holy days, holy fastinges:
Holy twitching, holy tastinges,
Holy visions and sights:
Holy wax, holy lead:
Holy water, holy bread:
To drive a way spirits.
Holy fire, holy palm:
Holy oil, holy cream:
And holy ashes also:
Holy brouches, holy rings:
Holy knelynge* holy sensynges:
And a hundred trim trams mo.
Holy crosses, holy belles:
Holy relics, holy iouels:
Of mine own invention:
Holy candels, holy tapers:
Holy parchementes, holy papers:
Had not you a holy son?

All these things, which thou hast done
My honour and laws hath maintained,
But now, Oh alas, one thing is begone
By the which mi kingdom is greatly decayed
I shall less al, I am sore afraid,
Except thy help I know right plain,
I shall never be able to recover it again.
Gods word is so greatly sprung up in youth
That he little regards my laws or me,
He tells his parents that is very truth,
That they of lunge time have deceived be,
He saith, according to christ's verity,
All his doings he will ordre and frame,
Mortifiyng the flesh with the lusts of ye same.

A sir a, there begins the game,

What, is Iuuentus become so tame?
To be a new gospeler.

As fast as I do make, he doth mar,
He that followed so lunge the steppes of good counsel.
that knowledge and he together doth dwell,
For who is so busy in every place, as youth

To read and declare the manifest truth?

But ho Hypocrisy if you could stop his mouth
Thou shouldest wyn mi heart for ever,
What would you have me to do in the matter?
Show me therein your advisement.
I would have the go incontinent,
And work some craft, feat or policy,
To set knowledge and him at controversy,
And his company thy self greatly use
That Gods word he may clean a buse.

At your request I will not refuse
to do that thing which in me doth lye,
Dout ye not, but I will excuse,
those things which ye doth plainly deny
And I will handel my matters so craftily
that ere he comes to mans state:
Gods word and his living shall be clean at the bate

thou shalt have my blessing both early and late,
And be cause thou shalt all mi counsel keep
thou shalt call my name frendshyp.

By the mass it is a name full mete,
For my proper and amiable person,

Oh, fare well fare well my son,
Speed thy busynes, for I must be gone,

I warrant you, let me a lone,
I will be with Iuuentus anon,
And that ere he be ware.
And I wysse if he walk not straight.
I will use such a sleyght,
That shall trap him in a snare.
How shall I bring this gear to pass?
I can tel now by the mass,
Without any more aduysement:
I will infect him with wicked company,
Whose conversation shall be so fleshly,
yea, able to over come an innocent,
This wicked felowshipe,
Sall him company keep,
For a while:
And then I will bring in,
Abominable living,
Him to beguile.
With words fair I will him tyse,
Telling him of a gyrlenyse,
Which shall him somewhat move:
Abhomynable living, though she be,
yet he shall no other wayesse.
But she is for to love.
She shall him procure*
To live in pleasure,
After his own phantesy*
And my matter to frame,
I will call her name,
Unknown honesty.
This will I convey,
My matter I say,
Some what handsomely,
That through wicked fellowship:
And false pretend frendshep,
youth shall live carnally.
Trudge hypocrysie trudge,
Thou art a good drudge,
To serve the deuel:
If thou shouldest lye and lurk,
And not entend thy work,
Thy master should do full euel.

Well I met by my troth
and whether a way?
you are the last man,
Which I called on,
I swear by this day.
Me thought by your face
Ere you cam in place,
It should be you:
Therefore I did a bide*
For your coming, this is true.

For your gentelnes, sir. most heartily I thank you
But yet you must hold me some what excused,
For to my simple knowledge I never knew
That you and I to gether were acquainted,
But nevertheless, if you do it renew,
Old acquaintance will some be remembered

Ah now I se well youth is fethered
And his crumes he hath well gathered,
Since I spake with him last
A pore mans tale can not now be herd
As in times past:
I cry you mercy, I was some what bold
Thinking that your mastership would,
Not have bin so strange:
But now I perceue that promocyon,
Causes both man, manners and fashion
Greatly for to change*

you are to blame this me to calenge

For I think I am not he which you take me for
yes, I have known you ever since you were bore
your age is yet under a score,
Which I can well remember:
I wisse, I wisse you and I.
Many a time have ben full mery^
When you were young and tender.

Then I pray let us reason no longer

But first show your nominacion.
Of my name to make declaracyon
Without any dissimulacyon,
I am called frendshyip:
Although I be simple and rude of fashion
yet by linage and generation,
I am ney kin to your mastership.
What frendshyp*

I am glad to se that you be merry,
By mi troth I had almost you forgot,
By long absence brought out of memory,

By the mass I love you so heartily,
That there is none so welcome to my company
I pray you tell me, whether are you going?

My entention is to go hear apreachyng

A preaching quod he, ha good little one
By christ she will make you cry out of the winning
If you follow her instruction so early in the morning,

Full great I do abhore this your wicked saying,
For no doubt they increase much sin and vice,
Therefore I pray you show not your meaning,
For I delight not in such foolish fantesies

Surely, then you are the more vnwyse.
you my have a spyrt amongst them now and then

Why should not you as well as other men?


As for al those fylthe doings. I utterly detest them,
I will hear no more of your wicked communycacyon.

if I may be so bold by your deliberation


What will you do at a preaching?
Learn some wholesome and godly teaching,
Of the true minister of Christ's gospel.

Tush, what he will say I know right well,
He will say that God is a good man,
He can make him no better, and say the best he can
I know that, but what then?
The more that Gods word is preached and taught
The greater the occasion is to all christen men,
To forsake their (...) livings, both wicked, vile nought
And to repent their former evils, which they have wrought
Trusting by Chrystes death to be redeemed.
And he that this doth, shall never be disceyued.

well said master doctor, well said.
By the mass we must have you, in to the pulpyt,
I pray you be remembered, and cover your head
For in dede you have need to keep in your wit,
A Sir, who would have thought it
That youth had been such a well learned man:
Let me se your portous gentle sir Ihon.

No, it is not a boat for to loke on,

you ought not to jest with Gods testamet.
What man, I pray you be content,
For I do nothing else but sai mi fantasy
But yet if you could do after mi aduisment
In that matter you should not be so busy
Was not your father as well learned as ye?
And if he had said then as you have now done
I wisse, he had ben like to make a burn

It were much better for me, then to return
Fro my faith in Christ, the profession of his word.

whether is better, a halter or a corde
I can not tell, I swear by Gods mother
But I thing you will have the one or the other
Will you lose al your friends Good will
To continue in that opion still,
Was there not as well learned men before as now?
yea, and better to I may say to you
And they thought the younger sort of the people
By the elders to take an example
And if I did not love you as nature doth me bind
you should not know so much of my mind

Whether were I better to be ignorant and blind
And to be dampned in hell for infidelity?
Or to learn godly knowledge, wherein I shall find
The right path way to eternal felicity?

Can you deny, but it is your duty
Unto your elders to be obedient

I grant I am bound to obey my parents
In al things honest and lawful.

Lawful quod ha, a fool fool
Will thou set men to scoole
when they be old
I may say to you secretly
The world was never meri
Since children where so bold.
Now every boy will be a teacher
The father a fool, and the child a preacher
This is preaty gear
The fool presumptuous of youth
will turn shortly to great ruth
I fear. I fear. I fear.

The sermon will be done ere I can com there,
I care not greatly whether I go or no,
And yet for my promys, by God I swear,
There is no remedy but I must needs go:
Of my companions there will be mo
And I promised them bi gods grace

To mete them there as the sermon was.
For onse breaking promise do not you pass,
Make some excuse the matter to cease
what have they to do?
And you and I were I wot wot where
we would be as merry as there
yea, and merryer to

I would gladly in your compane go
But if my companions should chance to se
They would report full euell by me:
And peradventure if I would it use.
My company they would clean refuse.

what, are those fellows so curious
That your self you can not excuse?
I will teach you the matter to convey
Do what your own lust, and say as they say
And if you be reproved with your own affynytye
Bid them pluck the beam out of there own eye
The old popysh priests mock and despise
And the ignorant people that believe their lies
Call them papists, hipocrites, ioynyng of the plough.
Fare out the matter, and then good enough.
Let your book at your girdle be tied,
Or else in your bosom that he may be spied,
And then it will be said both with youth and age
yonder fellow hath an excellent knowledge.
tush tush,
I could so bear the busshe,
that all should be flusshe.
that ever I did.

Now by my troth you are merrily disposed

Let us go thither as you thenke best.
How say you, shall we go to breakfast
will you go to the pie feast.
Or by the mass if thou wilt be my gest
It shall cost the nothing,
I have a furny card in a place,
that will bare aturne besides the ace,
She puruyes now a pace,
For mi coming
And if thou will fybbere as well as I.
we shall have merry company,
And I warrant (...) we have not a pie
we shall have a pudding.

By the mass that meat I love above all thing:

you may draw me a bout the town with a puddynge:
Then you shall se cunning.
A poor shyft for a living.
Amongst poor men used is,
The kind hart of hyrs,
Hyth eased my purse,
Many a time ere this
I marvel greatly where frendshyp is,

He promised to mete me here ear this time
I beshrew his hart that this promys doth mys,
And then be ye sure it shall not be mine
yes feloshyp that it shall be thine

For I have tarried here this our or twain,
And this honest gentleman in mi company hath ben

To abide your coming. this thing is plain
By the mass if you chide. I will be gon again
For in faith frendshyp, I my say to the
I love not to be there, where chyders be

No God it knows, you are as full of honesty
As a mary bone is full of honey
But syrra, I pray you bid this gentelman welcome
For he is desirous in your company to come,
I tel you he is a man of the right making
And one that hath excellent learning
At his girdle he hath such a book
That the popysshe priests dare not in him loke
This is a fellow for the nones.

I love him the better by gods precious bones,
you are hartele welcome as I may say
I shall desire you of better acquaintance
That of your company be bold I may
you may be sure if in me it lye,
To do you pleasure, you should it find
For by the mass I love you, both with hart and mind.

To say the same to you, your getlenes doth me bind
And I thank you heartily for your kyndnes

Will you se this gentelman fynes
your gentelnes and your kindness,
I thank him and I thank you,
And I think, if the truth weary sought,
The one bad, and the other nought,
Never a good I make God a vow.
But yet feloship tel me one thing.
Did you se little bess this morning?
We should have our brekefast, yester night she said,
But she hath fore gotten it now, I am a afraid.

Her promise shall be performed and paid,
For I spake with her since the time I rose
And then she told me how the matter goes:
We must be with her between eight and nyne,

And then her master mistress will be at the preaching
I purposed my self there to have been,
But this man provoked me to the contrary
And told me that we should have merry company.

Merry quod ha, we can not choose but be merry,
For there is such a girl, where as we go,
Which will make us be merry, whether we will or no

The ground is the better on the which she doth go
For she will make better chere with a little which she ca get
Then many one cane with a great banquet of meat,

To be in her company my hart is set,

Therefore I pray you let us be gone
She will com her self a none
For I told her before where we would stand.
And then she said she would beck us with her hand

Now by the mass I perceive that she is a gallaunde
What will she take pains to come for us hither?

yea I waraut you, therefore you must be familiar with her
When she comes in place,
you must her embrace,
Somewhat hamsomlie.
Lest she thinks danger
Be cause you are a stranger,
To come in your company.
yea, by Gods foot that I will be busy
And I may say to you I can play the knave secretly

Hem, com a way quickly
The back door is opned I dare not tarry,
Come fellowship come on a way.

What unknown honesty a word
you shall not go yet by God I swear.
Here is none but your friends, you need not to fray.
Although this strange young gentel man be here,

I trust in me she will think no danger.
For I love well the company of fair women.

Who you, nay ye are such a holy man,
That to tuche one ye dare not be bold,
I thing you would not kiss a young woman,
if own would give you.xx. pound in goulde,

yes by the mass that I would,
I could find in my hart to kiss you in your smock

My back is broad enough to bare a way that mock as mine
For one hath told me many a time,
That you have said iou would use no such vates copani

By dogs precious wounds yt was some whoreson vyllain
I will never eat meat that shall dome good,
Tell I have cut his flesh by gods precious blude,
Tell me I pray you who it was.
And I will tryme the knave by the blessed mass

Tush, as for that do not you pass
That which I told you was but for love

She did nothing else but prove,
Whether a little thing would you move
To be angry and fret
What and if one had said so,
Let such tryflyng matters go
And be good to men's flesh for all that.

you are welcome to my company
Sir I thank you most heartily,
By your kinds it doth a pere.

What a hurly burly is here,
Smicke smack and all this ger
you well to tycke take I fere.
if thou had time,
Well wanton well,
I wysse I can tell
That such smock smell
will set your nose out of tune.

what man you need not to fume,
Saying he is come in to my company now
He is as well welcome as the best of you
And if it lye in me to do him pleasur.
He shall have it, you may be sure.

The old acquayntauce is cleae out of favour.
Lo frendshyp, this geargoth with aflleight
He hath dreuen us twain out of conceit

Out of conceit, quod ha no no,
I dare welsay that she thinks not so,
How say you unknown honesty?

Do not you love felowshyp and me*
ye by the mass I love you all three,
But yet in dede if I should say the troth
Amongst all other welcome master youth

Full greatly I do delight to kiss your pleasaut mouth
I am not able your kinds to recompense,
I long to talk with you secretly, therefore let us go hence.
I agree to that, for I would not for.xx. pence,
That it were known where I have been

what and it were known it where no daly sin
As for my part I do not greatly care,
So that they find not your proper butteckes bare
Now much fie upon you how badi you are,

I wosse friendship it mouth have be spoken at twice
what thike you for your saing ye people will surmise

Who dare be so bold us to despise?
And if I may hear a knave speak one word,
I will run thorough his chekes with my sword*

This is an ernest fellow of gods word
Se I pray you, how he is disposed to fight

Why, should I not and if my cause be right
What, and if a knave do me beguile?
Sall I stand crouching like an owl,
No, no, then you might count me a very cow,
I know what belongs to gods law as well as you*

your wit therein greatly I do allow,
For and if I were a man as you are,
I would not stick to give a blow,
To teach other knaves to beware,
I beshrew you twyse and if you do spare,
But lay lode on the flesh whatsoever befall
you have strength enough to do it with all,

Let us depart, and if that we shall,
Come on masters, we twain will go before.

Nay nay my friend stop there
yt is not you that shall have her away,
She Sall go with me, and if she go to day.

She shall go with none of you I dare welsaye,
She will go with me before you both,

To forsake any of your company I would be very loath
Therefore I will follow you all three,

Now I beshrew his heart, that to that will not agree,
But yet because the time shall not seem very lunge,
Or eat we depart, let us have a merry songe

As the course of nature doth him bind,
Is not every thing ordained to do his kind?
Report me to you, report me to you.
Do not the flowers spring fresh and gay,
Pleasant and sweet in the month May?
And when their time comes they fayd away*
Report me to you, report me to you.
Be not the trees in wyntter bare,
Like unto their kind, such they are,
And when they spring, their fruit declare
Report me to you, report me to you.
What should youth do, with the fruit of age
But live in pleasure in this passage,
For when age comes hes lusts will swag
Report me to you, report me to you.
Why should not youth fulfil his own mind
As the course of nature doth him bind. c.
O merciful Lord, who can seace to lament,
Or keep his hart from continual morning,
To se how youth is fallen from thy word
And wholly inclined to abominable living,
He lives nothing according to his profession
But alas his life is, to thy word abusion,
Except thy grant mercy to his utter confusion.
O where is the godly conversation
Which should be among the professor of thy word
O where may a man find now one faithful
That is not enfected with dissencyon or descorde?
Or amongst whom are all vices abhord utterly
O where is the brotherly love between man man
we may lament the time our vice be began
O where is the peace mekenes, lunge suffering temperance
which are the fruit of Gods holy spirit,
with whom is the flesh brought under obedience,
Or who reads the scripture to the intent to follow it
who uses not now covetousness and disceite,
Who gives unto the poor that which is dew?
I think in this world, few that live now.
O where is ye godly example that parents should give.
Unto their young family, by godly virtuous living?
Alas how wicked do they themselves live,
Without any fear of God, or his ryghteous threatening,
They have no respect unto the dreadful rekenyng,
Which shall be required of us, when the Lord shall come,
As a right full judge at the day of dome,
O what a joyful sight was it for to se,
When youth began Gods word to embrace.
Then he promised godly knowledge and me,
That from our instructio he would never turn his face
But now he walk, alas: in the vngodlyes chase,

He that lives most ungodly, is counted most wise,
Who is here playng at the dice?
I herd one speak of sins and cyce,
His words did me entice.
Hither to come:

A youth youth, whether doest thou run?
Greatly I do be whale thy misrable estate,
The tyrrible plagues, which in Gods law are written,
Hang over thy head both early and late:
O fleshly capernite, stubburne and obstinate,
Thou had lever forsake Christ thy saviour and king
Then thy fleshly swinish lusts, abbomynable living.

what old hoorson, art thou a chydyng?
I will play a spyrt, why should I not?
I set a myte by thy chekyng
what hast thou to do, and if I lose my cote:
I will trill the bones while I have one groat,
And when there is no more ink in the pen,
I will make a shyfe as well as other men.

Then I perceue you have for gotton clean,
The promise that you made unto knowledge and me
you said such fleshly fruits should not be scene,
But to Gods word your life should agree
Full true be the words of the prophet Osey
No verytie nor knowledge of God is now in the land.
But abomynable vices hath gotten the upper hand.

your mind therein I do well understand.
you go about my lyueng to despise,
But you will not se the beams in your own eyes,

The deuell hath you dysceiued which is ye auctor of lies
And trape you in his snar of wicked hypocrye,
Therefore all that ever you do deuyse
Is to maintain your fleshly liberty

I merueyle why you do this report me,
Wherein do I my life abuse?

your whole conversation I may well accuse,
As in my consience just occasion I find.
Therefore be not offended, although I exprese my mind

Bi the mass if thou tel not truth, I will not be behind
To touch you as well again.

For this thing most chiefly I do complaye:
Have ye not professed the knowledge of Chrystes gospel
And yet I think no more vngodlines doth reign,
In any wicked Heathen, Turk or infidel:
who can deuyse that sin or evil,
That you practyse not from day to day
yea and count yt nothing but a jest or a play,
Alas, what wantonness remains in your flesh?
How desirous are you, to accomplish your own will
what pleasure delight have you in wickedness?
How diligent are you your lusts to fulfil?
S. Paul saith that you ought your fleshly lusts to kill
But unto his teaching, your life ye will not frame
Therefore in vain you bear a christians name.
Rede the.v. to the Galathians, there you shall se
That the flesh rebelleth against the spirit
And that your own flesh is our most veter enemy,
If in your souls health you do delight:
The time were to long now to recite,
What whordom, oncleanes and fylthe communycacyon
Is despersed with youth, in every congregation
To speak of pride, envy, and abhomynable oaths
They are the common practises of youth,
To advance your flesh, you cut iagge your clothes,
And yet ye are a great gospeller in the mouth:
What shall I say, for this plasphemyng the truth
I will show you what saint, Paule doth declare
In his epistle to the Hebrues, and the.x. Chapter.
For him saith he, which doth wyllyngly syn or conset
After he hath received the knowledge of the veryte
Remains no more sacrifice, but a fearful lokig for judgement
And a trrible fire, which shall consume ye adversary
And Christ saith that this blasphemy,
Shall never be pardoned nor forgeuen,
In this world, nor in the world to come
Alas alas, what I have wrought and done?

Herein this place I will fall down desperate,

Alas alas, that ever, I was begat,
I would to God I had never been borne.
All faithful me that behold this wretched state
May very iusty laugh me to scorn:
They may say my time I have euel spent and worn,
Thus in my first age, to work my own destructyon,
In the eternal pains is my part and portion.

Why youth, art thou fallen into desperation?
What man pluck up thine heart, and rise,
Although thou se nothing now, but thy condempnation
yet it may please God again to open thy eyes:
Ah wretched creature, what doest thou surmise?
Thinckest not that Gods mercy doth exceed thy sin?
Remember his merciful promises comfort thy self in hi

O sir, this state is so miserable the which I lye in,
That my comfort and hope from me is separated,
I would to god I had never been.
Wo worth the time that ever I was created.

A fair vessel unfaithful and faint hearted,
Doest thou think that god is so merciless,
That when the sinner doth repent, and is converted,
That he will not fulfil his merciful promyses:

Alas sir, I am in such heaviness,
That his promises I can not remember

In thy wickedness continue no longer,
But trust in the Lord without any fear,
And his mersifull promises shall shortly appear
I would believe if I might them hear,

With all my hart, power and mind,
The living God hath him hither assined:

Lo, where he comes even here by,
Therefore mark his sayings diligently.
The Lord by his prophet Ezechiel says in this wise playnlye
As in the.xxxiii. chapter it doth appear.
Be converted O ye children, and turn unto me,
And I shall remedy the cause of your departure,
And also he saith in the.xviii. chapter,
I do not delight in a sinners death,
But that he should convert live, thus the Lord saith,

Then must I give neither credit nor faith,
Unto saint Paules saying, which this man did alege

yes, you must credit the, according unto knowledge,
For saint Paul speaks of those which resist ye truth by violence
And so end their lives without repentance,
thus saint Austine doth them define,
if unto the Lords word you do your ears incline,
And obsarue those things, which he hath commanded
this sinful state, in the which you have lain.
Salbe forgotten, and never more remembered,
And Christ him self in the gospel hath promised,
that he which in him vnfaynedly doth believe,
Although he were dead, yet shall he live.

these comfortable sayings doth me greatly move
to arise from this wretched place.

For me his mercy sake thou shalt optayne his grace
And not for thine own deserts* this must thou know
For my sake alone he shall receive solace,
For my sake alone, he will thee marcy show,
therefore to him as it is most dew,
Give most hearty thanks, with hart unfeigned
Whose name for ever more be praised.

The prodigal son as in Luke we rede
which in vicious living his good doth wast,
As soon as his living he had remembered,
To confess his wretchedness he was not aghast,
wherefore his father, lovingly him embrast,
And as right joyful, the text saith plain
Because his son was returnen again.

O sinful flesh, thy pleasurs are but vain,
Now I find it true, as the scripture doth say,
Broad pleasant is the path, which ledeth unto payne,
But unto eternal life, full narow is the way,
He that is not led by Gods spyrite, surely goes astrayer
And all that ever he doth, shall be clean abhorde
Although he brag bost never so much of Gods word,
O subtell Satan, full deceitful is thy snare,
Who is able thy falsehood to disclose?
What is the man that thou doest favour or spare
And dost not tempt him eternal joys to lose?
Not on the world, surele I suppose,
Therfoore happy is the man, which doth truli wait,
Always to refuse thy decetful and crafty bait
When I had thought to live most christanly
And followed the steppes of knowledge good council,
Ere I was ware thou had deceived me
And brought me into the path* which leads unto hell:
And of an earnest professor of chrystes gospel
Thou made me an ypocrite, blind and pervert,
And from virtue unto vice, you had cleae turned mi hart
First by hypocrysie thou did me move,
The mortifycacyon of the flesh, clean to forsake,
And wanton desire to embrace and love,
Alas to think of it, my hart doth quake,
Under the title of frendshyp to me he spake,
And so to wicked feloshyp did me bring,
Which broughe me clean to abominable living
Thus I say. Satan did me disceyue,
And wrapped me in sin many afould,
The steppes of good counsel, I did forsake and laeue,
And forgot the words, which be fore to me he told:
The fruits of a true Christian, in me waxed cold
I folewed mine one lusts, the flesh I did not tame,
And had them in dirision, which would not do the same.
yet it hath pleased God of his endless mercy
To give me respite my life to a mend.
From the bottom of my hart, I repent my iniquity.
I will walk in his laws unto my lives end:
From his holy ordinance I will never dicende.
But my whole delight shall be to live therein,
Utterly abhorring all filthynes and sin.
All Christen people, which be here present,
May learn by me hypocrysye to know
With the which the deuel, as with a poison most pestilent
Daily seeks all men to over throw:
Credit not all things unto the out ward show,
But try the with Gods word, that squire a rule most just
Which never deceued them that in him put their trust
Let not flattryng fredship, nor yet wicked company
Parswade you in no wise, Gods word to a buse
But se that you stand steadfastly unto the verity
And accordig to the rule thereof, your doings frame use
Neither kynred nor felowshyp shall you excuse
When you shall appear before the judgment seat
But your own secret concyence shall the give an audit
All you that be young, whom I do now represent,
Set your delight both day night on Christ's testament
if pleasure you tickele, be not fikle, suddenly slyde,
But in Gods fear eueriwhere, se that you abide
In your tender age, seek for knowledge, after wisdom rune
in jour old age, teach your famili, to do, as you have du
your bodies subdue, unto virtue, delight not in vaniti
Say not I am young, I shall live long lest jour dais shorteed be
Do not enclyne, to spend ye time* in wanton joys nice
For idleness doth encrese much wickedness and vice,
Do not delay the time, and say my end is not ne'er
For with short warning, the lords comig shall sodely apere
God give us grace, his word to ebrace, to live thereafter
That be the same, his holy name, may be prased ever.

Now let us make our supplicacions together
For ye prosperous estate of our noble virtuous queen,
That in her godly proceedings she may still persevere,
Which seeks the glory of God a above all other thing.
O Lord endue her hart with true understanding.
And give her a prosperous life, lunge over us to rain,
To govern rule her people as a worthy servant.

Also, let us for all the nobilite of this realm,
And namely for those, whom her grace auctorised,
To maintain the public wealth over us them,
That they may se his gracious acts published,
And they, being truly admonished,
By the complaint of them, which are wrongfulli oppressed
May less a reformation, and se it redressed.

Then shall this land enjoy great quietness rest
And give unto God most herty thanks therefore,
To whom be honour, prase and glory for evermore

Quod R. Weuer.
Imprinted at London, in Lothbury, over against Saint Margarits Church, by
Wyllyam Copland.


