
YOu have shown a world of wealth;
I did not think there had been a Merchant
Lived in Italy of half your substance.

I'll give the King of Spain
Ten thousand Ducats yearly, and discharge
My yearly Custom. The Hollanders scarce trade
More generally then I: my Factors wives
Wear Shaperoones of Velvet, and my Scriveners
Merely through my employment, grow so rich,
They build their Palaces and Belvidears
With musical Water-workes: Never in my life
Had I a loss at Sea. They call me on th'Exchange,
The fortunate Young man and make great suite
To venture with me: Shall I tell you Sir,
Of a strange confidence in my way of Trading,
I reckon it as certain as the gain
In erecting a Lottery.

I pray Sir, what do you think
Of Seignior Baptisto's estate?

A mere Beggar*
He's worth some fifty thousand Ducats.

Is not that well?

How well? for a man to be melted to snow water,
With toiling in the world from three and twenty,
Till threescore for poor fifty thousand Ducats.

To your estate 'tis little I confess:
You have the Spring-tide of Gold.

Faith, and for Silver,
Should I not send it packing to th'East Indies,
We should have a glut on it.

Here's the great Lord Contarino.

Oh, I know his business, he's a suitor to your sister.

Yes Sir, but to you,
As my most trusted friend, I utter it,
I will break the alliance.

You are ill advised then;
There lives not a completer Gentleman
In Italy, nor of a more ancient house.

What tell you me of Gentry, 'tis nought else
But a superstitious relic of time past:
And sift it to the true worth, it is nothing
But ancient riches: and in him you know
They are pitifully in the wane; he makes his colour
Of visiting us so often, to sell land,
And thinks if he can gain my sisters love,
To recover the treble value.

Sure he loves her entirely, and she deserves it.

Faith, though she were
Crookt shoulderd, having such a portion,
She would have noble Suitors; but truth is,
I would wish my noble Venturer take heed,
It may be whiles he hopes to catch a Gilt head,
He may draw up a Gudgeon.

He's come: Sir, I will leave you.

I sent you the Evidence of the piece of land
I motioned to you for the Sale.

Yes.

Has your Counsel perused it?

Not yet my Lord: Do you intend to travel?

No.

Oh then you loose
That which makes man most absolute.

Yet I have heard of diverse, that in passing of the Alps, have but exchanged
their virtues at dear rate for other vices.


Oh my Lord, lye not idle;
The chiefest action for a man of great spirit,
Is never to be out of action: we should think
The soul was never put into the body,
Which has so many rare and curious pieces
Of Mathematical motion, to stand still.
Virtue is ever sowing of her seeds:
In the Trenches for the Soldier; in the wakeful study
For the Scholar; in the sorrows of the sea
For men of our Profession, of all which
Arise and spring up Honour. Come, I know
You have some noble great Design in hand,
That you levy so much money.

Sir, I'll tell you,
The greatest part of it I mean to employ
In payment of my Debts, and the remainder
Is like to bring me into greater bonds, as I aim it.

How Sir?

I intend it for the charge of my Wedding.

Are you to be married, my Lord?

Yes Sir; and I must now entreat your pardon,
That I have concealed from you a business,
Wherein you had at first been called to Counsel,
But that I thought it a less fault in Friendship,
To engage my self thus far without your knowledge,
Then to do it against your will: another reason
Was, that I would not publish to the world,
Nor have it whispered scarce, what wealthy Voyage
I went about, till I had got the Mine
In mine own possession.

You are dark to me yet,

I'll now remove the cloud. Sir, your sister and I
Are vowed each others, and there only wants
Her worthy mothers, and your fair consents
To stile it marriage: this is a way,
Not only to make a friendship, but confirm it
For our posterities. How do you look upon it?

Believe me Sir, as on the principal Colume
To advance our House: why you bring honour with you,
Which is the soul of Wealth. I shall be proud
To live to see my little Nephews ride
O'th upper hand of their Uncles; and the Daughters
Be ranckt by Heralds at Solemnities
Before the Mother: all this derived
From your Nobility. Do not blame me sir,
If I be taken with it exceedingly:
For this same honour with us Citizens,
Is a thing we are mainly fond of, especially
When it comes without money, which is very seldom,
But as you do perceive my present temper,
Be sure I am yours, fierd with scorn and laughter,
At your over confident purpose, and no doubt,
My mother will be of your mind.

Tis my hope sir.
I do observe how this Romelio,
Has very worthy parts, were they not blasted
By insolent vain glory: there rests now
The mothers approbation to the match,
Who is a woman of that State and bearing,
Tho she be Citie-borne, both in her language,
Her Garments, and her Table, she excels
Our Ladies of the Court: she goes not gaudy,
Yet have I seen her wear one Diamond,
Would have bought twenty gay ones out of their clothes,
And some of them, without the greater grace,
Out of their honesties.
She comes, I will try
How she stands affected to me, without relating
My Contract with her Daughter.

Sir, you are nobly welcome, and presume
You are in a place that's wholly dedicated
To your service.

I am ever bound to you for many special favours.

Sir, your fame renders you most worthy of it.

It could never have got a sweeter air to fly in,
Then your breath.

You have bin strange a long time, you are weary
Of our unseasonable time of feeding:
Indeed the Exchange Bell makes us dine so late;
I think the Ladies of the Court from us
Learn to lye so long a bed.

They have a kind, of Exchange among them too,
Marry unless, it be to hear of news, I take it,
Theirs, is like the New Burse, thinly furnished
With Tyers and new Fashions. I have a suite to you.

I would not have you value it the less,
If I say, Tis granted already.

You are all Bounty, tis to bestow your
Picture on me.

Oh sir, shadows, are coveted in Summer,
And with me, tis Fall o'th Leaf.

You enjoy the best of Time;
This latter Spring of yours, shows in my eye,
More fruitful and more temperate withal,
Then that whose date is only limited
By the music of the Cuckoo.

Indeed Sir, I dare tell you,
My Looking-glasse is a true one, and as yet
It does not terrify me. Must you have my Picture?

So please you Lady, and I shall preserve it
As a most choice Object.

You will enjoin me to a strange punishment:
With what a compelled face a woman sits
While she is drawing? I have noted diverse,
Either to fain smiles, or suck in the lips,
To have a little mouth; ruffle the cheeks,
To have the dimple seen, and so disorder
The face with affectation, at next sitting
It has not been the same; I have known others
Have lost the entire fashion of their face,
In half an hours sitting.

How?

In hot weather,
The painting on their face has been so mellow,
They have left the poor man harder work by half,
To mend the Copy h^ wrought by* but indeed,
If ever I would have mine drawn to'th life,
I would have a Painter steal it, at such a time,
I were devoutly kneeling at my prayers,
There is then a heavenly beauty in it, the Soul
Moons in the Superficies.

Excellent Lady,
Now you teach Beauty a preservative,
More then against fading Colours; and your judgment
Is perfect in all things.

Indeed Sir, I am a Widow,
And want the addition to make it so:
For mans Experience has still been held
Woman's best eyesight. I pray sir tell me,
You are about to sell a piece of Land
To my son, I hear.

Tis truth.

Now I could rather wish,
That Noble men would ever live ith Country,
Rather then make their visit's up to'th City
About such business: Oh Sir, Noble Houses
Have no such goodly Prospects any way,
As into their own Land: the decay of that,
Next to their begging Churchland, is a ruin
Worth all men's pity. Sir, I have forty thousand crowns
Sleep in my Chest, shall waken when you please,
And sly to your commands, Will you stay supper?

I cannot, worthy Lady.

I would not have you come hither sir, to sell,
But to settle your Estate. I hope you understand
Wherefore I make this proffer: so I leave you.

What a Treasury have I pearch'd.
I hope you understand wherefore I make this proffer.
She has got some intelligence, how I intend to marry
Her daughter, and ingenuously perceived,
That by her Picture, which I begged of her,
I meant the fair Iolenta: here's a Letter,
Which gives express charge, not to visit her
Till midnight: fail not to come, for tis a business
That concerns both our honours.
Yours in danger to be lost, Iolenta.
Tis a strange In^unction; what should be the business?
She is not changed I hope. I'll thither straight:
For women's Resolutions in such deeds,
Like Bees, light oft on flowers, and oft on weeds.

Oh sister come, the Taylor must to work,
To make your wedding Clothes.

The Tombe-maker, to take measure of my cossin.

Tombe-maker? look you,
The king of Spain greets you.

What does this mean, do you serve Process on me?

Process? come you would be witty now.

Why, what's this, I pray?

Infinite grace to you* it is a Letter
From his Catholic Majesty, for the commends
Of this Gentleman for your Husband.

In good season: I hope he will not have my
Allegiance stretched to the undoing of my self.

Undo your self? he does proclaim him here

Not for a Traitor, does he?

You are not mad;
For one of the Noblest Gentlemen.

Yet Kings many times
Know merely but men's outsides, was this commendation
Voluntary, think you?

Voluntary: what mean you by that?

Why I do not think but he begged it of the King,
And it may fortune to be out of's way:
Some better suite, that wooed have stood his Lordship
In far more stead: Letters of Commendations,
Why tis reported that they are grown stale,
When places fall in the University.
I pray you return his Pass: for to a Widow
That longs to be a Courtier, this Paper
May do Knights service.

Mistake not excellent Mistres, these commends
Express, his Majesty of Spain has given me
Both addition of honour, as you may perceive
By my habit, and a place here to command
Ore thirty Galleys; this your brother shows,
As wishing that you would be partner
In my good Fortune.

I pray come hither, have I any interest in you?

You are my Brother.

I would have you then use me with that respect,
You may still keep me so, and to be swayed
In this maine business of life, which wants
Greatest consideration, your Marriage,
By my direction: Here's a Gentleman --

Sir, I have often told you,
I am so little my own to dispose that way,
That I can never be his.

Come, too much light
Makes you Moone-eyed, are you in love with title?
I will have a Herald, whose continual practise
Is all in pedigree, come a wooing to you,
Or an Antiquary in old Buskins.

Sir, you have done me
The maynest wrong that ere was offred
To a Gentleman of my breeding.

Why sir?

You have led me
With a vain confidence, that I should marry
Your sister, have proclaimed it to my friends,
Employed the greatest Lawyers of our State
To settle her a jointure, and the issue
Is, that I must become ridiculous
Both to my friends and enemies: I will leave you,
Till I call to you for a strict account
Of your unmanly dealing.

Stay my Lord.
Do you long to have my throat cut? Good my Lord,
Stay but a little, till I have removed
This Court-mist from her eyes, till I wake her
From this dull sleep, wherein sheele dream herself
To a deformed Beggar: you would marry
The great Lord Contarino.

Contarino
Were you talking of? he lost last night at Diee
Five thousand Ducats; and when that was gone,
Set at one throw a Lordship, that twice trebled
The former loss.

And that flew after.

And most carefully
Carried the Gentleman in his Carroch
To a Lawyers Chamber, there most Legally
To put him in possession: was this wisdom?

O yes, their credit in the way of gaming
Is the mayne thing they stand on, that must be paid,
Tho the Brewer bawl for's money; and this Lord
Does she prefer in the way of marriage,
Before our Choice. Here noble Ercole,

You'll be advised I hope: Know for your sakes
I married, that I might have children;
And for your sakes, if you'll be ruled by me,
I will never marry again. Here's a Gentleman
Is noble, rich, well featured, but above all,
He loves you entirely; his intents are aimed
For an Expedition against the Turk,
Which makes the Contract cannot be delayed.

Contract? you must do this without my knowledge;
Give me some potion to make me mad,
And happily not knowing what I speak,
I may then consent too't.

Come, you are mad already,
And I shall never hear you speak good sense,
Till you name him for Husband.

Lady, I will do a manly Office for you,
I will leave you, to the freedom of your own soul,
May it move whither heaven and you please.

Now you express your self most nobly.

Stay sir, what do you mean to do?

Hear me, if thou dost marry Contarino,
All the misfortune that did ever dwell.
In a parents curse, light on thee.

Oh rise Lady, certainly heaven never intended
Kneeling to this fearful purpose.

Your Imprecation has undone me for ever.

Give me your hand.

No sir.

Giu't rue then:
Oh what rare workmanship have I seen this
To finish with your needle, what excellent music
Have these struck upon the Viol!
Now I'll teach a piece of Art.

Rather a damnable cunning,
To have me go about to giu't away,
Without consent of my soul.

Kiss her my Lord, if crying had been regarded,
Maidenheads had ne'er been lost, at least some appearance
Of crying, as an April shower in the Sunshine.

She is yours.

Nay, continue your station, and deal you in dumb show; kiss this
doggednesse out of her.


To be contracted in tears, is but fashionable.

Yet suppose that they were hearty.

Virgins must seem unwilling.

Oh what else; and you remember, we observe the
Like in greater Ceremonies then these Contracts,
At the Conseration of Prelates, they use ever
Twice to say nay, and take it.

Oh Brother.

Keep your possession, you have the door bithring,
That's Livery and Seasin in England; but my Lord,
Kiss that tear from her lip, you'll find the Rose
The sweeter for the dew.

Bitter as gall.

I, I, all you women,
Although you be of never so low stature,
Have gall in you most abundant, it exceeds
Your brains by two ounces. I was saying somewhat;
Oh do but observe ith City, and you'll find
The thriftiest bargains that were ever made,
What a deal of wrangling ere they could be brought
To an upshot.

Great persons do not ever come together.

With revelling faces, nor is it necessary
They should; the strangeness and unwillingness
Wears the greater state, and gives occasion that
The people may buzz and talk of't, tho the Bells
Be tongue-tide at the Wedding.

And truly I have heard say,
To be a little strange to one another,
Will keep your longing fresh.

I, and make you beget
More children when yare married: some Doctors
Are of that opinion. You see my Lord, we are merry
At the Contract, your sport is to come hereafter.

I will leave you excellent Lady, and withal
Leave a heart with you so entirely yours,
That I protest, had I the least of hope
To enjoy you, tho I were to wait the time
That Schollers do in taking their degree
In the noble Arts, 'twere nothing, howsoever
He parts from you, that will depart from life,
To do you any service, and so humbly
I take my leave.

Sir, I will pray for you.

Why that's well, 'twill make your prayer complete,
To pray for your Husband.

Husband?

This is the happiest hour that I ever arrived at.

Husband, I husband: come you peevish thing,
Smile me a thank for the pains I have taken.

I hate my self for being thus enforst,
You may soon judge then what I think of you
Which are the cause of it.

You Lady of the Laundry, come hither.

Sir?

Look as you love your life, you have an eye
Upon your Mistress; I do henceforth bar her
All Visitants: I do hear there are Bawds abroad,
That bring Cut-works, Man-toons, convey Letters
To such young Gentlewomen, and there are others
That deal in Corne-cutting, and Fortune-telling,
Let none of these come at her on your life,
Nor Dews ace the wafer woman, that prigs abroad
With Muskmeloons, and Malakatoones;
Nor the Scotchwoman with the Citterne, do you mark,
Nor a Dancer by any means, tho he ride on's foot-cloth,
Nor a Hackney Coachman, if he can speak French.

Why sir?

By no means: no more words;
Nor the woman with Maribone puddings. I have heard
Strange juggling tricks have been conveyed to a woman
In a pudding: you are apprehensive?

Oh good sir, I have travelled.

When you had a Bastard, you travelled indeed:
But my precious Chaperoones,
I trust thee the better for that; for I have heard,
There is no warier Keeper of a Park,
To prevent Stalkers, or your Night-walkers,
Then such a man, as in his youth has been
A most notorious Deare-stealer.

Very well sir,
You may use me at your pleasure.

By no means Winifrid, that were the way
To make thee travel again: Come be not angry,
I do but jest, thou know, wit and a woman,
Are two very frail things, and so I leave you.

I could weep with you, but tis no matter,
I can do that at any time, I have now
A greater mind to rail a little: Plague of these
Vnsanctified Matches; they make us loathe
The most natural desire our grandam Eve ever left us.
Force one to marry against their will; why 'tis
A more ungodly work, then enclosing the Commons.

Prithee peace;
This is indeed an argument so common,
I cannot think of matter new enough,
To express it bad enough,

Here's one I hope will put you out of't.

How now sweet Mistress?
You have made sorrow look lovely of late,
You have wept.

She has done nothing else these three days; had you stood behind the Arras,
to have heard her shed so much salt water as I have done, you would have
thought she had been turned Fountain.


I would fain know the cause can be worthy this
Thy sorrow.

Reach me the Caskanet, I am studying Sir,
To take an Inuentory of all that's mine.

What to do with it Lady?

To make you a Deed of gift.

That's done already; you are all mine.

Yes, but the Devil would fain put in for's share,
In likeness of a Separation.

Oh sir, I am bewitched.

Ha?

Most certain, I am forespoken,
To be married to another: can you ever think
That I shall ever thrive in it? Am I not then bewitched?
All comfort I can teach my self is this,
There is a time left for me to dye nobly,
When I cannot live so?

Give me in a word, to whom, or by whose means
Are you thus torn from me?

By Lord Ercole, my Mother, and by Brother.

I'll make his bravery fitter for a grave,
Then for a wedding.

So you will beget
A far more dangerous and strange disease
Out of the cure; you must love him again
For my sake: for the noble Ercole
Had such a true compassion of my sorrow.
Hark in your ear, He show you his right worthy
Demeanour to me.

Oh you pretty ones,
I have seen this Lord many a time and oft
Set her in's lap, and talk to her of Love
So feelingly, I do protest it has made me
Run out of my self to think on it; oh sweet breathed
Monkey, how they grow together? well, tis my opinion,
He was no woman's friend that did invent
A punishment for kissing.

If he bear himself so nobly,
The manliest office I can do for him,
Is to affoord him my pity, since h e's like
To fail of so dear a purchase: for your mother,
Your goodness quits her ill; for your brother,
He that vows friendship to a man, and proves
A traitor deserves rather to be hang d,
Then he that counterfeits money; yet for your sake
I must sign his pardon too. Why do you tremble?
Be safe, you are now free from him.

Oh but sir,
The intermission from a ^it of an ague
Is grievous: for indeed it doth prepare us,
To entertain torment next morning.

Why he's gone to sea.

But he may return too soon.

To avoid which, we will instantly be married.

To avoid which, get you instantly to bed together,
Do, and I think no Civil Lawyer for his fee
Can give you better Council.

Fie upon thee, prithee leave us.

Be of comfort sweet Mistress.

On one condition we may have no quarrel about

Upon my life none. (this.

None upon your honour?

With whom? with Ercole?
You have delivered him guiltless.
With your Brother? He's part of your self.
With your complemental Mother?
I use not sight with women
To morrow we'll be married:
Let those that would oppose this union,
grow ne'er so subtle, and entangle themselves
In their own work like Spiders, while we two
Haste to our noble wishes, and presume,
The hindrance of it will breed more delight,
As black copartaments shows gold more bright.


Am I well habited?

Exceeding well; any man would take you for a Merchant: but pray sir resolve
me, what should be the reason, that you being one of the most eminent Civil
Lawyers in Spain, and but newly arrived from the East Indies, should take this
habit of a Merchant upon you?


Why my son lives here in Naples in's riot
Doth far exceed the exhibition I allowed him.

So then, in this disguise you mean to trace him.

Partly for that, but there is other business
Of greater consequence.

Faith for his expense, tis nothing to your estate, What to Don Crispiano, the
famous Corrigidor of Civil, who by his mere practise of the Law, in less
time then half a Iubile, hath gotten thirty thousand Ducats a year.


Well, I will give him line,
Let him run on in's course of spending.

Freely?

Freely:
For I protest, if that I could conceive
My son would take more pleasure or content,
By any course of riot, in the expense,
Then I took joy, nay souls felicity
In the getting of it, should all the wealth I have
Waste to as small an atomy as Flies
In the 'unne, I do protest on that condition,
It should not move me.

How's this? Cannot he take more pleasure in spending it ryotously, then you
have done by scraping it together: O ten thousand times more, and I make no
question, five hundred young gallants will be of my opinio.

Why all the time of your Collectionship,
Has been a perpetual Callender, begin first
With your melancholy study of the Law
Before you come to singer the Ruddocks, after that
The tyring importunity of Clients,
To rise so early, and sit up so late,
You made your self half ready in a dream,
And never prayed but in your sleep: Can I think,
That you have half your lungs left with crying out
For Judgements, and days of Trial. Remember sir,
How often have I borne you on my shoulder,
Among a sh^ale or swarm of reeking Night-caps,
When that your Worship has bepist yourself,
Either with vehemence of Argument,
Or being out from the matter. I am merry.

Be so.

You could eat like a Gentleman, at leisure;
But swallow it like ^lap-dragons, as if you had lived
With chewing the Cud after.

No pleasure in the world was comparable too't.

Possible?

He shall never taste the like, unless he study law.

What, not in wenching sir?
Tis a Court game, believe it,
As familiar as Gleek, or any other.

Wenching? O fie, the Disease follows it:
Beside, can the fingering Taffaties, or Lawns,
Or a painted hand, or a Breast be like the pleasure
In taking Clients fees, and piling them
In several goodly rows before my Desk?
And according to the bigness of each heap,
Which I took by a lear: for Lawyers do not tell them,
I veiled my cap, and withal gave great hope
The Cause should go on their sides.

What think you then
Of a good cry of Hounds? It has been known
Dogs have hunted Lordships to a fault.

Cry of Cures?
The noise of Clients at my Chamber door,
Was sweeter Music far, in my conceit,
Then all the Hanting in Europe.

Pray stay sir,
Say he should spend it in good House-keeping.

I marry sir, to have him keep a good house,
And not sell't away, I'd find no fault with that:
But his Kitchen, I'd have no bigger then a Saw-pit;
For the smallness of a Kitchen without question,
Makes many Noblemen in France and Spain,
Build the rest of the house the bigger.

Yes, Mock-beggers.

Some seuenscore Chimneyes,
But half of them have no Tonnels.

A pox upon them Cuckshawes that beget
Such monsters without fundaments.

Come, come, leave citing other vanities;
For neither Wine, nor Lust, nor riotous feasts,
Rich clothes, nor all the pleasure that the Devil
Has ever practised with, to raise a man
To a Devils likeness, ere brought man that pleasure
I took in getting my wealth: so I conclude.
If he can out-vie me, let it fly to'th Devil.
Yon's my son, what company keeps he?

The Gentleman he talks with,
Is Romelio the Merchant.

I never saw him till now,
A has a brave sprightly look, I knew his father,
And soiourn'd in his house two years together,
Before this young mans birth; I have news to tell him
Of certain losses happened him at Sea,
That will not please him.

What that dapper fellow
In the long stocking? I do think 'twas he
Came to your lodging this morning.

Tis the same,
There he stands, but a little piece of flesh,
But he is the very miracle of a Lawyer,
One that persuades men to peace, compounds quarrels
Among his neighbours, without going to law.

And is he a Lawyer?

Yes, and will give counsel
In honest causes gratis, never in his life
Took fee, but he came and spake for it, is a man
Of extreme practise, and yet all his longing,
Is to become a Judge.

Indeed that's a rare longing with men of his profession. I think heel prove
the miracle of a lawyer indeed.


Here's the man brought word your father dyed in the Indies.


He died in perfect memory I hope,
And made me his heir.

Yes sir.

He's gone the right way then without question:
Friend, in time of mourning, we must not use any action,
That is but accessory to the making men merry,
I do therefore give you nothing for your good tidings.

Nor do I look for it sir.

Honest fellow, give me thy hand, I do not think but thou hast carried New
years gifts to'th Court in thy days, and learndst there to be so free of thy
pains taking.


Here's an old Gentleman says he was chamberfellow to your father, when they
studied the Law together at Barcellona.


Do you know him?

Not I, he's newly come to Naples.

And what's his business?

A says he's come to read you good counsel.

To him, rate him soundly.

And what's your counsel?

Why, I would have you leave your whoring.

He comes hotly upon me at first: whoring?

O young quat, incontinence is plagued
In all the creatures of the world.

When did you ever hear, that a Cockesparrow
Had the French pox?

When did you ever know any of them fat, but in the nest? ask all your
Cantaride-mongers that question; remember your self sir.


A very fine Naturallist, a Physician, I ^a^e you by your round slop; for tis
just of the bigness, and no more, of the case for a Urinal: tis concluded, you
are a Physician. What do you mean sir, youl^ take cold.


Tis concluded, ^ou are a fool, a precious one, you are a mere stick of
Sugar Candy, a man may look quite thorough you


You are a very bold gamester.

I can play at chess, know how to handle a rook.

Pray preserve your velvet from the dust.

Keep your hat upon the block sir,
'Twill continue fashion the longer.

I was never so abused with the hat in the hand
In my life.

I will put on, why look you,
Those lands that were the Clients, are now become
The Lawyers; and those tenements that were
The Country Gentleman's, are now grown
To be his Taylors.

Taylors?

Yes, Taylors in France, they grow to great
Abominable purchase, and become great officers.
How many Ducats think you he has spent
Within a tweluemonth, besides his fathers allowance?

Besides my fathers allowance?
Why Gentleman, do you think an Auditor begat me?
Would you have me make even at years end?

A hundred ducats a month in breaking Venice glasses.


He learnt that of an English drunkard,
And a Knight too, as I take it.
This comes of your numerous Wardrobe.

I, and wearing Cut-worke, a pound a Purl.

Your dainty embroidered stockings,
With overblown Roses, to hide your gowtie anckles.

And wearing more taffeta for a garter, then would serve the Gally dung-boat
for streamers. (strissimi.


Your switching up at the horse-race, with the Illu-

And studying a pussing Arithmatick at the cockpit.


Shaking your elbow at the Taule-boord.

And resorting to your whore in hired velvet,
With a spangled copper fringe at her netherlands.

Whereas if you had staid at Padua, and fed upon
Cow trotters, and fresh beef to Supper.

How I am baited?

Nay, be not you so forward with him neither, for tis thought, you'll prove a
maine part of his undoing.


I think this fellow is a witch

Who I sir?

You have certain rich city Chuffs, that when they have no acres of their
own, they will go and plow up fools, and turn them into excellent meadow;
besides some Enclosures for the first Cherries in the Spring,

And Apricots to pleasure a friend at Court with.

You have Potecaries deal in selling commodities to young Gallants, will put
four or five coxcombs into a sieue, and so drum with them upon their
Counter; they'll searse them through like Ginny Pepper, they cannot endure to
find a man like a pair of Tarriers, they would undo him in a trice.


May be there are such.

O terrible exactors, fellows with six hands,
And three heads.

I those are Hell hounds.

Take heed of them, they'll rent thee like Tenterhookes. Hark in your ear,
there is intelligence upon you; the report goes, there has been gold conveyed
beyond the Sea in hollow Aneres. Farewell, you shall know me better, I will
do thee more good, then thou art aware of.


He's a mad fellow.

He would have made an excellent Barber,
He does so curry it with his tongue.

Sir, I was directed to you.

From whence?

From the East Indies.

You are very welcome.

Please you walk apart,
I shall acquaint you with particulars
Touching your Trading in the East Indies.

Willingly, pray walk sir.

Oh my right worthy friends, you have staid me long, one health, and then
aboard; for all the Galleys are come about.


Signior Ercol^,
The wind has stood my friend sir, to prevent
Your putting to Sea.

Pray why sit?

Only love sir,
That I might take my leave sir, and withal
Entreat from you a private recommends
To a friend in Malta, 'twould be delivered
To your bosom, for I had no time to write.

Pray leave us Gentlemen.
Wilt please you sit?

Sir, my love to you has proclaimed you one,
Whose word was still led by a noble thought,
And that thought followed by as fair a died:
Deceive not that opinion, we were Students
At Padua together, and have long
To'th worlds ^ye shown like friends,
Was it hearty on your part to me?

Unfeigned.

You are false
To the good thought I held of you, and now
Join the worst part of man to you, your malice,
To uphold that falsehood, sacred innocence
Is fled your bosom. Signior, I must tell you,
To draw the picture of unkindness truly,
Is to express two that have dearly loved,
And fallen at variance; tis a wonder to me,
Knowing my interest in the fair Iolenta,
That you should love her.

Compare her beauty, and my youth together,
And you will find the fair effects of love
No miracle at all.

Yes, it will prove prodigious to you.
I must stay your Voyage.

Your Warrant must be mighty.

'Tas a Seal from heaven
To do it, since you would ravish from me
What's there entitled mine: and yet I vow,
By the essential front of spotless Virtue,
I have compassion of both our youths:
To approve which, I have not taken the way,
Like an Italian, to cut your throat
By practise, that had given you now for dead,
And never frowned upon you.

You deal fair sir.

Quit me of one doubt, pray sir.

Move it.

Tis this,
Whether her Brother were a maine Instrument
In her design for Marriage.

If I tell truth, you will not credit me.

Why?

I will tell you truth,
Yet show some reason you have not to believe me:
Her Brother had no hand in it, is't not hard
For you to credit this: for you may think,
I count it baseness to engage another
Into my quarrel; and for that take leave
To dissemble the truth. Sir, if you will fight
With any but my self, fight with her Mother,
She was the motive.

I have no enemy in the world then, but your self;
You must fight with me.

I will sir.

And instantly.

I will haste before you, point whither.

Why you speak nobly, and for this fair dealing,
Were the rich Jewel which we vary for,
A thing to be divided, by my life,
I would be well content to give you half:
But since tis vain to think we can be friends,
Tis needful one of us be taken away,
From being the others enemy.

Yet me thinks, this looks not like a quarrel.

Not a quarrel?

You have not apparelled your sury well,
It goes too plain like a Scholar.

It is an ornament makes it more terrible,
And you shall find it
A weighty injury, and attended on
By discreet valour; because I do not strike you,
Or give you the lye, such foul preparatives
Would show like the stale injury of Wine.
I reserve my rage to sit on my swords point,
Which a great quantity of your best blood
Cannot satisfy.

You promise well to your self.
Shall's have no Seconds?

None, for fear of prevention.

The length of our weapons.

We'll sit them by the way:
So whether our time calls us to live or dye,
Let us do both like noble Gentlemen,
And true Italians.

For that let me embrace you:

Me thinks, being an Italian, I trust you
To come somewhat too near me:
But your Jealousy gave that embrace to try
If I were armed, did it not.

No believe me,
I take your heart to be sufficient proof,
Without a privy coat; and for my part,
A Taffeta is all the shirt of Mayle
I am armed with.

You deal equally.

Where are these Gallants, the brave Ercole,
And noble Contarino?

They are newly gone sir,
And bade me tell you, that they will return
Within this half hour.

Met you the Lord Ercole?

No, but I met the devil in villainous tidings.

Why, what's the matter?

Oh I am powered out like water, the greatest
Rivers in the world are lost in the Sea,
And so am I: pray leave me.
Where's Lord Ercole?

You were scarce gone hence, but in came Contarino.

Contarino?

And entreated some private conference with Ercole,
And on the sudden they have giu'ns the slip.

One mischief never comes alone:
They are gone to fight.

To fight?

And you be Gentlemen,
Do not talk, but make haste after them.

Let's take several ways then,
And if it be possible for women's sakes,
For they are proper men, use our endeavours,
That the prick do not spoil them.

You'll not forgo your interest in my Mistress?

My sword shall answer that; come, are you ready?

Before you fight sir, think upon your cause,
It is a wondrous foul one, and I wish,
That all your exercise these four days past,
Had been employed in a most fervent prayer,
And the foul sin for which you are to fight
Chiefly remembered in it.

I'd as soon take
Your counsel in Divinity at this present,
As I would take a kind direction from you
For the managing my weapon; and indeed,
Both would show much alike.
Come are you ready?

Bethink your self,
How fair the object is that we contend for.

Oh, I cannot forget it.

You are hurt.

Did you come hither only to tell me so,
Or to do it? I mean well, but 'twill not thrive.

Your cause, your cause sir:
Will you yet be a man of Conscience, and make
Restitution for your rage upon your death-bed?

Never, till the grave gather one of us.

That was fair, and home I think.

You prate as if you were in a Fence-schoole.

Spare your youth, have compassion on your self.

When I am all in pieces, I am now vnsit
For any Ladies bed; take the rest with you.

I am lost in too much daring: yield your sword.

To the pangs of death I shall, but not to thee.

You are now at my repairing, or confusion:
Beg your life.

Oh most foolishly demanded,
To bid me beg that which thou can not give.

See both of them are lost; we come too late.

Take up the body, and convey it
To Saint Sebastians Monastery.

I will not part with his sword, I have won't.

You shall not:
Take him up gently: so, and bow his body,
For fear of bleeding inward.
Well, these are perfect lovers.

Why, I pray?

It has been ever my opinion,
That there are none love perfectly indeed,
But those that hang or drown themselves for love:
Now these have chose a death next to Beheading,
They have cut one another throats,
Brave valiant Lads.

Come, you do ill, to set the name of valour
Upon a violent and mad despair.
Hence may all learn, that count such actions well,
The roots of fury shoot themselves to hell.

Your losses I confess, are infinite,
Yet sir, you must have patience.

Sir, my losses I know, but you I do not.

Tis most true, I am but a stranger to you, but am
Wished by some of your best friends, to visit you,
And out of my experience in the world,
To instruct you patience.

Of what profession are you?

Sir, I am a Lawyer.

Of all men living,
You Lawyers I account the only men
To confirm patience in us, your delays
Would make three parts of this little Christian world
Run out of their wits else.
Now I remember, you read Lectures to Iulio,
Are you such a Leech for patience?

Yes sir, I have had some crosses.

You are married then I am certain.

That I am sir.

And have you studied patience?

You shall find I have.

Did you ever see your wife make you Cuckold?

Make me Cuckold?

I ask it seriously, and you have not seen that,
Your patience has not taken the right degree
Of wearing Scarlet; I should rather take you
For a Bachelor in the Art, then for a Doctor.

You are merry. (angry.

No sir, with leave of your patience, I am horrible

What should move you?
Put forth that harsh Interrogatory, if these eyes
Ever saw my wife do the thing you wot of.

Why I'll tell you,
Most radically to try your patience,
And the mere question shows you but a Dunse in it.
It has made you angry; there's another Lawyers beard
In your forehead, you do bristle.

You are very conceited:
But come, this is not the right way to cure you.
I must talk to you like a Divine.

I have heard some talk of it very much, and many
times to their Auditors impatience; but I pray,
What practise do they make of't in their lives?
They are too full of choler with living honest,
And some of them not only impatient
Of their own sleights injuries, but stark mad,
At one another preferment: now to you sir,
I have lost three goodly Carracks.

So I hear.

The very Spice in them,
Had they been shipwrecked here upon our coast,
Would have made all our Sea a Drench.

All the sick horses in Italy
Would have been glad of your loss them.

You are conceited too,

Come, come, come,
You gave those ships most strange, most dreadful,
And unfortunate names, I never looked they'd prosper.

Is there any ill Omen in giving names to ships?

Did you not call one, The Storms Defiance;
Another, The Scourge of the Sea; and the third, The great Leuiathan?

Very right sir.

Very devilish names
All three of them: and surely I think,
They were cursed in their very cradles, I do mean,
When they were upon their Stocks.

Come, you are superstitious,
I'll give you my opinion, and tis serious:
I am persuaded there came not Cuckolds enough
To the first Launching of them,
And 'twas that made them thrive the worse for it.
Oh your Cuckolds hansell is praid for in the City.

I will hear no more,
Give me thy hand, my intent of coming hither,
Was to persuade you to patience; as I live,
If ever I do visit you again,
It shall be to entreat you to be angry, sure I will,
I'll be as good as my word, believe it.

So sir: how now?
Are the Scritch-owles abroad already?

What a dismal noise yon bell makes,
Sure some great person's dead.

No such matter,
It is the common Bell-man goes about,
To publish the sale of goods.

Why do they ring before my gate thus?
Let them into'th Court, I cannot understand
What they say.

For pities sake, you that have tears to shed,
Sigh a soft Requiem, and let fall a Bead,
For two unfortunate Nobles, whose sad fate
Leaves them both dead, and excommunicate:
No Churchmans prayer to comfort their last groans,
No sacred seed of earth to hide their bones;
But as their fury wrought them out of breath,
The Canon speaks them guilty of their own death.

What Noble men I pray sir?

The Lord Ercole, and the noble Contarino,
Both of them slain in single combat.

O, I am lost for ever.

Denied Christian burial, I pray what does that,
Or the dead lazy march in the Funeral,
Or the flattery in the Epitaphs, which shows
More sluttish far then all the Spiders webs
Shall ever grow upon it: what do these
Add to our well being after death?

Not a scruple.

Very well then,
I have a certain Meditation,
If I can think of somewhat to this purpose,
I'll say it to you, while my mother there
Numbers her Beads.
You that dwell near these graves and vaults,
Which oft do hide Physicians faults,
Note what a small Room does suffice,
To express men's good, their vanities,
Would fill more volume in small hand,
Then all the Evidence of Church-land.
Funerals hide men in civil wearing,
And are to the Drapers a good hearing,
Make the Heralds laugh in their black Payment,
And all die Worthies die worth payment.
To the Altar Offerings, tho their fame,
And all the charity of their name,
'Tweene heaven and this yield no more light,
Then rotten trees, which shine in the night.
Oh look the last Act be the best in the Play,
And then rest gentle bones, yet pray,
That when by the precise you are viewed,
A Supersede as be not sued,
To remooub you to a place more airy,
That in your stead they may keep chary
Stockfish, or Seacole, for the abuses
Of sacrilege have turned graves to vilder uses.
How then can any Monument say,
Here rest these bones, till the last day,
When time swift both of foo^ and feather,
May bear them the Sexton ^ens not whither.
What care I then, tho my last sleep,
Be in the Desert, or in the deep,
No Lamp, nor Taper, day and night,
To give my Charnel chargeable light:
I have there like quantity of ground,
And at the last day I shall be found.
Now I pray leave me.

I am sorry for your losses.

Um sir the more spacious that the Tennis court is,
The more large is the Hazard.
I dare the spiteful Fortune do her worst,
I can now fear nothing.

Oh sir, yet consider,
He that is without fear, is without hope,
And sins from presumption; better thoughts attend you.

Poor Iolenta, should she hear of this?
She would not after the report keep fresh,
So long as flowers in graves.
How now Prospero.

Contarino has sent you here his Will,
Wherein a has made your sister his sole heir.

Is he not dead?

He's yet living.

Living? the worse luck.

The worse: I do protest it is the best,
That ever came to disturb my prayers.

How?

Yet I would have him live
To satisfy public Justice for the death
Of Ercole: oh go visit him for heavens sake.
I have within my Closet a choice Relic,
Preservative against swooning, and some earth,
Brought from the Holy Land, right sovereign
To staunch blood: has he skilful Surgeons, think you?

The best in Naples?

How oft has he been dressed?

But once.

I have some skill this way:
The second or third dressing will show clearly,
Whether there be hope of life: I pray be near him,
If there be any soul can bring me word,
That there is hope of life.

Do you prise his life so?

That he may live;
I mean to come to his try all, to satisfy the Law.

Oh, is't nothing else?

I shall be the happiest woman.

Here is cruelty appareled in kindness.
I am full of thoughts, strange ones, but they are no good ones.
I must visit Contarino, upon that
Depends an Engine shall weigh up my losses,
Were they sunk as low as hell; yet let me think,
How I am impaired in a hour, and the cause of't,
Lost in security: oh how this wicked world bewitches,
Especially made insolent with riches:
So Sails with fore-winds stretched, do soonest break,
And Pyramids ath top, are still most weak.

Look up sir, you are preserved beyond natural reason, you were brought dead
out a'th field, the Surgeons ready to have embalmed you.


I do look on my action with a thought of terror,
To do ill and dwell in it, is unmanly.

You are divinely informed sir.

I fought for one, in whom I have no more right,
Then false executors have in Orphans goods,
They cozen them of; yet tho my cause were nought,
I rather chose the hazard of my soul,
Then forego the complement of a choleric man.
I pray continue the report of my death, and give out,
Cause the Church denied me Christian burial,
The Vice admiral of my Galleys took my body,
With purpose to commit it to the earth,
Either in Cicil, or Malta.

What aim you at by this rumour of your death?

There is hope of life
In Contarino; and he has my prayers,
That he may live to enjoy what is his own,
The fair Iolenta; where, should it be thought
That I were breathing, happily her friends
Would oppose it still.

But if you be supposed dead,
The Law will strictly prosecute his life
For your murder.

That's prevented thus,
There does belong a noble Privilege
To all his Family, ever since his father,
Bore from the worthy Emperor Charles the fifth,
An answer to the French Kings challenge, at such time
The two noble Princes were engaged to fight.
Upon a frontier arm o'th sea in a flat-bottom'd Boat,
That if any of his Family should chance
To kill a man in the Field, in a noble cause,
He should have his Pardon; now sir, for his cause,
The world may judge if it were not honest.
Pray help me in speech, tis very painful to me.

Sir I shall.

The guilt of this lies in Romelio,
And as I hear, to second this good Contract,
He has got a Nun with child.

These are crimes that either must make work
For speedy repentance, or for the Devil.

I have much compassion on him,
For sin and shame are ever tide together,
With Gordian knots, of such a strong thread spun,
They cannot without violence be undone.


Well sir, now I must claim your promise,
To reveal to me the cause why you live thus clouded.

Sir, the King of Spain
Suspects, that your Romelio here, the Merchant
Has discovered some Gold-myne to his own use,
In the West Indies, and for that employs me,
To discover in what part of Christendom
He vents this I reasure: Besides, he is informed
What mad tricks has bin plaid of late by Ladies.

Most true, and I am glad the King has heard on it:
Why they use their Lords, as if they were their Wards;
And as your Dutchwomen in the Low-Countries,
Take all and pay all, and do keep their Husbands
So silly all their lives of their own estates,
That when they are sick, and come to make their Will,
They know not precisely what to give away
From their wives, because they know not what they are
So hear should I repeat what factions, (worth:
What Bat-fowling for Offices,
As you must conceive their Game is all i'thnight,
What calling in question one another honesties
Withal what sway they bear in the Viceroys Court,
You'd wonder at it:
Twill do well shortly, can we keep them off
From being of our Council of War.

Well, I have vowed,
That I will never sit upon the Bench more,
Unless it be to curb the insolences.
Of these women.

Well, take it on my word then,
Your place will not long be empty.

Excellently well habited, why me thinks,
That I could play with mine own shadow now,
And be a rare Italienated Jew;
To have as many several change of faces,
As I have seen carved upon on Cherrystone;
To wind about a man like rotten Ivy,
Eat into him like Quicksiluer, poison a friend
with pulling but a loose hair fro's beard, or give a drech,
He should singer of't nine years, and ne'er complain,
But in the Spring and Fall, and so the cause
Imputed to the disease natural, for slight villainies,
As to coin money, corrupt Ladies Honours,
Betray a Town to'th Turk, or make a Bonefire
A'th Christian Navy, I could settle too't,
As if I had eat a Politician,
And digested him to nothing but pure blood.
But stay, I loose my self, this is the house.
Within there.

Now sir.

You are the men of Art, that as I hear,
Have the Lord Contarino under cure.

Yes sir, we are his Surgeons,
But he is past all Cure.

Why, is he dead?

He is speechless sir, and we do find his wound
So festered near the vitals, all our Art
By warm drinks, cannot clear th'impostumation,
And he's so weak, to make
By the Orifix were present death to him.

He has made a Will I hear.

Yes sir.

And deputed Iolenta his heir.

He has, we are witness too't.

Has not Romelio been with you yet,
To give you thanks, and ample recompense
For the pains you have taken.

Not yet.

Listen to me Gentlemen, so I protest,
If you will seriously mind your own good,
I am come about a business shall convey
I arge legacies from Contarino's Will
To both of you.

How sir?
Why Rom. has the will, in that he has given us nothing.

I pray attend me: I am a Physician.

A Physician? where do you practise?

In Rome.

O then you have store of Patients.

Store? why look you, I can kill my ^o a month
And work but in the forenoones: you will give me leave
To jest and be merry with you, but as I said,
All my study has been Physic, I am sent
From a noble Roman that is near a kin
To Contarino, and that ought indeed,
By the Law of Iliance, be his only heir,
To practise his good and yours.

How, I pray sir?

I can by an Extraction which I have,
Tho he were speechless, his eyes set in's head,
His pulses without motion, restore to him
For half an hours space, the use of sense,
And perhaps a little speech: having done this,
If we can work him, as no doubt we shall,
To make another Will, and therein assign
This Gentleman his Heir, I will assure you,
Fore I depart this house, ten thousand Ducats,
And then we'll pull the pillow from his head,
And let him ^ne go whither the Religion sends him
That he died in.

Will you giue's ten thousand Ducats?

Upon my Iewisme.

Tis a bargain sir, we are yours:
Here is the Subject you must work on.

Well said, you are honest men,
And go to the business roundly: but Gentlemen,
I must use my Art singly.

Oh sir, you shall have all privacy,

And the doors locked to me.

At your best pleasure.
Yet for all this, I will not trust this Jew.

Faith, to say truth,
I do not like him neither, he looks like a rogue.
This is a fine toy fetch a man to life,
To make a new Will, there's some trick in it.
I'll be near you Jew.

Excellent as I would wish: these credulous fools
Have given me freely what I would have bought
With a great deal of money. -Softly, her's breuth yet;
Now Ercole, for part of the Revenge,
Which I have vowed for thy untimely death:
Besides, this politic working of my own,
That scorns President, why should this great man live,
And not enjoy my sister, as I have vowed
He never shall? Oh, he may alters will
Every New Moon if he please; to prevent which,
I must put in a strong Caveat. Come forth then
My desperate Stiletto, that may be worn
In a woman's hair, and ne'er discovered,
And either would be taken for a Bodkin,
Or a curling iron at most; why tis an engine,
That's only fit to put in execution Barmotho Pigs,
A most unmanly weapon,
That steals into a mans life he knows not how:
O great Caesar, he that past the shock
Of so many armed Pikes, and poisoned Darts,
Swords, Slings, and Battleaxes, should at length
Sitting at ease on a cushion, come to dye
By such a Shoo-makers aule as this, his soul et forth
At a hole, no bigger then the incision
Made for a wheal^: vos foot, I am horribly angry,
That he should dye so scurvily: yet wherefore
Do I condemn thee thereof so cruelly?
Yet shake him by the hand, tis to express,
That I would never have such weapons used,
But in a plot like this, that's treacherous:
Yet this shall prove most merciful to thee,
For it shall preserve thee
From dying on a public Scaffold, and withal
Bring thee an absolute Cure, thus.
So, tis done: and now for my escape.

You Rogue Mountebank,
I will try whether your inwards can endure
To be washed in scalding lead.

Hold, I turn Christian.

Nay prithee be a Jew still;
I would not have a Christian be guilty
Of such a villainous act as this is.

I am Romelio the Merchant.

Romelio! you have proved your self
A cunning Merchant indeed.

You may read why I came hither.

Yes, in a bloody Roman Letter.

I did hate this man, each minute of his breath
Was torture to me.

Had you forborne this act, he had not lived
This two hours.

But he had died then,
And my revenge unsatisfied: here's gold;
Never did wealthy man purchase the silence
Of a terrible scolding wife at a dearer rate,
Then I will pay for yours: here's your earnest
In a bag of double Ducats.

Why look you sir, as I do weigh this business,
This cannot be counted murder in you by no means.
Why tis no more, then should I go and choke
An Irish man, that were three quarters drowned,
With pouring Vsquebath in's throat.

You will be secret

As your soul. (then.

The west Indies shall sooner want gold, then you

That protestation has the music of the Mint in it.

How unfortunately was I surprised, I have made my self a slave perpetually to
these two beggars.


Excellent; by this act he has made his estate ours.

He presently grow a lazy Surgeon, ride on my foot-cloth; He fetch from him
every eight days a policy for a hundred double Ducats; if he grumble, I'll
peach.


But let's take heed he do not poison us.

Oh, I will never eat nor drink with him,
Without Unicorns Horne in a hollow tooth.

Oh.

Did he not groan?

Is the wind in that door still?

Ha! come hither, note a strange accident:
His Steel has lighted in the former wound,
And made free passage for the congealed blood;
Observe in what abundance it delivers the putrefaction.

Me thinks he fetches his breath very lively.

The hand of heaven is in it,
That his intent to kill him should become
The very direct way to save his life

Why this is like one I have heard of in England,
Was cured a'th Got, by being racked in the Tower.
Well, if we can recover him, here's reward
On both sides: howsoever we must be secret.

We are tide too't,
When we cure Gentlemen of foul diseases,
They give us so much for the cure, and twice as much,
That we do not blab on it. Come lets to work roundly,
Heat the Lotion, and bring the Searing.

Why do you grieve thus? take a Looking-glasse,
And see if this sorrow become you; that pale face
Will make men think you used some Art before,
Some odious painting: Contarino's dead.

Oh that he should dye so soon.

Why, I pray tell me,
Is not the shortest fever the best? and are not bad Plays
The worse for their length?

Add not to'th ill y'aue done
An odious slander; he stuck in the eyes a'th Court,
As the most choice jewel there.

Oh be not angry;
Indeed the Court to well composed nature
Adds much to perfection: for it is or should be,
As a bright Crystal, Mirror to the world,
To dress it self; but I must tell you sister,
If the excellency of the place could have wrought salvation,
The Devil had ne'er fallen from heaven; he was proud,
Leave us, leave us?
Come, take your seat again, I have a plot,
If you will listen to it seriously,
That goes beyond example, it shall breed
Out of the death of these two Noble men,
The advancement of our House.

Oh take heed, a grave is a rotten foundation.

Nay, nay, hear me.
Tis somewhat indirectly, I confess:
But there is much advancement in the world,
That comes in indirectly. I pray mind me:
You are already made by absolute Will,
Contarino's heir: now, if it can be proved,
That you have issue by Lord Ercole,
I will make you inherit his Land too.

How's this? issue by him, he dead, and I a Virgin!

I know you would wonder how it could be done,
But I have laid the case so radically,
Not all the Lawyers in Christendom,
Shall find any the least slaw in it: I have a Mistress
Of the Order of Saint Clare, a beauteous Nun,
Who being cloystred ere she knew the heat,
Her blood would arrive to, had only time enough
To repent, and idleness sufficient
To fall in love with me; and to be short,
I have so much disordered the holy Order,
I have got this Nun with child.

Excellent work made for a dumb Mid-wife.

I am glad you grow thus pleasant.
Now will I have you presently give out,
That you are full two months quickened with child
By Ercole, which rumour can beget
No scandal to you, since we will affirm,
The Pre-contract was so exactly done,
By the same words used in the form of marriage,
That with a little Dispensation,
A money matter, it shall be registered
Absolute Matrimony.

So then I conceive you,
My conceived child must prove your Bastard.

Right: for at such time
My Mistress falls in labour, you must fain the like.

Tis a pretty feat this, but I am not capable of it.

Not capable?

No for the thing you would have me counterfeit,
Is most essentially put in practise: nay, tis done,
I am with child already.

Ha by whom?

By Contarino, do not knit the brow,
The Pre-contract shall justify it, it shall:
Nay, I will get some singular fine Churchman,
Or tho he be a plural one, shall affirm,
He coupled us together

Oh misfortune!
Your child must then be reputed Ercoles.

Your hopes are dashed then, since your Votaries issue
Must not inherit the land.

No matter for that,
So I preserve her fame. I am strangely puzzled:
Why, suppose that she be brought abed before you,
And we conceal her issue till the time
Of your delivery, and then give out,
That you have two at a birth, ha, were not excellent?

And what resemblance think you, would they have
To one another? Twins are still alike:
But this is not your aim, you would have your child
Inherit Ercoles Land, -- Oh my sad soul,
Have you not made me yet wretched enough,
But after all this frosty age in youth,
Which you have witcht upon me, you will seek
To poison my Fame.

That's done already.

No sir, I did but fain it,
To a fatal purpose, as I thought.

What purpose?

If you had loved or tendered my dear honour,
You would have locked your poniard in my heart,
When I named I was with child; but I must live
To linger out, till the consumption of my own
Sorrow kill me.

This will not do; the Devil has on the sudden furnished me with a rare
charm, yet a most unnatural falsehood: no matter so 'twill take.

Stay sister, I would utter to you a business,
But I am very loath: a thing indeed,
Nature would have compassionately concealed,
Till my mothers eyes be closed.

Pray what's that sir?

You did observe,
With what a dear regard our mother tendered
The Lord Contarino, yet how passionately
She sought to cross the match: why this was merely
To blind the eye o'th world; for she did know
That you would marry him, and he was capable
My mother doted upon him, and it was plotted
Cunningly between them, after you were married,
Living all three together in one house,
A thing I cannot whisper without horror:
Why, the malice scarce of Devils would suggest,
Incontinence 'tweene them two.

I remember since his hurt,
She has been very passionately enquiring,
After his health.

Upon my soul, this Jewel,
With a piece of the holy Cross in it, this relic,
Vallewed at many thousand crowns, she would have sent him, lying upon his
death bed.


Professing as you say,
Love to my mother: wherefore did he make
Me his heir?

His Will was made before he went to fight,
When he was first a Suitor to you.

To fight: oh well remembered,
If he loved my mother, wherefore did he loose
His life in my quarrel?

For the affront sake, a word you understand not,
Because Ercole was pretended Rival to him,
To clear your suspicion; I was gulld in it too:
Should he not have fought upon it,
He had undergone the censure of a Coward.

How came you by this wretched knowledge?

His Surgeon ouer-heard it,
As he did sigh it out to his Confessor,
Some half hour fore he died.

I would have the Surgeon hanged
For abusing Confession, and for making me
So wretched by the report. Can this be truth?

No, but direct falsehood,
As ever was banished the Court: did you ever hear
Of a mother that has kept her daughters husband
For her own tooth? He fancied you in one kind,
For his lust, and he loved
Our mother in another kind, for her money,
The Gallants fashion right. But come, ne'er think on it,
Throw the foul to the Devil that hatched it, and let this
Bury all ill that's in it, she is our mother.

I never did find any thing ith world,
Turn my blood so much as this: here's such a conflict,
Between apparent presumption, and vnbeleefe,
That I shall dye in it.
Oh, if there be another world in the Moon,
As some fantasticks dream, I could wish all men,
The whole race of them, for their inconstancy,
Sent thither to people that. Why, I protest,
I now affect the Lord Ercoles memory,
Better then the others.

But were Contarino living.

I do call any thing to witness,
That the divine Law prescribed us
To strengthen an oath, were he living and in health,
I would never mary with him.
Nay, since I have found the world
So false to me, I'll be as false to it;
I will mother this child for you.

Ha?

Most certainly it will be guile part of my sorrow.

Oh most assuredly, make you smile to think,
How many times ith world Lordships descend
To diverse men, that might and truth were known
Be heir, for any thing belongs to'th flesh,
As well to the Turks richest Eunuch.

But do you not think
I shall have a horrible strong breath now.

Why?

Oh, with keeping your counsel, tis so terrible foul,

Come, come, come,
You must leave these bitter flashes.

Must I dissemble dishonesty? you have diverse
Counterfeit honesty: but I hope here's none
Will take exceptions; I now must practise
The art of a great bellied woman, and go fain
Their qualms and swoundings.

Eat unripe fruit, and Oatmeal, to take away your colour.


Dine in my bed some two hours after noone.

And when you are up,
Make to your petticoat a quilted preface,
To advance your belly.

I have a strange conceit now.
I have known some women when they were with child,
Have longed to beat their Husbands: what if I,
To keep decorum, exercise my longing
Upon my Taylor that way, and noddle him soundly,
Heel make the larger Bill for it.

I'll get one shall be as tractable too't as Stockfish.

Oh my fantastical sorrow,
Cannot I now be miserable enough,
Unless I wear a pyde fools coat:
Nay worse, for when our passions
Such giddy and uncertain changes breed,
We are never well, till we are mad indeed.

So, nothing in the world could have done this,
But to beget in her a strong distaste
Of the Lord Contarino: oh Jealousy,
How violent, especially in women,
How often has it raised the devil up in form of a law case!
My especial care must be, to nourish craftily this fiend,
Tweene the mother and the daughter, that the deceit
Be not perceived. My next task, that my sister,
After this suppofed child-birth, be persuaded
To enter into Religion: tis concluded,
She must never marry; so I am left guardian
To her estate: and lastly, that my two Surgeons
Be waged to the East Indies: let them prate,
When they are beyond the Lyne; the Callenture,
Or the Scurvy, or the Indian Pox, I hope,
Will take order for their coming back.
Oh here's my mother: I ha strange news for you,
My sister is with child.

I do look now for some great misfortunes
To follow: for indeed mischiefs,
Are like the Visits of Franciscan Fryers,
They never come to pray upon us single.
In what estate left you Contarino?

Strange, that you can skip
From the former sorrow to such a question!
I'll tell you, in the absence of his Surgeon,
My charity did that for him in a trice,
They would have done at leisure, and been paid for it.
I have killed him.

I am twenty years elder since you last opened your lips.


Ha?

You have given him the wound you speak of,
Quite thorough your mothers heart.

I will heal it presently mother: for this sorrow
Belongs to your error: you would have him live,
Because you think he's father of the child;
But Iolenta vows by all the rights of Truth,
Tis Ercole's: it makes me smile to think,
How cunningly my sister could be drawn
To the Contract, and yet how familiarly
To his bed. Doves never couple
Without a kind of murmur.

Oh, I am very sick.

Your old disease, when you are grieved,
You are troubled with the Mother.

I am rapt with the Mother indeed,
That I ever bore such a son.

Pray tend my sister,
I am infinitely full of business.

Stay you will morn for Contarino.

Oh by all means, tis fit, my sister is his heir.

I will make you chief mourner, believe it.
Never was woe like mine: oh that my care,
And absolute study to preserve his life,
Should be his absolute ruin. Is he gone then?
There is no plague in the world can be compared
To impossible desire; for they are plagued
In the desire it self: never, oh never
'Shall I behold him living, in whose life
I lived far sweetlier then in mine own.
A precise curiosity has undone me; why, did I not
Make my love known directly? it had not been
Beyond example, for a Matron
To affect in the honourable way of Marriage,
So youthfall a person: oh I shall run mad,
For as we love our youngest children best:
So the last fruit of our affection,
Where ever we bestow it, is most strong,
Most violent, most unresistable,
Since tis indeed our latest Hardest-home,
Last merriment Fore Winter; and we widows,
As men report, of our best Picture-makers,
We love the piece we are in hand with better,
Then all the excellent work we have done before,
And my son has deprived me of all this. Ha my son,
I'll be a fury to him, like an Amazon Lady,
I'd cut off his right pap, that gave him suck,
To shoot him dead. I'll no more tender him,
Then had a Wolf stolen to my tear in the night,
And robbed me of my milk: nay, such a creature
I should love better far. -Ha, ha, what say you?
I do talk to somewhat, me thinks; it may be
My evil Genius. Do not the Bells ring?
I have a strange noise in my head: oh, fly in pieces,
Come age, and wither me into the malice
Of those that have been happy, let me have
One property more then the Devil of Hell,
Let me envy the pleasure of youth heartily,
Let me in this life fear no kind of ill,
That have no good to hope for: let me dye
In the distraction of that worthy Princess,
Who loathed food, and sleep, and ceremony,
For thought of loosing that brave Gentleman,
She would fain have saved, had not a false countenance,
Let me sink, where neither man,
Nor memory may ever find me.

This is a private way which I command,
As her Confessor. I would not have you seen yet,
Till I prepare her. Peace to you Lady.

Ha?

You are well employed, I hope; the best pillow in the.
World for this your contemplation, is the earth,
And the best object heaven.

I am whispering to a dead friend.

And I am come
To bring you tidings of a friend not dead,
Reserved to life again.

Say sir.

One whom I dare presume, next to your children,
You tendered above life.

Heaven will not suffer me utterly to be lost.

For he should have been
Your son in Law, miraculously saved,
When Surgery gave him ore.

Oh, may you live
To win many souls to heaven, worthy sir,
That your crown may be the greater. Why my son
made me believe he stole into his chamber,
And ended that which Ercole began
By a deadly stab in's heart.

Alas, she mistakes,
Tis Contarino she wishes living; but I must fasten
On her last words, for my own safety.

Where, oh where shall I meet this comfort?

Here in the vowed comfort of your daughter.

Oh I am dead again, instead of the man, you present me the grave swallowed him.


Collect your self, good Lady,
Would you behold brave Contarino living?
There cannot be a nobler Chronicle
Of his good then my self: if you would view him dead,
I will present him to you bleeding fresh,
In my penitency.

Sir, you do only live,
To redeem another ill you have committed,
That my poor innocent daughter perish not,
By your wild sin, whom you have got with child.

Here begin a I my compassion: oh poor soul!
She is with child by Contarino, and he dead,
By whom should she preerue her fame to'th world,
But by my self that loved her above the world?
There never was a way more honourable,
To exercise my virtue, then to father it,
And preserve her credit, and to marry her.
I'll suppose her Contarino's widow, bequeathed to me
Upon his Death: for sure she was his wife,
But that the Ceremony a'th Church was wanting.
Report this to her, Madam, and withal,
That never father did conceive more joy
For the birth of an heir, then I to understand,
She had such confidence in me. I will not now
Press a Visit upon her, till you have prepared her:
For I do read in your distraction,
Should I be brought a'th sudden to her presence,
Either the hasty fright, or else the shame
May blast the fruit within her. I will leave you,
To commend as loyal faith and service to her,
As ere heart harboured; by my hope of bliss,
I never lived to do good act but this.

Withal and you be wise,
Remember what the mother has reueal'd
Of Romelio's treachery.

A most noble fellow in his loyalty.
I read what worthy comforts I have lost
In my dear Contarino, and all adds
To my despair. -- Within there.
Fetch the picture hangs in my inner closet. I remember,
I let a word slip of Romelio's practise
At the Surgeons: no matter I can salve it,
I have deeper vengeance that's preparing for him,
To let him live and kill him that's revenge
I meditate upon.

So, hang it up.
I was enjoined by thepartie ought that picture,
Forty years since, ever when I was vexed,
To look upon that: what was his meaning in it,
I know not, but me thinkesvpon the sudden,
It has furnished me with mischief such a plot,
As never mother dreamt of Here begins
My part in the play: my sons estate is sunk,
By loss at sea and he has nothing left,
But the Land his father left him. I is concluded,
The Law shall undo him Come hither,
I have a weighty secret to impart,
But I would have thee first confirm to me,
How I may trust, that thou can keep my counsel,
Beyond death.

Why Mistress, tis your only way,
To enjoin me first that I reveal to you
The worst act I ere did in all my life:
So one secret shall bind one another.

Thou instru'st me
Most ingenuously, for indeed it is not fit,
Where any act is plotted, that is nought,
Any of counsel to it should be good,
And in a thousand ils have hapt in the world,
The intelligence of one another shame,
Have wrought far more effectually then the tie
Of Conscience, or Religion.

But think not, Mistress,
That any sin which ever I committed,
Did concern you, for proving false in one thing,
You were a fool, if ever you would trust me
In the least matter of weight.

Thou hast lived with me
Th^se forty years; we have grown old together,
As many Ladies and their women do,
With talking nothing, and with doing less:
We have spent our life in that which least concerns life,
Only in putting on our clothes: and now I think on it,
I have been a very courtly Mistress to thee, (time,
I have given thee good words, but no deeds, now's the
To requite all; my son has six Lordships left him.

Tis truth.

But he cannot live four days to enjoy them.

Have you poisoned him?

No, the poison is yet but brewing.

You must minister it to him with all privacy.

Privacy? It shall be given him
In open Court, I'll make him swallow it
Before the Judges face: if he be Master
Of poor ten arpines of land forty hours longer,
Let the world repute me an honest woman.

So 'twill I hope.

Oh thou can not conceive
My unimitable plot; let's to my ghostly Father,
Were first I will have thee make a promise
To keep my counsel, and then I will employ thee
In such a subtle combination,
Which will require to make the practise fit,
Four Devils, five Advocates to a woman's wit.


Take her into your Office sir, she has that in her
Belly, will dry up your ink I can tell you.
This is the man that is your learned Council,
A fellow that will trowel it off with tongue:
He never goes without Restorative powder
Of the lungs of Fox in's pocket, and Malligo Reasins
To make him long winded. Sir, this Gentlewoman
Entreats your Counsel in an honest cause,
Which please you sir, this Brief, my own poor labour
Will give you light of.

Do you call this a Brief?
Here's as I weigh them, some fourscore sheets of paper.
What would they weigh if there were cheese
Wrapped in them, or Figdates.

Joy come to you, you are merry;
We call this but a Brief in our Office.
The scope of the business lies ith Margent sheet.

Me thinks you prate too much.
I never could endure an honest cause
With a long Prologue too't.

You trouble him.

Whats here? oh strange; I have lived this 60 years,
Yet in all my practise never did shake hands
With a cause so odious. Sirrah, are you her knave?

No sir, I am a Clarke.

Why you whoreson fogging Rascal,
Are there not whores enough for Presentations,
Of Overseers, wrong the will o'th Dead,
Oppressions of Widows, or young Orphans,
Wicked Diuerses, or your vicious cause
Of Plus quam satis, to content a woman,
But you must find new stratagems, new pursuits,
Oh women, as the Ballet lives to tell you,
What will you shortly come to?

Your Fee is ready sir.

The Devil take such Fees,
And all such Suits i'thtayle of thee; see the slave
Has writ false Latin: sirrah Ignorance,
Were you ever at the University?

Never sir:
It is well known to diverse I have Commenced
In a Pew of our Office.

Where, in a Pew of your Office?

I have been dry-foundred with it this four years,
Seldom found Non resident from my desk.

Non resident Subsumner:
I'll tear your Libel for abusing that word,
By virtue of the Clergy.

What do you mean sir?
It cost me four nights labour.

Had thou been drunk so long,
T'hadst done our Court better Service.

Sir, you do forget your gravity, me thinks.

Cry ye mercy, do I so?
And as I take it, you do very little remember,
Either womanhood, or Christianity: why do ye meddle
With that seducing knave, that's good for nought,
Unless the to fill the Office full of Fleas,
Or a Winter itch, wears that spacious Inkehorne
All a Vacation only to cure Tetters,
And his Penknife to weed Corns from the splay toes,
Of the right worshipful of the Office.

You make bold with me sir.

Woman, yare mad, I'll swear it, have more need
Of a Physician then a Lawyer.
The melancholy humour flows in your face,
Your painting cannot hide it: such vildsuits
Disgrace our Courts, and these make honest Lawyers
Stop their own ears, whilst they p'ead that's the reason
Your younger men that have good conscience,
wear such large Night-caps; go old woman, go pray,
For Lunacy, or else the Devil himself
Has taken possession of thee; may like cause
In any Christian Court never find name:
Bad Suits, and not the Law, bred the Laws shame.

Sure the old man's frantic.

Plague on's gowtie fingers,
Were all of his mind, to entertain no suits,
But such they thought were hotest, sure our Lawyers
Would not purchase half so fast:
But here's the man,
Learned Seignior Contilupo, here's a fellow
Of another piece believe it, I must make shift
With the foul Copy.

Business to me?

To you sir, from this Lady.

She is welcome.

Tis a foul Copy sir, you'll hardly read it,
There's twenty double ducats, can you read sir?

Exceeding well, very, very exceeding well.

This man will be faued, he can read; Lord, Lord,
To see, what money can do, be the hand never so foul,
Somewhat will be picked out on it.

Is not this Viuere honest?

No, that's struck out sir;
And where ever you find viuere honest in these papers,
Give it a dash sir.

I shall be mindful of it:
In troth you write a pretty Secretary,
Your Secretary hand ever takes best in mine opinion.

Sir, I have been in France,
And there believe it your Court hand generally,
Takes beyond thought.

Even as a man is traded in it.

That I could not think of this virtuous Gentleman
Before I went to'th the other Hogg-rubber.
Why this was wont to give young Clerks half fees,
To help him to Clients. Your opinion in the Case sir.

I am struck with wonder almost extaside,
With this most goodly Suite.

It is the fruit of a most hearty penitence.

Tis a Case shall leave a President to all the world,
In our succeeding Annals, and deserves
Rather a spacious public Theater,
Then a pent Court for Audence; it shall teach
All Ladies the right path to rectisie their issue.

Lo you, here's a man of comfort.

And you shall go unto a peaceful grave,
Discharged of such a guilt, as would have lain
Howling for ever at your wounded heart,
And rose with you to Judgment. (of Judgment.

Oh give me such a Lawyer, as will think of the day

You must urge the business against him
As spitefully as may be.

Doubt not. What is he summoned?

Yes, the Court will sit within this half hour.
Peruse your Notes, you have very short warning.

Never fear you that:
Follow me worthy Lady, and make account
This Suite is ended already.

You would have a private seat sir.

Yes sir.

Here's a Closs^t belongs to'th Court,
Where you may hear all unseen.

I thank you; there's money.

I give you your thanks again sir.

Is't possible Romelio's persuaded,
You are gone to the East Indies.

Most confidently.

But do you mean to go?

How? go to the East Indies?
And so many Hollanders gone to fetch sauce for their pickeld Herrings; some
have been pepperd there too lately, but I pray, being thus well recovered of
your wounds,

Why do you not reucale yourself?

That my fair Iolenta should be rumor'd
To be with child by noble Ercole,
Makes me expect to what a violent issue
These passages will come. I hear her brother
Is marrying the Infant she goes with, fore it be borne,
As if it be a Daughter,
To the Duke of Austrias Nephew; if a Son,
Into the Noble ancient Family
Of the Pala^afini: He's a subtle Devil.
And I do wonder what strange Suite in Law,
Has hapt between him and's mother.

Tis whisperd' mong the Lawyers,
'Twill undo him for ever.

Do you hear Officers?
You must take special care, that you let in
No Brachigraphy men, to take notes.

No sir?

By no means,
We cannot have a Cause of any fame,
But you must have scurvy pamphlets, and lewd Ballets
Engendered of it presently.

Have you broke fast yet?

Not I sir.

'Twas very ill done of you:
For this cause will be long a pleading; but not matter,
I have a modicum in my Buckram bag,
To stop your stomach.

What is't? Green ginger?

Green ginger, nor Pellitory of Spain neither,
Yet 'twill stop a hollow tooth better then either of them.

Pray what is't?

Look you,
It is a very lovely Pudding-pye,
Which we Clerks find great relief in.

I shall have no stomach.

No matter and you have not, I may pleasure
Some of our Learned Council with it; I have done it
Many a time and often, when a Cause
Has proved like an after-game at Irish.

Tis a strange Suite, is Leonora come.

She's here my Lord; make way there for the Lady.

Take off her Veil: it seems she is ashamed
To look her cause in the face.

She's sick, my Lord.

She's mad my Lord, would be kept more dark.
By your favour sir, I have now occasion to be at your elbow, and within this
half hour shall entreat you to be angry, very angry.


Is Romelio come?

I am here my Lord, and called I do protest,
To answer what I know not, for as yet
I am wholly ignorant, of what the Court
Will charge me with.

I assure you, the proceeding
Is most unequal then, for I perceive,
The Council of the adverse party furnished
With full Instruction.

Pray my Lord, who is my accuser?

Tis your mother.

She has discovered Contarino's murder:
If she prove so unnatural, to call
My life in question, I am armed to suffer
This to end all my losses.

Sir, we will do you this favour,
You shall hear the Accusation,
Which being known, we will adiourne the Court,
Till a fortnight hence, you may provide your Counsel.

I advise you, take their proffer,
Or else the Lunacy runs in a blood,
You are more mad then she.

What are you sir?

An angry fellow that would do thee good,
For goodness sake it self, I do protest,
Neither for love nor money.

Prithee stand further, I shall gall your got else.

Come, come, I know you for an East Indy Merchant,
You have a spice of pride in you still.

My Lord, I am so strengthened in my innocence,
For any the least shadow of a crime,
Committed against my mother, or the world,
That she can charge me with, here do I make it
My humble suite, only this hour and place,
May give it as full hearing, and as free,
And unrestrained a Sentence.

Be not too confident you have cause to fear.

Let fear dwell with Earth-quakes,
Shipwrecks at Sea, or Prodegies in heaven,
I cannot set my self so many fathom
Beneath the haight of my true heart, as fear.

Very fine words I assure you, if they were to any

Well, have your entreaty: (purpose,
And if your own credulity undo you,
Blame not the Court hereafter: fall to your Plea.

May it please your Lordsh. the reverend Court,
To give me leave to open to you a Case
So rare, so altogether void of President,
That I do challenge all the spacious Volumes,
Of the whole Civil Law to show the like.
We are of Council for this Gentlewoman,
We have received our Fee, yet the whole course
Of what we are to speak, is quite against her,
Yet we'll deserve our fee too. There stands one,
Romelio the Merchant; I will name him to you,
Without either title or addition:
For those false beams of his supposed honour,
As void of true heat, as are all painted fires,
Or Glow-wormes in the dark, suite him all basely,
As if he had bought his Gentry from the Herald,
With money got by extortion: I will first
Produce this Aesops Crow, as he stands forfeit,
For the long use of his gay borrowed plumes,
And then let him hop naked: I come to'th point,
T'as been a Dream in Naples, very near
This eight and thirty years, that this Romelio,
Was nobly descended, he has ranked himself
With the Nobility, shamefully vsurpt
Their place, and in a kind of lawcy pride,
Which like to Mushromes, ever grow most rank,
When they do spring from dung-hills, sought to oresway,
The Fliski, the Grimaldi, Dori,
And all the ancient pillars of our State;
View now what he is come to: this poor thing
Without a name, this Cuckoo hatched ith nest
Of a Hedge-sparrow.

Speaks he all this to me?

Only to you sir.

I do not ask thee, prithee hold thy prating.

Why very good, you will be presently
As angry as I could wish.

What title shall I set to this base coin;
He has no name, and for's aspect he seems,
A Giant in a May-game, that within
Is nothing but a Porter'^ I'll undertake,
He had as good have travelled all his life
With Gypsies: I will sell him to any man
For an hundred Chickeens, and he that buys him of me,
Shall loose byth hand too.

Lo, what you are come too:
You that did scorn to trade in any thing;
But Gold or Spices, or your Cochineele,
He rates you now at poor Iohn.

Out upon thee, I would thou were of his fide,

Would you so?

The devil and thee together on each hand,
To prompt the Lawyers memory when he founders.

Signior Contilupo, the Court holds it fit,
You leave this stale declaiming against the person,
And come to the matter.

Now I shall my Lord.

It shows a poor malicious eloquence,
And it is strange, men of your gravity
Will not forgo it: verily, I presume,
If you but heard your self speaking with my ears,
Your phrase would be more modest.

Good my Lord, be assured,
I will leave all circumstance, and come toth purpose:
This Romelio is a Bastard.

How, a Bastard? Oh mother,
Now the day begins grow hot on your side.

Why she is your accuser.

I had forgot that; was my father married to any other woman, at the time of my
begetting?


That's not the business.

I turn me then to you that were my mother,
But by what name I am to call you now,
You must instruct me: were you ever married
To my father?

To my shame I speak it, never.

Not to Franscisco Romelio?

May it please your Lordships,
To him I was, but he was not his father.

Good my Lord, give us leave in a few words,
To expound the Riddle, and to make it plain,
Without the least of scruple: for I take it,
There cannot be more lawful proof in the world,
Then the oath of the mother.

Well then, to your proofs, and be not tedious.

I'll conclude in a word:
Some nine and thirty years since, which was the time,
This woman was married, Francisco Romelio,
This Gentleman's putatiue father, and her husband
Being not married to her past a fortnight,
Would needs go travel; did so, and continued
In France and the Low-Countries eleven months:
Take special note o'th time, I beseech your Lordship,
For it makes much to'th business: in his absence
He left behind to sojourn at his house
A Spanish Gentleman, a fine spruce youth
By the Ladies confession, and you may be sure
He was no Eunuch neither; he was one
Romelio loved very dearly, as oft haps,
No man alive more welcome to the husband
Then he that makes him Cuckold.
This Gentleman I say,
Breaking all Laws of Hospitality,
Got his friends wife with child, a full two months
Fore the husband returned.

Good sir, forget not the Lambskin.

I warrant thee.

I will pinch by the buttock, to put you in mind of't.

Prithee hold thy prating.
What's to be practised now my Lord? Marry this,
Romelio being a young novice, not acquainted
With this precedence, very innocently
Returning home from travel, finds his wife
Grown an excellent good Huswife, for she had set
Her women to spin Flax, and to that use,
Had in a study which was built of stone,
Stored up at least an hundredth weight of flax:
Marry such a thread as was to be spun from the flax,
I think the like was never heard of.

What was that?

You may be certain, she would lose no time,
In braging that her Husband had got up
Her belly: to be short, at seven months end,
Which was the time of her delivery,
And when she felt her self to fall in travel,
She makes her Weighting woman, as by mischance,
Set fire to the flax, the flight whereof,
As they pretend, causes this Gentlewoman
To fall in pain, and be delivered
Eight weeks asore her reckoning.

Now sir, remember the Lambeskin.

The Midwife strait howls out, there was no hope
Of th'infants life, swaddles it in a stead Lambeskin,
As a Bird hatched too early, makes it up
With three quarters of a face, that made it look
Like a Changeling, cries out to Romelio,
To have it Christened, least it should depart
Without that it came for: and thus are many served,
That take care to get Gossips for those children,
To which they might be Godfathers themselves,
And yet be no arch-Puritans neither.

No more.

Pray my Lord give him way, you spoil his oratory else: thus would they jest
were they feed, to open their sisters cases.


You have urged enough;
You first affirm, her husband was away from her
Eleven months.

Yes my Lord.

And at seven months end,
After his return she was delivered
Of this Romelio, and had gone her full time.

True my Lord.

So by this account this Gentleman was begot,
In his supposed fathers absence.

You have it fully.

A most strange Suite this, tis beyond example,
Either time past, or present; for a woman,
To publish her own dishonour voluntarily,
Without being called in question, some forty years
After the sin committed, and her Council
To enlarge the offence with as much Oratory,
As ever I did hear them in my life,
Defend a guilty woman; tis most strange:
Or why with such a poisoned violence
Should she labour her soones undoing: we observe
Obedience of creatures to the Law of Nature,
Is the stay of the whole world; here that Law is broke,
For though our Civil Law makes difference
Tween the base, and the ligitimate; compassionate Nature
Makes them equal, nay, she many times prefers them.
I pray resolve me sir, have not you and your mother
Had some Suite in Law together lately?

None my Lord.

No? no contention about parting your goods?

Not any.

No flaw, no unkindness?

None that ever arrived at my knowledge.

Bethink your self, this cannot choose but savour
Of a woman's malice deeply; and I fear,
You're practised upon most deuillishly.
How hapt Gentlewoman, you reueal'd this no sooner?

While my husband lived, my Lord, I durst not.

I should rather ask you, why you reveal it now?

Because my Lord, I loathed that such a sin
Should lie smothered with me in my grave; my penitence,
Though to my shame, prefers the revealing of it
Above worldly reputation.

Your penitence?
Might not your penitence have been as hearty,
Though it had never summoned to the Court
Such a conflux of people.

Indeed I might have confessed it,
Privately toth Church, I grant; but you know repentance
Is nothing without satisfaction.

Satisfaction? why your Husbands dead,
What satisfaction can you make him?

The greatest satisfaction in the world, my Lord,
To restore the land toth right heir, that's my daughter.

Oh she's straight begot then.

Very well, may it please this honourable Court,
If he be a bastard, and must forfeit his land for it,
She has proved her self a strumpet, and must loose
Her Dower, let them go a begging together.

Who shall pay us our Fees then?

Most just.

You may see now what an old house
You are like to pull over your head, Dame.

Could I conceive this Publication
Grew from a hearty penitence, I could bear
My undoing the more patiently; but my Lord,
There is no reason, as you said even now,
To satisfy me: but this suite of hers
Springs from a devilish malice, and lier pretence,
Of a grieved Conscience, and Religion,
Like to the horrid Powder-Treason in England,
Has a most bloody unnatural revenge
Hid under it: Oh the violencies of women!
Why they are creatures made up and compounded
Of all monsters, poisoned Myneralls,
And sorceress Herbs that grows.

Are you angry yet?

Would men express a bad one,
Let him forsake all natural example,
And compare one to another; they have no more mercy,
Then minous fires in great tempests.

Take heed you do not crack your voice sir.

Hard hearted creatures good for nothing else,
But to wind dead bodies.

Yes, to weave seaming lace with the bones of their
Husbands that were long since buried, and curse them when they tangle.


Yet why do I
Take Bastardy so distastfully, when in the world,
A many things that are essential parts
Of greatness, are but by-slips, and are fathered
On the wrong parties.
Preferment in the world a many times,
Basely begotten: nay, I have observed
The immaculate Justice of a poor mans cause,
In such a Court as this, has not known whom
To call Father, which way to direct it self
For Compassion: but I forget my temper,
Only that I may stop that Lawyers throat,
I do beseech the Court, and the whole world,
They will not think the baselyer of me,
For the vice of a mother: for that woman's sin,
To which you all dare swear when it was done,
I would not give my consent.

Stay, here's an Accusation,
But here's no proof; what was the Spaniards name
You accuse of adultery?

Don Crispiano, my Lord.

What part of Spain was he borne in?

In Castile.

This may prove my father.

And my Master, my Clyent's spoiled then.

I knew that Spanyard well: if you be a Bastard,
Such a man being your father, I dare vouch you
A Gentleman, and in that Seignior Contilupo,
Your Oratory went a little too far.
When do we name Don Iohn of Austria,
The Emperors son, but with reverence:
And I have known in diverse Families,
The Bastards the greater spirits; but to'th purpose,
What time was this Gentleman begot?
And be sure you lay your time right.

Now the mettle comes to the Touchstone.

In Anno seventy one, my Lord.

Very well, seventy one:
The Battle of Lepanto was fought in it,
A most remarkable time, 'twill lye for no mans pleasure*
And what proof is there more then the affirmation of the
Mother, of this corporal dealing?

The deposition of a Wayting-woman served her the same time.


Where is she?

Where is our Solicitor with the Waitingwoman?

Room for the bag and baggage.

Here my Lord, Oretenus.

And what can you say Gentlewoman?

Please your Lordship, I was the party that dealt
In the business and brought them together.

Well.

And conueyed letters between them. (house?

What needed letters, when tis said he lodged in her

A running Ballad now and then to her Viol,
For he was never well, but when he was fiddling.

Speak to the purpose, did you ever know them bed together?


No my Lord,
But I have brought him to the bed side.

That was somewhat near to the business;
And what, did you help him off with his shoes?

He wore no shoes, an't please you my Lord.

No? what then, Pumps?

Neither.

Boots were not fit for his journey.

He wore Tennis-court woollen slippers,
For fear of creaking sir, and making a noise,
To wake the rest o'th house.

Well, and what did he there,
In his Tennis-court woollen slippers?

Please your Lordship, question me in Latin,
For the cause is very foul; the Examiner o'th Court
Was fain to get it out of me alone in the Counting-house,
Cause he would not spoil the youth o'th Office.

Here's a Latin spoon, and a long one,
To feed with the Devil.

I'd be loath to be ignorant that way,
For I hope to marry a Proctor, take my pleasure abroad
At the Commencements with him.

Come closer to the business.

I will come as close as modesty will give me leave.
Truth is, every morning when he lay with her,
I made a Caudle for him, by the appointment
Of my Mistress, which he would still refuse,
And call for small drink.

Small drink?

For a Iulipe.

And said he was wondrous thirsty.

What's this to the purpose?

Most effectual, my Lord.
I have heard them laugh together extremely,
And the Curtain rods fall from the tester of the bed,
And he ne'er came from her, but he thrust money in my
hand; and once in truth, he would have had some dealing
with me, which I took; he thought 'twould be the only
way ith world to make me keep counsel the better.

That's a stinger, tis a good wench, be not daunted.

Did you ever find the print of two in the bed?

What a questions that to be asked, may it please your
Lordsh* tis to be thought he lay nearer to her then so.

What age are you of Gentlewoman?

About six and forty, my Lord.

Anno seventy one,
And Romelio is thirty eight: by that reckoning,
You were a Bawd at eight year old: now verily,
You fell to the Trade betimes.

There ya're from the Bias.

I do not know my age directly; sure I am elder,
I can remember two great frosts, and three great plagues,
And the loss of Callis, and the first coming up
Of the Breeches with the great Codpiece,
And I pray what age do you take me of then?

Well come off again.

An old hunted Hare, she has all her doubles.

For your own gravities,
And the reverence of the Court, I do beseech you,
Rip up the cause no further, but proceed to Sentence.

One question more and I have done:
Might not this Crispiano, this Spanyard,
Lye with your Mistress at some other time,
Either before or after, then ith absence of her husband?

Never.

Are you certain of that?

On my soul, never.

That's well he never lay with her,
But in anno seventy one, let that be remembered.
Stand you aside a while. Mistress, the truth is,
I knew this Crispiano, lived in Naples
At the same time, and loved the Gentleman
As my bosom friend; and as I do remember,
The Gentleman did leave his Picture with you,
If age or neglect have not in so long time ruined it.

I preserve it still my Lord.

I pray let me see it, let me see the face
I then loved so much to look on.

Fetch it.

I shall, my Lord.

No, no, Gentlewoman,
I have other business for you.

Now were the time to cut Romelio's throat,
And accuse him for your murder.

By no means.

Will you not let us be men of fashion,
And down with him now he's going?

Peace lets attend the sequel.

I commend you Lady,
There was a maine matter of Conscience,
How many ills spring from Adultery!
First, the supreme Law that is violated,
Nobility oft stained with bastardy,
Inheritance of Land falsely possessed,
The husband! corned, wife shamed, and babes unblessed,
So, hang it up in the Court; you have heard,
What has been urged against Romelio.
Now my definitive sentence in this cause,
Is, I will give no sentence at all.

No?

No, I cannot, for I am made a party.

How a party? here are fine cross tricks,
What the devil will he do now?

Signior Ariosto, his Majesty of Spain,
Confers my Place upon you by this Patent,
Which till this urgent hour I have kept
From your knowledge: may you thrive in it, noble sir,
And do that which but few in our place do,
Go to their grave vncurst.

This Law business
Will leave me so small leisure to serve God,
I shall serve the King the worse.

Is he a Judge?
We must then look for all Conscience, and no Law,
Heel beggar all his followers.

Sir, I am of your Counsel, for the cause in hand
Was begun at such a time, fore you could speak;
You had need therefore have one speak for you.

Stay, I do here first make protestation,
I ne'er took fee of this Romelio,
For being of his Council, which may free me,
Being now his Judge, for the imputation
Of taking a Bribe. Now sir, speak your mind.

I do first intrear, that the eyes of all here present,
May be sixth upon this

Oh, I am confounded. this is Crispiano.

This is my father, how the Judges have bleated him.

You may see truth will out in spite of the Devil.

Behold, I am the shadow of this shadow,
Age has made me so; take from me forty years,
And I was such a Summer fruit as this,
At least the Painter sayned so: for indeed,
Painting and Epitaphs are both alike,
They slatter us, and say we have been thus:
But I am the party here, that stands accused,
For Adultery with this woman, in the year
Seventy one: now I call you my Lord to witness,
Four years before that time, I went to'th Indies,
And till this month, did never set my foot since
In Europe; and for any former incontinence,
She has vowed there was never any: what remains then,
But this is a mere practise against her son,
And I beseech the Court it may be sifted,
And most severely punished.

Vds foot, we are spoiled,
Why my Clyent's proved an honest woman.

What do you think will become of me now?

You'll be made dance ^achrimae I fear at a Carts

You Mistress, where are you now? (tail.
Your Tennis court slips, and your taken drink
In a morning for your hot liner; where's the man,
Would have had some dealing with you, that you might
Keep counsel the better.

May it please the Court, I am but a young thing,
And was drawn a^sie, varsie into the business.

How young? of five and forty?

Five and forty, and shall please you!
I am not five and twenty:
She made me colour my hair with Bean-flower,
To seem older then I was; and then my rotten teeth,
With eating sweet-meats: why, should a Farrier
Look in my mouth, he might mistake my age.
Oh Mistress, Mistress, you are an honest woman,
And you may be ashamed on it, to abuse the Court thus.

Whatsoere I have attempted,
Against my own fame, or the reputation
Of that Gentleman my son, the Lord Contarino
Was cause of it.

Who I?

He that should have married your daughter?
It was a plot belike then to confer
The land on her that should have bin his wife.

More then I have said already, all the world
Shall ne'er extract from me; I entreat from both,
Your equal pardons.

And I from you sir.

Sirrah, stand you aside,
I will talk with you hereafter.

I could never away with after reckonings.

And now my Lords, I do most voluntarily
Confine my self unto a stricter prison,
And a severer penance, then this Court can impose,
I am entered into Religion.

I the cause of this practise; this ungodly woman,
Has sold her self to falsehood: I will now reveal my self.

Stay my Lord here's a window
To let in more light to the Court.

Mercy upon me! oh, that thou art living
Is mercy indeed!

Stay, keep in your shell a little longer?

I am Ercole.

A guard upon him for the death of Contarino.

I obey the arrest o'th Court.

Oh sir, you are happily restored to life,
And to us your friends.

Away, thou art the Traitor:
I only live to challenge this former suite,
Touched but thy fame, this accusation
Reaches to thy fame and life: the brave Contarino
Is generally supposed slain by this hand.

How knows he the contrary?

But truth is,
Having received from me some certain wounds,
Which were not mortal, this wild murderer,
Being by Will deputed Overseer
Of the Nobleman's Estate, to his sisters use,
That he might make him sure from surviving,
To revoke that Will, stole to him in's bed, and killed him.

Strange, unheard of, more practise yet!

What proof of this?

The report of his mother delivered to me,
In distraction for Contarino's death.

For my death? I begin to apprehend,
That the violence of this woman's love to me,
Might practise the disinheriting of her son.

What say you to this Leonora?

Such a thing I did utter out of my distraction:
But how the Court will censure that report,
I leave to their wisdoms.

My opinion is,
That this late slander urged against her son,
Takes from her all manner of credit:
She that would not stick to deprive him of his living,
Will as little tender his life.

I beseech the Court,
I may retire my self to my place of penance,
I have vowed my self and my woman.

Go when you please: what should move you
Be thus forward in the accusation?

My love to Contarino.

Oh, it bore very bitter fruit at your last meeting.

Tis true: but I begun to love him,
When I had most cause to hate him, when our bloods
Embraced each other, then I pitied,
That so much valour should be hazarded
On the fortune of a single Rapier,
And not spent against the Turk.

Stay sir, be well advised,
There is no testimony but your own,
To approve you slew him, therefore no other way
To decide it, but by Duel.

Yes my Lord, I dare affirm against all the world,
This Noble man speaks truth.

You will make your self a party in the Duel.

Let him, I will fight with the both, sixteen of them.

Sir, I do not know you.

Yes but you have forgot me, you and I have sweat
In the Breach together at Malta.

Cry you me^, I have known of your Nation
Brave Soldiers.

Now if my father
Have any true spirit in him, I'll recover
His good opinion Do you hear? do not swear sir,
For I dare swear, that you will swear a lye,
A very filthy, stinking. rotten lye:
And if the Lawyers think not this sufficient,
I'll give the lye in the stomach,
That's somewhat deeper then the throat;
Both here, and all France over and over,
From Marselys, or Bayon, to Callis Sands,
And there draw my Sword upon thee,
And new scour it in the gravel of thy kidneys.

You the Defendant charged with the murder,
And you Second there,
Must be committed to the custody
Of the Knight-Marshall; and the Court gives charge,
They be to morrow ready in the Lists
Before the Sun be rissen.

I do entreat the Court, there be a guard
Placed ore my Sister, that she enter not
Into Religion: she's rich my Lords,
And the persuasions of Fryers, to gain
All her possessions to their Monasteries,
May do much upon her.

We'll take order for her.

There's a Nun too you have got with child,
How will you dispose of her?

You question me, as if I were graved already,
When I have quenched this wild-sire
In Ercoles tame blood, I'll tell you.

You have judged to day
A most confused practise, that takes end
In as bloody a trial, and we may observe
By these great persons, and their indirect
Proceedings, shadowed in a veil of State.
Mountains are deformed heaps, swelled up alofts
Vales wholesomer, though lower, and trod on oft.

Well, I will pu up my papers,
And send them to France for a President,
That they may not say yet, but for one strange
Law suite, we come somewhat near them.


How dost thou friend? welcome, thou and I.
Were play-fellowes together, little children,
So small awhile ago, that I presume,
We are neither of us wise yet.

A most sad truth on my part.

Why do you pluck your veil
Over your face?

If you will believe truth,
There's nought more terrible to a guilty heart,
As the eye of a respected friend.

Say friend, are you quick with child?

Too sure.

How could you know
Of your first child when you quic^ned?

How could you know friend?
Tis reported you are in the same taking.

Ha, ha, ha, so tis given out:
But Ercoles coming to life again, has shrunk,
And made innisible my great belly; ves faith,
My being with child was merely in supposition,
Not practise.

You are happy, what would I give,
To be a Maid again?

Would you, to what purpose?
I would never give great purchase for that thing
Is in danger every hour to be lost: pray thee laugh.
A Boy or a Girl for a wager?

What heaven please.

Nay, nay, will you venture
A chain of Pearl with me whether?

I'll lay nothing,
I have ventured too much for it already, my fame.
I make no question sister, you have heard
Of the intended combat.

O what else?
I have a sweet heart in it, against a brother.

And I a dead friend, I fear; what good counsel
Can you minister unto me?

Faith only this,
Since there's no means in the world to hinder it,
Let thou and I wench get as far as we can
From the noise of it.

Whither?

No matter, any whither.

Any whither, so you go not by sea:
I cannot abide rough water.

Not endure to be tumbled? say no more then,
We'll be land-Souldiers for that trick: take heart,
Thy boy shall be borne a brave Roman.

O you mean to go to Rome then.

Within there. Bear this Letter
To the Lord Ercole. Now wench, I am for thee
All the world over.

I like your shade pursue you.

Well, I do not think but to see you as pretty a
piece of Law-flesh.

In time I may,
Marry I am resolved to take a new way for it.
You have Lawyers take their Clients fees, their backs are no sooner turned,
but they call them fools, and laugh at them.


That's ill done of them.

There's one thing too that has a wild abuse in it.

What's that?

Marry this,
That no Proctor in the Term time be tolerated to go to the Tavern above six
times in the forenoon.


Why man?

Oh sir, it makes their Clients overtaken,
And become friends sooner then they would be.

Leave the Room, Gentlemen.

Wherefore should I with such an obstinacy,
Conceal my self any longer. I am taught,
That all the blood which will be shed to morrow,
Must fall upon my head; one question
Shall fix it or untie it: Noble brother,
I would fain know how it is possible,
When it appears you love the fair Iolenta
With such a height of fervor, you were ready
To father another child, and marry her,
You would so suddenly engage your self,
To kill her brother, one that ever stood,
Your loyal and firm friend?

Sir, I'll tell you,
My love, as I have formerly protested
To Contarino, whose unfortunate end,
The traitor wrought: and here is one thing more,
Dead all good thoughts of him, which I now received
From Iolenta.

In a Letter?

Yes, in this Letter:
For having sent to her to be resolved
Most truly, who was father of the child,
She writes back, that the shame she goes withal,
Was begot by her brother.

O most incestious villain.

I protest, before I thought 'twas Contarinos Issue,
And for that would have veiled her dishonour.

No more.
Has the Armourer brought the weapons?

Yes sir.

I will no more think of her.

Of whom?

Of my mother, I was thinking of my mother.
Call the Armourer.

You do love me sir, you say?

O most entirely.

And you will marry me?

Nay, I'll do more then that.
The fashion of the world is many times,
To make a woman nought, and afterwards
To marry her: but I a'th contrary,
Will make you honest first, and afterwards Proceed to the wedlock.


Honest, what mean you by that?

I mean, that your suborning the late Law-suite,
Has got you a filthy report: now there's no way,
But to do some excellent piece of honesty,
To recover your good name.

How sir?

You shall straight go, and reveal to your old
Mistress, for certain truth, Contarino is alive.

How, living?

Yes, he is living.

No, I must not tell her of it.

No, why?

For she did bind me yesterday by oath,
Never more to speak of him.

You shall reveal it then to Ariosto the Judge.

By no means, he has heard me
Tell so many lies ith Court, he will ne'er believe me.
What if I told it to the Capuchin?

You cannot think of a better; for as your young Mris.
Who as you told me, has persuaded you,
To run away with her: let her have her humour.
I have a suite Romelio left In the house,
The habit of a Jew, that I'll put on,
And pretending I am robbed, by break of day,
Procure all Passengers to be brought back,
And by the way reveal my self, and discover
The Commicall event. They say she's a little mad,
This will help to cure her: go, go presently,
And reveal it to the Capuchin.

Sir, I shall

A pox ont, I have undertaken the challenge very foolishly: what if I do not
appear to answer it?


It would be absolute conviction
Of Cowardice, and Perjury; and the Dane,
May to your public shame, reverse your Arms,
Or have them ignomiously fastened
Under his horse tail.

I do not like that so well.
I see then I must fight whether I will or no.

How does Romelio bear himself? They say,
He has almost brained one of our cunningest Fencers,
That practisd with him.

Very certain; and now you talk of fencing,
Do not you remember the Welsh Gentleman,
That was travailing to Rome upon return?

No, what of him?

There was a strange experiment of a Fencer.

What was that?

The Welshman in's play, do what the Fencer could,
Hung still an arse; he could not for's life
Make him come on bravely: till one night at supper,
Observing what a deal of Parma cheese
His Scholar devoured, goes ingeniously
The next morning, and makes a spacious button
For his foil of tosted cheese, and as sure as you live,
That made him come on the braueliest.

Possible!

Marry it taught him an ill grace in's play,
It made him gape still, gape as he put in for it,
As I have seen some hungry Usher.

The tosting of it belike,
Was to make it more supple, had he chanced
To have hit him a'th chaps.

Not unlikely. Who can tell me,
If we may breath in the Duel?

By no means.

Nor drink?

Neither.

That's scurvy, anger will make me very dry.

You mistake sir, tis sorrow that is very dry.

Not always sir, I have known sorrow very wet.

In rainy weather.

No, when a woman has come dropping wet
Out of a Cuckingstoole.

Then twas wet indeed sir.

Having from Leonoras Wayting-woman,
Delivered a most strange Intelligence
Of Contarino's recovery, I am come
To sound Romelio's penitence; that performed,
To end these errors by discovering,
What she related to me. Peace to you sir,
Pray Gentlemen, let the freedom of this Room
Be mine a little. Nay sir, you may stay.
Will you pray with me?

No, no, the world and I
Have not made up our accounts yet.

Shall I pray for you?

Whether you do or no, I care not.

O you have a dangerous voyage to take.

No matter, I will be mine own Pilot:
Do not you trouble your head with the business.

Pray tell me, do not you meditate of death?

Phew, I took out that Lesson,
When I once lay sick of an Ague: I do now
Labour for life, for life. Sir, can you tell me,
Whether your Tolledo, or your Millain Blade
Be best tempered?

These things you know, are out of my practice.

But these are things you know,
I must practice with to morrow.

Were I in your case,
I should present to my self strange shadows.

Turn you, were I in your case,
I should laugh at mine one shadow.
Who has hired you to make me Coward?

I would make you a good Christian.

Withal, let me continue
An honest man, which I am very certain,
A coward can never be; you take upon you
A Physicians place, rather then a Divines.
You go about to bring my body so low,
I should sight in the Lists to morrow like a Dormouse,
And be made away in a slumber.

Did you murder Contarino?

That's a scurvy question now.

Why sir?

Did you ask it as a Confessor, or as a spy?

As one that fain would jostle the devil
Out of your way.

Um, you are but weakly made for it:
He's a cunning wrestler, I can tell you, and has broke many a mans neck.


But to give him the foil, goes not by strength.

Let it go by what it will,
Get me some good victuals to breakfast, I am hungry.

Here's food for you.

Pew, I am not to commence Doctor:
For then the word, Devour that book, were proper.
I am to sight, to sight sir, and I'll do it,
As I would feed, with a good stomach.

Can you feed, and apprehend death?

Why sir? Is not Death
A hungry companion? Say? is not the grave
Said to be a great devourer? Get me some victuals.
I knew a man that was to loose his head,
Feed with an excellent good appetite,
To strengthen his heart, scarce half an hour before.
And if he did it, that only was to speak,
What should I, that am to do?

This confidence,
If it be grounded upon truth, tis well.

You must understand, that Resolution
Should ever wait upon a noble death,
As Captains bring their Soldiers out o'th field,
And come off last: for, I pray what is death?
The safest Trench in the world to keep man free
From Fortunes Gunshot; to be afraid of that,
Would prove me weaker then a teeming woman,
That does endure a thousand times more pain
In bearing of a child.

O, I tremble for you:
For I do know you have a storm within you,
More terrible then a Sea-fight, and your soul
Being heretofore drowned in security,
You know not how to live, nor how to dye:
But I have an object that shall startle you,
And make you know whither you are going.

I am armed for it.
Tis very welcome, this is a decent garment
Will never be out of fashion. I will kiss it.
All the Flowers of the Spring,
Meet to perfume our burying:
These have but their growing prime,
And man does slourish but his time.
Survey our progress from our birth,
We are set, we grow, we turn to earth.
Courts adieu, and all delights,
All bewitching appetites;
Sweetest Breath, and clearest eye,
Like perfumes go out and dye;
And consequently this is done,
As shadows wait upon the Sun.
Vain the ambition of Kings,
Who seek by trophies and dead things,
To leave a living name behind
And weave but nets to catch the wind:
O you have wrought a miracle, and melted
A heart of Adamant, you have comprised
In this dumb Pageant, a right excellent form
Of penitence.

I am glad you so receive it.

This object does persuade me to forgive
The wrong she has don me, which I count the way
To be forgiven yonder: and this Shroud
Shows me how rankly we do smell of earth,
When we are in all our glory. Will it please you
Enter that Closet, where I shall confer
Bout matters of most weighty consequence,
Before the Duel.

Now I am right in the Bandileere for the gallows.
What a scurvy fashion tis, to hang ones coffin in a scarf?

Why this is well:
And now that I have made you fit for death,
And brought you even as low as is the grave,
I will raise you up again speak comforts to you
Beyond your hopes, turn this intended Duel
To a triumph.

More Divinity yet?
Good sir, do one thing first, there's in my Closet
A Prayer book that is covered with guilt Vellum,
Fetch it, and pray you certify my mother,
I'll presently come to her.
So now you are safe.

What have you done?

Why I have locked them up
Into a Turret of the Castle safe enough,
For troubling us this four hours; and he please,
He may open a Casement, and whistle out to'th Sea,
Like a Boson, not any creature can hear him.
Wast not thou a weary of his preaching?

Yes, if he had had an houre-glasse by him,
I would have wished him he would have ioggd it a little.
But your mother, your mother's locked in to.

So much the better,
I am rid of her howling at parting.

Hark, he knocks to be let out and he were mad.

Let him knock till his Sandals fly in pieces.

Ha, what says he? Contarino living?

I, I, he means he would have Contarino's living
Bestowed upon his Monastery, 'tis that
He only fishes for. So, 'tis break of day,
We shall be called to the combat presently.

I am sorry for one thing.

What's that?

That I made not mine own Ballad: I do fear
I shall be roguishly abused in Meeter,
If I miscarry. Well, if the young Capuchin
Do not talk a'th flesh as fast now to your mother,
As he did to us a'th spirit; if he do,
Tis not the first time that the prison royal
Has been guilty of close committing.

Now to'th Combat.

Contarino living?

Yes Madam, he is living, and Ercoles Second.

Why has he locked us up thus?

Some evil Angel
Makes him deaf to his own safety, we are shut
Into a Turret, the most desolate prison
Of all the Castle, and his obstinacy,
Madness, or secret fate, has thus prevented,
The saving of his life.

Oh the saving Contarino's,
His is worth nothing: for heavens sake call louder.

To little purpose.

I will leap these Battlements,
And may I be found dead time enough,
To hinder the combat.

Oh look upwards rather,
Their deliverance must come thence: to see how heaven,
Can invert mans firmest purpose: his intent
Of murthering Contarino, was a mean
To work his safety, and my coming hither
To save him, is his ruin: wretches turn
The tide of their good fortune, and being drenched
In some presumptuous and hidden sins,
While they aspire to do themselves most right,
The devil that rules ith ay re, hangs in their light.

Oh they must not be lost thus; some good christian come within our hearing:
open the other casement that looks into the city.


Madam, I shall.


Give the Appealant his Summons, do the like
To the Defendant.
Can any of you allege ought, why the Combat
Should not proceed?

Nothing.

Have the Knights weighed,
And measured their weapons?

They have.

Proceed then to the battle, and may heaven
Determine the right.

Soit le Battle, et Victory a ceux que droit.

Stay, I do not well know whither I am going:
'Twere needful therefore, though at the last gasp,
To have some Church mans prayer. Run I pray thee,
To Castle Nouo; this key will release
A Capuchin and my mother, whom I shut
Into a Turret, bid them make hast, and pray
I may be dead ere he comes. Now, Victory a ceux que droit.

Hold, hold, for heavens sake hold.

What are these that interrupt the combat?
Away to prison with them.

We have been prisoners too long:
Oh sir, what mean you? Contarino's living.

Living!

Behold him living.

You were but now my second, now I make you
My self for ever.

Oh here's one between,
Claims to be nearer.

And to you dear Lady,
I have entirely vowed my life.

If I do not dream, I am happy to.

How insolently has this high Court of Honour
Been abused!


How now, who are these?

A couple of strange Foul, and I the Falconer,
That have sprung them. This is a white Nun,
Of the Order of Saint Clare; and this a black one,
You'll take my word for it.

She's a black one indeed.

Like or dislike me, choose you whether,
The Down upon the Ravens feather,
Is as gentle and as sleek,
As the Mole on Uenus cheek.
Hence vain show, I only care,
To preserve my Soul most fair.
Never mind the outward skin,
But the Jewel that's within:
And though I want the crimson blood,
Angels boast my Sister-hood.
Which of us now judge you whiter,
Her whose credit proves the lighter,
Or this black, and Ebon hew,
That unstained, keeps fresh and true:
For I proclaim't without control,
There's no true beauty, but ith Soul.

Oh tis the fair Iolenta; to what purpose
Are you thus ecclipst?

Sir, I was running away
From the rumour of this Combat: I fled likewise,
From the untrue report my brother spread
To his politic ends, that I was got with child.

Cease here all further scrutiny, this paper
Shall give unto the Court each circumstance,
Of all these passages.

No more: attend the Sentence of the Court.
Rareness and difficulty give estimation
To all things are in the world: you have met both
In these several passages: now it does remain,
That these so Comical events be blasted
With no severity of Sentence: You Romelio,
Shall first deliver to that Gentleman,
Who stood your Second, all those Obligations,
Wherein he stands engaged to you,
Receiving only the principal.

I shall my Lord.

I thank you,
I have an humour now to go to Sea
Against the Pirates; and my only ambition,
Is to have my Ship furnished with a rare consort
Of Music; and when I am pleased to be mad,
They shall play me Orlando.

You muft lay wait for the Fiddlers,
They'll fly away from the press like Watermen.

Next, you shall marry that Nun.

Most willingly.

Oh sir, you have been unkind;
But I do only wish, that this my shame,
May warn all honest Virgins, not to seek
The way to Heaven, that is so wondrous steep,
Through those vows they are too frail to keep.

Contarino, and Romelio, and your self,
Shall for seven years maintain against the Turk,
Six Galleys. Leonora, Iolenta,
And Angiolella there the beauteous Nun,
For their vows breach unto the Monastery,
Shall build a Monastery. Lastly, the two Surgeons,
For concealing Contarino s recovery,
Shall exercise their Art at their own charge,
For a tweluemonth in the Galleys: so we leave you,
Wishing your future life may make good use
Of these events, since that these passages,
Which threatened ruin, built on rotten ground,
Are with success beyond our wishes crowned.


