There rest my chariot on the mountain tops,
I that in shape appear unto your sight
A naked boy, not cloathde but with my wings,
Am that great God of Love, who with his might
Rules the wast wide world, and living things.
This left hand bears vain hope, short joyful state,
With fair Resemblance, lovers to allure,
This right hand holds Repentance all too late,
War, fire, blood, and pains without recure.
On sweet Ambrosia, is not my food,
Nectar is not my drink, as to the rest
"Of all the Gods: I drink the lovers blood,
"And feed upon the heart within his breast.
Well hath my power in heaven and earth bin tried,
And deepest hell, my piercing force hath known.
The marble seas, my wonders have descried,
Which elder age throghout the world hath blown.
To me, the king of Gods and men doth yield,
As witness can the Greekish maid, whom I
Made like a cow go lowing through the field,
Least jealous Iuno should the escape epsy:
The doubled night, the Suns restrained course,
His secret stealths, the slander to eschew,
In shape transformed, we list not to discourse.
All that and more we forced him to do.
The warlike Mars hath not subdued our might,
We feared him not, his fury nor disdain,
That can the Gods record: before whose sight
He lay fast wrapped in Vulcans subtle chain.
He that on earth yet hath not felt our power,
Let him behold the fall and cruel spoil
Of thee fair Troy, of Asia the flower,
So foul defast, and leveled with the soil.
Who forced Leander with his naked breast
So many nights to cut the frothie waives,
But Heroes love, that lay inclosde in Sest?
The stoutest hearts to me shall yield them slaves.
Who could have matched the huge Alcides strength,
Great Macedon, what force might have subdued?
Wise Scipio who overcame at length,
But we, that are with greater force endued?
Who could have conquered the golden fleece
But Iason, aided by Medeas art?
Who durst have stolen fair Helen out of Greece
But I, with love that boldened Paris heart?
What bond of nature, what restraint avails
Against our power? I vouch to witness truth.
The Myrhe tree that with shamefast tears bewails
Her fathers love, still weeps yet for ruth.
But now, this world not seeing in these days,
Such present proofs of our al-daring power,
Disdains our name, and seeks sundry ways,
To scorn and scoff, and shame us every hour,
A brat, a bastard, and an idle boy,
A rod, a staff, a whip to beat him out,
And to be sick of love, a childish toy,
These are mine honours now the world about,
My name disgrast, to raise again therefore,
And in this age, mine ancient renown
By mighty acts, intending to restore,
Down to the earth, in wrath now am I come.
And in this place, such wonders shall ye hear,
As these your stubborn, and disdainful hearts,
In melting tears, and humble yielding fear,
Shall soon relent by sight of others smarts.
This princely palace, will I enter in,
And there inflame, the fair Gismunda, so
Inraging all her secret veins within,
Through fiery love, that she shall feel much wo.
Too late repentance, thou shalt bend my bow.
Vain hope, take out my pale dead heavy shaft,
Thou fair Resemblance, foremost forth shalt go,
With Brittle joy: my self will not be least,
But after me, comes death, and deadly pain.
Thus shall ye march, till we return again,
Mean while, sit still, and here I shall you show
Such wonders, that at last with one accord,
Ye shall relent, and say that now ye know,
Love rules the world, Love is a mighty Lord,

"OVaine, vnsteadfast state of mortal things,
"Who trusts this world, leans to a brittle stay,
"Such fickle fruit, his flattering bloom forth brings
"Ere it be ripe, it falls to decay,
The joy and bliss that late I did possess,
In weal at will, with one I loved best,
Is turned now into so deep distress,
As teaches me to know the worlds unrest.
For neither wit nor princely stomachs serve
Against his force that slaies without respect,
The noble and the wretch: no doth reserve,
So much as one, for worthiness elect.
Ah me dear Lord, what well of tears may serve
To feed the streams of my foredulled eyes,
To weep thy death, as thy death doth deserve,
And wail thy want in full sufficing wise.
Ye lamps of heaven, and all ye heavenly powers,
Wherein did he procure your high disdain,
He never sought with vast huge mounting towers
To reach aloft, and ouer-view your reign,
Or what offence of mine was it unawares,
That thus your fury should on me be thrown,
To plague a woman with such endless cares,
I fear that envy hath the heavens this shown.
The Sun his glorious virtues did disdain,
Mars at his manhood mightily repind,
Yea all the Gods no longer could sustain,
Each one to be excelled in his kind.
For he my Lord surpassed them every one,
Such was his honour all the world throughout,
But now my love, oh whither art thou gone?
I know thy ghost doth hover here about,
Expecting me (thy heart) to follow thee:
And I (dear love) would fain dissolve this ^rife,
But stay a while, I may perhaps foresee
Some means to be disburdend of this life,
And to discharge the duty of a wife,
Which is, not only in this life to love,
But after death her fancy not remove.
Mean while accept of these our daily rites,
Which with my maidens I shall do to thee,
Which is, in songs to cheer our dying spirits
With hymns of praises of thy memory.

Fair daughter, I have sought thee out with g^iefe,
To ease the sorrows of thy vexed heart.
How long wilt thou torment thy father thus?
Who daily dies to see thy needles tears,
^uch bootless plaints that know nor mean nor end
(...) but increase the floods of thy lament,
And since the world knows well there e was no want
In thee, of ought that did to him belong
Yet all thou see could not his life prolong.
Why the doest thou provoke the heavens to wrath?
His doom of death was dated by his stars,
"And who is he that may withstand his fate?
By these complaints small good to him thou doest,
Much grief to me, most hurtvnto thy self,
And unto Nature greatest wrong of all.

Tell me not of the date of natures days,
Then in the April of her springing age:
No, no, it was my cruel destiny,
That spited at the pleasance of my life.

My daughter knows the proof of natures course
"For as the heavens do guide the lamp of life
"So can they search no further forth the flame,
"Then whilst with oil they do maintain the same.

Cursed be the stars, and vanish may they cursed,
Or fall from heaven, that in the dire aspect,
Abridgde the health and welfare of my love.

Gismund my joy, set all these griefs apart,
"The more thou art with hard mishap beset,
"The more thy patience should procure thine ease.

What hope of hap may cheer my hapless chance
What sighs, what tears may counteruail my cares?
What should I do, but still his death bewail,
That was the solace of my life and soul?
Now, now I want the wonted guide and stay
Of my desires, and of my wreaklesse thoughts,
My Lord, my love, my life, my liking gone,
In whom was all the fulness of my joy,
To whom I gave the first fruits of my love,
Who with the comfort of his only sight,
All cares and sorrows could from me rem^ue.
But father, now my joys forepast to tel,
Do but revive the horrors of my hell.
As she that seems in darkness to behold
The gladsome pleasures of the cheerful light.

What then avails thee fruitless thus to rue
His absence whom the heavens cannot return:
Impartial death thy husband did subdue,
Yet hath he spared thy kingly fathers life:
Who during life, to thee a double stay,
As father, and as husband will remain,
With doubled love to ease thy widows want.
Ofhim whose want is cause ofthy complaint,
Forbear thou (...) al these needless tears,
That nip the blossoms of thy beauties pride.

Father, these tears love challenges of due.


But reason saith thou should the same subdue.


His funerals are yet before my sight.


In endless moans Princes should n^t delight.


The turtle pines in loss of her true mate.


And so continues poor and desolate.


Who ca^ forget a ^well of such price?


She that hath learned to master her desires.
"Let reason work that time doth easily srame
"In meanest wits: to bear the greatest ills.

So plenteous are the springs
Of sorrows that increase my passions,
As neither reason can recure my smart,
Nor can your care, nor fatherly comfort
Appease the stormy combats of my thoughts,
Such is the sweet remembrance of his life.
Then give me leave, of pity pity me,
And as I can I shall allay these griefs.

These solitary walks thou do^st frequent,
Yield fresh occasions to thy secrete moans:
We will therefore thou keep us company,
Leaving thy maidens with their harmony.
Wend thou with us, virgins withdraw your selves.

The diverse haps which always work our care,
Our joys so far, our woes so near at hand,
Have long ere this, and daily do declare
The fickle foot on which our state doth stand.
"Who plants his pleasures here to gather root,
"And hopes his happy life will still endure,
"Let him behold how death with stealing foot
"Steps in, when he shall think his joys most sur^.
"No ransom serves to redeem our days.
If prowes could preserve, or worthy deeds,
He had yet lived whose twelve labours displays
His enddlesse fame, and yet his honour spreads.
And that gre^t king that with so small a power
Bereft the might ie Persian his crown:
Doth witness well our life is but a flower,
Though it be decked with honour and renown.

"What grows to day in favour of the heaven,
"Nursed with the sun, and with the showers sweet,
"Pluekt with the hand it withers ere even.
"So pass our days even as the rivers fleet.
The valiant Greekes that unto Troya gave
The ten years siege, left but their names behind.
And he that did so long and only save
His fathers walls, found there at last his end.
Proud Rome herself, that meanwhile laid her yoke
On the wide world, and vanquished all with war,
Yet could she not remove the fatal stroke
Of death, from them that stretched her power so far.

Look what the cruel sisters once decreed
The thunderer himself cannot remove:
They are the Ladies of our destiny,
To work beneath, what is conspired above,
But happy he that ends this mortal life,
By speedy death, who is not forced to see,
The many cares, nor feel the sundry griefs
Which we sustain, in wo and misery.
Here Fortune rules, who when she list to play,
Whirleth her wheel, and brings the high full low,
To morrow takes, what she hath given to day,
To show she can advance, and over throw.
Not Euripus unquiet flood so oft
Ebs in a day, and flows too and fro,
As Fortunes change, plucks down that was alo^t,
And mingles joy, with interchange of w^.

Who lives below, and feels not the strokes,
Which often times on highest towers do fall,
Nor blustering winds, wherewith the strongest oaks
Are rent and torn, his life is surste of all:
For he may sco^e Fortune, that hath no power
On him, that is well pleased with his estate:
He seeks not her sweets, nor fears her sower,
But lives contented in his quiet rate,
And marking how these worldly things do wade,
Rejoices to himself, and laughs to see
The folly of men, that in their wits have made,
Fortune a goddess, placed in the sky.

Dear Aunt, my sole companion in distress,
And true copartner of my thoughtful cares:
When with my self, I way my present state,
Comparing it with my forepassed days,
New heaps of cares, afresh beginnet' assay
My pensive heart: as when the glittering rays,
Of bright Phoebus, are suddenly ore-spred,
With dusky clouds, that dim his golden light,
Namely, when I, laid in my widows bed,
Amid the silence, of the quiet night,
With curious thought, the fleeting course observe,
Of gladsome youth: how soon his flower decays.
How time once past, may never have recourse,
No more then may the running streams revert,
To climb the hills, when they bin rolled down
The hollow vales, there is no curious art,
Norworldlie power, no not the gods can hold
The sway of flying time, nor him return
When he is past: all things unto his might
Must bend, and yield, unto the Iron teeth
Of eating time: this in the shedy night,
When I record, how soon my youth withdraws
It self away, how swift my pleasant spring
Runs out his race, this this (Aunt) is the cause.
When I advise me sadly on this thing,
That makes my heart, in pensive dumps dismayed.
For if I should, my springing years neglect.
And suffer youth, fruitless to fade away:
Whereto live I? or whereto was I borne?
Wherefore hath nature decked me with her grace?
Why have I tasted the delights of love?
And felt the sweets of Hymeneus bed?
But to say sooth (dear Aunt) it is not I
Sole and alone, can thus content to spend
My cheerful years: my father will not still
Prolong my mournings, which have grieved him,
And pleased me too long. Then this I crave,
To be resolved of his princely mind.
For, stood it with the pleasure of his will
To marry me, my fortune is not such,
So hard, that I so long should still persist
Makelesse alone in woeful widowhood,
And shall I tell mine Aunt? come hither then,
Give me that hand, by thine own right hand,
I charge thy heart my councels to conceal.
Late have I seen, and seeing, took delight,
And with delight, I will not say, I love,
A Prince, an Earl, a County in the Court.
But love and duty force me to refrain,
And drive away these fond affections,
Submitting them unto my fathers hest.
But this (good Aunt) this is my chiefest pain,
Because I stand at such uncertain stay.
For if my kingly father would decree
His final doom, that I must lead my life
Such as I do, I would content me then
To frame my fancies to his princely heast,
And as I might, endure the grief thereof.
But now his silence doubles all my doubts,
Whilst my suspicious thoughts twixt hope fear,
Distract me into sundry passions.
Therefore (good Aunt) this labour must be yours,
To understand my fathers will herein:
For well I know your wisdom knows the means,
So shall you both allay my stormy thoughts,
And bring to quiet my unquiet mind.

Suffices this (good Niece) that you have said,
For I perceive what sundry passions
Strive in your breast, which oftentimes ere this
Your countenance confused did bewray,
The ground whereof since I perceive to grow
On just respect of this your sole estate,
And skilful care of fleeting youths decay,
Your wise foresight such sorrowing to eschew
I much commend, and promise as I may
To break this matter, and impart your mind,
Unto your father, and to work it so,
As both your honour shall not be impeacht,
Nor he unsatisfied of your desire.
Be you no farther grieved, but return
Into your chamber. I shall take this charge,
And you shall shortly truly understand
What I have wrought, and what the king affirms.
I leave you to the fortune of my stars.

The heavens I hope will fauoury our request.
My Niece shall not impute the cause to be
In my default, her will should want effect:
But in the king is all my doubt, least he
My suite for her new marriage should reject.
Yet shall I prove him: and I heard it said,
He means this evening in the park to hunt,
Here will I wait attending his approach.

VNcouple all our hounds: Lords to the chase:
Fair sister Lucre, what's the news with you?

Si^ as I always have employed my power,
And faithful service, such as lay in me,
In my best wise, to honour you and yours:
So now, my bounden duty moves me,
Your majesty most humbly to entreat,
With patient ears, to understand the state,
Of my poreneece, your daughter.

what of her?
Is she notwell? Enjoys she not her health?
Say sister, ease me of this jealous fear?

She lives my Lord, hath her outward health,
But all the danger of her sickness lies
In the disquiet of her princely mind:

Resolve me? what afflicts my daughter so,


Since whenthe Princes hath intoumb'd her Lord
Her late disseased husband of renown:
Brother, I see, and very well perceive,
She hath not clos'de together in his grave,
All sparks of nature, kindness, nor of love:
But as she lives, so living may she feel,
Such passions as our tender hearts oppress,
Subject unto th impressions of desire:
Forwell I wot, my niece was never wrought,
Of steel, nor carved from the stony rock,
Such stern hardness, we ought not to expect,
In her, whose princely heart, and springing years,
Yet flowering in the chiefest heat of youth,
Is lead offorce, to feed on such conceits,
As easily befall that age, which asks ruth
Of them, whom nature binds by foresight
Of their grave years, and careful love to reach,
The things that are above their feeble force:
And for that cause, dread Lord although.

Sister I say.
If you esteem, or ought respect my life,
Her honour, and the welfare of our house,
Forbear, and wade no further in this speech.
Your words, are wounds, I very well perceive,
The purpose of this smooth oration:
This I suspected, when you first began,
This fair discourse with us: Is this the end
Of all our hopes, that we have promised
Unto ourselfe, by this her widowhood?
Would our dear daughter, would our only joy,
Would she f^sake us? would she leave us now?
Before she hath closed up, our dying eyes,
And with her tears, bewaild our funeral?
No other solace, doth her father crave,
But whilst the fates, maintain his dying life,
Her healthful presence, gladsome to his soul,
Which rather then he willing would for-goe,
His heart desires, the bitter taste of death:
Her late marriage, hath taught us to our grief,
That in the fruits, of her perpetual sight
Consists the only comfort and relief,
Of our unwieldy age: for what delight
What joy? what comfort? have we in this world,
Now grown in years, and ouer-worne with cares,
Subject unto the sudden stroke of death,
Already falling like the mellowed fruit,
And dropping by degrees into our grave.
But what revives us? what maintains oursoule
Within the prison of our withered breast?
But our Gismunda and her cheerful sight.
O daughter, daughter, what desert of mine,
Wherein have I been so unkind to thee?
Thou should desire to make my naked house
Yet once again stand desolate by thee?
O let such fancies vanish with their thoughts,
Tell her I am her father, whose estate,
Wealth, honour, life, and all that we possess,
Wholly relies upon her presence here.
Tell her I must account her all my joy,
Work as she will: But yet the were unjust,
To haste his death that lives by her fight

Her gentle hart abhors such ruthless thoughts.


Then let her not give place to these desires.


She craves the right that nature challenges.


Tell her the king commands otherwise.


The kings comandment always should be just.


What ere it be the kings command is just.


Just to command: but justly must he charge.


He charge justly that commands as king.


The kings command concerns the body best.


The king commands obedience of the mind.


That is exempted by the law of kind,


That law of kind to children doth belong.


In due obedience to their open wrong.


I then, as king and father, will command.


No more then may with right of reason stand.


Thou know our mind, resolve her, depart,
Return the chase, we have been chased ^nough.

He cannot hear, anger hath stopped his ears,
And ouer-loue his judgment hath decaide.
Ah my poor Niece, I shrewdly fear thy cause.
Thy just complaint shall never be relieved.

BY this I hope my aunt hath moved the king.
And knows his mind, makes return to me
To end at once all this perplexity.
Lo where she stands. Oh how my trembling heart
In doubtful thoughts pants within my breast.
For in her message doth rely my smart,
Or the sweet quiet of my troubled mind.

Niece, on the point you lately willed me
To treat of with the king in your behalf,
I brake even now with him so far, till he
In sudden rage of grief, ere I scarce had
My tale out told, praid me to stint my suite,
As that from which his mind abhorred most.
And well I see his fancy to refute,
Is but displeasure gained, and labour lost.
So firmly fixed stands his kingly will,
That till his body shall be laid in grave,
He will not part from the desired sight
Of your presence, which silder he should have,
If he had once allied you again,
In marriage to any prince or peer.
This is his final resolution.

A resolution that resolves my blood
Into the Ice-sie drops of Lethes flood,

Therefore my counsel is, you shall not stir,
Nor further wade in such a case as this:
But since his will, is grounded on your love,
And that it lies in you, to save or spill,
His old fore-wasted age: you ought t'eschew,
The thing that grieves so much his crazed heart,
And in the state you stand, content your self:
And let this thought, appease your troubled mind,
That in your hands, relies your fathers death,
Or blissful life, and since without your sight,
He cannot live, nor can his thoughts endure,
Your hope of marriage, you must then relent,
And ouer-rule these fond affections:
Least it be said, you wrought your fathers end.

Dear Aunt, I have with patient ears indurde,
The hearing of my fathers hard behest:
And since I see, that neither I my self,
Nor your request, can so preuaile with him,
Nor any sage advice persuade his mind
To grant me my desire, In willing wise,
I must submit me unto his command,
And frame my heart to serve his majesty.
And (as I may) to drive away the thoughts
That diversely distract my passions,
Which as I can, I'll labour to subdue,
But sore I fear, I shall but toil in vain,
Wherein (good Ant) I must desire your pain.

What lies in me by comfort or advice,
I shall discharge with all humility.

Who marks our former times and present years,
What we are now, and looks what we have bin,
He cannot but lament with bitter tears,
The great decay and change of all women.
For as the world wore on and waxed old,
So virtue quaild, and vice began to grow.
So that, that age, that meanwhile was of gold,
Is worse than brass, more vile than iron now,
The times were such, that if we ought believe
Of elder days) women examples were,
Of rare virtues: Lucre disdained to live
Longer then chaste: and boldly without fear
Took sharpe revenge on her enforced heart,
With her own hands: for that it not withstood
The wanton will, but yielded to the force
Of proud Tarquin, who bought her fame with blood.

Queen Artemissa thought an hepe of stones,
Although they were the wonder of that age)
A worthless grave, wherein to rest the bones
Of her dear Lord, but with bold courage,
She drank his heart, and made her lovely breast
His tomb, and failed not of wifely faith,
Of promised love, and of her bound behest,
Until she ended had her days by death.
Vlysses wife (such was her steadfastness)
Abode his slow return whole twenty years:
And spent her youthful days in pensiveness,
Bathing her widows bed with brinish tears.

The stout daughter of Cato Bratus wife, Portia
When she had heard his death, did not desire^
Longer to live: and lacking use of knife,
(A most strange thing) ended her life by fire,
And ^at what burning coals: O worthy dame!
O virtues worthy of eternal praise!
The flood of Lethe cannot wash out thy fame,
To others great reproach, shame, and dispraise.

Rare are those virtues now in women's mind,
Where shall we seek such jewels passing strange?
Scarce can you now among a thousand find
One woman steadfast: all delight in change.
Mark but this princess that lamented here,
Of late so sore her noble husbands death,
And thought to live alone without a pheare,
Behold how soon she changed hath that breath.
I think those Ladies that have lived to fore,
A mirror and a glass to women kind,
By those their virtues they did set such store,
That unto us they none bequeathed behind.
Else in so many years we might have seen
As virtuous as e^er they have been.

Yet let not us maidens condemn our kind,
Because our virtues are not all so rare:
For we may freshly yet record in mind,
There lives a virgin, one without compare:
Who of all graces hath her heavenly share.
In whose renown, and for whose happy days,
Let us record this Paean of her praise.

SO, now they feel what lordly love can d
that proudly practise to deface his nam
Invaine they wrestle with so fierce a foe,
of little sparks arise a blazing flame.
"By small occasions love can kindle heate,
"and wast the Oken breast to cinder dust:

I have enticed to forget
her widows weeds, and burn in raging lust:
Twas I ^nforst her father to deny
her second marriage to any peer:
Twas I allured her once again to try
the sower sweets that Lovers buy too dear.
The County Palurin, a man right wise,
a man of exquisite perfections:
I have like wounded with her pearsing eyes,
and burnt her heart with his reflections.
These two shall joy in tasting of my sweet,
to make them prove more feelingly the grief
That bitter brings: for when their joys shall fleet,
their dole shall be increased without relief.
Thus love shall make worldlings to know his might,
thus love shall force great princes to obey.
Thus love shall daunt each proud rebelling spirit,
thus love shall wreak his wrath on their decay.
Their ghosts shall do black hell to understand,
how great and wonderful a God is Love:
And this shall learn the Ladies of this land,
with patient minds his mighty power to prove.
From whence I did descend now will I mount,
to Jove, and all the Gods in their delights:
In throne of triumph there will I recount,
how I by sharpe reu^nge on mortal wights,
Have taught the earth, and learned hellish spirits
to yield with fear their stubburn hearts to love:
Least their disdain, his plagues and vengeance prove

Pity, that moves every gentle heart,
To rue their griefs, that be distressed in pain,
Enforces me, to wail my nieces smart,
Whose tender breast, no long time may sustain,
The restless toil, that her unquiet mind,
Hath caused her feeble body to endure,
But why it is, (alack) I must not find,
Nor know the man, by whom I might procure
Her remedy, as I of duty ought,
As to the law of kindship, doth belong,
With careful heart, the secret means I sought,
Though small effect, is of my travel sprung:
Full often as I durst, I have assaid,
With humble words, the princes to require,
To name the man, which she hath so denaid,
That it abashed me, further to desire,
Or ask from whence, those cloudy thoughts proceed,
Whose stony force: that smoky sighs forth send.
Is lively witness, how that carefnll dread,
And hot desire, within her do contend.
Yet she denies, what she confessed of yore,
And then conioynd me, to conceal the same:
She loved once, (she saith) but never more,
Nor ever will, her fancy thereto frame:
Though daily, I observed in my breast,
What sharpe conflicts, disquiet her so sore,
That heavy sleep cannot procure her rest,
But fearful dreams present her evermore
Most hideous sights her quiet to molest.
That starting oft therewith she doth awake,
to muse upon those fancies which torment
Her thoughtful heart with horror, that doth make
Her cold i will sweat break forth incontinent
From her weak limbs: and while the quiet night
Geues others rest, she turning to and fro
Doth wish for day. But when the day brings light,
She keeps her bed, there to record her woe.
As soon as when she rises flowing tears
Stream down her chekes, immixt with dedly groans
Whereby her inward sorrow so appears,
That as salt tears the cruel cause bemones.
In case she be constrained to abide
In preace of company, she scarcely may
Her trembling voice restrain it be not spied
From careful plaints her sorrows to bewray.
By which restraint the force doth so increase,
When time and place give liberty to plain.
That as small streams from running never cease,
Till they return into the seas again:
So her laments we fear will not amend,
Before they bring her Princely life to end.
To others talk when as she should attend,
Her heaped cares her senses so oppress,
That what they speak, or where their words tend
She knows not, as her answers do express.
Her chief delight is still to be alone,
Her pensive thoughts within themselves d^bate,
But whereupon this restless life is grown,
Since I know not nor how the same t'abate.
I can no more but wish it as I may,
That he which knows it would the same allay,
For which the Muses with my song shall pray.

Leave me my friends, this solitary walk
Intiseth me to break your company.
Leave me my friends, I can endure no talk.
Let me entreat this common courtesy.
WHat grecuous pain they dure which neither may
Forget their Loves, no yet enjoy their love.
I know by proof, and daily make assay,
Though Love hath brought my Ladies hart to love
My faithful love with like love to requite:
This doth not quench, but rather cause to flame
The creeping fire, which spreading in my breast
With raging heat, grants me no time of rest.
If they bewail their cruel destiny,
Which spend their love where they no love can find
Well may I plain, since Fortune hales me
To this torment of far more grievous kind.
Wherein I feel as much extremity,
As may be felt in body or in mind.
For by that sight which should recure my pain,
My sorrows are redoubled all in vain.
Now I perceive that only Ialone
Am her beloved, her looks assure me so:
The thought thereof provokes me to bemoan
Her heavy plight that grieves at my woe.
This intercourse of our affections:
I her to serve, she thus to honour me,
Bewrays the truth of our elections,
Delighting in this mutual sympathy.
Thus love for love entreats the Queen of love,
That with her help Loves solace we may prove.
I see my mistres seeks as well as I
To stay the strife of her perplexed mind:
Full fain she would our secrete company,
If she the wished way thereof might find.
Heavens have yeseen, or hath the age ofman
Recorded such a miracle as this?
In equal love two noble harts to frame,
That never spake one with another bliss,
I am assured that she doth assent,
To my relief that I should reap the same,
If she could frame the means of my content,
Keeping her self from danger of defame.
In happy hour right now I did receive
This cane from her: which gift though it be small,
Receiving it what joys I did conceive,
Within my fainting spiri^ therewithal,
Who knows love arightmay well conceive,
By like adventures that to them befall.
"For needs the Lover must esteem that well,
"Which comes from her with whom his hart doth dwell.
Assuredly it is not without cause
She gave me this: something she meant thereby:
For therewithal I might perceive her pause
Awhile, as though some weighty thing did lie
Upon her heart, which he concealed, because
The standers by should not our loves descry.
This clift bewrays that it hath been disclosed.
Perhaps herein she hath something inclosde.
O thou great th^nderer! who would not serve,
Where wit with beauty chosen have their place,
Who could devise more wisely to conserve
Things from suspect? O Venus, for this grace
That deigns me, all unworthy, to deserve
So rare a love, in heaven I should thee place.
This sweet letter some joyful news conteines.
I hope it brings recure to both our pains.
Mine own, as I am yours, whose hear: (I know)
No less then mine, for lingering help of woe
Doth long too long: Love tendering your case
And mine, hath taught recure of both our pain.
My chamber flower doth hide a cave, where was
An old vautes mouth: the other in the plain
Doet^ rise Southward, a furlong from the wall,
Descend you there. This shall suffice. And so
I yield my self, mine honour, life and all,
To you. Use you the same as there may grow
Your bliss and mine (mine Earl) and that the same
Free may abide from danger of defame.
Farewell, and fare so well as that your joy
Which only can, may comfort mine annoy.
Yours more then his own, Gismund.
O blissful chance my sorrows to assuage.
Wonder of nature, marvel of our age,
Comes this from Gismund? did she thus enfold
This letter in the cane? may it be so?
It were too sweet a joy, I am deceu'd.
Why shall I doubt, did she not give it me?
Therewith she smiled, she ioyde, she raught the cane
And with her own sweet hand she gave it me:
And as we danst, she dallied with the cane,
And sweetly whispered I should be her king,
And with this cane the sceptre of our rule,
Command the sweets of her surprised heart.
Therewith she raught from her alluring locks,
This golden tress, the favour of her grace,
And with her own sweet hand she gave it me.
O peerless Queen, my joy, my hearts d^cree;
And thou fair Letter, how shall I welcome thee:
Both hand and pen wherewith thou written were,
Blessed may ye be, such solace that impart,
And blessed be this cane, and he that taught
Thee to descry the hidden entry thus:
Not only through a dark and dreadful vaut,
But fire and sword, and through what ever be,
Mistres of my desires, I come to thee.

Right mighty is thy power, O cruel Love,
High Jove himself cannot resist thy bow,
Thou sent him down, even fro the heavens above,
In sundry shapes here to the earth below,
Then how shall mortal men escape thy dart?
The fervent flame, and burning of thy fire?
Since that thy might is such, and since thou art,
Both of the seas and land the Lord and sire.

But why doth he that sprung from Ioues high head?
And Phoebus sister shene, despise thy power?
No fears thy bow? why have they always led
A maiden life, and kept untouched the flower?
Why doth Aegistus love? and to obtain
His wicked will, conspires his uncles death,
Or why doth Phaedra burn? for whom is slain
Theseus chaste son? or Helen false of faith?
"For Love assauts not but the idle heart,
"And such as live in pleasure and delight,
"He turns oft their gladsome joys to smart,
"Their play to plaint, their sport into despite,
Tis true that Dian chase with her bow,

The flying Hart, the Goat and fomie Bore,
By hill, by dale, in heat, in frost, in snow,
She recks not, but labours evermore.
Love seeks not her, no knows where her to find,
Whilst Paris kept his heard on Ida down
Cupid ne'er sought him out, for he is blind.
But when he left the field to live in town,
He fell into his snare, and brought that brand
From Greece to Troy, which after set on fire
Strong Ilium, and al the Phryges land:
"Such are the fruits of love, such is his hire.

Who yields unto him his captive heart,
Ere he resist, and holds his open breast
Withouten war to take his bloody dart,
Let him not think to shake off when him list
His heavy yoke. "Resist his first assault,
"Weak is his bow, his quenched brand is cold,
"Cupid is but a child, and cannot daunt
"The mind that bears him, or his virtues bold.
But he geues poison so to drink in gold.
And hides under pleasant baits his hooke,
But ye beware, it will be hard to hold
Your greedy minds, but if ye wisely look
What sly snake lurks under those flowers gay,
But ye mistrust some cloudy smokes, and fear
A stormy shower after so fair a day.
Ye may repent, and buy your pleasure dear,
For seldom times is Cupid wont to send
"Unto anidle love a joyful end.

SIsters be gone, bequeath the rest to me,
That yet belongs unto this Tragaedie.
Vengeance and death from forth the deepest hell
I bring the cursed house where Gismund dwells.
Sent from the grisly god that holds his reign
In Tartars ugly Realm, where Pelops sire
(Who with his own sons flesh whom he had slain
Did feast the Gods) with famine hath his hire.
To gape and catch at flying fruits in vain,
And yielding waters to his gasping throat,
Where stormy Aeoles son with endless pain
Rowles up the rock: where Titius hath his lot
To feed the Gripe that gnawes his growing heart.
Where proud Ixion wherled on the wheel,
Pursues himself: where due deserved smart
The damned Ghosts in burning flame do feel,
From thence I mount: thither the winged God,
Nephew to Atlas, that vpholds the sky,
Of late down from the earth, with golden rod,
To Stigian Firrie, Salerne souls did guide,
And made report, how Love that lordly boy,
Highly disdaining his renownes decay,
Slipped down from heaven, have filled with fickle joy,
Gismunds heart, and made her throw away
Chastnes of life, to her immortal shame,
Minding to show by proof of her foul end,
Some terror unto those that scorn his name,
Black Pluto (that once found Cupid his friend
In winning Ceres daughter Queen of hells)
And Parthie moved by the grieved Ghost
Of her late husband, that in Tartar dwells,
Who praid due pains for her, that thus hath lost
All care of him, and of her chastity,
The Senate then of hell by grave advice
Of Minos, Aeac, and of Radamant,
Commands me draw this hateful air, and rise
Above the earth, with dole and death to dant
The pride and present joys, wherewith these two
Feed their disdained hearts, which now to do
Behold I come, with instruments of death.
This stinging snake which is of hate and wrath,
I'll fix upon her fathers heart full fast,
And into hers, this other will I cast,
Whose rankling venom shall infect them so
With ^nuious wrath, and with recurelesse wo
Each shall be others plague and overthrow.
Furies must aide when men surcease to know
Their gods: and hell sends forth revenging pain
On those whom shame from sin cannot restrain.
GOds are ye guyds of justice and revenge?
O thou great Thunderer, doest thou behold
With watchful eyes the subtle scapes of men
Hardened in shame, seared up in the desire
Of their own lusts: why then dost thou withhold
The blast of thy revenge? why doest thou grant
Such lively breath, such lewd occasion
To execute their shameless villainy?
Thou, thou art cause of al this open wrong,
Thou that forbear'st thy vengeance all too long,
If thou spare them rain then upon my head
The fullness of thy plagues with deadly ire,
To reeve this ruthful soul, who all too sore
Burns in the wrathful torments of revenge.
O earth the mother of each living wight,
Open thy womb, devour this withered corps,
And thou O hell, (if other hell there be
Then that I feel) receive my soul to thee.
O daughter, daughter, wherefore do I grace
Her with so kind a name? O thou fond girl,
The shameful ruin of thy fathers house,
Is this my hoped joy? is this the stay
Must glad my griefe-ful years that wast away?
For life which first thou did receive from me,
Ten thousand deaths shall I receive by thee?
For al the joys I did repose in thee,
Which I (fond man) did settle in thy sight,
Is this my recompense? that I must see
The thing so shameful, and so villainous,
That would to God this earth had swalowed
This worthless burden into lowest deeps,
Rather then I (accursed) had beheld
The sight that hourly massacars my life.
O whether, whether fly thou forth my soul?
O whether wanders my tormented mind?
Those pains that make the miser glad of death
Have c^az'd on me, and yet I cannot have
What villains may command, a speedy death.
Whom shall I first accuse for this outrage?
That God that guides all, and guides so
This damned deed. Shall I blaspheme their names?
The gods the authors of this spectacle:
Or shall I justly curse that cruel star
Whose influence assigned this destiny?
But nay, that traitor, shall that vile wretch live
By whom I have receau'd this injury?
Or shall I longer make account of her
That fondly prostitutes her widows shame?
I have bethought me what I shall request.

On bended knees, with hands heaved up to heaven
This (sacred senate of the Gods) I crave,
First on the traitor your counsming ire:
Next, on the cursed strumpet dire revenge:
Last, on my self, the wretched father, shame.
Oh could I stamp, and therewithal command
Armies of Furies to assist my heart,
To prosecute due vengeance on their souls.
Hear me my friends, but as ye love your lives,
Reply not to me, hearken and stand amazed,
When I (as is my wont) oh fond delight,
Went forth to seek my daughter, now my death,
Within her chamber (as I thought) she was,
But there I found her not, I deemed then
For her disport she and her maidens were
Down to the garden walked to comfort them,
And thinking thus, it came into my mind
There all alone to tarry her return:
And thereupon I (weary) threw my self
Upon her widows bed (for so I thought)
And in the curten wrapped my cursed head.
Thus as I lay anon I might behold
Out of the vaut up through her chamber floor
My daughter Gismund bringing hand in hand
The County Palurin, alas it is too true,
At her beds feet this traitor made me see
Her shame, his treason, and my deadly grief.
Her Princely body yielded to this thief.
The high despite whereof so wounded me
That traunce-like, as a senseless stone I lay,
For neither wit, nor tongue could use the mean
To express the passions of my pained heart.
Forceless, perforce, I sunk down to this pain,
As greedy famine doth constrain the hawk,
Peecemeale to rent and tear the yielding pray:
So fared it with me in that heavy stound,
But now what shall I do? how may I seek
To ease my mind that burns with desire
Of dire revenge? For never shall my thoughts
Grant ease unto my heart, till I have found
A mean of vengeance to requite his pains,
That first conveyed this sight unto my soul.
Renuchio.


What is your Highness will?


Call my daughter: my heart boils till I see
Her in my sight, to whom I may discharge
All the unrest that thus distempers me.
Should I destroy them both? O gods ye know
How near and dear our daughter is to us.
And yet my rage persuades me to imbrue
My thirsty hands in both their trembling bloods,
Therewith to cool my wrathful furies heate.
But Nature, why repin'st thou at this thought?
Why should I think upon a fathers debt
To her that thought not on a daughters due?
But still me thinks if I should see her die,
And therewithal reflex her dying eyes
Upon mine eyes, that sight would slit my heart.
Not much unlike the Cocatrice, that slaies
The object of his foul infections.
Oh what a conflict doth my mind endure?
Now fight my thoughts against my passions:
Now strive my passions against my thoughts.
Now sweates my heart, now i will cold falls it dead.
Help heavens, and succour ye Celestial powers,
Infuse your secrete virtue on my soul.
Shall nature win? shall justice not preuaile?
Shall I (a king) be proved partial?
"How shall our Subjects then insult on us,
"When our examples (that are light to them)
"Shall be eclipsed with our proper deeds?
And may the arms be rented from the tree?
The members from the body be disseuer'd?
And can the heart endure no violence?
My daughter is to me mine only heart,
My life, my comfort, my continuance,
Shall I be then not only so unkind
To pass all natures strength, and cut her off.
But therewithal so cruel to my self,
Against all law of kind to shred in twain
The golden thread that doth us both maintain.
But were it that my rage should so command,
And I consent to her untimely death,
Were this an end to all our miseries?
No, no, her ghost will still pursue our life.
And from the deep her bloodles gastfull spirit
Will as my shadow in the shining day,
Follow my footsteps till she take revenge.
I will do thus therefore: the traitor dies,
Because he scorned the favour of his king,
And our displeasure wilfully incurde:
His slaughter, with her sorrow for his blood,
Shall to our rage supply delightful food.

What is't your Majesty commands?


Iulio, if we have not our hope in vain,
Nor all the trust we do repose in thee:
Now must we try if thou approve the same.
Herein thy force and wisdom we must see,
For our command requires them both of thee.

How by your Graces bounty I am bound,
Beyond the common bond wherein each man
Stands bound unto his king, how I have found
Honour and wealth by favour in your sight,
I do acknowledge with most thankful mind.
My truth (with other means to serve your Grace,
What ever you in honour shall assign)
Hath sworn her power true vassal to your hest,
For proof let but your Majesty command
I shall unlock the prison of my soul,
(Although unkindly horror would gaine-say)
Yet in obedience to your Highness will,
By whom I hold the tenor of this life,
This hand and blade will be the instruments,
To make pale death to grapple with my heart.

Well, to be short (for I am grieved too long
By wrath without revenge) I think you know
Meanwhile a Palace builded strong
For war, within our Court, where dreadlesse peace
Hath planted now a weaker entrance.
But of that palace yet one vaut remains,
Within our Court, the secret way whereof
Is to our daughter Gismunds chamber laid:
There is also another mouth hereof,
Without our wall: which now is ouergrowen,
But you may find it out, for yet it lies
Directly South a furlong from our place:
It may be known, hard by an ancient stoop,
Where grew an Oak in elder days decaide,
There will we that you watch, there shall you see
A villain traitor mount out of a vaut:
Bring him to us, it is th'Earle Palurin,
What is his fault neither shall you enquire,
Nor list we to disclose, these cursed eyes
Have seen the flame, this heart hath felt the fire
That cannot else be quenched but with his blood.
This must be done: this will we have you do.

Both this, and else what ever you think good.


REnugio depart, leave us alone.

Gismund, if either I could cast aside
All care of thee: or if thou would have had
Some care of me, it would not now betide
That either thorough thy fault my joy should fade,
Or by thy folly I should bear the pain
Thou hast procured: but now tis neither I
Can shun the grief: whom thou hast more the slain
Nor may thou heal, or ease the grievous wound,
Which thou hast given me. That unstained life
Wherein I joyed, and thought it thy delight,
Why hast thou lost it? Can it be restored?
Where is thy widowhood, there is thy shame.
Gismund, it is no mans, nor men's report,
That have by likely proofs enformd me thus.
Thou know how hardly I could be induced
To vex my self, ^nd be displeased with thee,
With flying tales of flattering Sycophants.
No, no, there was in us such settled trust
Of thy chaste life, and uncorrupted mind:
That if these eyes had not beheld thy shame,
Invaine ten thousand censures could have told,
That thou did once vnprincelike make agree
With that vile traitor County Palurin.
Without regard had to thy self or me,
Vnshamefastly to stain thy state and mine.
But I unhappiest have beheld the same,
And seeing it, yet feeleth' exceeding grief
That slaies my heart with horror of that thought.
Which grief commands me to obey my rage,
And Justice urges some extreme revenge,
To wreak the wrongs that have been offred us.
But Nature that hath locked within thy breast
Two lives: the same inclines me to spare
Thy blood, and so to keep mine own vnspilt.
This is that ouerweening-loue I bear^
To thee vnduetifull, and undeserved.
But for that traitor, he shall surly die,
For neither right nor nature doth entreat
For him, that wilfully without all awe
Of gods, or men, or of our deadly hate,
Incurde the just displeasure of his king.
And to be brief, I am content to know
What for thy self thou can object to us,
Why thou should not together with him die,
So to assuage the griefs that overthrow
Thy fathers heart.
O king, and father, humbly give her leave
To plead for grace, that stands in your disgrace.
Not that she recks this life: for I confess
I have deserved, when so it pleases you,
To die the death. Mine honour and my name
(As you suppose) distained with reproach,
And well contented shall I meet the stroke
That must dissever this detested head
Fro these lewd limbs. But this I wish were known
That now I live not for my self alone.
For when I saw that neither my request,
Nor the entreaty of my careful Aunt,
Could win your Highness pleasure to our will:
"Then Love, heate of the heart, life of the soul,
"Fed by desire, increasing by restraint,
Would not endure controlment any more:
But violently enforst my feebled heart.
For who am I alas, still to resist
Such endless conflicts? To relent and yield
Therewith I chose him for my Lord and pheare.
Guiszard mine Earl that holds my love full dear,
Then if it be so settled in your mind,
He shall not live because he dared to love
Your daughter. Thus I give your Grace to know
Within his heart there is inclosde my life.
Therefore O father, if that name may be
Sweet to your ears, and that we may preuaile
By name of father, that you favour us.
But otherwise, if now we cannot find
That which our falsed hope did promise us.
Why then proceed, and rid our trembling hearts
Of these suspicions: since neither in this case
His good deserts in service to your Grace,
Which always have bin just, nor in desires
May mitigate the cruel rage of grief.
That strains your heart, but that mine Earl must die
Then all in vain you ask what I can say
Why I should live, suffices for my part
To say I will not live, and so resolve.

Dare thou so desperate decree thy death.


A dreadles heart delights in such decrees.


Thy kind abhors such unkindly thoughts.


Unkindly thoughts they are to them that live
In kindly love.

As I do unto thee.


To take his life who is my love to me.


Have I then lost thy love?


If he shall lose
His life, that is my love.

Thy love. Be gone.
Return unto thy chamber.

I will go.


IF it please your highness hither have we brought
This captive Earl as you commanded us.
Who (as we were foretold) even there we found
Where by your majesty we were inioin'd
To watch for him. What more your highness wills,
This heart and hand shall execute your hest.

Iulio we thank your pains. Ah Palurin,
Have we deserved in such traitorous sort
Thou should abuse our kingly courtesies,
Which we too long in favour have bestowed
Upon thy false-dissembling hart with us.
What grief thou therewithal hast thrown on us
What shame upon a house, what dire distress,
Our soul endures, cannot be uttered.
And durst thou villen dare to undermine
Our daughters chamber, durst thy shameless face
Be bold to kiss her: th'rest we will conceal.
Suffices that thou know I too well know
All thy proceedings in thy private shames.
Herin what hast thou won? thine own content,
With the displeasure of thy Lord and king.
The thought whereof if thou had had in mind
The least remorse of love and loyalty
Might have restraind thee from so foul a fact.
But Palurin, what may I deem of thee,
Whom neither fear of gods, nor love of him
(Whose Princely favour hath been thine vpreare)
Could quench the fuel of thy lewd desires.
Wherefore content thee that we are resolved
(And therefore laid to snare thee with this bait)
That thy just death, with thine effused blood,
Shall cool the heate and choler of our mood.

My Lord the ^ing, neither do I mislike
Your sentence, nor do your smoking sighs
Reached from the entrails of your boiling heart,
Disturb the quiet of my calmed thoughts:
For this I feel, and by experience prove,
Such is the force and endless might of love,
As never shall the dread of carren death
That hath enuide our joys, invade my breast,
For if it may be found a fault in me
(That evermore have loved your Majesty)
Likewise to honour and to love your child,
If love unto you both may be a fault,
(...) unto her my love exceeds compare,
Then this hath been my fault, for which I joy
That in the greatest lust of all my life,
I shall submit for her sake to endure
The pangs of death. Oh mighty Lord of love
Strengthen thy vassal, boldly to receive
Large wounds into this body for her sake.
Then use my life or death, my Lord and king,
For your relief to ease your grieved soul:
For whether I live, or else that I must die,
To end your pains I am content to bear:
Knowing by death I shall bewray the truth
Of that sound heart which living was her own,
And did alive for her that lived mine,

Thine Palurin, what, lives my daughter thine?
Traitor thou wrongst me, for she lives mine.
Rather I wish ten thousand sundry deaths,
Then I to live and see my daughter thine.
Thine, that is dearer then my life to me?
Thine, whom I hope to see an Empress?
Thine, whom I cannot pardon from my sight?
Thine, unto whom we have bequeathed our crown?
Iulio, we will that thou inform from us
Renuchio the Captain of our Guard,
That we command this traitor be conveyed
Into the dungeon underneath our Tower,
There let him rest until he be resolved
What further we intend, which to understand,
We will Renuchio repair to us.

O that I might your Majesty entreat
With clemency to beutifie your seat,
Toward this Prince distressed by his desires,
Too many, all too strong to captivate

"This is the soundest safety for a king
"To cut them off that vex or hinder him.

"This have I found the safety of a king,
"To spare the Subjects that do honour him.

Have we been honoured by this leachers lust?


No, but by this devout submission.


Our fortune says we must do what we may.


"This is praise-worth, not to do what you may.


And may the Subject countermand the king?


No, but entreat him.


What he shall decree.


What wisdom shall discern.


Nay what our word
Shall best determine. We will not reply.
Thou know our mind, our heart cannot be easd,
But with the slaughter of this Palurin.

O thou great God, who from thy hiest throne
Hast stooped down, and felt the force of love,
Bend gentle ears unto the woeful moan,
Of me poor wretch, to grant that I require:
Help to persuade the same great God, that he
So far remit his might, and slack his fire
From my dear Ladies kindled heart, that she
May hear my death without her hurt,
Herface, wherein there is as clear a light
As in the rising moon: let not her cheeks
As red as is the partie-coloured rose.
Be paled with the news hereof and so
I yield my self, my silly soul, and all,
To him, for her, for whom my death shall show
I lived, and as I lived, I did her thrall.
Grant this thou Thunderer: this shall suffice,
My breath to vanish in the liquid skies.

Who doth not know the fruits of Paris love,
Nor understand the end of Helens ^oy,
He may behold the fatal overthrow
OfPriams house, and of the town of Troy.
His death at last, and her eternal shame,
For whom so many a noble knight was slain.
So many a Duke, so many a Prince of fame
Bereft his life, and left there in the plain.
Medeas armed hand, Elizas sword,
Wretched Leander drenched in the flood.
Phillis so long that waited for her Lord
All these too dearly bought their loves with blood.

But he in virtue that his Lady serves
Newils but what unto her Honour longs,
Heneuer from the rule of reason swarues,
He feels not the pangs, no raging throngs
Of blind Cupid: he lives not in despair
As done his servants: neither spends his days
In joy, and care, vain hope, and throbbing fear.
But seeks always what may his sovereign please
In honour: he that thus serves, reapes the fruit
Of his sweet service: and no jealous dread
Nor base suspect of ought to let his suit
(Which causes oft the lovers hart to bleed)
Doth fret his mind, or burns in his breast:
He wayleth not by day, nor wakes by night,
When every other living thing doth rest.
Nor finds his life or death within her sight.

Remember thou in virtue serve therefore
Thy chaste Lady: beware thou do not love
As meanwhile Venus did the fair Adonne,
But as Diana loved the Amazons son.
Through whose request the gods to him alone
Restored new life: the twine that was undone
Was by the sisters twisted up again.
The love of virtue in thy Ladies looks,
The love of virtue in her learned talk,
This love yields matter for eternal books.
This love intiseth him abroad to walk,
There to invent and write new rondelaies
Of learned conceit, her fancies to allure
To vain delights, such humours he allaies,
And sings of virtue and her garments pure.

Desire not of thy Sovereign the thing
Whereof shame may ensue by any mean:
Nor wish thou ought that may dishonour bring.
So meanwhile did the learned Tuscan serve
His fair Lady: and glory was their end.
Such are the praises Lovers done deserve,
Whose service doth to virtue and honour tend.

OH cruel fate, oh miserable chance
Oh dire aspect of hateful destinies,
Oh wo may not be told: sufficed it not
That I should see and with these eyes behold
So foul, so bloody, and so basea deed:
But more to aggrauate the heavy cares
Of my perplexed mind, must only I
Must I alone be made the messenger,
That must deliver to her Princely ears
Such dismal news? as when I shall disclose
I know it cannot but abridge her days.
As when the thunderer and three forked fire
Rent through the clouds by Ioues almighty power
Breaks up the bosom of our mother earth,
And burns her heart before the heat be felt.
In this distress whom should I most bewail,
My woe, that must be made the messenger
Of these unworthy and unwelcome news?
Or shall I moan thy death, O noble Earl?
Or shall I still lament the heavy hap
That yet, O Queen, attends thy funeral.

What moans be these? Renuchio is this Salerne I see?
Doth here king Tancred hold the awful cronw?
Is this the place where civil people be?
Or do the savage Scythians here abound?

What mean these questions? whether tend these words?
Resolve us maidens, release our fears.
What ever news thou bring, discover them,
Deteine us not in this suspicious dread,
''The thought whereof is greater then the woe.

O whither may I cast my looks? to heaven?
Blackpitchy clouds from thence rain down r^uenge
The earth shall I behold? stained with the gore
Of his heart blood that did most innocent.
Which way so ere I turn mine eyes, me thinks
His butchered corps stands staring in my face.

We humbly pray thee to forbear these words
So full of terror to our maiden hearts:
''The dread of things unknown breeds the suspect
''Of greater dread, until the worst be known.
Tel therefore what hath chaunst, and whereunto
This bloody cup thou hold in thy hand.

Since so is your request that I shall do,
Although my mind so sorrowful a thing
Repines to tell, and though my voice eschewes
To say what I have seen: yet since your will
So fixed stands to hear for what I rue,
Your great desires I shall herein fulfil.
First by Salerne City, amids the plain,
There stands a hill, whose bottom huge and round,
Thrown out in breadth, a large space doth contain
And gathering up in height small from the ground
Still less and less it mounts: there sometime was
A goodly tower vpreard, that flowrde in fame
While fate and fortune served, but time doth pass,
And with his sway suppresses all the same:
For now the walls be euened with the plain.
And all the rest so fowly lies defast:
As but the only shade doth there remain
Of that which there was built in time forepast:
And yet that shows what worthy work tofore
Hath there been reared: one parcel of that tower
Yet stands, which eating time could not devour:
A str ong turret compact of stone and rock:
Huge without, but horrible within:
To pass to which by force of handy stroke
A crooked strait is made, that enters in
And leads into this ugly loathsome place.
Within the which carved into the ground
A deep dungeon there runs of narrow space
Dreadful and dark, where neue^ light is found:
Into this hollow cave, by cruel hest
Of king Tancred, were diverse servants sent
To work the horror of his furious breast,
Erst nourished in his rage, and now sterne bent,
To have the same performed: I woeful man
Amongst the rest, was one to do the thing
That to our charge so straightly did belong,
In sort as was commanded by the king.
Within which dreadful prison when we came,
The noble County Palurin that there
Lay chained in gives, fast fettered in his bolts,
Out of the dark dungeon we did vpreare
And hauled him thence into a brighter place,
That gave us light to work our tyranny.
But when I once beheld his manly face,
And saw his cheer, no more appauld with fear,
Of present death, then he whom never dread
Did once amate: my heart abhorred then
To give consent unto so foul a deed,
That wretched death should reeve so worthy a man
On false fortune I cried with loud complaint,
That in such sort ouerwhelmes nobility.
But he whom never grief no fear could taint,
With smiling cheer himself oft wills me,
To leave to plain his case, or sorrow make,
For him, for he was far more glad apaid
Death to embrace thus for his Ladies sake,
Then life, or all the joys of life he said.
For loss of life (quoth he) grieves me no more,
Then ioss^ of that which I (...) least,
My Ladies grief, least she should rue therefore,
Is all the cause of grief within my breast.
He praid therefore that we would make report
To her of those his last words he would say:
That though he never could in any sort
Her gentleness requite, nor never lay
Within his power to serve her as he would,
Yet she possessed his heart with hand and might,
To do her all the honour that he could.
This was to him of all the joys that might
Revive his heart, the chiefest joy of al,
That, to declare the faithful heart which he
Did bear to her, fortune so well did fall,
That in her love he should both live and die.
After these words he staid, and spake no more,
But joyfully beholding us eachone,
His words and cheer amazed us so sore
That still we stood: when forthwith thereupon
But why slack you (quoth he) to do the thing
For which you come? make speed and stay no more
Perform your masters will: now tel the king
He hath his life for which he longed so sore:
And with those words himself with his own hand
Fastened the bands about his neck. The rest
Wondering at his stout heart, astonished stand
To see him offer thus himself to death.
What stony breast, or what hard heart of flint
Would not relent to see this dreery sight?
So goodly a man, whom death nor fortunes dint
Could once disarm, murdered with such despite.
And in such sort bereft amidst the flowers
Of his fresh years, that ruthful was to seen:
"For violent is death, when he devours
"Young men, or virgins, while their years be green.
Lo now our servants seeing him take the bands
And on his neck himself to make them fast:
Without delay set to their cruel hands,
And sought to work their fierce intent with hast,
They stretch the bloody bands, and when the breath
Began to fail his breast, they slackt again.
Thrice did they pull, and thrice they losed him,
So did their hands repine against their hearts:
And oft times losed to his greater pain.
"But date of death that fixed is so fast,
"Beyond his course there may no wight extend,
For strangled is this noble Earl at last,
Bereft of life, unworthy such an end.

O daned deed.


What deem you this to be
Al the said news that I have to vnfould?
Is here (think you) end of the cruelty
That I have seen?

Could any heavier woe
Be wrought to him, then to destroy him so?

What, think you this outrage did end so well?
The horror of the fact, the greatest (...),
The massaker, the terror is to tell.

Alack what could be more? they threw percase
The dead body to be deuourd and torn
Of the wild beasts.

Would God it had been cast a savage pray
To beasts and birds: but lo, that dreadful thing
Which even the tiger would not work, but to
Suffice his hunger: that hath the tyrant king
Withouten ruth commanded us to do,
Only to please his wrathful heart withal.
Happy had been his chance, too happy alas,
If birds, or beasts had eaten up his corps,
Yea heart and all: within this cup I bring,
And am constrained now unto the face
Of his dear Lady to present the same.

What kind of cruelty is this you name?
Declare foo^hwith, and whereunto doth tend
This farther plaint.

After his breath was gone,
Forced perforce thus from his panting breast
Straight they dispoiled him, and not alone
Contented with his death, on the dead corps
Which ravenous beasts forbear to lacerate,
Even upon this our villens fresh begun
To show new cruelty: forthwith they pearce
His naked belly, and unripped it so,
That out the bowels gushed: who can rehearse
Their tyranny, wherewith my heart yet bleeds.
The warm entralles were torn out of his breast.
Within their hands trembling not fully dead,
His veins smok'd, his bowels all to (...)
Ruthless were rent, and thrown about the place:
All clottered lay the blood in lumps of gore,
Sprent on his corps, and on his paled face,
His trembling heart, yet leaping, out they tore,
And cruelly upon a rapier
They fixed the same, and in this hateful wise
Unto the king this heart they do present:
A sight longd for to feed his ireful eyes.
The king perceiving each thing to be wrought
As he had wild, (...) to behold
Upon the bloody sword the pierced heart,
He calls then for this massy cup of gold,
Into the which the woeful heart he cast,
And reaching me the same, now go, quoth (...),
Unto my daughter, and with speedy hast
Present her this, and say to her from me,
Thy father (...) here in this cup thee sent
That thing to joy and comfort thee withal,
Which thou loved best, even as thou were content
To comfort him with his chief joy of all.

O hateful fact! O passing cruelty!
O murder wrought with too much hard despit^e
O heinous deed, which no posterity
Will once believe!

Thus was Earl Palurin
Strangled unto the death, yea after death
His heart and blood disboweled from his breast:
But what avails (...)? it is but breath
Forewasted all in vain: why do I rest
Here in this place? why go I not and do
The hateful message to my charge committed?
Oh were it not that I am forced thereto,
By a kings will, here would I stay my feet,
No one whit farther wade in this intent:
But I must yield me to my Princes hest,
Yet doth this somewhat comfort mine unrest,
I am resolved her grief not to behold,
But get me gone my message being told.
Where is the Princess chamber?

Lo where she comes

THy father, O Queen, here in this cup hath sent
The thing to joy and comsort thee withal
Which thoulouedst best, even as thou wast content
To comfort him with his chief joy of all.
I thank my father, and thee gentle squire,
For this thy travel take thou for thy pains
This bracelet, and commend me to the king.

So now is come the long expected hour,
The fatal hour I have so looked for,
Now hath my father satisfied his thirst
With guiltless blood which he so coveted
What brings this cup? (ay me) I thought no less,
It is mine Earles, my Counties pierced heart,
Dear heart, too dearly hast thou bought my (...)
Extremely rated at too high a price.
Ah my sweet heart, sweet wast thou in thy life,
But in thy death thou proves passing sweet.
A fitter hearce then this of beaten gold,
Could not be lotted to so good an heart:
My father therefore well provided thus
To close and wrap thee up in massy gold,
And there withal to send thee unto me,
To whom of duty thou doest best belong.
My father hath in all his life bewraid
A princely care and tender love to me:
But this surpasses, in his later days
To send me this, mine own dear heart to me.
Were thou not mine, dear hart, whilst that my love
Danced and plaid upon thy golden strings?
Art thou not mine (dear heart) now that my love
Is fled to heaven, and got him golden wings?
Thou art mine own, and still mine own shalt be
Therefore my father sends thee to me.
Ah pleasant harborough of my hearts thought!
Ah sweet delight, the quickner of my soul
Seven times accursed be the hand that wrought
Thee this despite, to mangle thee so foul:
Yet in this wound I see mine own true love,
And in this wound thy magnanimity,
And in this wound I see thy constancy.
Go gentle heart, go rest thee in thy tomb,
Receive this token at thy last farewell:

Thine own true heart anon will follow thee,
Which panting hastes for thy company.
Thus hast thou run (poor heart) thy mortal race,
And rid thy life from fickle fortunes snares,
Thus hast thou lost this world, and worldly cares,
And of thy foe, to honour thee withal,
Receau'd a golden grave, to thy desert,
Nothing doth want to thy just funeral,
But my salt tears to wash thy bloody wound.
Which to the end thou might receive, behold
My father sends thee in this cup of gold,
And thou shalt have them, though I was resolved
To shed no tears, but with a cheerful face
Once did I think to wet thy funeral
Only with blood, and with no weeping eye.
This done, forthwith my soul shall fly to thee,
For therefore did my father send thee me.
Ah my pure heart, with sweeter company,
Or more content, how safer may I prove
To pass to places all unknown with thee.
Why die I not therefore? why do I stay?
Why do I not this woeful life forgo,
And with these hands enforce this breath away?
What means this gorgeous glittering head attire
How ill (...) these billam^nts of gold
Thy mournfu widowhood? away with them,
So let thy tresses flaring in the wind
Untrimmed hang about thy bared neck:
Now hellish furies set my heart on fire,
Bolden my courage, strengthen ye my hands
Against their kind, to do a kindly deed:
But shall I then vnwreaken down descen d?
Shall I not work some just revenge on him
That thus hath slain my love? shall not these hands
Fire his gates, and make the flame to climb^
Up to the pinnacles, with burning brands,
And on his cinders wreak my cruel teene.
Be still (fond girl) content thee first to die,
This venomed water shall abridge thy life,
This for the same intent provided I,
Which can both ease and end this raging strife.
Thy father by thy death shall have more woe,
Then fire or flames within his gates can bring:
Content thee then in patience hence to go,
Thy death his blood shall wreak upon the king.
Now not alone (a grief to die alone)
"The only mirror of extreme annoy,
But not alone, thou die my love, for I
Will be copartner o^ thy destiny.
Be merry then my soul, can thou refuse
To die with him, that death for thee did choose?

What damned fury hath possessed our Queen
Why sit we still beholding her distress?
Madame forbear, suppress this headstrong rage.

Maidens forbear your comfortable words.


O worthy Qu^, rashn^s doth overthrow
The author of his resolution.

Where hope of help is lost what boots fear?


Fear wilauoyd the sting of infamy.


May good or bad reports d^light the dead?


If of the living yet the dead have care.


An easy grief by council may be cured.


But hedstrong mischiefs princes should avoid


In headlong griefs and cases desperate?


Cal to your mind ( Gis.) you are the Queen.


Unhappy widow, wife, and paramour.


Think on the king.


The king? the tyrant king


Your father.


Yea, the murthrer of my love


His force.


the dead fear not the force of me


His care grief.


That neither cared for me
Nor grieved at the murder of my love,
My mind is settled, you with these vain words,
Withhold me but too long from my desire.
Depart ye to my chamber.

We will hast
To tel the king hereof.

I will prevent
Both you and him. Lo here, this hearty draught
The last that in this world I mean to taste,
Dreadlesse of death (mine Earl) I drink to thee.
So now work on, now doth my soul begin
To hate this light, wher^in there is no love,
No love of parents to their children,
No love of Princes to their Subjects true,
No love of Ladies to their dearest loves.
Now pass I to the pleasant land of love,
Where heavenly love immortal flourishes:
The Gods abhor the company of men,
Hell is on earth, yea hell it self is heaven
Compared with earth. I cal to wit^ h^n,
Heaven, said I? no, but hell record I call,
And thou sterne Goddess of revenging wrongs
Witness with me I die for his pure love
That lived mine.

WHere is my daughter?


Behold, here, woeful king.


Aim, break hart, thou fly forth my soul
What, doth my daughter Gis. take it so?
What hast thou done? oh let me see thine eyes,
Oh let me dress up those untrimmed locks,
Look up, sweet child, look up mine only joy,
Tis I thy father that beseeches thee:
Rear up thy body, strain thy dying voice
To speak to him, sweet Gismund speak to me.

Who stays my soul? who thus disquiets me?


Tis I thy father, ah behold my tears
Like pearled dew that trickle down my cheeks,
To wash my silver hairs.

Oh father king
Forbear your tears, your plaint will not avail.

Oh my sweetheart, hast thou receau'd thy life
From me, and wilt thou to requite the same,
Yield me my death? yea death and greater grief
To see thee die for him that did defame
Thine honour thus, my kingdom, and thy name.

Yea therefore father gave ye life to me,
That I should die, and now my date is done.
As for your kingdom, and mine own renown,
Which you affirm dishonoured to be
That fault imput^ it where it is, for he
That slew mine ^arle, and sent his heart to me,
His hands have brought this shame and grief on us
But father, yet if any spark remain
Of your dear love, if ever yet I could
So much deserve, or at your hands desire,
Grant that I may obtain this last request,

Sa^e lovely child, say on, what ere it be,
Thy father grants it willingly to thee.

My life I crave not, for it is not now
In you to give, nor in my self to save,
Nor crave I mercy for mine Earl and me,
Who hath bin slain with too much cruelty.
With patience I must awhile abide
Within this life, which now will not be long.
But this is my request, Father I pray,
That since it pleased so your majesty,
I should enjoy my love alive no more,
Yet neretheles let us not parted be,
Whom cruel death could never separate:
But as we lived and did together here,
So let our bodies be together tombde,
Let him with me, and I with him be laid
Within one shrine, where ever you appoint,
This if you grant me, as I trust you will,
Although I live not to requite this grace,
Th'immortall Gods due recompense shall give
To you for this, and so vain world farewell,
My speech is painful, and mine eie-sight fails.

My daughter dies, see how the bitter pangs
Of tyrannous death, torments her princely heart,
She looks on me, at me she shakes her head,
For me she groans, by me my daughter dies,
I, I, the author of this Tragedy.
On me, on me, ye (...) (...) down your (...)
Now (...) my daughter, (...) with (...) (...)
Oh fair in life, thrice fairer in (...) death,
Dear to thy father in thy life thou were,
But in thy death, dearest unto his heart,
I kiss thy paled cheeks, and close thine eyes,
This duty once I promised to my self,
Thou should perform to me, but ah false hope
Now ruthful wretched king what rests thee?
Wilt thou now live wasted with misery?
Wilt thou now live that with these eyes did see
Thy daughter dead? wilt thou now live to see
Her funerals, that of thy life was stay?
Wilt thou now live that wast her lives decay?
Shall not this hand reach to this heart the stroke
Mine arms are not so weak, nor are my limbs
So feebled with mine age, nor is my heart
So daunted with the dread of cowardice,
But I can wreak due vengeance on that head
That wrought the means these lovers now be dead
Iulio come near, and lay thine own right hand
Upon my thigh, now take thine oath of me.

I swear to thee, my liege Lord, to discharge
What ever thou enioynest Iulio.

First then I charge thee that my daughter have
Her last request, thou shalt within one tomb
Inter her Earl and her: and thereupon
Engrave some Royal Epitaph ofloue.
That done, I swear thee thou shalt take my corps
Which thou shalt find by that time done to death,
And lay my body by my daughters side.
Swear this, swear this I say.

I swear.
But will the king do so unkingly now.

A kingly deed the king resolves to do.


To kill himself.


To send his soul to ease.


Doth Jove command it?


Our stars copell it.


The wiseman ouerrules his stars.


So we


Undaunted should the minds of kings endure.


So shall it in this resolution.
^ulio sorbeare, and as thou love the king,
When thou shalt sec him weltering in his gore,
Stretching his limbs, and gasping in his groans
Then Iulio set to thy helping hand,
Redouble stroke on stroke, and drive the stab
Down deeper to his heart, to rid his soul.
Now stand aside, stir not a foot, least thou
Make up the fourth to fill this Tragedy.
These eyes that first beheld my daughters shame,
These eyes that longed for the ruthful sight
Of her Earles heart, these eyes that now have seen
His death, her woe, and her avenging teene:
Upon these eyes we must be first avenged.
Unworthy lamps of this accursed lump,
Out of your dwellings: so, it fits us thus
In blood and blindness to go seek the path
That leads down to everlasting night.
Why frighst thou dastard? be thou desperate,
One mischief brings another on his neck,
As mighty billows tumble in the seas.
Now daughter, see thou not how I amerce
My wrath that thus bereft thee of thy love,
Upon my head? now fathers learn by me,
Be wise, be warned to use more tenderly
The jewels of your joys. Daughter, I come.

LO here the sweets of, grisly-pale despair,
These are the blossoms of this cursed tree
Such are the fruits of too much love and care
Orewhelmed in the sense of misery.
With violent hands he that his life doth end,
His damned soul to endless night doth wend.
Now rests it that I discharge mine oath,
To see th'unhappy lovers and the king,
Laid in one tomb: I would be very loath:
You should wait here to see this mournful thing.
For I am sure, and do ye all to wit,
Through grief wherein the Lords of Salerne be,
These funerals are not prepared yet:
Nor do they think on that solemnity.
As for the fury, ye must understand,
Now she hath seen the'ffect of her desire,
She is departed, and hath left our land,
Granting this end unto her hellish ire.
Now humbly pray we that our English dames
May never lead their loves into mistrust:
But that their honours may avoid the shames
That follow such as live in wanton lust.
We know they bear them on their virtues bold
With blissful chastity so well content,
That when their lives, and loves abroad are told,
All men admire their virtuous government.
Worthy to live where Furieneuer came,
Worthy to live where love doth always see,
Worthy to live in golden trump of Fame,
Worthy to live, and honoured still to be.
Thus end our sorrows with the setting Sun:
Now draw the curtens for our Scaene is done.
R. W.

BEfore the second (...) (...) (...) (...) sweet noise of still pipes, which
sounding, L^crece (...), (...) ended by a maiden of honour with a cou^ed goddard
of gold, and drawing the curtens, she offreth unto Gismunda to taste thereof:
which when (...) had done, the maid returned, and Lucrece raises up Gismund
from her bed, and then it follows vt in Act. 2. Scen. 1.

Before this Act the Hobaies sounded a (...) Almain, and Cupid (...) after
him, Gui^ard and (...) hand in (...). (...) and L^crece, Renuchio and another
maiden of ^onor. The (...) (...), (...) genes a cane into Guiszards hand, and
they are all (...) forrth again by Cupid, Et sequitur.

Before this Act there was heard a consort of sweet music, which playing, I
ancred comes forth, draws Gismunds curte^s, (...) lies down upon her bed,
then from under the stage ascends (...). he helps up Gismund, they
amaro^slv embrace, depart. The king ar^seth enraged, then mas heard seen a
s^orm of thunder lightning, in which the ^ries rise up, Et sequitur.

Before this Act was a dead march (...), during which entered on the stage
Renuchio captain of the Guard, attended upon by the (...), they took up Guisz.
from under the stage, then after (...) (...) had kindly taken leave of them
all, a strangling cord was (...) about his neck, he haled forth by them.
Renuchio (...) it, then entering in, brings forth a standing cup of gold,
with a bloody hart reeking wh^t init, and then saith vt sequitur.

In the preface to the (...). maids, line 3. geamls, read gleams. before act 1.
l. x. with, read with. sce. ii. l. xxiiii. for fear that. r. fear of that.
sce. i. act i. l. xlvii. for by him, r. by thine. sce. i. act iii. l. xxv. for
distained r. distrained. sce. ii. l. vii. for lively breath. r. liberty. sce.
ii. act iiii. for but nay, r. but may. sce. iii. act (...). for widowhood, r.
wido^s bed. sce. ii. for meanwhile a r. meanwhile there was a. act iiii. l. xxiii.
hurt. read let not.


