TO sit on Honours seat, it is a lofty reach,
To seek for praise by making brags, oft times doth get a breach.
We list not ride the rolling rackes, that dims the crystal skies,
We mean to set no glimmering glance before your courteous eyes:
We search not Plutoes pensive pit, nor taste of Limbo lake:
We do not show of warlike fight, as shield and sword to shake:
We speak not of the powers divine, no yet of furious sprights:
We do not seek high hills to clime, nor talk of loves delights*
We do not here present to you the threshar with his flayle,
No do we here present to you the milk-maid with her payle:
We show not you of country toil, as hedger with his bill:
We do not bring the husbandman to lop and top with skill:
We pay not here the Gardeners part to plant, to set and sow:
You marvel then what wares we have to furnish out our show.
Your patience yet we crave a while till we have trimd our stall:
Then young and old come and behold our wares, buy them all.
Then if our wares shall seem to you, well woven, good fine,
We hope we shall your custom have again another time.

Lady Conscience, what shall we say to our estates,
to whom shall we complain?
O^ how shall we avridge such fates, as heaps up our pain?
Tis Lucar now that rules the rout, tis she is all in all,
^is she that holds her head so stout, in fine tis she that works our fall.
Oh Conscience, I fear, I fear a day,
that we by her and Usury shall quite be cast away.

Indeed I fear the worst, for every man doth sew
and comes from countries strange and far, of her to have view.
Although they ought to seek true Love and Conscience clear:
but Love and Conscience few do like, that ^eane on Lucars chair.
Men ought be ruled by us, we ought in them bear sway:
so should each neighbor live by other in good estate always.

For Lucar men come from Italy, Barbary, Turkie,
From Jury: nay the Pagan himself,
Indangers his body to gape for her pelf.
They forsake mother, prince country, religion, kiffe and kin,
Nay men care not what they forsake, so lady Lucar they win.
That we poor ladies may sigh te see our states thus turned and tossed,
and worse and worse is like to be, where Lucar rules the roast.

You say the truth, yet God I trust will not admit it so,
that Love and Conscience by Lucars lust shall catch an overthrow.

Good ladies rest content, and you no doubt shall see
them plagud with painful punishment for such their cruelty:
And if true Love and Conscience live from Lucars lust lascivious,
thou Fame a triple crown will give, which lasts ay victorious.

God grant that Conscience keep within the bounds of right,
and that vile Lucar do not daunt her heart with deadly spite.

And grant O God that Love be found in city, town country,
which causes wealth and peace abound, and pleases God almighty.

But Ladies, is't your pleasure to walk abroad a while,
and recreate your selves with measure your sorrows to beguile.

Pass on good Fame, your steps do frame, on you we will attend,
and pray to God that holds the rod, our states for to defend.

Nay no less than a farmer, a right honest man,
but my to^ng cannot stay me to tell what I am:
Nay, who is it that knows me not by my party coloured head?
They may well think that see me, my honesty is fled.
Tush, a fig for honesty, tut let that go.
Since men, women, and children my name and doings do know.
My name is Dissimulation, and no base mind I bear,
For my outward effects my inward zeal do declare:
For men do dissemble with their wives, their wives with them again,
So that in the hearts of them I always remain:
The child dissembles with his father, the sister with her brother,
the maiden with her mistress, and the young man with his lover,
There is Dissimulation between neighbor and neighbor, friend and friend, one
with another.
Between the servant and his master, between brother and brother,
then why make you it strange that ever you knew me,
Seeing so often I range throughout every degree?
But forget my baseness, i'll towards London as fast as I can,
to get entertainment of one of the three Ladies, like an honest man.

They say there is preferment in London to have,
Mas and there be i'll be passing and brave:
Why i'll be no more a miller, because the maidens call me dusty pole,
One thumps me on the neck, and another strikes me on the nole:
And you see I am a handsome fellow, mark the comporknance of my stature,
Faith i'll go seek peraduentures, and be a serving creature.

Whither away good fellow? I pray thee declare.

Mary i'll clare thee, to London, would thou did go there.

What if I did, would it be better for thee?

I marry should it, for I love honest company.

Agreed, there is a bargen, but what shall I call thee?

Cause thou art an honest man i'll tel thee, my name is Simplicity

A name agreeing to thy nature, but stay here comes more company.

Huff once aloft, and if I may hit in the right vain,
Where I may beguile easily without any great pain:
I will flaunt it and brave it after the lusty swash,
I'll deceive thousands, what care I who lie in the lash.

What Fraud well met, whither trauellest thou this way?

To London, to get entertainment there if I may,
Of the three ladies, Lucar, Love, and Conscience,
What care I to serve the Devil, so I may get pence?

O Fraud I know thee for a deceitful knave,
And art thou gotten so bon^acion and brave?
I knew thee when thou dwelt at a place called Grauesend,
And the guests knew thee too, because thou wast not their friend,
For when thou would bring reckoning to thy guess,
thou would say twice so much, and swear it cost thy dame no less.
So thou did deceive them, and thy dame too:
And because they spied thy knavery, away thou did go.
Then thou did go into Hartfordshyre to a place called Ware,
And because horses stood at hay for a penny a night there,
Do that thou could get nothing that kind of way,
thou did grease the horses teeth, that they should not eat hay*
And (...) tell the rider his horse no hay would eat,
Do the man would say, give him some other kind of meat.
Sir shall Igiue him ^ates, fitches peas barley, or bread,
But what ere thou gaust him, thou (...) three quarte^s when he was in bed,
And ^ow thou art so proud with thy filching coosning art,
But I think one day thou wilt be proud of the Rope and the Cart:
take a w^se fellows counsel Fraud, leave thy coosning and filching.

Thou hores^n rascal swad avaunt, i'll bang thee for thy brawling,
how dare thou defame a Gentleman that hath so large a living?

A goodly Gentleman Ostler, I think none of you al believe him.

What a clinchpoop drudge is this? I can forbear him no more.

My good friend Fraud refrain, and care not therefore,
tis Simplicity that patch, he knows not good from bad,
And to stand in contention with him, I would think you were ma^
But tell me Fraud tell me, hast thou been an Ostler in thy days?

Faith I have proved an hundred such ways,
For when I could not thrive by all other trades,
I became a squire to wai^e upon ^ades.
But then was then, and now is now, so let that pass,
I am as thou see me, what care? the devil what I was.

Y^ say you go to London, in faith have with you than.

Nay come and go with me, good honest man:
For if thou go with him, he will teach thee all his knavery,
there is none will go with him that hath any honesty.
A bots on thy ma^ley beard, I know thee thou art Dissimulation,
And hast thou got an honest mans coat to semble this fashion?
I'll tell thee what, thou wilt even semble cog with thine own father:
A couple of false knaves together, a thief and a broker:
thou makst towns folk believe thou art an honest man in the country*
yet dost nothing but cog, lye, and foist with hypocrisy.
You shall be hanged together and go alone together for me,
For if I should go the folks would say, we were knaves all three.

Friend Usury, I think we are well near at our journeys end:
But know thou whom I have espied?

No.

Fraud our great friend.

And I see another that is now come into my remembrance.

Who is that?

Mary M. Da^ie Dissimulation, a good helper, and our old acquaintance.

Now all the cards in the stock are dealt about,
the four knaves in a cluster comes ruffling out.

What Fraud and Dissimulation happily found out,
I marvel what piece of work you two go about?

Faith sir we met by chance, and towards London are ben^

And to London we hye it is our chiefest intent,
to see if we can get entertainment of the Ladies or no.

And for the self same matter even thither we go.

Then we are luckily well met, seeing we wish al for one thing,
I would we our wills and wishing might win.

Yes they will be sure to win the devil and all,
Or else they'll make a man to spue out his gall:
O that vile Usury, he lent my father a little money, for breking one day,
He took the see^simple of his house and mill quite away:
And yet he borrowed not half a quarter so much as it cost,
But I think if it had been but a shilling it had been lost:
So he killed my father with sorrow, and undid me quite,
And you deal with him sirs, you shall find him a knave full of spite,
And Simon I perse I. Symonie too, he is a knave for the nonce,
He loves to have twenty livings at once:
And if he let an honest man as I am to have one,
H^le let it so dear that he shall be undone.
And he seeks to get Parsons livings into his hand,
And puts in some odd dunce that to his payment will stand:
So, if the parsonage be worth forty or fifty pound a year,
He will give one twenty nobles to mumble service once a month there.
What rascal is he, that speaks by us such villainy?

Sirs, he was at us erewhile too, it is no matter, it is a simple soul called
Simplicity.

But here come two of the Ladies, therefore make ready.

But which of us all shall first break the matter?

Mary let Symonie do it, for he finely can flatter.

Nay sirs, because none of us shall have pre-eminence above other,
we will sing in fellowship together like brother and brother.

Of troth agreed my masters let it be so.

Nay and they sing, i'll sing too.

Good Ladies take pity, and grant our desire.




but if you refrain us, then most unhappy:
We will come we will run we will bend at our beck,
we will ply, we will hie, for fear of a check.

you will steal, you will rob, you will kill in your hate:
I deny you, I defy you, then cease off your talking,
I refrain you, I disdain you, therefore get you walking.
What Fraud, Dissimulation, Usury, and Symonie,
How dare you for shame presume so boldly,
As once to show your selves before Love and Conscience,
Not yielding your lewd lives first to repentance?
Think you not that God will plague your wicked practises,
If you intend not to amend your lives so far amiss?
Think you not God knows your thoughts words and works,
And what secret mischiefs in your hearts there lurks?
then how dare you offend his heavenly majesty,
With your dissembling deceit, your flattery, and your Usury?

Tut sirs, seeing lady Conscience is so scrupulous,
I will not speak to her, for I see it is frivolous.
But what say you lady Love, will you grant us favour?

I'll no such servants so ill of behaviour:
Servants more fitter for Lucar than Love,
And happy are they which refrain for to prove:
Shameless, pitiless, graceless, and quite past honesty,
then who of good conscience but will hate your company.

Here is scrupulous Conscience and nice Love indeed,
Tush, if they will not, others will, I know we shall speed.

But lady I stand still behind, for I am none of their compan^.

Why, what art thou? oh I know thou art simplicity.

I faith, I am simplicity, and would fain serve ye.

No, I may have no fools to dwell with me.

Why, then lady Love will you have me than?

Yes simplicity thou shalt be my man.

But shall I be your good man?

Yea my good man indeed.

I but I would be your goodman, swap up a wedding with speed

No, Love may not marry in any case with Simplicity,
But if thou wilt serve me, i'll receive it willingly,
And if thou wilt not, what remedy.

Yes i'll serve ye, but will you go in to dinner, for I am hungry?

Come lady Conscience, will you walk home from this company?

With right good will, for their sights likes not me.

Fraud is the clubbish knave, and Usury the hard hearted knave
And Symonie the diamond dainty knave,
And Dissimulation the spiteful knave of spade.
Come there any more knaves, come there any more:
I see four knaves stand on a row.

Away Drudge, be gone quickly.

I wis, do thrust out mine eyes with a Lady.

Did you ever see Gentleman so rated at before,
But it skils not, I hope one day to turn them both out at door.

We were arrantly flouted, railed at, and scoffed in our kind,
That same Conscience is a wild terror to mans mind:
Yet faith I care not, for I have borne many more than these,
When I was conversant with the Clergy beyond the Seas,
And he that will live in this world must not care what such say,
For they are blossoms blown down, not to be found after May.

Faith care that care will, for I care not a point,
I have shifted hitherto, and whilst I live I will ieopard a joint:
And at my death I will leave my inheritor behind,
That shall be of the right stamp to follow my mind:
Therefore let them prate till their hearts ache, and spit out their evil,
She cannot quail me, if she came in likeness of the great devil.

Mass Fraud, thou hast a doughty hart to make a hangman of,
For thou hast good skill to help men from the coffe,
But we were arrantly flouted, yet I thought she had not known me,
But I perceive though Dissimulation do disguise him, Conscience can see.
What though Conscience perceive it, all the world cannot beside?
Tush there be a thousand places where we our selves may provide:
But look sirs, here comes a lusty Lady towards us in haste,
But speak to her if you will, that we may be all plaste.

I pray thee do, for thou art the likeliest to speed.

Why then i'll to it with a stomach in hope of good speed,
Fair Lady, all the Gods of good fellowship kiss ye (I would say bless ye)

Thou art very pleasant full of thy roperipe, I would say rhetoric

Lady you took me at the worst, I beseech you therefore,
To pardon my boldness offending no more.

We do, the matter is not great, but what would thou have?
How shall I call thee, and what is't thou doest crave?

I am called Dissimulation, and my earnest request,
Is to crave entertainment for me and the rest,
Whose names are Fraud, Usury, and Symonie,
Great caters for your health, wealth* and prosperity.

Fra^d, Dissimulation, Usury, and Symonie,
Now truly I thank you for proffering your service to me:
You are all heartily welcome, and I will appoint straight way,
where each one in his office in great honour shall stay.
But Usury did thou never know my grandmother the old Lady Lucar of Uenice.

Yes Madame, I was servant unto her, and lived there in bliss.

But why came thou into England, seeing Uenice is a City where Usury by
Lucar may live in great glory?

I have often heard your good grandmother tell,
that she had in England a daughter, which her far did excel:
And that England was such a place for Lucar to bide,
as was not in Europe and the whole world beside:
then lusting greatly to see you and the country, she being dead,
I made hast to come over to serve you in her stead.

Gramercy Usury, doubt not but to live here as pleasantly,
and pleasanter too: but whence came you Symonie, tell me.

My birth, nursery bringing up hithertoo hath bin in Rome, that ancient
religious city:
On a time the monks a friars made a banquet, whereto they invited me
with certain other English merchants, which belike were of their
familiarity.
So talking of many matters, amongst others one began to (...)
of the abundant substance still brought to that state.
Soon said the increase of their substance and wealth,
came from other Princes, and was brought thither by ^ealth:
But the friars and monks with all the ancient company,
said that it first came, and is now upheld by me Symonie:
which the Englishmen gave ear too, then they flattred a little too much,
as English merchants can do for advantage when increase it doth such:
And being a shipboord merry, and overcome with drink on a day,
the wind served, they hoist sail, and so brought me away:
and landing here, I heard in what great estimation you were,
made bold to your honour to make my repair.

Well Symonie, I thank thee, but as for Fraud Dissimulation
I know their long continuance, and after what fashion.
Therefore Dissimulation, you shall be my steward,
An office that every mans case by you must be preferred.
And you Fraud shall be my rent-gatherer, my letter of leases my putchaser of
land,
so that many old bribes will come to thy hand.
And Usury because I know you be trusty, you shall be my secretary,
to ^eale amongst merchants, to bargen and exchange money.
And Symonie, because you are a sly fellow, have you^ tongue liberal,
we will place you over such matters as are Ecclesiastica^
And though we appoint sundry offices where now ye are in,
yet jointly we mean to use you together ofttimes in one thing.

Lady we rest at your command in ought we can or may.

Then master Dauie to my palace hast thee away,
(...) will Crafty Conveyance my butler to make ready
The best fare in the house, to welcome thee and thy company:
but stay Dissimulation, my self will go with thee.
Gentlemen i'll go before, but see in any case,
so soon as ye please resort to my place.

Doubt not fair Lady, we will not long absent be.

Fellow Symonie this fell out pat, so well as heart could wish,
we are cunning anglers, we have caught the fattest fish,
Certainly it is true that her grandmother told.
Here is good to be done by use of silver and gold.
And seeing we are so well settled in this country,
Rich and poor shall be pinched whosoever come to me.

Sir, being at Rome, and dwelling in the Friarie,
they would talk how England yearly sent over a great mass of money:
and that this little Yland was more worth to the Pope,
than three bigger Realms that had a great deal more scope:
For here were smoke pence, peter pence, and powle pence to be paid,
besides much other money that to the Popes use was made.
Why, it is but lately since the Pope received this fine,
Not much more than 33. years since, it was in Queen Maries time.
But England had never known what this great had meant,
Had friar Austen from the Pope not hither been sent.
For the Pope hearing it to be a little Yland, sent him with a great Army
over.
And winning the victory, he landed about Rye, Sandwych, or Dover.
Then he erected laws having the people in subjection,
and for the most part, England hath paid tribute so long.
I hearing of the great store and wealth in the Country,
could not choose but persuade myself the people loved symonie.

But stay your talk till some other time, we forget my Lady,

Of troth you say true, for she bad us make hast,
but my talk me thought savoured well, and had a good taste.

Me judge in my minda dat me be not very far
from de place where dwells my Lady Lucar:
But here come vne shentie mans so he do.

Pray ye heartily ^gnior leta me speaka you,
Pray ye do ye know un gentleman dat meshier Dauie do call^
Yes sir, my self am he, and what would you withal?

Good a my friend meshier Dauie, helpa me pray ye heartily,
(...) have sum acquaintance a with Madonna Lucar your Lady.
^ir upon condition I will, therefore I would you should know,
That on me and my fellowe^ you must largely bestow:
Whose names are Fraud, Usury, and Symony, men of great credit and calling,
And to get my Ladies good will and theirs it is no small thing
But tell me can you be content to win Lucar by Dissimulation?

A good a my friend axa me no shush a question,
For he dat will live in de world must be of the world sure,
And de world will love his own, so long as the world endure.

I commend you wit Sir, but here comes my Lady.

Come hider, heers too tree Crowns for de speak me.

Well sir I think you, I will go speak for you.

Master Dauy Dissimulation, what new acquaintance have ye gotten there?

Such a one Madam that unto your state hath great care:
And surely in my mind the Gentleman is worthy
To be well thought on for his liberality, bounty, great care to seek ye.

Gentleman, you are heartily welcome, how are you called, I pray you tell us?

Madonna, me be a Mershant and be called senior Merkadorus.

But I pray you tell me what Countryman.

Me be Madonna an Italian.

Yet let me trouble ye, I beseech ye whence came ye?

For serua voutra boungrace, me come form Turkie.

Gramercy, but senior Mercadore dare you not undertake, Secretly to convey
good commodities out of this country for my sake?

Madonna, me do for love of you tinke no pain too mush,
And to do any ting for you me will not grush:
Me will a forsake a my Fader, Moder, King, Country, more den dat,
Me will lie and forswear my self for a quarter so much as my hat.
What is dat for love of Lucar me dare or will not do:
Me care not for all the world, the great Devil, nay make my God angry
for you.

You say well Mercadorus, yet Lucar by this is not throwly won
But give ear and I will show what by thee must be done:
Thou must carry over Wheat, Peas, Barley, Oats, and Fitches, and all kind of
grain,
Which is well sold beyond sea and bring such merchants great gain.
Then thou must carry beside leather, tallow, beef, bacon, bell mettell, and
every thing,
And for these good commodities, trifles into England thou must bring:
As Bugles to make bables, coloured bones, glass beads to make bracelettes
withal:
For every day Gentlewomen of England do ask for such trifles from stall to
stall,
And you must bring more, as Amber, Jet, Coral, Crystal, and every such
babble,
That is slight pretty and pleasant, they care not to have it prefitable.
And if they demand wherefore your wares and merchandise agree,
You must lay Jet will take up a straw, Amber will make one fat,
Corrall will look pale when you besicke, and Crystal will stanch blad,
So with lying, flattering, and glossing you must utter your ware,
And you shall win me to your will, if you can deceitfully swear.

Tinke ye not dat me have carried over corn, Ledar, Beef and Bacon too all
tis while:
And brought hedar many bables this country men to beguile?
Yes, shall me tell you Madonna, me and my countrimans have sent over,
Bell mettell for make ordinance, yea and ordinance it self beside,
Day my country and other countries be so well furnished as dis country,
and has never been spied.

New I perceive you love me, and if you continue in this still,
You shall not only be with me, but command me when where you will.

Lady, for to do all dis and more for you me be content:
But I tinke some skall knave will put a bill in da Parliament,
For dat such a tings shall not be brought here.

Tush Mercadore, I warrant thee, thou need not to feare^
What and one do? there is some other will flatter and say,
They do no hurt to the country, and with a slight fetch that bill away.
And if they do not so, that by act of Parliament it be past,
I knew you merchants have many a slight and subtle cast,
So that you will by stealth bring over great store,
And say it was in the Realm a long time before.
For being so many of these trifles here as there is at this day,
You may increase them at pleasure, when you send over sea,
And do but give the searcher an odd, bribe in his hand,
I warrant you he will let you escape roundly with such things in and out the
land^
But senior Mercadore, I pray you ^ral^e in with me,
And as I find you kind to me, so will I savour ye,

Me tank my good Lady. But M. Dissimulation, here is for
your fellows, Fraud, Usury, and Symonie, and say me give it d^m.

I marry Sir, these bribes have welcome been,
Good saith I perceive, Dissimulation, Fraud, Symonie and Usury shall live
In spite of Love and Conscience, though their hearts it doth grieve.
Mas masters, he that cannot lie, cog, dissemble and flatter now a days,
Is not worthy to live in the world, nor in the Court to have praise.

I beseech you good M. Dissimulation, befreend a poor man,
To serve Lady Lucar and lu^e sir. i'll consider hereafter if I can.

What, consider me^ doest thou think that I am a bribe taker?
Faith it lies not in me to further thy matter.

Good M. Dissimulatten help me, I am almost quite undone,
But yet my living hitherto with Conscience I have won,
But my true working, my ca^ly ti^ing and my late going to bed,
Is scant able to find myself, wife and children dry break
For there be such a sort of strangers in this country.
That work fine to please the eye, though it be deceitfully,
And that which is slight, and seems to the eye well,
Shall sooner than a piece of good work be proffered to sell,
And our Englishmen be grow^e so foolish and nice,
That they will not give a penny about the ordinary price.

Faith I cannot help thee, tis my fellow Fraud must pleasure thee
Here comes my fellow Fraud, speak to him, and i'll do what I can.

I beseech you be good unto me right honest Gentleman.

Why and whereto? what would thou have me do?

That my estate you will so much prefar,
As to get me to be a workman to Lady Lucar:
And sir I doubt not but to please you so well for your pain,
That you shall think very well of (...) if I in her service remain.

Good fellow Fraud do so much for I see he is very willing to live
And some piece of work to thee for thy pains he will give.

Well upon that condition I will but I care not so much for his gifts,
As that he will by my name declare how he came by his great thrifts,
And that he will set out in every kind of thing,
That Fraud is a good husband, and great profit doth bring.
Therefore the next piece of work that thou d^est make,
Let me see how deceitful thou wilt do it for my sake.

Yes ^r I will s^r, of that be you sure,
I'll honour your name while life doth end^e.

Fellow Fraud, here comes a Citizen as I deem.

Nay rather a Lawyer, or some petty fogger, he doth seem.

Gentleman, my earnest suite is to desire ye,
That unto your Ladies service you would help me:
For I am an attorney of the law and pleader at the bar,
And have a great desire to plead for Lady Lucar.
I have been earnest Sir, as is needful in such a case,
For fear an other come before me, and obtain my place.
I have pleaded for Love and Conscience till I w^s weary,
I had in my Clients, and many matters, that made my purse light, and my heart
heavy.
Therefore let them plead for Conscience that list for me,
I'll plead no more for such as bring nothing but beggary.

Sir, upon this condition that you'll keep men in law,
Ten or twelve years for matters not worth a straw:
And that you will make an ill matter seem good and firmable in deed,
Faith I am content for me part that you shall speed.

Nay fellow thou know that Symonie and Usury hath an (...) matter in law at
this time,
Naw if thou can handle the matter so subtle and (...),
^s to plead that ill matter good and firmable at the bar,
Then thou shalt show thy self worthy to win Lady Lucar.
Therefore tell me if you can and will do it or no.
If you do it, be sure to get my Ladies good will ere you go.

By my honesty well remembered, I had quite forgot,
Tis about that, a fortnight ago sell cut the matter I wot.

Tush sir, I can make black white, and white black again,
Tut he that will be a Lawyer, must I aue a thousand ways to fain,
And many times we L^wyers do one befreend another,
And let good matters slip, tut we agree like brother and brother,
Why sir, what shall let us to wrest and turn the law as we list,
Seeing we have them printed in the palms of out fist?
Therefore doubt you not, but make bold report,
That I can, and will plead their ill cause in good kind of sort.

Of troth how likest thou this fellow Dissimulation?

Mary I like him well, he is a cunning Clarke, and one of our profession.
But come sir, go with us and we will prefer you.

Good M. Fraud remember me.

Leave thy prating, I will I tell thee.

Good M. Dissimulation think on me.

Thou art too importunate and greedy.

Come after dinner, or some other time when we are at leisure.

Come after dinner, or some other time indeed,
For full little do they think of a poor mans need:
These fellows will do nothing for pity and love,
And thrice happy are they that hath no need them to prove.
God he knows the world is grown to such a stay,
That men must use Fraud and Dissimulation too, or beg by the way.
Therefore i'll do as the most doth, the fewest shall laugh me to scorn,
And be a fellow amongst good fellows to hold by S. Lukes horne.

Good coossen Simplicity do something for me.

Yes faith coossen Sincerity, i'll do any thing for thee?
What would thou have me do for thee can tell that?
Mas I cannot tell what should do for me, except thou would give me a new
hat.

Alas I am not able to give thee a new.

Why then I marvel how thou doest do:
Doest thou get thy living amongst beggars from door do door?
Indeed coossen Sinceretie, I thought thou wast not so poor.

Nay cossen Simplicity I got my living hardly but yet I hope just
And with good Conscience too although I am restrained from my lust.
But this it is cousin Simplicity, I would request you do for me:
Which is, to get Lady Love, and Lady Conscience hand to latter:
That by their means I may get some benefice to make me live the better

Yes I'll do so much for thee cousin, but hast thou any here?

I behold they are ready drawn, if assined they were.

Let me see coossen, for I can read:
Mas tis bravely done, did thou it indeed?
Mistress Conscience, I have a matter to bequest you too.

What is't? I doubt not but tis some wise thing if it be for you,

Mary my cossen Sincerity, wad bestre to scribe these papers here
That he may get some preferment, but I know not where.

Be these your letters? what would you have me do, and how shall I call ye?

Lady, my name is Sincerity.

And from whence came ye?

I came from Oxford, but in Cambridge I studied late,
Having nothing, thought good if I could, to make better my state.
But if I had in stead of Divinity, the Law, Astronomy, Astrology,
Phislognomie, Palmistry, Arithmetike, Logic, Mas^cke, Phis^cke, or any such
thing,
I had not doubted then, but to have had some better living.
But Divines that preach the word of God sincerely and truly,
Are in these days little or nothing set by.
God grant the good Preachers be not taken away for our vnthankfulnes
There was never more preaching and less following, the people live so amiss:
But what is he that may not on the Saba^th day attend to hear Gods word?
But we will rather run to bowls, sit at the alehouse, than one hour affoord:
Telling a tale of Robin hood, sitting at Cards, playing at kettels, or some
other vain thing,
That I fear Gods vengeance on your head it will bring.
God grant amendment, but Lady Conscience I pray,
In my behalf unto Lucar do what ye may.

Mas my coossen can say his book well, I had not thought it,
Hes worthy to have a benefice, and it will hit.

God be blessed Sincerity, for the good comfort I have of thee,
I would it lay in us to pleasure such believe me.
We will do what we can: But ultra posse non e^t esse, you know,
It is Lucar that hath brought us poor souls so low.
For we have sold our house, we are brought so poor,
And fear by her shortly to be shut out of door.
Yet to subscribe our name we will with all our hart,
Perchance for our sake some thing she will impart:
Come hither Simplicity, let me write on thy back.

Here is the right picture of that fellow that sits in the corner.

Lady, me thinks you are bus^e.

I ^aue done sir, I was setting my hand to a letter to Lucar for our friend
Sincerity. But I would lady Love were here too.

She is at home with me, but if it please you, so much in her behalf i'll do.

I pray you heartily, and it shall suffice that turn well inow:
Good Simplicity, once more thy body do bow.

I think you'll make me serve to be a washing block for you.
I would do it for you, but am afraid yonder boy will mock me.

No i'll warrant thee.

Here take thy letters Sincerity, prosperous be they to thee.

I yield you most hearty thanks my good lady.

I Conscience, pleases it you to walk home and dine with me.

Thanks my good f^iend Hospitality.
But tell me sir, have you invited to dinner any strangers?

No sure, none but lady Love, and three or four honest neighbours.

^as my lady is gotten to dinner already,
I believe she rose at ten of clock she is so hungry.
What if I should come to dinner, is there any good cheer?

There's bread bear, one joint of meat, welcome thy best fare.

Why, art thou called Hospitality, hast no better cheer than that
Faith and thou hast no more meat for so many, theile ne'er be fat,
what if my coossen nay my self alone to dinner should come?
where should my lady and the te^ dine? for I would eat up every crum.
Thou art an old ^ser doest thou keep no better fare in thy house?
Hast no great bag pudding, nor hogs face, that is called sows

My friend, Hospitality doth not consist in great fare and banqueting.
But in doing good unto the poor, and to yield them some refreshing.
Therefore if thou and Sincerity will come and take part,
Such as there is i'll give you with a free and willing hart.

^e speaks well coossen, lets go to d^nner with him.
the old man shall not think but we will pleasure him.
Faith he might have richer fellows to take his part,
But he shall never have better eating fellows if he would swelte his heart.
Here be they that will eat with the proudest of them.
For my mother said I could eat as much as five men.
Nay I am sure the gift of eating is given to me,
For our Maids would never believe I put all the meat in my belly,
But yonder comes a Knave, my lady Lucars cogging man,
Give me your letters coossen, i'll prefer you if I can.

Dissimulation, out upon him, he shall be no spokeman for me.

Why then you are a fool coossen Sincerity,
Give me am then, for I know heal do it for me,

Seeing thou wilt have it, here receive it, but it grieves my har^ that this
dissembling wretch should speak on my part.

Hear ye sir, I would request to liver this letter, to your good wholesome
mistars lady Lucar.

Where had thou it tell me?

Mary of my coossen Sincerity.

Why I have nothing to do in it, tis not to me thou should com^
I have not to do with Sincerities matters, tis my fellow Symonies room.

Thou art a kin to the lawyer, thou wilt do nothing without a fee,
But thou, Fraud, Usury, nor yet Symonie shall have nothing of me.
And thou wilt do it, do it, and thou wilt not choose:
Both thee and their dealing I hate and refuse.

Why, and I am not bound to thee so far as knave go,
And therefore in despite of thee and thy coossen, there thy letters be,
What, think thou by captious words to make me do it?
Let them deliver your letters that hath a stomach to it

Faith coossen, hes such a tester in and semblation knave;
that heal do nothing les some bribery he have.
There's a great many such promoting knaves that gets their living,
With nothing else but facing, lying, swearing and flattering.
Why he has a face like a black dog, and blushes like the back side of a
chimney.
I was not for nothing thy Godfathers a cogging (...) gave thee.
But here comes his mistress lady Lucar,
Now coossen i'll liver your letter.
Mistress lady Lucar, here's a letter for ye.

Hast thou a letter for me?

Yes by saint Marie.
How say you coossen, she reads your letter?
And you can flatter, perhaps you shall speed better.

Thou speak the truth Simplicity, for flatterers now a days, live
Gentlemen-like, and with prating get praise.

Sir, I have read the tenure of your letter, wherein I find,
that at the request of Love and Conscience I should show my self kind,
And bestow some spiritual living on you, parsonage, or benefice,
For you stand greatly in need, as appears by this.
And trust me would do for you, but it lies not in me,
For all such matters are referred to my servant Symonie.
You must speak to him, and if you can get his good will,
then be sure of mine, their minds to fulfil.

Lady, I shall never get his goodwill for want of ability,
For he will do nothing except one bring money.
And if you grant it not, then it is past all doubt,
I shall be never the nearer, but go quite without.

Madam, i'll tell you what you may give,
Not hurting your self whereby he may live,
And without my fellow Symonies consent,
If to follow my mind you are any whit bent.

Pray thee what is it? for thou know while for their house I am bargaining,
And it be never so little, I must seem to do something.

Why, have not you the parsonage of S. Nihal to bestow?
if you give him that, Symonie shall never know.

Thou says true indeed: draw near Sincerity,
Lo for their sakes I will bestow frankly on thee,
The parsonage of saint Nihil i'll give thee to pleasure them withal,
And such another to it, if thou watch till it fall.

My lady axes you when you will take possession of your house, and lend the
rest of the money.

What are they so hasty? belike they spent it merrsly.

Faith no, for they would eat it if they could get it, when they are a
hungry.
But you may be happy, for you have sped well to day
You may thank God and good company that you came this way,
The parsonage of S. Michels, bir Lady if you have nothing else,
you shall be sure of a living, beside a good ring of Bells.
Coossen, i'll tell thee what thou shalt do, sell the bells and make money,

Thou may well be Simplicity for thou show thy folly.
I have a parsonage, but of what? of saint Nihil, and Nihil is nothing.
Then where is the Church, or any Bells for to ring?
Thou understand her not, she was set for to ^out,
I thought coming in their names I should go without,
Tis call to see that Lucar ^oues not Love and Conscience:
But God I trust will one day yield her just recompense.

Coossen, you said that some thing to me you would give,
When you had gotten preferment of Lucar to live:
And I trust you will remember your poor coossen simplicity,
you know to lady Conscience and cry body I did speak for you.

Good Simplicity hold thy peace, my state is yet nought,
I will help thee sure, if ever I get ought.
But here comes sir Nicholas Nemo, to him I will go,
And see if for their sakes he will any thing bestow.

You come from Love and Conscience, as seems (...) here,
My special good friends, whom I account of most dear,
And you are called Sincerity, your state shows the same,
you are welcome to me for their sakes, and for your own name,
And for their sakes you shall set what I will do for you,
Without Dissimulation, Fraud, Usury, or Symonie:
For they will do nothing without some kind of gain,
such cankered corruption in their harts doth remain.
But come in to dinner with me, and when you have din^, you shall have.

You shall have, but what? a living that is blown down with the wind.

Now cossen dismember your friends, seeing two livings you have
One that this man promised, and another that lady Lucar gave.
Mas you'll be a jolly man and you had three or four more,
Lets beg apace coossen, and we shall get us great store.
Do thou get some more letters, and i'll get them scribed of mistars Love and
Conscience,
And wele go beg livings together, wele beg no small pence.
How says thou coossen wut do so much?
If we can speak fair and semble, we shall be plaguy rich.

Good Simplic^tie content thee, I am never the better for this,
But of force must leave off, seeing how vain it is:
Nor boots it ^inceritie to look for relief.
So few regard that to me is a grief.
This was Nicholas Nemo, and no man hath no place.
then how can I speed well in this kind of case?
And no man bid me to dinner, when shall I dine?
Or how shall I find him, where, when, and at what time?
wherefore the relief had and to be had is small,
But to speak truth, the relief is nothing at all.
But come Simplicity, let us go see what may be had,
Sincerity in these days was sure borne to be sad.

Come lets go to dinner coossen, for the Gentleman I think hath
almost dined.
But if I get vittels enough i'll warrant you i'll not be behind.

What if thou can not get it, then how wilt thou eat?

Mary on this fashion, with both hands at once, ye shall see when I get meat.

why his name was Nemo, and Nemo hath no being.

I believe coossen you be not hungry, that you stand prating,
Faith i'll go do him a pleasure* because the hath need.
why and h^le needs have meat eat, a shall see how i'll feed,
I believe he will not did me come again to him,
Mas and he do, a shall find a fellow that has his eating.

Lady Conscience, is there any body within your house can you tell?

There is no body at all be ye sure, I know certainly well.

You know when one comes to take possession of any piece of land
There must not be one within, for against the order of law it doth stand.
Therefore I thought good to ask you, but I pray you think not amiss:
For both you, and almost all other knows, that an old custom it is.

You say truth, take possession when you please, good leave have (...)
Doubt you not, there is neither man, woman, nor child, that will or shall
hinder you.

Why then I will boldly enter.

Who is more bold than Usury to venture?
He makes the matter dangerous where is no need at all,
But he thinks it no pe^illous to seek every mans fall:
Both he and Lucar hath so pinched us, we know not what to do,
Were it not for Hospitality, we knew not whither to go.
Great is the misery that we poor ladies abide,
And much more is the cruelty of Lucar and Usury beside.
O Conscience, thou art not accounted of, O Love, thou art little set by,
For almost every one, true love, and pure conscience doth deny:
So hath Lucar crept into the bosom of man, woman and child,
That every one doth practise his dear friend to beguile.
But God grant Hospitality be not by them over pressed,
In whom all our stay and chiefest comfort doth rest*
But Usury hates Hospitality and cannot him abide,
Because he for the poor and comfortless doth provide.
Here he comes, that hath undone many an honest man,
And daily seeks to destroy, deface, and bring to ruin if he can.
Now sir, have you took possession as your dear lady wild you^

I have done, and I think you have received your money,
But this to you: my lady wild me to bid you provide some other hou^ out of
hand,
For she would not by her will have Love and Conscience to dwell on her land:
Therefore tis best to provide ye^
So shall you save charges, for a less house may serueyt.

I pray you heartily let us stay there, and we will be content
to give you ten pound a year, which is the old rent.

Ten pound a year, that were a state ieast,
If I should take the old rent to follow your request:
Nay after forty pound a year you shall have it for a quarter,
And you may think too, you are befriended in this matter:
But no longer than for a quarter to you i'll set it,
For my lady perhaps will sell it, or to some other will let it.

Well, since we are driven to this hard and bitter drift,
We accept it, and are contended to make bare and hard shift.

Then get you gone, and see at a day your rent be ready.

We must have patience perforce, seeing there is no remedy.

What a fool was I to let it so reasonable?
I might so well have had after threescore, as such a trifle,
For seeing they were distressed they would have given largely*
I was a right sot, but i'll be overseen no more believe me.

Ah my good a friend M. Usury, be my trot you be very well met:
Me be much beholding to you for your good will, me be in your debt.
But a me take a your part so mich against a scale shurle called Hospitality:
Did speak against you, and says you bring good honest men to beggary.

I thank you sir, did he speak such evil of me as now you say?
I doubt not but to reward him for his treachery one day.

But I pray tell a me how fare a my lady all dis while?

Marie well sir, and here she comes if my self I do not beguile.

What seneor Mercadore, I have not seen you this many a day,
I marvel what is the cause you kept so long away

Shall me say to you Madama, (...) me have had such business for you in hand,
For send away good commodities out of dis little country England:
Me have now sent over brass, copper pewter, and many odar ting,
And for dat me sall ha for Gentlewoman's fine trifles, that great profit will
bring.

I perceive you have been mindful of me, for which I thank ye:
But Usury tell me, how have you sped in that you went about?

Indifferently Lady, you need not to doubt,
I have taken possession, and because they were destitute,
I have let it for a quarter my tale to conclude.
Marry I have a little raised the rent, but it is but after forty pound by the
year:
But if it were to let now, would let it more dear.

Indeed it is but a trifle, it makes no matter,
I force it not greatly, being but for a quarter.

Madonna me a you vat you sall do, let them to stranger dat are content,
To dwell in a little room, and pay mush rent:
For you know da Frenchmans and Flemings in dis country be many,
So dat they make shift to be ten houses in one very gladly.
And be content a for pay fifty or threescore pound a year,
For dat which da Englishman's say twenty mark is too dear.

Why seneor Mercadore, think you not that I
Have infinite numbers in London that my want doth supply.
Beside in Bristow, Northampton, Norwich, Westchester, Canterbury,
Dover, Sandwich, Rye, Porchmouth, Plimmouth, and many mo,
That great rents upon little room do bestow.
Yes I warrant you, and truly I may thank the strangers for this,
That they have made houses so dear, whereby I live in bliss.
But seneor Mercadore, dare you to travel undertake:
And go amongst the Moors, Turks, and Pagans for my sake?

Madonna, me dare go to de Turks, Moors, Pagans, and more too,
What do me care and me go to da great devil for you.
Command a me Madonna* and you sall see plain,
Data for your sake me refusa no pain.

Then seneor Mercadore I am forthwith to send ye
From hence, to search ^or some new toys in Barbary or in Turkie,
Such trifles as you think will please wantons best:
For you know in this country tis their chiefest request.

Indeed de Gentlewoman's here buy so much vain toys,
Dat me strangers laugh a to tinke wherein da have deir joys.
Fait Madonna me will search all da strange countries me can tell,
But me will have sush tings dat please this Gentlewoman's vell.

Why then let us provide things ready to hast you away.

A voutro commaundemento Madonna me obey.

Now proceed with thy tale and i'll heart thee.

And so sir as I was about to tell you,
This same Presco, and this some Cracko, be both my parishioners no^
And sir they fell out marvelously about you:
The same Cracko took your part, and said that the Clergy
Was maintained by you, and upheld very worshipfully.
So sir, Presco he would not grant that in any case,
But said that you did corrupt the clergy, and dishonour that holy place.
Now sir I was weary to hear them at such great strife,
For I love to please men so long as I have life:
Therefore I beseech your maistership to speak to Lady Lucar,
That I may be her Chaplain, or else to serve her.

What is your name?

Sir Peter.

What more?

Forsooth Pleaseman.

Then your name is sir Peter Pleaseman.

Yea forsooth.

And please woman too now and th^n,

You know that homo is indifferent.

Now surely a good scholar in my judgment,
I pray you of what Uniuersitie were ye?

Di no Uniuersitie truly.
Mary I have gone to school in a College, where I have studied two or three
places o^ Divinity:
And all for lady Lucars sake, sir you may steadfastly believe me.

Nay I believe ye* but of what religion are you can ye tell?

Mary (...) of all religions, I know not my self very well.

You are a Prote stant now, and I think to that now will grant

Indeed I have been a Catholic* mary now for the most part a Protestant.
But and if my service may please her, hark in your care sir,
I warrant you my religion shall not offend her.

You say well, but if I help you to such great preferment,
Would you be willing for my pain,
I shall have yearly half the gain.
For it is reason you know that if I help you to a living,
That you should unto me be somewhat beholding,

Yea (...), and reason good, i'll be as your mastership please,
I care not what you do, so I may live at ease.

Then this man is answered, sir Peter pleasi^an come with m^
And i'll prefer you straight way to my lady.

Oh sir I thank yt.

You think I am going to market to buy roast meat, do ye not?
But see how you are deceived, for well I wot,
I am neither going to the Butchers to buy mutton, veale nor beef,
But am going to a bloudsucket, and who is it? faith Usury that thief.
Why sirs, twas no marckle he vndood my father that was called Plain dealing,
when he has undone my Lady and Conscience too with his vsuring.
Trust him not sirs, for heal flatter bonacion and sore,
till he has gotten the Bakers vauntage, then heal turn you out of door.

Simplicity, now of mine honesty very heartily well met,

What Semblation swear not, for thou swearest by that thou could never get:
Thou have honesty now? thy honesty is quite gone:
Mary thou had honesty at xi. of clock, but it went from you ere noone:
why, how can thou have honesty, when it dare not come me thee?
I warrant Semblation, he that has less honesty than thou, may defy thee:
thou hast honesty sir reverence, come out dog, where art thou?
Even as much honesty as hath my mothers great hoggish sow:
No faith thou may put out mine eye with honesty, thou had it here,
Hast not left it at the alehouse in gage for a pot of strong beer?

Pray thee leave prating Simplicity, and tell me what thou hast there?

Why, tis nothing for thee, thou doest not deal with such kind of ware.
Sir there is no beceit in a bag pudding, is there? nor in a plain pudding
pie:
Sir i'll tell thee, I will not tell thee, and yet i'll tell thee, now I member
me too:
Can tell, or would know whither with this parliament I go?
Faith even to s^ckswill thy fellow Usury I am sent,
With my lady Loves gown, and lady Conscience too, for a quarters rent.

Alas poor lady Love, art thou driven so low?
Some little pittance on thee i'll bestow.
Hold Simplicity, carry her three or four Ducats from me,
And commend me to her even very heartily.

Duck eggs, yes i'll carry them, and twere as many as this would hold.

Tush thou know not what I mean, take this, tis gold.

Mas tis gold indeed, why, wilt lend away thy gold, hast thou no more need?
I think thou art grown plaguy rich with thy dissembling trade,
But i'll carry my lady the gold, for this will make her well apaid.

And (...), carry lady Loves gown back again, for my fellow Usury
Shall not have her gown, I am sure so much he will befriend me.

But what shall Conscience gown do, shall I carry it back again too?

Nay, let Conscience gown and skin to Usury go.
If no body cared for Conscience more than I,
They would hang her up like bacon in a chimney to dry.

Faith I told thee thou caredst not for Conscience nor honesty:
I think indeed it will never be the death of thee.
But i'll go conspatch my arrant so soon as I can tell ye,
For now I ha gold, I would fain have some good meat in my belly.

Nay i'll hie me after, that I may send back lady Loves gown.
For I would not have Love bought quite out of town.
Mary for Conscience tut, I care not two straws,
Why I should take care for her, I know no kind of cause.

Oh what shall I say? Usury hath undone me, and now he hates me to the death.
And seeks by all means possible for to bereave me of breath.
I cannot rest in any place, but he hunts and follows me every where*
That I know no place to abide, I live so much in fear.
But out alas, here comes he that will shorten my days,

O have I caught your old gray beard you be the man whom the people so
praise:
You are a frank Gentleman, and full of liberality.
Why, who had all the praise in London or England, but M. Hospitality?
But i'll master you now i'll hold you a groat.

What will you kill me?

No, i'll do nothing but cut thy throat.

O help, help, help for Gods sake.

What lamentable cry was that I heard one make?

O lady Conscience, now or never help me.

why, what wilt thou do with him Usury?

what will I do with him? mary cut his throat and then no more

O doest thou not remember that thou shalt dearly answer for
Hospitality that good member, reframe it therefore.

Refrain me no refraining nor answer me no answering*
The matter is answered well enough in this thing,

For Gods sake spare him, for country sake spare him, for pity sake
spare him; for Love sake spare him, for Conscience sake forbear him.

Let country, pity, Love, Conscience, all go in respect of my self,
He shall die, come ye feeble wretch, i'll dress ye like an elf.

But yet Usury, consider the lamentable cry of the poor,
For lack of Hospitality, fatherless children are turned out of door.
Consider again the complaint of the sick, blind and lame,
That will cry unto the Lord for vengeance on thy head in his name.
Is the fear of God so far from thee that thou hast no feeling at all?
O repent Usury, leave Hospitality, and for mercy at the Lords hand call.

Leave prating Conscience, thou can not mollify my hart,
He shall in despite of thee and all other fe^le his deadly smart.
Yet i'll not commit the murder openly,
But hale the villain into a corner, and so kill him secretly.
Come ye miserable drudge, and receive thy death*

Help good lady, help, he will stop my breath.

Alas I would help thee, but I have not the power.

Farewell lady Conscience, you shall have Hospitality in London nor England no
more.

O help, help help some good body.

Who is that calls for help so hastily?

Out alas thy fellow Usury hath killed Hospitality.

Now Gods blessing on his heart, why twas time he were dead*
He was an old churl, with never a good tooth in his head.
And he ne'er kept no good cheer that I could see:
For if one had not come at dinner time he should have gone away hungry.
I could never get my belly full of meat,
He had nothing but beef, bread and chief for me to eat.
Now I would have had some Pies or bag puddings with great lumps of ^at:
But he did keep my mouth well enough from that.
Faith and he be dead, he is dead, let him go to the devil and he will.
Or if he will not go thither, let him even lie there still.
I'll ne'er make a lamentation for an old churlde,
For he has lived a great while, and now tis time that he were out of the
world.

What Conscience, thou look like a poor pigeon pulled of late.

what Lucar, thou look like a whore full of deadly hate.

Alas Conscience, I am sorry for thee, but cannot weep.

Alas Lucar, I am sorry for thee that thou can no honesty keep:
But such as thou art, such are thy attenders on thee,
As appears by thy servant Usury, that hath killed that good member
Hospitality.

Faith Hospitality is killed and hath made his will,
And hath given Dissimulation three trees upon a high hill.

Come hither Dissimulation, and hie you hence ^o fast as you may
And help thy fellow Usury to convey himself out of the way,
Further, will the Justices, if they chance to see him, not to know him*
Or know him, not by any means to hinder him.
And they shall command thrice so much at my hand.
Go trudge, run out away, how doest thou stand?

Nay good lady* send my fellow Simonie,
For I have an earnest suite to ye.

Then Symonie go do what I have wild.

I run Madam your mind shall be fulfild.

Well well Lucar, ^udeo tace^, I see and say nothing:
But I fear the plague of God on thy head it will bring.

Good lady grant that Love be your waiting maid,
For I think being brought so low, she will be well apaid.

Speak thou in good earnest, or doest thou but dissemble?
I know not how to have thee, thou art so variable.

Lady, though my name be Dissimulation, yet I speak bon^ side now,
If it please you my petitions to allow.

S^nd by, i'll answer thee anon: what news Symonie
Bring thou of thy fellow Usury?

Mary madam good news: for Usury ^es close
Hid in a rich mans house, that will not let him lose,
Until they see the matter brought to a good end,
For Usury in this country hath many a good friend:
And late I saw Hospitality carried to buryeng.

I pray thee tell me who were they that followed him?

There were many of the clergy and many of the nobiliti^
And many right worshipful rich Citizens,
Substantial, gracious and very wealthy Farmars.
But to see how the poor followed him it was a wonder,
Never yet at any burial was seen such a number.

But what say the people to the murder?

Many are sorry, and say tis great pity that he was slain*
But wh^ be they? the poor beggarly people that so complain:
As for the other they say twas a cruel bloody fact,
But I perceive none will hinder the murderer for this cruel act.

Tis well, I am glad of it, now Dissimulation if thou can get Lones good
will.
I am contented with all my heart to grant there until.

Thanks to you lady, and I doubt not but she
With a little entreaty will thereto agree.

Now I have it in my breeches, and very well can tell,
That I and my lady with mistars Lucar shall dwell.
But if I be her serving fellow, and dwell there,
I must learn to cog lie, foist and swear.
And surely I shall never learn, marie and twere to lie a bed all (...)
To that kind of lying I should give a good say.
Or if twere to eat ones meat, then I knew what for to do.
How say you strra, can I not, i'll be drudge by you?

Now to you little mouse, did I not tell you before,
That I should ere twere long turn you both out of door?
How say you pretty soul, is't come to pass, yea or no?
Me thinks I have pulled your peacocks plumes somewhat low.
And yet you be so stout as though you felt no grief,
But ere it be long you will come puling to me for relief.

Well Lucar well, you know pride will have a fall:
What avails it thee to win the world, and loo^e thy soul withall^
Yet better it is to live with little, and keep a conscience clear.
Which is to God a sacrifice, and accounted of most dear.

Nay Conscience, and you be b^okish i'll leave ye,
And the cold ground to comfort your feet i'll bequeath ye.
Me think you being so deeply learned, may do well to keep a school.
Why, I have seen so cunning a Clarke in time to prove a fool.

Sir, if thou should marry my Lady thou would keep her brave.
For me thinks thou art a plaguy rich knave.

Rich I am, but as for knave keep to thy self.
Come give me my Ladies gown thou ass^headed elf.

Why i'll go with thee, for I must dwell with my Lady.

Pack hence away, ^acke Drum^ entertainment, she will none of thee.

This is as my coossen and I went to M. Nemos hou^e,
There was no man to ^id a dog drink, or to change a man a ^ou^e,
But lady Conscience (nay who there) scratch that name away,
Can she be a lady that is turned out of all her array?
Do not be called no more lady, and if you be wise,
For every body will mock you, and say you be not worth two butter flie^.

What remedy Simplicity? I cannot do withal:
But what shall we go do? or whereto shall we fall?

Why to our vittails, what else have we to do?
And mark if I cannot eat twenty times so much as you.

If I go lie in an Inn, it will grieve me to see,
The deceit of the Ostler, the powling of the Tapster, as in most houses (...)
lodging they be,
If in a brewers house, at the ^uer plenty of water, and scarcenes of mal^
I should grieve,
whereby to enrich themselves, all other with unsavoury thin drink they
deceive.
If in a eannets house, with his great deceit in tanning,
If in a Weavers house, with his great coosening in weaving.
If in a Bakers house, with light bread, and very evil working.
If in a Chandlers with deceitful weights, false measures, selling for a
halfepeny that is scant worth a farthing.
And if in an A^lehouse, with the great resort of poor unthrifts, that with
swearing at the Cards consume their lives,
Having greater delight to spend a shilling that way, than a groat at home to
sustain their needy children and wives.
For which I judge it best form to get some solitary place,
where I may with patience this my heavy cross embrace,
And learn to sell broom, whereby to get my living,
Using that as a quiet mean to keep my self from begging*
wherefore Simplicity if thou wilt do the like,
^ettle thy self (...) it, and with true labour thy living do seek.

No faith M. Conscience i'll not for and I should sell broom, the Maids would
coossen me too competually with their old shoo^e.
And too I cannot work, and you would hang me out of the way.
For when I was a miller, Will did grind the meal while I did play.
Therefore i'll have as easy an occupation as I had when my Father was alive,
Faith i'll go even a begging, why tis a good trade a man shall be sure to
thrive.
For I am sure my prayers will get bread and cheese, and my singing will get me
drink.
Then shall not I do better than M. Conscience? tell me as you think.
Therefore God Pan in the Kitch^n, and God Pot in the buttery,
Come and resist me, that I may sing with the more meliositie.
But sir^, mark my cauled countenance when I begin,
But yonder is a fellow that gapes to b^e me, or else to eat that which I sing.
Why thou art a fool, can not thou keep thy mouth strait together^
And when it comes sna^ at it as my fathers dog wo^ do at a liver.
But thou art so greedy,
That thou think to eat it before it come ^ie thee.
Simplicity sings, and sperience doth prove,
No biding in London for Conscience and Love,
The Country hath no pear.
Where Conscience c^mes not once a year^
And Love so welcome to every town,
^s wind that blows the houses down.
Sing down down, down, down, down.
Simplicity sings it, and spertence doth prove,
No dwelling in London, no biding in London for Conscience and Love.

Now sir, hast eaten up my song? and ye have ye shall eat no more to day,
For every body may see your belly is grown bigger with eating up our play.
He has (...) his belly but I am never a whit the better,
Therefore i'll go seek some vittels, and member for eating up my song you
shall be my debtor.

But seneor Mercadorus tell me, did ye serve me well or no?
That having gotten my money would seem the country to forgo:
You know I lent you two thousand ducats for three m^nthes space,
And ere the time came you got another thousand by flattery, and thy smooth
face.
So when the time came that I should have received my money,
You were not to be found, but were fled out of the country,
Surely if we that be Iewes should deal so one with an other,
We should not be trusted again of our own brother
But many of you Christians make no conscience to falsify your faith and
break your day.
I should have been paid at three months end, and now it is two year you
have been away.
Well I am glad you be come again to Turkie now I trust I shall receive
the interest of you so well as the principal

A good a master Geronto pray heartily bare a me a little while,
And me shall pay ye all without any deceit or guile:
Me have much business for buy pretty knacks to send to England.
Good sir, bear a me four five days, meal dispatch your money out of hand.

Seneor Mercadore, I know no reason why, because you have dealt with me so ill,
Sure you did it not for need, but of set purpose and will:
And to bear with ye four or five days goes sore against my mind,
Least you should steal away, and forget to leave my money behind.

^ra heartily do (...) no such ting my good friend a me,
Be me trot and fact meal pay you all every penny.

I'll take your faith and troth once more, trust to your honesty
In hope that for my long tarrying you will ^eale well with me.
Tell me what good ware for England you do lack.

O no lack some pretty fine toy, or some fantastic new knack
For da Gentlewoman's in England buy mush tings for fantasie^
You pleasure a me sir, vat me mean a dare buy.

I understand you sir, but keep tutch with me, and i'll bring you to great
store,
Such as I know you came to this country for
As Musk, ^mber, sweet Powders, fine odors pleasant perfumes, and many such
toys,
Wherein I perceive consists that country Gentlewoman's joys.
Besides I have Diamonds, Rubies, Emerodes, Sapphires, Smaradines,
Opalles Onacles, Iacynthes, Aggattes, Turkasir, and almost
of all kind of precious stones:
And many fit things to suck money from such green headed wantons.

Fatta me good friend me tank you most heartily always,
Me shall a content your debt within dis two or tree day.

Well, see you hold your promise, and another tune you shall command me.
Come, go we home, where our commodities you may at pleasure see,
New brooms, green brooms, will you buy any,
Come maidens, come quickly, let me take a penny.
My brooms are not steeped,
but very well bound:
My brooms be not crooked,
out smooth cut and round.
I wish it should please you
to buy of my broom,
Then would it well case me,
if market were done.
Have you any ^lde boots,
or any old shoes:
Pouch rings or Bu^ins,
to cope for new broom.
If so you have maidens,
I pray you bring hither:
Tha^ you and I friendly
may ^argen together.
New brooms, green brooms, will you buy any:
Come Maidens, come quickly, let me take a penny.
Thus am I driven to make a virtue of necessity,
And seeing God almighty will have it so. I embrace it thankfully^
Desiring God to mollify and lesten Usuries hard heart,
That the poor people feel not the like penury and smart:
But Usury to made tolerable amongst Christians as a necessary thing
So that going beyond the limits of our law, they extort, and many to misery
bring.
But if we should follow Gods law, we should not receive above that we lend.
For if we lend for reward how can we say we are our neighbours fren^
O how blessed shall that man be that lends without abuse:
But thrice accursed shall he be that greatly covets use:
For he that covets over much insaciate is his mind,
So that to per^urie and cruelty he wholly is inclined:
Wherewith they sore oppress the poor, by diverse sundry ways,
Which makes them cry unto the Lord to shorten cutthrotes days:
Paule calls them thieves that doth not give the needy of their store,
And thrice accursed are they that take one penny from the poor,
But while I stand reasoning thus I forget my market clean,
And since God hath ordained this way, I am to use the mean,
Have ye any old shoes, or have ye any boots, have ye any bus^ins, or w^ ye
buy any broom.
Who bargens or chops with Conscience, what will no customer come?

Who is it that cries brooms, what Conscience selling brooms
above the street?

What Usury, it is great pity thou art vnhanged yet.

Believe me Conscience, it grieves me thou art brought so low.

Believe me Usury it grieves me thou wast not hanged long ago
For if thou had been hanged before thou slew Hospitality,
Thou had not made me and thousands more to feel the like poverty.

Me thought I heard one cry brooms along the door.

I mary Madam it was Conscience, who seems to be offended
at me very sore.

Alas Conscience art thou become a poor broom wife?

Alas Lucar, wilt thou continue a harlot all days of thy life?

Alas me thinks it is a grief to thee that thou art so poor.

Alas Lucar, me thinks it is no pain to thee that thou still platest the
whore.

Well well Conscience, that sharpe tongue of thine hath not been thy
furtherance.
If thou had kept thy tongue, thou had kept thy friend, and not have had
such hinderance.
But wottest thou who shall be married to morrow?
Love with my Dissimulation:
For I think to bid the guess, they are by this time well nie gone,
And having occasion to buy brooms, I care not if I buy them all.

Then give me a shilling, and with a good will have them you shall.

Usury, carry in these brooms, and give them to the maid.
For I know of such store she will be well apaid.
Hold Conscience, though thy brooms be not worth a quarter so much,
Yet to give thee a piece of gold I do it not grutch:
And if thou would follow my mind, thou should not live in such sort,
But pass thy days with pleasure store of every kind of sport.

I think you lead the world in a string, for every body follows you,
And since every one doth it, why may not I do it too:
For that I see your free heart* and great liberality,
I marvel not that all people are so willing to follow ye.

Then sweet soul, mark what I would have thee do for me,
That is to deck up thy poor Cottage handsomely:
And for that purpose I have five thousand crowns in store,
And when it is spent thou shalt have twice so much more.
But only see thy rooms be neat when I shall thither resort,
With familiar friends to pass the time in sport:
For the Deputy, Constable, and spiteful neighbours do spy, pry, and eye
about my house:
That I dare not be once merry within* but still mute like a mouse.

My good lady Lucar, I will fulfil your mind in every kind of thing.
So that you shall be welcome at all hours, whosoever you bring.
And all the dogs in the town shall not bark at your doings I trow,
For your full pretence and intent I do thoroughly know,
Even so well as if you had opened the very secrets of your hart,
For which I doubt not but to rest in your favour by my desert.
But here comes your man Usury.

I'll send him home for the money.
Usury, steppe in and bring me the box of all abomination that stands in
the window:
It is little and round, painted with diverse colours, and is pretty to the
show.

Madam, is there any superscription thereon?

Have I not told you the name: for shame get you gone.
Well my wench, I doubt not but our pleasures shall excel,
Seeing thou hast got a corner fit where few neighbours dwell,
And they be of the poorest sort which sits our turn so right:
Because they dare not speak against our sports and sweet delight,
And if they should (alas) their words would nought at all be weighed,
And for to speak before my face, they will be all afraid.

Madam, I deem this same be it, so far as I can guess.

Thou says the truth, tis it in deed, the outside shows no less.
But Usury I think Dissimulation hath not seen you since your co^ming home.
therefore go see him, he will rejoice when to him you are shown,
It is a bussie time with him, help to further him if you can.

He may command me to attend at board to be his man.

Hold here my sweet, and then over to see what doth want,
the more I do behold this face, the more my mind doth daunt:
This face is of favour, these cheeks are reddy and white,
these lips are cherry red, and full of deep delight,
Quick rolling eyes, her temples high, and forehead white as snow,
Her eye-browes seemly set in frame, with dimpled chin below:
O how beauty hath adorned thee with every seemly hue,
In limbs, in looks, with all the rest proportion keeping due:
Sure I have not seen a finer soul in every kind of part,
I cannot choose but kiss thee with my lips, that love thee with my heart.

I have told the crowns, and here are just so many as you to me did say.

Then when thou wilt thou may depart, and homewards take thy way,
And I pray thee make haste in decking of thy rome,
that I may find thy lodging fine, when with my friend I come.

I'll make speed, and where I have with brooms ofttimes been roaming.
I mean henceforth not to be seen, but sit to watch your coming.

O how joyful may I be that such success do find,
No marvel, for poverty and desire of Lucar do force them follow my (...)
Now may I rejoice in full contentation,
That shall marry Love with Dissimulation:
And have spotted Conscience with all abomination,
But I forget my self, for I must to the wedding,
Both vauntingly and flauntingly, although I had no bidding.

Sir, although you be my master, I would not have you to vpbrayd my name,
But I would have you use the right skill and title of the same:
For my name is neither scoggin nor scragging, but ancient Coggin:
Sir my ancestors were five of the four worthies,
And your self are of my near kin.

Indeed thou says true, for Coggin is a kinsman to Dissimulation.
But tell me have you taken the names of the guests?

Yea sir.

Let me hear after what fashion.

There is first and foremost master Forgery, and master Flattery
Master Perjury, and master Injury:
Master Cruelty, and master Pickerie, master Bribery, and master
Treachery:
Master Wink at wrong, and master Headstrong, mistress privy theft,
and master deep Deceit, master Abomination, and mistress Fornication
his wife, Fardinando false-waight, and Frissit false-measure his wife.

Stay, Fornication Frissit false-measure are often familiar
with my Lady Lucar, and one of them she accounts her friend:
Therefore they shall sit with the bride in the midst, and the men a^ each
end:
Let me see, there are sixteen, even as many as well near is able:
to dine in the summer parlour at the playing table:
Beside my fellow Fraud, and you fellow Symonie,
But I shall have a great miss of my fellow Usury.

Take no care for that, he came home yesterday even no longer,
His pardon was quickly begged, and that by a Courtier.
And sir, since he came he had like to have slain good neighbourhood and
liberality,
Had not true friendship stepped between them very suddenly:
But sir, he hit true friendship such a blow on the ear,
That he keeps out of all men's sight, for shame or for fear.

Now of my troth it is a pretty jest, hath he made true friendship
hide his head?
Sure if it be so, good neighbourhood and liberality for fear are fled.

But fellow Dissimulation tel me, what Priest shall marry ye?

Mary that shall an old friend of mine M. Doctor Hypocrisy.

Why will you not have sir Peter Pleasman to supply that want?

Indeed sir peter is a good Priest, but Doctor Hypocrisy is most ancient.
But (...) Eoggin, I pray you go to inuit the guess,
And tell them that they need not disturb their quietness:
Desire them to come at dinner time, and it shall suffice.
^ecause I know they will be loath so early to rise.
But at any hand will Doctor Hypocrisy,
That he meet us at the Church very early:
For I would not have all the world to wonder at our match.
It is an old proverb, tis good having a hatch before the door, but i'll
have a door before the hatch.

Sir, I will about it as fast as I can hie,
I'll first to that scald bald knave Doctor Hypocrisy.

But fellow Dissimulation, how dare thou marry with Love, bearing no love at
all?
For thou doest nothing but dissemble, then thy love must needs be small.
Thou can not love but from the teeth forward,
Sure the wife that marries thee shall highly be prefard.

Tush tush, you are a merry man, I warrant I know what I (...)
And can yield a good reason for it I may say unto you.
What and if the world should change, and run all on her side?
Then might I by her means still in good credit abide.
Thou know Love is ancient, and lives peaceably without any strifs,
Then sure the people will think well of me because she is my wife.

Trust me thou art as crafty to have an eye to the maine chance,
As the taylor that out of seven yards stole one and a halt of durance.
He served at that inn she devil in the likeness of S. Ratherme,
Such Taylors will thrive, that out of a doublet and a pair of hose can steal
their wise an Aporn^.
The Doublet sleeve three fingers were too short,
The Uene^ians came nothing near the knee.

Then for to make them long enough I pray thee what did he?

Two pieces set an handful broad to lengthen them withal,
Yet for all that be^w the knee by no means they could fall.
He seeing that, desired the party to buy as much to make another pair,
The party did, yet for all that he stole a quarter there.

Now (...) I can him thank, he could his occupation:
My fellow Fraud would laugh to hear one dressed of such a fashion,
But fellow Symonie, I thank you heartily for comparing the Taylor to me,
As who should say his knavery and my policy did agree.

Not so, but i was the willinger to tell thee, because I know it to be a true
tale,
And to see how Artificers do extol Fraud, by whom they bear their sale.
But come let us walk, and talk no more of this,
Your policy was very good, and so no doubt was his.

Seneor Mercadore, why do you not pay me? think you I will be mocked in this
sort?
This is three times you have flouted me, it seems you make thereat a sport.
Truly pay me my money and that even now presently,
Or by mighty Mahomet I swear, I will forthwith arrest ye.

Ha pray a bear wit me tree or four days, me have much business in hand.
Me be troubled wit letters you see here dat comes from England.

Tush this is not my matter, I have nothing therewith to do,
Pay me my money or i'll make you, before to your lodging you go.
I have officers stand watching for you, so that you cannot pass by,
Therefore you were best to pay me, or else in prison you shall lie.

Arrest me dou s^al knave, mary do if dou dare,
Me will not pay de one penny, arrest me, do, me do not care,
Me will be a Turk, me came hedar for dat cause,
Therefore me care not for de so much as two straws.

This is but your words, because you would defeat me,
I cannot think you will forsake your faith so lightly.
But seeing you drive me to doubt, i'll try your honesty:
Therefore be sure of this, i'll go about it presently.

Mary farewell and be hanged, sat seal drunken Jew,
I warrant ye me shall be able very vell to pay you.
My Lady Lucar have sent me here dis letter,
Praying me to coossen de Jew for love a her.
Therefore meal go to get a some Turks apparel.
Dat me may coossen da Jew, and end dis quarrel.

To the wedding, to the wedding, to the wedding go we,
To the wedding a begging, a begging all three.
TOm Beggar shall brave it, and wily Will too,
Simplicity shall knave it where ever we go:
With lustily Bravado, take care that care will,
To catch it, and snatch it, we have the brave skill.
Oar fingers are lime-twigges, and Barbarians we be,
To catch shears from hedges most pleasant to see:
Then to the Ilewife roundly we set them to sale,
And spend the money merrily upon her good ale.
To the wedding, to the wedding, to the wedding go we,
To the wedding a begging, a begging all three.
Now truly my masters, of all occupations under the sun, begging is the best,
For when a man is weary, then may he lay him down to rest.
Tell me, is it not a Lords life in s^mmer to louse one under a hedge,
And then leaving that game, may go clepe and coll his Madge?
Or else may walk to take the wholesome air abroad for his delight,
Where he may tumble on the grass, have sweet smells, and see mame a pretty
sight.
Why, an Emperor for all his wealth can have but his pleasure,
And surely I would not loose my charter of liberty, for all the Kings
treasure.

Shall I tell thee Tom Beggar, by the faith of a Gentleman,
this ancient freedom I would not forgo,
If I might have whole mines of money at my will to bestow.
Then a mans mind should be troubled to keep that he had,
And you know it were not for me, it would make my valiant mind mad.
For now we neither pay Church money, subsidies, fifteens, scot nor lot,
All the payings we par, is to pay the good ale pot.

But fellow beggars you coossen me, take away at the best meat.
And leave me nothing but browne bread, or sin of fish to eat.
When you be at the alehouse, you drink up the strong ale, and give me small
bear:
You tell me tis better than the strong, to make me sing clear.
Indeed you know with my singing I get twice as much as ye,
But and you serve me so you shall sing your selves, and beg alone for me.

We stand prating here, come let us go to the gate,
Mas I am greatly afraid we are come somewhat too late,
Good gentle M. Porter, your reward so bestw,
On a poor lame man, that hath but a patre of legs to go.

For Gods sake good mas Porter, give somewhat to the blind,
that the way to the Alehouse in his sleep cannot find.

For the good Lords sake take compassion on the poor.

How now sirs, you are vengeance hasty, can ye not tarri^
But stand ^auling so at my Ladies door.
Here take it amongst you, yet twere a good alms deed to give you nothing.
Because you were so hasty and kept such a calling.

I beseech yt not so sir, for we are very hungry,
that made us so earnest, but we are sorry we troubled ye.

look how greedy they be, like dogs that fall a snatching,
You shall see that I shall have the greatest alms, because I said nothing
Fraud knows me, therefore heal be my friend I am sure of that:
they have nothing but lean beef, ye shall see I shall have a piece that's
fat.
Master Fraud you have forgot me pray ye let me have my share,

Faith all is gone, thou come too late, thou see al is given there
By the faith of a Gentleman I have it not, I would I were able to
give thee more.

O sir, I saw your arms hang out at a stable door.

Indeed my arms are at the Painters, belike he hung them out to dry
I pray thee tell me what they were, if thou can them descry.

Mary there was never a scutchin, but there was 2 trees rampant
And then over them lay a sower tree parsant,
With a man like you in a green field pendant,
Having a hempten halter about his neck, with a knot under the left ear,
because you are a younger brother.
Then sir, there stands on each hand holding up the crease,
I worthy Ost^ers hand in a dish of grease:
Besides all this, on the helmet stands the hangmans hand,
Ready to turn the Ladder whereon your picture did stand:
Then under the helmet hung tables like chains, and for what they are I cannot
devise.
Except it be to make you hang fast, that the crows might pick out your eyes.

What a swad is this? I had been better to have sent him to the back door,
to have gotten some alms amongst the rest of the poor.
Thou praist thou can not tell what, or else art not well in thy wit,
I am sure my arms are not blazd so far abread as yet.

O yes sir, your arms were known a great while ago,
For your elder brother Deceit did give those arms too,
Mary the difference is all, which is the knot under the left ear.
the Painter says when he is hanged, you may put out the knot without fear.
I am sure they were your arms, for there was written in Roman
letters round about the hempten collar,
Given by the worthy valiant Captain master Fraud the O^lar.
Now God be with ye sir, i'll get me even close to the back door.
Farewell Com beggar, and wily Will, lle beg with you no more.

O farewell Simplicity, we art very loath to lose thy company.

Now he to gone give care to me. You seem to be sound men in every joint and
him.
And can ye live in this sort to ^o up and down the country a begging?
O base minds I trow, I had rather hack it out by the high way side,
Than such misery and pen^rie still to abide.
Sirs, if you will be ru^de by me, and do what I shall say,
I'll bring ye where we shall have a notable fine pray.
It is so sirs, that merchant, one Mercad^rus, is coming from Turkey
And it is my Ladies pleasure that he robbed should be,
She hath sworn that we shall be all sharers alike,
And upon that willed me some such companions as you be to seek.

O worthy Captain Fraud, you have wo^ne my noble hart:
You shall see how manfully I can play my part.
And here's wily Will, as good a fellow as your heart can wish,
To go a fishing with a crank through a window, or to set lime twigs to
catch a pan, pot, or dish.

He says true for I tell you I am one that will not give back,
Not for a double shot out of a black Jack.
O sir, you bring us a bed when ye talk of this gear,
Come, shall we go worthy Captain? I long till we be there.

I, let us about it, to provide our weapons ready,
And when the time serves, I my self will conduct ye.

O valiantly spoken, come wily Will, two pots of ale wele bestow
On our Captain courageously for a parting blow.

Sir Gerontus, because you are the palinti^e, you first your mind shall say,
Declare the cause you did arrest this merchant yesterday.

Then learned Judge attend; this Mercadorus, whom you see in place,
Did borrow two thousand ducats of me, but for a five weeks space.
Then sir, before the day came, by his flattery he obtained one thousand more,
And promised me at two months end I should receive my store:
But before the time expired, he ws closely fled away,
So that I never heard of him, at least this two years day,
till at the last I met with him, and did the money did demand,
Who swear to me at five days end he would pay me out of hand.
The five days came, and three days more, then one day he requested:
I perceiving that he flouted me, have got him thus arrested:
And now he comes in Turkish weeds to defeat me of my money,
But I trow he will not forsake his faith, I deem he hath more honesty.

Sir Gerontus you know, if any man forsake his faith, King, country, and
become a Mahomet.
All debts are paid, tis the law of our Realm, and you may not gainsay it.

most true (reverend judge) we may not, nor i will not against our Laws
grudge.

Semo: Mercadorus is this true that Gerontus doth tell?

My Lord judge, de matter, and circumstance be true me know well.
But me will be a Turk, and for dat cause me came here.

Then it is but a folly to make many words. Senior Mercadorus draw near.
Lay your hand on this book, and say after me.

With a good will my Lord judge, me be all ready.

Not for any devotion, but for Lucars sake of my money.

Say I Mercadorus do utterly renounce before all the world,
my duty to my Prince, my honour to my parents, and my good will to my
country.

Furthermore I protest and swear to be true to this country
during life, and thereupon I forsake my Christian faith.

Stay there most puissant judge. Senior mercadorus, consider what you d^,
Pay me the principal, as for the interest, I forgive it you:
And yet the interest is allowed amongst you Christians, as well as in Turkey
Therefore respect your faith, and do not seem to deceive me.

No point da interest, no point da principal.

Then pay me the one half, if you will not pay me all.

No point da half, no point denere, me will be a Turk I say,
me be weary of my Christs religion, and for dat me come away.

Well seeing it is so, I would be loath to hear the people say, it was long of
me
Thou forsakest thy saith, wherefore I forgive thee frank and free:
Protesting before the judge, and all the world, never to demand penny nor
halfepeny.

O sir Gerontus, me take a your prosser, and tank you most heartily.

But ^eneor mercadorus, I trow ye will be a Turk for all this.

Seneor no, not for all da god in da world, me forsake a my Christ.

Why then it is as sir Gerontus said, you did more for the greediness of the
money.
Then for any zeal or good will you bare to Turkey.

Oh sir, you make a great offence,
You must not judge a my conscience.

One may judge and speak truth, as appears by this,
Iewes seek to excel in Christianity, Christians in Iewishnes.

Uell vell, but me tank you sir Gerontus wit all my very hart.

Much good may it do you sir, I repent it not for my part.
But yet I would not have this holden you to serve another so,
Seek to pay keep day with men so a good name on you will go.

You say vel sir, it dus^ good dat me have coosend de Jew,
Faith I would my lady Lucar de whole matter now knew.
Uat is dat me well not do for her sweet sake,
But now me will p^uide my journey toward England to take.
Me be a Turk, no, it will make my lady Lucar to sin^e,
When she knows how me did da scale Jew beguile.

Mistress Love, I marvel not a little what ^oy conceit is crept into your
head,
that you seem so sad and sorrowful since the time you first did wed,
tell me sweet wench what thou ails, and if I can ease thy grief,
I will be pressed to pleasure thee in yielding of relief.
Sure thou make me for to think somewhat hath chaunst amiss.
I pray thee tell me what thou ails, and what the matter is.

My grief alas I shame to show, because my bad intent
Hath brought on me a just reward, and eke a strange event.
Shall I be counted Love, nay rather lascivious Lust,
Because unto Dissimulation I did repose such trust?
But now i moan too late, and blush my hap to tell,
My head in monstrous sort alas, doth more and more still swell.

Is your head then swollen good mistress Love, I pray you let (...) see.
Of truth it is behold a face that seems to smile on me:
It is fair and well favoured, with a countenance smooth and good,
Wonder is the worst, to see two faces in a hood.
Come lets go, wele find some sports to spurn away such toys,

Were it not for lucar, sure Love had lost her joys,

Why, but must I be whipped master Constable indeed?
You may save your labour, for I have no need.

I must needs see thee punished, there is no remedy,
Except thou wilt confess, and tell me.
Where thy fellows are become that did the robbery.

Indeed master Constable, I do not know of their ^ealing.
For I did not see them since we went together a begging:
Therefore pray ye sir be miserable to me, and let me go,
For I labour to get my living with begging you know.

Thou wast seen in their company a little before the deed was done.
therefore it is most likely thou know where they are become.

Why master Constable, if a sheep go among wolves all day.
Shall the sheep be blamed if they s^eale any thing away?

Yea mary shall he, for it is a great presumption,
that keeping them company, he is of like profession.
But dispatch sirs, strip him, and whip him:
Stand not to reason the question.

Indeed twas fraud so it was, it was not I,
And here he comes himself, ask him if I lie.

What says thou villain? I would advise thee hold thy tongue.
I know him to be a wealthy man, and a Burgess of the town.
Sir, and it please your mastership, here's one ^aunders you with (...)
He saith you were the chief doer of a robbery.

What says the rascal? but you know,
It stands not with my credit to brawl:
But good master Constalbe for his slanderous report,
Pay him double, and in as great a matter command me you shall.

M. Constable, must the countnance carry out the knave,
Why then if one will face folks out, some fine repar^ment he must have.

Come sir sack sauce: make quick dispatch at once,
You shall see how finely we will fetch the skin from your bones.

Nay but tell me be you both right handed or no?

What is that to thee, why would thou so same know?

Mary if you should both be right handed, the one would hinde^ the other,
then it would not be done finely according to order:
For if you whip me not with credit it is not worth a pin,
therefore I pray you M. Constable, let me be whipped on the skin.

Whereon dost thou think they would whip thee I pray thee declare?
that thou put us in mind, and take so great care.

I was afraid you would have worn out my clothe^ with whipping, then afterward
I should go naked a begging.

Have no doubt of that, we will savour thy clothes,
Thou shalt judge that thy self, by feeling the blows.

Seruiseable Diligence, bring hither such prisoners as are in
your custody.

My diligence shall be applied very willingly.
Pleases it you, there are but three prisoners so far as I know,
which are Lucar and Conscience, with a deformed creature much like Bi^ons the
base daughter of Iuno.

Nor where is that wretch Dissimulation?

He hath transformed himself after a strange fashion.

Fraud: where is he become?

He was seen in the streets walking in a Citizens gown.

What is become of Usury?

He was seen at the Exchange very lately.

Tell me, when you heard of Simony?

He was seen this day walking in Paules, having conference
very great familiarity with some of the Clergy.

Fetch Lucar and Conscience to the Bar.

Behold worthy judge, here ready they are.

Stand forth: Diligence divide them a sunder.

Lucar, thou art indicted by the name of Lucar,
To have committed adultery with mercadorus the merchant, and Creticus the
Lawyer.
Thou art also indicted for the robbery of mercadore.
Lastly, and chiefly, for the consenting to the murder of Hospitality.
What says thou, art thou guilty or not in these causes?

Not guilty, where are mine accusers, they may shame to show their faces?
I warrant you none comes, nor dare to discredit my name:
In despite of the teeth of them that dare: I speak in disdain.

Impudent, can thou deny deeds so manifestly known.

In denial stands trial: I shame not, let them be shown,
It grinds my gall, they should slander me on this sort:
they are some old cankered currish corrupt Carles that gave me this report.
My soul craves revenge on such my sacred foes,
And revengement I will have, if body and soul I lose.

Thy hateful heart declares thy wicked life,
In the abundance of thy abomination all evils are rife:
But what says thou Conscience to thy accusation
that art accused to have been hawde unto Lucar, and spotted with all
abomination.

What should I say, nay what would I say in this our naughty living.

Good Conscience if thou love me say nothing.

Diligence, suffer her not to stand prating.

What letter is that in thy bosom Conscience? Diligence reach it hither.
Conscience speak on, let me heart what thou can say,
For I know in singlenes thou wilt a truth bewray.

My good Lord I have no way to excuse my self,
She hath corrupted me by flattery, and her accursed ^elfe:
What need further trial, since I Conscience am a thousand witnesses,
I cannot choose but condemn us all in living amiss
Such terror doth affright me, that living, I wish to die:
I am afraid there is no spark left for me of Gods mercy.

Conscience where had thou this letter?

It was put into my bosom by Lucar:
Willing me to keep secret our lascivious living,
I cannot but condemn us all in this thing.

How now mallepart stand you still in defence or no?
This letter declares thy guilty Conscience, how says thou is it not for
Tell me, why stand thou in a maze? speak quickly:
Had thou thy tongue so liberal, and now stand to study?

O Conscience thou hast killed me, by thee I am overthrown.

It is happy that by Conscience thy abomination is known,
Wherefore I pronounce judgment against thee on this wise:
Thou shalt pass to the place of darkness, where thou shalt hear fearful
cries.
Weeping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, and torment without end,
Burning in the lake of fire and brunstone because thou can not amend:
Wherefore Diligence convey her hence, throw her down to the lowest hell,
Where the infernal sprites and damned ghosts do dwell.
And bring forth Love.
Declare that cause Conscience at large, how thou con^est so spotted,
Whereby many by thee hath been greatly infected:
For under the colour of Conscience thou deceiuedst many,
Causing them to difile the temple of God, which is mans body:
A clean conscience is a sacrifice: Gods own resting place,
Why wast thou then corrupted so, and spotted on thy face?

When Hospitality had his throat cut up Usury,
He oppressed me with cruelty, and brought me to beggary:
Turning me out of house and home, and in the end,
my gown to pait my rent, to him I did send;
So driven to that extremity, I have fallen to that you see,
Yet after judgment I hope of Gods mercy.

O Conscience, shall cankered quam corrupt thy heart?
Or shall want in this world cause thee to feel everlasting sma^t
O Conscience what a small time thou hast on earth to live,
why doest thou not then, to God all honour give?
Considering the time is everlasting that thou shalt live in bliss,
If by thy life thou rise from death, to judgment mercy, and forgiveness.
Stand aside Conscience, bring Love to the bar.
What says thou to thy deformity, who was the cause?

Lady Lucar.

Did Lucar choke thee so, that thou gave thy self over to lust?
And did prodigal expenses cause thee in Dissimulation to trust?
Thou wast pure Love, and art thou become a monster,
Bolstring thy self upon the lasciviousness of Lucar?
Love answer for thy self, speak in thy defence.

I cannot choose but yield, confounded by Conscience.

Then judgment I pronounce on thee, because thou followed Lucar,
Whereby thou hast sold thy soul to feel like torment with her,
Which torments comprehended are in the worm of Conscience,
who raging still, shall ne'er have end, a plague for thine offence,
Care shall be thy comfort, and sorrow shall thy life sustain,
thou shalt be dying, yet never dead, but pining still in endless pain.
Diligence convey her to Lucar, let that be her reward,
Because unto her cankered coin she gave her whole regard.
But as for Conscience, carry her to prison,
there to remain until the day of general session:
Thus we make an end,
Knowing that the best of us all may amend:
UUhich God grant to his good will and pleasure,
That we be not corrupted with the unsatiate desire of vanishing earthly
treasure:
For Covetousness is the cause of wresting mans Conscience,
Therefore restrain thy lust, and thou shalt shun the offence.

Paule Buck.

