TO greet this fair Assembly Hermes comes,
The winged Herald 'twixt the gods and men,
And helps an Infant-Muse, who not admires
His own, nor envies others clearer fires:
Whose modest Venus every where forbears
To speak what may offend your Attic ears.
His chiefest aim and Art is for to fit
Unto this Place, (the Vatican of Wit)
His Lines, that this fair Confluence may allow,
What his Minerva hath contrived now.
He to no foreign parts for plot doth roam,
But speaks such Language as he learnt at home.
The Scene Parrhesia is, the chiefest State
Of great, but much disturbed Hermenia:
Discourse fallen mad, and troubled Method fled;
Young Intellect surprised, Invention
Parts from Judicium; all that is amiss,
Is rectified by Analysis.
This, and what else we shall present to night
Unto this Round, we offer as a Rite:
For you can truly judge, and give report
Of what you hear above the Vulgar sort.
But here the Sophister, how to commence,
Or take's Degree, as yet is in suspense:
By keeping of his Acts, he now will try
To get your Placet by his Fallacy.

NOt yet begins the East-disturbing Morn
To draw aside Nights fable Canopy, (plays
Nor heavens great Spy, whose curious search dis-
The worlds close errors, yet o'relooks the earth,
When now long since lazy slow-pac't sleep
Hath posted by my scarce*saluted eyes:
And let him pass; he's not that powerful God,
Whom ever-waking Fallacy adores.
Sacred Deocit, to thee be consecrate
My Temples, aid thou Goddess mine attempt,
I soon will free me. Here comes my servant Ambiguity.

I am in doubt, and I think cannot easily be resolved, whether it were better
living in Hell, where there is no day; or at my Masters, where there is no
night: I cannot tell what any young Gentlewoman would answer to the blind
Philosophers question. I am sure to me, Nulla videtur voluptas nocturna: There
cannot the least sleep harbour under my brows, but it is presently started
with the loud cries of my Master. Melancholy keeps him always waking, and his
envy will not suffer me to take any rest: Then my head hath scarce forgot my
pillow, when his buzzing Suitors swarming about me, sting my ears like
Hornets: like ghosts on this side Cocytus, they flock thither in infinite
multitudes, to be wafted over to Hell: I would they were all once shipped
thither, and dispatched; they are so importunate, that I could curse Nature who
hath given me two ears to hear them, and but one tongue (though that
indifferent double) to answer them. But at length I bethought me, she hath
given me two legs to convey me from them.


'Twere good she had given you more eyes to see your Master.


I would she had given me yours, you might not have seen your man.


Well sir, I hope she would have left me hands to have felt him. But hast thou
brought what I bid thee?


I have Sir, and I have not. (not.

I was about to thank you Sir, but now I thank you
What hast thou done?

I have brought Sir, but not as you bid me.

Villain, go run again.

Nay Sir, I thought it better to bring two Violls at one going, than at twice
going one Viol. There were two of water of the same colour, and I have brought
them both.


Well, where are they?

Here sir.

So double diligence, 'Tis no great matter: Indeed their colours are the same,
and their effects not much unlike. This being tasted, causes drunkenness;
this sudden madness: and this is the drink I have provided for my Fathers
mornings draught. Sirrah take you that, you may chance to have use of it; you
know the virtue?


Yes Sir.

And now what are these Suitors that so much trouble you?


Master, you have seen Deaths dance in Boccus, Merchants, Vittulers, Vintners,
Tobacco-men, Informers, Projectors, all those that mourned at Tigellius his
Funeral; Ambubaiarum collegia, Pharmacapolae,

I am sure you know them.

And know my self unable to content them.
Riches and honour, all the worlds delights
Their hearts desire, I have given them,
And like the Farmer old Stercatius,
Still toiling in his dung-hill, or his field,
As with his grosser soul best sympathizing,
Spending his spirits, sparing of his pelf,
Defraudeth his own Genius, all to make
His Masters Son an upstart Gentleman
Of Innes of Court: so have I hitherto
On this still-craving brood freely bestowed
My choicest favours, to advance their states:
Whilst I my self in scorn and infamy,
Have basely lived, am basely like to dye.
And could I suffer this so vile contempt?
Yet am I hated too; who can endure
Contempt and hatred to go unrevenged?
Or were it else where, I might contaie my self
Dissemble this my grief, neglect my shame.
But here within the great Hermenia,
In hatred and contempt to draw my breath,
A thousand times 'tis worse than cursed death,
But that which more torments my vexed soul,
Bold Demonstration, and quick Topicus,
Though better borne, yet both my younger brothers,
Are every where admired, and beloved.
Them old Discourse, our too much doting Father,
Kisses, embraces, seeks to magnify.
On them the Vulgar and Nobility
With no less joy do fix their gazing eyes,
Than the neare-death escaping Mariners
Upon fair Ledaes Twins, if they appear
After a tempest, when the Heavens are clear.
To them which scarce my spite-swolne tongue can speak,
My heart abhors to think, are destined
The fair Scientia and Opinion
In happy Spousals to be married:
Now Fa^acy, 'tis thou must this prevent,
Or pine in grief, in shame, in discontent.
And see (o fairest Opportunity)
That ever favour'sts Fallacies attempts,
I'll kiss thy gracious hand, and with my heart
Embrace thy sweet-selfe-offering courtosie.

WEll hath the great Creator of the world
Framed it in that exact and perfect form,
That by it self unmovable might stand,
Supported only by his Providence.
Well hath his powerful Wisdom ordered
Th'in nature disagreeing Elements,
That all affecting their peculiar place,
Maintain the conservation of the whole.
Well hath he taught the swelling Ocean
To know his bounds, lest in luxurious pride
He should insult upon the conquered Land.
Well hath he placed those Torches in the Heavens,
To give light to our else all darkened eyes:
The Crystal windows thorough which our soul
Looking upon the worlds most beauteous face,
Is blessed with sight and knowledge of his works.
Well hath he all things done: for how alas
Could any strength or wit of feeble man
Sustained have that greater Universe,
Too weak an Atlas for one Common-wealth
How could he make the Earth, the Water, Air,
And Fire, in peace their duties to observe,
Or bridle up the head-strong Ocean,
That cannot rule the wits and tongues of Man,
And keep them in? it were impossible
To give light to the world, with all his Art,
And skill, that cannot well illuminate
One darkened understanding. Oh my sons,
Never admire the Seat of government,
Nor let the haughty and ambitious thoughts
Of an aspiring mind, inflame your hearts
To climb up to the false-supposed Heaven
Of high-authority.

Now I think I am prevented: is he not stark mad already?


The Chair of State,
Though glorious seeming, oft proves dangerous,
Is always troublesome, always envied.
J hear the Regent of this only Land
Not altogether unexperienced,
Having the assistance of grave Counsellers,
Ready to faint with burden of my cares,
Think happy great Tiphoeus, who, they say
Lies pressed down under large Sicily.

Your loving Son, if his purpose hold, will ease you; you shall not think
Ae^na upon your shoulders, he will make your head light enough.


Let then your true affection so well placed
On well deserving, well requiting loves,
Doubly reflecting on your nearer selves,
Grow strong in fast united amity;
That what no single strength or wit can do,
Virtue conjoined, may attain unto.
But Demonstration call young Intellect
To be instructed; he was hither sent
By that great Empress of the Isle of Man,
Renowned Anima his careful Mother,
And as his youth, this child-hood of the day
Will best admit the best impressions.
But who's that? Fallacy? and whence come you?

My gracious Father, carried on the wings
Of my ne'er sleeping Piety, I came
From my own house to do my humble duty
Unto your Majesty. (you

Your earliness hath made some hast, but a report of
From far, before you, late hath been with me.
How comes it to pass thus, o my son!
Unhappy son, borne to thy fathers shame,
Living unto his grief, thou cause me
In all the world to be ill spoken of
Through thy most lewd behaviour, I hear say
With Jugglers, Cony-catchers, Gypsies, Rogues,
Base gamesters, lying Mountebanks, wild bawds,
And most damned couzners, you keep company,
At blind Ale-houses, Innes, and Ordinaries,
Whore-houses, and Apothecary-shops,
With such like places, you do still frequent,
Where you abuse the plain simplicity
Of honest men, that I may justly spend
That breath where-with I would have blessed thee,
Into deserved cursings; and I ought
Profusely power it forth in chiding thee.
But oh though wicked, yet I think my son,
I do entreat thee, I will sue to thee
To leave these courses, and at length begin
Better to govern thy misguided self:
Look to thy brothers, and not scorn to learn;
To me they duly do perform their duty
To men they do approve their honesty.

Sir, will it please you to drink this morning?

Yes, I am dry with talking.

Then may it please your grace to give me leave
To speak in poor defence of my just cause.

Say what thou can, and oh I would thou could
Clear thee of these foul accusations?

First may I Sir, full worthily except
Against the oft-false-proved messenger,
Ever to be suspected, lying fame.
Then I appeal unto the Testimony
Of all the world, whether I have not
Always my self associated with
The best reputed sort: great Princes have
Accepted of my wished for company.
With most chief Statesmen I have been familiar,
Upon the Exchange not looked for, I have been
By many wealthy Merchants oft saluted.
The fairest streets of the most famous Cities,
Are almost worn out with my often steps.
Nay, what place is there of more special note,
Where I (though not apparent seen of all,
Iknow you hate that foolish vanity)
Have not been for the most part, resident?
But I hereafter, that your faithful eye
May give true witness to my carriage,
N^arer at home, here in your sight intend
To show my self, and my deserts approve
To your sure comfort, and my friends sound love.

Where's your Napkin Topicus?

I have forgot it.

Fie, had you no odd place to put you in mind,
Go quickly and fetch one.

Let me embrace thee Fallacy, let me kiss thee my dearest son, the prop of
my age, the sole heir of my love: My ears shall be shut up hereafter to any
complaints brought against thee; I will take it as against my self; if any
henceforth accuse thee, I will fight with him, I will beat and baffle him; I
will run upon him, spit upon him.


How lik'st thou this Ambiguity? is not his Style changed since?


Yes me thinks; before he spake in Verse, now he scannes not his words.


Oh thou shalt hear him talk out of all measure.

I will now go walk into the Garden of the Muses, and gather the choicest
flowers that grow about Helicon, to make a Garland for thy temples. I'll make
the skilful Rhetoricians to empty all their shops of the freshest colours to
paint thy cheeks withal. Then the Grammarians I'll cause to shape fit and
well-fashioned garments for thee of the purest Silk that ever was framed of
true-woven words: Come go with me, come go with me.


NOw what strange passion hath befallen my father I
I wonder that he did so fawn upon
Unworthy Fallacy; yet that may be
Proceeded from a Fathers tender love.
But he looked ghastly, and his colour changed,
And seemed to grow forgetful what he did;
I pray this humour hold not.

How now Brother?
Met you your Father?

Not I; is he gone?
He bid me call up young Lord Intellect.

Marry beshrew you, I could wish you had let me alone; you awaked me out of a
most sweet sleep.


What is the matter?

Nay I swear I know not;
But I do fear all is not well with him.

Not well, and stand we talking?

I protest I am amazed.

Come let us seek him out.

Young Lord you were best to stay; they go to seek one whom they know not
where to find. Now I hope to make my Master dote as much on me, as his mad
father doth on him, if I can convey away this purchase.


But when will Lord Discourse come? I desire to learn somewhat this morning.


My young Lord, if you will go with me, I will lead you to such a Library, as
all Hermenia yields not the like again.


But are there any Books for my use?

Of all sorts.

Any Logic or Philosophy?

The best Logic, Rhetoric, Philosophy that can be.

Whose I prithee?

Why you shall find there Piscators Logic, Butlers Rhetoric.


Indeed, Faecundi calices quem non fecere disertum?

O sir, the only Rhetoric in price;
You shall have too Magirus Physics.

What Kitchin-Physick?

Bakers Arithmetic.

That will teach me to tell Thirteen to the dozen* what, you think I will
prove Helluo librorum? Well, I will go with you for once.


And stay with me I hope, longer than you are willing

But is it certain which Report affirms?
Young Topicus and Demonstration,
So shortly shall be married? Speak Iudicium,
What do you hear?

I am for truth assured
E're night their Nuptials will be finished:
This Morning from Verona come the Ladies,
Whose presence only is attended here.
And now the love, Invention, which you bear
To Topicus, may best conceive my joy,
For Demonstrations equal happiness.

My joy and love esteemed by your own
You well approve, and make me confident
Upon your judgment in a lesser thing:
My working thoughts to celebrate this day,
Have here brought forth a rude impollisht Rime
Where-with I dare trust your friendly censure.

You may be bold, on me, who cannot blame
What ever quick Invention hath composed.

Nay, flattery becomes you not; 'tis this.

What is't an Epigram?

I have mistaken.

Nay Sir, by your favour, I will presume upon your courtesy to read it.


Our Civil Law doth seem a royal thing,
It hath more Titles than the Spanish King*
But yet the Common Law quite puts it down,
In getting, like the Pope, so many a Crown.

Nay, now I pray conceal not what you think,

You know Iudicium ought to be conformed
To Laws, and not to speak his mind of them.

I ask your censure of my Epigram,
Not of the Laws.

I think that it were fit
It had a gloss to show your meaning, what
You understand by Titles, and by Crowns;
Those words are doubtful: but Sir shall I see
The other?

Stay, her's Fallacy.

THese are the Dragons that so duly keep
The golden fruit which I so long to crop:
Oh that I could enchant them! well, I'll try:
Say, faithful followers of young Intellect,
Is your dear Lord come by? or where's he gone?

How? our dear Lord come by; or where's he gone?
What means Lord Fallacy? did not great Discourse
Send for him by your Brother?

We hither came, thinking to find him here.

I know not that, but this I do assure you,
He is departed from the Court, and fled:
The cause my sorrow doth forbid to show;
Thus much my love hath made me let you know.

'Twere needless now for us to ask the cause,
Let's think upon some means to find him out.

Can you advise us Fallacy?

Not I;
You better both can find and judge what's sit.

I am amazed.

And so I swear am I.

Well, if my counsel may do any good,
I wish that both of you pursue him straight;
You towards Rhemes, Invention, and you
Iudicium to Verona, nor return
Till you have found him: you may better seek
In any place than here, where oh alas,
Discourse distracted is enough to affright
Far stronger wits.

Discourse distracted? how?

O pardon me, I know not.

Come, let's go,
You vex him with your fruitless Questions.

Well may you speed, I would go on your way,
But that my piety here bids me stay:
What are you gone? ne'er may you meet again,
Or meeting, ne'er return. I cannot like
Such curious fellows in strange Commonwealths.
And now for young Lord Intellect, my hope
Stands resolute of quickly taking him,
I may go prosecute my chief designs.

I Would the number of things in the world had been less, or the names more, I
might not have been thus troubled. There is nothing spoken or written but is
subject to so many interpretations, that without Distinction* gives occasion
of an hundred evasions. An Obligation cannot be made for ten Groats, but the
Attorney will have half a Crown for Parchment: no less will hold the
Addition of the parties names, of younger and elder, Butcher and Tanner of
Witam and Wolvercoate; that if the unskilful Painter was fain to write under
his well resembled Pictures, this is a Dog, this is an Hare, I had need to
come after and tell what Dog, what Hare he means. But yesterday an Herald
was with me, who* as I loved to save blood-shed, entreated me to help him to
pacify two incensed Citizens, who since the year 1610, when all Artificers
and Tradesmen became Gentlemen, fortuned to light both upon the same
Coate-armour, and now were ready to fight, who should have it most proper, if I
lent him not some difference to put betwixt them: I asking what the Coat was,
he told me a Bulls head, whereupon I advised him to call his, that was the
younger, an Oxe-head, and make the horns a little longer; and I hope by this
they are contented. And indeed I cannot wonder that so often many things have
but one name, when sometimes one thing engrosseth many names, like the Spanish
Nobility, which require whole sheets for a Superscription. You may enquire for
a Broker, meet with a Bawd, and fall into the hands of an Usurer, yet all but
one Citizen. You may there see a Scholl^r troubled with the Rheum, a Gentleman
ill at ease, a Serving-man stark drunk, all sick of one disease; I would some
would reduce these things to a parity, and relieve the nullity of some by the
plurality of others; or som^ good Cyrus would adventure a jerking, by taking
away from short things those Titles which are too long for them, and giving to
those who are too short, and so fit them both. If Division would come once, I
would speak to him my self, to make a more equal distribution; and I wonder
he stays so long; but now here he comes with the rest.


Come, come, my Lord, it is time we were about this business.


Good my Lord Difinition, you must pardon me, you know I am troubled with two
shrewd impediments, Age and weakness; and besides Dichotomy hath let me
blood, and charged me I should neither use Horse nor Coach, but trust to mine
own two legs; nay he will fearce permit me a staff to Ieane upon.


My Lord Division, it were best that you fate down if you are weary.


Distinction have you brought the rolls? they be the Records which preserve
things done from swallowing up in oblivion.


If you mean the rolls you bid me, I have; if any other, I have not.


Description give me my Spectacles, not without good cause hath our Sovereign
sent unto us to draw out for him the pedigree, which is a true lineal descent
of all the chiefest inhabitants within these provinces, and view their ancient
possessions, which are be Dominions and Lands, conveyed them by their
Ancestors, least here it should come to pass, which is happened in all other
Countries, that the dignity and jurisdiction depart from the noblest houses,
which are families retaining in many generations, the impression of some
heroical virtue, and pass to upstarts, who are such as Fortune, not Desert
hath made gracious.


Nay fear not that; while Opposition lives, there shall be always some to
resist that confusion.


With which Province will you begin, with Substance, or with Quantity?


Best I think with Substance, right, and here is the roll: The first Duke
that reigned here, and gave his name to the Country was Substance; I cannot
well say what he was, his antiquity was so great.


He was the eldest son of Ens, was he not Opposition?


No, he was his eldest child, the rest were Daughters.


It should seem so, for accidents are of a feminine nature, they cannot exist
alone by themselves.


Well, howsoever this Realm was equally divided amongst them; I have heard,
Pythagoras was employed in assigneing them their portions.


It is not so, it was his Scholar Archetas Tarentinus, he measured out the
Provinces by his Geometry.


Hence we may gather of what antiquity this Kingdom was, it is sure as ancient
as the Roman Empire, for Architas and Numa were Schoole-fellowes.


Fie no, Pythagoras lived long before him.


This Country was then called Decaphylia, till afterward subdued by Mercury,
was by him called Hermenia.


Well, howsoever let us proceed: Substance matching with the Lady Corporea, had
by her a son called Corpus.


My Lord, there were two Dukes of that name, one in the Province of Substance,
another in the Province of Quantity.


But we mean him of Substance.


Good Lord, what odds there is betwixt the men that were in those days, and
the men that are now in this latter declining Age of the World. This Duke
Substance was a monstrous, tall, huge, big man; he had a head greater than
any Horse, a neck like a Bull, larger sides than the Western Hog; Legs
like Winde-mill posts, and feet proportionable: His son Corpus was very like
unto him; the Aldermen of the Corporation, that are scarce able'to come in at
our Colledge-gates, might have shown tricks like Tumblers in a hoop, through
his Thumb-ring; King Arthurs tallest Knight would have scarce trust his points.
The Bull-hide, that cut out in Thongs, compassed as much ground as the walls of
Carthage, could not make him a Girdle.


I wonder how any man had so much leisure as to look about him, and draw his
description.


O sir ex pede Herculem.


Him succeeded Corpus, surnamed Animatum; him Animal, who was named Rationale,
and begat Homo.


He had two wives, the other was Irrationale.


Sure that Irrationale had many Husbands, I have known her married to above
Twenty my self.


Why? had not all the rest so? Substance, Corpus, and Corpus animatum, my son
Privation, if he were here, could tell their names.


Where is he?


He hath lain a long time bed-ridden, deaf, blind, and dumb.


I am sorry for him.


Who are next Definition?


Homo begat Socrates, Plato, and the rest.


Now thou see Description, Nature gives with two hands; with one the gifts of
the body, with the other the qualities of the mind; so to these men she hath
now given more understanding than unto Substance, Corpus, and those in former
time.


But may it not be doubted, whether Socrates and Plato were of this Country; I
could never hear that they had much to do with Substance.


'Tis true, if you mean Substance as the Vulgar do, for wealth: But if you
understand it as we do, the Province, questionless they had.


I say they had not, and can prove it: They were Philosophers, were they not?


Yes.


And Philosophers have no place here.


And why not Sir?


Because ignorant fellows have not, it holds from contraries.


So it pleases you to conclude Sir; but how prove you that Sir?


They are Transcendents over all the Provinces, and therefore cannot rightly be
said to be in any.


Indeed they say, Homer had seven Cities strove for his Birth, but none ever
gave him place of abiding: but I thought Philosophers had more certain abode
than a wandering Poet.


They are in Substance, for they love to stand by themselves, and depend on
none: They are in Quantity, for ignorant men are in number many, in magnitude
monstrous.


I think least of all in Quantity, for they are rather in number infinite; and
I cannot tell whether they have Longitude and Latitude, I am sure they have no
profoundnesse.


Profoundnesse either may be taken for deepnesse of judgement and
understanding, and that they are far from, or for thick grosnesse, and that
in them is most palpable.


They are in Quality: for who so fat, fair, strong, and lusty as they? out of
Relation they cannot be: You have ignorant Rulers, ignorant Subjects, ignorant
Tutors, and ignorant Schollers: who more in Action? who more passionate in all
places, at all times? who use more gestures? Who better apparelled?


For the particulars, you Description, take this our Licence, by which we do
authorize you to go through the Country, and take notice of the names and
Differences of them all: For us it is sufficient to set down these things in
general.


Belike Sir, you mean I shall not dye in idleness?


Shall we proceed to some other Province?


I must first have the assistance of Lord Demonstratition; I can do nothing
without him.


Why send you not Distinction for him?

Go tell him we expect his coming; entreat him to make haste.


Now my Lords, as you love your selves, or respect the State, employ your
careful providence with all expedition.


Why? what is the matter? good Proposition speak.


Oh, I shall speak too soon: Our Lord Discourse, is fallen stark mad.


Fallen mad? Oh fatal calamity!


What shall we do?


Nay, worse than this.


Worse cannot be.


Demonstration, Topicus, and Fallacy, are hot in contention who must govern.


How comes Fallacy near him, lately he could no endure him?


I know not how: but now he seems exceedingly to affect him.


Have they no more care of their Father? this is too bad; 'twere good for to
take some order with them presently.


Let us go visit him, hereafter we will go finish these businesses.


HE is not here: 'tis common to say, He is a true man that never deceives his
Master: and I think it may properly be said, He is a rare Master that never
deceives his man. This is not the first time my Master Fallacy hath sent me on
such idle errands: He is right like the fellow that when he had nothing to
steal, filled his Pockets with Rushes: rather than he will deceive no body, he
will deceive me. But let him take heed he play not like the mad fellow Aiax,
who when he had left nothing else to kill, slew himself: and so when he can no
longer cozen others, he will cozen himself: His golden Letters, written with an
Angels quill, will do him no good: But here I think he comes; no, it is
Distinction: This Villain I can no more endure than Demosthenes could Phocion:
he is the fatal Axe of all my Policies, the (...) of all my subtle Devices.


My Lords, what are they gone? it had been solly for them to stay for
Demonstration.


He must not be of our Council, if Opposition should chance to come.


There was ado indeed: Old Discourse talking nothing but of Quadratures, of
Circles, of Lines running nearer and nearer, but never coming together: of
Hexities, Ideas, Quintessences, Sublimations, Corporal Ubiquities, infinite
Quantities, Consubstantiations, Transubstantiations; things beside impossible:
I wonder what he means; surely he is besides himself.


Well, I must adventure on him, delay may prove dangerous. How now Distinction,
what news is stirring?


Oh Sir, I see that stirring head of yours is weary of our better state: you
listen to hear of some new change?


What are there windows in my breast? this fellow knows my heart.

Not I Distinction.


No, you are Ambiguity.


You may mistake me.


Yes, if I take thee for any other than thou art.


What's that Sir?


An honest man.


Indeed you say true, he doth mistake me that thinks me other than an honest
man.


But you say false: I say he doth mistake that takes thee for an honest man,
otherwise than thou art.


Why Distinction? 'tis not you can find fault with my honesty.


No, I'll be sworn.


Why say you so then?


Because I can find no honesty with thy faults.


Come, come Distinction, if I have been faulty, you know no man is borne
without faults.


Yes, and I think there are few faults borne without thee.


Come prithee, thou art always disposed to cross me, but I will not fall out
with thee for a Kingdom.


You would for a lesser matter, if fear did not hold your hands.


Sir you shall know my hands be free.


Why, you will not draw Sir?


Yes, I will Sir.


What, not your Sword?


No, good Distinction, I love thee too well; I'll draw my Purse, with all my
heart, to do thee good.


I thank you good Amphoteros: but I fear you have two Purses, as he had two
Chests; one full of money, the other of thanks.


That I have, my dear Oudeteros, and if thou wilt go with me, I will draw
them both; the one to pay for the wine we will drink, the other to thank thee
for thy Company.


Well, I'll go with thee.


I Cannot conjecture wherefore Fallacy is so desirous to speak with me, he
requested I would meet him here sometime before we fate, and yet he is not
come. Now I do wonder I was so much moved at his carriage in this business, I
begin to pity his poor fortune: Alas, that he was base borne; but what of
his base birth? Hercules was base borne, so was Romulus, so many Worthies: He
seems to have more wit than both his Brothers, and although that be counted
such a blot, yet who can condemn him? it was no fault of his; but what if
there hath gone a bad report of him? why he may mend in time. Was not
Themistocles a dissolute young fellow, yet who proved a braver Soldier? Oh 'tis
Magistracy shows the man; what hopes? what encouragements hath he ever had?
still kept under and disgraced; neither is his Title altogether nought: and now
a days 'tis a small right a man would forgo for want of standing to it; I
cannot blame him and a little thing more would make me favour him.


O wonderful operation, two or three drops of this Wine fuming into his head,
turned his brains like the fans of a Winde-mill, and then his tongue like a
clack began to talk on both sides; every thing was taken dupliciter; he talked
pure Scot, and Thomas Occham and Caietan might have learnt some new
Schoole-learning from him: but this storm held not long, e're a still calm
followed this violent tempest; and he fell fast asleep, and I think I was not
long uncasing the Fox; he was so ready but now to give a double interpretation
of every word I spake, and I think (to be quitts with him) I shall make more
than a single use of this Cloak: first by this shift I have left him to pay
for the Wine, then by this disguise I may unsuspected come to deliver my
Masters Letter at the Bench, if Opposition come not before: But I think mine
eyes are dazzled; he is here, and I saw him not.


And I saw you, but I knew you not.


My Master Fallacy by me kindly greets you Sir, and would have met you here
himself, but was detained with extraordinary business, and desirous more
closely to impart his mind unto you, by these his Letters doth express the
same.

I doubt not but 'twill do; oh there is great hope: some think the mediation
of Angels may help in Heaven; I am sure Angels are the best intercessors in
Earth: when they become Orators, there is no doubt of propitious audience.
There is no reading to the golden Legends: This Chrysostomes Style is most
persuasive. Hath he done since? I think if it had been longer, it would not
have seemed tedious.


You may tell your Master from me, I have perused his Letters, know his mind,
and will give him my best assistance; bid him be confident.


I will Sir.


Well that's all; I never did hate this Fallacy, and of late I saw matter
deserving pity in him; but now I see he loves me, he is willing to rely upon
me, he dares so far trust me, he doth promise to advance me, I cannot choose
but love him, I must needs help him, I will do my best to honour him: well,
here they come.


GOod Reduction charge Conclusion to keep him fast, and if he chance to break
from him, do you assist him. Come young Lords, I would I could persuade you
altogether to desist from these troublesome contentions; but if that may not
be, this is a fitter place than your sick and distempered Fathers house; let
us hear what you would have, what you can plead for your selves.


Then why do not some dim purblind Stars,
Corrivals with the thrice most glorious Sun,
Sue at the Throne of Heavens Majesty
To rulethe the Day? 'twere less presumption
Than this of these competitors of mine:
For were not I by my Nobility,
And most apparent births prerogative,
In all men's sight, to be preferred, before
This Topicus, and bastard Fallacy:
Yet were my worth, great worth, beyond compare,
To prove my claim just, all-sufficient.
I from the State long since have banished
Gross ignorance, and that her cursed spawn,
Wild superstitious Admiration,
The Tyrant of the vulgar simple minds:
I the chief Shower to my Lord Discourse,
All the most strange and wonderful effects
Of closer working Nature have set forth,
The hidden cause locked from common eyes
In deep, scarce-searchable Obscurity,
I opened wide to his illustrious view.
I the renowned Champion of Truth,
Have her defended against her proudest foes,
And many combats for her honour fought,
Never returning conquered from the field,
And therefore now to any scorn to yield.

You may speak Topicus.

If any words of mine may find attention,
In your not yet fully possessed ears,
Nor shall it seem presumption to you
Judicious Lords, which seems so palpable
To prejudicious Demonstration,
That I my title dare maintain with him;
Your reverent wisdoms are not ignorant
That though he hath been honoured more of late,
Yet was I bo^ne before him; then if he
For birth-right claims ought, 'tis due to me:
Nor to his high prized worth inferior,
Are my deserts not und ervalued?
If he his foe in close and narrow lists
Have, as he bravely vaunts, encountered,
And that not often, for none-profiting
Only, selfe-pleasing, Contemplation,
The single combats oftner fought by me
In just defence of your empaired rights,
Are no less famous, no less known to you:
Besides, I always in the Champion field
Of Rhetoric well levied forces led,
Chief Muster-master to the Sovereign Liege,
Our high Commander and chief General,
Under Truths colours many skirmishes
I have endured, won many Victories:
Then let me for the King, for truth, for you,
In all your causes never wont to fail,
For mine own self in this mine own prevail.

If you have done, let's hear young Lord Fallacy.

If that my vows, or tears, my gracious Lords
Conjoined with yours, could move the angry Heavens,
This doubtful question should not trouble you:
Thou should great King enjoy thy right, and we --

(Oh admirable piety!)

Would rest as happy still enjoying thee:
But since that fate, (O hard and cruel fate)
Denies him his right mind, denies us him,
Envies us all this great felicity,
Who may more hope his regency t'attaine,
Than he in whom his virtues most remain
Nor let it any thing impeach my right,
That unadvised Demonstration
Objects to me, base birth, who doth not see
His Father he disgraces, and not me;
If ought he from his Mothers right doth claim,
Let him enjoy it, i'll him not deceive.
But if he at his Fathers rule doth aim,
He was my Father too, and by his leave,
Although I chance it not to have with him one mother
On the best side, I am his elder brother.
Nor are my virtues meaner than my birth,
Witness those many difficult attempts,
Which quite impossible for any else
To hope t'achieve, with expedition,
And not without success, I have performed.
Witness that most rare service to this Realm,
Which I with diligence have executed.
Discourse his chief controwler in the state,
Truths sole solicitor, common Attorney
In all the causes which concern the Land:
And all this, though by far exceeding all,
Which my Competitors can promise you,
If to my first deserts you give due meed,
With future industry I vow to exceed.
If they which most they can, (and who can less?
Shall scarce defend, scarce defence asking right,
I will your weakest causes fortefie,
And make appear most strong in most men's sight.
Who hates us, shall not think us overthrown;
Who favours us, shall swear the right our own.
Now all this that I might effect for you,
Let me receive at your hands what's my due.

My Lord speak what you think.

Did you as true Piety (which is a reverent and grateful respect of your
Parents) commands you, strive who should have the greatest part in lamenting
this his Ecstasy, (which is a Distraction of his brains, or a privation of
those gifts of understanding, which of late he happily enjoyed) I should give
you equal praise; (which is the deserved testimony of a virtuous action) but
seeing you carried by Ambition, (that violent passion, which desires nothing
but honour) into these Civil Divisions: (which are Dissentions, disquieting
your friends, and delightful to your enemies) To say no more, I can commend
none of you. But because Justice (which is a perpetual and constant will to
give to every man his due) doth warrant me to define this present controversy,
if you will stand to my Judgement, (which is the censure I shall give)
Demonstration, the noblest son of Discourse, by the Lady Necessity, (who
concludes all things which he undertakes so truly, so immediately, so surely)
shall succeed in his fathers dignity: (which is his kingdom and place in this
realm) what thinks Division?


These three that sue for Discourse his dignity, are either true borne sons,
or base borne: the true borne plead either in right of birth, or of desert;
their birth they either commend from Priority, or Nobility; their deserts
either they set out from their greatness, or from their goodness. Now because
base borne sons never inherit, I think Fallacy hath no right at all. Again,
because Primo-geniture hath been always preferred before great birth, and
often good works serving for use and action, are better than seldom great
effects, which tend to nothing but to Admiration and Contemplation: I Judge
Topicus, Discourse his eldest son, by meaner Parentaged Probability, in that,
in all matters, at all times, we shall have use of him to be chosen before
Demonstration, second son, though begotten on nobler descended Necessity, of
whose virtue we have so seldom experience.


If you have spoken, you may give me leave: I therefore think neither
Demonstration fit, nor Topicus worthy, and therefore choose Fallacy.


Why so?

Ask not my reason, I stand for him or none.

He is base borne, and base birth, is a vile condition, which to them that are
unlawfully hegotten doth purchase infamy, and bereaves them of all hope of
succession.


Now I think him as true borne as the best; for Demonstration, I always
suspected him to be thy son, because he was so like thee; but now I am
persuaded so, seeing thee to stand so mainly for him.


Nay good Opposition, either speak more advisedly, or hold your peace.


What I have spoken I will stand to it; I will maintain it.


We must bear with you, 'tis your nature to be crossing us perpetually.


Then Proposition it is you must end this controversy, ^ray speak quickly,
'tis your voice must do it.


If that three Dukedoms, all of equal worth,
To these three, all thrice-worthy, noble Lords
Should by our sentence be distributed,
I quickly would decide all doubt; but now
All having equal interest in my love,
All equally deserving in mine eyes,
I swear I know not whom I should prefer
Before the rest, lest I should do the rest
More injury than right to him: therefore
Let me entreat you take some other course,
For the determining of this weighty strife.

Well then young Lords, you must needs rest a while contented, till we can find
some other means to compose these differences, wherein we will use the
speediest means we can invent.


You see dear Brothers how this subtle States,
Defer this controversy to decide,
That keeping us from dignities, they may
Themselves be this Realmesonely Governors:
I therefore loving you, and this our State,
Hating such Machivillian Policy
Sit down unto you, as you can agree,
Let either of you rule the State for me.

And 'twould no less befit you Topicus
To know your self, and learn of Fallacy
To yield unto your betters.

You say true:
To know my self I well may learn of him,
For you are ignorant, and know me not,
Else I persuade my self, as he to both,
You would give place to me.

I do confess
I know thee not, for Demonstration
Looks not so low, with his inquiring eye,
In greater matters only busied.

Oh somewhat 'twas you ne'er could know your self,
Your higher gazing thoughts could ne'er descend
To so wild abject a baseness.

Now brave spirits,
Why suffer you our State unmanaged,
Your selves dishonoured? You are slothful Lords.

Brave spirit, and can I endure
To be called base and abject?

Thou mistake,
Those words were only spoken unto me.
And Contradiction calls thee sloathfull Lord.

Now let your noble courage show it self,
If you neglect this so faire-offerd place,
You worthy are to live in dishonour.

Rather as the Lightning shall my courage pierce
Through any Clouds, that likely are to obscure
My brighter glory.

May the soulest mouths
Of the base vulgar spit upon the face
Of my unspotted credit, if for want
Of courage I abandon these my hopes.

Should I through mine own fault be hindered
In such attempts, oh I should kill my self,
And on my self I would take just revenge.

And shall my brother seek to thrust me down,
And I endure it* Oh the name of a King
Is better than the common vulgar name
Of Brother. Topicus, look to thy self,
He that my right and honour shall deny,
If I do live and breath, shall surely dye.

Fond Demonstration, rather than I'll yield,
Appoint the place, I'll meet thee in the field.

What fitter place than this? where be the weapons?
Fie, fie, how dare you go so unprovided?

Go fetch thy weapons, I will not be long.

But I shall think so till I meet with thee.

I Think that Villain Ambiguity was borne to do me harm, I never was so
overtaken by any as by him: No sooner had I put the Cup to my lips, but my
wits shook hands with my head, and left me to be arrested by dull Sergeant
Sleep, so like a bankrupt Merchant, I was fain to lot down my Shop-windows,
and I think yet had not opend them: but that which plagued me worse, up comes
a Drawer, and delivering me from that prison, was like to have me waking to
another, unless I would pay for the Wine, which that Rascal had promised to
bestow upon me, which I had scarce done, when looking about me, I found the
Villain which had left me witless and money less, lest me also cloakelesse,
till I saw where the forke-tongued Snake had cast this his party-coloured
skin. Now I could be angry with my self for my simplicity: but see the
villain Ignoratio Elener the fool, his fellow, to laugh at me; this would
make Demotritus melancholy.


What Ambiguity, are you studying? My Master Fallacy bad me deliver you these
Keys, and would you should locke up this Viol where you found it: Ladies of
Verona, this wits I know would be working that way, and I must follow.


But say, where are our Brothers? oh I long
To understand how well your love succeeds.

Breathless and wounded both of them I left,
And ere my coming from them, they began
To faint with bleeding.

Bled they very much?

Exceedingly.
Well, so their streaming veins
Shall serve as Conduits dropping Clarret wine,
To sollemnize my Coronation:
And now I cannot but applaud my wits,
And hug my happy Genius that hath thus
Inspight of selfe-conceited honesty,
Found forth this passage to my sweet desires.

But shall your old friends escape so? will you not requite their kindness?


Let Definition and Division, both
Be banished the Court, for Proposition,
He ne'er opposed himself against me much,
We may procure his love, and use his help;
And therefore let him stay. But you
Lord Opposition, willingly I make
My sole or chiefest Counsellor of State,
By whom in all affairs I will be ruled.
You Contradiction. whereso e're I go,
I choose to bear my sword: to your fair trust
Committing both my fortunes and my self.

Ne'er may we thrive in this new policy
If we maintain not what we have begun.

I do believe you, and rely on you;
And therefore know, that not an hour since
I by a sly devised subtlety,
Have luckily surprised the Lady Truth,
With her two famous Daughters; now in doubt
How I might best captive their constant thoughts,
I fain would hear your resolutions.

Were it my care I would enforce them straight.

They should not eat, nor drink, nor rest on minute.
Nay, I would torture, and torment them all,
Till they did yield submissely to my pleasure.

I think such means at first too violent,
I'll try how glozing words, and kind entreaties
Can work upon them: You know not the force
Of well conveyed dissimulation,
Therefore go you, and through Parrhesia,
Proclaim my lawful just succession.

I will my noble Lord.

And do you hear?
To make my name more gracious, more beloved,
I will no longer be called Fallacy:
Stile me great Sophime. You Contradiction,
Let Definition and Division know
What is our pleasure to be done with them.

I ne'er did any thing more willingly.

I my self,
My proj^ct will pursue immediately;
Me thinks my hopes assure me. Now damned slaves,
Disloyal and unfaithful miscreants,
Think ye that I will trust your villainies?
No: these distempered, quarrelling, fighting fellow^.
Most not be conscious to our Policies,
They will rip open one auothers breast,
And prostitute their hearts to vulgar view:
Therefore the next thing that I will contrive,
Shall be their ruin: Dead dogs cannot bite:
That done, I fear not Fortunes envious spite.

IF I go any farther let me be frozen to death, like Sir Hugh Willowby, or be
made Cuckoid with the tedious Traveller Ulysses: It were impossible to see all,
yet I should see more than I should be able to relate, and like Munsier, or Sir
Iohn Mandovill, relate more than any would believe. I care not how these women
take it. The Tailor in Plutarch would as soon make a habit for the Moon, as
any man a Description of them, and so long would it fit them. I think they
consist of Materia prima, they are capable of all forms and impressions, but
constant to none: And it is no great matter to describe them you see them
curiously painted every where. And who would e're thought these Schollers
should have so much troubled me: I supposing they had been so like in their
humours, as they are agreeable in their formalities, thought first to have
drawn the Characters of some of them, but by what time I had observed some
Captitious Critics, Fantastic Humorists, and malicious Satirists, I found
it no less impossible than perilons to deal with that kind, and indeed am
quite dismayed from going any farther in this enterprise. Well, I will deliver
back to the Lords their Commission, and rather sue for a Protection. But who
comes here, Distinction?


How now Description, did thou see our Sove reign Sophime?


Hath Distinction gotten Ambiguities Linsie woolsie Coat? or Ambiguity
Distinctions party-colour'd Cloak? My cunning is quite staggered; I know not
whether I should believe mine eyes or mine ears.


Doth your feeling serve you any better?

Oh, is it you? No wonder I mistook Ambiguity. They say a man may know the
Devil by his cloven Foot; I am sure one may know thee by thy double hand.


Why double hand? I hope I have not four hands.


Nay, thou hast but one hand rather; thou art Ambo-dexter.


Is not that best? So Plato would have his Citizens.


But he would not have them double tongued, as you are.


Then be like Scaliger and (...), who had four and twenty tongues should have
had no place in his Common-wealth.


There is great difference. They many ways could speak one thing, thou one
way speak many things.


That's a sign my words are most significant, which is no small commendation.


Right, if the signification be single and true.

Why not double and true?

That's impossible.

O gross! what truer than the Oracles, which delivered their minds even with
my voice? and who more trusted, whose words cost more, than our common Lawyers,
who for their facility in double dealing, and speaking on both sides, are
called the Oracles of the City? But tell me, saw thou my new disguised
Master Sophime?


I prithee, how came thou by this Cloak?

Thou answer not what I ask thee.

Nor doest thou ask what I intend to answer thee.

But see here comes mad Discourse, he will make us admirable sport.


Well, I will not come near him if he be mad.

Nor I, if he were in his wits.

Certain 'tis so; nay I will maintain it, as long as I have any breath; for I
am neither in Delos, nor in the floating Islands of Scotland.


'Twere sitter you were in the Island of Anticyra.

Nor am I in a ship, that I should think the Earth moves.


If you be not, you deserve to be in the ship of fools.

No, no, 'tis even so; the Earth is turned about, his sphaericall form is apt
for such a motion.


You are monstrously deceived, 'tis nothing but the house goes round with you.


Again, the Heavens are of a duller mettle, nothin^, but blew Marble.


I'll go talk with him. My Lord (...), what Paradox is this, are the Heavens
made of Marble.


Doest thou doubt of that? why, in a clear day thou may see it plain; and
when it rains, those drops are nothing else, but such as fall from the
sweating stone.


Somewhat it was, that in the time of (...), and as Livy reports, in the 200.
year of Rome, it rained.


Thou say true, very true. (stones

But what think you of the Sun?

Indeed he is beholding to Nature for a better matter: he is made of bright
burnished gold.


If the Sun be gold, I will the sooner believe Sehnus, that there are a
people which see him not in half an year; I know some who see not Gold once
in twelve Months. But what is the Moon Sir?


Why she is but silver.

I think scarce that Sir. Sure that mettle is not of her Nature; it is often
at the wane, but never at the full in my purse.


The Stars begotten betwixt these two, are some bright Angels; others
Sovereigns, some round shillings, some but silver groats.


They are happy, whose Nativity these stars favour.

Iupiter, when he came to Danae, descended in a Cloak bespangled with these
falling Stars.


But how came you to learn all this?

Who I? I have often walked through all the Regions of Heaven.


I believe you have been with Menippus, as far as the Moon: your talk
favours of Lunacy.


I tell thee, I have been farther then ever the (...) man could reach.

I have paced the uttermost extreme outside of the Primum mobile, from whence,
many thousand miles below me, I beheld great Iupiter, and all the minor gods.


A most strange Traveller; I fear you will come anon to the greatest depth in
Hell: 'tis time for me to leave you.


I have been there already many a time,
Where never Hercules, nor Theseus durst approach:
Over Avernus, that most loathsome Lake,
Which never Bird as yet presumed to pass,
I with my Goose-quill wings have made a slight.
The dark, light, burning, black fiery flames of cold Phlegeton
With undazel'd eyes I have oft gazed upon.

Come good my Lord, you must needs return with me.

Bid Charon stay my leisure, I'll see first whether it be the same with the
Flementall fire, then I'll come.


I came not sir from Charon, neither am I going to him.

Who, Reduction? I would thou were; what would thou with me?


Fie my Lord, you will be always in these mad moods, pray will you go with
me?


O Heraclytus, well did thou say, the dry Air was the best soul: for had we
not need to melt away into tears, to see the misery of wretched men. (will.


Nay weep not good my Lord, you shall have what you

Shall I? so then I will pull out both mine eyes like Democritus, that I may
look thoroughly upon the follies of these times, and laugh my full at them.


So you were best Sir; but now pray come with me.

I come, I come, I come sir.

I know not how my presence may disgrace me,
That Lady hath a quick and piercing eye,
Able to search beyond the countenance;
The most reserved and concealed intents:
I'll keep my self aloose, and stand far off,
Till she hath swallowed down this gilded bait.
Then can I draw her wheresoever I list,
And if the common and divided humour
Of some self pleasing Poet be not in me,
I cannot choose but move affection;
This strain will win her.
Enough, I must be bold and confident:
Sirrha, go you, commend my dearest love
With these my letters, to Scientia;
Tell her I plead not my nobility,
Great births, or hopeful fortunes, powerful friends,
Down at her honours thrice most sacred feet,
I humbly lay these poor and mean respects,
But me in nou^ht else known ambitious,
Though now high soaring purest thoughts of love,
Like Venus silver feathered Dove have drawn
Up towards this high Heaven.

Sir I fear,
Like some imperfect tempered Meteor,
Near approaching that high region,
You soon will vanish, and your blazing love
Be quite burnt out.

Say first, the glorious light,
That with kind heate doth cherish all the world,
Shall suffer in perpetual Eclipse.

Sir fear not, if far protestations
May do you favour, I'll turn prodigal.

Well, take the chiefest opportunity,
If I do in joy her, thouknow'st not what's thy share,

I go my Lord.

Mistake you not your errand;
This is a stupid and forgetful knive,
But yet my letters may dire^t 'em:
I have taught others many times to woe,
And composse easily their dearest loves,
Some with new fashioned and fantastic suites,
I taught to cloak their soul deformities:
The stale and stiff legged Courtier, I have framed
To make young congees, and unthaw'd his joints,
An old worme-eaten wainscot countenance,
With a fresh varnish I have made to smile,
To win the favour of some younger wench;
Poor sirs, with brokers suites, and borrowed Liveries.
I have commended to their dimme-ey'd Dames;
The greatest hate, and inequality
To love and reconcilement I have wrought,
And should my self despair? despair dull fools,
Fallacy cannot be but fortunate.
But here comes
One of my sworn supporters, 'twere full time
I were delivered of their tedious service;
I think I am able now to stand alone.

All happiness befall my mighty Sovereign.

Thanks trusty faithful Opposition.

We have proclaimed your Royal Majesty
Rightful successor to the empty Crown
Of great Hermenia.

But with what success?
How stands the Commons to our Reign affected?

As if their fortunes were advanced with yours,
In volleys of fair acclamations
Through the spacious regions of the air,
They send that joy which in their narrow breasts
Seemed but imprisoned.

And it shall be my care
To recompense their loves with our deceit,
For I do hate ingratitude as death:
I do, Lord Opposition. I well weigh
How much I am oblieg'd to any; and for you,
Dear Lord, I would I were the Monarch of the world.

Would that procure thy noble hearts content,
No force should bar thee: but we long to hear
How stand your hopes for fair Verona?

Why my hopes are clear,
But yet my thoughts are somewhat over-cast,
To think that I should hazard, with my self,
The yet unthanked loves of all my friends.
Were it to be tried out by our wit, or words,
I could be confident; but boisterous force is.
Yet though I doubt, I fear not, and my friends
With patience will attend the maine event.

What's this my Sovereign speaks to himself?
My Lord I understand not what you would,
But gathering from your unaccustomed phrase,
That somewhat much concerns you, I request
Better to be acquainted with your meaning.

Lord Opposition, there's not any man
Hath greater interest in me than you;
And therefore look into my deepest thoughts
Scientia but even now hath sent me word,
That notwithstanding all her promises
To Demonstration, she could be content,
To place her best affections upon me:
But first entreats me to remove one le^.

One let? now were there twenty thousand l^s,
We would remove them.

None but Iudicium's witness to her vows,
Were he dispatch'd, she were resolved for me.

Iudicium? now I'll send him down to hell;
He may prove witness before Rhadamant,
But never shall disturb our peace on earth.

Nay, but the matter must be well conceived,
He hath procured him for his noble friend,
To bid me combat: which I have accepted;
And though I cannot well fore-see the event,
I rest in this, my friends will rest content.

Now I have cause enough of discontent:
Was not I worthy to have killed the slave?
Sir, you shall never undergo this action:
Or if you needs will fight, then fight with me;
For I do vow, unless you yield in this,
You kindle that proud heate which cannot dye,
But wrapped up in your ashes, or mine own.

Why, good my Lord, what would you have me do?
I prize your friendship at my kingdom rate,
Yet somewhat must esteem my reputation:
At least be pleased to meet in some disguise:
'Twas was his request to 'escape from conscious eyes,
If he survived, me conquered, he might take
Some mask upon him, which small liberty,
Presuming if I pleased on the like,
I granted him.

This 'tis, when men of judgement
Do venture on such weighty actions:
They make all sure, they will prevent the Fates:
I care not how I kill the villain,
Or who have credit for it; but I'll kill him.

Then be persuaded to anoint thy blade
With this enchanted oil, 'tis strong in virtue.

When is the time? where is the place?

'Tis here,
Within this hour.

I will but try my sword,
And surely meet him.

Nay, but hear a word:
Let me entreat your faithful secrecy,
And above all things, see you keep it close
From Contradi^ion, lest he second you.

I ear not, we men of action use few words.

Well, I perceive that you have vowed to make
Hermenia's Lord your vassal. Is he gone?
Now I could break with laughter. What his hare-brain'd son?
I'll send to meet him, oh twill do me good,
To see the villains tap each others blood.

Now will I blow up this fellow like a soap bubble. It is necessary for great
men to keep some fools as well as many knavs,

They will never dispute their business. And must
I frame inditements.

Yes, tis that I should have told thee sooner.

Tis well I must play the Scrich-owle and proclaim misfortunes, whilst you
become the Mercury of more pleasing messages, employed in tuning the strings of
love.


Sir you must do it, like it as you think fit.

I'll think upon it if it be but to sharpen my wits. And prithee noble
Ignoratio Surnamed Elenchi; wilt thou prove Pander and procurer to any man, thy
person promises more grace, stain not thy worthiness with so base
employments.


I never meant it.

So I think verily, and therefore thou did undertake it,
Thy brave spirits scorn such service.

Yes I do scorn it.

Thou dost know thy self.

I think I do, and admire my self as much as another.

Methinks thine own Idaea should be thy only Mistress.

I must confess I know not that shape that I could ever affect so well.


Why then should not these parts raise thee, Nature and Fortune have conspired
about thee. Take but this opportunity, and triumph over the world.


I doubt not that but I have a farther reach, tis here, tis here will do it.


I warrant tis some admirable plot.

I'll to the cunning man for some enchantments.

Out upon it, work by witchcraft, 'twill never prosper.

Then I will use some other means.

Whats that.

Why any thou wilt council me.

Then be ruled by me. Thou know our master now is called the great Sophism.


Yes.

And thou art Ignoratio Elenchi.

I am so.

Now thou art employed upon an honourable message.

Well.

Proclaim thy self Ambassador.

You say true; turn Ambassador, but I am no good speaker.


We will help that too; Thou hast his letters, open them, learn to pronounce
them, take his person, frame his posture, speak as if thou were the man thou
seem, she will not choose but answer expectation. Besure thou act this
before good company, a contract is nothing worth without witness.


Would thou be there I should speed much the better.

I will not fail thee, go and make thy self most richly fine.


I warrant you, you seldom see a man of my wits want good clothes. I'll about
it straight.


I care not if I cross my master in this project, we Creatures of the lower
region, never do worse then when the higher bodies grow in conjunction. If the
master once fry in a husbandish affection, the man may freeze and starve in
expectation.


Dear Contradiction, use all secrecy,
And for my credit get thee some disguise,
Nor speak to him by any means, thy voice
May shame us.

If he understand my blows so tis,
He gets no word of me.

Here, take with thee this powder, rub therewith
The instruments of thy revengeful wrath;
And, as most virtuous, be victorious.

Can Aequipolency endure all this? Can all this be endured by Aequipolency?


Who I Conversion? I can suffer any thing, faith there's nothing that I cannot
suffer. Prithee be ruled by me, stand to the present.


I am no Stoic.

So it seems, thou art rather a Pythagorian Peripatetic, thy very essence is
mutability. Thy soul could walk through more Sects then some honest bodies have
chan'd suits: methinks thou might do well at home by temporizing.


Oh these Climats are too cunning, I must seek further.

Read Lipsius Constancy, let that consirme thee.

Faith he will lead the next way from Leyden to Doway,
That it may be I may make use of him,
Did not these troubles banish me: I would go voluntary:
Your finest wits are thought insipu'd till
They have past the salt water.
Our home-spun learning's of a courser thread,
It's stained and smoked in dressing.
The Germans vates drenched in a deeper grain,
Venice and Padua will return them richer;
And I begin to pity thy wilfulness. What course intend thou?
'Twere thy best, being skilled in tempering
Confections, to proclaim some Paracelsian
Oil, or Angelical pills.

Nay, I'll rather profess the making of Aurum potabile, and credit it with
some two leaves of reasons, and ten of authority, for all diseases, griefs, and
maladies. But which way art thou bent?


I will to Flushing, Midleborough, Amsterdam, peradventure thence to Antwerp,
and so to see Reams and Room.


Take heed you come not back by Quinborow there is a groom with a curry-comb
will rub your sides. But if you may be persuaded, it is as easy to lay down
your stomach at home, as feed your self abroad by making buttons; you may
sooner be preferred to the Inquisition then to the Conclave.


Well, except the morrow Sun display more comfort, I am gone believe it.


You hope at your return to get a Doctership the cheaper, or a benefice with
less ado, but you may be deceived, I will expect your reconversion, adieu.


This fellow thinks himself as cunning as a tumbler that walks upon ropes,
and with his levell keeps himself upright, but his steps are dangerous, I had
rather walk on the Alps, though sleeper, where I may have sure footing.


I, who my restless wits have daily tied,
In searching choicest objects of delight:
Though none more grateful, none more tedious
Then that most blessed content which they enjoy,
Who underneath the courteous Laurel shade,
In muses laps do rest their weary heads;
But now alas, what proud ambition,
What jealous envy, greedy avarice,
Hath cast infection on those purer springs?
They whose kind steel was sometimes only proud
In giving waxen tablets, some cured wounds,
In their own ireful, and all hardened breasts,
Imprint the tragic characters of death
Hot in pursuit of lost lord Intellect;
I am informed by Definition,
My best esteemed loving Topicus
Lies desperate hurt by Demonstration.
So twixt my dear affection to him
And bounden duty to my absent Lord,
My hearts divided with convulsions,
But pardon me great Amina, thy son
Commands my service, this one duty done.

Well met Invention, what have you found young Lord Intellect?


No, and which adds to my misery, I hear I am like to loose my self, my dear
friend Topicus.


Indeed he is hurt, but our fear was greater then their danger, and it is
happened better then they deserved. There is good hope of recovery.


Thanks good Description for this happy news, but are you certain that the
danger's past.


It is most certain, and I would wish the other miseries which have so
unexpected befallen us, were likely to have so hopeful an issue.


Theare by Lady Methode and the banished lords,
How miserable you are all become,
By great Discourses strange Distraction.
Met you with Method? Oh she was too impatient and unkind to forsake our
Sovereign in his extremity: her presence might have yielded him especial
assistance.


Pardon and pity that distressed Queen,
Whose tender heart, oppressed with her grief,
Would break with any rough or unkind touch.
As towards Rhems I did direct my pace,
I overtook a weary fainting voice,
Which I approaching nearer found was hers,
Alas, quoth she, I long since banished
From the disordered Regions of the world,
Have been contented in this only place,
With old Discourse, my till now loving lord,
Till now to live under his lovely roof:
I always lay twixt his well folded Sheets,
I ever have enclapst him in mine arms,
Lest he should want desighting ornaments,
Or for his plainness pass with less regard,
I all the day have woed the Sciences,
To make him rob the longest coldest nights,
I have sate reaving up the finest arts,
And put into his hand a curious thread
Wherewith he guided hath his certain steps
Through many crooked winding Labyrinths;
And now my Theseus, ah my kinder Theseus!
Unwillingly was forced to leave his love,
Cruel discourse doth rudely cast me off,
And threatens me if I come near to him.
Here I stepped in, and with the fairest means
My troubled thoughts could find, persuaded her
To change her resolution, and return;
Which having half effected, there came on
Old Definition with Division,
Who caring less their own then her estate,
Are minded closely to return with her.
My Love to Topicus hath caused me
To use more hast, although assured by you
Of his recovery; I have been content
To favour thus my self, and let you know
Of Prethods kind intention to return.

I thank you Sir, and will accompany you.

Thou shouldest have starcht thy beard, or got some Beare-skin on thy head; at
least have powdered thy hair like an Ashwednesday penitent; one devise now
would do most admirable.


Impart it dear genius, if my wit can reach or wealth compass it, I will have
it immediately.


Nay tis soon done, tis not so much as a Majors feast or Citizens christening.
Thou hast heard how Simon circumvented the Trojans.


Yes, with a great woodden-horse; Must I get such an one?

(Yes, a great leaden-Asse) No, but you must counterfeit your self a captive,
stand with your hands fast bound and legs entangled, That will signify your
inthraldome. The Lady pitying your restraint, will untie your hands, and wrap
you in her arms; then may you enclaspe her girdle and untie the true-love-knot
of her virginity.


That will be most significant; But what do you think if (because Love is
blind) I went on blindfold, sure I should speak the bolder.


It would do excellent, Nox Amor, Darkness and Drunknesse, Blindness and
Love, are ever well macht.


So then i'll wear this Scarf.

I'll help thee. Now, how can thou speak?
It must be louder, she will not endure a chamber voice, thou must yawn Like
one that gapes for a Benefice: open like an Oyster, that she may gather the
pearls of thy speech.

Oh that we had some Peble-stones, such as Demosthones used; but hold, it may
be this will serve; Spare my fingers he gags him. but while I tell a hundred. I
warrant thee this will make thee like a chirping Sparrow. Now will I leave the
Coxcomb to adventure, and tis full time. What black Herald comes here.


What, this is not the place where base Iudicium and I should meet, thinks he
to prevent me, I will requite his diligence, but stay, he hath no weapons: now
the Coward Rogue would yield my prisoner, but he shall not escape me so; i'll
Baftinado him at least.

Is this Sientia's Chaplain? he's very still, now what ails him! i'll see for
the blow I gave him.


Now Sir, with all my heart, if you will have my purse.

Is this to be an Ambassador, to have no law of Arms nor liberty of legs to
protect me; now my only revenge is to hold my peace and be silent, which if I
can do, I may prove counsel to the veriest Wittoll. I am at a stand whether I
shall go on in sure, or give it over; I must be better counselled.


And can he no where here about be found.

No not by any inquisition.

And I by Fallacies advise him sought
Towards Verona, but alas in vain;
The troubles of that City as I was
Upon the way, by faithful grief informed,
Equal the stirs here in Parthesia:
Truth and her daughters being thence expelled,
And all the rule usurped by Fallaoy,
Those blessed civil laws are disanuled,
Which to so many glorious Emperors,
So many ages, in so many lands,
Have ever been so justly well approved;
There hath he planted rude and practique friends
Which grate the Commons, spoil Nobility.
Betwixt dear brothers and the nearest friends,
Endeavoured to sow vile dissentions.
There the most sacred ordinance of Heaven,
The divine Oracles they falsify,
And force upon the plain simplicity
Of easily deceived honest men,
Frail humane breath and bold traditions,
With singular fantastic vain conceits.
As brainsick Dreams, forged revelations:
That I rest well assured he is not there:
Although to seek him else I know not where.

Now we may pity our confederats,
But cannot as we ought, bewail their state.
Our nearer griefs do hugely overflow
The just proportion of all humane woe.

What else is befallen you since Discourse
Became distract?

Opposition and Contradiction contending for the rule,
Have wounded each the other wilfully.

Is Contradiction hurt? fond vanity
Under these ever sudden moving Spears
To look for rest or seek felicity
In earth, the well head of salt tears.
We think him mad, that thinks in the air,
To erect a castle or fair monument;
And through the Seas as passengers we fare,
Yet dare not dwell upon that element.
But on th'uncertaine, and short prosperous winds
of favour blooming Fortune we oft raise
High and huge hopes, to our now calm minds
Promise eternal Halcyonian days.
But the just heavens all well guiding care,
Least we forget them in our jollity
When we in greatest pomp triumphing are,
Humble our minds with some new misery;
For what else could our hearts content desire
But firm assurance of continuing?
When whilst with joy we others bliss admire,
Our self straight vex't with fortunes torturing
With sense do feeele how her fierce wrath extends
From our own selves unto our dearest friends.
But say, is his wound dangerous?
-- But see
Iudicium, here Lord Intellect is come.

All happiness attend your welcome presence.

Thanks good Iudicium, but you are man Distinction whom I must acknowledge the
author of my freedom.


Where hath your Lordship been? and whence is it Distinctions honest care hath
set you free.


I am indebted to Ambiguity, I was promised by him to be led to a fair
library, but was conducted to a Vatican of all villains.


Say good Distinction, how fell this out?

How he fell in you have heard already, and for his deliverance this it was. I
by reason of this coat (which how I got I list not now to tell) being taken of
Fallacy for Ambiguity received of him these keys, with direction to go to his
closet, together with a certain viol he delivered me which my curiosity
quickly apprehending, I went and found the young Lord Intellect in one room,
the Lady Truth and her daughters in others, all which I have thence delivered.


O act Heroical!

And were you in his closet?

A closet do you call it I will be sworn it is a spacious storehouse of all
subtilties, a Burse of impostures, an Italy of poisons, a Frankefurt of false
Authors, there are infinite Iliads of Hermetical precepts, many barrels of
white powder, bales of false dice, boxes of false weights, bags of counterfeit
coin, golden fishhookes, iron rakes, vizards, and dark Lanthornes for
thieves, masks and painting for Gentlewomen; for all he furnished them daily
enough to load an Argosy, or a Spanish Catrick.


And what was in the viol you named?

O, I thought to tell you: the rarest receipt that ever was composed, Predea
nor Circe never made the Like.


What was it poison?

When he gave it me, I marked he said it wrought powerfully, and so mistrusting
the effect, tried the conclusion upon a dog I met, which no sooner had tasted a
dram of it, but dragging his tail on the ground he grinned and snarled and
presently ran mad, which effect I observing, thought I had now opportunity to
requite a kindness Ambiguity did me, and so tempering it in a cup of sweet
wine, adventured amongst Fallacies followers, who bravely carousing to their
good fortunes, let my cup go round amongst them, and presently they all daunc't
Frantic, so that nothing grieved me, but that Ambiguity was not amongst them.


O strange! will any drug cause madness?

Easily. Quid bibit inde furit, I have both read and seen it, and I fear
Discourse's madness might have such a cause.


But do you hear Lord Proposition,
If he through artificial means lies mad,
As by these signs tis more then probable,
I know he may be helped again by Art;
Let him but purge and bleed in his head vein*
I dare to warrant his recovery.

Happy Hermenia, if again she see
Discourse recovered, and for ever bound
To your discreet good will and worthy love
Vouchsafed to us, in your friendly presence.

What cunning Surgeon hath Parthesia?

Here's one well practised skilful, fortunate
Analysis, who hath well nigh recur'd
The life-despairing brothers, Topicus and Demonstration.


Let him straight
Take care of him.

Sir, would you go your fair direction might assist us much.


With all my heart, young Lord pray lead the way.

What Panic fury hath o'rerun the world,
Or universal madness reigns this day?
Are there nor fellows, those whose subtle brains
Would have spun forth the finest villainies?
Those whose sound heads so oft I have employed
In working deep designments; and see now
What wild confusion hath taken hold of them?
Was't not enough that truth, and Intellect
With hated science and opinion,
Escaped by them, art set at liberty?
But they in this disordered fashion
Must make me odious, scorned, and despised?
Oh that I could convey me from this world,
Or know where to hide me, but my doors
Are locked against me, and my wicked walls
Late surfeiting with filthy luxury,
Do seem surcharged clea^e to spew me out.
Is't possible that I should be thus crossed?
What is there any goodness in the world
Offorce enough to contervaile the wit
Of proud Fallacy? or is't some fiend,
Some devil not of his own confederacy,
That with his counterplots controlls my skill?
Or was my self the cause, my cursed self,
Lulled asleep in fond security?

'Twas well you came so timely Aequipolency,
The memory of this foul imposture may survive
In that recovered couple.

Sir they added,
As they found ease amidst their vomiting,
Pouring forth curses against Falacie,
How for his sake they had thrust the worthy Brothers,
Topicus and Demonstration, into their desperate fury.

Now I do verily believe Analysis,
That villain's cause of all, it will appear
He forced his fathers madness.

Aequipolency,
Leave the perfume behind you. Look you use fresh pigeons,
Until the venom of their wounds be quite exhaled,
There were no loss of them but at this time,
Their words may be produced, therefore pray be careful.

I will.
Now let him be brought hither, fear not stirring him,
I warrant he's secure. Invention
You shall do well, if against his waking you provide some show,
And Music, which may welcome home his wandering senses.

I'll see what may be done for both.
Analysis lets Discourse blood.
Now see Iudicium, here's no blood but humours,
This black stuff is the excrement of Melancholy:
This sometimes makes him amongst the groves and rivers,
Pen Sonnets to the Nymphs and Goddesses;
In good assemblies to withdraw his thoughts,
And dictate to his Desk and Closet walls,
Dangers with which a wise man scarce would trust
His very bosom -- this next
Is Choler, hast thou met with voices,
Breathing seditious discontent and malice,
This humour rules them, from this siery vapour,
'Tis not the Chair of State or Justice seat,
Can shield the Prince or public Magistrate,
Yea unto Heaven it self it oft aspires,
Against Religion and the sacred Arts,
Casting profaner and impurer darts:
This watery Phlegm, is that which putrefying.
His springs of breath, infects the neighbouring air
With blasts of slothful envy, whence destruction
Casts mists upon the best endeavours.

Now me thinks
The blood appears, 'twere best Analysis
You stop the Orifice.

Oh his blood
Is much corrupted. This doth feed that vein
From whence lascivious Songs, lewd Epigrams
And obscene Satyrs flow. This itching humour
Oft keeps him waking: watching, fills his brains
With gyddy phantasmes; yet we will not take too much.
Bring me the cupping Glass.

What, must he be martyred?

This is most needful, else that windy matter
Which often grieves him worser then the Cholick
Till it break forth, will still continue.

Now I wish
The Hypocausticall and brothel-writers were thus eased,
Which vent forth volumes faster then the Press
Can get in rags for Paper.

'Tis enough.
Light the Perfume: Methinkes he moves a little,
Sweet smells confirm the sense and ease the brain,
And though no vapour nourish, it conveys
The spirits to the purest root of life.

What stir yet? the Music is at hand,
Attended with a Mask.

It comes most seasonable.

I think 'twere best we conveyed him in again Analysis,
And let him rest a while upon his pallet.

It may do well, I will not leave him now
Until these hopes grow stronger. Let us go.

My Lord, I have contrived the accusations.

Well, let me hear them: mine own wits do fail,
It may be there is somewhat thought upon,
May help in extremity: let's hear.

My Lord,
Forgetful of her honour, mighty Truth,
In base and mean attire hath walked the streets,
Yea, which hath made my modesty to blush,
Stark naked hath she oftentimes appeared,
And flying better presence, usually
With children, and grosse-pated long-tongu'd fools,
And poor distracted persons hath been found,
On Tavern benches plunged all in Wine,
By senseless drunkards lovingly embraced.
She oft hath sucked impure and loathsome breath,
From their unclean and foul stinck-belching throats,
With most disgrac't-esteemed heretics
Conversing always: never was she seen
Amongst religious, far more glorious
And fair appearing holy Confessors.

And have her daughters so demeaned themselves.

The heavens, stars, the Regions of the air,
The land, the Sea, Scientia hath seen,
But is a stranger in what most concerns
The country, families, or private good.
She is become the only patroness
Of idleness, and self consuming sloth.
The quickest spirits, fit for action,
Being dul'd in fruitless speculation:
Yea many of her most admired strain,
Puffed with conceits of their all knowing skill,
Have run stark mad, or in a vilder vein,
To damned Atheism have been inclined.
Lady Opinion seeks to insinuate,
And win good liking with the vulgar sort
To them, since pleasing objects she propounds,
And with most curious art and industry,
Doth both invite, and entertain their loves.
Prudent and virtuous axioms she hath made
Distasteful seem, and Paradoxical.
She sometimes simple, most times subtle is,
But now deceitful, straight deceiveable,
And only constant in inconstancy.

This will do well, for I must take some course
To satisfy this overcurious age.
But what news hear thou stirring?

Sir, I hear that Lord Opposition and Contradiction have hurt each other.


So! what dangerously?

Yes, so tis said.

I did think so much.
These fighting fellows will ne'er hold their hands*
Till they have pulled some vengeance on their heads
But thank thou Heaven for it, if thou miscarry,
Assure thy self that thou art only left
To be the heir of my prosperity.

O Sir, the Heavens intend me no such happiness, the scurvy Apothecary
Aequipolency hath with his curiosity drawn out the rancor of their wounds, and
no question is made of their recovery.


Is't possible?

Nay, which is as strange, he hath made them friends, and now they nothing but
exclaim against you, except it be sometimes when they rail against me for
your sake.


Well, we with patience must rest content,
Thou know that innocence is still traduced.

Again Sir, as I was coming hither, I was told that Analysis had let mad
Discourse blood, which I laughed at, thinking his head was light enough before.


Discourse let blood, and Opposition
Past danger, friends with Contradiction --
Tis time I look about me.
Now desperate misery inspire some trick,
I must do somewhat: so, this may do good,
I may escape so, but do make a vow
I will take heed of their Parrhesians.
But now Ambiguity, say my mad father should recover his little wits, and call
me to account for my ill government.


You must answer your self for me.

Answer for thee, why have you deserved so much think you, that you should be
called in question.


Sir, I mean you must answer by your self, I have some skill in accusing, but
none in defending.


I care not if I try what I could do. Do you examine like his gravity, I'll
answer as I can.


At your command.

But here, take first my Gown, 'twill make me speak the more respectively:
give me thy Cloak, now thou may be the bolder.

Well, when will you begin?

Could I so easily be well assured
Of your great care to rule, as reads our state,
I should as gladly thank, as now most loath,
Condemn your forwardness, and would you knew
How I dislike these courses t'ane of you.

My gracious Lord, 'tis known I did refrain
The weighty glory of your government,
Till my more able brothers sorely hurt,
Could not themselves, much less the state sustain.

But I do hear you banished have the realm
My trustiest and best known Councellers.

Doubting my Lord amongst many working heads,
Least some inflamed with ambition,
By ruin of their Countries common good,
Might seek to raise themselves; I did remove them
From meddling with all matters of state.

If it be so, I thank thee Fallacy,
And do commend thy wise bestowed care.

Now if I could leave him, this robe might serve as a safe conduct. I'll fain
some present business, well stay thou here, I in this disguise will muffle my
self and see what they do, the Evening approaching will keep my counsel.


Shall I expect you here?

Yes, by all means let me know where to find you.

So, this makes me think what I shall be, careless what I am, and forgetful
what I was, I seem half invested in my hopes already. Those sword and buckler
fellows I hope will never get his favour more: and now the joys of Hermenia,
are not equal to those in my bosom. I would the proudest enemy I have would
find me in this fashion, Oh I could look upon them most disdainfully -- will
no body come.


Was it not told us that Fallacy was here?

And here is some body; he, or his shadow

'Tis Ambiguity.

Sirrah, where is your Master Fallacy?

Lord Fallacy, my master, is not here;
His leisure serves not ordinary comers;
But if you have some earnest suite to him,
My means may prove your chiefest furtherance.

We thank you Sir, but we must speak with him.

You thank me, what unmannerly and untaught grooms are these, how unacquainted
with the phrase and methode of the court, I looked they should have answered in
a language better understood of great men's favourites. And must you speak with
him? I know no business of men of your fashion, but I may have the the hearing
of it, suffice it you, I will vouchsafe you answer.


Sir if you will needs know our business. Of Capital
Treason, we arrest you here,
As conscious of all those wild designs,
Which against our Sovereign and his worthy sons,
Against this state, and those distressed Ladies
Of poor Verona, late have been contrived
By Fallacy and you his damned creature.

What, mean you as you speak?

Yes, and ere we leave you, we will teach you to speak as you mean.
Equivocating shall not serve your turn.


Hath Fallacy used me thus, and forsaken me in my extremity.

Come, let us have him to our Sovereign. He shall examine him himself.


Stay, here comes his Majesty.

Now honourable friends, our realm and we
Rest much obliged to your happy loves,
And so may those ill fortunes prove the last
Instructions of your frail infirmity.
As we in service to you, and your state,
Intend to make some satisfaction.

Sir, our respect to you, our love to yours,
Makes all that can be found within our power
Seem but as tribute and deserved duty.

And you young Lord, whose wild imprisonment
Adds much unto the burden of my wrong,
I hope will not conceive amiss of us,
Who tenderly affect you, as our own.

May it please you, now I am returned again so safe,
I would not for any thing but have been shut up where
I was, I have seen more then ever I did before.

I easily believe it, what, Distinction, have you the Keys?

I have gracious Lord.

And cannot Fallacy as yet be found.

My Lord, we have surprised here
One of his chief and nearest followers,
But of himself, as yet we cannot learn.

And oh I pray he never may be found
Or heard of more within Hermenia:
Let him be hated throughout all the world,
But ever banished from forth the coasts:
That wretched father, with the wicked son,
That sought to spoil me of my dearest pledge,
Have felt in part, the Heavens impartial doom,
For violating all the laws of love:
Yet let them when their health and strength shall serve,
Be both conveyed hence to the Antipodes:
And as for that tumultuous frantic crew,
Which revel it so loosely in our streets,
Dragging our subjects basely by the ears,
Let them be ship't away to Barbary,
And serve as gally slaves till they come there:
Our selves desiring to make recompense
For those injurious wrongs which harmless Truth
And her distressed daughters have sustained,
Int end sorthwith in joy to celebrate,
Betwixt my sons and those admired Nymphs,
On either side long wished for Nuptials.
We hope ere this, our Queen and banished friends
Are safe returned, and now courteous Lords,
Late patient partakers of our woe,
Let us request of you, that ye this night
Associate us in feasting and delight.

My gracious Lord, you have forgot Ambiguity, shall not he be rack't, I could
stretch him exquisitely, I would fain be his Procrastes.


It were but folly to torture him,
We know too much already, too too much;
Yet let him strait be whipped out of these parts,
And if thou lik'st the office, thou thy self
May be his friendly executioner.

With all my heart.

What, come Lords, will you go?

We will attend your Majesty.

Oh Sir, you may remember how you used me, I thought I should have a time to
deal with you, will you untrusse, come, I must unease you, as you did me.


Fallacy hath your cloak, I have it not,

Th^t is no matter, you shall have it so sure as the gown is on your back.


Nay, good Invention, since we meeting here
Have found all things so quietly composed,
Suiting with our first expectation,
I must remember you of what you promised
The verses which you proffered to my view,
Cannot but fit this opportunity.

I hope I have not lost them, these are they --

SHould this our Play on Common Stage appear,
Some of the ignorant multitude would swear
That we chopped Logic; for such strains of Wit
They still like worse, the better they are writ.
But you, that fill this Orb, whose ears have hung
Attentively upon each Actors tongue,
Who ken where the least string of Art is cracked,
Where the conceit is proper, and where racked,
From whence a work is spun, out of what Fleece,
And know the Woof and Warp of the whole Piece;
The SOPHISTER doth on your suffrage stand,
That for his grace, you would put to your Hand.

