I Have in vain past through each stately street,
And blinde-fold turning of this happy town,
For weal^h, for peace, and goodly government,
Yet can I not find out a mind, a heart
For blood and causeless death to harbour in;
They all are bent with virtuous gainful trade,
To get their needmentes for this mortal life,
And will not soil their well addicted harts:
With rape, extortion, murder, or the death,
Of friend or foe, to gain an Empery.
I cannot glut my blood delighted eye;
With mangled bodies which do gasp and groan,
Ready to pass to fair Elizium,
Nor bath my greedy hands in reeking blood,
Of fathers by their children murdered:
When all men else do weep, lament and wail,
The sad exploits of fearful tragedies,
It glads me so, that it delights my heart,
To ad new torments to their bleeding smartes.
But here comes Avarice, as if he sought,
Some busy work for his pernicious thought:
Whether so fast all griping Avarice?
Why what ^arst thou, I seeeke for one I miss.

I may supply the man you wish to have.

Thou seems to be a bold audatious knave,
I do not like intruding company,
That seek to undermine my secrecy.

Mistrust me not I am thy faithful friend.

Many say so, that prove false in the end.

But turn about and thou wilt know my face,

It may be so, and know thy want of grace,
What Homicide thou art the man I seek:
I reconcile me thus upon thy cheek.
Had thou named blood and damned iniquity,
I had for borne to bight so bitterly.

Know thou a hart wide open to receive,
A plot of horrid desolation,
Tell me of this, thou art my chiefest good,
And I will quaff thy health in bowles of blood.

I know two men, that seem two innocents,
Whose looks surveyed with iuditiall eyes:
Would seem to bear the marks of honesty,
But snakes find harbour amongst the fairest flowers,
Then never credit outward semblaunces:
I know their harts relentless merciless,
And will perform through hope of benefit:
More dreadful things then can be thought upon.

If gain will draw, I prethy then allure,
Their hungry harts with hope of recompense,
But tie despair unto those moving hopes,
Vnleast a deed of murder farther it,
Then blood on blood, shall overtake them all,
And we will make a bloody feastiuall.

The plots are laid, the keys of golden coin,
Hath op'd the secret closets of their harts,
Inter, insult, make captive at thy will,
Themselves, and friends, with deeds of damned ill:
Yonder is truth, she comes to bewail,
The times and parties that we work upon.

Why let her weep, lament, and morn for me,
We are right bred of damned iniquity,
And will go make a two-folde Tragedy.

Go you disturbers of a quiet soul,
Sad, greedy, gaping, hungry Cannibals,
That joy to practise others miseries:
Gentles, prepare your tear bedecked eyes,
To see two shows of lamentation,
Besprinkled every where with guiltless blood,
Of harmless youth, and pretty innocents,
Our Stage doth wear habiliments of woe,
Truth rues to tell the truth of these laments:
The one was done in famous London late,
Within that street whose side the river Thames
Doth strive to wash from all impurity:
But yet that silver stream can never wash,
The sad remembrance of that cursed deed,
Performed by cruel Merry on just Beech,
And his true boy poor Thomas Winchester,
The most here present, know this to be true:
Would truth were false, so this were but a tale,
The other further off, but yet too near,
To those that felt and did the cruelty:
Near Padua this wicked deed was done,
By a false Uncle, on his brothers son,
Left to his careful education,
By dying Parents, with as strict a charge,
As ever yet death-breathing brother gave:
Look for no mirth, unless you take delight,
In mangled bodies, and in gaping wounds,
Bloodily made by mercy wanting hands,
Truth will not fain, but yet doth grieve to show,
This deed of ruth and miserable woe.
I live in mean and discontented state,
But wherefore should I think of discontent:
I am beloved, I have a pretty house,
A loving sister, and a careful man,
That do not think their days work well at end,
Except it bring me in some benefit:
And well frequented is my little house,
With many guests and honest passengers,
Which may in time advance my humble state,
To greater wealth and reputation.
And here comes friends to drink some bear or ale,
They are my neighbours, they shall have the best,
No. Come neighbor Beech lets have our mornings draught
And wele go drink it at young Merries house:
They say he hath the best in all this town,
Besides they say he is an honest man,
And keeps good rule and orders in his house.

He's so indeed, his conversation,
Is full of honest harmless courtesy:
I dare presume, if that he be within,
Heal serve us well, and keep us company,
See where he is, go in, i'll follow you.
Nay strain no courtesy you shall go before.

Your welcome neighbour, you are welcome sir,
I pray sit down, your very welcome both:

We thank you for it, and we think no less,
Now fill two cans of your old strongest bear:
That make so many loose their little wits,
And make indentures as they go along.

Hoe sister Rachel^:

I come presently.

Go draw these gentlemen two Cans of bear,
Your negligence that cannot tend the shop,
Will make our customers forsake the house.
Wheres Harry Williams that he stays not here.

My self was busy dressing up the house,
As for your man he is not very well:
But sits sleeping by the kitchen fire.

If you are busy get you up again,
I'll draw my neighbours then their drink my self,
I'll warrant you as good as any mans,
And yet no better, many have the like.

This shows him for a plain and honest man,
That will not flatter with too many words:
Some shriltong'd fellows would have cogd and faind,
Saying i'll draw the best in Christendom.

Hes none of those, but bears an honest mind,
And shames to utter what he cannot prove.
But here he comes, is that the best you have,

It is the best upon mine honest word.

Then drink to us.

I drink unto you both.

We pledge you both, and thank you heartily.

Here's to you sir.

I thank you,

Tis good indeed and I had rather drink,
Such bear as this as any Gascoine wine:
But tis our English manner to affect
Strange things, and price them at a greater rate,
Then home-bred things of better consequence.

Tis true indeed, if all were of your mind,
My poor estate would sooner be advanced:
And our French Merchants seek some other trade.

Your poor estate, nay neighbour say not so,
For God be thanked you are well to live.

Not so good neighbour, but a poor young man,
That would live better if I had the means:
But as I am, I can content my self,
Till God amend my poor ability.

In time no doubt, why man you are but young,
And God assure your self hath wealth in store,
If you awaight his will with patience.

Thanks be to God I live contentedlie,
And yet I cannot boast of mighty wealth:
But yet Gods blessings have been infinite,
And far beyond my expectations,
My shop is stored, I am not much in debt;
And here I speak it where I may be bold,
I have a score of pounds to help my need,
If God should stretch his hand to visit me,
With sickness, or such like adversity.

Enough for this, now neighbour whats to pay,

Two pence good sir.

Nay pray sir forbear,
I'll pay this reckoning for it is but small.

I will not strive since ye will have it so.

Neighbour farewell.

Farewell unto you both.
His shop is stored he is not much indebt.
He hath a score of pounds to help his need,
I and a score too if the truth were known:
I would I had a shop so stored with wares,
And forty pounds to buy a bargain with,
When as occasion should be offered me,
I'd live as merry as the wealthiest man;
That hath his being within London walls,
I cannot buy my bear, my bread, my meat:
My faggots, coals, and such like necessaries,
At the best hand, because I want the coin,
That many misers coffer up in bags,
Having enough to serve their turns besides:
Ah for a trick to make this Beeches trash,
Forsake his cofer and to rest in mine,
I marry sir, how may that trick be done:
Marry with ease and great facility,
I will invent some new-found stratagem,
To bring his coin to my possession;
What though his death relieve my poverty,
Gain waits on courage, loss on cowardice.

Brother and sister, pray you both draw near,
And here my will, which you have promised
Shall be performed with wished providence,
This little Orphan I must leave behind,
By your direction to be governed.
As for my wife and I, we do await,
The blessed hour when it shall please the Lord,
To take us to the just Jerusalem.
Our chiefest care is for that tender boy,
Which we should leave discomfortlesse behind,
But that we do assure us of your love,
And care to guide his weak vnhable youth,
In paths of knowledge grace and godliness:
As for the riches of this mortal life,
We leave enough four hundredth pounds a year,
Besides two thousand pounds to make a stock,
In money, Jewels, Plate, and household stuff,
Which yearly rents and goods we leave to you,
To be surrendered into his hands,
When he attains to years of discreation.
My Will imports thus much, which you shall hear,
And you shall be my sole Executor.

Brother and sister how my hart laments,
To see your weak and sick afflicted limbs,
Near overcome with direful malladies,
The God of heaven can truly testify,
Which to speak plain, is ne'er a whit at all.
Which knows the secret corners of my heart,
But for the care you do impose on me,
For the tu^ion of your little son,
Think my kind brother, I will meditate,
Both day and night, how I may best fulfil,
The care and trust, reposed in your Will,
And see him posted quickly after you.

Enough kind brother, we assure us so,
Else would we seek another friend abroad,
To do our wills and dying Testament,
Nature and love will have a double care,
To bring him up with careful diligence,
As best beseems one of such parentage.

Assure your self the safest course I can,
Shall be provided for your little son,
He shall be sent unto the King of heaven.

Fear not good brother, and my loving sister,
But we will have as tender care of him,
As if he were our own ten thousand times:
God will be father of the fatherless,
And keep him from all care and wretchedness.

Uncle and Aunt take comfort, I will see,
My little coozen have no injury.

We thank you all, come let the Will be read.

If it were sealed, I would you both were dead.

Then give attention, I will read the Will.

Thus if my son miscarry, my dear brother,
You and your son shall then enjoy the land,
And all the goods which he should have possessed,

If he miscarry, brother God forbid,
God bless mine Nephew, that thine eyes may see,
Thy childrens children with prosperity:
I had rather see the little vrchin hanged,
Then he should live, and I forgo the land.

Thanks gentle brother, husband feale the Will.

Give me a Pen and Ink, first to subscribe,
I write so ill through very feebleness,
That I can scarcely know this hand for mine,
But that you all can witness that it is.

Give me the seal: I pray sir take it of,
This you deliver for your latest Will,
And do confirm it for your Testament.

With all my hart: here brother keep my Will,
And I refer me to the will of God,
Praying him deal as well with you and yours,
As you no doubt will deal with my poor child:
Come my Pertillo, let me bless thee boy,
And lay my half dead hand upon thy head,
God grant those days that are cut off in me,
With joy and peace may multiply in thee:
Be slow to wrath, obey thy Uncle still,
Submit thy self unto Gods holy will,
In deed and word, see thou be ever true,
So brother, child, and kinsfolks all adieu.

Ah my dear mother, is my father dead?

I my sweet Boy, his soul to heaven is fled,
But I shall after him immediately,
Then take my latest blessing ere I dye,
Come let me kiss thy little tender lips,
Cold death hath taken possession of thy mother.
Let me embrace thee in my dying arms,
And pray the lord protect thee from al harms:
Brother, I fear, this child when I am gone,
Will have great cause of grief hideous fear:
You will protect him, but I prophecy,
His share will be of woe and misery:
But mothers fears do make these cares arise,
Come boy and close thy mothers dying eyes.
Brother and sister, here the latest words,
That your dead sister leaves for memory:
If you deal ill with this distressed boy,
God will revenge poor orphants injuries,
If you deal well, as I do hope you will,
God will defend both you and yours from ill.
Farewell, farewell, now let me breath my last,
Into his dearest mouth, that wants breath,
And as we loved in life embrace in death^
Peace conscience, peace, thou art too scripulous,
Gain doth attended this resolution,
Hence dastard fear, I must, I can, I will,
Kill my best friend to get a bag of gold:
They shall dye both, had they a thousand lives,
And therefore I will place this hammer here,
And take it as I follow Beech up stairs,
That suddenly before he is aware,
I may with blows dash out his hateful brains,
Ho^ Rachel, bring my cloak, look to the house,
I will return again immediately.

Here it is brother, I pray you stay not long,
Guess will come in, 'tis almost supper time.

Let others sup, i'll make a bloudier feast,
Then ever yet was dressed in Merryes house,
Be like thy self, then have a merry hart,
Thou shalt have gold to mend thy poverty,
And after this, live ever wealthilie.
What neighbour Beech, so godly occupied?

I master Merry it were better read,
Then meditate on idle fantasies.

You speak the truth: there is a friend or two
Of yours, making merry in my house,
And would desire to have your company.

Know you their names?

No truly nor the men.
I never stood to question them of that,
But they desire your presence earnestly.

I pray you tell them that I cannot come,
Tis supper time, and many will resort,
For ware at this time, above all other times;
Tis Friday night besides, and Bartholomew eve,
Therefore good neighbour make my just excuse.

In truth they told me that you should not stay,
Go but to drink, you may come quick again,
But not and if my hand and hammer hold.

I am unwilling, but I do not care,
And if I go to see t^e company.

Come quickly then, they think we stay too long^

I'll cut a piece of Cheese to drink withal.

I take the farewell of your cutting knife,
Here is a hand shall help to cut your throat:
And give my self a fairing from your chest:
What are you ready wi^l you go along?

I now I am, boy look you tend the shop,
If any ask, come for me to the Bull:
I wonder who they are that ask for me.

I know not that, you shall see presently,
Go up those stairs, your friends do stay above,
Here is that friend shall shake you by the head,
And make you stagger ere he speak to you.
Now you are safe, I would the boy were so,
But wherefore wish I, for he shall not live,
For if he do, I shall not live my self.
Lets see what money he hath in his purse,
Mass here's ten g^oates, here's something for my pain,
But I must be rewarded better yet.

Who was it Rachel that went up the stairs?

It was my brother, and a little man
Of black complexion, but I know him not.

Why do you not then carry up a light,
But suffer them to tarry in the dark.

I had forgot, but I will bear one up.

Do so I prithee, he will chide anon.

Oh brother, brother, what have you done?

Why murdered one that would have murdered me.

The world doth know^ thy brother but resigned,
The lands and goods, until his son attain'de,
To riper years to weld and govern them,
Then openly thou can not do him wrong,
He living: there's the burden of the song.
Call it a burden, for it seems so great
And heavy burden, that the boy should live,
And thrust me from this height of happiness:
That I will not endure so heavy weight,
But shake it off, and live at liberty,
Free from the yoke of such subjection,
The boy shall dye, were he my fathers son,
Before I'll part with my possession.
I'll call my son, and ask his good advice,
How I may best dispatch this serious cause:
Hoe sir Allens^?

Father.

Hearken son,
I must entreat your furtherance and advise,
About a thing that doth concern us near,
First tell me how thou dost affect in heart,
Little Pertillo, thy dead Uncles son.

So well good father, that I cannot tell,
Whether I love him dearer then my self:
And yet if that my heart were called to count,
I think it would surrender me to death,
Ere young Pertillo should sustain a wrong.

How got his safety such a deep regard
Within your heart, that you affect it so?

Nature gave root, love, and the dying charge,
Of his dead father, gives such store of sap,
Unto this tree of my affection,
That it will never wither till I dye.

But nature, love, and reason, tells thee thus,
Thy self must yet be nearest to thy self.

His love doth not estrange me from my self,
But doth confirm my strength with multitudes,
Of benefits, his love will yield to me.

Beware to foster such pernicious snakes,
Within thy bosom, which will poison thee.

He is a Dove, a child, an innocent,
And cannot poison, father though he would.

I will be plainer, know Pertill^s life,
Which thou dost call, a Dove, an innocent:
A harmless child, and, and I know not what,
Will harm thee more, then any Serpent can,
I, then the very sight of Basilisks.

Father, you tell me of a strange discourse,
How can his life produce such detriment,
As Basilisks, whose only sight is death?

Harken to me, and I will tell thee how:
Thou know his fathers goods, his houses, lands,
Have much aduaunc'd our reputation,
In having but their usage for a time,
If the boy live, then like to senseless beasts,
Like lo^gd eard Asses, and rich laden Mules,
We must resign these treasures to a boy,
And we like Asses feed on simple Hay:
Make him away, they shall continue ours,
By virtue of his fathers Testament,
The Jewels, castles, meadows, houses, lands,
Which thy small cozen, should defeat thee of,
Be still thine own, and thou advance thy self,
Above the height of all thine Ancestors.

But if I mount by murder and deceit,
Justice will thrust aspiring thoughts below,
And make me caper for to break my neck:
After some woeful lamentation,
Of my obedience to unlawfulness:
I tell you plain, I would not have him dye,
Might I enjoy the Soldans Empery.

What wilt thou bar thy self of happiness,
Stop the large stream of pleasures which would f^owe,
And still attend on thee like Serving-men:
Prefer the life of him that loves thee not,
Before thine own, and my felicity.

I'd rather choose to feed on carefulnesse^
To ditch, to delve, and labour for my bread,
N^y rather choose to beg from door to door,
Then condescend to offer violence,
To young Pertillo in his innocence,
I know you speak, to sound what mighty share,
Pertil^ hath in my affection.

In faith I do not, therefore prethie say,
Wil^ thou consent to have him made away.

Why then in faith, I am ashamed to think,
I had my being from so foul a lump
Of adula^ion and unthankfulness,
Ah, had their dying prayers no avail
Within your hart? no, damned extortion,
Hath left no room for grace to harbour in,
Audacious sin, how can thou make him say,
Consent to make my brothers son away.

Nay if you gin to brawl, withdraw your self,
But utter not the motion that I made,
As you love me, or do regard your life.

And as you love my saf^tie, and your soule^
Let grace, and fear of God, such thoughts controule^

Still prattling, let your grace and fear alone,
And leave me quickly to my private thoughts,
Or with my sword ^le open wide a gate,
For wrath and bloody death to enter in.

Better you gave me death and burial,
Then such foul deeds should overthrow v^ all.

Still are you wagging that rebellious tongue,
I'll dig it out for Crows to feed upon,
If thou continue longer in my sight.
He loves him better then he loves his life,
Here's repetition of my brothers care,
Of sisters chardge, of grace, and fear of God,
Fear^ dastards, cowards, fa^nt hart run-awayes,
I'll fear no colours to obtain my will,
Though all the fiends in hell were opposite^
I'd rather loose mine eye, my hand, my foot,
Be blind, want senses, and be ever lame,
Then be tormented with such discontent,
This resignation would afflict me with,
Be blithe my boy, thy life shall sure be done,
Before the setting of the morrow sun.

Make hast, run headlong to destruction,
I like thy temper, that can change a heart,
From yielding flesh, to Flint and Adamant,
Thou hitst it home, where thou dost fasten hold,
Nothing can seperate the love of gold.

Fear no relenting, I dare pawn my soul,
(And that's no gadge, it is the devils due)
He shall imbrew his greed^e griping hands,
In the dead bosom of the bloody boy,
And wind himself, his son, and harmless wife,
In endless folds of sure destruction.
Now Homicide, thy looks are like thy self,
For blood, and death, are thy companions,
Let my confounding plots but go before,
And thou shalt wade up to the chin in gore.

I find it true, for where thou art let in,
There is no scruple made of any sin,
The world may see thou art the root of ill,
For but for thee, poor Beech had lived still.

Oh my dear brother, what a heap of woe,
Your rashness hath poured down upon your head:
Where shall we hide this trumpet of your shame,
This timeless ugly map of cruelty?
Brother, if VVilliams do reveal the truth,
Then brother, then, begins our scene of ruth.

I fear not VVilliams but I fear the boy,
Who knew I fetched his master to my house.

What doth the boy know wherabouts you dwell?

I that torments me worse then pangs of hell,
He must be slain to, else heal utter all.

Hark brother, ha^ke, me thinks I here on call.

Go down and see, pray God my man keep close:
If he prove long-tongd then my days are done,
The boy must die, there is no help at all:
For on his life, my very life depends,
Besides I cannot compass what I would,
Unless the boy be quickly made away,
This that abridgde his haplesse masters days,
Shall leave such sound memorials one his head,
That he shall quite forget who did him harm,
Or trained his master to this bloody feast:
Why how now Rachel? who did call below?

A maid that came to have a penny loaf.

I would a penny loaf cost me a pound,
Provided Beeches boy had eat his last.

Perchance the boy doth not remember you.

It may be so, but i'll remember him.
And send him quickly with a bloody scroll,
To greet his master in another world.

I'll go to Beeches on a faind excuse,
To see if he will ask me for his master.

No, get you up, you shall not stir abroad,
And when I call, come quickly to the door.

Brother, or that, or any thing beside,
To please your mind, or ease your misery.

I am knee deep, i'll wade up to the wast,
To end my hart of fear, and to attain,
The hoped end of my intention?
But I may see, if I have eyes to see,
And if my understanding be not blind,
How many dangers do already weight,
Upon my steppes of bold security,
Williams is fled, perchance to utter all,
That's but perchance, nay rather flatly no,
But should he tell, I can but die a death,
Should he conceal, the boy would utter it,
The boy must d^e, there is no remedie^

I wonder that my master stays so long,
He had not wont to be abroad so late^
Yonder comes one, I think that same is he.

I see the boy sits at his masters door^,
Or now, or never, Merry stir thy self,
And rid thy hart from fear and jealousy:
Thomas Winchester go quickly to your shop,
What sit you still^ your master is at hand.

Oh God I think there's thieves in Beeches shop.

What cruel hand hath done so foul a de^de,
Thus to be mangle a distressed youth:
Without all pity or a due remorse,
See how the hammer sticks in his head,
Wherewith this honest youth is done to death,
Speak honest Thomas, if any speech remain,
What cruel hand hath done this villainy:
He cannot speak, his senses are bereft,
Hoe neighbour Loney, pray come down with speed,
Your tenant Beeches man is murdered.

What would you have some Mustard?

Your tenant Beeches man, is murdered.

Whose smothered, I think you lack your wit,
What neighbor? what make you here so late?

I was affrighted by a sudden cry,
And coming down found master Beeches man,
Thus with a hammer sticking in his head.

Ah wo is me for Thomas Winchester,
The truest soul that ever master had,
Wheres master B^ch?

Nay, no body can tell:
Did you see any running from the door,
When you looked out and heard the young man cry,

Yes I saw two truly to my thinking, but they
Ran away as fast as their hands could bear them:
By my troth twas so dark I could see no body,
Pray God master Beech hath not hurt his boy in his patience
And if he have he must be hanged in his choler.

I dare be sworn he would not strike him thus,
Pray God his master be no slain himself.
The night grows late, and we will have this course
Be watched all night, to morrow we shall see,
Whence sprang this strange uncivil cruelty.

Neighbour good night.

Neighbours all good night.

Pray God I never see so sad a sight.

Oh sister, sister, now I am pursued,
The mighty clamour that the boy did make,
Hath raised the neighbours round about the street:
So that I know not where to hide my self.

What brother, have you killed Beeches boy?

No, no, not I, but yet another hath,
Come, come to bed, for fear we be descried:
The fearefullest night that ever Merry knew.

Seem it not strange resolved gentlem^n,
That I thus privately have severed you,
To open secret sorrows of my hart:
Think not I do intend to undermine,
Your passed lives, although you know I am,
A man to whom the true unpartial sword,
Of equal justice is delivered,
Therefore swear both, as you respect your souls,
At the last dreadful sessions hold in heaven,
First to conceal, and next to execute,
What I reveal, and shall enjoin you to.

So you reward us, whatsoever it be,
We vow performance, and true secrecy.

There go aside, ye seeming semblances,
Of equal justice, and true piety,
And lay my hearts corrupted Cytadell,
Wide open to your thoughts to look into.
Know I am named Fallerio, to deceive
The world with show of truth and honesty,
But yet nor truth, nor honesty abides,
Within my thoughts, but falsehood, cruelty,
Blood sucking Avarice, and all the sins,
That hale men on to bloody stratagems,
Like to your selves, which care not how you gain,
By blood, extortion, falsehood, perjury,
So you may have a pleasing recompense:
Start not aside, depart not from your selves,
I know your composition is as mine,
Of blood, extortion, falsehood, perjury,
True branded with the mark of wickedness.

Be not so bitter, we are they indeed,
That would deprive our fathers of their lives,
So we were sure to have a benefit:
I way no more the murthring of a child,
Dragged from the sucking bosom of his mother,
Then I respect to quaff a boule of wine,
Unto his health, that dearly loves me.

Where gold rewards, were apparent death
Before mine eyes, bold, hearty, visible,
I'd wrestle with him for a deadly fall,
Or I would loose my guerdon promised:
I'd hang my brother for to wear his coat,
That all that saw me might have cause to say,
There is a hart more firm then Adamant,
To practise execrable butcheries.

I know that well for were I not assured,
Of your performance in this enterprice,
I would not open the closet of my breast,
To let you know my close intention,
There is a little boy, an vrchin lad,
That stands between me and the glorious rays,
Of my soule-wishing sun of happiness:
There is a thicket ten miles from this place,
Whose secret ambush, and vnvsed ways,
Doth seem to join with our conspiracy,
There murder him, and when the deed is done,
Cast his dead body in some dirty ditch,
And leave him for the Fowls to feed upon:
Do this, here is two hundredth marks in gold,
To harten on your resolution:
Two hundredth more, after the deed is done,
I'll pay you more for satisfaction.

Swones her's rewards would make one kill himself,
To leave his progeny so rich a prize,
Were twenty lives engadged for this coin,
I'd end them all, to have the money mine,

Who would not hazard life, nay soul and all,
For such a frank and bounteous pay-maister,
Sblood, what labour is't to kill a boy,
It is but thus, and then the task is done,
It grieves me most, that when this task is past,
I have no more to occupy my self,
Two hundredth marks to give a paltry stab,
I am impatient till I see the brat.

That must be done with cunning secrecy,
I have devised to send the boy abroad,
With this excuse, to have him fostered,
In better manners then this place affords,
My wife, though loath indeed to part with him,
Yet for his good, she will forgo her joy,
With hope in time to have more firm delights,
Which she expects from young Pertillos life.

Call you him Pert^llo, faith le^ue out the T.

Why so?

Because Perill^ will remain,
For he shall surely perish if I live:
What do you call the father of the child?

Why man, he hath no father left alive.

Yes such a father, that doth see and know,
How we do plot this little infants woe.

Why then his little son is much to blame,
That doth not keep his father company.
When shall we have delivery of the boy?

To morrow morning by the break of day,
And you must swear you'll see him safely brought,
Unto the place that I do send him to.

That may we safely, for you mean to send
Him to the wood, and there his journey ends:
Both soul and limbs shall have a place to rest,
In earth the last, the first in Abrams breast.

Come gentlemen, this night go rest with me,
To morrow end Pertillos tragedy.

Sister, now all my gold expected hopes,
Of future good, is plainly vanished,
And in her stead, grim visadged despair,
Hath taken possession of my guilty heart,
Desire to gain, began this desperate act,
Now plain appearance of destruction,
Of soul and body, weights upon my sin,
Although we hide our sins from mortal men,
Whose glass of knowledge is the face of man,
The eye of heaven beholds our wickedness,
And will no doubt revenge the innocent.

Ah, do not so disconsolate your self,
Nor add new streams of sorrow to your grief,
Which like a spring tide ouer-swels the banks,
Least you do make an inundation,
And so be borne away with swiftest tides,
Of all my friends Allenso loves me best.

I think thou art inspired with prophecy,
He loves thee better then I would he did:
Why wherefore think you so my pretty Nephew?

Because he taught me how to say my prayers,
To ride a horse, to start the fearful Hare,
He gave this dagger to me yester night,
This little Ring, and many pretty things:
For which, kind cousin, I rest your true debtor,
And one day I will make you recompense.

I, with thy lands and goods thou leau'st behind.

Pray father let me go along with him:
Now by the saviour of my sinful soul,
I do not like those fellows countenance.

Son be content, we'll go a seauenight hence,
And see him in his university weeds:
These will conduct him safely to the place,
Be well assured they'll have a care of him,
That you shall never see Pertillo more.

Father, I pray you to withdraw your self,
I'd have a word or two in secrecy.

Come living image of thy dead mothe^,
And take my loving farewell, ere we part,
I love thee dearly for thy fathers sake,
But for thy mothers, dote with ^ealousie,
Oh I do fear, before I see thy face,
Or thou, or I, shall taste of bitterness:
Kiss me sweet boy, and kissing fold thine Aunt,
Within the circle of thy little arms,
I need not fear, death cannot offer wrong,
The majesty of thy presaging face,
Would vanquish him though ne'er so t^rrible,
The angry Lioness that is bereaved,
Of her imperious crew of forest kings,
Would leave her fury and defend thee safe,
From Wolves, from Panthers, Leopards, and she Bears,
That live by rapine, stealth, and cruelty,
Therefore to God I do commend thy state,
Who will be sure to guarde thee tenderly.
And now to you, that carry hence this wealth,
This precious jewel, this vnprized good,
Have a regard to use him carefully,
When he is parted from that serious care,
Which was employed for his security:
I urge it not, that I misdoubt your truth,
I hope his Uncle doth persuade himself,
You will be courteous, kind and affable,
There's some reward for hoped carefulness.

Now by my soul I do suspect the men,
Especially the lower of the two:
See what a hollow discontented look
He casts, which brings apparent cause of fear,
The other, though he seem more courteous,
Yet doth his looks presadge this thought in me,
As if he scorned to think on courtesy.

Upon my life, my son you are to blame,
The gentlemen are honest, virtuous,
And will protect Pertillo happily:
These thoughts proceed out of abundant love,
Because you grieve to leave his company:
If ought betide him otherwise then well,
Let God require due vengeance on my head,
And cut my hopes from all prosperity.

A heavy sentence, full of wondrous fear,
I cannot choose but credit such a vow,
Come hither then, my joy, my chiefest hopes.
My second self, my earthly happiness,
Lend me thy little pretty cherry lip,
To kiss me cozen, lay thy little hand
Upon my cheek, and hug me tenderly,
Would the clear rays of thy two glorious suns,
Could penetrate the corners of my heart,
That thou might see, how much I tender thee.
My friends behold within this little bulk,
Two perfect bodies are incorporate,
His life holds mine, his heart conteines my hart,
His every limb, contains my every part:
Without his being, I can never be,
He being dead, prepare to bury me.
Oh thou immortal mover of the spheres,
Within their circled reuolusions,
Whose glorious image this small orphan bears,
Wrought by thy all sufficient Majesty,
Oh never suffer any wicked hand,
To harm this heavenly workmanship of thine,
But let him live, great God to honour thee,
With virtuous life, and spotless piety.

Cease my kind cousin, I cannot choose but weep,
To see your care of my security.

Knew thou my reason, that persuades my hart,
Thou would not wonder, why I grieve to part:
But yet I would suspect my fathers vow,
Did any other make it by your leave.

What have you done, this lothnesse to depart,
Seems you were trained up in tediousness,
That know not when and where to make an end:
Take him my friends, I know you will discharge,
The hope and trust that I repose in you.

Assure your self, in every circumstance.

Then to your horses, quickly, speedily,
Else we shall put our fingers in the eye,
And weep for kindness till to morrow morn.

Farewell good Uncle, Aunt, and loving cousin.

Farewell, I fear me everlastingly.

You mean not now to have him murdered?

Not murdered, what else? kill him I say,
But wherefore make thou question of my will?

Because you wished that God should be revenged
If any ill be^de the innocent.

Oh that was nothing but to blind the eyes,
Of my fond son, which loves him too too well.

It is enough, it shall be surely done.

What hast thou sped? have you bought the bag?

I brother, here it is, what is't to do?

To beat hence Beeches body in the night.

You cannot bear so great a weight your self,
And 'tis no tru^ng of another man.

Yes w^l enough, as I will order it,
I'll cut him peece-meale, fi^st his head and legs
Will be one burden, then the mangled rest,
Will be another, which I will transport,
Beyond the water in a Ferry boat,
And throw it into P^ris-gard^n ditch.
Fetch me the chopping-knife, and in the mean
I'll move the Faggots that do cover him.

Oh can you find in hart to cut and carve,
His stone cold flesh, and rob the greedy grave,
Of his dissevered blood besprinkled limbs?

I mary can I fetch the chopping knife.

This deed is worse, the when you took his life.

But worse, or be^ter, now it must be so,
Better do thus, then feel a greater woe.

Here is the knife, I cannot stay to see,
This barbarous deed of inhumanity.
Ye glorious beams of that bright-shining lamp,
That lights the star bespangled firmament,
And dimnes the glimmering shadows of the night,
Why dost thou lend assistance to this wretch,
To shamble forth with bold audacity,
His limbs, that bears thy makers semblance.
All you the sad spectators of this Act,
Whose harts do taste a feeling pensiveness,
Of this unheard of savage Massacre:
Oh be far of, to harbour such a thought,
As this audacious murderer put in ur,
I see your sorrows flow up to the brim,
And overflow your cheeks with brinish tears,
But though this sight bring surfeit to the eye,
Delight your ears with pleasing harmony,
That ears may countercheck your eyes, and say,
Why shed you tears, this deed is but a play:
His work is done, he seeks to hide his sin,
I'll wail his woe, before his woe begin.

Now will I high me to the water side,
And fling this heavy burden in a ditch,
Whereof my soul doth feel so great a weight,
That it doth almost press me down with fear,
Hark Rach^l: I will cross the water straight,
And fling this middle mention of a man,
Into some ditch, then high me home again,
To rid my house of that is left behind.

Where have you laid the legs battered head?

Under the faggots, where it lay before,
Help me to put this trunk into the bag.

My heart will not endure to handle it,
The sight hereof doth make me quake for fear.

I'll do it my self, only dry up the blood,
And burn the clothes as you have done before.

I fear thy soul will bur^e in flames of hell,
Unless repentance wash away thy sin,
With clensing tears of true contrition:
Ah did not nature oversway my will,
The world should know this plot of damned ill.

I am so weary in this combrous wood,
That I must needs go sit me down and rest^

What were we best to kill him unawares,
Or give him notice what we do intend?

Why then belike you mean to do your charge
And feel no taste of pity in your hart.

Of pity man, that never enters here,
And if it should, I'd threat my craven hart,
To stab it home, for harbouring such a thought,
I see no reason why I should relent:
It is a charitable virtuous deed,
To end this princkocke from this sinful world.

Such charity will never have reward,
Unless it be with sting of conscience:
And that's a torment worse then Sisipus,
That rowles a restless stone against the hill.

My conscience is not pricked with such conceit.

That shows thee further off from hoped grace.

Grace me no graces, I respect no grace,
But with a grace, to give a graceless stab,
To chop folks legs and arms off by the stumps,
To see what shift theile make to scramble home:
Pick out men's eyes, and tell them that's the sport,
Of hood-man-blinde, without all sportiuenesse,
If with a grace I can perform such pranks,
My hart will give mine agents many thanks.

Then God forbid I should consort my self,
With one so far from grace and piety:
Least being found within thy company,
I should be partner of thy punishment.

When we have done what we have vowed to do,
My hart desires to have no fellowship,
With those that talk of grace or godliness:
I named not God vnleast 'twere with an other,
Sense the first hour that I could walk alone,
(And you that make so much of conscience,
By heaven thou art a damned hipocrite:
For thou hast vowed to kill that sleeping boy,
And all to gain two hundredth marks in gold,
I know this pureness comes of pure deceit,
To draw me from the murthering of the child,
That you alone might have the benefit,
You are too shallow, if you gull me so,
Chop of my head to make a Sowsing-tub,
And fill it full of tripes and chitterlinges.

That thou shalt see my hart is far from fraud,
Or vain illusion in this enterprise,
Which doth import the safety of our souls,
There take my earnest of impiety.
Only forbear to lay thy ^uder hands,
Upon the poor mistrustlesse tender child,
As for our vows, fear not their violence,
God will forgive on hearty penitence.

Thou Eunuch, Capon, dastard, fast and loose,
Thou weathercock of mutability,
White liuered Paisant, wilt thou vow and swear,
Face and make semblance with thy bagpipe oaths,
Of that thou never meanst to execute?
Pure cowardice for fear to crack thy neck,
With the huge Caos of thy bodies weight,
Hath sure begot this true contrition,
Then fast and pray, and see if thou can win,
A goodly pardon for thy heinous sin,
As for the boy, this fatal instrument,
Was marked by heaven to cut his line of life,
And must supply the knife of Atropos,
And if it do not, let this master piece,
(Which nature lent the world to wonder at)
Be slit in Carbonadoes for the jaws,
Of some men-eating hungry Cannibal:
By heaven i'll kill him only for this cause,
For that he came of virtuous Ancestors,

But by that God, which made that wondrous globe,
Wherein is seen his powerful deity,
Thou shalt not kill him maugre all thy spite:
Swear, and forswear thy self ten thousand times,
Awake Pertillo, for thou art betrayed,
This bloody slave intends to murder thee.

Both him, and all, that dare to rescue him.

Wherefore? because I slept without your leave?
Forgive my fault, I'll never sleep again.

No child, thy wicked Uncle hath suborned,
Both him and me to take thy life away:
Which I would save, but that this hellish imp,
Will not consent to spare thy guiltless blood.

Why should Falleria seek to have my life.

The lands and goods, thy father left his son,
Do hale thee on to thy destruction.

Oh needy treasure, harm begetting good,
That safely should procure the loss of blood.

Those lands and goods, thy father got with pain,
Are swords where with his little son is slain.

Then let our swords let out his guitlesse life.

Sweet, sour, kind, cruel, hold thy murthering knife,
And here me speak, before you murder me.

Fear not sweet child, he shall not murder thee.

No, but my sword shall let his puddings forth.

First here me speak, thou map of Butchery,
Tis but my goods and lands my Uncle seeks,
Having that safely, he desires no more,
I do protest by my dead parents souls,
By the dear love of false Fallerios son,
Whose heart, my heart assures me, will be grieved,
To hear his fathers inhumanity:
I will forsake my country, goods, and lands,
I and my self, will even change my self,
In name, in life, in habit, and in all,
And live in some far moved continent,
So you will spare my weak and tender youth,
Which cannot entertain the stroke of deat^
In budding years, and very spring of life.

Leave of these bootles^ protestations,
And use no ruth enticing arguments,
For if you do, i'll lop you limb by limb,
And torture you for childish eloquence.

Thou shalt not make his little finger ache.

Yes every pa^t, and this sha^ prove it true.

Oh I am slain, the Lord forgive thy fact,
And give thee grace to dye with penitence.

A treacherous villain, full of cowardice,
I'll make thee know that thou hast done amiss.

Teach me that knowledge when you will or dare.

Swoones I am peppered, I had need have salt,
Or else to morrow I shall yield a stincke,
Worse then a heap of dirty excrements:
Now by this Hilt, this gold was earned too dear:
Ah, how now death, wilt thou be conqueror?
Then vengeance light on them that made me so,
And there's another farewell ere I go.

Enough, enough, I had my death before.

How now my Lords, was't not a gallant course,
Believe me sirs, I never saw a wretch,
Make better shift to save her little life:
The thickets full of busks and scratching briars,
A mighty dew, a many deep mouthed hounds,
Let loose in every place to cross their course,
And yet the Hare got cleanly from them all:
I would not for a hundred pound in fait^
But that she had escaped with her life,
For we will wind^ a merry hunters horne,
And ^tart her once again to morrow morn.

In troth my Lord, the little ^locked hound,
That had but three good legs to further him,
Twas foremost still, and surer of his ^ent,
Then any one in all the cry besides^

But yet Pen^ragon gave the Hare more turns.

That was because he was more politic,
And eyed her closely in her coverts still:
They all did well, and once more we will try,
The subtle creature with a greater crie^

But say, what well accomplished Gentleman,
Is this that comes into our company?

I know him well, it is Fall^rios son,
Pandynos brother (a kind Gentleman)
That dyed, and left his little pretty son,
Unto his fathers good direction.

Stand close awhile, and over hear his words,
He seems much ouer-gone with passion.

Ye timorous thoughts that guide my giddy steps,
In unknown paths of dreadful wilderness,
Why traitor-like do you conspire to hold,
My pained heart, twixt fear and jealousy,
My too much care hath brought me carelessly,
Into this woody savage labyrinth,
And I can find no way to issue out,
Fear hath so^ dazzled all my better part,
That reason h^h forgot discreations art:
But in good time, see where is company.
Kind Gentlemen, if you unlike my self,
Are not encumbered with the circling ways,
Of this erroneous winding wilderness,
I pray you to direct ^e forth this wood,
And show ^he path that leads to P^du^.

We all are Padu^, and we all intend,
To pass forthwith, w^th speed to Padua.

I will attend upon you presently.

Come then away, but gentlemen behold,
A bloody ^ight, and murderous spectacle.

Oh God forgive me all my wickedness,
And take me to eternal happiness.

Hark one of them hath some small spark of life,
To kindle knowledge of their sad m^haps.

Ah gracious Lord, I know this wretched child,
And these two men that here lye murdered.

Do you Alenso?

I my gracious Lord^
It was Pertillo my dead Vne^es sonne^
Now have my fears brought ^o^th ^his fearful child,
Of endless care, and everlasting grief.

Lay hands upon Alenso Gentlemen,
Your presence doth confirm you had a share,
In the performance of this c^uelt^e.

I do confess I have so gr^at a share,
In this mishap, that I will give him thanks,
That will let foo^ my sorrow wounded soul,
From out this goal of lamentation.

Tis now too late to wish for had^wis^,
Had you withheld you^ hand f^om this attempt,
Sorrow had never so imp^oned you.

Oh my good Lord, you do mist^ my ^se,
And yet my grief is sure infallible,
The Lord of heaven can witness with my soul,
That I am guiltless of your wrong suspect,
But yet not griefel^sse tha^ the deed i^ done.

Nay if you stand to justify your self,
This Gentleman whose life doo^h see me to stay,
Within his body tell he tell your shame,
Shall testify of your integrity:
Speak then thou sad An^tomy of death,
Who were the agents of your woefulness.

O be not blinded with a false ^urmise,
For least my tongue should fail to end the ^al^.
Of our untimely f^e appointed death:
Know young Allenso is as innocent,
As is Faller^ guilty of the crime.
He, he it was, that with four hundredth marks,
Whereof two hundred he paid presently,
Did hire this damned villain and my self,
To massacre this harmless innocent:
But yet my conscience touched with some remorse,
Would fain have saved the young P^rtillos life,
But he remorseless would not let him live,
But unawares thrust in his harmless breast,
That life bereaving fatal instrument:
Which cruel deed I seeking to revenge,
Have lost my life, and paid the slave his due
Reward, for spilling blood of Innocents:
Surprise Fallerio author of this ill,
Save young Allenso, he is guiltless still.

Oh sweetest honey mixed with bitter gall,
Oh Nightingale combined with Ravens notes,
Thy speech is like a woodward that should say^
Let the tree live, but take the root away.
As though my life were ought but misery,
Having my father slain for infamy.

What should incite Fallerio to devise,
The overthrow of this unhappy boy.

That may be easily guest my gracious Lord^
To be the lands Pandino left his son,
Which after that the boy were murdered,
Descend to him by due inheritance.

You deem aright, see gentlemen the fruits
Of coveting to have another right,
Oh wicked thought of greedy couetice^
Could neither nature, fear of punishment,
Scandal to wife and children, nor the fear,
Of Gods confounding strict severity,
Allay the head-strong fury of thy will,
Beware my friends to wish unlawful gain,
It will beget strange actions full of fear,
And overthrow the actor unawares,
For first Fallerios life must satisfy,
The large effusion of their guiltless bloods,
Trained on by him to these extremities,
Next, wife and children must be dispose,
Of lands and goods, and turned to beggary,
But most of all, his great and heinous sin,
Will be an eye sore to his guiltless kin.
Bear hence away these models of his shame,
And let us prosecute the murderer,
With all the care and diligence we can.

Forbear a while, to bear away my joy,
Which now is vanished, since his life is fled,
And give me leave to wash his deadly wound,
With hearty tears, out-flowing from those eyes,
Which loved his ^ight, more then the sight of heaven:
Forgive me God for this idolatry.
Thou ugly monster, grim imperious death,
Thou raw-bonde lump of ^oule deformity.
Reguardlesse instrument of cruel ^ate,
Vnparciall Sergeant, full of treachery,
Why did thou flatter my ill boding thoughts,
And flesh my hopes with vain illusions:
Why did thou say, Pertillo should not dye,
And yet, oh yet, hast done it cruelly:
Oh but behold, with what a smiling cheer,
He intertain'd thy bloody harbinger:
See thou transformer of a heavenly face,
To Ashy paleness and unpleasing looks,
That his fair countenance still retains grace,
Of perfect beauty in the very grave,
The world would say such beauty should not dye,
Yet like a thief thou did it cruelly:
Ah, had thy eyes deep sunk into thy head,
Been able to perceive his virtuous mind,
Where virtue sate enthroned in a chair,
With awful grace, and pleasing majesty:
Thou would not then have let Pertillo die,
Nor like a thief have slain him cruelly.
Inevitable fates, could you devise,
No means to bring me to this pilgrimage,
Full of great woes and sad calamities,
But that the father should be principal,
To plot the present downfall of the son:
Come then kind death and give me leave to die,
Since thou hast slain Pertillo cruelly.

Forbear Allenso harken to my doom,
Which doth concern thy fathers apprehension,
First we enjoin thee upon pain of death,
To give no succour to thy wicked sire,
But let him perrish in his damned sin,
And pay the price of such a treachery:
See that with speed the monster be attached,
And bring him safe to suffer punishment,
Prevent it not, nor seek not to delude,
The officers to whom this charge is given,
For if thou do, as sure as God doth live:
Thy self shall satisfy the laws contempt,
Therefore forward about this punishment.

Thanks gracious God that thou hast l^ft the means
To end my soul from this perplexity,
Not succour him on pain of present death:
That is no pain, death is a welcome guest,
To those whose harts are overwhelmed with grief,
My woes are done, I having leave to die,
And after death live ever joyfully.

Now Avarice I have well satisfied,
My hungry thoughts with blood and cr^eltie:
Now all my melancholy discontent,
Is shaken of, and I am thoroughly pleased,
With what thy policy hath brought to pass,
Yet am I not so thoroughly satisfied:
Until I bring the purple actors forth,
And cause them quasfe a bowl of bitterness,
That father, son, and sister brother may,
Bring to their deaths with most assured decay.

That will be done without all question,
For thou hast slain Allenso with the boy:
And Rac^ell doth not wish to ouerliue,
The sad remembrance of her brothers sin,
Leave faithful love, to teach them how to dye,
That they may share their kinsfolks misery.

I have bestowed a watery funeral,
On the half body of my butchered friend,
The head and legs I'll leave in some dark place,
I care not if they find them yea or no.

Where do you mean to leave the head and legs,

In some dark place ne'er to Bainardes castle,

But do it closely that you be not seen,
For all this while you are without suspect.

Take you no thought, i'll have a care of that,
Only take heed you have a special care,
To make no show of any discontent,
Nor use too many words to any one.
I will return when I have left my load,
Be merry Rachel half the fear is past.

But I shall never think my self secure,
This deed would trouble any quiet soul,
To think thereof, much more to see it done,
Such cruel deeds can never long be hid,
Although we practice ne'er so cunningly,
Let others open what I do conceal,
Lo he is my brother, I will cover it,
And rather dye then have it spoken rife,
Lo where she goes, betrayed her brothers life.

Why how now Harry what should be the cause,
That you are grown so discontent of late:
Your sighs do show some inward heaviness,
Your heavy looks, your eyes brimful of tears,
Bears testimony of some secret grief,
Reveal it Harry, I will be thy friend,
And help thee to my poor habillity.

If I am heavy, if I often sigh,
And if my eyes bear records of my woe,
Condemn me not, for I have mighty cause,
More then I will impart to any one.

Do you misdoubt me, that you dare not tell
That woe to me, that moves your discontent.

Good master Cowley you were ever kind,
But pardon me, I will not utter it,
To any one, for I have past my word,
And therefore urge me not to tell my grief.

But those that smother grief too secretly,
May wast themselves in silent anguishment,
And bring their bodies to so low an ebb,
That all the world can never make is flow,
Unto the h^ppy hight of former health:
Then be not iniu^ious to thy self,
To wast thy strength in lamentation,
But tell thy case, wele seek some remedy.

My cause of grief is now remediless,
And all the world can never lessen it,
Then since no means can make my sorrows less,
Suffer me wail a woe which wants redress.

Yet let me bear a part in thy lamentes,
I love thee not so ill, but I will moan,
Thy heavy haps, thou shalt not sigh alone.

Nay, if you are so curious to intrude,
Your self to sorrow, where you have no share,
I will frequent some unfrequented place,
Where none shall here nor see my lamentations.

And I will follow where soever thou go,
I will be partner of thy helpless woe.

Will is't not time we should go to our boats,
And give attendance for this Bartlemew tide:
Folks will be stirring early in the morning.

By my troth I am indifferent whether I go or no.
If a fare come why so, if not, why so, if I have not their money, they shall
have none of my labour.


But we that live by our labours, must give attendance,
But where lies thy Boat?

At Baynard castle stairs.

So does mine, then lets go together.

Come, I am indifferent, I care not so much for going,
But if I go with you, why so: if not, why so.
Sblood what rascal hath laid this in my way?

A was not very indifferent that did so, but you are so permentorie, to say,
why so, and why so, that every one is glad to do you injury, but lets see,
what is it?


Whats that so much, I am indifferent, yet for mine own part, I understand the
misery of it, if you do, why so, if not, why so.


By my troth I understand no other mystery but thi^,
It is a strange and very rueful sight,
But prithee what dost thou conceit of it.

In troth I am indifferent, for if I tell you, why so, if not why so.


If thou tell me, I'll thank thee, therefore I prithee tell me.


I tell you I am indifferent, but to be plain with you,
I am grieved to stumble at the hangmans budget.

At the hangmans budget, why this is a sack.

And to speak indifferently, it is the hang-mans Budget, and because he
thought too much of his labour to set this head upon the bridge, and the legs
upon the gates, he flings them in the street for men to stumble at, but if I
get him in my boat, I'll so belabour him in a stretcher, that he had better be
stretched in one of his own halfepeny halters: if this be a good conceit, why
so, if not, why so.


Thou art deceived, this head hath many wounds,
And hoase and shoes remaining on the legs,
Bull always strips all quartered traitors quite.

I am indifferent whether you believe me or no, these were not worth taking
off, and therefore he left them on, if this be likely why so, if not, why so.


Nay then I see you grow from worse to worse,
I heard last night, that one near Lambert hill
Was missing, and his boy was murdered,
It may be this is a part of that same man:
What ere it be, I'll bear it to that place.

Mass I am indifferent, I'll go along with you,
If it be so, why so, if not why so.

Hoe master Loney, here you any news,
What is become of your Tenant Beech?

No truly sir, not any news at all.

What hath the boy recovered any speech,
To give us light of these suggestions,
That do arise upon this accident.

There is no hope he should recover speech,
The wives do say, he's ready now to leave
This grievous world full fraught with treachery,

Me thinks if Beech himself be innocent,
That then the murderer should not dwell far off,
T^e hammer that is sticking in his head,
Was borrowed of a Cutler dwelling by,
But he remembers not, who borrowed it:
He is committed that did owe the hammer,
But yet he stands upon his innocence,
And Beeches absence causes great suspicion.

If Beech be faulty, as I do not think,
I never was so much deceived before,
Oh had you known his conversation,
You would not have him in suspicion.

Devils seem Saints, and in this hateful times,
Deceit can bear apparraunt signs of truth,
And vice bear show of virtues excellence.

I pray is this master Beeches house?

My friend this same was master Beeches shop,
We cannot tell whether he live or no.

Know you his head and if I show it you,
Or can you tell what hose or shoes he ware,
At that same time when he forsook the shop.

What have you head, and hose, and shoes to show,
And want the body that should use the same.

Behold this head, these legs, these hose and shoes,
And see if they were Beeches yea or no.

They are the same, alas what is become,
Of the remainder of this wretched man.

Nay that I know not, only these we found,
As we were coming up a na^row lane,
Near Baynardes Castle, where we two did dwell,
And heering that a man was missing hence,
We thought it good to bring these to this place,

Thanks my good friends, there's some thing for your pains,

We are indifferet, whether you give us any thing or nothing, and if you had
not, why so, but since you have, wh^ so.


Leave your repining sir we thank you heartily.

Farewell good fellows, neighbour now be bold,
They dwell not far that did this bloody deed,
As God no boubt will at the last reveal:
Though they conceal it ne'er so cunningly,
All houses, gutters, sincks and creuices,
Have carefully been sought for, for the blood.
Yet there's no instance found in any place.
But who is that, that brings a heavy load,
Behind him on a painful porters back.

Pray gentlemen which call you Beeches shop?

This is the place, what wold you with the man?

Nothing with him, I hear the man is dead,
And if he be not, I have lost my pains.

Hes dead indeed, but yet we cannot find,
What is become of half his hopeless body,
His head and legs are found^ but for the rest,
No man can tell what is become of it.

Then I do think I can resolve your doubt,
And bring you certain tidings of the rest,
And if you know his doublet and his shirt:
As for the body it is so abus^d.
That no man can take notice whoes it was,
Set down this burden of another shame,
What do you know the doublet and the shirt.

This is the doublet, these the severed limbs,
Which late were joined to that mangled trunk:
Lay them together see if they can make,
Among them all a sound and solid man.

They all agree, but yet they cannot make,
That sound and whole, which a remorsles hand
Hath severed with a knife of cruelty:
But ^ay good sir, where did you find this out?

Walking betime by Paris-garden ditch,
Having my Wa^er Spaniel by my side,
When we approached unto that haplesse place,
Where this same trunk lay drowned in a ditch,
My Spaniel began to sent, to bark, to plunge,
Into the water, and came forth again,
And fawnd on me, as if a man should say,
Help out a man that here lies murdered.
At first I took delight to see the dog,
Thinking in vain some game did there lye hid,
Amongst the Nettles growing near the bank:
But when no game, nor any thing appeared,
That might produce the Spaniel to this sport,
I began to rate and beat the harmless Cur,
Thinking to make him leave to follow me,
But words, nor blows, could move the dog away,
But still he plunged, he dived, he barked, he ran
Still to my side, as if it were for help:
I seeing this, did make the ditch be dragd,
Where then was found this body as you see,
With great amazement to the lookers on.

Behold the mighty miracles of God,
That senseless things should propagate their sin,
That are more bestial far then beastliness,
Of any creature most insensible.

Cease we to wonder at Gods wondrous works,
And let us labour for to bring to light,
Those masked fiends that thus dishonour him:
This sack is new, and lo behold his mark
Remains upon it, which did sell the bag,
Amongst the Salters we shall find it out,
When, and to whom, this bloody bag was sold.

Tis very likely, let no pains be spared,
To bring it out, if it be possible,
Twere pity such a murder should remain
Unpunished, amongst Turks and Infidels.

Sirs, I do know the man that sold this bag,
And if you please, I'll fetch him presently?

With all our harts, how say you Gentlemen?
Perchance the murt^er thus may come to light.

I pray you do it, we will tarry here:
And let the eyes of every passenger
Be satisfied, which may example be,
How they commit so dreadful wickedness.

And please your maisterships the boy is dead.

Tis very strange, that having many wounds,
So terrible, so ghastly, which is more,
Having the hammer sticking in his head,
That he should live and stir from Friday night,
To Sunday morning, and even then depart,
When that his Masters mangled course were found,
Bring him forth too, perchance the murderers
May have their hearts touched with due remorse,
Viewing their deeds of damned wickedness.

Here is the Salters man that sold the bag,

My friend, how long since did you sell that bag?
And unto whom, if you remember i^?

I sold ^he bag good ^ir but yesterday,
Unto a maid, I do not know her name.

Nor where she dwells.

No certainly.

But what apparel had she on her back?

I do not well remember what she wore,
But if I saw her I should know her sure.

Go round about to every neighbours house,
And will them show their maids immediately:
God grant we may find out the murderers.
Bring forth such maids as are within your house.

I have but one, i'll send her down to you.

Is this the maid.

No sir, this is not she.
How many maids do dwell within this house?

Her's ne'er a woman here, except my wife.

Whose house is this?

An honest civil mans, called Master Merry,
Who I dare be sworn, would never do so great a murder
But you may ask here to for fashion sake.

How now fair maid, dwells any here but you?
Thou hast too true a face for such a deed.

No gen^le sir, my brother keeps no more.

This is not she?

No truly gentleman.

This will not serve, we cannot find her out,
Bring in those bodies, it grows towards night,
God bring these damned murderers at length to light.

Why go the neighbours round about the street
To every house? what hast thou heard the cause?

They go about with that same Salters man,
Of whom I bought the bag but yesterday,
To see if he can know the maid again
Which bought it, this I think the very cause.

How were my senses overcome with fear,
That I could not foresee this jeopardy:
For had I brought the bag away with me,
They had not had this me^nes to find it out.
Hide thee above least ^hat the Salters man,
Take notice of thee that thou art the maid,
And by that knowledge we be all undone.

That fear is past, I saw, I spake with him,
Yet he denies that I did buy the bag:
Besides, the neighbours have no doubt of you,
Saying you are an honest harmless man,
And made enquiry here for fashion sake.

My former life, deserves their good conceits,
Were it not blemished with this treachery.
My heart is merier then it was before,
For now I hope the greatest fear is past,
The hammer is denied, the bag unknown,
Now there is left no means to bring it out,
Unless our selves prove Traitors to our selves.

When saw you Harry Wi^liams?

Why to day
I met him coming home from ^owles Cross,
Where he had been to hear a Sermon.

Why brought you not the man along with you
To come to dinner, that we might persuade
Him to continue in his secrecy.

I did entreat him, but he would not come,
But vowed to be as secret as my self.

What, did he swear?

What need you ask me that?
You know we never heard him swear an other.
But since he hath concealed the thing thus long,
I hope in God he will conceal it still.

Pray God he do, and then I have no doubt,
But God will overpass this grievous sin,
If you lament with true unfeigned tears,
And seek to live the remnant of your years,
In Gods true fear with upright conscience.

If it would please him pardon this amiss,
And rid my body from the open shame,
That doth attend this deed, being brought to light,
I would endeavour all my coming days,
To please my maker, and ex^l^ his praise:
But it grow^s late, (...) bring (...) to my bed,
That I may rest my sorrow charged head.

Rest still in calm secure tranquillity,
And ouer-blowe this storm of mighty fear,
With pleasant gal^ of hoped ^n^sse,
Go when you will, I will ^ttend, and pray,
To send this woeful night a cheer^full day.

Pass (...) these rugged ^urrowes of laments,
And come to plainer paths of cheerfulness,
Cease thy continual showers of thy woe,
And let my pleasing words of comfort chase,
This dusky clouds of thy unjust despair,
Far from thy hart, and let a pleasing hope,
Of young Pertillos happy safe return,
Establish all your ill divining thoughts,
So shall you make me cheerful that am sad,
And feed your hopes with fond illusions.

I could be so, but my divided soul,
Twixt fear and hope of young Pertillos life,
Cannot arrive at the desired port,
Of ^irme belief, until mine eyes do see,
Him that I sent to know the certainetie.

To know the certainty, of whom, of what,
Whom, whether when, or whereabout I pray,
Have you dispatcht a frustrate messenger,
By heaven, and earth, my heart misguiseth me,
They will prevent my cunning policy.
Why speak you not what winged Pega^us,
Is posted for your satisfaction.

Me thinks my speech reveals a hidden fear,
And that fear tells me, that the child is dead.

By sweet S. Andrew and my fathers soul,
I think the peevish boy be too too well:
But speak, who was your passions harbinger.

One that did kindle ^y misdoubting thoughts,
With the large flame of his timiddity.

Oh then I know the tinder of your fe^re,
Was young Allenso your white honey son:
Confusion light upon his timorous head,
For broching this large stream of fea^efulnesse,
And all the plagues that damned f^ies feel,
For their forepassed bold iniquities:
Afflict you both for thus preventing me.

Preventing you, of what, Fallerio speak,
For if you do not, my poor hart will break.

Why of the good ^hat I had purposed,
To young Pertillo, which I would conceal,
From you, and him, until the deed were done.

If it were good, then we affect him dear,
And would add furtherance to your enterprise.

I say your close ease-dropping policies,
Have hindered him of greater benefits,
Then I can ever do him after this:
If he live long, and grow to riper sin,
Heel curse you both, that thus have hindered
His freedom from this goal of sinful flesh:
But let that pass, when went your harebrainde son,
That Cuckoo vertue-singing, hateful bird,
To guarde the safety of his better part,
Which he hath pend within the childish coop,
Of young Pertillos sweet security.

That lovely son, that comfort of my life,
That root of virtuous magnamitie,
That doth affect with an unfeigned love,
That tender boy, which under heavens bright eye,
Deserves most to be affected dear,
Went some two hours after the little boy
Was sent away, to keep at Padua.

What is a lovely? he's a loathsome toad,
A one eyed Cyclops, a stigmaticke brat,
That durst attempt to contradict my will,
And pry into my close intendements.
Mas here a comes, his downcast sullen look,
Is over waigh'd with mighty discontent,
I hope the brat is posted to his sire,
That he is grown so lazy of his pace:
Forgetful of his duty, and his tongue,
Is even fast tide with strings of heaviness.
Come hither boy, saw thou my obstacle,
That little Dromus that crept into my son,
With friendly hand, remoou'd and thrust away,
Say I, and please me with the swee^est note,
That ever relis^t in a mortals mouth.

I am a Swan that singe before I dye,
Your note of shame and coming misery.

Speak softly son, let not thy mother hear,
She was almost dead before for very fear.

Would I could roar as instruments of war,
Wall battring Cannons, when the Gun-powder
Is touched with part of Etnas Element,
Would I could bellow like enraged Bulls,
Whose harts are full of indignation,
To be captived by human policy:
Would I could thunder like Almighty Jove,
That sends his far heard voice to terrific,
The wicked hearts of earthly citizens:
Then roaring, bellowing, thundering, I would say,
Mother lament, Pertillos made away.

What is he dead, God give me leave to die,
And him repentance for his treachery.

Never the like impiety was done,
A mother slain, with terror of the son:
Help to repair the damadge thou hast made,
And seek to call back life with diligence.

Call back a happy creature to more woe,
That were a sin, good Father let her go:
O happy I, if my tormenting smart,
Could rend like her's, my grief afflicted heart,
Would your hard hart extend unto your wife,
To make her live an euerdying life.
What is she dead? oh then thrice happy she,
Whose eyes are bard from our callamitie.

I all too soon, thou viper, parricide,
But for thy tongue thy mother had not died,
That belching voice, that harsh night-rauen sound,
Untimely sent thy mother to the ground,
Upbraid my fault, I did deceive my brother,
Cut out thy tongue, that slue thy careful mother.

God love my soul, as I in heart rejoice,
To have such power in my death bringing voice,
See how in stead of tears and hearty sighs:
Of folded arms and sorrow speaking looks,
I do behold with cheerful countenance,
The lifeless root of my nativity:
And thank her hasty soul that thence did go,
To keep her from her son and husbands woe.
Now father give attention to my tale:
I will not dip my grief deciphering tongue,
In bitter words of reprehension,
Your deeds have thrown more mischiefs on your head
Then wit or reason can remove againe^
For to be brief, Pertillo, oh that name
Cannot be nam'de without a hearty s^gh,
Is murdered, and,

What and, this news is good.

The men which you suborned to murder him.

Better and better, then it cannot out,
Unless your love will be so scripulous,
That it will overthrow your self and me.

The best is last, and yet you hinder me,
The Duke of Padua hunting in the wood:
Accompanied with Lords and gentlemen,

Swones what of that? what good can come of that?

Was made acquainted by the one of them,
(That had some little remnant of his life:)
With all your practice and conspiracy?

I would that remnant had fled quick to hell,
To fetch fierce finds to rend their carcases,
Rather then bring my life in jeopardy:
Is this the best, swones do you mock me son,
And make a ^est at my calamitie^

Not I good father, I will ^ase your woe,
If you but yield unto my policy.

Declare it then, my wits are now to seek,
That piece of life hath so confounded me,
That I am wholly overcome with fear.

The duke hath vowed to prosecute your life,
With all the strict severity he can,
But I will cross his resolusion:
And keep you from his fury well enough,
I'll wear your habit, I will seem the man,
That did suborn the bloody murderers,
I will not stir from out this house of woe,
But weight the coming of the officers,
And answer for you fore the angry Duke,
And if need be suffer your punishment.

I'll none of that, I do not like the last,
I love thee dearer then I do my life,
And all I did, was to advance thy state,
To sun bright beams of shining happiness.

Doubt not my life, for when I do appear
Before the duke, I being not the man,
He can inflict no punishment on me.

Mas thou says true, a cannot punish thee,
Thou were no actor of their Tragaedie:
But for my beard thou can not counterfeit,
And bring gray hairs upon thy downy chin,
White frosts are never seen in summers spring.

I bought a beard this day at Padua,
Such as our common actors use to wear:
When youth would put on ages countenance,
So like in shape, in colour, and in all,
To that which grows upon your aged face,
That were I dressed in your abilimentes,
Your self would scarcely know me from your self.

That's excellent, what shape hast thou deuis'd,
To be my vizard to delude the world.

Why thus, i'll presently shave off your hair,
And dress you in a lowly shepherds weed,
Then you will seem to have the careful charge,
Of some wealth bringing rich and fleecy flo^ke,
And so pass currant from suspicion.

This care of thine my son doth testify,
Nature in thee hath firm predominance,
That neither loss of friend, nor vile reproach,
Can shake thee with their strongest violence:
In this disguise, i'll see the end of thee,
That thou acquitted, then may succour me.

I am assured to be exempt from woe.
This plot will work my certain overthrow.

I will bear hence thy mother, and my wife,
Untimely murdered with true sorrows knife.

Untimely murdered, happy was that grief,
Which hath abridged whole numbers, numberless:
Of hart surcharging deplorations.
She shall have due and christian funeral,
And rest in peace amongst her ancestors,
As for our bodies, they shall be interred,
In ravening mawes, of Ravens, Puttockes, Crows,
Of tatlin Magpies, and deaths harbingers,
That will be glutted with wind shaken limbs,
Of blood delighting hateful murderers:
And yet these many winged sepulchers,
Shall turn to earth^ so I, and father shall,
At last a^taine to earth by funeral,
Well I will prosecute my policy,
That wished death may end my miseries.

Still in your dumps, good Harry yet at last,
Utter your motive of this heaviness:
Why go you not unto your masters house?
What are you parted? if that be the cause,
I will provide you of a better place.

Who roves all day, at length may hit the mark,
That is the cause, because I cannot stay,
With him whose love, is dearer then my life.

Why fell you out? why did you part so soon?

We fell not out, but fear hath parted us.

What did he fear your truth or honest life?

No, no, your vnde^standing is but dim,
That far removed, cannot judge the fear,
We both were fearful, and we both did part,
Because indeed we both were timorous.

What accident begot your mutual fear?

That which my hart hath promised to conceal.

Why now you fall into your ancient vain.

Tis vain to urge me from this silent vain,
I will conceal it, though it breed my pain.

It seems to be a thing of consequence,
And therefore prithie Harry for my love,
Open this close fast clasped mystery.

Were I assured my heart should have release,
Of secret torment, and distemperature,
I would reveal it to you specially,
Whom I have found my faithful favourite.

Good Harrie VVilliams make no doubt of that,
Besides, your grief reueald may have relief,
Beyond your present expectation:
Then tell it Harry, what soere it be,
And ease your hart of horror, me of doubt.

What have you heard of Beech of Lambert hill?
And of his boy which late were murdered.

I heard, and saw, their mangled carca^es.

But have you heard of them that murdered them?

No, would I had, for then I'd blase their shame,
And make them pay due penance for their sin.

This I misdoubted, therefore will forbear,
To utter what I thought to have reueald.

Know thou the actors of this murthrous deed,
And wilt conceal it now the deed is done?
Alas poor man, thou know not what thou dost,
Thou hast incurred the danger of the law,
And thou amongst them must suffer punishment,
Unless thou do confess it presently.

What? shall I then betray my masters life?

Better th^n hazard both thy life and soul,
To bolster out such barbarous villainy.
Why then belike your master did the deed.

My master unawares escaped my mouth,
But what the Lord doth please shall come to light,
Cannot be hid by human policy:
His haplesse hand hath wrought the fatal end,
Of Rob^rt Beech and Thomas VVinchester.

Could he alone do both those men to death?
Had thou no share in execution?

Nor knew not of it, till the deed was done.

If this be true, thou may escape with life^
Confess the truth unto the officers,
And thou shalt find the favour of the law.

If I offended, 'twas my Masters love,
That made me hide his great transgressions:
But I will be directed as you please,
So save me God, as I am innocent.

Part of my self, now seem thou wholly me,
And I seem neither like my self, nor thee:
Thanks to thy care, and this unknown disguise.
I like a shepherd now must learn to know,
When to lead forth my little bleating flock,
To pleasing pastures, and well fatting walks,
In stormy time to drive them to the lee,
To cheer the pretty Lambs, whose bleating voice,
Doth crave the wished comfort of their dams,
To sound my merry Bag-pipe on the downs,
In shearing times poor shepherds festivals,
And lastly, how to drive the Wolf away,
That seek to make the little Lambs their pray.

Ah have you care to drive the Wolf away,
From silly creatures wanting intellecte,
And yet would suffer your devouring thoughts,
To suck the blood of your dead brothers son,
As pure and innocent as any lamb,
Pertillo was, which you have fed upon,
But things past help may better be bewaild
With careful tears, then find a remedy,
Therefore for fear our practise be espied,
Let us to question of our husbandry,
How many Lambs fell from the middle flock,
Since I my self did take the latter view.

Some viue and twenty, whereof two are dead,
But three and twenty s^ud about the fields,
That glads my hart to ze their jollity.

This is the man, conferring of his Lambs,
That slew a Lamb worth all his flock besides.

When is the time to let the Weathers blood,
The forward spring, that had such store of grass,
Hath filled them full of rank unwholesome blood,
Which must be purged, else when the winter comes,
The rot will leave me nothing but their skins.

I will let om blood, but yet it is no time,
Until the zygne be gone below the hart.

Forbear a while this idle business,
And talk of matters of more consequence.

Che tell you plain, you are no honest man,
To call a shepherds care an idle toy,
What though we have a little merry sport,
With flowery gyrlonds, and an Oaten pipe,
And jolly friskins on a holly-day,
Yet is a shepherds cure, a greater cark,
Then sweating Plough-men with their busy warke.

Hence leave your sheepish ceremonial,
And now Fallerio, in the Princes name,
I do arrest you, for the cruel murder
Of young Pertillo left unto your charge,
Which you discharged with a bloody writ,
Signed by the hands of those you did suborn:
Nay look not strange, we have such evidence,
To ratify your Stigian cruelty,
That cannot be deluded any way:

Alas my Lords, I know not what you say,
As for my Nephew, he I hope is well,
I sent him yesterday to Padua.

I, he is well, in such a vengers hands,
As will not winck at your iniquity.

By heaven and earth my soul is innocent,
Say what you will, I know my conscience.

To be afflicted with a scourge of care,
Which my ore weaning rashness did in^flict.

Come bear him hence, expostulate no more,
That heart that could invent such treachery,
Can teach his face to brave it cunningly.

I do defy your accusations,
Let me have justice I will answer it.

So bear him hence, I mean to stay behind,
To take possession of his goods and lands:
For the Dukes use, it is too manifest.

I hope you'll answer any thing you do,
My Lord Vesuuio you shall answer it:
And all the rest that use extremities.

I to the Dukes Exchecker not to you.

Thus shades are caught when substances are fled,
Indeed they have my garments, but my self,
Am close enough from their discovery,
But not so close but that my very soul,
Is ract with torments for Pertillos death;
I am Acte^n, I do bear about
My horns of shame and inhumanity,
My thoughts, like hounds which late did flatter me:
With hope of great succeeding benefits.
Now gin to tear my care-tormented heart,
With fear of death and tortring punishment,
These are the stings when as our consciences,
Are stuf^d and clogd with close concealed crimes,
Well I must smoather all these discontentes,
And strive to bear a smoother countenance:
Then rugged care would willingly permit,
I'll to the Court to see Al^enso free,
That he may then relieve my poverty.

Who would have thought of all the men alive,
That Thomas Merry would have done this deed:
So full of ruth and monstrous wickedness.

Of all the men that live in London walls.
I would have thought that Merry had bin free,

Is this the fruits of Saint-like Puritans,
I never like such damned hypocrisy.

He would not loase a sermon for a pound,
An oath he thought would rend his jaws in twain,
An idle word did whet Gods vengeance on:
And yet two murders were not scripulous,
Such close illusions God will bring to light,
And overthrow the workers with his might.

This is the house, come let us knock at door,
I see a light they are not all in bed:
How now fair maid, is your brother up?

He's not within sir, would you speak with him?

You do but lest, I know he is within,
And I must needs go up and speak with him.

In deed good sir, he is in bed a sleep,
And I was loath to trouble him to night.

Well sister, I am sorry for your sake,
But for your brother, he is known to be
A damned villain and an hipocrite,
Rachel, I charge thee in her highness name,
To go with us to prison presently.

To prison sir, alas what have I done?

You know that best, but every one do know,
You and your brother murdered master Be^ch,
And his poor boy that dwelt at Lambert hill.

I murdered, my brother knows that I
Did not consent to either of their deaths.

That must be tried, where doth your brother lye?

Here in his bed, me thinks he's not a sleep.

Now master Merry, are you in a sweat.

No verily, I am not in a sweat.

Some sudden fear affrights you, whats the cause?

Nothing but that you waked me unawares.

In the Queenes name I do command you rise,
And presently to go along with us.

With all my hart, what do you know the cause?

We partly do, when saw you master Beech?

I do not well remember who you mean.

Not Beech the chaundler upon Lambert hill.

I know the man, but saw him not this fortnight.

I would you had not, for your sisters sake,
For yours, for his, and for his harmless boy,
Be not obdurate in your wickedness,
Confession draws repentance after it.

Well master Constable I do confess,
I was the man that did them both to death:
As for my sister and my harmless man,
I do protest they both are innocent.

Your man is fast in hold, and hath confessed,
The manner how, and where, the deed was done:
Therefore twere vain to colour any thing,
Bring them away.

Ah brother woe is me,

I comfortless will help to comfort thee.
Weep, weep poor souls, interchange your woes,
Now Merry change thy name and countenance:
Smile not, thou wretched creature, least in scorn,
Thou smile to think on thy extremities,
Thy woes were countless for thy wicked deeds,
Thy sisters death need not increase the coumpt,
For thou could never number them before:
Gentles help out with this suppose I pray,
And think it truth for Truth doth tell the tale.
Me^ry by law convict, as principal,
Receives his doom, to hang till he be dead,
And afterwards for to be hanged in chains:
Williams and Rachel likewise are convict
For their concealment, VVilliams craves his book,
And so receaues a brond of infamy.
But wretched Rachels sex denies that grace,
And therefore doth receive a doom of death,
To dye with him, whose sins she did conceal.
Your eyes shall witness of their shaded tips,
Which many here did see performed indeed:
As for Fallerio, not his homely weeds,
His beardless face, nor counterfeited speech,
Can shield him from deserved punishment:
But what he thinks shall rid him from suspect,
Shall drench him in more wa^es of wretchedness,
Pulling his son into relentless jaws,
Of hungry death, on tree of infamy:
Here comes the Duke that dooms them both to die,
Next Merries death shall end this Tragedy.

Where is that Siren, that incarnate fiend,
Monster of Nature, spectacle of shame,
Blot and confusion of his family,
False seeming semblance of true-dealing trust,
I mean Fallerio bloody murderer:
Hath he confessed his cursed treachery,
Or will he stand to prove his innocence.

We have attach'de Fallerio gracious Lord,
And did accuse him with Pertillos death:
But he remote, will not confess himself,
Neither the means, nor author of the same,
His mighty vows and protestations,
Do almost seem to plead integrity,
But that we all do know the contrary.

I know your error strikes your knowledge blind,
His seeming me, doth so delude your mind.

Then bring him forth, to an^wer for himself,
Since he stands stoutly to deny the deed:
His son can witness, that the dying man,
Accused Fallerio for his treachery.
Stand forth thou close disguised hipocrite,
And speak directly to these articles,
First, did thou hire two bloody murderers
To massacre Pertillo in a wood?

I never did suborn such murderers,
But ever loved Pertillo as my life.

Thy son can witness to the contrary.

I have no son to testify so much.

No, for his gravity is counterfeit,
Pluck of his beard, and you will swear it so.

Have you no son? doth not Alenso live?

Alenso lives, but is no son of mine.

Indeed his better part had no^ his source,
From thy corrupted vice affecting hart,
For virtue is the mark he aims at.

I dare be sworn that Sostrata would blush,
Should thou deny Alenso for thy son.

Nay did she live, she would not challenge me,
To be the father of that haplesse son.

Nay, then anon you will deny your self,
To be your self, unjust Fallerio.

I do confess my self, to be my self,
But will not answer to Fall^rio.

Not to Fallerio, this is excellent,
You are the man was called Fallerio.

He never breathed yet that called me so,
Except he were deceived as you are now.

This impudence shall not excuse your fault,
You are well known to be Fallerio,
The wicked husband of dead Sostrata,
And father to the virtuous Alenso,
And even as sure as all these certeinties,
Thou did contrive thy little Nephews death.

True, for I am nor false Fallerio,
Husband, nor father, as you do suggest,
And therefore did not hire the murderers:
Which to be true acknowledge with your eyes.

How now my Lords, this is a miracle,
To shake off thirty years so sodeinlie,
And turn from feeble age to flourishing youth.

But he my Lord that wrought this miracle,
Is not of power to free himself from death,
Through the performance of this sudden change.

No, were he the chiefest hope of Christendom,
He should not live for this presumption:
Use no excuse, Alenso for thy life,
My doom of death shall be irrevocable.

Ill fare his soul, that would extenuate
The rigour of your life confounding doom:
I am prepared with all my hart to die,
For that's th'end of human misery.

Then thus, you shall be hanged immediately,
For your illusion of the Magistrates,
With borrowed shapes of false antiquity.

Thrice happy sentence, which I do embrace,
With a more fervent and unfeigned zeal,
Then an ambitious rule desiring man,
Would do a Gem bedecked Diadem,
Which brings more watchful cares and discontent,
Then pomp, or honour, can remunerate:
When I am dead, let it be said of me,
Al^nso died to set his father free.

That were a freedom worse then servitude,
To cruel Turk, or damned Inf^dell:
Most righteous Judge, I do appeal for Justice,
Justice on him that hath deserved death,
Not on Alenso, he is innocent.

But I am guilty of abbetting him,
Contrary to his Majesties Edict,
And therefore death is meritorious.

I am the wretch that did subborne the slaves,
To murder poor Pertillo in the wood,
Spare, spare Alenso, he is innocent.

What strange appeal is this, we know thee no^,
None but Falle^io is accused hereof.

Then father get you hence, depart in time,
Least being known you suffer for the crime.

Depart, and leave thee clad in horrors cloak,
And suffer death for true affection:
Although my soul be guilty of more sin,
Then ever sinful soul were guilty of:
Yet fiends of hell would never suffer this,
I am thy father, though unworthy so:
Oh still I see these weeds do sear your eyes:
I am Fallerio, make no doubt of me.
Though thus disguised, in habit, countenance,
Only to escape the terror of the law.

And I Alenso that did succour him,
Against your commandment, mighty Sovereign:
Ponder your oath, your vow, as God did live,
I should not live, if I did rescue him:
I did, God lives, and will revenge it home,
If you defer my condign punishment.

Assure your selves you both shall suffer death:
But for Fallerio, he shall hang in chains,
After he's dead, for he was principal.

Unsavoury Woorme wood, Hemlock, bitter gall,
Brings no such bad, vnrelisht, sower taste,
V^o the tongue, as this death boding voice,
Brings to the ears of poor Fallerio.
Not for my self but for Allensoes sake,
Whom I have murdered by my treachery:
Ah my dread Lord, if any little spark,
Of melting pity doth remain alive,
And not extinguished by my impious deeds,
Oh kindle it unto a happy flame,
To light Allenso from this misery;
Which through dim death he's like to fall into.

That were to overthrow my soul and all,
Should you reverse this sentence of my death:
My self would play the death man on my self,
And overtake your swift and winged ^oule,
Ere churlish Caron had transported you,
Unto the fields of sad Proserpina.

Cease, cease Fallerio, in thy bootless prayers,
I am resolved, I am inexorable,
Vesuuio, see their judgment be performed,
And use Al^nso with all clemency:
Provided that the law be satisfied.

It shall be done with all respectiuenesse,
Have you no donbt of that my gracious Lord.

Here is a mercy mixed with equity,
To show him favour, but cut off his head.

My reverend father, pacify your self,
I can, and will, endure the stroke of death,
Were his appearance ne'er so horrible,
To meet Pertillo in another world.

Thou should have tarried until natures course
Had been extinct, that thou ore grown with age,
Might die the death of thy progenitors,
Twas not thy means he died so soddenly,
But mine, that causing his, have murdered thee.

But yet I slew my mother, did I not?

I, with reporting of my villainy,
The very audit of my wickedness,
Had force enough to give a sudden death:
Ah sister, sister, now I call to mind,
Thy dying words now proved a prophecy,
If you deal ill with this distressed child:
God will no doubt revenge the innocent,
I have dealt ill, and God hath taken revenge.

Now let us leave remembrance of past deedes^
And think on that which more concerns us.

With all my hart thou ever were the spur,
Which prict me on to any godliness:
And now thou doest endeavour to incite,
Me make my parting peace with God and men:
I do confess even from my very soul,
My heinous sin and grievous wickedness,
Against my maker many thousand ways:
Ab imo cordis I repent my self,
Of all my sins against his majesty:
And heavenly father lay not to my charge,
The death of poor Pertillo and those men,
Which I suborned to be his murderers,
When I appear before thy heavenly throne,
To have my sentence, or of life or death.

Amen, amen, and God continue still,
These mercy moving meditations.

And thou great God which art omnipotent,
Powerful enough for to redeem our souls:
Even from the very gates of gaping hell,
Forgive our sins, and wash away our faults;
In the sweet river of that precious blood,
Which thy dear son did shed in Galgotha,
For the remission of all contrite souls.

Forgive thy death my thrice beloved son.

I do, and father pardon my misdeeds,
Of disobedience and vnthankfullnesse.

Thou never yet were disobedient,
Unless I did command unlawfulness,
Ungratefulness did never trouble thee,
Thou art too bounteous thus to guerdon me.

Come let us kiss and thus embrace in death,
Even when you will come bring us to the place:
Where we may consummate our wretchedness,
And change it for eternal happiness.

Now sister Rachel is the hour come,
Wherein we both must satisfy the law,
For Beeches death and harmless Winchester:
Weep not sweet sister, for that cannot help,
I do confess fore all this company,
That thou were never privy to their deaths,
But only helpest me when the deed was done,
To wipe the blood and hide away my sin,
And since this fault hath brought thee to this shame,
I do entreat thee on my bended knee,
To pardon me for thus offending thee.

I do forgive you from my very soul,
And think not that I shed these store of tears,
For that I price my life, or fear to dye,
Though I confess the manner of my death,
Is much more grieueuous then my death it self;
But I lament for that it hath been said,
I was the author of this cruelty,
And did produce you to this wicked deed,
Whereof God knows that I am innocent.

Indeed thou art, thy conscience is at peace,
And feels no terror for such wickedness,
Mine hath been vexed but is now at rest,
For that I am assured my heinous sin:
Shall never rise in judgment against my soul,
But that the blood of Iesus Christ hath power,
To make my purple sin as white as Snow.
One thing good people, witness here with me,
That I do dye in perfect charity,
And do forgive, as I would be forgiven,
First of my God, and then of all the world:
Cease publishing that I have been a man,
Trained up in murder, or in cruelty,
For fore this time, this time is all too soon,
I never slue or did consent to kill,
So help me God as this I speak is true:
I could say something of my innocence,
In fornication and adultery,
But I confess the justest man alive
That bears about the frailty of a man,
Cannot excuse himself from daily sin,
In thought, in word, and deed, such was my life,
I never hated Beech in all my life,
Only desire of money which he had,
And the inciting of that foe of man,
That greedy gulf, that great Lauiathan,
Did halle me on to these callamities,
For which, even now my very soul doth bleed:
God strengthen me with patience to endure,
This chastisement, which I confess too small
A punishment for this my heinous sin:
Oh be courageous sister, fight it well,
We shall be crowned with immortallitie.

I will not faint, but combat manfully,
Christ is of power to help and strengthen me.

I pray make hast, the hour is almost past.

I am prepared, oh God receive my soul,
Forgive my sins, for they are numberless,
Receive me God, for now I come to thee.

Nay shrink not woman, have a cheerful hart.

I, so I do, and yet this sinful flesh,
Will be rebellious against my willing spirit.
Come let me clime these steps that lead to heaven,
Although they seem the stairs of infamie^
Let me be merror to ensuing times,
And teach all sisters how they do conceal,
The wicked deeds, of brethren, or of friends,
I not repent me of my love to him,
But that thereby I have provoked God,
To heavy wrath and indignation,
Which turn away great God, for Christ's sake.
Ah Harry Williams, thou were chiefest cause,
That I do drink of this most bitter cup,
For had thou opened Beeches death at first,
The boy had lived, and thou had saved my life:
But thou art bronded with a mark of shame,
And I forgive thee from my very soul,
Let him and me, learn all that hear of this,
To utter brothers or their masters miss,
Conceal no murder, least it do beget,
More bloody deeds of like deformity.
Thus God forgive my sins, receive my soul,
And though my dinner be of bitter death,
I hope my soul shall sup with Iesus Christ,
And see his presence everlastingly.

The Lord of heaven have mercy on her soul,
And teach all other by this spectacle,
To shun such dangers as she ran into,
By her misguided taciturnitie:
Cut down their bodies, give hers funeral,
But let his body be conueyed hence,
To Mile-end green, and there be hanged in chains.

See here the end of lucre and desire
Of riches, gotten by unlawful means,
What monstrous evils this hath brought to pass,
Your scarce dry eyes give testimonial,
The father, son; the sister, brother brings,
To open scandal, and contemptuous death.
But here come they that wrought these deeds of ruth,
As if they meant to plot new wickedness:
Whether so fast, you damned miscreants?
Ye vain deluders of the credulous,
That seek to train men to destruction.

Why we will on, to set more harms a flote,
That I may swim in rivers of warm blood,
Out-flowing from the sides of Innocents.

I will entice the greedy minded soul,
To pull the fruit from the forbidden tree:
Yet Tantall like, he shall but glut his eye,
Nor feed his body with salubrious fruit,

Hence Stigmaticks, you shall not harbour hear,
To practice execrable butcheries:
My self will bring your close designs to light,
And overthrow your wild conspiracies,
No hart shall entertain a murthrous thought,
Within the sea embracing continent,
Where fair Eliza Prince of piety,
Doth wear the peace adorned Diadem.

Maugre the worst, I will have many harts,
That shall affect my secret whisperings,
The chinck of gold is such a pleasing cry,
That all men wish to hear such harmony,
And I will place sterne murder by my side,
That we may do more harms then haughty pride.

Truth, now farewell, hereafter thou shalt see,
Il^ vex thee more with many tragedies.

The more the pity, would the hart of man,
Were not so open wide to entertain,
The harmfull baits, of self devouring sin,
But from the first unto the latter times,
It hath and will be so eternally,
Now it remains to have your good advice,
Unto a motion of some consequence,
There is a Bark that's newly rigd for sea,
Vnmand, vnfurnishd with munition:
She must encounter with a greater foe,
Then great Alcydes slue in Lerna Lake,
Would you be pleased to man this willing bark,
With good conceits of her intention,
To store her with the thundering furniture,
Of smoothest smiles, and pleasing plaudiats,
She shall be able to endure the shock,
Of snarling Zoylus, and his cursed crew,
That seeks to sink her in reproaches waives,
And may perchance obtain a victory,
Against curious carpes, and fawning Parasites:
But if you suffer her for want of aid,
To be orewhelmd by her insulting foes,
Oh then she sinckes, that meant to pass the flood,
With stronger force to do her country good:
It rests thus, whether she live or dye,
She is your Beades-man everlastingly.


