Nay, I will taste of other assays
And space our dame for holy days
So that for very need she must use her feat
With other of her house, and such as she can geate,
Yet is she not much to blame
Though she increase her husbands name
Such children ^o bring as now ye see me
Tall men as I am unworthy though I be.
Thou spekest like a Lorell full large full lewdly
And not like a child gotten of true matrymony
And yet though thy person induce no lykelyhode
That in thee should be any manhood
Yet beside that thou seem of manhood frail
Because so abused is thy light apparaile.

Apparel, good sir, what fault is that
Though grey be her cote why blame ye ye wild cat
Why should ye him deem of nature frail
Though as wise as ye would were a Fox tail
Or a cote after the come usage
Or have by nature a mad visage
These be no wytnesse for Justice to dyserne
Nor certain knowledge of nature to learn
And christ taught you sir how ye should judge men
S^yenge Noli^e iudicare secundum faciem.
And yet in nature better knowledge should be
Then is in apparel ye know perdie.

O yet in apparel is great abusion
If it be framed without dyscretion
For in apparel there may a great token be
Of fraylenes, of pride, and instabylytie,
If come assyse therein use no mesure
For then is apparel a wanton foolish pleasure
And folly, best mede is of presumption
When nature or reason used resumpcyon,
And therefore Christ taught a great wise prose
Saying Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos.

Yet with ye same text I pray you wipe your nose
He said not Ex vestibus eorum cognoscetis eos.

Yet friends I pray you once again
To seat your trauice that breeds disdain
And heartily both I do you pray
That both your frendshyps have I may.

Sir as for mine ye shall not miss
But this gentleman I think will go pysse.

Nay sir Albyon I will not draw back
If that of me ye have lack,
So that I were in perfyte suertie
That this man here should manhood be.

Now Chrystes benedycyte
How Albion and Justice hath forgot me
Because of me they had no exercise
Of long time by any enterprise
Wherefore sithen ye can not know me by experience
I wot not how ye should know me but by my credence
Therefore by my troth by my honesty
Believe me, for manhood truly I am he.

Then by your other I am content
To have your frendshyp with good assent
And Justice I pray you to do the same.

Sir if manhod be his name
As he hath sworn I would be glad
That his frenshyp also I had.

Then Justice I pray you both
Let me knyt you both upon his other.
Now friends I trust we be all three
And with this knot I pray you contented to be

Sir ye ought to be contented best of all
Where justice is treited with due equity
And where no favour nor mede should be
And when reason hath tried there every deal
That such an act were good for the come weal
If therein any loss may be
To the disadvantage of Principaltie
Such an act leases all his suit
With a little indoysing of reason astute
And if it touche the Lords sprytuall
Or be disauauntage to the Lords temporal
Fare well, go bett, this bill may keep
As well as through the parlyament creep
And if that Merchants be moouid with all
Or any multitude of the come hall
This is not for us say they than
This bill is nought but for to wipe a pan
And this is all your new equity
And for all your message, yet thus will it be.

Alas if this may not reformed be
I shall never be sure of prosperity.

Ye and what follows hereof master Albion
To your person universal derysion

Why to me derision.


For all other strange nations
They will rail on you with open proclamacions
Saying whosoever do as he dose
Is half a man and half a wild goose.

Why half a man and half a wyld goose.


For with hie reason they say ye can dispute
And try out perils with labourous suit
And eke the treasure for the come veil
As far as wit or reason can assail
But when all is done and your statute made
Then soorth ye go in a wise trade
To bring it all to good conclusion
And put it never in execucyon
Then speak they further in steed of a mock
They have made a statute like a woodkoeke
That hath but one eye and the other blind
And it will turn with every wind
And for because ye study but for the beginning
And never provide for a sure ending
Beginning like a man ye take great assay
At last like a wyld goose even but to fly away.

Well if this be true it is more pity
Yet let us endeuer both ye and I
To taste our message that it were done
To help here of some reformacyon.

Ye that to do I pray you both
And to you two I promise by other
I shall me endeuer with the comynaltie
Their hole allegyaunce to keep in vnytie.

Then God be your speed for I will forth my way


And I will after god guide us that best may.


And I will tarry no longer while
But as I see you over the style.

Now here begins a game ywys
For manhood they wene my name is
But trust me sirs if I should not lye
My name is called Injury
Which name to hyde I thought it polysie
And turn it to manhood, and wot ye why?
It is a part of our new experience
When I against right make styffe defence
That Justice in his seat may not be enstabled
Then am I Injury manhood called
O than of me craketh every man
How like a Lord this fellow stere can
The law to defend without a fall
For all their pledyng in Westminster hall,
Or say what they will and babble there
Yet maintenance and I will keep the chere
If it come once to the country
Then as I will so shall it be
A very cause sirs why I hyde my name
Was, they should not suspect my fame
Because I would spy all their intent
To change their purpose after my judgment
And so will I do, for this is their pretence
By mean of Justice to bring in experience
That peace should continue the people among
And so by that mean to banish me wrong
But trust me sirs I will none of that
But rather by their faces I will them scrat
And me to maintain in this opinion
I have an old mate called Dyuycion
That shall be of my counsel in this case
Which I trust will not turn his face
Till Peace be driven clean from Albyon
And then let Justice and me alone
For I trust or he and I have done
He shall go whystle in a mary bone
As for any rightful judgment
That after this shall follow his intent
And now sirs will I goo my way
My fellow to seek, find him if I may.

Have in the ruske
Out of the buske
A lusty Captain,
A Boor with a tusk
A sturdy Luske
Any battle to detain
A stalyon stout
To bear it out
In every where,
And never to Lout
For a knaves clout
though my head it bear.
As styffe as a stake
Battle to make
As never aferde.
I can awake
These knaves and take
Them fast by the berde.
For Peace is bent
Nor (...) intent
To live at ease,
Shall not prevent
Let of my judgment
To (...) in disease.
Such can I have
To conjure a knave
Out of his skin,
Though Justice rave
To hang or save
Fie on him whoreson.

Mary fie on him horeson
What art thou mad again.

What (...) old friend Injury
How were other hanged and ^

By god because I took delay*
For lack of thee to be mine ^.

What whoreson would thou have me
Be trussed up in stead of thee.

Ye by god, but even for a say
That I might learn of you to know the play.

To play whoreson, what menist thou by that

By god me thought even now ye were in a snare
Or else an hunting to catch an bare
But hark I say, do together and spell
Beware ever among of the frery clarks bell.

It is doubtful to me all that thou spekest
I pray thee spell it thy self tell me what thou menest

But would thou needs so fain know it
I tell thee with Albion and Justice I am knyt
Therefore it were wisdom for thee
To beware what thou say before me

What horeson then thou hast forsaken me.

Nay I had lever ye were skynned all three
For I have turned the wrong side of my hod
And told them my name was manhood
And now by god in any wise
For both our eases I must have thine advise.

What hast thou now changed thine old copy
To Justice and Albyon to be a come hoby,
Or art thou a ferde of thy old name
That in every place is had in fame
And is supported in such suffrentie
From the lowest unto the highest degree.

Nay by god I was not aferd
It was but for to claw their berde
Or rub it of all that they meant
That I might know all their intent
Whereof the matter is to lunge to tell
For the time that we did mell
But shortly to show thee for a conclusion
Their mind is to bring us both to confusion.

I pray thee by what mean.

Albyon hath sent Justice to Pryncypaltie
To have assystence, and me to suffreyntie
Of the Lords temporal to have their aid
That Justice in no wise should be delayde.
And this thou know well enough perdye
Thus they mean to destroy thee and me
And as for Justice forth is gone
Speed as he can, but I tarried alone
And yet I would no messenger be
Till I had the aduyce of thee
Therefore how say thou now in this case
We shall not be idle to play at this base.

Tush as for this I care not a puddyng prycke
For we two will go thorough thyn and thycke
Maygresse their heads euerychone
Though they be as harde as rock or stone

I pray thee tell me howe

First I my self will enterprise
That peace shall have no exersyse
Between the commons and Pryncypalitie
Nor between lords spiritual lords of the temporaltie

Or you go any further tel me by what mene

I have two spies of great exercise
The one is called double deuyce
Him will I send I may tell thee
Unto the court to Pryncypalytye,
And him will I charge that with his provision
Pryncypalytye and the commons to set at dyuysyon
The second spy is called old debate
A synguler fellow with a ballyd pate
Him will I send to the lords spiritual
To cause them to wrangle with the lords temporal.

What shall they use in their devise.

The one to principalytie shall surmyse
That the commons hearts do arise
Against him, when that he doth ask
In time of need, our money for task,
His heart to move with such vnkyndnes.
Then the same spy shall use like doublenes
And go to the commons and to them tell
That Principalytie with equtie doth rebel
More to his lucre in every deal
Applyeng his affection then to the come weal
And how that he of neglygence
Doth not apply for their defence,
Neither by Sea nor by land
Neither by hye ways, neither by stronde
But thieves and raueners and murders eke
Daily true men they pursue and seek
And that his laws indifferently
Be not used, but maintenance and brybary
Is suffered alone without reformation
That the poor commons is in altercation
Of this matter and wot not what to say
Bringing them in opinion yt they ought not to pay
To pryncypalytie their duty of very desert
Except like duty be mynistred on his part.

I make god a vow this is a sovereign bait
To bring our purpose to a narow strayte
But what shall the other spy then do
A felowshyp tell me that also.

Mary he shall enfourme the lords temporal
That the spyrytuall men would rule all
And say it were shame to them by the rood
That ben descended from the noble blood
To suffer any other of such power to be
To have the governance about principalytie
Sythen they inheritoures are borne to be
Of the hye counsel by blood and dygnytie
Which medicine I trow will not lyghlie start
Till it hath tyckled them all by the heart
Then shall the same spy taste the other part
And turn to them the wrong side of the carte
And say that god of his hye great grace
To them hath given good fortune and space
By learning sadness and gravity
And for their due reward in honour to be
And bear to them boldly in hand
That they ought by reason to rule this land
Because the power of temporaltie
Hath no knowledge in conning perdie
Neither in youth will labour the passage
Of pain for virtue to rule in age
So that if they rulers wold be
They know not how, for in suffycientie
Thus will I divide by this proper train
That peace amongst them shall not rain.

Mary this is a cast of a new horse comb
To rub any on the nauyll that hath a tickle wobe
This ger will work after my fantasy
To make of an old grudge a new frenesie
And this opens the gate even for me
That both the one and the other degree
Shall wrestle with them self in such afflictions
That euerychone shall disdain at other jurisdictions

What wilt thou do the let me here thy cast

This gentle sede will I sow at the last
When Peace by thee is in perplexity
And wore not in what part quyete to be
Then Justice must ever be in doubt
Which part at need shall bear him out
So that for my part he shall stand styll
While I run at large and have all my will.

But to what conclusion will thou bring it then

Why know not thou, then hark me man
This Justice is a fellow of a far cast
And drives such dryftes to rule all at the last
And Peace is his brother of one degree
Which hath a fair daughter that is called plenty
And Albion as lunge as rest him treats
He loves fair flesh of all meates
And it is a come saieng that Justice Peace he
Will conclude a marriage with fair dame plenty
And then will Albyon that old soot
With rest and peace so on her doot
That than she by her and her friends
Shall sail in storms at all wyndes.

By gods bread thou say troth
But this to help we must not use sloth.

No, and therefore hark me to an end
Thou and I shall this matter defend
For thou shalt to Albyon a messenger be
And say thou were present when principality
With Justice fell at great debate
When that his message he did delat
From Albio, tel him that principality in no wise
His will with equ^ti^ will grant to exercise
But that the law should be out after his liking
And every wryt after his entytelyng
And that his will who ever list to strife
Should be the best part for his prerogatyfe
And than they both suddenly upon this
In great rages departed wis
Wherefore Justice said I am in such confusion
That I am ashamed to turn again to Albyon
And when this message thou hast done soberly
Tell him thy name is Polysy.

What the devil menest thou by that
Should I decemble from a wyld cat
That ever before this have used patchyng
And now to play the wise man leave scratching.

Why whoreson it is a point of hye madness
For a time to desemble sadness,
And though thou be all ready as mad as a heart
Yet will I make thee madder then thou art

Well say on then.


Mary then even thus I say
When that to Albion thou hast taken thy way
And done thy message as I thee bad
He will for a while be pensive and sad
And he will ask thine advise
Then must thou dissemble thy self wise.

I make god a vow that is impossible
That I and wisdom should knyt in one quyneble
Or in my brain to print such abusyon
That wisdom and I should be in one conclusion
For when I was yonge my mother charged me
And said beware wit son though thou never thee.

I am not disposed to change much your live
But here me speak an end though you never thrive

Well say on then and tell me what counsel
I shall give Albion that may sound dwell
To both our profits that would I know.

Thou shalt tech him a wrong cross row
And tell him best it is after thine advise
With mirth and Prodigality him to exercise
And take of his own good while he may
Lest all at last be brybid away


