GAllants, and Friends-spectators, will ye see
A strain of Wit that is not Poetry?
I have Authority for what I say:
For He himself says so, that Writ the Play,
Though, in the Muses Garden he can walk;
And choicest Flowers pluck from every stalk
To deck the Stage; and purposes, hereafter,
To take your Judgements: now He implores your laughter;
Says He would see you merry; thinks it long
Since you were last delighted with a Song.
Your Books, he says, can show you History;
And serious Passages better then He;
And that He should take pains in Act to show
What you already by your Studies know
Were a presumption. Tis a Modesty
Vn-vs'd amongst Poets. This being only He
That boasts not his worth; and doth subscrib^
Himself an vnder-seruant in their Tribe.
Yet though he slight himself, We not despair,
By him, to show you what is Good and Rare.

But I beseech you sir, Take me somewhat nearer your Council. May I assure my
self, that this report goes true; that you are on this treaty of Marriage with
that Widow?


Faith cousin, I take it as my fortune; and ^m fully bent on the adventure.


Troth in my mind, you were better venture your self, and fortune to the
Bermudas. Tis true, she has a good estate: some nine thousand, I think: and
were an apt match for one that knew how to govern it, and her; some hard bred
Citizen, crafty Lawyer, or country Justice. But you, a tender Nur^eling of
the Court, altogether vnmixt with such nature or education, to cast your self
upon her, who for her years might be your Mother (they say: I never saw her)
and has been the Town widow these three years, still conversant with
Doctors, and Proctors of the civil Law; of which Tribe her husband was too.
Never look to be the better for her Riches: Shee'll consume yours and you
too* though your back were Herculean; and lay you in your grave, or in Bedlam
(my life on it) before she dream of dying, though it be all that you can hope,
or pray for, after Marriage.


You speak sir out of some unfortunate examples, and your extraordinary care
of me. But truth is, all deswasion comes too late; and all vrgings against it
are now uncharitable: For we are already Man and Wife.


What married!


Lustily promised sir. Absolutely contracted.


Send you joy. I'll out of Town.


I hope you'll see our Marriage. I sent indeed to bid you.


No, good sir Phillip, rather then I would be in sound of a Bell that should
ring at it, I would have my brains fillipt out with the Clapper.


Nay good cousin: I intended you my principal Guest. We'll have all very
private: not above four or five friends more.


Sir, I intend to be none of your Mourners, which indeed my presence there
would m^ke me; and so, perhaps, infect the rest. I leave my best wishes to
you, and will endeavour to pray for you. Indeed I will.


Indeed this is very abrupt.


Mr. Tridewall! well met. Why so fast sir, I took you for a Foot-post.


A Foot-post! Indeed your fine wit will post you into another world one of
these days, if it take not the whipping post in the way. And why Foot-post, in
your little witty apprehension?


Because you went so fast. B^t since you are angry, I would you were going
twice as last. If I interrupt you, hang me. Dee hear?


Nay I know you are apt to decline any mans anger, good Captain Anvil: you
have been beaten to it.


Why, if he have, he may thank such as you are, that can endure no jest.


What are you there too? Mr. Widgine, I take it?


My name is Walter Widgine sir, not to be denied* the only brother here of sir
Phillip Luckless his betroch'd. She is a Widgine borne sir, and of the best
family: Our Ancestors flew out of Holland in Lincolnshire to prevent
peri^cation.


From Crowland, I warrant you, a little before a Moulting time.


Like enough sir. My sister can tell you. Since, by marriage, she was made a
Fitchow: Her husband was Fitchow the civil Lawyer; He was called the great
Canno^r of the civil Law: because he could dischardge or make report of every
Canon therein; Canon after Canon, or Canon upon Canon at his fingers ends, as
readily as I can tell these pieces.


A fair Demonstration!


He had many rare parts in him, besides sir, as my sister can tell you.


This fellow cannot choose but have a rare sister: He quotes her so!


But all the good I can speak of him is, that he left my sister rich; or at
least a reasonable estate, half a score thousand pounds or so: which she,
with her self, bestows upon this honourable knight sir Phillip Luckless, to
be a Lady* of that name, and God give him joy. And for you: being his kinsman,
I shall desire your nearer acquaintance.


In good time sir.


The match was not altogether her own seeking sir, though she refused two
Aldermen for him, on my own knowledge.


Might she have had'hem both sir?


I and half a score Aldermens fellows to boot: yet refused all for him.


In deed six yoke of such cattle would plow up all his acres in a forenoon.


My sister can tell you more sir.


Still she is his Authority. I will see this woman. Sir Phillip, here are
Guests will applaud your match. Bid'hem welcome* God buy.


For my part I honour any Man, that marries my sister. Sir Phillip, and my
noble brother in expectation, I pray embrace my Governor, Captain Anvil,
here; and give him and me our gloves: you shall find him worthy your
acquaintance. He has wit, I can tell you; and breaks as many good jests as
all the VVits, Fits, and Fancies about the Town, and has trained up many young
gentlemen, both here, and in diverse parts beyond the Seas. He was dry nurse
(that's one of his own jests upon himself) to the English youth, a dozen
years together beyond Sea: And now he is my Governor, and I find profit in
it: you cannot think what an ass I was before I met with him: And I mean to
travel with him, two or three years hence, my self. In the mean time, he
shall spend a hundred a year out of Wat Widgines purse. Shall it ^faith
Governor, what ails thou? art thou not right?


I shall find a time to right my self, I doubt not.


But will you travel at these years Mr Widgine?


Will you not call me brother? Two days hence when you have married my sister,
you must. Must he not, Governor?


Yes an't please him.


He ails something.


Well then, Brother two days hence, will you travel?


I some two years hence, mistake me not. I know I am but young yet: besides I
mean to marry first as other young heirs do. And then towry lowry, faith, my
noble Governor, and I! Twill be brave going into France then: I may learn
half their fashions before I go, and bate so much, being taught at when I
come there. VVhats the matter Governor? thou were not wont to be thus. Is thy
money all gone? Here's five pieces to buy pomps against my sisters wedding.


Have I eyes and ears, and can think of trifling Money matters?


Pox on it I had forgot. That sciruy surly gentleman angerd him ere while, and
put him out of patience. How the hot ^ome of his rage boils out at his Mouth*
If I durst go so near the heate of him I would skim the pot.


If I try not this Tridewell; put him to the dearest trial of his life. --


I there tis, he will never come to himself till he beat, or be beaten.


Let me have these knockd out; these pulled off; these pluckd out, and these sawd
off.


I must venture on him. Nay Governor: pray thee consider. --


The time and place you mean. Think you he durst have done it, but in his
kinsmans house; he and the multitude of his servants present.


I, and we know not how many armed men in the next room. Hark Governor.


What things are these! I shall marry into a fine stock! How untimely some
considerations fall into my mind* My Cousins council, which hath ever been
oraculously good; against which I violently bear my self, to mix my blood
amongst a race of fools. Had but these thoughts been mine but one day past,
they had prevented all that may prove dangerous in this, so great and doubtful
undertaking.


Sir, there's a gentlewoman would speak with you.


Who is it? Do you not know her?


I never saw her before sir. I asked her name. But I perceived some displeasure
in her look (whether it were shame, grie^e, or anger I know not) that made her
conceal it: Only telling me she was a woman very hurtless, and warrantable
against your fear.


I warrant tis my sister. She frowned, did she not, and looked fightingly? If
she did, 'tis my sister, your wife that shall be. She will look so at you, I
can tell you, or me, or my Governor, for all he is a Captain. She fears no
colours I faith, to tell you true, she beat him once for a jest he broke upon
her Monkey. Is it not she, think thou?


No sir it is not she. I know my Lady that shall be.


My Lady that shall be! how sweetly it chimes. Here's something for that word.


Go bring her up. Good brother VVidgine, fly into the next room, with your
Governor. I'll wait on you presently.


My Lady! And brother VVidgine! I must admire. Our house is raised by this two
stories higher. --


There's no recalling time; and vows of this high nature are no trif^les.


Sir I suppose you are sir Phillip Luckless.


I am the man Lady.


And you are shortly to marry a City Widow, one Mistress Fitchow?


Most true.


For whose dear sake you purchased a four hundred pounds knighthood, to go a
wooing in: out of which she is to give nine thousand pounds for a Ladyship for
term of life.


What mean you Gentlewoman?


Sir not to scold, or brawl, (a vice to frequent in our Sex.) But, in few
words (and civil ones) to make you sensible of a little of that infinite
injury, you have done to one, whose vnvaluable portion of virtue makes her fit,
(besides the right she has already in you) to take a brides place, before your
later choy^, or any she, whose wealth might weigh down hers. You stand as if
you knew not who I mean.


Nor what neither. Sure my name's abused.


Pray sir bethink your self. Has there not been a former contract made
betwixt you and some other.


No. Nor any faithful promise neither.


That I may well believe, when you forget it.


I pray speak nearer to my understanding: whom may you suggest to be the woman
^o much forgotten?


If you have soul, or sense, you must remember her: No? Read then her name
subscribed to that.

If pity, love, or thought of me,
Live in your breast I need not die.
But if all these from thence be fled;
Live you to know, that I am dead.
Farewell good Constance. I am sorry I have no further for thee.


Do you know that name sir?


Yes Lady so well, that I am sorry, that a gentlewoman of your good seeming
should have to do for so light a piece of vanity. Leave going of the devils
Errants: His kingdoms large enough, and too much peopled already.


Pray sir, are you in sober earnest?


I good faith am I.


You are unhappy then. For you shall loose, in this disdain of yours, more
honour then your life time in repentance can recover. So fare you well sir.


Farewell old Whiskin. Slid I'll marry out of the way; tis time I think: I
shall be taken up for whores meat else. Constance! she had a Bastard the other
day too. What a mischeiuous Maw has this she Caniball that gapes for me!
Slight a common Trader, with I know not how many! I marvel she was left out
of Cupids Muster. Sure she bribd the Ballat-maker: One that I have paid at all
times too; here's one, there's the other* And now she hears I am towards marriage
pretends a claim to me. And what a Minister she had procured! A Devil in a
most gentlewomanlike apparition. It had been well to have pumpd her. Is she
gone?


Who sir, the Gentlewoman? I put her in her coach.


Her Coach! Coaches must needs be common, when their cariages are so. By this
light, Oliver, a Bawd; a very Bawd. Where's my brother Widgine, and his
Governor, Anvil! They are wholesomer company of the two, yet.


A Bawd I Bless my Masters wits. But the best is, if he be mad, there's that
at hand will tame him, or any man: A fine Cooler, called Marriage, to take his
bachelors button a h^le lower! Can it be possible? She might have been
Mother of the Maids, as well, to my seeming; or a Matron, to have trained up
the best Lady Daughters in the Country. Here comes her Man, again.


Is sir Phillip Luckless in the house still sir?


Are you the Cock-bawd to the hen was here, ere while sir.


Are you mad, or are you drunk sir?


C^me you to bargain for a Punk sir? Faith where's the meeting? Wher's the
Supper? at the Bridgefoot, or the Cat? or where is it?


Nay then sir, though your Master be allowed to measure his manners, by his
pleasure, here, on his own yard, I'll be bold to pull you out on it by the
ears, and beat you into better fashion.


Hold, hold. Pray hold a little sir. I cry you mercy. I might be mistaken. I
see thou art a good fellow. I have half a dozen for thee faith. S' foot what
big words and terrible action he has! Is this the Bawds language? Pray pardon
me sir: I have been overwatched of late, and knew neither place, person, not
what I said at the instant.


Indeed?


I sir, tis an infirmity I am much troubled withal; a kind of a -- between
steep and waking -- I know not what to call it. I would give tvventie nobles
to be cured on it. I pray take it not ill sir; I use any man so, when the fits
on me, till they thoroughly wake me.


What as I did now? by the ears? Are you come to your self enough yet? or
shall I help you further sir?


No, tis very well now I thank you sir. Alas I put my Master to the pains,
twice or thrice a week, I assure you, to my grief.


A very strange disease! How might you get it?


Faith I fell into 't first, with a conceit I took for overbuying a bargain
of Drink. Your business with my Master sir? I pray.


Only to speak with him from the Gentlewoman was here even now.


I shall acquaint him with it.


I shall be your servant.


I pray pardon my error.


And you my boldness.


O not so sir. Well master Pimp I have a plot upon your employment, as bravely
as you carry it. I know he is a Bawd by his out-facing. And I do humble and
disguise my Manhood to work on him by policy: And if I put not a fine^ slur
upon him for all his brave brauados, then Oliver Pate has no brains; nor is
there any difference betwixt a Serving-man and a Pandar. --


What a Trim-tram trick is this? the Master and the Man both brain-cras'd; as
the one used me, so did the other my Mistress. But I have brought this into a
kind of civil sense again. Do we look like Bawds? There is some strange
ground for this mistaking. I am sure she has ever been reputed a virtuous
Gentlewoman; and has now the government, and bringing up of a Virgin, of a
most hopeful goodness. And I think, I know my self; and dare beat any Man
into a better construction of my quality.


Now wit, and be thy will! Sir, my Master desires to be excused: for he is
with some friends, on private business, concerning his Marriage; which is to be
to morrow. But says, if it please you to meet him in the Evening, between
four, and five, in the great Palace; and condnuct him to the Gentlewoman, he
will attend her with his best service.


Between four, and five in the Palace: but how shall I know him? I never saw
him.


As I wished: But you may easily. He is of a comely stature; and will be in a
red cloa^e and a white Feather, Besides I'll wait on him.


I thank you sir.


Fare you well sir. Good Foist, I shall make a Whiskin of you now, and for
nothing too. I have been a little bold with my Masters name in this answer;
the knowledge of which he is vnguilty of. I saw how he shifted her off:
Therefore I will further be bold both with his name and person, which I will
put upon a friend in store. My special friend, Captain Anvil, a notable
lecherous Tuppe: He has been at me for a bit out of my Masters flock any time
these three weeks. I'll pleasure him with her for ready money. I know tis some
cast stuff, that my Master has done withal. And let him take what follows.


Well sir. And what said Master Luckless?


Sir Phillip you mean forsooth.


The very same sir. But I begin to call him now, as I must call him
hereafter. Ladies do not call their husbands, as they are Knights: as sir
Phillip, sir Timothy, or sir Gregory. Did you ever hear my Lady Squelch call
her husband sir Paul? No. But master Squelch. Indeed all others must sir them
by their Christen names; because they are Knights, and to be known from other
men: only their own wives must master them, by their Surnames; because they
are Ladies, and will not know them from other men. But to our business. What
said he to you?


His worship said forsooth --


Nay, What said you to him first? I love to hear things in order.


I said that as you bad me forsooth.


As I bad you, Clotpoll? what was that? Shall I ever mould thee into a
Gentleman Usher think thou, that stand so? Come forwards sir, and repeat.


My Mistress commends her best love unto your Worship; and desires to know how
your Worship came home last night; and how your Worship have rested; and how
your Worship dos this morning? She hopes the best of your Worships health; and
would be glad to see your Worship at your Worships best leisure.


This was very well: word for word as I instructed. But did you worship him so
much?


Yes truly, and he commended me for it; and said I showed my breeding.


Now sir. His answer? in his own words.


Quoth he. I thank thy Mistress, and I thank thee. Prithee commend my service
to her, and tell her, my worship came home upon my worships Foot-cloath; my
worship took very good rest, in my worships bed: My worship has very little to
do this Morning, and will see her at my worships leisure.


Did he say so?


Twas either so, or so much I am sure. But he did not make me repeat, as you
did, till I had cond it by heart.


Well Howdie get you down. And ^oe you hear Howdee? If sir Paul Squelch come,
bring him up.


I will forsooth Mistress.


I bad you learn to call me Madame.


I shall forsooth Ma-dame.


You shall forsooth Madame. Tis but a day to it; and I hope one may be a Lady
one day before her time.


A day too soon ^ doubt in this forward age.


In the mean time, let me study my remembrances for after marriage.

Imprimis, To have the whole sway of the house; and all domestic affairs;
as of accounts of household chardges, placing and displacing of all seruant^ in
general; To have free liberty, to go on all my visits; and though my knights
occasions be never so urgent, and mine of no moment, yet to take from him the
command of his Coach; To be in special fee with his best trusted servant; nor
to let one live with him, that will not bewray all his counsels to me. To
study and practise the Art of jealousy; To fain anger, melancholy, or
sickn^sse, to the life. These are Arts that women must be well practised in,
ere they can attain to wisdom, and ought to be the only study of a widow,
from the death of her first husband, to the second: From the second to the
third, matters of deeper moment; From the third to the fourth deeper yet; And
so proportionably to the seventh, if she be so long blessed with life: But of
these I may find time hereafter to consider in order as they fall. Besides, in
all, to be singular in our will; to reign, govern, ordain laws and break
them, make quarrels and maintain 'him; profess truths, devise falsehoods;
protest obedience, but study nothing more then to make our husbands so;
Control, controvert, contradict, and be contrary to all conformity: To which
end we must be sure to be armed always with prick and praise of the deceased;
and cary the Inuentory of our goods, and the gross sum of our Dowry
perpetually in our mouths. Then dos a husband tickle the spleen of a woman,
when she can anger him to please him; chide him to kiss him; Mad him to
humble him; make him stiff necked to supple him; and hard-hearted to break
him; to s^t him up, and take him down, and up again, and down again, when,
and as often as we list.


Madame.


I marry, now thou say well.


Andt please your Ladyship.


Well said again.


One M. Tridewell, ^ Gentleman, desires to speak with your Ladyship, from Sir
Phillip.


Tridewell! O it is Sir Phillips Kinsman. I have heard him speak much good of
him; and entreated me to give him good respect; which were enought to mar
his entertainment, had I not another purpose of mine own, that may prove as
ill. Bring him up Howdee.


I will Madame --


I that was very well. This Howde^ do I mean with a cast Gown to put in
apparel, and make my Gentleman Usher; Not only for the aptness of his name,
to go on my visits; but for his proportionable talent of wit and manners.


If I can yet redeem him, he is happy. By your leave Lady: May my boldness
prove pardonable?


Sir the name of him, you come from, is warrant sufficient to make your welcome
here: All that is here being his.


Is this she trow!


I understand you come from Sir Phillip Luckless.


'Tis true, I brought his name thus far to enter me to your presence. But
here I shake it off, as I would do his remembrance: but that I know him too
well.


Too well Sir? How mean you?


Too well indeed Lady; but in the ill part. I know him to be no equal Match
for you. Yet I hear you receive him as a Suitor.


Right Sir. and him only.


It is not gone so far I hope.


Beshrew me but it is; and farther too Sir. He has all wooed and won me.


Beshrew your fortune then. And if my coun^ell;
The friendliest counsel e're you hearkened to,
Stop not your venturous foot from one step further,
(For now you are upon the brink of danger)
You fall into a Sea of endless sorrows.

This is pretty!

Look back into your self; read over your Story,
Find the content the quiet mind you lived in,
The wealth, the peace, the pleasure you enjoyed;
The free command of all you had beneath you,
And no^e to be commanded by above you.
Now glance your eye on this side, on the yoke,
You bring your neck to, l^den down with cares,
Where you shall faintly draw a tedious life,
And every step encounter with new strife.
Then, when you groan beneath your burdenous charge,
And wearily chance to revert a look
Upon the price you gave for this sad thraldom,
You'll feel your heart stabbed through with many a woe,
Of which one dyes not while a thousand grow.
All will be then too late: Now is the time,
Now rings the warning bell unto your breast:
Where if you can but entertain a thought,
That tells you how you are beset with danger,
You are secu^e; Exclude it, you are lost
To endless so^rowes, bought with dearest cost.

Pray Sir deal freely with me. What respect
Moves you to make this strong dissuasion?
Is it your care of me? or love of him?

A subtle question! This woman is not brainelesse.
Love of him Lady? If this can be love,
To seek to cross him, in so great a hope,
As your enjoying; being all the means,
Or possibility he has to live on;
If it be love to him, to let you know
How lewd and dissolute of life he is,
By which his fortunes being sunk, he is grown
The scorn of his acquaintance, his friends trouble,
B^ing the common borrower of the Town.
A Gallant lights not a Iobacco Pipe,
But with his bor^owing letters (she's not moved)
And if you put him off a fortnight longer,
Hee^l be laid up for moneys he took up
To buy his Knighthood; besides his deep engagements
To Goldsmith, Silkman, Taylor, Milliner,
Sempster, Shoemaker, Spurrier, Vintner, Tapster,
(All stirs her not, she stands as if prepared
To hear as much of truth and bear with it.)
Men of all Trades, and Occupations,
From his Mercer downward to his Waterman,
Have ventured the last sixpence on his Credit;
And all but wait to pay themselves from you.
And I may well imagine how't would grieve
A woman of your wealth, to disburse all,
To save a Knight out of his Ward in the Counter;
And lack with all his company at home;
While he frequents youthful society
To make more charge for Nurseries abroad:
For I have heard him say you are old; and that
It is your wealth he marries, ^d not you.
If this be love to him, that I discover
(The means to save you to be his undoing,)
Let no man take a friends help in hi^ wooing.

And how this should proceed from care of me
Falls not into my understanding Sir.

Consid^r Lady --

Sir I have considered
Before, and in your speech, and since; and cannot
By all that can be said remove a thought.
I loved him not for words: Nor will I use
Words against yours: 'twere poor expression
Of love to boast it. Tis enough I know it.
Boasters of love, how can we Lovers call,
When most of such love one no more then all.

Sure, I was much mistaken in this woman.


Nor would I have you to expect a railing,
To say you basely wrong the Gentleman:
A way so common, common women use it.
But this Sir I will say, I were too blame
If I should think your love to him were less
Then the great care of me, you seem to urge,
As you pretend it is.

She will discover me.

You are his Kinseman nearly; and reputed,
By his own mouth, his best of chosen friends;
My selse an utter stranger, one from whom
You never had, or can expect least good.
And why you should, for a respect so contrary,
Call my poor wit in question to believe you,
Is most unconscionable.

Me think I stand
Like a false witness against another life,
Ready to take his punishment.

Nor will I foudly think you meant to seek,
Crossing his Match, to make it for your self:
Both for my known unworthiness; and your
Deprauing him being no possible way
To make me think the better of your worth.

Can this be she? how strangely am I taken!

But I forgive, and charitably think
All this brought no ill purpose; pretty Pageantry
Which may hereafter, among our marriage mirth,
Fill up a Scene: for now I'll take no notice.
Indeed I will not: you may, if you please,
And tell your Cousin how haynously I take it.

If thou hast mercy, Love, keep't from my heart.
Will it please you hear me?

Sir I have, enough.
And crave but leave to speak this little to you,
Which shall by heaven be vncontrol'd as Fate.
If I shall find him bad, I'll blame my fortune:
Never repent or thank you for your counsel.
If I shall find him good; and all this false,
Which you so violently have urged against him;
I'll love him ne'er the more, nor you the worse:
For I am not so poor, nor weakly spiritted,
That should all friends to whom my faith is bound,
Say on their knowledge, that all this were true,
And that one hours protraction of our Marriage
Should maked appear, that I would give allowance
To all their bugbear reasons, to defer
That hour the uniting of our hands: because
Our hearts are linked by the Divinest laws.

What have I done? The curse of ouer-weening brains,
Shame, and disgrace are guerdon of my pains.
O, I shall fall beneath the scorn of fools:
A punishment as just, as great for such,
That do in things, concern them not, too much.

What ails the Gent?

O^ what a settled rock of Constancy
She plants her affection? not to move,
Though all the breath of sl^nderous reproach,
Driving tempestuous clouds and storms of horror,
Should beat, at once, against it.

Sir How dee?

Ma-dame.

Not you Sir.

I would I had not seen, at least not heard her
In all so contrary to all opinion.

You are not well Sir.

They said she was old, unhandsome, and vnc^uill,
Forward, and full of womanish distemper.
She's none of these: but opposite in all.

Sir.

My witty purpose was to save my friend
From such a hazard; and to loath her so,
That I might make her loathsome to his fancy:
But I my self am fallen into that hazard;
To wrong my friend; to burn in lawless lo^e;
Which oh that prayers or penance may remove.

You are not going Sir?

I beg your pardon; dare not look upon you. --

Gone in a dream* Well, I perceive this juggling.
This strain was only to explore the strength
Of my affection to my luckless Knight.
For which, if both their Cunnings I not fit,
Let me be called the barren wife of wit.

The strangeness of this Gentleman's action will not out of my mind yet. Sir
Phillip could not but have a hand in it. Does he repent his bargain already;
and desire to be quit with loss of his earnest? Tis but his faith and troth.


Sister, where are you? My Governor and I are come to wait upon you in sir
Phillip Luckless coach. It waits at door for you; and what to do think you?


I can not tell. Perhaps to inuit me forth into the air of ^ideparke or
Maribone; or else --


Or else me no or elses, sister, you cannot guess it. And I was a fool to
ask you the question, now I think on it.


That was well remembered brother.


Sister, you are to be a Lady, within this half hour. Your knight is ready,
so is the Parson too. My Governor here knows.


Yes Lady; and that he entreats you, to bear with the sodain^sse of the
occasion, which he protests, deeply urges him to be married presently;
desiring you not to trouble your self in examination of his reasons: for upon
his honesty and honour, the end of it is for good to you both. Come sweet
Madame (now I am bold to give you your dew title) your knight is ready pressed on
his aduontures (dee hear) and tis only you, that he seeks to encounter.


There's a jest now: but she understands it not. He makes her an Infidel, a
wild beast or a Monster, by that word Encounter; what do Knights adventurers
encounter else? look all the Mirror over. Hee'll encounter her. O the wit of a
Governor!


Tis as I say Madame, (dee hear) the good fit's come on him.


Ever at the tail of his dee hear, I am sure to smell a jest: the fits come
on him:


This sudden importunity confirms my former doubt: He thinks his Scare-crow
will make me keep off now; but he is cossend. Well sir. He shall find me
obedient to his hand. I am in all prepared to meet his purposes; Though,
Brother I had thought to had conference this Morning with sir Paul Squelch
touching a match for you.


For me sister: have you found out a wi^e for me? have you? pray speak, have you?


And a good match too brother; Sir Paul's Niece: on whom, he, being childles,
means to bestow a large Dowry.


By my faith, and he may do it. He is rich Governor; one of the best Ten in the
hundred men about this Town.


He is a right good man. Within there. Flaps your fellow bring my Fan and
Masque.


Is he bounteous and liberal ha? Does he make large Suppers and lend money.
Dee hear? Is he good at that?


Nay, there you mistake Governor. A good man in the City is not called af^er
his good deeds, but the known weight of his purse. One, whose name any Usurer
can read without spectacles; One that can take up more with two fingers and a
thombe upon the Exchange, then the great man at Court, can lift with both his
hands; One that is good only in riches, and wears nothing rich about him but
the Gout, or a thombe Ring with his Grandsites sheepmarke, or Grannams
butter-print on it, to seal bags, acquittanc^s and Counternanes.


A Butter-print?


I twere a cunning Herald could find better Arms for some of them: though I
have heard ^r Paul Squelch protest he was a gentleman, and might quarter a coat
by his Wives side. Yet I know he was but a Grasier when he left the Country;
And my Lord his father whistled to a team of horses (they were his own
indeed.) But now he is right worshipful, and I would I had his Niece vnsight
and unseen I faith for her monies sake. You never heard me ask if she were
fair or handsome, dee mark that sister? My fathers rule right. And if I be not
a true Widgine. (God forgi' me) I think he was none.


But she is very fair brother, and very hansom^ and the prettiest innocent
country thing withal. Do I want nothing here?


I now you bring me to bed sister.


Your Masque sits well forsooth.


But where's my Wimple forsooth?


Upon the Cupboards head, pray Humfrey fetch it.


He lives not that loves a Country thing like me* Alas none loves a Country
thing l^ke me. And though I am a Cockney, and was never further then
Hammersmith; I have read the Country mans common wealth; and can discourse of
Soccage and Tenure, Free-hold, Copy-hold; Lease, Demeans, Fee-simple and
Fee-taile, Plowing, Hedging, Diking, Grubbing, occupying any Country thing
whatsoever; and take as much pleasure in it, as the best Clown borne of 'h^m
all.


And she is very young, (...) above fifteen, brother.
How this fellow stays! Go you.

And that's a safe age for a Maid in the country: dee hear?


Pardon me Governor. I do hear and not hear thee at this time.


And sings, and speaks so pretty northenly they say.


Is she Northern (dee hear) will she not shrink in the wetting?


Governor, I know thou spokst a jest now, by thy dee hear: but prithee
forgive me; I cannot applaud nor mark thee at this time.


What mak^s you stay so? I fear you have been among my sweet meats.


She said it was upon the Cupboard; and it was under the Cupboard.


Is this my Wimple? Do you bring Carpenters tools to dr^sse me withal.


Here is your Wimple forsooth.


I sh^ll teach you to know a difference between gentlewomens geere and
Carpenters tools. I shall


Nay, she is so vexed now I Dear sister to the Country Lass again. You
said, she spoke and sung Northernly. I have a great many Southern songs
already. But Northern airs nips it dead. York York for my money.


Yes brother she is Northern, and speaks so: for she has ever lived in the
Country, till this last week, her Uncle sent for ^er up to make her his
child, cut of the Bishopric of Durham.


Bishop, nor Bishopric shall hold her from me.


And brother --


S^ster no mo^e, though I have never seen her. No Bishopric in the land from
me shall win her. If you will go, and clap hands with your knight, come; I
would see you matchd first: because that will add some honour to the Widgine^,
when my self shall be brother to a Lady. I shall write first of that name.
And then am I no sooner married, Governor, but we will set our travels a
foot: to know Countries, and Nations, Sects and Factions, Men and Manners;
Language and Behaviour.

And so in height of complement grow complete
More goes to making of a Man, the^ meat.

Pray tell me; and tell me truly. What is the most has past between you? I^
it be the maine loss of your Mayden-head, it shall near go further:
the^efore let me know it.


As I live Mistress Trainewell, all that ere he had o'me was but a kiss. But I
mun tell ye, I wished it a thoosnnd, thoosand till him.


How often have you seen him?


Feath but that bare eance another, and your seln were by too. Trow ye that I'd
not tell ye and twere maer. By my conscience Mrs. Trainewell I lee not.


That once that I saw him with you, your V^cle was there, too, in the Orchard,
but last week.


Vary true, Mine Uncle was than by too. And he brought sir Phillip to see his
Orchard. And what did he than do, trow you, but tuke me thus by the haund,
and thus he kust me; he sed I were a deft Lass: but there he fiend. But for
my life I could not but think, he war the likest man that I had seen with
mine eyne; and could not devaise the thing I had, might be vnbeggen by him.
Then by and by as we walkd, he asked mine Uncle, gin he would give him me to
make a Lady till him. And by my troth Mistress Trainwell, I lee not, I blushed
and luk'd upon him as I would feine a head it so: Mine Uncle said yes, and sir
Phillip shuke my haund, and good feath my heart joyed at it. God gin the Priest
had been by. But I thought all sure enough; and would not have sold my part for
the Spanish Ladies Ioincture. But straight anon mine Uncle and he fell on other
talk, of Lords and Ladies, and many found like things, I minded not: For I is
weell sure, this kept me waking ere sine. And God pardon me what I misthought
every hour in the night.


How have you made me wrong this Gentleman, to challenge him as if he had
been your due upon this idle complement? when I undertook the Message, I
presumed (for so your words did intima^e to me) you had been sure, as fast as
faith could bind you, man and wife. Where was my discretion? Now I perceive
this was but common Courtship; and no assurance of a Marriage promise.


I wot not what he meant. But I is weell sure, I'll ne'er be sure to any Man but
he. And if he love me not as weell, God pardon him. For I meant him none
ill.


I know not how to counsel or comfort you, until I hear him speak. My man
tells me, he appointed him to meet, and bring him to you about this hour.
Poor heart I pity thee. Before thou come to half my years thou wilt forget
to love half so truly.


Mistress.


O, are you come? where's the Knight?


He stays below, and wild me to come up first, to to make his passage clear
and secure.


That was discretion.


Rather fear I think: for he asked me if the house were not much haunted with
Roarers or Swaggerers, poniards and pistols: whether there were not an Assurer
for it as upon the Exchange, as i^ his life were upon hazard? whether a Man
might come on without loss of credit, and off without need of a Surgeon? Much
odd talk he delivers; that in my conceit betrays, at once, both a ^asciuious
and cowardly disposition; and upon my understanding, ca^not be so generous, or
nobly spirited, as he is received. Do what you will.


I suspect something.


Will he not come Mrs. Trainewell?


Yes sweetheart. But go you to your Chamber and let me have a word before you
see him. Go call him in. Do so swetheart. I'll not be long.


I'll do ought you bid me God gin I saw him eance.


A place of fair promising! How have I lived that never discovered this place
before? This place royal! But sought my recreation, in by-lanes, and sluttish
corners, unsavoury Allies and Ditch sides? when here the whole house is
perfumed: An Earl might think it his own lodging; Ladies might come to see
the pictures, and not blush, to go in or out unmasked.


Sir, will you speak to my Mistress? The man is transported sure!


I understand thy office, leads thee no further; thy pains are abroad and
below stayres. Here honest Fetch. Look thee, here's the poor price of a new
pair of shoes; take it. Descend, and execute thy duty.


Bless me! this is another man. More abuse yet?


Now gentlewoman to you. What fees belong to your Key? Come, vvher's the bed?
vvhere's the party? Here's the man: her^'s the money. Chunke chunke you old
Gamester, dost hear? Here's half a piece to buy t^ee complexion, sack or
Aqua-vitae. What thou lik'st.


What are you sir I pray?


Faith one that's a little ill given at this time. Where's the ^ece? here are
the pieces ^ tell thee.


What piece sir? If you can imagine what you are, where you are, what you would
have, or where you would be, I pray tell me sir. ^le do the best I can to
satisfy you. Of my discretion will I sir.


Give me but a little space to wonder at thy strange demands and I will tell
thee, good discretion. If I should purchase a broken Cock^combe, or bruz'd ribs
now, for mistaking another mans habit, the smart were only mine. The villain
swore to me, his Master was sent for; and that his Master swore this w^s a Bawd
to his choice Whore, newly intertayn'd; and that she knew not him, and might
well mistake me for him. On which presumption I ha^e waded thus far: and if I
stick in the Mud, or be driven back by a tempest, I am armed. Tis not the
first time I have been Wether-beaten, or Dry-beaten, dee hear?


Sir.


You do not know me? or, at least, not remember me?


If I erte therein sir, I hope your pardon. For as you shall reveal your
self, I shall either repent me of my oblivion, or accuse you of
vnaduisednesse.


She speaks like the wife of an Orator, that could dictate her husbands
speeches! Were not you this Morning at sir Phillip Luckless lodging? spoke not
you with him? sent you not for him afterwards to repair hither to the party?
And know you not the man?


O infinite abuse! Sir I cry you mercy. I hope you will pardon my weak
sightednes. The worlds ^ad and we love to deal securely. Could not your
worship make your self known sooner? Please you to entertain you self here
a while, I will instantly provide for your better welcome. O horrible
indignity! But if Porters and cudgels may be had for money, and I fit you not,
let me loose my discretion. I am furnished with blankets already. --


I will instantly provide for your better welcome! Will you so? Twill pass:
and by this light I think for my Masters jest: I will recover my chardges, and
gain over and above for three returns more with the bare repetition of it out
of one ma^s pu^se, the Widgine. My jests are his nutriment; and my wit is his
own^, he pays so duly for it. If the Wench be but pleasing, now, ^o my
expectation, my felicity is crowned.


O child, we are undone.


Mary, God shield Mrs. Trainewell. Is he geane? Must I not see him?


A lass it is not he: but some Villain s^nt by him to vex and spite you. One
that persuades himself, we are of those common creatures* that sell their
honesties.


Heaven bliss us, and give us leave to dee first. Can he be so vnkaind, to
scorn me so, Woe i^ me.


He is so dishonourable. But I wi^ fit his Vndertaker, what ere he be. Look
you, is that he think you?


O Weell a near Mistress Trainewell! Sir Phillip is the likest man that ere you
saw days of your life. This Lozell dow not. Nor would he send him. So trim a
Man cannot have ^ike bad purpose.


Mistress, there's a Gentleman, one Master Tridewell, that says he is sir
Phillips Kinseman, will by all means speak with him.


Sweet heart, can you dissemble your sorrow with a Song, to pass a little
time? I'll down and sift out the subtlety of this deceit.


There is no government under the Sun, like the politic government of a
Bawdy-house.

You say my Love is but a Man.
But I can find more ods.
Twixt him and others then I can,
find between him and Gods.
H^ has in's eye
such Majesty.
His shape is so divine.
That were I Owner of the world.
He only should be mine.

Sweet prolog^e to the ensuing Intertude^


Only hers upon my sincerity sir.


Excellent! She has raised my desire above her notes. Why am I th^s rauishd,
and yet delayed?


Sir, for that my Mistress craves your Pardon. Tis not her neglect, that works
upon your patience; But the necessity to rid a troublesome Lord or two out of
the house, be^ore the Party can appear to you. But please you to obsucre your
self in this dark Cl^set, while I convey them hence, and then, instantly, the
top Gallant of pleasure shall crown your Maine-mast, she says.


O how her wit and care revives me! From hence forth she is my Bawd for ever.
My discretion! But are they wholesome Lords Sirah?


Tis no matter for any thing they did here sir, I warrant you. Inquickly pray
si^.


Must I be locked in?


You cannot be safe else sir.


The politic government of this little common wealth!


Indeed Lady, I am so far from being in any plot herein, that I protest it
was merely by his outside, and that in the do^btfull light of the Evening, that
I could guess twas he. An^ had he been denied, I had gone well satisfied, it
had been some other man. Which if it prove, and so his name be abused -- Or if
it be he indeed, though hitherto my most respected Cousin, that offers such an
outrage, as you deliver it to be: I am so much a friend to honesty, that let me
but see the man or beast, I'll do the fair office of a Gentleman to right you.
Indeed Lady I will.


You profess nobly sir. First will it please you, see this Gentlewoman; so
much the servant of your Kinsman? What she is I have told you. Only I present
her to your judgment, whether her outward seeming may d^s^rue such scorn?


Alas fair Lady, would they injure you?


Yea feath, and scorn me too sir. Ill betide them. But and you do me help,
and ma' sir Phillip love me, God reward you.


And has your youth and b^auty placed your love on him?


Good ^eath sir, I may not say how well I love him: But were I one of near ^a
mickle, heest even have all. And yet he loves me not.


Indeed tis pitiful. Weep not sweet Lady. He shall love ye.


Now Gods benison light o'yee for it.


Show me the mischief, that hath abused us all. Can you conceal him longer?


In thus much* to conjure you by your Manhood; to do nothing that law may
question, to your, or our disuantage: we shall not need,

For our own ^ight, to do our selves misdeed. Therefore take this in hand. --



You do instruct me well. Pray let me see him.


Oh for a large Window, one of the last edition, to leap out with half my
life or limbs.


Lo ye lo ye, the worst like man to Sir Phillip ye saw in all your days.


Mischeiuous Devil! What magical madness conjured you i^to this shape?

Indeed I'll conjure you out on it.


Oh hold: for heavens sake hold. I'll confess.


Nay, indeed I'll beat you a little first, you'll confess the better. Twill
come the easier from you. Tis a good preparati^e.


Oh! oh, i'll co^f^sse any thing.


No sir, n^t any thing. But the truth the truth sir.


The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth (...) h^lpe me --


You would be sweari^g now would you? there's for th^t.


No indeed, indeed, and indeed la I will not.


Go^d sir no more. What may this poor thing be, that br^' it ^o bu^ n^w?


I'll t^ll you Lady. The most notorious, base, beat^n Rascal ^out the Town.
Twere l^st breath to say more by him. H^e is as you see* Only is name is
Anvil: and they that know him not, call ^im Cap^aine.


Anvil? Pray sit let me try in* blade on him too.


I pray thee do, to lave me a l^bour: for he is not h^lf^ b^at^n yet.


Oh, oh. Ladies speak for me. have you no mercy?


Hold. No more.


Well sir, thank the Ladies. Now sir, put this Ladies favour here in your
p^cket; and keep it there till I call f^r it. And mark what I say, if ever I
find thee without this Instrument or the like, when I shall call for it, to
beat the^ (mark me) indeed ^le ^eat thee (...). And now to your ^xamination.
How got your rotten Mutton ship into this Lyo^s case? was it by the Owners
knowledge? was the Master of these Clothes privy to your undertaking? Answer^
sirah, bonafide, I or no.


No upon my life; only his Man abused me for my Mo^ey.


What presumption made you think so vilely of the^e Ge^tlewomen?


Sir Phillips own words to his Man, upon a letter this Lady delivered to him
this Morning.


The Error's found. Her name you say is Constance, which likewise is the name
of a prostituted Strumpet, with whom, tis thought, the wantonness of his youth
hath held former familiarity; and now it seems makes doubt, imagining that
letter to be hers, that she pretends a claim to him.


Right sir: which he took so contemptuously, that instantly he resolved to
mary the Widow, Mistress Fitchow; and was this Morning married privately in a
Chamber, within an hour after you saw him.


And I undone than.


And I if it be so.


It is undoubtedly true. I saw them married, and dined with them, at his
lodging, where they will sup too: But after S^pper they go to her house in the
Town to bed.


This fo^le mistaking we shall all repent; if we preu^nt not what may issue
from it.


Alas sir all will be too late.


Will you but trust my service for your honour?


We will wait on you sir.


Then Sir for this time you shall be reprieved,
^rom further penance: Rise and be our Guide.
But ke^pe your fear still: for if all out art
Miscarry, thou art sure to share the smart.

Brother Hum^rey, take my hand and word for thy instructions. I will acquaint
thee with an old Ladies Usher, in the Strand, that shall give thee thy Gait,
they Postures, thy Language, thy Habit, and thy whole chardge in so plain^ a
Method, that thou shalt instantly start up as pretty a Gen^leman Usher, none
disprays'd as any between Temple-bar and Charing-crosse; mary further I cannot
promise you^ B^t prithee tell me. Is our Lady of so hot a temper and stately
carriage as she is reputed?


O I brother. She must command all, or all shall smoke for it. She did so in
my old Masters days I a^ (...). And he glad of peace at that rate too.


But how is she to her servants? Bountiful and free?


Y^s both of her voice, and han^s.


She will not strike will she?


And she could bite as well, the rankest Jade that ere was curried could not
come neat her.


Heaven be good to us! she ne'er struck thee, did she?


Tis no matter for that.


Nay brother, you know we have vowed to be all one: the Marriage hath united us.
Prithee tell me.


She broke me a tooth once with a deaths Headring on her finger? it had like
to have cost me my life! 't has b^ene a true Memento to me ever since: bobs of
the lips, tweakes by the nose, cuffs of the ear, and trenchers at my head in
abundance.


Will she throw too?


Any thing she can lift. and makes us pay for all she bre^kes, though she
break our heads or races withal. Fan-handles, Look^ng-glasses or any thing.


We shall have a foul h^ use on it I feare^ But since it is too ^ate, fight
Dog, fight B^are. I'll turn my Master loose to her. Here they come. By this
light me thinks they look as if they were fallen out already.


Though I were absent at the Ceremony, I now bring my wishes of much joy.


And not too late I hope sir Paul. We may yet c^rry them to bed with us*


You had been chiefly sir invited, had we not stolen a day fr^ Time, to have
done a^ athers part at Church, to which (...) yo^r absence, I entreated our
worthy friend Mr: App ^he^sion Bulfi^ch ^ere.


M^st^r Bulfinch, I rejoice t^ meet you here directly. Look you sir. Do you
know this young Gentleman?


Yes sure, methinkes I should know him. But I am sure I never saw him before.
ha --


Have you forgot sir Hercules?


I apprehend him to be Master Salom^ Nonsense, Son and Heir to my right worthy
friend, sir Hercules Nonsense of Cornwall. If you be not he sir. I am sure it
is you. I m^y be deceived, but I am certain tis he.


He is doubtful, but yet he is sure he knows him. What a Bulfinch is this
I sure tis his language they call bull-speaking.


You say very well sir. And never credit me as you knew my Father, I would be
very ready, as you know how duty binds: for because it is a usual thing in
these days, desiring the love and friendship, I protest and vow sir. I sh^uld
--


Most perfect Nonsense! this is a finer youth then the other. My wives
acquai^tance are most answerable to her Kin^red.


Tis so dir^ctly Master Bulfinch, and I have brought him to Town -- I
vnderst^nd my N^ce is in your house, my Lady Bride. Is she employed in your
Chamber?


She is not here sir. Is she Howdee?


Certes no Ma-dame.


How! not here? Sir^h what did you tell me?


What shall I say or do? ^ hanged directly.


How was she accompanied?


By my Mist^is sir, and (...) Gentlemen of her acquaintance, whose names I know
not.


Kmuery, Villainy and ^he^uery! ^ s^ll it rank. She's stolen, she's gone
directly.


Tis indirectly sir if she be stolen. There your word fails you.


If she be in the land I will recover her, I hope I shall find (...) much
right in Law, as a Broker or a Joiner.


Good sir Paul, I have not seen you thus d^mperd. What a^flicts you?


Oh Mistress Fitchow, my Niece, my Niece.


He's mad I think. Sir you forget my sister is a lady.


She's is lost, she's stolen, and all my joy is gone. My Niece my Constance.


Constance!


Who your young Niece that came la^y^ out of the Country?


My Country thing sister, that you promised me?


Promised you? I am abused. I do suspect you accessaries. Sir I have purposed
and promised her to this Gentleman. And here I charge you to restore her me.


Are you the Man si^ that must have her?


Never credit me sir, if I have her, or have her not to my knowledge.


Sir Phillip, you are courteous and noble: as you will continue so in opinion
of honest men, let me have right.


Sir Paul, upon my faith I am ignorant of any such wrong. And, for her part,
should she fare amiss, I should suffer in her injury equally with your self:
for I profes^ to you, I did love the Lass so well; and at the first sight,
that had I not been otherwise allotted, and indeed contracted to her, from
whom now there is no starting, she should have been my Bride, if all my love
and fortune might have won her.


Had you spared this Protestation, Sir, you might have dissembled your love to
me the better.


Dissemble?


Tis said sir.


By this hand my Lady's jealous already.


Bless us! what looks are these!


Sir I must take my leave, this is no time to trouble you.


Nay good sir stay, and share in our ill Banquet. Hark, some friend I hope.
Look firah. --


Some of your old companions have bro^ght you a sit of Mirth. But if they enter
to make a Tavern of my house, i'll add a voice to their consort shall drown
all their fiddling. What are they?


Some that come in gentile fashion to prese^e a Mask.


Locke up the doors, and keep them out.


Break them open and let them in --


Shall I not be Master of my own house?


Am not I the Master of i^ and you --


Nay sister.


Passion of my heart.


Bu^. Madame, Madame.


you must allow of reasonable things.


Be contented, sir Phillip in a noble Gentleman, and a Courtier, and as I
apprehend.


I dare warrant you sister these are of his friends, that come with their Loves
to congratulate his fortune. Speak Master Nonsense. A speech of your would
do it.


Never credit me, but I for sooth am of that opinion, that it is as it were. I
protest and vow -- I should be as sorry as any Man. --


It this were to be put into latin now. Which were the principal Verb.


M. Nonsense, you have preuaid. You see Jam content. But what I purpose, Fate
shall not prevent.


Did I not tell you.


More lights, and let them enter. Gentlemen take your places. Sir Paul to night
forget your sorrow. So will I mine, though I renew ^ tomorrow. Come sit sit.
M^stris please you.


You wrong your honour sir, your most humble Hand-maid.


Brother I told you always she had hasty humours, and as unreasonable as heart
can wish: but soon over. Now she's as mild as any Dove again.


Then we are friends; and she's my Dove again.

Nor Love, ^or Fate dare ^ accuse,
For that my Love did mere ^use;
But oh mine own unworthiness,
That durst presume so mickle bliss.
It was too much for me to lou^
A Man, so like the Gods above;
An Angels shape, a Saint-like voi^e,
Are to Divine for Humane choice.
Oh had I wishly gi^'n my heart,
For to have loved him but in part;
Sought only to enjoy his face;
Or any one peculiar Grace
Of Foot, of Hand, of Lip, or Ey,
I might have lived where now I dye.
But I presuming all to choose
Am now c^domned all to loose.

Tis well performed. Now we would gladly know. To whom we owe our thanks.


That I'll deliver to you. Mean while the rest desire they may withdraw a
while.


Light and all fair respect be given unto them. --


The Woman's voice had much in it like my Niece.


^our Ne^ce sir Paul, ods me I must go see her.


Nay brother give them all their free pleasures. By your leave you shall stay.


(...) sh^ll? I will then.


Now to your (...) I disclose my self.


Whoo^ (...) Gouer^our: Look you sister. Look you (...) ^hillip. Did nor I
always tell you he was the (...) wit ^the world? This was his own invention
^e be hanged else. Sweet Governor the conceit of the Willow, and why tho^
wear it?


My self, only to make the number in the Dance suitable. And so did all the
rest to fulfil the fashion, only two excepted, that were the Leaders and
subject of the Dance. The one, your Cousin Tridewell, who holds himself a lost
Lover, in that you Madame to whom his affection is wholly devoted, have made
your self incapable of him, in being the lawful right of another. This paper
shows him more at large.


Is't possible! Did he for that so earnestly deswade me from her this Morning?


I never saw him before this day, nor he me. These are tricks and studied
fooler^es to abuse me --


Who was the other.


She was your fair Niece sir Paul; the most disconsolate Beauty that ere I
saw, giving her self for ever lost unto your love sir Phillip, presuming you
once promised her Marriage, of which she made a claim this Morning by her
Nurse, whom you reviled by name of Bawd, calling fair Constance Whore; and to
her more despite, hastened your Marriage sooner by ^ day, then you before
intended with this Lady.


Constance! May that name in all other women be accursed beyond themseLucs.
Hell it self could not have vapor'd such an error forth, as I am lost in.
Constance! why was that name made her^, that Saint-like Maids, when it brought
to my mind a Devils, nay worse, a Whores? to whom before was given.


Sir Phillip, and Madame, you apprehend these things as things done, when they
are not things indeed, but as it were show and devise, as by the sequel you
may at large apprehend.


I am of your mind Master Bulfinch. And trust me I am glad my Niece was drawn
into the witty conceit. For which with a new Gown he thank her.


Where is she? I will endure no longer till I see her.


The Masquers are all gone sir.


Gone Vill^ine.


They took their Co^ches instantly, and dispers^t themseLucs by (...) ways, I
had no Commission to stay them.


Are you so sensible of her loss? --


My Niece might not withstanding her lost love have taken me home in her Coach.


You shall have mine sir Paul and my company so far to see her; and whether
their presentation were jest or earnest, I will not rest till I be satisfied;
My Coach. ^le make no stay S^eet-heart. She's gone.


Excellent! the Bride's stolen to bed.


It should be so. I like the custom well.


^ or if you apprehend it rightly, it expresses duty in the Woman to lye
prepared for him; and love in the Man, not to be slack to ^mbrace that duty.


A p^tty M^r^ll^ A Woman's duty to lye down, and a Mans love to get up. One
may learn something of these old fellows every day.


Therefore no Coach, no Company noble Knight. Pursue your home occasions, and
God g^'yee joy.


Nay sir Paul. I protest.


Not a word more of it directly.


Take me with you good sir Paul to see your Niece. I find Master Nonsense here
very indifferent, And I know ^will be the great^r ^oy to her to match but into
the family of sir Phillip, of which I am a half Pill^r now. Besides my sister
made me half a promise of her in good saith, my ^ouer^ours my Witness, and I
have loved her ever since.


But you never saw her face.


No, but i'll be hanged if I did not love her Visor the best ere while, though
I cou^d not tell whose twas, nor which was which.


Good Master Water Widgine, this is no time of night to dive into business of
this depth. It is Nestling time I take it. How think you Master Bul^inch.


I apprehend it to be past 12^ Clock very near.


Therefore what your sister hath promised you, let her perform if she can;
mean time this Gentleman is my choice: come Master Nonsense, you have had a
long time of silence. Master Bul^inch.


I apprehend you sir.


Weell, ^e you to the Gate by your leave Ex Omnes.


What has she written here? It is the same hand I read in the Morning.

I am not your c^unterfeit, or unchaste Constance; But that only Constance, that
truly love you, and that will, if you live not for me, die for you. Oh that^
could at any price or penance now redeem one day! Never was hasty Match sooner
repented.


He's me^ cholly me thinks. Slid my sister may lye long enough languishing
for a Ladyship, if this fit hold him: for she has it not really till he go to
bed and ^u^ her.


Will you not go to bed sir? we wait for your p^ints.


I will. But is it time? Brother, would you would do me the favour to inquire.


Yes, i'll go see for the Possets sake. --


Captain, deal fairly with me. By what mean^s joined you with this society?
or how grew so soon your trust or great acquaintance with them?


Without offence i'll tell you. You know this Morning at your Lodging, there
past some words betwixt me, and your sullen Kinsman, Master -- indeed la,
Tridewell, and from him too much indeed for me, a professed Soldier to bear:
But the place protected him. Till after upon m^ture consideration I made after
him for satisfaction, thus armed as you see. Purposing with this Ropes end to
right me; and to maintain that right with this sword, which I thank Mars
never yet failed me; as it hath well been manifested by the effusion of much
unworthy blood of my abusers, in France, Spain, Italy, Poland, Sweden,
Hungary, all parts of Germany.


Good Captain travel not so far in your relation: but come home again to
the business.


I have used it in some score or two of Sea fights too by the way.


But to the matter Captain; where met you my Cousin?


The first sight I recovered of him, was as he was entering the house of the
greasy Knight there, what call you him?


Sir Paul Squelch?


Squelch, I a pox squelch him. I waited a quarter of an hour at his door, for
your Kinsman; and longer I would not, had he been Kinsman to the Emperor, and
my Enemy. Therefore in I went, told Master Tridewell in his ear, my coming
was to call him forth, to dischardge the office of a Gentleman with his Sword,
in answering those wrongs wherewith I held my reputation wounded. Was it not
well, ha? Could a poor Gentleman say more? and that in civil fashion very
privately in respect of the company, not showing any the least distemper, in
look or gesture. But the Women read presently in his countenance the whole
matter; and briefly by their pretty persuasion I took ordinary satisfaction of
him.


What was that Captain?


Why he confes^'d he wronged me, was sorry for it, and so forth. What should
we speak more on it. This you must not speak of neither. You must promise me
that of your honour, as you desire to hear what follows: I love no ripping up
old so^res.


Not a word I, Captain upon my word. What a Rascals this! to the point good
Captain.


Then thus sir? I soon perceived, their drist to appease, win me to their
friendship was for my assistance, and indeed to bear the^ out in this nights
work, the Mask. The whole plot of all which was merely to so we dissention
between you and your new married Lady, to work if they can a separation,
before carnal copulation, in which if they can prevail, and that the dislike
continue between you to that height, that a divorce be required equally by the
consent of you both, your Marriage then is frustrated, and you stand in stat^
quo prim dee hear. So your Cousin Tridewell may lawfully pursue his hopes in
your Bride, who he loves as eagerly as the melancholy virgin dotes on you.


But may this hold good in Law Captain?


There's a Ganon for it Sir. If both parties agree to a divorce after Marriage,
so it be before Copulation.


Though the former part of his discourse, was a most egregious lye, yet the
last hath some sound of pleasure in it: which I may make use of.


Come gi'me the instrument. Shall I never find thee any where, but thou wilt by
just desert exact a beating from me? Hast thou no conscience? would thou have
me lame my self, or melt my grease upon thee. Come Sir, I have ouer-heard you
all; give me the Instrument, the instrument I say. Indeed I'll have it. So.
Now Sir --


Nay Cousin, for the service he hath done you to night, and love of me, pardon
him this time. Besides, his charge is in the house, at whose charge he lives.
You will both shame and undo him.


Well Sir, I shall for this time pardon you, and never beat you more, it before
Sir Phillip here you will subscribe to this. Tis nothing but a faithful
protestation to do reasonable things as I shall appoint, and not to reveal
what I shall trust you withal.


If you will covenant on your part in defence of my reputation, to let me rail
at you behind your back, I will subscribe*


Take your pleasure. I am content. Write Sir.
In what without a Knave we cannot end,
A Knave employed does the o^fice of a friend.

Here Sir, I deliver it as my deed.


Here, and I deliver you this again to keep. Indeed you shall for performance
of covenants.


Oh Sir you are defeated. My sister hath fortified her lodging with locks,
bolts, bars, and barricados.


To what ^nd brother: for what cause?


I know not whither it be discontent or wilfulness, that possesses her: but
you are to have no entrance there to night. That she has suificiently sworn.


Good.


How! am I denied? To my wish.


Pray let me speak with you Sir.


At large you shall. For though it be my wedding night you shall be my
Bedfellow. Lights there. Good night brother.


Good night Captain.


How now Goue^nour? what has angerd thee? something troubles thy countenance.


Your coming, and the privilege of this place hath once more preserved that
unworthy Tridewell from the justice of my fury, which should have fallen on
him, had he bin tw^nd with me by this light.


By this light, Governor? would you have fought by Candl^-light.


Sir I dare do it by day light, Moone-light, Star-light.


Ow'e-light.


Any light under the S^nne. And that shall be tried well on Tridewel^ head,
dec hear?


A good jest! Tried well upon Tridewell. He has wit in his anger. But
Governor, laying your anger aside, let me be behol^en to your wit in
achieving this Northern Lass. Thy acquaintance with her must be the means.
Prithee go lye with me, and help me to dream ^ut some course. Nay look now
thy fury blows so high thou dost not hear me.


Not h^are? ye^, were I in a Combat as great as ever I my self fought any, I
could both hear, and give counsel. Therefore say unto your self, by the
help of your Governor she is your own.


O Man past example!


But dee hear?


Here, here. Thou shalt have anything --


Come your ways huswife. No more of your whynings, and counterset tricks. If
this Gentleman be not worthy of your love, I am not worthy to be your Vnc^e,
directly.


Alas, what mean you sir.


Accept of him, you accept of me. if you refuse him you deny me directly.


She understands you not a word sir.


If you will join hands and faith with him, Here's your portion, there's your
ioincture; if not, your way lies before you, pack directly.


Good sir, consider her disease. If her understanding were direct, you might
speak directly to her. But if I have any discretion she is too full of
melancholy to be purged this way.


What would you have me do? Or how in your discretion would you council me?


Not to be mad sir, because she is melancholy, not by taking a wrong course
for her recovery to ruin her, and forfeit your judgment Do you think, that
commands with chidings, threats, or stripes have power to work upon her, when
she has neither will nor reason within her self to do, or not to do
anything whatsoever.


Now the g^gs up.


If her health in sense and understanding were perfect: yet as she is Woman,
her will were first to be wrought upon by fair and gentle treaty. But as she
is at this time so sick in mind, that knowledge of what she i^, what she
do^, especially of what she should do is dead in her, her Mind must be first
recovered; and that by a due course, in soft and temperate proceedings; to
which fit time as well as means must be ^ilovved. Moreover --


Oh. No moreouers I besee^h you, not more of her at this time. I understand
your purpose already. I do directly. Therefore speedily take what course, and
use what means shall in your discretion be thought fit. I will subcribe, I
will directly (...) to your discre^ion. My wise when thee went out of the wo^l^
le^t me as great a c^e behind her in the charge she gave me with this Woman,
this quick fighted Guide of my house, a blind one were better.


You should first see, if it pleased you, how her affection may b^e wrought
upon by the Gentleman's own fair entreaty. Pray sir speak to her like a
Su^er, look upon him Sweet heart: This Gentleman loves you. Pray speak sir.
Do you not?


N^uer credit me pretty Gentlewoman --


Nor will I, fear it not. Nor any man that says he loves me. For alas! I was
too lately sco^n'd.


You are a L^sse indeed. I pro^st and vow, and such ^ ^ne, as I would be very
^rry to appear any way, or in the least (...), as it were please you to
understand me: for I'll be sworn, ^he^e is not in the World.


Truth in swearing, less in promising.


If you will believe me Lady.


Nor no man for your sake.


There is not in the world I say --


I say so too sir. What wast I pray.


There is not in the world any Gentlewoman --


Tell that no further; for we are all too gentle lessen men were less cruel.


Hear him speak Constance.


You shall hear me sing first by your leave.


Poor heart.


Here's wise work! direct ^nacy and Ideotismc. Bless my house from the Ward
Masters Informers,


Pray sir, are you sir Phillip?


Say you are.


Yes Lady, I am sir Phillip.


But you are none of my Sparrow. Your mouth's not wide enough for your words.


She has stopped his mouth there.


His words would soften Adamantine ears. And looks would melt a Marble hea^t
to tears. O Wea is me!


Nay you must not weep Swe^t-heart.


What (...) I do them? Shall I ever get him by singing trou ye? In truth I
would never but sing, if I thought that were the gainest way.


I had rather hear you sing though, then see you weep.


It must be of my Love than, my Sparrow as I told you. And thus it goes.

A bonny bonny Bird I had
A bird that was my Marroe:
A bird whose pastime made me glad,
And Phillip twas my Sparrow.
A pretty play-fere: Ch^p it would,
And hop, and fly to fist,
Keep^ ^ut, as ^ were a Vsur^rs Gold,
And bill me when I list.
Phillip, Phillip, Phillip it cries
But he is fled and my loy dyes.
But were my Phillip combed a gain,
I would not change my Love
For Iuno's bird with gaudy train,
Nor yet for Venus Dove.
Nay, would my Phillip come again,
I would not change my state,
For his great Name sakes wealth of Spain,
To be another Mate.
Phillip Phillip, c.
No no, you cannot be the Man. I know him right weel by you sir, as w^ly as you
be. Gin you had all his trim geere upon you, and all his sweets about you, yet
I should not be so fond to mistake a Ienny How let for a Tasse^ Gentle. Ah,
ah, ha.


Why Lone, what faul^ do you find in this Gentleman?


Feath, but even eane. That her is not ^ir Phillip. For thus would he do.
Thus would he kiss his hand; and thus ta' me by mine. Thus would he look,
and set his eye on mine: And give me lea^ to see my self in's eye^. Twas the
best Glass in truth that ere I saw. I ne'er look weell fine. Nor ere shall ime
sure, until I see me there again.

But he is geaue, alas he's geane, and all too late I sorrow.
For I shall never be well again, till yesterday be to marow.
God you good Even sir. --


^ollow her sir.


And put her to it sir, and out of this humo^. I'll add the the other five hundred
to her portion, and you bring her about handsomely. O when I was a Bachelor! I
think I can do somewhat yet in my old days. But when I was a Bachelor, how
I could have handled this geere.


Never credit me sir, if you will believe me but --


I do believe you sir sufficien^ly good Master Nonsense. No more of your
impertinent speec^es. But follow her, and put her to'^ I say, to'^ directl^.
Take her into the Orchard^ ^as there she fell in love they say It may be the
place is O neno ^.


Sir, there will be no way for her recovery, but to rem^u. her lodging, and
have some good Physicians about her.


Where you please; and use whose help you please: sh^e is your own; dispose
of her treely, as I will of what is ^ course of life directly. Let me see.
She (...), past recovery. Say I should marry, I might yet have an ^ mine
own.


Yes, but of whose getting sir?


There might rise a fearful question.


Think not of it sir. A man of your years, and gravity, with the respect the
World gives you for your place and worship in the Common Wealth, together
with the riches you have p^ld up in a Mountainous estate; to cast all down
with your (...), and fortune at the foot of a stranger I Think what would
be thought of you, if such a dotage should possess you


She's falling into a tedious Lecture.


Pray how was Master Spartledirt talked on the other day for doing such a
trick? yet he was held a wise Lavvyer: You see a fair example in the late
Marriage of sir Phillip Luckless, and his Fitchow, a Match of your own
making, and ^use of your Nieces and your ovv^e Misfortune.


No more I beseech you.


There's tugging for a Mastery, and buffeting for the breeches. He barks at
her, she snaps at him; she breaks his wine Glass, he her looking Glass;
she puts away his Servants, he turns away hers; she locks her Chamber door,
he bolts his, begetting nothing but a World of strife and disorder.


I pray shut up that point, I will not marry. No directly I will not, though
the truth is my purpose: was to have cast my self and fortune wholly upon y^u,
if (...) might hove seemed well in your discretion, vmh vmh.


I pray stay a little sir, take me along with you.


Not a step further, this way by your leave. I think I have pusseld ^er
discretion.


Understand me sir. As I would not have you fall rashly upon anything; no more
would I have you fly suddenly from any purpose, without advise and sober
deliberation. If you should marry one that would be a Comfortable Nurse unto
you, as (though I say'^) you partly know --


Say you nothing, ^er I do know nothing, nor I will know nothing more of this
matter directly: For if ever I ma^ry, let me suffer a^ that the-Law provides
for Periuty; let me be cropped and slit worse then a French Curtal, or a
parliamentall delinquent for blaspheming the blood royal. No, I wi^ now bestow
my wealth in Mo^umentall good deeds, and ch^ritable uses in my life time, to
be talkd well on when I am dead.


Yes, build Alms houses and Hospitals for beggars, and provide in Bridewell,
and houses of Correction for your friends and ki^d^ed. Pray give enough to
Bedlam, you may feel some part of that benefit your self before you die, if
these sits hold you.


She would have me do no good with that I have n^ther. Let me consider. The
most I have to say directly (...) not been very well gotten. Were it not a
point of good conscience, to spend that prodigally, and save a ^ And that which
I have g^t well and honestly, hath been (...) much care and travel; were it
not then a point of equity to my self, to spend that with ease and pleasure?
Tis done directly, what I have is mine own; and I will be merry with it.
Within there ho.


What's the toy now?


Sirah. Take there twenty pieces. B stow it all presently in choicest meates,
and richest Wines for my Supper. This one nights Supper directly. What I have
is mine own: and I will be merry with it.


Cl^. Bless us!


Six brace of Partriches, and six Pheasants in a Dish. Godvvits, Knots,
Quails, and the rest of the meares ansvverable for half a score, or a dozen
persons of the best quality: whom I will think of presently.


Brain of a down right Justice! What means my Master, to leap out of
thirty shillings a Week house keeping into tvventie pounds a Supper? I may
sell my Clerks place: for sure he means to thrust himself out of the
Commission. He can be no Justice long if this humour hold. Who shall be the
Guests tro^?


I h^ue it directly. You shall go to the Ordinaries, and from thence inuit
such young G^llants as you find to be Ga^^rs. I mean of the highest cut.


Men that you do not know sir?


I directly. If they know me, or have heard of me tis sufficient: we shall be
s^ one acquainted. Bring not a man with any paid for gold Lase or Searlet about
him, I charge you, nor without a Protection in his pocket.


You run a great hazard in this sir. You may perhaps be cheated of all you
have, if I have any discreation.


And much good do it their good hearts. What I have is mine own, and I will be
merry with it directly. You have put me by one or two courses: But not all your
discretion shall beat me out of this. If you take some care in the business, and
huswife the entertainment to make it brave for my credit, you may get a Gown
or a Jewel by it. If not --


Sir i'll obey you. If he be mad I will not be foolish, bat strike in for a
^are. And for your Guests sir, let me alone. My man is b^st acquainted at the
Ordinaries.


Why now you speak.


Within there. Beauis. But in truth sir, I doubt whither any such Guests will
come, you have always been so strict and terrible in your iustitrary courses.


Let him say mine eyes are opened, and their virtue is revealed unto me. And if
any of the youngsters have Mistrisse^, let' hem bring'hem. They shall have
Mn^cke^ what I have is mine own, and I will be me^y with it. My flesh, though
not in the way of marriage, requires some satisfaction too. Where might a man in
all this plenti^ull Town, find a choice piece directly that he might make his
own? only his own? A very hard question. And custom has made it almost an
vnreasonaone, though it were in ones own Wife. In a Citizens or Tradesmans
Wife; a Man must suffer the Riuall-ship of a slovenly husband: the stink of
his horns ever under ones nose. A cast Lady, or Gentlewoman of courtly
acquaintance, to maintain her, is to ^eed a Fountain, that wastes it self
through many Spow^s: What I supply her with, will be drawn out by twenty. All
her friends must share of my prodigality. To train up an innocent country
Girl, is like hatching a Cuckoo; as soon as she is ripe, and sees the world
before her, she flies at her advantage, and leaves me dead in the nest. How
now.


Sir, here's a Delinquent brought before your worship to be examined, a
Gentlewoman sir.


Who brings her?


Ve^hem the Constable sir.


Look on his feet. Sure tis the Devil in his likeness: That old Bawd knowing
how it stood with me, has brought me one of his Succubae Art. Sure tis Vexhem?


Sure sir? The devil himself knows him not better then I know him from the
Devil. I am sure, he has been in see with me these nine years: almost ever
since he was Constable; and has brought more profit to my desk then all the
honest Officers in the counties of your Commission sir. Oh he's a rare fellow,
hee'll tickle a Whore in Coany.


You know my mind. I will in and handle this g^ere in privity.


Beauis, You understand me. Prithee go discreetly about it.


Pray let me see a little of this first.


If I put her to it or ever offer to put any Woman to it again, never credit me:
let me never be trusted, I protest and (...) Gentlewoman she has used me --


Very ill fauouredly me thinks.


Have you put herto't sir.


I cannot put her to it, nor she will not be put to it. Sing.


I wo'not go to it, nor I man not go to it,
For love, nor yet for see:
For I am a Maid, and will be a Maid,
And a good one till ^ ^aye.
Yet mine intent, I could repent, for ^ne mane company.
But you are not he Sir. If you b^, you are wondrously changed. I am sure his
faults were not written on his forehead. God pardon him.


If mine be, you can best read'hem, it is your own hand-writing.


She has done a cure on him. He spoke sense now. Alas Sir, that a fair hand
should make such blots I what hand i^ it? Secretar, Roman, Court, or Text? I
have not seen the like: 'tis all dominicall letters, red Ink. His face is
like an Almanac of all Holy ^ayes.


Sure tis Stenography, every Character a word: and here and there one for a
whole sentence.


Here's one might serve for a whole History. The life and deatho' Raw head, and
Bloody bones.


I see I am not such an Ass, I would I might never stir but I am -- Wh^r^'s
S^r Paull If I do not tell him --


What did you to prov^ke her thus?


Nothing but what I can ans^ere in a sort dee see me as well as -- never (...)
credit I had warrant under his hand


How Sir?


By word of mou^h sir.


That's about hand by your leave.


Is it so? Good S^r, his meaning was, you should put her fairly on like a
Lover, with sweet speeches, and gentle behaviour.


S^ee vnd^stands nothing that I can speak.


Nor any body else I think.


And therefore you fell to express your self in rude action. She has sorn'd
you but well: you are a sine putter to it indeed.


Mum to^t Mun toot, Muntara rara Muntara ra ra rarie, And ever I sigh and cray
alack for Phillips love I die.

^ust so did our Deyry Maid at home serve my Lady Fidledees Battler. And there I
learnt it. But when she had so done what did she than do? Bestowed a
pennyworth of Vnguentum Album, and it made him whole presently. Good Mrs.
Traynwell send to your Poth^cary for some: 'twill make him we ^ e'n^ now.


I sweet-heart: but first you shall go in the Coach with^ to the Doctors.


I know I am not weell too. But I'll ha'no Doctor but Sir Phillip.


It shall be Sir Phillip, (poor soul,) all must be Sir Phillip. ^ou shall lye
at his house.


But not wi^h him by my faith, and your leave, in it we be married. Prithee
Beauis gar him wash his face hee'll scare some bodies Barnes else. --


I'll throw him into the Dock rather then he shall succeed Jack O'Dandy. Come
sir, all shall be well again. Fear not.


I thank you sir.


Cousin, I understand you at full. And am glad that occasion hath pointed out a
probability to lead me out of this labirinth; and you to your desired end.


Follow but the way you are in Sir, and you shall arrive at your own wishes.


She has put me into it her self too.


By sequestering her self from you the first night.


For which Cousin, if I take not occasion to keep my self from her, all
nights, days, and times hereafter, may the act of our bodies beget prodigeous
monsters and nothing else.


A fearful vow! look too't. And I warrant she sues for the Divorce first.


May we prove but as certain as you are confident in out other project, for
recalling Constance to her self, and me then to her, these ^etters being
shaken off, may they pro^e g^lden ones to you, I shall not envy you.


For her take no thought sir. The interest I have in her Tu^resse, with the work
I have fashioned upon my Anvil, shall bring all to your wish. I expect to hear
from him instantly.


I'll freely resign your wish to you, and add half I have to a^gment her
estate to you. Oh I tremble ^o think on her: her presence shakes the house
like an earthquake: the outrage of Prentices is not so terrible to a Bawd or a
Cutpurse, as her voice is to me. Yet to you she may be calm as the breath of
friendship, and mild as the midnight whispers of chaste love.


Sir, I profess my affection flies eagerly at her. She takes me deeply, how
ever you have mistaken one another. Oh here comes my Anvil! Me thinks his
very countenance invites me to strike him* though I know he dos me good
service now.


Tis done sir. I warrant she's placed, successfully, dee hear?


How prithee?


I have sent her before his Worship by a Constable.


Who has he sent? before whose Worship?


You shall know all. He has sent your cast whore before sir Paul.


The Mystery, Gentlemen?


The success shall unfold it in good time to your and my benefit? doubt not,
if she but follow her instructions.


Nay, if she be not Mistress of her Art, there is no deceit among Trades men,
no bribery among Officers, no bankrupt out of Ludgate, nor Whore out of
Bridewell.


And if I have not fitted her with a Second, my friend vex h^m, the Constable,
then say there is no wit among Kna^es, no want among Schollers, no rest in the
grave, nor unquietness in Marriage, dee hear?


Of which here comes the truest testimony.


Out of my doors thou Miscreant.


Nay sister. O governor, art here.


Avoid my house, and that presently, I'll claw your skin off after your Liuory
else, and make you so much nakeder then time makes all other serving Creatures.


Do you talk of turning away my Man? You shall give me leave to turn away
your Howdee first, and then put off my, God a mercy how dost thou.


Am I ieerd? flouted to my face? Is this fit usage for a Wife?


A Wife? a Witch.


A Husband? a Hangman.


Out pusse.


Nay sir, indeed the fault is yours most extremely now. Pray sir forbear to
strain beyond a Woman's patience.


Am I scorned and reuild?


Ah, ha ha.


Made a property for laughter?


A ha, ha.


Have I no friend, no Servant to command?


Ah ha, ha,


Has my Ladyship made me so lamentable a thing, that I have lost the power of a
Mistress? You sir, run and call some friends to succour me, or I'll thratle you.


Stir but a foot sirah, or utter but a syllable, and i'll cut your thratle
pipe.


I shall be carved out betwixt them.


What will become of me? you, VVood-cock, Ninihammer.


Have you forgot my name sister? would not Widgin^ become your mouth, as well?
forget your natural brothers name?


Can you call me sister, and see me abused thus?


Foutre for sisters; I am not to meddle with an other mans Wife. I am about one
for my self. You mentioned her first to me. But I must be be holden to others
wits and means to compass her: or else --


Do as I bid you, or --


O sir shee'll rend me in pieces, tear me like a Lark.


Dost thou fear her or me. Do it or I --


Sir, there's Master Walt^r can sing it rarely.


So he shall sir, and so will all; but you must put us in. Begin.


Hey down down, c.


S^ster, Wife, and a^l, is a present nothing to this. Come rou^d Gentlemen*
Keep her but off, and let me alone.


They all take hands, and dance round. VVidgine in the midst sings this Song.
They all b^are the burden, while she^ scold^ and strives to be amongst'hem.
T^ewell holds (...) off.

He that marries a Scold, a S^old,
He has most cause to be m^rry:
For when she's ^n her fits, he may cherish his wits
By singing hey down derry.

-- Hey down down derry down down down, c.


I cry you mercy Gallants. I apprehend you would be private.


O (...) M^ster Bulfinch, you shall make one of our Counc^ll.


I appreh^n^ Gen^lemen you are merrily disposed; in good ^adnesse.


App^e^end a ^o^les head. Come into play.


I, (...) with him, and about again.


He that marries a merry Lass,
He has most cause to be ^ad;
For let her go free in her merry tricks, she
Will work his Patience mad.
But he that marries a (...) a Scold, c.
He that weds with a Roa^ing (...),
that will both ^crat^ and (...)*
Though he study all day to make her away,
will be glad to please her at night.
And he that copes with a sullen Wench,
That ^carc^ will speak at ^ll,
Her doggednesse more then a Scold or a Whore,
Will perpetr^te his Gall.

Hey down down, c.
He that's matchd with a Turtle Do^e,
That has no spleen about her,
Shall wast so much life in the love of his wife,
He were better be without her.
But he that marries a Scold, a Scold, c.

O scorn upon scorn, torment upon torment. Let me rather be buried alive then
bear this. (...) She gets loose. Slaves, Rascals, get ye all out of my
doors. By virtue of my nails, I cha^g^ ye. ^e not leave an Eye (...) a No^e
amongst ye


O Lord, O Lord.

Come bouncing after my boys.

Oh how am I wronged.

Sure I (...) apprehend this (...) as ^ight as could be possi^le the wrong
way.


Madame, I see too much of your vexation; and indeed I suffer too much with
you. As I am a Gentleman I will give you right friendly Counc^ll, if you will
hear me.


Sir I ha^e per^'d humanity in you and do love it in you. But I know not what
to do, nor whom to hear. I am fallen ^nto the pit of bondage, and will take
any course for my Redemption. Oh Master Bulfinch.


This will make to my purpose.


Sir I am wrong^ b^yond e^pression. This Gentleman is an eye witness of my
sufferings. Pray come in Sir. I will hear your counsel together with this
Gentleman's advise.


Madam^, your case is in my apprehension, most d^sperate, yet ^ comfort in
regard you seek ad^ise and counse^l. Mine is ever ready, and more fortunate
oftentimes the (...). For I do nothing but upon good reason and de^beration.


Sir I bes^ch your worship, deal not so severely with me.


Sirah I will teach you how to deal with Dealers, and not with virtuous
Gentlewomen; bring Innocence before Justice; and be able to lay nothing to her
charge.


Indeed sir, the Captain informed me of her; and said he would be here ready
to accuse her. Good sir.


Most officious Sir. What warrant had you? None. What is the Captains name?
you know not. Where's his lodging? you are ignorant. But here was your
cunning; it appears most plainly, that you thinking her to be one of the
trade, thought to make a Prey of her pu^se: which since your affrightment,
could not make her open unto you, you thought to make her Innocence smart
for it. I will make your Knavery smart for it directly. Come is the Mittimus
ready? give mee't --


Good your worship, hold your hand. For my poor family sake.


Here take him forth, and let the next Constable convey him to Nowgate.


Sir 'tis the first time that ever I offended in this kind. I pray your worship
be of a better mind towards me.


Away I say directly. As I am in my right Mind and Midlesex. I will show my
justice on thee.


Ah, ha, ha.


Does the Knave laugh? Bring him back. May a man ask the cause of your Mirth?
Vex. Sir I have laughed at the vexation of a thousand in my days. I hope I may
have lea^e once in my life to laugh at mine own.


Oh is it so? Pray hold you merry sir.


Ah, ha, ha, ha --


Now Lady, whereas you were brought before me as a Delinquent, I retain you as
my Mistress. I like her beyond measure. A pretty young thing: new brought to a
pace! Ah, h^! She has committed a little Country folly, as she priu^tely
confesses. Whats that ^ It may stand in rank with that they call virtue here;
and then she is content to li^e as privately as I please. She shall up, I
will winter and summer her before she shall see a high way of this Town.
She's for my turn directly. Mistress Holdup, is your (...) say you?


Camitha Holdup sir. A poor Gentlewoman. My father bore the office of a
Commissioner for the peace in the West country, till Misfortune wr^gth his
estate out of his hands.


Holdup! I have heard of him, and know what twas that sunk him. He lived by
the Sea side; twas trading with the Pirats. Buying their goods, and selling
them victuals;


Tis too true sir. He paid so dearly for it at last, that I have no more, but
my bare breeding, and what I bear about me to live upon.


Which is enough ^ enough directly; if you can bear your self discreetly, and
contain your self within those bounds of Fortune, in which I'll plant you.
Alas good soul, weep not; let Money and Authority be thy comfort. By which
tho^ shalt fe^le no want, nor fear no danger. But to our business. I have
already acquainted you with my Niece Constances disease, and that she is
removed out of my house for her health. I will lodge you at a trusty Tenants
house where she is unknown. You shall take her name upon you.


Which is mine own already.


And if you can but a little counterfeit her Melancholy, you may freely pass
for her; and my accesses to thee, my sweet Girl, shall crown us with f^lnes
of delight and pleasure.


Sir, you have most worthily made me your own; and all my study shall be to
obey you.


Now had I but ^ fit attendant for the person of my love*


Some simple honest body sir.


Then we were fitted. How now.


My Lady Luckless man desire to speak with you.


Stand you by unseen a while. Send him in. I do expect some Message now, in
the behalf of her unlucky Ladyships wise brother, Master Widgi^e, tou^hing my
Niece. Now stend how does my good Lady?


I left her very ill sir; for she has beaten me, and thrust me out of doors
with her own hands, without penny in my purse, or other Cloak o'my back, then
the bare Liuory, that a cast Se^uing man can not shake off, of Kna^e and
Beggar.


Thou leftest her very ill indeed. But well, thou would have me be a means
to reestablish thee in thy Lady.


In her service sir.


I speak by a figure Humfrey: for to be inward with, or indeed within a
Mistress, is to be a ser^e in the most Courtly phrase.


I sir. Those are convenient S^uants sir. We are covenant servants. They are
respected above husbands: We abased beneath slaves. They purchase place,
honours, and offices oftentimes with their Ladies ^, when we find not our
wages without hard words, and are in fear, (poor ^akes) to have our sloughes
pulled over our ear^s before the year go about. We drudge for our Ladies,
they play with their Ladies: But the best is, we labour and sweat it out for
our Ladies, when they are fain to tal^e Physic, and lye in for their Ladies.


Most intelligent Humfrey. Let us retire to the purpose. Put ^ase I have a
Mistress in store for you; to whom I may comm^nd you upon my own credit, and
undertake for your entertainment and means by my own purse. What would you
say? what would you do?


Sir, I will say over the Gent. ushers Grammar to you, and do her service by
the rules.


Well said directly. Incipe Humfride. Say your part.


In a Gentleman Usher there be eight parts. Boldness, Neatness, ^attery and
Secrecy, rewarded. Diligence, Obedience Tru^h and Hon^sty, unrewarded.


What is his B^ldnesse.


His Boldness^ is the use of his Manhood in right of his Ladi^s honour, degree,
place or privilege, at home, abr^ad, in private or public meeting, for the
hand, for the w^ll, for the what she will, ^or the what she calls.


How is it rewarded?


By obtainin^ of Suits made out of cast Gowns or P^icoates. Which if (...) be
a Taylor, as most of our middle sort of Professors are, he is thereby made a
Man in spite of the proverb, and th^ust into the high way of advancement.


Perge Humfrey His neatness now?


His neatness consists most diue^sly* sir. Not on^ly in the decent wearing of
those clothes and c^eane linen, pruning his hair^, rufsling his Boo^es, or
ordering his shooe^ ties; these are poor expressions, a ^ourney man Barbar will
do it. But to do his office neatly, his g^rb^, his pace, his postures, his
co^es on and his comes off, complement^, his visits (...)*


His Howdees.


In which a profound judgment ^ould be pussell^d.


I believe thee.


And the most absolute or artificial memory set of the rack. To be able to
relate how this Ladies tooth does; and the other La^ies toe. How this Ladies Milk
does: and how ^others Doctor liked her last water: how this Ladies husban^; and
how the other Ladies dog slept last night: how this child, that Monk^y, this
Nurse, that Parrot, and a^thousand such. Then his neatness in Chamber-wo^ke,
or about the person of his Lady, in case her Maid or her Woman be otherwise
occupied, to convey a pin into her r^ffe neatly, or add a help to her head
dressing, as well as Iohn among the Maids, Lastly, his dexterity in Carving,
and his discretion in Marshalling of meates; to give eu^ry mess the due
service, and every dish his lawful pre-eminence.


And how is this neatness rewarded Humfrey?


Doubly sir: at board and at bed* by good bits, and the love of the
Chambermaid.


Well Humfrey, because we will not make this scene too long, we will omit the
rest: only why are your last four parts, Diligence, Obedience, Truth and
Honesty unrewarded?


Sir. They are parts that spring out of virtue, and are therefore borne with
their reward in their mouths, and ought to expect no further from any service
in these times.


Most edifying Humfrey. I have a Mistress in store for thee.


I long to see her sir.


Did thou never see my Niece Constance?


No sir. But I have heard she is diseased with Melancholy; and if she should
prove mad too, like my old Lady, I were then as far to seek as ere I was.


Fear it not Hum^rey. My (...) ease thy care. Niece come forth. Humfrey. Your
C^rbe. your Lady. Singular well, good Humfrey.


Sir, I can Shoulder my Lady too: but that is when (...) takes Co^ch; and Foot
my Lady, when she alights.


Precious Humfrey, I admire thy Art.


I learnt all of a good old Ladies man in the Strand sir, that must be
nameless.


Now Humfrey, Walk your Lady to the Burse.


O most Hostlerly spoken! Under correction sir, Wait your Lady I pray sir.


Well said Humfrey. Here's something for my instruction. Now wait your Lady to
the Burse. She has some tri^les to buy there. I will find you there presently,
and conduct you to your lodging.


What shall I do with all this sir? I would indeed but buy an ounce or two of
thread; some Netting pins and Needles, an^ a Frame to flourish my work on.
Hereafter I will work in gold and silver, if you please, for your own
wearing.


As I would wish! her simplicity takes me above her beauty. Go I say. I'll
follow. Me thinks I even feel my self, thank my self for being in this
good humour. What I have is mine own, and I will be merry with it directly. --



Gentlemen, you now know the calamity I suffer under. And you have sh^w'd me
the best way to comfort: for which I thank you. I have given you my resolution
for a Divo^ce, upon condition. Before which, I must promise you nothing sir.
But I assure you in the mean time, you stand prime in my affection: for I have
in all found you a right worthy Gentleman.


Madame, I have not utterance to declare my acceptance of your love. It must
therefore be locked up in my breast, the treasure of my heart. Now for the
condition upon which your Divorce depends, we must see that performed, and then
--


Sir, I will make good more then I now may promise.


You speak nobly.


It relishe^ a little ^ do much of womanly ^lfulnesse I confess. But all my
wilfulness (that I'll promise you sir) shall die in the end of this business.


Well then, before your discreet neighbour M. Bulfi^ch here. If you have not
your will in this, I will disclaim in your favour hereafter. Sir, the
condition is (as you may remember --


I apprehend it Sir. That sir Paul Squelch his Niece be first married or
contracted, and then she consents to a divorce: And that you be assistant to
her brother here to obtain her for him.


To which I promise my ready help, only I must not appear in the business.


I will only appear in it, for I will not be seen in the ^atter.


As how sir?


As thus sir. I will keep your counsel: not only in holding my peace to all
the world, but in saying nothing to sir Paul himself. Dee apprehend me sir?


And thank you sir. Now every man to his part M. Widgine, You have both your
sisters and my best directions already, which I doubt not but with the help of
your Governor you will make good use of. Madame will you in, and but wish well
to our proceedings, and trouble your thoughts no further.


Sir, what help he has of me, is for the Ladies and his own sake, not yours
dee hear.


No blustering now good Governor: Prithee restrain thy fury. Thou can never
hear nor speak to that Gent. with any patience; and yet he is on our side now.
Prithee let's loose no time. I never ^ong'd more for my mothers coming from a
Christening, then to be at this Northern Lass. --


Wanton, you have begun propitiously: Proceed but confidently, and I'll
warrant thee a wealthy husband by it, or a composition that may prove the
better purchase.


Sir, be you and thi^ Lady but as confident of my fidelity, and trust me in
this action, and if I break not the toils your Kinsm^n is in, and make you
Mistress of my Interest in sir Paul, let all the good you intended me, be a
lockram Co^fe, a blew Gown, a Wheel and a clean Whip. You are sure the Lady
will yield to Divorce, if Constance whom I now perso^ate be first married or
contracted.


Right. She does but hold off till then, and that wilfully; because she
fears it is for Constances love only, that her Husband desires the Divorce.


And you are sure that Constance is safe from her discovery.


I upon the hazard of my discretion.


To any then that knows her not very well, If I appear not the same Constance
-- you have given me her Character right?


The best that we can possibly.


Nay, I have a fu^ther help then, you both imagine yet.


May we know it.


It shall be no secret. My Servant Howdee, whom you and sir Paul, suppose his
Lady turned away, was by her Ladyship taught only to feign it; and cunningly
instructed to work himself into the se^uice of Constance, to further her
brothers proceedings. And since fortune has put him upon me, whom he takes to
be the same Mistress, if I make not ^pt use of it --


Tis most fairly omenous. Come Lady. He cannot. but be at hand; and our stay
may do hurt, (You remember the Doctors lodging I told you of, and sir Phillips
appointment to m^et you there an hour hence?


All sir. I would use no other. She is there already. Ex.


No more then; away. Fare you well sweet Creature.


If my deceit now, should be disco^ered, before my work be ended, my Brain
tricks might perhaps, in stead of all these fair hopes, Purchase me the Lash.
fore Ve^us. my flesh (...) trembles to think on it. It brings likewise into my
consideration, the baseness of my condition; how much unpitied the punishment
of a Whore is, an^ how suddenly it overtakes her? My joint Con^piratours are
in no danger. I only run the hazard, though they are as deep in fact as my
s^lfe. Well. If I escape this pull, and draw any fortune by it, i'll change my
function sure. A common Whore? I'll be a Nun rather. They come most fitly, and I
must into my fit -- Withdraws behind the ^anging.


Indeed sir, it was my Ladies plot, but you must take no notice of it.


I'll thank her with all my heart, and she shall never know on it.


But if sir Paul, my now Master should discover my deceit, how shall I escape
his vengeance.


What dost thou think of me, weak fellow? Am not I a Commander, ha?


I, in the war Captain: but he is a Justice of Peace, and a Commander of
Captains in Midlesex, sends two or three drunken Ones to Newgate at a clap
sometimes.


Fear no discovery Humfrey. Let me but see her, and I'll warrant thee.


Shee'll see none but sir Phillip, you must be no body else. Remember that: you
must know no other name you have. Now if you can sir Phillip it handsomely
there's it.


I warrant thee, and my Governor shall sir Phillip me at every word; and if I
do ^ot sir Phillip her, better then ever she was Phillips in her life, then
say I am no Legitimate Widgine.


^is pa^ your ^rength or reach either by forty I believe. I doubt your middle
finger is too short Master Widgin^.


Well, I must venture it. Here she comes. Has a Baby.


What's she doing. Ods me ^ making a Baby I think Are you good at that
in faith? I'll be at that sport with you, it shall cost me a fall else.


Oh she has a hundred such ^ pish toys. E^ne now she was great with Child
for^ooth as she could go. And was persuaded she had a Child as big as I in
her belly. I wondered at it, and she told me she had had a hundred there as
big in her days.


What, what?


I but she knew not what she said. By and by, I must be a Man-Midwife
forsooth and deliver her: for twas past all Woman's skill? Now she thinks she
is brought a bed, and nurses the Child her self.


And who's the father?


O none but sir Phillip.


^le father it as well as he. I^t a Boy or a Girl trow* Would she would make
a Christening Banquet while we are here. Hark she sings.

Peace wayward Barn; O cease thy mo^e:
Thy far more wayward Daddy's gone:
And never will recalled be
By cries of either thee, or (...):
For should we cry,
until we dye,
VVee could not sc^nt his cr^elty.
Ballow, Ballow, c.
H^e ne^ds might in himself forese^,
What (...) ^ccessiuely might be;
And ^ould he then, (though me forego)
His Infant leave, ere he d^d know,
How like the Dad
would be the Lad,
In time, to make fon^ Maidens glad^
Ballow, ballew, c.

How is this pretty Mrs. Con^ance, that you complain of your Love before he be
lost?


Who be you I pray?


Pray thee tell her Governor. I haven't the heart to lye now.


It is sir Phillip Lady, come to do you right. De^ hear?


Yes sir, I hear you vary weell; and could ^ene wish (...) my heart I could
believe you.


Speak your self sir.


You may Mistress Constance; for as I am an honest man, I never meant to wrong
you.


I do bele^ue you sir. But pray prote^ no more by that name till you make your
self such by marrying me. You have getten a barn by me, I is sure o'that.


I come for the same purpose Sweet-heart. I'll both father and keep thy Child,
and make thee an honest Woman. Give me your hand before this Gentleman, and
your Servant here; and say but the word; ^le get a Licence presently, fetch you
away, and dispatch you to night.


Marry me, marry me, quoth the bo^y Lass: and when will you begin.


As for thy w^dding Lass wee'^ do well enough, in spite ^' the best of thy
Kin.


I can but thank you, obey you, and pray for you sir.


Governor; wilt thou believe me? It ee^e pities my heart, to wrong so sweet a
piece of simplicity. But Fortune has dressed her for me to seed on; and I'll fall
to.


Or the Devil to choke you. Well boisterous Master Tridewell, your Ropes end
hath driven me into a business, here, deserves a whole Rope. But I hope that
Dostiny attends not me, though this Marriage be his: And since it is his Fate,
fair befall it him, I am discharged


Come Governor, we are agreed^ lets go that we may hye us again, and
dispatch.


Nay sir. You shall not say, you married me for nought: you shall hear me sing
before you go.


What an Owsell tis ^ she means he shall marry her for a Song. B^rlady a
competent Modern portion.


As I was gathring Aprill's flowers,
He^ straight let fall one of his showers;
Which dra^e me to an arbour.
Twere better I my Lap had filled.
Although the wet my clothes had spilled,
Then to ha'found that harbour
For there a subtle Serpent was,
Close lying, lurking in the Grass.
And there while harmless thinking I,
Still watching when the (...) would dye,
Lay listening to a Bird,
That singing ^ate upon the Bo^er,
Her notes unto the falling shower,
the Snake beneath me stirred;
And with his sting gave me a clap,
that swole my belly not my lap.

By my troth tis pretty.


And by my conscience tis true, twere made (...) Durham, on a Lass of my
bigness.


And in thy clothes I believe.


But will you be began now, than all my joy leaves me.


Sweet soul, thou shalt have thy joy again. I will joy thee, enjoy thee, and
over joy thee. Governor let us fly about this business. I will not sleep,
before I have got a License, stolen her away, wedded her, bedded her, and put
her in her wits again.


Are you able to do that think you?


I'll warrant thee: for all Maids are mad till they be^ married.


What say you to that Lady. P^x on you, I run^ sweet hazard to advance your
fortune, do I not?


Remember your Covenant with Master Tridewell Captain. And when the work is
done, here's my hand, you shall partake of what I get by it. And hark you.


She may perhaps, when she comes to her self, and finds me to be no sir
Phillip, be a little startled. But I mean the f^st night to put so much of my
own love into her, as shall work out his I doubt not, or any his that came
there before me.


O Gentlemen! my Masters coming, alls spoiled if he take you. Part quickly.


Is mine Uncle combed? and mun we part than?


Kiss, and part; kiss and part.


Sweet heart, not a word of me till I come to fetch you off with honour.


All be^isons be with you. Indeed you be the goodliest man, that ere made
Maiden fain.


Poor heart she dotes. I do not know how much I am in debt to my conscience,
till I have made her amends. --


This may breed good blood. If I come but as well off of my old Uncle, as ^like
to come on with my young Cose^, here will be a match unlooked for; a match
without treaty; a m^tch vntalk'd or unheard of. He is coming before I have
shifted my ^ace. Me thinks I hear the rusting of ^is bristles hither. ^et my
lips must stand the assault; pray love the Porcupine, leave none of his quills
in them.


Where's my Girl? My honey sweet Girl? Kiss m^e; (...) I say directly: I'll
s^cure thee. As I am a Man of Authority, and that of Midlesex, I 'le secure
thee. Ha my Las^, these lips have the true Elixi^ in them indeed, to restore
youth and strength; past all Medeas charms, or what the Poets would have
fai^'d. How now ^ Love? I hope my Nieces habit has not wrought her di^ease into
thee.


No: now I see you sir, I am well: perfectly well: yet pardon me sir. Your
absence cannot but breed me fear, when I have leisure to think on my unworthy
condition, and the danger I undergo in it.


'Twas a thousand pities that this Wench was seduced. She might have ma^e a
Wi^e for a good Esquire. She would serve a Tradesman yet, most vnblemishably.
And when I have done with her, doing that f^r her, as I mean to do. She may
perhaps match with a younger brother, purchase him a place, advance his
fortune, to be able in the end to repay h^r with a Ladyship. 'Tis not
without a president; and I will help her to follow the example directly. For
what I have is mine own, and I will be merry with it. Ha my bird, my chick
^ Kiss me. Kiss me up. So. Kiss me up I say. So again. Thou hast don't
directly. Maintain it now, with a cordial ^isse. So, so, so* Good. Very
good; and while it is so, a word with you in private. Come my bird, mh mh mh.


Sit, there's a woman below. --


Sir, what have I to do with any woman below: Do you with your woman
below, I am very well here.


Is the old man mad trow. Sir, she will have to do with you above, if you
speak not with her below. I had much a do to keep her down stayres, her case
is so lamentable she says. I never saw a woman so importunate in my life sir.
You must down sir.


I am down already. All's nought. What limb of the devil is' ^? Dost thou
know her?


She says she is wife to a Constable s^r, that you lately committed; and if
your Worcester. dos not release him presently, that he's undone, and she's undone,
all their children ar^ undone, that unborn in her belly is undone, and I know
not how many more are undone for ever.


Hell take her. How could she know that I was here?


She spied you in the Street sir, and followed you, and follow you she
would, had you gone into the Privy Chamber she swears; her cause enforces her
she says. And she is so great with child too, that no man dares give her a
thrust to keep her back. I hear her blow up stayres.


Keep her down, I'll follow thee --


Good sir be pitiful for the woman's sake, and release him. Perhaps her
reckoning is out, and she has no body to call the Midwife.


I must home to my Clerk then: for I cannot write here; nor do any good
besides I am so vexed. But I will return to th^e in the evening, Duck: And
since I am so apt to be spied, ^ will come disguised.


Indeed I'll put out the Candle when you are here then, for I shall never
endure to ^ee other shape of Man. O these trunk ho^ are a comely wearing.


I will be ^i^guis'd directly. I will run through all the shapes of Iupi^er,
befor^ I will again be prevented. Farewell. O my ^weet! At seven in the
eu^ning expect me. --


Sweet say thou? Thou art not I'll swear. I am glad he was prevented. I
should never held out a course with him, that cannot endure a breathing: a
Cheese-shop on fire cannot out-stinke him.


Your Vncle's gone Mistress, and says he will be here at seven a clock ag^ine.
But shall I tell you a five thing Mistress?


Yea marry Humfrey, what may that be and tis not of Sir Phillip


But it is of him Mistress. He says he will bring a Coach for your at six a
clock to fetch you away: will you go with him?


By my saule that will I an't be all the world over.


How shall you Uncle find you at 7 then?


We'll leave him at six and seauens. I mean betwixt both. 'Twill be trim
trust me. And hear thou me Humfrey. Thou must bid Mistress Traynwell (...) to
me a little before six ^ for a very good reason.


Hmh --


Nay, it shall hinder nothing. We 'le away the faster.


I think she be in her wits already. If not, I must humour her, though I be
put to the trouble to shift her away again. She shall mar no sport that's
certain.


Come with me Humfrey, thou shalt go even now, and tell her; and I'll be
packing up the while. --


This Clinches. I shall win my Ladies heart for ever. To manage two such
bus^n^sses more, were enough to raise me Agent for a State.


To discourse a tedious Lecture unto you, Lady, in speaking philosophically of
the disease of Melancholy, were to show more learning then discretion. There
are large volumes of it in Print, to very slender purpose.


Sir, I desire rather your discretion, then the gloss of Learning. I am rather
governed by the wholesome effects of the one, then the smooth directions o^ the
other.


To the point then Lady. I see no reason why I should vex and torment this
delicate and tender body, with Physic. Her disease is Melancholy; The cause
of this disease I have found apparently in the two hours probation since you
left her with me, to be Love, which she hath so greedily taken in, that it
hath overwhelmed her spirits, and turned the faculties of all her senses into a
rude confusion, sending forth the use of them extravagantly.


Sir, I must not only approve, but applaud your skill. Tis love indeed, And ^
am right glad that your opinion iumps with my own knowledge: for now I doubt
not of your speedy address to the cure.


'Tis done in three words. The Party that she loves, must be the Doctor, the
Medicine, and the Cure.


Sir, the Gentl^man is below, he came with me, only I would not bring him to
her fight without your approbation, ^caring it might do hurt.


Pray call him up, on peril of my judgement. Constance. I have good news for
you.


Tis a lo^g whayle ^ine I hear^ any.


The Gentleman, whom you love best, shall be your bedfellow.


He is wed already Sir. Another wife would gar him be put down at gallows: an
^ I would not ^ee sh^e for all the wordly good that ere I ^aw with ^. And of
my consci^nce I^e be none of his ^


She pra^tl^s very prettily me thinks. (...) already? Sure Cupid shot you with
a f^or^ed arrow out o^ his Crosbow. But what will you say Lady, i^ by my Ar^ I
(...) this Gent^eman unmarried again, and a Suitor unto y^u pr^sen^ly?


Marry* shall I tell you what I'll say sir? Th^t d^serues hanging worse then
the other ^at^er, you would poison his wife by your Art, wod ye? and make your
gown th^re the Hangmans ^ee the second time? It looks as it had been once
his already; and you like such a Doctor I mu^ tell ye, by your leave. God
bl^sse me fro thee. Mrs. Traynwell where are you?


Out of her wits say they? I fear she is (...) then all of us, that have to
do with her. She knows my gown b^tter th^n I do: for I have had but two
ho^res acquaintance with it. 'Tis ^o longer since I hired it of the hangmans
Mercha^t a Broker. It might have been Lopus gown for ought I know.


They are fallen out I think.


O Mrs. Traynwell, for dear Charities ^ake have me soone^ (...) this Man: for
I'll ne'er take any thing at him. He talks of poisoning.


By my faith you wrong me: Nor of any poisoning purpo^e. I was but putting a
case of --


Pray put up your Pipes sir. I like not your Music: troth nor his countenance
nather. Sweet Mrs. Traynwell gar me be shut on him. Now all the joys of
Immortality light of ye sir.


Is that the Gent?


Yes sir. Pray observe. But how fell you out sir?


I must first ^alute him by your favo^r. Sir, all the accumul^tions of honour
shower down upon you.


S^r. May you r^pe the whole harvest of your fruitful wishes.


Dear sir, keep^ further fro him.


But one word sweet Lady; and you shall have the whole benefit of h^s
presence to your s^lfe.


^e not afraid sweet-heart, he dares not hurt sir Phillip.


In ^roth he breathes to near him.


(...) wa^rant y^u. What has he done to m^ue her thus? I know not what thi^
(...) Doctor is. But M. Tridewell put me upon him; and his ^pproved honesty has
and must kill all m^s ^rust in me.


Your C^ach is ready at door you say.


Ye^ my most d^licate Doctor.


As you find her then after a few words away with her. I have (...) my part
sir. In le hold the discreet ^ouernesse in talk in the nex^ room.


But one word call ye this?


I have done sweet soul. Lady I have instructed the gent. shall we l^au^ th^m?


One word, by your leave first M. Doctor, and I'll attend you. Sir not alone
my Discretion, but my Reputation lies at stake: and I make no doubt of your
nobleness upon your Kin^mans word, my Complotter in this business. Therefore
while I hold argument with the Doctor (who shall by no means perceive our
deceit) slip you away with her in your Coach, where M. Tridewell* hath
appointed, till the Eueni^g; and let me alone to scuffle with the old man the
while* And then I doubt not all our troublesome labours shall have a peaceable
end. I'll send old Mad-cap to your Lady in a Thunder-clap. But nobl^ sir, your
reputation --


My life and honour be her Guard, and your security.


No more sir. I'll lay no conjurations upon so noble a spirit. Come Master
Doctor --


But do you love me Constance?


O right weell sir.


And will you be my Woman?


I is sure, i'll nener be mine own els^.


But you will not go away with m^c now, if I request you?


Any whither but to bed before we be married.


What from your Governess, your Uncle, and all the World?


And thank you too sir. And ta' me but fro this ill looking Doctor; for I
shall be weell with you sir.


Come, since you trust me so well, we two will not part till we are lawfully
made one.


Heaven bliss the hour you speak in, and all Saints be with^sses.


Where's this Doctor? where's this melancholy Gentlewoman?


O me is he come?


Is this her Uncle?


E^en he sir. Where's my charge; Mistress Constance?


S^ue ye sir I'll go find her --


Where's my charge? I'll go find her! What's the meaning?


She was here but now sir, while the Music plaid. And we withdrew our
sclues, thinking she might sleep sir.


There went a Coach away as I came in. Whole was it?


A C^ach sir? Alas I am afraid; my flesh trembles.


At what in your great Master the Devils name? Where's my Ncece?


Sir here came in one Master Widgine, the Lady Luckt^s brother --


Well.


As acquainted with the Doctor sir --


Well, well.


And he saw her sir. But seemed to depart, when we withdrew our selves to
talk about the cure.


Very very well. While you were wisely talking about the cure, a Widgine flies
away with the Patient. Where's this Doctor? Doctor I say. Doctor! He's run
away too, my life on it. A mere plot, a Conspiracy; tis so directly, below
there. I can not see how it can be otherwise.


Exceeding well* How came your Discretion acquainted with this Doctor?


Sir he was reported to me by very good Judgements, to be a rare Practitioner.


A most rare fellow, and does admirable tricks, by slight of heals. But I may
perhaps out-run them --


My purge works as I wished. I am amused though at the flight of the Doctor.
But I have too many businesses to entertain new thoughts.


May I belceue it, Good sir? may I be so happy, that my brother has her?


As I have truth in me, I am most credibly told so. Mary the worst is, her
Uncle is so mad at their escape, th^t he will never give consent to the match,
whereby her portion will be less.


Hang him Clod. My will shall be a portion su^ficient to my brother, I care
not, though he give her not a penny, so What has the Wench.


Make you no more doubt of that, then I do Madame, who have upon the report
of it already, prepared the Learned of the Civil Law, those that you nominated
of your good acquaintance, and are forward to do you the best office, who have
appointed to meet before the Iu^ge of the Archdeaacous Court p^esent^y, whither
I have promised to bring, and will attend you.


But the other side must be summoned by process.


Sir Phill^p hath wa^ning already M^dame; and without needless process will
be there before you, and wait your co^ming. So that my self and his serua^t,
who have never been both absent from one of your companies, since your
Marriage, justly deposi^g you ne^er did the reallest Rite of Marriage, the bed
o^lice, Madame; y^u both consenting, and d^siring a Divorce, It i^ inst^ncly
g^au^ed, with^ut any proceedings i^ Law. So that all will be euded in three
whispers. Ods pity, look who here is.


O are you here my Lady Lu kiesse?


Twas time you found me sir; you might ha'mistaken my name else. F^r withi^
this heure, ^ m^ght have retu^'d the ancient title of your friend, and Awdery
F^tchow.


Slow wov, where is my N^?


Where are your wits si^? you come upon me inde^d ^ What Niece? What's the
matter?


My Niece Censtance, that your brother Widgi^e stole from the Doctor, and is
stowne away witha^. But he must not think to escape so? I may take him, and
his Duck too, in my D^coy, before they be coupled, as sure as your Ladyship or
your Fitchow ship, and they think your selves.


Sure the old Gentleman is fallen mad. What hath happened?


The plot smells of your Ladyships policy; you^ Ladyships Lilly white fist is
t^ule in t^e business. But I will have a b^utat sisticuffs in Law with your
Ladyship: your great acquain^nce, and alliance in the Whatshical. Court No^b^
(...) ^our^ (...) there must not cary it, my great Lady. Directly it must not.


Your ^re an uncivil greasy Co^panion, to upbraid and revile me thus in my
own house.


O good Madarne, hurt not your self with anger better laugh it out.


He makes me forget my self by his example. Sir you are a Commissioner for
the Peace I take it. Does it become a M^n of you^ place and gravity, to fly out
in these extremes? You spend too much breath in these loud notes, very
hurtful to the Lungs, If you will fall into a lower Key, and speak peaceably,
I will answer you.


I pray you, Forsooth, or sweet Madame, or what you please; Where is my Niece?


Will you believe me sir? you may: For tis Truth, as I have any; And before
this worthy Gentleman; I never saw your Niece in my life; only I have heard
she is a pretty Gen^evvoman: likely to make a good Match, for which I told my
brother of her, and would have treated with you for her, cou^d I have spoken
with you as I wished by two or three Mess^ges. But whither my brother has
got her, or wh^r he, or she is of my own knowledge, I cannot say directly.


She mocks me to my face all this while. Well good-Wise, Mi^ris, Madame --


Well my Lord Innekee pers second Son: Does your Pro^ender prick you?


Prick Madame: I tell thee thou Thing, made up of Chippings, brok^n Bear,
Candle-ends, and sisting of Sea cole.


O^t you Curry-combe.


Forbear sweet Lady, let him be mad by himself.


I will be so revenged --


How pray?


He had been better to have killed a Man, ravished ^ Virgiue; nay, done the
most dangerous contempt that law ^ld devise to punish, then if I take him to
suffer under my revenge.


Ha, ha, ha.


I'll m^ster up my Constables, and send out a privy search immedia^ly. --


What think you of your Brothers success, now Madame?


Much the better, that it vexes him so: Sciruy foul unouth'd fellow.


Look you now Madame. See who here come^.


Sister fall down, and adore me for my great at chieuement. H^msrey kneel
down to her that she may dub thee for thy sernice. Never did the best nosed
Dogs, that ever were coached for their goodness, hunt more truly, take more
bravely, and cary away more cleanly, then we have done this dainty piece of
flesh here. Sister kiss her, and be better acquainted: she is mine own
flesh, I'll uphold it.


She is a Holdup her self, if I mistake not her name.


Being your flesh brother, her nearest affinity of blood runs in my veins.
Therefore with a sisters love I embrace you, and bid you welcome.


Mine Uncle will by right wood I fear me. But I'll near greet for that sir,
while I have your love.


I know it is she by her tongue, though I never heard her before. Nor ever
fear sweet sister, we shall be all friends shortly.


I would be glad and twere so.


Sister come hither. Now hear and admire my wit; as well as my Fortune.
Humfrey come and take thy share of my sisters wonder.


I hope I performed my duty.


Which we must not see unrewarded sister.


No: I mean to give him my Maid, and a hundred Marks with her, besides all
she has about her.


I am made for ever. I thank your languishing Ladyship.


Well said Howdee: for my Ladyship is even at the last gasp. I am to be
Diuorc'd within this half hour. But your proceedings brother? How did she
receive you at first?


O at first, she was the prettiliest mad that ere you saw. You your self can
not devise to be so mad, as she was.


I thank you sir.


And all for sir Phillip, she would love none but sir Phillip, speak to none
but sir Phillip. I told her I was sir Phillip, (ah God a mercy Humfrey: that
was thy invention.) Then the little Vip^r hang upon me, not to be shook off,
till I promised her Marriage, and to father a Child, which, in her distraction,
she conceited she had by me. I promised her any thing; so took her into an
inner too me, to make all sure, as well within as without; and I so phillipt
her --


Enough brother, no more. I understand you.


But I must have more, and shall never have enough on it. It passes your
understanding and mine too, the delight of it. Oh what a delight she gave me.
And how light I am after (...) Heigh. My pretty sweet Rascal.


Enough I say.


You do not love to hear on it, because you lack it. But you shall hear the
Miracle it wrought sister. The loss of her Maiden head recovered her wits. I
made her right and straight in an instant. And now she loves me in my own
person; knows me for a Widgine, and will not give her Wat for the best sir
Philip of them all. And longs for nothing but the Priest and Bed time. Ha my
sweeter and sweeter I My Gouernour's gone sor a Licence.


So, ha you done now?


I'll undertake --


Yet again.


That Humfrey, and I with the tricks and trinkets, we have about us will cure
all the mad Maids of her standing in the Tovvne. And do not think, but much
may be gotten to profess it.


You have made a large relation Master Widgine, and a pleasant, I doubt not.


Oh I could live and dye in this discourse sir.


Lady do you think of the time?


I will instantly along with you. Hewdee come you with me. Brother, the
search hath past this house already. You any go in with your Svveet-heart,
and stay here safely. Go in, and keep close, till I send to meet me at
Supper.


In and in sister, and be close enough, sear not --


Now sir when you please.


I am your seruent Lady --


Mistri^, I will go no further in this business, then you have lim^ed me in
your directions: 'twill be revenge enough for my disgrace to make him see his
error.


Therefore be discreet and secret. The disguise he is in I have told you. The
place is this. At the door you shall leave me. The hour 7 a clock.


Mistress, I will not watch more truly at Midnight, then I will pray for you for
this Lisc^uery. I will instantly call my priuy-search, guard, and catch a bird,
of Justice in the lime-twigs of his own Warrant. --


I tit not speak with Sir Paule then, it seems, to know the reason why I am
subdoodled thus, In I protest and vow a kind of ^ooles Paradise.


Good sir bear your injury with a Mans patience. Sir Paule will not be long
absent. And till he comes, my Mistress entreats you (for your own good) to
take his part upon you, in giving entertainment to divers of his friends, who
are invited hither to a Feast to night.


H^ you any Whitpots?


Much better meat sir. But here's the strangeness of it; and the only
occasi^n that r^quires you aid in the entertainment. This great Supper or ^ast
(as I may properly call it) was appointed by Sir Poule himself, the money to
buy the Provision^d live^'d by his own hand, to his own Servant; the Guests of
h^s own election; vet he, out of the multiplicity of cross effaires, that
have happened this day, hath quite forgot that there was any such preparation,
or any such m^eting inten^ed, as appears evidently by his absence. But ^y
Mistress has got all the meat privately made ready at the next house, on
purpose that h^sh u^d see nothing --


To try is he would forget it or no?


Right sir. I have bidden all the Guests: and expect them immediately.


But what must I say to them?


Only sal^te them, bid them welcome; Tell'hem Sir Paule was hastily called
forth on his Majesties affaites; Entreat their patience till his return,
which you know will be every sudden although you know not where he is; and
so forth, as occasion serves.


Your Master abroad and not within say you?


Yes. But good sir stay his coming, I pray you, for his good.


I partly apprehend you at full. Mistress Traynwell appointed me to come too
with all possible speed. M. Vonsens^ you are well apprehended.


Only salute them, bid' hem welcome. Tell'hem Sir Paule was hast^ly called
forth on his Majesties affairs. Entreat their patience till his return, which
you know will be very sudden, although you know not where he is. And so
forth as occasion serves.


Love has made you a Courtier. M Nonsense


No I protest and vow. I do but speak as they say. --


What have you said Sir?


What you said I have an ill verbatim else.


I said but the meaning of what you should say, and put it in your own words.


No sir. I will take your own words for this matter.


I am beholden to you.


I am glad Fortune has sent one man of Civil government before the Roarers
come. Here comes some of them already. I'll down and look to the rest of the
house.


Save you sir. Are you the Worshipful of the house?


I apprehend you sir. --


How sir? --


Mistake me not I beseech you, I apprehend you to be some great stranger here:
because you know the place better then the Master of it.


You do not mock me sir?


Sir, This is one of the Guests?


Only salute them. Bid them welcome --


What's this?


Tell them Sir Paule was hastily called forth on his Majesties affairs --


Is this a Parrot or a Popingay?


Entreat their patience till his return, which you know.


Do you know what you say sir?


Will be very sudden, although you know not where he is --


If I did I would not seek him here sir.


And so forth as occasion serves.


This is some inchaun^ed P^ace, and the people are charmed. I have mistaken the
house sure.


Where's this hospitable Knight that invites Strangers. I mean mere
Strangers, that he knows not. Show me the Lad of bounty. I hunger not for his
Sapper as I do to salute him.


He will prove the greatest stranger here himself I think, for he is not at
home sir. I am a Guest as you are, and would be as glad to see him.


He dos not mean to jear us dos he?


I bese^ch you mistake not so his purpose sir: which is fair welcome, and
good cheer to you all. Therefore Gentlemen and ladies, will it please you to
entertain one another a while. Paule will be here himself.


This fellow speaks.


As I am a Justice of Peace I cannot apprekend, and yet me thinks I do. What
sort of people these Gentlemen may be. See: more I Is sir Paule turned
swaggerer? Or is his house abused by servants? I will not leave it, until
they go out before me like a layle delivery. They lo^ke like men betwixt a
Reprive and Pardon. Friend: Are these sir Paules elected friends?


His protected friends sir.


Protected?


I sir. There is a fraternity of them. The brothers of the Protect. There's not
a man of them, but has all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Sergeants at Mace,
Marshalls men, Constables, and other his Majesties Officers, in a Combcase in
his pocket. They are a Generation that never eat but in Parliament time, and
now every table is full of them.


I should wonder what they did here else. See. A roaring Doctor too, broke out
of the Kings Bench.


By your leave Gallants. I perceive your Company is not yet full.


Are you of the invited sir?


It is not to be doubted sir. Yet a Voluntary. But there are some without that
are more then invited, yet come against their wills.


How mean you M. Doctor?


Brought sir by a Constable and Officers, to be examined. Where's the jolly
Justice?


What are they can ye tell sir?


A Gentlewoman, and a Spaniard.


A Spaniard, Ha!


I, a Spaniard, Ha: if you will have it so:


If we had but a Justice among us to Examine them, it might pass the time well
till sir Paule came.


Sir, here is a Justice, and for the same purpose too for ought we know, that
shall not resuse to do it, and in sir Paules Gown and Cap too.


This is a witty fellow.


Sir, you cannot do a more acceptable office for your friend, then to execute
his place in his absence. Your anthority makes you capable of it; and I do the
rather persuade it, because the Gentlemen whom you wisely suspect for loose
person^, may see some example of Justice; which may prevent some present evil
in their stay here.


I apprehend you friend. Give me the Gown and Chair, and let the Delinquents
approach. Vmh, vmh.


Tis a Spaniard indeed.


An English Spaniard sir, And therefore the verier knave: as will be proved I
doubt not, to his shame, and my renown in the Common (...). By your Worships
leave.


What news b^ing ^ou M. Constable?


Spanish news sir. Wi^t please your Worship to examine the virtue of my
Warrant, and then these Persons aecordingly?


Very good! I am brought before my self to be examined, and before a fine
rabble too! how the devil broke this unknown N^tion into my house, or do not I
mistake it? My foolery has led me into a fine predicament. I will not yet
disclose my self: but look a little surther towards the event.


Are you a Spa^iard sir?


Such a one as you see Signior.


See Signior. He speaks nothing but Spanish. The question will be how we
shall understand this Examinant.


Hey day!


I do see Signior I thank the light, that you are a goodly man of outward
parts, and ezcept it were the black Knight himself, or him with the Fistula,
the proprest man I have seen of your Nation. They are a People of very spare
diet, I have ^eard, and therefore seldom fat. Su^e you you have had most of
your br^eding in this C^untrey, the diet whereof you like better then your own,
which makes you linger here, after all you Country men, upon ^ome vn^ouch plot.
And I shall wonder therefore how you can speak no English. Can you speak no
English at all sir? Answer me I pray.


Not an English word not I s^. Alas I have not been sieve ^ayes in the
K^ngio^e.


This is exc^llent!


I, peace Y u'll mar all if you laugh.


(...), what shall we do then? Gentlemen, have any of you any Spanish, to
help me to understand this strange S^a^get?


Not a Riall sir not I.


Nor a Rialls worth amongst us of any language but sh^er^ English.


What S^iere of our Nation is next to Spain? Perhaps he may vnd^rst^nd that
Shi^r, English.


Devonshire or Corn^all sir.


Never credit me, but I will spout some Cornish at him. Peden bras vidne whee
his cregas.


Am I transform' ^ utterly? Is my Language altered with my apparel, or are you
all mad? what unspeakable misery is this.


I see we shall never understand, nor do good on him, till he be instructed
in the English tongue.


And please your worship, the best University for this purpose will be
Bridewell. I am acquainted with the best Tutors there, Master Cleanewhip,
Master Dri^lash, and diverse others.


You o^licious Rascal, are you mad?


No such matter sir. But in my right mind, and Midlesex fear it not.


It must be so. His instruction will cost little there, if he be not too old to
learn. Therefore set him by, and let me fall upon the Gentlewoman.


Oh, he's rarely vexed.


Now Gentlewoman, will it please you to be vnmasqu'd.


Yes sir look you, I dare show my face.


Mistress Trainowell, as I apprehend.


Mistress Trainewell.


Trainewell!


Even she Gentlemen, as I will more circumstantially reveal unto you
presently, after a word or two with my fellow prisoner, for which I crave your
favour.


With all my heart, so you can speak Spanish and make him understand you.


You see I am not the Woman you took me for: but one ordained for your greater
good. If you will give me my present demand. I will turn all your disgrace
into laughter; make you of worthier esteem now at the instant, then ever you
were, by the general approbation of these, and all that know you beside. Your
Niece to shall be restored to your own liking, and all shall be as well as you
can wish. Otherwise, if you have a mind to be everlastingly shamed, by being
perpetually laughed at, take your own course, I'll take mine.


I am astonished. What is your Demand?


Whereas your purpose was to make a Whore. Make me your honest Wife; no more.
Be sudden in your resolve, all will be nought else.


I am in a mischievous straight then. Redime to captum. Thy wit deserves my
love. I'll do it; here's my hand and faith, I'll do it. Tho^ art mine, and I am
thine directly.


Then ^earke you sir.


Sir what will you say, if this Gentlewoman convert the Spaniard, turn him
true English subject, and present him to you with the oaths of Alegiance,
S^premacie in his mouth presently?


I will say, she ^e^erues ^or ever hereafter to hold her peace.


Now bear^ up sir. Look confidently, and say, you put on your Disguise
purp^sely to entertain disguised Guests. Come avaunt with your Picca de goat,
and begin with the Justice here.


Thou hast made me a M^n for ever, and I will make thee a Woman directly.
Gallants save you. See here the Metamor. phosis, that means to metamorphose
you all. Alas I know you for all your Disguises, and thought to entertain you
in your k^nd.


Sir P^ul Squelch!


I^st out of you, my Usurper, and most Vpstartical Justice, whose o^lice is
your trade, and Clerk your Prentice, I will draw a man of little, or no
Moment: yet my friend, and Master Bulfinch, out of the Chair of Justice. ^his
my prognosticate the p^t^ing of my self, or many others out of Commission
within these few years; though I am no Prophet. Do I speak English now? Do
I know you now, or you me?


Question (...), we should know one another sir Paul: or else o^e of us two
were both very ignorant.


To proceed in my Metamorphosis. I will change you most confused Roarer, into
an accomplished Knight. And bid you welcome, noble sir Phillip Luckless.


I like the change well, and thank you sir.


Next sir of you Roarer, or Iieter, or whatsoever you are, I will make a
complete Gentleman, most answerable to you name Master Tridewell.


Very well sir.


But out of you Master Doctor, I will pick a certain Knane. W^ere is my Niece
slrah?


Which of your N^eces sir?


Have I so many sir? I mean my only one Constance, find her me, ^r I will
translate you out of an Aesculapian Cock into a Newg^e ^ird immediately.


Sir if you will Metamorphose me out of a Batch^ lor, into a Bridegroom, I'll
show you your Niece.


This my Niece?


O have I found you Mistress? Sir this is the Gentlewoman I brought before your
worship to day.


Hold they peace; art in thy right mind?


As I am in my right mind and Midlesex, it is she sir. I had not matter enough
then to lay to her charge; for which I thank your worship I kissed Newgate. But
now I have sir; she has lest a Child upon our Parish, I am sure got by an
unknown father; and has been a loose Liven, both at Duke Humfreyes, and most
of the winkd it houses about the Town these four years: which I can
sufficiently prove.


Hold thy peace Knave. I'll put these plums in thy mouth else


Sir, my Child shall trouble your Parish no longer, here is a Father, my troth
plight Husband, sufficient to keep it and me, wilt thou not Duck?


Duck? my name is Widgi^e, you mistake the man sure.


Sure I do not. This Gentleman, and this Gentlewoman, and this trusty Servant
of ours are my witnesses, I am your Wife sir.


O I am vn^one, quite cast away. Sister help me now with your Law wit, or I
perish for ever.


This is not to be endured: cheating, and vile abuse, This contract can not
be lawful. One person mistaken for another a lawful impediment to be
diuore'd for, though they were married.


I^ might do well if (as he con^esses himself) he had not made all too sure,
as well within as with^ut.


Sir Phillip, while they wrangle out their cause, l^t us agree: Find you but
the means to make her lawfully your Wife, and here take her with my faithful
promise, of the equal half of any estate presently.


Sir Paul I thank you.


I say this is no lawful contract: And though we are legally diuorc'd, yet
neither he nor I may lawfully marry, while w^ both live, having been lawfully
married. And till you can disprove that, sir I'll forbid your Banes good sir
Phillip, and lay your hopes a cooling, friendly Master Tridewell, for your love
in managing this business.


Lady give me leave, if I have strayn'd a point of friendship, it was your love
gave the strenght to my wit. Fit. (...) love?


Your love indeed Lady. Which (and which Cupid pardon me for) now, that I see I
may enjoy, I am not so eagerly taken with, yet if you will --


Sir you cannot enjoy me, not he her, less you can disprove the lawfulness of
our former Marriage.


To clear that point, do you know the Minister?


Tis not so long since, but I can remember his face.


Then to continue sir Paul's Metamorphosis? I'll draw him out of this Doctor. Is
not this he?


It is. But is not he a lawful Minister; I would know that.


To clear that doubt there lies my Order of Priesthood.


Who, Oliuer! --


Even he, the Parson Nochurch, and this my Patron, whom I must beseech
together with the whole company, to preserve me out of the high Commission: for
look you, here is again your Licence.


Would you do this Master Tridewell?


Faith I foresaw an unto wardnesse in the Match: which if you repent the breach
of, there's your Licence; and the way to Church lies before you.


No sir. First get my brother free of his contract, and then a Licence with
your own name, and I'll wait on you to Church, as soon as you will.


O that's done already. What are ^ou agreed?


Most happily sir, sister alls well again. I have given her a hundred pound to
relinquish her right in me. Which before all these witnesses you do; do you
not?


Yes most freely.


Well then, I will not forswear to marry, But if ever I steal a Wife again,
let her be a witch, and may I ourn with her for company. Governor, thou art
out of countenance, and thou too honest Humfrey, me thinks. Come bear up. I
forgive. Twas your errors, not malice.


Sir for my part, i'll take my corporal oath --


It s^ll not need good Humfrey.


And for me sir -- wid. Nay, I dare not but beeleeue th^e before thou speak
Couernour: therefore prithee lets not talk o^'t our selves, but quietly, and
presently begin our travels, that we may hear no body else talk on it.


Gentlemen and L^dies, I ^ee you all at peace^o well, that I wish no further
content to any, except Master Nonsense h^re.


Never credit me but I have had sport en^ugh'o conscience, and if I do not
make a Stage phyen't, when I come into Cornwall: I protest and vow then say
there was Nonsense in this.


I am glad you conclude so ^rendly with the rest. All the unquietness will be
in the Kitchen presently If your meat stay for you. Gallants.

You ^re all Welcome: And I wish every Guest
as merry, as our Northern ^asses Feast.


