HE, that his wonted modesty retaynes,
And never set a (...) upon his Brains
Above your Judgments; nor did ever strive
By Arrogance or Ambition to achieve
More praise unto himself, or more applause
Unto his Scenes, then such, as know the Laws
Of Comedy do give; He only those (...)
Now prays may scan his Verse, and weigh his Prose:
Yet thus far he thinks meet to let you know
Before you see it, the Subject is so low,
That to expect high Language, or much Cost,
Were a sure way, now, to make all be lost.
Pray look for none: He will promise such hereafter,
To take your graver judgments, now your laughter
Is all he aims to move. I had more to say -- -
The Title, too, may prejudice the Play.
It says the Sparagus Garden; if you look
To feast on that, the Title spoils the Book.
We have yet a taste of it, which he doth lay
In the midst o'th journey, like a Bait by the way:
Now see with Candor: As our Poet's free,
Pray let be so your Ingenuity.

With me gentlemen?


Only a few neighbourly and friendly words sir.


Oh you are most friendly welcome good Mr. Gilbert G^lawire, and Mr. Walter
Chamlet I take ye to be.


The same sir at your service.


Your fathers both were my good neighbours indeed; worthy and well reputed
members of the City while they lived: but that may be read upon the Hospital
walls, and gates; it is enough for me to say they loved me: Sanson Touchwood!
and I were a wretch if I should not honour their memory in their happy
succession: Again gentlemen you are welcome.


Yet you may be pleased sir to remember, though our fathers were both loving
friends to you, yet they were sometimes at odds one with another.


True, true, ever at odds: They were the common talk of the town for a pair
of wranglers; still at strife for one trifle or other: they were at law
logger-heads together, in one match that held 'em tugging tone the the other by
the purse-strings a matter of nine years, and all for a matter of nothing.
They cours'd one another from Court to Court, and through every Court Temporal
and Spiritual; and held one an other play till they lost a thousand pound a
man to the Lawyers, and till it was very sufficiently ad judged that your
father was one fool, and your father was another fool. And so again
gentlemen you are welcome: now your business.


You may now be pleased sir to remember that our fathers grew friends at last.


Heaven forbid else.


And note the cause, the ground of their reconciliation, which was upon the
love, betwixt me and this gentleman's sister. My fathers Son married his
fathers Daughter, and our two fathers grew friends, and wise men again.


To the point good gentlemen, yet you are welcome.


Troth sir the point is this: You know (and the town has taken sufficient
notice of it) that there has been a long contention betwixt you and old Mr.
Striker your neighbour --


Ha?


And the cause or ground of your quarrel (for ought any body knows but your
selves) may be as trivial, as that which was derided in our fathers.


Are you there with me?


And great hopes there are, and wagers laid by your friends on both sides, that
you two will be friends.


I'll hold you an hundred pounds of that.


Nay, more, that Mr. Striker will be willing to give his Grand-child to your
Son, so you'll give your consent.


And your coming is to persuade that, is it not? if it be so, speak; deal
plainly with me gentlemen, whilst yet you are welcome.


Insooth it is so, we come to negotiate the match for your son, and your
friendship with old Mr. Striker.


You are not welcome.


But when you weigh the reasons, and consider the perfect love of the young
pair, and how the world will praise your reconciliation, and bless the
providence, that made their loves the means to work their parents charity.


Again you are not welcome.


Your self but now commended the atonement
Of our two fathers, wrought by the same means:
I mean my marriage with his sister here
Against as great an opposition.

But our fathers loved their children.


Your fathers were a couple of doting fools, and you a pair of saucy knaves;
now you are not welcome: and more then so, get you out of my doors.


Will you sir, by your wilfulness, cast away your son?


My son? no son of mine, I have cast him off already for casting an eye
upon the daughter of mine enemy: let him go, let him pack; let him perish: he
comes not within these doors, and you, that are his fine spoken spokes-men,
get you off of my ground I charge you.


We are gone sir: only but wishing you Mr. Touchwood to remember that your
sonne's your son.


Indeffinitely not sir, until he does not only renounce all interest in the
love of that baggage; but do some extraordinary mischief in that family to
right me for the trespass he has done; and so win my good opinion, till which
be done a daily curse of mine he shall not miss; and so you may inform him.


What an uncharitable wretch is this?


The touchiest piece of Touchwood that e're I met withal.


I feared we should inflame him.


All the comfort is, his son may yet out-live him.


BUt the danger is, his father may dis-inherit him


He cannot be so devilish; here comes his son, a gentleman of so sweet a
disposition, and so contrary to his crabbed Sire, that a man who never heard of
his mothers virtue might wonder who got him for him.


Not at all I assure you, Sam is his fathers nowne son: for the old man you
see, is gentle enough, till he be incensed; and the son being moved, is as
fiery as the father.


But he is very s^dome and slowly moved; his father often and of the sudden.


I prithee would thou have green wood take fire as soon as that which is
old and sere?


He is deep in thought.


Over head and ears in his Mrs. contemplation.


To dis-obey a father, is a crime
In any son unpardonable. Is this rule
So general that it can bear no exception?
Or is a fathers power so illimitable,
As to command his sons affections?
And so control the Conqueror of all men
Even Love himself? no: he, that enterprises
So great a work, forgets he is a man;
And must in that forget he is a father,
And so if he forgo his nature, I
By the same Law may leave my Piety.
But stay, I would not lose my self in following
This wild conceit

How now Sam, whither away?


I was but casting how to find the way
Unto my self. Can you direct me gentlemen?

Yes, yes; your father has told us the way.


Ha you had conference with him? ha ye? speak.


Marry sir ha we, and I think to purpose.


Ha you won ought upon him to my advantage?


As much as may restore you to acquaintance
With him again, can you but make good use on it.

Pray do not trifle with me; tell me briefly.


Briefly he says you must not dare to see him;
Nor hope to receive blessing to the value
Of a new three-pence, till you disclaim your love
In your fair Annabell; and not only so,
But you must do some villainous mischievous act
To vex his adversary, her Grand-father;
Or walk beneath his curse in banishment.

A most uncharitable and unnatural sentence.


But think withal it is your father, that
Makes this decree; obey him in the 'xecution:
He has a great Estate, you are his only son:
Do not lose him, your fortune, and your self
For a frail piece of beauty: shake her off;
And do some notable thing against her house,
To please your father

The Devil speaks it in thee,
And with this spell I must Conjure him out.

Oh friend you*are too violent.


He's too desperate,
To urge me to an act of such injustice.
Can her fair love, to whom my faith is given,
Be answered with so loud an injury?
Or can my faith so broken yield a sound
Less terrible than thunder, to affright
All love and constancy out of the breast
Of every Virgin that shall hear the breach
Of my firm faith?

Be not so passionate.


I have no further power to do an out-rage
Against that Family to whom my heart
Is linked, then to rip out this troubled heart
The only ominous cause, indeed, of all.
My over passionate fathers cruelty; and that
(If I must needs do an injurious Office)
Alone, shall be my act to calm his fury.

Prithee blow over this passion; thou were wont
To affect wit, and can not be a Lover
Truly without it. Love is wit it self,
And through a thousand lets will find a way
To his desired end.

The Ballet taught you that.


Well said, Love will find out the way:
I see thou art coming to thy self again,
Can there no shift, no witty slight be found
(That have been common in all times and ages)
To blind the eyes of a weake-sighted father,
And reconcile these dangerous differences
But by blood-shedding, or outrageous deeds,
To make the feud the greater? recollect
Thy self good Sam; my house, my purse, my counsel
Shall all be thine, and Wat shall be thy friend.

Let me entreat your friendship.


And me your pardon.


So, so, all friends; let's home and there consult
To lay the tempest of thy fathers fury;
Which cannot long be dangerous, 'tis but like
A storm in April, spent in swift extremes,
When straight the Sun shoots forth his cheerful beams.

YOu will not assault me in mine own house? I hope you will not; nor urge me
beyond my patience with your borroughing attempts* good sir Hugh Mony-lacks I
hope you will not.


I hope I moved you not, but in fair language sir;
Nor spoke a syllable that might offend you.
I have not used the word of loan, or borrowing;
Only some private conference I requested.

Private conference! a new coined word for borrowing of money; I tell you, your
very face, your countenance (though it be glossed with Knight-hood) looks so
borrowingly, that the best words you give me are as dreadful as Stand and
deliver, and there I think I was w'ye. I am plain w'ye sir, old Will Striker
I.


My father Striker, I am bold to call you.


Your father! no, I desire no such near acquaintance with you, good sir Hugh
Mony-lacks: you are a Knight and a noble gentleman, I am but an Esquire and out
of debt; and there I think I was w'ye again*


I shall be with you anon, when you have tal'^d your self out of breath.


'Tis true, I had the honour to be your Worships father in law when time was,
that your Knight-hood married and Ladyfied a poor daughter of mine: but yet
she had five thousand pounds in her purse if you please to remember it; and as
I remember you had then fourteen hundred a year: But where is it now? and
where is my daughter now? poor abused Innocent; your riotousnesse abroad, and
her long night watches at home shortened her days, and cast her into her grave
-- And 'twas not long before all your estate was buried too; and there I was
w'ye again I take it: but that could not fetch her again.


No sir, I wish my life might have excused
Hers, far more precious: never had a man
A juster cause to morn.

Nor mourned more justly, it is your only wearing; you have just none other:
nor have had means to purchase better any time these seven years as I take
it* By which means you have got the name of the mourning Knight; and there I
am sure I was w'ye.


Sir, if you will not be pleased to hear my desires to you, let me depart
without your derision.


Even when you please, and whither you please good sir Hugh Mony-lacks: my
house shall be no enchanted Castle to detain your Knight-errandship from your
adventures. I hope your errand hither was but for your dinner; and so far
forth (and especially at your going forth) you are welcome. Your daughter I do
keep, and will for her poor mothers sake; (that was my daughter) peace be
with her -- she shall be no more a trouble to you; nor be your child any
longer: I have made her mine; I will adopt ^er into mine own name, and make
her a Striker; she shall be no more a Mony-lack^, and if she please me well in
matching with a husband, I know what I will do for her.


I thank you sir.


Do you thank me sir, I assure you you need not; for I mean so to order her
estate, and bind it up in that trust that you shall never finger a farthing
on it: am I w'ye sir?


I cannot choose but thank you though in behalf of my child.


Call her your child again, or let me but hear that you suffer her to ask you
a bare blessing, i'll send her after you upon adventures sir Knight* and who
shall give a portion with her then? or what can she hope from a father that
groans under the weight of a Knight-hood for want of means to support it?


I* shall find means to live without your trouble hereafter.


You may, you may; you have a wit sir Hugh, and a projective one; what, have
you some new project a foot now, to out-^oe that of the Hand-barrowes? what
call you 'em the Sedams? oh cry you mercy, cry you mercy; I heard you had put
in for a share at the Asparagud Ga den: or that at least you have a P^sion
thence; to be their Gather guest and bring 'em custom, ^nd that you play the
fly of the new Inne-there; and sip with all companies: am I w'ye there sir?


You may be when you please sir; I can command the best entertainment there
for your money.


In good time sir.


In the mean time sir, I had no mind to beg nor borrow of you, and though
you will not* give me leave to call you father, nor my daughter my daughter,
yet I thought it might become my care to advertise you (that have taken the
care of her from me) of a danger that will much afflict you, if it be not
carefully prevented.


How's this?


You have an adversary --


But one that I know, the rascal my neighbour Touchwood.


There I am w'ye sir, I am informed that his only son is an earnest Suitor
to your Daughter: (I must not call her mine)


How's that?


That there is a deep secret love betwixt 'em; and that they have had many
private meetings: and a stolen match very likely to be made if you prevent it
not.


Can this be true?


Give me but a piece from you, and if by due examination you find it not so,
i'll never see your face again till you send for me.


To be rid of you take it.


I am gone sir, and yet I think i'm w'ye.


Is the Devil become a match-broker? what, who within there: what?

Annabell? what Friswood?


Here sir, I am here forsooth.


Are you so forsooth? but where's your Mistress forsooth?


Listening is good sometimes; I heard their talk, and am glad on it.


Where is your Mrs. I say?


My Mrs. Annabell, forsooth, my young Mrs?


What other Mrs. hast thou but the Devils Dam her self, your old Mrs.? and
her I ask not for; good Mrs. Flibber de'Jibb with the French fly-flap of your
coxcomb.


Is the old man mad troe?


I ask for Annabell.


Bless me! how do you look?


Where's Annabell I say? fetch her me quickly, least I bast her out of your old
Whit-leather hide.


How youthful you are grown? she is not far to fetch sir; you know you
commanded her to her chamber, and not to appear in sight, till her debauched
father was gone out of the house.


And is not he gone now forsooth? why call you her not?


I warrant he has told you some tale on her. That lewd Knight, now he has
undone himself by his unthrifty practises, begins to practise the undoing of
his daughter too! is it not so forsooth? has he not put some wickedness into
your head to set you against her?


I never knew thee a Witch till now.


Ha, ha, ha; I warrant he told you that your adversary Touchwoods son, and
my Mistress Annabell are in love league together.


Marry did he; and I will know the truth.


Ha, ha, ha.


Dare thou laugh at me?


No, no; but I laugh at the poor Knights officiousnes, in hope of some great
reward for the gullery that I put upon him: ha, ha, ha. Good sir a little
patience, and I will tell! you. Ha, ha, ha -- 'twas I that devised it for a
lye, and told it him in hope that his telling of it to you, would provoke you
to beat him out of the house; for reporting a thing that had no probability or
resemblance of a truth in it.


Is it but so?


Sir I have been your creature this thirty years, down lying and uprising;
(as you know) and you should believe me, you had me in my old Mistresses days
-- --


I, thou wast a handsome young wench then; now thou art old.


Yet not so wondrous old as to be sung in a Ballet for it, or to have been able
ere Ad^m wore beard to have crept into Eves bed, as I did into my Mistresses.
(Heaven pardon you, as I do with all my heart.)


What in thy fooleries now?


Nor so old neither but you are content to make a sorry shift with me still; as
your abilities will serve you --


Come, come; thou art not old.


Nay that's not it that troubles me: but that I, that served you before your
daughter was borne; I mean your daughter that was mother to this daughter
which now you have made your daughter; that I that saw the birth, the marriage,
and the death of your daughter; and have had the governance of this her
daughter ever since, till now she is marriageable; and have all this while
been as pliant as a twig about you, and as true as the sheath to your steel
as we say, that I should now be mist^usted to connive at an il match for her,
for whom my chiefest care has bin from the Cradle? there's the unkindness.


Enough, enough; Fid* I believe there is no such matter.


I thought you had known me --


I do, I do; I prithee good Fid be quiet, it was a witty trick of thee to
mock the poor Knight withal: but a pox on him, he cost me a piece for his
news; there's another for thee: but the best is he hath tied himself by it,
never to trouble me more; I have that into my bargain.


And you would tie me so too; would you?


Not so Fid, not so: but look to my Girl, and thus far mark me. If ever I
find that young Touchwood, the son of that miscreant, whose hatred I would
not lose for all the good neighbor-hood in the Parish; if ever J say, he and
your charge do but look upon one another, i'll turn her and you both out of
doors: there J will be w'ye, look to it.


Agreed sir; agreed.


Look to it J say, J must abroad, my anger is not over yet: I would I could
meet my adversary to scold it out; I shall be sick else.


'Twas well I over-heard 'em, my young lovers had bin spoiled else: had not I
crossed the old angry mans purpose before he had met with the young timorous
Virgin, she had confessed all; and and all had bin dashed now.


HOw now Fris. is my Grand-father gone out of door?


If he were as safe out of the world, it were well for you.


Nay say not so good Fris.


Your unlucky father has destroyed all your hopes in Mr. Sam Touchwood; in
discovering your loves (what Devil soever gave him the intelligence) and you
must resolve never to see your sweet Sam again.


I must resolve to dye first: oh.


Ods pity! how now! why Mrs. why Annabell, why Mrs. Annabell; look up, look
up I say, and you shall have him spite of your Grand-father and all his
works: what do you think I am an Infidel, to take Mr. Samuels forty pieces?
and a Ronlet of old Muskadine for nothing? come be well, and indeed you shall
have him.


Oh Sam, sweet Sam --


These love-sicke maids seldom call upon other Saints then their
sweet-hearts; look up I say, your sweet Sam is coming.


Ha, where? where is he; why do you abuse me?


I say he will come presently; look up I say, forgive me! he comes indeed: my
Mr. thought I was a witch, and I now suspect my self for one. Oh Mr. Samuel,
how came you hither? here he is Mrs. what mean you to come now to undo her
and your self too? yet she had dyed and you had not come as you did. Why do
you not look upon him and be well? get you gone, we are all undone if my Mr.
come back and find you: speak to her quickly, then kiss her and part, you
will be parted for ever else.


How fares my love?


Better then when I was in earthly being,
This bosom is a heaven to me; through death
I am arrived at bliss, most happily
To be so well revived thou made me dye.

I made you not dye, as you will dye, if you stand prattling till my Mr. return
and take you: for Mr. Samuel, I must tell you Mr. Samuel, he knows all Mr.
Samuel.


My father knows as much, and that's the cause
Of my adventuring hither to instruct you
In a strange practice; here it is in writing,
'Tis such a secret that I durst not trust
My tongue with the conveyance of't; nor have I
The confidence to hear it read: take it,
And in my absence join your best advises,
To give it life and action; 'tis rule*
Which (though both hard and grievous to pursue)
Is all that can our hopes in love renew.

What horrible thing must we do troe? pray let me see the paper, I hope there
is no pistolling nor poisoning in it: though my old Striker come short of the
man he was to be with me, I would be loath to shorten his days with the
danger of my neck; or making a Bon-fire in Smithfield: pray let me see the
paper.


Not until my departure gentle Friswood.


Is there such horror in it, that you dare not stand the opening of the paper?


Consider sweet our love is Fever sick,
Even desperately to death;
And nothing but a desperate remedy
Is left us: for our bodily health, what sour
Unsavoury loathsome medicines we will take
But to remove an Ague?
What sharpe incisions, ^earings, and cruel Corsives
Are daily suffered, and what limbs dissever'd
To keep a Gangrene from the vital parts,
That a dismembered body yet may live!
We in like ca^e must to preserve our love,
(If we dare say we love) adventure life,
Fame, Honour, which are all but Loves attendants
To maintain it.

I understand you, sweet,
And do before I read your strong injunction,
Resolve to give it faithful execution
What ere it be. I ha got courage now,
And (with a constant boldness let me tell you)
You dare not lay that on me I'll not bear:
And Love, predominant over all other passions,
Shall bear me out in it.

Oh you have made me happy.


As I live my Master --
Kiss and away; whip quickly through the Garden --
Run you up to your Chamber; i'll see you out my self.

Thus let us breath that till we meet again.


Whoop what do ye mean?


We leave for truce at raising of the siege,
Our interchanged hearts each others pledge.

Go fools, this sets you both but more on edge.


Farewell,


Farewell.


SWeet wife content thy self.


Yes content my self! shall I so? with what, you Iohn Bopeepe? you must be my
husband, and I must content my self, must I? no sir, 'tis you that must
content me, or 'tis your heart must smart for it.


If you could be content with all that I have, or all that I can do, and
expect no further, I then might hope to pacify you.


All has not done it yet you see, nor have you yet found out the way. Five
years practice one would think were sufficient, so long you have had me; and
too long it is unless I had got a better name by it, to be accounted barren --
-- oh me.


Now 'tis out; zonnes what would you have me do? where's the defect think you?
is it not probable that you may be defective as well as I?


That I may be defective! I defy thee, Lubber; I defy thee and all that say
so, thou fribling fumbler thou; I would some honest sufficient man might be
Judge betwixt us whether I be defective.


How now, always wrangling?


Defective quoth a --


What's the matter Land-lord?


Do I look like a thing defective?


Land-Lady --


Oh fearful!


Mrs. Brittle-ware what's the matter?


You shall be Judge Sir Hugh, whether I be defective; you have lain here Sir
Hugh these three years, have been our constant lodger off and on as we say;
and can you think me defective?


You will not be impudent?


Good* Mr. Brittle-ware what's the matter?


The matter is sir she will be content with nothing.


The best wife in the world! and if you cannot afford her that to content her,
you are a most hard-harted husband.


What nothing? would you wish him to afford me nothing to content me? I must
have something to content me; and something he must find me, or I will make him
look out for it.


Come, come, I know the quarrel; and I know you will never get a child by
falling out.


Nor any way else so long as he is such a jealous beast as he is.


Oh you must leave your jealousy Mr. Brittleware; that's a maine hindrance


I am not jealous I.


Not, and stare like a mad Ox upon every man that looks upon me?


Fie upon him, is he such a beast, to be jealous of his own wife? if every man
were so, it would spoil the getting of some children in a year.


And denies me all things that I have a mind to.


The best is* the loss of your longings will not hurt you; unless you were
with child.


I must have my longings first; I am not every woman I,
I must have my longings before I can be with child I.

You must not long for every strange thing you see or hear of then.


As true as I live he fribles with me sir Hugh; I do but now long for two or
three idle things scarce worth the speaking of; and do you think he will
grant me one of 'em?


What may they be? he shall grant 'em.


One of my longings is to have a couple of lusty able bodied men, to take me
up, one before and another behind, as the new fashion is, and carry me in a
Man-litter into the great bed at Ware.


There's one, and will you deny her this to hinder a child getting?


Then I do long to see the new ship, and to be on the top of Paul's Steeple
when it is new built, but that must not be yet; nor am I so unreasonable but I
can stay the time: in the mean time I long to see a play, and above all
plays, The Knight of the burning -- what dee' call it.


The Knight of the burning Pestle.


Pestle is it? I thought of another thing, but I would fain see it. They say
there's a Grocers boy kills a Giant in it, and another little boy that does a
Citizens wife thy daintielist -- -- but I would fain see their best Actor do
me; I would so put him too't, they should find another thing in handling of me
I warrant 'em.


Heyday! so last frost she longed to ride on one of the Dromedaries over the
Thames, when great men were pleased to go over it a foot.


Well, shall I make a convenient motion for you both?


Quickly sweet sir Hugh, I long for that before you name it.


Have you this Spring eaten any Asparagus yet?


Why is that good for a woman that longs to be with Child?


Of all the Plants, herbs, roots, or fruits that grow, it is the most
provocative, operative and effective.


Indeed Sir Hugh?


All your best (especially your modern) Herballists conclude, that your
Asparagus is the only sweet stirrer that the earth sends forth, beyond your
wild Carrets, Corne-^lag, or Gladiall. Your roots of Standergrasse, or of
Satyrion boiled in Goats milk are held good; your Clary or Horminum in divers
ways good, and Dill (especially boiled in Oil) is also good: but none of
these, nor Saffron boiled in wine, your Nuts of Artichoakes, Rocket, or seeds of
Ash-tree (which we call the Kite keys) nor thousand such, though all are
good, may stand up for perfection with Asparagus.


Do you say so sir Hugh?


I have it from the opinion of most learned Doctors, rare Physicians, and one
that dares call himself so.


What Doctor is he, a fool on horse-^acke?


Doctor Thou-Lord, you know him well enough.


Yes, we know Doctor Thou-Lord, though he knows none but Lords and Ladies, or
their companions. And a fine conceited Doctor he is, and as humorous I warrant
ye; and will Thou and Thee the best Lords that dares be acquainted with him:
calls Knights, Jack, Will, and Tom familiarly; and great Ladies, Gills, and
Sluts too, and they cross him. And for his opinion sake, and your good report
sir Hugh, I will have Sparagus every meal all the year long, or i'll make all
fly for it; and do you look to it Fribble, for it will be for your commodity as
well as mine.


And sure it is a rare commodity when a Knight is become a Broker for to cry it
up so.


And let me have some presently for my next meal, or you cannot imagine how
sick I will be.


But mistake not me* nor the commodity we speak of Mrs. Brittle-ware; where
would you have it? here in our own house? fie! the virtue of it is mortified,
if it pass the threshold from the ground it grows on. No, you must thither,
to the Garden of delight, where you may have it dressed and eaten in the due
kind; and there it is so provocative, and so quick in the hot operation, that
none dare eat it, but those that carry their coolers with 'em, presently to
delay, or take off the delightful fury it fills 'em with.


Is there convenience for that too?


Yes, yes; the house affords you as convenient Couches to retire to, as the
garden has beds for the precious plants to grow in: that makes the place a
palace of pleasure, and daily resorted and filled with Lords and Knights, and
their Ladies; Gentlemen and gallants with their Mistresses --


But do not honest men go thither with their wives too?


None other; some to their own costs, and some at other men's.


Why do we not go then? or what stay we for, can you tell fumbler?


Nay Mrs. Brittle-ware, not so suddenly; towards the evening will be the
fittest season of the day: mean while go in and fit your self for the walk,
your husband and I are first for an other business.


Noble Knight I thank you, I hope my next longing shall be to bespeak you for
a God-father.


You shall not long long for that.


I take your noble word.


She's gone, and now sir Hugh let me tell you, you have not dealt well with me,
to put this fagary into her foolish fancy.


Wilt thou be an Ass now? do not I know how to fetch it out on her again
think thou? she shall not go, and yet be contented too.


I you tell me so


Why thou wilt not be jealous of me now, that has lain in thy house these
three years, wilt thou? nor think me so foolish to provoke thee with an
injury; that know me and my ways so well.


I know something by your worship worth the price of a new Pillory.


Why so then; and will I wrong thee Jack think thou, ha? no nor mistrust thee
neither: for though thou art a jealous coxcomb over thy wife, and she a touchy
thing under thee, yet thou and I Jack have bin always confident of each
other, and have wrought friendly and closely together, as ever Subtle and his
Lungs did; and shared the profit betwixt us, have not we Jack: ha?


I think we have; and that you have some new device, some stratagem in hand
now. Uds me, I now remember, is the party come to town?


Yes; and my Spring has seized him upon the way: and here I expect him
instantly.


And will he be made a gentleman?


That's his ambition Jack; and though you now keep a China-shop, and deal in
brittle commodities (pots, glasses, Purslane Dishes, and more trinkets then an
Antiquaries study is furnished withal) you must not forget your old trade of
Barber Surgeon, 'tis that must sted us now in our new project.


I warrant you, is he a trim youth?


We must make him one Jack, 'tis such a squab as thou never saw; such a
lump, we may make what we will of him.


Then sure we will make money of him.


Well said Jack, Spring has writ me here his full description.


SLid he's come already: now Mr. Spring?


I come to present a gentleman to you sir.


How a gentleman? will you abuse me?


He finds your defect already; but be bold sir, he desires to be a Gentleman
sir; and (though he be but course mettle, yet) he has that about him which with
your help may quickly make him a clear Gentleman.


I have four hundred pounds sir; and I brought it up to town on purpose to
make my self a clear gentleman of it.


It was well brought up; it appears also that you have had some breeding,
though but a Yeomans son.


'Tis true, I have a little learning sir, and a little wit, though last night I
met with some upon the way at Hammer-Smith that had more: yet I had enough to
perceive I was cheated of a matter of seven pound (almost all the odd money I
had about me) at my Card before thy Card; a pox take the whole pack on 'em.
Sdaggers if ever man that had but a mind to be a Gentleman was so noddy poopt!
oh how I could chafe to think on it.


Oh but you must not, it becomes not the temper of a Gentleman.


So you told me; then I thank you friend.


Your small acquaintance sir.


I have had more acquaintance where I have found less love, and I thank you
again good small acquaintance: you told me indeed it became not a gentleman to
cry for losing his money; and I told you then, that I should, or would be a
gentleman: Whereupon Small acquaintance (because I was resolved to play no
more) you advised me to give over; and you told me you would upon our coming
to the City, here bring me to a Knight, that was a Gentleman-maker, whom I
conceive this to be, and here am I, and here's my four hundred pound, which my
man has here drawn up to Town, and here I mean to quarter it.


But I will see what penniworths you bargain for first, by your Masterships
leave.


Drawn and quartered! you have a wit Sir, I find that already.


Yes sir, I have a down right Country wit, and was counted a pretty spark at
home. Did you never hear of little Tim of Tanton? But I now mean to have a
finical City wit, and a superfinicall Court wit too, before I see mine Uncle.


You may sir.


And be able to jest and jeer among men of judgment: I have a many small
jests, petty Johns, as I call them: But I will have a clubbing wit, and a
drinking wit; and be able to hold play with the great Poets I: and with dry
jests to maule the mallipart'st lesser ones (that hold themselves better than
the biggest) out of the pit of wit I, before I see mine uncle.


You may have all sir, if you quarter your four hundred pound discreetly: but
who is your uncle I pray?


For that you shall pardon me, till I am a Gentleman: But I assure you he is a
great gentleman in the City here; and I neither must nor dare see him, till I
am one at least: and I will tell you presently how I mean to quarter my money.


They'll quarter that and you too, if I see not the better to the matter.


Dost thou know the uncle he speaks of?


No, nor cannot learn who it is for my life.


Some great man sure that's ashamed of his kindred: perhaps some Suburb
Justice, that sits of the skirts of the City, and lives by it.


Well said Jack.


Look you sir, thus had I cast it: Small acquaintance pray do you note it too:
I love your advice, that at first sight of me (which was but last night) could
relieve me from Cheaters.


From some of his own companions to cheat, you more himself.


The first hundred pound to be for the making of me a gentleman: the second
hundred shall be for apparel.


He speaks half like a gentleman already.


Right, there's half disposed of.


The third hundred ^le spend in pleasure: hark Small acquaintance, we'll have
wenches.


What wants he of a gen^leman, and go no further, but save the last hundred.


Oh Small acquaintance, that must walk too: but all for profit to support my
gentility hereafter.


As how?


I will be cheated of it.


How?


Nor in gross, but by retail, to try men's several wits, and so learn to
shift for my self in time and need be.


Do you hear this?


There's a plot now!


I protest I admire him: J never found like Craft in a Yeomans son before.


No words on it J beseech you sir; nor name that foolish word Yeomans son any
more: J came to change my Copy, and write Gentleman: and to go the nighest
way to work, my Small acquaintance here tells me, to go by the Heralds is the
farthest way about.


Well sir, we will take the speediest course for you that may be possible.


The season of the year serves most aptly too,
Both for purging and bleeding:
Give your name into this book sir.

Timothy Hoyden, sir.


Timothy Hoyden.


But must J bleed sir?


Yes, you must bleed: your fathers blood must out,
He was but a yeoman, was he?

As rank a Clown, none dispraised, as any in Sommerset shire.


His foul rank blood of Bacon and Pease-porridge must out of you to the last
dram.


You will leave me none in my body then, I shall bleed to death, and you go
that way to work.


Fear nothing sir: your blood shall be taken out by degrees, and your veins
replenished with pure blood still, as you loose the puddle.


How must that be done?


I that ich I would hear.


I commend you that you seek reason: it must be done by meats and drinks of
costly price; Muscadell caudels, jellies, and cock-broaths. You shall eat
nothing but Shrimp porridge for a fortnight; and now and then a Phesants egg
soopt with a Peacocks feather. I that must be the diet.


Delicate!


This stands to reason indeed.


Then at your going abroad, the first air you take shall be of the Asparagus
Garden, and you shall feed plentifully of that.


Of the air do you mean?


No of th'Asparagus. And that with a Concoction of Goats milk, shall set you
an end, and your blood as high as any Gentleman's lineally descended from the
loins of King Cadwalader.


Excellent, I like all excellently well, but this bleeding. I could never
endure the sight of blood.


That shows the malignant baseness of your fathers blood within you*


I was bewiteh'd I think before I was begot, to have a Clown to my father:
yet sit my mother said she was a Gentlewoman.


Said? What will not Women say?


Nay, small acquaintance, she professed it upon her Deathbed to the Curate and
divers others, that she was sister to a Gentleman here in this City; and
commanded me in her Will, and upp^n her blessing, first to make my self a
Gentleman of good fashion, and then to go to the gentleman my uncle.


What gentleman is that?


I must not, nor I wo'not tell you that, till I am a gentleman my self: would
you have me wrong the will of the dead? Small acquaintance, I will rather dye a
Clown as I am first.


Be content sir; here's half a labour saved; you shall bleed but of one side:
the Fathers side only.


Say you so?


The Mother vain shall not be pricked.


I thank you sir:
I would 'twere done once.

But when this is done, and your new blood infused into you, you shall most
easily learn the manners and behaviour.


The Look, the garb, the congee --


And all the Complements of an absolute gentleman.


O brave!


For which you shall have best instructions;
You'll run a chargeable course in it, that I'll tell you:
And may yet if you please retain your money;
Cross your mothers will and dye a Clown.

By no means sir.


I begin to believe honestly of the Knight.


Do you note this skin of his here?


Skin, 'tis a hide sir.


'Tis somewhat thick and foul indeed sir.


He must have a bath, and that will be more charge.


Tis pity he should be flayed.


I thank you small acquaintance; pray let me have a bath, what ere it cost me,
rather than flea me.


Well sir, this house shall be your lodging, and this the Mr. of it, an
excellent Surgeon, and expert in these affairs, shall be your attendant.


My man may attend me too, may he not?


Yes, by all means, and see the laying out of your money.


I like that best: sure they are honest men.


Is that your man? what does he wear a Coulter by his side?


No sir, my name is Coulter; I my self am a Coulter. and this is but my Hanger
on, as I am my Masters.


Thou may make a Country gentleman in time, I see that by thy wit.


All my friends will be glad on it.


Come gentlemen, I'll lead you the way.


But how can you assure me gentlemen that this is true?


We saw't not acted sir, nor had reported it,
But on those terms of honour you have sworn to;
In which you are engaged first to forgive
Your son: then never to reveal to friend,
Or foe, the knowledge of the fact.

You cannot now but receive
Your son into your favour, that did urge him
To do some outrage, some villainous shame or mischief
Upon that Family as he would shun your curse.

This is a mischief with a witness to it:
He has done it home it seems.

Sir, can a son
Do his fathers will too fully?

You may be pleased to call him.
I would now put on anger, but I fear
My inward joy's too great, to be dissembled:
Now for a rigid brow that might enable
A man to stand competitor for the seat
Of austere justice -- Are you come to boast
The bravery of your fact, with a dissembled
Show of obedience; as if you had merited
Forgiveness and a blessing; when my shame
For thy lewd action makes me turn and hide
My face -- for fear my laughter be descried.

Pray turn not from him sir.


I have heard sir of your workmanship; but may
A man receive it on your word for truth?

It is too true, unless you please in mercy
To pardon, and preserve me from the rigour
Of Justice, and the sharper censure
That I shall suffer in all good opinion.

I mean you shall out of the noise on it presently:
So -- there's a hundred pieces, get you gone;
Provide you for a journey into France,
Bear your self well, and look you come not home
A verier Coxcomb than you went abroad:
Pray wear no falling bands and cuffs above
The price of suits and cloaks, least you become
The better half undone in about at Buffets.

I hope you shall hear well of me.


Amen.


Pray bless me sir.


My blessing be upon thee,
Go get thee gone, my tenderness will show
It self too womanish else.

Goodness of nature.


We'll help to set you forward.


Thank ye gentlemen:
Be but my son, thou shalt not want a father,
Though somebody must seek one: ha, ha, ha --
I'd give another hundred Pieces now
With all my heart, that I might be untongue-ty'd,
And triumph over my adversary now,
And dash this business in his angry teeth:
Strike Strikers teeth out with his own abuse:
Perhaps he knows't already, if he does;
I may take notice, and make bold to jeer him:
This is his usual walk.

I was too blame
To give it so much credit at the first,
As to be troubled at it.

'Tis the Rascal.


That he, the son of my despite and scorn,
Should gain of Fate a lot to see my Niece,
Much less a face to ask her for his wife.

Perhaps he's casting of his will.


Yet the vexation that I was but told so,
Lies gnawing in my stomach, that until
I vomit it upon that Dung-hill wretch;
I cannot eat nor sleep to do me good.
And I thank Chance he's here.

He comes, and so have at him.


Hum, hum, hum, humh.


And ha, ha, ha to thee old puppy.


Sirrah, sirrah, how dare thou keep a son that dares but look upon my
Niece? there I am we'yee sir.


Sirrah, and sirrah to thy withered jaws, and down that wrinkled throat of
thine: how dare thou think a son of mine dares for displeasing me, look but
with foul contempt upon thy loathed issue?


Impudent villain, I have heard he has seen her.


Has he but seen her? ha, ha, ha, I fear I shall out with it: I would not be
forsworn: i'll keep't in if I can.


Yes Malipert Jack, I have heard that he has seen her, but better had thou
pissed him against the wall, then he presume to love her: and there I am we'yee
sir.


Hast thou but heard he has seen her: I tell thee thou old booby thou; if he
had seen, felt, heard, and understood her: nay had he got her with child, and
then left her, he were my son, and I would cherish him.


Dare thou speak so, thou old Reprobate.


Thou dost not hear me say it is so, though J could wish it were with all my
heart, because I think it would break thine.


Hugh, hugh, hugh.


I hope I shall keep it within the compass of mine oath; yet there was a
touch for him.


Oh thou hel-bred Rascal thou; hugh, hugh,


So, so, up with it, Lungs, Lights, Liver, and all: choke up in a churls
name.


Hugh, hugh.


I have put him into these fits forty times at least, and not without hope it
will thratle him at last -- -- if you do break a gut, or a rib or two, with
straining, a rope will be your only remedy: and so I leave you: by the way you
have not heard me say that I know any thing by your Niece: But what I know I'll
keep to my self.


And hang thy self, I care not what thou know, yet thus far take me
we'yee sir.


Not a step, unless I were sure I were going to the devil, huh, huh: no sir,
you shall not trip me: you shall not fetch it out of me: tush, my sonne's my
son, and keep your niece to yourself, huh, and if she has any thing of his
you may keep that too huh; and so choke up again with all my heart, and much
good do it you.


Huh, huh -- h^m! so he's gon, the villain's gone in hope that he has killed me,
when my comfort is he has recovered me:

I was heart-sicke with a conceit which lay so mingled with my
Fleagme there I had perished, if I had not broke it, and made me
spit it out; hemh, 'tis gone, and i'll home merrily.
I would not that he should know the good he has done me
For half my estate; nor would I be at peace with him
To save it all: His malice works upon me,
Past all the drugs and all the Doctors Counsels,
That ere I cop'd with: he has been my vexation
These thirty years; nor have I had another
Ere since my wife died; if the Rascal knew't,
He would be friends, and I were instantly
But a dead man, I could not get another
To anger me so handsomely.

YOu are welcome home sir.


And merrily too Fid. Hemh light at heart,
I met with my Physician, Dog-leech, Touchwood;
And cleared my stomach, and now I am light at heart.
And thou shalt hear on it Fid anon perhaps.

You are the better able then to hear
And bear what I must tell you.

Where's my Niece?
How does she* ha?

As well as a young woman
In her case may do sir.

Ha! how's that?


Twill out, and I as fit to tell't you as another.


Out with it then.


Tis true, I faced you down there was no league
Between young Touch-wood, and your Niece, in hope
To turn her heart from him before the knowledge
Of any thing that past should be a grief to you:
But since I have discovered tis too late;
And she can be fit bride for no man else.

He has not lain with her, has he?


You speak as just as Gormans lips.


I hope he has not lipped her so:
Prithee what can thou mean?

Sir, if you think

The knowledge of a truth of this sad nature

May prejudice your health, by drawing a Choleric fit into you, you were best
to send for your Physician, your dog-leech Touchwood, as you called him, to
break your bed of Fleagme, by laughing at you.


What dost thou mean now, I have asked thee twice.


I say young Touch-wood has touched, and clapped your niece;
And (which is worse) with scorn and foul disdain
Has left and quite forsaken; and is gone:
(They say) sent by his father to travail.

Twas this the villain hammered on to day,
When he spoke mystically, doubtful words,
Reflecting on this mischievous sense: Hell, hell, hell.

Twere good you would forsake the thought of hell sir,
And think upon some timely course to save
Her credit, and the honour of your house by marriage.

You counsel very well;
But were you privy in their loves affair?

Indeed I knew too much on it: think of a course good sir.


I know no course for her and you but one,
Young whore and bawd, and that is instantly
To pack you out of doors to seek your living,
And there I will be we'yee.

Sir that you must not.


Sprecious dost thou must me in mine own house?


In your own house sir, kill us if you please,
And take the sin upon you; but out of it
You must not dare to thrust us with your shame:
Which I will so divulge, as you shall find
Your house to be no sanctuary for your self;
And there i'll be with you*

This is lusty.


Consider wisely that I know you sir,
And can make foul relation of some passages
That you will shame to hear.

Hold your peace.


Remember sir, near thirty years ago,
You had a sister, whose great marriage portion
Was in your hands: good gentlewoman, she
Unfortunately loving a false Squire,
Just as your Niece hath now, did get a clap:
You know sir what I mean.

You'll hold your peace?


I'll speak it though I dye for it; better here
Than in a worse place: So clapped I say she was,
I know not yet by whom you do, and bear
An inward grudge against some body to this hour for it.
But to my story, good gentlewoman she
Was by your most unbrotherly cruel usage
Thrust out a doors, as now you threaten us:
And miserably big-bellied as she was
Leaving her most unjustly detained her portion
In your false hands, forsook you and the town,
To fly the air, where ^er disgrace was spread:
Some jewels and some gold she had concealed:
But to what part of the world she took we know not,
Nor did you ever care, but wished her out on it,
By any desperate end, after her flight
From portion, blood and name; and so perhaps
Immediately she was: for which, this judgement
Is justly fallen upon you.

Yet hold thy peace.


Neither by threats, nor bribes, nor all persuasion,
Until you take your Niece into your care:
What will the world say when it hears this story
Of your own natural sister, and your cruelty,
When you shall second it with your Nieces shame?

I never was so mated, so astonished.


Nay, more than this, old Striker, i'll impeach
You for foul incontinence; and shaking your
Old Bullion Tronkes over my Trucklebed.

Thou art not desperate! wilt thou shame thy self?


I value neither shame, nor name, nor fame;
And wealth I have none to lose; you have enough
To pay for all I take it.

Oh I am sick.


Be of good cheer, i'll send for your Physician.


Sick, sick at heart; let me be had to bed.


I hope I have laid the heat of his severity,
So sometimes great offences pass for none,
When severe Judges dare not hear their own.

PRay lets agree upon it good wife, you are my wife I take it, and I should have
the command, yet I entreat, and am content you see.


And so would any man I think that has such a help and comings in by his wife
as you have: tis not your dirty Sparagus, your Artichoaks, your Carpes, your
Tulips, your Strawberries, can bring you in five hundred pound a year, if my
helping hand, and brain too were not in the business?


Let us agree upon it: and two or three years toil more, while our trade is in
request and fashion, will make us purchasers. I had once a hope to have bought
this Manor of Marshland for the resemblance it has to the Low Country soil
you came from, to have made you a Banke-side Lady. We may in time be somewhat.
But what did you take yesterday Mat in all, what had you, ha?


Poor piddling doings; some four and twenty pound.


What did the rich old Merchant spend upon the poor young gentleman's wife in
the yellow bed-chamber?


But eight and twenty shillings, and kept the room almost two hours, I had no
more of him.


And what the Knight with the broken Citizens wife (that goes so Lady like) in
the blew bed-chamber.


Almost four pound.


That was pretty well for two.


But her husband, and a couple of serving-men had a dish of Sparagus, and three
bottles of wine, besides the broken meat into one of the Arbors.


Every thing would live Mat: but here will be great Courtiers and Ladies to day
you say.


Yes they sent last night to bespeak a ten pound dinner, but I half fear
their coming will keep out some of our more constant, and more profitable
customers.


Twill make them the more eager to come another time then Mat. Have they paid
their reckoning in the Parlour?


Yes, but hutchingly, and are now going away.


O here they are going.


I protest Mr. Gardner your wife is too dear: Sixteen shillings for a dish of
Sparagus, two bottles of wine, and a little Sugar, I wonder how you can reckon
it.


That was your rec^oning in all sir; we make no account of particulars, but
all to Mall, as they do in the Netherlands.


Your Dutch account Mrs. is too high for us to trouble you any more.


That's as you please sir, a fair day after you:

Who would be troubled with such pinching guests?


I, tis good to misreckon such to be rid of them.


They are ee'n as welcome as the Knight that comes hither alone always, and
walks about the garden here half a day together, to feed upon Ladies looks,
as they pass to and fro; the peeping Knight, what do you call him?


O Sir Arnold Cautiou^.


You may call him Cautious, I never saw five shillings of his money yet.


No, he comes but to feed his eye, as you say, with leering at good faces, and
peeping at pretty insteps.


Sir Hugh-Money-lacke, our gather-guest as we call him, sends us no such dull
customers: O that good Gentleman I never did any ^averne, Inn, or new Ordinary
give tribute to a more deserving gentleman -- oh here come gallants.


Three, and ne'er a woman! strange! these are not the Courtiers we look for.

This is his daily haunt: I warrant thee we find him.


And it shall take, ne'er fear it Sam.


By your leave Mr. and Mrs. or rather Lord and Lady of the new plantation here.


Nay Prince and Princess of the Province of Asparagus.


The Island of two Acres here, more profitable than twice two thousand in the
Fens, till the drainers have done there.


You are pleasant gentlemen: what is your pleasure?


Saw you Sir Arnold Cautious here to day?


Not yet sir.


Have you a room in your house for us?


Have you any more company to come to you?


Yes, we expect some gentlemen.


Gentlemen did you say?


Yes indeed gentlemen, no gentlewomen I assure you.


In truth sir all the rooms within are gone.


What they are not gone abroad, are they?


You are always pleasant sir: I mean they are all taken up.


There are some taken up in them, is't not so?


Still you are pleasant sir: they are indeed bespoken for great Courtiers, and
Ladies that are to dine here.


If you will bestow your selves in the garden, and make choice of your Arbour:
you shall have the best cheer the house can afford ye, and you are welcome.


Be it so then; lets walk about gentlemen. Pray send us some wine.


And a dish of your Sparagus.


You shall have it gentlemen.


Did you note the wit of the woman?


I, because we had no wenches we must have no chamberroome, for fear she
disappoynt some that may bring them.


She spake of great Courtiers and Ladies that are to come.


Some good stuff perhaps.


Why I assure you, right noble, and right virtuous persons, and of both sexes
do frequent the place.


And I assure you, as ignoble and vicious do pester it too much; and these
that respect profit merely have not the wit, and less the virtue to
distinguish betwixt the best and the worst, but by their purses.


'Tis enough for them to weed their garden, not their guests: O here comes our
collation.


ANd what's the price of this feast boy?


Plaist ill Monsieur.


What a^t thou a French-man?


No, I took you for one sir, to bargain for your meat before you eat it,
that is not the generous English fashion, you shall know anon sir.


Go get you gone with your wit, and tell your prodigal fools so.


Go, we'll call when we want attendance.


Sam you are too sad; let not your disguise alter you with us: Come here's a
health to the Hans in Kelder, and the mother of the boy, if it prove so.


I'll pledge it.


We want Sir Hugh Mony-laok^ here to discourse the virtues of this precious
plant Asparagus, and what wonders it hath wrought in Burgundy, Almaino, Italy,
and Languedoc before the herborists had found the skill to plant it here.


What's he to whom weeseeke?


Who mine Uncle, Sir Arnold Cautious; he'll come, ne'er doubt him; he seldom
misses a day to pry and pier upon the beauties that come to walk here.


Tis such a Knightling, I'll but give ye his Character, and and he comes I
warrant thee* he is an infinite admirer of beauty, and dares not touch a woman:
he is aged about fifty, and a* bachelor: he defies wed locke, because he
thinks there is not a maiden*head in any marriagable beauty to be found among
Women.


Yet you say he is an admirer and hunter after the sight of beauty.


He gets a crick in his neck oft-times with squinting up at windows and
Belconies; and as he walks the streets, he peepes on both sides at fair
breasts and faces, as he were seeking Birdsnests; and follows pretty feet and
insteps like a hare tracker.


This is still mine Uncle.


And when he sees a Coach of Ladies about to alight, he makes a stand, in hope
to see a delicate leg slip through a laced smock, which if he chance to
discover he drivells.


Well, how your plot may hold to my purpose I cannot see: he is the unlikeliest
man to have a wench put upon that you can mention.


I grant the attempt is hard, but the higher will be the achievement: trust my
experience Sam: for as in every instrument are all tunes to him that has the
skill to find out the stops, so in every man there are all humours to him that
can find their faussets, and draw them out to his purpose.


Fear not the plot, as we have cast it, nor the performance in the Comedy,
though against mine own Natural Uncle.


Thy unnatural Vuncle thou would say; he ne'er did thee good in's life:
Act but thine own part, and be not out Sam, and fear nothing.


He's somewhat too young to act a rorer: but what Iads have we seen pass for
soldiers?


O here come the great guests.


And these are noble ones indeed; these are Courtiers Clinquant, and no
counterfeit stuff upon them: I know them all, every Lady with her own husband
too: what a virtuous 'honest age is this: and see if thine Uncle be not at his
old game, bopeepe in the tail of them. He shall follow them no further: Sir
Arnold Cautious, Noble Knight you are well encountered.


Good Master Gold wire, do you know these Ladies; or be they Ladies, ha?


Yes, and noble ones, the three Graces of the Court, the Lady Stately, the Lady
Handsome, and the Lady peerless, do not you know them?


No not I.


How the slave twitters; you look not up at greatness, you mind too much the
worldly things that are beneath you: if you had such a Lady under you, (of your
own I mean) you would mind her.


Oh fie, fie, fie.


Look no more aft^r them, they are gone: besides they are virtuous, and too
too great for you: when will you get a convenient wife of your own, to work
out the dry itch of a stale Bachelor?


Go, go, you are a wag, I itch not that way.


Will you go this way with me then, and hear what I will say to you?


With all my heart, I am free from business.


You have a Nephew, whose sister I married, a virtuous wife she is, and I love
him the better for it; he is a younger brother, and borne to no great fortune:
now you are very rich, a Bachelor, and therefore I think child less --


In truth Mr. Gold-wyer you must pardon me, I may not stay with you: I had
almost forgot a most important business.


Ee'n now he had none.


Nay good Sir Arnold Cautious, you know not what I'll say.


I say he is an unthrift, a Squanderer, and must not expect supplies from me.


He does not, shall not, not to the value of a token: pray stay, and hear me
sir; tis no ill air to stay in.


I withal my heeart good Mr. Gold-wyer; I like the air well, and your motion
hitherto.


Will you be pleased to do your kinsman the favour to further him in a match;
I mean an honest lawful marriage match -- but with your countenance, and a
good word at most.


The most unthankful office in the world: pray use some other friend in it:
indeed I stay too long.


Hear but who it is that he loves, how likely he is to obtain, what abundant
profit the match may bring him, and the desperate undoing danger he falls into
if he be not matched, and then do your pleasure.


Why what new danger is he towards, more than the old ill company he was wont
to keep?


Oh sir, he is now in league with a companion more dreadful than them all, a
fellow that is in part a Poet, and in part a Soldier.


Bounce, bounce.


You have hit upon his name: his name is Bounce, do you know him sir?


Not I, nor desire acquaintance with either of his qualities.


He is a gentleman sir, that has been upon some unfortunate late services, that
have not answered his merit.


And now he is come home to right himself, by writing his own meritorious
acts, is he?


Good in truth, I wish you would see them, to come over them with a jeer or
two; I know you are good at it: They are in an Arbour here close by, drinking
to their Muses, and glorifying one another for eithers excellency in the art
most Poetically.


Glorify do you say? I have heard Poets the most envious det ractors of one
another of all Creatures, next to the very Beggars.


Abroad perhaps and asunder, but together there's no such amity: You never saw
them drink; pray see them sir, it may take your Nephew off of his Ningle, who
hath infected him with Poetry already: and twenty to one, if he fail in the
match, which I was about to mention; he will win him away to the wars too,
and then he may be lost for ever.


Good Mr. Gold-wyer go you to your company, I am not a man of reckoning
amongst such; besides, I seldom drink betwixt meals.


Athis own cost he means.


I commend your temper: you shall not be in the reckoning; but I beseech you
let me prevail with you: See, we are upon hem: save you Gentlemen: I have
brought you a noble friend, your uncle; I know he is welcome to you brother
Wat; and you I am sure will make him so Mr. Bounce: when you shall hear he is
an admirer of Poetry and war.


Even a far off I assure ye: I never durst approach near the fury of either
of the fiery qualities.


It is your modesty, not fear that keeps you at distance I imagine.


Poets may imagine any thing: imagination is their wealth, some of them would
be but poor else: are you turned Poet Nephew?


For my private recreation sir.


What by writing Verses to win some Mistresses to your private recreation:
mean you so?


You dare not sir blaspheme the virtuous use
Of sacred Poetry, nor the fame traduce
Of Poets, who not alone immortal be,
But can give others immortality.
Poets that can men into stars translate,
And hurl men down under the feet of Fate:
Twas not Achilles sword, but Homers pen,
That made brave Hector dye the best of men:
And if that powerful Homer likewise would,
Hellen had been a hag, and Troy had stood.

Well said Poet, thou tumblest out old ends as well as the best of them.


Poets they are the life and death of things,
Queens give them honour, for the greatest Kings
Have bin their subjects.

Enough, enough; you are the first good Poet that e're I saw wear so good a
Countenance: leave it, I would not have a gentleman meddle with Poetry for
spoiling of his face: you seldom see a Poet look out at a good Visnomy.


Think you so sir?


Yes, and that it is a Poetical Policy, where the face is naturally good
without spot or blemish, to deface it by drinking, or wenching, to get a name
by it.


A death deserving scandal.


Hold, hold.


Thy malice, and thy ignorance
Have doomed thee.

Gentlemen what mean ye?


My blood must not endure it.


You have wronged us all, and me the most.


The wrong is chiefly mine; yet you add to it
By hindering my just vengeance.

I'll find a time to right you, or my self.


My next sight of thee is thy death:
I fear you are hurt sir; are you, pray sir tell me?

Let me first admire thy goodness and thy pity:
My own true natural Nephew.

Now it works.


I now consider, and will answer thee
In a full measure of true gratitude.

But good sir are you not hurt? if you bleed, I bleed with you.


Oh sincere Nephew, good boy I am not hurt,
Nor can I think of hurt, my thoughts are bent
Upon thy good; you were speaking of a choice sir,
My Nephew would be matched to, let me know the party.

Will you sir stand his friend?


Let me but know the party and her friend,
And instantly about it.

He is caught.


How am I bound to you!


Nephew I am yet bound to thee, and shall not rest till I am dis-ingag'd by
doing this office for thee: what is she, let me know?


Sir, as we walk you shall know all: i'll pay the reckoning within as we pass.


But by the way Nephew, I must bind you from Poetry.


For a Wife you shall sir.


Poetry, though it be of a quite contrary nature, is as pretty a jewell as
plain deal^ng, but they that use it forget the Proverb.


COme Madams, now if you please after your garden Feast,
To exercise your numerous feet, and tread
A curious knot upon this grassy square;
You shall fresh vigour add unto the spring,
And double the increase, sweetness and beauty
Of every plant and flower throughout the garden.

If I thought so my Lord, we would not do
Such precious work for nothing; we would be
Much better huswifes, and compound for shares
Of the gardeners profit.

Or at least hedge in
Our Sparagus dinner reckoning.

I commend your worldly providence:
Madam, such good Ladies will never dance
Away their husbands Lands.

But Madams will ye dance?


Not to improve the garden good my Lord,
A little for digestion if you please.

Music, play.


You have done Nobly Ladies, and much honoured
This piece of earth here, with your graceful footing.

By your fair imitation, good my Lords.


May the example of our harmless mirth
And Civil recreation purge the place
Of all foul purposes.

Tis an honest wish:
But wishes weed no gardens; hither come
Some wicked ones they say.

We seek not to abridge their privilege;
Nor can their ill hurt us; we are safe.

But let us walk, the time of day calls hence.


Agreed.


YOu are now welcome to the Asparagus Garden Land-lady.


I have been long a coming for all my longings: but now I hope I shall have
my belly full on it.


That you shall, fear not.


Would I were at it once.


Well, because she desires to be private, go in with your wife Mr.
Brittleware, take a room, call for a feast, and satisfy your wife, and bid
the Mrs: of the house to provide for us.


I will sir.


And how do you feel your self Mr. Hoyden after your bleeding, purging, and
bathing, the killing of your gross humours by your spare diet, and your new
infusion of pure blood, by your quaint feeding on delicate meates and drinks?
how do you feel your self?


Marry I feel that I am hungry, and that my shrimped yet and sippings have
almost famished me, and my purse too; slid I dare be sworn, as I am almost a
gentleman, that every bit and every spoonful that I have swallowed these ten
days, has cost me ten shillings at least.


Is it possible that you can consider this, and be almost a gentleman?


Small acquaintance I do not lye to you: truth's truth, as well in a Gentleman
as a beggar, for I am both almost, and perhaps not the first that can write so.


Do you note how his wit rises?


There's one of my hundred pounds gone that way, all but these twelve pieces.


You see now what a fine hand you have made of your money, since you got it out
of my clutches.


Then there's my apparel, a hundred pound went all in three suits, of which
this is the best.


But what do you think of your wit hundred pound?


Marry I think that was the best laid out: for by it I have got wit enough to
know that I was as clearly cozened of it as heart can wish: of my soul and
conscience, and as I am almost a gentleman, and a man had come to London for
nothing else but to be Cheated, he could not be more roundlier rid of his
money.


Well sir, if you repine at your expenses now, that you want no hang but your
Belly-full of Sparagus to finish my work of a gentleman in you; I will, if you
please, in lieu of that stuff up your paunch with Bacon and Bagge-pudding and
put you back again as absolute a Clown a^ ever you came from plough.


I would he're come to that once.


Take heed how you cross him.


Nay pray sir be not angry, (though to the shame of a Gentleman I say it) my
teeth do ee'ne water at the name of the sweet Country dish you spoke of (bacon
and bag-pudding) yet I will forbear it: but you say I shall fill my belly with
this new Daintrill that you spake of; these Sparowbills, what do you call'hem.


You shall have your belly full.


Top full I beseech you.


Humh --


You shall: but I must tell you, I must ha you turn away this grumbling Clown
that follows you: he is as dangerous about you, as your fathers blood was
within you, to cross and hinder your gentility.


True, you said you would help me to a boy no bigger than a Monkey.


And you shall have him, a pretty little knave, you may put him in your pocket.


Yes wusse, to pick's money out if he had it; shortly 'twill come to that
bevore't be long.


Coulter you must to the plough again; you are too heavy a clog at the heals
of a gentleman.


I with all my heart, and I con youthanks too.


The Clown, my fathers heir, will be glad of you.


Have you an elder brother?


You do not hear me say he is my brother; but the clown my father had a
former son, by a former wife, that was no gentlewoman as my mother was, and he
is a Clown all over, and incurable, even get you to him, like to like will
agree well: here's a Crown for you, 'twill carry you a foot to Tanton; and so
get you gone like a Clown as you are.


'Tis well you allow me some mon ey yet: we shall have you beg all the way
home shortly, when your Cheaters have done we' ye.


How villain!


Why do you not correct him sir?


Nay why do not you, he dares not? though he could spare his Clown blood, he
dares not venture his Gentleman blood so, nor you yours, tis all too fine I
doubt; therefore keep it, make much on it: I would be* loath a jail should
stay my journey, or by my Cursen soul I would see, what colour the best on it
were before I go. But if I don't your errand to your brother, and tell'n how
you do vlout'n behinde's back, then say Cut's a Cur: And so a vart for a
varewell to the proudest o'yee; and if you be an angered, tak't in your angry
teeth.


Mon. Ha, ha, ha.


What a rude Rascal 'tis? you are happy that he is gone.


And so am I, he hindered half my work; seven years time is too little to
make a gentleman of one that can suffer such a Clown within seven mile of him.


Would he were beyond Brainford on his way then by this time for me. But you
forget the way you were in; you said you would fill my belly; and then fall to
practice fine complements and congees to make me a perfect gentleman, and fit
to see mine unknown uncle.


All shall be done.


See if my Surgeon and his wife have not filled themselves, and come wiping
their lips already.


So shall you presently: now Landlady are you pleased with your Asparagus?


With the Asparagus I am; and yet but half pleased neither, as my husband
shall very well know.


Well, we will leave you to talk with him about it: come sir let us into the
house.


But half pleased sweet-heart?


No indeed Iohn Brittleware* the Asparagus has done its part; but you have not
done your part Iohn; and if you were an honest man Iohn, you would make sir
Hughes words good of the Asparagus, and be kinder to me: you are not kind to
your own wife Iohn in the Asparagus way; you understand me: for ought I see
Pompeons are as good meat for such a hoggish thing as thou art.


Well, when we come at home Beck, I know what I know.


At home, is't come to that? and I know what I know: I know he cannot love his
wife enough at home, that won't be kind to her abroad: but the best is I know
what my next longing shall be.


More longings yet! now out of the unsearchable depth of woman's imagination,
what may it be?


It begins to possess me already, still more and more: now tis an absolute
longing, and I shall be sick till I have it.


May I know it forsooth, tell it that you may have it.


I dare tell it you, but you must never know that I have it.


If you dare tell it.


Dare* nay be as jealous as you will: thus it is, I do long to steal out of
mine own house, unknown to you as other women do, and their husbands ne'er
the wiser, hither to this s^me Sparagus Garden, and meet some friend that will
be kind to me.


How, how!


In private; unknown to you, as I told you; 'tis* unpossible I shall ever have
a child else, and you so jealous over me as you are?


Art thou a woman and speak this?


Art thou a man, five years married to me; and ask me now if I be a woman?


Art thou so full of the Devil to fly out in this manner*


Why his horns fly not out of me to fright thee, do they?


Oh for a hell that has not a woman in it?


Look you there Iohn jealousy* there's an example before your eyes, if nothing
hang i'your sight; there you may see the difference between a sower husband and
a sweet natured gentleman! good heart! how kindly he kisses her! and how
feately she holds up the neb to him! little heart! when will you be so kind to
your own wife Iohn.


Is that his wife think you?


No, no, I know her, tis Mris. Holy-hocke the precise Drapers wife* oh, how my
longing grows stronger in me: J see what shift soever a woman makes with her
husband at home, a friend does best abroad.


Jndeed my Mris. will not take this money, there wants two shillings.


Why is my piece too light*


Two light for the reckoning Mrs. it comes to two twenty shillings, and this is
but twenty.


Unreasonable; how can she reckon it,


J know what you had sir, and we make no bills:


Well fare the Taverns yet, that though they cozened never so much, would down
with it one way or other^e and their Jacks, go again; now tel^ your Mris. that
will hinder her somewhat.


Not a jo^ sir.


Then tell her the Countess of Copt* Hall is coming to be her neighbour
again, and she may decline her trade very dangerously.


My Mris. scorns your words sir.


You. Rogue*


Nay sweet Co^, make no upror^ for my reputation^ sake; here youth there's two
shillings more, commend me to your Mistress.


She pays the reckoning it seems.


It seems then he has been as kind to her another way.


How is't? J hope you are not wrangling now, but better pleased than so.


No, no, sir Hugh, 'tis not the Spa^gus can do it, unless the man were better:


But may J now be confident that J am almost a gentleman.


Without that confidence you are nothing.


There wants nothing now, but that you learn the rules rudiments, the
principles and instructions for the carriages, congees, complements, which
we'll quicly put into you by practice.


And then the spending the little rest of my money, J am a clear gentleman, may
see my uncle.


Right, right.


And I will write it, and crowd it into as many Bonds as I can a purpose to
write gentleman; Timothy Hoyden of Tanton -- no, of London, Gentleman: London
is a common place for all gentlemen of my rank, is it not?


Excellent, do you not mark howfinely he comes on?


But as I hope to live and dye a gentleman Mrs. what shi* call, your reckoning
was devilish dear* s'daggers three pound for a few Cuckoo pintles, they were
no better I think.


Now you fall back again, and derogate from the condition of a gentleman most
grossly, to think any thing too dear you cate or drink.


Pox on it, I had forgot.


When he has his rules and principles, which must be his next study, he will
remember.


Pray let's about it (...).


Now we'll go; but you forget me Mistress.


No indeed sir Hugh* here's two Piece for last week and this.


Tis well* Landlord and Landlady will you go?


Would you would long to be at home once.


(...) I do perhaps and to be here again, and there again; and here, and
there* and here again ^ and all at once.


Hey kicksie winsie.


And I do long to go to Windsor too, to know if the prophecy (...) there,
(...) reported here.


How did you hear it goes forsooth?


That all old women shall die, and many young wives shall have Cuckol^s to their
husbands*


I heard forsooth that all young wives should dye that were pu^e maids when
they were married.


And none other?


(...) report goes forsooth*


You speak very comfortably: It may be a long journey to the worlds end yet.


It seems you are not proscribed by the prophecy then?


I thank my destiny.


My first work when I am complete gentleman shall be to get them a Child, and
make them friends.


A most gentlemanly resolution.


And truly the City is much bound to such well affected gentlemen.


IS it possible that half this can be true, that a half brother of mine can
be made such an ass all over?


Tis all true, as I am a Cursen fellow Mr. Thomas, every word on it: ^ scorn to
lye in a syllabub I; what luck had I to meet you? I never thought to see you
at London.


S'daggers death, it has as good as veez'd me out o'my wits to think on it: was
my vathers blood so quaisome to him, (with a mischief to t) that he must let
it out to be a gentleman, because his mother was one (by her own report:) for
our own parts we another know nor care where hence she coame, nor whither she's
gone, but dead she is) she brought my father a good purse of money, and kept
another in store it seems, till she could keep't no longer, and then bestowed
it well and wisely upon Chitty vace her zonne, to make him a geantleman, and
told him what great house he coame on by her side; for she was a Striker
forzooth, and ga'n directions to vinde an old Uncle of his here in
Cuckold-shire, one Mr. Striker: but first she bade him put his zelfe into
vashion, and be sure to beare's zelfe like a Gentleman; and he has ta^ne a
wise course to compass it, i^ zeems: I warrant he ha made a voole of his voure
hundred pound by this time.


Ay, and o'his zelfe too, as his Cony catchers ha handled him: And you had
zeen't, you would have be pissed your zelfe for woe, how they blooded him.


Ah.


And then how they spurg'd his guts out.


Ah.


A Bots light on them, 'twould ha made a dog zick to zeet how like a scalded
pig he looked.


Ha, ha, ha.


And then how they did veed'ne with a zort of zlip zlaps not all worth a' mess
of milk porridge to make him vine vorsooth.


Ah.


You'll see such an altrication in him as never was seen in a brother.


But I wo'not zee'n yet as voule a Clown, as I am, and as vine a gentleman, as
he is, I have a trick i'my skonce to make a younger brother o'ne.


I that would be zeene now.


I have it, and 'tis a vine one, I came to London to seek the voole my brother,
and ha the same directions from our Curate, (to whom my mother told all) that
Tim had to vinde his uncle Strikers house, and I ha quir'd it out; and this is
it, and thou zhalt see what I chill do now: wh'are within.


Who would you speak with.


By your leave vorsooth, I would speak with the Mr. of the house: I understand
his worships name is Mr. Striker.


He is so sir, but he is not in case to buy any cattle at this time.


Nor do I come to zell'n any; my coming is of a dead bodies errand vorsooth.


What strange fellow is this troe?


I* pray vorsooth, and you be old enough (as it zeems you be) to remember when
my mother was a maid, did you know a zuster of Mr. Strikers that was married
into Zummerzet shire?


What was her name I pray?


Her Cursen name was Audrey, she zed, and a Striker she as before she was
married; but my father made a Hoyden.


Hoyden.


Yes Hoyden, so I say; there be very good vokes of th name, as you shall well
know; I cham one my zelfe, and she need not be ashamed I wusse of the kin she
coame on, to hugger mugger it as she did to her dying day.


Most wonderful, but is she dead?


Yes vaith she's dead, and as sumptiously buried, though I zay't, as any
yeomans wife within ten mile of Tanton, any time these ten and twenty year.


Pray what were you to her?


I tell you, my va^her married her; and I should be her zonne I think.


Good heaven, how things will come about!


Coulter keep thy countenance Coulter, *i'll make^' hem believe I am her very
natural zonne, see what will come on it.


I'll keep my countenance, and get a vace on it too and ne^d be.


Your Uncle Striker at this time is very sick sir, but I will acquaint him
with your desire: pray walk into the next* room the while sir.


If he should dye now Coulter, and make me his heir?


I marry Mr. so you might make a better journey on it then the gentleman your
brother.


This to me is the greatest wonder of all, that I am presently possessed of my
Mrs. sullen sickness, which has ee'n drawn him to deaths door, and my
Mistresses unfortunable condition are nothing to this Country Hoydens relation:


O Mr. Touchwood, you are the welcom'st Gentleman that ever could come into so
heavy a house.

A stinking one it is I am sure: that nasty carrion thy Mr. is i'my nose
already, I think I were best go no further.


Let not the sadness of this place dismay you.


But is he dead already, ha?


Not altogether dead sir


The worse luck; and how does your Mistress? ha, ha, ha, well well I say
nothing.


She is in bodily health sir, but very sad and much disconsolate, poor
Damsel.


Not for her Grandsire, is she: if the worst dog he keeps howl for him, I'll
worry sheep with mine own* teeth, and truss for him; but why is she sad,
prithee tel me^ ha* ha, ha.


I marvel at your mirth sir.


I would now give her a new Gown, to tell me the true cause that I might save
mine oath, and roar out my rejoicings: twas a devilish trick of the Rascals
to bind me by oath never to speak of it, but to those that should tell me of
it first. I have such a coil to keep it in now: Prithee tell me, what has the
old Traveller* that is now bound for the Low Countries, gi'n thy Mrs. in his
will, can tell?


Alas he is offended with her, she has displeased him in somewhat, that is the
maine cause of his mortal sickness.


That's my boy, there boy, there, that was a home blow.


She comes not at him sir, nor dares not see him: do you know any thing by her
sir?


No, no, no, not I, not I; s'bores I bit my tongue too hard.


If you do sir, would you would speak a good word for her, that he may dye in
charity with her.


The jade jeeres me, I'll stay no longer ^'the house.


Nay good sir say not so, after so many messages and entreaties, by all the
best of the parish, and an exhortation made to you by the Minister himself: did
you vouchsafe to come, and will you now come short to see my Master, now the
Doctors have given him over, and he is dying?


I confess 'twas my desire to see that dying that brought me hither: where is
he? I'll hold my nose, and have at him.


I hope you will be friends with him now sir; for he's ee'n a going.


Friends? I'll rather go with him, and fight it out by the way.


Look you sir here he is.


What up and in a Chair?


Yes sir; he will not yield by any persuasion to dye in his bed.


Then he may live to be hanged yet* for ought I see.


See sir, your neighbour Touchwood comes to be reconciled to you.


You are quite besides the book sir Domine, I have no friends in hell to send
to by him: no sir, I come to see him dye, as he lived a hateful miscreant.


Let me pray and beseech you to speak more charitably, or else not to offend
the dying man with your presence.


Do I come to humour him, or you, or my self, think you: you that take upon
you, and do rather go about to sooth him up in his sickness, then to fright
him out of his pain, rather encourage him to live then rid the world of him,
and his abominations.


Best look into your self Sir: The worlds a stage, on which you both are
Actors, and neither to be his own Judge.


But he has played many wild and beastly parts in it, let him go, I would see
his last Exit, and hiss him out of it; hark, the Ravens cry pork for him,
and yet he dyes not.


O you are a hard-hearted man.


My heart's not hard enough to break his, I would it were: where's your kind
hearted Mistress, fetch her, and try what she can do.


Huh, huh, huh,


What have you done sir?


So, so, so, so it works, it works.


Out snarling Hell-hound my curse upon thee, and thy cursed son that has
undone my Niece and me: curse upon curse light on ye.


Oh fearful.


How heartily he prays; sure he is near his end.


Pray sir depart, you are too uncharitable.


My son undone thy Niece: has he not done her think thou? ha, ha, ha.


Huh, huh, huh: Villain thou know what he has done; huh, huh.


I know not whether I know or no; tell me, and I'll tell thee.


I'll tell you then that which you know already,
Although you keep it for a joy within you:
Your wicked son has by her own confession
Done that unto her, that unless he play
The honest mans part and marry her, he will
Full dearly answer it in Hell.

Huh, huh, huh.


Speak English, has he lain with her?


Tis so:
She has confessed it to her grandfather,
To me, and Mr. Pancridge here is made
Acquainted with it.

Ha, ha, ha*


The Virgin says
She is depusilated by your son.

Depusilated, ha, ha, ha.


It is no laughing matter: therefore send
Speedily for your son, before the rumour
Make it ridiculous; as yet none knows it,
But we a slender few.

Will you direct
Your Divine Rhetoric there to him; and win him
But to entreat me in this case, and try
What I will say to it.

Be persuaded sir.


In this extremity I do entreat you that they may marry*


I have my ends upon thee; quickly dye,
And take thine own, thy base submission
Has rendered thee more odious, more loathsome
To me than all thy former villainies.

Huh, huh huh.


And hark thee ere thou die, for now you are going*
Before my son shall wed that whore thy Niece,
She shall bring all the hands of all the whore-masters
In City, Court, and Kingdom, (black Coats, and all)
I will spare none) unto a fair Certificate
That she is clear of all men but my son,

Huh, huh, huh.


Nay more:
That she is clear of him too; and that he
Has never topped her in the way we treat of,
Before he wed her: for my son shall not ride
In his old boots upon his wedding night:
So, now dye and sink
Into thy grave, to rid us of thy stink.

I have not known such want of charity.


Unconscionable wretch, thou hast killed my Mr.


Vgh, ugh, no Fid ugh hem! he has cured me:
I am light at heart again: he has cured me;
He has played the good Physician against his will;
And a halter be his fee for it.

The Devil I have, and his Dam it shall.


Ah hem! I am light at heart again.


O damned old counterfeit.


Well fare your heart old Master.


Though she prove bastard-bellyed, I will own her,
Cherish, maintain, and keep her from thy son.

Oh I could tear that tongue out.


Keep her child too.


Do, and her next, and fill thy house with bastards.


I'll hold them more legitimate than thy brood.


What mean you gentlemen?


For thou, thy son, thy house is all a Bastard.


Bear witness, he calls my house a Bastard.


Ha, ha, ha.


I'll make thy house to smoke for it.


Bear witness there, he says he will fire my house.


For neighbour-hood and Charity speak lower.


Tis'petty treason; i'll be wi'yee there sir.


And hang thy self old scare Crow.


Will you eat a piece of Ginger-bread for your Wind Sir.


Out Witch.


O murder, murder.


I'll lay as many actions on thee as thou hast bones in that Swines foot of
thine.


My Nailes shall right me: I'll teach him to kick a woman.


Hold mistress Friswood*


O Villain kick a woman!


Thou laidst this plot to murder me, thou man-killer.


Blood-sucker thou lie.


Help from above, within, or any whence, in the name of sanctity I conjure
you. Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.


What's the matter? by your leave which is my zick Uncle? are you scuffling
for's money before he be dead.


We'll part you with a vengeance.


Ha you your Tennants, your Clowns here brought in to butcher me?


Slave they are thine, brought in to spoil and rob me; I know 'he^n not.


I fear I have conjured up fiends indeed, how infernally they look?


No sir, we come with no zick intendment on neither another zide; but an you be
Mr. Striker, we are o'your zide, an't be to cut all the rest into Pot-hearbs.


No, this is my Mr.


Say but the word then, and have at them.


Had you your ambuscado for me?


They are a pair of the Sedan Mules I take it.


Moyles sir, we be no Moyles would you should well know.


We be Cursen folk as good as your zelfe, and get you out of the house by mine
Uncles leave here.


Your Uncle, oh brave.


Orif I baste you not well a fine, and Lamb-skinne your jackets till your bones
rattle i'your hides, then say cha bewrai'd the house I coame on.


Well sir, I'll go and leave you to your Uncle: rejoice sir with your kind red:
I hope you will have more shortly, if your Niece prove fruitful: Come Master
Paneridge, will you go?


With joy for your recovery, and manners to your privacy, Right Worshipful I
leave you to talk with' Clown your Nephew.


Tarry, tarry; as sure as a Club, this Clown is sent for out of the Country,
to soder up his cracked Niece in Matrimony, and therefore calls him Uncle; I
could spoil the Match, but by my oath I dare not; and therefore Clown take
thy course: come let us go Mr. Pancridge


And why you my Nephew sir?


And why not I your Nephew; have not she told you, and haven't I told you as much
as the matter's worth, and do ye mean to vlee from the bargain?


What new afflictions hourly find me out?


And for your health, I hope sir.


Sir, I'll have better testimony then your own;
Tis true I lost a sister; but till you
Bring stronger proof she was your mother sir,
Your Clowneship must not Uncle me; am I we'you sir?
Kings Crowns have been pretended to by'impostures;
And knavery is as rife in Russet Wool,
As in the proudest purple; get you gone,
There I am we'you directly.

Is't come to this now?


Your project will not hold Mr. Thomas, best zeek your brother Tim, he has a
zertification from the parish, and the Priest too, of all your mothers mind,
and you could cousin him on it, and come again, and uncle this weese gentleman,
whether he wool or no; 'twould be vine i'vaith


Agreed: well sir, for this time I ha no more to say t'yee, since you be so
budge: but he that made you zave you


Farewell sir, I do begin to think there's something in it.


He made me think he was your sisters son In m sure.


I will not think so, no he was set on
By some of my maligners to abuse me;
It had been good to ha laid him by the heals:
But let him go; call down my Niece out of
The melancholy mist she's chambred in,
All makes for her; their vexing me, restores
Her to my love again; and reason good;
She's mine own natural Niece: and though
She has lost the husband, and the name she sought,
Yet she appears a Striker; and I will cherish her.
Come you shall grieve no longer, I am friends wi'yee:
Stand up, stand up I say, and look up too,
Off with this mourning veil, and dry those tears:
I have considered that right Noble Parents
Have pardoned in their Children as great faults;
But let it be your warning, not your licence.

For your security I am content,
And would entreat to live in that retirement,
Which your fair Justice, and my foul offence
Of late confined me to, to weep and sigh
My loathed life away.

No more: you shall
No longer live reclus'd in wilful darkness;
Enjoy your former liberty; see, and be seen:
And (as you weigh my pardon and my love)
Let not your blemish dwell upon your face;
Nor any argument of grief, or shame
Be legible there, to the most curious eye:
But let your cheek be cheerful, and your brow
Crowned with as great a confidence, as may
Comply with Virgin Modesty: and that
Add to your beauty with full strength of Art,
Beyond the eye to take a lovers heart.

In all I will obey you,


If I make
Choice of a husband for you then, you'll take him.

Twill but become my duty.


A good girl.


Sir here's the Knight come again, that has been here in the time of your
sickness to have seen you, and my Mistress, but could not: and left a letter
for you once: he that looks women through so.


Oh* Sir Arnold Cautious: did you tell him I was of the mending hand.


Yes I told him you were so, so.


Give me my Gown and Cap though, and set me charily in my sickly chair; his
letter is a treaty of a match betwixt his Nephew and my Niece: go fetch him
up.

In Niece, and be not seen until I call you: until you hear me call you,
do you hear?

Could I but catch this Cautious coxcomb Knight now -- I'll put fair for it.


Here is the Knight sir.


Why reach you not a Chair? I hope sir Arnold
You'll pardon the necessity of my rudeness:
I cannot rise, nor stoop, to you, uh, uh, uh.

Rather excuse me sir, that press upon you
Thus in your weakness: but you understand
My business by my letter if you have read it.

Yes sir, go forth; but be not far I pray you.
I have heard your Nephew is a wild young man*

A very bashful boy I assure you; that's the reason
That I am won to be a spokes-man for him.

Oh no dissembling sir; you know he is wild,
And suffers under your displeasure for it: uh, uh, uh.

A witch could not guess righter: but they say
That dying men are Prophets oftentimes.
Suppose he has been wild, let me assure you
He's now reclaimed, and has my good opinion:
And is as like in person and behaviour
To gain the maids affection.

Speak to the purpose; pray what's his estate?


I there's the point indeed: why sir, he has
A hundred pound a year; and is withal
A hopeful, and a handsome gentleman.

Hopeful, and handsome! uh, uh, uh.


You sir have wealth enough.


And she has choice enough
Of greater matches: could I get her
Into a marriage vain, but she'll not look
Upon a man not she; but lives retired
Here in my house, and is a careful Nurse:
She's fitter sir to be an old mans Nurse,
Then any young mans bride: uh, uh, uh, uh.

Is she so grave in youth? I have often sought
A sight of her, but never could obtain it.

Not without my consent I warrant you;
She's nearer to a mother than a maid.
I tell you truth sir, and you know deceit
Becomes not dying men: uh, uh, uh. For virtue and obedience
She's fitter for your self then for your Nephew:
But to the point, a hundred pound a year
You say he has, and hopes and handsomnesse,
Which may acquire, with your assurance of
So much for jointure -- Yes, a thousand pound
In portion with her: but sir let me tell you,
I'd rather give six thousand unto one
Of mine own choice; which she will not refuse,
If I but say this is the man, and take him.

Will not your Niece be seen: I fain would see her.


At hand: she will not out of my presence sir,
Nor ever was by man, not since the clock
Of her Virginity struck eleven, not she,
Except at door or window, as men pass:
And so perhaps your Nephew may have seen her.

In truth no otherwise; and so he told me*
May not I see her sir?

I tell you true;
Deceit you know becomes not dying men: uh, uh, uh.
And therefore hark you sir, I have a purpose,
(That if she take the man whom I will choose)
To make her my sole heir; provided that
She match before I dye: uh, uh, I cannot last*

Pray let me see your Niece.


Friswood -- why Friswood.


Is that her name?


No sir, I call my maid.


A maid; I took her for an old woman.


A maid upon my virtue: and I fear
That her frigidity has mortifi'd my Niece:
Deceit becomes not dying men you know
Friswood I say, I bad her not be far:
I dare not strain my self to call her louder.

I'll call her for you sir: Fris --


Hold sir, hold, pray use this whistle for me,
I dare not strain my self to wind it I,
The Doctors tell me it will spend my spirits,
So, so, enough sir -- Fie, f^e upon you:
Go call my Niece, uh, uh.

Be of good cheer sir, and take courage man:
What you have been a Striker in your days:
And may be again, I would not have him dye.

Uh -- alas I cannot last -- why comes she not?


I cannot get her from her work; nor to
Believe me that you sent for her, because
I told her that a gentleman was with you

There was your fault, then I must call my self.
Why Anna-bell, ah, ah, ah, An-na-bell.

Take heed, strain not your self too hard, but send again:
The rarest beauty that I e're beheld,
Which with a maiden-head of that growth,
Would be an absolute wonder, her sweet modesty,
And meek obedience* justifies that too,
And makes her up a miracle of nature;
My former misbeliefe I do renounce,
And at first sight, (which is the birth of love)
A faith grows in me, strengthened by the word
Of this expiring man, that chastity
Has not forsaken beauty.

You shall hear him.


What to propound a husband? honoured sir,
Although I rather wish to dye a Virgin;
Yet my obedience to your grave behests
Shall sway my will: your choice shall be my liking:
But let me thus much favour beg, before
You make that choice, that you will not destroy
The building you have rear*d; your care and cost
Hath built me up by virtuous education,
Unto that height that I consider heaven;
And wax so old in that high contemplation,
That to look down on youthful vanities,
Were to be at a stand; and to delight in them,
Were to fall back again; and to be linked
In marriage, to a man whose wild affections
Are bent to worldly pleasures a maine perdition.

I dare not speak to her for my Nephew now:
Nor (though I love her strangely) for my self.

Do you tell me of his Nephew sir? even he
The Knight himself, I hold to be too young
For a well governed man as the world goes.

I have not the heart to wrong her; she's too good.


Sir, here's a gentleman presses at my heals
To speak with you.

Mr. Goldwire, what's your haste?


I come to cry you mercy, and this good gentleman;
And this sweet Gentlewoman, who I take it
Is his fair Niece, of whom you are in treaty;
If it be not already gone too far;
Let me entreat you not to put your finger
Further in the business in behalf of your Nephew.

You first moved me to it.


Tis that repents me:
Your base unworthy Nephew has abused me;
I do not speak it for a slight hurt he has gi'n me,
But for his breach of Faith to another Virgin.

Oh me; and would you speak for such a man?


And the false way, the plot he had upon you,
To put you on this enterprise, the Quarrel*
In which he rescued you, to indeere himself to you,
Was a mere counterfeit squabble, a very trick
Contrived betwixt him* and his brother Poet
T'abuse your goodness:
J leave it to your consideration sir:
I am in haste; and so I wish you health sir;
And you much happiness in a husband Lady.

Has given me here a letter; I want but
Place fit to peruse it.

Had he a plot upon me, I'll have my plot too;
And now woe for my self sir if you please.

Sir, let me tell you, I think well of you, uh, uh,
Deceit becomes not dying men you know,
She would make ee'ne too good a wife for you:
(...) I have heard sir of your disposition,
Never to marry without best assurance,
First, of Virginity, and then of Chastity,
In her that you would choose; and let me tell you, uh, uh,
I know not where you can so well be fitted:
She's right, uh, uh, if you dare take a weak mans word,
Deceit would ill become me, uh, uh.

I take you at your word, and thank you sir.


Vh, uh, uh, uh -- O lay me in my bed:
You need not leave me yet sir.

No sir, no,
It shall be a match, or no match ere I go.

NOw sir have you your rules by heart?


Both Rules and Rudiments I have al ad unguem.


Repeat your Principles.


Principles to be imprinted in the heart of every new made gentleman: To
commend none but himself: to like no mans wit but his own: to slight that
which he understands not: to send money, never look for it again: to take up upon
obligation, lend out upon affection: to owe much, but pay little* to sell land,
but buy none: to pawn, but never to redeem again: to fight for a whore: to
cherish a Bawd, and defy a trades-man.


And can you observe and keep these rules think you?


I hope I can sir, and have begun pretty well already* you see I have spent
and lent all my money; and pawned all my Clothes but these a* my back, as I am
a clear gentleman; and for the rest of the rudiments, and the several
carriages and deportments by garb, by congy, complement, c. which are to be
attained by practice when I come abroad and amongst them, you shall gain
credit by me.


I commend your confidence: now Mr. Spring, and Mr. Brittleware, play you the
Complementasters before him a little, for his further instruction: Imagine them
a couple of Courtiers scarcely acquainted fall to; and look that you congy in
the new French Bum-trick; here Landlord, take his Cloak and hat to appear more
generous.


Bum trick!


Come meet and begin; play but two or three bouts at most at single Rapier
complement, and one or two at Back-sword and you ha done: now observe sir.


Single Rapier, and Back-sword Complement foil.


Noble Master Fine-wit, the single example of Court-Ceremony, if my
apprehension deal fairly with me.


Sir, how auspiciously have I fallen upon the knowledge of you by virtue of the
same apprehension.


So, there's one.


What's here?


Peace, let's see a little more.


As I am a Gentleman, a neat bout and fairly come off of both sides.


Sir* I shall ever bless the promptness of my memory, in being so fortunate
to collect the fallacious acquaintance of so complete a goodness.


Sweet sir I shall ever bless, c.


Oh you are pleased out of that noble worth which can convert all things to the
form and image of its own perfection to make your self glorious, with that
which is miserably impoverished in it self.


Good, there's two.


Miserably impoverisht in it self -- oh sweet.


Sir, you have such a conquering way in humility, that he shall be sure to
come off vanquished that offers to contend with you.


This is the noblest of all humanity to piece up the defect of your friend with
a glory of your own.


A plain hit that: here were three bouts well plaid.


Piece up the defect of your friend with a glory of your own: most stately
fine, as I am a gentleman.


So much for single Rapier: now for your secret wipe at Back-sword.


I that I would see, like the hackling of the Millers legs: now for a delicate
back-blow.


See you yon fellow I held complement with?


Yes sir, a well-spoken gentleman and a lovely.


The arrantst trifle in a Kingdom.


What he is not, is he?


Made only to make physic work: a very lump of laughter.


Ha, ha, ha.


You have done well: now you sir.


Do you note him yonder that past from you?


That gallant sir?


The very scorn at Court;
So empty, not one passable part about him.

Good.


A very tilting stock for young practisers to break their jests on.


Enough.


Good and enough; do you call this good enough, to abuse one another thus?


Yes, this is qacksword Complement: this wipes off the false praise which the
first thrust on: you must be seen in both, or you are no true garbist else.


J shall soonest hit o'this; for from a whelp I could give scurvey language.


Now break in upon them; save you sir Hugh.


O course salutation: save you sir Hugh.


How got you hither gentlemen?


Here we are sir, and have seen part of your practice, your Courtly exercise.


Peace: but how got you in, and a stranger with ye?


He shall betray nothing.


We found fair entrance into the house.


'Sfoot where's my wife then?


If your wife be the gentlewoman of the house sir, she's now gone forth in one
of the new Hand-litters: what call ye it, a Sedan.


O Sedana.


He's run mad with his horns.


He's run with my Hat and Cloak by your leave.


He'll come again, near doubt him.


You say so small acquaintance* but I could ne'er see any thing of mine again,
since I came amongst you, if it once got out of my sight: what money have I
left troe?


I pray gentlemen which way took she:


Down towards the Strand I tell you, in a new Litter, with the number one and
twenty in the breech on it.


A Litter of one and twenty in her breech: High time to run.


You see we have our plot in action too, sir Hugh, and it runs fairly on.


But what a rogue art thou to put such a slur upon thine own Uncle* first to
put him on for thy self, then you with a Counterfeit trick to put him off of
that course, to run desperately headlong to break his own neck in a match:
what a Rogue art thou to use thine uncle thus?


Nay what a wretch were you, if you should cross your daughter in such a
fortune?


Which if I do, cut my wind-pipe: what the young rascal Touchwood is gone into
France they say?


I he's safe enough.


Sir Cautious to be caught! if I do not love my daughter the better for her
lucky leg stretching* I am a villain, I am taken with such kind of roguery.


Take heed you have not a cross plot in that itching pate of yours to spoil
all now.


Then cut my weasond I say.


And I swear I will, or cut these hands off; I thought good to tell you so,
because I know what tricks you have done, what discoveries you have made for
small parcels of ready money.


Hoo pox, I want no money; now look there comes Mr. Hoyden, salute these
gallants.


What without a hat or cloak?


The better for a young beginner.


Sweet sir, I shall ever bless my auspicious stars, that shined me into the
falicious acquaintance of so singular goodness.


Sir you forget your self.


Most singular sweet sir, most miserably impoverish't in it self.


Good sir forbear, make not an Idol of me.


You piece up the defect of your friend with a glory of your own.


Can you say this gentleman was a Clown within this fortnight?


Within this fortnight I assure you sir, as rank a Clown of one side, as ever
held Cow to Bull.


Had it been of both sides, it had been miraculous.


Now note me sir: do you see that fellow I left?


Yes, tis my friend.


The arrantest coxcomb in a Country


How sir?


Made only to make Physic work.


You do not know him sure.


A tilting stock for young practisers to break jests on: there's a wipe for
you at back sword Complement.


There's another for you sir.


You knock at the wrong door sir, and I pity your ignorance: go to school
as I have done, and learn more wit: kick a gentleman.


Here he is and here be all the crew on them, and more.


Here? thou mockst he is not here: sure these be all Lords I think.


How now; what's he?


Slid 'tis his Clown brother he spake of?


Is't possible? icha made a sweet jaunt after you have I wound a vine voole
o'thee: where's thy voure hundred pound? is that made a voole on too troe:
where's the zartificate my mother ga' thee to vinde thine uncle? give me that,
chill ^ee what I can do wi'it.


Away Clown I know thee not can thou complement?


Complement lies, I can complement dagger out o'sheath, an I get on it.


I hope he'll veeze you, and make your zilken jacket hum: well zed Mr. Thomas
to them, and to them all I'll zi^e ye.


Mr. Thomas does he call him?


Yes, Mr. Thomas, and what say you to that; and as good a Mr. as the best
o'yee, and you go to that; for by uds shall jidge me, I think you are all but
a company of Cheaterlings; and if you do not give the voole my brother
sartifaction for the wrongs you hawed one him, and me in him, I'll canvas it out
of the carcasses o'zome o'yee, by uds daggers death will I. Draw Coul^er,
amongst them.


Hold sir, hold, you shall have satisfaction.


O shall I zoe, put up again Coulter.


This is a stout roaring Clown.


Where's the Mr. of the house?


He's run mad, after his wife, now he should look to his house.


Cha mich a do to vorbeare beating o'thee yet, my vingers do so itch at thee.


I understand thee not, as I am a gentleman.


But now I think on it Coulter, we'll have all ag^ine, by a quieter way; and
teach them to like honey, catch birds with Chafe, or go to plow with dogs.


Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha; who understands the Barbarian trow?


Uds vish Master they do nothing but jeer to you all this while now.


Do they jeer, let them jeer gibe too; i'll vetch ones Warrant shall out jeer
them all, and he be above ground.


You shall not need sir; go but in till the Mr. of the house comes home, you
shall have your desire.


You say very well sir; say well is good, but do well is better. Lets see what
you will do now.


Remember we have warned you sir Hugh, we must leave you.


Nay I'chill look to you: sirrah come in my hand.


Now for a trick to rid us of this Clown,
Or our trade sinks, and up our house is blown.

T^s as I tell you Mr. Touchwood; your son has lost a fair fortune in the
young gentlewoman, and as I conceive by your wilfulnes Sir Arnold Cautions
licks his lips at her. I assure you; and a sweet lick it is, six thousand
pound in present portion.


A sweet li^k he has indeed if he knew all.


He does know all sir.


If he did, I know what I know; good oath let me not lose thy virtue.


He knows moreover, that Mr. Strike^, her grandfather has covenanted to give
her two thousand pound more at the birth of his first Child, lawfully begotten
on her body.


Ha, ha, ha; but what if her first child prove illegitimate?


That is not to be thought sir.


Yes, and spoken too, if I durst; but good oath let me not lose thy virtue.


And then he had entered into ten thousand pound bond, to leave her his heir if
she survive him.


But he's well recovered you say.


Very lusty, very lively sir.


Then hang him, he'll never dye; I am a feared I must be fain to give him
over, I shall never vex him to death: no, no, I shall never do it.


No sir, I heard himself say, that your vexing him has bin his physic, and
the best means to keep him alive.


Did he say so? I'll tear this match in pieces presently: and see how that will
work on him; i'll do it, what's an oath to me, in respect of sending him to the
Devil, I'll do it.


I would you could sir, and recover her for your son yet.


Vmh.


Because I love the young gentleman well


Vmh.


Though I assure you the writings are all past, signed, sealed, and delivered;
but I have them in my hands yet, and can do you a pleasure.


Humh.


And came purpos^ly to advise you, because I love your son.


Vmh -- what a world of villainy lies in the jobber noule of a Lawyer.


Think of it sir, and be speedy.


Right learned in the Law, and my sons friend Mr. Trampler, Mr. Ambodexter
Trampler, you are a most notorious knave, and you shall hear on it o'both
sides, as you take fees.


Nay, and you be so hot Mr Touchwood I am gone.


I know my course; either I will crack the heart-strings of Striker, in
crossing this match, with the cracked credit of his Niece, or else I will be
friends with him, and that will kill him out right: But my oath still troubles
me -- Oh gentlemen you are welcome.


Ha you heard sir of your son yet?


Not I, he lacks no money yet it seems:
Young Travellers make no other use of their fathers.

But ha you heard the news of his young Mistress?


What of sir Cautious being caught, the wise and wary gentleman, your Uncle,
that would not believe there could be a marriagable maid, though she were
justified by a jury of Midwifes, and therefore purposed to have died a
Bachelor: that he should now be caught with a pipt Nut-shell, and a Maggot
in it.


Sure he was strangely wrought to it.


I you must think
There have been knavish heads used in the business.

But I will cross it and their knaveries, what ere they are.


I hope you will not cross mine uncle in such a fortune tho.


What to marry a wench?


No, so much wealth sir.


Pray let me use my Christian Liberty, my Conscience pricks me to it, it must be
done.

Now what say you sir?


We might ha spared this labour: he was resolved before we came it seems to
spoil the marriage.


We could not be too sure though: we are now sure enough, that our
dissuasions will spur him on the faster.


And we are no less sure, that sir Hugh Mony-lacks will set his strength to
life Sir Cautious off of the hooks, in hope of a matter of 5. Pound, though ^e
forfeit the obligation of his throat by it.


All the danger is, that Sir Hugh will be with mine Uncle too soon, prevent the
match before he be too deep engaged in it.


For that my letter of instructions, which I have given Annabell shall prevent
him; and Striker keeps Sir Cautious in his house so warily, that until the
intended wedding hour, Sr. Hugh shall not obtain admittance.


Go fetch them in, and make the warrant: ha, ha, ha: Gentlemen will you hear
a complaint my man tells me of certain Clowns that desire my warrant to
apprehend for notorious Cheaters, whom do you think?


I cannot guess.


I know none I hope.


Even Sir Hugh Money-lacks, the mourning Knight, and some of his associates.


O'my life it is the roaring Clown, about the new made Gentleman his brother.


What is it you sir, Mr. Strikers Nephew, as I take it, you called his great
worships Uncle lately as I take it, and did your best to tore me out of his
house.


Zheart Coulter we be vallen into the Bakers ditch.


And do you bring your complaints to me sir, ha?


Get a good vace on it; and veare no colours though.


I am an honest man, and a true man for all that, and I thought you the vittest
to make my complaint to because you were the next Justice, to as pestilence a
piece of villainy as ever you were Master of in all your life: I come but v^r
justice, and to pay for what I take, and't be avore hand, here it is, whether
it be for your Clarke or your zelfe, who makes or meddles with it, your man has
my complaint in writing, pray let me have your warrant.


You shall, but first tell me, how came it that you called that Strike^ uncle.


For cause that he is uncle to a voole that I have to my brother, and I thought
I might be so bold wee'n, and he was not against it at first, till you were
gone, and then he bad me go zeek better testimony, and so I went and wound my
brother Tim, his own zusters zonne I assure ye.


His Sisters son?


Where he was made such a Tim, as ne'er was heard on in To^ton, amongst a many
Cheaters: by mass here are a couple o'^.


These were of the crew.


How now my Masters: sure fellow thou art mistaken.


No sir, I am not mistaken I but I take them I, where I vinde them I: And I
charge your justiceship with them I, till they bring out my brother I.


Bring out your brother: why what has your brother done?


Done: nay they have done and undone him amongst them. And I think devoured him
quick too for he is lost, no where to be wound.


Do you know the meaning of any of this gentlemen?


If he were your brother sir, that you found at Sir Hugh Money-lacks lodging,
you know we left him in your hands.


We stepped in but by chance, such a youth we found there, there we left him in
your and their hands, that had the managing of him.


So you did, but what then did me the rest, but pli'd me, and my man Coulter
here with wine, and zack, and something in it, I dare be zwore that laid us a
zleep, when we mistrusted nothing but vaire play: oh speak Coulter, oh.


And then when were vast azleep, they all gave us the zlip, the Knight was gon,
and the Squire was gon, Mr. Tim was gon, but he was made away, without all
peraventure; for all the parrell that he wore was left behind: and then --
speak Master.


And then the Mr of the house came home, made a monstrous wonderment for the
loss of his wife; he could not vinde her he zed. and so he vaire and vlatly
thrust us out o'doores, and is gone a hunting after his wife again: speak
Coulter.


Alas poor Britlew^re.


And then we came for your warrant, to find all these men again.


And to take them where we vinde them, these were some on them, when time was,
and pray look to them.


I know not what to make o'this but sure there's something in it: And for these
gentlemen i'll see them forth-comming.


We thank you sir.


And I will undertake Sir Hugh Mony-lacks will be at the Bride-house.


And thither will I instantly.


We'll wait upon you sir.


And I chill make bold to wait upon you till I be better zartified.


You shall, come on your way, come gentlemen.


Well, here is such a knot now to untie,
As would turn O^dipus his brain ^wry.

Be appeased and comforted, good Mr. Br^tleware, trouble not your head in
running after your fate, nor break your weighty brains in seeking ways after
your wives heals, which are so light by your own report, they cannot crack an
egg.


Her credit yet they may and mine.


Besides your wife is your wife where e're she is abroad as we as at home, yea,
lost perhaps as well as found: I am now going to yoke a heifer to a husband,
that perhaps will say so shortly: whither away Mr. Trampler?


To the wedding house: where I think I saw your wife last night Mr.
Britleware.


Did you sir, did you^


I cannot say directly; but I think 'twas she: does she not call the
gentlewoman Aunt that keeps Mr. Strikers house?


Yes Mistress Friswood, she is her Aunt sir.


Come go with us and find her.


Pray gentleman stay, for I suppose She's here here's number one and twenty;
this is sure the litter.


What peep y^u for; you ought not to do so sir.


By what Commission ought you to carry my wife in a Close stool under my nose


Tis a close Chair by your leave: And I pray forbear, you know not who we
carry.


I know the clothes she wears, and I will see the party.


I know that voice, let me see the man; it is my surgeon.


A Surgeon! I took you for a China shop-keeper Master Britleware; these by
trades are for some by purposes, and I smell knavery.


And Lawyers commonly are the best upon that sent.


Gentlemen this is a man that lay in my house.


A gentleman you would say, or my cost was ill besto'd there.


These are my goods he wears; that was my mothers Gown, and feloniously he
wears it.


Tis all I have to show for four hundred pound I laid out in your house; and
Sir Hugh put it upon me, and hired these men to carry me -- Whither was it?


Up to a lodging in St. Gileses sir.


Where he promised to finish his work of a gentleman in me, and send me to my
Uncle.


O monstrum horendum; a man in women's clothes.


Tis felony by the Law.


Has sir Hugh gin me the slip to finish his work in private? it shall all out,
I am resolved, though I bewray my self in it: pray gentlemen assist me with
this party to Mr. Justice Strikers, you say my wife is there.


Yes you shall thither.


And there I'll take a course you shall smell knavery enough.


I find Jam abused enough of conscience: and shall be carried to mine Uncle
now before my time and not as a gentleman, but as a gentlewoman, which grieves
me worst of all.


Hinc illae lachrimae, the youth is sure abused indeed.


Oh.


Come leave your crying: And you beasts up with your luggage, and along with
us; i'll fetch such drivers as shall set you on else.


Let us be paid for our labour, and we'll carry him to Bride-well, if you
please.


Oh, oh, that ever I was born in this groa^g chair.


It was well I sent for thee Niece, to help me deck the Bride here; and that
the jealous fool thy husband thinks thou art gone astray the while; it will
be a means for thee to take thy liberty another night, and pay him home
indeed, when he shall not have the power to mistrust thee: it is the common
condition of Cuckolds to mistrust so much before hand, that when they are Du^'d
indeed, they have not a glimpse of suspicion left.


Their horns hang i^ their light then; but truly Aunt, for mine own part, I
had rather my husband should be jealous still then be cured in that right kind;
though I confess the ends of all my longings, and the vexations I have put him
to

Were but to run his jealousy out of breath,
And make him pant under the frivolous weight
He bears; that is, a Cuckold in conceit;
Which without doubt he labours with by this time:
And when he finds me clear, twill be as well:
( I hope) and better then if it were done
By the broad way of foul pollution.

Nay I do not persuade you, take the downright way,
Nothing against your Conscience Niece; I sent
For him to ha come and found you here by chance;
But he has shut up house, and is run mad
About the Town I hear to all your haunts.

He shall come hither and renounce his jealousy,
And then entreat me too before I go.

Yes, that's a wise wives part.


What's the Bride ready?


Yes sir, she's dressed.


And dressed, and dressed indeed;
Never was maid so dressed: oh sir you are happy;
The happiest Knight, and are now in election
Of the most sweet encounter in a bride,
That e're your chivalry could couch a Lance at.

I thank you Mrs. and I'll bring her shortly to bestow money w'yee in China
wares.


She is her self the purest piece of Pur^lane -- that e're had liquid sweet
meats licked out of it.


And purer too I hope.


Go call h^r down.


She's at her private prayers yet sir, she.


When she has done, then hasten her away.


Such Brides do seldom make their grooms their prey.


Do you now conclude Sir Arnold you are happy?


As man can be being so near a wife.


By your leave gentlemen.


He come? I fear a mischief.


How comes it Father Striker, and son Cautious in election
That you huddle up a match here for my child,
And I not made acquainted, as unworthy,
Until the very intended marriage hour?

Who sent you hither, I sent not for you now sir:
And there I am with ye sir.

Tis true, I covenanted not to come at you,
Until you sent for me, unless you found
Young Touchwood had the love of Annabell,
You have heard he has touched her has he not?

Hold your peace.


Has he not made her Touchwood too?


Can you say so?


Yes, struck fire too in her tinderbox.


You will not speak thus.


To you I need not; for you know it already;
But to my friend Sir Cautious, whom I honour,
And would not see so shipwrecked, I may speak it.

Will you undo your daughter?


My daughter; no you shall not put her upon me now.
She is your daughter sir: if I bu^ call her mine,
Or suffer her to ask me a bare blessing,
You'll thrust her out: no, you adopted her
In your own name, and made a Striker of her,
No more a Monylacks.

The beggarly Knight is desperate,
And should he out with it, my shame were endless:
This is the way or none to stop his mouth:
Tis but a money matter; stay a little

Go not away sir Arnold, I must speak with ye.


I am not going sir.


Be not a Mad-man here, here's forty pieces,
I know you use to strike for smaller sums:
But take it for your silence, and withal
My constant love, and my continual friendship.

Give me your hand of that; enough. Sir Arnold.


What say you to me sir Hugh?


What does he mean trow?


You must not have my daughter.


No sir Hugh.


Unless you mean to take another leavings.


Oh devilish reprobate.


How mean you that?


Till she has buried first another husband,
And he leave her a widow: I am her father,
And claim a fathers interest in her choice;
And I have promised her to one already,
This very day, because I was not privy
To your proceedings; and have taken here
This fair assumpsit forty pieces sir;
You might admire how I should have them otherwise.

Here's an impudent villain.


For these I give a hundred, if you wed her.


To show my love unto your daughter sir I'll pay't.


Security in hand were good.


Pray lend me sir a hundred Pieces.


I dare not cross this devil, I must fetch them.


Twill ne'er the less be my disparagement.


What, when they know her grandfather disposed her,
That has the care of her, and gives her portion?
And then he can ^a' but his money, can he?

Oh but the wench, the wench, is such a wench,
Scarce ^wo such married in a Diocese,
In twice two twelve months, for right and straight ones.

There said you well; the straight ones I like well:
But those that men call right, or good ones, suffer
A by Construction.

Amongst the Iewd.


Here sir.


But is here weight and number sir?


Now the fiend stretch thee -- you may take my word.


Here I am with ye sir.


Though you are fully bent to cross the marriage,
Yet lets entreat you not to be too sudden.

Till they come to the word, for better, for worse
I will not touch at it.

How now, what mates break in upon us here?


I come not as a guest sir, or spectator
To your great wedding, but of the Kings affairs;
In which I must crave your assistance sir;
Deny it me, or my entrance, if you dare.

It is some weighty matter sure then.
But not to trouble your sconce with too much business
At once, pursue your own, we will attend a while.

So it is sir,


In that he has said well: I would the Bride
And Priest were come once; I am content they stand
For witnesses: what my kind Nephew are you here?
I thank you for your plot, you see what 'tis come to.

Tis not all finished yet sir.
All in good time: the Bride is coming now.
You and your brother Poet are grown friends I see.

But it may be


Whats he?


A friend of Wats he brought for company.


He was amongst them too at the cheating exercise, and yonds the Knight
himself; I know them all I troe.


And you'll stand to this, that your lost brother
Was Strikers Sister Audreyes son.

I ha told you twonty times, and yet because you say you'll stand my vrend, i'll
tell you more, she was with child with Tim before my father married her (she
brought him in her belly vrom this town here (where they get Children without
veare or wit) but for her money, and's own credits zake, my father was well
apaid to keep it for his own; and no body knew to the Contrary, not Tim
himzelfe to this hour.


Then how came thou to know it?


My father told it me upon his death-bed, and charged me on his blessing, never
to open my mouth to man, woman, nor child, so I told no body but vokes on it.


Well, hold thy peace, tis an absolute wonder! ^ow to the wedding


Hows this? my bride in mourning habit, her head inwillow?


What's the meaning of it?


I said she was dressed as never Bride was dressed.


A solemn show, and suiting well the Scene!
She seems round bellied, and you mark it too.

My habit and my dressing suits my fortune.


Pray sir do your office, her conceit
We will know afterward.

Hem, hem.


Oh, oh.


Oh me; why Mistress look up, look up I say.


Clap her cheek, rub her nose.


Sprinkle cold water on her face.


Cut her lace, cut her lace, and bow her forward, so, so, so.


I'll lay my life she quickens now with child.


Oh.


What think you is the matter?


Women how is it with her?


Sir, as with other women in her case.


How's that I pray you. you have bin doing something afore-hand sir.


Twill out, 'twill out,


Have I?


It seems so by the story.


Is she so dressed?


Ha, ha, ha.


You may leave laughing, it was your son that did it.


I am undone, my house disgraced for ever.


He knew't before hand, now I may declar't,
Speak of thy Conscience, did^t not?

Oh my heart.


Oh the hangman.


Deceit becomes not dying men you know,
Into a whirlepoole of confusion
Sink thou and all thy family, accursed miser.

This was a sure way now Sir Cautious,
To marry a maid, there's one in the mothers belly.

Vh, uh, uh, uh.


You knew not where I could be so well fitted.


Vh, uh, uh.


A rot o'your dissembling entrails, spit them out, you durst not strain your
self to wind your whistle, your Doctor told you it would spend your spirits,
so made me whistle for her


Vh, uh, uh.


Cheer up, cheer up, I may be friends wi'yee now:
Here's one has cause, and knows the way to vex ye,
To preserve life in you as well as I.

A hem, a hem, I will out-live you both:
This days vexation is enough for a life time.

And may it last thee to thy lives last hour.


Now let me talk wi'yee, and come you hither sir.


I tell you true, your writings are so past, that if you go
Not off by composition, you'll shake your whole estate.

Come hither Nephew,
I'll give thee a thousand pound, and take her off me.

I cannot with my reputation now:
But I will do my best to work a friend to 't.

Prithee do, try thy Poetical soldier.


That Clown come hither too: I fear I am trapt.


Tis all as I have told you, and without question,
The man in question is your sisters son.

Would it might prove so, that I had yet a Nephew,
For now my Niece is lost.

Here's one shall find him out: or stretch a neck for it.
Sir Hugh you are charged for making of a gentleman.

Now I am in.


And more then so, for making him away.


What gentleman?


Marry my brother Tim.


Your patience yet a while: now gentlemen all,
Sir Cautious, and the rest, pray hear a story:
I have bin often urged to yield the cause
Of the long quarrel twixt this man and me:
Thirty years growth it has, he never durst
Reveal the reason; I being sullen would not.

You will not tell it now?


Indeed I will:
He had a sister (peace to her memory)
That in my youth I loved, she me so much,
That we concluded, we were man and wife;
And dread less of all marriage lets, we did
Anticipate the pleasures of the bed.
Nay it shall out; briefly, she proved with child:
This covetous man then greedy of her portion,
(Of which for the most part he was possessed)
Forces her with her shame to leave his house.
She makes her moan to me, I then (which since
I have with tears a thousand times repented)
Against my heart stood off, in hope to win
Her Dowry from him: when she gentle soul
(Whom I must now bewail) when she I say,
Not knowing my reserved intent, from him and me,
From friends, and all the world, for ought we knew,
Suddenly slipped away: after five years
I took another wife, by whom I had
The son, that has done that the woman says:
But where I left, if this mans tale be true,
She had a son, whom I demand of you.

I shall have a kind of an uncle of you anon,
And you prove Tims father.

The young Gentleman that sir Hugh had in handling, is in the house, and Master
Brittleware with him.


Only we kept em back, till our more serious office were ended.


Pray em in, lets see him.


Sir, will it please you first to see a match quickly clapped up? This Gentleman
whom I know every way deserving, were your Niece now in her prime of Fortune
and of Virtue, desires to have her, and she him as much.


He shall not have her.


How can you say so?


He knows his son I fear.


My son shall make his fault good, and restore her honour to her if he lives, in
meed for your f^ire sisters wrong and my misdeed, my son shall marry her;
provided that he take her in his Conscience unstain'd by any other man.


On that condition I'll give her all the worldly good I have.


We take you at your word.


My son!


I take her not with all faults, but without any least blemish.


My supposed slain: Thus I cast from me.


Znailes a Cushion, how warm her belly has made it.


And that all was but a plot 'twixt him and me, and these gentlemen: This paper
may resolve you.


Tis mine own hand by which I instructed her by a dissembled way, to wound her
honour.


Which, to preserve my love, again i'd do,
Hoping that you forgive it in me too.

Now am I cheated both ways.


The plot is finished: now thanks for your thousand pound sir.


You are mine own; welcome into my bosom.


Whoop, who oomes here, my brother Tim dressed like Master Majors wife of
Taunton-Deane.


Tis all I could get to escape with out of the cozning house; and all I have to
show of four hundred pound; but this certificate and this small jewel which my
dying mother ga'me; and I had much ado to hide it from the Cheaters, to bring
unto mine Uncle; which is he?


Lets see your token Sir.


This is a jewell that I gave my Awdrey.


That was my mother.


And that's your father he zaies.


And a gentleman? what a divellish deal of money might I ha saved! for
gentle-men let me tell you, I have been cozened black and blew; backe-guld and
belly-guld; and have nothing left me but a little bare Complement to live upon,
as I am a clear gentleman.


Will you bestow some of it upon me.


Uncle you shall: First i'll give you a hit at single Rapier complement: and
then a wipe or two with the Back-sword Complement and I ha done.


Pray begin.


Noble Mr. Striker the grave Magistrate (if my apprehension deal fairly with
me) whose praises reach to Heaven, for the fair distribution of equal
justice: the poor mans Sanctuary, the righter of Widows, and the Orphans
wrongs.


Enough, enough, you have said very well.


Note you yond justice sits upon the Bench?


Yes, I do note him.


The Stocks were fitter for him: the most corrupted fellow about the Suburbs,
his conscience is stewed in Bribes, all his poor neigbours curse him; tis
though the keeps a whoor now at three score.


A very Western Southsayer, thou art mine own.


His Niece is much suspected.


Nay there you went too far, this is his Niece, and my daughter now.


I know no Niece he has, I speak but backsword complement.


You put me well in mind though, here's one, that ere the Parson and we part,
i'll make an honest woman.


And for your part sir Hugh, you shall make satisfaction, and bring in your
Confederates.


Here's one that came to complain of me for my Robes here, but I ha lost my
small acquaintance.


I'll answer for him too, give you al the satisfaction that I can


What you cannot shall be remitted, we have all our faults.


And have I found thee Beck in so good company?


I Jack, be you jealous no more, and I will long no more to vex rhee.


Live lovingly and honestly I charge you, or come not at me when I am married.


This yonker i'll take care for,
And make him a new gentleman by new breeding,
Without the Diet, bathing, purge, or bleeding.

Sweet Sir I thank you.


I'll home again then and make Tanton ring on it.


Our quarrel in this piece of folly ends.


He parted us, and he has made us friends.


Nephew, and Gentlemen, I am friends with all,
You had your plot upon me, I had mine.

Lets in, and end all differences in wine.


AT first we made no boast, and still we fear,
We have not answered expectation here,
Yet give us leave to hope, as hope to live,
That you will grace, as well as Justice give.
We do not dare your Judgments now: for we
Know lookers on more then the Gamsters see;
And what ere Poets write, we Act, or say,
Tis only in your hands to Crown a Play.

