AS in battles, so in all other actions that are to be reported, the first,
and most necessary part is the description of the place, with his opportunities,
and properties, whether they be natural, or artificial. The great hall
(wherein the Mask was presented) received this division, and order: The upper
part where the cloth chair of State were placed, had scaffolds and seats on
either side continued to the screen; right before it was made a partition for
the dancing place; on the right hand whereof were consorted ten Musicians,
with Basse and Mean Lutes, a Bandora, a double Sack-bott, and an Harpsicord,
with two treble Violins; on the other side somewhat nearer the screen were
placed 9. Violins and three Lutes, and to answer both the Consorts (as it were
in a triangle) six Cornets, and six Chapel voices, were seated almost right
against them, in a place raised higher in respect of the piercing sound of
those Instruments-eighteen foot from the screen, an other Stage was raised
higher by a yearde then that which was prepared for dancing: This higher Stage
was all enclosed with a double vale, so artificially painted, that it seemed as
if dark clouds had hung before it: within that shroud was concealed a green
valley, with green trees round about it, and in the midst of them nine golden
trees of fifteen foot high, with arms and branches very glorious to behold:
From the which grove toward the State was made a broad descent to the dancing
place, just in the midst of it; on either hand were two ascents, like the sides
of two hills, dressed with shrubs and trees; that on the right hand leading to
the bower of Flora: the other to the house of Night; which bower and house were
placed opposite at either end of the screen, and between them both was raised
a hill, hanging like a cliffe over the grove below, and on the top of it a
goodly large tree was set, supposed to be the tree of Diana; behind the which
toward the window was a small descent, with an other spreading hill that climbed
up to the top of the window, with many trees on the height of it, whereby
those that played on the Hoboyes at the Kings entrance into the hall were
shadowed: The bower of Flora was very spacious, garnished with all kind of
flowers, and flowery branches with lights in them; the house of Night ample,
and stately, with black pillors, whereon many stars of gold were fixed:
within it when it was empty, appeared nothing but clouds and stars, and on
the top of it stood three Turrets vnderpropt with small black starred pillars,
the middlemost being highest and greatest, the other two of equal proportion:
about it were placed on wire artificial Battes, and Owls, continually moving:
with many other inventions, the which for brevity sake I pass by with
silence.

Thus much for the place, and now from thence let us come to the persons.

The Maskers names were these, (whom both for order and honour I mention in the
first place.

Their number Nine, the best and amplest of numbers, for as in Music seven
notes contain all variety, the eight being in nature the same with the first,
so in nubring after the ninth we begin again, the tenth being as it were the
Diappason in Arithmetic. The number of 9. is famed by the Muses, and Worthies,
and it is of all the most apt for change, and diversity of proportion. The
chief habit which the Maskers did use, is set forth to your view in the first
leaf: They presented in their feigned persons the Knights of Apollo, who is the
father of heat, and youth, and consequently of amorous affections.

These are the principal persons that bear sway in this invention, others
that are but secunders to these, I will describe in their proper places,
discoursing the Mask in order as it was performed.

As soon as the King was entered the great Hall, the Hoboyes (out of the wood
on the top of the hill) entertained the time till his Majesty and his train
were placed, and then after a little expectation the consort of ten began to
play an Air, at the sound whereof the vale on the right hand was withdrawn,
and the ascent of the hill with the bower of Flora were discovered, where Flora
Zepherus were busily plucking flowers from the Bower, and throwing them into
two baskets, which two Siluans held, who were attired in changeable Taffeta,
with wreathes of flowers on their heads. As soon as the baskets were filled,
they came down in this order, First Zepherus and Flora, then the two Siluans
with baskets after them: Four Siluans in green taffeta, and wreathes, two
bearing mean Lutes, the third a base Lute, and the fourth a deep Bandora.

As soon as they came to the descent toward the dancing place, the consort of
ten ceac't, and the four Siluans played the same Air, to which Zepherus and
the two other Siluans did sing these words in a base, Tenor, and treble voice,
and going up and down as they song, they strewn flowers all about the place.

Flora robbed her bowers
To befrend this place with flowers;
Strowe about, strowe about,
The Sky rayn'd never kindlyer Showers.
Flowers with Bridalls well agree,
Fresh as Brides, and Bridgromes be,
Strowe about, strowe about,
And mix them with fit melody.
Earth hath no Princelier flowers
Then Roses white, and Roses red,
But they must still be mingled.
And as a Rose new plucked from Venus thorne
So doth a Bride her Bride grooms bed adorn.
Diverse diverse Flowers affect
For some private dear respect,
Strowe about, strew about,
Let every one his own protect.
But hes none of Floras friend
That will not the Rose commend.
Strew about, strew about,
Let Princes Princely flowers defend.
Roses the Gardens pride,
Are flowers for love, and flowers for Kings,
In courts desired, and Weddings.
And as a Rose in Venus bosom worn,
So doth a Bridegroom his Brides bed adorn.
The Musique cease, and Flora speaks.

FLowers and good wishes Flora doth present,
Sweet flowers, the ceremonious ornament
Of maiden marriage, Beauty figuring,
And blooming youth, which though we careless fling
About this sacred place, let none profane
Think that these fruits from common hills are taken,
Or Vulgar valleys which do subject lie
To winters wrath, and cold mortality.
But these are hallowed and immortal flowers
With Floras hands gathered from Floras bowers.
Such are her presents, endless, as her love,
And such for ever may this nights joy prove.

FOr ever endless may this nights joy prove,
So eccocs Zephyrus the friend of love.
Whose aide Venus implores when she doth bring
Into the naked world the green leaved spring.
When of the Suns warm beams the Nets we weave
That can the stubborn'st heart with love deceive.
That Queen of beauty, and desire by me
Breaths gently forth this Bridal prophecy.
Faithful and fruitful shall these Bedmates prove,
Blessed in their fortunes, honoured in their love.

ALL grace this night, Siluans so must you,
Offering your marriage song with chages new

The song in form of a Dialogue.

WHO is the happier of the two,
A maid, or wife?

Which is more to be desired
Peace or strife?

What strife can be where two are one,
Or what delight to pine alone?

None such true friends, none so sweet life,
As that between the man and wife.

A maid is free, a wife is tied.

No maid but fain would be a Bride.

Why live so many single then.
Tis not I hope for want of men?

The bow and arrow both may fit,
And yet tis hard the mark to hit.

He levels fair that by his side
Lays at night his lovely Bride.

Sing Io: Hymen, Io: Io: Hymen.

THis song being ended the whole vale is suddenly drawn, the grove and trees
of gold, and the hill with Dianas tree are at once discovered.

Night appears in her house with her 9. hours, apparelled in large robes of
black taffeta, painted thick with stars, their hairs long, black, and
spangled with gold, on their heads coronets of stars and their faces black,
every hour bore in his hand a black torch, painted with stars, and lighted.
Night presently descending from her house spake as follows.

VAnish dark vales, let night in glory shine
As she doth burn in rage, come leave our shrine
You black haired hours, and guide us with your lights,
Flora hath wakened wide our drowsy sprights
See where she triumphs, see her flowers are thrown,
And all about the seeds of malice sown?
Despiteful Flora is't not enough of grief
That Cynthia's robbed, but thou must grace the thief?
Or did not here Nights sovereign Queen complain
Hymen had stolen a Nymph out of her train.
And matched her here plighted henceforth to be
Loves friend, and stranger to Virginity
And make thou sport for this?

Be mild sterne night
Flora doth honour Cynthia, and her right,
Virginity is a voluntary power,
Free from constraint, even like an untouched flower
Meet to be gathered when tis thoroughly blown.
The Nymph was Cinthias while she was her own,
But now another claims in her a right
By fate reserved thereto, and wise foresight.

CAn Cynthia one kind virgins loss bemoan?
How if perhaps she brings her ten for one?
Or can she miss one in so full a train?
Your Goddess doth of too much store complain.
If all her Nymphs would ask advise of me
There should be fewer virgins then there be.
Nature ordained not Men to live alone,
Where there are two, a Woman should be one.

THou breath sweet poison wanton Zephyrus
But Cynthia must not be deluded thus.
Her holy Forests are by thieves profaned,
Her Virgins frighted, and lo, where they stand
That late were Phoebus Knights, turned now to trees
By Cynthias vengement for their injuries
In seeking to seduce her Nymphs with love:
Here they are sixth and never may remove
But by Dianaes power that stuck them here.
Apollos love to them doth yet appear,
In that his beams hath guilt them a they grow,
To make their misery yield the greater show.
But they shall tremble when sad Night doth speak,
And at her stormy words their boughs shall break.

Toward the end of this speech Hesperus begins to de^cend by the house of
Night, and by that time the speech was finished he was ready to speak.

Night, hail Queen of Flowers,
Mild sprited Zephyrus hail, Siluans and Hours.
Hesperus brings peace, cease then your needless jars
Here in this little firmament of stars.
Cynthia is now by Phoebus pacified,
And well content her Nymph is made a Bride*
Since the fair match was by that Phoebus graced
Which in this happy Western I'll is placed
As he in heaven, one lamp enlightening all
That under his benign aspect doth fall*
Deep Oracles he speaks, and he alone
For arts and wisdoms meet for Phoebus throne.
The Nymph is honoured, and Diana pleased:
Night be you then, and your black hours appeased*
And friendly listen what your Queen by me
Farther commands, let this my credence be,
View it, and know it for the highest gem,
That hung on her imperial Diadem.

I know, and honour it lovely Hesperus,
Speak then your message, both are welcome to

YOur Sovereign fro the virtuous gem she sends us.
Bids you take power to retransforme the friends
Of Phoebus, metamorhpos'd here to trees,
And give them straight the shapes which they did leese.

This is her pleasure.

HEsperus I obey,
Night must needs yield when Phoebus gets the day.

Honoured be Cynthia for this generous deed.

Pity grows only from celestial seed.

IF all seem glad, why should we only lower?
Since t'expresse gladness we have now most power.
Frolic graced Captives, we present you here
This glass, wherein your liberties appear,
Cynthia is pacified, and now blithe Night
Begins to shake off melancholy quite.

WHo should grace mirth, revels but the night,
Next love she should be goddess of delight.

TIs now a time when (Zephyrus) all with dancing
Honour me, above day my state advancing.
I'll now be frolic, all is full of hart,
And even these trees for joy shall bear a part.
Zephyrus they shall dance.

Dance Goddess? how?

Seems that so full of strangeness to you now?
Did not the Thracian harp long since the same?
And (if we rip the old records of fame)
Did not Amphions lyre the deaf stones call,
When they came dancing to the Theban wall?
Can music then joy? joy mountains moves
And why not trees? joys powerful when it loves.
Could the religious Oak speak Oracle
Like to the Gods? and the tree wounded tell
To Aeneas his sad story? have trees therefore
The instruments of speech, and hearing more
Then th'aue of pacing, and to whom but Night
Belong enchantments? who can more affright
The eye with magic wonders? Night alone
Is fit for miracles, and this shall be one
Apt for this Nuptial dancing jollity.
Earth then be soft and passable to free
These fettered roots? joy trees the time draws near
When in your better forms you shall appear.
Dancing, and music mnst prepare the way,
There's little tedious time in such delay.
This spoken, the four Siluans played on their instruments the first strain
of this song following: at the repetition thereof the voices sell in with the
instruments which were thus divided, a treble and a base were placed near his
Majesty, and an other treble and base near the grove, that the words of the
song might be heard of all, because the trees of gould instantly at the first
sound of their voices began to move, and dance according to the measure of the
time which the musicians kept in singing, and the nature of the words which
they delivered.

Move now with measured sound
You charmed grove of gould,
Trace forth the sacred ground
That shall your forms unfold.
Diana, and the starry night for your Apollos sake
Endue your Siluan shapes with power this strange delight to make
Much joy must needs the place betide where trees for gladness move,
Afairer sight was ne'er beheld, or more expressing love.
Yet nearer Phoebus throne
Mete on your winding ways,
Your Bridal mirth make known
In your high-graced Hayes.
Let Hymen lead your sliding rounds, guide the with his light,
While we do Io Hymen sing in honour of this night
Join three by three, for so the night by triple spell decrees
Now to release Apollos knights from these enchanted trees.

This dancing song being ended, the golden trees stood in ranks three by
three, and Night ascended up to the grove, and spake thus, touching the first
three severally with her wand.

BY virtue of this wand, and touch divine,
These Siluan shadows back to earth resign,
Your native forms resume, with habit fair,
While solemn music shall enchant the air
Presently the Siluans with their four instruments,

Diana charge,
And th'Earth obayes
Opening large
Her secret ways,
While Apollos charmed men
Their forms receive again.
Give gracious Phoebus honour then,
And so fall down, and rest behind the train
Give gracious Phoebus honour then and so fall c.

When those words were sung, the three maskers made an honour to the King, and
so falling back the other six trees three by three came forward, when they
were in their appointed places Night spake* again thus

THus can celestials work in humane fate,
Transform, form as they do love or hate.
Like touch, and change receive: the Gods agree
The best of numbers is contained in three.
The song of transformation again.

Night and Diana, c.

THen Night touched the second three trees and the stage sunk with them as
before. And in brief the second three did in all points as the first: Then
night spake again.

THe last, third of nine, touch magic wand,
And give them back their forms at nights command

Night touched the third 3. trees the same charm of Night and Diana was sung
the third time, the last three trees were transformed, and the Maskers raised.
When presently the first Musique began his full Chorus.

Again this song revive and sound it hie,
Long live Apollo Britains glorious eye.

THis Chorus was in manner of an Echo, seconded by the Cornets, then by the
consort of ten, then by the consort of twelve, and by a double Chorus of voices
standing on either side, the one against the other bearing five voices a piece,
and sometime every Chorus was heard severally, sometime mixed, but in the end
altogether: which kind of harmony so distinguisht by the place, and by the
several nature of instruments, and changeable conveyance of the song, and
performed by so many excellent masters, as were actors in that music, (their
number in all amounting to forty two voices and instruments) could not but
yield great satisfaction to the hearers.

While this Chorus was repeated twice over, the Nine maskers in their green
habitts solemnly descended to the dancing place, in such order as they were
to begin their dance, and as soon as the Chorus ended, the violins, or
consort of twelve began to play the second new dance, which was taken in
form of an Echo by the cornetts, and then cat'cht in like manner by the
consort often, sometime they mingled two musickes together; sometime plaid all
at once; which kind of echoing music rarely became their Siluan attire, and
was so truly mixed together, that no dance could ever be better graced then
that, as (in such distraction of music) it was performed by the maskers.
After this dance Night descended from the grove, and addreste her speech to
the maskers, as follows.

PHoebus is pleased, and all rejoice to see
His servants, from their golden prison free,
But yet since Cynthia hath so friendly smiled,
And to you tree-borne Knights, is reconcild,
First ere you any more work undertake,
About her tree solemn procession make,
Dianas tree, the tree of Chastity,
That placed alone on yonder hill you see.
These green leau'drobes wherein disguised you made
Stelths to her Nymphs through the thick forests shade
There to the goddess offer thankfully,
That she may not in vain appeased be.
The night shall guide you, and her hours attend you
That no ill eyes, or spirits shall offend you.

At the end of this speech Night began to lead the way alone, after her an
Hour with his torch and after the hour a masker, and so in order one by one,
a torch-bearer and a masker, they march on towards Dianas tree. When the
Maskers came by the house of Night, every one by his hour received his helmet,
and had his false robe plucked off, bearing it in his hand, with a low honour
offred it at the tree of Chastity, and so in his glorious habit, with his
hour before him marched to the bower of Flora. The shape of their habit the
picture before discovers, the stuff was of Carnation satin laid thick with
broad silver lace, their helmets being made of the same stuff. So through the
bower of Flora they came, where they joined two torch-bearers, and two Maskers,
and when they past down to the grove: the hours parted on either side, and
made way between them for the Maskers, who descended to the dancing place in
such order as they were to begin their third new dance. All this time of
procession the six Cornets, and six Chapel voices sung a solemn motet of
six parts made upon these words.

WIth spotless minds now mount we to the tree
Of single chastity.
The root is temperance grounded deep
Which the coldiewc't earth doth steep:
Water it desires alone,
Other drink it thirsts for none:
Therewith the sober branches it doth feed,
Which though they fruitless be,
Yet comely leaves they breed,
To beautify the tree,
Cynthia protectress is, and for her sake,
We this grave procession make.
Chaste eyes and ears, pure hearts, and voices
Are graces wherein Phoebe most rejoices.
The motet being ended the Violins began the third new dance, which was lively
performed by the Maskers, after which they took forth the Ladies, and danced
the measures with them, which being finished, the Maskers brought the Ladies
back again to their places: and Hesperus with the rest descended from the
grove into the dancing place, spake to the Maskers as follows.

KNights of Apollo proud of your new birth,
Pursue your triumphs still with joy and mirth,
Your changed fortunes, and redeemd estate
Hesperus to your Sovereign will relate,
It is now high time he were far hence retired,
Th'ould Bridal friend, that ushers Night desired
Through the dim evening shades, then taking flight
Gives place and honour to the nuptial Night.
I that wished evening star must now make way
To Hymens rights much wronged by my delay.
But on Nights princely state you ought t'attend,
And t'honour your new reconciled friend.

HEsperus as you with concord came, even so
It is meet that you with cocord hence should go
Then join you that in voice, and art excel,
To give this star a musical farewell.

A Diologue of four voices two Bases and two trebles.

Of all the stars which is the kindest
To a loving Bride?

Hesperus when in the west
He doth the day from night divide.

What message can be more respected
Then that which tells wished joys shall be effected?

Do not Brides watch the evening star?

O they can discern it far:

Love Bridegrooms revels?

But for fashion.

And why?

They hinder wished occasion.

Longing hearts and new delights,
Love short days, and long nights

HEsperus since you all stars excel
In Bridal kindness kindly farewell farewell.

WHile these words of the Chorus (kindly farewell farewell) were in singing
often repeated Hesperus took his leave seue ally of Night, Flora, Zephyrus,
the Hours, and Siluans, and so while the Chorus was sung over the second time,
he was got up to the grove, where turning again to the singers, and they to
him. Hesperus took a second farewell of them, and so past away by the house of
Night: Then Night spake their two lines, and therewith all retired to the grove
where they stood before.

COme Flora let us now withdraw our train
That th'ecclipst revels may shine forth again

Now the Maskers began their lighter dances as Currantoes, Leualtas and
galliards, wherein when they had spent as much time as they thought fit, night
spake thus from the grove, and in her speech descended a little into the
dancing place.

HEre stay, Night leaden-eied, and sprighted grows
And her late hours begin to hang their brows
Hymen long since the Bridal bed hath dressed,
And longs to bring the turtles to their nest.
Then with one quick dence sound up your delight,
And with one song we'll bid you all god-Night.

At the end of these words, the violins began the 4. new dance, which was
excellently discharged by the Maskers, it ended with a light change of music
mesure: After the dance followed this dialogue of 2 voices, a base tenor sung
by a Siluan, an Howre.

TEll me gentle howre of night
Wherein dost thou most delight?

Not in sleep,

Wherein then?

In the frolic view of men?

Love thou music?

O it is sweet.

Whats dancing?

Even the mirth of feet

Joy you in Fairies and idelues?

We are of that sore our selves,
But Siluan say why do you love
Only to frequent the grove?

Life is fullest of content
Where delight is innocent.

Pleasure must vary not be long,
Come then lets close, and end our song.

YEt ere we vanish from this princely sight,
Let us bid Phoebus, his states god-night

This Chorus was performed with several Echoes of music, and voices, in
manner as the great Chous before. At the end whereof the Maskers putting off
their visards, helmets, made a low honour to the King, and attended his Ma: to
the banqueting place

Neither buskin now, norbayes
Challenge I, a Ladies praise
Shall content my proudest hope,
Their applause was all my scope
And to their shrines properly
Revels dedicated be:
Whose soft ears none ought to pierce
But with smooth and gentle verse,
Let the tragic Poem swell,
Raising raging seendes from hell,
And let Epicke Dactils range
Swelling seas and Countries strange.
Little room small things contains
Easy praise quites easy pains.
Suffer them whose brows do sweat
To gain honour by the great.
It s enough if men me name
A Retailer of such fame.
Quid tu te numeris immis^es? anne medente^
Metra cathedratum ludicra scripta decent
Musicus medicus, celebris quoque Phoebe Poeta e^
Et lepor aegrotos art rogante i^uat.
Cred mihi doctum qui carmen non sapit, idem
Non habet ingentum, nec genium medici.
^
Now hath Flora robde her bowers to be friend this place with flowers
Flowers with Bri-dals well agree fresh as Brides and bridegrooms be
^
strew about strew about the sky rainde never kindlier showers,
strew about strew about and mix them with fit melody,
^
earth hath no princelier flowers the roses white and roses red, but they must
^
still be mingled and as a rose new plucked from Venus thorne so doth a bride
^
her bridegrooms bed adorn.
^
Now hath Flora robde her bowers to befrend this place with flowers,
Flowers with bri- dals well agree: fresh as brides and Bridegrooms be.
^
^
strew about strew about the sky rainde never kindlier showers,
strew about strew about and mix them with sit melody,
^
^
earth hath no princelier flowers the roses white and roses red,
^
^
but they must still be mingled and as a rose new plucked from
^
^
Venus thorne so doth a bride her bridegrooms bed adorn.
^
^
^
^
^
Move now with measurd sound you charmed groves of gold
Trace forth the sa-cred ground that shall your forms un fouled
^
^
Di-a na and the starry night for your Apollos sake
much joy must needs the place betide where trees for gladness move
^
^
en- due your siluan shapes with power this strange delight to make
a fairer sight was near be- held or more expressing love.
^
^
Move now with mesur'd sound you charmed grove of gold, Dia na and
Trace forth the sacred ground that shall your forms unfold, much joy must
needs
^
the starry night for your Apollos sake endue your Siluan shape with power this
the place be-tide where trees for gladness move, a fairer fight was near
be-held or
^
strange delight to make,
more expressing love.
^
^
^
Shows nightly revels signs of joy and peace fill royal
Fair and princely branches with stro arms increase from that deep
^
^
Britains court while cruel war far off doth rage for ever hence.
rooted tree whose sacred strength glory for-ren malice hath.
^
^
ex-iled Our divided kingdoms now in friendly kindred meet
be-guiled Truly recon- ciled grief appears at last more sweet
^
^
and old debate to love kindness turns our power with double force v-
both to our selves faithful friends our vn-der-mi- ning foes af-
^
^
niting.
frighting.
^
^
^
^
^
Triumph now with Joy and mirth the God of peace hath
We en- joy the fruits of earth through fa-uour of his
^
^
blessed our land we through his most lo uing grace a King king lie
bounteous hand Like a son with lesser star^ or careful shepsheard
^
^
seed be-holde Triumph then and yield him praise that gives us blessed
to his fold.
^
^
joyful days.
^
^
^
^
Time that leads the fatal round hath made his center in our ground
And there at one stay he rests and with the fates keeps holy feasts
^
^
with swelling seas em- braced Light Cupids there do dance and
with pomp pastime graced Their sogs are al of joy no sign
^
^
Venus sweetly singes with heavenly notes tuned to sound of
of sorrow there but all as stars glistering fair and
^
^
silver strings,
blithe appear.
^
^
^

