I Have now taken occasion to satisfy many, who long since were desirous that
the Lords mask should be published, which (but for some private lets, had in
due time come forth. The Scene was divided into two parts from the roof to the
floor, the lower part being first discovered (upon the sound of a double
consort, expressed by several instruments, placed on either side of the room)
there appeared a Wood in perspective, the innermost part being of releaue, or
whole round, the rest painted. On the left hand from the seat was a Cave, and
on the right a thicket, out of which came Orpheus, who was attired after the*
old Greek manner, his hair curled, and long; a laurel wreath on his head;
and in his hand he bare a silver bird, about him tamely placed several wild
beasts, and upon the ceasing of the Consort Orpheus spake.

Again, again, fresh kindle Phoebus sounds,
T'exhale Mania from her earthy den;
Allay the fury that her sense confounds,
And call her gently forth, sound, sound, again.

The Consorts both sound again, and Mania the Goddess of madness appears
wildly out of her cave. Her habit was confused and strange; but yet graceful,
she as one amazed speaks.

What powerful noise is this importunes me,
T'abandon darkness which my humour fits?
Ioues hand in it I feel, and ever he
Must be obai'd even of the franticst wits.

Mania?

Hah.

Braine-sick, why start'st thou so?
Approach yet nearer, and thou then shalt know
The will of Jove, which he will breath from me,

Who art thou? if my dazzled eyes can see,
Thou art the sweet Enchanter heavenly Orpheus.

The same Mania, and Jove greets thee thus,
Though several power to thee, and charge he gave,
T'enclose in thy Dominions such as rave
Through bloods distemper, how durst thou attempt
T'imprison Entheus, whose rage is exempt
From vulgar censure? it is all divine
Full of celestial rapture, that can shine
Through darkest shadows, therefore Jove by me
Commands thy power strait to set Entheus free.

How can I? Franticks, with him many more
In one cave are locked up, open once the door,
All will fly out, and through the world disturb,
The peace of Jove; for, what power then can curb
Their rainelesse fury? --

-- Let not fear in vain
Trouble thy crazed fancy, all again
Save Entheus to thy safeguard shall retire,
For Jove into our music will inspire
The power of passion, that their thoughts shall bend
To any form or motion we intend:
Obey Ioues willing then, go, set Entheus free.

I willing go, so Jove obeyed must be.

Let Music put on Protean* changes now,
Wild beasts it once tamed, now let Franticks bow.

At the sound of a strange music twelve Franticks enter, six men, and six
women, all presented in sundry habits and humours: there was the Lover, the
Selfe-louer, the melancholicke-man full of fear, the Schoole-man ouer-come
with fantasy, the ouer-watched Usurer, with others that made an absolute
medley of madness, in midst of whom Entheus (or Poetic fury) was hurried
forth, and tossed up and down, till by virtue of a new change in the music,
the Lunatickes fell into a mad measure, fitted to a loud fantastic tune,
but in the end thereof the music changed into a very solemn air, which they
softly played, while Orpheus spake.

Through these soft and calm sounds Mania pass
With thy Phantasticks hence; here is no place
Longer for them or thee; Entheus alone
Must do Ioues bidding now, all else be gone.

During this speech, Mania with her Franticks depart, leaving Entheus behind
them, who was attired in a close Curace of the Antique fashion, Bases with
labels, a Robe fastened to his shoulders, and hanging down behind; on his head
a wreath of Laurel, out of which grew a pair of wings, in the one hand he
held a book, and in the other a pen.

Divinest Orpheus, o how all from thee
Proceed with wondrous sweetness, am I free?
Is my affliction vanished?

-- Too too long
Alas, good Entheus, hast thou brook't this wrong;
What? number thee with madmen? o mad age,
Senseless of thee, and thy celestial rage.
For thy excelling rapture, even through things
That seems most light, is borne with sacred wings:
Nor are these Musics, Shows, or Revels vain,
When thou adorn'st them with thy Phoebean brain;
They are palate sick of much more vanity,
That cannot taste them in their dignity.
Jove therefore lets thy prison'd spright obtain
Her liberty and fiery scope again:
And here by me commands thee to create
Inventions rare, this night to celebrate,
Such as become a nuptial by his will
Begun and ended, --

-- Jove I honour still,
And must obey, Orpheus I feel the fires
Are reddy in my brain, which Jove enspires,
Lo, through that veil, I see Prometheus stand
Before those glorious lights, which his false hand
Stole out of heaven, the dull earth to inflame
With the affects of Love, and honoured Fame,
I view them plain in pomp and majesty.
Such as being seen might hold riualitie,
With the best triumphs; Orpheus give a call
With thy charmed music, and discover all.

Fly cheerful voices, through the air, and clear
These clouds, that you hid beauty may appear.
COme away; bring thy golden theft,
Bring bright Prometheus all thy lights,
Thy fires from Heaven bereft
Show now to humane sights.
Come quickly come; thy stars to our stars straight present,
For pleasure being too much deferred, loses her best cotet,
What fair dames wish, should swift as their own thoughts appear,
To loving to longing harts every hour seems a year.
See how fair; O how fair they shine,
What yields more pomp beneath the skies?
Their birth is yet divine,
And such their form implies.
Large grow their beams, their ne'er approach afford theso
By nature sights that pleasing are, cannot too amply show,
O might these flames in humane shapes desced this place,
How lovely would their presence be, how full of grace!

In the end of the first part of this Song, the upper part of the Scene was
discovered by the sudden fall of a curtain, then in clouds of several
colours (the upper part of them being fiery, and the middle heightened with
silver) appeared eight Stars of extraordinary bigness, which so were
placed, as that they seemed to be fixed between the Firmament and the Earth;
in the front of the Scene stood Prometheus, attired as one of the ancient
Heroes.

Patron of mankind, powerful and bounteous,
Rich in thy flames, reverend Prometheus,
In Hymens place aide us to solemnize
These royal Nuptials, fill the lookers eyes
With admiration of thy fire and light,
And from thy hand let wonders flow to night.

Entheus and Orpheus names both dear to me,
In equal balance I your Third will be
In this nights honour, view these heaven borne Stars,
Who by my stealth are become Sublunars.
How well their native beauties fit this place,
Which with a chorall danee they first shall grace,
Then shall their forms to humane figures turn,
And these bright fires within their bosoms burn.
Orpheus apply thy music for it well
Helps to induce a Courtly miracle.

Sound best of Musics, raise yet higher our sprights,
While we admire Prometheus dancing lights.
Advance your Chorall motions now
You musick-louing lights,
This night concludes the nuptial vow,
Make this the best of nights,
So bravely Crown it with your beams,
That it may live in fame,
As long as Rhenus or the Thames
Are known by either name.
Once move again, yet nearer move
Your forms at willing view,
Such fair effects of joy and love,
None can express but you,
Then revel midst your airy Bowers
Till all the clouds do sweat,
That pleasure may be powered in showers
On this triumphant Seat.
Long since hath lovely Flora thrown
Her Flowers and Garlands here,
Rich Ceres all her wealth hath shown,
Proud of her dainty cheer.
Changed then to humane shape descend,
Glad in familiar weed.
That every eye may here commend
The kind delights you breed.

According to the humour of this Song, the Stars moved in an exceeding
strange and delightful manner, and I suppose few have ever seen more neat
artifice, then Master Innigoe Iones showed in contriving their Motion, who in
all the rest of the workmanship which belonged to the whole invention, showed
extraordinary industry and skill, which if it be not as lively expressed in
writing as it appeared in view, rob not him of his due, but lay the blame on
my want of right apprehending his instructions for the adoring of his Art. But
to return to our purpose; about the end of this Song, the Stars suddenly
vanished, as if they had been drowned amongst the Clouds, and the eight
Maskers appeared in their habits, which were infinitely rich, befitting States
(such as indeed they all were) as also a time so far heightened the day
before, with all the richest show of solemnity that could be invented. The
ground of their attires was massy Cloth of Silver, embossed with flames of
Embroidery, on their heads, they had Crowns, Flames made all of Gold-plate
Enamelled, and on the top a Feather of Silk, representing a cloud of smoke.
Upon their new transformation, the whole Scaene being Clouds dispersed, and
there appeared an Element of artificial fires, with several circles of
lights, in continual motion, representing the house of Prometheus, who then
thus applies his speech to the Maskers.

They are transformed.

So, pause awhile, and come ye fiery spirits,
Break forth the earth-like sparks t'attend these Knights.

Sixteen Pages like fiery spirits, all their attires bing alike composed of
flames, with fiery Wings and Bases, bearing in either hand a Torch of Virgin
Wax, come forth below dancing a likely measure, and the Dance being ended,
Prometheus speaks to them from above.

The Torch-bearers Dance.

wait spirits wait, while through the clouds we
And by descending gain a hier place. (pace,

The Pages return toward the Scaene, to give their attendance to the Maskers
with their lights: from the side of the Scaene appeared a bright and
transparent cloud, which reached from the top of the heavens to the earth: on
this cloud the Maskers led by Prometheus, descended with the music of a full
song; and at the end of their descent, the cloud brake in twain, and one part
of it (as with a wind) was blown overthwart the Scaene.

While this cloud was vanishing, the wood being the vnder-part of the Scaene,
was insensibly changed, and in place thereof appeared four Noble women-statues
of silver, standing in several nices, accompanied with ornaments of
Architecture, which filled all the end of the house, and seemed to be all of
gold-smithes work. The first order consisted of Pilasters all of gold, set
with Rubies, Saphyrs, Emeralds, Opals, and such like. The Capitels were
composed, and of a new invention. Over this was a bastard order with Cartouses
reversed, coming from the Capitels of every Pillaster, which made the upper
part rich and full of ornament. Over every statue was placed a history in gold,
which seemed to be of base releaue; the conceits which were figured in them
were these. In the first was Prometheus, embossing in clay the figure of a
woman, in the second he was represented stealing fire from the chariot-wheele
of the Sun: in the third, he is expressed putting life with this fire into his
figure of clay; and in the fourth square, Iupiter enraged, turns these new
made women into statues. Above all, for finishing, ran a Cornish, which
returned over every Pillaster, seeming all of gold and richly carved.

SVpported now by Clouds descend,
Divine Prometheus, Hymens friend,
Lead down the new transformed fires,
And fill their breasts with loves desires:
That they may revel with delight,
And celebrate this nuptial night,
So celebrate this nuptial night,
That all which see may stay.
They never viewed so fair a sight,
Even on the clearest day.
While this Song is sung, and the Maskers court the four new transformed
Ladies, four other Statues appear in their places.

See, see Prometheus, four of these first dames
Which thou long since out of thy purchac't flames,
Did forge with heavenly fire, as they were then,
By Jove transformed to Statues, so again,
They suddenly appear by his command
At thy arrival, Lo how fixed they stand,
So did Ioues wrath too long, but now at last,
It by degrees relents, and he hath placed
These Statues, that we might his aid implore,
First for the life of these, and then for more.

Entheus, Thy councels are divine and just,
Let Orpheus deck thy Hymn, since pray we must.

Powerful Jove, that of bright stars,
Now hast made men fit for wars;
Thy power in these Statues prove,
And make them women fit for love.
See Jove is pleased, Statues have life move,
Go new-borne men, and entertain with love,
These new-borne women, though your number yet
Exceeds their's double, they are armed with wit,
To bear your best encounters, Court them fair:
When words and Music speak, let none despair.
Woo her, and win her, he that can,
Each woman hath two lovers,
So she must take and leave a man,
Till time more grace discovers;
This doth Jove to show that want,
Makes beauty most respected;
If fair women were more scant,
They would be more affected.
Courtship and Music, suite with love,
They both are works of passion,
Happy is he whose words can move,
Yet sweet notes help persuasion.
Mix your words with Music then,
That they the more may enter;
Bold assaults are fit for men,
That on strange beauties venture.

Cease, cease your wooing strife, see Jove intends,
To fill your number up, and make all friends,
Orpheus, and Eutheus, join your skils once more,
And with a Hymn the Deity implore.
Powerful Jove, that hast given four,
Raise this number but once more,
That complete, their numerous feet
May aptly in just measures meet.

The other four statues are transformed into women, in the time of this
invocation.

The number's now complete, thanks be to Jove,
No man needs fear a Rival in his love;
For, all are sped, and now begins delight,
To fill with glory, this triumphant night.

The Maskers having every one entertained his Lady, begin their first new
entering dance: after it, while they breath, the time is entertained with a
dialogue song.

BReath you now, while Io Hymen
To the Bride we sing:
O how many joys, and honours,
From this match will spring?
Ever firm the league will prove,
Where only goodness causes love.
Some for profit seek
What their fancies most disleeke,
These love for virtues sake alone:
Beauty and youth unite them both in one.
Live with thy Bridegroom happy, sacred Bride;
How blessed is he, that is for love enui'd.

The Maskers second dance.

BReath again, while we with music
Fill the empty space:
O but do not in your dances,
Your selves only grace.
Every one fetch out your Pheare,
Whom chiefly you will honour here,
Sights most pleasure breed,
When their numbers most exceed:
Choose then, for choice to all is free,
Taken or left, none discontent must be.

Now in thy Revels frolicke-faire delight,
To heap Joy on this ever honoured night.

The Maskers during this Dialogue take out others to dance with them, men
women, and women men, and first of all the Princely Bridegroom and Bride were
drawn into these solemn Revels, which continued a long space, but in the end
were broken off with this short Song.

CEase, cease you Revels, rest a space,
New pleasures press into this place,
Full of beauty and of grace.
The whole scaene was now again changed, and became a perspective with
Porticoes on each side, which seemed to go in a great way, in the middle was
erected an Obelisk, all of silver, and in it lights of several colours, on
the side of this Obelisk, standing on Pedestals, were the statues of the
Bridegroom and Bride, all of gold in gracious postures. This Obelisk was of
that height, that the top thereof touched the highest clouds, and yet
Sybilla did draw it forth with a thread of gold. The grave Sage was in a Robe
of gold tuckt up before to her girdle, a Kirtle gathered full, and of silver;
with a veil on her head, being bare necked, and bearing in her hand a scroll of
Parchment.

Make clear the passage to Sibilla's sight,
Who with her Trophy comes, to crown this night,
And as her self with Music shall be led,
So shall she pull on with a golden thread.
A high vast Obelisk, dedicate to fame,
Which immortality it self did frame.
Raise high your voices now, like Trumpets fill,
The room with sounds of Triumph, sweet and shrill.

COme triumphing, come with state,
Old Sibilla, reverend Dame,
Thou keep the secret key of fate,
Preventing swiftest fame.
This night breath only words of joy,
And speak them plain, now be not coy,
DEbetur alto jure, Principium Ioui,
Votis det ipse vim meis, dict is fidem.
Vtrin{que} decoris splendet egregium Iubar,
Medio triumphus mole stat dignus sua,
Coelum{que} summo Capite dilectum petit;
Quam pulchra la sponsa respondet viro!
Quam plena numinis? Patrem vultu exprimit,
Parens futura masculae prolis, Parens
Regum, imperatorum: Additur Germaniae
Robur Britannicum. ecquid esse par potest?
Vtram{que} iunget una men's gentem, fides,
Dei{que} Cultus vnus, simplex amor.
Idem erit vtri{que} hostis, sodalis idem, idem
Votum periclitantium, at{que} eadem manus.
Fauebit illis Pax, fauebit bellica
Fortuna, semper aderit Adiutor Deus.
Sic, sic Sibilla; vocibus nec his deest
Pondus, nec hoc inane momumentum trahit.
Et aureum est, qual nec flammas timet,
Nec fulgura, ipsi quip sacratur Ioui.

The good old Sage is silenced, her free tongue
That made such melody, is now vnstrung:
Then grace her Trophy with a dance triumphant,
Where Orpheus is none can fit music want.

DAnce, dance, and visit now the shadows of our joy,
All in height, and pleasing state, your changed forms employ.
And as the bird of Jove salutes, with lofty wing, the morn;
So mount, so fly, these Trophies to adorn.
Grace them with all the sounds and motions of delight,
Since all the earth cannot express a lovelier sight,
View them with triumph, and in shades the truth adore,
No pomp or sacrifice can please Ioues greatness more.
Turn, turn, and honour now the life, these figures bear,
Lo, how heavenly natures far above all art appear,
Let their aspects revive in you, the fire that shined so late,
Still mount and still retain, your heavenly state.
Gods were with dance, and with music served of old,
Those happy days derived their glorious stile from gold:
This pair by Hymen joined, grace you with measures then,
Since they are both divine, and you are more then men.
Let here Sybilla's Trophy stand,
Lead her now by either hand,
That she may approach yet nearer,
And the Bride and Bridegroom hear her
Bless them in her native tongue,
Wherein old prophesies she sung,
Which time to light hath brought:
She speaks that which Jove hath taught.
Well may he inspire her now,
To make a joyful and true vow.

Sponsam sponse t^ro ten pudicam,
Sponsum sponsa ten toro pudicum.
Non haec vnica nox datur beatis,
At vos perpetuo haec beabit una
Prole multiplici, pari{que} amore.
Laeta, ac vera refert Sybilla, ab alto
Ipse Iuppiter annuit loquenti.

So be it ever, joy and peace,
And mutual love give you increase,
That your posterity may grow
In fame, as long as Seas do flow.

Live you long to see your joys,
In fair Nymphs and Princely Boys:
Breeding like the Garden flowers,
Which kind heaven draws with her warm showers.

Enough of blessing, though too much
Never can be said to such;
But night doth wast, and Hymen chides,
Kind to Bridegrooms and to Brides,
Then singing the last dance induce,
So let good night prevent excuse.

NO longer wrong the night,
Of her Hymenaean right,
A thousand Cupids call away,
Fearing the approaching day,
The Cocks already crow,
Dance then and go,
The last new Dance of the Maskers, which concludes all with a lively strain
at their going out.


