IN ancient times, when any man sought to shadow or heighten his Invention, he
had store of feigned persons ready for his purpose; As Satyrs, Nymphs their
like: such were then in request and belief among the vulgar. But in our days,
although they have not utterly lost their use, yet find they so little credit,
that our modern writers have rather transferd their fictions to the persons of
Enchaunters Commanders of Spirits, as that excellent Poet Torquato Tasso hath
done, and many others.

In imitation of them (having a presentation in hand for Persons of high State)
I grounded my whole Invention upon Inchauntmens and several transformations:
The work-manship whereof was undertaken by M. Constantine an Italian, Architect
to our late Prince Henry: but he being too much of him self, and no way to be
drawn to impart his intentions, failed so far in the assurance he gave, that
the mayne invention even at the last cast, was of force drawn into a far
narrower compass then was from the beginning intended: The description whereof
as it was performed, I will as briefly as I can deliver. The place wherein the
Mask was presented, being the Banqueting house at White Hall: the upper part,
where the State is placed, was Theatred with Pillars, Scaffolds, and all things
answerable to the sides of the Room. At the lower end of the Hall before the
Scene was made an Arch Tryvmphall, passing beautiful, which enclosed the
whole Works: The Scene it self (the Curtain being drawn) was in this
manner divided.

On the upper part there was formed a Sky with Clouds very arteficially
shadowed. On either side of the Scene below was set a high Promontory, and on
either of them stood three large pillars of gold: the one Promontory was
bounded with a Rock standing in the Sea, the other with a Wood; In the midst
between them apeared a Sea in perspective with ships, some cunningly painted,
some arteficially sailing. On the front of the Scene, on either side was a
beautiful garden, with six seats a piece to receive the Maskers: behind
them the mayne Land, and in the midst a pair of stayres made exceeding
curiously in the form of a Schalop shell. And in this manner was the eye first
of all entertained. After the King, Queen, and Prince were placed, and
preparation was made for the beginning of the Mask, there entered four
Squires, who as soon as they approached near the Presence, humbly bowing
themselves, spake as follows.

THat fruit that neither dreads the Syrian heats,
Nor the sharp frosts which churlish Boreas threats,
The fruit of Peace, and Joy our wishes bring
To this high State, in a Perpetual Spring.
Then pardon (Sacred Majesty) our grief
Unseasonably that presses for relief.
The ground whereof (if your blessed ears can spare
A short space of Attention) we will declare.
GReat Honours Herrald Fame having Proclaym'd
This Nuptial feast, and with it all inflamed*
From every quarter of the earth three Knights
In Courtship seen, as well as Martial fights)
Assembled in the Continent, and there
Decreed this night A solemn Service here.
For which, by six and six embarked they were
In several Keels; their Sails for Britain bent.
But (they that never favoured good intent)
Deformed Error that enchanting fiend,
And wing-tongu'd Rumour his infernal friend,
With Curiosity and Credulity,
Both Sorceresses, all in hate agree
Our purpose to divert, in vain they strive,
For we in spite of them came near t'ariue,
When suddenly (as Heaven and hell had met)
A storm confused against our Tackle beat,
Severing the Ships: but after what befell
Let these relate, my tongu's too weak to tell.

A Strange and sad Ostent our Knights distressed,
For while the Tempests fiery rage increased,
About our Decks and Hatches, lo, appear
Serpents, as Lerna had been poured out there
Crawling about us, which fear to eschew
The Knights the Tackle climbed, and hung in view,
When violently a flash of lighning came,
And from our sights did bear them in the flame.
Which past, no Serpent there was to be seen,
And all was husht, as storm had never been.

AT Sea, their mischiefs grew, but ours at Land,
For being by chance arrived, while our Knights stand
To view their storme-tost friends on two Cliffs near,
Thence lo they vanished, and six Pillars were
Fixed in their footsteps, Pillars all of gold,
Fair to our eyes, but woeful to behold.

THus with prodigious hate and cruelty,
Our good Knights for their love afflicted be,
But, o protect us now, Majestic Grace,
For see, those cursed Enchanters press in place
That our past sorrows wrought: these, these alone
Turn all the world into confusion.

Towards the end of this speech, two Enchanters, and two Enchanteresses
appear: Error first, in a skin coat scaled like a Serpent, and an antic
habit painted with Snakes, a hair of curled Snakes, and a deformed vizard.
With him Rumour in a skin coat full of winged Tongues, and over it an antic
robe, on his head a Cap like a tongue, with a large pair of wings to it.

Curiosity in a skin coat full of eyes, and an antic habit over it, a
fantastic Cap full of Eyes.

Credulity in the like habit painted with ears, and an antic Cap full of
ears.

When they had whispered a while as if they had rejoiced at the wrongs which
they had done to the Knights, the Music and their Dance began: strait forth
rushed the four Winds confusedly, the Eastern wind in a skin coat of the
colour of the Sunrising, with a yellow hair, and wings both on his shoulders
and feet.

The Western Wind in a skin coat of dark crimson, with crimson hair and
wings.

The Southern Wind in a dark russet skin coat, hair and wings suitable.

The Northern wind in a grisled skin coat, with hair and wings accordingly.

After them in confusion came the four Elements: Earth, in a skin coat of
grass green, a mantle painted full of trees, plants, and flowers, and on his
head an oak growing.

Water, in a skin coat waved, with a mantle full of fishes, on his head a
Dolphin.

Air, in a skye-coloured skin coat, with a mantle painted with Foul, and on
his head an Eagle.

Fire, in a skin coat, and a mantle painted with flames: on his head a cap of
flames, with a Salamander in the midst thereof.

Then entered the four parts of the earth in a confused measure.

Europe in the habit of an Empress, with an Imperial Crown on her head.

Asia in a Persian Ladies habit with a Crown on her head.

Africa like a Queen of the Moors, with a crown.

America in a skin coat of the colour of the juice of Mulberies, on her head
large round brims of many coloured feathers, and in the midst of it a small
Crown.

All these having danced together in a strange kind of confusion; past away,
by four and four.

At which time, Eternity appeared in a long blew Taffeta robe, painted with
Stars, and on her head a Crown.

Next, came the three Destinies, in long robes of white Taffeta like aged
women, with Garlands of Narcissus Flowers on their heads, and in their left
hands they carried distaffs according to the descriptions of Plato and
Catullus, but in their right hands they carried altogether a Tree of Gold.

After them, came Harmony with nine Musicians more, in long Taffeta robes and
caps of Tinsel, with Garlands guilt, playing and singing this Song.

Vanish, vanish hence confusion,
Dim not Hymens golden light
With false illusion.
The Fates shall do him right,
And fair Eternity,
Who pass through all enchantements fre:
Bring away this Sacred Tree,
The Tree of Grace, and Bounty,
Set it in Bel-Annas eye,
For she, she, only she
Can all Knotted spells untie.
Pulled from the Stock, let her blessed Hands convey
To any suppliant Hand, a bough,
And let that Hand, advance it now
Against a Charm, that Charm shall fade away.
Toward the end of this Song the three, destinies set the Tree of Gold before
the Queen.

Since Knightly valour rescues Dames distressed,
By Virtuous Dames, let charmed Knights be released.
After this Chorus, one of the Squires speaks.

SInce Knights by valour Rescue Dames distressed,
Let them be by the Queen of Dames releast:
So sing the Destinies, who never err,
Fixing this Tree of Grace and Bounty here,
From which, for our enchanted Knights we crave
A branch, pulled by your Sacred Hand, to have;
That we may bear it as the Fates direct,
And manifest your glory in the'ffect.
In virtues favour then, and Pity now,
(Great Queen) vouchsafe us a divine touched bough.

At the end of this speech, the Queen pulled a branch from the Tree and gave it
to a Nobleman who delivered it to one of the Squires.

Go happy man like th'Euening Star,
Whose beams to Bridegrooms well-come are.
May neither Hag, nor Fiend withstand
The pow're of thy Victorious Hand.
The Vncharm'd Knights surrender now,
By virtue of thy raised Bough.
Away Enchauntements, Vanish quite,
No more delay our longing sight:
'Tis fruitless to contend with Fate,
Who gives us pow're against your hate.
Brave Knights, in Courtly pomp appear,
For now are you long looked for here.
Then out of the air a cloud descends, discovering six of the Knights alike,
in strange and sumptuous atires, and withal on either side of the Cloud, on
the two Promontories, the other six Maskers are suddenly transformed our of
the pillars of gold, at which time, while they all come forward to the dancing
place, this Chorus is sung, on the sudden the whole Scene is changed: for
whereas before all seemed to be done at the sea and sea coast, now the
Promontories are suddenly remooved, and London with the Thames is very
arteficially presented in their place.

The Squire lifts up the Bough.

Virtue and Grace, in spite of Charms,
Have now redeemed our men at Arms.
There's no enchantment can withstand,
Where Fate directs the happy hand.
The Maskers first Dance.

while dancing rests, fit place to music granting,
Good spells the Fates shall breath, al envy daunting
Kind ears with joy enchanting, chanting.
Io, Io Hymen.
Like looks, like hearts, like loves are linck't together,
So must the Fates be pleased, so come they hither,
To make this Joy persevere ever.
Io, Io Hymen.
Love decks the spring, her buds to the air exposing,
Such fire here in these bridal Breasts reposing
We leave with charms enclosing, closing.
Io, Io Hymen.
The Maskers second Dance.

LEt us now sing of Loves delight,
For he alone is Lord to night.
Some friendship between man, and man prefer,
But I th'affection between man and wife.
What good can be in life,
Whereof no fruits appear?
Set is that Tree in ill hour,
That yields neither fruit nor flower.
2 How can man Perpetual be,
but in his own Posterity?
That pleasure is of all most bountiful and kind,
That fades not straight, but leaves a living Joy behind.
After this Dialogue the Maskers dance with the Ladies, wherein spending as
much time as they held fitting, they returned to the seats provided for them.

Straight in the Thames appeared four Barges with skippers in them, withal
this song was sung.

Come a shore, come merry mates,
With your nimble heals, and pates:
Summon every man his Knight,
Enough honoured is this night.
Now, let your Sea-borne Goddess come.
Quench these lights, and make all dombe.
Some sleep, others let her call,
And so Godnight to all, godnight to all.
At the conclusion of this song arrived twelve skippers in red caps, with
short cassocks and long slopps wide at the knees, of white canvas striped with
crimson, white gloves and Pomps, and red stockings: these twelve danced a brave
and lively dance, shouting and tryvmphing after their manner.

After this followed the Maskers last dance, wherewith they retired.

At the Embarking of the Knights, the Squires approach the state, and speak.

ALl that was ever asked, by vow of Jove,
To bless a state with, Plenty, Honour Love,
Power, Triumph, private pleasure, public peace,
Sweet springs, and Autumn's filled with due increase,
All these; and what good else, thought can supply.
Ever attend your Triple Majesty.

ALl blessings which the Fates, Prophetic Sung,
At Peleus Nuptials, and what ever tongue
Can figure more, this night, and aye betide,
The honoured Bridegroom, and the honoured Bride.

Thus speaks in us th'affection of our Knights,
Wishing you health, and Myriads of goodnights.

The Squires speeches being ended, this Song is Sung while the Boats pass
away.

Hast aboard, hast now away,
Hymen frowns, at your delay:
Hymen doth long nights affect;
Yield him then his due respect.
The Sea-borne Goddess straight will come,
Quench these lights, and make all dombe.
Some Sleep, others she will call,
And so godnight to all, godnight to all.
^
BRing a- way, bring a- way this sacred Tree,
^
^
the tree of grace and boun-tie, Set it in Bel- Annae's, eye: for she, she
only
^
^
she only, she can all knotted spells vn- tie. Pulled from this stock, let her
blessed
^
^
hand convey To any suppliant hand a bough, And let that hand advance
^
^
it now Against a charm, that charm shall fade a- way.
^
^
BRing away.
^
^
Go happy man like th'Euening Star, Whose beams to
May neither Hag nor Fiend with- stand, The power of
^
^
Bride- grooms welcome are. Th'vnchar- med Knights surren- der
thy vi- ctorious hand.
^
^
now, By ver- tu of thy raised Bow.
^
Away Enchantments; vanish quite:
No more delay our longing sight.
'Tis fruitless to contend with Fate,
Who gives us power against your hate.
Brave Knights in Courtly pomp appear,
For now are you long looked for here.
^
Go happy man.
^
^
WHile dancing rests fit place to Mu- sick granting,
^
^
Good spells the Fates shall breathe, all En- uy daunting,
^
^
Kind ears with joy en- chan- ting. Io Io Io Io Io
^
^
Hy- men, Io Hy- men.
^
Like looks, like hearts, like loves are linked together.
So must the Fates be pleased, so come they hither.
To make this joy persevere.
Io Io Hymen.
Love decks the Spring, her buds to the air exposing:
Such fire here in these Bridal breasts reposing,
They leave with Charms enclosing.
Io Io Hymen.
^
WHile dancing.
^
^
COme a shore, come merry Mates, With your nim- ble heals pates,
^
^
Summon every man his Knight, Enough ho-nour'd is this night. Now
^
^
let your sea-borne Goddess come, Quench these lights and make all dombe,
^
^
Some sleep, others let her call, And so good night, good night to all. go^
^
^
night, good night, good night, good night to all.
^
Hast abourd, hast now away:
Hymen frowns at your delay*
Hymen doth long nights affect;
Yield him then his due respect.
The Sea-borne Goddess straight will come,
Quench those lights, and make all dumb.
Some sleep; others she will call;
And so good night to all, good night to all.
^
COme a shore.
^
^
Woo her and win her he that can, Each wo- man
So she must take and leave a man, Till time more
^
^
hath two Lo- uers: This doth Jove to show that want makes beau- tie
grace dis- co- uers. If fair Women were more scant, they would be
^
^
more respe- cted.
more affe- cted.
^
Courtship and Music suit with Love;
They both are works of passion:
Happy is he whose words can move,
Yet sweet Notes help persuasion.
Mix your words with Music then,
That they the more may enter:
Bold assaults are fit for men,
That on strange beauties venture.
^
Woo her.
^

