FOr as much as this late Entertainment hath been much desired in writing,
both of such as were present at the performance thereof, as also of many which
are yet strangers both to the business and place: it shall be convenient, in
this general publication, a little to touch at the description and situation
of Cawsome seat. The house is fairly built of brick, mounted on the
hill-side of a Park, within view of Redding, they being severed about the
space of two miles. Before the Parke-gate, directly opposite to the House, a
new passage was forced through earable-land, that was lately paled in, it being
from the Park about two flight-shots in length: at the further end whereof,
upon the Queenes approach, a Cynic appeared out of a Bower, dressed in a
skin-coate, with Bases of green Calico, set thick with leaves and boughs:
his nakedness being also artificially shadowed with leaves; on his head he
wore a false hair, black and disordered, stuck carelessly with flowers.

STay; whether you humane be or divine; here is no passage; see you not the
earth furrowed? the region solitary? Cities and Courts fit tumultuous
multitudes: this is a place of silence; here a kingdom I enjoy without
people; my self commands, my self obeys; Host, Cooke, and Guest my self; I
reap without sowing, owe all to Nature, to none other beholding: my skin is
my coat, my ornaments these boughs and flowers, this Bower my house, the
earth my bed, herbs my food, water my drink; I want no sleep, nor health; I
envy none, nor am envied, neither fear I, nor hope, nor joy, nor grieve: if
this be happiness, I have it; which you all that depend on others service, or
command, want: will you be happy? be private; turn Palaces to Hermitages,
noies to silence, outward felicity, to inward content.


A stranger on horse-back was purposely thrust into the troupe disguised, and
wrapped in a cloak that he might pass unknown, who at the conclusion of this
speech began to discover himself as a fantastic Traveller in a silken suit
of strange Checker-worke, made up after the Italian cut, with an Italian hat, a
band of gold and silk, answering the colours of his suit, with a Courtly
feather, long guilt spurs, and all things answerable.

Whether travels thy tongue ill nurtur'dman? thy manners show madness, thy
nakedness poverty, thy resolution folly; since none will undertake thy
presumption; let me descend, that I may make thy ignorance know how much it
hath injured sacred ears.


The Traveller then dismounts and gives his cloak and horse to his Foot-man,
in the mean time the Cynic speaks.

Naked I am, and so is truth; plain, and so is honesty; I fear no mans
encounter, since my cause deserves neither excuse, nor blame.


Shall I now chide or pity thee? thou art as miserable in life, as foolish in
thy opinion; answer me; doest thou think that all happiness consists in
solitariness?


I do.

And are they unhappy that abide in society?

They are.

Doest thou esteem it a good thing to live?

The best of things.

Had thou not a Father and Mother?

Yes.

Did they not live in society?

They did.

And were not thou one of their society, when they bred thee, instructing thee
to go, and speak?


True.

Thy birth then and speech in spite of thy spleen make thee sociable, go, thou
art but a vaine-glorious counterfeit, and wanting that which should make thee
happy, contemnest the means; view but the heavens, is there not above us a
Sun and Moon, giving and receiving light? are there not millions of Stars
that participate their glorious beams? is there any Element simple? is there
not a mixture of all things? and would thou only be singular? action is the
end of life, virtue the crown of action, society the subject of virtue,
friendship the band of society, solitariness the breach. Thou art yet young,
and fair enough, were thou not barbarous; thy soul poor wretch is far out
of tune, make it musical, come, follow me, and learn to live.


I am conquered by reason, and humbly ask pardon for my error, henceforth my
heart shall honour greatness, and love society; lead now, and I will follow
as good a fellow as the best.


The Traveller and Cynic instantly mount on horse-backe, and hasten to the
Parke-gate, where they are received by two Keepers, formally attired in green
Perpetuana, with jerkins and long hose, all things else being in colour
suitable, having either of them a horne hanging formally at their backs, and on
their heads they had green Mommoth-caps, with green feathers, the one of them
in his hand bearing a hooke-bill, and the other a long pike-staffe, both
painted green: with them stood two Robin-Hood-men, in suits of green striped
with black, dressed in doublets with great bellies and wide sleeves, shaped
fardinggale-wise at the shoulders, without wings; their hose were round, with
long green stockings; on their heads they wore broad flat caps with green
feathers cross quite over them, carrying green Bows in their hands, and
green Arrows by their sides.

In this space Cornets at sundry places entertain the time, till the Queen
with her train is entered into the Park: and then one of the Keepers presents
her with this short speech.

More then most welcome, renowned and gracious Queen, since your presence
vouchsafes to beautify these woods, whereof I am Keeper, be it your pleasure
to accept such rude entertainment, as a rough Wood-man can yield. This is to us
a high holy-day, and henceforth yearly shall be kept and celebrated with our
Country sports, in honour of so Royal a guest; come friends and fellows now
prepare your voices, and present your joys in a Siluan dance.


Here standing on a smooth green, and environed with the Horse-men, they
present a Song of five Parts, and withal a lively Siluan-dance of six
persons: the Robin-hood-men fain two Trebles, one of the Keepers with the
Cynic sing two Countertenors, the other Keeper the Base; but the Traveller
being not able to sing, gapes in silence, and expresses his humour in Antike
gestures.

DAnce now and sing the joy, and love we owe:
Let cheerful voices and glad gestures show,
The Queen of grace is she whom we receive,
Honour and State are her guides,
Her presence they can never leave.
Then in a stately Siluan form salute
Her ever flowing grace.
Fill all the Woods with Echoed welcomes,
And strew with flowers this place:
Let every bow and plant fresh blossoms yield,
And all the air refine.
Let pleasure strive to please our Goddess,
For she is all divine.
Yet once again, let us our measures move,
And with sweet notes record our joyful love.
An object more divine none ever had.
Beauty, and heau'n-borne worth,
Mixed in perfection never fade.
Then with a dance triumphant let us sing
Her high advanced praise,
And even to heaven our gladsome welcomes,
With wings of music raise;
Welcome, O welcome, euer-honoured Queen,
To this now-blessed place,
That grove, that bower, that house is happy
Which you vouchsafe to grace.
This song being sung and danced twice over, they fall instantly into a kind
of Curranta, with these words following.

NO longer delay her,
'Twere sin now to stay her
From her ease with tedious sport;
Then welcome still crying,
And swiftly hence flying,
Let us to our homes resort.
In the end whereof the two Keepers carry away the Cynic; and the two
Robin-hood-men the Traveller, when presently Cornets begins again to sound in
several places, and so continue with variety, while the Queen passes through
a long smooth green way, set on each side with Trees in equal distance; all
this while her Majesty being carried in her Caroch.

But because some wet had fallen that day in the forenoon (though the
Garden-walks were made artificially smooth dry) yet all her foot-way was spread
with broad cloth, and so soon as her Majesty with her train were all entered
into the Bower Garden, a Gardiner with his Man and Boy, issued out of an Arbour
to give her Highness entertainment: The Gardener was suited in gray with a
jerkin double jagged all about the wings skirts, he had a pair of great slops
with a codpiece, and buttoned Gamachios all of the same stuff, on his head he
had a straw hat, pibaldly dressed with flowers, and in his hand a silvered
spade: His man was also suited in gray with a great buttoned flap on his jerkin,
having large wings and skirts, with a pair of great slops and Gamachios of the
same, on his head he had a straw hat, and in his hand a silvered Mattox: The
Gardiners Boy was in a pretty suit of flowery stuff, with a silvered Rake in
his hand: when they approached near the Queen, they all valed Bonet, and
lowting low, the Gardner began after his antique fashion this speech.

Most magnificent and peerless Deity, lo I the surueyer of Lady Floras
works, welcome your grace with fragrant phrases into her Bowers, beseeching
your greatness to bear with the late wooden entertainment of the Wood-men,
for Woods are more full of weeds then wits, but gardens are weeded, and
Gardeners witty, as may appear by me. I have flowers for all fancies, Time for
truth, Rosemary for remembrance, Roses for love, Hartsease for joy, and
thousands more, which all harmoniously rejoice at your presence; but my self,
with these my Paradisians here, will make you such music, as the wild
Wooddists shall be ashamed to hear the report of it. Come sirs prune your
pipes, and tune your strings, and agree together like birds of a feather.


welcome to this flowery place,
Fair Goddess and sole Queen of grace:
All eyes triumph in your sight,
Which through all this empty space
Casts such glorious beams of light.
Paradise were meeter far
To entertain so bright a Star:
But why erres my folly so?
Paradise is where you are
Heaven above, and heaven below.
Could our powers and wishes meet,
How well would they your graces greet,
Yet accept of our desire,
Roses of all flowers most sweet
Spring out of the silly brier.
After this song, the Gardiner speaks again.

Wonder not (great Goddess) at the sweetness of our Garden-aire (though
passing sweet it be) Flora hath perfumed it for you (Flora our mistress, and
your servant) who enuites you yet further into her Paradise; she invisibly
will lead your grace the way, and we (as our duty is) visibly stay behind.


From thence the Queen ascends by a few steps into the upper Garden, at the
end whereof, near the house, this Song was sung by an excellent counter-tenor
voice, with rare variety of division unto two unusual instruments, all being
concealed within the Arbour.

O Joys exceeding?
From love, fro power of your wished sight proceeding!
As a fair morn shines divinely,
Such is your view, appearing more divinely.
Your steppes ascending,
Raise high your thoughts for your content contending;
All our hearts of this grace vaunting,
Now leap as they were moved by enchanting.
So ended the entertainment without the House for that time, and the Queenes
pleasure being that night to sup privately: The Kings Violins attended her
with their sollemnest music, as an excellent consort in like manner did the
next day at dinner.

Supper being ended, her Majesty accompanied with many Lords and Ladies came
into the Hall, and rested Her self in Her Chair of State, the Scaffolds of
the Hall being on all parts filled with heholders of worth, suddenly forth
came the Traveller, Gardiner, Cynic, with the rest of their crew, and others
furnished with their Instruments, and in manner following entertain the time.

A Hall, a hall for men of moment; Rationals, and Irrationals; but yet not all
of one breeding. For I an Academic am, refined by travel that have learned
what to Courtship belongs, and so divine a presence as this; if we press past
good manners, laugh at our follies, for you cannot show us more favour, then to
laugh at us. If we prove ridiculous in your sights, we are gracious; and
therefore we beseech you to laugh at us. For mine own part (I thank my
Stars for it) I have been laughed at in most parts of Christendom.


I can neither brag of my Travels, nor yet am ashamed of my profession; I
make sweet walks for fair Ladies; Flowers I prepare to adorn them; close
Arbours I build wherein their Loves unseen may court them; and who can do
Ladies better service, or more acceptable? when I was a Child and lay in my
Cradle, (a very pretty Child) I remember well that Lady Venus appeared unto me,
and setting a Silver Spade and Rake by my Pillow, bad me prove a Gardiner; I
told my Mother of it (as became the duty of a good Child) whereupon she
provided straight for me two great Platters full of Pap; which having
dutifully devoured, I grew to this portraiture you see, sprung fodainely out of
my Cabin, and fell to my profession.


Verily by thy discourse thou hast Travelled much, and I am ashamed of my self
that I come so far behind thee; as not once to have yet mentioned Venus or
Cupid, or any other of the gods to have appeared to me. But I will henceforth
boast truly, that I have now seen a Deity as far beyond theirs, as the
beauty of light is beyond darkness, or this Feast whereof we have had our
share, is beyond thy Sallets.


Sure I am, it hath stirred up strange thoughts in me; never knew I the
difference between Wine and Water before. Bacchus hath opened mine eyes, I now
see bravery and admire it, beauty adore it. I find my Arms naked, my
discourse rude, but my heart soft as Wax, ready to melt with the least beam
of a fair eye; which (till this time) was as untractable as Iron.


I much joy in thy conversion, thou hast long been a mad fellow, and now
proues^ a good fellow, let us all therefore join together sociably in a Song,
to the honour of good fellowship.


A very Musical motion, and I agree to it.

Sing that sing can, for my part I will only while you sing, keep time with
my gestures. A la more du France.


NIght as well as brightest day hath her delight,
Let us then with mirth and Music deck the night,
Never did glad day such store
Of joy to night boqueath.
Her Stars then adore,
Both in Heaven, and whore beneath.
Love and beauty, mirth and Music yield true joys,
Though the Cynickes in their folly count them toys.
Raise your spirits ne'er so high,
They will be apt to fall:
None brave thoughts envy,
Who had ere brave thought at all.
Joy is the sweet friend of life, the nurse of blood,
Patron of all health, and fountain of all good:
Never may joy hence depart,
But all your thoughts attend,
Nought can hurt the heart,
That retains so sweet a friend.
At the end of this Song, enters Siluanus, shaped after the description of the
ancient Writers; His lower parts like a Goat, and his upper parts in an
antique habit of rich Taffeta, cut into Leaves, and on his head he had a false
Hair, with a wreath of long Boughs and Lillies, that hung dangling about his
neck, and in his hand a Cypress branch, in memory of his love Cyparissus,
The Gardiner espying him speaks thus.

Silence sirs, here comes Siluanus god of these Woods, whose presence is rare,
and imports some novelty.


Let us give place, for this place is fitter for Deities then us.


They all vanish and leave Siluanus alone, who coming nearer to the State, and
making a low Congee, speaks.

THat health which harbours in the fresh aired groves,
Those pleasures which green hill and valley moves,
Siluanus the commander of them all,
Here offers to this State Imperial;
Which as a homager he visits now,
And to a greater power his power doth bow,
With all, thus much his duty signifies:
That there are certain Semideities,
Belonging to his Siluan walks, who come
Led with the Music of a Sprightly drome,
To keep the night awake and honour you,
(Great Queen) to whom all Honours they hold due,
So rest you full of joy, and wished content,
Which though it be not given, 'tis fairly meant.

At the end of this speech there is suddenly heard a great noise of drums and
phifes, and way being made, eight Pages first enter, with green torches in
their hands lighted; their suits were of green Satin, with cloaks and caps
of the same, richly and strangely set forth: Presently after them the eight
Maskers came, in rich embroidered suits of green Satin with high hats of the
same, and all their accoutrements answerable to such Noble and Princely
personages, as they concealed under their visards, and so they instantly fell
into a new dance: at the end whereof they took forth the Ladies, and danced
with them, and so well was the Queen pleased with her entertainment, that she
vouchsafed to make her self the head of their Revels, and graciously to adorn
the place with her personal dancing: much of the night being thus spent with
variety of dances, the Maskers made a conclusion with a second new dance.

At the Queenes parting on wednesday in the afternoon, the Gardiner with his
Man and Boy and three handsome Country Maids, the one bearing a rich bag
with linen in it, the second a rich apron, and the third a rich mantle,
appear all out of an Arbour in the lower Garden, and meeting the Queen, the
Gardiner presents this speech.

STay Goddess, stay a little space,
Our poor Country love to grace,
Since we dare not too long stay you,
Accept at our hands, we pray you,
These mean presents to express
Greater love, then we profess,
Or can utter now for woe
Of your parting hast'ned so.
Gifts these are, such as were wrought
By their hands, that them have brought,
Home-bred things, which they presumed,
After I had them perfumed
With my flowery incantation,
To give you in presentation
At your parting, come feat Lasses
With fine curtsies, and smooth faces,
Offer up your simple toys
To the Mistress of our joys;
While we the sad time prolong
With a mournful parting song.

CAn you the Author of our joy
So soon depart?
Will you revive, and straight destroy,
New mirth to tears convert?
O that ever cause of gladness
Should so swiftly turn to sadness!
Now as we droop, so will these flowers
Bard of your sight.
Nothing avail them heavenly showers
Without your heavenly light.
When the glorious Sun forsakes us,
Winter quickly ouer-takes us.
Yet shall our prayers your ways attend,
When you are gone;
And we the tedious time will spend,
Remembering you alone.
Welcome here shall you hear ever,
But the word of parting never.

