HErod the son of Antipater (an Idumean,) having crept by the favour of the
Romanes, into the Jewish Monarchy, married Mariam the daugh^er of Hircanus,
the rightful King and Priest, and for her (besides her high blood, being of
singular beauty) he reputiated Doris, his former Wife, by whom he had
Children.

This Mariam had a Brother called Aristobolus, and next him and Hircanus his
Graund-father, Herod in his Wives right had the best ^le. Therefore to remove
them, he charged the first with treason: and put him to death; and drowned the
second under colour of sport. Alexandra, Daughter to the one, and Mother to the
other, accused him for their deaths before Anthony.

So when he was forc'te to go answer this Accusation at Rome, he left the
custody of his wife to Ios^phus his Uncle, that had married his Sister Sal^me,
and cut of a violent affection (unwilling any should enjoy her after him) he
gave strict and private commandment, that if he were slain, she should be
put to death. But he returned with much honour, yet found his Wife extremely
discontented, to whom Ios^phus had (meaning it for the best, to prove Herod
loved her) revealed his charge.

So by Salomes accusation he put Iosephus to death, but was reconciled to
Mariam, who still bare the death of her Friends exceeding hardly.

In this mean time Herod was again necessarily to revisit Rome, for Caesar
having overthrown Anthony his great friend, was likely to make an alteration
of his Fortune.

In his absence, news came to Jerusalem that Caesar had put him to death,
their willingness it should be so, together with the likelihood, gave this Rumour
so good credi^, as Sohemus that had suceeded Iosephus charge, succeeded him
likewise in revealing it. So at Herods return which was speedy and unexpected,
he found Mariam so far from joy, that she showed apparent signs of sorrow.
He still desiring to win her to a better humour, she being very unable to
conceal her passion, ^ell to upbraiding him with her Brothers death. As they
were thus debating, came in a fellow with a Cup of Wine, who hired by Salome,
said first, it was a Love potion, which Mariam desired to deliver to the King:
but afterwards he affirmed that it was a poison, and that Sohemus had told her
somewhat, which procured the vehement hate in her.

The King hearing this, more moved with Jealousy of Sohemus, then with this
intent of poison, sent her away, and presently after by the instigation of
Salome, she was beheaded. Which rashness was afterward punished in him, with an
intolerable a^d almost Frantic passion for her death.

HOw oft have I with public voice run on?
To censure Romes last Hero for deceit:
Because he wept when Pompeis life was gone,
Yet when he lived, he thought his Name too great^
But now I do recant, and Roman Lord
Excuse too rash a judgement in a woman:
My Sex pleads pardon, pardon then afford,
Mistaking is with us, but too too common.
Now do I find by self Experience taught,
One Object yields both grief and joy:
You wept indeed, when on his worth you thought,
But joyed that slaughter did your Foe destroy.
So at his death your Eyes true drops did raine^
Whom dead, you did not wish alive again.
When Herod liu^d, that now is done to death,
Oft have I wished that I from him were free:
Oft have I wished that he might lose his breath,
Oft have I wished his Carcass dead to see.
Then Rage and Scorn had put my love to flight,
That Love which once on him was firmly set:
Hate hid his true affection from my sight,
And kept my heart from paying him his debt.
And blame me not, for Herods Jealousy
Had power even constancy it self to change:
For he by barring me from liberty,
To shun my ranging, taught me first to range.
But yet too chaste a Scholar was my hart,
To learn to love another then my Lord:
To leave his Love, my lessons former part,
I quickly learned, the other I abhord.
But now his death to memory doth call,
The tender love, that he to Mariam bare:
And mine to him, this makes those rivers fall,
Which by an other thought vnmoistned are.
For Aristobolus the lowlyest youth
That ever did in Angels shape appear:
The cruel Herod was not moved to ruth,
Then why grieves Mariam Herods death to hear?
Why joy I not the tongue no more shall speak,
That yielded forth my brothers latest dome:
Both youth and beauty might thy fury break,
And both in him did ill befit a Tomb.
And worthy Grandsire ill did he requite,
His high Assent alone by thee procured,
Except he murdered thee to free the spright
Whi^ (...) he thought on earth too long immured.
How happy was it that Sohemus mind
Was moved to pity my distressed estate^
Might Herods life a trusty servant find,
My death to his had been vnseparate.
These thoughts have power, his death to make me bear,
Nay more, to wish the news may firmly hold:
Yet cannot this repulse some falling tear,
That will against my will some grief unfold.
And more I owe him for his love to me,
The deepest love that ever yet was seen:
Yet had I rather much a milke-maide be,
Then be the Monarch of Iudeas Queen.
It was for nought but love, he wished his end
Might to my death, but the vaunt-currier prove:
But I had rather still be foe then friend,
To him that saves for hate, and kills for love.
Hard-hearted Mariam, at thy discontent,
What floods of tears have drenched his manly face?
How can thou then so faintly now lament,
Thy truest lovers death, a deaths disgrace:
I now mine eyes you do begin to right
The wrongs of your admirer^ And my Lord,
Long since you should have put your smiles to flight,
Ill doth a widowed eye with joy accord.
Why now me thinks the love I bare him then,
When virgin freedom left me vnrestraind:
Doth to my heart begin to creep again,
My passion now is far from being faind.
But tears fly back, and hide you in your bank^s,
You must not be to Alexandra seen:
For if my moan be spied, but little thanks
Shall Mariam have, from that incensed Queen.

WHat means these tears? my Mariam doth mistake,
The news we heard did tell the Tyrants end:
What weepst thou for thy brothers murders sake,
Will ever wight a tear for Herod spend?
My curse pursue his breathless trunk and spirit,
Base Edomite the damned Esaus heir:
Must he ere Iacobs child the crown inherit?
Must he vile wretch be set in Dauids chair?
No Dauids soul within the bosom plac'te,
Of our forefather Abram was ashamed:
To see his seat with such a toad disgrac'te,
That seat that hath by Iudas race been feigned.
Thou fatal enemy to royal blood,
Did not the murder of my boy suffice,
To stop thy cruel mouth that gaping stood?
But must thou dim the mild Hersanus eyes?
My gracious father, whose too ready hand
Did lift this Idumean from the dust:
And he ungrateful catiffe did withstand,
The man that did in him most friendly trust.
What kingdoms right could cruel Herod claim,
Was he not Esaus Issue, heir of hell?
Then what succession can he have but shame?
Did not his Ancestor his birth-right sell?
O yes, he doth from Edoms name derive,
His cruel nature which with blood is fed:
That made him me of Sire and son deprive,
He ever thirsts for blood, and blood is red.
Weepst thou because his love to thee was bent?
And readst thou love in crimson characters?
Slew he thy friends to work thy hearts content?
No: hate may Justly call that action hers.
He gave the sacred Priesthood for thy sake,
To Aristobolus. Yet doomde him dead:
Before his back the Ephod warm could make,
And ere the Myter settled on his head.
Oh had he given my boy no less then right,
The double oil should to his forehead bring:
A double honour, shining doubly bright,
His birth anointed him both Priest and King.
And say my father, and my son he ^lewe,
To royalize by right your Prince borne breath:
Was love the cause, can Mariam deem it true,
That Mariam gave commandment for her death?
I know by fits, he showed some signs of love,
And yet not love, but raging lunacy:
And this his hate to thee may justly prove,
That sure he hates Hercanus family.
Who knows if he inconstant wavering Lord,
His love to Doris had renewed again?
And that he might his bed to her afford,
Perchance he wished that Mariam might be slain.

Doris, Alas her time of love was past,
Those coals were rakte in embers long ago:
If Mariams love and she was now disgrast,
Nor did I glory in her overthrow.
He not a whit his first borne son esteemed,
Because as well as his he was not mine:
My children only for his own he deemed,
These boys that did descend from royal line.
These did he stile his heirs to Dauids throne,
My Alexander if he live, shall sit
In the Majestic seat of Salamon,
To will it so, did Herod think it fit.

Why? who can claim from Alexanders brood
That Gold adorned Lyon-guarded Chair?
Was Alexander not of Dauids blood?
And was not Mariam Alexanders heir?
What more then right could Herod then bestow,
And who will think except for more then right,
He did not raise them, for they were not low,
But borne to wear the Crown in his despite:
Then send those tears away that are not sent
To thee by reason, but by passions power:
Thine eyes to cheer, thy cheeks to smi^es be bent,
And entertain with joy this happy hour.
Feliciti^, if when she comes, she finds
A mourning habit, and a cheerless look,
Will think she is not welcome to thy mind,
And so perchance her lodging will not brooke.
Oh keep her whilst thou hast her, if she go
She will not easily return again:
Full many a year have I endured in woe,
Yet still have sud her presence to obtain:
And did not I to her as presents send
A Table, that best Art did beautify
Of two, to whom Heaven did best feature lend,
To woe her love by winning Anthony:
For when a Princes favour we do crave,
We fir^ their Minions loves do seek to win:
So I, that sought Felicity to have,
Did with her Minion Anthony begin,
With double slight I sought to captivate
The warlike lover, but I did not right:
For if my gift had borne but half the rate,
The Roman had been ouer-taken quite.
But now he fared like a hungry guest,
That to some plenteous festival is gone,
Now this, now that, he deems to eat were best,
Such choice doth make him let them all alone.
The boys large forehead first did fairest seem
Then glaunst his eye upon my Mariams cheek:
And that without comparison did deem,
What was in either but he most did leek.
And thus distracted, eythers beauties might
Within the others excellence was drowned:
Too much delight did bare him from delight,
For eithers love, the others did confound.
Where if thy portraiture had only gone,
His life from Herod, Anthony had taken:
He would have loved thee, and thee alone,
And left the browne Egyptian clean forsaken.
And Cleopatra then to seek had been,
So firm a lover of her waned face:
Then great Anthonius fall we had not seen,
By her that fled to have him hold the chase.
Then Mariam i^ a Romans Chariot set,
In place of Cleopatra might have shown:
A mart of Beauties in her visage met,
And part in this, that they were all her own.

Not to be Emprise of aspiring Rome,
Would Mariam like to Cleopatra live:
With purest body will I press my Toome,
And wish no favours Anthony could give.

Let us retire us, that we may resolve
How now to deal in this reversed state:
Great are th'affaires that we must now revolve,
And great affairs must not be taken late.

MOre plotting yet? Why? now you have the thing
For which so oft you spent your supliant breath:
And Mariam hopes to have another King,
Her eyes do sparkle joy for Herods death.

If she desired another King to have,
She might before she came in Herods bed
Have had her wish. More Kings then one did crave,
For leave to set a Crown upon her head.
I think with more then reason she laments,
That she is freed from such a sad annoy:
Who is't will weep to part from discontent,
And if she joy, she did not causeless joy.

You durst not thus have given your tongue the rain,
If noble Herod still remained in life:
Your daughters betters far I dare maintain,
Might have reioyc'd to be my brothers wife.

My betters far, base woman it is untrue,
You scarce have ever my superiors seen:
For Mariams servants were as good as you,
Before she came to be Iudeas Queen.

Now stirs the tongue that is so quickly moved,
But more then once your collor have I borne:
Your fumish words are sooner said then proved,
And Salomes reply is only scorn.

Scorn those that are for thy companions held,
Though I thy brothers face had never seen,
My birth, thy baser birth so far exceld,
I had to both of you the Princess been.
Thou party Jew, and party Edomite,
Thou Mongrell: issued from rejected race,
Thy Ancestors against the Heavens did fight,
And thou like them wilt heavenly birth disgrace.

Still twit you me with nothing but my birth,
What ods betwixt your ancesters and mine?
Both borne of Adam, both were made of Earth,
And both did come from holy Abrahams line.

I favour thee when nothing else I say,
With thy black acts i'll not pollute my breath:
Else to thy charge I might full justly lay
A shameful life, besides a husbands death.

Tis true indeed, I did the plots reveal,
That past betwixt your favourites and you:
I meant not I, a traitor to conceal.
Thus Salome your Minion Ioseph slue.

Heaven, dost thou mean this Infamy to smother?
Let sl^ndred Mariam open thy closed ear:
Self guilt hath ever been suspicious mother,
And therefore I this speech with patience bear.
No, had not Salomes vnstedfast heart,
In Iosephus stead her Constabarus placed,
To free her self, she had not used the art,
To slander haplesse Mariam for unchaste.

Come Mariam, let us go: it is no boot
To let the head contend against the foot.

Lives Salome, to get so base a stil^
As foot, to the proud Mariam Herods spirit:
In happy time for her endured exile,
For did he live she should not miss her merit:
But he is dead: and though he were my Brother,
His death such store of Cinders cannot cast
My Coals of love to quench: for though they smother
The flames a while, yet will they out at last.
Oh blessed Arabia, in best climate placed,
I by the Fruit will censure of the Tree:
Tis not in vain, thy happy name thou hast,
If all Arabians like Silleus be:
Had not my Fate been too too contrary,
When I on Constabarus first did gaze,
Silleus had been object to mine eye:
Whose looks and personage must allies amaze.
But now ill Fated Salome, thy tongue
To Constabarus by it self is tide:
And now except I do the Hebrew wrong
I cannot be the fair Arabian Bride:
What childish lets are these? Why stand I now
On honourable points? Tis long ago
Since shame was written on my tainted brow:
And certain tis, that shame is honours foe.
Had I upon my reputation stood,
Had I affected an unspotted life,
Iosephus veins had still been stuffed with blood,
And I to him had lived a sober wife.
Then had I never cast an eye of love,
On Constabarus now detested face,
Then had I kept my thoughts without remou^
And blushed at motion of the least disgrace:
But shame is gone, and honour wiped away,
And Impudency on my forehead sits:
She bids me work my will without delay,
And for my will I will employ my wits.
He loves, I love; what then can be the cause,
Keeps me for being the Arabians wife?
It is the principles of Moses laws,
For Contabarus still remains in life,
If he to me did bear as Earnest hate,
As I to him, for him there were an ease,
A separating bill might free his fate:
From such a yoke that did so much displease.
Why should such privilege to man be given?
Or given to them, why bard from women then?
Are men then we in greater grace with Heaven?
Or cannot women hate as well as men?
I'll be the custome-breaker: and begin
To show my Sex the way to freedoms door,
And with an offering will I purge my sin,
The law was made for none but wh^ are poor.
If Herod had lived, I might to him accuse
My present Lord. But for the futures sake
Then would I tell the King he did refuse
The sons of Baba in his power to take.
But now I must diuorse him from my bed,
That my Silleus may possess his room:
Had I not begged his life he had been dead,
I curse my tongue the hindrer of his doom,
But then my wandering hea^ to him was fast,
Nor did I dre^me of change: Silleus said,
He would be here, and see he comes at last,
Had I not named him longer had he staid.

WEll ^ound fair Salome Iudaeas pride,
Hath thy inn^ted wisdom found the way
To make Silleus deem him deified,
By gaining thee a more then precious pray?

I have devised the best I can devise,
A more imperfect means was never found:
But what cares Salome, it doth suffice
If our endeavours with their end be crowned.
In this our land we have an ancient use,
Permitted first by our law-giuers head:
Who hates his wife, though for no just abuse,
May with a bill diuor^ her from his bed.
But in this custom women are not free,
Yet I for once will wrest it, blame not thou
The ill I do, since what I does for thee,
Though others blame, Silleus should allow.

Thinks Salome, Silleus hath a tongue
To censure her fair action^: let my blood
Bedash my proper brow, for such a wrong,
The being yours, can make even vices good:
Arabia joy, prepare thy earth with green,
Thou never happy were indeed till now:
Now shall thy ground be trod by beauties Queen,
Her foot is destined to depress thy brow.
Thou shalt fair Salome comm^und as much
As i^ the royal ornament were thine:
The weakness of Ara^ias King is such,
The kingdom is not his so much as mine.
My mouth is our Obodas oracle,
Who thinks not ought but what Sill^us will?
And thou rare creature. Asias miracle,
Shalt be to me as It: Obo^as still.

Tis not for glory I thy love accept,
Iudea yields me honours worthy store:
Had not affection in my bosom crept,
My native count^y should my life ^plore.
Were not Silleus n^ with home I go,
I would not change my Palastine for Rome:
Much less woul^ I a glorious state to show,
Go far to purc^ase an Arabian roome^

Far be it from Silleus so to think,
I know it is thy gratitude requites
The love that is in me, and shall not shrink
Till death do sever me from earths delights.

But whist; me thinks the wolf is in our talk,
Be gone Silleus, who doth here arrive?
Tis Constabarus that doth hither walk,
I'll find a quarrel, him from me to drive.

Farewell, but were it not for thy command,
In his despite Silleus here would stand.

OH Salome, how much you wrong your name,
Your race, your country, and your husband most?
A strangers private conference is shame,
I blush for you, that have your blushing lost.
Oft have I found, and found you to my grief,
Consorted with this base Arabian here:
Heaven knows that you have bin my comfort chief,
Then do not now my greater plague appear.
Now by the stately Carved edifice
That on Mount Zion makes so fair a show,
And by the Altar fit for sacrifice,
I love thee more then thou thy self doest know.
Oft with a silent sorrow have I heard
How ill Iudeas mouth doth censure thee:
And did I not thine honour much regard,
Thou should not be exhorted thus for me.
Did thou but know the worth of honest fame,
How much a virtuous woman is esteemed,
Thou would like hell eschew deserved shame,
And seek to be both chaste and chastely deemed.
Our wisest Prince did say, and true he said,
A virtuous woman crowns her husbands head.

Did I for this, vpreare thy lowe es^ate?
Did I for this requital beg thy life,
That thou had forfeited hapless fate?
To be to such a thankle^ wretch the wife.
This hand of mine hath lifted up thy head,
Which many a day ago had fallen full lowe,
Because the sons of Baba are not dead,
To me thou doest both life and fortune owe.

You have my patience often exercised,
Use make my choler keep within the banks:
Yet boast no more, but be by me advised.
A benefit upbraided, forfeits thanks:
I prethy Salome dismiss this mood,
Thou doest not know how ill it fits thy place:
My words were all intended for thy good,
To raise thine honour and to stop disgrace.

To stop disgrace? take thou no care for me,
Nay do thy worst, thy worst I set not by:
No shame of mine is like to light on thee,
Thy love and admonitions I defy.
Thou shalt no hour longer call me wife,
Thy Jealousy procures my hate so deep:
That I from thee do mean to free my life,
By a diuorcing bill before I sleep.

Are Hebrew women now trasform'd to men?
Why do you not as well our battles fight,
And wear our armour? suffer this, and then
Let all the world be topsy turued quite.
Let fishes graze, beasts, swine, and birds descend,
Let fire burn downew^rd^ whilst the earth aspires:
Let Winters heat and Summers cold offend,
Let Thistles grow on Vines, and Grapes on Briers,
Set us to Spin or Sow, or at the best
Make us Wood-hewers, Waters-bearing wights:
For sacred service let us take no rest,
Use us as Ioshua did the Gibonites.

Hold on your talk, till it be time to end,
For me I am resolved it shall be so:
Though I be first that to this course do bend,
I shall not be the last full well I know.

Why then be witness Heaven, the Judge of sins,
Be witness Spirits that eschew the dark:
Be witness Angels, witness Cherubins,
Whose semblance sits upon the holy Arc:
Be witness earth, be witness Palestine,
Be witness Dauids City, if my heart
Did ever merit such an act of thine:
Or if the fault be mine that makes us part,
Since mildest Moses friend unto the Lord,
Did work his wonders in the land of Ham,
And slew the first-borne Babes without a sword,
In sign whereof we eat the holy Lamb:
Till now that fourteen hundred years are past,
Since first the Law with us hath been in force:
You are the first, and will I hope, be last,
That ever sought her husband to divorce.

I mean not to be led by president,
My will shall be to me in stead of Law.

I fear me much you will too late repent,
That you have ever lived so void of awe:
This is Silleus love that makes you thus
Reverse all order: you must next be his.
But if my thoughts aright the cause discuss,
In winning you, he gains no lasting bliss,
I was Silleus and not long ago
Iosephus then was Constabarus now:
When you became my friend you proved his foe,
As now for him you break to me your vowed.

If once I loved you, greater is your debt:
For certain tis that you deserved it not.
And undeserved love we soon forget,
And therefore that to me can be no blot.
But now fare ill my once beloved Lord,
Yet never more beloved then now abhord.

Yet Constabarus bidde^h thee farewell.
Farewell light creature. Heaven forgive thy sin:
My prophecying spirit doth foretell
Thy wavering thoughts do yet but new begin.
Yet I have better escaped then Ioseph did,
But if our Herods death had been delayed,
The valiant youths that I so long have hid,
Had been by her, and I for them betrayed.
Therefore in happy hour did Caesar give
The fatal blow to wanton Anthony.
For had he lived, our Herod then should live,
But great Anthonius death made Herod dye.
Had he enjoyed his breath, not I alone
Had been in danger of a deadly fall:
But Mariam had the way of peril gone,
Though by the Tyrant most beloved of all.
The sweet faced Mariam as free from guilt
As Heaven from spots, yet had her Lord come back
Her purest blood had been unjustly spilt.
And Salome it was would work her wrack.
Though all Iudea yield her innocent,
She often hath been near to punishment.

THose minds that wholly dote upon delight,
Except they only joy in inward good:
Still hope at last to hop upon the right,
And so from Sand they leap in loathsome mud.
Fond wretches, seeking what they cannot find,
For no content attends a wavering mind.
If wealth they do desire, and wealth attain,
Then wondrou^ fain would they to honour lep:
Of mean degree they do in honour gain,
They would but wish a little higher step.
Thus step to step, and wealth to wealth they ad,
Yet cannot all their plenty make them glad.
Yet oft we see that some in humble state,
Are chreefull, pleasant, happy, and content:
When those indeed that are of higher state,
With vain additions do their thoughts torment.
Th'one would to his mind his fortune bind,
T'hother to his fortune frames his mind.
To wi^h variety is sign of grief,
For if you like your state as now it is,
Why should an alteration bring relief?
Nay change would then be feared as loss of blis.
That man is only happy in his Fate,
That is delighted in a settled state.
Still Mariam wished she from her Lord were free,
For expectation of variety:
Yet now she ^ees her wishes prosperous be,
She grieves, because her Lord so soon did die.
Who can those vast imaginations feed,
Where in a property, contempt doth breed?
Were Herod now perchance to live again,
She would ^gaine as much be grieved at that:
All that she may, she ever doth disdain,
Her wishes guide her to she knows not what.
And sad must be their looks, their honour sower,
That care for nothing being in their power.

TIs true Graphin^, now the time draws ny
Wherein the holy Priest with hallowed right,
The happy long desired knot shall tie,
Pheroras and Graphina to unite:
How oft have I with lifted hands implored
This blessed hour, till now implord in vain,
Which hath my wished liberty restored,
And made my subject self my own again.
Thy love fair Maid upon mine eye doth sit,
Whose nature hot doth dry the moisture all,
Which were in nature, and in reason fit
For my monachall Brothers death to fall:
Had Herod lived, he would have plucked my hand
From fair Graphinas Palm perforce: and tide
The same in hateful and despised band,
For I had had a Baby to my Bride:
Scarce can her Infant tongue with easy voice
Her name distinguish to another ear:
Yet had he lived, his power, and not my choice
Had made me solembly the contract swear.
Have I not cause in such a change to joy?
What? though she be my Niece, a Princess borne:
Near bloods without respect: high birth a toy.
Since Love can teach blood and kindreds scorn.
What booted it that he did raise my head,
To be his Realms Copartner, Kingdoms mate,
Withal, he kept Graphina from my bed,
More wished by me then thrice Iudeas state.
Oh, could not he be skilful Judge in love,
That doted so upon his Mariams face?
He, for his passion, Doris did remove.
I needed not a lawful Wife displace,
It could not be but he had power to judge,
But he that never grudged a Kingdoms share,
This well known happiness to me did grudge:
And meant to be therein without compare.
Else had I been his equal in loves host,
For though the Diadem on Mariams head
Corrupt the vulgar judgements, I will boast
Graphina: brow's as white, her cheeks as red.
Why speaks thou not fair creature? move thy tongue,
For Silence is a sign of discontent:
It were to both our loves too great a wrong
If now this hour do find thee sadly bent.

Mistake me not my Lord, too oft have I
Desired this time to come with winged feet,
To be inwrapt with grief when tis too nie,
You know my wishes ever yours did meet:
If I be silent, tis no more but fear
That I should say too little when I speak:
But since you will my imperfections bear,
In spite of doubt I will my silence break:
Yet might amazement tie my moving tongue,
But that I know before Pheroras mind,
I have admired your affection long:
And cannot yet therein a reason find.
Your hand hath li^ted me from lowest state,
To highest eminency wondrous grace,
And me your hand-maid have you made your mate,
Though all but you alone do count me base.
You have preserved me pure at my request,
Though you so weak a vassal might constrain
To yield to your high will, then last not best
In my respect a Princess you disdain,
Then need not all these favours study crave,
To be requited by a simple maid:
And study still you know must silence have,
Then be my cause for silence justly waide,
But study cannot boot nor I requite,
Except your lowly hand-maides steadfast love
And fast obedience may your mind delight,
I will not promise more then I can prove.

That study needs not let Graphina smile,
And I desire no greater recompense:
I cannot vaunt me in a glorious stile,
Nor show my love in far-fetcht eloquence:
But this believe me, never Herods heart
Hath held his Prince-borne beauty famed wife
In nearer place then thou fair virgin art,
To him that holds the glory of his life.
Should Herods body leave the Sepulcher,
And entertain the severed ghost again:
He should not be my nuptial hinderer,
Except he hindered it with dying pain.
Come fair Graphina, let us go in state,
This wish-indeered time to celebrate.

NOw valiant friend you have our lives redeemed,
Which lives as saved by you, to you are due:
Command and you shall see your self esteemed,
Our lives and liberties belong to you.
This twice six years with hazard of your life,
You have concealed us from the tyrants sword:
Though cruel Herods sister were your wife,
You durst in scorn of fear this grace afford.
In recompense we know not what to say,
A poor reward were thanks for such a merit,
Our truest friendship at your feet we lay,
The best requital to a noble spirit.

Oh how you wrong our friendship valiant youth,
With friends there is not such a word as det:
Where amity is tide with bond of truth,
All benefits are there in common set.
Then is the golden age with them renewed,
All names of properties are banished quite:
Division, and distinction, are eschewed:
Each hath to what belongs to others right.
And tis not sure so full a benefit,
Freely to give, as freely to require:
A bountious act hath glory following it,
They cause the glory that the act desire.
All friendship should the pattern imitate,
Of Iesses Son and valiant Ionathans
For neither Sovereigns nor fathers hate,
A friendship f^xt on virtue sever can.
Too much of this, tis written in the heart,
And need no amplifying with the tongue:
Now may you from your living tomb depart,
Where Herods life hath kept you over long.
Too great an injury to a noble mind,
To be quick buried, you had purchased fame,
Some years a go, but that you were confined.
While thousand meaner did advance their name.
Your best of life the prime of all your years,
Your time of action is from you bereft.
Twelve winters have you operpast in fears:
Yet if you use it well, enough is left.
And who can doubt but you will use it well?
The sons of Babus have it by descent:
In all their thoughts each action to excel,
Boldly to act, and wisely to invent.

Had it not like the hateful cuckoo been,
Whose riper age his infant nurse doth kill:
So long we had not kept our selves unseen,
But Constabarus safely crossed our will:
For had the Tyrant fixed his cruel eye,
On our concealed faces wrath had swaide
His Justice so, that he had forced us die.
And dearer price then life we should have paid,
For you our truest friend had fallen with us:
And we much like a house on pillars set,
Had clean depressed our prop, and therefore thus
Our ready will with our concealment met.
But now that you fair Lord are daungerlesse,
The Sons of Baba shall their rigour show:
And prove it was not baseness did oppress
Our hearts so long, but honour kept them low.

Yet do I fear this tale of Herods death,
At last will prove a very tale indeed:
It gives me strongly in my mind, his breath
Will be preserved to make a number bleed:
I wish not therefore to be set at large,
Yet peril to my self I do not lear:
Let us for some days longer be your charge,
Till we of Herods state the truth do hear.

What art thou turned a coward noble youth,
That thou beginst to doubt, undoubted truth?

Were it my brothers tongue that cast this doubt,
I fro his hart would have the question out:
With this keen fashion, but tis you my Lord
Against whose head I must not lift a sword:
I am so tide in gratitude Constable. believe
You have no cause to take it ill,
If any word of mine your heart did grieve
The word discented from the speakers will,
I know it was not fear the doubt begun,
But rather valour and your care of me,
A coward could not be your fathers son,
Yet know I doubts unnecessary be:
For who can think that in Anthonius fall,
Herod his bosom friend should escape vnbrusde:
Then Caesar we might thee an idiot call,
If thou by him should be so far abused.

Lord Constab: let me tell you this,
Upon submission Caesar will forgive:
And therefore though the tyrant did amiss,
It may fall out that he will let him live.
Not many years agone it is since I
Directed thither by my fathers care,
In famous Rome for twice twelve months did live,
My life from Hebrewes cruelty to spare,
There though I were but yet of boyish age,
I bent mine eye to mark, mine ears to hear.
Where I did see Octauious then a page,
When first he did to Iulions sight appear:
Me thought I saw such mildness in his face,
And such a sweetness in his looks did grow,
Withal, comixed with so maie^ticke grace,
His Phi^mony his Fortune did for^show:
For this I am indebted to mine eye,
But then mine ear received more evidence,
By that I knew his love to clemency,
How he with hot^est choler could dispense.

But we have more then barely heard the news,
It ha^ bin twice confirmed. And though some tongue
Might be so fal^e, with fal^e report t'abu^e,
A fal^e report hath never la^ed long.
But be it so that Herod have his life,
Concealment would not then a whit avail:
For certain it is, that she that was my wife,
Would not to set her accusation fail.
And therefore now as good the venture give,
And free our selves from blot of cowardice:
As show a pitiful desire to live,
For, who can pity but they must despise?

I yield, but to necessity I yield,
I dare upon this doubt engage mine arm:
That Herod shall again this kingdom weeld,
And prove his death to be a false alarm.

I doubt it too: God grant it be an error,
Tis best without a cause to be in terror:
And rather had I, though my soul be mine,
My soul should lie, then prove a true divine.

Come, come, let fear go seek a dastards nest,
Undaunted courage lies in a noble breast.

YOur royal buildings bow your lofty side,
And scope to her that is by right your Queen:
Let your humility upbraid the pride
Of those in whom no due respect is seen:
Nine times have we with Trumpets haughty sound,
And banishing sow'r Lea^en from our taste:
Observed the feast that takes the fruit from ground.
Since I fair City did behold thee last,
So long it is since Mariams purer cheek
Did rob from mine the glory. And so long
Since I returned my native Town to seek:
And with me nothing but the sense of wrong.
And thee my Boy, whose birth though great it were,
Yet have thy after fortunes proved but poor:
When thou were borne how little did I fear
Thou should be thrust from forth thy Fathers door.
Art thou not Herods right begotten Son?
Was not the hapless D^ris, H^rods wife?
Yes: ere he had the Hebrew kingdom won,
I was companion to his private life.
Was I not fair enough to be a Queen?
Why ere thou were to me false Monarch tide,
My lake of beauty might as well be seen,
As after I had lived five years thy Bride.
Yet then thine oath came pouring like the rain,
Which all affirmed my face without compare:
And that if thou might Doris love obtain,
For all the world besides thou did not care.
Then was I young, and rich, and nobly borne,
And therefore worthy to be Herods mate:
Yet thou ungrateful cast me off with scorn,
When Heavens purpose raised your meaner fate.
Oft have I begged for vengeance for this fact,
And with dejected knees, aspiring hands
Have prayed the highest power to inact
The fall of her that on my Trophy stand^.
Revenge I have according to my will,
Yet where I wished this vengeance did not light:
I wished it should high-he^rted Mariam kill.
But it against my meanwhile Lord did fight
With thee sweet Boy I came, and came to try
If thou before his bastards might be placed
In Herods royal seat and dignity.
But Mariams infants here are only graced,
And now for us there doth no hope remain:
Yet we will not return till Herods end
Be more confirmed, perchance he is not slain.
So glorious Fortunes may my Boy attend,
For if he live, hee'll think it doth suffice,
That he to Doris shows such cruelty:
For as he did my wretched li^e despise,
So do I know I shall despised die.
Let him but prove as natural to thee,
As cruel to thy miserable mother:
His cruelty shall not upbraided be
But in thy fortunes. I his faults will smother.

Each mouth within the City loudly cries
That Herods death is certain: therefore we
Had best some subtle hidden plot devise,
That Mariams children might subverted ^ee,
By poisons drink, or else by murderous Knife,
So we may be advanced, it skils not how:
They are but Bastards, you were Her^ds wife,
And foul adultery blotteth Mariams brow.

They are too strong to be by us removed,
Or else revenges foulest spotted face:
By our detested wrongs might be approved,
But weakness must to greater power give place.
But let us now retire to grieve alone,
For solitariness best fitteth moan.

WEll met Iudean Lord, the only wight
Silleus wished to see. I am to call
Thy tongue to strict account.

For what despite
I ready am to hear, and answer all.
But if directly at the cause I guess
That breeds this challenge, you must pardon me:
And now some other ground of fight profess,
For I have vowed, vows must vnbroken be.

What may be your expectation? let me know.

Why? ought concerning Salom, my sword
Shall not be welded for a cause so low,
A blow for her my arm will scorn t'afford.

It is for slandering her unspotted name,
And I will make thee in thy vows despite,
Suck up the breath that did my Mistress blame,
And swallow it again to do her right.

I prithee give some other quarrel ground
To find beginning, rail against my name:
Or strike me first, or let some scarlet wound
Inflame my courage, give me words of shame,
Do thou our Moses sacred Laws disgrace,
Deprave our nation, do me some despite:
I'm apt enough to fight in any case,
But yet for Salome I will not fight.

Nor I for ough^ but Salome: My sword
That owes his service to her sacred name:
Will not an edge for other cause afford,
In other fight I am not sure of fame.

For her, I pity thee enough already,
For her, I therefore will not mangle thee:
A woman with a heart so most unsteady,
Will of her self sufficient torture be.
I cannot envy for so light a gain,
Her mind with such inconstancy doth run:
As with a word thou did her love obtain,
So with a word she will from thee be won.
So light as her possessions for most day
Is her affections lost, to me tis known:
As good go hold the wind as make her stay,
She never loves, but till she call her own.
She merely is a painted sepulcher,
That is both fair, and vilely foul at once:
Though on her out-side graces garnish her,
Her mind is filled with worse then rotten bones.
And ever ready lifted is her hand,
To aim destruction at a husbands throat:
For proofs, Iosephus and my self do stand,
Though once on both of us, she seemed to do at.
Her mouth though serpent-like it never hisses,
Yet like a Serpent, poisons where it kisses.

Well Hebrew well, thou bark'st, but wilt not bite.

I tell thee still for her I will not fight.

Why then I call thee coward.

From my heart
I give thee thanks. A cowards hateful name,
Cannot to valiant minds a blot impart,
And therefore I with joy receive the same.
Thou know I am no coward: thou were by
At the Arabian battle the other day:
And saw my sword with daring valiancy,
Amongst the faint Arabians cut my way.
The blood of foes no more could let it shine,
And twas inameled with some of thine.
But now have at thee, not for Salome
I fight: but to discharge a cowards stile:
Here gins the fight that shall not parted be,
Before a soul or two endure exile.

Thy sword hath made some windows for my blood,
To show a horrid crimson physiognomy:
To breath for both of us me thinks twere good,
The day will give us time enough to die.

With all my hart take breath, thou sh^lt have time,
And if thou list a twelve month, let us end:
Into thy cheeks there doth a paleness clime,
Thou can not from my sword thy self defend.
What need thou for Salome to ^ght,
Thou hast her, and may keep her, none strives for her:
I willingly to thee resign my right,
For in my very soul I do abhor her.
Thou see that I am fresh, unwounded yet,
Then not for fe^re I do thi^ offer make:
Thou art with loss of blood, to fight unfit,
For here is one, and there ^nother take.

I will not leave as long as breath remains
Within my wounded body: spare your word^,
My heart in bloods stead, courage entertains,
Salomes love no place for fear afford^.

Oh could thy soul but prophecy like mine,
I would not wonder thou should long to die:
For Salome if I aright divine
Will be then death a greater misery.

Then list, I'll breath no longer.

Do thy will,
I hateles fight, and charitably kill. I, I, they fight,
Pity thy self Silleu^, let not death
Intru'd before his time into thy hart:
Alas it is too late to fear, his breath
Is from his body now about to part.
How far'st thou brave Arabian? Silleus very well,
My leg is hurt, I can no longer fight:
It only grieves me, that so soon I fell,
Before fair Salo^s wrong^ I came to right.

Thy wounds are less then mortal. Never fear,
Thou shalt a safe and quick recovery find:
Come, I will thee unto my lodging bear,
I hate thy body, but I love thy mind.

Thanke^ noble Jew, I see a courtiou^ foe,
Sterne enmity to friendship can no art:
Had not my heart and tongue engagde me so,
I would from thee no foe, but friend depart.
My heart to Salome i^ tide so fast,
To leave her love for friendship, yet my skill
Shall be employed to make you favour last,
And I will honour Constabarus still.

I open my bosom to thee, and will take
Thee in, (...) friend, and grieve for thy complaint:
But if we do not expedition make,
Thy loss of blood I fear will make thee faint.

TO hear a tale with ears prejudicate,
It spoils the judgment, and corrupts the sense:
That humane error given to every state,
Is greater enemy to innocence.
It makes us foolish, heddy, rash, unjust,
It makes us never try before we trust.
It will confound the meaning change the words,
For it our sense of hearing much deceives:
Besides no time to Judgment it affords,
To way the circumstance our ear receiue^.
The ground of accidents it never tries,
But makes us take for truth ten thousand lies.
Our ears and hearts are apt to hold for good,
That we our selves do most desire to be:
And then we drown objections in the flood
Of partiality, tis that we see
That makes false rumours long with credit p^st,
Though they like rumours must conclude at l^st.
The greatest part of us prejudicate,
With wishing Herods death do hold it true:
The being once deluded doth not bate,
The credit to a better likelihood due.
Those few that wish it not the multitude,
Do carry headlong, so they doubts conclude.
They not object the weak uncertain ground,
Whereon they built this tale of Herods end:
Whereof the Author scarcely can be found,
And all because their wishes that way bend.
They think not of the peril that ensu'th,
If this should prove the contrary to tru^.
On this same doubt, on this so light a breath,
They pawn their lives, and fortunes. For they all
Behave them as the news of Herods death,
They did of most undoubted credit call:
But if their actions now do rightly hit,
Let them commend their fortune, not their wit.

Urge me no more Graphina to forsake,
Not twelve hours since I married her for love:
And do you think a sisters power cane make
A resolute decree, so soon remove?

Poor minds they are that honour not affects.

Who hunts for honour, happiness neglects.

You might have been both of felicity,
And honour too in equal measure seasde.

It is not you can tell so well as I,
What tis can make me happy, or displeased.

To match for neither beauty nor respects
One mean of birth, but yet of meaner mind,
A woman full of natural defects,
I wonder what your eye in her could find.

Mine eye found loveliness, mine ear found wit,
To please the one, and to enchant the other:
Grace on her eye, mirth on her tongue doth sit,
In looks a child, in wisdoms house a mother.

But say you thought her fair, as none thinks else,
Knows not Pheroras, beauty is a blast:
Much like this flower which to day excels,
But longer then a day it will not last.

Her wit exceeds her beauty,

Wit may show
The way to ill, as well as good you know.

But wisdom is the porter of her head,
A^d b^res all wicked words from issuing thence.

But of a porter, better were yo^ sped,
If she against their entrance made defence.

But wherefore comes the sacred Ananell,
That hitherward his hasty steppes doth bend?
Great sacrificer you're arrived well,
Ill news from holy mouth I not attend.

MY lips, my son, with peaceful tidings blessed,
Shall utter Honey to your listening ear:
A word of death comes not from Priestly breast,
I speak of life: in life there is no fear.
And for the news I did the Heavens salute,
And filled the Temple with my thankful voice:
For though that mourning may not me pollute,
At pleasing accidents I may rejoice.

Is Herod then reuiu'd from certain death?

What? can your news restore my brothers breath?

Both so, and so, the King is safe and sound,
And did such grace in royal Caesar meet:
That he with larger stile then ever crowned,
Within this hour Jerusalem will greet.
I did but come to tell you, and must back
To make preparatives for sacrifice:
I knew his death, your hearts like mine did rack,
Though to conceal it, proved you wise.

How can my joy sufficiently appear?

A heavier tale did never pierce mine ear.

Now Salome of happiness may boast.

But now Pheroras is in danger most.

I shall enjoy the comfort of my life.

And I shall loose it, loosing of my wife.

Joy heart, for Constan: shall be slain^.

Grieve soul, Graphina shall from me be tan^.

Smile cheeks, the fair Silleus shall be mine.

W^pe eyes, for I must with a child combine.

Well brother, cease your moans, on one condition
He undertake to win the Kings consent:
Graphina still shall be in your tuition,
And her with you be ne'er the less content.

What's the condition? let me quickly know,
That I as quickly your command may act:
Were it to see what Herbs in Ophir grow,
Or that the lofty Ty^us might be sacked.

Tis no so hard a task: It is no more,
But tell the King that Consta: hid
The sons of Baba, done to death before:
And tis no more then Consta. did.
And tell him more that he for Herods sake,
Not able to endure his brothers foe:
Did with a bill our separation make,
Though ^oth from Consta: else to go.

Believe this tale for told, I'll go from hence,
In Herods ^are the Hebrew to deface:
And I that never studied eloquence,
Do mean with eloquence this tale to grace.

This will be Constabarus quick dispatch,
Which from my mouth would lesser credit find:
Yet shall ^e not decease without a match,
For Mariam shall not linger long behind.
First Jealousy, if that avail not, fear
Shall be my minister to work her end:
A common error moves not Herods ^are,
Which doth so firmly to his Mariam bend.
She shall be charged with so horrid crime,
As Herods fear shall turn his love to hate:
He make some swear that she desires to clime,
And seeks to poison him for his estate.
I scorn that she should ^iue my birth t'vpbraid,
To call me base and hungry Edomite:
With patient show her choler I betrayed,
And watched the time to be revenged by (...)
Now tongue of mine with scandal load her name,
Turn hers to fountains, Herods eyes to flame^
Yet first I will begin Pheroras suite,
That he my earnest business may effect:
And I of Mariam will keep me mute,
Till first some other doth her name detect.
Who's there, Silleus man? How fares your Lord^
That your aspects do bear the badge of sorrow^

He hath the marks of Constabarus sword,
And for a while desires your sight to borro^

My heavy curse the hateful sword pursue,
My heavier curse on the more hat^full arm
That wounded my Sill^us. But renew
Your tale again. Hath he no mortal harm?

No sign of danger doth in him appear,
Nor are his wounds in place of peril seen:
He bides you be assured you nee^ not fear,
He hopes to make you yet Arab^as Queen.

Commend my heart to be Silleus charge,
Tell him, my brothers sudden coming now:
Will give my foot no room to walk at large,
But I will see him yet ere night I vow.

SOhemus, tell me what the news may he
That makes your eyes so full, your cheeks so blew?

I know not how to call them. Ill for me
Tis sure they are: not so I hope for you.
Herod.

Oh, what of Herod? Sohem. Herod liue^.
How! lives? What in some Cave or forest hid^

Nay, back returned with honour. Caesar gives
Him greater grace then ere Anthonius did.

Foretell the ruin of my family,
Tell me that I shall see our City burned:
Tell me I shall a death disgraceful die,
But tell me not that Herod is returned.

Be not impatient Madam, be but mild,
His love to you again will soon be bred:

I will not to his love be reconcilde,
With solemn vows I have forsworn his Bed.

But you must break those vows.

I'll rather break
The heart of Mariam. Cursed is my Fate:
But speak no more to me, in vain ye speak
To live with him I so profoundly hate.

Grea^ Queen, you must to me your pardon give,
Sohemus cannot now your will obey:
If your command should me to silence drive,
It were not to obey, but to betray.
Reject, and slight my speeches, mock my faith,
Scorn my observance, call my counsel nought:
Though you regard not what Sohemus saith,
Yet will I ever freely speak my thought.
I fear ^re long I shall fair Mariam see
In woeful state, and by her self undone:
Yet fo^ your issues sake more temperate be,
The heart by affability is won.

And must I to my Prison turn again?
Oh, now I see I was an hypcorite:
I did this morning for his death complain,
And yet do morn, because he lives ere night.
When I his death believed, compassion wrought,
And was the stickler twixt my heart and him:
But now that Curtaine's drawn from off my thought,
Hate doth appear again with visage grim:
And paint^ the face of Herod in my heart,
In horrid colours with detested look:
Then fear would come, but scorn doth play her part,
^d saith that scorn with fear can never brooke.
(...) now I could enchain him with a smile:
^d lead him captive with a gentle word,
^corne my look should ever man beguile,
^r other speech, then meaning to afford.
^lse Salome in vain might spend her wind,
^n vain might Herods mother whet her tongue:
^n vain had they complotted and combined,
For I could overthrow them all ere long.
Oh what a shelter is mine innocence,
To shield me from the pangs of inward grief:
Against all mishaps it is my fair defence,
And to my sorrows yields a large relief.
To be commandress of the triple earth,
And sit in safety from a fall secure:
To have all nations celebrate my birth,
I would not that my spirit were impure.
Let my distressed state unpitied be,
Mine innocence is hope enough for me.

Poor guiltles Queen. Oh that my wish might place
A little temper now about thy heart:
Unbridled speech is Mariams worst disgrace,
And will endanger her without desert.
I am in greater hazard. Over my head,
The fattall axe doth hang vnstedily:
My disobedience once discovered,
Will shake it down: Sohemus so shall die.
For when the King shall find, we thought his death
Had been as certain as we see his life:
And marks withal I slighted so his breath,
As to preserve alive his matchless wife.
Nay more, to give to Alexanders hand
The regal dignity. The sovereign power,
How I had yielded up at her command,
The strength of all the city, Dauids Tower.
What more then common death may I expect,
Since I too well do know his cruelty:
Twere death, a word of Herods to neglect,
What then to do directly contrary?
Yet life I quite thee with a willing spirit,
And think thou could not better be imploi'd:
I forfeit thee for her that more doth merit,
Ten such were better dead then she destroyed.
But fare thee well chaste Queen, well may I see
The darkness palpable, and rivers part:
The sun stand still: Nay more retorted be,
But never woman with so pure a heart.
Thine eyes grave majesty keeps all in awe,
And cuts the wings of every loose desire:
Thy brow is table to the modest law,
Yet though we dare not love, we may admire.
And if I die, it shall my soul content,
My breath in Mariams service shall be spent.

TIs not enough for one that is a wife
To keep her spotless from an act of ill:
But from suspicion she should free her life,
And bare her self of power as well as will.
Tis not so glorious for her to be free,
As by her proper self restrained to be.
When she hath spacious ground to walk upon,
Why on the ridge should she desire to go?
It is no glory to forbear alone,
Those things that may her honour overthrow.
But tis thanke-worthy, if she will not take
All lawful liberties for honours sake.
That wife her hand against her fame doth rear,
That more then to her Lord alone will give
A private word to any second ear,
And though she may with reputation live.
Yet though most chaste, she doth her glory blot,
And wounds her honour, though she kills it not.
When to their Husbands they themselves do bind,
Do they not wholly give themselves away?
Or give they but their body not their mind,
Reserving that though best, for others pray?
No sure, their thoughts no more can be their own,
And therefore should to none but one be known.
Then she vsurpes upon another right,
That seeks to be by public language graced:
And though her thoughts reflect with purest light,
Her mind if not peculiar is not chaste.
For in a wife it is no worse to find,
A common body, then a common mind.
And every mind though free from thought of ill,
That out of glory seeks a worth to show:
When any's ears but one therewith they fill,
Doth in a sort her purenes overthrow.
Now Mariam had, (but that to this she bent)
Been free from fear, as well as innocent.

Hail happy city, happy in thy store,
And happy that thy buildings such we see:
More happy in the Temple where w'adore,
But most of all that Mariam lives in thee.
Art thou returned? how fares my Mariam?

She's well my Lord, and will anon be here
As you commanded.

Muffle up thy brow
Thou days dark taper. Mariam will appear.
And where she shines, we need no^ thy dim light,
Oh hast thy steps rare creature, speed thy pace:
And let thy presence make the day more bright,
And cheer the heart of Herod with thy face.
It is an age since I from Mariam went,
Me thinks our parting was in Dauids days:
The hours are so increased by discontent,
Deep sorrow, Iosua like the season stays:
But when I am with Mariam, time runs on,
Her sight, can make months, minutes, days of weeks
An hour is then no sooner come then gon.
When in her face mine eye for wonders seeks.
You world commanding city, Europes grace,
Twice hath my curious eye your streets suruai'd,
And I have seen the statue filled place,
That once if not for grief had been betrayed.
I all your Roman beauties have beheld,
And seen the shows your Ediles did prepare,
I saw the sum of what in you exceld,
Yet saw no miracle like Mariam rare.
The fair and famous Liuia, Caesars love,
The worlds commanding Mistress did I see:
Whose beauties both the world and Rome approve,
Yet Mariam: Liuia is not like to thee.
Be patient but a little, while mine eyes
Within your compassed limits be contained:
That object straight shall your desires suffice,
From which you were so long a while restrained.
How wisely Mariam doth the time delay,
Least sudden joy my sense should suffocate:
I am prepared, thou need no longer stay:
Whose there, my Mariam, more then happy fate?
Oh no, it is Pheroras, welcome Brother,
Now for a while, I must my passion smother.

ALl health and safety wait upon my Lord,
And may you long in prosperous fortunes live
With Rome commanding Caesar; at accord,
And have all honours that the world can give.

Oh brother, now thou speak not from thy hart,
No, thou hast struck a blow at Herods love:
That cannot quickly from my memory part,
Though Salome did me to pardon move.
Valiant Phasaelus, now to thee farewell,
Thou were my kind and honourable brother:
Oh hapless hour, when you self stricken fell,
Thou fathers Image, glory of thy mother.
Had I desired a great^r suit of thee,
Then to withhold thee from a harlots bed,
Thou would have granted it: but now I see
All are not like that in a womb are bred.
Thou would not, had thou heard of Herods death,
Have made his burial time, thy bridal hour:
Thou would with clamours, not with joyful breath,
Have showed the news to be not sweet but sour.

Phasaelus great worth I know did stain
Pheroras petty valour: but they lie
(Excepting you your self) that dare maintain,
That he did honour Herod more then I.
For what I showd, loves power constrained me show,
And pardon loving faults for Mariams sake.

Mariam, where is she?

Nay, I do not know,
But absent use of her fair name I make:
You have forgiven greater faults then this,
For Constabarus that against you will
Preserved the sons of Baba, lives in bliss,
Though you commanded him the youths to kill.

Go, take a present order for his death,
And let those traitors feel the worst of fears:
Now Salome will whine to beg his breath,
But I'll be deaf to prayers: and blind to tears.

He is my Lord from Salom diuorst,
Though her affection did to leave him grieu^:
Yet was she by her love to you enforced,
To leave the man that would your foes relieve.

Then haste them to their death. I will requite
Thee gentle Mariam. Salom I mean
The thought of Mariam doth so steal my spirit,
My mouth from speech of her I cannot wean.

ANd here she comes indeed: happily met
My best, and dearest half: what ails my dear?
Thou doest the difference certainly forget
Twixt Duskey habits, and a time so clear.

My Lord, I suit my garment to my mind,
And there no cheerful colours can I find.

Is this my welcome? have I longd so much
To see my dearest Mariam discontent?
What is't that is the cause thy heart to touch?
Oh speak, that I thy sorrow may prevent.
Art thou not Juries Queen, and Herods too?
Be my Commandres, be my Sovereign guide:
To be by thee directed I will woo,
For in thy pleasure lies my highest pride.
Or if thou think Iudaeas narrow bound,
Too strict a limit for thy great command:
Thou shalt be Empress of Arabia crowned,
For thou shalt rule, and I will win the Land.
I'll rob the holy Dauids Sepulcher
To give thee wealth, if thou for wealth do care:
Thou shalt have all, they did with him inter,
And I for thee will make the Temple bare.

I neither have of power not riches want,
I have enough, nor do I wish for more:
Your offers to my heart no ease can grant,
Except they could my brothers life restore.
No, had you wished the wretched Mariam glad,
Or had your love to her been truly tide:
Nay, had you not desired to make her sad,
My brother nor my Grandsyre had not did.

Wilt thou believe no oaths to clear thy Lord?
How oft have I with execration sworn:
Thou art by me beloved, by me adored,
Yet are my protestations heard with scorn.
Hercanus plotted to deprive my head
Of this long settled honour that I wear:
And therefore I did justly doom him dead,
To rid the Realm from peril, me from fear.
Yet I for Mariams sake do so repent
The death of one: whose blood she did inherit:
I wish I had a Kingdoms treasure spent,
So I had ne'er expelled Hercanus spirit.
As I affected that same noble youth,
In lasting infamy my name inrole:
If I not mournd his death with hearty truth.
Did I not show to him my earnest love,
When I to him the Priesthood did restore?
And did for him a living Priest remove,
Which never had been done but once before.

I know that moved by importunity,
You made him Priest, and shortly after die.

I will not speak, unless to be believed,
This froward humour will not do you good:
It hath too much already Herod grieved,
To think that you on terms of hate have stood.
Yet smile my dearest Mariam, do but smile,
And I will all unkind conceits exile.

I cannot frame disguise, nor never taught
My face a look dissenting from my thought.

By heaven you vex me, build not on my love.

I will not build on so unstable ground.

Nought is so fixed, but peeuishnes may move.

Tis better sleights cause then none were found.

Be judge your self, if ever Herod sought
Or would be moved a cause of change to find:
Yet let your look declare a milder thought,
My heart again you shall to Mariam bind.
How oft did I for you my Mother chide,
Revile my Sister, and my brother rate:
And tell them all my Mariam they belide,
Distrust me still, if these be signs of hate.

what hast thou here?

A drink procuring love,
The Queen desired me to deliver it.

Did I: some hateful practise this will prove,
Yet can it be no worse then Heavens permit.

Confess the truth thou wicked instrument,
To her outrageous will, tis passion sure:
Tell true, and thou shalt escape the punishment,
Which if thou do conceal thou shalt endure.

I know not, but I doubt it be no less,
Long ^ince the hate of you her heart did cease.

Know thou the cause thereof?

My Lord I guess,
Sohemus told the tale that did displease.

Oh Heaven! Sohemus false! Go let him die,
Stay not to suffer him to speak a word:
Oh damned villain, did he falsify
The oath he swore even of his own accord?
Now do I know thy falsehood, painted Devil
Thou white Inchantres. Oh thou art so foul,
That Ysop cannot cleanse thee worst of evil.
A beauteous body hides a loathsome soul,
Your love Sohemus moved by his affection,
Though he have ever heretofore been true:
Did blab forsooth, that I did give direction,
If we were put to death to slaughter you.
And you in black reu^nge attended now
To add a murder to your breach of vow.

Is this a dream?

Oh Heaven, that 'twere no more,
I'll give my Realm to who can prove it so:
^ would I were like any beggar poor,
So I for false my Mariam did not know.
Foul pith contained in the fairest rind,
That ever graced a Caedar. Oh thine eye
Is pure as heaven, but impure thy mind,
And for impurity shall Mariam die.
Why did thou love Sohemus? Mar: they can tell
That say I loved him, Mariam says not so.

Oh cannot impudence the coals expel,
That for thy love in Herods bosom glow^:
It is as plain as water, and denial
Makes of thy falsehood but a greater trial.
Hast thou beheld thy self, and could thou stain
So rare perfection: even for love of thee
I do profoundly hate thee. Were thou plain,
Thou shoul'dst the wonder of Iudea be.
But oh thou art not. Hell it self lies hid
Beneath thy heavenly show. Yet never were thou chaste:
Thou might exalt, pull down, command, forbid,
And be above the wheel of fortune placed.
Had thou complotted Herods massacre,
That so thy son a Monarch might be stilde,
Not half so grievous such an action were,
As once to think, that Mariam is defiled.
Bright workmanship of nature sulli'd ore,
With pitched darkness now thine end shall be:
Thou shalt not live fair fiend to cozen more,
With heavy semblance, as thou cousnedst me.
Yet must I love thee in despite of death,
And thou shalt die in the despite of love:
For neither shall my love prolong thy breath,
Nor shall thy loss of breath my love remove.
I might have seen thy falsehood in thy face,
Where coul'dst thou get thy stares that served for eyes?
Except by theft, and theft is foul disgrace:
This had appeared before were Herod wise,
But I'm a sot, a very sot, no better:
My wisdom long ago a wandering fell,
Thy f^ce incoun^ring it, my wit did fetter,
And made me for delight my freedom ^ell.
Give me my heart false creature, tis a wrong,
My guliltles heart should now with thine be slain:
Thou had no right to look it up so long,
And with usurpers name I Mariam stain.

Have you designed Sohemus to his end?

I have my Lord Herod: Then call our royal guard
To do as much for Mariam, they offend
Leave ill vnblam'd, or good without reward.
Here take her to her death Come back, come back,
What meant I to deprive the world of light:
To muffle Jury in the foulest black,
That ever was an opposite to white.
Why whither would you carry her: Sold: you bad
We should conduct her to her death my Lord.

Wie sure I did not, Herod was not mad,
Why should she feel the fury of the sword?
Oh now the grief returns into my heart,
And pulls me peecemeale: love and hate do fight:
And now hath above acquired the greater part,
Yet now hath hate, affection conquered quite.
And therefore bear her hence: and Hebrew why
Seize you with Lyons paws the fairest lam
Of all the flock? she must not, shall not, die,
Without her I most miserable am.
And with her more then most, away, away,
But bear her but to prison not to death:
And is she gon indeed, stay villains stay,
Her looks alone preserved your Sovereigns breath.
Well let her go, but yet she shall not die,
I cannot think she meant to poison me:
But certain tis she lived too wantonly,
And therefore shall she never more be free.

Foul villain, can thy pitchy coloured soul
Permit thine ear to hear her caules doom?
And not enforce thy tongue that tale control,
That must unjustly bring her to her too me.
Oh Salome thou hast thy self repaid,
For all the benefits that thou hast done:
Thou art the cause I have the queen betrayed,
Thou hast my hart to darkest false-hood won.
I am condemned, heaven gave me not my tongue
To slander innocents, to lie, deceive:
To be the hateful instrument to wrong,
The earth of greatest glory to bereave.
My sin ascends and doth to heaven cry,
It is the blackest deed that ever was:
And there doth sit an Angel notary,
That doth record it down in leaves of brass.
Oh how my heart doth quake: Achitophel,
Thou founds a means thy self from shame to free:
And sure my soul approves thou did not well,
All follow some, and I will follow thee.

NOw here we step our last, the way to death,
We must not tread this way a second time:
Yet let us resolutely yield our breath,
Death is the only ladder, Heaven to clime.

With willing mind I could my self resign,
But yet it grieves me with a grief untold:
Our death should be accompani'd with thine,
Our friendship we to thee have dearly sold.

Still wilt thou wrong the sacred name of friend?
Then should thou never stile it friendship more:
But base mechanic traffic that doth lend,
Yet will be sure they shall the debt restore.
I could with needless complement return,
Tis for thy ceremony I could say:
Tis I that made the fire your house to burn,
For but for me she would not you betray.
Had not the damned woman sought mine end,
You had not been the subject of her hate:
You never did her hateful mind offend,
Nor could your deaths have freed your nuptial fate.
Therefore fair friends, though you were still unborn,
Some other subtlety devised should be:
Were by my life, though guiltles should be torn,
Thus have I proved, tis you that die for me.
And therefore should I weakly now lament,
You have but done your duties, friends should die:
Alone their friends disaster to prevent,
Though not compelled by strong necessity.
But now farewell fair city, never more
Shall I behold your beauty shining bright:
Farewell of Jewish men the worthy store,
But no farewell to any female wight.
You wavering crew: my curse to you I leave,
You had but one to give you any grace:
And you your selves will Mariams life bereave,
Your common-wealth doth innocence chase.
You creatures made to be the humane curse,
You Tigers, Lyonesses, hungry Bears,
Tea^e massacring Hienas: nay far worse,
For they for pray do shed their fained tears.
But you will weep, (you creatures cross to good)
For your unquenched thirst of humane blood:
You were the Angels cast from heaue'n for pride,
And still do keep your Angels outward show,
But none of you are inly beautified,
For still your heaven depriving pride doth grow.
Did not the sins of many require a scourge,
Your place on earth had been by this withstood:
But since a flood no more the world must purge,
You staid in office of a second flood.
You giddy creatures, sowers of debate,
You'll love to day, and for no other cause,
But for you yesterday did deply hate,
You are the wreak of order, breach of laws.
You best, are foolish, froward, wanton, vain,
Your worst adulterous, murderous, cunning, proud^
And Salome attends the latter train,
Or rather he their leader is allowed.
I do the sottishness of men bewail,
That do with following you enhance your pride:
'twere better that the humane race should fail,
Then be by such a mischief multiplied.
Chams servile curse to all your sex was given,
Because in Paradise you did offend:
Then do we not resist the will of Heaven,
When on your wills like servants we attend?
You are to nothing constant but to ill,
You are with nought but wickedness indude:
Your loves are set on nothing but your will,
And thus my censure I of you conclude.
You are the least of goods, the worst of evils,
Your best are worse then men: your worst then devils.

Come let us to our death: are we not blessed?
Our death will freedom from these creatures give:
Those trouble quiet sowers of unrest,
And this I vow that had I leave to live,
I would for ever lead a single life,
And never venture on a di^ellish wife.

NAy, she shall die. Die quoth you, that she shall:
But for the means. The means! Me thinks tis hard
To find a means to murder her withal,
Therefore I am resolved ^he shall be spared.

Why? let her be beheaded.

That were well,
Think you that swords are miracles like you:
Her skin will every Curtlax edge revel,
And then your enterprise you well may ^ue.
What if the fierce Arabian notice take,
Of this your wretched weaponless estate:
They answer when we bid resistance make,
That Mariams skin their fanchions did rebate.
Beware of this, you make a goodly hand,
If you of weapons do deprive our Land.

Why drown her then.

Indeed a sweet device,
Why? would not every River turn her course
R^ther then do her beauty prejudice?
And be reverted to the proper source.
So not a drop of water should be found
In all Iudeas quondam firtill ground.

Then let the fire devour her.

'twill not be:
Flame is from her derived into my heart:
Thou nurse flame, flame will not murder thee,
My fairest Mariam, fullest of desert.

Then let her live for me.

Nay, she sha^ I die:
But can you live without her?

doubt you that?

I'm sure I cannot, I beseech you try:
I have experience but I know not what.

How should I try?

Why let my love be slain,
But if we cannot live without her sight
You'll find the means to make her breathe again,
Or else you will bereave my comfort quite.

Oh I: I warrant you.

What is she gone?
And gone to bid the world be overthrown:
What? is her hearts composure hardest stone?
To what a pass are cruel women grown?
She is returned already: have you done?
Is't possible you can command so soon?
A creatures heart to quench the flaming Sun,
Or from the sky to wipe away the Moon.

If Mariam be the Sun and Moon, it is:
For I already have commanded this.

But have you seen her cheek?

A thousand times.

But did you mark it too?

I very well.

What is't?

A Crimson bush, that ever limes
The soul whose foresight doth not much excel.

Send word she shall not dye. Her cheek a bush,
Nay, then I see indeed you marked it not.

Tis very fair, but yet will never blush,
Though foul dishonours do her forehead blot.

Then let her die, tis very true indeed,
And for this fault alone shall Mariam bleed.

What fault my Lord?

What fault is't? you that ask:
If you be ignorant I know of none,
To call her back from death shall be your task,
I'm glad that she for innocent is known.
For on the brow of Mariam hangs a Fleece,
Whose slenderest twine is strong enough to bind
The hearts of Kings, the pride and shame of Greece,
Troy flaming Helens not so fairly shined.

Tis true indeed, she lays them out for nets,
To catch the hearts that do not shune a bait:
Tis time to speak: for Herod sure forgets
That Mariams very tresses hide deceit.

Oh do they so? nay, then you do but well,
Insooth I thought it had been hair:
Nets call you them? Lord, how they do excel,
I never saw a net that showed so fair.
But have you heard her speak?

You know I have.

And were you not amazed?

No, not a whit.

Then t'was not her you heard, her life I'll save,
For Mariam hath a world amazing wit.

She speaks a beauteous language, but within
Her hea^t is false as powder: and her tongue
Doth but allure the auditors to sin,
And is the instrument to do you wrong.

It may be so: nay, tis so: she's unchaste,
Her mouth will open to every strangers ear:
Then let the executioner make haste,
Lest she enchant him, if her words he hear.
Let him be deaf, lest she do him surprise
That shall to free her spirit be assigned:
Yet what boots deafenes if he have his eyes,
Her murderer must be both deaf and blinde^
For if he see, he needs must see the stars
That shine on either side of Mariams face:
Whose sweet ^spect will terminate the wars,
Wherewith he should a soul so precious chase.
Her eyes can speak, and in their speaking move,
Oft did my heart with reverence receive
The worlds mandates. Pretty tales of love
They utter, which can humane bondage weave.
But shall I let this heavens model dye?
Which for a small selfe-portraiture she drew:
Her eyes like stars, her forehead like the sky,
She is like Heaven, and must be heavenly true.

Your thoughts do rave with doting on the Queen,
Her eyes are ebon hewde, and you'll confess:
A sable star hath been but seldom seen,
Then speak of reason more, of Mariam less.

Your self^ are held a goodly creature here,
Yet so unlike my Mariam in your shape:
That when to her you have approached near,
My self hath often taken you for an Ape.
And yet you pra^e of beauty: go your ways,
You are to her a Sun burnt Blackamoor:
Your paintings cannot equal Mariams praise,
Her nature is so rich, you are so poor.
Let her be staide from death, for if she die,
We do we know not what to stop her breath:
A world cannot another Mariam buy,
Why stay you lingering? countermand her death.

Then you'll no more remember what hath past,
Sohemus love, and hers shall be forgot:
Tis well in truth: that fault may be her last,
And she may mend, though yet she love you not.

Oh God: tis true. Sohemus: earth and heaven,
Why did you both conspire to make me cursed:
In cousning me with shows, and proofs vneu'n?
She showed the best, and yet did prove the worst.
Her show was such, as had our singing king
The holy Dauid, Mariams beauty seen:
The Hit^its had then felt no deadly sting,
Nor Bethsabe had never been a Queen.
Or had his son the wi^est man of men,
Whose fond delight did most consist in change:
Beheld her face, he had been staid again,
No creature having her, can wish to range.
Had Asuerus see^e my Mariams brow,
The humble Iewe, she might have walked alone:
Her beauteous virtue should have staid below,
Whiles Mariam mounted to the ^ersian throne.
But what avails it all: for in the weight
She is deceitful, light as vanity:
Oh she was made for nothing but a b^it,
To train some hapless man to misery.
I am the hapless man that have been trained,
To endless bondage. I will see her yet:
Me thinks I should discern her if she fainde,
Can humane eyes be dazde by woman's wit?
Once more these eyes of mine with hers shall meet,
Before the headsman do her life bereave:
Shall I for ever part from thee my sweet?
Without the taking of my latest leave.

You had as good resolve to save her now,
I'll stay her death, tis well determined:
For sure she never more will break her vow,
Sohemus and Iosephus both are dead.

She shall not live, nor will I see her face,
A long heald wound, a second time doth bleed:
With Ioseph I remember her disgrace,
A shameful end ensues a shameful deed.
Oh that I had not called to mind anew,
The discontent of Mariams wavering hart:
Twas you: you foul mouthed Ate, none but you,
That did the thought hereof to me impart.
Hence from my sight, my black tormenter hence,
For had not thou made Herod unsecure:
I had not doubted Mariams innocence,
But still had held her in my heart for pure.

I'll leave you to your passion: tis no time
To purge me now, though of a guiltles crime.

Destruction take thee: thou hast made my hart
As heavy as revenge, I am so dull,
Me thinks I am not sensible of smart,
Though hiddious horrors at my bosom pull.
My head ways downwards: therefore will I go
To try if I can sleep away my woe.

AM I the Mariam that presumed so much,
And deemed my face must needs preserve my breath?
I, I it was that thought my beauty such,
At it alone could countermand my death.
Now death will ^each me: he can pale as well
A cheek^ of roses, as a cheek less bright:
And dim an eye whose shine doth most excel,
As soon as one that casts a meaner light.
Had not my self against my self conspired,
No plot: no adversary from without
Could Herods love from Mariam have retired,
Or from his heart have thrust my semblance out.
The wanton Queen that never loved for love,
False Cleopatra, wholly set on gain:
With all her slights did prove: yet vainly prove,
For her the love of Herod to obtain.
Yet her allurements, all her courtly guile,
Her smiles, her favours, and her smooth decei^:
Could not my face from Herods mind exile,
But were with him of less then little weight.
That face and person that in Asia late
For beauties Goddess Paphos Queen was taken:
That face that did captive great Iulius fate,
That very face that was Anthonius bane.
That face that to be Egipts pride was borne,
That face that all the world esteemed so rare:
Did Herod hate, despise, neglect, and scorn,
When with the same, he Mariams did compare.
This made that I improuidently wrought,
And on the wager even my life did pawn:
Because I thought, and yet but truly thought,
That Herods love could not from me be drawn.
But now though out of time, I plainly see
It could be drawn, though never drawn from me:
Had I but with humility been grac'te,
As well as fair I might have proved me wise:
But I did think because I knew me cha^te,
One virtue for a woman, might suffice.
That mind for glory of our sex might stand,
Wherein humility and chastity
Doth march with equal paces hand in hand,
But one (...) ^ingle seen, who sets by?
And I had singl^ o^e, but tis my joy,
That I was ever innocent, though sower:
And therefore can they but my life destroy,
My Soul is free from adversaries power.)
You Princes great in power, and high in birth,
Be great and high, I envy not your hap:
Your birth must be from dust: your power on earth,
In heaven shall Mariam sit in Saraes lap.

I heaven, your beauty cannot bring you thither,
Your soul is black and spotted, full of sin:
You in adultry lived nine year together,
And heaven will never let adultry in.

What art thou that dost poor Mariam pursue?
Some spirit sent to drive me to despair:
Who sees for truth that Mariam is untrue,
If fair she be, she is as chaste as fair.

I am that Doris that was once beloved,
Beloved by Herod: Herods lawful wife:
Twas you that Doris from his side removed,
And robbed from me the glory of my life.

Was that adultry: did not Moses say,
That he that being matched did deadly hate:
Might by permission put his wife away,
And take a more beloved to be his mate?

What did he hate me for: for simple truth?
For bringing beauteous babes for love to him:
For riches: noble birth, or tender youth,
Or for no stain did Doris honour dim?
Oh tell me Mariam, tell me if you know,
Which fault of these made Herod Doris foe.
These thrice three years have I with hands held up,
And bowed knees fast nailed to the ground:
Besought for thee the dreggs of that same cup,
That cup of wrath that is for sinners found.
And now thou art to drink it: Doris curse,
Upon thy self did all this while attend,
But now it shall pursue thy children worse.

Oh Doris now to thee my knees I bend,
That hart that never bowed to thee doth bow:
Curse not mine infants, let it thee suffice,
That Heaven doth punishment to me allow.
Thy curse is cause that guiltles Mariam dies.

Had I ten thousand tongues, and every tongue
Inflamed with poisons power, and steeped in gall:
My curses would not answer for my wrong,
Though I in cursing thee employed them all.
Hear thou that did mount Gerarim command,
To be a place whereon with cause to curse:
Stretch thy revenging arm: thrust forth thy hand,
And plague the mother much: the children worse.
Throw flaming fire upon the baseborne heads
That were begotten in unlawful beds.
But let them live till they have sense to know
What tis to be in miserable state:
Then be their nearest friends their overthrow,
Attended be they by suspicious hate.
And Mariam, I do hope this boy of mine
Shall one day come to be the death of thine.

Oh! Heaven forbid. I hope the world shall see,
This curse of thine shall be returned on thee:
Now earth farewell, though I be yet but young,
Yet I, me thinks, have known thee too too long.

THe fairest action of our humane life,
Is scorniug to revenge an injury:
For who forgives without a further strife,
His adversaries heart to him doth tie.
And tis a firmer conquest truly sed,
To win the heart, then overthrow the head.
If we a worthy enemy do find,
To yield to worth, it must be nobly done:
But if of baser mettle be his mind,
In base revenge there is no honour won.
Who would a worthy courage overthrow,
And who would wrestle with a worthless foe?
We say our hearts are great and cannot yield,
Because they cannot yield it proves them poor:
Great hearts are task't beyond their power, but seld
The weakest Lyon will the lowdest roar.
Truths school for certain doth this same allow,
High hartednes doth sometimes teach to bow.
A noble heart doth teach a virtuous scorn,
To scorn to owe a duty ouer-long:
To scorn to be for benefits forborne,
To scorn to lie, to scorn to do a wrong.
To scorn to bear an injury in mind,
To scorn a free-borne heart slaue-like to bind.
But if for wrongs we needs revenge must have,
Then be our vengeance of the noblest kind:
Do we his body from our fury save,
And let our hate preuaile against our mind?
What can against him a greater vengeance be,
Then make his foe more worthy far then he?
Had Mariam scorned to leave a due vnpaide,
She would to Herod then have paid her love:
And not have been by sullen passion swaide
To fix her thoughts all injury above
Is virtuous pride. Had Mariam thus been proved,
Long famous life to her had been allowed.

WHen, sweetest friend, did I so far offend
Your heavenly self: that you my fault to quit
Have made me now relator of her end,
The end of beauty? Chastity and wit,
Was none so hapless in the fatal place,
But I, most wretched, for the Queen t'chuse,
Tis certain I have some ill boding face
That made me could to tell this luckless news.
And yet no news to Herod: were it new,
To him unhappy it had not been at all:
Yet do I long to come within his view,
That he may know his wife did guiltles fall:
And here he comes. Your Mariam greets you well.

What? lives my Mariam? joy, exceeding joy.
She shall not die.

Heaven doth your will repell.

Oh do not with thy words my life destroy,
I prethy tell no dying-tale: thine eye
Without thy tongue doth tell but too too much:
Yet let thy tongues addition make me die,
Death welcome, comes to him whose grief is such.

I went amongst the curious gazing troop,
To see the last of her that was the best:
To see if death had hart to make her stoop,
To see the Sun admiring Phoenix nest.
When there I came, upon the way I saw
The stately Mariam not debased by fear:
Her look did seem to keep the world in awe,
Yet mildly did her face this fortune bear.

Thou dost usurp my right, my tongue was framed
To be the instrument of Mariams praise:
Yet speak: she cannot be too often famed:
All tongues suffice not her sweet name to raise.

But as she came she Alexandra met,
Who did her death (sweet Queen) no whit bewail,
But as if nature she did quite forget,
She did upon her daughter loudly rail.

Why stopped you not her mouth? where had she words
To dark that, that Heaven made so bright?
Our sacred tongue no Epithet affords,
To call her other then the worlds delight.

She told her that her death was too too good,
And that already she had lived too long:
She said, she shamed to have a part in blood
Of her that did the princely Herod wrong.

Base picke-thanke Devil. Shame, twas all her glory,
That she to noble Mariam was the mother:
But never shall it live in any story
Her name, except to infamy i'll smother.
What answer did her princely daughter make?

She made no answer, but she looked the while,
As if thereof she scarce did notice take,
Yet smiled, a dutiful, though scornful smile.

Sweet creature, I that look to mind do call,
Full oft hath Herod been amazed withal.

Go on, she came vnmou'd with pleasant grace,
As if to triumph her arrival were:
In stately habit, and with cheefull face:
Yet every eye was moist, but Mariams there.
When justly opposite to me she came,
She picked me out from all the crew:
She beckoned to me, called me by my name,
For she my name, my birth, and fortune knew.

What did she name thee? happy, happy man,
Wilt thou not ever love that name the better?
But what sweet tune did this fair dying Swan
Afford thine care: tell all, omit no letter.

Tell thou my Lord, said she.

Me, meant fl^e me?
Is't true, the more my shame: I was her Lord,
Were I not made her Lord, I still should be:
But now her name must be by me adord.
Oh say, what said she more? each word she sed
Shall be the food whereon my heart is fed.

Tell thou my Lord thou saw me loose my breath.

Oh that I could that sentence now control.

If guiltily eternal be my death,

I hold her chaste even in my inmost soul.

By three days hence if wishes could revive,
I know himself would make me oft alive.

Three days: three hours, three minutes, not so much,
A minute in a thousand parts divided,
My penitence for her death is such,
As in the first I wished she had not died.
But forward in thy tale.

Why on she went,
And after she some silent prayer had sed:
She did as if to die she were content,
And thus to heaven her heavenly soul is fled.

But art thou sure there doth no life remain?
Is't possible my Mariam should be dead,
Is there no trick to make her breathe again?

Her body is divided from her head.

Why yet me thinks there might be found by art,
Strange ways of cure, tis sure rare things are don:
By an inventive head, and willing heart.

Let not my Lord your fancies idly run.
It is as possible it should beseene.
That we should make the holy Abraham live,
Though he entombed two thousand years had been,
As breath again to slaughtered Mariam give.
But now for more assaults prepare your ears,

There cannot be a further cause of moan,
This accident shall shelter me from fears:
What can I fear? already Mariams gone.
Yet tell even what you will:

As I came by,
From Mariams death I saw upon a tree,
A man that to his neck a cord did tie:
Which cord he had designed his end to be,
When me he once discerned, he downwards bowed,
And thus with fearful voice she cried aloud,
Go tell the King he trusted ere he tried,
I am the cause that Mariam causeles did.

Damnation take him, for it was the slave
That said she meant with poisons deadly force
To end my life that she the Crown might have:
Which tale did Mariam from her self divorce.
Oh pardon me thou pure unspotted Ghost,
My punishment must needs sufficient be,
In missing that content I valued most:
Which was thy admirable face to see.
I had but one inestimable Jewel,
Yet one I had no monarch had the like,
And therefore may I curse my self as cruel:
Twas broken by a blow my self did strike.
I gazed thereon and never thought me blessed,
But when on it my dazzled eye might rest:
A precious Mirror made by wondrous art,
I prizd it ten times dearer then my Crown,
And laid it up fast folded in my heart:
Yet I in sudden choler cast it down.
And pasht it all to pieces: twas no foe,
That robbed me of it; no Arabian host,
Nor no Armenian guide hath used me so:
But Herods wretched self hath Herod crossed.
She was my graceful moiety, me accursed,
To slay my better half and save my worst.
But sure she is not dead you did but jest,
To put me in perplexity a while,
Twere well indeed if I could so be dressed:
I see she is alive, me thinks you smile.

If sainted Abel yet deceased be,
Tis certain Mariam is as dead as he.

Why then go call her to me, bid her now
Put on fair habit, stately ornament:
And let no frown ore shade her smoothest brow,
In her doth Herod place his whole content.

She'll come in stately weeds to please your sense,
If now she come attired in robe of heaven:
Remember you your self did send her hence,
And now to you she can no more be given.

She's dead, hell take her murderers, she was fair,
Oh what a hand she had, it was so white,
It did the whiteness of the snow impair:
I never more shall see so sweet a sight.

Tis true, her hand was rare.

her hand? her hands;
She had not singly one of beauty rare,
But sueh a pair as here where Herod stands,
He dares the world to make to both compare.
Accursed Salome, had thou been still,
My Mariam had been breathing by my side:
Oh never had I: had I had my will,
Sent forth command, that Mariam should have did.
But Salome thou did with envy vex,
To see thy self out-matched in thy sex:
Upon your sexes forehead Mariam sat,
To grace you all like an imperial crown,
But you fond fool have rudely pushed thereat,
And proudly pulled your proper glory down.
One smile of hers: Nay, not so much a: look
Was worth a hundred thousand such as you,
Iudea how can thou the wretches brooke,
That robbed from thee the fairest of the crew?
You dwellers in the now depriued land,
Wherein the matchless Mariam was bred:
Why grasp not each of you a sword in hand,
To aim at me your cruel Sovereigns head.
Oh when you think of Herod as your King,
And owner of the pride of Palestine:
This act to your remembrance likewise bring,
Tis I have overthrown your royal line.
Within her purer veins the blood did run,
That from her Grandam Sara she derived,
Whose beldam age the love of Kings hath won,
Oh that her issue had as long been li'ud.
But can her eye be made by death obs^ure?
I cannot think but it must sparkle still:
Foul sacrilege to rob those lights so pure,
From out a Temple made by heavenly skill.
I am the Villain that have done the d^ed,
The c^uell deed, though by another hand,
My word though not my sword made Mariam bleed,
Hircanus Grandchild did at my command.
That Mariam that I once did love so dear,
The partner of my now detested bed,
Why shine you sun with an aspect so clear?
I tell you once again my Mariams dead.
You could but shine, if some Egiptian blows,
Or Ethiopian doudy lose her life:
This was, then wherefore bend you not your brows,
The King of Juries fair and spotless wife.
Deny thy beams, and Moon refuse thy light,
Let all the stars be dark, let Juries eye
No more distinguish which is day and night:
Since her best birth did in her bosom die.
Those fond Idolaters the men of Greece,
Maintain these orbs are safely governed:
That each within themselves have Gods a piece,
By whom their steadfast course is justly led.
But were it so, as so it cannot be,
They all would put their mourning garments on:
Not one of them would yield a light to me,
To me that is the cause that Mariams go^.
For though they ^ame their Sa^urne melancholy,
Of sour behaviours, and of angry mood:
They ^ame him likewise to be just and holy,
And justice needs must seek revenge for blood,
Their Jove, if Jove he were, would sure desire,
To punish him that slew so fair a lass:
For Laedaes beauty set his heart on fire,
Yet she not half so fair as Mariam was.
And Mars would deem his Venus had been slain,
Sol to recover her would never stick:
For if he want the power her life to gain:
Then Physics God is but an Empiric.
The Queen of love would storm for beauties sake,
And Hermes too, since he bestowed her wit,
The nights pale light for angry grief would shake,
To se^ chaste Mariam die in age unfit.
But oh I am deceived, she past them all
In every gift, in every property:
Her Excellencies wrought her timeles fall,
And they reioyc'd, not grieved to see her die.
The Paphian Goddess did repent her wast,
When she to one such beauty did allow:
Mercurius thought her wit his wit surpassed,
And Cynthia enui'd Mariams brighter brow.
But these are fictions, they are vo^d of sense,
The Greekes but dream, and dreaming falsehoods tell:
They neither can offend nor give defence,
And not by them it was my Mariam fell.
If she had been like an Egiptian black,
And not so fair, she had been longer lived:
Her overflow of beauty turned back,
And drowned the spring from whence it was deriude.
Her heavenly beauty twas that made me think
That it with chastity could never dwell:
But now I see that heaven in her did link,
A spirit and a person to excel.
I'll muffle up my self in endless night,
And never let mine eyes behold the light.
Retire thy self vile monster, worse then he
That stained the virgin earth with brothers blood,
Still in some vault or den enclosed be,
Where with thy tears thou may beget a flood,
Which flood in time may drown thee: happy day
When thou at once shalt die and find a grave,
A stone upon the vault, some one shall lay,
Which monument shall an inscription have.
And these shall be the words it shall contain,
Here Herod lies, that hath his Mariam slain.

WHo ever hath beheld with steadfast eye,
The strange events of this one only day:
How many were deceived? How many die,
That once to day did grounds of safety lay?
It will from them all certainty bereave,
Since twice six hours so many can deceive.
This morning Herod held for surely dead,
And all the Iewes on Mariam did attend:
And Constabarus rise from Saloms bed,
And neither dreamd of a divorce or end.
Pheroras joyed that he might have his wife,
And Babus sons for safety of their life.
To night our Herod doth alive remain,
The guiltles Mariam is deprived of breath:
Stout Constabarus both diuorst and slain,
The valiant sons of Baba have their death.
Pheroras sure his love to be bere^t,
If Salome her suit unmade had left.
Herod this morning did expect with joy,
To see his Mariams much beloved face:
And yet ere night he did her life destroy,
And surely thought she did her name disgrace.
Yet now again so short do humours last,
He both repents her death and knows her chaste.
Had he with wisdom now her death delaide,
He at his pleasure might command her death:
But now he hath his power so much betrayed,
As all his woes cannot restore her breath.
Now doth he strangely lunatickly rave,
Because his Mariams life he cannot save.
This days events were certainly ordainde,
To be the warning to posterity:
So many changes are therein contained,
So admirablie strange variety.
This day alone, our sagest Hebrewes shall
In after times the school of wisdom call.


