FRom my Devotions yonder am I come,
Drawn by a nearer and more glorious Sun.
Hayle o ye sacred Lights; who do inspire
More than yond holy and eternal Fire.
A foreign Court lands here upon your Shore,
By showing its own worth to show yours more:
Set here as Sapphires are by your Queen's veins,
Not to boast Colour, but confess their staines.
No matter now for Art, you make all fit;
Your Presence being still beyond all wit.
Whiles by such Majesty our Scene is dressed,
You come both the Entertainer and the Guest.

AFter our Rites done to the King, we do
Think some Devotions to be paid to you.
But I could wish some Question hung up there,
That we by Genuine sounds might take your ear*
Or that our Scene in Bodley's Building lay,
And the Metaphy sickes were cast into a Play.
To please your Palates I could wish there were
A new Professor, Poet of the Chair.
But as where the Earth cannot ascend, we know
The Sun comes down and cheers her here below:
So we (the Stage being ayr'd now, and the Court
Not smelt) hope you'll descend unto our sport;
And think it no great trespass, if we do
S^ne over our Trifle once again to you.
'Tis not the same as then, that glorious Press
Did pass both for the matter, and the dress*
For where such Majesty was seen, we may
Say, the Spectators only made the Play.
Expect no new thing yet; 'tis without doubt
The former Face, only the Eyes put out,
But you add new ones to it, being sent
As for our grace, so for our supplement.
We hope here's none inspired from late damned books,
Will sour it into Tragedy with their looks;
The little Ruff, or Careless, without fear
May this securely see, securely hear.
There's no man shot at here, no Person's hit,
All being as free from danger, as from wit*
And such should still the first adventures be
Of him, who's but a Spy in Poetry.
No Envy then or Faction fear we, where
All like your selves is innocent and clear.
The Stage being private then, as none must sit,
And, like a Trap, lay wait for sixpence wit;
So none must cry up Booty, or cry down;
Such Mercenary Guise fits not the Gown.
No Traffic then: Applause, or Hiss elsewhere
May pass as ware, 'tis only Judgment here.

Most mighty KING, and Most gracious QUEEN: THe rites and Worship are both
old, but you
Have pleased to make both Priest and People new.
The same Sun in yon Temple doth appear;
But they'are your Rays, which give him lustre here.
That Fire hath watched e're since; but it hath been
Only Your gentler breath that kept it in.
Things of this nature scarce survive that night
That gives them Birth; they perish in the sight;
Cast by so far from after-life, that there
Is scarce ought can be said, but that they were.
Some influence yet may cross this fate; what You
Please to awaken must still come forth new.
And though the untouched Virgin Flower doth bring
The true and native Dowrys of the Spring;
Yet some desires there are perhaps, which do
Affect that Flower chafed and sullied too:
For in some bosoms stuck, it comes from thence
Double-perfum'd, and deeper strikes the Sense.
And we are bid plead this; fore-seeing how
That which was fresh ere while may languish now.
Things twice seen loose; but when a King or Queen
Commands a second sight, they're then first seen.

THese wicked Ephesian Captives, are most everlasting Tipplers; I charmed my
fleas with'em last night, and left them too I'm sure well to live, and yet
they're at it again this morning.


Hem! hem! hem! A pox on our Gaolor. c.


So! now they're tuning their Pipes. O the Religion of these Greekes! they sing
and drink down the Sun, and then they sing and drink him up again. Some
drunken Hymn I warrant you towards now, in the praise of their great huge,
rolling, Tunbellyed god Bacchus as they call him. Let's hearken a little.


He pox on our Gaolor, and on his fat Jowle
'Ther's liberty lies in the bottom o'th'Bowle.
He fig for what ever the Rascal can do,
'Our Dungeon is deep, but our Cup's so too.
'Then drink we a round in despite of our Foes,
'And make our hard Irons cry clink in the Close.
Wondrous good I faith! These fettered Swans chant it most melodiously before
their deaths. Sure there is a great deal of pleasure in being hanged; for I
have observed it e're since I was a little one, that they always sing before
they go to it. But here's that will spoil your voices my Friends.


Who's there?


Your friend at a dead lift; your Landlord Molops.


Now grand Commissioner of fate; what would thou have Heir apparent to
Pluto?


Come forth; and if you can endure to read, her's a Persian line in my hand
will instruct you.


Guardian of Rags and Vermin, Protector of halfe-breeches and no shirts,
what's thy Raskalship's pleasure?


Good words Sir, good words: I am your Destiny, do you not see your Thread of
Life here?


Yes, yes, 'tis of thy wives one twisting, good Molops, I know the Promotion of
your Family: she came from the Web-errantry of highway-Inkle, to the domestic
turning and winding of home bred Hemp, and thence gets a three-halfe-penny
Legacy at the departure of every wronged Sinner.


And as for thy self, had not that weighty bulk of thine cracked so many
Gibbets, that the King began to fear his Forests, thou had never been
preserved to whiffle plagues as thou usher'st us to the Bar, and take away
the Judges stomachs as often as they come to eat upon Life and Death, and
celebrate the Funerals of distressed Gentlemen.


You dying men may be impudent by your places, but I'd wish you to compose your
countenances and your manners both, for the King is coming to visit you.


What make thou here then? though I easily believe thou hast an ambition to
be seen in good company, yet prithee be gon, and don't discredit us. The King
loves no Garbidge-tubbes.


The King shall be informed of the foul words you give his Officers.


Why what can he do? he won't let us go and conquer us again, will he?


But good honest Landlord, what's the Kings intent to honour us with his Royal
visit?


To assign us perhaps some three or four hundred stripes aday a piece, to
take down my Landlord's body, and make him in case to suffer what he hath
been long adjudged to.


No, Saucines, 'tis to make one of you King.


Then Saucines, know your Masters.


Be not mistaken: 'tis not any way to hon^ you, but to make himself sport. For
you must know, that tis the custom of the Persian Kings after a Conquest, to
take one of the Captives, and adorn him with all the Robes of Majesty, giving
him all Privileges for three full days, that he may do what he will, and
then be certainly led to death.


Will he allow so long* I'd give my life at any tim^ for one days Royalty;
'tis space enough to new mould a Kingdom. His Majesty uses us wondrous
reasonably, I'd as liffe deal with him as any man I know. But who's to have
our clothes, Sirrah, when we have done?


'Tis a small fee that the State hath entayl'd upon my Place an't please you.


By my troth! guessed so: I was wondering how their Courtiers could go so brave
with so little means.


Well, what must be, must be* I was afraid I should have died a silly foolish
old Animal, called Virgin. But now, have at one of the Ladies e're I go* I
have a strong desire to leave some Posterity behind me. I would not have the
house of the Stratocles decay for want of Issue.


If I have the fortune of't, I'll Revel it all night; Kings they say, ought
not to sleep for the good of the people.


Sirrah Gaolor, see you send Mistress Turne-key your wife to take us up whores
enough: and be sure she let none of the young Students of the Law fore-stall
the Market.


Peace, the King approaches: stand in your ranks orderly, and show your
breeding; and be sure you blow nothing on the Lords.


ARe these the fairest, and the handsomest
among all the Captives?

There is one more which I set apart; a good personable fellow, but he's
wondrous heavy and bookish, and therefore I thought him unfit for any honour.


Go call him forth; there's none of all these has
A Forehead for a Crown; their blood runs thick,
As if it would blot a sword.
See, there comes one
Armed with a serious and Majestique look,
As if he would read Philosophy to a King:
We've conquered something now. What readst thou there?

I believe he's conning a Hymn against the good Time.


'Tis a discourse of the Nature of the Soul;
That shows the vicious Slaves, but the well inclined
Free* and their own though conquered.

Thou dost speak
As if thou were victorious, not Arsamnes.

I not deny your Conquest, for you may
Have virtues to entitle't yours; but otherwise,
If one of strange and ill contrived desires,
One of a narrow or intemperate mind
Prove Master of the field, I cannot say
That he hath conquered, but that he hath had
A good hand of it; he hath got the day,
But not subdued the men: Victory being
Not fortunes gift, but the deservings Purchase,

Whom dost thou call deserving?


Him, who dares
Die next his heart in cold blood; him, who fights
Not out of thirst, or the unbridled lust
Of a fleshed sword, but out of Conscience
To kill the Enemy, not the man. Who when
The Lawrell's planted on his brow, even then
Under that safe-protecting Wreath, will not
Contemn the Thunderer, but will
Acknowledge all his strength derived, and in
A pious way of gratitude return
Some of the spoil to Heaven in Sacrifice;
As Tenants do the first fruits of their Trees,
In an acknowledgment that the rest is due.

True, Tell me, were thou then to pay thy vows
What would thou sacrifice? the best, or worst?

The best, unto the Best. If I had destined
An Ox unto the Altar, he should be
Fair, and well fed; for the Deity doth not love
The maimed, or misshapen, because it is
A thing so different from himself, deformity
Being one of Natures trespasses: he should
Be crowned then, and conducted solemnly,
That my Religion might be specious,
'Twere stealth else, not Devotion.

Bravely said.
But (t's pity) thou hast reasoned all this while
Against thy self, for our Religion doth
Require the Immolation of one Captive;
And thou hast proved that he is best bellowed
That best deserves to be spared.

I could
Tell you, the Gods have neither appetite
Nor entralls; that they do not hunger after
Your Cookery of sacrifice, and that
A grain of Incense, or a piece of Gum,
If offered with Devotion, may redeem
A destined Hecatomb. But this would be
To deprecate my fate; which by your Sun,
Your Sun that doth require me, I expect
With the same mind, as I would do my Nuptials.

And so't shall come, thy shape and virtues do
Enrich and furnish thee for Heaven. I would
Or thou had fled, or I not conquered.
Adorn him with Robes. But thou must swear
First to be faithful to the State.

I swear.

'Come from the Dungeon to the Throne
To be a King, and straight be none.
'Reigne then a while, that thou may be
'Fitter to fall by Majesty.

'So Beasts for sacrifice we feed;
'First they are crowned, and then they bleed.
'Wash with thy Blood what wars have done
'Offensive to our God the Sun:
'That as thou fall we may see
'Him pleased, and set as red as thee.
'Enjoy the Glories then of state,
'Whiles pleasures ripen thee for fate.

'So Beasts: c.


Now then, Cratander, I do here indulge thee
All the Prerogatives of Majesty
For three full days; which being expired, that then
Thou may fall honourably, I intend
To strike the blow my self.

I neither take
New courage from the Power, nor suffer new
Fears from the Death that waytes it: both are things
That have two ears, by which they may be taken;
So that they are indifferent in themselves;
And only good or bad as they are ordered.
Off with their shakells Sirrah: you my Lords
Take order they be quickly well attired,
That they may come to Court, and do us service.
'Tis next of all our Royal pleasure, that
Battle be re-inforc'd by the next Sun,
To make our Conquest perfect: all's not safe
Till the Snake leave to threaten with his tail.
Our Reign is short, and business much, be speedy.
Our Counsels and our deeds must have one birth.

If you'll make use of any Ornaments, I've a couple of Jack-chaynes at your
service.* Come Gentlemen, please you to follow, I'll give you ease of your
Irons suddenly.


Sirrah be quick, that my foot may be at liberty to kick thee.


Whether tends the mind of this ambitious wretch?
H'hath thoughts so hasty, and so large, as if
He would over-runne the whole world in a breath.

I like the courage of the man: methinkes
H'hath given a taste, how worthy he is of
A longer Kingdom.

You'll obey him then?


I don't obey
Him, but the King; as they that pay their vows
Unto the Deity, shrouded in the Image.

True, 'tis the King's will he should be obeyed
But he's a Slave; the man looks personable,
And fit for Action, but he is a Slave.
He may be noble, virtuous, generous, all,
But he is still a Slave.

As if the sullying
Must turn all purer mettle into dross;
Or that a lewell might not sometimes be
In the possession of a private man.

What? you too for the rising Sun my Lord
Though't be but a Meteor cast from the true one?
If that the conquered Hart must lead the Lyon,
I'll teach my wishes to run thwart unto
That large success you look for.

Be my fears
No Omen to the Kingdom, o ye Gods,
But I suspect, this Comic folly will
Sport our free Monarchy into a Nation
Of cheated Slaves. But peace; the Queen.

We two
Will go, and see his carriage.

Do my Lords;
And because you wish his State so well, pray see
The Slaves provided of their clothes.

Y'Have seen
This Three-dayes King my Lords? I cannot sport
At the Miseries of men: methinkes I feel
A touch of pity, as often as I view him.
How do you think hee'le bear his State?

As Schoole-boyes
In time of Misrule, look big a while, and then
Return dejected to the Rod.

I wonder
No woman's chosen Queen for company.
These Male wits are but gross and sluggish; faith
You'd see a delicate Comedy, if that
A she wit might but Imp his Reign.

O Madam!
Your Sex is too imperious to Rule;
You are too busy, and too stirring, to
Be put in Action; your Curiosity
Would do as much harm in a Kingdom, as
A Monkey in a Glasse-shop; move and remove,
Till you had broken all.

Things then it seems
Are very brittle, that you dare not trust us.

Your Closet and your Senate would be one;
You'd Gossip at the Councell-table, where
The grand contrivance of some finer Posset
Would be a State affair.

I never knew
But this one difference yet 'twixt us and you:
Your follies are more serious, your vanities
Stronger, and thicker woven; and your Councels
About the razing of a Fort or City,
Contrived as ours about a mess of spoon-meat;
So that you laugh, and are laughed at again.

I hope you do but exercise, your wits
Are not at sharpes?

Wee'le venture how he will,
Foils, or bare points we care not.

Cease the strife.
How's this Cratander qualified, my Lords
What virtues has he?

No great store of virtues;
He's a tough fellow, one that seems to stand
Much on a resolute carelessness, and hath
A spice of that unnecessary thing
Which the mysterious call Philosophy.
Here comes a couple can inform you better:
They have observed the thing.

MY Lords, what think you
Of this new King? what doth he do? what is he?

He's one that knows, and dares preserve his own
Honour, and others too; a man as free
From wronging any, as himself; he bears
A Kingdom in his look; a kingdom that
Consists of Beauty, seasoned with Discretion.
His Graces are virile, and comely too:
Grave, and severe delights so tempering
The softness of his other pleasures, that
A settled full content doth thence arise,
And wholly take up the beholders thoughts.

Why then hee'le turn the Scene; we did expect
Something that would have saved us the labour
Of reading Play-bookes, and Love-stories.

See,
How you're mistaken Madam: he doth carry
All things with such a State, and yet so free
From an insulting Pride, that you'd conceive
Judgement and power put into the Scales,
And neither overpoysing, whiles he shows
Rather that he can rule, then that he will.

The afflicted ne'er want praises. O how false
Doth the Eye of pity see! the only way
To make the Foul seem gracious, is to be
Within the ken of death; he that e're while
Would have been thought a Monster, being now
Condemned to die, is thought an Hero.

Truly,
I think you have not yet been near your death.

I've been but seldom with your Ladyship.


Away, let's go and view again: he promises
Something that is not sport: If he do well,
And keep his virtues up until his fall,
I'll pay a good wish to him as he's going,
And a fair mention of him when he's gone.

HOw doth our new King bear his Royalty?


If he go still on thus, his three days folly
Will fill your Annalls.

He is grown the talk
And sight of all the Court: h' hath eyes chayn'd to him,
And some say hearts; nor are they mean ones, such
As he may steal without being missed, but those
The theft of whom turns sacrilege.

I hope
Atossa is not in the Roll; he dares not
Be favoured by my Queen.

Her pure Affections
Are sacred as her Person, and her thoughts
Soaring above the reach of common Eyes,
Are like those better Spirits, that have nothing
Of Earth admixt, but yet look down upon
Those number of Inhabitants, and where
They see a worthy mind oppressed, vouchsafe
At least to help with pity.

Doth she then
Seem to compassionate his fortune? we
Must watch his Actions narrowly.

He may
Grow insolent else past remedy: but yet
Your Majesty hath a preventing eye.
He may, when that his Channel's full, discharge
His streams on all that's round him, rushing forth
With a strong headlong Torrent, as mischeevous
As uncontrollable, the ungrateful waters
Choking even that which gave 'm life; but yet
You can kill evils by first seeing them.

All this hath taken up but one Ear only;
The other, and the softer is reserved.
Religion, and your word (which, equally
As that, is binding) are both past for three days:
To cut him off before, were to abridge
Your Triumph, and Devotion.

He must live
And Reign his time prescribed; but he must not
Perform the Actions he intends. Let then
All the delights and pleasures, that a Slave
Admires in Kings be offered. Though an hundred
Still watchful eyes beset his head, yet there
Is one way left; Music may subtly creep
And rock his senses so, that all may sleep.

PErish their Tables, and themselves: a Throne
May stand without those tumults of delights,
That wait on big and pompous Luxury*
I'll cross their expectation, and quite banish
All that their weaker minds do think delight.
Kings pleasures are more subtle, then to be
Seen by the vulgar; they are Men, but such
As ne'er had any dregs, or if they had,
Dropped 'em as they were drawing up from out
The grovelling Press of Mortals. To offend
Beyond the reach of Law without control,
Is not the Nature, but the vice of Power;
And he is only great, that dares be good.

HE wears a serious look still; we may hope
As soon to calm a Tempest with a song,
As soften him.

Beasts and hard Rocks have both
Been moved, and by his Country-man. Let's try.
That we may some way, Sir, express our service
Unto you, with intent you may not feel
Bare honour only without the delights,
We have provided you a taste, of our
Best Persian Music.

That's an innocent pleasure;
Spears make it, and Gods hear it.

Boy come in.


YOur last new song, that which I gave you Sirrah.


See yonder where he sits; let's stand and see
How hee'le behave himself; the Lords have vowed
To try him to the utmost*

I begin
To fear that he is mortal.

Come begin


Come my sweet, whiles every strain
Calls our Souls into the Ear;
Where they greedy listening fain
Would turn into the sound they hear*
Lest in desire
To fill the Quire
Themselves they tie
To Harmony,
Let's kiss and call them back again.
Now let's orderly conveigh
Our Souls into each other's Breast,
Where interchanged let them stay
Slumbering in a melting rest.
Then with new fire
Let them retire,
And still present
Sweet fresh content
Youthful as the early day.
Then let us a Tumult make,
Shuffling so our souls, that we
Careless who did give or take,
May not know in whom they be.
Then let each smother
And stifle the other,
Till we expire
In gentle fire
Scorning the forgetful Lake.
I did expect some solemn Hymn of the
Great world's beginning, or some brave Captains
Deserving deeds extolled in lofty numbers.
These softer subjects grate our ears: But what
Are these my Lords? she Minstrells?

Consequences,
Which we out of that duty which we owe you
Thought a fit present, that you might not want
Any delight that Persia yields.

I have
No humane thought about me now, forbear.

You are no Statue Sir? or if you were,
These yet methinkes might melt you.

If you will
Needs put your selves to the trouble of Procurers,
Bring me a Kingdom in one face, or show me
A People in one body; then you might
Happily work on mine Affections.
There I durst power my self into Embraces,
Loosing my self in a Labyrinth of joy.
As 'tis you only make me colder, by
Surrounding me with these your hostile flames.

I hope you do conceive it our Affection,
And duty to your Sceptre.

Let me ask you*
Was't not enough you tried me with those baits
Of wines, and meates, culled from the spoil of Nature,
But you must bring vice in another fashion?

Will you then let your days pass sluggishly,
And reap no pleasure from your Power?

'Tis one
To punish such offenders as your selves,
That will abase your honour to so vile
And abject an employment. If you offer
The like again, you shall perceive, that Kings,
How short so e're their Reigns be, have long hands.
This Act, what e're you stile it, is flat Treason.
Our Honour is abused in it. O the foreheads
Of women once grown impudent! that these
Can stand so long, and hear their infamy
Debated quietly, expecting when
They shall be called to their reproach! what fled?
And left the Prey behind to tempt me? Ho!
Who waytes without? Conveigh these wicked creatures
Unto the Gaolor Molops: give him charge
To use them as he would do Enemies.
My Country would twice suffer, should I yield
Unto their vices too. But Greece is not
Only preserved in me: had they perhaps
Carried these Creatures to the wilder knot,
Headlong Archippus, or bold Stratocles,
Easy Leocrates, or prone Philotas,
Their Present might have hit. But hark, they come.
I'll step aside, and watch their actions.

What do you think Mandane? is he mortal?


HOw far do we out-shine the Persian Court*
See what good clothes can do. I think there are not
Four properer Gentlemen walk the streets.

The Ladies certainly must love us now*


But are you sure they will pass this way*


Yes, yes.
Let's to our stations, and be ready to
Accost *m at the first approach.

Mandane*
Do you and Ariene step down to em*
And try their Courtship.

All I think be safe.


Cratander is hard by; ne'er fear; let's down.


I wonder none pass by yet: sure theyl'e send
Tickets unto us, to invite us to
Their Lodgings the back-way.

Ne'er doubt it Man,
They will come themselves; for proof behold*

Half booty;
Equal division Gentlemen.

Agreed, agreed.


Agreed, agreed.


Agreed, agreed.


Nay, start not Ladies, we are men,


'Tis well
You tell us so before hand, we might else
Think you disguised Satyrs, come on purpose
To put the Nymphs to flight.

We are not hairy;
We have no Tails, I'm sure.

Truly if Satyrs
And you were in one Market-towne, I think
You might see one another for nothing.

Do you
Take us for Monsters then?

Pray heaven we don't
Discover 'em in your Manners.

We are come
Not to disturb, but heighten your delights.

Can you show any tricks then?


Love-trickes Lady.


Can you run through a Hoop? or fetch up money
With your eye-lids backward?

Can you pierce your Tongue,
Or cut your Throat, and yet live after it?

Do y'thinke us Tumblers then, or Jugglers?


Both;
And truly these would please us far above
Your Love-trickes.

Shall I draw some Ribbon then
Out of my Throat? Shall I cast a Lock upon
Your pretty cheeks, or seal your lovely lips
Up?

What will content you when you have done*


A kiss.


We do not use to grant such favours gratis*


What will you take to give one then?


A Muffler.


I perceive you are well skilled
In the whole course of Love, you but keep off
To make delights more sweet.

You would do well
To do so too.

Why Madam? do not fear me:
I snore not in my sleep; this Nose of mine
Will not proclaim.

'Tis something Trumpet-like;
I would not trust my self with such an Instrument*
Methinkes 'tis somewhat guilty*

How I love
This pretty, pettish, froward, wanton anger?
Give me a Pleasure that I struggle for.
That Favour's genuinely sweet, that's wrested.

Fear him not Madam; I'll be your defence;
My soul is linked and chayn'd unto your Tongue.

You speak in a fit dialect; you relish
Of the Language of the place whence you came lately.
But to be serious now awhile, pray speak,
What do you see in us fit for desire?
You cannot love us possibly.

By this kiss.


Stand off.


And this.


Your Oath's not good in Law.
Tell us, what wrong hath either of us done you,
That you should seek thus to revenge your selves*

You are too scornful, we too easy; come
Let's hurry 'em to some place of secrecy,
Where all their scoffing shall not prevail: you two
Quickly seize her.

Help, help.


Help, help.


YE Villains hold.
What is the matter? why this violence?

A little Love-sport only; we were arguing
Pro, and Con out of Plato, and are now
Going to practise his Philosophy.

What they stile Love-sport only, and misname
An arguing out of Plato, would have proved
A true and downright Rape, if that your presence
Had not become our Rescue.

Wicked Villains,
That in your miseries can't forget your vices,
Acting those crimes to day, which e're the Sun
Thrice set, will elsewhere be your Torture. Cannot
The chain and hunger kill those seeds of evil,
But even in the midst of your misfortunes,
Your sports must be the robbing of fair honour*
And Rapes your Recreations? which, an't please
The Gods, you call Philosophy. Leave the place;
Infection's busy where you breath; the next
Attempt installs you in the Dungeon.

Most worthy Sir, your Nobleness hath shown
A mind beyond your fortune: though it be not
Real as we could wish it, yet believe it
You hold a perfect Royalty in the hearts
Of those, whose honours you have now preserved.

I owe this duty to your virtues Madam.
These Slaves must be repressed; the giddy People
Are ready to transpose all crimes upon
Him that should moderate them; so perhaps
Their faults might be accounted mine. Besides
Snares are laid close in every path for me;
And if a King but stumble, 'tis a Precipice:
When all eyes see it, a blemish is a Monster.
Pure virtue then, and thou fair honour, give me
Leave to cotemplate on your Beauties; let
The strength of my Imagination dwell
U^on the sight of your Divinities.
What? more temptations yet? ha? whence? from whom*
The heavens I hope don't drop down follies too:
No arm out of the clouds* a chain? why this
Is but an Exprobration of my late
Distressed fortune. 'Tis rich yet, and Royal;
I 'cann't be the wealth of any, but the Throne*
Fall out what will, I'll wear it, 'till I know
From whence it came; and if it prove a Mettle
That some foul drossy mind could not endure
Should longer dwell with it, I then will cast it
With as much scorn and anger from my shoulders,
As now I do receive't with admiration.

Look, there he walks alone considering;
Let's to him while we may; good day Craetander*

Good Hippias, Phocion! you are welcome; how
Dare you trust your selves in an Enemies Court?

We pass disguised to see what will become
Of our Affairs; and being the future state
Of Ephesus depends on you, are come
Only to give you notice of it, for
We do presume you're not to be entreated
To do us good.

Alas! I am not, after
The period of three days; this makes the time
Which even now I thought an age, seem short
And too contract for my desires.

When you
Should raise your Country struggling in the dust,
The time is short, and too contract; 'tis long
Enough to lead an Army out against it,
To crush those Relics of an halfe-life, that
Her doubtful body faintly breaths; you may
With that right hand spin three days to the space
Of many Olympiads.

What is your meaning?


Have we endured the hate, and felt the fury
Of violent Arsamnes so long? have we
Suffered his sword until it did grow blunt,
And rather broke, then wounded? have you tried
The weight and strictness of the Persian chain
So long, and ask us now, what is your meaning?
Come, come Cratander, I could chide you, but
That I believe you only hide the good
That you intend your Country, that it may not
Be disappointed; you may safely tell us
You will betray the Persians into our hands,
That we may gather forces, and prepare
Against their coming.

Oh! is this your Errant?
Here, take your chain again, it cannot bind.

How e're don't exprobrate our Poverty,
Though all our wealth hath been the Persians spoil.

Why you threw't in before you, to make way
Unto your Suit.

Is it not lawful to
Salute the Persian Mock-King, think y', unless
We bring a Gift? I'd thought the name of Ephesus
Had privileged our access. Think on the honours,
The long continuing honours, that you shall
Receive at home; think on those numerous tears
That you shall wipe away from flowing Eyes,
At the first sight of Liberty.

Your approach
Will entice Cities out of Houses; the aged,
And the young too; the Matron, and the Virgin,
All mingled in a blessed confusion,
Will in a solemn full Procession come,
And with that great Religion bring you in,
As if their Captive Gods were brought them back.
Come then a King home, that went out a Slave.

I am so still; no sooner did I come
Within the Persian Walls, but I was theirs*
And since, good Hippias, this power hath only
Added one link more to the Chain. I am
Become Arsamnes Instrument: I've sworn
Faith to his Sceptre and himself, and must
Ask his leave, e're I do betray his Country.

You're free enough against us. O the justice
Of an unnatural Son! yet ask your self;
Ought that be ratified that's done by force?

As if the valiant could be forced by any.


You shall not change your fortune, you shall only
Pass to another Empire; and for that
Right may be violated.

Empires are
Desired for glory; be all wickedness then
Far absent, for in that there can be none.

You are resolved to reason your self then
Into a measured unthankefulnesse? what can
Hinder this good t'your Country, but your self?
Fear thou the Thunder, and the Gods? the anger
Of the Grecian Powers will be upon thee, if
Thou not restor'st them to their seats. On then,
Thou undertak'st their cause, thou fight their war*

I cannot tell what powers you pretend;
Tell me of Justice and Fidelity,
These are the Grecian Gods.

Be then thy name
Blasted to all Posterity, and let
Our wretched Nephews, when then Souls shall labour
Under the Persian Yoke, curse thee, and say,
This slavery we owe unto Cratander.

Pray stay, I will go with you, and consider,
How am I straightened! Life is short unto me:
And the good man's End ought still to be a business*
We must die doing something, least perhaps
We loose our Deaths; we must not yet do ill
That we misplace not Action: If I strike
On this hand, I'm a Parricide; if on that,
The same brand waytes me too: how do I tremble,
Like to the doubtful Needle 'twixt two Loadstones,
At once inclining unto both, and neither!
Here Piety calls me, there my Justice stops me.
It is resolved; Faith shall consist with both;
And aged Fame after my Death shall tell,
Betwixt two sins, Cratander did do well.

SEt a watch at the door, to keep out sleep;
He's mortal that offers to betray so much weakness
As to wink. Here Archippus.

May not a man wink without mortality,
When he lets it go down? Here Stratocles.

I do state winking in that case divine.


Come thou uneven lump, thou heap of sins in proof; we will liquor thy
Keys, open thy Cages, and give thy meager Tenants a Play day, Rascal. Bring
the Jarres nearer. As I hope for fortune, I think my soul will pass into a
frog. Now for a hundred Throats; to thee Molops.


You Grecians I think have sponges in your mawes; 'tis but setting your hands
to your sides, and squeezing your selves and presently you drink as much as
before.


Off with thy Cup Landlord, and talk not; we learned it from the Teat, soole.


Have at thee, Archippus.


I do not like these healths at random; let's have a sober methodical order
for a while.


What? shall we drink by dice then, and let fortune name the heir to the Cup?


Or shall we drink our Mistresses names, and soak it Alphabetically?


If we drink names, let not the Letters pass for single ones, but as they
would in number: I do pronounce Alpha no letter till it begin to multiply.


I never thought Drinking such a Mystery before; a blockhead can't be drunk, I
see.


Right; shallow brains can ne'er attain to it; that makes your fools, and
your old governing Philosophers continue so sober still. The veget Artist, and
the vigorous Poet, whose brains are full and forging still, will straight get
a pleasant madness from that that will but warm those colder Rheumaticke
Sages, whose noses always drop like Still-snoutes.


The noblest drinking methinkes is the Postures.


Let's have'em


Bring the Pots in play. But where's the wenches, and the Music you promised
us, good Molops.


For wenches, the Town will not yield any at this time; and I durst not
venture my single wife amongst you all. For Fiddlers, I have provided them, they
stand ready without.


Call 'em in sweet Molops.


Well, what shall those Raskalls play, whiles we drink the Postures?


The Battle by all means.


Strike up the Battle then. Think your selves all in service now, and do as I
do.

Take your Bows Gent: and make a stand.
Right! draw your shafts now, neck 'em.
Very good! now smooth your feathers.
Well done! Present, and take aim.
Here's to thee Leocrates.

Have towards thee Philotas.


To thee Archippus.


Here Molops.


Have at you Fiddlers.


Now draw your Bows and let loose all.


The other charge, good fellow Soldiers.


Let's have a Song between, and then have at you


Fiddlers, employ your Throats and sing a while; you shall drink with 'em
after.


Sing that which I made in the Prison; 'tis seasonable enough.


Now, now, the Sun is fled
Down into Tethys bed,
Ceasing his solemn course awhile.
What then?
'Tis not to sleep, but be
Merry all night, as we;
Gods can be mad sometimes, as well as men.
Then laugh we, and quaff we, until our rich nose:
Grow red, and contest with our Chaplets of Roses*
If he be fled, whence may
We have a second day,
That shall not set till we command?
Here see
A Day that does arise
Like his, but with more eyes,
And warmes us with a better fire, than he*
Then laugh we, c.
Thus then we chase the night
With these true floods of light,
This Lesbian wine, which with it's sparkling streams,
Darting diviner Graces,
Cast's Glories round our Faces*
And dulls the Tapers with Majestique Beams.
Then laugh we, c.
Well said! now the other charge to the honour of Cratander.


I feel a rumbling in my head, as if the Cyclops were forging Thunder in my
Brains: But no matter, give it me: our ancient Orpheus says it, Perpetual
drunkenness is the reward of Virtue.


Which the most vicious have: must I still meet
Some thing must greeve me more than your misfortunes?
The Chain and Fetter were your Innocence.

We don't fire Temples Sir: we kill no Father
Nor Mother, 'tis not Incest to be merry.

But to be drunk is all. Do but consider*
(If that at least you can) how Greece it self
Now suffers in you; thus, say they, the Grecians
Do spend their Nights: Your vices are esteemed
The Rites and Customs of your Country, whiles
The beastly Revelling of a Slave or two,
Is made the Nations Infamy. Your wreathes
Blu^h at your Ignominy: what praise is't
When't shall be said, Philotas stood up still
After the hundredth Flagon; when 'tis known
He did not so in war? you're now just fit
To reach the Spartan boys sobriety;
Are all good Principles washed out? how e're
Be without vices, if not virtuous.
That I should have authority to command
Vices but not forbid 'em! I would put you
Once more into his charge, but that you would
Make even the Dungeon yet more infamous.

Gentlemen hear me; Cratander
Speaks well, and like a good Common-wealth's* man*

Out you dissembling Rascal; are you of Cratander's faction.


Good Gentlemen don't kick me: I shall leave al my drink behind me, if you
do.


Must we still thus be checked? we live not under
A King, but a Pedagogue: he's insufferable

Troth he's so proud now he must be killed to make a supper for the immortal
Canniballs, that there's no Ho with him.


I never thought he would have been either so womanish, as to have been chaste
himself, or so uncivil as to keep us so* but he talks of lying with
surprised Cities, and committing Fornication with Victory, and making Mars
Pimp for him.


These are the fruits of Learning; we suffer all this merely because he hath a
little familiarity with the Devil in Philosophy, and can conjure with a few
Notions out of Socrates.


In good troth I take it very scurvily at his hands, that he will not let me
deserve hanging. I'd thought to have done all the villainies in the world, and
left a name behind me: but he's severe forsooth, and cries out Virtue,
Mistress Virtue.


Diseases take her; I ne'er knew any good she did in Common-wealth yet. I
wonder how he dares be so impudent, as to be good in a strange place.

Did not you mark his Rhetoric cast at me?
I was the But the shot at. -- What praise if it,
When't shall be said Philotas stood up still
After the hundredth Flagon, when 'tis known
He did not so in war? -- mere, mere upbrayding:
And shall Philotas this? this from Cratander?

Whence this deep silence? are you sacrificing
To your dumb Gods of Greece? where are your Caps?
Your Loves, your Madness?

Do not Ravish me;
I will cry out a Rape, if that you come
Within twelve foot of me; we must be modest.
Modest an't please the Gods.

Fie! fie! We looked, you should
Have left at least a dozen of great bellies
A piece behind you upon every Tribe.
Where are your Spirits? had I been in your case*
Nature e're this had been inverted. But
You think on your last end, as if the world
Were to expire with you.

O! we must walk
Discreetly, look as carefully to our steps,
As if we were to dance on ropes, with Eggs
Under our feet: we have left off shackles,
To be worse fetterd.

Can a breast of large
And ample thoughts tamely endure the ring?
And be led quietly by th'Patient Nose,
When Licence is Religion? One whose dull
And sluggish temper is called wisdom, one
Whose indiscretion killed with some formality,
As Quicksilver with fasting spittle, doth pass
For a grave governing Garb This heavy lump
Dulls all your active fire.

You understand not:
For to what end is Liberty indulged?
To be oppressed by a severer Rule?
One newly taken from among your selves,
To make your state worse by his Tyranny?
But you show what you can endure.

By Heaven
We do enslave our selves; We can b'as free
As is Cratander, though not so malicious.

You are as things of nought with him; for tell me;
When called he Stratocles to Council? when
Asked he Leocrates his advice? Philotas,
Archippus, names excluded from his thoughts,
But when he means to show that he hath anger.

What Star were thou borne under Stratocles?


That which all Governors of Market-townes are,
Some lazy Planet, I believe.

Thou 'wer^ wont
To exercise upon a throat or two,
To keep thy hand in ur; now show thy self*
Let's slit this graver weazen.

Now I see
You have some man about you, now your bloods
Run as they should do, high and full; you slept
Merely till now. If that Cracander should
Quit scores with Nature e're his time be out,
The King must choose again; the dead you know
Ne'er goes for Sacrifice.

Must one of us
Piece up his Reign then?

There's no other way;
The Gods themselves require't.

My Hanches quake,
As if that Molops were to season them,
And put 'em straight in paste for the great Gods

Who e're
Succeeds him. shall allow the rest what e're
Nature or Art can yield. Nothing shall be
Uulawfull, but to sleep and mumble Prayers.

Agreed, agreed.


Agreed, agreed.


Agreed, agreed.


Then fill me out an Oath.
All I presume will bind themselves with this
Good common looser of all cares, but what
Do tend to Liberty to do the like.

The motion's worthy; crown the Goblet then.


Would *twere his blood. By Truth her self th'Ofspring
And child of Wine, Cratander dyes e're half
The glass of his short Tyranny run out.
This the to the infernal Gods.
this
To our just angers, Gods as great as they.
Good Omen! so! the thickened streams run black;
'Twas blood methought I drank: 'twere Lazynes
To say, he shall be dead; he's dead already.
Drink and prepare for Pleasures.

Liberty.


HE must be more than Man that gains it back
Without my will.

Your Justice must restore it.
Will your severer Majesty triumph,
With soft spoils of a Lady's Cabinet?

As I would not feign Favour, and be-ly
A Jewell or a Twist, to gain the name
Of Creature, or of Servant unto any;
So by your Beauty, (for if Persians may
Swear by their Sun, I well may swear by that)
Where honour is transmitted in a true
Mysterious Gage of an Immaculate mind,
I will defend it as some sacred Relic,
Or some more secret pledge, dropped down from Heav^n*
To guard me from the dangers of the Earth.

But in that
You make it common, you bereave it o^
All that you call Divinity.

He that vaunts
Of a received Favour, ought to be
Punished as Sacrilegious Persons are,
Because he doth violate that sacred thing,
Pure, spotless Honour. But it may be seen,
And yet not prostitute. I would not smother
My Joys, and make my happiness a stealth.

How your thoughts slatter your deceived Fancy
Into a State, that when you leave to think,
Dyes, as your thoughts that kept it up! what is't
That you call joy and happiness?

I must
Confess, I have no Merits, whose just heat
May extract ought from you, called Love: yet when
I do consider, that Affection
Cannot look virtuously on any thing
That is resplendent, but a subtle image
Purely reflecting thence, must needs arise,
And pay that Look again; I do take leave
To say, the careful Deities provide,
That Love shall ne'er be so unhappy, as
To want his Brother.

Why? I never spent
A sigh for you; you never had a kiss,
Nor the reversion of one yet.

Such Love
Is but Love's I doll; and these soft ones, that
Confine it to a kiss, or an embrace,
Do, as the superstitious did of old,
Contract the Godhead into a Bull, or Goat,
Or some such lustful Creature. Be it far,
Be it far from me to think, where e're I see
Clear streams of Beauty, that I may presume
To trouble them with quenching of my thirst.
Where a full splendour, where a bright effusion
Of immaterial Beams do meet to
Make up one Body of perfection;
I should acc^unt my self injurious
Unto that Deity, which hath let down
Himself into those Rays, if that I should
Draw nigh without an awful Adoration.
Which my Religion pays to you: but being
You like not the Devotion, be content
To slight the Sacrifice, but spare the Altar.

I am so far from ruining that Breast
In which there lives a spark of chaster honour,
That I would hazard this so prized a trifle,
Which men call Life, that I might live there still;
And prove that Love is but an Engine of
The careful Powers, invented for the safety
And preservation of afflicted goodness.
Conceive not hence a passion burning toward you.
For she that speaks like woman, is a Queen.

I can distinguish betwixt Love, and Love,
Tweene Flames and good Intents, nay between Flames
And Flames themselves: the grosser now fly up,
And now fall down again, still cov'ting new
Matter for food; consuming, and consumed.
But the pure clearer Flames, that shoot up always
In one continued Pyramid of lustre,
Know no commerce with Earth, but unmixed still,
And still aspiring upwards, (if that may
Be called aspiring, which is Nature) have
This property of Immortality
Still to suffice themselves, neither devouring,
And yet devoured; and such I knowledge yours.
On which I look as on refined Ideas,
That know no mixture or corruption,
Being one eternal simpleness; that these
Should from the Circle of their chaster Glories
Dart out a beam on me, is far beyond
All humane merit; and I may conclude,
They've only their own Nature for a cause,
And that they're good, they are diffusive too.

Your tongue hath spoke your thoughts so nobly (...).
I bear a pity to your virtues, which
E're night shed Poppy twice over th'weary'd world,
Must only be in these two Registers;
Annalls, and Memory. Could you but contrive,
How you might live without an injury
Unto Religion, you should have this glory.
To have a Queen your Instrument.

There's nothing
Can woo my heart unto a thought of life,
But that your presence will be wanting to me,
When I'm shut up in silence: yet I have
A strong Ambition in me to maintain*
An equal faith 'twixt Greece and Persia:
That like a river running 'twixt two fields,
I may give growth and verdure unto both.
Praxaspes, and Masistes, potent Lords,
Are both against my designs; so that I shall not
Obtain an Army* for they think I have
That vile mind in me to betray this Kingdom*
To which I've sworn fidelity; when by
Your self, by all that's good, my'intent is only
To perfect great Arsamnes Conquest, and
In that be beneficial to my Country.
In which if that your Majesty will descend
To act a part, after the Scene is shut,
I'll down to Elysium with a joyful mind,
And teach our Grecian Poets your blessed name
And virtues, for an everlasting Song.

Were it against my self, I'd not deny it.
Walk in, I*le follow you. In great designs.
Valour helps much, but virtuous Love doth more.

WAs't not enough that you perused his Actions,
And surfeited your Eyes upon his follies,
Seeing, and seen again, but you must cast him
A Chain, an Emblematicke Chain?

'Tis not
The veyle that hinders the quick busy Eye
From reading over the Face, but Modesty.
He hath a weak defence, that doth entrust
The preservation of a chaster Love
Unto a silken Cloud.

I stand not much
Upon the commerce of your Eyes, but 'tis
Your Chain. -- Your Favour -- that --. Do'y 'thinke 'tis fit
A Queen should send one link unto a Slave?

Doth not the Sun (the Sun, which yet you worship)
Send beams to others than your self? yet those
Which dwell on you loose neither light, nor heat,
Coming not thence less vigorous, or less chaste.
Would you seal up a Fountain? or confine
The Air unto your walk? would you enjoin
The Flower to cast no smell, but as you pass?
Love is as free as Fountain, Air, or Flower.
For it stands not in a point; 'tis large, and may*
Like streams* give verdure to this Plant* that Tree,
Nay that whole field of Flowers, and yet still run
In a most faithful course toward the bosom
Of the loved Ocean.

But when you divert
And break the Stream into small Rivulets,
You make it run more weak, then when it kept
United in one Channel.

If it branch
Into a smaller twining here, and there,
The water is not lost, nor doth it quit
The former Name; this is not to destroy,
But to enlarge the stream: did it dry up,
And leave the Fountain destitute, indeed
You'd reason to be angry.

But what should make you
Present him with a gift? you might have smothered
A good opinion of him in your Breast,
(As some digressing streams flow under ground)
And so have rested; but you show it now,
And make the world partaker.

Who would stifle
An honest Fire? that flame's to be suspected
That hides it self. When that a man of valour
Graces his Country with a good attempt,
You give a Sword, an Horse, a Mannoure, nay
Sometimes a whole Province for reward. We have
A sense of Virtue too, as well as you:
And shall we be denied the Liberty
To show we have that sense? A Favour is
The Alms of Love; I do not pass away
My heart in Charity* Virtuous Cratander
Shows forth so full a Transcript of your life,
In all but his misfortunes, that methinkes
You may admire your self in him, as in
Your shade. But yet let chaste Atossa rather
Not be at all, than not be wholly yours.

Thou art still virtuous my Atossa, still
(...) as thy Crystal, but more spotless.
Fools that we are, to think the Eye of Love
Must always look on us. The Vine that climbs
By conjugal Embraces about the Elm,
May with a ring or two perhaps encircle
Some neighbouring bough, and yet this twining prove.
Not the Offence, but Charity of Love.

THat we have naturally a desire
To preserve Honour is a Principle
Not questionable, but by those that would
Corrupt, and rob us of it: that you prize
Your Chastity more than wealth, and think your Cabinets
Cheap and unworthy, if compared t'your minds,
I'm so assured, that I need only tell you
The danger, not entreat you to avoid it.
The Slaves next night intend a Rape upon
Your Honour, and your Wealth; to tell your Husband*
Were to procure a slaughter on both sides.
If we avert the riot, and become
Our own defence, the Honour, as the Action,
Will be entirely ours: which may be done
Only by flying to Arsamnes Castle.
A thing so easy, that 'twill only be
To take the Air for fame: and when we do
Return, our Husbands shall strew praises in
Our ways* which we will tread on, and contemn*

Let's fly, let's fly, let's fly.


How I do love
These worthy, noble thoughts* the Action
Will make our Tombs not need an Epitaph*
When we shall live still fresh in History.
The sacred Gods of Marriage will present
Themselves unto you night by night for this,
And personally thank you in your Dreams,
For thus preserving their Rites undefiled*
But time is short, I must away, to make
Provision for our flight. If any do
Desire a further satisfaction
In this our grand design, we leave our Ladies
Mandane here, and Ariene, who
Can give a full relation of our business.

Away, away, to the Castle, to the Castle.


Urge me no more, I am sure my Country
Requires not Perjury.

Ought any word
Be kept with Enemies? no path is foul
That leads to liberty.

O Phocion!
Such men as you have made our Grecian faith
Become a Proverb to express Treachery.
An Oath's the same in Persia, and in Greece:
And binds alike in either.

But consider
Wee're thrall'd and yoked; the hard gains of our sweat
Must be sent in to serve their Luxury.
Tribute* and tax, and payment, will still keep us
As in a siege: to take the Air perhaps
Will be a charge unto us.

Nor is't Ephesus
That only dreads this slavery; Claros too,
And Colophon, nay Magnesia, and others
That joined in the war do fear a share in the Tyranny.

Your forces are so weakened, that you cannot
Regain a perfect Liberty: your Friends
Begin to fall off too: all that you can
Expect now, is to settle these your evils,
And live protected as a weakened friend
Under the Persian shelter: still preserving
Your Laws and Liberties inviolate.
A thing perhaps yet rather to be wished for,
Then compassed.

Yet methinkes you might procure it,
Having such command.

What may be done in so
Short space, shall all be to your good: go then
And deal discreetly with the Army: tell them
The tempest that is falling on their head,
Unless the Persian shield them. When you have
Persuaded them to this, conduct your Forces
Towards Arsamnes Castle, where the Queen,
And Ladies now expect me. But be sure
You come not within sight of Sardis.

Why?
Shall we not march beyond the Fronteirs then?

By no means, for you'll cut off all retreat,
Now, when you see the numerous Persian come,
You may securely fly without the loss
Of any; this will quell the future rising
Of those, whose frowardness is not content
Either with th'Calme or Tempest of Affairs*
We must comply with Fortune, now wee're conquered,
Permit the rest unto the Gods and me.

Success attend it.


So; my next care now
Must be to avoid those Slaves, who, I o'reheard,
Have a design upon my life. But let
Even the plotting Destinies contrive,
And be themselves of Council, all their malice
Shall only show an idle fruitless Hate,
Whiles Wisdom takes the upper hand of Fate.

HOlla!


Holla!


Archippus?


Leocrates? Ne'er be afraid man, 'tis I, the very same.


Before Mercury I did not know thee: thy coming forth out of the wood with that
raw arm, and those tottered clothes, makes thee show like Acteon, newly
revived after his worrying.


Where's Stratocles, and Philotas?


They're looking Bur-leaves perhaps for Excoriation; or else ^obbing some
Gibbet to accommodate themselves with decent weeds.


Holla!


Holla!


Hark: I hear 'em; they are hard by; let's answer 'em. Holla!


O are you there?


Save thee Brother Stratocles: Joy to thee Valiant Philotas; I commend you that
you keep your words: I'm glad we are so punctual.


D*ye think we have no Religion in us? 'tis a most corrupt time, when such as
we cannot keep touch, and be faithful one to another.


But are you sure Cratander will pass by this way?


My Lord Praxaspes says he loves this walk.


But wee've done ill to leave our weapons yonder*


Pish! he won't pass by this hour, he's busy yet: Wee'le fetch 'em as soon
as we can agree who shall do the deed.


Who shall do the deed say thou? why thou, or he, or he, or I.


Do thou then if thou hast a mind to it.


No faith, thou shalt have the whole honour of it to thy self; I will not rob
thee of an inch of it: I am not envious, Leocrates, not envious.


Well; the next Passenger is to decide it then; he that shall be judged the
fittest to make a Persian Priest, must do the deed.


What else? dost thou think we will be so base, as not to stand to Covenants?


You have all made your selves very unfit to be Priests methinkes.


Why so Philotas? do you not see wooden legs, and Crutches, wry Necks, and
lame Arms, maym'd limbs, and blind sides?


Good faith, we may be all taken for an Hospital broke loose.


And we have wood enough among us to --.

As I hope for Mercy Cratander. -- by the ball of Fortune here he comes: Soul
of my life what shall we do?


Not a sword, not a knife among us! all left behind us in the wood! that we
should be all manicled now, out of a most unluckily Policy! We shall never have
him alone again* make toward him and be hanged, that he may resolve the
Question however.


Bless thy senses and thy limbs, fair Master: do a courtesy to a company
of poor distressed Persians; 'tis not money we ask, nor clothes; only thy
Judgement, thy Judgement* man of Understanding.


What's your request?


That out of thy great Wisdom, soul of Learning, Thou'd'st be pleased to tell
us freely, which of us four is fittest to make a Persian Priest.


I am not well skilled in your Persian Rites,
I know not what Man, or how qualified
Your Temple may admit of, but I have
Two or three Servants within call here, they
Shall umpire this your variance. Ho! Sisarmes,
Ho! Artobazes, draw nigh quickly; seize
These four pernicious Raskalls: did you think
You could lie hid? 'tis not your leg good Stratocles,
Nor your close arm Leocrates, that can
Disguise you from mine eye. I can tell you
Who drank my death, who were your grand Abettors.
In this design. You now would know who's fittest
To make a Persian Priest: Malicious fools,
Is it not all one as to ask me, who
Is fitt'st to Sacrifice me? But you see
I live, and will do, to your Punishment.
Go, away with 'em; take them as they are.
Let 'em not alter either Clothes, or Posture,
But lead 'em through the City thus to Molops;
And give him charge to keep 'em so, until
He hear our farther Pleasure.

Come along, Gentlemen, wee'le try your stumps,
How many miles a day you can halt*

Sirrah, be civil, or else before Jove I'll pull off my wooden leg, and break
your Pate with it, though I die for it.


WEe're like to have an honest Court of*t shortly*


You speak my Lord, as if'twere not so now*


Tis honest now, and shortly will not have
The Power to be otherwise.

Why Hydarnes?


There's not a woman left man; all are vanished*
And fled upon the sudden.

What? I hope
They have not changed their Sex all in a minute?
They are not leap*d into rough chins, and Tulipants*

There's scarce a face without a beard appears.


A sign there are few Eunuchs in the Palace.


My Lords,
This is not to discover what's become of *em.
They've taken weapons with *em too they say.

They have no Sacrifice to perform, that I
Can tell of, neither if they had, would they
Take arms, that were t'invade the Deity.
The Sword's no Instrument of their Devotion.

My Lords, you must make haste with all your forces
To th'Queene and Ladies in Arsamnes Castle:
They now are likely all to be surprised,
By the remainder of the Greekes.

Cratander,
That damned Villain hath enticed 'em thither
Merely t* entrap 'em. Let us to the King;
Wee'le on although against revolted Slaves
We fought with Men before, but now with Vice;
He calls for death that must be conquered twice.

MOst virtuous Queen, you make me search my self,
To find the worth which you do so far prize;
As thus to hazard for one man* whose life
Is under value, that which others would not
For a whole Kingdom, Reputation.

Where Goodness is to suffer, I would willingly
Become the Sacrifice my self to free it.

Had great Arsamnes been in danger, had
Your whole Line been in jeopardy of ruin,
You could have done no more; Your pity hath
Thrust you into Heroic Actions, far
Beyond the eager Valour of tried Captains;
Which I can never worthily admire,
When I consider your reward will only
Be, to be ranked in story with a Slave.

I do it not to the Man, but to the Virtue.
The deed's reward enough unto it self.

'Twould be a piece of exemplary Ingratitude,
To bring you into any danger hence:
You're safe as in your Court; your Subjects shall not
Run any doubtful hazard, in the Chance
Of an uncertain Battle: their first step
Shall be Victorious: and when your Eloquence,
Guarded with Beauty, shall procure the freedom
Of our Enthralled City, the Ephesians
Shall know a Goddess greater than their own,
And you depose our magnified Diana;
Having Shrines in every Breast out-shining hers.
As for my self, I shall live still in those
Good benefits my Country shall receive.
This day instating me in Immortality:
While raising thus our City by my fall,
I shall go down a welcome shade, and dwell
Among the Ancient Fathers of my Country.

Leave the Conditions to me: but peace;
Expect me quietly a while, they come.

CAn you contain Sir? look how proudly he
Sits in the midst, hemmed in on every side
With Beauties, which his wheeling eye runs over
All in a Minute.

Here's a delicacy
That ne'er was practis*d by a Captive yet,
Nor heard of since the Custom first began,
That Conquered Slaves should personate their King,

The Luxury and Riot of arm*d Love!
O that mine eyes could dart forth piercing Lightning*
That I could shoot some quick invisible Plague
Into his boiling marrow. He is seated
So, that a Dart or Arrow cannot reach him,
Without the danger of a Persian breast,
Worth all his Nation. But why name I worth,
Where I see so much Infamy? O Atossa!
Is this your amity to Virtue? this
The Pity that you lend afflicted goodness?
There's work enough now for my sword, although
The Enemy approach not. Credulous woman,
Descend, Arsamnes calls thee; if he be
A Name regarded when Cratander's by.

Most virtuous Sir, you may expect perhaps
Atossa's breast grown strange, and wrested from
Her wonted faith; but witness O thou Sun,
Whom with a pious eye I now behold,
That I have neither tried t'unty, or loosen
That sacred knot: but what I've condescended
To aid thus far, is only a fair likeness
Of something that I love in you.

If then
Your Loyalty be still entire to me,
Show it, and yield Cratander up to us.

As his designs are honourable, so
Are our intents, with which there needs must stand
A resolutenesse: it cannot be Virtue,
Unles't be constant too. The approach of the Enemy
Forbids me to say more: On to your Victory,
Your wonted art to Conquer; they're the Relics
Of a few scattered troops, the fragments of
The last meal that your swords made; on, and when
You have subdued them wholly, we will plant
Fresh Baize upon your brows, and seal unto you
A peace, as everlasting as our Loves.

within. Arm, arm, arm, arm.


Mithra and Victory.


Let us be resolute now my Ladies, and
At their return show them that they have something
Left yet to Conquer; Breasts, that are not shaken
With their loud noise of Trumpets. See, they're coming
This was a Race, no Battle; Let's prepare.

WHat? fly upon the sight of us? to'appeare
Was here to overcome, a look hath done
The business of the sword; your fears may sleep
Securely now; Open the Castle gates.

But you must grant us some Conditions first.


Must we be Articled with by our women?
What is't an't please the Gods, that you require?

Cratanders life.


It is not in your Power
To grant it great Arsamnes: your Queen speaks
Out of a tender pity to no purpose.

Hear me Arsamnes: whom the raging sword
Hath spared, why should the peaceable destroy?
All hate's not ended in the field, I see:
There's something still more cruel after war.

Alas! you know not what you ask; the Gods
Permit not that he live; he falls to them.

You must not hear her, Sir, against the Gods,
Who now expect their solemn Feast and Banquet.

If they are Gods, Pitty's a Banquet to 'em.
When e're the Innocent and Virtuous
Doth escape death, then is their Festival.
Nectar ne'er flows more largely, then when bloud's
Not spilt, that should be saved. Do y'thinke the smoke
Of humane Entralls is a steam that can
Delight the Deities? Who e're did burn,
The Building to the honour of the Architect?
Or break the Tablet in the Painters praise?
'Tis Mercy is the Sacrifice they like.

Let not Affection call a Curse upon you,
While you permit it to take place of your
Religion.

See, he will not live Atossa;
To do the unwilling man a courtesy
Is but a specious Tyranny.

Alas!
He would be near the Gods, he would leave us.
You must not, shall not kill him, my Arsamnes.
Speak Ariene, call to him Mandane.

You owe him, Sir, the honour of your Court;
Slaves had defiled our Husbands beds, and we
Brought forth a Race of unlike Children, to
Blemish your Realm, and us; when now by him
Wee're all preserved immaculate and spotless,
As tender Votaries.

Consider next,
No heated rage hath snatched a sacred Goblet
From any Altar, to profane it with
The streams of bold intemperance; no cries
Of Virgins came unto your Ears; you've lived
This while as safe, as if you had been guarded
By the revengeful Thunder.

I may not
Afflict him with a Curtsy; it can't be
A Gift, that he must be compelled to take.

'Tis the best time to fall, when there are most
Requests made for our preservation.
Though, great Atossa, I could wish that your
Blessed Prayers were spent in gaining a good peace
For hopeful Ephesus. The Gods that do
Require my ruin, would accept their safety.

He durst not be so bold, unless h'were Innocent.


Will you be so ungrateful then, Cratander,
As after all to cast away your self?
Forbid him good Arsamnes, by these Tears
I ask you: * but I am too womanish.

Your Majesty is not Rock: you had a Nurse
That was no Tiger; look but up upon her.

Can you deny ought, when the Soul is powered
Out at the eyes in a Petition?

Cratander, live; we do command thee, Live.


Bear witness o ye Gods, that I do suffer
This as his Servant too. And ye the Souls
Of my deceased Country-men, who fell
in the last Battle, if there yet be sense
In the forgetful Urn, know that it was
No stratagem of mine to be detayn'd
Thus long from your Society. Now to you,
Arsamnes: Good Kings equal those in Laws
Whom they have overcome in war; and to
The Valiant, that chief part of good, to which
We all are borne, sweet Liberty, is pleasing
Even in the Enemy. Your Queen, and others
Her Ladies here, with the most beautiful
Part of your Royal Court, are in my power.
But far be it from me t'injure but the meanest:
Only one life I'm so much Master of,
(Since you have put it in my Power) that I
Must give it back again, if it must be
Beyond the Ephesian safety: the Altar comes
More welcome than the Throne, if this shall bring
Freedom to me, and Slav'ry to my City.

Here I must dwell, Arsamnes, tie*d by great
And solemn Vows, (our Gods do now require it)
Till you shall grant that the Ephesians may
Still freely use their ancient Customs, changing
Neither their Rites nor Laws, yet still reserving
This honest Power unto your Royal self,
To command only what the free are wont
To undergo with gladness. I presume
You scorn to have them subject as your own,
And vile as strangers, Tyrants conquer thus.

It is a time of Mercy; you have only
Called forth those Favours which were freely coming*
These generous thoughts have added to our Conquest.
It is no Victory, that's got upon
The sluggish, and the abject. Descend then;
And when wee've joined our hands, as Pledges of
Our hearts combining so, let us return
To th'Celebration of an equal Triumph,
In an united marriage of our joys.

There I confess a Conquest, where I find
He that subdued my body, gains my mind.

NAy, remember you kicked me Gentlemen.


Faith Landlord Molops, I'd have sworn thou had been of a better Nature,
than to remember Pot quarrels.

By my troth I should have kicked my Father in that humour.


Well, you collogue now: say I should present you to Arsamnes and Cratander,
what would you do?


Only welcome their return with a Dance, that so we might frisk into Liberty.


Yes, and kick me again.


Dost thou think we are Rogues and Villains?


Well, with all my heart, but upon this Condition, that you untie neither Leg,
nor Arm; you know Cratanders charge.


Dost thou think weed bring thee into any danger? We have studied the Figure,
and the Measure already.


You must let the two old women dance with you.


Who, the two whores that Cratander committed?


The very same. They are wondrous suitable now: for you must know, that when
such slippery Eels do come under my fingers, the first thing that I do, is
to strip 'em and to put 'em into other cases. You^le make a most perfect
Gobline's Masque among you.


Why? they will fall in pieces, If they stir but any thing violently.


No matter for falling in pieces; I'll pawn my word to you, they shall not
sweat.


Any thing, good honest Molops, we are content.


You, within there, Polecats; do y'heare? I have procured so much of the
Gentlemen, hold your breaths be sure, and remember you do not drown the
Music with your Coughing.


Whiles thus we're joined we are too hard for fortune, Scarce Heaven it self
can hurt us, for it will not.

There's no care now remaining, but t'invent

New pleasures. Let the hours wheel swiftly away

In sports and Dances. Then we pay the Gods

Best thanks, when we do show most sense of joy.


I have an humble suit to your Majesty in the behalf of some distressed
people.


Let's heare't: what is't?


There are half a dozen of sinners at the door, four of them are the
Captives which your Majesty refused* two of 'em are of another Sex, but would
willingly join with 'em, and present you with a Dance, in congratulation of
your happiness.


Go, bring 'em in, let Prisons this day know
The joys of Palaces. We will receive
All the delights the world can yield us. Hark.

I hope your Majesty will not deny
To grace a Company of younger Ladies,
With the like favourable eye.

They do
Honour our joys in condescending to
Be Actors in their Celebration.

Insonuit cum verbere signa magister,
Muta to sque edunt pariter tunc pectora motus,
In latus allisis clypeis, aut rursus in altum
Vibratis, grave parma sonat mucronis acurum
Murmur, umbonum pulsu modulante resultans
Ferreus alterno concentus plauditur ^ctu.
I see that Sardis hath it's Amazons:
An Army of these would subdue the world.

THe fire is fully kindled, and the people
All in their festival attire; there wants
Only the Sacrifice, and your self to kill it.

The voice of Ravens in the dead of night
Conveighs not harsher notes into mine ears.
I've pardoned him.

You cannot, unless you
Will be more impious in preserving him,
Than you were valorous in conquering.

Will not the Gods receive an Hecatomb
Of Oxen in exchange? may we not find
The Destiny's in Beasts entralls? we will choke
The fire with weighty lumps of richer gummes,
And send perfumed clouds up into their seats
In one continued thankfulness, if that
They will spare this humane Sacrifice.

To promise
The fairest Captive, and redeem him with
A Beast, or Tear of some relenting Tree,
Is not to worship, but delude.

Cratander,
The Gods recall my courtesy; I stand
Doubly engaged, to Heaven, and to thee;
But thou can easier pardon; for I know
Thy Vertue's such, that thou had rather suffer
Thy self, than Heaven should be violated.
Being then this sword must cut thy precious thread,
If Statues may preserve thee, and thou think it
A life to flourish in fair memory,
I'll people all my Kingdom with thy Images,
To which they shall pay vows, as to those Gods
Who now require thy company.

Ye^ Powers,
Why are you grown thus cruel unto Virtue?
'T will be a wish hereafter to be foul.
I cannot see him die, and live my self.
Pray you defer his death a while, don't post him
Away; perhaps the Gods may spare him yet.

I know that divers minds are here contained
Under one silence, all expecting how
I'll bear this sudden accident. T'accuse
Or Gods, or Men,'s the part of him that would
Live longer. If I look on the desires
Of some here, whenever I shall fall,
I shall be thought to have lived too little: if
On the Actions I have done, I've lived enough
If on the injuries of Fortune, too much:
If on mine honour, and my fame, I shall
Live still; he gains by death that doth die prays'd*
Others have longer kept an Empire, but
None better left it. To speak more, were but
A sluggard's Policy, to defer his sufferings.
On to the Altar.

Art thou willing too?
Cursed be my Victory! and thou my Sword
Be never henceforth happy, if there be
Another Sacrifice to fall like this.
Witness ye Gods, how I unwilling pay
My vows in kind. Most virtuous Cratander,
(Worthy of Heaven, but yet to tarry longer,
And make Earth happy by thy presence,) look;
These tears I pay thee as a sad farewell.
I feel the blow my self that I must give thee.

These tears do neither befit you to pay,
Nor me to take; be then Arsamnes, on.

I feel a numnesse seize me; I am stone;
I shall not lift mine arm against thee. Sure
The Gods desire it not.

Thou o bright Sun who see all.
Look down upon our Captives fall.
Never was purer Sacrifice:
'Tis not a Man, but Virtue dyes.

While thus we pay our thanks, propitious'be;
And grant us either Peace or Victory.

But thou o Sun may set, and then
In brightness rise next morn again.
He, when he shall once leave this light,
Will make and have eternal night.

Good deeds may pass for Sacrifice, o than
Accept the Virtues, and give back the Man.

Hold, hold Arsamnes;
Heaven is not pleased with your Sacrifice.
The glorious Sun hath veyl'd his face in clouds
Not willing to behold it, and the skies
Have s^ed such numerous tears, as have put out
The fire though fully kindled.

Thou hast now,
The voice and visage of the Gods, good Priest.
The Heavens were never more serene. The Gods
Have justified my care, Cratander.

Happy news,
Death sends thee back unto us; this comes not
From any humane power; 'tis not my hand
That spares thee, blessed Cratander, 'tis some God,
Some God reserves thee unto greater works
For us, and for thy Country.

Being then
You so interpret it, I'll thus divide
That life they lend me, one haife shall be yours,
The other Ephesus's, that mine Actions
Wearing both Gratitude and Piety,
Like to some well wrought Picture, may at once
Behold both you, and that. 'I shall ne'er be said,
The Gods reserved Cratander to a crime,
To make him fall more foul.

Thy faith hath been
So firm and tried, thy moderation
So stayed, that in a just reward I must
My self conduct thee into Greece, and there
Continue thee a King; that what was meant
For sport and mirth, may prove a serious honour;
And thy Three Days pass over into a long
And happy government; to be ruled by thee
Will be as freedom to them; 'twill not be
Accounted slavery to admit a Prince
Chosen from out themselves: thy Virtues there
May shine, as in their proper Sphere. Let others
When they make war, have this ignoble end
To gain 'em Slaves, Arsamnes gains a Friend.

THose glorious Triumphs of the Persian Court
Are honoured much in being made your sport
The Slave though freed by the King, and his Priest too,
Thinks not his Pardon good, till sealed by you:
And hopes, although his faults have many been,
To find here too the favour of a Queen.
For 'tis our forward duty that hath shown
These loyal faults in honour to your Throne
Great joy doth bring some madness with it still;
We challenge that as title to do ill.
Can you expect then perfect motion, where
'Tis the Digression only of our Sphere
Which wheels in this new course, ^ express the sense
Of your approach, it's best Intelligence?
O were you still fixed to it! your resort,
Makes us desire an everlasting Course.
And though wee've read you over so long, that we
Begin to know each line of Majesty,
We think you snatched too soon, and grieve, as they
Who for an half yeare's night, part with their day.
And shall, till your return, though you appear
In favours still, think darkness in our Sphere.
Your sight will be preserved yet, though you rise*
When e're you go, Great Sir, hearts will have eyes.

THus cited to a second night, wee've here
Ventured our Errors to your weighing Ear.
Weed thought they'd have been dead, as soon as borne;
For Dreams do seldom live until the morn.
There's difference 'twixt a College and a Court;
The one expects Science, the other sport.
Parts should be Dialogues there, but Points to you:
They look for pleasing, you for sound, and true.
We fear then we have injured those, whose Age
Doth make the Schools the measure of the Stage:
And justly thence for want of Logic darts,
May dread those sturdy Yeomen of the Arts.
We are not trained yet to the Trade, none's fit
To fine for Poet, or for Player yet.
We hope you'll like it then, although rough filled;
As the Nurse loves the lisping of the child.
The Slave (then truly Royal, if you shall
By your smiles too redeem him from his fall)
Hopes you'll dismiss him so, that he may swear,
One Court being gone, he found another here.
Though rays^d from Slave to King, he vows he will
Resume his former Bonds, and be yours still.

THe unfil'd Author, though he be assured,
That a bad Poet is a thing secured.
Feare's yet he may miscarry, for some do
Having just nothing, loose that nothing too.
His comfort's yet, that though the Incense fly
Foul and unwelcome, and so scattered die,
Neither the blot nor sin can on him stand,
Being the Censer's in another hand.
For though the Piece be now marked his, and known:
Yet the Repeaters make that Piece their own.
Being then a new Reciter some way is
Another Author, we are thus made his.
We therefore hope nothing shall here be seen
To make the Slave appeal from King or Queen:
From your selves here, t'your selves at Oxford; grace
And favour altering with the time and Place,
So that some thence may deem it happy fell
There only, where you meant to take all well.
'Tis then your Countenance that is the price
Must redeem this, and free the Captive twice.
He fears ill fate the less, in that if you
Now kill him, you kill your own favour too.
How e're he will not ^gainst injustice cry;
For you who made him live, may make him die.

