Fair stars attend this presence, Gentlemen,
Our Author bids me bid ye welcome, then
Our house bids welcome, I my self again,
Well, then at once thrice welcome Gentlemen.
But first, to you whose education brings
Learning along wee't for to judge of things;
I speak, but what needs that, your natures such,
That with nice Criticism it scorns to touch.
Ladies for you, I read it in each front;
You will, nay more, you must look fair upon it,
How ere, we hope, that all your smiles will be,
Propitious to our labours, not that we,
Forestall your judgements, or do beg applause,
That's not our meaning, we have no such cause;
Yet do believe, you will your Candors bring,
Cause 'tis the Primrose of the Authors Spring.

COme Hilts, one cup more.


Not a drop, I know they have dined by this time, and if I shu'd be out of the
way, when my master comes, he would rail, that the noise of an Oyster wench
wu'd not be half so devilish.


Come, come, one lusty dish now in the bottom of the cellar's worth all the rest
--


A way with your number 4. it makes rattle-bagges and windmills in my guts, I
cannot endure it.


Come, come, I warrant ye, it will not, prithee come.


Not? Why I'm blown wee't already like a Lancashire Bag-pipe upon a May day;
and besides, tis so weak, that a man cannot keep it alive while he throws it
in's guts, when thou comst' to our house I'll give thee a cup of Beer will make
thy nose cry twang Roger.


Why, but ye do not keep such a house for all your jesting, do ye?


Such a house, shat come in a morning, and find the cellar a foot deep in
March beer; here a black Jacke, and there a slagon standing in it like
steeples in a drowned city -- There's house-keeping Roger.


I marry sir, there's a house well kept indeed.


Nay sir, by this means we make my Master a better house keeper than ere his
father or grandfather was before him; for where they were used to ride every
day a Hawking and hunting, my Master keeps the house sometimes for two or
three years together, and what's the cause? nothing but our mirth, our
randans, our tarra tantaras -- oh the only way in the world to make a
gentleman a house-keeper.


Well, come, I must needs have our round about to thy Masters daughters; for
dost hear Hilts, me thought there was a little nodding and winking betwixt my
young Master, Mr. Valentine Crambag, and Mistress Sabina, did not perceive
it Rowland?


Yes marry did I, and the other gentleman there his Kinsman me thought now and
then cast a sheep eye towards Mistress Mirabell; go to, an old Ape has an
old Eye, Roger.


Why but Roger you are not such a Sillibraine, I hope to think that your young
Master loves Mistress Sabina --


Nay, I me past thinking, for I do partly know it.


How?


Why, tis neither impossible nor unlikely?


I do not believe your young Master's such a stout fellow Roger.


Why pray?


I mean, as to venture himself upon such a wild thing, I tell you sirs, your
young Master, I confess is a pretty dappart young gentleman, but in respect of
her he is but a Child, a shrimp, a Butterfly, a Chitterling, a Babble; in love
with her quoth a? She's not one that cares for complements, or will be won
with cringes, or your tres-humble serviteur Madame; no no Roger; she is a
Blade, a Spark, a Teare-coate; and he that carries her away, must mumble her,
jumble her, rumble her, and tumble her, swagger, roar, and tear like a mad
man; your young Master quoth a? -- pish,


Husht, here come the gentlemen.


Why stand you here? make sir Timothy Testies man welcome -- go.


It was a brave speech of your worships sir.


O Cousin,
The womb of Aetnas but a rock of ice,
Compared unto those flames that rage within
My bosom;
I must enjoy, or else give end unto
This mortal life by some untimely means.

Good stars forbid it sir;
Come, come,
Lull not your own destruction, nor unman
Your self in doting on the outward frame
Of an imperfect soul,
Follow discretions finger that will guide
Your understanding and your mind to one,
Whose person's virtues Temple;
Cousin think on it,
Her qualities and yours will ne'er agree;
Your civil nature ne'er will correspond
With her wanton humours.

It cannot be,
There's nothing save a Deity can inhabit
So glorious a mansion,
Not love her, say ye? not have her;
I hope my stars will never look so black,
How ever yet my comforts this,
If I cannot have her I can perish.

That case is desperate, when a man must needs
Sink in a gulf, or split upon the rock;
Know sir, I bear as good a mind
To her fair sister Mirabell; but yet
I check these passions fearing that she is
Too like her sister, yet my flames do rise
So high, that she takes notice on it; come
Learn to forget her, for you must expect
Nothing from her but scorn.

That such a creature has so foul a soul,
'Twill never pierce
My understanding judgement, or belief;
Her birth and education needs must purge
Such grossenesse.

Sir be happy, hug your own fancy,
May things prove well, I shall be glad to see it;
Far be it from me to envy any good
Betydes a friend and kinsman.
Peace, they are both come.

Welcome fair one,
Welcome I fay, to the arms of him that flies,
All joys but those that in thy bosom lies.

My bosom? what dee you find there pray sir; you have a mind perhaps to my
Jewell, if you will not hurt it, ye shall have it a while to play with, tis a
pretty bright thing sir.


Not so bright as your white bosom, Lady.


As how pray ye? what see you there?


O no, the gods wu'd frown if any mortal breath,
Shu'd once profane that milky way,
There's not a little in that lovely place,
But does create a wonder:
When Cupid's thirsty, and desires a sip,
Of Nectar, than he runs unto thy lip,
And for your hair, the brightness of it does
Persuade my soul the very graces spun
The golden twist.

Pray ye speak on sir, when ye have emptied your pockets you'll be quiet.


Emptied my pockets?


Sir, these are but pocket complements, run 'em over once, and then perhaps I
shall talk with ye; remember where ye left, I wu'd be loath to put ye out
sir, my hair was golden twist, ye said, come, what of all this?


This has inflamed my thoughts,
Ensnared my soul, and made me vow
A desperate destruction to my self,
Except from you I have one gracious smile
May stile me servant;
And for your fathers mind,
I know it jumpes with our desires.

My fathers mind? dee think his frosty beard,
Can temper my affections,
No, no,
His precepts are too withered for my youth;
Know sir,
That I disdain those low-borne worms
That will be circumscribed by dotage
In loves affairs: I scorn to be directed,
I am my self sir, and my only soul
Is my own will and humour:
But pray whence come these words?

From my deep passions.


Whence those passions.


From your fair eyes, they
Were the happy guiders of my soul,
Unto this bower of wonder;
They fired my heart
Which burns, and will do in remorseless flames,
Until from them I do receive a glance,
May sweeten these my torments.

Not so loud I pray you, speak softly sir.


Speak Mirabell,
May I think a proud thought.

O by no means sir, they are great sins.


This of mine's a virtue.


What may it be sir?


Nothing Lady, but a presumptuous study to be yours.


Sir, you may speak what you please, but first
Let it arrive my apprehension what
Or how you mean, according to my skill,
I will return my answer.

Only to be
One of the number that do still attend
Your pleasures beck, and so be styled your servant.

Sir,
My thoughts nor fortunes ever were so high,
To keep a servant of that consequence,
And tis my hope they never will, or shall be.

Break not a sacred oath, for I have sworn
My self your servant: then for pities sake,
Do not infringe my vow.

Well,
Tendering your vow, Suppose I should admit
Your self into my service, wod ye strive,
To express the faith and diligence belongs
Unto a servant.

My pleasure and delight should fix,
On nothing more than to express,
My faith and loyalty.

Well, I admit you into my service,
But by the way you may perhaps observe
Some passages betwixt a friend and me,
As letters, tokens passages, or so;
Which if ye do, take heed ye word it not,
But still possess your self with secrecy.

Betwixt a friend and you? -- umph.


Ne'er scratch your head about it, for y' are now My servant.


I am, I've sworn it, and I will be so,
But yet ye did not hear me swear my self,
A servant to your friend -- I'll none of that.

Your reason?


Tis love that makes me here present my self,
And with my self to tender up my soul,
Engaged by vows and oaths to wait upon
No creature but your self:
Love is the spur that pricks me on to this,
And love you know can brooke no rivals.

Do you love and serve your self?


You and my self I do.


Your self's the friend I mean, and this discourse
Has been a true prospective glass, whereby
To peep into your mind, which now I find
Full fraught with sweetness, when I did desire,
Ye wod keep private what ye did observe,
'Twas nothing else
But to be secret to your self and me;
Sir, in a word, I do embrace your love.

Be not too prodigal of thy goodness sweet,
Consider what a scarciti's of it now
In the world.

Let this suffice sir, -- I am yours.


Pray let me entreat ye to love your self a little better than to spend all
this breath to no purpose.


Why then I'll take my leave, but first, let this snow white hand but deign to
bless the unhallowed lips of your admiring Slave, that I may hence with
gladness, and have cause to boast of something.


With all my heart sir; but I pray how long were you Doctor of the chair in
the school of complements?


O they can never come from a dejected spirit.


Well, now I hope you are satisfied.


I wish my heart could truly speak it.


Come, come, you are too importunate.


O let not anger bend so smooth a brow,
Not for the earths hid mineral wod I give
The least occasion of a frown to thee,
For if I should,
I should perpetually abhorring my self
Though not a word,
Yet let me have one glance before I go,
For nothing fair one speaks a lovers mind,
So well as the eye,

They talk of women, but you are able to teach all the women in the world to
talk much to little purpose, for ought I see; come I must tutor ye a little, I
see that.


Were I so happy to be your Pupil, I were a wonder to my self.


If it were so I think you wod not be much troubled to make him untrusse
forsooth.


For pities sake jest not at pities object:
Little know thou the miseries of him,
That has his amorous flames returned with scorn:
Well, since tis thus, I will my self translate
From this mortality, and embrace my Fate.

No further, no further, pray return.


Good sir give me leave to bring you a little further.


Pray ye, return, ye do but trouble your self and me to no purpose, well,
Sir Plenteous Crambagge I thank ye.


Farewell good sir Timothy Testy.


Come girls, come -- where's Hilts? -- ha. Where is he?

Where are you sir, when ye should wait upon me? -- ha, Where I say?


I was but in the cellar, forsooth.


In the cellar forsooth? what business have you in the cellar for sooth? who should
wait upon me the whilst? wherefore do I give you three pound a year, and a
trencher-cloake? -- ha? -- well --


Farewell sir Plenteous,

Farewell good sir Timothy Testy. Fairefaith? how shall we squander away this
afternoon, can you tell?


As you please sir.


Come, I have a mighty mind to be merry, what so ere the matter is.


I'm very glad of it sir.


But I have always observed that when I am so extremely disposed to mirth,
one vexation or other falls presently in the very nick.


It falls so sometimes sir.


Well come, what de'e say gallants?
My thoughts me thinks are on a jocund pin,
I am strained up to a mighty pleasant key, me thinks.

What say you cousin Valentine?


What ye please.


Nay, In me indifferent, my masters walk the fields.
Go by Water, see a Play, or what ye will, tis
All one to me, come what say you son, -- speak?
Which of these three, come, come, you are too sad*
Say, what shall we do?

What ye will sir, I confess I do sometimes Walk the fields, thinking to
purge vexatious thoughts, but wheresoever I turn mine eye, something or other
ministers occasion of fresh tortures: when I go by water, then the waves that
tumble one in the others neck, present to my fancy the multiplicity of
distraction crowding in at the door of my thoughts, and for seeing a Play, I
confess it a brave thing, both to feast the wit, and recreate the mind: but,
I think I shall ere be long see my self act my own Tragedy.


I told you cousin, this Sunny flash wud have a storm;
Whats the matter son? -- ha? --
Why thus dejected? --
Speak -- cousin, what is the business?
What ails my son?

No great hurt sir.


Speak man, here's none but friends, unbrest your self, Whats the matter I
say?


Nothing, nothing sir, only a melancholy fit.


Nothing? that's strange -- Cousin, how comes my son thus discontented? what
wud he have?


Sir, to stretch your patience no further than it will reach, tis a gentlewoman
that he wud have, a good lusty handsome gentlewoman.


A gentlewoman? how dee mean a gentlewoman? What wud he do with her cousin?


I cannot tell sir, he has a use for her it seems, he is in love with her,
you may imagine now what he wud do with her.


How? in love with a gentlewoman?
You are a forward boy indeed -- I hope
'Tis with one that hath a good portion, if not youth by
Gold and silver, you and I shall not be friends -- umph:
In love quoth a? It is a thing cousin, I never yet knew
What it was, and yet I'm three score and upwards.

Not sir,
Were ye not in love with your Lady before ye married her?

Tis true, I had a great deal of money with her.


More than your sonne's like to have with this gentlewoman I hear.


Say ye so? how comes this about son? -- ha? Is't possible?


Sir,
Tis not this transitory pelf,
Nor all the trumpery the world cries up
That I respect; no, I esteem a soul
Sweetened with education;
Let dung admirers idolize their bags;
Tis not for man,
In whom there dwells an immortality:
I have made a choice,
Not for such by respects, this creature is
The pride and darling both of love and fame:
Sir, know that I
Scorneto dishonour my good stars so far,
As to besmear my soul with trash,
Or to profane Loves sacred rites for wealth.

Come, come, tell not me of education, and I cannot tell what, I must have
money, I cannot purchase land
With education not I, neither with all your
Philosophy, I tell you, I must have
Money, and I will have money -- but prithee cousin what is this
Gentlewoman -- ha?

A brave lusty bouncing Lass, I can ell ye -- what dee think of Mistress
Sabina Testy, daughter to Sir Timothy Testy.


What of her?


She is the goddess of your sons idolatry.


She? Passion of my heart, son, coud'st thou find no body else to dote on
but she? did I cark, and care, and watch, and toil and moyle, and sweat for
this -- ha? have I endured a thousand millions of curses for exacting of
forfeitted bonds, and mortgaged lands for this? Sir Timothy Testy's daughter,
quoth a? a wild slut, her father a decayed gentleman, and one that with riot
and excess has cut so many collops out of his estate, that sometimes he is
glad to keep his chamber, and gentily begin a course of physic two or three
years together, Sir Timothy Testy's daughter quoth a?


O my heart, me thinks it tears in a thousand shivers, Mistress -- father --
friends, and all averse to my desires, be not so cruel Fates.


Well, to be short, if sir Timothy can, or will, give a considerable portion,
tis a match, if not, Pardona moy, good son, I will not have a brood of beggars
in my house -- not I.


Stay a little sir, the greatest matter you do not either know, or consider,
were your consent the thing, that I think wod not be much stood upon; but here
comes the break neck of the business; the gentlewoman scorns him.


How? scorn the Crambags? Sir, Be it known to all men by these presents, that
there's ne'er a gentleman of 'em all but are now and then glad to be beholden
to the Crambagges; she scorn him? come cousin, I'll go talk with her father
about it, but first I'll know her portion.


Tis in vain, she cannot love, not? why can she not love? am I so vile a
thing? no, I am not, whats the reason then? tis her immortal mind that wings
her thoughts above my reach, there, there 'tis; what shall I do then? turn
coward and suffer it; nay, what can I do -- what? I can die --

O ye fields of bliss,
If ye contain a flowery grove of rest,
Prepared for those that must needs dye for love,
Embrace my vows, and entertain that soul
That flies for shelter to your sacred shades,
Come forth thou purge of melancholy,
Rip up this lump of sadness, cut those chains,
Wherewith my soul is linked to misery;
-- Stay, -- come down proud thoughts,
Consider well what ye attempt to do:
Am I a sacrifice for such a wight?
-- O no, I'll then resolve to live,
Although it be but to torment my self,
And think that torment pleasure, cause tis she,
For whom alone I suffer misery.

PIsh, pray sir do not urge me, I'm a little busy.


Tis but a word sir, and the matter ends.


Words, or matter, I cannot hear it now I tell ye.


Tis a concernment requires your serious intention, as much as mine sir.


Sir, I do not use to step out of my humour, neither for my own sake, nor no
mans else.


Tis for your own profit and good, pray hear it sir.


Well, lets here it then, lets hear it, but dee hear, be brief.


Thus it is.


Nay, come come, make an end, make an end.


I have not begun yet sir.


Preethee make an end I say.


Well, then you shall hear the end: my son Valantine has a mind to make a
conjunction copulative with your daughter Sabina.


Speak in a plainer part of speech man, what dee mean?


He has a mind to lye with her sir.


I'll see him hanged first, except he marry her first.

So he does entend sir, but you would not hear the beginning, which made me
begin at the end.


Well, come to th'point, what says my daughter too't?


Rich Parents ne'er question that sir, they first wisely agree upon Portions,
seal Writings, then marry the young couple, and afterwards, give 'em time to
consider of that, if we may have your consent, I make no question of hers.


Well, ye have it, ye have it.


I thank ye sir, I shall make my son a glad man when I come home sir.


Send 'em joy, come, is this all ye have to say?


Tis all sir.


Well, fare ye well.


Stay sir, I had like to have forgot the maine business.


Puh, yet again, speak, speak come, what is't?


I wud desire to know sir what blessings you mean to bestow upon your
daughter?


Pish, dee think I'll be backward in these things? She shall have a thousand.


Tis a fair portion sir.


Have ye done now?


I have done, I have done, heavens protect ye sir --

A due, a due.


-- Good sir, but one word more, and then I have done.


What again, what ails the man trow?


Only this sir, I hope you'll pay the money upon the wedding day sir, will not
ye?


Money? -- what money?


The marriage money sir.


What marriage money?


The thousand pound.


The thousand pound? what dee mean sir?


Did you not say but now you wod give a thousand pound with her?


I told you I wod give her a thousand blessings; passion of my heart, a
thousand pound quoth a? sir I scorn it; ye have abused me to think so, let
those scraping curmudgions, that for the most part beget ^riples and idiots
like themselves, I say, let those do it J tell ye; on the wedding day, as I
said, I'll give her a thousand blessings with all my heart.


And ne'er a penny of money?


Not a penny.


What? Not with your own child?


Not a Denier, not one Denier:

Why then give me leave to tell ye, your resolution is unworthy, nay, tis
scurvy.


How scurvy? and in my own house too?


Ay scurvy, and I must tell ye, argues no better than a beggarly disposition.


Beggarly disposition? O baseness it self.


Base, I ne'er stood yet sir with my cap in my hand to a Scrivener for the
procuring of ten pounds upon my own bond.


How? I stand with my cap in my hand ye rascal? when? when? how? to whom? I
stand with my cap in my hand? -- I defy thee.


How now? what dee affront my master in's own house sir, pray avoid.


Out of my house ye dunghill, ye dirt, ye spawn of ten ith hundred.


Come, come sir, lets see your back, or your worships pate feel the weight of
my cudgel.


Out ye villain.


Very well sir.


A slave abuse me thus, and in my own house too.


Come sir, do not trouble your self, he's gone now

A Sir, an old Pancridge.


Nay I see you are bell mettle sir if you're angered once.


Angry? twas well thou came in, for in my conscience I had killed the rogue
else.


Whats the matter Hilts, who has vexed my father thus

Old Crambag forsooth, has been here and so abused me as I was never abused
since I peeped into the world, and whats the reason forsooth, because his son
and heire's in love with you forsooth, and entends to make you his bride
forsooth, therefore must I give thim a thousand pound forsooth, but I'll see him
hanged for a sign ats own door first; the truth is daughter, his son is a
pretty gentleman, but here's the thing, his son, as I perceive is mad in love,
and for ought I see, rather than fail, he will give me a thousand pound for my
consent, were not I an Ass then Hilts, to give a man a thousand pound to marry
my daughter; when the same man rather than go without her will give it me?
were not I a Buzzard then I say?


A man wod think so sir.


Why shod I do it -- ha? give me but a why, and I'm satisfied?


In troth sir I cannot give you any great reason, unless your purse were sick
of a Plurifie which I cud ne'er find yet.


Well, for the business of marriage, use your own mind daughter, I cannot
tell, perhaps the old cur may leave him an estate -- Well, once trouble not
me, and do your pleasure, but if you talk of money, I shall be angry, come
along Hilts.


This young gentleman, a nimble spark I see, that I did not think the young
co^ wod have been leaping so quickly -- therefore do you hamper him as soon
as ye can, dee hear.


Come away Hilts.


I'm coming and please your worship.


Advise me in this dangerous maze to steer a safe course.


Ye are in a fair way to do your self a great deal of good, keep your
self in it sister, the gentleman's a great heir, sweetly behaved, bravely
discoursed* and besides, a proper handsome complete gentleman, what can you
desire more sister?


Sister, I love the gentleman, at first, I confess, I did a little slight
him, but my second thoughts framed a recantation which my intentions have
directed to salute him speedily.


A way with it sister, give it not a minutes more entertainment for a world,
send it immediately.


Come, I'll dispatch it instantly.


Be certain ye do sister.


-- umph,
And was I borne to the sport of Fate,
Cud not the destinies as well have said
Be happy
-- inexorable stars,
Had ye but doomed me to have trod the paths
Of dreadful banishment never to return,
It had been a heaven in respect of this
-- But tis in vain,
Upon the statutes of the stars to plain;
I must even rush upon some desperate death,
And there's an end.

Heaveans forbid sir.


There's no remedy, her loves impossible.


Impossible? why dee think the world contains a creature cannot be won.


Yes indeed?


You might as well have told me, that he that has a Puritanicall wife cannot
be a cuckold sir; take this from me, there's not the bravest gallant that e're
went naked to the middle, but a handsome man, good clothes, language, and money
will bring her under the see, I warrant ye.


Sir, me thinks it were not a miss if you did cast your eye upon some other,
the world is wide and populous, and now and then to look a squint, wud be a
good way to assuage the violence of your passion.


O no, she -- she is the blazing star where on I gaze, and the little world
of beauty which I admire.


O brave Master -- there was a speech; O Master Sportlove, this learning's a
dainty matter -- dee hear sir, shall I go and tell her what ye say? --


You cannot come again time enough, let it alone.


I warrant ye sir.


Come, Try her again sir, ye cannot tell, drops of rain may pierce an
Adamant.


That's with often falling upon it sir, if he cud but learn that, she wud love
him presently.


Push, away with these fruitless passions, be your self once again.


That cannot be sir, you must consider he is in love.


Why, cannot a man be in love, and yet be himself too?


He may be, but 'tis raro aut nunquam, jealousy in a woman, love in a man, and
tooth ach in a dog, are three of the most dangerous things I can tell ye,
that are incident to mortals.


Nay, I'm come again gentlemen.


What already, and done your errand too?


O rarely, sir, I had it as perfect --

Sir, what did ye tell her? you are so officious.


I told her sir, that your worship said, she was the staring blaze whereon you
gazed, and the world of little beauty which you admired.


Out ye rogue, ye small knowing rascal, thou hast undone me; did I tell ye
so? dost thou go and turn my words backwards, ye villain.


Gentlemen, if I cud run away from him, I wud not be beholden to ye, for
shame, do not stand still and see a man killed.


It was but a mistake sir, pray pardon him.


Twas nothing sir, but only the wrong end came out first, the gentlewoman
understood it well enough.


Come, pray ye sir have patience.


I must kill the rogue, for he will never have wit.


Forbid that sir, if men should be killed for want of wit, I had been a
Masterless coxcomb long ago sir, but tis no matter, you may use me at your
pleasure.


Come, come, all's well, all's well.


I that's true indeed, when I'm beaten once, then all's well still.


But Mr. Sportlove, nothing but this gentlewoman troubles me, that she should be
so fair, so young, so handsome, and yet cannot love -- me thinks 'tis strange.


It may be she feeds upon preserved snow, which if she do, she'll seldom
have a warm thought, I can tell ye,


Nay, her diet's good I'll assure ye, for she will constantly have a breakfast
of Oringoes, a dinner of Potatoes, a Sack posset to supper, and so goes to
bed.


If she feed thus, tis impossible for the poor gentlewoman to hold out long.


Fellow servant, how fares our Mistress?


Ye were told but just now, were not ye?


This Letter was commanded first to kiss your hand, and then inform ye.


To the gentle hand of her dearest Valentine address these.

Val. Sir, I hope by this time your good nature has granted a pardon for my
seeming rashness, which proceeded not from a mind fraught with disdain, but
grounded on a resolution to be your servant, th'old man's not yet in bed, but
half an hours forbearance locks him up in slumber; about which time my
ambition is to see you at my chamber, where my servant shall attend to give you
access to,

Your respective handmaid, Sabina Testy.


Now sir you wud run into the fire, and drown your self, wud ye? what dee
think of me now sir, did I not do my errant bravely sir, did not I?


Thou hast done ingeniously, and I will study correspondent gratitude.


Nay, pray sir, I had as leefe you did beat me again, as give me hard words
forsooth, I cannot endure 'em.


O how precious are those minutes wherein are wrapped unexpected joys, sweet
piece of paper; fair was that star under whose influence thou were made -- O
this half hours forbearance, pardon sweet heart, passion had almost made me
forget a due respect.


Pray sir do not charge your memory with these things, leave 'em to me sir.


To you sir, wherefore?


Because she is the Sugar-plumme -- of my affections sir.


Cry ye mercy, farewell pretty Duck; tell your Mistress I will fly like
time, till I have blessed these eyes with the sight of her.


Cousin, you're now in a progress towards the gentlewoman, take a little of my
advice along with ye -- having now the advantage of a fair opportunity, try
her every way, you know my meaning, and then as you find her disposed, you may
better dispose of your affections.


Sir, were it in my case, I tell ye in plain terms, I wud promise her a
thousand things, and it may be for a nights lodging, I wud vow'em and swear
'em too; but when J had once satisfied my purposes, I wud show her a fair
pair of heals, and there's an end.


Spoke like a gentleman, I'll assure ye sir.


Tis easy sporting where no pain is felt,
Come, come, lets go.

We attend your pleasure sir, for I perceive you long to be where your mind
is.


A lack aday, you must consider sir every thing wud live.


Sweet, I come.


Did ever see a passion so transport a man, heaven^ bless his wits.


Twas a good prayer sir, but he must have 'em first.


What said he Betty when he read the Letter.


He was so ravished with joy, that J think he knew not what he said forsooth,
and for the letter, he did so cull it, and lull it, and clip it, and hug it,
and bus it -- O me Mistress, this love --


Tis a pretty pleasant vexation; but did he say he wud come?


He told me he wud come with all speed, and that he should think every minute
a hundred years till he saw ye, with many other pretty words which I cannot
repeat for sooth.


I shall be extreme melancholy till I see him; but are you sure he did say he
wud come?


Very certain, forsooth.


How long dee think it will be first?


Your own appointment was half an hour, but for ought I saw, he was resolved
not to forbear so long forsooth.


Prithee Betty help me to cousin the time a little with some pretty love Song.


That will but make ye the more melancholy forsooth.


Though it do, yet me thinks I love it dearly.


Me thought ye said ye were afraid of being melancholy but now forsooth?


I did so, and so I am, and yet I love it.


I had heard 'em say forsooth, that melancholy people are like Spaniells.


Why prithee?


They say a Spaniel, the more a man beats him the more he fawns upon him; so
melancholy people, me thinks, the more the humour torments 'em the more they
love it.


Tis very true, come reach me my Lute -- prithee sing Betty.


BE not so cruel fairest Boy,
But unstring thy golden bow,
In love we must expect no joy,
Nothing there but sorrow's flow;
If thy flaming arrow did
But touch, yet it still appears,
We must for ever after bid
Farewell joye, and welcome tears;
Tell us, then tell us where doth grow,
The herb that cures the wounded eye,
Else we must cry alas and woe,
There's no such herb that grows, and dye.

Twas well sung.


No indeed forsooth my voice is quite gone, Chambermaids have occasion you
know forsooth now and then to sit up in the nights when they have business to
do, and that spoils a maids voice quickly forsooth -- they knock.


They're come I vow, run to the door.


My little Tewxbury mustard, how does thou do?


Mustard? why mustard, pray ye?


Because I never come near thee, but thou makes my very eyes water.


Sir, tis fit we now withdraw; the darkness of the night preswaded our
attendance, now common civility requires our absence -- pleasures attend your
proceedings sir.


Sweet night embrace ye sir.


Thanks noble sir, peace conduct ye.


Well now your worships pleased I hope -- but stay, Where's Betty?


She's gone out with the gentlemen.


Gone out with the gentlemen quoth a? and I stand here.


Your courteous invitation makes some recompense for the late scorn with which
you did slight my honest zeal.


I do acknowledge sir
The error of my rashness, and beg pardon,
I have informed my judgement better since;
And you appear to my opinion
More acceptable far than when you first
Presented your desires with your self,
That now shall want no fitting entertainment
To satisfy the first neglect.

I cannot deny, but that it made ^
Of some sad thoughts within me, but I ^
A little rectified, consideration
Hath almost cured my passions, and my fire
Of love is some what abated.

The few hours
Are added to my age, since you last saw me,
Have made no wrinkles yet upon that beauty,
To which you then did give large attributes,
And to be cold so soon, argues 'twas only
Your flattery and courtship.

Not so Lady,
I ne'er dissembled any false intents,
My words were the true characters of my thoughts,
Only your scorn, -- there tis.

Sir I amalter'd much
From that bad humour, and my heart hath taken
A flame into it from the observation
Of your complete deservings, and is ready
To answer your desires.

You engage me
To a due gratitude, but I have settled
New resolutions.

Sir, ye are now revengeful,
And punish scorn with scorn; a gentle nature
Wud not deny a reconciliation
Upon such terms; but you suspect my freeness.
I blush to think on it, and am sorry sir,
The offer of my self is no more valued,
Than thus to be refused, straight my servant
Shall be your guide, and so I wish sweet peace
To your fair thoughts.

They are the fairer, Lady,
In that they have called back your fairest self
To be their object.

Call not back your humour
To flatter me.

By my best hopes I do not;
A Saints devotion ^ earnester,
Or more free fro^ ^ny pocrisie than my love:
I own not a desire but what is yours;
And if again you chide my forward zeal,
My danger will be more in the relapse,
Than in the first disease which you have cured;
In steed of healing Balms, apply no Corrosives
To my sick heart, but gently entertain
My second motions, for next to Eternity
You are my happiness.

You did intimate
That you had fixed upon some other beauty,
From whose pure excellence, a brighter flame
Is shot, than my dull eyes can sparkle forth;
If it be so I shall not envy it.

Your error
Was a just motive I confess, but when
I said I had settled new resolutions,
I did but dissemble, which pray pardon first,
And then receive me to your fair opinion,
By all the sacred powers, religious mortals
Invoke to make an oath of power to force
Belief, you only must be she,
Or none; in whose blessed union I shall joy,
And satisfy my kinreds expectation
Of issue.

Urge no more,
My Faith takes all for truth, and in exchange
Of your dear self, delivers up my self as freely.

This blessed minute doth deserve
A note in times large register.

To morrow
Let it have public motion before our friends;
And when you please the consummation
Of our full joys shall follow: Dear, farewell,
I must to bed.

I will go with ye sweet --

Forbid ye chaste directors of my soul,
Desire should be so forward ere the Ceremonies
Confirm it lawful.

Why should we be nice,
And stand upon the outside of our actions
More than the substance, though we should anticipate
Those pleasures, since our vows are past we need not
Have scruple, they will beget a second doubt,
And make the earnestness of love suspected.

O fie upon it sir, do not cloud your virtue
With such a stain, you're lovely to me yet,
And shall be whilst you're faithful -- I'll to bed
And wish you rest.

Good night.


Are ye a man?
And wud not take
A better leave of me?

How looking back, and leaving open the door,
I'll leave you such an earnest, if I can
Prevail, that you shall swear I am a man.

MY cousin Valentine not yet returned, say ye?


Not yet indeed sir.


What dee think should be the reason?


Tis not revealed to me sir; but I think he prevailed with his Mistress for
a nights lodging, and that may be the cause of his long stay.


He has staid something long indeed, but -- I believe he will come home very
shortly forsooth.


I confess I long to be acquainted with the issue of his enterprise.


Oh my sweet Master's come again.


I am so.


And you are even as welcome sir, as ever poor Master was to a servant.


-- Pray sweet heart return, let not me trouble ye.


No trouble sir, -- if you have any other commands To impose, I shall joy
t'observe'em.


Not I sweet heart, only fare ye well.


O my sweet hony-suckle, art thou gone already.


Good stars, gentlemen.


Fair morning to my sweet cousin, we hope health betides your Mistress, and
do now expect to be gladded with the news of a fair progress to the end of
your desires.


The end of my desires is even the desire of my end, for I have no joy on
earth.


What again in these perplexities, whence come these clouds of discontent now?
-- ye took no joy before because ye had no hope t'enjoy her, in whom ye had
placed all your hopes and joys, the cause of that distempers removed, what may
occasion this -- heavens know.


Ye cannot tell sir, perhaps the letter was dissembled, and she in some idle
humour might send for him to abuse him.


O cousin Fairefaith, this gentlewoman --

What? cannot she love yet?


Yes -- love? O yes.


Whence rise these distractions then?


Even from her love.


How? can neither frowns nor smiles give ye satisfaction, tis some what
strange, two mere contraries should produce the very same effect.


She has with love undone her self and me.


There's some mystery in it without question.


I pray sir untie these knotty expressions, for I cannot.


To be too prodigal of that, which once lost, the whole world cannot recover
-- weakness intolerable Admit Iurg'd her,

I'd thought the treasures not of earth or sea
Cud have persuaded such a brave borne mind,
Unto the pleasures of forbidden sheets.

O sir, is the wind in that corner now?


What dee think of my opinion now sir.


O cousin Fairefaith, had I been a woman --

You wud have been an arrant whore in my conscience.


I say, if I had been a woman cousin,
Armies of Virgin resolutions should
Have still environd me:
O misery!
Had she been cautious in preserving that,
That rien of immortality her honour;
Earth had not carried such a Paragon;
But now
Her outward frame sets but the blacker dye
Upon her minds deformity; I'm now resolved
To hate those very thoughts that pitch upon
So pure a piece of impurity.

Puh, what needs all this stir Master, suppose ye have found her to want a
grain or two, do but consider of it, 'tis nothing amongst friends; alack a
day sir, the Goldsmith himself may be cozened with a light piece, ant shall
please your worship.


But will not ye visit her again?


Never -- never.


Nor send to her?


No, neither my self, nor any one depends on me shall ere come there again.


O poor Betty, I shall ne'er see thee again, I perceive that.


Come cousin, I must be gone.


Sir, I shall entreat to be excused,
I have engaged my self to meet a friend,
Which will expect me here immediately.
Farewell cousin.

Dee hear sir?


Come, what say you?


I have a strange thing come just now into my head sir, and that's this sir;
there's Newgate for Thieves, Bridewell for Whores, and Bedlam for Madfolkes,
yet among all these I do wonder there's ne'er a place for fools.


'Twere a charitable foundation had a man means to do it with, your Master has
an estate, and might do well to think of such a thing.


Ye say right sir indeed; charity should begin at home, that's the truth on it
-- but let me tell ye sir, this gentlewoman does a little trouble my scull for
all that.


What a capcase were I in, if her sister should be of the same stamp, what wud
the world say, what wud men think?


What? -- they wud think ye were borne when the sign was either in Aries,
Taurus, or Capricorne, that's all they wud think for ought I know, and so fare
ye well.


Children and fools tell truth, well
If it be my fate, there's no remedy,
Nor friend to fly unto in such a case
But honest patience.
Stay, here she comes, I'll see,
If in her carriage I can read my fortune
-- What my Mirabell -- unexpected happiness.

How dee sir?


Better then I was.


Why? were ye sick sir?


Suppose I had been, or am, your presence wud beget a health immediately, J
confess I was not even now so well as now I am, because I wanted thee which
now I have sweetest.


I should be loath to be found wanting, when your occasions call upon my service
sir.


Sweetly spoken fair Mirabell,
But hear me,
Admit I had a strange occasion now
To try thy bosom, wudst thou be content
To run a hazard that might manifest
Thy love and loyalty?

There's not a danger in the world can be
So dreadful to my thoughts, but I wud run
T'embrace it for the pleasure of my love;
But pray sir, what mean these doubts?

Nothing fair one, only a conceit.


May it concern me sir.


Yes -- 'tis but a thing incident to all your Sex.


Please you to unlock your mind sir,
I'll study what I can to purge your thoughts.

Tis only this -- I fear you are too coy,
That's all my fear, too coy Mirabell, too coy,

Coinesse! O heavens! tis the only object of my scorn s;ir,
I do not think there's such a thing in the world,
Or that kind nature
Was e're the mother of so vile a monster;
Were I persuaded that my veins contained,
But the least dram of such a peevish humour,
Though't kept my heart alive I'd rince it out;
In a word I disdain it.

My hopes say you do.


Sir, if you please,
Put your invention to the rack,
Till it find out some strange device to try
Whether I'm coy or no;
Breath but a syllable, and it straight commands
The mind or person to serve
Your pleasures.

There's not a tittle of a word in this,
But has its quire of harmony;
But why do I defer so great a bliss?
Come, let love embraces crown our sweet desires.

What dee mean sir?


Only a gentle taste of loves delicious sweets.


What, before we marry?


Yes.


Your reason.


O it puts life into a patient expectation -- come.


Pray forbear sir.


How? forbear?
What's become of this present minutes protestations.

I never dreamed that you
Had ever sullied your well tutored soul
With such a vile intention.

Come, come, where twining hearts unite
What need these scruples?

Sir,
Stain not your breast with such ignoble thoughts,
Tis true --
I scorn proud coinesse, but I do abhor
To think of this.

O that those eyes
Should be the portals to a heart of flint,
I cannot endure it;
Come, come, I must needs satisfy my flames.
Therefore no more excuse.

Sir, ye have uttr'd words
Do breath an air wud kill a Basilisk;
Call ye this love?
'Tis rather treason against Loves Majesty*
Will you pretend t'expresse a love to me,
And yet speak ruin to my reputation;
Banish these thoughts, or else for ever be
A detestation to my bosom.

Dwell in thy goodness, gentle love;
'Twas not to please a wanton appetite,
Or spot thy shrine of Virgin purity
That I have spoke;
No it was only but to try the strength
Of thy resolves in goodness, what before
I did but love, I now admire;
But --
If like thy sister thou had swarv'd a jot,
From that integrity wherewith I see
Thy mind is fortified, I should have cut
Thee off from my acquaintance.

How's this? if like my sister, say ye?
What has she done, pray ye?

No great hurt forsooth.


If ye love me tell me sir.


Now ye conjure me, I will. My cousin Valentine Crambagge that was so in love
with her, it seems he prevailed with her a little too much, to give it ye in
plain terms he has lain with her, glutted himself with the sweet spoils of
her virginity, and now for ought I hear by the virtue of Hocus Pocus, my
gentleman's gone.


Accursed fate, Sabina thus dishonoured,
And by thy kinsman?
I fear too much of that detested blood
Flows in thy veins, henceforth I'll not converse
Either with thee or any other man
That is of kindred to him, pray ye be gon,
Your presence turns my very stomach up,
Take it as ye please, I must for e're discard ye.

Displeased with me for his faults?


Tis all one, speak not -- reply not -- your sentence Is this -- fare ye well.


I obey it --

It has been still observed since time begun
That sweetest natures still are soonest won,
This is the fate that usually attends
Best dispositions:
Poor women! into how many fools paridices are we daily brought by these
wicked men!
Ah poor sister.

How now, what ails your sister now?


Nothing forsooth.


What does the wedding hold or no? -- ha?


She's wedded already sir.


How? and I not know on it? what a forward saucy girle's this?

But is she married indeed?


Yes, to misery, shame, and infamy.


What's the matter girl? -- ha? -- speak -- what's the matter?


He that pretended so much love to her, I mean young Crambragge.


Ay -- what of him? -- ha? what's the business I say?


O Sister, sister!


Daughter, I charge ye tell me what the matter is, what of young Crambagge?


He -- that villain has by smooth words wrought upon her gentle nature, to her
perpetual dishonour; to tell ye the plain truth sir, he has lain with her,
published it abroad to her disgrace, and is now fled.


-- umph -- lain with her? -- and fled?
Is there no thunder left above the sky?
Is Jove grown deaf? or has he sworn to lie
A sleep, and thus forget the earth?
What's your business sir?

Sir, my Master sent me to your worship, to tell your worship, that your
worship needs not trouble your self about your daughters portion, for his
minds altered, and he bid tell your worship that he wud entreat your worship
to have patience.


Sir, your Master's a rascal, and you are another.


O by no means, and please your worship.


O Mirabell, me thought I had a good opinion of him, he had so civilised her,
and me thought had brought her to be the best natured girl:

Merciless fate,
My passive fortitude wherewith I once
Out-fac'd misfortune now is fled and gone,
My daughter thus digrac'd?
What's the reason I knew't no sooner?

It comes too soon whenever sir;
The messenger has heals of lead that brings
Good news, but ill news fly with Eagles wings.

Stand fast ye weak supporters of my age
Henceforth my hand be pillow to my head,
O my perplexed soul!
Cud I but leap now from some rocky top,
Into the plunging swallow of the sea,
'Twud be some ease,
Fetch her Mirabell, fetch her,
Alas I little dreamed of this.

Your worship might have dreamed on it, for to my knowledge your worship was a
sleep in your bed when the business was done.


O that I had the rogue by the ears.


I but he does not desire to give ear to ye.


Out ye strumpet, ye whore, does thou play the whore and look me in the face?
hast thou played the baggage? hast thou played the whore? -- Ha? Out of my sight
ye queen, get ye out.

O Mirabell is there no stones, nor water, fire nor sword to be revenged with
-- Ha?


Tis more then I know Sir, tis the first time I heard on it, if I had seen the
saucy rascals I wud have sent 'em further with a vengeance.


Abominable -- thus to disgrace her self and me, where is she, did not I bid
ye fetch her?


She has been here Sir, and you sent her out again.


Has she? I know not, these distractions do so confound me, that I forget the
last minute: O daughter Mirabell what should I do?


Me thinks your worship should keep always a rope about your house against
such a desperate case as this is.


Hilts take that rogue, and dee hear, deliver him from me to the keeper of
Bridewell -- take him away I say.


Come Sir come, are ye come hither to jeer?


No Sir, I did not jeer Sir.


Take him away I say.


Come along come.


Master Hilts, your master does but jest man.


Sir your master has abused my house, and I'll make him smart fort.


Tis like enough and please your worship, but shall I be punished for the
wickedness of my Masters Codpeece, and please your worship, no no.


Carry him away I say.


Your worship's a merry Gentleman, you love to make sport I see that.


Hilts, I bid you once more carry him away, what dee think to laugh me out of
my resolutions?


Come your ways sir.


Hilts is in sober sadness and please your worship.


So am I too sir, carry him I say --

Was thou mad to talk thus to a Justice of Peace, a Justice of Corum horum
rotulorum? 'tis as much as thy life's worth.


A prating saucy rascal; carry him away.


I beseech your worship forgive me, good your worship.


Carry him away I say.


Good your worship forgive me, I beseech your worship.


Well, let him go for this time, get ye gone sir.


Yes and shall please your worship -- gone quoth a? I'll see your worship hanged
before I'll come near ye again.


O Hilts, this wicked fellow has undone us.


Who dee mean sir? Mr. Crambagge?


The same.


What has he done sir?


What? my cheeks wud burn to speak it, uncontrouleable fates -- is there no
pity in your votes.


Well, if I once meet with him --

What then?


I'd make him an example to all the young lads in England, I wud fustinado the
carcass of him till the limbs of the rogue flew one from another, and then I
wud beat 'em together again.


No, no, if we should hurt him Hilts, the Law wud be of his side.


Hurt him, no forsooth, I wud only bestow a little timber upon the shoulders
of him.


Pish, pish, come, go your ways to my cousin Muchcraft the Attorney, tell him
I'm coming to him for his advice; in the mean time do you put the Case to
him for coming into the house at an unseasonable time of the night, go your
ways, I'll be with ye presently.


Your father's coming after us here.


Where is he?


O son -- I have been so abused -- nay, and a hundred to one but I had been
soundly basted too, and all this to please thee.


As how pray sir?


I went to treat with sir Timothy about the marriage, and because I stood upon
a portion, old Testy was pleased to call me a thousand rascals; and in the
heate of the business (O my arms!) comes me in that same great horse-bon'd
Hilts, and so shakes me; well son, I'll even walk in, if any body come to pay
money tell 'em I'm within, if they come for money, tell 'em I'm not well, for
this fellow has so bruised my arms that I'm not able to tell it; dee hear
what I say, to ye son?


Sir, the last night your son went to see his Mistress, and prevailed so
far with her, that to tell you the naked truth, they lay together all night;
he perceiving her so easily won to wantonness, and fearing hereafter she
might be a little too liberal of her entertainment, has cast her quite off
now fears your displeasure for his too much forwardness, and that's the cause
of his sadness.


How? lay with her -- 'tis not possible.


Not for a gentleman to lie with a handsome wench, why, 'tis one of the
possiblest things that can be sir.


I'ame sorry to hear it cousin, but I'm glad he has put her off, a company of
rascals, they are served well enough, I warrant ye, the poor boy hearing how
her father had abused me, cud not find in's heart to love her a jot longer;
yet for all that cousin, I like not's humour in this, that he cannot talk with a
woman but he must be jobbing presently, I do not like that I must tell ye --
well 'tis done and past now.


I but I'm afraid you'll hear on it again, sir Timothy intends to clap him up
till he has made satisfaction, but pray sir voice it not that I told ye.


Will he so? tell him, I'll see him hanged by the neck in the high way to
Paddington first; he clap him up? he shall not have so much as a hair of his
head except it were to choke himself with, and yet my son shall go up and
down, aye, and job him upon the nose too and he shall not know him; and if
you please tell him, that I'm resolved before I have done with him, so
bitterly to vex him, that he shall be glad to come with a rope in's hand, and
make a humble petition to the Hingman, that he may have license to hang
himself to save his clothes -- come along.


Not vex?
Why? Do you think there is a woman lives.
That has a sister abused as mine
And not yet be vexed?
To bring a maid into this misery,
And all under loves pretence:
This is your kinsman sir, your own flesh and blood sir.

The more sorry am I forsooth;
But if you'll please to entertain my vows,
Of real love and service once again
Into your better thoughts, I'll use a means
That shall preserve her honour from the dust,
If not abhor me.

Let your heart and tongue but correspond
And you enslave my soul.

I have already hammered in my scull,
A vindication that shall make her name
Shine to posterity.

The boundless Ocean of your goodness drowns
The slendernite of what I can return.
Here she comes, if ye can do her a favour,
Both she and I will be glad to snatch all
Opportunities to express our thankful minds sir.

Ladies, thus it is, he has disguised himself, goes in woman's apparel, if ye
please I'll bring ye to him, where, if there be occasion, you shall command my
best assistance.


Pray ye sir where is the place?


It is at A Shoemakers house in the Strand, but that's all one, follow me.


Budget.


Sir.


Have ye drawn William Woodcocks plea to Tristram Widgroms declaration -- ha?


No sir, the cause is removed, Woodcock fearing to be overthrown at Common
Law, comes with a pitiful long bill, makes a case of conscience on it, and so
is flown away.


Is he so? if I had known that Budget, I wud have Plucked his feathers a little
first, but 'tis no matter, let him go.


Fellow? Sir I'm none of your fellows, not I.


I believe ye are not, whats your business before me?


Sir I do not come to do my business before you.


What mean these frivolous answers? Whose man are ye sir?


My masters sir.


Very good -- what mad man are you pray?


Mad sir, no more than your self -- mad sir? -- umph.


Nay let him alone Budget, we shall have a brave action of battery here by and
by.


Sir, I belong to the right worshipful Sir Timothy Testy; my master sent me
for your Vice, the Case is this; a Gentleman comes into my masters house at an
unreasonable time of the night contrary to my Masters known will and command,
whether is this a trespass or no?


No, no, prithee do not trouble me, I'm a little busy.


Cousin Muchcraft, how dee sir?


Sir Timothy Testy, you are kindly welcome sir, how dee sir?


Never worse cousin, -- even almost dead with grief, most abominably abused.


Wherein, pray ye sir?


That I will tell more at large hereafter sir, not only a piece, but my whole
love attends ye sir -- the case is this; a Gentleman comes into my house, at an
uncivil and unseasonable time of the night, contrary to my known will and
command; a Trespass or no?


A trespass: a transcendent crime sir; a most foul matter, I'll assure ye; your
man did not put the Case to me in this manner.


Not? ye whoreson blockhead, are ye not able to speak to a man? wherefore do
I keep ye? -- ha?


I cud not, I had not instructions in my pocket.


'Tis well enough sir, both Law and Equity supports your cause; come, wee'le
walk out and talk of it.


Your tongue drops honey cousin, and you have revived my staggering spirits:

And now though time and age,
Cover my head with honourable hairs,
Yet --
Since rays of Sunny thoughts peep out again,
I'll strive to quell these passions -- come
Sad sighs, and tears are Orators of grief,
But 'tis an active brain that brings releese.

Come, pray sir do not think on it.


How shall I stand by and see.
A gentlewoman of my kindred wronged?
Be patient?
And my kindred thus abused? my proper flesh
And blood disgraced, our reputation turned
Quite topsy turvie, nay, and all this done
By a lascivious villain?
No, no,
Nothing but's blood shall pacify my sword;
Had but the slave as many thousand lives
As there do grains of sand surround the sea,
There wud be scope to vent my fury on;
But now 'tis circumscribed within the verge
Of one poor rascals life, whose blood will scarce
Give satisfaction to my thirsty steel:
Come sir, I do perceive you know his haunts,
which if ye do,
I do conjure ye here to bring him forth;
And if you will, or dare to second him,
I'll stand ye both.

Sir, on my life I vow,
The place of his abodes unknown to me;
They say he's fled and gone:
Tis true, I had
Some conversation with him, but I was
A stranger to his thoughts and actions;
And where this time he does bestow himself
Tis not known to me.

Sir, what say you? where's your Master?


Ah, I wud I cud tell ye, he has left me in a pitiful case here, if old sir
Plenteous do not take pity upon me, I must even go and drive Wheele-barrowes
in Lincolnes-Inne-fields, for ought I know.


Alas poor fellow, I'm sorry for that, what can do?


I have a quality sir, but the world now adays does not respect men of parts.


What is't?


A Bagge-piper, an't shall please your worship,


A Bagpiper?


Yes indeed sir, as simple as I stand here, I have plaid before as good Bears
as be in the Kingdom of England.


Where dost live now?


Sir, in the mean time J wait upon the Lady that lies in the house here.


Trash.


Madam.


Come ye hither.


Unhappy eyes ye have undone my heart.


I come forsooth.


Stay fair one, stay,


Speak ye to me sir?


I do,
But first, I do entreat you will be pleased
To smile upon my rashness, then must I
Perforce inform ye, that just now I felt
A blow upon my heart, which I conceive
Was darted from your eyes.

Your conceit was in an error sir.


O no,
I see betwixt those breasts
Is Adons garden, and Elisiums love,
And from these lips proceeds an air transcends
Sabean spices, or the Phoenix nest;
Lady,
Be pleased to let this Jewell pride it self
Between those snowy hills, and you engage
My soul unto your self.

My gratitude entertains your loving directions sir, A word sir, Sabina Testy,
know ye him not?


Not I, I met him here by chance, it matters not who 'tis, take you his gifts
-- and be sure to yield what he would have ye do, and we shall want neither
gold nor jewels, I see that: and dee hear, you will by this means put such a
trick upon your sweete-hearts Champion as never was, -- and in the issue it
will be found to be but a jest, there's and end.


Pray accept of this.


I were to blame if I should not sir; Wheelebarrowes, quoth a? I'll see 'em all
hanged first, a handsome gentlewoman's service is as good as fee tail, I see
that.


Me thinks Lady, you much resemble a gentleman I know, one Mr. Valentine
Crambagge, one that I wud be every glad to see.


I know the gentleman sir, he is, I take it, a friend to one Mistress Sabina
Testy.


A friend,
Had she been dead when first she saw his face,
She had been happy.

Pray you why sir?


Has done her that dishonour,
That time can never raze out of memory;
And in regard she is my nearest cousin,
The sad remembrance of it tears my heart
Into a thousand shivers;
But now your presence like the morning Sun
Drives off these melancholy mists wherein
My soul did sometimes wander.

Sir, I am yours.


O the sweetness of those words!


Nay, there's a pound of Sugar almost in every word she speaks sir.


Lets mix our selves.
But first, let Hymen with a wedding knot
Knit up our souls.

O no sir.


Nay you are now my captive.


I hope I shall easily procure my redemption.


Thy very hearts thy ransom, nothing shall,
But only that redeem thee.

I doubt not sir, but your own goodness will plead my excuse;
For know, I did
Set up a resolution long ago,
Never to marry.

Pish.


How, not marry?


Remember what I told you cousin; Sir, I know she will be persuaded, but that
gentlewomen, ye know, think it a kind of disparagement to be too soon won,
that's all sir.


Pray express your intentions Lady.


I have already sir.


And is that your resolution?


Indeed it is sir.


Why then I'll tell ye mine:
I'm now in quest of this detested slave
That wronged my cousin, and do hope ere long
To vindicate her quarrel, therefore know,
If thou'lt not marry me immediately,
Those looks that do so much resemble his,
Shall whet my sword against thee, nay, convert
My love to fury, and shall sacrifice
Thy blood, to expiat my kindreds wrong;
Therefore I must, nay more, I will enjoy;
Despite of fate I will;
My quike desires do chide my patience,
And thou must yield or die, than quickly speak;
I cannot stand to wait upon discourse:
But by the way consider, that ye are now
To give a sentence either of life or death,
Upon your self, take heed; if ye say aye,
You live my darling, but if no, you die.

Sir, I consent to marry, and am content to be disposed of as you shall please.


Your breath is music now, come lets along.


Why, but sir, you will not carry away my Mistress I hope in this manner, will
ye? and I have but newly got her neither -- slid, these are tricks indeed?


Sir, there's for you hold you, your peace, it is my humour.


Bless your worship sir, and keep ye in this humour still say I.


Well sir, I hear ye, but ye have not spoke toth purpose yet.


Accept this from me sir, I'll prove sir, that my son was invited and sent
for, and that her maid and she both used all means possible to allure him
thither.


Ay, now you have spoke home sir, this is something now, I feel your cause a
little better* and thus much for your comfort, never trouble your self
Timothy's cause is not worth the leg of a Fly, and yet he does so torment my
house, that I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep; ye know Budget how often I
have desired him to forbear my house* and yet all will not do.


I wish he were hanged, he makes me tell a hundred lies in a week in telling
him ye are not within, of purpose to be rid of him.


Here's a rogue.


Alas for's business, were my case, if any body wud but give me a saucer of
Mustard sor't, he should have it.


Saucy rascal.


Suppose he brings his action, what can he do in*t? -- not this, tis true, he
wud have retained me to have taken out a Writ against ye, but when I perceived
that it was nothing but a malicious humour, I bid him go and be hanged with
this brabbles* I wud not be troubled with 'em.


Very good, but you were willing enough to be troubled with my money, I have
heard you all this while, and this your sucking knave too.


Sir Timothy, come, come, Ime glad you are come, Ime glad you are here with all
my heart, come, I must have you made friends by all means.


Friends? I'll see him stand bare to the tail of a Cart first, I friends with
him? -- hang him rascal.


Sir, I make no doubt but I shall make you know, and your daughter too before I
have done with her, that she has abused my son, I cannot tell, I will not
say she has bewitched him, but if I prove it, I'll make ye all stink with a
vengeance.


Why, ye worme-eaten slave, does my daughter look like a Witch?


Budget, pray ye put down worme-eaten slave, and the day of the month too,
be hear?


Did not come thy self (you whoreson gull*)


Write ye whoreson gull.


Yes sir.


Did not come, thy self, I say to know what portion I wud give her? Now I
find it was but a mere pretence, ye cheating rogue you.


Write ye cheating rogue you.


Yes forsooth.


If my man Hilts were here I wud beat thy very nose into thy face, and
afterwards beat it out again.


What wud ye do sir?


Nay pray gentlemen forbear while ye are in my house.


I can forbear him no longer.


Come sit Timothy, pray go along with me.


Sir Plenteous, pray ye go along with me sir.


Prithee let me beat the rogue first.


Nay come sir, come, come.


Why so?
This is the crown of all our joys on earth,
When love and marriage trip it hand in hand,
It makes the mind to vault
And caper over the clouds of discontent;
Me thinks my soul has wings and I cud fly,
From hence to Elizium, come cheer up my sweet,
What art thou sad, and see thy husband laugh?
Come now we are married, we must have but one
Passion betwixt us -- Gentlemen what?
Frowns at a Wedding?

How? frowns?
Should a man seem to droop or hang the wings
At such a time, he were far fitter for
T'accompany wild Tigers in a wood,
Then to converse with men, the gods themselves
Sing Epithalamies, when mortals wed,
If Gods are subject to these passions, then
They needs must over-sway the hearts of men;
Sir, joys attend ye, may you ever be
As full of joys, as we are now to see
Your happy Nuptials:
Pish, be not so sad cousin.

Come leave this dull discourse, and let us fill,
Our active souls up to the brim with joy;
Come,
FArewell this company,
If you love sadness,
For melancholy is,
Nothing but madness;
Hang up proud costly clothes,
Peddlers and pack toys;
Let us make the hogs-heads weep,
Claret and sack boys.
Are there no Fiddlers in this world?

Sir, I wud they wud come once, my very heals are up in the air already me
thinks in this humour, I cud wish the whole world were a Morris dance for
four forty hours outright.


O thou egregious puppy, if the whole world were a Morris dance for four and
forty hours outright, what should, nay, what does thou think wud the good
people of New England do all that while.


I do think they wud pray for a timely cessation of the noise of the
superstitious bells hanging about their knees.


A most damnable witch in my conscience.


Come sweet-heart, rush up your spirits, put on a resolution to be jocund;
think but on what must pass betwixt us two this very night;

How I must revill in thy arms, and then
How thou must tumble in my bosom;
And that I know will be enough to purge
Sad contemplations.

Sir, pray you excuse me;
Troublesome things do whisper in my ear,
Which for the present J cannot expel.

Pish.


Do not heed or nusle the least sad thought
At such a time, tell 'em some other time
You'll sit and hear their grievances.

Ay, ay, do so, what? upon your jovial day be sad? but where be these
Fiddlers?


We are come sir.


Pray ye play then.
Come, a song, a song.

Joy, health, and pleasure, wait upon
This lovely pair,
May all your days like to this one
Be void of care,
And may those twinkling stars of night
Attend your bed,
That so the bridegroom may get right
Your maidenhead.
And let Arabian odours then
Perfume thy sheets;
Strewing thy chamber once again
With dainty sweets,
Then let these pretty thoughts that move
A flame in Cupids fires,
Bring ye to bed where you may prove
The things that love desires.

Come, these Nuptial rites being done,
It now remains we speed it to the bed,
Where we will arm in arm discourse and act
Loves pretty handy dandyes -- Gentlemen
-- speak --
Has not my stars been kind,
To grace my Fortunes with so fair a bliss.

Sir, ye enjoy a happiness beyond
Expression or compare.

Nay sir, I'll promise ye this, that as long as she is your wife, no man
breathing shall ere bring Acteons punishment upon your head -- I will not say
what the woman may do, and that's a rare blessing Rowland betwixt you and me,
I can tell ye.


Me thinks I see
My self now dandl'd on the knee of Fate.

Sir, you do now embrace
A richer vein than ere the Sun beheld,
And I presume none save your only self,
Whose presence is a treasure of enchantments,
Could have prevailed so far with her, whose eye
Ne'er yet cast glance of love upon a man,
Therefore do I pronounce
You the only minion both of Fame and Fate.

Nay, you are a happy man, that's certain sir, if all men had such wives, we
should have a strange world, for then we should be troubled neither with children
nor cuckholds.


Well gentlemen golden slumbers attend ye,
Come fair one, come, we have too long deferred
The love embraces of the marriage bed,
O how it rapps my soul to think that I
This very hour with my fair love must lie,
Raked up in cinders, love may burn, but when
It 'gin's to flame, it fires both gods and men;
Come.

Pray ye sir forbear a little.


I will sweet-heart.


Cousin Fairefaith, a word, you have brought me here upon a business will
utterly disgrace me; what will this gentleman think of me dee think, when he
finds that I have gulled him thus.


Come, come, put your feats to sleep,

Nay, come sweete-heart, why these delays?


Pray ye sir deal gently with her, she's young and fearful to lie with a
man, and that's the business sir, that makes her so loath t'unpin.


Alas poor soul, in my conscience you had rather lie with a woman, than with
these rude men behalf, wud not ye forsooth?


Come, give me your hand.


Good sir.


Why? what's the matter?


Nothing sir.


Nothing? I know tis something; are not y^ well?


Yes forsooth.


What's the reason ye will not go to bed then? pray ye come without more
ado.


Fie upon it cousin, a woman wud scorn these things.


Nay, ye are in the right sir, I do believe she wud defy it.


Come, what's the business with ye? will ye not go to bed -- ha?


Sir, I'll consider of it presently.


How, consider of it?
Am I a man? a married man? or what?
Am I a husband? must a husband then
Entreat his wife?
Is Nature grown so old she has forgot
To teach her children what belongs unto
Their different places?
Although before I was content to bend
My spirits to your foot, yet know, that now
The will of Fate has destined me to be
Next under it the sole, commander of
Your mind and person, therefore now I must,
Nay, I will be obeyed.

Pray ye do not fright her too much, she's a very tender hearted thing
forsooth -- pray ye speak her fair.


Hold you your prating sir, she shall observe my will now.


You'll never do good sir with foul means.


By your favour my friend, I know this out of my own knowledge, that a froward
sharpe husband will presently make a woman do what she list.


Stop your mouths.


Sir, for my part I will not stop my mouth, I underderstand what I say sir,
I'm a married man my self sir, and 'tis well known to be true, that I cud
never yet get any thing of my wife by harsh words.


Once more I bid you hold your babbling.


Sir, she shall not go to bed till she has a mind to go to bed, nor I will
not hold my babbling neither sir.


Hold your peace Trash.


Yes forsooth.


You'll close your mouth by and by I hope.


Yes marry will J sir, but not at your bidding sir: what now -- what dee think
I'm a fool in a Play?


Will you hold your tongue or no?


Yes forsooth and please your worship.


This insolence I cannot bear,
And for your part you are my wife, and one
In whom obedience ought to be expressed,
And I your top.

Ay, you want but a little whipping.


What say you sir?


I say, a woman that has a good husband, and all things else, and will not go
to bed, wants nothing but whipping.


Well, 'tis thus,
If mild entreaties, nor a gentle fawn;
Nor protestations, nor a husbands love
Can mollify thy Stubbornness, nor bring
Thy sturdy disposition to my hand;
I'll for a time quite turn out of my thoughts
A husbands pities, and where smiles did fail,
A lusty bastinado shall persuade
-- What shall I be bafled thus
Out of my pleasures with a woman's blush;
Is't fit that I stand pleading where my stars
Bid me command? I scorn it, therefore speak
This very present minute, nay before
You fetch more breath, speak either ay, or no,
Or I must strike, there's no remedy.

We shall have the Peace broken, here presently, I see that.


Peace, quoth a? nay and my head be not broken I care not.


Come, she is content to go sir.


Give the word.


Sir, I will go to bed.


Come your ways then.


Dee hear gentlemen, dee hear?
What if this gentleman should get my Master with child now?

Nay, what if your Master should get that gentleman with child.


I cannot tell what he may do for men, but I ne'er knew him do such a
courtesy for a woman yet.


Mr. Fairefaith, pray tell me one thing, why did you being my Masters kinsman,
and an old soldier stand so patiently, and see him so affronted.


J that's true indeed Rowland, he being an old beaten soldier too.


A beaten soldier?


An old soldier I mean sir.


I confess I had no disposition to meddle in it, because J know they will agree
themselves, I know the bowels of the business, which you do not, come, go
along, and by the way I'll tell ye the plot.

And then wee'le bring this news
To bless the ears of old sir Timothy,
Come --
Strength I confess may make a Giant yield,
But give me policy to win the field.

O My poor sister!


There's no question but we shall find her, how long has she been wanting
forsooth?


A great while Kate, a little faster, what shall I tread upon your heals? --
not so fast neither.


What the devil ails ye? too soft, and then too fast, here's more ado with
you, than with all the Pageants in my Lord Majors show; he that waits on you,
had need to have his steppes pricked out with a pair of Compasses, for ought
I see.


What a surly groom are you, may not one speak to you?


Speak? yes forsooth you may speak, but I do not love to walk before a
Gentlewoman like one of these gingerly youths that go before their
Mistresses, as if the streets were paved with eggs, not I.


Why, how now sir sauce box, what is't all fellows with ye, ye filthy,
stinking, saucy, dirty, scabbed, paltry, lousy, mangy rogue ye.


Heyda, Mistress Juniper, what's the matter with you trow? you were not used to
be so snappish, I'm sure on it, I have both gone and rid before you, and you
ne'er found fault with it.


O ye lying rascal, did ye ever ride before me in your life?


Yes marry have I forsooth.


'Tis as false a tale Mistress as ever was told; 'tis true, ^e rid before me
one night a little short journey; 'twas nothing, I cud even a gone as far a
soot upon the matter.


Who doubts that forsooth?


Why will you lie then ye rascal?


Why, whats the business? what the mischief ails ye? sure ye have not made
water today I think.


Come Hilts come, you should bear with her.


Bear forsooth, she should bear, she's used too it, more than I am forsooth.


What should I bear pray? suffer such an Ass as you to ride upon my back, should
I not?


Why not? as well as always upon your belly forsooth?


Come, come, pray ye go along, we have something else to think on than stand
here.


Very well sir, I shall think upon your words.


This way forsooth?


Yes, yes, go on.


How now daughter, whether are you going?


To see if I can find my sister sir.


Come, come, do not trouble your self to no purpose, I have ordered it
already, I'll have these men go that have authority to make the doors and
gates fly open where they come and go, and dee hear Officers, look too it,
and be sure to search very narrowly the places that I told ye of, and
especially the house where young Crambagge is suspected to lie, and if ye
find either one or both of 'em, bring 'em away, dee hear?


We shall sir.


Daughter, I rather think (to put her self out of th-way of this approaching
disparagement) she has run her self upon some desperate course.


But dee think these men will find her sir?


I cannot tell, we shall know presently.


Do not weep Mistress, I hope she's well, and will be here again shortly.


Come, come, lets have no weeping.


Do not you greeve, and for them 'tis not a pin matter, let them alone,
weeping is as wholesome for a woman sir as making of water.


Had she but bid farewell
'Twud not have troubled me so much;
But thus to go away --

Ne'er fear, she's well enough I'll warrant ye.


Oh Hilts,
Her high borne spirit cannot brooke disgrace,
And I do fear these mischiefs will provoke
Some violent hand upon her self;
yet me thinks one thing
Whispers my understanding in the ear,
And tells me she is safe;
There's not a jewell, ring, or bracelet left
That ere she wore, but is conveyed away.

Nay then sir fear nothing, for if she had so much wit to carry away her
rings and jewels, she has wit enough to keep her self from killing or
drowning, I warrant ye.


O heavens!
With what a swinge is youth,
Hurried along the world and subject still,
Unto the rule of an unbridled will:
Oh!
Pity those Parents then, who oftentimes
Are brought unto their graves by children crimes;
In, in, and comfort your self;
I'll see these Officers dispatcht away,

Rowland, Rowland* Rowland; I say.


What's the matter here?
Wast you that called sir?

It was I.


What wud ye have sir, are not ye well?


I wud I were.


I'm sorry you are not well sir?


Call Trash, call Trash.


Trash, Trash.


What's the matter?


Come presently, you master's not well;
Hes coming sir, what wud ye please to have sir?

Nothing, nothing at all.


Rowland, where art fool?


Here, here man, whether dost go?


What's the matter Rowland -- ha?


Your Master's not well here.


Not well? O alas! I'll run and fetch some hot water presently.


Stay, whether dee go? come your ways hither, what will you fetch man, I'm
not sick.


Not? you're but a yawling rascal Rowland for waking of me, I was in the
daintiest sleep, and the sweetest dream; me thought my Master was in bed with
the bravest wench --


'Twas too true.


How? was it too true? in truth, I thank ye for nothing, you ne'er dreamed so
for me I'm sure on it.


O Rowland, I'm undone, I'm undone.


What's the matter sir?


I'll warrant ye the gentleman that went to bed with him, finding himself
cozened has killed himself, or one mischief or other, I thought no good wud
come on it.


No, no, 'twas a woman all the while, 'twas a woman.


'Twas a woman good man simple, what? dost thou think that I dream out of
Aesops Fables?


'Twud vex a man to marry in jest, and then to have it prove plain earnest,
I'll assure ye that.


O Trash, I'm undone.


Why undone sir, why dee say so, and please your worship.


Ime married man, I'm married with a vengeance,

Why so am I too sir; but how should we help it, can ye tell that sir.


O Rowland, what shall I do? where shall I go? where shall I run?


Run quoth a? nay, if you're married once, I'll trust ye for running.


I am married, and I know not to whom, did I but know that.


That's no great matter, 'tis but going to the Church Book, and you may know
that presently.


Accursed Fate, what marriages might I have had? to what a pitch might I have
mounted up my fortunes? which now I see are nothing but confusion:

Who knows what strumpet this may be,
Some queen for ought I know, that thinks to raise
Her self out of my ruins:
Now my perplexed thought begin to burn
With flames of guilt:
Now comes my trembling soul unto the bar
Of my own knowledge:
O Sabina, Sabina!
The gods now tumble vengeance on my head
For wrongs to thee;
Had I been well advised, O then I might
Have lain by thy fair side, where every touch:
Had been as tender as a bed of down.
And every smile a heaven;
But 'tis too late,
To call back what is past, it was my fate,
And there's an end;
Now am I round entrenched with miseries;
One side a marriage nips me in the bud;
On the other side, a rankrous enemy,
Old Testy, who still gazes on the print
Of our mistaken step, therefore 'tis now
No time to pause, pack up my clothes this night,
I do intend to save my self by flight:
Trash, about it presently.

Yes and please your worship.


But dee hear, let not my Landlady, nor her husband have so much as a glimpse
of it, for I have no money for 'em.


Nay sir, if you intend to travel, be sure ye take all your money along with
ye, especially if you mean to be merry, for you shall find that money is the
most dainty companion sir; but Rowland, dee hear? scatter no words.


By no means.


Not a word sir;
Travel quoth a? here's a piece of work indeed:
O Mr. Welt, how dee sir, how does my Landlady -- ha?

Very well, how dee you Rowland?


Troth, pretty well, Serving-man like, careless of much, proud of a little,
drunk for want of wit, and sometimes sober for want of money.


I thought ye had been sick, because I have not seen ye this long time.


Sick quoth a? my pockets are a little cowardly now and then indeed, that's
all my sickness.


What? wud ye have 'em quarrelsome?


Quarrelsome? no, but I wud have 'em to have a little more mettle in 'em for
all that.


Wher's your Master pray?


Nay I know not, I have not seen him this six hours.


There is a little money due to me from him, I wish he wud take the payment of
it into consideration, I have exextraordinary occasion to use the money, if he
please to let me have but some of it, it will do me a courtesy, he shall
find me reasonable.


How idly you talk husband? Is that a way to live in the world, do you
think it is for my ease to have gentlemen come, and lie in my house, and go
away and pay nothing -- ha?


Pay? yes good sweetheart, why should he not pay; there's no body speaks against
that, sweetheart.


Why do you talk so foolishly then of being reasonable, and I cannot tell
what, I do not like such words I tell ye truly; -- reasonable quoth a? Eat
my meat, drink my drink, burn my wood, foul my rooms, wear my sheets,
make use of my servants, and yet I must be reasonable; if ye can talk no
wiselier before folks, pray ye hold your peace and let your wife speak --
besides, ye know he owes me both for boots, shoes, and pantables, and I
shall give him that too shall not I? no indeed forsooth, I wud have your
Master to know that I do not buy my leather so cheap, I'll assure ye -- be
reasonable quoth a? besides, I have promised to pay Mr. Sugerbox the Chandler,
nutmegs and sugar for his mornings draughts, and Mr. Dash the Vintener for
wine in's chamber, and shall I pay them before your Master has paid me --
in truth I do not mean it.


'Tis fit a gentleman should pay you before, that's the truth of it.


Ye say right Rowland, I see you have more consideration with ye than my
husband has -- be reasonable quoth a? -- marry whoop.


Why dee keep all this stir, my Master's not running away woman -- here's a
quarter indeed, if he will be ruled by me, he shall not give you one
farthing, because you keep such a coil.


How keep such a coil ye jacke sawee? how now? such a coil? dee think ye
are talking to your companions sir? such a coil? and in my own house too
sir? and you must stand by forsooth like Iohn a Noakes, and see every
Serving-man run upon me in this manner; remember this when ye come to bed; and
for your Masters not paying of me, ye Sawcebox, I'm at the better end of the
staff with him, for I have locked up all his clothes; nay if you're so Saucy,
I'll fit him, I'll warrant ye.


Ye will?


Yes indeed will I?


Rowland, Rowland, Rowland, thieves, thieves, thieves, thieves, Rowland,
thieves.


How now? how now?


All my Masters clothes are stolen quite a way Rowland, all stolen every jot,
breeches, doublet, boots, spurs, cloaks, gowns, hats, bands, cuffs, roughs,
caps, shoes, shirts, all gone, all stolen, every jot.


Here's the thief.


Where? where?


Here I say.


Who, my Landlady, did you steal my Masters clothes -- ha? wherefore pray ye?


Steal 'em? no sir J scorn it; I took 'em indeed, and I'll justify it; and
more than so sir, I have locked 'em up, and I'll justify that too.


How? locked up my Masters clothes, wherefore I pray ye?


Wherefore? do not ye know your Master owes me money? do not you know I have
often asked it, and cannot get it? do not ye know that it is a pretty sum?
do not you know that it is for meat, drink, lodging, fire, and candle-light,
washing, wringing, and starching; besides, boots, shoes, pantables, and
galosheas: if, I had the Book I cud show ye.


Nay, you're perfect enough without book for ought I see.


Trash, Your Master's come home, and you must come to him presently.


Here's a creature I'll swear upon a book, this woman has no bones in her
tongue, if any man love trumpets, there's a noise for him, sure I do not
think but this Shoomaker's a witch, he wud never a contracted himself to the
devil else.


What, are ye here? and I have nothing put up yet?


Sir, your clothes are all put up, and safe under locke and key.


Nay then 'tis no matter; who put 'em up?


That did my Landlady sir, she has locked 'em up, and swears she'll keep 'em
safe till she can persuade ye to part with some pocket mettle sir.


Enough, enough, I will not be beholden to her, I'll satisfy her.


O sir, have I found ye out in the end, Come Officers lay hold on him -- but
stay lets talk with ye a little first.


Sure my master was borne when the sign was in Cancer, for whatsoever he does
intend, goes always quite backwards, well some body shall know on it presently,
that shall fetch him off again for all this sir.


Sir, hold your peace, and
Be gone about your business fellow,
Dost know what thou hast done? or have my wrongs
Arrived at thy understanding yet? -- ha?

Sir I am conscious to my self of all
The wrongs and injuries that I have done ye.

Why hast thou put this blemish on my child,
Which like a Canker threatens to deface
My Story, and for ever raze my name
Out of the book of honour, nay, a spot,
Which time nor date, nor all the brinish waves
Can e're wash out -- speak thou detested wretch;
Had not a spark of virtue left within
Thy bosom to preserve thy honour -- speak, I say.

In trembling reverence to your precepts here,
I creep upon my knees before the bar
Of Your just frowns, I dare not plead excuse,
No, no, my crimes are writ upon my front
In die of blushing guilt, which nothing but
Your reconciling smiles can ere wash out,
-- They, I say, they must be
That expiating sacrifice for me.

Smiles on thee?
Hast thou the face to say thy faults can be
Capable of mercy? go to, mark what I say,
Unless thou can contrive a way to cure
The wounded reputation of my Girl,
Expect not one commiserating thought,
But all the tortours of severity
That e're can be inflicted --
Come, come, rise up, it is in vain to kneel,
My ears are stopped to mercy, nothing now
But only that can open them.

Sir, I am content to engage all my possibilities to accomplish your desires.


There may be some hope in this.


Sir, Devise how I may
But give this satisfaction you require,
And my soul shall study its performance.

I cannot tell,
Thou hast so plunged her in a sink of shame,
-- That't will, for ought I know,
Nonplus the world to find a remedy.

Her case is not so desperate, I hope,
I'm ready here to hug
The most ingenious torments on these terms,
That she and you'll be pleased;
Were to encounter a whole host of fiends,
Never to sleep but in a Dragons den;
Or from the bowels of the burning hill
To fetch a cole, eat fire, or drink a cup
Of Mercurie precipitat, I'll do it,
And think it an Elisium, if it may
Redeem your loves, and state me once again
In your esteem.

'Tis well, I do commend your forward mind;
But this will never do it;
There's nothing but a marriage will admit
A thought of remedy.

Nothing but marriage?


Not any thing in the world but Marriage*


Not?


No indeed.


Merciless Planets, will ye still go on,
To heap these hills of mischief on my neck*
Or can misfortune reach a higher pitch
In him whose misery is intolerable,
And remedy impossible, O no;
Sir, in a word,
Your daughter's quite undone, and so am I.

How stands the business?
Speak the worst, if truth, and let me die.

Sir, 'tis in vain to counterfeit,
Or build up castles where they cannot stand;
Do with me what ye please, the truth is this,
I am already married.

How? already married?
Villain, keep in that breath;
The repetition of these words wud tear
A heart of brass -- already married?
Did thou ensnare my child for this?
Hast thou betrayed her white innocence for this?
Blasted the blossom of her virgin spring,
And married now another?
Can hope or dream, that e're thy perjured soul
Shall see the Elisian groves?
Hold heart from breaking, now or never hold,
Married to another?
Shall I be bandied thus for ever twixt
Rackets of shame and misery,
Cud fate find ne'er a football but my self
To toss and spurn -- umph?
Hell and the furies do conspire I think,
To cull out me from all the rest of the world
To vent their mischiefs on, who is't ye have married? speak.

It is unknown to me sir.


I ask ye who 'tis you have married?


Sir,
Upon my life I know not who she is.

Has thy lewdness brought thee to distraction; married, and ye know not to
whom? come take him away, 'tis in vain to talk -- but stay a little. I'll see
what creature 'tis.


'Tis very true sir.


What wilt thou make me mad?
Where is she, in the house?

Yes.


Officer, go fetch her hither,
I'll make her tell me who she is,
If she can:
Married already quoth a? and ye know not to whom neither, here's a marriage
with a vengeance.


We heard ye sent for my cousin Valentines wife sir.


I did so.


We have brought her to you sir, here she is sir.


Very well, in good time: what are you gentlewoman? whence are ye? ha? --
speak; nay, if you will not give me an account, I must punish ye;

-- let not my eyes surfeit -- what my Sabina?
My lovely Girl?
Thrice welcome to my bosom?
My Sabina? my daughter, and the wife
Of this my deared friend, unexpected felicity,
Sir Plenteous? welcome thrice noble sir Plenteous;
But stay
Gentlemen, pray ye present her to her husband first,
Sweet sir Plenteous, how dee sir?

Dee know me sir, nay gaze on sir.


He knows her present I see that.


Know her? he has been familiarly with her -- before man, and that thee did
not know.


Gaze on still sir,
I'm not Sabinaes ghost, but her poor self;
Here stands the creature that was wronged by thee,
The very selfsame that you married sir:
What dost thou think?
Dost thou not tremble, lest I should begin,
To number up my wrongs?
I that was lulled in the bosom of my friends,
And as 'twere dandl'd on a Fathers knee;
Forfeited all this favour, and was made
A stranger to his eye for love to thee;
Yet thou
Like the prodigious Monster of the world
Ingratitude, did labour to forget,
Not my love only, but those sacred vows
Have past betwixt us; but to be short,
Thus -- thus I revenge my self.

O my Sabina!
It is too sweet and loving a revenge
Upon so vile a miscreant.

Come
Let the remembrance of these matters dye,
And be confined to dust, let 'em be trod
Into the very center of the earth,
Never to rise again; and let our loves
For ever twine like twins;
What's past I have forgot and pardoned.

Seal it, or else I die;
Live, O live!
A rare example to all future times
Of constancy in love.

Daughter, my heart bids thee welcome,
This night my house shall give thee entertainment,
Whereof thy self shall be sole governess,
And when the icy hand of death shall drive
My soul out of this clod,
It shall be his and thine.

But gentlemen, me thinks I long to hear
The story of this marriage, how it come to pass;
For did I know it, I should adore the star,
Under whose influenee she woe brought t'arive
Midst storms of woe upon this shore of bliss.

Sir, I do think 'twill be
A seasonable discourse for supper;
Suspend but your desires till then
And you shall be satisfied.

With all my heart, with all my heart, but son, I have one petition to
prefer to you.


You may stile it a command sir.


You must needs bestow upon me your servant Trash.


Heyda? now I'm a begged fool, I see that.


Sir, attend my father.


Your worships humble servant sir.


In all this business I have observed in thee
Discretion -- judgement -- wit -- and police;
Therefore
I do appoint thee Steward of my house,
And put into thy charge the overseeing
Of all my businesses.

Nay sir, for an oversight in any business let me alone.


And what is more.
Dispose my house and servants as you please.

Hilts, come hither -- Sir, do you wait upon me.


Yes forsooth.


I did ever think thou wudst come to some good, for thou hast been always an
honest Trojan; Dee hear, if you had carried me to Bridewell, when ye were bid
-- where had your proferments beenethen Hilts.


Mr. Fairefaith, for you,
I do perceive your ingenuity,
Has been a means to make my comfort swell;
And for return, J do bestow on thee
My daughter Mirabell.

Sir, your returns are far beyond the claim
Of my deserts; and though J am not fit
To bandy favours with so brave a Knight,
Yet I will stretch my studes to express
A detestation of ingatitude: and now Sabina,
I do salute thee by the word of Sister,
-- but why so dumpish on a sudden -- ha?
I know the cause already, 'tis for fear
Your censures on her faults be too severe;
She has given satisfaction where 'twas due,
Her Father's pleased, and so we hope are you:
To you she is referred, who now are set,
Ready to give your sentences; but yet
Be pleased to speak your doom with gentle breath,
Cause you're the Judges of her Life and Death.


