THow blind imperfect Goddess, that delights
(Like a deepe-reaching Statesman) to converse
Only with Fools: Jealous of knowing spirits;
For fear their piersing Judgements might discover
Thy inward weakness, and despise thy power;
Contemn thee for a Goddess; Thou that lad'st
Th'vnworthy Ass with gold; while worth and merit
Serve thee for nought; (weak Fortune) I renounce
Thy vain dependence, and convert my duty
And sacrifices of my sweetest thoughts,
To a more Noble Deity. Sole friend to worth,
And Patroness of all good Spirits, Confidence.
She be my Guide, and hers the praise of these
My worthy undertakings.
MOrrow Brother; Not ready yet?


No; I have somewhat of the Brother in me; I dare say, your Wife is many times
ready, and you not up. Save you sister; how, are you enamoured of my presence?
how like you my aspect?


Faith no worse then I did last week, the weather has nothing changed the
grain of your complexion.


A firm proof, 'tis in grain, and so are not all complexions.

A good Soldiers face Sister.


Made to be worn under a Beaver.


I, and 'twould show well enough under a mask too.


So much for the face.


But is there no object in this suite to whet your tongue upon?


None, but Fortune send you well to wear it: for she best knows how you got
it.


Faith, 'tis the portion she bestows upon younger Brothers, valour, and good
clothes: Marry, if you ask how we come by this new suite, I must take time to
answer it: for as the Ballad says, in written Books I find it. Brother these
are the blossoms of spirit: and I will have it said for my Fathers honour,
that some of his children were truly begotten.


Not all?


Shall I tell you brother that I know will rejoice you? my former suites have
been all spenders, this shall be a speeder.


A thing to be heartily wished; but brother, take heed you be not gulled, be
not too forward.


'T had been well for me, if you had follow'd that counsel: You were too
forward when you stepped into the world before me, and gulled me of the Land,
that my spirits and parts were indeed borne too.


May we not have the blessing to know the aim of your fortunes, what coast,
for heavens love?


Nay, tis a project of State: you may see the preparation; but the design lies
hidden in the breasts of the wise.


May we not know it?


Not unless you'll promise me to laugh at it, for without your applause, I'll
none.


The quality of it may be such as a laugh will not be ill bestowed upon it;
pray heaven I call not Arsace sister.


What? the Pandresse?


Know you (as who knows not) the exquisite Lady of the Palace? The late
Governors admired Widow? The rich and haughty Countess Eudora? Were not
she a Jewel worth the wearing, if a man knew how to win her?


How's that? how's that?


Brother, there is a certain Goddess called Confidence, that carries a maine
stroke in honourable preferments. Fortune waits upon her; Cupid is at her
beck; she sends them both of errands. This Deity doth promise me much
assistance in this business.


But if this Deity should draw you up in a basket to your Countesses window,
and there let you hang for all the wits in the Town to shoot at: how then?


If she do, let them shoot their bolts and spare not: I have a little Bird
in a Cage here that sings me better comfort. What should be the bar? you'll
say, I was Page to the Count her husband. What of that? I have there by one
foot in her favour already; She has taken note of my spirit, and surveyed my
good parts, and the picture of them lives in her eye: which sleep, I know, can
not close, till she have embraced the substance.


All this savours of the blind Goddess you speak of.


Why should I despair, but that Cupid hath one dart in store for her great
Ladyship, as well as for any other huge Lady, whom she hath made stoop
Gallant, to kiss their worthy followers. In a word, I am assured of my
speed. Such fair attempts led by a brave resolve, are evermore seconded by
Fortune.


But brother? have I not heard you say, your own ears have been witness to
her vows, made solemnly to your late Lord; in memory of him, to preserve
till death, the unstained honour of a Widows bed. If nothing else, yet that
might cool your confidence.


Tush sister, suppose you should protest with solemn oath (as perhaps you have
done, if ever Heaven hears your prayers, that you may live to see my Brother
nobly interred) to feed only upon fish, and not endure the touch of flesh,
during the wretched Lent of your miserable life; would you believe it Brother?


I am therein most confident.


Indeed, you had better believe it then try it: but pray Sister tell me, you
are a woman: do not you wives nod your heads, and smile one upon an other when
ye meet abroad?


Smile? why so?


As who should say, are not we mad Wenches, that can lead our blind husbands
thus by the noses? do you not brag amongst your selves how grossly you abuse
their honest credulities? how they adore you for Saints: and you believe it?
while you adhorne their temples, and they believe it not? how you vow
Widdow-hood in their life time, and they believe you, when even in the sight of
their breathless corse, ere they be fully cold, you join embraces with his
Groom, or his Physician, and perhaps his poisoner; or at least by the next
Moon (if you can expect so long) solemnly plight new Hymineall bonds, with a
wild, confident, untamed Ruffine?


As for example.


And make him the top of his house, and sovereign Lord of the Palace, as for
example. Look you Brother, this glass is mine.


What of that?


While I am with it, it takes impression from my face; but can I make it so
mine, that it shall be of no use to any other? will it not do his office to
you or you: and as well to my Groom as to my self? Brother, Monopolies are
cried down. Is it not madness for me to believe, when I have conquered that
Fort of chastity the great Countess; that if another man of my making, and
mettle, shall assault her: her eyes and ears should lose their function, her
other parts their use, as if Nature had made her all in vain, unless I only
had stumbled into her quarters.


Brother: I fear me in your travail, you have drunk too much of that
Italian air, that hath infected the whole mass of your ingenuous Nature;
dried up in you all sap of generous disposition, poisond the very Essence of
your soul, and so polluted your senses, that whatsoever enters there, takes
from them contagion, and is to your fancy represented as foul and tainted,
which in it self perhaps is spotless.


No sister, it hath refined my senses, and made me see with clear eyes, and
to judge of objects, as they truly are, not as they seem, and through their
mask to discern the true face of things. It tells me how short lived
Widows tears are, that their weeping is in truth but laughing under a Mask,
that they morn in their Gowns, and laugh in their Sleeves, all which I
believe as a Delphian Oracle: and am resolved to burn in that faith. And in
that resolution do I march to the great Lady.


You lose time Brother in discourse, by this had you bore up with the Lady and
clapped her aboard, for I know your confidence will not dwell long in the
service.


No, I will perform it in the Conquerours stile. Your way is, not to win
Penelope by suite, but by surprise. The Castle's carried by a sudden assault,
that would perhaps sit out a twelue-moneths siege. It would be a good breeding
to my young Nephew here, if he could procure a stand at the Palace, to see with
what alacrity I'll a-coast her Countesship, in what garb I will woo her, with
what facility I will win her.


It shall go hard but we'll hear your entertainment for your confidence
sake.


And having won her Nephew; This sweet face
Which all the City says, is so like me,
Like me shall be preferred, for I will wed thee
To my great widows Daughter and sole Heir,
The lovely spark, the bright Laodice.

A good pleasant dream.

In this eye I see
That fire that shall in me inflame the Mother,
And that in this shall set on fire the Daughter.
It goes Sir in a blood; believe me brother,
These destinies go ever in a blood.

These diseases do, brother, take heed of them:
Fare you well; Take heed you be not baffeld.

Now thou that art the third blind Deity
That governs earth in all her happiness,
The life of all endowments, Confidence;
Direct and prosper my intention.
Command thy servant Deities, Love and Fortune
To second my attempts for this great Lady,
Whose Page I lately was; That she, whose board
I might not sit at, I may board a bed
And under bring, who bore so high her head.

'TIs miraculous that you tell me Sir: he come to woo our Lady Mistress for his
wife?


'Tis a frenzy he is possessed with, and will not be cured but by some violent
remedy. And you shall favour me so much to make me a spectator of the Scene.
But is she (say you) already accessible for Suitors? I thought she would
have stood so stiffly on her Widow vow, that she would not endure the sight of
a Suitor.


Faith Sir, Penelope could not bar her gates against her wooers, but she will
still be Mistress of her self. It is as you know, a certain Itch in female
blood, they love to be sued to: but sheele hearken to no Suitors.


But by your leave Lycus, Penelope is not so wise as her husband Vlysses, for
he fearing the jaws of the Siren, stopped his ears with wax against her voice.
They that fear the Adders sting, will not come near her hissing. Is any
Suitor with her now?


A Spartan Lord, dating himself our great Viceroies Kinsman, and two or three
other of his Country Lords, as spots in his train. He comes armed with his
Altitudes letters in grace of his person, with promise to make her a Duchess
if she embrace the match. This is no mean attraction to her high thoughts;
but yet she disdains him.


And how then shall my brother presume of acceptance? yet I hold it much more
under her contentment, to marry such a Nasty braggart, then under her honour
to wed my brother: A Gentleman (though I sai't) more honourably descended than
that Lord: who perhaps, for all his Ancestry would be much troubled to name
you the place where his Father was borne.


Nay, I hold no comparison betwixt your brother him. And the Venerean disease,
to which they say, he has been long wedded, shall I hope first rot him, ere
she endure the savour of his Sulphurous breath. Well, her Ladyship is at hand;
you're best take you to your stand.


Thanks good friend Lycus.


I Admire Madame, you can not love whom the Viceroy loves.


And one whose veins swell so with his blood, Madam, as they do in his
Lordship.


A near and dear Kinsman his Lordship is to his Altitude, the Viceroy; In
care of whose good speed here. I know his Altitude hath not slept a sound
sleep since his departure.


I thank Venus I have, ever since he came.


You sleep away your Honour, Madam, if you neglect me.


Neglect your Lordship? that were a negligence no less than disloyalty.


I much doubt that Sir, It were rather a presumption to take him, being of the
blood Viceroiall.


Not at all, being offered Madame.


But offered ware is not so sweet you know. They are the graces of the Viceroy
that woo me, not your Lordships, and I conceive it should be neither Honour nor
Pleasure to you, to be taken in for an other mans favours.


Taken in Madam? you speak as I had no house to hide my head in.


I have heard so indeed, my Lord, unless it be another mans.


You have heard untruth then; These Lords can well witness I can want no
houses.


Nor Palaces neither my Lord.


Nor Courts neither.


Nor Temples I think neither; I believe we shall have a God of him.


SEe the bold fellow; whether will you Sir?


(...) way, all honour to you Madam?


How now base companion?


Base Madame: hes not base that fights as high as your lips.


And does that beseem my servant?


Your Court-seruant Madam.


One that waited on my board?


That was only a preparation to my weight on your bed Madam.


How dare thou come to me with such a thought?


Come to you Madam? I dare come to you at midnight, and bid defiance to the
proudest spirit that haunts these your loved shadows; and would any way make
terrible the access of my love to you.


Love me? love my dog.


I am bound to that by the proverb Madam.


Kennel without with him, intrude not here. What is it thou presum'st on?


On your judgment Madam, to choose a Man, and not a By but, as these are that
come with Titles, and Authority, as they would conquer, or ravish you. But I
come to you with the liberal and ingenuous Graces, Love, Youth, and Gentry;
which (in no more deformed a person then my self) deserve any Princess.


In your saucy opinion Sir, and sirha too; get gone; and let this malipert
humour return thee no more, for before heaven I'll have thee tossed in blanquets.


In blanquets Madam, you must add your sheets, and you must be the Toffer.


Nay then Sir you're as gross as you are saucy.


And all one Sir, for I am neither.


Thou art both.


Thou lie; keep up your smiter Lord Rebus.


Uses thou thus his Altitudes Cousin?


The place thou know protects thee.


Tie up your valour then till an other place turn me loose to you, you are the
Lord (I take it) that wooed my great Mistress here with letters from his
Altitude; which while she was reading, your Lordship (to entertain time)
strodl'd and skal'd your fingers; as you would show what an itching desire you
had to get betwixt her sheets.


Slight, why does your Lordship endure him?


The place, the place my Lord.


Be you his Attorney Sir.


What would you do Sir?


Make thee leap out at window, at which thou came in: Whores-sonne bag-pipe
Lords.


What rudeness is this?


What tamenesse is it in you Madam, to stick at the discarding of such a
suitor? A lean Lord, dubbed with the lard of others? A diseased Lord too, that
opening certain Magic Characters in an unlawful book, vp-start as many
aches in's bones, as there are ouches in's skin. Send him (Mistress) to the
Widow your Tenant; the virtuous Pandresse Arsace. I perceive he has crowns
in's Purse, that make him proud of a string; let her pluck the Goose therefore,
and her maids dress him.


Still my Lord suffer him?


The place Sir, believe it the place.


O good Lord Rebus; The place is never like to be yours that you need respect
it so much.


Thou wrong'st the noble Gentleman.


Noble Gentleman? A tumor, an impostume he is Madam; a very hault-boy, a
bag-pipe; in whom there is nothing but wind, and that none of the sweetest
neither.


Quit the House of him by 'thead and Soulders.


Thanks to your Honour Madame, and my Lord Cousin the Viceroy shall thank you.


So shall he indeed sir.


Will you be gone sir?


Away poor Fellows.


What is he made of? or what Devil sees your childish, and effeminate spirits
in him, that thus ye shun him?
Free us of thy sight;
Be gone, or I protest thy life shall go.

Yet shall my Ghost stay still; and haunt those beauties, and glories, that
have rendered it immortal.
But since I see your blood runs (for the time)
High, in that contradiction that fore-runs
Truest agreements (like the Elements
Fighting before they generate;) and that Time
Must be attended most, in things most worth;
I leave your Honour freely; and commend
That life you threaten, when you please, to be
Adventured in your service; so your Honour
Require it likewise.

Do not come again.

I'll come again, believe it, and again.

If he shall dare to come again, I charge you shut doors upon him.


You must shut them (Madam)
To all men else then, if it please your Honour,
For it that any enter, heal be one.

I hope, wise Sir, a Guard will keep him out.

Before Heaven, not a Guard (ant please your Honour.)


Thou lie base Ass; One man enforce a Guard?
I'll turn ye all away (by our Isles Goddess)
If he but set a foot within my Gates.

Your Honour shall do well to have him poisoned.

Or begged of your Cousin the Viceroy.

This braving wooer, hath the success expected; The favour I obtained, made me
witness to the sport; And let his Confidence be sure, I'll give it him home.
The news by this, is blown through the four quarters of the City. Alas
good Confidence: but the happiness is he has a forehead of proof; the stain
shall never stick there whatsoever his reproach be.


WHat? in discourse?

Hell and the Furies take this vile encounter.
Who would imagine this Saturnian Peacock
Could be so barbarous to use a spirit
Of my direction, with such loved respect?
Fore heaven it cuts my gall; but I'll dissemble it.

What? my noble Lord?

Well Sir, that may be yet, and means to be.

What means your Lordship then to hang that head that hath been so erected;
it knocks Sir at your bosom to come in and hide it self.


Not a jot.


I hope by this time it needs fear no horns.


Well Sir, but yet that blessing runs not always in a blood.


What blanqueted? O the Gods! spurned out by Grooms like a base Bisogno?
thrust out by the head and shoulders?


You do well Sir to take your pleasure of me, (I may turn tables with you ere
long.)


What has thy wits fine engine taken cold? art stuff't inth head? can answer
nothing?


Truth is, I took my entertainment the better that 'twas no better.


Now the Gods forbid that this opinion should run in a blood.


Have not you heard this principle, All things by strife engender.


Dogs and Cats do.


And men and women too.


Well Brother, in earnest, you have now set your confidence to school, from
whence I hope 't has brought home such a lesson as will instruct his master
never after to begin such attempts as end in laughter.


What Sir, you lesson my Confidence still; I pray heavens your confidence have
not more shallow ground (for that I know) then mine you reprehend so.


My confidence? in what?


May be you trust too much.


Wherein?


In humane frailty.


Why brother know you ought that may impeach my confidence, as this success
may yours? hath your observation discovered any such frailty in my wife (for
that is your aim I know) then let me know it.


Good, good. Nay Brother, I write no books of Observations, let your
confidence bear out it self, as mine shall me.


That's scarce a Brothers speech. If there be ought wherein your Brothers good
might any way be questioned can you conceal it from his bosom?


So, so. Nay my saying was but general. I glanc't at no particular.


Then must I press you further. You spake (as to your self, but yet I
ouer-heard) as if you knew some disposition of weakness where I most had fixed
my trust. I challenge you to let me know what t'was.


Brother? are you wise?


Why?


Be ignorant. Did you never hear of Actaeon?


What then?


Curiosity was his death. He could not be content to adore Diana in her
Temple, but he must needs dog her to her retired pleasures, and see her in
her nakedness. Do you enjoy the sole privilege of your wives bed? have you
no pretty Paris for your Page? No mystical Adonis to front you there?


I think none: I know not.


Know not still Brother. Ignorance and credulity are your sole means to
obtain that blessing. You see your greatest Clerks, your wisest Politicians,
are not that way fortunate, your learned Lawyers would lose a dozen poor men's
causes to gain a lease ant, but for a Term. Your Physician is jealous of his.
Your Sages in general, by seeing too much oversee that happiness. Only your
block-headly Tradesman; your honest meaning Citizen; your not-headed Country
Gentleman; your vnapprehending Stinckerd is blessed with the sole prerogative of
his Wives chamber. For which he is yet beholding, not to his stars, but to
his ignorance. For if he be wise, Brother, I must tell you the case alters.

How do you relish these things Brother?


Passing ill.


So do sick men solid meates: hark you brother, are you not jealous?


No: do you know cause to make me?


Hold you there; did your wife never spice your broth with a dram of
sublimate? hath she not yielded up the Fort of her Honour to a staring
Soldado? and (taking courage from her guilt) plaid open banckrout of all shame,
and run the Country with him? Then bless your Stars, bow your knees to
Iuno. Look where she appears.


We have sought you long Sir, there's a Messenger within, hath brought you
letters from the Court, and desires your speech.


I can discover nothing in her looks. Go, I'll not be long.


Sir, it is of weight the bearer says: and besides, much hastens his
departure. Honourable Brother! cry mercy! what, in a Conquerours stile? but
come and overcome?


A fresh course.


Alas you see of how slight mettle Widows vows are made.


And that shall you prove too ere long.


Yet for the honour of our sex, boast not abroad this your easy conquest;
another might perhaps have staid longer below stairs, but upon your
confidence, that surprised her love.


My uncle hath instructed me how to accoast an honourable Lady; to win her, not
by suite, but by surprise.


The Whelp and all.


Good Uncle let not your near Honours change your manners, be not forgetful
of your promise to me, touching your Ladies daughter Laodice. My fancy runs
so upon it, that I dream every night of her.


A good chicken, go thy ways, thou hast done well; eat bread with thy meat.


Come Sir, will you in?


I'll follow you.


I'll not stir a foot without you. I can not satisfy the messengers
impatience.





Of what? Virgil did his Mistress; who caused all the Fire in Rome to fail so;
that none could light a torch but at her nose. Nowforth: At this house dwells a
virtuous Dame, sometimes of worthy Fame, now like a decayed Merchant turned
Broker, and retailes refuse commodities for unthrifty Gallants. Her wit I must
employ upon this business to prepare my next encounter, but in such a fashion
as shall make all split. Ho? Madam Arsace? pray heaven the Oister-wiues have
not brought the news of my wooing hither amongst their stale Pilcherds.


WHat? my Lord of the Palace?


Look you.


Why, this was done like a beaten Soldier.


Hark, I must speak with you. I have a share for you in this rich
adventure. You must be the Ass chardg'd with Crowns to make way to the Fort,
and I the Conqueror to follow, and seize it. See thou this jewel?


Is't come to that? why Tomasin.


Madam.


Did not one of the Countesses Serving-men tell us that this Gentleman was
sped?


That he did, and how her honour graced and entertained him in very familiar
manner.


And brought him down stairs her self.


I forsooth, and commanded her men to bear him out of doors.


Slight, pelted with rotten eggs?


Nay more, that he had already possessed her sheets.


No indeed Mistress, twas her blanquets.


Out you young hedge-sparrow, learn to tread before you be fledge.

Well have you done now Lady.

O my sweet kilbuck.

You now, in your shallow pate, think this a disgrace to me, such a disgrace
as is a batterd helmet on a soldiers head, it doubles his resolution. Say,
shall I use thee?


Use me?


O holy reformation! how art thou fallen down from the vpper-bodies of the
Church to the skirts of the City! honesty is stripped out of his true substance
into verbal nicety. Common sinners startle at common terms, and they that by
whole mountains swallow down the deeds of darkness; A poor mote of a
familiar word, makes them turn up the white o'th eye. Thou art the Ladies
Tenant.


For term Sir.


A good induction, be successful for me, make me Lord of the Palace, and thou
shalt hold thy Tenement to thee and thine ears for ever, in free smockage, as
of the manner of Panderage, provided always.


Nay if you take me unprovided.


Provided I say, that thou make thy repair to her presently with a plot I
will instruct thee in; and for thy surer access to her greatness, thou shalt
present her, as from thy self with this jewel.


So her old grudge, stand not betwixt her and me.


Fear not that.
Presents are present cures for female grudges,
Make bad, seeme-good; alter the case with Judges.

SO now we are our selves. Brother, that ill relished speech you let slip from
your tongue, hath taken so deep hold of my thoughts, that they will never give
me rest, till I be resolved what 'twas you said, you know, touching my wife.


Tush: I am weary of this subject, I said not so.


By truth it self you did: I ouer-heard you. Come, it shall nothing move me,
whatsoever it be; pray thee unfold briefly what you know.


Why briefly Brother. I know my sister to be the wonder of the Earth; and the
Envy of the Heavens. Virtuous, Loyal, and what not. Briefly, I know she hath
vowed, that till death and after death, sheele hold inviolate her bonds to you,
that her black shall take no other hew; all which I firmly believe. In brief
Brother, I know her to be a woman. But you know brother, I have other irons on
th'anuile.


You shall not leave me so unsatisfied; tell me what tis you know.


Why Brother; if you be sure of your wives loyalty for term of life: why
should you be curious to search the Almanacs for after-times: whether some
wandering Aeneas should enjoy your reversion; or whether your true Turtle would
sit mourning on a withered branch, till Atropos cut her throat: Beware of
curiosity, for who can resolve you? you'll say perhaps her vow.


Perhaps I shall.


Tush, her self knows not what she shall do, when she is transformed into
a Widow. You are now a sober and staid Gentleman. But if Diana for your
curiosity should translate you into a monckey; do you know what gambolds you
should play? your only way to be resolved is to die and make trial of her.


A dear experiment, then I must rise again to be resolved.


You shall not need. I can send you speedier advertisement of her constancy,
by the next Ripier that rides that way with Mackerel. And so I leave you.


All the Furies in hell attend thee; has given me a
Bone to tire on with a pestilence; slight know?
What can he know? what can his eye observe
More then mine own, or the most piersing sight
That ever viewed her? by this light I think
Her priuat'st thought may dare the eye of heaven,
And challenge th'enuious world to witness it.
I know him for a wild corrupted youth,
Whom profane Ruffians, Squires to Bawds, Strumpets,
Drunkards, speud out of Taverns, into'th sinks
Of Tap-houses, and Stews, Reuolts from manhood;
Debauched perdu's, have by their companies
Turned Devil like themselves, and stuffed his soul
With damned opinions, and unhallowed thoughts
Of womanhood, of all humanity,
Nay Deity it self.

WElcome friend Lycus.


Have you met with your capricious brother?


He parted hence but now.


And has he yet resolved you of that point you brake with me about?


Yes, he bids me die for further trial of her constancy.


That were a strange Physic for a jealous patient; to cure his thirst with a
draught of poison. Faith Sir, discharge your thoughts an't; think 'twas but a
Buzz deuis'd by him to set your brains a work, and divert your eye from his
disgrace. The world hath written your wife in highest lines of honoured Fame:
her virtues so admired in this I'll, as the report thereof sounds in foreign
ears; and strangers oft arriving here, (as some rare sight) desire to view her
presence, thereby to compare the Picture with the original. Nor think he can
turn so far rebel to his blood*

Or to the Truth it self to misconceive
Her spotless love and loyalty; perhaps
Oft having heard you hold her faith so sacred
As you being dead, no man might stir a spark
Of virtuous love, in way of second bonds;
As if you at your death should carry with you
Both branch and root of all affection.
T'may be, in that point he's an Infidel,
And thinks your confidence may ouer-weene.

So think not I.

Nor I: if ever any made it good.
I am resolved of all, sheele prove no changeling.

Well, I must yet be further satisfied;
And vent this humour by some strain of wit,
Somewhat I'll do; but what, I know not yet.

PAssion of Virginity, Ianthe, how shall we quit our selves of this Pandresse,
that is so importunate to speak with us? Is she known to be a Pandresse?


I, as well as we are known to be waiting women.


A shrew take your comparison.


Lets cal out Argus that bold Ass that never weighs what he does or says; but
walks and talks like one in a sleep; to relate her attendance to my Lady,
and present her.


Who? ant please your Honour? None so fit to set on any dangerous exploit.
Ho? Argus?

WHats the matter Wenches?


You must tell my Lady here's a Gentle-woman called Arsace, her Honours
Tenant, attends her, to impart important business to her.


I will presently.


Well, she has a welcome present, to bear out her unwelcome presence: and I
never knew but a good gift would welcome a bad person to the purest. Arsace?


I Mistress.


Give me your Present; I'll do all I can, to make way both for it and your
self.


You shall bind me to your service Lady.


Stand unseen.


HEre's a Gentle-woman (ant
Please your Honour) one of your Tennants
Desires access to you.

What Tenant? what's her name?

Arsace, she says Madam.

Arsace? what the Bawd?

The Bawd Madam? she strikes, that's without my privity.


Out Ass, know not thou the Pandresse Arsace?


She present your Honour with this Jewel?


This jewel? how came she by such a jewel?
She has had great Customers.

She had need Madam, she sits at a great Rent.

Alas for your great Rent: I'll keep her jewel, and keep you her out, ye
were best: speak to me for a Pandresse?


What shall we do?


Go to; Let us alone. Arsace?


I Lady.


You must pardon us, we can not obtain your access.


Mistress Sthenio, tell her Honour, if I get not access to her, and that
instantly she's undone.


This is some-thing of importance. Madam, she swears your Honour is undone if
she speak not with you instantly.


Undone?


Pray her for her Honours sake to give me instant access to her.


She makes her business your Honour Madame, and entreats for the good of
that, her instant speech with you.


How comes my Honour in question? Bring her to me.


Our Cypriane Goddess save your good Honour.


Stand you off I pray: How dare you Mistress importune access to me thus,
considering the last warning I gave for your absence?


Because, Madam, I have been moved by your Honours last most chaste admonition,
to leave the offensive life. I led before.


I? have you left it then?


I, I assure your Honour, unless it be for the pleasure of two or three poor
Ladies, that have prodigal Knights to their husbands.


Out on thee Impudent.


Alas Madam, we would all be glad to live in our callings.


Is this the reformed life thou talk on?


I beseech your good Honour mistake me not, I boast of nothing but my charity,
that's the worst.


You get these jewels with charity, no doubt. But whats the point in which my
Honour stands endangered I pray?


In care of that Madam, I have presumed to offend your chasteies with my
presence. Hearing it reported for truth and generally, that your Honour will
take to husband a young Gentleman of this City called Tharsalio.


I take him to husband?


If your Honour does, you are utterly undone, for he's the most incontinent,
and insatiate Man of Women that ever VENVS blessed with ability to please them.


Let him be the Devil; I abhor his thought, and could I be informed
particularly of any of these slanderers of mine Honour, he should as dearly
dare it, as any thing wherein his life were endangered.


Madam, the report of it is so strongly confident, that I fear the strong
destiny of marriage is at work in it. But if it be Madam: Let your Honours
known virtue resist and defy it for him: for not a hundred will serve his one
turn. I protest to your Honour, When (VENVS pardon me) I winckt at my
vnmaidenly exercise. I have known nine in a Night made mad with his love.


What tell thou me of his love? I tell thee I abhor him; and destiny
must have an other mould for my thoughts, then Nature or mine Honour, and a
Witchcraft above both, to transform me to another shape, as soon as to an
other conceit of him.


Then is your good Honour just as I pray for you, and good Madam, even for your
virtues sake, and comfort of all your Dignities, and Possessions; fix your
whole Woman-hood against him. He will so enchant you, as never man did woman:
Nay a Goddess (say his light housewives) is not worthy of his sweetness.


Go to, be gone.


Dear Madam, your Honours most perfect admonitions have brought me to such a
hate of these imperfections, that I could not but attend you with my duty, and
urge his unreasonable manhood to the fill.


Man-hood, quoth you?


Nay Beastly-hood, I might say, indeed Madam, but for saving your Honour; Nine
in a night said I?


Go to, no more.


No more Madame? that's enough one would think.


Well be gone I bid thee.


Alas Madam, your Honour is the chief of our City, and to whom shall I
complain of these inchastities, (being your Ladyships reformed Tenant) but to
you that are chastest?


I pray thee go thy ways, and let me see this reformation you pretend
continued.


I humbly thank your good Honour, that was first cause of it.


Here's a complaint as strange as my Suitor.


I beseech your good Honour think upon him, make him an example.


Yet again?


All my duty to your Excellence.


These sorts of licentious persons, when they are once reclaimed, are most
vehement against licence. But it is the course of the world to dispraise faults
use them; that so we may use them the safer. What might a wise Widow resolve
upon this point now? Contentment is the end of all wordly beings: Beshrow her;
would she had spared her news.


See if she take not a contrary way to free her self of us.


You must complain to his Altitude.


All this for trial is; you must endure
That will have wives, nought else, with them is sure.

HAst thou been admitted then?


Admitted? I, into her heart, I'll able it; never was man so praised with a
dispraise; nor so spoken for in being railed on. I'll give you my word; I have
set her hart upon as tickle a pin as the needle of a Dial; that will never let
it rest, till it be in the right position.


Why dost thou imagine this?


Because I saw Cupid shoot in my words, and open his wounds in her looks. Her
blood went and came of errands betwixt her face and her heart; and these
changes I can tell you are shrewd tell-tales.


Thou speak like a Doctrisse in thy faculty; but howsoever, for all this
foil, I'll retriue the game once again, he's a shallow gamester that for one
displeasing cast gives up so fair a game for lost.


Well, 'twas a villainous invention of thine, and had a swift operation, it
took like sulphur. And yet this virtuous Countess hath to my ear spun out
many a tedious lecture of pure sisters thread against concupiscence. But ever
with such an affected zeal, as my mind gave me, she had a kind of secret
titillation to grace my poor house sometimes; but that she feared a spice of
the Sciatica, which as you know ever runs in the blood.


And as you know, sokes into the bones. But to say truth, these angry heates
that break out at the lips of these straight laced Ladies, are but as symptoms
of a lustful fever that boils within them. For wherefore rage wives at their
husbands so, when they fly out, for zeal against the sin?


No, but because they did not purge that sin.


You are a notable Siren, and I swear to thee, if I prosper, not only to give
thee thy mannor-house gratis, but to marry thee to some one Knight or other,
and bury thy trade in thy Ladyship: Go be gone.


WHat news Lycus? where's the Lady?


Retired into her Orchard.


A pregnant badge of love, she's melancholy.


'Tis with the sight of her Spartane wooer. But howsoever tis with her, you
have practised strangely upon your Brother.


Why so?


You had almost lifted his wit off the hinges. That spark jealousy falling
into his dry melancholy brains, had well near set the whole house on fire.


No matter, let it work; I did but pay him in's own coin; Sfoot he plied me
with such a volley of vnseason'd scoffs, as would have made Patience it self
turn Ruffine, attiring it self in wounds and blood: but is his humour better
qualified then?


Yes, but with a medicine ten parts more dangerous then the sickness: how know
you strange his dotage ever was on his wife; taking special glory to have her
love and loyalty to him so renowm'd abroad. To whom she oftentimes hath vowed
constancy after life, till her own death had brought forsooth, her
widdow-troth to bed. This he ioi'd in strangely, and was therein of infallible
belief, till your surmise began to shake it; which hath loosed it so, as now
there's nought can settle it, but a trial, which he's resolved upon.


As how man? as how?


He is resolved to follow your advise, to die, and make trial of her
stablenesse, and you must lend your hand to it.


What to cut's throat?


To forge a rumour of his death, to uphold it by circumstance, maintain a
public face of mourning, and all things appertaining.


I, but the means man: what time? what probability.


Nay, I think he has not licked his Whelp into full shape yet, but you shall
shortly hear ant.


And when shall this strange conception see light?


Forthwith: there's nothing stays him, but some odd business of import,
which he must wind up; least perhaps his absence by occasion of his intended
trial be prolonged above his aims.


Thanks for this news in faith. This may perhaps prove happy to my Nephew.
Truth is I love my sister well and must acknowledge her more then ordinary
virtues. But she hath so possessed my brothers heart with vows, and
disauowings, sealed with oaths of second nuptials; as in that confidence, he
hath invested her in all his state, the ancient inheritance of our Family: and
left my Nephew and the rest to hang upon her pure devotion; so as he dead, and
she matching (as I am resolved she will) with some young Prodigal; what must
ensue, but her post-issue beggerd, and our house already sinking, buried quick
in ruin. But this trial may remove it, and since tis come to this; mark but
the issue Lycus, for all these solemn vows, if I do not make her prove in
the handling as weak as a wafer; say I lost my time in travail. This
resolution then has set his wits in joint again, he's quiet.


Yes, and talks of you again in the fairest manner, listens after your
speed.


Nay he's passing kind, but I am glad of this trial for all that.


Which he thinks to be a flight beyond your wing.


But he will change that thought ere long. My Bird you saw even now, sings me
good news, and makes hopeful signs to me.


Somewhat can I say too, since your messengers departure, her Ladyship hath
been something altered, more pensive then before, and took occasion to
question of you, what your addictions were? of what taste your humour was? of
what cut you wore your wit, and all this in a kind of disdainful scorn.


Good Callenders Lycus. Well I'll pawn this jewel with thee, my next encounter
shall quite alter my brothers judgment. Come lets in, he shall commend it for
a discreet and honourable attempt. Men's judgments sway on that side fortune
leanes,
Thy wishes shall assist me:



And my means.


I Must confess I was ignorant, what 'twas to court a Lady till now.


And I pray you what is it now?


To court her I perceive, is to woo her with letters from Court, for so this
Spartane Lords Court discipline teaches.


His Lordship hath procured a new Packet from his Altitude.


If he bring no better ware then letters in's packet, I shall greatly doubt of
his good speed.


If his Lordship did but know how gracious his Aspect is to my Lady in this
solitary humour.


Well these retired walks of hers are not usual; and bode some alteration in
her thoughts. What may be the cause Sthenio.


Nay 'twould trouble Argus with his hundred eyes to descry the cause.


Venus keep her upright, that she fall not from the state of her honour; my
fear is that some of these Serpentine suitors will tempt her from her constant
vow of widdow-hood. If they do, good night to our good days.


'Twere a sin to suspect her; I have been witness to so many of her fearful
protestations to our late Lord against that course, to her infinite oaths
imprinted on his lips, and sealed in his heart with such imprecations to her
bed, if ever it should receive a second impression, to her open and often
detestations of that incestuous life (as she termed it) of widows marriages,
as being but a kind of lawful adultery; like usury permitted by the law,
not approved. That to wed a second, was no better then to cuckold the first:
That women should entertain wedlock as one body, as one life, beyond which
there were no desire, no thought, no repentance from it, no restitution to it.
So as if the conscience of her vows should not restrain her, yet the worlds
shame to break such a constant resolution, should repress any such motion in
her.


Well, for her vows, they are gone to heaven with her husband, they bind not
upon earth: And as for Women's resolutions, I must tell you, The Planets, (as
Ptolomie says) the winds have a great stroke in them. Trust not my learning
if her late strangeness, and exorbitant solitude, be not hatching some new
Monster.


Well applied Argus; Make you husbands Monsters?


I spoke of no husbands, but you Wenches have the pregnant wits, to turn
Monsters into husbands, as you turn husbands into monsters.


Well Ianthe, 'twere high time we made in, to part our Lady and her Spartane
wooer.


We shall appear to her like the two fortunate Stars in a tempest, to save the
shipwreck of her patience.


I, and to him to, I believe; For by this time he hath spent the last dram of
his news.


That is, of his wit.


Just good wittals.


If not, that my Lady be not. too deep in her new dumps, we shall hear from
his Lordship; what such a Lord said of his wife the first night he embraced
her: To what Gentleman such a Count was beholding for his five children. What
young Lady, such an old Count should marry; what Revels: what presentiments
are towards; and who penned the Pegmas; and so forth: and yet for all this, I
know her harsh Suitor hath tired her to the uttermost scruple of her
forbearances, and will do more, unless we two, like a pair of Sheres, cut
asunder the thread of his discourse.


Well then, lets in; But my masters, wait you on your charge at your perils,
See that you guard her approach from any more intruders.


Excepting young Tharsalio.


True, excepting him indeed, for a guard of men is not able to keep him out
ant please your Honour.


O Wenches, that's the property of true valour, to promise like Pigmy, and
perform like a Giant. If he come, I'll be sworn I'll do my Ladies
commandment upon him.


What? beat him out?


If he should, Tharsalio would not take it ill at his hands, for he does but
his Ladies commandment.


WEll, by Hercules he comes not here.


By Venus but he does: or else she hath heard my Ladies prayers, and sent
some gracious spirit in his likeness to fright away that Spartane wooer, that
hants her.


There stand her Sentinels.


Slight the Ghost appears again.


Save ye my quondam fellows in Arms; save ye; my women.


Your Women Sir?


'Twill be so. What no courtesies? No preparation of grace? observe me I advise
you for your own sakes.


For your own sake, I advise you to pack hence, lest your impudent valour cost
you dearer then you think.


What senseless boldness is this Tharsalio?


Well said Clinias, talk to him.


I wonder that notwithstanding the shame of your last entertainment, and
threatenings of worse; you would yet presume to trouble this place again.


Come you're a widgine; Off with your hat Sir, acknowledge: forecast is better
then labour. Are you squint eyed? can you not see before you. A little foresight
I can tell you might sted you much as the Stars shine now.


'Tis well sir, tis not for nothing your brother is ashamed on you. But Sir,
you must know, we are chardg'd to bar your entrance.


But Wifler, know you, that who so shall dare to execute that charge, I'll be
his Executioner.


By Jove, Clinias, me thinks, the Gentleman speaks very honourably.


Well I see this house needs reformation, here's a fellow stands behind now,
of a forwarder insight then ye all. What place hast thou?


What place you please Sir.


Law you Sir. Here's a fellow to make a Gentleman Usher Sir, I discharge you of
the place, and do here invest thee into his room, Make much of thy hair, thy
wit will suit it rarely. And for the full possession of thine office; Come,
Usher me to thy Lady: and to keep thy hand supple, take this from me.


No bribes Sir, ant please your Worship.


Go to, thou dost well; but pocket it for all that; it's no impair to thee:
the greatest do it.


Sir, tis your love only that I respect, but since out of your love you please
to bestow it upon me, It were want of Courtship in me to refuse it; I'll
acquaint my Lady with your coming.


How say by this? have not I made a fit choice, that hath so soon attained the
deepest mystery of his profession: Good sooth Wenches, a few curtsies had not
been cast away upon your new Lord.


We'll believe that, when our Lady has a new Son of your getting.


WHats the matter? whose that, you say, is come?


The bold Gentleman, ant please your Honour.


Why thou flering Ass thou.


Ant please your Honour.


Did not I forbid his approach by all the charge and duty of thy service?


Madam, this fellow only is intelligent; for he truly understood your command
according to the stile of the Court of Venus; that is, by contraries: when you
forbid you bid.


By heaven I'll discharge my house of ye all.


You shall not need Madame, for I have already casheer'd your officious Usher
here, and chos'd this for his Successor.


O incredible boldness!


Madam, I come not to command your love with enforst letters, nor to woo you
with tedious stories of my Pedigree, as he who draws the thread of his descent
from Ledas Distaff; when 'tis well known his Grandsire cried Coniskins in
Sparta.


Whom mean you Sir?


Sir, I name none, but him who first shall name himself.


The place Sir, I tell you still; and this Goddesses fair presence, or else my
reply should take a far other form upon it.


If it should Sir, I would make your Lordship an anser.


Anser's Latin for a Goose, ant please your honour.


Well noted Gander; and what of that?


Nothing, ant please your Honour, but that he said he would make his Lordship an
answer.


Thus every fool mocks my poor Suitor. Tell me thou most frontlesse of all
me, did thou (when thou had means to note me best) ever observe so base
a temper in me, as to give any glance at stooping to my Vassal?


Your drudge Madam, to do your drudgery.


Or am I now so scant of worthy Suitors, that may advance mine honour; advance
my estate; strengthen my alliance (if I list to wed) that I must stoop to make
my foot my head.


No but your side, to keep you warm a bed. But Madame vouchsafe me your
patience to that points serious answer. Though I confess to get higher place
in your graces, I could wish my fortunes more honourable; my person more
gracious; my mind more adorned with Noble and Heroical virtues, yet Madame
(that you think not your blood disparadg'd by mixture with mine) deign to know
this: howsoever I once, only for your love, disguised my self in the service
of your late Lord and mine, yet my descent is as honourable as the proudest of
your Spartane attempters; who by unknown quills or conduits under ground,
draws his Pedigree from Lycurgus his great Toe, to the Viceroies little
finger, and from thence to his own elbow, where it will never leave itching.


Tis well Sir, presume still of the place.


Sfoot Madame, am I the first great personage that hath stooped to disguises for
love? what think you of our Countrie-man Hercules; that for love put on
Omphales Apron, and sate spinning amongst her Wenches, while his Mistress wore
his Lyons skin and Lamb-skin'd him, if he did not his business.


Most fitly thou resembl'st thy self to that violent Atlas, that claimed all
other men's possessions as his own by his mere valour. For what less hast
thou done? Come into my house, beat away these Honourable persons?


That I will Madam. Hence ye Sparta Velvet.


Hold, she did not mean so.


Away I say, or leave your lives I protest here.


Well Sir, his Altitude shall know you.


I'll do your errand Sir.


Do good Cousin Altitude; and beg the reversion of the next Lady: for Dido has
betrotht her love to me. By this fair hand Madam, a fair riddance of this
Calidonian Bore.


O most prodigious audaciousnesse!


True Madam; O fie upon am, they are intolerable. And I can not but admire
your singular virtue of patience, not common in your sex; and must therefore
carry with it some rare indowment of other Masculine and Heroical virtues. To
hear a rude Spartane court so ingenuous a Lady, with dull news from Athens,
or the Vicerois court; how many dogs were spoiled at the last Bull-baiting;
what Ladies dubbed their husbands Knights, and so forth.


But hast thou no shame? No sense of what disdain I showed thee in my last
entertainment? chacing thee from my presence, and charging thy duty, not to
attempt the like intrusion for thy life; and dare thou yet approach me in
this unmannerly manner? No question this desperate boldness can not choose but
go accompanied with other infinite rudenesses.


Good Madam, give not the Child an unfit name, term it not boldness, which the
Sages call true confidence, founded on the most infallible Rock of a woman's
constancy.


If shame can not restrain thee, tell me yet if any brainless fool would
have tempted the danger attending thy approach.


No Madam, that proves I am no Fool: Then had I been here a Fool, and a base
low-sprited Spartan, if for a Ladies froune, or a Lords threats, or for a
Guard of Grooms, I should have shrunk in the wetting, and suffered such a
delicious flower to perish in the stalk, or to be sauadgely plucked by a
profane finger. No Madam: First let me be made a Subject for disgrace; let
your remorseless Guard seize on my despised body, bind me hand and foot, and
hurl me into your Ladyships bed.


O Gods: I protest thou dost more and more make me admire thee.


Madam, ignorance is the mother of admiration: know me better, and you'll admire
me less.


What would thou have me know? what seeks thy coming? why dost thou hant
me thus?


Only Madam, that the Aetna of my sighs, and Nilus of my tears, poured forth
in your presence, might witness to your Honour the hot and moist affection of
my hart, and work me some measure of favour, from your sweet tongue, or your
sweeter lips, or what else your good Ladyship shall esteem more conducible, to
your divine contentment.


Pen and Inck-horne I thank thee. This you learned when you were a
Serving-man.


Madam, I am still the same creature; and I will so tie my whole fortunes to
that stile, as were it my happiness (as I know it will be) to mount into my
Lords succession, yet vow I never to assume other Title, or State, then your
servants: Not approaching your board, but bidden: Not pressing to your bed, but
your pleasure shall be first known if you will command me any service.


Thy vows are as vain as a Ruffians oaths; as common as the air; and as
cheap as the dust. How many of the light housewives, thy Muses, hath thy love
promised this service besides, I pray thee?


Compare shadows to bodies, Madam; Pictures to the life; and such are they to
you, in my valuation.


I see words will never free me of thy boldness, and will therefore now use
blows; and those of the mortalest enforcement. Let it suffice Sir, that all
this time, and to this place, you enjoy your safety; keep back: No one foot
follow me further; for I protest to thee, the next threshold past, lets pass
a prepared Ambush to thy latest breath.


This for your Ambush, He draws. Dare my love with death?


Slight; follow ant please your Honour.


Not I by this light.


I hope Gentle-women you will.


Not we Sir, we are no parters of fraies.


Faith nor I'll be any breaker of customs.


WOuld any heart of Adamant, for satisfaction of an ungrounded humour, rack a
poor Ladies innocence as you intend to do. It was a strange curiosity in
that Emperor, that ripped his Mothers womb to see the place he lay in.


Come do not lode me with volumes of persuasion; I am resolved, if she be gold
she may abide the taste, lets away, I wonder where this wild brother is.


SIr.


I pray thee wife show but thy self a woman; and be silent: question no more
the reason of my journey, which our great Viceroies charge urged in this letter
doth enforce me to.


Let me but see that letter, there is something in this presaging blood of mine,
tells me this sudden journey can portend no good, resolve me sweet, have not I
given you cause of discontent, by some misprision, or want of fit observance,
let me know that I may wreak my self upon my self.

(...) of art to cover your buske points; which a blunt and resolute encounter,
taken under a fortunate aspect, easily disarmes you off; and then alas what are
you? poor naked sinners, God wot: weak paper walls thrust down with a
finger; this is the way on it, boil their appetites to a full height of lust;
and then take them down in the nick.


Is there probability in this; that a Lady so great, so virtuous, standing on
so high terms of honour, should so soon stoop?


You would not wonder sister, if you knew the lure she stoo'pt at: greatness?
think you that can curb affection; no, it whets it more; they have the full
stream of blood, to bear them: the sweet gale of their sublimed spirits to
drive them: the calm of ease to prepare them: the sun-shine of fortune to
allure them: Greatness to waft them safe through all Rocks of infamy: when
youth, wit, and person come aboard once, tell me sister, can you choose but
hoise sail, and put forward to the maine?


But let me wonder at this frailty yet; would she in so short time wear out
his memory, so soon wipe from her eyes, nay, from her heart, whom I my self,
and this whole I'll besides, still remember with grief, the impression of his
loss taking worthily such root in us; howe think you Wife?


I am ashamed ant, and abhor to think,
So great and vowed a pattern of our sex,
Should take into her thoughts, nay to her bed,
(O stain to woman-hood) a second love.

In so short time.


In any time.


No wife.


By Iuno no; sooner a lothsom Tod.


High words believe me, and I think sheele keep them; next turn is yours
Nephew; you shall now marry my noblest Ladie-Daughter; the first marriage in
Paphos; next my nuptials shall be yours; these are strange occurrents brother,
but pretty and pathetic: if you see me in my chair of Honour; and my
Countess in mine arms; you will then believe, I hope, I am Lord of the
Palace, then shall you try my great Ladies entertainment; see your hands
freed of me, and mine taking you to advancement.


Well, all this rids not my business; wife you shall be there to partake the
unexpected honour of our House. Lycus, and I will make it our recreation by the
way, to think of your Revels and Nuptial sports; Brother my stay hath been
for you; Wife pray thee be gone, and soon prepare for the solemnity, a
Month returns me.


Heavens guide your journey.


Fare-will.


Fare-well Nephew; prosper^ virilitie, but do you hear; keep your hand from
your voice, I have a part for you in our Hymencall show.


You speak too late for my voice, but I'll discharge the part.


Occurrents call ye them; soul shame confound them all; that impregnable Fort
of chastity and loyalty, that amazement of the world; O ye Deities could
nothing restrain her? I took her spirit to be too haughty for such a
depression.


But who commonly more short held; then they that are high 'ith in-step.


Me thinks yet shame should have controlled so sudden an appetite.


Tush, shame doth extinguish lust as oil doth fire,
The blood once hot, shame doth inflame the more,
What they before, by art dissembled most
They act more freely; shame once found is lost;
And to say truth Brother; what shame is due to it? or what congruence doth it
carry, that a young Lady, Gallant, Vigorous, full of Spirit, and Complexion;
her appetite new whetted with Nuptial delights; to be confined to the
speculation of a deaths head, or for the loss of a husband, the world
affording flesh enough, make the noone-tide of her years, the sunne-set of her
pleasures.


And yet there have been such women.


Of the first stamp perhaps, when the mettle was purer then in these degenerate
days; of later years, much of that coin hath been counterfeit, and besides
so cracked and worn with use, that they are grown light, and indeed fit for
nothing, but to be turned over in play.


Not all brother.


My matchless sister only excepted: for she, you know is made of an other
mettle, then that she borrowed of her mother. But do you brother sadly
intend the pursuit of this trial?


Irrevocably.


Its a high project: if it be once raised, the earth is too weak to beat so
weighty an accident, it cannot be conjured down again, without an
earth-quake, therefore believe she will be constant.


No, I will not.


Then believe she will not be constant.


Neither, I will believe nothing but what trial enforces; will you hold your
promise for the governing of this project with skill, and secrecy?


If it must needs be so. But hark you brother; have you no other Capricions
in your head to entrap my sister in her frailty, but to prove the firmness
of her widow vows after your supposed death.


None in the world.


Then here's my hand, I'll be as close, as my Ladies shoe to her foot that
pinches and pleases her, and will bear on with the plot, till the vessel
split again.


Forge any death, so you can force belief. Say I was poisoned, drowned.


Hanged.


Any thing, so you assist it with likely circumstance, I need not instruct
you: that must be your employment Lycus.


Well Sir.


But brother you must set in to; to countenance truth out, a hearse there must
be too; Its strange to think how much the eye prevails in such impressions; I
have marckt a Widow, that just before was seen pleasant enough, follow an
empty hearse, and weep devoutly.


All those things leave to me.


But brother for the bestowing of this hearse in the monument of our Family,
and the marshalling of a Funeral.


Leave that to my care, and if I do not do the mourner, as lively as your
Heir, and weep as lustily as your Widow, say there's no virtue in Onions;
that being done, I'll come to visit the distressed widow; apply old ends of
comfort to her grief, but the burden of my song shall be to tell her words
are but dead comforts; and therefore counsel her to take a living comfort;
that might Ferrit out the thought of her dead husband, and will come prepared
with choice of suitors; either my Spartane Lord for grace at the Viceroies
Court, or some great Lawyer that may soder up her cracked estate, and so forth.
But what would you say brother, if you should find her married at your
arrival.


By this hand split her Wezand.


Well, forget not your wager, a stately chariot with four brave Horses of the
Thracian breed, with all appurtenances. I'll prepare the like for you, if you
prove Victor; but well remembered, where will you lurk the whiles?


Mewd up close, some short days journey hence, Lycus shall know the place,
write still how all things pass, brother adieu; all joy attend you.


Will you not stay our nuptial now so near.


I should be like a man that hears a tale And heeds it not; one absent from
himself, my wife shall attend the Countess, and my Son.


Whom you shall here at your return call me father, adieu: Jove be your speed.

My Nuptials done, your Funerals succeed.


A Hall, a hall: who's without there?


Now, alas fellow Argus, how thou art comberd with an office?


Perfume sirrha, the roome's dampish.


Nay you may leave that office to the Ladies, they'll perfume it sufficiently.


Cry mercy Sir, here's a whole Chorus of Syluans at hand, cornetting, tripping
ath' toe, as the ground they trod on were too hot for their feet. The device
is rare; and there's your young Nephew too, he hangs in the clouds Deified with
Hymens shape.


Is he perfect in's part? has not his tongue learned of the Syluans to trip
ath' Toe?


Sir, believe it, he does it pretiously for accent and action, as if he felt
the part he plaid: he rauishes all the young Wenches in the Palace: Pray Venus
my young Lady Laodice have not some little prick of Cupid in her, she's so
diligent at's rehearsalls.


No force, so my next vows be heard, that if Cupid have pricked her, Hymen my
cure her.


You mean your Nephew Sir that presents Hymen.


Why so, I can speak nothing but thou art with in me: fie of this wit of
thine, 'twill be thy destruction. But howsoever you please to understand, Hymen
send the boy no worse fortune: And where's my Ladies honour?


At hand Sir, with your vnparagond sister, please you take your chair of
Honour Sir?


Most serviceable Argus, the Gods reward they service; for I will not.


COme sister, now we must exchange that name
For stranger Titles, let's dispose our selves
To entertain these Syluane Revellers.
That come to grace our loved Nuptials,
I fear me we must all turn Nymphs to night,
To side those sprightly wood-Gods in their dances;
Can you do it nimbly sister? slight what ail you, are you not well?

Yes Madam.

But your looks, me thinks, are cloudy; suiting all the Sunne-shine of this
clear honour to your husbands house.

Is there ought here that sorts not with your liking?


Blame her not Mistress, if her looks show care.
Excuse the Merchants sadness that hath made
A doubtful venture of his whole estate;
His livelihood, his hopes, in one poor bottom,
To all encounters of the Sea and storms.
Had you a husband that you loved as well,
Would you not take his absent plight as ill?
Cavil at every fancy? Not an object
That could present it self, but it would forge
Some vain objection, that did doubt his safety;
True love is ever full of jealousy.

Jealous? of what? of every little journey?
Mere fancy then is wanton; and doth cast
At those slight dangers there, too doting glances;
Misgiving minds ever provoke mischances:
Shines not the Sun in his way bright as here?
Is not the air as good? what hazard doubt you?

His horse may stumble if it please your Honour;
The rain may wet, the wind may blow on him;
Many shrewd hazards watch poor travellers.

True, and the shrewdest thou hast reckend us.
Good sister, these cares fit young married wives.

Wives should be still young in their husbands loves.
Time bears no Since should bear down them before him.
Our lives he may cut short, but not our loves.

Sister be wise, and ship not in one Bark,
All your ability: if he miscarry,
Your well tried wisdom should look ont for new.

I wish them happy winds that run that course,
From me tis far; One Temple sealed our troth.
One Tomb, one hour shall end, and shroud us both.

Well, you're a Phoenix, there be that your cheer
Love, with your husband be, your wisdom here.
Hark, our sports challenge it; Sit dearest Mistress.

Take your place worthiest servant.

Serve me heaven.
As I my heavenly Mistress, Sit rare sister.

Hymen descends; and six Syluanes enter beneath, with Torches.

A hall, a hall: let no more Citizens in there.

O, Not my Cousin see; but Hymens self.

He does become it most enflamingly.

Hail honoured Bridegroom, and his Princely bride
With the most famed for virtue, Cynthia;
And this young Lady, bright Laodice,
One rich hope of this noblest Family.

Hark how he courts: he is enamoured too.

O grant it Venus, and be ever honoured.

In grace and love of you, I Hymen searched
The groves and thickets that embrace this Palace
With this clear-stam'd, and good aboding Torch
For summons of these fresh and flowery Syluans,
To this fair presence; with their winding Haies,
Active and Antique dances to delight
Your frolic eyes, and help to celebrate
These noblest nuptials; which great Destiny,
Ordained past custom and all vulgar object
To be the readuancement of a house,
Noble and Princely, and restore this Palace
To that name, that six hunderd Summers since
Was in possession of this Bridegrooms Ancetors,
The ancient and most vertue-fam'd Lysandri.
Syluans! the Courtships you make to your Dryads,
Use to this great Bride, and these other Dames,
And heighten with your sports, my nuptial flames.

O would himself descend, and me command.

Dance; and his heart catch in an others hand.

Now, what the Power and my Torches influence
Hath in the blessings of your Nuptial joys
(Great Bride and Bridegroom) you shall amply part
Betwixt your free loves, and forgo it never.

Thanks to great Hymen, and fair Syluanes ever.

I Hope Sir by this time.


Put on man, by our selves.


The edge of your confidence is well taken off; would you not be content to
with-draw your wager?


Faith fellow Lycus, if my wager were weakly built, this unexpected accident
might stagger it* For the truth is, this strain is extraordinary, to follow
her husbands body into the Tomb, and there for his company to bury her
self quick: it's new and stirring, but for all this, I'll not despair of my
wager.


Why Sir, can you think such a passion dissembled?


All's one for that, What I think I think; In the mean time forget not to
write to my Brother, how the plot hath succeeded, that the news of his death
hath taken; a funeral solemnity performed, his supposed Corse bestowed in the
monument of our Family, thou and I horrible mourners: But above all that his
intolerable virtuous Widow, for his love; (and for her love) Ero her
hand-maid, are descend with his Corse into the vault; There wipe their eyes
time out of mind, drink nothing but their own tears, and by this time are
almost dead with famine. There's a point will sting it (for you say tis true)
where left you him?


At Dipolis Sir, some twenty miles hence.


He keeps close.


I sir, by all means; skulks unknown under the name of a strange Knight.


That may carry him without descrying, for there's a number of strange Knights
abroad. You left him well.


Well Sir, but for this jealous humour that hants him.


Well, this news will absolutely purge that humour. Write all, forget not to
describe her passion at thy discovery of his slaughter: did she perform it
well for her husbands wager?


Perform it, call you it? you may jest; men hunt Hares to death for their
sports, but the poor beasts die in earnest: you wager of her passions for your
pleasure, but she takes little pleasure in those earnest passions. I never saw
such an ecstasy of sorrow, since I knew the name of sorrow. Her hands flew up
to her head like Furies, hid all her beauties in her discheuel'd hair, wept as
she would turn fountain. I would you and her husband had been behind the
Arras but to have heard her. I assure you Sir, I was so transported with the
spectacle, that in despite of my discretion, I was forced to turn woman, and
bear a part with her. Humanity broke loose from my heart, and streamed
through mine eyes.


In prose, thou weptst. So have I seen many a moist Auditor do at a play; when
the story was but a mere fiction: And did act the Nuntius well, would I had
heard it: could thou dress thy looks in a mournful habit?


Not without preparation Sir; no more then my speech, twas a plain acting of
an enterlude to me, to pronounce the part.


As how for heavens sake?


Phoebus addressed his chariot towards the West
To change his wearied Coursers, and so forth.

Nay on, and thou love me.

Lysander and my self beguiled the way
With enterchang'd discourse, but our chief Theme,
Was of your dearest self, his honoured wife;
Your love, your virtue; wondrous constancy.

Then was her Cu to whimper; on.

When suddenly appeared as far as sight
A troop of horse, armed as we might descerne,
With Iauelines, Spears, and such accoutrements.
He doubted nought (As Innocence ever
Is free from doubting ill.)

There dropped a tear.

My mind misgave me.
They might be mountaners. At their approach
They used no other language but their weapons,
To tell us what they were; Lysander drew,
And bore himself Achilles like in fight,
And as a Mower sweeps off t'heads of Bents,
So did Lysanders sword shave off the points
Of their assaulting lances.
His horse at last, sore hurt, fell under him;
I seeing I could not rescue, used my spurs
To fly away.

What from thy friend?

I in a good quarrel, why not?

Good; I am answered.

A lance pursued me, brought me back again;
And with these wounds left me t'accompanie
Dying Lysander: Then they rifled us,
And left us.
They gone; my breath not yet gone, began to strive
And revive sense: I with my feeble joints
Crawled to Lysander, stirred him, and withal
He gaspt; cried Cynthia! and breathed no more.

O then she howled out right.

Passengers came and in a Chariot brought us
Straight to a Neighbour Town; where I forthwith
Coffind my friend in lead; and so conveyed him
To this sad place.

'Twas well; and could not show but strangely.

Well Sir, This tale pronounced with terror, suited with action clothed with
such likely circumstance; My wounds in show, her husbands hearse in sight,
think what effect it wrought: And if you doubt, let the sad consequence of her
retreat to his Tomb, be your woeful instructor.


For all this, I'll not despair of my wager: These
Grieves that sound so loud, prove always light,
True sorrow evermore keeps out of sight.
This strain of mourning with Sepulcher, like an ouer-doing Actor, affects
grossly, and is indeed so far forced from the life, that it bewrays it self
to be altogether artificial.
To set open a shop of mourning! Tis palpable.
Truth, the substance, hunts not after the shadow of popular
Fame. Her officious ostentation of sorrow condemns her sincerity. When did
ever woman morn so immeasurably, but she did dissemble?

O Gods! a passion thus borne; thus apparelled with tears, sighs, swownings,
and all the badges of true sorrow, to be dissembled! by Venus I am sorry I
ever set foot in it. Could she, if she dissembled, thus dally with hunger, be
deaf to the barking of her appetite, not having these four days relieved
nature with one dram of sustenance.


For this does she look to be Deified, to have Hymns made of her, nay to
her: The Tomb where she is to be no more reputed the ancient monument of our
Family the Lysandri; but the new erected Altar of Cynthia: To which all the
Paphian widows shall after their husbands Funerals, offer their wet
muckinders, for monuments of the danger they have past, as Sea-men do their
wet garments at Neptunes Temple after a ship wrack.


Well, I'll apprehend you, at your pleasure: I for my part will say; that if her
faith be as constant as her love is hearty, and vnaffected, her virtues may
justly challenge a Deity to enshrine them.


I, there's an other point too. But one of those virtues is enough at once. All
natures are not capable of all gifts. If the brain of the West, were in the
heads of the learned; then might Parish-Clerkes be common counsel men, and
Poets Aldermens deputies. My sister may turn Niobe for love; but till Niobe
be turned to a Marble, I'll not despair but she may prove a woman. Let the
trial run on, if she do not out-runne it, I'll say Poets are no Prophets,
Prognosticators are but Mountibankes, none tell true but wood-mongers.


A sweet Gentleman you are. I marvel what man? what woman? what name? what
action doth his tongue glide over, but it leaves a slime upon it. Well, I'll
presently to Dipolis, where Lysander stays; and will not say but she may
prove frail: But this I'll say, If she should chance to break, Her tears are
true* though women's truths are weak.


O Miracle of nature! women's glory;
Men's shame; and envy of the Deities!
Yet must these matchless creatures be suspected;
Accused; condemned!
Now by th'immortall Gods,
They rather merit Altars, Sacrifice,
Then love and courtship.
Yet see the Queen of these lies here interred;
Tearing her hair; and drowned in her tears.
Which Jove should turn to Crystal; and a Mirror
Make of them; wherein men may see and wonder
At women's virtues. Shall she famish then?
Will men (without dissuasions) suffer thus
So bright an Ornament to earth, tomb'd quick.
In Earths dark bosom: Ho!
Who's in the Tomb there?
Who calls? whence are you?

I am a Soldier of the watch and must enter.

Amongst the dead?

Do the dead speak? open or I'll force it open.

What violence is this? what seek you here
Where nought but death and her attendants dwell.

What wretched souls are you that thus by night lurk here amongst the dead?

Good Soldier do not stir her, She's weak, and quickly seized with
swowning and passions, and with much trouble shall we both recall her fainting
spirits.

Five days thus hath she wasted; and not once seasoned her Palate with the
taste of meat; her powers of life are spent; and what remains of her famished
spirit, serves not to breath but sigh.

She hath exiled her eyes from steep, or sight, and given them wholly up to
ceaseless tears over that ruthful hearse of her dear Spouse, slain by
Bantditos, Nobly borne Lysander.


And hopes she with these heavy notes and cries to call him from the dead? in
these five days hath she but made him stir a finger or fetch one gasp of
that forsaken life she mourns?

Come, honoured Mistress; I admire your virtues;
But must reprove this vain excess of moan;
Rouse your self Lady, and look up from death,
Well said, tis well; stay by my hand and rise.
This Face hath been maintained with better housewifery.

What are you?

Lady, I am Sentinel,
Set in this hallowed place, to watch and guard
On forfait of my life, these monuments
From Rape, and spoiled of sacrilegious hands,
And save the bodies, that without you see
Of crucified offenders; that no friends
May bear them hence, to honoured burial.

Thou seem an honest Soldier; pray thee then
Be as thou seem; betake thee to thy charge
And leave this place; add not affliction
To the afflicted.

You misname the children.
For what you term affliction now, in you
Is but selfe-humour; voluntary Penance
Imposed upon your self: and you lament
As did the Satire once, that ran affrighted
From that horns sound that he himself had winded.
Which humour to abate, my counsel tending your termed affliction,
What I for Physic give, you take for poison.
I tell you honoured Mistress, these ingredients
Are wholesome, though perhaps they seem untoothsome.

This Soldier sure, is some decayed apothecary.

Dear Ghost be wise, and pity your fair self
Thus, by your self unnaturally afflicted:
Chide back, heart-breaking groans, clear up those lamps,
Restore them to their first creation:
Windows for light; not sluices made for tears.
Beat not the senseless air with needless cries,
Baneful to life, and bootless to the dead.
This is the Inn, where all Deucalions race
Sooner or later, must take up their lodging;
No privilege can free us from this prison;
No tears, no prayers, can redeem from hence
A captived soul; Make use of what you see:
Let this affrighting spectacle of death
Teach you to nourish life.

Good hear him: this is a rare Soldier.

Say that with abstinence you should vnlose the knot of life: Suppose that in
this Tomb for your dear Spouse, you should entomb your self a living Corse;
Say that before your hour without due Summons from the Fates, you send your
hasty soul to hell: can your dear Spouse take notice of your faith and
constancy? Shall your dear Spouse revive to give you thanks?


Idle discourser.

No, your moans are idle.
Go to I say, be counsail'd; raise your self:
Enjoy the fruits of life, there's viands for you,
Now, live for a better husband.
No? will you none?

For love of courtesy, good Mistress, eat,
Do not reject so kind and sweet an offer,
Who knows but this may be some Mercurie
Disguis'de, and sent from Iuno to relieve us?
Did ever any lend unwilling ears
To those that came with messages of life?

I pray thee leave thy Rhetoric.

By my soul; to speak plain truth, I could rather wish t'employ my teeth
then my tongue, so your example would be my warrant.


Thou hast my warrant.

Well then, eat my wench,
Let obstinacy starve.
Fall to.

Persuade my Mistress first.

Slight tell me Lady,
Are you resolved to die? If that be so,
Choose not (for shame) a base, and beggars death:
Die not for hunger, like a Spartane Lady;
Fall valiantly upon a sword, or drink
Noble death, expel your grief with poison.
There 'tis, seize it. -- Tush you dare not die.
Come Wench thou hast not lost a husband;
Thou shalt eat, you are now within
The place where I command.

I protest sir.

Well said; eat, and protest, or I'll protest
And do thou eat; thou eat'st against thy will,
That's it thou would say.

It is.

And under such a protestation
Thou lost' thy Maiden-head.
For your own sake good Lady forget this husband,
Come you are now become a happy Widow,
A blessedness that many would be glad of.
That and your husbands Inuentorie together,
Will raise you up husbands enough.
What think you of me?

Trifler, pursue this wanton Theme no further;
Lest (which I would be loath) your speech provoke
Uncivil language from me; I must tell you,
One joint of him I lost, was much more worth
Then the racked value of thy entire body.

O know what joint she means.

Well, I have done.
And well done frailty; proface, how lik'st thou it.

Very toothsome Ingrediens surely sir,
Want but some lycor to incorporate them.

There tis, carouse.

I humbly thank you Sir.

Hold pledge me now.

Tis the poison Sir,
That preserves life, I take it.

Do so, take it.

Sighing has made me something short-winded.
I'll pledge y'at twice.

Tis well done; do me right.

I pray sir, have you been a Apothecary?

Marry have I wench; A woman's Apothecary.

Have you good Ingredients?
I like your Bottle well. Good Mistress taste it.
Try but the operation, twill fetch up
The Roses in your cheeks again.
Doctor Verolles bottles are not like it;
There's no Guaicum here, I can assure you.

This will do well anon.

Now fie upon it.
O I have lost my tongue in this same lymbo.
The spring ants, spoiled me thinks; it goes not off
With the old twang.

Well said wench, oil it well; twill make it slide well.

Aristotle says sir, in his Posterionds.

This wench is learned; And what sales he?

That when a man dies, the last thing that moves is his heart, in a woman her
tongue.

Right; and adds further, that you women are a kind of spinners; if their legs
be plucked off, yet still they will wag them; so will you your tongues.
With what an easy change does this same weakness
Of women, slip from one extreme to another?
All these attractions take no hold of her;
No not to take refection; 'T must not be thus.
Well said wench; Tickle that Helicon.
But shall we quit the field with this disgrace
Given to our Oratory? Both not gain
So much ground of her as to make her eat?

Faith the truth is sir; you are no fit Organ
For this business;
Tis quite out of your Element:
Let us alone, sheele eat I have no fear;
A woman's tongue best fits a woman's ear.
Jove never did employ Mercurie,
But Iris for his Messenger to Iuno.

Come, let me kiss thee wench; wilt undertake
To make thy Mistress eat?

It shall go hard Sir
But I will make her turn flesh and blood,
And learn to live as other mortals do.

Well said: the morning hastes; next night expect me.

With more provision good Sir.


Very good.

And bring more wine.

What else; shalt have enough:
O Cynthia, heir of her bright purity,
Whose name thou dost inherit; Thow disdain
(Severed from all concretion) to feed
Upon the base food of gross Elements.
Thou all art soul; All immortality.
Thou fasts for Nectar and Ambrosia,
Which till thou find, and eat'st above the stars,
To all food here thou bidd'st celestial wars.

So; lets air our dampish spirits, almost stifled in this gross muddy
Element.


How sweet a breath the calmnesse of the night inspires the air withal?


Well said; Now you're your self: did not I tell you how sweet an operation the
Soldiers bottle had? And if there be such virtue in the bottle; what is there
in the Soldier? know, and acknowledge his worth when he comes in any case
Mistress.


So Maid,


Gods my patience? did you look forsooth that Iuno should have sent you meat
from her own Trencher, in reward of your widows tears? you might sit and
sigh first till your heart-strings broke, I'll able't.


I fear me thy lips have gone so oft to the bottle, that thy tongue-strings
are come broken home.


Faith the truth is, my tongue hath been so long tied up, that tis covered
with rust, I rub it against my palate as we do suspected coins, to try
whether it be currant or no. But now Mistress for an upshot of this bottle;
let's have one carouse to the good speed of my old Master, and the good speed
of my new.


So Damsel.


You must pledge it, here's to it. Do me right I pray.


You say I must.


Must? what else?


How excellent ill this humour suites our habit?


Go to Mistress, do not think but you and I shall have good sport with this
jest, when we are in private at home. I would to Venus we had some honest shift
or other to get off withal; for I'll no more ant; I'll not turn Salt-peeter in
this vault for never a mans company living; much less for a woman's. Sure I am
the wonder's over, and 'twas only for that, that I endured this; and so a my
conscience did you. Never deny it.


Nay pray thee take it to thee.


Hark I hear some footing near us.


Gods me 'tis the Soldier Mistress, by Venus if you fall to your late black
Santus again, I'll discover you.


What's here? The maid hath certainly prevailed with her; me thinks those
clouds that last night covered her looks are now dispersed: I'll try this
further. Save you Lady.


Honourable Soldier? you're welcome; please you step in sir?


With all my heart sweet heart; by your patience Lady; why this bears some
shape of life yet. Damsel, you have performed a service of high reckoning, which
cannot perish unrewarded.


Faith Sir, you are in the way to do it once, if you have the heart to hold
on.


Your bottle has poisond this wench sir.


A wholesome poison it is Lady, if I may be judge; of which sort here is one
better bottle more. Wine is ordained to raise such hearts as sink,
Whom woeful stars distemper; let him drink.
I am most glad I have been some mean to this part of your recovery, and
will drink to the rest of it.


Go to Mistress, pray simper no more; pledge the man of War here.


Come you're too rude.


Good.


Good sooth Lady you're honoured in her service; I would have you live, and
she would have you live freely; without which life is but death. To live
freely is to feast our appetites freely; without which humanes are stones; to
the satisfaction whereof I drink Lady.


I'll pledge you Sir.


Said like a Mistress; and the Mistress of your self; pledge him in love too: I
see he loves you; She's silent, she consents sir.


O happy stars. And now pardon Lady; me thinks these are all of a piece.


Nay if you kiss all of a piece we shall ne'er have done: Well twas well
offered, and as well taken.


If the world should see this.


The world! should one so rare as your self, respect the vulgar world?


The praise I have had, I would continue.


What of the vulgar? Who hates not the vulgar, deserves not love of the
virtuous. And to affect praise of that we despise, how ridiculous it is?


Comfortable doctrine Mistress, edify, edify.
Me thinks even thus it was when Dido
And Aeneas met in the Cave; And hark
Me thinks I hear some of the hunters.

TIs such an obstinacy in you Sir,
As never was conceited, to run on
With an opinion against all the world,
And what your eyes may witness; to adventure
The famishment for grief of such a woman
As all men's merits met in any one,
Could not deserve.

I must confess it Lycus,
We'll therefore now prevent it if we may,
And that our curious trial hath not dwelt
Too long on this unnecessary hant:
Grief, and all want of food; not having wrought:
Too mortally on her divine disposure.

I fear they have, and she is past our cure.

I must confess with fear and shame as much.

And that she will not trust in any thing
What you persuade her to.

Then thou shalt hast
And call my brother from his secret shroud,
Where he appointed thee to come and tell him.
How all things have succeeded.

This is well.
If (as I say) the ill be not so grown,
That-all help is denied her. But I fear
The matchless Deem is famished.

Slight, whose here?
A Soldier with my sister? wipe, wipe, see
Kissing by Jove; she, as I lay tis she.

What? is she well Sir?

O no, she is famished;
She's past our comfort, she lies drawing on.

The Gods forbid.

Look thou, she's drawing on.
How say thou?

Drawing on? Illustrious witchcrafts.

Lies she not drawing on?

She draws on fairly.
Our sister Sir? This she? can this be she?

She, she, she, and none but she. He dances sings.
She only Queen of love, and chastity,
O chastity; This women be.

Slight tis prodigious.

Horse, horse, horse,
Four Chariot Horses of the Thracian breed,
Come, bring me brother. O the happiest evening,
That ever drew her veil before the Sun.
Who is't can tell?

The Soldier Sir that watches
The bodies crucified in this hallowed place.
Of which to lose one, it is death to him,
And yet the lustful knave is at his Venery,
While one might steal one.

What a slave was I
That held not out my winds strength constantly,
That she would prove thus? O incredible?
A poor eight-pennie Soldier? She that lately
Was at such height of interiection,
Stoop now to such a base conjunction?
By heaven I wonder now I see it in act,
My brain could ever dream of such a thought.
And yet, tis true: Rare, pereles, is't not Lycus?

I know not what it is; Nor what to say.

O had I held out (villain that I was,)
My blessed confidence but one minute longer,
I should have been eternis'd. Gods my fortune,
What an unspeakable sweet sight it is?
O eyes I'll sacrifice to your dear sense.
And consecrate a Phane to Confidence.

But this you must at no hand tell your brother.
Twill make him mad: For he that was before
So scurg'd but only with bare jealousy.
What would he be, if he should come to know it?

He would be less mad: for your only way
To clear his jealousy, is to let him know it.
When knowledge comes suspicion vanishes.
The Sunne-beames breaking forth swallow the mists.
But as for you Sir Gallant; howsoever
Your banquet seems sweet in your lycorous palate,
It shall be sure to turn gall in your maw.
Thy hand a little Lycus here without.

To what?

No booty serve you sir Soldado
But my poor sister? Come, lend me thy shoulder,
I'll climb the cross; it will be such a cooler
To my Venerean Gentleman's hot liver,
When he shall find one of his crucified bodies
Stolen down, and he to be forthwith made fast
In place thereof, for the sign
Of the lost Sentinel. Come glorify
Firm Confidence in great Inconstancy.
And this believe (for all proved knowledge swears)
He that believes in error, never errs.

Tis late; I must away.

Not yet sweet love.

Tempt not my stay, tis dangerous. The law is strict, and not to be dispenst
with. If any Sentinel be too late in's watch, or that by his neglect one of
the crucified bodies should be stolen from the cross, his life buys it.


A little stay will not endanger them.
The days proclaimer has not yet given warning.
The Cock yet has not beat his third alarm.

What? shall we ever dwell here amongst the Antipodes?
Shall I not enjoy the honour of my fortune in public? sit in
Lysanders chair? Reign in his wealth?

Thou shalt, thou shalt; though my love to thee
Hath proved thus sudden and for hast leapt over
The complement of wooing, Yet only for the worlds opinion.

Mark that again.

I must maintain a form in parting hence.

Out upon it, Opinion the blind Goddess of Fools, Foe to the virtuous; and
only friend to undeserving persons, contemn it. Thou know thou hast done
virtuously; thou hast strangely sorrowed for thy husband, follow'd him to death;
further thou could not, thou hast buried thy self quick. (O that 'twere
true) spent more tears over his carcase, then would serve a whole City of
saddest widows in a plague time; besides sighings, and swownings, not to be
credited.


True; but those complements might have their time for fashion sake.


Right, Opinion and Fashion. Sfoot what call you time? to hast wept these four
whole days.


Nay berladie almost five.


Look you there; ne'er upon five whole days.


Well go and see; Return, we'll go home.


Hell be thy home, Huge Monsters damn ye, and your whole creation, O ye
Gods; in the height of her mourning in a Tomb, within sight of so many deaths!
her husbands believed body in her eye. He dead, a few days before; this
mirror of Nuptial chastity; this Votresse of widdow-constancie: to change
her faith; exchange kisses, embraces, with a stranger; and but my shame
with-stood, to give the utmost earnest of her love, to an eight-pennie
Sentinel: in effect, to prostitute her self upon her husbands Coffin! Lust,
impiety, hell, womanhood it self, add if you can one step to this.


ONe of the crucified bodies taken down!


Enough.


And the Sentinel not to be heard off?


No sir.


Make out; hast, search about for him; does none of you know him? nor his name?


He's but a stranger here of some four days standing; and we never set eye
on him, but at setting the watch.


For whom serves he? you look well to your watch masters.


For Seigneur Stratio, and whence he is, tis ignorant to us; we are not
correspondent for any, but our own places.


You're eloquent. Abroad I say, let me have him. Isis, done to himself. I must
sit fast, and be sure to give no hold to these fault-hunting enemies.


Pray thee disturb me not; put out the lights.


Faith I'll take a nap again.


Thou shalt not rest before I be resolved
What happy wind hath driven thee back to harbour?
Was it my love?

No.

Yet say so (sweet) that with the thought thereof I may enjoy all that I wish
in earth.


I am sought for. A crucified body is stolen while I loitered here; and I must
die for it,


Die? All the Gods forbid; O this affright torments me ten parts more then the
sad loss of my dear husband.


(Damnation) I believe thee.


Yet hear a woman's wit.
Take counsel of Necessity and it.
I have a body here which once I loved
And honoured above all; but that time's past.

It is, revenge it heaven.

That shall supply at so extrem a need the vacant Gibbet.

Canero. What? thy husbands body?

What hurt is't, being dead it save the living?

O heart hold in, check thy rebellious motion.

Vex not thy self dear love, nor use delay.
Tempt not this danger, set thy hands to work.

I can not do it; my heart will not permit
My hands to execute a second murder.
The truth is I am he that slew thy husband.

The Gods forbid.

It was this hand that bathed my reeking sword
In his life blood, while he cried out for mercy,
But I remorseless, panch't him, cut his throat,
He with his last breath crying, Cynthia.

O thou hast told me news that cleaves my heart;
Would I had never seen thee, or heard sooner
This bloody story; yet see, note my truth
Yet I must love thee.

Out upon the Monster.
Go, tell the Governor; Let me be brought
To die for that most famous villainy;
Not for this miching base transgression
Of tenant negligence.

I can not do it.
Love must salve any murder: I'll be judge
Of thee dear love, and these shall be thy pains
In steed of iron, to suffer these soft chains.

O I am infinitely obliged.

Arise I say, thou saver of my life.
Do not with vaine-affrighting conscience
Betray a life, that is not thine but mine:
Rise and preserve it.

Ha? thy husbands body?
Hanged up you say, in steed of that that's stolen;
Yet I his murderer, is that your meaning?

It is my Love.

Thy love amazes me,
The point is yet how we shall get it thither,
Ha? Tie a halter about's neck, and drag him to the Gallows: shall I my
love?

So you may do indeed,
Or if your own strength will not serve, wee'le aide
Our hands to yours, and bear him to the place.
For heavens love come, the night goes off apace.

All the infernal plagues dwell in thy soul;
I'll fetch a crow of iron to break the coffin.

Do love, be speedy.

As I wish thy damnation.
O I could tear my self into Atoms; off with this Antic, the shirt that
Hercules wore for his wife, was not more baneful. Is't possible there should
be such a latitude in the Sphere of this sex, to entertain such an extention
of mischief, and not turn Devil. What is a woman? what are the worst when
the best are so past naming? As men like this let them try their wives again.
Put women to the test; discover them; paint them, paint them ten parts more
then they do themselves, rather then look on them as they are; Their wits are
but painted that dislike their painting. Thou foolish thirster after idle
secrets, And ill's abroad; look home, and store choke thee; There sticks an
Achelons horne of all, Copy enough.

As much as Alizon of streams receives,
Or lofty Ilea shows of shady leaves.
Who's that?

I wonder Lycus fails me. Nor can I hear whats become of him. He would not
certain ride to Dipolis to call my brother back, without my knowledge.


My brothers voice; what makes he here abouts so untimely? I'll slip him.


Who goes there?


A friend.


Dear friend, lets know you. A friend least looked for but most welcome, and
with many a long look expected here. What sir vnbooted? have you been long
arrived?


Not long, some two hours before night.


Well brother, you've the most rare, admirable, unmatchable wife, that ever
suffered for the sin of a husband. I cannot blame your confidence indeed
now: 'tis built on such infallible ground; Lycus I think be gone to call you
to the rescue of her life; why she! O incomprehensible!


I have heard all related since my arrival, we'll meet to morrow.


What hast brother? But was it related with what untolerable pains, I and my
Mistress, her other friends, Matrons and Magistrates, laboured her diuersion
from that course?


Yes, yes.


What streams of tears she powered out; what tresses of her hair she tore! and
offered on your supposed hearse!


I have heard all.


But above all; how since that time, her eyes never harboured winck of slumber,
these six days; no nor tasted the least dram of any sustenance.


How is that assured?


Not a scruple.


Are you sure there came no Soldier to her nor brought her victuals?


Soldier? what Soldier?


Why some Soldier of the watch, that attends the executed bodies: well brother
I am in hast; to morrow shall supply this nights defect of conference; Adieu.


A Soldier? of the watch? bring her victuals? Go to brother I have you in
the wind; he's vnharnest of all his travailing accoutrements. I came directly
from his house, no word of him there; he knows the whole relation; he's
passionate: All collections speak he was the Soldier. What should be the
riddle of this? that he is stolen hither into a Soldiers disguise? he should
have staid at Dipolis to receive news from us. Whether he suspected our
relation; or had not patience to expect it, or whether that furious, frantic
capricious Devil jealousy hath tossed him hither on his horns, I can not
conjecture. But the case is clear, he's the Soldier. Sister, look to your
fame, your chastetie's vncouer'd. Are they here still? here believe it both
most woefully weeping over the bottle.


Who's there.


Tharsalio, open.


Alas Sir, tis no boot to vex your sister, and your self, she is desperate,
will not hear persuasion, she's very weak.


Here's a true-bred chamber-maid. Alas, I am sorry for it; I have brought her
meat and Candian wine to strengthen her.


O the very naming an't, will drive her into a swoon; good Sir forbear.


Yet open sweet, that I may bless mine eyes with sight of her fair shrine;
and of thy sweetest self (her famous Pandresse) open I say. Sister? you hear
me well, paint not your Tomb without; we know too well what rotten carcases
are lodged within; open I say. Ero opens, and he sees her head laid on the
coffin, c. Sister I have brought you tidings to wake you out of this sleeping
mummery.


Alas she's faint, and speech is painful to her.


Well said frubber, was there no Soldier here lately?


A Soldier? when?


This night, last night, the other night; and I know not how many nights and
days.


Whose there?


Your brother Mistress, that asks if there were not a soldier here.


Here was no soldier.


Yes Mistress I think here was such a one though you took no heed of him.


Go to sister; did not you join kisses, embraces, and plight indeed with
him, the utmost pledge of Nuptial love with him. Deni't, deni't; but first
hear me a short story. The Soldier was your disguised husband, dispute it
not. That you see yonder, is but a shadow, an empty chest containing nothing
but air. Stand not to gaze at it, tis true. This was a project of his own
contriving to put your loyalty constant vows to the test; you're warnd, be
armed.


O fie a these perils.


O Ero! we are undone.


Nay, you'd ne'er be warned; I ever wished you to withstand the push of that
Soldiers pike, and not enter him too deep into your bosom, but to keep sacred
your widows vows made to Lysander.


Thou did, thou did.


Now you may see th'euent. Well our safety lies in our speed: heel do us
mischief, if we prevent not his coming. Lets to your Mothers: and there cal
out your mightiest friends to guard you from his fury. Let them begin the
quarrel with him for practising this villainy on your sex to entrap your
frailties.


Nay I resolve to sit out one brunt more; to try to what aim heel enforce
his project: were he some other man, unknown to me, his violence might awe me;
but knowing him as I do, I fear him not. Do thou but second me, thy strength
and mine shall master his best force, if he should prove outrageous. Despair
they say makes cowards turn courageous. Shut up the Tomb.


All pains are lost in hunting out this Soldier; his fear (adding wings to
his heals) out-goes us as far as the fresh Hare the tired hounds. Who goes
there?


A friend.


O, your success and mine touching this Sentinel, tells, I suppose, one tale;
he's far enough I undertake by this time.


I blame him not: the law's severe (though just and can not be dispensed.)


Why should the laws of Paphos, with more rigour, then other City laws
pursue offenders? that not appeased with their lives forfait, exact a justice
of them after death? And if a Soldier in his watch forsooth lose one of the
dead bodies, he must die for it: It seems the State needed no soldiers when
that was made a law.


So we may chide the fire for burning us; or say the Bee's not good because she
stings; Tis not the body the law respects, but the soldiers neglect; when the
watch (the guard and safety of the City) is left abandoned to all hazards.
But let him go; and tell me if your news sort with mine, for Lycus;
apprehended they say, about Lysanders murder.


Tis true; he's at the Captains lodge under guard, and tis my charge in the
morning to unclose the leaden coffin, and discover the body; The Captain will
assay an old conclusion often approved; that at the murderers sight the blood
revives again, and boils a fresh; and every wound has a condemning voice to
cry out guilty against the murderer.


O world, if this be true; his dearest friend, his bed companion, whom of all
his friends he culled out for his bosom!


Tush man, in this topsy turuy world, friendship and bosom kindness, are but
made covers for mischief, means to compass il. Near-allied trust, is but a
bridge for treason. The presumptions cry loud against him; his answers found
disiointed; crosselegd tripping up one another. He names a Town whether he
brought Lysander murdered by Mountainers, that's false, some of the dwellers
have been here, and all disclaim it. Besides, the wounds he bears in show, are
such as shrews closely give their husbands, that never bleed, and find to be
counterfeit.


O that jade falsehood is never sound of all; but halts of one leg still.
Truth pace is all upright; sound every where.
And like a die, sets ever on a square.
And how is Lycus his bearing in this condition?

Faith (as the manner of such desperate offenders is till it come to the point)
careless, confident, laughing at all that seem to pity him. But leave it to
th'euent. Night fellow Soldier, you'll not meet me in the morning at the Tomb,
and lend me your hand to the vnrigging of Lysanders hearse.


I care not if I do, to view heavens power in this vnbottomd seller. Blood,
though it sleep a time, yet never dies.
The Gods on murderers fix revengeful eyes.
COme my borrowed disguise, let me once more
Be reconcild to thee, my trustiest friend;
Thou that in truest shape hast let me see
That which my truer self hath hid from me,
Help me to take revenge on a disguise,
Ten times more false and counterfeit then thou.
Thou, false in show, hast been most true to me;
The seeming true; hath proved more false then her.
Assist me to behold this act of lust,
Note with a Scene of strange impiety.
Her husbands murdered corse! O more then horror!
I'll not believe it vntri'd; If she but lift
A hand to act it; by the fates her brains fly out,
Since she has madded me; let her beware my horns.
For though by goring her, no hope be shown
To cure my self, yet I'll not bleed alone.

Who knocks? Lys The soldier; open.
See sweet, here are the engines that must do it,
Which with much fear of my discovery
I have at last procured.
Shall we about this work? I fear the morn
Will ouer-take's; my stay hath been prolonged
With hunting obscure nookes for these emploiments,
The night prepares away; Come, art resolved.

I, you shall find me constant.

I, so I have, most prodigiously constant,
Here's a rare halter to hug him with.

Better you and I join our hands and bear him thither, you take his head.

I, for that was always heavier then's whole body besides

You can tell best that loded it.

I'll be at the feet; I am able to bear against you I warrant you.

Hast thou prepared weak nature to digest
A sight so much distasteful; hastser'd thy heart
I bleed not at the bloody spectacle?
Hast armed thy fearful eyes against th'affront
Of such a direful object?
Thy murdered husband ghastly staring on thee;
His wounds gaping to affright thee; his body soild with
Gore? fore heaven my heart shruggs at it.

So does not mine,
Loue's resolute; and stands not to consult
With petty terror; but in full carrier
Runs blind-fold through an Army of misdoubts,
And interposing fears; perhaps I'll weep
Or so, make a forced face and laugh again.

O most valiant love!
I was thinking with my self as I came; how if this
Brake to light; his body known;
(As many notes might make it) would it not fix
Upon thy fame, an vnremoued Brand
Of shame, and hate; they that in former times
Adored thy virtue; would they not abhor
Thy lothest memory?

All this I know.
But yet my love to thee
Swallows all this; or whatsoever doubts
Can come against it.
Shame's but a feather balanced with thy love.

Neither fear nor shame? you are steel to the
Proof (but I shall iron you): Come then lets to work.
Alas poor Corps how many martyrdomes
Must thou endure? mangled by me a villain,
And now exposed to foul shame of the Gibbet?
Fore, piety, there is somewhat in me strives
Against the deed, my very arm relents
To strike a stroke so inhumane,
To wound a hallowed hearse? suppose twere mine,
Would not my Ghost start up and fly upon thee?

No, I'd mall it down again with this.

How now?

Nay, then I'll assay my strength; a Soldier and a raid of a dead man? A
soft-r'ode milk-sop? come I'll doot my self.

And I look on? give me the iron.

No, I'll not lose the glory ant. This hand, c.

Pray thee sweet, let it not be said the savage act was thine; deliver me the
engine.

Content your self, tis in a fitter hand.

Wilt thou first? art not thou the most.

Ill-destin'd wife of a transformed monster;
Who to assure him self of what he knew,
Hath lost the shape of man.

Ha? crosse-capers?

Poor Soldiers case; do not we know you Sir?
But I have given thee what thou came to seek.
Go Satire, run affrighted with the noise
Of that harsh sounding horne thy self hast blown,
Farewell; I leave thee there my Husbands Corps,
Make much of that.

What have I done? O let me lie and grieve, and speak no more.

BRing him away; you must have patience Sir: If you can say ought to quit you
of those presumptions that lie heavy on you, you shall be heard. If not, tis
not your braves, nor your affecting looks can carry it. We must acquit our
duties.


You're Captain a the watch Sir.


You take me right.


So were you best do me; see your presumptions be strong; or be assured that
shall prove a dear presumption, to brand me with the murder of my friend. But
you have been suborned by some close villain to defame me.


Twill not be so put off friend Lycus, I could wish your soul as free from
taint of this foul fact; as mine from any such unworthy practise.


Conduct me to the Governor him self; to confront before him your shallow
accusations.


First Sir, I'll bear you to Lysanders Tomb, to confront the murdered body;
and see what evidence the wounds will yield against you.


You're wise Captain. But if the body should chance not to speak; If the
wounds should be tongue-tied Captain; where's then your evidence Captain?
will you not be laughed at for an officious Captain?


You're gallant Sir.


Your Captainship commands my service no further.


Well Sir, perhaps I may, if this conclusion take not; we'll try what
operation lies in torture, to pull confession from you.


Say you so Captain? but hark you Captain, Might it not concur with the
quality of your office, ere this matter grow to the height of a more
threatening danger; to winck a little at a by slip, or so?


How's that?


To send a man abroad under guard of one of your silliest shack-rags; that be
may beat the knave, and run's way. I mean this on good terms Captain; I'll
be thankful.


I'll think ont hereafter. Mean time I have other employment for you.


Your place is worthily replenished Captain. My duty Sir; Hark Captain,
there's a mutiny in your Army; I'll go raise the Governor.


No hast Sir; heel soon be here without your summons.


Bring forth the Knight ath' Tomb; have we meet with you Sir?


Pray thee soldier use thine office with better temper.


Come convey him to the Lord Governor, First before the Captain Sir. Have the
heavens nought else to do, but to stand still, and turn all their malignant
Aspects upon one man?


Captain here's the Sentinel we sought for; he's some new pressed Soldier,
for none of us know him.


Where found you him?


My truant was mich't Sir into a blind corner of the Tomb.


Well said, guard him safe, bur for the Corps.


For the Corps Sir? bare misprision, there's no body, nothing. A mere
blandation; a deceptio visus. Unless this soldier for hunger have eat up
Lysanders body.


Why, I could have told you this before Captain; The body was borne away
peece-meale by devout Ladies of Venus order, for the man died one of Venus
Martys. And yet I heard since 'twas seen whole ath' other side the downs
upon a Colestafe betwixt two huntsmen, to feed their dogs withal. Which
was a miracle Captain.


Mischief in this act hath a deep bottom; and requires more time to sound it.
But you Sir, it seems, are a Soldier of the newest stamp. Know you what tis
to forsake your stand? There's one of the bodies in your charge stolen away;
how answer you that? See here comes the Governor.


STand aside there.


Room for a strange Governor. The perfect draught of a most brainelesse,
imperious upstart. O desert! where were thou, when this wooden dagger was
gilded over with the Title of Governor?


Peace Masters; hear my Lord.


All wisdom be silent; Now speaks Authority.


I am come in person to discharge Justice.


Of his office.


The cause you shall know hereafter; and it is this. A villain, whose very
sight I abhor; where is he? Let me see him.


Is't Lycus you mean my Lord?


Go to sirrha you're too malipert; I have heard of your Sentinels escape;
look too't.


My Lord, this is the Sentinel you speak of.


How now Sir? what time a day is't?


I can not show you precisely, ant please your Honour.


What? shall we have replications? Reioinders?


Such a creature, Fool is, when he bestrides the back of Authority.


Sirrha, stand you forth. It is supposed thou hast committed a most
inconvenient murder upon the body of Lysander.


My good Lord, I have not.


Peace varlet; dost chop with me? I say it is imagined thou hast murdered
Lysander. How it will be proved I know not. Thou shalt therefore presently be
had to execution, as justice in such cases requires. Soldiers take him away:
bring forth the Sentinel.


Your Lordship will first let my defence be heard.


Sirrha; I'll no fending nor proving. For my part I am satisfied, it is so:
that's enough for thee. I had ever a Sympathy in my mind against him.

Let him be had away.


A most excellent apprehension. He's able ye see to judge of a cause at first
sight, and hear but two parties. Here's a second Solon.


Hear him my Lord; presumptions oftentimes,
(Though likely grounded) reach not to the truth.
And Truth is oft abused by likelihood.
Let him be heard my Lord.

Madam, content your self. I will do justice; I will not hear him. Your late
Lord, was my Honourable Predecessor: But your Ladyship must pardon me. In
matters of justice I am blind.


That's true.


I know no persons. If a Court favourite write to me in a case of justice: I
will pocket his letter, and proceed. If a Suitor in a case of justice thrusts
a bribe into my hand, I will pocket his bribe, and proceed. Therefore Madam,
set your heart at rest: I am seated in the Throne of justice; and I will do
justice; I will not hear him.


Not hear him my Lord?


No my Lady: and moreover put you in mind, in whose presence you stand; if you
Parrot to me long; go to.


Nay the Vice must snap his Authority at all he meets, how shalt else be
known what part he plays?


Your husband was a Noble Gentleman, but Alas he came short, he was no
Statesman. He has left a foul City behind him.


I, and I can tell you twill trouble his Lordship and all his Honourable
assistants of Seauingers to sweep it clean.


It's full of vices, and great ones too.


And thou none of the meanest.


But I'll turn all topsy turuie; and set up a new discipline amongst you. I'll
cut of all perished members.


That's the Surgeons office.


Cast out these rotten stinking carcases for infecting the whole City.


Rotten they may be, but their wenches use to pepper them; and their Surgeons
to perboile them; and that preserves them from stinking, ant please your
Honour.


Peace Sirrha, peace; and yet tis well said too. A good pregnant fellow in faith.
But to proceed. I will spew drunkenness out ath' City.


In to the Country.


Shifters shall cheat and starve; And no man shall do good but where there is
no need. Braggarts shall live at the head; and the tumult that hant Taverns.
Asses shall bear good qualities, and wise men shall use them. I will whip
lechefie out ath' City, there shall be no more Cuckolds. They that heretofore
were errand Cornutos, shall now be honest shop-keepers, and justice shall take
place. I will hunt jealousy out of my Dominion.


Do hear Brother?


It shall be the only note of love to the husband, to love the wife: And none
shall be more kindly welcome to him then he that cuckolds him.


Believe it a wholesome reformation.


I'll have no more Beggars. Fools shall have wealth, and the learned shall live
by their wits. I'll have no more Banckrouts. They that owe money shall pay it at
their best leisure: And the rest shall make a virtue of imprisonment; and their
wives shall help to pay their debts. I'll have all young widows spaded for
marrying again. For the old and withered, they shall be confiscate to
unthrifty Gallants, and decayed Knights. If they be poor they shall be
burnt to make soap ashes, or given to Surgeons Hall, to be stamped to salve for
the French mesells. To conclude, I will Cart pride out ath' Town.


Ant please your Honour Pride ant be ne'er so beggarly will look for a Coch.


Well said a mine Honour. A good significant fellow in faith: What is he? he
talks much; does he follow your Ladyship?


No ant please your Honour, I go before her.


A good undertaking presence; A well-promising fore head, your Gentleman Usher
Madam?


Yours if you please my Lord.


Borne in the City?


I ant please your Honour, but begot in the Court.


Tressellegg'd?


I, ant please your Honour.


The better, it bears a breadth; makes room a both sides. Might I not see his
pace?


Yes ant please your Honour.


Tis well, tis very well. Give me thy hand: Madame I will accept this property
at your hand, and will wear it threadbare for your sake. Fall in there, sirrha.
And for the matter of Lycus Madam, I must tell you, you are shallow: there's a
State point in it? hark you: The Viceroy has given him, and we must uphold
correspondence. He must walk; say one man goes wrongfully out ath' world,
there are hundreds to one come wrongfully into the world.


Your Lordship will give me but a word in private.


Come brother; we know you well: what means this habit? why staid you not at
Dipolis as you resolved, to take advertisement for us of your wives bearing?


O brother, this jealous frenzy has borne me headlong to ruin.


Go to, be comforted; uncase your self; and discharge your friend.


Is that Lysander say you? And is all his story true? Berladie Madam this
jealousy will cost him dear: he undertook the person of a Soldier; and as a
Soldier must have justice. Madam, his Altitude in this case can not dispense.
Lycus, this Soldier hath acquitted you.


And that acquitall I'll for him requite; the body lost, is by this time
restored to his place.


It is my Lord.


These are State points, in which your Lordships time has not yet trained your
Lordship; please your Lordships graces Nuptial we have now in hand.

Twixt this young Lady and this Gentleman.
Your Lordship there shall care the ample story.
And how the Ass wrapped in a Lyons skin
Fearfully rord, but his large ears appeared
And made him laughed at, that before was feared.

I'll go with you. For my part, I am at a non plus.

Come brother; Thank the Countess: she hath suet to make your peace. Sister
give me your hand.
(...) Brother let your lips compound the strife,
And think you have the only constant Wife.


