NOt out of Envy, for there's no effect
Where there's no cause; nor out of Imitation
For we have evermore bin Imitated;
Nor out of our contention to do better
Then that which is opposde to ours in Title,
For that was good; and better cannot be:
And for the Title if it seem affected
We might as well have called it, God you good Even:
Only that East-ward; west-wards still exceeds,
Honour the Suns fair rising, not his setting;
Nor is our Title utterly ensorste,
As by the points we touch at, you shall see;
Bear with our willing pains, if dull or witty,
We only dedicate it to the City.

AND whether with you now? what loose action are you bound for? come what
comrades are you to meet withal? whers the supper? whers the supper? whers
the randeuous?


Indeed, and in very good sober truth, Sir.


Indeed, and in very good sober truth Sir? Behind my back thou wilt swear
faster then a french foot boy, and talk more bawdily then a common midwife,
and now indeed and in very good sober truth Sir: but if a privy search should
be made, with what furniture are you rigged now? Sirrah I tell thee, I am thy
master William Tutchstone Goldsmith: and thou my Prentice Francis
Quick-siluer: and will see whether you are running. Work upon that now.


Why Sir I hope a man may use his recreation with his masters profit.


Prentices recreations are seldom with their masters profit. Work upon that
now. You shall give up your cloak tho you be no Alderman. Heyday, Ruffians
hall. Sword, pumps, heers a Racket indeed.


Work upon that now.


Thou shameless Varlet dost thou jest at thy lawful master contrary to thy
Indentures?


Why zbloud sir, my mother's a Gentlewoman: and my father a Justice of Peace,
and of Quorum, and tho I am a younger brother and a prentice yet I hope I am my
fathers son: and by Gods lid, tis for your worship and for your commodity
that I keep company. I am entertained among gallants, true: They call me
coozen Frank, right; Ilend them monnies, good; they spend it, well. But when
they are spent, must not they strive to get more? must not their land fly? and
to whom? shall not your worship ha, the refusal? well, I am a good member of
the City if I were well considered. How would Morchants thrive, if Gentlemen
would not be unthrifts? How could Gentlemen be vnthrists if their humours were
not fed? How should their humours be fed but by whit meat, and cunning
secondings? well, the City might consider us. I am going to an Ordinary now;
the gallants fall to play, I carry light gold with me: the gallants call
coozen Frank some gold for silver, I change, gain by it, the gallants loose
the gold; and then call coozen Frank lend me some silver. Why --


Why? I cannot tell, seue score pound art thou out in the cash, but look to
it, I will not be gallanted out of my monies. And as for my rising by other
men's fall; God shield me. Did I gain my wealth by Ordinaries? no: by
exchanging of gold? no: by keeping of gallants company? no. I hired me a little
shop, fought low, took small gain, kept no debt book, garnished my shop for
want of Plate, with good wholesome thrifty sentences; As, Touchstone, keep thy
shop, and thy shop will keep thee. Light gains makes heavy purses. Tis
good to be merry and wise: And when I was wiu'd, having something to stick too,
I had the horne of Suretiship ever before my eyes: You all know the devise of
the Horne, where the young fellow slips in at the Butte end, and comes squesd
out at the Buckall: and I grew up, and I praise providence, I bear my brows
now as high as the best of my neighbours: but thou-well look to the accounts,
your fathers bond lies for you: seven score pound is yet in the reere.


Why Slid sir, I have as good, as proper gallants words for it as any are in
London, Gentlemen of good phrase, perfect language, passingly behau'd, Gallants
that wear socks and clean linen, and call me kind coozen Frank, good
coozen Frank, for they know my Father; and by god; lid shall not I trust
hem? not trust?


What do ye lack Sir? What is't you'll buy Sir?


I marry Sir, there's a youth of another piece. There's thy fellowe-Prentise,
as good a Gentleman borne as thou art: nay, and better meant. But dos he pump
it, or Racket it? Well, if he thrive not, if he out-last not a hundred such
crackling Bauins as thou art, God and men neglect industry.


It is his Shop, and here my M. walks.


With me Boy?


My Master, Sir Petronel Flash, recommends his love to you, and will instantly
visit you,


To make up the match with my eldest daughter, my wives Dilling, whom she longs
to call Madam. He shall find me unwillingly ready Boy.

There's another afliction too. As I have two Prentices: the one of a boundless
prodigality, the other of a most hopeful Industry. So have I only two
daughters: the eldest, of a proud ambition and nice wantonness: the other of a
modest humility and comely sobernesse. The one must be Ladyfied forsooth: and
be attired just to the Court-cut, and long tail. So far is she ill naturde
to the place and means of my preferment and fortune, that she throws all the
contempt and despite, hatred it self can cast upon it. Well, a piece of Land
she has, t'was her Grandmothers gift: let her, and her Sir Petronel, flash out
that. But as for my substance, she that skornes me, as I am a Citizen and
Trades-man, shall never pamper her pride with my industry: shall never use me
as men do Foxes; keep themselves warm in the skin, and throw the body
that bare it to the dung-hill. I must go entertain this Sir Petronell.
Goulding, My utmost care's for thee, and only trust in thee, look to the
shop, as for you, Master Quick-siluer, think of husks, for thy course is
running directly to the prodigaills hogs trough. husks Sra. Works upon that
now.


Mary sough goodman flat-cap: Sfoot tho I am a prentice I can give arms, and
my father's a justice a peace by descent: and zbloud --


Fie how you swear.


Sfoot man I am a Gentleman, and may swear by my pedigree, Gods my life.
Sirrah Goulding, wiit be ruled by a fool? turn good fellow, turn swaggering
gallant, and let the Welkin roar, and Erebus also: Look not Westward to the
fall of Don Phoebus, but to the East; Eastward Hoe, "Where radiant beams of
lusty Sol appear,
"And bright Eous makes the welkin clear.
We are both Gentlemen, and therefore should be no coxcombs: lets be no longer
fools to this flat-cap Touchstone. Eastward Bully: this Satin belly, Canvas
backed Touchstone; Slife man his father was a Malt-man, and his mother sold
Ginger-bread in Christ-church.


What would ye ha me do?


Why do nothing, be like a gentleman, be idle the curse of man is labour. Wipe
thy bum with testones, make Ducks and Drakes with shillings: What Eastward
hoe. Wilt thou cry, what is't ye lack? stand with a bare pate, and a dropping
nose, under a wooden pent-house, and a^t a gentleman? wilt thou bear Tankards,
and may bear Aims? be ruled, turn gallant, Eastward hoe, ta lyre, lyre,
to., Who calls Ieronimo? speak here I am: gods so, how like a sheep thou
look, a my conscience some cowheard begot thee, thou Goulding of
Goulding-hall, ha boy?


Go, ye are a prodigal coxcomb, I a cowheards son, because I turn not a
drunk whore-hunting rake-hell like thy self?


Rakehell? rakehell?


Pish, in soft terms ye are a cowardly bragging boy. I'll ha you whipped.


Whipped, that's good in faith, untruss me?


No, thou wilt undo thy self. Alas I behold thee with pity, not with anger;
thou common shot-clog, gull of all companies: me thinks I see thee already
walking in Moore fields without a Cloak, with half a Hat, without a band, a
Doublet with three Buttons, without a girdle, a hose with one point and no
Garter, with a cudgel under thine arm borrowing and begging three pence.


Nay Slife, take this and take all: as I am a Gentleman borne, I'll be drunk,
grow valiant, and beat thee.


Go thou most madly vain, whom nothing can recover but that which reclaims
Athiests, and makes great persons sometimes religious: Calamity. As for my
place and life thus I have read:

What ere some vainer youth may term disgrace,
The gain of honest pains is never base:
From trades from arts, from valor honour springs,
These three are founts of gentry, yea of Kings.

For the passion of patience, look if sir Petronell approach; that sweet, that
fine, that delicate, that -- for loves sake tell me if he come. O sister Mill,
though my father be a low capt tradsman, yet I must be a Lady: and I praise God
my mother must call me Medam, (does he come?) off with this gown for shames
sakes, off with this gown: let not my Knight take me in the City cut in any
hand: tear't, pax ont (does he come) tear't of. Thus whilst she sleeps I
sorrow, for her sake, c.


Lord sister, with what an immodest impaciencie and disgraceful scorn, do
you put off your City tier: I am sorry to think you imagine to right your
self, in wronging that which hath made both you and us.


I tell you I cannot endure it, I must be a Lady: do you wear your Quoiffe
with a London licket; your Stammel petticoat with two guards, the Buffin
gown with the Tuftaffitic cape, and the Velvet lace. I must be a Lady, and I
will be a Lady. I like some humours of the City Dames well, to eat Cherries
only at an Angel a pound, good; to dye rich Scarlet black, pretty: to line a
Grogaram gown clean thorough with velvet, tolerable; their pure linen,
their smocks of 3. li. a smock are to be borne withal. But your minsing
niceryes, taffeta pipkins, durance petticotes, silver bodkins: -- Gods my life,
as I shall be a Lady I cannot endure it. Is he come yet? Lord what a long
knight tis! And ever she cried shout home, and yet I knew one longer, and
ever she cried shout home, fa, la, lie, re, lo, la.


Well Sister, those that scorn their nest, oft fly with a sick wing.


Boe-bell.


Where Titles presume to thrust before fit means to second them, Wealth and
respect often grow sullen and will not follow. For sure in this, I would for
your sake I spake not truth. Where ambition of place goes before fitness of
birth, contempt and disgrace follow. I heard a Scholar once say, that Vlisses
when he counterfeited himself mad, yoked cattes, and foxes, and dogs
together to draw his plow, whilst he followed and sowed salt: But sure I judge
them truly mad, that yoke citizens and courtiers, trades men and soldiers,
a gold-smiths daughter and a knight: well sister, pray God my father sow not
salt too.


Alas, poor Mil. when I am a Lady, I'll pray for thee yet I faith: Nay, and I'll
vouchsafe to call thee sister Mil still, for though thou art not like to be a
Lady as I am, yet sure thou art a creature of Gods making; and may
peradventure to be saved as soon as I, (dos he come?) And ever and anon she
doubled in her song.

Now (Ladies my comfort)
What a profane Ape's here!
Tailor, Poldavis, prithee fit it
fit it: is this a right Scot?
Does it clip close? and bear up round?

Fine and stiffly i faith, twill keep your thighs so cool and make your waste
so small: here was a fault in your body, but I have supplied the desect, with
the effect of my steel instrument which, though it have but one eye, can see
to rectify the imperfection of the proportion.


Most aedefying Tailor! I protest you Tailers are most sanctified members, and
make many crooked thing go upright. How must I bear my hands? light? light?


O I, now you are in the Lady-fashion, you must do all things light. Tread
light, light. I and fall so: that's the court-Amble.


Has the Court ne'er a trot?


No, but a false gallop, Lady.


And if she will not go to bed


The knights come forsooth.


Is my knight come? O the Lord. my band? Sister do my cheeks look well? give
me a little box a the ear that I may see me to blush: now, now. So, there,
there, there! here he is: O my dearest delight, Lord, Lord, and how do my
Knight?


Fie, with more modesty.


Modesty! why I am no citizen now, modesty? am I not to be married? you're
best to keep me modest now I am to be a Lady.


Boldness is good fashion and courtlike.


I, in a country Lady I hope it is: as I shall be. And how chance ye came no
sooner knight?


Faith, I was so entertained in the Progress with one Count Epernoum a welch
knight: we had a match at Baloone too, with my Lord Whachum, for four
crowns.


At Baboon? Iesu! you and I will play at Baboon in the country? Knight.


O sweet Lady: tis a strong play with the arm.


With arm, or leg, or any other member, if it be a court-sport. And when
shal's be married my Knight?


I come now to consummate it; and your father may call a poor Knight, Son in
Law.


Sir, ye are come, what is not mine to keep, I must not be sorry to forgo: A
100. li. Land her Grandmother left her, tis yours, her self (as her mothers
gift) is yours. But if you expect ought from me, know, my hand and mine eyes
open together; I do not give blindly: Work upon that now.


Sir, you mistrust not my means? I am a Knight.


Sir, Sir; What I know not, you will give me leave to say, I am ignorant of.


Yes, that he is a Knight; I know where he had money to pay the Gentlemen
Ushers, and Heralds their Fees. I, that he is a Knight: and so might you have
been too, if you had been ought else then an Ass, as well as some of your
neighbours. And I thought you would not ha been Knighted, (as I am an honest
woman) I would ha dubbed you my self, I praise God I have wherewithal. But as
for you daughter. --


I mother, I must be a Lady to morrow: and by your leave mother (I speak it
not without my duty, but only in the right of my husband) I must take place
of you, Mother.


That you shall Lady-daughter, and have a Coach as well as I too.


Yes mother. But by your leave mother, (I speak it not without my duty but
only in my husbands right) my Coach-horses must take the wall of your
Coach-horses.


Come, come, the day grows low: tis supper time; use my house the wedding
solemnity is at my wives cost; thank me for nothing but my willing blessing:
for (I cannot fain) my hopes are faint. And Sir, respect my daughter, she has
refused for you wealthy and honest matches, known good men, well monied,
better traded, best reputed.


Body a truth, Chittizens, Chittizens. Sweet Knight, as soon as ever we are
married, take me to to thy mercy out of this miserable Chittie, presently,
carry me out of the sent of New-castle Coal, and the hearing of Boe-bell, I
beseech thee down with me for God sake.


Well daughter, I have read, that old wit sings:

The greatest rivers flow from little springs.
Though thou art full, scorn not thy means at first,
He that's most drunk may soonest be a thirst.
Work upon that now.
No, no; yon'd stand my hopes.


Come hither daughter. And how approve you your sisters fashion? how do you
phantsie her cho ye? what dost thou think?


I hope as a sister, well.


Nay but, nay but how dost thou like her behaviour and humour? speak freely.


I am loath to speak ill: and yet I am sorry of this, I cannot speak well.


Well: very good, as I would wish: A modest answer* Goulding, come hither:
hither Golding. How dost thou like the Knight. Sir Flash? dos he not look
big? how likst thou the Elephant? he says he has a castle in the Country.


Pray heaven, the Elephant carry not his Castle on his back.


Fore heaven, very well: But seriously, how dost repute him?


The best I can say of him is, I know him not.


Ha G ulding? I commend thee, I approve thee, and will make it appear my
affection is strong to thee. My wise has her humour, and I will ha, mine. Dost
thou see my daughter here? she is not fair, well-fauoured or so, indifferent,
which modest measure of beauty, shall not make it thy only work to watch
her, nor sufficient mis^baunce, to suspect her. Thou art towardly, she is
modest, thou art provident, she is careful. She's now mine: give me thy
hand, she's now thine* Work upon that now.


Sir, as your son, I honour you; and as your servant obey you.


Say thou so, come hither Mildred. Do you see yon'd fellow? he is a
Gentlemen (tho my Prentice) has somewhat to take too: a Youth of good hope;
well friended, well parted. Are you mine* You are his. Work (you) upon that
now.


Sir, I am all yours: your body gave me life, your care and love happiness of
life: let your veriue still direct it, for to your wisdom I wholly dispose my
self.


Say thou so? be you two better acquainted. Lip her, Lip her knave. So shut
up shop: in* We must make holiday.

This match shall on, for I intend to prove
Which thrives the l^st, the mean or lofty love.
Whether fit Wedlock vowed twixt like and like.
Or prouder hopes, which daringly ore strike
Their place and means: tis honest Times expense.
When seeming lightness bears a morrallsence.
Work upon that now.


Quickesiluer, master Frances Quickesiluer, master Quickesiluer?


Here sir;


So sir; nothing but flat Master Quickesiluer (without any familiar addition)
will fetch you: will you truss my points sir?


I forsooth:


How now sir? the druncken hyckop, so soon this morning?


Tis but the coldness of my stomach forsooth.


What? have you the cause natural for it? you're a very learned drunckerd: I
believe I shall miss some of my silver spoons with your learning. The
nuptial night will not moisten your throat sufficiently, but the morning
likewise must rain her dews into your gluttonous wesand.


An't please you sir, we did but drink


To the coming off an'him?


I forsooth: we drunk to his coming on


A very capital reason. So that you go to bed late, and rise early to commit
drunkenness? you fulfil the Scripture very sufficient wickedly forsooth.


The Knights men forsooth be still a their knees at it,


I pray sir, even to them again then; you're one of the separated crew, one of
my wives faction, my young Ladies, with who with their great match, I will have
nothing to do.


So sir, now I will go keep my


In any case Sir, lay one cup of Sack more alyour cold stomach, I beseech you.


Yes forsooth.


This is for my credit Servants ever maintain drunkenness in their masters
house, for their masters credit; a good idle Seruing-mans reason: I thank
Time, the night is past; I ne'er waked to such cost; I think we have stowd more
sorts of flesh in our bellies, then ever Noahs Arc received: and for Wine, why
my house turns giddy with it, and more noise in it then at a Conduict; Aye
me, even beasts condemn our gluttony. Well, 'tis our Cities fault, which
because we commit seldom, we commit the more sinfully, we lose no time in our
sensuality, but we make amends for it; O that we would do so in virtue, and
religious negligences; But see here are all the sober parcels my house can
show, I'll cauesdrop, hear what thoughts they utter this morning.


But is it possible, that you seeing your sister preferred to the bed of a
Knight, should contain your affections in the arms of a Prentice?


I had rather make up the garment of my affections in some of the same piece,
then like a fool wear gowns of two colours, or mix Sackcloth with Satin.


And do the costly garments; the title and fame of a Lady the fashion;
observation, and reverence proper to such preferment, no more inflame you, then
such convenience as my poor means and industry can offer to your virtues?


I have observed that the bridle given to those violent flatteries of fortune,
is seldom recovered; they bear one headlong in desire from one novelty to
another: and where those ranging appetites reign, there is ever more passion
then reasons no staye, and so no happiness. These hasty advancements are not
natural; Nature hath given us legs, to go to our objects; not wings to fly
to them.


How dear an object you are to my desires I cannot express, whose fruition
would my masters absolute consent and yours vouchsafe me, I should be
absolutely happy. And though it were a grace so far beyond my merit, that I
should blush with unworthiness to receive it, yet thus far both my love my
means shall assure your requital; you shall want nothing fit for your birth
and education; what increase of wealth and advancement the honest and orderly
industry skill of our trade will afford in any, I doubt not will be aspirde
by me; I will ever make your contenment the end of my endeavours; I will love
you above all; and only your grief shall be my misery; and your delight, my
felicity.


Work upon that now. By my hopes, he woes honestly and orderly; he shall be
Anchor of my hopes. Look, see the ill yoked monster his fellow.


Eastward Hoe; Holla ye pampered lades of Asia.


Drunk now down right, a, my fidelity.





Fie fellow Quickesiluer, what a pickle are you in?


Pickle? pickle in thy throat; zounes pickell? wa ha ho, good morrow knight
Petronell: morrow lady Gouldsmith* come of, Knight, with a counterbuff, for the
honour of knighthood.


Why how now sir? do ye know where you are?


Where I am? why sbloud you loulthead where I am?


Go to, go to, for shame go to bed, and sleep out this immodesty: thou
sham'st both my master and his house.


Shame? what shame? I thought, thou would show thy bringing up: and thou were
a Gentleman as I am, thou would think it no shame to be drunk. Lend me some
money, save my credit, I must dine with the Serving men and their wives; and
their wives sirha.


E'ene who you will, I'll not lend thee three pence.


Sfoote lend me some money, hast thou not Hyren here?


Why how now sirha? what vain's this, hah?


Who cries on murder? lady was it you? how does our master? pray thee cry
Eastward ho?


Sirha, sirrha, you're past your hickvp now, I see you're drunk.


Tis for your credit master.


And hear you keep a whore in town.


Tis for your credit Master.


And what you are out in Cashe, I know.


So do I. my fathers a Gentleman, Work upon that now; Eastward hoe.


Sir, Eastward hoe, will make you go Westward ho; I will no longer dishonest my
house, nor endanger my stock with your licence; There sir, there's your
Indenture, all your apparel (that I must know) is on your back; and from this
time my door is shut to you: from me be free; but for other freedom, and the
moneys you have wasted; Eastward ho, shall not serve you.


Am I free a, my ferters? Rense; Fly with a Duck in thy mouth: and now I tell
thee Touchstone --


Good sir.


When this eternal substance of my soul,


Well said, chandge your gould ends for your play ends.


Did live imprisoned in my wanton flesh.


What then sir?


I was a Courtier in the Spanish court, and Don Andrea was my name.


Good master Don Andrea will you marche?


Sweet Touchstone, will you lend me two shillings?


Not a penny.


Not a penny? I have friends, I have acquaintance, I will peace at thy shop
posts, and throw rotten Eggs at thy sign: Work upon that now.


Now sirha, you? hear you? you shall serve me no more neither; not an hour
longer.


What mean you sir?


I mean to give thee thy freedom; with thy freedom my daughter: with my
daughter a fathers love. And with all these such a portion, as shall make
Knight Petronell himself envy thee: you're both agreed? are ye not?


With all submission, both of thanks and duty.


Well then, the great power of heave bless confirm you. And, Goulding, that
my love to thee may not show less then my wives love to my eldest daughter;
thy marriage feast shall equal the Knights and hers.


Let me beseech you, no Sir, the superfluity and cold meat left at their
Nuptials, will with bounty furnish ours. The grossest prodigality is
superfluous cost of the Belly: nor would I wish any invitement of States or
friends, only your reverent presence and witness shall sufficiently grace
and confirm us.


Son to mine own bosom, take her and my blessing: The nice fondling, my
Lady sir-reuerence, that I must not now presume to call daughter, is so
rauish't with desire to hansell her new Coche, and see her knights Eastward
Castle, that the next morning will sweat with her busy setting forth, away
will she and her mother, and while their preparation is making, our selves with
some two or three other friends will consummate the humble match, we have in
Gods name concluded.

Tis to my wish; for I have often read,
Fit birth, fit age, keeps long a quiet bed.
Tis to my wish; For Tradesmen (well tis known)
Get with more ease, then Gentry keeps his own.

My privy Guest, lusty Quickesiluer, has drunk too deep of the Bride-boule,
but with a little sleep he is much recovered; And I think is making himself
ready, to be drunk in a gallanter likeness: My house is as 'twere the Cave,
where the young Out-lawe hoards the stolen veils of his occupation; And here
when he will revel it in his prodigal similitude, he retires to his Trunks,
and (I may say softly) his Punks: he dares trust me with the keeping of both:
for I am Security it self, my name is Security, the famous Usurer.


Come old Security, thou father of destruction: th'indented Sheepeskinne is
burned wherein I was wrapped, and I am now loose, to get more children of
perdition into thy vsurous Bonds. Thou feed my Lechery, and I thy
Covetousness: Thou art Pandar to me for my wench, and I to thee for thy
coosenages: K. me, K. thee, runs through Court and Country.


Well said my subtle Quickesiluer, These K's open the doors to all this worlds
felicity: the dullest forehead sees it. Let not mast. Courtier think he
carries all the knavery on his shoulders: I have poor Hob in the country,
that has worn hob-nayles on's shoes, have as much villainy in's head, as he
that wears gold bottons in's cap.


Why man, tis the London high-way to thrist, if virtue be used; tis but as a
scrap to the net of villainy. They that use it simply, thrive simply I
warrant: Weight and fashion makes Goldsmiths Cockolds.


Here sir, put of the other half of your Prentiship.


Well said sweet Syn: bring forth my bravery.
Now let my Trunks shoot soorth their silks concealde,
I now am free; and now will justify
My Trunks and Punkes: Avaunt dull Flat-cap then,
Via, the curtain that shadowed Borgia;
There lie thou husk of my envassail'd State.
I Sampson now, have burst the Philistins Bands,
And in thy lap my lovely Dalida,
I'll lie and snore out my enfranchisde state.
When Sampson was a tall young man
His power and strength increased than,
He sold no more, nor cup, nor can,
But did them all despise.
Old Touchstone, now wright to thy friends,
For one to sell thy base gold ends
Quickesiluer, now no more attends
Thee Touchstone.
But Dad, hast thou seen my running Gelding dressed to day?


That I have Frank, the Ostler a'th Cock, dressed him for a Breakfast.


What did he eat him?


No, but he eat his breakfast for dressing him: and so dressed him for
breakfast. Quicksiluer. O witty Age, where age is young in wit,
And al youths words have gray beards full of it!



But ah-las Frank, how will all this be maintained now?


Your place maintained it before.

Why and I maintained my place. I'll to the Court, another manner of place for
maintenance I hope then the silly City. I heard my father say, I heard my
mother sing a nolde Song and a true: Tou art a she fool, and know not what
belongs to our male wisdom. I shallbee a Merchant for-sooth: trust my estate
in a wooden Troughe as he does? What are these Ships, but Tennis Balls for
the winds to play withal? Tossed from one wave to another; Now vnder-line;
Now over the house; Sometimes Bricke-wal'd against a Rock, so that the guts
fly out again: sometimes struck under the wide Hazard, and farewell Mast.
Merchant.


Well Frank, well; the Seas you say are uncertain: But he that sails in
your Court Seas, shall find them ten times fuller of hazard; wherein to see
what is to be seen, is torment more then a free Spirit can endure; But when
you come to suffer, howe many Injuries swallow you? What care and devotion
must you use, to humour an imperious Lord? proportion your looks to his
looks? smiles to his smiles? fit your sails to the wind of his breath?


Tush he's no Iourney-man in his craft, that can not do that.


But he's worse then a Prentice that does it, not only humouring the Lord,
but every Trencherbearer, every Groom that by indulgence and intelligence
crept into his favour, and by Pandatisme into his Chamber; He rules the roast:
And when my honourable Lord says it shall be thus, my worshipful Rascal
(the Groom of his close stool) says it shall not be thus, claps the door
after him, and who dares enter? A Prentice, quoth you? tis but to learn to
live, and does that disgrace a man? he that rises hardly, stands firmly: but
he that rises with ease, Alas, falls as easily.


A pox on you, who taught you this mor rallitie?


Tis long of this witty Age, Master Francis. But indeed, Mistress Synnedefie,
all Trades complain of inconvenience, and therefore tis best to have none. The
Merchant he complains, and says, Traffic is subject to much uncertainty
and loss: let them keep their goods on dry land with a vengeance, and not
expose other men's substances to the mercy of the winds, under protection of a
wooden wall (as Master Francis says) and all for greedy desire, to enrich
themselves with unconscionable gain, two for one, or so: where I, and such
other honest men as live by lending money, are content with moderate profit;
Thirty, or Forty i'th'hundred: so we may have it with quietness, and out of
peril of wind and weather, rather then run those dangerous courses of
trading, as they do.


I Dad thou may well be called Security, for thou take the safest course.


Faith the quieter, and the more contented; and, out of doubt, the more godly.
For Merchants in their courses are never pleased, but ever repining against
Heaven: One prays for a Westerly wind to carry his ship forth; another for
an Easterly to bring his ship home; and at every shaking of a lease, he
falls into an agony, to think what danger his Ship is in on such a Coast,
and so forth. The Farmer he is ever at odds with the Weather, sometimes the
clouds have been too barren; Sometimes the Heavens forget themselves, their
Harvests answer not their hopes; Sometimes the Season falls out too
fruitful, Corn will bear no price, and so forth. Th'Artificer, he's all
for a stirring world, if his Trade be too full and fall short of his
expectation, then falls he out of joint. Where we that trade nothing but
money, are free from all this, we are pleased with all weathers: let it rain
or hold up, be calm or windy, let the season be whatsoever, let Trade go how
it will, we take all in good part; even what please the heavens to send us; so
the Sun stand not still; and the Moon keep her usual returns; and make up
days, months, and years.


And you have good security?


I mary Frank, that's the special point.


And yet forsooth we must have Trades to live withal; For we cannot stand
without legs, nor fly without wings; and a number of such skurvie phrases.
No, I say still; he that has wit, let him live by his wit: he that has none,
let him be a Trades-man.


Witty Master Francis!

Tis pity any Trade should dull that quick brain of yours. Do but bring
Knight Petronell into my Parchment Toils once, and you shall never need to
toil in any trade, a my credit! You know his wives Land?


Even to a foot Sir, I have been often there: a pretty fine Seat, good Land,
all entire within it self.


Well wooded?


Two hundred pounds worth of wood ready to fell. And a fine sweet house
that stands just in the midst an't, like a Prick in the midst of a Circle;
would I were your Farmer, for a hundred pound a year.


Excellent M. Francis; how I do long to do thee good: How I do hunger, and
thirst to have the honour to enrich thee? I, even to die, that thou might
inherit my living: even hunger and thirst, for a my Religion, M. Francis. And
so tell Knight Petrouell I do it to do him a pleasure.


Marry Dad, his horses are now coming up, to bear down his Lady, wilt thou
lend him thy stable to set them in?


Faith M. Francis, I would be loathe to lend my Stable out of doors, in a
greater matter I will pleasure him, but not in this.


A pox of your hunger and thirst. Well Dad, let him have money: All he could
any way get, is bestowed on a Ship, now bound for Virginia: the frame of which
voyage is so closely conveyed, that his new Lady nor any of her friends know
it. Notwithstanding, as soon as his Ladies hand is gotten to the sale of her
inheritance, and you have furnished him with money, he will instantly hoist
Sail, and away.


Now a Frank gale of wind go with him, Master Frank, we have too few such
knight adventurers: who would not sell away competent certainties, to purchase
(with any danger) excellent uncertainties? your true knight venturer ever does
it. Let his wife seal to day, he shall have his money to day.


To morrow she shall, Dad, before she goes into the country, to work her to
which actio, with the more engines, I purpose presently to prefer my sweet
Sin here, to the place of her Gentlewoman; whom you (for the more credit)
shall present as your friends daughter, a Gentlewoman of the country, new come
up with a will for a while to learn fashions for-sooth, and be toward some
Lady; and she shall buzz pretty devises into her Ladies ear; feeding her
humours so seruiceablie (as the manner of such as she is you know.)


True good Master France.


That she shall keep her Port open to any thing she commends to her.


A'my religion, a most fashionable project; as good she spoil the Lady, as the
Lady spoil her; for tis three to one of one side: sweet mistress Sin, how
are you bound to master Frances! I do not doubt to see you shortly wed one
of the head men of our city.


But sweet Frank, when shall my father Security present me?


With all festination; I have broken the Ice to it already; and will presently
to the Knights house, whether, my good old Dad, let me pray thee with all
formallitie to man her.


Command me Master Frances; I do hunger and thirst to do thee service. Come
sweet Mistress Sin, take leave of my Wynnifride, and we will instantly
meet frank Master Frances at your Ladies.


Where is my Cu there? Cu?


I Winnie.


Wilt thou come in, sweet Cu?


I Wynney, presently.


I Wynney, quod he? that's all he can do poor man; he may well cut off her
name at Wynney. O tis an egregious Pandare! what will not an vsurous knave be,
so he may be rich? O 'tis a notable lewes trump! I hope to live to see dogs
meat made of the old Usurers flesh; Dice of his bones; and Indentures of his
skin: and yet his skin is too thick to make Parchment, 'twould make good
Boots for a Peeter man to catch Salmon in. Your only smooth skin to make
fine Vellam is your Puritanes skin; they be the smoothest and slickest knaves
in a country.


I'll out of this wicked town as fast as my horse can trot: Here's now no good
action for a man to spend his time in. Taverns grow dead; Ordinaries are
blown up; Plays are at a stand; Howses of Hospitality at a fall; not a
Feather waving, nor a Spur jingling any where: I'll away instantly.


Y'ad best take some crowns in your purse Knight, or else your Eastward Castle
will smoke but miserably.


O Frank! my castle? Alas all the Castles I have, are built with air, thou
know.


I know it Knight, and therefore wonder whether your Lady is going.


Faith to seek her Fortune I think. I said I had a castle and land Eastward,
and Eastward she will without contradiction; her coach, and the coach of the
Sun must meet full butt: And the Sun being out shined with her Lady-ships
glory, she fears he goes Westward to hang himself.


And I fear, when her enchanted Castle becomes invisible, her Ladyship will
return and follow his example.


O that she would have the grace, for I shall never be able to pacific her,
when she sees her self deceived so.


As easily as can be. Tell her she mistook your directions, and that shortly,
your self will down with her to approve it; and then, cloth but her
croupper in a new Gown, and you may drive her any way you list: for these women
Sir, are like Essex Calves, you must wriggle them on by the tail still, or
they will never drive orderly.


But alas sweet Frank, thou know my hability will not furnish her blood
with those costly humours.


Cast that cost on me Sir, I have spoken to my old Pandare Security, for
money or commodity; and commodity (if you will) I know he will procure you.


Commodity! Alas what commodity?


Why Sir? what say you to Figs, and Raysons?


A plague of Figs and Raysons, and all such frail commodities, we shall make
nothing of them.


Why then Sir, what say you to Forty pound in roasted Beef?


Out upon it, I have less stomach to that, then to the Figs and Raysons: I'll
out of Town, though I sojourn with a friend of mine, for staye here I must
not; my creditors have laid to arrest me, and I have no friend under heaven
but my Sword to bail me.


Gods me Knight, put them in sufficient sureties, rather then let your Sword
bail you; Let them take their choice, either the Kings Bench, or the Fleet,
or which of the two Counters they like best, for by the Lord I like none of
them.


Well Frank there is no jesting with my earnest necessity; thou know if I
make not present money to further my voyage begun all's lost, and all I have
laid out about it.


Why then Sir in earnest, if you can get your wise Lady to sether hand to the
sale of her Inheritance, the blood hound Security will smell out ready money
for you instantly.


There spake an Angel. To bring her to which conformity, I must fain my
self extremely amorous; and alleging urgent excuses for my stay, behind,
part with her as passionately, as she would from her foysting hound.


You have the Sow by the right ear Sir: I warrant there was never Child
longd more to ride a Cock horse, or wear his new coat, the she longs to ride
in hexr new Coach: She would long for every thing when she was a maid; and
now she will run mad for them: I lay my life she will have every year four
children; and what charge and change of humour you must endure while she is
with child; and how she will tie you to your tackling till she be with child,
a Dog would not endure: Nay, there is no Turne-spit Dog bound to his wheel
more seruily, then you shall be to her wheel; For as that Dog can never
climb the top of his wheel, but when the top comes under him: so shall you
never clime the top of her contentment, but when she is under you.


Slight how thou terrify me?


Nay hark you sir; what Nurses, what Midwives, what Fools, what Physicians,
what cunning women must be sought for (fearing sometimes she is bewitched, some
times in a consumption) to tell her tales, to talk bawdy to her, to make her
laugh, to give her glisters, to let her blood under the tongue, and betwixt
the toes; how she will revile and kiss you; spit in your face, and lick it off
again; how she will vaunt you are her Creature; she made you of nothing; how
she could have had thousand mark jointures; she could have bin made a Lady by
a Scotche Knight; never have married him: She could have had Poynados in her
bed every morning; how she set you up, and how she will pull you down: you'll
never be able to stand of your legs to endure it.


Out of my fortune, what a death is my life bound face to face too? The best
is, a large Time-fitted conscience is bound to nothing: Marriage is but a form
in the School of Policy, to which Schollers sit fastened only with painted
chains, old Securities young wife is ne'er the further of with me.


Thereby lies a tale sir. The old usurer will be here instantly, with my Puncke
Syndefie, whom you know your Lady has promised me to entertain for her
Gentlewoman: and he (with a purpose to feed on you) invites you most solemnly
by me to supper.


It falls out excellently fitly: I see desire of gain makes Jealousy
venturous:

See Frank here comes my Lady; Lord how she views thee, she knows thee not
I think in this bravery.


How now? who be you I pray?


One master Frances Quickesiluer, an't please your Ladyship.


Gods my dignity! as I am a Lady, if he did not make me blush so that mine
eyes stood awater, would I were unmarried again:

Where's my woman I pray?


See Madam, she now comes to attend you.


God save my honourable Knight, and his worshipful Lady.


You're very welcome! you must not put on your Hat yet.


No Madam; till I know your Ladyships further pleasure, I will not presume.


And is this a Gentleman's daughter new come out of the country?


She is Madam; one that her Father hath a special care to bestow in some
honourable Ladies service, to put her out of her honest humours forsooth, for
she had a great desne to be a Nun, an't please you.


A Nun? what Nun? a Nun Substantiue? or a Nun Adiectiue?


A Nun Substantiue Madam I hope, if a Nun be a Noune. But I mean, Lady, a vowed
maid of that order.


I'll teach her to be a maid of the order I warrant you: and can you do any
work belongs to a Ladies Chamber?


What I cannot do, Madam, I would be glad to learn.


Well said, hold up then; hold up your head I say, come hither a little.


I thank your Ladyship.


And hark you; Good man, you may put on your Hat now, I do not look on you:
I must have you of my faction now; not of my Knights, maid.


No forsooth Madam of yours.


And draw all my servants in my Bow, and keep my counsel, and tell me tales,
and put me Riddles and read on a book sometimes when I am busy, and laugh at
country Gentlewomen, and command any thing in the house for my reteiners, and
care not what you spend, for it is all mine; and in any case, be still a Maid
what soever you do, or whatsoever any man can do unto you.


I warrant your Ladyship for that.


Very well, you shall ride in my coach with me into the country to morrow
morning; Come Knight, pray thee lets make a short supper, and to bed presently.


Nay good Madam, this night I have a short Supper at home, waits on his
worships acceptance.


By my faith but he shall not go Sir; I shall swoune and he sup from me.


Pray thee forbear; shall he lose his provision?


I by Lady Sir, rather then I lose my longing; come in I say: as I am a Lady
you shall not go.


I told him what a Bur he had gotten.


If you will not sup from your Knight Madam, let me entreat your Ladyship to
sup at my house with him.


No by my faith Sir, then we cannot be a bed soon enough, after supper.


What a Medcine is this? well Master Security, you are new married as well as
I; I hope you are bound as well: we must honour our young wives you know.


In policy Dad, till to morrow she has sealed.


I hope in the morning yet your Knight-hood will breake-fast with me.


As early as you will Sir.


Thank your good worship; I do hunger and thirst to do you good Sir.


Come sweet Knight come, I do hunger and thyrst to be a bed with thee.


Thanks for our feastlike Breakfast good Master Security, I am sorry, (by
reason of my instant haste to so long a voyage as Virginia,) I am without
means, by any kind amends to show how affectionately I take your kindness,
and to confirm by some worthy ceremony a perpetual league of friendship
betwixt us.


Excellent Knight; let this be a token betwixt us of inviolable friendship: I
am new married to this fair Gentlewoman you know; (by my hope to make her
fruitful though I be something in years) I vow faithfully unto you, to make
you Godfather (though in your absence) to the first child I am blessed withal;
and henceforth call me Gossip I beseech you, if you please to accept it.


In the highest degree of gratitude, my most worthy Gossip; for confirmation of
which friendly title, let me entreat my fair Gossip your Wife here, to accept
this Diamond, and keep it as my gift to her first Child, wheresoever my
Fortune in event of my Voyage shall bestow me.


How now my coy wedlock! make you strange of so Noble a favour? take it I
charge you, with all affection, and (by way of taking your leave) present
boldly your lips to our honourable Gossip.


How venturous he is to him, and how jealous to others!


Long may this kind touch of our lips Print in our hearts al the forms of
affection. And now my good Gossip, if the writings be ready to which my wife
should seal, let them be brought this morning, before she takes Coach into
the country, and my kindness shall work her to dispatch it.


The writings are ready Sir. My learned counsel here, Master Bramble, the
Lawyer hath perusde them; and within this hour, I will bring the Scriuenour
with them to your worshipful Lady.


Good Master Bramble, I will here take my leave of you then; God send you
fortunate Pleas sir, and contentious Clients.


And you foreright winds Sir, and a fortunate voyage.


Sir Petronell, here are three or four Gentlemen desire to speak with you.


What are they?


They are your followers in this voyage Knight, Captain Seagull and his
associates, I met them this morning, and told them you would be here.


Let them enter I pray you, I know they long to be gone, for their stay is
dangerous.


God save my honourable Collonell.


Welcome good Captain Seagull, and worthy Gentlemen, if you will meet my
friend Frank here, and me, at the blew Anchor Tavern by Billinsgate this
Evening, we will there drink to our happy voyage, be merry, and take Boat to
our Ship with all expedition.


Defer it no longer I beseech you Sir, but as your voyage is hitherto carried
closely, and in another Knights name, so for your own safety and ours, let it
be continued, our meeting and speedy purpose of departing known to as few as
is possible, least your Ship and goods be attacht.


Well advised Captain our Collonell shall have money this morning to dispatch
all our departures, bring those Gentlemen at night to the place appointed, and
with our skins full of vintage, we'll take occasion by the vantage, and away.


We will not fail but be there sir.


Good morrow good Captain, and my worthy associates. Health and all
Sovereignty to my beautiful gossip, for you sir, we shall see you presently
with the writings.


With writings and crowns to my honourable gossip: I do hunger and thirst to
do you good sir.


Here's a stir when Citizens ride out of Town indeed, as if all the house
were a fire; Slight they will not give a man leave, to eat's breakfast before he
rises.


What Coachman? my Ladies Coach for shame; her ladyships ready to come down;


Sfoote Hamlet; are you mad? whether run you now you should brush up my old
Mistress?


What Potkinn? you must put off your Tankerd, and put on your blew cote and
wait upon Mistress Toochstone into the country.


I will forsooth presently.


Come sweet Mistress Gazer, lets watch here, and see my Lady Flash take
coach.


A my word here's a most fine place to stand in, did you see the new Ship
lancht last day Mistress Fond.


O God, and we citizens should loose such a sight?


I warrant, here will be double as many people to see her take coach, as there
were to see it take water.


O she's married to a most fine Castle 'ith' country they say?


But there are no Giants in the Castle, are there?


O no, they say her Knight kild' hem all and therefore he was knighted.


Would to God her Ladyship would come away.


She comes, she comes, she comes.


Fond. Pray heaven bless your Ladyship.


Thank you good people; my coach for the love of Heaven, my coach? in good
truth I shall swoune else.


Coach? coach my Ladies coach.


As I am a Lady, I think I am with child already, I long for a coach so; may
one be with child before they are married Mother?


I by 'rladie Madam, a little thing does that; I have seen a little prick no
bigger then a pins head, swell bigger and bigger, till it has come to an Ancome;
even so tis in these cases.


Your Coach is coming, Madam.


That's well said; Now heaven! me thinks, I am even up to the knees in
preferment; But a little higher, but a little higher, but a little higher,
There, there, there lies Cupids fire.



But must this young man, an't please you Madam, run by your coach all the way
a foot?


I by my faith I warrant him, he gives no other milk, as I have an other
servant does.


Alas! tis even pity me thinks; for Gods sake Madam buy him but a Hobbie
horse, let the poor youth have something betwixt his legs to ease them;
Alas! we must do as we would be done too;


Go too, hold your peace dame, you talk like an old fool I tell you.


Wilt thou be gone, sweet Honny suckle, before I can go with thee?


I pray thee sweet Knight let me; I do so long to dress up thy castle before
thou come: But I marle how emy modest Sister occupies her self this morning,
that she can not wait on me to my Coach, as well as her mother!


Mary Madam, she's married by this time to Prentice Goulding; your Father, and
some one more, stole to Church with them, in all the haste, that the cold meat
lest at your wedding, might serve to furnish their Nuptial table.


There's no base fellow, my Father, now: but he's even fit to Father such a
Daughter: he must call me daughter no more now; but Madam; and please you
Madam: and please your worship Madam, indeed; out upon him, marry his daughter
to a base Prentice?


What should one do? is there no law for one that marries a woman's daughter
against her will? howe shall we punish him Madam.


As I am a Lady an't would snow, weed so pebble them with snow balls as they
come from Church; but sir, Frank Quicksiluer.


I Madam.


Dost remember since thou and I clapped what d'ye' clats in the Garrat?


I know not what you mean Madam.


His head as white as milk,
All flaxen was his hair:
But now he is dead,
And laid in his Bed,
And never will come again.
God be at your labour.


Was there ever such a Lady?


See Madam, the Bride and Bridegroom:


Gods my precious! God give you joy Mistress What lack you. Now out upon thee
Baggage: my sister married in a Taffeta Hat? Mary hang you; Westward with a
wanio te'yee, Nay I have done we ye Minion they faith, never look to have my
countnance any more: nor any thing I can do for thee. Thou ride in my Coach? or
come down to my Castle? fie upon thee: I charge thee in my Ladyships name,
call me Sister no more.


An't please your worship, this is not your Sister: This is my daughter, and
she call me Father, and so does not your Ladyship an't please your worship
Madam.


No nor she must not call thee Father by Heraldrie, because thou make thy
Prentice thy Son as well as she; Ah thou misproude Prentice, dare thou
presume to marry a Ladies Sister?


It pleased my Master forsooth to embolden me with his favour: And though I
confess my self far unworthy so worthy a wife (being in part, her
servant, as I am your Prentice) yet (since I may say it without boasting) I am
borne a Gentleman, and by the Trade I have learned of my Master (which I trust
taints not my blood) able with mine own Industry and portion to maintain
your daughter, my hope is, heaven will so blesle our humble beginning, that in
the end I shall be no disgrace to the grace with which my Master hath bound me
his double Prentice.


Master me nomore Son if thou think me worthy to be thy father.


Sun? Now good Lord how he shines and you mark him! he's a gentleman.


I indeed Madam, a Gentleman borne.


Never stand a'your Gentry M. Bridgegrome: if your legs be no better then
your Arms, you'll be able to stand upon neither shortly.


An't please your good worship Sir, there are two sorts of Gentlemen.


What mean you Sir?


Bold to put off my hat to your worship.


Nay pray forbear Sir, and then forth with your two sorts of Gentlemen.


If your worship will have it so? I say there are two sorts of Gentlemen.
There is a Gentleman Artificial, and a gentleman Natural; Now, though your
worship be a Gentleman Natural: Work upon that now.


Well said old Touchstone, I am proud to hear thee enter a set speech
in faith, forth I beseech thee.


Cry you mercy Sir, your worship's a Gentleman, I do not know? if you be one
of my acquaintance you're very much disguised Sir.


Go too old Quipper: forth with thy speech I say.


What Sir, my speeches were ever in vain to your gracious worship: And
therefore till I speak to you gallantry in deed, I will save my breath for my
broth anon. Come my poor son and daughter; Let us hide our selves in our
poor humility and live safe: Ambition consumes it self, with the very show.
Work upon that now.


Let him go, let him go for Gods sake: let him make his Prentice, his son
for Gods sake: give away his daughter for Gods sake: and when they come a
begging to us for Gods sake, let's laugh at their good husbandry for Gods sake.
Fare-well sweet Knight, pray thee make haste after.


What shall I say? I would not have thee go,


Now, O now, I must depart;
Parting though it absence move,
This Ditty knight, do I see in thy looks in Capital Letters.
What a grieftis to depart, and leave the slower that has my hart?
My sweet Lady, and alack for we, why should we part so?
Tell truth Knight, and shame all dissembling Lovers; does not your pain lye
on that side?


If it do, can thou tell me how I may cure it?


Excellent easily; divide your self in two halfes, just by the girdlestead;
send one half with your Lady, and keep the cother your self: or else do as
all true Lovers do, part with your heart and leave your body behind: I have
seen't done a hundred times: Tis as easy a matter for a Lover to part without
a heart from his sweet heart, and he ne'er the worse: as for a Mouse to get
from a Trappe and leave her tail behind him. See here comes the Writings.


Good morrow to my worshipful Lady. I present your Ladyship with this
writing; to which if you please to set your hand, with your Knights, a velvet
Gown shall attend your journey a'my credit.


What Writing is it Knight?


The sale (sweet heart) of the poor Tenement I told thee off, only to make
a little money to send thee down furniture for my Castle, to which my hand
shall lead thee.


Very well: Now give me your Pen I pray.


It goes down without chewing y'faith.


Your worships deliver this as your deed?


We do.


So now Knight farewell till I see thee.


All farewell to my sweet heart.


God-boye, son Knight.


Farewell my good Mother.


Farewell Frank, I would fain take thee down if I could.


I thank your good Ladyship; Farewell Mistrie Syndifie.


O tedious Voyage, where of there is no end! What will they think of me?


Think what they list; They longed for a vagarie into the Country, and now
they are fitted: So a woman marry to ride in a Coach, she cares not if she ride
to her Ruin; Tis the great end of many of their marriages: This is not first
time a Lady has rid a false journey in her Coach I hope.


Nay, tis no Matter, I care little what they think; he that ways men's
thoughts, has his hands full of nothing: A man in the course of this world
should be like a Surgeons instrument, work in the wounds of others, and
feel nothing himself. The sharper, and subtler, the better.


As it falls out now Knight, you shall not need to devise excuses, or endure
her out cries, when she returns; we shall now be gone before, where they
can not reachevs.


Well my kind Compere, you have now Th'assurance we both can make you; let me
now entreat you, the money we agreed on may be brought to the Blew Ancor,
ne'er to Billings-gate, by Six a Clock: where I and my chief friends, bound
for this voyage, will with Feasts attend you.


The money my most honourable Compere, shall without fail observe your
appointed howre.


Thanks my dear Gossip. I must now impart
To your approved love, a loving secret:
As one on whom my life doth more rely
In friendly trust, then any man alive.
Nor shall you be the chosen Secretary
Of my affections, for affection only;
For I protest, (if God bless my return,)
To make you Partner, in my actions gain
As deeply, as if you had ventured with me
Half my expenses. Know then, honest Gossip,
I have enjoyed with such divine contentment,
A Gentle woman's Bed, whom you well know,
That I shall ne'er enjoy this tedious Voyage,
Nor live the lest part of the time it asks,
Without her presence; So I thirst and hunger
To taste the dear feast of her company.
And if the hunger and the thirst you vow
(As my sworn Gossip) to my wished good
Be (as I know it is) vnfainde and firm,
Do me an easy favour in your Power.

Be sure brave Gossip, all that I can do
To my best Nerve, is wholly at your service:
Who is the woman (first) that is your friend?

The woman is your learned Counsels wife,
The Lawyer Master Bramble: whom would you,
Bring out this Even, in honest Neighbour-hood
To take his leave with you, of me your Gossip.
I, in the mean time, will send this my friend
Home to his house, to bring his wife disguised
Before his face, into our company:
For Love hath made her look for such a wile,
To free her from his tyrannous Jealousy.
And I would take this course before another:
In stealing her away to make us sport,
And gull his circumspection the more grosely.
And I am sure that no man like your self,
Hath credit with him to entice his Jealousy,
To so long staye abroad, as may give time
To her enlardgment, in such safe disguise.

A pretty, pithy, and most pleasant project!
Who would not strain a point of Neigh-bourhood,
For such a point, de-vice? that as the ship
Of famous Draco, went about the world,
Will wind about the Lawyer, compassing,
The world him self, he hath it in his arms:
And that's enough, for him, without his wife.
A Lawyer is Ambitious, and his head,
Can not be prais'de, nor rais'de too high,
With any Forcke, of highest knavery.
I'll go fetch her straight.

So, so, Now Frank go thou home to his house,
Stead of his Lawyers, and bring his wife hither:
Who just like to the Lawyers wife, is prison'd,
With his sterne vsurous Jealousy; which could never
Be over reacht-thus, but with ouer-reaching.

And M. Francis, watch you th'instant time
To Enter with his Exit: t'wilbe rare,
Two fine horned Beasts A Cammell and a Lawyer!

How the old villain joys in villainy?
And hark you Gossip, when you have her here,
Have your Boat ready, ship her to your Ship
With utmost haste, lest Master Bramble stay you,
To over reach that head that outreacheth all heads?
Tis a trick Rampant; Tis a very Quiblyn;
I hope this harvest, to pitch cart with Lawyers;
Their heads will be so forked; This sly tooche
Will get Apes to invent a number such.

Was ever Rascal, honied so with poison? He that delights in slavish Avarice.
Is apt to joy in every sort of vice.


Well, i'll go fetch his wife, whilst he the Lawyers.


But stay Frank, lets think how we may disguise her upon this sudden.


Gods me there's the mischief; but hark you, here's an excellent device; fore
God a Rare one: I will carry her a Sailors gown and cap and cover her; a
players beard;


And what upon her head?


I tell you a Sailers Cap: slight God forgive me, what kind of sigentmemorie
have you?


Nay then, what kind of figent wit hast thou?
A Sailors cap? how shall she put it off
When thou presentst her to our company?

Tush man, for that, make her a saucy sailor.


Tush tush tis no fit sauce for such sweet mutton; I know not what t'aduise.


Knight, knight a rare devise.


Sownes yet again.


What stratagem have you now?


The best that ever. You talked of disguising?


Imary Gossip that's our present care.


Cast care a way then, here's the best device
For plain Security (for I am no better)
I think that ever lived: here's my wives gown
Which you may put upon the Lawyers wife,
And which I brought you sir for two great reasons;
One is, that Master Bramble may take hold
Of some suspicion that it is my wife,
And gird me so perhaps with his law wit,
The other (which is policy indeed)
Is, that my wife may now be tied at home,
Having no more but her old gown abroad,
And not show me a quirck, while I fyrke others.
Is not this rare?

The best that ever has.


Am I not borne to furnish Gentlemen?


O my dear Gossip!


Well hold Master Francis, watch when the Lawyer's out, and put it in; and now
-- I will go fetch him.


O my Dad! he goes as twere the Devil to fetch the Lawyer; and devil shall he
be if horns will make him.


why how now Gossip, why stay you there musing?


A toy, a toy runs in my head in faith.


A pox of that head, is there more toys yet?


What is it pray thee Gossip?


Why Sir? what if you should slip away now with my wives best gown. I having
no security for it?


For that I hope Dad you will take our words.


I by th'masse your word that's a proper staff
For wise Security to lean upon;
But tis no matter, once i'll trust my Name,
On your cracked credits, let it take no shame,
Fetch the wench Frank.

I'll wait upon you sir.
And fetch you over, you were ne'er so fetched:
Go, to the Tavern Knight, your followers
Dare not be drunk I think, before their Captain.

Would I might lead them to no hotter seruise,
Till our Virginian gould were in our purses

Come Drawer, pierce your neatest Hogsheades, lets have cheer, not fit for
your Billingsgate Tavern; but for our Virginian Colonel; he will be here
instantly.


You shall have all things fit sir; please you have any more Wine.


More wine Slave? whether we drink it or no, spill it, and draw more.


Fill all the pots in your house with all sorts of liquor, and let them wait
on us here like Soldiers in their Pewter, coats; And though we do not
employ them now, yet we will maintain them, till we do.


Said like an honourable Captain; you shall have all you can command Sir.


Come boys, Virginia longs till we share the rest of her Maiden-head,


Why is she inhabited already with any English?


A whole Country of English is there man, bred of those that were left there in
79. They have married with the Indians, and make them bring forth as beautiful
faces as any we have in England: and therefore the Indians are so in love with
them, that all the treasure they have, they lay at their feet.


But is there such treasure there Captain, as I have heard?


I tell thee, Gold is more plentiful there then Copper is with us: and for as
much red Copper as I can bring, I'll have thrice the weight in Gold. Why man
all their dripping Pans and their Chamber pots are pure Gold; and all the
Chains, with which they chain up their streets, are massy Gold; all the
Prisoners they take, are fetterd in Gold: and for Rubies and Diamonds, they go
forth on holidays and gather them by the Sea-shore, to hang on their childrens
Coats, and stick in their Caps, as commonly as our children wear Saffron
guilt Brooches, and groats with hoales in them.


And is it a pleasant Country withal?


As ever the Sun shined on: temperate and full of all sorts of excellent
viands; wild Boar is as common there, as our tamest Bacon is here: Venison,
as Mutton. And then you shall live freely there, without Sargeants, or
Courtiers, or Lawyers, or Intelligencers. Then for your means to advancement,
there, it is simple, and not preposterously mixed: You may be an Alderman there,
and never be Scauinger; you may be any other officer, and never be a Slave. You
may come to preferment enough, and never be a


To Riches, and Forune enough and have never the more Villainy, nor the less
wit. Besides, there, we shall have no more Law then Conscience, and not too
much of either; serve God enough, eat and drink enough, and enough is as good
as a Feast.


Gods me! and how far is it thither?


Some six weeks sail, no more, with any indifferent good wind: And If I get
to any part of the coast of Africa, I'll sail thither with any wind. Or when
I come to Cape Finister, there's a foreright wind continual wastes us till we
come at Virginia. See, our Collonell's come.


Well met good Captain Seagull, and my Noble Gentlemen! Now the sweet
hour of our freedom is at hand.

Come Drawer. Fill us some carouses; and prepare us for the mirth, that will be
occasioned presently: Here will be a pretty wench Gentlemen, that will bear us
company all our voyage.


Whatsoever she be; here's to her health Noble Colonel, both with Cap and
Knee.


Thanks kind Captain Seagull. She's one I love dearly; and must not be
known till we be free from all that know us: And so Gentlemen, here's to her
health.


Let it come worthy Collonell, We do hunger and thirst for it,


Before heaven, you have hit the phrase of one that her presence will touch,
from the foot to the forehead, if ye knew it.


Why then we will join his forehead, with her health, sir: and Captain
Scapethrift, here's to them both,


See, see, Master Bramble; fore heaven their voyage cannot but prosper, they
are o'their knees for success to it.


And they pray to God Bacchus.


God save my brave Colonel with all his tall Captains and Corporalls; see
sir, my worshipful learned Counsel, M. Bramble, is come to take his leave of
you.


Worshipful M. Bramble, how far do you draw us into the sweet brier of
your kindness? come Captain Seagull, another health to this rare Bramble, that
hath never a prick about him.


I pledge his most smooth disposition sir: come master Security, bend your
supporters, and pleadge this notorious health here.


Bend you yours likewise, M. Bramble, for it is you shall pleadge me.


Not so, M. Security, he must not pleadge his own health.


No Master Captain?

Why then here's one is fitly come to do him that honour.


Here's the Gentlewoman your cousin sir, whom with much entreaty I have brought
to take her leave of you in a Tavern; ashamed whereof, you must pardon her if
she put not off her Mask.


Pardon me sweet Cousin, my kind desire to see you before I went, made me so
importunate to entreat your presence here.


How now M. Frances? have you honoured this presence with a fair Gentlewoman?


Pray sir, take you no notice of her, for she will not be known to you.


But my learned Counsel, M. Bramble here, I hope may know her.


No more then you sir, at this time, his learning must pardon her.


Well, God pardon her for my part, and I do I'll be sworn; and so Master
Francis, here's to all that are going Eastward to night, towards Cuckolds
haven; and so to the health of Master Bramble.


I pledge it Sir, hath it gone round, Captains?


It has sweet Frank, and the round closes with thee.


Well Sir, here's to al Eastward toward Cuckolds, so to famous Cuckolds haven
so fatally remembered. Surgit.


Nay pray thee Cousin weep not; Gossip Security?


I my brave Gossip.


A word I beseech you Sir; our friend, Mistress Bramble here, is so dissolved
in tears, that she drowns the whole mirth of our meeting: sweet Gossip,
take her aside and comfort her.


Pity of all true love, Mistress Bramble, what weep you to enjoy your love?
whats the cause Lady? is't because your husband is so near, and your heart
earnes, to have a little abused him? Alas, Alas, the offence is too common to
be respected; So great a grace, hath seldom chanced to so unthankful a woman;
to be rid of an old jealous Dotard; to enjoy the arms, of a loving young
Knight; that when your prick-lesse Bramble is withered with grief of your
loss, will make you floorish a fresh in the Bed of a Lady.


Sir Petronell, here's one of your water men come to tell you, it will be flood
these three hours; and that 'twill be dangerous going against the Tide: for
the sky is over cast, there was a Porcpisce, even now seen at London bridge,
which is always the messenger of tempests, he says.


A Porcpisce? whats that to th'purpose? charge him if he love his life to
attend us: can we not reach Black wall (where my ship lies) against the tide,
and in spite of Tempests? Captains and Gentlemen, we'll begin a new ceremony
at the beginning of our voyage, which I believe will be followed of all future
adventurers.


Whats that good Colonel?


This, Captain Seaguli; we'll have our provided Supper brought a board Sir
Francis Drakes Ship, that hath compassed the world: where with full Cupps, and
Banquets we will do sacrifice for a prosperous voyage. My mind gives me that
some good Spirits of the waters should haunt the desert ribs of her; and be
auspicious to all that honour her memory, and will with like Orgies, enter
their voyages.


Rarely conceited; one health more to this motion, aboard to perform it. He
that will not this night be drunk, may he never be Sober.


Sir Petronell and his honourable Captains in these young services, we old
Servitors may be spared: We only came to take our leaves, and with one health
to you all, I'll be bold to do so. Here neighbour Security, to the health of
Sir Petronell, and all his Captains.


You must bend then Master Bramble; So, now I am for you: I have one corner of
my brain, I hope, fit to bear one carouse more. Here Lady, to you that are
encompast there, are ashamed of our company. Ha, ha, ha, by my troth, (my
learned counsel Master Bramble) my mind runs so of Cuckolds haven to
night, that my Head runs over with admiration.


But is not that your wife, Neighbour?


No by my troth Master Bramble; ha, ha, ha, a Pox of all Cuckolds-hauens I
say.


A'my faith, her garments are exceeding like your wives.


Cucullus non facit Monachum, my learned Counsel; all are not Cuckolds that
seem so, nor all seem not that are so. Give me your hand, my learned
Counsel, you and I will Supp some where else, then at Sir Frances Drakes
Ship to night. Adieu my Noble Gossip.


Good Fortune brave Captains; fair skies God send ye.


Farewell my harts, farewell.


Gossip, laugh no more at Cuckolds-hauen Gossip.


I have done, I have done Sir, will you lead Master Bramble? ha, ha, ha.


Captain Seagull, charge a boat.


A Boat, a boat, a boat.


You're in a proper taking indeed to take a Boat, espepecially at this time of
night, and against Tide and Tempest; They say yet, drunken men never take
harm; this night will try the truth of that Proverb.


What Winnie? Wife, I say? out of doors at this time* where should I seek the
Gad-flye? Billingsgate, Billingsgate,


She's gone with the Knight, she's gone with the Knight; woe be to thee
Billingsgate. A boat, a boat, a boat, a full hunderd Marks for a boat.


All hail, fair Haven of married men only, for there are none but married
men Cuckolds. For my part, I presume not to arrive here, but in my Masters
behalf, (a poor Butcher of East-cheape) who sends me to set up (in honour of
Saint Luke) these necessary Ensigns of his homage: And up I got this morning,
thus early, to get up to the top of this famous Tree, that is all fruit and
no leaves, to advance this Crest of my Masters occupation. Up then, Heaven and
Saint Luke bless me, that I be not blown into the Thames as I clime, with
this furious Tempest; Slight, I think the Devil be abroad, in likeness of a
storm, to rob me of my Horns: Hark how he roars. Lord! what a coil the
Thames keeps! she bears some unjust burden I believe, that she kicks and
curuets thus to cast it: Heaven bless all honest passengers, that are upon her
back now, for the Bit is out of her mouth I see, and she will run away
with them. So, so, I think I have made it look the right way, it runs
against London-Bridge (as it were) even full butt. And now, let me discover
from this lofty prospect, what pranks the rude Thames plays in her
desperate lunacy. O me, here's a Boat has been cast away hard by. Alas,
alas, See one of her passengers, labouring for his life, to land at this Haven
here; pray heaven he may recover it: His next land is eve just under me; hold
out yet a little: whatsoever thou art, pray, and take a good heart to thee. Tis
a man, take a mans heart to thee; yet a little further, get up a thy legs
man: now, tis snallowe enough. So, so, so! Alas, he's down again; hold thy
wind Father: tis a man in a Night-cappe. So! now he's got up again: now
he's past the worst: yet thanks be to heaven; he comes toward me pretty and
strongly.


Heaven, I beseech thee, how have I offended thee! where am I cast a shore
now, that I may go a righter way home by land? Let me see. O I am scarce able
to look about me! where is there any Sea-marke that I am acquainted withal?


Look up Father, are you acquainted with this Mark?


What! landed at Cuckolds haven? Hell and damnation. I will run back and
drown my self.


Poor man how weak he is! the weak water ha's washed away his strength.


Landed at Cuckolds haven? if it had not bin to die twenty times a live, I
should never have escaped death: I will never arise more: I will grovel here,
and eat dirt till I be choak't: I will make the gentle earth do that, which
the cruel water ha's denied me.


Alas good father, be not so desperate; Rise man: if you will, I'll come
presently and lead you home.


Home? shall I make any know my Home, that has known me thus abroad? how Iowe
shall I crouch away, that no eye may see me? I will creep on the earth while
I live, and never look heaven in the face more.


What young Planet reigns now troe, that old men are so foolish? What
desperate young Swaggerer would have bin abroad such a whether as this, upon the
water? Ay me, see a another remnant of this unfortunate ship-wrack! or some
other. A woman! in faith, a woman, though it be almost at S. Kath'rins, I
discern it to be a woman for al her body is above the water, her clothes swim
about her most handsomely. O they bear her up most bravely! has not a woman
reason to love the taking up of her clothes the better while she lives, for
this? Alas, how busy the rude Thames is about her? A pox a'that wave. It will
drown her, in faith, twill drown her. Cry God mercy, she has escaped it! I
thank heaven she has escaped it. O, how she swims like a Mermaid! some
vigilant body look out, and save her. That's well said, just where the Priest
fell in, there's one sets down a Ladder, and goes to take her up: Gods
blessing a thy heart boy, now take her up in thy arms and to bed with her.
She's up, she's up! She's a beautiful woman I warrant her, the Billows
durst not devour her.


How fare you now Lady?


Much better, my good friend then I wish: as one desperate of her Fame, now
my Life is preserved.


Comfort your self; That power that preserved you from death: can likewise
defend you from infamy, howsoever you deserve it. Were not you one that took
Boat, late this night, with a Knight, and other Gentlemen at Billings-gate?


Unhappy that I am, I was.


I am glad it was my good hap to come down thus far after you, to a house
of my friends here in S. Kath'rines, since I am now happily made a mean to
your rescue, from the ruthless tempest; which (when you took Boat) was so
extreme, and the Gentleman that brought you forth, so desperate and vnsober,
that I feared long ere this I should hear of your ship-wracke, and therefore
(with little other reason) made thus far this way: And this I must tell you,
since perhaps you may make use of it, there was left behind you at our
Tavern, brought by a Porter (hyr'd by the young Gentleman that brought you) a
Gentle woman's Gown, Hat, Stockings, and Shoes; which if they be yours, and
you please to shift you, taking a hard bed here, in this house of my friend, I
will presently go fetch you.


Thanks my good friend, for your more then good news. The Gown with all
things bound with it are mine; which if you please to fetch as you have
promised, I will boldly receive the kind favour you have offered, till your
return: entreating you, by all the good you have done in preserving me
hitherto, to let none take knowledge of what favour you do me, or where such a
one as I am bestowed, lest you incur me much more damage in my fame, then
you have done me pleasure in preserving my life.


Come in Lady, and shift your self; resolve, that nothing, but your own
pleasure, shall be used in your discovery.


Thank you good friend: the time may come, I shall requite you.


See, see, see! I hold my life, there's some other a taking up at Wapping, now!
Look, what a sort of people cluster about the Gallows there! in good troth it
is so. O me! a fine young Gentleman! What? and taken up at the Gallows? Heaven
grant he be not one day taken down there: A, my life it is ominous. Well, he
is delivered for the time, I see the people have all left him; yet will I keep
my prospect a while, to see if any more have bin shipwrecked.


Accurse, that ever I was saved, or borne.
How fatal is my sad arrival here?
As if the Stars, and Providence spake to me,
And said, the drift of all unlawful courses,
(What ever end they dare propose themselves,
In frame of their licentious policyes.)
In the firm order of just Destiny,
They are the ready high ways to our Ruins.
I know not what to do, my wicked hopes
Are, with this Tempest, torn up by the roots.
O, which way shall I bend my desperate steppes,
In which unsufferable Shame and Misery
Will not attend them? I will walk this Bank,
And see if I can meet the other relics
Of our poor shipwrecked Crew, or hear of them.
The Knight (alas) was so far gone with wine,
And the other three, that I refus de their Boat,
And took the haplesse Woman in another,
Who cannot but be sunk, what ever Fortune
Hath wrought upon the others desperate lives.

Zounds Captain, I tell thee, we are cast up of the Coast of France, Sfoote, I
am not drunk still, (I hope?) Dost remember where we were last Night?


No by my troth Knight, not I. but me thinks we have bin a horrible while
upon the water, and in the water.


Aye me we are undone for ever: hast any money about thee?


Not a penny by heaven.


Not a penny betwixt us, and cast a shore in France?


Faith I cannot tell that; my brains, nor mine eyes are not mine own, yet.


Sfoote wilt not believe me? I know it by th'eleuation of the Pole; and by the
altitude and latitude of the Climate. See! hers comes a couple of French
Gentlemen* I knew we were in France: dost thou think our Englishmen are so
Frenchyfied, that a man knows not whether he be in France, or in England, when
he sees them? What shall we do? we must cene to them, and entreat some relief
of hem: Life is sweet, and we have no other means to relieve our lives now,
but their Charities;


Pray you, do you beg on them the, you can speak French.


Monsieur, plaist il d'auoir pity de nostre grand infortunes? Iesuis un pour
Chevalier D'Angloterre qui a souffris infortune de Naufrage.


Un pour Chevalier D'Angliterre?


Oui Monsieur, il est trop vraye; mais vousscaues bien nous somes toutes
subject a fortune.


A poor Knight of England? a poor Knight of Windsore, are you not? Why speak
you this broken French, when you're a whole English man? on what coast are you,
think you?


on the coast of France, sir.


On the cost of Dogs Sir: You're in the I'll a Dogs I tell you. I see y'aue been
washed in the Thames here, I believe ye were drowned in a Tavern before, or else
you would never have took boat in such a dawning as this was. Farewell,
farewell, we will not know you for shaming of you. I ken the man weel, he's one
of my thirty pound Knights.


No no, this is he that stole his knighthood of the grand day, for four pound
giving to a Page, all the money in's purse I wot well.


Death, Collonell, I knew you were over shot.


Sure I think now indeed, Captain Seagull, we were something overshot.

What* my sweet Frank Quicksiluer! dost thou survive to rejoice me? But what*
no body at thy heels, Frank? Ay me, what is become of poor Mistress
Security.


Faith gone quite from her Name, as she is from her Fame I think; I left her
to the mercy of the water.


Let her go, let her go: let us go to our ship at Blackwall and shift us.


Nay by my troth, let our clothes rot upon us. and let us rot in them:
twenty to one our Ship is attacht by this time? if we set her not under Sail
this last Tide, I never looked for any other. Woe, woe is me, what shall become
of us? the last money we could make, the greedy Thams has deuourde; and if our
Ship be attach't, there is no hope can relieve us.


Sfoote Knight, what an vn-knightly faintness transports thee? let our Ship
sink, and all the world that's without us be taken from us, I hope I have some
tricks, in this brain of mine, shall not let us perish.


Well said Frank faith. O my nimble-spirited Quick-siluer, Foregod, would
thou had been our Colonel.


I like his spirit rarely, but I see no means he has to support that spirit.


Go to Knight, I have more means then thou art aware off: I have not lived
amongst Gould-smiths and Gouldmakers all this while, but I have learned
something worthy of my time with them. And, not to let thee stink where thou
standst, Knight, I'll let thee know some of my skill presently.


Do good Frank I beseech thee.


I will blanch Copper so cunningly, that it shall endure all proofs, but the
Test: it shall endure malleation, it shall* have the ponderositie of Luna, and
the tenacitie of Luna, by no means friable.


Slight, where learn'st thou these terms, trow?


Tush Knight, the terms of this Art, every ignorant Quack-saluer is perfect
in: but I'll tell you how your self shall blanch Copper thus cunningly. Take
Arsnicke, otherwise called Realga, (which indeed is plain Ratsbane) Sublime
them three or four times, then take the Sublimate of this Realga, and put'hem
into a Glass, into Chymia, let'hem have a convenient decoction Natural, four
and twenty hours, he will become perfectly fixed: Then take this fixed powder,
project him upon wel-purgd Copper, et habebis Magistriu.


Excellent Frank, let us hug thee.


Nay this I will do besides; I'll take you off twelve pence from every Angel,
with a kind of Aquafortis, and never deface any part of the Image.


But then it will want weight?


You shall restore that thus: Take your sal Achyme prepared, and your distild
Urine; and let your Angels lie in it but four and twenty hours, and they
shall have their perfect weight again: come on now I hope this is enough to
put some spirit into the livers of you, I'll infuse more an other time. We have
saluted the proud Air long enough with our bare skonces, now will I have you
to a wenches house of mine at London, there make shift to shift us, and after
such fortunes as the stars shall assign us.


Notable Frank! we will ever adore thee.


Now sweet friend you have brought me ne'er enough your Tavern, which I
desired that I might with some colour be seen near, enquiring for my husband;
who I must tel you stale thither last with my wet gown we have left at your
friends: which, to continue your former honest kindness, let me pray you to
keep close from the knowledge of any; and so, with all vow of your requital,
let me now entreat you to leave me to my woman's wit, and fortune.


All shall be done you desire; and so, all the fortune you can wish for, attend
you.


I will once more to this unhappy Tavern before I shift one rag of me more,
that I may there know what is left behind, and what news of their passengers.
I have bought me a Hat and band with the little money I had about me, and made
the streets a little leave staring at my night-cap.


O my dear husband! where have you bin to night? al night abroad at Taverns?
rob me of my garments? and fare as one run away from me? Alas! is this seemly
for a man of your credit? of your age? and affection to your wife?


What should I say? how miraculously sorts this? was not I at home, and called
thee last night?


Yes Sir, the harmless sleep you broke, and my answer to you would have
witnessed it, if you had had the patience to have staid and answered me; but your
so sudden retreat, made me imagine you were gone to Master Brambles, and so
rested patient, and hopeful of your coming again, till this your unbeleeued
absence brought me abroad with no less then wonder, to seek you, where the
false Knight had carried you.


Villain, and Monster that I was, howe have I abused thee, I was suddenly gone
indeed! for my sudden jealousy transferred me. I will say no more but this
dear wife I suspected thee.


Did you suspect me?


Talk not of it I beseech thee, I am ashamed to imagine it; I will home, I
will home, and every morning on my knees ask thee heartily forgiveness. Lukes
memory, with so ridiculous a custom. Thou dishonest Satire, farewell to honest
married Men; Farewell, to all sorts, and degrees of thee. Farewell thou horne of
huger that call th'Inns a court to their Manger; Farewell thou horne of
aboundace, that adornest the headsmen of the Common-wealth; Farewell thou home
of Direction, that is the City Lantern; Farewell thou Horne of Pleasure,
the Ensign of the huntsman; Farewell thou Horne of Destiny, thensigne of the
married man; Farewell thou Horne Tree that bear nothing but Stone fruit


Ha Sirah! Thinks my Knight Aduenturer we can no point of our compass? Do
we not know North-north-east? North-east and by East? East and by North! nor
plain Eastward? Ha? have we never heard of Virginia? nor the Cauallaria? not
the Colonoria? Can we discover no discoveries? well, mine errant Sir Flash, and
my runagate Quicksiluer, you may drink drunk, crack cannes, hurl away a
browne dozen of Monmouth Caps or so, in sea-ceremonie to your boon voyage but
for reaching any Coast save the coast of Kent; or Essex, with this Tide, or
with this fleet, I'll be your warrant for a Grauesend Tossed: There's that gone
asore, will stay your Admiral and Vice-admiral, and Rere-admirall, were they al
(as they are) but one Pinnace, and under sail, as well as a Remora, doubt it
not; and from this Sconce, without either powder or shot, work upon that now.
Nay, and you'll show tricks, we'll vie with you, a little. My Daughter, his
Lady, was sent Eastward, by land, to a Castle of his, in the air (in what
region I know not) and (as I hear) was glad to take up her lodging in her
Coach, she and her two waiting women, her maid, and her mother, like three
Snails in a shall, and the Coachman a top on them, I think. Since they have
all found the way back again by weeping Cross. But i'll not see them. And for
two on them, Madam, and her Malkm, they are like to bite o the bridle for
William, as the poor horses have done al this while that hurried them, or else
go graze of the common: So should my Dame Touchstone too, but she has been my
Cross these thirty years, and i'll now keep her, to fright away sprights;
In faith. I wonder I hear no news of my son Goulding! He was sent for to the
Guild-hall, this Morning betimes, and I marvel at the matter, if I had not
laid up Comfort, hope in him, I should grow desperate of al. See, He is come
I'my thought! How now Son? what news at the Court of Aldermen?


Troth Sir, an Accident somewhat strange, else it hath little in it worth the
reporting.


What? It is not borrowing of money then?


No sir it hath pleased the worshipful Commoners of the city, to take me one
i'their number at presentation of the inquest


Ha!


And the Alderman of the ward wherein Idwel, to appoint me his Deputy --


Howe!


In which place, I have had an oath ministered me, since I went.


Now my dear, happy Sonnellet we kiss thy new worship, a little boast mine own
happiness in thee: What a fortune was it (or rather my judgment indeed) for me,
first to see that in his disposition, which a whole City so conspires to
second? Taken into the Liuory of his copany, the first day of his freedoe? now
(not a week married) chosen Commoner? and Aldermans Deputy in a day? note but
the reward of a thrifty course. The water of his Time! Well, I will honour M.
Alderman, for this act, (as becomes me) shall think the better of the common
Councels wisdoe, worship, while I live, for thus meeting, or but coming after
me in the opinion of his desert. Forward, my sufficient Son, and as this is
the first, so esteem it the least step, to that high and prime honour that
expects thee.


Sir, as I was not ambitious of this, so I covet no higher place; it hath
dignity enough, if it will but save me from contempt: and I had rather my
bearing, in this, or any other office, should add worth to it; then the Place
give the least opinion to me.


Excellently spoken: This modest Answer of thine blushes, as if it said, I will
wear Scarlet shortly. Worshipful Son! I cannot contain my self, I must
tell thee, I hope to see thee one of the Monuments of our City, and reckoned
among her worthies, to be remembered the same day with the Lady Ramsey, and
grave Gresham: when the famous fable of Whittington, and his Pusse, shallbe
forgotten, and thou and thy Acts become the Posies for Hospitals, when thy
name shall be written upon Conduits, and thy deeds plaid i'thy life time, by
the best companies of Actors, and be called their Get-peny. This I divine. This
I Prophecy.


Sir, engage not your expectation farther, then my abilities will answer: I that
know mine own strengths, fear them; and there is so seldom a loss in
promising the least, that commonly it brings with it a welcome deceit. I have
other news for you Sir.


None more welcome, I am sure?


They have their degree of welcome, I dare affirm. The Colonel, and all his
company, this morning putting forth drunk from Belinsgate, had like to have
been cast away o'this side Greenwich: and (as I have intelligence, by a false
Brother,) are come dropping to town, like so many Masterless men, i'their
doublets and hose, without Hat, or Cloak, or any other --


A miracle! the Justice of Heaven! where are they? lets go presently and lay
for them.


I have done that already Sir, both by Constables, and other officers, who
shall take them at their old Anchor; and with less tumult, or suspicion, then
if your self were seen in it: under colour of a great Press, that is now
abroad, and they shall here be brought before me.


Prudent, politic son! Disgrace them all that ever thou can; their Ship I
have already arrested. How to my wish it falls out, that thou hast the place of
a Justicer upon them! I am partly glad of the injury done to me, that thou
may punish it. Be severe i'thy place, like a new officer of the first quarter,
vnreflected: you hear how our Lady is come back with her train, from the
invisible Castle?


No, where is she?


Within, but I have not seen her yet, not her mother; who now begins to wish
her daughter vndub'd, they say, and that she had walkd a foot-pase with her
sister. Here they come, stand back.

God save your Ladyship; 'saue your good Ladyship: your Ladyship is welcome
from your enchanted Castle; so are your beauteous Retinew. I hear your Knight
errant is trauayld on strange adventures: Surely in my mind, your Ladyship
hath fished fair, and caught a Frog, as the saying is.


Speak to your Father, Madam, kneel down.


Kneel? I hope I am not brought so low yet: though my Knight be run away, has
sold my land, I am a Lady, still.


Your Ladyship says true, Madam, it is fitter, and a greater decorum, that I
should curtsy to you that are a knights wife, and a Lady, then you be brought
a'your knees to me, who am a poor Cullion, and your Father.


Law! my Father knows his duty.


O child!


And therefore I do desire your Ladyship, my good Lady Flash in all humility,
to depart my obscure Cottage, and return in quest of your bright, and most
transparent Castle, how ever presently concealed to mortal eyes. And as for
one poor woman of your train here, I will take that order, she shall no
longer be a charge unto you, nor help to spend your Ladyship; she shall stay
at home with me, and not go abroad, not put you to the pawning of an odd
Coach-horse, or three wheels, but take part with the Touchstone: If we lack,
we will not complain to your Ladyship. And so good Madam, with your Damoselle
here, please you to let us see your straight backs, in equipage; for truly,
here is no roust for such Chickens as you are, or birds o'your feather, if it
like your Ladyship.


Mary, fist o'your kindness. I thought as much. Come away Sin, we shall
as soon get a fart from a dead man, as a farthing of curtsy here.


O, good Sister!


Sister, sir reverence? come away, I say, Hunger drops out at his nose.


O Madam, Fair words never hurt the tongue.


How say you by that? you come out with your gold ends now!


Stay Lady-daughter: good husband.


Wife, no man loves his fetters, be they made of gold: I list not have my head
fastened under my child's girdle; as she has brewed, so let her drink, a Gods
name: she went witless to wedding, now she may go wisely a begging. It's but
hony-Moone yet with her Ladyship; she has Coach horses, Apparel, Jewels yet
left, she needs care for no friends, nor take knowledge of Father, Mother,
Brother, Sister, or any body: When those are pawned, or spent, perhaps we shall
return into the list of her acquaintance.


I scorn it in faith. Come Sin.


O Madam, why do you provoke your Father, thus?


Nay, nay, even let Pride go before, Shame will follow after, I warrant you.
Come, why dost thou weep now? thou art not the first good Cow hast had an ill
Calfe, I trust. What's the news, with that fellow?


Sir, the Knight, and your man Quickesiluer are without, will you ha them
brought in?


O by any means. And Son, here's a Chair; appear terrible unto them, on
the first enter view. Let them behold the melancholy of a Magistrate, and taste
the fury of a Citizen in office.


Why Sir, I can do nothing to them, except you charge them with somewhat.


I will charge them, and recharge them, rather then Authority should want foil
to set it of.


No good Sir, I will not.


Son, it is your place; by any means.


Believe it, I will not Sir.


How Misfortune pursues us still in our misery!


Would it had been my fortune, to have been trust up at Wapping, rather then
ever have come here.


Or mine, to have famished in the Island.


Must Goulding sit upon us?


You might carry an M. under your girdle to Master Deputis worship.


What are those, master Constable?


And't please your worship, a couple of Masterless men, I pressed for the
Low-countries, Sir.


Why do you not cary them to Bridewell, according to your order, they may be
shipped away?


An't please your Worship, one of'hem says he is a Knight; and we thought good
to show him to your worship, for our discharge.


Which is he?


This Sir.


And what's the other?


A Knights Fellow Sir, an't please you.


What? a Knight, and his Fellow thus accoutred? Where are their Hats and
Feathers, their Rapiers, and their Cloaks?


O they mock us.


Nay truly sir, they had cast both their Feathers, and Hats too, before we
see them. Here's all their furniture, an't please you, that we found. They say,
Knights are now to be known without Feathers, like Cockerels by their Spurs,
Sir.


What are their names, say they?


Very well this. He should not take knowledge of them in his place, indeed.


This is Sir Petronell Flash.


How!


And this Francis Quickesiluer.


Is't possible? I thought your Worship had been gone for Virginia, Sir* You
are welcome home sir. Your Worship has made a quick return, it seems and no
doubt a good voyage. Nay pray you be co^ Sir. How did your Bisquet hold out
Sir? Me thought, I had seen this Gentlemen before; good Master Quickesiluer!
How a degree to the Southward has changed you.


Do you know them Father? Forbear your offers a little, you shall be heard
anon.


Yes, Master Deputy: I had a small venture with them in the voyage, a Thing,
called a Son in Law, or so. Officers, you may let them stand alone, they will
not run away, I'll give my word for them. A couple of very honest Gentlemen.
One of them was my Prentice, M. Quicksiluer, here, when he had 2. year to
serve, kept his whore, his hunting Nag, would play his 100. pound at Gresco, or
Primero, as familiarly ( al a'my purse) as any bright peace of Crimson on them
all, had his changeable trunks of Apparel, standing at livery, with his Mare,
his Chest of perfumd linen, and his Bathing Tubbs, which when I told him off,
why he -- he was a Gentleman, and I a poor Cheapside Groom. The remedy was,
we must part. Since when he hath had the gift of gathering up some small
parcels of mine, to the value of 500. pound dispersed among my customers to
furnish this his Virginian veture; wherein this knight was the chief, sir
Flash: one that married a daughter of mine, Ladefied her, turned two thousand
pounds worth of good land of hers, into Cash, within the first week, bought
her a new Gown, a Coach, sent her to seek her fortune by land, whilst
himself prepared for his fortune by sea, took in fresh flesh at Beling sgate,
for his own diet, to serve him the whole voyage, the wife of a certain
usurer, called Security, who hath been the broker for them in all this
business: Please Master Deputy, Work upon that now.


If my worshipful Father have ended.


I have, it shall please M. Deputy.


Well then, under correction. --


Now son, come over them with some fine guird, as thus, Knight you shall be
encountered, that is, had to the Counter; or Quicksiluer, I will put you in a
crucible or so.


Sir Petronell Flash, I am sorry to see such flashes as these proceed from a
Gentleman of your Quality, Rank; For mine own part, I could wish, I could
say, I could not see the: but such is the misery of Magistrates, and men in
Place, that they must not wink at Offenders. Take him aside, I will hear you
anon sir.


I like this well yet: there's some grace in the knight, left, He cries.


Francis Quick-siluer, would God thou had turned Quack-saluer, rather then run
into these dissolute, lewd courses; It is great pity, thou art a proper young
man, of an honest and clean face, somewhat near a good one, (God hath done
his part in thee) but, thou haste made too much, and been to proud of that
face, with the rest of thy body; for maintenance of which in neat and garish
attire, (only to be looked upon by some light houswifes) thou hast prodigally
consumed much of thy Masters estate: and being by him gently admonished, at
several times, hast returned thy self haughty, and rebellious, in thine
answers, thundering out uncivil comparisons, requiting al his kindness with a
course and harsh behaviour, never returning thanks for any one benefit, but
receiving all, as if they had bin Debts to thee, no Courtesies. I must tel thee
Francis, these are manifest signs of an ill nature; and God doth often punish
such pride, and butrecuidance, with scorn and infamy, which is the worst of
misfortune. My worshipful father, what do you please to charge them withal?
from the press I will free them Master Constable.


Then i'll leave your worship, Sir.


No, you may stay, there will be other matters against them.


Sir I do charge this Gallant, Master Quicksiluer, on suspicion of Felony; and
the Knight as being accessory, in the receipt of my goods.


O God Sir!


Hold thy peace, impudet varlot, hold thy peace. With what forehead or face,
dost thou offer to chop Logic with me, having run such a race of Riot, as
thou hast done? Does not the sight of this worshipful mans fortune temper,
confound thee, that was thy younger fellow in household, and now come to have the
place of a Judge upon thee? Dost not observe this? Which of al thy Gallants,
Gasters, thy Swearers thy Swaggerers, will come now to moan thy misfortune, or
pity thy penury? They le look out at a window, as thou rid'st in triumph to
Tiborne, and cry, yonder goes honest Frank, mad Quicksiluer; He was a free
boon companion, when he had money, says one; Hang him fool, says another,
he could not keeepe it when he had it; A pox of the Cullio his Mr. (sais a
third) he has brought him to this: when their Pox of pleasure, their piles of
perdition, would have been better bestowed upon thee, that hast ventured for
them with the best, and by the clew of thy knavery, brought thy self weeping,
to the Cart of Calamity.


Worshipful Master.


Offer not to speak, Crocodile, I will not hear a sound come from thee. Thou
hast learnt to whine at the Play yonder. Master Deputy, pray yon commit them
both to safe custody, till I be able farther to charge them.


O me, what an unfortunate thing am I!


Will you not take security Sir.


Yes mary will I sir Flash, if I can find him, charge him as deep as the best
on you. He has been the plotter of all this: he is your Inginer, I hear.
Master Deputy, you'll dispose of these? In the mean time, I'll to my Lo.
Mayor, get his warrant, to seize that Serpent Security into my hands, seal up
both house, and goods, to the Kings use, or my satisfaction.


Officers take them to the Counter.


O God.


Nay on, on: you see the issue of your Sloth. Of Sloth comes Pleasure, of
Pleasure comes Riot, of Riot comes Whoring, of Whoring comes Spending, of
Spending comes Want, of Want comes Theft, of Theft comes Hanging; and there is
my Quickesiluer fixed.


Ah Sin! hast thou ever read in the Chronicle of any Lady, and her
waiting-woman, driven to that extremity, that we are, Sin?


Not I truly, Madam, and if I had, it were but cold comfort, should come out
of books, now.


Why, good faith Sin, I could dine with a lamentable story, now. O hone,
hone, o no nera, c. Can thou tell ne'er a one, Sin?


None, but mine own, Madam, which is lamentable enough; first to be stolen
from my Friends, which were worshipful, and of good account, by a Prentile, in
the habit and disguise of a Gentleman, and here brought up to London, and
promised marriage, and now likely to be forsaken (for he is in possibility to be
hanged.)


Nay weep not good Sin. My Petronell, is in as good possibility as he. Thy
miseries, are nothing to mine, Sin: I was more then promised marriage, Sin,
I had it Sin: was made a Lady; and by a Knight, Sin: which is now as good as
no Knight, Sin: And I was borne in London, which is more then brought up, Sin:
and already forsaken; which is past likelihood, Sin: and in stead of Land in the
Country, all my Knights Living lies in the Counter, Syn. there's his Castle
now?


Which he cannot be forced out off, Madam.


Yes, if he would live hungry a week, or two. Hunger they say breaks stone
walls. But he is even well enough served, Sin, that so soon as ever he had got
my hand to the sale of my inheritance run away from me, and I had been his
Punk, God bless us. Would the Knight of the Sun, or Palmerin of England,
have used their Ladies so, Syn? or sir Lancelot? or sir Tristram?


I do not know, Madam.


Then thou know nothing, Syn. Thou art a Fool, Syn. The Knighthood now a
days, are nothing like the Knighthood of old time. They rid a horseback Ours
go afoot. They were attended by their Squires. Our by their Lacquaies. They
went buckled in their Armour, Ours muffled in their Cloaks. They trauaild
wildernesses; deserts, Ours dare scarce walk the streets. They were still pressed
to engage their Honour, Ours still ready to pane their clothes. They would
gallop on at sight of a Moster, Ours run away at sight of a Sergeant. They
would help poor Ladies, Ours make poor Ladies.


I Madam, they were Knights of the Round-Table at Winchester, that sought
Aduetures, but these of the Square Table at Ordinaries, that sit at Hazard.


True Syn, let him vanish And tel me, what shall we pawn next


I mary, Mada, a timely consideration, for our Hostess (profane woman) has
sworn by bread, salt, she will not trust us another meal.


Let it stink in her hand the: I'll not be beholding to her. Let me see, my
Jewels begone, my Gowns, my red velvet Petticoat, that I was married in, my
wedding silk stockings, al thy best apparel, poor Syn. Good faith, rather the
thou shouldest pawn a rag more, Il'd lay my Ladyship in lavender, if I knew
where.


Alas, Madam, your Ladyship?


I, why? you do not scorn my Ladyship, though it is in a Waistcoat? Gods my
life, you are a Peat indeed! do I offer to mortgage my Ladyship, for you, and
for your avail, and do you turn the Lip, and the Alas to my Ladyship?


No Madam, but I make question, who will lend any thing upon it?


Who? marry inow, I warrant you, if you'll seek them out. I'm sure I remember
the time, when I would have given a thousand pound, (if I had had it) to have
bin a Lady; and I hope I was not bred and borne with that appetite alone: some
other gentle-borne of the City, have the same longing I trust. And for my part,
I would afford them a peny'rth, my Ladyship is little the worse, for the
wearing, and yet I would bate a good deal of the sum. I would lend it (let
me see) for 40 li^ in hand, Syn, that would apparel us; and ten pound a
year: that would keep me, and you, Syn, (with our needles) and we should
never need to be beholding to our sciruy Parents? Good Lord, that there are no
Fairies now adays, Syn.


Why Madame?


To do Miracles, and bring Ladies money. Sure, if we lay in a cleanly house,
they would haunt it, Sin? I'll try. I'll sweep the Chamber soon at night,
set a dish of water of the Hearth. A Fayrie may come, and bring a Pearl, or a
Diamond We do not know Syn? Or, there may be a pot of Gold hid of the
backside, if we had tools to dig for it? why may not we two rise early
in the morning (Syn) before any body is up, and find a Jewel, in the streets,
worth a 100. li.? May not some great Court-Lady, as she comes from Revels at
midnight, look out of her Coach, as 'tis running, and loose such a Jewel, and
we find it? Ha?


They are pretty waking dreams; these.


Or may not some old Usurer be drunk ouer-night, with a Bag of money, and
leave it behind him on a Stall? for God-sake, Syn, let's rise to morrow by
break of day, and see. I protest law, If I had as much money as an Alderman, I
would seatter some on it, i'th'streetes for poor Ladies to find, when their
Knights were laid up. And, now I remember my Song of the Golden shower, why may
not I have such a fortune?

I'll sing it, and try what luck I shall have after it.

Fond Fables tell of old,
How love in Danaes lap
Fell in a shower of Gold,
By which she caught a clap;
O, had it been my hap,
(How ere the blow doth threaten)
So well I like the play,
That I could wish all day
And night to be so beaten.
O, here's my Mother! good luck, I hope. Have you brought any money, Mother?
Pray you Mother, your Blessing. Nay, sweet Mother, do not weep.


God bless you; I would I were in my Grave.


Nay, dear Mother, can you steal no more money from my father? dry your eyes,
comfort me. Alas, it is my Knights fault, and not mine, that I am in a
Wast-coate, and attired thus simply.


Simply? Tis better then thou deserve. Never whimper for the matter. Thou
should have looked, before thou had leaped. Thou were a fire to be a Lady,
and now your Ladyship and you may both blow at the Cole, for ought I know.
Self do, self have. The hasty person never wants woe, they say.


Nay then Mother, you should ha loook'd to it; A body would think you were
the older: I did but my kind, l. He was a Knight, and I was fit to be a Lady.
Tis not lack of liking, but lack of living, that severs us. And you talk
like your self and a Cittiner in this, in faith. You show what Husband you come
on Iwys. You smell the Touch-stone. He that will do more for his daughter,
that he has married a sciruie Gold-end man, and his Prentice, then he will for
his the other Daughter, that has wedded a Knight, and his Customer. By this
light, I think he is not my legitimate Father.


O good Madam, do not take up your mother so.


Nay, nay, let her cene alone. Let her Ladyship grieve me still, with her
bitter taunts and terms. I have not dole enough to see her in this miserable
case, l? without her Velvet gowns, without Ribbands, without Jewels, without
French-wires, or Cheat bread, or Quails, or a little Dog, or a Genttleman
Usher, or any thing indeed, that's fit for a Lady. --


Except her tongue.


And I not able to releiue her neither, being kept so short, by my husband.
Well, God knows my heart. I did little think, that ever she should have had
need of her sister Golding.


Why Mother, I ha not yet. Alas, good Mother, be not intoxicate for me, I am
well enough. I would not change husbands with my Sister, I. The leg of a
Lark is better then the body of a Kite.


I know that. But --


What sweet Mother, What?


It's but ill food, when nothing's left but the Claw.


That's true Mother; Aye me.


Nay, sweet Lady-bird, sigh not. Child, Madame. Why do you weep thus? Be of
good cheer. I shall die, if you cry, and mar your complexion, thus?


Alas Mother, what should I do,


Go to thy Sister's Child, She'll be proud, thy Lady-ship will come under
her roof. She'll win thy Father to release thy Knight, and redeem thy
Gowns, and thy Coach, and thy Horses, and set thee up again.


But will she get him to set my Knight up, too?


That she will, or any thing else thou'it ask her.


I will begin to love her, if I thought she would do this.


Try her good Chuck, I warrant thee.


Dost thou think she'll do it?


I Madame, and be glad you will receive it.


That's a good Maiden, she tells you true. Come, I'll take order for your debts
i the Ale-house.


Go, Syn, and pray for thy Frank, as I will, for my Pet.


I will receive no Letters, M Woolf, you shall pardon me.


Good Father let me entreat you.


Son Goulding, I will not be tempted, I find mine own easy nature, and I
know not what a well-pend subtle Letter may work upon it: There may be
Tricks, Packing, do you see? Return with your Packet, Sir.


Believe it Sir, you need fear no packing here. These are but Letters of
Submission, all.


Sir, I do look for no Submission. I will bear my self in this like Blind
Justice, Work upon that now. When the Sessions come, they shall hear from me.


From whom come your Letters, M. Woolfe?


And't please you Sir. One from Sir Petronell. Another from Francis
Quickesiluer. And a third, from old Security, who is almost mad in Prison.
There are two, to your worship: One from M. Francis, Sir. Another from the
Knight.


I do wonder, M. Woolfe, why you should travail thus, in a business so
contrary to kind, or the nature o'your Place! that you being the Keeper of a
Prison, should labour the release of your Prisoners! Whereas me thinks, it
were far more Natural, Kindly in you, to be ranging about for more, not let
these escape you have already under the Tooth. But they say, you Wolves, when
you have sucked the blood once, that they are dry, you have done.


Sir, your Worship may descant as you please o'my name, but I protest, I was
never so mortified with any men's discourse, or behaviour in Prison; yet I have
had of all sorts of men in the Kingdom, under my Keys, almost of all Religions
in the land, as Papist, Protestant, Paritane, Brownist, Anabaptist, Millenary,
Fam^ly o'Loue, Iewe, Turk, Infidel, Atheist, Good Fellow, c.


And which of all these (thinks M. Woolfe) was the best Religion?


Troth, M. Deputy, they that pay Fees best: we never examine their consciences
farther.


I believe you M. Woolfe. Good faith, Sir, Here's a great deal of humility
i'these Letters.


Humility, Sir? I, were your Worship an Eyewitness of it, you would say so.
The Knight will in the Knights-Ward, do what we can Sir, and Master
Quickesiluer, would be in the Hole, if we would let him. I never knew, or saw
Prisoners more penitent, or more devout. They will sit you up all night singing
of Psalmes, and aedifying the whole Priso^ only, Security sings a note to
high, sometimes, because he lies in the Two-penny ward. far of, and can not
take his tune. The Neighbours can not rest for him, but come every Morning to
ask, what godly Prisoners we have.


Which on them is't is so devout, the Knight, or the to'ther?


Both Sir. But the young Man especially! I never heard his like! He has cut his
hair too* He is so well given, and has such good gifts! He can tell you,
almost all the Stories of the Book of Martyrs, and speak you all the
Sicke-mans Salve without Book.


I, if he had had grace, he was brought up where it grew, I wis. On Master
Wolf.


And he has converted one Fangs a Sarieant, a fellow could neither write, nor
read, he was called the Bandog of the Counter: and he has brought him already to
pare his nailes, and say his prayers, and 'tis hoped, he will sell his place
shortly, and become an Intelligencer.


No more, I am coming all ready. If I should give any farther ear, I were
take. Adieu good Master Wolf. Son, I do feel mine own weaknesses, do not
importune me. Pity is a Rheum, that I am subject too, but I will resist it.
Master Wolf, Fish is cast away, that is cast in dry Pooles: Tell Hypocrisy,
it will not do, I have touched, and tried too often; I am yet proof, and I will
remain so: when the Sessions come, they shall hear from me. In the mean
time, to all suites, to all entreaties, to all letters, to all tricks, I will
be deaf as an Adder, and blind as a Beetle, lay mine care to the ground, and
lock mine eyes i'my hand, against all temptations.


You see, master Wolf, how inexorable he is. There is no hope to recover him
Pray you commend me to my brother Knight, and to my fellow Francis, present
them with this small token of my love; tell them, I wish I could do them any
worthier office, but in this, 'tis desperate: yet I will not fail to try the
uttermost of my power for them. And sir, as far as I have any credit with you
pray you let them want nothing: though I am not ambitious, they should know so
much.


Sir, both your actions, and words speak you to be a true Gentleman. They
shall know only what is fit, and no more.


Who would you speak with, Sir?


I would speak with one Security, that is prisoner here.


You'are welcome Sir. Stay there i'll call him to you. Master Security.


Who call's?


Here's a Gentleman would speak with you.


What is he? Is't one that grafts my forehead now I am in prison, and comes to
see how the Horns shoot up, and prosper.


You must pardon him Sir: The old man is a little crazed with his imprisonment.


What say you to me, Sir? Look you here. My learned Counsel, M. Bramble!
Cry you mercy, Sir: when saw you my wife?


She is now at my house, Sir, and desired me that I would come to Visit you
and inquire of you your Case, that we might work some means to get you
forth.


My Case, M. Bramble, is stone walls, and iron grates; you see it, this is the
weakest part on it. And, for getting me forth, no means but hang my self, and
so to be carried forth, from which they have here bound me, in intolerable
bands.


Why but what is't you are in for, Sir?


For my Sins, for my Sins Sir, whereof Marriage, is the greatest. O, had I
never married, I had never known this Purgatory, to which Hell is a kind of
cool Bathe in respect: My wives confederacy Sir, with old Touchstone, that
she might keep her Iubilaee, and the Feast of her New-Moone. Do you
understand me Sir?


Good Sir, go in and talk with him. The Light dos him harm, and his example
will be hurtful to the weak Prisoneis. Fit, Father Security, that you'll
be still so profane, will nothing humble you?


What's he?


O he is a rare young man. Do you not know him?


Not I. I never saw him. I can remember.


Why, it is he that was the gallant Prentice of London, M. Touchstones man.


Who Quickesiluer?


I, this is he.


Is this he? They say, he has been a Gallant indeed.


O, the royal est fellow, that ever was bred up in the City. He would play you
his thousand pound, a night at Dice; keep Knights and Lords Company; go with
them to bawdy houses; had his fix men in a Livery; kept a stable of Hunting
horses; and his Wench in her velvet Gown, and her Cloth of silver. Here's one
Knight with him here in Prison.


And how miserably he is chaung'd!


O, that's voluntary in him; he gave away all his rich clothes, as soon as ever
he came in here, among the Prisoners: and will eat of the Basket, for
humility.


Why will he do so?


Alas he has no hope of life. He mortifies himself. He dos but linger on,
till the Sessions.


O, he has penned the best thing, that he calls his Repentance, or his Last
Fare-well, that ever you heard: He is a pretty Poet, and for Prose -- You
would wonder how many Prisoners he has helped out, with penning Petitions for
them, and not take a penny. Look, this is the Knight, in the rug Gown.
Standby.


Sir, for Securities Case, I have told him; Say he should be condemned to be
carted, or whipped, for a Bawd, or so, why I'll lay an Execution on him o'two
hundred pound, let him acknowledge a Judgment, he shall do it in half an
howre, they shall not all fetch him out, without paying the Execution, o'my
word.


But can we not be bay'ld M. Bramble?


Hardly, there are none of the Judges in Town, else you should remove your
self (in spite of him) with a Habeas Corpus: But if you have a Friend to
deliver your tale sensibly to some Justice of the Town, that he may have
feeling of it, (do you see) you may be bayl'd. For as I understand the Case,
tis only done, In Terrorem, and you shall have an Action of false Imprisonment
against him, when you come out: and perhaps a thousand pound Costs.


How now, M, Woolfe? What news? what return?


Faith, bad all: yonder will be no Letters received. He says the Sessions
shall determine it. Only, M. Deputy Golding commends him to you, and with
this token, wishes he could do you other good.


I thank him. Good M. Bramble, trouble our quiet no more; do not molest us in
Prison thus, with your winding devises: Pray you depart. For my pat, I co mm t
my cause to him that can succour me, let God work his will. M. Woolfe, I pray
you let this be distributed, among the Prisoners, and desire them to pray for
us.


It shall be done, M. Francis.


An excellent temper!


Now God send him good-lucke.


But what said my Father in Law, M. Woolfe?


Here's one would speak with you, Sir.


I'll tell you anon Sir Petronell. who is't?


A Gentleman, Sir, that will not be seen.


Where is he? M. Deputy! your worcester: is wel-come. --


Peace!


Away, Srah.


Good faith, M. Woolfe, the estate of these Gentlemen, for whom you were so
late and willing a Suitor, doth much affect me: and because I am desirous to
do them some fair office, and find there is no means to make my Father
relent, so likely, as to bring him to be a Spectator of their Miseries; I have
ventured on a device, which is, to make make my self your Prisoner:
entreating, you will presently go report it to my Father, and (sayning, an
Action, at suit of some third person) pray him by this Token, that he will
presently, and with all secrecy, come hither for my Bail; which train, (if
any) I know will bring him abroad; and then, having him here, I doubt not but
we shall be all fortunate, in the Event.


Sir, I will put on my best speed, to effect it. Please you come in.


Yes; And let me rest concealed, I pray you.


See, here a Benefit, truly done; when it is done timely, freely, and to no
Ambition.


I will sail by you, and not hear you, like the wise Vlisses.


Dear Father.


Husband.


Father.


M. Touchstone.


away sirens, I will inmure my self, against your cries; and locke my self
vpto our Lamentations.


Gentle Husband, hear me.


Father, It is I Father; my Lady Flash: my sister and I am Friends.


Good Father.


Be not hardened, good M. Touchstone.


I pray you, Sir, be merciful.


I am dease, I do not hear you; I have stopped mine ears, with Shoemakers
wax, and drunk Lethe, and Mandragora to forget you: All you speak to me, I
commit to the Air.


How now, M. VVoolfe?


Where's M. Touchstone? I must speak with him presently: I have lost my breath
for hast.


What's the matter Sir? pray all be well.


Master Deputy Goulding is arrested upon an execution, and desires him
presently to come to him, forthwith.


Aye me; do you hear Father?


Tricks, tricks, confederacy, tricks, I have them in my nose, I sent them.


Who's that? master Touchstone?


Why it is M. Wolf himself, husband.


Father.


I am dease still, I say: I will neither yield to the song of the Siren, nor
the voice of the Hyena, the tears of the Crocodile, nor the howling of the
Wolf: avoid my habitatio mosters,


Why you are not mad Sir? I pray you look forth, and see the token I have
brought you, Sir.


Ha! what token is it?


Do you know it Sir?


My son Gouldings ring! Are you in earnest My. Wolf?


I by my faith sir. He is in prison, and required me to use all speed, and
secrecy to you.


My Cloak there (pray you be patient) I am plagued for my Austerity; my
Cloak: at whose suite master Wolf?


I'll tell you as we go sir.


Why, but is his offence such as he cannot hope of life?


Troth it should seem so: and 'tis great pity; for he is exceeding penitent.


They say he is charged but on suspicion of Felony, yet.


I but his master is a shrewd fellow, Heel prove great matter against him.


I'd as live as any thing, I could see his Farewell.


O tis rarely written: why Tobis may get him to sing it to you, he's not
curious to any body.


O no. He would that all the world should take knowledge of his Repentance, and
thinks he merits in it, the more shame he suffers.


Pray thee try, what thou can do.


I warrant you, he will not deny it; if he be not hoarce with the often
repeating of it.


You never saw a more courteous creature, then he is; and the Knight too: the
poorest Prisoner of the house may command them. You shall hear a thing,
admirably pend.


Is the Knight any, Scholar too?


No, but he will speak very well, and discourse admirably of running Horses,
and White-Friers, and against Bawds; and of Cocks; and talk as loud as a
Hunter, but is none.


Please you stay here sir, i'll cal his worship down to you.


See, he has brought him, and the Knight too. Salute him I pray, Sir, this
Gentleman, upon our report, is very desirous to hear some piece of your
Repentance.


Sir, withal my heart, as I told M. Tobie, I shall be glad to have any man a
witness of it. And the more openly I prosesse it, I hope it will appear the
hartier and the more vnsained.


Who is this? my man Francis? and my son in Law?


Sir, it is all the Testmonie I shall leave behind me to the World, and my
Master, that I have so offended.


Good Sir


I writ it, when my spirits were oppressed.


I, I'll be sworn for you Francis.


It is in imitation of Maningtons; he that was hanged at Cambridge, that cut of
the Horses head at a blow.


So sir.


To the tune of I wail in woe, I plunge in pain.


An excellent Ditty it is, and worthy of a new tune.


In Cheapside famous for Gold Plate,
Quicksiluer I did dwell of late:
I had a Master good, and kind,
That would have wrought me to his mind.
He bad me still, Work upon that,
But alas I wrought I knew not what.
He was a Touchstone black, but true:
And told me still, what would ensue,
Yet, woe is me, I would not learn,
I saw, alas, but could not discern.

Excellent, excellent well.


O let him alone, He is taken already.


I cast my Coat, and Cap away,
I went in silkci, and saitens gay,
False Mettle of good manners, I
Did daily coint valavvsully.
I scorned my Master, being drunk.
I kept my Golding, and my Punk,
And with a knight, sir Flash, by name,
(Who now is sorry for the same)

I thank you Francis.

I thought by sea to run, But Thames, and Tempest did me stay.


This cannot be fained sure. Heaven pardon my seucrity. The Ragged Colt, may
prooke a good Horse.


How he listens! and is transported? He has forgot me.


Still Eastward hoe was all my word:
But Westward I had no regard.
Nor never thought, what would coin aster
As did alas his youngest Daughter,
At last the black Ox trod o'my foot,
And I saw then what longd vntoo't,
Now try I, Touchstone, touch me still,
And make me currant by thy skill.

And I will do it, Francis.


Stay him M. Deputy, now is the time, we shall loose the song else.


I protest it is the best that ever I heard.


How like you it Gentlemen?


O admirable, sir!


This Stanze now following, alludes to the story of Mannington from whence I
took my project for my invention.


Pray you go on sir.


O Manington thy stories show,
Thou cutst a Horse-head off at a blow
But I confess, I have not the force
For to cut off the head of a horse,
Yet I desire this grace to vvinne,
That I may cut off the Horse-head of Sin.
And leave his body in the dust
Of sinneshigh way and bogs of Lust,
Whereby I may take Virtues purse,
And live with her for better, for vvorse.

Admirable sir, excellently conceited.


Alas sir.


Son Goulding M. Wolf, I thank you: the deceit is welcome, especially from
thee whose charitable soul in this hath shown a high point of wisdom and
honesty. Listen. I am ravished with his Repentance, and could stand here a
whole prentiship to hear him,


Forth good sir.


This is the last, and the Farewell.

Farewell Cheapside, sarevvel sweet trade
Of Goldsmiths all, that never shall fade
Farewell dear fellow Prentices all
And be you vvarned by my sall:
Shun Usurers, Bawds, and dice, and drabs.
Avoid them as you would French scabs
Seek not to go beyond your Tether,
But cut your Thongs unto your Leather
So shall you thrive by little and little,
Escape Tiborne, Couters, the Spitle

And escape them shalt thou my penitent, dear Frances.


Master!


Fatherl


I can no longer forbear to do your humility right: Arise, and let me honour
your Repentance, with the hearty and joyful embraces, of a Father, and Friends
love. Quicksiluer, thou hast eat into my breast, Quicksiluer, with the drops
of thy sorrow, and killed the desperate opinion I had of thy reclaim:


O sir, I am not worthy to see your worshipful face.


Forgive me Father.


Speak no more, all former passages, are forgotten, and here my word shall
release you. Thank this worthy Brother kind friend, Francis. -- M. Wolf. I am
their Bail;


Master Touchstone? Master Touchstone?


Who's that?


Security, Sir.


Pray you Sir, if you'll be won with a Song, hear my lamentable tune, too:

O Master Touchstone,
My heart is full of woe;
Alas, I am a Cuckold:
And, why should it be so?
Because I was a Usurer,
And Bavvd, as all you know,
For which, again I tell you,
My heart is full of wot.

Bring him forth, Master Wolf, and release his bands. This day shable sacred
to Mercy, the mirth of this Encounter, in the Counter. -- See, we are
encountered with more Suitors.

Save your Breath, save your Breath; All things have succeeded to your wishes:
we are heartily satisfied in their events.


Ah Runaway, Runaway! have I caught you? And, how has my poor Knight done all
this while?


Dear Lady-wife; forgive me.


As heartily, as I would be forgiven, Knight. Dear Father, give me your
blessing, and forgive me too; I have been proud, and lascivious, Father; and a
Fool, Father; and being raised to the state of a wanton coy thing, called a
Lady, Father; have scorned you, Father; and my Sister; my Sisters Velvet Cap,
too; and would make a mouth at the City, as I rid through it; and stop mine
ears at Bow-bell: I have said your Beard was a Base one, Father; and that you
looked like Twierpipe, the Taborer; and that my Mother was but my Midwife.


Now God forgi'you, Child Madame.


No more Repetitions. What is else wanting, to make our Harmony full?


Only this, sir. That my fellow Francis make amends to mistress Sindefie, with
marriage.


With all my heart.


And Security give her a do were, which shall be all the

(...)

