Rocks? Nothing but Rocks in these masking deu^ces? Is Invention so poor
she must needs ever dwell amongst Rocks? But it may worthily have chaunc'd
(being so often presented) that their vain Custom is now become the
necessary hand of heaven, transforming into Rocks, some stony hearted Ladies,
courted in former masks; for whose loves, some of their repulsed servants have
perished: or perhaps some of my flintie-hearted Usurers have been here
metamorphosed; betwixt whom and Ladies, there is resemblance enough: Ladies
using to take interest, besides their principal, as much as Usurers. See, it
is so; and now is the time of restoring them to their natural shapes: It
moves, opens, excellent! This metamorphosis I intend to ouek-heare.


HOw hard this world is to a man of wit? he must eat through many Rocks for
his food, or fast; a restless and tormenting stone, his wit is to him: the very
stone of Sisyphus in hell; nay, the Philosophers stone, makes not a man more
wretched: A man must be a second Proteus, and turn himself into all shapes
(like Vlisses) to wind through the straits of this pinching vale of misery;
I have turned my self into a Tailor, a Man, a Gentleman, a Nobleman, a Worthy
man; but had never the wit to turn my self into an Alder-man. There are
many shapes to perish in, but one to live in, and tha's an Aldermans: Tis not
for a man of wit to take any rich Figure upon him: your bold, proud, ignorant,
that's brave and clinkant, that finds crowns put into his shoes every
morning by the Fairies and will never tell; whose Wit is humour, whose Judgment
is fashion, whose Pride is emptiness, Birth his full man, that is in all
things something, in Sum total, nothing. He shall live in the land of Spruce,
milk and honey flowing into his mouth sleeping.


This is no transformation, but an intrusion into my golden mines: I will hear
him-further.


This breach of Rocks I have made, in needy pursuit of the blind Deity,
Riches: who is miraculously arrived here. For (according to our rare men of wit)
heaven standing, and earth moving, her motion (being circular) hath brought one
of the most remote parts of the world, to touch at this all-exceeding Island:
which a man of wit would imagine must needs move circularly with the rest of
the world, and so ever maintain an equal distance. But, Poets (our chief men
of wit) answer that point directly; most ingeniously affirming: That this I'll
is (for the excellency of it) divided from the world ( diuisus ab orb
Britannus) and that though the whole World besides moves; yet this I'll stands
fixed on her own feet, and defies the Worlds mutability, which this rare
accident of the arrival of Riches, in one of his furthest-off-scituate
dominions, most demonstratiuely proves.


This is a man of wit indeed, and knows of all our arrivals.


With this dull Deity Riches, a rich Island lying in the South-sea, called
Poeana, (of the Poeans (or songs) sung to the Sun, whom they there adore (being
for strength and riches, called the Nauill of that South-sea) is by earths
round motion moved near this Brittan Shore. In which Island (being yet in
command of the Virginian continent.) A troupe of the noblest Virginians
inhabiting; attended hither the God of Riches, all triumphantly shining in a
Mine of gould. For hearing of the most royal solemnity, of these sacred
Nuptials; they crossed the Ocean in their honour, and are here arrived. A poor
snatch at some of the golden Ore, that the feet of riches have turned up as he
trod here, my poor hand hath purchased; and hope the Remainder of a greater
work, will be shortly extant.


You Sir, that are miching about my golden Mines here.


What, can you see Sir? you have heretofore been presented blind: like your
Mother Fortune; and your Brother Love.


But now Sir, you see I see.


By what good means, I beseech you Sir.


That means, I may vouchsafe you hereafter; mean space, what are you?


I am Sir a kind of Man; A Man of wit: with whom your worship has nothing to
do I think.


No Sir, nor will have any thing to do with him: A Man of wit? whats that? A
Beggar.


And yet no Devil Sir.


As I am, you mean.


Indeed sir your Kingdom is under the Earth.


That's true; for Riches is the Atlas that holds it up, it would sink else.


Tis rather a wonder, it sinks not with you Sir, you're so sinfully, and
damnably heavy.


Sinful? and damnable? what a Puritan? These Bellows you wear on your head,
show with what matter your brain is puffed up Sir: A Religion-forger I see you
are, and presume of inspiration from these Bellows; with which ye study to
blow up the settled governments of kingdoms.


Your worship knocks at a wrong door Sir, I dwell far from the person you
speak of.


What may you be then, being a man of wit? a Buffon, a Jester. Before I would
take upon me the title of a man of wit, and be baffled by every man of
wisdom for a Buffon; I would turn Banckrout, or let up a Tobacco shop,
change cloaks with an Alchemist, or serve an Usurer, be a watering pot for
every Groom; stand the push of every rascal wit; enter lifts of jests with
trencher-fooles, and be foold down by them, or (which is worse) put them
down in fooling: are these the qualities a man of wit should run proud of?


Your worship I see has obtained wit, with sight, which I hope yet my poor wit
will well be able to answer; for touching my jesting, I have heard of some
Courtiers, that have run themselves out of their states with Iusting; and why
may not I then raise my self in the State with jesting? An honest Shoemaker,
(in in a liberal Kings time) was knighted for making a clean boot, and is it
impossible, that I for breaking a clean Jest, should be aduaunct in Court, or
Counsel? or at least, served out for an Ambassador to a dull Climate? Jests,
and Merriments are but wild weeds in a rank soil, which being well manured,
yield the wholesome crop of wisdom and discretion at time ath'yeare.


Nay, nay, I commend thy judgment for cutting thy cote so just to the breadth
of thy shoulders; he that cannot be a courser in the field, let him learn to
play the Iack-an-Apes in the Chamber, he that cannot personate the wise-man
well amongst wisards, let him learn to play the fool well amongst dizzards.


Tis passing miraculous, that your dull and blind worship should so suddenly
turn both sightfull, and witfull.


The Riddle of that miracle, I may chance dissolve to you in sequel; mean
time, what name sustain'st thou? and what toys are these thou bear so
phantastically about thee?


These, toys Sir, are the Ensigns that discover my name and quality: my name
being Capriccio, and I wear these Bellows on my head, to show I can pusse up
with glory all those that affect me: and besides, bear this spur, to show I
can spur gall, even the best that contemn me.


A dangerous fellow, But what make thou (poor man of wit) at these pompous
Nuptials;


Sir, I come hither with a charge; To do these Nuptials, I hope, very
acceptable service; And my charge is; A company of accomplished Travellers; that
are excellent at Antemaskes; and will tender a taste of their quality, if your
worship please.


Excellent well pleased; of what virtue are they besides.


Passing grave Sir, yet exceeding acute: witty, yet not ridiculous; never laugh
at their own jests: laborious yet not base, having cut out the skirts of the
whole world, in amorous quest of your gould and silver.


They shall have enough; cal them: I beseech thee call them: how far hence
abide they?


Sir (being by another eminent quality the admired soldiers of the world) in
contempt of softness, and delicacy, they lie on the naturally hard boards of
that naked tree; and will your worship assure them rewards fit for persons of
their freight.


Dost thou doubt my reward being pleased?


I know Sir, a man may sooner win your reward, for pleasing you, the deserving
you. But you great wise persons, have a fetch of State; to employ with
countenance, and encouragement, but reward with answer and disgrace, save your
purposes, and lose your honours.


To assure thee of reward, I will now satisfy thee touching the miraculous
cause, both of my sight and wit, and which consequently moves me to humanity,
and bounty; And all is, only this; my late being in love, with the lovely
Goddess Honour.


If your Worshipp love Honour, indeed, Sir you must needs be bountiful. But
where is the rare Goddess you speak of to be seen?


In that Rich Temple, where Fortune fixed those her golden wings, thou see;
And that rolling stone she used to tread upon, for sign she would never
for-sake this Kingdom; There is adored, the worthy Goddess Honour. The
swetnesse of whose voice, when I first heard her persuasions, both to my self,
and the Virginian Princes arrived here, to do honour and homage, to these
heavenly Nuptials, so most powerfully enamoured me, that the fire of my love
flew up to the sight of mine eyes: that have lighted within me a whole
firmament of Bounty, which may semingly assure the, thy reward is certain:
therefore call thy accomplished company to their Antemaske.


See Sir, The time, set for their apperance, being expired; they appear to
their service of them-selues.


Gramercy now Capriccio, take thy men of complement, and travail with them to
other marriages. My Riches to thy Wit; they will get something some-where.


Whats this?


A strain of Wit beyond a Man of Wit. I have employed you, and the grace of
that, is reward enough; hence; pack, with your complemental Farthel: The sight
of an attendant for reward, is abominable in the eyes of a turne-seru'd
Politician, and I fear, will strike me blind again. I can not abide these
bellows of thy head, they and thy men of wit have melted my Mines with them,
and consumed me, yet take thy life and be gone. Neptune let thy predecessor,
Vlysses, live after all his slain companions, but to make him die more
miserably living; gave him up to ship wracks, enchantments; men of wit are but
enchanted, there is no such thing as wit in this world. So, take a tree, inure
thy soldiers to hardness, tis honourable, though not clinkant.


Can this be possible?


Alas! poor man of wit, how want of reward daunts thy virtue? But because I
must send none away discontented, from these all-pleasing Nuptials; take this
wedge of gold, and wedge thy self into the world with it, renouncing that
loose wit of thine, 'twill spoil thy complexion.


Honour, and all Argus eyes, to Earths all-commaunding Riches. Pluto etiam cedit
Iupiter


These humble objects can no high eyes draw,
Eunomia? (or the sacred power of Law)
Daughter of Jove, and Goddess Honours Priest;
Appear to Plutus, and his love assist.

What would the god of Riches?

Join with Honour:
In purposed grace of these great Nuptials;
And since to Honour none should dare access,
But helped by virtues hand (thy self, chaste Love
Being Virtues Rule, and her directfull light)
Help me to th'honor of her speech and sight.

Thy will shall straight be honoured; all that seek
Access to Honour, by clear virtues beam,
Her grace prevents their pains, and comes to them.

Crown of all merit, Goddess, and my Love;
Tis now high time, that th'end for which we come
Should be endeuor'd in our utmost right,
Done to the sweetness of this Nuptial night.

Plutus? The Princes of the Virgin land,
Whom I made cross the Britan Ocean
To this most famed I'll, of all the world,
To do due homage to the sacred Nuptials
Of Law, and Virtue, celebrated here,
By this Howre of the holy Eeuen I know,
Are ready to perform the rites they owe
To setting Phoebus; which (for greater State
To their appearance) their first act aduances.
And with songs Ushers their succeeding dances,
Herrald! give summons to the Virgin Knights,
No longer to delay their purposed Rites.

Knights of the Virgin Land, whom beauties lights
Would glorify with their inflaming sights;
Keep now obscured no more your fair intent,
To add your Beams to this nights ornament,
The golden-winged Howre strikes now a Plain,
And calls out all the pomp ye entertain;
The Princely Bridegroom, and the Brides bright eyes,
Sparkle with grace to your discoveries.

Open Earth thy womb of gold,
Show Heaven thy cope of stars.
All glad Aspects unfold,
Shine out, and clear our Cares:
Kiss Heaven and Earth, and so combine
In all mixed joy our Nuptial Twine.
Se now the setting Sun, casts up his bank,
And shows his bright head at his Seas repair,
For sign that all days future shall be fair.

May he that rules the nights days confirm it.

Behold the Suns fair Priests the Phaebades,
Their evening service in an Hymn address
To Phoebus setting; which we now shall hear,
And see the forms of their devotions there.

Descend (fair Sun) and sweetly rest,
In Tethis Crystal arms, thy toil,
Fall burning on her Marble breast,
And make with Love her billows boyle.

Blow blow, sweet winds, O blow away,
Al vapours from the fined air:
That to this golden head no Ray,
May languish with the least empaire.

Dance Tethis, and thy loves red beams,
Embrace with Joy he now discends:
Burns burns with love to drink thy streams,
and on him endless youth attends.

This superstitious Hymn, sung to the Sun,
Let us encounter with fit duties done
To our clear Phoebus; whose true piety,
Enjoys from heaven an earthly deity.

Rise, rise O Phoebus, ever rise,
descend not to th'inconstant stream,
But grace with endless light, our skies,
to thee that Sun is but a beam.

Dance Ladies in our Suns bright rays,
in which the Bride and Bridegroom shine:
Clear sable night with your eyes days,
and set firm lights on Hymens shrine.

O may our Sun not set before,
he sees his endless seed arise:
And deck his triple crowned shore,
with springs of humane Deities.

Set Set (great Sun) our rising love
shall ever celebrate thy grace:
Whom entering the high court of Jove,
each God greetes rising from his place.
When thow thy silver bow dost bend,
all start aside and dread thy draughts:
How can we thee enough commend,
commanding all worlds with the shafts?

Blessed was thy mother bearing thee,
and Phoebe that delights in darts:
Thou artful Songs dost set; and she
winds horns, loves hounds, high pallmd harts

Again our Musique and conclude this Song,
To him, to whom all Phoebus beams belong:

Rise still (clear Sun) and never set,
but be to Earth her only light:
All other Kings in thy beams met,
are clouds and dark effects of night.
As when the Rosie Morn doth rise,
Like Mists, all give thy wisdom way;
A learned King, is, as in skies,
To poor dim stars, the flaming day*

Blessed was thy Mother, bearing Thee,
Thee only Relic of her Race,
Made by thy virtues beams a Tree,
Whose arms shall all the Earth embrace.

Virginian Princes, ye must now renounce
Your superstitious worship of these Suns,
Subject to cloudy darknings and descents,
And of your sweet devotions, turn the events
To this our Britan Phoebus, whose bright sky
(Enlightened with a Christian Piety)
Is never subject to black Errors night,
And hath already offered heavens true light,
To your dark Region, which acknowledge now;
Descend, and to him all your homage vow.

Musiquely our voices, now tune sweet and hie,
And singe the Nuptial Hymn of Love,
Twinns, as of one age, so to one desire
May both their bloods give, an vnparted fire.
And as those twinns that Fame gives all her prise,
Combind their lifes power in such Symphathies;
That one being merry; mirth the other graced:
If one felt sorrow, the other grief embraced.
If one were healthful; Health the other pleased:
If one were sick: the other was diseasd;
And all ways joined in such a constant troth
That one like cause had like effect in both,
So may these Nuptial Twynnes,
Spend in such even parts, never grieving more,
Then may the more set off their joys divine;
As after clouds, the Sun, doth clerest shine.

Bright Panthaea borne to Pan,
Of the Noblest Race of Man,
Her white hand to Eros giving,
With a kiss, joined Heaven to Earth
And begot so fair a birth,
As yet never graced the living.

ATwinne that all worlds did adorn,
For so were Love and Beauty borne.
Both so loved, they did contend
Which the other should transcend,
Doing either, grace, and kindness;
Love from Beauty did remove,
Lightness called her stain in love,
Beauty took from Love his blindness.

Love sparks made flames in Beauties sky,
And Beauty blew up Love as hie.

Virtue then comixed her fire;
To which Bounty did aspire,
Innocence a Crown conferring;
Mine, and Thine, were then vnusde,
All things common: Nought abused,
Freely earth her frutage bearing.

Nought then was cared for, that could fade,
And thus the golden world was made.

Now may the blessings of the golden age,
Swim in these Nuptials, even to holy rage,
A Hymn to Sleep prefer, and all the joys
That in his Empire are of dearest choice,
Betwixt his golden slumbers ever flow,
In these; And Theirs, in Springs as endless grow.

Now sleep, bind fast, the flood of Air,
strike all things dumb and deaf,
And, to disturbbe our Nuptial pair,
Let stir no Aspen leaf.
Send flocks of golden Dreams
That all true joys presage,
Bring, in thy oily streams,
The milk and honey Age.
Now close the world-round sphere of bliss,
And fill it with a heavenly kiss.

Come Virgin Knights, the homage ye have done,
To Love and Beauty, and our Britan Sun,
Kind Honour, will requite with holy feasts
In her fair Temple; and her loved Guests,
Gives me the grace t^inuite, when she and I
( Honour and Riches) will eternally
A league in favour of this night combine,
In which Loves second hallowed Tapers shine;
Whose Joys, may Heaven Earth as highly please
As those two nights that got great Hercules.

SInge, Singe a Rapture to all Nuptial ears,
Bright Hymens torches, drunk up Parcaes tears:
Sweet Hymen; Hymen, Mightiest of Gods,
Atoning of all-taming blood the odds;
Two into One, contracting; One to Two
Dilating, which no other God can do.
Make sure, with change, and lett'st the married try,
Of Man and woman, the Variety.
And as a flower, half scorched with days long heate Simil.
Thirsts for refreshing, with Nights cooling sweat,
The wings of Zephyr, fanning still her face,
No chere can ad to her heart-thirsty grace;
Yet wears she against those fires that make her fade,
Her thick hairs proof, al hyd, in Midnights shade;
Her Health, is all in dews; Hope, all in showers,
Whose want bewailde, she pines in all her powers:
So Loue-scorch't Virgins, nourish quenchles fires;
The Fathers cares; the Mothers kind desires.
Their Gould, and Garments, of the newest guise,
Can nothing comfort their scorched Fantasies,
But, taken rauish't up, in Hymens arms,
His Circkle holds, for all their anguish, charms:
Then,
That all the helps, of Earth, Heaven combines
In Her sweet grouth: Puts in the Morning on
Her cherefull airs; the Suns rich fires, at Noone;
At Even the sweet deaws, and at Night with stars,
In all their virtuous influences shares;
So, in the Bridegrooms sweet embrace; the Bride,
All varied Joys tastes, in their naked pride:
To which the richest weeds: are weeds, to flowers;
Come Hymen then; com close these Nuptial hours
With all years comforts. Come; each virgin keeps
Her odorous kisses for thee; Golden sleeps
Will, in their humours, never steep an eye,
Till thou inuit'st them with thy Harmony.
Why staiest thou? see each Virgin doth prepare
Embraces for thee; Her white breasts lays bare
To tempt thy soft hand; let's such glances fly
As make stars shoot, to imitate her eye.
Puts Arts attires on, that put Natures down:
Singes, Dances, sets on every foot a Crown,
Sighs, in her songs, and dances; kisses Air
Till Rites, and words past, thou in deeds repair;
The whole court Io sings: Io the Air:
Io, the floods, and fields: Io, most fair,
Most sweet, most happy Hymen; Come: away;
With all thy Comforts come; old Matrons pray,
With young Maids Languors; Birds bill, build, and breed
To teach thee thy kind, every flower and weed
Looks up to gratulate thy longed for fruits;
Thrice given, are free, and timely-granted suites:
There is a seed by thee now to be sown,
In whose fruit Earth, shall see her glories show'n,
At all parts perfect; and must therefore loose
No minutes time; from times use all fruit flows;
And as the tender Hyacinth, that grows
Where Phoebus
Is propped with care; is watered every howre;
The sweet winds adding their increasing power,
The scattered drops of Nights refreshing dew,
Hasting the full grace, of his glorious hew,
Which once disclosing, must be gatherd straight,
Or hew, and Odor both, will lose their height;
So, of a Virgin, high, and richly kept,
The grace and sweetness full grown must be reap't,
Or, forth her spirits fly, in empty Air;
The sooner fading; the more sweet and fair.
Gentle, O Gentle Hymen, be not then
Cruel, That kindest arts to Maids, and Men;
These two, One Twynn are; and their mutual bliss,
Not in thy beams, but in thy Bosom is.
Nor can their hands fast, their harts joys make sweet;
Their harts, in breasts are; and their Breasts must meet.
Let, there be Peace, yet Murmur: and that noise,
Beget of peace, the Nuptial battles joys.
Let Peace grow cruel, and take wrake of all,
The wars delay brought thy full Festival.
Hark, hark, O now the sweet Twyn murmur sounds;
Hymen is come, and all his heate abounds;
Shut all Doors; None, but Hymens lights advance.
No sound styr; let, dumb Joy, enjoy a trance.
Sing, sing a Rapture to all Nuptial ears,
Bright Hymens Torches drunk up Parcaes tears.

