Leave ^e a while my Lords and wait for me,
At the black fountain, by Os^is grove,
^le walk alone to holy Irus cave,
Talking a little while with him and then return.
Ianthe begone.
Now Irus Let thy minds eternal eye,
Extend the virtue of it past the Sun.
Ah my Cleanthes where art thou become,
But since I saved thy guiltless life from death,
And turned it onelyinto banishment,
Forgive me love, me pity comfort me.

Master.


Pego.


VVipe your eyes and you had them.


Why Pego.


The Queen is here to see your blindness.


Her Majesty is well come, Heavens preserve,
And send her highness an immortal rain.

Thanks reverent Irus for thy gentle prayer,
Dismiss thy man a while and I will lead thee,
For I have weighty secretes to impart.

Would I were blind that she might lead me.


Irus thy skill to tell the drifts of fate,
Our fortunes and things hid from sensual eyes,
Hath sent me to thee for aduertisment.
Where Duke Cle^nthes lives that was exiled,
This kingdom for attempting me with love,
And offering stain to Ae^ipts royal bed.

I hope your majesty will pardon me,
I^ Conscience make me utter what I think,
Of that hye love affairs twixt him and you.

I will sweet Jrus being well assured,
That whatsoever thy sharpe wisdoms sees,
In my sad frailty thou w^llt h^ue regard,
To my estate and name and keep (...) clo^*

Of that your highness may be well assured,
Then I am bound madam to tell you this,
That you your self did seek Cl^nthes love,
And to aspire it, made away his Dutch,
Which he well knowing and affecting her,
Dear as his life denied to satisfy,
That kindness offered twixt ^our self and him.
Therefore did ^ou in rage inform the Duke,
He sought ^our love, and so he (...) him.

To true it is grave Irus ^hou ha^t told,
But for my loves sake which not Gods can rule,
Strike me no more of that wound yet too green,
But only tell me where Cleanthes is,
That I may follow him in some disguise,
And make him recompense for all his wrong.

Cleanthes is about this City off,
With whom yo^r majesty shall meet ere long:
And speak with him, if you will vs^ such means,
As you may use for his discovery.

What shall I use then what is in my power,
I will not use for his discovery,
I'll bind the wings of love unto mine arms,
And like a Eagle prying for her pray,
Will overlook the earths round face for him,
Were this sufficient.
Or I will Moorelike learn to swim and dive.
Into the bottom of the Sea for him.
Least being the son of Aegyp^ and now set,
Thetis in rage with love would ravish him.
Were this sufficient.

But Madam this must be the likli^st mean
To seek him out, and have him at your will
Let his true picture through your land be sent.
Opposing great rewards to him that finds him,
And threaten death to them that succour him,
So I'll assure your grace shall meet with him ear long.

Happy and blessed be Irus for his skill
He sweetly plants in my contentious mind,
For which most reverent and religious man,
I give this Jewel to thee richly worth.
A kentall or an h^ndreth weight of gold,
Bestow it as thou list on some good work,
For well I know thou nothing dost reserve,
Of all thy riches men bestow on thee,
But would thou leave this place and poor mans life,
The count of Aegipt should embrace thy feet,
And Toples honours be bestowed on thee,

I thank your highness for thus raising me,
But in this barrenness I am most renound.
For wisdom and the sight of heavenly things,
Shines not so clear as eathlye vanities.

Most rich is Irus in his poverty
Oh that to find his skill my crown were lost.
None but poor Irus can of riches boast,
Now my Clea^thes I will straight advance
Thy lovely pictures on each monument
About the City and within the land.
Proposing twice five thousand Crowns to him,
That finds him to be tendered by my hands,
And a kind kiss at my imperial lipes,
To him that succours him, I'll threaten death,
But he that doth not threaten him shall die,
For who is worthy, life will see him want.
To all his pictures when they be dispersed.
Will I continual pilgrimages make,
As to the saints and Idols I adore,
Where I will offer sighs, and vows, and tears.
And sac^ifice a hecatomb of beast,
On several alters built where they are placed,
By them shall Isis stature gently stand,
And I'll pretend my Jealous rites to her
But my Cleanthes shall the object be,
And I will kneel and pray to none but he.

See Earth and Heaven where her Cleanthes is*
I am Cleanthes and blind Iru^ too,
And more then these, as you shall soon perceive,
Yet but a shepherds son at Memphis borne,
And I will tell you how I got that name,
My Father was a fortune teller and from him I learnt his art,
And knowing to grow great, was to grow rich,
Such money as I got by palmistry,
I put to use and by that means became
To take the shape of Leon. by which name,
I am well known a wealthy Usurer,
And more then this I am two noble men,
Count Hermes is another of my names,
And Duke Cleanthes whom the Queen so loves,
For till the time that I may claim the crown,
I mean to spend my time in sports of love,
Which in the sequel you shall plainly see,
And Joy I hope in this my policy.

Oh master here comes the three wenches now strike it dead for a ^ortune.


These are the nymphs of Alexandria.
So called because there beauties are so rare.
With two of them at once am I in love
Deeply and Equally the third of them,
My silly brother here as much affects,
Whom I have made the Burgomaister of this rich town,
With the great wealth, I have bestowed on him,
All three are maids kept p^ssing warily,
Yet lately being at their ^athers house as I was Leon the rich usurer
I fell in love with them, and there my brother too,
This fitly chances that they have liberty,
To visit me alone: now will I tell their fortunes so,
As may make way to both their loves at once,
The one as I am Leon the rich usurer,
The other as I am the mad brain Count,
And do the best too, for my brothers love,

Thanks good master brother, but what are they that
Talk with themso long are they wooers trow,
I do not like it, would they would come near.

O those are three servants that attend on them,
Let them alone, let them talk a while.

Tell us M^nippus, Druso, and P^lydor,
Why all our parents gave you three such charge,
To wait on us and over see us still,
What do they fear, think you that we would do.

There fear is least you should accompany,
Such as love wanton talk, and dalliance,

Why what is wanton talk.


To ^ell you that were to offend our selves,
And those that have forbidden you should hear it.

Why what is dalliance says my servant then,


You must not know because you must not dally.


How say you by that, well do you keep it from us, as much as you can, we'll
desire it neuerlesse I can tell ye,


Lord what strait keepers of poor maids are you,
You are so chaste you are the worse again:

Pray you good servants will you do us the service,
To leave us alone a while.

We are commanded not to be from you,
And therefore to lean you alone,
Were to wrong the trust your parents put in us.

I cry you mercy sir, yet do not stand all on the
Trust our parents puts in you, but put us in a little to I pray.

Trust us good servants by our selves a while.


Lets my mastrs and you say the word,
They'll but to Irus for to know their fortunes,
And hes a holy man all Egypt knows.

Stay not to long, then mistress and content,


That's my good servant we will straight return.


And you mistress.


And I trusty servant.


Faith then I'll venture my charge among the rest.


A mighty venture you shall be cronicled in Abrahams asses,
Catalog of cockscombes for your resolution.

Now the great fool take them all who could have,
Picked out three such lifeless puppies,
Never to venture on their mistresses.

One may see by them it is not meet choice men should have offices,


A pretty moral work it in the samplar of your hart,


But are we by our selves.


I think so unless you have alone in your belly.


Not I God knows I never camewhere they grew yet,
Since we are alone lets talk a little merrily,
Me thinks I long to know what wanton talk and dalliance is

I'll lay my life tis that my mother uses when she and others,
Do begin to talk and that she says to me maid,
Get ye hence fall to your needle: what a maid and Idle.

A maid and Idle why maids must be Idle but not an other thing.


then do not name it for I fear tis nought.
For ^esterday I hard Menippus as he was talking,
With my mothers maid and I stood harkening at the chamber door,
Said that, with that word a maid was got with child.

How with the very word.


I mean with that the word seems to express.


Nay if you be so fine you will not name it now,
We are all alone, you are much too nice.

Why let her choose, let us two name it,


Do then Elimine.


Nay do you Martia.


Why woman I dare.


Do then I warrant thee.


I'll warrant my self if I list, but come let it alone,
Let us to Irus for our fortunes.

God save grave Irus.


Welcome beauteous Nymphs.


How know you Irus we are beautiful and cannot see.


Hom^r was blind yet could he best di^cerne,
The shapes of every thing and so may I,

Indeed we hear your skill can beautify,
Beauty it self, and teach dames how to deck,
Their heads and bodies fittest to their forms,
To their complexions and their countenances.

So can I beateuous Nymphs, and make all eyes,
Sparkle with love fire from your excellence.

How think you we are tyred to tempte men's looks,
Being thus Nimphlike is it not too strange,

It is the better so it doth become.
But that I may disclose to you your fortunes
Tell me first Pego their true faces forms.

Mary ^r this that speaks to you has a face thin like unto water grewell,
but yet it would do your hart good if you could see it


I know and see it better then thy self,
The blaze whereof doth turn me to a fire.
Burning mine Entrails with a strong desire.

Why turnst thou from us Irus tell my fortune.


I wonder at the glory it presents,
To my souls health that sees upon your head,
Acorronet, and at your gracious feet,
Nobles and princes in their highest state,
Which state shall crown your fortune ear you die,
And ear the hart of Heaven, the glorious sun,
Shall quench his rosiat fires within the west.
You shall a husband have noble and rich.

Happy Elimine, oh that I might too.


Thanks for this new^s good Irus but disclose,
The means to this, if it be possible.

When you come home ascend your Fathers tower
If you see a man come walking by,
And looking up to you, descend,
And Issue, for you shall have leave,
And if he woe, you choose him from the world,
Though he seem humorous and want an eye,
Wearing a velvet patch upon the same,
Choose him your husband, and be bl^st in him,

I'll do as thou adu^sest gentle Irus,
And proving this I'll love thee (...) I live.

My fortune now sweet Irus.


What face hath this Nymph Peg^.


Mary sir a face m^de in form like the ace of hearts.


And well compared for she commands al^ hearts,
Equal in beauty with that other Nymph,
And equally she burns my hart with love,

Say, s^y sweet Irus what my fortune is,
Thou turnst from me, as when thou did admire.
The happ^e fortune of Elimine.

So might I well, admiring yours no less.
Then when the light cround monarch of the hea-
Shall quench his fire within the Oceans breast (ue^s
Rise you and to your fathers garden hie,
There in an arbour do a banquet s^,
And if there come a man that of him self,
Sits down and bi^s you welcome to your feast,
Accept him for he is the richest man,
That Alexandria or Egypt hath,
And soon possessing him with all his wealth,
In little time you shall be (...) of him,
Making your second choice amongst mighty kings.

Blessed be thy ^ppes sweet Irus, and that light,
That guides thy bosom with such deep fore sight,
Sleep shall not make a closet for these eyes,
All this succeeding night for hast to rise.

My fortune now sweet Irus, but I faith,
I have some wrong to be the last of all,
For I am old as they, and big enough,
To bear as great a fortune as the best of them,

What face hath this Nymph Pego.


Oh master what face hath she not, if I should beg a face I would have her
face.

But is it ro^nd, and hath it near a blemmish,
A mouth to wide a look too impudent.

Oh master tis without all these, and without al cry.


Round faces and thin skinde are hapieest still.
And unto you fair Nymph.
Shall fortune be exceeding gracious too,
When the next morning therefore you shall rise,
Put in your bosom rosemary time and rue.
And presently stand at your fathers door,
He that shall come offering kindness there,
And crave for favour those same wholesome herbs,
bestow them on him, and if meeting him,
He keep the nuptial Rosemary and time,
And tread the bitter rue beneath his feet,
Choose him your husband a^d be blessed in him.

I will sweet Irus nothing grieves me now,
But that Elimine this night shall have,
Her happy husband, and I s^ay till morning.

Nought gr^ues me Irus but that we are maids.
Kept short of all things and have nought to give thee,
But take our loves and in the wished proof,
Of these high f^rtunes thou foretellest us.
Nothing we have shall be to dear for thee.

we that are sisters Irus by our vow,
Will be of one self blood and thankful mind,
To adore so clear a sight in one so blind.

farewell most beauteous Nymphs your loves to me.
Shall ^ore then gold or any treasure be,
Now to my wardroppe for my velvet gown, now doth the sport begin,
Come gird this pistol closely to my side,
By which I make men fear my humour still,
And have slain two or three as twere my
When I have done it most advisedly (mood
To rid them as they were my heavy foes,
Now am I known to be the mad brain Count,
Whose humours twice, five summers I have held,
And said at first I came from stately Rome,
Calling my self Count Hermes and assuming
The humour of a wild and frantic man,
Careless of what I say or what I do,
And so such faults as I of purpose do,
Is buried in my humour and this gown I wear,
In rain or snow or in the hottest summer,
And never go nor ride without a gown,
which humour doth not fit my frencie well,
But hides my persons form from being known,
When I Cleanthes am to be descried,

How now master brother.


Oh sir you are very well suited. Now M. Burgomaister.
I pray you remember to seize on all Aleantisthenes his goods
His lands and cattels to my proper use,
As I am Leon the rich usurer.
The sun is down and all is forfeited.

It sh^lbe done my noble Count.


And withal sir I pray you forget not your love,
To morrow morning at her fathers door.

Ah my good Count I cannot that forget,
For still to keep my memory in order,
As I am Burgomaister, so love is my recorder.
Now see a morning in an evening rise.
The morning of my love and of my joy,
I will not say of beauty, that were pride,
With in this tower I would I had a torch,
To light like hero my leander heat^er,
Who shall be my lea^der let me see,
Rehearse my fortune.
When you see one clad in a velvet gown
And a black patch upon his eye,
A patch, patch that I am, why that may be a patch of cloth,
Of Buckrome, or a fustian cloth, say with a velvet patch,
Upon his eye so my thoughts may patch up love the better
See where he comes, the Count, what girl a countess,
See, see, he looks as Irus said he should go not away my love,
I'll meet thee straight.

Oh I thank you I am much beholding to you,
I saw her in the tower and now she is come down,
Luck to this patch and to this velvet gown.

How now shall I be troubled with this rude spaniard now,


One word sweet nymph.


How now sir what are you,


I am s^gneor Braggadino the Martial spaniardo the aide of Egypt in her
present wars, but lesu what art thou that hast the guts of thy brains gript
with such famine of knowledge not to know me.


How now sir I'll try the proof of your guts with my pistol if you be so
saucy sir.


Oh I know him well it is the rude Count the uncivil Count, the unstayed
Count, the bloody Count, the Count of all Counts, better I were to hazard the
dissolution of my brave soul against an host of grantes then with this loose
Count, otherwise I could tickle the Count, I faith my noble Count, I do
descend to the craving of pardon, love blinded me I knew thee not.


Oh sir you are but bonaventure not right spanish I perceive but do you hear
sir are you in love.


Surely the sudden glance of this lady Nymph hath suppled my spanish
disposition with love that never before dreamed of a woman's concauitie.


^ woman's conc^uitie, sblood whats that,


Her hollow dispositon which you see sweet nature will supply or otherwise
stop up in her with solid or firm faith.


Give me thy hand wear lovers both, shall we have her both


No good sweet Count pardon me.


Why then thus it shall be we'll strike up a drum, set up a tent, call people
together, put crowns a piece lets ris^e ^or her.


Nor that my honest Count.


Why then thus it shall be, we'll woo her both and him she likes best shall
lead her home thorough streets holding her by both her hands, with his face
towards her, the other shall follow with his back towards her biting of his
thumbs, how say thou by this.


It is ridiculous, but I am pleased for upon my life I do kn^w this the shame
wi^l light on the neck of the Count.


Well to it lets hear thee.


Sweet Nymph a spaniard is compared to the to the great elixar or golden
medicine.


What dost thou come upon her with medicines d^st thou think she is sore.


Nay by thy sweet favour do not interrupt me.


Well sir go forward.


I say a spaniard is like the Philosophers stone.


And I say an other mans stone may be as good as a Philosophers at all times.


By thy sweet favour.


Well sir go on.


Sweet nymph I love few words you know my intent my humour is in sophistical
plain I am (...) borne, my birth speaks for my nature, my nature for your
grace, and should you see a whole Battle ranged by my skill you would commit
your whole self to my affection, and so sweet nymph I kiss your hand.


To see a whole battle ha ha ha what a jest is that, thou sh^lt se a wh^le
battle come forth presently of me sa sa sa.


^ut up thy pistol tis a most dangerous humour in thee.


Oh is that all why see tis up again, now thou shalt lee I'll come to her in
thy humour, sweet lady I love swee^ words, but sweet deeds are the noble
sowndes of a noble spaniard, noble by country, noble by valour, noble by
birth, my very foot is nobler then the head of another man, upon my life I
love, and upon my love ^iue live, and so sweet N^ph I kiss your hand, why lo
here we are both, I am in this hand, and he is in that handy dandy p^ickly
brandy, which hand will you have.


This hand my Lord if I may have my choice


Come spaniard to your penance bite your thumbs.


Oh base woman.


Sblood no base woman but bite your thumbs quickly.


Honour commands I must do it.


Come on sweet lady give me your hands if you are mine, I am yours, if you
take me now at the worst I am the more beholding to you, if I be not good
enough, I'll ^nd what would you more.


It is ^nough my Lord and I am yours.
Since I well know my fortune is to have you
Now must I leave the ^leasant maiden chase,
In hunting savage beasts with Is^s nymphs,
And take me to a life which I God knows,
Do know no more then how to scale the heavens.

Well I'll teach you fear not you, what signior ^ot bite your thumbs,


Pardon me sir, pardon me.


By Gods blood I will not pardon you therefore bite your thumbs.


By thy sweet let me speak one word with thee, I do not like this humour in
thee in pistoling men in this sort, it is a most dangerous and stigmatical
humour, for by thy favour tis the most sinest thing of the world for a man to
have a most gentlemanlike car^iage of himself, for otherwise I do hold thee
for the most tall resolute and accomplished gentleman on the face of the earth,
hark ye we'll meet at Corrucus and we'll have a pipe of Tobacco adieu adieu.


Do you hear sir, put your thumbs in your mouth with out any more ado, by
the heavens I'll shoot thee through the mouth.


It is base and ridiculous.


Well thou shalt not do it, lend me thy thumbs I'll bite them for thee


Pardon me.


Swoons and you had I would have made such a woeful parting betwixt your
fingers and your thumb that your spanish fistes should never meet again, in
this world will you do it sir.


I will, I will presto and I will follow thee.


Why so oh that we had a noise of musicians to play to this antique as we go,
come on sweet lady give me your (...) (...) to Church and be married straight,
bear with (...) (...) (...), I'll be slow enough another time I warrant you,
come (...) questo, questo, spaniola questo.


Advance that picture on this fatal spring,
And Herald speak uttering the kings edict.

Ptolomie the most sacred king of Egypt first of that n^me, desiring peace and
amity with his neighbour princes hath caused this picture of Cleanthes to be
set up in all places, proposing great rewards to him that finds him, and
threatening death to him that sucours him.


Which Gods forbid, and put it in his mind.
Not so to stomach his unjust exile.
That he convert the fury of his arm,
Against fosaken Egypt taking part,
With those four neighbour kings that threaten him,
And have besieged his most Imperial town.

Now may it please your highness to leave your discontented passions, and take
this mornings pride to hunt the Bore.


We have attended on our grace thus far,
Out of the City being glad to hear,
Your highness had abandoned discontent.
And now will bend your self to merriment,

So will I lovely Ianthe come then.
Let us go call forth sacred Isis Nymphs,
To help us keep the game in cealesse view,
That to the busy brightness of his eyes.
We may so interuent his shifts to escape.
That giddy with his turning he may fall, (...)
Slain with our beauties more then sworde^ on darts.

Now am I Leon The rich usurer and here according
To the kings command and mine own promise.
I have brought my sword and fix it by the statue,
She set up, by this am I known to be Cleanthes,
Whose sudden sight I now will take upon me,
And cause the nobles to pursue my shadow,
As for my subs^nce they shall never find,
Till I my self, do bring my self to light.
Cleanthes, Cleanthes, stop Cleanthes, see Cleanthes,
Pursue Cleanthes, follow Cleanthes.

where is Cleanthes, Leon saw thou him.


I why should I else have thus cried out on him,
I saw him even now here did he fix his sword
And not for dastard fear or cowardice,
For know all Egypt ^inges of his renown.
But fearing for his noble service done,
To be rewarded with ingratitude, he fled
From hence fearing to be pursued,

Come on my Lords then let^ follow him
And pursue him to the death.

Oh do not hurt him gentle Citizens,
See how they fly from him whom they pursue.
I am Cleanthes, and whilst I am hear,
In vain they follow for to find him out,
But here comes my love Bright Psamathis,
Whom I love Equally with fair Elimine,
See here she comes as I appointed her.

But I faith mistress is this for a woer.


Not for a woer only my Jaquine,
But a quick speeder girl for this is he,
That all my ^tune runs upon I tell thee,

O dainty mistress send for some more banquet.


No my fine wench this and my self is well.
And let him not sit down like the ox and the ass,
But give God thanks for we are worthy of it though we faite.

Mistress tis true.
And that he may be good,
I conjure him by these three things a cross,
Now let him come he shall be good I warrant ye,

Nay do not fly me gentle Samathis,


Pardon me sir for if I see a man,
I shall so blush still that I warrant you,
I could make white wine claret with my looks,

But do not blush and fly an old mans sight.


From whom if no^ from old men should I fly


From young men rather that can swift pursue,
And then it is some credit to out go them,
Yet though my years would have me old I am not,
But have the gentle Jerk of youth in me,
As fresh as he that hath a maidens chin.
Thus can I bend the stiffnes of my limbs,
Thus can I turn and leap and hoise my gate,
Thus can I lift my love as light as air,
Now say my Samathis am I old or yo^g.

I would have my love ne^ther old nor young
But in the middle Just between them both.

Fit am I then for matchless Samathis.
And will be bold to sit. For batchlers
Must not be shamefast when they meet with maids,
Sweet love now let me entreat you sit,
And welcome you to your own banquet here,

Even thus did ^rsu say that he should say,
Then by your leave sir I will sit with you,

Welcome as gold into my tresurie,
And now will I drink unto my love.
VViththe same mind that drinking fi^st began to one another.

And what was that I pray sir.


I'll tell my love the first kind cause of it.
And why tis used as kindness still amongst us,
If it be vsda right tis to this end,
When I do say I drink this love to you,
I mean I drink this to your proper good,
As if I said what health this wine doth work in me,
Shall be employed for you at your command to your proper use
And this was first thentent of drinking to you.

Tis very pretty is it not Jaquine.


Oh excellent Mistress hes a dainty man.


Now to your use sweet love I drink this wine,
And with a merry hart that makes long life,
Over the cup I'll sing for my loves sake.
Health, fortune, mirth, and wine,
To thee my love divine.
I drink to my dareling,
Give me thy hand sweeting.
UUith cup full ever plied,
And ^artes fullneuer dried.
Mine own, mine own dearest sweeting.
Oh oh mine own dearest sweeting.
What frolic love mirth makes the banquet sweet.


I love it sir as well as you love me.


That is as well as I do love my self,
I will not Joy my treasure but in thee,
And in thy looks I'll count it every hour,
And thy white arms shall be as bands to me,
Wherein are mighty Lordshippes forfeited,
And all the dames of Alexandria,
For their attire shall take there light from thee,

Well sir I drink to you pray you think
You are as welcome to me as this wine,

Thanks gentle Samathis, but delicious lo^e,
Hath been the fig I eat before this wine,
Which kills the taste of these delicious cates,
Will you bestow that banquet love on me,

Nay gentle Leon talk no more of love
If you love God or a good countenance,
For I shall quite be out of countenance then,

Love decks the countenance, speriteth the eye,
And tunes the soul in sweetest harmony,
Love then sweet Samathis.

What shall I do Iaquine.


Faith Mistress take him.


Oh but he hath a great nose.


Tis no matter for his nose, for he is rich.


Leon I love and since tis forth farewell.


Then triumph Leon ^icher in thy love.
Then all the heaps of treasure I possess,
Never was happy Leon rich before,
Nor ever was I covetous till now,
That I see gold so fined in thy hair.

Impart it to my Parents gentle Leon,
And till we meet again at home farewell.

Soon will I talk with them and follow thee,
So now is my desire accomplished.
Now was there ever man so fortunate.
To have his love so sorted to his wish,
The joys of many I (...) one enjoy.
Now do I mean to woe them crossly
The one as I am Leon the rich usurer. (both,
The other as I am the mad brain Count.
Which if it take effect, and rightly prove,
Twill be a sporte for any emperors love.

Prince of Arcadia lovely Doricles,
Be not discouraged that my daughter here,
Like a well fortified and lofty tower,
I^ so repulsiue and unapt to yield,
The royal siege of your he^oycke parts,
In her acheeuement will be more renound,
And with the greater merit is employed.
The bewtious queen my wife her mother here
Was so well mand and yet had never man,
So mayne a rock of chaste and cold disdain.

My Lord what mean ye, go Aspasia,
Send for some Ladeis to go play with you,
At chess, at Billiardes, and at other game,
Ianthe attend her.
You take a course my Lord to make her coy,
To urge so much the love of D^ricles,
And frame a virtue of her wanton hate,
We must persuade her that he loves her not,
But that his services and vows of love,
Are but the gentle complimentes of court,
So would she think that if she would have loud,
She might have won him.
And with that conceit of hardness to be won,
His merits grace will shine more clearly,
In her turning eyes,
Things hard to win with ease makes love ^ited,
And favours won with ease are hardly quited,
Then make as If you loud her not my Lord.

Love that hath built his temple on my brows
Out of his Battlementes into my hart,
And seeing me to burn in my desire,
Will be I hope appeased at the last.

Be ruled by me yet, and I warrant you,
She quickly shall believe you love her not,

What shall I do Madam.


Look not on her so much.


I cannot choose my neck stands never right,
Till it be turned asside and I behold her.

Now trust me such a wry neck^ love was never scene,
But come with me my Lord and I'll instruct you better

So madam I leave you now from our love sports,
To Antistenes and his great ^ute with Le^n,
See the Burgomaister Antistenes and Leon.
Comes together stay master Burgomaister.
What reason made you use your office on the
Lord Antistenes seazing on al his movables,
And goods at the suit of Leon.

I will tell your grace the reason of it or any
Thing else for I know you are a wise prince,
And apt to learn.

I thank you for you^ good opinion sir,
But the reason of your office done upon this noble man
And his lands.

The reason why I have put in office or execution,
My authority upon this nobleman consists,
in three principal points or members,
Which indeed are three goodly matters.

I pray you lets hear them.


The first is the credit of this honest man because he is rich.


Why is he honest because he is rich.


Oh I learn that in any case, the next is the forfaite of his assurance and
the last I will not trouble your grace with all.


But this it is whereof I most complain unto your grace,
That hau^ng occasion in your graces service,
To borrow money of this Leon here,
For which I morgagd al my lands and goods
He only did agree that paying him four
thousand pound at the day I should receive
safely, in which now not only falsely he denies* (my statute
But that he hath received one penny due,
Which this my friend can wittnes I repay de,
Upon the stone of Irus the blindeman,
Four thousand pound in Jewels and in gold,
And therefore crave I justice in this case,

Voutchsafe dre^ sovereign an unpartial ^are.
To that I have to say for my (...),
He pleads the pay^nt of four thousand pound,
Upon the stone before blind Irus cave,
To which I answer and do swear by heaven,
He spake with me at the foresaid place,
And promised payment offoure thousand pound,
If I would let him have his statu^es in,
And take other assurance for another thousand,
Some three months to come or thereabouts.
Which I refusing he repayed me none,
But parted in a rage and card not for me.

Oh monstrous who ever hard the like.
My Lord I will be sworn he paid him,
On poor Irus stone four thousand pound,
Which I did help to tender and hast thou
A hellish conscience and such a brazen forehead,
To deny it against my witness,
And his noble word.

Sir against your witness and his noble word,
I plead mine own and one as good as his,
That then was present at our whole conference.

My Lord there was not any but our selves,
But who was it that thou affirmst was there,

Count Hermes good my Lord a man
Well known though he be humorous to be ho^orable,

And will he say it.


He will my gracious Lord I am well assured,
And him will I send hither presently,
Entreating your gr^ious favour if the impediment,
Of a late sickness cause me not return,
For I am passing ill.

Well send him hither and it shall suffi^.


I will my gracious Lord ^nd stand
To any censure passing willingly,
Your highness shall set down or command,
VVorshipfull master Burg^maister your officer,
To see performed betwixt us.

We Thank you heartily, alas poor soul,
How sick he is.
Truly I cannot choose but pity him,
In that he loves your gracious officers,

Oh I thank you sir.


King by your leave, and yet I need not ask leave,
Because I am sent for if not I'll begone again.
without leave, say am I sent for yea or no,

You are to witness twixt Antistenes and wealthy Leon.


I know the matter and I come from that old miser
Leon, who is suddenly fallen sick of a knaves evil,
Which of you are troubled with that disease masters.

Well say what you know of the matter, betwixt them.


Then thus I say my Lord, Antistenes came,
To the stone of the blind fool Irus,
That day when four thousand pounds were to be paid,
Where he made proffer of so much money if Leon would return the mortgage of
his lands, and take assurance for another thousand to be paid I trow some
three months to come or there about, which Leon like an old churl as he was
most vncourteously refused: my Lord Antistenes as he might very well departed
in a rage but if it had been to me I would have pistoled him I faith.


But you are wondrously deceived my Lord.
And was not by when he and we did talk.

Swoons th^n I say you are deceived my Lord,
For I was by now by my honour and by all the gods.

Then you stood close my Lord unseen to any,


Why I stood close to you and seen of all, and if You think I am too mad a
fellow to witness such a weighty piece of work the holy beggar shall perform
as much, For he was by at our whole conference.


But say Count Hermes was the beggar by.


I say he was and he shall say he was.


But he is now they say locked in his ca^e,
Fasting and praying talking with the Gods,
And hath an Iron door twixt him and you,
How will you then come at him,

I'll fetch him from his cave in spite of all his Gods and Iron do^es, or beat
him bli^de when as I do catch him next, farewell my Lords you have done with
me, I'll send the beggar presently for I am now riding to Corrucus.


I know not what to think in these affairs
I cannot well condemn you my Lord,
And your s^fficient witness being a gentleman,
Nor yet the other two, both men of credit,
Though in his kind this Count be humorous,
But stay we shall here straight what Irus will depose,

Oh who disturbs me in my holy prayers,
Oh that the king were by that he might here,
What thundering there is at my farther door,
Oh how the good of Aegipt is disturbed in my devotion.

I am here Irus and it was Count He^mes.
That was so rude to Interrupt thy prayers,
But I suppose the end of thy repair,
Being so weighty could not have displeased,
For on thy witness doth d^pend the living
Of Lord Antistenes, who doth affirm,
That three days past he tendered at thy stone,
Four thousand pounds to Leon, and desired
His mortgage quited which he promising
On such assurance, more as he proposed,
Received at that time his four thousand pounds.

I then was in the hearing of them both.
But hard no penny tendered, only proposed
By Lord Antistenes, if he would bring him in,
His mortgage and take assurance for another thousand
Some three months to come or there abouts,
Which Leon most vncourteously refused,
My Lord was angry and I hard no more,
And thus must I crave pardon of your grace.

Farewell grave I^s.


Gods are become oppressors of the right.


Never had right so violent a wrong.
For let the thunder strike me into hell.
If what I have reported be not true,

This holy man no doubt speaks what he hard
And I am sorry for Antistenes.
But I'll relieve your lowe estate my Lord,
And for your service done me gwerdon you,
Master Burgoma^ster let the Lord have liberty,
And I will answer Leon what is due.

Soft Mistress Burgomaister, pray you stay, your hart is
greater then your parson far or your state either, do we not
know ye trow, what woman you are but a Burgomaisters wife,
And he no wiser then his neighbours ney^her,
Give me the place acording to my calling.

What skill for places, do we not all call sisters,


No by my faith I am a countess now,
I should have one to go before me bare,
And say stand by there to the best of them,
And one to come behind and bear my train,
Because my hands must not be put unto it.
My husbaud is a Lord and past a Lord,

And past a Lord what is that past I pray,


Why hes a what you calt.


A what you call it can you not name it.


I think I must not name it.


And why so I pray.


because it comes so near a thing that I know,


Oh he is a Count that is an Earl.


And yet he is not known to have much land.


Why therefore he is an unknown man.


I but my husband is the kings officer.


I but my husband is able to (...) (...) yours,


You say husband, I may say (...) Lord.


And me thinks husband is worth ten o^ Lord.


Indeed I love my Lord to call me (...),
Better then Madam yet do I not mean^,
To lose my Ladies, titles at your hands,
I may for courtesy and to be termed,
A gentle Lady call you sisters still,
But you must say and please your Ladyship,
Tis thus and so, and as your honour (...),
Yet shall my husband call me wife lik^ yours,
For why made god the husband and the wife,
But that those terms should please us more then others
New fashion terms I like not for a man,
To call his wife cony, forsooth, and Lamb,
And Pork, and Mutton, he as well may say,

Well Madam then and please your Ladyship,
What gowns and head tyres will your honour wear.

Twenty are making for me head tyres and gowns,
Head tyres enchast in order like the stars,
Which perfect great and fine cut precious stones,
One hath bright Ariadnes Crown in it,
Even in the figure it presents in heaven,
Another hath the fingers of Diana,
And Berenices ever burning hair,
An other hath the bright Andr^mica,
With both her silver wristes bound to a rock,
And Perseus that did lose her and save her life,
All set in number and in perfect form,
Even like the Asterismes fixed in heaven,
And even as you may see in Moon shine nights,
The Moon and Stars reflecting on their streams
So from my head shall you see stars take beams,

Oh brave God willing I will have the like.


And so will I by Gods grace if I live.


Come up to supper it will become the house wonderful well


Well if my husband will not, let him not loke for one good look of me.


Nor mine I swear.


I'll ask my husband when I am with child,
And then I know I shall be sped I faith.

But every pleasure hath a payne they say
My husband lies each other night abroad,

and so d^th mine which I like but little,


Well time I hope and change of company,
Will teach us somewhat to bear out the absence,

I know not what to say,
My husband makes as if each other night he had occasion,
To ride from home at home serves not his turn,
To mygood turn it, cupid I beseech you,

Now will I try to make my self the Count.
An arrant Cuckold and a witto^ too.

Now may I chance to prove a cunning man,
And tell my mistress where mymaister hants,

Bright Nymph I come in name of all the world,
That now sustaines dead winter in the spring,
To have a graces from thy summer darted,
Thy love sweet^soule is all that I desire,
To make a general summer in this hart,
Where winters duble wrath hath t^nisde.

How dare you Leon thus solicit me,
Where if the Count my husband should come now,
And see you courting you were sure to die.

Oh but he is safe, for at my house,
Booted and spurred and in his velvet gown,
He took his horse and rode unto Corrucus,
And therefore beauteous Lady mak^ not strange,
To take a ^nd and add un to thy Joys,
O^ happ^ wedlock: the end of every act,
Is to inc^se con^nt and renown,
Both which my love: shall amplye joy in you,

How can ^owne ensue an ^ct of shame,


No ac^ hath any shame within itself,
But in the knowledge and ascription.
Of the base world from whom shall this be kept,
As in a labyrinth or a brazen tower.

But virtues sole regard must hold me back.


The virtue of each thing is in the praise,
And I will rea^ thy praises to the skies,
Out of my tresurie choose the choice of gold,
Till thou find some matching thy hair in brightness,
But that will never, be so choose thou ever.
Out of my Iewelrye choose thy choice of Diamonds*
Till thou find some as bright some as thine eyes,
But that will never be, so choose thou ever,
Choose Rubies out until thou match thy lips,
Pearl till thy teeth, and Ivory till thy skin,
Be matched in witness but that will never be.
Nor never shall my tresurie have end,
Till on there beauties Ladies loath to spend,
But that will never be so choose thou ever.

Now what a gods name would this vain man have,
Do you not shame to tempt a woman thus,
I know not what to say nor what to do,
He would have me do that I fear I should not,
Some thing it is he seeks that he thinks good,
And me thinks he should be more wise then I,
I am a foolish girl though I be married
And know not what to do, the Gods do know.

Are you content sweet love to grant me love,


and what then sir.


To grant me lodging in your house this night,


I think the man be weary of his life,
Know you the Count my husband.

Marvelous well and am^assurd of him,


Faith that you ^re as sure as I my self,
So you did talk of gold and Diamonds,

I and gold and Diamonds shall my sweet love have,


Well I'll not bid you sir but if you come,
At your own peril for I'll wash my hands.

A plague of all sanguine simpliciti


But do you hear sir pray you do not think that I granted you.


No I warrant you, I'll have no such thought. (in any case
Oh this is old excellent.
Now who can desire better sporte.
This night my other wife must lie alone,
And next night this wife must do the like.
Now will I woe the other as the Count*
Which if she grant and they do break their troth,
I'll make my self a cuckold twixt them both.

I'll follow him until he take the earth, and then i'll leave him.


Now if my husband be not all alone,
He is from home and hath left me alone,
So I must learn to lie, as children go,
All alone, all alone, which lesson now.
I am able to bear a child is worse to me then when I was a child
The moral this strength without a health a disadvantage is.
Mistress what will you say if I can tel you where my master is,


Where Druso I pray thee.


Even close with the young countess I faith.


Out on her strumpet doth she brag so much,
Of her great Count, and glad to take my husband
Hence comes her head tyres and her fay^ gowns,
Her train borne up and a man bare before her,
Was this my fortune that should be so good,
I faith you beggar you, you old false knave,
You holy v^e you prophetic ass,
Know you no better what shall come to pass,
I'll be revenged I faith, I faith I'll be revenged.

Oh Irus shall thy long approved skill,
Fail in my fortunes only, when shall I meet,
With my Cleanthes what a world of time,
Is it for me to lie as in a sound,
Without my life Cleanthes, can it be,
That I shall ever entertain again,
Having the habit of cold death in me,
My life Cleanthes.
Let me come in you knaves, I say let me come in,


Sir, we are set to guard this place as our lives and None without a warrant
from the King or the Queen must enter here.


Swoundes tell not me of your warrantes, let me come in I say,


My Lord we are commanded to keep out all comers, because of the branch
wherein the kings life remaynes,


Let me come in you knaves, how dare you keep meout, twas my gown to a mantle
of rug, I had not put you all to the pistol.


Shall we be troubled now with this rude Count


How now Queen what art thou doing, passioning over the picture of Cleant^ I
am sure for I know thou love him,


VVhats that you traitor.


No traitor neither but a true friend to you, for had Ibene otherwise I should
have dis^losed the secret talk thou had with Cleanthes in the arbour, the
night before he was banished, whilst I stood close and hard all.


The man is mad chains and a whip for him.


Be patient my wench and I'll tell th^ the very words, oh my Cleanthes, love me,
pity me, hate me not for love, and it is not lust hath made me thus
importunate, for then there are men enough besides Cl^es, go to tel me were not
these your words, I like no traitor to you but a tru^ie friend now by this
pistol which is Gods angel I never uttered them till now


I spake them not but had you been so bad,
As some men are you might have said as much,
By fi^s only therefore I must needs,
Think much the better of you to conceal it,

Oh your a cunning wench and am not I ^ mad slave to have such virtue as
s^resic in me and none never looked ^or any such thing at my hands, and here's a
branch forsooth of your little son turned to a Mandracke tree, by Hella the
sorceress.


Tis true and kills me to remember it.


Tut tut remember it and be wise thou would have Cleanthes, come again
would thou not,


The king is so advised to give him death.


The King, come come tis you rule the King now would any wise woman in the
world be so hungerstarued for a m^n and not use the means to have him,
think thou Cleanthes will come again to have his head chopped of so soon as
he comes, but had you plucked up this branch wherein the King thy husbands life
consists and burnt it in the fire, his old beard would have stunckefort in
the grave ere this, and then thou should have seen whether Cleanthes would
have come unto thee or no^.


Oh excreable counsel.


Go to tis good counsel, take the grace of God before your eyes, and follow
it to it wench corragio, I know I have gotten thee with child of a desire, and
thou longst but for a knife to let it out, hold there tis serve God and be
thankful, now you knaves will you let me come out trow.


Please your Lordship to bestow something on us for we are poor knaves.


Hark you be even knaves still, and if you be poor long your foolish knaves,
and so I'll leave you.


Nay swoons my Lord no knaves neither.


Then he was a knane that told me so, what dost thou tell me that.


This serpents counsel stings me to the hart.
Mounts to my brain and binds my prince of sense.
My voluntary motion and my life,
Sitting it self triumphing in there thrones,
And that doth force my hand to take this knife,
That bows my knees and sets me by thy branch,
Oh my diones oh my only son,
Can thou now feel the rigour of a knife,
No thou art senseless and I'll cut thee up,
I'll shroud thee in my bosom safe from storms,
And trust no more my trustless guard with thee,
Come then return unto thy mothers arms, and when I pull thee forth to scrue
the fire, turn thy self wholly into a burning tongue, in voking furies and
infernal death, to cool thy torments with thy fathers breath.


Now madam countess do you make account.
To take up husbands by your countishippe.
Have you the broad seal for i^, are you so hye, and stoop,
To one so lowe as is my husband,
Hence come your headtyres and your costly gowns,
Your train borne up and a man bare before you,
Now sye on pride when woman go thous naked.
I ever thoug^ that pride would have a fall
But little thought it would have such a fall.

What fall I pray you.


There you lay last, forsooth there you lay last.


Be not so angry woman you are deceived


I know I am deceived for thou deceiuedst me,
Thou might as well have pict my purse I tell thee,
Oh would my mother say, when you have a husband.
Keep to him only but now one may see,
How horible a thing it is to change,
Because it angers one so ho^bly,
You must have Ushers to make way be^e you,

The dame is mad, I'll stay no longer with her.


Well mad^ short heals I'll be even withyou,
See where the mad brain Count her husband comes*

I will begone.


Hear you Usurers wife stay, a plague on you stay, whither go you so fa^, why
did I ever hurt any of your sex yet.


Why no my Lord.


Why no my Lord, why the devil do you tu^ tail when you should not, when
you should you will not be half so hasty, a ^n must love you, woe you, spend
upon you and the d^ll of one of you is worthy to kiss the he^ of my riding
gown here.


Is this your riding gown my Lord.


Tis no matter what it is, talk not to me, what the d^ll did I mean to call
thee back again,


Why, my Lord I mean not to trouble you,


Go to stay I say, tis against my will that I use you so kindly I can tell
you.


Why you may ch^se my Lord.


I but I cannot choose, there you lie now, tis love forso^th that Intailes me to
you, for i^ it had not been for love, I had not been here now, for the Gods
do know I hold thee dearer then the Poungranet of mine eye, and that's better by
three pence then the apple of mine eye.


My Lord I am sorry for your heaviness.


Nay tis no matter I am not the first ass that hath borne Cupids tresurie.


My Lord tis enough to make an ass wise to bear tres^.


Why then be you t^at wi^ ass, and bear me for
I have some treasure ^ut me will you love me.

Love you my Lord it is strange you will ask it.


I am not the first hath desired you*


Nor you shall not be the last I wi^ refuse.


Nor are you the fairest I have seen,


Nor the foulest you hau^ loud.


Nor the fittest to be beloved.


Nor the unfittest to hate.


Do and you dare but sir and thou wilt not love,
I pray thee be proud

Why so my Lord.


Because I would have thee fall, for pride must have a fall.


Do you delight in my fall so much.


As much as in mine own rising I faith, but do not you think it strange that
I do love you, for before I did love you, Cupid pin^kt me a spanish leather
Jerkin with shooting at me, and made it so ^ull of holes that I was fain to
leave it of, and this loss have I had for your sake.


My Lord I'll bestow an old Jerkin on you,


Nay that shall not serve your turn, for I have had a greater loss then that,
I lost my left eye ^or your sake.


I do not think so.


I but I'll tell you how as I was hunting in the park, I saw Cupid shooting a
cockhye into your face, and gazing after his arrow it fell into mine eye.


A pretty fiction.


I but I find this no fiction, and you shall make me amends with love or by
this patch of mine eye, and the patch thou wotest where I will swear to all
the City I have lain with thee*


I hope your Lordship will not do me that wrong.


Then do you me right and let me lie with you, I have made the botle nosd knave
your husband so drunk that he is not able to stand go get you home I'll follow
you.


Why my Lord what will you do there.


Go to make no more questions but say I shall be welcome or by mine honour I'll
do as I say, otherwise be as secret as death.


Twenty to one he will, well my Lord if you come you come.


Oh I thank you heartily, oh exellent or never trust me.


Madam your honour is come somewhat to soon.


Why so Menippus.


Had you stayed never so little longer you should have met my Lord coming out
of Leons ^use and out of his movables,


How out of his movables.


Even in plain troth, I see him woe her, win her, and went in with her.


Now of mine honour I will be revenged fetch me the Burgomaister Menippus I'll
have them both whipped about the town.


Nay madam you must not dshonor him so,


What shall mine honour do then.


Do but tongu^ whip him madam and care not,
And so I leave him to the mercy of your tongue,

My tongue shall have hell and no mercy in it

Excellent music exellent m^sicke.


And the Devil take the Instrument,


What art thou so ny.


I and it were a good deed to be a little nier too, you make a Count ass of
me indeed, as if I were too little for you, but bigness is my fault unless I
were a little better used at your hands.


Why thou wilt be to perfect if I should use thee much for use makes
perfitnesse.


I but I cannot be too perfect and the^fore I'll spoil her perfections that
helps to spoil mine I warrant her.


Why may not I lie with her as well as thou lay with her husband.


I defy you and all the world that can say black is mine eye.


I think so indeed, for thine eye is gray, but thou did lye with him by
that same token he gave thee a carknet, and thou toldst me that thy mother sent
it thee, thou did promise to banquet him when I was next abroad, thou did
say he could not be so old as he made himself to be, thou d^dst say twas
pity of his nose, for he would have been a fine man else, and that God did
well to make him a rich man, for a was a good man too, and these tokens I
think are sufficient, ^or these a told me with his own mouth.


He lied like an old knave as he was and that he shall know the next time
these lips open in faith, oh wicked periurd man would a d^sclose my secretes
I faith what woman would trust any man a live with her honesty.


Ha ha ha, I have s^nt her in a pelting ch^fe,
But I'll follow her and make her mad with anger.

Thus have we trod the sandy vales of Egypt,
Adjoining to the plains of Alexan^ria,
Where proud king ` (...) keeps his refidence,
Securely trusting to his prophesies,
Which hath foretold him many years ago,
That if the young Arcadian Doricles,
Should link in marriage with his lovely daughter.
He then should conquer all our bordering (...),
And make us subject to his tirrannie.

Trusting to his fond fantastic dreams,
He hath exild the warlike Duke Cleanthes.
Whose name was terror to our valiant troops.

Cleanthes exild gives us easy way,
To our attempts where had he stayed,
And been afreind to him, yet should he not
Escape subjection.

We will divide his kingdom twixt us four,
And reeve from him his four chief ornaments,
And for to grieve his aged mind the more,
He shall b^ kept in lasting servitude.
So to fulfil what fates to him assigned,

Come let us march and brave him at the walls,
If Porus live to wield his martial sword,
His City walls shall not preserve him safe,
But he shall dye by Porus and his friends.

Sweet madam grant me once a cheerful look
To glad my dying hart with sorrow killed,
Your father hath resignd his free consent.
You bound by duty to obey his will,

Nay rather let him hayle me to my de^th
Then gaynst my will constrain me match my self.

Dye thou vile wretch and live Aspatia,
(...) now I hard thy father (...)
With words that still do tingle in mine (...),
(...) him heir to Alexandria,
Tis time ^or me to stir when such young boys,
Shall have their weak necks over poisd with crowns
Which must become resolved champions,
That for a crowns exchange will sell their souls, He kills hi^.

Wicked Count Hermes for this monstrous (...),
Egypt will hate thee. and thou sure must dye,
Then hye thee to the hills beyond the Aipes,
Fly tovnknowne and unfrequented climes,
Some des ert place that never saw the sun,
For if the king or any of his friends,
Shall find Count Hermes thou art surely dead.

I'll fly no more then doth a settled rock,
No more then mountains or the steadfast powles,
But come sweet love if thou wilt come with me,
We two will live amongst the shadowy groves,
And we will sit like shepherds on a hill,
And with our heavenly voices tice the trees,
To echo sweetly to our (...) tunes.
Fls will I angle in the running brookes,
Seasoning our toils with kiss, on the banks,
Sometime I'll dive into the murmerrng springes,
And fetch thee stones to hang about thy neck,
Which by thy splendour will be turned to pearl,
Say fair Aspasia wilt thou walk with me.

No bloody Count but I will clear my self,
And tell thy murders to the amassed court.

Nay if thou wilt not choose you peevish girl
Thou can not say but thou were offered fair,
But here m^st end Count (...) strange disguise,
My velvet gown my pistol and this patch,
No more must hide me in the counts attire,
Now will I turn my gown to Usurers Cotes,
And thus appear unto the world no more,
^arewell Aspasia.

Go wretched villain hide thy hated head,
Where never heavens light may shine on thee,
Whose there, Come forth for here is murder done,
Murder Murder of good prince Doricles.
Who calls out murder Lady was it you.


As I was walking in the pleasant weeds,
With Doricles the young Arcadian prince,
rushed in Count Hermes and in desperate words,
Hath slain this prince.

A baleful deed pursue the murderer,
And tell the King of this foul accident

Oh tell no more in stead of tears,
M^ beating hart dissolves in drops of blood,
And from mine eyes that stares upon this corse.
Leaps out my soul and on it I will die,
Oh Doricles oh dear Arca^ prince,
The bulwark and supporter of my life.
That by decree of fates was promised,
To add four neighbour kingdoms to my crown,
And shield me ^rom a most abhorred death,
Now shall my kingdom leave me with my life,
And suddenly look for some monstrous fate,
Shall fall like thunder on my wretched state.
Arm arm my Lord, my Lords to instant arms,
Four mighty kings are landed in thy coast,
And threaten death and ruin to thy land,
Black (...) the (...) king,
Comes marching first with twenty thousand men,
Next Rhesus king of sweet Arabia,
In warlike manner marches after him,
In equal number and in battle ray,
Next B^n king of rich Phasiaca,
And sterne Bebritius of Bebritia,
With each of them full twenty thousand strong
All which hath vowed the death, of Ptolomy, and thus they hither bend their
speedy feet.


How suddenly is weather over cast,
How is the face of peaceful Egypt changed,
Like as the smiling flowers above the ground,
By keenest edge of E^ras breath is cut.

To arms my Lord and gather up your strength,
Your bands in Memphis and in Caspia,
Joined with your power of Alexandria,
Will double all the forces of these kings,

All shall be done we may mean while,
Bury the body of this slaughtered prince,
Least with the view my senses follow his,
Cursed be his hand that wrought the damned deed,
Cold and uncovered may his body lye.
Let stotmie hayle and thunder beat on him
And every bird and beast run over him,
That robbed poor Ptolomy of such a hope,
Pursue the desperate Count that murdered him,
A thousand kingdoms shall not save his life
A miracle a miracle, a dreadful miracle.


What miracle, oh what will heavens do more,
To punish Egypt and her haplesse king,

As I was walking through the Serian groves
I saw the desperate Count the murderer,
Of good prince Do^icles as I hear say,
Fly through the deserts to the mimphick shades
Where hell to interrupt his passage thither,
Raving beneath the ground work of the earth
As if ten thousand vapours burst in her,
Severed her womb and swallowed quick,
The miserable Count.

Just are the heavens in his most dreadful end,
But come my Lords let us to instant arms,
To drive away more mischeiefes from our land.

So get you gone and p^ish all with him,
Now shall you know what want you have of me,
Now will I gather up my sommes of money,
And of my creditors borrow what I can,
Because as Leon I'll be seen no more,
This day they promised for to meet me here,
And here comes some of them.
My master sir your friend Calatius, Hath sent you sir your five hundredth
crowns for the rich Jewel that he bought of you. I thank him heartily, this
Jewel of so many thousand crowns The Queen of Egypt did bestow on me,
when that I told her in poor Jrus shape where her Cleanthes was, but soft who
hau^ we here.

Druso the Italian Merchant here by me,
Hath sent you sir in Diamonds and in Pearls,
So much as mounts to five thousand crowns,
A^d craves no more assurance but your word,

There's my bill and thank thy master he shall have more then word.

Never shall he nor they see this again,
Nor me neither as I am this present man,
This with the rest I have will make a pretty sum
With this will I employ ^e in these wars,
Now will I take on me the form and shape,
Of Duke Cleanthes, but what intends this alarm*
Where may I seek to find Cle^thes out,
That martial prince whom Ptolomy unkind,
Hath banished from out the Egyptian Land,
Our warlike troops are scatered and over throne,
And his dear friends Acatos and Acanthes,
Lie in the field besmired in their ^loodes,
I'll run through al these groves to find him out.

My sweet Acates and Acanthes slain,
Grief to my hart and sorrow to my soul,
Then rouse thy self Cleanthes and revenge.
Their guiltless blood on these base miscreantes
Oh let the cankered trumpet of the deep,
Be rattled out and ring into their ears,
The dire revenge Cleanthes will inflict,
One these four Kings and all there accomplices,

Thus have you strove in vain against those Gods,
That rescues Egypt in Cleanthes arms,
Come yield your crowns and homages to me,
Though Ptolomie is dead yet I survive,
Elect and chosen by the pears to scourge,
The vile presumption of your hated lives,
Then yield as vanquished unto Aegypts king.

First by thy valour and the strength of arms,
Porus the wealthy Ethiopian king,
Doth yield his crown and homage unto thee,
Swearing by all my Gods whom I adore,
To honour Duke Cleanthes whilst he live,
And in his aid with twenty thousand men,
Will always march gaynst whom thou meanst to fight,

Bion whose neck was never forct to bow
Doth yield him captive to thy warlike sword,
Command what so thou list, we will perform,
And all my power shall march at thy command.

Rhesus doth yield his crown and dignity,
To great Cleanthes Aegyptes only strength,
For if Cleanthes lives, who ever lived,
More likelier to be monarch of the world,
Then here accept my vow^ allegiance,
Which as the rest I render ^nto thee.

So saith Bebritius of (...).
And lays his crown and homage at thy feet,

Hold take your crowns again and keep your othe^ and fealties to me,
So shall you live as free as here to fo^e
And near hereafter stoup to conquest more.

Here comes the two widows of the beggar and the king, little know they that
both their husbands are turned into one king, there would be old st^iuing who
should be Queen I faith.


Pity dread sovereign.


Pity gracious Lord.


What are your suits.


I the poor countess and the widow left,
Of late Count Hermes having all my goods,
seazd to our late kings use for murder done,
Of young prince Dorules humbly pray your grace,
I may have somewhat to mainetayne my state,
And this poor bu^ then which I go withal.
The haplesse Infant of a haplesse father.

And I my Lord humbly entreat your grace.
That where my husband Leon is deceased,
And left me much in debt, his creditors
Having seized all I have into their hands,
And turned me with this haplesse burden here,
Into the streets your highness will descend,
To my relief by some convenient order.

Poor souls I most extremely pity them,
But say is Leon dead,

Men say my Lord he cast his desperate body,
From Thalexandrian tower into the sea.

Who saw the sight, or gave out this report,
You master Burgomaister.

I did my gracious Lord.


So I deuisd indeed that he should say,
That none should never look for Leon more
But these my widows here must not be left,
unto the mercy of the needy world,
Nor mine own Issue that they go withal,
Have such base fortunes and there fire so great,
VVidowes in pity of your widowhood,
And vntymely ends of both your husbands,
The slaughter of the Count your husband madam,
Shall be remitted* and your self enjoy,
The utmost of the living he possessed,
So will I pay your husband Leons debt,
And both shall live fitting there wonted states,
Kings in there mercy come most near the Gods,
And can no better show it then in ruth,
Of widows and of children fatherless,
My self will therefore be to both your births,
A careful father in there bringing up.

The Gods for ever bless your majesty,


But tell me were your husbands such bad men,
That every way they did deserve such ends,

Mine was a husband to my hearts content.
But that he used the privilege of men.

What privilege of men,


To take some other love besides his wife
Which men think by their custom they may do,
Although their wives be strictly bound to them.

With whom suspectyou he was great with all.


With this poor widow here the world supposes.


So thinks the world my husband was with you.


Fair dames what will you say to me,
If I can tell you where your husoandes be.

What can you sir.


Nay nothing sir I did but ieast with you, I feared him
I ^yth but I'll be secret that's flat.

Well master Burgomaister see that you restore,
The goods and lands you ceasd.
Both of the countess a^d rich Leons wife,
Not p^ie of their wido ^odes alone,
But their rare beauties move me to this good.
Oh Master Burgomaster see here's your wife come to
welcome you home from war^.
Oh husband hu^and will you go to ^re, and leave me in this taking.


This taking why this is a very good taking how say you is it not and like your
Majesty.


Tis very well Master Burg^ster.


But Shall I entreat one boon of your Majesty.


VVhats that Master Burgomaister.


Mary even to be god father to my young Burgomaister here.


Withal my hart sir.


Come on sweet husband fot my time draws near.


Fear not thou shalt be a joyful mother I warrant thee.


How say you my Lords is not our Burgomaister a tall man every way, did you
not mark how manfully he be haued himself in our late Battle,


We did my Lord and wonder at his courage


His merit doth deserve a better place.
Then to be Burgomaister of Alexandria.

Then say my Lords how shall we deal with him.


Had he been widower he might have wedded with this countess here.


Oh I have one of mine own I thank you sir, here's one has the sweet of them
I faith:


My Lord the offer had been to hye a grace for him
For near did eye behold a fairer face.

So saith mine eye that hath my hart incensed.


And Rhesus me thinks this exceeds her far,


No question of it as the son a star.


As suddenly as lightning beauty wounds.


None ever loud but at first sight they loud*


Loves darts are swift as is the lightning fire.


See he shoots arrows bur^ing from her eyes.


Why which loves Rhesus.


This celestial dame.


And which loves Bion*


Even the very same.


Then may I freely Joy the countess here.


No Porus for B^itins loves her too


Are they in love oh Gods would that were true
My loving joy the fresh desire of kings.
How now my Lords doth beauty startle you*

More then dead stocks would startle at such beauty,


In vain do I resist my passions,
Mighty Cleanthes to annex ^y hart,
In love to thee as well as victory,
Grant this fair countess here may be my queen.

No great Cleanthes give her to my hand,
Whose hart was first the subject of her graces.

Then let the Arabian king make this his queen.


Nay this ^eanthes let my love enjoy.


How fatal are these loves now I perceive,
Their fortunes that I told as I was Irus.
Will now in force I see be come to pass.

Oh holy Irus blessed be thy tongue,
That like an orator hath told our fortunes.

He told us we should soon lose our first loves,
Making our second choice amongst greatest kings.

I did indeed, but God knows knew not how.


How say you master brother, am not I secret now*


Thou art and be so still for not the world,
Shall ever know the mad pranks I have played,
Now stand sayre my Lords and let these Ladies view you,

In my eye now the blackest is the fairest,
For every woman chooses white and red,
Come martial Perus thou shalt have my love.

Out on thee foolish woman thou hast chose a devil.


Not yet sir till he have horns.


Tis not the face and colour I regard,
But fresh and lovely youth allures my choice.
And thee most beauteous Bion I affect.

Haplesse is Rhesus.


Accursed ^britius.


Have patience gentle Lords I will provide,
Other Egyptian Ladies for your t^ne,
So will we link in perfect league of lou^
So shall the victory you lost to me,
Set double glory on your conquered he^des.
So let us go to frolic in our Court.
Carousing free whole boules of greekish win^*
In honour of the conquest we have made,
That at our banquet all the Gods may tend,
Plauding our victory and this happy end.


