BYron sallue in so tratrous a relapse,
Aleadgd for our ingratitude: what offices,
Titles of honour, and what admiration,
Could France afford him that it pourd not on?
When he was scarce arrived at forty years,
He ran through all chief dignities of France.
At fourteen years of age he was made Colonel
To all the Suisses serving then in Flanders;
Soon after he was marshall of the camp.
And shortly after, marshall General:
He was received high Admiral of France
In that our Parliament we held at Tours;
Marshall of France in that we held at Paris.
And at the Siege of Amiens he acknowledgd,
None his Superior but our self, the King;
Though I had there, the Princes of the blood
I made him my Lieutennant General,
Declard him Jointly the prime Peer of France,
And raised his Barony into a Duchy,

And yet (my Lord) all this could not allay
The fatal thrist of his ambition.
For some have heard him say he would not die,
Till on the wings of valour he had reached
One degree heigher; and had seen his head*
Set on the royal Quarter of a crown;
Yea at so vnbeleeu'd a pitch he aymd,
That he hath said his heart would still complain,
Till he aspird the style of Sovereign,
And from what ground my Lord rise all the leuyes
Now made in Italy? from whence should spring
The warlike humour of the Count Fuentes?
The restless stirrings of the Duke of Sauoye?
The discontent the Spaniard entertained,
With such a threatening fury, when he heard
The prejudicial conditions,
Proposed him, in the treaty held at Veruins?
And many other beaueries, this way aiming,
But from some hope of inward aid from hence?
And that, all this directly aims at you,
Your highness hath by one intelligence,
Good cause to think; which is your late advice,
That the Sea army, now prepared at Naples,
Hath an intended Enterprise on Prouence?
Although the cunning Spaniard gives it out,
That all is for Algier.

I must believe,
That without treason bred in our own breasts,
Spaines, affairs are not in so good estate,
To aim at any action against France:
And if Byron should be their instrument,
His altered disposition could not grow,
So far wide in an instant; Nor resign,
His valor to these lawles resolutions
Upon the sudden; nor without some charms,
Of foreign hopes and flatteries sung to him:
But far it flies my thoughts, that such a spirit,
So active, valiant, and vigilant;
Can see it self transformed with such wild furies.
And like a dream it shows to my conceits,
That he who by himself hath won such honour:
And he to whom his father left so much,
He that still daily reapes so much from me,
And knows he may increase it to more proof
From me, then any other foreign King;
Should quite against the stream of all religion,
Honour, and reason, take a course so foul,
And neither keep his Oath, nor save his Soul.
Can the poor keeping of a Citadel
Which I denied, to be at his disposure,
Make him forgo the whole strength of his honours?
It is impossible, though the violence,
Of his hot spirtit made him make attempt
Upon our person for denying him;
Yet well I found his loyal judgment served,
To keep it from effect: besides being offered,
Two hundred thousand crowns in yearly pension,
And to be General of all the forces
The Spaniards had in France; they found him still,
As an vnmatcht Achilles in the wars,
So a most wise Vlisses to their words,
Stopping his ears at their enchanted sounds;
And plain he told them that although his blood
(Being moved) by Nature, were a very fire
And boiled in apprehension of a wrong;
Yet should his mind hold such a sceptre there,
As would contain it from all act and thought
Of treachery or ingratitude to his Prince.
Yet do I long, me thinks, to see La Fin,
Who hath his heart in keeping; since his state,
(Grown to decay and he to discontent)
Comes near the ambitious plight of Duke Byron,
My Lord Vidame, when does your Lordship think,
Your uncle of La Fin will be arrived.

I think (my Lord) he now is near ariuing
For his particular journey and devotion,
Would to the holy Lady of Loretto,
Was long since past and he upon return.

In him, as in a crystal that is charmed,
I shall descerne by whom and what designs,
My rule is threatened^ and that sacred power
That hath enabled this defensive arm,
(When I enjoyed but in an unequal Nook,
Of that I now possess) to front a King
Far my Superior: And from twelve set battles,
March home a victor: ten of them obtained,
Without my personal service; will not see
A traitrous subject foil me, and so end
What his hand hath with such success begun.

See the young Daulphin brought to cheer your highness.

My royal blessing, and the King of heaven,
Make thee an aged, and a happy King:
Help Nurse to put my sword into his hand;
Hold Boy, by this; and with it may thy arm
Cut from thy tree of rule, all traitrous branches,
That strive to shadow and eclips thy glories;
Have thy old fathers angel for thy guide,
Redoubled be his spirit in thy breast;
Who when this State ran like a turbulent sea,
In civil hates and bloody enmity,
Their wrathes and envies, like so many winds,
Settled and burst: and like the Halcions birth,
Be thine to bring a calm upon the shore,
In which the eyes of war may ever sleep,
As ouermacht with former massacres,
When gultie, made Noblesse, feed on Noblesse;
All the sweet plenty of the realm exhausted;
When the nak't merchant, was pursued for spoil,
When the pore Pezants frighted neediest thieves
With their pale lea^enesse; nothing left on them
But meager carcases sustained with air,
Wandering like Ghosts affrighted from their graves,
When with the often and incessant sounds
The very beasts knew the alarm bell,
And (hearing it) ran bellowing to their home:
From which unchristian broils and homicides,
Let the religious sword of justice free
Thee and thy kingdoms governed after me.
O heaven! or if th'vnsettled blood of France,
With ease, and wealth, renew he ^iuill furies:
Let all my powers be emptied in my Son
To curb, and end them all, as I have done.
Let him by virtue, quite out of from fortune,
Her fetherd shoulders, and her winged shoes,
And thrust from her light feet, her turning stone*
That she may ever tarry by his throne.
And of his worth, let after ages say,
(He fighting for the land; and bringing home
Just conquests, laden with his enemies spoils)
His father past all France in martial deeds,
But he, his father twenty times exceeds.

My dear friends D'Avuergne* and Laffin,
We need no conjurations to conceal:
Our close intendments, to advance our states
Even with our merits; which are now neclected;
Since Britain is reduced, and breathless war
Hath sheathed his sword, and wrapped his Ensigns up;
The King hath now no more use of my valor,
And therefore I shall now no more enjoy
The credit that my service held with him;
My service that hath driven through all extremes,
Through tempests, droughts, and through the deepest floods;
Winters of shot: and over rocks so high
That birds could scarce aspire their ridgy tops;
The world is quite inuerted: virtue thrown
At Vices feet: and sensual peace confounds,
Valor, and cowardice: Fame, and Infamy;
The rude and terrible age is turned again:
When the thick air hid heaven, and all the stars,
Were drowned in humour, tough, and hard to peirse,
When the red Sun held not his fixe^ place;
Kept not his certain course, his rise and set
Nor yet distinguisht with his definite bounds;
Nor in his firm conuersions, were discerned
The fruitful distances of time and place,
In the well varied seasons of the year;
When th'incomposd incursions of floods
Wasted and eat the earth; and all things showed
Wild and disordered: nought was worse then now;
We must reform and have a new creation
Of State and government; and on our Chaos
Will I sit brooding up another world.
I who through all the dangers that can siege
The life of man, have force my glorious way
To the repairing of my countries ruins,
Will ruin it again, to re-aduance it;
Romaine Camyllus, safte the State of Rome
With far less merit, then Byron hath France;
And how short of this is my recompense.
The king shall know, I will have better price
Set on my services; in spite of whom
I will proclaim and ring my discontents
Into the farthest ear of all the world.

How great a spirit he breaths? how learned? how wise?
But (worthy Prince) you must give temperate air,
To your vnmatcht, and more then human wind;
Else will our plots be frost-bit, in the flower.

Betwixt our selves we may give liberal vent
To all our fiery and displeased impressions;
Which nature could not entertain with life,
Without some exhalation; A wronged thought
Will break a rib of steel.

My Princely friend,
Enough of these eruptions; our grave Councellor
Well knows that great affairs will not be forged
But upon Anuills that are lined with wool;
We must ascend to our intentions top
Like Clouds that be not seen till they be up?

O, you do too much ravish; And my soul
Offer to Musique in your numerous breath;
Sententious, and so high, it wakens death;
It is for these parts, that the Spanish King
Hath sworn to win them to his side
At any price or perril^; That great Sauoy,
Offers his princely daughter, and a dowry,
Amounting to five hundred thousand crowns;
With full transport of all the Sovereign rights
Belonging to the State of Burgondie;
Which marriage will be made, the only Cement
T'effect and strengthen all our secret Treaties;
Instruct me thererfore, (my assured Prince)
Now I am going to resolve the King
Of his suspicions, how I shall behave me.

Go my most trusted friend, with happy feet:
Make me a sound man with him; Go to Court
But with a little train; and be prepared
To hear, at first, terms of contempt and choler,
Which you may easily calm, and turn to grace.
If you beseech his highness to believe
That your whole drift and course for Italy,
(Where he hath heard you were) was only made
Out of your long-well-knowne devotion
To our right holy Lady of Lorretto,
As you have told some of your friends in Court:
And that in passing Mylan and Thurin,
They charged you to propound my marrriage
With the third daughter of the Duke of Sauoy;
Which you have done, and I rejected it,
Resolved to build upon his royal care
For my bestowing, which he lately vowed.

O, you direct, as if the God of light
Sat in each nook of you; and pointed out
The path of Empire; Charming all the dangers
On both sides armed, with his harmoniouse finger.

Besides let me entreat you to dism^sse,
All that have made the voyage with your Lordship,
But specially the Curate: And to locke
Your papers in some place of doubtless safety;
Or sacrifice them to the God of fire;
Considering worthily that in your hands
I put my fortunes, honour, and my life.

Therein the bounty that your Grace hath shown me,
I prize past life, and all things that are mine;
And will undoubtedly preserve, and tender
The merit of it, as my hope of heaven.

I make no question; farewell worthy friend.

Are these proofs of that purely Chatholike zeal
That made him wish no other glorious title,
Then to be called the scourge of Huguenots?

No question sir he was of no religion;
But (upon false grounds, by some Courtiers laid)
Hath oft been heard to mock and jest at all.

Are not his treasons heinous?

-- Most abhord;

All is confirmed that you have heard before,
And amplified with many horrors more.

Good De'Laffin; you were our golden plummet,
To sound this gulf of all ingratitude;
In which you have with excellent desert
Of loyalty and policy, expressed
Your name in action; and with such appearance
Have proved the parts of his ungrateful creasons,
That I must credit, more then I desired,

I must confess my Lord, my voyages
Made to the Duke of Sauoy and to Mylan;
Were with endeavour, that the wars returned,
Might breed some trouble to your Majesty;
And profit those by whom they were procured;
But since, in their disseignes, your sacred person
Was not excepted (which I since have seen)
It so abhord me, that I was resolved
To give you full intelligence thereof;
And rather chose to fail in promises,
Made to the servant; then infringe my fealty
Sworn to my royal Sovereign and Master;

I am extremely discontent to see,
This most vnaturall conspiracy;
And would not have the Marshall of Byron,
The first example or my forced Justice;
Nor that his death should be the worthy cause,
That my calm reign, (which hitherto hath held
A clea^e and cheerful sky above the heads
Of my dear subjects) should so suddenly
Be overcast with clouds of fire, and thunder;
Yet on submission, I vow still his pardon.

And still our humble counsayles, (for his service)
Would so resolve you, if he will employ
His honoured valor as effectually,
To fortify the State, against your foes;
As he hath practised bad intendments with them.

That vow shall stand; and we will now address,
Some messengers to call him home to Court;
Without the slendrest intimation,
Of any ill we know; we will restrain
(Withal forgiveness, if he will confess)
His headlong course to ruin; and his taste,
From the sweet poison of h^s friendlike foes:
Treason hath blistered h^eles, dishonest Things
Have bitter Riue^s, though delicious Springs;
Descures haste you unto him, and inform,
That having heard by sure intelligence,
Of the great leuies made in Italie,
Of Arms and soldiers; I am resolute,
Upon my frontiers to maintain an Army;
The charge whereof I will impose on him;
And to that end, expressly have commanded,
De Vic, our Lord Ambassador in Suisse,
To demand levy of six thousand men:
Appointing them to march where Duke Byron
Shall have directions; wherein I have follow'd.
The counsel of my Constable his Gossip;
Whose liked advice, I made him him know by letters,
Wishing to hear his own; from his own mouth,
And by all means conjure, his speediest presence;
Do this with utmost hast.

I will my Lord.

My good Lord Chancellor, of many Pieces,
More then is here, of his conspiracies
Presented to us, by our friend, Laffin;
You, only, shall reserve these seven and twenty,
Which are not those that must conclude against him;
But mention only him: since I am loath,
To have the rest of the conspirators, known.

My Lord, my purpose is to guard all these,
So safely from the sight of any other:
That in my doublet I will have them sowed;
Without discovering them to mine own eyes,
Till need, or opportunity requires.

You shall do well my Lord, they are of weight;
But I am doubtful; that his conscience
Will make him so suspicious of the worst,
That he will hardly be induced to come.

I much should doubt that to, but that I hope
The strength of his conspiracy, as yet
Is not so ready, that he dare presume,
By his refusal to make known so much
Of his disloyalty.

I yet conceive;
His practises are turned to no bad end,
And good Laffin, I pray you wright to him,
To hasten his repair: and make him sure,
That you have satisfied me to the full.
For all his actions, and have vtterd nought,
But what might serve to banish bad impressions.

I will not fail my Lord.

Conua^e your letters;
By some choice friend of his: or by his brother:
And for a third excitement to his presence;
Ianin, your self shall go, and with the power
That both the rest employ to make him come,
Use you the strength of your persuasions.

I will my Lord, and hope I shall present him.

Wilt please your Majesty to take your place,
The Mask is coming.

Room my Lords, stand close.

My Lord, these Nymphs, part of the scattered train,
Of friendless virtue (living in the woods
Of shady Arden: and of late not hearing
The dreadful sounds of War; but that sweet Peace,
Was by your valor lifted from her grave,
Set on your royal right hand: and all virtues
Summoned with honour, and with rich rewards,
To be her hand-maides): These I say, the virtues,
Have put their heads out of their Caves and Coverts,
To be her true attendants in your Court:
In which desire, I must relate a tale,
Of kind and worthy emulation,
Twixt these two Virtues, leaders of the train.
This on the right hand is Sophrosyne,
Or Chastity: this other Dapsyle
Or Liberality: their Emulation
Begat a jar, which thus was reconciled.
I, (having left my Goddess mothers lap,
To hawlke, and shoot at Birds in Arden groves,)
Beheld this Princely Nymph* with much affection,
Left killing Birds, and turned into a Bird,
Like which I flew betwixt her Ivory breasts,
As if I had been driven by some Hawlke,
To sue to her for saftety of my life;
She smiled at first, and sweetly shadowd me,
With soft protection of her silver hand;
Some-times she tied my legs in her rich hair,
And made me (past my nature, liberty)
Proud of my fetters: As I pertly sat,
On the white pillows of her naked breasts,
I sung for joy; she answered note for note,
Relish for relish, with such ease and Art,
In her divine division, that my tunes,
Showd like the God of Shepherds to the Suns,
Compared with hers: ashamed of which disgrace,
I took my true shape, Bow, and all my shafts,
And lighted all my torches at her eyes,
Which (set about her, in a golden ring)
I followed Birds again, from Tree to Tree,
Killed, and presented, and she kindly took.
But when she handled my triumphant Bow,
And saw the beauty of my golden shafts,
She begged them of me; I, poor boy replied,
I had no other Riches; yet was pleased
To hazard all, and stake them against a kiss,
At an old game I used, called Penny-prick.
She p^iuie to her own skill in the play,
Answered my challenge, so, I lost my arms:
And now my Shafts are headed with her looks,
One of which Shafts she put into my Bow*
And shot at this fair Nymph, with whom before
I told your Majesty, she had some jar.
The Nymph did instantly repent all parts
She played in urging that effeminate war,
Loved and submitted; which submission
This took so well, that now they both are one:
And as for your dear love, their discords grew,
So for your love, they did their loves renew.
And now to prove them capable of your court*
In skill of such conceits, and qualities
As here are practiced; they will first submit
Their grace in dancing to your highness doom,
And pray the press to give their meisures room,
If this suffice, for one Court complement,
To make them gracious, and entertained;
Behold another parcel of their Court-ship,
Which is a rare dexterity in riddles,
Shown in one instance, which is here inscribed.
Here is a Riddle, which if any Knight
At first fight can resolve; he shall enjoy
This Jewel here annexed; which though it show
To vulgar eyes, no richer then a Pebble;
And that no Lapydarie, nor great man
Will give a Soulz for it; 'tis worth a kingdom:
For 'tis an artificial stone composde,
By their great Mistress, Virtue: and will make
Him that shall wear it, live with any little,
Suffizde, and more content then any king.
If he that undertakes cannot resolve it;
And that these Nymphs can have no harbour here;
(It being considered, that so many virtues
Can never live in Court) he shall resolve
To leave the Court, and live with them in Arden,

Pronounce the riddle: I will undertake it.

'Tis this sir.
What's that a fair Lady, most of all likes,
Yet ever makes show she least of all seeks?
That's ever embraced and affected by her,
Yet never is seen to please or come nigh her:
Most served in her night-weeds: does her good in a corner,
But a poor mans thing* yet doth richly adorn her:
Most cheap, and most dear, above all worldly pelf,
That is hard to get in, but comes out of it self.

Let me peruse it, Cupid.

Here it is.

Your Riddle is good Fame.

Good fame? how make you that good?

Good fame is that a good Lady most likes I am sure;

That's granted;

Yet ever makes show she least of all seeks: for she likes it only for the
virtue, which is not glorious.

That holds well

Tis ever embraced and affected by her: for she must, persevere in virtue or
fame vanishes.
Yet never is seen to please or come ny her for fame is Invisible,

Exceeding right.

Most served in her night weeds: for Ladies that most wear their Nightweeds
come left abroad, and they that come least abroad serve fame most; according to
this; Non forma sed fama in publicum exire de bet.


Tis very substantial,


Does her good in a corner: that is in her most retreat from the world,
comforts her; but a poor mans thing: for every poor man may purchase it, yet
doth richly adorn a Lady.


That all must grant.


Most cheap for it costs nothing, and most dear, for gould can not buy it;
above all worldly pelffe; for that's transitory, and fame eternal. It is hard
to get in; that is hard to get: But comes out of it self; for when it is
vertuosely deserved with the most inward retreat from the world, it comes out
in spite of it, so Cupid your jewel is mine.


It is: and be the virtue of it, yours.
We'll now turn to our dance, and then attend,
Your heighnes will, as touching our resort,
If virtue may be entertained in Court,

This show hath pleased me well, for that it figures.
The reconcilement of my Queen and Mistress:
Come Let us in and thank them and prepare,
To entertain our trusty friend Byron.

Dear friend, we must not be more true to kings,
Then Kings are to their subjects, there are schools,
Now broken open in all parts of the world,
First founded in ingenious Italy,
Where some conclusions of estate are held,
That for a day preserve a Prince, and ever,
Destroy him after: from thence men are taught,
To glyde into degrees of height by craft,
And then lock in them-selues by villainy:
But God, who knows kings are not made by art,
But right of Nature, nor by treachery propped,
But simple virtue, once let fall from heaven,
A branch of that green tree, whose root is yet*
Fast fixed above the stars: which sacred branch,
We well may liken to that Laurel spray,
That from the heavenly Eagles golden seres,
Fell in the lap of great Augustus wife:
Which spray once set, grew up into a tree,
Whereof were Girlonds made, and Emperors,
Had their estates and foreheads crowned with them:
And as the arms of that tree did decay,
The race of great Augustus wore away,
Nero being last of that imperial line,
The tree and Emperor together died.
Religion is a branch, first set and blessed
By heavens high finger in the hearts of kings,
Which whilelome grew into a goodly tree,
Bright Angels sat and sung upon the twigs,
And royal branches for the heads of Kings,
Were twisted of them but since s^uint-ey'd ^nuye:
And pale suspicion, dashed the heads of kingdoms,
One against another: two abhorred twins,
With two foul tails: sterne War and Liberty,
Entered the world. The tree that grew from heaven.
Is overrun with moss; the cheerful musique,
That heretofore hath sounded out of it,
Begins to cease; and as she casts her leaves,
(By small degrees) the kingdoms of the earth
Decline and wither: and look whenever
That the pure sap in her, is dried up quite;
The lamp of all authority goes out,
And all the blaze of Princes is extinkt;
Thus as the Poet sends a messenger
Out to the stage, to show the sum of all,
That follows after: so are Kings reuolts,
And playing both ways with religion,
Fore-runners of afflictions imminent,
Which (like a Chorus) subjects must lament.

My Lord I stand not on these deep discourses,
To settle my course to your fortunes; mine
Are freely and inseperablie linked:
And to your love my life.

Thanks Princely friend,
And whatsoever good shall come of me,
Pursued by al the Catholic Princes aids
With whom I join, and whose whole states proposde,
To win my valor, promise me a throne:
All shall be equal with my self; thine own.

My Lord here is D'escuris sent from the King,
Desires access to you.

Attend him in.

Health to my Lord the Duke:

Welcome D'escuris,
In what health rests our royal Sovereign.

In good health of his body, but his mind,
Is something troubled with the gathering storms,
Of foreign powers; that as he is informed
Address themselves into his frontier towns;
And therefore his intent, is to maintain:
The body of an army on those parts;
And yield their worthy conduct to your valor.

From whence hears he that any storms are rising?

From Italy; and his intelligence,
No doubt is certain, that in all those parts
Leuies are hotly made; for which respect,
He sent to his Ambassador De Vic,
To make demand in Switzerland, for the raising
With utmost diligence of six thousand men;
All which shall be commanded to attend,
On your direction; as the Constable
Your honoured Gossip gave him in advice;
And he sent you by wrighting: of which letters,
He would have answer, and advice from you
By your most speedy presence.

This is strange,
That when the enemy is t'attempt his frontiers,
He calls me from the frontiers; does he think,
It is an action worthy of my valor
To turn my back, to an approaching foe?

The foe is not so ne'er, but you may come,
And take more strict directions from his highness,
Then he thinks fit his letters should contain,
Without the least attainture of your valor;
And therefore good my Lord, forbear excuse
And bear your self on his direction;
Who well you know hath never made design
For your most worthy service, where he saw
That any thing but honour could succeed.

I will not come I swear:

I know your grace,
Will send no such unsavoury reply.

Tell him that I besecch his Majesty,
To pardon my repair till th'end be known
Of all these leuies now in Italie.

My Lord I know that tale will never please him;
And wish you as you love his love and pleasure*
To satisfy his summons speedily:
And speedily I know he will return you;

By heaven it is not fit: if all my service
Makes me know any thing: beseech him therefore,
To trust my judgment in these doubtful charges,
Since in assured assaults it hath not failed him.

I would your Lordship now, would trust his judgment.

Gods precious, you're importunate past measure,
And (I know) further, then your charge extends,
I'll satisfy his highness, let that serve;
For by this flesh and blood, you shall not bear,
Any reply to him, but this from me.

Tis nought to me my Lord, I wish your good,
And for that cause have been importunate.

By no means go my Lord; but with distrust,
Of all that hath been said or can be sent;
Collect your friends, and stand upon your guard,
The Kings fair letters, and his messages
Are only Golden Pills, and comprehend
Horrible purgatiues.

I will not go,
For now I see th'instructions lately sent me,
That something is discovered, are too true,
And my head rules none of those neighbor Nobles,
That every Purs^uant brings beneath the axe:
If they bring me out, they shall see i'll hatch
Like to the Black-thorne, that puts forth his leaf,
Not with the golden fawnings of the Sun,
But sharpest showers of hail, and blackest frosts:
Blows, batteries, breaches, showers of steel and blood,
Must be his doun-right messengers for me,
And not the misling breath of policy:
He, he himself, made passage to his Crown
Through no more armies, battles, massacres,
Then I will ask him to arrive at me;
He takes on him, my executions,
And on the demolitions, that this arm,
Hath shaken out of forts and Citadells,
Hath he aduanc't the Trophies of his valor;
Where I, in those assumptions may scorn,
And speak contemptuously of all the world,
For any equal yet, I ever found;
And in my rising, not the Syrian Star
That in the Lyons mouth, undaunted shines,
And makes his brave ascension with the Sun,
Was of the Egiptians, with more zeal beheld,
And made a rule to know the circuit*
And compass of the year; then I was held
When I appeared from battle; the whole sphere,
And full sustainer of the state we bear;
I have Alcides-like gone under the earth
And on these showlders borne the weight of France:
And (for the fortunes of the thankles King)
My father (all know) set him in his throne,
And if he urge me, I may pluck him out.

Here is the president Ianin, my Lord;
Sent from the King, and urges quick access.

Another Pursiuant? and one so quick?
He takes next course with me, to make him stay:
But, let him in, let's here what he importunes.

Honour, and loyal hopes to Duke Byron.

No other tooch me: say how fares the King?

Fairly my Lord; the cloud is yet far off
That aims at his obscuring, and his will,
Would gladly give the motion to your powers
That should di^perse it; but the means, himself,
Would personally relate in your direction*

Still on that hante?

Upon my life, my Lord,
He much desires to see you, and your sight
Is now grown necessary to suppress
(As with the glorious splendour of the Sun)
The rude winds that report breaths in his ears,
Endeavouring to blast your loyalty.

Sir, if my loyalty, stick in him no faster
But that the light breath of report may loose it,
(So I rest still vnmoou'd) let him be shaken.

But these aloof abodes, my Lord bewray,
That there is rather firmness in your breath.
Then in your heart; Truth is not made of glass,
That with a small touch, it should fear to break,
And therefore should not shun it; believe me
His arm is long, and strong; and it can fetch
Any within his will, that will not come:
Not he that surfeits in his mines of gold,
And for the pride thereof, compares with God,
Calling (with almost nothing different)
His powers invincible, for omnipotent,
Can back your boldest Fort against his assaults;
It is his pride, and vain ambition,
That hath but two stairs in his high designs;
(The lowest envy, and the highest blood)
That doth abuse you; and gives minds too high,
Rather a will by guiddinesse to fall,
Then to descend by judgment.

I rely
On no mans back nor belly; but the King
Must think that merit, by ingratitude cracked,
Requires a firmer sementing then words.
And he shall find it a much harder work
To soder broken hearts* then shiuerd glasses.

My Lord, 'tis better hold a Sovereigns love
By bearing injuries; then by laying out
Stir his displeasure; Princes discontents
(Being once incensed) are like the flames of Aetna,
Not to be quenched, nor lessend: and be sure,
A subjects confidence in any merit,
Against his Sovereign, that makes him presume
To fly too high; approoues him like a cloud,
That makes a show as it did hawlke at kingdoms,
And could command, all raised beneath his vapor:
When suddenly, the Foul that hawlkt so fair,
Stoops in a puddle, or consumes in air.

I fly with no such aim, nor am opposde,
Against my Sovereign; but the worthy height
I have wrought by my service, I will hold,
Which if I come away, I cannot do;
For if the enemy should invade the Frontier,
Whose charge to guard, is mine, with any spoil,
(Although the King in placing of another
Might well excuse me) Yet all foreign Kings
That can take note of no such secret quittance,
Will lay the weakness here, upon my wants;
And therefore my abode is resolute.

I sorrow for your resolution,
And fear your dissolution, will succeed.

I must endure it;

Fare you well my Lord;

Farewell to you;
Captain what other news?

La Fin salutes you;

Welcome good friend; I hope your wished arrival*
Will give some certain end to our disseignes;

I know not that, my Lord; reports are raised so doubtful and so different,
that the truth of any one can hardly be assured.

Good news, D'Avuergne; our trusty friend La Fin,
Hath cleared all scruple with his Majesty,
And vtterd nothing but what served to clear
All bad Suggestions.

So he says, my Lord
But others say, La Fins assurances
Are mere deceipts; and wish you to believe;
That when the Vidame, nephew to La Fin,
Met you at Autune, to assure your doubts,
His uncle had said nothing to the King
That might offend you; all the journeys charge,
The King defraid; besides, your truest friends
Willed me to make you certain that your place
Of government is otherwise disposed;
And all advise you, for your latest hope,
To make retreat into the Fr^nch County.

I thank them all, but they touch not the depth,
Of the affairs, betwixt La Fin and me.
Who is returned contented to his house,
Quite freed, of all displeasure or distrust;
And therefore, worthy friends wele now to Court.

My Lord, I like your other friends advices,
Much better then Laffins; and on my life
You can not come to Court with any safety.

Who shall infringe it? I know, all the Court,
Have better apprehension of my valor;
Then that they dare lay violent hands on me;
If I have only means to draw this sword,
I shall have power enough to set me free,
From seasure, by my proudest enemy.

He will not come I dare engage my hand.

He will be fetched then, i'll engage my head.

Come, or be fetched, he quite hath lost his honour,
In giving these suspicions of revolt
From his allegiance: that which he hath won,
With sundry wounds, and peril of his life;
With wonder of his wisdom, and his valor,
He loses with a most enchanted glory:
And admiration of his pride, and folly.

Why did you never see a fortunate man,
Suddenly raised to heaps of wealth and honour?
Nor any rarely great in gifts of nature,
As valor, wit, and smooth use of the tongue,
Set strangely to the pitch of populare likings?
But with as sudden falls the rich and honoured,
Were ouerwhelmd by poverty* and shame
Or had no use of both above the wretched.

Men never are satisfied with that they have;
But as a man, matched with a lovely wife,
When his most heavenly Theorye of her beauties,
Is duld and quite exhausted with his practise:
He bring^ her forth to feasts, where he alas,
Falls to his viends with no thought like others,
That ^hinke him blessed in her, and they (poor men)
Court, and make faces, offer service, sweat,
With their desires contention, break their brains
For jests, and tales: sit mute, and loose their looks,
(Far out of wit, and out of countenance)
So all men else, do what they have transplant,
And place their wealth in thirst of that they want.

He will not come; I must both grieve and wonder,
That all my care to win my subjects love
And in one cup of friendship to comix,
Our lives and fortunes: should leave out so many
As give a man (comtemptuous of my love,
And of his own good, in the Kingdoms Peace)
Hope, in a continuance so ungrateful,
To bear out his designs in spite of me;
How should I better please all, then I do?
When they supposed, I would have given some,
Insolent garrisons; others Citadells,
And to all sorts, increase of miseries;
Province by Province, I did visit all
Whom those injurious rumours had diswaide;
And showed them how, I never sought to build,
More forts for me, then were within their hearts;
Nor use more sterne constraints then their good wills,
To succour the necessities of my crown,
That I desired to ad to their contents
By all occasions, rather then subtract;
Nor wished I, that my treasury should flow,
With gold that swum in, in my subjects tears;
And then I found no man, that did not bless,
My few years reign, and their triumphant peace,
And do they now so soon, complain of ease?

He will not come?

O madness? he is come.

The duke is come my Lord:

Oh Sir, y^are welcome,
And fitly, to conduct me to my house;

I must beseech your Majesties excuse,
That (Ielouse of mine honour) I have used,
Some of mine own commandment in my stay,
And came not with your heighnesse soonest summons.

The faithfu'l servant right in holy wri^;
That said he would not come and yet he came:
But come you hither; I must tell you now,
Not the contempt you stood to in your stay,
But the bad ground that bore up your contempt,
Makes you arrive at no port, but repentance,
Despair, and ruin;

Be what port it will,
At which your will, will make me be arrived,
I am not come to justify my self,
To ask you pardon nor accuse my friends,

I^ you conceal my enemies you are one,
And then my pardon shall be worth your asking,
Or else your head be worth my cutting of.

Being friend and worthy fautor of my self,
I am no foe of yours, nor no empayrer,
Since he can no way worthily maintain
His Princes honour that neglects his own:
And if your will have been to my true reason,
(Maintaining still the truth of loyalty)
A check to my free nature and mine honour,
And that on your free justice I presum,d
To cross your will a little, I conceine,
You will not think this forfaite worth my head;

Have you maintained your truth of loyalty?
When since I pardoned foul ententions,
Resolving to forget eternally, What they apperd in,
And had welcomed you as the kind father doth his riotous son.
I can approve facts fowler then the intents,
Of deep disloyalty and highest treason;

May this right hand be thunder to my breast,
If I stand guilty of the slendrest fact,
Wherein the left of those two can be proved,
For could my tender conscience but have touched,
At any such unnatural relapse;
I would not with this confidence have run,
Thus headlong in the furnace of a wrath,
Blown, and thrice kindled: having way enough,
In my election both to shun and slight it.

You're grosely and vain gloriously abused,
There is no way in Sauoy nor in Spain,
To give a fool that hope of your escape,
And had you not (even when you did) arrived.
(With horror to the proudest hope you had)
I would have fetched you.

You must then have used.
A power beyond my knowledge, and a will,
Beyond your justice. For a little stay
More then I used would hardly have been worthy,
Of such an open expedition;
In which to all the censures of the world,
My faith and Innocence had been foully foyld;
Which (I protest) by heavens bright witnesses
That shine far, far, from mixture with our fears.
Retain as perfect roundness as their spheres;

Tis well my Lord, I thought I could have frighted
Your firmest confidence: some other time,
We will (as now in private) sift your actions.
And pour more then you think into the si^e,
Always reserving clemency and pardon
Upon confession, be you ne'er so foul,
Come lets clear up our brows shall we to tennis.

I my Lord if I may make the match.
The Duke Espernon and my self will play,
With you and Count Soissons;

I know my Lord.
You play well but you make your matches ill.

Come tis a match.

How like you my arrival?

I'll tell you as your friend in your ear.
You have given more preferment to your courage,
Then to the provident counsels of your friends.

I told him so my Lord, and much was grieved
To see his bold approach, so full of will.

Well I must bear it now, though but with th'head,
The shoulders bearing nothing.

By Saint Iohn,
Tis a good headless resolution.

O the most base fruits of a settled peace!
In men, I mean; worse then their dirty fields,
Which they manure much better them-selues:
For them they plant, and sow, and ere they grow,
Weedie, and choked with thorns, they grub and proyne,
And make them better, then when cruel war,
Frighted from thence the sweaty labourer:
But men them-selues, in steed of bearing fruits,
Grow rude, and foggy, ouer-growne with weeds,
Their spirits, and freedoms smootherd in their ease;
And as their tyrants and their ministers,
Grow wild in prosecution of their lusts,
So they grow prostitute, and lye (like whores)
Down and take up, to their abhord dishonours:
The friendless may be injured and oppressed;
The guiltless lead to slaughter, the deserver
Given to the beggar; right be wholly wronged,
And wrong be only honoured; till the strings
Of every mans heart, crack; and who will stir,
To tell authority, that it doth err.
All men cling to it, though they see their bloods
In their most dear associates and Allies,
Poured into kennels by it: and who dares
But look well in the breast, whom that impayres?
How all the Court now looks askew on me?
Go by without saluting, shun my sight,
Which (like a march sun) agues breeds in them,
From whence of late, 'twas health to have a beam.

Now none will speak to us, we thrust our selves
Into men's companies, and offer speech,
As if not made, for their diverted ears*
Their backs turned to us, and their words to others,
And we must like obsequious Parasites,
Follow their faces, wind about their persons,
For looks and answers: or be cast behind,
No more viewed then the wallet of their faults.

Yet here's one views me, and I think will speak*

My Lord, if you respect your name and race,
The preservation of your former honours,
Merits and virtues; humbly cast them all,
At the kings mercy; for beyond all doubt,
Your acts have thither driven them: he hath proofs
So pregnant, and so horrid, that to hear them,
Would make your valor in your very looks,
Give up your forces, miserably guilty:
But he is most loath (for his ancient love
To your rare virtues:) and in their empaire,
The full discouragement of all that live,
To trust or favour any gifts in Nature)
T'expose them to the light; when darkness may
Cover her own brood, and keep still in day,
Nothing of you but that may brooke her brightness:
You know what horrors these high strokes do bring,
Raised in the arm of an incensed King.

My Lord, be sure the King cannot complain
Of any thing in me, but my true service,
Which in so many dangers of my death,
May so approve my spotless loyalty;
That those quite opposite horrors you assure,
Must look out of his own ingratitude;
Or the malignant envies of my foes,
Who power me out in such a Styg^an flood,
To drown me in my self, since their desert^
Are far from such a deluge; and in me
Hid like so many rivers in the Sea.

You think I come to ^ound you; fare you well,

See see, not one of them will cast a glance
At our eclipsed faces;

They keep all to cast in admiration on the King:
For from his face are all their faces moulded.

But when a change comes; we shall see them all
Changed into water, that will instantly
Give look for look, as if it watched to greet us;
Or else for one, they'll give us twenty faces,
Like to the little specks on sides of glasses;

Is't not an easy loss to lose their looks,
Whose hearts so soon are melted?

But me thinks,
(Being Courtiers) they should cast best looks on men,
When they thought worst of them.

O no my Lord,
They ne'er dissemble but for some advantage;
They sell their looks, and shadows; which they rate
After their markets, kept beneath the State;
Lord what foul weather their aspects do threaten?
See in how grave a Brake he sets his vizard:
Passion of nothing; See, an excellent Gesture:
Now Courtship goes a ditching in their fore-heads;
And we are fallen into those dismal ditches;
Why even thus dreadfully would they be rapt,
If the Kings butterd eggs, were only spilt.

Lord Chancellor;

I my Lord;

And lord Vidame:

And not Byron? here's a prodigious change;

He cast no Beam on you;

Why now you see
From whence their countenances were copied.

See, here comes some news, I believe my Lord.

What says the honest captain of my guard?

I bring a letter from a friend of yours.

Tis welcome then:

Have we yet any friends?

More then ye would I think: I never saw,
Men in their right minds so unrighteous
In their own causes.

See what thou hast brought,
He wills us to retire our selves my Lord,
And makes as if it were almost too late,
What says my captain; shall we go or no?

I would your daggers point had kissed my heart,
When you resolved to come.

I pray the why?

Yet, doth that senseless Apopelxy dull you?
The devil or your wicked angel blinds you,
Bereaving all your reason of a man
And leaves you but the spirit of a horse,
In your brute nostrills: only power to dare.

Why, dost thou think, my coming here hath brought me
To such an unrecoverable danger?

Judge by the strange O^tents that have succeeded,
Since your arrival: the kind foul, the wild duck,
That came into your cabinet, so beyond
The sight of all your servants, or your self:
That flew about, and on your shoulder sat
And which you had so fed, and so attended;
For that dum love she showed you; just as soon,
As you were parted, on the sudden died.
And to make this no less then an Oftent;
Another that hath fortuned since, confirms it:
Your goodly horse Pastrana, which the Archduke,
Gave you at Bruxells; in the very hour,
You left your strength, fel-mad, and killed himself;
^e like chance it to the horse the great duke sent you:
^nd, with both these, the horse the duke of Lorraine,
Sent you at, Vinsie made a third presage,
Of some Inevitable fate that touched you,
Who like the other pined away and died,

All these together are indeed o^tentfull,
Which by another like, I can confirm:
The matchless Earl of Essex who some make,
(In their most sure diuinings of my death)
A parallel with me in life and fortune,
Had one horse like-wise that the very howre,
He suffered death, (being well the night before)
Died in his pasture. Noble happy beasts,
That die, not having to their wills to live:
They use no deprecations, nor complaints.
Nor suit for mercy: amongst them the Lion,
Serves not the Lion; nor the horse the horse,
As man serves man: when men show most their spirits,
In valor and their utmost dares to do;
They are compared to Lions, Wolves, and Bores,
But by conversion; None will say a Lyon,
Fights as he had the Spirit of a man.
Let me then in my danger now give cause,
For all men to begin that Simile.
For all my huge engagement, I provide me,
This short sword only; which if I have time,
To show my apprehendor, he shall use,
Power of ten Lions if I get not loose.

What shall we do with this unthankful man?
Would he (of one thing) but reveal the truth,
Which I have proof of, underneath his hand,
He should not taste my Justice. I would give,
Two hundred thousand crowns, that he would yield,
But such means for my pardon, as he should;
I never loved man like him: would have trusted,
My Son in his protection, and my Realm:
He hath deserved my love with worthy service,
Yet can he not deny, but I have thrice,
Saved him from death: I drew him of the foe.
At Fountain Francoise where he was engaged,
So wounded and so much amazd with blows,
That (as I played the soldier in his rescue,)
I was enforced to play the Marshall,
To order the retreat: because he said,
He was not fit to do it nor to serve me,

Your majesty hath used your utmost means,
Both by your own persuasions, and his friends
To bring him to submission, and confess
(With some sign of repentance) his foul fault:
Yet still he stands prefract and insolent.
You have in love and care of his recovery
Been half in labour to produce a course,
And resolution, what were fit for him.
And since so amply it concerns your crown^,
You must by law cut of, what by your grace,
You cannot bring into the state of safety,

Begin at the end my Lord and execute,
Like Alexander with Parmeni^.
Princes (you know) are Masters of their laws,
And may resolve them to what forms they please,
So all conclude in justice; in whose stroke,
There is one sort of manadge for the Great;
Another for inferior: The great Mother,
Of all productions (grave Necessity)
Commands the variation: And the profit,
So certenly fore-seene, commends the example.

I like not executions so informall,
For which my predecessors have been blamed:
My Subjects and the world shall know; my power,
And my authority by laws usual course
Dares punish; not the devilish heads of treason,
But there confederates be they ne'er so dreadful*
The decent ceremonies of my laws,
And their solemnities shall be observed,
With all their St^menes and Severity.

Where will your highness have him apprehended?

Not in the Castle (as some have advised)
But in his chamber;

Rather in your own,
Or coming out of it; for tis assured
That any other place of apprehension,
Will make the hard performance, end in blood.

To shun this likely-hood, my Lord tis best
To make the apprehension near your chamber;
For all respect and reverence given the place,
More then is needful, to chastise the person,
And save the opening of to many veins;
Is vain and dangerous.

Gather you your guard,
And I will find fit time to give the word,
When you shall seize on him and on D'Avuergne;

We will be ready to the death; (my Lord)

O thou that gouernst the keen swords of Kings,
Direct my arm in this important stroke,
Or hold it being aduanc't; the weight of blood,
Even in the basest subject, doth exact
Deep consultation, in the highest King;
For in one subject, deaths unjust affrights,
Passions, and pains, (though he be ne'er so poor)
Ask more remorse, then the voluptuous spleens
Of all Kings in the world, deserve respect;
He should be borne grey-headed that will bear
The sword of Empire; Judgment of the life,
Free state, and reputation of a man,
(If it be just and worthy) dwells so dark
That it denies access to Sun and Moon;
The souls eye sharpened with that sacred light,
Of whom the Sun it self is but a beam,
Must only give that judgment; O how much
Err those Kings then, that play with life and death,
And nothing put into their serious States,
But humour and their lusts! For which alone
Men long for kingdoms; whose huge counterpoise
In cares and dangers, could a fool comprise,
He would not be a King but would be wise;

Here comes the man, with whose ambitious head
(Cast in the way of Treason) we must stay
His full chase of our ruin and our Realm;
This hour shall take upon her shady wings
His latest liberty and life to Hell.

We are undone?

Whats that?

I heard him not;

Madam you're honoured much, that Duke Byron
Is so observant; Some, to cards with him,
You four, as now you come, sit to Primero;
And I will fight a battle at the Chess;

A good safe fight believe me; Other war
Thirsts blood, and wounds, and his thirst quenched, is thankles;

Lift, and then cut;

Tis right the end of lifting,
When men are lifted to their highest pitch,
They cut of those that lifted them so high.

Apply you all these sports so seriously?

They first were from our serious acts deuis'd,
The best of which, are to the best but sports;
(I mean by best, the greatest) for their ends,
In men that serve them best, are their own pleasures.

So, in those best men's services, their ends
Are their own pleasures; pass.

I vy't;

I see it;
And wonder at his frontles impudence;

How speeds your Majesty?

Well; the Duke instructs me
With such grave lessons of mortality
Forced out of our light sport; that if I loose,
I cannot but speed well.

Some idle talk.
For Courtship sake, you know does not amiss.

Would we might hear some of it.

That you shall,
I cast away a card now, makes me think,
Of the deceased worthy King of Spain.

What card was that?

The King of hearts (my Lord)
Whose name yields well the memory of that King,
Who was indeed the worthy King of hearts,
And had, both of his subjects hearts, and strangers,
Much more then all the Kings of Christendom.

He wun them with his gold.

He wun them chiefly,
With his so general Piety and Justice:
And as the little, yet great Macedon,
Was said with his humane philosophy,
To teach the rapefull Hyrcans, marriage;
And bring the barbarous Sogdians, to nourish,
Not kill their aged Parents; as before,
The incestuous Persians to reverence
Their mothers, not to use them as their wives;
The Indians to adore the Grecian Gods,
The Scythians to inter, not eat their Parents;
So he, with his divine Philosophy,
(Which I may call his, since he chiefly used it)
In Turkey, India, and through all the world,
Expelled profane idolatry; and from earth,
Raised temples to the highest: whom with the word,
He could not win, he justly put to sword,

He sought for gold, and Empire.

Twas Religion,
And her full propagation that he sought;
If gold had been his end, it had been hoarded,
When he had fetched it in so many fleets:
Which he spent not on Median Luxury,
Banquets, and women; Calidonian wine,
Nor dear Hyrcanian fishes* but emploid it,
To propagate his Empire; and his Empire
Desired t'extend so, that he might withal,
Extend Religion through it, and all nations,
Reduce to one firm constitution,
Of Piety, Justice, and one public weal;
To which end he made all his matchless subjects
Make tents their castles, and their garrisons;
True Catholikes contrimen; and their allies,
Heretikes, strangers, and their enemies.
There was in him the magnanimity.

To temper your extreme applause (my Lord)
Shorten, and answer all things in a word,
The greatest commendation we can give
To the remembrance of that King deceased;
Is, that he spared not his own eldest son,
But put him justly to a violent death,
Because, he sought to trouble his estates.

Is't so?

That bit (my Lord) upon my life,
Twas bitterly replied, and doth amaze him.

It is resolved,
A work shall now be done,
Which, (while learned Atlas shall with stars be crowned,
While the Ocean walks in storms his wavy round,
While Moons at full, repair thei^ broken rings:
While Lucifer fore-shewes Auroras springs,
And Ar^tos sticks above the Earth vnmou'd,
Shall make my realm be blessed, and me beloved;
Call in the count D' Auuergne.
A word my Lord.
Will you become as wilful as your friend?
And draw a mortal justice on your heads,
That hangs so black and is so loath to strike?
If you would utter what I know you know,
Of his inhumaine treason; on Strong Bar,
Betwixt his will, and duty were dissolud.
For then I know he would submit himself;
Think you it not as strong a point of faith,
To rectify your loyalties to me,
As to be trusty in each others wrong?
Trust that deceives our selves in treachery,
And Truth that truth conceals an open lie;

My Lord if I could utter any thought,
Instructed with disloyalty to you,
And might light any safety to my friend;
Though mine own heart came after it should out;

I know you may, and that your faith's affected
To one another, are so vain and faulce,
That your own Strengths will ruin you: ye contend,
To cast up rampires to you in the sea,
And strive to stop the waives that run before you,

All this my Lord to me is misery.

It is; I'll make it plain enouge. Believe me.
Come my Lord Chancellor let us end our mate.

You are undone my Lord;

Is it possible?

Play good my Lord: whom look you for?

Your mind,
Is not upon your Game,

Play, pray you play,

Enough, tis late, and time to leave our play,
On all hands; all forbear the room, my Lord?
Stay you with me; yet is your will resolved,
To dewty, and the maine bond of your life?
I swear (of all the Intrusions I have made,
Upon your own good, and continew'd fortunes)
This is the last; inform me yet the truth,
And here I vow to you, (by all my love;
By all means shown you, even to this extreme,
When all men else forsake you) you are safe.
What passages have slipped twixt count Fuentes,
You, and the Duke of Sauoye?

Good my Lord.
This nail is driven already past the head,
You much have ouerchargd, an honest man:
And I beseech you yield my Inocence justice,
(But with my single valor) against them all,
That thus have poisoned your opinion of me,
And let me take my vengeance by my sword:
For I protest, I never thought an Action,
More then my tongue hath vtterd.

Would twere true.
And that your thoughts and deeds, had fell no fouler.
But you disdain submission, not remembering,
That (in intents vrdgd for the common good)
He that shall hold his peace being chardgd to speak:
Doth all the peace and nerues of Empire break
Which on your conscience lie, adieu, good night.

Kings hate to hear what they command men speak,
Ask life, and to desert of death ye yield.
Where Medicines loath, it yrcks men to be heald,

Resign your sword (my Lord) the King commands it*

Me to resign my sword? what king is he,
Hath used it better for the realm then I?
My sword, that all the wars within the length,
Breadth and the whole dimensions of great France,
Hath sheathd betwixt his hilt and horrid point?
And fixed ye all in such a flourishing Peace?
My sword that never enemy could enforce,
Bereft me by my friends? Now, good my Lord,
Beseech the King, I may resign my sword,
To his hand only.

You must do your office,
The King commands you;

Tis in vain to strive,
For I must force it;

Have I n^ere a friend,
That bears another for me? All the Guard?
What will you kill me? will you smother here
His life that can command, and save in field,
A hundred thousand lives? For man-hood sake;
Lend something to this poor forsaken hand;
For all my service, let me have the honour
To dye defending of my innocent self,
And have some little space to pray to God.

Come, you are an Atheist Byron, and a Traitor,
Both foul and damnable; Thy innocent self?
No Leper is so buried quick in ulcers
As thy corrupted soul: Thou end the war?
And settle peace in France? what war hath raged,
Into whose fury I have not expos^d,
My person* which is as free a spirit as thine?
Thy worthy Father, and thy self, combined,
And arm^d in all the merits of your valors;
(Your bodies thrust amidst the thickest fight*)
Never were bristeld with so many battayles*
Nor on the foe have broke such woods of Lances
As grew upon my thigh; and I have Marshald;
I am asham^d to brag thus; where envy
And arrogance, their opposite Bulwark raise;
Men are allowed to use their proper praise;
Away with him;

Away with him? live I?
And here my life thus slighted? cursed man,
That ever the intelligensing lights
Betrayed me to men's whorish fellowships;
To Princes Moorish slaueries; To be made
The Anuille, on which only blows, and wounds
Were made the seed, and wombs of others honours;
A property for a Tyrant, to set up,
And puff down, with the vapour of his breath;
Will you not kill me?

No; we will not hurt you,
We are commanded only to conduct you
Into your lodging;

To my lodging? where?

Within the Cabinet of Arms my Lord:

What to a prison? Death; I will not go;

We'll force you then;

And take away my sword;
A proper point of force; ye had as good,
Have robbed me of my soul; Slaves of my Stars,
Partial and bloody; O that in mine eyes
Were all the Sorceress poison of my woes,
That I might witch ye headlong from your height,
And trample ou't, your excrable light.

Come will you go my Lord? this rage is vain;

And so is all your grave authority;
And that all France shall feel before I Die;
Ye see all how they use good Catholiques;

Farewell for ever; so have I desern'd
An exhalation that would be a Star
Fall when the Sun forsook it, in a sink.
Shoes ever overthrow that are too large,
And hugest canons, burst with overcharge.

My Lord I have commandment from the King,
To charge you go with me, and ask your sword;

My sword, who fears it? it was ne'er the death
Of any but wild Bores; I prithee take it;
Had thou aduertis'd this when last we met,
I had been in my bed, and fast asleep
Two hours a go; lead; i'll go where thou wilt:

See how he bears his cross, with his small strength,
On easier shoulders then the other Atlas.

Strength to aspire, is still accompanied
With weakness to endure; All popular gifts,
Are coullors, it will bear no vinegar;
And rather to adverse affai^es, betray;
Thine arm against them; his State still his best
That hath most inward worth; and that's best tried,
That neither glories, nor is glorified.

What shall we think (my Lords) of these new forces
That (from the King of Spain) hath past the Alps?
For which (I think) his Lord Ambassador,
Is come to Court, to get their pass for Flanders?

I think (my Lord) they have no end for Flanders;
Cont Maurice being already entered Brabant
To pass to Flanders, to relieve Ostend,
And th'Arch-duke full prepared to hinder him;
And sure it is that they must measure forces,
Which (ere this new force could have past the Alps)
Of force must be encountered.

Tis unlikely,
That their march hath so large an aim as Flanders;

As these times sort, they may have shorter reaches;
That would pierce further;

I have been aduertis'd,
That Cont Fuentes (by whose means this army
Was lately levied; And whose hand was strong,
In thrusting on Byrons conspiracy)
Hath caused these cunning forces to advance,
With coullor only to set down in Flanders;
But hath intentional respect to favour
And countnance his false Partisans in Bresse,
And friends in Burgondie; to give them hart
For the full taking of their hearts from me;
Be as it will; we shall prevent their worst,
And therefore call in Spaines Ambassador,
What would the Lord Ambassador of Spain?

First (in my masters name) I would beseech
Your highness hearty thought; That his true hand,
(Held in your vowed amities) hath not touched,
At any least point in Byrons offence;
Nor once had notice of a crime so foul;
Whereof, since he doubts not, you stand resolved,
He prays your Leagues continuance in this favour;
That the army he hath raised to march for Flanders,
May have safe passage by your frontier towns,
And find the River free, that runs by Rhosne.

My Lord my frontiers shall not be disarmed,
Till, by araignment of the Duke of Byron,
My scruples are resolved; and I may know
In what account to hold your Masters faith,
For his observance of the League betwixt us;
You wish me to believe that he is clear
From all the proiects caused by Cont Fuentes,
His special Agent; But where, deeds, pull down,
Words, may repair, no faith; I scarce can think
That his gold was so bounteously employed,
Without his special counsel, and command:
These faint proceedings in our Royal faiths,
Make subjects prove so faithless: If because,
We sit above the danger of the laws,
We likewise lift our Arms above their justice;
And that our heavenly Sovereign, bounds not us
In those religious confines; out of which
Our justice and our true laws are informed;
In vain have we expectance that our subjects,
Should not as well presume to offend their Earthly,
As we our Heavenly Sovereign? And this breach
Made in the Forts of all Society;
Of all celestial, and humane respects,
Makes no strengths of our bounties, counsels arms,
Hold out against their treasons; and the rapes
Made of humanity, and religion,
In all men's more then Pagan liberties,
Atheismes, and sla^eries, will derive their springs
From their base Presidents, copied out of kings.
But all this, shall not make me break the commerce,
Authorisde by our treaties; let your Army
Take the directest pass, it shall go safe.

So rest your highness ever; and assured
That my true Sovereign, lothes all opposite thoughts.

Are our dispatches made to all the kings,
Princes, and Potentates, of Christendom?
Ambassadors and Province governors,
T'enforme the truth of this conspiracy?

They all are made my Lord, and some give out,
That 'tis a blow given to religion,
To weaken it, in ruining of him,
That said, he never wished more glorious title,
Then to be called the scourge of Hugenots.

Others that are like favourers of the fault,
Said 'tis a politic advise from England,
To break the feared Javelins, both together*

Such shut their eyes to truth, we can but set
His lights before them, and his trumpet sound
Close to their ears; their partial wilfulness,
In resting blind, and deaf, or in peruerting,
What the^r most certain senses apprehend,
Shall nought discomfort our impartial Justice.
Nor clear the desperate fault that doth enforce it.

The Peers of France (my Lord) refuse t'appeare,
At the arraignment of the Duke Byron.

The Court may yet proceed; and so command it,
'Tis not their slackness to appear shall serve,
To let my will t'appeare in any fact.
Wherein the bouldest of them tempts my justice.
I am resolved, and will no more endure,
To have my subjects make what I command,
The subject of their oppositions,
Who euer-more slack their allegiance,
As kings forbear their penance; how sustain
Your prisoners their strange durance?

One of them,
(Which is the Count D'Avuergne) hath merry spirits,
Eats well, and sleeps: and never can imagine,
That any place where he is, is a prison;
Where on the other part, the Duke Byron,
Entered his prison, as into his grave,
Reiects all food, sleeps not, nor once lies down:
Fury hath armed his thoughts so thick with thorns,
That rest can have no entry: he disdains
To grace the prison with the slendrest show,
Of any patience, least men should conceive,
He thought his sufferance in the best sort fit;
And holds his bands so worthless of his worth,
That he empaires it, to vouchsafe to them,
The best part of the peace, that freedom owes it:
That patience therein, is a willing slavery.
And (like the Cammell) stoops to take the load:
So still he walks: or rather as a Bird,
Entered a Closet, which unawares is made,
His desperate prison (being pursued) amazd,
And wrathful beats his bre^t from wall to wall,
Assaults the light strikes down himself, not our,
And being taken, struggles, gaspes, and bites,
Takes all his takers strokings, to be strokes,
Abhors food, and with a savage will,
Frets, pines, and dyes, for former liberty.
So fares the wrathful Duke; and when the strength
Of these dumb rages, break out ^nto sounds,
He breaths defiance* to the world, and bids us,
Make our selves drunk, with the remaining blood
Of five and thirty wounds receiud in fight,
For v^ and ours; for we shall never brag,
That we have made his spirits check at death:
This rage in walks and words; but in his looks
He cements all: and prints a world of books,

Let others learn by him to curb their spleens,
Before they be curbed; and to cease their grudges:
Now I am settled in my Sun of height,
The circula^e splendour, and full Sphere of State.
Take all place up from envy: as the sun,
At height, and passive ore the crowns of men,
His beams diffusd, and downright pourd on them,
Cast but a little or no shade at all,
So he that is advanced above the heads,
Of all his Emulators, with high light,
Prevents their envies, and deprives them quite,

I wonder at the prisoners so long stay,

I think it may be made a question,
If his impacience will let him come.

Yes, he is now well stayed: Time and his Judgment,
Have cast his passion and his fever of.

His fever may be past, but for his passions,
I fear me we shall find it spiced to hotly,
With his old poulder.

He is sure come forth;
The Carosse of the Marquis of Rhosny
Conducted him along to the Arcenall,
Close to the Riuer-side: and there I saw him,
Enter a barge covered with Tapestry,
In which the kings guards waited and received him.
Stand by there clear the place,

The prisoner comes.
My Lord Laffin forbear your sight a while,
It may incense the prisoner: who will know,
By your attendance ne'er us, that your hand,
Was chief in his discovery; which as yet,
I think he doth not doubt,

I will forbear,
Till your good pleasures call me,

When he knows
And sees Laffin, accuse him to his face,
The Court I think will shake with his distemper.

You see my Lord, 'tis in the golden chamber.

The golden chamber? where the greatest Kings
Have thought them honoured to receive a place:
And I have had it; am I come to stand
In rank and habit here of men arraignd,
Where I have sat assistant, and been honoured,
With glorious title of the chiefest virtuous,
Where the Kings chief Solicitor hath said,
There was in France, no man that ever lived,
Whose parts were worth my imitation;
That, but mine own worth; I could imitate none:
And that I made my self inimitable,
To all that could come after; whom this Court
Hath seen to sit upon the Flower de Lice
In recompense of my renowned service.
Must I be sat on now, by petty Judges?
These Scarlet robes, that come to sit and fight
Against my life; dsmay my valor more,
Then all the bloody Cassocks Spain hath brought
To field against it.

To the bar my Lord.

Read the indictment.

Stay, I will invert
(For shortness sake) the form of our proceedings,
And out of all the points, the process holds,
Collect five principal, with which we charge you.

First you conferd with one, called Picote,
At Orleance borne, and into Flanders fled,
To hold intelligence by him with the Archduke,
And for two voyages to that effect,
Bestowd on him, five hundred, fifty crowns.

Next you held treaty with the Duke of Sauoy,
Without the Kings permission; offering him
All service and assistance against all men,
In hope to have in marriage, his third daughter.

Thirdly you held intelligence with the Duke,
At taking in of Borge, and other Forts;
Advising him, with all your prejudice,
Against the Kings army, and his royal person.

The fourth is; that you would have brought the King,
Before Saint Katherines Fort, to be there slain:
And to that end writ to the Governor,
In which you gave him notes to know his highness.

Fiftly, you sent Laffin to treat with Sauoy,
And with the Count Fuentes, of more plots,
Touching the ruin of the King and realm.

All this (my Lord) I answer, and deny:
And first for Picote; he was my prisoner,
And therefore I might well confer with him:
But that our conference tended to the Arch-duke,
Is nothing so; I only did employ him
To Captain La Fortune, for the reduction
Of Seurre, to the service of the King.
Who used such speedy diligence therein,
That shortly 'twas assut'd his Majesty,

Next, for my treaties with the Duke of Sauoy,
Roncas his Secretary, having made
A motion to me, for the Dukes third daughter,
I told it to the King; who having since,
Given me the understanding by La Force
Of his dislike; I never dreamd of it.

Thirdly, for my intelligence with the Duke,
Advising him against his Highness army:
Had this been true, I had not undertaken
Th'assault of Bourg, against the Kings opinion,
Having assistance but by them about me:
And (having won it for him) had not been
Put out of such a government so easily.

Fourthly, for my advise to kill the King;
I would beseech his Highness memory,
Not to let slip, that I alone dissuaded
His viewing of that Fort; informing him,
It had go^d marke-men; and he could not go,
But in exceeding danger, which advise
Diverted him; the rather, since I said,
That if he had desire to see the place
He should receive from me a Plot of it;
Offering to take it with five hundred men,
And I my self would go to the assault.

And lastly, for intelligences held,
With Sauoy and Fuentes: I confess,
That being denied to keep the Cytadell,
Which with incredible peril I had got,
And seeing another, honoured with my spoils,
I (...) so desperate that I found my spirit,
Enraged to any act, and wished my self,
Covered with blood.

With whose blood?

With mine own;
Wishing to live no longer, being denied,
With such suspicion of me, and set will,
To rack my furious humour into blood.
And for two months space, I did speak, and wright,
More then I ought; but have done ever well,
And therefore your enformers have been false.
And (with intent to tyrani^e) subornd.

What if our witnesses come face to face,
And justify much more then we allege?

They must be ^lings then, and men corrupted.

What think you of La Fin?

I hold La Fin,
An honoured Gentleman, my friend and kinsman.

If he then aggrauate, what we affirm,
With greater accusations to your face,
What will you say?

I know it cannot be.

Call in my Lord La Fin.

Is he so near?
And kept so close from me? can all the world,
Make him a treacher.

I suppose my Lord,
You have not stood within; without the ear
Of what hath here been urged against the Duke;
If you have heard it, and upon your knowledge
Can witness all is true, upon your soul;
Utter your knowledge.

I have heard my Lord,
All that hath past here; and upon my soul,
(Being charged so vrgently in such a Court)
Upon my knowledge I affirm all true;
And so much more: as had the prisoner lives
As many as his years, would make all forfaite.

O all ye virtuous powers, in earth and heaven,
That have not put on hellish flesh and blood,
From whence these monstrous issues are produced,
That cannot bear in execrable concord,
And one prodigious subject; contraries;
Nor (as the I'll that of the world admired)
Is severed from the world) can cut your selves
From the consent and sacred hermony
Of life, yet live; of honour, yet be honoured;
As this extravagant, and errant rog,
From all your fair Decorums, and just laws,
Finds power to do: and like a loathsome wen,
Sticks to the face of nature, and this Court;
Thicken this air, and turn your plaguy rage,
Into a shape as dismal as his sin.
And with some equal horror tear him of
From sight and memory: let not such a court,
To whose fame all the Kings of Christendom,
Now laid their ears; so crack her royal Trump,
As to sound through it, that here vanted justice
Was got in such an incest: is it justice
To tempt, and witch a man, to break the law,
And by that witch condemn him? let me draw
Poison into me with this cursed air,
If he bewitched me, and transformed me not;
He bit me by the ear, and made me drink
Enchanted waters; let me see an Image
That vtterd these distinct words; Thou shalt dye,
O wicked King; and if the devil gave him
Such power upon an Image; upon me
How might he tyrannize? that by his vows
And oaths so Stygian, had my Nerues and will,
In more awe then his own: what man is he
That is so high, but he would higher be?
So roundly sighted, but he may be found,
To have a blind side, which by craft, persude,
Confederacy, and simply trusted treason,
May wrest him past his Angel, and his reason?

Witchcraft can never taint an honest mind.

True gold, will any trial stand, untouched.

For colours that will stain when they are tried,
The cloth it self is ever cast aside.

Some-times, the very Gloss in any thing,
Will seem a stain; the fault not in the light,
Nor in the guilty object, but our sight.
My gloss, raised from the richness of my stuff,
Had too much splendour for the Owly eye,
Of politic and thankless royalty:
I did deserve too much; a pleurisy
Of that blood in me is the cause I dye.
Virtue in great men must be small and slight:
For poor stars rule, where she is exquisite,
Tis tyrannous, and impious policy,
To put to death by fraud and treachery;
Slight is then roy^ll, when it makes men live,
And if it urge faults, urges to forgive.
He must be guiltless, that condemns the guilty,
Like things, do nourish like, and not destroy them:
Minds must be sound, that judge affairs of weight,
And seeing hands, cut corosiues from your sight.
A Lord intelligencer? hangman-like,
Thrust him from human fellowship, to the deserts
Blow him with curses; shall your justice call
Treachery her Father? would you wish her weigh
My valor with the hiss of such a viper?
What I have done to shun the mortal shame,
Of so unjust an opposition;
My envious stars cannot deny me this,
That I may make my Judges witnesses;
And that my wretched fortunes have reserved
For my last comfort; ye all know (my Lords)
This body gasht with five and thirty wounds,
Whose life and death you have in your award,
Holds not a vein that hath not opened been,
And which I would not open yet again,
For you and yours; this hand that writ the lines
Alledgd against me; hath enacted still,
More good then there it only talked of ill.
I must confess my choler hath transferd
My tender spleen to all intemperate speech:
But reason ever did my deeds attend.
In worth of praise, and imitation,
Had I borne any will to let them loose,
I could have fleshed them with bad services,
In England lately, and in Swizerland:
There are a hundred Gentlemen by name,
Can witness my demeanour in the first;
And in the last Embassage I adiure
No other testimonies then the Seigneurs
De Vio, and Sillerie; who amply know,
In what sort, and with what fidelity
I bore my self; to reconcile and knit,
In one desire so many wills disioynde,
And from the Kings allegiance quite with-drawne.
My acts ask^ many men, though done by one.
And I were but one, I stood for thousands,
And still I hold my worth, though not my place:
Nor slight me, Judges, though I be but one,
One man, in one sole expedition,
Reduced into th'imperiall power of Rome,
Armenia, Pontus, and Arabia, Syria, Albania, and Iberia,
Conquered the Hyreanians; and to Caucasus,
His arm extended; the Numidians
And Africa to the shores Meridionall,
His power subjected; and that part of Spain
Which stood from those parts that Sertorius ruled,
Even to the Atlantique Sea he conquered.
The Albanian kings, he from the kingdoms chased,
And at the Caspian Sea, their dwellings placed:
Of all the Earths globe, by power and his advice,
The round-eyd Ocean saw him victor thrice:
And what shall let me (but your cruel doom,)
To add as much to France, as he to Rome,
And to leave Justice neither Sword nor word,
To use against my life; this Senate knows,
That what with one victorious hand I took,
I gave to all your uses, with another:
With this I took, and propped the falling kingdom,
And gave it to the King: I have kept
Your laws of state from fire; and you your selves,
Fixed in this high Tribunal; from whose height
The vengeful Saturnals of the League
Had hurled ye head-long; do ye then return
This retribution? can the cruel King,
The kingdom, laws, and you, (all saved by me)
Destroy their saver? what (aye me) I did
Adverse to this; this damned Enchanter did,
That took into his will, my motion;
And being banck-route both of wealth and worth,
Pursued with quarrels, and with suites in law;
Feared by the kingdom; threatened by the king;
Would raise the loathed dung-hill of his ruins,
Upon the monumental heap of mine:
Torn with possessed whirle-winds may he dye,
And dogs bark at his murthorous memory,

My Lord, our liberal sufferance of your speech,
Hath made it late; and for this Session,
We will dismiss you; take him back my Lord.

You likewise may depart.

What rests now
To be decreed against this great prisoner?
A mighty merit, and a monstrous cri^,
Are here concurrent; what by witnesses;
His letters and instructions, we have proved
Himself confesses, and excuses all
With witch-craft, and the only act of thought.
For witch-craft I esteem it a mere strength
Of rage in him conceived against his accuser;
Who being examinde hath denied it all;
Suppose it true, it made him false; But wills
And worthy minds, witch-craft can never force.
And for his thoughts that brake not into deeds;
Time was the cause, not will; the minds free act
In treason still is Iudgd as th'outward fact.
If his deserts have had a wealthy share,
In saving of our land from civil furies:
Manlius had so that fast the Capital;
Yet for his after traitorous factions,
They threw him head-long from the place he saved.
My definite sentence then, doth this import:
That we must quench the wilde-fire with his blood,
In which it was so traitorously inflamed;
Unless with it, we seek to licence the land,
The King can have no refuge for his life,
If his be quitted: this was it that made
Lewis th'eleuenth renounce his countrymen,
And call the valiant Scots out of their kingdom,
To use their greater virtues, and their faiths,
Then his own subjects, in his royal guarde:
What then conclude your censures?

He must dye.

Draw then his sentence, formally, and send him;
And so all treasons in his death attend him.

I joy you had so good a day my Lord.

I won it from them all: the Chancellor
I answered to his uttermost improuements:
I moved my other Judges to lament
My insolent misfortunes; and to loathe
The pocky soul, and state-bawde, my accuser,
I made reply to all that could be said,
So eloquently, and with such a charm,
Of grave enforcements, that me thought I sat,
Like Orpheus casting reigns on savage beasts;
At the arms end (as twere) I took my bar
And set it far above the high tribunal,
Where like a Cedar on Mount Lebanon,
I Grew, and made my judges show like Box-trees*
And Boxtrees right, their wishes would have made them,
Whence boxes should have grown, till they had struck
My head into the budget: but alas,
I held their bloody arms, with such strong reasons;
And (by your leave) with such a ^yrck of wit:
That I fetched blood upon the Chancelors cheeks,
Me thinks I see his countenance as he sat;
And the most lawierly delivery
Of his set speeches: shall I play his part?

For heavens sake, good my Lord.

I will in faith,
Behold a wicked man: A man debauched,
A man, contesting with his King; A man,
On whom (my Lords) we are not to connive,
Though we may condole: A man:
That Laesa Maiestate sought a lease,
Of Plus quam satis. A man that vi et armis
Assaild the King; and would per fas et nefas,
Aspire the kingdom: here was lawyers learning.

He said not this my Lord, that I have heard.

This or the like, I swear* I pen no speeches.

Then there is good hope of your wished acquitall.

Acquitall? they have reason; were I dead
I know they can not all supply my place;
Is't possible the King should be so vain,
To think he can shake me with fear of death?
Or make me apprehend that he intends it?
Thinks he to make his firmest men, his clouds?
The clouds (observing their Aerial natures)
Are borne aloft, and then to moisture hanged,
Fall to the earth; where being made thick, and cold,
They loose both al their heate, and levity;
Yet then again recovering heate and lightness,
Again they are aduanc't: and by the Sun
Made fresh and glorious; and since clouds are rapt
With these uncertainties: now up, now down,
Am I to flit so with his smile, or froune?

I wish your comforts, and incoradgments,
May spring out of your safety; but I hear
The King hath reasond so against your life,
And made your most friends yield so to his reasons,
That your estate is fearful.

Yield to his reasons?
O how friends reasons, and their freedoms stretch,
When power sets his wide tenters to their sides!
How, like a cure, by mere opinion,
It works upon our blood? like the ancient Gods
Are Modern Kings, that lived past bounds themselves,
Yet set a measure down, to wretched men*
By many Sophisms, they made good, deceit;
And, since they past in power, surpassed, in right:
When Kings wills pass; the stars winck, and the Sun,
Suffers eclips: rude thunder yields to them
His horrid wings: sits smooth as glass engazd,
And lightning sticks twixt heaven and earth amazd:
Men's faiths are shaken: and the pit of truth
O'reflowes with darkness, in which Justice sits,
And keeps her vengeance tied to make it fierce;
And when it comes, the increased horrors show,
Heavens plague is sure, though full of state, and slow.

O my dear Lord and brother,
O the Duke?

What sounds are these my Lord? hark, hark, me thinks
I hear the cries of people.

Tis for one,
Wounded in fight here at Saint Anthonies Gate:

Sfoote, one cried the Duke. I pray harken,
Again, or burst your selves with silence, no:
What contriman's the common headsman here?

He's a Bourgonian.

The great devil he is,
The bitter wizerd told me, a Burgonian,
Should be my headsman; strange concurrences:
S'death whose here?
O then I am but dead,
Now, now ye come all to pronounce my sentence.
I am condemned unjustly: tell my kinsfolks,
I die an innocent:
If any friend pity the ruin of the States sustainer
Proclaim my innocence; ah Lord Chancellor,
Is there no pardon? will there come no mercy?
I, put your hat on, and let me stand bare,
Show your self right a Lawyer.

I am bare,
What would you have me do?

You have not done,
Like a good justice; and one that knew
He sat upon the precious blood of virtue;
Y'aue pleased the cruel King, and have not borne,
As great regard to save as to condemn;
You have condemned me, my Lord Chancellor,
But God acquites me; he will open lay
All your close treasons against him, to colour
Treasons laid to his truest images;
And you my Lord shall answer this injustice,
Before his judgment seat: to which I summon
In one year and a day your hot apparanse;
I go before, by men's corrupted domes;
But they that caused my death, shall after come
By the imaculate justice of the highest.

Well, good my Lord* commend your soul to him,
And to his mercy, think of that, I pray.

Sir, I have thought of it, and every howre,
Since my affliction, asked on naked knees
Patience to bear your vnbeleeu^d Injustice:
But you, nor none of you have thought of him,
In my euiction: you're come to your benches,
With plotted judgements; your linked ears so loud,
Sing with prejudicate winds, that nought is heard,
Of all, pore prisoners urge against your award;

Passion, my Lord, transports your bitterness,
Beyond all colour; and your proper judgment:
No man hath known your merits more then I;
And would to God your great misdedes had been,
As much undone, as they have been concealde;
The cries of them for justice (in desert)
Have been so loud and piersing; that they deafened
The ears of mercy; and have labord more,
Your Judges to compresse then to enforce them.

We bring you here your sentence, will you read it.

For heavens sake, shame to use me with such rigour;
I know what it imports, and will not have,
Mine ear blown into flames with hearing it;
Have you been one of them that have condemned me?

My Lord I am your Orator: God comfort you.

Good Sir, my father loved you so entirely,
That if you have been one, my soul forgives you;
It is the King (most childish that he is
That takes what he hath given) that iniures me:
He gave grace in the first draught of my fault,
And now restaines it: grace again I ask;
Let him again vouchsafe it: send to him,
A post will soon return: the Queen of England,
Told me that if the wilful Earl of Essex,
Had used submission, and but asked her mercy,
She would have given it, past resumption;
She (like a gracious Princess) did desire
To pardon him: even as she praid to God,
He would let down a pardon unto her;
He yet was guilty, I am innocent:
He still refused grace, I importune it.

This asked in time (my Lord) while he besought it,
And ere he had made his severity known,
Had (with much joy to him) I know been granted;

No, no, his bounty, then was misery,
To offer when he knew 'twould be refused;
He treads the vulgar path of all advantage,
And loves men, for his vices, nor for their virtues;
My service would have quickn'd gratitude,
In his own death, had he been truly royal;
It would have stirred the image of a King,
Into perpetual motion; to have stood
Near the conspiracy restraind at Mantes;
And in a danger, that had then the Wolf,
To fly upon his bosom, had I only held
Intelligence with the conspirators;
Who stuck at no check but my loyalty,
Nor kept life in their hopes, but in my death;
The seege of Amiens, would have softened rocks,
Where covered all in showers of shot and fire,
I seemed to all men's eyes a fighting flame
With bullets cut, in fashion of a man;
A sacrifice to valor (impious King)
Which he will needs extinguish, with my blood;
Let him beware, justice will fall from heaven,
In the same form I served in that seege,
And by the light of that, he shall decern,
What good, my ill hath brought him; it will nothing,
Assure his State: the same quench he hath cast
Upon my life, shall quite put out his fame;
This day he loses, what he shall not find,
By all days he survives; so good a servant,
Nor Spain so great a foe; with whom, alas,
Because I treated am I put to death?
Tis put a politic gloss: my courage raised me,
For the dear price of five and thirty skarres,
And that hath ruined me, I thank my Stars*
Come i'll go where ye will, ye shall not lead me.

I fear his frenzy,
Never saw I man of such a spirit so amazed at death.

He alters every minute: what a vapor?
The strongest mind is to a storm of crosses.

O of what contraries consists a man!
Of what impossible mixtures? vice and virtue,
Corruption, and eternnesse, at one time,
And in one subject, let together, loosse?
We have not any strength but weakens us,
No greatness but doth crush us into air.
Our knowledges, do light us but to err,
Our Ornaments are Burdens: Our delightss
Are our tormentors; fiends that (raised in fears)
At parting shake our Roofs about our ears.

O virtue, thou art now far worse then Fortune*
H^r gifts stuck by the Duke, when thine are vanished,
Thou brau'st thy friend in Need: Necessity,
That used to keep thy wealth, contempt, thy love,
Have both abandoned thee in his extremes,
Thy powers are shadows, and thy comfort, dreams,

O real goodness if thou be a power!
And not a word alone, in human uses,
Appear out of this angry conflagration,
Where this great Captain (thy late Temple) burns,
And turn his vicious fury to thy flame,
From all earths hopes mere gilded with thy fame:
Let piety enter with her willing cross,
And take him on it; open his breast and arms,
To all the Storms, Necessity can breath,
And burst them all with his embraced death,

Yet are the ciuille tumults of his spirits,
Hot and outragiouse: not resolved, Alas,
(Being but one man) render the kingdoms dome;
He doubts storms, threatens, rues, complains, imp^ores,
Grief hath brought all his forces to his looks,
And nought is left to strengthen him within,
Nor la^ts one habit of those grieved aspects:
Blood expells paleness, paleness Blood doth chase,
And sorrow errs through all forms in his face,

So furiouse is he, that the Politic law,
Is much to seek, how to enact her sentence:
Authority backed with arms, (though he unarmed)
Abhors his fury, and with doubtful eyes,
Views on what ground it should sustain his ruins,
And as a Savage Bore that (hunted lunge,
Assayld and set up) with his only eyes,
Swimming in fire keeps of the baying hounds,
Though sunk himself, yet houlds his anger up,
And snowes it fo^th in foam; houlds firm his stand,
Of Batta^ouse Bristles: feeds his hate to die,
And whets his tusks with wrathful majesty.
So fares the furious Duke, and with his looks,
Doth teach death horrors; makes the hangman learn
New habits for his bloody impudence;
Which now habitual horror from him drives,
Who for his life shunns death, by which he lives,

Will not your Lordship have the Duke distinguisht
From other prisoners? where the order is,
To give up men condemned into the hands
Of the executioner; he would be the death,
Of him that he should die by, ere he suffered,
Such an abiection,

But to bind his hands*
I hold it passing needful,

Tis my Lord,
And very dangerous to bring him loose.

You will in all despair and fury plunge him,
If you but offer it.

My Lord by this,
The prisoners Spirit is some-thing pacified,
And tis a fear that th'offer of those bands,
Wou^d breed fresh furies in him, and disturb,
The entry of his soul into her peace,

I would not that, for any possible danger,
That can be wrought, by his unarmed hands,
And therefore in his own form bring him in,

Where shall this weight fall? on what rhegion,
Must this declining prominent pour his lode?
I'll break my bloods high billows against my stars,
Before this ^ill be shook into a flat,
All France shall feel an earthquake; with what murmur,
This world shrinks into Chaos?

Good my Lord,
Forgo it willingly; and now resign,
Your sensual powers entirely to your soul.

Horror of death, let me alone in peace,
And leave my soul to me, whom it concerns;
You have no charge of it; I feel her free,
How she doth rowze, and like a Falcon stretch
Her silver wings; as threatening death, with death;
At whom I joyfully will cast her off:
I know this body but a sink of folly,
The ground-work, and raised frame of woe and frailty*
The bond, and bundle of corruption;
A quick corse, only sensible of grief,
A walking sepulcher, or household thief:
A glass of air, broken with less then breath,
A slave bound face to face, to death, till death:
And what said all you more? I know, besides
That life is but a dark and stormy night,
Of senseless dreams, terrors, and broken sleeps;
A Tyranny, devising pains to plague
And make man long in dying, racks his death;
And death is nothing, what can you say more?
I bring a long Globe, and a little earth,
Am seated like earth betwixt both the heavens:
That if I rise; to heaven I rise; if fall
I likewise fall to heaven; what stronger faith,
Hath any of your souls? what say you more?
Why lose I time in these things? talk of knowledge,
It serves for inward use. I will not die
Like to a Clergy man; but like the Captain,
That prayed on horse-back and with sword in hand,
Threatend the Sun, commanding it to stand;
These are but ropes of sand.

Desire you then,
To speak with any man?

I would speak with La Force, and Saint Blancart.

Do they fly me?
Where is Pr^u^st, controwler of my house?

Gone to his house ith country three days since.

He should have stayed here, he keeps all my blancks*
O all the world forsakes me! wretched world,
Consisting most of parts, that fly each other:
A firmness, breeding all inconstancy,
A bond of all disiunction; like a man
Long buried, is a man that long hath lived;
Touch him, he falls to ashes; for one fault,
I forfeit all the fashion of a man;
Why should I keep my soul in this dark light?
Whose black beams lighted me to loose my self.
When I have lost my arms, my fame, my wind,
Friends, brother, hopes, fortunes, and even my fury?
O happy were the man, could live alone,
To know no man, nor be of any known!

My Lord, it is the manner once again
To read the sentence?

Yet more sentences?
How often will ye make me suffer death?
As ye were proud to hear your powreful domes?
I know and feel you were the men that gave it,
And die most cruelly to hear so often
My crimes and bitter condemnation vrdg'd:
Suffize it, I am brought here; and obey,
And that all here are privy to the crimes.

It must be read my Lord, no remedy.

Read, if it must be, then, and I must talk.

The process being extraordinarily made and examined by the Court, and
chambers assembled --

Condemned for depositions of a witch?
The common deposition, and her whore
To all whorish perjuries and treacheries.
Sure he called up the devil in my spirits,
And made him to usurp my faculties:
Shall I be cast away now he's cast out?
What Justice is in this? dear countrymen,
Take this true evidence, betwixt heaven and you*
And quit me in your hearts.

Go on.

Against Charles G^ntalt of Byron: knight of both the orders; Duke of Byron,
peer and marshall of France; Governor o^ Burgondy, accused of treason in a
sentence was given the 22. of this month, condemning the said Duke of Byron of
heigh treason, for his direct conspiracies against the kings person;
enterprises against his state. --


That is most false; let me for ever be,
Depriued of heaven, as I shall be of earth,
If it be true: know worthy country-men.
These two and twenty months I have been clear,
Of all atempts against the king and state.

Treaties and trecheries with his Enemies, being marshall of the Kings army,
for reparation of which crimes they depriued him of all his estates, honours and
dignities, and condemned him to lose his head upon a Scaffold at the Greaue


The Greaue? had that place stood for my dispatch
I had not yielded; all your forces should not,
Stire me one foot; wild horses should have drawn,
My body peece-meale, ear you all had brought me.

Declaring all his goods moveable and inmoueable whatsoever to be confiscate to
the King: the Signeury of Byron to loose the title of Duchy and Peer for ever.


Now is your form contented,


I my Lord
And I must now entreat you to deliver,
Your order up, the king demands it of you.

And I restore it, with my vow of safety,
In that world, where both he and I are one,
I never brake the oath I took to take it,

We will now my Lord we'll take our latest leaves,
Beseeching heaven to take as clear from you,
All sense of torment in your willing death:
All love and thought of what you must leave here,
As when you shall aspi^e-heauens highest sphere,

Thanks to your Lordship and let me pray to,
That you will hold good censure of my life,
By the clear witness of my soul in death,
That I have never past act against the King,
Which if my faith had let me undertake,
They had been three years since, amongst the dead;

Your soul shall find his safety in her own,
Call the executioner*

Good sir I pray,
Go after and beseech the Chancellor
That he will let my body be interrd,
Amongst my predecessors at Byron:

I go my Lord:

Go, go? can all go thus?
And no man come with comfort? farewell world:
He is at no end of his actions blessed,
Whose ends will make him greatest, and not best;
They tread no ground, but ride in air on storms,
That follow State, and hunt their empty forms;
Who see not that the Valleys of the world,
Make even right with the Mountains? that they grow
Green, and lye warmer; and ever peaceful are,
When Clouds spit fire as Hills, and burn them bare?
Not Valleys part, but we should imitate Streams,
That run below the Valleys, and do yield
To every Mole-hill; every Bank embrace
That checks their Currants; and when Torrents come,
That swell and raise them past their natural height,
How mad they are, and trubl'd? like low strains
With Torrents crowned, are men with Diademes;

My Lord tis late; wilt please you to go up?

Up? tis a fair preferment, ha ha ha,
There should go shouts to vp-shots; not a breath
Of any mercy, yet? come, since we must;
Whose this?

The executioner, my Lord;

Death slave, down, or by the blood that moves me
I'll pluck thy throat out; go, I'll call you straight,
Hold boy; and this,

Soft boy i'll bar you that

Take this then, yet I pray thee, that again
I do not joy in sight of such a Pageant
As presents death; Though this life have a curse;
Tis better then another, that is worse;

My Lord, now you are blind to this worlds sight,
Look upward to a world of endless light;

I, I, you talk of upward still to others,
And downwards look, with headlong eyes your selves.
Now come you up sir; But not touch me yet;
Where shall I be now?

Here my Lord;

Wheres that?

There, there, my Lord;

And where, slave, is that there?
Thou see I see not? yet I speak as I saw;
Well, now is't fit?

Kneel, I beseech your Grace,
That I may do mine office with most order;

Do it, and if at one blow thou art short,
Give one and thirty, I'll endure them all.
Hold; stay a little; comes there yet no mercy?
High Heaven curse these exemplary proceedings,
When Justice fails, they sacrifice our example;

Let me beseech you, I may cut your hair;

Out ugly Image of my cruel Justice;
Yet wilt thou be before me, stay my will,
Or by the will of Heaven I'll strangle thee;

My Lord you make to much of this your body,
Which is no more your own;

Nor is it yours;
I'll take my death, with all the horrid rites
And representments, of the dread it merits;
Let tame Nobility, and numbed fools
That apprehend not what they undergo,
Be such exemplary, and formal sheep;
I will not have him touch me, till I will;
If you will needs rack me beyond my reason,
Hell take me, but I'll strangle half that's here,
And force the rest to kill me* I'll leap down
If but once more they tempt me to despair;
You wish my quiet, yet give cause of fury:
Think you to set rude winds upon the Sea,
Yet keep it calm? or cast me in a sleep,
With shaking of my chains about mine ears?
O honest Soldiers, you have seen me free,
From any care, of many thousand deaths!
Yet, of this one, the manner doth amaze me.
View, view, this wounded bosom, how much bound
Should that man make me, that would shoot it through;
Is it not pity I should lose my life,
By such a bloody and infamous stroke?

Now by thy spirit, and thy better Angel,
If thou were clear, the Continent of France,
Would shrink beneath the burden of thy death,
Ere it would b^ are it;

Whose that?

I say well:
And clear your Justice, here is no ground shrinks,
If he were clear it would: And I say more,
Clear, or not clear, If he with all his foulness,
Stood here in one Scale, and the Kings chief Minion,
Stood in another, here: Put here a pardon,
Here lay a royal gift, this, this, in merit,
Should hoise the other Minion into air:

Hence with that frantic:

This is some poor witness
That my desert, might have out-weighed my forfeyt:
But danger, hants desert, when he is Greatest;
His hearty ills, are proved out of his glances,
And Kings suspicions, needs no Balances;
So her's a most decreetall end of me:
Which I desire, in me, may end my wrongs;
Commend my love, I charge you, to my brothers,
And by my love, and misery command them,
To keep their faiths that bind them to the King,
And prove no stomakers of my misfortunes;
Nor come to Court, till time hath eaten out,
The blots, and skarres of my opprobrious death;
And tell the Earl, my dear friend of D'Auergne,
That my death utterly were free from grief,
But for the sad loss of his worthy friendship;
And if I had been made for longer life,
I would have more deserved him in my service,
Beseeching him to know I have not used
One word in my arraignment; that might touch him,
Had I no other want then so ill meaning:
And so farewell for ever: never more
Shall any hope of my reuiuall see me;
Such is the endless exile of dead men.
Summer succeeds the spring; Autumn the Summer,
The Frosts of Winter, the fallen leaves of Autumn:
All these, and all fruits in them yearly fade,
And every year return: but cursed man,
Shall never more renew, his vanished face;
Fall on your knees, then Statists ere ye fall,
That you may rise again: knees bent too late,
Stick you in earth like statues: see in me
How you are powered down from your clearest heavens;
Fall lower yet: mixed with the vnmoued center,
That your own shadows may no longer mock ye*
Struck, struck, O struck;
Fly, fly commanding soul,
And on thy wings for this thy bodies breath,
Bear the eternal victory of death.


