WITHOVT the Gate which is towards the West, where the street ascends to
Heroites Hospital, did an Arch arise of height.... of breadth.... square with
the battlements and inmost side of the towne-wall, the face looking to the
Castle, represented a City situated on a rock, which with pointed Cliffs,
Shrubs, Trees, Herbs, and Verdure, did appear in perspective upon the
battlements; in great Letters was written, (...)

As Ptolomeus names it: in a less and different Character was written.

Castra Puellarum. And under that in a different colour M. Edenbourgh: The
Rock was inscribed Montagna de dia mant, after two Italians which gave that
name to the greatest Rock near Edenborough, and Cardan, who in his book, De
rerum varietate, highly priseth the Diamond of the Rock.

In the Freeze under the Town was written Ingredere ac nostris succeed
penatibus.

Upon one side of the Town was drawn the flood Lithus, in a Mantle of
sea-greene or water colour, a Crown of sedges and reeds on his head with long
locks; his arm leaned upon an earthen pot, out of which water and fishes
seemed to run forth, in his hand he held a bundle of flowers, over him was
written Picciol Mafamoso.

On the other side of the Town appeared Neptune bestriding his Hippocampius,
the Nereides about him, his Trident in his hand, the word over him was, Adsum
Defensor vbi{que}.

The Theater under the Arch was a Mountain, upon which appeared the Genius of
the town represented by a Nymph; she was attired in a sea-greene velvet
Mantle, her sleeves and under robe of blew tissue, with blew Buskins on her
feet, about her neck she wore a chain of Diamonds, the dressing of her head
represented a Castle with turrets, her locks dangled about her shoulders; upon
her right hand stood Religion all in white taffeta, with a blew Mantle seeded
with stars, a Crown of stars on her head, to show from whence she is, she
leaned her on a Scutcheon, where upon was a Cross with the word, Coelo
descendet ab alto.

Beneath her feet lay Superstition trampled, a woman blind, in old and worn
garments, her Scutcheon had -- Ultra Sauromatas. On the lefthand of this Nymph
stood Justice, a woman in a red damask Mantle, her under garments Cloth of
silver, on her head a Crown of Gold, on a Scutcheon she had Balances and a
Sword drawn. The word was, Fida regnorum Custos.

Beneath the feet of Justice lay Oppression trampled, a person of a fierce
aspect, in arms but broken all and scattered. The word was, Tenente Carolo
Terras.

The Mountain at the approach of the Kings Majesty moved, and the Nymph thus
spake unto him.

Sir, If nature could suffer Rocks to move, and abandon their natural places,
this Town founded on the strength of Rocks (now by all cheering rays of your
Majesties presence, taking not only motion, but life) had with her Castle,
Temples, and Houses moved towards you, and besought you to acknowledge her
yours, and her indwellers your most humble and affectionate Subjects, and to
believe how many souls are within her circuits, so many lives are devoted to
your sacred Person and Crown; and here Sir, she offers by me, to the Altar of
your glory, whole Hecatombes of most happy desires, praying all things may
prove prosperous unto you, that every virtue and heroic grace which make a
Prince eminent, may with a long and blissed governament attend you; your
Kingdoms flourishing abroad with Baize, at home with Olives. Presenting you
Sir, (who art the strong key of this little world of Great Britain) with these
keys, which cast up the gates of her affectioun, and design you power to open
all the springs of the hearts of these her most loyal citizens. Yet this almost
not necessary, for as the Rose at the far appearing of the Morning Star
displays and spreads her purples, so at the very noise of your happy
return to this your native country their hearts (if they could have shined
without their breasts) were with joy and fair hopes made spacious, nor did
they ever in all parts feel a more comfortable heate, then the glory of your
presence at this time darte^h upon them.

The old forget their age, and look fresh and young at the sight of so
gracious a Prince, the young bear a part in your welcome, desiring many years
of life, that they may serve you long, all have more joys then tongues; for as
the words of other Nations far go beyond and surpass the affection of their
hearts; So in this Nation the affection of their hearts is far above all they
can express by words. Deign then, Sir, from the highest of Majesty, to look
down on their lowness, and embrace it, accept the homage of their humble
minds, accept their grateful zeal, and for deeds, accept that great good-will
which they have ever carried to the high deserts of your Ancestors, and shall
ever to your own, and your Royal race, Whilst these Rocks shall be
overshadowed with buildings, these buildings inhabited by men, and while men
be endued either with counsel or courage, or enjoy any piece of reason,
sense, or life.

The keys being delivered in a basin of silver, and his Majesty received by
the Magistrates, under a Pale of state, where the street ascends proudest,
beginning to turn towards the Gate of the old Town, he meets with an Arch,
the height of which was.... the breadth.... the frontispiece of this
represented, in Land-skip, a country wild, full of Trees, Bushes, Bores, white
Kine; along the which appeared one great Mountain to extend it self, with the
word upon it, Grampius.

In some parts was seen the Sea enriched with Corrall, and the Mussell that
conceives the pearl; farther off in an Island appeared a flaming Mountain
with the word, Tibi serviet vltima Thule.

On the Chapter was a Lyon rampant, the word Imperat ipse sibi.

On the Land-skip was Caledonia in great Letters written, and part represented
a number of men in Arms flying and retiring with S. P. Q. R. on their
Ensigns, which show them to be Romanes; an other part had a number of naked
persons flying and enchained, with the figures of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, drawn on their skins, and shapes of flowers, which represented the
Picts, under the Romanes, and under-written, Fracti bello fatisque repulsi.

A Courten falling, the Theater discovered a Lady attired in tissue, her hair
was dressed like a Cornucopia, two chains, one of gold, another of pearl
baudricke ways, hung down her shoulders, a Crown of gold hung from the Arch
before her, fhee represented the Genius of Caledonia; near unto her stood a
woman with an Olive-coloured mask, long black Locks waving over her back,
her attire was of divers coloured feathers, which show her to be an American,
and to represent new Scotland, the Scutcheon in her hand bare the Arms of new
Scotland, with this word, Auspicijs CAROLE magne tuis.

His Majesty coming near, was welcomed with these verses by Caledonia.

THe heavens have heard our vows, our just desires
Obtained are, no higher now aspires
Our wishing thoughts, since to his native clime
The flower of Princes, honour of his time,
Encheering all our Dales, Hills, Forests, streamos,
(As Phoebus doth the Summer with his beams)
Is come, and radiant to us in his train
The golden age and virtues brings again;
Prince so much longed for, how thou becalm'st
Minds easelesse anguish, every care embalm'st
With the sweet odours of thy presence! now
In swelling tides joys every where do flow
By thine approach, and that the world may see
What unthought wonders do attend on thee,
This Kingdoms Angel I, who since that day
That ruthless Fate thy Parent rest away,
And made a Star, appeared not any where,
To gratulate thy coming saving here.
Hail Princes Phoenix, Monarch of all hearts,
Sovereign of love and justice, who imparts
More then thou can receive; to thee this Crown
Is due by birth; but more, it is thine own
By just desert; and ere another brow
Then thine should reach the same, my flood should flow
With hot vermilion gore, and every Plain
Levell the hills with Carcases of slain,
This I'll become a red Sea: Now how sweet
Is it to me, when love and Laws thus meet
To girt thy Temples with this Diadem,
My nurselings sacred fear, and dearest Gem.
No Roman, Saxon, Pict by sad alarms
Could this acquire and keep; the heavens in arms
From us repelld all perils, nor by wars
Ought here was won but gaping wounds and scars,
Our Lions Climacteric now is past,
And crowned with Baize, he rampant's free at last.
Here are no Serean fleeces, Peru gold,
Auroras gems, nor wares by Tyrians sold;
Towns swell not here with Babylonian walls,
Nor Nero's sky-resembling gold-seel'd halles,
Nor Memphis spires, nor Quinzayes arched frames,
Captiving Seas, and giving Lands their names:
Faith (milke-white Faith) of old beloved so well,
Yet in this corner of the World doth dwell
With her pure Sisters, Truth, Simplicity;
Here banished Honour bears them company,
A Mars-adorning brood is here, their wealth
Sound minds and bodies, and of as sound a health:
Walls here are men, who fence their Cities more
Then Neptune when he doth in mountains roar,
Doth guard this Isle, or all those Forts and Towers
Amphions Harp raised about Thebes bowers,
Heavens arch is of their roof, the pleasant shed
Of Oak and Plain oft serves them for a bed.
To suffer want, soft pleasure to despise,
Run over panting Mountains crowned with Ice,
Rivers overcome, the wastest Lakes appall
(Being to themselves, Oars, Steerers, ship and all)
As their renown; a brave all-daring race
Courageous, prudent, doth this Climate grace:
Yet the firm Base on which their glory stands,
In peace true hearts, in wars is valiant hands,
Which here (great King) they offer up to thee,
Thy worth respecting as thy pedigree:
Though much it be to come of Princely stem,
More is it to deserve a Diadem.
Vouchsafe blessed people, ravished here with me,
To think my thoughts, and see what I do see,
A Prince all gracious, affable, divine,
Meek, wise, just, valiant, whose radiant shine
Of virtues (like the Stars about the Pole
Guilding the night) enlightneth every soul
Your Sceptre sways, a Prince borne in this age
To guard the innocents from Tyrants rage,
To make Peace prosper, Justice to reflowre,
In desert hamlet as in Lordly bower;
A Prince, that though of none he stand in awe,
Yet first subjects himself to his own law,
Who joys in good, and still as right directs
His greatness measures by his good effects,
His Peoples pedestal, who rising high
To grace this throne make Scotlands name to fly
On Halcyons wings (her glory which restores)
Beyond the Ocean to Columbus shores,
Gods sacred picture in this man adore,
Honour his valour, zeal, his piety more,
High value what ye hold him, deep engrave
In your hearts heart, from whom all good ye have:
For as Moons splendour from her brother springs,
The peoples welfare streams from their Kings.
Since your loves object doth immortal prove,
O love this Prince with an eternal love,
Pray that those Crowns his Ancestors did wear,
His temples long (more orient) may bear.
That good he reach by sweetness of his sway,
That even his shadow may the bad affray,
That heaven on him what he desires bestow,
That still the glory of his greatness grow,
That your begun felicities may last,
That no Orion do with storms them blast,
That victory his brave exploits attend,
East, West, or South do he his Forces bend,
Till his great deeds all former deeds surmount,
And quail the Nimbrot of the Hellespont;
That when his well-spent care all care be calms,
He may in peace sleep in a shade of Palms;
And rearing up fair Trophies, that heavens may
Extend his life to worlds extremest day.
The other face of the arch show men, women, and children, dancing after
diverse postures with many Musical Instruments, the word above them in great
Characters was, HILARITATI PVBLICAE. S.P.Q.E.P.

Where the great street divides it self in two, upon the old Foundations,
inhabited by the Goldsmiths and Glovers, did an Arch arise of height... of
breadth... upon the Chapter of his Arch was a Crown set with this word Nec
primam visa est similem, nec habere secundam.

The face of the Arch had an Aback or Square with this inscription, Carolo,
Mag. Brit. Reg. Iacobi filio Princi: optimo, maximo, libert. vindici.
Restauratori legum, fundatori quietis, Conservatori Eccleclesiae, Regni ultra
Oceanum in Americam Promotori. S.P.Q. E.P.

Amidst flourishes of Arms, as Helmes, Lanses, Corslets, Pikes, Muskets,
Bows, Cannons, at the one side of the aback stood Mars, the word by him was,
Patrium cognoscite Numen.

At the other side, amongst flourishes of instruments of peace, as Harps,
Lutes, Organs, Cisseres, Hauboises, stood Minerva, her word, Quo sine me.

Upon each side was Arms of the two Kingdoms, and an Intertexture of Crowns
with a word, Nexus foelix.

Upon the Freeze was written -- Genus immortale manet, multos{que} per annos
Stat fortuna domus avi numerantur avorum.


At the approach of the King, the Theater (a Courten drawn) manifested
Mercury, with his feathered hat, and his Caduceus, with an hundred and seven
Scottish Kings, which he had brought from the Elisian fields, Fergus the first
had a speech in Latin, which is here desired. -- Upon the Cross of the Town
was a show of Panisques, Bacchus crowned with Ivy, and naked from the
shoulders up, bestroad a Hogshead, by him stood Silenus, Silvanus, Pomona,
Venus, Ceres in a straw coloured mantle, embroidered with ears of Corn, and a
dressing of the same on her head, should have delivered a speech to the King
but was interrupted by the Satyrs; she bare a Scutcheon, upon which was,
Sustulit exutis vinclis ad la palmas.

Meaning by the King she was free of the great abuse of the Tithes in this
Country.

In the midst of the street, there was a Mountain dressed for Parnassus,
where Apollo and the Muses appeared, and ancient Worthies of Scotland, for
learning was represented; such as Sedullius, Ioannes, Duns, Bishop Ecphistoun
of Aberdeen, Hector Boes, Ioannes Major, Bishop Sawen Douglasse, Sir David
Lindsay, Georgius Buchananus; the word over them was Fama super ether noti.

The Muses were clad in varying taffetas, cloth of silver and purl;
Melpomene, though her under vesture was black, yet her Buskines and Mantle
were crimson, they were distinguished by the Scutcheons they bare, and more
properly then by their flats; every one had a word, the first was Clio, who
bare Si vis omniatibi subjici, subjice te rationi.

Which was the Kings Symbol when he was Prince.

Melpomene had the Symbol of King Iames,

Parcere subiectis, debellare superbos.
Thalia had that of Queen Anna,

Mia Magrandezza del excelso.
Euterpe had the word of Prince Henry,

Fax gloria mentis honestae.
TERPSICHORE.

Regni clementia custos.
ERATO.

Parendo imperat.
CALLIOPE.

Aurea sors regum est, velle posse bear.
VRANIA.

Non vinci potis est, no{que} fingi regia virtus.
POLYHYMNIA.

Patiens fit principis auris.
Apollo sitting in the midst of them was clad in Crimson taffeta, covered with
some purl of gold, with a bowdricke like the Raine-bow, a Mantle of tissue
knit together above his left shoulder, his head was crowned with Laurel, with
locks long and like gold; he presented the King with a book.

Where the great street contracts it self, at the descent of the Eastern
Gate of the Town, did an Arch arise of height.... of breadth.... the face of
this represented a Heaven, into the which appeared his Majesties ascendant
Virgo, she was beautified with six and twenty stars, after that order that
they are in their constellatioune.

One of them being of the first magnitude, the rest of the third and fourth; by
her was written Habet quantum ether habebat.

Beneath on the earth lay the Titanes prostrate, with Mountains over them, as
when they attempted to bandy against the gods; their word was on the Freeze.

Moniti no temnite divos. The Chapter show the three Parcae, where was written,
Thy life was kept till these three Sisters spun
Their threads of gold, and then thy life begun.


The Stand discovered the seven Planets sitting on a Throne, and Endymion.
Saturne in a sad blew Mantle embroidered with golden flames, his Girdle was like
a Snake biting his tail, his Scutcheon bare Spondeo digna tuis ingentibus
omnia coeptis.

Iupiter was in a Mantle of silver, embroidered with Lillies and Violets, his
Scutcheon bare Sat mihi fit Coelum, post haec tua fulmina sunto.

Mars, his hair and beard red, a Sword at his side, had his robe of deep
crimson Taffeta, embroidered with Wolves and Horses, his head bare a Helmet,
and his Scutcheon, Per tela, per hostess.

The Sun had a Crown of flowers on his head, as Marigolds, and Panses, and a
Tissue Mantle, his Scutcheon bare, Imperium sine fine dedi.

Venus had the attire of her head rising like parts in a Coronet, and roses,
she was in a mantle of green Damask embroidered with Doves, instead of her
Caestus she wore a scarf of diverse colours, her word Nullas recipit tua
gloria metas.

Mercury had a Dressing on his head of parti-coloured flowers, his Mantle
parti-coloured, his word Fata aspera rumpes.

The Moon had the attire of her head, like an half Moon or Crescent of
pearl; her Mantle was sad Damasse Frenzend with silver, embroidered with
Chamelions and Gourdes, her word Consequitur quodcun{que} petit.

At a corner of the Theater, from out a Verdant Grove came Endymion, he was
apparelled like a Shepherd in a long Coat of crimson velvet coming over his
knee; he had a wreath of flowers upon his head, his hair was curled, and
long; in his hand he bare a S^eep-hooke, on his legs were Buskins of gilt
Leather: These before the King had this actioune.

ROws'd from the Latmian Cave, where many years
That Empress of the lowest of the Sphaenes,
Who cheers the night, and kept me hid, apart
From mortal wights, to ease her love-sicke heart,
As young as when she did me first enclose
As fresh in beauty as the Maying rose,
Endymion; that meanwhile kept my Flocks
Upon Ionas flowery hills and rocks,
And warbling sweet lays to my Cynthea's beams,
Out-sang the Swannets of Meanders streams;
To whom (for Guerdon) she heavens secret bars
Made open, taught the paths and powers of Stars;
By this dear Ladies strict commandment
To celebrate this day I here am sent:
But whether is this heaven, which stars do crown,
Or are heavens flaming splendors here come down,
To beautify this nether world with me?
Such state and glory did e're Shepherd see?
My wits my sense mistrust, and stay amazed,
No eye on fairer objects ever gazed,
Sure this is heaven, for every wandering star,
Forsaking those great orbs where whirled they are,
All dismal sad aspects abandoning,
Are here assembled to greet some darling;
Nor is it strange if they heavens hight neglect,
Unwonted worth produces like effect,
Then this it is, thy presence (royal youth)
Hath brought them here within an Azymuth,
To tell by me (their Herald) coming things*
And what each Fate to her sterne distaff sings;
Heavens volume to unclaspe, wast pages spread,
Mysterious golden ciphers clear to read,
Hear then the augur of the future days
And all the starry Senate of the Says;
For what is firm decreed in heaven above
In vain on earth strive mortals to improve.
TO fair hopes to give reins now is it time,
And soar as high as just desires may climb;
O Halcyonean, clear, and happy day,
From sorry wights let sorrow fly away,
And vex Antarticke climes, great Britains woes
Evanish, joy now in her Zenith glowes,
The old Leucadian Syth-bearing Sire
(Though cold) for thee feels flames of sweet desire,
And many lufters at a perfect height
Shall keep thy Scepters majesty, as bright
And strong in power and glory every way,
As when thy peerless Parent did it sway,
Ne'er turning wrinkled in times endless length,
But on in her first beauty, youthful strength,
Like thy rare mind, which steadfast as the Pole
Still fixed stands, however Sphaeres do role;
More, to enchant thy favours, this thy reign
His age of gold he shall restore again,
Love, Justice, Honour, Innocence renew,
Men's spirits with white simplicity endue,
Make all to live in plenties ceaseless store
With equal shares, not wishing to have more;
Then shall not cold the Plow-mens hopes beguile,
On earth shall sky with lovely glances smile,
Vntill'd, which shall each flower and herb bring forth,
And with fair gardens make of equal worth;
Life (long) shall not be thrall'd to mortal deats,
Thus heavens decree, so have ordained the Fates.
DElight of heaven, sole honour of the earth,
Jove (courting thine ascendant) at thy birth
Proclaimed thee a King, and made it true,
That Emperies should to thy worth be due,
He gave thee what was good, and what was great,
What did belong to love, and what to state,
Rare gifts whose ardors turn the hearts of all,
Like tunder when flint attomes on it fall;
The Taramont which thy fair course directs,
Shall counsels be, approved by their effects;
Justice kept low by grants, and wrongs, and jarres,
Thou shalt relieve, and crown with glistering stars,
Whom nought save law of force could keep in awe
Thou shalt turn Clients to the force of law,
Thou arms shalt brandish for thine own defence,
Wrongs to repell, and guard weak innocence,
Which to thy last effort thou shalt uphold,
As Oak the Ivy which it doth enfold;
All overcome, at last thy self overcome,
Thou shalt make passion yield to reasons doom:
For smiles of fortune shall not raise thy mind,
Nor dismal most disasters turn declined,
True Honour shall reside within thy Court,
Sobriety, and Truth there still resort,
Keep promised faith thou shalt, Supercheries
Detest, and beagling Marmosets despise,
Thou, others to make rich, shalt not make poor
Thy self, but if that thou may still give more;
Thou shalt no Paranymph raise to high place,
For frizl'd leap, quaint pace, or painted face;
On gorgeous rayments, womanising toys,
The works of worms, and what a Moth destroys,
The Maze of fools, thou shalt no treasure spend,
Thy charge to immortality shall tend,
Raise Palaces, and Temples vaulted high,
Rivers ore arch, of hospitality,
Of Sciences the ruined Innes restore,
With walls and ports in circle Neptunes shore,
To new found worlds thy Fleets make hold their course,
And find of Canada the unknown Source,
People those Lands which pass Arabian fields
In fragrant Wood and Musk which Zephyre yields;
Thou feared of none, shalt not thy people fear,
Thy peoples love thy greatness shall up-reare,
Still rigour shall not shine, and mercy lower,
What love can do thou shalt not do by power,
New and vast taxes thou shalt not extort,
Load heavy those thy bounty should support,
By harmless Justice graciously reform,
Delighting more in calm then roaring storm,
Thou shalt govern in peace as did thy Sire,
Keep, save thine own, and kingdoms new acquire,
Beyond Alcides Pillars, and those bounds
Where Alexanders fame till now resounds,
Till thou the greatest be among the Greats;
Thus heavens ordain, so do decree the Faits.
Son of the Lyon, thou of loathsome bands
Shalt free the earth, and what e're thee withstands
Thy noble paws shall tear, the God of Thrace
Shall be the second, and before thy face,
To Truth and Justice, whilst thou Trophies reares,
Armies shall fall dismayed with Panic fears,
As when Aurora in skies azure lists
Makes shadows vanish, doth disperse the mists,
And in a twinkling with her opal light,
Nights horrors checks, puts stars to flight,
More to inflame thee to this noble task,
To thee he here resignes his Sword and Cask*
A wall of flying Castles, armed Pines
Shall bridge thy sea, like heaven with steel that shines,
To aide earths tennants by soul yokes oppressed,
And fill with fears the great King of the West:
To thee already Victory displays
Her garlands twined with Olive, Oak, and Baize,
Thy triumphs finish shall all old debates;
Thus Heavens decree, so have ordained the Fates.
WEalth, Wisdom, Glory, Pleasure, stoutest hearts,
Religion, Laws, Hyperion imparts
To thy just Reign, which shall far far surpass,
Of Emperors, Kings, the best that ever was;
Look how he dims the stars; thy glories rays,
So darken shall the lustre of these days:
For in fair virtues Zodiac thou shalt run,
And in the heaven of worthies be the Sun.
No more contemned shall haplesse Learning lie;
The maids of Pindus shall be raised high;
For Bay and Ivy which their brows enrolled,
Thou shalt them deck with gems and shining gold;
Thou open shalt Parnassus Crystal gates,
Thus heavens ordain, so do decree the Fates.
THe Alcidanian Queen amidst the Baize
Shall twine her myrtles, grant thee pleasant days;
She did make clear thy house, and with her light
Of churelesse stars, put back the dismal spite,
Thy Hymenean bed fair brood shall grace,
Which on the earth continue shall their race,
While Floras treasure shall the Meads endear,
While sweet Pomona Rose-cheekt fruits shall bear,
While Phaebes beams her brothers emulates:
Thus Heavens decree, so have ordained the Fates.
GReat Atlas Nephew, shall the works of peace,
(The works of plenty) Tillage, Trades increase,
And Arts in times gulfs lost again restore,
To cheer Perfection; nay, find many more,
More perfect artists, Ciclopes in their forge
Shall mould those brazen Tiphones, which disgorge
From their hard bowels mettle, flame and smoke,
Mufling the air up in a sable cloak:
The Sea shrinks at the blow, shake doth the ground,
The worlds West corners doth the sound rebound,
The Stygian Porter leaves off to bark,
Black Jove appalled doth shrow'd him in the dark;
Many a Typhis in adventures lost
By new found skill shall many maiden coast,
With thy sayle-winged Argoses find out,
Which like the Sun shall run the earth about;
And far beyond his paths score wavie ways,
Cathayes Lands by Hyperborean Seas,
He shall endue thee both in peace and war,
With Wisdom, which then Strength is better far,
Wealth, Honour, Arms, and Arts shall grace thy states:
Thus Heavens ordain, so do decree the Fates.
O How the fair Queen with the golden maids,
The Sun of night, thy happy fortunes aids,
Though turban'd Princes for a badge her wear,
To them she wain'd, to thee would full appear;
Her Hand-maid Thetis daily walks the round
About the Delos that no force it wound,
Then when thou left it and abroad did stray
(Dear Pilgrim) she did straw with flowers the way,
And turning foreign force and counsel vain,
Thy Guard and Guide returned thee home again;
To thee she Kingdoms, Years, Bliss did divine,
Quailing Medusas grim Snakes with her shine,
Beneath thee reign Discord (fell mischiefs forge
The bane of peoples, state and kingdoms scourge)
Pale Envy (with the Cockatrices eye,
Which seeing kills, but seen doth forthwith dye:)
Malice, Deceit, Rebellion, Impudence
Beyond the Garamants shall pack them hence,
With every Monster that thy glory hates,
Thus Heavens decree, so have ordayn'd the Fates.
THat heretofore to thy heroic mind
Haps, (hopes not answered as they were designed:)
O do not think it strange, times were not come,
And these fair stars had not pronounced their doom;
The destinies did on that day attend,
When to this Northern Region thou should lend
Thy cheering presence, and charged with Renown,
Set on thy brows the Caledonian Crown;
Thy virtues now thy just desire shall grace,
Sterne Chance shall change, and to Desert give place;
Let this be known to all the Fates admit
To their grave Counsel, and to every Wit
That spies Heavens inside; this let Sibilles know,
And those mad Corybants which dance and glow
On Dindimus high tops with frantic fire:
Let this be known to all Apollo's Quire,
And people let it not be hid from you,
What Mountains noise and Floods proclaim as true*
Where ever fame abroad his praise shall ring,
All shall observe, and serve this blessed King
The back face of this Arch towards the East, had the three graces drawn upon
it, which were naked and in others hands; they were crowned with ears of
Corn, Flowers and Grapes to signify fecunditie; their word Loeto testamur
Gaudia plausu.

By them was Argos full of eyes; his word Vt videam.

Under all was written, Tales Roma fuit quondam admirata triumphos.

The Emperor Iustinian appointed that the Shows and Spectacles made to
Princes, should be seven for the East; on the Battlements of the East Gate, in
a Coat all full of eyes and tongues, with a Trumpet in her hand (as if she
would sound) stood Fame, the wings of the Bat at her, feet, a Wreath of gold
on her head, and by her, Honour a person of a reverend countenance in a blew
Mantle of the colour of silver, his hair broydered with silver shaddowing in
waves his shoulders, they were above the statue of King Iames, under which was
written AT length we see those eyes,
which cheer both over earth and skies,
Now ancient Caledon
thy beauties heighten, richest robes put on,
and let young joys to all thy parts arise.
Here could thy Prince still stay,
each month should turn in May,
We need not star nor Sun,
save him to lengthen days and joys begun,
sorrow and night to far climes hast away.
Now Majesty and Love
combined are from above,
Prince never Sceptre swayd
loved subjects more, of subjects more obeyed,
which may endure whilst heavens great orbs do move
Joys did thee always last,
lifes spark ye soon would wast,
Grief follows sweet delight,
as day is shadowed by sable night,
yet shall remembrance keep you still, when past.


ILlustrious Top-bough of Heroic Stem,
Whose head is crowned with glories Anademe,
My shallow Muse, not daring to draw near
Bright Phoebus burning flames in his career;
Yet knowing surely that Apollo shines
Upon the Dung-hill, as on golden Mines:
And knowing this, the bounty of best Kings,
To mark the giver, not the gifted things,
Doth boldly venture in this pompous throng
To greet thy greatness with a wel-come Song;
And with the Pie doth Ave Caesar sing,
While graver wits do greater Offerings bring.
ADmired Phoenix, springing from those Syres,
Whose souls the heaven, whose merit fame admires
Whose memory is wrapped up in roles,
Kept by Eternity above the Poles;
Thrice-blessed CHARLES, sprung from thy royal Sire
Great IAMES, whose fame shall with this frame expire,
And yet begin afresh for to be sung,
By sacred Quires in a celestial tongue;
O thou the Subject of this wel-borne thought!
Immortal King, hast neither said nor wrought
Any thing yet, which can detract thy praise,
Since you're more old in virtues then in days:
Bred in the bed of honour, thou art blessed
With rare perfections, far above the rest
Of mortal kind: for as thy birth is great,
So is thy mind, too high a mark for hate:
Envy may spew her spite, yet cannot harm
The Man, whom all the host of Heaven doth arm:
When bright Apollo circling in his Carre,
Doth drive away the day-denuncing Star,
His pow'rfull rays diffuse in mortal minds
A sweet desire of day, which straight unbinds
Sleep-fettered-senses and his cheerful light
Doth wast all vapours closed in cloudy night:
So my dear Phoebus whilst Thy face doth shine
Upon this Land, which by descent is shine
From hundred and eight Kings, thy cheerful rays,
Do change my nights in Halcyonian days,
And straight dissolve these frightful forms of woe,
Which did possess my troubled thoughts ago.
What sad affliction did my soul possess,
When Ibers streams reflex'd thy glorious face;
My groans are turned to greetings, and my wrongs
Are changed in hymns and sweet Syrenean songs:
My spirit then, which for thy absence groaned,
Rejoices now to see thee here enthroned.
What greater joy can conceive, then see
My native Prince, his native Throne supply:
Thrice happy CHARLES with all those gifts enriched,
Which heavens allot to Mortals, I'm bewitched
In admiration of these royal parts,
Which makes thee more then Monarch of men's hearts,
My heart and hands, and all submitted here,
Attest the Heavens that I account thee dear,
And dearest dear of all this All: I place
My chiefest joys in favour of thy face,
I do not point my praises, nor this Land,
Although rich Nature with a liberal hand
Hath bravely decked her with all kind of things,
Which from her womb for humane use forth springs,
Both Pan and Pales, Pleasures, Gems and Ore,
Which wretched worldlings for their God adore:
I, only I, when all the World by War,
Was boylde in blood as red as Marses Star,
Did safely sleep, secured from foreign Arms,
And did disdain Bellonas loud Alarms:
The Gothes, the Danes, the Saxons here did feel,
And Normanes fierce, the fury of my Steel:
Here Caesar pitched his tens, and proudly thought
His Trophies over our tombs to Rome have brought,
But all in vain, his conquering hand was stayed.
And by his troupes a wall-dividing laid
At Carons banks, whose ruins yet may tell.
How far in worth I did his force excel:
And as in Mars, so in Minervas field
For Arms and Arts I keep rich Pallas shield,
Did not the Germanes borrow light from me,
And France, which all posterity shall see
Even to the fatal doom, when All's in fire,
Then shall the records of my worth expire:
Thus gracious CHARLES deign with a loving eye,
The sweet desires of my pure heart to spy.
Look with what love and with what cheerful part,
I consecrate to thee, a loyal heart,
My humbled knees lo! and my heaved up hands,
The sacred oath of love from thee demands:
Thrice Glorious CHARLES, how amiable's thy face,
Whose loving looks my clouds of care do chase:
I reap more joy from this thy coming here,
Then e're Penelope of Vlisses dear,
Who after thousand dangers did return,
And cured those griefs, which did her bovvels burn:
O thou more worthy then Vlisses far,
Honours bright Ray, Goodness, and Greatness, Star,
Long did I wish to see thy sacred Face,
My Towns and Temples with thy presence grace.
Great Ioves Vice-gerent look with kind aspect
On my Emporium EDINBVRGH, direct
No oblique Rays, accept in love her Shows,
Her Verdant Glory which so bravely goes,
To do thee service, all her cost compense
With kind acceptance, with her faults dispense,
And if in Her omission shall be found,
Let Her Endeavours brave, Defects confound:
If Jove who all the starry Heavens doth guide,
Delights sometimes at Creta to abide,
As in the place, where first he sucked the air;
And i^ Apollo, Delos doth repair,
Leaving his Claros, Tenedos behind;
Thus since th'immortall gods have such a mind
To Native soil, it is no wonder then
Though Demi-gods be moved, and earth-borne men.
May still Great CHARLES thy Scotland Creta be,
And Delos where thou may delight, to see
The Naides and the Mountain Nymphs most fair,
With unaccustomed clamours beat the Air,
The Satyrs dance, the Corribantean Priests
O're-joyde with joy to pulse their panting breasts:
O what great joy, hath thy dear presence brought,
Let all the Annals through all age be sought,
The like was never seen, the senseless stones
Do melt for joy, the Mountains leap at once,
The winds are calmed, and Neptunes lowdest roar
Deavde with my shouts of joy is heard no more,
And when the Air with thy great Name I wound,
The Mountains answer, and the Rocks resound,
The Woods re-echo'd, and the Floods proclaim,
Melodious murmurs hearing of thy Name,
The Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts are struck with wonder,
Whilst to the clouds I tell my Joys in thunder.
Thou art my rich Palladium, while I keep
My God and thee, I may securely sleep,
And fear no terror nor disturbing Foe,
Whilst I have thee to ante-vert my woe,
God hath by nature walled me round about,
And given me Neptune sentinel and scout,
Whose tossed Trident threatens death to such
As dare in deep disdain my borders touch,
And if by Fates I be enforced to war,
And make my Lyons roar be heard afar,
O may it be for some such sacred cause!
As doth subsist with Heaven and humane Laws,
O! may it be to vindicate the wrong
Of thy dear Sister, and her Children young,
Whose matchless Worth and virtues merit praise
From all which can set, sing, o^ sound sweet lays,
Till she, (dear she,) be re-invest again
With her own Rights, possessed with her demaine,
Till she be safely situat on her Rhyne,
(And as the Moon amongst the Stars doth shine)
Till she in greatness do exceed all those,
Who to her glory did their rage oppose,
Till that Sun-gazing Eagle be forced to fall
Before her feet, and for her pardon call:
Let's beat Alarms, and let our trumpets sound,
Let Cornets shrill the yielding air now wound,
Let frightful shouts of Soldiers pierce the sky,
And reach the convexe of Olympus high
Above the thundering clouds, let noises make,
The soaring Eagle for fear of CHARLES to shake.
Let Vienn's walls astonished with our cry
Like stubble before the fire, fall down and fly
Scattred with winds of his revenging wrath,
Who in his hand hath power of life and death.
Let Rome with her seven hills be shaken too,
And at thy Name O CHARLES obedient bow.
(Heaven grant I may victorious still return,
Drunk with the blood of Foes sleep in the Urn
Of my Ancestors, whose Manes shall be glad,
When it shall be to future ages said
That I in worth did so exceed them far,
As doth the Sun in light each little star.)
O may thy Ensigns ever be displayed!
O may my heart and hand be ne'er dismayed
In thy defence, till all the world adore
Thy dreadful name from Vesper till Aurore.
Thine be the Night and Day, may stars bright shine,
And Planets wander over no Land but thine,
And when by Death thou shalt shut up thy days,
Thy memory shall still inherit praise,
And after age shall Obeliskes upreare,
In which thy worth and virtues shall appear,
High Phanes and Temples shall by thy name be called,
And thou among th'immortal Gods installed
Shalt see the Offerings and the yearly vows
Posterity unto thy fame allows.
Religious rites and games for thee erected,
Shall show on earth how much thou wast respected.

