WEll done my lusty bloods, Well done. Fit, fit observance for this
May-morning; Not the May-Moneth alone, they take when it comes; Nor the first
week of that Month; Nor the first day; but the first minute of the first
hour, of the first day. Loose no time bloods, loose no time; though the Sun
go to bed never so much before you, yet be you up before him; call the
golden sluggard from the silver arms of his Lady, to light you into yours,
when your old father January here in one of his last days, thrusts his
fore-head into the depth of Mayes fragrant bosom: What may you Aprilles
perform then? O what may you do? Well yet will I say thus much for my self,
wheresoever the affections of youth are, there must needs be the instruments,
and where the instruments are, there must of necessity be the faculties; What
am I short of them then? A sound old man, ably constituted, holsomly dieted,
that took his May temperately at their ages, and continued his own; why
should he not continue their ages in his own? By the Mass I feel nothing
that stands against it, and therefore sweet May I salute thee with the youngest:
I have love to employ thee in, as well as the proudest young princock, and so
have at you Mistress Frances China: have at you Mistress Frank: I'^e sprede my
nets for you in faith, though they be my very purse nets, wherein what heart will
not willingly lye panting?


How now? Gods my life, I wonder what made this May-morning so cold, and now I
see 'tis this January that intrudes into it; what paper is that he holds in
hand trow we?


Here have I put her face in rime, but I fear my old vain will not stretch to
her contentment. O hair, no hair but beams stolen from the Sun.


Out upon her, if it be she that I think, she has a Fox red cranion;


A fore-head that disdains the name of fair.


And reason, for 'tis a folwe one.


A matchless eye.


True, her eyes be not matches.


A cheek, vermillion red.


Painted I warrant you.


A far commanding mouth.


It stretches to her ears in deed.


A nose made out of wax.


A red nose, in sincerity.


This could I send, but person, person does it: A good presence, to bear out a
good wit; a good face, a pretty Court leg, and a deft dapper personage, no
superfluous dimensions, but fluent in competence; for it is not Hector but
Paris, not the full armefull, but the sweet handful that Ladies delight in.


O notable old whyniard.


Such a size of humanity now, and brain enough in it, it is not in the
strength of a woman to withstand; well she may hold out a parl^e or two, for
'tis a weak fort that obeys at the first or second summons, if she resist
the third she is discharged, though she yield in future: for then it appears
it was no fault of hers: but the man that would take no denial. What rests
now? means for access: True. O an honest Bawd were worth gold now.


A plague upon him, I had thought to have appeared to him, but now if I do, he
will take me for the man he talks on: I will therefore post by his dull
eye-sight, as in hast of business.


What Signior Angelo? soft I command you.


Gods precious, what mean you Sir?


I would be loath to be out-runne I assure you Sir: was I able to stay you?


Your ability stood too stiff Sir, beshrow me else.


O most offencelesse fault, I would thou would blaze my imperfection to one
thou know, in faith.


Well Sir another time, tell me where she is, and I'll do so much for you
gratis. Good morrow Sir.


Nay stay good Angelo.


My business says nay Sir, you have made me stay to my pain Sir, I thank
you.


Not a whit man I warrant thee.


Go to then, briefly, to whom shall I commend your imperfections, will you
tell me if I name her?


That I will, y^aith Boy.


Is not her hair, no hair, but beams stolen from the Sun?


Black, black as an Ouzell.


A fore-head that disdains the name of fair.


Away Witch, away:


A matchless eye.


Nay fie, fie, fie. I see you are a very Devil Angelo. And in earnest, I
jested, when I said my desire of thy friendship touched my self, for it
concerns a friend of mine just of my standing.


To whom then would he be remembered that I can solicit?


To sweet Mistress Franciscina: with whom I hear thou art ready to lye down,
thou art so great with her.


I am as great as a near Kinseman may be with her Sir, not otherwise:


A good consanguinity: and good Angelo, to her with thou deliver from my
friend, in all secrecy, these poor brace of bracelets?


Perhaps I will Sir, when I know what the Gentleman and his intent is.


Never examine that man; I would not trouble you with carrying too much at once
to her, only tell her, such a man will resolve her, naming me: and I do not
greatly care, if I take the pains to come to her, so I stay not long, and be
let in privily: and so without making many words: here they be* put them up
closely I beseech thee, and deliver them as closely.


Well Sir, I love no contention with friends, and therefore pocket many things,
that otherwise I would not: but I pray Sir licen^e me a question. Do not I
know this Gentleman that offers my Cozen this kindness?


Never saw him in thy life, at least never knew him; but for his bounty
sake to all his well willers, if this message be friendly discharged, I may
chance put a dear friend of him into your bosom: Sir, and make you profitably
acquainted.


But I pray you Sir, is he not a well elderly Gentleman?


Wide, wide; as young as day, I protest to thee.


I know he is young too, but that is in ability of body, but is he not a pretty
little squat Gentleman, as you shall see amongst a thousand?


Still from the cushion, still, tall and high, like a Cedar.


I know he is tall also, but it is in his mind Sir, and it is not Hector but
Paris, not thy full armefull, but the sweet handful that a Lady delights to
dandle.


Now the good Devil take thee, if there be any such in hell, hell I beseech
thee.


Well, well Signior Lorenzo, in faith the little Squire is thought to be as
parlesse a piece of flesh, for a piece of flesh, as any hunts the hole pale of
Venus I protest t'ee.


I cannot contain my self, in faith Boy, if the Wenches come in my walk, I
give 'em that they come for, I dally not with hem.


I know you do not Sir, his dallying days be done.


It is my infirmity, and I cannot do withal, to die for it.


I believe you Sir.


There are certain envious old fellows, my neighbours, that say, I am one
vnwieldly and stiff: Angelo, did ever hear any wench complain of my
stiffenesse?


Never in my life: your old neighbours measure you by themselves.


Why there's the matter then?


But in faith Sir: do you ever hope to win your purpose at my losing hands,
knowing her (as all the world does) a woman of that approved lowlynesse of
life, and so generally tried?


As for that take thou no care, she's a woman, is she not?


Sure I do take her to have the flesh and blood of a woman.


Then good enough, or then bad enough, this token shall be my Gentleman Usher
to prepare my access, and then let me alone with her.


I marry Sir, I think you would be alone with her; Well Sir, I will do my
best, but if your Gentleman Usher should not get entrance for you now, it would
be a grief to me.


Fear it not man: Gifts and gold, take the strong'st hold; Away, here comes a
snudge that must be my son in law: I would be loath he should suspect these
tricks of youth in me, for fear he fear my daughter will trot after me.


Fare you well Sir.


Godge you God morrow Sir, godge you God morrow.


God morrow neighbour Gasparo: I have talked with my daughter, whom I do yet
find a green young plant, and therefore unapt to bear such ripe fruit, I
think I might have said rotten, as your self: But she is at my disposition,
and shall be at yours in the end, here's my hand, and with my hand take hers.


Nay by my faith Sir, you must give me leave to shake her portion by the hand
first.


It is ready told for you Sir, come home when you will and receive it,


Well, I will come for her potion Sir, and till then, God take you to his
mercy.


Adieu my good son in law, I'll not interrupt her, let her meditate a my late
motion.


'Tis strange to see the impiety of parents,
Both priuiledgd by custom, and professed,
The holy institution of heaven;
Ordeyning marriage for proportiond minds,
For our chief humane comforts; and t'encrease
The loved images of God in men:
Is now perverted to th'increase of wealth;
We must bring riches forth, and like the Cuckoo
Hatch others eggs; Join house to house, in choices
Fit timber-logs and stones, not men and women:
Ay me, here's one I must shun, woude embrace.

O stay and hear me speak or see me dye.


How now? what have we here? what a loathsome creature man is being drunk: Is
it not pity to see a man of good hope, a toward Scholar, writes a theme
well, scannes a verse very well, and likely in time to make a proper man, a
good leg, specially in a boot, valiant, well spoken, and in a word, what
not? and yet all this overthrown as you see, drowned, quite drowned in a quart
pot.


O these same wicked healths, breed monstrous diseases.


Aurelio, speak man, Aurelio?


Pray heaven all be well.


O speak, if any spark of speech remain.
It is thy dear Aemilia that calls.

Well, well, it becomes not a friend to touch the deadly wounds of his friend
with a smiling countenance.


Touch thee? sblood I could find in my heart to beat thee; up in a fools
name, up: what a Scene of foppery have we here?


Prithee have done.


Up Cuckoo Cupids bird, or by this light I'll fetch thy father to thee.


Good Lodouico, if thou love me, leave me; thou come to consaile me from
that, which is joined with my soul in eternity: I must and will do what I do.


Do so then, and I protest thou shalt never like thy lips after my
Kinsewoman, while thou liu'st: I had thought to have spoken for th^e, if thou
had taken a manly course with her: but to fold up thy self like an Vrchine,
and lye a caluing to bring forth a husband: I am ashamed to think on it: sblood
I have heard of wenches that have been won with singing and dancing, and some
with riding, but never heard of any that was won with tumbling in my life.


If thou knew how vain thou seem.


I do it of purpose, to show how vain I hold thy disease, S'hart art thou the
first that has shot at a wenches heart and mist it? must that shot that mist
her wound thee? let her shake her heals in a shrowes name: were she my Cozen
a thousand times, and if I were as thee, I would make her shake her heals too,
before I would shake mine thus.


O vanity, vanity.


S'death, if any wench should offer to keep possession of my heart against my
will, I'd fire her out with Sack and Sug^r, or smoke her out with Tobacco,
like a hornet, or purge for her, for love is but a humour: one way or other I
would vent her, that's infallible.


For shame hold thy tongue, me thinks thy wit should feel how stale are these
love storms, and with what general privilege love pierses the worthiest.
Seek to help thy friend, not mock him.


Marry, seek to help thy self then, in a halters name, do not lie in a
ditch, and say God help me, use the lawful tools he hath lent thee. Up I say
I will bring thee to her.


Shee'll not endure me:


She shall endure thee do the worst thou can to her, I and endure thee till
thou can not endure her; But then thou must use thy self like a man, and a
wise man, how deep soever she is in thy thoughts, carry not the prints of it
in thy looks; be bold and careless, and stand not sautring a far of, as I
have seen you, like a Dog in a firmetypot, that licks his chops and wags his
tail, and fain would lay his lips to it, but he fears tis too hot for him:
that's the only way to make her too hot for thee. He that holds religious and
sacred thought of a woman, he that bears so reverend a respect to her, that he
will not touch her but with a kissed hand and a timorous heart; he that adores
her like his Goddess: Let him be sure she will shun him like her flaue.
Alas good souls, women of themselves are tractable and tactable enough, and
would return Quid for Quod still, but we are they that spoile'em, and we shall
answer for it another day. We are they that put a kind of wanton Melancholy
into 'em, that makes 'em think their noses bigger then their faces, greater
then the Sun in brightness; and where as Nature made 'em but half fools,
we make 'em all fool. And this is our palpable flattery of them, where they
had rather have plain dealing Well, in conclusion, I'll to her instantly, and
if I do not bring her to thee, or at the least some special favour from her,
as a feather from her fan, or a string from her shoo, to wear in thy hat,
and so forth, then never trust my skill in poultry whilst thou liu'st again.


THou shalt not to the wars, or if thou dost I'll bear thee company, dear
Quint. do not offer to forsake me.


Hands off wife, hang not upon me thus; how can I maintain thee but by using
my valour? and how can I use that, but in action and employment? go in, play
at cards with your Cozen Angelo here, and let it suffice I love thee.


Come sweet Cozen, do not cloy your husband with your love so, especially to
hinder his preferment; who shall the D^ke have to employ in these Marshall
necessities if not Captain Quintiliano, he bears an honourable mind, and tis
pity but he should have employment. Let him get a company now, and he will be
able to maintain you like a Duchess hereafter.


Well said Signior Angelo, gossaue me you speak like a true Cozen indeed,
does he not Quint?


He does so, and I thank him; yet see how the fool puts finger in the eye
still.


I'll cheer her up, I warrant you Captain; come Cuze, lets in to tables.


Farewell sweet Mistress.


Farewell my good servant.


Now take away thy hand, and show thou did laugh all this while; good Lord
who would not marry to have so kind a wife make much on him?


After Boy, give your attendance.


Could you not spare me money for mine hostess, where you put me to board?
you're a whole fortnight arr^rages.


Attend I say, the hostess of the Lyon has a leg like a Cyant, want for
nothing Boy, so she score truly.


Faith Sir, she has chaulk't up twenty shillings already, and swears she
will chaulke no more.


Then let her choke, and choke thou with her: S'blood hobby horse, and she had
chaulkt up twenty pounds, I hope the world knows I am able to pay it with a
wet finger.


Alas Sir, I think you're able, but the world does not know it.


Then the worlds an ignorant Sir, and you are an innocent, vanish Boy, away.


I hope he will foist some money for my score, out of this gull here.


'Tis a plaguy good wag Quint. is't not?


I'll make him a good one here I ha done with him; but this same loving fool my
wife now, will never leave weeping, till I make her believe I will not have a
company. Who would be encumbered with these soft hearted creatures, that are ever
in extremes, either too kind, or too unkind?


Save me, 'tis true, 'tis a hard thing must please'em in sadness.


Damn me, if I do not pity her with my heart; plague on her kindness, she
has half persuaded me to take no company.


Nay sweet Quint: then how shall I be a Lieutenant?


Well, and my promise were not past to thee, I am a villain if all the world
should part Frank and me; think I love thee therefore, and will do thee
credit: It will cost me a great deal a this same foolish money to buy me drum
and ensign, and furnish me thoroughly, but the best is I know my credit.


Sfut Quint, we'll want no money man, I'll make my row of houses fly first.


Let'em walk, let'em walk; Candle rents: if the wars hold, or a plague come
to the town, theill be worth nothing.


True, or while I am beyond Sea, some sleepy wench may set fire ith bed-straw.


Right, or there may come an earthquake, and ouerturne'em.


Just, or there may be conjuring, and the wind may down with'em.


Or some crafty petty-fogger may find a hole in the title, a thousand
casualties belongs to 'em.


Nay, they shall walk, that's certain, I'll turn 'em into money.


That's thy most husbandly course in faith Boy, thou may have twenty in the
hundred for thy life, I'll be thy man for two hundred.


Will it in faith Quint? gossaue me tis done.


For your life, not otherwise.


Well, I desire no more, so you'll remember me for my Lieftenantship.


Remember thee? 'tis thine own already Boy, a hundred pounds shall not buy it
from thee; give me thy hand. I do here create thee Lieutenant Innocentio.


If you have a company Captain.


If I have: damn me if such another word do not make me put thee out ath'
place again; if I have a company, Sfut, let the Duke deny me one, I would
twere come to that once, that employment should go with the vndeseruer, while
men of service sit at home, and feed their anger with the blood of red
lattices. Let the Duke deny me to day, I'll renounce him to morrow. I'll to the
enemy point blank, I'm a villain else:


And I by heaven I swear.


Well if that day come, it will prove a hot day with some body.


But Captain, did not you say that you would enter me at an Ordinary, that I
might learn to converse?


When thou wilt Lieutenant; No better time then now, for now you are in good
clothes, which is the most material point for thy entrance there.


I but how should I behave my self?


Marry Sir, when you come first in, you shall see a crew of Gallants of all
sorts:


Nay Captain if I come first in I shall see no body.


Tush man, you must not do so, if you have good clothes and will be noted let
am all come in before you, and then as I said shall you see a lusty crew of
Gallants, some Gentlemen, some none; but that's all one: he that bears himself
like a Gentleman, is worthy to have been borne a Gentleman: some aged have
beards, and some have none, some have money, and some have none, yet all must
have meat: Now wil^ all these I say at you^ first entrance wonder at you, as
at some strange Owl: Examine your person, and observe your bearing for a time.
Do you then ath' the other side seem to neglect their observance as fast, let
your countenance be proof against all eyes, not yielding or confessing in it
any inward defect. In a word be impudent enough, for that's your chief virtue
of society.


Is that? faith and I need not learn that, I have that by nature I thank
God.


So much the better, for nature is far above Art, or judgment. Now for your
behaviour; let it be free and negligent, not clogged with ceremony or
observance, give no man honour, but upon equal terms; for look how much thou
giu'st any man above that, so much thou take from thy self: he that will
once give the wall, shall quickly be thrust into the kennel: measure not thy
carriage by any mans eye, thy speech by no mans ear, but be resolute and
confident in doing and saying, and this is the grace of a right Gentleman as
thou art.


Sfut, that I am I hope, I am sure my father has been twice Warden on's
company.


That's not a pear matter man, there's no prescription for Gentility, but good
clothes and impudence: for your place, take it as it falls, but so as you think
no place to good for you; fall too with ceremony whatsoever the company be: and
as near as you can, when they are in their Mutton, be thou in thy Wood-cocke,
it shows resolution. Talk any thing, thou care not what, so it be without
offence, and as near as thou can without sense.


Let me alone for that Captain I warrant you.


If you chance to tell a lye, you must bind it with some oath, as by this
bread, for breads a binder you know.


True.


And yet take heed you swear by nomans bread but your own, for that may
breed a quarrel: above all things you must carry no coals.


By heaven not I, I'll freeze to death first.


Well Sir, one point more I must remember you of. After dinner there will be
play, and if you would be counted complete, you must venture amongst them; for
otherwise, theill take you for a Scholar or a Poet, and so fall into contempt
of you: for there is no virtue can escape the account of baseness if it get
money, but gaming and law; yet must you not loose much money at once, for that
argues little wit at all times.


As gossaue me, and that's my fault; for if I be in once, I shall loose all I
have about me.


Is true, Lieutenant? byr'lady Sir I'll be your moderator, therefore let me see
how much money have you about you?


Not much, some twenty mark or twenty pound in gold.


'Tis too much to loose by my faith, Lieutenant; give me your purse Sir, hold
ye, heers two brace of Angels, you shall venture that for fashion sake, I'll
keep the rest for you, till you have done play.


That will be all one, for when that's lost I shall never leave till I get the
rest from you: for I know thou wilt let me have it if I ask it.


Not a penny by this gold.


Prithee do not then, as gossaue me and you do:


And I do, hang me; Come lets to the Duke.


NAy Mistress, pray even go in again, for I have some inward news for you.


What are those pray.


Tis no matter Mistress till you come in, but make much a time in the mean
time, good fortune thrusts her self upon you in the likeness of a fine young
Gentleman, hold up your apron and receive him while you may, a Gods name.


How say by that? you're a very wise counselor.


Well Mistress, when I was a Maid, and that's a good while ago I can tell you.


I think very well.


You were but a little one then I wisse.


Nor you neither I believe.


Faith it's one of the furthest things I can remember.


But what when you were a Maid?


Marry Mistress I took my time, I warrant you. And there's Signior Leonoro now,
the very flower of Venice, and one that loves you dearly I ensure you.


God forgive him if he do, for I'll be sworn I never deserved his love, nor
never will while I live.


Why then, what say to Signior Collatin^! there's a dainty piece of Venzon for
you, and a fervent lover indeed.


He? I dare say, he knows not what wood loves shafts are made of, his Signiory
would think it the deepest disparagement could be done to him, to say that ever
he spent sigh for any Dame in Italy.


Well, you have a whole browne dozen a suitors at least, I am sure; take your
choice amongst'em all, if you love not all, yet you may love three or four on
'em to be doing withal.


To be doing withal? love three or four?


Why not, so you love 'em moderately. What must that strange made piece
Theagines that you cry out upon so often, have all from other, and yet know not
where he is?


O my Theagine, not Theagines, thy love hath turned me woman like thy self,
shall thy sight never turn me man again. Come lets to the Minster, God hear
my prayers as I intend to stop mine ears against all my suitors.


Well Mistress, yet peradventure, they may make you open before the Priest have a
penny for you,


Here's a coil to make wit and women friends: come hither wench, let me have
thee single; now sit thee down, and hear good counsel next thy heart, and
God give thee grace to lay it to thy heart.


Fie Cozen, will this wild tongue of yours never receive the bridle?


Yes, thou shalt now see me stroke my beard, and speak sententiously: thou
tell^st me thy little father is in hand with a great rich marriage for thee,
and would have thee commit matrimony with old Gasparo, art thou willing with
it?


I rather wish my self married to a thousand deaths.


Then I perceive thou know him not; did he never woo thee?


I protest, I never changed three words with him in my life; he hath once or
twice woo'de my father for me, but never me.


Why that's the reason thou love him not, because thou take in none of his
valiant breath to inflame thee, nor vouchsaf'st his knowledge; I'll tell thee
what he is, an old sapless trunk, fit to make touch-wood of hollow, and bald
like a blasted Oak, on whose top Ravens sit and croak the portents of funerals;
one that noints his nose with clow^ed cream, and Pomatum. His breath smells
like the butt end of a shoo-makers horne. A leprous scaly hide like an
Elephant. The son of a Sow-gelder, that came to town (as I have heard thy
father himself say) in a tottred ^uffer cote, high shoes, and yet his hose
torn aboue'em; A long pike-staffe in his neck (and a tord in his teeth) and a
wa^et on his right shoulder, and now the cullion hath with Nouerint vniuersi
eaten up some hundred Gentlemen: he must needs rise a Gentleman as 'twere out
of their Ashes, or disparage a Gentlewoman, to make himself a Gentleman, at
least by the wives side.


The worse my fortune to be entangled with such a winding bramble.


Entangled? Nay if I thought 'twould ever come to that, I'd hire some
shag-ragge or other for half a chickeene to cut's throat, only to save thy
hands from doing it; for I know thou would poison him within one month; love
thee he will never, and that must be thy happiness: for if he do, look to be
coop't up like a prisoner, condemned to execution, scarce suffered to take the
air, so much as at a window, or waited on continually by an old beldam: not
to keep thee company, but to keep thee from company: thy pocket searched, thy
cabinets ransacked for letters: ever in opposition, unless (like the Moon)
once a Month in conjunction; wealth thou may have indeed, but enjoy it as
in a dream, for when thou wake thou shalt find nothing in thy hand;


O ugly, and monstrous spectacle.


Now tell me whether thou would make choice of him or a young gallant in prime
of his choicenesse; one that for birth, person, and good parts, might
m^ritoriously marry a Countess; and one to whom his soul is not so dear as
thy self. Gasparo and he be not a little different. Aurelio? stay beast, wilt
thou make such a blessed opportunity curse thee? I'll fetch her out to thee.


Wretch that I am, how she lothes me? if I abide her, I shall consume in the
lightnings of her anger.


Here's a life indeed; what's he gone? passion of death, what a babe 'tis? I
could find in my heart to jerk him, but temper me friendship, no remedy now;
now wit turn his defects to perfection. Why Cuze he's quite out of sight. By
my life I commend him; why this is done like thy self Aurelia, were she the
Queen of love and woude run from thee, fly thou from her; why now I love
thee, for I see you are worthy of my love, thou carry a respect to thine own
worth, and wilt express it with spirit; I dare say, thou look to have had
him fall on his knees, and adored thee, or beg his life at thy hands: or el^e
turned Queen Dido, and pierce his tender heart with sword full sharpe; no
faith wench, the case is altered, love made Hercules spin, but it made him rage
after: there must go time to the bridling of every passion; I hope my friend
will not love a wench against her will, if she woude have met his kindness
half way, so: if she skit and recoil, he shoots her off warily, and away he
goes: I marry Sir, this was a Gentlemanly part indeed. Farewell Cuze, be thou
free in thy choice too, and take a better and thou can a Gods name.


Nay dear Cuze, a word.


A word? what's the matter? I must needs after him, and clap him ath'backe,
this spirit must be cherished.


Alas what would you wish me to do?


Why, nothing.


Would you counsel me to marry him against my fathers will?


Not for the world, leave him, leave him, leave him: you see he's resolved,
hee'll take no harm an you, never fear to embrew your hands with his liver I
warrant you.


Come you are such an other.


This same riches with a husband, is the only thing in the world, I protest;
good Gasparo, I am sorry I have abused thee in faith, for my Cozens sake; how
prettily the wretch came crawling by with his crooked knees even now: I have
seen a young Gentlewoman, live as merry a life with an old man, as with the
proudest young upstart on'em all: farewell Cuze, I am glad you are so wise
in faith.


If you go, I die: fie on this affection, it rages with suppression. Good
Cuze, I am no longer able to continue it, I love, Aurelio better then it is
possible for him to love me.


Away, away, and could not this have been done at first, without all these
superfluous disgracings? O this same vnhearty niceness of women, is good for
nothing but to keep their huswife hands still occupied in this warp of
dissembling.

Wel^ wench redeem thy fault, and write a kind letter to him presently,
before this resolution of his take too deept root in him.


Nay sweet Cuze, make me not so immodest, to write so suddenly, let me have a
little time to think upon it.


Think me on nothing till you write: think as you write, and then you shall
be sure to write as you think. Women do best when they least think on it.


But rather then write I will meet him at your pleasure.


Meet him? dost thou think that I shall ever draw him again to meet thee,
that rush't from thee even now with so just a displeasure?


Nay good Cuze, urge not my offence so bitterly, our next meeting shall pay the
forfeit of all faults.


Well you are my pretty Cuze, and I'll do my best to bring him to thee again,
if I cannot, I shall be sorry in faith, thou wr't so injuriously strange to him.
But where shall this interview be now.


There is the mischief, and we shall hardly avoid it, my father plies my
haunts so closely: and uses means by our maid to entrap us, so that this
Terrace at our back gate is the only place we may safely meet at: from
whence I can stand and talk to you. But sweet Cuze you shall swear, to keep
this my kindness from Aurelio, and not intimate by any means that I am any
thing acquainted with his coming.


Slife, dost think I am an Ass? to what end should I tell him? he and I'll
come wandering that way to take the air, or so, and I'll discover thee.


By mere chance as 'twere.


By chance, by chance, and you shall at no hand see him at first, when I bring
him for all this kindness you bear him.


By no means Cuze.


Very good: And if you endure any conference with him, let it be very little;
and as near as you can, turn to your former strangeness in any case.


If do not Cuze, trust me not.


Or if you think good, you may flirt away again as soon as you see him, and
never let your late fault be any warning t'ee.


I will do all this, I warrant thee Cuze.


Will you so Cozen fool? can thou be brought to that silly humour again by
any persuasions? by Gods Lord, and you be strange again, more then needs must,
for a temperate modesty, I'll break's neck down from thee, but he shall do as
he did to thee.


Now, fie upon you Cuze, what a fool do you make me?


Well Dame, leave your superfluous nicety in earnest* and within this hour I
will bring him to this Terrace.


But good Cuze if you chance to see my chamber window open, that is upon the
Terrace, do not let him come in at it in any case.


Sblood how can he? can he come over the wall think?


O Sir, you men have not devices with ladders of topes to scale such walls at
your pleasure, and abuse us poor wenche^.


Now a plague of your simplicity, would you discourage him with prompting him?
well Dame, I'll provide for you.


As you love me Cuze, no words of my kindness from me to him.


Go to, no more ado.


GOd ye God morrow Sir, truly I have not heard a sweeter breath then your Page
has.


I am glad you like him Mistress Temperance.


And how dee Sir?


That I must know of you Lady, my welfare depends wholly upon your good speed.


How say Sir? and by my soul I was coming to you in the morning when your
young man came to me; I pray let him put on, unless it be for your pleasure.


He is young, and can endure the cold well enough bare-headed.


A pretty sweet child 'tis I promise you.


But what good news Mistress Temperance, will your Mistress be won to our
kind meeting?


Faith I'll tell you Sir, I took her in a good mood this morning, and broke
with her again about you, and she was very pleasant as she will be many
times.


Very well, and is there any hope of speed?


No by my troth Gentleman, none in the world, an obstacle young thing it is, as
ever I broke with all in my life: I have broke with a hundred in my days, tho
I say it, yet never met her comparison.


Are all my hopes come to this Mistress Temperance?


Nay 'tis no matter Sir, this is the first time that ever I spake to any in
these matters, and It shall be the last God willing.


And even now she had broke with a hundred and a hundred.


But do you love her Sir indeed?


Dost thou make a question of that?


Pardon me I pray Sir, I mean dee love her as a Gentleman ought to do, that
is, to consumi^ate matrimony with her as they say?


That's no matter to you Mistress Temperance, do you procure our meeting, and
let my favour be at her hands as I can enforce it.


You say like an honest Gentleman; a woman can have no more: and faith Sir I
wish you well, and every day la dinner my Mistress uses to go to her chair or
else lie down upon her bed, to take a nap or so, to avoid idleness as
many good huswifes do, you know, and then do I sit by her and ^ew, or so: and
when I see her fast asleep, Lord do I think to my self, (as you know we
waiting women have many light thoughts in our heads) Now if I were a man, and
should bear my Mistress an ill will, what might I do to her now.


Indeed then you have very good opportunity.


The best that may be, for she sleeps like a sucking P^gge, you may jogge her
a hundred times, and shee'll stir no more then one of your stones, here.


And could you put a friend in your place think you?


Nay byr'lady Sir, back with that leg, for if any thing come on it but well,
all the burden will lye upon me.


Why what can come of it? only that by this means I may solicit her love my
self.


I but who knows if the Devil (God bless us) should be great wee', how you
would use her?


What dost thou take me for a beast, to force her that I would make my wife?


Beast Sir; Nay there's no beastliness in it neither, for a man will show like
a man in those cases: and besides, you may mar the bed, which every body
will see that comes in; and that I would not for the best gown I shall wear
this twelve Month.


Well, to put thee out of that fear, it shall be worth such a gown to thee.


I thank you for that Sir, but that's all one, and thus Sir, my old Master
Honorio, at two a clock will be at Tilting, and then will his son Signior
Aurelio, and his man Augelo, be abroad; at which hour if you will be at the
back gate, and muffle your self handsomely, you may linger there till I call
you.


I marry Sir, so I may be there long enough.


Nay, but two a clock, now, now is my hour Sir.


Very well, and till then farewell.


Boy to you heartily.


Boy to him indeed if he knew all.


I Have provided thee a ladder of ropes, therefore resolve to meet her, go
wash thy face, and prepare thy self to die, I'll go make ready the ladder.


But when is the happy hour of our meeting?


Marry Sir, that's something uncertain, for it depends wholly upon her fathers
absence, and when that will be God knows: but I doubt not it will happen once
within this twelue-Moneth.


Sownds a twelue-Moneth.


Nay hark you, you are all upon the spur now, but how many lovers have
served seven twelue-Moneths prenticeships, for the freedom of their Mistress
favours? notwithstanding to shorten your torments, your man Angelo must be the
mean, to draw the lap wing her father from his nest, by this device that I
tell you.


I did ever dream that once in my life good fortune would warm her cold hand
in my naked bosom. And that once is now come, I'll lay hold upon it, in faith; I
have you my little squire, I have you upon mine Anueill, upon which I will
mallet you and work you; coining crowns, chickins, bracelets, and what not
out of you; for procuring you the dear gullage of my sweet heart mistress
Francischina.


I am glad it rests in my kind servant Angelo. Angelo, well met, it lies in
thee now, make me no more thy master, but thy friend, and for ever happy in thy
friendship.


In what part of me does that lie Sir, that I may pull it out, for you
presently?


My friend Lodouico here hath told me, what thou reuealedst to him to day,
touching his uncle Lorenzo, and his louesute to Francischina.


Slight I told it him in secret sir.


And so did I tell it him Angelo, I am a Jew else.


It may well be sir, but what of that?


This Angelo, he would have thee procure my old uncles absence from home this
afternoon, by making him meet or pretending his meeting with his mistress,
and thy sweet heart Francischina.


Which if thou dost Angelo, be sure of reward to thy wishes.


What talk you of reward sir? to the loving and dutiful servant, 'tis a
greater encouragement to his service to hear his master say, God a mercy
Angelo, spy out Angelo, I'll think of thy pains one day Angelo, then all your
base rewards and preferments: yet not to hinder your hand sir, I will extend
mine to his service presently, and get your old uncle ( Signior Lorenzo) out of
the ways long enough I warrant you.


Tis honestly said, which when thou hast performed, enforce us


I will not fail sir, I was resolved to make him away before they spake to me,
in procuring his access to Francischina, for what is his presence at her
house, but his absence at his owns? and thus shall I with one trewell daube
two walls,


What means my love by these strange salutations?


Pre thee ask me no questions; hold take these bracelets, put up this purse of
gold quickly, and if thou wilt have any of these things, I have cried to thee,
speak and tis performed.


From whose treasury comes all this, I pre thee?


Lorenzo, Lorenzo, a gentleman of much antiquity, and one that for his love
hath burned hundreds of hearts to powder; yet now it falls out, that his tree of
life is scorched and blasted with the flames of thy beauty, ready to wither
eternally, unless it be speedily comforted with the sweet drops of thy nose.


Gods my life, is that old squire so amorous?


You wrong him to term him old, he can draw his bow, ride his horse, use his
sword, and trail his pike under Loves colours, as well as ever he did.


I believe that easily.


Well, go thy ways in and prepare to entertain him now thy husband is from
home, only with good words, and best kindnesses, making him put all into deeds
till his treasury be deedlesse.


You speak as if I had nothing to respect but his entertainment, when you know
how close and timely it must be put in execution, considering with what envious
eyes my neighbours survey me.


Think thou, I consider not all this? he shall come in disguised, wench, and
do thou devise for our mirth, what ridiculous disguise he shall come in, and he
shall assume it.


What a magnifico of the City, and one of the Senate, think thou he will
not see into that inconvenience?


No more then no Senator, for in this case, my assurance is that Cupid will
take the scarf from his own eyes, and hoodwink the old buzzard, while two
other true turtles enjoy their happiness: get thee in I beseech thee love,
tell thy gold, and say thy prayers.


I see him within eare-shot; well may beauty inflame others, riches may tempt
others; but for me, mine ears and mine eyes, are proof against all the
Sirens, and Venusses, in all the seas of the world; beauty is a whore, riches a
baud, and I'll trust none an you.


What ails poor Angelo?


Nay mistress Frank, if you prove disloyal once, farewell all constancy in
women.


How now man? what's the matter?


O Sir are you so near? I shall trust your experience in women the better
while I live.


I pre thee why so?


Say true Sir, did you never solicit your loue-sute to fair mistress
Francischina?


Never I protest Angelo.


Upon my life 'tis a strange thing; I would have sworn all Italy, could not so
suddenly have fastened a favour upon her, I looked for a siege of Troy at least,
to surprise the turrets of her continence; but to yield at the first sight of
her assailants colours, and before any Cannon was mounted before her, 'tis one
of the loosest parts of a modest woman that ever I heard of.


How say thou? did not I tell thee as much? beware of an old colt while you
live, he can tell when to strike I warrant you.


Women and feathers? now fie on that affinity.


Alas Angelo, a feeble generation, soon overcome God knows, the honester
mind, the sooner overcome.


Gods my life, what light huswife would yield at first to a stranger, and yet
does this whirligig stand upon terms of honour forsooth? tenders her
reputation as the Apple of her eye; she has a jealous and a cutting husband,
envious neighbours, and will die many deaths rather then by any friends open
access to her, be whip't naked with the tongues of scandal and slander; and a
whole sanctuary of such ceremonies.


O she does worthily in that Angelo, and like a woman of honour, thou hast
painted her perfection in her faults thou find, and tickil'st me with her
appetite.


And to avoid all sight of your entrance, you must needs come in some disguise
she says; so much she tenders your high credit in the City, and her own
reputation, forsooth.


How, come in some disguise?


A toy, a very toy which runs in her head with such curious feet Sir,
because if there be any resemblances of your person seen to enter her house,
your whole substantial self will be called in question; any other man she
says, might better adventure with the least thing changed about 'em then you
with all; as if you were the only noted mutton-monger in all the City.


Well Angelo, heaven forgive us the sins of our youth.


That's true Sir, but for a paltry disguise, being a magnifico, she shall go
snicke up.


Soft good Angelo, soft, let's think on it a little: what disguise would serve
the turn says she?


Faith, I know not what disguise she would have for you: she would have you
come like a Calfe with a white face, I think, she talks of Tinkers, peddlers,
porters, chimney-sweepers, fools and Physicians, such as have free egress and
regress into men's houses without suspicion.


Out upon 'em, would she have me undergo the shame and hazard of one of those
abjects?


In faith I told her so, a squire of that worship, one of the Senate, a grave
Justicer, a man of wealth, a magnifico?


And yet by my troth, for the safeguard of her honour, I would do much; me
thinks a Friars weed were nothing.


Out vppon't, that disguise is worn thread bare upon every stage, and so much
villainy committed under that habit; that 'tis grown as supicious as the
vilest. If you will hearken to any, take such a transformance, as you may be
sure will keep you from discovery: for though it be the stale refuge of
miserable Poets, by change of a hat or a cloak, to alter the whole state of a
Comedy, so as the father must not know his own child forsooth, nor the wife
her husband, yet you must not think they do it earnest to carry it away so:
for say you were stuffed into a motley coat, crowded in the case of a base
Viol, or buttond up in a cloakbag, even to your chin, yet if I see your
face, I am able to say this is signior Lorenzo, and therefore unless your
disguise be such that your face may bear as great a part in it as the rest,
the rest is nothing.


Good reason, in faith Angelo; and what, shall I then smurch my face like a
chimney sweeper, wear the rest of his smokinesse?


I'll tell you sir, if you be so mad to condescend to the humour of a foolish
woman, by consideration that Jove for his love took on him the shape of a
Bull, which is far worse then a chimney sweeper, I can fit you rarely.


As how I pre thee?


There is one little snail you know, an old chimney sweeper.


What, he that sings, Maids in your smocks, hold open your locks, fluds.


The very same sir, whose person (I borrowing his words) you will so lively
resemble, that himself in person cannot detect you.


But is that a fit resemblance to please a lover Angelo?


For that sir, she is provided: for you shall no sooner enter but off goes your
rusty skabberd, sweet water is ready to scour your filthy face, milk, a
bath of fernebraks for your fusty body, a chamber perfumed, a wrought shirt,
night cap, and her husbands gown, a banquet of Oysters pies, Potatoes, Skirret
roots, Eringes, and diverse other whetstones of venery.


O let me hug thee Angelo.


A bed as sustained as her hair, sheets as delicate as her skin, and as sweet as
her breath, pillows imitating her breasts, and her breasts to boot, Hypocras
in her cups, and Nectar in her lips, Ah, the gods have been beasts for less
felicity.


No more good Angelo, no more, how shall I requite the happiness thou wilt
bring me too? haste any mind of marriage?


Not much sir, but an extraordinary wife might tempt me.


By my troth and she were not promised, thou shouldest have my daughter: but
come lets to our disguise, in which I long to be singing.


I'll follow you presently.


How now Angelo?


Why sir, I am providing means to lead your old uncle out ath'way, as you
willed me, by drawing him into the way of Quintilianoes wife, my sweet heart,
and so make room for him by Quintilianoes room: you that lead him any way,
must needs seek him out and employ him to some tavern.


He will be with me presently Angelo, and here's a freshman come from Padua,
whom I will powder with his acquaintance, and so make him an excellent morsel
to relish his carouses.


Go to Sir, by this light you'll be complained on, there cannot be a fool
within twenty mile of your head, but you engross him for your own mirth:
Noble-mens tables cannot be served for you.


Stut, I'll complain of them man, they hunt me out and hang upon me, so that I
cannot be rid on'em, but they shall get some body else to laugh at, or I'll
turne'em over to our Poets, and make all the world laugh at'em.


Well Sir, here comes your man, make him sure from his wife, and I'll make the
the other sure with her.


SEe Signior Gionanelle, here comes the famous Captain you would so fain be
acquainted withal; be acquainted with him at your peril: I'll defend you from
his swaggering humour, but take heed of his cheating.


I warrant you Sir, I have not been matriculated at the University, to be
meretriculated by him: salted there to be colted here.


Very well Sir, lets hear him.


I have examined the particulars of your bill Master Taylor, and I find them
true Orthographie, thy payment shall be correspondent: marry I will set no day,
because I am loath to break.


Alas Sir, pray let this be the day: consider my charge. I have many children,
and this my poor child here whom I have brought up at school, must loose all
I have bestowed on him hitherto, if I pay not his Master presen^y the
quartridge I owe him.


Fool dost thou delight to hear thy son beg in Latin, pose him
Lieutenant.


How make you this in Latin boy? My father is an honest Taylor.


That will hardly be done in true Latin Sir.


No? why so Sir?


Because it is false English sir.


An excellent Boy.


Why is it false English?


Marry sir, as bona Mulier is said to be false Latin, because though bona be
good, Mulier is nought; so to say my father is an honest Taylor, is false
English; for though my father be honest, yet the Taylor is a thief.


Believe it a rare shred, not of home-spunne cloth upon my life: Taylor, go,
send the schoole-master to me at night and I'll pay him.


Thank you good Captain, and if you do not pay him, at night my wife will
come to you her self, that's certain, and you know what a tongue she has.


Like the sting of a Scorpion, she nailes mine ears to the pillory with it,
in the shame and torment she does me. Go I will void this Bill and avoid
her.


I thank you sir.


Lieutenant, is not this a brave gullery? The slave has a pretty wife, and she
will never have me pay him, because she may ever come to my chamber, as she
says, to rail at me, and then she goes home and tells her husband she has
tickled me in faith.


By my life, a rare jest.


Thou may see this Boy is no shred of a Taylor, is he not right of my look
and spirit?


Right as a line, in faith.


And will agree in the halter. -- Save you Captain Quintiliano.


And dost thou live my noble Lodouico? Boy, take my cloak, when shals have a
rouse, ha? my Lieutenant and I were drunk last night, with drinking health on
our knees to thee.


Why, would not your legs bear you Sir?


How many miles to midsommer? S'blood, whose fool are you? are not you the
tassell of a Gander?


No indeed not I Sir: I am your poor friend Sir glad to see you in health.


Health? S'fut, how mean you that? dee think I came lately out ath' powdering
Tubbe?


Gossaue me Sir 'twas the furthest part of my thought.


Why you're not angry, are you?


No, nor you shall not be.


S'blood, I hope I may and I will.


Be and you dare Sir.


Dare?


I, dare.


Plague on thee, you are the made Lodouico in the world, s'fut do thou stab
me, and you have a mind too't, or bid me stab my self, is this thy friend?
dost thou love Lodouico?


With my heart I protest Sir.


S'heart, a lies in's throat that does not; and whence come thou wag, ha?


Even new arrived from Padua Sir to see fashio^s.


Give me thy hand, you are welcome* and for thy fashions, thou shalt first
drink and wench it: to which end we will carouse a little, some six or seven
miles hence, and every man carry his wench.


But where shall we have them Captain?


Haue'em Lieutenant? if we haue'em not, my Valentine shall be one, and she
shall take a neighbour or two with her to see their nursed childes or so; we'll
want for no wenches I warrant thee,


But who comes here?


O tis my Barber.


S'blood how thy trades men haunt thee.


Alas they that live by men, must haunt'em,


God save you Sir.


How now Cutberd, what news out of Barbary?


Sir, I would borrow a word with you in private.


Be brief then Cutbeard, thou look lean me thinks, I think you are newly
married.


I am indeed Sir.


I thought so, keep on thy hat man, twill be the less perceived, what, is not
my Taylor and you friends yet? I will have you friends that's certain, I'll
maintain you both else.


I know no enmity betwixt us Sir, you know Captain I come about another
matter.


Why but Cutbeard, are not you neighbours? your trades Cousin german, the Taylor
and the Barber? does not the Taylor sow? doest not thou Barber reap? and do
they not both band themselves against the common enemy of mankind, the louse?
are you not both honest men alike? is not he an arrant knave? you next door to
a knave, because next door to him?


Alas Sir, all this is to no purpose, there are certain odd crowns betwixt
us you know.


True Cutbeard, wilt thou lend me as many more to make'em even Boy?


Faith Sir, they have hung long enough a conscience.


Cut'em down then Cutbeard, it belongs to thy profession if they hang too
long.


Well Sir if this be all, I'll come by'em as I can, and you had any honesty.


S'blood honesty you knave? do you tax any Gentleman in this company for his
honesty?


Blame me not sir, I am undone by him, and yet I am still of as good credit in
my Parish as he too.


S'blood Rascal, as good credit as I?


Nay pre thee Captain forbear.


Good Captain be gone.


Let me alone; I'll not strike him by this hand, why hark ye Rogue: put your
credit in balance with mine? dost thou keep this company? here's Signior
Lodouico, one of the Clarissimi, a man of worship: here's a Gentleman of Padua,
a man of rare parts, ^n excellent scholar, a fine Ciceronian.


Well sir.


And here's my Lieutenant, I hope thou know the Worshipful man his father
with the blew beard, and all these are my companions; and dare you a barbarous
slave, a squirting companion, compare with me? but here's the point; now behold
and see: Signior Giouenelle, lend me four or five pounds, let it be five
pounds, if you have so much about you.


Here's my purse sir, I think there be just so much in it.


Very good, now Cutbeard, are you a slanderous cut-throat or no? will thy
credit do this now? without scrip or scroll. But thou wilt think this is
done for a colour now; do you not lend it me simply?


What a question's that?


For how long?


At your pleasure Captain.


Why so, here you poling Rascal, here's two crowns out of this money: now I
hope wilt believe 'tis mine, now the property is altered.


Why you might a done this before then.


No Cutbeard, I have been burned in the hand for that, I'll pay ne'er a knave an
ye all money, but in the presence of such honest Gentleman that can witness
it; of my conscience I have paid it thee half a dozen times; go to sir be
gone.


Fare ye well sir.


Thank you Signior Giouenelle; though you're sure of this money again at my
hands, yet take heed how this same Lodouico get it from you, he's a great
sharker; but you have no more money about thee hast thou?


Not a do it, by this candle.


All the better, for he would cheat thee on it, if thou had ever so much,
therefore when thou come to Padua, ply thy book and take good courses, and
'tis not this again shall serve thy turn at my hands, I swear to thee.


Thank you good Captain.


Signior Lodouico, adieu.


Not so sir, we will not part yet, a carouse or two me thinks is very necessary
betwixt us.


With all my heart Boy, into the Emperors head here.


Content.


SAy Sir, have you plaid the man and housed the Captain?


I have housed and lodged him in the Emperors head Tavern, and there I have
left him glorified with his two gulls, so that presume of what thou wilt at his
house, for he is out of the way by this time both ways.


It is very well handled sir, and presume you your friend my master Aurelio of
what may satisfy you at your uncles, for he is now going out of the way, and
out of himself also: I have so besmeared him with a chimney sweepers
resemblance, as never was poor Snail, whose counterfeit he triumphs in,
never thinking I have daubd his face sufficient, but is at his glass as
curiously busied to beautify his face (for as of Moo'rs so of chimney
sweepers) the blackest is most beautiful as any Lady to paint her lips.


Thou art a notable villain.


I am the fitter for your employment Sir: stand close I beseech you, when I
bring him into the streets, encounter and bait him in stead of Snail, but in
any case let none else know it.


Not for the world.


If you should tell it to one, so you charge him to say nothing, 'twere
nothing, and so if one by one to it play holy water frog with twenty, you know
any secret is kept sufficiently; and in this, we shall have the better sport at
a Bear baiting, fare ye well Sir.


SIgnior Lodonico good even to you.


The like to Signior Honorio, and hark you Sir, I must be bound with my uncle
Lorenzo, and tell you a pleasant secrete of him, so in no sort you will utter
it.


In no sort as I am a Gentleman.


Why Sir he is to walk the streets presently in the likeness of Snail the
chimney sweeper, and with his cry.


What is he Sir? to what end I beseech you Sir will he disfigure himself so?


In faith Sir I take it for some matter of policy, that concerns town
government.


Towne-bull government, do you not mean so Sir?


O no Sir, but for the general business of the City I take it.


Well sir well we will not examine it too far, but guess at it.


So sir when he comes forth do you take one corner to encounter him as I will
do another, and taking him for Snail, imagine he went about stealing of
City venison, (though he do not,) and make what sport you think good with
him, always provided it be cleanly, and that he may still think he goes
invisible.


I warraut ye Signior Lodouico, and thank you heartily for this good cause of
our honest recreation.


Scarce honest neither sir, but much good do it you, as it is,


O that my son, your friend Aurelio, were here to help to candy this ieast
a little.


Alas sir, his sick stomach can abide no sweet meates, he's all for aye me,
we'll make the Ieast relish well enough I warrant you: Lorenzo my uncle an
old Senator, one that has read Marcus Aurelius, Gesta Romanorum, the Mirror of
Magistrates, c. to be led by the nose like a blind Bear that has read nothing.
Let my man read how he deserves to be baited.


'Tis a pretty wonder in faith Signior Lodouico.


Slife, 'twere a good deed, to get boys to pin cards at his back, hang
squibs at his tail, ring him through the town with basins, besnowball him
with rotten eggs, and make him asham'de of the Commission before he scale it.


What says Signior Lodouico, I beseech you sir? me thinks his pleasant
disposition should intend some waggerie.


I will tell you Signior Gasparo, but in any case you must say nothing.


In no case will I say any thing sir.


Then this is the case: Signior Lorenzo (your probable father in law) in the
case of Snail the chimney sweeper, will straight tread the streets for his
pleasure.


For his pleasure?


For his pleasure sir, say it be so, wonder not, but ieast at it, consider what
pleasure the world says he is most given to, and help bait him hereafter,
but in any case cleanly, and say nothing.


O monstrous, I conceive you, my father in law, will his daughter have his
tricks think you?


Faith for that you must even take fortune de la pace, kiss the Paxe, and be
patient like your other neighbours. So, here stand I, chose you another place.


O me, what if a man should call him to sweep a chimney in earnest, what would
he do? I'll put him too't a my credit, and here will I stand.


How now sir, are you well yet think you?


A little more here good Angelo.


Very well sir, you shall have enough.


It will be the most perfect disguise that ever was imitated.


I'll warrant you that in faith sir; ya're fitted beyond the forehead for a right
counterfeit; It is well now sir?


Yet a little more here Angelo, and then master Painter let Michael Angelo
himself amend thee.


For a perfect natural face, I care not if all the world explain it.


So now take this glass, and give me my furniture, and have at your smoky
chimney.


Have at your smokey chimney Mistress Frank: here (...) take up your
occupation, and down with Snail for a chimney sweeper.


A^ay, see if the coast be clear.


I will sir.


Take good view, look about to the doors and windows.


Not a dog at a door, not a cat at a window. Appear in your likeness, and
not with your quality.


Chimney sweep; work for chimney sweep, wilt do sirha?


Admirably.


Does my suit become me?


Become you sir? would to heaven mistress Frank could bring you to the
wearing of it always.


I'll forth in faith then; Maids in your smocks, set open your locks, Down,
down, down:
Let Chimney sweeper in:
And he will sweep your chimneys clean,
Hey derry, derry, down.
How dost like my cry, ha?



Out of all cry, I forbid Snail himself to creep beyond you.


As God help, I begin to be proud on it: Chimney sweep.


Gods pity, who comes yonder?


My nephew Lodowicke; Gods me, I'll start back again.


Nay there's no starting now, hee'll see you go into your house then; fall into
your note; stand to Snails person and I warrant you.


Chimney sweep.


How now Snail, how dost thou?


Thank your good worship.


Me thinks thy song is more hearty then 'twas wont to be, and thou look
much better.


Thank God and good friends sir; and a merry heart that prolongs life. Chimney
sweep.


Nay good Snail, lets talk a little, you know Rose mine uncle Lorensoes maid
Snail!


That I do well sir.


She complains of you Snail, and says, you're the bawdiest old knave in
venery.


Alas sir, she wrongs me: I am not fed thereafter, let her look for that
commendation in her richer customers.


Who are they Snail? I hope you do not mean mine uncle her Master; he's
mine uncle and I love him well, and I know the old lickspiggot will be nibbling
a little when he can come too't: but I must needs say he will do no hurt, he's
as gentle as an Adder that has his teeth taken out.


You're a merry Gentleman sir; and I have haslie labour in hand, I must crave
pardon.


What old Snail? how dost thou and thy chimneyes?


Marry sir I was asking him questions about one of them.


What Signior Lodouico? what one is that I pray?


Mine uncle Lorenzos maid Rose sir, and he will needs persuade me, her old
master keeps her for his own saddle.


Her old master? I dare swear they wrong him that say so; his very age would
make him ashamed to be overtaken with those goatish licences.


True sir, and his great authority in the City, that should whip such
unseasonable lechers about the walls of it.


Why, you're in the right sir, and now you talk of your uncle, I heard say
Captain Quintiliano cheated him yesterday of five pounds, as he did a young
Gentleman of Padua this morning of as much more.


Faith sir he drew such a kind of tooth from him indeed.


Is it possible he should be so wrought upon by him? Now certain I have ever
held him a most wise Gentleman.


An arrant Rooke by this light; a capable cheating stock; a man may carry him
up and down by the ears like a pipkin.


But do you think he will let the Captain pass so?


Why alas, what should he do to him sir? the pasture is so bare with him, that
a goose cannot graze upon it.


Marry sir then would I watch him a time when he were abroad, and take out my
penniworthes of his wife, if he drew a tooth from me, I would draw another
from her.


Well, God be with your worships: chimney sweeper, I thought I should never
have been rid of them,


What old Snail, dost thou cry chimney sweep still? why they say thou art
turned mighty rich of late.


I would they said true sir?


Yes by the mass, by the same token, that thos^ riches make thy old name for
venery increase upon thee.


Foolish tales sir, foo^ish tales.


Yes by the mass, Snail, but they be told for such certain tales, that if
thou hast a daughter to marry with ten thousand crowns, I would see her
pithole, before I would deal with her, for fear she should trot through her
fathers trumperies.


Alas sir your worship knows, I have neither daughter nor riches, Idle talk
sir, Idle talk: chimney sweep.


Nay stay Snail, and come into my house, thou shalt earn some money of me, I
have a chimney to sweep for thee.


I thank your worship, I will wait upon you next morning early sir: but now I
have promi'st to sweep another mans chimney in truth.


But goodd Snail take mine in the way.


What does he cry chimney sweep, and refuse to sweep 'em?


No master, alas you know I live by it, and now I cry as I go to work that I
have promi'st, that I may get more against other times: what would ye have me
do tr^e?


Alas poor S^ayle; farewell good Snail, farewell.


Lord keep your good worship. -- And a very vengeance, I beseech the black
father of vengeance.


Poor uncle, he begins to be melancholy, has lost his song among's


Was never such man touched with such oversight?


Bear with age, Signior Gasparo, bear with age, and let us all tender his
credit as we have vowed, and be silent; he little thought to have been thus
betrayed as he is; and where secrecy is assured, it bears with many bad
actions in the very best I can tell you, and so good Signior Lodouico adieu, and
I heartily thank you.


Adieu good Signior Honorio.


Adieu to you likewise sir.


Likewise to you sir. Alas poor uncle, I have monstrously abused him; and yet
marvelous worthy, for he disparageth the whole blood of us; and I wish all
such old sheepebiters might always dip their fingers in such sauce to their
mutton; but thus will he presently be safe; for by this he is near his
sweet hearts house, where he is like to be entertained with worse cheer then
we made him. Quintilliano is now carousing in the Emperors head, while his
own head buds horns to carouse in; and in the mean time will my amorous
friend and I, make both their absences shooing horns to draw on the presence
of Aemilia.


what says your worship now? Do you not walk invisible, all your ancient
acquaintance, your own nephew to talk with you and never discover you?


But Angelo, a villainous fear shook me the whiles I swear, for still I was
afraid my tongue would have likt away the soot of my face, and bewrayed me;
but Snail, hitherto thy rusty shell has protected me: persevere till I have
yonder house a my head, hold in thy horns, till they look out of
Quintillianoes forehead: for an old man to make a young man cuckold, is one of
Hercules labours.


That was the cleansing of other men's stables.


To make youth rampant in age, and age passant in youth, to take a man down at
his own weapon; to call back time in one, and thrust him headlong upon
another.


Now your worship is Oracle to your own miracles; how you shine in this smoky
cloud? which you make the golden net to embrace Venus, y'aue past the pikes
in faith and all the Iayles of the loue-god swarm in yonder house, to salute
your recovery.


Well Angelo, I tell thee, now we are past the danger, I would not for 40 crowns
but have heard, what I have heard.


True sir, now you know what the world thinks on you, 'tis not possible for a
great man, that shines always in his greatness, to know himself; but O twice
young Leander, see where your Hero stands with torch of her beauty to direct you
to her tower, advance your sweet note, upon her.


Chimney sweep, work for chimney sweep.


Come in chimney sweeper.


O Angelo.


Why now sir thine Angelo is your good Angel; enter and prosper, and when you
are in the midst of your happiness, think of him that preferred you.


Angelo, give him not too much time with me, for fear of the worst, but go
presently to the back gate, and use my husbands knock, then will I presently
thrust him into my cole-house: and there shall the old flesh-monger fast for
his iniquity.


Well said mine own Frank in faith, we shall trim him betwixt us, I for the
most slovenly case in the town; she, for the most sluttish place in the
house: Never was old horse-man so notoriously ridden; well, I will presently
knock him into the cole-house, and then haste to Lodouico, to know when he
shall be releast.


HEre's thy ladder, and there's thy gallows, thy Mistress is thy hangman, and
must take thee down: This is the Terrace where thy sweet heart tarries; what
would thou call it in Rime?


Celestial sphere, wherein more beauty shines.


Room for a passion.


Then on Dardanian Ida, where the pride
Of heavens selected beauties strived for prize.

Nay you shall know, we have watered our houses in Helicon. I cannot abide this
talking and undoing Poetry, leave your me^ifluous numbers: yonder's a sight
will stea^e all reason from your rime I can tell you; down of your knees you
sl^ue, adore. Now lets hear you invoke, O the saple hams of a lover, go
to, do not, stand up close, for she must not see you yet, though she know you
are here.


Cozen Lodowicke?


Who calls Lodowicke?


What t^mpest hath cast you on this solitary shore? Is the party come?


The party? now a plague of your modesty, are your lips too nice to name
Aurelio?


Well, is he come then?


He, which he? s'fut name your man with a mischief to you, I understand you
not.


Was there ever such a wild-braine? Aurelio.


Aurelio? ^ord how loath you are to le^ any sound of him come out an you, you
hold him so dear within, I'll present her with a ^ight, will startle her nicety
a little better; hold you, fasten the end of this ladder I pray.


Now Iesus bless us, why cousin, are you mad?


Go to you spirit of a feather, be not so soft hearted, leave your nicety, or
by this hemp I'll so hamper thy affections in the halter of thy lovers absence,
making it up in a gordian knot of forgetfulness, that no Alexander of thy
allurements, with all the swords of thy sweet words, shall ever cut in pieces.


Lord, how you roll in your rope-ripe terms.


Go to, tell me, will you fasten the ladder or no?


I know not what I should say t'ee: I will fasten it, so only your self will
come up.


Only my self will come up then.


Nay sweet Cuze, swear it.


If I should swear thou would curse me: take my word in a halters name, and
make the ladder as fast to the Terrace, as thou would be to Aurelio.


Nay see if he do not make me give over again?


Was there ever such a blew kitling? fasten it now^ or by heaven thou dost
loose me for ever.


Well sir, remember your word; I will fasten it, but in faith Cuze, is not the
Gentleman, and his parting choler parted yet?


In faith with much ado:


Nay, nay, choose him; I shall live, if they be not^ and if I live till his
choler kill me, I shall live till he leave loving me, and that will be a good
while first.


Lord, Lord, who has enform'd you of such amorous fervency in him: are you so
confident in his kindness?


Nay by my troth, tis but a careless confidency neither, which always last
longer then that which is timorous: well Cuze, here I have fastened it for your
pleasure; but alas, the fear of my fathers coming does so distract me that I
scarce know what I do or say.


Your father? dost think we would venture all this prepa^tion, and not make
him safe?


But are you sure he is safe?


Am I sure this is Aurelio? look upon him wench, is it not thy love? thy life?
come sir, mount.


O cousin Lodwicke, do you thus cousin and betray me?


Cuze, Cuze, thou hast acted thy dissembling part long enough, in the most
modest judgment, and passing naturally: give over with thy credit then,
unmask thy love, let her appear in her native simplicity, strive to conceal
her no longer from thy love, for I must needs tell thee he knows all.


What does he know?


Why all that thou told me, that thou love him more then he can love thee,
that thou hast set up thy resolution, in despite of friends or foes, weals or
woes, to let him possess thee wholly, and that thou did woo me to bring him
hither to thee: All this he knows; that it was thy device to prepare this
ladder, and in a word, all the speech that past betwixt thee and me he knows,
I told him every word truly and faithfully Gods my Judge.


Now was there ever such an immodest creature?


Via, with all vain modesty, leave this colouring, and strip thy love stark
naked, this time is too precious to spend vainly; mount I say.


Model of heavenly beauty.


Sownds, wilt thou melt into rime a the the other side? shall we have lines?
change thy stile for a ladder, this will bring thee to Parnassus, up I say.


Unworthy I t'approach the furthest step to that felicity that shines in her.


O spurblinde affection, I have seen a fellow, to a worse end ascend a ladder
with a better will, and yet this is in the way of marriage, and they say,
marriage and hanging have both one constellation. To approve the which old
saying, see if a new ladder make 'em not agree.


Peace, some body comes.


That you heard, was but a mouse, so boy I warrant thee.


O sacred goddess, what so ever thou art
That in mere pity to preserve a soul
From vndeseru'd destruction, hast vouchsaf't
To take Aemiliaes shape.

What a poetical sheep is this? S'life, will you stand riming there upon a
stage, to be an eye-marke to all that pass? is there not a chamber by?
withdraw I say for shame, have you no shame in you? here will come some body
presently I lay my life on it.


Dear mistress, to avoid that likely danger,
Vouchsafe me only private conference,
And 'tis the fulness of my present hopes.

Aurelio, Occasion is bald, take her by the forelock; so, so. In Hymens name
get you together, here will I stand Sentinel. This is the back gate to
Honorios house, which shall be Aurelios, if God give him grace to weep for his
fathers death in time. And in this garden, if I could see the chaste Lucresse,
or the affable mistress Temperance, I might (thus wrapped in my cloak) steal a
little courtship through the chink of a pale. But indeed I think it safer to
sit closer, and so to cloud the sum of my visnomy, that no eye discern it.
No, for there is neither money nor credit proposed or expected, and besides
there is no unlawful act intended, no not this same lasciua actio animi: I
think for his part, much less hers: go to, let me do my kinswoman, and her
sex right, sit at rest with me then reputation, and conscience, fall asleep
with the world, but this same idle attendance is the spite of it, Idleness is
accounted with other men a sin, to me 'tis a penance, I was begot in a
stirring season, for now hath my soul a thousand fancies in an instant, as
what wench dreams on when she lies on her back, when one hen lays an egg and
another sits it, whether that hen shall mother that chicken? If my bull leap
your cow, is not the calfe yours? yes no doubt, for Aedificium cedit solo says
the Lawyer: and then to close all comes in a sentence, Non omnia possumus
omnes: for some are borne to riches, others to verses, some to be bachelers,
others to be cuckolds, some to get crowns, and others to spend'm, some to get
children, and others to keepe'em: and all this is but idleness, would to God I
had some scurvy poem about me to laugh at,


Yonder he sits in faith, well done true love, good Signior Leonoro, he keeps
promise the best, he does not see me yet.


'Tis the stayed Madam Temperance, a pretty pinnace she has been in her days,
and in her nights too, for her burden, and reasonable good under sail, and
see she hath discovered a sail, see, see, she hales him in, ha? tis this way
to the rewards, slight 'tis this way: I hope the baud knows not me, and yet I
know not, she may be a witch, for a whore she was before I knew her, a baud I
have known her any time this dozen years, the next step to honour then is a
witch, because of Nature, for where the whore ends, the baud begins, and the
corruption of a baud, is the generation of a witch. And Pythagoras holds
opinion, that a witch turns to a wild Cat, as an old Ostler turns to an
ambling nag.


This is the back gate, where Temperance should meet me at this howre.


I wonder she fails, for I see her not.


Why sits that fellow there troe? come let's hover here abouts 'twill not be
long ever we encounter.


So, now this riddle is expounded, this baud took me for this aduenturer whom
(twenty to one) she attended, to waft him into Lucretias chamber, what a beast
was I, not to apprehend this advantage, thus muffled as I am, she could not
have perceived me till I had been in, And I might safely have staid a while
without endangering my lovers:


Come, come, gingerly for Gods sake, gingerly.


SE^ Lyonell, yet she is not come, and the privy atte^dant is gone.


I wonder what it was.


I ^eare me some other client of hers, whom she pr^fe^res before me, come, we
must not linger here too long together, we'll enter on this backside, to the
Emperors head, where we will stay a little, and then make the last trial of
this bawds honesty.


Come A^cient, lets leave our company a little, and air our selves in this
backside. -- Who goes there?


A friend.


The word.


God save you Captain Quintiliano.


Shot him Ancient, a spy, the word's the Emperors head, and thither you
shall go sir.


Pardon me good Captain.


Come, be not retrograde to our desires.


I attend a friend of mine.


You have attended him already, I am witness too't, deni't and he dare,
whatsoever he be, and he shall attend thee another while, and he will: You are
as good a man as he, and he be the Duke himself, for a Clarissimo; entertain
him Ancient, bid the Clarissimo, welcome, I'll call a drawer, and we'll have
some wine in this Arbor.


You're very welcome Signior Clarissimo, desire you more acquaintance sir.


My name is Leonoro sir, indeed I scarce know you.


No sir, and you know me, you must know as much as I know, for Scientia and
Scientificus is all one; but that's all one, in truth sir, you shall not spend
a penny here, I had money, I thank God even now, and peradventure shall have
again e're we part, I have sent to a friend of mine.


Here honourable Clarissimo, I drink to thee.


Thank you good Captain.


S'fut, winesucker, what have you filled us here, baldredash? taste Leonoro.


Me thinks 'tis sack.


Let us taste sir, 'tis claret, but it has been fetched again with Aqua
vitae.


S'light me thinks t'as taken salt water, who drew this wine you rogue?


My fellow Sam drew it sir, the wine's a good neat wine, but you love a
pleasanter grape, I'll fit your palate sir.


Is this thy boy Leonoro?


For fault of a better sir.


Before heaven 'tis a sweet faced child, me thinks he should show well in
woman's attire: and he took her by the lilly white hand, and he laid her upon
a bed. I'll help thee to three crowns a week for him, and she can act well.
Hast ever practised my pretty Ganimede?


No, nor never mean sir.


Mean sir? No marry Captain, there will never be mean in his practise I
warrant him.


O finely taken; Sirha, Clarissimo, this fellow was an arrant Asle this
fore-noone, before he came to be an Ancient.


But where's your Lieutenant Captain?


Sownds man, he's turned swaggerer.


Is't possible?


Swaggerer by this light he; and is in the next room writing a challenge to
this tall Gentleman my Ancient here.


What, mutinous in your own company?


S'fut man, who can bridle the asses valour?


S'blood and any man think to bridle me.


But what was the quarrel?


Why sir, because I entertained this Gentleman for my Ancient, (being my dear
friend and an excellent scholar) he takes pepper in the nose and sneeses it out
upon my Ancient; now sir (he being of an vncol^-carrying spirit) falls foul on
him, calls him gull openly; and ever since I am fain to drink with 'em in two
rooms, dare not let'em come together for my life, but with pen and
inke-hornes, and so my Lieutenant is in the next chamber casting cold Ink upon
the Clarissimo hold my Ancient.


Good Ancient, forbear in a Tavern.


Revenge noble Lieutenant, hast thou done it?


S'light I think I have pepperd him, but twas his own seeking you know.


That's certain.


Sownds my seeking sir?


Hold him Leonoro; and if it be possible, persuade him to hear the challenge
from the enemies own mouth.


I'll undertake he shall Captain: Good Ancient let me entreat you.


Well sir, because you're a stranger to me, you shall do more with me.


Thank you good ancient.


Read fiery Lieutenant, read boy, legibly.


Here it is sir: Signior Giouenelli, it is not ignorant unto you, that even now
you crossed me over the cocks-comb.


I did so sir: I will not deny it I warrant you.


Good Ancient peace.


And that openly, or else it would never have grieved me.


That openly was all indeed.


And moreover, very vnreuerendly to call me gull, and ass to my face: And
therefore, though I held it good discretion in me to wink at the blow, not
seeing to take notice of it.


Good discretion in deed.


Yet know that I will have satisfaction from you.


Well sir, and you shall.


Nay good Ancient hear him.


And desire you to send me word, whether you will maintain it or no, hoping
that you will not offer that discourtesy to do me wrong, and stand to it when
you have done.


That were foul indeed.


And as for the words, in that you called me gull, and Ass to my face, resolve
me by letter (for I do not think fit we should meet) first whether you spake
any such words or no: and secondly by whom you meant'em. And it by me (as I
think you durst not) confess you are sorry for'hem: and if I have offended
you, I heartily ask you forgiveness. And so farewell.


Before heaven Ancient, this would have tickled you, but good Leonoro, and thou
be a right Clarissimo, lets make'em friends, and drink to one another:
S'fut, we have no wine here me thinks, where's this Aperner?


Here Sir.


Have you mended your hand sir.


I Captain, and if this please not your taste, either you or I cannot taste a
cup of wine.


Sounds you're very saucy sir, here Lieutenant, drink to thy Ancient, and void
mutinies with your officer, marshall law is dangerous.


Is he content I should drink to him?


He is I warrant thee.


Why then Ancient good luck t'ee.


Let come Lieutenant, I pledge you.


Why so, now my company is cur'de again, before 'twas wounded. Come honourable
Clarissimo, lets retire to our strength, taste a fresh carouse or two, and then
march home with Music. Tapster, call us in some Music.


I will sir.


STrike up Scrapers, honourable Clarissimo, and thy sweet Adonis, adieu,
remember our device at the show soon.


I will not fail Captain, farewell t'ee both: come Lionel, now let us try
the truth of Madam Temperance, and see if she attend us.


I hope by this time she remembers her promise sir.


How now Lieutenant, where's my Ancient?


Marry Captain y'aue left him casting the reckoning ith'chimney.


Why then his purse and his stomach will be empty together, and so I cashier
him; let the scholar report at Padua, that Venice has other manner of learning
belongs to it: what does his Continuum Contiguum here? let'em go to the Ink
pot and beware of the wine pot. Fill red cheeked Bacchus, let the Bordeaux grape
Skip like la voltos in their swelling veins.
Te dan, dan tidle, te dan de dan tidle didle, c.



O God Captain that I could dance so.


He took her by (strike up fiddlers) the lilly white hand and he laid her upon
the bed. Oh what a spirit have I now? I long to meet a Sergeant in this
humour, I would but have one whiffe at one of these same peuter buttoned
shoulder-clappers, to try whether this chopping knife or their pestels were
the better weapons. Here's a blade Boy, it was the old Dukes first
predecessors; I'll tell thee what Lieutenant, this sword has dubbed more Knights
then thy knife has opened Oysters.


Is't possible Captain, and me thinks it stands a little.


No matter for that, your best mettald blades will stand soonest: so, now we
have attained our Mansion house. At which I'll sing a verse shall break the
doors. O noble Hercules, let no S^ygian lake.
Te dan dan tidle, te dan de dan tidle didle, c.
Farewell scrapers, your reward now shall be that I will not cut your strings
nor break your sidles, via, away.


Come Captain, lets enter, I long to see my Mistress, I warrant she's a heavy
Gentlewoman for your absence.


S'fut she's an Ass, honour woos me, preferment calls me, and I must lye
pampered in a wenches lap, because she dotes on me. Honour says no,
Lieutenant, Pugna pro patria, we must too't in faith and seek our portion
amongst the scratched faces.





Whoe's that cais there?


I heard no body.


No? there was one called Mistress: I say who called Mistress, s'blood I hope I am
not drunk.


In truth sir I heard no body.


I tell thee I smelt a voice here in my entry, s'fut I'll make it smell worse
and'cheare it again.


O me, hee'll draw upon his own shadow in this humour, if it take the wall of
him. Follow him Fannio, look he do no harm for God sake.


Help, help, help.


Name of God, what's there to do?


Good Captain do not hurt me.


Sounds is hell broke loose? why Snail, though you can sing songs and do
things Snail, I must not allow ye to creep into my wives cole-house, what
Snail into my withdrawing chamber?


I beseech your Worship hear me speak.


O Snail, this is a hard case; no room serve your turn, but my wives
cole-house, and her other house of office annexed to it? a privy place for her
self, and me sometimes, and will you use it being a stranger? s'light how
comes this about? up sirha and call your Mistress.


A plague of all disguises.


Alas poor Snail, what did thou make here?


I protest sir for no harm, my Mistress called me in to sweep her chimney, and
because I did it not to her mind, she made me do penance in her cole-house.


Search him Captain and see, if he have stolen nothing.


Kill me, hang me, if I have.


Yes Snail, and besides I hear complaints of you, you're an old luxurious
hummerer about wenches Snail, does this become your gravity sir? Lieutenant,
fetch me a cole-sacke, I'll put him in it and hang him up for a sign.


I beseech your Worship be good to me.


Good Captain pardon him, since he has done nothing but swept your chimney
worse then my Mistress would have it swept, he will do it better another time.


Well Snail, at this Gentleman's request, (to whom I can deny nothing) I
release you for this once, but let me take you no more thus I advise you.


Not while I live good Captain.


Hence, trudge you d^udge, go away.


A plague of all disguises.


I have looked about all the house for my Mistress sir, but I cannot find her.


Go then, look all about the town for her too; come in Lieutenant, lets
repose a little after our liquor.


Dear life, be resolute, that no respect
Heighted above the compass of your love,
Depress the equal comforts it retains;
For since it finds a firm consent in both,
And both our births and years agree so well,
If both our aged parents should refuse,
For any common object of the world,
To give their hands to ours, let us resolve
To live together like our lives and souls.

I am resolved my love; and yet alas,
So much affection to my fathers will
Consorts the true desires I bear to you,
That I would have no spark of our love seen,
Till his consent be asked, and so your fathers.

So runs the mutual current of my wish,
And with such staid and circumspect respects,
We may so serve and govern our desires,
That till fit observation of our fathers,
Prefer the motion to them; we may love
Without their knowledge and the skill of any,
Save only of my true friend Lodowicke.

I wonder where he is.

Not far I know,
For in some place, he watches to prevent
The feared danger of your fathers presence.

SOunds stay for the love of your honour sir.


A plague of all disguises Angelo.


What reason have you to curse them? has not one of them kept you safe from the
shame of the world, as much as a poor disguise might do; but when your
ridiculous fears will cast it off, even while it is on, so running through the
streets, that they rise all in an uproar after you* alas what is the poor
disguise to blame sir?


Well then fortune is to blame, or some thing; come as thou did help to
dawbe me, help to cleanse me, I prithee.


Let alone a while sir for Gods sake, I'll go see whether the Captain be gone
from home or no.


Out upon that course Angelo; I am frighted out of it, come enter my house,
enter.


What, will you enter your house sir before you know who is in it: keep your
self close, and let me first enter and discover.


I know there is no body.


You cannot know it sir, I heard even now that diverse of the Senate were
determined to come and sit in Counsel there.


A tale, a very tale Angelo, enter for the love of heaven, enter and vnsmother
me.


What shall I do? my poor Master is berai'd, O that same faithless
Lodowicke, that could drown the swaggering Captain no better in his
drunkenness; alas how should I salve this?


How now? whom do I see? my daughter and a yonker together? passion of death,
hell and damnation, what lecherous capricorne reigns this unhappy day? old and
young in a predicament? O fie of filthy sin and concupiscence, I will conceal
my rage a while that it may break forth in fury; I'll shift me presently
Angelo, and go fetch the Provost.


O unspeakable madness, will you for ever dishonour your daughter, and in her
your self sir?


Talk not to me, out upon this abominable concupiscence, the pride of the
flesh, this witchcraft of the Devil: talk not to me, justice cries out an't
in the streets, and I will see it punish't, come good Angelo to help to shift
me.


I'll follow you Sir instantly; Master, Master.


Angelo? what news?


Miserable Master, cast down your ladder, and come down instantly.


Alas, why, Angelo is my father coming.


Let us not talk but come down I say.


Dear life, farewell, we'll shortly meet again,
So parts the dying body from the soul;
As I depart from my Aemilia.

So enter frighted souls to the low world,
As my poor spirit upon this sudden doubt,
What may succeed this danger.

Come away, you'll be whipped anon for your amourosity, hast for shame hast, c.


Once more and ever, fare my dear life well.


Leave your amorous congeis get you in Dame* sir you and I will talk as 'twere
betwixt the pales, now, get you and shift you of this suit presently.


Shift me Angelo? why man?


Ask me no questions, but go home and shift you presently, and when I have
done a little business here within, I'll come and tell you my device: there
hath more chance it then you are aware of, and then I can stand to tell you; away
therefore presently go home and shift you.


Very good sir, I will be ruled by you, and after lear^e the mysteries.


Now will I let the little squire shift and cleanse himself without me, that
he may be longer about fetching the Provost, and in the mean time will I take
my Masters suit (of which the little squire took note) and put it on my sweet
heart Francischina, who shall presently come and supply my Masters place, with
his Mistress; for the little squire amazed with his late affrights and this
sudden offencefull spectacle of his daughter, took no certain note who it
was that accosted her; for if he had, he would have blamed me for my Master,
only the colour of his garment sticks in his fancy, which when he shall still
see where he left it, he will still imagine the same person wears it, and thus
shall his daughters honour and my Masters be preserved with the finest sugar of
invention. And when the little squire discovers my sweet heart, she shall
swear, she so disguised her self, to follow him, for her love to him; ha, ha
ha, O the wit of man when it has the wind of a woman.


HOld, hold, I pre thee hold; I yield my rapier,
Let my submission, my presumption salve.

Ignoble Lodwicke, should I take thy life,
It were amends too little for the wrong.

O the precious heavens:
How was I gul'd? haud, hide thy self for shame.
And henceforth have an eye before thy fingers.

Well do not ieast it out, for I protest
If this disguise, which my inhumane fate
Puts on my proper sex, be by thy means
Seen through, by any other then thy self,
The quarrel twixt us shall be more then mortal.
And thy dishonour to a friendless stranger
(Exild his native country, to remnine
Thrall to the mercy of such unknown miads
As fortune makes the rulers of my life)
Shall spread it self beyond my misery,

Nay, mix not cause of mirth with passion,
Do me the grace t'vnfold thy name and state,
And tell me what my whole estate may do,
To salve this wrong unwittingly I did thee?
And set the plantife thoughts of thy hard fate
In such peace, as my friendship may procure:
And if I fail thee, let Jove fail my soul,
When most this earth makes it need help of heave.

In the more then temper my late rage
And show your virtues perfectly derived
From the Venetian noblesse; for my name
It is Lucr^tio, which to fit this habit
I turned Lucretia: the rest that rests
To be related of my true estate,
I'll tell some other time: least now your presence
Might dumbly tell it (if it should be seen)
To all the world, or else make it suspect
My female life of lightness: then with thanks
And vow of all true friendship, for th'amends
Your kindness makes me, take your sword again,
And with it while I live the power of mine
In any honoured use shall command.
Then till we meet, and may laugh at this error,
I'll once more try the free peace of my chamber.

Do so sweet friend: a plague of Gingerly?
Where is that stale and fulsome Gingerly,
She brought me to a fury, I'll be sworn
Rather then man or woman: a flat beating:
I found her supposed mistress fast asleep,
Put her to the touchstone, and she prou' a man.
He waked, and with a more then manly spirit
Flew in my face, and gave me such a dash
In steed of kissing, of these licorish lips
That still my teeth within them bled I swear
Gengerly, Gingerly, a plague a you.
But now how does my lovers on the Terrace?

HOld, take my doublet too, my hat and all, and quickly hie thee to thy sweet.


S'ounds, see sir see, your proper Sentinel, that when you needed him, gave
you a slip.


Friend Lodouico, by my life, well welcome to this my fathers backside.


Well sir, well, I would I had kissed almost your fathers backside so I had
ne^er known it.


A my life he faints extremely, he left you even now to purchase him the
amorous interview of your fair cuze Lucretia that lies here.


Gods me, sweet friend, would thou use such a slight to any one that lay
within my walk? who was thy mean to her?


I lay my life, tame madam Temperance, the notorious Pandar.


S'^ut friend, wat a notorious oversight was that? and what a violent injury
unto thy friend?


A plague upon you both, you scurvy hind, have you no gull but me to whet your
wit upon?


My friend a privy lover? I'd have sworn
Love might spend all his shafts at butterflies
As well as at his bosom.

'Twas your fault then,
For I have noted a most faithful league
Betwixt him and his barber now of late,
And all the world may see, he does not leave
One hair on his smooth chinn, as who should say,
His haplesse love was gone against the hair.

S'bloud these rogues knew how I was deceived,
They'd stout me into motley, by this light.

Well sir, I ever thought y'ad the best wit
Of any man in Venice next mine own,
But now I'll lay the bucklers at your feet,

A pox upon thee, tame your bald hewed tongue,
Or by the Lord of heaven I'll pull it out.

O my sweet friend, come I'll know more of this,
And tell thee all our fortune, hence good Angelo.

O, if this man had patience to his brain,
A man might load him till he smart again.

Patience worthy friend, he knows you love him for his knavish wit.


THou shalt not stay sweet Temperance, tell us the manner of our war and
we'll leave thee presently.


Why that perl's man Lodowicke, according to your appointment was jump at
three with me, just, ^eene full at your hour; Muffled as I wild you, ee'ne
your fashion and your very leg for all the earth, and followed me in so
gingerly, that by my troth I must needs say, he was worthy the pleasuring; but
in what a taking was I when I perceived his voice? when I saw my mistress he
together by the ears?


What did thy mistesse fight with him?


O king a heaven, she ran upon his naked weapon the most finely that ever
lived, and I ran away in a swoon for fear.


Has she a good courage?


It seems she is too honest for our companies, a little more good Temperance.


And when he saw me, he called me punk, and pander, and doxy, the vilest
nicknames as if I had ben an arrand naughty-packe.


'Tis no matter Temperance, he's known and thou art known.


I thank heaven for it, and there's all indeed, I can stay no longer.


Farewell honest Temperance: how was it possible, Lodouico should fit all these
circumstances without the confederacy and treachery of this beldam? well
Lodouico must satisfy this doubt when I see him.


That will be at the May night show at Signior Honorios.


I would not meet him there, I shall offend him, but there I must needs be, and
have thee disguised like a woman.


Me sir?


No remedy, the Captain Quintilliano and I have deuis'd it to gull his
Lieutenant: for thou shalt dance with him, we will thrust him upon thee, and
then for his courting and gifts, which we will tell him he must win thee
withal, I hope thou wilt have wit enough to receive the tone, and pay him
again with the the other, come Lionell let me see how naturally thou can play
the woman.


Better then you think for.


COme Lientenant, this nap has set a nap of sobriety upon our brains, now lets
sit here consult, what course were best for us to take in this dangerous
mansion of mans life.


I am for you in faith Captain you go to consult once.


I know it Lieutenant, say then what think thou? we talked of employmet, of
action, of honour, of a copany so forth.


Did we so Captain?


Did we so Ass? S'fut, were thou drunk before thou went to the tavern,
that thou hast now forgotten it?


Cry you mercy good Captain, I remember I am your Lieutenant.


Well sir, and so thou shalt be called still, and I Captain, though we never
lead other company then a sort of quart pots.


Shall we Captain, bith mass then lets never have other company in deed.


Why now you are wise, and hast a mind transformed with maine right, and to
confirm thee, I will compare the noble service of a feast with the honourable
service of the field, and then put on thy hand to which thou wilt.


Thank you good Captain, but do you think that war is nought sir?


Exceeding nought.


Why then sir take heed what you say, for 'tis dangerous speaking against any
thing that is nought, I can tell you.


Thou say wisely Lieutenant, I will not then use the word nought, nor speak
ill of either, but compare them both, and choose the better.


Take heed then good Captain, there be some prickecar'd in elligencers
conveyed into some wall or other about us.


If there were I care not, for to say true, the first model of a battle was
taken from a banquet. And first touching the offices of both: for the general
of the field, there is the master of the feast, for the Lieutenant General,
the mistress, for the Sergeant Mayor, the Steward, for the Gentleman usher,
the Marshall, for master of the Ordinance the Sewer, and all other officers.


Yet you're reasonable well Captain.


Then for the preparation, as in a field is all kind of artillery, your
Cannon, your Demicannon, Culuerings, falkons, Sacres, minions, such goodly
ornaments of a field, I speak no hurt of em thou see, I'll have nothing to do
do with 'am.


Hold you still there Captain.


Besides other munition of powder and shot, and so for the feast, you have your
Court, cubbords planted with flagons, cannes, cups, beakers, bowles, goblets,
basins and ewers: And more glorious show I wisse then the the other, and yet I
speak no hurt of the other.


No I'll be sworn Captain.


Besides your munition of manchet, napery plats, spoons, glasses and so forth;
Then for your kitchen artilieri^, there shall you see all your brass pieces
mounted in order, as your beefe-pots, your chaldrons, your kettles,
chafingdishes, ladies, spits, a more edifying spectacle then your Cannon
Culuering, and yet I speak no hurt of them neither.


No Captain, thus far, I go we.


Then sir, as in the field the drum, so to the feast the dresser gives the
Alarm, Ran tan tara, tan tan tantara tan.


O how it stirs my stomach?


First then sets forward a wing of light horse, as salads, brothes, sauces,
flew'd meats, and other kickshores* and they give a charge, then do the battle
join Captain Capon in white-brith, Lieutenant calves head.


That's my place.


Ancient Surloigne, a man of a goodly presence, and full of expectation, as you
ancient ought to be, then have you Sergeant Piemeat, Corporal Conny,
Lanceprizado Lark, Gentlemen, Panbakex, all the species of a company.


Would we might fall to the fight once.


Why now grows the fight hot man, now shall you see many a tall piece of
beef, many a tough capon go down, and hee'rs the trial of a mans stomach,
all the while the Artillery plays on both hands, the Canons lay about them,
the flagons go off, thick and threefold, and many a tall man goes halting off,
some quite overthrown both horse and foot.


O my heart bleeds.


That is, thy teeth water. In conclusion, as the remnant of the feast, (I mean
such dishes as escaped the fury of the fight) if they be serviceable, are
reserved to furnish out another day if they be maimed or spoiled, they are sent
abroad to relieve prisons and hospitals. So the remainder of the fight, if they
be serviceable, they are reserved to supply a second field, for the fragments
of the fight, viz. the maimd soldiers, they are sent likewise to furnish
prisons and hospitals, how say thou now Lieutenant, shall we to the feast,
or to the fight?


No fighting good Captain, to the feast for Gods sake.


Tha'rt a my mind right, and so will we presently march on to the sack of the
Emperors head, then to the May-night feast, and show at Signior Honorios, and
there will be a wench there boy, a delicate young morsel, a kinswoman of
Signior Honorios, and her fathers only child, he a mighty rich Clarissimo, and
her shalt thou court, win her and wear her, thou hast wit at will.


But shall that wench be her fathers son and heir Captain?


She shall be his heir, a mine honesty.


But shall not my Mistress your wife be at that show?


She shall, and we could find her; Fannio has been abroad this hour to
seek her: the Ass is stepped into some corner or other mourning for my absence.



Come Cuze, march fair, me thinks thou become a Page excellent naturally,
cheer up thy heart wench.


Fie for shame kiss in the streets?


Why not? truth seeks no corners, and 'twas a true loves kiss, and so is
this.


Ware riot, dost thou mark Lieutenant?


Gods pity, my husband.


What were these Captain?


Upon my life the hindmost of them, is a wench in mans attire, did thou not
mark besides his slabbering about her, her big thighs and her sp^ay feet.


By the meskin me thought they were so indeed.


S'life, the hungry knave her squire, could not hold in the open streets.


What should she be?


The Doxy was muffeld in her cloak, I had but a glimpse of her; but s'light I
will know her, she passes not so, come we'll follow. I'll beat the Rogue and
take away's whore from him.


COme courage Cuze, we have sailed the man of War out of sight, and here we
must put into harbour. Hist, haw Amila?


O welcome good Angelo.


Here take in, go, get up lightly, away, take heed you slip not Cuze, remember
you're short heeled.


Hold fast for Gods sake.


Nay hold you fast, you'^l shame us all else; so Jove receive thy soule^ I take
away the ladder: Now till you have d^ceiued the Provost, farewell, remember
your l^s^on Cuze.


I warrant you.


How unhappily did we miss 'em? they slipped into some vaulting house, I hold my
life.


Faith it's good we mist'em, she was some stale punk I warrant her.


Twenty to one she is some honest mans wife of the Parish that steals abroad
for a trimming, while he sits secure at home, little knowing, God knows, what
hangs over his head; the poor Cuckold esteeming her the most virtuous wife in
the world. And shoude one tell him, he had seen her dressed like a Page
following a knave thus, I'll lay my life he would not believe it.


Why no Captain, wives take all the faith from their husbands. And that makes
'em do so many good works as they do.


Mercy for that in faith Lieutenant, stand close.


My Mistress in mans apparel say thou?


Thy Mistress in mans apparel I assure thee, and attended by Angelo.


Would to heaven I had seen her, can tell whither she went.


Full butt into Lorenzoes house, and if thou knew him, thou know
wherefore, an ill-fauourd trimming is her errand.


'Tis very well, she trims my Captain prettily, in the mean time his head
pays for all, and yet alas poor hornestocke, he thinks her to have no fault,
but her too much dotage upon him, well my conscience will not let me keep her
counsel, he shall know on it.


Why man if both of us should tell him her fault he will not believe us.


No, nor if he had seen it with his own own eyes I think, I shall never
forget how the profound Cockatrice hung on his sleeve to day, and he shoude not
from her sight, she would follow him into the wars, one day should make an end
of both their loves and lives, and then to see him the withal, my Captain
began to stroote, and batle the pride of his merits that so heightened her
affection.


True, and how the foppasty his Lieutenant, stepped in to persuade with her, to
take it patiently, for friends must part, we came not all together, and we must
not go all together.


Well, 'twill not be for any man to follow him, if this were known once.


Lord how all the boys in the town would flock about him as he walks the
streets, as 'twere about a bagge-pipe, and hoot the poor Cuckold out of his
hornecase.


Well, and I were worthy to give him counsel, he should even fair and well
hang himself.


No, no, keep it from him, and say thou found her at a woman's labour.


A plague of her labour, the Captains brows sweat while she labours.


If I were in thy case, I should laugh out right when I saw him.


That dare not I do, but as often as he turns his back to me, I shall be
here V with him that's certain: or when I follow him and his cheating stock
Innocentio, in the streets, I shall imagine still I am driving an Ox and an
Ass before me, and cry phtroh, ho^ ptrough.


S'light Captain take this and take all.


Not a word for the world, for if we should take notice of his words the slave
would deny all, leave it to me to sif^ it in priua^e. Now sir, what news with
you? where's your Mistress, that you range thus at your pleasure?


In health sir I trust.


Come forward you rogue you: come forward, whither creep you behind so?
where's your Mistress sir?


At a poor woman's labour sir.


Very well sir, come Lieutenant, go you before, and do you follow him sir.


What before my Captain sir: you shall pardon me.


Before you rogue, before.


SIgnior Lorenzo, and Gasparo, you're very welcome, we shall have good company
and sport to entertain you ere long I hope, shall we not Angelo?


Yes sir, I have enuited all you commanded me.


This is the honest man indeed, that took the pains to come for me.


And for me also.


No pains but pleasure sir, I was glad I had such good means to be known to
your Worship.


Nay, I have known you before, to be the servant of Signior Honorio here, I
take it.


Not my servant Signior Lorenzo, but my sons.


O, your son Aurelios servant? believe me you or your son (in mine opinion,
though I say it before him) made good choice of him: for he hath a good honest
face, and to a man of judgment (I tell you) that's as good as a good surety
for him. I will be better acquainted with you sir, pray you give me your hand.


Both my hand and heart sir, shall be ever at your service.


Thanks my good friend, I'll make thee laugh anon Angelo.


I thank your Worship, you have done so often.


A notable wag Signior Gasparo.


How curiously Lorenzo thinks he carries the matter?


How now Gentlemen, is't a merry secret, that you smile so?


No secret Signior Lorenzo, but a merry conceit we were thinking on, to
furnish our show anon, if it had been thought on in time.


What was that I pray?


Marry sir, we had good sport to day with Snail the chimney-sweeper.


Had you so sir?


That ever was.


Lord that I had been amongst you, but what more of him sir?


Marry sir, we were thinking how we might m^rrily deceive our company that is
to come, if we could have gotten him some M^gn^ficoes suit of the City, whom
for his lit^le stature and ^ane face he might resemble, that in that habit he
might have stolen some kind favours from the Ladies, to make him amends and
please him for the anger we put him in.


It would have made excellent merriment.


You are his best Master sir, and if it please you to send me for him by some
token, I'll go for him; otherwise he will not come to these Gentlemen.


Shall he come Gentlemen?


If you ^lease sir.


Why then heark^ thee Angelo; not for the world.


Think you me such an Ass sir?


Shall he have one of my little brothers suites, and come in amongst the Dames
for him?


If you could, it would fit him exceedingly.


Much; now laugh Angelo: what Gentleman was that I spied aloft with my daughter
think thou?


I know not sir; I beseech your Worship who was it?


Frank, in mans apparel Angelo.


O wonderful.


We cannot invent a token, for my love Angelo.


O excellent.


We will hit it anon Gentlemen.


At your leisure sir.


The swaggerer her husband, had note of it by his Page, and yet the same Page
hath persuaded him, since that 'twas but a gullery.


'Tis a notable crack; and his Master hath such a pure belief in his wife,
that he's apt to believe any good of her.


True Angelo, enough for this time; thou shalt make as if thou went for
Snail, and return without him, saying thou can not find him.


Agreed sir.


Now Gentlemen, we have deuis'd a wile to bring Snail amongst us, and I have
given Angelo order for a suit for him, that is my little brothers, and him he
shall counterfeit; go Angelo seek him out.


I will sir.


Thank you for this good Signior Lorenzo.


It will quicken the company well.


For their sakes and yours, I have done it Gentlemen; and see the fair flock
come upon us.


Welcome fair Ladies, but especially you Lady, that are so mere a stranger,
Signior Lorenzo you know young Leonoro?


Very well sir, a gallant spark.


And I think you know his father.


Know him? I faith sir there was a reveller, I shall never see man do his
lofty tricks like him while I live.


This Gentlewoman is his Niece sir.


His Niece? she shall do her self wrong not to be acquainted with her dear
uncles companion:


You know not this Gentlewoman sir?


Not very well sir indeed, but entertainment must be given, mercy Frank for
thy mans apparel, a plague of all swaggering husbands. Nay I must forth
in faith, Signior Honorio* this is for your sake, am I not a kind help to your
enter^ainement?


An exceeding kind one sir, and I exceedingly thank you.


The maskers are come sir.


Do you and your fellows attend them in.


We will sir.


Sit gentle Ladies till the maskers raise you to dance.


WElcome Gallants, O the roome's too scant, a hall Gentlemen.


See how womanly my Boy looks Quintiliano.


'Twill be rare sport; Lieutenant, that sweet wench in the brancht gown is the
heir I told thee of.


Gods me, I'll to her and kiss her.


O no, you must not unmask.


No, no, I'll kiss her with my mask and all.


No Lieutenant, take her and court her first, and then kiss her.


To her slave.


There's thy wife too, Quintiliano*


True, little knows she I am so near her; I'll single her out, and try what
entertainment a stranger may find with her.


Do^ so, and we'll take up the the other.


I can by no means find Snail sir.


The worse luc^, but what remedy?


Gramercy Angelo* but Signior Lorenzo, me thinks I miss one flower in this
femal^ garland.


Whose that?


Your Niece Lucretia*


By my soul 'tis true; whats the reason Angelo Lucretia is not here?


I know no reason but her own will sir.


There's somewhat in it certain. They dance again.


Did you see the play to day I pray?


No, but I see the fool in it here.


Do you so forsooth? where is he pray?


Not far from you sir, but we must not point at any body here.


That's true indeed, cry mercy forsooth, do you know me through my mask?


Not I sir* she must have better skill in baked meats then I, that can
discern a woodcock through the crust.


That's true indeed, but yet I thought I'd try you.


What N^phew Lodwicke, I thought you had been one of the mask^rs.


I use no masking sir with my friends.


No signior Lodowick, but you're a very truant in your school of frien^ship*
that come so late to your friends.


Somewhat has crossed him sure.


Somewhat shall cross him; Lodouico let me speak with you.


With me sir?


You are the man sir, I can scarce say the Gentleman, for you have done a wrong
the credit of a Gentleman cannot answer.


Would I might see his face, that durst say so much.


Observe him well, he shoes his face that will prove it when thou dare.


How now Leonoro, you forget your self too much, to grow outrageous in this
company.


Aurelio, do not wrong me, and your self, I undertake your quarrel, this man
hath dishonord your Kinswoman Lucretia, whom (if I might) I intended to marry.


Some error makes you mistake Leonor^, I assure my self.


What interruption of our sport is this gentlemen?


Are not my Nephew and Leonoro friends?


He charges me with dishonoring his mistress Lu^retia.


Byr'lady Lodouico, the charge touches you deeply, you must answer it.


I only desire I may sir, and then will refer me to your censures.


Well Nephew, well; will you never leave this your haunt of fornication? I
school him, and do all I can, but all is lost.


Good Uncle give me leave to answer my other accuser, and then I'll descend,
and speak of your fornication, as the last branch of my division.


Very well, be brief.


I will sir; The ground upon which this man builds his false imagination, is
his sight of me at Honorios back gate, since dinner, where muffled in my
cloak, kind Madam Temperance, the attendant of Lucretia, from the Terrace,
wa^ted me to her with her hand; taking me (as now I understand) for this honest
Gentleman, I not knowing what use she had to put me to, obaid the attraction
of her signal, as gingerly as she bad me. (A plague upon her gingerly) till
she locked me into Lucretias chamber, where Lucretia lying asleep on her bed,
I thought it rudeness to wake her; and (imagining when she waked she had
something to say to me) attended her leisure at my ease, and lay down softly
by her; when (having chaster and simpler thoughts then Leonoro imagines)
because he measures my wast by his own) in the very coldness and dullness of
my spirit, I fell suddenly asleep. In which my fancy presented me with the
strangest dream, that ever yet possessed me.


Pray God you did but dream Nephew.


You shall know that by knowing the event of it.


Go to, pray let us hear it.


Me thought Lucretia and I were at maw, a game Uncle that you can well skill
of.


Well sir I can so.


You will the more muse at my fortune; or my oversights. For my game stood, me
thought, upon my last two tricks, when I made sure of the set, and yet lost it,
having the varlet and the five finger to make two tricks.


How had that been possible?


That had been no misfortune sure but plain oversight.


But what was the reason you thought you lost it sir?


You shall hear; she had in her hand the Ace of Hearts, me thought, and a
Coate-carde, she led the board with her coat, I plaid the varlet, and took up
her coat, and meaning to lay my five finger upon her Ace of hearts, up start a
quite contrary card; up she rises withal, takes me a dash a the mouth, drew a
rapier he had lay by him, and out of doors we went together by the ears.


A tapier he had lay by him?


What a she turned to a he? dost thou not dream all this while Nephew.


No nor that time neither, though I pretended it; let him be fetched, I warrant
you he will show as good cards as the best on you, to prove him an heir Male,
if he be the eldest child of his father.


This is exceeding strange: go Angelo, fetch her and her hand-maide.


I will sir, if her valor be not too hot for my fingers.


Could such a disguise be made good all this while without my knowledge? to say
truth, she was a stranger to me, her father being a Sicilian: fled thence for
a disausterous act, and coming hither grew kindly acquainted with me, and
called me brother. At his death committing his supposed daughter to my care and
protection, till she were restored to her estate in her native Country.


Was he in hope of it?


He was, and in near possibility of it himself, had he lived but little
longer.


Here's the Gentlewoman you talked of sir, nay you must come forward too grave
Mistress Temperance.


How now sir? who wants gentility now I beseech you?


Who have we here?


Stand not amazed, nor disparage him: you see sir, this habit truly doth suit
my sex, howsoever my hard fortunes have made me a while reject it.


What hard fortunes?


Those you know of my father sir: who feared my following of him in my native
likeness, to the haven, where he by stealth embarqu't us, and would have
discovered him, his offence being the slaughter of a Gentleman, that would h^ue
slain him.


But did you not tell me you were betrothed before this misfortune happened, to a
young Gentleman of Sicily, called Theagines?


I told you I was betrothed to one Theagine, not Theagines, who indeed was a
woman,


And yet whosoever had seen that Theagine since might have taken him for a
man.


Do you know her Gentlewoman?


It seems you will not know her.


Hark how my boy pla^es the knave with her.


A noble rogue, S'fut Lieutenant, wilt thou suffer thy nose to be wiped of this
great heir^?


S'^ight sir you are no handkercher are you?


Pre thee forbear, more happy then unlooked for (...) this dear accident:
adopted and noble father, this is the Gentlewoman to whom I told you I was
betrothed, the happy news she had to relate to me, made her a traveller, the
more search of her passage made her a Page, and her good fortune obtained her --
this honest Gentleman to her Master, who I thank him, being (as he supposed
me) ^ou'd me, accept us both for your children.


Most gladly and with no less care, then mine own protect you.


S'fut, how now Leonora? new fireworks?


New sir, who wants gentility? this is a gentlemanly part of you to keep a
wench in a Pages furniture?


It was more then I knew Sir, but this shall be a warning to me while I live,
how I judge of the instrument by the case again.


Nay it is you friend Lodouico that are most to blame, that holding the whole
feminine sex in such contempt, wou^d yet play the pickpurse, and steal a
poor maids maidenhead out of her pocket sleeping.


'Twas but to cous^n me.


And to be before me in love.


And to laugh at me.


Nay, ieast not at me sweet Gentles, I v'sd plain and mannerly dealing, I
neither v'sd the brokage of any* as you know who did Le^noro, nor the help of a
ladder to creep in at a wenches chamber window (as you know who did Aurelio.)
Nor did I case my self in buckrame, and cry chimney sweep (where are you
uncle?) but I was trained to it by this honest matron here.


Meddle not with me sir.


I am beholding to her, she was loath to have me lead apes in hell.


Look that you keep promise with me Lady, when will thy husband be from
home?


Not so soon as I would wish him, but whenever you shall be welcome.


I very kindly thank you Lady.


Gods me, I took you for Sigmor Placenti^.


S'fut, thou lie in thy throat, thou knew me as well as my self.


What, Signior Quintilian, and friend Innocentio? I looked not for you here*
you're much the better welcome.


Thanks dad Honorio, and lives my little squire? when shall I see thee at my
house lad?


A plague a your house, I was there too lately.


See Lordings, her's two will not let go till they have your consents to be
made surer.


By my soul, and because old Gasparo here has been so cold in his love suit,
if she be better pleased with Aurelio, and his father with her, heaven give
abundance of good with him.


So you stand not too much upon goods, I say, Amen.


Faith use him as your son and heir, and I desire no more.


So will I of mine honour, are you agreed youths*


And most humbly gratulate your high fa^rs.


Faith Jove give 'em joy together for my part.


Yet is here another nail to be driven, here's a virtuous Matron, Madam
Temperance, that is able to do much good in a commonwealth, a woman of good
parts, sells complexionn helps maids to services, restores maidenheads, brings
women to bed, and men to their bedsides.


By my faith, but save votre grace sir.


Hath drinks for love, and gives the diet.


Byr'lady, and that's not amiss for you sir.


For me, with a plague tee?


No nor for any man that's not sound I mean sir.


S'fut ma^ters these be good parts in the old wench, wilt thou have her
Lieutenant? sheele be a good stay to the rest of thy living, the gallants will
all honour thee at thy house I warrant thee.


Fore God Captain I care not if I have.


Well young Gentleman, perhaps it should not be the worst for you.


Why law, thy virtues have own her at first sight, she shall not come to thee
empty, for I'll promise thee that I'll make her able to bid any Gentleman
welcome to a piece of mutton and rabbit at all times.


Byr'lady, a good Ordinary.


Thow't visit sometimes Dad.


That I will in faith boy in authority wise.


Why then strike hands, and if the rest be pleased,
Let all hands strike as these have struck before,
And with round Echoes make the welken roar.


