HEnce Clouds of melancholy
^le be no longer subject to your sismes,
But thou dear soul, whose nerues and artires
^n dead resoundings summon up revenge,
And thou shalt hate, be but appeased sweet h^arse
The dead remembrance of my living father
And with a hart as air, swift as thought
I'll excuse justly in such a cause
Where ^ruth leads, what coward would not fight
Ill acts move some, but myne's a cause is right
See the powers of heaven in apparitions
And fight full aspects as in^en^ed
That ^ thus tardy am to do an act
which justice and a fathers death exites,
Like threatening methors antedates destruction.
Again I come, I come, I come,
Be silent thou ^igies of fair virtue
That like a goodly syen wear't plucked up
By murderous, winds, infectious blasts and gusts
I will not leave thee, until like thy self,
I'ue made thy enemies, then hand in hand
Wee'le walk to paradise -- again more blessed
I'll to yon promonts top, and their survey,
What shipwrecked passengers the belgique sea
Casts from her fomy entrails by mischance.
Roar sea and winds, and with celestial fires,
Quicken high projects, with your highest desires.

Yet this is somewhat like, but brambles, you are to busy, were I at
Luningberge, and you caught me thus, I should go near to ask you at whose
suit, but now I am out of sent, And fear no ^eriants, for I think these woods
and waters are common wealths that need no such subjects nay they keep not a
Constable at sea, but a mans ouerwhelmd without order. -- Well, dry land I love
thee, though thou swarm with millions of devourers, yet hast thou no such
swallow as the sea.


Thou lie, there lives upon the earth more ^easts
With wide devouring throats, then can be found
Of ravenous fishes in the Ocean:
The huge Leuiathan is but a shrimp
Compared with our Balena on the land

I am of your mind; but the Whale has a wide mouth
To swallow fleeting waters, and poor fish,
But we have Epicures and Cormorants,
Whom neither sea, nor land can hardly serve
They feed them fat, while arms and honour starve,
Desert looks pale as death, like those bare bones.

Ha -- amazd.

See thou them trembling, slave here were Arms?
That served the troth less state of Luningberge.

So do I sir serve the dukes son of the state,

Ha, ha, I laugh to see how dastard fear
Hastens the death doomed wretch to his distress,
Say did thou serve the duke of Luningberge.

His son Otho sir, ^'me a poor follower of his
And my master is ayring of himself at your Cell,

Is he that escaped the wrack young Luningberg?

I sir, the same sir, you are in the right sir.

Revenge I kiss thee, vengeance you're at liberty,
Would thou having lost a father as I have,
Whose very name dissolves my eyes to tears
Could duty and thy love so different prove,
Not to avenge his death whose better part
Was thine, thou his, when he fell part of thee
Fell with him each drop, being part thine own
And would not be revenged;

Yes on the murderer,

On him, or any man that is a^ied
Has but one ^unce of blood, of which hes part
He was my father, my hart still bleeds
Nor can my wounds be stopped, till an incision,
I'ue made to bury my dead father in:
Therefore without protraction, sighing, or excuses
Swear to be true, to aid assist me, not to stir
Or contradict me in any enterprise
I shall now undertake, or heareafter.

I swear.

Were I persuaded that thou could shed tears,
As doth the Egyptian serpents near the Nile;
If thou would kiss and kill, embrace and stab,
Then thou should live, for my inuictiue brain
Hath cast a glorious project of revenge
Even as thou kneel'st, wilt thou turn villain speak.

Oh sir when was I otherwise, from my creation nothing else, I was made of no
other stuff, villainy is my only patrimony: though I be an irreligious slave,
yet I bear a religious name, though I want courage, yet in talk, I'll put
them all down, though I have nothing in me that is good:

Yet i'll --

Forbear thy Lord is coming i'll go in
And royally provide for such a Prince,
Say thou hast met the kindest host alive,
One that adores him, with no less zeal
Then rich men gold, or true religious heaven
Dissemble cunningly, and thou shalt prove
the minion of my thoughts, friend to my love.

Well sir ne'er fear me this is an excellent fellow
A true vil^aine fitter for me then better company,
This is Hannce Hoffmans son.
that stole down his fathers Anotamy from the gallows at Leningberge, I'tis
the same upon the dead scull there's the iron Crown that burnt his brains out,
what will come of this, I neither know nor care: but here comes my lord.


A fearful storm

And full of horror.

Trust me Lorrique besides the inlie grief
That swallows my content when I perceive
How greedily the feirce unpitying sea, and waives,
Devoured our friends another trouble grieves my vexed eyes
With gashtly apperitions, strange aspects
Which either I do certainly behold
Or else my soul divining some sad fate
Fills my maginary powers with shapes
Hideous and horrid.

My lord let your hart have no commerce with that
Mart of idle imaginations, rouse up your nobleness
To apprehend comfort, kindness ease and what otherwise
Entertained so solitary a place as this, can the
Ancient subject of the state of Leningberg collect
Tis I take it the son to that Viz-admirall that
Turned a terrible pirate.

Let us turn back into the sea again
Yealding our bodies to the ruthless sound
That hath divided us and our late friends
Rather then see choice Hoffman.

Corrage brave Otho, he will use thee kindly.
Here he comes, sweet host here is the dukes heir of
Leningberge do homage and after entertain him and me his
Follower with the most conspictious pleasures
That lies in thy poor hability.

Before I speak to my most sacred Lord
I join my soft lips to the ^ollid earth
And with an honoured benison I bless
The hour, the place, the time of your arrive
For now my savage life, lead amongst beasts
Shall be turned ciuell by your grarious help

I see thy true hearts love drop down in tears
And this embrace shows I am free from fears
My disturbed blood runs smoothly through my veins
And I am bold to call thee friend, bold to entreat
Food for by wrack I have lost ship, friends and meat.

You that attend my Lord enter the cave
Bring forth the homely Cakes their hands prepared
While I entreat his excellence sit down
Villain bring nothing buta burning Crown.

What's that thou bid him bring, a burning Crown

Still you suspect my harmless inocence
What though your father with the power state
And your just uncle duke of Brusia
After my father had in thirty fights
Filled all their treasures with somens spoils
And paid poor soldiers from his treasury
What though for this his merits he was named
A prescript out law for a little debt
Compelled to fly into the Belgique sound
And live a pirate.

Prithee speak no more
Thou raysest new doubts in my troubled heart
By repetition of thy fathers wrongs

Then he was wronged you grant but not by you,
You virtuous gentleman
Sate like a just ^udge of the vnder-shades,
And with an unchanged Rhadamantine look,
Beheld the fiesh mangled with many scars
Par'd from the bones of my offended father
And when he was a bare anatomy,
You saw him chained unto the common gallows,

Hoffman.

Nay hear me patiently kind Lord
My innocent youth as guilty of his sin,
Was in a dungeon hidden from the sun,
And there I was condemned to endless night
Except I past my vow never to steal
My fathers fleshles bones from that base tree
I know nor who it was, I guess your mother,
She kneeled and wept for me, (but you did not)
Beseeching from that vow I might be freed
Then did I swear if Nations foreign power
Compelled me to take down those naked bones
I never would release them from those chains
Never entomb them, but immediately
Remove them from that gallows to a tree
I kept mine oath: look Luningberg; tis done
Behold a father hanged up by his son

Oh horrible aspect murderer stand off
I know thou meanst me wrong

My Lord behold these precious twines of light
Burnt out by day eclipsed when as the sun
For shame obscured himself this deed was done
Where none but schrich owls sung, thou receptacle
thou organ of the soul;
Rest, go rest, and you most lovely Couplets
Legs and arms reside, for ever here
This is my last farewell, what do you weep?

Oh Lorrique I am betrayed, slave touch me not

Not touch thee? yes, and thus trip down thy pride.
You pla'ct my father in a Chair of state:
This earth shall be your throne, villain come forth
And as thou mean to save thy forfeit life,
Fix on thy Masters head my burning Crown,
While in these Cords, I in eternal bands
Bind fast his base and coward trembling hands.

Lorrique, art thou turned villain to my life.

I'll turn any thing sir rather then nothing, I was taken life promised to
betray you, and I love life so well, that I would not loose it for a Kingdom,
for a Kings Crown, an Empire.


On with the Crown.

Oh tortor above measure.

My father felt this pain* when thou had pleasure.

Thy father dyed for piracy.

Oh peace, had he bi^iudge himself, he would have showed
He had bin clearer then the Crystal morn!
But wretches sentenced never find defence,
How ever guiltless be their innocence,
No more did he, no more shalt thou, no ruth
Pitied his winter age, none helps thy youth.

Oh Lorrique tortor, I feel an Aetna burn
Within my brains, and all my body else
Is like a hill of Ice, all these Belgique seas
That now, surround us cannot quench this flame
Death like a tyrant seizes me unawares,
My sin^wes shrink like leaves parcht with the sun
My blood dissolves, nerues and tendons fail
Each part's disioynted, and my breath expires
Mountsoule to heaven, my body burns in fire.

He's gon.

Go let him come Lorrique
This but the prologue to the'nsuing play.
The first step to revenge, this seane is donne
Father I offer thee thy inurtherers ^onne.

Princes of Saxony and Austria,
Though your own wor^sare of sufficient weight
To justify the honourable love borne by Lodowick to bright Lucybell,
Yet since your parents live and as I hear
There is between them some dissention,
Blame us not for detaining yo^ thus long
Till we had notice how the business stood

Your royal entertain great Ferdinand,
Exceeding expectation in our stay,
Bind us to thanks, and if my brother please
To hold his challenge for a Tournament
In praise of Lucibellas excellence,
No doubt our father and the Austrian duke
Will be in person at so royal sport.

We trust they will.

I do assure your grace
The Austrian and the duke of Saxony
By true report of pilgrims at my cell
From either of there courts set hetherward
Some six days since.

Thanks Rodorick for this news
They are more welcome then the sad discourse
Of Leningberg our nephews timeles wrake
Which adds sorrow to the mourning g^iefes
Abound in us for our Dutch death.

I truly Princes, my father has had but hard luck since your coming to his
court, for ought I know you are bred of ill weather, come before you are sent
for, yet if my most gracious father say you are welcome, I his more gracious
son take you by the hands, though I can tell you my mothers death comes
somewhat near my heart, but I am a prince, and princes have power more then
common people to subdue their passions.


We know your worthiness is experienc't in all true wisdom.


True, I am no fool, I have bin at Wittenberg, where wit grows.


Peace thou vnshapen honour, my states shame,
My ages co^siue, and my black sins curse,
Oh had thou never bin, I had bin then,
A happy childless man, now among men,
I am the most unhappy, one that knows
No end of mine, and of my peoples woes.
I tell you Princess, and most gracious maid;
I do not wear these sable ornaments
For Isabel^ (...) death, though she were dear,
Nor are my eyelids overflown with tears,
For Otho of Luningberg, wracked in the Soun,
Though he wer^ a^ my hope: but here's my care,
A wit^esse fool must needs be Prussias h^ire.

Well, and you were not my father, -- s'nailes, and I would not draw rather
then put up the fool, would I might never win this lady at tilt and
tournament: ^s Knights, I defy you both, for her; even you Lodowick, that loves
her, and your brother that loves you: look to me, Stilt, and I have practised
these two days: s'nailes god forgive me to swear, she shall not be carried
away so.


We are glad to hear your grace so ^esolute.


As I am a Prince, and a D^kes heir, though I say it my self, I am as full of
resolution as the proudest of you all


I thank Prince Lodowick he ha's bound my youth
To be the conquerors prize, and if my stars
Allott me to be yours, I will be proud,
For how so ere you seem not fashioned
Like me, and cunning Courtiers; I protest,
By some small love I bear thee in mine eye,
Your worthy beauty, wealth and dignity.

Heart you would not unhorse Hercules for her father, i'll practice again at
Dantzike, you say in the Dukes mead; i'll meet thee Mathias: there's my gloue^
For a gauntle^, though my father count me a fool, you shall find me none.


Would I might never find thee any thing,
For thou indeed art nothing in ^steeme,
My sad soul sinks with sorrow at thy sight,

Health to the right gracious, generous, virtuous, and valorous Ferdinand Duke
of Prussia.


Hermit dost thou not know this young mans face?
I'st not Lorique, that met us at thy cell
With letters from our brother Luningberg?

It is that gentleman.

I am no l^sse.

thou said thou wast my nephews play fellow,
Appointed to await his virtuous person,
How is it then thou were so ill advised
To take the land away, and forsake thy Lord?
Whom I have never seen, nor never may,
Though in his life my hope and comfort lay.

Be it known right gracious: Lorrique had never so little grace, as to leave
his loved lord for weather or water, for torture or fire, for death or for
life, since I first came to move in a pilgrims proportion; much disguised,
being so proper a man: but only for those six words; that I was sent wholly to
give notice of his coming.


But thou hast left him now sunk in the sea.


I left the ship sunk, and his highness sau'd^, for when all hope had left
Master and pilot, sailor and swabber, I caused my Lord to leap into the cock,
and for fear she should be sunk with too much company; I capered out* and cut
the cable: rouse, quoth the ship against the rocks, roomer cry I in the cock,
my Lord wept for the company: I laughed to comfort him; last by the power of
heaven, goodness of stars, kindness of winds, mercy of the waives, our cock
and we were cast a shore under Reeshopscurre, we clamberd up, but having
escaped drowning, were in danger of killing.


What there betided you?


Marry (...) Lord a young villain, son of a damned pirate, a maid ravisher.


Be brief, what was he?


Clois Hoffman.


Oh my heart! did the false rebel hurt his sovereigns son?


No my Lord, the prince so hought and hoft him, that he had no other help but
to his heals, and then I, my good Lord, being ro^footed, ^utstript him in
running, tripped him by strength, and in fine, finely cut's throat.


Where is the villains body?


Marry even heaved over the scarr, and sent a swimming toward Burtholme, his
old habitation; if it be not intercepted by some Scale, Shark, Sturgeon, or
such like.


Where is our nephew?


He intends to stay at the same hermitage, where I saluted your excellence,
with news of my lords excellencies intent, to visit you* for that his
apparel is somewhat sea-sicke, and he wants shift.


A chariot, and rich robes attend Lorrique.
And his rewa^d, be thirteen hundred dollars,
For he hath driven dolor from our heart.
Princes, and Princess, in your kindest love,
Attend our person to the hermitage,
where we shall meet the heir of two great States,
Rich Luningberg, and warlike Prussias,
Otho living, we'll disinherit our fond son:
And bless all Dantzike, by our son elect,
Hermit you have at home, a guest of ours,
Your little cell, is a great princes court;
Had you bin there to entertain young Otho,
He would have took your welcome thankfully,
Where now he mourns, for want of company.

I will go on before my gracious Lord.

Nay I am jealous of my approaching joy,
And fearful, any eye but mine, should gain
The pleasure of my glad divining soul;
Forward come all, in my delight take part,
He that's now glad, adds joy to gladness heart.
If there live ere a surgeon that dare say
He could do better: i'll play Mercury,
And like fond Marsias flea the Quacksaluer^
There were a sort of filthy Mountebankes,
Exp^rt in nothing but in idle words,
Made a days work^, with their incision knives
On my oppressed poor father: silly man,
Thrusting there dastard fingers in his flesh,
That durst not while he lived, behold his face;
I have fitted my anatomy
In a fair^ chain to; father this youth scorned
When he was set in an ascending throne,
To have you stand by him; would he could see,
How the case alters, you shall hang by him,
And hang before him to, for all his pride,
Come image of bare death, join side, to side,
With my long injured fathers naked bones;
He was the prologue to a Tragedy,
That if my destinies deny me not,
Shall pass those of Thyestes, Tereus,
Iocasta, or Duke Iasons jealous wife;
So shut our stage up, there is one act done
Ended in Othos death; 'twas somewhat single;
I'll fill the other fuller, if Lorrique,
That I have late sworn to be murders slave,
Swears he will protest me to be Othos,
Whom Prussia his uncle unknown loves;
If I be taken for him well: Oh then!
Sweet vengeance make me happiest of all men:
Prussia, I come as comets against change:
As apparitions before mortal ends;
If thou accept me for thy nephew, so;
Uncle, i'll uncle thee of thy proud life.
Father farewell, i'll to the hermitage,
Where if I be received for Luningberg,
I will have thy dry bones, sanguin'd all over
With thy foes blood, Rhamnusia help thy priest,
My wrong thou know, my willingness thou see.

Come Stilt, bestir your stumps; you know I must be a tilter.


I my lord, I know you should be one, but I hope you are not so mad.


what dost thou count it madness to run a tilt.


I my Lord, for you that cannot sit a hobby, you'll hardly manage your
tilthorse.


Why? they say Stilt, that stone Mares are gentler, see if thou can get me
one of them.


Not before next grass; I could help you now to a stone mule, a stone ass.


Well, i'll try one course with thee at the half pike, and then go, come draw
thy pike.


That's not your fit word; you must say, advance your pike, and you must be
here sir, and here, you'll never learn for all my teaching.


I have answered you Stilt, that Princes have no need to be taught, and I have
even determined with my self, not to run at tilt, least I hazard my horse
and harness: therefore i'll to the court, and only see my new cousin, that
they said was drowned: and then retire to my (astle at Helsen, and there write a
new poem, that I have taken pains in, almost these ten years: It is in praise
of picketoothes.


That will be excellent my Lord, the barbers will buy those poems abominably.


Nay sir, i'll get a patent from the Duke, my father, for the Cum Priuilegio
for that poem, Ad imprimendum solum; besides thou shalt have a priniledge, that
no man shall sell tooth pickes without thy seal: my father says I am a fool,
but I think I bestow my time to look out for setting a new nap upon his
threadbare Common wealth: Who's that knocks? who dares disturb our honourable
meditation? hark Stilt, dost thou see no noise?


No, but I hear a noise.


A hall then; my father and my new cousin: stand aside, that I may set my
countenance, my beard brush and mirror, Stilt, that set my countenance right to
the mirror of Knight-hood, for your mirror of magistrates is somewhat to sober*
how lik'st me?


Oh excellent! heers your casting bottle.


Sprinkle, good Stilt, sprinkle, for my late practise hath brought me into
strange favour: ha mother of me, thou had almost blinded the eyes of
excellence; but omnia been, let them approach now, and I appear not like a
Prince, let my father cashier me, as some say he will.


Cashier you? no, do but manage your body, and have here, and here your
congees, and then quid sequitur, Stilt knows, and all the court shall see.


Ferdinand by the divine grace, prince of Heidelberg lord of Pomer, and Duke of
Prussia, for sundry reasons h^m moving, the quiet state of his people
especially: which as a witl^sse and insufficient prince, disinherits Ierom
Heidelberg his known son, and adopteth Otho of Iuningberg his sisters son,
as heir, immediately to succeed after his death in all his provinces. God save
Duke Ferdinand, and Otho his heir.


Amen, Heaven witness, how my heart is pleased,
With the conceit of Prussias after-peace,
By this election.

Why? but hear you father*

Away, disturb us not, let's in and feast,
For all our country in our choice is blessed.

Why, but Stilt, what's now to be done Stilt?


Nay that's more then I know: this matter will trouble us more then all your
poem of picktooths, s'nailes: you were better be vnknighted then vnprinc'd, I
have lost all my hope of preferment, if this hold.


No more Stilt, I have it here; 'tis in my head, and out it shall not come,
till red revenge in robes of fire, and madding mischief run and rave: they
say I am a fool Stilt, but follow me; i'll seek out my notes of Machiauel,
they say he's an odd politician.


I faith he's so odd, that he hath driven even honesty from all men's hearts.


Well, sword come forth, and courage enter in,
Breast break with grief; yet hold to be revenged:
Follow me Stilt; widows unborn shall weep,
And beardless boys with armour on their backs
Shall bear us out, Stilt we will tread on stilts,
Through the purple pavement of the court,
Which shall be, let me see, what shall it be?
No court, but even cave of misery.
There's an excellent speech Stilt, follow me, pursue me, will accquire,
And either die, or compass my desire.

Oh brave master, not a Lord: O, Stilt will stalk, and make the earth a stage,

But he will have thee lord in spite of rage.

Sir since you are content, you here shall find,
A sparing supper, but a bounteous mind:
Bad lodging, but a heart as free, and generous,
As that which is fed with generous blood,

Your hermitage is furnished for a prince.

Last night this roof covered the sacred heads
Of five most noble, fair, and gracious Princes,
Duke Ferdinand himself, and Otho his nephew,
The sons of Saxon, and ^he Austrian Princess.

Oh god! that girl, which fled my Court and love,
Making love colour for her heedles flight,

Pardon great prince: are you the Austrian duke?

Hermit I am, Saxons proud wanton sons
Were entertained like Priam's Firebrand
At Sparta: all our State gladly 'appear'd
Like chierfull Lacedemons, to receive
Those Daemons that with magic of their tongues,
Bewitched my Lucibells my Helen's ears.

Who travels so late? who knocks so hard?
Turn to the east end of the Chapel, pray;
We are ready to attend you.

Which is the way to Dantzike?

There is no way to Dantzike you can find
Without a guide thus late, come near I pray,

look to our horses, by your leave master Hermit,
We are soon bidden, and will prove bold guests:
God save you sir.

That should be Saxons tongue.

Indeed I am the Duke of Saxony.

Then art thou father to lascivious sons,
That have made Austrea childles.

O subtle duke, thy craft appears in framing thy excuse,
Thou dost accuse my young sons innocence:
I sent them to get knowledge, learn the tongues,
Nor to be metamorphis'^ with the view
Of flattering beauty, peradventure painted.

No; I defy thee ^ohn of Saxony;
My Lucibell for beauty needs no art,
Nor do I think the virtues of her mind
Ever inclind to this ign^ble course
But by the charms and forcings of thy sons.

Oh would thou durst maintain thy words proud Duke.

I hope great Princes, neither of you dare
Commit a deed so sacrilegious: This holy cell
Is dedicated to the son of peace;
The foot of war never profaned this floor,
Nor doth wrath here with his cons^ming voice
Affright these buildings; charity with prayer,
Humility with abstinence combined,
Are here the guardians of a grieved mind.

Father we obey thy (...) voice;
Duke Iohn of Saxony, receive my faith;
Ti^l our ears hear the true course thy so^nes
Have taken with my fond and mis-led child.
I proclaim truce, Why dost thou ^ullen stand?
If thou mean peace, give me thy Princely hand.

Thus do I plight thee troth, and promise peace,

Nay, but thy eyes agree not with thy heart;
In vows of combination, there's a grace
That shows the intention in the outward face,
Look cherefully, or I expect no leagu^.

First give me leave to view a while the person,
Of this He^mer, Austria note him well,
Is he not like your brother Rodorick?

He's like him, but I heard he lost his life
Long since in Persia, by the Sophies wars.

I heard so much my Lords, but that report
Was purely feigned, spread by my erring tongue,
As double as my heart, when I was yonge*
I am that Rodorick that aspired your throne;
That vile false brother who with rebel breath,
Drawn sword, and treacherous heart threatened your death*

My brother I nay, then i'faith old Iohn lay by
Thy sorrowing thoughts, turn to thy wonted vein,
And be mad Iohn of Saxony again.
Mad Rodorick, art alive? my mothers so ^nne
Her joy and her last birth; oh she coniur^d me
To use thee thus, and yet I banished thee:
Body of me; I was unkind I know,
But thou deserve it then; but let it go:
Say thou wilt leave this life thus truly idle,
And live a Statesman, thou shalt share in reign,
Commanding all but me thy sovereign.

I thank your Highness; I will think on it:
But for my sins this sufferance is more fit.

Tut, title, tatle, tell not me of sin.
Now Austria once again thy Princely hand:
I'll look thee in the face, and smile, and swear,
If any of my sons have wronged thy child,
I'll help thee in revenging it my self;
But if as I believe they^ mean, but honour,
As it appears by these justs proclaimed.
Then thou shalt be content to name him thine,
And thy fair daughter i'll account as mine.

Agreed.

Ah Austria! t'was a world when you and I
Ran these Carreers; but now we are stiff and dry.

I am glad you are so pleasant my good Lord.

T'was my old mood, but I was soon turned sad*
With over grieving for this long lost lad;
And now the Boy is grown, as old as I,
His very face as full of gravity.

Please your Graces enter,
I know the servants that attend one me
By the appointment of Duke Ferdinand
By this have covered.

Why then let's in: brother I trust, and brother
Hold you this hand, Rodorick hold thou the other,
By heaven my heart with happiness is crow'nd,
In that my long lost brother now is found:

so run on fate, my destinies are good,
Revenge hath made me great by shedding blood:
I am supposed the heir of Luningberg,
By which I am of Prussia Prince elect.
Good: who is wronged by this? Only a fool:
And 'tis not fit that idiots should bear rule.

My Lord I have as you inioyn'd, enticed Saxons elder son to talk with you:
and here he comes with his most excellent, amorous, and admirable Lady.


Hast thou the Hermits weeds for my disguise?


All ready, fit, fit' in the next chamber, your beard is point-vice, not a
hair amiss.


Faithful Lorrique in thy unfaithfulness:
I kiss thy cheek, and give thee in that kiss
The mo^tie of all my earthly bliss.

Good: I am half a Monarch: half a fiend
Blood I begun in and in blood must end
yet this Clois is an honest villain, ha's conscience in his killing of men:
he kills none but his fathers enemies, and there issue, 'tis admirable, 'tis
excellent, 'tis well 'tis meritorious, where? in heaven? no, hell.


Now friend, where is prince Otho?

Sad, sir, and grieved.

Why? prithee why?

Alas I know not why.
The hermit Rodorigo talked with him
Somewhat of you, and somewhat of the Duke,
About surprising you and murdering Lodowick:
Or such a thing, nay sure 'twas such a thing.

Surprising me and murdering Lodowicke.

By whom? by what complot?

Sure by the Duke, the Duke's an odd old lad:
I know, this nigh^ there's set a double guard,
And there's some trick in that: but patience:
Here comes the Hermit: holy reverent man!
Somewhat important, wings his aged feet
With speedy nimbleness: heaven grant that all be well*

Princes in pity of your youth, your love,
Your virtues, and what not, that may move ruth,
I offer you the tender of your lives,
Which yet you may preserve: but if you stay,
Death and destruction waits your delay.

Who hath conspired our deaths? speak reuere^ man.

The Duke of Prussia, doting on this face;
Worthy indeed of wonder, being so fair,
This night hath plotted, first to murder you;
The guard are set that you may not escape,
Within, without, and round about the court;
Only one way, thorough Prince Otho his lodging
Is left; here is the key, and for more proof
Of my great zeal and care, on with these robes.
Within are Grecian habits for your heads;
Nay if you love life do not stand amazed,
But take the path toward my hermitage,
Yet I aduize you, that you go not in;
There may be plots to, for ought I know;
But turn down by the river, there's a way
Leads to a little Chapel; in that porch
Stay, till I visit you with better news;

I will but call my brother, and then go.

That were a going never to return:
I'll send him after you, be well assured.

Oh god! the Duke of Prussia grown thus false,
such shows of friendship, and so little faith.

Come Lucibella lets embrace this mean,
Duke Ferdinand shall with a sorrowing heart,
Repent this base dishonourable plot:
Father, our fortunes if they sort aright,
shall with continual thankfulness require
This virtuous and this charitable care:
Farewell: we'll wait thee in the Chapel porch
Bring Prince Mathias our kind brother thither,
And thou shalt add good works to charity:
Once more farewell Lorrique; there's for thee,
Commend me to thy Lord, tell him this wrong
Of his false uncle, sha^l mere full revenge:
But do to him our duties. Come chaste, fair,
We must not now by (...) and turnameut
Maintain thy honour: for thy champion Knight,
Is for'st by treason to unwilling flight.

so run to mischief: Oh my dear Lorrique^
When I have summed up my account of death,
And robbed those fathers of there lifes and joy,
That robbed me of my joy, my fathers life,
Thus thy hand clasped in mine, we'll walk and meditate,
And boast in the revenges I have wrought;
That done; i'll seat thee by m^ throne of state,
And make thee rival in those governments,
That by thy secrecy thou li^'^t me to;
Shalt be a Duke at least.

I thank your Grace, but pray resolve me,
what you now intend,
To these three Princes Lodowick, and Mathias,
And the thrice beauteous Princess Lucibell.

Death certain: call in Mathias, if my plot prove good, (...) make one brother
shed the others blood.


I am nimble as your thought, devise, i'll execute what you command.


A pre^ious villain: a good villain too*
W^ll if he be no worse; that is do worse,
And honey me in my death-stinging thoughts,
I will prefer him: he shall be preferred
To hanging peradventure; why not? 'tis well
His sufferance here may save his soul from hell.
He comes; what news my faithful servant? wher's the Prince.

He's talking with the lady Lucibell,
And when I said your Highness sent for him,
He 'gan with courtly salutations,
To take his leave and to attend your grace.

Well god-a-mercy friend, thou got me grace:
But more of that at leisure: take this gown;
My cloak, a chair; I must turn melancholy.
Second what ere I say, approve my words,
That we may move Mathias to mad rage.

God save your excellence: what sad, dull, heavy?
Or are you now in meditation
Which part to take to morrow at the Tilt?
The mead is ringd with tents of stranger Knights,
Whose rich devices, and caparisons
Exceed the Persian Monark's, when he met
Destruction and pale death sent from the sword
Of Philips son, and his stout Macedons
Cheerely Prince Otho there's such a warlike sight
That would stir up a leaden heart to fight.

For what?

For honour and fair Luicbell.

Oh Prince Mathias! it is ill combined
When honour is with fickle beauty joined.
Where is your most Princely brother?

I cannot tell I left him with his loved Lucibell.

But she has got another love,
Dishonoured all this rich assembly,
Left the m^moriall of such infamy,
As cannot die while men have memory.

How? p^ay you how? what hath the princess done?

she with a Grecian is but new fled hence,
Belike some other love of hers before:
Our tilt and tournament is spoiled and crossed.
The fair we should defend, her faith hath lost.

Fled with a Grecian? saw you them go Prince Otho?

I, I, I saw them go.

And would not stay them?

My true servant knows,
How at the sight of such inconstancy
My gentle heart was smitt with inward grief
And I sunk down with sorrow.

s'death; what path? which way? that I may track her harlot-steps,
Fled now: gone now: i'll go seek Lodowicke

Nay then you add an irreligious work,
To there lascivious act; follow your self,
I and my man will bear your company
Lorrique, as I think, thou nam'dst a chapel,
A Hermit, some such thing: I have lost the form.

I heard her say, she could not travel far,
He told her, they would rest the dead of night*
Near to a chapel, by a hermitage.

Where is that chapel? wher's that hermitage?
If you love honour Princely Luningberg,
Lets to that chapel: if you know the way,
That I may kill our shame, ere it s^e day.

I'll guide you to the chapel, aid your arm*
In your revenge, against that Grecian,
But for the Lady spare her, she is fair.

I will do what I can; oh hell of life!
Who, but a fool would strive to win a wife?
shall we call Lodowick?

no^, 'twould smite his soul in sunder, split his heart,
If he should hear of such adulterate wrong,
Cover the fault or punish as you please:
Yet I would save her fain, for she deserue^
pity for beanty.

Nothing, no for nothing.
She is as harlots, fair, like gilded tombs
Goodly without; within all rottennes:
she's like a painted fire upon a hill,
set to allure the frost-nipt passengers,
And starve them after hope: she is indeed^
As all such strumpets are, Angel in show,
Devil in heart: Come, come if you love me go.

Follow Lorrique; we are in the right way.

To hell I fear: tush let all fear go by,
Whoo'l shun a bad way with good company.

Are you not faint divinest Lucibell?

No, the clear moon strowes silver in our path,
And with her moist eyes weeps a gentle dew
Upon the the spotted pavement of the earth,
Whi^h softens every flower whereon I tread
Besides; all travel in your company
Seems but a walk made in some goodly bower,
Where loves fair mother strips her paramour.

This is the Chapel, and behold a bank,
Covered with sleeping flowers, that miss the Sun:
Shall We repose us till Mathias come?

The Hermit will soon bring him, let's sit down*
Nature, or art hath taught these boughs to spread,
In manner of an arbour over the bank.

No, they bow down as veils to shadow you*
And the fi^sh flowers beguiled by the light
Of your celestial eyes, open there leaves,
And when they entertain the lord of day
You bring them comfort like the Sun in May.

Come* come, you men will flatter beyond mean:
Will you sit down? and talk of the late wrong
Intended by the Duke of Prussia?

Fairest forget it, leave till we are clear freed hence,
I will defy him, and cause all the knights
Assembled for our purposed tournament,
To turn there keen swords against his catiue head.

Prithee no more, I feel thy blood turn hot,
And wrath inflames thy spirit, let it cease;
Forgive this fault, convert this war to peace.

O breath sweet touch with what a heavenly charm
Do your soft fingers my wa^-^houghts disarm,
Prussia had reason to attempt my life
Enchanted by the magic of these looks,
That cast a luster on the blushing stars.
Pardon chaste Queen of beauty, make me proud
To rest my toild head on your tender knee,
My chin with sleep is to my bosom bowed;
Fair if you please a little rest with me.

No, i'll be Sentinel; i'll watch for fear
Of venomous worms, or wolves, or wolfish thieves:
My hand shall fan your eyes, like the film'd winge
Of drowsy morpheus; and my voice shall sing
In a low compass for a Lucibell.
Sleep sweet, perhaps i'll sleep for company.

I thank you; I am drowsy, sing I pray;
Or sleep: do what you please, I am heavy, I;
God night to all our care: oh! I am blessed
By this soft pillow where my head doth rest.
By my troth I am sleepy too: I cannot sing,
My heart is troubled with some heavy thing.
Rest one these violets, whilst I prepare,
In thy soft slumber to receive a share:
Blush not chaste Moon to see a virgin lie
So near a Prince, 'tis no immodesty:
For when the thoughts are pure, no time, no place,
Hath power to work fair chastities disgrace;
Lodowick I clasp thee thus, so arm clip arm,
So sorrow fold them that wish true love harm.

Art sure tha'st found them?

Look, are these they?

Adulterer: stiumpet.

Oh!

Oh!

Vnhumane deed to kill both.

Both have abu^'d our glory, both shall bleed,

how now! what have ye done? my Lodowick bleeds
Some savage beast hath fixed his ruthless fange
In my soft body: Lodowick, I faint*
Dear wake; my Lodowick: alas what means
Your breast to be thus wet? I'st blood or sweat*

Who troubles me?

Brother.

Who is that? Mathias.

I, accursed I,

Wher's the good Hermit? thank him for his love*
Yet tell him; Ferdinand of Prussia
Hath a long arm; some murderer of his
hath killed us sleeping.

Killed thee? oh no! I trust the careful destinies deny
So hard a fate: 'tis I alone am killed.
Come Lodowick, and close up my night-vaild eyes
That never may again behold the day.

What means Mathias?

Hold me not Prince Otho.
I will revenge my self upon my self*
For Parricide for damned parricide:
I have killed my brother sleeping in the arms
Of the divinest form that e're held breath.
I have killed loves Queen defaced with my foul hand,
The goodliest frame that ever nature built
And driven the graces from the mansion
Wherein they have continued from their birth;
She now being dead, she'll dwell no more on earth.

What moved you to it brother?

Jealous rage, suspicion by Prince Otho,
That Lucibell had fled with a base Greek,
Oh me accursed! I am borne to shame.

But I am wretcheder, that from the lou^
Devoted to the house of Saxony,
Have thus begot this monster cruelty:
I lay within an arbour, whence I saw
The princess, and your self in this disguise
Departing secretly my uncles court:
I judged you for a Greek as you appeared.
Told Prince Mathias of your secret flight;
And he led on by fury followed you
Where thus deceased by night and your attire,
Hath robbed your heart of life, his own of joy.

Forgive me brother, pardon fairest maid,
And ere the icy hand of ashy death
Fo^d your fair bodies in this sable veil;
Discover why you put on this disguise.

To escape the lustful Duke of Prussia,
Who purposed this night to murder me,
And ravish her whom death hath made his pray
My Lucibell, whose lights are masked with clouds
That never will be cleared.

My uncle, fie, who buz'd into your head
This damned lie?

it's no lie.

No lie: 'tis true, 'tis true,
The reverent Hermit Rodorick told it us.

The Hermit is a villain damned in hell
Before the worlds creation, if he sai't
My Princely uncle purposed such a thought.
Look to the Princess, there's life in her:
Cheer up your heart Prince Lodowicke, courage man.
Your being of comfort may recover her,
While I bring forth the Hermit and disprove
This false assertion: Rodorick is a slave
A vile and irreligious hypocrite,
No Hermit, but a devil if he dare
Affirm such falsehood of Duke Ferdinand.

Rodorick is not as you report him sir,
Nor did he ere^belie Duke Ferdinand.

No did? why then did you maliciously
Advise Prince Lodowick and fair Lucibell
To fly the Prussian court this dismal night.

Who I? I spake not with them,

Yes ye did.

Where was it that he spake with you? tell us where?

At Dantzike in the Duke of Prussias court.

Who heard him besides you?

The Princess Lucibell.

As heaven shall help my fleeting soul, I did.

why speaks my dukedoms hope in hollow sounds?
Look up fair child here's Saxony and I
Thy father, Lucibella look on me;
I am not angry that thou fled'st away
But come to grace thy nuptials; prithee speak.

Father I thank you: Lodowick reach me thy hand
How cold thou art; death now assails our hearts,
Having triumphed over the outward parts;
Farewell a while, we die but part, to meet
Where joys are certain, pleasures endless, sweet.
Father, this latest boon of you I crave,
Let him, and me, lie in one bed, and grave.

Oh me! oh miserable wretched me.

Hover a little longer blessed soul, glide not away too fast: mine now forsaks
his earthly mansion and on hopes gilt wings will gladly mount with thine, where
Angels sing celestial ditties to the King of Kings. brother adieu, your
rashness I forgive, pardon me father, pardon; Austria your daughter is become
a bride for death: the dismal even before her wedding day. Hermit God pardon
thee: thy double tongue hath caused this error: but in peace farewell. He
that lifts us to Heaven keep thee from Hell.


Oh strange conjecture! what should move this Prince
To charge me with such horrid cruelty?

I'll tell thee hypocrite.

Stay Mathias stay,
(...) is thy uncle Rodorigo, and besides,
My hon or and Duke Austria's shall be gaged,
He never parted from our company in his own hermitag^
Since day declined, and glimmering twilight ushered in the night.

Not from his hermitage?

No not he.

^'st possible?

By Heaven he did not.

Then there is villainy, practice, and villainy
Mathias hath bin wronged and drawn to kill
His natural brother, with him to destroy
The rarest piece of natures workmanship,
No doubt by practise and base villainy
The Hermit not at court? strange! wondrous!

Oh for my fonne, and Austria's worthy child.

Thou weep in scorn, and very tear of thine
Cou^rs a smile: Saxony, I defy
All truce, all league of love, guard thee proud Duke;
Thy sons have made me childless; I'll have thee
Con^ort in death with my wronged girl and me.

Help Prince Mathias: Hermit, oh the Heavens!
The Austrian Duke sinks down upon the earth.

Proud Iohn of Saxony: hast thou no wound?

Not any Austria; neither touched I thee.

Somebody touched me home: vain world farewell
Dying I fall on my dead Lucibell.

Sir what are you that take on you to part?
It's by your weapon that the Duke is fallen.

If I thought so, i'd fall upon the point,
But I am innocent of such an ill:
Kill my good kinsman, Duke of Austria;
Then were Prince Otho of Luningberg set down
In sad despairs black book to rave and die;
But I am free from such imprety.

Are you Prince Otho of Luningberg?

He is, and heir apparent to Duke Ferdinan^

May be the Moon deceives me, and my grief^
As well in the distinguishing of sounds,
As sight: I have heard of young Luningberg,
And seen him to at Hoffmans overthrow,
He looked not like you, neither spake like you.

Father, 'tis he: Lorrique his man attends him,
That fellow which is all composed of mirth
Of mirth? of death: why should I think of mirth
After so foul a murder? come lend hands
To give this Princely body funeral rites,
That I may sacrifice this hand and heart
For my peace-offerings on their sepulchers.

Nay, boy, thou shall not leave old Saxony
Childles for all this sorrow: Prince, and if Otho
Help in my son with noble Austria,
Lodowick shall be my burden: brother yours
The lovely but the luckless Lucibell.
So tread a heavy measure; now lets go
To inter the dead, our hearts being dead with woe.

There's life in Lucibell, for I feel
A breath, more odoriferous then balm
Thirle through the corrall pora^s of her lips,
Apparent signs of life, her pu^ses beat;
Oh if I could but yet recover her,
'twould satisfy the State of Austria,
That else would be disturbed for want of heirs
Heaven be propitious, guide my artless hand,
To preserve fainting life in this clear form.
Grant this thou soul of all Divinity,
And I will strive what ever mortal may
To serve thee on my knees both night and day.
Tarry Prince Otho and see their bodies balm'd,

I pray you think me not in passion dull;
I must withdraw, and weep, my heart is full.
Oh reverent man, thou bear the richest fruit;
That ever fell in the vnripired spring,
Go lay her soft, she had ill fatero fall;
But rich or fair or strong, death swallows all,
Hol^! Lorrique, leave our horse; draw near.
Help me to sing a hymn unto the fates
Composed of laughing interiections.

Why my good Lord? what accidents
Have chance it, that tickle so your spleen?

Oh my dear self: thou trusty treasurer of my reuenge^
Kneel down, and at my bidding kiss the earth;
And on her cold ear whisper this strict charge:
That she provide the best of her perfumes,
The fat of Lambs raped from the bleating Ewes,
The sweetest smelling wood she can devise;
For I must offer up a sacrifice,
To blessed occasion that hath seconded
With opportune means my desire of wreak*

Now I have kis't the earth, let me partake
In your great joy, that seems to exceed.
Are Lodowick, and the Princess murdered?

Tis done, go, hie thee to Prince Ferdinand;
Tell him how misadventure and mistrust
Hath killed Prince Lodowick and bright Lucibell:
By Prince Mathias hand: add to that chance,
Another unexpected accident:
Say that the Dukes of Austria and Saxony,
Being by the Hermit Rodorick intertain'd,
And hearing outcries in the dead of night,
Came and beheld the tragic spectacle,
Which sight did so enrage the Austrian Duke,
That he, assailed the Saxon, but fell slain,
On his (...) daughter, now deflowered by death.

Is Austria then slain by Saxony?

Come, come, he's dead, either by him or me,
No matter, he's gone: there's more to go.
Run with the news; away.

Father, set you the army in qeraye, while I invoke:
The General Foulkes: Fibs, forman, and
Friends all, Officers ail, help to marshall; Prince
Ierom my Lord shall remunerate that, is shall be
Full of thanksgiving, while nature is able to
Nourish, or sustain; Father you have order to stay the rest, be sententious,
and full of circumstance I advise you; and remember this, that more then
mortality fights on our side; For we have treason and iniquity to maintain our
quarrel.


Hah! what say my son? treason and iniquity?


Reason, and equity I meant Father; there's little controuersity in the words:
but like a Captain courageous, I pray go forward, remember the place you are,
in no more, but this; the days of old, no more, but that; and the glory
Father; Knighthood at least, to the utter defacing of you and your posterity,
No more but so.


Well, go thy ways: thou art able to put fire into a Flint stone; thou hast
as rheumatic a tongue to persuade as any is between Pole and Pomer; but thou
art even kitt after kind, I am thy father, and was infamous for my
exprobations, to discourage a dissembly of tall soldiers before thou w^rt
borne, and I have made them stand to it tooth and nail; how say you, most
valiant and reprobate Country men: have ye not heard I have bin a stinger, a
tickler, a wormer.


Yet; noble, ancient Captain Stilt, ye have removed men's hearts I have heard
that of my father (God rest his soul,) when ye were but one of the common all
soldiers that served old Sarloys in Norway.


I then was, and Sarloys was; a gentleman would not have given his head for the
washing; but he is cut of, as all valiant caualeroes shall; and they be no
more negligent of themselves; But to the purpose: we are dissembled together,
and fallen into ba^tayle beray in the behalf Prince Ierom a virtuous Prince, a
wise Prince, and a most respectless Prince; my son Timothies master, and the
unlawful heir of this land. Now sir the old Duke has put out a declamation,
and says our rising is no other then a resurrection, for the Prince inspires
not against his father; but the Duke inspires against his son, using him most
naturally, charitably, and abhominably, to put him from intercession of the
crown; wherefore as ye be true men, and obstinate subjects to the State
uncover your heads, and cast up your caps and cry a Ierom, a Ierom,

Om, A Ierom, a Ierom, a Ierom.


Most noble Countrymen I cannot but cond le in joy, and smile in tears to see
you assembled in my right, but this is the lamentation that I poor Prince must
make, who for my fathers proclamation am like for to loose my head; except you
stand to me, for they are coming on with bows, bills, and guns, against us:
but if you be valiant, and stand to me lustily, allth' earth 'shall roar but
we'll have victory.


Upon those traitors valiant gentlemen:
Let not that bea^ the multitude confront,
With garlicke-breath and their confused cries
The Majesty of me their awful Duke,
Strike their Typhoean body down to fire
That dare against us, their sovereign conspire.

Come, come, you shall have your hands full, and you
Come where we have to do, stand to it Stilt.

stand to it? here's the father and the son will stand, though all the rest fly
away.


I warrant you Prince, when the battle comes to joining, my son and I will
be invisible, and they overcome us, i'll give you leave to say I have no pith
in me; upon um true Prince upon um.


I thought twou'd come to that;
I thought we should bring
The false Prince on his knees.

What means my Dukedoms hope to turn thus base? arise, and smite thy fo^s.


I see them not my most honoured uncle; pity I beseech
These silly people, that offend as babes,
Not understanding, how they do ^ffend:
And s^ffer me chief agent in this wrong,
To plead their pardons with a peaceful tongue.

We scorn pardons, Peace and pity; We'll
have a Prince of our own choosing, Prince Ierom.

I, I, Prince lorom or no body; be not obstacle old Duke, let not your own
flesh and blood be inherited of your Dukedom, and a stranger displaced in his
retority: for and you do, we will take no comparison of you and your army,
but fall upon you like temperance and lightning.


Upon your peril; gentlemen assail.

If any bosom meet the brunt of war,
Mine shall be first opposed; these honest men
That rise in arms for my young Cozens right
Shall be Protected whilst Prince Charles can stand.

Why see now what a thing Majesty is;
Stilt and the rest of my good people; my cousin)
Charles looking but in the face of our excellence
Cannot choose but take our part.

Nay but trust him not my Lord; take heed of him,
Aware your enemies at any hand.

Why should you make this intercession
For these base abjects, whose presumptuous hearts
Have drawn their rebel bodies against their head:
Entreat not for them, they are all but dead.

Forbear a little worthy Countrymen.

Nay we deny that, wear none of your Countrymen; you are an ar^ant arrant
Alien.


True son uncere peregrination, and one that was not borne within our Dukes
damnation, and therefore not to be remitted to any vpstantiall degree of office
amongst us: that's the fine, that's the confusion of all.


But hear me.


I, I* pray hear him; nay I charge you all upon pain of death that you hear
my cozen.


he Well we will are him: come on, speak, what wlil ye say?


O I beseech you save your lives and goods,
For the Dukes squadrons armed with wrath and death,
Watch but the signal when to cease on you,
That can no more with stand their approved strengthes
Then sparrows can contend with towering hawks:
Or against the Eagles ayer^:
This act of yours by gathering to a head,
Is treason capital, and without grace
Your lives are forfeit to extremest law.

Mas he says true son; but what's the remedy?

None at all father, now we are in, we must go through stitch.


Yes, there is remedy: cast your weapons down,
And arm your selves with mercy of your Prince
Who like a gracious shepherd ready stands
To take his lost sheep home in gentle hands.
As for your Prince, I will for him entreat
That he may be restored again in love,
And unto offices of dignity, as either Taster,
Sewer, Cupbearer, the place himself thinks
Fittest for his state, and for my part when
That unhappy time of Princely Ferdinands
Sad death shall, come: --
Which moment: --
But should I as I say behold that hour,
Although I am elected for your Prince,
Yet would I not remove this gentleman,
Bat rather serve him as his councellor.

Give me your hand of that Cozen; well said, now get a pardon for me, and my
merry men all; and then let me be my fathers Taster, being the office belonging
to his eldest son; I Being the same, and then you shall see me behave my
self, not as a rebel, or reprobate, but as a most reasonable Prince, and
sufficient subject.


Well since my Lord ha's said the word, bring that of spake he to pass and ye
shall have my word too, and old Stilt my fathers, being a man of good reproach I
tell you, and condemnation in his country.


I that I am my Lord, I have lived in name and shame ^hese threescore, and
seven winters, all my neighbours can ^are me testament, and accord.


Well, rest ye quiet; Sovereign on my knees
I beg your Highness grant to there request:
Suppose them silly, simple, and your own;
To shed their blood were just, yet rigorous,
The praise of Kings is to prove gracious.

True soul of honour, substance of my self,
Thy merit wins thee mercy, go in peace,
Lay by your unjust arms, live by your sweat,
And in content the bread of quiet eat.

Godsaue Duke Ferdinand.

Pray Father, forgive me, and my man,
And my mans father by our single selves;
For we have bin the capital offenders.

I truly my Lord, we raised the resurrection,

I pardon all; give thee my Tasters place:
Honour this Prince that hath thus won you grace.

Y-S. God save Duke Ferdinand, and Prince Otho.

I and me too.

And Prince Ierom too; well son, i'll leave thee a Courtier still, and get me
home to my own desolation, where i'll labour to compel away excessity: and so
fareyee well.


This business over: worthy nephew Charles,
Let us go visi^ the sad Saxon Duke,
The mourning Hermit,
That through affection wrought his brothers fall.

I'll wait your Highness to that house of woe,
Where sad mischance sits in a purple chair,
And vnderncath her beetle cloudy brows
smiles at vnlockt for mischsefes; oh there
Doth grief vnpainted, in true shape appear.

Shrill trumpets sound a flourish
For the cries of war are drowned.

Nay but cozen cozen, i'st not necessary I wait
Upon mine own father? and stilt upon me?

It's most expedient, be obsequious.
No doubt his ^xcellence will l^e that well.

Dieu vou guard Mounsieur.

Welcome my friend, hast any suit to me?

Away Mounsieur, if you be the grand Princ^
Legitimate of Prussia, I have for tender
To your Excellence de service of one poor
Gentle home of Champaign.

I am not he you look for gentlemen,
My cozen is the true and lawful Prince.

I sir I am the legitimate, and am able to entertain
A gentleman though I say it and he be of any quality,

Lorrique, now or never play thy part:
This Act is even our Tragedies best hart.

Let me alone for plots, and villainy,
Only commend me to this fool the Prince.

I tell thee, I am the Prince, my cozen knows it,
That's my cozen, this is stilt my man.

A vostree service Mounsieur most Genereux.

No doubt he is some cunning gentleman
Your Grace may do a deed befitting you
To entertain this stranger.

It shall bedone cozen; i'll talk with him a little
And follow you, go commend me to my father
Tell him I am coming, and Stilt, and this stranger, be mindful cozen, as
you will answer to my Princely indiguation.


Well sir, I will be careful, never doubt;
Now scarlet Mistress from thick sable clouds
Thrust forth thy blood-staind hands, applaud my plot,
That giddy wonderers may amazed stand
While death smytes down suspectles Ferdinand.

Sweet Prince I scarce understand this fellow well, but I like his conceit in
not trusting Prince otho; you must give him the remove that's flat.


I be, gar, he be chose again you, he give you good word so be dat, but he
will have one fisgig or dia by gar for company on in principality be no
possible.


Well, I apprehend thee, I have a certain Princely feeling in my self that he
loves me not.


Hold ye there my Lord, I am but a poor fellow and have but a simple living
left me; yet my brother were he a very natural brother of mine own, should
he b^e dopted, I would dopt him, and herrite him, i'll fit him.


I but how Stilt, but how?


By gar my Lord, I will tell you fine knacks, for make him kick up his heals,
and cry we, or be gar I be hang, and so shall I be to, and for de grand love
I bear you, for de Lady Issabella's sake your most tres-excellent Lady moder,


Did, thou know her French doctor? did thou?


I as beggars do the Ladies that are their Almesgigiuers.


By gar you lye, like Iacknape, I love de Lady.

With a boon coeur, and for her sake here take dissame, and dis same, put dis
in de cup, where de competitor Prince otho shall drink; by gar it will poison
him bravely.


That were excellent my Lord, and it could be done, and no body know on it.


I, but he always drinks in my Fathers cup.


I so let be, let de Duke drink a de same.


What poison my father? no, I like not that so well.


You shall drink too, and I too and when we be sick, as we shall baue as
shall have a petit rumble in de belly; dan take a dis same, and give your sadra
dis: but your cozin none of it, and bygar no body shall be dead, and kicka,
and cry oh, but Otho.


That's excellent, master;


This is the poison then, and this is the medicine?


I dat be true.


Well Physician, attend in my chamber here, till Stilt and I return; and if I
pepper him not, say I am not worthy to be called a Duke, but a drawlatch.


Farewellawe, and iebbit a vow; and we speed by thy practice we'll crush a
cup of thine own country wine.


Go speed to spoil your selves.
Doctor lie there, Lorrique, like thy self appear
So now i'll post vuto the Hermitage, and smile
While silly fools act treason act through my guile.

See Princely uncle black dormitory,
Where Austria and Prince Lodowick are laid
On the cold bed of earth, where they must sleep
Till earth and air, and sea consume by fire.

Their rest be peace, their rising glorious;
Sad mourners, give your partners leave to kneel,
And make their offertorie on this tomb,
That does contain the honourablest earth
That ever went upright in Germany,

Welcome Duke Ferdinand, come, come, keele, kneel*
Thus should each friend another sorrow feel.

Is Lucibella in this monument?

No, she's recovered from deaths violence;
But through her wounds and grief distract of sense.

Heaven help her, here she comes;

Kneel still, I p^ay.

Oh me accursed I why live I this black day*

Oh a sword, I pray you kill me not,
For I am going to the rivers side.
To fetch white lillies, and b^ew daffodils
To stick in Lodowicks bosom, where it bled,
And in mine own; my true love is not dead,
No you're deceiud in him, my father is:
Reason he should, he made me run away*
And Lodowick too, and you Mathias too;
Alack for woe, yet what a the remedy?
We must run all away: yet all must dye.
'Tis so, I wrought it in a sampler,
'Twas heart in hand, and true loves knots and words,
All true stitch by my troth: the posy thus:
No flight dear love but death, shall sever us;
Nor that did not neither; he lies here does he not?

Yes lovely madam, pray be patient.

Iso I am, but pray tell me true,
Could you be patient, or you, or you, or you,
To loose a father and a husband too:
Ye could, I cannot; open, door here hoe!
Tell Lodowick, Lucibell would speak with him;
I have news from heaven for him, he must not die,
I have robbed Prometheus of his moving fire:
Open the door, I must come in, and will,
I'll beat my self to air, but I'll come in.

Alas her tender hands smiting the ston^
Beweep their mistress rage in tears of blood.

Fair Lady be of comfort, it is in vain
To invoke the dead to life again.

I gentle Daughter be content, I pray*
Their fate is come, and ours is not, far off.

Here is a hand over my fate hath power*
And I now sink under the stroke of death,
But that a purer spirit fills my breast
And guides me from the footsteps of despair,

A heavenly motion full of charity,
Your self to kill you self were such a sin
As most divines hold deadly.

I but a knave may kill one by a trick,
Or lay a plot, or so, or cog, or prate,
Make strife, make a mans father hang him,
Or his brother, how think you goodly Prince,
God give you joy of your adoption;
May nor tricks be used?

Alas poor Lady.

I that's true, I am poor, and yet have things,
And gold ring, and amidst the leaves greenea
Lord how dee, well I thank god, why that's well,
And you my Lord, and you too; never a one weep,
Must I shed all the tears? well he is gone,
And he dwells here ye said, ho i'll dwell with him,
Death, dastard, Devil, robber of my life
Thou base adulterer, that partst man and wife
Come I defy thy darts.

O sweet for bear.
For pities sake a while her rage restrain
Last she do violence upon herself.

O never fear me, there is somewhat cri^
Within menoe: tells me there's knaves abroad
Bids me be quiet, lay me down and sleep
Good night good gentlefolkes, brother your hand,
And yours good father, you are my father now,
Do but stand here, l'fe sun a little course
At base, or barley-breake, or some such toy,
To catch the fellow, and come back again,
Nay look thee now, let go, or by my troth
I'll tell my Lodowick how ye use his love:
So now god-buye, now god-night indeed:
Lie further Lodowick* take not all the room,
Be not a churl, thy Lucibell doth come.

Follow her brother, follow son Mathies,
Be careful guardians of the troubled maid;
While I con^erre with Princely Ferdinand
About an embassy to Austria,
With true reports of there disastrous haps.

Well, I will be her guardian and her guide,
By me her senses have bin weakened,
But i'll contend with charitable pain,
To serve her, till they be restord again.

A virtuous, noble resolution.

Worthy Prince Rodorigo, when tempestuous woe
Abates her violent storm, I shall have time
To chide you for vnkindenes, that have lived
In solitary life with us so long.
Believe me Saxon Prince you did us wrong:

Would I might never live in no worse state;
For contemplation is the path to heaven.
My new conversing in the world is proved
Luckless and full of sorrow; fare-ye-well
My heavens, alone, all company seems hell.

My nephew call for winemy soul is dry
I am sad at sight of so much misery.

Is the Dukes taster there?

I am at hand with my office.

Fill for the Duke good cozen, taste it first.

I have no mind to it Stilt, for all my antidote.

I warrant you Master let Prince Otho drink next,

Here cozen, will you begin to my father?

I thank you kindly, i'll not be so bold,
It is your office; fill unto my Lord.

Well god be with it, it's gon down, and now i'll send the medicine after;
Father pray drink to my cozen for he is so mannerly that he will not drink
before you.


Pray ye do my Lord, for Prince Otho is best worthy of all this company to
drink of that cup, which and he do, I hope he shall ne'er drink more.


Good for tune after all this sorrow Saxony.


O worthy Ferdinand, fortune and I are parted, she has played the minion with
me, turned all her favours in to frowns, and in scorn robbed me of all my
hopes, and in one hour over turned me from the top of her proud wheel.


Build not on fortune, she's a sickle dame
And those that trust unto her sphere are fools.
Fill for his Excellence.

Here cozen for your Excellence, pray drink you to the Duke of Saxony.


Not I kind cozen, I list not to drink.

Gods Lady, I think Stilt, we are all undone, for I feel a iumbling worse
and worse.


O give the Duke some of the medicine


What medicine talk thou of? what ails my son?


O lord, father, and ye mean to be a lives man take some of this.


Why? this is deadly poison unprepared.


True, but it was prepared for you and me by an excellent fellow, a french
Doctor?


I, he is one that had great cqre of you.


Villain what was he? drink not Saxony
I doubt I am by treason poisoned.

Heaven keep that fortune from my dread Lord.


Treason ye Princes, treason to the lives
Of Ferdinand the D^ke of Prussia
My Princely master! Otho of Luningberg

Who should intend us treason?


This fond Prince.


Never to you Father, but to my cozen Charles* indeed I meant to poison him,
but I have pepperd my self.


I never gave thee cause.


That's nothing to the purpose, but my Lord took occasion by the council of a
French Doctor.


Physicians for the Duke, ^y vncie faints.


Surgeons for the Prince, my master falls.


Call no Physicians, for I feel it too late,
The subtle poison mingled with my blood
'Nums all the passages, and^ nimble death
Fleets on his p^rple currents to my heart.

Father, I am dying too, oh now I depart,
Be good to Stilt my man, he was accessory
to all this.

I truly: was I sir therefore I hope you'll be good to me, I helped to mingle
the poison as the French Doctor, and my master charged me.


What's that French Doctor?


What's become of him?


We left him in the court in my masters chamber.


I sir woe worth him, farewell Stilt, farewell fathers
I ask you pardon with repentant eyes;
Fall stars, O Stilt, for thus thy master dyes.

Take hence that maytor for the fool his man.


I pray provide for me sit;


Let him be tortured, then upon a wheel
broke like a traitor and a murderer.

O lord sir. I meant you no hurt, but to Prince Charles


Away, distur be us not with idle talk.


Provide quoth a^ and you call this providing, pray let me, provide for my
self, alas my poor father, hee'le creep upon crutches into his grave when,
he hears his proper'st Stilt is cut off by the stumps.


Hence with that fellow.


Pray, not so hasty, you would scarce be so forward, and you were going as I
am, to the gallows.


How cheers my royal uncle ^

Likea ship that having long contended with
The waives, is at last with one proud billow
Smit into the ruthless swallow of the sea.
For thee alas I perceive this plot was lay de;
But heaven had greater mercy-on ^hy youth,
And one my people, that shall find true rest
Being with a Prince so wise and virtuous blessed.
Farewell most noble Iohn of Saxony,
Bear thy unmatched grief with a mind bent
Against the force of all temptations;
By my example Princely brother, see,
How vain our lives and all our glories be.

God for thy mercy! treason upon treason,
How now young Otho what art thou poisoned too?

Would God I were, but my sad stars reserve
This simple building for extreamer ruin:
Oh that French doctor.

I that worst of hell.
No torment shall content us in his death.

Nay soft and fair, let him be taken first;
How now sad brother, are you come to see
This Tragic end of worthy Ferdinand?

I heard of it too soon, and come too late.

Well brother leave the Duke, and wait on me*
Mathias, and the heartgreiu'd Lucibell
Shall go with us to Wittenberg, and shun
That fatal land filled with destruction.

But Lucibella like a chased hind
Flies through the thickets, and neglects the briars,
After her runs your Princely son Mathias,
As much disturbed, though not so much distract,
Vowing to follow her, and if he can,
Defend her from despairing actions.

And we will follow them, Prince Otho adieu
Care goes with us, yet we leave grief with you,
Inter your uncle, punish traitors crimes,
Look to your person* hese are dangerous times,

Lords take this body, bear it to the court,
And all the way sound a sad heavy march,
Which you may truly keep, then peeple tread
A mournesfull march indeed,
Go on before, i'll stay a while, and weep
My tributary tears paid on the ground
Where my true joy your Princemy uncle fell:
I'll follow to drive from you all distress
And comfort you, though I be comfortless.
Art not thou plumpt with laughter my Lorrique,

All this excellent, but worthy Lord,
There is an accident this instant chanc'st
Able to overthrow in one poor howre
As well your hopes as these assurances.

Whats that Lorrique? what can fortune do
That may divert my strai^e of policy.

You know all Prussia take you for the son
Of beauteous Martha,

I they suppose me to be Otho her son,
And son to that false Duke whom I will kill
Or curse my stars

His star is sunk already, death and he
Have vowed an endless league of amity.

Had I Briareus hands, i'd strine with heaven
For executing wrath before the hour,
But wishes are in vain, he's gone.

Our son is somewhat slack as we conceive
By this delaying, while our heart is feared,
And our eyes dim'd with expectation
As are the lights of such as on the beach
With many a longing, yet a little proof
Stand weighting the return of those they love.

His Excellence no doubt hath great affairs
But his familiar friend Lorrique is come.

kneel not Lorrique, I prithee glad my heart
With thy tongues true report of my son Otho
Whom since his Princely Father is decea'st
I am come from oppressed with grief
In person to salute him for our Duke.

Your mother like affection, and high care,
His H^igh^es doth return with dut^ous thanks
Defiring pardon of your excellence,
In that he did not first salute your grace:
But dis^al accidents and bloody deeds,
Poisoning streasons, so disturb this state
Chiefly this gentle mind since the late death
Of your right princely brother Ferdinand
That like the careful Captain of a band
He is compelled to be the last in field;
Yet he protests by me, and I for him:
That no soft rest shall enter his grecu'd eyes
Till he behold your presence, more desired
Then the large Empire of the wide earth;
Only he prays that you would take your rest
For in your soft content his heart is blessed.

Spread me a Carpet on the humble earth:
My hand shall be the pillow to my head.
This stepmy bolster, and this place my bed.

Your Highness will take harm*

Nay, never fear.
A heart with sorrow filled sleeps any where,
Will our son come to night?

Madam he will.

See our train lodgd, and then Lorrique attend
For captain of the guard; that wait on us,
Go all away, no body stay with me
Except our son, come if we chance to call,
Trouble us not, god night unto you all.
Quo fugiat mortale genm? nil denique tutum est,
Crudelis nam morsomnia falce secat?
Nil durum, nil non mortis penetrabile telis,
Omnia vi demit, mors vio ^nesa sua.
Tis true, the wise, the fool, the rich, the poor
The fair, and the deformed fall; their life turns
Air: the King and Captain are in this alike
None hath free hold of life, but they are still
When death heavens steward comes, tennents at will.
I lay me down, and rest in thee my trust,
If I wake never more, till all flesh rise
I sleep a happy sleep, sin in me dyes.

Art sure she is a sleep!

I cannot tell, be not too hasty.

She stirs not, she is fast.
Sleep sweet fair Duchess, for thou sleep thy last:
Endymions love, muffle in clouds thy face,
And all ye yellow tapers of the heaven
Veil your clear brightness in Cimerian mistmis;
Let not one light my black deed beautiste;
For with one stroke virtue and honour dyes.
And yet we must not kill her in this kind:
Weapons draw blood, blood shed will plainly prove
The worthy Dntchesse, worthless of this death
Was murdered, and the guard are witnesses,
None entered but our selves.

Then strangle her, here is a towel fit.

Good: kneel and help, compass her neck about,
Alas poor Lady thou sleep here secure
And never dream of what thou shalt endure.

Nay, good my Lord dispatch.

What ruthless hind
Shall I wrong nature that did ne'er compose
One of her sex so perfect? prithee stay,
Suppose we kill her thus about her neck,
Circles of purple blood will change the hue
Of this white porphirie and the red lines
Mixed with a deadly black, will tell the world
She dyed by violence, then 'twill be inquired
And we held ever hateful for the act.

Then place beneath her nostrils this small box
Containing such a powder that hath power,
Being set on fire to suffocate each sense
Without the sight of wound, or show of wrong.

That's excellent, fetch fire, or do not, stay:
The candle shall suffice, yet that burns dim;
And drops his waxen tears as if it mourned
To be an agent in a deed so dark.

Will you confound your self by dotage speak,
S'wounds i'll confound her, and she linger thus.

Thou were it as good, and better, -- note my words:
Run unto the top of dreadful scarre,
And thence fall headlong on the under rocks,
Or set, thy breast against a cannon fired,
When iron death flies thence on flaming wings,
Or with thy shoulders, Atlas like attempt,
To bear the ruins of a falling tower,
Or swim the Ocean; or run quick to hell;
(as dead assure thy self no better place)
Then once look frowning on this angels face
Confound her? black confusion be my grave
Whisper one such word more, thou die base slave.

I have done, i'll honour her if you command.

She stirs, and when she wakes observe me well,
Sooth up what ere, I say, touching Prince Otho.

Prince Otho, is our son come? who's there Lorrique?

What shall I answer her?

Whose that thou talk with?

The most indebted servant to your Grace
Of any creature underneath the Moon.

I prithee friend be brief, what is thy name?
I know thee not, what business hast thou here?
Art thou a messenger come from our son?
If so acquaint us with the news thou bring.

I saw your Highness son, Lorrique here knows, the last of any living.


Living? heaven help,
I trust my son he has no commerce with death.

Your son no doubt is well, in blessed state.

My heart is smitten through thy answer,
Lorrique, where is thy gracious Lord?

In heaven I hope.

True madam, he did perish in the wrack
When he came first by sea from Lubecke haven.

What false impostor then hath mock't my care?
Abused my Princely brother Ferdinand?
Gotten his Dukedom in my dead sons name?

I grant him an impostor, therein false
But when your Highness hears the circumstance,
I know your wisdom and meek piety
Will Judge him well deserving in your eyes.

What can be said now I have lost my son?
Or how can this base two-tongu'd hypocrite
Excuse concealing of his masters death.
Unhappy Martha, in thy age undone,
Robbed of a husban'd, cheated of a son.

Hear me with patience for that pities sake
You showed my captive body, by the tears
You shed, when my poor father dragd to death
Endured all violence at their hands:
By all the mercies poured on him and me
That like cool rain somewhat allayd the heate
Of our sad torment, and red sufferings;
Here me but speak a little to repay
With gratitude the favours I received.

Art thou the luckless son of that sad man
Lord of Burtholme some time admiral?

I was his only son, whom you set free,
Therefore submissively I kneel and crave,
You would with patience hear your servant speak;

Be brief, my swollen heart is at point to break.

I stood upon the top of the high scarre,
Where I beheld the splitted ship let in
Devouring ruin in the shape of waives,
Some got on Rafts, but were as soon cast off
As they wear seated; many strid the mast,
But the seas working was so violent,
That nothing could preserve them from their fury,
They did and were entombed in the deep.
Except some two the surges washed a shore
Prince Charles being one, who on Lorriques back
Hung w^h clasped hands, that never could unfold,

Why not as well as he Lorrique doth live,
Or how was he found clasped upon his back
Except he had had life to fold his hands.

Madam, your Highness errs in that conceit,
For men that dye by drowning, in their death,
Hold surely what they clasp, while they have breath.

Well he held me, and sunk me too.

I'll witness, when I had recovered him
The Princes head being split against a Rock
Past all recover, Lorrique in desperate rage,
Sought sundry means to spoil his new-gain'd; life*
Exclay ming for his master: cursing heaven,
For being unjust to you, though not to him,
For robbing you of comfort in your son
Oh gracious Lady said this grieved man
Could I but work a means to called me her grief.
Some reasonable course to keep black care
From her white bosom; I were happy then;
But knowing this, her heart will sink with woe
And I, am ranked with miserablest men,

I gods my witness, these were my laments,
Till Hoffman being as willing, as my self;
Did for his love to you, that pitied him.
Take on him to be called by your sons name,
Which now he must refuse except your Grace
Attept his service in Prince Otho's place,

If this that you protest be true, your care
Was like a long reprieve, the date worn out;
The execution of my woe is come,
And I must suffer it with patience:
Where have you laid the body of my son?

Within the chapel of an hermitage,
Some half a mile hence.

I'll build me there a Cell,
Made like a tomb, till death, therein i'll dwell:
Yet for thy wrongs young man attend my words
Since neither Ferdinand, nor Saxony,
Have any heirs, to sway their several states;
I'll work what lies in ^e to make thee Duke,
And since thou art accepted for my son,
Attempting it only to do me good
I here adopt thee: mine christen thee Otho,
Mine eyes are now the font, the water tears,
That do baptize thee in thy borrowed name.

I thank your Highness, and of just heaven crave
The ground I wrong you in, may turn my grave.

Lights to our chamber, now our fears are past,
What we long doubted, is proved true at last.
Attend us son.

We'll wait upon your Grace.
Son, this is somewhat, this will bear the eyes
Of the rude vulgar, but this serves not me;
Dukedoms I will have them my sword shall win,
If any interposer cross my will,
But new made mother, there's another fire
Burns in this liver lust, and hot desire,
which you must quench; must? I and shall; I know
Women will like how ever they say no;
And since my heart is knit unto her eyes
If she, being sanctimonious, hate my ^uit,
In love this course i'll take, if she deny;
Force her: true, so: si non blanditijs, vi.

Have you not found her yet?

Not I,

Nor I.

Then I beleeeue borne by her fits of rage
She ha's done violence to her bright same,
And fallen upon the bosom of the Balt.

What reason leads ye to believe it, son?

I did perceive her some half hour since
Clambering upon the steepenes of the rock,
But whether up or down I could not guess
By reason of the distance.

Stand aside, she comes, let her not escape us now.

What has she got apparel? I and rich,
Poor soul, she in her idle lunacy
Hath took it from some house where 'twill be mist.

Lets circle her about, least spying us
she run away with wonted nimbleness,
Fairest well met.

Well overtaken sir.

What have ye here?

And you too heartily.

I am sure you know.

Why that's well, I like that, that you are well and you, and you: god buy.


Nay, nay you must not go, we'll hold you now.

Why that's well, done, Pray come, see my house
I have a fine house now, and goodly knacks
And gay apparel; look ye here, this is brave;
And two lean porters starved for lack of meat,
Pray let go minearmes, look here they be.

Oh horrid sight!

Nay, never start I pray; is it not like I keep
A princely house, when I have such fat porters at my gate;

What should this mean? why in this wood
So thick, so solitary, and remote
From common road of men, should these hang thus*
Brother your Hermitage is not far hence,
When knew you any execution here?

I never knew any, and these bones are green,
This less anatomy hath not hung long
The bigger, by the moss and drynes seems
Of more coutinuance.

What's on there heads?

why golden Crowns, my porters shall be Kings*
And hide there barebones with these gay weeds.

I do remember the Admiral

that kept the Island of Burtholme
Was by the Duke of Prussia adiudg'd
To have his head feared with a burning crown,
And after made a bare Anatomy,
Which by his son was from the gallows stolue;

I, that same son of his, but where lives he

No doubt, he doth possess some cave hard by.

Come, go with me, i'll show you where he dwells,
Or some body; I know not who it is;
Here, look, look here, here is a way goes down,
Down, down a down, hey down, down.
I sung that song, while Lodowicke sl^pt with me.

This is some Cave, let's boldly enter in,
And learn the mystery of that sad sight,
Come Lady, guide us in, yon know the way.

True, that's the way, you cannot miss the path;
The way to death and black destruction
Is the wide way; no body is now at home,
Or tarry, peradventure here comes some will tell you more.

Stand close, this is Lorrique, I do not know the
Lady comes with him.

I have seen that countenance.

Stand close, I pray, my heart divines,
Some strange and horrid act will be reueald.

Nay that's most true, a fellow with a red cap told me so
And bad me keep these clothes, and give them
To a fair Lady in a mourning gown;
Let go my arms; I will not run away
I thank you now, now you shall see me stay,
By my troth I will, by my maidenhead I will.

Lorrique return into the beaten path,
I asked thee for a solitary plot,
And thou hast brought me to the dismallest grove
That ever eye beheld, no woodnimphes here
Seek with their agill steps to outstrip the Roe,
Nor doth the sunsucke from the queachy plot
The ranknes and the venom of the Earth
It seems frequentlesse for the use of men:
Some basilisks, or poisonous serpents den!

It is indeed an vndelight full walk;
But if I do not err in my belief,
I think the ground, the trees, the rocks, the springs,
Have since my Princely Master Charles his wrack
Appeared more dismal, then they did before,
I^ memory of his vntimelesse fall.
For hereabouts, hereabouts the place,
Where his ^ayre body lay deformed by death
Here Hoffmans son, and I enbalm'd him
After we had concluded to de^caue
Your sacred person, and Duke Ferdinand
By causing Hoffman to assume his name.

This is very strange.

Nay tarry, you shall hear all the knavery anon.

And where's the Chapel that you laid him in?

I'ts an old Chapel, near the Hermitage:

But was the Hermit at his burial?

No, Hoffman and I only dug the grave
Played Priest and Clarke, to keep his burial close?

Most admirable!

Nay, pray you peace.

Alas! poor son, the soul of my delights;
Thou in thy end were robbed of Funeral rites,
None sung thy requiem, no friend closed thine eyes,
Nor laid the hallowed earth upon thy lips,
Thou were not houseled, neither did the bells ring
Blessed peals, nor towel thy funeral knell,
Thou wo^st to death, as those that sink to hell;
Where is the apparel that I bad him wear
Against the force of witches and their spells.

We buried it with him it was his shroud,
The desert woods no fitter means allowed.

I think he lies.
Now by my troth, that gentleman smells knave.

Swear one thing to me, ere we leave this place;
Whether young Hoffman did the most he might to save my son.

By heaven it seems he did, but all was vain
The flinty rocks had cut his tender scull,
And the rough water washed away his brain.

Liar, liar, like dish.

How now what woman's this? what men are these?

Apoore maiden mistress, ha's a suite to you,
And 'tis a good suite, very good apparel.
Lo, here I come a wooing my ding, ding,
Lo, here we come a suing, my darling,
Lo, here I come a praying, to biaea, bidea.
How do you Lady, well I thank God, will you buy a barganei pray, i'ts fine
apparel.


Run my lives blood, comfort my troubled heart,
That trembles at the sight of this attire:
Lorrique, look on them, know thou not these clothes?
Nor the distracted bringer? prithee speak.

Ay me, accursed and damned; I know them both;
The bringer is the Austrian Lucibell^

I, you say true, I am the very same,

The apparel was my Lords, your Princely son's.

This is not seawet, if my son were drowned
Then why thus dry is his apparel found?

O me accursed, o miserable me?
Fall heaven, and hide my shame, gape earth, rise sea,
Swallow, orewhelme me, wherefore should I live,
The most perfidious wretch that ever breathed,
And base consenter to my dear Lords death.

Nay, look you here, do you see these poor starved ghosts; can you tell
whose they be?

Alas! what are they? what are you that seem
In civil habits to hide ruthless hearts;
Lorrique, what are they? what wilt thou attempt?
Help Gentlemen, if ye be Gentlemen,
And stay this fellow from despairing ill.

I was ordained unto perdition, stay me not;
For when ye know the mischiefs I have done,
(at least, consented to, through coward fear)
You would not stop me, if I skipped in quick
To that black, bottomless and ruthless, gulf,
Where everlasting sorrows like linked chains
Fetter the wretched in eternal night.

what hast thou done?

Knavery I warrant you, tell truth and shame the
Devil my boy, do, and thou shalt have a fine thing by and by.

I take your Highness for that reverend Dutch
Late wife unto the Duke of Prussia.

I am the wretched childless widow sir.

Princess hear me, and I will briefly tell
How you came childless, you brotherlesse,
You husbandless, and fatherless, all, all,
I'll tell you, having ended, act my fall.

Well, forward;

Be it so, I have deserved a greater cruelty,
To be kept living when I long to dye.

I charge thee setting by all circumstance,
Thou utter what thou know: my heart is steel,
Nor can it suffer more then it doth feel.

Then thus, Prince Charles and I escaped the wrack,
Came safe a shore to this accursed plot,
Where we met Hoffman, who upon yon tree
Preserved his fathers bare anatomy,
The biggest of them two were those strong bones
That acted mighty deeds.
Hoffman the son full of revenge and hate,
Against every hand that wrought his fathers hurt,
Yet gilded ore his envy with fair shows,
And entertained us with as friendly terms
As falsehood could invent; and 'tis well known*
Bitter deceit uses the sweetest speech.
At length he took advantage, bound my Lord,
And in a chain tied him to yonder rock,
While with a burning Crown he feared in twain
The purple Veins, strong sinews, arteries, uerues,
And every cartilage about the head,
In which sad torment the mild Prince fell dead.

Did Hoffman this? and thou conceal'st the deed?

Pardon my fear, Dread Madam.

well, go on, I am confident to hear all cruelty,
And am resolved to act some, if no hand
Will else attempt the murderers and, but mine.

Be patient; you will find associates:
For there are many murderers more behind.

what did he with the body of my son?

Buried the slesh, the bones are they that hang
Close by his fathers.

Let them hang a while
Hope of revenge in wrath doth make me smile.

Pray let him tell the rest.

This acted, Hoffman forced me to conceal
The murder of my Lord, and threatened more
Then death by many torments, till I swore
To call him Otho, and say he was your son*
I swore and kept my oath.

O Heaven.

O Devil.

Nay, I pray you peace.

Thensent he me for you, and you he sent,
Or as I best remember, lead you on
Unto the Chapel porch, where he himself
Appointed them to stay, and there you know
What happened in your wrath.

To me a sleep,
And to my harmless Lodowick in my arms.

On on, that deed is writ among the acts of guilt:
A brothers sword a brothers life blood spilt.

Proceed, what's next? killed he not Austria?

He did.

O villain did he kill my Father?
And make my brother kill my husband too?

Go forward.

After all those hated murders
He taught the foolish prince in the disguise
Of a French Doctor to prepare a poison,
Which was the death of Princely Ferdinand:
Next plot he purposed your graces death,
And had opposd my strength of my tears,
You had bin murdered as you lay a sleep.

Let's hear no more, seek out the hated wretch,
And with due torture let his life be forced
From his despised body.

Do I pray.

All the Land will help,
And each man be a justice in this act.

Well, I that never knewreuenges power,
Have entertained her newly in my breast:
Determine what's to do.

Even what you will; would I were with my Lod^wick a sleep
In the Elizian fields, where no fears dwell;
For earth appears as vile to me as hell.

Let me be Prologue to your scene of wrath,
And as the Roman Cateline resolved
His doubtful followers by exhausting blood
From the live body, so draw mine, cast mine
Upon the troubled and offended earth;
Offer blood fit for an infernal sacrifice,
Wine is not powered but on celestial offerings:
Therefore I advise you
As you hope to thrive in your revenge, smite me.
That have bin pander to this injury.

Thou merit'st death indeed.

Stay judge him not, let me a little plead in his excuse,
And this one sentence serves; a manaompel'd
To evil acts, cannot be justly held
A wilful malefactor; the law still
Looks upon the deed, ne'er on the will:
Besides although I grant the matter small
And very safe to raise a multitude,
That by their power might cease the m^rderer,
Yet two especial reasons cross that course:
First: many having notice of our plot,
One babbling tongue may utter out intent,
And Hoffman being warned is surely armed
Having the fort and treasure in his power,
And be his cause more then notorious ill,
He may with gold maintain it at his will
Escape us, for no doubt he's full of sleights:
Besides, Revenge should have proportion,
By sly deceit he acted every wrong,
And by deceit I would have him entrapped;
Then the re^enge were fit, just, and square,
And 'twould more vex him that is all composed
Of craft and subtilty to be outstripped
In his own fashion, then a hundred deaths.
Therefore by my advice pardon Lorrique
Upon condition, that he lay some plot
To intercept the other.

We are agreed.

Your mercy doth all bounds of hope exceed,
And if you will repose that trust in me,
By all the protestations truth can make,
Before the Sun have run his mid-dayes course,
I will to morrow! yield him to your hands.

Show us the means.

The means is in the Duchess policy.
If she can smooth the murder but a while.

I'll turn deceit to overthrow his fraud.

Then with fair words his flatteries e^tertayne,
And when he doth importune you for love,
Desire him first to show you the first place,
Where he beheld Prince Charles after the wrack
Say you have earnestly entreated me,
But I have lead you in a labyrinth
Of no effect; he full of heate and ^ust,
Glad of occasion will no doubt alone
Conduct you to this fatal horrid cave,
Thy king by force, or fair means, to attain
His false hearts longing, and your honours stain;
But being in the height of his base pride,
The Duke, the Hermit, Lodowick and my self,
Will change his pleasures into wretched
And redeemelesle misery.

The plot is good, Madam, are you agreed?

To any thing how ever desperate.

I but by your leave, Lady, and Lords all, what if
This knave that has bin, play the knave still,
And tell tales out of school; how then?

I know not what to swear by; but no soul
Longs for the sight of endless happiness,
With more desire, then mine thirsts for his death:
By all the gods that shall give ill men li^e,
I am resolved chief agent in his end.

We credit thee, join hands, and ring him round,
Kneel, on his head lay our right hands, and swear
Vengeance against Hoffman.

Vengeance, vengeance, fall
On him, or sudden death upon us all.

Come, part, we to the cave,
You to the Court:
Justice dig murders grave.

Nay, I'll come, my wits are mine again
Now faith grows firm to punish faithless men.

Not to be found? hell which way is she gon?

Her Highness charged us to call you her son,
The mystery we know not, but we know,
You are not Princely Otho of Luningberg.

No matter what I am; tell me the way she went
With that Lorrique; speak, or by heaven
Hell shall receive you all.

Be not in raged she comes,
And with her comes trusty Lorrique.

Madam, I feared you, and my heart was sick,
With doubt some ouer-desperate accident
Had drawn you to the melancholy paths,
That lye within the verge of this rough scarre.

Your doubt was but an Embryo; I indeed
Desired Lorrique to bring me to the place
Where you beheld the shipwreck of my son;
And he hath led me up and down the wood,
But never brought me to the fatal beach,

It were not fit you should see the sad place,
That still seems dismal since the Princes death.

Dead? is our sovereign Lord the Prince dead?

Inquire no more of that, I will anon
Resolve you of his fate, this time for bear,
Esteem this gentleman your Lord and Prince.

We hold him so, since you command us so.

Will you go forward, Madam?

Willingly, so you will promise me to walk to morrow
And see the Earth that gently did receive
My sons wrack't body from the churlish some.

I'll wait upon your Grace, set forward there,
Tricks, and devices! longings! well 'tis good:
I'll swim to my desires, through seas of blood.

Fox you'll be taken, hunter you are fallen
Into the pit you dug; I laughed to see
How I out-strip the Prince of villainy.
Hoffman for me told such a smoothing tale,
That had not this strange accident befallen
In finding of the cave; I had bin held
More d^ere then ever, in the Duchess eyes:
But now she'll hold me hard, what ere she say,
Yet is her word past that she'll pardon me,
And I have wealth hoor'd up which i'll bear
To some strange place: rich men live any where.

What? are you gadding sir? what moves your flight?
Coin not excuses in your crouching come,
What cause have you to ^ie and seek strange hoards
For your wealth gotten by my liberal gift?

And my desert, my Lord.

Well be it your desert;
But what's the cause you'll fly this country?

As I live, my Lord, I have no such intent*
But with your leave, I was debating things,
As if it should chance thus, and thus, why then
'Twere better be far of, but otherwise
My love and life, low at your service lye.

You are a villain damned as low as hell;
An hypocrite, a fawning hypocrite:
I know thy heart, come Spaniel up, arise,
And think not with your antiques and your lies
To go beyond me, you have played the slave,
Betrayed me to the Datchesse, told her all,
Disappoynting all my hopes with your base tongue,
Ore^rn'd the height of my intendments,
For which i'll hurl thee from my mountain wrack,
Into the lowest Cavern of pale death.

Alas my Lord for bear, let me be heard.

Thou hast betrayed me, therefore never talk.

By heaven --

O hell! why should thou think on heaven.

Stay, and believe me, think you I am mad,
So great a foe to my own happy chance,
When things are sorted to so good an end,
That all is hid, and we held in regard:
After such horrid, and perfidious acts,
Now to betray my self; be reasonable,
And think how shallow such an act would seem
In me, chief agent in so many ills.

Thou hast a tong^e as glib and smooth to lies,
As full of false inventions, and base fraud,
As prone to circumvent believing souls,
As ever heretic or traitor used,
Whose speeches are as honey, their acts gall,
Their words raise up, but their hands ruin all.

By virtues glorious soul.

Blasphemer peace, swear not by that thou hat'st;
Virtue, and thou have no more sympathy,
Then day with night, Heaven with Hell.
Thou know, I know thy Villainies excel

Why then by vil^any, by blood, by slights,
By all the horrors tortures can present,
By Hell, and by revenges purple hand
The Duchess had no conference with me,
But only a desire to see the place
That first received her son, whom she believes
The unrelenting waives and flinty rocks,
Had severed from sweet life after the wrack.

May I believe thee?

Have I fayld you yet?
Measure my former acts, and you shall find
My foul allied to yours, wholly estranged
From all I ^uer loved.

No more, have done.
Tha'st won me to continue thee my friend;
But I can tell thee somewhat troubles me,
Some dreadful misadventure my soul doubts,
And I conceive it with no common thought,
But a most potent apprehension;
For it confounds imaginary sense,
Sometimes inflames my blood, another while
'Nums all the Currents that should comfort life,
And I remain as 'twere a senseless stone.

Come, come, I know the cause, you are in love,
And to be so, is to be any thing.
Do you not love the Duchess?

Yes, I do.

Why there's the matter, then, be ruled by me,
To morrow morning she desires to see
The shore, that first received her sea-wrackt son,
And to be vnaccompained she loves;
Except some one or two, you and I:
Now when you have her near your dismal I cave,
Force her, I dot man, make no scruple do it,
Else you shall never win her to your bed:
Do a mans part, please her before she go,
Or if you see, that she turns violent,
Shut her perpetual prisoner in that den;
Make her a Philomel, prove Tereus:
Do it, never fear it.

Why she will be mist.

By whom? by fools* gross, dull, thick sighted fools,
whom every mist can blind, I'll sway them all,
With exclamation that the grieved Duchess
when she beheld the sea that drowned her son,
S^ood for a while like weeping Niobe,
As if she had bin stone: and when we strived
With mi^de persuasions to make less her woe
She madd^r then the wife of Athamas
Leaped suddenly into the troubled sea,
Whose surges greedy of so rich a prey,
Swallowed her up, while we in vain exclaym'd
Against Heaven and hell, against fortune and her fate,

Oh my good vi^laine! how I hug thy plots,
This shall be done, she's mine: run swi^t slow hours,
Make a short night hasten on day apace,
Rough arms wax soft soft beauty to embrace.

Why so, now your fear will q^ickly end,

Thou wilt not talk of this?

Will I be hanged?
Nee're take me for a blab, you'll find me none.

I have a another secret, but --

Come what is't? come, this breast is yours,
My heart's your treasury.

Thou must be secret, 'tis a thing of weight concerns thee near.


Were it as near as life, come, pray speak.

Hark in thine ear, I would not have the air
Be privy to this purpose, wilt thou swear?

What? to be secret? if the least jot I tell
Let all my hopes sink suddenly to hell.

Thou hast thy wish, down villain, keep this close.

Unthankful murderer, is this my mead?
Oh slave, tha'st killed thy heart in wounding mine,
This is my day, to morrow shall be thine.

Go fool; now thou art dead, I need not fear.
Yet as thou were my servant just and true,
I'll hide thee in the ditch: give dogs there due,
He that will prove a mercenary slave
To murder, seldom finds so good a grave,
He's gone, I can now spare him, Lorrique farewell;
Commend me to our friends thou meet in hell:
Next plot for Mathias and old Saxony,
There ends shall finish our black tragedy.

How little care had we to let her escape,
Especially on this so needful time,
When we are vowed to wait upon revenge.

No doubt our uncles care will keep her safe,
Nor is she in her fits so violent
As she was wont, look where my
Uncle comes, sustaining with one hand
A dying man, and one the other side,
Fair Lucibell supports the fainting body.

Look you here, you maruai'ld why I went,
Why this man drew me unto him, can you help
Him now. Hoffman has hought him too.

Brother who is't you bring thus ash pale;
I'st not Lorrique;

I am, and 'tis in vain to strive for longer hope.
I cannot, only be provident; I greatly fear
The murdrous traitor out of mere suspect
Will plot some stra^agem against the life
Of the chaste Duchess, help her what you can,
Against the violence of that wicked man.

Hast thou not told him, what we do intend?

No, as heaven help me in my wretched end,
Be confident of that, now I must fall
Never again to rise, you know his wrongs:
Be careful Princes to revenge them all.

Well, farewell fellow, thou art now paid home
For all thy counce^ling in knavery,
Good Lord! what very fools are very knaves!
There cunning bodies often want due graves.

Son, daughter, brother, follow my advice,
Let us no longer keep this hateful plot,
Least we be circumuented.

True, 'tis to put on open arms.

Tis now too late, we are beset
With soldiers, we must fight, and since it must be;
Let's to it valiantly.

Princes prepare not to resist your foes,
We are as firm as life unto your blood.
The Duchess Martha greetes old Saxony,
Prince Mathias, Rodorick, and fair Lucibell:
To me she hath discovered the damned plots
Of that perfidious Hoffman, and hath sent
These armed soldiers, to attend on you.

We thank her Highness, but we think in vain
Both you and we attend; Lorrique lies slain
By Hoffmans sly suspicion; best be joined
To appr^hend him publicly.

There is no need, our Duchess hath apparrel'd
Her speech in a green livery,
She salutes him fair, but her heart
Like his actions, is attired
In red, and blew, and sable ornaments.

But tell us where they are?

At hand she comes, with him alone her plot is,
She comes in happy time for all your good.

Cease words, use deeds
Revenge draws nigh.

Come set his body like a scarcrow,
This bush shro^d you, this you,
Stand close true soldiers, for revenge.

I: do, do, do, I pray you heartily do, stand close.

I wonder much why you ask me for Lorrique,
What is Lorrique to you, or what to me?
I tell you he is damned, enquire no more,
His name ^s hatefuller then death.

Heaven! what alterations these!
Can I believe you love me as you swore,
When you are so inconstant to your friend?

He is no friend of mine whom you affect,
Pardon me Madam, such a fury reigns
Over my boiling blood, that I envy
Any one on whom you cast anamorous eye.

What grown so loving? marry heaven defend,
We shall deceive you if you dote on us,
Fot I have sworn to lead a widows life,
And never more to be termed married wife.

I, but you must.

Must? use not force, I pray.

Yield to my love, and then with meekest word^
And the most humble actions, i'll entreat
Your sacred beauty; deny me? i'll turn fire,
More wild then wrath, come then agree,
If not to marry, yet in unseen sports
To quench these Lawless heates that burn in me.

What my adopted son become my lover?
And make a want on minion of his mother?
Now fie upon you fie you're too obscene
If like your words, your thoughts appear unclean.

By heaven I do not ieast, go to, believe me,
'Tis well you laugh; smile on, I like this:
Say, will you yield?

At the first? fie no.
That were an abject course, but let us walk
Into some covert, there are pretty caves,
Lucky to lovers suites, for Virgil sings;
That Dido being driven by a sharpe storm
Into a Lybian cave, was there enticed
By siluer-tongu'd Aeneas to affect;
And should you serve me so, I were undone,
Disgraced in Germany by every Boor,
Who in their rymes would jest at Marthas name
Calling her minion to her cozen son.

Fairer then Dido, or loves amorous Queen;
I know a cave, where in the bright days eyes
Looked never but a skance through a small creek,
Or little cranny of the fretted scarre;
There I have sometimes lived, there are fit seats,
To sit and chat, and coll, and kiffe, and steal
Loves hidd^n pleasures, come, are you disposed
To venture entrance? if yo^ be, assay,
'Tis death to quick desire, use no delay.

Virtue and modesty bids me say no,
Yet trust me Hoffman tha'rt so sweet a man,
And so beloved of me, that I must go.

I am crowned the King of pleasure.

Hateful slave, thou go to meet destruction in the cave.


S'death who stands here?
What's that? Lorriques pale ghost?
I am amazed: nay slave stand of:
Thy weapons sure, the prize is ours.

Come forth dear friends, murder is in our powers

Yield thee, base son of shame.

How now whats here? am I betrayed?
By dotage, by the falsehood of a face?
Oh wretched fool fallen by a woman's hand
From high revenges sphere, the bliss of souls.

Cut out the murderers tongue.

What do you mean?
Whom have I murdered; wherefore bind ye me;

They are Justices to punish thy bare bones,
Look with thy blood-shed eyes on these bare bones,
And tell me that which dead Lorrique confessed
Who is't thou villained that least? who wast?

Why Otho thy sons, and that's my fathers by him.

O mercil^sse and cruel murderer
To leave me childl^sse.

And me husbandless.

Me brotherlesse. oh smooth tongued hypocrite
How thou did draw me to my brothers death.

Talk no more to him, he seeks dignity,
Reason he should receive his desperate hire,
And wear his crown made flaming hot with fire:
Bring forth the burning crown there.

Do old dog, thou helpst to worry my dead Father
And must thou kill me too? 'tis well, 'tis fit,
I that had sworn unto my fathers soul
To be revenged on Austria, Saxony,
Prussia, Luningberg, and all there heirs:
Had prospered in the downfall of some five;
Had only three to offer to the fiends,
And then must fall in love; oh wretched eyes
That have betrayed my heart; be you accursed;
And as the melting drops run from my brows,
So fall they on the strings that guide your heart
Whereby their oylye heat may crack them first,
I so, boyle on thou foolish idle brain,
For giving entertainment to loves thoughts.
A man resolved in blood, bound by a vow
For no less vengeance, then his fathers death,
Yet become amorous of his foes wife!
Oh sin against all conceit! worthy this shame
And all the tortures that the world can name.

Call upon heaven, base wretch, think on thy soul.

In charity and prayer
To no purpose without charity.

We pardon thee, and pray for thy souls health.

So do not I for yours, nor pardon you;
You killed my father, my most warlike father,
Thus as you deal by me, you did by him;
But I deserve it that have slackt revenge
Through fickle beauty, and a woman's fraud;
But Hell the hope of all despairing men,
That wring the poor, and eat the people up,
As greedy beasts the harvest of their spring:
That Hell, where cowards have their seats prepared*
And barbarous asses, such as have robbed souldrers of
Reward, and punish true desert with scorned death.


