Amongst all the youthful lovers which adore
Your daughters beauty, and implore my aid,
Don Roderigo and Don Sancho strive
Who shall show most the fire her beauties raised.
But yet Cimena is indifferent
To both their loves, and with an equal eye
Beholds them both, nor does she take away
Or add ought to their hopes, but still expects
A husband from your choice alone designed.

She does her duty, both of them deserve her,
Both sprung from brave and noble families,
Both young, yet such as in their faces show
The illustrious virtue of their Ancestors,
But above all, in Roderigo's face
There's not a line which speaks not a brave man;
His family has been fruitful still in soldiers,
As if they had been borne in the midst of laurels.
His fathers valour, in his time, unequalled,
(Whilst his strength lasted) was a prodigy.
The furrows in his fore-head seem to be
The ingravements of his noble actions,
And Roderigo's person seems to promise
The virtues of his father. In conclusion,
My daughter if she love him shall please me;
Go entertain her with it, but be sure
You hide my intentions, and discover hers,
At my return wee'le speak of it together,
Time calls me now to wait upon the Council,
Where the King means to choose a Governor
Unto the Prince his son, or rather seat me
In that high place of honour, for my merits
Forbid me to expect an opposition.

HOw welcome news will this be to our lovers?
How fortune has provided, that all things
Should sort to their contentment?

How now Elvira?
What in conclusion must I hope or fear?
What must become of me? what says my father?

Only two words, enough to charm your senses,
You cannot love Roderigo, more than he
Does value him.

Prithee speak truth Elvira,
The excess of this my happiness does stagger
My faith in it; may I believe thy words?

Nay he went farther, he approves his love,
And will command you meet with his desires,
This you will find 'soone as the Council rises,
And that Don Diego meeting time, and place
Fit for his purpose, shall propose the business;
Fear not but your desires will be contented.

I cannot tell, but yet me thinks my soul
Does not receive this joy; but all confounded
Expects what moment will present to me
A divers face from this my happiness,
And cross my present fortune.

You will find
This fear of yours most happily deceived.

Well, let us go then, and attend the issue.

Go boy, look out Cimena, and from me
Tell her, her presence was expected sooner,
My friendship must complain of this her sloth.

I perceive, Madame, that all days alike
You 're sad and pensive, and the same desire
To know how her love goes, still presses you.

How should it not? when I my self have made her
Receive the hurt wherewith her soul is wounded,
She loves Don Roderigo by my means,
And by my means he has vanquished her disdain,
Then since to take them I have laid the snare,
To free them unto me belongs the care.

And yet in the midst of all their good success
One may perceive in you a kind of sorrow;
Why should that love which lifts them up with joy
Weigh your great heart down with a heavy sadness,
And the interest which you have in their love,
Make you unhappy, when themselves are blessed?
But I'm too forward, and grow indiscreet.

To stifle it increases more my grief!
Leonora, thou shalt know it, and now hear
What a strange conflict I have had within me,
And when the hast heard it, pitying my weakness,
Admire my virtue, love is such a Tyrant
As will spare none, this Gentleman, this lover
Which I've bestowed on her, I love my self.

You Madame?

Lay thy hand upon my heart
And feel now how it pants at the hearing of
The name of its own Conqueror.

Pardon me, Madam,
If blaming of your love, I do forget
My due respect; is he a match for you,
A private Gentleman? can you a Princess
In a point of such consequence forget
Whose child you are? what will the King say, think you?
Do you remember, Madam, whose you are?

Yes, yes, Leonora, and will rather die
Than do a thing unworthy of my birth:
Though I could tell thee that in noble souls
Merit alone ought to produce true love,
And if my passion would fly to excuses,
Many examples might authorize it,
Yet I'll not follow that in which my honour
Must be engaged. If I have much of love,
I have much more of courage, and me thinks
A noble true disdain tells me that I,
The daughter of a King, should deem all others
Below my love, unless it were a Monarch:
But when I see my heart is not of force
To make its own defence, I give away
That which I dare not take: 'stead of my self
I put Cimena fast into his fetters,
And kindle their fire to put out mine own.
Be not amazed then, if with distraction
I still expect their marriage; you see
All my repose only depends on it,
If love do live on hope, it dies with it;
'Tis a fire, that not nourished will go out,
And spite of my ill fortune, if Cimena
Marry Don Roderigo, my long hopes
Dying, my mind will be at ease; till then
I'm still in torment; till his day of marriage
Roderigo is my love, whom though I labour
To lose, I cannot choose but grieve to lose him;
I find my soul divided in two parts,
My heart with honour fired as well as love:
This Hymen's fatal, I both wish, and fear it.
Nor can I hope for any perfect joy,
Since whether he obtain his love, or no,
So many baits my love and honour have,
In stead of comfort I must find a grave.

After this, Madam, I have nought to say,
Unless it be to grieve for your misfortunes,
Before I blamed you, now I pity you:
But since your virtue has made good it self,
So strongly against the powerful charms and force
Of love and honour, and beat back the assault
Of this, and bait of that, in a short time
'Twill give you ease of all, in the mean while
Cast your firm hope on heaven, which has more justice
Than to let virtue be a sufferer long.

My best of hopes is to cast off all hope.

Madam, Cimena's come, as you commanded.

Go, entertain her in the Gallery.

But will you still remain in these sad fancies?

No, I will 'spight of all my grief, put on
A face of gladness. Go, I'll follow you.
Just heaven, from whence I do expect my aid,
Put now at length some period to my evils;
Assure mine honour with some ease of love,
I seek my happiness in another bliss,
To which give speed good heaven, or more strength
To my yet feeble soul, which ne'er can be
(Till Hymen have bound them) at liberty.

WEll sir, you have got the day, the Kings high favour
Has lifted you to that which was my due,
H' has made you governor to the Prince of Castile.

This honour which he has done my family,
Shows he is just, and knows well how to pay
With recompense, past services.

Though Kings
Be great, they are like us, and as much subject
To be deceived, as we, and this his choice
Makes us (which are his servants) see, how ill
He recompenses present services.

Pray let's no more of this: perhaps to advance
My business, favour did as much as merit:
And happily you had been the better choice,
But yet the King thought me more fit for him:
You may to the honour which the King has done me
Add one more if you please, in joining both
Our families by sacred marriage.
Roderigo loves your daughter, whom h' has made
The chiefest object of's affections,
Give your consent, and take him for your son.

O Sir, Roderigo must look higher now,
The splendour of this honour newly done you
Ought to put greater thoughts into his heart.
Look to your office well; govern the Prince,
Show him the way how he may rule a Province,
Make people every where obey his law,
Teach him to love the good, to awe the bad,
Add to these virtues, those of a General,
Instruct him how to harden his soft body
With pain and travel, till he leave himself
Without a Rival in the art of War,
To sit continued days and nights on horse-backe,
To take his rest in's Arms: To force a Rampire,
And not to owe a victory but to himself,
Show him this by example, and remember
You ought to represent what you would teach.

To instruct him by example, this I'll say
In spite of envy, let him read my life,
And by that story learn to tame fierce Nations.
To set on any place, to range an Army,
And lay his ground of honour on his actions.

Living examples move more forcibly
Than books, in which a Prince scarce learnes his duty:
But what I pray has all your long years done
That one day of my actions has not equalled?
If you were valiant once, I still am so,
This arm's the firm supporter of Castile,
My sword once drawn has made Granado tremble,
Arragon quake; without me other laws
You must have had, and other Princes served:
Each day, each instant, to my eternal glory,
Has piled up victory on victory.
The Princeto set an edge upon his valour,
Marching by me shall be victorious,
Far from your cold instructions, he shall learn
(Though to my valour they're preferred by some)
In seeing my actions, how to overcome.

In vain you tell me that I know already,
I've seen you fight, and under me command.
When age hath shrunk my sinews up with cold,
Your youth and valour have supplied my place.
But not to make so many words of nothing,
You are what I was once, and yet the King
'Twixt our deserts has put a difference.

That which was my desert, you have obtained.

He that has got it, sure has best deserved it.

He that can best discharge it, best deserves it.

'Tis no good sign though to be put beside it.

Like an old Courtier, by much suit you got it.

My honourable actions stood for me.

Come, come, the King thus honoured your gray hairs

He prized my valour, when he gave it me.

If so, the honour had been mine, not yours.

He that could not obtain't, did not deserve it.

Not I deserve it, mean you?

No, not you.

Take that, rash Dotard, for thy impudence.

Nay make it up, and after this affront.
Take my life too.

What dost thou hope to do thou feeble fool,
Thy sword is mine, but yet I scorn to take it,
Go now and bid the Prince read over thy life,
And let him not omit this part of it,
In which hee'le find the just revenge I take
Of this thine insolence, a fair example.

Will you then spare my life?

I'm satisfied;
Mine eyes cry shame unto mine hands for this.

Then you do scorn to take it.

If I should,
I did but cut the thread of three days lasting.

Rage and despair! must I needs live thus long,
To see this, one day of my infamy
Blast all the Trophies of my former years,
O fatal dignity! which art to me
No other than a precipice, from whence
Mine honour headlong falls unto the earth,
Let him that has disarmed me take the place
Of Governor to the Prince, for I that am
A man dishonoured, am not fit for it.
And thou my sword, that hang here for a show,
The glorious instrument of my actions past,
But now the idle ornament of my age,
Go to his hands that can tell how to use thee,
Be then my sons, who, if he be my own,
Cannot but have a sense of my dishonour,
And though he love Cimena, yet 'tis fit
His love give place to the more ardent fire
Of valour, animated by an affront,
Which, though it fell on me, did yet result
On him: and see, he's here, Roderigo tell me,
Hast the any courage?

ANy man but my father
Should quickly find I have.

Well said, my boy,
I now perceive my blood runs in thy veins,
This noble anger says thou art my son;
My youth revives in me from this thy heat.
Thou shalt revenge me son.

Of what, or whom?

Of an affront so cruel, that our honours
Suffer together in it. 'Twas, Roderigo,
A box o'th ear, which on th'insolent giver
I had revenged, but that my feeble age
Failed my strong heart. This sword then, which my arm
Knew not to wield, take thou, and with it punish
The arrogant that wronged me, and be sure
Thou kill, or die, for such a stain as this
Is never washed, but in the offenders blood.
But let me tell thee, I do send thee now
To combat with a man whom I have seen
All on a gore, in midst of a fought battle,
Making himself a Rampire of slain men.

Pray Sir his Name, let him be what he will.

To tell thee more then; besides that he is
The bravest soldier, and the best Commander
That I have seen; he is --

For heavens sake what?

The father to Cimena.

The?

Reply not,
I know thy love, but yet remember son,
He that can live contemned, doth not deserve
To breath an hour; thou know the affront was given
To me, to thee I leave the just revenge;
The sense of honour, and the fire that springs
From thence, should put out the less heat of love;
Revenge me, and thy self, show thy self worthy
Of me thy father, now o're-borne with miseries,
Which whilst I go to moan, haste thou to punish.

Struck to the very heart, with a blow as fatal
As un-foreseene; what shall I do? I must
Revenge my father, and provoke my mistress,
Either betray my honour, or my love,
It were a better choice for me to die
Than to do either:
If I revenge my father, I must lose
My love; if not, I must live infamous;
How can I live, having lost all I live for?
But infamy pursues me after death.
On then my soul, and rather choose to die
Losing thy love, than live ingloriously,
And start not at the name of the offender,
Because he is the father of thy mistress,
But rather think thine own received the offence,
And thou art bound to give the recompense.

I Must needs say, when I did give the affront
My blood was over-heated, and my hand
Somewhat too ready, but now who can help it?
Since it is done, it cannot be recalled.

Faith, Let your courage stoop to the Kings will,
He takes the business much to heart, and being
So highly incensed, believe it hee'le proceed
With his full power, and then what defence
Can you make for your self, when the affront,
And it's high quality shall be aggravated
By the person of the offended, and the place.
These will require of you, my Lord, submissions
Beyond all ordinary satisfaction.

Then let him take my life, 'tis in his power.

Abate some of your heat, and hear what's reason,
Will you not seek to appease a Prince that loves you
He says, I'll have this done, will not you do it?

Sir, to preserve my honour, I cannot think
'Tis such a crime, somewhat to disobey,
But were it greater, what I've done for him,
Would be more than enough to make my excuse.

Suppose you've done all that a man can think
In the Kings service: is he bound to thank you?
Can a Prince be beholding to a subject?
You are too much o're-weening, you must know,
He that best serves his King does but his duty,
If you think otherwise, you are undone.

I shall believe you when I find it so.

Your can't but fear the power of the King.

One day destroys not such a man as I am.
Let him arm all his power to punish me,
The state shall rather perish, than I suffer.

Do you so little fear the sovereign power?

What? of that Sceptre? which if not for me
Had ere now fallen out of his hand: my person
Is Sir, of so much consequence to the King,
That if my head fall, his crown cannot stand.

My Lord, give reason leave to settle you,
Think on it a little.

The thought's already taken.

What shall I say then? I must give him an account.

This: that I know not how to give consent
To mine own shame.

But my Lord imagine,
Kings will be absolute.

Let them be so,
The Die is cast Sir, let's talk no more on it.

Then I must take my leave, since my persuasions
Can do no good: though you be covered over
with laurels, yet my Lord, take heed of thunder.

I'll wait it without fear.

It will come home.

If it do, D. Diego's satisfied.
How little am I scared with these poor threats?
My honour once engaged, a thousand deaths
Presented to me in the most hideous forms,
Cannot once startle me.

MY Lord a word.

Speak.

Resolve me of a doubt, do you know
Don Diego well?

I do.

And that he was
The spirit and the glory of his time,
Do you know this?

Perhaps he might be so.

And that this ardor which mine eyes do bear,
Do you know it is his blood it represents?

What's that to me?

Some distance from this place
I'll make you know it.

Presumptuous boy!

Be not so hot, I know I'm young, but yet
In noble souls, valour prevents their years.

But who has led thee to that vanity?
To set thee upon me, thou that did never
Bear arms, perhaps thou know not who I am.

Yes: and I know a stouter man than I
Would tremble at the hearing of thy name.
Thy head is covered over with laurels, where
Victory perches, and from thence reads to me
The fate of my destruction: I do challenge
Like a rash youth, a man inur'd to conquest,
Yet having heart enough, I shall not want strength,
Or if I should, wearing my fathers cause
Upon my sword and arm, they cannot fail me.

This courage which appears in thy discourse,
I have been long acquainted with, and hoping
To see the honour of Castile in thee,
'Twas in my thoughts to give my daughter to thee;
I know thy love, and am amazed to see
It's motions to give place unto thy honour,
And meaning to find out a perfect man,
And complete Cavalier for my son in law,
I'm not mistaken in the choice I've made.
But here my pity intervenes, and though
I wonder at thy courage, yet I grieve
To see thy rashness: do not seek thy death,
Prithee excuse my valour from a combat
So far unequal. If thou fall by me,
'Twill be no honour to me. To overcome
Where there's no danger, will be a triumph
Where there's no glory: for thou wilt be thought
To have with ease been ruined, and my self
Shall alone feel the grief that I have done it.

The hast seconded the affront thou gav'st my father,
With a pity worse than that, dare thou deprive me
Of my honour, and yet fear to take my life?

Leave me good youth.

Let's go, and talk no more on it.

Art thou so weary of thy life?

Art thou
So afraid to die?

Come then, thou dost no more
Than is thy duty, he's a degenerate son
That will out-live one jot his fathers honour.

BE not so grieved, Cimena, dry thine eyes,
Use now thy constancy in this misfortune,
Thou'lt see it clear up after a little tempest:
Thy happiness is but clouded for a while,
And some small time will make thee no great loser.

What can I hope now, but continual troubles,
A storm so sudden coming over this calm
Threatens a certain shipwreck to our loves:
'Tis past all doubt, I perish in the haven.
I loved, was loved again, our friends agreed,
And I no sooner had told you the news,
But in an ill hour sprung their fatal quarrel,
Which when I heard, I knew my hopes were ruined:
Cursed ambition, honour pitiless,
Under whose tyranny the bravest souls
Do ever suffer: how many tears and sighs
Must I pay for you?

Thou hast no reason
To fear their quarrel, which on a sudden borne,
Will as soon die: there's too much noise of it
To let it live. The King shall take it up,
And for thy sake I'll see it shall go no farther.

This business will admit no composition,
The affronts to honour never are repaired,
Wisdom or power can prevail little here;
This wound will not be healed, it may be covered,
And stifled hate nourishes secret fires
Within the breast, but such as burn more fiercely.

But the holy knot which shall once join Cimena
To Roderigo, will dissolve the hatred
Of both their fathers, and the bonds of love,
As being more strong, will quickly stop their discord.

rath e r do desire, than hope it, Madam,
Don Diego is too haughty, and I know
My father well, of what a spirit he is.
I feel my tears run, which I would retain:
What's past, torments me, and I fear the sequel.

Dost thou fear what a weak old man can do?

Roderigo is not weak.

But he's too young.

Valiant young men are ever very sudden.

But that thou need not fear. He loves thee too well
To anger or displease thee, one poor word
Out of thy mouth, will quickly stay his heat.

If he do not obey, how great's my grief?
And if he do, what will men say of him,
That being a Gentleman, he could put up
Such an affront? so that if he resist,
Or else give way to his affection,
I cannot but be troubled, orasham'd
At his too much respect, or just denial.

Cimena's generous, and though she be
Engaged, she cannot suffer a base thought.
But if I make a prisoner of this lover
Until this business be taken up betwixt them,
Will not your love turn into jealousy?

Ah, Madam, in this case I have no such thought.

Boy, look out Roderigo, bring him hither.

He, and the Count of Gormas

Good God, I tremble!

Speak.

Went out together.

Alone?

Alone, and as it seemed, they went to quarrel.

Ay me, my fear's, they 're fighting by this time.

Let's spend no more time then, but go look um out.

IS he so vain, has he so little reason,
That he dares think his crime yet pardonable?

I treated long with him on your behalf,
I did (Sir) my devoir, but obtained nothing.

Just heaven! can a subject be so rash
To have so little care to please his Master?
He has stricken Don Diego, scorned his King,
In my own Court he means to give me laws:
Be he ne'er so good a soldier or commander,
I'll make him know what 'tis to disobey.
I would have treated him with all fair means,
But since he has abused my patience,
Go some of you and look him out, and whether
He do resist, or not, make sure of him.

Perhaps some little time will bring him in.
He was taken boiling in his choler, Sir,
And a stout heart will hardly yield to reason,
In the first motion of its rage and heat.
Here's no man, that not thinks he is to blame,
But yet so high a spirit is not brought
At first so easily to confess his fault.

Don Sancho, hold your peace, and let me tell you,
He that shall take his part is alike faulty.

I obey Sir, and am silent, but with favour,
A word in his defence.

What can you say?

Sir, that a soul accustomed to great actions,
Cannot abase it self to low submissions.
It knows not how to do it without shame,
And that's the word which troubles most the Count.
He finds it somewhat hard to do his duty.
He would obey if he had less of courage;
If you'd command, that he being used to arms,
Should with his sword repair this injury,
I'll undertake he shall make satisfaction.

You are too bold Sir, but your age I pardon,
Thinking it to proceed from heat of youth.
A prudent King knows better how to husband
His subjects blood, then so to venture 'em.
For mine, I mean my care shall still conserve them.
As the head cares for the members which do serve it.
You speak Sir, as a soldier, but I must
Do as a King, and whatsoere the Count
Does say or think, I'm sure he cannot lose
Ought of his honour in obeying me:
The affront he did to him whom I have made
Governor to my son, does touch me nearly,
And this his insolence hath quarrelled me,
And the choice I made: So if he do submit,
I am the man he satisfies. But no more,
Don Arias, by an advice of late received,
I hear the Moors mean shortly to surprise us.

Dare the Moors stir?

Their vessels are discovered
At the Rivers mouth, and you know how easily
At a full Sea they may come up.

The battles
Tthey've lost already, should make them loose the heart
To set on such a Conqueror as you.

They cannot but with Jealouzy look on,
Seeing me rule in Andalouzia,
And this fair Country, which I took from them,
Keeps their designs awake. It is the reason,
Why here in Sevill I have placed my Throne,
That being neere'um I may be more ready
To meet with their attempts.

Sir, they have learnt,
At the great charge of their own heads by this time,
How much your presence does assure your conquest,
Y' have nothing Sir, to fear.

Nor to neglect:
Too much assurance still draws danger with it:
The enemy which we now think to destroy,
If he can take his time, may annoy us.
But yet since I'm not certain of my news,
I would not stir up in my subjects hearts
Vain panic terrors, or this present night
Affright the City with a false alarm:
Let the haven be well guarded, and the walls,
And for this night it shall suffice.

Sir, the Count is dead,
Roderigo's hand has satisfied his father.

I divined what would follow, when I first
Heard of the affront, and would have then prevented it.

Sir, here's Cimena, who presents her grief
Upon her knees, with tears demanding justice.

Although my soul suffer with his misfortunes,
The affront he did, deserved the punishment,
Which though it were most just, yet can't I lose
Without regret, a servant of his merit.

Justice, Sir, Justice, I ask it on my knees.

O Sir give ear to my defence.

Revenge my fathers death.

Of him that punished the highest insolence.

Roderigo, Sir,

Has done the office of an honest man.

Has killed my father.

Has revenged his own.

A King owes justice to his subjects blood.

A just revenge can fear no punishment.

Rise both of you, and speak without disturbance,
I bear a part, Cimena, in thy sufferings.
Trouble her not, when she has done, I'll hear you.

My father's slain, Sir, and these eyes have seen
His blood gush out in bubles; that dear blood
Which has so oft preserved your walls, so oft
Been fired to gain you battles, and which yet
Reakes with just anger, to have been spilt for any
But you the King, which war durst never draw,
Roderigo in your Court has made to flow
Upon the earth, and for his first essay,
Has taken away the firm prop of your State,
Breathless, and pale, I came unto the place,
And found him dead! Dead! pardon Sir, my grief,
My voice does fail me, let my tears speak the rest.

Daughter, take comfort, and be confident
Thou hast a King will be a Father to thee.

You'ave done my miseries, Sir, too much honour.
Thither I came amazed, and found him dead,
He spoke nought to me, but the more to move me,
His spilt blood wrote my duty on the dust.
Rather his worth reduced to that poor State,
Spoke to me through his wound and hastened me
To this pursuit, and to be heard the better,
Of the most just of Kings, borrowed my voice.
Suffer not Sir, such rage to pass unpunisht
Before your eyes, and let not heady youth,
Lave themselves in the blood of your best Soldiers,
And brave their memories. If you permit it,
You'll have, but few that will desire to serve you,
In fine my Father's dead, I demand justice
Rather for yours, than my own interest,
You are engaged in the loss of such a man,
Revenge it then, and require blood for blood.
Sacrifice D. Diego, and his family
To your self, to the people, to Castile,
What can be dear enough to satisfy
For my dead Father?

D. Diego answer.

How happy is the man Sir?
Who parts no sooner with his strength than life,
Since to the valiant, age is most unhappy
Accompanied with weakness; I that have
Gotten such glory by my former actions,
Whom victory has ever waited on
See my self now, for having lived too long
Affronted, and overcome. And that which neither
Combat, nor siege, nor ambushes could do,
Nor all your enemies, nor mine to boot,
The pride of one man in your Court has done
Almost before your face, and sullied
The reverence, and honour of my age,
Advantaged by his youth, and by my weakness,
And so Sir, these my hairs which have grown white
Under my helmet, and my blood, which has
So oft for you been spent, should have descended
Unto the grave with cureless infamy.
Had I not got a Son to save my honour,
Who lending me his hand has slain the Count.
If to show courage, and a sense of wrong,
If to revonge a blow o'th face deserve
Severely to be punished, let it fall
On me that tempest, what soer'e it be,
For the arms fault, we punish oft the head,
I am the head, Sir, he is but the arm,
And if Cimena do complain that he
Has slain her Father, I must answer her,
Had I been able, he had never done it.
Sacrifice then this head, which age will take,
The arm Sir, may hereafter do you service.
And let Cimena's wrong be satisfied
At my own bloud's expense, and I shall be
So far from thinking it an uniust censure,
That dying with mine honour, I shall die
Withou t regret.

The affair is of importance,
And merits to be heard in a full Counsel.
Don Sancho, wait upon Cimena home,
Don Diego's word shall be his surety.
Let his son be looked out. I'll do you justice.

'Tis just great Sir to cut off murderers.

Daughter, take truce a little with your griefs.

To give them truce, is to increase them more.

WHat mean you Roderigo? whither would you?

I would pursue the course of my sad fortune.

But this is a strange boldness, to appear
In the same place which you have filled with mourning,
Come you to affront the ghost of the dead Count?
Have not you slain him?

His life was my disgrace,
Mine honour at my hands required dis death.

But in the house of death to look for refuge,
Did ever homicide make that his Asilum?

Did never any murderer present
Himself unto his Judge? ne'er wonder at me,
I come to seek for that I gave another,
That's death; my love Cimena is my Judge.
When I deserved her hate, I deserved death,
And for that cause I stand here to receive
My sentence from her mouth, death from her hand.

Fly rather from her sight, and do not meet
With the first motions of her grief and anger,
Why, would you more inflame her present passion?

No, that dear object which I durst displease,
To punish me cannot have too much passion;
I should be happy if I could augment it,
And hasten so my death from her fair hand.

Cimena's at the Court, bathed in her tears,
And will return thence with much company.
For heavens sake fly: what will men's censures say
If y' are discovered here? they must report
Cimena to have received into her house
The Assassin of her father. Hark, she comes,
It is her voice: at least, Roderigo,
To save her reputation, hide your self.

I Madame, never think of any other
But bloody sacrifices: your anger's just
And your grief lawful, for my part Madame
I'll neither go about to pacify
Or comfort you; but if my present service
Can be of use to you; employ my Sword
To cut out your revenge; from your commands
My heart takes courage, and my arm its strength.

O me unfortunate!

Madame accept my service.

I shall offend the King then who has promised
To do me Justice.

But you know, justice
Is so slow paced and languishing, that seldom
It overtakes the crime; the wrong was done
By th'sword, then let a Cavalier revenge it
By the sword again: It is the readiest way.

'Tis the last remedy, but if it must
Arrive at that, and this your noble pity
Of my misfortunes do continue with you,
I shall then give you the freedom you desire.

It is the only happiness I wish,
So having hopes to see it, I take my leave.

AT length I find I'm free to open to thee
The fadnesse of my soul, and to give way
to my deep sighs, which else would stifle me.
My fathers dead, Eluira, the first sword
That Roderigo used has cut his thread,
Weep, weep mine eyes, melt into tears my brain
Half of my life, the other half has slain,
And ty's me to revenge on what is left,
That part of which by this I am bereft.

Quiet your self, sweet Madame.

How unfitly
Thou bid me to be quiet, when at once
I must bewail my loss, and th'hand that made it,
Or what is't I can hope for in this life
But torments, near to be redres'd by time,
If loving the Author, I pursue the crime.

Can you then love the man that killed your Father?

Love him, Eluira? more than that I adore him,
My love stands up against the sense, I should have
Of a slain father, and would quite o're-beare it.
I find my lover in mine enemy,
And spite of all my anger, in my heart
Roderigo makes his part good against my father:
Yet though my love has these advantages,
I'll not advise with it about my duty.
Nothing is dearer to me than Roderigo,
My heart would take his part, but then my honour
Tells me I had a father, which he slew.

But do you mean to prosecute him, Madam?

O cruel meaning! cruel prosecution!
To which I'm forced. I ask his head, and yet
Fear to obtain it. I would ha him punished,
And yet my death, I know, must wait on his.

Fie, Madam, quit this tragical design,
Be not so cruel to your self.

Shall I see
My father die between my arms? his blood
Crying vengeance to me, and shall not I hear him?
Shall my heart think, because 'tis charmed by love,
That nothing's due unto a fathers death
But childish tears? or shall I suffer love
To steal into my heart, and thrust out honour?

Believe me, Madam, you may well be pardoned,
If you preserve unto your self a man
You cannot parallel, and one you love.
Y'have done enough to have been with the King,
Ne'er press it farther, be not obstinate.

Then is my glory lost; no, it behoves
I be revenged.

But you love Roderigo,
He can't displease you.

No I'll swear he can't.

These things considered, Madam, what can you do?

To save mine honour, and to put an end
To all my griefs at once, I am resolved
First to pursue him unto death, and then
To die my self.

TO save the trouble of
Pursuing me, behold I'm here before you,
Glut your self with the pleasure of my death.

What place is this, Elvira? who is this?
Roderigo in my house! before my face!

Spare not my blood, but taste the sweetness of
My death, and your revenge, without resistance.

Aye me!

Hear me Cimena.

I dye.

A word

Away and let me dye.

And afterwards
Make me no answer but with this my sword.

That sword be fmear'd with the blood of my dead father.

My Cimena

Fie, take away that object
Which to mine eyes upbraids thy crime, and life.

Look on it rather to increase thy hate
T'excite thine anger, and to speed my death.

'Tis died in my own blood.

Plunge it in mine,
And make it lose the colour so of thine.

What cruelty is this, which in one day
Father and daughter both deprives of life,
One by the sword, the other by the sight?
Remove that object of my hate, thy sword,
Thou would be heard of her thou mean to kill.

I do obey, yet with the same desire
To dye by thee. For from my affection
Never expect a cowardly repentance
Of a good action, the box o'th ear
Thy father gave, dishonoured mine, thou know
How home that touches any man of spirit,
I shared in the affront and went to seek
The Author, having found him I revenged
Mine and my fathers honour: were it to do
Again I'd do it, yet think not but thy love
Held out against my father, and my self,
A combat long enough, and made me doubt
Whether I should displease thee or sit down
By the injury receav'd. I held my hand
And blamed my self for too much violence:
And without doubt thy beauty had over swayed,
Had I not cast in balance, that a man
Dishonoured never could be worthy thee,
That she who loved me when my fame stood clear,
Would hate me, stained with infamy. 'Tis true,
I did thee an affront, and 'tis as true
I ought to do it both to save my honour
And merit thee. But having thus acquitted
My father and my self, 'tis only you
That I now come to satisfy, and make
A present of my blood. I know the thought
Of a slain father, arms thy hate against me,
Nor will I rob thee of thy sacrifice
Here, offer to the blood already shed
The blood of him, that glories to have shed it,

True Roderigo, (though thine enemy)
That thou did shun disgrace, I cannot blame thee,
And whatsoever face my griefs put on
I not accuse thee, but my own misfortune.
I know what honour, after such an out rage,
Demaund's of any brave and generous spirit.
Thou did thy duty but in doing it
Thou t'aught'st me mine. The same regard thou had
To vindicate thine own, and fathers honour
Fall's now one me, and the more t'afflict me
Of thee I must require, what I have lost;
It is thy interest makes me despair,
Had any other hand, or sad misfortune
Deprived me of my father, I had found
My comfort in thy sight, the only charm
Against my griefs: When by so dear a hand
My tears had been wiped off: but now I must
Lose him and thee too, and what's more cruel,
I'm bound my self to labour thy destruction,
For never look from my affection
The least resentment for thy punishment;
For though our love would speak in favour of thee,
Mine honour yet must go as high as thine;
Thou in my wrong shewd'st thy self worthy me,
I in thy death will appear worthy thee.

Never defer then longer what your honour
Requires of you. It demands my head,
To stay till justice give it you, will delay
As well your glory, as my punishment.
I shall die happy, dying by your hand.

Away, I'm thy accuser, not thy heads-man,
Is't fit for me to take the head thou offer?
'Tis of another that I must obtain it;
I must pursue thy crime, not punish it.

Though love speak to thee in my favour, yet
The brav'ry of thy mind ought to answer mine,
Which trust me (my Cimena) cannot be,
If to revenge thou borrow'st other hands.
For my revenge I used none but my own,
And thou for thine, must use thy hand alone.

Cruel! to be so obstinate in this,
If without help thou did revenge thy self,
Why dost thou offer't me? I'll follow thee,
My courage is too great to let thee bear
The least part in my glory, neither shall
Mine, or my fathers honour stoop so low
As to thy love, or thy despair to owe.

Hard point of honour! can I by no way
Obtain this grace? punish me in the name
Of thy dead father, or our dearest love,
Either do it in revenge, or else in pity.
'Twill to thy lover prove a gentler fate,
To die thus by thy hand, than to live with thy hate.

Away, I hate thee not.

Thou ought to hate me.

I can't.

But fear thou not the blame and scandal
Which men will raise, when they shall know my crime,
And the continuance of thy love; no, rather
Force them to silence, and without more words,
By my death give thy reputation life.

It will live better, if I let thee live;
I'll have the voice of the most black mouthed envy
Admire my glory, and pity my hard sufferings,
When they shall know, that though I love thy person,
I prosecute thy crime. Go Roderigo,
And let the darkness of the night conceal
Thy parting hence, mine honour cannot run
A greater hazard, than if men shall know
That I have kept thee company so long.

'Tis death to hear this.

Away.

But what, are you resolved to do.

Spite of this loving fire which would restrain
That of my anger, I shall do my best
To have full vengeance for my fathers death,
And yet in spite of this so cruel honour,
My desire is to have my desires crossed.

O miracle of love!

But heaped with griefs.

How many tears will these our fathers cost us?

Who would have thought it Roderigo?
Who

Cimena would have said it?

That our joys
Should be so nigh us and so quickly lost.

And that so near the Port a sudden storm
Should shipwreck all our hopes.

Go Roderigo,
And think I cannot, dare not, hear thee longer.

I go then to draw out a dying life,
Till thy pursuit shall bring it to an end.

If I obtain the effect, I sadly vow
Not to draw breath one minute after thee,
Adieu, and have a care thou be not seen.

AT length I see what all my industry
Could not effect, chance offers to me, this
Must be my Son. Roderigo, blessed be Heaven
That gives me leave to see thee.

Ay me!

Do not confound my joys with these sad accents,
But give me leave to praise thy early Valour,
Which shows the noble stock from which thou sprang
The first stroke of thy sword, has equalled all
That mine could do, and thy brave youthful spirit,
Has reached the glory of thy Ancestors.
Prop of my age, and fullness of my joy,
Touch these white hairs, whose honour thou hast saved,
Come kiss this cheek; and view the place which thou
Being affronted, rescud'st from disgrace.

The honor's due to you, heaven be my witness
That coming from you, I could do no less,
I hold my self most happy, that the first
Trial of my poor valour should please him
To whom I owe my life, but in these pleasures
Have not a jealousy of me, because
After you, I dare satisfy my self
Give me leave to despair; 'tis all I ask.
Let not your praise flatter me out of that.

By, from so brave a heart banish this weakness,
Think there are Mistresses enough in the world,
But no more than one honour; love, is but
A little pleasure, honour is a duty.

What say you, Sir?

That which thou ought to know.

Would you then shame me with inconstancy,
A coward Soldier, and a perjured Lover,
Run the same course of infamy alike.
Cannot I be thought generous unless
I be perfidious. Alas my bonds
Are too fast tied, to be so soon undone
And since I can nor have, nor leave my love,
The death I mean to seek is my best comfort.

This is no time to seek out death. Thy King,
Thy Country needs thy aid, the Fleet we feared
That entered on the River, is now ready
To take the City by surprise. The Moors
Are come in silence almost to our walls,
The Court is in an uproar, and the people
Call to take arms. Nothing but cries are heard
In the midst of these calamities, my fortune
Has favored me so much to let me see,
Five hundred of my friends, within my house,
Who hearing of the affront was given me,
Offered their lives to vindicate mine honour,
Thou hast prevented them, but their brave valours
Will better be employed against the Moors;
Go march in the head of them; where honour calls thee,
Impeach the landing of the enemy.
And if thou must seek death, go find it there;
But rather Crowned with victory return,
And by thy valour force even justice self
To pardon, and Cimena to be silent,
If thou dost love her, think thy coming home
A Conqueror, must regain her heart, or nothing.
But time's too precious to be spent in talk,
I stay thee in discourse, when thou should fly,
Come follow me to my house: Let the King see
What he has lost in the Count, he has found in thee.

BUt is this true, Elvira? art thou sure on it?

How hard it is to be get faith in you,
When every man extoll's the glorious actions
Of this young Heroes: The Moors before him
Appeared, but to their shame. They quickly landed,
But quicker was their flight. Three hours fight
Left to our men a victory entire,
And two Kings prisoners. Their leaders valour
Could meet with nothing durst stand in its way.

And was't Roderigo's hand that did these wonders.

The two Kings which he vanquished are his prize.

Whence could thou gather this strange news, Elvira?

From those who sound his praises up and down,
The people, who with one voice do salute him
Their Guardian Angel, saver of their Country.

How does the King look, upon this his valour?

Roderigo dares not yet appear in Court,
But Don Diego, in the Conquerours name,
Has made a present of these Crowned Captives,
And all he does demand, is, that the King
Would deign to see the hand that freed his Country.

But has he got no wound?

I know not that.
Why change you colour so? resume your spirits.

Let me resume my anger, which my love
Has so enfeebled; must my care for him
Make me forget my self? peace, peace my love,
And let my anger work; though he have vanquished
Two kings, he has not overcome my duty.
These mourning habits, where I read my miseries,
Are the first fruits his valour did produce,
And though all tongues should speak in his defence
All objects here do represent his crime.
Veil, Cypres, and these blacks sad memories
Of my dead Father, keep a little up
Mine honour against my passion, and when love
Shall get the power of me, tell my heart
I owe a duty to a Father slain.

Be not transported so: The Infanta's here.

I Come not here, Cimena, with faint comforts
To plead against thy grief, but with sad sighs
To mingle with thy tears.

Nay rather, Madame,
Share in the common joy, and fully taste
The happiness, kind heaven has sent to you,
I only am designed for grief; the dangers
From which y' are rescued by Rodcrigo's hand,
And all your safeties purchased by his arms.
To me alone bequeath these tears and sighs,
'Tis he has saved the City, served his King,
And only ruined me.

'Tis true, Cimena,
He has done wonders.

Yes the unwelcome news,
Has pierced my ears already, I can hear
How the voice goes, and that he's famed no less
A Valiant Soldier, than a luckless lover.

How comes this news to be unwelcome to you?
Was not the man they praised your servant once?
And had not he your heart? in honouring him
They honour much your choice.

I needs must say
His honours are but due, and yet to me
Each p raise of him, is a new punishment,
For I can't chose but know how great my loss is,
Finding the value of the thing I lose
The more his merit, and my love increases,
The more my duty gets advantage of me,
And spite of my affection puts me on
To prosecute his crime.

But will you, Madam,
Believe the counsel of a faithful friend.

Not to obey you were a sin unpardonable.

Though yesterday purfuing your revenge,
You did so much that all the Court admired
Your height of spirit, and bewaild your love;
Yet the same way is not now to be taken.
Roderigo's now the only hope and stay
Of all Castile. The terror of the Mores.
His valour has restored us what before
It took away, in him your father seems
To live again, and in a word pursuing
His death, you go about the public ruin,
What? to revenge a father, is it lawful
To give your Country up to its Enemies?
And are we to be punished for his fault?
I say not this, that I would have you marry
The man y' are bound to prosecute. I'd rather
You should avoid that envy, and deprive
Him of your love, but not us of his life.

Ah, Madam, give my spirit its full course,
Though my heart make a faction against me,
Though he be loved by the King, adored by the people,
Though he be compassed with the stoutest Soldiers,
He overwhelm his Laurel, with my Cyprus.

I must confess, it is a mark of spirit
To prosecute the life you loved so dearly,
Yet I should think, it were more noble fat
To give up to the public interest
The private ones of blood. For credit me,
Cimena, 'tis enough, to leave to love him:
Banish him from your heart and he will find
A heavy punishment. Your Countries good
Requires this, besides you must not think
The King should grant you your request.

He may.
Refuse me if he please, but I must speak.

Consider well, Cimena, what it is
You go about, and think of it at leisure.

THou brave descendent of a noble race,
Who have been still supporters of my kingdom,
(Who's valour the first proof of thine has equalled)
My power is too narrow for thy merit.
To free thy Country of so rude a foe
As are the Moors, before my self could give
Order for their repulse, is such an act
As flies beyond all thought of recompense.
But the two captived Kings which thou hast taken,
Shall give thee thy reward, they both have named thee
Their CID before me; which in their tongue sounds
As much as Lord in ours, and this fair title
I will not envy thee; from henceforth be
Their CID, that at thy name the Moors may tremble.
And that my Subjects hearing it may know
Thy value, and how much to thee I owe.

Let not your Majesty confound your servant
With too much shame, to set so high a prise
Upon so poor a service. I must blush
To see such honour done so slender merit.
My debt to you, Sir, and my Country is
The blood I live by, and the air I breath;
And when I lose them for so fair an object,
I do, Sir, but the duty of a Subject.

Few of those whom their duty binds to serve me,
Can so acquit themselves, as thou hast done,
Suffer then thy just praises, and at full
Relate the story of thy Victory.

Sir, you have heard how in this urgent danger,
Which put the City in so great a tumult,
A company of my friends met at my fathers,
Moved me to go upon this enterprise,
But I crave pardon of your Majesty:
For daring to employ them without leave,
The danger was at hand, So were my friends;
The hazard of my head, made me I durst not
Appear at Court, and I had rather lose
My life in the defence of the whole State,
Than give it up unto Cimena's plaints.

I must excuse the heat of thy revenge,
The State defended speaks in thy defence,
Henceforth Cimena moves me but in vain,
Whom if I hear 'tis but to give her comfort;
But on with your relation.

Under me
This troop advanced with such a confidence,
And so good order, that where ere they passed
They diffused courage through the lookers on,
Which so much moved um that although at first
We numbered but five hundred, ere we reached
The Port, we were increased into three thousand,
Two thirds of these when I ariv'd, I hid
In the bottom of our ships, which there I found,
The rest, whose number every hour increased,
Lay close to the ground, and in deep silence past
The greatest part of that fair night away.
To the guard I gave command to do the like,
Affirming stoutly that I had your order,
For what I did. At length the glimmering star light
Made us discover thirty sail coming up
With a full tide, for the swollen Sea at once
Powered both it self, and them into our Haven,
We let them pass discovering none of us
In the haven, or the walls, and this our silence
Made them so confident of our surprise,
That presently they landed, fiercely running
To meet the ruin which awaited them.
Then rose we up, having received the signal
From those within our ships;
Who starting up in arms, did so confound
The Moors, that they were frighted ere half landed.
They came to pillage, but they met with War
At Sea and Land, we bore them down before us,
Many we slew in the place before they could
Fall into rank or make the least resistance,
When suddenly in spite of our endeavours,
Their Princes rallied their dispersed troops,
And from a shame they felt, to dye so tamely,
They took new courage, and restored their ranks,
With their swords drawn, making their fight on foot,
Then fell the bravest of our Soldiers
Mixed with their Captains, the land, the water,
Their Fleet, our Haven, seemed a field of slaughter
Where death did only triumph; blood, and darkness
Covered the place; what had their valour been,
Who fought thus in the dark, had they been seen.
I, on all sides encouraged our own men;
Some I made fall upon the foe, and others
I kept from falling from us, those that came
I ranged in order, put them on the places
Which they were to make good; but what was done
We had no means to know, 'till the first light
Showed us our victory, and their loss.
They seeing a new supply come to our aide,
Fled now more fiercely, than before they fought.
They got into their ships, and cut their cables,
Disorderly retreating, and not minding
Whether their Kings retired or stayed behind,
Fear more prevailing, made them lose their duty.
They came in with the flood, and with the ebb.
They went away. In the mean time their Kings,
And some few of their men engaged amongst us,
Sold their lives dear enough; I bid'um yield,
But while they had a Sword to fight, they would not,
Till seeing their Soldiers fall about their feet
And that alone they must defend them selves,
They asked who was our leader, I was named,
They yield themselves to me. So was this Battle
Ended for want of men to fight it out.
And thus, Sir, when we are about your service

Sir, here's Cimena come to ask you justice.

What shall I do? I would not have her see thee,
In stead of thanks I must dismiss thee from me,
But ere thou leave the Court, return again
Unto thy Kings embraces.

'Tis strange, she should
Pursue the man thus, whom she fain would save.

I'm told she is in love with him. I'll try,
Make show as you were sad. At length Cimena,
Content your self, for your desires have met
With their success. Though Roderigo's valour
Ha'got the better of the Moors. Himself
Has perished with the wounds he there received,
Give thanks to heaven that has given you vengeance;
Her colour's changed already.

But, Sir, mark
Her swoundings, and by them how she betrays
The secrets of her Soul, surely she loves him.

Is Roderigo dead then?

No, no, he lives,
And still remains thy true, and constant lover,
Thou shalt enjoy him, take thy mirth again.

Sir, we as often faint with joy as sadness,
And when excess of that surprises us,
It soon confounds our senses.

Thou would fain
That to do thee a courtesy we should
Believe impossibles; but here thy sadness
Has showed it self too plain.

Well, Sir, you may
Add this too, if you please, to my misfortunes,
And call my swoundings the effects of grief,
I must confess, I grieved to see my self
Robbed of the life I sue for. If he dye
Of wounds he has received for 's Countries good,
My vengeance is lost, and my designs betrayed,
I ask his death, but not a glorious one;
I would not have him dye in the bed of honour,
But on a Scaffold, that his name may rot,
And his memorial perish, 'Tis no shame
To say I love his victory, by it
He has assured the State, and rendered me
A noble sacrifice, in stead of Flowers
Crowned with victorious bays, and such a one,
As I'd have offered to my Fathers ghost.
But why, alas, am I transported so?
Roderigo needs not fear what I can do.
What can a Virgins tears despised and scorned.
Your Kingdom is to him a place of free
Security, and he shall triumph over me
As 'ore his enemies, the blood of the Moors
Shall choke up justice here, which must be made
A Trophy to the Victors crimes; Whilst I
Amongst the rest, adorn his victory.

Sweet heart y' are too much hurried with your passions.
We, when we render Justice use to cast
Each thing in balance, Roderigo killed
Thy Father, but he gave the first offence.
Equity binds me then, to show some sweetness
To the first injured. But before thou accuse him,
Ask counsel of thy heart. Of which he's master.
I'm sure thy love, secretly thanks thy King,
Whose favour keeps so brave a Lover for thee.

For me! my Enemy the Author of
My miscries, the murderer of my father.
Is my just suite so slighted that I'm thought
To be obliged because I am not heard?
Sir, since my tears cannot obtain it of you,
Let the sword, I beseech you, give me justice
By that I'm injured and by that I crave
To be revenged. Of all your Cavaliers
I ask his head, to him that brings it me,
As to the Conqueror I give my self,
The Combat ended, he shall be my husband,
This, I beseech your Majesty may be published
By your authority.

This Countries custom,
More ancient than good, under the colour
Of punishing unjust attempts, has robbed
The state of its best Soldiers, and often
The success does not answer the intent,
The guilty escape, and kill the innocent;
I must dispense with Roderigo's blood,
It is more precious to me, than so flightly
To be exposed to hazard, though his spirit
Forced him to do an outrage, yet in freeing
His Country from the Moors, h'has freed himself.

How, Sir, for him must you reverse your laws,
Which have so often been observed? what will
The people, or the tongue of envy say,
Hearing he lives by your protection?
And that it only serves him for a colour
To hide his cowardice. These are favours, Sir,
Which bring dishonour, with'um to the takers,
The Count durst do a wrong, my Son durst punish,
Let him maintain the honour he has won.

Since you will have it so, let it be done,
But if Roderigo be exposed to all
That will come in to fight for such a prize*
He must be sure to want no enemies.
I will have only one t'incounter him.
Choose whom you will, Cimena, and choose wisely,
But after this, urge me to nothing farther.

An't please your Majesty to let the lists
Be opened, I shall be the undertaker;
Madam, you know your promise, I beseech you
Let me obtain the grace to be your Champion.

What say you, Cimena, shall he be the Man?

Sir, I have promised him.

Be ready than to morrow.

Defer it not so long, Sir;
A man of courage is at all times ready.

Shall he no sooner be returned from one,
But he must enter on another fight?

He has taken breath, Sir, in recounting it.

How ere, an hour or two let him repose,
But lest I should be thought to countenance
Proceedings of this bloody nature, neither
My self nor any of my Court shall see it performed,
Do you look to it, and take care that both
Present themselves, as befits men of arms,
The Combat done, bring me the Conqueror,
I mean my self to give him to Cimena.

That were t'impose too hard a law upon me.

Thy love dares not avow this thy complaint,
If Roderigo conquer, thou must have him,
Never dispute my sentence or repine,
Who ere is Victor, I will make him thine.

WHat Roderigo, in the open day!
Whence comes this boldness? do you mean t'undoe
Me, and mine honour? Fie, retire your self.

Madame, I go to dye, and therefore come
Before my death, to take my last farewell,
My love does owe you this: and my thrall'd heart
Dares not depart your Kingdom without leave.

You go to dye?

Nay, more, I run; as soon
As I have taken my leave, the Count's revenged.

You go to dye! And is Don Sancho then
A man so terrible, that you need fear him?
Who has made you so weak? or him so valiant?
Roderigo goes to fight, and thinks himself
Already dead. He that nor feared the Moors,
Nor yet my Father, going to encounter
Don Sancho, trembles at it. Does your spirit
Fail you at greatest need?

'Tis not to the Combat
That I go now, but to my punishment.
For when you seek my death, my love cannot
Defend a life against you. My heart is still
The same, but not my arm, when it should guard
That which displeases you. This night already
Had been my last, if for my private quarrel
The fight had been: But since 'twas for the King,
His People, and my Country, had I left
My self defencelesse, I'd betrayed them all:
I must confess, I did not hate my life
So much as with false treachery to part from it.
Now, since no interest but mine own is in it,
And you demand my death, I accept your sentence,
For which y'have made choice of another hand.
(It seems I not deserved to dye by yours)
I shall not go to exchange blow, for blow,
I owe him more respect that fights for you
And since it is your honour which he fights for,
I'll open him my breast, in his, adoring
Your hand, from which I'll welcome my destruction.

If the just violence of a fatal duty,
Which makes me to pursue thee against my will,
Prescribe unto thy love so hard a law,
That thou wilt not defend thy self against him
That fights for me. Take head least thou forget
That both thy life, and glory fall together,
And howsoever Roderigo has lived
Being slain, he will be thought a vanquished man.
Honour was dearer once then I was to you,
When in my Fathers blood you imbru'd your hands,
It made you then in spite of your affection
Renounce the hope of ere enjoying me;
But now you value it so little that
You care not who it is that conquers you.
See how unseasonable your virtue is,
Why were you valiant once are not now?
Were you so only to do me an outrage?
Or will you be so cruel to my father,
That having conquered him, you will submit
Your self to any hand. No Roderigo
Defend thy honour, though thou slight thy life.

Mine honour cannot need any defence
More than it has already. He that could
Defeat the Moors, and kill the Count of Gormas,
Has not an enemy besides to fear.
No, no, Roderigo know's what ere you think,
How in this fight to die and save his honour,
That none shall dare to think he wanted courage,
Only they will say he did adore Cimena.
He would not live, having deserved her hate,
How he gave way unto the cruel fate
which forced his Mistress to pursue his death.
She asked his head, and his great heart conceived
He should commit a crime, if he denied it.
T'acquit his honour he renounced his love,
T'acquit his Mistress he renounced his life.
Thus shall you see my glory in this Combat
Shine more than ere it did. My willing death
Shall have this honour, that no Man but I
Could for the wrong done to you satisfy.

Since nor thy love, nor honour can prevail
To hold thee from thy ruin, dear Roderigo,
If ere I loved thee, I conjure thee now
To do thy best, if for no other end
To free me from Don Sancho, let me not
Be given up to the object of my loathing.
What shall I say more? go defend thy self,
And if thy love be not congealed to ice,
Be Victor where Cimena is the price,
Adieu! this last word makes me blush for shame.

Is there an Enemy now, that I can fear?
Moors, and Castilians, or what ere you be,
Whom Aragon, or Spain thinks valiant,
Appear, and make one army of your selves,
My soul encouraged thus shall throw me on you.
For so sweet hopes, what is't I dare not meet with?

IS it to me you come now Leonora?

Madame, I come to testify the joy
I feel, to see your heart at rest.

My heart?
Can rest come to a heart that's filled with griefs?

If love do live on hope, and dye with it,
Roderigo cannot trouble you any longer,
You know the Combat where he is engaged
By his Cimena, there he must or dye,
Or be her husband, but what ever happen,
Whether he live, or dye, your hope is dead.

But how can thou assure me it is dead,
If upon these conditions Roderigo
Do entertain the Combat, have not I
Inventions enough to break it off?
Love the sweet Author of my punishment,
Can teach the wits of lovers many slights.

Hope you to breed a discontent between'um,
Which a Fathers death cannot. Cimena shows
By her conduct of this affair, that hate
Causes not her pursuit, 'tis true she has got
The Combat granted, but to take her part
Whom has she chosen, not an expert man,
Or one already famous for his actions.
Don Sancho serves her turn, who till this time
Did never put on arms; she loves in him
His small experience. This her sudden choice
Must make you see, she sought for such a Combat
As might enforce her duty to be silent,
And yet assure Roderigo's conquest.

I see it well enough, and yet my heart
Strives with Cimena's, who shall most adore him,
What had I best resolve on, Leonora?

Madam, bethink your self of whom you're borne,
A King, heaven owes you, and you love a subject.

No, no, my thoughts are off from their first object,
I love not Roderigo as a Gentleman,
He that I love now, is the Valiant CID,
The Master of two Kings. And yet I mean
T'orecome my self, not for the fear of blame,
But that I won't disturb so fair a flame,
And though they would now crown him, yet I should not
Resume the gift which I have given another
Then since thou say Roderigoe's Victory
Is certain, let's go give him to Cimena.
And thou that know how far my love has run,
Come, see me finish what I have begun.

WHat shall I do Elvira? all my hopes
Are lost, and I have nothing left but fears,
I dare not give consent to my own wishes,
I've caused two Rivals to take arms for me,
What ever happens. Sorrow is my lot;
For think the best, I can of fate obtain,
My Father's unrevenged or lover slain.

From both sides you will find reason of comfort,
Either you have revenge or Roderigo
How ever destiny disposes of you
It saves your honour, and provides y'a husband.

What? the object of my hate, or of my anger?
Roderigo's, or my Fathers murderer,
From this or that, I must expect a husband
Died in the blood of him I held most dear,
I fear the issue worse than any death.
Go vengeance, or my love that trouble me,
Thou hast not sweets I'm sure to make me amends,
And thou the powerful mover of that fate
Which does me all this violence, determine
This Combat equally, without advantage,
That neither be the Victor, or the Vanquished.

That were to handle you with too much cruelty,
If when the fight were done, you should be bound
A new to demand justice, and near leave,
With rigour to pursue the man you love.
No, it were better that his unmatched valour
Should get him victory, and silence you,
And that the King, according to his law
Should force you to comply with your own wishes.

Doest think though he be Conqueror that I will
Yield my self his? my duty is too strong,
And my loss over great. He may overcome
Don Sancho easily, but not so soon
The glory of Cimena. Though a Monarch
Have promised me unto his victory
Mine honour, (rather than I'll be his prize)
Shall raise him up a thousand enemies.

Take heed, lest heaven for this strange pride of yours
Suffer you not to be revenged at all.
What? mean you to refuse this happiness
That you may when you please sit down with honour?
What is't you would pretend? what can you hope?
Will your Lovers death restore your Father to you
Or is your Fathers death so small a mischief,
That you'd heap up loss on loss, grief upon grief.
Well, do, continue in this stubborn humour.
You scarce deserve the man they 'ave destined for ye
And heaven being weary of its too much favour,
In stead of him, will wed you to Don Sancho.

The griefs Elvira, I sustain already,
Need not thy fatal augury to augment them,
I would, if possible, avoid them both,
If not, Roderigo has my best of wishes.
Not that my love inclines me more to him,
But lest he failing, I should be Don Sancho's.
The thought of that, makes me to wish him well.
What's this Elvira? See 'tis done already.

AT your feet, Madame, I present this sword.

What that yet reeking with Roderigo's blood?
Traitor, how dare thou come into my sight,
When thou hast ravished from me, all I loved?
Shine now at full my love, thou need not fear,
My Father's satisfied. One only blow,
^as to mine honour given security,
To my soul despair, to my love liberty.

Hear me with better temper.

Dare thou yet
Speak to me? Cursed murderer of that Heroes
Which I do most adore. Go, thou hast slain him
Perfidiously, for otherwise that man
Could never fall by such a hand as thine.

But hear him, Madame.

What would thou have me hear?
Can I doubt, when my eyes are satisfied,
I have obtained the mischief which I sought for,
And my just suit has had too good success,
Pardon dear love, its bloody cruelty.
Think though a lover, yet I was a daughter.
If on thy blood I have revenged my Father.
For thy revenge I will exhaust my own,
My soul has nothing now, that should retain it,
It shall go after thine, to ask it pardon.
And thou that think to obtain me by his death,
Disloyal minister of my cruel fate,
Hope nothing at my hands. Thou hast done me
No service, only hastened on my death.

'Tis a strange passion will not give me hearing.

What would thou have me hear thee, whilst with boasting
Thou paint'st out to me my own fatal crime,
And his misfortunes, that thy cruel story
May kill me in thy sight. No, I can dye
Without thy help. My soul can find out death,
Instructed by no aid but her own mischiefs.

SIr, I need not now dissemble any longer
What never art of mine could hide from you
I loved, you know, yet to revenge my Father
I would proscribe the head I held so dear,
By that your Majesty might easily see,
I meant my love should give place to my duty.
In fine Roderigoe's dead. His death has changed
Her, who was once his mortal enemy
To an afflicted lover. That revenge
I to my Father ought, and to my love
These tears which now I shed; Don Sancho has
In taking of my part quite ruined me,
And yet for doing so I'm made his prize.
Sir, if kind pity ever moved a King,
Now of your grace revoke this cruel law,
Though he have slain the man I loved so dearly,
I'll give him all I have for his reward,
So he will leave me to my self, and that
I may bewail (the time I have to live)
My Father, and my Lover, in a Cloister.

Now you perceive she loves, Sir, and not thinks
'Tis such a crime to a vow her lawful love.

Sweet heart mistake not, Roderigo lives
Don Sancho has made thee a false report.

Sir, not by me, but by her too much heat
She was deceived: For had she given me leave;
I should have told her, that her noble Lover,
When he disarmed me, bade me banish fear,
For that (sai'd he) I'd rather leave the conquest
Uncertain, than I'd spill a drop of blood
That's ventured for Cimena, but since I
Am by my duty called to attend the King,
Ooe you and entertain her in my stead,
And at her feet offer your life and sword.
Which when I came to do, the sword deceived her,
With which seeing me return, she thought that I
Had been the Victor. Presently her anger
Betrayed her love, with such impatience
That I had not a minutes audience.
For my part though I am a vanquished man,
And though the interest of my love be great
Yet I repute my self in this my loss
To be a gainer, loving my distress
Which brings so fair a flame, so good success.

You must not be ashamed of such a love
Cimena, or seek means to disavow it,
Your honour's disengaged, your duty quitted,
Your Father satisfied; what would you more?
Must you still put Roderigo in new danger,
You see hey ven otherwise disposes of him.
And since that it has done so much for him,
Do you too something for your self, and take
Him for your husband that I offer you,
And whom I know you love.

COme Cimena,
Dry thy eyes: And receive with a glad heart
This noble Conqueror, from thy Princesse's hand.

Great Sir, be not offended if before you,
The duty which I owe to love, do cast me
Here at her feet. I come not to demand
The prize which I have won, but once more yet
To offer you my life. My love shall not
Or plead the combats law, or the Kings will,
If all that's done cannot appease your anger,
Tell me what means is left to satisfy.
Must I encounter yet a thousand Rivals,
Travail from one end of the Earth to the other
Or force a Camp my self, or rout an Army,
If at length I may expiate my crime,
I shall attempt all this: But if your honour
Be still inexorable, and nothing can
Appease it but my death; Behold my head
I cast it at your feet. Take it your self,
And arm no other hand for your revenge,
Since none but yours can do it. Yet let my death
Be all my punishment, and let me not
Be banished from your memory, but say
If any time you call to mind my pain
Had he not loved me, he had not been slain,

Rise Roderigo. Sir, I must needs say
My love has showed it self too much, for me
Now to deny it. Roderigo has
Such virtues, as I know not how to hate.
And you're my King. I cannot but obey you,
But is there here any appearance of
A Marriage, if it be, it is a sad one,
That one day should begin, and end my mourning,
That having laid my Father in his grave,
I should lay Roderigo in my bed:
That were to hold intelligence with's murderer,
And soil my honour with eternal shame.

Time often makes that lawful, which at present
Seems not to be so. Roderigo, has won thee,
And his thou must be. But though his valour
Have made you his, yet I should do you wrong
So soon to give him the reward he fought for.
Take if you will a year, to end your mourning.
In the mean time Roderigo shall take arms,
And having under his command my Army,
Shall carry back the War unto the Moors
Which they brought hither, that they all may tremble
At this brave name of CID, which they have given thee
They've called thee Lord already, and they would
Make thee their King. But let not (Roderigo)
Thy great exploits, take off thy loyalty;
Return, if possible, more worthy of her,
And let thy deeds set such a price upon thee,
That she may court thy Marriage as an honour.

For my Cimena, Sir, and for your service,
What can you bid me do I won't accomplish?
And though I hardly can endure her absence,
Yet are the hopes you give sufficient happiness.

Rely upon thy valour and my promise,
And now thou hast thy Mistress heart already,
This point of honour (which is the last thing)
Let time over come, thy valour, and thy King.

THis Tragicomedy, called, The Valiant Cid, translated out of French, as it was
acted before the King and Queen at Court, may be printed.

HENRY HERBERT.
Imprimatur.

THO. WYKES.



