WHy how now Puss, what ails my Monkey to chatter out of tune thus?


A whoreson senseless Coxcomb -- but I am glad you are come, I long for a
pottle of wine and a Capon.


Good provision for the present Monkey, but viderit futuritas, in the mean
time, who lays up for futurity? Come you raise four hundred per annum, out of
pottles of Wine and Capons?


Yes my Granado, in this quality: they that come short of my breeding have
don't. The first credit I won was in a Garrison.


In Holland.


No; and yet in the low Countries: I never sate foot in a leaguer yet.


The reason of that?


My hard fate nothing else, having as much impudence, and as many ways to
manage it, receiving weekly Corantoes from Paris, Roterdam, and Flushing, and
having trade too in Middleborough, I have been house Lecturer three years
together, and read Aretine, both in print and picture, and that is much for one
of my years.


'T may be thou want acquaintance.


No such matter, the old Exchange, the new Burse, and new Town, afford plenty;
not a Prentice that can cry Bawd, nor a Butchers Dog that can say bow wow, but
is of my acquaintance.


Yet it may be they are precise, and will not be seen in it.


That I know not, but most sure, I have feasted the Liberty twice at mine own
charge, and helped their wives and daughters to the earning of many a fair
pound: they will be seen in that.


Well, I am sure I have furnished thy Library with all books of behaviour, and
tables of entertainment.


And I have culled out all my phrases as curiously stuck my language with such
enticing conveniences: and for intellicence, all the lawn women, lace women,
box women, and to come nearer to the business, very hair women, periwig
women, and candied Elicumpany lick halbars, come in twice a week like decoy
Ducks, with whole shoal at the ^aile of them.


Why, then there's a fault in your company.


I, I, that villainous company undoes all, There's Lodowick Tomaso Vallentine,
high talkers, and deep drinkers, but they have wit in their wine, and too much
honesty in their actions at all time, there's only on Gentleman --


Stultissimo of a plain cut and square size, he runs just as you throw him; rub
him a little against the grain now, and he will come off a great deal the
smoother. You would not think, what charitable benefactors three or four
such plush Colonels would be to the founding of a new honour.


But hast thou such a purpose, indeed?


Why should not I have purpose and effect as much as any: A leaguer, yes, so it
lay in the I'll of plenty; I'd dig through the Alps with Haniball, and fetch
Theseus from Hell, with Hercules purpose and practice, my precious Monkey, tis
done.


And shall I come to the honour to write Mistress of the Leaguer.


Shall not bate an accent of that title my Catamptiall Monky, but you must look
out for Spiders Monky, and the Sprall of all four Puzz: I have laid the
foundation in gold already.


Hast had a good return of thy Rings chuck?


Rings hangum, they are as stale as Scotch Lanson, Or as your Decoy,

No, I have sent um out in a desperate venture to Cape.

No Monkey, my old friend Franciscus hath repaired my Jacket already, has
promised to new thatch my outside too.

One of these boxes has 100 pieces of new gold,

With chains and keys correspondent.


For what use Chick?


For a dead lift Monkey: a Leaguer cannot be planted, manned, victualled and
munition'd with a small Magazine: to work Monkey, a mouzing Puss, make choice
of your company, admit no parley with the popular, be high and proud of thy
self, and let those that will needs buy thee, pay soundly for thee with a pox
to um, Puss a wink to the wise, you know my mind, let's have no more midnight
catterwowlings under Sale-mens shop windows, Vintners dark cellars, no Justices
long Entries, but bear up your self so civil and so meager*

You may be stilde a sister of the Leaguer.


Away you Rogue.


As I am a Gentleman body and soul I'll break your windows.


Master, as you are a man stand and tickle her.


Will you, you Rascal.


Ah, sweet heart, prithee good woman.


Nay, let her come I'll give her heart belly full.


Let her alone Fub: let her alone, by this hand, I'll make the boys maule her
Ruffs.


Fie how I am tyred a whoreson stinking shamleg'd, Fie, fie, fie, use a
Gentlewoman thus in her own lodging.


How does your back, O the Fucas, out alas, here's half a Crown in Complexion
utterly cast away.


If I be not even with the Rutter --


If he come where you have to do, let him pay soundly.


A plague upon his Asses ears, by my Virginity, I'll send his beard into
New-found-land for this.


And so I would, to make lines to catch Cods: out, out, out, a Gentleman, and
use a woman no otherwise; in faith, yfath, it stands not with his reputation.


A whoreson smelt: Mistress Durable, I would I had some of your aqua vitae, I'm
sick after the conflict.


And shall good woman, come, come, pray keep your self warm.


Forsake me honour, when I do forget the bond of friendship, let not poverty,
no, nor your fathers haviour Julio: though our Venetian law proved him a
Traitor: come pluck away your interest from my breast: when we were pupills in
the Academy, I was Franciscus and your fellow then; I am Franciscus and your
fellow still, nor can be altered: I have now a heart as free from pride, as
when I clipped thee thus, before thou knew the taste of poverty, or I
prosperity. Think not ancient friend I can forget thee, though thy need were
such as beggary despised.


The liberal hand of heaven reward your love, or lend my wishes that ability
to thank you in requital.


Amen to that and more.

I tell thee Iulio, I am not happier in my virtuous wife: and yet that's
greater than yielding thee relief tis all that good men wish: Why have we
wealth bestowed on us, but to return the same, where stern necessity pinches
the ribs of him or her that wants? it has no other worth, no more esteem of
me. Heap it together while the, massy weight even crack, what bears it less
than dust? on dust deserves no more regard. I have a Wife, Nurse, and mother,
all she is in one; yet one deserves more Titles, besides her feature, which may
make compare with those that boast of parts: she is so kind, that many
millions may be stamped again, ere one so perfect currant. She is worth more
than the earth is: but she is my wife, and I will cease her praise: you know
her father when you have his name: he is called Chrisippus, many stile him
good, and wish all Venice such.


Ere I was banished for my fathers fact, my knowledge coated, and all Italy,
spoke of a Damsel called Cornelia, this good Chrisippus daughter.


She is that jewell, that unmatched, thing I made my boast of: That Cornelia is
none but mine, I dare boldly say, and eke affirm it: See my Julio, she meets
us unexpected, and comes to hinder what I would speak more, in cause of her
demerit, modesty, and sweetness.


Franciscus: son!


My Love and duty make me ever such.
To all this company a happy hour.

You have bin mist Franciscus.


You have been mist Cornelia.


Where?


Where ere I have bin, this is my friend, tender him your welcome with as good
respects as I my self where he.


Sir, bid your own welcome, and command as much as all we have, were yours.


Your courtesies to one so thronged in misery As my self, dulls my behaviour,
that I know not how Enough to laud or thank you.


You shall exchange your habit:

Phemone, sister, Anthonio --


We mist you yester night.


I durst not come believe it:
Vallentius for says rowses are too great,
They make me quake to see 'em.
How fares my cousin Lodwick?

He spoiled our sport: he was not well he said:

I would you had been there: Tomaso pledged you twice.


I thank his love.


It is not worth it Sir.


In faith Nephew I was extreme drunk, ask my man Fub else, he will tell you what
a coil he had with me: the rarest lest in faith: prithee tell 'em how thou
foundst me underneath the stairs.


By no means, 'twill make 'em drunk to hear it.


Signior Arbaces you are the man I wished for.


Well met Gentlemen: are you here Antonio?


Cornelia.


Sir.


No, tis no matter. Tomaso you shall do it,
Go see nothing want; you are all my guests, you dine with
Me that's certain: Nay, I will not be denied:
Most welcome Sir to you: will you walk?

Ever, ever welcome.


Will you walk sir? will you munch?


Sirrah Fub, thou would not think how sore my head is, ever since I had the
knock with the Ladle?


I believe you: will you feed sir?


No more in the Ladle. Me thinks I am pocky melancholy here of late.


So I guest, ever since you knew the Gentlewoman that beat you.


Thou say true, ever since in faith.


Why she is able to make any body pocky melancholy. But would you would snap a
bit sir.


I love her I cannot tell how: in faith and I were well searched, I think I am
little kin to a Spannell, the more I am beaten, the better I affect.


Would I were sure of that.


Well, she shall hear from me in some Sonnet or Ditty; some rare thing of mine
own invention, and that speedily: Let me see to what tune shall I have it?


And if you please, let it go to the Punkes delight; 'tis your only sweet
tune: for women do love the Punks delight.


By this hand gramercy; they do indeed, thou can sing if need be.


I can make a scurvy shift: But to say truth I am no good Querister.


But can thou do well and scurvily?


After my manner.


Would I might be hanged presently, but methinkes I am a piece of a Poet
already, there's such a whistling in my pate.


That's nothing but your conceit sir.


Conceit merrily: O that my love were any thing but woman.


O that your love were any thing but Common: then might she be. --


What might she be.


Nay what you will in faith.


I'll to it while tis hot, I know I'm in an excellent vein.


Prick it quickly then:

But Hark you Signior, shall you not need my help?


I defie't, It shall be all mine own, I cannot abide, tis the scurviest thing
to rob others of their wit, good or bad, it shall flow from mine own sweet
brain.


I believe you'll find the tide turned, tis ebbing water there, would I might
be begged, as he had like to have been, if his foolery do not vex my
discretion, but he gives me means, and I could do little if I could not smile.


Well Vallentius, and you be caught in the purlues: and you be not stung for it
I'll forswear privacy, and all that belongs too^, I have a Girl, the very
spirit of what she was made for, and she were honest, she might crave
supremacy of Hellen, and make her ride behind.


And I love one were she not honest, that's her only fault, she were a Paragon
unparalleled, mingle all beauty that our Venice yields, and set her self aside,
she would stand peerless, over-shine them all, and dim the Artists cunning.


Is she a woman?


Yes, but such a one no voluntary habit, nor sly drift with all accommodations
that beseems, unblemished truth it self can bring to speech or give my
thoughts access.


What is she for a Saint, that stands in the how fair and beautiful: may one
of my birth entreat her name and knowledge?


Vow your assistance to my purposes, and I a Traitor to my self reveal the
treason of my mind.


Give me your hand, I am yours for better or worse, in all causes, all
adventures, my sword and self vow fealty: Is she a wife?


I, would she were not.


Know you Vanderman our great Physician.


What, my fretful Doctor? the only curer of mad folks; Know I my self?


You know he's married.


Yes, and what of this (oh would you be ministering therein.) I have you my
dear Flora, well take my word she's thine.


I would that I were hers.


Why it lies in thine own choice.


But setting all this pleasantness aside, in earnest Lodowick I affect her so,
no motive mean nor yet dire accident can change my steadfast will, I must enjoy
her, or I must not live.


Thou shalt enjoy her, or I will not live.


You speak like a friend.


I speak like what I am, a Christian, and by that Epethite, I meant as much as
I speak, nor could I think, Vallentius, you of all the men alive, would have
mistaken me.


In any kind but this I never had: pardon me Lodowick this doting loves bears
such a jealous sway, the least suspicion puts us on the wrack, and breaks all
chains of duty: You may persuade me to believe, but yet he that never saw a
Vessel under sail, cannot imagine what the Seaman brooks, the Merchant
sleeping on his downey Couch, ne'er dreams what danger the bold Souldie^r dures,
and he that never felt the pangs of Hell, cannot report the torments: assure
thee Lodowick so be satisfied, since I knew her, I have not known my self, so
mighty is loves extremes.


Tis strange.


She troth plight was to me, and had been mine, had not desire of pelf altered
her friends, and I dare well vow she loved me once, what ere her mind be now.


Come be ruled by me, thou shalt set thy toe in the Doctors stirrup, ride and
go a foot at thy pleasure: did she love thee once?


I had her oath.


Go to, renew thy suite, the fire is not all out, stir up the ashes, and thou
dost not find some embers, that will both glow and warm, pawn me for buttered
Sack, and let me never be worthy redemption.


I want the means.


Think not of that, tis here my Flora, what man? he's not the first Doctor has
worn a corner Cap: come, will you be merry Vallentius, and you'll forsake not
this mood, I renounce society.


I am yours, obedient as your hand.


Follow me then, and I drive not this melancholy fit out of thee, I'll never
trust my conceit: what, ho Damazella? Knocks, and Clarislona looks out at the
window.


Whose there?


He's here that should be here, come down?


Lodowick.


Yes.


What's she.


The commodity I told you of, there's a Gentleman a friend of yours in love
with her.


Not your self.


No faith, though you shall hear her swear as much, tis our rich heir
Signior Stultissimo.


What, the Fool?


That mor sell of mans flesh, she cannot beat him away, he haunts the Eves
like a Sparrow in March, you may hunt flies from honey sooner then him out of
her company: now Mistress how stands things with you, when did you play with
your fools babble?


You'll never leave this.


Bid my friend welcome.


I thank you Lady.


Come kiss me?


Will you stay all night?


Yes, when I am weary of strength, and foes with my back.


In faith Lodowick, you must leave this?


So I will*


When?


When thou leave thy trade?


Will you sup here?


Yes drink, nothing else.


Lord, how wise your grown?


So I were, if I could keep out of your company.


Fie, your'e to uncourteous Lodwick: nay, he's ever thus, but tis my fault.


Marry mend it then for shame.


Where's my Bracelet, which of your Truls has that?


Shall I be true to thee?


Your'e ne'er true to me.


I mean honest.


I care not for your honesty.


I believe that too, but in plain verity. Your bracelet embraces my horses
main.


Come, you jest.


No good troth.


Swear you, I hope you make a difference between your horse and me.


Faith but little: and yet your'e both good bearers.


By the bright Sun you wrong her: weep not fair one.


What, shall we have tricks?


You are too blame beshrow me.


Now, when, what needs all this, nay, and you powt farewell.


As I am a Gentleman you part not so.


Sweet, Lodwick.


Hum, why was not this before, I have seen the Bears.


Do not I know your woman?


Hist, hist, Are you the man of War?


Nay, you must draw nearer, if you'll have your Embassy answered: how is't
Mistress Durable?


How do you Master Lodowick?


The worse for you, and your creatures.


It's a good hearing.


Shall I have three or four words in private?


Not with her unless I participate.


Whats the matter?


Yonder's Fub, the parties man you wot on has something under hand and seal.


For me.


So he gives out.


You may admit him.


Rest you merry Gentlemen.


Whose this secret party, this concealed Champion* What have ye here, Signior
Stuliissimoes man?


All hail.


This fellow would keep a wild coil if he were a top ath' tiles.


Gentiles, good speed.


What, the Plough?


No, you, and you please, Marona to your self.


This fellows discreet.


To me.


So says his backside.


You the man of War, or more properly Pirat, that gave summons to the leaguer.


Leaguer, Sir.


Leaguer, Sir, the report of your Pot-guns cannot make us hang up a white flag.


The skirt of a clean smock's more proper ath' two.


We come not to learn whats proper of you, Monkey, and catch flies.


Play at his foolery, come hither Punck.


Sir, you're uncivil, she's none; nor this a Bawdy house; but a Leaguer of
gentle entertainment.


The fellow dreams: Come wake and be thy self.


My self? Would you were as sure your selves as I am.


A what?


I'd fain know that of you:
But I advise you to take council of your best judgment first,
Your words will be questioned.

Question that dares, you are an arrant Cheater.


Tis not your pare royal of plush Coxecombes can secure you in it.


Valiant a the sudden too.


Not suddenly neither:
The growth has both time and sufficient temper.
Why I a Cheater? let any impartial --
Ride Circuit, and sit in judgement of us all,
And show any reason either in Art or Nature,
Why I a Cheater more than any of you.

Thou hast nothing but a little wit to live upon.


That's endowment enough for a Gentleman:
I ever shall count him the nobler gentleman
That makes himself a fortune in the world, than he
That brings it into the world with him.

Suppose this granted: yet why this a Leaguer?


I want words for you: only for conclusion, one out of a strange affected
carriage has gathered an admirable method of drilling, and training men from
the flying of Cranes: Another rare order and government of Commonwealths, from
the poor labour of the Be: And I out of this Leaguer --


Will extract certain ways and carriages for Cheaters and Libertines.


Twere not from my purpose if I granted that to. Lycurgus was the first
Law-maker; and the best Law that ever he made, was a provision or maintenance
for Cheats, as you call em, and Felons (viz.) That he (without exception of
age, quality, or condition) which could do the most high dainty, and dangerous
piece of Felony, and come clear off, should be preferred to the most eminent
place of office in the State; but if he failed, he was then to receive Martial
Law.


Strange course, pick Officers out of Felons.


'Tis a kind of Meslin or mingled grain still. How much of the poores money
was found in one of the Churchwardens purchase last day?


None I think.


How many thieves horses have bin watered at the High Constable of the hundreds
watering trough within this ten years?


I think not any.


It may be so: But I am sure, I have heard, or read* or something, that a new
Chief Justice of some place, or a better man wo'd not ha made very nice to bid
a fat purse to breakfast with him if he light upon it soundly: so that it is
not so much the Art to know, as the government to dispose: that quallifies the
man.


He says true: all times have bin guilty of good fellowship, why not this? I
like the Leaguer now so well, I care not if I buy a place of command in it my
self.


Why now you come to me,
That's the Pearl I ha^ dived for all this while:
I have a catalogue of names, places, and prizes.
A cup of entertainment for my friend.
Welcome to the new Leaguer.

We will pledge, we will pledge:
Victual'd and Win'd already?

To the Society at the Swan two pottles and a half: Monkey the health; these
are my noble prime visi tants; the boxes I gave you to lay up.


How now Iulio, gold?


By this light, and the most curious.


A poor Grannams gift gentlemen: 300 pieces, or such a taste, par^ly induction
to a business, or so. There's a Bordeaux Merchant in Town now, would lay me
between wind and water this twelve month, but the spite is, I am tied not to
part with this gold for ever: if I knew where to borrow but half the worth
on it --


Half the worth?
I'll vow to lend the full worth,
If that will pleasure thee.

You shall keep the gold under locke and key for your pawn.


Thou shalt not want for such a courtesy to do thee good: Ime glad you are so
thriving.


Lock up the box, and keep the key; there's the full sum.


To a Piece I assure you: you shall see else again.


No more, no more trouble:
Let me see for how long?

Three Months, not a day longer:
Nay sooner if money chance to come in before:
I have offices in my Leaguer stand upon Fortunes hill.
'Vds me Signior Stultissimo promi^ed
Me a courtesy last night:

Assure thee sweet chuck he will not fail thee.


I believe thee without an oath:
Make my friend welcome to the Leaguer Monkey:
As soon as I have dispatch'd my voyage
To the Canaries, I am for you again Lads.

Gentlemen, who can read?


Who cannot?


I can resolve you:
She cannot.

What's here?
Opprobrious Saint, and most Angellicke fiend,
Ere I begin, thus do I make an end.

I should have been sorry else:
Nay silence, or the Proclamation's lost.
And if thy heart be not patched up in Marble,
Hark how my pen does in thy praises warble.

O dear Apollo, how art thou abused, Is there more?

Sweet stinging Wasp, and well conceited Dove*
For beauty nice, entitled Queen of love
Of me; Sir reverence; that does thee adore;
Which art esteemed a good one and no more:
Let reason rule thy Amazonian sist*
Let ladle rude be thrown at hady wist,
So shall I love thee, take it for no fable
Better then well, and more then I am able.
Yours despite your guts. S. S.

Ass, Ass.


The Authors name.


Cannot you get her Signior Stultissimo?


O, lamentable complaint!


As ever poor man heard.


Will he take no warning.


Is this a Challenge?


Fie no, they are too violent to come in rime.


Lodowick, is not this your practice?


Why, dost thou think me so simple, so ridiculous.


No, I'll assure you, It's a token of good will of my Masters, there's no brain
guilty ont but his own: if you like it you may, and you will not, the laws in
your own hands, you may choose.


Good Gentlemen return the Carrier.


What? a cuffe or a knock.


He has penned a Song too, which I should have tickled, if I had not been
hoarse with drinking Flap-Dragons last night.


Whats thy name?


Fub.


Prithee honest Fub, tickle thy self out of our companies, we'll be Fubb'd no
longer.


Will not you be Fubb'd Sir.


Thou know my resolution.


Nay, but will ye not indeed?


No faith*


I am glad I know it, -- be with you.


Have you any wine in the house?


Yes dearest.


Come, a pox a these devices, hang off: will you drink Vallentius?


Will I live?


Where's the Matron?


The Matron, Lord, you're the strangest man. --


Your Matron Grandum, what will you have it, your Bawd?


I must be quiet.


Nay, enter, enter.


The easy time, and such as thrive in it, favour my wishes, the ignorant whose
sole dependence is on verity, and carry conscience in their timorous breasts,
are not associates meet for Iulio. Those that near knew the strain of
Policy, nor aim at more, then what may well content, draw not my length, the
way to prosper, the directest course such are my sore necessities, is to get
liking of this lovely Maid Franciscus sister, bright Phemone, the Virgin's
modest, chaste, and debonair, besides her brother's rich, there hang my hopes,
but she affects not me, all her desires are on young Anthonios, rich Arbaces
son, my friend (supposed) at least, but that is breath; by what man has, or
can have, he's my foe that hinders my design, where he my next of blood, that
shall he find: the mean to purchase what I reach at now, there is but only
one, one only mean that can supplant him, here it lies shall do it, were he
as dear in estimation as Nisus to Eurialus.

I love my self, I count him still most wise,
That cares not who's thrown down so he arise.

THou hast to say something, yet nothing I hope trivial, by our known affection
I beseech thee, speak what thou can.


I would I had embraced my poverty, while the pale Moon has residence in
heaven, would I had been deaf.


Whereto tends this speech if I thought my fault, or any ones pertained to me,
through wilful negligence, or otherwise, to breed the occasion of this
passionate mood, I should condemn the cause of the offence, and deem my self
unhappy.


Can heaven suffer it?


What, what does heaven suffer, speak my Iulio?


Too much of ill.


Let me know that ill, and I rest satisfied.


Pray no more, the malady is mortal, unsanctified, monstrous. Anthonio is
there such a man?


Many that wear that name in Italy: but one amongst that many known to me.


Hate all the name.


Pardon Iulio, I'll hate my self first.


Anthonio is a Villain.


Blot not the reputation of his youth with such calumny, he is no way such,
but as unblemished, as the snow before it touch the Mountains.


He's a Villain.


Villain never had so fair an out-side, nor yet heart so just as that he
carries.


He's a Villain.


I have some business at the Port, you'll sup with me to night.


Do you love your self, do you love honour, do you love your wife?


I do.


Then hate that Anthonio.


Give me to understand, since you will force me to endure your report, wherein
he's culpable, or does deserve these ignominious titles.


He loves not you.


Tis not my fault.


He wrongs your sister.


Therein, he's too blame.


He loves your wife.


That amends, quits all his former wrongs.


Can you bear it thus, wink Vulcan then,
And let the god of War, throw up her skirts again.

How's this?


You will not understand; I'll speak no further.


Come, come, my wife is honest.


Yes.


If she be, tis nothing you have said, I'll hear no more; begone.


Will you list a word, Anthonio wongs you.


Wrong me, and if he would he cannot.


He plays the Parasite, the officious Ass to veil his sin.


Would I might understand you?


The Serpent tempts your wife, these ears and eyes can testify; for your
sister, she's stale: his excuse, whereby he cloaks his vice.


I wish you Iulio, to know what you speak.


I am not mad, I love you, tis my love, you are my father.


I pray be advised, consider what you do? speak not this no report, be certain;
do not abuse my patience. Tempt my wife, rent earth, and swallow falsehood.


Will you be moved Pernassus, the two topped, forked Mount?


My blood is not mine own, I want command of all that now obeyed me, how
different are my fits? I am now a congealed, kneaded cake of ice, bound from
all motion, now again (me thinks) a flaming Island, a Vesunius Hill, merely
combustion.


Forget not, sir, your patience.


Tell me of patience when I am my self: how did he tempt her, how did she
accord on thy reputation?


I would I had been dumb?


Hang not in the wind, (delay does torture) answer me as how?


Kind, sir, recall your wonted manhood?


Answer me how.


I pray pardon me.


What? strike and cry mercy, I must be resolved, thou hast flung me in the fire,
even in the Oven, the mouth of Aetna, nothing thou coulst have said, nothing
have done, could have assured like torture.


Would, when I saw him kiss her, crush her hand, wink and laugh out, use his
undecent language: Fie, fie.


Cornelia false, the flood may come again, nothing impossible, kiss, and crush
hands, wink, wink heaven and all above.


Kind, sir.


Bear witness, all that good are, how dear, how dear, I held that most
false man: set him here, here, even on the spire and pinnacle of my heart; my
life was his, and all that I call mine, but her he has abused?


Dear friend, do not forget your name, these are but likelihoods, far from
the thing it self, and say he be a Villain, as no doubt he's little better in
his rude exposures: she may be honest.


No Julio, no, had she meant well,
She would have warnd me of his foul attempts,
Said such, and so's his haviour.
When she was loyal, as sure one she was,
(If ever any was) no accident how vain
So e're it seemed, but she a woman, would unfold
Her sex, and say 'twas thus, and thus.

I have stroke him through.


Treble abuse:
Deflowered my wife, abused me,
Disgraced my sister; thrown infamy
On all our heads at once: What beast uncivil bred,
Amongst careless Monsters (but thee Antonio)
Would have been kicked on to that damned enterprise?
That I had patience; me thinks thou should not
Be the Villain yet, report does speak thee.

Nay gentle friend.


Tis true, 'tis true.
Had any 'twixt the North and Southern Pole
Spoke these words but he, it had not been,
And he had falsely lied.
This is a Creature I have raised, revived,
Snatched from destructions teeth,
Incorporated to me, so dear and just, as not
A thing in all the world can be more truer to it self
And certain: but his modesty conceals it,
Could write a Volume of their loathed designs,
And curse the stories cause. O false Cornelia!

Remember what you are.

Remembrance burst!
There's no contemplation, nothing what ere can
Drive the thought of shame out of my mind:
Would I had never known discretion,
Could never have made distinctions of persons,
And harmless Creatures; hence forth be ignorance:
Mother of Nations and Understanding perish:
Fair, foul Cornelia. The blue faced
Occan, nor her fertile womb, that yields
Us all increase, nourishes none so false as woman:
Traitors have they been since their first being,
And betrayed poor man e're he beheld himself.
Cornelia can it be thou art a Strumpet?
Oh, oh, fury finish that, burns thee to Cinders.

Work on, work on:
Fate lifts me to the seat of my desires;
And I am prosperous and happy.
This Devil jealousy, my present friend,
Cannot at least but quite supplant Anthonio:
Besides this seeming honesty of mine, begets me good
Opinion of Franscicus, as shall install my wish;
All adds to my avail: what need I curses fear
For the debate my policy shall raise betwixt these Turtles*
I hold with Machievel, for fame or profit
To break oath or league with friend,
Or Brother: there's nothing gainful bad:
I ha my wish, Advancement now
Is what I aim at, present glory here:
He's true religious, that does nothing fear.

And how? and how?
Was it not pathetic and pretty?

Y faith I never heard the like.

Nor I.

I thank the Muses, I have as sharpe a conceit of mine own when I list.


Sir I take you to be a great devourer of Verjuyce.


Now and then; but 'tis not altogether that; every one has his gift.


Tis so.


Some has two or three.


You say true Signior, some has twenty: for which they may thank impudency and
the art of begging.


The art of begging: pray you how long has begging been an art?


Ever since in rid in a foote-cloath, and wore the badge of authority.


How long's that ago?


Ever since you Grannams daughter had a Calfe of your age.


Is't possible?


Yes, and will continue till he's a Bull and horne mad.


Most miraculous: would I were mercenary, and had no more in me than an
ordinary man: Signior, I cry you mercy. How do you since you powered the
pottle of wine in my neck, and threw the pot at my head, because I would not
pay my part o'th shot?


Was there such a time?


Was there? Why have you forgot how you kicked me, and I crept under the Table:
I'll be sworn this Hip's as lame ever since, as if I had the Cyatica.


Absurd and gross.


We must leave you Signior.


I thank you with all my heart: I am going to the foresaid place: here's my
servant Fub can tell you if I lye in my throat.


I will assure you he's wandering to Pusse, or as a man would say, to deal with
Mistress Clariflora.


Yes faith am I: she beat me the other day, and I am now going to make her amends.
I think I endure more beating than any three in Venice.


Than a Stock-fish.


'Tis a sign you are offensive.


So they say that do it. Yester night a scurvy boy did so joule my head and the
wall together, for holding opinion that Cheese was unwholesome.


No more good Signior: farewell.


At your service:
Shall we expect you at the old house?

If you please:
Have you heard the like?

These are Asses so tedious --

They're kin to Burs, they will not off with shaking.
Now my Thomaso what I have to say:
The chief occasion made me summon you,
Is to entreat your knowledge and assistance
In such a project, (as your self set by) and him that must
Partake in the attempt, Venice in Italy
Conceals the man that I durst credit.

Let it not touch confusion of the State,
Treason, and Murder: whatsoever it be,
Command my will and sufferance.

Defend that ever I should be such:
Vallentius never had so foul a thought,
To infect himself, and others.
Thus, in brief, I love a woman; fairer
Than her self ne'er wore the Epethite:
You have seen her sure, and know her:
She's wife to Vanderman.

Correma's daughter?

That same only wight, is the most precious
Beauty I adore, and would fain call mine own.

Knew you her husband?

By his name, no further;
By that knowledge you understand his course.

Yes he's a Physician: and besides,
What else report speaks of him.

Listen then my purpose,
The severe sir, whose high stretched phrases
Galls the ears of Patience, and wisdom would fain shun,
Bears such a jealous and observant eye
Over the prey I aim at, all conference is debarred,
And you may sooner whisper with the Saint
Argos had charge of, than converse with her,
Unseen, and unsuspected.

Is there no device to compass her?

But one, and this is it;
Your self and Lodwicke (harken I beseech you)
Shall to this skilful Vanderman present me
As one distracted: nay smile anon,
And with a kind of sober modesty, as if you list you can,
Report some probable possibility, how
And which way I got my ecstasy:
Let me alone to make your words seem truth,
And so possess my prating Mountebank,
That he shall say and swear I'm mad at least.
If not past all recovery.

Will this do?

This, or none.

Then none.
Why this is the shallowest, indirectest course to win a woman that ever was
composed, in my opinion.

In your opinion: why sir?

Why, hope you to gain her thus with a mad fit: mark the event, this is a
course as wide: Are you so simple to imagine, she a timorous woman, will endure
your presence, seeming possessed? for shame believe it not, invent some other
means.


I verily think so too, but he will never be persuaded.

This were a way to scare her, and to make her shun you.

Leav't off, leav't off, and study some other new passage.

Do, do; this is the grossest: fie Vallentius:

Come, you shall pardon him once: we all miss sometimes.

Good gallants do not ride me, lest I gall you: I'll assure you I trot hard:
why my brace of conceits, my wits; what does your abundance of wit run at
waste: for shame, have you so poor a brain, and you my most exquisite
excellent, for shame take off your spectacles and see better: are you such a
dunce: are you so rare a Coxcomb, to deem I will appear always the same:
are you the men you promised? will you be Masters of your words and oaths,
tender your vowed assistances?


I am Lodwicke still.

And I Tomaso.

Continue so: what shall redound upon this adventure, falls upon my head, be it
no shame to yours: only preferment and your smooth apologies.


Leave that to us.

But can you act the mad-man bravely?

Tut, I have played Ajax, and performed the part well, to make boast of
imitation, better than he that Lucian writes of, who so digested what he plaid,
that he run mad indeed.


Can you do it?

So well, as Aesop could discharge his Scene, whereby he won most laud.

This praise were well in me.

Mistrust not my behaviour, and if it prove not correspondent to my word,
think me an idle vanter, and no meet associate for you.


When put we this in practice?

There's no deferring weeks, nor days, this hour, this very evening does my
fit begin.

Shall we about it then?

What else, what else? Remember gentlemen you fall not upon the scandal of
Ignorance: but in any case keep your countenances.


Make no doubt of that.

Come then, and fortune friend us.

Draw your sword.

Against whom?

Against me.

Against any living man that's your enemy:
What ails my dear Francisco?
By your face you should not be in health.

Draw your sword.

What mean you?

Draw your sword.

Against you never in anger:
Are you well Franciscus? me thinks your cheek
Carries a paler hue than wont to be his Livery.

I must fight with you.

With me.

With thee perfidious monster, with thee thou Iudas.

Are you your self?

Thou hast abused me, wronged me.

I wronged and abused you?
Franciscus, can you think so of me?

Do not enquire; yonder he sits knows all:
Look yonder, thou art to him transparent, and seen through,
As easy as the air: do not cloak thy vice, do not:
See thou this? see thou the place we tread on?
Mark my speech, one of us twain, or both (never start)
On this cold earth, this very Champion, shall
Offer up a crimson sacrifice of his most precious blood:
For that cause drew I to this silent shade,
Remote from all suspicion, where
Revenge might glut with satisfaction:
Draw thy sword, or else thou never shalt.

Did not my love prohibit,
Think, Francisco, I could not be a Coward,
Nor endure the opprobrious taunts the malice
Of your heart has made your tongue throw on me;
Why I know not: believe me, and receive it for a truth,
Were you some other, in this wide vast world,
And not Franciscus, you had been a dog
That I had kicked long since; but you are my friend,
And my disgrace is buried: yet if you carry honour
In your breast, and bear your wonted venerable mind,
Make me to understand from whence, or why your
Comminations undecent language point thus at me alone?

Will you draw?

Do you thirst for blood? if so, and mine, hide to the hilts your naked
instrument, my bosom is your mark: thrust home and take your fill.


Will you draw?

You had mine answer, never* never.

Do you not love my wife?

Yes, by Heaven.

Confess, o impudence! my wrong cries out, no more expostulation, remember
Iulio.

Wherefore him, he is a Toad more virulent, oh, oh!

Bathe there, adulterate fiend, and thy red drops wash off thy guilty stains.

Oh, some charitable creature!
Francisco, dear Francisco.
No pity, no remorse, I bleed, and much effusion robs me of my breath,
something of sense relieve me, help, o help.

That dying tune, was sure a mans, where art thou friend, speak thou that
cryd'st for help, if thou would have thy wish, speak once again: where art
thou?


Here.

To one in thy case could I ne'er less wish, then health and mercy, how fare
you sir?

Oh! Oh!

His utterance is decayed, and life begins to creep out of his wounds: let me
see, so many, and so mortal! can I but stay the course I wish no more: have I
nothing left, to stay this passage: well, yet still he breathes, that I had
here some help. Thy aid Omnipotent, yet his pulses beat, life is not quite
discharged, -- no succour! keep he but motion, till I can bear him to my Cell,
I doubt not, his recovery: this wind, this wind, that my Balms were here:
for my youthful days heaven lend ability.


Run to all brief confusion.

Good, sir, be pacified.

Even in the pride, and noon time of his fortunes, brought to destruction thus:
a milder, better tempered Gentleman, Venice nor Europe yielded; his knowledge
made me proud, and I was rich in his adoption.


O my Franciscus, o my gentle Lord!

My brother, my dear brother.

My son, my son, so noble, valiant, wise, dearer to me then him I call mine
own by true succession, do you weep?


I am not blessed, all things do sort contrary; 'twill not do, my projects
thrive not, would I had been silent, we know the first, but not the last, I
begin to perceive our policies of times whets the Axe, cuts off our own necks;
I have and one my self, that it should come to this, we seek to mend so
long, that we mar all: for mine own part, would I could have been content:
but who would have dreamt the course would have proved so violent: well this I
am sure on, I may starve ere I get such another friend.


Sister, if it be true, as so the rumour goes, you have played false, and
wronged your dearest friend: you are not worthy such another man, you sole
Queen of Africa; had you to live as many ample years as our first fathers, or
their ages thrice: you might spend all those tedious houses twice told, ere you
find a Mate so worthy, were you equivalent, in birth and beauty, and had no
parallel: Neptunes gems to boot, you want worth and excellency both, to weigh
down his demerit; Virtue and Honour stamped him for their own, at his first
being, and the Graces strove to increase his plenitude. More perfection then he
has, he needs not, where ere he's betook.


Something that's mighty, stain me Leopard like, if ere I gave offence.

I should be loath to wish so.

Not you offend? look here,
This letter left he as a testimony,
Who is there here amongst all this company,
That knew Franciscus, knew not he affected,
And highly prized the slain Antonio?
What could have raised such deadly enmity?
But this, but this, thou strumpet,
Between such twinlike friends?
Thy misdemeanour, thy approved falsnesse;
Which too, too well he knew*
Thou hast und one him,
Fled he is and gone;
His goods already seized are for the State:
And die he shall if ever he be took,
Oh, fie upon thee my perpetual shame!

Can you this behold, you upright Justices?

Thou art not mine, I here deny thy claim,
And warn thee hence-forth,
Come not near my roof:
Pine, starve and die, relief and comfort
Never more expect from him that was thy father.

'Tis nothing I see, to work the dissolution of a house,
How easily this is done?

I must weep, to deem
I should be forced to be so cruel;
More I have to say, if tears would let me;
(Me thinks) I could both kiss and curse her:
If she be wronged, and through some make-strife,
These foul ills prove a greater plague,
Then fell in Egypt, light on the Authors head,
The maws of Dogs be his Tomb:
Help me to curse him Iulio.

Ten thousand swords struck me together.

Lived there such a wretch,
And that I knew him,
Let my faith not save me,
But I would tear the Viper with my teeth,
And like a rude and savage Caniball,
Eat out his treacherous heart.

Now the foul Devil, stuff thy glutnous paunch,
I am no viand for thee?

Who's this comes here, Arbaces?

Disgrace and woe smite all this company, and make them feel my grief.

Disgrace, contagion, and what can be worse,
Smite thee and all thy tribe.

Undone, undone, where is Anthonio?
Where's my son Crisippus?

Answer thine own words;
Where's mine Arbaces?

Where such a Villain --
And fell murderer should.

More charity for shame.

Sorrow gripe my heart till it be blood less,
But what thou speak is false:
A more slanderous lye never left the lips of any.

Lye?

Sir, be persuaded.

Tell not me, I'll prove it on him, Arbaces, boy --

That we were alone.

Well said, old Lad.

Show thy self a man, meet me to morrow.

Good, sir, forbear.

Not meet him.

Will you be entreated?

Give me leave.

Will you be pacified?

Meet thee, yes I will meet thee;
I dare meet a man: Arbaces thou shalt find it.

Come, you are a prater.

Prate; ye shall hear from me.

With reverence of your age, good sir,
You want of that discretion and stayed judgement;
Your years and place requires: It is not well,
One of your reputation and report,
Should so forget your self: to be plain,
You lack advice; and this same cavillation,
Merely provoked by you.
Proclaymes a loud your inconsiderate folly.

Sir, sir; check your own: --
You never lost a son, and cannot
Aim at my affections and paternal care:
You have undone me --
Robbed me of my joy.

You are not right considerate,
Who has undone you sir?

You, you, and she, and every one of you;
The punishment for murder fall on all your heads,
And blast your terrene hopes:
Cruel, cruel, butchery.
Wast not sufficient that he took his life,
As by his own confession:
Undid his woeful mother and my self,
But he must practice more
Immanly, more dire austerity;
Throwing his breathless trunk
In some obscure night-shaded Mansion,
A prey for ravenous beasts;
Where never eye of creature rational,
Shall more behold him: unchristian part,
If there be justice, above or here;
As certainly there's both: I'll petition,
My loud complaints shall pierce both sides of the globe,
And strike a sorrow in the rudest thing,
Nature for mans use moulded:
O! my Antonio? my joy, my life;
My dear, my dear Antonio.

There's cause for this.

Sure, sure, how fond was I
That could not weigh this before;
Having his proper cause,
If for some not slaughtered,
Nor mine own, but by selection,
I could sigh my age, shed floods of tears,
Meet dangers in my shirt, bid conquering
Death defiance, if all this and more I durst attempt,
For one no otherwise, then mine by law;
Needs must he rave past rules of Manhood,
And forget all precepts that support his suffrance:
See you this? What think you of your self?
Have you not done well? account thou scandal,
That like the Whore of Greece,
Was teem'd for mans destruction;
Thy sin upon thy self, my door is shut;
That hospitality I show a stranger,
Shall be restrained from thee.

Most courteous sir, -- expect more.

Keep your Orisons to charm relenting beggars.
Such in need, as may thy wants relieve;
Or at least sympathy thy mournfu tale,
When fierce distress smiles,
Expect more comfort from the blustering North,
When he does blow the highest Acorn head
Down to the Meadow, and there dips his cup;
Then least relief from me, for thee;
For thee chaste Maid, all benisons,
And goodness, that I can, command and have.

Your liberality was ever such,
As merits more then thanks; yet thus far,
Truth emboldens me to say you are too cruel kind,
Not all the proofs,
What ere incensed my brother to his rage;
Can wean me to that vain opinion,
To think it her desert: I dare protest for her,
No persuasion can drive belief in me,
To call Antonio false; if you prove so cruel,
So unnatural as you speak, there is no pity in you:
Nor are you such as a father ought to be,
Thrust her out, then turn me off;
If you supplant one, you extirp us both,
And her extremes are mine.

Since you disdain my proffered courtesy,
Together shelter your necessities;
Take up your harbour with the hardy beast;
These gates are locked to her and her relievers
Hence-forth I will forget her,
Blot her name forth of the Bed roll
Where my children stand,
And vow I had none such:
Hence, hence, thou scandal.

Thus guilt less ones, suffer the guilties blame,
While they triumph in fraud, thus the strict Judge
Condemns th'innocent for the thieves offence;
Whilst partiality allows his wrong,
And greatness makes it good;
Will equity never take place again?
Has trust left swaying here? that I but knew my crime:
Or that Francisco but beheld my heart!
Let mine eyes rain a river of salt drops,
And my tears drown me, if any foul sin of mine,
Deserve Franciscoes hate:
I had rather heaven had made me any thing,
Then one so much unhappy,
When ere thou bidest on the plenteous shore,
Or labouring flood,
Prosperity adhere to thy proceedings,
And fame conclude thy deeds,
For me despised, such be my fortune as my loyalty,
And I request no more,
My sweet, my sweet Francisco.

Heaven do thee right.

And if thou be not honest,
There's neither pride nor cozenage in this City:
If every conscience were well searched,
And you did not find
Some dainty fine conceited Rogue
Has been tempering,
Let me return to my Cradle,
And be hanged in my swaddling clouts.

THink you it so?


Yes, and verily believe't.


Tis strangely carried.


Mark the end, mark the end;
Why do you sigh, Signior?
Are you troubled with the Cramp?

O, blame him not, he has good cause to sigh,
Francisco set by him precious: How fare you, Signior?

Never worse, my Friend's undone.


I, a mischief and a vengeance of the cause, by this sword, nay, fear not man,
I am not angry, and I could not judge, well, I say no more: but if he did not
walk on Stilts, I do detest eating and drinking, and those are two
necessaries, a man can hardly live well without them.


The very Paragon, mirror of the time.

If I could not have wept when I beheld her, and that was more then I did at
the death of my father, I have no belief in me.


Who but she, the wonder of our age.

No more words, mark the end, mark the end; I say, still mark the end.

I must leave you.

Not as the wench left the Frenchman in the suds, there's neither mettle nor
society in thee; if thou abandon'st my company, till we have visited Valentius.


I wonder how he speeds?

Did he not act the madman to the life, was't not well? could ever a Dunsticall
Doctor in this Town, have picked falsehood out of his behaviour: he was so
mutable, so full of varying tricks (me thinks) I see him yet.


Defer your visitation till to morrow, or late sometime to night: I am yet
unfit, this sudden trouble has made me not my self.


Nay, you must go; I have sworn you shall, and (that presently.

I pray you pardon me,

I will not be denied, refuse me now and ever.

You'll have your humour still?

What, eschew acquaintanceship? forget, After my most hearty commendations, my
very trusty friend, 'Twere sin and shame Tomaso.


But some other time.

This time, sometime, other times, and all times, this day, yesterstay, the other
day, and every day; no hour amiss, march on, march on.


I could launch my Dagger through my side, at one easy throw: beggar my
friend; subvert mine own estate, and undo her, by whom I hope to climb,
accursed, brainles slave: could the damned Devil with all his fire-brands,
beat into my pate no sounder subtilty. I had, I had relief, Fool vaunt of
that?* boast what thou had? or might have? tis past, 'tis gone, my villain
self, confounded has my self, and him that did sustain me:

What chokes Corn sooner than side-fed weeds,
Who ofter does man wrong than he afeeds:
Let me ponder; have I no other invention?
No trick to take away my life, after my means:
Study upon it, I'm struck upon a sand,
Swallowed, devowr'd, through wilful ignorance,
Never to rise again: 'tis a villains cast,
First to sink others, them himself at last.

You cannot blame me neither:
For love himself undertook more for love;
Had you been tangled in a Labyrinth more intricate
Than held the Minataure, or have been
By Enchantments bound to servitude,
My life's adventure had my love expressed,
And offered the release.

Our plighted amities will dwell in me
While life endures; the many winters, the tedious hours
We two have spent alone, alone Vallentius,
When nothing but what was not fit the Sun
Should look upon, -- Alack my Husband.

It must not be denied, I'll maintaine't before the Synod, here's my witness:
was't not well done of brave Caligula to make his horse a Senator? deny it,
deny it, would not a good horse show well among a team of Asses: ha, what
think you: give me another sword: O noble Hector, look, Achilles flies, and
bloody Pyrrhus shrinks.


Alas, alas.

What news, what news?

Gentlemen he takes me for a Carrier:
You are deceived sir, I am not the party.

Will Pluto keep his word, shall all extortioners, engrocers, usurers, be
finely damned, of what kind so ever? will he spare none?


Wondrously spent.

Let me see, let me see, the son of Panace, a sprightly Lad; Hercules, a
lusty youth, a very lusty youth; Sampson, a tall young man, a very tall young
man.


Does he not do it well?

I'll make thee proov't, I'll make thee proov't.

I think you are mad:
What shall I prove?

Why greatest generals, that command whole Legions, and train, and keep in
order every man, cannot keep in a woman.


That's an easy question, because most of them get Follies wings, and grow so
light there's no ho with them: they must fly out.


Hang them, they are nought all: Tell not me learned Ovidius Naso, what's your
name.

Good sir.

That bloody villain: Treason gentlemen, call up a Guard, the traytor's
discovered: bind him sure, sure: are you took napping sirrah: Down with him,
down with him, down.


Help, help, help Gentlemen.

I do not like this.

Now my sweet I have sent him off in post,
Let us retire the while.
Who in affection will not his wits prove,
Was never loyal, nor did ever love.

Past, past cure, I doubt. Give me leave, I find by my Art 'tis no Vertiga, no
whirling, but a mere settled frenzy: Nay I pray you give me leave: for as both
Hypocrates, and Gallen, Avicen, Podalirius, Rucis, Cornelius, Celsus, Corannus,
Augustino, and Rombart, do you conceive me? besides a dozen or two of
English-men, most learned and worthy physicians (if I knew what they were) have
demonstrated paraphrastically, both it and the cause, styling the malady the
digestion of the brain, or Irrevocabilis ignis, the irrevocable fire: Nay,
will you understand me?


Would we could.

I pray you give me leave.

Who hinders him?

Sir if you can speak our tongue, I would very fain be beholding to you.

Art thou mad?

Not altogether mad, though I confess I have been pricked with the thorns of
Love: I have been over shoes in my days.


Avoidance, for charity avoidance.

Yes marry shall you: I would desire you to help me to a pill, or a potion
that could make one honest, that I doubt is a little gone astray.


Avaunt, avaunt.

No sir, she is none of my naunts: she's one that must be my wife.

Turbulant fiend: avaunt, avaunt I charge thee.

I would have it applied sir.

Illiterate dunce, abandon my house, avaunt I say again.

Nay, I pray you be quiet, for though I have endured many hard words at your
hands, I shall hardly brooke blows.


Good gentlemen give me leave to laugh: ha, ha, ha, the Doctors wife, and the
Mad-man: the mad-man, and the Doctors wife.


Why, what's the matter?

Why sir, the fits upon him, and he's upon her, and younder's such sport, ha,
ha, ha.

Fire and Thunder.

Run: ware horns.

Is this true sirrah?

Follow the Doctor, believe your eyes.

Beware the trap Valentius.

Pray heaven he be not taken with nibbing.

Why are you melancholy Signior?

Faith sir In me troubled with corns, and ever against rain they make me so
melancholy --

Is that it, for the thing you spake on, you shall not be beholding to the
scald peremptory Doctor: Come to my Chamber anon, and I'll give you a powder
shall fulfil your request, as well as all the potions or Pills he can devise.


Nay, but will you be constant.

Say no more:

And you do take my word, while I live: She and I will be at your service:
when shall I come for it?

Any time after noone. Will you walk Tomaso?

This is good news withal my heart: Fub we are all made; thou shalt have a
new Livery out of the bargain.

I thank you sir, I would I had it.

Thou shalt, that's as good: would I were whipped but I could be monstrous merry
now.

No I pray you be not monstrous merry till you are married.

I'll go give thee a pottle of Sack.
And ever he gave her a bob,
And ever he gave her a blow:
But where he knocked her once above,
He thumpt her thrice below.
What will it not do? prethee-let's be lusty.

As a Crow in a Gutter. Run there she goes.

Father, for so I must stile you,
Your care and pains in my recovery,
Deserves a recompense more than I am able to perform:
Now I consider with my self, had we compassionate souls,
Or were men but good, they would banish beggary
The World quite over, and every one have sufficient.
As hitherto you have concealed my course,
Continue still your wonted secrecy,
Call me your son, and such appoyntments as a father
Should command me to endure I shall perform:
Blessed, blessed be you: effectual be my prayers.

The longer time you so journe here with me
The more welcome: nothing more I crave;
But if I dye while you recide in the grove,
Out of your charity you'll take the pains
To lay me in the grave I have prepared, and with your hand,
Your foot, or any thing, cast dust upon my body,
And spend a little Ceremony.

More than this I will, and more than I will speak.
Francisco, whersoe're thou bidest, abide in quiet,
And have my pardon ever. If thou be fled
For any cause of mine, and I thy ruin prove,
Defend it heaveu, were it not for trial of Phemone's love,
And promised constancy, how soon would I renounce
My habitatiation, uncloath thy fear, set all even again?
Nothing 'mazes, nor drives me into that serious
Contemplation, as whence his wrath should proceed.
Perchance Franciscus thinks me unfit to call him brother,
And his sud deign rage proceeded from advice.
If it be so for ever will I keep this shady bower,
And never hold companionship with man,
More than is present, forget Arbaces ever
Called me his, or that I was his son.
Circle me safety, what are these come here
Where never neighbourd welt?

Calamity could not inflict so much as I could bear
With patienee, did Franciscus imagine but the truth:
No lenity, but all extremes that may
Attend me with their sharpest violence,
If e're I broke my vow: this sorrow,
Nor the haviour I sustain are for mine own endurings,
Witness you that know all secrets, 'tis for him
I wish thrice better than my self.

Yes, and that Cornelia; as sure as the black Ousell
Has a yellow mouth, that whistles me awake.
Tis she, or I am fond.

O my Franciscus! O my dearest Lord!

There needs no more for confirmation:
What make they here? Do not undo me wonder.
Ne'er had two ragged coats more orient pearls,
Than you two shells do hide: 'tis she, or I am fond,
Leap not forth with joy, such needy robes
Should wrap the shoulders of necessity,
When winter falls the Leaf: happy Antonio,
I am disguised, and so, if that my speech reveal not,
Without suspect I may obtain my wish,
And have all doubts resolved: I'll greet 'em.
Bonny wight, what e're you be,
Luck be in your company:
Are you Sylvanus, say to me?

None such, good Shepherd.

Deft and trim ones mickle glee,
Be you what you please to be,
Some disaster tend by ye,

Never, never more.

A me unfortunate.

Welladay, now by my Creed,
And my merry Oaten Reed,
Sike another rousing sigh
Would well split me gay and blithe:
Let a loutish Clown partake,
Why this sobbing dole you make?

O inconstant world.

A me unfortunate.

Wonderment of woe relate
If simpleness you might not scorn,
How you hapt to be forlorn.

The story would be too tedious for the time,
And would undo the speaker: Friend no more,
You shall do well to leave us.

Be not all too keen, bright star,
If my pertnesse went too far,
Mercy is the doom I sue,
Good things never meant more true,
Than the silly shepherd did,
Late wen he your sorrow bid:
Discourse the means merry Pan,
And the sagest gods do scan;
Wherefore was it? well a near,
You foul mucky cloud I fear
Will be sprint us, Poebus twain,
If so list you but to deign
A poor shepherds entertain,
Welcome should you be, I wisse,
Nor thing comely should you miss,
Though not courtly: answer make,
Will you my small feasting take?

The rain begins to fall;
Sister accept the Shepherds courtesy,
His simpleness cannot but mean well sure.

Even what you please:
Whither I go, or wheresoever I rest,
Sorrow with me, and I with sorrow feast.
Welcome, welcome, welcome still,
Never with a freer will
Was welcome spoken, by the sky;
Welcome, welcome heartily.
Alack, alack, the rotten south
'Gins to open his dewy mouth,
Time to hide you: Father meek
Give kind welcome, I beseek,
To these white ones, bonny girls,
Welcommer than heaps of Pearls.

You see our Cave, and make as bold as welcome.

Receive my adorations Queen of chance, Thou never gav'st that jewell to that
man, was half so well esteemed; my hopes have their desires, Phemone, blessed
success; nothing that's amiss, but I shall understand: disguise I thank
thee, joy ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak; they part not soon.


What Angle of the Earth must be my grave?
The Sea and Sun have bounds, and know their course,
The sons of men have none:
Limitlesse he wanders the foreign deserts,
And begets more wonders every hour:
The Chime that tells the last minute of the night,
Chides but in vain when every thing's a sleep;
So I in the relation of my woe, when no man hearkens,
Spend but idle breath, and never find relief.
But for increase sake, I could wish devoutly,
I never had known woman:
What comfort ever others reaped from them,
They have been plagues to me: to note the difference,
They are such things, nothing's more worse, nor better;
To say truth, they are Angels, and Devils;
I will not curse 'em, lest I make them worse
That needs no badness, nor rip up their defects,
Lest I spend all my after time of life in nothing else but that.
Iulio, the profit of my Orisona be thine,
Where e're I spend 'em, upright constant man:
Yet I am eased, in that I do not bear my slavish yoke,
Cocker mine infamy, as many do within our Venice gates:
Thanks to thee Iulio; Chastity, honour of women,
Whither art thou fled? that they are all so false
I must forget 'em, they will make me mad
To think of their abuse: would I could learn
What inquisition is made after me;
Some speech of my concealment will report blab out,
That I may hear the danger does pursue me,
Though I adventure life, I will know more,
Or dye in the presumption: I'll nearer to the City.

That's a good jest in faith; Drawer, gives more Wine.

What's a good jest Signior?

That none should be honest but the valiant.

How's that? how's that?

Why my beetle-brow'd Host swears 'tis impossible for any to be honest, that
is not valiant.

What said he? What said he?

That none could be honest, that were not valiant.

O very good, very good: more Wine here, he's packing, set out his hand.

And his foot too, ere I have done: where's this fellow? another Pottle
sirrah.

Sir I thank you for my powder, it gave her half a dozen of tickling stools,
she has been loose ever since.

Give me your hand, here's even now to all the invisible horns in the City.

Forget not the Country, let it go round I pray you.

A health.

You'll have reason to pledge this shortly.

Will you come? to morrow is the day I'll assure you, for better or worse.

To morrow from better to worse?

Yes faith he has said it, and I swear it, from better to worse indeed.

Married to morrow Signior?

You have said we shall be doing.

Undoing he means.

So near marrying Clariflora, and not acquaint your friend? in faith I thought
Mistress you would have let me understood what had past.


'Tis my part to conceal.

She were no good Bawd else.

Come, sit round, sit round, to morrow the day?

Pardon me, I'll not sit next this lousy fellow: gentlemen, what do you with
this poor rogue in your companies? Does he come to make mirth, can he play
the fool wittingly?


I know him not.

Would he were set down stairs, I never could endure him from the first:
Franciscus made me know him.

Sir, if you mean to depart in peace, begone suddenly.

Would the Ass could rid this intruding Copesmate.

Let me beseech you.

You shall go, your prayers cannot save you; Fub, show him the way down.

Shall I be your Usher? will you follow your leader sir?

Thus poverty's despised at home, abroad, and in all companies.

A whoreson Tatred-demallion, come amongst Gentlemen of sort. What, is't no more
but up and ride? How now Fub, is he vanished?


The Drawers have drawn him out Sir.

Clink boys.

Drink boys.

And let the Cannikin clink boys.

Stultus.

Yes Lodwick.

Tomaso, shall's make a night on it mad lads?

And a mad night too Bullies: where shall's strike fail?

The Leaguer, where but a'th' new Leaguer: there's generous entertainment for
Gallants of sort at all times: and for entrance trust me my mates.


But money grows low, and expenses will fly high.

Fly hye, let it, I have a jacke in a box shall pay for all one day.

I am as full as a Sponge, I cannot sink up a drop more.

No matter, we can squeeze some more out thus: we can wake the Constable,
trouble the neighbours, disquiet the Master and whole family, spill his Wine,
puff his Tobacco, foul his rooms, practise who shall break most holes, and
cleanliest, in the bottom of quart-pots, with a piece of a Tobacco-pipe: cry
good morrow mine Host, we have made a mad night on it I vow, and so trance; we
are no Gallants and we cannot do this.


But this course is either conscionable, or commendable.

Faith 'tis the course, most of the corke-headed Candle-snuffes walk in these
latter days, late at nights.

Well, let them rest: So, ho, the Leaguer.

Chi-va-lah.

Amice.

The word.

Pecima largienda.

Let 'em pass: down with the Percullis:
Lights and attendance, welcome Gentlemen.

I ever said, it might come in a night, that came not in an age, Et ecce noctem
faelicem; see, that jovial night is come: They have been playing high, and
potting deep: Lights, Wine, and more stools for these Gentlemen; welcome.


Tomaso when's the day?

Assure's this the night before to morrow, I have brought in my Estate a matter
of 400 pound per annum, in Deeds, Leases, Fee-simple, and Coppy-hold already:
and that's no simple Estate you'll say: I mean to bid you welcome to a Leaguer
of mine own shortly Gentlemen; some wine you Scondrils.


I'm pleased to here't, whose faults this, yours Tomaso?

What's this Leaguer raised yet, Par la ho boy, I thought we should have had a
second siege of Troy on it, is their Reckoning paid? not a penny, they called
for one, but in such a drunken key; I bad em sleep upon it, and I would tell em
more on it when they were sober.


Best of all, and whats to pay then?

Nine and six pence, Sir, allowance for lights, linen, coals to light faggots:
and six pence for one journymans sleep only deducted, and yet they grumbled
too.


But nine and six pence, and grumble; my friend the reckoning's not paid you
say.

Not a penny.

The reckoning but nine and six pence, how poorly this shows, in a Leaguer
too, and friends that pretended me a courtesy too? How many joints of meat to
supper?


Only a couple of clean Pipes, some three times filled I think.

No meat, come to hansell a Leaguer, what no meat? Are they abed at Anthonies
Ordinary yet?

Two hours ago.

Step down, and see, nine and six pence, they must and shall hear more of
this: we may go beg, or buy up all the, refuse, broken bread and meat, scraps,
offall, and garbage that Cooks shops, Shambles, Ordinaries, Entries, and
Richmens doors afford; nine and six pence, if they do not hear more of this --



Tis past that time of night; Charitie's bed, sir, but if not. --

Bread and meat for poor prisoners, Bread meat.

What doth that fellow cry?

Bread and meat for the poor prisoners, bread meat.

For poor prisoners? as fit for my purpose, as a Conny for a Pursnet; here,
take money, buy his provision by the lump: if I had studied for a fortune to
fall upon me, I could not have had a fairer.


Wilt thou victual thy Leaguer with scraps, sweet Chuck?

No, my sweet Monkey, I have further aims then so, this broken meat and
baggage offall, will I strew in my Kitchen, Dressers, Hall, Entries, and every
door and drawwindow, and perspicous places about the house: foul all the
vessel, three or four times over, all to besmeere the rusty spits and
dripping-pans; break all my broken glasses, beat the bottom out of my Cans:
beat all my foul Tobacco-pipes, into fractions


And to what end all this?

Perlahay, My friends shall hear more of that in the reckoning: My sweet
Monkey, when the Drunkards shall wake, and see all these ruins, or rather
remayns of a plentiful Leaguer: Oh, hast thou no apprehension? Why, I tell
thee, they cannot choose out of their generous bounties, but see all
discharged?

Within. A cup of six, Drawer.

Oh, the Leaguer begins to rise! Come Monkey a few directions for you in
private, give you attendance on the Leaguer; let em call for what they will, and
want nothing they call for: only I will tell em no more of nine and six pence
in the reckoning.


But for the nine and six pence.

Monkey, you shall hear more of that anon, when they are sober? why Drawer,
Dog, Dunghil-raker; is the Leaguer dry? By and by, a cup of six into the low
Leaguer, there.


So, ho, the Leaguer.

What do ye lack? by and by, do ye call Gentlemen?

No, and I called a Gentleman, he would answer me, I call a Drawer goodman
Rascal, art thou one?

For fault of a better, sir.

Could not ha said so then? where's the Master of the Leaguet?

Parlahey Monkey, been venu Gallants, com a stato Sigiores mio com I stato.

Marry the better for your entertainment; thanks, sir.

Thank him, I scorn to thank him, I'll pay him, and be out of his debt: come, to
pay? A reckoning Drawer.

You Rascal, who takes away here? here's a house bestrewed with garbage and
offall, as if the great Inquest had been feasted, c.


As good men, to no mans dispraise be it spoken, where's a Bill?

Prithee knock us not down, before our time; was this certain feast of our
making? what a spoil of Poultery has here been? Tom^so, I must be beholding to
thee for this ordinary.


Some small trifle Stultissimo, the Reckoning is thought to be.

The Reckoning's very high, nine pound six shillings.

Nine pound six shillings, Parlahey, and yet I use you like Christians too
boys.

Nine pound six shillings, how could we four devour so much being half
drunk when we came in?

Why there's the mystery? you fall asleep with meat in your mouths, my Mistress
and I stood it out.

Wast not an excellent Swan-pie? Servant.

As ere swam in Mil-dam.

Nine pound six shillings, one lay out for all,
Come, your purses Gentlemen.

And you love me, let me have the credit at this time there's: ten pounds, give
me the rest again (ah, we had the bravest Marchpane, and Sugar-candy Custard)
or do not, let it run on towards fouling of linen, and paying for sawee: the
rest again, or do --


I do not think but you are saw pretty well already, for the Devil a bit of
meat saw I, and yet all these scraps could not come of nothing.


The Reckoning's paid to a hair, come let's withdraw (but while the Room be a
little finificald.

Parlahey, welcome Gallants to the Leaguer still: please you withdraw.

We accept it thankfully.

Whose fault's this yours Tomaso?

There wants lap.

Throw down the pottle pot, let's have a gallon more.

Wilt please you Gentlemen, to hear any Music* and a good Song?

Very fain, a good one.

What's your fellows, whose noise are you?

Ruberts noise, and please you?

Call your fellows, and strip your tools.

Here's to you Signior.

A brace of them if you love me.

Marry and shall.

Score a gallon of Claret in the Pomegranat.

What Tim?

Master Fub I rejoice to see you well.

You are not merry Gentlewomen, Mistress Durable what, no mirth?

And how is't, how have you done this seven years, welcome again.

As you see, in perfect memory, when shall we ride the hogsheads?

Ha, do you remember that night, Ancient Thumps health overthrew me, my Master
goes out of Town next week; in faith and you'll come, there's half a dozen good
boys, we'll be swingeing merry, will give him a crash, old Will, Will be here?


What Will?

Little Will of the Mitre. Oh, Master Fub, Sir, out Maid, that gave us the
Neats Tongue is gone.

See, see.

Some Sugar there?

Ha, ha, hum.

In ample stories written tis,
Who list but for to mind it;
How loved Narcissus?
Go look and you shall find it.
This Echo was a Nymph most chaste,
A lack, the more the pity*
She should be so, and should not reap*
What follows in my Ditty?
Narcissus was but young, I wisse,
But yet of perfect feature,
And had enough to satisfy
A reasonable creature.
His brawny limbs became his parts,
No one of sense could blame them:
And so did something else I trow,
Echo knew how to name them.

A virtuous piece of matter, Gentlemen, wee'le no more on it.

Nay, hold up, Signior.

Bid her hold up, fear not me.

Come Gentlewomen, shall we have a dance? Tomaso what say you?

You prevented me.

I thought it should have been my motion?

Wherefore ring those bells?

Bells, you are deceived, it is the clincking of pots.

I would have sworn, it had been Coronation day.
Masters, can you play us Gascoynes Whibling?

Yes, sir.

Let's have it.

Here lacks a couple, we cannot dance it.

Lack a couple, what serve Tim and I for?

Tis true, well remembered.

Truly, Master Fub, I cannot dance.

Truly, you shall learn then.

I shall be willing to endeavour.

Strike.

I'll throw the pot at his head that strikes here,
Whose that will strike?

Rare in faith, give's more wine.

What, Timothy?

By and by.

Look to the Lion.

I'll have my Galliard too

You spoil all.

How does your head, sweet heart?

Yes faith, and thank you too, what Rogue's he that turns the Room round? shall
we not quench our thirsts before we part?


What else my sweet Signior, this is your servant?

Good enough for a property, he will serve my turn, as well as a better, I
shall but use his name: do you think I would marry the Coxcomb, but only for
colour and fear of the Law? I'd see him baked first.


Tis wisely done of you? and so my Gossip Slight could say I warrant you.

Boy, another quart, and bring a Reckoning. Here sir.

Heaven keep your Worship.

In honester company.

Fub, call for a Looking-glasse.

Did you go the right way?

It's a cup of neat wine, I'll assure --

Mistress to your self, and to our next meeting?

What's to pay?

Nine and six pence, and you're welcome.

How comes that to pass?

Here's seven groats Glasses.

How?

No less, I'll assure your Worship.

Come your money, Signior --

Fub, discharge it Fub.

Some lights, show the Gentlemen.

Fub, I am en as full as a Toad.

Yes, sir, but do not spit your venom.

Prithee give me another sip. I am as dry as a Cook.

So I think.

A pox a this Megrum.

What's here, I prithee mark Tomaso: Lodwick, I have my desire: fetch me off
speedily, lest I cure the Doctor? yours Vallentius, lest I cure the Doctor.


What should he mean by this?

Why, belike he has infused his fit into him, and the Physician's turned
Patient?

That's impossible?

But for Vallentius.

We must redeem him.

What else.

Heyda, is the wind in that door?

A link good Tim, a link.

Here's one ready, sir.

Signior, good night.

Not a drop more in faith.

Wee'le take our leaves.

When shall we see you?

Sometime to morrow, if my father send not.

Good night Master Lodwick, good night good, sir.

Good night Tim, remember Friday.

I warrant you, forget not to bring Hugh, Welcome Gentlemen.

I Speak't in thunder once again, no more: thou Babylonian Strumpet, in thunder
I command thee thou lump of sin, no more.


Have patience, sir.

I roar it in thy ears, once more aloud, no more: cannot I deal, but you must
be applying, you must be tampering, you must minister: have you not Pills for
Potions? do you not traffic? do not you exchange Merchant?


Good Vanderman.

Sorceress, I defy thee, and thy deeds of darkness.

Hear me, sir.

I have heard and seen too much, has he not paid you soundly for your pains:
no, has he popped you.


You are deceived.


You say very true, I am deceived indeed, and Fub'd, and Gulled, and Rid, and you
are Rid too.

What mean you?

Here blow it abroad, there's horns enough to do it.

Why are you thus impatient?

Dainty fine y faith, very dainty. Whore thou hast made me monstrous, and I may
challenge Giants: Yes, he shall be your mad-man; Do you not like his fits, do
you not, do you not?


God morrow to you both.

Why should this be?

How do you sir? how does your patient?

Are you not satisfied? am I a stale? must you have new-found Crochets?

Do you hear me sir: is he recovered*

Homo Armatus, a man armed.

Have you heard the like?

Me thinks 'tis excellent.

And when, when shall he plant again?

I wish you would understand me, sir.

Here's a fruitful soil.

Ha, ha.

Sir, I will be heard, and understood:
Save you Lady:

More furies, might, and secrecy, whoredom and The every bring all to
confusion.

Would we had more of this: we will see what will come of all.

I perceive Vallentius was in the right, he's mad indeed:

Good Morrow Gentlemen: I have good news for you; your friend is well.

Your tidings makes us happy, and gives us a moyetie of that content which
nothing can do more.

I shall rejoice to see him what he was, and Master of that temper he
commanded, when he did dare the vaunting Bajeset for taxing his belief.


Tomaso, Lodwick.

Valentius.

I am glad to see you once again your self.

You're welcome to your wits.

When time and place shall serve, my wit shall thank you I am ever bound to
you sweet Lady.

Hark you Lodwick, are not we partly Bawds?

Faith in one kind, we have a snatch that way.

So I say partly.

I must confess, partly.

Not remember you, have not that bad opinion, do not think I can be one so
false by this kiss.

Sibylla.

Ay me, my husband.

Once again and part.

Sibylla.

Farewell, Valentius.

A thousand take with thee.

What, hungry still Vallentius, that you cast such a greedy eye that way?

How is't man? what in a trance?

And kinder far then fair.

What, shall we have a Pamphlet; that he begins to study? do you hear
Valentiuss: here's a friend of yours would speak with you, when you are at
leisure.


I crave your pardon Gentlemen, as I live she is --

What's this to the purpose?

You know my price: for the fineness of the silk, the working of the stuff,
and the pleasantness of the colour, the whole street shall not afford you a
better, I'll assure you tis died in grain.


The better for him that shall wear it, nothing but what's in grain can please
him: let me see, I know not how my money will reach: the Silkman hath emptied
my pocket this morning, but you will bate nothing of your price?


I protest sir, I cannot, and save by it, and I know you would not wish me to
be a loser.

By no means, I would have every man to live thrive by what he professes, it
is mine own case: let me see, I cannot make up the sum, I pray you let one of
your men step over to the next lane: I lie there at the Barbers, I'll dispatch
him presently.


My servants are all busy for the present, you see my shop is full of
Customers, and every one striveth who shall be first served.


And I am in haste too, for I have sent for my Tailor to meet me at my lodging,
and I am loath to disappoint him, because I would have his opinion in the
stuff.


I pray you, sir, be expeditious, and my man shall be with you by that time you
have told out the money.

I am much obliged to you as a stranger, I care not if I accept --

Dispatch me that Customer quickly, and follow this Gentleman to his lodging:
you hear where he lies.

Yes, at the next turning?

I'll but fold up this bolt of Satin, and be with him instantly.

Turn by the next lane, and thou shalt be sure not to miss it, though thou
find not me, I have took sufficient order and you shall be sure to be
satisfied.


We have many cheapners, but few buyers, many such customers as this would make
quick riddance.

What comes the sum to, sir.

Three yards of Satin and a half at seventeen, eight yards of Plush at four
and twenty; nay, there are divers other parcels, the sum is soon cast up:
thou shalt have a note of all.


And I'll but fold up these few bolts lie loose, and clear the counter and be
gone.

Be quick there.

But thou must be secret.

As your self, Sir.

A pretty handsome youth, and will be loath to discover himself, being
extremely bashful, and will make it strange.

Leave him to me, I'll persuade him that I knew him, ere I saw him.

He's my Kinsman, next Cousin German's by the Mothers side; now playing the
Wag, as many youths will do, you know it Barber.


Very well, it hath been many a good mans case.

He hath got a clap.

These claps are got by clapping.

But for one thing, never should it grieve me, I fear it might go ne'er to
spoil his marriage, which I would not for more than I'll speak.


You show your self a Kinsman.

Now his exuse will be (as I told thee he's extremely bashful) to enquire for
a Gentleman that owes his Master money, to comply with the old Proverb, Though
his excuse be draff, yet drinks his errand.


And lotion must be used.

As it shall seem best: but think thou he will endure it.

'Twill put him to some pain.

Which I'll not hear, my heart's so tender ore him: when he comes (as long he
will not stay) take him in charge, Thy pains shall be well paid, for doubt not
but I'll come to the conclusion.


Very good, sir?

My hope is it will succeed according to my wishes.

Make no doubt of that, sir.

If I had, I had not made choice of thee above any other.

You are my friend indeed: and so I hope to keep you.

I will withdraw for the present, and instantly return.

Now good speed with you, good customers are thick sowed, and come up but
thin. It is good to make much of them, when we have them. This should be the
patient, that he talked off.


I come to seek a Gentleman.

You do: that owes your Masters money.

Very true, sir, you know my errand then.

Before you came.

The Gentleman belike hath told it you.

He hath indeed.

Is he within?

But before he went, left order with me, you should be dispatcht.

Then I shall find him as good as his word: he hath acquainted you with my
occasions.

I'll assure you that, and intends well towards you, I pray come near into the
withdrawing Room.

I'll wait on you, pray know you what it comes too.

Yes youth, I know, wherefore you come: pray rest you in that chair, and I'll be
for you presently; be not ashamed, you are not the first, nor shall be the
last, that meet with these disasters: and now come, pray show me your
commodity.


The commodity belongs, sir, to my Master, 'twas not mine.

Are his in danger too? let him not fear, but if he have not let it run too
far, there may be help found: nay, come, will you show?


Mean you the note: there are the parcels sent.

These parcels may in time grow great, come, will you be ruled, the Gentleman
your Kinsman, told me before, how bashful you would be; and it becomes you
well: but for your parcels, show them in time: for if delay be long, that
little which perhaps you shall have left, in time will come to nothing: your
Kinsman's loath that you should spoil your Marriage?


Spoil my Marriage, spoil not my Masters debt, Neither draw these fearful
tricks on me: I need them not, pay me the money that your friend hath left,
Dispatch me so, for Kinsman I have none; And honest Barber find some else to
sport with, make me none of your Gulls?


But I pray say.

I say, pay me sir, what's my due, what by your confession, your friend left,
or bring me to the party, or commodity he late had of my Master, or Coin
for it: you have confessed him to be your friend, therefore for him must answer.


By your favour, no more friend of mine, then you found him, to claim Kindred:
my acquaintance with him, yet is scarce a full hour.


You are Confederates, and so I fear that I shall find you: You know my
errand, promised me dispatch: Why am I not dispatched then?


My meaning was to give you a Sering, or an incision Knife, Of which he told me
you did stand in need: Indeed I deal in such commodities, And am acquainted what
such parcels mean: For other wares or money due for them, I know not what
belongs to it.


Satisfy my Master so, quit me, and clear thy self; or 'twill fall foul upon
thee.

Willingly: my cloak boy, I'll along, yet am afraid That he who had professed
himself thy Kinsman, and my dear friend, will prove thy Masters Cousin.


Give you joy Master Stultissimo; give you joy.

You talk like Gentlemen, and I like your talk the better, because you talk to
a Gentlemen; you call me Stultissimo, and I say, Stultorum plena sunt omnia:
and now I talk to you like a Gentleman and a Scholer.


All health and joy betide you.

Gramercy Gentlemen, I am not now the man, I was in the morning; I did rise
single, I return double: in the Meridian but Worshipful, in the afternoon
Honourable before Sun-set, and who knows but Majestic before mid-night: nay I
persuade my self I am so: am I not sweet Monkey?


Thou art my dear Baboon.

Very pretty names in faith: I prithee let's interchange them still betwixt us:
or Marmoset, or Apes face.

Yes, yes, by any means.

All thy goods and chattels, thy movables, and the stuff that belongs thereto,
thy utensils and implements; now are all mine.


They are, to have and to hold.

Yes, as long as ye can keep them.

I have purchased thee in thy proper person by my word, but all thy other
omnium gathrum, beforenamed, by my deeds, I think thou hast them to show.


The mind gives sometimes words unto the tongue, and makes it speak perforce,
bear with him Lodwick.

Let the Doctors wife bear with him, for mine own part, without he renounce
this mood, and become sociable, as he had wont, I defy his fellowship.


Will you dine with me Vallentius?

Yes, shall we be merry?

O is the tide turned, is the wind come about, by this good day, and I were
not cursing my self, for being accessory to this melancholy, I have no faith
in me; if women can transmute men thus suddenly, hang me, if I keep not out of
their clutches.


Gallants, shall we walk? I have a story for ye: prithee Lodwick frown not, be
a friend indeed, and see not my defects, I have a tale shall make you laugh
anon, and will excuse my blame; prethe be thy self, be jocund man.


Nay, I am soon persuaded.

Where shall we be?

At the old house.

Come then, I'll make you laugh I swear.

Thus by degrees, with hazard of my life, have I attained unto my wishes rest;
and boldly gaze thee Venice in the face: the time has been, Oh, but that time
is past, when I was more familiar with thy pomp, but all that bliss is gone:
And murder now, has with a crimson stain sealed me accursed, and like a
condemned guilty Fugitive; I wander in despair; fearing the ru^le of the
harmless bird, and the flies clamour, the Ant, the Wasp, and every lesser
thing, Dreadlesse of danger, strayes abroad for food; Not caring who behold
them, But I, alas, of all; am most unhappy: Would I were dead, and past the
fear of that, Makes me thus Cowish. Who art thou come here, more needy
then my self?


Where might I run to meet destruction, And set a period on my wretchedness?
Stern misery I know, and feel thee now: Yet is the earth content to bear my
weight, And suffer what proud man disdains to know, Unless to spit upon, or
add to that, Which wants no extreme.


I cannot hold: his voice, his humour, I dare swear as much, 'tis he; 'Tis he
by heaven, my Iulio.

Franciscus, preserver of my life; O let me kiss the ground whereon thou
treads, then rise to thank thee.

That I could spend my self to tears for joy, bear witness you that know it:
Iulio, for ever dwell within these arms of mine, thou truest among men, I have
not power to question thee, my danger, my joy is so excessive; run all to
spoil, terror meet with terror; I fear none my Julio.


Strike when thou wilt proud death, I dare thee now; For having what I wished, I
wish no more, nor would entreat time to defer a minute to have him rest an
age, since all things must have end, end it at once, my prayer is confirmed, I
have seen you e're I die.


And if you love me wish me not that wrong by praying for your end: do not
quite undo me, if you but knew my heart, my Julio, you would not crav't
again: I could have comfort now, and clean forget the dangers I have past,
and those pursue me still: nothing to come can half so much dismay, as thou
dost comfort; be it sudden death or torture worse than it: but for your sake,
would in my womb I had bin strangled, and never drawn this air.


Where art thou Conscience? whither hast thou took Since thou did leave mans
breast? that we should all have mothers; Wisdom all, yet all contemn her
precepts: when you first fled, and by commandment from the Senate house, your
ships and lands were seized on for the State, those that which staid them did
appear so near, as if their blood had tied them to your service, grew so
forgetful in a moments space, that neither argument, nor extreme signs could
win them to belief there had been such, as what you were to them: I (as no
less I could) bound to it by duty, spoke your merits still, and did maintain
your right, on the Allies of your inconstant wife: but I am poor for it, truth
was still despised, and less I could not be.


Take all I have* had I my former wealth,
My bounty could not recompense thy worth,
And power it all before thee (my dear Iulio:)
Be not impatient with thy sufferance, he's above will pay thee all
My debts, though I should perish now.
Contemned for me? alack, alack, if there be such
A thing in Charity, be charitable: do not curse the cause
Of this thy present want, I do beseech thee do not thou Iulio?
I prithee answer me, and either do what I have wished,
Or cure the wound thou hast made.

Good sir no more: do not call all the tears out of mine eyes; think who I
am: would you did but know.

I will not urge thee further:
Shall we here combine, and shape our course alike,
And never, never part; yet pardon me,
I will not wish thee so much injury
To be unknown of woman.

You wish me not so well, how e're you wish, if you wish otherwise: your misery
be mine, and my enduring yours; one grave receive our bones; and he that says
this Sepulcher is mine, call it Francisco's Tomb.


I have a habit for thee yet unknown, or worn,
But by my self: 'tis not a Furlong from the Antique Beech,
Whose hollow sides conceals it: bide but here,
Till I can reach it from the hidden place,
And take it for thine own: though homely,
Yet the coursenesse will keep warm,
And ward the sharpest blast.

You bind me to my prayers.

I'll be with thee straight.

Ignorant honesty, shallow Italian, yes, live a wretch: Can thou be so fond
to think me of that mettle? hast thou eyes, and may, yet will not see how
thou art o're-recht: yes, do continue innocent, do, and die a fool, my
friend, my friend, my very loyal friend, all friendship I forswear, save
outward signs, which with my garment J cast nightly off. The father of the
slain Antonio promises liberally by Proclamation to any that can bring
Francisco forth. I will betray him, I will be the man shall purchase the
reward: What way I curses, or care for the report the multitude shall clamour
therein. I'll imitate the Lawyer, making bad words my gain. Franciscus thou
wast born for my advancement: he's sunk himself, and fruitless is the hope
depends on that which was, and not which is; give me the present, not precedent
man. Let me not hanker for emergency, but take the instant sway, the published
recompense is mine, 'tis said, 'tis mine.


That any should be false -- But were there no dross, gold could not be
esteemed, nor nothing precious rare. Cornelia let me forget that name and
nothing else.


It is a month and more since she left Venice.

Would I had left the world when I first saw her.

And the same minute did Phemone forsake her friends and kindred: but where or
whither they have betook themselves the most knowing but conjecture.


How easy could we make our miseries, if we might live and dye when't
pleased our selves?

These strange additions to my news I add, Antonio's Carcass never could be
found since yours and his contention.

I left him dead: thou art still just; some beast has made that fouler beast
his prey, and made up my revenge: but come with me, let us withdraw unto you
thicket by, and speak at large that woeful history comixed of my proceedings,
and pursuith; wilst time's our own.


I would provide me of some necessaries, small in expense, which make a mighty
miss, and health cries out to have: so if you please but let me fit my present
want, at my return enjoin me to your will, though it continue to the latest
date, and I am serviceable.


Speak no more such words, but make your own content: yet good Iulio be not
absent long, make me not long to see thee.


Such shall be my speed, you will not wish me sooner to return.

Not wish thee? yes, though thou should make return e're thou depart.

Mark the end.

Be brief, and goodness take with thee. This Iulio, if desert might purchase
Fame, deserves sufficient: but thou art partial Fortune in cramming Buzzards,
whilst the Eagle sterves: How many in this fertile Italy, whom Nature moulded
when she loathed her task, and blew her seed among the ignorant, hast thou
adorned with plenty? whilst seemly virtue, wracked with poverty, jets under
base control: There's no felicity, nor true content here upon earth: The
Spider builds his Web in Barnes and Palaces: and the Prince himself tastes
gall as honey: Happiness there's none, for least or greatest: Here my grief so
parches me, that it does pain me to relate my woes, and make my feelings
known. Beneath this Hill a clear and pleasant fountain curls along, whose
shallowness makes the small pebbles 'peare above like Rocks, and murmure as
she runs down to the silver Current, thither will I high, and borrow so
much of her watery store, as will assuage my thirst:

All things are kind,
And feed our wants when they themselves are pined.

Now my Catter-whauling Pusse, how did thou like my last Cheat? did I not
fool them finely?

Thou art the very mere Mephostophelus, and I persuade my self thou hast new
vamped thy wits.

Tush these are nothing: I have cheated one of the bravest Stats-men of the
world; the very quintessence of Spain: Nay, I have fooled him who boasted in
his Country, he had gulled all our Nation A Guelding is not rid in the
horse-faire, but he is mine to ride, maugre his Masters teeth. I have
out-fac'd a fellow of his horse in the open Market, sold him before his face;
but making a question whether he trots or ambles, ride away both with the horse
and money, my Pusse. Sweet Munkey look to the house at home, I must abroad
again, to fetch in a new purchase.


May thou thrive according to thy will, and to my wishes.

And what's your Action?

Three hundred pound: be you ready to snap him, and not to escape you
without good bail: he's as slippery as an Eel.


Therefore we will take him by the shoulder, and not by the tail; and so we
shall be sure to hold him. But can you show us the man?


This is his walk, and without waiting long you may spy him.

Say but that's he, and 'tis enough.

Stand as close as you can: If he have but the least suspicion of an arrest,
he's gone in a twinkling.

But will not you stay and assist us?

By no meunes; I'll but see him in hucksters handling, and be gone. Are you not
paid your Fees afore-hand, and -- That's he now: Now let him escape upon your
own peril. Farewell.


If he do, say no more: Yeo man stand to me.

Now let me see: whom shall I next encounter?

Marry the Counter sir: for we arrest you.

Ha, Counterfeits so nigh?

Yet currant enough to carry you to prison.

And yet your Counter-tenour sounds but like scurvy Music: am I caught then?
I pray you at whose fuite?

At three men's suite.

Then three merry men, and three merry men be we, are we not honest Sergeants?
well, there's a piece to begin withal: lets talk further of the business.


You speak well sir, if you hold on as you begin: and if you can find good
bail, ten to one but we shall prove as you late called us (Honest Sergeants.)


Me thinks you do not speak like Varlets:

May it please you, sir, to employ mine industry For any further service?

Something more,
Which in my former Letter I forgot,
I would entreat you bear in memory:
And that's but this --

And in good time: Know you that reverend man?

Know him sir, yes, for a worthy Doctor.

He's mine own Uncle: will you take his word.
And make it to me as a free discharge?
If he but say (nay there's another piece)
I'll see you satisfied?

Yes could we hear him say so: for he's one whose word will not be
questioned.

'Tis enough:
Give me but so much leave as speak unto him,
All I'll keep in fair distance: on my life,
If he ^ay not I'll see you satisfied,
I will return your prisoner.

'Tis enough: for so far we dare trust you: you have paid for it well: but we
will watch him at an inch.

I know he will not suffer me to lye
For such a petty sum: Now brain or never.
Excuse my boldness Sir: though it be scarce manners,
To interrupt your serious conference.

With me sir is your business?

Such a business,
Which as it touches me in Charity,
So should it you in Conscience.

Speak it pray.

Look well on these two men.

He points at us.

The one is an arch Brownist, and the other
Cannot endure to see a Surplice worn:
Subject indeed to no conformity;
Yet both so well persuaded of your learning,
And spotless life, that what you shall propose
They are willing to subscribe too.

I am as ready to give them my instructions.

And please you say so, that they may hear you sir.

Well I will:
My honest friends, and please you to have the patience
Till I have ended with this gentleman,
And instantly I'll see you satisfied.

It is enough grave sir.

Now honest Sergeants: what desire you more?

Nothing from you sir.

I hope so honest Sergeant: you see I deal fairly.
Farewell my honest Sergeants.

I have told you all: only remember me to these my noble friends.

With all the art
My weak tongue can deliver.

So, he is now at leisure.

And now I come to you.

Most welcome, sir, we stay for the same purpose.

Now, tell me briefly, which of you is the Brownist?
which the other, cannot endure a Surplice?

You are pleasant, sir,
We wait here, hoping to be satisfied.

And to that end I stay, for these opinions
So erroneons and so gross.

Sir, all the opinion that we hold is that you will pay us the money.

Still obstinate in error; 'tis this money,
And worldly care on which so much you dote:
Breeds in you these distractions.

Please you to pay the money, you shall find us conformable in all things.

Money my friends, are not you Sectaries?

Sectaries; no, sir, we are Sergeants.

Sergeants; and wait for me? I owe you money?

Yes, sir, for your Nephew that was with you but now, and told you of it; we
heard you say, you would see us satisfied.

The man's to me a stranger I protest,
And his request was I should satisfy you
In some points of Religion.

Religion, sir, 'tis a theme we seldom think of,
But three hundred pound is money.

But I tell you,
I past my word for counsel not for coin,
And this is all that you from me can have:
Endure a Surplice, and beware a Knave.

Had we not warning sufficient of this before?

Well, howsoever, we have had good counsel,
If we had the grace to follow it.

ASsure me of the promised recompense, I'll bring you to his presence.

Hear me a word.

Now Signior, how do you feel you self? How like you marriage?

Faith it's a pretty quaint thing, and there's much good sport belongs to it,
would I were unmarried again?

Why? are you weary of Clariflora already?

Weary no, but I would have store.

Hark you, sir, take my counsel; though store be no sore, meddle with no more
of them, lest you make me a Prophet, and get many a sore head by the match:
have you not heard the ancient saying, No man can serve two masters?


That's true, but any man may serve two Mistresses.

And serve their turns well.

Nay, i'll leave that to the performer.

Hark you Master Lodwick, you or any man may think he does well, and yet come
short.

Briefly, directly, and learnedly spoken, sweet Fub.

I speak by proof.

Go to, your are a Knave Fub.

Hold your peace, there's more in the company.

Well said, in faith, thank him Lodwick.

It's not worth it, though I should say as much by you.

This fellow flows with wit.

Gallants, when were you at Court? I have been desired thither forty times, my
wife (I think) has a hundred friends there: besides Cooks and Pantlers, that
she has had many a good thing of, and they have sworn to bid me welcome for her
sake.


You may see what comes by marriage?

If we might see all that comes by marriage, there would be old butting abroad?

Here's the sum, perform thy word, and claim it.

Good morrow, good Arbaces.

Make me not known to these?

Vallentius.

He?

Are you not mad, I heard no less of late.

Report's a calumnious quean, and will abuse virtue it self you see, both what
he is, and what he was?

I am not sorry, that I am deceived: hear you not of Franciscus.

Upon my credit nothing.

Fair be your company, come Gentlemen.

What's he that throws his Cloak about his nose?
Is it not Iulio?

By all exterior seeming?

My life 'tis he?

What should this mean?

I was asking that.

Marked you Arbaces: he hath some drift in hand.

Did you not note his followers?

Yes, and the Arms they carried.

Shall we trace them, firs? and leave our wonder: I dare gage my life, the
knowledge will deserve the industry?

You speak my words.

He named Franciscus.

Yes, and questioned me.

Withal, observed you but his speed.

Come, we will pursue him.

La, la, la, la: nay, I pray take me with you Gentlemen.

If not for company, for mirth's sake, take heed before there.

In mighty men how great appears the virtue ne'er so small; how small the vice,
though mighty Philosophie, they rules bridles my cogitations, and prolongs,
what manhood would disdain, the time to come appales my courage and strikes
instant fears through every nerve and artery: might we like beasts end when
we die, and never make account in no other place then heer: what heart so base
would fear the threatening Law? Flatter the Judge to save him: I would not
sure: but there is bliss and torment much to come, we cannot think on it yet
the Resurrection aws me, I am much distempered, and want of company, begets in
me millions of terrors: Iulio tarries long, my Orisons secure him, could the
tears wash the blood but of my hands, my mind were something free.


This is the place, and there Franciscus walks.

Where?

That's he: apprehend him, i'll not be seen in it.

Your office, sir.

What are these for men.

Lay hands upon him.

What mean you friends?

This we mean to attach you, as a murderer.

Arbaces, I am betrayed.

Look to the homicide, such mercy as a Tiger yields his prey, when he's pinched
for want of what's his booty, expect from me thou murderer.


None I have deserved, or am about to crave, I know the worst, my life thou
can but have, 'Tis thine; I make a tender of it ere the sentence come, give
thy labour ease, alas, poor Iulio: thou wilt unfriended, run thy future race
without society, I pity thee my friend more then my self, danger to me is
such, I do expect and dread not. Fare thee well, my breach of promise, is not
with my will, but merely on constraint.


Lead him hence.

Here they are.

Who have we here bound to the good behaviour? Franciscus!

My dear friend.

My brother.

Officers, why do you linger thus, away with him?

How fare you, sir?

Sick, sick to death Vallentius: shall we hence?

I now behold my fear, when I did hear Arbaces speak of him.

Something of badness shoot me instantly, but he does pierce me through.

Good Gentleman.

Has he recided here since he first fled?

I thought him now in Millain, where he did traffic much.

I wonder how he came to be discovered?

Beshrew my blood, I pity his estate.

Will you accord with me, show that respect you once did tender him, and
withal willingness strive to invent a means may do him ease.


What, my sword, my word, or wealth can do is his, command it for him?

Let us petition to his rough adversary, and like true Suppliants in our own
behalfs, draw mercy from Arbaces.

Agreed.

About it then, and our intentions thrive. Manet Julio.

The gold is mine, his certain bondage does assure me it, why should I be an
Ass, and nicely stand on that no Tradesman does: no thrifty one, what
conscience, any thing but such a word: our wise divines that preach an't, know
it not, nor make good use of that, or ought they say, but of good money: this I
daily see, and sometime make my daily meditation, all's Ceremony composed for
purpose:

But be it what it will, this is my grace,
If not for one, I'm for the other place.

Bring the offender forth.

Have mercy, good my Lord.

Believe't thou may sooner move a rock, which neither blustering wind, nor
boisterous Sea could shake or swallow, then beget remorse or smallest favour in
so foul a case: I were unjust, and much unmeet to be the man I am, should we
show mercy where the crime deserves, beyond the laws extent. He that shall
pardon murder, take it from me, is accessory to the guilty deed, and stands in
self predicament: Heaven defend we should be such, were he my Nephew, nay, my
first-borne son, or one more near: let me not be blessed in my proceedings, if
our Authority should blind his sin, or alter justice course, set him forth:
what favour equity can yield be his, no more expect Crisippus.


Read the indictment.

Save that pains, guilty, nor do repent, that in my wrath I did, whereof I
stand convict.

Art thou not sorry for thy heinous crime?

No mighty sir, but rather joy the more, in that it breviats my passage here,
which I would willingly leave.

Impudent homicide: justice good my Lord, with that severity which they
deserve, which wilfully commit --

Arise, thou need not kneel, nor beg for justice, be assured Arbaces: such
his deservings, such his punishment, and cruel as the cause, thou most
brutish man, nay, beast or something worse: had thou no humanity, no spark
of reason then, nor sense, to think thy trespass foul and ugly? dost not
repent thy tyranny in death, though not the deed it self: fie on thee monster,
hast thou a foul and dreadst not her perdition: what heathen savage, nay, what
ruder thing, having the life thou soughtst, would have enacted such a deed of
ruth, as thou, thou worst of creatures, on the image and liveless carcass of
thy loving friend.


'Twas most uncivil, most unchristianly.

An act, a Tiger would not have performed, on one that had slain his brood.

Hear me good my Lord.

My poor Antonio.

That I did take his life, I have confessed, what further accusations laid on
me, is merely malice, and proceed from some, could wish my torment worse.


Out on thee butcher: give me leave my Lord.

Silence.

Can thou deny thy wrathful cruelty, impetuous tyranny, and fell revenge
upon his bleeding trunk?

Unless I should belie my self, and speak like a vain boaster, more then
what I did, I must say this is false, and he's from truth, as far as I am
from hope of life, begot this slander.


Produce your proof Arbaces, strike blushes through the cheeks of this false
man, and let him see his shame.

What Devil should be raised from the lowest hell, to justify this wrong?

This is strange.

I never thought Franciscus one so foul, as I behold him now.

Not thought, I durst have sworn him of a purer mettle* and better temper
far.

Prosperity to the Venetian State.

Iulio: he's not his proof I hope.

Is this the Gentleman?

This is he my Lord.

Make room, give way there.

How comes this about?

The fact's confessed, my Lord, what need we further wade into the Law, or heap
on troubles which we may eschew, upon so plain a case? the crime is Murder,
Murder is confessed, then as you find the guilt, proceed to judgement, and make
no further question.


We shall be sudden.

My sentence, good my Lord.

Speak, sir, can you report any thing more touching this business then what
already is delivered here in the open Court.


No more or less, then what his own tongue uttered, can I or have to say.

How's that?

We were once friends: once had I such opinion of his virtues, my life and
estimation were both his, he might command them, much it were to speak of all
that past between us: thus in short, I would some other were compelled to this,
which you have tied me too, my nearest friend alive.


Arbaces: was this the man gave you first notice where this Murderer kept?

The same my Lord.

Did he betray me? can this be.

Forward.

Speak.

Must we be enforced, what should I speak, he flue him, ripped his bowels,
mangled him, and in his wrath, as man will any thing: tumbled his reeking
quarters down a Vault most steep and loathsome: what of this, he might deserve
much worse austerity, yet this was bad enough?


Ha?

Justice, gracious Prince, justice, justice, sir.

Is this truth?

Let me be deposed --

The most erroneous, execrable part that ever was performed.

Were he my father, should forget himself, and match this outrage, mercy
quite forsake me if I would sue his pardon.

It was ruthless, fell, and bloody.

Look not up for shame, thou hast no interest there.

I have done wrong, mighty, mighty wrong.

Can thou behold it now?

Pardon me father, pardon good Arbaces: that villain, that foul villain.

'Twas time to come.

Show mercy, mercy, Duke.

Pity our complaints, have some compassion.

What are these that make this earnest deprecation, with such a hearty zeal;
are they well known to this assembly?

Cornelia, sister.

Fair Phemone.

When will these humid fountains be dried up, and yield no more warm drops?

My sweet Franciscus.

Some good or bad thing fell me suddenly, let me behold no more.

Is that his wife?

She was my Lord, while some hard fate dis-joyn'd their mutual league, and
burst the holy concord.

Wilt thou pardon me and live a happy one, when I am dead, and lapped in this
cold earth.

Franciscus I was ever true to you.

I see it, and believe: that villain, oh, that villain!

Harken thy sentence.

Hear me my good Lord, little I have to say, yet to much grief tend my few
words, this traitor, nay, 'tis title all too good for one so heinous foul,
that he is perjured, by the death I owe his latest words do witness what he
is more, and worse: with pardon Lords, I shall delat at large, that all
hereafter may example take, and shun a villains snare; I took him up, when
like an Adder in the frosty dew, the cold had starved him: that I had set my
foot upon his head, when to my bosom I did take the Serpent, not cherished,
comforted long had he been, but he both bit and stung me: foolish man I was
to be so fond, not many months, nor happy days I had with this most truest,
most immaculate piece, but that perfidious Caitiff, that black fiend by
strange suggestions, and invented projects, draws me into a confirmed
jealousy, that she had stained her honour, falsely played with young Antonio.


O forgive me heaven, what is this?

I from my wrong conceived, least could I not, Drew him apart into a silent
Grove, Having before vowed solemnly revenge, Where I made some repetition of my
grief: he still (I see him) innnocent gentleman, taking my words For such as
Lovers use, when they are wanton, Smiles me in the face, and would not thing
'twas anger.


Tis truth he speaks.

This kindled me, and as Boar,
When he does chaw his foam, predicts some mischief,
So my bended front fore-told his ruin,
Forth I drew my sword, and sheathed it
Within his breast, what else is added,
He's a Jew averres, and falser than a whore.

See, see the Ages wickedness: can it be possible?
O miserable time, when men make no more reckoning of their souls! Fie, fie,
Francisco, think upon your end, and whither you must go. Most reverend
Fathers, observe you this his contumacy: I shall I fear be forced to speak
what in my heart till now I chested, and rib'd in, because mine oath, 'twas not
my will hath hear constrained me to expose his blame, my soul had vowed to
hide; Note into malice how he throws himself, and would stain my reputation
with a calumnious lye.


Art thou a man, or something else; oh fool, fool.

Is this possible?

Give ear unto thy sentence.

I must, in --

Did not I say he's mad, stark raving mad, away with him. The man's alive
that's dead.

Yes, they supped together: I love this fellow.

Your Grace shall do well to punish this saucy groom.

You are a most pernicious damned villain, and your soul knows it.

Come, sir, depart, rave not, or I shall see you whipped.

Good Father pardon; pardon mighty Duke, pardon Antonio, cause of this
disquiet. Lod. Antonio?

By this light he supped with him indeed.

It is not so, this cannot be.

Is there no mountain nigh to fall on me, no roten house?

I know not whether I may call thee son, or rest in doubt for ever.

I am Antonio, and I was your son, when I left Venice last.

Is no man here amazed but only I?

My dear Phemone!

Were you the Shepherd?

You see chaste Cornelia.

Was ever man so blessed?

Nay, come Francisco, I must have your hand: I can as well forgive, as I can
love; and nothing more than both: good Crissippus, my old friend.


You have bin a stranger Signior; but I'm glad 'tis thus.

Whither away: stay him officers; we have not done with you.

Wither shall I run to hide my self?
What Climate, or what Region? Pardon greatest Prince.
Pardon grave Fathers.

Against that prayer kneel I:
No pardon Prince, as thou dost hope for bliss.

Grant him a halter; nothing else good Duke.

Give him his liberty: Art thou so impudent to plead for mercy, and beg of me,
having committed such a capital trespass here in my view?


Though what I speak, with some additions, I have done and more, and he more
false has plaid, than I have said, blot his offences: be propitious Sir.


Though the greatest sufferance fell on my part, I here acquit him, and beseech
for mercy.

Yet be compendious, and possess this presence, what cause thou had that
tempted thee so badly to seek my ruin.

The Devil and his Angels.

O fie Ioretzo.

How Ioretzo? not the son of that pernicious traitor, had plotted with
Lamunes for sums of gold to burn our City?

He's dead, and suffered for the same offence.

When brought the toad forth other than himself, unless 'twere something
worse?

Forget his Fathers faults: be pitiful.

He that prays next in his behalf, by heaven friends not himself, and is mine
enemy: We have too long suffered such Weeds as these to flourish in our soil:
No more the bosom of this earth of ours, shall (like a mother) lend her
fruitless increase, to cherish those would bane her: The sword of justice cut
the justice off that keeps it sheathed to such: His deeds were shameful, his
rewards be so, and quittance his desert: S^are on his brow in letters
cappitall, the name of knave, that all behold may read him what he is, and
hate him in the sight: His next doom is this; after three days we charge thee
on thy life, never set foot more in thy Native Climate.

So, bear him to his torture, speech is vain:
For what is said there's nothing can restrain.

Most worthy Prince.

I'll be honester while I live for this trick.

Can you forgive mine injury, Antonio?

As freely as I hope to be forgiven; and crave no more amends, but only this
you'll call me brother, and make Phemone mine.


I need not make what's made, take and enjoy her that hath vowed to be none but
yours.

Thy hand Arbaces, our quarrell's over, we will no fighting.

Fight, yes: I hope we shall find something else to do.

Daughter I have done thee wrong too; but I'll seek forgiveness when we have
more leisure.

This day breeds wonders: by what accident escaped you of your wounds?

Here stands the means, whom I must ever tender with respect, as with my full
proceedings you shall hear, when none can interrupt.


Francisco, henceforth know your virtuous wife, prize her as a jewell: I have
heard the world speak well of her, and those unmatched wish they may have your
fortunes. Lodwicke where's the dumb show you promised me.


Even ready my Lord; but may be called a motion: for puppets will speak but such
corrupt language, you'll never understand without an interpreter, or a short
plot; which I have drawn thus -- Now the motion follows.


What not divulge: yes, yes, I will divulge.

The jealous Doctor: I have him.

Do me right, sweet Duke, do me right.

What art?

A fool, a physician, a maintainer of whoredom, with a pox to me.

Then Medice cura teipsum; more knave than fool, the plot's false drawn else:
away with em.

Come sir, depart.

Purge me Duke, purge me, or let my wife take out my corrupted brains, and
rince them in a Cucking-stoole: I come Skimmington, I come.


Vallentius you must take some order for the Doctors cure: he befriended you in
as great a courtesy.

Trot on before: is the Corne-cutter come yet?

The Horne-cutter is come, sir.

On, on to the Leaguer then: I am ashamed to show my head amongst Animals: on
to the Leaguer.

This is a Monster of your making, Lodwicke, buy him a Cap-case to hide up his
horns in, for shame of the world.

Come we are both --

He comes, he comes.

Where doth he come? he is rather drawn hither like a Bare to a stake.

What in a Coach?

Nay, rather in an open Chariot: and yet it cannot be properly called a
Chariot, because it runs but on two Wheels.


Room for him there: for I am sure he had rather any here had his room than
his company.

Silence there; you in the Docket there, let but one speak in the Court at
once.

Noverint universi,
It is the Dukes mercy;
And the condition of my Obligation,
To make my recantation,
That I within bound,
Should give reasons profound,
Why (much against my heart)
I thus ride in a Cart.
Nay, gentlemen, no eggs I beseech you: for I love them at this time, neither
raw, roasted, nor rotten. For should they hit me on the breast, they would go
clean against my stomach.


You Phaeton.
Is that your Father Phoebus his Chariot, and will he allow you never a Box to
sit in?

No jugglers Box, I'll assure thee friend: for here's neither pass, nor
repast, I stand here you see for an example, And could wish all these good
people to follow it.


Who's that, Boots mounted in his Charles wane? doth he cry Pippings,
Carrets, or Turnips?

You are deceived, Signior: rather Bread, and Meat, as Pye-crust, bones, and
fragments out of the Ludgate mans basket: Nay, hold your hands, I beseech you
Gentlemen, and use your tongues and spare not.


Well, he stands hear but for a show, and I am sure I suffered for it really
and indeed.

Bear witness my Masters, that is the maine malefactor indeed, and I stand
here for a show: I'll go no further than his own confession.


They talk of Cheaters, here is a twenty shillings piece that I put into my
mouth, let any Cheater in Christendom cousin me of this, and carry it away
cleanly, and I'll not only forgive him, but hug him and embrace him for it,
and say he is a very Hocus Pocus indeed.


What said that fellow?

He saith he hath a piece in his mouth, that all Europe shall not cheat him
of.

I have marked him, 'tis mine own: and notwithstanding all this melancholy
we will spend it at night in Wine and Music.


He that can pluck this piece out of my jaws, spite of my teeth, and I
keep my mouth fast shut, I'll say he is more than a Cheater, and a Doctor
Faustus, or Mephostophilus at least.


Dost hear how he brags?

'Tis mine own I warrant thee.

But what's become of my horse?

And what's become of my load of hay?

May I eat hay with your horse, if they were not both done neatly and cleanly.
But Gentlemen, and the rest, you see I am at this present your pitiful
spectacle. I looked once within this twelve month, not to have been mounted in
such state: but no man knows what preferment he is born to. You see I have
hitherto sailed through this great storm without soyling my Suite, spoiling my
Ruff, or spattering my Beaver: thanks to these kind spectators.


But Master Fast and Loose; do you remember what a slippery trick you served
Master Doctor and us?

And was it not fairly done Master Sergeant, to teach you how to digest the
wearing of a Surplice, before you came to stand in a white sheet.


Well now you are at your journies end: May it please you to alight for your
ease?

Withal my heart: and if either you or any of my accusers be weary with
following me on foot, the Room is now empty, I will give him leave to ride in
my place.

He draws his handkerchief (as to wipe his eyes) just before the Country
fellow, and scatters some small money.

Sir, you have (I think) let fall some money.

Thanks honest friend.

What do you look for? I can assure you here is all that fell.

Nay, sure I had more money? 'tis not in my handkerchief, nor in my pockets, I
have examined them both.

Why, what do you want sir?

A piece, a piece, and had it now, just now; sure whilst I was so high pearcht
none could dive so low into my pocket, it was sure as I lighted, and dropped from
me, just as I drew my handkerchief.


Some such thing I saw fall.

Pray who were they that stooped?

I saw none stoop but this Country fellow.

Then sir, I must demand this piece of you.

Of me? I profess I took up but two shillings and six pence, and that I gave
into your hand.

But I profess that one of them was a piece, and never came into my hand, and
that I must demand of you: say did no body stoop but he?


None I assure you.

Thou art still my honest Sergeant.

That fellow hath something in his mouth.

Yes my tongue and my teeth, and what of all that.

Nay, something else sure, for he is not troubled with the Mumps, and yet see
how one side of his cheeks bumps out.

I am afraid, we shall find him a Cheater.

Sirrah know I am an Officer, I charge you open your mouth, and let us see what
you have in it, c.

Well sir, I have a twenty shillings piece, what then?

And this man misses a twenty shilling piece out of his pocket.

Plead well Sergeant and thou shalt have thy see.

Well, there it is, what can you make of it?

Marry twenty shillings good and lawful currant money, Puss, was not this the
piece that I put in my pocket this morning?


I know it by that mark.

And she's witness sufficient in conscience.

Do you see Gentlemen. I am here brought to public penance for a Cheater, and
here's a plain fellow that (it seems) in his simplicity would out-doe me: if I
be thus censured merely for suspicion; shall he escape free that is taken in
the very action?


No, no, mount him, mount him.

Nay, by your favour Gentlemen, I have driven a Cart often for my pleasure, and
would be loath to ride in one now for my punishment. It is penance enough for
me to part with my piece, which cannot be more currant of Coin, then his is
Arrant for Knavery.


He's gone, I am still here, now Gentlemen,
If heretofore there hath been any Doll,
Any bold Beachum, and any Cut-purse Moll.
Any Bawd fat with wealth, or with care meager,
That spends her time in Garrison or Leaguer,
Grace me so far to say, that of a Cheater
Though some have been more grave; scarce any greater,
But Gentlemen; what need we more repeating?
Knowing, that even in all Trades there is cheating?
Tis common both in buying and in selling,
In all Commerce; nay, even in money telling.
Tis frequent 'twixt the Pander and the Whore,
We our selves find it at the Play-house door.
And though (for an example) here I stand,
I am not all the Cheaters in the land.
Some here (no question) know it but I vow,
(They what they please) I will cheat none of you.

We understand their humours,
And the cause of their distempers;
And have too long suffered such weeds
As these to flourish in our soil,
But now no longer shall this earth of ours,
Like a ^inde Mother lend her fruits increase,
To cherish those would eclipse her worth.
But those whose aims and acts are imitable,
Crown with green Garlands, and with Bowls brimmed full.
Musique proclaim a general Festival,
A Jubilee of joy and mirth to all:
May love and truth, never like comfort miss,
Nor Knave in Grain, escape a reward like this.


