AWake dark sleep, rouse thee fro out this Cave;
Thy Mother Night that bred thee in her
And fed thee first with silence with case, (womb
Doth here thy shadowing operations crave:
And therefore wake my Son, awake, and come
Strike with thy Horny wand, the spirits of these
That here expect some pleasing novelties:
And make their slumber to beget strange sights,
Strange visions and unusual properties.
Unseen of latters Ages, ancient Rytes.
Of gifts divine, wrapped up in mysteries.
Make this to seem a Temple in their sight,
Whose mayne support, holy, Religion frame:
And 1 Wisdom, 2 Courage, 3 Temperance, 4 Right,
Make seem the Pillars that sustain the same.
Shadow some sybill to attend the Rytes,
And to describe the Powers that shall resort,
With th'interpretation of the benefits
They bring in Clouds, what they do import.
Yet make them to portend the true desire
Of those that wish them waking real things:
Whilcst I will hoou'ring, here a-loofe retire
And cover all things with my sable Wings.

Dear Mother Night, I your commandment
Obey, and Dreams t'interpret Dreams will make,
As waking curiosity is wont.
Though better dream a sleep, the dream awake.
And this white horny Wand shall work the deed;
Whose power doth Figures of the light present:
When from this sable radius doth proceed
Nought but confused shows, to no intent.
Be this a Temple; there Sybisla stand,
Preparing reverent Rytes with holy hand,
And so bright visions go, and entertain
Al round about, whilst I'll to sleep again.

I The daughter of Wonder, (now made the Messenger of Power) am here descend,
to signify the coming of a Celestial presence of Goddesses, determined to
visit this fair Temple of Peace, which holy hands devout desires, have
dedicated to unity and concord. And leaving to show themselves any more in
Sames, Ida, Paphos, their ancient delighting-places of Greece, Asia, made now
the seats of Barbarizme spoil, vouchsafe to recreat themselves upon this
Western Mount of mighty BRITTANNY, the Land of civil Music and of rest, and
are pleased to appear in the selfe-same Figures, wherein antiquity hath
formerly clothed the, and as they have been cast in the imagination of piety,
who hath give mortal shapes to the gifts effects of an eternal power, for
that those beautiful Characters of sense were easier to be read then their
mystical Ideas, dispersed in that wide, and imcomprehensible volume of Nature.

And well have mortal men apparelled, all the Graces, all the Blessings, all
Virtues, with that shape wherein themselves are much delighted, which work the
best Motions, and best represent the beauty of heavenly Powers.

And therefore reverent Prophetess, that here attendest upon the devotions of
this Place, prepare thy self for those Rytes that appertain to thy function,
and the honour of such Deities, and to the end thou may have a fore-notion
what Powers, who they are that come, take here this Perspective, and therein
note and tell what thou see: for well may thou there observe their
shadows, but their presence will bereave thee of all, save admiration and
amazement, for who can look upon such Powers and speak? And so I leave thee.


WHAT have I seen? where am I? or do I see at all? or am I any where? was this
Iris, (the Messenger of Iuno) or else but a fantasme or imagination? will the
divine Goddesses vouchsafe to visit this poor Temple? Shall I be blessed, to
entertain so great Powers? it can be but a Dream: yet so great Powers have
blessed, as humble roofs, use, out of no other respect, then their own
gracefulnes to shine where they will. But what Perspective is this? or what
shall I herein see? Oh admirable Powers! what sights are these?

FIRST here Imperial Iuno in her Chair,
With Septer of command for Kingdoms large:
Descends all clad in colours of the Air,
Crowned with bright Stars, to signify her charge.
NEXT war-like Pallas, in her Helmet dressed
With Lance of winning, Target of defence:
In whom both Wit and Courage are expressed,
To get with glory, hold with Providence.
THEN lovely Venus in bright Majesty,
Appears with mild aspect, in Doue-like
With th'all combyning Skarffe of Amity, (hue:
T'ingird strange Nations with affections true.
NEXT Holy Vesla, with her flames of Zeal
Presents her self, clad in white Purity:
Whose book, the souls sweet comfort, doth re-
By the euer-burning Lamp of Piety. (ueale
THEN chaste Diana, in her Robes of green,
With weapons of the Wood her self addrests
To bless the Forests, where her power is seen,
In peace with all the world, but Savage beasts.
NEXT rich Proserpina, with flames of gold,
Whose state although within the earth, yet she
Comes from above, in her hand doth hold
The Mine of wealth, with cheerful Majesty.
THEN all in purple Robes, rich Happiness
Next her appears, bearing in either hand,
Th'Ensignes both of wealth, and wits t'expresse,
That by them both, her Majesty doth stand.
NEXT all in partie-coloured Robes appears,
In white and crimson, graceful Concord dressed
With knots of Union, and in hand she bearcs
The happy joined Roses of our rest.
CLeare-eyed Astrea, nex, t with reverent brow
Clad in Celestial hue, (which best she likes)
Comes with her Balance, and her sword to show
That first her judgement weighs before it strikes.
THen cheerful Flora, all adorned with flowers,
Who clothes the earth with beauty delight
In thousand sundry suits, whilst shining hours
Will scarce afford a darkness to the night.
NExt plenteous Ceres in her Harvest weed,
Crowned with th'increase of what she gave to
To gratitude faith: in whom we read, (keep:
Who sows on Virtue shall with glory reap.
LAstly comes Tethis, Albious fairest love,
Who she in faithful Arms deign t'embrace
And brings the Trydent of her Power, t'approue
The kind respect she hath to do him grace.
Thus have I read their shadows, but behold!
In glory, where they come as Iris told!

DEsert, Reward, and Gratitude,
The Graces of Society;
Do here with hand in hand conclude
The blessed chain of Amity:
For we deserve, we give, we thank,
Thanks, Gifts, Deserts, thus join in rank.

We yield the splendent raijes of light,
Unto these blessings that descend:
The grace whereof with more delight,
The well disposing doth commend;
Whilst Gratitude, Rewards, Deserts,
Please, win, draw on, couple hearts.

For worth and power and due respect,
Deserves, bestows, returns with Grace:
The meed, reward, the kind effect,
That give the world a cheerful face,
And turning in this course of right,
Make Virtue move with true delight.

OPower of powers, grant to our vows we pray,
That these fair blessings which we now erect
In Figures left us here, in substance may
Be those great props of glory and respect.
1 Let kingdoms large, 2 let armed policy, (white
3 Mild love, 4 true Zeal, 5 right shouting at the
Of brave disignes: 6 let wealth, 7 felicity,
8 Justice, 9 cocord, 10 pleasure, 11 plenty, 12 might
And power by Sea, with Grace proportionate,
Make glorious both the Sovereign his State.

WHiles worth with honour make their choice
For measured motions ordered right,
Now let us likewise give a voice,
Unto the touch of our delight.
For comforts locked up without sound,
Are th'vnborne children of the thought:
Like unto Treasures never found
That buried lowe are left forgot.
Where words, our glory doth not show,
(There) like brave Actions without Fame;
It seems as Plants not set to grow,
Oras a Tomb without a Name.

AS I was the joyful Messenger to notify the coming, so am I now the same of
the departure of these divine powers. Who having clothed themselves with these
apparances, do now return back again to the Spheres of their own being
from, whence they came. But yet, of my self, this much I must reveal, though
against the warrant of a Messenger; who I know had better to fail in
obedience then in presumption, that these Deities by the motion of the
all-directing Pallas, the glorious Patroncsse of this mighty Monarchy,
descending in the Majesty of their invisible essence, upon yonder Mountain,
found there, the best, (and most worthily the best) of LADIES, disporting with
her choicest Attendants, whose forms they presently undertook, as delighting
to be in the best-built-Temples of Beauty and Honour. And in them vouchsafed
to appear in this manner, being otherwise no objects for mortal eyes. And no
doubt, but that in respect of the persons under whose beautiful coverings they
have thus presented themselves, these Deities will be pleased the rather at
their invocation (knowing all their desires to be such) as evermore to grace
this glorious Monarchy with the Real effects of these blessings represented.



