DIscord a malicious Fury, appears in a storm, and by the Invocation of
malignant spirits, proper to her evil use, having already put most of the
world into disorder, endeavours to disturb these parts, envying the blessings
and Tranquillity we have long enjoyed.

These Incantations are expressed by those spirits in an Antimasque: who on a
sudden are surprised, and stopped in their motion by a secret power, whose
wisdom they tremble at, and depart as foreknowing, that Wisdom will change
all their malicious hope of these disorders into a sudden calm, which after
their departure is prepared by a dispersed Harmony of Musique.

This secret Wisdom in the Person of the King attended by his Nobles, and
under the name of Philogenes or Lover of his People, hath his appearance
prepared by a Chorus, representing the beloved people, and is instantly
discovered, environed with those Nobles in the throne of Honour.

Then the Queen personating the chief Heroin, with her martial Ladies, is
sent down from Heaven by Pallas as a Reward of his Prudence, for reducing the
threatening storm into the following calm.

IN the border that enclosed the Sceans and made a frontispiece to all the
work, in a square Neech on the right hand stood two figures of women, one of
them expressing much majesty in her aspect, apparelled in sky colour with a
crown of gold on her head, and a bridle in her hand, representing Reason: the
other embracing her was in changeable silk with wings at her shoulders,
figured for intellectual Appetite, who while she embraces Reason, all the
actions of men are rightly governed. Above these in a second order, were winged
children, one riding on a furious Lion, which he seems to tame with reins
and a bit: Another bearing an Antique ensign: the third hovering above with a
branch of Palm in his hand, expressing the victory over the Perturbations. In
a Neech on the other side stood two figures joining hands, one a grave old man
in a robe of purple, with a heart of gold in a chain about his neck, figured
for Counsel; the other a woman, in a garment of cloth of gold, in her hand a
sword with a serpent winding about the blade, representing Resolution, both
these being necessary to the good means of arriving to a virtuous end.

Over these and answering to the other side was a round Altar raised high, and
on it the bird of Pallas, figured for Prudence: on either side were children
with wings, one in act of Adoration, another holding a book, and a third
flying over their heads with a lighted Torch in his hand, representing the
intellectual light accompanied with Doctrine and Discipline, and alluding to
the figures below, as those on the other side.

Above these ran a large Freeze, with a Cornicement: in the midst whereof was a
double Compartment rich and full of ornament: on the top of this sate Fame
with spreaded wings, in act, sounding a Trumpet of gold: joining to the
Compartment in various postures lay two Figures in their natural colours as
big as the life; one holding an Anchor representing safety; the other
expressing Riches, with a Cornu-copia; and about her stood Antique vases of
gold. The rest of this Freeze was composed of Children, with significant signs
to express their several qualities; Forgetfulness of injuries, extinguishing
a flaming torch on an Armour; Commerce, with ears of Corn; Felicity, with a
basket of Lillies; Affection to the Country, holding a Grasshopper; Prosperous
success, with the Rudder of a Ship; Innocence, with a branch of Fearne: All
these expressing the several goods, followers of peace and Concord, and
fore-runners of humane felicity: so as the work of this Front consisting of
Picture qualified with moral Philosophy, tempered delight with profit.

In the midst of the aforesaid Compartment in an Oval Table was written.

SALMACIDA SPOLIA. The Ancient Adagies are these.

Salmacida Spolia sine sanguine sine sudore, potius quam.
Cadmia victoria, ubi ipsos victors pernicies opprimit.
But before I proceed in the descriptions of the Sceanes, it is not amiss
briefly to set down the Histories from whence these Proverbs took their
original.

For the first Melas and Arevanias of Argos, and Troezen conducted a common
Colony to Habicarnassus in Asia, and there drave out the barbarous Carry and
Lelegi, who fled up to the Mountains; from whence they made many incursions,
robbing and cruelly spoiling the Grecian Inhabitants, which could by no means
be prevented.

On the top of the right horne of the hill which surrounds Halicarnassus, in
form of a Theater, is a famous Fountain of most clear water, and exquisite
taste called Salmacis: It happened that near to this Fountain one of the
Colony (to make gain by the goodness of the water) set up a Tavern, and
furnished it with all necessaries, to which the Barbarians resorting (enticed
by the delicious taste of this water, at first some few, and after many
together in troops,) of fierce and cruel natures, were reduced of their own
accord to the sweetness of the Grecian customs.

The other Adage is thus derived.

The City of Thebes, anciently called Cadmia, had war with Adrastus, the
Argive King, who raised a great Army of Arcadians and Missenians, and fought a
battle with them near Ismenia, where the Thebans were overthrown, turned
their backs, and fled into their City; the Peloponnesians (not accustomed to
scale walled Towns) assaulting furiously, but without order, were repulsed from
the walls by the defendants, and may of the Argives slain: at that instant the
besieged making a great sally, and finding the enemy in disorder and confusion,
cut them all in pieces, only Adrastus excepted, who was saved by flight: but
this victory was gotten with great damage and slaughter of the Thebans, for few
of them returned alive into their City.

The allusion is, That his Majesty out of his mercy and clemency approoving the
first Proverb, seeks by all means to reduce tempestuous and turbulent
natures into a sweet calm of Civil concord.

A Curtain flying up, a horrid Scene appeared of storm and tempest: no
glimpse of the Sun was seen, as if darkness, confusion, and deformity, had
possessed the world, and driven light to Heaven, the trees bending, as forced by
a gust of wind, their branches rent from their trunks, and some torn up by
the roots: a far off was a dark wrought sea, with rolling billows, breaking
against the rocks, with rain, lightning and thunder: in the midst was a globe
of the Earth, which at an instant falling on fire, was turned into a Fury, her
hair upright, mixed with snakes, her body lean wrinkled and of a swarthy
colour, her breasts hung bagging down to her waste, to which with a knot of
serpents was girt red bases, and under it tawny skirts down to her feet: in
her hand she brandished a sable Torch, and looking a Scanse with hollow envious
eyes came down into the Room.

BLow winds! until you raise the Seas so high,
That waves may hang like Tears in the Suns eye,
That we (when in vast Cataracts they fall)
May think he weeps at Natures Funeral.
Blow winds! and from the troubled womb of Earth
(Where you receive your undiscovered birth)
Break out in wild disorders, till you make
ATLAS, beneath his shaking Load to shake.
How am I grieved, the world should every where
Be vexed into a storm, save only here?
Thou over-lucky too much happy I'll!
Grow more desirous of this flattering stile!
For thy long health can never altered be,
But by thy surfeits on Felicity:
And I to stir the humours that increase
In thy full Body (over-growne with peace)
Will call those Furies hither, who incense.
The guilty, and disorder Innocence.
Ascend! Ascend! you horrid sullen brood
Of evil spirits, and displace the good!
The great, make only wiser, to suspect
Whom they have wronged by falsehood, or neglect;
The Rich, make full of avarice as pride,
Like Graves, or swallowing Seas, unsatisfied;
Busy to help the State (when needy grown)
From poor men's fortunes, never from their own.
The Poor, ambitious make, apt to obey
The False in hope to rule whom they betray:
And make Religion to become their vice,
Named, to disguise ambitious Avarice:
The speech ended, three Furies make their entry presented by

This Antimasque being past, the Scene changed into a calm, the sky serene,
a far off Zephyrus appeared breathing a gentle gale: in the Landscape were
Corn fields and pleasant Trees, sustaining Vines fraught with grapes, and in
some of the furthest parts Villages, with all such things as might express a
Country in peace, rich, and fruitful. There came breaking out of the Heavens a
silver Chariot, in which sate two persons, the one a woman in a watchet
garment, her dressing of silver mixed with bulrushes, representing Concord:
somewhat below her sate the good Genius of Great Britain, a young man in a
carnation garment, embroidered all with flowers, an Antique sword hung in a
scarf, a garland on his head, and in his hand a branch of Platan mixed with
ears of corn: these in their dissent sung together.

WHy should I hasten hither, since the good
I bring to men is slowly understood?

I know it is the Peoples vice,
To lay too mean, too cheap a price
On every blessing they possess
Th'injoying makes them think it less.

If then, the need of what is good,
Doth make it loved, or understood,
Or tis by absence better known
I shall be valew'd, when I'm gone.

Yet stay! O stay! if but to please
The great and wise Philogenes.

Should dews not fall, the Sun forbear
His course, or I my visits here;
Alike from these defects would cease
The power and hope, of all increase.

Stay then! O stay! If but to ease
The cares of wise Philogenes.

I will! and much I grieve, that though the best
Of Kingly science, harbours in his breast,
Yet tis his fate, to rule in adverse times,
When wisdom must awhile give place to crimes.



Being arrived at the Earth, and descended from the Chariot, they sing this
short Dialogue, and then departed several ways to incite the beloved people
to honest pleasures and recreations which have ever been peculiar to this
Nation.

O who but he, could thus endure
To live, and govern in a sulleine age,
When it is harder far to cure,
The Peoples folly than resist their rage?

After which there followed these several Entries of Antimasques.

Wolfgangus Vandergoose Spagricke, Operator to the invisible Lady stiled the
Magical sister of the Rosicrosse, with these receipts following, and many other
rare secrets, undertakes in short time to cure the defects of nature, and
diseases of the mind:



Four old men richly attired, the shapes proper to the persons, presented by

Three young soldiers in several fashioned habits, but costly, and presented
to the life, by

A nurse and three children in long Coats, with bibbes, biggins, and
muckenders.

An ancient Irishman, presented by M. Iay.

An ancient Scotishman, presented by M. Atkins.

An old fashioned Englishman, and his mistress presented by

These three Antimasques were well and naturally set out.

Doctor Tartaglia and two pedants of Francolin, presented by

Four Grotesques or drolities, in the most fantastical shapes that could be
devised.

The invisible Lady magical sister of the Rosicrosse.

A shepherd, presented by M. Charles Murry.

A Farmer and his wife, presented by M. Skipwith.

A Country Gentleman, his Wife, and his Bailiff, presented by

An amorous Courtier richly apparelled, presented by M. Seymor.

Two Roaring boys, their suites answering their profession.

Four mad Lovers, and as madly clad.

A jealous Dutchman, his wife and her Italian Lover, presented by

Three Swisses, one a little Swisse, who played the wag with them as they slept,
presented by

Four antique Cavaliers, imitating a manage and tilting.

A Cavaleritro and two Pages.

All which Antimasques were well set out and excellently danced, and the tunes
fitted to the persons.

The Antimasques being past, all the Scene was changed into craggy rocks and
inaccessible mountains, in the upper parts where any earth could fasten, were
some trees, but of strange forms, such as only grow in remote parts of the
Alps, and in desolate places; the furthest of these was hollow in the midst,
and seemed to be cut through by art, as the Pausilipo near Naples, so high as
the top pierced the clouds, all which represented the difficult way which
Heroes are to pass ere they come to the Throne of Honour.

The Chorus of the beloved people came forth (led by Concord the good Genius of
Great Britain,) their habits being various and rich, they go up to the State
and sing.

WHen with instructed eyes, we look upon
Our blessings that descend so fast,
From the fair Partner of our Monarchs Throne,
We grieve, they are too great to last.
But when those groweing comforts we survey,
By whom our hopes are longer lived,
Then gladly we our vows, and praises pay
To her, from whom they are derived.
And since (great Queen) she is derived from you;
We here begin our offerings,
For those who sacrificed to Rivers, knew,
Their first rights due, unto their Springs.
The Stream, from whence our blessings flow, you bred;
You in whose bosom, e'ven the chife, and best
Of Modern Victors laid his weary head,
when he rewarded Victorys with rest.
Your Beauty kept his vallor's flame alive;
Your Tuscane wisdom taught it how to thrive.
WHy are our joys detained by this delay?
Unless (as in a morning Overcast)
We find it long, ere we can find out day;
So whilst our hopes increase, our time doth waste.
Or are you slow because th'way to Honor's Throne
(In which you travail now) is so uneven,
Hilly, and craggy, or as much unknown,
As that uncertain path which leads to Heaven?
O that Philosophers (who through those mists
Low nature casts, do upper knowledge spy)
Or those that smile at them (o're-weening Priests)
Could with such sure such an undoubted eye,
Reach distant Heaven, as you can Honors' Throne,
Then we should shift our flesh t'inhabite there,
Where we are taught, the Heroes are gone;
Though now content with Earth, because you are here.
The song ended they return up to the Stage, and divide themselves on each
side; then the further part of the Scene disappeard, and the Kings Majesty and
the rest of the Masquers were discovered, sitting in the Throne of Honour, his
Majesty highest in a seat of Gold, and the rest of the Lords about him: this
Throne was adorned with Palm trees, between which stood statues of the
ancient Heroes: in the under parts on each side lay captives bound in several
postures, lying on trophies of armours, shields, and Antique weapons, all his
Throne being feigned of Goldsmiths work. The habit of his Majesty and the
Masquers was of watchet, richly embroidered with silver, long stockings set up
of white: Their caps silver with scrolls of gold, and plumes of white
feathers.

THose quar'ling winds (that deafened unto death
The living, and did wake men dead before)
Seem now to pant small gusts, as out of breath,
And fly, to reconcile themselves on shore.
If it be Kingly patience to out last
Those storms the peoples giddy fury raise,
Till like, fantastic winds themselves they waste,
The wisdom of that patience is thy praise.
Murmur's a sickness epidemical;
'Tis catching, and infects weak common ears;
For through those crooked, narrow Alleys, all
Invaded are, and killed by Whisperers.
This you discerned, and by your mercy taught,
Would not (like Monarchs that severe have bin)
Invent, Imperial Arts, to question thought;
Nor punish vulgar sickness as a sin.
Nor would your valour, (when it might subdue)
Be hindered of the pleasure to forgive;
They are worse than overcome (your wisdom knew)
That needed mercy to have leave to live.
Since strength of virtues, gained you Honours throne;
Accept our wonder, and enjoy your praise!
He's fit to govern there, and rule alone,
Whom inward helps, not outward force doth raise.
Whilst the Chorus sung this Song, there came softly from the upper part of
the Heavens, a huge cloud of various colours, but pleasant to the sight; which
descending to the midst of the Scene opened, and within it was a transparent
brightness of thin exhalations, such as the Gods are feigned to descend in* in
the most eminent place of which, her Majesty sate, representing the chief
Heroin, environed with her martial Ladies; and from over her head were darted
lightsome Rays that illuminated her seat, and all the Ladies about her
participated more or less of that light, as they sate near or further off:
this brightness with many streakes of thin vapours about it, such as are seen
in a fair evening sky softly descend: and as it came near to the Earth,
the seat of Honour by little and little vanished, as if it gave way to these
Heavenly Graces. The Queenes Majesty and her Ladies were in Amazonian habits of
carnation, embroidered with silver, with plumed Helmes, Bandrickes with Antique
swords hanging by their sides, all as rich as might be, but the strangeness of
the Habits was most admired.

YOu that so wisely studious are,
To measure, and to trace each Star,
How swift they travail, and how far,
Now number your celestial store,
Planets, or lesser lights, and try,
If in the face of all the sky,
You count so many as before?
If you would practise how to know
The chief for influence, or show;
Levell your perspectives below!
For in this nether Orb they move!
Each here (when lost in's doubtful Art)
May by his Eyes, advance his Heart,
And through his Optic learn to love!
But what is she that rules the night?
That kindles Ladies with her light,
And gives to Men the power of sight?
All those who can her virtue doubt,
Her Mind, will in her face advise,
For through the Casements of her Eyes,
Her Soul is ever looking out.
And with its beams, she doth survey
Our growth in Virtue* or decay;
Still lighting us in Honours way!
All that are good, she did inspire!
Lovers are chaste, because they know
It is her will, they should be so;
The valiant take from her their Fire!
When this heavenly seat touched the Earth, the Kings Majesty took out the
Queen, and the Lords the Ladies, and came down into the Room, and danced
their entry, betwixt which and the second dance was this song.

WHy stand you still, and at these Beauties gaze,
As if you were afraid,
Or they were made,
Much more for wonder than delight?
Sure those whom first their virtue did amaze,
Their feature must at last invite.
Time never knew, the mischiefs of his haste!
Nor can you force him stay
To keep off day:
Make then fit use of Tiumphs here;
It were a crime against pleasant youth, to waste
This night, in overcivill fear.
Move then like Time, for Love (as well as he)
Hath got a Calendar,
Where must appear,
How evenly you these measures tred;
And when they end, we far more grieved shall be,
Than for his Hours when they are fled.
The second Dance ended, and their Majesties being seated under the State, the
Scene was changed into magnificent buildings composed of several selected
pieces of Architecture: in the furthest part was a Bridge over a River, where
many people, coaches, horses, and such like were seen to pass to and fro:
beyond this on the shore were buildings in Prospective, which shooting far from
the eye showed as the suburbs of a great City.

From the highest part of the Heavens came forth a cloud far in the Scene, in
which were eight persons richly attired representing the spheres; this joining
with two other clouds which appeared at that instant full of Music covered all
the upper part of the Scene, and at that instant beyond all these, a Heaven
opened full of Deities, which celestial Prospect with the Chorus below filled
all the whole Scene with apparitions and harmony.

SO musical as to all Ears,
Doth seem the music of the Spears,
Are you, unto each other still;
Tuning your thoughts to eithers will.
All that are harsh, all that are rude,
Are by your harmony subdued;
Yet so, into obedience wrought,
As if not forced to it, but taught.
Live still, the pleasure of our sight;
Both our examples and delight.
So long, until you find, the good success
Of all your virtues, in one happiness.
Till we so kind, so wise, and careful be,
In the behalf of our Posterity,
That we may wish your Scepters ruling here,
(Loved even by those, who should your justice fear)
When we are gone, when to our last remove
We are dispatch'd, to sing your praise above.
After this song the Spheres past through the Air, and all the Deities
ascended, and so concluded this Masque: which was generally approoved of,
especially by all Strangers that were present, to be the noblest and most
ingenuous that hath been done here in that kind.

The Invention, Ornament, Sceans and Apparitions, with their Descriptions, were
made by INIGO IONES, Surveyor General of his Majesties Works.

What was spoken or sung, by WILLIAM DAVENANT, her Majesties Servant.

The Subject was set down by them both.

The Music was composed by LEVVIS RICHARD, Master of her Majesties Music.




