THis puzles my belief: the sickly Moon
Hath not yet twice expired her usual (...)
Since you did mingle Souls, and can (...)
That she so soon recoyles from grac^
Harmonious quiet of your bed?

My Dear
Meruolle she is lost: As well may I
Collect the scattered winds into a bag,
Or from the watery surface scrape the gilt
Reflections of the Sun, as bring her heart
Within the quiet list of wives that will
Obey and love.

Can the Duke (her Uncle)
Give an encouragement to her revolt,
Maintain the females Charter against the male?

Him, and his supreme title she still (...)
To justify the glory of her birth,
And then recites the Vilages and wealth,
She brought to me for dowre, in parallel
With what I formerly possessed, she doth
Affront my memory with stories of
My lean and niggard fate, and urging then
Her vast supplies, doth challenge leave to call
Her pride and rigour just.

This grief is of
Sad quality!

The heart hangs heavy on
The strings, when it alone contains the cause
And knowledge of its weight: for troubled winds
In their dispersion loose their strength; so griefs,
Whilst they are reueal'd, diminish from themselves.
But the calamities, that do perplex
The Nuptial bed, are of a property
Recluse, and must be hidden even from friends:
For on such secrets Fame doth feed with fierce,
And meagre appetite* and as swift Fame
Doth travail with them, they increase. So much
Commerce I have with humane Arts, that I
Can steep my Gall in my own tears; and make
That salt which she intended bitter; Show
Her crime to spring, not from poisoned malice,
But from the feminine mistakes of wit:
For modern Courts now preach, wit doth reside
In Ladies subtle riots, and their pride.

Behold your brother (sir) whose safe return,
This morn I mentioned to your ear --

Thy growth
Hath so orereach'd my sight, that I'm estranged
To my best blood: and but, thy figure in
My heart I wear (by which my memory's
Enform'd) I should not know I had thee here --

I reckon this the chief delight I ha^e
Received on Earth. And (sir) your love is of
Such sou'raigne quality, a little soon
Will overcharge my sense. Give but a part
To me, the rest confer upon my friends --
Who, though in witherd habits, do deserve,
Society with Kings: for never yet,
Did bolder Soldiers listne to the Drum.

Gentlemen, ye shall enrich my knowledge --

Noble Signior, unprofitable love
Is all our wealth --

But wee'le contrive our selves
For your best use. --

I'ue said, consider them
Within; their weeds are overgrown and cheap.

Brother (how ere wise fate may answer it)
Me thinks, these your own robes are not o'th right
Tyrian die; nor hath the rich weight of your
Tall Plume the Ostrich robbed of both her wings.

Even thus (sir) poor, and with small victory
Am I returned from our cast Troops. Our pay
Rests in Areres, and Pisa's lost: But you
(I hear) have fond a Jewel, that contains
All price and lustre; and you do wear it
In your bosom: (a noble wife) whose birth
And beauty, are alike vnuallu'd as
Her dowre. This I encountered on
The Lips of Fame; and I made haste to share
In your success, and put your bounty to
The test.

Florello, I have lost my sleep.
Things differ much from the sincerity
Of their first growth: Alteza hath forgot
Th'allegiance of a wife, she doth practise
How with her riot to impoverish States,
And by her lofty pride, to justify
The immortality of flesh: This Theme
Is sad; but I will give you cause t'expect
The utmost strength and power of my relief.

You teach my feeble wants a confidence.


If you a while obscure your self (for fear
Your poverty increase her scorn) you shall
Perform a rational request. Our young
Fair Sister, is concealed for the same cause.

Your mention doth anticipate my love.
Is our fair Sister well?

She doth enjoy
Rare beauty, and much health.

I hear your wife.


You and your friends, move back, and be not seen.


Try Signior Allidore, Antonio's son:
Vtruuio, or the rich Pirracco.
Gritalin, or old Contarini of
Placentia --

Madam, your husband hath
Protested against your credit, even to these.

Slave, go force an answer more delightful.


I obey you Madam.


Is't come to this?
I'll be a crooked Spinster first, and with
My spittle and my flax procure my bread.

What is the cause my Princess thus delight^
In frowns? Anger sits on her brow like age.

Hence, I see thee, and my eyes shrink into
My skull: the Rauen's not so ominous and black.

Yet urge the cause (my Love) why your
Defiance is so violent and loud?

A Millainois showed me to day for sale,
Bright and spacious Jewels; but in the dark,
Your pusill malice hath betrayed my faith,
With Merchants. You have now my credit wrought
So low, and cheap; I cannot stand deposd
For th'triuiall loan of forty thousand crowns.

I would survey a list of all your wants,
That I may so have power to hasten the
Redress: Do you dislike your properties
Of house, your Vestments, or service of your
Table; Give but a name unto thy wish?

I would have my Orchard -- paved with Aggats.


O, and your garden walls raised high, t'hedge in
Paraquetos, and th'rhetoricall Dawe?

Thou hast a rude heart, and a blistered tongue!


Well, the first day of your conjunction Sir,
I little thought you would have used her thus.

Charintha's become her Sisters Pupil.


And I perceive a masculine itch beneath
Her left eye; she longs to taste man.

Come Love,
Be gentle as thy bridal smiles: for by
Thy self I swear, my speech did purpose nought*
To tempt thy spleen. Lend me thy melting hand!

There -- 'tis to reach back the heart I gave ye --

You spirits that secure the property
Of humane love, be still official here!
Why should we not for ever thus remain,
Incorporate, and conjoined. Tis sympathy,
And love, that gives the world continuance
And life. Each species Love preserves. Tis love
That makes th'eternall Wisdom thus forbear
The silly crimes of dull humanity:
And suffers us, like each delighted fly,
To play the trivial wantons in his eye.

You preach of love, but your obedience would
More pleasure me.

This argues thy revolt!
And is a stratagem against nature.
Thou would usurp the Charter of the male,
Tis my confession, that thy dowre was vast
And opulent, and such as may support
Thy titles, and thy birth, with all the pride
And cunning of magnificence. Let my
Sincere phrase instruct thy heart. Reassume
The blushes of thy youth; with timorous
Modesty behave thy gesture and thy tongue,
And then, thou shalt stand up exemplary
To all triumphant Courts: the envy of
The Eastern Queenes: th'Astrologers mistake,
Who shall direct their Optics unto thee,
As to a new and unknown Star.

Sister! --

The small Musicians of the air (whom Queene^
With mimic falconrie do perch upon
Their fists) shall be thy food. Thy maids shall eat
Young Pelicanes, and Squirils hearts.

Exc'lent!


Thy beuiridge shall be prophetic, and
Divine; for thou shalt drink that sou'raigne dew,
That hangs upon the frighted Lillies cheek,
And brewed with Sirens tears, such as they shed
In real obsequies.

O bounteous Sir! --

The soft entraile o'th Persian worm, th'Ermines
Palefur, shall cloth thy limbs.

More precious still!


Those gums and spices which the Arabian bird,
Collects to make her tragic piles, shall be
Thy winter fuel*

Pretty Sir, proceed!


Thou shalt have Marmasets, and Dwarfs, the male
And female too, to procreate in thy house;
That thy delights may ever be renewed.
Thy Jewels shall increase, as if the loved
Indies were thy Quarry. Th'Almightie Sun
Shall rise, and see a nobler day break from
Thy Cabinet, then yet the illustrious East
Ere knew.

But how will you perform these hopes?


The miracle, and power, do both consist,
In my large wealth.

Death on my Tribe! Your wealth?


I, my sweet Love.


Your wealth?


This iteration
Scarce will delight, if it be negative.

Can thou persist in such accursed schism?


Did you not then intend, when you endowed
Me with your wealth, that I should call it mine?

By heaven not I. I forfeited the love
O'th'great Duke (my Uncle) to marry thee;
That were a thing shrunk from thy fate, and lost
Unto the lips and eyes of men; but yet
In most assured hope, that thou would prove,
An humble and obedient husband.

You are more impudent, then the Basilisk,
Who stares in the blessed face of man, until
He kill him with his eyes.

Hear Altamont!
For I will give solemnity unto
A vow, that shall for evermore, divide
Thee from my bed --

Dear Madam hold! Each sense
Of mine doth blush, that can perceive, your wild,
Rebellious wrath. Hath not the Church named him
Your husband, and your Lord?

M'opinions of
The Church, I'll tell to'th Conclave, not to you --

Is this the help, Divinity gave man?
Snuff the Moon, she burns dim. The Spheres are now
Ill tuned, and aged nature backward reeles.

Thy anger's vain. Here I do banish thee
My bed: And we will never more embrace.

Rebellious fiend.


I now divide my house:
This side is mine, with the dimensions that
Dependence have on this square frame: for here
My family and I will rule. That side
You, and your meagre ragged train possess.
Thou may henceforth my neighbour, but no more
My husband be. Charintha, come away --

I must pursue, lest she her anger make
Too loud, so we inuit the public scorn.

Is not thy brothers wife a pure tame hen?
How dost thou like her noise?

Were she but mine,
I'd teach her keep a noise too after death.

How so?


I'd strip her skin over her ears and
Make a drum on it.

She was borne in a storm!


And begot sure with the Boeswayns whistle.


Meruolle, you have named Charintha,
As a precious Virgin, of nature most
Remiss, a quiet tongue, and such a heart,
As might become an able sacrifice,
T'expiate the whole world?

This I esteemed
My justice on her merits, but it seems
Her Sisters documents ore rule her now.
Her dowry is of ample rate, and may
Deserve the chief of our Italian youth.

What's Dandalo, that sues to her for love?


Dandalo, the Count of Millaine? A thing
Co^posd of spicery and starch! Nature
Contrived him in her sleep. If's ignorance
Might answer for his sins; he would account
Amongst his wealth, the land he has in Heaven.

I heard you say, she never saw him yet.


Never Sir: He woos her by his letters.
She desiring a personal survey
Ere prosecution of the suit, he sent
Her word, he'd make's address by stealth; but we
Expect him not ere'th'birth of the next Moon.

Will his arrival be so long delayed? --
Brother! -- How thrives your patience ore your wife?

Some Philosophicke hope remains: the storm
Can't last, because 'tis still more violent.
Sh'ath taken Caroch for the Palace, and means
Strait to disgrace me to the Duke
By her complaints.

Her veins oreflow with Gall!


Florello, I desire thou'lt not appear
Before her eye, until thy habit's changed.
My present power sums but a thousand crowns,
Which I have brought, and prostrate to thy use --

Sir it is fit your blessings were encreasd;
And that your wife had read your worth.

My Art betrays my hopes, or I have found
A remedy to cure her pride: your help
Meruolle, I must crave, and with swift speed:

Rossa, Molard, (friends to my Soul and Brain)
Advance your subtle Eyes! The sou'raigne mine
Behold, that makes the solemn Patriarch dance,
And the anointed King to skip, as doth
His limber Dwarf.

Yellow as foot of Kite!


Shall we be tender natured, and divide?


This is the portion will procure us all
High dignity and place. Rossa, you must
Find cause to number these -- Go, ransom out
Our captive weeds, and the rich habit I
From Pisa brought: whilst you (Mollard) with the
Assistance of these few -- procure us fit
Materials to adorn, and put in bright
Aspect our Corps. Enquire for Pearls: Stones of
The cunningest soil, we will like them, and disburse.

Is there some aged vessel now asleep
In the Dock, that will pay for her calking?

Florello, must we stop the public leaks?


Ere long we shall be great, be able to
Advance with smiles, and with our frowns destroy.
You Rossa, I'll create a Magistrate.
Go practise the austeere Cough. Pale dilinquents
Thou shalt learn to ieere, and to sleep ore men
Condemned.

The calling (Sir) I do vouchsafe.


Thou (my Molard) shalt rule in Villages,
Grow popular, and mistake the Laws. Thou shalt
Delight in the Kallender: the Rubricke days
Thou shalt observe, and then destroy thy beef.
Whilst thy dull earthy Tennants feed until
They smell.

My Launcepresado then shall sop
His Crust in Cider and in wine!

And my
Dread Corporal shall sin no more for Leekes,
His Girdle and his socks he shall vnpawne.

The solitary Hostess shall no more
Boyle the Carrion meat that she must trust,
In her own tears; Nor with a Requiem bring
The service up, as if it were the Haunch
Of her dead Husband.

I am entire flame!


The Geographicke Captain shall no more
Study the Town Map, that's dark walks may be
Contrived through slender Allies and through Lanes,
To escape his hungry Creditors abroad.

Thy Province is Chaldea, thy Father
Was a Rabby!

And thy Aunt a Sybill!


These are the victories of wit: by wit
We must achieve our hopes; which to refine
And purify, with paces doubled let's
Descend a Marble vault, there taste the rich
Legitimate blood of the mighty Grape.
Tis precious as the milk of Queenes; such as
Would teach dull Saturne laugh. It magnifies
The heart, and makes the agill spirits dance,
It drownds all thoughts adulterate and sad;
Inspires the Prophet, makes the Poet glad.

I Have received a mandate from the Duke,
That will (I fear) increase her insolence.
Like an old Tyrant he bestows his threats;
As if his anger did obey his will,
Not justice, nor the Laws.

Does your wife know
This preparation you have made to cure
Her haughtiness?

All is discovered to
Her ear: the news hath taught her boyle her heart
In her own blood. She now weeps vinegar;
Boasts of revenge, as if the Thunder were
Her own.

'twere fit your pretty Agent here,
Received instructions how to shape her garb
And port, just as th'imployment doth require.

Her knowledge is already satisfied.
Alteza's threats shall only move her scorn.

I will perform my best in your behalf*
But I do fear I am not valiant Sir.

O, you! that call your sins your duty, that
Obey your Ladies riots out o'zeale! --

Signior! --

Her honours spittle you preserve
As a Restorative for your salt itch

I beseech ye --

You third in Bracelets too,
The Pearls that drop from her authentic nose.

What mean you Sir?


To cleave you from the scalp
Unto the twist: to make nine skittles of
Your bo^es, and wind your heratstrings about my thumb --

O mercy Sir! So rotten are my Limbs
That when you stretch your Cheeks and blow on me,
I strait am scattered into sand --

Coward!
Creep strait into my Houreglasse then, and there
Eternally distinguish fatal time --

What slave disturbs the quiet of my Ear?


Ne'er look Sir! I serve my Lady; and I
Do scorn to yield --

Do ye bristle Porcupine? --

Take heed! -- I have the mallady of France --

Stay Altamont! withdraw thy violence!
If thou disorderst but a hair, that doth
Belong to th'Eyebrow of my meanest Groom,
I will proclaim my superiority
And rule i'th'Streets.

Hell cannot miss thee long!


Insult beneath thy own low Roof! This part
O'th'House doth call me sovereign

Retire!


Is that the Piece you have so magnified,
She you boast of for your pastime Royal?

She clips the grey and shiuer'd wings of Time
to make him slow; that our embraces like
Succeeding minutes then, may add unto
Their length. Let me engender on thy lips --

So our progeny may still be kisses --

A meek and gentle heate, whilst thus we bill
We imitate the sober lust of Doves --

That kiss (Sir) was so powerful and moist,
That you have robbed my Lips of all their wealth!

Take back thy wealth again! --

Are ye so hot? --

Thy Lips are thin and lank ( Alteza) as
The Lids that close thine Eyes. Hers gently swell
Like Eastern fruit, and are more soft then is
The fleecy Air that clothes the Infant Morn.

Pray a word! Is there in this Pagentry
Ought like to truth? Discover your intent!

I'll make my anger equal unto thine,
And my revenge above them both. This bright
Auspicious Maid shall govern in my bed.
She is my Concubine: the Off spring of
Her womb shall triumph here, maugre thy sight:
Whilst envy does consume thy flesh until
Thy body lighter grow then thy loose mind.

How well my Stars behave their influence?


Meruolle, go! my Mistress guide unto
Those lodgings that oreuiew the Garden mount.

If you retard your presence whilst the Sun
(In's race) fill up one Howre, you'll find before
Your next review, that grief hath made me old,
And I shall look more like a Matron then
A Bride; so much your absence mortifies.

Thou art to every sense I have, a Spell.
Conduct her strait (Meruolle) to some Throne!

Then are the vows, the Ecclesiasticke rites
With which the zealous Priest obliged us to
Peculiar heate, to abstinence from change,
And various love, quite cancelled by your lust?

Accuse thy pride!


Thou art a perjured man!


Go, thou art as light as feathers, or the Air,
were but an Attome indiuiduall placed
With thee in balance even, 'twould hoise thee up
To th'Cloudes.

Thy breath is fulsome as that steam
Which Toads when they engender vaporate.

Alteza, bath in penitential tears
Thy leprous heart, or when the Elements
Are mixed and the sad day ariues, that dooms
The world unto eternity of joy,
Or pain, thou shalt (like to a glimmering Lamp)
Be hung upon the sooty walls of Hell.

I smile at thee, and thy thin Arts; like to
Some homely Village Leuite, thou doest preach
Of terrors strange, to keep dull faith in awe:
I pray stay; I am not angry Sir.

No?


I practisd all this while how t'indanger
your spleen (Sir) not my own* which if my powers
Prove just, I shall, perform ere long.
Niente, send the party in --

More wrath!


A slow device (Sir) but o'my own Brain.


Who art thou?


A keen Guest, invited here --

To what?


To taste -- your wives Gammons.


Bold slave! be in thy speech more evident.


I am come to get your children for you.


Do ye want a clearer paraphrase? He is
My servant Sir, my stallion if I please.
A Courtly implement, and much in use
Among Ladies of my growth and Title.

O my cold Blood! My patience will be wrought
So low, that I shall learn t'mike a Heifer.

Since I'm so aptly furnished with delight,
Your Concubine may fearless walk about
The house, and share the wholesome Sun in peace.

Thy tongue I do neglect: but you (sir) shall
Ere long complain of your mortality:
The minutes you must waste on Earth are few.

This I consider Sir, and therefore make
Such haste to mingle with your wife; that the
Kind world may have some issue from my Loins.

If this prove true, let Babes peace out my Eyes --

Hold Altamont, or else I wound thy heart --

If you advance one inch beyond that rush
I'll amble through the Streets, and blow your Dirge
With the great Horne that grows upon your Brow.

If there be Gall in Heaven, the gen'rall Bag
Is opned, and it falls in Showers!

S'light Sir;
I come t'ease the labour of your Body;
And you want courtship to return me thanks.

Hang him Ingrate!


But what hereafter I
Perform, shall be for your good Ladies sake,
And not for yours.

Pray (sir) let's interchange
A little breath: withal (if you consent)
We will put our Swords to a more quiet use --

Now Sir, you power sweet Cassia in my Broth.
My Blood affects to skirmish more
With Ladies then with men. What would you speak?

My true opinion sir concerning you.
I know you do but countrfeit this lust,
This lawless heate. You purpose not t'abuse
the Charter of my Bed,

Who told ye so?


I read it in your noble feature and
Your looks. You have Religion in your shape.
And can it be, you should so soon commit a crime
So much unwholesome to the Angels sight?
Let me now make a forfeiture of Eyes,
If ever I beheld a man that's more obliged
To Nature for his Limbs: A carnal frame
So full of equal strength I never saw.

The better shaped I am (Sir) the more cause
You'll find, to love the Issue I shall get
Upon your wife.

Do not belie thy own
True merits and comport! Th'adulterate fire
Did ne'er inflame thy sober heart, I know
Thou scornst to do it.

Not I believe it Sir!
Sir I will do it. Is your Lady fruitful?
I would be loath t'loose my labour on her?

Pestilence! and blood!


Fling a danger from
Thy arm, I'll summon strait (with Trumpet and
with Drum) the world to hear thy infamy --

O fie! You an Italian Sir, and thus
Behave the knowledge of disgrace with loud
And popular dislike?

Nay it becomes
You finely, does it not?

You think because
You're cursed, we will allow you short Horns: I'll graft
Upon your head a pair so tall, they shall
Go near to prick the very Planet (Sir)
Thet ruled at your nativity.

He sleeps.


Signior, go! take down a Cushion, and pray*
You cannot choose but know the frailty of
The times: the surfeits of the womb, and how
Great Ladies do relieve their Appetites.
Your own confession of my parts commends
Your wife in her sage choice. There be that sin
With feeble ushers and the witherd Dwarf.

He wants a judgment to consider this.


I merit better looks Sir, that must thrash
All night for ye, and without wages Sir!

Dead as a monument! Let us leave him! --

Had he the Devil for's Physician chose,
He could ne'er have come by the like Cordial. --

You swelling mountains (that oreuiew the Earth)
Fall now, make me eternally unseen!
Philosophie contract thy meek sage brow:
Let Patience be no more thy Saint. As soon
Give med'cines to the dead, teach statues how
To walk, and angry winds to sleep in the North.
As soon bid empty Lions play with Kids;
And to the shaggy Scythian say, Go weep
As Virgins do, when they their Loves inter:
The blind and shuffled Elements that first
In Chaos strove, were not so opposite
As this Religious frost unto my heate.
Patience, thou art more fond then teeming wives,
Tamer then sseepe! Divinity which calls
Our anger sin, and courage pride, hath sent
This silly Cherubine on Earth, Patience,
(The Cowards sword) which only doth disarm
Dull sleep, that neither can nor would do harm.

Florence knows me well: I'm called Sciolto,

I needs must sing my ushers praise: he made
A most discreet election of a man.

Your mercy and your kindness (Lady) thus
Advance my shape; your pleasure was I should
despise your husbands frowns, and I behau'd
My self with terror masculine: but now
We are peculiar and reserved, I know
Humility, a soft and quiet garb;
A distance that shall well become the state
So eminent and rich a beauty claims.

Sir, that we do expect, and then you shall
Ore take our noble Sense, with newer love.
Our husband is a trifle, such as can
No way disturb your peace or safety here.

Madam, store me with arms and weapons to
Resist his personal assault, and I
Shall need no more protection then my self.

Active and bold! Niente thou hast made
A choice out-parallels the world.

Madam,
See his horse veins: they are large as Conduit pipes;
His Sinnews are like Cables.

Las! not mine!
Tis true, that if I like my Opposite,
I have a trick te give an easy fall,
And stand to it stiffly too when I ha'done --

I will assure your Ladyship, the Bawds
Give him good report.

Do they Niente?


He's great with Ladies of all ages, all Degrees.


Excuse me Sir, they are great by me!


As how Sir?


Madam -- They are all wi'child!


How Signior? Is your appetite so strong?


Blame the humorous Planets that orerule
The blood. Ere yet this present Month expires;
(Let's see -- I,!) Some three and forty Ladies
(Or there about) will quicken with male Twins.

All of your begetting?


So wise Fame sings.
I will make bold to gather my first fruits --

Stay my pregnant Signior! Our love is not
Yet ripe: there is a larger distance too
Belongs unto our Lips.

How dear Lady?


I am too proud to have my favours soon
and easily conferred. Such smiles are cheap.
I mean to procreate by prescription Sir,
Make my lust as physical as my meals.

Death, I'm Suitor unto Gallens widow!
Madam, I know it not becomes the high
Demeanour of your birth to dance (just like
A Kid) to th'musicke of each wind that blows.
Ere you admit of dalliance I should use
Some industry of Tongue, and flexure of
the pliant Joints, to court and woo consent.

And can your rudeness covet then where your
Safe wit and knowledge warnes your abstinence?

Only a little t'recreate the Chine --

Keep back, if you'll continue life. When I
Am pleased to be delighted Sir, I can
command the function of your Limbs.


Sister, I come. Throw him to his chamber --

Hast no good book, whose comfortable use
may fill th'expence of time?

What would you read?


Any o'th Moderns. Rablays in the praise of
Midwives. Aretine on copulation.
Or th'Odes of Theophile unto his whore.

My Usher in my closet can appoint
Your choice of these.

Think on the frailty of
The flesh; and be not long unmerciful --


Away; I come, I come.


The Millaine Count (my Suitor) is arrived.


Signior Dandolo! Why 'tis yet a month
Ere he should meet your expectation here.

Tis he Madam, and such a he as must
Be only likened to himself.

More rich,
And gaudie then the East. So liberal too,
That you would think he Natures Steward were.
He gives amongst m^ slaves, as if unto
Ambassadors he did cast Donatiues.

Milk him (my Charintha) oft I have preached
Unto thine Ear a sou'raigntie ore man.
Take all he gives, it's princely fashion now.
Could but thy acceptance beggar him,
Thy little wit were ever magnified.

You know I am o'th'wits, I have bin sworn
To beggar Suitors, and ieere my husband.

Which is the Lady that I come to woo?


My name's Charintha --

Present me thy Lips!
I say advance --

You are not understood --

My Lord, I scarcely own desert enough
T'intice this Jewel from your Cabinet.

A Stone, a Stone! the thing grows, I'ue enough --

So free? I am Charintha's Sister Sir --

It may be so. A fine house, fine Town too!
Were Florence mine, I would not give it for
The best winter Seat my father left me.

Tis Sir, th'ambition of my love, that you
Would know me for Charintha's Sister! --

I shall. Rossa, remember it!


My Lord!


I must know her for Charintha's Sister.


Is there no trick in ceremony Sir,
To give your memory a better hint?

Kiss none but thee! A device i'th'blood! but
Princes have one toy or other still, t'make
Their descent known. -- There, a Diamond that,
And that a Ruby. --

What means your Lordship?


They are none of mine. I have enough, weare'em --

Your Lordship binds my great acknowledgement.
In the leisure of a wink, he will give away
An Empire.

I'm Charintha's woman Sir --

Who can help it? Mistress, wilt thou not bid
My servants welcome? They are rich Choughs, th'aue store
Of Villages, and ploughed Earth.

Their judgment is
So kind (Sir) as to know they may command
The house.

We thank your Ladyship.


This is my Parasite, and this my Pimp.
I'ue a Fool, a Dwarf too at home. I made
My iaunt too early by a month, or else
My Train had been enlarged.

They are rarely fixed,
If they import as much as you denominate.

I keep my parasite to cure the dull
Melancholy of State. He does admire
My wit and Beard. He says I cannot sin.
Princes would still be sad out for such worrmes.

But how (Sir) does your Pimp adhere to use?


He is as pertinent to Lords as lust.
My Fool I keep to laugh at me. My Dwarf
Is for my wife. I do intend she shall
Affect the Court, and then she'll quickly learn.
To make the Toy useful.

My Lord, be pleased
To walk, and use th'aduantage of the Air.

I'ue Instruments distinct, that take a charge
O'th several quarters of my Frame, My Dwarf
Doth dress me up unto the knees, and when
His stature leaves his reach, young Virgins then
(Th'issue of decayed Barons) do begin
And govern to the Navel. Whilst upwards
Barbarians, Painters, and Parasites are used.

But will your Lordship walk and see the spring?
We have a Garden where it ever dwells.

And shall we be delighted and entranced?


We will sacrifice the utmost of our wealth
And love, t'expresse your welcome Sir.

Wilt'I faith.
There's a Saphyre Chain: Tie thy Monkey in it --
Take it; for by this hand I am in haste
And cannot offer twice.

If you should chance
(My honoured Lord) to drop those trifles here,
I would be mannerly, and reach'em up.

I will give thee a Bushel of Seed-Pearle
To imbroider thy Petticoat.

This way --

Your Lordship hath forgot to leave notice for
Those Princes in diguise that shall by chance
Demand ye at the gate.

Who does he mean?


A leash of Germane Dukes that walk in Rug.
I should consult with'em'bout subversion
Of a State or two; but I'm not yet at
Leisure.

My Lord, they shall be answered so.


Your hypocrisy wants a little Art.


Your bounty will impoverish us too soon.


Ye both do lie, I weave my cunning close.
Fortune, redeem the credit of thy Eyes.
Thou wilt (if thou art partial now and kind)
But wink on me, though to the world you are blind.

THis is the truth, therefore consider now
my Fate. Hah! Sciolto!

What makes he there.


Tis Sciolto, the brute Adulterer,
He whom I lately mentioned in my speech.
A slave more salt then is the Balticke ware,
More hot then hell, a Satire or a Goat.

And shall be still so (Sir) unless your wife
Dismiss her pride, and vouchsafe to cool me.

Devils and death, I'm murderd through the Ear --

Take discipline awhile, Know if there be
A boisterous motion used, I have for each
Of you a round Synamon Plumme, and they
Shall enter your nice stomachs the wrong way --

Though thou were hardy as the Lions race;
And armed with all th'Artillery on Earth,
I durst assault thee as I am; but so
I cannot satisfy Revenge.

Sciolto, now my memory begins
To know you better: for your riots bold
And loud demeanour in this City hath
Been long observed. I wonder much y'imploy
Your precious minutes in a course so vile.

What, as to copulate and increase kind?
It has been a vocation ever since
The Sun spied man thus crawling on the Earth --

But what excuse can thou in honour urge,
for wearing such advantageous defence,
Against his just and single violence?

I have an odd humour, not to be killed.


O Alteza, had but my name been hid
Beneath some fold in the voluminous
Dark book of Fate, I might have missed of my
Creation then, so I should ne'er have seen
Thy face.

My curses (Sir) have cause t'assault
Her more then yours: for she has starved me here
With want of natural delight. My free
Large growth and tincture of my hair denote,
My constitution cannot suffer me,
To wear a surplice, or proceed Eunuch.
Though I should bath and swim in Iulips Sir,
I'ue still unruly heate about my Chine.

A Salamander that doth feed and cloth
It self with flame, was thy Progenitor.

Have I not equal reason to complain?
In three Hours not so much as a dry kiss.
Th'old amorous Deacon that embraced his Cow
Was not so destitute.

Fine calumny!


A Negro might be useful now, although
Sh'ad but one eye, and that fixed on her heel.

I'll strew upon thy food the teeth of Snakes,

Signior, presume no more upon a fond
Easy nature. I have been abstinent
Too long. Haste, and with pliant steps present
Your wife; Ot else I'll assure ye you shall seek
Some other man to Cuckold ye for me.

Sciolto, this is barbarous!


I'll shoot
Thy heart with needles, small as splinters of
A hair that thou may die, and yet not know
That thou art killed.

I thank ye (Signior) but
We Florentines do sleep like Leuorites,
With our Eyes open: how ere, I could vouchsafe
To shoot you now, and prevent your kindness. --

Sciolto, hold. If either charge do miss,
He that survives, shall grind thy marble heart,
Between his teeth --

I meant not to give fire.
There is a trick of gravity in the state
Called Law. Besides, you dead, the children which
I chance to get upon your buxom wife,
I should go near to keep at my own charge.

Africa breeds no monster like to thee.


I'll to my chamber now, and fortify
There, I remain (during the pleasure of
Your wife) your Tenant (Signior) in fee tail. --

It is a cunning, and promiscuous slave.
This story of Alteza's abstinence,
He doth but counterfeit, to gull my sight.

Had the Devil himself crep't into flesh,
And undertook this service to your wife,
She had possessed, the weaker Instrument.
He hath in 's Veins, a most intemperat blood
His valour's so renowned, that all the smooth,
The curled, and silken Nobles of the Town,
Do homage to his Sword; and by such Acts
As these, he glorifies his truant youth.

Thy faith was jealous, I seduced thy ear
To share untruths: but now, thou know too much.

T'was my suspect of Fame, and dispersement
Of your deep wrong, that manacled till now,
Your hands. My temperate Lectures cease. Obey
Revenge, and I will follow it, until
My wealth, and life, are forfeited to Law.

Hah! wilt thou? O my quickened heart (entombed
Before within my breast) wilt thou? This, this
Then is the direful night, wherein I'll give
A strict and cruel justice to Revenge.

This then is the night, wherein my bold love
Shall merit me th'eternall name of friend.

Come swear, swear now (on this victorious sword)
Thou wilt obey th'iniunctions of my wrath,
And yet in personal act, not move, but when
My will appoints a mixture of thy strength.

My choice Religion, the honours of my blood,
I here do pawn to ratify the vow --

Now work my iniurd spirits, till you make
Dull sorrow rise in nimble flame. Anger,
Is blood, pow'rd, and perplexed into a froth,
But Malice is, the wisdom of our wrath.

Your Lordships letters were of a prompt stile!


This orient Rope is yours, and you must wear't;
I sickne else, and grow a villager
In Elizium!

Your bounty choakes my thanks.


Take it. Afflict me Fame, if ere I knew
His parallel; he woes at Neroe's rate.

Madam, there's a new Dand^lo, a new
Count, lighted at the Gate, and craves entrance.

That's rare i'faith; have I a shadow walks
Without leave of the Sun?

A conspiracy.


Did not Meruolle say, 'twould be a month,
Ere he arrived?

Be bold and meet your chance^


Stand firm, and stiffly on your sinews then,
Avouch me still, for the true Dandolo.

Charintha, 'tis some stratagem; but if
He Jewels bring, and in a hand as large,
And open as yon'easy snypes, thou hast
Ill luck if thou constrain him not to loss.

I'll smile no longer then these rich sparkles
Shine in my Eyes.

The Lady that is named
Charintha here, must be reueald; for Il'd
Exallt her Lips, and make'em known to mine.

S^light, this is the great Cham. Hark ye, Signior --

My Lord, I pray afford him leave to speak.


What, is that saucy Groom? Does he sell Eggs?


I'll show ye my Trade; A poor sword-man, I --

Sir you destroy the quiet of my Hows:
He shall have safety here, and leave to speak.

I'm called Charintha Sir; proceed to speech.


I'll first do special grace unto your Lip --
My Pen hath wooed you oft; but now by stealth
Thus single I'm arui'd, a Moon before
The time I did prefix.

I sir, the cause.


T'was Winter when I specified the date
Of my approach, and then my blood was cold;
But now the spring is come, Things would couple.
These (Lady) are very serculare Pearl --

I sir, and in such Toys, she much delights:
Allthough her modesty be loath, to make
Her fancies known. Would you had brought some few
To mach'em.

Do you affect'em Lady?


I rejoice in all the works of Nature!


I am instructed then.


As how, dear Sir?


That I did ill, to leave my Pearls behind.


Sister this Hulke, is neither rigged, nor fraught,

I'll have no more of him, he is too costive.


Sir a word. Me thinks you look, like raw Pork.


Has not this house the privilege of peace?


Ladies, this Impostor steals my Titles,
And my name, I ask leave, to punish him.

Wee'le not protect his crimes, use your justice.


Unless you are an Ostrich, Sir, and can
Digest steel, cool your lungs, and calmly wait
Th'inquiry I shall urge.

Hence, and be dead!


Molard, reveal how long thou hast bin Pimp,
To the family of the Dandolos?

About some thirty years (Sir.) I'ue procured
Both time and place, for your good Fathers game,
Ere since he was capable of woman.

He used the Trade (Sir) in his infancy.


I scare could walk, when I began't: the first
I brought him was my Nurse.

Can point, at ought
He did some two and twenty years ago?

Distinctly Sir. I know that Gentleman,
He was got, on a Tripewife of Lucca.

O th'action of my fathers loins!


My lord?


I'm an old ^ew at Genealogies.
This fellows descent I know now, and where
He took 's creation too. By chance thus have
I met forty of my Fathers Bastards.
They are poor, and put me oft to charge. Brother,
Welcome. -- Rossa, give him a Quardecus.

Bid Kings wind silk, and Princes measure oats.


Your train of Parasite, Pimp, Fool and Dwarf,
Speak you at first, to be the true young Lord.

Yet the other has some marks, that do belong
Unto a Count, o'th last edition too:

Do you think you're the Count?


I do, think it, Sir.


Thought's free.


He should be a Venetian,
By the wit, and policy of his courage.

Beauties, were you^ hands clean, they should be kil^ (...).


Bold illegitimate.


Sir, -- you shall know,
No man ere got me, but my own Father.

Besognia speak in my behalf; I'll give
Thee a Pearl then, big as a Pompeon.

Which, when your Lordship does, I'll return ye
A pointed Diamond, big as a Steeple.

Y'on thrifty counterfeit, has much perplexed
Your servants wit.

My Lord. Lets in, and ieere.


Slow method fools obey. To the stars advance
His head, who thus resists the power of Chance.

Like to my Genius he doth move about
The house. Our souls are surely near allied --

Calls he her, his concubine? By this hand
There's not a Prince in all the East, has such
Another. This Altamont still gripes'em
In the flank; he knows to choose his cattle.
Be thou pleased, O young and wholesome Lady!

The Garden (Signior) doth contain more walks,
As pensatiue in shade as this. I do
Beseech you, change your path, and leave me here.

The fumes of spicery? you must not now --

My vows have promised you the ample truth
Of my intelligence. Behold, whom there,
Sciolto keeps in amorous whisper.

Hah, Scoperta! Libid'nous Girl, what makes
She with that Horse?

Shall I disturb their speech?


No, let'em Knit and generate; my words
Shall never penetrate her Ear until
I am revenged for what my Eyes have seen.

There is a general tainture in the Sex.


She is proscribed, I'ue filled her in the List
With those that taste to Night a bitter fate.
Away, away. This object ruins all
My faculties.

I sigh my first salute
Was so intempratly performed. But O!
The justice of my Stars! My love is now
Revenged upon my lust. With pure chaste flame
I Court the Mistress unto Altamont;
One here reserved for sinful use. Stay, stay! --

If I am seen, my life is forfeited --

Hast thou not heard my vows, whose violence
And number well might satisfy suspect
in wayward Kings.

How dare I traffic thus
For love with thee: when thy accounts with Heaven
Are yet not cleared that lust betrayed thee to?

With what advice of modesty can thou
Accuse my blood; when in this Mansion you are
Contained for the like sin?

Were I well known
Unto the quality of thy new love,
I would reveal my self, and take from thy
Belief the false opinion of my guilt.

If ere I practise impious heate again,
Some long armed Fiend that in the Center dwells
Reach at my foot, and pull me into flames.

Bear witness Immortality and Truth
That I'm official here but by pretence,
My Veins are cold and chaste as Northern snow.

Thy name, and then my doubts I will forsake?


Scoperta is my name. I Sister am
To Altamont; not Mistress of his lust.

O dire affinity! my love is now
Alli'd unto my hate. Yet Altamont
Ne'er merited my wrath. It is the wit
The policy of sin, to hate those men
We have abused. When first I spied the grace
And lustre of thy shape; me thought I loved,
And my sick heart enform'd me love was good:

And you when I beheld, I said to Heaven,
O make but his immortal part like to
The Garment Nature clothes it in, and h^lle
Remain a Type, from whom shall be derived
The Prophets, and the Kings that rule the Earth.

Her beauties so increase; that they do make
My comprehension poor.

I should have used
More leisure and nice Art, when I did give
My love away.

O stay, until my vows
Affoord a larger warrant of my faith --

Our new society must not be seen.
But if thy love be free from carnal Arts,
(Such as the curled Youth of Italy
Do use) make me thy sudden stealth* Early,
(Ere the succeeding Sun arrive i'th'East)
Appear beneath my Casements view, and I
Will follow thee along the spacious World.

Go noble Maid, were thou divided from
My reach, by Sheets of Elemental fire,
By streams of recking blood, by purple mists
(Which Cannons in their acclamation breath)
Or winds (when met to blow each other from
The Earth) yet I would pull thee to my Heart.
False lust, I take of thee eternal leave --

Convey those odors thither, and disperse
The costly smoke, about the room.

I shall.


Place soft and easy fingered Lutes, behind
The Arras; voices feminine and young.
And spread the Couch, with the green Persian Quilt.

All is prepared.


For what are these designed?


I feel a slothful grudging in my veins,
And therefore mean to solace with a male.
Brush thy Beard, and follow me. --

Now am I
As rascally a sinner, as ever.

Why come thou not?


O Love! A little grace.


Is not thy blood well? Kiss me Sciolto.


Shall we be wrapped in curlings intricate?


We will have our artificial heates, and with our own
Panting cool us to new, and younger strength.

And shall we 'tweene two shady Poplars hang
In the Indian-Net, whose slippery closures may
Entangle us so fast, we ne'er shall be
Untied again*

We will grow as in one skin.


Yes, much! Not an inch. --

I want thy meaning.


And shall my action more. It mightiness
And state, taught me to fast from flesh; and now,
I am well pleased to maked perpetual Lent.

I like this well. My Male is witty grown.


Go, kneel to your husband, and beg from him
Lawful recreation: My self intend
To purchase a few Beads, and turn Vot'ry.
She'll ne'er move hence, 'till I'ue enraged her spleen.

What motive (Sir) persuades ye, use me thus?


Why -- ye are not handsome.


Trim prodigy!


Question your Glass! Your Face was carved -- out of
A Blew Cabbage; and 'tis contracted now
To one, oblique Wrinkle.

Villain, thou lie.


Thy aged skull in stead of hair
Oregrowne with Moss, and looks as if it had bin,
A Thousand years entoomb'd.

Adders, and snakes.


Thy solitary Teeth, in distance stand
Like the decayed Arches of a Bridge.

Better, th'adst bin unborn.


Wilt not yet go?
Thy Fingers are all crooked, like the Tallans
Of a Griffon. Thou walkst on Cloven-feete.

Hoa! Niente.


Thy Bones are piled across*
Much like the Sticks on a Conjurers fire.

Are my Grooms dead? what hoa! I'll impound ye. --

It must not be. For with these two (of which
I mean to rob your armoury) there shall
Be passage forced broad enough for a Teem
Of Southern Elephants. Farewell Oyster! --

Where are my Grooms, my slaves? injurious wolf.
Bark at my precious feature, and thus strew
My beauty ore, with infamy and dust?
Strike my green youth, with Epethites of age?
My Altamont ne'er used me thus. He oft
Compared me to the Stars, m'Eies to Eastern light,
When day smiles at her birth. O! I could curse
The giddy judgment of my blood; that thus
Seduced me to forsake that Saint, and mix
My knowledge with this Devil. He's fled too,
Untouched by my revenge. Niente, hoa!

'Tis Alteza, I know her sinful voice, --

O Sir, if anguish, or distress, can make,
An humble heart, behold your Lady now;
That shortens thus, her stature, at your feet. --

What may this forced humillitie portend?


Sciolto (cruel as the winds in March)
Hath struck, my womanhood, with tyranny,
And scorn. Can Fate present so large a test,
Of your true love, (both to your self, and me)
As that you minister revenge upon
His Life. Go, and salute his recreant Heart
With your bright Steel, and then obedience claim
Replete with fond Idolatry, and love.

The Fiends are surly married too; for there's
No torment like a Wife! false Alteza.

So ill I merit charity: that all
My passions argue cunning and pretence.
This is a wise hypocrisy, to hide
Thy lust, or snare me in some guilt, whereby
The Duke may claim my life, and thou receive
More quiet space, t'inioy Sciolto's limbs.

Those angry spirits that reside below,
In flaming Ouens, are not more cruel in
Their envy, then am I in hate to him.

So soon, dost steep him in thy gall, whom thou
Hast washt'i'th warm distilments of thy heart.

If ere I knew him, with more guilt, then what
My wishes and my thoughts containd; let wrath
Then make me her experiment, to try
How much of pain, mortality can hear.

Thy perjured attestations cease; for though
The hours are few, since first you did confer,
Yet you had both the pregnant thrift, to make
The time advantageous to sin.

Express,
Some mercy in your faith, and hear me speak.

Keep thy denial 'tweene thy blistered lips.
I^ vtterd' thou art dead.

Love is no more.


Dost weep? I sooner thought t'haue seen the Flin^
Supple as Sponge; th'obdurate Diamond melt
At the Glow-wormes pale eye.

How hath the pride
Of Courts misse-led my youth, that you should think
I'ue lost, all tender complements of grace?

Thou were a Virgin sweet, so precious in
Thy frame, that with the cordage of thy hair
Thou might have fetterd Kings. Thy voice has marred
The beauties of the night. When thou did sing
The quiet stars, would fall asleep and wink.
Thou art all discord now: thy glorie's dark;
Thy thin, and Rosiall blood, i^ turned to Ink.

I have outliu'd the help of penitence,
And benefit of hope.

Oft have I sai'd
Let's leave the false, the buisie world and sleep
Beneath our vines; Nature (not cunning) then,
Augments our wealth; the dew of heaven is cheap,
Nor need we pay for'th Suns warm light, If kind
Divinity allow t'each humane soul
A star; our issue w'ele increase, until
The bright and numerous throng be all imploi'd.

But I am sterill as a wilderness,
My name, is sickness to your memory.

Witness you silent powers, the crime is not
Derived from me. T'explaine my innocence,
Know, she that here I housd, t'affront thy pride,
Was my chaste sister, not my Concubine.

Then you are loyal still, t'oth Marriage vow.


But; she treds the slimy path. Scoperta,
Is now thy R^uall in Sciolto's lust.

All springs from the ambition of my guilt. --

Although thy penitence be rash, it doth
Become thee well, and thou hast qui^e dissolved
The stony corners of my heart. This night
I purposd thee a cruel death, but now
Rise, and continue mortal still -- I'll lay
My mercy on thy Lip, and for it take
My last farewell --. I'll never see thee more.

This is a mercy that confounds the will
And strength of all my gratitude. O sad
Decree. You have diuorc'd me from your Eyes.

Two neighboring Lillies whom rude winds disperse
Amongst restless dust, may sooner meet upon
Their stalks again, and kiss each other in
A second growth, then we our loves renew.

Take heed (Sir) how you prophecy! For my
Humility with moist contrition joined,
May hope to wash my leprous staines away.

O no! my jealousy is grown so sick, that my
Suspect enformes me, it will ne'er be cured.

I creep thus to my Tomb, indebted for
Your love, till all the drowsy world shall rise
To general Accounts; and then my want
Of earlier gratitude will make my Debt
A sin --

O trivial property of life!
Some do attend the mighty war, and make
Divinity their yoke; till for the sport
Of Kings th'augment the number of the dead.
Some walk in slipprie paths of Court, and feed
On silent smiles; the gravity of mirth.
Some travail in the search of humane Arts,
But knowledge is reserved: She sits so high
In Clouds, we cannot reach her with our Eye:
Or if with patient steps we to her climb,
Death says we cannot reach her with our time.
For witherd age ariues, when numbering on
Our griefs not years; the tedious space of life
We strait accuse. For life is like the span
Forced from a gowtie hand; which, as it gains
Extent, and active length, the more it pains.

MY journey was by stealth, else I had brought
With these, Legions of Dukes to speak my birth.

My Lady'gins t'enquire (Sir) after sleep,
For it grows late.

My corporal method
I will disorder, ere I'll miss her view.
This British Groat is thine; traffic for Pins.

Make the Devil your Factor; There's a Stock
To set up with.

No bribes? I am beloved.


Brother, I wish you would avoid my haunts.
Tis not for my credit, nor yet for our
Dead fathers, thus to make your person known,
Being you're illegitimate begot,
By the motion of the evil Spirit.

Go, let that fellow die.


Why, let him Sir.


Were we his heirs, w'had cause to hasten his Decease.


Do ye walk like Neptune in a mask,
Attended on by two o'th calm Winds?

They are Nobles of a supreme race. This is
Stocccata called, and that Punto. They both
Are come to warrant my creation good
Upon the Gauntlet of a Giant or a Whale.

Maintain your birth -- Were you my fathers Bawds?


Alas, you are young (Sir) you know not us!
We cannot swell and rant like things that would
Be rather heard then felt: but we can thrust
Our Whineards home, with joy and quiet too.

Sweet heart; you are not read i'th'rudiments
Of wrath. You shall perceive some that are loud
And active with their Lungs; Courage in them
You may suspect: but when you see a cool
And silent anger like to ours, then keep
Your wandering hands at home. Soft Sir, beware!

Stay, woo't thou kill him (Punto) or shall I?


I'ue buisnesse now of a more serious garb.
Dispatch him thy self. Early to morrow
I'll do as much for thee on the two Zwits.

Do ye make no more o'th'Infants of the Earth? --

Fie Sir. Draw your weapon in a Ladies
Chamber? You still display a courage ill
Brought up, most vainlie nurturd (Sir) believe it.

Forbid it Heaven; but you should have free space
T'imploy your best strength in your defence.
But Sir, 'tis sober patience makes us safe.
If now on eithers Haunch you did confer
A kick; our secret wisdom would direct
Us how to bear it for the time, and in
Our own advantage too.

Is't possible?


Hear Sir th'aduice of an old shot. I'ue hit
The mark more then once in my time, and tamed
Many a mad Boy too. If either of's
Vouchsafe to greet ye with a hand or foot,
Take it, and be thankful: le^t by return
Of wrath, worse do ensue.

Not I believe it.


He's young, Stoccata, carve him gently up! --

They take me for a Capon. What Weapons
Fight ye with, Demiculuering or Drake?

Steel of Toledo is all we manage --

What then remains but Rossa and Molard,
Assault you two, I, my bastard Brother --

Come Sir, --

We will jerk you with our iron Rods --

Keep your sword warm, it belongs to the scabbard --

O Sir, your valour still imports some want
Of a discreet and temperate breeding.

Tumultuous fights the vestments mar.


His bounty ne'er will give me cause t'aduance
My wit: he grows much troublesome.

Lady! behold two Worthies here; Dragons
In fight. They come to preach my birth.
They are known to Fame.

Fame blew'em from her Breech!


I say they are Potentates; and they do awe --

The Chrysome Babe.


Signior, you still forget
The quiet and the courteous ways of spleen.

I will try your politic patience Sir --

You see we still are calm --

He has but thin
Philosophie that cannot suffer this --

You marmalet Count deserves as much too.


I do oppugn the motion with my scorn.


Do ye scorn (Sir) to be kicked?


Pardon me Sir!
I say it aloud; The proudest wight on Earth
Shall not kick me, excepting your dear self.

I have privacies (Madam) for your Ear! --

You, and your fierce Champions strait remove;
Craule hence, and be not visible again:

Enhance our pay, we will kill him in the da^ke.


Agreed, Six Duck^ts you shall number more.


The neighbours say, forty Seriants wait his
Departure hence, who give him a new name.

Hah! What do they call him?


Florello, and
Report him brother unto Altamont.

My Eyes are infom'd, Two Faces more alli'd
In all deuotes of view I have not seen.
The younger brother unto Altamont;
Fantastic too as Winds, and sillier then
A silenced Priest. Fate had much preferred me.

Madam, it must be he. I'ue taken a strict
Survey of's Nose; 'tis so like Altamonts.

He is already so exhaust, that his
Wise bounty can no more be Argument
For wit: And now to have this plea for his
Dismission is above my joy. Signior! --

Sweet Love, I have been bold to give away
One or two of thy Farms to these my Foll'wers,
They are kind wretches both, and love thee well.

Indeed?


Yes saith, They bid me rather then
Thou should thus pine for love to marry thee.

Stand off! More distant yet.


Would view my Limbs? --

When you do make your Christianity
More known, you must be called Florello*

Hah!


Forty blew Fiends wait to arrest you in
Your passage home.

Madam, I am traduced.


Could your abusiue Arts make choice of none
But me? Be sure this visit is your last.

I must not, dare not, leave ye, till I'ue cleared
The errors in this callumnie --

Return,
Or you affront my power, and I shall think
Your love, is, as your person, counterfeit.
The strength of all my Charity affords
You but this Key, which in my Orchard Gate
You may employ, and free you from th'Arrest.
Besognia, I'll to bed. --

A sober truth.
Sums I owed when I embarked for Pisa. --

Now shall I, like a melancholy worm,
Feed on raw Roots. --

Sing Canticles of woe!
I must even go tag points in a Garret. --

This Key, with rescue o'th'young Rapiers of
The Law will bring us home.

No monies Sir?


Faith we must all disrobe, our Vestments old
Stitch on again, and mortgage these to raise
A Sum that may assist my librrtie.

Creep in our Rags of Tinder, in our thin
And dusty webs again.

I feel a heard
Of small cattle graze on my left shoulder. --

O my forward bounty! There's but sick hope
My Jewels will return; since custom shows;
What Ladies thus from there dull Suitors get
They do preserve as Tribute to their wit.

The longer moitie of the Night's vnspent.


Since time grew old, he slowly finds his steps
In the dark: by day he swifter moves. Get thee
To bed; The Casements of thine Eyes are shut;
Impris^ning their dear Light.

Madam, good night.


Come my Sciolto, and confirm the virtue of
Thy faith; or I disperse my Soul in Sighs,
And make this Chair my easy monument.

All are departed that to Charintha
Made visit: Your Servants have begun
Their sleep, and Guards are placed upon the Gates.

Are my bold Instruments in ambush laid,
And scattered for the best advantage of
Their concealed action, and their view?

They are.


Expect me then beneath the Garden Mount.


You swelling Clouds choke my afflicted sight*


The Stars like scattered embers fall. The Tears
Of men do meet in Seas, and Seas orewhelme
The Earth. The amazed Herds howl to the Sun
For help; whose Beams suck moisture up, till he
Hath made the flood his draught; but vomits all
In Showers again; such as Deucalion saw!

Nature (it seems) is frighted from her health.


Behold my Coral hands, they seem to blush
With guilt of humane sacrifice. Me thinks
I look like to a Memphian Priest, that had
Dissection made of Hecatombs t'appease
Their false Divinity. Alteza's dead.

I want pretence to sooth my faith: Else I
Would hope your hands depriued her not of breath?

Fathers that feed on Sons, and Sons that drink
Their mothers blood, reach not that cruelty
Which her sterne guilt did throw into my Breast.

May some kind Saint, weep over your Soul until
With holy dew, he wash this sin away.

Thou doest mis-spend thy vestal charity.
In the solitary age of Night I come,
To find those Angels that have business now
On Earth, in Synod here with thee: hoping
I shall receive reward for my just Act.

The hours that gave her opportunity
To err, were known so few; that my belief
Concludes her guiltless of the actual sin.

Before the hindmost part of her vexed Soul
Forsook her thrilling Lips, she did confess,
Sciolto had performed all circumstance
That doth engender Man. Sciolto too,
Confirmed her attestation as a truth.

Be deaf (sweet heaven) to this. Did Sciolto
Iterate her foul speech?

He did, which I,
Ore heard, and forced a passage to his Heart.
From its warm Throne, I snatched the aching Lump,
And threw it straight unto a hungry Fiend.

Is he dead too? The Genius of the world
Is sick, all Forms must cease.

Dost weep for him?


O Sir, should I restrain the flux, my Eyes
Would drop from their loose Strings instead of Tears.

This obsequy, doth make Compassion sin.


O Sciolto. Art thou so early fled,
To taste eternity, and unknown fate.

Stint thy hoarce Dirge, pernicious Whore. I had
Some hope, the interview that you enjoyed
Might be enforced by his unruly strength:
But now, I find it was with thy consent
Procured. You've struggled in each others lust.
All now is evident as light.

I bring
My innocence, to'th'cleere survey of Heaven.

Though dull, to Men of harsh, strict discipline,
Yet know, I have some cunning in my rage.
I came to fright this secret from thy Heart:
M^ Hands I did not bath in humane blood,
Alteza, and Sciolto are alive.

This joy will make my Heart dance in my Breast. --

Sink into th'Earth, where sorrow dwells. Ere yon --
Dim Morn shall add one Howre unto her Age,
Scioltos Soul shall take a doubtful flight:
It only stayed to mingle company
With thine. My anger was so just, I Would
Not prosecute thy life; until my doubts
Were cleared. Go, go, and number over thy Beads.

Is there in all your veins, no drop (vnmix'd
With Gaul) that from our Mother is derived,
And so may tempt compassion from your Breast?

Alteza mourns, as if t'expiate
A Nation with her grief. Had thou reueald
Such penitence, it might have softened my
Decree. But thou art sour and sterne of Soul.

No mercy, for our Noble Mothers sake?


M^ Mother when she lay, a cold pattern for
The figure on her Tomb, spent her last breath
In praise of thee. Quoth she; For my sake use
Thy Sister well: th'acqaintance that she hath
In Heaven is great. In the blossom of her growth
She shall ore'come the Eyes of men, and in
Her Age, she shall have skill in Prophecy.
But O false lore! Our Mother kind, (whom I
A Sybill held) thou now hast proved a Witch.

I am too weak to force from your belief
Mistakes so strong.

Go pray, the Hours are swift:
I'ue purposd thee a prisoner here till my
Return. -- This is a sickly Rheum* and not
Compunction in my Eyes. --

The last of all
My merits shall be called obedience to
Your will: If you do owe a kindness to
Your self; think on Religion and the Laws.

Nature do thou direct my spleen. The Laws
Are sinfullie contrived. Justice should weigh
The present crime, not future inforence
On Deeds. But now they cheapen blood: 'tis spilt
To punish the example, not the guilt.
Religion too, on our Italian Earth,
Grows like the Cedar big and high; but yields
No fruit. The abject race of men she doth
Confound with hope, and bids them not obey,
T'augment humility, but her own sway.

Your strength does but entangle ye the more.


I'll not be trus'd (Sir) like a Pullet thus --

Leave nothing that can minister defence.
Disarm him of his Pins.

Pare my nailes too. --

You shall be angerd strait, till you bestow
The time to bite'm off. Soon as we spied
You scaling ore the Orchard wall; we guessed
The hopes of your visit. There have been snares
Laid for your feet, ere since you left the House. --

There is some danger in this chance, my dull
Heart beats with slow, and ominous leisure. --

Pale Planet shine! It must be he. My Ears
Persuade me they oretooke his voice. Sir, Sir! --

Hah! Scoperta? A cruel destiny
Ha^ murdered all our joy. endeavouring an
Add (...) for stealth of thee, I was surprised,
Disa^md; even here 'ith presence of my Stars.

There's not a Star in all the Firmament
Belongs to us.

O none! Or if there be,
Thei^ influence is so weak that at
This distance Babes may blow'em out. Sure ou^
Creation we have took unknown to Fate.

Our love was of too nimble growth unless
Philosophie give hope, that after death
We may converse; this is the last of all
Our interuiewes.

That fatal Prophecy
Will shake my Soul from out my flesh; and like
Some tame Hermit I shall unwounded die.

The word that's heard abreuiates our discourse
And li^e: the Sand that limits both is fallen
Into the reach of number now: and I
Have spent with thee the hasty time prefixed
For a devout employment of my Beads.
The murderers are within.

Grimm wild horror!
Hast thou no weapons there that I may use
T'anihilate their vigour and their shape?

Unto thy Lips I'd throw a kiss; but with
The strings of my poor solitary Lute
They'^e bound my hands! --

O my hot rage! I could
Spit fire till I enkindle yonder Grove,
Raising a flame that might perplex the Earth,
And make'em think Heaven had dropped a Planet.

And I could weep until I quenched that ^ame,
And drew suspicion that a second Flood
Was come to drown mortality again!

This sudden elevation of the Soul*
Presages death: as if it practised how
To rise, and climb ere she begins her flight.

Whence is that noise?


I'll be as calm as are Arabian winds.
Scoperta, stay; Unheard we will converse. --

They come, they come, dear love, for evermore farewell*

O for the Giant race, to help me heave
Those Mountains up; that I might bury this
Proud Structure and my self! Yon burly Oak
(Whose Roots reach hell) I'll manage till I pound
And batter all the Marble into Flower. --

You have oreheard, what will your knowledge grieve.


Her Soul is ill prepared*

I gave command
They should awhile delay her death, lest want
Of leisure might destroy her penitence.

Remain within the summons of my call:
And leave me here. I charge thee by thy Vow,
And our friendships dear use, that thou depart.

Speak what thou art?


Some call me Altamont.
I'ue seen thee walk armed like a Magazine*
With small Artillery entrenched: but thou
Art fitly now prepared for sufferance.

Not thy tame sacrifice, but victory
I'll be. For naked as I am I will
Resist my death; and since vnfurnish'd to
Revenge, yet I shall trouble thy best strength. --

Sciolto, though, thou merit treachery*
And opposition that, by darkest stealth,
(...) of thy luxurious soul,
Yet I will give thee fair and equal Game.

False tyranny!


Stay. This I will perform*
And 'tis to know the rigour of thy might,
What wondrous flame and spirits do possess
Thy spacious Breast.

There's relish of intent!


I'd learn the providence and justice of
My Fate; try if they'll let me fall before
Th'incounter of thy bestial strength; thou that
Augments't thy sins t'orecome the memory
Of Heaven: in silly hope, th'accompts may be
Unwillingly surua^'d, because they are long.
Receive thy Sword. --

Miracle of bounty!


If whilst we struggle in the pride of hope
Thou can so weaken my defence, that I
Become disarmed; thy liberty is gained.

With solemn penitence I could accuse
My crimes against thee: but griefe's akinne to fear.
This great demeanu^e of thy spleen divides
Th'intent of Gratitude. I know not which
T'affoord thee most, my envy, or my love.

The moon hath now put on her brightest Robe;
My anger too, doth carry fire enough
To light us to the charge* Guard well thy Heart. --

A little respite give, -- Must we needs ^ight?


You then would cousin me of my revenge? --

Yet stay! -- Know I do love thy Sister well.


Mark (sweet Heaven) with what exalted triumph
He boasts the foul remembrance of his sin. --

Stiff as a column! --

Th'Arcadian wrestler told
Young Theseus so; but he did yield as if
His sinews had bin made of silk. So fierce? --

I'll work thy strength so low, that Virgins shall
Have power to shakle thee with spinners Thirds --

Thus I will bore thy flesh, till thou become
Transparent as a Sieve --

This closure hath
Entangled us, let's make another charge?

Even thus divided Billows part, that they
May meet in greater foam --

Wilt thou not bleed?
Not yet? -- I skirmish with vnbodied Air.

Thy guillt betrai's thy hand unto mistakes,
And thus my iniurd Spirits greet thy life --

That Wound gapes like to a yawning Giant.


So hot is thy lascivious blood, that as
I sprinkle it, it scaldes my hands --

I reel
Before thy breast, and stumble at a Wart --

Thy Sword's my Captive now. Meruolle, hoa!


^ have some courage yet, le^t in my Teeth,
If thou art kind, come nearer with my Throat --

O the Celestial powers are just. See there,
He bleeds like to a Spring, that borders on
The Rubicke Sea, whilst I remain vntuch'd.

Has he not lost the benefit of breath?


Stop all his wounds, and give him time to spend
The rest of's moisture in repentant Tears --

My wounds closed up, what means this courtesy?


That thou might leisure have to pray. Be sure

Unto a powerful length; you strangle him.

Can thy young honour stoop to such low flight?


Unto resistance equal, I exposd
My strength, to try thy courage and my fate.
This was my iusti^e to my self: ^ustice
I'll give to thee: Thy crimes do merit death.

O sooth my last ambition then* be thou
My Executioner.

Thou art disarmed,
Thy blooming honours now are withered on
Thy Crest. I should deprive my Anger of
Her fame, to be thy active opposite.

Scoperta, stay. My Soul shall hover strait
With thine. Stay for me in the Milky-path.

Let Italy avowch the just demean
Of my revenge. Dull Britains know no wrath.
Th'vnskillfull youth, that equal Duel give
To him that first incensd the blood; but tempt
The courtesy of Fate, such take delight
To stroke abuse, pay Injuries, with right.

This way (Sir) leads unto your Grave. You shall
Have space, to gain some friendship with the Saints --

A sudden frost congeales my Heart; I shrink
Like crooked Age; I am unwieldy on
My joints, as if my veins were empty grown. --
Wounded. His point has stollne into my Breast.
Oh help. I'ue yet some use for life. Th'nice search,
I made to know Heaun's secret justice is
Aueng'd. (Bold Earth!) I weep into the Sea,
And sigh t'augment the winds. Repentance is
An immaterial Salve, it cures th'vnsound
Diseased Soul, but not the Bodies wound.

A Guard upon my Gates, and have they there
Bin placed ere since the first arrival of
The Night?

Meruolle keeps the Keys, ho^le let
No servant be awake about the house.

The Sun begins to bath i'th'Mornings Tears*
Hast thou Lucio called, and bid Pytho mix
With him in a sad Song?

I have Madam.


No more ( Niente) shalt thou service do
For me: last night I told thee I had lost
My vanity: that courtly Lady serve
Who finds it first. But least thy wants augment
Thy Sins, my charity affords thee this --

Well I'm resolved to mend, or become worse.


THis Lady, ripe, and calm, and fresh,
As Eastern Summers are;
Must now forsake both Time, and Flesh,
T'adde Light to some small Star.
Whilst yet alive, each Star decayed*
She may relieve with Light:
But Death leads Beauty to a shade
More cold more dark, then Night.
The saucy faith of man doth blind
His pride, 'till it conduce
To Destine all his abject kind
For some Eternal use.
But ask not Bodies (doomed to die)
To what abode they go;
Since Knowledge is, but sorrows Spy,
It is not safe to know.
Howl, howl, until you wake the inhabitants
Of Graves! till you disquiet all the Spheres;
And put harmonious Nature out of tune,

What means this fatal summon, that doth make
Amazement cold, as is Iberian Ice.

Great Altamont (your Lord) who still was prompt
To curb th'incitements of your wrath; threw wise
Advantage from his reach, and struggled with
The bold Sciolto, in an equal war.

Down holy flame. When Hope doth sicken so,
I would not have the power to prophecy.

The surly Lyon, and the testy Bore,
Did ne'er maintain, resistance with like fierce
And ruinous return of strength: for from
Their Eyes such Lightning flew, that Villagers
(Whose early labours till'd the Earth) did think
Rash Phaeton did scourge the fiery Teem
Again. Sciolto chipp'd* gagged with wounds;
Did bleed away his strength. This his false Sword
Your Husband bade me prostrate at your feet --
And 'tis the last memorial of his love.

Ambiguous History! He conqueror,
Yet this the last memorial of his love!

Wise Heaven did mock your Altamont: for whilst
Ore joyed with victory, he spies in's Breast
A large deep wound, and thence his Soul took flight.

O my poor Lord! how soon hast thou begun
Thy immortality. The hasty Spark
So vp^ard mounts, and then no more is seen.

I'th'last remainder of his dying speech,
He briefly told his Testament; which doth
Contain employments sad, and such as you
Must actuate strait. To please his Ghost, show now
A little loyalty and love, Rise, and
Be conducted by my slow steps. I will
Inform your knowledge all that he enioyn'd

Th'obedience which I ^canted to his life,
Unto his memory I'll strictly pay.

You have a loss that doth out-speake complai^*
If sweet and pliant discipline of Courts,
If feats of mighty War, or sober A^ts
Advance th'esteeme of humane quali^ie;
'Tis fit your Altamont we strive to raise,
Above the charity or skill of praise*

Who did assist your passage to this walk?


Meruolle Sir, with whom we used your name.
Do you observe the Count, and his two lean
Ianizaries?

What in captivity?


Certain stratagems (Sir) have bin leuel'd
Against the Prerogative of your li^e ro^all.
Molard. Ere since the h^pe of day* they wai^ed your
Descent from the Cloister Bridge: but doubting
Their own courage, and meeting us disguised,
Thus in our original weeds; they would
Have bribed us for two Pistolets t'assist
The prosecution of your death. Our Grace
And strength bound them to their good behaviour.

They walk like Caterpillars on a Leaf. --
Yield me the cause why you contrived my death.

Good faith (Sir) for no harm.


Give me a Knife! --

Here is one belonged to Hans van Geulicke.


Take your self solemnly aside and cut
Your Throat! do it strait, and neatly too, you'd best.

The motion I d^slike, 'tis dangerous.


Have you three throats, can you revive as oft
As you are killed, to take new punishment,
That thus you mutiny against kind reason?

These thousand years 't has b^n observed, th'eldest
Brothers of her house (Sir) could ne'er endure
To cut their Throats.

Tis fit (dear Count) that you
Must die; I'm else unjust unto my self.

With sapi^nt Arts, we will project to save
Th'reputation of your i^stice.

As how?


I will promulgate I am dead, and both,
My Champions here shall sw^r't.

Wele venture one
Commandment to save another sir.

This cannot satisfy. How ere (Sir Count)
If you will patiently accept your death.
I'll furnish ye with Guides, for your last iaunt.
You Punto, and Stoccata too! No more
Of your philosophy. Fix Brow, to Brow,
Knock out, each others Brains, and show your Lord
The way, unto th'Elizian-Field. Do it
At first encounter too; For I'm in haste --

Slight Sir, I ne'er was in Elizium, I.
Nor should I find the way thither, though Signior
Argos, lent me Nintie Nine of his Eyes.

Then Punto shall be conduct to ye both.


Good Signior, any courtesy but this
You may command. You still do most presume
Upon the calmest, and th'easie Nature.

They all are forfeittures to th'Law. If you'll
Bestow'em but as prisners unto us,
They shall suffer, or give us large ransom.

How? a ransom? Th^se Two are poorer then
Carthusian-Monkes: lean as a Romish Lent.
Slaves, who pretend sickness, that they may lie
In Hospitals to steal the Sheets. Achornes
They eat, such as Westphalia-Hoggs do scorn.

The Count (Sir) will untie his Strings for'em.


Ransom, I'll give: for I do hate to die.


The ransom must
Be small. Shuffle'em together: and pack
'Em hence. I will not hear a syllable
Of thanks. Rossa, see'em horsed for Millaine.

O dismal change! does your victo^ous Sword
Hang now on aged Belt of Bandeleere?
Is your high Plume moulted to a sprig, small,
As if 'twere made o'th wing of a Beetle.

Who can resist the frowns of destiny?
My suffrance gives my merits their reward.

Your speech was wont to be in a more high
Exalted Key: loud as a Gulf! Your heart
Was full of ligges, and your feet did wander
Even like Autumns dust.

Affect so much
Humility as may employ your thoughts
With more compassion on my ru'nou^ fall.

I threw on you perpetual banishment.


I'm come to manifest the sin of my
Disguise* though it proceeded more from hope
T'inioy your person then your wealth. Witness
Each nimble Register of humane Thoughts!

'Has got a sweet and powerful way in speech.


This is my real ^hape, in which I do
Appear, a thin and witherd Soldier borne,
I'th'later age of war: When glorie's sick,
And honour trivial as the spleen of Babes.

He was not wont to use this Dialect.


Grant now (thou beauteous wealth of Italy)
An expiation for my crimes; For know,
I would be clean when I shall dedicate
My future vows to th'absent Altar of
Thy Heart: lest I do loose the use of my
Idolatry; and make repentance sin.

Do all harmonious gifts reside within
Such course and humble weeds?

Destroy me not
With scorn: I know you Ladies most delight
I'th'fraile surface of the body, in name,
And gilded pomp, which was the fatal cause
I practised them on you:

Y' endear the worst
Of fashion unto us, by making it
A custom in your selves. If men did not
Provide such follies for our sight, we knew
Not where to find their use, for they digest
Them first, then they become our nourishment.

Vain men. We alter our creation so
With female shapes, that Heaven scarce knows its stam^
And Nature (that distinction still commands
T'each Sex) forgets the work of her own hands.

I ne'er beheld a feature masculine
Till now: had you but thus appeared unto
My first survey, I might have loved in haste,
And yet excused the rashness of my eyes.
I gin to feel some danger in my stay.

Ere you depart, a small memorial from
Your hands, I crave, to wear upon my crest,
That it may tempt kind fate to look on me,
When I in glorious battle strive; and
I will absent my self for evermore.

I nothing keep for such sad use, as to
Deprive me of so sweet a miracle.

Grant my request, or I'll pursue your steps

If you continue still to beg, I fear
My bounty will prove rash: and I shall give
So much of love, as you can ne'er repay. --

O my auspicious stars! Should I not now
Make use of your good influence, I were
Unworthy of your care. --

The choice you make
Can ne'er deserve your chaste and lawful fire
She is Florello of a heart and strain
Too insolent for nuptial happiness:

Thou hast bin called my friend. But if thy spleen
Continue a dislike of her, I'll blow thee from
My memory, and with my chiefest strength
I'll punish thy missetake --

A des'late grief
Will more become thy breast then this proud rage.
Thy brother's dead, and his decease caused by
Her sisters pride.

My sisters husband dead.


Into my ^ares thou hast a horror powered
That hath already stiffened every hair
On my amazed skull into a Reed.

Wilt thou neglect to cherish the swift growth
Of our new loves?

Like to her sister she
But counterfeits a passionate esteem,
That thy fond Nature she might tempt beneath
Her rule. If Altamont be dear unto
Thy thought, leave her, and straight attend his Hearse,
That in the Chapel waits thy obsequy.

The inspired Needle's not more true unto
The North, the Sun to his diurnal race,
Nor Rivers to the Maine; then I to thee.

Sorrow and love, my senses do divide.
If I remain with thee, then only love
I serve, if with sad fleps, I tread the way
Unto my Brothers Hearse, I both obey.

Thou dost requite the skornes which I did throw
On thy first love. My destiny must needs
Be tragic now: since the contracted scope
Of all my joy, rests in diseased hope.

Behold the Throne, your Lord commanded me
Prepare: and here you must be pleased to sit. --

Can this advancement ought refer to your
Delight, or to my Lords last Testament?

Justice hath laid her sword within your reach:
And you have power to sh^ath it so; that where
You execute, you may a murder do,
Or sacrifice. Bring the delinquents in.

Sciolto and Scoperta still alive?


Thy spirit Altamont ascended with
The love of all my chiefest orisons.

These two were by your husbands jealousy*
And hate, ordained for death: but ere that we
Could actuate his will; his noble breast
Received a wound, that bad him strait provide
For 's own eternity. The last of all
His speech, referd them both unto your power.
You may appoint them live or die: and I'm
Obliged by vow, to see performed what you
Command.

O dire, sinister accident!


Your Jewels, and your wealth, I have packed up,
To ease our flight, when we have finished
This usurpation of the Laws. Let them
Enjoy their eyes; that they may know their Judge.

Hah, Sciolto!


Scoperta, O my Girl!


Keep them divided from each others reach*


I thought thy beauties had been dark and cold,
And th'adst (ere this) begun an easy sleep
Within thy silent Grave.

And I supposed thee fled
A Harbenger to Heaven: with purpose to
Bespeak my Billet near to thine.

Since this sad night, did blind the drowsi^ world,
They thus have manacled my strength. They'ue watched
My hardy violence so tame, that now
Each featherd Forester roosts in my Beard.

We cannot (Sir) be mortal long; therefore
Receive a hope our sufferance will cease.

Sciolto, now requite the leisure I
Have given thy penitence, by rendering straight
Unto the world, how far thou did corrupt
These Ladies with thy guilt. For know, I still
Persuaded Altamont thy lust inioi'd
No more, then what concerned wishes or hope.
And I was ushered to'th belief of this,
By knowledge of those secret spies which he
Employed to watch your personal remooues,
About the House: whose labours ever missed
Of finding that success he prophesied.

I do confess m'imagination once
Did sin against them both: but if it ere
Extended unto act; let me lose Heaven*

If Altamont were now alive, he would
Permit this utterance clear his faith. Madam,
You hear that he Scoperta vindicates
By oath; though his own crime doth carry an
Import more evident, and black; but yet
When you behold his feature, and his youth,
Your mercy may conceive 'twere pity that
He should so soon depart from time and flesh.

Sir, you have skill to know my womanhood
Is weak as ignorance, or sleep. Why should
You seat me here, thus to dispose of Law:
That ne'er knew any justice, but revenge.

Your sentence I am bound to execute.


Have I not heard you say, my Husband did
Ordain them both for death? 'twould ill become
The duty of my knowledge t'alter his
Decree.

Keep your intent, I will usurp
The office of your tongue. Mutes, strangle them.

If in thy functions, gentle Nature claim
An interest, let us embrace, and use
Solemnity, before we do forsake
Each others view.

I grant what you
Request: make your performance short; whilst I
Reveal m'opinions (Lady) to your ear.

O Scoperta! this is the last of all
Our busy dreams; what we possess is but
Imaginary now: Thy shadow I,
Embrace, not thee: for like to it, thou'lt fly
From my enjoyment, and no more be seen! --

So much of various fate, so soon expres'd
Two lovers yet ne'er knew; since sympathy
First dwelt on Earth.

Ere long we must be cold,
Cold, cold my Love, and wrapped in stubborn sheets
Of lead: hows'd in a deep, a gloomy vault;
Where no society will mix with us,
But what shall quicken from our tainted limbs.

Whilst still there's noise, and business in the world;
Whilst still the wars grow loud, and battles join;
Whilst Kings their Queenes salute in Ivory beds.

But O! how many Ages may succeed
In Heavens dark Calendar; ere we again
Material be, and meet in our warm flesh?

And whether that our souls, when they're preferred
To taste eternity will ever think
Upon the bargains of our humane love,
Is unto me a desolate suspense.

Philosophy doth seem to laugh upon
Our hopes, and wise Divinity belies
Our knowledge, with our Faith: jealous Nature,
Hath locked, her secrets in a Cabinet,
Which Time ne'er saw: and he that in it price
Unto Religion forfeites his bold Eyes.

Our Reason frights our Senses to distrust.
My Lips do beage from thine a Legacy --

O sad acomp^. How is my bounty now
Exhaust: This is the last I ere shall give --

Blind them again and stay their deaths awhile.
Madam, your knowledge is already taught
Scoperta's innocence. Sciolto's deed
Stands ne'er your punishment; but distant far
From remedy. Mark, his goodly feature.
With what magnificence he's built? Besides
This Morn* his Uncle too (the wealthiest of
Our Senators) is dead, and has bine pleased
T'intitle him his Heir.

Should I not chide?


Think how you loved him once. He will (to save
His life) d^scard Scoperta's interest,
And marry you: a happiness complete
For both

Hah?


Slaves. Stretch now your Cordage out,
Pull till my Eyes do^ start like Bullets from my Skull,
Murdering where they fly --

Hold. hold. -- Did my
dead Lord bid you perform, what I decree?

He did: and I asured it with my Vows.


Hear then without resistan^ of my breath,
Sciolto is condemned by Law; as known
The fatal Instrument that did deprive
My Lord, of precious life; so he must die.
'twere fit my care affected mercy in
Scoperta's dome; she's Sister to my Lord:
But her sweet innocence doth make her safe.
She must remain among the living still;
And in her rome, I do condemn my self.
For my sterne pride, was the original cause
Of this black Tragedy. Kind ^
Esteem your Vows, see my edic^ (...)*
And give me pri^iledge first to (...)
its wrath --

This carries wonder in it

I'll not resign these bonds of Death, unless
Sciolto share in the compassion too --

Give me your pardon (gentle Maid). I have
Deprived you of a Brother that deserved
More Pyramids, then all th'Egiptian Kings.
Instead of him, receive my prayers, my wealth.
When over his Hersse you raise a Monument,
And fix my Marble-Figure near to his,
Create me weeping. -- I shall go, with so
Much sorrow, to my Grave, that being dead,
My Ashes will have power to penetrate
The Stones. Release this pious Lady and
Perform your execution upon me --

Away you dreadful Ministers of death.
The Laurel Sprig, the Myrtle nicely wreathed
In Coronets, my Love deserves; for she
Is grown too good for Earth. --

My Altamont. --

This deceit brings wonder, great as our joy.
They that divide us now, must use the strength
Of swelling floods, and help of Thunder too --

Put all thy beauties on again, and smile
At the return of our long absent love:
My wound is closed, and will hau^ instant cure --

The Earth groaned at my fall, so heavy are
My sins, so much they did increase my weight.

Rise gently like a flame, from incense sprung.
Meruolle, to appease my jealousy
Ordained me this disguises that I might hear
How in your s^ntence you behau'd your love
To me: Had thou continued false, I had
Increased the anger of thy fate: but now
Thou art endeared unto my heart again. --

Sir, I have hope my future loyalty
Will manifest, your mercy well bestowed. --

Scoperta, thou'lt excuse the carriage of
My doubts, I looked on thee with th'eies of love,
And love is still too strict in her survey. --

My memory wou^d sin, should it record
Ought that might nourish my dislike of you:
You made me taste of sorrow, not of wrath.

Tis I, that have most ^eedfull use of your
Kind charity: forget my errors past,
And to oblige my future gratitude
Give Hymen leave to know your sister for
My wife. ^y Uncles death hath lent me power
Still to maintain her in such quality
As shall become my dear respects to you,
The greatness of her virtue, and her blood.

Take her, and be as tender of her health,
As Heaven hath over thy wounds; which in their cure
Express much miracle. -- My io^'s so swell
My breast, that I do find there's danger in
Delight. How blessed Meruolle are thy Arts?

Some Angels care assisted the success.


Not Altamont's return to life, nor yet
Sciolto's and Scoperta's glad reprive
Nor all the joys in reconcilement of
Your loves expressed, can my cold senses please:
Florello is unkind. --

The little God
Hath lately pricked her with his bawdy shaft.

Tell me Charintha, is thy love sincere:
Such as in the simple youth of Nature is
Exchanged by lovers with a harmless plight?

It is sincere, as holy Hermits vows,
And true, as their confession at their death^.

Appear Florello, and receive thy doom.


It was Meruolle's care thus to assure
Thy Mistress real love, and constancy
Ere thou should give too much of thine away.
But now receive her from Alteza's hand. --

Charintha, thy election is so safe
Thou never wilt repent the judgment of
Thy sight. He cannot be so near alli'd
Unto the blood of Altamont, but he
Must needs participate in virtue too.

We will embrace each other until Age,
Deprive our courteous sinews of extent. --

The gentle Turtle shall direct us how
T'augment our loves; the Eagle to renew
Our youth, and we will strive to imitate
The crooked Vine in our increase. --

Joy, joy!
The firmament is now unmasked, and each
Of us, hath found his star.

My Loved Sister,
I have orchear'd the story of your griefs,
And from this noble Signior, I must beg
A faith endeared, the name of Brother too.

You shall be precious to my eyes as day.


The great Dandolo and his Giant whelps
Are mounted on a Mule.

Naked they ride
As scouts of Tartary they're victual'd with
A single egg.

What are these, walking Drums?


They are such your knowledge shall affect: they must
Enjoy what I achieve. Dull men, o'war,
The Trophy of my victory behold,
She's mine: bow, and do homage to her lip. --

Still thou dost mourn ( Alteza) like a Dove.
Hark, hark how the Roman-Organ seems
T'inuoke the Thracian Lire; the Cymbals of
Iudea, call Castilian-Cornets forth,
And German-Viols wake the Tuscan Lute*
The sacred noise attend, that whilst we hear,
Our souls may dance into each others ear.


