I must not be so rude as to believe
That you (my Lord) can your affections set;
Upon a Maid, so humble in her birth
As she you name, for regard of honour
Do not mock the sister of your servant.

This way to madness leads, teach not my heart
Such modern Heraldry. Let it dispose
Of charitable thoughts, with natural eyes,
Vnlimmited by customary form,
Which gain, and nicety have made an Art,
Virtue, not blood ennobles us, and ernes
Her atribute, without hereditary help
From ancestors. O my dear Forest?
Thy sister with such noble wealth is fraught,
That to be covetous for her, appears,
A holy sin. But thou art cruel grown
Thy memory is sick. The old effects
That witness how I love thy learned soul,
Are quite forgot.

Young Lord, disclaim that thought!
Hear I Promulgate, you my Patron are;
You found me in estate so poor, so lowe,
That you were fain to stoop to lift me up,
You are the Dukes Creature! who doates by Art,
Who in his love, and kindness, Method keeps:
He holds thus his Arms, in fearful care
Not to bruise you with his dear embraces,
And what is she whose Virgin blood disdains
To quench your lawful fire? or whom the Duk
Would not procure to climb your Marriage be
Upon her Knees? And shall I then
(Like to the treacherous Moon) strive to eclip
The Sun that gives me light? Shall I consent
That she, that tumbled in a Womb with me,
Shall give your Issue birth? The royal Duke
Would thank me for such charity. My Lord
Though you are wise, you are but young.

Heart of Viper!
Sure Time hath lost his feathers from his Heals,
Mark how slow he goes? Shall I near be old
That my designs may repute have,
And credit in the World. I do not ask
Thy Sister for my Whore; but for my Wife.

Sir it is already joined unto my Creed*
For I would eat your Heart, should it contrive
A way in thought, how to cheat my Sister
Of her pure Chastity. I love you so
That I with care suppose; She not deserves
To be your Wife, and so esteem of her
That she is much too good, to be your Whore.
In this new Argument, I am too bold,
You know my duty well. The Dukes abroad
Though but the birth of day. Go Sir!

My glorious Boy, you are too vigilant:
The Sun, and you, do visit me at once.
This courtship is not safe. You must not meet
Your Lover, with a Rival, glorious
As your self. Forest! welcome from Genoa,
How fares our Brother Cardinal?

In health, and ease. He bad me tell your Grace
It was a deed of charity to think
Him worthy of this same great employment.
And this letter he humbly recommends
To your perusal.

How can it choose
But choke the very Soul, and bruise the Heart
To think that such a giddy Snipe: a Fool
(That merely lives to disparage Nature)
Should creep to this ambitious government.
Still he rules the Ruler. The Duke is Ward
Unto a Page; whose Eie-browes wear more Beard,
Then doth his Chin: And there's his Instrument,
A dark fellow; that with d^sguised Looks
Cou^d cheat an Hypocrite, older then Time.

I'ue heard a better Character of both,
Such, as to the young Count, Wit, and valour gives:
Unto Forest, honest Spirits.

R^port is then become a Bawd to Luck;
Whom Fortune do henrich, Fame doth flatter.

Sure this tame Priest will make us all Cowards.
We must a truce confirm with Genoa.
Well, be it so. Where now (my noble Boy)
Shall I occasion find, to testify
That you deserve my love, by virtue of your own?
In sickly times, when War and civil Spleen
Besiege the Heart, with treacherous designs,
A friend shall find a cause to make him known,
But now in fair weather: I need not ask
What Houell's ne'er?

In this, I dare discredit Fate.
They are not so wealthy in affliction:
With sorrow so well stored; as could suffice
To try my sufferance: in the behalf
Of you my Prince, and still royal Master.

Dare thou then die for me?
Here -- make thy self a sacrifice to Fame,
Take it: and I will be thy Chronicler.

It were (Sir) but ingratitude in me
To l^ssen thus, the number sanctifide
Of your true friends. Be you pleased to sheath it,
In that same part, which you do most abhor.

O Lucio! thou art my Earew^g now,
Creep'st in my ear, to feast upon my Brains.
When in my private grave I lye enclosed,
More silent then my ruined Fame: no tongue
Shall pay his tribute to my memory
But thine: for thou art likely to survive.
Thy years are few, but full of gratitude. --
Come: hye we to the Park: The sprightful morn
Gives motion wings, and liberty to those
Whom lameness stakes unto the ground.

Royal dotard, like tinder, thou dost waste
Thy forced fire: to give another light
Whose saucy flame will darken thine. Monstrous!

Why dost thou spend thy gall in secret thus?
A pox upon it: turn thoughts to action:
Heaven knows, I had rather enrich my self,
Then envy others wealth. Employ thy brain.
Get the Dukes fist to this; and thou shalt share
Five hundred Crowns.

What is't?

The old business.

And not yet signed: This it is to be modest.
Had I had reputation in thy Creed
It had been done long since. There's my agent.
Hence and provide me thanks. Save you Signior.

You may with charity.

Am I in your remembrance sir?

Signior Castruchio, as I take you.

The same. Because I never did desire
To gain by being troublesome, I lost
The dear benefit of the practique part.
Custom's a suitors safe encourager.
I the Duke have served, since I was able
To serve my self. Yet never had the luck
To get by it: and as the times promise,
Never shall: Unless I imitate the Crab,
And find my way (as he doth his) backwards.
That is. to make petition to the foot
That he will please t'instruct, and teach the head
When to comiserate my affair.

Signior. I need a comment to your words.

If you will move my Lord (the Count)
To get the Dukes fair hand, subscribed here;
Then shall I feel my self well understood.

Sir my abilities are most pregnant
When I find I may be profitable
To any Courtiers just, and modest suit.
I pray what sense carries the inscription?

Only this Sir. There is an Engine made
Which spends its strength by force of nimble wheels,
For they once screwed up, in their return
Will rive on Oak: but with such subtle force
That motion gives no leisure to impediment.
The large and ponderous Log is soon consumed,
To shauings more transparent then a Glass.
Of these the skillull Boxes make, Scabbards,
Sheathes, Cheasts, and molds for childrens Cabinets.

Trust me an Engine of importance great.
But now, what would the Enginere himself?

Faith Signior, nought but a Monopoly
For all those wares, his Engine makes.

Keep it. Good sir keep it. A monopoly
Why sir the common-wealth hath been so crushed,
With th'insulting Charter of such Parents,
That now the very word defiles the cause.
I had thought you Signior would have engaged
My industry in such a suit as might
Noway disparedg though it did enrich;
How ever not abuse the public weal.

Very good Sir. My Lord the Count, your self
(His servile Instrument) and some others,
Of this new faction that now, engross
All Offices, and send your Scouts abroad
Intelligencers strict, that bring you home
The number, and the rate of what your selves,
Or others in the dark can put to sale.
Nature hath not altered yet: the first
And antic method to preserve our breaths.
We must eat bread if we intend to live;
Which how to get (unless this humble way
That you deride) In troth I cannot tell.
It makes me mad to think you should expose
Us Men of Heart, to those fastidious helps
That escape your own acceptance. Your wide Threats,
That soon will swallow any thing which fills
Although it nourish not. A pox upon you all!

I did expect you would begin to rail.
Good troubled Soul! I knew you well before.
You are the only Man, whose wealthy Muse
Doth furnish all the Fiddlers in the State
With d^sp'rate Ballads, and invective Songs.
Libells of such weak fa^cy and composure
That we do all esteem it greater wrong
T'haue our Names extant in such paltery Rhyme
Then in the slanderous sense.

Very well Sir!

You, you must be a Satyrist forsooth,
Calumniate by instinct and inspiration.
As if just Heaven would borrow Gall of you,
Wherewith to write our faults. (O strict account!)
Your Gall, which in the Pen so overflows,
That still it blots, where in inscribs.
You imitate the property of Dogs,
Who bark and snarle most at him they know not
For else among all those you scandalize
Why named you me? (almost a stranger to your Eye)
My Ancestors that built no Monument
For their fames to dwell in; You also bring
Into the knowledge of the critic World.
Why I could never see thee yet but dru^ke:
Which makes thy Verses reel and stagger so.

Come sir! We may exchange one thrust unseen.
They draw fight, close, For stings down Cas disarmes him.

A pretty Cur! dare it bite as well as bark!
How now sir, your Mathematical thrusts!
Then have at ye -- Yield me thy Sword, or else thou dy'st.
I have no joy to set a^ liberty
A Soul so unprepared. And as thou art
My Enemy, I take a full revenge,
By suffering thy corrupted blood to dwell.
And taint within th^ veins. We're discovered --
Take thy sword Now get thee home and rail upon it,
Because 'twould fight no better.

Yet we may meet in the dark. You have a throat
And there are Knives in Italy.

A good day attend my ghostly Father!
Doth this your tarriance here discover ought,
You would with me?

Your leisure shall produce my utterance.
O Son, your fame is of complexion clear,
Such as ensnares the virtuous Eye, to love
And adoration. Such as would procure
All the skilful Angels suitors to her,
And such as serves for my encouragement
For I no letters have from Noble friends,
Which a requital from themselves inuit,
By Courtship bold, and troublesome to others,
Noram I with that wicked mettle stored,
That rules the mighty, and betrays the mind
To toil in a design, which angers Heaven,
And makes the Devil blush. But yet (dear Son)
I have a suite to thee.

Which I desire to know.

In the ancient Covent of S. Austine
There is a holy brother lately dead,
Whose place if you will but confirm on me
By the Dukes letter to the brother-hood,
Then shall I better leisure have to pray
For you my Patron.

Alas my Father!
The times are more observant to your Tribe.
It is the method now that your deserts
Need not to usher but succeed reward.
The Treatise (written lately) to confute,
The desperate sect in Mantua, calls it you
The Author?

It knows no other.

There your preferment safely takes root.
Believe me (ghostly Father) I will choose
The fittest time to woke in your behalf.

Heaven prosper your designs.

What throngs of great impediments besiege
The virtuous mind? so thick in multitude,
They iostle one another as they come.
Hath Vice a charter got, that none must rise
But such, who of the Devils faction are?
The way to honour is not evermore
The way to Hell: a virtuous Man may climb.
Let the flatterer sell his Lies, else where
It is unthrifty merchandise to change
My gold for breath. Of all Antagonists
Most charity I find in envious men.
For they do sooner hurt themselves, then hurt
Or me, or him, that raised me up.
An envious man is made of thoughts.
To ruminate much doth melt the brain,
And make the heart grow lean. Such men as these:
That in opposing waste their proper strengths:
That sacrifice themselves in silly hope,
To butcher us; save Revenge a labour,
And dye to make experiment of Wrath.
Let Fame discourse aloud until she want
An Antidote: I am not scared with noise.
Here I dismiss my fears. If I can swell
(Vnpoyson'd by those helps, which Heaven forbids)
Fond love of ease, shall near my soul dehort:
Maugre all flattery, envy, or report.

O good your Grace hear us, hear the complaints
Of us poor Men: O hear us! we are all
Undone! Good your Honour hear us.
Death encounter 'em! Lucio shut the door!
Tis the plague of greatness, the curse
Of pomp, that in our darkest privacy, we must
Even public be to every Mans affairs.
How now! All these saucy Troops of brawling
Suitors, attend on you my glorious Boy.

It is their humble skill not to arrive
Before your Grace, but by an Advocate
A Mediator blessed in your Eyes.

How apt am I to love! yet now observe
Unkindness in my care, and bitterness
In Physic. I study how to make thee less
That I may make thee more and more my own.
Office and Dignity are Enemies
To health, and ease. Respect grows tedious
Observance troublesome, where tis most due.
He that gives his Soul no more employment
Then what's her own: may sleep within a Drum.
While busy Hearts, that love to undertake
Beyond their reach of years: are fain to use
Drowsy potions: yet watch the Winter night
With more distinction then the Parish Clock.
Could thou resign thy titles and thy cares
To make me yet more capable of still
Enjoying thee?

My zeal unto my self forbids my speech.
Since if I make reply to this, I but
Disparedge duty, and consume my breath.
Where ^ight is young, and clear, there Spectacles
Are troublesome; and rather hide, then show
The object. The most devout obedience
Which I shall ever owe unto your Grace
Becomes my heart, much better then my tongue.

But yet observe (my Lucio)
Th'vnkind tricks of Nature: how we are fooled
By a religious constancy in Love.
A Princes hate doth ruin where it falls:
But his affection warms where it shines
Until it kindle fire to scorch himself.
If we are subject to the sin of Heaven,
(Too much charity) extremity of love:
Let there be mercy shown in punishment.
Why is the corrupted use of Royal love
Imputed to our charge, to our Audit laid?
We that with all those Organs furnished are
All those faculties natural in Men:
Yet limited in use of each: prescribed
Our conversation, by a saucy form
Of State. How can we choose (by this restraint)
But struggle more for liberty? make choice
Of some one Ear; wherein to empty out our Souls,
When they are full of busy thoughts; of plotts
Abortive, crude, and thin. It is cheap, and base
For Majesty not to be singular
In all effects. O then, if I must give my heart
To the command of one: send him (sweet Heaven!)
A modest appetite: teach him to know
The stomach sooner surfeits with too much,
Then starves for lack of that supply
Which covetous Ambition calls want.
For when my Friend begs, my bounty then
Concludes to make me poor before that he
Shall so unthrifty be of breath to ask in vain.
Distraction! tamenesse! O my Lucio.
How can thou construe this. After I have chid
I seem to flatter thee.

My gracious Lord! --

Peace --
I will no more employ my memory
Thus to discourage thine. Where's Forest!
It is fit he know you are not vigilant
In his behalf. Farelo de Sforza
(My old Secretary) is newly dead:
The place is his. I shall expect no thanks
From you, nor yet from him:
My bounty is requited in her choice.

Your Grace will bring us both within the reach
Of public envy.

Thou now would certify,
His birth obscure and base discourages
Such earnest help to his so great promotion.
Not a jot: Know my Boy! it is the vulgar,
Not the Royal trade to patch up things:
Or seek to mend what was before of quality
Perfect enough it self. To make a Man
Of nothing: why this same creation
Enclines a little near Divinity.
Near the old performance; which from Chaos
Drew this multitude of subtle forms.

Since you (the royal maker) do commend
The mettle, and your workmanship; it shows
There's little skill in those which envy him.
Forest is your Creature. Many times
I do acquaint him what the general voice
Doth urge in his disgrace. He laughs it out
And swears he would not loose that privilege
Which Nature gave him by her kind mistake
In his nativity, for the Seas worth.
As if from his Issue, he could ne'er deserve.
A ^nument, v^lesse himself do hew
The stones whereof it is built: unless he raise
His Monument on a Wart; his dignity
On poverty obscure and base.

We do aff^ct his thoughts Such industry
Proclaims him fit for high designs: Some Men
Attend the talking Drum, and riddle out
Their lives on Earth; with Madness Sophistry:
Calling their loss, their gain, danger, delight.
Some men converse with Books, and melt the brain
In sull^n study how to vindicate
The liberal Arts. Those loose formality,
Then grow Methodical; and die in the dark.
Some practise rules of State, and suffer much
For Honours sake: nay tread upon themselves
At first; to reach the higher. Some pursue
The Plough; and in their wholesome sweat do swim.
And some that furnished are with nimbler souls,
Employ their times in wanton exercise;
Masques and Revels: the complements of Love,
And Love I find the easiest vanity.

O gentle Corsa! make it so with me,
Fain would I (if I durst) reveal to him
The heate of my affection, and where it is fixed.

Hark: sure the gallery door is left vnlockt.
Are we debarred all place of privacy?
Nature in us hath lost her vulgar right.
A loud, bawling suitor; doth not waken
Charity, but deafen her.
A shame upon 'em all? In Lucio.

1. Heaven bless his Grace!
2. Amen: and my Lord the Count's good Honour.
3. Friend* went the Duke this way?
2. Here. This way.
3. Pray show me him: they call Signior Lucio
2. The Count. Come, I'll show you him.
1. Follow, follow, follow.
Dost here? Cosimo.

What say thou?

I prithee stay, why slip but here asid^
And thou shalt see the most resplendent Fop,
That ever did discredit Nature. Sigmor.
Lothario; a Country Gentleman
But now the Court Baboon: who persuades himself,
(Out of a new kind of madness) to be
The Dukes favourite. He comes. The other is
A bundle of Proverbs: whom he seduced
From the Plough; to serve him for Preferment.

Borachio.

My Lord?

Survey my garments round, and then declare If I have hit it?

You have sir: but not the mark.

What mark? thou bold Parishioner of Hell.

Why Sir, the mark I aim at: Preferment.
After a storm, comes a calm: the harder
You blow, the sooner your Cheeks will ache: and he
That cares for your anger, may have more of't
When he list, for my part, I know my Mother.

The froward Sisters have conspired Slave! Dog
Wilt thou never leave this immense folly?
Can nothing serve these dull Lips but Proverbs?

Sir, I know none of your Proverbs. First come,
First served. These words that are nearest the tongue,
Have opportunity soonest to leave
The mouth.

Is it then decreed, I must grow mad?

I'll be no more flow^ed, nor brus'd, not I
What need my Lord, be beholding to me
For's mirth; when he may laugh at's own folly?
Besides though motion and exercise
Be good for gross bodies; therefore, must they
Of the Guard, pitch me up and down like a bar?

Sa, sa, sa, A mutiny in Heaven!

If there be; You are not likely to come
Thither to appease it, first end this quarrel
Upon earth, I have served you this six Months,
In hope of an Office; and am no more
An Officer then she that bore me.

Alas poor fool!
I pity thee. Thou wilt believe nothing
But that which may be seen or understood.
I say thou art an Officer. Or if thou art not
Thou shalt be; which is better: for that same
Which we now enjoy is in some danger
To be lost: but that which we never had
Cannot be lost before we have it.

O rare conclusion:

Besides. Look here and then rejoice, Is the Count
(Whom they call my Rival in the Dukes favour)
Is he (I say) accoutred like to me?
Why his sleeves sit like stockings on his Arms.
His Breeches are like two Clokebags, half sowde
Together in the Twist: and his other
Garments show like Players on him. Follow.
And make thy fortune fat.

Well. He that still expects, but tires his hope,
What One cannot, another can: it is so
With days and hours too. And for my part
Let the Glass run out.

His Man's as full of Proverbs
As a Constable: he coins 'em himself.

And such another Heade-peece filled with Why
As is the Master here, the Sun ne'er saw.

He walks like a Zealand-storke.

But sure the Duke
Enables error in their fancy, by some
Behaviour equiualent to what
The Master, and the Man expect: for else
Folly cannot be so sickely-Eied; but time
Will give it strength to know it self.

Why sir; this dignifies the Ieast. They scarce
Ere saw the Duke: and are less known
Unto the world. His Grace well apprehends,
These voluntary mistakes of Nature,
In preservation of their intellects,
Are fitter subjects for accidental mirth,
Then a Comical continuance. It is
A levity too humble in a Prince
To heed such trifles.

Nay -- Prithee lead the way*

I cannot tell, why thou (my Girl) should joy
In my advancement thus. Honour, and place
Bring sullen thoughts with them: business of such
A ragged quality, as takes away
The amorous garb: those soft wanton touches,
Wherewith the youthful flatterer betrays
The weaker side to action: whose effects
More weakness brings. I shall no leisure have
To comfort thee with smiles: when it is assigned
That I must venture for a Boy: 'twill be
In haste. My business will not suffer me
To stay, and make a prologue to the act,
To kiss, or simper invitation.

It is not fit I apprehend you now,
But I wish that you would know; My duty
Is so well preserved from all corruption:
Which either youth: or foul example might
Produce: that it in plores for ^fferance,
To certefie the world how strong it is.

I was assured before. This is the time,
In which I shall oblige posterity
Or fall (my wench) by flattering error.
Hast thou to my sister counsel given?
Instructions safe! whereby her actions
May warrant her promotion well deserved.

It was my tongues last employment.

I would have her wear her growing fortunes,
In a handsome fashion: Do but observe
The vnpollish'd garb of City dames: of those
Whom ^athers purse-strings hoyfe up to honour.
How they do suck their Chins into their Necks.
Simper with unskilful leuetie: and trip
On their wanton Toes; like Kibe^heel'd-Fayries.
The Devils damme shows like a vestal Nun
To them: more powerful in humility.
Instruct my Sister, gentle wife. --

I shall be earnest to my utmost skill.

My Lord is come, where's my Sister.

With the Horentine: who instructs her* in music.

Signior Forest,
You see my love is rude, and bold. ^am
The usher to my own entrance.

My good Lord, The proverb will persuade you:
To be bold, with wha^s your own.
Your title's strong, bo^ to the house, and me.

I am in debt for both. wilt thou not child.
To see my heart assume this liberty.
Upon my Tongue: before it rightly knows!
Thy sisters heart:
The Duke consent, as yet unasked too: h^arke?

Cease that noise, tis troublesome:

How Forest? Hast thou ears? and wilt thou^
(...) such hopeful harmony, ^
Thy thrist unnatural, wilt thou forbid
Thy friend to share in what is good, sweet tongue
And hand, persist in what your kindness proffered.

Obey him, if the music not deserve
Your strict attention: You must blame your self.

Show me the way Forest.

Whither sir?

My heart is stolen out of my ear; let me
But know the thief, and I'll forgive the robbery.
Speak; who is't that, with a voice so amorous
And shrill, confounds the others hollow organ?
Still so reserved, and unto me.

Why then look there, the voice was hers, go sir
And take what else you would enforce from my possession.

Is this that child of Orpheus? how? kneel to me?

Stay Sir -- If she consent but to abuse
The property of motion in such kind
As may exalt her person but on such
Above this height: I am her enemy
For evermore. Consider what you do.
She brings no portion but humility,
If her first payment fail: who dares assure
The future debt? Pray look into her lap:
You'll find she comes not from the East enriched
With Diamonds, bright wealth: whose wanton worth
Unskilful fancy prises not from use
But from the idolatrous doting of the eye.
Her chaste obedience is all her dowry.
O bitter speech! it cuts my very soul
To think that fortune should create us two
Mere patterns of your charity.

Dare you authorize this Idolatry?
Then I'll kneel too.

And I,
Will join to make th'offence seem virtuous.
Now interchange your souls. Where passion is
So fond, it cannot well be counterfeit.
Each vnbusied Angel, hear me speak!
O send, send down unto this youthful pair
Celestial heate. Such serious love as makes
A business of delight; Instruct her soul
To practise duty in the humble strain.
And furnish him with an acceptance prompt.
Make her fruitful as the Vine; which grows
Crooked with the weight of its own increase.
So blessed in their Issue, that when time
Shall think them fit to taste the privilege
Of Death: they shall not need a Monument
Yet dwell as chief in the memory of Fame.

Amen, Amen.

Such is my prayer too. O Forest!
Excessive joy disturbs my utterance.
My words are parted on any tongue. O speak!
Thou know my heart! Tell her, there may lie hope,
I shall deserve those Tears that show like dew
Upon the Morning cheek. Entreat her, that
My years may not disgrace my love. Though I
Am young, I cannot counterfeit,
I ever speak my thoughts. I am overcome.

Alas sir, so am I, There needs no Art,
To help belief, where no suspicion is.

Now; I'll leave you to your selves.

I'ue much to promise in my own behalf:
Of my future love, and humble duty
To you my dearest Lord. Time lays his hand
On Pyramides of Brass, and ruins quite
What all the fond Artificers did think
Immortal workmanship. He sends his worms
To Books, to old Records: and they devour
Th inscription. He loves Ingratitude,
For he destro^d the memory of Man:
But I shall near forget on what strange terms
You ta^ me to your bed.

Excellent wretch! I am undone with joy
I will not blame the Coward to fear death,
Since the world contains such joy as this.
Why do you weep Lady? can you suppose
Forest would consent to what is done,
Unless he knew there were no danger in it?
Sure his Mother was a Sibyll; he sees
With a prophetic aim; the end of his
Designs; before they come to action.
He is too wise to err. Why weep you then?

It is a folly in my Eyes.
I know not why they weep: unless they weep
Because they now have lost their liberty;
Heretofore each man, which chance presented,
Was to them a lawful object: but now,
They are to look on none but you.

Mark then the bondage I impose on mine,
My poor eyes have no object, but your face:
Of which I will deprive them thus --
Shroud thee in thy vestal ornaments.
Creep, creep, my glorious Sun, behind a cloud.
For else my eyes, will su^feit with delight.
I never felt true joy till now. Me thinks
A brisk alacrity, a nimble fire,
Con^ayes me strangely from my flesh.
Not the Cannons, Iron-entraile, when wrapped
Within a swarthy case of troubled Air,
Could ^quall me in emphasis of Motion.

Though Mo^est would suffer me to boast,
Yet 'twere not in the power of breath, to make
My joy so known, as i^ is felt.

Come then (my dear Corsa) the Priest attends
Within; the world wants Men; and Hymen is
A nimble God. When all is past prevention
The Duke shall know my choice.

This disgrace, makes thy Cousin boyle his heart
In his own blood.

He hath writ a most pestilent Libel
Which must be sung all about the city,
By one he calls his Daw; A tall, big, fellow.

I know him. He sings like Phalaris Bull.

I supposed at first, he would have sent him
A Challenge.

But that's contingent now: Forest
Being made Secretary of State.

I'haue heard of the new edict, which institutes
A mysterious toy, ^'th' H^tband, for those
Of the faction.

Why about two days since: one of the sect
Sent me a Challenge. Because my sister
Drunk his Lords health, with her Quoife on. Each hour
These giddy Participles do embark
Themselves for Duels. The one is a kin
To my honourable Lady. Ih'other
To my very good Lord.

There comes my Cousin, chawing his lean heart.

Good morrow to the Court Satyrist.

The world is altered Dorido, Forest
Is stepped beyond my reach: we cannot meet
In Duel: The Heralds stand between.
But my sine Thrush, can sing you a new Libel.

We shall have your Thrush, in a Cage shortly.
Remember, who you deal withal.

Hang him, d^ll, open slave, His thoughts may be
Discerned, through the shaving of a deal bo^d.
I'll sift and winnow him, in an old hat.

Prithee (sweet Castruchio) leave thy barkeing.
'Twill bet treason shortly for any man,
To carry ears, within three, miles of thy Tongue.

Why Signior, what Faction are you of:

Not of your faction (Sir) if none return
Unto the prison for your libelling.
You remember your Vices-strip'd, and whipped.
Your trim Eclogues, the fulsome Satyr too,
Written to his Grace. Wherein you flatter,
Whine, and damn your self to get a pardon
For what seems there a resolute offence.
Satyrs, are more useful, now then ever.
Nor grieves it me to see the humour used,
But thus abused. To see a Bard still reach
At ho^ Baize, Passion o'me! I'll tell thee.
Thy R^mes i^clude not so much Brains, as would
Suffice to fill a Cherry-stone.

Yo'ld fain make me angry.

I, with thy self.

And then thou spend thy Gall, with more justice,
Then when, thou rayl'st against Forest.

Cry you mercy (precious Cox) Hath Forest,
So great a share in your tongue too? Sympathy
Is corupted. Behold society
Amongst the wicked: whilst a virtuous man,
Is left alone to resist his bad fate.
Let him chide the fulsome Age, rail against
The Times, aloud; though in a Vault: or'tweene
Two Hills. He shall find no zealous ecchoe,
To second his bold Language. When I dye,
I dye a Martyr to the Commonwealth.

Dull Caitiff, leave these abortive Prouects,
And talk in the newest fashion. I'll have
My very Dug bark in the Courtly garb.

Steppe aside. They are as mad as thy Cousin.

The excrements and mere defects of nature,
shall be reduced to Ornaments in me.
I'll feed upon the tongues of Nightingales,
For so each fart I let, will be a Song --

For the Peripateticks being Butchers
Here in Sienna: --

A Pallas hewn in an entire Carbuncle.
Encircled with a More that flows with Lhasis --

Derin'd their Angury from the warm Entrails
Of a Calfe.

Sir. These are some of those, that laughed at ye
In the presence.

At me? thou lie. They laughed at thee.

Why then the Devil, will ne'er give a Ma^
Leisure, to believe a truth.

Seignior Lothario, the great Minion
To our Duke: I greet your health, with all joy.

And I with all humility.

And I with all celerity.

Hark! thou dull Sinner. Is this real? hah?

Sir, let him, that hath a heart of his own
Think what he list.

Do they adore, or flout me now?

All is witc^craft. know when the Moon winks
There's something in'^, besides an eclipse.

Miscreant: What suspicious follys
Dost thou creat within that Wolden-skull?
And with what Heathen-phrase uttered? Know Dog,
If I employ my wrath --

Allas sir l'ue more faults then misbeliefe.
Therefore give me your bles^ing, and let me
Go home in peace. It is true, wh^n the sky falls
We shall have Larks. But let weaker stomachs,
Ex^ect such curious meat. I can eat
Oats, and Garlic, under my own Roof.

How? will Borachio leave the Court?

What accident of dire portent is fallne?

G^ntlemen applaud my patience: Because,
He cannot furnish me with wholesome Suits,
He doubts my power to get 'em granted.

Why we, will furnish him with Suits.

But wont ye flout, and play the knave with one?

How (Knave!) was that the word?

Interpret the word, as your self shall please.
I scorn to be your Dictionary.
Marry come up: Are your ears so tender?
I hope I'm a Man, although a sinner.

Use no choler Amorous child. But if
Thou want suits, thy Lord being near the Duke,
May furnish thee with --

Or me thinks thou would become a knighthood
Get him to beg it for thee.

No, no, Hot words make but warm air, A figg
For a Knight-errant; that hath a stile, and ne'er a hedge.

Then get a Patent to survey Brine-pits.
Or else for casting Ordinance in Loom.

Or else search Saint Peters patrimony,
Lay Prebendrys are good, and Symony
Is an old Paradox.

Hold, hold
Enough suffices all women but whores.
He that expects the Morning lengthens the Night
Therefore straitway let my Lord get the Duke
To sign these Patents: which done
I'll return to the wife of my bowels,
And dye for joy.

Why this, is fit, and requisite.

If Signior Lothario do consent.

It is decreed.

Who would hasten Time, when we may be old
Too soon. Let me take down a Cushion, and pray.
For I shall have more dignity then will suffice
To damn a Monk.

Who could perish in a better cause?

Why, can I help it? If a man be borne
To Offices. Or as my Master said,
Predestinate in the womb of greatness.
Tis not our faults. Each man obayes his Star,
In spite of his Teeth,

All this is Alcaron.

One thing grieves me. I'ue a bad memory
Already, and now 'twill be made worse.

How can preferment hurt thy memory?

O Sir! preferment makes a man forget
His dearest friends; nay his kindred too.

Look, Thy Master's building more Castles, in the Air.

He has intelligence from Spain, and fortefies,
To no purpose against the next Spring.

All offices shall be sold in the dark --

How! Grow not old in another garment,
Sell what's your own, Some of those offices
Are mine by promise.

Still, cross to my designs. I'll stretch your Sinws^

Hold! Signior Lothario, hold! Mercy
Becomes the powerful,

Let the Devil take the Knighthood, and make
His Damme a Lady. I'll not be his Ass,
That served for blows, and Prouander.

Lets relieve Borachio, or all our Comic Scenes
Are at an end.

Forest

My gracious Lord.

Are yet our Letters to his Holiness
Dispatch'd?

They are so please your Grace.

Did the French-Embassador make some show
Of discontent at his departure hence?

Both in his words and looks: for when he heard
The English-Leiger had opposed his Treaty
Concerning trassique with the Florentine,
His anger straight dismissed the Argument,
And seized upon the Nation, nay rayl'd
Against the Leiger too, whose opposition,
Might be chidden as too nice a Virtue,
But could not be accused as a vice,
Tis known indeed the French do take a prides,
In the emphasis of sudden anger,
As if alacrity in ill did make,
The fault look handsomely, and dullness add
Deformity to sin.

Tis faithfully observed.

Swelled with uncharitable pride: such as
Admits no stile of Neighbour; as if grown
Above the use of friendship. They seem to call
Those mighty Ilanders nearest their soil,
Poor borderers to their Continent. Such,
Whose thin numbers, have in bloody battle,
Made their multitudes their impediments,
Worn their Ensigns, instead of gaudy Skarfes.

The chance of war,
Admits many times of Miracles,
Even such, as do discredit History,
High-prouidence confers the conquest there,
Where probability conferd the loss.
And this is done, that we may attribute
The praise to him that gave the victory,
Not to them that got it. Observe besides,
That when the weak do overcome: the strong,
Do leave that stain, for their Posterity
To wipe away: which is already done;
The French, have fiery ni^ble spirits.

Your Grace deals justly in your praise. They (have
Spirits: but they all are useless made,
By forward and affectate violence.
He that spends his fury, and his strength
In the first charge, must not hope to make's retreat,
So nobly, as the modest Combarant,
Whose onset slowly moves: as careful not
T'outride his skill. Their valour is t'attempt.
Not to perform. It is a giddy Nation;
And never serious but in trifles.

Thou doest mistake in natural effects,
Where Fanc^ is so rich, the incident
To s^me u^-expence. These (...)
Divulge the wealth o^h' Brain. ^uite that is ripe
Is prone to fall, or to (...) self.
(...) to the ^e of ^archies:
Th^y now are full^ ripe: they reach
The height, and (...) of mortal ^aeuleies.
Nature (...) them doth stand upon the verge
Of her (...) y^uth The English want
Three ^u^dred y^eres of that perfection.
And as the Moo^e ner'e changes but i'th'full
Even so the mighty Nations of the Earth,
Change in their greatest glory. First their strict
And rugged d^scipline, to vain delights.
Their solemn Marches next to wanton ^igs.
Their Battles fierce to Duels spleenatiue,
Or witty quarrels of the Pen.

Here may my knees take root: whilst I do grow
A living Statue of true obedience,
Or let my royal Master grant his pardon.

Sure we may trust, the judgment of our eyes,
Thou dost not look as if thou could commit
A sin so horrid, so ugly as can fright
Our mercy from us. Rise, we pardon thee.
Now let us know thy crime.

It is no crime
Unless against that great prerogative
Your ear hath ouerrune. Perhaps my Heart,
Hath made escape through these fond Eyes. And I
(In the rash discretion of my youthful blood)
Confined my self in Matrimonial bonds.

Hah! married? speak suddenly, to whom?

Io my Sister. Sir pardon the permission,
Or frown, and leave your creature more obscure
Then when you owned him first. Now is the time
To show your charity Divine. Preserve
What you have made.

Forest this is ill.
What confederate with vngouern'd youth?
But (...), we pardon you. Where's the Lady?
Rare beauty! --
You have our pardon, and our favour too.
I thus inuit more knowledge of your worth.
Believe me Lady: you have a feature
That ^ould b^tray a more experienced Eye
Then Lucio's is. Excellent wretch! with a
Timorous modesty, she stifles up
Her v^terance. O such a pregnant Eye!
And yet ^ slow of speech; is a wonder
More d^ightfull, then any Nature makes.
Hast thou Lucio, so much vnh^ppy wit,
As to be ^ealous yet? with thou suppose
Thy self s^c^re in our discou^se?

Heaven ^orb^d, your Grace should ever employ
Your ^ as to discourse with her
'Till grew (...).

Come hither Lady, come, confess, how chance
Y^u have b^witch'd my Boy with subtle smiles,
With wan^on hauiour of those pretty Eyes?
Doth H^uen bestow such Noble ornaments,
To be abused in the use: and now
He is your Prisoner too, in cheerful bonds,
How can you have the heart to make s^ch spoil,
And havoc of his beauty? hah! speak Lady!

I hope your Grace hath thoughts more me^cifull.
I know this match was made in Heaven; and not
Prouok'd by any sinful art in me.
How I have v^'d him in this little time
That he hath bin my Lord: let him declare.
My duty is so strict, I need not blush
To hear the story told.

No! look, look there. His Eyes for very shame
Their luster's lost are crep't into his head:
Encircled with the weakly cullor blew.
The Roses in his Cheeks are withered quite
His clear and brisk aspect is muddy now
And dull: His voice (that was so shrill; and could
Even Trumpet-like, outscolde the Ecchoe)
Is hollow grown, and horce. Have you then used him well?

Alas (most gracious sir) go not about
To make my Lord suspect my Loyalty.
If Nature sickne in his faculties;
Which (heaven be thanked) I perceived not yet,
It cannot prove a guiltiness in me.

Believe (young wife) I am no Proselyte,
I still auerr, you are that greedy Nymph,
That hath devoured the rich complexion of my Boy.
See how his feature's shrunk? his beauty stained?
The Scythian Dame (whose cruelty is such,
Whose lust so prodigal, that she doth strive
To kill the able Lecher in the act;
Making her womb his Sepulchre) would yet
Have spared that wanton handsomeness; to show
As pattern of her Lenity.

I hope, your Grace will pardon Ignorance,
That so ill mannerd is, as not to know
Your meaning.

No matter Lady.
My accusation shall withdraw it self.
Pretty innocence! Lucio, prepare.
Tis our will to make thy Wife a Courtier;
She shall be high in favour; if she'll leave
Her modesty; that's out of fashion now:
In Neighbour Courts, the Ladies so preuaile
With masculine behaviour: they grow
In factions able to depose their Husbands
From the charter of their Sex.

It is strange that his dislike is fled so soon.

Your Marriage we will solemnize with masques,
And Revels. If Invention ^uer mean,
To get reward for subtlety; tis now.
We take notice ( Lucio) She is thy wife,
And thy sister our Forest.

We your Graces humblest Creatures.

Affection is become a Parasite;
Strives to please, whom it cannot benefit.

Known, by whom by City wits!

Or my Ladies workmen.

Who ne'er saw verse, but what their Suitors writ,
Which they read like Prose too.

I'll not discredit my patience, talk on.

They say you are particular with a
Great Lady.

Yes, and her Pensioner.

Some loose thing (belike) yet will be at charge,
To secure her fame from noise. For thou prayst
Against all lechery but thine own.

And she hath wished in witty-penitence,
Thou had been single in the world,

I, for then she had lived chaste. He grows angry,
His eyes look red.

No Sir. They blush to see a Fool.

'twere fit they would employ their modesty
At home. For thou art a fool in print.

Yet had he lived, when the old Sybill,
Presented her divine Manuscripts, to
The dull Roman; he would have scolded with her,
Unless his Pamphlets had attained the first
Acceptance.

True, for every Poet thinks himself
The best Poet in the world.

And that Satyr not the worst; wherein
He chides Women, for wearing their Halfe-Ruffes,
Which pinned behin'd trans sc^tuates the face,
Or makes'em look, like Ianus with two faces.

A just exception: for going hastily
To kiss his whore; he could not find her Mouth.

Why sure her breath was strong enough
To direct him to it.

Yet I have heard nothing, but what deserves
More pity, then anger.

Now when he hath provided some high toy
For the Press; he thinks on d^dic^tion,
Strait chooses one of the faction; who must
Not Patronize, but buy what he makes vendable,
With praise in the Epistle.

Can you deny this Cousin Satyrist?

And nothing makes Learning so cheap; but that
Every writer sells his works.

Nay let's follow; and worry him to pieces.

Our ruin is contrived above.
If our Master p^ocue vnkin'd, the Planets
Govern ill: For our gratitude, and care,
Deserves more constancy.

Looks he so strangely on ye?

As if the object were but new to him.
And his own heart unsettled in his b^ast.

Is his violence so soon tired? survey
The Register of your own deeds. Speak Sir,
Have you so engrossed his ears, as if their
Organ, were yours, not his. Confined 'em to
Your own tongue: and so d^priu'd the sorrowful,
The grieved in heart, of an easy audience?

^euer.

Since you have shared the Dukes prerogative,
And by his love, held opposition.
At such great advantage. did you e're slight
With cheap regard, those of high, and Noble birth?

My soul abhors such tyranny.

Have those who wear th'Eternalls Livery
Bought their wages of ye? Or have they found
Bold, and skilful flattery, more helps
Adua^cement; then deep and modest Learning?

Never, since my distinction was of power,
To help its choice.

In nice trial, or evidence of Law,
Hath Custom (which only gives us hope
Of certainty in Justice) bin traduced
By your obscure help?

Never.

Hath the desolate Wid^ow scared mercy
From your eyes, with her old ruined beauty,
(For grief was never amorous) or hath
The torn Beggar too soon dismissed your charity
Because not giddy enough to delight
Wantonness.

Never.

Then if our great Master withdraw his love;
The weight of sufferance cannot bruise ye;
For the whole world will share in the burden.

From whom is this sir?

From my Lord Marquise de Loretta.

I humbly kiss his hand.

Now luck flatter me but once, and I am made --
Tis short, pray heaven it be sweet, or I'll ne'er love
The Proverb.

Sir, have you ever bin in service,
Under any eminent Commander?

Never yet.

Read these Forest.
How Reputation lessens in esteem.
Courtesy grows so cheap, that denial,
Seems less troublesome then consent.
And performance is only Lazy.
The labour of subscription hinders more,
Then thought of that, to which it doth subscribe.
This Letter would fain make you a Captain
In the new Troupes, sent to the Valtaline.
But sure your modesty will teach you baulke
The grant, though I should beg ye to receau't.

Sir. Shall the grey head, the old Soldier.
That tries misfortune by his constancy
In sufferance; ^ffronts the winters rage;
Whilst his blood is frozen into Corrall,
His sins into Wire: whole Valour thinks
To wear Chained shot, as bracelets on his Loins.
Shall his preferment be intercepted?
Shall he now trail a Pike under a Boy,
Whose experience is younger then his face?

No, the frien^ship of the noble Marquisse
Shall never countenance unjust deeds.
Find a Suit more capable of my grant,
And your acceptance, it is your own.

Noble Signior, I'll put ye to the test.

Princes letters are c^e^per far then those
Which Scriuen^rs put to sale. If such Pigmyes,
Apes in doublets, procure command of the Camp,
Let the Cranes wage war again. No opposition
Is too weak to ruinate. -- Go young Lord,
The Duke is ill accompanied, if on^y
With his own thoughts. Discover more. Perhaps
His discontent concerns not you.

I fear, yet my hopes would fain comfort me,
Farewell.

I would not be unmannerly, but if
She be at leisure, tell her, I am here.

Please your Ladyship to sit, I'll tell her so.
She's come already.

I saw your entrance. How do you Sister?

I humbly thank your honour, I am well,
Pray dismiss your woman: I would impart
A privacy.

Watch my Lords coming from the Duke, and bring
Me word, before he is vncoach'd

I shall.

O Madam Time is now grown old, and runs
But slowly, I thought each Hour, a year,
Until I saw your Ladyship.

Why what's the matter? I hope my brother's well

Yes, I thank heaven. But pray come hither.
Who do you suppose was with me last night,
When my husband was at Court?

How should I tell, without you instruct me.

Why give a guess.

The Lady Benuolia, or the Lady
Vtruvia, who was it?

Nay t'was a Man too.

That's fine i'faith, pray name him to me.

What think you of the best man in Sienna?

How! was the Duke with ye?

Yes, disguised too: he either came, (or else
Pretended so) to meet your husband there.
After some talk, (in which he did express
His love to all our family) he gave
An ample praise of you: and said he saw
Already so much worth in your fair breast
As will add a knot to your Lords Heart,
And his own: nay and make his constant love
A pattern for every royal Master.

Indeed, I daily pray to have it so.

Then he gave me this same Jewel; to you
He recommended the receipt of this.

Trust me wench, they are both full of glory
Rarely cut, and set.

Yours is the better of the twain,

It is.
But truly I mislike the manner of
The gift. Dost thou think his thoughts are honourable?
I prithee tell me?

They are such as I suspected at the first,
Such as made me to refuse these Jewels.
He swore I was a Traitor, if I thought.
He meant amiss Or if I did deny
To bear this same to you, I did but ill
Require his kind request unto my husband.
Then in the close he used such Art, such subtle phrase,
To free his thoughts from the strict jealousy
Of mine; as reconciled me to obey his will.
You know besides how harsh it is to chide
With Majesty, or slight Princes favours.

I'll show to my Lord.

I had thought t'haue shown my husband mine too
But since it is capable of curious
Questioning, I mean to stay awhile.

Thou counsayl'st well. We'll wear 'em both at once.
Mine is the best, I e're was Mistress of.

And mine is not eclipsed much by yours.

Madam, my Lord is near at hand.

Come Sister, we shall here the news at Court.

I'll wait upon your Ladyship.

Sir Knight, believe Forest is the Man*
That dulls your reputation with the Duke.
And subbornes the Count against ye.

Dares he control my purposes?

Ask honest Borachio else.

Nay He will not believe me: though I should sw^
You slout him behind his back: and when a man
Sees things plainly; he need not buy spectacles,
Till he grow old.

I'll mince the Villain into sand, to fill
My Howerglasse --

In this Garden he walks continually
After dinner. Here stay, and expect him.
And Signior in this skin of parchment; mark
What pains I take, to perfect your revenge.
In the shape of tree (which takes root in Hell)
You shall discover all his base descent.
On that branch appears a Hangman. Then,
A Iakes-man, then, a Tynker. On's Mothers side
A Bawd professed. then, a Tybb. then a Trypewife.
A Synagogue of Welsh Rabbys; could not
Express more skill in Genealogies,
Then this includes. Sir, show it him, and he
Insaniates strait.

I'll make him wear it on his forehead.

Excellent rage! but not a word of me.
I humbly take my leave.

Not the four winds (met in March) shall cool my spleen

Sir, now we are private, tis a fit time
To be troublesome --

I'll cram Cerberus, with sopps made of the slaves blood --

Concerning those Offices. I'ue thought on'em.
And will have 'em all in spite of Boltens teeth.

Signior Lothario! Boracho too.
Thou art an honest fellow.

I, your worship is wise, to speak no more,
Then what you may well stand too.

Base stem, derived from I soap root,
Our Ancestors were not so familliar.
Behold, grow more mannerly.

Whats here? My Pedigree? Some saucy knave
Hath counselled him, to this affront. What he,
I must know th'originall proiector.
Lay hold upon those fools.

Lay hold on me?
Take off your hands; or I will toss ye all
Into the clouds, and kick the Mountains after ye.

I pray bid the Gentleman take good heed;
For my Master, can do all this, and more too
I have seen him.

Be you quiet. You that desire Offices.

If I do, what then? there be ^hose desire
Worse things.

Know ye not Rogues, that I can muzle up
The testify Unicorn, in a Spinners thread?

Lay all hold on him.

He that cannot run for his Liberty
Hath no courage in his Heals. Let the Gout
Take him, that hath Legs, and w'ont vse'em

No matter, let him go. Convey that fool,
Unto the Porters Lodge.

A Chaos shall succeed this same.

Whither so fast (sweet Lord!)

Forest, I have taken my leave of the Duke.

Must ye away to night.

Now, presently. My followers attend
At door. I only came to kiss thy hands.

The Sun will fail ye, ere ye reach Lucca.

I must through. His grace will have it so.
Why dost thou make thy head, to shake and reel,
Upon thy shoulders thus. Is it overcome
With thoughts, and such as must be hid from me?

Take heed, suspicion is the Favourite
Of Time, and Nature, it takes a sudden grouth:
And gathers in the breast, like Balls of suow,
In snow; until the weight make it deny
To be remoou'd: then melts at leisure too.

He's too moderate, that will at my years,
Be satisfied thus.

Why then consider thus. You go to Lucca,
There to congratulate the sate approach
Of the Popes Legate; He hath bin there a week;
And why he was not visited ere this
Or why upon such strict, and short summons.
Your self must now be sent; quite puzles me.
Actions rare, and sudden, do commonly
Proceed from fierce necessity: or else
From some oblique design: which is ashamed,
To show it self in the public Rode.

Forest is this all?

Why me sweet Patron: this is enough
Of danger, since none is merited.

Young thoughts encourage me to sufferance.
Each storm is usher to a gentle calm:
Why toils with speed, gets soonest home to rest.
The plodding Mule shall sleep eternally.
Why should the stricken dear bem^ane his death:
His obsequies, were full of noble rites:
Acteons Quire, a jolly Requiem gave:
And the Arrow from the bow did sing his dirge.

Thus thy years do riddle grief away;
Making sorrow swift, because 'tis mortal.
Let me wait, on your Lordship to your horse,
And at your better leisure read this same.
I'll tell ye as we go, who brought it me.

To wrong my boy, unkind, incestuous heate!
Why is Copulation legal; it gives
Authority to lust, for chastity
Would soon conclude the World. O virtuous
Pre^dice, when error, prevents folly!
Fiends, Devils, that do live in liquid fire,
Have constitutions not half so hot,
So riotous as mine. But why this?
The beauteous Corsa is not yet defiled.
He that repents e're he commits a fault,
Doth like a thirsty, sinner store his Soul
With mercy, to absolve that sin himself;
Which he may afterwards, more securely
Fall into. Enough this soon Initiates.
The credulous Count her husband, I have sent
To Lucca. And tomorrow he returns.
My plots are limmited too short a time
To become Actions. Nor was it skill
To send the Jewel by her sister. Mark!
My Soul and brain, are perfect Courtiers grown;
In my declention, and my greatest want
They leave me to instruct, and help my self.

These fancies are not old: the whole Court
Observes him strangely altered. But why
Am I sent for? that I must know, by safe,
And cautelous insinuation.

How soon, I'ue profited in discipline
Of Hell I must through What I did mean
Adultery at first; will now I fear
Become a Rape.

Hah! still upon that string? I like it well,
It is musical.

Castrucho! art thou come?
Thou hast bin a Courtier long; but whether
'Twas want of skill in me to choose a Man,
Or want of luck in thee to be my choice;
Suspense makes neutral. But know; my love
Was tardy, because still void of leisure;
To warrant passion well bestowed; by safe
(Though tedious) trials. Affection
That is slow, is sure: And now, I wear my heart
Not in m^ne own breast, but thine.

I have but one life, it is some error
In your Grace, thus t'oblige me to the loss
Of more, in your dear service.

I am not skil'd in words. But I affect
Thy fury. For thou art the bold Satyr,
That whips Forest, and the wanton Count,
In thy tart Verse.

My gracious Lord! I shall conceive much grief,
If my zeal mistake in accusation
Of those Men, which th'vncertaine Tongue of Fame
Delivers to my charge.

Nay, make not thy confession an excuse
Rather then a story: For there needs none.
I hate Forest, and the Count, and would
Devise succinct ways to my revenge.

Heaven forbid: I'd rather far disgrace
The skill of my subject; call accusation
Slander: then that the busy multitude
Should note inconstancy in you,

This is a damned Hypocrite. Chamellons
Changes, are not so intricate to sense.
Castruchio! ease me with nimble apprehension.
I have not leisure, to be modest now.
Speak; hast no acquaintance with any near
Corsa's person; the Counts fair wife?

I humbly beg, your Grace would not mistake
The conditions of my duty.

I beg of thee not to mistake the sense
Of my designs. My words import my heart,
And both, no danger unto thee.

I hope my skill in servitude, will not
Provoke my Prince to tempt my honour.

What prolix love is this; Dost thou indent
With my acceptance, make choice of services!

Your Grace will give me leave; since that I know
I not deserve to share in your high secrets,
To doubt my safety in knowing this.

Death! and horror! thy suspicions are too thin.
Consider why I sent the Count to Lucca?
Upon my life thou art secure: therefore
Reply unto my former question.

My gracious Lord, I have some interest
In her woman.

In Corsa's woman known to thee?

She is. Perhaps --

Discharge thy tongue. May my ears blister
If they digest words to thy prejudice.

Perhaps I knew her, beyond the modest strain.

There's Gold. Castruchio, show some pity
On rebellious blood. Be my Harbenger,
Billet me this night where she doth lye
And thou art made for ever.

Must it be this night?

Strict opportunity will have it so.
Her Lord returns with the next Sun.

I cannot say her self shall porter be
Unto your entrance; but her woman shall.

Enough! here's more Gold. Smmon up thy brain
Thy heart, thy soul, to meet in consulation,
And so contrive my peace, Farewell.

I will instruct your Grace e're long: both when,
And how to make this armorous assault.

My self and my Exchequer are thine own.
There needs no Art to work him into evil;
He is bad enough t'infect the Devil.

Good! they have left the Garden door unlocked
I'll venture in to help discovery.
Castruchio is graced with rare employment:
The Duke and he do here consume the Night.
These are hours for Ghosts, Adulterers
And Thieves. The slave is Haggard. At Supper
Being full of gold: his vain Appetite
Fed at Nero's rate; I was discarded
With a frown: shaken like a Bur from his sleeve.
As if my closure heretofore had bin
Impertinent. Ambition lessens all
Beneath it self to nothing: the higher
We do stand: so much less those men appear
Whom we behold below -- Hark! Kind Fortune
Lend me thy Ears --

The night grows aged now. 'twere fit the Duke
Would hasten his departure. In troth Wench,
Thy service to him exceeds requital.
But what; she took it willingly!

No, but she did not.

Pox 'o these modest Lies! I say she did,

In troth you do abuse her then; I'm sure
Her shrieks did scare my heart up to my lips.

Then thou could have Kissed heartily.

I wonder, it wakened not the whole house.

Is't possible! what means did the Duke use
To stifle up this noise?

Nay, I know not. But since she was no more
Pliant; it doth repent me much, I'ere
Was instrument to his other actions.

What, repent! I prithee sweet Duarte
Wrong not Divinity so much: waste not
A virtue, that would more profit others:
And to suppose that the Lady was ravished,
Is an heresy, which my Soul must ne'er
Be guilty of. Do not I know Women
Are a kind of soft wax, that will receive
Any impression?

And do not I know: there is difference
In workmen as in wax. Hard wax (when cold)
Accepts of no impression. By coldness
I in far chastity: for chastity
Is cold,

But those workmen are harder far
Then that hard wax. And it is hardest of all
To find those workmen: unless by Russia
Where the people freeze, till they spit snow. Come,
Kiss me Chuck. Again, once more --

A precious Satyrist! This surly Dog,
Inueyes against lechery in others, because
He would engross all Women to himself.

Your greatest Thieves, are commonly begot
When Parents do their lechery by stealth.
Men get Cowards, when frighted in the Act.
And by such vulgar consequence: it is now
A proper time to beget a Pander.
One, that may hereafter do other men
The same office: which we do the Duke now.
Come. Shall we, in and try?

You presume much, on an easy nature;
And how extravagant you are abroad;
I am not so unkind to question.

Faith Wench: I've some interest in every Child
That playsi'th' street, The Dukes come down. Go, go,
Give your Lady a Caudle: and let me hear
How she likes her new Bedfellow. I'll meet
His Grace two hours hence: when he hath dismissed
Those thoughts, which still succeed unlawful lust.

O damned villainy: Is this th'imployment
That doth make ye proud? I will haunt ye still,
To strengthen my intelligence.

O silly, weak evasion! being dark,
I creep within my Cloak. To is modesty
In sin to practise every disguise
To hide it from the World. But Creatures free from guilt
Affect the Sun, and hate the dark; because
It hides their innocence. O traitor Lust.
That leads us with encouragement to fight,
And when we have discharged our Veins for thee,
We're besieged with thoughts, that more perplex us
Then the former. For then we did complain
Of strength; but now of weakness more.
Away, ^way. It is time that I were gone:
The modest Morn doth blush in the East, as if
Ashamed to see so foul a Ravisher.

So swift of foot! I must overtake ye.

How now! the World is wide enough: wherefore
Dost thou iostle me?

Cry mercy Signior: the day's blear Eie'd yet,
And my own hast made me unmannerly.

Sig^ior Dorido is it you? Tis much
To see you appear before the Sun.

Faith Signior; the Count being out of Town
I though^ Forest would have more leisure
To peruse my new Suit. He's early up;
Which caused my vigilance.

Why Signior use a means more absolute;
It is true, Forest does all: but how?
As th'instrument governed in the workman's hand.
Instruct me with conueniency of time,
And I will work the Duke in thy behalf.

Then Signior, you will oblige my prayers.

At supper, when you departed from me,
You gave demonstrations of discontent:
Who knows, but whilst the soul's employed within;
The body might neglect some outward form,
Which curiosity preferrs to custom.
Custom to abuse. It was my business
Not disrespect of you, that did deprive
My complement of vanity. I shall
Rejoice when I can show you kindness.

I will be bold to think so.

I'd have thee build thy Mansion on a Rock.
Favourites are served in with those Dishes
The Prince best loves. And meat we most affect
We soonest surfeit on. Instruct thy soul.
The Count is but a glorious trifle.
And to be factious without benefit --
Well, think upon it. I know a way to get
The Dukes best Ear, without Foreste's help.
Farewell.

The Profit of the day be yours. These tricks
Shall make me wear him in my Eyes. The slave
Doth usher out his breath in state; as if
His honours had out grown his own knowledge.
Yet but a tame Pande^. The beauteous Corsa
Is ravished by the Duke. O black horror.
Arise my soul, inspire my industry
With noble purpose. Something I'll do
That shall proclaim my Spirit.

Hence, hence, like Time; who swiftly flies away,
But evermore returns. Go cruel wench!
Thou hast betrayed thy Mistress, even to
Eternal loss. Th'Angels that live above
Have seen it all. They know thee well enough.
In the general Session of the world;
It will not my adultery be called;
But a prodigious Rape derived from thee.

Good Madam, your Conscience is too bold:
It troubles you too much. Dismise't: think,
That other Ladies have offended more.

Out Devil. Wilt thou betray my soul too?
Duarte hence! I am inspired with strength
To make revenge prove masculine.
Fly quickly hence. Why doest thou stay? There's Gold.
I prithee wench in all thy Pilgrimage
Disperse my fault in charitable sense.
Use me nobly with thy Tongue. So farewell.

Or let my sin no mercy find in Heaven,
No pity here on Earth.

Now all the motives of my Lords delight
Exterminate for evermore with me.
My silent Lute's interred in the Case.
My voice now rather frights, then captivates
The sense.
O Sister, dare you visit me?
I am a strumpet grown. Hence, and secure
Your fame.

Alack, what prodegie is this!

I will tell thee all. For I should disgrace
Iniquity to be modest now. The Duke --

Ay me! What in that name can privilege
Offence?

Hear my Luinna, hear. In midst of night,
By my pernicious woman's help; He opes
My chamber door: whose faithful Hinges shrieked,
To warn me of his dire approach. His Hand
Employed a Torch, a Torch; whose fancy weak
Aged, and black, had ouergrowen the flame.
And showed (me thought) like unto Tarquins Ghost;
Preaching in fire: as if it counselled him,
To prevent such penance by forsaking
His attempt. This, I told him too. But he
(That came not to consider, but to act)
O're^u^'d my Hands with his: then made shipwreck
Of my Honour.

O royal Villain!
My joints and sinnews dissipated are,
And scattered in a trembling fear. But mark
More sorrows yet. My Husband looking in
My Cabinet, did spy that Jewel there,
Which the Duke last gave me. It was to him
A new, and unknown star: and Comet like,
Employed his thoughts with such Astrology
As made an Optic of his jealousy;
Through which, he would discern the cause, the effect
Of its being there. I told him all the truth:
And Truth's oftner praised, then rewarded
Here on Earth: for he dismissed me straight
With fatal looks.

My Brother is a noble Gentleman.
Go, go, and kneel to him. All jealousy
Must still be strangled in its birth: or Time
Will soon conspire to make it strong enough
To overcome the truth. Shield us sweet Heaven!
The Sybills dance about my Heart. They lay
Their verges here: infusing a prophetic fear:
Which whispers we shall never meet again,
Lets take a solemn leave -- farewell for ever

Farewell! the noblest Lady of the World.

I am glad to see thee well Borachio!
But where's thy Master? what, in durance still?

Alas Sir, I (Good Gentleman,) the Room
Wherein they have put him, is so little
He fills it up to the Roof: and is fain
To leave his Legs Sentinels without door,
To watch the rest of his body. Tis no
Chamber, but a Court. Cupboard.

But they make him amends in his diet.

They cannot Sir, For he's a faint eater,
If he would pray so often as he fasts;
He had bin at liberty long ago.
He will dine upon a single Pea; and leave Orts.

Do they no more regard his potent hopes?

Alas Sir, when Fortune's Tippet stands up,
Few men will lend a pin to tack it down,
I, and my linage have sweet loss of him:
I'm sure o'that,

Nay, that's too evident.

O sir! I would not a'giuen this Rush;
T'haue bin assured all th'offices in's gift
But hang such Dukes (I say) that suffer thus
Their Favourites to be imprisoned.

How now Borachio! Dost thou speak treason?

Sir, I have said no more, then what I mean
To unsay again: which is but a kind
Of loosing one'^ labour. An^ '^is better,
To be ill employed then to be idle.

How the slave sows his Proverbs together.
Are you come? I have stayed until the Clock
Gave your promise the lye.

My time was spent to more advantage.
I have declared my interest in your blood.
If you assist my plots; you needs must share
Success, that hath already warranted
A large requital.

I am resolved: and wish my self more able.

It is well. But now you undertake business:
You must be as serious as a Musle.
That is: wear your Beard, upon your tongue: talk,
Bravely. But of all avoid Dorido
As you would to drink
A violent poison.

Enough, he is a stranger to my thoughts.

There's fresh encouragement --

A little more of this mettle would puzle
My Geography; Is this Italy
Or the Indies, There Borachio! Weep no more
For thy Master.

Allas I'm apt to weep, though I but see
An Onion stripped naked.

I thought to meet thy Master here. I'm sure
I saw the warrant signed for his release.

The Devil take your worship for me, why,
D'yee bring such good news, on a work'y day?

But thou pray ill, in praying the Devil
To take me.

Why could he ever come to less purpose
Then when he finds you doing well. Though he
Loose his labour once: I dare warrant ye,
He will come again on the same arrand.

A bitter fool.

Sir, let we friends be true to one another.
There are but few true friends extant. Let them
Be kindly used and kept, if only for breed.

With all my heart, translate thy meaning.

Is my Master at liberty?

I'll defer an answer of this, until
Thy own Eyes be a little elder.

Well, is he still in favour with the Duke?

Why he shall shortly govern all at Court,
And be a very Mote in the Duk's eye.

Enough. It is not wholesome to burst with ^oy.

But what then?

I'ue thought with much care on these Offices:
And find my self fitting to be in'em.
I will haue'em all; come Cut, and Long-taile.
For my Wife, will be such a glad woman.

Look! who comes there?

O Sir! give me your blessing --

Weep not Borachio! I have prepared
Such bloody art in my revenge; as makes
Men's wits, more famous then their cruelty,
Let horror propagate. All's too little
For my use. But you Sir had the honour,
To release me.

Or else I had bin much dishonoured.

Sir, now he supposes you in durance:
And is himself secure; happily drunk,
Or riding in the stews; you may take some
Advantage on his soul too. Loose no time.

That's my intent.
For it were dull humanity to aim
No farther then his life. I'll pursue him
Even to Hell.

And let me alone so to facilitate
The project, by search of fit time, and means:
As shall declare the act less troublesome,
Then thus to threaten it with words.

You Signior Castruch^o! Signior Coxcomb!
Are you ti^'d with doing well? you have scarce
Brought my poor Lord out of the Prison doors;
But you long to have him in again. Nay,
Ne'er look! For my Sword dwells within a Yard
Of my Tongue, and shall defend what I say

What a p^rnicious Calfe is this?

What harm have my poor Wife, and Children done
To you, or yours; that seeing me within
A hairs breadth, of a hundred offices,
You confound all, by leading my poor Lord
Into new broils.

Bold Miscreant! If I but stir --

Nay Signior! let him alone. Borachio!
Steep thy wrath in cold water: follow,
And be dumb. All shall be well.

Yes, persuade me to dry Ice in an Oven!
But I'll follow your Heals so close: as I'll
Go near to tread upon your Kibes.

Signior, I knew ye a brave Commander
Under the great Petruchio; and since
That time your constant virtues have deserved
More recompense, then Fate will minister
By me. My kindness is no miracle:
Since gratitude is only sick, not dead.
But pray believe what I have said is truth.

O Sir, it is th'error of unskilful love
To be too constant in her charity
To all. But I have grounds more relatiue
To make me jealous of the truth: and I
Believe you with my heart: and yet it is strange.
Doth this Castruchio think his haggard fate
Can triumph over mine? because in lust
The Devil did instruct his industry:
Dares he attempt my life?

I give you real grounds for my suspense.
Reward (sir) may make a Villain bloody
Though it cannot make him valiant. The Duke
Will let him want no Gold.

Nay it is often seen.
Amongst the several Creatures of a Prince,
Such instruments as these most profit reap.
Employments noble do requite themselves,
And honour pays, the great of heart: who loose
But Time in service which is the Bodies wealth.
Your friend stays. If you please t'appeare with him
From thence, at my summons: I shall discover more.

Noble Signior, I am yours,

What hoa? Luinna! Wife!

My Lord!

Come hither Love. Signefie in secret
When was the royal Lecher here disguised?
What did he send thee last? when must ye quench
The Cyprian fire: hah! you may tell me all,
For I'll not blab. Alas, I'm more silent
Then my Grandsire in his Tomb. A subtle Pimp, I,
A Pander learned in the art. Tell me Chuck?

Alas my noble Lord! what do ye mean?

Why nothing, I: yet tis enough I feel
The wrong, If ignorant, I suffer twice.
And therefore let me know my Enemy.
The little worm, when trod upon; will turn
His Head, to look upon his Murderer.
And hath my Spleen no Eyes: Is the revenge
Of Man less curious then a Worms. -- She weeps,
O Luinna, the sacred knot's vnti'd.
Thou hast defiled and stained the vestal Sheets,
Thy Breast shall be no more my Pillow.

O say not so. Let Thunder strike me dead,
If I'ere knew the ' Duke; with knowledge more
Dishonest, then what harbours in the Eyes;
Only by sight.

O new horror! such brazen impudence,
Would make a Negro blush. Come glo^ious who^e,
Acquaint me with your tricks. Who! when, where, how^
For besides the Jewel which he gave thee:
I have proofs, that will even damme my sister;
And convince thee too.

My dear Lord? be not cruel in your Faith;
What I have said is truth.

Still constant in thy perjury. Mercy
Were tamen^sle then. Thou shalt dye
Like an heroyique Whore: a (...) Martyr
To thy concealed lover. Appear ho!
Here my she goat! These men are full and fresh;
But if they cannot tire ye out: I will
Procure ye some of larger Thighs; that feed
On the vnctious Lhasis, and the Persian-Crab.
Or bring the riotous Horse, and the Town Bull
To drowned ye in the act. Take her aside,
And agree who shall begin.

Stay, stay, O my Husband, my dearest Lord?
Will you permit such cruelty against
Your own Wife. She, that hath so often slept
Within your Bosom. O speak? do you want
The natural touch^ stay, stay, I will confes't.

Stay, I'm of too easy, too soft a Soul.
My Heartstrings (sure) are made of silk: and 'tis
A subtle whore, she knows it well enough.
But come, be brief. Charm me not with stories
Of my former love between us.
I see thee as thou art, and thou appear'st
Like an entire, proportionable Boyle.
Why speak thou not?

Sorrow was ever slow of v^terance,
And I do tremble still. I knew the time,
My duty hath bin held in more regard
Then now it is. All former interest
Is quit forgot.

Mark, did not I suspect, she would begin
Her Charms again. Away with her.

O stay, now, now, I will reveal all.

Be nimble then: and tell me punctual truth,
For my revenge is honest, and would not
Willingly mistake, when it shall strike.

It is true, your Sster's ravished by the Duke.
Which fatal truth, this morning I receau'd
From her own mouth, But if I ere did break
My Marriage vows, or think unlawfully;
Then may I loose my interest in Heaven.
My duty, and my love remain still yours,
And this constancy deserves some kindness.
Therefore, if it is decreed that I must dye:
Let me dye a modest death. Expose not
Your poor wife, unto the cruelty
Of Ravishers.

What think ye sir?

My thoughts continue in the former sense:
I have a chaste, and virtuous wife; however
You desired assurance from a trial
So unkind as this.

Still me thinks that Jewel which he gave her,
Procured the same requital that my Sister made.
But let it pass. I do conjure ye both,
(As you've bin Soldiers) to keep your Tongues,
A safe distance from your Ears, Let not words
Disperse what you have heard. It is external
Reputation that keeps some Men from sin.
Our faults once known, we do neglect to mend:
Since Reputation suffers still: for that
Admits of help, but it is never cured.
And so the fatal jars tweene Man, and Wife,
If secret kept, dissension falls asleep.
But if once known to Fame; Fame talks so loud
She wakes it again. Your silence Signiors,
Shall challenge much from my requital.

Besides our obligations to your worth,
Even both our honours would impose it
As a virtue, not a trouble. We are
Your humble servants.

I will deserve you for my friends. Rise --
You must be cleared by a stricter trial:
'Till when I do neglect the large Charter
Of Husbands over their Wives: and command ye
As a Judge th'offendor. Hence, and become
My Prisoner in your Closet. Take heed,
No curiosity in fear make you,
To pry in my designs.

I do obey ye cheerfully.

O my heart! shall my industry, and hopes
Find this period? My sufferance is tired.
It is an old inconstancy in Fate,
Soon to erect, and soon to ruinate.

FOREST, No, no, my Stars, it is too much to bear,
Though I were stomached like an Ostrich,
Yet could I not digest such hard dealing.
My Wife defiled, Corsa ravished. The Count
Abused where satisfaction is exempt
By Nature. My self proscribed to suffer
By the cheap valour of obscure Villains.
Would I had trod the humble path, and made
My industry less ambitious. The Shrub
Sccurelie grows. The tallest Tree, stands
Most in the wind. And thus we distinguish
The Noble from the base: the Noble find
Their lives, and deaths still trouble some:
But humility doth sleep, whilst the storm
Grows horce with scolding My Gall o'reflowes my heart:
And drowns propitious Thoughts. I will be just
Yet cruel too. The darkness of the Night
Is thick. I feel as I grope for way --
Stay -- That sickly light from her chamber breaks.
Minion l^e begin with you.
Sing gentle youth; who knows if I shall live
Timploy thy voice again.

Boy. Weep no more for what is past
For Time in motion makes such hast
He hath no leisure to descry
Those errors which he passes by.
If we consider Accident,
And how repugnant unto sense,
It pays desert with bad event:
We shall disparedge Providence.
This is your Dirge,

Hah! who is there?

Tis. I. Dismiss that trisle hence, and shut
The door.

Farewell Youth! Get he to bed.

But where's the wriggled Hag; the incestuous lump
Of heate? where is she, speak?

Alas Sir, who do you mean?

Why she that Gossips with the Devils Damme,
The subtle Bawd, your Woman. O Sister! Corsa kneeles.
I have heard all. -- Nay do not work distinction thus.
Kneel not to me; you are my Patrons wife.
But yet where obligation is endeared;
There Injury condemns it self. Can you
Surui^e a wrong so eminent: a wrong
Committed' against your Husband, and my Patron?

O Sir! I hope if you have heard the truth:
You will conclude it as a rape in the Duke;
And no adultery in me.

How, a rape! o weak, and immodest shift,
Were Aretine alive; or had I brought
A Crew of Midwives here: whose obscene art
Might warrant the distinction good;
Although the cause did blush, to own th'effect;
Yet thy appeal might stand: but here are none.
If compulsion doth insist, until
Enforcement breed delight, we cannot say,
The female suffers. Acceptance at the last,
Disparageth the not consenting at the first:
Calls her d^niall, her unskilfulness;
And not a virtuous frost in the blood.
Come, sit thee down. -- Or if ye mean to pray,
Kneel, and be nimble in devotion.
That art to dye.

My Noble Brother!
Do not fright my sufferance: use me kindly
With your tongue, and looks: I am already
Reconciled to Heaven; and would perhaps
Consent to your design.

Blessed speech! thou shalt prescribe my gesture
And my Phrase.

'twere not unnatural in me, to wish
For life^ yet minding what constructions
The world may make of my sinister chance --

I there's the point. The giddy multitude
Have neither skill, nor leisure to c^nuince
Supposition, with Arguments of strength
And charity. Their quick censure, brings such
Eff^ct, as Spectacles, when used in hast;
Which then ^oe rather aggrauate the shape:
Then giu^ distinction of the form. Who, who,
Would live to be an Argument for them?

Do ye conclude then, that I must now dye?

Why is't not apt, and pregnant to your sense,
It should be so?

Ere I take my last leave of my kind Lord.

Ceremonious form, doth oft, so long
Delay our journey; till it prove too late
To reach our home. It is a long way to Heaven.
We must make hast. Nay, if your courage fail
Before it comes unto the test: I shall
Prepare to be unkind. Grimm, black fancy
Could you endure to see your Lord; defiled,
Polluted as you are? That kind Patron
To all our family; whose constant love
Is warranted by Time; that best can judge
Of constancy. Who took you to his bed;
Upon conditions cheap, and dangerous
To his own estate.

Sir, speak no more: but use me as you please;
I will obey in all.

Come, stretch down your Arm: and permit this Scarf
To fastne it to the Chair. Then veil your Eyes.
We must not trust a Woman's valour so --

Oh, oh, oh.

The torture's past. Thy wrist waynes are cut, Here
In this Basin bleed: till dryness make them curl
Like Lute-strings in the fire --

Commend me to my dearest Lord. I am
His humble sacrifice. Hee'le not be more
Unwilling to grant atonement: then I
Have been to need it. The Fates give others
Expiation: which now they want themselves.
I speak too loud. For who dares chide with them
That may employ Thunder.

Her beauty'gins to wither. She distills
Like to a Rose. O could I separate
The blood defiled from what is pure: I would
Shed that; then restrain the current, know!
(Unskilful Nature) If operation
Should long subsist in such gross mixture: Men,
Would be Devils here they lived in Hell.

I come Celestial Quire! --

Ecstasy! through weakness in expense of blood!
Dear sister! Disturb not your last Minutes.

I must ascend --

How! would you enter Heaven; with fetters on
Your Soul? clogged with these mortal Limbs. Sit down,
Expire in peace.

O my Brother! whilst I am yet humane,
Let me feel some interest in your blood.
What fault of mine deserves impediments
In my last journey? If my Lord were here
He would have seen me used with mercy.

Sweet Soul! these, are but mistakes of weakness.

Will not my Lord be merciful; to me,
And to my memory.

Sit still. I bring no negative reply.
Thy worth shall shine in such a Character:
That being dead; he needs must woo thy Ghost.

And will Posterity consent, that I
Abide in List; with those of modest fame?

That Astrologer; who spies thee first
Within a Star: must not find thee billeted
Near to Venus. Such error in his Act;
Would make me wreath his Body into Cords.
And with prolix strength draw the dull Caytiffe,
Through his slender Optic.

Oh, oh, oh --

A Convulsion in her Arteries!

Mercy Heaven!

Hark!
As she ascends, the Spheres do welcome her,
With their own Music. -- Her Soul is gone!
Hah? whether is it gone? O vast suspense!
Madness succeeds inquiry. Fools of Nature!
What Ancestor (that died long since) hath brought
Us news of his abode! or told us how
They use him in the other world? O this
Wild mystery so much concerns Man:
That we would willingly dismiss suspense
With Eiesight not with consequence.
For he that sees through Faith, but flatters doubt.
Faith's a Perspective; through whose narrow lane;
Little things (far of) seem so much too great,
Too near: that what was first unknown is more
Estranged from knowledge, then it was before.
Yet by the rules of lawful notion: It
Goes well with her: for she was ever given
To prayer: superstitious in humility:
And even unthrifty in her charity.
She held her Virtues in such high extremes,
That her Divinity was troublesome.
Grew from a Saint, a holy Cynic. Sleep here:
A sacri^ice to thy wronged Lord: Till I
(Thy Pries't) become an Executioner
To him; who was thy cruel Ravisher.

Doth she insist in censure of the act
With such a sterne impatience, and dislike?

Even so (Sir) my intelligence imports.
For since her Woman, was dismissed: she sent
A Messenger unto Lucca; to urge,
Her Lords return: whom (by a labor'd consequence)
I do expect within this Hour. Hee'le choose
To travail in the Night for privacy.

And I have sent to stay him there: until
A new Commission order his return.

Most royal Sir, you then may guess what frights
Such opposition in these messages
Will nourish in his Heart. And being young,
He cannot feed on doubts. Hee'le rather think
His interest in you his preuiledge to err:
So, slight your Mandate, and come home,
To settle his suspense.

Remorse doth cherish danger! Let me be safe,
Sec^re me in thy wholesome Art. I would
Express my self without a Tongue --

My gracious Lord; my apprehension lies
Not in my Ears but in my Brain. I can
Conceive without the noise of words. It shows
Apparent to my intellect: the Count
Presuming on that free address, he still
Hath had unto your person: will hither bring Corsa, and Forest to show the
shape,
And quality, of his new sufferance.
Be you within your bed, to free you from
The worlds suspicion: whilst I do place
Behind the Gallery door (which leads unto
Your Closet Chapel) such trusty spirits,
As shall dare to thrust their weapons home.

O quintesence of Soul. I will devote
My actions wholly to thy use. Good night.

May slumber cease upon your toyall Eyes
With gentle closure. Know, poor Forest!
The bag that holds my Gall is so immense,
That when I steep thee in it thou art drowned.

Castruchio; I have better thought upon it.

My gracious Lord.

I would not have thee hurt my Boy: use him
Kindly for my sake.

Shall I not strike him here; between the Ribs?

Not for the world. Thou dost not know his Soul.
He's of so soft, so sweet a property,
That he enchants where he is known. Besides,
I find I am so powerful over his youth:
That I shall soon extirpate from his memory
The wrong I did his Wife, and him. As for
Forest: his experience is of growth
Too stubborn, of practise stiff; and will not
Be remoo'd from his revenge, by strength of words.
Therefore, let him no mercy feel: but let;
My Boy be gently used for my sake. Farewell --

This is a silly kind of love!
But let me think -- So to contrive this plot:
That Lothario may destroy Forest,
And him to make his silence safe! humh --

No; it must not be --

My royal Lord!

Lucio (my Boy) is not proscribed. Take heed
Castruchio! If thou dost extend thy hand:
In motion, boisterous, and rough to him;
Thou dost infect all thy other kindness:
And I shall see thee as a Cocatrice:
That will enforce my Optick-nerues to shrink,
And pull my Eyes into my skull. Look to it.

Most gracious Sir, were his person bulwark'd
With the Alps: were he hidden in^s own fear;
He could not be more safe, then you have made him.

Once more then good Night.

A plague upon this turdy love. Such thoughts
When first your Blood did make your Veins to swell
(Like Bridges'ore your flesh) had prevented
My employment. Softly, softly.
Fear, and suspicion ever walk on Eggs.

Leave here the Light, and go to Bed.
Break open the door, break open the door.

Hah! who counsels so unlawfully?

O Forest! the fatal Hour is come
Ring out your Bells, until they wake the dead.
Let the Drum murmure in a ^able Bag.
Reverse your Muskets, and trail your stubborn Pikes
In slimy-Channels. Let Trumpets groan,
And the shrill Phiph be hoarce. The fatal Hour,
Is come.

Why, what's the matter Sir?

O my wife! by this she did entreat me
Suddenly, (upon some urgent cause)
To haste from Lucca to her: Just now;
I lighted from my Horse, entered her Chamber:
And found her newly murdered in her Chair.
My Servants say that my arrival there,
Did just succeed your departure from her.

Dismiss your Servants, and you shall know all.

Hence, and expect me strait at home.

I pray come hither Sir. -- Do you dislike

That justice which deprived your Wife of breath?
Doest thou call it Justice?

Yes, in the noblest strain: she was defiled.
The royal Goat (the Duke) hath ravished her:
And I (that never could admit excuse
In points of honour) (where ever suspicion
Suffices to condemn) did summon up
My memory: wherein the kind effects,
Of your best love to us are registered.
And finding you betrayed in your own Fort!
I slit her Wrist-^aynes, and gave perpetual
Liberty, to her polluted Blood.

O Villain! more bloody then the Tiger;
Whose empty Entrails noise, doth (Trumpet like)
Encourage cruelty; Though thou did flight her
As my poor Wife: yet she might well expect
Some mercy, as being thy own sister.

Had she included all propinquity
Of blood; which lawful Marriage keeps known,
Or promiscuous Copulation, makes
Intricate: this bare word (Honour) had bin
Enough, t'haue diuorc'd her from my mercy.
Sweet Lord; do not mistake your Servant:
Whose kindness thinks his own Sister (when defiled)
Was to base for your use.

A bloody kindness to distinguish so
She was no Adulteress, but enforced. Her thoughts
Were pure: and such a noble sympathy
Indeerd her Soul to mine; that her own Tears,
Might soon have washed away her Bodies stain,
And she again seem clean. Corsa!
O my Wife! my bosom Girl! where art thou?
Speak, no reply? Art thou so much busied
With thy new acquaintance now in Heaven:
That thy poor Lord, may not borrow one word
At parting? Draw, draw ungrateful Monster!
That hast prevented thus our Dialogue.

Sir, cool your spleen! take breath awhile:
And hear me speak.

No false Siren! thou holy Hypocrite!
I know thy tricks too well! Because I am young,
Too soft of heart, and apt to melt
In every flame of my own trivial love;
Therefore thou think to practise on me now
With subtle phrase. Draw, or else thou dy'st.

Come -- Let me dye (as she) a sacrifice
To thee my Patron.

A sacrifice to me! O Forest!
Why dost thou multiply thy skill
To thy friends pr^iudice? It is not well,
In troth it is not. Employ thy own heart:
Think upon it thy self. Tis not kindly done:
I should not have used you thus --

O my dear Lord! where did I loose your heart?
I am overcome at these expressions.
I cannot weep much: yet my Eyes are moist.
O my unskilful gratitude! what dire
Mistake, confounds our properties! I killed
A Sister, to secure a Friend. T'was ill,
Twas not the right way. A true Roman now,
Would walk aside, and with his own Sword
Dismiss his own Soul: and not permit
Moisture in youthful Eyes, thus to disgrace
The strength of elder love. I cannot weep,
But our divinity supplies us with
Discreeter ways, to make affection known;
Enough. I will prefix but one short Hour,
To think upon it. Here sir. Sheath your good sword,
Till revenge prove ripe. And I conjure
By all my Sisters love to follow me:
In whose behalf, your instice may employ
It self. Which done, you shall behold my Heart
Without a Perspective.
If it concerns her; by whom thou dost
Conjure my service, I'm bound to follow thee.

What hoa!

My Lord.

Come Minion, come along with us. You walk
Unto the Barte. If trial find thee false;
Thou shalt be scattered into Attomes*

O my divining Soul* Sure my Sister
Is not safe.

Signior Lothario!

Here! Signior Cossimo!

I am here. Speak low. Cousin Castruchio.

I am here too. Why are we scattered thus?

It is in search of Borachio; who fearing
Danger in this action, commits himself
Very tamely to his Heals.

Let him be damned unthought of. Have you heard,
Or seen a Passenger.

No, yet Lothario gives me notice:
Of a noise far off: but you know the length
Of an Asses ear.

Pastes there (say you) who is't?

He echoes by mistake. No body: but
My Cousin says he will lug the Asses ear,
Speaking of your Man.

The Butchers dog shall save him a labour.

Well Gentlemen, I have intelligence
(By my Boy) that Forest, and the Count,
Are coming hither. Look to it. But let the Count
Be safe. You know his voice Lothario?

Very distinctly.

Well, any Man (but he) that stirs his Tongue,
Enuites his own ruin Give me your Hands
I'll bring ye to a door: through which, if they
Do pass, it must be over us.

Leave Forest to my charge for I am
His impediment.

Softly, softly.

Now set the reflex at liberty:
Here let me beg your tarriance: 'till I
Resolve a doubt that most concerns my Heart.

You shall. But do not execute revenge,
Upon the Duke; till my assent encourage thee.

My actions are confined: Upon, not in
The Bed? Guilt confounds all order, and makes,
Our rest unnatural. Mistress, stand you there.

Hah! from whence that light! who waits within

is it you? what do you mean
By this uncivil visitation!

I am not so unthrifty of time
To join replies, unto demands, I must
Deprive you of your Soul.

How? Is this Language lawful, unto me
Thy Sovereign Prince. Did not high-prouidence,
Treble the assurance of my safety:
By Guards invisible, when I was first
Predestinate to this supreme function?
And dare thou tempt the strength of Heaven?

I know to were a profane curiosity
In me, to question the prerogatives
Of a free Prince. For Ignorance, and a dull,
Easy faith; must flatter bondage still.
Or Liberty (th'eldest Child of Nature)
Confounds predominance, by suing for
Equality amongst the Sons of Men:
And so revokes a Chaos.

Which soon returns: unless distinction
Persuade thee fix my Royalty, above
Thy reach: that art my natural Subject.

Enough false Sir. Warm not the air with words.
Be still, or I conclude ye in a trice,
And now requite the Leisure, I permit
For prayer: by a true reply to what
I shall demand.

I will.

Look on your opposite.
Did you ever make her an Adulteress?
Speak truth, so come your Soul to Heaven.

Never. So come my Soul to Heaven, as I
Speak truth.

O Sir?
Take heed the Periurer hath little hope
On the last day, to hide himself in the Crowd.
He is a sinner much too eminent.
But what meant that Jewel which you gave her;
And which she concealed; till its own lustre
Did betray it?

I gave it to disguise the cause, for which
I sent the other unto Corsa.

That name will prick my fury on: although
I strive to be propitious.

I know Luinna, thou art merciful:
Forgive me gentle Girl. It was the first
Bargain we did make in the Church, to Share
In sufferance.

And 'tis my duty Sir, to be most prompt
In the observance.

My Lord!

A rude summons, that calls me as a Judge,
To censure on the errors of my Prince.

What, Is he there too? O killing object!

Behold (young Lord) the cruel Ravisher.
Whom Time himself shall never parallel,
Though he survey his old Records, and scratch
His reverend Head to waken memory.

O horror! furnish us (sweet Heaven) with some
Instinct. Inspire remorse: or we accuse
Thy skilfulnesse to predestine us a Prince:
Murdering, whom thou did anoint our Sovereign.

My heart swells. I'm full of grief, and danger.
Some Iron Hoops to help my Ribs, or I shall burst.

The cause deserves great alteration.
More then mortallity can see, and yet
Be safe. I wonder Heaven takes so little
Notice of it. I am not singed to death
With Lightning Like the Dorr: nor murdered through
The Ear with thunder; like a Batt. O Lucio!
Mind not my former love: but strike, until
I groan my last.

Forest sheath thy sword. It must not be.
He was our Royal Master once, and might
In modesty compare himself; with all
But Princes; whom Fame reserues as Paternes,
For my sake sheath your Sword.

O I shall survive my Royal Charter!
My creature is more beautiful then I:
More wealthy in his love.

For my own part, I will annihilate
My self: for should I live, I should grow mad.
But I am bound to care for you (my Lord)
Take heed! I know the tricks of Majesty.
They think they cannot be secure after
Doing ill; but by doing worse: that is,
By killing quite, whom erst they did but wound.

And that's the surgery, which I desire.
I will endure all. O my Lord, my Lord;
I will not bid Posterity tell tales: nor charge
Historians to insert in Annalls;
On such a Night a great Italian. Duke,
Ravished his Creature Lucio's Wife: Sister
To Forest, his active Councellor.

Lucio, composed of such an humble love:
That to secure his Masters feet, would spread.
And scatter all his Limbs, for him to walk upon.

And Forest, whose industry, and care
Outwatch'd Leane-vigilance, 'till she grew mad.
But come, Let's leave him to contrive our deaths.
My Heart so fills my mouth, I cannot speak.

Lucio stay, Forest stay awhile.
Leave me not thus anatomized with breath.
Dissect me really with your good Swords.
Behold my Breast, take out my Heart: and if
You find your figures there, then use my Fame
With Mercy.

Forest come away.

Make hast Luinna.

I am waked out of a strange amazement.

Hide me swelling Hills! rough, and scabbed Rocks,
Ye Quarrles cleave, and suck me in, then join
Again. Would it not make a Patriarch mad?
O who shall bribe the Sun, that in the day
Of general accounts: he may avouch
He never saw me here. Hah! false Memory!
I forgot to tell 'em of Castruchio.
Tis best to o'retake 'em. I cannot guess
Which way they went.

Hell, and the Pillary take such dull Ears.
It cannot be, but they have passed the Cloisters,
And e're this, with help of private Keys,
Entered the Dukes Bedchamber.

Those were Authors of that noise, I spoke of.

The very same. A pox upon demurs.

Will you lead the way, that we may hearken
If they be there, or no.

If I should come too late? --

That's none of the Counts voice. Have at ye sir;

O, O, O, I am surprised in my own snare.

It is Forest sure. Let's make safe work
Kill Lothario, lay him by him, and depart,

A match.

O Villains, O, O, O.

What noise is that?

Another Forest.

My Royal Master bleeding on the Ground:
O murderous Villains:

Murder, murder. Help! oh help?

The Duke my Soueraign^ sla^e, and Lucio
Bleeding at his feet. Villain take this thrust
At my own prejudice.

I am foyld by a base hand.

Fly Cosime, fly.

Some comfort yet remains: in that I am,
Proscribed to share in thy fate, though it be bad.
I loose much blood. O trivial fortitude,
False Sinews, do you begin to shrink?

Lucio, Let my Soul, cary your pardon
With her unto Heaven; and yours Forest.
This strangeme was mine, but the success,
Was much against my will.

Sir, I forgive you all.

Nay let us join Hands. -- We do forgive
Each other, and the World. The like mercy
May Heaven bestow on us.

Amen, Amen.

Amen, Amen.

There his heartstrings broke. Lucio (my Patron)
Already Chapf^lne to: that sight deserves a Tear:
Though I should stab my Eyes to warrant it.

Bring the slaves in, their deeds will soon convince
Their faint denial, where did you leave 'em Lady?

Here, here, O my Lord, my Lord.

I have not breath enough to comfort thee.
With words, mercy Heaven.

O my Lord? my Husband He's dead, he's dead.

Hold the Lady there: O dire spectacle.
the Duke, Lucio, Forest, and Lothario
Lye here breathless. I did suspect some black
Conspiracy. Which made me haunt them two
Unto the Palace, but I did loose 'em
By the Chapel stairs; bloody dogs, what Devil
Prompted thee to this action.

I hope, I'ue not so much Blood left, as will preserve
Me for an answeere.

I feel my end to near.

Take em away, and close their wounds, though there
Be some mercy shown, by thus deferring
That reward which your black souls shall receive
In Hell. Yet know the Law will here on Earth
Provide such tortures as shall make your deaths
Exemplary to all succeeding times. --
Gentlemen, your silence may be excused.
Where, there's so much cause of admiration.
Some help transfer the dead from hence, others
Call up the Councellors of state.
So intricate is Heavens revenge against lust.
The righteous suffer here, with the unjust.


