AWake dark sleep, rouse thee from out thy Cave;
Thy Mother Night, that bred thee in her womb,
And fed thee first with silence and with ease,
Doth here thy shadowed operations crave.
And therefore wake my son, awake and come:
Strike with thy Hornie wand, the spirits of their
That here expect some pleasing novelties;
And make their slumber to beget strange sights.
Strange visions and vn-usual properties,
Vn-seene of latter ages, ancient rites;
Of gifts divine, wrapped up in Mysteries,
Make this to seem a Temple in their sight:
Whose maine support, holy religion, frame,
And wisdom, courage, Temperance and right:
Make seem the pillors that sustain the same,
Shadow some Sibill to attend the rites;
And to describe the power that shall resort,
With the interpretation of the benefits
They bring in Clouds, what they do import,
Yet make them to protend the true desire
Of those that wish them, waking real things;
Whilst I will hoou'ring here aloof retire,
And cover all things with my sable wings.

Some. Dear Mother Night, I your commandment
Obey, and dreams t'interpret dreams, will make
As waking curiosity is wont.
Though better dreams asleep, the dreams awake
And this White Horny wand shall work the deed:
Whose power, doth figures of the light present,
When from this sable Radius doth proceed
Nought but confused dark shows to no intent:
And therefore go bright visions, entertain
All round about, whilst I'll to sleep again.

I The daughter of wounder, now made the Messenger of power; here descended,
to signify the coming of a Celestial presence of Goddesses, determined this
fair Temple of peace, with holy hands and devout desires, have dedicated to
unity and concord: and leaving to themselves in Ouidos Ida Paphos their
ancient delighting places of Greece and Asia, now made the seats of
Barbarism, and spoil, vouchsafe to take their recreation, here, upon the
Western Mount of mighty Brittanie, the Land of Civil Music and of rest:
And are pleased to appear in the self-same figures, wherein antiquity hath
formorly clothed them; and as they have been cast in the imagination of
pity, who hath given mortal shapes to the gifts and effects of an eternal
power: For that those beautiful Carrecters of sense were easier to be read,
then their mystical Ideas, dispersed in that wide and incomprehensible volume
of Nature. And well have mortal men apparelled all the virtues, all the
graces, all blessings, with that shape wherewith themselves are most delighted,
and which work the best motions, and best represent the beauty of heavenly
powers. And therefore, reverend Prophetess, who hear attendest upon the
devotions of this place, prepare thy self for those rites that pertain to thy
function, and the honour of such deities. And to the end thou may have a
fore-notion what powers, and who they are that come; take here this
Perspective, and herein note and tell what thou see: For well may thou
there observe their shadows, but their presence will bereave thee of all, save
admiration and amazement. For who can look upon such powers and speak? And so
I leave thee.


WHat have I seen? Where am I? Or do I see at all? or am I any where? What?
was this IRIS the Messenger of IVNO, or else, but a fantasma or imagination?
Will the Divine Goddesses vouchsafe to visit this poor Temple? Shall I be
blessed to entertain so great powers? It can be but a dream; yet such great
powers have blessed as humble Roofs, and use it of no other respect, then their
own great favours to shine where they will. But what Perspective is this? or
what shall I herein see? O admirable powers! what sights are these?


FIrst, here Imperial IVNO in her chair,
With Sceptre of command, for Kingdoms large:
Ascends, all clad in colours of the air,
Crowned with bright Stars, to signify her charge.
Next, warlike PALLAS, in her helmet dressed,
With Lance of winning; Target of defence:
In whom both wit and courage are expressed,
To get with glory, hold with providence.
Then lovely VENVS in bright Majesty,
Appears with mild aspect in Doue-like-hewe,
With th'al combining scarf of amity;
T'ingird strange Nations with affections true.
Next, chaste DIANA in her robes of green,
With weapons of the Wood her self addrests,
To bless the Forest where her power is seen,
T'hold peace with all the World, but with wild beasts.
Then comely VESTA with her flames of zeal*
Presents her self, clad in white purity,
Whose book the souls sweet comfort doth reveal,
By th'euer burning lamp of piety.
Next, rich PROSERPINA with flames of gold,
Whose estate, although within the earth, yet she
Comes from above, and in her hand doth hold
The Mine of wealth, with cheerful Majesty.
Then al in purple robes, rich Happiness:
Next her appears, bearing in either hand,
Th'ensignes both of wealth and wit; t'expresse,
That by them both, her Majesty doth stand.
Then all in partie-coloured robes appears
In White and Crimson-gracefull Concord, rest
With knots of union; and in hand she bears
The happy joined Roses of our rest.
Cleare-eyde ASTRAEA next, with reverend brow,
Clad in Celestial hew, which best she likes:
Comes with her balance, and her sword to show,
That first her judgement weighs before it strikes.
Then cheerful FLORA, all adorned with flowers,
Who clothes the earth with beauty and delight,
In thousand sundry suits, whilst shining hours,
Will scarce afford a darkness to the Night.
Next, plenteous CERES in her harvest weed,
Crowned with the'ncrease of what she gave to keep,
To Gratitude and Faith in whom we need:
Who sows on Virtue, shall with glory reap.
Lastly comes TETHIS, ALBIONS dearest Love,
Whom she in faithful arms doth deign to embrace:
And brings the Trident of her power t'approue
Her favour and respect to do him grace.
Thus have I read their shadows, but behold:
In glory where they come as IRIS told.
DEsert, Reward, and Gratitude,
The Graces of Society:
Do here with hand in hand conclude,
The blessed chain of amity.
1. For I deserve. 2. I give. 3. I thank:
All. Thanks, gifts, deserts thus join in rank.
We yield the splendent rays of light,
Unto the blessings that descend;
The grace whereof with more delight,
The well disposing doth commend,
Whilst gratitude, rewards, deserts,
Please, win, draw on, and couple hearts.
For worth, and power, and due respect,
Deserves, bestows, returns with grace;
The meed, reward, the kind effect,
That gives the world a cheerful face.
And turning in this course of right,
Makes virtue move with true delight.

O Power of powers, grant to our vows we pray,
That these fair blessings which we here arrest,
In figures left us here, in substance, may
Be those great proppes of glory and respect.
Let Kingdoms large, let armed Pollicye,
Mild Love, true Zeal, right shooting at the white,
Of brave designs, let Wealth, Felicity,
Justice, and Concord, Pleasure, Plenty, Might
And power by Sea, with grace proportinate,
Make glorious both this Kingdom and Estate.

whilst worth with honour, make their choice,
For measured motions ordered right:
Now let us likewise give a voice,
Unto the touch of our delight.
FOr comforts locked up without sound,
Are th'vnborne Children of the thought:
Like unto Treasures never found,
That buried lowe, are left forgot.
Where words or glory do not show,
There like brave actions without Frame,
It seems like plants not set to grow,
Or as a tomb without a name.

AS I was the joyful Messenger, to notify the coming of these divine powers;
so am I now the same of their departure, who having clothed themselves with
these apparances, do now return back Spheres of there own being from
whence they are. But yet of my self, this much I must reveal, though against
the warrant of a Messenger, who, I know had better to fail in obedience, than
in presumption, that these Deities by (the motion of the all-directing Pallas,
the glorious Patroness of this mighty Monarchy) descending in the Majesty of
their invisible essences, upon yonder Mountain; found there the best and most
worthy, the best of Ladies, disporting her self with the choicest attendants,
whose forms they presently took, as delighting to be in the best built
Temples of beauty and honour, and in them vouch safed to appear in this
manner, being otherwise no objects for mortal eyes.

And no doubt, but that in respect or the persons, under whose beautiful
coverings they have thus presented themselves? these Deities will be pleased,
the rather at their invocation, knowing all their desires to be such, as
evermore to grace this glorious Monarchy, with the Royal effects of these
blessings represented.



