THe tranquil silence of a propitious hour,
Charm your attentions in a gentle spell:
Whilst our endeavours get a vocal tongue,
To fill the pleasing roundure of your ears.
Our Scene is mantled in the robe of truth,
Yet must we crave (by law of poesy)
To give our history an ornament.
But equalling this definition, thus,
Who gives a foul unto his Cooke to dress:
Likewise expects to have a foul again,
Though in the Cooks laborious workmanship
Much may be deminisht, som-what added,
The loss of feathers and the gain of fauce:
Yet in the back surrender of this dish,
It is (and may be truly called) the same:
Such are our acts: should our tedious muse
Pace the particulars of our travellers,
Five days would break the limits of our Sceanes
But to express the shadows: therefore we,
(Leaving the feathers and some needless stuff)
Present you with the fairest of our feast,
Clothing our truth within an argument,
Fitting the stage and your attention:
Yet not so hid but that she may appear,
To be her self, even truth: now your asists
To help the entrance of our history:
First see a father parting with his sons,
Then in a moment, on the full fails of thought
We will divide them many hundred leagues,
Our Scene lies speechless, active, but yet dumb:
Till your expressing thoughts give it a tongue.

Imagine now the gentle breath of heaven,
Hath on the liquid high-way of the waives*
Conveyed him many thousand leagues from us.
Think you have seen him sail by many lands,
And now at last arrived in Persia:
Within the confines of the great Sophey,
Think you have heard his courteous salute
Speak in a peal of shot, the like, till now
Ne'er heard at Casbin, which towns governor,
Doth kindly entertain our English knight:
With him expect him first, the rest observe.
If foreign strangers to him be so kind,
We hope his native Country we shall find
More courteous, to your just censures then,
We offer up their travels and our pen.
SIr, yet your entertain hath been but weak,
But now assure ye, 't shall be strengthened:
A Princes absence clothes his public weal
In mourning garments: now our widdo-hood
In a conquering return shall be made good.
This day my royal master, the Persian Sophey:
(Accompanied with a glorious tribute
Which forty thousand Turkish lives have paid)
Is hitherwards in march, to whom I have
Delivered your arrival here in Persia,
Your state, your habit, your fair demeanour,
(And so well as my weak oratory could recite)
Spoke of those worths I have observed in you.

Sir, nothing I fear so much,
Least that the merit you have laid on me
Should not go even with your report.

It will: yet (if I may), I'll thus far counsel ye.
It is the Sophyes high will and pleasure:
That you be seated here in the market place,
To view the manner of his victories:
Which would you greet with your high tongues of war,
Whose thunder ne'er was heard in Persia:
Till you gave voice to them at Casbin first,
In what his kingdom best can furnish ye,
It is his pleasure and command you want not.

It was my purpose so to salute him
Brother, pray ye see our diections falter not,
See all in order as we did determine.

I shall sir.


With such a train as many Casualties,
(A travellers mishaps) have left with me:
I'll greet his highness in the best I may.

Christian or howsoever, courteous thou seem,
We bid thee welcome in unused phrase:
No gentle stranger greetes our continent,
But our arms fold him in a soft embrace:
Yet must his gratulation first be paid
Upon our foot, you stoop but to our hand:
This for your followers, welcome, welcome,
Our governor of Casbin, see these strangers placed,
Be it your care and charge, since they have met
Their welcome first in weatherbeaten steel,
We'll show the manner of our Persian wars,
Our musique and our conquests, divide ye,
The one half are Persians, the rest are Turks,
Strike, a conqueror that still retains his name:
To tell his conquests, is not pride but fame.

These are our victories, to see those tongues
That lately threw defiance in our teeth
Quite put to silence in their caves of Earth:
Then are we sure our enemy is dead,
When from the body we divide the head:
How likes the Christian of our Persian wars?
As themselves deserve renowned Sophy,
Your Wars are manly, stout and honourable,
Your Arms have no employment for a coward:
Who dares not charge his courage in the field,
In hardy strokes against his opposed foe,
May be your Subject, not your Soldier.
Your Grace in this hath done me too much honour,
Which would you licence me but in part to pay
With sight of such wars as Christians use*
So far as my small retinue will serve.
I'll shadow forth my Countries hardiment:
Think it a picture which may seem as great,
As the substantial self, when laid unto it
The compass of the hand would cover it,
Your favour and tis done, so that your eyes,
Will deign to grace our seeming victories.

You have prevented us in proffering it,
We had requested else, our self will sit,
And so justly censure of your state in field,
That if yours best deserve, then ours shall yield.
What powers do wrap me in amazement thus?
Me thinks this Christian's more then mort all,
Sure he conceals himself, within my thoughts
Never was man so deeply registered,
But God or Christian, or what ere he be,
I wish to be no other but as he.

The Sophy dotes upon this fellow already,


Most devoutly, we shall have his statue erected in our Temple shortly.


I'll ne'er pray again if it be,


Hark they come, we'll note how the Sophy will grace them.


It shall not please me be it ne'er so good.


Next Mortus Ally, and those Deities,
To whom we Persians pay devotion
We do adore thee: your wars are royal,
So joined with music that even death it self
Would seem a dream: your instruments dissolve
A body into spirit, but to hear
Their cheerful Clamours: and those your Engines,
(We cannot give their proper Character)
Those loud tongues that spit their spleen in fire,
Drowning the groans of your then dying friends,
And with the smoke hiding the gasp of life,
That you ne'er think of ought but victory,
Till all be won or lost, we cannot praise
It well, but what means those in bondage so?
These are our prisoners,


Why do they live?


In this I show the nature of our wars,
It is our clemency in victory,
To shed no blood upon a yielding foe,
Sometimes we buy our friends life with ourfoes,
Sometimes for Gold, and that hardens valour,
When he that wins the honour, gets the spoil.
Sometime for torment we give weary life.
Our foes are such, that they had rather die,
Then to have life in our Captivity.

We never heard of honour until now,


Yet have we engines of more force then these
When our ore-heated bloods would massacre:
We can lay Cities level with the pavement,
Bandee up Towers and turrets in the air;
And on the Seas ore-whelme an Argosie
These are those Warriors.

Mahomet, it thunders.


Sure this is a God.


Sure 'tis a Devil, and Ime tormented to see him graced thus.


First teach me how to call thee ere I speak*
I more and more doubt thy mortallity:
Those tongues do imitate the voice of heaven
When the Gods speak in thunder: your honours
And your qualities of war, more then humane,
If thou hast God-head, and disguised art come
To teach us unknown rudiments of war,
Tell us thy precepts; and we'll adore thee.

Oh let your Princely thoughts descend so low,
As my beings worth, think me as I am:
No stranger are the deeds I show to you
Then yours to me: My countrie's far remote,
An Island but a handful to the world;
Yet fruitful as the meads of paradise,
Defenc'd with streams such as from Eden run,
Each port and entrance kept with such a Guard
As those you last heard speak: there lives a Princess,
Royal as your self, whose subject I am,
As these are to you.

As we? comparisons.


So long as war attempted our decay,
So ill repayd, we so by heaven preserved,
That war no more dares look upon our Land.
All Princes league with us, which causes us,
That wont to write our honours down in blood,
Cold and vnactiue to seek for employment
Hither am I come, (renowned Persian,)
My force and power is yours, say but the word,
So against Christians I may draw no sword.

With arms of love and adoration,
I entertain thee worthy Christian,
And think me happier in thy embrace,
Then if the God of Battles fought for me,
Thou shalt be General against the Turks.

Hee'll make him his heir next,


I'll loose my head first.


A camp of equal spirits to thy self,
Would turn all Turkey into Persia,
Let me feast upon thy tongue, I delight to hear thee speak.

I'll interrupt ye. Ye Persian Gods look on,
The Sophy will profane your Deities,
And make an Idol of a fugitive: My Liege,

You describe wonders.


he minds me not: My Liege,


You trouble us, and what's the difference twixt us and you?


None but the greatest (mighty Persian)
All that makes up this earthly Edifice,
By which we are called men, is all alike.
Each may be the others Anatomy,
Our Nerues, our Arteries, our pipes of life,
The motives of our senses all do move
As of one Axeltree, our shapes alike,
One worke-man made us all, and all offend
That maker, all taste of interdicted sin,
Only Art in a peculiar change
Each country shapes as she best can please them,
But that's not all, our inward offices
Are most at jar, would they were not, (great Prince)
Your favour here if I out-strippe my bounds,
We live and die, suffer calamities,
Are underlings to sickness, fire, famine, sword,
We all are punished, by the same hand and rod.
Our sins are all alike, why not* our God.

My Liege.


What makes these slaves so bold to trouble me,
Well sir, now your sweating message?

The Turks have gathered power,


So have we.


Those that retired from your last victory have met fresh supply, and all
turn head upon your confines.


So have we fresh supply
We'll meet half way, welcome again brave Englishman
Our best employment in this war is thine,
For thy sake do I love all Christians:
We give thee liberty of Conscience,
Walk in our hand, thou hast possessed our heart,
Away, for wars, we must cut short our feasts,
Least that our foes prove our unwelcome guests.

Stand, stand, our fury swells so high,
We cannot march a foot ere it break forth,
Oh thou inconstant fate whose deadly wings,
Lifts thee like Falcons up to fall on Kings
On greater then on Kings, for it strikes us
To whom Kings kneel, our potent power,
Whom Judgment holds to be invincible,
Be but a handful of our enemies,
The Sophy and his troupes are forced to fly,
Not daring to resist, fearing to die,

Yet let the Sun of Ottaman take strength,
Call up his forces, and join war again.

Join war again we may to show our will,
But prove like those, resist to their own ill.
Hark Bassa how their voice of coming on,
Speaks like the tongue of heaven
Threatening destruction to mankind when it please,

Yet, let your blood be like the Ocea troubled with the wind
Rise till it dim the stars such your high mind,

It shall it shall, we will hold calm no longer,
Swell sea of fury, till these Persians,
Standing like trees upon our circling banks,
Be ouer-flowne: Men, wrath and blood,
Meet like Earth, Fire and Air, that's not withstood.

We thus confront thee.


We thus answer thee.


Know thou that call thy self a God on Earth,
And would have nations stoop to thee, as men to heaven,
We are thus armed, I, and for this defence,
Twixt God and Man, to approve a difference.

Know thou whose power is but a wart to mine,
If Earth have good from Heaven, Hell power by sinners,
If death be due to men, as bliss to Angels.
This Sun at Christians west shall not set true,
Before thy life meet death, hell have her due.

Endure him not Great Emperor,


Patience,
Know thou again, in this just war I'm knit
With Christians and with subjects, whose warlike arms
Like steel rebates not, but like fire shall fly,
To burn thee down, whose Prid's above the sky.

Thy Christians I contemn like to their God,


Oh
They shall have graves like thee dishonoured,
Unfit for heaven or earth this we prepare,
Betwixt them both we'll seat you in the Air.

Turk, Infidel, thou that talk of Angels,
The Chroniclers of Heaven who in their regester
Record thee living as a soul for hell.
By him that died for me, my pains shall sweat,
These poets to open, but I will pay this debt,
I'll vex them with my sword and being pangd:
With earthly torments send them to be damned.

Wilt Christian.


If I live I will,
As sure as day doth progres toward night,
In death of Pagans all Christs sons delight,
And I am one of them.

A larum then.


To fight with devils loth'd of virtuous men,


Our Patron the great Sophy hath the worst,
Yet I have taine this Bassa from the Turks:
Stir not thou son of Ismaell or thou die,
Young Robin and my brother tho as yet
The art but a novice in this school of death,
And scarcely red in martial discipline:
As thou hast a great spirit or would show,
That thou art sprung from aged Sherlies loins,
Approve it now, keep this prisoner for me,
Loose rather life then leaue-him, if he escape:
Tis not by cowardice but my mishap.

And if I do not,
From all our Ancestors most worthy roll,
Be my name blotted, and from heaven my soul,

I thank thee by my troth i'll to the battle,
To save the Sophy pressed with multitudes,
And rescue him or die, sure without doubt:
Our lives are lighted tapers that must out.

Come Turk I am made your Jailer in these chains,
To which thou art bond-man who dares fetch thee out:
I could have wished my self in thick of danger,
When men drop down for graves like rain from heaven
But that my brother councelled otherwise,
Who is my schoole-maister in these desseignes:
He swettes for honour like a Christian
Against Christ's foes, leaving me here
To keep thee prisoner purchase of his sword,
And come thy Father that's the devil Turk:
To be thy rescue, tho he fight in fire,
Rather then loose thee, by the King of stars,
I'll part with life, make this a pile of scars.

Resign thy prisoner youthful Englishman,
His life, thy victory is due to us:
By the custom of our nation.

Is it so my Lord.


It is, let it suffice thee that I say it is,
Tis grace enough that thou hast made him Captive
His head shall be the honour of our sword:
And thus I cease on it.

You may my Lord.


Thou shalt have soldiers pay, good words for deeds,
Not have the honour to present his head:
That Trophes due to Cusshan Halybeck,

Then Cusshan Halibeck must have this prisoner:


I must, I will, who dare deny him me.


Not I, a Sherly dare not to deny a Persian.


Bassa.


What say thou Halibeck.


See thou this blade.


I do, but fear it not.
Custom of tirany betwixt our nations,
Hath made me not so much amazed of thee.
As by a stranger which did conquer me.

This steel shall glase it self within thy blood,
And blunt his keen edge with thy Turkish bones:
This point shall tilt it self within thy scull,
And bear it, as birds fly twixt us and heaven;
And as thy blood, shall stream along this blade:
I'll laugh, and say, for this our foes were made.

Will the great Halie be so tyrranous?


What boots it thee to ask, or fit to know?


He was my prisoner, I had charge of him.


But now my prisoner, who ere conquered him,
Whose life shall pay his ransom, and his grave
Shall be in the breast of Fowls as fits a slave.

'Twere good I see it not then.


Ha.


So.


How.


Thus, 'twere good I see it not then:
These hands were made his keeper by my brother,
Whose sword subdued him, gave him prisoner
To me.

To thee.


To me, Persian to me.


Thus Eagles wings shake off a buzzing Fly.
Pray Turk, let thy heart sigth, thine eyes weep,
That thus they go to their eternal sleep.

Thou art better go down quick unto thy grave
Then touch him, better abuse thy Parents,
Be thine own murderer, let thine own blood out,
And seal therewith thine own damnation:
Better do all may tumble thee to hell,
Then wrong him.

How Christian?


Thus Pagan, he's my prisoner.
And here's the Key that locks him in these chains,
Rescue, release, or hurt him if thou dare.

Dare.


Dare,
State out thine eye-balls I out dare thee to it,
Or let thy hand wrong but a hair on's head,
This hand meates out thy grave where thou doest tread.

Your will shall be our master, we'll obey you Sir.


Your swords not tilted then within his scull,


Our nations custom shall be old by you.


Nor borne as birds do fly twixt us and heaven.


We will become your slaves, and kneel to you.


He's not your prisoner then, who ever conquered him.


We'll be your dogs, and fawn, and curse our fate,
When upstarts nobles brave, wretched's the state.

But 'tis more woe in realms, when men's deserts,
Are spurnd or stolen then worn in cowards hearts.

Yet English Christian, this be sure I'll keep,
The Sunn's heates waking, when 'tis thought a sleep.

Thy valour hath commanded us the day,
Brave Englishman we thank thee, by a peace concluded*
Bassa, we ransomless return thee to thy master:
His valour that subdued thee we'll reward
With favour, and with bounty: and now to counsel,
Where we'll determine of your motion,
Made of a league twixt us and Christendom.

A league with Christendom.


He hath advised him too't, ha patience brother,


In the eye of heaven we swear without offence,
We'll hear what instances you can produce,
How such a league may be advantage to us,
Sit, sit, to hear, and speak as free,
Without control 'tis we give liberty.
Concerning then our peace with Christian Princes.

To join with them, great Emperor you shall be,
A Captain for the highest, and in your war,
Have. Angels hands to guard and fight for you,
Religious men shall wear their bended knees,
Even to the bone, in ceaslesse prayers for you:
To whose continual kneelings, tears and sighthes,
Heavens ears be never shut, but do receive
Their souls devotion, makes the clouds to clear,
And thus dispatches each peticioner.
Who fights for us, I'll be their comforter,
White headed age, then with their hearts like youth.
Go boldly to the field: Infants at suck,
Cry as they thought it long ere they were men,
Then Christian Princes join their hands with yours,
And sweep their several nations to a heap,
With one desire to number out their men,
Knowing who fight for heaven each souldier's ten,
And every hand is free in shedding blood,
Since tis to wash the evil from the good

What profit may this war accrue to us.


Honour to your name, bliss to your soul.


Dishonour unto both my sovereign,
Shall you whose empire for these thousand years,
Have given their adoration to the sun,
The silver moon, those her cowntlesse eyes,
That like so many servants wait on her,
Forsake those lights perpetually abide,
And kneel to one, that lived a man and died.

Or shall our sacred Sovereign forget,
You means, by which his Ancestors did rise,
And had the name of Persian Emperors.

What can this English Christian say that they receive,
Of gift, of comfort, riches, or of life,
Unto the deity that he adores,
That we enjoy not from that glorious Lamp,

Enough to make a Pagan, if a man
Of vnderstanding-soule turn Christian.

Our God gives us this light by which we see,


And our God made that light by which you see,
Then who can this deny If not a Turk,
The maker still is better then his work,

What fruit, what food, what good to men doth flow,
But by our Gods created and doth grow,

I grant the Sun a vegetatiue soul,
Gives to all fruits of the earth, herbs, plants and trees,
And yet but as a servant swayd by him
Made men like Angels and controuleth sin.

Our King of day, and our fair Queen of nights,
Walk over us with their perpetual lights,
To see we should not want and to defend us,
Her rain with dews doth all our fruits adorn,
Which in his rise are offered to his throne,
He warmes, she waters, and to them as due,
Our knees we give all other Gods eschew.

Then all your lives are but to meet a death,
That keeps you dying, and yet never dead,
And he that speaks in thunder, and whose brow,
Is now contract to here his name denied,
Hath vengeance in his hand to strike you down,
Yet with a smile, he doth wipe of his frown,
And spares in hope, yet he stores up his doom,
That plagues heaped up, fall waightiest when they come.
You then that scourge my Saviour with your words,
My sword hath no assistance for; nor this arm
A growing strength to bear in your defence.
Great Emperor, for your favours here's a friend
Should do you manly service in your wars,
Did not so just a cause compel me hence,
Now back I go upheld with this good,
In my Gods cause, I ha'shed some pagans blood,

Stay worthy Englishman and worthy Christian,
We cannot loose a mowld of so much worth,
What is the end thy suit would have of us.

That you by Embassy make league with Christendom
And all the neighbor Princes bordering here,
And crave their general aid against the Turk,
Whose grants no doubt of: so shall your Grace
Enlarge your Empire living, and being gon,
Be called the Champion for the holiest one,
These arms shall do you credit; and if I
Miscarry, then tis happy so to die,

Thy counsel we accept, and do applaud it,
Advise us then ye friends of Persia,
Who's fittest in our power to undertake,
A business of so great import as this,

Who better then the Councellor my Lord,
Being both a Christian and a (...),
Whom if men envied could not but commend,
And him will now prefer as you advise,
And grace him forth such an Ambassador as never went fro
( Persian Emperor.

Yet were it requisite my noble Lord
Some man of worth were joined along with him,
'Twould give more countenance to his disseignes.

Good, that's the way to choke him.


So shall your business soonest take effect,
The cause be heard, he had in chief respect.

Thy counsel we accept and order thee,
As the first friend to bear him company,
Late Sherley Knight, now Lord Ambassador
Chife in commission with Duke Halibeck,
To make a League twixt us and Christendom,
For furtherance of sharpe war against the Turk,
I'll send thee forth as rich as ever went,
The proudest Trojan to a Grecians tent.
Call thy best eloquence into thy tongue,
That may preuaile with Princes; if thou speed,
The Christians be the honour, while Turks bleed.

My utterance is to short for fitting thanks.


And to approve we'll not forget thee absent,
Call ne'er the brother of the Ambassador.
Thy place of General given thee in our wars,
From thee we thus take of, and here bestow.

Hart how these honours makes me hate these Christians


Poison finds time time to burst, so shall ours*


Though young. I have scene thee valiant, still deserve,
And still be honoured: then this charge forget not,
That in thy battles thou preserve no foe*
Unto our Nation, or for love or wealth,
So prove victorious, while within our eye,
Thy self art gracious, stayres to seat thee high.

If to spend blood may make me honourable,
I will be thrifty yet a prodigal.

Enough
Let me ^
So let us part, at parting only this
Unto my dearest Mistress give this jewel,
Say that to leave her here I go from hence,
Like one that's banished, and for no offence.

I'll find fit time to tell your griefs to her,


That in my business I will faithful be,
I leave my brother as a pledge for me.

You straight shall be dispatcht to levy forces,
You as befits be furnished on your way,
But first in full cups, we'll every other greet,
That at next meeting we may prosperous meet.

Dalibra?


Madam


Give me thy bosom? what dost thou think of the two English brothers?


I think Madam, if they be as pleasant in taste, as they are fair to the eye,
they are a dish worth eating.


A Caniball Dalibra, would eat men,


Why not Madam; fine men cannot choose but be fine meat.


I, but they are a filling meat.


Why so are most of your sweet meats, but if a woman have a true appetite to
them they will venture that.


I'd not be free of that company of Venturers.


What tho their voyages be somewhat dangerous? they are but short, thei'le
finish one of their voyages in forty weeks, and with in a month after, hoist
sail, and too't again for another.


You sail clean from the Compass Dalibra: I only questioned you about the
Christians habits and behauiors.


That's like their conditions very civil and comely,


I but they are strangers Dalibra.


Strangers? I see no strangeness in them, they speak as well or rather better
then our own Countrymen, and I make no question can do as well if it came once
to execution.


There valour shown in the late overthrow of the Turks, seals that for
currant.


And yet there are some about the Sophy your uncle that look with a sullen
brow upon them.


I hold them the more worthy for that: For envy malice are always stabbing
at the bosom of worth: when folly and cowardice walk up and down in
reguardles security, and here comes one of them.


Health to your Ladyship.


In wine? or beer my Lord:


In a full bofome of love madame.


I pledge no love healths my Lord: but fro whence is't? If I like the party my
maid shall take it form.


From my great brother warlike Halibeck,
That makes your love the mark of all his hopes.

Im'e sorry for him has mist his mark then: but how did the two English
brothers bear themselves in the battle*


Marched with the rest of meaner action,
Like stars amongst a regiment of planets:
Shined with the rest tho much below the rest.

That's very strange, it came to us by letters,
The English brothers took more prisoners:
Then any four Commanders in the camp

Indeed they took some straggling runagates,
Poor heartless snakes that scarce had strength to crawre:
But had you seen the valiant Prince my brother --

Do any thing worth note I should commend him fort, nor is the elder of the
English Sherlies employed in Embassage to Christendom.


Only for guide unto my warlike brother,
But neither privy to the business:
Nor party joined in his commission.

Then fames a lier,


Madame my brother doth commend himself.


He could do little and he cold not commend himself but who comes here.


The younger brother of the Sherleys madam:


Now by my hopes a goodly personage,
Composed of such a rich perfection:
As valour seems his servant -- ought with us.

As servants to there Lords, subjects to Kings,
Love mixed with duty worthelesse Sherley brings:
To your high excellence.

From whence and whom.


Worthy employment having called my brother,
Your worthless servant to the Christian states:
Me has he made his trembling messenger,
To bring his dear commends unto your grace.

Which with no common favour we receive,
Our hand for his tried service and your own:
Our love in fair requite all shall be shown.

Death to a Christian.


Nearer yet more nearer.


I cannot.


Why.


Your beauty shines to clear,
Let cloud borne Eagles tower about your seat:
Suffice it me I prosper by the heate.

The glorious Sun of Persia shall ensuse,
His strength of heate into thy generous veins
And make thee like himself: in the mean time
Look high; find feet, we'll set thee steps to clime.

I am high enough, the Sherlies humble aim,
Is not high Majesty, but honoured Fame.

And that you both have won, and with the loss
Of your best bloods do your high deeds engross
In times large volume: where to Englands Fame,
Ranckt with best Warriors stands brave Sherleys name:
Me thinks your Country should grow great with pride,
To see such branches spring out of her sides,
Your aged Father should grow young again*
To hear his sons live in the friendly pen,
Of kind Antiquity: all Persia sings
The English Brothers are Coe-mates for Kings.

You ouerprize us madame and report,
Striving to right us doth our worthes much wrong:
Las: we are men but meanly quallefi'd,
To the rich worthies of our English soil:
And should they hear what prodigal report
Gives out of us, they would condemn us for it,
And though these parts would swear us Innocent,
Our Countrymen would count us insolent:
For tis the nature of our English coast,
What ere we do for honour not to boast.

You do your Country credit.


Honoured princes.
The mighty Sophey your renowned uncle,
Expects my service.

Fare thee well good Sherlei,
Were thy religion -- wherefore stays your honour.

My brother.


Is employed, pray begone,
Our thoughts are private and would talk alone.

Slighted tis well, what I intend i'll keep,
Revenge may slumber but shall never sleep.

But he is a Christian and his state to mean,
To keep even wing with us, then die the thoughts:
Of idle hope, be thy self complete,
Great in descent, be in thy thoughts as great.

What dreaming madame?


Yes and my dream was of the wandering knight Eneas.


O the true Trojan.


Yet he played false play with the kind hearted Queen of Carthage.


And what did you dream of them.


A very proffitable dream, which tells me that as strangers are amorous, so in
the end they prow dangerous, and like the industrious Be, having sucked the
Juice of foreign gardens they make wing to there own homes, and there make
merry with the fraught of there adventures.


Troubled with the fear of suspicion madame.


Tis a disease very incident to our sex: but who comes here, my old malady.


Madam the Sophey your renowned uncle,
Expects your company.

It may be so.


Presently madam.


And that may be to.


What to my message.


Why you may be gone.


This is no answer.


Why then look for none.


I hope for better.


This is all you get,
I cannot come, excuse me by your wit.

Cannot, nor will not.


Honourable princes,
The mighty Sophey craves your company.

Instantly Sherley: my huge honoured Lord,
If your all lauded brother Halybeck
Would ought of love with us give it our maid,
She knows our mind and you may sooner hast:
When Emperors call we cannot fly to fast.

Then madan.


Nay good my Lord if you would ought with me deliuert to my boy, I must observe
my Lady.


If you would any thing with me tell it to the post I must go play again at
shittle-cocke.


Life, a disgrace, deluded to my teeth,
Lives my great brother in so mean respect:
By Mortus Aly, and our Persian Gods,
The Sophy shall have note on it, if he pause,
To take revenge, no more, i'll put the cause,
To steeles Arbitrament: Revenge and Death,
Likeslander attend the sword of Calymath.

Time that upon his wrestlesse wings Conveys,
Hours, days and years, we must entreat you think
By this hath borne our worthy Trauailor,
Toward Christendom as far as Russia
In his affairs, with him's gon Halibeck,
Who seems with friendly steps to tread with him,
But in his heart lurks envy like a Snake,
Who hurts them sleeping whom he fears awake.
Our Story then so large we cannot give,
All things in acts, we should entreat them live;
By apprehension in your judging eyes,
Only for taste, before their Ambasly
Had time of hearing with the Emperor,
Great Haly traitorously suggests against him
Of his low birth, base manners, and defects,
Which being fastened in their credulous ears,
How he was welcome by this show appears.
Stay, and resolve you Councellors of State,
What cause neglects or what offence of ours
Makes this disgrace wear such a public habit.

Sherley thy self, that art a Fugitive,
A Christian spy, a Pirate and a Thief.

O Halibeck,
Whom my great My* made Coe-mate with me.

As candles lighted to burn out themselves,
He gave thee grace as parent to disgrace:
His wisdom there held thee unfit for life,
Yet sent thee hither near thy Christian floor,
That falling there thy shame might be the more.

O treason when thou bear the highest wing,
Thy tongue seems oily with a venomous sting:
I stand not Lords to purge his evidence,
Nor to accuse his slander, these blushelesse papers
Which his Imperyall Master made to me,
Or quit me or condemn me, If I look red,
Tis my hearts die with anger not with dread.

Your letters we'll advise on, in the mean time,
We take you to our charge as prisoner:
If fair we find your cause and without rust,
Such shall your sentence be upright and just.

How ere, come death tis innocence delight,
Tho the world spot her, yet her face is white.

Thus by your information have we done,
Our Justice on that stranger gentleman:
Your Princely self we do entreat to feast,
Till leisure ean conclude your business.

Which in our masters name we thank you for,
Now droopes the Christians honour ne'er to rise:
And in his fall envy hath washed her eyes.

Sir Anthony Sherley was thus imprisoned.
And Cusshan Halybeck in royal sort
Had entertainment with the Russian,
During which time his counsel with advice:
Had red his letter by the Persian sent,
Suspected by the commendation given
Of his approved worth in war and peace,
And his authority asseign'd to them:
That all sugestions from the others tongu,
Were envies bolts, that spares not whom to wrong,
Yet to make strong their censure they straight sent,
For the English agent, and for English merchants,
Where after question of his life and birth,
They found him sprung from honourable stock,
And that his country hopes in time to come,
To see him great, though envied of some.
They so resolved their Master, how he left the Court,
To please your eyes we in this show report.
Thus graced by the Muscouian Emperor,
Envy grew still more rank in Haly's heart,
Yet both dispatcht on their disseignes in hand.
Time now makes short their way, and they at Rome;
In state are brought before his holiness:
Where what succeeded for the former grudge,
Give you us leave to show, take leave to judge.

With greatest pomp, magnificence and state,
To the adoration of all dazzled eyes,
We do intend, the Ambassadors once come,
Shall have a hearing, feasting* and their welcome.
Descend O brother-hood of Cardinals,
And all the holy orders that attend us.
And let your diligence approve your care,
To bring them to our presence in Peters chair.

Your Holiness shall have your will obeyed.


If to the advancement of Gods Church and Saints,
The tennor of their Embassage appears,
They shall have all our furtherance, prayers and tears.

Peace to the Father of our Mother Church,
The stayre of men's saluations, and the Key*
That binds or loses our transgressions.

The virtue of your Embassy, go on.


These papers be the precepts taught my tongue,
The force of whose inscription runs thus:
That Christian Princes would lend level strength,
To curb the insulting pride of Paganism,
And you the mouth of heaven, advertise them,
To join their bodies, to an able arm,
That as aboue's sterne vengeance for heavens foes,
So men (heavens friends) should seek their overthrows.

Ascend my son, the furtherance of this right,
Commands our conscience, is our souls delight,

Down for thy pride, and for the wrong thou did me.
This place admits not thy unhallowed feet,
And heart being treasons, fondly climb unto it.

Even step by step, whereas this business tends,
My place admits me, and my feet ascends.

But Phaeton for climbing had a fall,
And so shalt thou, damnation prove withal.

Refrain therefore, and what ere you are,
If you were Kings, as but Kings ministers,
Thinking by privilege of your affairs,
Your outrage hath a freedom, you are deceived,
For as vncheckt, the winds command the seas,
The best shall shake our mightiness displeased.

Pardon dread Father, that my heate of blood*
Took from me the remembrance of the place,
Wherein all knees should stoop, no hand offend,
And this repentance for remission plead,
Rashness doth make the obedient be deceived,
Nor wast so much my wrongs in Russia,
Wherein his slander made me prisoner,
Remember me to take revenge on him,
As that his Pagan feet should dare to clime,
Where none but Christians knees should, and then mine*
Much less admit him have the upper way,
From men whose souls fear them whom we obey.

Christian thy name, that in this register,
To honour thee we may remember it.

Sherlye a Christian and a Gentleman,
A Pilgrim Soldier, and an Englishman.

For all these stiles we love and honour thee,
And in thy affairs will so effectually
Deal for thee in our name to Christian Princes,
They shall so honour thee, that thou shalt back,
With powers so strong, whose sight makes Turkey shake.

Heaven shall gain souls thereby, religion glory.


First to Saint Angelo thus hand in hand*
Then counsel, to make Christian Turkish land.

Our Traveller here's feasted, banquets done,
And he with letters is dispatcht from Rome,
Unto the States of Venice, suppose him there,
Where we will leave him, and entreat your thoughts,
To think their eyes transported, and they see,
Sir Thomas Sherleys following misery,
From England by desire to see his brother,
With some few ships well mand, and well provided,
Suppose him now at sea, where with cross winds,
Unequal to his merits and his hopes
He long remained: at last in Italy.
In the great Duke of Florence Court he is arrived,
Feasted and honoured; from thence being furnished,
With all things fitting for a prosperous voyage,
He is come unto the Staights of Gibralter,
Then to Legorne, then to the Duke of Tuscan,
Where diverse Merchants did corrupt his men,
Against his course, and made them mutinous,
Which to appease, they put to Sea again,
And being in sight of the Isle of Sisily,
Two of his ships forsook him, and he with one,
Is come to Ieo in the Turks dominion:
This latter warning me fro speech doth break,
Suppose him landed here himself to speak.

Welcome a shore, a shore, welcome a shore,
Forget the past adventures, think that the Seas,
Played with us but as great men do a land.
Hurled us now up then down, had room to toss,
And fed their pleasures though to others loss,
Believe that all misfortunes are like thirst,
That makes your drink taste sweeter when it comes,
For me, as you are, so am I, a little pile
Of earth slim'd earth, and have no greater stile
Then you have, but a man
And if your blood have the same heate as mine,
We'll never back unto our mother country, but our stream
Shall loose his vital way, ot be a theme,
Unto our sanguine brothers, how to raise,
Poeans of Triumphs in our virtues praise,
Or else, even here this be our fatal lot,
We'll dye unknown, so buried and forgot.

While we have life, even against this rocky town,
We'll find us graves in stones, or beat it down.

You are our General, and with you we'll stand,
Who fear not sea-stormes, shrink not being a land.

I thank you all, be but your actions thus,
Men shall not fright us, nor this losty town,
Built upon stony hills to out-face the clouds,
Be able to amaze us, but the men
That keep those walls, shall perish though not then:
Then Master Gunner instead of other parley,
Go let a piece of Ordenance summon them.

I go.


The rest make good this ground, while that my self
At their walls side will question them to yield:
Mercy we'll offer, which if they deny,
In the same hour they do resist, they die.
This tongue proclaims, to them we are hither come,
With Souldiars hands that bring destruction
To them and their fenced town, if they hold out,
Our self will take their answer, ift be proud,
The spoil is yours, the earths for them a shroud.
Arm then as I do.

Tis for hope of wealth.


And Pagans glories to enrich us with.


At my return we'll fight to purchase gould,
Or tak't with ease which hope makes cowards bold.

But whose too venturous, generals should know*
In steed of gold may meet his overthrow:
For tell me sailors and my fellow mates,
What gain may be expected from this town:
That we should venture for, nay what from him,
We term our general of worth or rule:
More then we him enabled in our selves?

Why speaks the Captain thus.


That mischiefs should be shunned ere they begun,
And we our selves void danger ere vndun:
For but bethink your selves in all our voyage,
What prosperous howre, hath given encouragement
To make our hopes look cheerful? what have we had
But sickness, sea-stormes and contrary winds?
And what can we expect here being landed,
Should but the hardy enemy come and descend
But wretched slavery and at last our end?

But how can we prevent it being here?
And to perform this voyage bound with him.

Why leave him here and take our selves to sea,
And every man be Captain of himself:
Where what pillage we can make our prey,
Twill be our own and we to none obey.

Degenerous man:
So big of boane and yet so base of mind,
To counsel against him so good then:
What tho our fortune with ungentle hand,
Hath crossed his enterprise and actions:
Can then to him whose bounty gave thee means,
Preferment, grace, beyond thy mertis worth,
Poison thy self and make thy tongue a sting,
Against his life that gives thy fortunes wing:

Whats don is past times were fortunes to come,
And to repay sometimes to speak is dum:
Then speak my hearts if that my motion please,
Hoist sails my masters and again to seas:

A Captain a Captain.


Say whether fly you feeble mates in streams,
When I am come to have you bring relief:
Unto our general that's oppressed by the Turks.

To sea, to sea.


To sea for what?
And leave our general in distress a land:
The Turks that at my sommons gave their oaths,
To hold an hours parley break there word:
Come valiently upon him: soldier like
He hath resisted till his fastened hilto
Was bladlesse in his hand: nothing now rests*
But present rescue or a present death.

Death unto him that seeks it, we will fly
For certain safeguard; wise security
Seeks shelter ere the storm can trouble.
To sea my mates then Inn you must with us.
Deny all serves not, nor resistance neither,
They are best in health can set them to the weather:
And so to sea.

To sea, to sea.


Base villains Fates,
Unpartial fates to spin their lives this length,
Who leave their Master and should be his strength.

Friends, soldiers, sailors,
A rescue or I am taken prisoner.

Bootless you call Sir their inconstant faith is fled from you.


ha.


Hark they way anchor get your ships to sea,
And leave you to men's tirany a land:
They in one knot are knit and only I,
Stay here, as you, now ere to live or die:

I thank thee, less I cannot give thee,
Fate do thy worst my courage takes no flight:
But here keeps court though my cross destines fight.

Follow, follow, follow.


A Christian, a Christian.


Though weaponless I am left with these i'll fight,


In what I may i'll show my best of might.


So bear him prisoner to Constantinople,
To be examined of the Emperor.

Even where you will if to my overthrow,
My mind is high, lie my head ne'er so lowe.

I will not leave you Master since I have escaped
From their surprise, but with my best indeauor,
Will strive to see what shall become of you.
If worse then I could wish i'll sorrow for it:
If in my means to help, i'll comfort it.

My thanks to heaven that ouerlookt this day,
And thus hath aided with an host divine:
The feeble remnants of us thy herralds,
That shall proclaim thy name throughout the world:
And wear this badge of courage on our breasts,
Joined with a motto, calling on thy name:
This shall redouble valour when it faints,
This says our blood can be no better shed
Then in that bloods behalf that died this red,
Lets now recount our victory to day,
What prisoners have we taken?

Between thirty and forty of their chief comanders.


Between thirty and forty of their chief commanders:
We are now here the Persian substitute,
And cannot use our Christian clemency,
To spare a life, off with all their heads:
Speak, do ye renounce your Prophet Mahomet?
Bow to the Deity that we adore.
Or die in the refusal.

For Mahomet we dye.


Join Mortus Aly then with Mahomet,
That slew your Prophets Hamer and Vsman,
And on a snowy Cammell went to heaven,
And yet you shall find grace in Persia.

For Mahomet, none but Mahomet,


To death with them, the rest shall follow.


Off with his head too, we'll have no ransom,
But conversion.
I have somewhat to deliver ere I dye.


Be thou a convertite, we'll here thee, not else.


Then I must be silent, I'll choose to dye,
Before the faith I do profess, deny.

Off with his head then.


Stay, I am not as I seem.


Thou seem a Turk.


Yet am a Christian.


The more thy crime.
Against Christians, thou hast been a foe to day,
How comes it else thou art our prisoner?

If I be blameful found, then let me dye:
First peruse this.

I am prisoner in Constantinople, use your best relief. Thomas Sherlie.

Oh heavens!
Although the news be bitter in it self,
I cannot but applaud this happy knowledge,
Ten thousand heads now shall not buy this head,
Thou art my best friends equal for this deed:
Oh that the fortune of ten doubtful days,
Were to begin their pale encountering close:
So that my brother stood in armour here,
To join with me, but can ye help my
Understanding with any further notice.

Not any, letters had I none, but short commends,
Whilst his hand writ down this brief tenor:
So straight is his converse with Christians:
For him and you this have I undertook:
First I was forced your most unwilling foe,
So to become your willing prisoner.

I thank ye, and I shall remember ye,
How many of their commanders are yet living?

Thirty my Lord.


Still let them live,
Those thirty lives shall buy my brothers life,
And I shall think them happily bestowed,
I'll send an Embassy to offer it:
But pray ye be sparing in your speech,
For if by any half intelligence
He be known my brother, hes sure to die.
So heaven hath aided me, thrice against these Turks,
That they would hate the man that loves me,
And to my name they add, Sherley the great:
Though my humillitie (I vow by heaven)
Doth not affect that over dignity:
But if they do refuse this proffered gift,
Sherley shall wish to be no other great,
Then to be great in their great over throw:
If that he die within their Captives thrall:
Ten thousand Turks shall morn his funeral.

Thus like the Sun in his Meridian pride.
Attended by a regiment of stars,
Stand we triumphant amongst our petty Kings.
Upon the highest proment of either globe,
That heaves his forehead nearest to the clouds
Fix we our foot: and with our Egles wings
Canopy ore three quarters of the world,
And yet we write, Non ultra: the proud Sophey:
The Persian beggar that by starts Invades us,
Our potent Army like so many wolves
Let loose into a flock of fencelesse sheep,
Shall bait and werrie home into there folds,
Whilst Fate and Conquest our high state vpholds.

Yet mighty and magnificent; your powers,
In this late conflict against Persia
Have met much loss.

Base and degenerate coward,
Are not we Hamath the sole god of earth
King of all Kings, provost of Paradise,
Sultan and Emperor of Babilon:
Of Catheria, Aegipt, Anthioche,
Lord of the precious stones of India:
A Champion and defendor of the gods,
Prince and conductor from the withered tree
To the green bosom of Achaia mount,
The joy and comfort of great Mahomet:
And last protector of the Sepulcher,
Of Juries god and crucified King:
And dares the Persian compaire with us?
What and from whom?

The Christian general,
Sherley the great sends you this mild falute:
In this his late yet bleeding overthrow,
Where men like grass stepped to the street of death,
20. most choice and valorous commanders,
He has given life to, and in fair exchange,
Tenders them for the life and liberty,
Of an imprisoned English Gentleman.

Twenty for one what is the Christians name?


I know not that.


How shall we know to free him.


His stature and proportion
Is given me by prescription so directly
As from a thousand I can point him out.

Conduct him in, and bring the prisoner forth,
He is sure some Prince or else a man of worth
That in exchange of him the General
Proffers so largely. Now is this the man.

The same great Emperor.


Then Christian,
For by no other title can we call thee,
Acquaint us with thy parentage and name:
For from the Christian general Sherley the great,
We have means that labour thy delivery

Great Emperor, I am a man whose birth
And mean attempts were never registered,
Amongst the English worthies: if great Shirley,
Hath ought proposd for my delivery,
Twas in a genetall zeal to Christendom,
Not any private notice of my worth.

Dissemble not; for subtle Englishman,
We rather judge, nay absolutely know,
Thou either art allied to him by birth,
Or some great Prince, which till thou dost confess,
Thy torments shall be more, thy freedom less.
As for our Captains, let them live or die,
The Christian shall in slavish irons lie:
Begone with that and back with him to prison,
Double his irons and take back half his diet,
Strengthen our powers and bravely to the field,
Our breasts with Iron, our spirits with fire are steeld.

Come Sir, had not you better confess and be hanged, then bestaru'd to death,
and hanged after.


Sir Ime armed with patience: tyrants hate
Is bounded with in limits: they may will,
But their's a God that can prevent their ill.
That power I ground on: here's my greatest cross,
A brothers love turns to a brothers loss*
My Journey towards heaven, fate sent me hither,
You like kind guides send me the next way thither.

I will send you the nearest way but because you shall not be hungry. I'll diet
you with puddle water and bran, you will be the lighter to take your journey.


That into England, that to Persia,
And now dear friend what tidings at S. Mark.

Like to men's minds distract and variable,
You have hard your brothers bloody overthrow
Given to the Turks.

It came to me last night:
What news from England.

Nothing of import.
The yongst and greatest grows up here at hand.

Ought that concerns me.


About the jewel,
It fills the town with admiratlon,
That which great Princes for the worth deny,
You but a Lord Ambassador should buy

Twas for the Sophie and I wonder much
He sends not in the cash.

The Jew expects it.


And here he comes, God morrow honest Zariph.


The Hebrew God and sanctified King
Bless them that east kind greeting at the Jew,

Iowe thee money Zariph.


That's the cause.
Of your kind speech, a Christian spaniel claws,
And fauns for gain, jest on, deride the Jew,
You may, vexed Zareph will not jest with you,
Now by my soul, 'twould my sprits much refresh;
To taste a banquet all of Christians flesh.

I must entreat thee of forbearance Zariph,


No not an hour,
You had my Jewel I must have your Gold.

Let me entreat thee Zariph for my sake
That have stood friend to all thy brethren.

You have indeed, for but this other fast,
You sold my brother Zacharie like a horse,
His wife and children at a common out-crie,

That was the Law,


And I desire no more,
And that I shall have, tho the Jew be poor,
He shall have law for money.

Nay but Zariph
I am like thee, a stranger in the City:
Strangers to strangers should be pitiful.

If we be cursed we learned of Christians,
Who like to swine crash one another bones.

Is it a sin ih them? 'tis sin in you,


But they are Christians Zariph is a Jew,
A crucifiyng Hang-man trained in sin,
One that would hang his brother for his skin.

But till to morrow.


Well you shall not say,
But that a Jew will bear with you a day,
Yet tak't not for a kindness but disgrace,
To show that Christians are then Turks more base,
Theile not forbear a minute, there's my hand,
Tomorrow night shall serve to clear your band.

I thank thee and inuit thee to a banquet,


No banquets, yet I thank you with my heart,
And vow to play the Jew why tis my part.

Sir here's an Englishman desires access to you.


An Englishman whats his name,


He calls himself Kempe.


Kemp, bid him come in, welcome honest Will, and how doth all thy fellows in
England.


Why like good fellows when they have no money, live upon credit.


And what good new Plays have you.


Many idle toys, but the old play that Adam and Eve acted in bare action under
the fig tree draws most of the Gentlemen.


Jesting Will.


In good earnest it doth sir.


I partly credit thee, but what Play of note have you?


Many of name, some of note, especially one, the name was called Englands Joy,
Marry he was no Poet that wrote it, he drew more Connies in a purse-nette,
then ever were taken at any draught about London.


Sir, here's an Italian Harlaken come to offer a play to your Lord-ship.


We willingly accept it, hark Kempe:
Because I like thy gesture and thy mirth,
Let me request thee play a part with them.

I am somewhat hard of study and like your honour, but if they will invent any
extemporal merriment, i'll put out the small sack of wit I have left, in
venture with them.


They shall not deny it, Signior Harlaken he is content: I pray thee question
him --


Now Signior, how many are you in company?


None but my wife and my self sir.


Your wife, why hark you, will your wife do tricks in public.


My wife can play.


The honest woman, I make no question, but how if we cast a whores part or a
courtesan.


Oh my wife is excellent at that, she's practisd it ever since I married her,
tis her only practise.


But by your leave, and she were my wife, I had rather keep her out of
practise a great deal.


Yet since 'tis the custom of the country,
Prithe make one, conclude upon the project:
We neither look for Schollership nor Art.
But harmless mirth, for that's thy usual part.

You shall find me no turne-coate, but the project come, and then to casting
of the parts.


Marry sir, first we will have and old Pantaloune.


Some jealous Coxcomb.


Right, and that part will I play.


The jealous Cox-combe.


I ha plaid that part ever since.


Your wife plaid the Courtesan.


True, and a great while before, then I must have a peasant to my man, and he
must keep my wife,


Your man, and a peasant, keep your wife, I have known a Gentleman keep a
peasants wife: but 'tis not usual for a peasant to keep his masters wife.


Oh 'tis common in our country.


And i'll maintain the custom of the country.


What do you mean sir?


Why to rehearse my part on your wives lips: we are fellows, and amongst
friends and fellows you know all things are common.


But she shall be no common thing, if I can keep her several: then sir we
must have an Amorado that must make me Cornuto.


Oh for love sake let me play that part.


No ye must play my mans part, and keep my wife.


Right, and who so fit to make a man a Cuckold, as he that keeps his wife.


You shall not play that part.


What say you to my boy?


I, he may play it and you will.


But he cannot make you jealous enough?


Tush I warrant you, I can be jealous for nothing.


You should not be a true Italian else.


Then we must have a Magnifico that must take up the matter betwixt me and my
wife.


Any thing of yours, but I'll take up nothing of your wives.


I wish not you should, but come, now am I your Master.


Right, and I your servant.


Lead the way then.


No, I ha more manners then so: in our country 'tis the custom of the Master
to go In-before his wife, and the man to follow the master.


In --


To his Mistress.


Ye are in the right --


Way to Cuck-holds-hauen, Saint Luke be your speed.


A hundredth thousand Ducats, sweet remembrance,
I'll read it again, a hundredth thousand Ducats,
Sweeter still: who owes it? a Christian,
Canaans brood: honey to my joyful soul,
If this sum fail (my bond unsatisfied)
He's in the Iewes mercy, mercy, ha, ha:
The Lice of Aegipt shall devour them all,
Ere I show mercy to a Christian:
Unhallowed brats, seed of the bond-woman,
Swine devourers, vncircumcised slaves,
That scorn our Hebrewsanctimonious writ,
Despise our laws, profane our sinagogues,
Old Moises ceremonies, to whom was left,
The marble Decalogue, twice registered,
By high Iehouahs self, lawless wretches,
One I shall gripe, break he but his minute,
Heaven grant he may want money to defray,
Oh how I'll then embrace my happiness,
Sweet gold, sweet Jewel, but the sweetest part
Of a Iewes feast, is a Christians heart:
Whose there, a friend, a friend, good news, good news.

Zariph the best, the Christian is thine own,
I'll sell him to thee at an easy rate,
It shall but cost thy pains, joined with a heart,
Relentless as a Flint, that with more strokes,
Reuerberates his anger with more fire:
I know i'ts thine, Ime sure 'tis my desire.

It is, it is, sweeten my longing hopes,
For charity give me the happy means.

He should discharge thy bond to night?


He should, but I hope he cannot.


He cannot,
The money he expected from the Sophy,
My self have intercepted by the way,
Tis (to him unknown) given to my hands,
And ere this shall aid him.

He shall dye with Core,
As poor and loathsome as was leprous Iob;
Sink down with Dathan to hells black abisse,
A Christians torture, is a Iewes bliss,
For further execution, say, say.

Sit at his banquet with a smiling cheek*
Let him run out his prodigal expense:
To the full length, the beggar has a hand
As free to spread his coin* as the swollen clouds,
Throw down their watery pillage, which from the sea,
The misty Pirats fetch: then cease on him:
Defer not, this night, vengeance in height of mirth,
Galls deepest, like a fall from heaven to earth.

Oh that thou were one of the promised seed,
To sleep with blessed Abraham, when thou die
For this good news: here shall be Canniballs,
That shall be ready to tear him peece-meale,
And devour him raw, throw him in the womb
Of unpitied misery, the prison,
There let him starve, and rot, his dungeon cry,
To Zariphs cares shall be sweet harmony.

It is enough, determine, follow it,
My self will presently back to Persia,
And by the way I will invent such tales,
As shall remove the Sophies further love.
Ere any stranger shall with me walk even,
I'll hate him, were his virtues writ in heaven,
The Musique says the banquet is at hand.

Let us abridge the office of our breath,
To give to each of you a several welcome,
I do beseech ye take it all at once,
Yee' are all welcome, now I pray ye sit,

We'll not strive for first.


'Tis more used then fit.


Oh this sweet Musique is heavens rhetoric,
The Art was first reueald to Tuball Cain,
Good Hebrew, 'tis now forgot, 'tis grown stale,
New-fangled ages makes old virtues fail.

So much the Hebrew writ doth testify,
Yet are there different to that opinion:
The Grecians do allow Pithagoras,
The Thracians give it to their Orpheus,
As first inuentors of the harmony.

All errors, Tuball, Tuball, Hebrew Tuball.


But howsoever, we'll hold no dispute,
Our attention is tied to some other sports.

Our act is short, your liking is our gains,
So we offend not, we are paid our pains.

No more of this, we'll have a Iewes Jig, to your business delay not.


What means this violence?


We'll not stand upon Intergatories, away with him*


Jew.


Christian, away with him.


Hear me.


In prison, I'll listen to laugh at thee.


Be merciful.


Merciful, ha, ha,


No not to me, I scorn to ask it of thee,
But to thine own black soul be merciful
Inhumane Dog; that in midst of cuitesie
Dost yoke me in a Serpents arm: true seed
Of that kiss killing Iudas, can thy black soul
Have hope of pity being pitiless?

Pray for thy self, I am saved already.


Halibeck, *does not your eye discover a treacherous heart in this?


Ha ha.


Dost laugh at me?


Sir, be comforted, Uenice shall not see your fortunes long oppressed for a
greater matter then this.


I am not moved sir,
It hath not emptied the least pipe of blood,
That are within my Cheeks, only this is all
That wrappes my senses in astonishment,
In all my travails I ne'er saw hell till now,
Tis here true portraid, set in open view;
In an envious knave and a bloody Jew.

There rot and starve, starve and rot, Oh my delight, I shall dream of this
happiness to night.


To Persia now, while Sherley here sinks lowe,
There Hallebeck above his height shall grow.

No more; by Mortus Ali we are moved:
Dares that proud Shirly whom our powerful heate,
Drew from the Earth, refind and made up great:
Dares he presume to contradict our Will,
And save a man whom we command him kill.
He would not: nay he durst not, he brues his death
Rides in a cloud of our offended breath.

He knows it,


And he fears it.


All your self
I speak not to disparadge Sherlies worth,
Nor to divorce him from your gracious favour,
But to maintain the custom of our wars,
Which most contemptuously he has broke down
In giving life to thirty prisoners,
And talking with the Turk by messengers.

Send to the Turk, and save our prisoners lives.


With proffer to return them ransomless.


By Mortus Ali and our Persian Gods.
For every man he saved I'll have a joint,
And for conversing with the Turk his head --

Besides your gracious Niece.


Ha? what of her?
Dares the proud Christian think upon our Niece.

And look and love her.


How?


And she on him.


To save the body we must loose a limb;
Sherley shall off.

And time.


One call our Niece.
Alter our Customs* steal our subjects bosoms,
And like a cunning Adder twine himself
About our Nieces heart, she once his own,
He's Lord of us, and of the Persian Crown.

What craves the mighty Sophy.


Loose your train.
And to the purpose, when and what commends
Came to your hands from our new general,
Sherley the Great.

That he is great in name,
Springs not from ought in us, but his own fame*
But for what reason doth your greatness make,
This privy search in my concealed thoughts
Touching the English General.

Thy bosom.
Harbours a Traitor, dost thou not love young Sherley.

I do not hate him, should I answer so
Against my tongue, my conscience would say no.

Why then you love him.


Should I not say I,
My honoured thoughts would give my tongue the lie.

She has confessed,


That I love him: true.


And English Sherley.


If he had his dew,
You should all love him, he has spent a sea
Of English blood to honour Persia.

And through that bloody sea his treacherous head,
Shall make a purple voyage to the shade
Where treason lives appareled in red flames.

For me? because your Niece does honour him.


For thee because my Niece doth dote on him,
Forgetful of thy Fortunes and high birth,
More bestial in thine Appetite then beasts.
The Princely Lioness disdains to mate
But with a Lyon. Time and Experience shows,
That Eagles scorn to build or bill with crows.

What means all this?


That with thy love to Shirlie.
Thou bui'st our hate.

Berlady a hard bargain:
But Merchant venturers cannot always win,
You forced my thought to love him, and like a Tutor,
First taught my tongue to call him honourable,
Your breath commanded knees to bow to him,
Tongue to adore and duty to attend him,
And is affection turned Apostata?
But I have found your humour you grow jealous,
Least I should rob you of your Minion,
In faith you need not.

Our inkinled rage,
Is grown too strong to be blown out with Ieasts,
Thou love.

The very ground he goes upon,
But why? because it bears my bodies want,
By Jove and by a Virgins modest thought:
(Which like a Laurel Gyrland decks my brows,)
I love not Sherly: never harbord thought
That told me he was lovely, at least equal
To maintain wing with us.

Come you dissemble.


I loved him to please you: to humour you
Gave him kind language: if I praised his worth,
'Twas not my tongue but yours, if twere a lie,
It came from these, they author'd it not I,
Yet i'll recant it too; call him un civil,
Ill-fauour'd, treacherous, disobedient,
And to appease the tempest of your wrath,
Swear him a coward worse then Calimath.

I'll not endure.


Unequalled Excellence,
She doth disgrace us all to honour him,

You all disgrace your selves to Envy him,
Whose worth has been an honour to you all.

Conquest and peace attend you.


A strong guard.


What means the Sophey? here are none --


But traitors.
Ignoble Sherley, treacherous Christian:
How durst thou against the custom of our kingdom,
reserve those prisoners lives.

Dread Majesty.
Not proud contempt but Christian charity:
The Pilot of mine actions.

But we know,
You come not empty of excuse proud Sherley:
Have we breth'd life into thy sickly fortunes,
And like the lowe and mean bred Saraber:
Having alloud thee seat-roome at our foot,
Dare thou presume to clime up to our Crown:
Presumptuous, know our breath can shake thee down.

Look through my bosom, if you find one thought,
Basely condicion'd or ambitious.

You are all ambition and hast drawn the love,
Out of our subjects breasts; who to defeat,
Us of our due, title thee Sherley the great.

Great was there error that informd you so,
My thoughts are like my fortunes, mean and lowe
If the high favours you have thrown on me,
By my dear industry I have increased:
Adds honour to your own, for saving of my prisoners,
Let but a brothers love plead my excuse.

Ambitious like your own
Are his proceedings; tis brought to us by letter
How much he has abused himself, and us
In his employments.

Dearest excellence,
Let not his want of duty fall on me:
Nor mine return to him.

Yet for his love
You do confess you save these prisoners.

True for a brothers love but not for his,
I have an elder brother, so every way complete
With virtuous qualleties, that even his foes,
Cannot but speak him well: desire of fame
That in all ages has been Sherleys aim
Drew him from home: mischances that like hail
Fall on bold minds did him so hard assail,
That by the Turk he was surprised and taken*
"By many strokes the tallest oaks are shaken:
To ransom him, not to Infringe your right,
I freed these prisoners, manly taine in fight.

And was not that ambition.


If to save,
A worthy brother from a worthless grave
Be held ambitious, I have in a sin
Waded so deep that I must perish in.

Perish may twenty cowards first.


Away with her to prison suppose as you infer,
To ransom him you saved your prisoners lives:
For whose sake do you love our Niece.

You fire
That lightens all the world, knows my desire
Durst never look so high.

Come you that durst
Break our Lands custom for a brothers sake
Durst for your own sake dote upon our Niece.
But see what credit your ambition bears,
Go mount those prisoners heads on thirty spears.

First be my blood there ransom, ere the Turk
Should have that proud advantage to report,
A Christian and a true borne English soldiar
Promised and had not power to perform:

Then learn to promise nothing but your own.


Nor did I mighty Prince, with my one hands:
I took those Captive Turks, with my dere blood
I bought them of proud danger: this being known:
In giueing them I gave nought but my own.

Come you're to peremptory.


I am indeed,
Before mine honour let my mans heart bleed:
Were it mine equal did me half this wrong:
He should find sharper vengeance then my tongue.

You can produce no probable excuse.


Your ears will here no reason Calimath,
Thou hast a brother, Persian so have I:
A prisoner brother to redeem his life,
That all this while lies on the the edge of death:
I saved these prisoners, were to do again,
Again i'd venture: have ye shapes of men
And want there spirits: we in all are three,
Sons of one Father, branches of one tree:
Should a rough hand but violently tear,
One siens from a tree the rest must bear
Share in the hurt, the smallest wound that draines,
Blood from our breasts empties our fathers veins:

Hast thou another brother.


We in all are three,
The youngst and meanest spirit speaks in me:
Yet ere the Turk should think I had not power
To back my word; O be this Instant howre
My latest minut: with your warlike sword:
Strike of my head lifes cheaper then my word

Be Master of thy wish, but first we here take off,
Thy offices and titles, and bestow them
Upon this worthy gentleman, charging thee,
By that first moouer whom thou call thy god:
The blessed Messias and the Sacrament
Which Christians hold so ceremonious:
Thy Fathers blessing, and thy brothers love,
And the long progress which thy soul must go,
Whether thou ever leueledst at our Crown,
Or an unlawful contract with our Niece.

Never: for had I harbord such intent,
Nothing cold make me basely to repent:
But I had never* any life nor death,
Can make a Christian falsefie his breath:

Withdraw the Christian and produce our Niece,
And officer tis well.

Will you speak yet, yet can ambition read,
Your hateful practise.
Had young Sherleys head --


A traitors head whose proud ambitious tongue,
Did at his death basely confess his wrong:
Do you as much and take our princely pardon,
Speak did you love that Christian or no.

I never loved him living, but being dead,
Thus i'll embrace, thus kiss his lovely head:
Alas good Sherley did thy warlike hand,
For this defend the Sophey, guard his land:
Did thou for this, forsake thy country, friends?
And weeping father, that's a kind amends.

Speak did you love him.


No for if I had,
I should have grown impatient, wild and mad:
Washed of this blood with tears and --

Take her hence.
She dies but she acknowledge her offence.

Stay, since I must I will, I did offend,
Cause undeserved I wrought brave Sherleis end:
I did offend for careless I stood by,
And let true valour amongst cowards die.

Cowards.


I cowards, his worth recorded stands
Upon you file of stars, he has the hands
Of all the holly Angels, to approve.
What blood ha's spent in quest of Christian love,
I speak not like a strumpet, that being filled,
With spirit of lust, her own abuse to gild
Slanders her friend: till now I never loved him,
And now by yonder Sun I dote on him.
I never heard him vow, protest or speak
Word that might his approou'd allegiance break:
Oh you have done a deed blacker then night,
A murder that would murders soul affright,
Your very foes will say when this is known,
In cutting off his head, you have scard your own*
Were I his brother, countrey-man, or slave,
I'd kill his murderer or dig my grave
Under the Sophies feet: oh you have won
The Ire of heaven, and hate of Christendom.

If he be Innocent.


By heaven he is.


Then we confess our spleen ha's done amiss.


Redeem it then, and in his winding sheet,
Let his dissevered head and body meet:
Return them me, let me the credit have,
And lay his mangled body in a grave.

Take it with our best love and furtherance,
And having ioynde his body to the head,
His winding sheet be thy chaste marriage bed,

Then lives young Sherley?


Yea and still shall stand,
Loved of the Sophy, honoured in his land,
All stiles and offices we late took off,
We back restore; and now to Callymath,
Thus far on your report we have proceeded,
And had we found them either culpable,
Their heads had paid for it, but being clear,
We here restore them to their former state,
Renew them with our love, thee with our hate.

For this dear favour, as for all the rest,
Low-minded Sherley counts him highly blessed.

Your sweating news?


To the great General.
To your demand, thus sends the haughty Turk,
That were your thirty prisoners petty Kings,
He would not free the English Gentleman.

Would not: lead on? we'll talk with him in Steel,
What he denies to hear, we'll force him feel:
Will not return them? then will we head our spears,
With Vizeroyes skulls, and ore his crauin ears
Batter his Castles like a shower of Hail:
On to the field heaven and our right preuaile.

Hell on our wrongs: give him his Niece in Manet Cally. marriage.
First like an Ass load me with ornaments,
To see how I de, become his golden trapps
And the same minute snatch them off again,
Oh I am vexed, damnation and black hell,
Author my actions: in my passions dwell,
Commotiue thoughts envy and hate,
Strive in my breast like twins inseperate,
My spleens in travel, and till they be borne,
My swollen heart labours and my breast is torn:
To ease which torment and to free my breath,
I'll be delivered, my kind Midwives death.

According to this my warrant here, I must this morning fetch my prisoner to
ayring, he had need be hung out, least his flesh should mould, for I am sure,
his clothes are musty already; We Turks are to these Christians for all the
world like Usurers to young heirs, make picking meat of their carcases, even
to the very bones, and then leave them to the hang-man, for theil none of them:
and not like Englishmen to their Oxen, the nearer fat, the nearer fed upon,
well hither he must come, and yet I think scarcely too unless he be carried,
for I am sure, let me see, these five or six months at least, he has had
nothing but the hard boards for his bed, dry bread for his food, and
miserable water for his drink: and we Turks think, that it is too good for
these Christians too, for why should we do any better to them, since they do
little better one to another, but where are you here, ha.


What would thy tongue with me, unless to have,
Thy tyrannies writ here, fright thine own soul,
Or art thou come to add unto my bones,
Having no sense of suffering in my flesh,
Speak out thy worst, our spirits not afraid,
At what can come, though in our looks dismayed.

All this Sir is to be left to the discretion of the higher powers, I ha
nothing to do with it, only sir I have a warrant here, to make two knots to
tie your ankles in, all the teeth in your head cannot tel how to undo them,
and here they are ready sir.


How slave?


Nay come resist not, but remember we have cold Irons, a good cudgel, and a
strong arm, put in your bearers,


Blind Fortune when thou look a skance on me. Thou art without conscience in
thy plaguing them.


Come, come, your legs are shrunk, as you had bin at your lechery lately,
we shall have them slip their collars anon; so, you may say your prayers now,
you shall have more company presently.


What folly were in me to sigh at this
Or chide my fortune, being common that she brings
Full hands to fools knaves grief; even to Kings:
Or what avails it me to rail at them,
That fled from me whose faiths I built upon,
Since tis as ripe in trust, to find some slaves,
As honest men to die and have due graves:
Or that my flesh is shrunk, and my blood pal'd,
Since I have this to make my courage bold,
Men have but done a part of what death should:
Or why should my captivity afflict me?
Good minds know this, imprisonment's no shame,
Unless the cause be foul which blots the name.
Then all the griefs in my remembrance be
Is that my Fathers eyes should weep for me
And my misfortune: for mine own mishapps,
Are to my mind as are heavens thunder-claps,
Who clears the air of foul infection,
And in my thoughts do only publish this,
Affliction's due to man as life and sin is.

Speak.
Where is this Captive English Christian.

Here as appointed by our Emperor.


Say Christian yet resolve us thy descent,
And promise of the ransom that's assigned thee,
Our tortures shall enforce it from thy tongue:
With the suns light this day we have thee graced,
Which till this hour we have exempt from thee,
Which grace of ours unless thou do confess,
Thy tortures shall be more, thy freedom less.

That I enjoy you benefit of heaven.
The life and solace of each living creature,
Here to refresh mine eyes, I do confess
By you kept from me, by you bounty given me,
And this some comfort to my misery,
That sun shines on my Father looks on me:
But to resolve your grace to pay a ransom,
And know not how to make my promise good,
I had rather you should take, I yield my blood.

Why think thou Christian our beleefs so slight,
Great Sherley for thy ransom would send back
Thirty of chiefest note in our respect
And thou of obscure parentage and birth,
Thou hast waked our anger put him on the rack,
Where four and twenty hours he shall remain,
Upon your lives I charge it quickly done,
Our self will see the execution.

'Tis but the farthest way about to death
To give men lingering tortures, when a small prick
Is mans conclusion: but how so ere my Lord,
I have patience to accept what you afford,
The dungeon, this, now that. If back again
Unto your loathsome prison after rack,
True constancie's my fore-front and my back.

Weell try your patience Christian, hoist him up.


Oh oh.


Now where's your haughty courage durst withstand us.
And Roman spirit that forswore to yield.

Here, Emperor here, even in these outstretcht veins,
Lives my amaselesse vitals, here's an undaunted heart,
That never yields by Turkish tyranny:
I am the same, through all that made me man,
Scorn Pagans threats, to die a Christian.

Wrinch him again.


Ohoh.


Yet wilt thou tell thy blood and parentage,
And yield unto the ransom we have assignd thee.

No Emperor, no,
Even in this hell of pain I answer never,
I once denied thee, and my tongue's no lier.

we stand amazed at thy constancy.
Yet answer us, wilt thou forsake thy faith,
Become as we are, and to Mahomet
Our holy prophet, and his Alcoran
Give thy devotion, and by our Kings we swear
We will accept thee in the place of Kings.

First shall the Sun melt from his rest-lesse seat,
Ere that our name shall turn Apostata:
Thy Kingdoms be unpeopled, and thy nations
Become as free for beasts as now for men,
Thy self as sometimes were thy Ancestors
Fed in a cage (...) at conquerors heals.

Presumptuous Christian.


And thy bad life meet such a hateful death,
Even fowls shall loath thy body, men thy breath.

Thy strength of faith hath bred a wonder in us,
One take him down and bear him back to prison:
We yet resolve not how to deal with him.

Even where you will, to torture back again,
Our comforts this hell stores for you like pain.

The hasty news.


The English agent craves access to you,


Admit him.


From my dread Master Englands royal King,
By these his letters fair commends to you.

We greet him with like love; his letters crave
A prisoner that's called Sherley we should have.

An English knight whom his misfortunes cast,
Upon your Turkish shore.

We have as yet had notice of no such.


By name perhaps dread Emperor, yet in this place,
By your commandment he lives prisoner:
And brother to that Sherley called the great.

Ha.


Which in the Persians wars is general:


Had I known that, by Mahomet he had died.


His miseres have spoke unto our king,
Joined with his worth, and he hath sent for him.

We'll not deny your Mr his request,
Yet how to know we do not send him back
His subject: but a present given from us,
Whom we esteem of an vnualu'd worth:
One bring him forth receive him English Agent.
To thee,
As to thy Masters hand we thus present him:
Bid him accept him as our thoughts did hold,
A Gem could not be bought from us with (...)
His pass shall be for Florence, then for England:
Least he in Persia should embrace his brother,
And prove a plauge to us as great as the other.

Grave father for the reverence of your age,
And Justice of the cause for which you come:
Being to advance the glory of our God,
Wherein no soul should have neglectful thoughts:
I have lain by particular affairs,
To give a hearing to your buysines.

Go on my son, to him being dutiful,
Virtue will make thy name more honourable:
My self from far have on these aged feet,
Whose knees do buckle, and have scarce there strength
To bear me further then a graves in length.
With easy paces but a swift desire,
Inquird thee out: that hearing thee a Christian:
So gracious with this Persian Emperor,
A mind so noble in thy actions.
A body fortunate in his desseignes,
Thou mights as well bestow thy pains and blood
To advance religion as for heathens good.

Heaven knows,
Knew I the means I were his willing servant.

If like thy tongue thy intention have a care,
Clime up to heaven by this ascending stair:
Entreat thy Emperor thou may raise a Church,
To sacrifice thy prayers unto that name
To whom all names should kneel: when if his Priests,
Himself, his Counsel; any heathen breath
Should contradict the high authority,
Of thy devoted zeal, spare not to say,
Their god's, his servant whom thy thoughts obey:
And win, as by persuasion kings are won,
Or else confute them by religion.

Alas sir my vngrowne experience,
To argue a difference of that height
Betwixt their god and ours, is so far unfit,
I rather shall abuse then honour it:

Why, why my son doest thou forget to know,
Our gods the spring whence eloquence doth flow:
And can infuse into thee were thou dumb,
Words thunderlike, a contradictlesse tongue:
That when thou speak for the honour of that name:
Made earth to hang betwixt yon heavenly frame
Borne on no Axeltree, angels do sit
About thine ears and breath into thy wit,
And if thou shouldest in such a quarrel die,
Martirs looks on thee with a joyful eye:

Ye have given unto my life another soul,
And never reverend father could you have come
In time that's fitter; wherein I may prove,
My duty to the highest, to Christians love:
This present day I have an Infant borne,
Who tho descended from the Emperors Niece,
A Pagan, i'll baptise in Christian faith,
Confute there Ignorance, heaven assisting me:
That mine one soul this comfort may partake,
Sherley in Persia did the first Christian make:
Then raise a temple for our further good,
Or in the fair adventure spend my blood.

In all necessities i'll further thee,
And if by my advice thou die, i'll die with thee:

And so to die your life were new begun,
Old age to die with him a made gods son:

Haly go on, and of your great affairs,
Deliver us every several circumstance.

From thence I left dread sovereign thus ensues,
That Sherley, whom you joined with me in embassey
Having our footing once on Christian ground,
Became so proud, so wild, so prodigal,
All eyes contemn him, only some few,
That gave his rising looks, but for the dew
Your Grace bestowd on him in Princes Courts:
His fellowship was fools: his actions sports
For wise-mens tables. I often did advise him,
That such behaviours no way did befit
The glory of his place, nor would you suffer it
When his return gave place for punishment.
When first in Russia he abused your greatness,
For which the just State did imprison him,
Yet for the honour of the Cause in hand,
Ere long he was releast: we come to Rome,
Where I but striving to ascend as chief,
Being in person there your sacred self,
His hand first struck me, while his tongue did chime,
No Pagans must ascend where Christians climb.

Durst he say so?


He did my Lord;
Yet past we thence to Venice, where as before,
He kept his flood of riot and abuse,
For which hes there kept prisoner: and the State,
Returned me back, nothing determined of.

Now may my sovereign evidently see,
Their subtle glosings, have this inward kind,
Theild wound your heart, though seem to please your mind

By day, if this be true no Christian lives,
Within the compass where our word may kill,
Speak?
How can thou answer this appeal of theirs?

O let the Emperor but desist a while,
From the remembrance of a tale he heard:
Or else but think, great men may face a lie,
Till truth appear and give their check a die.
These letters in your eyes first speak for me,
Whilst in their ears a story I'll unfold
Shall make their heads shake and their hearts cold.
The first from Russia, where this envious man,
Accused my brother as a Fugitive,
A thief, a Pirate, and a Christian spy,
For which he was imprisoned; till evidently
The State had knowledge of his innocence:
Then him releast, sent that intelligence.
At Rome I not deny my brother struck him,
For pride, so just the Father of that seat,
In his behalf doth in his letter speak.
Now let your eyes but look what Uenice writes,
That this man by suggestions wrought the State,
Against my brothers labours: with-held the treasure,
Your Princely self sent to discharge the Jew,
For the rich Jewel that my brother bought,
And all the benefit to Christendom
And to your honour is by him undone.

Treasons unheard of, such shall the revenge be,
His silence and his looks approves his guilt:
Great Sherley at thy censure there he stands,
To doom him death may equal his offence;
Unto thy brothers life* he stretched his sin,
Be his alike, we freely give thee him.

Then here's my justice for so vile a crime,
Since that it reatcht unto my brothers life,
And blemish of his honour and his worth,
And hindered that ordained for Christian glory;
He shall confess unto your sacred self
All treasons in those letters mentioned
To be his plots and actions against my brother:
And tell the world to shut up scandalls tongue,
All that thou did from roots of envy sprung*
And no desert of his: they satisfied,
For all conspiracy all envies sin,
We thus will love thee, learn but to love him.

Thou art to merciful,


In this as merciful as honourable.


Thy clemency doth make me see my self,
To have been a villain to that gentleman,
Deserves so well of all men, best of me,
Great Emperor not a letter that is there,
If every character were doubled twice,
But the attempts are mine against his life,
Death I have deserved then much I owe to thee,
That might have taken my life and set me free.

Stay there Sir.
Sherley ha's pardoned the offence to him,
Not the transgressions thou hast done to us,
We sent thee forth as our Ambassador,
To deal for us, as we our self were there,
Which dignity of ours thy tongue profaned,
For which we do adjudge thee loose thy tongue:
We made thy hand like ours to strike, or spare,
Which power and grace of ours thou did abuse,
For which thou shalt go handless to thy grave,
And that thy head that made the rest offend
Shall off.

Mercy dread Emperor.


Who talks of mercy tastes our wrath with him,
And you that are a kin to him in blood,
Whose eyes being brothers should taste grief alike,
We charge you see the execution.

Dread Emperor.


Speak not we are resolved.


And I to dye.
Ambition still lies lowest, seeking to fly.

His honours and possessions now are thine,
If yet unsatisfied thy griefs remain,
Ask yet to please thy self it shall be granted.

I fear to be too bold.


Ask and obtain.


My child may be baptis'd in Christian faith,
And know the same God that the father hath.

Baptize thy Child, our self will aid in it,
Our self will answer for it, a Godfather,
In our own arms we'll bear it to the place,
Where it shall receive the complete Ceremony;
Speak, what else thou would have granted thee,

You are too lavish of your high favours,
I would entreat I might erect a Church,
Wherein all Christians that do hither come
May peaceably hear their own Religion.

Tis granted, erect a stately Temple,
It shall take name from thee, great Sherleys Church,
Finish thy suit, what ere it be.

You are too prodigal, I too presuming,
Yet since your self doth thus authorize me,
I will not hide my heart: your further leave,
I would by your permission raise a house,
Where Christian children from their cradles,
Should know no other Education,
Manners, language, nor Religion,
Then what by Christians is delivered them.

We'll ask no Council to confirm that grant
'tis obtained, speak al*

Your favour, love and good estimation,
And my suit is ended.

In the best embrace of our endeared love,
We do enclose thee, Sherley shall approve,
Our favours are no cowards to give back,
They shall abide till death, thou shalt not lack
Our loves plenitude, our dearest nephew,
Now for the Temple, where our royal hand,
Shall make thy Child first Christian in our land.

Thus far hath Fame with her proclaiming trump,
Sounded the travails of our English brothers,
Unhappy they (and hapless in our Sceanes)
That in the period of so many years,
That destinies mut able commandress
Hath never suffered their regreeting eyes
To ki^ each other at an interview:
But would your apprehensions help poor art
Into three parts dividing this our stage:
They all at once shall take their leaves of you,
Think this England, this Spain, this Persia,
Your favours then, to your observant eyes:
We'll show their fortunes present qualities.

To those that need further description,
We help their understandings with a tongue:
Sir Anthonie Sherleie we have left in Spain,
Knight of Saint Iago, one of the counsel
Of his highness wars against the infidells,
Captain of the Armado, with other honours:
The eldest in England is: to sew unknown
His worth, his merit and his offices.
The last in Persia, as you have seen:
This is the utmost of intelligence,
If we should prosecute beyond our knowledge:
Some that fill up this round circumference,
(And happily better know their states then we:)
Might justly call the authors, travellers,
And give the actors too, the soldiers spite,
Then here we leave them, now the rest to you:
Since they have safely past so many perrills,
(For what through danger passes, is the best,)
Since they in all places have found favourites:
We make no doubt of you twere too hard doom,
To let them want your liking here at home.


