Sons, hopeful buds of fruitful Italy,
Having banished war which like a prodigal*
Kept wasteful revels with our subjects blond:
Since proud Anthonio our arch-enemy
Is in his journey towards th'vnderworld,
Or hovers in the shade of banishment;
Let us in peace smile at our victory*
And every breast pass his opinion
What pastime best becomes a conqueror.

What sport but conquest for a conqueror,
Then with our wounds undressed* our steeds still ^nd,
Branded with steel ere we wipe of the blood
Of conquered foes, lets with our shriller bugles
Summon the surly Landlord of the forest,
The Kingly Lyon to a bloody parle,
Combat the Hart, the Leopard or the Bore,
In single and adventurous hardyment:
The spirit of mirth in manly action rests,
Having queld men lets now go concuer beasts.

Manly resolved; Hippolitoes advise*

Rather like soldiers, and Octanioes sons,
Lets throw a general challenge through the world,
For a proud turney, at the which our selves
Consorted with a hundred of our knights,
Accoutred like so many Gods of war,
Will keep the lists against all adventurers,
Which like the suns light sigurd in a star,
Should be a brief Epitome of war.

Noble and royal, your opinion daughter.

Faith I shall anger soldiers, I would pour
Spirit of life* Aurum Potabile
Into the jaws of chap-falne schollership,
That have since amorous Quid was exild,
Lain in a sown, y aue many holds for war,
I would once view a garrison for wit:
Twere heavenly sport to see a train of schollers
Like old trained soldiers fkit^ish in the schools*
Traverse their Ergoes and discharge their jests
Like peals of small-shot, were this motion granted
My self would be free woman of their hall,
And sit as sister at their festiual^.

Have we not Padua

Yes, but the commanders
Deal with our graduates, as the general
Doth with his soldier, gives him place for favour,
Not for deserving, look intoo't your self,
You have Courts for tennis, and me thinks 'twere meet,
Learning should not stand balling in the street
For want of houseroome: oh tis much unfit
Courtiers should be all pleasure and small wit.

All that you speak is but what we command

But Officers fother cannot understand
Their Lords at first: were not a gallant sight,
To see wits army royal come from fight?
Some crowned with gold, others with wreath of baize,
And whilst they hold their solemn holydaies,
Music should like a lover court the skies,
And from the world wrest ringing plaudities.

My sister would make a rare beggar.

True, she's parcel Poet, parcel fiddler already, and they commonly sing
three parts in one.


Wrong neither art nor music, they are twins
Borne and begot in heate, your thought of both.

I think my Lord that music is divine,
Whose sacred strains have power to combine
The soul and body; and it reason bears,
For it is said that the Celestial spheres,
Dance to Apolloes lyre whose sprightly fires
Have tamd rude beasts and charmed men's wild desires:
The author was immortal, the first strings,
Made by a King, therefore an art for Kings:
The world's a body, every liberal art
A needful member, music the soul and hart.

Well for her sex hath Flor^mell discourse
Of heavenly music, and since all conclude
It is an art divine, we were too rude
Should we reject it, music, I take great pride,
To hear soft music and thy shrill voice chide.

To please your grace, though J want voice and skill,
I'll show my self obedient to your will.

This would have done rare at a schollers window,
How do you like it father?

Highly my boys, I relish all delight*
For when the fiery spirit of hot youth
Kept house within me, I was all delight:
Then could I take my love, no love more fair
By the smooth hand, and gazing in loves air
Tell her her beauty beautified the sky,
And that the sun stole lustre from her eye.

I do admire to hear my princely father thus mertilie discourse of trifling
love.


Nay more my boys, when J was at your years,
I went a pilgrimage through Italie,
to find the shrine of some loue-hallowed saint.
Devote to beauty, I would pray for love,
Desiring beauty I would sue for love,
Admiring beauty I would serve for love:
Pray, sue, and serve, till beauty granted love.
If she denyd me, I would swear she granted,
If she did swear that she could never love me,
Then would I swear she could not choose but love me:
Let her swear ne'er so much, still have I sworn,
Till she had said, I should not be forsworn.

I marry brothers, here was cunning love,
Learn like good schollers, heel make you wise in love:
He was a man in love, were you such men,
Then were you men indeed, but boys till then.

To please my Father, i'll inquest of beauty,
And never make return till I have found,
A love so fair, so rich, so honourable,
As fits the honour of Octanioes sons.

The like (you pleased) vows young Hippolito.

Do boys, and I will teach you how to choose them.
Elect not amongst whole troupes of Courtly dames,
For amongst many, some must needs be ill:
The seld seen Phoenix ever sits alone,
Jove courted Danac when she was alone:
Alone my boys, that is the only way,
Ladies yield that alone, they else say nay.

An expert soldier; how shall they choose them Father?

If her bright eye dim not the Diamond,
Say it is bright, but brighter iems delight you,
If that her breath do not perfume the air;
Say it is sweet, but sweeter sweets content you.
If that her cheek compared to the Lilly,
Make not the Lilly black with whiter whiteness;
Say it is Lilly white, but black to white,
When your cho^e white must have such high exceeds.

Father you do exceed things possible,
Faith say how many Ladies have you seen,
Much fairer then my self, in all your travail?

Should the Crow teach me, then no Lady fairer,
If judgment tell me, then a many fairer:
Thou art mine own, J must think well of thee,
Yet Florimella many do excel thee.

Should the Crow teach, I am not all Crowblacke.
Though judgment; J not all perfection black,
Though you have seen Ladies that dim the day,
Yet will J think my self as fair as they.

Do Florimella, and i'll one day get,
A husband for thee that shall think thee fair.

And time in faith, that pretty sport would be,
Wive it for them, you shall not husband me.

Yet you will take my counsel in your choice.

Yes, if I had not years enough to choose,
Would you direct me as you do your sons?
With daughter take a man with such a nose,
With such an eye, with such a colour beard,
Thus big, thus tall, with all his teeth before;
Thus lipped, thus legedd, thus handsome, thus apparrelld,
Were not this pitiful! o pitiful:
Now by the soul of soul*commanding love,
I will not stoop to such obedience,
I must be bid to blush when I am kissed,
Bid my love welcome, and I thank you sir,
With no indeed, I know not what love is,
I never heard so much of love before,
I pray take heed, nay fie you go too far,
With such a rabble of prescriptions,
As never maid of a Conceiving spirit,
Will follow them, yet brothers go you on,
Take you good counsel, Florsmell will none.

I daughter? are you so experiened?
An elder woman might have spoken less,
Yet by your leave minion, i'll watch you so,
Your I shall still be governed by my no.
But come my sons take pattern of great Jove,
Early in the morning suit your selves for love.

Go daughters with your Angels to the brooke,
And see if any siluer-coated fish,
Will nibble at your worme-emboweldhooks:
Decciue the wat^y subjects, yet the name
Of foul deceit me thinks should fray them from you,
Alack, alack, I cannot blame the world,
That in the world there is so much deceit;
When this poor simple trade must use deceit.
But with what conscience can J make this net,
Within whose meshes all are caught that come:
They cousin one at once, this cousins many,
I will vndoo't it shall not cousin any.
But daughters go practise that little sin,
I'll mend this great fault ^re the fault begin.
O cousening fortune how hast thou deceived me,
Turning me out a doors to banishment,
And made another Lord of Mantua.
I that was Lord now slave to misery.

Take comfort yet dear father.

Comfort? no:
My brest's turned prison, my proud jailer woe,
Locks out all comfort: whers your valiant brother?

All discontent like to a wounded lyon
He forrages the woods, daring proud fortune
At her best weapon, he accounts this smart,
As a slight hurt, but far off from the hart.

How holds his humour?

The same fashion still:
But somewhat ^dder-colourd death may end
But never change him, see our words have raised him.

Fitly applied for a walks like a ghost* Why how now son?


Peace.

Brother.

Good now peace,
VVake me not as you love me.

What a sleep?

I, in a most sweet sleep, blisters o'your tongues for waking me.


Thou forget thy self.

J should not be a Courtierels, me thought J was at a strange wedding?


Prithee what wedding?

Of a young Lawyer and old Madam Conscience.

I scarce believe that.

Nor J neither, because it was a dream, but me thought the young man doted on
the old woman exceedingly.


That was miraculous! did they live together?

In the country they did, and agreed passing well, all the long vacation, and
but for two things he would have carried her up to the ^erme with him.


What things were those?

One was, because her gown was of the old fashion, the other was cause he
would not have her by when he took fees*


His reason for that?

For fear if a bribe had bin offered, she being by he should have had the bad
conscience to take it.


His wife and he lived together.

Conscience and the Lawyer, as lovingly as men and their wives do, one flesh
but neither meddle nor make one with another


Man and wife part, that's strange!

O lord sit, profit can part the soul and the body, and why not man and wife,
now you have had my dream father, let me understand yours.


How can he dream, that never sleeps my son*

O best of all: why, your whole world doth nothing but dream, your machiauell
he dreams of state, deposing kings, grounding new monarchies: the lover he
dreams of kisses, amorous embraces: the newe-married wife dreams, that rid of
her young husband she hugs her old love, and likes her dream well enough too:
the Country gentle woman dreams that when her first husband's dead, she marries
a knight, and the name of Lady sticks so in her mind, that she's never at
heartsease till she get her husband dubbed; the Captain, he dreams of
oppressing the soldiers, devising stratages, to keep his dream, and that
dream wakes in the pate of Octauio your Arch-enemy* who is not content to
hurl us into the whirlepoole of banishment, but binds weights at our heals
leaden poverty, to sink us to the very depth that we should never rise again.


Then since all dream, let us dream of revenge.

I marry sister, that were a dream worth dreaming, and i'll sleep out my
brains but i'll compass it.


Pretty content; we kill our foes in dreams.

Vds foot, i'll do it waking then.

Aspero.

At Counsel table.

Hear me.

In his Dutch arms, twere base to go disguisd,
No, my revenge shall wear an open brow;
J will not play the coward, kill him first
And send my challenge after; i'll make known
My name, and cause of coming, if I thought
Grief like a painter had so spoiled mmy visage
He could not know me, on my breast i'd write
How ere I am disfigured through woe,
J am the thing was made for Aspero.
Speak not, I am as constant as the Center,
Some fortune good or bad doth beckon me,
And I will run, bitter revenge tastes sweet,
If ne'er on earth farewell, in heaven we'll meet.
Attendance sitra, your low Commedie,
Craves but few Actors, we'll break company.

As many blessings as the sea hath sands
Attend thee in thine honourable journey:
Come pretty maids we have not wrought to day,
Or fish, or fast, our need must needs obey.

Now sir what have you been about?

About my living sit.

Whats that? feeding?

No sir, looking into the vnderofficers about the Court.

Can get any living out of them?

I sir, my betters get good livings out of officers, and why not I? but to be
plain, I have bin seeking your good Lordship.


But your boyship hath so sought us, that we have found you.


Will you sell your findings my Lord?

They are scarce worth giving.

Yes, a box to keep them in, for fear you loose them again.


And I were a man as I am no woman, id'e pepper your box for that ieast.


You ieast.

In earnest law I would Madam.

Well sir, no more, here comes our royal Father.

How now my boys? provided for your journey?
Beauty conduct you: what, attyrd like shepherds?
I thought t'haue seen you mounted on your steeds,
Whose fiery stomachs from their nostrills breath
The smoke of courage, and whose wanton mouths
Do proudely play upon their iron bits:
And you in stead of these poor weeds in robes,
Richer then that which Ariadne wrought,
Or Cytharaes aery-mouing vestment.
Thus should you seem like lovers suited thus,
y'oude draw fair Ladies harts into their eyes,
And strike the world dead with astonishment.

Father such cost doth pass your sons revenues
We take example from immortal Jove,
Who like a shepherd would repair to love.

And gentle love conduct you both my sons,
Daughter go bring them onward in their way,
Were not we called back by important business,
We would not leave you thus: Hortensio
Is my disguise prepared, for J unknown
Will see how they behave themselves in love.

Tis done my Lord.

Once more my boys adieu:
He sends you forth that means to follow you.

Now brothers you must amongst these wenches,
Faith for a wager which shall get the fairest?

I'll gage a 100. crowns mine proves the fairest.

A match, i'll venture twice so much of mine.

And i'll lay against you both, that both your loves Get them when you can where
you can, or how you can, shall not be able to compare with me in beauty.


That wager i'll take for tis surely won.

Las thou art but a star to beauties sun.

Star me no stars, go you and stare for love,
I'll stay at home, and with my homely beauty
Purchase a love, shall think my looks as fair,
As those fair loves that you shall fetch so far;
But take your course, fate send you both fair luck.

How if it be foul?

Nay ift be forked, you must bear it off with head and shoulders.


Oh stale, that ieast runs oth'lees.

You must consider tis drawn out of the bottom of my wit.


O shallow wit, at the bottom so soon.

Deep enough to lay you in the mire.

Orels tis shallow indeed, for they are foundered already,
but I must play dun, and draw them all out o'th mire,
Whats a clock my Lord?

Which of them dost ask? thou see they are two.

What two are they Madam?

Why two fools.

Is it not past two, doth it not come somewhat near three sister:


Show perryall and tak't, but come my Lord you have stood fooling long enough,
will you about your business in good earnest?


Indeed we will.

And they are deeds you must trust too, for women will respect your words but
slitely without deeds.


Why, are women called Angels but because they delight in good deeds, and
love heaven, but that it will not be won without them.


They shall have deeds.

Brother, and good deeds too:
They are tongues that men must speak with when they wo.

That tongue weel practise, sister to love we leave you.

Lovers take heed least cunning love deceive you.

NO more; thus suited i'll attend my sons,
Impute it not to any ruffian vain,
But to a fathers wakeful providence,
Lovers like bees are priuiledgd to taste,
All buds of beauty: should they chance to light
Upon some worthless weed i'll hinder it:
The eyes of youth will now and then dwell there,
Whereas they should not glance, this doubt I fear.

And well advised my liege should they incline
To love not fitting their estates and births,
You with your present counsel may prevent them.

That's my intent, and further in my absence
I leave my land and daughter to thy charge,
The girl is wanton, if she gad abroad
Restrain her, bound her in her chamber door;
My word's thy warrant, let her know so much:
Farewell, at home I leave my fear with thee
And follow doubt abroad.

I'll careful be.

Now to my business, I have a strange habit, and I must cut out an humour
suitable to it, and humours are picked so near the bone, a man can scarce get
humour enough to give a flea his breakfast, but I am a stale ruffian, my habit
is brave, and so shall my humour be, and here comes one to give me earnest of
it.


Send him a letter that I come to kill him.

Twere great valor but little policy my Lord.

How long have you bin a matchiauilian boy?

Ever since I practisd to play the knave my Lord,

Then policy and knavery are somewhat a kin.

As near, as penury and gentry, a degree and half remou'de no more.


How came in the kindred twixt gentry and penury?

Shall I tell you sir*

First tell me what thou art?

Lyme and hair: plaster of Paris, kneaded together with rye dow and goats
milk, I am of a hot constitution, wonnot freeze.


Thy profession.

A fool or a knave choose you which.

Then thou art fit for any gentleman's company.

True boy, for your sweet fool and your fine knave are like a pair of
upright shoes, that gentlemen wear so long now of one foot, then of another,
till they leave them never a good soale.


That makes your fool your knave have such bad soales; but what dost thou
seek?


Mine own undoing sir, service.

Indeed service is like the common law, it undoes any one that follows it
long, can describe service?


Yes, tis a vacant place, filled up with a complete knave, a miserable pandar,
or an absolute beggar.


your opinion boy.

I say a serving-man is an Antecedent.

Because he sits before a Cloakebag.

He is likewise a nominatiue Case, and goes before his mistress.


That's when the verb he goes before his mistress and he can agree together.


If not, he turns Aocusatiue and follows his master.

Woot follow me fellow.

To a tavern, and thou woot pay for my ordenary.

My business is more serious, thou dost not know me.

Nor my self neither so long as I have maintenance.

Did never hear of the wars betwixt Venice and Mantua.


I cut some few of the Mantuans throats.

And were not a knave for it.

No, J was a Venetian commander, a great man: the reason of this question.


Dost know the Duke of Venice?

I am his right hand.

Woot do me a message to him*

What is't?

Tell him J hate him, my name's Aspero, has banished my father, usurps his Duke
dome, and I come to be reuengd.


Anthonioes son? vesfoot hast any gold.

Thy reason.

Shalt be reuengd, give me money, i'll be thy snail score out a silver path to
his confusion.


No, my revenge shall be like my fathers wrongs in Apert^ lend me any honest
aide.


Pax of honesty, it goes a begging upon crutches, and can get relief out of
few but schollers, I shall not kill him?


Jde be thy death first.

Yet you say you hate him.

Equal with my shame.

Make him chew a bullet then.

No, though my state with poverty be tainted,
Mine acts and honour shall live still acquainted.

True moulded honour I admire the temper
Of thy mild patience, that not all the wrongs
J laid upon thee can enforce thy spleen
To foul requital, had thy coming taken
Any base level, it had cost thy life,
But being free and full of honour live,
Thy virtues teach me honour freely go,
A secret friends worse then an open for:
You are too honest for my attendance, farewell sir.

And thou too knavish for my employment.
But here comes more company.

Boy, let your attendance wait further of*
Under this shade J mean to take a sleep.

And may you madam like a soldier sleep.

How boy in alarms.

No Lady but in arms, and you had need of them too, for see the enemy comes
down, shall I sound a parley*


Peace wag.

Peace, O coward, offer peace and but two to two of them.

Boy dost know what gentleman it is?

Gentle madam no, but he is a man.

Believe me boy he is a proper man.

Man is a proper name to a man, and so he may be a proper man.


I love him hes a very proper man.

She loves him for his properties, and indeed many women love men only to make
properties of them.


Pray gentleman if no more, tell me where you were born.

Fair virgin if so much, no where some where any where, where you would have
me.


Faith I would have it.

Marry and you shall have it Lady.

What shall J have sir.

Why a kiss.

Nothing else: we Courtiers* count them trifles, not worth taking.


Why then bestow one of me i'll take it most thankfully*

I will not stand with you for a trifle, sir pray where were you borne?


In Italy, but never yet in Venice.

You may in Venice, gentle sir adieu.

Gentle Lady thrice as much to you.

Farewell sweet heart.

God a mercy bagpudding.

You may in Venice gentle sir adieu? this begets wonder.

Yare not wise then* what do you take her for?

Some great woman*

Some woman great with child, be ruled, she's a pynk board her.


But how* the means.

Make but a shot of flattery at her broad side, and sheele strike sail
presently.


Flattery*

I flattery, women are like fiddlers, speak them fair theile play of any
instrument.


I, that they can play of*

She's a botcher cannot play a little of all*

And to common that will play too much of any, but come i'll use means to get
her.


Nay you must first have means to give her.

Why in the course of schollership, the genitiue Case goes before the Datiue.


The Grammarians are fools that plac'de them so; for in Rerum Natura, the
Datiue goes before the genetiue, you must always give before you can get,
lovers are fools, and fools must be liberal.


Will not women respect a man for his good parts?

yes, some few; but all for his good guiftes, a gentleman with his good gifts
sit at the upper end of the table on a chair and a cushion, when a scholar
with his good parts will be glad of a joined stool in the Lobby with the
Chambermaids.


I will have good gifts show my self liberal to, though I beg for it.


I think that will be the end, for penury has taken a leaf of your pocket to
keep Court in this Christmasse.


Well, how so ere, she's fair and courteous,
And courteous fair, is a fair gift in Ladies:
She may be well descend, if she be,
She's sit for love, and why not then for me.

And you be not fitted in Venice tis strange, for tis counted the best flesh
shambles in Italie: but here's no notable coward, that having suffered wrong by
a man, seeks to right himself of a woman.


Look you sir, I am like an irish beggar, and an English bur, will stick
close where I find a good nap, I must and will dwell with you.


What can do:

Still Aquanit^, stamp Crabs, and make mustard, I can do as much as all the
men you keep*


Prithee what?

Why undo you, and twenty could do no more, but business, come my wits grow
rusty for employment.


Can keep counsel*

My mother was a midwife.

Hast any skill in Love?

I am one of C^pids ageats, have Ouids are a^andi ad vngues, know (...) and can
apply ^emedium, and minister effectum to a hair, but why do you ask* have you
traue^st an action in loves spiritual court*


Not to dissemble, we have.

And without dissembling you'll never (...) out of it, but tell me true, are you
in love already* or ha^ you (...) des^e to be in love


Indeed I am in love to be in love.

And I desire to live in fond desire,
And yet I doubt to ^ch blind ^ancie^ f^e^.

Tis good to doubt, but t^s not good to fear,
Yet still to doubt, will at the lest prove fear;
Doubt love, tis good, but tis not good to fear it,
Love hurts them most, that least of all come near it.

Then to doubt love is the ne^t way to love*

Doubtless it is if you ^s doubt not love*

Doubt and misdoubt? what difference is there here?

Yes, much: when men misdoubt, tis said they fear*

But is it good in love to be in doubt*

No not in love, doubt then i^ (...)
Tis good to doubt before you be i^ love,
Doubt counsell^, how (...) loves misery.

Your doubtful counsel counsels us to love.

To equal love, I like experience speak.

Experien^d lover, you have spoken well.

Experince wanting lovers, truth I tell,
Young wits be wife, in love live constant still,
You need nor doubt good hap not misdoubt ill.

And see your discourse has coniurd up beauty in the likeness of two
countrimaides, but you shall not come in the circles of their arms if J can
keep you ou^.

These are too mean for love, brother lets leave them.

What? speechless? will you make dumb virgins of them?

Oh we are sons of a great father.

So is the sun of heaven, yet he smiles on the bramble as well as the Lilly,
kisses the check of a beggar as lovingly as a gentlewoman, and tis good to
imitate, him tis good.


Say sister, had we not fine sport to day?

We had, if death may be accounted play.

Why tis accounted pleasure to kill fish.

A pleasure nothing pleasant to the fish.

Yet fishes were created to be killed.

Cruel creation then to have lives spilled.

Their bodies being food, maintain our breath.

What bodies then have we to live by death?

Come, come, you vainly argue, it is good.

What is it good to kill? oh god oh god?

If it be sin, then you your self's a sinner.

I thank proud fortune fort, my woes beginner.

Foot are ye not asha^d to staud by like idle ^iphers, such places of account
void? and they had bin rich offices and you poor Courtiers, you would have
bin in them in ^al^e the time.


Though against stomach. --

Nothing against stomach and you love me.

Fair maids if so* you be you are well met.

Shepherds or be what else you are well met.

Tis well, if that well met we be to you.

If not to us you are unto your selves.

We did not meet, you sa^vs come together.

What ere we saw* you ^et ere you came hither.

We did, we m^t^n kindred, we are brothers.

So shepherds we did meet for we are sisters.

Then sisters, let us brothers husbands ^e.

So brothers without our leaves you well may be.

Say we desire to husband it with you.

Know we desire no husbands such as you*

A shepheatd is an honest trade of life.

Yet honest shepherd has with honest trade some strife.

He seldom swears but by his honesty.

So honest men do too as well as he.

But will you trust a shepherd when he vows,

No never, if his oath be that he loves.

Yet if I swear, that needs must be mine oath,

Swear not, for we are misbeleeuers both.

Let us persuade you to believe we love you.

First we entreat you give us time to prove you.

Take time, mean time we'll praise ye to our powers.

Oh time, sometime shepherds have idle hours.

I'll say thy cheek no natural beauty lacks,

Good, if it had bin spoke behind our backs.

I'll say this is the heaven of heavenly graces.

O heaven, how they can flatters to our faces. Exeunt.

Brother the last is fairest in my eye.

I but the first brother is first in beauty*

First in your choice, but not in beauty sir.

Come ye so near as choice: then tis time for me to stop for fear the
music run too far out of tune, how now gallants? in dumps.


No, but in love.

That's a dump, loves nothing but an Jtalian dump or a
French brawl.

Me thinks tis sweeter music.

And twere in tune I confess it, but you take your parts too low, you are
treble Courtiers, and will never agree with these Country Mynnikins, the
musickes too base, never meddle in it.


Peace doatard, peace, thy sight of love is done,
Thou can not see the glory of loves sun.
Spent age with frosty clouds thy sight doth dim,
That thou art blind to see and apt to sin.

Is it accounted sin to speak the truth.

And worse, when age spits poison against youth.

They do not fit your callings, let them go.

Yet they are fair: we love, thou art loves foe.

J am your friend, and wish you from this love.

Can thou heave hills? then thou my thoughts may mon^* but never else.


Never!

No never.

Stay.

We are bound for love.

Hate.

Hinder not our way.

J boys? will Eagles Eglets turn to bastards.
Then must J change my vain, and once more prove,
To teach you how to hate as well as love.

SWeet honey candy madam, if it be no forfeit to tell tales out of Cupids free
school, tell what proficient your lover Aspero proves.


Now so love help me lot, a passing weak one and very unready.


The better, for women would have their lovers vnreadye (...) choose.


(...) ready you are to play the knave? but to Aspero^

(...) not think but theirs good music in him, your tongue harps so much upon
his name*


J shall never forget him.

I faith Lady then I know what J know*

What do you know I prey?

Marry that if you never forget him, you shall ever remember him, was he never
in your chamber*


Yes, but he showed himself the strangest fool: And by my troth lo. J am
sorry for it to, J had as good an appetite to maintain discourse; but here
acomes, if ever I choose a man by the fullness of his Calfe, or a cock by the
crowing, look and the ^ashfull fool do not blush already.


You may do well to kiss him, and make him bold Madam.

Boy, go know what strange gentleman that is*

Slid what a strange Lady's this^ madam though I seem a stranger to you, J lay
with one last night that's well acquainted with you.


Acquainted with me?

And knows you, and loves you, and you love him, have bestowed kind favours of
him to.


I bestow favours? what favours?

Though twere but a trifle he took it as kindly as some would have done a
kiss*


Lord what a while this jest has bin a brooding? and it proves but addle too
now it is hatched.


Tis a pig of your own sow madam, and I hope your wit will bestow the nursing
of it.


So it had need, I think tis like to have but a dry nurse of yours.


O dry ieast, all the wit in your head will scarce make sippits in it, what a
ground? and such a fair landing place? get a shore, or be rank amongst fools
for ever.


And faith is't not pity such a proper man should keep company with a fool.


I keep company with none but you Lady.

You keep mine against my will.

So do I the fools I protest; but take away yours, i'll soon shift away the
fools.


I have not seen a fool so handsomely shifted in Venice.


But come, shall the fool and you be friends?

The fool and J? you're too familiar.

Why, J hope a fool may be a Ladies familiar at all times*

Come you're too saucy.

Indeed tis a fools part of Ione to be in the sauce before my
Lady; otherwise I am neither fool nor saucy.

Not, proud sir?

Not, coy Lady; come why should your tongue make so many false fierce that never
come from your heart: you love me, I know you love me, your spirit, your look,
your countenance betrays it.


You ieast.

In earnest you do, and you shall know it in earnest too, lend me this jewel.


Jewel? away you sharking companion.

How?

Wandering strauagant, that like a droane flies humming from one land to
another.


Slight and thou hast any wit, now show her thy sting.

And lightst upon every dayry maid and kitchen-wench.

And now and then on a Ladies lip as --

You did of mine you would say, and J am hart sorry you can say it, and when by
your buzzing flattery, you have sucked the smallest favour from them, you
presently make wing for another.


Marry buzz.

Double the zard and take the whole meaning for your labour.


The buzzards wit's not so bald yet I trow.

A word in your ear, madam the buzzard will anger you.

With staying you do.

With going I shall.

Away.

I away, never entreat, tis too late, if you send after me, I will not come
back, if you write to me, I will not answer, drown your eyes in tears, I will
not wipe them, break your heart with sighs, J will not pity you: never
look, signs cannot move me, if you speak, tis too late, if you entreat, tis
bootless, if you hang upon me, tis needless, I offred love you scorned it, my
absence will be your death, and I am proud o^t*


Js he gon boy?

Yes faith Madam.

Clean out of sight?

And out of mind to, or else you have not the mind of a true woman.


Thou readst a false comment boy, call him again; yet do not, my heart shall
break ere it bend.


Or else it holds not the true temper of woman* hood, but faith tell me Madam,
do you love him?


As a Welshman doth toasted cheese, I cannot dine without him, he's my pillow
I cannot sleep quietly without him; my rest, I cannot live without him.


O that he knew (...) Lady.

He does, he would never have left me else, he (...)

You called him fool, but me thinks he proves a physician, has found the
disease of your liver, by the complexion of your looks, but see he returns.


And now me thinks J loath him more then I loved him* go run for Hortensio my
guardian, bid him come armed, thet's intent of treason tell him.


My Lady cannot choose but dance well, she's so full of pretty changes.


I wonder you dare come in my sight, considering the wrong you did me.


I came I confess, but with no intent to see you J protest, and that shall be
manifested by the shortness of my stay.


Tis too long and twere shorter then tis, will he not court me? not? no^ speak
to me neither? nay never ask pardon* tis to late, we shall ha'you come to my
window one of these mornings with music, but do not, my patience is to much
out of tune, out of my sight I hate thee, worse then I loath painting, I hate
thee, out of my sight.


Enough, will you be a quiet woman yet? will you, speak before my resolve take
strength? will you, do but say you are sorry I ask no mends but a kiss,
kindly, come: shall I hat'e?


I'll kiss a toad first.

You will, remember this another time, a toad you will: J know thou love me,
and J see the pride of thy humour; I do, and thou shalt know I do; half an
hour hence we shall have you weeping on your knees, with O my Aspero would I
had died when I rejected thee, but do, weep till J pity thee; a tooad! i'll
make thee creep on thy knees for a kiss.


you will.

Thy bare knees, J will, and go without it to.

Out humoured? O I would sell my part of immortality.

But to touch my hand, thou would, I know thou would,

O how spleen swells me? help Hortensio, creep a my knees? Hotensio.


How fares my beauteous charge? weeping Lady? the law shall fetch red water
from his veins that hath drawn blood of your eyes, is this the traitor?


Traitor? in thy disloyal throat thou lie.

O monstrous, a wishes you choked my Lord.

How! choked?

I choked? for a wishes the traitor in your throat, and he's a very small
traitor that is not able to choke a wiser man then your Lordship.


Down with him.

I, down with him, if he stick in your throat, and spare not.

Do not kill him, though he deserves death yet do not kill him, only
disweapon him; so.


But madam.

I will not hear him, keep him; but keep him safe on your lives, if he get
away or miscarry in prison: as I am heir of Venice i'll have your heads for it.


I warn you madam, if irons will hold him.

Fie, fie, with a cord? here, bind him with my scarf, that will hold, and yet
stand away, i'll do it my self, I cannot trust him with you, least you should
let him sometime escape free: besides, you cannot use him according to the
quality of his offence, and because i'll glory in his bondage my chamber shall
be his prison, let him have neither light meat nor drink, but what J provide
him my self.


Your will's a law, we obey it madam.

She knows me sure; well, though my joys be thrall,
My comforts this, a speedy death ends all.

Oh you are not gone then.

Here's a new kind of courting, never seen before J think.


He would anger me.

Nay you take a course, to anger him first J think.

Should J have let him go, (as I could no other way detain him in modesty) and
he had set his love on some other, 'twould have fretted my hart strings a
sunder.


Why did you set him so light then?

Not for any hate, but in pride of my humour.

Why did you command him close prisoner to your chamber.


That I may feed mine eye with the sight of him, and be sure no other beauty
can rob me of his company: I will have it all, I will not loose an inch of him:
And in this, I but imitate our Italian dames, who cause their friends to clap
their jealous husbands in prison, that if they have occasion to use them within
forty weeks and a day, they may surely know where to find them.


If I had any knavery in me, as J am all honesty, I could make a notable
scene of mirth betwixt these two Amorists.


Early sorrow, art got up so soon?
What? ere the Sun ascends in the East?
O what an early waker art thou grown?
But cease discourse, and close unto thy work;
Under this drooping myrtle will I sit,
And work a while upon my corded net;
And as I work, record my sorrows past,
Asking old Time, how long my woes shall last:
And first, but stay alas what do J see?
Moist gum like tears, drop from this mournfu tree
And see, it sticks like birdlime; twill not part;
Sorrow is even such birdlime at my hart.
Alas poor tree, dost thou want company?
Thou dost, I see it, and J will weep with thee,
Thy sorrows make thee dumb, and so shall mine.
It shall be tongueles, and so seem like thine;
Thus will I rest my head unto thy bark,
Whilst my sighs tell my sorrows; hark tree, hark.

Fie, fie, how heavy is light love in me?


How slow runs swift desire?


This leaden air,
This ponderous feather, merry Melancholy.

This passion, which, but in passion
Hath not his perfect shape.

And shapeless love
Hath in his watch of love oreslept himself.

Then sleepy wakers, let these grave lets wander
And wait th'ascension of beauties wonder:
But stay, a man striving twixt life and death.

Nay then tis so, my heavenly loue's gone by,
And struck him dead with her loue-darting eye.

If speech-bereauing love will let thee speak,
Then speechless man, speak with the tongue of love,
And tell me, if thou saw not Cynthia
Seeking Endimion in these flowery dales.

Dales for Endimion and fair Cynthia fit,
But never heavenly goddess blessed this grove,
These woods are consecrate to grief, not love.

Out Atheist, thou prophan*st loves deity,
For, false-reporter, I in them have seen
A love that makes a Negro of Loves Queen:
One that when as the sun keeps holliday,
Her beauty clads him in his best array,

Now truly shepherd none such sojourn here
Please you survey the Cell, go in and see,
I'm hearst, and none but sorrow lies with me.

Call you this sorrows cave?


Rather a Cell,
Where pleasure grows, and none but Angels dwell.

To what compare shall I compare thee to?
Incomparable beauties Paragon.

I will compare her beauty to the sun,
For her bright lustre gives the morning light.

Jle say she is like Cynthia when day's done,
Or Lady to the mistress of the night.

O speak but to me, and J shall be blessed.


One smile would lay my jarring thoughts at rest.


How now fair sister? you are hard beset.


Nymph.


Goddess.


Saint, once more, you're both well met.


O she is fair.


She fairer.


Both more fair
Then rocks of pearl, or the chaste evening air.

Say sweet, intend you not to fish to day?


No, shepherds, now fish do not bite but play.


What time, sweet love, keep fishes when they bite?


Early in the morning, or else late at night.


Come, will you talk with me till time of fishing?


My father, sir, will chide if I be missing.


The match is made, they are even upon going.


What should we do?


Why as poor parents and dutiful servants should do, run amongst the bushes
and catch flies.


Stay forward daughters whether are ye going*


Father, I think these shepherds come a wooing.


A wooing daughters? ne'er imagine so:
What man's so mad to marry grief and woe?

Why where lives sad grief? here's all speaking joy.


O I would live and die with such annoy.


But they are poor, and poverty is despised:


No, they are fair, beauty is highly prized.


Twill be a match, they are beating the price already.


They once were fair, sorrow from that hath changed them
They once knew wealth, but chance hath much estrangd them,

Have they bin fair? what fairer then they are?
Why tis not possible, this heavenly fair
Hath only in it self beauties exceed,
O then rich, fair, and only selves exceed.

Come daughters, and come shepherds, if you please,
I'll lead you to the lodge of little ease,
Where I will feast you with what cheer I may,
Grief shall turn mirth, and keep high holliday.

A word with you, you mean to marry these wenches,


We do.


And are going to contract your selves.


We are.


And what say you to this?


God speed you: I would have you marry on saint Lukes day.


Why?


Because J would offer at your wedding.


Come, you are all envy, feed upon thy hate,
This day our quest of love shall terminate.

Not if I live, this malady of love,
Js grown so strong, it will not be driven out.
To see the folly of a doting father;
What toil I had to fashion them to love,
And how tis doubled to misfashion them.
They shall not wed, yet how shall J prevent it?
Fearing th'euent I have forethought a means,
And here it lies, swaggering becomes not age,
Now like the Fox, i'll go a pilgrimage.
Frolic my boys, I come to mar your sport,
Your Country music must not play at Court.
But first, i'll write back to Hortensio
For apprehension of young Aspero:
They have not yet dynde, i'll bid my self their guest
Religion beg? a fashion in request.

Art sure she hates me boy.


More then her death, J have bin in her bosom sir, and this day she intends
your execution.


My execution! the reason of her hate?


Her humour, nothing but a kind of strange cross humour in that you rejected
her love.


That's not capital.


Not to cross a great ones humour? no treason more* great personages humours
are puritanes, thei'l as live endure the devil as soon as a cross, and can
away with him better.


I will submit, ask pardon on my knee.


Is your proud humour come down in faith, your high humour that would not stoop an
inch of the knees; i'll helped up again, and't be but to uphold the ieast; I
must bring her as low ere I have done; O base, J would rather lay my neck
under the Axe of her hate, then my sporte under the feet of her humour; but be
counselld, i'll teach you to prevent both, perchance make her upstart humour
stoop gallant too.


I'll hold thee my best jewel and thou dost.


And pawn me as poor Lords do their jewels too, will you not? receive me;
you shall counterfeit your self dead.


The life of that ieast.


It may be she dissembles all this while, loves you, and puts on this show of
hate of purpose to humble you: she may, and I believe --


What?


That most intelligencers are knaves, and some women disseblers; being thought
dead (as let me alone to buzz that into the credulous ear of the Court) if she
have any sparks of love, theil kindle and flame bright through the cinders of
her hart.


If not,


If not, twill be a means for your escape: i'll say you requested at your death
to be buried at your native City: and what Courtier, if a Christian can deny
that?


I am all thine, my humor's thy patient.


And if I do not kill it, I am not worthy to be your physician.


I mary Lady; why now you credit your sex: a woman's honour or humour should be
like a ship under sail, split her keele ere she veil.


I'll split my heart ere my humour strike sail: here comes his Page, how now
boy? how doth your master.


Well madam he.


Well?


Very well.


Where is he?


Where none of your proud sex will ever come, I think: in heaven.


Is he dead?


See madam, and seeing blush, and blushing shame, that your ungentle humour
should be the death of so good and generous a spirit.


My Aspero dead!
Boy See madam, what a mutation

I see too much, and curse my proud humour that was the cause of it: Aspero,
kind soul, proud sullen Florimell, disdainful humour, that in one minute hast
eternally undone me: I would not kiss the living substance, that being dead
dote on thy picture: oh I loved thee ever with my soul: O let me kiss this
shroud of beauty: I would not accept thee living, that being dead on my knees
adore thee: could kisses recover thee, I would dwell on thy lips: kneel till
my knees grew to the ground, dear gentle Aspero she that procured thy death
will die with thee,

And crave no heaven, but still to lie with thee.


I take you at your word Lady:

Nay never recant, I have witness on it now: is your proud humour come down?
could you not have said so at first? and saved me a labour of dying?


Lives Aspero?


Live quotha? sfoot what man would be so mad to lye in his cold grave alone,
and may lie in a warm bed with such a beautiful wife as this will be? have I
taken your humour napping in faith?


Am I ore reached?


In your humour Madam, nothing else, and I am as proud on it.


Do not flowt me; and you do, I shall grow into my humour again.


In ieast.


In earnest I shall, and then I know what I know.


You may* but and you do, I shall die again.


In ieast.


Nay in earnest madam, and then --


No more, thou hast driven me clean out of conceit with my humour, I love
thee, I confess it, shalt be my husband, i'll live with thee, thou art my life,
and i'll die with thee.

What more I mean is coated in my look,
If thou acceptst it, swear,

I kiss the book.


Boy, run to the master of my Gundelo, and will him attend me after supper at
the garden stairs, I mean to take the evening air, tell him.


It shall be done madam.


Nay if I say the word, it shall be done Aspero*


Look to your ^elfe my Lord, I lay my life, my Lady means to steal you away to
night.


Away? i'll call Hortensio, i'll not be accessory to your felony madam.


The fool comes without calling.


You shall know him by these signs.


Good figure, very good figure, for as the house is found out by the sign, so
must this traitor be scented out by the token, up with the first sign good
Assistance.


A proper man without a beard.


How? a proper man without a beard? we shall scarce find that sign in all
Venice: for the propernesse of a man lives altogether in the fashion of his
beard, good Assistance the next.


Fair spoken and well conditioned.


More strange: you shall have many proper men fayrespoken, but not one amongst
twenty well conditioned, but soft, this should be the house by the sign, I
must pick it out of him by wit.


As good say steal my Lord, what mary-bone of wit is your judgment going to
pick now?


I must, like a wise Justice of peace, pick treason out of this fellow.


Treason?


I, treason madam; know you this hand?


My royal fathers:


Then whilst you and your fathers letters talk together, let me examine this
fellow: are you a proper man without a beard?


My propernes sir contents me: for my beard, indeed that was bitten the last
great frost, and so were a number of Justices of peace besides.


Tis rumourd about the Court that your name is Aspero.


I am called Aspero.


Son to the Duke of Mantua that was.


The duke of Mantuaes son that is.


Then the Duke of Mantua has a traitor to his son, lay hands of him and to
close prison with him.


Can he be closer then in my custody?


I do not think so madam, but your father has imposde the trust upon me.


And dare not you trust me?


With my head if you were my wife, but not with my profit, if you were my
mother: will you along si^?


With all my heart sir, see what your humour's come to now go my Lord? as
willingly as a slave from the galleys: for as I shall have a stronger prison,
so J shall be sure of a kinder and a wiser jailer.


Do you observe how he flowts you my Lord? that I had bin his keeper but one
night longer* but keep him close, if he escape (though against thy will) as I
am a maid,


A maid against your will.


Shalt pay as dear for it as thou did for thy office.


If he escape, hang me.


I shall wish thee hanged, if he do not: treason! I may thank my peevish humour
fort.


Madam the Gundelo is ready.


Thou bring physic when the patient's dead boy: out ieast's turned earnest.


Is a dead in earnest?


As good, or rather worse, he's buried quick.


O madam, many a good thing has bin buried quick and suruiu'd again, I would
be buried quick my self, and I might choose my grave.


He's buried in close prison boy, he's known for the duke of Mantuaes son,
and by my fathers letter a^ched for a traitor.


Good gentleman, and I be not sorry for him: who is his keeper?


The testy ass Hortensio.


Vds foot lets enlarge him,


Not possible boy.


Not possible (...) we'll coufen his keeper.


We cannot.


Cannot! we can: your father made a Lord of him, but be ruled by me, his
daughter shall make a fool of him: you are not the first woman has made a
fool of a wiser Lord then he is.


Shall he be cousend?


As palpably as at the Lottery, my brains are in labour of the stratagem
already.


Sons of Octanio if your princely thoughts
Can stoop to such mean beauty, from this hand
Receive your wives, but should the Duke your father --

Fear not old man, he was the means that breathed this spirit into us.


Wood us to this course.
But should he prove Apostata, deny
Love which he first enforcd us to profes,
So firm are our inseparate affections,
To win our loves weed loose the names of sonne^.

Your father thanks you, but hot-sprighted you that,
Take counsel from experience, ere ye tie
The gordian knot which none but heaven can loose,
Crave his consent: when an imperial (...)
Shakes a weak shed, the building ^

Not stand? it shall: not Iou^ ^ the ground*work (...) love*


Not Jove!

Not Jove,
Should a speak ^
Ourloue admits no ^

Then to ^ your love is ^


As ^


As ^


And your^*


And ours,


And ours,


Then lend me all your hands,
Whilst thus a fathers tongue forbids the bands,
Forgetful boys, but most audacious traitor,
That durst in thought consent to wrong thy Prince,
Out of my fight; no Land that calls me Lord,
Shall bear a weight so hateful as they self:
Live ever banished, if (three days expired)
Thou or these lustful strumpets.

Father.


Boys;
If you be mine show it in obedience:
If (three days past) you live within my dukedom,
Thee as a slave i'll doom unto the galleys,
And these thy brats as common prostitutes*
Shall dry their lustful veins in the (...)
Come boys, to Court; he that first (...) lives,
Will to your births provide you equal (...)

They have our loves.


Our oaths.


Our hearts and hands.


Tut, lovers oaths, like toys writ down in (...)
Are soon blown ore, contracts are common wiles,
Tintangle fools, Jove himself sits and smiles
At lovers perjuries, bawd, strumpets hence,
My bosome's charged, give way to violence:
Come do not mind them.

How? not mind them father?
When in your Court you courted us to love,
You red another lecture, women then*
Were angels.

True, but that was before Angels
Had power to make them devils; they were then
Fiend^ to themselves, and Angels unto men.
VV^en upon Po thou find a cole-black swan,
You have found a woman constant to a man.

And not before?


Never before.


Your tongue
V^ speaks your former speech.

It doth; new theames
Must have new change of Rhetoric; all streams
Flow not alike one way; when I spake like a lover,
It was to break you from your soldiers humour;
Having made you lovers, I, like Envy, speak
To make you hate love; Art still strives to break
Bad to make better:

You have your wish.


Then onward to the Court,
Make us of love, as schoole-boyes do of sport.

Call out the jailer boy, yet do not; hast got a beard like Hortensio?


Yes, madam, J have got his hair, if I could come as easily by his wit.


VVouldst rob him of his wit?


If I should, he could not hang me for^* tis not worth thirteen pence half
penny* but what shall I do with it?


Put it on boy.


That shall J madam, O forward age, I am a man already: how do you like me
Lady?


Very ill, and my plot worse.


Then leaue't of, if you be grounded in the plot,
You will but mar the Comedy.

I purposde, thou in the habit of Hortensio, should under pretence of
removing Aspero to a new prison, have freed him out of the old one.


Tut, J can tell you a trick, worth two of that: madam, your ear, take some
care in the managing, and let me alone to prepare it.


Vdsfoot break prison my Lord, tis but swimming the River.


Break prison? twere both dishonour to my name, and treason to my love, what
benefit were it for me to free my body, leave my heart in bondage? i'll die, ere
i'll harbour a disloyal thought.


It bears no relish of disloyalty: being in prison you live as far from love
as liberty: being abroad, you may by letters, or a thousand means purchase her
company, and compass your content.


Shalt be my Lawyer boy and counsel me.


I'll look for my Fee then.


If thy Counsel prospers.


That's an exception Lawyers never respect, but come my lord, leap, as we have
risen together, we'll fall together,


Blame me not love,


Vdsfoot your jailer my lord*


Am I prevented?


Yes faith, there had bin a Counsellors fee cast away now.


You have heard his usage Lady, seen his lodging, and if it please you, you
both may and shall confer with him.


Prithee call him.


My Lord, your keeper hath brought a Lady or two to see you.


To see me? why am I turned monster? doth he take money to show me? what doth a
take a piece troe?


Why how now gallant, not gone yet?


Not, I thank you Lady, and yet I was neer't.


How do you man?


Musty for want of ayring.


VVeele have you hanged out in the fresh air, one of these mornings.


Youd be glad to take me in then.


Yes, when you had hanged abroad a little: but my Lord Hortensio (for I think I
must be your Lady when all's done) what sport? I would be merry a purpose to
make him mad; the room's private and fit for any exercise.


Vdsfoot to her, can a woman offer fairer for it?


Why shall we go to span-counter madam?


To span-counter, best ask her and sheele go to Coits.


No, I love some stirring exercise, my body's condiciond like the sun; it would
never be out of motion.


I hau't in faith, when I was student in Padua,
We used a most ingenious pastime.

The name my Lord.


I cannot give it a name equal to the merit.
Tis vulgarly called Blindmans buff.

Blind mans buff? ha, ha, ha,


Do you laugh at it?


At the happiness of your wit my Lord, that you should hit upon that sport,
which of all other I delight in.


Will you hear an Apology I made in the commendation of it?


We'll have the thing it self first; and as we like that, weel hear your
Apology after: who shall be hud-winckt first?


Who but the Author?


I, I, none shall be blind but I; help of with my gown boy.


What shall we have to blind him?


My scarf, take my scarf my Lord.


There's a simple favour for you.


And most fit, for indeed nothing blinds lovers sooner then Ladies favours, but
who shall blind me.


Mary that will I my Lord, let me alone to blind you.


Good again; for who should blind men, but beauteous women? come sweet madam.


But how if you take me? as I know that will be your aim,


If J take you prisoner madam, you must either be hudwinckt your self, or
give your conqueror a kiss for your ransom.


An easy ransom: i'll not be prisoner long, if a kiss will enlarge me.


Lord what scambling shift has he made for a kiss and cannot get in neither; a
little higher, so, so, so, are you blind my Lord?


As a purblind Poet: have amongst you blind Harpers.


Me thinks he looks for all the world like God Cupid.


Take heed of his dart madam, he comes upon you,


He cannot come to fast, O I am taken prisoner.


Your ransome's but a kiss.


Is that your law of arms?


Yes madam, but i'll take it on your lips.


My lips like faithful Treasurers shall see it discharged.


And here are my honest receivers to take it.


Am I freed now?


As if you had served seven year for it: sweet kiss, rare lip.


Has she not a sweet breath my Lord?


As perfume.


And a soft lip?


And smooth as velvet: I could scarce discern it from velvet: i'd pawn my
office for the fellow on it, madam.


Here.


Here Aspero, on with this beard and gown: I think he follows me by the
sent, his hat, so: a narrow miss in faith my Lord?


Gone madam?


Even upon going, one of you counterfeit my voice, there I deceiud you my Lord.


Have you deceived me madam?


Not yet, but I will, and you look not the better too't, busy him till you
think we are out of the Court, and then follow us: you shall find us at the
south port, now or never my Lord.


Why then twill never be Lady.


Here.


Where?


Here.


Escaped again?


She's escaped indeed my Lord, you may cast your cap after her, for I see you
can do no other good upon her.


What have I catchd you?


Kiss her and let her go.


Kings truce till I breath a little.


And you had need so, for I think you are almost out of breath, if you be
not, you shall be, and that's as good, but breathe and spare not.


Did you ever converse with a more stranger dissolute, madam?


Peremptory jack, jailer, as you respect your office, lay special watch that
none of what degree soever have access to him.


Without me.


Or your signet.


Signet me no signets, your goldsmiths shop is like your Swans nest, has a
whole brood of signets, and all of a feather, amongst many, one may be like
another, let none enter upon the stage where Aspero plays the madam, without
Hortensio.


Is he mad my Lord?


As the Lord that gave all to his followers, and begged more for himself.


If he call for me, tell him I scorn him.


If he counterfeit my voice (as mad fellows will counterfeit great men's hands,
and their tongues too) rate him for it, threaten him with the whip.


But come not at him.


If he call for meat promise him fair;


But give him none.


If for light.


He may fire the house, let him have none.


If he chafe, laugh.


If he rail, sing.


If he speak fair, flowt him.


Do any thing to vex him.


But nothing to content him, you hear my charge, as you respect your office
regard it.


I warn you my Lord, let me alone, and we knew not how to abuse a prisoner,
we were not worthy to be a Jailer.


Are you in breath my Lord?


As a bruers horse, and as long-winded; look to your self madam, I come upon
you.


J am ready for you sir; O for a bul-rush to run a tilt at's nose.


A fair miss in faith.


I'll mend it next course you shall see.


In the corner of the left hand; vdsfoot ware shins my Lord,


Madam.


Here.


Where?

Help me up Madam,


O strange, cannot you get up without help? there's my glove, but come no
nearer, as you love me.


I do love you madam.

Oh blind love.

True madam; your beauty has made me blind.

Indeed loves sons like spaniells are all borne blind,

But they will see.

Not till they be nyne days old my Lord,

But will you give me the fingers that hold this glove madam?


And the whole body to pleasure you my Lord, but let me go a little.


I will not loose you yet Lady.

But you shall my Lord; hist, then keep me still.
He fastens the glove to a post.

Faith let go my Lord, for she grows sullen, and you had as good talk to a
post, and as good answer 'twould make you.


Nay but dear madam, do but answer me, may I presume, upon my knees I beg
it; but to take a favour from your sweet lips? shall I? las I am not the first
man, that love has blinded, may I presume'^ I would be loath to offend your
mild patience so much, as with an unreverend touch: speak; if I shall reap
the harvest of my honest defires, make me blessed in proposing the time when;
what? not a word? are you displeased? or shall I take your silence for a
consent? shall I? speak; or if modesty locke in your syllables, seal my
assurance with a kiss: not? neither? shall I have neither your word nor your
bond? nay then I must make bold with modesty; by this kiss madam, O my hard
fortune? have I made suit to a post all this while? what block but I, would
have bin so senseless? my excule is, 'twas but to make my Lady sport: and:
Madam? how? Lady? madam? boy; madam, Aspero* but whist, I have the conceit,
'twas excellent in my Lady, and J applaudit, suppose my Lady and her prisoner
had an intent of private business in the next room; was it not better in her to
blind me, then I should as gentlemen ushers (cases so standing) have blinded
my self? again, J applaud her, and adore my stars that made me rather a
blind then a seeing dore-keeper: shall I interrupt them? no: madam? they have
not done yet, sure they have not: what have we here? a base viol! though J
cannot tickle the mynnikyn within, i'll (though it be some what base) give them
a song without, and the name of the Ditty shall be;

The Gentleman Ushers Voluntary.


Peace, peace, peace, make no noise,
Pleasure and fear lie sleeping?
End, end, end your idletoyes,
Jealous eyes will be peeping.
Kiss, kiss and part, though not for hate for pity,
Ha done, ha done, ha done, for I ha done my ditty.
And if you have not done now too, let me be as base as my fiddle, if I rowze
you not: madam for shame, what do you mean to make of me, how? sfoote what
have you made of me already? all gone? Jailer?

How now? who calls?

Why saucy knave tis J.

You, what you?

A single V, I came in double, but I thank them, they are gone out, and left
me here a single. --


Fool, and so I leave you.

Knave, I am Hortensio, I charge thee let me out.

Fool, you lye, you are Aspero, and I have charge to keep you in.


From whom?

From my Lord Hortensio.

Sfoot knave J tell thee I am he, and thou wilt not believe me, trust thine
eyes, come in and see.


'Twill not serve your turn, J like a whole skin better then a pinkt one:
content your self to night, and in the morning i'll tell you more.


Where's my Lady, send her hither,

She's busy with my Lord Hortensio, but if you have any use for a woman, i'll
send you one of the Laundresses: fare you well sir, be content, you shall want
nothing of any thing you have.


Hortensio gone outland my Lady busy with Hortensio* I am gulld, palpably
gulled: whilst I like a block stood courting the post, Aspero is m my appatrell
escaped: villains, traitors, open the door, t^e Duke's abused, his daughter's
fled: I proclaim ye all traitors that hinder me in the pursuit.


O for a reasonable audience to applaud this scene of merriment: i'll go call
my Lady and my Lord Hortensio.


Blindmans buff? I have bufft it fairly, and mine own gullery grieves me not
half so much as the Dukes displeasure, jailer, not a word? jailer, there's no
way to please a knave but fair words, and gold: honest kind jailer, here's
gold for thee: do but take pity upon me, a miserable cony-catchd Courtier:
not? neither fair nor foul? thou art a degree worse then a woman; what shall
I do? I can compare my fortune and my unfortunate self to nothing so fitly
as my Base here, we suffer every fool to play upon us for their pleasure:
and indeed 'twas the intent of our Creator that made fiddles and servitors to
nothing but to be played upon, and played upon we shall be, till our heart
strings crack, and then they either cast us aside or hang us up, as worthy no
other employment; well, if I can work my means, of escape, so: if not, I must
lie by it.


MY daughter fled? and with Hortensio,
It bears no formal shape of likelihood,
Her Eagle spirit soard to proud a pitch,
To seixe so base a prey; let privy search
Look through the cities bosom till they find her:
For gone she is not.
Has not Anthonies son
Sent them by some base practise to their death?

His breasts too full of honour; trusty Iulio?
What weighty business draws thee from thy charge?

Came not the cause before me? the proud Man^uan^
Basely revolt, deposde me from the seat
And chair of Regentship, sending in quest
Of proud Anthonio their late-bani^ Duke,
Him if they find or Aspero his son
Theile reinstall him in the regiment*

Him let them seek in the vast shades of death, as for his son.


He's sure enough my Lord, he was a mad kn^ue when he came in, but J think, I
have made a t^me soole of him by this time: for a has neither had bread nor
water these four and forty hours.


More villain thou.

My Lord, Hortensio was the villain, he left such command with me, he's the
wheel that turns about, and I a Country Jack must strike when I am commanded.


Although my foe, he's honourably tempered,
Yet armed against my life go* call him forth,
Guard in my safety with ^ ring of steel,
And mark how proudly heel demean revenge.

Goblins, spirits, furie^, f^eryes, the prison is haunted.

With a knave is't not?

Yes, and an old fool my Lord, in the likeness of Hortensio.


Villain where's Aspero.

I know not my Lord: I let him in and my Lady to laugh at him, and it seems,
he consented to treason, and let him out in his apparel.


They consented together to cousin me, for taking delight (as my betters may
do) in a foolish pastime called Blindmans buff, they stole away my gown,
escaped the prison, and left me in fools paradise, where, what song I have
played, my Viol can witness, they made me a little better then a bawd my Lord.


In act:

Not merely in act: sed cogitatione, id satis est vt inquit Suetonius.


Js he escaped* and Florimell with him?
Hortensio thy head shall answerit.

I pray let my tongue be my heads Attorney, and plead my excuse.


Urge no excuse, away with him to prison.

It shall be done my Lord.

Nay you sir too, shall taste of the same sauce, away with both,


Come my sons,
Lets levy present arms gaynst Mantua.
Being scarce come home we must abroad again,
The Common good's a catefull Princes payne.

You that in all my banished pilgrimage,
Would never alienate your natural loves,
But in desire to see me reinstalld,
Have thrust out proud Octauices substitute,
And seated me in ancient dignity,
I am yours, and ready at your best dispose.

Your own, my liege, we like inferior lights
Take life from your reflection, for like stars
Unto the sun, are Counsellours to Kings*
He feeds their orbs with fire, and their shine
Contend to make his glory more divine.
And such are we to great Anthonio.

The veins and arteries of Anthonio
Through which the blood of greatness flows in us.
Our life, and cause efficient of our state,
And these our pretty partners in exile.

We ha yet performed but the least part of duty,
Your reinstalment: it rests, that with our blood,
We keep out innouasiue violence.

You new-create me, and breath second life
Into my dying bosom, knew my soon
Of this vnlookt-for Fortune, but ill Fate
Has played the Traitor, and given up his life
To coward treason.

Vdsfoot what offence have I committed against the state, that these
yron-handed Plebeians so applaud me for?


Tis a sign they love you*

I had rather thy should hate me, it makes me suspect my bosom, for they love
none, but the masters of factions, treasons, and innouasions.


Then you do not love the Commons.

Yes, as wise men do their flattering wives, only for show: the popular voice
is like a cry of bawling hounds, and they get the foot of a fantastic and
popular-affecting statesman, they never leave him, till they have chased him
into disgrace, then, like hounds, are at a loss, and with their loss, see, I
have found my father, safety attend you.


Welcome thou hope of Mantua and of us,
We now are honours new beginners boy,
And may we better thrive then heretofore.

Never doubt it father, I hau^ attractive stuff that will draw customers.


What Lady's that.

One that has played the part of a Constable, brought you home a Runaway.


A friend of mine Father, but daughter to your Archenemy.


Octauioes daughter?

Yes faith, you are out with the Father, and i'll see if I can fall in with the
daughter.


And am I not a good child to leave my fathers love at six and seven, and
hazard my honour upon your sons naked promise, and your hopeful acceptance.


She has followed me through much danger.

The better welcome, I love her for it.

Like her and you please, id'e have no body love her but my self.


And Lady, though your Father be our foe,
The virtuous love betwixt our son and you,
May nerethelesse retain his sympathy.

Shall nerethelesse retain his sympathy,
Anthonio know I am loves resolute,
Confirmed and grounded in affection:
I loved your son, not for he was a Prince,
But one no better then his present fortunes,
I'll love him still, since first I loved him so,
Let Father, friends, and all the world say no.

There's mettle Father, how can we choose but get cocking children, when
father and mother too are both of the game.


To arms my Lord, Octauio comes in arms
To give a proud assault unto the City.

Proud his assault, as proud be our re^ist,
Vie shot for shot, and stake down life for life,
Our brest's as bold as theirs, our blood as deep,
All that we'll loose, or this our gettings keep.

Come brother, talk not of devouring war,
Say messenger, comes not Octauioes sons?

They do, as proudly as the morning Sun
Beating the azurd pavement of the heaven.

Then fear not father, my sister and my self,
Will be your champions and defend the City.

Why Ladies, have you such large interest in our brothers.

Princess, we have, within there: reach our shields,
When beauty fights, the God of battle yields.

They offer parley, let me answer them.
Brothers, how now? who made you soldiers?
Faith even my father as he made you lovers*
What? hath he changed your shepherds hooks to swords?
Of Amoradoes made you armed knights?
O seld-seene metamorphosis! J have known
Soldiers turn lovers, but for amorous lovers
To re-assume their valour, tis a change,
Like winter-thunder, and a thing as strange.

Our sister prisoner?

Tell me Florimell,
Dost thou live there enforced, or of free-will?

Free will, brothers, mine own freewill, all free in Mantua, here's freewill
in faith, speak am I not a free-woman?


As if you had served for it, any man may set up under her copy without a
protection.


J wag? are you there too?

Yes faith my Lord, my Lady has had my attendance to a hair.


You lie boy.

If not mine, some bodies else: there's one has done --

What have I done sir?

Nay nothing, but what my Lady was very well content with.


Why sister, shame you not to set your love
On one, that is our Fathers enemy.

Shame? not a whit: but come, your wenches brothers,
I make no question, I have won my wager:
Are they as fair as I?

Leave that to trial.
Aspero make surrender of our sister.

And have her in quiet possession? what do you think me.

We think thee a proud villain and our foe.

By heaven, they are villains all that think him so,

Why do you love him.

I should curse my self
if I should hate him:

Bring the ladders forth,
Bravely assault to separate their lives,
As they are sealing the walls, the Ladies come forth.

Stand proud Francisco.

Sand! O excellent word in a woman!

Hold Hippolito.

Hold! up with that word, and tis as good as the other.

What nymph or god desse in my Hermiaes shape,
Stands to debar my entrance to the town:

Madam, I wonder they enter not.

Why boy it seems they dare not,

O cowards and have two such fair breaches already,

Immortal Pallas that art more divine,
In my loves beauty that thou cloth'st thee in,
With draw thy self, and give our fury limits.

I will, but first Francisco take my shield.

And mine as challenge to a single combat,

Read the conditions and return your answers.

Well done in faith wenches, O that the old gray-beard my Father were here, i'd
have about with him as I am honourable.


VVhats here!
A shepherd wooing of a Country maid,
As she sits angling by a Rivers side,
By them an aged man making a net!
The Motto* Sic! this Emblems moral is,
The former love I had with Lucida,
And this hope tells me that's fair* Lucida.

Brother, my shield the like presents to me,
But holds far more familiar reference,
Here doth the amorous shepherd kiss the Nymph;
Which she with a chaste blush consents unto:
And see, a gloomy man, clad like a pilgrim
Comes in, and seperates their sweet delights:
The Motto, Sie! I so my Father came,
and banished me from beauteous Hermia,
and this hope tells me is fair Hermia.

The more I look, the more me thinks tis she.

The more I think the more I find tis she.

What should I think to prove it is not she?

Look, think, find, prove, do what you can,
These are the wenches that you courted than:
Then honey bees lay by your smarting stings,
and buzz sweet love into your Ladies ears,
Tell them of kisses, and such pretty things,
These drumming dub adubs loves pleasure fears.

O heaven, oh fortune, and most happy stars,
Do I find love, where I expected wars?

I that but now was all for war and death,
am made all love, wars humour's out of breath.

How, my sons love the daughters of my foe! it cannot be,


Then question them your self.

Why how now sons, is this your worth in arms.

Why are we not in arms father.

Yes, and in such arms as no Coward, but would venture life to march in.

Then boys, you love the daughters of Anthonio.

We liked them first.

VVel^ep^ th^ liking still.

And you will love them.

Fatherinfaith they will.

I, run away ^are you there? whom ha^ your Ladyship got to your husband?


One that I stumbled on at Blind man buff, a proper man, a man every inch of
him: and you would say so, and you knew but as much as I -- mean to know ere I
have done with him*


Is he not son unto Anthonio?

Great Duke I am, and prostrate on my kne^,
Ibeg a peace, which if your spleen deny,
I proudly stand where erst I mildly kneeled,
and east down bold defiance from their walls.

Nomore your loves make my proudhart ashamed,
Your consort's sweet, and i'll not be a mean
To make it jar: what my sons like shall stand,
By my consent, allowed and perfected;
all hate is banished, and revenge lies dead.

Then stead of spears, let Hymens torches flame
With hallowed licence, and the God of spright,
Swell up your veins with amorous delight:
an^ so that up our single Comedy,
(...) Plai^u^ phrase: Si places, ^landite.


