HOw now gallants, what is't? what is't?


The I'll of Gulls.


The I'll of Gulls, what should that be?


A play by the name, but come shals quarter our selves?


If some had had the wit to do so in time, they might ha saude the hangman a
labour. But come boy, furnish us with stools.


Pardon me sir, my office is to speak a Prologue, not to provide you stools.


And you were the Epilogue to sir-


Fie be not incivil: dost hear youth, prethe whats he that discovered your new
found Land, the I'll of Gulls? what is he?


A mere stranger sir.


A stranger? the better welcome: comes he East-ward, West-ward, or North-ward
hoe?


None of the three ways I assure you.


Prethe where is he?


Not on his knees in a corner, to Apollo praying that his play may hold in a
good hand at Passadge, not on the stage amongst gallants, preparing a bespoke
Plaudit; but close in his study writing hard, to get him a handsome suite
against Summer.


And where sits his friends? hath he not a prepared company of gallants, to
aplaud his jests, and grace out his play.


None I protest: Do Poets use to bespeak their Auditory.


The best in grace do, and but for that, some that I know, had never had their
grace in Poetry till this day.


Then must our Author look for a certain disgrace, for he is altogether
vnfurnisht of such a friendly audience.


Then he must lay his trial upon God and good wits. But why doth he call his
play The I'll of Gulls, it begets much expectation.


Not out of any dogged disposition, not that it figures a^ certain state, or
private government: far be that supposition (...) the thought of any
indifferent Auditor: and the argument being a little string or Riuolet, drawn
fro the full strain of the right worthy Gentleman, Sir Phillip Sydneys well
known Archadea, confirms it: only a Duke to make trial of certain
experiments, retires with his retinue into a Nameless desert. Now as well for
fashion sake, as that all those which have to do in that desert, are gulled in
the reach of their hopes, therefore he calls it, (and as he presumes, not
improperlie) The I'll of Gulls.


Out a question he hath promised thee some fee, thou plead so hard for him,
but and he be a right Poet he will never perform it. But what method observes
he in his play, is't any thing Critical? Are Lawyers fees, and Citizens wives
laid open in it: I love to hear vice anotomizd, abuse let blood in the master
vain, is there any great mans life charactred int?


None I protest sir, only in the person of Dametas he expresses to the life the
monstrous and deformed shape of vice, as well to beget a loathing of abuse, as
that his villainy may give the greater luster to the virtuous dispositions of
true-borne gentility.


All that's nothing to me, and there be not Wormwood water and Copperes int,
I'll not like it, should Apollo write it, and Rosius himself act it.


Fie upon thee, thou art too too Critical: is there any good bawdry int, jests
of an ell deep, and a fathom broad, good cuckolding, may a couple of
young-setters up learn to do well int? Give me a scene of venery, that will
make a men's spirits stand on their typtoes, and die his blood in a deep
scarlet, like your Ouids Ars Amandi, there flows the true Spring-head of
Poetry, and the very Crystal fount of Parnassus.


Chaste ears would never endure it sir.


Chaste ears, now deafenes light upon em, what should chaste ears do at a
play.


Tis strange now, I am of neither a both your opinions, I like neither railing
nor bawdry: no, give me a stately pend history, as thus, The rugged winds,
with rude and ragged roughs. c.


Fie vpont, mere Fustian; I had rather hear two good bawdy jests, then a
whole play of such teare-cat thunderclaps.


Alas Gentlemen, how is't possible to content you? you will (...) railing, and
invectives, which our Author neither dares, nor affects: you bawdy and
scurrill jests, which neither becomes his modesty to write, nor the ear of a
generous Auditory to hear: you must ha swelling comparisons, an^ bombast
Epithets, which are as fit for the body of a C^edie, as Hercules shoe for the
foot of a Pygmey: yet all these we must have, and all in one play; or tis
already condemned to the hell of eternal disgrace.


Look toot, if there be not gall int, it shall not pass.


If it be not bawdy, tis impossible to pass.


If it be both Critical and bawdy, if it be not high written, both your Poet
and the house to, loose a friend of me.


Nay I beseech you sir, if you be his friend, stand so to him still, for he
hath too many enemies already, in whose judgements, he and his labours stand
excommunicate, as though unworthy to present themselves in this assembly.


Enemies, nays foot then there's some hope in's play, for Envy never works
but against desert and merit. If he be envied there's some worth in him, and
I'll see out his play for that only.


Faith and I'll see an act or two out, but I tell you afore-hand I cannot see it
out.


Not see it out? your reason.


Fore God I lay in bed till past three a clock, slept out my dinner, and my
stomach will toule to supper before five, therefore you must pardon me.


Either see it all or none; for tis grown into a custom at plays, if any one
rise (especially of any fashionable sort) about what serious business soever,
the rest thinking it in dislike of the play, tho he never thinks it, cry mew,
by Iesus wild; and leave the poor hartlesse children to speak their Epilogue
to the empty seats.


Why dost think thy audience like a flock of sheep, that one cannot leap
over a hedge, but all the rest will follow, they ha more of reason in them then
so.


Well, I'll sit out the play, and be but to avoid that sheepish imputation, but
see it be bawdy, or by this light I and all my friends will hiss.


You should not deal gentleman-like with us else.


The misery that waits upon the pen
Of the best Writers, judge it gentlemen,
Let them express the very soul of wit,
And want Opinions voice to countnance it,
Tis like the idle buzzing of a fly,
Heard, not regarded: wretched Poetry:
If a write mirth, tis Rybaldry, and mean,
Scorned of chaste ears. If he compose a Scene
Of high writ Poesy, fitting a true stage,
Tis counted fustian: If portick rage
Strike at abuse, or open the vain of sin,
He is straight informed against for libelling.
Neither quick mirth, invective, nor high state,
Can content all: such is the boundless hate
Of a confused Audience: Then we
That scarcely know the rules of Poesy
Cannot escape check. Yet this our comfort is,
The wise will smile to hear the impartial hiss.
We neither brag, nor tremble, faint nor entreat,
Our merits nothing, yet our hopes are great,
Yet this our Author bad me boldly speak,
His play shall pass, let Envy swell and break,
Detraction he scorns, honours the best,
Ta^ti for hate; thus low to all the rest.

Welcome gallants, welcome honoured bloods; the reason that we have vncloth'd us of
our princely government in Arcadia, and have to do with this private
retirement here in this defart I'll, you shall find in that shedule, only thus
much for public satisfaction: Tis not strange to you, that the choicest
treasure Nature endowed us with, is mind up in the veins of my two daughters:
howe much their quiet, and the smothe stream of our government in Arcadia, was
troubled by the impetuous concourse of unruly suitors, is familiar with your
knowledge; this to avoid, I have for my Image there in my absence appointed my
brother, and undertook this private retirement.


Why my lord, are you so covetous of your daughters beauties, that their
perfections shall be a means to hinder their preferment?


Rather to further it fair Queen: they are the only pearls of our age, and
to see them well set in honourable and wel-befitting

Marriage, is our wishes happiness.
To which effect we have sent a general challenge
To all the youthful bloods of Africa,
That whosoever (borne of princely stem)
Dares foot the bosom of this desert I'll,
(The stage where I'll perform this lovers prize)
And by his wit and active policy,
Woo, win, entice, or any way defeat
Me of my charge, my daughters of their harts,
Shall with their loves wear my imperial crown
Wreathe of their conquest.

A prize, a prize, rare work for Fencers.


What coward would not venture a cracked crown for such a booty?


To that intent our Island is fenc't in
By sea and Land, and at each corner built
A Castle for defence, which like great men
Do ouer-looke Archadea: over which,
We have appointed Captains. More to desire,
Is more then we are willing to discover.

Well then sister, I see we must to hap-hazard for husbands.


God send me one with a good face and I care not.


Love and be thy will, send me one with a fair table in his forehead, like
Time.


Nay, and his face be good, let me alone to trick his forehead, a
country-gentlewoman taught me how: But father I wonder how you dare undertake
such a peremptory challenge against all comers, considering you have been so
long troubled with an Ague.


An ague? what ague?


Why your quotidian, Dametas the Court surfeit, he that dwells in your eye,
like a disease in your blood.


And the Presence were not exceeding empty-stomackt, it would never digest
such Almes-basket-scraps, the very fall garbidge of gentry; fie upon him, he
becomes the great chamber worse then a Gentleman-vsher with wry legs.


He is the most misshapen suit of gentility that ever the Court wore.


Had he not been of my fathers own making, I should ha condemned his taylor
for an exceeding botcher.


If you retain the love of children, or the duty of subjects, express it in
your obedience, we know Dametas loves us.


As Captains and Courtiers do old widows, for profit and preferment.


In sign whereof we make him.


Nay, you have bestowed too much of the making of him up already.


The very making of him up, has stood you in more then the whole our sides
worth.


In my free thoughts you wrong him, therefore to express our love, and to give
the world public note of his loyalty, we create him your Guardian.


How father, my Guardian.


I minion, yours.


Do you hear father, bid him bespeak Spectacles, for my fingers have vowed to
have a blind match with his eyes.


Well said Haggart, I'll make your proud hart stoop to the lure of obedience.
But come, by this time our challenge is published, and our gallants wits
sweating in the field of Invention, and it behooves us not to rest vnexercised.

So to our lodge, in the mean time be it known,
Our breath has power to raise, or cast men down.

Now Captain Observation, times bawd, thou that hast kept the Ages door,
whilst vp-start baseness crept into the bed of greatness, what dost thou
think of this change?


That it pleased the Duke, and becomes not subjects to examine his actions.


That's no part of my meaning, yet would I gladly be better instructed why the
Duke broke up his Court in Archadea, and removed it into this Island?


I am not Secretary to his thoughts, but the general mmour is, that out of
the freenes of his spirit, he hath sent a challenge to all his neighbor
Princes, that who soever (within a twelve month) can defeat him of his
daughters, shall with their loves, enjoy his dukedom, the garland proposde for
the victors.


Your words throw sense into me, and that's the cause the Island is so surely
guarded with watch-towers, over which our selu^ and other Captains have the
charge.


And to the end, that not affection, but desert may prove victor, are the two
Ladies so narrowly obserud, the one never out a the eye of her Father, the
other continually in the lodge of Dametas, the Dukes chief director.


If inquisitiveness be not too bold a guest, what do you think of Dametas.


As of a little hillock, made great with others ruins.


Your comparison holds, for by report, his avarice has unmade many to make him
up.


How did he first stumble on the Princes favour?


As some do upon offices, by fortune and flattery, or as truth says, the
Prince having one day lost his way, wandering in the woods found this Dametas,
affected his discourse, took him along to the Court, and like great men in
love with their own doings, countenanct his defects, gave him offices,
titles, and all the additions that g^e to the making up of a man worshipful.


I cannot but commend the Duke for raising him, nor yet praise him, that he
proportions not his carriage answerable to his fortunes.


Your thoughts and mine are twynnes in that: but I hear the warning bell, some
strangers are arrived.


Lets to our office then, and conduct them to Dametas, whose custom is to spent
hem, whilst his scribe Mayor takes they^ Examinations.


Manasses, how dost like my play at Tennys?


You play well Sir, but you loose still.


Pollecie Manasses, policy, for when any man upbraids me with my gettings at
Court, I may swear truly I have lost more then I have got byte.


By the Tennis court I think you have.


If by any Court, tis enough to save mine oath.
But what do our spruce witted gallants say of my bounty.

Faith sir according to the proportion of it, little or nothing they say tis a
banckrout, and dares not show his head.


Then let em leave resting at me, though it please the Duke for some few good
parts that he sees in me, to make me his familiar, I scorn to be public, or
every Courtiers companion: but who comes here?

The Captains of the watch-towers? what news with you.


A couple of peticioners, ant like your worship.


Had I best take their petitions Manasses?


O in any case, though you never peruse em, tis the only course in request.


Fellows, deliver your petitions to my scribe Mayor, and dost hear, put em up
Manasses, they may be wrongs to us.


And they be, I hope they be not the first wrongs I have put up for your
worship.


That fellows pocket is like a Tailors hell, it eats up part of every mans
due: tis an Executioner, and makes away more innocent petitions in one year,
then a red-headed hang man cuts ropes in an age.


Now, what are you sir?


A poor soldier ant like your worship.


Poor soldiers do not like my worship, they are bad members.


Then if they had a woman to their Judge, they should be sure to be cut off,
for they cannot endure bad members in a Common-wealth.


What are you?


A poor scholar, ant like your worship.


Poor schollers do not like our worship neither, they rail against rich
Cormorants, they are bad members to.


Cut them off both sir, and make the Land an Eunuch.


I'll take order with em I warrant thee, and I may have my will, I'll ha neither
poor scholar nor soldior about the Court.


The next way to make it the I'll of fools.


Whats he talks of fools there? why how now sir, know you to whom you
speak?


Cry your worship mercy, I had forgot your authority.


But I remember well enough I warrant you, I command you, in my name and the
Dukes, to attend your guard, and you regard me no more then a careless Lawyer
doth an undone clyant, but I'll inform: the Duke shall know, out, pack.


Command your slaves sir, we are gentlemen.


Why so I hope are we sir, and of the best and last edition, of the Dukes own
making.


Cry your authority mercy, will you discharge us of these passengers?


You are discharged, about your business.


Bad fate, that wrong should set his foot on right, And true borne Eagles
stoop to this base kite.


What an excellent trade it is to be an officer maker, I'll have more officers,
and one shall be to keep schollers and soldiers out of the Court, for they
dare not come in the great Chamber already, for want of good clothes. But gods
me Manasses, go tell the Duke I must speak with him.


Presently sir, I'll go fetch the head to give the foot a posset: and my
master had wit to his villainy, he would make an excellent dish for the
hangman.


Right worshipful.


I sir, I know my place is worshipful, I tell thee knave I could hang thee by
my patent, if it were granted once, I'll tell thee how it runs, It allows
me 24 knaves, 6 Kinghts, 10 fools, 13 felons, and 14 traitors by the year,
take em howe, why, when, and where I please.


I do not think the Duke will ever grant it.


Why not grant it? why should you think he will not grant it. Such another word
I'll send you to Limbo instanthe.


We thank you good Dametas.


I hope you'll take reasonable bail for our forth-comming.


The case is altered with you since you came out of Archadea.


My honourable friends, Iulio and Aminter, my self and the best ability of my
power, lies at your service.


You see how confidentlie we presume upon your Letters promise, in furthering
us to attain the lovers prize.


The Dukes daughters are your own, and in a word thus shall you attain em,
some 3 days hence I will appoint a hunting, to which I will invite the Duke
both his daughters: in this hunt will I upon some sudden occasion divide the
train* and having singled out the two Does, I hope you have wit enough to
strike.


To strike, how mean you.


As headsmen do, of with their maiden-heads, or if the Duke offer resistance,
of with his crown to.


That were violence, clean opposite to the intent of the challenge.


Come ye are shallow, too't vi et armis, too't, I'll be your second, think of
the crown, ha my Letters trauaild for you, my wit wrought for you, and my
invention sweat for you, to possess you of your loves, and seat you in the
Dukedom, come you now with tis violence, and against the intent of the
challenge, I am ashamed to hear you.


Nay Dametas, and your resolution be so forward, ours shall ouer-take you, we
doubted least the preferments your Lord hath heaped upon you, had smothered your
affection to us ward.


That was the father that begot the doubt in us, you will appoint the hunt.


Sever the Duke, divide the train, and then.


We ha your meaning.


Put it in execution then, but first entertain some new disguise, as at our
next meeting I'll inform you. Adieu, I shall think long till I see you again.


As a Lawyer doth for his clyant for a second see. Here's no Iudas?


Yes, and a damned one to, for he would betray and sell his Master.


Tis common in such base fellows, such Court-spyders, that weave their webs
of flattery in the ears of greatness, if they can once entangle them in
their quaint treachery, they poysen em straight.


They are like unnecessary worms, who the son of greatness creates of the
gross and slimy multitude, as soon as they recover strength, they eat into
the credit of true borne gentry, undermine and work out the true nobility,
to inroote establish themselves.


And in the end, like Esops starved snake, having lapped the sweet milk of
greatness, made themselves strong in authority and friends, they turn their
stings of envy into their preservers bosom.


The example lives in this Dametas, who notwithstanding the Duke hath raised him
to that height that he looks equal with himself, yet for the base hope of
uncertain government, he offers him to sale, but let his treason live to the
last minute.


For my part I'll make that use of him that Physicians do of poison, use as much
of him as serves for mine honest intent, cast down the rest, as unfit for any
necessary employment.


Let our carriage in this attempt put on no show of violence either to the
Duke, or his daughters.


And let our discourse go so smoothly apparelled, that it move not the
patience of the most tender ear.


About it then, though his intent be base,
Our enterprise shall wear a noble face.

Archadea, thou heaven, within whose sphere
The star that guides my motion is fixed,
I court thy gracious bosom with a kiss
For this admittance: in thine amorous arms
Fair Violetta, fairer then the flower
That christened her, and graced her with that name
Do play the wanton:
Only her Father like a covetous Churl,
Owner of that vnvalewed Diamond,
Hath made this desert I'll th'vnwilling chest
In which he locks her. But the fair advantage
Of this large challenge, and my stars to friend,
Aided by this disguise, I shall break open
His iron Casket, and enlarge my hope.

This way she went sir, this way.


But I say this way, I would thou should know, we old Courtiers can hunt a
Cony, and put her to the squeak, make her cry out like a young married wife of
the first night.


For more help, as some of them have done,
But there she is.

I'll upon her presently, dost hear me firra, thou vessall of infirmity,
woman, and by thy out-side little better then one of the wicked, come hither
and show thy self before us, show thy self before Dametas.


Dametas, Lisander then dissemble,
For he's the man must work thy entrance.

What art thou, speak.


My mother is the Queen of Amasons,
My self a virgin, married unto Arms
And bold archieuements, who have paced the world
In quest of fair Autioste my sister:
And turning homeward, the inconstant winds
And wrathful Neptune cast me on this shore.

And whats your business now you are landed?


My business is private with the Duke.


The Duke is busy, and shall speak with no body.


I beseech you sir.


Tis no beseeching matter I assure you.


No, never beseech for the matter, for except you could beseech with the tongue
of Angels, tis to no purpose with him.


Tis strange, I have heard thy master is a very good man where he takes.


True, where he takes he is, but he takes nothing of you, and therefore look
for no kindness from him.


Good, and dost thou take after thy master?


No madam, I take commonly before my master, for where he takes, he takes all,
and leaves nothing for me to take.


Oh, I feel your meaning.


Let my master have some feeling of yours, and heel preset your suit.


Tis not the Dukes pleasure Peticioners should buy their access.


Als one, tis my masters pleasure, and usual fashion.


And I must maintain the fashion. Worshipful Dametas, my late shipwreck as
you see, hath made a defeat both of my friends and treasure, notwithstanding,
Fortune hath reserved me one Jewel, which if I might request your worship in
love to accept, and be a means to work my admittance to the Duke, I should
become a true detter to your love.


Well Madam, tho I hate nothing more then a man that takes bribes, yet pressed
by your importunity, and that you tender it in love, least I might seem too
nice to withstand a Ladies favour, I'll wear it for your sake, and if the Duke
be not too busily employed, work your access.


So doing, you shall perform the office of a dere-bought friend.


How quickly the tyde's turned, but do you hear Madam, tho I take neither
before nor after my Master, yet take my counsel, do not trust my master: If
you have a suit to the Duke keep it to your self, for if you trust my master
with it, heel prefer it for you, but heel begged for himself.


That's plain coosnage.


Fie no, tis cunning in him, marry 'twould be though little better then
coosnage in a country gentleman: but he returns.


Madam, I have been earnest, very earnest with the Duke for your admittance.


And have you wrought it?


I have, marry you must think I bestowd much labour int.


Tmay be you did.


Tmay be you did: look a seance like a Apothecaries wife pounding
Colliquintida, have my brains sweat for this.


Why the Jewel is right Dametas, had I but an Ass that would sweat me such
pearl.


An Asle? and sweat such pearl, I'll bar her admittance, here take your
Jewel, the Duke will allow no admittance, I will keep you back.


Keep me back, thou could do no more and I were a poor mans peticioner.


And I'll do so much being a rich peticioner.


You cannot sir. You Court spaniel, you unnecessary mushrump, that in one
night art sprung out of the root of greatness, I have bought my admittance, and
I'll hate in dspetto del fato.


I must admit her, these Ladies are so inward with our tricks, there's no good
to be done upon them: well Madam, your admittance is open, will ye follow.


With all my hart sir, I'll be the blind man and poor peticioner, and thou
shalt play the Court spaniel with the silver bell, I cad me into the Presence.


Court spaniel? mum: I'll bosom what I think,
Old Gibs not blind, I see although I wink.

Boy, how dost like me in this attire?


As the audience do a bad play, scuruely.


Is it not strange a prince should be thus metamorphosed?


Not so strange as the metamorphosis of Aiax and like your grace.


Grace you Aggot: hast not forgot that yet?


No, and yet tis a wonder I ha not, grace being so fildome used, Ime sure they
say none at some Ordenaries, for at sitting down they cannot intend it for
hunger, and at rising up, they are either drunk, or have such mind a dice,
they never remembe^, my Lord then.


No more Lord, sir.


Indeed there are many already, but is not this strange, that rich men should
forsake their titles? master then.


Your will sir.


You have left many Countries behind you in seeking your friend Lisander, and
yet you cannot find him.


True sir.


I ha seen much gold lying upon Lombards stalls, and could never finger
penny of it.


Very well.


Nay, twas not well sir.


What conclude you then?


That you were best sit down, and see what you ha got by your journey.


I have seen a face as beautiful as heaven.


That's nothing, a prisoner sees the face of heaven it self, when he looks
but out at the prison-gate, I'll stand root, a man were as good be hanged, so a
meet a handsome hangman, a strong rope, as be in love.


Your reason for that.


Mary this sir, hanging is end of all troubles, love the beginning. Nay
further, I think a Lo^d cannot be saved, for he is of all religions.


Your proof for that.


This; he thinks with the Atheist there's no GOD but his Mistress, with the
Infidel no heaven but her smiles, with the papist no purgatory but her frowns,
with the family of love, hold it lawful to lie with her, though she be
another mans wife.


So sir, what follows?


Serving men sir, the Master goes in before his wife, the serving-man follows
his master.


Syrra forbear, I must meditate.


As the Usurer before he parts with money, meditate upon the assurance.


I^ Violettaes presence ha not quenched
The memory of all things but herself,
I should be more familiar with that fate.

I have left my country to seek out my friend.


And I my country and my friend for love.


And in the search of him have lost my self
In the strange Region of a woman's eye.

In love, and in Archadea.


As much as heaven transcends the humble earth,
So towers her praise, her face differs as far
From others, as a glo worm from a star.
She is a princess that my soul affects.

And rich.


Half heir unto this Dukedom.


And she were whole heir to the four moral Virtues, twere nothing: when
shall I see the time that men will love for virtue, or a rich h^yre marry a
poor wench without a portion, never I think.


Had not my friend Lisander.


What of me?


L^nt in Thrace.


We had never met in love,
His syllables betray him. I arrest you.

At whose suit.


Not at his Tailors in any case, for there's no greater stitch to a younger
brothers conscience, then to pay for a suit of appariell when tis worn out.


Lisander or his ghost.


Demetrius,
Or some illusiue tenant in his shape.

Unkind, why did thou leave my company?


For that which made the amorous Gods leave heaven,
For love: but why is Demetrius thus disguisd?

For that which would make a lackanapes a Monkey, and he could get it: a tail.


Peace rogue.


Why wag, is thy master in love?


Faith sir he hath entered his action in Cupids court, means to proceed in the
suit it should seem.


Why did not take my counsel in thy choice?


Because I feared a chiding, for doubting thine honourable thoughts would not
have consented to my effeminate attempts, I stole this secret course, and
manner of disguise, as best helping to access, which it hath begot, now what
access will bring forth, I commit to unborn Industry.


It cannot but be prosperous: only the strict observance of our loves, hinders
the passage of our hopes.


Indeed that's not the least hinderance, yet the Duke himself, and my quaint
disguise hath removed it out of my way, who not only takes me for a woman,
but hath allowed me for my loves companion.


Fortune deals kindly with thee, I am as far from access to my love, as
when I was in Thrate.


Dametas is the oystershell that holds thy pearl, our vvits must fish for
him.


Will the Cods head byte?


Like an old Usurer at a young heirs inhe^tance, and I h'ate ready hookt for
him: and he ere he comes, my plot is to preferr^ thee to his service.


Prethe do, and I'll serve him in his right kind.


Dametas, my love is yours.


Which madam I am as proud of


As a malecontent of a change, or an old Lady of a new fashion.


To be roud I have a suit to you in the behalf of this woodman


To me sweet blossom, tho I be somewhat strict in mine office, I cannot be stony
to Ladies. Fellow is thy petition drawn?


Petition.


Your only way to move a (...) by: Humbly complaining to your good worship, O
tis most pathetic, and indeed without money, can do just nothing with
authority.


Come hither stripling whose son were thou?


I am not so wise a child as you take me for, I never knew^ my father.


Did not know thy father?


A common fault, his betters forget themselves when they grow rich, then blame
not him to forget his father.


What was his name?


If I may give credit to my mother, they called him Menalchas, who on his
death-bed made me his heir, with this charge, to seek your worships service,
gave me this gold as a remembrance to purchase your favour.


Gold him?


Now doth my Master long more to finger that gold, then a young girl married
to an old man, doth to run her husband? ashore at Cuckolds haven.


Well, I could do for this fatherless youth.


As many Executors and Overseers have done, cheat him of his portion, and
then turn him out of doors a begging.


But for I have the guardian ship of the Prince, I dare do nothing without the
consent of the Duke.


Come come sir, your worship shall not refuse him.


Well then I wo not, but tis for your sake I assure you.


Meaning the gold.


What shall I call thy name?


Dorus ant like your worship.


Ah, good Dorus, be an honest youth Dorus, reverence your Master, and love
your self: be sure to get under me, and you shall loose nothing in my service.
Madam, the Duke and Dutch expect you at the hunt, await your coming at
Dianaes oak.


I'll attend them presently, be a good seruaunt Dorus.


Twill be his own another day Madam.


In the mean time let it be yours to lead the way.


My service doth attend you,


As the Pursuivant doth the prisoner for a double fee.


Welcome slave to a slave, a fair presage,
The hope of love sweetens loves vassalage.

Now Dametas be the mettle he was stamped for, a right villain.


And he be not, hang him.


Nay he deserves hanging to if he be: but will you trust him?


Yes as far as I see him, and he that trusts him further my trust is he will
be deceiud.


Indeed, he that will prove false to his maker, will be true to no man.


Yes for the present time, like a bawd to him that gives most.


That's not for love.


Yes of the money: he that looks for other love in this age. This is the place
his Letter speaks of, and here he comes himself.


Why so lo: now is the web of my hopes upon the loombe of perfection, and in
this quech of lashes Aminter and Iulio.

See and see not, all mum, you know your que,
The games your own, if you can hunt it true.

Dametas, were thine ears ever at a more musical banquet? how the hounds
mouths like bells are tuned one under another like a slothfulnes, the speed of
the cry out-ran my sense of hearing.


Cross over the Forest to Dianas oak my liedge, there your grace advantagde
by the height of the ground, shall not only at pleasure hear, but be
eye-witnes of their musical contention.


Thanks good Dametas, be thy directions our wives convoy.


Where is his highness Dametas?


At Adonis bower Madam, where he expects your presence to see the fleshing of a
couple of Spartane hounds, in the wasting blood of the spent Dear.


Thanks good Dametas, mine eyes would not be good friends with my feet,
should they not bring em to that kingly sport.


Sweet Ladies, to save you the expense of much breath* which must be laid out
in the purchase of the game. I have provided you this stand, from whence your
eyes may be commanders of the sport: such sport as you little dream of.


We are your loves detters kind Dametas.
As I love virtue I pity these poor beasts,
These Syluane comoners, to see what tasks
Our covetous Foresters impose upon them,
Who not content with impost of their breath,
(Poor harts,) pursue them smiling to their death.

Twas the end of their creation Madam.


So was the end of ours to live in peace,
And not to tyrannise on harmless beasts,
But Foresters, like Images set forth
The tyranny of greatness without pity,
As they the Dear, so covetous wealth pursues
The trembling state of their inferiors.
And to clasp up the volume of their sins,
They drink their blood, and clothe them with their skins,
Then cease to press poor beasts with tyranny,
You love your lives, think they are loath to die.

You are too tender-harted to be a good huntswoman lady.


And some of you too hard-harted, but leaving this discourse of hunting, have
all our gallantry of Lacedemon and Greece, spent the vigour of their wits, that
not one dares venture.


For our loves sister, you may see the properer women, the worse luck.


Tush you shall have suitors, fear not madam.


No at any hand sister, for with a fear it comes.


Then I'll fear of purpose, because I would have em come.


And they do not, they are notable cowards.


Then let em keep away still, for I have vowed my maiden-head shall never do
homage to the bed of a coward.


Sweet Ladies, will you beguile a minute or two with this discourse, till I
step up to the top of the hill, and make discovery of the game,


Let your return be speedy good Dametas.


I'll put on wings and fly.


Out of the Court, and the whole Country shall have a good riddance.


So, he hath put em fair to the stand, lets issue and surprise them,


Be resolute and sudden.


Murder, treason, reskue, help.


Yes much reskewe, much help, much Dametas: why so, this lest was drawn home
close to the head, it cannot choose but cleave the very white of our hopes, the
Dukes wit ^to thy tackle good wit, some sudden sea room, or our stratagem is
run a ground.


Tell me Dametas, was not the Dear a prodigal, did he not spend his breath
freely amongst us?


And his blood too my liege, but did you observe how the hounds like
politicians nosd out the game?


True: coming to the loss Melampus, but where are our daughters?


Did you observe that my liege, that Melampus as a true hound is ever horce
cheerd or hollow, yet he kept time to.


Certain Dametas, but where are our daughters man?


Busy my Lord under a brake bush, disputing of the virtue of sweet water, and
ground Ivy.


What cry of treasons that Dametas?
Pray God no danger sets upon my daughters,
Seek out our wife, I'll hast unto their reskue.

And my sword vn-imployd? allegiance: says nay to that my Liege, I am for the
adventure my self, if they be surprisd (I am a mad man) your grace shall
hear more: If not ((...) the more sorry) your grace shall hear more to: make
peace with your thoughts till my return, and doubt not their recovery.


Speak, where's the Duke?


Here my Genitia.
What mean these weapons, are our daughters safe?

As a thief in a ^ill father, we thank our redeemers.


The more my grief, were you surprisd then madam?


Yes saith Dametas.


And how sweet Ladies, and how were you reskewd?


Being surprisd, this gallant Amason
Pressed to their reskew, had you seen what worth
She and this woodman spent in our defence,
Wonder would ha bereft you of all sense.
She raised her sword with such a manly grace,
As had nor her mild sexe-contrould my thoughts,
I could have fallen in love with her high worth.

You over price us madam, not our dese^
But the weak spi^ of our opposites.
Gave leister to the di^nes of our worth.

It please your modesty to lesson it.
But it shall still live great in our regard. What woodmans that?

My follower my Liege.


What ere he be, he hath deserved our love.
Fellow be near us, and for this desert,
Performed against those Traitors to our blood,
Under thy master we give thee an attendant,
To guard the life and safety of our daughter.

Thank you good father, who ever loose by the bargain, I ha got me a servant
by the match: wot serve me fellow?


In the best I can.
In hart your fellow, though in show your man.

I'll try your du^ious service: I command,
Your knee to kiss the ground, your lip my hand.

Pardon me Madam.


Here's hot love no doubt,
I may command my man, and go without.

Truce to this airy war, these paper bullets
Better become a Closet then a Park,
The Forest music is to hear the hounds
Rend the thin air, and with a lusty cry
Awake the drowsy Echo, and confound
Their perfect language in a mingled sound,
Then so the Court, our Forest sport being done,
A second chase o^ lovelier sport's begun.

If fortune cross not what our hopes pursue,
Our fears have met their deaths, our loves their due.

Crossed in my hopes, the Ladies reskewd, and the Princes like cravens beat out
of the game-place, my invention must turn travailer for more stratagems^ what
I should discover their plot to the Duke, attach em for traitors, and beg
their lands for my labour; though they be my friends, twere a pretty parcel of
policy.

All things are lawful that do profit bring,
A wise-mans bow goes with a two-fold string.

Did ever two princes meet such strange changes in their loves? now we have
wrought our admittance, and in a manner got em into our possessions, ou^ hopes
like false fires having brought us within ^en, vanish, and leave us out of all
comfort.


That the duke should dote upon thee for a woman, makes for our purpose, but
that the dutch should be enamourd on thee for a man, is prepostrous.


Whether my (...) sh^wne in the reskue of the Ladies, or the ardent glances
her daughters beauty steals from mine eyes, give her thoughts encouragement, I
know not, but her hopes stand confident I am a man, for that cause am I bard
from access.


I way thy co^rances by mine own, for tho by the Dukes allowance I am her
privileged attendant, yet such is the deuilishnes of Dametas, that I cannot
joy so much access as to confer with her.


I can compare my lord and his friend to nothing in the world so fitly as to a
couple of water buckets, for whilst hope winds the one up, despair plunges the
other down, whilst I like a Harl^kene in an Italian comedy, stand making faces
at both their follies.


Well, since the shape of our proceeding grows so monstrous, lets cast our
inventions in a new mold, and having so firm a foundation as this disguise to
build upon, lets draw the model, and raise the whole frame of our attempts
anew.


Indeed, lovers should be conditiond like tyrants, who having the aim of a
crown in ^ violently over all lets that intervent their course, and so must
we.


And so will we, my resolutions already bent, if I shoot not, the next level
I take, ^ I beseech thee break thy bow about mine ears, and strike the horns
in my forehead, for married men to hang their caps on.


I have met a means (...) my purpose already: Mopsa Dametas only daughter, is
^ in love with me, to her I'll fain extreme ardor of affection, and make her
the shadow under which I'll court the true substance of my divine Hippolita.


About it then, I'll sweat my invention to death but I'll overtake thee; but
here comes one of my (...). I must hear his importunity, for no reasonable
denial will brush him of.


Zehnane.


My Liedge.


My thoughts come like a sail before the wind, swollen big with news and thine
ears the midwife must deliver me of this burden, my Dutch is sick, hart
sick for thee Zelmane.


For me, why my Lord, I am no Rosasolis, nor Aqua mirabilis to recover sick
folks.


Shall I be short with thee? My Lady's in love with thee.


With me my Lord.


With thee my Lady: her amorous glances are her accusers, her very looks write
Sonnets in thy commendations, she carves thee at board, and cannot sleep for
dreaming on thee in bed, she's turned sunne-riser, haunts private walks,
like a disgrast Courtier, studies the Art of melancholy.


Now alas good Lady.


Nay never pity her, she deserves none, rather lets bend our endeavours to
entangle her more. To see the kindness of Fortune, who fearing we should be
acquainted with solitude in this our 12 month retirement, hath begot a
domestic merriment, and made our own thoughts actors int, and as bad a Poet
as I am, I'll ha one scene int of mine own invention.


Dametas will storm at that, for he cannot endure Poetry should be
countnanst: but how is't my Liege?


Tis ready plotted already, and that the Dutch may not find thee unprovided
when she comes to court thee


Court me, court a woman my Liedge.


Why that's the very happiness of the jest, but in any case confess thy self
a man.


A man my liedge, I ha no colour fort.


Tush I'll furnish thee, say thou art some Prince, no matter who, hast to do
with this disguise of purpose to court my daughter Violetta,


Is this scene of your own inventing my liege?


Mine own in faith, and to confirmt the rather, use more oft private conference
with my daughter, interchange discourse amorous dalliance, oh twill set my
Dutch affections a flre, to think her riuald by her daughter, and give us
smooth passage to our love.


How occasion plays the wanton with me. Well my liedge, do but you work my
admittance to your daughter, I'll bestow al the art I am worth in courting her,
and see, as if Fortune had a hand in our Comedy, she hath entered the Dutch
just at her que, shadow your self in your Arc, leave me to give her
entertainment.


Forget not to personate some Prince in any case.


I'll warrant you, I'll play the Prince with much art.


This way he went, on this sweet violet bed
Still dwells the print of his enamourd tread,
The depressed flowers have strengthened their sweet
By stealing amorous kisses from his feet.

Absolute Poet, Penelope was a ballet-maker to her.


Oh do not fli^ my presence, gentle wanton stay,
What have I found you, faith you run-away
I'll tie a chain about your wast for this,
And make you buy your freedom with a kiss.

Fie madam, this courtesy is more then needs*


Be not so coy, let not a loving Dame
Find thee less kind then senseless elements,
Thou never walkst, but the enamourd air
Like an officious lover bears thy train,
Whilst the cool wind doth with his velvet wing
Fan the thin air upon thy sweaty cheek,
Stealing sweet kisses from thy silken lip.

Shield this vain breath, beat at some ladies ear.


But you are none, you are not, come you are not,
Your valor, looks, and gesture show you are not,
Your manly brow, and your commanding eye,
Where war and fortune dwell in majesty,
Your private walks, and varied passions,
Your glances to my daughter, sure you are not,
And my firm love is confident you are not.

There's a lover of a right temper, sheele outface the name of her sex
instantly.


Well madam, since your observation hath discovered me, upon promise of your
secrecy I confess my self a man.


Good, excellent, how truly she takes my directions.


I knew my judgment could not be deceiud,
Nor durst proud love have done me so much wrong
To cast my thoughts unto a woman's eye.

Love durst not, good, good, excellent, what next.


But madam, now I am known to you, what further request you.


Exchange of looks, and freedom of thy bed,
Thy presence, thy embraces, thy kind love,
For which my amorous thoughts have long line sick.

Thank you good wife, nay a Dutch long to give her husbands the horning, let
it never grieve butchers to do homage at Cuekolds haven.


Well madam, to give content to your affections, and in a strong hope you will
mediate my suit to your daughter, sort out but fit time and opportunity, and
master your desires.


And he were a man now I might be rarely tupt.


Give me thy hand then, with this amorous kiss I seal thee mine.


And I confirmt with this.


Rare, rare, rare, she's his sealed and delivered in the presence of her husband.


Now least my husband should suspect our love,


Now, what shadow for that now.


Hear a good jest, persuade him you are a woman.


That's not to do now madam, for he as confidently belieues and ardently courts
me for a woman, as you for a man.


Good, excellent, maintain that humour still,
Seem coy, look nice, and as we women use,
Be mild and proud, embrace, and yet refuse.

Excellent virtues in a woman.


I prethe do, twill be a scene of mirth
For me to quote his passions and his smiles,
His amorous hauiour, and how his eye
Will beget strange variety of looks.
And shoot em into thine, but the chief sports this
To see an old man with a young man kiss.

To see an old Dutch a young Lady kiss.
Now the plot packs the sceanes all comical,
I cannot speak for laughter, to see these women
That would be counted wonders for their wit,
Lay plots to gull themselves, silly conceit,

To take me for a man.


And arm herself
To laugh at me, make jests and scoffs at me,
But sooth her humour, the revenge sheede throw
Upon my head, shall fall on her own brow.

Upon you both, so, so, so, how greedily their inventions like bugles follows
the sent of their own gullery, yet these are no fools, God forbid, not they:
but to the drift, mirth in my warm blood sits, laughing at this division of
their wits.


Wot te believe me sister, I never eat a cherry, but it puts me in mind of a
husband, it kisses my lips with such a harmless prettines.


Now in good deed lo I love em a life to, I think I shall never ha my belly
full on em.


Of what, not of husbands Violetta.


No, of cherries Hipolita, but take heed of em, they be a ver^e filling meat,
and dangerous things for us maids I can tell you, we may surfeit after em
presently.


Surfeit after what, a husband?


I and after cherries to Hippolita.


I warrant you sister, an old lady in Lacedemon taught me a preservative
against that.


For the love of cherries what.


Marry this it was, still said she, betwixt every cherry said she, be sure to
crack a stone said she.


Then let me alone, I'll crack a couple a stones betwixt every cherry, rather
then surfeit on em.


You must take heed you crack not too many to, for you may surfeit of the
stone as well as of the cherry.


Nay they be such dangerous things, I have done with em.


So have I to for this time, but sister, is it not a strange kind of servile
liberty that we live in here in Archadea?


For all the world as Englishmen keep their felons, Italians their wines, we
never stir abroad without our Jailers.


And for what cause forsooth, only to keep us fro marriage.


Sure tis either some high content, or extreme discommodity, that our father
debarrs us of it.


By this stone me thinks I long like a woman with child, till I know the
difference betwixt a maid and a wife.


Well, god a mercy of all cursen souls, I was near the knowledge ont last
night I can tell you.


O that I had been with thee I might ha been so to: for love of marriage how?


Why thus: as I lay slumbering in my bed,
No creature with me but my maidenhead:

Is that a creature?


Some maintain it is.
Got in the eye, conceived in a kiss:
Others whose speech seem near akin to truth
Say tis a passion, bred ith heate of youth,
Some callt a sigh, and some an amorous groan,
All differ in the definition,
But in the allowed opinion of most,
Tis never truly had till it be lost.
But lying thus alone, as maids do use,
Me thought I dreamt, as maids can hardly choose,
And in my dream me thought twas too much wrong
A pretty maid should lie alone so long:
With that a gallant comes, gallants can do
Much with young maids,

And with old women to.


He couted me once, and again, and thrice,
Tis virtue to say nay, to be too nice
Agrees not with my humour, yet some say,
We maids wish things, to which we answer nay,
Briefly me thought he stood so long a wooing,
I rather could a wished he had been doing
Some other business, yet at last we greed,
Twere strange if earnest suitors should not speed.

In what agreed you?


In our wedding ring,
Time, place, and howre, indeed in every thing:
The day appointed, and each thing in frame,
I thought each howre an age until it came,
Well, come it is, the morning once in sight,
I thought it ten times longer till twas night.
At dinner time me thought I swelled with pride
To be drunk to by name of Mistress bride,
Music spake loud, no delicates were scant,
Yet still me thought another thing did want,
For sure thought I, there's something in a man
That wives love well, hope brides may wish it than.
Long looked for comes at last, to bed we go.

Would I had dreamt I might ha done so to.


My bed-mate turned, and as he would ha spoke
I swe^t with fear, and in that fear I woke,
But seeing my kind bed-fellow was gone,
Lord how it chaft me that I waked so soon,
One minutes dreaming longer, I had tried,
The difference twixt a virgin and a bride.

O 'twould ha vexed a saint, my blood would burn
To be so near, and miss so good a turn.

And so did mine to I warrant you, nay tho I be but a little pot, I shall be as
soon hot as another.


You should not be my sister else.


Nor my mothers daughter neither.


And in good earnest we are not fatherd much amiss.


Are you aui^d of that, and in faith tell me, what think you of your servant
Dorus.


As of a sweet Almond in a rugged shell, the sun in a cloud, or a wealthy
diamond in a rock, indeed clean contrary to the world, he wears the worst
side outward, is much better then he seems: but what think you of your manly
Amazon.


Nay the sport is I know not what to think, Zelmanes humour would afford
project for a pretty Court comedy, my father courts her for a woman, and as I
fear she is, my mother doares upon her for a man, and as I wish he were, and
that with such an ardor of affection, that I could find in my hart to turn my
mother out of the company, and play the lovers part my self.


How ever man or woman, the jest holds currant in one.


I know not what knavish motion hath had to do with my thought, but my mind
tells me that your servant Dorus my Amazon, are other then they seem: and
here he comes.


Why how now madam, Ladies gadding, is this the obedience of your fathers
charge.


Pardon Mistress Miso, twas my doing and the Dukes.


But the Dutch w^l like neither the Dukes doings nor yours neither in this
case I can tell you. The Duke stays your coming yet the dutch is very
desirous ont, my husbands is in the next Arbor to man you. For you Lady, my
presence be your privilege.


Miso should be either a hangman or a Herald, for she never comes amongst us,
but she quarters our company and arms.


Excellent beauty, therefore more excellent, because situate in so fair a
creature.


You are a merry man Dorus, but all this cannot make me think you love me, how
say you mother doth he.


Mary let him chose daughter, when I was as thou art.


You were as she is, but faith madam Mopsa, I perceive my servant Dorus bears
a months mind to you, be not so straight laced to him. Mop. Straight laced,
sgod mend me I am not laced at all, am I Dorus, no in soth, I go wide open
wensday, I never lace my self but on sondaies, that for fear I should burst
with eating of plum porridge. Hip. I mean let fall some comfortable looks on
your suitor.


sgod mend me I'll let fall or take up any thing I have to do him good.


Why that's kindly said, Dorus your love is very ambitious, to climb so hie as
the beautiful Mopsa.


O are you avisd of that, twold make a horse break his bridle to hear how the
youth of the village will commend me, oh the pretty little pincking nyes of
Mopsa says one, oh the fine flat lips of Mopsa says another, and then do I
bridle my head like a malt-horse thus, set mine arms a kembo thus, wrethe my
neck and my body thus, wink with one eye thus, spread my peacocks tail as
broad as the proudest minx of em all.


These extraordinary graces must not want admiration, but where's your mother.


Speak softly in the Lobby there, for waking my Ladies foisting hound.


Godsme, my mothers stealing of a nap.


Nay, she cannot be said to steal a nap, for the noise she makes herself
would discover her theft: but Dorus since your fortunes are poor, you should
study to ennoble your deserts, and beget effects worthy to court and win your
Ladies acceptance.


Lass madam, I choose no better moderater then your self, betwixt me and my
unworthy services, suppose your self tho but a Cucko compared with this sweet
singing Nitingale, should be sued to by a prince like me, I mean like me in
love, for love in princes peasants admits comparison: suppose Demetrius should in
like disguise court you as I do, Mopsa, sigh for you, as I do, for Mopsa,
kneel to you thus, as I do, to Mopsa, lay down his life to you, as I do, to
Mopsa, prefer your good before his own, as I protest I do, Mopsaes, suppose he
should show you the known mark of his neck, to assure you he were Demetrius,
as I do this to Mopsa, to witness I am the son of Menalchas, could your disdain
stand out like Mopsaes?


What a kenes necessity sets upon the edge of invention, trust me Mopsa your
servant speaks well, if he can prove himself the man he speaks of, and my
wishes well hope, Demetrius, you have no reason to think scorn of him.


Why what should I do madam, my mother tells me I must not say as I think.


I am no counseller, but should Demetrius in like disguise court me, thus would
I embrace him, thus seal my affections with a kiss, thus argue: think not
Demetrius that the clouds of baseness could so muffle thee, but that the sun of
valor shined through them long since, in regard of thy serviceable duty in
concealing, and vnpre^ented policy in thus making known thy love, sort but out
fit opportunity, in despite of all guardians strict observance, go where thou
wilt, the worth of Demetrius shall draw Hippolita, this would I vow, and this
will I perform.


And were I Demetrius you Hippolita, I would deciue Dametas, outreach Miso,
forswear Mopsa, forsake Archadea to share the fortunes of divine Hippolita.


And what should I do then?


I do but speak in the person of Demetrius, under Hippolita shadow what I
intend to the rare, and never enough wondered at Mopsa, the black swan of
beauty, madg-howled of admiration.


Do not you flout me Dorus, you do not, provide a priest and I'll marry you, and
my father and mother shall never know one.


Manasses is the man.


And I'll be the woman, who so ever say nay toote, little dreams my mother of
what we have done.


Tmay be she did, for she sighed grond much in her sleep.


Tis well she was so quiet, for she eat peas poridge to breakfast, they'll make
me break wind in my sleep like a horse, and see as the devil will hate she
wakes, and here comes my father, no words and ye love me.


Why god a mercy Dorus, this diligence becomes the seruaunt of Dametas, and
I'll prefer thee fort.


You were worse then the devil else, for they say he helps his servants, then
you may do little you cannot help yours.


Will you break your jests against the bars of you chamber window, clear
the green, the duke is coming to bowles, I would not for half mine office
you should be a rub in the way of his patience: Daughter and Wife, conduct her
to the Lodge. Dorus. make you haste about your business.


I warrant you Sir: be my hopes rightly placed?
You will condemn me for my too much haste.

Why so: this tis to be in authority: Inferior persons, I and the Princes
themselves, fly from my presence, like the chirping Birds from the sight of
the Falcon: my very breath like a mighty wind blows away inferior Officers
(the Court rubbish) out of my way, and gives me a smooth passage: I am the
morning star, I am seldom seen but about the rising of the Sun: indeed I
am never out of the Dukes eye; and here he comes.


Doth our match hold.


Yes, whose part will you take.


Zelmanes.


Soft, that match is yet to make.


Lets cast a choice, the nearest two take one.


My choice is cast, help sweet occasion.


Come, here's a good.


Well, bettered.


Best of all.


The Duke and I.


The weakest go to the wall.


I'll lead.


I'll follow.


We have both one mind.


In what?


In leaving the old folk behind.


Well jested daughter, and you lead not fair,
The hindmost hound, though old, may catch the hate.

Your last Boule come?


By the faith a me, well led,


Would I might lead you,


Whither?


To my bed.


I am sure you would not?


By this air I would.


I hope you would not hurt me, and you should.


I'd love you sweet.


Sour, so I heard you say.


Accept it then.


Of what acquaintance pray?


Of loves, and mine.


Daughter, your bowl wins one.


None of my Maidenhead Father, I am gone,
The Amason hath won one.

Yield to that.


The cast I do.


Your self?


Nay scrape out that.


Whose is it yet?


The Dukes: play smooth and fine,
The smallest help that is, will make your mine.

Me yours?


Your mine, for tho the cast I loose,
I ha won your love.

Much: in my the other house.


Come, the last market this cast is worth all the rest.


The leader as the follower.


Badd's the best,
I win her for ten crowns, and there they be.

I take your lay.


A match twixt you and me.


I'll be your half.


That were unkindly done.


Pardon me mother, I'll bear all or none.


I ha won you Madam.


Me?


I mean your bet.


Then take your winnings, i'll not die in debt.


Madam believe me, I am as I protest, a Prince, my name Lisander.


Look to the Dukes standing Madam.


So I will I warrant you, and to your falling.


Thus clouded as you see, for your love, my soul speaks in my tongue: I
appointed this match at bowles a purpose to acquaint you with it.


Bar stealing Father; yet and all hit right,
Here's one would steal a piece of flesh to night.

Dear Madam.


No more words, I have perceived as much in your eye, as you can express with
your tongue, and as far as my mothers jealousy would give me leave, answered
it with kind looks: your bias stands wrong mother.


Why? It stands towards Zelmanes.


Hath it stood so long?


All the game through.


Then all your game's bold wrong: furnish you with necessaries befitting an
escape, my will shall be as ready to take wing, as yours; put in a cast now
mother, or the game is gone indeed.


Whose is the throw?


Ours, till the last bowl came.
But that hath wont'em clear, both cast and game.

Our winnings come, a kiss and bate the rest.


What do you kiss in earnest or in jest?


In earnest in good truth.


Troth, kindly sed,
Take heed you kiss not out your maidenhead.

In ieast?


In earnest.


Tis the fashion,
Much in request among our Nation.

To kiss away their maidenheads?


Now and then,
And being gone, to kiss it back again:
For lovers indentures are nea're fairly drawn,
Until the maidenhead be left in pawn,
As earnest of the match, so mothers sed,
And so will daughters do when Mams be dead.

What? pawn their maidenhead?


Yes, and loose'em too.


And you'll maintain that fashion?


Signeor No.


Lay by this homebred mirth, and prepare your ears to entertain strangers.


Stranger? why Father, Strangers are as welcome to me, as mine own
Countrymen; if they bring good manners, civil humanity in their company:
otherwise, they are like foul weather, come before they be sent for.


Dometas, nay then we shall have news enough; for he never comes into the
Presence, but he brings a whole sack full of ^es: of news I should say.


Welcome Dametas: what officious fellow is that?


A pure welwiller of your Majesties, a follower of mine.


O tis Manasses; and he could make Arms as well as he mars Legs, he would grow
in great request for Heraldrie: What's your news?


These Lacedaemonians, Subjects to your Majesty, having a Messadge to deliver
to your Majesties instruments of hearing, commonly eclipt, ears.


How? Hath any one here, clipped ears?


Sweet Femenine, clip off the tail of thy discourse with the Scissors of
attention, as I say, these Lacedaemonians have chosen me their tongue.


Of a long tongue thou speak very little.


That proves me no woman, for they speak over much.


What greuances oppress them? briefly speak.


Merchandise (my Ledge) through the avarice of purchasing Officers, is racked
with such unmerciful Impost, that the very name of Traffic grows odious
even to the professor.


Towns so oppressed for want of wonted and natural liberty, as that the native
Inhabitants seem Slaves, the Forrayners free Denizens.


Offices so bought and sold, that before the purchaser can be said to be
placed in his Office, he is again by his covetous Patron displaced.


Common Riots, Rapes, and wilful Homicide in great men's followers, not only,
not punished, but in a manner countenanced and aplauded.


Indeed since your Majesty left the Land, the whole body of the
Common-wealth runs clean against the bias of true and pristine government.


And your honourable Brother, like a Ship toste upon the violent billows of
this Insurrection, by us entreats your Majesties Letters of speedy
reformation, for fear the whole kingdom suffer inevitable shipwreck.


Which after short deliberation with our Counsel, your self shall return.
Dametas, reward their travails with 200. Crowns: in the mean time, let'em
taste the best entertainment of our Court.

Proud Rebels, they shall see that a Dukes frown,
Can at his pleasure, turn Rebellion down:
See them rewar^ed.

Manasses, see the fellows entertained; I must attend of the Duke.


Boy, see the fellows entertained? I must wait of my lord.


Fellows, be as merry as you may, I must follow my M.


So, here's Peticioners attendance right; good words, and short commons: But
tis not their entertainment we come for. I made a simple shift to get
entertainment into the Court,


Well Cupid, pray for our lives, for and we were gone, I know not where thou
would have two such statesmen again.


His Common-wealth could not stand without us: and that his Mother knows well
enough: and he sends no better success then we had at our hunting, he looses
a friend of me.


'twill not sink in my thought yet, but that old musty slave Dametas played
the slave with us.


Would I could prove it once: but since we are again admitted our Realm,
shall we be idle? somewhat we'll do, though they'll give us but small thanks
for our labour.


The Duke shall not say his Daughters are so ill beloved, but we'll change a
thrust or two with his intent for'em.


'twould put the poor Wenches out of conceit with themselves, and there should
not be some contending for'em.


We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim deceives not.


We are I faith: Invention could not weave,
A quainter web, Suspicion to deceive.

Come, pass off this groueling imitation; a Lovers thoughts must be ambitious,
and like the Eagle, scorning the base air where Kites and Crows lie flagging:
mount the clear sky of Invention, overpeer al hindrances:

The Ladies themselves are willing.

Ready to embark upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.


Let me alone to work it then. But here comes my Boy.


'twere more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man: but men war
were worn out of fashion both in a Somer.


I am of thy belief in that, Boy.


Would my Lord were so to, Sir.


Suppose I were Sir what then?


I should (as many vpstartes have done) prove rich: for I believe you would
make me your heir.


Is that part of your belief?


A principal point Sir.


Renounce it then, for I believe you'll never besaud by it.


I am sure I cannot loose by it. I believe further, that many Knights, and some
Ladies, were never of Gods making.


Of whose then, wag?


I'll tell you: the Minters quoine Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds make
Nnights, and Knights stamp Ladies.


And what do Ladies?


They live not idly neither; they make some Knights, and mar many
Gentlemen.


Ladies are good worke-women too, then?


Far better then any Taylor: they will make you an end of a suite, especially
a Court suite, when all the Taylors in a Country know not how to set a stitch
in it.


I am of the belief you are a Knave, Sir.


I had no saith, should I say you were not.


Well, what, a Knave?


In a Knaves belief Sir.


Because in yours?


Do you say it, and I'll swere't, my Lord.


No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.


That coufirmes'em to be good Sir.


Your reason for that, Sir?


Because travellers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.


Goodly ones in deed: but leaving this high-way of circumstance; I sent you
for Manasses.


The learned Scribe attends you.


Will you fall off, Sir?


Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking.


Welcome Manassas: I have present employment for thee, in which I must borrow


Pardon me Madame, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without security
and pawnes.


It is not money (Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.


Good counsel is worth good money, Madame.


Thou shalt be well considered; there's twenty Crowns in earnest.


Nay Madame, this hand's like a fellow, it takes every thing in jest; if you
be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and jest,
if your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed, and
put me in trust to execute it.


Tak't, in a word this honest Shepherd, and thy Lords daughter Madame Mopsa,
are man and wife.


Man, an woman perhaps; but not man and wife: for though most women have a will
to be Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady have not wit to be a wife,
as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I do in this?


O very much: for though they be man and wife by oath and protestation, the
chiefest ceremony of all; namely Mariadge, is yet unperformed, and hearing
that you have taken orders.


That I have: I have taken order for the making away of a hundred Maidenheads in
my time, and not so few: but I am in in the mind of you now, these two
Beagles, Dorus and Mops^, have run themselves breathless in the chase of love,
you would ha me couple'm up in the leases of Matrimony.


You are in the right.


And you in the wrong, I'll keep your ieast, but in any case take back again
your earnest: i'll not purchase my Lords displeasure with your gold.


Thy Lord shall never know it.


Oh sir! though my M. hath but bad eyes, he hath exceeding long ears: and
though a Forrayner may play with a Citizens wooden Dagger, I would not wish any
to jest with a Courtiers steeld Sword; tis seldom drawn but it draws blood.


Tush man, be not so timorous, my credit shall countenance thee: be not an
Ass, make use of thy time: thy Masters service is no heritage; the world
knows he gettes under the Duke, thou art a fool, and thou wilt loose under
him: there's a hundred Crowns for thee; tush man, thy betters will strain
curtsy with aleagence for a bribe.


Madam, could you to every one of these Crowns give me a Kingdom,


What then?


I should ha more ground then half the Kings in Christendom: here's my hand,
I'll do it: my M. is my M. I love him; but my gold's my God, and I honour it: I'll
do it; the time place?


Soon in the evening at Adonis Chapel. Art resolute?


As your Adamant: think you t'was fear made me keep out? no t'was hope of
these flattering sweet lipped drabs, I fear to marry my Ladies daughter? no
nor to go to bed with her neither. Why, I have counterfeited his hand seal. He
has been content with me, to come nearer to him, at his entertainment of the
last Ambassador, when he was heat with drinking of healths. As I led him to
his Chamber, I nimde his Chain, and drew his Purse, and next morning persuaded
him he lost it in the great Chamber at the Revels. He puts me in trust with
his whole estate: he buys Manners, I purchase Farms: he builds houses, I
pluck down Churches: he gets of the Duke, and I of the Commons: he beggars
the Court, and I beggar the whole Country.


These are notable knavish courses. What breeding hast had?


Very good breeding Sir: My great Grandfather was a Rat-catcher, my Grandsier
a Hangman, my Father a Promooter, and my self an Informer.


Thou were a Knave by inheritance.


And by education too: but Bawdy Informations growing stale, I gave up my
cloak to a Broker, and crept into credit for a Gown, and of Manasses a
penurious Informer, I turned Copy, became Manasses, a most, precise,
illiterate expositor.


Were you a Reader then?


And a Writer too Bullie; I set some of my Parishioners Wives such Copies, as
their Husbands might cast their caps at it, but could never come near.


But and you used such a high and elevate stile, your auditories low and humble
understandings should never crall ouer't.


Tush I could fashion the body, of my discourse fit to the ear of my
auditorre: for to cast Eloquence amongst a company of Stinctards, is all one
as if a man should scatter Pearl amongst the hoggish animals ecliped Swine: no
I had paraphrasticall admonitions of all sorts; Some against covetous
Landlords, and that would I squirt awongst beggarly Tennants: Some against
Usurers, and that would I throw in at Prison Grates amongst prodigal
Banqeoutes: Some against the pride of the Court, and that honies the ear of
the Citizen: Some against the fraud of the City, and that's Cake and Cheese
to the Country: Some against Protestants, and that's plumpes the lasy
Catholic against Papist and Protestant, and that fattens the rank witted
Puritand, against Papist, Puritand, and Protestant; and that tickles the ear
of the luxur ous Atheist.


Why you never light upon any Atheistes, do you?


Oh very many.


In the Country perhaps, and the out-skirtes of the city?


In the very bosom of the City: and by your leave, here and there one in
the Court too: But we fi^t 'em all; for in deed we wandering Lights, have
(as other tradesmen have) Commodities of all sorts, and prises.


How do they come by them?


As many do by Offices, steal into them ere the Duke be aware of 'em.


Some buy'em at Booke-sellers stalls; but the best they bespeak of Poets.


Me thinks Poets of all men, should not edify, they are so envious.


One to another, to no body else: a proud Poet is for all the world like a
Puncke in request, covetous of many Cliantes, when she hath more then she can
handsomely play off: You shall have some Poet (Apolloes Vicar, especially)
write you a comical, Pastoral, Tragical, Musical history in prose, will
make the auditors eyes run a water like so many waterspouts: I had one of
them my self, and your ears be in case, I'll give you a taste on it; his
argument was fet out of the Poem called, The lost sheep: and thus it is.


Prithee be brief?


Nay peace, and it were in place where you might wake, the best men in the
parish, for commonly they sleep the beginning, because they love not
division: but to the lost Sheep. Beloud, you must imagine this Sheep was a
Sheep, a lost Sheep; a Sheep out a the way: but my dear flock and loving
Sheep, whom like a careful Shepherd, I have gathered together with the
whistle or pipe, as it were of mine eloquence, into this sold of peaceful
Community; Do not you stray do not you fly out, do not you wander, do not
you loose your selves; but like kind Sheep, and valiant Rams: I speak to you
the better part and head of my flock. As I say, you shall see the valiant
Rams turn all their horns together, and appose themselves against the
Woolfe, the hungry Woolfe, the greedy Woolfe, the Lams-deuowring Woolfe, the
Woolfe of all Woolfes, to defend their Eawes and young ones. Durst you say all
your heads together, and with the horns of your Manhood defend your
families, your own wives, and your neighbours children: Was not this stinging
geere?


A good Sheepish admonition.


The fitter for my Audience: while you live, have a ear to fit your
Audience.


Thou speak like a Christian: prithee what Religion art of?


How many souer I make use of, I'll answer with Piauano Orllotto the Italian:
I profess the Dukes only.


What's his reason for that?


A very sound reason: for says he, I came Raw into the world, and I would not
willingly go roasted out, so close up the stomach of your Discourse with that
dry answer, and euey man about his business.


You'll be mindful of to morrow-night.


As your Lawyer of the Term, or your Landlord of the Quarter day.


Why so: the mettle I must forge my plot on, lies a warming in the furnace of
my brain; and I must fashion it Instantly, for fear it burst the heat. Give
my conceit way, for here comes one must help to proportion it.


How now Demetrius, what wind hath blown up this storm of melancholy, thy
countenance was not wont to be thus cloudy? Whence proceeds this sudden
alteration?


From mine own hard fortune my Lord, that my ill-stard nativity should
continue thus opposite.


Art crossed in a suit at Court? or what's the matter? speak.


I'll acquaint your Honour: I hope no other ear ouerheares us, Under Dianaes Oak
I found an inscription upon a stone, which told me, that wealth Aristomeres
sometimes brought into Archa lea, had there under hid a massy sum of
treasure.


Under Dianaes Oak? Dorus shall have my daughter Mopsa: no more words on it, and
thou love me Dorus: smother thy golden hops a day or two; thou shalt have
Mopsa, but I'll have all the Gold, then marie my daughter to some great man,
though he be poor, tis the fashion: I'll be Nobly allied what ere it cost me:
shalt be my Son in law Dorus: have an eye to the Princess, fall close to my
daughter Mopsa,

Court her and spare not: now begins the sport,
Kiss her, do kiss her; thou shalt pay sweetly fort:
I can gull you, know what fair words can do,
I'm an old Knave, and a young Courtier too.

So, so; how violently he deuowers his bane, and steals himself into the
order of Gullerie: me thinks I see how betwixt hope and fear he sweates in
his practise, and like a foolish dreamer, castes how to lay out his wealth
before it comes in. So much for him: Now to my Lady Beauty his wife; and as
the Devil would ha're, here she comes.


Dorus, how now Dorus' What time a day is't with you?


What time a day so'ert be with me, tis sleeping time with my Lord, I'am sure
of that.


Sleeping time Dorus, what dost thou mean by that?


Nay nothing: he is troubld with a kind of malady called Iusurectio carnis.


How, a dish of Creuices? nay and that be the worst, good enough: I am glad a
falls to Fish, for he was given to Flesh a late too too bad.


Mass I thought as much, for I saw him go a angling.


I hold my Ladyship to some strumpet.


Life, a jealousy; I think you are a Witch, t'was so indeed.


Nay I thought as much: he was wont to kiss me, and do all kindness a man
could do, till he came to the Court; and now he will not lie with me
forsooth: and why? tis the Court fashion. He will not love me, and why? tis
the Court fashion. I must not come near him at his down lying, nor his
uprising, ctc. And this be the Court fashion, would I were an honest woman of
the Country again, be Courtiers who list. I, I, Dorus, I tell thee in tears,
he hath not done by me, as a Husband should do.


Tis nothing to me, I cannot do withal Madam, would I could.


Yes marie may thou Dorus; thou may, and shalt do withal too and thou
wilt: but as thou look to enjoy my daughter Mopsa, acquaint me with the
old Foxes starting hole.


That's past my cunning: the old Fox has more holes then one, to hide's head
in: But not to go long about the bush with you.


No good Dorus, I do not love a man should go long about my bush: What is she
for a woman?


I know not what she is for a woman; marie I fear she's little better then a
Whore for your Husband: hark in your ear; she's Manasses wife.


Manasses wife? marie fire Master gunner; a Putitane turned Puncke: Gods my
precious. I'll slit her nose, as I am a Lady will I: is she the party you wot
on?


Yes faith Madam, she is the Mare the man rid on.


I'll spoil their sport, saddle my Mule there, have an eye to the princess:
shalt ha my daughter and be but to spite him withal, faith Fox i'll ha you out
of your hole, or i'll fire you out.


Nay that will do no good, but for your own good Madam, take heed you do not
scold.


Why may not a Lady scold Dorus?


Scold, O in no case, twill mar a Ladies beauty clean, and make her look
as hard favoured at any ordinary woman.


Godamercie for that Dorus, I'll not loose my beauty for twenty on'em: saddle
my Mule, bring me my chopping knife, I'll gold the lecherous Goat, and mince his
Trull, as small as herbs to the pot. This is not scolding Dorus, is't?


No this is tolerable.


Nay then I care not, saddle my Mule I say, let her pray God her feeling be
good, for as I am a Lady, I'll not leave her an eel to see withal, and yet I
will not scold neither.


Oh take heed of that at any hand, So, so, so: now it begins to quicken me
thinks, I see already how she runs atilt at the Wenches eyes: calls the maid
Baud, the woman Whore, and her husband Lecher: and when all comes to all, like
an Irish Wolf, she barks at her own shadow; but committing her and her Ass
to their wildgoose chase: now to my sweet hart Mopsa, for she's all the blocks
last in my eye to slumble on: and God bless my wits, for the fool haunts me.


Dorus, where's my Father Dorus?


Your Father, Oh my dear Mopsa?


Nay now you flout me?


Flout you? oh the fair heavens, but this tis for a man to cast away himself
in violence of passion and extremity of sighs on a piece of beauty, that
cares not for him, but it is the tricks on you all.


Tricks, no as god mend me, and I should not have a husband till I got him
with tricks, I should lead apes in hell: but faith tell me, dost thou love me
Dorus?


Do I love you quoth ye, It cuts my very heart strings, do I love you? why
tis the only mark my Inqeuors she or at.


If thou dost not hit the mark, then you're a very bungler: but where is my
Father?


Why I have sent him and your mother out of the way of purpose, and appointed
Manasses to meet us this evening at Adonis Chapel in the Amasons apparel, to
marry us: I think this are signs I love you.


I but you ieast, I doubt you will not marry me.


Will you mere me there?


As I am a Virgin I will.


And come with an intent to marry me?


As I hope to be a wife I will.


You must take heed you keep our purpose close,


As I did the loss of my Maidenhead.


Why have you lost it then?


Many a dear day ago, yet I told Nobody on it but my Mother and our
Horsekeeper, and they say I am ne'er the worse maid for that, and I can keep my
own counsel, as I hope I shall; but will you meet me soon?


Just in the mid-way, as Tilters do.


I'll go before and stay, but do not deceive me, and you do, I'll show my
Fathers Horsekeeper all as God mend me.


So tria sequntur tria, now am I rid of a triumuirie of fools,
and by there absence have won a free accesle to an escape.
If my Lisanders hope prove like to this,
This night shall Crown us Monarchers of our bl^e.

No more of these delays sweet Madam, your love hath broken day oft with my
expectance, I dare give it trust no longer.


I confess it my Liege, and like a spent Dear, not able to maintain longer
flight, I cast my self down breathless at your loves mercy: yet I beseech
your Majesty, let not your eager desires, practise any present violence upon
my yielding chastity: twas only possession of my love you had in chase, which
with conuenent time place purchased, I put your grace in full possession of.


Although thy Breath be never but Musical, yet it never taught the string of
true happiness till now: and to approve thy heart sets hand to thy word, appoint
the time.


Then this present evening (and yet my Virgin blood, and ashamed to consent to
the betraying of my modesty) meet me at Adonis bower, where i'll make tender
of subdued chastity to your high Majesty, as my first most victoriuos
conqueror.


By my Imperial Globe, and hope of those Joys, thy presence shall bring to
enrich me with, i'll meet thee, and make thee Queen over the most submiss
Captive that ever love took prisoner.


If you deceive me.


Not except warm life,
Deceive my voice of their innatiue heate.
Then hast slow time, exchange thy leaden sleete,
For Hormes wings till I my fair hopes meet.
But locked once in the arms of my delight,
Cloth all the world in an eternal night.
And steed of morning when the Sun should rise,
They shall see two in my Zelmanes eyes.

So farewell thought I, I have prepared you a Zelmanes answerable to your
expectation.
Then triumph in thy will, and let thy thoughts
Proclaim a lubilee: my teeming hope:
Are now delivered of a gracious birth,
Which I have Christened, opportunity.
Unto whose shrine in honour of this day,
My thoughts shall hold a monthly sacrifice,
Love grant Demetrius, meet the like success,
Our pains are crowned with double happiness.

Only our disguises hold firm, but all other attempts meet untimely deaths,
even in their cradles.


What and we should acquaint the Ladies with our intents.


'twould argue a kind of cowardice in out wits, that ha such suspectles
admittance to there presence, as this disguise hath purchased us, we should not
have that ability of inuenture to entangle'em in their own security.


Well howsoever, we must not dwell long determining for the liberty of stay
with Dametas, who out of his covetous disposition in detaining our reward,
allowed us the eldest day of our licent abode at Court, is run out.


Tis very true, and for my part, I'll rather go home with a private repulse,
then managing any unlikely attempt, become sufferer under a public disgrace.


That's my very thought, yet that our second arrival be not altogether empty of
employment, lets practise something upon Dametas, and acquaint the world with
his coward baseness; in which, he not only detracts from his masters bounty,
but look how as Conduit head or master-spring that is poisoned, doth his best,
to enfect the whole body of the court, with the leprosy of his covetousness.


There's no action of his begetting can be said to be truly honourable.


How can they when there Father's a mongrel, the Duke out of his honourable
bounty commanded him to reward our travails with 200. Crowns: and now after
two months attendance, and enforst delays: In which time an ordenarie
petitioner might have spent the vasew of the reward, he packs us off with 50.
Crowns, his excuse being that his master hath forgot us, and what he doth, is
of his own bounty, as if the Moon should brag she gave the world light, when
al the luster she hath, comes from the heat of the Sun.


Should his villainies be suffered to prosper, they would grow to such height,
as the Dukes authority should ha much trouble to prune them.


To prevent which, his majesty shall have private note of it, knew we in whose
trust to conduct it.


Tis an Office very few dare undertake, he is so riueted to the Dukes good
opinion.


Lies there no jar twixt none of the Nobility and him, what say you
Zelmanes?


The gallant, Amason: you could not ha cast your choice fitter, for her
honourable mind maintains deadly feud against his base proceedings: and here
she comes, attended by Dametas servant, lets wait on opportunity.


Lisander.


Demetrius.


Lisander and Demetrius, stand close, of my life we are come to the birth of
some notable knavery.


How blows the winds of our hopes?


Fair to the point of our expectlicion, I have made away the Duke and the
Dutch.


How made away them? poisoned them.


with a confection of love, which I have so tempered with fair promices, as
their minds are in loves heaven already: Videlicet in Adonis bower, where this
evening I have given em my word to meet em; but I have so cast it, that
Manasses shall meet em in my steed.


Twil be a rare scean of mirth, to hear what costly discourse the i'll bestow
upon the fool in thy outside.


Do you hear that.


yes, thank love and my ears, but list the conclusion.


I have cleared the way to Violetta, but what order hast thou taken, with thy
burbolts: Dameta, Myso, and amorous Mopso.


shot em away, at three several marks, yet so conveyed it that in the end they
shall all meet at Adonis chapel.


This project cannot but bring forth some notable deceit.


My hopes should want of thyer will, and it do not.


Now we have made a smooth passage to our escape, how shall convey our lover
out of the Island.


I have determined of that sir, and better to effect, my boy this time hast
cast such a bait of knavery to the two Captains, Kalader and Philinax, as we
may pass without suspicion.


But how for transportation.


I am furnished of that to, you remember the two Lacedemou intelligencers


Now what of us.


Hold my life, we shall be put in this scean of gullery.


Oh in any case.


For the love of Cupid do, iniquiris past, lets take our entrance, and pass
over the stage like mu^es, to furnish out a show.


And see occasion like a kind wench presents em in the very instant my honest
friends welcome, have you not your dispatch with a letter to Lacedemon.


Madam we have, and stay only to take our leaves of your Ladyship, and know
what service your honour will command.


you have my thanks, for the truth is, I must commit business of much import
unto your trust, and to prevent much circumstances take my word, you are not
ignorant of the Kings general challenge.


About his daughters.


you understand me, with these few crowns receive my mind which is to convey
the 2, ladies whom we in these disguises have won to Lacedemon,


were we but confirmed of your of estates.


wele give your sufficient assurance of that and the princesses themselves
shall confirm it.


we crave no better madam, but shall we not ha yours honours company.


No: having brought them aboard, we'll make return to the Duke, to let him
understand we stole not our prizes but won them manfully at the point of wit.


A noble resolution.


His foil will appear the more palpable, and your conquest the more
applausable, where shall we receive the Ladies.


Be that our care, but on your lives be heedful of your safe ties.


More then of our own my lord,


Enough whilst you attend we'll to the Duke, and play all gulls or none.


All Gulls indeed since you had follies whip,
No gulls, to all gulls, fools love fellowship.

Look well to mine Ass there, lord how I sweat with anger; this sames the
house sure, and now like a wise Lady let me count my hurts, and see how I shall
be reuengd: it shall be so, i'll have em both carted, and manasses shall go before
like a whifler and make way with his horns, where be these whores: open the
door, where be these pan ders: O that I were not a lady: I could scold like a
butter-whore,


whose there a gods name, lord for his mercy is the woman mad.


yes I thank ye fort: horn mad, wheres your companion whetes the old
lecherous goat my husband, open the door I say.


Iesus for thy mercy sake madam, what do I want.


what do I want, the chief implement a woman should have I want that as a woman
cannot be without, I mean my husband, I want.


your husband, I saw him not as I am an honest woman.


not as you are an honest, so I think, but as you are an arrant whore you did,
you must have your Creuishes with a pox cannot City Maunchet and fresh
cod-serue your turn, but you must have Court cake-bread and Creuishes with a
vengeance, but come give me my husband, or i'll have him out of the flesh on
thee, and yet I will not scold neither.


Pray Madam ha patience: what should your husband do here


That which he should do at home with his wife, and he were worth his ears.


Lady I protest I do not know him,


Not know him thou lie in every vain ith hart thou lie, thou know him,
and as Adam knew Eve thou know him, he hath been as inward with thee, as
ever he was with me, he hath by his own confession he hath, thou deny it,
thou lie in thy throat like a Puritanicall whore as thou art, O that I were a
butter-whore for an hour I might scold a little.


Madam they are no honest men that bring these tales to you


Men bring tales to me, I defy thee in thy guts, I defy thee, men bring tales
to me, thou take me to be one of thine own church dost: they are no honest
men that bring tales to thee and ha wives of their own, and my husbands one of
them, go thy ways now.


I beseech you madam do but hear me.


Hear thee, I have heard too much of thee, too too much too much, wheres my
husband, bring forth my husband, i'll teach him to put a difference betwixt Ioan
and my lady I hold him ten pound ont, and yet I will not scold neither, and I
had bin an old hag past tea ming as his whore is a puritan, it had bid somewhat,
but being a woman of Gods making, and a lady of his own, and wearing mine own
hair which is much in a lady of my standing I can tel you, to use me thus,
flesh and blood cannot induer^, let me come in, open the door let me come in, O
that I were any vile thing in the world but a lady that I might scold a
little.


So so, so, take your places, for the same bald pated oak is the stage, where
ye shall see the part of a doting fool performed by an old man and a young
wench,

Do worshipful Dametas,
The same man,
Hath he no fellow acters in his most lamentable, commical, historical,
tragical, musical, pastoriall.

None that require any mouthing but his Ass and himself, marry then he has
Signer Mattock, a very sharpe sastyricall humotist, and Mounser le spade, but
he goes somewhat more bluntly to his business, yet heel serve for mutes, and
as good as the best to furnish out the stage.


But dares Dorus being but Dametus servant so abuse his mad master thus
grosely.


O Lord Sir, their ha ben serving men have done their Masters far greater
abuse, yet had their wives concealed it, their ears should never have bin
acquainted with it.


Is that a fashion in request.


Altogether I'll assure you, but obedience Gentleman the sean begins.


Pray God it be good he stays so long,
Ridiculous enough, and good enough.

So, stand Ass, stand gentle Ass.


What countreimen is his Ass he speaks so familiarly to him.


Ath City breed, marry he picks up his living ath burs and nettles that grow
about the Court gate.


be in readiness good mattock, play thy part sweet spade, let me see Dianaes
oak? I held Dianaes oak divine, true pure gold honest, Dorus, fortunate
Dametas.


An excellent come dyan, what life he puts into his part.


So, by thy leave stone, by thy patience honest stone, the very gravel savours
of treasure, this sames the bed chamber of my Lady Pecunia, and see, see some
of her golden hairs, more, more, more yet divine tree, pure gold, honest
Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, softly, softly, not to fast, let me not devour my
content too greedily least like a cormorant I take a surfeit ont.


Oh take heed of that master in any case.


Pure mettle, excellent gold: but let me see now, I shall by computation have
some three millions of them, I some three or four millions, how shall I employ
em to make the most profit of em.


That would be known indeed.


I'll put out one million to use, after the rate af seven score to the hundredth:
and yet I wnot, no fie, for then you will ha my humour brought ath stage for a
usurer; to prevent with scandalous report, i'll put it into my Scribe-maiors
hand, and he shall deal for me.


There's is a simple cloak to cover his villainy.


Tis a very short one,: and passing slite to hide his knavery.


it cannot chose but be seen through,


An other Million i'll lay to bestow in Offices. I will have wealth or i'll rake it
out ath kennels else, chimneys ha smoked for already, and now i'll deal upon
sea-cole and salt, now, now, now, it comes, sweet gold, honest Dorus, fortunate
Demetrius, divine gold, how, how, shall I adore thee, O let me do the homage of
my knees: now now, for the tongue of a Poet, tho I hate poetry worse then any
of the seven deadly sins, I could wish my self a Poet for some hour, to
write a Poem in the praise of my divine mistres; and see the very bed wherein
her divinity is lodged: happy, happy, thrice


happy Dametas, now like an oreioid lover, let me open the sheets of my
heavenly mistress, with reverence, so with humble reverence, and like a
blushing lover that puts out the light ere he presumes to touch the bed of his
love so let me darken the candles of my body, mine eyes, and first bless my
hands with touching, next enrich mine ears with hearing, and lastly make
happy my eyes with with seeing, and let them convey the joy downinto the
bosom of my thoughts, by degrees, softly by degrees.


Did you ever see Ass make such a ceremonious preparation


be not offended sweet mistress that I presume to touch.


a fools head of your own,


Has a bin at any cost of al this invoke for a coxcomb and a bell.


beshrow my judgment but he desetues it,


And his desert were near so much, he could but bear away the bell, and so you
say he doth:


A coxcomb and a bell, oh indignity: damnable ok^, vile and evil accuest Dorus,
unfortunate Dametas, Diana I tel thee thou art no honest gods to use a
Gentleman thus. What here a writing, your help good spectacles, lend me your
help good spectacles, some comfortable news good spectacles:

Who hath his hire hath well his labours placed,
Earth thou did seek, and store of earth thou hast.
He that vain hopes pursues for love of pelf,
Shall loose his wits and likely find himself,
Then think thy pains rewarded well,
Thou broughst the fool, bear back the bell:
Of other matters what ensues
Adonis bower shall tell the news,
Villainous poetry, I am made a flat fool by poetry,
But though I can do em no futther disgrace, my fatal curse,
a Wronged gentleman's fatal curse dwell ever upon them, Diana
Here me, and let my words find gracious acceptance.

Hide your heads, the terrible curse comes like a ston upon you


Rancor, spite, malice, hate, and all disasters,
Strengthen my faith against all portastors.
May their intents tho pure as crystal glasses,
Be counted faults and capital trespasses,
O may their lives and labourd industry,
Though worthy of Apolloes plaud it be
The clearest thought in loyalty excelling
Be by some Dor presented for libelling,
when they have writ a seeine in which their brains,
Have dropped there dearest sweets, and their swoln veins,
Emptied their Cundits of their purest spirit,
As they stand gaping to receive their merit,
In sted of plaudities their chiefest blisses
Let their deserts be crowned with mews and hisses:
Behind each post and at the gallery corners,
Sit empty gulls, slight fools and false informers,
Let some sly Fox out of discreations embers,
Term them the lands unnecessary members,
And like the dear when they have spent their breath,
to make kings sport let them betorne to death,
Even by their friends, twold set my thoughts a twanging
Might I but see one of them go to hanging.

A passing strange curse and no question he has travelled far for some of the
rimes,


He must travail further that finds any reason int,


No matter for reason theirs rime enough and that be good.


Some: of it is no better then it should be, or my judgment deceives me.


Sure he had some reason to make this rime, and a man could pick it out,


rather then i'll be counted inquisitive, mine ears shall content themselves
with the rimes only, and leave the reason to the scanning of poets whom it
more nearly concerns.


But wheres the wag that invited us to this banquet of mirth shrunk in the
wetting?


tware a rare jest now if whilst the boy kept us here in expectation of
Dametas gullery his M: had made an escape with the duks daughters,


that or some knavery else upon my life, I had the boy in shroud suspicion at
the first.


And this his sudden and stolen departure, confirms it currant


then we are sped, for in suspisions face,

I see some subtle stratagem in chase.

Will your lordship believe me now: nay and I sait your worship may swert, tho
I have but a (poor as to say) hole of mine own I hope the spirits have more
denomination over me, then to make it a common slaughter house of carnallity
where every jack may command flesh for his money,


No more words sweet woman I confess I was in the wrong, there is not the
hole the Fox hides his head in: and therefore for the love of womanhood
conceal mine errors, for howsoever I complaind tis thy forhed aks, thy temples
ha the terrible blow as the say, thy husband is a bad man.


my husband:


I, I, good woman thy husband: he is as I say a fleshly member and I fear he
hath overcome the foolish thing my daughter.


your daughter i'll slit her nose by this light and she were ten ladies, twas not
for nothing my husband said he should meet her this enening at Adonis chapel,
but and I come to the godspeed ont, i'll tel em ont soundly?


I do good woman tel em ont, spare not but in any case do not scold.


Why may not a gentlewoman scold in a good case:


I know not what a gentlewoman do in a good case, but a lady must not in any
case:


tho I may not scold I may tel em roundly ont I hope,


that may you do law,


and i'll not be mealely mouthd I warrant em, will you bear me company to the
chapel madam?


withal my hart mistress, what Dorus hath given me, i'll give my friend, no
fool to company.


Farewell bright sun thou lightener of all eyes
thou falst to give a brighter beam to rise.
Each tree and shrub were trammels of thy hair,
But these are wier, for none but kings to wear,
And my rude tongue striving to blaze her forth,
Like a bad art seman doth disgrace her worth,
but here's the place, upon this crystal stream:
Where Citherea did vnyoake her team
Of silver doves, to interchange a kiss
With young Adones shall I meet my bliss:
The gentle minits crowned with crystal flowers,
Loosing there youths, are grown up perfect hours,
To hasten my delight, the bashful moon
that since her dalliance with Endimior,
Durst never walk by day is under sail,
In steed of sheets has spread her silver veil,
Each gliding brooke and every bushy tree
Being tipped with silver were her livery,
And the dim night to grace our amorous wars,
Hath stuck nine spheres full of immortal stars,
Insted of pearls the way on which she treads
Is strawd with Crystal deu and silver beads.
She comes, her feet makes music with the ground,
And the chaste air is ravished with the sound,
My soul flies forth to meet her: hell my wife,
Her presence like a murderer drives the life
Out of my pleasure breast, her jealous cie
Enuyes the heaven of my felicity.
Zelmane, or my husband life or hate.


What makes old Autum out a bed so late,
that snow should go a woeing to the sun
When one ^arme kiss works her confusion.

I have the jest, suspicion that keeps
Court in my husbands thoughts, seeing my love,
Elect this walk, hath brought him after him.

She dogs her fure, and she to shake her off Hath taine some other walk I'll
place mine ear in distance of her will.


Could I but hear the innocent delivery of his breath, twold be a second
iubile of mirth.


Here comes my love.


your love? Alas poor Duke,
Your forward hopes will meet a barren spring,
My sun appears.

Fie your love speaks to loud,
Your suns eclipsed, your date upon a cloud.

See how his arms like precious phoenix wings,
Spread to embrace me.

Now the Cucko sings,
Those amorous arms do make a golden space
To hug a Duke.

But i'll fill up the place.


Those fingers tipped with curious porphery,
Staining Pigmalions matchless imagery,
Like amorous twins all of one mother nursed,
Contend in courtesy who should touch me first.

should touch me first: their strife is undertook,
To twine a young bay not a far stooping oak.

Young bay, stale lest, that a dry sapless rind
should hold young thoughts, and a licentious mind,
Were he but gone now.

Were the Duke away,
My hope, had got the better of the day.

This is Adonis chapel, I wonder they come not, tho I bear a little learning
about me, and a few good clothes, I wold not wisham to make Balams ass a me:
for though many fools take no felicity but in wearing good clothes (tho they
be none of their own) I have a further reach in me.


I could ban my stars.


I curse my fate.


That cross me thus.


Make me unfortunate.


Alas good lady, how her pretty feet labour to find me.


that my hopes should meet such black events.


O would the trindly night darken her self.


Would the Moon lose her light,
That in the bosom of some foggy cloud
I might embrace my love.

But night is purblind
To make a Duke a slave.

To make a Dutch
wrestle with amorous passions.

life a spleen
Could my rough breath like a tempestuous wind,
Blow out heavens candles, leave the world stark blind,
That it might either have no eyes to see:
Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me.

Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me.


Who would ha thought the cold had been so good a musician: howe it plays
upon my chappes, and makes my teeth skip up and down my mouth like a
company of virginall Jacks, but I find small music in it, and Mopsa should
come now I could do her little good, yet and she were here, she and I would
have about at cob-nut or at cheri-pit or somewhat to keep our selves from
idleness, tho she be but a fool, the bables good enough to make sport with all
in the dark and that very word hath started her.


whose there Manasses.


yes Mopsa.


plain


I might be madam Mopsa in your mouth, goodman c. whers Dorus.


why because he will not be said to make too much hast to a bad bargain, he is
not come yet,


not come, a pescod on him, but als one I thought at first he would make but a
fool on me.


would you have him mend Gods wormanship?


But chose him, since he hath build me with an vrchin, i'll go fetch Raph our
horskeeper, let him that got the calfe keep the cow in a knaves name and he
will, ha you your book here.


no matter wench, I can dote well enough without book,


Nay and ye can dote well enough your self, I care for neither of them both,
but indeed I love to have a thing well done, for says my mother, a thing once
well done, is twice done, and I am in her mind for that up and down,


Whose with my Lord the Duke, it cannot be,
Mine eye would not conceal such treachery.

Tis not the Dutch sure, no it is amorous Jove,
that seeing Zelmane passionate for love,
Descends to comfort her, Jove if there be
A powerful Phebus God of poetry,
In dear remembrance of fair Daphnes rape,
to win my love, lend me some stranger shape,
Such as your selves have worn, that when your fame
is sung by poets, they may cote my name,

Sure tis my daughter,


Daughter: how her eye
Cuts out new forms, new shapes of jealousy:

As sure as death tis she, for see they stand
like amorous twins, intwisted hand in hand,
Breast against breast, and that no joy be missing,
To hear discourse, their lips keep time with kissing,
I'll not indurst impatience grow strong,
And tho a prince, tel him he doth thee wrong.

Do prithee do, this sweetens al the rest,
But here would be the elixar of the jest,
if whilst we kept each other at a bay,
A third should come, and bear the hare away.

villainous poetry, unchristian like poetry, I am cozend of my gold by
poetry, robbed of my charge by poetry, made an apparent fool by poetry
villainous Oak, accursed Dorus, unfortunate Dametas: whose there my daughter and
with Zelmane? a wel-willer to Dorus, a favourite to poetry, and therefore enemy
to Dametas, come hither mop so, a thy fathers blessing come not near her: what
Mopsa.


yes, whose there? Dorus.


Confusion a Dorus, I am thy miserable father, did not see Hippolita,


no by my troth not I? Did ye not see Dorus.


Pox of dorus I am undone madam and thou telst me not of Hipolita,


Pox a Hippolita, I am a dumb woman and you can tel me news of Dorus


I had rather see ten doruses hanged then lose Hippolita,


I had rather see ten fathers damned then lose my sweet dorus,


I shall run mad and I find not Hippolita.


I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus.


Whats here, I shall run mad for Hipolita.


And I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus, I hold my life we have some
comedy in hand, we shall have a full scene, for here comes more actors.


Assures I am a sinner to God madam, that sames he.


What with a brace of wenches, I faith old broke, have I taken you in the
manner, is this the fruits of your lying alone? is this your court custom with
a wanion, lend me thy knife, tho I had neither house, nor land to give em, i'll
bestow a whores make betwixt you and yet I will not scold neither.


What a gudyere ail you mother, are you frampall, know you not your own
daughter.


Mopsa, O insufferable wrong, make thine own natural child thy bawd,


Here's an excellent pattern for wives to learn to scold by


What mistres Amason, ha you such a cocking spirit, honest Women cannot keep
their husbands at home for you: tis not for nothing now I see, that the Dutch
looks yellow on you, but i'll tear that painted whores face of yours (by this
light) and yet I will not scold neither.


Madam,


i'll mad you with a vengeance.


Touch not the prince.


On your alleagance forbear, what means this outrage, cannot our private walks
be privileged from your wild contentious.


how fares the prince.


How cheers my good Zelmane?


Zelmane, no Gods my judge my liege, I am Manasses, miserable Manasses, your
husbands scribe-ma^or madam.


Manasses.


A fool.


My man.


And my dear head, alas sweet love, what make thou heer.


Mary work for the hangman, and the Duke be not the more merciful.


There's some deceit in this, Dametas, wheres Hippolita?


I, I, there's some knavery in this: Mopso wheres Hippolita?


doubtless there's some villainy in this, Mepso whers Hipolita?


Theirs no plain dealing in this, Manasses wheres Dorus?


Answer directly, wheres Hippolita?


Alas madam I know not, whilst I almost melted my self with digging of gold
in Dianaes oak, I left her in my wives charge


And whilst I ran to Manasses, thinking to take my husband his wife in the
manner, I left Hipolita in my daughters chamber


and whilst I came to Adonis chapel to be tossed in my marriage blankets with
Dorus, I left my little dog pearl plucking daisies:


Who sent you to Diannes oak to dig gold?


who sent you to take your husband in Manasses house?


dorus.


who sent you to Adonis chapel.


dorus:


And who turned you into this shape:


They that I fear have made gulls of us all, Zelmane, and dorus:


we are all simply gulde, and see where the Sun scarce halfeready, skippes
from his Eastern bed, smiling at our gullery:


Come wheres this lusty wit-maister.


the keeper of this loue-lottery,


This gallant luventus of fourscore, that like my Lady of the Lake, displays
against al comers.


May a couple of plain witted princes have a sight of your prizes:


Where be these Ladies ha? ha your wits had such a skirmishing that the two
maids have lost their heads in the conflict.


Heads, I and bodies to my Lord, and all at one shot, and which is worse our
wits are so scatered with the terible blow that to be plain we are scarce our
own men again.


then you have had some knock^ng,


so it appears by the story my Lord:


How say y^u my lady, what Oule sings out of that Ivy bush


was your (...) knighted in this last action:


I am ^ch a fool, I love my lord, I am no knight, I am Manasses, they made a
plain fool.


the only were, for the gaurded fool is out of request: but faith my liedge
how did your opposites behave themselves, did they win the Wenches fair at the
point?


At the very push of invention, and went off clear untouched,


And could you draw no blood of their wits:


Not a drop.


Nor demetrius neither, nor Manasses?


Neither, to our own disgrace be it spoken, the carriage of their stratagem
deserves applause, and I held it a credit to rest captive to such valiant
conquerors?


Why so be, I like a man that will confess his error.


It merits comisseration madam and my liege, not to detract from our worth:
your ear, we two are the parties you wot on.


Ware you the men?


No he was the man, mary I was the woman in the moon, that made you walk al
this last night like the man in the mist, I could say somewhat to you to Madam
as for demetrius his man let them stand like fools as they are.


Can it be possible.


No, no, we are gulls, Innocent sots, but lante tanta, the girls are ours we
have won em away to dargison.


Come we have won the conquest, and that's sufficient.


You are a manasses tis not sufficient: aha not Hercules for iole, Jove, for
Danue, Apollo for daphene, pan for Si^ne, nay the whole pack of their piperly
godheads could a discharged a stratagem with more spirit of al merit, an ambling
nag and a down a down we have borne her away to dargison.


Twas the most rarest, divinest, Metaphisicalst, piece of invention, that, what
say you my liege.


I give your deserts their full merit you have gotten equality


All the wenches gave you:


Alas what spirits under the moon could have detainder but know that her
cherry red lip, a down, a down.


Trust me but you have deserved high commendation.


Your merit stood of the upper stair of admiration.


Why thou hast a pretty relish of wit, now that can see the broad ey of my
desert at a little hole of demonstration.


your desert save me free, you have done a most (to use your own phrase)
Metaphysicall piece of service, but you had some help int questionles,


I do not think but the ladies had some hand int:


A finger, I confess a finger by the hope of perseverance, a very little
finger.


I thought as much by the making of the jest.


I cannot detract from the ladies worth, for I knowem for excellent work women,


work women fit to make tailors men.


I by my faith do I, nay your best tailors are arrant botchers to em, you shall
have a lady make an end of a suit, a court suit, especially when all the
tailors in a country know not how to set a stich int.


Some ordinary suit perhaps.


your best court suits that are, are finished by ladies, I have known a suit my
self lien a making and maring 3, 4, and five year together and then a lady
hath despacht it in a month with a wet finger, such a finger might the ladies
have in your plot.


never wet a finger by this sun.


Then she helped you with one dry jest or other, but and we may be so bold:
faith where are the ladies?


sure enogh I warrant you, some fools now would have kept em hear and have
been gulled on em again, and laughed at age, but to prevent all danger, we have
shipped em home for Lacedemon,


to Lacedemon, your sun of wit shines but dimly in that methinkes, to whose
charge have you trusted em?


to them we durst, nay you must think we are no fools,


Fools: nay deep wit, and policy forbid.


We had no sooner their surprise, but we had disguise ready, a ship ready, a
couple of lusty friends ready, the Lacedemons intelligencers:


durst you trust such precious jewels in such rusty caskets:


durst, our health, our lives: why they were my tenants, nay you must think we
sifted them, we are no fools in that neither.


If in any thing your wits deserve the babble tis in that,


none but fools wold have committed such inestimable peers to a couple of
strangers:


And in a ship to,


And under sail to.


And vnfurnisht of friends to.


And without shipping to follow em to.


you were no fools in any thing but that, in that not to flatter, you express
the true shape of folly and merely merit the name of fools.


What will you say now when these fellows surrender us our loves?


We'll discharge you and set their names down for gulls in your stead.


you know the proverb when the sky falls we shall have larks.


And when you can bring proof that we are cosend of our Wenches we'll be the
woodcocks.


Why then we have once springed a couple of woodcockes.


Do you know these? Who are the fools now?


Violletta.


My Hippolita:


What a strange change is here:


yes faith gallants you have very strange carding and you knew al, but I hope
you'll offer up your cards and yield the set lost.


Gulls:


And abused i'll loose my life before I loose my honour,


Honour, and life before i'll loose my love:


Nay gentlemen we bar all violence, the liberty of our challenge was to all
alike equally free, and since these by fair play have won em, it stands with
our honour to see them peaceably possessed of em, then surely take em, for though
you wear the breeches give us leave to stand a little:


why father is't not time that we were sped
Tis a great charge to keep a maidenhead,
Loose it we must and to prevent il course,
Better to giuet then have it stolen perforce,
if you be pleased let envy do her worst
Spit out her poison or containt and burst?
Welcome to all, to all a kind god night,
They trewly live, that live in scorn of spite.

In B. the last page, for Lord, read love cannot be saved.


