Divine invention, O how I could hug,
And like an amorous Lover court thy beauty,
That crownst me King of pleasures! were my brain
Fordg'dout of vulgar metal without fire,
And sprightly motion, my big-swolne hopes,
Had been still-borne, but when dejected minds,
Out slept the golden pleasure of the night:
My serious meditations have out-watch'd,
The glorious tapers that attend the Moon:
I turned my thoughts into a thousand shapes:
Moulded the fashion of ten thousand plots,
Liked and disliked so many, that my brain
The mother of Invention grew barrayne,
Almost past bearing, still my laboring thoughts
Conceived a yet more strange and quaint Idea,
Gave it proportion, and I brought it forth:
And that blessed infant of Invention
Beyond all hope hath my contentment won,
And that's Loves heaven I love a face more fair
Then Cinthe as hue that seems above compare,
But hell, her husband with a jealous eye
Ushers her steps, oh wedded slavery!
This tender rose, whom artles marriage,
Hath grafted on a nettle (testy age)
Have I vngrafted, made himself untie
The knot of wedlock: thanks sweet industry.
And here a comes, that which most heaps my fame,
His wit's well spoken of.

This wit's a sprightly thing*

For such as haue't.

It not alone doth bring,
Public applause, but knowledge in the law*
Teaches to speak in distance.

How the daw
Scores ore his rusty phrases? honoured Count,
How grows your plot?

My thriving fortunes mount
Above suppose, even to my harts content:
We are diuorc'd.

My hopes are prevalent.

You know the cause on it, two sufficient men
Swore her a harlot, and the partial Bench
Inspirde by my good Angels (Angels wings
Sweep a clear passage to the seat of Kings)
Sealed our divorce.

But doth her brother swallow
This gross abuse?

Abuse, away, away.
They know me rich Horatio, chink, chink:
Whilst this holds out* my cause shall never sink.

See where a comes, his sad complexion wears,
Griefs mourning livery, he is clothed in tears.

Whence springs this sorrow?

For my sisters shame,
My sister, oh my sister, whose repute
Hung like a Jewell on her sexes forehead.

And what of her?

She is, o no she was
Pure as the Diamond, clear as crystal glass,
But now, O hell, her credit is more foul,
Then speckled scandal, or black murders soul.

I cannot think it.

But I know it too true,
She was my wife and by her means, my head
Was fay rely tupt and you will buy a Lantern:
Bespeak my sconce, tis ready hornd and all.

Not yet, but I'll take order that it shall.

And are ye parted?

What a question's that?
Shall I wear cracked rings, Diamonds with a flaw,
I'll carry coals and you will, no horns, I know the law.

Is this your grief?

This is enough, to make
Patience tu^nerussin, she that was the pattern,
To whose proportion all our courtly dames,
Cut out their actions, she to fall^a sign --

More will fall shortly.

Her shame --

Grows here, who ever broached the wine,
The butt stands here, my forehead bears the sign,

It merits none, the shame's nor yours nor his,
That foot's even made that never treads a miss,
Beauty came first from Heaven, Prometheus,
Stole it to make proud women bewteous,
Now, stolen goods thrive not: women steal from men
Then blame not them to seek their own again.
Kings have for this been felons, and tis proved,
He never was divine that never loved.

I find no law for this.

Custom you prove,
And what's more Ancient then to pilfer louet

A quillet well applied.

Then bury grief,
If this be felony, my self's a theife.

A nimble wit, just of the length ofmine.
But come my leidge, forget, it so will I,
Our infant griefs must be old men and die,

Not whil st her fault survives,
What news with thee.

I bring your honour comfortable news,
Your sonne's returned from Pisa,

A comes ill,
And yet I hope his blessed arrive will kill
This monster grief.

He is a toward Prince.

Toward enough, and yet most strangely weaned
And wedded from this worlds society.

A pa^lous youth, sharpe and sattyricall,
Would a but spend some study in the law,
A would prove a passing subtle Barrister.

Ha's a quick wit.

And a speaks Latin too,
Truly and so few Lawyers use to do.

Health to this honoured presence: passing good!

Welcome sweet Prince.

Thanks: superpassing good!
But honoured father, see how he proceeds:
Learning was first made pilot to the world,
And in the chair of contemplation,
Many degrees above the turning clouds
Held in his hand the nine-leaf'd marble book,
Drawn full of silver lines and golden Stars.

But Son?

But father, it was learnings place,
Till empty outsides, shadows daubed with gold
Plucked him down headlong, then alost his wits,
And ever since lives Zany to the world,
Turns Pageant-Poet, toyler to the press,
Makes himself cheap* detested, hist and stale,
To every bubble and dull Groom.
Who for his out-sides gawdie, will presume
To make poor wit a hackney to his pride.
And with blunt rolled Jests spur-gall his side
Till his soul bleed, O, I am more then mad,
To see mere shadows censure and control,
The substance, worthier both in sense and soul

Fie Polymetes, though therobe of learning,
Sit comely on a Prince, yet wean thy thoughts
From this strict contemplation, and embrace
Public assemblies, knightly exercise.

How's that? to swear and give the sunden stab?
Sell Lands to purchase fashions? O tis base!
Bought gentry, should true-borne worth disgrace.

Practise to hunt.

No, some that use that sport
Giu't ore, being scarce one hair the better for it.

Then practise Revels.

Revels sprightly play,
Yet every year, some revel all away.

All these are trivial: Prince, be a Lawyer:

Of all Land monsters, some that bear that name,
Might well be spared, whose vulture Avarice
Devours men living: they of all the rest,
Deal most with Angels, yet prove least blessed.

Wrong not the Law.

I cannot, tis divine:
And i'll compare it to a golden chain,
That links the body of a common-wealth,
Into a firm and formal Union.
It holds the sword, with an impartial hand,
Curbs in the rains of an unruly land,
Tis twined to Justice, and with holy zeal,
Rightly determines the poor mans appeal.
And those that are laws true administers,
Are fathers to the wronged, heauen's Justicers.

Fore-god tis true, right properties of the Law
But under favour, and with due respect
Of that unvalued perle, and the professors,
Your self and such lacke-Latin Advocates
Infect the heart, and do their best to change
The true intent of sanctimonious law.
Turn Church yards Champions, and make the ground grown rank w th
Grandsires flesh,
Bear corn to feed the Son.

Will this be suffered?
But Polymetes, in thy stay at Pisa,
When heard thou of thy Sister?

Much to late,
The reason, with your patience i'll relate.
Beauteous Emilia, whom I never saw,
But in the Rhetoric of discoursiue tongues
In Sancta Monta, neighbour to Sardinia,
Where silver Arno in her Crystal bosom,
Courts the fresh banks with many an amorous kiss.
My Sister (as the country custom claimed)
With all the choicest virgins of the Land,
Met at the Temple* half a league remote,
From all resort of people, which was decked
With all the Relics, and the choicest lemmes,
Marcellis, Pisa, or Ligorne could yield.

What follow'd this rich preparation?

Whilst they securely ^end their Orisons,
Three armed Galleys of the faithless Turks,
At this advantage set their men on shore,
Entered the Temple, and prophande their shrines,
On the high Altar sacrificed the Priests,
Disray'd the Temple of the golden robes,
Murdered the matrons, ravished the Maids,
And dragging them by the disheueld hair,
Did with their ravished bodies fill their boats,
Amongst the rest, Emilia whom report
Called by no name but only beautiful,
Was ravished, slain, or taken prisoner.

O Polymetes! thy discourse confounds,
Thou healst old hurts, yet giu'st us deeper wounds,
But words are air, see our armed Galleys manned,
And in them place as many of our Knights
As loved Emilia and their Sovereigns health.
I'll unto Pisa, and till our return,
Because our widowed Duke-dome shall not morn.
Be thou her minion, and possess her chair,
Fill that with honour, 'twill fill thee with care,
Vrgeno denials, Genowaes a dew,
We leave old griefs, and go in quest of new.

Better and better, now my hopes are fit,
The Duke thus gone, what tongue so bold dares say
I wronged my wife?

That dares Horatioes.

Thou art my self, we both have but one bosom
One tongue, one soul, two bodies one heart.

I know it my Lord.

Tis true, but let that pass,
We two are one.

I know your honour's wise.

And I know thee
For no small fool, twa's simple policy,
And not without some counsel of the law,
That not withstanding my wives near alliance
Unto the Duke, I purchased a divorce.

What was the cause?

I tell thee, the most wrong
Was this, my Avarice thought she lived too long.
I know one man hath coffind up six wives
Since she was mine, and by the poorest, purst
A brace of thousand pounds: still good in Law,
Men must be rich, by thrift our treasures rise,
Give me the man's knave rich, take you poor wise,
But close, cock sure i'll feed me fat with sport,
Gull all, f^ole all, why? I have Law-tricks for it.

How Justice Slender glories in the plot,
Which to deceive him, my full brain begot?
But to his wife, true virtue though disgraced,
She's now half wooed because she's thought unchaste
Her sexes credit, or discredit thrives
In the outward shape and fashion of their lives,
and be a woman's virtues ne'er so strong.
Her honour's weighed upon discourses tongue.
Be her same sullied, were her thoughts as bright
As Innocence, the world would count her light.
For though amongst women, most are beauteous,
They that please time are counted virtuous,
And in this hope, i'll to the Countess go,
She's counted light, Love grant I find her so.

Welcome to Genea Madam, and to make a short cut of our long travel, faith
tell me, how do you feel your self since you came a shore?


Feel my self? why with my hands, what an idle question's that?


Then pray be you better occupied in your answer: but Madam, do you remember
what a multitude of fishes we saw at Sea? and I do wonder how they can all
live by one another.


Why fool, as men do on the Land, the great ones eat up the little ones, but
Ioculo, I am great, passing great, and ready to lye down.


Do Madam, and i'll stand by and do my good will to deliver you.


Mans death of what?


Why of your Maiden-head Madam if you please, or rather of the huge birth of
knavery you're in travel of.


And insooth Ioculo at this time I stand in some need of a witty Mid-wif: but
may I trust thee?


Above the girdle-stead, and below the knee Madam without any danger, why
Madam, you know at our first meeting in the Turks Galleys, where we were both
prisoners, and in a manner strangers, I rested faithful when we counterfeited
ourselves lunatic to escape their fury I proved not false when we were cast
naked a shore: I stood firm to you, and never since left your company: now
having had these trials of me abroad, neues mistrust my secrecy at home.


I will credit thee, and now receive this embrion of knavery, briefly as I
deliver it. I understand since our private arrival here at Genoa, that the
Duke my father hearing of my surprise from Monta sancta, attended with a
hundred Knights, is gone to seek a needle in a bottle of Hay.


Or rather to catch a quick Eel by the --


Teeth, as I have done you sir?


Nay, and you break jests a my teeth once, I have done with you.


If the breaking of the jest kept your teeth whole, twas well broken: but to
the purpose; as well to try what mettle our Genow aies wits are made of, as
also to put my Brothers humour to the test, I intend to dance a pretty change
with my name (for by nothing else I am sure they can know me, being in my
infancy carried to my Aunts at Pisa) then instead of Emilia, call me
Tristella.


Agreed, but what man in the mist is this?


I know not yet, lets walk, and take occasion to confer with them.


Yet keep without eye-shot so long as you can


O most Divine!


Tobacco? the best in Europe, 't cost me ten Crowns an ounce by this vapor.


Art not ashamed?


Of your foppish humour? yes by this Element villanou^ly ashamed, poxon't, leave
it, you are a scholar, go but to antiquity, read the Chronicles, you may
find some of your Ancestors chronicled for winning a Wenches favour for
loosing their armour, but few for wit and Schollership: Soldiers Scollers
could never set their horses together, especially in this kicking age: but who
comes here? one she-Satyre or other to pitch up her Tent, cast down her
gauntlet and proclaim thee coward for not stabbing her, when she gave thee
the most plain apparent and open lye.


Ioculo, we are fallen into their eyes.


Theile hardly see their way then, for we are shrewd moats, but al's one, i'll
give occasion of quarreil, answert you as you can,


Your reason Sir?


To make thee recoil, or with the Soldier to fall off, i'st your country
manner to corriue a leader, being upon or before present service as I am?


Pardon me sir, I did not see your charge.
Would I had never seen her, for her eye
Hath set my thoughts in a strange mutenie.

What, in love Iulio?


No Prince, loue's in me,
I like a slave endure loves tyranny.

Madam, your Brother.

Slave to all slaves be he that snares his eye,
In a weak Sirens Cob-web flattery.

God save fair sweet.


Amen, from such as you.


You had said for such, had your tongue gone true.


Why then belike I lye.


I would you did, within my Curtens.


Marry love forbid.


Nay, love is willing, for he cries lets go:


Then love hath two tunges, for he tells me no,
so pray let's part.

What, and our lips not meet?


Now fie upon it, like Broom-men in the street?
You're a young wooer, or else much to rude,
To show this kindness fore a multitude,
But by the blush that colours ore your face,
You would scarce do it in a more private place.

This same strange thing in the likeness of a woman,
Tastes of much wit, though I not love her sex,
I'll arm my thoughts to crack a jest with her.
What, graueld lulio?

No, but run a Land:
Is your wits shipping any better mand?

Yes, will you board it?


No, I dare not venture:


Make but a shot in jest and you may enter.


You are a Scholar.


I have seen some Schools.


You came not ore in the last fleet of Fools.


You took my room up.


I pray tak't again,
We'll have no women fools sail amongst men.

Your wit's much currish.


Why 't bites not you,
It feeds on fools flesh, so wisemen adicu

Please you accept the curtsy of the town?


I need not, I have curtsies of mine owns
there's one for you.

How chance your wit's so free?


Only to out-goe Iadish company.


Here are none such.


Take heed, for if you tire,
Sheele keep her pace and leave you in the mire.

A woman's feature, but a Schollers tongue
In quick discourse, Philosophers ne'er wondered
More at the strange conception of the winds,
Then I admire how she attained this wit:
Did not true learning make the soul divine,
She hath spoke enough to make me conuertine.

My loves are sound, wait but your reply,
A short lined accent, either no or I.

I am not too seueare, nor yet so kind,
To fall for eucrie idle puff of wind.
But farewell, i'll take counsel of my pillow,
Pity fresh youth should wither in green willow.

Appoint the place sweet, i'll not miss mine houte.


At the three fools.


I'll meet.


And make up four.


Sweet words, kind looks, what? and a parting kiss.
Words, looks and lips cry all, the wench is his.
I am possessed devil, love persuades my mind,
That if to him, to me she'll prove more kind.
What's Iulio made of? had thou soul or sense,
Thou would not prentice thy affections,
Nor tie thy fortunes to a strangers love.

A little liking my Lord, a ierk a trick or so, but no pure love I protest, but
be impartial, cast of the furd-gowne of hate, and fpeake out of the naked
Doublet and hose of judgment: is she not worthy to be beloved? nay, might not
she and I live passing well together?


Yes, if to live in bondage be no hell,
I think you two, might do exceeding well.

Well my Lord, because i'll be no example of selfe-will, i'll break off our
meeting at the three Fools, and send for her to Court, where i'll put al my
love into one quart of Maligo, your melancholy humour into another, and he that
hath done last, shall for penance give her a kick a the lips, and a pipe of
Tobacco be my witness, that's all the love I bear her.


Well Iulio,
How ere you juggle, if you do agree,
You must be pleased to wear the keepers fee. Exennt

Sir, I do not love to double with a woman if my friend, much less with you my
most upright straight Count, my young Lord (as I told you) is turned absolute
prodigal.


How prodigal?


Marry thus prodigal, to frequent ordinaries is his ordinary practise, rubs
out whole weeks together in bowling. Allies, bandies away his pocket full of
French-Crownes in a morning, and counts it a pretty sport to procure heate.


Thou telst me wonders, he that but last day,
Was never seen to walk without a book,
Writ against pleasure, and make bitter jests
Of honest recreation, turned dissolute,
I see no reason for it, the law and I,
(I tell you plainly Adam) think you lye.

Think as you will sir, there's not a trick used in the town that deserves
damnation, but he desires to deal in it, tis pity a was not made a tradesman,
he loves to follow his occupation a life, that which makes him doubt most, he
is in love with the Indian punck Tobacco.


Punk! how the fool that doth not know it slanders a leaf, nick-names a
stranger herb.


No herb a grace I hope sir.


Nor good thrift neither,
Yet there s one dunce, a kind of plodding Poet,
S^care's twas not in the first creation,
Because he finds no ballad argument,
To prove old Adam a Tobacconiste,

I think none a the name lout's it, I have heard old Adam was an honest man,
and a good Gardiner loved Lattice well, Sallets and Cabbage reasonable well,
yet no Tobacco: Again, Adam Bell a substantial out-law, passing a good Archer,
yet no Tobaconist. Further, Diogenes, whose proper name might be Adam for
ought I know, loved Carretts well, Leek porridge* passing well, yet no
Tobacco: to conclude, my great Grandfathers Grandfathersfather, and my self
all Gardeners, yet could not abide this Chimney-sweeper Tocause, tobacco.


They did not: take me with you, what's the They were al plain folks, did not
know the laws.


They were plain indeed, and thereof grew the prouer be, plain dealing is a
Jewel.


But he that uses it shall die a beggar.


That addition was made by some Lawyer or Poet, to avoid which, they cannot
endure plaine-dealing should have a hand in any of their actions.


Touch no mans functio, there are ierks tricks
Spurn not the law, for if you do, it kicks.

So will a spur-gald Jade sir, but to all these misdemeanours, a maintains a
private punck, one Tristella that he had in way of reversion from Iulio, a
twindger, a mere Horsleach, one that will suck out the brains of his
treasury, and make a mere skin of his wealth, I, out of my Love reprehended
his error, and he in a fury kick't me out of doors, and discharged me of his
service.


I like not this, tis neither right nor straight done with no law-trick, nor no
good conceit, but here a comes.


With Autumn in his bosom, pray God she shake not down his leaves, and leave
him to make the Duke his father a bald reckoning.


Peace and observe.


Though I be a stranger to you,
Yet am I well acquainted with your humour.
A Lady cannot live about the Court
Without the envy of your Epigrams,
If she be pleasant, she is counted light,
If ruddy, painted, if her roughs be thick,
They ask much poaking.

Trust me, love hath killed
That wormwood humour, bring th'auth oritie
Of one true tongue to prove my poesse,
Ever wronged woman.

And you'll do it again?


That's a good wench.


I pray who ought that pen?
That in a stammering Iambick vain,
Glanced at Emiliaes loose and gaudie train.
And broke broad jests upon her narrow heel,
Poked her Rebatoes, and surveyed her steel,
tide her fringed garters, bought her words by weight

Still good in law, and an upright conceit.


Do you not know that man?


Suppose I do?


You did but flout them, and you'll flout me too
You wondered not Cornelia being so fair,
Would be beholding to her Laun dress haite.

I know not this.


True, nor that Florymell,
Became a Pages habit passing well,
Vside single Rapier, took the rouse and swore,
Of all land Beasts she could not brooke the Bore,
Nor that Count Lurdo, coming to a fray,
Brought not the worth of one poor hair away.

More then his own.


That jest comes near to me,
Tis our-growne now, a wants authority.

Nor that Melina whom your Muse renownes
Wore out as many suitors as new gowns.
And the same day that she was married,
Upon her finger wore her maiden-head.
In likeness of a Diamond.

Indeed twa's sed,
That for Ring Melina sold her head.

But you're all Ouids.


They are bawdy mates,
Touch Lawyers too, indeed abuse all states,

Poets are wanton, and no doubt enjoy,
Their fair Corynnaes, though perhaps less coy.

Suppose some do?

Each one in this agrees to scandal us.


And talk of Lawyers fees.


Grant me but love, with my utmost power,
I will defend your sexes stainlesse honour:
And with my pen dipped in the juice of gall,
Be his souls terror, that hereafter shall,
Cast ink at honours garments, or aspire
To name your sex with an unhallowed fire.

I take your word.


Then seal it with a kiss.


That kiss my Lord deserves an Epigram*


Sit down good Uncle.


An unbidden guest
Should bring a stool along.

A woman's jest.


You mean a lye, for women use to lye.


But not like Schollers by authority.


Yet they may produce lying authority, and so cannot Poets,


Nor Lawyers neither.


Are you a Lawyer?


In faith Madam, he hath sit on the skirts of law any time this thirty years.


Then he should be a good Trencher-man by his profession.


Your reason Adam.


I knew one of that faculty in one term eat up a hole Town, Church, Steeple
and all.


I wonder the Bells rung not all in his belly.


No sir, he sold them to buy his wife a Taffeta
Gown, and himself a velvet Jacket.

What a proved Jack was that? but I wonder at Lawyers for one thing, many of
them use to take their fees afore-hand.


For a two-folde policy, one is they were commonly greedy, the other for
fear if their Clients follow their Counsel long, they will not be worth a
fee.


Tis well said Lady, you do well to jest with an oldeman.


A says true, for if you should jest too much with a young man, it might prove
earnest, so the fruits of your ieasts make you both a shamed on it.


Well said Adam, but leaving at a full jest, Uncle, what earnest business
brought you hither?


Your honours sudden Metamorphosis,
Told by your trusty Servant, and confirmed
By public rumour.

Why what says Goody Fame, and my trusty Servant


This is the worst my Lord that you expend
Your treasure on that Ladies maintenance.

S'foot say I do, what, has the worme-eaten bawd Fame: or ere a pander-like
fool else to do with it? give her maintenance, why she is of my ne'er
affinity, should I see my she affinity go in tatters? I allow my Servant
rags, I were worse then a Jew, if I should suffer my she affinity to go
naked.


Law takes your part, if your purse grow short
Rather then spend the public treasury,
I'll lend your Grace a brace of thousand pounds,
Provided this, that as our Booke-men write
I have security.

A Lawyer right?


Security? Leases and old rents, Castle and Towne-ships, able men, good
security, Towns are no Starters, theile hold out wind and weather.


I crave no more, let me have pawnes and use.


How? Lords turn Usurers? those that should
punish broke age deal upon pawnes?
If it were once his own,
Hee'de lend him money on his Duke-domes crown

But faith Uncle tell me, what think you of this
Lady? would she not make a pretty peart Dutch?

She's fair, nor do I discommend your choice
I wish her yours, a private friend or so,
I know mad Ierks, and know that Law allows,
Princes their private pleasures, and my self
Will do my best to gain your honours love,
I will not absolutely say there are,
But there may be, if so your honour please,
Sellers and Vaults, which from your private Garden
May under ground lead to your bed-chamber.
Whither, I will not name my self, but some close friend,
May unsuspected bring your beauteous Lady.

Lord what a broaking Advocate is this?
He was some Squires Scriuenor, and hath scrapped
Gentility out of Atturneys fees*
His bastard actions prove him such a one,
For true worth scorns to turn Camelion.

Madam* my Uncle out of tender-loue,
Better to shun all scandalous suspect,
That might attend on our vnsuiting Iodes
Will lodge you at his house, whither at times --

Your Grace may have access.


Tis so indeed.


Is there a back way?


And a private door,
A secret vault, and twenty odd tricks more.

A Stoue?


And Arbors with sweet violet Beds,
That have bin pressed to death with maiden-heads,
Where you may sport and breath, and take a rouse

Pe rdy, this Lawyer keeps a bawdy house,
I shall be ready to deceive you all.
My Lord, your Law-plot's, most judicial.

But who comes here? some one of your cast clients.

Gods me, the Countess.


Mum, I cannot stay,
There's a cloud rising, drives my Sun away.

Is this your wife?


Madam, tis she that was.


That was and is not? how comes that to pass?


I cannot tell, God his conscience knows


And the world sees Colossus on my brows,
Hercules Pillars, here 's non ultra writ.

Not in brass Characters?


No, horns more fit.


Hath not the Law diuorc'd and made a bar twixt our affections? were not thou
content to take a pension?


Which you still detain.


Good wit, Law-trickes and firm, you may complain.


Complain I do, I kneel before the throne and sue for Justice, but yet can
purchase none.

Complain I do Cousin.


Away.


O, as you are a Prince, and you a virgin.

I was one long since,
This is no place for passion, dry your eyes,

Grief nailes me to the ground, I cannot rise,
I'll grow immodest, justice is exild,
And so shall duty, patience turn wild,

Come, leave the Bedlam.


Do, for wit and Law know she's a fool,


A couple quoth Iack-daw.


Madam.


Who calls?


Madam.


Horatio.


In passion Lady.


Discontent or so.


Be not, be counsaild, do not let despair,
Like the rank cancker bred by sultry air.
Eat this young Rose of beauty in the bud:
But in the April Sun of youthful blood
Let the sweet blossom ripen, thrive and grow,
To those full joys which none but Lovers know.

The man talks idly, tell me I am fair,
Lovely and young.

You are, by love you are,
Not fair, you are: Leanders paramour:
Compared with you was a swarth Blackamour
Your hair is softer then the Colchean Fleece,
Your well limed features, natures master piece
Your eyes too Dyamonds, set in purer mould
Then rocks of currall, or the Indian gold.
In thy smooth chin there is an Ivory pit,
Where blushing Venus and young Cupid sit,
Feathering of golden shafts, the wounding heads,
Made of thy ^mber tresses finest threads.

You will not buy me sure you praise me so.


Yet fair, i'll bid fair for you ere I go,


He that bids fair for me deceives his eye.


By heaven a doth not.


Wilful perjury, what means all this?


This my discourse intends,
Were husbands Saints, some wives would have close friends.

Some bad perhaps, but --


Husbands but for it, true, woot? prithee woot thou?


What?


Vd's Hartlings do?


Do what?


Loue-tricks quickly, woo't thou prithee.


No, I prize my credit.


Credit? life a man,
What talks of credit? art not known a strumpet?

You do me wrong.


Damnation, what a gloss,
This gilded copper, Diamond of glass,
What strange show it makes? i'll give you a colot
Your face was ne'er worse painted, then i'll paint
Your Wain-fcot credit, you are a private bit,
Kept for some great made Dives. Red hot scandal
Suck the native colour of your souls
As it hath scorched thy credit, shrivelled Bawed,
Sponge, Lemon-pill, and more irrelishable
Then ore-dride Stock-fish, fie.

Upon thy shame.


Thy husband, O thy husbands bow-leg'd fame
Death I shall hate thee.

O for honour do.


Swear thou art my strumpet.


I'll endure that to.


Shalt not deny it, hart, can not.


Yes, I can.


Do it for thy life, thy soul, basse courtesan.


Farewell, if friendship be at such a rate,
Before i'll purchased, i'll live still in hate.

Hart, a new fashion,
A Lady poor, beautiful and chaste? clean
From the bias of Custom: to be poor, painted,
And proud is as common in Genoa, as felt and feather
In the fortunate Island: but chaste and poor,
As singular and rare, as Conscience with the Anabaptist.

Come hither Boy, did never owe me service


Yes Madam, more then ever I paid you honestly, and were a not my Master.


Thy Master, who?


Horatio, he that puts chastity to the quick, honour to the stab, but i'll show
him the nature of a right French-man, deny him homage, for swear allegiance,
and come behind hand in cash keeping, with his own purse maintain you
against him.


Thy purpose briefly.


In bald sentences, your noted wrongs are pitied.


Pitied, by whom?


By me, lodgings prepared and diet, which I humbly tender your honour, as first
payment of the ancient debt, my service owes you.


But is the lodging private?


At mine own mothers, and though I say it, she keeps an honest house, though
my father be a Cittiz^n.


Of what profession?


Neither fool nor Physician, but an ingenious Apothecary.


And what resort?


Very civil and most quiet resort, patients, the house is set round with
patients twice or thrice a day, and because theile be sure not to want drink,
every one brings his own water in an Urinal with him.


Doth a use physic too? that's beyond his warrant.


O Lord Madam, better men then he strain curtes^ie with their warrants in
this age, besides, you being musical, shall meet much content, for my mother
lodges three or four Knights Ladies Daughters that practise music and
needle-work, and will no doubt be exceeding proud of your company, wilt please
you walk?


Thou art the Star, by whom my fate is led, My shame's so public, i'd fain
hide my head.


CVrrant in Law, how encountered you. Wiu. I'll tell you my good Lord (I thank my
bringing up, I can talk, I use not to have my tongue to seek when it should
pleasure any man, especially my good Lord) I told her what a credit it was to
have a man of great credit, that which is more, a skilful Lawyer that can
stand out in her case at a dead life, and one that if need were, could make a
crazy action sound, I put her in mind what it was to have such a one to her
sweet heart.


Thou speak but right, for so I am indeed.

You are, I urged it, and she confessed to me that the very first night she saw
you she dream't on you, and wished you in her bed, and her bed in the midst of
the River.


How, ith the River?

Yes for sooth,

In the middle of the tide.

Yes in her dream.

Good,
But she doth love me.

Believe it my Lord she doth, martie you must think I drew her and drew her,
and wrought her and wrought her, till I made her as pliant and, trac table as
wax, marry with all, she is as constant as Lucretia, and will not for a
thousand pounds, till she hath the law of her side.


I sound her meaning, first i'll gull my Nephew.


Her intent right, she intends to make a Gull of the Prince, and an absolute
Goose of you.


Still good in Law, i'll fetch him ore of all,
Get all, purse all, and be possessed of all,
And then conclude the match, marry at least,
When can you tell? I'll use her as a hand
To pick the Princes coffers, and for reward
To prison, marry her, for tricks can do it, (actions.
The worlds squint-eyd, and dares not pry into our
Here lies her walk (my Lute Win) she shall see,
Youthe's leaden footed in respect of me.

Win, prithee give the Fiddler a testar and fend him packing, what a scraping
the rongue keeps? does a think the Count keeps a Tavern or a Bawdie-house?
my good Lord! beseech your honour pardon me.


No harm sweet Love, how dost thou like this Caper?


Passing well my Lord, will you never leave these coltish tricks? but to the
matter: I sent you my resolution by your Maid, have you received it.


I have, and it holds currant,
Then tender me possession.

Of what?

Of thy chaste love.

Not too much hast for that, you have a wife.

I had one.

And still have.

Thy love shall quickly wed her to her grave, I ne'er did love her.


When she was a maid
You swore you did, how soon poor youth's betrayed
To helpless ruin* do you love me?

I faith.

For how long?

Till death.

O deadly lye.
I'll tell you just how long, loue's bred in the blood,
Prospers as long as beauties in the bud.
When beauty withers, lustful love grows cold,
And ere it be half ripe, tis rotten old.
If you have me, you must not put on yellows,
I'll have my felfe, my servant and my fellows.
My love, my liking, and a second me,
I love to relish sweet variety:
Your old wife moved you, I shall vex you more.
Take Coach with Gallants even a sore your door.
Take Rings, give bracelets woven of my hair,
Which to spite you, my Servants arm shall wear.
I'll in your presence sit upon his knee,
Exchanging kisses if you speak to me.
I'll pont in scorn, cry mew, and look aside,
At which, if you but frown, i'll roundly chide,
I am not as I seem, dissembling wit
Is my best means.

Square to my humour fit.

I was a Beggar borne.

And so was I.

Traded in lust and gainful brothelrie.

The fitter for my turn, I was a man
Borne to no hopes, but a few shreds of wit
A Grammar Scholar, then a Scriuenor.
Dealing for private use twixt man and man,
and by close broke age set them at debate:
Incensed them unto Law, which to maintain,
I lent them money upon Lands and Plate,
After the rate of seauen-score in the hundred.
Then did I learn to countefeit men's hands,
Noble-mens arms, interline Evidences,
Make false conveyances, yet with a trick,
Close and cock-sure, I cony-catch'd the world.
Having scraped pretty wealth, I fell in League
With my first wife, and (though I say it my self)
She had good doings, her back comings in
And private goings out, raised me aloft:
I followed cases of the law abroad,
and she woe merry with her friends at home.

Did you ne'er take her kissing?

Twenty times.

Were you not Jealous?

Never nothing less.

Yet saw her kiss with Strangers.

Kiss and play.

And were you a Cuckold.

Cuckold by this light.

What? a withal.

And a Withal too.

And knew't?

And knew't.

And suffered it.

I did.

It went attired in gold, a golden Crest,
Is a brave fashion, and accounted best.

Madam, my Lord.

What news?

The Prince.

The Prince.

And Iulio.

Which way?

Where?

From thence.

That way the vault, from thence the private door, as I stood Sentinel at the
further end of the Vault, they being unacquainted with the turnings, came
g^oping and feeling, as commonly men will do especially in a strange place, and
as I am true sinner, had I not spied the Diamod on his finger (twin, to this
a my conscience) they had been upon me in the dark ere I had been aware of
them.


The Prince.

And Iulio.

Quick away.

What plot?

Behind the Arras? escaped behind the Arras.

Behind the Arras.

Close, cock, sure, be wise,
They only thrine that best can temporize.

A rare vault by this light, and never deuis'd without the advice of a grand
Jury of Bawds, a word with your lips Tris.


As god mend me Prince you smell bawdy.

Since I came into thy company Win. And how is't Tris? fore-God a pretty
lodging.


And very fair hangings.

Passing good workman-ship, what story is this Tris?


Why my Lord? the Poetical fiction of Venus kissing Adonis in the violet bed.


Fore-god tis true, and mark where the Cuckoldly knave Vulcan stands sneaking
behind the brake bush to watch a*m.


A pretty conceit Iulio, dost see Vulcan with the horning parenthesis in his
fore-head! I hit indirectly upon the least pap at three passes for a hundred
Crowns.


Not for a hundred.

Is't a match?

Tis done, where will you take your stand?

Here, any where, hart has the Arras an ague, it trembles so?


No, Vulcans fearful.

And with a fear it comes, have at the Cuckkold.


Oh!

Hark, the Arras is in labour.

Mas I heard something groan.

I'll be the Mid-wife and help to deliver it.

Sweet Prince.

Hark Wench, I smell Bores grease.

Will you but hear me?

Now excuse what trick? She whispers to him.

How? but a Picture? i'll try that presently,
If you love me, disfigure it not, I esteem it only for
the lively workmanship.

Then let me have a sight on it.

Upon condition you'll neither deface it with weapon, nor soil it with your
breath --


On my Virginities maiden-head we will not discover Lurdo behind the Arras.


Hart a the Devil, your Uncle.

O forbear, fore God passing good workman indeed.


Mark but the glance of his eye.

The hanging of his neither lip.

The blush of his cheek.

The curl of his hair.

The pit of a chin.

What a smooth hand a hath?

Long fingers like a Lady.

Not so much but a seal Ring.

Arms and all, viz a tame Gudgeon.

And the fool swallows it rarely, you mark him.


Is the numb Ass insensible of Scoffs?
I'll touch him nearer, yet mine eye deceives me,
And this be not Count Lurdoes counterfeit.

You may soon know that my Lord.

As How?

If it be his, a hath the Gowte in his left foot,

The very same, his sh o is cut and all, Farewell Tris, and yet i'll startle
him a little better before we leave him, fore-god tis so like him, I doubt,
whether it be the shadow or his substance.


A block.

A shadow.

A mere senseless stone.

Then tis a counterfeit.

An absolute counterfeit, what do you mean?


Marry many Counterfeits walk in the likeness of good money, and so may this
do, which to prevent i'll nail him to a post, for fear a pass currant on
your lips in my absence, and so deceive me?


I'll swear a shall not, gentle Prince be short,
Length kills the heart of the most feeling sport.

Well Maiden, I am content, this jest shall reprive your head for this once,
but beware the next encounter, come Ariadnes clew, will you unwind, and light
us through this vault of darkness, and there's your Naulum.


Thank you my Lord, and your business stand this way at midnight, i'll let you
in by this token, and take this fro me, when you come again, bring the Lady a
Diamond, or some pretty foolish stone, for I ca tel you these same paltry
stones are in high request amongst Ladies, especially such old mowsers as I
have been in my time, as I say when you come, be not ashamed to knock, and if
I come not knock lustely, and again, and never give over knocking till you
hear my hem, did you never know Wins hem?


Never.

Why hast thou a private hem?

Have I? In faith sir I, few Gallants ith the town that are of any standing at
all, but are acquainted with my hem, but come close my Lord, close, besure the
next time you come you do not forget to knock lustily,


My Lord.

My Love, my life, oh thou art made
Out of the soul of wit, and thy conceits,
Of the best fashion.

Did you taste the jest?

Divinely, oh divinely, tart and quick,
Pleasing, yet not tedious I was wrapped

In a knaves skin.

My senses were entranced.

Into a fools Paradise.

Oh my sweet Phoenix, out of thy ashes.

Is your love so hot, you mean to burn me*

Oh fit honnyed me,
And then their numnesse, did thou never read
Of any Lawyer came to be Duke?

Never, but I have heard of a Cuckold that was an Usurper.


Why such a one would I be.

What, a Cuckold?

Yes, and an Usurper too.

So you are for you Lawyers usurp more crowns then half a Country.


Vlisses, Tully, Lawyers, but no Dukes.

Menelaus and Vulcan were Cuckolds but no Lawyers.


Fore-mee tistrue, but now I do remember nought to that purpose:


The most lustful Goats
Wear gilded horns, and go in Velvet Coats.

Whatnewes Win?

Faith ordinary household news, yonders a wel-fac'd Gentleman craves a may
change a word with you.


His name?

Horatio.

Leave us to confer.
A trusty friends, the souls high Treasurer.

In dumps Horatio? what, my second self clouded with passion?

O my honoured Lord, Our souls and our affections are made all of one fashion
now the slightest wrong that scars the reputation of my friend, stabs daggers
to my heart.


I know it true, and I can proou't,
Our loves are twins,
But to the wrong, dares any idle tongue
Bark at our greatness?

Yes.

Their names?

Your wife.

My wife? the manner?

Amongst her lustful Mates,
She shame's not to give out, that by your greatness,
knowledge, credit, and friends in highest place,
You have diuorc'd her without due desert.

We must demurie of this, i'll have a trick
By way of Habeas Corpus to remove
This talking Gossip, come Hotatio,
Some project, how? what course for her remove:

I cannot counsel, but fore-god my Lord,
My lodgings mightily annoyed with rats,
That eat my papers and deface my books
How should I rid them.

Easily, poison them,
And well remembered, this she Rat my wife,
That eats and tears the leaves of my repute,
Shall taste like speeding Physic in thine ear,
Can temper poison?

Yes.

And kill a Rat.

That she shall never swell on it.

Mum for that,
This she Rat is a Devil.

A Limb of Satan.

Envy.

Destruction.

Malice.

Ratsbane do it?

Ere my disgrace get age, rare tricks and I will fool the world, woo't, do it?


The Rate shall die.

Quick pretty Damsels, that your task were done The fore-noones eldest minutes
almost run.


Then the glass runs to fast.

I think not so,
Had thou my cares, thoudst think it ran too slow.

I have my task forsooth.

So have not I.
Yet with these sands my sorrows run away
I turn them with the glass, the glass is run,
Yet my hudge mass of cares is scarce begun,
Here's a fault, little one what work make you.

True stitch forsooth.

Then see you work it true.

Pray madam teach me to take out this knot Of hearts ease.

Hearts ease, I have almost forgot,
I could have wrought it well when I was young:
But in good sadness, I have had none long.
What's that?

A branch of Rue.

A common weed, of all herbs else I work that well indeed, how chance your
flower is behind the glass?


Indeed I'll get it up:

Indeed alas.
I cannot chide with her, yet tyrant care,
At my entreat will not one sight forbear:

Why sigh you madam?

Oh I grieve to see,
Youth run to cath at their own misery.
You are like April or Rose buds in May,
You never wither, till the wedding day,
Even so did I, so pretty souls will you,
Youth wears mild Hearts ease, marriage bitter Ru^.

Be not so sad, good madam, do b ut smile,
We'll have a song sad sorrow to beguille.

Save you fair Ladies, madam, my business leads me to you.


If in your ancient suite,
My cares are deafened and my utterance mute.

Your ear, be wood, what should beget this coins
Were I a stranger, or some City Gull
I would commend thee, but I know the world.
Lodging is costly, maintenance asks charge:
Thou art diuorc'd and hast no other help,
But thy bare comings in: accept my Love,
I w ill allow thee twenty pound a quarter.
To buy thee Pins.

Leave this ymodest suite.
Or by my honour --

Come, these words of course
My fame, mine honour, and my dear respect:
Are but like Ignes fatui to delude,
Green and vnseason'd wits, pry thee be kind,
A gilded slip carries as fair a show,
As perfect gold, guilt honour may do so

But put your slip to trial, the slight gold,
Is soon rubbed of:

Come, thy distinctions sold
Let not thy April beauty like a Rose,
Fade in the bud, and ripened pleasures lose,
My sword thy honour: thy estate my purse,
Shall man an d strenghten,

I detest that course.

Your husband hath a sweet heart:

For his ill.
Shall I turn traitor mine own fame kill?

Tis* dead already, every idle tongue, Stabs it to death.


I have the greater wrong.

Thou wrongst thy self spurnst thy proper good
Am I not youthful see my wanton blood
Dances within my veins, and blushing, Courts
Thy generous beauty to more amorous sports,
You shall not choose.

hands of.

I love the e dear.

I hate thee deadly.

Dost thou?

Shall I swear?

No, i'll believe thee Phoenix of thy sex,
I glory in thy virtues, and reveal,
What by my oath I promised to conceal.
Your jealous husband urged me to this try all,
Pawning his oath upon your strict deny all,
all bastard Jealousy should be exiled,
and ancient love entirely reconsilde.
I touched your heart, and now I find it true,
I'll give you notice, i'll impoison you.

Thou speak all comfort.

I was made of hope. and rich performance waits upon my words.


Father of my fair fortunes, whose rich love begets this reuniting covenant,

When comes this long expected sealing day?

To morrow, the hour eight.

Certain?

As life.

Then follow me to feast,
Thy news Horatio is the Welcomest guest.

Swell heart, hold bosom, yield not to relent,
and yet her beauty, colourable trash,
Her virtues, vengeance Hypocritical,
I love her, fury, poison, Hidraes gall,
Impatience man me, black damnation
Usher my practice, poison play thy part,
and do my latest greetings to her heart.
We all must down, yet here the difference lies.
Many for sins, she for her virtue dyes.

T Tristella.

My Lord?

Good wine needs no bush, nor a good face payting thou art favour of thy
self, and what thou cost is not under a colour.


I know no other painter but one, and her name is modesty, and she sometimes
throws a blush into my face to make my pale cheeks red, but else you shall
never take me for an Aldermans post.


Why an Aldermans poest?

Mark but where great posts are newly painted, you shall see much egress
regress in and out, where you see a face newly okered, tis a sign there's
great traffic, much stirring to and fro.


Come sit, sit, nay nearer, nearer, nearer yet.

Then I shall sit upon your skirts.

Iulio and Horatio, what shal's have to supper?
I am now in the spending vain.

Then God for me* what make I so near?

Good action, you shall not remove, I learnt that phrase of mine uncle, boy,
know what Adam hath bespoken for our palates.

Where there a banquet to be had,
More rate and dear, then that Vitellius made:
It should be served in, but Horatio,
What shall we eat that's costly, and that's rare?

A roated Phoenix were excellent good for that Lady.


Andf why for that Lady.

Fare ech'd and dear bought, is good for you know hwo.


For Ladies.

I for Ladies.

Then the most cheap stuff, and next to hand is good for you know who.


For knaves.

I for knaves.

Adam what have you ready.

Sir you may have a Calves head.

here's a Gentleman hath one in his hat already, no more. Calves head I pray
thee.


Hast any Pheasants or Partridges?

No, but if your Lord-shipe will have a dish of Woodcocks.


No for God-sake, they are the stalest meat with me of any, for I never sit to
meat with these gallants, but there's Woodcocks clean through the table.


Then unless you will have a Dotrell or a Gull.


A Gull? why which of these Gent. woot thou serve in? do you not hear how Adam
flouts you?


I mean a Sea-gull bakt.

I in any case lets have that, I have fed my wit on many a land-Gull, once let
me banquet my self of a Sea-gull, some Sea Captain, I lay my life that has a
desire to sup with me, but such as thou hast, I prithee be brief


Lay the table in the with-drawing room.

I will sir, your honour can have no Larks I'll assure you.


And why?

Two Citizens sons and a Poet bought up all ith town, flung away the bodies
only to have a pie made of the brains.


A sign either they lackd brains, or else they did it because they would
bear a brain.


T was told me that the young Lord Polymetes Was entered here.


He that so told thee fellow told thee true.

I cry your Lordship mercy, let this letter
Supply th* un willing office of my tongue,
And be the sad reporter of my news.

What ominous news can Polimetes daunt?
Have we not Hyren here?

Ouid not all thy Metam orphosis
Can show such transformation, oh my God!
It is not possible, (is this my son?)
A has mistook himself, my life a has,
For the seven liberal sciences; a reads,
The seven black deadly finns.
Must you needs son turn over these linen leaves
having such store of paper? this is miraculous.

News, news my hearts will make your jocund souls dance in your bosoms,
now which joyful tongue amongst you all cries first God save the Duke? God
save Duke Polymetes.


The news is not so happy.

Tush look here.

My Lord I'm sorry for your he auinesse.

Thou should have said so to a Porter that's heavy laden.
But come, sit, sit in council, let's deuize
How to spend all this countless mass of wealth,
My father hath bequeathed me at his death,
Quite from the popular and vulgar garb,
We will be ode in all things, and retain
No common humour in our large expense.

An honourable mind, and were your father
A live to note these hopeful parts in you,
How would it move him and surprise his heart?
But now my lord: my message being done,
I must return i'm glad I have found your son.

For thy good news take that along with thee,
Look here Tris, would not these
Make notable states-me? methinks state steals upon me.

And I have known some steal state.

Then they came never trnely by it as I do, but pergite porro, methinkes I
could make an indifferent careless Duke.


And I could make a notable Courtier, methinks I am begging already.


O mine Uncle would make an Excellent Court spaniel, he would sent out offices
concealed lands, a hundred mile of, and a were my cashier but twenty years, I
durst change livings with him.


But what employment for Horatio?

O, he would make a good grumbling surly politician, thou shalt be my
politician.


I shall never be loved.

Not loved, your reason?

I hate the base and rascal multitude,
I cannot nod, ride bare-head through the streets,
Nor wreath my body like a Cable Hat-band
To every Peddler and mechannick Townes-man,
I hate the poor, am envious at the rich,
Love none.

Yes, women.

Faith after a sort, I love a good smooth face*

Then you love mine.

And forty more.

I muse yo do not marry.

I would to night, upon condition
That I might bury her to morrow, God Boy.

Fill him some wine.

I cannot drink, god boy.

It is not poisoned.

Hum, I cannot tell,
The Countess drunk and did.

Come, come.

Farewell.

Still in the b^gs of Melancholy, pax on it, tis staler then Tobacco, not so
much but the singing Cobbler is grown melancholy, and correctes shoes in
humour, fie ont, come sit, we must talk about many matters, Riuo, I'll be
singular, m^ Royal expense shall run such a circular course that the Rascal
spawn of Imitators shall split their wooden brains, and sink their wealth in
the Gulf of prodigality, and yet like a bad Archers shaft, fall fixescore
short of their aim, my expense shall be royal and peculiar.


I'll fashion you a course.

Divinely, come.

Divinely indeed, serve God, live honestly* relish not Atheism.


That's clean out of the fashion indeed.

Then good.

Because out of the fashion, set down that Adam

Tis done*

I hau't my Lord, I haue't in faith.

Nay quickly, how?

We'll keep no Pages.

Excellent, that's clean out of the fashion for Pages, that's good, that
stands, down with it Adam.


Tis done sir.

We'll use no great Horses.

How shall we ride then?

On Mules and she Asses.

Down with that Adam.

But, for my train, for a Page with Pages,

Maintain a hundred Gallants at your heals,
Live in the Country, entertain again
Into the Court, long-banish'd hospitality,
Who since the first great hose with Codpieces grew out of fashion near durst
show his head.


Another, set it down, i'll spend after forty po d a day, i'll see which of my
cheuerill brained immitators dares follow my fashion: sblood I cannot drink
Tobacco two days, but the third the Church wardens fidemen are at it in the
Alehouse in sermon time, I cannot wear a suit half a day but the Tailors
Iournyman creeps into it: I cannot keep a block private, but every Citizens
son thrusts his head into it: I cannot keep a wench but every grand-Iurors
son in the Country imitates me, I care not if I make it petty treason for any
man to kiss under ten pound a Kiss.


Oh my Lord, twill never pass ith the Lowerhouse, they will not loose their
liberty of kissing.


Then keep a leash of Wenches.

As common as cracking of nuts, not a serving-man, but doth as much.


Fore-god I hau't, peculiar I haue't.

What is't Iulio?

Your honour shall keep no wenches at all.

No wenches? what shall become of me then?

I must be round with you Tris, you must pack, many women they say are common,
and i'll entertain nothing that savours of Community, I will not divulge.


Nay, but hark you my Lord, though you maintain me, you do not lye with me,
and I think that's the newer fashion.


Fore-god the newest of all, for there's not a gallant maintains his wench but
a will lye with her, down with that Adam.


Tis done.

My Lord my Lord, the Duke your father with a great train is coming.


From heaven or hell.

That's more then I know, but by the faith of a page, or the word of a Gent.
which you will, he is arrived and in great state entered the City.


Zounds wheres the slave that brought the falsereport of his death?


But art sure tis my father?

Or else your Mother did you the more wrong, shift for your selves, for he is
come.


My father alive and come home, hart a me what shift? come home find the Court
turned Ale-house Dicing-house, Dancing school, I am undone horse and foot.


Some Rosasolis or Aqua mirabilis ho, for our general coward's in a swoune.


I know you are a hot shot in a feather-bed Tris, but that will uot serve turn
now, therefore fall off, the enemy is too strong, deed Tris, every Lamb to
his fold, and Cony to her Borough, for the old Fox is abroad no, wilt not
be? why then God a mercyes brain.

Cedant arma togae, my gown and books boy, some sudden devise to keep him
back half an hour, and win my good opinion for ever.


And I do not, let me die of the bastina^ do.


Lords, make a stand, I wonder that our Son glads not our wished arrival with
his presence.


No doubt my Lord, his honourable care,
Is not acquainted with your sudden landing.

We take it so, and whilst our self in person
Enquire the cause, attend us in the Hall,
Little thinks he his father is so near,
But unexpected, i'll go startle him,
And put his wit unto the present try all.

where's the Prince?

my most honoured Lord?
In private conference with an English post.

An English post?

An English post my Lord: the effect of his letters I know, not but I heard him
begin a most strange discourse.


Of what I prithee?

Please your honour take a turn or two, I shall relate (quickly my Lord)
heereports there fell such an Inundation of waters in the month of July, about
the third of dog-dayes, that the Owers and Scullers that use to work in the
Thames, rowed over houses landed their fairs in the middle I'll of Paules.


Is't possible?

Very easily possible (sfoot quickly) and more the fishermen that rid between
Dover and Calis, took red spurlin, and she Mackerel in the midst of the
Exchange, which made mutton so cheepe and stale, that it is thought the better
half of the townsmen will run horne mad about it.


It cannot be.

Not be? why look you sir,

Nay.

But hear the conclusion, just on Saint Lukes day coming shall be a
twelue-month, Westminster Winchester, drinking a quart of wine together on
Salisbury-playne fell into hard words and strange terms, there was thou knave
and I knave, and such foul words, as if tow young Barristers had been
breathing their wits for a wager, (sfoot make an end) now it was thought
Westminster stood most upon his terms, yet in the end Winchester got one of
his best terms from him spite on his teeth, which so vexed Westminster, that
it grew to a deadly feud, which was so hottly pursued that the taking up of the
matter cost many broken heads.


How.

So sir, (sfoot not done yet?) and had not Charing-crosse a tall bow legedd Gent:
taken up the matter, tis thought Westminster stones would have bin too hot for
some of them: and in parting the fray, Charing-crosse got such a box of the
ear, that he will carry it to his deathsday, some say a got a wry neck by
parting the fray, marry Winchester says flatly, a got a creeck in his neck,
with looking westward for Termers.


Thou should have told me.

Of the English post* why look you my Lord, the post coming in poast-hast
to show his duty to the Prince, stumbled at a post that lay in his way and
broke his sinister shanck, and so I break of my discourse and bid your honour
welcome home.


What a strange tale is here? of slouds and hills of Charing-crosse, Terms*
and I know not what? and when I loo'd for the conclusion.

A breaks of all and leaves me in a Cloud.

There is some trick in it, honoured*Iulio?

Health to my Sovereign.

How fares our Son?
Have your inducements drawn him from his humour?

Faith my Lord I have done a childes part, and almost spent a childes part, to
draw him to society, but tis labour lost.


What is his business with the English post?

The English post my Lord? your grace is merry.


His boy informd me a held conference,
Bout serious matters with an English post.

Alas my Lord, the boy is lunatic.

How lunatic? and a fo^e god me thought
A told a mad discourse, but the occasion.

I t^ll you my Lord, coming a bruptly as your honour o^ any else may do to the
Princes chamber, about some ordinary service, a found him in his study, and a
company of botlno^'d Devils dancing the Irish hay about him, which on the
sudden so startled the poor boy, as a clean lost his wits, and ever since
talks thus idle, as your Excelence hath heard him


But tell me doth my son converse with Devils?


As familiarly as you and I, they are his only company keepers, when a hath
been duld at his study, I have known a Devil and he play at Ticktack for
phillips, by the whole day together.


Tis passing strange, but may we without danger go near his study?


At yonr honours spleasure,

See where a sits, be Patient and observe.

prevented still? now by Medusass snakes,
And black Erinnis ever burning lamp,
If all the skill in pyromantique rules,
Deep Eromancy, or the precious soul,
Of Ge man*ique spells and Characters
Graven in the sir face of our mother earth,
Can work this strange achievement,

How his brain sweates in pursuit of learning


Oh attend.

The first house is vulgariz'd, the Horoscop or Angle of the Orient, and his
Ascendant betokens beginning of life, Merchandise, marriage and --


Lets break him off.

So please your excellence.

The second and third house, the third House is cadent from the Angle of the
Orient, and Ascendant to the Angle Septent^ionall, signifying Fathers Sisters
and Daughters absent and lost, Daughters and fathers lost: here then I find my
demand, the Maid lost my Sister, thus then I proportion my figure, there I
place my witnesses, and here my Judge, and thus proceed to the Invocation.


Renowned Prince, Prince Polymetes, zounds Prince.


Discourteous Iulio, give my study leave.

Hart not a ^ot, the Duke your father.

I'll make my father joyful by my toil,
Had not thy folly interiupted me,
My hopes ere this had met their period.

Your princely father.

O torment me not with his remembrance.

S'blood he's safe returned.

O would a were, then should not Genoaes Crown,
For want of strong supportance be pressed down.
I^ not enough, that like a harmeles Prince
Spending my hou^es in Contemplation,
I let you hold the rains of government.
Unfit for me, my father hath a deep
And searching judgment that can brush and sweep
such idle brayn'd and antique Parasites,
Forth of his presence, pray your absence,

I can but smile to sue how Protheus like,
They turn the shape of their discourse project,
Thinking to lead me in an idle maze,
after their folly, well, I'll temporize,
and note the issue, come my Lords let's in,
His humour's grounded, and like subtle fire:
The more suppressed, it mounts so much the hier.

Why so, this jest came smoothly of and was not soild in the working


That boy is worth his weight in pearl, did mark what a tale of a Cock and a
Bull, he told my father whilst I made thee and the rest away, by a bill of
Convey anee at his back?


And I did simple Knights seruire in persuading the Duke the boy was lunatic.


twas admirable, doth not this jest deserve to be chronicled?


No by my troth, yet I must needs say, some as bad have bin, for how soever our
practise pass currant with your father for the present, our villainies must
needs break* forth, they are so notorious and public.


No matter let*am, have not we brains? brains and they be well mincde are sauce
for any meat, let mine uncle turn Turxe and break forth, let the whole town
turn cuckold and blow their horns in our disgrace, I have brains, let the
Sun and the seven Stars be opposed, I have brains for that too my present
wit shall give*am all the lye in their throats, and may ntayne it at pocket,
dagger, and pistol when I have done.


A mourner boy? what solemn funeral,
Hath hung that sable livery on thy back?

Her death my Lord that hath cut out the like,
For both your honours, the Countess is deceased.

Then will my uncle be a hauy mourner.
But how the manner of her death?

I'll eell your honour that hereafter and give you the ground of an admirable ie
ast.


And we play not true moals and work it out of the ground, let me dye of the
greene-sicknsses.


The ground then comes?

No I'll tell you that in private, the life of a jest thrives in the first
revealing, it concerns the manner of your avnts death and a law-trick of your
uncle.


Come to the solemperites, and weep at least those being ended wele receive y
our jest.


What is a man? hart a the Devil mere fools,
His rich invention, Machiuilian plots:
Idle illusiue antic fantasies.
Apelles grapes, I had as full a brain,
Fertile invention and as forward hopes,
As man could father, or his wit bring forth:
Yet in a minute in bubles age,
The venomdfury of a bitter spleen,
Confounded all, forgetful that I was,
Women are moulded out of bashfulness:
And must be drawn to kindness by degrees.
All this I knew.

Neither the Law nor I,
Know any reason why Horatio.
But mum, Law-tricks as closely as I can,
Mine ear shall drink his meditation.

Had she ^uruiu'd Time --

Might have found us out,
Good, firm in Law, I am a fool to doubt,
His constant secrecy.

But now she's dtad.

The deepest wit could not have bettered,
Our smooth conveyance, but upright and straight,
Unknown, unseen, i'll work upon conceit.

Had she been living, golden promises,
The smooth Atturneys to a Lovers tongue
Might have in time solicited my suite,
Guiftes might have pleaded, mournful Elegies,
Told her my passions, had she been composde
Of steel or flint, nay, made of women's hearts,
The most obdurate mettle, Time and Art,
But she is dead, oh hell! and in her tomb.
My hopes are buried.

My conceited brain,
Hath an odd crotchet called me back again.

To all these bad mis-fortunes should the Corn^ use any tricks?


Ha? a talks of tricks,
Of count and tricks, for tricks and count are twinns.

Yet I regard not.

I am right and straight.

Say a complain?

Suppose he tell the Duke he gave the poison.

He contrived her death and cannot wrong me,

Fie, I fear him not,
He doth but father, what my brain begot.

This comfort yet which many want I have,
To follow my fair fortunes to the grave.

OH, shall I venture? ha, shall I enter?
Shield me Appollo, the ground is so hollow
That every step I tread upon it,
Methinkes it sings a dead mans Sonnet.
Fates, oh Fates be honest Drabs,
Fear gives me ten thousand stabs,
I dare not further tis wilful murder,
Thus late to tread the cloister vaults.
For though i'm small, I have great men's faults,
Then gentle Fates, take some remorse,
I watch an honest, kind, quick course.
Grant that no Hobgoblins fright me,
No hungry devils rise up and bite me:
No Vrchin, Elves, or drunkards Ghoasts,
Shove me against walls or posts,
O grant I may no black thing touch,
Though many men love to meet such.
But here's the tomb, my hopes suffizing,
I watch a dainrie Ducks uprising,
Her cheeks now are chilly, as is the pale lilly, (Roses)
But when her eye vncloses, theile look like two fair
A light my master? or some spright,
Yet What need Devils have candle-light,
Tis he, all hid, i'll not be seen,
For once this tomb shall be my screen.

I cannot rest, my guilt keeps open mine eyes.
My passion rips my bosom, and my blood
Is turned to poisoned water, and so swells,
That my vexed soul, endures a thousand hells.
If I chance slumber, then I dream of Serpents,
Toads, altogether, and such venomous evils,
As hale me from my sleep like forked Devils,
Midnight, thou Aethiope, Empress of black souls,
Thou general Bawd to the whole word, I salute thee,
Wishing thy poison dropped upon my brain,
For my so rude, so rash, so heedeles murder,
In the ambition the height of lust,
Not giving my blood liberty to cool.
To poison such a beauty, O black Fate!
Thus many killed, too soon repent too late.
Soft, stay, this sames the chilly monument,
That hugs her body in his marble arms.
Thou gentle soul of my deceased love?
O, were but possible to enjoy thy voice,
Thy sweet Harmonious voice, I should be blessed,
But Even to dally with thy silables,
O tomb.

No tomb but Cistern filled with tears.

O heart!

No heart, but sink of grief and fears.

Countess, soul shadow, shadow speak again*

Speak again.

What should I speak, my hate, or thy huge wrongs?


Hudge wrongs.

Hudge wrongs indeed, but charitable soul,
What ransom shall I pay thee for thy life?

Thy life.

My life?

^ life.

Discourteous air,
My blood is frozen with despair.

Despair.

Pardon forgive me, shall I go?

I go.

But shall your hate pursue me, I or no?

No.

Adieu my grief and i'll go sleep.

Pray God my tongue can my hearts counsel keep

Ha? are you vanished? let me see, a may be fallen a sleep against some pillar,
for i'll be sworn a talked very idly, Abut decessit euasit erupit, I would
fain know that Wag that can put me down for a woman's Ghost extempore,
especially if it were to be performed under a tomb cloth, but here lay the
desperate venture, had she chaunc'd to have risen, and spoke before her qu, as
about this time she must tise, or my sleepy drink plays, the drowsy
companion with her.

Hart a me, my master again, what cross points are these? I see I must
betake me to my late refuge.


It was no Ghost, subtle opinion,
Working in mans decayed faculties,
Cuts out and shapes illusiue fantasies,
And our weak apprehensions like wax,
Receive the frome, and presently convey
Unto our dull imagination.
And hereupon we ground a thousand lies,
As that we see Devils rattling their chains,
G^astes of dead men, variety of spirits,
When our own guilty conscience is the hell.
and our black thoughts, the Caverns where they dwell:
Yet sure this was her shadow, for I hear
Her last words sound still dancing in mine ear.
Then gentle soul* if thou be yet vnthronde,
Answer one question and no more.

No more?

May my hearts true repentance satisfy,
My wi^ful* murder, your reply.

I.

Thanks, thousand thanks, and so farewell.

Farewell.

The bane of murder is despair and hell.

Was ever poor little knave put to his last trumps as I am? what shall I do
now* my heart goes pit a pat in my belly like a pair of washing beetles,
should a return again now, as my hand to a Lobsterpye a will, all the Fat were
in the fire, but hark tis one a clock, and just about this minute she should
play the wagtail and stur.


What trance was this? where am I?

Oh she speaks, Fates and be good girls keep my master away, and let his man
have a little sport with his mistress.


What place is this? am I in heaven or no.

No.

What voice is that? is this place earth?

Earth.

Earth? how came I hither? do I live again?

Live again.

What voice is that? a woman or some youth?

Youth.

My fears will murder me, my powers are frighted.

Alas poor stirring ghost art over sprighted.

Boy.

mestresse.

Tell me.

all and more anon.
The sleepy drink hath plaid the honest man,

What sleepy drink? how came I in this tomb?

I'll tell you that in a more private room,
Away I'll tell you a strange wonder,
Then wintes lightning, or Christmas thunder,
Then to my fathers trip and go,
Nimble prevention ont runs woe.

No more of mourning brother, we have laid
Our timeless sorrows in a quiet grave,
When men inter their comfort let them weep:
Not when their crying charm is laid to sleep.

Great Duke mine eyes are not thus great with tears,
For our griefs funeral, but that her shame,
And future scandal will out live her name,

Come let mirth kill it, and to your discourse,
Is our son grown unto that height of riot
Your speeches intimate.

I know the law, if I have wronged the Prince,
I stand in compass of a praemonire,
And he by writ of ad quod dampnum may,
sue his recovery, I know the law.

Nay his own letter partly grants as much,
But note his subtle reason, here a writs,
That of set purpose a laid by himself,
And plaid the part of a wild prodigal,
Only to put your love unto the test,
On which advantage to igrese his wealth,
You did indea^e him to society,
Of careless wantons and light Curtezans,
Made secret vaults and cellars under ground.

Non tenet in bocardo I demur,
Do but send out your Jterum summoneas,
Or capias vt legatum to attach,
And bring him viva voce tongue to tongue,
And vi armis I'll revenge this wrong.

Leave that to trial, here a further writte^,
That by his skill and practise in black Art,
He hath found out and by much toil redeemd,
My daughter from the Turkish servitude.

Redeemde your daughter* an apparent error,
Which you by way of melius inquiren dum.
May soon discuse, he ran some home your daughter
As sure as I made cellars under ground,
Or played his pandar.

How so ere it prove,
I mean to try the utmost of his wit,
To see how quaintly he can bear himself:
But who comes here.

Marry my good Lord, this is the green bur, that stuck so close to the young
Princes sleeve, the shoemakers cutting knife, that fitted his boots to the
prodigalls last.


If I be Compose mentis, this is she,
Must play your daughters part, my Lord be ware,
Work close cock sure, I se the gin the snare.

Most reverend father.

Father? now it fits,
Ware an old Fox, Duke I have brains I have wits.

Immodest impudent and shameless girl,
Is't not enough thou hast mis-led my son,
And wrong his reputation?

How wronged him father? I must needs say I have played Will with the wisp with
my brother and have led him up and down the maze of good fellowship, till I
have made his wit and his wealth both turn sick but for any other wrong, I
appeal to himself, my uncle honest Iulio, where is a? and all the rest of
this good Audience, therefore pray good father.


Out of my sight, thou art no child of mine,

You're the more beholding to some of your neighbours, tut ma look on me well,
here's your now no nose, and thick kissing lip up and down, and my mother were
living, she would never bus you more, till you confessed I were your daughter.


What an audatious naughty pack is this?
Have her before a Justice, Adam.

Do, with all my heart good father, send me to a Justice, for apretty woman
with a smooth tongue and an Angels voice, can do much with Justice in this
golden age, but thus much before I go, if Justice will not p^ouide me a better
father, I'll have you, or I'll give the beadle of the ward a fee to cry, a new
father a new, as they do oysters at Call^is.


Brother cre you acquainted with this woman?

I must needs say that at my nephews suite,
I gave her a months lodging and her diet.
But Nada veritate in bare truth,
bona side without circumstance,
Splendente Sole the bright Sun ne'er saw,
A wench more capable of wit and law,
And how soere she is with beauty graced,
I dare engage mine honour she is chaste,

I give your words good credit, yet tis tare,
to find a woman wanton, chaste and fair,
But now unto my son, whose powerful art,
Strives to vngiue his sisters servitude.

Thanks He eat, thou hast insphearde my hope
In a gold circle, o were my father here,
This fight would of his age bate twenty year.

What sight my son.

Lend me your watery eye,
That swims in passion for my sisters loss,
And in this book perspective, let it read,
Apleasing lecture.

I conceive two shapes.
A civil merchant and a bewteous maid.
Their pace is speedy and my slower eye,
Cannot keep way with their celerity.

That maid's my sister, whom on magiques wing,
To this fair presence, my rich Art shall bring,
Prepare to meet them, for this minutes age,
sends with my charm their airy pilgrimage.

Where are are we now? how strange (...) were we borne
Upon the pinions of the fleeting air,
And where dismounted? unto what great Prince
Christian or Pagan longs this mansion.

Are we in any sociable place?
Or in the Cell of some Magician,
Who by his skill in hellish exorcisms,
Made us his thrall?

I can forbear no longer,
Welcome thrice welcome.

Welcome?

Whence?

To whom?

to me.

Thy father.

and thy friends.

do not beguile us, O Demetrio?
We are betrayed, see the Magtiian,
That by his cunning and strong working charms,
Brought us unknown.

^to thy fathers arms,
Welcome Emilia, with this Ivory chain,
I sphaere my hopes and in thy bosom rain,
These tears of comfort, then embrace thy friends.
Thy Brothers Art all further difference ends.

Your City.

Genoa*

And your reverend name.

Ferneze.

Father.

Yes the very same,
I do remember when she went to nurse,
What a cursed vixen two*s, but now she's grown.

Not past all goodness, yet I hope s^r: but in faith Brother wast you that brought
us from Turkey a cockhorse? and your Genoan hackneye be so quick paced you shall
have more of our Custom.

Lay by discourse, what Gentleman is that comes vninuited to our feast of joy.


Pray welcome him father, he's a Genoan merchant, that with much suite
ransomed me from the Turk.


My hopes redeemer welcome, but proceed
Unto the doubtful fortunes of my child:
Twas told me she was stolen from Monta sancta.

You help my memory, thence she was stolen,
And for her beauty, chosen Concubine
To the lascivious Turk, but by much suit,
And meditation of some special friends,
I bought her freedom with a thousand marks*

Which we'll repay with ample interest,
Once more we'll bid you welcome, and to set
A smoother gloss upon our merriment,
There's a quick Wench that only lives by wit,
Who understanding I had lost my Daughter,
Borrowed thy habit, and Vsurpes thy name,
One call her in, now Daughter make thee sit,
To combat and dismount her active wit.

A parlous Girl, her wits a mere Snaphaunce,
Goe's with a fire locke, she strikes fire from stones,
She knows the Law too, a mere murthering piece,
Fight lowe, locke close, she speaks mere* lightning Niece.


How now father, have you put on your considering Cap, and bethought you? or
shall I proceed and traverse my writ of errors?


Ha, writ of errors? Law-trickes, words of Art Demurs and quillets.


All not worth a pin, will you bethink you father?


I have bethought me, and to let thee see,
The true proportion of thy impudence,
Behold my Daughter, whom thou personat'st.

How, your Daughter?

Yes minkes, his Daughter.

My niece, and I will make it good.

Pretty in faith, have ye any more of these tricks? I may be out-fac'd of my
self with a Card often, but in faith Uncle, the best knave 'ith bunch, nor all
the law in your Budget cannot do it, as for you Sisley bumtrinkets, i'll have
about with you at the single Stackado are you a woman?


No.

What then?

A Maid.

If his tongue falter, all our plots bewraide.

If a true maid, lend a true maid your hand.

Both hand and heart

The like of me command,
Now I conjure thee by the love
Y^u bear Dian^es frien^ Grove,
By Cupids by ve, and go den arrow,
Venus Dove, and chirping Sparrow,
By all those vo^es, the listening winds,
Hear when Maids v^claspe their minds.
By those sweet oaths men use in bed,
Beseeging of a Maiden head.
I do conjure you fore these Lords,
To answer truly to my words.

By these and more, by all the scapes
Of amorous Jove and Phoebus rapes,
By Lovers sweet, and secret meetings,
Hand embracings and lip-greetings,
I promise you before these Lords,
To answer truly to your words.

Where were you borne?

In Genoa.

Your name?

Emilia.

Lye not.

Twere open shame
to lye before so many.

In what Art were you instructed?

That's not in my part.

Say musique.

Quickly*

I was taught to sing,
Unto the Lute, and Court each amorous string
With a soft finger.

Good, how many springs
Lived you in Monta Santa?

Zounds this stings.

How many?

Nine.

Zounds ten.

Ten fops.

Nay quick

Twixt nine and ten*

Right, answer.

In the nick.

Your age?

What?

Any thing.

Come, fie, you linger.

I am just as old.

As what?

my little finger.

You dally

Sixteen.

Eighteen.

Eighteen fools,

Nay and you prompt we'll hiss you forth the schools.


Come your reply, nay quick your certain age,

I am just as old as -- true Emilaes page.

A page?

Disguised?

Wrapped in a woman's smock?

Ime in a wood.

And I can spring a cock,

Woodcock of our side:

And you bill so fair,
Make a clear glade, I'll single forth a pair.

Fie her wit scaldes.

We shall have change of weather.

Cocks of one hen, come prince, lets hold together.


I thought we should find a Counterfeit of you

Then nail me to your lips with a kiss, and make me currant payment.


What, young Orlando? how dooes Charing-Crosse?
Is Westminster yet friends with Winchester?

Zounds Iulio now.

Alas my Lord, it was a mere device to --

Make your Highness merry, when I heard
You were returned without your wished Adventure.

Oh Master Merchant, you aduenturd well,
To cheat your self thus of a thousand marks,

How now my Lord?

Nay, i'll but see your breast, mine eyes desire,
No lower object.

Go to, read your errors.

I cannot now return, non est inuenta,
Brother embrace your child, your second heir,
I found firm witness in her bosom bare.

Art thou Emilia?

Emelia, your Daughter, once a Turkish prisoner

Receive a joyful blessing rise and say,
What wit or power freed thee.

Dear father, the manner both of my enlarging and captiuing i'll relate, when
more convenient time and place shall incite me, but upon this occasion, pray
give me leave to put my brother beside his melacholy


I prithee do so.

Why how now Student? grand Magician,
Puritan, come, you never plaide the Wag,
You know not Winefrides hem, nor the Counts vault.

A'mort man? what, can Polymetes daunt?
Hath a not Hyren here?

Zounds all will out, brains --

Now for a hundred dozen of Larks to make a pie of the brains.


Well, done it was, and out it must.

Why how now Polymetes in a dump?
Wheres your Venetian Merchant and your Sister?

Who? Emilia? why look you here father, do you think I knew her not? ask
the Boy and Iulio, do you think I would have maintained her as I did but only
for affinities sake? what said I at first Nuncle? did I not urge affinities?
and you would see me hanged say and I did not urge affinity?


And yet you pleaded hard for a nights lodging

Only to try thy honesty by this Element, ask my uncle else?


He's a sweet womanist.

No more a that, niece you're a wag.

Well said old water Ratt,
But that my brother Conjurer should fail,
In the black Art. --

In the black Pudding: pish,
Of all arts else, only the law is firm.

And yet that dances changes every Term.

Well ieston gallants, and uncle, you that make a pish at the black Art, my
books to the piece of Arras, where Venus and Adonis stood kissing and the
cuckoldly pandar Vulcan watched them, and all your by ways to boot, I raise up
my Aunt your late wife in the same proportion, habit and gesture, she usually
wore in her life time.


Do that, I'll swear there's virtue in thy Art.

And if I do not, say Philosophie is foolery, Logic legerdemain, and
Conjuring mere couicatching, as indeed it is.

And now by virtue of this wand,
Each in his circle keep his stand,
Now Belioll and Astaroth,
Sole commanders of the North,
By H^cates head, E^innis snakes,
S^ix and all infernal Lakes,
I charge you kneel to Proserpine,
And by her licence all divine
Dismiss the Countess from those shades,
Where pleasure springs and never fades.
Festina, ci^o, c^tius, come
free Tenant of Elizium.

The Count look, pale.

why starts Horatio?

What writ the shadow?

That, these lines will show,
Horatio, base Horatto poisoned me,
I was your sister, right mine injury.

Horatio?

Yes, Horatio poisond her
Revenge it Duke be a true Irsticer.

Reueng't I will, degenerous homicide,
What reason led thee to so damned a deed?

I loved her, wood her, my hot love denied
Changed into hate, I poisoned her, she died.

Sounds this like truth.

And if you think I lye,
Ask Lurdo, his damb'd tongue will answer I.

Had he a hand in it?

No, I will demur.

Revenge it Duke, be a true Justicer.

He gave the poison.

And you laid the plot

Knit up two villains in one riding knot.

What quillet now?

At non plus.

Senseless, mute?
Silence cries guilty, a lets fall the suite.

Our sentence guilty,

Then be this your doom,
You shall be clos'de aline in her dead tomb.

Urge a reprieve:

Our punishment defer,

No, we must be an upright Justicer;
To the execution.

Do, the world shall prove
My heart's as bold to die as twa's to love.

Byr'lady so is not mine, i'd give my goods,
For a good habous Corpus, to remove me
Into another Country.

Leave demurs,
Close them into that grave, that dead mans Inn,
Pity true virtue should be lodged with sin.

Make room dear Madam, law this leave dothgiue
To die by thee with whom I could not live,

And wronged Countess though I hated thee,
I come to take my latest sleep with thee.

Kind thou art welcome, and shalt ever have,
My arms thy winding sheet, my breast thy grave.

Sister?

Aunt?

Madam?

My much wronged wife?

Justice great Duke, give me my husbands life,
Both his and his, if your demand be why,
See she surniues for whose death they should die.

Alive.

Vnblemish't.

S'blood I gave her poison.

I could tell your honour a tale in your ear to the contratie, I must needs
say your will was good, but my father being your drug-seller, instead of a
deadly poison, gave you a sleepy potion, do you remember the Ecc^o at the
tomb? though I plaid the knave with you, I did like an honest man with her.


Thou did stiudeede, and i'll requite thee well.

How now Uncle? what think you of Schollership now?


As of the law, good as it may be used,
But to my wife.

Brother, i'll speak your part,
Receive her, love, and lodge her in your heart.

Nocte die{que}.

What shall I do then?

Justice shall merce thee, and by our command
We banish thee the Court, though not our Land,
Your course is virtuous, let your honour grow
Till age hath clothed you in a robe of snow.
Lastly, thy merit is not trivial,
That turned to mirth a Scene so tragical.

Who would have thought, such strange events should fall
Into a course so smooth and comical?
Who would have thought such treachery could rest,
In such a smooth and virtuous seeming breast?
Who would have thought a bud of this young growth,
Should out of present wit ore-reach us both?
And to conclude, who would have thought the ear
Of your mild patience would so gently bear
With these our weak deserts? which if they please you ought
Tis less then we desire, more then we thought.


