BEhold, yon Comet shows his head again;
Twice hath he thus at crosse-turnes thrown on us
Prodigious looks: Twice hath he troubled
The waters of our eyes. See, he's turned wild;
Go on in Gods name.

On before there ho.

Kinsmen and friends, take from your manly sides
Your weapons to keep back the desprate boy
From doing violence to the innocent dead.

I pry thee dear Matheo.

Come, you're mad.

I do arest thee murderer: set down.
Villains set down that sorrow, tis all mine.

I do beseech you all, for my bloods sake
Send hence your milder spirits, and let wrath
Join in confederacy with your weapons points;
If he proceed^ ^o vex us, let your swords
Seek out his bowels: funeral grief loathes words.

Set on.

Set down the body.

O my Lord?
You're wrong: in the open street? you see she's dead.

I know she is not dead.

Frantic young man,
Wilt thou believe these gentlemen? pray speak:
Thou dost abuse my child, and mockst the tears
That here are shed for her: If to behold
Those roses withered, that set out her cheeks:
That pair of stars that gave her body light,
Darkened and dim for ever: All those rivers
That fed her veins with warm and crimson streams,
Frozen and dried up: If these be signs of death,
Then is she dead. Thou vnreligious youth,
Art not ashamed to empty all these eyes
Of funeral tears, (a debt due to the dead,)
As mirth is to the living: Sham'st thou not
To have them stare on thee? hark, thou art cursed
Even to thy face, by those that scarce can speak.

My Lord.

What would thou have? is she not dead?

Oh, you ha killed her by your cruelty.

Admit I had, thou killst her now again;
And art more savage then a barbarous Moore.

Let me but kiss her pale and bloodless lip.

O fie, fie, fie.

Or if not touch her, let me look on her.

As you regard your honour.

Honour! smoke.

Or if you lov'de her living, spare her now.

I, well done sir, you play the gentleman:
Steal hence: tis nobly done: away: I'll join
My force to yours, to stop this violent torment:
Pass on.

Matheo, thou dost wound me more.

I give you physic noble friend, not wounds,

Oh well said, well done, a true gentleman:
Alack, I know the sea of lovers rage
Comes rushing with so strong a tide: it beats
And bears down all respects of life, of honour,
Of friends, of foes, forget her gallant youth.

Forget her?

Na, na, be but patient:
For why deaths hand hath sued a strict divorse
Twixt her and thee: whats beauty but a coarse?
What but fair sand-dust are earths purest forms:
Queenes bodies are but trunckes to put in worms.

Speak no more sentences, my good lord, but slip hence; you see they are but
fits, i'll rule him I warrant ye. I, so, tread gingerly, your Grace is here
somewhat too long already. Sbloud the jest were now, if having taken some
knocks o'th pate already, he should get loose again, and like a mad Ox,
toss my new black cloaks into the kennel. I must humour his lordship: my
lord Hipolito, is it in your stomach to go to dinner?


Where is the body?


The body, as the Duke spake very wisely, is gone to be wormd.


I cannot rest, i'll meet it at next turn,
I'll see how my love looks,

How your love looks? worse than a scarre-crowe, wrestle not with me: the
great fellow gives the fall for a duckat.


I shall forget my self.


Pray do so, leave your self behind your self, and go whither you will.
Sfoote, do you long to have base roags that maintain a saint Anthonies fire
in their noses (by nothing but two penny Ale) make ballads of you? if the Duke
had but so much mettle in him, as is in a cobblers awl, he would ha been a
vexed thing: he and his train had blown you up, but that their powlder haz
taken the wet of cowards: you'll bleed three pottles of Aligant, by this light,
if you follow em, and then we shall have a hole made in a wrong place, to have
Surgeons roll thee up like a baby in swaddling clouts.


What day is to day, Mathaeo?


Yea mary, this is an easy question: why to day is, let me see, thurseday.


Oh, thurseday.


Here's a coil for a dead commodity, sfoote women when they are alive are but
dead commodities, for you shall have one woman lie upon many men's hands.


She died on monday then.


And that's the most villainous day of all the week to die in: and she was well,
and eat a mess of water-grewel on monday morning.


I, it cannot be,
Such a bright taper should burn out so soon.

O yes my Lord, so soon: why I ha known them, that at dinner have bin as well,
and had so much health, that they were glad to pledge it, yet before three a
clock have bin found dead drunk.


On thurseday buried! and on monday died,
Quick haste byr'lady: sure her winding sheet
Was laid out fore her body, and the worms
That now must feast with her, were even bespoke,
And solemnly invited like strange guests.

Strange feeders they are indeed my lord, and like your jeaster or young
Courtier, will enter upon any mans trencher without bidding.


Cursed be that day for ever that robbed her
Of breath, and me of bliss, henceforth let it stand
Within the Wizardes book (the calendar)
Marked with a marginall finger, to be chosen
By thieves, by villains, and black murderers,
As the best day for them to labour in.
If henceforth this adulterous bawdy world
Be got with child with treason, sacrilege,
Atheism, rapes, treacherous friendship, perjury,
Slander, (the beggars sin) lies, (sin of fools)
Or any other damned impieties,
On Monday let em be delivered:
I swear to thee Mathaeo, by my soul.
Hereafter weekly on that day i'll glue
Mine eie-lids down, because they shall not gaze
On any female cheek. And being locked up
In my close chamber, there i'll meditate
On nothing but my Infaelices end,
Or on a dead mans scull draw out mine own.

You'll do all these good works now every monday, because it is so bad: but I
hope upon tuesday morning I shall take you with a wench.


If ever whilst frail blood through my veins run,
On woman's beams I throw affection,
Save her that's dead: or that I loosely fly
To'th shore of any other wafting eye,
Let me not prosper heaven. I will be true,
Even to her dust and ashes: could her tomb
Stand whilst I lived so long, that it might rot,
That should fall down, but she be ne'er forgot.

If you have this strange monster, Honesty, in your belly, why so Iig-makers
and chroniclers shall pick something out of you: but and I smell not you and a
bawdy house out within these ten days, let my nose be as big as an English
bag-pudding: I'll follow your lordship, though it be to the place aforenamed.


How now porter, will she come?


If I may trust a woman sir, she will come.


There's for thy pains, godamercy, if ever I stand in need of a wench that
will come with a wet finger, Porter, thou shalt earn my money before any
Clarissimo in Millane; yet so god sa me she's mine own sister body and soul,
as I am a christian Gentleman; farewell, i'll ponder till she come: thou hast
bin no bawd in fetching this woman, I assure thee.


No matter if I had sir, better men than Porters are bawds.


O God sir, many that have borne offices. But Porter, art sure thou went
into a true house?


I think so, for I met with no thieves.


Nay but art sure it was my sister Viola.


I am sure by all superscriptions it was the party you ciphered.


Not very tall.


Nor very lowe, a middling woman.


Twas she faith, twas she, a pretty plump cheek like mine.


At a blush, a little very much like you.


Gods so, I would not for a duckat she had kicked up her heals, for I ha spent
an abomination this voyage, ma^ie I did it amongst sailers and gentlemen:
there's a little modicum more porter for making thee stay, farewell honest
porter.


I am in your debt sir, God preserve you.


Not so neither, good porter, gods lid, yonder she coms. Sister Viola, I am
glad to see you stirring: its news to have me here, i^t not sister?


Yes trust me: I wondered who should be so bold to send for me, you are welcome
to Millan brother.


Troth sister I heard you were married to a very rich chuff, and I was very
sorry for it, that I had no better clothes, and that made me send: for you
know we Millaners love to strut upon Spanish leather. And how does all our
friends?


Very well; you ha travelled enough now, I trow, to sow your wild oats.


A pox on em; wild oats, I ha not an oate to throw at a horse, troth sister I
ha sowde my oats, and reaped 200. ducats if I had em, here, mary I must
entreat you to lend me some thirty or forty till the ship come, by this hand
i'll discharge at my day, by this hand.


These are your old oaths.


Why sister, do you think i'll forswear my hand?


Well, well, you shall have them: put your self into better fashion, because I
must employ you in a serious matter.


I'll swear like a horse if I like the matter.


You ha cast off all your old swaggering humours.


I had not sailed a league in that great fish-pond (the sea) but I cast up my
very gall.


I am the more sorry, for I must employ a true swaggerer.


Nay by this iron sister, they shall find I am powlder and touch-box, if they
put fire once into me.


Then lend me your ears.


Mine ears are yours dear sister.


I am married to a man that haz wealth enough, and wit enough.


A linen Draper I was told sister.


Very true, a grave Citizen; I want nothing that a wife can wish from a
husband: but here's the spite, he haz not all things belonging to a man.


Gods my life, he's a very mandrake, or else (God bless us) one a these
whiblins, and that's worse, and then all the children that he gets lawfully of
your body sister, are bastards by a statute.


O you run over me too fast brother, I have heard it often said, that he who
cannot be angry, is no man. I am sure my husband is a man in pri^t, for all
things else, save only in this, no tempest can move him.


Slid, would he had been at sea with us, he should ha been moved and moved
again, for I'll be sworn la, our drunken ship reeled like a Dutchman.


No loss of goods can increase in him a wrinkle, no crabbed language make his
countenance sour, the stubburnnes of no servant shake him, he haz no more gall
in him than a Dove, no more sting than an Ant: Musician will he never be, (yet
I find much music in him,) but he loves no frets, and is so free from anger,
that many times I am ready to bite off my tongue, because it wants that virtue
which all women's tongues have (to anger their husbands:) Brother, mine can by
no thunder: turn him into a sharpness.


Belike his blood sister, is well brewd then.


I protest to thee Fustigo, I love him most affectionately, but I know not -- I
ha such a tickling within me -- such a strange longing; nay, verily I do
long.


Then you're with child sister, by all signs and tokens; nay, I am partly a
Physician, and partly something else. I ha read Albertus Magnus, and Aristotles
emblems.


You're wide ath bow hand still brother: my longings are not wanton, but
wayward: I long to have my patient husband eat up a whole Porcupine, to the
intent, the bristling quills may stick about his lips like a flemmish,
mustacho, and be shot at me: I shall be leaner than the new Moon, unless I
can make him borne mad.


Sfoote half a quarter of an hour does that: make him a cuckold.


Puh, he would count such a cut no vnkindenes.


The honester Citizen he, then make him drunk and cut off his beard.


Fie, fie, idle, idle, he's no French-man, to fret at the loss of a little
scald hair. No brother, thus it shall be, you must be secret.


As your Mid-wife I protest sister, or a Barber-surgeon.


Repair to the Tortoys here in S. Christophers street, I will send you money,
turn your self into a brave man: instead of the arms of your mistress, let
your sword and your military scarf hang about your neck.


I must have a great Horse-mans French feather too sister.


O, by any means, to show your light head, else your hat will sit like a
coxcomb: to be brief, you must be in all points a most terrible wide-mouth'd
swaggerer.


Nay, for swaggering points let me alone.


Resort then to our shop, and (in my husbands presence) kiss me, snatch rings,
jewels, or any things so you give it back again brother in secret.


By this hand sister.


Swear as if you came but new from knighting.


Nay, I'll swear after 400. a year.


Swagger worse then a Lievetenant among fresh-water soldiers, call me your
love, your yngle, your cousin, or so; but sister at no hand.


No, no, It shall be cousin, or rather cousin, that's the gulling word between the
Citizens wives their old dames, that man em to the garden; to call you one a
mine aunts, sister, were as good as call you arrant whoores no, no, let me
alone to cousin you rarely.


Haz heard I have a brother, but never saw him, therefore put on a good face.


The best in M^lan I warrant.


Take up wares, but pay nothing, rifle my bosom, my pocket, my purse, the
boxes for money to dice with all; but brother, you must give all back again in
secret.


By this welkin that he^re roars? I will, (...) else let me never know what a
secret is: why sister do you think I'll cunni-catch you, when you are my
cousin? Gods my life, then I were a stark Ass, if I fret not his guts, beg me
for a fool.


Be circumspect, and do so then, farewell.


The Tortoys sister? I'll stay there; forty ducats.


Thither I'll send: this law can none deny,
Women must have their longings, or they die.

Give charge that none do enter, locke the doors;
And fellows, what your eyes and ears receave,
Upon your lives trust not the gadding air
To carry the least part of it: the glass, the houre-glasse.

Here my Lord.

Ah, tis mere spent.
But Doctor Benedict, does your Art speak truth?
Art sure the soporiferous stream will ebb,
And leave the Crystal banks of her white body
(Pure as they were at first) just at the hour*

Just at the hour my Lord.

Vncurtaine her.
Softly sweet Doctor: what a coldish heate
Spreads over all her body.

Now it works:
The vital spirits that by a sleepy charm
Were bound up fast, and threw an icy rust
On her exterior parts, now gin to break:
Trouble her not my Lord.

Some stools, you called
For music, did you not? Oh ho, it speaks,
It speaks, watch sirs her waking, note those sands,
Doctor sit down: A Dukedom that should wey mine
Own down twice, being put into onestale:
And that fond desperate boy Hipolito,
Making the weight up* should not (at my hands)
Buy her in the the other, were her ^
Than hers, who makes a dowry up ^
Doctor I'll starve her on the Appenine
Ere he shall marry her: I must confess,
Hipolito is nobly bo^ne, a man;
Did not mine enemies blood boil in his veins,
Whom I would court to be my son in law?
But Princes whose high spleens for empery swell,
Are not with easy art made parallel.

She wakes my Lord.

Look Doctor Benedict.
I charge you on your lives maintain for truth,
What ere the Doctor or my self aver
For you shall bear hes hence to Bergaine

Oh God, what fearful dreams?

Lady.

Ha.

Girl.
Why Infaelisha, how is't now, ha, speak?

I'm well, what makes this Doctor here? I'm well.

Thou were not so even now, sickness pale hand
Laid hold on thee even in the deadst offeasting,
And when a cap crowned with thy lovers health
Had touched thy lips, a sensible cold dew
Stood on thy cheeks, as if that death had wept
To see such beauty altered.

I remember
I sate at banquet, but felt no such change.

Thou hast forgot then how a messenger
Came wildely in with this vnsavorie news
That he was dead.

What messenger? whoes dead?

Hipolito, alack, wring not thy hands.

I saw no messenger, heard no such news,

Trust me you did sweet Lady.

La you now.

Yes indeed Madam.

La you now, tis well God knows.

You ha slain him, and now you'll murder me.

Good Infaelishae vex not thus thy self,
Of this the bad rep^ before did strike
So coldly to the heart* that the swift currents
Of life were all frozen up.

It is untrue,
Tis most untrue, O most unnatural father*

And we had much to do by Ar^ best cunning,
To fetch life back again.

Most certain Lady.

Why la you now, you'll not believe me, friends,
Sweat we not all; had we not much to do?

Yes indeed my Lord, much*

Death drew such fearful pictures in thy face,
That were Hipolito alive again,
I'll kneel and woo the noble gentleman
To be thy husband* now I (...) repent
My sharpness to him* and his family*
Nay, do not weep for him, we all must die:
Doctor, this place where she so oft hath seen
H^ lively presence, haunts her, does it not?

Doubtless my Lord it does*

It does, it does.
Therefore sweet girl thou shalt to Berg^n^*

Even where you will, in any place there's woe.

A Coach is ready, Berg^ doth stand
In a most wholesome air, sweet walks, there's deer,
I, thou shalt hunt and send us venison.
Which like some gods in the (...) groves*
Thine own fair hand shall strike; sirs, you shall teach he^
To stand, and how to shoot, I, she shall hunt:
Cast off this sorrow* In girl, and prepare
This night to ride away to Berg^.

O most unhappy maid.

Follow it close.
No words that she was buried on your lives*
Or that her ghost walks now after she's dead;
I'll hang you if you name^ funerall^

He speaks (...) Lord* (...) I speak (...) deadly word.

And I'll speak ^ Greek.

Away* look to ^
Did you observe how ^
Upon his name and death, O would 'twere true.

It may my Lord.

May? how? I wish his death.

And you may have your wish* say but the word,
And tis a strong Spell to rip up his grave:
I have good knowledge with Hipolito,
He calls me friend, I'll creep into his bosom,
And sting him there to death^poison can do it.

Perform it; I'll create thee half mine heir.

It shall be done, although the fact be foul.

Greatness hides sin, the guilt upon my soul.

Signior Pioratto, signior (...), shall^ be merry? shall^ play the wags now?


I, any thing that may beget the child of laughter.


Truth I have a pretty sportive conceit new crept into my brain, will move
excellent mirth.


Lets have it, lets have it, and where shall the scene of mirth lie?


At signior Candido^s house, the patient man, nay the monstrous patient man;
they say his blood is immovable, that he haz taken all patience from a man,
and all constancy from a woman.


That makes so many whoores nowadays.


I, and so many knaves too.


Well sir.


To conclude, the report goes, hes so mild, so affable, so suffering, that
nothing indeed can move him: now do but think what sport it will be to make
this fellow (the mirror of patience) as angry, as vexed, and as mad as an
English cuckold.


O, twere admirable mirth, that: but how wilt be done signior?


Let me alone, I have a wicke, a conceit, a thing, a device will st^g him
in faith, if he have but a thi^blefull of blood i^ belly, or a spleen not so
big as a tavern token.


Thou (...) him? thou move him* thou anger him? alas, I know his approoved
temper^ thou (...) him? why he ha^ a patie^ce above ^ sooner raise a spleen
in an Angel* than rough humour in him: why i'll give you instance for it. This
wonderfully tempered signior Candido upon a time invited home to his house
certain Ne^politane lords of curious taste, and no mean palate, conjuring
his wife of all loves, to prepare cheer fitting for such honourable
trencher-men. She (just of a woman's nature, covetous to try the uttermost of
vexation, and thinking at last to get the start of his humour) willingly
neglected the preparation, and became vnfurnisht, not only of dainty, but of
ordinary dishes. He (according to the mildness of his breast) entertained the
lords, and with courtly discourse beguiled the time (as much as a Citizen
might do:) to conclude, they were hungry lords, for there came no meat in;
their stomachs were plainly g^ld, and their teeth deluded, and (if anger
could have (...) a man) there was matter enough in faith to vex any citizen in
the world, if he were not too much made a fool by his wife.


I, I'll swear for it: sfoote, had it been my case, I should ha played mad
tricks with my wife and family: first I would ha spitted the men, stewed the
maids* and baked the mistress, and so served them in.


Why 'twould ha tempered any blood but his,
And thou to vex him th^ to anger him
With some poor^ shallow jest*

Sbloud signior Pioratto, (you that disparage my conceit) i'll wage a hundred
ducats upon the head on it, that it mooves him, fretts him, and galle^ him.


Done, tis a lay, join golls on it: wit^ us signior Fl^llo.


Witness: tis do^e*
Come, follow me: the house is not far off*
I'll thrust him from his humour, vex his breast,
And win a hundred ducats by one ^east.

Come, you put up your wares in good order here, do you not think you, one
(...) cast this way, another that way? you had need have a patient master
indeed.


I, i'll besworn, for we have a ^.


You mumble, do you mumble? I would your (...) or I could be a no^e more angry:
for two patient folks in a house spoil all the servants that ever shall come
under them.


You patient* I, so is the devil when he is horne mad.


Gentlemen, what do you lack? what is't you buy? See fine hollands, fine
cambrickes, fine lawns.


What is't you lack?


What is't you buy?


Wheres signior Candido thy master?


Faith signior, hes a little negotiated, hee'le appear presently.


Fellow, lets see a lawn, a choice one sitra.


The best in all Mill^n, Gentlemen, and this is the piece. I can ^it you
Gentlemen with fine callicoes too for dublets, the only sweet fashion now,
most delicate and courtly, a meek gentle calico, cut upon two double affable
taffataes, ah, most neat, feat, and ^.


A notable-voluble tongde villain.


I warrant this fellow was never begot without much Pr^ting.


What, and is this she say thou?


I, and the purest she that ever you fingered since you were a gentleman: look
how even she is, look how clean she is, ha, as even as the brow of Cynthia,
and as clean as your sons and heirs when they ha spent all.


Puh, thou talk, pox on it tis rough.


How? is she rough? but if you bid pox on it sir, twill take away the roughness
presently.


Ha signior; haz he fitted your French curse?


Look you Gentleman, here's an other, compare them I pray, compara Virgilium
cum Flomero, compare virgins with harlot^.


Puh, I ha seen better, and as you term them, evener and cleaner.


You may see further for your mind, but trust me you shall not find better for
your body.


O here he comes, lets make as tho we pass,
Come, come, we'll try in some other shop.

How now? what's the matter?


The gentlemen find fault with this lawn, fall out with it, and without a
cause too.


Without a cause!
And that makes you to let'em pass away,
Ah, may I crave a word with you gentlemen?

He calls us.


Makes the better for the jest.


I pray come near,-y'are very welcome gallants,
Pray pardon my mans rudeness, for I fear me
Ha's talked above a prentice with you,-Lawnes!
Look you kind gentlemen-this! no: I this:
Take this upon my honest-dealing faith,
To be a true weave, not too hard, nor slack,
But even as far from falsehood, as from black.

Well, how do you rate it?


Very conscionably, 18. s^a yard.


That's too dear: how many yards does the whole piece contain think you?


Why, some 17. yards I think, or there abouts,
How much would serve your turn? I pray.

Why let me see-would it were better too.


Truth, tis the best in Millan at few words.


Well: let me have then-a whole penny-worth.


Ha, ha: you're a merry gentleman.


A pennyworth I say.


Of lawn!


Of lawn? I of lawn, a pennyworth, sblood dost not hear? a whole pennyworth, are
you deaffe?


Deaffe? no Sir: but I must tell you,
Our wares do seldom meet such customers.

Nay, and you and your lawns be so squeamish,
Fare you well.

Pray stay, a word, pray Signior: for what purpose is it I beseech you?


Sblood, whats that to you: I'll have a penny worth.


A penny-worth! why you shall: I'll serve you presently.


Sfoot, a penny-worth mistress!


A penny-worth! call you these Gentlemen?


No, no: not there.


What then kind Gentle-man? what at this corner here?


No nor there neither.
I'll have it just in the middle, or else not.

Just in the middle: -ha-you shall too: what?
Have you a single penny?

Yes, here's one.


Lend it me I pray.


An exlent followed jest.


What will he spoil the Lawn now?


Patience, good wife.


I, that patience makes a fool of you: Gentlemen, you might ha found some
other Citizen to have made a kind gull on, besides my husband.


Pray Gentlemen take her to be a woman,
Do not regard her language. -- O kind soul:
Such words will drive away my customers,

Customers with a murre: call you these customers?


Patience, good wife.


Pax, a your patience.


Sfoot mistress, I warrant these are some cheating companions.


Look you Gentleman, there's your ware, I thank you, I have your money; hear,
pray know my shop, pray let me have your custom.


Custom quoth a.


Let me take more of your money.


You had need so.


Hark in thine ear, thast lost an hundred ducats.


Well, well, I knowt: is't possible that Homo,
Should be nor man, nor woman: not once moved;
No not at such an injury, not at all!
Sure hes a pigeon, for he has no gall.

Come, come, you're angry tho you smother it:
Yare vexed in faith,-confesse.

Why Gentle-men
Should you conceit me to be vexed or moved?
He has my ware, I have his money fort,
And that's no Argument I am angry: no,
The best Logitian can not prove me so.

oh, but the hateful name of a pennyworth of lawn,
And then cut out, ith middle of the piece:
Pah, I guess it by my self, would move a Lamb
Were he a Lynnen-draper -twould in faith.

Well, give me leave to answer you for that,
Were set here to please all customers,
Their humours and their fancies: -^ffend none:
We get by many, if we leese by one.
May be his mind stood to no more then that,
A penworth serves him, and amongst trades tis found,
Deny a pennyworth, it may cross a pound.
Oh, he that means to thrive with patient eye,
Must please the devil, if he come to buy.

O wondrous man, patient above wrong or woe,
How blessed were men, if women could be so.

And to express how well my breast is pleasd^,
And satisfied in all: - George fill a beaker.
I'll drink unto that Gentleman, who lately
Bestowed his money with me.

Gods my life,
We shall have all our gains drunk out in beakers,
To make amends for pennyworths of lawn.

Here wife, begin you to the Gentleman.

I begin to him.

George, filt up again:
Twas my fault, my hand shook.

How strangely this doth show?
A patient man linked with a waspish shrowe.

A silver and gilt beaker! I have a trick to work upon that beaker, sure twil
fret him, it cannot choose but vex him. Seig* Castrachio, in pity to thee, I
have a coceit, will save thy 100. Ducats yet, twil doot, work him to
impatience.


Sw^et Fluello, I should be bountiful to that conceit.


Well tis enough.


He^e Gentleman to you,
I wish your custom, yare exceeding welcome.

I pledge you Seig. Candido, -heere you, that must receive a 100. Duccats.


I'll pledge them deep in faith Castruchio,
Signior Fluello?

Come: play't off: to me,
I am your last man.

George, supply the cup.

So, so, good honest George,
Here Signior Candido, all this to you.

Oh you must pardon me, I use it not.

Will you not pledge me then?

Yes, but not that:
Great love is shown in little.

Blurt on your sentences, -Sfoot you shall pledge me all.


Indeed I shall not.

Not pledge me? Sblood, I'll cary away the beaker then.

The beaker! Oh! that at your pleasure sir.

Now by this drink I will.

Pledge him, heel do it else.

So: I ha done you right, on my thumble nail,
What will you pledge me now?

You know me sir, I am not of that sin.

Why then farewell:
I'll bear away the beaker by this light.

That's as you please, tis very good.

Nay it doth please me, as you say, tis a very good one:
Farewell Signior Candido.

Farewell Candido.

You're welcome gentlemen.

Heart not moved yet?
I think his patience is above our wit,

I told you before mistress, they were all cheaters.

Why fool, why husband, why madman, I hope you will not let'em sneak away so
with a silver and gilt beaker, the best in the house too: go fellows make hue
and cry after them.


Pray let your tongue lye still, all will be well:
Come hither George, hye to the Constable,
And in calm order wish him to attach them,
Make no great stir, because they're gentlemen,
And a thing partly done in merriment.
Tis but a size above a jest thou know,
Therefore pursue it mildly, go be gone,
The Constabl's hard by, bring him along, -make hast again.

O you're a goodly patient Woodcock, are you not now? Myllan: a woman's well
holp't up with such a meacock, I had rather have a husband that would swaddle
me thrice a day, then such a one, that will be gulled twice in half an hour, Oh
I could burn all the wares in my shop for anger.


Pray wear a peaceful temper, be my wife,
That is, be patient: for a wife and husband
Share but one soul between them: this being known,
Why should not one soul then agree in one?

Hang your agreements: But if my beaker be gone.

Oh, hear they come.

The Constable sir, let'em come along with me, because there should be no
wondering, he stays at door.


Constable goodman Abram.

Now Signior Candido, Sblood why do you attach us?

Sheart! attach us!

Nay swear not gallants,
Your oaths may move your souls, but not move me,
You have a silver beaker of my wives.

You say not true: tis gilt.

Then you say true.
And being gilt, the guilt lies more on you.

I hope you're not angry sir.

Then you hope right, for I am not angry.

No, but a little mou'de.

I moved! twas you were moved, you were brough^ hither.

But you (out of your anger impatience,)
Caused us to be attacht.

Nay you misplace it.
Out of my quiet sufferaence I did that,
And not of any wrath, had I shown anger,
I should have then pursued you with the law,
And hunted you to shame, as many worldlings
Do build their anger upon feebler grounds,
The mores the pity, many loose their lives
For scarce so much coin as will hide their palm:
Which is most cruel, those have vexed spirits
That pursue lives, in this opinion rest,
The loss of Millions could not move my breast.

Thou art a blessed man, and with peace dost deal,
Such a meek spirit can bless a common weal.

Gentlemen, now tis upon eating time,
Pray part not hence, but dine with me to day.

I never heard a carter yet say nay
To such a motion. I'll not be the first.

Nor I,

Nor I,

The constable shall bear you company,
George call him in, let the world say what it can,
Nothing can drive me from a patient man.

A non forsooth.


What are you playing the rogue about?


About you forsooth: I me drawing up a hole in your white silk stocking.


Is my glass there? and my boxes of complexion?


Yes forsooth: your boxes of complexion are here I think: yes tis here: her's
your twe complexions, and if I had all the four complexions. I should ne'er set
a good face vpont, some men I see are borne under hard-fauourd planets as well
as women: zounds I look worse now then I did before, it makes her face glister
most damnably, there's knavery in daubing I hold my life, or else this is only
female Pomatum.


Wheres my ruff and poker you block-head?


Your ruff, your pocket, are engendering together upon the cup-bord of the
Court, or the Court-cup-bord.


Fetch em: Is the pox in your hames, you can go no faster?


Wood the pox were in your fingers, unless you could leave flinging; catch.


I'll catch you, you dog by and by: do you grumble?
Cupid is a God, as naked as my nail
I'll whip him with a rod, if he my true love fail.

Theirs your ruff, shall I poke it?


Yes honest


no stay: pry thee good boy, hold here,
Down, down, down, down, I fall down and arise, down, I never shall arise.

Troth M. then leave the trade if you shall never rise.


What trade? good-man Abram.


Why that, if down and arise or the falling trade.


I'll fall with you by and by.


If you do I know who shall smart fort:
Troth Mistress, what do I look like now?

Like as you are: a panderly Sixpenny Rascal.


I may thank you for that: infaith I look like an old Proverb, Hold the
Candle before the devil.


Vds life, I'll stick my knife in your Guts and you prate to me so: What?

Well met, pug, the pearl of beauty: vmh, vmh.
How now sir knave, you forget your duty, vmh, vmh.
Marry muffe Sir, are you grown so dainty; fa, la, la, c.
Is it you Sir? the worst of twenty, fa la, la, leera la.
Pox on you, how doest thou hold my glass?


Why, as I hold your door: with my ^ingers.


Nay pray thee sweet honey


hold up handsomely

I lay my little meadenhead, my nose itches so.

I said so too last night, when our Fleas twing'd me.


So Poke my ruff now, my gown, my gown, have I my fall?
Wher's my fall Roger?

Your fall forsooth is behind.


Gods my pittikins, some fool or other knocks.


Shall I open to the fool mistress?


And all these bables lying thus? away with it quickly, I, I, knock be dambde,
whosoever you be. So: give the fresh Salmon lyne now: let him come a shore,
he shall serve for my breakfast, tho he go against my stomach.


Morrow coz.


How does my sweet acquaintance?


Save thee little Marmoset: how doest thou good pretty rogue?


Well, Godamercy good pretty rascal.


Roger some light I pry thee.


You shall Signior, for we that live here in this vale of misery, are as dark
as hell.


Good Tobacco, Fluello?


Smell?


It may be tickling geere: for it plays with my nose already.


Her's another light Angel, Signior.


What? yon pied curtal, whats that you are neighi^g?


I say God send us the light of heaven, or some more Angels.


Go fetch some wine, and drink half of it.


I must fetch some wine gentlemen and drink half of it.


Here Roger*


No let me send pry thee.


Hold you canker worm.


You shall send both, if you please Signiors.


Stay, whats best to drink a mornings?


Hypocras sir, for my mistres, if I fetch it, is most dear to her.


Hypocras! there then, her's a teston for you, you snake


Right sir, her's iij.s.vi.d. for a pottle a manchet-


Her's most herculania Tobacco, ha some acquaintance?


Fah, not I, makes your breath stink, like the peace of a Fox. Acquaintance,
where supped you last night?


At a place sweet acquaintance where your health danc'de the Canaries y'faith:
you should ha ben there.


I there among your Punkes, marry fah, hang-em: scorn't: will you never leave
sucking of eggs in other folks hens nests.


Why in good troth, if you'll trust me acquaintance, there was not one hen at
the board, ask Fluello.


No faith Coz; none but Cocks, signior Malauella drunk to thee.


O, a pure beagle; that horse-leach there?


And the knight, S. Oliuer Lollilo, swore he wold bestow a taffeta petticoat
on thee, but to break his fast with thee.


With me! I'll choke him then, hang him Mole-catcher, its the dreamingst
snotty-nose.


Well, many took that Lollio for a fool, but he's a subtle fool.


I, and he has fellows: of all filthy dry-fisted knights, I cannot abide that
he should touch me.


Why wench, is he scabbed?


Hang him, heel not live to be so honest, nor to the credit to have scabs
about him, his betters have em: but I hate to wear out any of his course
knight-hood, because he's made like an Aldermans night-gowne, facst all with
conny before, and within nothing but Fox: this sweet Oliuer, will eat Mutton
till he be ready to burst, but the lean iawde-slaue will not pay for the
scraping of his trecher.


Plague him, set him beneath the fault, and let him not touch a bit, till every
one has had his full cut.


Lord Ello, the Gentleman-Vsher came into us too, marry twas in our cheese, for
he had been to borrow money for his Lord, of a Citizen.


What an ass is that Lord, to borrow money of a Citizen.


Nay, Gods my pity, what an ass is that Citizen to lend money of a Lord.


Save you Gallants, signior Fluello, exceedingly well met, as I may say.


Signior Matheo, exceedingly well met too, as I may say.


And how fares my little pretty Mistress?


Even as my little pretty servant; sees three court dishes before her, and not
one good bit in them: how now? why the devil standst thou so? Art in a trance?


Yes forsooth.


Why dost not fill out their wine?


Forsooth tis filled out already: all the wine that the signior has bestowed upon
you is cast away, a Porter ran a little at me, and so fac'st me down that I
had not a drop.


^me a cursed to let such a withered Artichocke faced-Rascall g^ow under my
nose: now you look like an old ^e ca^, going to the gallows: I'll be hanged if
he ha not put up the money to cony-catch us all.


No truel^ forsooth, tis not put up yet.


How many Gentlemen hast thou served thus?


None but five hundred, besides prentices and serving-men.


Doest think ^e pocket it up at thy hands?


Yes forsooth, I fear you will pocket it up.


Fie, fie, cut my lace good servant, I shall ha the mother presently Im^e so
vexed at this horse-pl^mme.


Plague, not for a scald pottle of wine.


Nay, sweet Bellafronte, for a little Pigs wash.


Here Roger, fetch more, a mischance. In faith Acquantance.


Out of my sight, thou ungodly puritanical creature.


For the the other pottle? yes forsooth.


Spill that too: what Gentleman is that servant? your Friend?


Gods so a stool* a stool, if you love me Mistress entertain this Gentleman
respectively, bid him welcome.


Hes very welcome, pray Sir sit.


Thanks Lady.


Count Hypolito, is't not? cry you mercy signior, you walk here all this
while, and we not heard you? let me bestow a stool upon you beseech you, you
are a stranger here, we know the fashions ath house.


Please you be here my Lord.


No good Castruchio.


You have abandoned the Court I see my lord since the death of your mistress,
well she was a delicate piece-beseech you sweet, come let us serve under the
colours of your acquaintance still: for all that, please you to meet here at my
lodging of my cousin, I shall bestow a banquet upon you.


I never can deserve this kindness sir.
What may this Lady be, whom you call cousin?

Faith sir a poor gentlewoman, of passing good carriage, one that has some
suits in law, and lies here in an Attorneys house.


Is she married?


Hah, as all your punks are, a captens wife, or so? never saw her before, my
Lord.


Never trust me a goodly creature.


By gad when you know her as we do, you'll swear she is the prettiest, kindest,
sweetest, most bewitching honest ape under the pole. A skin, your satin is not
more soft, nor lawn whiter.


Belike then she's some sale courtesan.


Troth as all your best faces are, a good wench.


Great pity that she's a good wench:


Thou shalt ha in faith mistress: how now signiors? what? whispering? did not I
lay a wager I should take you within seven days in a house of vanity.


You did, and I beshrew your heart, you have won.


How do you like my mistress?


Well, for such a mistress: better, if your mistress be not you master.

I must break manners gentlemen, fare you well.


Sfoote you shall not leave us.


The gentleman likes not the taste of our company,


Beseech you stay.


Trust me my affairs beckon for me, pardon me.


Will you call for me half an hour hence here?


Perhaps I shall.


Perhaps? fah! I know you can swear to me you will,


Since you will press me on my word, I will.


What sullen picture is this servant?


Its Count Hipolito, the brave Count.


As gallant a spirit, as any in Millan you sweet Iewe,


Oh hes a most essential gentleman, coz.


Did you never hear of Count Hipolitos acquaintance?


Marymuffe a your counts, be no more life in'em.


Hes so malcontent! sir Bellafronta, you be honest gallants, lets sup
together, and have the count with us: thou shalt sit at the upper end puncke.


Puncke, you sowcde gurnet?


Kings truce: come, i'll bestow the supper to have him but laugh.


He betrays his youth too grossly to that tyrant melancholy.


All this is for a woman.


A woman! some whore! what sweet Jewel is't?


Wod she heard you.


Troth so wud I.


And I by heaven.


Nay good servant, what woman?


Pah.


Pry thee tell me, abusse and tell me: I warrant hes an honest fellow, if he
take on thus for a we^ch: good rogue who:


Byth Lord I will not, must not faith mistress: is't a match sirs? his night,
at Th'antilop: I, for theirs best wine, and good boys.


Its done at Th'antilop.


I cannot be there to night.


Cannot? bith lord you shall.


By the Lady I will not: shaall!


Why then put it off till friday: wut come then cousin?


Well.


You're the waspishest Ape. Roger, put your mistress in mind to sup with us on
friday next: you're best come like a madwoman without a band in your waistcoat,
the lynings of your kirtle outward, like every common hackney that steals out
at the back gate of her sweet knights lodging


Go, go, hang your self.


Its dinner time Matheo, shalls hence?


Yes, yes, farewell wench.


Farewell boys: Roger what wine sent they for?


Bastard wine, for if it had bin truly begotten, it wud not ha bin ashamed to
come in, her's vi. s. to pay for nursing the bastard.


A company of rooks! O good sweet Roger, run to the Poulters and buy me some
fine Larks.


No woodcocks?


Yes faith a couple, if they be not dear.


I'll buy but one, there's one already here.


Is the gentleman (my friend) departed mistress?

His back is but new-turnd sir.

Fare you well.

I can direct you to him.

Can you? pray.

If you please stay, heel not be absent long.

I care not much.

Pray sit forsooth.

I'm hot.

If may use your room, i'll rather walk.

At your best pleasure-whew-some rubbers there.

Indeed i'll non: -Indeed I will not: thanks.
Pretty-fine-lodging. I perceive my friend
Is old in your acquaintance.

Troth sir, he comes
As other gentlemen, to spend spare hours;
If your self like our roof^ (such as it is)
Your own acquaintance may be as old as his.

Say I did like; what welcome should I find?

Such as my present fortunes can afford.

But would you let me play Mathaeos part?

What part?

Why embrace you: dally with you, kiss:
Faith tell me, will you leave him, and love me?

I am in bonds to no man sir.

Why then,
You're free for any man: if any, me.
But I must tell you Lady, were you mine,
You should be all mine: I could brooke no sharers,
I should be covetous, and sweep up all.
I should be pleasures usurer: faith I should.

O fate!

Why sigh you Lady? may I know?

T'has never bin my fortune yet to single
Out that one man, whose love could fellow mine.
As I have ever wished it: o my Stars!
Had I but met with one kind gentleman,
That would have purchacde sin alone, to himself,
For his own private use, although sc^rce proper:
Indifferent handsome: meetly legedd and thyed:
And my allowance reasonable-yfaith,
According to my body-by my troth,
I would have bin as true unto his pleasures,
Yea, and as loyal to his afternoones,
As ever a poor gentlewoman could be.

This were well now, to one but newly ^ledg'd^
And scarce a day old in this subtle world:
Twere pretty Art, good bird-lime, cunning net:
But come, come, faith-confesse: how many men
Have drunk this selfe-same protestation,
From that red tycing lip?

Indeed not any.

Indeed? and blush not!

No, in truth not any.

Indeed! in truth!-how warily you swear?
Tis well: if ill it be not: yet had I
The ruffian in me, and were drawn before you
But in light colours, I do know indeed,
You could not swear indeed, But thunder oaths
That should shake heaven, drown the harmonious sphers,
And pierce a soul (that loved her makers honour)
With horror and amazement.

Shall I swear?
Will you believe me then?

Worst then of all,
Our sins by custom, seem (at last) but small.
Were I but over your threshold, a next man,
And after him a next, and then a fourth,
Should have this golden hooke, and lascivious bait,
Thrown out to the full length, why let me tell you:
I ha seen letters sent from that white hand,
Tuning such musi^ke to Matheos ear.

Mathaeo! that's true, but believe it, I
No sooner had laid hold upon your presence,
But straight mine eye conueid you to my heart.

Oh, you cannot fain with me, why, I know Lady,
This is the common passion of you all,
To hooke in a kind gentleman, and then
Abuse his coin, conveying it to your lover,
And in the end you show him a french trick,
And so you leave him, that a coach may run
Between his legs for breadth.

O by my soul!
Not I: therein i'll prove an honest whore,
In being true to one, and to no more.

If any be disposed to trust your oath,
Let him: i'll not be he* I know you feine
All that you speak, I: for a mingled harlot,
Is true in nothing but in being false.
What! shall I teach you how to loath your self?
And mildly to^: not without sense or reason.

I am content, I would fain loath my self,
If you not love me.

Then if your gracious blood be not all wasted,
I shall assay to do it.
Lend me your silence, and attention,-you have no soul,
That makes you wey so light: heavens treasure bought it,
And half a crown hath sold it: for your body
Is like the common shore, that still receives
All the towns filth. The sin of many men
Is within you, and thus much I suppose,
That if all your committers stood in rank,
Theide make a lane, (in which your shame might dwell)
And with their spaces reach from hence to hell.
Nay, shall I urge it more, there has been known,
As many by one harlot, maym'd and dismembered,
As would ha stuffed an Hospital: this I might
Apply to you, and perhaps do you right:
O you're as base as any beast that bears,
Your body is ee'ne hired, and so are theirs.
For gold and sparkling jewels, (if he can)
You'll let a Iewe get you with christian:
Be he a Moore, a Tartar, tho his face
Look vglier then a dead mans scull,
Could the devil put on a humane shape,
If his purse shake out crowns, up then he gets,
Whores will be rid to hell with golden bits:
So that you're crueller then Turks, for they
Sell Christians only, you sell your selves away.
Why those that love you, hate you: and will term you
Lickerish damnation: wish themselves half sunk
After the sin is laid out, and ee'ne curse
Their fruitless riot, (for what one begets
Another poisons) lust and murder hit,
A tree being often shook, what fruit can knit?

O me unhappy!

I can vex you more;
A harlot is like Dunkirke, true to none,
Swallows both English, Spanish, fulsome Dutch,
Blacke-doord Italian last of all the French,
And he sticks to you faith: gives you your diet,
Brings you acquainted, first with monsier Doctor,
And then you know what follows.

Misery.
Rank, s^nking, and most loathsome misery.

Me thinks a toad is happier then a whore,
That with one poison swells, with thousands more
The other stocks her veins: harlot: fie! fie,
You are the miserablest Creatures breathing,
The very slaves of nature: mark me else,
You put on rich attires, others eyes wear them,
You eat, but to supply your blood with sin,
And this strange curse ee'ne haunts you to your graves.
From fools you get, and spend it upon slaves:
Like Bears and Apes, you're baited and show tricks
For money; but your Bawd the sweetness licks.
Indeed you are their Iourney-women, and do
All base and damned works they list set you to:
So that you ne'er are rich; for do but show me,
In present memory, or in ages past,
The fairest and most famous Courtesan,
Whose flesh was dearest; that raised the price of sin,
And held it up; to whose intemperate bosom,
Princes, Earles, Lords, the worst has bin a knight,
The mean a Gentleman, have offred up
Whole Hecatombs of sighs, raind in showers
Handfuls of gold, yet for all this, at last
Diseases sucked her marrow, then grew so poor,
That she has begged, e'ene at a beggars door.
And (wherein heaven has a singer) when this Idol,
From coast to coast, has leapt on foreign shores,
And had more worship, the th'outlandish whores:
When several Nations have gone over her,
When for each several City she has seen,
Her Maidenhead has bin new, bin sold dear:
Did live well there, might have died unknown,
And vndefam'd; back comes she to her own,
And there both miserably lives and dyes,
Scorned even of those, that once adored her eyes,
As if her fatall-circled life, thus ran,
Her pride should end there, where it first began.
What do you weep to hear your Story read?
Nay, if you spoil your cheeks, I'll read no more.

O yes, I pray proceed:
Indeed 'twill do me good to weep indeed.

To give those tears a relish, this I add,
You're like the Iewes, scattered, in no place certain,
Your days are tedious, your hours burdensome:
And were it not for full suppers, midnight Revels,
Dancing, wine, ryotous meetings, which do drown,
And bury quite in you all virtuous thoughts,
And on your eye-lids hang so heavily,
They have no power to look so high as heaven,
Youde sit and muse on nothing but despair,
Curse that devil Lust, that so burns up your blood,
And in ten thousand shivers break your glass
For his temptation. Say you taste delight,
To have a golden Gull from ^ize to See,
To meat you in his hot luxurious arms,
Yet your nights pay for all: I know you dream
Of warrants, whips, Beadles, and then start
At a doors windy creak: think every Weezle
To be a Constable: and every Rat
A long tayld Officer: Are you now not slaves?
Oh you have damnation without pleasure for it!
Such is the state of Harlots. To conclude,
When you are old, and can well paint no more,
You turn Bawd, and are then worse then before:
Make use of this: farewell.

Oh, I pray stay.

See Matheo comes not: time hath bard me,
Would all the Harlots in the town had heard me.

Stay yet a little longer. no: quite gone!
Cursed be that minute (for it was no more.
So soon a maid is changed into a Whore)
Wherein I first fell, be it for ever black;
Yet why should sweet Hipolito shun mine eyes;
For whose true love I would become pure-honest,
Hate the worlds mixtures, the smiles of gold:
Am I not fair? Why should he fly me then?
Fair creatures are desired, not scorned of men.
How many Gallants have drunk healths to me,
Out of their daggerd arms, thought the blessed,
Enjoying but mine eyes at prodigal feasts!
And does Hipolito detest my love?
Oh, sure their heedless lusts but flattred me,
I am not pleasing, beautiful nor young,
Hipolito hath spied some ugly blemish,
Eclipsing all my beauties: I am foul:
Harlot! I, that's the spot that taynts my soul:
What! has he left his weapon here behind him,
And gone forgetful? O fit instrument
To let forth all the poison of my flesh!
Thy M. hates me, cause my blood hath ranged:
But when tis forth, then heel believe Ime chag'd.

Mad woman, what art doing?

Either love me,
Or split my heart upon thy Rapiers point:
Yet do not neither; for thou then destroyst
That which I love thee for (thy virtues) here, here,
You are crueller, and kilst me with disdain:
To die so, sheds no blood, yet tis worse payne.
Not speak to me! not bid farewell! a scorn!
Hated! this must not be, some means I'll try.
Would all Whores were as honest now, as I.

See Gentlemen, what you lack? a fine Holland, a fine Cambric, see what you
buy.


Holland for shirts, Cambric for bands, what is't you lack?


Sfoot, I lack em all, nay more, I lack money to buy em: let me see, let me
look again: mass this is the shop; What Coz! sweet Coz! how dost ifayth, since
last night after candlelight? we had good sport ifayth, had we not? and when
shals laugh again?


When you will, Cozen.


Spoke like a kind Lacedemonia: I see yonders thy husband.


^ ^her's the sweet youth, God bless him.


And how is't Cozen? how? how is't thou squall?


Well, Cozen, how fare you?


How fare I? troth, for sixpence a meal, wench, as well as heart can wish, with
Calves chaldron^ and chitterlings, besides I have a Punch after supper, as good
as a roasted Apple.


Are you my wives Cozen?


A am, sir, what hast thou to do with that?


O, nothing but you're welcome.


The Devils dung in thy teeth: I'll be welcome whether thou wilt or no, I: What
Ring's this Coz? very pretty and fantastical ifayth, lets see it.


Puh! nay you wrench my finger.


I ha sworn I'll have it, and I hope you will not let my oaths be cracktin the
ring, will you? I hope, sir, you are not mallicolly at this for all your great
looks: are you angry?


Angry? not I sir, nay, if she can part
So easily with her Ring, tis with my heart.

Suffer this, sir, suffer all, a whoreson Gull, to --,


Peace, George, when she has reaped what I have sown,
Sheele say, one grain tastes better of her own,
Then whole sheaves gatherd from another land:
Wit's never good, till bought at a dear hand.

But in the mean time she makes an Ass of some body.


See, see, see, sir, as you turn your back, they do nothing but kiss.


No matter, let 'em: when I touch her lip,
I shall not feel his kisses, no nor miss
Any of her lip: no harm in kissing is.
Look to your business, pray, make up your wares.

Troth Coz, and well remembered, I would thou would give me five yards of
Lawn, to make my Punk some falling bands a the fashio, three falling one upon
another: for that's the new editio now: she's out of linen horribly too,
troth, sha's never a good smock to her back neither, but one that has a great
many patches in it, that I'm fain to wear my self for want of shift to:
prithee put me into holesom napery, bestow some clean commodities upon us.


Reach me those Cambrics, the Lawns hither.


What to do wife? to lavish out my goods upon a fool?


Fool! Sneales eat the fool, or I'll so batter your crown, that it shall
scarce go for five shillings.


Do you hear sir? you're best be quiet, say a fool tells you so.


Nailes, I think so, for thou telst me.


Are you angry sir, because I named the fool?
Trust me, you are not wife, in mine own house;
And to my face to play the Antique thus:
If you'll needs play the madman, choose a stage
Of lesser compass, where few eyes may note
Your actions error; but if still you miss,
As here you do, for one clap, ten will hiss.

Zwounds Cozen, he talks to me, as if I were a scurvy Tragedian.


Sir George, I ha thought upon a device, how to break his pate, beat him
soundly, and ship him away.


Do it.


I'll go in, pass thorough the house, give some of our fellow Prentices the
watch-word when they shall enter, then come fetch my master in by a wile, and
place one in the hall to hold him in conference, whilst we cudgel the Gull out
of his coxcomb.


Do it: away, do it.


Must I call twice for these Cambrics lawns?


Nay see, you anger her, George, prithee dispatch.


Two of the choicest pieces are in the warehouse sir.


Go fetch them presently.


I, do, make haste, sir.


Why were you such a stranger all this while, being my wives Cozen?


Stranger? no sir, I me a natural Millaner borne.


I perceive still it is your natural guise to mistake me, but you are welcome
sir, I much wish your acquaintance.


My acquaintance? I scorn that ifayth; I hope my acquaintance goes in chains
of gold three and fifty times double: you know who I mean, Coz, the posts of
his gate are a painting to.


Signior Pandulfo the Marchat desires conference with you.


Signior Pandulfo? I'll be with him straight. Attend your mistress and the
Gentleman.


When do you show those pieces?


I, when do you show those pieces?


Presently sir, presently, we are but charging the.


Come sir, you Flat-cap, where be these whites?


Flat-cap^ hark in your ear sir, yare a flat fool, an Ass, a gull, I'll
thrum you: do you see this cambric sir?


Sfoot Coz, a good jest, did you hear him? he told me in my ear, I was a flat
fool, an Ass, a Gull, and I'll thrumb you: do you see this Cambric sir?


What, not my men, I hope?


No, not your men, but one of your men isayth.


I pray sir, come hither, what say you to this? here an excellent good one.


I marry, this likes me well, cut me off some half score yards.


Let your whores cut, yare an impudent cox comb, you get none, yet I'll thrum
you.-A very good Cambric sir.


Again, again, as God judge me: Sfoot, Coz, they stand thruming here with me all
day, yet I get nothing.


A word I pray sir, you must not be angry, prentices have hot bloods, young
fellows,-What say you to this piece? look you, tis so delicate, so soft, so
even, so fine a third, that a Lady may wear it.


Sfoot I think so, if a Knight marry my Punck, a Lady shall wear it: cut me
off 20. yards: you are an honest lad.


Not without money, gull, i'll through you to.


Gull, we'll thrum you.


O Lord, sister, did you not hear something cry thrum? zounds your men here
make a plain Asle of me.


What, to my face so impudent?


I, in a cause so honest, we'll not suffer
Our masters goods to vanish money less.

You will not suffer them.


No, and you may blush,
In going about to vex so mild a breast,
As is our masters.

Take away those pieces.
Cozen, I give them freely.

Mass, and I'll take em as freely.


We'll make you lay em down again more freely.


Help, help, my brother will be murdered.


How now, what coil is here? forbear, I say.


He calls us Flatcaps, and abuses us.


Why, sirs? do such examples flow from me?


They are of your keeping sir, alas poor brother.


I faith they hapepperd me, sister: look, dost not spin? call you these
Prentices? I'll ne'er play at cards more when clubs is trump: I have a goodly
coxcomb, sister, have I not?


Sister and brother, brother to my wife.


If you have any skill in Heraldry, you may soon know that, break but her
pate, and you shall see her blood and mine is all one.


A Surgeon, run, a Surgeon: Why then wore you that forged name of Cozen?


Because its a common thing to call Coz, and mingle now adays all the world
over.


Cozen! A name of much deceit, folly and sin,
For under that common abused word,
Many an honest tempered Cityzen
Is made a monster, and his wife trained out
To foul adulterous action, full of fraud.
I may well call that word, A Cities Bawd.

^roth, brother, my sister would needs ha me take upon me to gull your patience
a little: but it has made double Gules on my coxcomb.


What, playing the woman? blabbing now you fool?


O, my wife did but exercise a jest upon your wit.


Sfoot, my wit bleeds for it, me thinks.


Then let this warning more of sense afford.
The name of Cozen is a bloody word.

I'll ne'er call Coz again whilst I live; to have such a coil about it: this
should be a Coronation day; for my head runs Claret lustily.


Go with the Surgeon to have great respect.
How now, my friend, what, do they sit to day?

Yes sir, they expect you at the Senate-house.

I thak your pains, I'll not be last man there.
My gown, George, go, my gown. A happy land,
Where grave men meet each cause to understand,
Whose consciences are not cut out in bribes,
To gull the poor mans right: but in even scales,
Peize rich poor, without corruptions veyles.
Come, wheres the gown?

I cannot find the key sir.

Request it of your mistress.

Come not to me for any key.
I'll not be troubled to deliver it.

Good wife, kind wife, it is a needful trouble, but for my gown.


Moths swallow down your gown:
you set my teeth an edge with talking on it.

Nay pry thee, sweet, I cannot meet without it,
I should have a great fine set on my head.

Set on your coxcomb: tush, fine me no fi^es.

Believe me (sweet) none greets the Senate-house, without his Robe of
reverence, that's his Gown.


Well, then you're like to cross that custom once,
You get nor key, nor gown, and so depart:
This trick will vex him sure, and fret his heart.

Stay, let me see, I must have some device,
My cloke's too short: fie, fie, no cloak will do it:
It must be something fashioned like a gown,
With my arms out: oh George, come hither George,
I pry thee lend me thine advice.

Troth sir, were it any but you, they would break open chest.

O no, break open chest! that's a Thieves office:
Therein you counsel me against my blood:
'Twould show impatience that, any meek means
I would be glad to embrace. Mass I have got it:
Go, step up, fetch me down one of the Carpets,
The saddest coloured Carpet, honest George,
Cut thou a hole ith middle for my neck,
Two for mine arms, nay prithee look not strange.

I hope you do not think sir, as you mean.


Prithee about it quickly, the hour chides me:
Warily George, softly, take heed of eyes,
Out of two evils he's accounted wise,
That can pick out the least; the Fine imposde
For an vn-gowned Senator, is about
Forty Cruzadoes, the Carpet not'boue four.
Thus have I chosen the lesser evil yet,
Preserved my patience, foyld her desperate wit.

Here, sir, here's the Carpet.


O well done, George, we'll cut it just ith midst:
Tis very well I thank thee, help it on.

It must come over your head, sir, like a wenches petticoat.

You are in the right, good George, it must indeed.
Fetch me a nightcap: for I'll gyrd it close,
As if my health were queazy: 'twill show well
For a rude careless night-gowne, will it not think?

Indifferent well, sir, for a night-gowne, being girt pleated.

I, and a night-cap on my head.

That's true sir, I'll run fetch one, a staff.

For thus they cannot choose but construe it,
One that is out of health, takes no delight,
Wears his apparel without appetite,
And puts on heedles raiment without form.
So so, kind George, be secret now: prithee do not laugh at me till I me out of
sight.


I laugh? not I sir.

Now to the Senate-house:
Methinks, I'd rather wear, without a frown,
A patient Carpet, then an angry Gown.

Now looks my M. just like one of our carpet knights, only he's somewhat the
honester of the two.


What, is your master gone?

Yes forsooth, his back is but new turned.

And in his cloak? did he not vex and swear?

No, but heel make you swear anon: no indeed, he went away like a lamb.


Key sink to hell: still patient, patient still!
I am with child to vex him: prithee George,
If ere thou look for favour at my hands,
Uphold one Jest for me.

Against my master?

Tis a mere iestin faith: say, wilt thou do it?

Well, what is't?

Here, take this key, thou know where all things lie,
Put on thy masters best apparel, Gown,
Chain, Cap, Ruff, every thing, be like himself,
And against his coming home, walk in the shop,
Fain the same carriage, and his patient look,
'Twill breed but a jest thou know, speak, wilt thou?

'Twill wrong my masters patience.

Prithee George.

Well, if you'll save me harmless, and put me under covert barn, I am content
to please you provided it may breed no wrong against him.


No wrong at all: here take the Key, be gone:
If any vex him, this: if not this, none

O Roger, Roger, where's your mistress, wher's your mistress? there's the finest,
neatest Gentleman at my house, but newly come over: O where is she, where is
she, where is she?


My mistress is abroad, but not amongst em: my mistress is not the whore now that
you take her for.


How? is she not a whore? do you go about to take away her good name, Roger?
you are a fine Pandar indeed.


I tell you* Madonna Finger-locke, I am not sad for nothing, I ha not eaten one
good meal this three thirty days: I had wont to get sixteen pence by
fetching a pottle of Hypocras: but now those days are past: we had as good
doings, Madonna Finger-locke, she within doors and I without, as any poor young
couple in Millain.


Gods my life, and is she changed now?


I ha lost by her squeamishness, more then would have builded 12. bawdy
houses.

And had she no time to turn honest but now? what a vile woman is this? twenty
pound a night, I'll be sworn, Roger, in good gold and no silver: why here was a
time, if she should ha picked out a time, it could not be better! gold enough
stirring; choice of men, choice of hair, choice of beards, choice of legs, and
choice of every, every, every thing: it cannot sink into my head, that she
should be such an Ass. Roger, I never believe it.


Here she comes now.


O sweet Madonna, on with your loose gown, your felt your feather, there's the
sweetest, proprest, gallantest Gentleman at my house, he smells all of Musk
Amber greece, his pocket full of Crowns, flame-colourd doublet, red satin hose,
Carnation silk stockings, and a leg and a body, oh!


Hence, thou our sexes monster, poisonous Bawd,
Lusts Factor, and damnations Orator,
Gossip of hell, were all the Harlots sins
Which the whole world conteynes, numbered together,
Thine far exceeds them all; of all the creatures
That ever were created, thou art basest:
What serpent would beguile thee of thy Office?
It is detestable: for thou liu'st
Upon the dregs of Harlots, guard'st the door,
Whilst couples go to dancing: O course devil!
Thou art the bastards curse, thou brandst his birth,
The lechers French disease; for thou dry-suckst him:
The Harlots poison, and thine own confusion.

Mary come up with a pox, have you no body to rail against, but your Bawd now?


And you, Knave Pandar, kinsman to a Bawd.


You and I Madonna, are Cozens.


Of the same blood and making, near allied,
Thou, that slave to sixpence, base-mettald villain.

Sixpence? nay that's not so; I never took under two shillings four pence, I
hope I know my fee.


I know not against which most to inveigh:
For both of you are damned so equally.
Thou never spar'st for oaths: swearst any thing,
As if thy soul were made of shoe-leather.
God dam me, Gentleman, if she be within,
When in the next room she's found dallying.

If it be my vocation to swear, every man in his vocation: I hope my betters
swear and dam themselves, and why should not I?


Roger, you cheat kind gentlemen*


The more gulls they.


Slave, I cashier thee.


And you do cashier him, he shall be entertaynd.


Shall I? then blurt a your service.


As hell would have it, entertaynd by you!
I dare the devil himself to match those two.

Ma^y gup, are you grown so holy, so pure, so honest with a pox?


Scurvy honest Punck! But stay Madonna, how must our agreement be now? for you
know I am to have all the comings in at the hall door, you at the chamber
door.


True Rog. except my veils.


Veils, what veils?


Why as thus, if a couple come in a Coach, light to lie down a little, then
Roger, that's my fee, you may walk abroad; for the Coach man himself is their
Pandar.


Is a so? in truth I have almost forgot, for want of exercise: But how if I
fetch this Citizens wife to that Gull, that Madonna to that Gallant, how then?


Why then, Roger, you are to have sixpence a lane, so many lanes, so many
sixpences.


Is't so? the I see we two shall agree and live together.


I Roger, so long as there be any Taverns and bawdy houses in Millain.


THe Courtiers flattering Jewels,
(Temptations only fewels)
The Lawyers ill-got monies,
That suck up poor Bees Honyes:
The Citizens sonne's riot,
The gallant costly diet:
Silks and Veluets, Pearls and Ambers,
Shall not draw me to their Chambers.
Silks and Veluets, c.
Oh, tis in vain to write: it will not please,
Ink on this paper would ha but presented
The foul black spots that stick upon my soul,
And rather make me lothsomer, then wrought
My loves impression in Hipolitoes thought.
No, I must turn the chaste leaves of my breast,
And pick out some sweet means to breed my rest.
Hipolito, believe me I will be
As true unto thy heart, as thy heart to thee,
And hate all men, their gifts and company.
You, goody Punck, subandi Cockatrice, O yare a sweet whore of your promise,
are you not think you? how well you came to supper to us last night: mew, a
whore break her word! nay you may blush, hold down your head at it well
enough: Sfoot, ask these gallants if we staid not till we were as hungry as
Seriants.


I, and their Yeoman too.


Nay faith Acquaintance, let me tell you, you forgot your self too much: we
had excellent cheer, rare vintage, and were drunk after supper.


And when we were in our Woodcocks (sweet Rogue) a brace of Gulles, dwelling
here in the City, came in paid all the shot.


Pox on her, let her alone.


O, I pray do, if you be Gentlemen:
I pray depart the house; beshrew the door
For being so easily entreated: faith,
I lent but little ear unto your talk,
My mind was busied otherwise in troth,
And so your words did unregarded pass:
Let this suffice, I am not as I was.

I am not what I was! no I'll be sworn thou art not: for thou were honest at
five, now you are a Puncke at fifteen: thou were yesterday a simple whore, and
now you are a cunning Conny-catching Baggage to day.


I'll say I me worse, I pray forsake me then,
I do desire you leave me, Gentlemen,
And leave your selves: O be not what you are,
(Spendthrifts of soul and body)
Let me persuade you to forsake all Harlots,
Worse the the deadliest poisons, they are worse:
For over their souls hangs an eternal curse,
In being slaves to slaves, their labours perish,
They are seldom blessed with fruit; for ere it blossoms,
Many a worm confounds it.
They have no issue but foul ugly ones,
That run along with them, e'ene to their graves:
For stead of children, they breed rank diseases,
And all, you Gallants, can bestow on them,
Is that French Infant, which ne'er acts but speaks:
What shallow son heir then, foolish gallant,
Would waste all his inheritance, to purchase
A filthy loathd disease? and pawn his body
To a dry evil: that vsurie's worst of all,
When th'interest will eat out the principal.

Sfoot, she gulls em the best: this is always her fashion, when she would be
rid of any company that she cares not for, to enjoy mine alone.


Whats here? instructions, Admonitions, and Caveats? come out, you scabberd of
vengeance.


Fluello, spurn your hounds when they fist, you shall not spurn my Punk, I
can tell you my blood is vexed.


Pox a your blood: make it a quarrel.


You're a Slave, will that serve turn?


Sbloud, hold, hold.


Matheo, Fluello, for shame put up.


Spurn my sweet Varlet!


O how many thus
Moved with a little folly, have let out
Their souls in Brothel houses, fell down and dyed
Just at their Harlots foot, as 'twere in pride.

Matheo, we shall meet.


I, I, any where, saving at Church: pray take heed we meet not there.


Adieu, Damnation.


Cockatrice, farewell.


There's more deceit in women, then in hell.


Ha, ha, thou doest gull em so rarely, so naturally: if I did not think thou
had bin in earnest: thou art a sweet Rogue for it ifayth.


Why are not you gone to, Signior Matheo?
I pray depart my house: you may believe me,
In troth I have no part of Harlot in me.

How's this?


Indeed I love you not: but hate you worse
Then any man, because you were the first
Gave money for my soul; you brake the Ice,
Which after turned a puddle: I was led
By your temptation to be miserable:
I pray seek out some other that will fall,
Or rather (I pray) seek out none at all.

Is't possible, to be impossible, an honest whore! I have heard many honest
wenches turn Stru^npets with a wet finger; but for a Harlot to turn honest,
is one of Hercules labours: It was more easy for him in one night to make
fifty queens, then to make one of them honest again in fifty years: come, I
hope thou dost but jest.


Tis time to leave off jesting, I had almost
Jested away Salvation: I shall love you,
If you will soon forsake me.

God buy thee.

Oh, tempt no more women: shun their weighty curse,
Women (at best) are bad, make them not worse,
You gladly seek our sexes overthrow:
But not to raise our states for all your wrongs.
Will you vouchsafe me but due recompense,
To mar^y with me?

How, marry with a Punck, a Cockatrice, a Harlot? mary foh, I'll be burnt thorough
the nose first.


Why la? these are your oaths you love to undo us,
To put heaven from us, whilst our best hours waste:
You love to make us lewd, but never chaste.

I'll hear no more of this: this ground upon,
You are damned for altering thy Religion.

Thy lust and sin speak so much: go thou my ruin,
The first fall my soul took; by my example
I hope few maidens now will put their heads
Under men's girdels: who least trusts, is most wise:
Men's oaths do cast a mist before our eyes.
My best of wit be ready: now I go,
By some device to greet Hipolito.

So, this is Monday morning, and now must I to my housewifery: would I had bin
created a Shoemaker; for all the gentle craft are gentlemen every Monday by
their Copy, scorn (then) to work one true stitch. My M. means sure to turn
me into a student; for here's my book, here my desk, here my light; this my
close chamber, and here my Punck: so that this dull drowsy first day of the
week, makes me half a Priest, half a Chandler, half a painter, half a
Sexton, I half a Bawd: for (all this day) my office is to do nothing but keep
the door. To prove it, look you, this good-face yonder gentleman (so soon as
ever my back's turned) will be nought together.


Are all the windows shut?


Close sir, as the fist of a Courtier that hath stood in three reigns.


Thou art a faithful servant, and obseru'st
The Calender, both of my solemn vows,
And ceremonious sorrow: Get thee gone,
I charge thee on thy life, let not the sound
Of any woman's voice pierce through that door.

If they do, my Lord, I'll pearce some of them.
What will your Lordship have to breakfast?

Sighs.


What to dinner?


Tears.


The one of them, my Lord, will fill you too full of wind, the other wet you
too much. What to supper?


That which (now) thou can not get me, the constancy of a woman.


Indeed that's harder to come by then ever was Ostend.


Prithee away.


I'll make away my self presently, which few Servants will do for their Lords;
but rather help to make them away: Now to my dore-keeping, I hope to pick
something out of it.


My Infelices face: her brow, her eye,
The dimple on her cheek: and such sweet skill,
Hath from the cunning workman's pencil flown,
These lips look fresh and lively as her own,
Seeming to move and speak. Las^ now I see,
The reason why fond women love to buy
Adulterate complexion: here 'tis read,
False colours last after the true be dead.
Of all the Roses grafted on her cheeks,
Of all the graces dancing in her eyes,
Of all the Music set upon her tongue,
Of all that was past woman's excellence,
In her white bosom, look! a painted board,
Circumscribes all: Earth can no bliss affoord.
Nothing of her, but this? this cannot speak,
It has no lap for me to rest upon,
No lip worth tasting: here the worms will feed,
As in her coffin: hence then idle Art,
True loue's best pictured in a true-loues heart.
Here art thou drawn sweet maid, till this be dead,
So that thou liu'st twice, twice art buried.
Thou figure of my friend, lye there. Whats here?
Perhaps this shrewd pate was mine enemies:
Las! say it were: I need not fear him now:
For all his braves, his contumelious breath,
His frowns (tho dagger-pointed) all his plot,
(Tho 'nere so mischievous) his Italian pills,
His quarrels, and (that common fence) his law,
See, see, they're all eaten out; here's not left one?
How clean they're picked away! to the bare bone!
How mad are mortals then to rear great names
On tops of swelling houses? or to wear out
Their fingers ends (in dirt,) to scrape up gould!
Not caring so (that Sumpter-horse) the back
Be hung with gaudy trappings, with what course,
Yea rags most beggarly, they cloth the soul:
Yet (after all) their Gay-nes looks thus foul.
What fools are men to build a garish tomb,
Only to save the carcass whilst it rots,
To maintein't long in stinking, make good carrion,
But leave no good deeds to preserve them sound,
For good deeds keep men sweet, long above ground,
And must all come to this; fools; wise, all hither,
Must all heads thus at last be laid together:
Draw me my picture then, thou grave neat workman,
After this fashion, not like this; these colours
In time kissing but air, will be kissed off,
But here's a fellow; that which he lays on,
Till dooms day, alters not complexion.
Deaths the best Painter then: They that draw shapes,
And live by wicked faces, are but Gods Apes,
They come but near the life, and there they stay,
This fellow draws life to: his Art is fuller,
The pictures which he makes are without colour.

Here's a person would speak with you Sir.


Hah!


A parson sir would speak with you.


Vicar?


Vicar? no sir, has too good a face to be a Vicar yet, a youth, a very youth.


What youth? of man or woman? lock the doors.


If it be a woman, mary-bones and Potato pies keep me for meddling with her,
for the thing has got the breeches, tis a male-varlet sure my Lord, for a
woman's tailor nor measurd him.


Let him give thee his message and be gone.


He says hes signior Mathaeos man, but I know he lies.


How doest thou know it?


Cause has ne'er a beard: tis his boy I think sir, whosoere paid for his
nursing.


Send him and keep the door.
Fata si liceat mihi,
Finger arbitrio meo,
Temperem Zephyro leuivela.
I'd sail were I to choose, not in the Ocean,
Cedars are shaken, when shrubs do feel no bruize*
How? from Mathaeo.

Yes my Lord.

Art sick?

Not all in health my Lord.

Keep off.

I do:
Hard fate when women are compelled to woo.

This paper does speak nothing.

Yes my Lord,
Matter of life it speaks, and therefore writ
In hidden Character; to me iustruction
My master gives, And (less you please to stay
Till you both meet) I can the text display.

Do so: read out.

I am already out:
Look on my face, and read the strangest story!

What villain, ho?

Call you my Lord?

Thou slave, thou hast let in the devil.

Lord bless us, where? hes not cloven my Lord that I can see: besides the
devil goes more like a Gentleman than a Page: good my Lord Boon couragio.


Thou hast let in a woman in mans shape.
And thou art damned for it.

Not damned I hope for putting in a woman to a Lord.

Fetch me my Rapier, -- do not: I shall kill thee.
Purge this infected chamber of that plague,
That runs upon me thus: Slave, thrust her hence.

Alas my Lord, I shall never be able to thrust her hence without help: come
Mermaid you must to Sea again.


Here me but speak, my words shall be all Music:
Here me but speak.

Another beats the door,
The other Shee-diuell, look.

Why then hell's broke loose.

Hence, guard the chamber: let no more come on,
One woman serves for mans damnation.
Beshrew thee, thou dost make me violate,
The chastest and most sanctimonious vow,
That ere was entered in the court of heaven:
I was on meditations spottles wings,
upon my journey thither; like a storm
Thou beats my ripened cogitations,
flat to the ground: and like a theife dost stand,
To steal devotion from the holy land.

If woman were thy mother; if thy hart,
Be not all Marble, (or ift Marble be)
Let my tears soften it, to pity me,
I do beseech the do not thus with scorn,
Destroy a woman.

Woman I beseech thee,
Get thee some other suite, this fits thee not,
I would not grant it to a kneeling Queen,
I cannot love thee, nor I must not: See,
The copy of that obligation,
Where my soule's bound in heavy penalties.

She's dead you told me, shele let fall her suite.

My vows to her, fled after her to heaven,
Were thine eyes clear as mine, thou might behold her,
Watching upon yon battlements of stars,
How I observe them: should I break my bond,
This board would rive in twain, these wooden lips
Call me most periurde villain, let it suffice,
I ha set thee in the path; Is't not a sign,
I love thee, when with one so most most dear,
I'll have thee fellows? All are fellows there.

Be greater then a king, save not a body,
But from eternal shipwreck keep a soul,
If not, and that again, sins path I tread,
The grief be mine, the guilt fall on thy head.

Stay and take Physic for it, read this book,
Ask counsel of this head whats to be done,
Heal strike it dead that tis damnation,
If you turn turk again, oh do it not,
The heaven cannot allure you to do well
From doing ill let hell fright you: and learn this,
The soul whose bosom lust did never touch,
Is Gods fair bride, and maidens souls are such:
The soul that leaving chastities white shore,
Swims in hot sensual streams, is the devils whore,
How now: who comes.

No more knaves my Lord that wear smocks: here's a letter from doctor Benedict;
I would not enter his man, tho he had hairs at his mouth, for fear he should
be a woman, for some women have beards, mary they are half witches, Slid you
are a sweet youth to wear a codpeece, and have no pins to stick vpont.


I'll meet the doctor, tell him, yet to night
I cannot: but at morrow rising Sun
I will not fail: go: woman fare thee well.

The lowest fall can be but into hell,
It does not move him. I must therefore fly,
From this undoing City, and with tears,
Wash off all anger from my fathers brow,
He cannot sure but joy seeing me new borne,
A woman honest first and then turn whore,
Is (as with me) common to thousands more,
But from a trumphet to turn chaste: that sound,
Has oft bin heard, that woman hardly found.

Hold up your hands gentlemen: here's one, two, three, (nay I warrant they are
sound pistols, and without flaws, I had them (of my sister, and I know she
uses to put nothing that's cracked,) three, four, five, six, seven, eight and
nine, by this hand bring me but a piece of his blood. and you shall have 9.
more. I'll lurk in a tavern not far off, provide supper to close up the end of
the Tragedy, the linen drapers remeber-stand toot I beseech you, play your
parts perfectly.


Look you Signior, tis not your gold that we way.


Nay, nay, way it and spare not, if it lack one grain of corn;
I'll give you a bushel of wheat to make it up.

But by your favour Signior, which of the servants is it, because wele punish
justly.


Mary tis the head man; you shall rast him by his tongue a pretty tall prating
fellow, with a Tuscalonian beard.


Tuscalonian: very good.


Cods life I was near so thrumbd since I was a gentleman: my coxcomb was dry
beaten as if my hair had been hemp.


Wele dry beat some of them.


Nay it grew so high, that my sister cried murder out very manfully: I have her
consent in a manner to have him pepperd, else i'll not doot to win more then ten
cheaters do at a rifling: break but his pate or so, only his mazer, because
i'll have his head in a cloth as well as mine, hes a linen draper and may take
enough. I could enter mine action of battery against him, but we may haps be
both dead and rotten before the lawyers would end it.


No more to do, but ensconce your self in the taueren; provide no great cheat,
couple of Capons, some Phesants, Plouers, an Oringeado-pie or so: but how
bloody so ere the day be, sally you not forth.


No, no, nay if I stir, some body shall stink: i'll not budge: i'll lie like a
dog in a manger.


Well, well, to the tavern, let not our supper be raw, for you shall have
blood enough-your belly full.


That's all so god same, I thirst after, blood for blood, bump for bump, nose
for nose, head for head, plaster for plaster, and so farewell: what shall I
call your names because i'll leave word, if any such come to the bar.


My name is Corporal Crambo.


and mine, Lieutenant Poh.


Poli. Is as tall a man as ever opened Oyster: I would not be the devil to
meet Poh, farewell.


Nor I by this light, if Poh be such a Poh.


Whats a clock now.


Tis almost 12.


That's well.
The Senate will leave wording presently:
But is George ready,

Yes forsooth, hes surbusht.


Now as you ever hope to win my favour,
Throw both your duties and respects on him,
With the like awe as if he were your master,
Let not your looks betray it with a smile,
Or ieering glance to any customer,
Keep a true Settled countenance, and beware,
You laugh not whatsoever you hear or see.

I warrant you mistress, let us alone for keeping our countenance: for if I
list, there's never a fool in all Myllan shall make me laugh, let him play the
fool never so like an Ass, whether it be the fat Court fool, or the lean
City fool.


enough then, call down George.


I hear him coming.

Be ready with your legs then let me see,
How curtzy would become him: gallantly!
Beshrew my blood a proper seemly man,
Of a choice carriage walks with a good port,

I thank you mistress, my back's broad enough, now my Masters gown's on.


Sure I should think it were the least of sin,
To mistake the master, and to let him in.

Twere a good Comedy of errors that in faith.


whist, whist, my master.


You all know your tasks: gods my life, whats that he has got vpon's back?
who can tell?


That can I, but I will not.


Girt about him like a mad-man: what: has he lost his cloak too: this is the
maddest fashion that ere I saw.

What said he George when he pasde by thee?

Troth Mistress nothing: not so much as a Be, he did not hum: not so much as a
bawd he did not hem: not so much as a Cuekold he did not ha: neither hum, hem,
nor ha, only stared me in the face, past along, and made hast in, as if my
looks had worked with him, to give him a stool.


Sure hes vexed now, this trick has moved his Spleen,
Hes angered now, because he uttered nothing:
And wordlesse wrath breaks out more violent,
May be heel strive for place, when he comes down,
But if thou love me George, affoord him none.

Nay let me alone to play my masters prize, as long as my Mistress warrants
me: Ime sure I have his best clothes on, and I scorn to give place to any that
is inferior in apparel to me, that's an Axiom, a principle, is observed as
much as the fashion; let that persuade you then, that lie shoulder with him for
the upper hand in the shop, as long as this chain will maintain it.


Spoke with the spirit of a Master, tho with the tongue of a Prentice.
Why how now mad-man? what in your tricksicoates!

O peace good Mistress:


I that he can, out of a whole piece of Lawn in faith.


Pray see your choice here Gentlemen.


O fine fool? what a mad-man? a patient mad-man? who ever heard of the like?
well sir I'll fit you and your humour presently: what? crosse-points, I'll untie
em all in a trice, I'll vex you faith: Boy take your cloak, quick, come.


Be covered George, this chain, and welted gown, Bare to this coat: then the
worlds upside down*


Vmh, vmh, hum.


That's the shop, and there's the fellow.


I but the Master is walking in there.


No matter, we'll in.


Sbloud doest long to lye in Limbo?


And Limbo be in hell, I care not.


Look you Gentlemen, your choice: Cambrics?


No sir, some shirting.


You shall.


Have you none of this stripped Canvas for doublets.


None stripped sir, but plain.


I think there be one piece stripped within.


Step sir and fetch it, hum, hum hum.


Look you Gentlemen, I'll make but one spredding, here's a piece of cloth, fine,
yet shall wear like Iron, tis without fault, take this upon my word, tis
without fault.


Then tis better than you sir.


I, and a number more, o that each soul
Were but as spotless as this Innocent white,
And had as few brakes in it.

'twould have some then: there was a fray here last day in this shop.


There was indeed a little flea-biting.


A Gentleman had his pate broke, call you that but a flea-biting.


He had so.


Zownes do you stand in it?


Sfoot clubs, clubs, prentices, down with em, ah you rogues, strike a Citizen
in's shop.


None of you stir I pray, forbear good George.


I beseech you sir, we mistook our marks, deli^er us our weapons.


Your head bleeds sir, cry clubs.


I say you shall not, pray be patient,
Give them their weapons, sirs you're best be gone,
I tell you here are boys more tough then Bears:
Hence, least more fists do walk about your ears.

We thank you sir.


You shall not follow them.
Let them alone pray, this did me no harm,
Troth I was cold, and the blow made me warm,
I thank em for it: besides I had decreed
To have a vain pricked, I did mean to bleed,
So that there's money saved: they are honest men,
Pray use em well, when they appear again.

Yes sir, we'll use em like honest men.


I well said George, like honest men, tho they be arrant knaves, for that's the
praise of the city; help to lay up these wares


Yonder he stands.


What in a Prentise-coate?


I, I, mad, mad, pray take heed.


How now? what news with them? what make they with my wife? officers is she
attachd? look to your wares.


He talks to himself, oh hes much gone indeed.


Pray pluck up a good heart, be not so fearful,
Sirs hark, we'll gather to him by degrees.

I, I, by degrees I pray: oh me! what makes he with the Lawn in his hand,
heel tear all the ware in my shop.


Fear not we'll catch him on a sudden.


O you had need do so, pray take heed of your warrant


I warrant mistress. -- Now Signior Candido?


Now sir, what news with you sir?


What news with you he says: oh hes far gon.


I pray fear nothing, lets alone with him,
Signior, you look not like your self me thinks,
(Steal you a the other side) you're changed, you're altered.

Changed sir, why true sir, is change strange, tis not the fashion unless it
alter: Monarchs turn to beggars; beggars creep into the nests of Princes,
Masters serve their prentices: Ladies their Serving-men, men turn to women.


And women turn to men.

I, and women turn to men, you say true, ha ha, a mad world, a mad world.


Have we caught you sir?


Caught me: well, well: you have caught: me.


He laughs in your faces.


A rescue Prentices, my maister's catch-pold.


I charge you keep the peace, or have your legs gartered with Irons, we have
from the Duke a warrant strong enough for what we do.


I pray rest quiet, I desire no rescue.


La: he desires no rescue, I as poor heart,
He talks against himself.

Well, whats the matter?

Look to that arm,
Pray make sure work, double the cord.

Why, why?

Look how his head goes! should he get but loose,
Oh twere as much as all our lives were worth.

Fear not, we'll make all sure for our own safety.

Are you at leisure now? well, whats the matter?
Why do I enter into bonds thus? ha?

Because you're mad, put fear upon your wife.

Oh I, I went in danger of my life, every minute.

What? am I mad say you, and I not know it?

That proves you mad, because you know it not.

Pray talk as little to him as you can,
You see hes too far spent.

Bound with strong corde,
A Cisters thread in faith had been enough,
To lead me any where: Wife do you long?
You are mad too, or else you do me wrong.

But are you mad indeed Master?

My Wife says so,
And what she says; George, is all truth you know:
And whether now? to Bethlem Monastery? -- ha! whether?

Faith even to the mad-mens pound.

A Gods name, still I feel my patience sound.

Come we'll see whether he goes, if the master be mad, we are his servants,
and must follow his steps, we'll be mad caps too; Farewell mistress, you shall
have us all in Bedlam.


I think, I ha fitted now, you and your clothes,
If this move not his patience, nothing can,
I'll swear then I have a saint, and not a man

give us a little leave. Doctor your news.

I sent for him my Lord: at last he came,
And did receive all speech that went from me,
As gilded pills made to prolong his health:
My credit with him wrought it: for, some men.
Swallow even empty hooks, like fools. that fear
No drowning where tis deepest, Cause tis clear:
In th'end we sat and eat: a health I drank
To Infaelices sweet departed soul,
(This train I knew would take.)

Twas excellent.

He fell with such devotion on his knees,
To pledge the same.

Fond superstitious fool?

That had he been inflamed with zeal of prayer,
He could not power't out with more reverence.
About my neck he hung, wept on my cheek,
Kissed it, and swore, he would adore my lips,
Because they brought forth Infaelices name.

Ha, ha, alack, alack.

The cup he lifs up high, and thus he said,
Here noble maid: drinks, and was poisoned.

and died?

And died my Lord.

Thou in that word,
Hast pei^d mine aged hours out with more years,
Than thou hast taken from Hipolito,
A noble youth he was, but lesser branches
Hindering the greaters growth, must be lopped off,
And feed the fire: Doctor we're now all thine,
And use us so: be bold.

Thanks gracious Lord:
My honoured Lord:

hmh.

I do beseech your grace to bury deep,
This bloody act of mine.

Nay, nay, for that,
Doctor look you toot: me it shall not move,
Their cursed that ill do, not that ill do love,

You throw an angry forehead on my face,
But be you pleased, backward thus for to look,
That for your good, this evil I undertook,

I, I, we construe so:

And only for your love.

Confessed: tis true.

Nor let it stand against me as a bar,
To thrust me from your presence: nor believe
(As Princes have quick thoughts,) that now my finger
Being deept in blood, I will not spare the hand,
But that for gold (as what can gold not do?)
I may be hi'rde to work the like on you,

Which to prevent.

Tis from my hart as far.

No matter Doctor, cause i'll fearless sleep,
And that you shall stand clear of that suspicion
I banish thee for ever from my court.
This principle is old but true as fate,
Kings may love treason, but the traitor hate,

Is't so: nay then Duke, your stale principle
With one as stale, the Doctor thus shall quit,
He falls himself that digs another pit,
How now: where is he? will he meet me:

meet you sir, he might have met with three fencers in this time and have
received less hurt then by meeting one Doctor of Physic: why sir has walked
under the old Abbey wall yonder this hour, till hes more cold then a
Citizens country house in Ianiuere, you may smell him behind sir; la you:
yonder he comes.


leave me.

Itch lurch if you will.

O my most noble friend.

Few but your self,
Could have intied me thus, to trust the Air,
With my close sighs, you send for me: what news?

Come you must doff this black: die that pale cheek,
Into his own colour; go: Attire your self
Fresh as a bridegroom, when he meets his bride,
The Duke has done much treason to thy love,
Tis now revealed, tis now to be revenged,
Be merry honoured friend, thy Lady lives.

What Lady?

Infaelice, She's reuiude;
Reuiude: alack! death never had the hart,
To take breath from her.

Vmh: I thank you sir,
Physic prolongs life, when it cannot save,
This helps not my hopes. mine are in their grave:
You do some wrong to mock me.

By that love,
Which I have ever borne you, what I speak
Is truth: the maiden lives: that funeral,
Dukes tears, the morning, was all counterfeit,
A sleepy draught cozend the world and you,
I was his minister and then chambred up,
To stop discovery.

O treacherous Duke:

He cannot hope so certainly for bliss:
As he believes that I have poisoned you,
He wode me toot, I yielded, and confirmed him,
In his most bloody thoughts.

A very devil!

Her did he closely coach to Bergamo,
And thither?

Will I ride, stood Bergamo,
In the low countries of black hell, i'll to her.

You shall to her, but not to Bergamo,
How passion makes you fly beyond your self.
Much of that weary journey I'ha cut off,
For she by letters hath intelligence,
Of your supposed death, her own interment,
And all those plots, which that false Duke, (her father)
Has wrought against you: And sheele meet you.

O when:

Nay see: how covetous are your desires,
Ea^ely to morrow morn.

O where good father.

At Bethlem monastery: are you pleased now?

At Bethlem monastery: the place well fits,
It is the scoole where those that loose their wits,
Practise again to get them: I am sick
Of that disease, all love is lunatic.

We'll steal away, this night in some disguise,
Father Anselmo, a most ^euerend Friar,
Expects our coming, before whom we'll lay,
Reasons so strong, that he shall yield, in bonds,
Oh holy wedlock, to tie both your hands.

This is such happiness:
That to believe it* tis impossible.

Let all your joys then die in misbeliefe,
I will reveal no more.

O yes good father,
I am so well acquainted with despair,
I know not how to hope: I believe all.

We'll hence this night, much must be done, much said
But if the Doctor fail not in his charms,
Your Lady shall ere morning fill these arms.

heavenly Physician: far thy fame shall sprede,
That make two lovers speak when they be dead.

O watch good George, watch which way the Duke comes.


Here comes one of the butter flies, ask him.


Pray sir, comes the duke this way.


He's upon coming mistress.


I thank you sir: Geroge are there many madfolkes, where thy Master lies.


O yes, of all countries some, but especially mad greekes they swarm: troth
mistress, the world is altered with you, you had not wont to stand thus with a
paper humbly complaining: but you're well enough served: prouander pricked you,
as it does many of our Cittie-wiues besides.


Doest think George we shall get him forth.


Truly mistress I cannot tel, I think you'll hardly get him forth: why tis
strange* Sfoot I have known many women that have had mad rascals to their
husbands, whom they would belabour by all means possible to keep em in their
right wits, but of a woman to long to turn a tame ma into a madman, why the
devil himself was never used so by his dam.


How does he talk George! ha! good George tell me.


Why your best go see.


Alas I am afraid.


Afraid! you had more need be ashamed: he may rather be afraid of you.


But George hes not stark mad, is he? he does not rave, hes not horne-mad
George is he?


Nay I know not that, but he talks like a Justice of peace, of a thousand
matters and to no purpose.


I'll to the monastery: I shall be mad till I enjoy him, I shall be sick till I
see him, yet when I do see him, I shall weep out mine eyes.


I, i'd fain see a woman weep out her eyes; that's as true, as to say, a mans
cloak burns; when it hangs in the water: I know you'll weep mistress, but
what says the painted cloth.

Trust not a woman when she cries,
For sheele pump water from her eyes,
With a wet finger, and in faster showers,
Then April when he rains down flowers.

I but George, that painted cloth is worthy to be hanged up for lying, all
women have not tears at will, unless they have good cause.


I but mistress how easily will they find a cause, and as one of our
Cheese-trenchers says very learnedly:

As out of Wormwood Bees suck Honey,
As from poor clients Lawyers firk money,
As Parsley from a roasted cunny.
So tho the day be ne'er so sunny,
If wives will have it rain, down then it drives,
The calmest husbands make the stormest wives,

Tame George, but I had on storming now.


Why that's well done, good mistress throw aside this fashion of your humour, be
not so fantastical in wearing it, storm no more, long no more. -- This
longing has made you come short of many a good thing that you might have had
from my Master: Here comes the Duke.


Oh I beseech you pardon my offence,
In that I durst abuse your Graces warrant,
Deliver forth my husband good my Lord.

Who is her husband?

Candido my Lord,

Where is he?

Hes among the lunatics,
He was a man made up without a gall,
Nothing could move him, nothing could convert
His meek blood into fury, yet like a monster,
I often beat at the most constant rock
Of his unshaken patience, and did long
To vex him.

Did you so?

And for that purpose,
Had warrant from your Grace, to cary him
To Bethlem Monastery, whence they will not free him,
Without your Graces hand that sent him in.

You have longd fair; tis you are mad I fear,
Its fit to fetch him thence, and keep you there:
If he be mad* why would you have him forth?

And please your grace, hes not stark mad, but only talks like a young
Gentleman, somewhat phantastically, that's all: there's a thousand about your
court, city and country madder then he.


Provide a warrant, you shall have our hand.


Here's a warrant ready drawn my Lord.


Get pen Inck, get pen inck:


Where is my Lord the Duke?


How now? more mad men.


I have strange news my Lord.


Of what? of whom?


Of Infaelice, and a marriage.


Ha! where? with whom.


Hipolito.


Here my Lord.


Hence with that woman, void the room.


Away, the Duke's vexed.


Whoop, come mistress the Duke's mad too.


Who told me that Hipolito was dead?


He that can make any man dead, the Doctor: but my Lord, hes as full of life
as wilde-fire, and as quick: Hipolito, the Doctor, and one more rid hence this
evening; the Inn at which they light is Bethlem Monastarie: Infaeliche comes
from Bergamo, and meets them there: Hipolito is mad, for he means this day to
be married, the afternoon is the hour, and Friar Anselmo is the knitter.


From Bergamo? is't possible? it cannot be,
It cannot be.

I will not swear my Lord,
But this intelligence I took from one,
Whose brains works in the plot.

Whats he?

Mathaeo.

Mathaeo knows all.

Hes Hipolitoes bosom.

How far stands Bethlem hence?

Six or seven miles.

Is't even so, not married till the afternoon you say?
Stay, stay, lets work out some prevention: how:
This is most strange, can none but mad-men serve
To dress their wedding dinner? All of you,
Get presently to horse; disguise your selves
Like Countrie-Gentlemen,
Or riding citizens, or so: and take
Each man a several path, but let us meet,
At Bethlem Monastery, some space of time
Being spent between the arrival each of other,
As if we came to see the Lunatics.
To horse, away, be secret on your lives,
Love must be punished that unjustly thrives.

Be secret on your lives! Castruchio
You're but a scurvy Spaniel; honest Lord,
Good Lady: Zounds their love is just, tis good,
And I'll prevent you, tho I swim in blood.

Nay, nay, resolve good father, or deny.

You press me to an act, both full of danger,
And full of happiness, for I behold.
Your fathers frowns, his threats, nay perhaps death,
To him that dare do this, yet noble Lord,
Such comfortable beams break through these clouds,
By this blessed marriage, that your honoured word
Being pawnd in my defence) I will tie fast,
The holy wedding Knot.

Tush fear not the Duke.

O son, wisely to fear: Is to be free from fear.

You have our words, and you shall have our lives,
To guard you safe from all ensuing danger.

I, I, chop em up and away.

Stay, when is't fit for me, safest for you,
To entertain this business.

Not till the evening.

Be it so, there is a chapel stands hard by,
Upon the West end of the Abbey wall,
Thither convey your selves, and when the sun
Hath turned his back upon this upper world,
I'll mary you, that done, no th^ndring voice,
Can break the sacred bond, yet Lady here you are most safe.

Father your lou's most dear.

I well said locke us into some little room by our selves that we may be mad
for an hour or two.


O good Mathaeo no, lets make no noise.


How! no noise! do you know where you are: sfoot amongst all the mad-caps in
Millan: so that to throw the house out at window will be the better, no man
will suspect that we lurk here to steal mutton: the more sober we are, the
more scurvy tis. And tho the Friar tell us, that here we are safest, ^'me not
of his mind, for if those lay here that had lost there money, none would ever
look after them, but hear are none but those that have lost their wits, o
that if hue and cry be made, hither theile come, and my reason is, because none
goes to be married till he be stark mad.


Muffle your selves yonders Fluello.

Zounds!

O my Lord these cloaks are not for this rain, the tempest is too great: I
come sweating to tell you of it, that you may get out of it.


Why whats the matter.

Whats the matter! you have matterd it fair: the Duk's at hand.

The Duke?

The very Duke.

Then all our plots are turned upon our heads; and we are blown up with our own
vnderminings. Sfoot how comes he, what villain durst betray our being here.


Castruchio, Castruchio told the Duke, and Mathaeo here told Castruchio.


Would you betray me to Chastruchio,


Sfoot he damned himself to the pit of hell if he spake ont again.


So did you swear to me, so were you damned.


Pox on em, there be no faith in men, if a man shall not believe oaths: he
took bread and salt by this light, that he would never open his lips.


Oh God, oh God.


Son be not desperate have patience, you shall trip your enemy down, by his
own slights, how far is the Duke hence.


Hes but new set out: Castruchio, Pioratto and Sinezi come along with him: you
have time enough yet to prevent them if you have but courage.


You shall steal secretly into the Chapel,
And presently be married; if the duke
Abide here still, spite of ten thousand eyes,
You shall escape hence like Friars.

O blessed disguised: O happy man.

Talk not of happiness till your closed hand,
Have her bit^' forehead, like the lock of time,
Be not too slow, nor hasty, now you clime,
Up to the tower of bliss, only be wary
And patient, that's all, if you like my plot
Build and dispatch, if not farewell, then not.

O Yes, we do applaud it, wee^e dispute,
No longer, but will hence and execute.
Fluello you'll ^tay here, let us be gon,
The ground that freighted lovers tread upon,
Is stuke with thorns.

Come then, away: tis meet,
To escape those thorns, to put on winged feet.

No words I pray Fluello, for it stands us upon.

Oh sir, let that be your lesson.
Alas poor lovers, on what hopes and fears,
Men toss themselves for women. when she's got
The best has in her that which pleases not.

whose there!

My Lord.

Peace, send that Lord away,
A Lordship will spoil all, lets be all fellows.
Whats he.

Fluello, or else Sinezi by his little legs.

All friends, all friends.

What! met upon the very point of time,
Is this the place.

This is the place my Lord.

Dream you on Lordshps! come no more Lords: pray
You have not seen these lovers yet.

Not yet.

Castruchio art thou sure this wedding feat,
Is not till afternoon?

So tis given out my Lord.

Nay, nay, tis like, thieves must observe their hours,
Lovers watch minutes like Astronomers,
How shall the Interim hours by us be spent,

Lets all go see the madmen.

Mas content.

Oh here comes one, question him, question him.

How now honest fellow dost thou belong to the house.

yes forsooth, I am one of the implements; I swepe the madmens rooms, and
fetch straw for em, and buy chains to tie em, and rods to whip em, I was a mad
wag my self here once, but I thank father Anselm he lashed me into my right
mind again.


Anselmo is the Friar must marry them,
Question him where he is,

And where is father Anselmo now?


Mary hes gon but even now.


I, well done, tell me, whether is he gone?


Why to God a mighty.


Ha, ha, this fellow is a fool, talks idlelie.


Sir are all the mad folks in Millan brought hither?


How all, there's a wise question indeed: why if al the mad folks in Millan
should come hither, there would not be left ten men in the City.


Few gentlemen or Courtiers here, ha.


Oh yes? abundance, abundance, lands no sooner fall into their hands, but
straight they run out a their wits: Citizes sons heirs are free of the house
by their fathers copy: Farmers sons come hither like geese (in flocks) when
they ha sold all their corn fields, here they sit pick the straws.


Me thinks you should have women here as well as men.


Oh, I: a plague on em, there's no ho with them, they are madder then march
hairs.


Are there no lawyers here amongst you?


Oh no, not one: never any lawyer, we dare not let a lawyer come in, for heel
make em mad faster than we can recover em.


And how long is't ever you recover any of these.


Why according to the quantity of the Moon that's got into em, an Aldermans
son will be mad a great while a very great while, especially if his friends
left him well, a whore will hardly come to her wits again: a puritan there's no
hope of him, unless he may pull down the steeple and hang himself it'h
bell-ropes.


I perceive all sorts of fish come to your net.


Yes in truth, we have blocks for all heads, we have good store of wild oats
here: for the Courtier is mad at the Citizen, the Citizen is mad at the
Country men, the shoemaker is mad at the cobbler, the cobbler at the carman the
punk is mad that the Merchants wife is no whore, the Merchants wife is mad
that the puncke is so common a whore: gods so, here's father Anselmo. pray say
nothing that I tel tales out of the school.


God bless you father.


Thank you gentlemen.

Pray may we see some of those wretched Souls,
That here are in your keeping?

Yes: you shall,
But gentlemen I must disarm you then,
There are of mad men, as there are of tame,
All humoured not alike: we have here some,
So apish and phantastike, play with a feather,
And tho 'twould grieve a soul, to see Gods image,
So blemished and defaced, yet do they act
Such antique and such pretty lunacies,
That spite of sorrow they will make you smile:
Others again we have like hungry Lions,
Fierce as wild Bulls, vntameable as flies,
And these have oftentimes from strangers sides
Snatched rapiers suddenly, and done much harm,
Whom if you'll see, you must be weaponless.

With all our harts.

Here: take these weapons in,
Stand of a little pray, so, so, tis well:
I'll show you here a man that was sometimes,
A very grave and wealthy Citizen,
Has served a prentiship to this misfortune,
Bin here seven years, and dwelt in Bergamo.

How fell he from his wits?

By loss at Sea:
I'll stand aside, question him you alone,
For if he spy me, heel not speak a word,
Unless hes thoroughly vexed.

Alas poor soul.

A very old man.

God speed father.

God speed the plough: thou shalt not speed me.

We see you old man, for all you dance in a net.

True, but thou wilt dance in a halter, I shall not see thee.

O, do not vex him pray.

Are you a Fisherman father?

No, i'm neither fish nor flesh.

What do you with that net then?

Doest not see fool! there's a fresh Salmon in it: if you step one foot further,
you'll be over shoes, for you see ime over head ear in the salt-water: if you
fall into this whirlpoole where I am, you're drowned: you're a drowned rat. -- I am
fishing here for five ships, but I cannot have a good draught, for my net
breaks still, and breaks, but I'll break some of your necks I catch you in my
clutches. Stay, stay, stay, stay -- wheres the wind, wheres the wind, wheres
the wind: wheres the wind: out you gulls, you goose-caps, you gudgeon eaters!
do you look for the wind in the heavens? ha ha ha ha, no no, look there,
look there, look there, the wind is always at that door: hark how it
blows, pooff pooff, pooff.


Ha ha ha.


Do you laugh at Gods creatures? do you mock old age you rogues? is this gray
beard and head counterfeit, that you cry ha ha ha? -- Sir, art not thou my
eldest son?


Yes indeed father.


Then you are a fool, for my eldest son had a pol^ foot, crooked legs, a
vergis face, a peare-coullourd beard; I made him a scholar, and he made
himself a fool. -- Sir! thou there? hold out thy hand.


My hand, well, here tis.


Look, look, look, look: has he not long nailes, and short hair?


Yes monstrous short hair, and abominable long nailes.


Ten-peny naile's are they not?


Yes ten penny nailes.


Such nailes had my second boy: kneel down thou varlet, and ask thy father
blessing. Such nailes had my midlemost son and I made him a Promoter: he
scrapped, scrapped, scrapped, till he got the devil and all: but he scrapped thus and
thus, thus, and it went under his legs, till at length a company of Kites
taking him for carrion, swept up all, all, all all, all, all, all. -- If you
love your lives, look to your selves, see, see, see, see, the Turks galleys
are fighting with my ships, Bounce goes the guns. -- oooh! cry the men: romble
romble go the waters -- Alas! there! tis sunk -- tis sunk: I am undone, I am
undone, you are the damned Pirates have undone me, -- you are bith Lord, you are,
you are, stop em, you are.


Why how now Syrra, must I fall to tame you?


Tame me? no: i'll be madder than a roasted Cat: see, see, I am burnt with
gupowder, these are our close fights.


I'll whip you, if you grow unruly thus.


Whip me? out you toad: -- whip me? what justice is this, to whip me because
Ime a beggar? -- Alas? I am a poor man: a very poor man: I am starved, and
have had no meat by this light, ever since the great sloud, I am a poor man.


Well, well; be quiet and you shall have meat.


I, I, pray do, for look you, here be my guts: these are my ribs, -- you may
look through my ribs, -- see how my guts come out -- these are my red guts,
my very guts, oh, oh!


Take him in there.


A very piteous sight.


Father I see you have a busy charge.


They must be used like children, pleased with toys,
And anon whipped for their vnrulinesse:
I'll show you now a pair quite different
From him that's gon; he was all words: and these
Unless you urge em, seldom spend their speech,
But save their tongues-la you-this hithermost
Fell from the happy quietness of mind,
About a maiden that he loud, and dyed:
He followed her to church, being full of tears,
And as her body went into the ground,
He fell stark mad. That is a married man,
Was jealous of a fair, but (as some say)
A very virtuous wife, and that spoiled him.

All these are whoremongers lay with my wife: whore, whore, whore, whore,
whore.


Observe him.


Gaffer shoemaker, you pulled on my wives pumps, and then crept into her
pantofles: lye there, lye there, -- this was her Tailor,-you cut out her
loose-bodied gown, and put in a yard more then I allowed her, lye there by the
shoemaker: o, master Doctor! are you here: you gave me a purgation, and then
crept into my wives chamber, to feel her pulses, and you said, and she said,
and her maid said, that they went pit a pat-pit a pat-pit a pat,-Doctor I'll put
you anon into my wives urinal: -heigh, come a loft Jack? this was her
school-maister, and taught her to play upon the Virginals, and still his Jacks
leapt up, up: you pricked her out nothing but bawdy lessons, but I'll prick you
all, -Fidler-Doctor-Tayler-Shoomaker,-Shoomaker-Fidler-Doctor-Tayler-so! lye
with my wife again now.


See how he notes the other now he feeds.


Give me some porridge.


I'll give thee none.


Give me some porridge.


I'll not give thee a bit,


Give me that flap-dragon.


I'll not give thee a spoonful: thou lie, its no Dragon tis a Parrot, that I
bought for my sweet heart, and i'll keep it.


Here's an Almond for Parrot.


Hang thy self.


Here's a rope for Parrot.


Eat it, for i'll eat this.


I'll shoot at thee and thow't give me none.


Wut thou?


I'll run a tilt at thee and thow't give me none.


Wut thou? do and thou dare.


Bounce.


Ooh! I am slaine-murder, murder, murder, I am slain, my brains are beaten
out.


How now you villains, bring me whips: i'll whip you


I am dead, I am slain, ring out the bell, for I am dead,


How will you do now sir? you ha killed him.


I'll answer't at Sessions: he was eating of Almond Butter, and I longd for it:
the child had never bin delivered out of my belly, if I had not killed him I'll
answer't at sessions, so my wife may be burnt ith hand too.


Take em in both: bury him, for hes dead.


I indeed, I am dead, put me I pray into a good pit hole.


I'll answer't at Sessions.


How now huswife, whether gad you?


A nutting forsooth: how do you gaffer? how do you gaffer? there's a French
curtsy for you too.


Tis Bellafronte.


Tis the puncke bith Lord.


Father whats she I pray?


As yet I know not,
She came but in this day, talks little idly
And therefore has the freedom of the house,

Do not you know me? nor you? nor you, nor you?


No indeed.


Then you are an Ass, and you are an Ass, and you are an Ass, for I know
you.


Why, what are they? come: tell me, what are they?


The're fish-wiues: will you buy any gudgeons, gods santy yonder come Friars, I
know them too, how do you Friar?


Nay, nay, away, you must not trouble Friars.
The duke is here speak nothing.

Nay indeed you shall not go: we'll run at barlibreak first, and you shall be in
hell.


My puncke turned mad whore, as all her fellows are?


Speak nothing, but steal hence, when you spy time.


I'll locke you up if you're unruly fie


fie! mary ^o: they shall not go indeed till I ha told^ em their fortunes.


Good Father give her leave.


I pray, good father, and I'll give you my blessing.


Well then be brief, but if you are thus unruly,
I'll have you locked up fast.

come, to their fortunes.


Let me see 1.2.3. and 4. i'll begin with the little Friar first, here's a fine
hand indeed, I never saw Friar have such a dainty hand: here's a hand for a
Lady, here's your fortune,

You love a Friar better then a Nun,
Yet long you'll love no Friar, nor no Friars son.
Bow a little, the line of life is out, yet i'm afraid,
For all your holy, you'll not die a maid, God give you joy.
Now to you Friar Tucke.

God send me good luck.


You love one, and one loves you.
You are a false knave, and she's a Jew,
Here is a Dial that false ever goes.

O your wit drops.

Troth so does your nose, nay lets shake hands with you too:
Pray open, here's a fine hand,
Ho Fryer ho, God be here,
So he had need: you'll keep good cheer,
Here's a free table, but a frozen breast,
For you'll starve those that love you best.
Yet you have good fortune, for if I am no liar,
Then you are no Friar, nor you, nor you no Friar
Ha-ha ha-ha.

Are holy habits cloaks for villainy?
Draw all your weapons.

do, draw all your weapons.

Where are your weapons, draw.

The Friar has gulled us of em.

O rare trick:
You ha learnt one mad point of Arithmetic.

Why swells your spleen so hie? against what bosom,
Would you your weapons draw? hers! tis your daughters:
Mine! tis your sons.

Son?

Son, by yonder Sun.

You cannot shed blould here, but tis your own,
To spill your own blood were damnation,
Lay smooth that wrinkled brow, and I will throw
My self beneath your feet,
Let it be rugged still and flinted over,
What can come forth but sparkles, that will burn,
Your self and us? She's mine; my claims most good,
She's mine by marriage, tho she's yours by blood.
I have a hand dear Lord, deep in this act,
For I foresaw this storm, yet willingly
Put fourth to meet it? Oft have I seen a father
Washing the wounds of his dear son in tears,
A son to curse the sword that struck his father,
Both slain ith quarrel of your families,
Those scars are now taken off: And I beseech you,
To seal our pardon, all was to this end
To turn the ancient hates of your two houses
To fresh green friendship, that your Loves might look:
Like the springs forehead, comfortably sweet,
And your vexed souls in peaceful union meet,
Their blood will now be yours, yours will be theirs,
And happiness shall crown your silver hairs.

You see my Lord there's now no remedy.

Beseech your Lordship.

You beseech fair, you have me in place fit
To bridle me, rise Friar. you may be glad
You can make madmen tame, and tame men mad,
Since fate hath conquered, I must rest content,
To strive now would but ad new punishment:
I yield unto your happiness, be blessed,
Our families shall henceforth breath in rest.

O happy change.

Yours now is my consent,
I throw upon your joys my full consent.

Am not I a good girl, for finding the Friar in the well? gods so you are a
brave man: will not you buy me some Sugar plums because I am so good a fortune
teller.


Would thou had wit thou pretty soul to ask,
As I have will to give.

Pretty soul, a pretty soul is better than a pretty body: do not you know my
pretty soul? I know you: Is not your name Mathaeo.


Yes lamb.


Baa, lamb! there you lie for I am mutton; look fine man, he was mad for me
once, and I was mad for him once, and he was mad for her once, and were you
never mad? yes I warrant, I had a fine jewel once, a very fine jewel and that
naughty man stole it away from me, a very fine jewel.


What jewel pretty maid.


Maid nay that's a lie, O twas a very rich jewel, called a Maidenhead, and had
not you it leerer.


Out you mad Ass away.


Had he thy Maiden-head? he shall make thee amends, and marry thee.


Shall he? o brave Arthur of Bradly then?


And if he bear the mind of a Gentleman,
I know he will.

I think I rifled her of some such paltry Jewel.


Did you? then mary her, you see the wrong
Has led her spirits into a lunacy.

How, marry her my Lord? sfoot marry a mad-woman: let a man get the tamest wife
he can come by, sheele be mad enough afterward, do what he can.


Nay then, father Anselmo here shall do his best,
To bring her to her wits, and will you then?

I cannot tell, I may choose.

Nay then law shall compel: I tell you sir,
So much her hard fate moves me: you should not breath i'll mary her.
Under this air, unless you married her.

Well then, when her wits stand in their right place,

I thank your grace, Mathaeo thou art mine,
I am not mad, but put on this disguise,
Only for you my Lord, for you can tell
Much wonder of me, but you are gon: farewell.
Mathaeo thou did first turn my soul black,
Now make it white again* I do protest,
Ime pure as fire now, chaste as Cynthias breast.

I durst be sworn Mathaeo she's indeed.

Cony-catcht, gulled, must I sail in your flie-boate,
Because I helped to rear your maine-mast first:
Plague found you fort, - tis well.
The Cuckolds stamp goes currant in all Nations,
Some men have horns given them at their creations,
If I be one of those, why so: its better
To take a common wench, and make her good,
Than one that simpers and at first, will scarce
Be tempted forth over the threshold door,
Yet in one seven-night ^ounds, turns arrant whore,
Come wench, thou shalt be mine, give me thy gols,
We'll talk of legs hereafter: see my Lord,
God give us joy.

God give you joy.

Come mistress we are in Bedlam now, mas and see, we come in pudding-time, for
here's the Duke.


My husband good my Lord.


Have I thy husband?


Its Candido my Lord, he's here among the lunatics: father Anselmo, pray fetch
him forth: this mad woman is his wife, and tho she were not with child, yet
did she long most spitefully to have her husband mad, and because she would be
sure, he should turn Jew, she placed him here in Bethlem, youder he comes.


Come hither Signior -- Are you mad.

You are not mad.

Why I know that.

Then may you know, I am not mad, that know
You are not mad, and that you are the duke:
None is mad here but one -- How do you wife:
What do you long for now? -- pardon my Lord,
She had lost her childes nose else: I did cut out
Penniworths of Lawn, the Lawn was yet mine own:
A carpet was yet my gown, yet twas mine own,
I wore my mans coat* yet the cloth mine own,
Had a cracked crown the crown was yet mine own,
She says for this Ime mad, were her words true,
I should be mad indeed -- o foolish skill,
Is patience madness? I'll be a mad-man still.

Forgive me, and i'll vex your spirit no more.

Come, come, we'll have you friends, join hearts, join hands.

See my Lord, we are even,
Nay rise, for ill-deeds kneel unto none but heaven.

Signior, me thinks, patience has laid on you
Such heavy weight, that you should loath it.

Loath it.

For he whose breast is tender blood so cool,
That no wrongs heate it, is a patient fool,
What comfort do you find in being so calm.

That which green wounds receive fro sovereign balm,
Patience my Lord; why tis the soul of peace:
Of all the virtues tis neerst kin to heaven.
It makes men look like Gods; the best of men
That ere wore earth about him, was a sufferer,
A soft, meek, patient, humble, tranquil spirit,
The first true Gentleman that ever breathed;
The stock of Patience then cannot be poor,
All it desires, it has; what Monarch more?
It is the greatest enemy to law
That can be, for it doth embrace all wrongs,
And so chains up, lawyers and women's tongues.
Tis the perpetual prisoners liberty:
His walks and Orchards: 'tis the bond slaves freedom,
And makes him seem proud of each iron chain.
As tho he wore it more for state then pain:
It is the beggars Music, and thus sings,
Although their bodies beg, their souls are kings:
O my dread liege! It is the sap of bliss,
Reares us aloft; makes men and Angels kiss,
And (last of all) to end a household strife,
It is the honey against a waspish wife.

Thou giu'ft it lively colours: who dare say
he's mad, whose words march in so good array?
Twere sin all women should such husbands have.
For every man must then be his wives slave.
Come therefore you shall teach o^ court to shine,
So calm a spirit is worth a golden Mine,
Wives (with meek husbands) that to vex them long,
In Bedlam must they dwell, else dwell they wrong.


