ARt sure old Maybery Innes here to night,


Tis certain the honest knave Chamberleine that hath bin my Informer, my baud,
ever since I knew Ware assures me of it, and more being a Londoner though
altogether unacquainted, I have requested his company at supper.


Excellent occasion: how we shall carry our selves in this business is only to
be thought upon.


Be that my undertaking: if I do not take a full revenge of his wives
puritanicall ^oynesse.


Suppose it she should be chaste,


O hang her: this art of seeming honest makes many of our young sons and
heirs in the City, look so like our prentices, -- Chamberlaine.


Hear Sir.


This honest knave is called Innocence, is't not a good name for a Chamberlaine?
he dwe't at Dunstable not long since, and hath brought me and the two Butchers
Daughters there to interview twenty times not so little I protest: how chance
you left dunstable Sir?


Faith Sir the town droopt ever since the peace in Ireland, your captains
were wont to take their leaves of their London Polecats, (their wenches I mean
Sir) at Dunstable: the next morning when they had broke their fast together
the wenches brought them to ^ckly 'ith hole, so the one for London the other
for Westchester, your only rode now Sir is York York^ Sir.


True, but yet it comes scant of the Prophesy; Lincolne was, London is, and
York shall-be.


Yes Sir, tis fullfild, York shall be, that is, it shall be York still, surely it
was the meaning of the prophet: will you have some Cray-fish, and a
Spitchcocke.


And a fat Trout.


You shall Sir; the Londoners you wot of:


Most kindly welcome -- I beseech you hold our boldness excused Sir.


Sir it is the health of Travellers, to enjoy good company: will you wa^ke.


Whether Travail you I beseech you.


To London Sir we came from Sturbridge.


I ^el you Gentlemen I have observed very much with being at sturbridge; it
hath afforded me mirth beyond the length of five latin Comedies; here should
you meet a Nor-folk yeoman ful-but; with his head able to ouer-turne you; and
his pretty wife that followed him, ready to excuse the ignorant hardness of
her husbands forehead, in the goose marked number of freshmen; stuck here and
there, with a graduate: like cloves with great heads in a gammon of bacon: here
two gentlemen making a marriage between their heirs over a wool-pack; there a
Ministers wife that could speak false latin very lispingly; here two in one
corner of a shop: Londoners selling their wares, other Gentlemen courting their
wives; where they take up petticoats you should find schollers towns-mens
wives crowding together while their husbands wear in another market busy
amongst the Oxen; twas like a camp for in other Countries so many Punks do not
follow an army. I could make an excellent description of it in a Comedy: but
whether are you trauailyng Gentlemen?


Faith Sir we purposed a dangerous voyage, but upon better consideration we
altered our course.


May we without offence partake the ground of it.


Tis altogether triuial in-sooth: but to pass away the time till supper, I'll
deliver it to you, with protestation before hand, I seek not to publish every
getle-womans dishonour, only by the passage of my discource to have you censure
the state of our quarrel.


Forth Sir.


Frequenting the company of many merchants wives in the City, my heart by
chance leapt into mine eye to affect the fairest but with al the falsest
creature that ever affection stooped to.


Of what rank was she I beseech you.


Upon your promise of secrecy.


You shall close it up like treasure of your own, and your self shall keep
the key of it,


She was and by report still is wife to a most grave and well reputed Citizen.


And entertained your love.


As Meadows do April: the violence as it seemed of her affection -- but alas
it proved her dissembling, would at my coming and departing be-dew her eyes
with love drops; O she could the art of woman most feelingly.


Most feelingly.


I should not have liked that feelingly had she been my wife, give us some
sack hear and in faith -- we are all friends; in private -- what was her
husbands name* -- I'll give you a carouse by and by.


O you shall pardon me his name, it seems you are a Citizen, it would be
discourse enough for you upon the exchange this fort-night should I tell his
name.


Your modesty in this wives commendation; on sir.


In the passage of our loves, (amongst other favours of greater value) she
bestowed upon me this ^inge which she protested was her husbands gift.


The poesy, the poesy -- O my heart, that ring good infaith:


Not many nights coming to her and being familiar with her.


Kissing and so forth.


I Sir.


And talking to her feelingly.


Pox on it, I lay with her.


Good infaith you are of a good complexion.


Lying with her as I say: and rising some-what early fro her in the morning, I
lost this ring in her bed.


In my wives bed.


How do you Sir.


Nothing: lets have a fire chamberlaine; I think my boots have taken water
I have such a shudering: in the bed you say;


Right Sir, in Mistress Maiberies sheets.


Was her name Maybery.


Beshrew my tongue for blabbing, I presume upon your secrecy.


O God Sir, but where did you find your loosing;


Where I found her falsnesse: with this Gentleman; who by his own confession
pertaking the like inioyment; found this ring the same morning on her pillow,
and shamed not in my sight to wear it.


What did she talk feelingly to him too; I war^nt her husband was forth a
Town all this while, and he poor man trauaild with hard Eggs in's pocket, to
save the charge of a bait, whilst she was at home with her Plouers, Turkey,
Chickens; do you know that Maibery.


No more then by name.


He's a wondrous honest man; lets be merry; will not your
mistress?-gentlemen, you are tenants in common I take it.


Yes.


Will not your Mistress make much of her husband when he comes home^ as if no
such legerdemain had bin acted.


Yes she hath reason for it, for in some countries, where men and women have
good travailing stomachs, they begin with porridge; then they fall to Capon or
so-forth: but if Capon come short of filling their bellies, to their porridge
again, tis their only course, so for our women in England.


This wit taking of long journeys: kindred that comes in ore the hatch, and
sailing to Westminster makes a number of Cuckolds.


Fie what an idle quarrel is this, was this her ring?


Her ring Sir.


A pretty idle toy, would you would take money for it,


Money sir.


The more I look on it, the more I like it.


Troth 'tis of no great value, and considering the loss, and finding of this
ring made breach into your friendship, Gentlemen, with this trifle purchase his
love, I can tell you he keeps a good Table.


What my Mistress gift?


Faith you are a merry old Gentleman; I'll give you my part in it.


Troth and mine, with your promise to conceal it from her husband.


Doth he know of it yet?


No Sir.


He shall never then I protest ^ look you this ring doth fit me passing
well.


I am glad we have fitted you.


This walking is wholesome, I was a cold even now, now I sweat for it.


Shalls walk into the Garden Luke. Gentlemen we'll down and hasten supper.


Look you, we must be better acquainted that's all.


Most willingly; Excellent, he's heat to the proof, lets with-draw, and give
him leave to rave a little.


Chamberlaine, give us a clean Towel.


How now man?


I am foolish old Maybery, and yet I can be wise Maybery too; I'll to London
presently, begone Sir.


How, how?


Nay, nay, Gods precious you do mistake me Master Bellamont; I am not
distempered, for to know a mans wife is a whore, is to be resolved of it, and
to be resolved of it, is to make no question of it, and when a case is out of
question; what was I saying?


Why look you, what a distraction are you fallen into?


If a man be deuorst, do you see, deuorst forma Iuris, whether may he have an
action or no, against those that make horns at him?


O madness! that the frailty of a woman should make a wise man thus idle! yet
I protest to my understanding, this report seems as far from truth, as you
from patience.


Then am I a fool, yet I can be wise and I list too: what says my wedding
ring?


Indeed that breeds some suspicion: for the rest most gross and open, for two
men, both to love your wife, both to enjoy her bed, and to meet you as if by
miracle, and not knowing you, upon no occasion in the world, to thrust upon you
a discourse of a quarrel, with circumstance so dishonest, that not any
Gentleman but of the country blushing, would have published. I and to name you:
do you know them?


Faith now I remember, I have seen them walk muf^ed by my shop.


Like enough; pray God they do not borrow money of ^ twixt Ware and London:
come strive to blow over these ^lowdes.


Not a cloud, you shall have clean Moone-shine, they have good smooth looks
the fellows.


As Jet, they will take up I warrant you, where they may be trusted; will you
be merry?


Wondrous merry; lets have some Sack to drown this Cuckold, down with him:
wondrous merry: one word no more; I am but a foolish tradesman, and yet I'll be
a wise tradesman.


Arrest me? at whose suit? Tom Chartley, Dick Leuer-poole, stay, Ime arrested.


Arrested?


Gentlemen break not the head of the peace; its to no purpose, for he's in
the laws clutches, you see he's fangd.


Vds life, do you stand with your naked weapons in your hand, and do nothing
with em? put one of em into my fingers, I'll tickle the pimple-nosed varlets.


Hold Doll, thrust not a weapon upon a mad woman, Officers step back into the
Tavern, you might ha taken me ith street, and not in the Tavern entry, you
Cannibals.


We did it for your credit Sir.


How much is the debt? Drawer, some wine.


Four score pound: can you send for Bail Sir? or what will you do? we
cannot stay.


You cannot, you pasty-footed Rascals, you will stay one day in hell.


Four score pounds draws deep; farewell Doll, come Sergeants, I'll step to
mine Uncle not far off, here-by in Pudding lane, and he shall bail me: if
not, Chartly you shall find me playing at Span-counter, and so farewell. Send
me some Tobacco.


Have an eye to his hands.


Have an eye to his legs.


Ime as melancholy now?


Villainous spiteful luck, I'll hold my life some of these sawsie Drawers
betrayed him.


We sir! no by Gad Sir, we scorn to have a Iudas in our company.


No, no, he was dogd in, this is the end of all dyeing.


This is the end of all whores, to fall into the hands of knaves. Drawer, tie
my shoe pry thee: the new knot as thou see this: Philip is a good honest
Gentleman, I love him because heel spend, but when I saw him on his Fathers
Hobby, and a brace of Punkes following him in a coach, I told him he would run
out, hast done boy?


Yes forsooth: by my troth you have a dainty leg.


How now good-man rogue.


Nay sweet Mistress Doll.


Doll! you reprobate! out you Bawd for seven years by the custom of the
City.


Good Mistress Dorothy; the pox take me, if I touched your leg but to a good
intent.


Prate you: the rotten toothed rascal, will for six pence fetch any whore to
his masters customers: and is every one that swims in a Taffeta gown Lettis
for your lips? vds life, this is rare, that Gentlewomen and Drawers, must
suck at one Spigot: Do you laugh you unseasonable puck-fist? do you grin?


Away Drawer: hold pry thee good rogue, hold my sweet Doll, a pox a this
swaggering.


Pox a your guts, your kidneys; mew: hang ye, rooke: I'm as melancholy now
as Fleet-streete in a long vacation.


Melancholy? come we'll ha some muld Sack.


When begins the te^me?


Why? hast any suites to be tried at Westminster?


My Suits you base ruffian have been tried at Westminster already: so soon as
ever the term begins, I'll change my lodging, it stands out a the way; I'll lye
about Charingcrosse, for if there be any stirrings, there we shall have 'em: or
if some Dutch-man would come from the States! oh! these Flemmings pay soundly
for what they take.


If thou't have a lodging West-ward Doll, I'll fit thee.


At Tyburne will you not? a lodging of your providing? to be cal^d a
Lieutenants, or a Captains wench! oh! I scorn to be one of your Low-country
commodities, I; is this body made to be maintained with Provant and dead pay?
no: the Mercer must be paid, and Satin gown^ ^ be taken up.


And gallon pots must be tumbled down.


Stay: I have had a plot a breeding in my brains -- Are all the Q^est-houses
broken up?


Yes, long since: what then?


What then? mary then is the wind come about, and for those poor wenches that
before Christmasse fled West-ward with bag and baggage, come now sailing
along the lee shore with a No^therly wind* and we that had warrants to lie
without the liberties, come now dropping into the freedom by Owle-light
sneakingly.


B^t Doll, whats the plot thou spakst off?


Mary this: Gentlemen, and Tobacco-stinckers, and such like are still buzzing
where sweet meates are (like Flies) but they make any flesh stink that they
blow upon: I will leave those fellows therefore in the hands of their
Laundresses: Silver is the Kings stamp, man Gods stamp, and a woman is mans
stamp, we are not cu^rant till we pass from one man to another.


Very good.


I will therefore take a fair house in the City: no matter tho it be a
Tavern that has blown up his Master: it shall be in trade s^ill, for I know
diverse Taverns ith Town, that have but a Wall between them and a
hotte-house. It shall then be given out, that I'm a Gentlewoman of such a
birth, such a wealth, have had such a breeding, and so forth, and of such a
carriage, and such qualities, and so forth: to set it off the better, old Jack
Hornet shall take upon him to be my Father.


Excellent, with a chain about his neck and so forth.


For that, Saint Martins and we will talk: I know we shall have Gudgions
bite presently: if they do boys, you shall live like Knights fe^lowes; as
occasion serves, you shall vveare liveries and vvaite, but when Gulls are my
winde-falls, you shall be Gentlemen, and keep them company: seek out Jack
Hornet incontinently.


We will; come Charely, vveele play our parts I warrant.


Do so: --
The world's a stage, from which strange shapes we borrow:
To day we are honest, and rank knaves to morrow.

Where is your Mistress, villain? when went she abroad?


Abroad Sir, why as soon as she was up Sir.


Up Sir, down Sir, so sir: Master Bellamont, I will tell you a strange secret
in Nature, this boy is my wives bawd.


O fie sir, fie, the boy he does not look like a Bawd, he has no double
chin.


No sir, nor my breath does not stink, I smell not of Garlic or Aqua-vitae: I
use not to be drunk with Sack and Sugar: I swear not God dam me, if I know
where the party is, when 'tis a lye and I do know: I was never Carted (but in
harvest) never vvhipt but at School: never had the Grincoms: never sold one
Maiden-head ten several times, f^st to an Englishman, then to a Welshman, then
to a Dutchman, then to a pock^e Frenchman, I hope Sir I am no Bawd then.


Thou art a Baboune, and holdst me with tricks, whilst my Wife grafts grafts,
away, trudge, run* search her out by land, and by water.


Well Sir, the land I'll ferret, and after that I'll search her by water, for it
may be she's gone to Brainford.


Inquire at one of mine Aunts.


One of your Aunts are you mad?


Yea, as many of the twelve companies are, troubled, troubled.


I'll chide you: go too, I'll chide you soundly.


Oh master Bellamont!


Oh Master Maybery! before your Servant to dance a Lancashire Horne-pipe: it
shows worse to me, then dancing does to a deaf man that sees not the
fiddles: Sfoot you talk like a Player.


If a Player talk like a mad-man, or a fool, or an Ass, and knows not what
he talks, then Ime one: you are a Poet Master Bellamont, I will bestow a
piece of Plate upon you to bring my wife upon the Stage, wud not her humour
please Gentlemen.


I think it would: yours wud make Gentlemen as fat as fools: I wud give two
pieces of Plate, to have you stand by me, when I were to write a jealous mans
part: Jealous men are either knaves or Coxcombs, be you neither: you wear
yellow hose without cause.


With-out cause, when my Mare bears double: without cause?


And without wit.


When two Virginall Jacks skip up, as the key of my instrument goes down!


They are two wicked elders.


When my wives ring does smoke for it.


Your wives ring may deceive you.


O Ma^ster Bellamont! had it not been my wife had made me a Cuckold, it should
never have grieved me.


You wrong her upon my soul.


No, she wrongs me upon her body.


Now blew-bottle? what fl^tter you for Sea-pye?


Not to catch fish Sir, my young Master, your son master Philip is taken
prisoner.


By the Dunkirks.


Worse: by Catch-polls: he's encountered.


Shall I never see that prodigal come home.


Yes Sir, if you'll fetch him out, you may kill a Calfe for him.


For how much lies he?


The debt is four score pound, marry he charged me to tell you it was four
^core and ten, so that he lies only for the odd ten pound.


His child's part shall now be paid, this money shall be his last, this vexation the
last of mine: if you had such a son master Maiberie.


To such a wife, twere an excellent couple.


Release him, and release me of much sorrow, I will buy a Son no more: go
redeem him.


Here's the party Sir.


Hence, and lock fast the doors, now is my prize.


If she beat you not at your own weapon, wud her Buckler were cleft in two
pieces.


I will not have you handle her too roughly.


No, I will like a Justice of peace, grow to the point: are not you a whore:
never start: thou art a Cloth-worker, and hast ^urnd me.


How Sir, into what Sir, have I turned you?


Into a Civil Suite: into a sober beast: a Land-rat, a Cuckold: thou art a
common bedfellow, art not? art not?


Sir this Language, to me is strange, I understand it not.


O! you study the french now.


Good Sir, lend me patience.


I made a fallade of that herb: doest see these flesh-hookes, I could tear
out those false eyes, those Cats eyes, that can see in the night: punck I
could.


Hear her answer for her self.


Good Master Bellomont,
Let him not do me violence: dear Sir,
Should any but your self shoot out these names,
I would put off all female modesty,
To be revenged on him.

Know thou this ring? there has bin old running at the ring since I went.


Yes Sir, this ring is mine, he was a villain,
That stole it from my hand: he was a villain:
That put it into yours.

They were no villains,
When they stood stoutly for me: took your part:
And stead of colours fought under my sheets.

I know not what you mean.


They lay with the: I mean plain dealing.


With me! if ever I had thought unclean,
In detestation of your nuptial pillow:
Let Sulphur drop from Heaven, and nail my body
Dead to this earth: that slave, that damned fury
(Whose whips are in your tongue to torture me)
Casting an eye unlawful on my cheek,
Haunted your thre-shold daily, and threw forth
All tempting baits which lust and credulous youth,
Apply to our frail sex: but those being weak
The second seige he laid was in sweet words.

And then the breach was made.


Nay, nay, hear all.


At last he takes me sitting at your door,
Seizes my palm, and by the charm of oaths
(Back to restore it straight) he won my hand,
To crown his finger with that hoop of gold.
I did demand it, but he mad with rage
And with desires unbridled, fled and vowed,
That ring should me undo: and now belike
His spells have wrought on you. But I beseech you,
To dare him to my face, and in mean time
Deny me bedroom* drive me from your board,
Disgrace me in the habit of your slave,
Lodge me in some discomfortable vault
Where neither Sun nor Moon may touch my sight,
Till of this slander I my soul acquit.

Guiltless upon my soul.


Troth so ^hinke I.
I now draw in your bow, as I before
Supposed they drew in mine: my stream of ielozy,
Ebs back again, and I that like a horse
Ran b^nd-fold in a Mill (all in one circle)
Yet thought I had go^ fore-right, now spy my error:
Villains you have abused me, and I vow
Sharp vengeance on your heads: drive in your tears
I take your word ya're honest, which good men,
Very good men will scarce do to their wives.
I will bring home these serpents and allow them,
The heate of mine own bosom: wife I charge you
Set out your hauiours towards them in such colours,
As if you had bin their whore, I'll have it so,
I'll candy over my words, and sleek my brow,
Entreat 'em that they would not point at me,
Nor mock my horns, with this Arm I'll embrace 'em
And with this -- go too.

Oh we shall have murder -- you kill my heart.


No: I will shed no blood,
But I will be revenged, they that do wrong
Teach others way to right: I'll fetch my blow
Fair and a far off and as Feneers use
Tho at the foot I strike, the head I'll bruize.

I'll join with you: lets walk: oh! here's my Son.
Welcome a shore Sir: from whence come you pray.

From the house of prayer and fasting -- the Counter.


Art not, thou ashamed to be seen come out of a prison.


No Gods my Judge, but I was ashamed to go into prison.


I am told sir, that you spend your credit and your coin upon a light woman.


I ha seen light gold sir, pass away amongst Mercers.


And that you have laid thirty or forty pounds upon her back in taffeta
gowns, and silk petticoats.


None but Taylors will say so, I ne'er laid any thing upon her back: I
confess I took up a petticoat and a raiz'd fore-part for her, but who has to
do with that?


Mary that has every body Master Philip.


Leave her company, or leave me, for she's a woman of an ill name.


Her name is Dorothy sir, I hope that's no il name.


What is she? what wilt thou do with her?


Sbloud sir what does he with her?


Doest mean to marry her? of what birth is she? what are her comings in,
what does she live upon?


Rents sir, Rents, she lives upon her Rents, and I can have her.


You can.


Nay father, if destiny dog me I must have her: you have often told me the
nine Muses are all women, and you deal with them, may not I the better be
allowed one than you so many? look you Sir, the Northern man loves
white-meates, the Southery man Salads, the Essex man a Calfe, the Kentishman
a Wag-taile, the Lancashire man an Egg-pie, the Welshman Leekes and Cheese, and
your Londoners raw Mutton, so Father god-boy, I was borne in London.


Stay, look you Sir, as he that lives upon Salads without Mutton, feeds
like an Ox, (for he eats grass you know) yet rizes as hungry as an Ass,
and as he that makes a dinner of leekes will have lean cheeks, so, thou
foolish Londoner, if nothing but raw mutton can diet thee, look to live like a
fool and a slave, and to die like a beggar and a knave, come Master Maiberie,
farewell boy.


Farewell father Snot -- Sir if I have her, I'll spend more in mustard vinegar
in a year, then both you in beef.


More saucy knave thou.


AM I like a fiddlers base viol (new set up,) in a good case boys? is't neat,
is it terse! am I handsome? ha*


Admirable, excellent.


An under sheriff cannot cover a knave more cunningly.


Sfoot if he should come before a Church-warden, he wud make him peu-fellow
with a Lords steward at least.


If I had but a staff in my hand, fools wud think I were one of Simon and
Iudes gentlemen ushers, and that my apparel were hired: they say three Taylors
go to the making up of a man, but Ime sure I had four Taylors and a half went
to the making of me thus: this Suite tho it ha bin canuast well, yet tis no
law-suite, for twas dispatcht sooner than a posset on a wedding night.


Why I tel thee Jack Hornet, if the Devil and all the Brokers in long lane had
rifled their wardrob, they wud ha been damned before they had fitted thee thus.


Punck, I shall be a simple father for you: how does my chain show now I
walk.


If thou were hung in chains, thou could not show better.


But how fit our blew-coates on our backs.


As they do upon banckrout retainers backs at Saint Georges feast in London:
but at VVestminster, It makes 'em scorn the badge of their occupation: there
the bragging velure-caniond hobbi-horses, prance up and down as if some a the
Ti^ters had ridden 'em.


Nay Sfoot, if they be banckrouts, tis like some have ridden 'em: and
there-vpon the Citizens Proverb rises, when he says; he trusts to a broken
staff.


Hornet, now you play my Father, take heed you be not out of your part, and
shame your adopted Daughter.


I will look gravely Doll, (do you see boys) like the fore-man of a Jury:
and speak wisely like a Latin Schoolmaster, and be surly and dogged, and
proud like the Keeper of a prison.


You must lie horribly, when you talk of your lands.


No shop-keeper shall out lye me, nay, no Fencer: when I hem boys, you shall
duck: when I cough and spit gobbets Doll.


The pox shall be in your lungs Hornet.


No Doll, these with their high shoes shall tread me out.


All the lessons that I ha pricked out for 'em, is when the Wether-cock of my
body turns towards them, to stand bare.


And not to be saucy as Serving-men are.


Come, come, we are no such creatures as you take us for.


If we ^aue but good draughts in my peeter-boate, fresh Salmon you sweet
villains shall be no meat with us.


S^oot nothing moves my choler, but that my chain is Copper: but tis no
matter, better men than old Jack Hornet have rode up Holburne, with as bad a
thing about their necks as this: your ^ight whis^ler indeed hangs himself in
Saint Martins, and not in Cheape-side.


Peace, some-body rings: run both, whilst he has the the rope in's hand if it
b^ a prize, hale him, if a man a war, blow him up, or hang him out at the maine
yards end.


But what ghost, (hold up my fine Girl) what ghosts haunts thy house?


Oh! why diverse: I have a Clothiers Factor or two; a Grocer that would fain
Pepper me, a Welsh Gaptaine that lays hard seege, a Dutch Marchat, that would
spend al that he's able to make in the low countries, but to take measu^e of my
Holland sheets when I lye in 'em: I hear trampling: 'tis my Flemish Hoy.


Dar is for you, and for you: even, twea, dry, vier, and viue skilling, drinks
Skellum vysie freeze: nempt, dats v drink gelt.


Till our crowns crack again Master Hans van Belch.


How is't met you, how is't bro? vr^lick?


Ick var well God dank you: Nay Ime an apt scholar and can take.


Datt is good, dott is good: Ick can neet stay long: for Ick h^ben skip come
now upon de vater: O mine schoomen vro, we sall dance lanteera, teera, and
sing Ick brincks to you min here, van: -- wat man is dat vro.


Nay pray sir on.


Wat honds foot is dat Dorrothy.


Tis my father.


Gotts Sacrament! your vader! why seyghen you niet so to me! mine heart tis
mine all great desire, to call you mine vader ta for Ick love dis schonen vro
your dochterkin.


Sir you are welcome in the way of honesty.


Ick bedanck you: Ick heb so ghe founden vader.


Whats your name I pray.


Mun nom bin Hans van Belch.


Hans Van Belch!


You, you, tis so, tis so, de drunken man is alteet remenber me.


Do you play the merchant, son Belch.


You vader: Ick heb de skip swim now upon de vater if you endouty, go up in de
little Skip dat go so, and be pulled up to Wapping, Ick sal bear you on my
back, and hang you about min neck into min great Skip.


He Says Doll, he would have thee to Wapping and hang thee.


No Father I understand him, but master Hans, I would not be seen hanging
about any mans neck, to be counted his Jewel, for any gold.


Is your father living Master Hans.


You, you, min vader heb schonen husen in Ausburgh great mine hear is mine
vaders brother, mine vader heb land, and bin full of see, dat is beasts, cattle


He's lowzy be-like.


Min vader bin be grotest fooker in all Ausbrough.


The greatest what?


Fooker he says.


Out upon him.


Yaw yaw, fooker is en great min here hes en elderman vane City, gots
sacrament, wat is de clock? Ick met stay.


Call his watch before you, if you can.


Her's a pretty thing: do these wheels spin up the hours! what's a clock.


Acht: yaw tis acht.


We can hear neither clock, nor Jack going, we dwell in such a place that I
fear I shall never find the way to Church, because the bells hang so far;
Such a watch as this, would make me go down with the Lamb, and be up with the
Lark.


Seghen you so, dor it to.


O fie: I do but jest, for in truth I could never abide a watch.


Gotts sacrament, Ick niet heb it any more.


An other peal! good father launch out this hollander.


Come Master Belch, I will bring you to the water-side, perhaps to Wapping,
and there i'll leave you.


Ick bedanck you vader.


They say Whores and bawds go by clocks, but what a Manasses is this to buy
twelve hours so dearly, and then be begged out of'em so easily? heel be out
at heals shortly sure for he's out about the clocks already: O foolish young
man how doest thou spend thy time?


Your grocer.


Nay Sfoot, then i'll change my tune: I may cause such leaden-heeld rascals;
out of my sight: a knife, a knife I say: O Master Allom, if you love a woman,
draw out your knife and undo me, undo me.


Sweet mistress Dorothy, what should you do with a knife, it^ ill meddling with
edge tools, what's the matter Masters! knife God bless us.


Sfoot what tricks at noddy are these.


Oh I shall burst, if I cut not my lace: I'm so vexed! my father he's rid to
Court: one was about a matter of a 1000. pound weight; and one of his men like
a rogue as he is is rid another way for rents, I looked to have had him up
yesterday, and up to day, and yet he shows not his head; s^e he's run away,
or r^bd run thorough; and here was a scrivener but even now, to put my father
in mind of a bond, that will be forfit this night if the money be not paid
Mais^er Allom. Such cross fortune!


How much is the bond?


O rare little villain.


My father could take up, upon the bareness of his word five hundred pound:
and five toe.


What is the debt?


But he scorns to be -- and I scorn to be --


Pree thee sweet Mistress Dorothy vex not, how much is it?


Alas Master Allom, tis but poor fifty pound.


If that be all, you shall upon your word take up so much with me: another
time i'll ^un as far in your books.


Sir, I know not how to repay this kindness: but when my father --


Tush, tush, tis not worth the talking: Just 50 pound? when is it to be paid.


Between one and two.


That's we three.


Let one of your men go along, and I'll send your fifty pound!


You so bind me sir, -- go sir: Master Allom, I ha some qu^nces brought
from our house ith Country to preserve, when shall we have any good Sugar come
over? the wars in Barbary make S^ger at such an excessive rate; you pay
sweetly now I warrant, sir do you not.


You shall have a whole che^t of Sugar if you please.


Nay by my faith four or five loves wil-be enough, and I'll pay you at my fi^st
child Master Allom.


Content in faith, your man shall bring all under one, i'll borrow a kiss of you
at parting.


You shall sir, I borrow more of you.


Save you Captain.


Welcome good captain Iynkins.


What is he a Barber Surgeon, that dressed your lips so.


A Barber ^ he's may Taylor; I bid him measure how hie, he would make the
standing collar of my new Taffeta Gown before, and he as Tailors will be
saucy and lickerish, laid me ore the lips.


Vds blood i'll lay him cross upon his coxcomb next day.


You know tis not for a Gentlewoman to stand with a knave, for a small matter,
and so I wud not strive with him, only to be rid of him.


If I take Master prick-louse ramping so hie again, by this Iron (which is
none a gods Angel) i'll make him know how to kiss your blind cheeks sooner:
mistress Dorothy Hornet, I wud not have you be a hornet, to like at Cowsherds,
but to s^ng such sh^eds of rascality: will you sing a Tailor shall have me my
joy?


Captain, i'll be lead by you in any thing! a Taylor! foh.


Of what stature or sis have you a stomach to have your husband now?


Of the meanest stature Captain, not a s^ze longer than your se^fe, nor
shorter.


By god, tis well said: all your best Captain in the Low-cou^tr^es are as
taller as I: but why of my pitch Mistress Dol?


Because your smallest Arrows fly farthest; ah you little hard-fauord
villain, but sweet villain, I love thee because thou't draw a my side, hang
the rogue that will not fight for a woman.


Vds blould, and hang him for vrse than a rogue tha^ will slash and cut for
an oman, if she be a whore.


Pree the good Captain Iynki^s, teach me to speak some welch, me thinks a
Welchmans tongue is the neatest tongue! --


As any tongue in the vrld, unless Cramacrees, that's vrse.


How do you say, I love you with all my heart.


Mi cara whee, en hellon.


Mi cara whee, en hel-hound.


Hell* hound, o mondu, my cara whee, en hellon.


O, my cara whee en hellon.


Oh! and you went to writing school twenty score year in Wales, by Sesu, you
cannot have better utterance, for welch.


Come tit me, come tat me, come throw a kiss at me, how is that?


By gad I kanow not, what your tit mees and tat mees are, but me uatha --
Sbloud I know what kisses be, as well as I know a Welch hooke, if you will go
down with Shrop-sheere cariers* you shall have Welch enough in your pellies
forty weeks.


Say Captain that I should follow your colours into your Country how should I
fare there?


Fare? by Sesu, O there is the most abominable seer! and wider silver pots to
drink in, and softer peds to lie upon do our necessary pusines, and fairer
houses and parks, holes for Conies, and more money, besides tosted Sees and
buttermilke in Northwales diggon: besides, harps, Welch Freeze, and Goats,
and Cow-heeles, and Metheglin, ouh, it may be set in the Kernicles, will you
ma^ch thither?


Not with your Shrop-sheire cariers, Captain.


Will you go with Captain Ienkin and see his Cousin Maddoc upon Ienkin there,
and i'll run hedlongs by and by, batter away money for a new Coach to iolt you
in.


Bestow your Coach upon me, two young white Mares, and you shall see how I'll
ride.


Will you? by all the leekes that are worn on Saint Dauies day I will buy not
only a Coach, with four wheels, but also a white Mare and a stone horse too,
because they shall traw you, very lustily, as if the devil were in their arses.



How sir; Taylors.


O good Captain, tis my Cousin.


Is he, I will Cousin you then sir too, one day.


I hope sir then to Cousin you too.


By gad I hobe so, fare-well Sidanien.


Her's both money, and sugar.


O sweet villain, set it up.


Sfoot, what tame suaggerer was this I met Doll.


A Captain, a Captain: but hast escaped the Dunkerks honest Philip? Philip
ryalls are not more welcome: did thy father pay the sho^?


He paid that shot, and then shot pistolets into my pockets: hark wench:
chinck chink, makes the punck wanton and the Baud to winck.


O rare music.


Heavenly consort, better than old Moons.


But why? why Dol, go these two like Beadells in blew? ha?


There's a moral in that: flea off your skins, you precious Cannibals: O that
the welch Captain were here again, and a drum with him, I could march now,
ran, tan, tan, tara, ran, tan, tan, sir Philip has thy father any plate in's
house.


Enough to set up a Gold-smithes shop.


Can not borrow some of it? we shall have guests to morrow or next day and I
wud serve the hungry rag-a-muffins in plate, tho twere none of mine own.


I shall hardly borrow it of him but I could get one of mine Aunts, to beat
the bush for me, and she might get the bird.


Why pree the, let me be one of thine Aunts, and do it for me then. As Ime
virtuous and a Gentlewoman i'll restore.


Say no more tis don.


What manner of man is thy father? Sfoot i'd fain see the witty Monky because
thou say he's a Poet: i'll tell thee, what i'll do: Leuer-poole or Chartly,
shall like my Gentleman usher go to him, and say such a Lady sends for him,
about a sonnet or an epitaph for her child that died at nurse, or for some
device about a mask or so; if he comes you shall stand in a corner, and see in
what State i'll bear my self: he does not know me, nor my lodging.


No, no.


Is't a match Sirs? shalls be merry with him and his muse.


Agreed, any scaffold to execute knavery upon.


I'll send then my vant-currer presently: in the mean time, marche after the
Captain, scoundrels, come hold me up:

Look how Sabrina sunk in the river Seuerne,
So will we four be drunk in the ship-wrack Tavern.

Come Wife, our two gallants will be here presently: I have promised them the
best of entertainment, with protestation never to reveal to thee their
slander: I will have thee bear thy self, as if thou made a feast upon Simon
and Iudes day, to country Gentlewomen, that came to see the Pageant, bid them
extremely welcome, though thou wish their throats cut; 'tis in fashion.


O God I shall never endure them.


Endure them, you are a fool: make it your case, as it may be many women's of
the Freedom; that you had a friend in private, whom your husband should lay to
his bosom: and he in requital should lay his wife to his bosom: what treads
of the toe, salutations by winckes, discourse by bitings of the lip, amorous
glances, sweet stolen kisses when your husbands backs turn^d, would pass
between them, bear your self to Greeneshield as if you did love h^m for
affecting you so entirely, not taking any notice of his journey: theile put
more tricks upon you: you told me Greeneshield means to bring his Sister to
your house, to have her board here.


Right, she's some cracked demy-culuerin, that hath miscaried in service: no
matter though it be some charge to me for a time I care not.


Lord was there ever such a husband?


Why, would thou have me suffer their tongues to run at large, in Ordinaries
and Cock-pits; though the Knaves do lye, I tell you Master Bellamont, lies
that come from sterne looks, and Satin out-sides, and guilt Rapiers also,
will be put up and go for currant.


Right sir, 'tis a small spark, gives fire to a beautiful woman's discredit.


I will therefore use them like informing kna^es in this kind, make up their
mouths with ^iluer, and after be re^eng'd upon them: I was in doubt I should
have grown fat of late: it were no^ for law suites: and fear of our wives, we
rich men should grow out of all compass: they come, my worthy friends welcome:
look my wives colour rises already.


You have not made her acquainted with the discovery.


O by no means: ye see Gentlemen the affection of an old man; I would fain
make all whole again. Wife give entertainment to our new acquaintance, your lips
wife, any woman may lend her lips without her husbands privity tis alowable.


You are very welcome; I think it be near dinner time Gentlemen: I'll will the
maid to cover, and return presently.


Gods precious why doth she leave them?


O I know her stomach: she is but retired into another chamber, to ease her
heart with crying a little: it hath ever bin her humour* she hath done it 5. or
6. times in a day, when Courtiers have been hear, if any thing hath bin out
of order, and yet every return laughed and bin as merry: how is it Gentlemen,
you are well acquainted with this room, are you not?


I had a dellicate banquet once on that table.


In good time: but you are better acquainted with my bed chamber.


Were the cloth of gold Cushins set forth at your entertainment?


Yes Sir.


And the cloth of T^ssew Valance*


They are very rich ones.


God refuse me, they are lying Rascols, I have no such furniture.


I protest it was the strangest, and yet with-all the happiest fortune that we
should meet you two at Ware, that ever redeemed such desolate actions: I would
not wrong you again for a million of Londons.


No, do you want any money? or if you be in debt, I am a hundredth pound in the
Subsidy, command me.


Alas good Gentleman; did you ever read of the like patience in any of your
ancient Romans?


You see what a sweet face in a Velvet cap can do, your cittizes wives are like
Partridges, the hens are better the the cocks.


I believe it in troth, Sir you did observe how the Gentlewoman could not
contain her self, when she saw us enter.


Right.


For thus much I must speak in allowance of her mode^tie, when I had her most
private she would blush extremely.


I, I warrant you, and ask you if you would have such a great sin lie upon
your conscience, as to lie with another mans wife.


In truth she would.


And tell you there were maids enough in london, if a man were so viciously
given, whose Portions would help them to hu^sbands though gentlemen gave the
first onset.


You are a merry old gentleman infaith Sir: much like to this was her
langwage.


And yet clipe you with as voluntary a bosom; as if she had fallen in love
with you at some Innes a court revels; and invi^ed you by letter to her
lodging.


Your knowledge Sir, is perfect without any information.


I'll go see what my wife is doing gentlemen, when my wife enters show her this
ring; and twill quit all suspicion.


Dost hear Luke Greeshield will thy wife by here presently.


I left my boy to weight upon her, by this light, I think God provides; for if
this cittisen had not out of his overplus of kindness proffered her, her diet and
lodging under the name of my sister, I could not have told what shift to have
made; for the greatest part of my money is revolted; we'll make more use of him,
the whoreso rich Innkeeper of Doncaster her father showed himself a rank
ostler: to send her up at this time a year; and and by the carrier to, twas but
a jade trike of him.


But have you instructed her to call you brother.


Yes and shele do it, I left her at Bosoms Inn, sheele be here, presently.


Master Greenesheild your sister is come; my wife is entertaining her, by the
mass I have bin upon her lips already, Lady you are welcome, look you master
Greeneshield, because your sister is newly come out of the fresh air, and that
to be pent up in a narrow lodging here in the city may offend her health she
shall lodge at a garden house of mine in Morefeilds where if it please you and
my worthy friend hear to bear her company your several lodgings and Joint
commons (to the poor ability of a citizen) shall be provided.


O God Sir.


Nay no complement your loves command it: shalls to dinner Gentlemen, come
master Bellamont I'll be the Gentleman usher to this fair Lady.


Here is your ring Mistress; a thousand times, -- and would have willingly lost
my best of maintenance that I might have found you hair so tractable.


Sir I am still my self, I know not by what means you have grown upon my
husband, he is much deceived in you I take it: will you go in to dinner -- O God
that I might have my will of him it were not for my husband i'd scratch out his
eyes presently.


Welcome to London bonny mistress Kate, thy husband little dreams of the
familiarity that hath past between thee I Kate.


No matter if he did: he ran away from me like a base slave as he was, out of
Yorke-shire, and pretended he would go the Island voyage, since I near heard
of him till within this fortnight: can the world condemn me for entertaining a
friend, that am used so like an Infidel?


I think not, but if your husband knew of this he'd be deuorst.


He were an ass then, no wisemen should deal by their wives as the sale of
ordinance passes in Englad, if it break the first discharge the workman is at
the loss of it, if the second the Merchant, the workman jointly, if the third
the Merchant, so in our case, if a woman prove false the first year, turn her
upon her fathers n^ck, if the second, turn her home to her father but allow
her a portion, but if she hold pure mettaile two year fly to several pieces,
in the third, repair the ruins of her honesty at your charges, for the best
piece of ordinance, may be cracked in the casting, and for women to have cracks
and slaves, alas they are borne to them, now I have held out four year, doth
my husband do any things about London doth he swagger?


O as tame as a fray in Fleet estreete, when their are nobody to part them.


I ever thought so, we have notable valiant fellows about Doncaster, theile
give the lie and the stab both in an instant.


You like such kind of man-hood best Kate.


Yes in truth for I think any woman that loves her fried, had rather have him
stand by it then lie by it, but I pray thee tel me, why must I be quarterd at
this Citizens garden house, say you.


The discou^se of that will set thy blood on fire to be reuegd on thy husbands
forehead piece.


Will you go in to dinner sir?


Will you lead the way forsooth?


No sweet forsothe we'll follow you.

O Master Bellamont: as ever you took pity upon the simplicity of a poor
abused gentlewoman: will you tell me one thing.


Any thing sweet Mistress Mayberrie.


I but will you do it faithfully?


As I respect your acquaintance I shall do it.


Tell me then I beseech you, do not you think this minx is some noughty pack
whom my husband hath fallen in love with, and means to keep under my nose at
his garden house.


No upon my life is she not,


O I cannot believe it, I know by her eyes she is not honest, why should my
husband proffer them such kindness? that have abused him and me; so
intolerable: and will not luffer me to speak; there's the hellont not suffer
me to speak.


Fie fie, he doth that like a usurer, that will vfe a man with all kindness,
that he may be careless of paying his money, upon his day, and after-wards take
the extremity of the forfature; your jealousy is Idle: say this were true, it
lies in the bosom of a sweet wife to draw her husband from any loose
imperfection, from wenching, from Jealousy, from couituousnes from crabbednes,
which is the old mans common disease, by her politic yealding.


She may do it from crabednes, for example I have known as tough blades as
any are in England broke upon a featherbed, -- come to diner,


I'll be ruled by you Sir, for you are very like mine uncle.


Suspicion works more mischief grows more strong, To sever ch^st beds then
aparant wrongs.


Come my little Punk with thy two Compositors to this unlawful painting
house, thy pounders a my old poe^icall dad will be here presently, ^ake up thy
State in this chair, and bear thy self as if thou were talking to thy
pottecary after the receipt of a purgation: look scurvily upon him: sometimes
be merry and stand upon thy pantoffles like a new elected scauinger.


And by and by melancholic like a Tilter that hath broke his staves foul
before his Mistress.


Right, for he takes thee to be a woman of a great count: hark upon my life
he's come.


See who knocks: thou shalt see me make a fool of a Poet, that hath made five
hundred fools.


Please your new Lady-ship he's come.


Is he? I should for the more state let him walk some two hours in an utter
room: if I did owe him money, 'twere not much out of fashion; but come enter
him: Stay, when we are in private conference send in my Tailor.


Look you my Lady's a sleep, ^heele wake presently.


I come not to teach a Starling sir, God-boy-you.


Nay, in truth Sir, if my Lady should but dream you had been hear.


Who's that keeps such a prating?


'Tis I Madam.


I'll have you preferred to be a Crier: you have an exlent throat for it: pox a
the Poet is he not come yet?


He's here Madam.


Cry you mercy: I ha cursed my Monkey for shrewd turns a hundred times, and
yet I love it never the worse I protest.


Tis not in fashion dear Lady to call the breaking out of a Gentlewoman's lips,
scabs, but the heate of the Liver.


So sir: if you have a sweet breath, and do not smell of swetty linen, you
may draw nearer, nearer.


I am no friend to Garlic Madam.


You write the sweeter verse a great deal sir, I hau^ heard much good of your
wit master Poet: you do many devises for Citizens wives: I care not greatly
because I have a City Laundress already, if I get a City Poet too: I have
such a devise for you, and this it is.


I'll take my leave of your Ladyship.


No: I pray thee stay: I must have you sweat for my device Master Poet.


He sweats already believe it.


A cup of wine there: what fashion will make a woman have the best body
Taylor.


A short dutch wast with a round cathern-wheele fardingale: a close sleeve wi^h
a cartoose colour and a pickadell.


And what meat will make a woman have a fine wit Master Poet.


Foul madam is the most light, delicate, witty feeding.


Foul say thou: I know them that feed of it every meal, and yet are as
arrant fools as any are in a kingdom of my c^edit: hast thou don Taylor? now
to discover my device sir: I'll drink to you sir.


Gods precious, we ne'er thought of her device before, pray god it be any thing
tolerable.


I'll have you make 12. poesies for a dozen of cheese trenchers.


O horrible!


In welch madam?


Why in welch sir.


Because you will have them seru^d in with your cheese Lady.


I will bestow them indeed upon a welch Captain: one that loves cheese better
than venson, for if you should but get 3. or 4. Cheshire cheeses and set them a
running down Hiegate-hill, he would make more hast after the than after the
best kennel of hounds in England; what think you of my device?


Fore-god a very strange device and a cunning one.


Now he begins to eye the goblet.


You should be a kin to the Bellamonts, you give the same Arms madam.


Faith I paid sweetly for the cup, as it may be you and some other Gentleman
have don for their Arms.


Ha, the same weight: the same fashion: I had three nest of them given me, by
a Nobleman at the christing of my son Philip.


Your son is come to full age sir: and hath taken possession of the gift of
his God-father.


Ha, thou wilt not kill me.


No sir, i'll kill no Poet least his ghost write satires against me.


Whats she? a good common welthes woman, she was borne.


For her Country, and has borne her Country.


Heart of virtue? what make I here?


This was the party you rail^d on: I keep no worse copany than your self
father, you were wont to say venery is like usury that it may be allowed tho it
be not lawful.


Wherefore come I hither.


To make a device for cheese-trenchers.


I'll tell you why I sent for you, for nothing but to show you that your gravity
may be drawn in: white hairs may fall into the company of drabs as well as
red beards into the society of knaves: would not this woman deceive a whole
camp ith Low-countries, and make one Commander believe she only kept her cabin
for him, and yet quarter twenty more in it.


Pree the Poet what doest thou think of me.


I think thou art a most admirable, brave, beautiful Whore.


Nay sir, I was told you would rail: but what do you think of my device sir,
nay: but you are not to depart yet Master Poet: wut sup with me? I'll cashier
all my young barnicles, we'll talk over a peace of mutton and a partridge,
wisely.


Sup with thee that art a common vndertaker? thou that doest promise nothing
but watchet eyes, bombast calves and false peryvvigs.


Pree the comb thy beard with a comb of black lead, it may be I shall affect
thee.


O thy unlucky star! I must take my leave of your worship I cannot fit your
device at this instant: I must desire to borrovv a nest of goblets of you: O
villainy! I wud some honest Butcher would beg all the queens and knaves ith
City and cary them into some other Country they'd sell better than Beefs and
Calves: what a virtuous City would this be then! mary I think there would
be a few people left int, vds foot, gulled with Cheese-trenchers and yokt in
entertainment with a Taylor? good, good.


How doest Doll?


Scurvy, very scurvy.


Where shalls sup wench?


I'll sup in my bed: get you home to your odging and come when I send for
you, o filthy rogue that I am.


How! how, mistress Dorothy?


Saint Antonies fire light in your Spanish slops: vds life, ille make you know
a difference, between my mirth and melancholy, you panderly rogue.


We observe your Ladyship.


The puncks in her humer -- pax.


I'll humour you and you pox me: vds life have I lien with a Spaniard of late,
that I have learnt to mingle such water with my Malago, Other's some scurvy
thing or other breeding; how many several loves of Players of Vaulters, of
Lieutenants have I entertained besides a runner a the ropes, and now to let
blood when the sign is at the heart? should I send him a letter with some
Jewel in it, he would requite it as lawyers do, that re-returne a wood-cock pie
to their clients, when they send them a Basin and a Eu^e, I will instantly go
and make my self drunk, till I have lost my memory, live a scoffing Poet?


Now Squiri^l wilt thou make us acquainted with the jest thou promised to tell
us of?


I will discover it, not as a Darby-shere women discovers her great teeth, in
laughter: but softly as a gentleman courts a wench behind an Arras: and this it
is, young Greenesheild thy Master with Greenesheilds sister lie in my masters
garden-house here in More-fields.


Right, what of this?


Mary sir if the Gentlewoman be not his wife, he commits incest, for Ime sure
he lies with her every night.


All this I know, but to the rest.


I will tell thee, the most politic trick of a woman, that ere made a mans
face look witherd and pale like the tree in Cuckolds Haven in a great snow:
and this it is, my mistress makes her husband believe that she walks in her
sleep a nights, and to confirm this belief in him, sondry times she hath
rizen out of her bed, vnlockt all the doors, gon fro Chamber to Chamber, opend
her chests, toused among her linen, when he hath wakte mist her, coming to
question why she conjured thus at midnight, he hath found her fast a sleep,
mary it was Cats sleep, for you shall hear what prey she watched for.


Good; forth.


I ouer-heard her last night talking with thy Master, and she promised him that
as soon as her husband was a sleep, she would walk according to her custom,
and come to his Chamber, mar^y she wou^d do it so pu^annically, so secretly I
mean that no body should hear of it.


(...) possible?


Take but that corner and stand close, and thine eyes shall w^t^ esse it.


O ^ntollerable wit, what hold can any man take of a woman's honesty.


Hold? no more hold then of a Bull noynted with Soap, and baited with a sn^a^e
of ^idle^s i^ Staffordshire: stand close I hear her coming.


W^at a filt^y knave was the shoo-maker, that made my slippers, what a cre^king
they keep: O Lord, if there be any power that can make a w^mans husband sleep
s^undly at a pinch, as I have often (...) in foolish Poetry that the^e is,
now, now, and it be thy will, let him dream some fine d^ame or other, that
he's made a Knight, or a Noble-man, or some-what whilst I go and take b^t two
kisses, but two kisses from sweet Fetherstone.


Sfoot he may well d^eame hes made a Knight: for I'll be hanged i^ she do ^ot
d^b him.


Was there ever any walking spirit, like to my wife? what reason s^ould there
be in nature for this* I will question some ^tion: not hear neither: vdslife,
I would laugh if she were in Master Fetherstones Chamber, she would fright
him, Mai^er Fetherstone, Master Fetherstone.


Ha, how now who calls?


Did you leave your door open last night?


I know not, I ^inke my boy did.


Gods light she's there then, will you know the jest, my wife hath her old
tricks, I'll hold my life, my wife's in your chamber, rise out of your bed, and
see and you can feel her.


He will feel her ^ warrant you?


Have you her sir?


^ot yet sir, she's here sir.


So I said even now to my self before God la: take her up in your arms, and
bring her hither softly, for fear of waking her: I never knew the like of this
before God la, alas poor Kate, look before God; she's a sleep with her eyes
open: pretty little rogue, I'll wake her, and make her ashamed of it.


O you'll make her sicker then.


I warrant you; would all women thought no more hurt then thou dost, now sweet
villain, Kate, Kate.


I longd for the merry thought of a pheasant.


She talks in her sleep.


And the foule-gutted Tripe-wife had got it, eat half of it: and my colour
went and came, and my stomach wambled: till I was ready to sound, but a
Mid-wife perceived it, and marked which way my eyes went; and helped me to it,
but Lord how I picked it, 'twas the sweetest meat me thought.


O politic Mistress.


Why Kate, Kate?


Ha, ha, ha, I beshrew your hart, Lord where am I?


I pray thee be not frighted.


O I am sick, I am sick, I am sick, O how my flesh trembles: oh some of the
Angelica water, I shall have the Mother presently.


Hold down her stomach good master Fetherstone, while I fetch some.


Well dissembled Kate.


Pish, I am like some of your Ladies that can be sick when they have no stomach
to lie with their husbands.


What mischiuous fortune is this: weel have a journey to Ware Kate, to redeem
this misfortune.


Well, Cheaters do not win all ways: that woman that will entertain a friend,
must as well provide a Closet or Back-doore for him, as a Fether-bed.


Be my troth I pity thy husb^nd.


Pity him, no man dares call him Cuckold; for he wears Satin: pity him, he
that will pull down a mans sign, and set up horns, there's law for him.


Be sick again, your husband comes.


I have the worst luck; I think I get more bumps and shrewd turns in the dark,
how does she master Fetherstone.


Very ill sir; she's troubled with the mother extremely, I held down her
belly even now, and I might feel it rise*


O lay me in my bed, I beseech you.


I will find a remedy for this walking, if all the Docters in town can sell
it; a thousand pound to a penny she spoil not her face, or break her neck, or
catch a cold that she may ne'er claw off again, how dost wench?


A little recovered; alas I have so troubled that Gentleman.


None in the world Kate, may I do you any farther service.


And I were where I would be in your bed: pray pardon me, wast you Master
Fetherstone, hem, I should be well then.


Mark how she wrings him by the fingers.


Good night, pray you give the Gentleman thanks for patience.


Good night Sir.


You have a shrewd blow, you were best have it searched.


A scratch, a scratch.


Let me see what excuse should I frame, to get this wench forth a town with
me: I'll persuade her husband to take Physic, and presently have a letter
framed, from his father in law, to be delivered that morning for his wife, to
come and receive some small parcel of money in Enfield chase, at a Keepers
that is her Uncle, then sir he not being in case to travel, will entreat me
to accompany his wife, we'll lye at Ware all night, and the next morning to
London, I'll go strike a Tinder, and frame a Letter presently.


And I'll take the pains to discover all this to my master old Maybery, there
hath gone a report a good while, my Master hath used them kindly, because they
have been over familiar with his wife, but I see which way Fetherstone looks.
sfoote there's near a Gentleman of them all shall gull a Citizen, think to go
scot-free: though your commons shrink for this be but secret, and my Master
shall entertain thee, make thee instead of handling false Dice, finger nothing
but gold and silver wag, an old Serving-man turns to a young beggar, whereas
a young Prentice may turn to an old Alderman, wilt be secret?


O God sir, as secret as rushes in an old Ladies Chamber.


Sir, I'll speak with none.


Not a plaier:


No tho a Sharer ball,
I'll speak with none although it be the mouth
Of the big company, I'll speak with none, -- away.
Why should not I be an excellent sta^esman? I can in the writing of a
tragedy, make Caesar speak be^ter than ever his ambition could: when I write
of Pompey I have Pomp^ies soul within me, and when I pe^sona^e a worthy Poet,
I a^ then truly my self, a poo^e vnpreferd scholar.


Here's a ^waggering fellow sir, that speaks not like a man of gods making,
swears he must speak with you and will speak with you.


Not of gods making what is he? a Cuckold?


He's a Gentl^man sir, by his clothes.


Enter him and his clothes: cl^the^ sometimes are better Gentlemen than their
Masters.


I seek sir, (god plesse you) for a Sentillman, that talks besides to
himself when he's alone, as if he were in Bed-lam, and he's a Poet.


So sir it may be you seek me, for Ime sometimes out a my wits.


You are a Poet sir, are you.


Ime haunted with a Fury Sir.


Pray Master Poet shute off this little pot-gun, and I will conjure your Fu^y:
tis well lay you sir, my desires are to have some amiable and amorous sonnet or
madrigal composed by your Fury, see you.


Are you a lover sir of the nine Muses.


Ow, by gad out a cry.


You're then a scholar sir.


I ha picked up my cromes in Sesus college in Oxford one day a gad w^ile ag^e*


You're welcome you're very welcome, I'll borrow your Judgment look you sir, Ime
writing a Tragedy, the Tragedy of young Astianax.


S^nax Tragedy is he living can you tell? was not Stianax a M^n-mouth man?


O no sir, you mistake, he was a Troyane great Hectors Son.


Hector was grannam to Cadwallader, when she was great with child, god vdge
me, there was one young Styanan of Mon-mouth sheire was a madder greek as any
is in al Englad.


This was not he assure ye: look you sir, I will have this Tragedy presented
in the French Court, by French Gallants.


By god your Frenchmen will do a Tragedy enterlude, poggy well.


It shall be sir at the marriages of the Duke of Orleans, and Chatilion the
admiral of France, the stage.


Vds blood, does Orleans marry with the Admiral of France now.


O sir no, they are two several marriages. As I was saying the stage hung all
with black velvet, and while tis acted, my self will stad behind the Duke of
Biron, or some other chief minion or so, -- who shall, I they shall take some
occasion about the music of the fourth Act, to step to the French King, and
say, Sire, voyla, il et votre treshumble seruiteur, le plu sage, e diuin^
espirit, monsi^ur Bellamont, all in French thus pointing at me, or you is the
learned old English Gentleman Master Bellamont a very worthy man, to be one
of your privy Chamber, or Poet Lawreat.


But are you sure Duke Pepper-noone will give you such good vrdes, behind your
back to your face.


Oh I, I, I man, he's the only courtier that I know there: but what do you
think that I may come to by this.


God vdge me, all France may hap die in your debt for this.


I am now writing the description of his death.


Did he die in his ped*


You shall hear: suspicion is the Minion of g^eat hearts, no: I will not begin
there: Imagine a great man were ^o be executed about the 7. hour in a gloomy
morning.


As it might be Sampson or so, or great Golias that was killed by my Countryman.


Right sir, thus I express it in young Astianax.
Now the wild people greedy of their griefs,
Longing to see, that which their thoughts abhord,
Prevented day, and rod on their own roofs.

Could the little horse that ambled on the top of Paules^ cary all the people;
else how could they ride on the roofs!


O sir, tis a figure in Poetry, mark how tis followed,
Rod on their own roofs,
Making all Neighboring houses tilde with men; tilde with men ^ist not good.

By Sesu, and it were tilde all with naked Imen twere better.


You shall hear no more; pick your ears, they are foul sir, what are you sir
pray?


A Captain sir, and a follower of god Mars.


Mars, Bachus, and I love Apollo! a Captain! then I pardon your sir, and
Captain what wud you press me for?


For a witty ditty, to a Sentill-oman, that I am fallen in with all, over head
and ears in affections, and natural desires.


An Acrostick were good upon her name me thinks.


Cross sticks: I wud not be too cross Master Poet; yet if it be best to
bring her name in question, her name is mistress Dorothy Hornet.


The very consumption that wastes my Son, and the Aim that hung lately upon
me: do you love this Mistress Dorothy?


Love her! there is no Captains wife in England, can have more love put upon
her, and yet Ime sure Captains wives, have their pellies full of good men's
loves.


And does she love you? has there past any great matter between you?


As great a matter, as a whole coach, and a horse and his wife are gon too and
fro between us.


Is she? ifayth Captain, be valiant and tell truth, is she honest?


Honest? god vdge me, she's as honest, as a Punck, that cannot abide
fornication, and lechery.


Look you Captain, I'll show you why I ask, I hope you think my wenching
days are past, yet Sir, here's a letter that her father, brought me from her
and enforced me to take this very day.


Tis for some love -- song to send to me, I hold my life.


This falls out pat, my man tells me, the party is at my door, shall she come
in Captain?


O I, I, put her in, put her in I pray now.


The letter says here, that she's exceeding sick, and entreats me to visit
her: Captain, lie you in ambush behind the hangings, and perhaps you shall
hear the piece of a Commedy: she comes, she comes, make your self away.


Does the Poet play Torkin and cast my Lucraesies water too in hugger muggers?
if he do, Styanax Tragedy was never so horrible bloudy-minded, as his Commedy
shall be, -- Tawsons Captain Ienkins.


Now Master Poet, I sent for you.


And I came once at your Ladyships call.


My Ladyship and your Lordship lie both in one manner; you have conjured up a
sweet spirit in me have you not Rimer?


Why M^dea! what spirit! wud I were a young man for thy sake.


So wud I, for then thou could do me no hurt; now thou doest.


If I were a yonker, it would be no Imodesty in me to be seen in thy company;
but to have snow in the lap of June; vile! vile: yet come; garlic has a white
head, and a green stalk, then why should not* I? lets be merry: what says
the devil to al the world, for Ime sure thou art carnally possessed with him.


Thou hast a filthy foot, a very filthy cariers foot.


A filthy shoe, but a fine foot, I stand not upon my foot I.


What stands he upon then? with a pox god bless us?


A leg and a Calfe! I have had better of a butcher forty times for carrying
a body! not worth begging by a Barber-surgeon.


Very good, you draw me and quarter me, fates keep me from hanging.


And which most turns up a woman's stomach, thou art an old hoary man: thou
hast gon over the bridge of many years, and now art ready to drop into a grave:
what do I see then in that withered face of thine?


Wrinkles: gravity.


Wretchedness: grief: old fellow thou hast be witch me; I can neither eat for
thee, nor sleep for thee, nor lie quietly in my bed for thee.


Vd^ blood! I did never see a white flea before I will clinge you?


I was borne sure in the dog days ^me so vnluky; I, in whom neither a flaxen
hair, yellow beard, French doublet, nor Spanish hose, youth nor personage,
rich ^ace nor money cold ever breed a true love to any, ever to any man, am now
besotted, dote, am mad, for the carcass of a man, and as if I were a baud, no
ring pleases me but a deaths head.


Sesu, are I men so arsy varsy.


Mad for me? why if the worm of lust were wrigling within me as it does in
others, dost think I'd crawl upon thee; wud I low after thee, that art a
common calfe-bearer.


I confess it.


Do you, are you a town cow and confess you bear calves.


I confess, I have bin an Inn for any guest.


A pogs a your stable-roome; is your Inn a bawdy house now?


I confess (for I ha bin taught to hide nothing from my Suergeon and thou art
he) I confess that old stinking Surgeon like thy self) whom I call father,
that Hornet never sweat for me, Ime none of his making.


You lie he makes you a punk Hornet minor.


Hes but a cheater, and I the false die he plays withal, I power all my
poison out before thee, because heareafter I will be clean: shun me not, loath
me not, mock me not, plagues confound thee, I hate thee to the pit of hell,
yet if thou go thither, i'll follow thee, run, aid do what thou can, i'll
run and ride over the world after thee.


Cockatrice: you mistress Salamanders that fear no burning, let my mare and my
mares horse, and my coach come running home again and run to an hospital, and
your Surgeons, and to knaves and panders and to the tiuell and his tame to.


Fiend art thou raized to torment me.


She loves you Captain honestly.


I'll have any man, oman or cilde by his ears, that says a common drab can
love a Sentillman honestly, I will sell my Coach for a cart to have you to
puncks hall, Pridewell, I sarge you in Apollos name, whom you belong to, see
her forth-comming, till I come and tiggle her, by and by, Sbloud I was never
Couzend with a more rascal piece of mutton, since I came out a the Lawer
Countries.


My doors are open for thee, be gon: woman!


This goats -- peezle of thine --


Away: I love no such implements in my house.


Doest not? am I but an implement? by all the maidenheads that are lost in
London in a year ( that's a great oath) for this trick, other manner of women
than my self shall come to this house only to laugh at thee; and if thou
would labour thy heart out, thou shalt not do withal.


Is this my Poetical fury? how now sir!


Master Maybery and his wife sir ith next room.


What are they doing sir?


Nothing sir, that I see, but only wud speak with you.


Enter 'em: this house will be to hot for me, if this wench cast me into these
sweates, I must shift my self, for pure necessity, haunted with sprites in my
old days!


A Commedy, a Canterbury tale smells not half so sweet as the Commedy I have
for thee old Poet: thou shalt write upon it Poet.


Nay I will write upon it ift be a Commedie, for I have been at a most
villainous female Tragedy: come, the plot, the plot.


Let your man give you the boots presently, the plot lies in Ware my white
Poet: Wife thou and I this night, will have mad sport in Ware, mark me well
Wife, in Ware.


At your pleasure sir.


Nay it shall be at your pleasure Wife: look you sir, look you: Fetherstones
boy (like an honest crack-halter) laid open all to one of my prentices, (for
boys you know like women love to be doing.)


Very good: to the plot.


Fetherstone like a crafty mutton-monger, persuades Greenshield to be run
through the body.


Strange! through the body?


I man, to take physic* he does so, he's put to his purgation; then sir what
does me Fetherstone, but counterfits a letter from an Innkeeper of Doncaster, to
fetch Greenshield (who is needy you know) to a keepers lodge in Enfeild-chace*
a certain Uncle, where Greenshield should receive money due to him in behalf
of his wife.


His wife! is Greensheild married? I have heard him swear he was a batchiler.


So have I a hundred times.


The knave has more wives than the Turk, he has a wife almost in every shire
in England, this parcel Gentlewoman is that Inkeepers Daughter of Doncaster.


Hath she the entertainment of her fore-fathers? will she keep all comers
company?


She help's to pass away stale Capons, sower wine, and musty prouander: but to
the purpose, this train was laid by the baggage her self and Fetherstone, who
it seems makes her husband a unicorn: and to give fire to^t, Greensheild like
an Arrant withal entreats his friend, to ride before his wife, and ^etch the
money, because taking bitter pills, he should prove but a loose fellow if he
went, and so durst not go.


And so the poor Stag is to be hunted in Enfeild^chace


No sir, Master poet there you miss the plot. Fetherstone and my Lady
Greensheild are rid to batter away their light commodities in Ware,
Enfeild-chace is to cold for 'em.


In Ware!


In dur^ Ware: I forget my self wise, on with your riding suite and cry
North-ward hoe, as the boy at Powles says, let my Prentice get up before thee,
and m^n t^ee to Ware, lodge in the ^ne I told thee, spur cut and away.


Well sir.


Stay, stay, whats the bottom of this riddle? why send you her away?


For a thing my little hoary Poet: look thee, I smelt out my noble stincker
Greensheild in his Chamber, and as tho my heart strings had bin cracked, I
wept, and sighed, thumpd, and thumpd, and raved and randed, and raild, and told
him how my wife was now grown as common as baibery, and that she had hierd
her Taylor to ride with her to Ware, to meet a Gentleman of the Court.


Good; and how took he this drench down.


Like Eggs and Muscadine, at a gulp: he cries out presently, did not I tell you
old man, that shed win my game when she came to bearing? he rails upon her,
wills me to take her in the Act; to put her to her white sheet, to be
diuorc'd, and for all his guts are not fully scourd by his Pottecary, he's
pulling on his boots, will ride along with us; lets muster as many as we can.


It will be excellent spo^t, to see him and his own wife meet in Ware, wilt
not? I, I, we'll have a whole Regiment of horse with us.


I stand upon thorns, tel I shake him bith hor^es: come, boots boy, we must
gallop all the way, for the Sin you know is done with turning up the white of
an eye, will you join your forces.


Like a Hollander against a Dunk^rke.


March then, this curse is on all lechers thrown,
They give horns and at last, horns are their own.

Set the best of your little diminutive legs before, and ride post I pray.


Is it possible that mistress D^ll should be so bad?


Possible! S^ould tis more easy for an oman to be nought, than for a soldier
to beg, and that's horrible easy, you know.


I but to connicatch us all so grossly.


Your Norfolke tumblers are but zanyes to connicatching punckes.


She gelded my purse of fifty pounds in ready money.


I will geld all the horses in five hundred Sheires, but I will ride over her,
and her cheaters, and her Hornets; She made a stark Ass of my Coach-horse,
and there is a putter-box, whom she spread thick upon her white bread, and
eat him up, I think she has sent the poor fellow to Gilderland, but I will
marse prauely in and out, and pack again upon all the low countries in
Christendom, as Holland and Zeland and Netherland, and Cleueland too, and I
will be drunk and cast with master Hans van Belch, but I will smell him out.


Do so and we'll draw all our arrows of revenge up to the head but we'll hit
her for her villainy.


I will traw as petter, and as vrse weapons as arrewes up to the head, lug you,
it shall be warrants to give her the whip deedle.


But now she knows she's discovered, sheele take her bells and fly out of our
reach.


Fl with her pells! ownds I know a parish that sal tag down all the pells and
sell em to Captain Ienkens, to do him good* and if pelle will fly, we'll fly
too, unless, the pell-ropes hang us: will you amble up and down to master
Justice by my side, to have this rascal Hornet in corum, and so, to make her
hold her whoars peace.


I'll amble or trot with you Captain: you told me, she threatened her champions
should cut for her, if so, we may have the peace of her.


O mon du! u dguin! follow your leader, Ienken shall cut, and Slice, as worse
as they: come I scorn to have any peace of her, or of any onam, but open
wars.


What? will these young Gentlemen to help us to catch this fresh Salmon, ha!
Phillip! are they thy friends.


Yes Sir*


We are beholding to you Gentlemen that you'll fill our consort I ho seen your
faces me thinks before; and I cannot inform my self where.


May be so Sir.


Shalls to horse, hears a tickler: heigh: to horse.


Come Switts and Spurs! lets mount our Cheualls: merry quoth a.


Gentlemen shall I shoot a fools bolt out among you all, because we'll be
sure to be merry.


What is't?


For mirth on the high way, will make us rid ground faster then if thieves were
at our tails, what say ye to this, lets all practise jests one against
another, and he that has the best jest thrown upon him, and is most gald,
between our riding forth and coming in, shall bear the charge of the whole
journey.


Content in faith.


We shall fit one a you with a Cox-combe at Ware I believe.


Peace.


Is't a bargen.


And hands clapped upon it.


Stay, yonders the Dolphin without Bishops-gate, where our horses are at rack
and manger, and we are going past it: come cross over: and what place is
this?


Bedlam is't not?


Where the mad-men are, I never was amongst them, as you love me Gentlemen,
lets see what Greekes are within.


We shall stay too long.


Not a whit, Ware will stay for our coming I warrant you: come a spurt and
away, lets be mad once in our days: this is the door.


Save you sir, may we see some a your mad-folkes, do you keep em?


Yes.


Pray bestow your name sir upon us.


My name is Full-moone.


You well deserve this office good master Full-moone: and what mad-caps have
you in your house,


Diverse.


Gods so, see, see, whats he walks yonder, is he mad.


That's a Musician, yes he's besides himself.


A Musician, how fell he mad for Gods sake?


For love of an Italian Dwarf.


Has he been in Italy then?


Yes and speaks they say all manner of languages.


Gods so, look, look, whats she.


The dancing Bear: a p^itty well-fauourd little woman.


They say, but I know not, that she was a Bawd, and was frighted out of her
wits by fire,


May we talk with 'em master Ful-moone


Yes and you will; I must look about for I have unruly tenants.


What have you in this paper honest friend?


Is this he has al manner of languages, yet speaks none


How do you Sir Andrew, will you send for some ^quauite for me, I have had no
drink never since the last great rain that fell.


No that's a lye.


Nay by gad, then you lie, for all you're Sir Andrew, I was a dapper ^ogue in
Portingall voyage, not an inch broad at the heel, and yet thus high, I scorned
I can tell you to be drunk with rain water then Sir, In those golden and
silver days: I had sweet bitts then Sir Andrew: how do you good brother
Timothy?


You have bin in much trouble since that voyage.


Never in bride-wel I protest, as Ime a virgin: for I could never abide that
bride-wel I protest, I was once sick, and I took my water in a basket, and
carried it to a doctors.


In a basket.


Yes Sir: you arrant fool there was a urinal in it.


I cry you mercy.


The Doctor told me I was with child, how many Lords Knights, Gentlemen,
Citizens, and others promised me to be god-fathers to that child: twas not Gods
will: the prentices made a riot upon my glasse-windowes the Shroue-tuesday
following and I miscaried.


O do not weep.


I ha cause to weep: I trust Gintlewomen their diet sometimes a fortnight:
lend Gentlemen holland shirts, and they sweat 'em out at tennis: and no
restitution, and no restitution* but I'll take a new order, I will have but six
stewed prunes in a dish and some of mother Walls cakes: for my best customers
are taylors.


Taylors! ha ha.


I Taylors: give me your London Prentice; your country Gentlemen are grown too
politic.


But what say you to such young Gentlemen as these are.


^oh, they as soon as they come to their lands get up to London, and like
squibs that run upon lines, they keep a Spitting of fire, and cracking till
they ha spent all, and when my squib is out, what says his punk, foh, he
stinks.

Me thought this other night, I saw a pretty sight,
Which pleased me much.
A comely country maid, not squeamish nor afraid,
To let Gentlemen touch.
I sold her maiden-head once, and I sold her maiden-head twice,
And I sold it last to an Alderman of York.
And then I had sold it thrice.

You sing sc^ruily.


mary muffe, sing thou better, for I'll go sleep my old sleeps.


What are you a doing my friend.


Pricking, pricking.


What do you mean by pricking?


A Gentleman like quality.


This fellow is some what prouder, and sul^ner then the other.


Oh; so be most of your musicians.


Are my teeth rotten?


No Sir.


Then I am no Comfit-maker, nor Vintner, I do not get wenches in my drink:
are you a musician?


Yes.


we'll be sworn brothers then, look you sweet rogue.


Gods so, now I think upon it, a Jest is crept into my head, steal away, if
you love me.


Was ever any merchants band set better I set it: walk Ime a cold, this white
satin is to thin unless it be cut, for then the Sun enters: can you speak
Italian too, Sape^e Italiano.


Un poco.


Sblood if it be in you, I'll po^ke it out if you; un poco, come March lie hear
with me but till the fall of the lease, and if you have but poco Italiano in
you, I'll fill you full of more poco March.


Come on.


Good Master Mayberie, Philip, if you be kind Gentlemen uphold the jest: your
whole voyage is paid for.


Follow it then.


The old Gentleman say you, why he talked even now as well in his wits as I do
my self, and looked as wisely.


No matter how he talks, but his Pericranion's perished.


Where is he pray?


Mary with the Musician, and is madder by this time


He's an excellent Musician himself, you must note that.


And having met one fit for his one tooth: you see he skips from us.


The troth is master Full-m^one, diverse trains have bin laid to bring him
hither, without gaping of people, and never any took effect till now.


How fell he mad?


For a woman, look you sir: here's a crown to provide his supper: he's a
Gentleman of a very good house, you shall be paid well if you convert him; to
morrow morning, bedding, and a gown shall be sent in, and wood and coal.


Nay sir, he must ha no fire.


No, why look what straw you buy for him, shall return you a whole harvest.


Let his straw be fresh and sweet we beseech you sir?


Get a couple of your sturdiest fellows, and bind him I pray, whilst we slip
out of his sight.


I'll hamper him, I warrant Gentlemen.


Excellent.


But how will my noble Poet take it at my hands, to betray him thus.


Foh, tis but a jest, he comes.


Perdonate mi, si Io dimando del vostro nome: oh, whether ^hrunke you: I have
had such a mad dialogue here.


We ha bin with the other mad folks.


And what says he and his prick-song?


We were up to the ears in Italian in faith.


In Italian; O good master Bellamont lets hear him.


How now, Sdeath what do you mean? are you mad?


Away sir, bind him, hold fast: you want a wench sir, do you?


What wench? will you take mine arms from me, being no Heralds? let go you
Dogs.


Bind him, be quiet: come, come, dogs, fie, a gentleman.


Master Maibery, Philip, master Maibery, vds foot.


I'll bring you a wench, are you mad for a wench.


I hold my life my comrads have put this fools cap upon thy head: to gull me:
I smell it now: why do you hear Full-moone, let me loose; for Ime not mad;
Ime not mad by Iesu:


Ask the Gentlemen that.


Bith Lord I'm as well in my wits, as any man in the house, this is a trick put
upon thee by these gallants in pure knavery.


I'll try that, answer me to this question: loose his arms a little, look you
sir, three Geese nine pence; every Goose three pence, whats that a Goose,
roundly, roundly one with another.


Sfoot do you bring your Geese for me to cut up.


Hold, hold, bind him master Full-moone.


Bind him you, he has paid me all, I'll have none of his bonds not I, unless
I could recover them better.


Have I given it you master Poet, did the Lime-bush take.


It was his warrant sent thee to Bedlam, old Jack Bellamot, and master
Full-ith'moone, our warrant discharges him; Poet, we'll all ride upon thee to
Ware, back again I fear to thy cost.


If you do, I must bear you, thank you Master Greenshield, I will not dye
in your debt: farewell you mad rascals, to horse come, 'tis well done; 'twas
well done, you may laugh, you shall laugh Gentlemen: if the gudgeon had been
swallowed by one of you it had bin vile, but by Gad 'tis nothing, for your best
Poets indeed are mad for the most part: farewell good-man Full-moone.


Pray Gentlemen if you come by call in.


Yes, yes, when they are mad, horse your selves now if you be men.


He gallop must that after women rides,
Get our wives out of Town, they take long strides.

But why have you brought us to the wrong Inn? and withal possessed Greenshield
that my wife is not in town: when my project was, that I would have brought
him up into the chamber, where young Fetherstone and his wife lay: and so all
his Artillery should have recoild into his own bosom.


O it will fall out far better, you shall see my revenge will have a more
neat and unexpected conveyance: he hath bin all up and down the town, to
enquire for a Londoners wife, none such is to be found: for I have mewd your
wife up already. mary he he^es of a Yorke-shire Gentlewoman at next Inn, and
that's all the commodity Ware affords at this instant: now sir, he very
pollitickly imagines, that your wife is ^ode to Puckridge, five mile further,
for saith he in such a town where Hosts will be familiar, and Tapsters saucy,
Chamberlains worse then thieves intelligencers, theile never put foot out of
Stirrup: either at Pucridge or Wades-mill (saith he) you shall find them:
because our horses are weary, he's gone to take up Post horse: my counsel is
only this, when he comes in, ^aine your self very melancholy, swear you
will ride no far^er, and this is your part of the Comedy: the sequeil of the
jest shall come like money borrowed of a Courtier, and paid within the day, a
thing strange unexpected.


Enough, Iha't,


He comes.


Come gallants, the post horse are ready, tis but a quarter of an hours
riding, we'll ^er^it them and ^ke them in-faith.


Are they grown politic? when do you see honesty covet corners, or a
gentleman that's no thie^e lie in the Inn of a carrier.


Nothing hath undone my wife, but too much riding.


She was a pri^ty piec^ of a Poet indeed, in her discourse would as many of
your Gold-smit^s wives do, d^aw her ^mily from precious stones, so wittily, as
redder then your Ruby, harder then your Diamond, and so from stone to stone, in
l^sse time then a man can draw on a straight boot, as if she had been an
excellent Lapidary.


Come will you to horse sir?


No let her go to the devil and she will, I'll not stir a foot further.


Gods precious is't come to this: persuade him as you are a Gentleman, there
will be ballads made of him, the burden thereof will be, if you had rode out
5. mile forward, he had found the fatal house of Braineford North-ward, O
hone, hone, hone ononero.


You are merry sir.


Like your Citizen, I never think of my debts, when I am a horseback.


Vou imagine you are riding from your creditors.


Good infaith: will you to horse?


I'll ride no further.


The i'll discharge the post-maister: was't not a pretty wit of mine master
Poet to have had him rod into Puckridge, with a horne before him, ha wast not?


Good sooth excellent: I was dull in apprehending it: but come since we must
stay: wele be merry, chamberlaine call in the music, bid the Tapsters maids
come up and dance, what weel make a night of it, hark you masters, I have an
exellent jest to make old Maibery merry, Sfoote we'll have him merry.


Lets make him drunk then, a simple catching wit I.


Go thy ways, I know a Nobleman would take such a delight in thee.


Why so he would in his fool.


Before God but he would make a difference, he would keep you in Satin, but
as I was a saying weel have him merry: his wife is gon to Puckridge, tis a
wench makes him melacholy, tis a wench must make him merry: we must help him to
a wench. when your citizen comes into his Inn, wet cold, dropping, e^her the
hostis or one of her maids, warmes his bed, pulls on his night-cap, cuts his
corns puts out the candle, bids him command ought, if he want ought: and so
after master cittiner sleeps as quietly, as if he lay in his own low-country
of Holland, his own linen I mean sir, we must have a wench for him.


But wher's this wench to be found, here are al the moveable peticotes of the
house.


At the next Inn there lodged to night --


Gods precious a Yorkshire Gentlewoman; I have it, I'll angle for her presently,
we'll have him merry.


Procure some Chamberlaine to Pander for you.


No I'll be Pander my self, because we'll be merry.


Will you, will you?


But how? be a Pander as I am a gentleman? that were horrible, I'll thrust my
self into the out-side of a Fawlconer in town here: now I think on it there
are a company of country players, that are come to town here, shall furnish me
with hair and beard: if I do not bring her, -- will be wondrous merry.


About it look you sir, though she bear her far aloof, and her body out of
distance, so her mind be coming 'tis no matter.


Get old Maibery merry: tha^ any man should take to heart thus the down fall
of a woman, I think when he comes home poor snail, heel not dare to peep
forth of doors least his horns usher him.


Go thy ways, there be more in England wear large ears and horns, then
Stags and Asses: excellent he rides post with a halter about his neck.


How now wilt take?


Beyond expectation: I have persuaded him the only way to make you merry, is
to help you to a wench, and the fool is gone to pander his own wife hither.


Why heel know her?


She hath been maskt ever since she came into the Inn, for fear of
discovery.


Then sheele know him.


For that his own unfortunate wit helped my lasy invention, for he hath
disguisd himself like a Fawkner, in Town hear, hoping in that procuring
shape, to do more good upon her, then in the out-side of a Gentleman.


Young Fetherstone will know him?


He's gone into the town, and will not return this half hour.


Excellent if she would come.


Nay upon my life sheele come: when she enters remember some of your young
blood, talk as some of your gallant commoners will, Dice and drink: freely:
do not call for Sack, least it betray the coldness of your man-hood, but fetch
a caper now then, to make the gold chink in your pockets: I so.


Ha old Poet, lets once stand to it for the credit of Milkestreete. Is my wife
acquainted with this.


She's perfect, will come out upon her qu, I warrant you.


Good wenches infaith: fills some more Sack hear.


Gods precious, do not call for Sack by any means.


Why then give us a whole Lordship for life in Rhenish, with the reversion in
Sugar,


Excellent.


It were not amiss if we were dancing.


Out upon it, I shall never do it.


Out of mine nostrils tapster, thou smel^t like Guild-hall ^wo days after
Simon and I^de, of drink most horribly, off with thy mask sweet sinner of
the North: these masks are foils to good faces, and to bad ones they are like
new satin out-sides to lousy linings.


O by no means sir, your Merchant will not open a whole piece to his best
costomer, he that buies a woman, must take her as she fales: I'll unmask my
hand hears the sample.


Go to then, old Poet I have taken her up already as a pinnace bound for the
straights, she knows her burden yonder.


Lady you are welcome: you is the old Gentleman and observe him, he's not one
of your fat City chuffs: whose great belly argues that the felicity of his
life consists in capon, sack, and sincere honesty, but a lean spare bountiful
gallant one that hath an old wife, and a young performance: whose reward is not
the rate of a Captain newly come out of the Low-cout^ies: or a Yorkeshiere
Atturny in good contentious practice, some angel, no the proportion of your
wealthy Citizen to his wench, is, her Chamber, her diet, her physic, her
apparel, her painting, her monkey, her pandar, her every thing. You'll say your
young Gentleman, is your only service that lies before you like a Calves head,
with his brains some half yard from him, but I assure you, they must not
only have variety of foolery; but also of wenches: whereas your conscionable
gray-beard of Farrington within, will keep himself, to the ruins of one cast
waighting-woman an age: perhaps, when he's past all other good works, to wipe
out false waightes, and twenty ith hundred, marry her --


O well bold Tom () we have presedents, for it*


But I have a husband sir.


You have, if the knave thy husband be rich, make him poor, that he may
borrow money of this Merchant, and be laid up in the Counter, or Ludgate, so it
shall be conscience in you old Gentleman, when he hath seized all thy goods,
to take the horne and maintain thee.


O well bold Tom () we have presedents for it.


Well if you be not a Nobleman, you are some great valiant Gentleman, by your
bearth: and the fashion of your beard: and do but thus to make the Citizen
merry, because you owe him some money.


O you are a wag.


You are very welcome.


He is taken, excellent, excellent, there's one will make him merry: is it any
imputation to help ones friend to a wench?


No more then at my Lords entreaty, to help my Lady to a pretty weighting
woman: if he had given you a gelding, or the reversion of some Monopoly, or a
new suit of Satin to have done this, happily your Satin would have smelt of
the Pander: but what's done freely, comes like a present to an old Lady,
without any reward, and what is done without any reward, comes like wounds to
a Soldier, very honourably not-withstanding.


This is my breeding Gentlewoman: and whether travail you?


To London sir, as the old tale goes, to seek my fortune.


Shall I be your fortune Lady?


O pardon me sir, I'll have some young landed heir to be my Forrune, for they
favour she fools more then Citizens.


Are you married?


Yes, but my husband is in garrison in the Low-countries, is his Colonels bawd,
and his Captains Jester: he sent me word over, that he will thrive: for though
is apparel lie ith Lumbard, he keeps his conscience in the Mu^ter-booke.


He may do his country good service Lady.


I as many of your Captains do, that fight as the Geese saved the Capital,
only with prattling: well, well, if I were in some Nobleman's hands now, may be
he would not take a thousand pounds for me.


No.


No sir: and yet may be at years end, would give me a brace of hundredth pounds
to marry me to his Bailey, or the Solicitor of his Law suits: whose this I
beseech you?


I pray you forsooth be patient.


Passion of my heart, Mistress Maybery.


Now will she put some notable trick, upon her Cuckoldly husband.


Why how now Wife, what means this? ha?


Well, I am very well: o my unfortunate parents, would you had buried me quick,
when you linked me to this misery.


O wife be patient, I have more cause to rail wife.


You have, prove it, prove it: wheres the Courtier, you should have taken in my
bosom: I'll spit my gall in's face, that can tax me of any dishonour: have I
lost the pleasure of mine eyes, the sweets of my youth, the wishes of my
blood: and the portion of my friends, to be thus dishonord, to be reputed wild
in London, whilst my husband prepares common diseases for me at Ware, O god O
god.


Prettily well dissembled.


As I am true hostice you are to blame sir, what are you masters: I'll know
what you are before you depart masters, dost thou leave thy Chamber in an
honest Inn, to come and inueagle my costomers, and you had sent for me up, and
kissed me and used me like an hostice* twold never have gre^ued me, but to do it
to a stranger.


I'll leave you sir.


Stay, why how now sweet gentlewoman, cannot I come forth to breath my self,
but I must be haunted, rail upon old Bellamont, that he may discover them,
you remember Fetherstone Greensheild.


I remember them, I, they are two as coging, dishonourable damned forsworn
beggarly gentlemen, as are in al London, and there's a reverent old gentleman to,
your pander in my conscience.


Lady, I will not as the old gods were wont, swear by the infernal ^tix: but
by all the mingled wine in the seller beneath, and the smoke of Tobacco that
hath fumed over the vessailes, I did not procure your husband this banqueting
dish of suckket look you behold the parenthesis.


Nay I'll see your face too.


My dear unkind husband; I protest to thee I have played this knavish part only
to be witty.


That I might be presently turned into a ma^ter more sodllid then horne, into
Marble


Your husband gentlewoman: why he never was a soldier


I but a Lady got him pricked for a Captain, I warrant you, he will answer to
the name of Captain, though he be none: like a Lady there will not think
scorn to answer to the name of her firs^ husband; though he wear a
Sope-boyler.


Hang of thou devil, away.


No, no, you fled me the other day,
When I was with child you ran away,
But since I have caught you now.

A pox of your wit and your singing.


Nay look you sir, she must sing because we'll be merry, what though you rod
not five mile forward, you have found that fatal house at Brainford Northward,
O hone ho no na no to.


God refuse me Gentlemen, you may laugh and be merry: but I am a Cockold and
I think you knew of it, who lay ith segges with you to night wild-ducke.


No body with me, as I shall be saved: but Master Fetherstone, came to meet
me as far as Roistone.


Fetherstone.


See the hawke that first stooped, my pheasant is killed by the Spaniel that first
sprang all of our side wife.


Twas a pretty wit of you sir, to have had him rod into Puckeridge with a horne
before him; ha: wast not;


Good.


Or where a Citizen keeps his house, you know tis not as a Gentleman keeps
his Chamher for debt, but as you said even now very wisely, least his horns
should usher him.


Very good Fetherstone he comes.


Luke Greeneshield Master Maybery, old Poet: Mol and Kate, most hapily
incounterd, vdslife how came you heather, by my life the man looks pale.


You are a villain, and I'll maked good upon you, I am no serving-man, to feed
upon your reversion.


Go to the ordinary then.


This is his ordinary sit in this she is like a London ordinary: her best
getting comes by the box.


You are a damned villain.


O by no means.


No, vdslife, I'll go instantly take a purse, be apprehended and hanged for it,
better then be a Cockold.


Best first make your confession sir.


Tis this thou hast not used me like a Gentleman.


A Gentleman: thou a gentleman: thou art a Taylor.


Ware peaching.


No sir if you will confess ought, tell how thou hast wronged that virtuous
Gentlewoman: how thou laiest at her two year together to make her dishonest:
how thou would send me thither with letters, how duly thou woudst watch the
citizens wives vacation, which is twice a day; namely the exchainge time,
twelve at noone and six at night, and where she refused thy importunity, and
vowed to tell her husband: thou would fall down upon thy knees, and entreat
her for the love of Heaven, if not to ease thy violent affection, at least to
conceal it, to which her pity and simple virtue consented, how thou took
her wedding ring from her, Met these two Gentlemen at Ware: fained a quarrel,
and the rest is apparent, this only remains what wrong the poor Gentlewoman
hath since received by our intolerable lye; I am most heartily sorry for, and
to thy bosom will maintain all I have said to be honest.


Victory wise thou art quit by proclamation.


Sir you are an honest man, I have known an arrant thief for peaching made an
officer, give me your hand Sir.


O ffilthy abominable husband did you all this?


Certainly he is no Captain he blushes.


Speak Sir did you ever know me answer your wishes.


You are honest, very virtuously honest.


I will then no longer be a loose woman, I have at my husbands pleasure taken
upon me this habit of jealousy: Ime sorry for you, virtue glories not in the
spoil but in the victory.


How say you by that goody Sentence, look you sir; you gallats visit cittizes
houses, as the Spaniard first sailed to the Indies, you preted bying of wares
or selling of lads: but the end proves tis nothing but for discovery conquest of
their wives for better maintenance why look you, was he a ware of those broken
patience when you met him at Ware, possessed him of the downfall of his wife: you
are a Cockcold you have paderd your own wife to this gentleman better men have
don it, honest Tom (), we have presidents for it, hie you to London: what is
more Catholic ith City then for husbands daily for to forgive, the nightly
sins of their bedfellows: if you like not that course but to intend to be rid
of her: rifle her at a Tavern, where you may swallow down some fifty wisacres
sons and heirs to old tenements, and common gardens: like so many raw
yeolkes with Muskadine to bed-ward.


O filthy knave, dost compare a woman of my cariadge to a horse.


And no disparagment; for a woman to have a high forehead: a quick ear, a full
eye, a wide nostrell, a sleek skin, a straight back, a round hip, and so forth
is most comely.


But is a great belly comely in a horse sir.


No Lady.


And what think you of it in a woman I pray you.


Certainly, I am put down at my own weapon; I therefore recant the riflying?
no there is a new trade come up for cast Gentlewemen, of peeriwip making: let
your wife set up ith Strand, and yet I doubt, whither she may or no, for they
say, the women have got it to be a corporatio; if you can you may make good use
of it, for you shall have as good a coming in by hair (tho it be but a
falling commodity) by other foolish tyring, as any between Saint Clements and
Charing.


Now you have run your self out of breath, here me: I protest the gentlewoman
is honest, and since I have wronged her reputation in meeting her thus
privately, I'll maintain her: wilt thou hang at my purse Kate, like a pair of
barbary buttons, to open when tis full, and close when tis empty?


I'll be diuorc'd by this Christian element, and because thou think thou art a
Cockold, least I should make thee an infidel, in causing thee to believe an
vntrueth, I'll make thee a Cockold.


Excellent wench.


Come, lets go sweet: the Nag I ride upon bears double, we'll to London.


Do not bite your thumbs sir.


Bite his thumb!
I'll make him do a thing worse than this,
Come love me where as I lay.

What Kate!


He shall father a child is none of his,
O the clean contrary way.

O lusty Rate.


Me thought he said, even now you were a Taylor.


You shall hear more of that hereafter, I'll make Ware and him stink ere he
goes, if I be a Taylor, the rogues naked weapon shall not fright me, I'll
beat him and my wife both out ath Town with a Taylors yard.


O Valiant sir Tr^stram; room there.


News father, most strange news out of the Low-countries, your good Lady and
Mistress that set you to work upon a dozen of cheese-trenchers is new lighted
at the next Inn, and the old venerable Gentleman's father with her.


Let the gate^ of our Inn be locked up, closer than a Noble-mans gates at
dinner time.


Why sir, why?


If she enter here, the house will be infected: the plague is not half so
dangerous, as a Shee-hornet: Philip this is your shuffling a the cards, to
turn up her for the bottom card at Ware.


No as Ime virtuous sir, ask the two Gentlemen.


No in troth sir; she told us, that inquiring at London for you or your son,
your man chalkt out her way to Ware.


I wud Ware might choke 'em both, Master Maybery, my horse and I will take
our leaves of you? I'll to Bedlam again rather than stay her.


Shall a woman make thee fly thy country? stay, stand to her tho she were
greater than Pope Ioane, what are thy brains conjuring for, my poetical
bay-leafe-eater?


For a sprite a the buttry, that shall make us all drink with mirth if I can
raize it: stay, the chicken is not fully hatched, hit I beseech thee: So; come!
will you be secret Gentlemen and assisting.


With browne bills if you think good.


What will you say, if by some trick we put this little Hornet into Fetherstones
bosom, and marry 'em together.


Fuh, tis impossible.


Most possible, I'll to my trencher-woman, let me alone for dealing with her:
Fetherstone Gentlemen shall be your patient.


How! how?


Thus: I will close with this country Peddler mistress Dorothy (that travels up
and down to exchange Pins for Cunny-skins) very lovingly, she shall eat of
nothing but sweet-meates in my company (good words) whose taste when she likes,
as I know she will, then will I play upon her with this Artillery, that a very
proper man, and a great heir (naming Fetherstone) spied her from a window,
when she lighted at her Inn, is extremely fallen in love with her, vows to
make her his wife, if it stand to her good liking, even in Ware; but being (as
most of your young Gentlemen are) some-what bashful, and ashamed to venture
upon a woman.


City and suburbs can justify it: so sir.


He sends me (being an old friend) to undermine for him: I'll so whet the
wenches stomach, and make her so hungry, that she shall have an appetite to
him, fear it not; Greenesheild shall have a hand in it too, and to be
revenged of his partner, will I know strike with any weapon.


But is Fetherstone of any means? else you undo him and her.


He has land between Foolham and London, he would have made it over to me: to
your charge Poet, give you the assault upon her, and send but Fetherstone to
me, I'll hang him by the gills.


Hes not yet horsed sure, Phillip, go thy ways, give fire to him, and send him
hither with a powder presently.


Hes blown up already.


Gentlemen you'll stick to the devise, look to your plot?


Most Poetically: away to your quarter.


I marche, I will cast my rider gallants: I hope you see who shall pay for our
voyage.


That must he that comes here: Master Fetherstone, O Master Fetherstone, you
may now make your fortunes weigh ten stone of Feathers more then ever they did:
leap but into the Saddle now, that stands empty for you, you are made for
ever.


An Ass I'll be sworn.


How for Gods sake? how?


I would you had, what I could wish you, I love you, and because you shall be
sure to know where my love dwells, look you sir, it hangs out at this sign:
you shall pray for Ware, when Ware is dead and rotten: look you sir, there is
as pretty a little Pinnas, struck sail hereby, and come in lately; she's my
kinse-woman, my fathers youngest Sister, a ward, her portion three thousand;
her hopes if her Grannam dye without issue, better.


Very good sir.


Her Guardian goes about to marry her to a Stone-cutter, and rather than sheele
be subject to such a fellow, sheele dye a martyr, will you have all out? she's
run away, is here at an Inn in the town, what parts so ever you have plaid
with me, I see good parts in you, and if you now will catch times hair that's
put into your hand, you shall clap her up presently.


Is she young? and a pretty wench?


Few Citizens wives are like her.


Young, why I warrant sixteen hath scarce gone over her.


Sfoot, where is she? if I like her personage, as well as I like that which you
say belongs to her personage, I'll stand thrumming of Caps no longer, but board
your Pynnis whilst 'tis hot.


Away then with these Gentlemen with a French gallop, and to her: Phillip here
shall run for a Priest, and dispatch you.


Will you gallants go along: we may be married in a Chamber for fear of hew
and cry after her, and some of the company shall keep the door.


Assure your soul she will be followed: away therefore. Hes in the Curtian
gulf, and swallowed horse and man: he will have some body keep the door for
him, sheele look to that: I am younger then I was two nights ago, for this
physic. -- how now?


God plesse you; is there not an arrant scurvy trab in your company, that is a
Sentill-woman borne sir, and can tawg Weleh, and Dutch and any tongue in your
head?


How so? Drabs in my company: do I look like a Drab-driuer?


The Trab will drive you (if she put you before her) into a pench hole.


Is not a Gentleman here one Master Bellamont sir of your company.


Yes, yes, come you from London, heel be here presently.


Will he? tawsone, this oman, hunts at his tail like your little Goats in
Wales follow their mother, we have warrants here from master Sustice of this
shire, to show no pity nor mercy to her, her name is Doll.


Why sir, what has she committed? I think such a creature is in the town.


What has she committed: ownds she has committed more th^n man-slaughters, for
she has committed her self God plesse us to everlasting prison: lug you sir,
she is a punk, she shifts her lovers (as Captains and Welsh Gentlemen and
such) as she does her Trenchers when she has well fed upon it, and that there is
left nothing but pa^e bones, she calls for a clean one, and scrapes away the
first.


Gods so Master Fetherstone, what will you do? here's three come from London,
to fetch away the Gentlewoman with a warrant.


All the warrants in Europe shall not fetch her now, she's mine sure enough:
what have you to say to her? she's my wife.


Ow! Sbloud do you come so far to fish and catch Frogs? your wife is a
Tilt-boate, any man or oman may go in her for money; she's a Cunny-catcher:
where is my mooueab'e goods called a Coach* and my two wild peasts, pogs on you
wud they had trawne you to the gallows.


I must borrow fifty pound of you Mistress Bride.


Yaw vro, and you make me de gheck, de great fool, you heb mine gelt to: war
is it?


Out you base scums, come you to disgrace me in my wedding shoes?


Is this your three thousand pound ward, ye told me sir she was your
Kinswoman.


Right, one of mine Awnts.


Who pays for the Northern voyage now lads?


Why do you not ride before my Wife to London now? the Woodcocks ith^ Sprindge.


O forgive me dear husband! I will never love a man that is worse than hanged,
as he is.


Now a man may have a course in your Park?


He may sir.


Never I protest, I will be as true to thee, as Ware and Wades-mill are one to
another.


Well, it's but my fate: Gentlemen, this is my opinion, it's better to shoot
in a Bow that has been shot in before, and will never start, than to draw a
fair new one, that for every Arrow will be warping: Come wench we are joined,
and all the Dogs in France shall not part us: I have some lands, those I'll
turn into money, to pay you, and you, and any: I'll pay all that I can for
thee, for Ime sure thou hast paid me.


God give you joy.


Come lets be merry, lye you with your own Wife, to be sure she shall not
walk in her sleep: a noise of Musicians Chamberlaine.

This night lets banquet freely: come, we'll dare,
Our wives to combat in the great bed in Ware*


