WHat Honour can be greater to a Kingdom, than to have a City for beauty,
able to match with the Fairest in the World? A City, renowned Abroad, admired
at Home. London, and her Royal Daughter (Westminster) are the Representatiue
body of the general State; for, here our Kings and Queenes keep their Courts;
here are our Princes, the Peers, Nobility, Gentry, Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, with the Numerous Communalty.

London in Foreign Countries is called the Queen of Cities, and the
Queene-mother over her own. She is her Kings Chamber-royall, his Golden-Key:
His Store-house: The Magazine of Merchandise; the Mistress of Sciences; a Nurse
to all the Sheers in England.

So famous she is for her Buildings, that Troy has leaped out of her own
Cinders, to build Her Walls. So remarkable for Priority and Power, that hers is
the Master-wheele of the whole Kingdom: As that moves, so the maine Engine
works.

London is Admiral over the Navy royal of Cities: And as she sails, the
whole Fleet of them keep their course.

Fully to write down all the Titles, Stiles, and Honours of this our
Metrapolis, would weary a 1000. pens: Apollo shall have a New Garland of
Baize, to undertake it.

As thus in State, she her self is Glorious; so have all our Kings held it
fit to make her chief Ruler eminent, and answerable to her greatness. The
Praetorian Dignity is therefore come from the ancient Romans, to invest with
Robes of Honour, our Lord Mayor of London: Their Consuls are our Sheriefes;
their Senators our Aldermen.

The extention of a Lord Majors power, is every year to be seen both by Land
and Water: Down as low as Lee in Essex: Up, as high as Stones in Middlesex: In
both which places, he keeps personal Courts. His House is a Chancery: He the
Chancellor to mitigate the fury of Law: He the Moderator between the griping
Rich and the wrangling Poor.

All the City* Orphans call him Father: All the Widows call him their
Champion. His Table lies spread to Courtiers, and Free to all Gentlemen of
fashion.

More to Proclaim his Greatness, what Vice-roy is installed with louder
popular acclamations? What Deputy to his Soraigne goes along with such
Triumphs? To behold them, Kings, Queenes, Princes, and Ambassadors (from all
parts of the World) have with Admiration, rejoiced.

These Triumphal passages are full of Magnificence for State, Munificence for
Cost, and Beneficence for doing good. For* besides all the twelve Companies,
(every one of which is a gainer by this employment:) it would puzzle a good
memory to reckon up all those Trades-men (with other extraordinary Professions
which live not in the City) who get money by this Action.

Then by this means, are every Year added to those that were before, three
Fair, Spacious, and Pallacious Houses, Beautified, Painted, and Adorned.

The Lord Mayor of London (like a Prince) hath likewise his Variety of Noble
Recreations: As Hunting, Shooting, Wrestling, before him, and such like.

Thus having (as it were in Lantschip) a far off shown you the Tops only
of our City-Buildings; and in a little Picture drawn the Face of her
Authority, giving but a glimpse of her Praetor as he passes by; let me now
open a Book to you, of all those Ceremonies, which this great Festival day
hath provided to Attend upon him, and do him Honour.

The first Salutation being on the Water, is furnished with Persons and
Properties fitting the quality of that Element. An Artificial Rock therefore
is queintly contrived: On whose highest Ascent fits Amphitrite Queen of the
Seas, habited to her State; a Mantle frindg'd with silver crossing her Body:
Her hair long, and dishevelled, on her head, a fantastic dressing made out
of a Fishes writhen shell, interwouen with Pearl, the shell is silver, on the
top of it stands an Artificial moving Torroyse: On each side of her, swim
two Mermaids. These two enticed by the variety of several instruments
(echoing to one another) have followed the SeaSoueraigne, and wait upon her,
as Maids of Honour.

Round about the Rock are Sea-Nimphes, and in places convenient for them are
bestowed our three famous Rivers, Humber, Trent, and Seuerne, aptly attired
according to the quality of such Marine Persons, who play upon Cornets.

Amphitryte is the Speaker. From whom are delivered these lines.

Hail worthy Praetor, (Hail Grave Senators)
The Queen of Waives (leaving Gray Neptunes Bowers)
waits here (Fair Lord) to serve you. Fames Report,
(so far as old Oceanus Crystal Court)
what Tryumphes Ceremony forthwould Call
To Swell the Joys of This Grand Festival,
Iutic'de me with my Mermaids and a Train
Of Sea-Nymphes hither. Here (this day) shall Reign
Pleasures in State Majestic: And to lend
A brighter Splendour to them, do Attend
Three of my Noblest Children, Humber, Trent,
And Seuerne (Glorious made by Punishment.)
The Siluer-footed Thames (my eldest son)
To Grace your Tryumphes, by your Barge shall run.
Your Fortunes (led by a white-handed Fate
Up to this High Fame) I Congratulate:
Glad am I to behold you Thus Set Round
With Glories, Thus with Acclamations Crowned,
So Circled, and Hemmed in, on Every side
With Echoing Music, Fishes even take pride
To Swim along, and listen, Go, and Take
The Dignity stays for you, whilst I make
Smooth way Before you, on This Glassy Floor,
Ushering your glad Arrival to the Shore.
To Honours Temple now you have not far,
Hye, and Come back more Great than yet you Are, On,

And so the Cornets playing one to Another, they go forward. If her Majesty
be pleased on the Water, or Land, to Honour These Tryumphes with her Presence;
This following Speech in French is then delivered to her, with a Book of the
Presentatiens, All the Cover, being set thick with Flower de Luces in Gold.

MADAME, VOicy, maintenant les Quatre Elements qui vos Attendent pour vous
fair Honneur. L'eau est Couverte de Triomphes flottans, pour Dancer en L'Air:
E'L'Air est Remply de Mill Echos, Retentit de la doulce Musique, que leur voix
resonne, pour Attirer vos oreilles fauorables a les Escouter. Puis vous auez
sir la, Terre dix mill Mains qui vous Applaudissent pour Joy Allegresse
quelles ressentent de voir vostre Majesty dans la Ville. L'Element du Feu,
Bruit Tonne vostre Bien Venue. Vos Subjects accourent a grand Foulle, rauis de
voir les Graces qui ont choisi leur Throsne sir vostre Front. Toutes les
Deliees d' Amour se Iouent sir vos paupieres, La Rose d' Angleterre, les Fleurs
de lis de France S'entrebaisent sir le Vermeil de vos Ioues. Soyez Sane comme
le printemps, Glorieuse comme l'Este, Autant Fructeuse que la vigne. Que seurte
guarde, Enuironne vostre Chariot le Jour: Et le Sommeil door Dress orne vostre
Chambre de Nuict. Viuez longuement: Viuez Heureuze: Viuez aimee, Cherie. Bonte
vous guarde; Virtue vous Couronne; Et les Anges vous guident.

ROYAL LADY, BEhold, the four Elements wait upon you to do you Honour: Water
hath provided Floating Tryumphes to Dance in the Air: In the Air are a
Thousand Echoes with Music in their Mouths, to Entice you to hear them: On
the Shore shall ten thousand pair of hands give you Plaudits in the City: The
Element of Fire, Thunders aloud your welcomes. Thronges of Subjects here, are
glad to see the Graces Inthroand on your Forehead: All the Delicacies of Love,
playing on your Eye-lids, The Roses of England, and the Lillies of France,
Kissing one Another on your cheeks. Be you healthful as the Spring; Glorious
as Summer: Fruitfu^l as the Vine: Safety run along your Chariot by Day;
Golden Slumbers dress up your Chamber at Night.

Live long,
Live happy,
Live beloude;
Goodness Guard you,
Virtues Crown you,
Angels Guide you.
A Person in a rich Roman Antique Habit, with an ornament of Steeples, Towers,
and Turrets on her head, Sits in a quaint Arbor, Interwouen with several
Branches of Flower^.

In her Left han^, she holds a golden Truncheon (leaning on the ground) to show
that she's a Leader Conductresse of a Mighty People: Her Right Hand (thrusting
through the Arbor) takes hold of a Tree, out of which spread Twelve Maine and
Goodly Branches.

This Lady (thus si^ting) Represents London: The Tree (guarded, and supported
by her) The 12. Superior Companies.

Upon every particular Branch, is bestowed the Arms of some One of the Twelve,
expressed in the True Colours within a fair shield. The highest Branch of all
(as ouer-topping the Rest at This Time) bearing the Arms of the Skinners in a
more large and glorious Escutcheon.

Among the Leaves in the Top, is a Tablet, in which is written, in letters of
gold, Viuite Concordes, Live in Love: Or Agree in one.

Over the Person, Representing London, is likewise Inscribed in golden
Capitals, This, Me ^nctus Lauro perducit ad astra Triumphus.
Each Triumph Crowned with Baize,
Me to the Stars does raize.


In places convenient, and in a Triangular form, under the twelve branches of
the Tree, are seated Minerua, (Inuentresse and Patroness of Arts,
Handy-crafts, and Trades) in Ornaments proper to her quality: And not far
from her, is Bellona goddess of War, in a Martial habit, on her head a
Helm and Plume, in her hands a golden Spear and Shield, with Medusaes ^ad.
Hereby intimating, that both Arts and Arms, are (in a high degree and
fullness of honour,) nurc'd up and maintained by and in the City: And, that
either of them flourish bravely under the shadow and protection of the twelve
Branches, shooting forth from that. New Troy's Tree of Honour.

Upon a border of Flowers, enclosing this Tree, are fitly bestowed the Arms of
as many of the inferior Companies in less Escucheons, as for the quantity of
room, can there be handsomely placed.

Within the same Border, (where less Trees also grow) are presented Peace,
Religion, Civil Government, Justice, Learning, Industry, and close to
Industry, Honour. For as all these are golden Columns, to bear up the Glories
of the City, so is the City an indulgent and careful Mother, to bring up them
to their Glories. And as these twelve Noble Branches cover these Persons, (as
it were with the wings of Angels,) so the Persons watch day and night to defend
the twelve Branches.

These Persons are adorned fitting their state and condition, and hold such
properties in their hands, as of right belong unto them.

1. Peace hath a Dove on her fist, and a Palme-tree Branch in her hand.

2. Religion is in a white glittering robe, with a Coronet of Stars on her
head, holding in one hand, a Book open, in the other, a golden ladder,
(emblem of prayer, by whose steppes we climb to Heaven.)

3. Civil Government is in a robe full of eyes, and a Dial in her hand to
express her Vigilance: For she must watch every hour, and keep all eyes
open, yet all little enough.

4. Justice holds a Sword.

5. Learning a Book, and a Iacobs Staff.

6. Industry, a golden Hammer, and a Sea-mans Compass, as taking pains to get
wealth, both by Sea and Land.

7. Honour sits in Scarlet.

The Person, in whom is figured London, is the Speaker, who thus salutes his
Lordship.

TEn thousand welcomes Greet you on the shore,
(My long expected Praetor,) O before
You look on Others, fix your eyes on Me,
On Me, your second Mother, (London.) She
Whom all Great Britains Cities, stile their Queen,
For still I am, and have her Darling been.
The Christian World, in Me, reads Times best stories,
And Reading, falls blind at my dazzling Glories,
But now the Snow of age, covers my head:
As therefore you, by Me have up binbred*
You ( Sir) must Nurse me now: with a quick eye
View then my Tree of Honour, branching high
For hundreds of past years, with 12. large Stems,
Twelve Noble Companies, which like 12. Iems
So shine, they add new Sun beams to the Day:
Guard all these 12. maine-Boughes; but you must lay:
A soft hand, on the Topping-branch, for there
(Thrive the Root well) your Self grows al this year:
The lesser twigs which lowly run along
My tall Tree, Border, you must shield from wrong,
There the poor Be, (the sweating Trades man) flies
From Flower to Flower, and home with Honey byes.
With me Minerua; and Bellona come,
For Arts and Arms, must at your Board have room,
Your Gates will spread, the Rich to entertain,
But whilst the Mightyones within remain,
And feast: Remember at the same Gate stands
The Poor, with crying Papers in their hands,
To watch when Justice up the Glass shall turn,
Let those sands run, the Poor can never morn.
Place in your eyes two Beacons, to descry
Dangers far off, which strike ere home they fly;
Kiss Peace; let Order ever steer the Helm,
Left-handed Rule, a State does ouer-whelme.
You are your Sovereigns Gardner for one year,
The Plot of Ground, you're trusted with, lies here,
(A City,) and your care must all be spent,
To prune and and dress the Tree of Government.
Lop off Disorders, Factions, Mutiny,
And Murmurations against those sit high,
May your years last day, end as this begins,
Sphar'd in the loves of Noble Citizens.

THis is a Chariot Triumphant, garnished with Trophies of Armours. It is drawn
by two Luzernes, The Supporters of the Skinners Arms. On the two Luzernes ride
two Antiques, who dance to a Drum beating before them, there aptly placed. At
the upper end of this Chariot, in the most eminent Seat, carrying the
proportion of a Throne, are advanced a Russian Prince and Princess; richly
habited in Furs, to the custom of the Country.

1. Under them, sits an old Lord, Furred up to his chin in a short cloak.

2. By him, a Lady with Martin skins about her neck, and her hands in a
Muffe.

3. Then, a Judge in Robes Furred.

4. Then, an University Doctor, in his Robes furred.

5. Then, a Fro^ in a short furred Cassock, girt to her.

6. Then a Skipper in a furred Cap.

I^ all these Persons, is an implication of the necessary, anci^nt and general
use of Furs, from the highest to the lowest.

On the Top of this Throne, (at the four corners) are erect^d the Arms of the
City, in four Pendants: On the point of the ^ore front, a large square Banner
plays with the wind, which Fame (who is in this Chariot,) holds in her hand,
as she stands upright, Being the Speaker.

FAme's turn is now to Speak; for who but Fame
Can with her thousand Tongues abroad Proclaim,
Your this days Progress (rising like the Sun,)
Which through the yearly Zodiac on must run.
Fame hath brought hither from great Mosco's Court,
(The seauen-mouth'd Volga, spreading the report,)
Two Russian Princes, who to feast their eyes,
With the rich Wonders of these rarities,
Ride in this glorious Chariot; How amazed
They look, to see streets thronged, and windows glazed
With beauties, from whose eyes such beams are sent,
Here moves a second starry Firmament.
Much, on them, startling admiration wins,
To see these Brave, Grave, Noble Citizens,
So streamed in mu^titudes, yet flowing in State,
For all their Orders are Proportionate.
Russia, now envies London, seeing (here) spent
Her richest Furs, in graceful ornament,
More Brave and more Abounding, than her own:
A golden Pen he earnes, that can make known
The use of Furs, so Great, so General,
All men, may these, their Winter Armours call.
Th'inuention of warm Furs the Sun did fret,
For Russians lapped in these, slighted his heate,
Which seen, his fiery Steeds he drove from thence,
And so the Muff has dwelt in cold ere since.
What royalties, add Furs to Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earles, in the distinguishings,
Of all their several Robes? The Furs worn here,
Above th'old Roman State make Ours appear:
The reverend Judge, and all that climb the trees
Of sacred Arts, ascend to their Degrees,
And by the colours changed of Furs are known:
What Dignity, each Corporation
Puts on by Furs, witness these infinite eyes,
Thank then the bringers of these Rarities.
I wish ( Grave Praetor) that as Hand in Hand,
Plenty and Bounty bring you safe to Land,
So, Health may be chief Carver at that Board,
To which you hasten. Be as Good a Lord
I'th'eyes of Heaven, as this day you are Great
In Fames applause: Hye to your Honoured Seat.
THis is a Magnificent Structure, Advancing it self from the Platform, or
Ground-worke upward, with the Bew^y of eight Antique Terms, By whose strength
is supported a Four square Building; The Top of which is a Watch-Tower, or
Lantern, with eight Columns of silver: And, on the Highest point of this
Watch-Tower, is Advanced a Banner, bearing the Cullo^s of the Kingdom.

At four Corners of the upper Square, stand four Pendants; In which are the
Arms of the four Companies of which his Lordship is Free.

At rach end of this Platform, stands a great Corinthian Brazen Pillar, on a
Pedestal of Marble.

On the Capitals of those Pillars, stand two Angels, in Postures ready to fly:
holding Garlands of Victory in one hand, stuck with White and Red Roses, and
Branches of Palm in the other.

The Capitals and Bases of the Pillars are Gold, and are Emblems of the two
Houses of York and Lancaster; once divided, but now Joined into One Glorious
Building, to Support This Royal Kingdom, Consequently This City.

At Night, in place of the Angels, are set two Great Lights: and so is the
Watch-Tower at that Time, Filled with lighted Tapers.

Upon the same Square, in four several Places, are Advanced four stately
Pyramides, being Figures, of the four Kingdoms Embellished with Escutcheons.

In the upper seat of all (fashioned into a Throne) is placed Britannia,
Majestically attired, fitting to her Greatness.

Beneath Her, and round about Her, are these Petsons: viz. Magnanimity with a
drawn Sword.

A Shipwright with a Mallet, holding a Scutcheon, in which is drawn a Ship
under sail. Then, A person representing Victory, with a Palm Tree. Providence
with a Trumpet, ready to Foresee Dangers, and awaken Men to meet them.

All These have been, and still are, Watch-Towers, and Lanthornes, in the
Nighrs of Fear and Trouble, to Guard the Kingdom, and in the Kingdom, This
City.

In other Eminent places are seated some of those Kiuges of England(in Robes
Ermynd) whose loves and Royal favours, in former times were Watch-Towers to
Grace London, stuck full with the Beams and Lights of Honours, Titles,
Offices, Magistracies and Royalties, which they Bestowed upon Her.

Edward Confessor, called Londons Chief Ruler, a Port-reue. Richard 1.
appointed two Bayliffes over London.

King Iohn gave the City a Lord Mayor and two Sheriffs. Henry 3. added
Aldermen.

These were Tender over the Renown of the City, and still heaped on her head,
Royalties upon Royalties.

And albeit most of our Kings, have in most of all of the twelve Companies,
Entered their Names, as Free of the Societies, thereby to Royallize their
Brotherhoods: And that many of our Kings likewise, besides Princes and Great
Personages, have bin Free of This Company, whose Names I forbear to set down,
because they have in former years been fully expressed: yet no Company, did
ever, or can hereafter, receive such Graces from Kings, as This Ancient, and
Honoured Corporation of Skinners, hath had, and still have, In regard that All
our Kings and Princes, sit in their high Courts of Parliament in Robes Ermynd,
(being the richest Fur) the workmanship of which goes through the Skinners
fingers, wearing likewise under their Crowns, Royal Caps of Honour Ermynd.

Three of such Crowns, being the rich Arms of This Company, thereby
expressing as well their Honour, as Antiquity.

Britannia delivers thus much.

SHall the proud wife of Neptune, or shrill Fame,
Or Troynouant her self, Ring out your Name:
And I be Dumb, or sparing, to Sound high,
The Glories of This Day? No, They shall Fly
Like Soaring Eagles, to That Curled Maine
whose Head my Rocky Bridle, In does Reyne:
The Great Britannia, Bred you in her Womb,
Hear then a Mothers Counsel; You are Come
Aboard a Goodly Ship, where all your State,
Fame, Honour and Renown (Embarked) must wait
The voyage of twelve Moons. High A^mirall
You are to All That Fleet, which Thus you Call
To s^yle in This vast Ocean. Nor must you
Walk Heartless on the Hatches, I here's a New
State-Nauigation, to be studied Now,
With an High reared, Undaunted, Fixed Brow.
Be su^e to have Brave Ordnance, and charged well;
In this your S^ip, Trust None, For Officers Sell
Their Captains Trust; let None but your own Eyes,
Rule Chart and Compass, There your Safety lies.
Your Own Hands steer the Helm, But strongly Steer,
And spite of storms, be stout when you stand There.
Emblem of Mercy! Your Keen sword does sleep,
But why a Sword, if not to Kul, and Keep
Vices (like Slaves) in Awe? Fullness of Wine
Is a Foul Dropsy, That and Lust Entwine:
Pride a swollen Timpany, Sloth, the Beggars Gout,
(In Tradesmen's Hands and Feet, It runs about,)
No Cure for this! Oaths thick as Small-shot fly
From Children, No Defence to Put this by!
You May, you Must. I Counsel not, but Read
A Lesson of my love; By which Love led
I'll on, and Bring you to your Honoured Chair,
Whi^st Aves (Round about you) Dance in the Air.

The upper part of this, is adorned with several Flowers, which in^erwou^n
together, dress up a comely Green Arbor, in which the Sun si^s, with golden
Beams about his Face; an Attire glittering like gold; and a mantle bright as
his garment, fringed with gold, his hair curled and yellow. About him are
placed, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, in proper Habiliments. Beneath
these, is a Wilderness, in which are many sorts of such Beasts, whose rich
Skins serve for Furs: As the Rear, Wolf, Leopard, Luzerne, Cat-
A-Mountaine, Foxes, Sables, Connies, Ferrets, Squirrels, c. Of these Beasts,
some are climbing, some standing, some grinning, with lively, natural
postures. In a Scroll, hanging on a Bough, This is written in Cap^tall letters.

Deus ecce Furentibus obstat.
See, for all some Beasts are fell,
There's one, that can their curstness quell.
Sol is the Speaker.

Heavens bright Oriental Gates I op'd this Morn,
And Hither wheeld my Chariot to adorn
These splendors with my Beams: ne'er did the Sun
In his Celestial Circle faster run
Than Now, to see these Sight^s: O how I joy
To view a Kingdom, and a New-built Troy
So flourishing so full, so fair, so dear
To the Gods. they leave Ioue's Court to revel here.
All over the World, I travel in one Day,
Yet oft am forced to leave my beaten way,
Frighted with Uproars, Battles, Massacres,
Famines, and all that Hellish brood of wars:
I meet no Peace but here. O blessed Land!
That see fires kindling round, and yet can stand
Vnburnt for all their flames; O Nation blessed!
When all thy Neighbours shrike, none wound thy breast.
To Crown these joys, with me are come along,
The four Lords of the year, who by a strong
Knit Charm, bring in this goodly Russian prize,
As earnest of a more rich Merchandise:
Half of our Race, Time, and my Hours have run,
Nor shall they give over till the Goal be won.

The Sun at Night being covered with a veil of Darkness: The Person,
representing London, thus takes leave.

THe Sun is mantled in thick Clouds of Black,
And by his hidden Beams, threatens the wrack
Of all these Glories: Every pleasure dyes
When Rauen-winged Night, from her Cave flies;
None but these Artificial Stars keep fire
To Light you Home, these burn with a desire
To lengthen your brave Triumphs; but their heate
Must cool, and dye at length, tho ne'er so Great.
Peace therefore guide you on: Rest, charm your eyes,
And Honours wait to cheer you when you Rise.

Let it be no Ostentation in Me the Inuentor, to speak thus much in praise of
the works, that for many years, none have been able to Match them for
curiosity: They are not Vast, but Neat, and Comprehend as much Art for
Architecture, as can be bestowed upon such little Bodies. The commendations of
which must live upon Mr. Gerard Chrismas the Father, and Mr. Iohn Chrismas the
Son.


