To all good Fellows, Professors of the Gentle Craft; of what degree soever.
Kind Gentlemen, and honest boon Companions, I present you here with a merry
conceited Comedy, called the Shoemakers Holiday, acted by my Lord Admiralls
Players this present Christmasse, before the Queenes most excellent Majesty.
For the mirth and pleasant matter, by her Highness graciously accepted; being
indeed no way offensive. The Argument of the play I will set down in this
Epistle: Sir Hugh Lacie Earl of Lincolne, had a young Gentleman of his own
name, his ne'er kinsman, that loved the Lord Majors daughter of London; to
prevent and cross which love, the Earl caused his kinsman to be sent Coronell
of a company into France: who resigned his place to another gentleman his
friend, and came disguised like a Dutch Shoemaker, to the house of Symon Eyre
in Tower street, who served the Mayor and his household with shoes. The
merriments that passed in Eyres house, his coming to be Mayor of London,
Lacies getting his love, and other accidents; with two merry Three-mens songs.
Take all in good worth that is well intended, for nothing is purposed but
mirth, mirth lengthneth long life which, with all other blessings I heartily
wish you.

Farewell.
O the month of May, the merry month of May,
So frolic, so gay, and so green, so green, so green:
O and then did I, unto my true love say,
Swat Peg, thou shalt be my Summers Queen.
NOw the Nightingale, the pretty Nightingale,
The sweetest singer in all the Forests queer:
Entreats thee sweet Peggie, to hear thy true loves tale,
Lo, yonder she sits, her breast against a brier.
But O I spy the Cuckoo, the Cuckoo, the Cuckoo,
See where she sits, come away my joy:
Come away I prithee, I do not like the Cuckoo
Should sing where my Peggie and I kiss and toy.
O the month of May, the merry month of May,
So frolic, so gay, and so green, so green, so green:
And then did I, unto my true love say,
Sweet Peg, thou shalt be my Summers Queen.
COld's the wind, and wet's the rain,
Saint Hugh be our good speed:
Ill is the weather that brings no gain,
Nor helps good hearts in need.
Trowel the boll, the jolly Nut-browne boll,
And here kind mate to thee:
Let's sing a dirge for Saint Hughes soul,
And down it merrily.
Down a down, hey down a down,
Hey derie derie down a down,
Close with the tenor boy:
Ho well done, to me let come,
King compass gentle joy.
Trowel the boll, the Nut-browne boll,
And here kind c as often as there be men to drink.
At last when all have drunk, this verse.
Cold's the wind, and wet's the rain,
Saint Hugh be our good speed:
Ill is the weather that brings no gain,
Nor helps good hearts in need.
AS wretrhes in a storm (expecting day)
With trembling hands and eyes cast up to heaven,
Make Prayers the anchor of their conquered hopes,
So we (dear Goddess) wonder of all eyes,
Your meanest bassalls (through mistrust and fear,
To uncke into the bottom of disgrace,
By our impersit pastimes) prostrate thus
On bended knees, our sails of hope do strike,
Dreading the bitter storms of your dislike.
Since then (unhappy men) our hap is such,
That to our selves our selves no help can bring,
But needs must perish, if your saint-like cares
(Locking the temple where all mercy sits)
Refuse the tribute of our begging tongues.
Oh grant (bright mirror of true Chastity)
From those life-breathing stars your sun-like eyes,
One gracious smile: for your celestial breath
Must send us life, or sentence us to death.
MY Lord Mayor, you have sundry times
Feasted my self, and many Courtiers more,
Seldom, or never can we be so kind,
To make requital of your courtesy:
But leaving this, I hear my cousin Lacie
Is much affected to your daughter Rose.

True my good Lord, and she loves him so well, That I mislike her boldness in
the chase.


Why my lord Mayor, think you it then a shame, To join a Lacie with an Otleys
name?


Too mean is my poor girl for his high birth,
Poor Citizens must not with Courtiers wed,
Who will in silks, and gay apparel spend
More in one year, then I am worth by far,
Therefore your honour need not doubt my girl.

Take heed my Lord, advise you what you do,
A berier vnthrist lives not in the world,
Then is my cousin, for I'll tel you what,
Tis now almost a year since he requested
To travel countries for experience,
I furnished him with coin, bills of exchange,
Letters of credit, men to wait on him,
Solicited my friends in Italie
Well to respect him: but to see the end:
Scant had he journeyed through half Germanie,
But all his coin was spent, his men cast off,
His bills imbezeld, and my jolly coze,
Ashamed to show his bankerupt presence here,
Became a Shoemaker in Wittenberg,
A goodly science for a gentleman
Of such descent: now judge the rest by this.
Suppose your daughter have a thousand pound,
He did consume me more in one half year,
And make him heir to all the wealth you have,
One twelve moneth's rioting will waste it all,
Then seek (my Lord) some honest Citizen
To wed your daughter to.

I thank your Lordship,
Well Fore, I understand your subtlety,
As for your nephew, let your lordships eye
But watch his actions, and you need not fear,
For I have my daughter far enough,
And yet your cousin Rowland might do well
Now he hath learned an occupation,
And yet I scorn to call him son in law.

I but I have a better trade for him,
I thank his grace he hath appointed him,
Chief colonel of all those companies
Mustered in London, and the shires about,
To serve his highness in those wars of France:
See where he comes: Louel what news with you?

My Lord of Lincolne, tis his highness will,
That presently your cousin ship for France
With all his powers, he would not for a million,
But they should land at Deep within four days.

Go certify his grace it shall be done:
Now cousin Lacie, in what forwardness
Are all your companies?

All well prepared,
The men of Hartfordshire lie at Mile end,
Suffolke, and Essex, train in Tuttle fields,
The Londoners, and those of Middlesex,
All gallantly prepared in Finsbury,
With frolic spirits, long for their parting hour.

They have their impressed, coats, and furniture,
And if it please your cousin Lacie come
To the Guild Hall, he shall receive his pay,
And twenty pounds besides my brethren
Will freely give him, to approve our loves
We bear unto my Lord your uncle here.

I thank your honour.


Thanks my good Lord Mayor.


At the Guild Hal we will expect your coming,


To approve your loves to me? no subtlety
Nephew: that twenty pound he doth bestow,
For joy to rid you from his daughter Rose:
But cousins both, now here are none but friends,
I would not have you cast an amorous eye
Upon so mean a project, as the love
Of a gay wanton painted citizen,
I know this churl, even in the height of scorn,
Doth hate the mixture of his blood with thine,
I pray thee do thou so, remember coze,
What honourable fortunes wait on thee,
Increase the kings love which so brightly shines,
And gilds thy hopes, I have no heir but thee:
And yet not thee, if with a wayward spirit,
Thou start from the true bias of my love.

My Lord, I will (for honour (not desire
Of land or livings) or to be your heir)
So guide my actions in pursuit of France,
As shall add glory to the Lacies name.

Coze, for those words here's thirty Portugues
And Nephew Askew, there's a few for you,
Fair Honour in her loftrest eminence
Stays in France for you till you fetch her thence,
Then Nephews, clap swift wings on your dissignes,
Be gone, be gone, make haste to the Guild Hall,
There presently I'll meet you, do not stay,
Where honour becomes, shame attends delay.

How gladly would your uncle have you gone?


True coze, but I'll ore-reach his policies,
I have some serious business for three days,
Which nothing but my presence can dispatch,
You therefore cousin with the companies
Shall hasse to Dover, there I'll meet with you,
Or if I stay past my prefixed time,
Away for France, we'll meet in Normandie,
The twenty pounds my Lord Mayor gives to me
You shall receive, and these ten portugues,
Part of mine uncles thirty, gentle coze,
Have care to our great charge, I know your wisdom
Hath tried it self in higher consequence.

Coze, al my self am yours, yet have this care,
To lodge in London with al secrecy,
Our uncle Lincolne hath (besides his own)
Many a jealous eye, that in your face
Stares only to watch means for your disgrace.

Stay cousin, who be these?


Leave whining, leave whining, away with this whimpring, this pewling, these
blubbering tears, and these wet eyes, I'll get thy husband discharged, I warrant
thee sweet Iane: go to.


Master, here be the captains.


Peace Hodge, husht ye knave, husht.


Here be the cavaliers, and the coronels, master.


Peace Firk, peace my fine Firk, stand by with your pishery pasherie, away, I
am a man of the best presence, I'll speak to them and they were Popes,
gentlemen, captains, colonels, commanders: brave men, brave leaders, may it
please you to give me audience, I am Simon Eyre, the mad Shoomaster of
Towerstreete, this wench with the mealy mouth that will never tire, is my wife I
can tel you, here's Hodge my man, and my foreman, here's Firk my fine firking
journeyman, and this is blubbered Iane, al we come to be suitors for this honest
Raf keep him at home, and as I am a true shoemaker, and a gentleman of the
Gentle Craft, buy spurs your self, and I'll find ye boots these seven years.


Seven years husband?


Peace Midriffe, peace, I know what I do, peace.


Truly master cormorant, you shall do God good service to let Raf and his wife
stay together, she's a young new married woman, if you take her husband away
from her a night, you undo her, she may beg in the day time, for hes as good
a workman at a prick an awl, as any is in our trade.


O let him stay, else I shall be undone.


I truly, she shall be laid atone side like a pair of old shoes else, and be
occupied for no use.


Truly my friends, it lies not in my power,
The Londoners are pressed, paid, and set forth
By the Lord Mayor, I cannot change a man.

Why then you were as good be a corporal, as a colonel, if you cannot
discharge one good fellow, and I tell you true, I think you do more then you
can answer, to presie a man within a year and a day of his marriage.


Well said melancholy Hodge, gramercy my fine foreman.


Truly gentlemen, it were il done, for such as you, to stand so stiffly
against a poor young wife: considering her case, she is new married, but let
that pass: I pray deal not roughly with her, her husband is a young man and
but newly entered, but let that pass.


Away with your pisherie pasherie, your pols and your edipolls, peace Midaffe,
silence Cisly Bumtrincket, let your head speak.


Yea and the horns too, master.


Too soon, my fine Firk, too soon: peace scoundrels, see you this man?
Captains, you will not release him, well let him go, he's a proper shot, let
him vanish, peace Iane, dry up thy tears, theile make his powder darkish,
take him brave men, Hector of Troy was an hackney to him, Hercules and
Termagant scoundrelles, Prince Arthurs Round table, by the Lord of Lutgate,
ne'er fed such a tall, such a dapper swordman: by the life of Pharo, a brave
resolute swordman, peace Iane, I say no more, mad knaves.


See, see Hodge, how my master raves in commendation of Raf.


Raph, thart a gull by this hand, and thou go.


I am glad (good master Air) it is my hap
To meet so resolute a soldier.
Trust me, for your report, and love to him,
A common flight regard shall not respect him.

Is thy name Raph?


Yes sir.


Give me thy hand,
Thou shalt not want, as I am a gentleman:
Woman, be patient, God (no doubt) will send
Thy husband safe again, but he must go,
His countries quarrel says, it shall be so.

Thart a gull by my stirrup, if thou dost not go, I will not have thee strike
thy gimblet into these weak bessels, prick thine enemies Raf.


My lord, your uncle on the Tower hill,
Stays with the lord Mayor, and the Aldermen,
And doth request you with al speed you may
To hasten thither.

Cousin, lets go.


Dodger run you before, tel them we come,
This Dodger is mine uncles parasite,
The arrantst varlet that e re breathed on earth,
He sets more discord in a noble house,
By one days broching of his pickethanke fales,
Then can be salu'd again in twenty years,
And he (I fear) shall go with us to France,
To pry into our actions.

Therefore coze,
It shall behoove you to be circumspect,

Fear not good cousin: Raph, hie to your colours.


I must, because there's no remedy,
But gentle master and my loving dame,
As you have always been a friend to me,
So in mine absence think upon my wife.

Alas my Raph.


She cannot speak for weeping.


Peace you cracked groats, you mustard tokens, disquiet not the brave soldier,
go thy ways Raph.


I I, you bid him go, what shall I do when he is gone?


Why be doing with me, or my fellow Hodge, be not idle.


Let me see thy hand Iane, this fine hand, this white hand, these pretty
fingers must spin, must card, must work, work you bembast
cotten-candle-queane, work for your living with a pox to you: hold thee Raph,
here's five sixpences for thee, fight for the honour of the Gentle Craft, for
the gentlemen Shoemakers, the courageous Cordwainers, the flower of S. Martins,
the mad knaves of Bedlam, Fleetstreete, Towerstreete, and white Chapel,
crack me the crowns of the French knaves, a pore on them, crack them, fight,
by the lord of Ludgate, fight my fine boy.


Here Raf, here's three two pence, two carry into France, the third shall wash
our souls at parting (for sorrow is dry) for my sake, Firk the Basa mon
cues.


Raph, I am heavy at parting, but here's a shilling for thee, God send thee to
cram thy slops with French crowns, and thy enemies bellies with bullets.


I thank you master, and I thank you all:
Now gentle wife, my loving lovely Iane,
Rich men at parting, give their wives rich gifts,
Jewels and rings, to grace their lilly hands,
Thou know our trade makes rings for women's heals:
Here take this pair of shoes cut out by Hodge,
Sticht by my fellow Firk, seemed by my self,
Made up and pinckt, with letters for thy name,
Wear them my dear Iane, for thy husbands sake,
And every morning when thou pull'st them on,
Remember me, and pray for my return,
Make much of them, for I have made them so,
That I can know them from a thousand mo.
Here sit thou down upon this flowery bank,
And make a garland for thy Lacies head,
These pinks, these roses, and these violets,
These blushing gilliflowers, these marigoldes,
The fair embroidery of his coronet,
Carry not half such beauty in their cheeks,
As the sweet countnaunce of my Lacy doth.
O my most unkind father! O my stars!
Why lowrde you so at my nativity,
To make me love, yet live robbed of my love?
Here as a thief am I imprisoned
(For my dear Lacies sake) within those walls,
Which by my fathers cost were builded up
For better purposes: here must I languish
For him that doth as much lament (I know)
Mine absence, as for him I pine in woe.

Good morrow young Mistress, I am sure you make that garland for me, against I
shall be Lady of the Harvest.


Sibil, what news at London?


Noue but good: my lord Mayor your father, and master Philpot your uncle, and
master Scot your cousin, and mistress Frigbottom by Doctors Commons, do all
(by my troth) send you most hearty commendations.


Did Lacy send kind greetings to his love?


O yes, out of cry, by my troth, I scant knew him, here a wore scarf, and
here a scarf, here a bunch of feathers, and here precious stones and jewels,
and a pair of garters: O monstrous like one of our yellow silk curtains, at
home here in Old-ford house, here in master Bellymounts chamber, I stood at
our door in Cornehill, looked at him, he at me indeed, spake to him, but he not
to me, not a word, mary guy thought I with a wanion, he passt by me as proud,
mary foh, are you grown humorous thought I? and so shut the door, and in I
came.


O Sibill, how dest thou my Lacy wrong?
My Rowland is as gentle as a lamb,
No dove was ever half so mild as he.

Mild? yea, as a bushel of stamped crabs, he looked upon me as sour as
veriuice: go thy ways thought I, thou may be much in my gaskins, but
nothing in my neatherstockes: this is your fault mistress, to love him that
loves not you, he thinks scorn to do as he's done to, but if I were as you,
I'd cry, go by Ieronimo, go by, I'd set mine old debts against my new
driblets, and the hares foot against the goose giblets, for if ever I sigh when
sleep I should take, pray God I may loose my mayden-head when I wake.


Will my love leave me then and go to France?


I know not that, but I am sure I see him stalk before the soldiers, by my
troth he is a proper man, but he is proper that proper doth, let him go
snicke-vp young mistress.


Get thee to London, and learn perfectly,
Whether my Lacy go to France, or no:
Do this, and I will give thee for thy pains,
My cambric apron, and my romish gloves,
My purple stockings, and a stomacher,
Say, wilt thou do this Sibil for my sake?

Will I quoth a? at whose suite? by my troth yes, I'll go, a cambric apron,
gloves, a pair of purple stockings, and a stomacher, I'll sweat in purple
mistress for you, i'll take any thing that comes a Gods name, O rich, a Cambric
apron; faith then have at up tails all, I'll go, Iiggy, Ieggy to London, and be
here in a trice young mistress.


Do so good Sibill, mean time wretched I
Will sit and sigh for his lost company.

How many shapes have gods and kings devised,
Thereby to compass their desired loves?
It is no shame for Rowland Lacy then,
To clothe his cunning with the Gentle Craft,
That thus disguised, I may unknown possess,
The only happy presence of my Rose:
For her have I forsook my charge in France,
Incurd the Kings displeasure, and stirred up
Rough hatred in mine uncle Lincolnes breast:
O love, how powerful art thou, that can change
High birth to bareness, and a noble mind,
To the mean semblance of a shoemaker?
But thus it must be: for her cruel father,
Hating the single union of our souls,
Hath secretly conveyed my Rose from London,
To bar me of her presence, but I trust
Fortune and this disguise will further me
Once more to view her beauty, gain her sight.
Here in Towerstreete, with Air the shooe-maker,
Mean I a while to work, I know the trade,
I learned it when I was in Wittenberge:
Then cheer thy hoping sprites, be not dismayed,
Thou can not want, do fortune what she can,
The Gentle Craft is living for a man.

Where be these boys, these girls, these drabbes, these scoundrels, they
wallow in the fat brewisse of my boutie, and I locke up the crumbs of my table,
yet will not rise to see my walks cleansed: come out you powder-beefe-queanes,
what Nan, what Madge-mumble-crust, come out you fat Midriffe-swag,
belly-whores, and sweep me these kennels, that the noisome stench offend not
the nose of my neighbours: what Firk I say, what Hodge? open my shop windows,
what Firk I say.


O master, is't you that speak bandog and bedlam this morning, I was in a
dream, and muzed what mad man was got into the street so early, have you
drunk this morning that your throat is so clear?


Ah well said Firk, well said Firk, to work my fine knave, to work, wash
thy face, and thou t be more blessed.


Let them wash my face that will eat it, good master send for a sowce wife,
if you'll have my face cleaner.


Away sloven, avaunt scoundrell, good morrow Hodge, good morrow my fine
foreman.


O master, good morrow, yare an early stirrer, here's a fair morning, good
morrow Firk, I could have slept this howre, here's a brave day towards.


O haste to work my fine foreman, haste to work.


Master I am dry as dust, to hear my fellow Roger talk of fair weather,
let us pray for good leather, and let clowns and plowboyes, and those that
work in the fields, pray for brave days, we work in a dry shop, what care
I if it rain?


How now dame Margery, can you see to rise? trip and go, call up the drabs your
maids.


See to rise? I hope tis time enough, tis early enough for any woman to be
seen abroad, I marvel how many wives in Towerstreet are up so soon? Gods
me, tis not noone, here's a yawling.


Peace Margerie, peace, wheres Cisty Bumtrinket your maid? she has a privy
fault, she fartes in her sleep, call the queen up, if my men want
shooethreed, i'll swinge her in a stirrup.


Yet that's but a dry beating, here's still a sign of drought.


Der was even bore van Gelderland, Frolic u byen,
He was als dronck he cold nyet stand, vpsolce se byen,
Tap eens de canneken drink scheue mannekin.

Master, for my life yonders a brother of the Gentle Craft, if he bear not
saint Hughes bones, I'll forfeit my bones, hes some vplandish workman, hire him
good master, that I may learn some gibble, gabble, twill make us work the
faster.


Peace Firk, a hard world, let him pass, let him vanish, we have journeymen
enough, peace my fine Firk.


Nay, nay, y are best follow your mans council, you shall see what will come on
t: we have not men enough, but we must entertain every butter-boxe: but let
that pass.


Dame, fore God if my master follow your counsel, heel consume little beef,
he shall be glad of men and he can catch them.


I that he shall.


Fore God a proper man, and I warrant a fine workman: master farewell, dame
adieu, if such a man as he cannot find work, Hodge is not for you.


Stay my fine Hodge.


Faith, and your foreman go, dame you must take a journey to seek a new
iorneyman, if Roger remove, Firk follows, if S. Hughs bones shall not be set
a work, I may prick mine awl in the walls, and go play: fare ye well master,
God buy dame.


Carry my fine Hodge, my brisk foreman, stay Firk, peace pudding broth, by
the lord of Ludgate I love my men as my life, peace you gallimafrie, Hodge if
he want work I'll hire him, one of you to him, stay, he comes to us.


Eoeden dach meester, end v vro oak.


Nayis if I should speak after him without drinking, I should choke, and you
friend Oak are you of the Gentle Craft?


Yaw yaw, Ik bin den skomawker.


Den skomaker quoth a, and hark you skomaker, have you al your tools, a good
rubbing pin, a good stopper, a good dresser, your four sorts of awles and
your two balls of wax, your paring knife, your hand and thumb-leathers, and
good S. Hughs bones to smooth up your work.


Yaw yaw be niet for veard, Ik hab all de dingen, voour mack shoes groot and
clean.


Ha ha good master hire him, heel make me laugh so that I shall work more in
mirth, then I can in earnest.


I care ye friend, have ye any skill in the mystery of Cordwainers?


Ik weet niet wat you seg ich vestaw you niet.


Why thus man, Ich verste v niet quoth a.


Yaw, yaw, yaw, ick can dat well done.


Yaw, yaw, he speaks yawing like a Jack daw, that gapes to be fed with cheese
curdes, O heel give a villainous pull at a Can of double Beer, but Hodge and I
have the vantage, we must drink first, because we are the eldest journeyman.


What is thy name?


Hans, Hans, Meulter.


Give me thy hand, the art welcome, Hodge entertain him, Fyrk bid him welcome,
come Hans, run wife, bid your maids, your Crullibubs, make ready my fine
men's breakefasts: to him Hodge.


Hans, you are welcome, use thy self friendly, for we are good fellows, if not
thou shalt be fought with, were thou bigger then a Giant.


Yea and drunk with, were thou Gargantua, my master keeps no cowards, I tel
thee: he, boy, bring him an heele-blocke, heers a new journeyman.


Oich wersto, you Ich moet even halue dossen Cans betaelen: here boy nempt dis
skilling, tap eens freelicke.


Quick snipper snapper, away Fyrk, scour thy throat, thou shalt wash it with
Casulian liquor, come my last of the fiues, give me a Can, have to


Lo dame you would have lost a good fellow that will teach us to laugh, this
beer came hopping in well.


Simon it is almost seven.


Is't so dame clapper dudgeon, is't seven a clock, and my men's breakfast not
ready? trip and go you sowst cunger, away, come you mad Hiperboreans,
follow me Hodge, follow me Hans, come after my fine Fyrk, to work, to work a
while and then to breakfast.


Soft, yaw, yaw, good Hans, though my master have no more wit, but to call you
before me, I am not so foolish to go behind you, I being the elder journeyman.


Cousin, beat every brake, the game's not far,
This may with winged feet he fled from death,
Whilst the pursuing hounds scenting his steps:
Find out his high way to destruction,
Besides, the millers boy told me even now,
He saw him take sail, and he hallowed him,
Affirming him so embost,
That long he could not hold.

If it be so,
Tis best we trace these meadows by old Ford.

How now boy, wheres the dear? speak, saw thou him?


O, yea I saw him escape through a hedge, and then over a ditch, then at my Lord
Majors pale, over he skipped me and in he went me, and holla the hunters cried,
and there boy there boy, but there he is a mine honesty.


Boy God amerey, cousin lets away,
I hope we shall find better sport to day.

Why Sibill wilt thou prove a forester?


Upon some no, forester, go by: no faith mistress, the dear came running into
the barn through the orchard, and over the pale, I wot well, I looked as pale as
a new cheese to see him, but whip says goodman pinne-close, up with his
fiaile, and our Nick with a prong, and down he fell, and they upon him, and I
upon them, by my troth we had such sport, and in the end we ended him, his
throat we cut, flayed him, vnhornd him, and my lord Mayor shall eat of him anon
when he comes.


Hark hark, the hunters come, you're best take heed
They'll have a saying to you for this deed.

God save you fair ladies.


Ladies, O gross!


Came not a buck this way?


No, but two Does.


And which way went they? faith weel hunt at those


At those? upon some no: when, can you tell?


Upon some, I.


Good Lord!


Wounds then farewell.


Boy, which way went he?


This way sir he ran.


This way he ran indeed, fair mistress Rose,
Our game was lately in your orchard seen.

Can you advise which way he took his flight?


Follow your nose, his horns will guide you right.


Thart a mad wench.


O rich!


Trust me, not I,
It is not like the wild forest dear,
Would come so near to places of resort,
You are deceived, he fled some other way.

Which way my suger-candie, can you show?


Come up good honnisops, upon some, no.


Why do you stay, and not pursue your game?


I'll hold my life their hunting nags be lame.


A dear, more dear is found within this place.


But not the dear (sir) which you had in chase.


I chased the dear, but this dear chaceth me.


The strangest hunting that ever I see,
But wheres your park?

Tis here: O stay.


Impale me, and then I will not stray.


They wrangle wench, we are more kind then they


What kind of hart is that (dear hart) you seek?


A hart, dear hart.


Who ever saw the like?


To loose your heart, is't possible you can?


My heart is lost.


Alack good gentleman.


This poor lost hart would I with you might find.


You by such luck might prove your hart a hind.


Why Luck had horns, so have I heard some say.


Now God and't be his will send Luck into your way.


What M. Hammon, welcome to old Ford.


Gods pittikins, hands off sir, heers my Lord.


I hear you had ill luck, and lost your game.


Tis true my Lord.


I am sorry for the same.
What gentleman is this?

My brother in law.


Y are welcome both, since Fortune offers you
Into my hands, you shall not part from hence,
Until you have refreshed your wearied limbs:
Go Sibel cover the board, you shall be guest
To no good cheer, but even a hunters feast.

I thank your Lordship: cousin, on my life
For our lost venisou, I shall find a wife.

In gentlemen, I'll not be absent long.
This Hammon is a proper gentleman,
A citizen by birth, fairly allide,
How fit an husband were he for my girl?
Well, I will in, and do the best I can,
To match my daughter to this gentleman.

Ick sal you wat seggen Hans, dis skip dat come from Candy is al wol, by gots
sacrament, van sugar, civet, almonds, cambric, end alle dingen towsand towsand
ding, nempt it Hans, nempt it voz v meester, daer be de bills van laden, your
meester Simon Eyre sal have good copen, wat seggen you Hans?


Wat seggen de reggen de copen, slopen, laugh Hodge laugh.


Mine lieuer brother Firk, bringt meester Eyre lot den sign un swannekin, daer
sal you find dis skipper end me, wat seggen you brother Firk? doot it Hodge,
come skipper.


Bring him quoth. you, heers no knavery, to bring me master to buy a ship, worth
the lading of 2 or 3 hundred thousand pounds, alas that's nothing, a trifle, a
babble Hodge.


The truth is Firk, that the merchant owner of the ship dares not show his
head, and therefore this skipper that deals for him, for the love he bears to
Hans, offers my master Eyre a bargain in the commodities, he shall have a
reasonable day of payment, he may sell the wares by that time, and be an huge
gainer himself.


Yea, but can my fellow Hans lend my master twenty porpentines as an earnest
penny.


Portegues thou would say, here they be Firk, hark, they gingle in my
pocket like S. Mary Queries bells.


Mum, here comes my dame and my master, sheele scold on my life, for loitering
this Monday, but al's one, let them al say what they can, Monday's our holiday.


You sing sir sauce, but I beshrew your heart,
I fear for this your singing we shall smart.

Smart for me dame, why dame, why?


Master I hope yowle not suffer my dame to take down your journeymen.


If she take me down, I'll take her up, yea and take her down too, a button,
hole lower.


Peace Firk, not I Hodge, by the life of Pharao, by the Lord of Ludgate, by
this beard, every hair whereof I value at a kings ransom, she shall not
meddle with you, peace you bumbast-cotten-candle Queen, away queen of Clubs,
quarrel not with me and my men, with me and my fine Firk, I'll firk you if you
do.


Yea, yea man, you may use me as you please: but let that pass.


Let it pass, let it vanish away: peace, am I not Simon Eyre? are not these my
brave men? brave shoemakers, all gentlemen of the gentle craft? prince am I
none, yet am I nobly borne, as being the sole son of a Shoemaker, away
rubbish, vanish, melt, melt like kitchen stuff.


Yea, yea, tis well, I must be called rubbish, kitchen stuff, for a sort of
knaves.


Nay dame, you shall not weep and wail in woe for me: master I'll stay no
longer, here's a vennentorie of my shop tools: adieu master, Hodge farewell.


Nay stay Firk, thou shalt not go alone.


I pray let them go, there be mo maids then mawkin, more men then Hodge, and
more fools then Firk.


Fools? nailes if I tarry now, I would my guts might be turned to shoo-thread.


And if I stay, I pray God I may be turned to a Turk, and set in Finsbury for
boys to shoot at: come Firk.


Stay my fine knaves, you arms of my trade, you pillars of my professio. What,
shall a tittle tattles words make you forsake Simon Eyre? avaunt kitchinstuffe,
rip you brown bread tannikin, out of my sight, move me not, have not I taken you
from selling tripes in Eastcheape, and set you in my shop, and made you hail
fellow with Simon Eyre the shoemaker? and now do you deal thus with my
Journeymen? Look you powder beef queen on the face of Hodge, heers a face
for a Lord.


And heers a face for any Lady in Christendom.


Rip you chitterling, avaunt boy, bid the tapster of the Bores head fill me a
dozen Cannes of beer for my journeymen.


A dozen Cans? O brave, Hodge now I'll stay.


And the knave fills any more then two, he pays for them: a dozen Cans of
beer for my journeymen, hear you mad Mesopotamians, wash your livers with
this liquour, where be the odd ten? no more Madge, no more, well said, drink
to work: what work dost thou Hodge? what work?


I am a making a pair of shoes for my Lord Majors daughter, mistress Rose.


And I a pair of shoes for Sybill my Lords maid, I deal with her.


Sybil? fie, defile not thy fine workmanly fingers with the feet of
Kitchinstuffe, and basting ladies, Ladies of the Court, fine Ladies, my lads,
commit their feet to our apparelling, put gross work to Hans; yarke and
seam, yarke and seam.


For yarking seaming let me alone, I come toot.


Well master, al this is from the bias, do you remember the ship my fellow Hans
told you of, the Skipper and he are both drinking at the swan? here be the
Portigues to give earnest, if you go through with it, you can not choose but be
a Lord at least.


Nay dame, if my master prone not a Lord, and you a Lady, hang me.


Yea like enough, if you may loiter and tipple thus.


Tipple dame? no, we have been bargaining with Skellum Skanderbag: can you
Dutch spreaken for a ship of silk Cyprus, laden with sugar Candy.


Peace Firk, silence tittle tattle: Hodge, I'll go through with it, heers a
seal ring, and I have sent for a guarded gown, and a damask Casock, see where
it comes, look here Maggy, help me Firk, apparreline Hodge, silk and satin
you mad Philistines, silk and satin.


Ha, ha, my master will be as proud as a dog in a doublet, al in beaten
damask and velvet.


Softly Firk, for rearing of the nap, and wearing thread-bare my garments: how
dost thou like me Firk? how do I look, my fine Hodge?


Why now you look like your selfmaster, I warrant you, there's few in the city,
but will give you the wall, and come upon you with the right worshipful.


Nailes my master looks like a thred-bare cloak new turned, and dressed: Lord,
Lord, to see what good raiment both? dame, dame, are you not enamoured?


How say thou Maggy, am I not brisk? am I not fine?


Fine? by my troth sweet hart very fine: by my troth I never likte thee so well
in my life sweet heart. But let that pass, I warrant there be many women in
the city have not such handsome husbands, but only for their apparel, but let
that pass too.


Godden day master, dis be de skipper dat heb de skip van marchandice de
commodity ben good, nempt it master, nempt it.


Godamercy Hans, welcome skipper, where lies this ship of marchandice?


De skip ben in rouere: dor be van Sugar, Cyuet, Almonds, Cambric, and a
towsand towsand tings, gotz sacrament, nempt it master, yo sal heb good copen.


To him master, O sweet master, O sweet wares, prunes, almons, suger-candy,
carrat roots, turnips, O brave fatting meat, let not a man buy a nutmeg but
your self.


Peace Firk, come Skipper, I'll go abroad with you, Hans have you made him
drink?


Yaw, yaw, it heb veale ge drunk.


Come Hans follow me: Skipper, thou shalt have my countenance in the City.


Yaw heb veale ge drunk, quoth a: they may well be called butter-boxes, when
they drink fat veale, and thick bear too: but come dame, I hope you'll chide
us no more.


No faith Firk, no perdy Hodge, I do feel honour creep upon me, and which is
more, a certain rising in my flesh, but let that pass.


Rising in your flesh do you feel say you? I you may be with child, but why
should not my master feel a rising in his flesh, having a gown and a gold
ring on, but you are such a shrew, youl'e soon pull him down.


Ha, ha, prithee peace, thou make my worship laugh, but let that pass:
come I'll go in Hodge, prithee go before me, Firk follow me.


Firk doth follow, Hodge pass out in state.


How now good Dodger, whats the news in France?


My Lord, upon the eighteen day of May,
The French and English were prepared to fight,
Each side with eager fury gave the sign
Of a most hot encounter, five long hours
Both armies fought together: at the length,
The lot of victory fell on our sides,
Twelve thousand of the Frenchmen that day did,
Four thousand English, and no man of name,
But Captain Hyam, and young Ardington,
Two gallant Gentlemen, I knew them well.

But Dodger, prithee tell me in this fight,
How did my cozen Lacie bear himself?

My Lord, your cousin Lacie was not there.


Not there? Dog. No, my good Lord.


Sure thou mistake,
I saw him shipped, and a thousand eyes beside
Were witnesses of the farewells which he gave,
When I with weeping eyes bid him adieu:
Dodger take heed.

My Lord I am advised,
That what I spake is true: to prove it so,
His cousin Askew that supplied his place,
Sent me for him from France, that secretly
He might convey himself hither.

Is't even so.
Dares he so carelessly venture his life,
Upon the indignation of a King?
Hath he despised my love, and spurned those favours,
Which I with prodigal hand powered on his head?
He shall repent his rashness with his soul,
Since of my love he makes no estimate,
I'll make him wish he had not known my hate,
Thou hast no other news?

None else, my Lord.


None worse I know thou hast: procure the king
To crown his giddy brows with ample honours,
Send him chief Colonel, and all my hope
Thus to be dashed? but tis in vain to grieve,
One evil cannot a worse relieve:
Upon my life I have found out his plot,
That old dog Love that fawnd upon him so,
Love to that puling girl, his fair cheeked Rose,
The Lord Majors daughter hath distracted him,
And in the fire of that loves lunacy,
Hath he burnt up himself, comsum'd his credit,
Lost the kings love, yea and I fear, his life,
Only to get a wanton to his wife:
Dodger, it is so.

I fear so, my good Lord.


It is so, nay sure it cannot be,
I am at my wits end Dodger.

Yea my Lord.


Thou art acquainted with my Nephews haunts,
Spend this gold for thy pains, go seek him out,
Watch at my Lord Majors (there if he live)
Dodger, thou shalt be sure to meet with him:
Prithee be diligent. Lacie thy name
Lived once in honour, now dead in shame:
Be circumspect.

I warrant you my Lord.


Good master Scot, I have been bold with you,
To be a witness to a wedding knot,
Betwixt young master Hammon and my daughter,
O stand aside, see where the lovers come.

Can it be possible you love me so?
No, no, within those eie-bals I epsy,
Apparent likelihoods of flattery,
Pray now let go my hand.

Sweet mistress Rose,
Misconstrue not my words, nor misconceive
Of my affection, whose devoted soul
Swears that I love thee dearer then my heart.

As dear as your own heart? I judge it right.
Men love their hearts best when they are out of sight.

I love you, by this hand.


Yet hands off now:
If flesh be frail, how weak and frail's your vow?

Then by my life I swear.


Then do not brawl,
One quarrel loses wife and life and all,
Is not your meaning thus?

In faith you jest.


Love loves to sport, therefore leave love you're best.


What? square they master Scot?


Sir, never doubt,
Lovers are quickly in, and quickly out.

Sweet Rose, be not so strange in fancying me,
Nay never turn aside, shun not my sight,
I am not grown so fond, to fond my love
On any that shall quit it with disdain,
If you will love me, so, if not, farewell.

Why how now lovers, are you both agreed?


Yes faith my Lord.


Tis well, give me your hand, give me yours daughter.
How now, both pull back, what means this, girl?

I mean to live a maid.


But not to die one, pause ere that be said.


Will you still cross me? still be obstinate?


Nay chide her not my Lord for doing well,
If she can live an happy virgins life,
Tis far more blessed then to be a wife.

Say sir I cannot, I have made a vow,
Who ever be my husband, tis not you.

Your tongue is quick, but M. Hamond know,
I bade you welcome to another end.

What, would you have me pule, pine, and pray,
With lovely lady mistress of my heart,
Pardon your servant, and the rimer play,
Railing on Cupid, and his tyrants dart,
Or that I undertake some martial spoil,
Wearing your glove at turney, and at tilt,
And tel how many gallauts I unhorsed,
Sweet, will this pleasure you?

Yea, when wilt begin?
What louerimes man? fie on that deadly sin.

If you will have her, I'll make her agree.


Enforced love is worse then hate to me,
There is a wench keeps shop in the old change,
To her will I, it is not wealth I seek,
I have enough, and will prefer her love
Before the world: my good lord Mayor adieu,
Old love for me, I have no luck with new.

Now mammet you have well behau'd your self,
But you shall curse your coins if I live,
Whose within there? see you connay your mistress
Straight to th'old Forde, I'll keep you straight enough,
Fore God I would have sworn the puling girl,
Would willingly accepted Hammons love,
But banish him my thoughts, go minion in,
Now tel me master Scot would you have thought,
That master Simon Eyre the shoemaker,
Had been of wealth to buy such merchandise?

Twas well my Lord, your honour, and my self,
Grew partners with him for your bills of lading,
Show that Eyres gains in one commodity,
Rise at the least to full three thousand pound,
Besides like gain in other merchandise.

Well he shall spend some of his thousands now
For I have sent for him to the Guild Hal,
See where he comes: good morrow master Eyre.

Poor Simon Eyre, my Lord, your shoemaker.


Well well, it likes your self to term you so,
Now M. Dodger, whats the news with you?

I'd gladly speak in private to your honour.


You shall, you shall: master Eyre, and M. Scot,
I have some business with this gentleman,
I pray let me entreat you to walk before
To the Guild Hal, I'll follow presently,
Master Eyre, I hope ere noone to call you Sheriff.

I would not care (my Lord) if you might cal me king of Spain, come master
Scot.


Now master Dodger, whats the news you bring?


The Earl of Lincolne by me greets your lordship
And earnestly requests you (if you can)
Inform him where his Nephew Lacie keeps.

Is not his Nephew Lacie now in France?


No I assure your lordship, but disguised Lurks here in London.


London? is't even so?
It may be, but upon my faith and soul,
I know not where he lives, or whether he lives,
So tel my Lord of Lincolne, lurch in London?
Well master Dodger, you perhaps may start him,
Be but the means to ris him into France,
I'll give you a dozen angels for your pains,
So much I love his honour, hate his Nephew,
And prithee so inform thy lord from me.

I take my leave.


Farewell good master Dodger.
Lacie in London? I dare pawn my life,
My daughter knows thereof, and for that cause,
Denied young M. Hammon in his love,
Well I am glad I sent her to old Forde,
Gods lord tis late, to Guild Hall I must hie,
I know my brethren stay my company.

Thou go too fast for me Roger.


I forsooth.


I pray thee run (do you hear) run to Guild Hall, and learn if my
husband master Eyre will take that worshipful vocation of M. Sheriff upon him,
hie thee good Firk.


Take it? well I go, and he should not take it, Firk swears to forswear him,
yes forsooth I go to Guild Hall.


Nay when? thou art too compendious, and tedious.


O rare, your excellence is full of eloquence, how like a new cart wheel my
dame speaks, and she looks like an old musty ale-bottle going to scalding.


Nay when? thou wilt make me melancholy.


God forbid your worship should fall into that humour, I run.


Let me see now Roger and Hans.


I forsooth dame (mistress I should say) but the old term so sticks to the
roof of my mouth, I can hardly lick it off.


Even what thou wilt good Roger, dame is a fair name for any honest christian,
but let that pass, how dost thou Hans?


Me tanck you vro.


Well Hans and Roger you see God hath blessed your master, and perdie if ever he
comes to be M. Sheriff of London (as we are al mortal) you shall see I will have
some odd thing or other in a corner for you: I will not be your back friend,
but let that pass, Hans pray thee tie my shoe.


Yaw it sal vro.


Roger, thou know the length of my foot, as it is none of the biggest, so I
thank God it is handsome enough, prithee let me have a pair of shoes made,
cork good Roger, wooden heel too.


You shall.


Art thou acquainted with never a fardingale-maker, nor a French-hoode maker, I
must enlarge my bumine, ha ha, how shall I look in a hood I wonder? perdie
oddly I think.


As a cat out of a pillory, very well I warrant you mistress.


Indeed all flesh is grass, and Roger, can thou tel where I may buy a good
hair?


Yes forsooth, at the poulterers in Gracious street.


Thou art an ungracious wag, perdy, I mean a false hair for my periwig.


Why mistress, the next time I cut my beard, you shall have the shauings of it,
but they are all true hairs.


It is very hot, I must get me a fan or else a mask.


So you had need, to hide your wicked face.


Fie upon it, how costly this world's calling is, perdy, but that it is one of
the wonderful works of God, I would not deal with it: is not Firk come yet?
Hans be not so sad, let it pass and vanish, as my husbands worship says.


Ick bin vrolicke, lot see you so.


Mistress, will you drink a pipe of Tobacco?


O fie upon it Roger, perdy, these silthie Tobacco pipes are the most idle
slavering bables that ever I felt: out upon it, God bless us, men look not
like men that use the.


What fellow Raf? Mistres look here, Ianes husband, why how, lame? Hans make
much of him, hes a brother of our trade, a good workman, and a tall soldier.


You be welcome brother.


Pardie I knew him not, how dost thou good Raf? I am glad to see thee well.


I would God you saw me dame as well,
As when I went from London into France.

Trust me I am sorry Raf to see thee impotent, Lord how the wars have made
him Sunburnt: the left leg is net well it was a fair gift of God the infirmity
took not hold a little higher, considering thou came from France: but let
that pass.


I am glad to see you well, and I rejoice
To hear that God hath blessed my master so
Since my departure.

Yea truly Raf, I thank my maker: but let that pass.


And sir Raf, what news, what news in France?


Tel me good Roger first, what news in England?
Haw does my Iane? when did thou see my wife?
Where lives my poor heart? she'll be poor indeed
Now I want limbs to get whereon to feed.

Limbs? hast thou not hands man? thou shalt never see a shoemaker want bread,
though he have but three fingers on a hand.


Yet all this while I hear not of my Iane.


O Raf your wife, perdie we know not whats become of her: she was here a
while, and because she was married grew more stately then became her, I checked
her, and so forth, away she flung, never returned, nor said bih nor bah: and
Raf you know call me, call thee. And so as I tell ye. Roger is not Firk come
yet?


No forsooth.


And so indeed we heard not of her, but I hear she lives in London: but let
that pass. If she had wanted, she might have opened her case to me or my
husband, or to any of my men, I am sure there's not any of them perdie, but
would have done her good to his power. Hans look if Firk be come.


Yaw it sal vro.


And so as I said: but Raf, why dost thou weep? thou know that naked we
came out of our mothers womb, and naked we must return, and therefore thank
God for al things.


No faith Iane is a stranger here, but Raf pull up a good heart, I know
thou hast one, thy wife man, is in London, one told me he saw her a while
ago very brave and neat, we'll ferret her out, and London hold her.


Alas, poor soul, hes overcome with sorrow, he does but as I do, weep for
the loss of any good thing: but Raf, get thee in, call for some meat and
drink, thou shalt find me worshipful towards thee.


I thank you dame, siuce I want limbs and lands,
I'll to God, my good friends, and to these my hands.

Run good Hans, O Hodge, O mistres, Hodge. heave up thine ears, mistress
smug up your looks, on with your best apparel, my master is chosen, my
master is called nay condemned by the cry of the country to be sheriff of
the City, for this famous year now to come: and time now being, a great many
men in black gowns were asked for their voices, and their hands, and my master
had al their fists about his ears presently, and they cried I, I, I, I, and so
I came away, wherefore without all other grieve, I do salute you mistress
shrieue.


Yaw, my master is de groot man, de shrieue.


Did not I tell you mistress? now I may boldly say, good morrow to your
worship.


Good morrow good Roger, I thank you my good people all. Firk, hold up thy
hand, here's a three-peny piece for thy tidings.


Tis but three half pence, I think: yes, tis three pence, I smell the Rose.


But mistress, be ruled by me, and do not speak so pulingly.


Tis her worship speaks so, and not she, no faith mistress, speak me in the
old key, too it Firk, there good Firk, ply your business Hodge, Hodge,
with a full mouth: I'll fill your bellies with good cheer till they cry twang.


See mine lieuer brother, heer count my meester.


Welcome home master shrieue, I pray God continue you in health and wealth.


See here my Maggy, a chain, a gold chain for Simon Eyre, I shall make thee a
Lady, here's a French hood for thee, on with it, on with it, dress thy brows
with this flap of a shoulder of mutton, to make thee look lovely: where be my
fine men? Roger, I'll make over my shop and tools to thee: Firk, thou shalt be
the foreman: Hans, thou shalt have an hundred for twenty, be as mad knaves as
your master Sim Eyre hath bin, you shall live to be Sheriues of London: how
dost thou like me Margerie? Prince am I none, yet am I princely borne, Firk,
Hodge, and Hans.


I forsooth, what says your worship mistress Sheriff?


Worship and honour you Babilonion knaves, for the Gentle Craft: but I forgot
my self, I am bidden by my Lord Mayor to ^ner to old Ford, hes gone before,
I must after: come Hodge, on with your trinkets: now my true (...), my fine
Firk, my dapper Hodge, my honest Hans, some device, some odd crochets, some
morris, or such like, for the honour of the gentle shooemakers, meet me at old
Ford, you know my mind: come Madge, away shut up the shop knaves, and make
holiday.


O rare, O brave, come Hodge, follow me Hans,
We'll be with them for a morris dance.

Trust me you are as welcome to old Ford, as I my self.


Truly I thank your Lordship.


Would our bad cheer were worth the thanks you give.


Good cheer my Lord Mayor, fine cheer, a fine house, fine walls, all fine
and neat.


Now by my troth I'll tel thee master Eyre,
It does me good and al my brethren,
That such a madcap fellow as thy self
Is entered into our society.

I but my Lord, he must learn now to put on gravity.


Peace Maggy, a fig for gravity, when I go to Guildhal in my scarlet gown,
I'll look as demurely as a saint, and speak as gravely as a Justice of peace,
but now I am here at old Ford, at my good Lord Majors house, let it go by,
vanish Maggy, I'll be merry, away with flip flap, these fooleries, these
gulleries: what hunnie? prince am I none, yet am I princly borne: what says my
Lord Mayor?


Ha, ha, ha, I had rather then a thousand pound,
I had an heart but half so light as yours.

Why what should I do my Lord? a pound of care pays not a dram of debt: hum,
lets be merry whiles we are young, old age, sack and sugar will steal upon us
ere we be aware.


Its well done mistress Eyre, pray give good counsel to my daughter.


I hope mistress Rose will have the grace to take nothing that's bad.


Pray God she do, for in faith mistress Eyre,
I would bestow upon that peevish girl
A thousand Marks more then I mean to give her,
Upon condition shed be ruled by me,
The Ape still crosses me: there came of late,
A proper Gentleman of fair revenues,
Whom gladly I would call son in law:
But my fine cockney would have none of him.
You'll prove a cockscombe for it ere you die,
A courtier, or no man must please your eye.

Be ruled sweet Rose, you are ripe for a man: marry not with a boy, that has
no more hair on his face then thou hast on thy cheeks: a courtier, wash, go
by, stand not upon pisherie pasherie: those silken fellows are but painted
Images, outsides, outsides Rose, their inner linings are torn: no my fine
mouse, marry me with a Gentleman Grocer like my Lord Mayor your Father, a
Grocer is a sweet trade, Plums, Plums: had I a son or Daughter should marry
out of the generation and blood of the shoe-makers, he should pack: what, the
Gentle trade is a living for a man through Europe, through the world.


What noise is this?


O my Lord Mayor, a true of good fellows that for love to your honour, are
come hither with a morrisdance, come in my Mesopotamians cheerely.


Master Eyre, are al these shoe-makers?


Al Cordwainers my good Lord Mayor.


How like my Lacie looks yond shooe-maker.


O that I durst but speak unto my love!


Sibil, go fetch some wine to make these drink,
You are al welcome.

We thank your Lordship.

For his sake whose fair shape thou representst, Good friend I drink to thee.


It be dank good frister.


I see mistress Rose you do not want judgment, you have drunk to the properest
man I keep.


Here be some have done their parts to be as proper as he.


Well, urgent business calls me back to London:
Good fellows, first go in and taste our cheer,
And to make merry as you homeward go,
Spend these two angels in beer at Stratford Bow.

To these two (my mad lads) Sim Eyre ads another, then cheerely Firk, tickle
it Haunce, and al for the honour of shoemakers.


Come master Eyre, lets have your company.


Sibil What shall I do?


Why whats the matter?


That Haunce the shoemaker is my love Lacie,
Disguised in that attire to find me out,
How should I find the means to speak with him?

What mistress, never fear, I dare venture my maidenhead to nothing, and that's
great odds, that Haunce the Dutchman when we come to London, shall not only
see and speak with you, but in spite of al your Fathers policies, steal you
away and marry you, will not this please you?


Do this, and ever be assured of my love.


Away then and follow your father to London, left
your absence cause him to suspect something:
To morrow if my counsel be obayde,
I'll bind you prentice to the gentle trade.

Yonders the shop, and there my fair love sits,
She's fair and lovely, but she is not mine,
O would she were, thrice have I courted her,
Thrice hath my hand been moistened with her hand,
Whilst my poor famished eyes do feed on that
Which made them famish: I am unfortunate,
I still love one, yet no body loves me,
I muse in other men what women see,
That I so want? fine mistress Rose was coy,
And this too curious, oh no, she is chaste,
And for the thinks me wanton, she denies
(...) cheer my cold heart with her sunny eyes:
How prettily she works, oh pretty hand!
Oh happy work, it doth me good to stand
(...) to see her, thus I oft have stood,
In frosty evenings, a light burning by her,
Enduring biting cold, only to eye her,
One only look hath seemed as rich to me
As a kings crown, such is loves lunacy:
Muffeled I'll pass along, and by that try
Whether she know me.

Sir, what is't you buy?
What is't you lack sir? calico, or lawn,
Fine cambric shirts, or bands, what will you buy?

That which thou wilt not sell, faith yet I'll try:
How do you sell this handkercher?

Good cheap.


And how these roughs?


Cheap too.


And how this band?


Cheap too.


All cheap, how sell you then this hand?


My hands are not to be sold.


To be given then: nay faith I come to buy.


But none knows when.


Good sweet, leave work a little while, lets play.


I cannot live by keeping holliday.


I'll pay you for the time which shall be lost.


With me you shall not be at so much cost.


Look how you wound this cloth, so you wound me.


It may be so.


Tis so.


What remedy?


Nay faith you are too coy.


Let go my hand.


I will do any task of your command,
I would let go this beauty, were I not
In mind to disobey you by a power
That controls kings: I love you.

So, now part.


With hands I may, but never with my heart,
In faith I love you.

I believe you do.


Shall a true love in me breed hate in you?


I hate you not.


Then you must love.


I do, what are you better now? I love not you,


All this I hope is but a woman's fray,
That means, come to me, when she cries, away:
In earnest mistress I do not jest,
A true chaste love hath entered in my breast,
In love you dearly as I love my life,
I love you as a husband loves a wife.
That, and no other love my love requires,
Thy wealth I know is little, my desires
Thirst not for gold, sweet beauteous Iane whats mine,
Shall (if thou make my self thine) all be thine,
Say, judge, what is thy sentence, life or death?
Mercy or cruelty lies in thy breath.

Good sir, I do believe you love me well:
For tis a seely conquest, seely pride,
For one like you (I mean a gentleman)
To boast, that by his love tricks he hath brought,
Such and such women to his amorous lure:
I think you do not so, yet many do,
And make it even a very trade to woo,
I could be coy, as many women be,
Feed you with sunne-shine smiles, and wanton looks,
But I detest witchcraft, say that I
Do coustantly believe you, constant have.

Why dost thou not believe me?


I believe you,
But yet good sir, because I will not grieve you,
With hopes to taste fruit, which will never fall,
In simple truth this is the sum of all
My husband lives, at least I hope he lives,
Pressed was he to these bitter wars in France,
Bitter they are to me by wanting him,
I have but one heart, and that hearts his due,
How can I then bestow the same on you?
Whilst he lives, his I live, be it ne'er so poor,
And rather be his wife, then a kings whore.

Chaste and dear woman, I will not abuse thee,
Although it cost my life, if thou refuse me,
Thy husband pressed for France, what was his name?

Raf Damport.


Damport, here's a letter sent
From France to me, from a dear friend of mine,
A gentleman of place, here he doth write,
Their names that have bin slain in every fight.

I hope deaths scroll contains not my loves name


Cannot you read?


I can.


Beruse the same,
To my remembrance such a name I read
Amongst the rest: see here.

Aye me, hes dead:
Hes dead, if this be true my dear hearts slain.

Have patience, dear love.


Hence, hence.


Nay sweet Iane,
Make not poor sorrow proud with these rich tears,
I morn thy husbands death because thou mournst.

That bil is forgde; tis signed by forgery.


I'll bring thee letters sent besides to many
Carrying the like report: Iane tis too true,
Come, weep not: mourning though it rise from love
Helps not the mourned, yet hurts them that morn.

For Gods sake leave me.


Whither dost thou turn?
Forget the deed, love them that are alive,
His love is faded, try how mine will thrive.

Tis now no time for me to think on love,


Tis now best time for you to think on love, because your love lives not.


Though he be dead, my love to him shall not be buried:
For Gods sake leave me to my self alone.

I would kill my soul to leave thee drowned in moan:
Answer me to my suit, and I am gone,
Say to me, yea, or no.

No.


Then farewell, one farewell will not serve, I come again, come dry these wet
cheeks, tel me faith sweet Iane, yea, or no, once more.


Once more I say no, once more be gone I pray, else will I go.


Nay then I will grow rude by this white hand,
Until you change that cold no, here i'll stand,
Till by your hard heart

Nay, for Gods love peace,
My sorrows by your presence more increase,
Not that you thus are present, but al grief
Desires to be alone, therefore in brief
Thus much I say, and saying bid adieu,
If ever I wed man it shall be you.

Oh blessed voice, dear Iane I'll urge no more,
Thy breath hath made me rich.

Death makes me poor.


Hey down, a down, down derie.


Well said my hearts, ply your work to day, we loytred yesterday, to it pell
mel, that we may live to be Lord Majors, or Aldermen at least.


Hey down a down derie.


Well said in faith, how say thou Hauns, doth not Firk tickle it?


Yaw master.


Not so neither, my organ pipe squeakes this morning for want of licoring: hey
down a down derie.


Forward Firk, tow best un jolly yongster hort I master it bid yo cut me un
pair vapres for master ieffres boots.


Thou shalt Haims.


Master.


How now, boy?


Pray, now you are in the cutting vain, cut me out a pair of counterfeits,
or else my work will not pass currant, hey down a down.


Tell me sirs, are my cousin M. Priscillaes shoes done?


Your cousin? no master, one of your aunts, hang her, let them alone.


I am in hand with them, she gave charge that none but I should do them for
her. ^


Thou do for her? then ^ that she loves not: Raf, thou n^ in faith I would
have yearkt and ^ down a down derry, this geere w^


How say thou Firk? were ^ Ford?


How merry? why our buttocks went Iiggy ioggy like a quagmyre: well sir Roger
Oatemeale, if I thought all meal of that nature, I would eat nothing but bag
puddings.


Of all good fortunes, my fellow Hance had the best.


Tis true, because mistress Rose drank to him.


Well, well, work apace, they say seven of the Aldermen be dead, or very sick.


I care not, I'll be none.


No nor I, but then my M. Eyre will come quickly to be L. Mayor.


Whoop, yonder comes Sibil.


Sibil, welcome in faith, and how dost thou mad wench?


Sib whore, welcome to London.


Godamercy sweet Firk: good Lord Hodge, what a delicious shop you have got,
you tickle it in faith.


God a mercy Sibil for our good cheer at old Ford.


That you shall have Raf.


Nay by the mass, we had tickling cheer Sibil, and how the plague dost thou
and mistress Rose, and my L. Mayor? I put the women in first.


Well Godamercy: but Gods me, I forget my self, wheres Haunce the Fleming?


Hark butter-boxe, uowe you must yely out some spreken.
^od gon Frister.
^me to my young mistress, to pull

^le fro, var ben your mistress?
^ our London house in Cornewaile
^ serve her turn but Hans?
^ come Hans, I stand upon needles.

Why then Sibil, take heed of pricking.


For that let me alone, I have a trick in my budget, come Hans.


Yaw, yaw, ic sall meet yo gane.


Go Hans, make haste again: come, who lacks work?


I master, for I lack my breakfast, tis munching time, and past


Is't so? why then leave work Raph, to breakfast, boy look to the tools, come
Raph, come Firk.


Let me see now, the sign of the last in Towerstreet, mas yonders the house:
what haw, whoes within?


Who calls there, what want you sir?


Marry I would have a pair of shoes made for a Gentlewoman against to morrow
morning, what can you do them?


Yes sir, you shall have them, but what lengths her foot?


Why you must make them in all parts like this shoe, but at any hand fail not
to do them, for the Gentlewoman is to be married very early in the morning.


How? by this shoe must it be made? by this, are you sure sir by this?


How, by this am I sure, by this? art thou in thy wits? I tell thee I must have
a pair of shoes, dost thou mark me? a pair of shoes, two shoes, made by
this very shoe, this same shoe, against to morrow morning by four a clock,
dost understand me, can thou do it?


Yes sir, yes, I, I, I can do it, by this shoe you say: I should know this
shoe, yes sir, yes, by this shoe, I can do t, four a clock, well, whither
shall I bring them?


To the sign of the golden ball in Watlingstreete, enquire for one master
Hamon a gentleman, my master.


Yea sir, by this shoe you say.


I say master Hammon at the golden ball, he's the Bridegroom, and those
shoes are for his bride.


They shall be done by this shoe: well, well, Master Hammon at the golden shoe,
I would say the golden Ball, very well, very well, but I pray you sir where
must master Hammon be married?


At Saint Faiths Church under Paules: but whats that to thee? prithee dispatch
those shoes, and so farewell.


By this shoe said he, how am I amazed
At this strange accident? upon my life,
This was the very shoe I gave my wife
When I was pressed for France, since when alas,
I never could hear of her: it is the same,
And Hammons Bride no other but my Iane.

Snails Raph thou hast lost thy part of three pots, a countrieman of mine gave
me to breakfast.


I care not, I have found a better thing.


A thing? away, is it a mans thing, or a woman's thing?


Firk, dost thou know this shoe?


No by my troth, neither doth that know me? I have no acquaintance with it, tis
a mere stranger to me.


Why then I do, this shoe I durst be sworn
Once covered the instep of my Iane:
This is her size, her breadth, thus trod my love,
These true love knots I pricked, I hold my life,
By this old shoe I shall find out my wife.

Ha ha old shoo, that were new, how a murren came this ague fit of foolishnes
upon thee?


Thus Firk, even now here came a serving-man,
By this shoe would he have a new pair made
Against to morrow morning for his mistress,
That's to be married to a Gentleman,
And why may not this be my sweet Iane?

And why may not thou be my sweet Ass? ha, ha.


Well, laugh, and spare not: but the truth is this.
Against to morrow morning I'll provide,
A lusty crew of honest shoemakers,
To watch the going of the bride to church,
If she prove Iane, I'll take her in despite,
From Hammon and the devil, were he by,
If it be not my Iane, what remedy?
Hereof am I sure, I shall live till I die,
Although I never with a woman lie.

Thou he with a woman to build nothing but Cripple-gates! Well, God sends
fools fortune, and it may be he may light upon his matrimony by such a device,
for wedding and hanging goes by destiny.


How happy am I by embracing thee,
Oh I did fear such cross mishaps did reign,
That I should never see my Rose again.

Sweet Lacie, since fair Opportunity
Offers her self to further our escape,
Let not too ouer-fond esteem of me
Hinder that happy hour, invent the means,
And Rose will follow thee through all the world.

Oh how I surfeit with excess of joy,
Made happy by thy rich perfection,
But since thou paist sweet interest to my hopes,
Redoubling love on love, let me once more,
Like to a bold faced debtor crave of thee,
This night to steal abroad, and at Eyres house,
Who now by death of certain Aldermen,
Is Mayor of London, and my master once,
Meet thou thy Lacie where in spite of change,
Your fathers anger, and mine uncles hate,
Our happy nuptials will me consummate.

Oh God, what will you do mistress? shift for your self, your father is at
hand, hes coming, hes coming, master Lacie hide your self in my mistress,
for Gods sake shift for your selves.


Your father come, sweet Rose, what shall I do?
Where shall I hide me? how shall I escape?

A man and want wit in extremity,
Come, come, be Hauns still, play the shoemaker,
Pull on my shoe.

Mas, and that's well remembered.


Here comes your father.


Forware metresse, tis un good skow, it sal vel dute, or ye sal neit betallen.


Oh God it pinches me, what will you do?


Your fathers presence pinches, not the shoo.


Well done, fit my daughter well, and she shall please thee well.


Yaw, yaw, ick weit dat well, for ware tis un good shoo, tis go mait van neits
leither, se ener mine here.


I do believe it, whats the news with you?


Please you, the Earl of Lincolne at the gate is newly lighted, and would
speak with you.


The Earl of Lincolne come speak with me?
Well, well, I know his errand: daughter Rose,
Send hence your shoemaker, dispatch, have done:
Sib, make things handsome: sir boy follow me.

Mine uncle come, oh what may this portend?
Sweet Rose, this of our love threatens an end.

Be not dismayed at this what ere befall,
Rose is thine own, to witness I speak truth,
Where thou appoints the place I'll meet with thee,
I will not fix a day to follow thee,
But presently steal hence, do not reply.
Love which gave strength to bear my fathers hate,
Shall now add wings to further our escape.

Believe me, on my credit I speak truth,
Since first your nephew Lacie went to France,
I have not seen him. It seemd strange to me,
When Dodger told me that he staide behind,
Neglecting the hie charge the King imposed.

Trust me (sir Roger Otly) I did think
Your counsel had given head to this attempt,
Drawn to it by the love he bears your child.
Here I did hope to find him in your house,
But now I see mine error, and confess
My judgment wronged you by conceuing so.

Lodge in my house, say you? trust me my Lord,
I love your Nephew Lacie too too dearly
So much to wrong his honour, and he hath done so,
That first gave him advise to stay from France.
To witness I speak truth, I let you know
How careful I have been to keep my daughter
Free from all conference, or speech of him,
Not that I scorn your Nephew, but in love
I bear your honour, least your noble blood,
Should by my mean worth be dishonoured.

How far the churls tongue wanders from his hart,
Well, well sir Roger Otley I believe you,
With more then many thanks for the kind love,
So much you seem to bear me: but my Lord,
Let me request your help to seek my Nephew,
Whom if I find, I'll straight embark for France,
So shall my Rose be free, your thoughts at rest,
And much care die which now dies in my breast.

Oh Lord, help for Gods sake, my mistress, oh my young mistress.


Where is thy mistress? whats become of her?


She's gone, she's fled.


Gone? whither is she fled?


I know not forsooth, she's fled out of doors with Hauns the Shoemaker, I saw
them scud, scud, scud, apace, apace.


Which way? what Iohn, where be my men? which way?


I know not, and it please your worship.


Fled with a shoemaker, can this be true?


Oh Lord sir, as true as Gods in heaven.


Her love turned shoemaker? I am glad of this.


A fleming butter bore, a shoemaker,
Will she forget her birth? requite my care
With such ingratitude? skornd she young Hammon,
To love a honnikin, a needy knave?
Well let her fly, I'll not fly after her,
Let her starve if she will, she's none of mine.

Be not so cruel sir.


I am glad she's escaped.


I'll not account of her as of my child:
Was there no better object for her eyes,
But a foul drunken lubber, swill belly,
A shoemaker, that's brave.

Yea forsooth, tis a very brave shoe, and as fit as a padding.


How now, what knave is this, from whence comes thou?


No knave sir, I am Firk the shoemaker, lusty Rogers chief lusty iorneyman,
and I come hither to take up the pretty leg of sweet mistress Rose, and thus
hoping your worship is in as good health as I was at the making hereof, I bid
you farewell, yours Firk.


Stay stay sir knave.


Come hither shoemaker.


Tis happy the knave is put before the shoemaker, or else I would not have
vouchsafed to come back to you, I am moved, for I stir.


My Lord, this villain calls us knaves by craft.


Then tis by the Gentle Craft, and to cal one knave gently, is no harm: sit
your worship merry: Sib your young mistress I'll so bob then, now my master M.
Eyre is Lord Mayor of London.


Tell me sir, whoes man are you?


I am glad to see your worship so merry, I have no maw to this geere, no
stomach as yet to a red petticoat.


He means not sir to woo you to his maid,
But only doth demand whose man you are.

I sing now to the tune of Rogero* Roger my fellow is now my master.


Sir, know thou one Hauns a shoemaker?


Hauns shoemaker, oh yes, stay, yes I have him, I tel you what, I speak it in
secret, mistress Rose, and he are by this time: no not so, but shortly are to
come over one another with, Can you dance the shaking of the sheets? it is
that Hauns, I'll so gull these diggers.


Know thou then where he is?


Yes forsooth, yea marry.


Can thou in sadness?


No forsooth, no marry.


Tell me good honest fellow where he is,
And thou shalt see what I'll bestow of thee.

Honest fellow, no sir, not so sir, my profession is the Gentle Craft, I care
not for seeing, I love feeling, let me feel it here, aurium tenus, ten pieces
of gold, genuum tenus, ten pieces of silver, and then Firk is your man in a
new pair of strechers.


Here is an Angel, part of thy reward,
Which I will give thee, tell me where he is.

No point: shall I betray my brother? no, shall I prove Iudas to Hans? no, shall
I cry treason to my corporation? no, I shall be firkt and yerkt then, but give
me your angel, your angel shall tel you.


Do so good fellow, tis no hurt to thee.


Send simpering Sib away.


Huswife, get you in.


Pitchers have ears, and maids have wide mouths: but for Hauns prauns, upon
my word to morrow morning, he and young mistress Rose go to this geere, they
shall be married together, by this rush, or else turn Firk to a firkin of
butter to tanne leather withal.


But art thou sure of this?


Am I sure that Paules steeple is a handful higher then London stone? or that
the pissing conduit leaks nothing but pure mother Bunch? am I sure I am lusty
Firk, Gods nailes do you think I am so base to gull you?


Where are they married? dost thou know the church?


I never go to church, but I know the name of it, it is a swearing church,
stay a while, tis: I by the mas, no, no, tis I by my troth, no nor that, tis I
by my faith, that that, tis I by my Faiths church under Paules cross, there
they shall be knit like a pair of stockings in matrimony, there theile be in
cony.


Upon my life, my Nephew Lacie walks
In the disguise of this Dutch shoemaker.

Yes forsooth.


Doth he not honest fellow?


No forsooth, I think Hauns is no body, but Hans no spirit.


My mind misgives me now tis so indeed.


My cousin speaks the language, knows the trade.


Let me request your company my Lord,
Your honourable presence may, no doubt,
Refrain their head-strong rashness, when my self
Going alone perchance may be oreborne,
Shall I request this favour?

This, or what else.


Then you must rise betimes, for they mean to fall to their hey pass, and
repast, pindy pandy, which hand will you have, very early.


My care shall every way equal their haste,
This night accept your lodging in my house,
The earlier shall we stir, and at Saint Faiths
Prevent this giddy hare-braind nuptial,
This traffic of hot love shall yield cold gains,
They ban our loves, and we'll forbid their baines.

At Saint Faiths church thou say.


Yes, by their troth.


Be secret on thy life.


Yes, when I kiss your wife, ha, ha, here's no craft in the Gentle Craft, I
came hither of purpose with shoes to sir Rogers worship, whilst Rose his
daughter be coniecatcht by Hauns: soft now, these two gulles will be at Saint
Faiths church to morrow morning, to take master Bridegroom, and mistress
Bride napping, and they in the mean time shall chop up the matter at the Sauoy:
but the best sport is, sir Roger Otly will find my fellow lame, Rafes wife going
to marry a gentleman, and then heel stop her in steed of his daughter; oh
brave, there will be fine tickling sport: ^t now, what have I to do? oh I know
now a mess of shoemakers meat at the wool sack in I vie lane, to cozen my
gentleman of lame Rafes wife, that's true, alack, alack girls, hold out
tack, for now smocks for this tumbling shall go to wrack.


This is the morning then, stay my bully my honest Hauns, is it not?


This is the morning that must make us two happy, or miserable, therefore if
you


Away with these iffes and ands Hauns, and these et caeteraes, by mine honour
Rowland Lacie none but the king shall wrong thee: come, fear nothing, am not I
Sim Eyre? Is not Sim Eyre Lord mayor of London? fear nothing Rose, let them al
say what they can, dainty come thou to me: laugh thou?


Good my lord, stand her friend in what thing you may.


Why my sweet lady Madgy, think you Simon Eyre can forget his fine dutch
Journeyman? No vah. Fie I scorn it, it shall never be cast in my teeth, that I
was vnthankeful. Lady Madgy, thou had never covered thy Saracens head with
this french flap, nor laden thy bum with this farthingale, tis trash,
trumpery, vanity, Simon Eyre had never walkte in a red petticoat, nor wore a
chain of gold, but for my fine Iourneymans portigues, and shall I leave him?
No: Prince am I none, yet bear a princely mind.


My Lord, tis time for us to part from hence.


Lady Madgy, lady Madgy, take two or three of my pie-crust eaters, my
buffe-ierkin varlets, that do walk in black gowns at Simon Eyres heals,
take them good lady Madgy, trip and go, my browne Queen uf Periwigs, with
my delicate Rose, and my jolly Rowland to the Sauoy, see them linckte,
countenance the marriage, and when it is done, cling, cling together, you
^amborow Turtle Doves, I'll bear you out, come to Simon Eyre, come dwell with
me Hauns, thou shalt eat minede pies, and marchpane. Rose, away cricket,
trip and go, my Lady Madgy to the Sauoy, Hauns, wed, and to bed, kiss and
away, go, vanish.


Farewell my lord.


Make haste sweet love.


Sheede fain the deed were done.


Come my sweet Rose, faster than Dear we'll run.


Go, vanish, vanish, avaunt I say: by the lord of Ludgate, its a mad life
to be a lord Mayor, its a stirring life, a fine life, a velvet life, a
careful life. Well Simon Eyre, yet set a good face on it, in the honour of
saint Hugh. Soft, the king this day comes to dine with me, to see my new
buildings, his majesty is welcome, he shall have good cheer, delicate cheer,
princely cheer. This day my fellow prentices of London come to dine with me
too, they shall have fine cheer, gentlemanlike cheer. I promised the mad
Cappidosians, when we all served at the Conduit together, that if ever I came
to be Mayor of London, I woould feast them al, and I'll doot, I'll doot by the
life of Pharaoh, by this beard Sim Eire will be no flincher. Besides, I have
procurd, that upon every Shrouetuesday, at the sound of the pancake bell: my
fine dapper Allyrian lads, shall clap up their shop windows, and away, this is
the day, and this day they shall doot, they shall doot: boys, that day are you
free, let masters care, and prentices shall pray for Simon Eyre.


Come Raf, stand to it Firk: my masters, as we are the brave bloods of the
shooemakers, heirs apparent to saint Hugh, and perpetual benefactors to all
good fellows* thou shalt have no wrong, were Hammon a king of spades, he
should not delve in thy close without thy sufferance: but tell me Raf, art
thou sure tis thy wife?


Am I sure this is Firk? This morning when I strokte on her shoes, I looked
upon her, and she upon me, and sighed, askte me if ever I knew one Raf. Yes
said I: for his sake said she (tears standing in her eyes) and for thou art
somewhat like him, spend this piece of gold: I took it: my lame leg, and my
travel beyond sea made me unknown, all is one for that, I know she's mine.


Did she give thee this gold? O glorious glittering gold; she's thine own, tis
thy wife, and she loves thee, for I'll stand toot, there's no woman will give
gold to any man, but she thinks better of him than she thinks of them she
gives silver to: and for Hamon, neither Hamon nor Hangman shall wrong thee in
London: Is not our old master Eire lord Mayor? Speak my hearts.


Yes, and Hamon shall know it to his cost.


Peace my bullies, yonder they come.


Stand toot my hearts, Firk, let me speak first.


No Raf, let me: Hammon, whither away so early?


Unmannerly rude slave, whats that to thee?


To him sir? yes sir, and to me, and others: good morrow Iane, how dost thou?
good Lord, how the world is changed with you, God be thanked.


Villains, hands off, howe dare you touch my love?


villains? down with them, cry clubs for prentices.


How, my hearts touch her Hamon? yea and more than that, we'll carry her away
with us. My masters and gentlemen, never draw your bird spittes, shooemakers
are steel to the back, men every inch of them, al spirit.


Well, and what of all this?


I'll show you: Iane, dost thou know this man? tis Raf I can tell thee: nay,
tis he in faith, though he be lamde by the wars, yet look not strange, but
run to him, fold him about the neck and kiss him.


Lives then my husband? oh God let me go,
Let me embrace my Raf.

What means my Iane?


Nay, what meant yon to tell me he was slain?


Pardon me dear love for being misled,
Twas rumord here in London thou were dead.

Thou see he lives: Lass, go pack home with him: now M. Hamon, wheres your
mistress your wife?


Swounds M. fight for her, will you thus lose her?


Down with that creature, clubs, down with him.


Hold, hold.


Hold fool, sirs he shall do no wrong,
Will my Iane leave me thus, and break her faith?

Yea sir, she must sir, she shall sir, what then? mend it.


Hark fellow Raf, follow my counsel, set the wench in the midst, and let her
choose her man, and let her be his woman.


Whom should I choose? whom should my thoughts affect?
But him whom heaven hath made to be my love,
Thou art my husband and these humble weeds,
Makes thee more beautiful then all his wealth,
Therefore I will but put off his attire,
Returning it into the owners hand,
And after ever be thy constant wife.

Not a rag Iane, the law's on our side, he that sows in another mans ground
forsets his harvest, get thee home Raf, follow him Iane, he shall not have so
much as a buske point from thee.


Stand to that Raf, the appurtenances are thine own, Hammon, look not at
her.


O swounds no.


Blew coat be quiet, we'll give you a new livery else, we'll make Shrove
Tuesday Saint Georges day for you: look not Hammon, lear not, I'll Firk you,
for thy head now, one glance, one sheep eye, any thing at her, touch not a
rag, least I and my brethren beat you to clowtes.


Come master Hammon, there's no striving here.


Good fellows, hear me speak: and honest Raf,
Whom I have injured most by loving Iane,
Mark what I offer thee: here in fair gold
Is twenty pound, I'll give it for thy Iane,
If this content thee not, thou shalt have more.

Sell not thy wife Raf, make her not a whore.


Say, wilt thou freely cease thy claim in her,
And let her be my wife?

No, do not Raf.


Sir Hammon Hammon, dost thou think a Shooe-maker is so base, to be a bawd
to his own wife for commodity, take thy gold, choke with it, were I not
lame, I would make thee eat thy words.


A shoemaker sell his flesh and blood, oh indignity!


Sir, take up your pelf, and be packing.


I will not touch one penny, but in lieu
Of that great wrong I offered thy Iane,
To Iane and thee I give that twenty pound,
Since I have failed of her, during my life
I vow no woman else shall be my wife:
Farewell good fellows of the Gentle trade,
Your mornings mirth my mourning day hath made.

Touch the gold creature if you dare, ya're best be trudging: here Iane take
thou it, now lets home my hearts.


Stay, who comes here? Iane, on again with thy mask.


Yonders the lying varlet mocked us so.


Come hither sir.


I sir, I am sir, you mean me, do you not?


Where is my Nephew married?


Is he married? God give him joy, I am glad of it: they have a fair day, and
the sign is in a good planet, Mars in Venus.


Villain, thou toldst, me that my daughter Rose,
This morning should be married at Saint Faiths,
We have watched there these three hours at the least,
Yet see we no such thing.

Truly I am sorry for it, a Bride's a pretty thing.


Come to the purpose, yonder's the Bride and Bridegroom you look for I hope:
though you be Lords, you are not to bar, by your authority, men from women,
are you?


See see my daughters maskt.


True, and my Nephew.
To hide his guilt, counterfeits him lame.

Yea truly god help the poor couple, they are lame and blind.


I'll ease her blindness.


I'll his lamenes cure.


Lie down sirs, and laugh, my fellow Raf is taken for Rowland Lacy, and Iane
for mistress damask rose, this is al my knavery.


What, have I found you minion?


O base wretch,
Nay hide thy face, the horror of thy guilt,
Can hardly be washed off: where are thy powers?
What vattels have you made? O yes I see
Thou foughtst with Shame, and shame hath conquered thee.
This lameness will not serve.

Unmask your self.


Lead home your daughter.


Take your Nephew hence.


Hence, swounds, what mean you? are you mad? I hope you cannot enforce my wife
from me, wheres Hamon?


Your wife.


What Hammon?


Yea my wife, and therefore the proudest of you that lays hands on her first,
I'll lay my crutch cross his pate.


To him lame Raf, here's brave sport.


Rose call you her? why her name is Iane, look here else, do you know her now?


Is this your daughter?


No, nor this your nephew:
My Lord of Lincolne, we are both abused
By this base crafty varlet.

Yea forsooth no varlet, forsooth no base, forsooth I am but mean, no crattie
neither, but of the Gentle Craft.


Where is my daughter Rose? where is my child?


Where is my nephew Lacie married?


Why here is good laid mutton as I promised you.


Villain, I'll have thee punished for this wrong.


Punish the iornyman villain, but not the iorneyman shoemaker.


My Lord I come to bring unwelcome news,
Your Nephew Lacie, and your daughter Rose,
Early this morning wedded at the Sauoy,
None being present but the Lady Mairesse:
Besides I learnt among the officers,
The Lord Mayor vows to stand in their defence,
Against any that shall seek to cross the match.

Dares Eyre the shoemaker uphold the deed?


Yes sir, shoemakers dare stand in a woman's quarrel I warrant you, as deep as
another, and deeper too.


Besides, his grace, to day dines with the Mayor,
Who on his knees humbly intends to fall,
And beg a pardon for your Nephews fault.

But I'll prevent him come sir Roger Oteley,
The king will do us justice in this cause,
How ere their hands have made them man and wife,
I will disioyne the match, or loose my life.

Adieu monsieur Dodger, farewell fools, ha ha, Oh if they had staide I would
have so lambde them with ^outes, O heart, my codpeece point is ready to fly
in pieces every time I think upon mistress Rose, but let that pass, as my
Lady Mairesse says.


This matter is answered: come Raf, home with thy wife, come my fine
shoemakers, lets to our masters the new lord Mayor and there swagger this
shrove Tuesday, i'll promise you wine enough, for Madge keeps the seller.


O rare! Madge is a good wench.


And I'll promise you meat enough, for simpering Susan keeps the larder, I'll
lead you to victuals my brave soldiers, follow your captain, O brave,
hark, hark.


The Pancake bell rings, the pancake bell, tri-lill my hearts.


Oh brave, oh sweet bell, O delicate pancakes, open the doors my hearts, and
shut up the windows, keep in the house, let out the pancakes: oh rare my
hearts, lets march together for the honour of saint Hugh to the great new hall
in Gracious street corner, which our Master the new lord Mayor hath built.


O the crew of good fellows that will dine at my lord, Majors cost to day!


By the lord, my lord Mayor is a most brave man, how shall prentices be bound to
pray for him, and the honour of the gentlemen shoemakers? lets feed and be fat
with my lords bounty.


O musical be still! O Hodge, O my brethren! there's cheer for the heavens,
venson pastimes walk up and down piping hot, like sergeants, beef and
brewesse comes marching in dry fattes, fritters and pancakes comes trowling in
in wheel barrowes, hens and orenges hopping in porters baskets, colloppes
and eggs in scuttles, and tartes and custardes comes quavering in in malt
shovels.


Whoop, look here, look here.


How now mad lads, whither away so fast?


Whither, why to the great new hall, know you not why? The lord Mayor hath
bidden all the prentices in London to breakfast this morning.


Oh brave shoemaker, oh brave lord of incomprehensible good fellowship, whoo,
hark you, the pancake bell rings.


Nay more my hearts, every Shrouetuesday is our year of Jubilee: and when the
pancake bell rings, we are as free as my lord Mayor, we may shut up our shops,
and make holiday: I'll have it called, Saint Hughes Holiday.


Agreed, agreed, Saint Hughes Holiday.


And this shall continue for ever.


Oh brave! come come my hearts, away, away.


O eternal credit to us of the gentle Craft, march fair my hearts, oh rare.


Is our lord Mayor of London such a gallant?


One of the merriest madcaps in your land,
Your Grace will think, when you behold the man,
Hes rather a wild ruffin than a Mayor:
Yet thus much I'll ensure your majesty,
In al his actions that concern his state,
He is as serious, provident, and wise,
As full of gravity amongst the grave,
As any mayor hath been these many years.

I am with child till I behold this half cap,
But all my doubt is, when we come in presence,
His madness will be dashed clean out of countenance.

It may be so, my Liege.


Which to prevent,
Let some one give him notice, tis our pleasure,
That he put on his wonted merriment:
Set forward.

On before.


Come my fine Hodge, my jolly gentlemen shooemakers, soft, where be these
Caniballes, these varlets my officers, let them al walk and wait upon my
brethren, for my meaning is, that none but shoemakers, none but the livery of
my Company shall in their satin hoods wait upon the trencher of my
sovereign.


O my Lord, it will be rare.


No more Firk, come lively, let your fellow prentices want no cheer, let
wine be plentiful as beer, and beer as water, hang these penny pinching
fathers, that cram wealth in innocent lamb skins, rip knaves, anaunt, look
to my guests


My Lord, we are at our wits end for room, those hundred tables will not feast
the fourth part of them.


Then cover me those hundred tables again, and again, till all my jolly
prentices be feasted: avoid Hodge, run Raf, frisk about my numble Firk,
carouse me fadome healths to the honour of the shoemakers: do they drink lively
Hodge? do they tickle it Firk?


Tickle it? some of them have taken their liquor standing so long, that they
can stand no longer: but for meat, they would eat it and they had it.


Want they meat? wheres this swag-belly, this greasy kitchinstuffe cooke,
call the varlet to me: want meat! Firk, Hodge, lame Raf, run my tall men,
beleager the shambles, beggar al East-Cheape, serve me whole oxen in chargers,
and let sheep whine upon the tables like pigs for want of good fellows to
eat them. Want meat! vanish Firk, avaunt Hodge.


Your lordship mistakes my man Firk, he means their bellies want meat, not
the boards, for they have drunk so much they can eat nothing.


Where is my Lord.


How now lady Madgy.


The kings most excellent majesty is new come, he sends me for thy honour: one
of his most worshipful Peers, bade me tel thou must be merry, and so forth: but
let that pass.


Is my Sovereign come? vanish my tall shoemakers, my nimble brethren, look to
my guests the prentices: yet stay a little, how now Hans, how looks my little
Rose?


Let me request you to remember me,
I know your honour easily may obtain,
Free pardon of the king for me and Rose,
And reconcile me to my uncles grace.

Have done my good Hans, my honest iorneyman, look cheerely, I'll fall upon
both my knees till they be as hard as horne, but I'll get thy pardon.


Good my Lord have a care what you speak to his grace.


Away you I slington whitepot, hence you happerarse, you barley pudding full of
magots, you broyld carbonado, avaunt, avaunt, avoid Mephostophilus: shall Sim
Eyre leave to speak of you Lady Madgie? vanish mother Miniuer cap, vanish,
go, trip and go, meddle with your partlets, and your pishery pasherie, your
flewes and your whirligigs, go, rub, out of mine alley: Sim Eyre knows how to
speak to a Pope, to Sultan Soliman, to Tamburlaine and he were here: and shall
I melt? shall I droop before my Sovereign? no, come my Lady Madgie, follow me
Hauns, about your business my frolic freebooters: Firk, frisk about, and
about, and about, for the honour of mad Simon Eyre Lord Mayor of London.


Hey for the honour of the shoemakers.


Well Lacie though the fact was very foul,
Of your renolting from our kingly love,
And your own duty, yet we pardon you,
Rise both, and mistress Lacie, thank my Lord Mayor
For your young bridegroom here.

So my dear liege, Sim Eyre and my brethren the gentlemen shoemakers shall set
your sweet majesties image, cheek by jowl by Saint Hugh, for this honour you
have done poor Simon Eyre, I beseeth your grace pardon my rude behaviour, I am
a handicrafts man, yet my heart is without craft, I would be sorry at my soul,
that my boldness should offend my king.


Nay, I pray thee good lord Mayor, be even as merry as if thou were among thy
shoemakers, It does me good to see thee in this humour.


Say thou me so my sweet Dioclesian? then hump, Prince am I none, yet am I
princely borne, by the Lord of Ludgate my Liege, I'll be as merry as a pie.


Tel me infaith mad Eyre, how old thou art.


My Liege a very boy, a stripling, a yonker, you see not a white hair on my
head, not a gray in this beard, every hair I assure thy majesty that sticks
in this beard, Sim Eyre values at the king of Babilons ransom, Tama Chams
beard was a rubbing brush toot: yet I'll shave it off, and stuff tennis balls
with it to please my bully king.


But all this while I do not know your age.


My liege, I am six and fifty year old, yet I can cry humpe, with a sound
heart for the honour of Saint Hugh: mark this old wench, my king, I dauncde
the shaking of the sheets with her six and thirty years ago, and yet I
hope to get two or three young Lord Majors ere I die: I am lusty still, Sim
Eyre still: care, and cold lodging brings white hairs. My sweet Majesty,
let care vanish, cast it upon thy Nobles, it will make thee look always
young like Apollo, and cry humpe: Prince am I none, yet am I princely borne.


Ha ha: say Cornwall, did thou ever see his like?


Not I, my Lord.


Lincolne, what news with you?


My gracious Lord, have care unto your self,
For there are traitors here.

Traitors, where? who?


Traitors in my house? God forbid, where be my officers? I'll spend my soul ere
my king feel harm.


Where is the traitor? Lincolne.


Here he stands.


Cornwall, lay hold on Lacie: Lincolne, speak:
What can thou lay unto thy Nephews charge?

This my dear liege: your grace to do me honour,
Heaped on the head of this degenerous boy,
Desertlesse favours, you made choice of him,
To be commander over powers in France,
But he.

Good Lincolne pry thee pause a while,
Even in thine eyes I read what thou would speak,
I know how Lacie did neglect our love,
Ran himself deeply (in the highest degree)
Into vile treason.

Is he not a traitor?


Lincolne, he was: now have we pardned him,
Twas not a base want of true valors fire,
That held him out of France, but loves desire.

I will not bear his shame upon my back.


Nor shalt thou Lincolne, I forgive you both.


Then (good my liege) forbid the boy to wed
One, whose mean birth will much disgrace his bed.

Are they not married?


No my Liege.


We are.


Shall I divorce them then? O be it far,
That any hand on earth should dare untie,
The sacred knot knit by Gods majesty,
I would not for my crown disioyne their hands,
That are conioynd in holy nuptial bands,
How say thou Lacy? would thou loose thy Rose?

Not for all Indians wealth, my sovereign.


But Rose I am sure her Lacie would forgo.


If Rose were asked that question, shed say, no.


You hear them Lincolne.


Yea my liege, I do.


Yet can thou find ith heart to part these two?
Who seeks, besides you, to divorce these lovers?

I do (my gracious Lord) I am her father.


Sir Roger Oteley, our last Mayor I think,


The same my liege.


Would you offend Loves laws?
Well, you shall have your wills, you sue to me,
To prohibit the match: Soft, let me see,
You both are married, Lacie, art thou not?

I am, dread Sovereign.


Then upon thy life,
I charge thee, not to call this woman wife.

I thank your grace.


O my most gracious Lord!


Nay Rose, never woo me, I tel you true,
Although as yet I am a bachelor,
Yet I believe I shall not marry you.

Can you divide the body from the soul,
Yet make the body live?

Yea, so profound?
I cannot Rose, but you I must divide:
Fair maid, this bridegroom cannot be your bride.
Are you pleased Lincolne? Oteley, are you pleased?

Yes my Lord.


Then must my heart be eased,
For credit me, my conscience lives in pain,
Till these whom I deuorcde be joined again:
Lacy, give me thy hand, Rose, lend me thine.
Be what you would be: kiss now: so, that's fine,
At night (lovers) to bed: now let me see,
Which of you all mislikes this harmony?

Will you then take from me my child perforce?


Why tell me Oteley, shines not Lacies name,
As bright in the worlds eye, as the gay beams
Of any citizen?

Yea but my gracious Lord,
I do mislike the match far more than he,
Her blood is too too base.

no more,
Dost thou not know, that love respects no blood?
Cares not for difference of birth, or state,
The maid is young, well borne, fair, virtuous,
A worthy bride for any gentleman:
Besides, your nephew for her sake did stoop
To bare necessity: and as I hear,
Forgetting honours, and all courtly pleasures,
To gain her love, became a shoemaker.
As for the honour which he lost in France,
Thus I redeem it: Lacie, kneel thee down,
Arise sir Rowland Lacie: tell me now,
Tell me in earnest Oteley, can thou chide?
Seeing thy Rose a lady and a bryde.

I am content with what your Grace hath done.


And I my liege, since there's no remedy.


Come on then, at shake hands, I'll have you friends,
Where there is much love, all discord ends,
What says my mad Lord Mayor to all this love?

O my liege, this honour you have done to my fine journeyman here, Rowland
Lacie, and all these favours which you have shown to me this day in my poor
house, will make Simon Eyre live longer by one dozen of warm summers more then
he should.


Nay, my mad Lord Mayor (that shall be thy name)
If any grace of mine can length thy life,
One honour more I'll do thee, that new building,
Which at thy cost in Cornehill is erected,
Shall take a name from us, we'll have it called,
The Leaden hall, because in digging it,
You found the lead that covers the same.

I thank your Majesty.


God bless your Grace.


Lincolne, a word with you.


How now my mad knaves? Peace, speak softly, yonder is the king.


With the old troupe which there we keep in pay,
We will incorporate a new supply:
Before one summer more pass ore my head,
France shall repent England was injured.
What are all those?

All shoemakers, my Liege,
Sometimes my fellows, in their companies
I siude as merry as an empror.

My mad lord Mayor, are all these shoemakers?


All Shooemakers, my Liege, all gentlemen of the Gentle Craft, true Troians,
courageous Cordwainers, they all kneel to the shrine of holy saint Hugh.


God save your majesty all shoemakers


Mad Simon, would they any thing with us?


Mum mad knaves, not a word, I'll doot, I warrant you. They are all beggars, my
Liege, all for themselves: and I for them all, on both my knees do entreat,
that for the honour of poor Simon Eyre, and the good of his brethren these mad
knaves, your Grace would vouchsafe some privilege to my new Leden hall, that it
may be lawful for us to buy and sell leather there two days a week.


Mad Sim, I grant your suite, you shall have patent
To hold two market days in Leden hall,
Mondayes and Fridayes, those shall be the times:
Will this content you?

Iesus bless your Grace.


In the name of these my poor brethren shoemakers, I most humbly thank your
Grace. But before I rise, seeing you are in the Giving vain, and we in the
Begging, grant Sim Eyre one boon more.


What is it my Lord Mayor?


Vouchsafe to taste of a poor banquet that stands sweetly waiting for your
sweet presence.


I shall undo thee Eyre, only with feasts,
Already have I been too troublesome,
Say, have I not?

O my dear king, Sim Eyre was taken unawares upon a day of shrouing which I
promised long ago to the pren tises of London: for andt please your Highness, in
time past

I bare the water tanker (...) my coat
Sits not a whit the world (...) my back:
And then upon a morning some mad boys,
It was Shrouetuesday eeune as tis now,
Gave me my breakfast, and I swore then by the stopple of my tankerd, if ever
I came to be Lord Mayor of London, I would feast al the prentices, This day (my
liege) I did it, and the slaves had an hundred tables five times covered, they
are gone home and vanished: yet add more honour to the Gentle Trade, taste of
Eyres banquet, Simon's happy made.


Eyre, I will taste of thy banquet, and will say,
I have not met more pleasure on a day,
Friends of the Gentle Craft, thanks to you al,
Thanks my kind Lady Mairesse for our theere,
Come Lords, a white lets revel it at home,
When all our sports, and banquetings are dome,
Wars most right wrongs which frenchmen have begun.


