COme bedfellow come, strew apace, strew, strew: in good troth tis pity that
these flowers must be trodden under feet as they are like to be anon.


Pity, alack pretty heart, thou art sorry to see any good thing fall to the
ground: pity? no more pity, then to see an Innocent Mayden-head delivered up
to the ruffling of her new-wedded husband. Beauty is made for use, and he that
will not use a sweet soul well, when she is under his fingers I pray Venus he
may never kiss a fair and a delicate, soft, red' plump-lip.


Amen, and that's torment enough.


Pity? come fool fling them about lustily; flowers never dye a sweeter death,
than when they are smoother'd to death in a Lovers bosom, or else pave the
high ways, over which these pretty, simpering, jetting things, called brides,
must trip.


I pray thee tell me, why do they use at weddings to furnish all places thus,
with sweet herbs and flowers?


One reason is, because tis -- o a most sweet thing to lye with a man.


I think tis a O more more more more sweet to lye with a woman.


I warrant all men are of thy mind: another reason is, because they stick
like the scutchions of madame chastity, on the sable ground, weeping in their
stalks, and winking with their yellow-sunke eyes, as loath to behold the
lamentable fall of a Maidenhead: what senseless thing in all the house, that is
not now as melancholy, as a new set-vp Schoolmaster?


Troth I am.


Troth I think thou mournst, because you have mist thy turn, I do by the
quiver of Cupid: you see the torches melt themselves away in tears: the
instruments wear their heart strings out for sorrow: and the Silver Ewers
weep most pitiful Rosewater: five or six pair of the white innocent
wedding gloves, did in my sight choose rather to be torn in pieces than to be
drawn on; and look this Rosemary, (a fatal herb) this dead-mans nose-gay,
has crept in amongst these flowers to decke^ th'nuisible coarse of the Brides
Maidenhead, when (oh how much do we poor wenches suffer) about eleven or
twelve, or one a clock at midnight at furthest, it descends to purgatory, to
give notice that Caelestine (hey ho) will never come to lead Apes in hell.


I see by thy sighing thou wilt not.


If I had as many Mayden-heads, as I have hairs on my head I'd venture them
all rather then to come into so hot a place; prethy strew thou, for my little
arms are weary.


I am sure thy little tongue is not.


No faith that's like a woman bitten with fleas, it neuerlyes still: ^ye vpont,
what a miserable thing tis to be a noble Bride, there's such delays in rising,
in fitting gowns, in tyring, in pinning Rebatoes, in poaking, in dinner, in
supper, in Revels, last of all in cursing the poor nodding fiddlers, for
keeping Mistress Bride so long up from sweeter Revels; that, oh I could never
endure to put it up without much bickering.


Come you are an odd wench, hark, hark, music? nay then the Bride's up.


Is she up? nay then I see she has been down: Lord ha mercy on us, we women
fall and fall still, and when we have husbands we play upon them like Virginall
Jacks, they must rise and fall to our humours, or else they'll never get any
good strains of music out of us; but come now, have at it for a mayden-head.


Come knaves, night begins to be like my self, an old man; day plays the
thief and steals upon us; O well done wenches, well done, well done, you have
covered all the stony way to church with flowers, tis well, tis well, there's an
Emblem too, to be made out of these flowers and stones, but you are honest
wenches, in, in, in.


When we come to your years, we shall learn what honesty is, come pew-fellow.


Is the music come yet? so much to do! Is't come?


Come sir.


Have the merry knaves pulled their fiddle cases over their instruments ears?


As soon as ere they entered our gates, the noise went, before they came ne'er
the great Hall, the faint hearted villiacoes sounded at least thrice.


Thou should have reuiu'd them with a Cup of burnt wine and sugar; sir,
you, horse-keeper, go, bid them curry their strings: Is my daughter up yet?


Up sir? she was seen up an hour a go.


She's an early sturrer, ah sir.


She'll be a late sturrer soon at night sir.


Go too Peeter Flash, you have a good sudden flash of brain, your wits
husky, and no marvel, for tis like one of our Comedians beards, stillith
stubble: about your business, and look you be nymble to fly from the wine, or
the nymble wine will catch you by the nose.


If your wine play with my nose Sir, I'll knocke's coxcomb.


Do Peeter, and wear it for thy labour; Is my Son in Law Sir Walter Terell
ready yet?


Ready sir.


One of you attend him: Stay Flash, where's the note of the guests you have
invited?


Here Sir, I'll pull all your guests out of my bosom; the men that will come,
I have crossed, but all the Gentlewomen have at the tail of the last letter a
prick, because you may read them the better.


My spectacles, light, light, knaves: Sir Adam Prickshaft, thou hast crossed him,
heel come.


I had much a do sir, to draw Sir Adam Prickeshaft home, because I told him
twas early, but heel come.


Justice Crop, what will he come?


He took physic yesterday sir.


Oh then Crop cannot come.


O Lord yes, sir yes 'twas but to make more room in his Crop for your good
cheer, Crop will come.


Widow M^neuer.


She's pricked you see sir, and will come.


Sir Vaughan ap Rees, oh hee^s crossed twice, so, so, so, then all these Ladies,
that fall downewardes here, will come I see, and all these Gentlemen that
stand right before them.


All will come.


Well said, here, write them out again, and put the men from the women; and
Peeter, when we are at Church bring wine and cakes, be light nimble good Flash,
for your burden will be but light.


Prickeshaft God morrow, god morrow: go, in, in, in, to the Bridegroom, taste
a cup of burnt wine this morning, twill m^ke you fly the better all the day
after.


You are an early styrrer Sir Quintilian Shorthose.


I am so, it behooves me at my daughters wedding, in, in, in; fellow put ou^ thy
torch, and put thy self into my buttery, the torch burns ill in thy hand, the
wine will burn better in thy belly, in in.


Ware there, room for Sir Adam Prickeshaft: your Worship --


Sir Vaughan a^d Widow, Mineuer, welcome, welcome, a thousand times: my lips
Mistress Widow shall bid you God morrow, in, in, one to the Bridegroom, the
other to the Bride.


Why then Sir quiontilian Shorthose, I will step into mistress Bride, and Widow
Mineuer, shall go upon M. Bridegroom.


No pardon, for by my truly Sir Vaughan, I'll ha no dealings with any M.
Bridegrooms.


In widow in, in honest knight in.


I will usher you mistress widow.


Light there for sir Vaughan; your good Worship --


Drink that shilling Ma. Peeter Flash, in your guts and belly.


I'll not drink it down sir, but I'll turn it into that which shall run down,
oh merrily!


God morrow to these beauties, and Gentlemen, that have Ushered this troop of
Ladies to my daughters wedding, welcome, welcome all; music? nay then the
bridegroome's coming, where are these knaves here?


All here sir.


God morrow Ladies and fair troops of gallants, that have deposed the drowsy
King of sleep, to Crown our train with your rich presences, I salute you all;

Each one share thanks from thanks in general.

God morrow M. Bridegroom, mistress Bride.

God morrow M. Bride groom.

Gallants I shall entreat you to prepare,
For Masks and Revels to defeat the night,
Our Sovereign will in person grace our marriage.

What will the king be heer?

Father he will.

Where be these knaves? More Rose-mary and gloves, gloves, gloves: choose
Gentlemen; Ladies put on soft skins upon the skin of softer hands; so, so: come
mistress Bride take you your place, the old men first, and then the Bachelors;
Maids with the Bride, Widows and wives together, the priset's at Church, tis
time that we march thither


Dear Blunt at our return from Church, take pains to step to Horace, for our
nuptial songs; now Father when you please.


Agreed, set on, come good Sir Vaughan, must we lead the way?


Peeter you go too fast for Mistress pride: so, gingerly, gingerly; I muse why
Sir Adam Prickeshaft sticks so short behind?


He follows close, not too fast, hold up knaves,
Thus we lead youth to church, they us to graves.

To thee whose fore-head swells with Roses,
Whose most haunted bower
Gives life sent to every flower,
Whose most adored name encloses,
Things abstruse, deep and divine,
Whose yellow tresses shine,
Bright as Eoan fire.
O me thy Priest inspire.
For I to thee and thine immortal name,
In-in-in golden tunes,
For I to thee and thine immortal name --
In-sacred raptures flowing, flowing, swimming, swimming:
In sacred raptures swimming,
Immortal name, game, dame, tame, lame, lame, lame,
Pux, hath, shame, proclaim, oh --
In Sacred raptures flowing, will proclaim, not --
O me thy Priest inspyre!
For I to thee and thine immortal name,
In flowing numbers filled with spright and flame,
Good, good, in flowing numbers filled with spright flame.

Horace, Horace, my sweet ningle, is always in labour when I come, the nine
Muses be his midwives I pray Iupiter: Ningle.


In flowing numbers filled with sprite and flame, To thee.


To me? I pledge thee sweet Ningle, by Bacchus quassing boule, I thought
th'adst drunk to me.


It must have been in the divine lycour of Pernaessus, then in which, I know
you would scarce have pledged me, but come sweet rogue, sit, sit, sit.


Over head and ears y^aith? I have a sacke-full of news for thee, thou shalt
plague some of them, if God send us life and health together.


Its no matter, empty thy sack anon, but come here first honest rogue, come.


Is't good, Is't good* pure Helicon ha?


Dam me ift be not the best that ever came from me, if I have any judgment,
look sir, tis an Epithalamium for Sir Walter Terrels wedding, my brains have
given assault to it but this morning.


Then I hope to see them fly out like gun-powder ere night.


Nay good rogue mark, for they are the best lines that ever I drew.


Here's the best leaf in England, but on, on, I'll but tune this Pipe.


Mark, to thee whose fore-head swells with Roses.


O sweet, but will there be no exceptions taken, because fore-head and swelling
comes together?


Push, away, away, its proper, besides tis an elegancy to say the fore head
swells.


Nay an't be proper, let it stand for Gods love.

Whose most haunted bower,
Gives life and sent to every flower,
Whose most adored name encloses,
Things abstruse, deep and divine.
Whose yellow tresses shine,
Bright as (...) fire.

O pure, rich, there's heate in this, on, on.

Bright as Eoan fire,
O me thy Priest inspire!
For I to thee and thine immortal name -- mark this.
In flowing numbers filled with spryte and ^ame.

I mary, there's spryte and flame in this.

A pox, a this Tobacco.

Wod this case were my last, if I did not mark, nay all's one, I have always
a consort of Pypes about me, mine Ingle is all fire and water; I marked, by this
Candle (which is none of Gods Angels) I remember, you started back at sprite
and flame.


For I to thee and thine immortal name,
In flowing numbers filled with sprite and flame,
To thee Loves mightiest King,
Himen o Himen does our chaste Muse sing.

There's music in this;

Mark now dear Asinius.
Let these virgins quickly see thee,
Leading out the Bride,
Though their blushing cheeks they hide,
Yet with kisses will they fee thee,
To untie their Virgin zone,
They grieve to lye alone.

So do I by Venus.


Yet with kisses will they fee thee, my Muse has marched (dear roagu^) no ^arder
yet: but how is't? how is't? nay prithee good Asini^s deal plainly, do not
flatter me, come, how? --


If I have any judgment:


Nay look you Sir, and the^ follow a troop of other rich and laboured
conceits, oh the end shall be admirable! but how is't sweet Bubo, how, how?


If I have any Judgment, tis the best stuff that ever dropped from thee.


You ha seen my Acrostics?


I'll put up my pypes and then I'll see any thing.


You have a Copy of mine Odes to, hast not Bubo?


Your odes? O that which you spake by word a mouth at th'ordinary, when Musco
the gull cried Mew at it:


A pox on him poor braineles Rooke: and you remember, I told him his wit lay
at pawn with his new Satin suit, and both would be lost, for not fetching
home by a day.


At which he would fai^e ha blushed but that his painted cheeks would not let
him.


Nay sir the Palinode, which I mean to stitch to my Revels, shall be the
best and ingenious piece that ever I sweat for; stay rogue, I'll fat thy spleane
and make it plump with laughter.


Shall I? faith Ningle, shall I see thy secrets?


Puh my friends.


But what fardle's that? what fardle's that?


Farthel, away, tis my packet; here lies intoomb'd the loves of Knights and
Earles, here tis, here tis, here tis, Sir Walter Terils letter to me, and my
answer to him: I no sooner opened his letter, but there appeared to me three
glorious Angels, whom I adorned, as subjects do their Sovereigns: the
honest knight Angles for my acquaintance, with ^uch golden baits -- but why
dost laugh my good rogue? how is my answer, prithee, how, how?


Answer, as God judge me Ningle, for thy wit thou may answer any Justice of
peace in England I warrant; thou writ'st in a most goodly big hand too, I like
that, readst as leageably as some that have bin saved by their neck-verse.


But how dost like the Kinghts indicting?


If I have any judgment; a pox o^t, here's worshipful lines indeed, here's
stuff: but ^ra Ningle, of what fashion is this knights wit, of what block^?


Why you see; well, well, an ordinary Ingenuity, a good wit for a knight, you
know how, before God I am haunted with some the most pittyfull dry gallants.


Troth so I think; good pieces of lantskip, show best a far off.


I, I, I, excellent sumpter horses, carry good clothes; but honest rogue,
come, what news, what news abroad? I have heard a the horses walking a^h top
of Paules.


Hay? why the Captain Tucca rails upon you most preposterously behind your
back, did you not hear him*


A pox upon him: by the white soft hand of Minerua, I'll make him the most
ridiculous: dam me if I bring not's humorath stage: -- scu^uy lymping tongued
captain, poor grea^ie buff lerkin, hang him: tis out of his Element to
traduce me: I am too well ranckt Asinius to be stabbed with his dudgion wit:
sir, I'll compose an Epigram, upon him, shall go thus --


Nay I ha more news, there's Crispinus his Iorneyman Poet Demetrius Faninus too,
they swear they'll bring your life death vpon'th stage like a Bricklayer in a
play.


Bubo they must press more valiant wits than their own to do it: me ^th stage?
ha, ha, I'll start thence poor copper-lace workmasters, that dare play me: I
can bring ( that they quake at) a prepared troop of gallants, who for my sake
shall distaste every vnsalted line, in their ^y-blowne Comedies


Nay that^s certain, i'll bring 100. gallants of my rank


That same Crispinus is the silliest Dor, and Faninus the slightest
cob-web-lawne pierce of a Poet, oh God! Why should I care what every Dor doth
buzz. Incredulous ears, it is a crown to me. That the best judgements can
report me wronged.


I am one of them that can report it:


I think but what they are, and am not moved.
The one a light ^ptuous Reueler,
The other, a strange arrogating puff,
Both impudent, and arrogant enough.

S'lid do not Cri^cus Revel in these lines, ha Ningle ha?


Yes, they're mine own.


Horrace.


Flaccus.


Horrace, not up yet;


Peace, tread so^tly, hyde my Paper; who's this so early?

Some of my rooks, some of my gulls?

Horrace, Flac^us.


Who's there? st^ay, tread softly: Wat Terill on my life: who's there? my
gown sweet rogue, so, come up, come in.


God morrow Horrace.


O, God save you gallants.


Asinius Bubo well met.


Nay I hope so Crispinus, yet I was sick a quarter of a year a got of a
vehement great tooth-atch: a pox o^t, it bit me vi^ye, as God same la ^ knew
twas you by your knocking so soon as I saw you; Demetrius Fannius, will you
take a whiffe this morning? I have tickling gear now, here's that will play
with your nose, and a pipe of mine own scouring too.


I, and a Hodgshead too of your own, but that will never be scoured clean I
fear.


I burnt my pipe yesternight, and twas never used since, if you will tis at
your service gallants, and Tobacco too, tis right pudding I can tell you; a
Lady or two, took a pipe full or two at my hands, and praizde it for the
Heavens, shall I fill Flannius?


I thank you good (...) for your love,
I fildome take that Physic, tis enough
Having so much fool to take him in snuff.

Good Bubo read some book* and give us leaue^ --

Leave have you dear Ningle, marry for reading any book I'll take my death
vpout (as my Ningle says) tis out of my Elemet: no faith, eue^ since I felt
one hit me ith teeth that the greatest Clarks are not the wisest men, could I
abide to go to School, I was at As in present^ and left there: yet because
I'll not be counted a worle fool then I am, I'll turn over a new leaf.


To see my fate, that when I dip my pen
In distilde Roses, and do strive to dreine,
Out of mine Ink all gall; that when I wey
Each syllable I write or speak, because
Mine enemies with sharpe and searching eye*
Look through through me, carving my poor labours
Like an Anatomy: Oh heauen^ to see,
That when my lines are measured out as straight
As even Paralels, tis strange that still,
Still some imagine they are drawn aw^y.
The error is not mine, but in their eye,
That cannot take proportions.

Horrace, Horrace,
To stand within the shot of galling tongues,
Proves not your gilt, for could we write on paper,
Made of these turning (...) of heaven, the clouds,
Or speak with Angels tongues* yet wise men know,
That some would sha^e the head, tho Saints should sing,
Some snakes ^, because they reborne with stings.

Tis true.

Do we not see fools laugh (...) heaven and mock
The Makers workmanship; be not you grieved
If that which you mould fair, upright and smooth,
Be skrwed a wry, made crooked, lame and vile,
By racking coments, a^d calumnious tongues,
So to be bit it raukcles not: for innocence
May with a feather brush off the foulest wrongs.
But when your d^stard wit will strike at men
In corners, and in riddles fold the vices
Of your best friends, you must not take to heart,
If they take off all gilding from their pills,
And only offer you the bitter Coare.

Crispinus.

Say that you have not sworn unto your Paper,
To blot her white cheeks with her dregs and bottom
Of your friends private vices: say you swear
Your love and your aleageance to bright virtue
Makes you descend so low, as to put on
The Office of an Executioner,
Only to strike off the head of sin,
Where ere you find it standing,
Say you swear;
And make damnation parcel of your oath,
That when your lashing jests make all men bleed;
Yet you whip none. Court, City, country, friends,
Foes, all must smart alike; yet Court, nor City,
Nor foe, nor friend, dare winch at you; great pity.

If you swear, dam me Faninus, or Crispinus,
Or to the law ( Our kingdoms golden chain)
To Poets dam me, or to Players dam me,
If I brand you, or you, tax you, scourge you:
I wonder then, that of five hundred, four hundred five,
Should all point with their fingers in one instant
At one and the same man?

Dear Faninus.

Come, you cannot excuse it.

Hear me, I can --

You must da^be on thick colours then to hide it.

We come like your Physicians, to purge
Your sick and dangerous mind of her disease.

In troth we do, o^t of our loves we come,
And not revenge, but if you strike us still,
We must defend our reputations:
Our pens shall like our swords be always sheathed,
Unless too much prou^, (...) i^ then
They draw blood of you, blame us not, we are men:
Come, let thy Muse bear up a smoother sail,
Tis the easiest and the basest Art to rail,

Deliver me your hands, I love you both,
As dear as my own soul, prove me, and when
I shall traduce you, make me the scorn of men.

Enough, we are friends.

What reads Asinius?

By my troth here's an excellent comfortable book, it's most sweet reading in
it.


Why, what does it smell of Bubo?


Mas it smells of Rose-leaues a little too.


Then it must needs be a sweet book, he would fain perfume his ignorance.


I warrant he had wit in him that penned it.


Tis good yet a fool will confess truth.


The whoorson made me meet with a hard stile in two or three places as I went
over him.


I believe thee, for they had need to be very lowe easy Stiles of wit that thy
brains go over.


Wher's this gallant? Morrow Gentlemen: what's, this devise (...) yet Horace?


Gods so, what mean you to let this fellow dog you into my Chamber?


Oh, our honest Captain, come, prithee let us see.


Why you bastards of nine whoores, the Muses, why do you walk here in this
gorgeous ga^le^y of gallant inventions, with that whooreson poor lyme
hayre-rascall? why --


O peace good Tucca, we are all sworn friends,


Sworn, that Iudas yonder that walks in Rug, will dub you Knights ath post,
if you serve under his band of oaths, the copper fact rascal will for a good
supper out swear twelve dozen of grand Iuryes.


A pox ont, not done yet, and bin about it three days?


By Iesu within this hour, save you Captain Tucca.


Dam thee, thou thin bearded Hermaphrodite, dam thee, I'll save my self for one
I warrant thee, is this thy Tub Diogines?


Yes Captain this is my poor lodging.


Morrow Captain Tucca, will you whiffe this morning?


Art thou there goats pizzel; no goda^ercy Caine I am for no whiffs I, come
hither sheep-skin-weauer^s ^foote thou look as though th'adst begged out of a
Jail: draw, I mean not thy face (for tis not worth drawing) but draw near:
this way, march, follow your commander you scoundrell: So, thou must run of
an errand for me Mephostophiles.


To do you pleasure Captain I will, but whether


To hell, thou know the way, to hell my fire and brimstone, to hell; dost
stare my Sar^en^-head at Newgate? dost gl^ate? I'll march through thy (...)
gu^s, for shooting jests at me.


Dear Captain but one word.


Out bench-whistler out, i'll not take thy word for a dagger Pie: you
browne-bread-mouth stinker, i'll teach thee to turn me into Banks his horse,
and to tell gentlemen I am a Juggler, and can show tricks.


Captain Tucca, but half a word in your ear.


No you starved rascal, thou't bite off mine ears then, you must have three or
four suites of names, when like a lousy Pediculous vermin you have but one
suite to thy back: you must be called Asper, and Criticus, and Horace, thy
tytle's longer a reading then the Stile a the big Turks: Asper, Criticus,
Quintus, Horatius, Flacu^s.


Captain I know upon what even bases I stand, and therefore --


Bases? wud the rogue were but ready for me.


Nay prithee dear Tucca, come you shall shake --


Not hands with great Hunkes there, not hands, but I'll shake the gull-groper
out of his tanned skin.


For our sake Captain, nay prithee hold.


Thou wrongst here a good honest rascal Crispinus, and a poor varlet
Demetrius Fanninus (brethren in thine own trade of Poetry) thou say
Crispinus Satin doublet is Reauel'd out here, and that this penurious sneaker
is out at elboes, go two my good full mouthed ban-dog, I'll ha thee friends
with both.


With all my heart captain Tucca, and with you too, I'll lay my hande^ under
your feet, to keep them from aching.


Can you have any more?


Say thou me so, old Coal come? do it then; yet tis no matter neither, I'll
have thee in league first with these two roly powlies: they shall be thy Damons
and thou their Pithyasse; Crispinus shall give thee an old cast Satin suite,
and Demetrius shall write thee a Scene or two, in one of thy strong garlic
Comedies; and thou shalt take the guilt of conscience for ^and swear tis thine
own old lad, tis thine own: thou never yet fels't into the hands of satin,
did?


Never Captain I thank God.


Go too, thou shalt now King Gorboduck, thou shalt, because I'll ha thee
damned, I'll ha thee all in Satin: Asper, Criticus, Quintus, Horatius, Flaccus,
Crispinus shall do it, thou shalt do it, heir apparent of Helicon, thou shalt
do it.


Mine Ingle wear an old cast Satin suite?


I wa^er-fate your Ningle.


If he carry the mind of a Gentleman, he'll scorn it at's heals.


Mary muffe, my man a ginger-bread, wilt eat any small coal?


No Captain, wod you should well know it, great coal shall not fill my
belly.


Scorn it, dost scorn to be arrested at one of his old Suit^s?


No Captain, I'll wear any thing.


I know thou wilt, I know you are an honest low minded Pigmy, for I ha seen
thy shoulders lapped in a Players old cast Cloak, like a Sly knave as thou art:
and when thou ranst mad for the death of Horatio: thou borrowed a gown of
Roscius the Stager, (that honest Nicodemus) and sentst it home lousy, did
not? Responde, did not?


So, so, no more of this, within this hour --


If I can sound retreat to my wits, with whom this leader is in skirmish, I'll
end within this hour.


What wut end? wut hang thy self now? has he not writ Finis yet Jack? what
will he be fifteen weeks about this Cockatrices egg too? has he not
cackeld yet? not laid yet?


Not yet, he swears he will within this hour.


His wits are somewhat hard bound: the Puncke his Muse has sore labour ere
the whore be delivered: the poor saffron-cheeke Sun-burnt Gypsy wants
Physic; give the hungrie-face pudding-pye-eater ten Pills: ten shillings my
fair Angelica, they' make his Muse as yare as a tumbler.


He shall not want for money if heel write.


Go by Ieronimo, go by; and here, drop the ten shillings into this Basin;
do, drop, when Iacke^ he shall call me his Moecen^: besides, I'll dam vp's
Ouen-mouth for railing at's: So, i^t right Jack? is't sterling? fall off now to
the vauward of yonder four Stinkers, and ask aloud if we shall go? the
Knight shall defray Jack, the Knight when it comes to Summa totalis, the
Knight, the Knight. --


Well Gentlemen, we'll leave you, shall we go Captain? good Horrace make some
hast.


I'll put on wings.


I never saw mine Ingle so dashed in my life before.


Yes once Asinius.


Mas you say true, he was dashed worse once going (in a rainy day) with a
speech to'th Tilt-yard, by Gods lyd has called him names, a dog would not put
up, that had any discreation.


Hold, hold up thy hand, I ha seen the day thou did not scorn to hold up
thy golles: there's a Soldiers Spur-royall, twelve pence: Stay, because I know
thou can not write without quick-^uer; up again, this goll again, I give thee
double presse-money: Stay, because I know thou hast a noble head, i'll divide my
Crown, o royal Porrex, there's a teston more; go, thou and thy Muse munch,
d^e, munch; come my dear Mandrake, if Skeldring fall not to decay, thou shalt
flourish: farewell my sweet Amadis de Gaul, farewell.


Dear Captain.


Come Jack.


Nay Captain stay, we are of your band.


March fair then:


Horace farewell, adieu Asinius


Ningle lets go to some ^auerne, and dine together, for my stomach rises at
this scurvy leather Captain.


No, they have choked me with mine own disgrace, Which (fools) i'll spit
again even in your face.


Knaves, Varlets, what Lungis, give me a dozen of stools there.


Sesu plesse us all in our five senses a piece, what mean ye sir Kintilian
Sorthose to stand so much on a dozen stools, here be not breeches inuffe to
hyde a dozen stools, unless you wisse some of us preake his sins.


I say sir Vaughan no shin shall be broken heer* what lungis, a chair with a
strong back, and a soft belli^, great with child; with a cushion for this
reverend Lady.


God never gave me the grace to be a Lady, yet I ha been worshipped in my
conscience to my face a thousand times, I cannot deny sir Va^ghan, but that I
have all implements, belonging to the vocation of a Lady.


I trust mistress Mineuer you have all a honest oman should have?


Yes perdie, as my Coach, and my fan, and a man or two that ^ turn, and other
things which I'd be loath every one should see, because they shall not be
common, I am in manner of a Lady in one point.


I pray mistress Mineuers, let us all see that point for our better
understanding.


For I ha somethinges that were fetched (I am sure) as far as some of the Low
Countries, and I paid sweetly for them too, and they told me they were good
for Ladies.


And much good do it thy good heart fair widow with them.


I am fair enough to be a Widow, Sir Quintilian.


In my soul and conscience, and well favoured enough to be a Lady: here is
sir ^ntilian Sorthose, and here is sir Adam Prickshaft, a sentleman of a very
good brain, and well headed: you see he shoots his bolt seldom, but when
Adam lets go, he hits: and here is sir Vaughan ap Rees, and I believe if God
sud take us all from his mercy, as I hope he will not yet; we all three love
you, at the bottom of our bellies, and our hearts: and therefore mistress
Mineuer, if you please, you shall be knighted by one of us, whom you fall
desire to put into your device and mind.


One I must have sir Vaughan.


And one of us thou shalt have widow.


One I must have, for now every one seeks to crow over me.


By Sesu and if I find any crowing over you, he were a cock (come out as
far as in Turkeys country) tis possible to cut his comb off.


I muse why sir Adam Prickshaft flies so far from us.


I am in a browne study, my dear, if love should be turned into a beast, what
beast he were fit to be turned into.


I think Sir Adam an Ass, because of his bearing.


I think (saving your reverence) Sir Adam a puppy, for a dog is the most
loving creature to a christian that is, unless it be a child.


No, I think if love should be turned away, and go to serve any beast, it
must be an Ape, and my reason --


Sir Adam, an Ape? there's no more reason in an Ape, than in a very plain
Monkey; for an Ape has no tail, but we all know, or tis our duty to know, love
has two tails; In my sudsment, if love be a beast, that beast is a bunce of
Reddis; for a bunce of Reddis is wise meat without Mutton, and so is love.


There's the yawning Captain (saving your reverence that has such a sore mouth)
would one day needs persuade me, that love was a Rebato; and his reason was
(saving your reverence) that a Rebato was worn out with pinning too often; and
so he said love was.


And Master Captain Tucca said wisely too, love is a Rebato indeed: a Rebato
must be poaked; now many women wear Rebatoes, and many that wear Rebatoes --


Must be poakt.


Sir Adam Prickshaft has hit the clout


The Music speaks to us, we'll have a dance before dinner.


The King's at hand.

Father the King's at hand.
Music talk louder, that thy silver voice,
May reach my Sovereigns ears.

I pray do so, Musicians bestir your singers, that you may have us ^


His Grace comes, a Hall (...), where be my men? blow, blow your cold ^ they
sweat; tickle them till they sound again.


Be^t go meet his Grace.


Agreed.


Pray all stand bare, as well men as women: Sir Adam is best you hide your head
for fear your wise brains take key-colde: on before Sir Kintilian; Sentlemen
fall in before ^he Ladies, in seemly order and fashion; so this is come^ye.


Nay if your pleasures shrink at sight of us,
We shall repent this labour, Mistress Bride
You that for speaking but one word to day*
Must loose your head at night; you that do stand
Taking your last leave of virginity;
You that being well begun, must not be Maid:
Win you the Ladies, s^the men will woo,
Our self will lead my blushing Bride with you.

God bless your Majesty, and send you to be along King William Rufus over us,
when he sees his times pleasures.


We thank you good Sir Vaughan, we will take your meaning not your words.


Load Music there.


I am glad, our Majesty will take any thing at my hands; my words ^ trust in
Sesu, are spoken between my soul and body together, and have neither Felonies
nor treasons about them, I hope.


Good words Sir Vau^han, I prithee give us leave.


Good words sir Vaughan? that's by interpertation in english, you^r best give
good words sir Vaughan: god and his Ansells bless me, what ails his majesty
to be so tedious and difficult in his right minds now, I hold my life that
file rascall-rymer Horace hath puzd and puzd above a hundred merry tales and
lice, into his great and princely ears: by god and he use it, his being
Phoebus priest cannot save him, if he were his Sapline too i'd press upon his
coxcomb: good lord bless me out of his majesties cellar: King Williams, I hope
tis none offences to make a supplication to god a mighty for your long life:
for by shesu I have no meaning in it in all the world, unless rascals be here
that will have your grace take shalke for she's, and unless Horace has sent
ly^e to your majesty.


Horace, what's he sir Vaughan?


As hard-fauourd a fellow as your majesty has seen in a summers day: he does
pen, an't please your grace, toys that will not please your grace; tis a Poet,
we call them Bardes in our Country, singes ballads and rymes, and I was
mighty sealous, that his Ink which is black and full of gall, had brought my
name to your majesty, and so lifted up your hye and princely collar.


I neither know that Horace, nor mine anger, If as thou say our high and
princely choler Be up, we'll tread it down with dances; Ladies Loose not
your men; fair measures must be tread, When by so fair a dancer you are
lead.


Mistress Miniuer:


Perdie sir Vaughan I cannot dance.


Perdie by this Miniuer cap, and acording to his masesties leave too, you
sall be put in among theise Ladies, dance ere long I trest in god, the saking
of the seetes.


That turn fair Bride shows you must turn at night,
In that sweet dance which steals away delight.

Then pleasure is a theife, a fit, a fever:

True, he^s the thief, but women the receiver.

This change sweet Maid, says you must change your life,
As Virgins do.

Virgins ne'er change their life,
She that is wiu'd a maid, is Maid and wife.

But she that dyes a Maid; --

Thrice happy then.

Leads Apes in hell.

Better lead Apes then men.

Well met.

Tis overtaken.

Why fair sweet?

Women are overtaken when they meet;

Your blood speaks like a coward,

It were good,
If every Maiden blush, had such a blood.

A coward blood, why whom should maidens fear?

Men, were Maids cowards, they'd not come so ne'er,
My Lord the Measure's done, I pleale my duty.

Only my heart takes measure of thy beauty.

Now by my hose I swear, that's no deep oath,
This was a fine sweet earth-quake gently moved,
By the soft wind of whispring Silks: come Ladies,
Whose joints are made out of the dancing Orbs,
Come, follow me, walk a cold measure now;
In the Brides Chamber; your hot beauty's melt,
Take every one her fan, give them their places,
And wave the Northern wind upon your faces.

Sir Walter Terrill.

My confirmed Liege

Beauty out of her bounty, thee hath lent,
More then her own with liberal extent.

What means my Lord?

Thy Bride, thy choice, thy wife,
She that is now thy fathom, thy new world,
That brings thee people, and makes little subjects;
Kneel at thy feet, obey in every thing,
So every Father is a private King.

My Lord, her beauty is the poorest part,
Chiefly her virtues did endow my heart.

Do not back-bite her beauties, they all shine,
Brighter on thee, because the beams are thine,
To thee more fair, to others her two lips
Show like a parted Moon in thine Eclipse;
That glance, which lovers amongst themselves devise,
Walks as invisible to other eyes:
Give me thine ear.

What means the King?

Tis a quaint strain.

My Lord.

Thou dare not Wat.

She is too course an object for the Court.

Thou dare not What: let to night be to morrow,

For she's not yet mine own.

Thou dare not Wat*

My Lord I dare, but --

But I see thou dare not.

This night.

Yea, this night, tush thy mind repairs not,
The more thou talk of night, the more thou dare not;
Thus far I tend, I wod but turn this sphere,
Of Ladies eyes, and place it in the Court,
Where thy fair Bride should for the Zodiac shine,
And every Lady el^e sit for a sign.
But all thy thoughts are yellow, thy sweet blood
Rebels, you are jealous Wat; thus with proud revels
To emmulate the masking firmament,
Where Stars dance in the silver Hall of heaven,
Thy pleasure should be seasoned, and thy bed
Relish thy Bride, But, but thou dare not What.

My Loord I dare.

Speak that again.

I dare.

Again kind What, and then I know thou dare.

I dare and will by that joint holy oath,
Which she and I swore to the book of heaven.
This very day when the surveying Sun,
Riz like a witness to her faith and mine,
By all the loyalty that subjects owe
To Majesty, by that, by this, by both,
I swear to make a double guarded oath,
This night untainted by the touch of man,
She shall a Virgin come.

To Court?

To Court.
I know I took a woman to my wife,
And I know women to be earthly Moons,
That never shine till night, I know they change
Their Orbs (their husbands) and in sickish hearts,
Steal to their sweet Endimions, to be cured
With better Physic, sweeter diet drinks,
Then home can minister: all this I know
Yet know not all, but give me leave O King,
To boast of mine, and say that I know none;
I have a woman but not such a one.

Why, she's confirmed in thee; I now approve her,
If constant in thy thoughts who then can move her?

Wilt please your Highness take your place within,
The Ladies attend the Table.

I go good Knight; Wat thy oath.

My Lord,
My oath's my honour, my honour is my life,
My oath is constant, so I hope my wife.

If you fly out Ningle, here's your Cloak; I think it raine^ too.


Hide my shoulders in it.


Troth so th'adst need, for now thou art in thy Pee and Kue; thou hast such a
villainous broad back, that I warrant you are able to bear away any mans ie^es
in England.


It's well Sir, I ha strength to bear yours me thinks; fore God you are
grown a piece of a Critist, since you fell into my hands: ah little rogue,
your wit has picked up her crum^ pretty and well.


Yes faith, I find my wit a the mending hand Ningle; troth I do not think
but to proceed Poetaster next Commencement, if I have my grace perfectly:
every one that confer with me now, stop their nose in merriment and swear I
smell somewhat of Horace; one calls me Horaces Ape, another Horaces Beagle,
and such Poetical names it passes. I was but at Barbers last day, and when he
was rencing my face, did but cry out* fellow thou makst me (...) too long,
says he says hyee, Master Asinius Bub^, you have even Horaces words as right
as if he had spit them into your mouth.


Well, away dear Asinius, deliver this letter to the young Gallant Drus^, he
that fell so strongly in love with me yesternight.


It's a sweet Muske-cod, a pure spic^d-gull, by this feather I pity his
Ingenuities; but hast writ all this since Ningle? I know thou hast a good
running head and thou listest.


Foh come, your great bellied wit mu^ long for every thing too; why you R^oke,
I have a set of letters ready starcht to my hands, which to any fresh suited
gallant that but newly enters his name into my roll, I send the next morning,
ere his ten a clock dream has rize from him, only with clapping my hand
to it, that my Novice shall start, ho and his hair stand an end, when he sees
the sudden flash of my writing; what you pretty Diminutive rogue, we must
have false fierce to amaze these spangle babies, these true heirs of Ma^
Ius^ice Shallow.


I wod always have thee saw^ a fool thus.


Away, and, stay: here be Epigrams upon Tucca, divulge these among the
gallants; as for Crispinus, that Crispin-asse and Fannius his Play-dresser; who
(to make the Muses believe, their subjects ears were starved and that there
was a dearth of Poefie) cut an Innocent Moore in the middle, to serve him in
twice; when he had done, made Poules-worke of it, as for these Twynnes these
Poet-(...):

Their Mimic tricks shall serve
With mirth to feast our Muse, whilst their own starve.

Well Ningle I'll trudge, but where's the Randeuow?


Well thought off, marie at Sir Vaughans lodging the VVelsh knight, I have
composed a loue-letter for the gallants worship, to his Rosamond: the second,
Mistress Miniuer, because she does not think so soundly of his ^ame English as
he could wish; I ha gulled his Knight-ship here to his face, yet have given
charge to his winking understanding not to perceive it: nay Gods so, away
dear Bubo.


I am gone.


The Muses birds the Bees were hiu'd and fled,
Us in our cradle, there by prophecying;
That we to learned ^ares should sweetly sing,
But to the vulger and adulterate brain,
Should loath to prostitute our Virgin strain.
No, our sharpe pen shall keep the world in awe,
Horace thy Poesy, wormwood wreathes shall wear,
We hunt not for men's loves but for their fear.

O Sir Adam Prickshaft, you are a the bow hand wide, a long, yard I assure you:
and as for Suitors, truly they all go down with me, they have all one flat
answer.


All Widow? not all, let Sir Adam be your first man still.


Widow, art stolen from Table? I Sir Adam,
Are you my rival? well, fly fair you're best;
The King's exceeding merry at the banquet,
He makes the Bride blush with his merry words
That run into her ears; ah he's a wanton,
Yet I dare trust her, had he twenty tongues,
And every tongue a Stile of Majesty,
Now Widow, let me tell thee in thine ear,
I love thee Widow, by this ring; nay wear it.

I'll come in no rings pardie, I'll take no gold.

^

Master Peter Flash, I will grope about Sir Quintilian, for his terminations
touching and considering you.


I thank your Worship, for I have as good a stomach to your Worship as a man
could wish.


I hope in God a mighty, I shall fill your stomach Master Peter: What two upon
one Sentlemen; Mistress Miniuer, much good do it you Sir Adam.


Sir Vaughan, have you dined well Sir Vaughan?


As good seer as would make any hungry man (and a were in the vilest prison
in the world) eat and he had any stomach: One word Sir Quintilian in hugger
mugger; here is a Sentleman of yours, Master Peter Flash, is tesirous to have
his blew coat pulled over his ears; and --


No Sir, my petition runs thus, that your worship would thrust me out of
doors, and that I may follow Sir Vaughan.


I can tell you Master Flash, and you follow me I go very fast, I think in
my conscience, I am one of the lightest knights in England.


It's no matter Sir, the Flashes have ever bin known to be quick and light
enough.


Sir Vaughan, he shall follow you, he shall dog you good Sir Vaughan.


Why then Peter Flash I will set my four marks a year, and a blew coat upon
you.


God a mercy to your worship, I hope you shall never repent for me.


You bear the face of an honest man, for you blush passing well Peter, I will
quench the flame out of your name, and you shall be christened Peter Salamander.


The name's too good for me, I thank your worship.


Are you come Master Horace, you sent me the Copy of your letters
countenance, and I did write and read it; your wits truly have done very
valliantlie: tis a good inditements, you ha put in enough for her ha you not?


According to my instructions.


Tis passing well, I pray Master Horace walk a little beside your self, I
will turn upon you incontinent.


What Gentleman is this in the Mandilian, a soldyer?


No, tho he has a very bad face for a soldier, yet he has as desperate a wit
as ever any Scholar went to cuffs for; tis a Sentleman Poet, he has made
rimes called Thalamimums, for M. Pridegroome, on vrd widow.


Is this he? welcome Sir, you name? pray you walk not so stately, but be
acquainted with me boldly; your name Sir?


Quintus, Horacius, Flaccus.


Good Master Flappus welcome.


Mistress Miniuer, one vrde in your corner here; I desire you to break my
arms here, and read this Paper, you shall feel my minds and affections in
it, at full and at large.


Iletreceiue no Love libels perdy, but by word a mouth.


By Sesu tis no libel, for here is my hand to it.


I'll ha no hand in it Sir Vaughan, I'll not deal with you.


Why then widow, I'll tell you by word a mouth my devices.


Your devices come not near my mouth Sir Vaughan perdy, I was upon a time in
the way to marriage, but now I am turned a the other side, I ha sworn to lead a
single and simple life.


She has answered you Sir Vaughan.


Tis true, but at wrong weapons Sir Adam; will you be an Ass Mistress Miniuers?


If I be you shall not ride me.


A simple life! by Sesu tis the life of a fool, a simple life!


How now Sir Vaughan?


My brains has a little fine quawme come under it, and therefore Sir Adam, and
Sir Quintilian, and mistress Miniuer caps God bo'y.


Good Sir Vaughan.


Master Horace, your inventions do her no good in the Vniuersalities; yet
here is two shillings for your wits; nay by Sesu you shall take it if it were
more: yonder bald Adams, is put my nose from his joint; but Adam I will be even
to you: this is my cogitations, I will indite the Ladies Miniuer caps to a
dinner of Plumbs, and I shall desire you M. Horace, to speak or rail; you
can rail I hope in God a mighty.


You mean to speak bitterly:


Right, to spit bitterly upon baldnes, or the thinnes of hair; you ^all eat
down Plumbs to sweeten your mouth, and here is a good Ansell to defend you:
Peter Salamander follow me.


With hue and cry and you will Sir.


Come M, Horace, I will go pull out the Ladies.


And I'll set out my wits, Baldnes the Theme? My words shall flow hye in a
silver stream.


Wher's my most costly and sump^uous Sho^hose^*


Is the King risen from table Captain Tucca?


How? risen? no my noble Quintilian, kings are greater men then we Knights and
Cauallie^s, and therefore must eat more then lesser persons; Godamercy good
Dives for these crumbs: how now? has not Friar Tucke dined yet? he falls so
hard to that Oyster-pye yonder.


Oyster-pye Captain? ha ha, he loves her, and I love her and fear both shall
go without her.


Dost love her, my finest and first part of the Mirror of Knighthood? hang
her she looks like a bottle of ale, when the cork flies out and the Ale fomes
at mouth, she looks my good button-breech like the sign of Capricorne, or
like Tiborne when it is covered with snow.


All's one for that, she has a vizard in a bag, will make her look like an
Angel; I wod I had her, upon condition, I gave thee this chain manly Tucca.


I? say thou so Friskin? I have herath hip for some causes, I can sound her,
she^ll come at my beck.


Wod I could sound her too Noble commander.


Thou shalt do it; that Lady ath Lake is thine Sir Tristram, lend me thy
chain, do, lend it, I'll make her take it as a token, I'll link her unto
thee; and thou shalt wear her glove in thy Worshipful hat^e like to a leather
broo^h; Nay and thou mistrusts thy collar, be tied in it ^ill.


Mi^rust Captain no here tis, give it her if she'll take it, or wear it thy
s^lfe, if shee'll take me, I'll watch him well enough too.


No more, Il^ shoot away yonder Prickshaft, and then belabour her, a^d fly
you after yonder Cucko: dost here me my noble Gold^n^h: --


No more.


How do^ thou my smug Belimperia? how dost thou? hands off my little bald
Derricke, hands off: hark hither Susanna, beware a these two wicked Elders,
shall I speak well or ^ll of thee?


Nay, even as you please Captain, it shall be at your choice.


Why well said, my nimble Short-hose.


I hear her, I hear her.


Art angry father time? art angry because I took mother-Winter aside? I'll
hold my life thou art struck with Cupids Birde-bolt, my little prick shaft,
art? dost love that mother Mumble-crust, dost thou? dost long for that
whim-wham?


Wod I were as sure to lye with her, as to love her.


Have I found thee my learned Dunce, have I found thee? If I might ha my will,
thou should not put thy spoon into that bumble-broth (for indeed I'd taste
her my self) no thou should not; yet if her beauty blind thee, she's
thine, I can do it, thou heard her say even now, it should be at my choice.


She did so, work the match and I'll bestow --


Not a silk point upon me, little Adam she shall be thy Eeue, for less
then an Apple; but send, be wise, seud her some token, she's greedy, she
shall take it, do, send, thou shalt stick in her (Prickeshaft) but fend.


Here's a purse of gold, think you that will be accepted?


Go to, it shall be accepted, and twere but silver, when that Flea-bitten
Short-hose steppes hence: vanish too, and let me alone with my Grannam in
Gutter-Lan^ there, and this purse of gold do, let me alone.


The King, gods Lord, I do forget the King;
Widow, think on my words, I must be gone
To wait his rising, I'll return anon.

Stay Sir Quintilian, I'll be a waiter too.


Widow we'll trust that Captain there with you.


Now, now, mother Bunch how dost thou? what dost frown Queen Gwyniuer? dost
wrinkle? what made these pair of Shittle-cockes here? what do they fumble
for? I'll ha none of these Kites flutering about thy carks, for thou shalt be
my West Indyes, and none but trim Tucca shall discover thee.


Discover me? discover what thou can of me.


What I can? thou know what I can discover, but I will not lay thee open to
the world,


Lay me open to the world?


No I will not my moldie decayed Chari^g-crosse, I will not.


Hang thee patch-pannell, I am none a thy Charing-crosse: I scorn to be Cross
to such a scab as thou makst thy self.


No, tis thou makst me so, my Long Meg a Westminster, thou breedst a fcab, thou
--


I? dam thee filthy Captain, dam thy self.


My little devil a Dow-gate, I'll dam thee, (thou know my meaning) I'll dam
thee up; my wide mouth at Bishops-gate.


Wod I might once come to that damming.


Why thou shalt, my sweet dame Annis a clear thou shalt, for I'll drown my
self in thee; I, for thy love, I'll sink, I, for thee.


So thou wilt I warrant, in thy abominable sins; Lord, Lord, howe many
filthy words hast thou to answer for.


Name one Madge-owlet, name one, I'll answer for none; my words shall be forth
coming at all times, shall answer for them selves; my nimble Cat-a-mountaine:
they shall Sislie Bum-trincket, for I'll give thee none but Sugercandie words,
I will not Pusse: goody Tripe-wife, I will not.


Why dost call me such horrible ungodly names then?


I'll name thee no more Mother Red^cap upon pain of death, if thou wilt
Grimalkin, Maggo^ a-pye I will not.


Wod thou should well know, I am no Maggot, but a mere Gentlewoman borne.


I know thou art a Gentle, and I'll nibble at thee, thou shalt be my
Cap-a-maintenance, I'll carry my naked sword before thee, my reverend Lady
Lettice-cap.


Thou shalt carry no naked swords before me to fright me, thou --


Go too, let not thy tongue play so hard at hot-cockles; for, Gammer Gurton, I
mean to be thy needle, I love thee, I love thee, because thy teeth stand like
the Arches under London Bridge, for thou't not turn Satire bite thy husband;
No, come my little Cub, do not scorn me because I go in Stag, in Buff,
here's velvet too; thou see I am worth thus much in bareveluet.


I scorn thee not, not I.


I know thou dost not, thou shat see that I could march with two or three
hundred links before me, look here what? I could show gold too, if that
would tempt thee, but I will not make my self a Gold-smithes stall I; I scorn
to go chained my Lady ath Hospital, I do; yet I will and must be chained
to thee.


To me? why Master Captain, you know that I have my choice of three or four
pair of Knights, and therefore have small reason to fly out I know not how in
a man of war.


A man a war? come thou know not what a worshipful focation tis to be a
Captains wife: three or four pair of Knights? why dost hear Ioane-a-bedlam,
I'll enter into bond to be dubbed by what day thou wilt* when the next action is
laid upon me, thou shalt be Ladified.


You know I am offered that by half a dozen.


Thou shalt little Miniuer, thou shalt, I'll ha this frock turned into a
foote-cloth; and thou shalt be carted, drawn I mean, Coached, Coached, thou
shalt ride Iigga-Iogge; a Hood shall flap up and down here, and this
shipskin-cap shall be put off.


Nay perdie, I'll put off my cap for no mans pleasure.


Wut thou be proud little Lucifer? well, thou shalt go how thou wilt
Maide-marian; come, bus thy little Anthony now, now, my clean Cleopatria;
so, so, go thy ways Alexis secrets, you have a breath as sweet as the Rose,
that grows by the Bear-garden, as sweet as the proud'st head a Garlic in
England: come, wut march in, to the Gentle folks?


Nay truly Captain you shall be my leader.

I say Mary Ambree* thou shalt march foremost,
Because I'll mark how broad you are in the heals.

Perdie, I will be set ath last for this time.

Why then come, we'll walk arm in arm,
As tho we were leading one another to Newgate.

Mine's of a fashion, cut out quite from yours.

Mine has the sharpest tooth, yonder he is.

Captain Tucca.

How now? I cannot stand to read supplications now

They're bitter Epigrams composed on you By Horace.

And dispersed amongst the gallants In several copies, by Asinius Bubo.

By that live Eel? read, Leg Legito, read thou ^acke.

Tucca's grown monstrous, how? rich? that I fear,
He's to be seen for money every where.

Why true, shall not I get in my debts, nay and the rogue write no better I
care not, farewell black Jack farewell.


But Captain, here's a nettle.

Sting me, do.

Tucca's exceeding tall and yet not hye,
He fights with skill, but does most vilye lye.

Right, for here Ilye now, open, open* to make my adversary come on; and then
Sir, here am I in's bosom: nay and this be the worst, I shall hug the poor
honest face-maker, I'll love the little Atheist, when he writes after my
commendation, another whip? come yerk me.


Tucca will bite, how? grown Satirical,
No, he bites tables, for he feeds on all.

The whoreson clouen-foote devil in mans apparel lies,
There stood above forty dishes before me to day,
That I ne'er touched, because they were empty.

I am witness young Gentlemen to that.

Farewell stinckers, I smell thy meaning Screech-owle, I do tho I stop my nose:
and Sir Poet, we'll have thee untrust for this; come, mother Mum-pudding,
come.


My song of parting doth this burden bear;
A ki^e the Ditty, and I s^t it here.
Your lips are well in tune, strung with delight,
By this fair Bride remember soon at night:
Sir Walter.

My Liege Lord, we all attend,
The time and place.

Till then my leave commend.

Ladies* I am to put a very easy suite upon you all, and to desire you to
fill your little pellies at a dinner of plums behind noone; there be Suckets,
and Marmilads, and Merchants, and other long white plummes that fain would
kiss your delicate and sweet lips; I indite you all together, and you
especially my Lady Pride; what do you say for your sells? for I indite you
all.


I thank yo^ good Sir Vaughan, I will come.


Say Sentlewomen will you stand to me too?


We'll sit with you sweet Sir Vaughan.


God a mighty plesse your faces, and make your peauties last, when we are all
dead and rotten: -- you all will come.


All will come.


Pray God that Horace be in his right wits to rail now.


Come Lady, you shall be my dancing guest.
To tread the maze of music with the rest.

I'll lead you in.

A maze is like a doubt:
Tis easy to go in, hard to get out.

We follow close behind.

That measure's best.
Now none marks us, but we mark all the rest.

Father, and you my Bride; that name to day,
Wife, comes not till to morrow: but omitting
This enterchanging of Languages; let us think
Upon the King and night and call our spirits
To a true reckoning; first to Arm our wits
With complete steel of Judgment, and our tongs,
With sound attillery of Phrases: then
Our Bodies must be motions; moving first
What we speak: afterwards, our very knees
Must humbly seem to talk, and suit out speech;
For a true furnished Cortyer hath such force,
Though his tongue faints, his very legs discourse.

Son Terrill, thou hast drawn his picture right,
For he's no full-made Courtier, nor well strung,
That hath not every joint stuck with a tongue.
Daughter, if Ladies say, that is the Bride, that's she,
Gaze thou at none, for all will gaze at thee.

Then, o my father must I go? O my husband
Shall I then go? O my self, will I go?

You must.

You shall.

I will, but give me leave,
To say I may not, nor I ought not, say not
Still, I must go, let me entreat I may not.

You must and shall, I made a deed of gift,
And gave my oath unto the King, I swore
By thy true constancy.

Then keep that word
To swear by, O let me be constant still.

What shall I cancel faith, and break my oath?

If breaking constancy thou breakst them both.

Thy constancy no evil can pursue.

I may be constant still, and yet not true.

As how?

As thus, by violence detained,
They may be constant still, that are constrained.

Constrained? that word weighs heavy, yet my oath
Weighs down that word; the kings thoughts are at odds,
They are not even ballanst in his breast;
The King may play the man with me; nay more,
Kings may usurp; my wife's a woman; yet
Tis more then I know yet, that know not her,
If she should prove mankind, twere rare, fie, fie,
See how I loose my self, amongst my thoughts,
Thinking to find my self; my oath, my oath,

I swear another, let me see* by what,
By my long stocking, and my narrow skirts,
Not made to sit upon, she shall to Court.
I have a trick, a charm* that shall lay down
The spirit of lust, and keep thee vndeflowred;
Thy husbands honour saved, and the hot King,
Shall have eno^gh too* Come, a trick, a charm.

God keep thy honour safe, my blood from harm.

Come, my sicke-minded Bride, I'll teach thee how,
To relish health a little: Taste this thought,
That when mine eyes served loves commission,
Upon thy beauties I did seize on them.
To a Kings use; cure all thy g^iefe with this,
That his great seal was graven upon this ring,
And that ^ was but Steward to a King.

Ladies and Sentlemen, you are almost all welcome, to this swe^t nuncions of
Plums.


Almost all ^ir Vaughan: why to which of us are you so niggardly, that you cut
her out but a peace of welcome.


My interpretations is that almost all are welcome, because I indicted a brace
or two more that is not come, I am sorry my Lady Pride is not among you.


Slid, he makes hounds of us Ningle, a brace quoth a?


Peter Salamanders draw out the pictures of all the joint stools, Ladies sit
down upon their wooden faces.


I warrant Sir, I'll give every one of them a good stool.


Master Horace, Master Horace, when I pray to God, and desire in hipocrit^es
that bald Sir Adams were heer, then, then, then begin to make you ra^les at the
poverty and beggarly want of hair.


Leave it to my iudg^ment.


M. Bubo sit there, you and I will think upon our ends at the Tables: M.
Horace, put your learned body into the midst of these Ladies; so tis no matter
to speak graces at nuncions, because we are all past grace since dinner.


Mas I thank my destiny I am not past grace, for by this hand full of
Carrawaies, I could never abide to say grace.


Mistress Miniuer, is not that innocent Gentleman a kind of fool?


Why do you ask Madam?


Nay for no harm, I ask because I thought you two had been of acquaintaine.


I think he's within an Inch of a fool.


Madam Philocalia, you sit next that spare Gentleman, wod you heard what
Mistress Miniuer says of you.


Why what says she Madam Dicache.


Nay nothing, but wishes you were married to that s^all timbered gallant.


Your wish and mine are twins, I wi^ so too for Then I should be s^re to lead
a merry life.


Yes faith Lady, I'd make yo^ laugh, my bolts now and then should be soon
shot; by these com^its, weed let all slide.


He takes the sweetest oaths that ever I heard a gallant of his pitch swear;
by these Comfits, these Carrawaies, I warrant it does him good to swear.


Yes faith tis meat and drink to me.
I am glad Lady Petula (by this Apple) that they please you.

Peter Salamanders wine, I beseech you Master Asinius Bubo, not to swear so
deeply, for there comes no fruit of your oaths; here Ladies, I put you all
into one corners together, you shall all drink of one cup.


Peter I prithee fill me out too.


I'd fling you out too and I might ha my will, a pox of all fools.


Mistress Miniuers, pray be lusty, wod Sir Adams Prickshaft stuck by you.


Who, the bald Knight Sir Vaughan?


The same M. Horace, he that has but a remnant or parcel of hair, his crown
is clipped and par'd away; me thinks tis an excellent quality to be bald;
for and there stuck a nose and two nyes in his pate, he might wear two faces
under one hood.


As God save me la, if I might ha my will, I'd rather be a bald Gentleman then
a hairy; for I am sure the best and tallest Yeomen in England have bald heads:
me thinks hair is a scurvy lousy commodity.


Bubo, herein you blaze your ignorance.


Pray stop and fill your mouths, and give M. Horace all your ears.


For* if of all the bodies parts, the head
Be the most royal: if discourse, w^t, Judgment,
And all our understanding faculties,
Sit there in their high Court of Parliament,
Enacting laws to sway this humorous world:
This little I'll of Man: needs must that crown,
Which stands upon this supreme head, he fair,
And held inualuable, and that crowne's the Hair:
The head that wants this honour stands awry,
Is hare in na^e and in authority.

Hemeanes balde-pates mistress Mini^ers.

Hair, tis the robe which curious nature weaues,
To hang upon the head: and does adorn,
Our bodies in the first hour we are horne:
God does bestow that garment: when we dye,
That (like a soft and silken Cano^)
Is still spread over us; ^n spite of death
Our hair grows in our grave, and that alone
Looks fresh, when all our other beauty's gone.
The excellence of Hair, in this shines ^l^ere,
That the four El^ments take pride to wear
The fashion of it: when Fire most bright does burn,
The flames to golden locks do strive to (...)*
When her lascivious arms the Water hurles,
About the shores wast, her sleek head she curls:
And rorid clouds being sucked into the Air,
When down they melt, hangs like fine silver hair.
You see the Earth (whose head so oft it sho^ne)
Frighted to feel her locks sorudely ^orne,
Stands with her hair an end, and (thus afraid^)
Turns every hair to a green naked blade.
Besides, when (struck with gr^efe) we long to dye,
We spoil that most, which most does beau^fie,
We r^nd this Head-tyre off. I thus conclude,
Colours set colours out; our eyes judge right,
Of vice or virtue by their opposite:
So, if fair hair to beauty ad such grace,
Baldnes must needs be ugly, vile and base.

True M. Horace, for a bald reason, is a reason that has no hairs upon it, a
scurvy scalded reason.


By my truly I never thought you could ha picked such s^range things out of
hair before.


Nay my Ningle can tickle it, when he comes too't.


Troth I shall never be enameld of a bare-headed man for this, what shift so
ever I make.


Then Mistress Miniuer S. Adams Prickshaft must not hit you; Peter take up all
the clothes at the table and the Plums.


Save thee my little worshipful Harper; how do ye^ my little cracknels? how
do ye?


Welcome M. Tucca, sit and shoot into yo^r belly some Sugar pellets.


No, Godamercy Cadwallader, how do you Horace?


Thanks good Captain.


Wher's the Sering thou carry about thee? O have I found thee my
scowring-sticke; what's my name Bubo?


Wod I were hanged if I can call you any names but Captain and Tucca.


No Fye'st, my name's Hamlet revenge: thou hast been at Parris garden hast not?


Yes Captain, I ha plaide Zulziman there.


Then M. Horace you plaide the part of an honest man.


Death of Hercules, he could never play that part well in's life, no Fulkes you
could not: thou call Demetrius Iorneyman Poet, but thou putst up a
Supplication to be a poor Iorneyman Player, and had been still so, but that
thou could not set a good face upon it: thou hast forgot how thou amblest (in
leather pilch) by a play-wagon, in the high way, and took mad Ieronimoes
part, to get service among the Mimickes: and when the Stagerites banished thee
into the I'll of Dogs* thou turn'dst Ban-dog (villainous Guy) ever since bitest,
therefore I ask if you have been at Parris-garden, because thou hast such a good
mouth; thou ba^tst well, read, leg, save thy self and read.


Why Captain these are Epigrams composed on you.


Go not out Farding Candle, go not out, for trusty Damboys now the deed is
done, I'll pledge this Epigram in wine, I'll* yellow i^, I, yes.


God bless us, will be drunk with nittigrams now.


So, now arise sprite ath Buttry; no Herring-bone I'll not pull thee out, but
arise dear Echo rise, rise devil or I'll con^ure thee up.


Good Master Tucca lets ha no conjuring here.


Vddes blood you scald gouty Captain, why come you to set encombrances here
between the Ladies.


Be not so tart my precious Metheglin, be not (my old whore a Babilon, sit
fast.)


O Iesu it I know where abouts in London Babilon stands.


Feed and be fat my fair Calipolis, stir not my beauteous wriggle-tailes, I'll
disease none of you, I'll take none of you up, but only this table-man, I must
enter him into some filthy sink point, I must.


Captain, you do me wrong thus to disgrace me.


Thou think thou may be as saucy with me as my Buff Jerkin to sit upon me,
dost?


Dam me, if ever I traduced your name,
What imputation can you charge me with?

Sblud, I, what coputations can you lay to his ^ge? answer, or by Se^u I'll
canvas your coxcomb Tucky.


If they draw sweet hearts, let us shift for our ^elues.


My noble swaggerer, I will not fall out with thee, I cannot my mad Cumrade*
find in my heart to shed thy blood.


Cumrade by Sesu call me Cumrade again, and i'll Cumrade ye about the sins
and shoulders; ownds, what come you to smell out here? did you not dine and
feed horribly well to day at dinner, but you come to munch h^ere, and give us
winter-plummes? I pray depart, go marse, marse, marse out a doors.


Adieu Sir Eglamour, adieu Lute-stringe, Curtin-rod, Goose-quill; here, give
that full-nos'd Skinker, these rimes; hark, I'll tag my Codpeece point with
thy legs, spout-pot I'll empty thee.


Dost threaten me? Gods lid I'll bind thee to the good forbearing.


Will you amble Hobby-horse, will you trot and amble?


Raw Artichocke I shall sauce thee.


I pray you Master Tucca, will you send me the five pound you borrowed on me; O
you cannot hear now, but I'll make you hear me and feel me too in another
place, to your shame I warrant you, thou shalt not conny-catch me for five
pounds; he took it up Sir Vaughan in your name, he swore you sent for it to
Mum withal, twas five pound in gold, as white as my kercher.


Ownds, five pound in my name to Mum about withal.


I, to Mum withal, but he plays mum-budget with me.


Peter Salamander, tie up your great and your little sword, by Sesu I'll go
sing him while tis hot, I'll beat five pound out of his leather pilch: Master
Horace, let your wits inhabit in your right places; if I fall sansomely upon
th^ Widow, I have some cossens Garman at Court, shall beget you the reversion
of the Master of the Kings Revels, or else be his Lord of Misrule now at
Christmas: Come Ladies, whoreson Straggling Captain, I'll pound him.


How now? what ail'st tho^, that thou look'^t so pay?


Nay not^ing, but I am afraid the Welsh Knight has given me nothing but
purging Comfits: this Captain* sticks pockily in my stomach; read this
scroll, he says they are rimes, and bid me give them you.


Rimes^tis a challenge sent to you.


To me?


He says here you divulged my Epigrams.


And for that dares he challenge me?


You see he dares but dare you answer him?


I date answer his challenge, by word of mouth, or by wr^ting, but I scorn to
meet him, I hope he and I are no^ Para^els.


Dear Bubo, thou shalt answer him; our credits
Lye pawned upon thy resolution,
Thy valour must redeem them; charge thy spirits,
To wait more cl^se, and near thee: if he kill thee,
I'll not sur^iue; into one Lottery.
We'll cast our fates; together live and dye.

Content, I owe God a death, and if he will make me pay't against my will, I'll
say tis hard dealing.


Did Apolloes Freeze gown watch man (boy, dost hear Tu^kie-co^kes tail have
an eye behind, least the enemieassault (...) R^re-ward) on proceed Father
Adam; did that same tiranicall-tongu'd rag-a-muffin Horace, turn baldpates out
so naked?


He did, and whipped them so with nettles, that
The Widow swore that a bare-headed man,
Should not man her: the Lady Petula
Was there, heard all, and ^olde me this.

Go too.
Thy gold was accepted, it was, and she shall bring thee into her Paradise,
she shall small Adam, she shall.


But how? but how Captain?


Thus, go, cover a table with sweet meates, let all the Gentlewomen, and that
same Pasquils-mad-cap (mother Be there) nibble, bid them bite: they will come
to gobble down Plummes; then take up that pair of Basket hilts, with my
commission, I mean C^spinus and Fannius; charge one of them to take up the
Bucklers, against that hayre-monger Horace, and have about or two, in defence
of balde-pates: let them crack every crown that has hair on it: go, l^t
them lift up baldenes to the sky, and thou shalt see, twill turn Miniuers
heart quite against the hair.


Excellent, why then M. Tucca --


Nay, wh^r, nymble Prickshaft; whir, away, I go upon life and death, away,
fly Scanderbag fly.


Arm Captain, arm, arm, arm, the foe is come down.


Hold Captain Tucca hold, I am Bubo, come to answer any thing you can lay to my
ch^rge.


What, dost summon a parley my little Drum-sticke? tis too late; thou see my
red flag is hung out, I'll fill thy guts with thine own carrion carcass, and
then eat them up instead of Sawsages.


Use me how you will; I am resolute, for I ha made my Will.


Wilt fight Turke-a-ten-pence? wilt fight then?


Thou shalt find I'll fight in a Godly quarrel, if I be once fired.


Thou shalt not want fire, I'll ha thee burnt when thou wilt, my cold
Cornelius: but come: Respicefunem; look, thou ^eest; open thy self my little
Cutlers Shop, I challenge thee thou slender Gentlem^n, at four sundry
weapons.


Thy challenge was but at one, and I'll answer but one.


Thou shalt answer two, for thou shalt answer me and my Captain.


Well said Cockerel out-crowe him: art hardy noble Huon* art Magnanimous?
licke-trencher; look, search, least some lye in ambush; for this man at Arms,
has paper in's belly, or some friend in a corner, or else he durst not be so
crank.


Captain, Captain, Horace stands sneaking here.


I smelt the foule-fisted Morter-treader, come my most damnable fastidious
rascal, I have a suite to both of you.


O hold, most pitiful Captain hold.


Hold Captain, tis known that Horace is valiant, a man of the sword.


A Gentleman or an honest Citizen, shall not Sit in your pennie-bench
Theaters, with his Squirrel by his side cracking nuts; nor sneak into a
Tavern with his Mermaid; but he shall be Satyr'd, and Epigram'd upon, and his
humour must run vpo'th Stage* you'll ha Eu^ry Gentleman in's humour, and Every
Gentleman out on's humour: we that are heads of Legions and Bands, and fear
none but these same shoulder-clappers, shall fear you, you Serpentine rascal.


Honoured Captain.


Art ^ot famous enough yet, my mad Horastratus, for killing a Player, but thou
must ea^e men alive? th^ friends? Sir wilde-man, thy Patrons? thou
Anthropophagite, thy Mecaenas^s?


Captain, I'm sorry that you lay this wrong.
So close unto your heart: dear Captain think
I writ ^ut of hot blood, which (now) being cold,
I could be pleased (to please you) to quaff down,
The po^son'd Ink, in which I dipped your name.

Say thou so, my Palinodicall rimester?

Hence forth I'll rather breath out S^l^ecismes
(To do which I'd as soon speak blasphemy)
Than with my tongue or pen to wound your worth,
Believe it noble Captain; it to me
Shall be a Crown, to crown your acts with praize,
Out of your hate, your love I'll strong lie raize.

I know now th^ast a number of these Quiddits (...) bind men to'th peace: tis
thy fashion to (...) Ink in every mans face; and then to craule into his
bosom, and damn thy self to w^p^t off again: yet to g^ue out abroad, that he
was glad to come to composition with thee: I know Monsieur Mac^iauell tis one a
thy rules; My long-heel'd Troglodite, I could make thine ears burn now, by
dropping into them, all those hot oaths, to which, thy self gau's^ volun^rie
^re, (when thou wast the man in the Moon^) that thou would never squib out any
new Salt-p^t^r Ie^ against honest Tucca, nor those Maligo-tasters, his
Poetasters; I could Cino^phal^s, but I will not, yet thou know thou hast
broke those oaths in print, my excellent infernal.


Captain.


Nay I smell what breath is to come from thee, thy answer is, that there's no
faith to be held wi^h Heritickes Infidels, and therefore thou swear any
thing: but come lend m^e thy hand, thou and I hence forth will be Alexander
and Lodwicke, the G^mini: sworn brothers* thou shalt be Peritho^s and Tucca
Theseus; b^t ^le leave thee ^th lurch, when thou make thy voyage into hell:
till then, ^hine^assure^ly.


With all my soul dear Captain.


Thou'lt shoo^ thy quills at me, when my terrible backe's turned for all
this, wilt not Porcupine? and bring me my Heliconistes into thy Dialogues to
make us talk madlie, wut not Lucian?


Captain, if I do --


Nay and thou dost, horns of Lucifer, the Parce^l-Poet^ shall Sue thy
wrangling Muse, in the Court of Pernassus, and never leave hunting her, till
she plead in Forma P^uperi: but I hope th'a^t more grace: come: friends,
clap^h^ndes tis a bargain; am^able Bubo, thy fist ^ust walk ^oo: so, I love
thee, now I see you are a little Hercules, and wilt fight; I'll S^icke thee now
in my company like a sprig of Rosemary.


Draw Sir Rees he's yonder shall I upon him?


Upon him? go too, go too Peter Sal^mander; hold, in Gods name hold; I will
kill him to his face, because I mean he shall answer for i^; being an
eye-witnes; one vrde Captain Tucky.


I'll give thee ten thousand words and thou wilt, my little Thomas Thomasius.


By Sesu, tis best you give good vrdes too, least I b^ate out your tongue, and
make your vrde ne'er to be taken more; do you hear, five pounds, five pounds
Tucky.


^hou shalt ha five, and five, and five and thou want money my Iob.


L^aue your fetches and your fegaries, you tough leather-Ierkins; leave your
quandaries, and tricks, and draw upon me you're best: you conny-catch Widow
Miniuer-caps for five pounds, and say tis for me to cry Mum, and make me run
up and down in dishonours, and discredites; is't not true, you winke-a-pipes
rascal? is not true?


Right, true, guilty, I remember't now; for when I spake a good word to the
Widow for thee my young Sampson --


For five pounds you cheating scab, for 5. pounds, not for me.


For thee o Caesar, for thee I took up five pounds in gold, that lay in her
lap, ^aid I'd give it thee as a token from her: I did it but to smell out how
she stood affected to thee, to feel her; I, and I know what she said, I know
how I carried away the gold.


By Sesu, I ha not the mercy to fall upon him now: M. Tucky, did widow
Miniuers part quietly from her gold, because you lied* and said it was for me?


Quietly, in peace, without grumbling; made no noise, I know how I tempted her,
in thy behalf; my little Trang do.


Captain Tucky, I will pay back her 5. l. (unless you be damned in lies) hold
you, I pray you pocket up this; by the cross a this sword dagger, Captain you
shall take it.


Dost swear by daggers? nay then I'll put up more at thy hands then this.


Is the fray done si^?


Done Peter, put up your s^eeter.


Come hither, my soure-fac'd Poet; fling away that beard-brush Bubo, cashier
him and hark: Knight attend: So, that raw-head and bloudy-bones Sir Adam, has
fee'd another brat (of those nine common wenches) to defend baldnes and to
rail against hair: he'll have a ^ling at thee, my noble Cock-Sparrow.


At me? will he ^ling the cudgels of his wit ^t me?


And at thy button-c^p too; but come, I'll be your leader you shall stand, hear
all, not be seen; cast off that blew coat away with that flawne, and follow,
come:


Bubo, we follow Captain.


Peter, leave coming behind me, I pray any longer for you and I must part
Peter.


Sounds Sir, I hope you will not serve me so, to turn me away in this case.


Turn you into a fools coat; I mean I will go solves, or in solitaries
alone; ounds y-are best give better words, or I'll turn you away indeed; where
is Captain Tucky? come Horace; get you home Peter.


I'll home to your cost, and I can get into the Wine-Seller.


Remember where to meet me.


Yes I'll meet; Tucca should ha found I dare meet.


Dare defend baldnes, which our conquering Muse
Has beaten down so flat? Well, we will go,
And see what weapons their weak wits do bring;
If sharpe, we'll spread a large and nobler wing;
Tucca, here lies thy Peace: war roars again;
My Sword shall never cut thee, but my pen.

Thanks good Sir Adam.

Welcome red-cheekt Ladies,
And welcome comely Widow; Gentlemen,
Now that our sorry banquet is put by,
From s^aling more sweet kisses from your lips
Walk in my garden: Ladies let your eyes
Shed life into these flowers by their bright beams,
Sit* Sit h^ere's a large bower, here all may hear,
Now good Crispinus let your praize begin.
There, where it left off Baldnes.

I shall win.
No praise, by praising that, which to deprave,
All tongues are ready* and which none would have.

To prove that best, by strong and armed reason,
Whose part reason fears to take, cannot but prove,
Your wit's fine temper, and from these win love.

I promise you has almost converted me, I pray bring
forward your bald reasons M. Poet.

Mistress you give my Reasons proper names,
For Arguments (like Children) should be like,
The subject that begets them; I must strive
To crown Bald heads, therefore must baldlie thrive;
But be it as it can: To what before,
Went armed at table, this force bring I more,
If a Bare head (being like a dead-mans scull)
Should bear ^p no praise else but this, it sets
Our end before our eyes; should I despair,
From giving Baldnes higher place then hair?

Nay perdie, hair has the higher place.

The goodliest mo^t glorious strange-built wonder,
Which that great Architect hath made, is heaven;
For there he keeps his Court, It is his Kingdom,
That's his best Master-piece; yet tis the roof,
And Sel^ng of the world: that may be called
The head or crown of Earth, and yet that's bald,
All creatures in it bald; the lovely Sun,
Has a face sleek as gol^e; the full-cheekt Moon,
As brigh^ and smooth as silver: nothing there
Wears dangling locks, but sometime blazing Stars,
Whose fla^ing curls se^ realms on fire with wars.
Descend more low; look through mans fiue-folde sense,
Of all, the Eye, bears greatest eminence;
And yet that's bald, the hairs that like a lace,
Are sticht unto the (...), borrow those forms,
Like Pent-houses to save the eyes from storms.

Right* well ^aid.

A head and face ore-g^owne with Shaggy dross,
O, tis an Orient pearl hid all in Moss,
But when the head's ^ll naked and vncrown'd,
It is the worlds Globe, even, smooth and round;
(...) i^ ^ which ^,
Shoots her last Arrow: what man ever lead
His age (...) with a staff; but had a head
Bare and vncouer'd? he whose years do rise,
To their full height, yet not bald, is not wi^e.
The Head is Wisdoms house, (...) but the thatch,
Hair? It's the basest stubble; in scorn of it,
This Proverb sprung, he has more hair then wit:
Mark you not in derision how we call,
A head grown thick with hair, B^sh-naturall?

By your leave (Master Poet) but that Bush-naturall, is one a the trimmest, and
most intanglingst beauty in a woman.


Right, but believe this ( pardon me most fair)
You would have much more wit, had you less hair:
I could more weary you to tell the proo^s.
(As they pass by) which fight on Baldnes side,
Then were you taskt to number on a head,
The hairs: I know not how your thoughts are lead,
On this strong Tower shall my opinion rest,
Heads thick of hair are good, but bald the b^st,

You are within a hair of it, my sw^t Wit whe^r wil^ tho^? my delicate
Poetical Fury, th'a^t hit it to a hair.


By your favour Master Tucky, his bald reasons are wide above two hairs, I
besees you pardon me Ladies, that I thrust in so malepartly among you, for I
did but much hee^e, and see how this cruel Poet did handle bald heads.


He gave them but their due Sir Vaughan; Widow did he not?


By my faith he made more of a bald head, than ever I shall be able: he gave
them their due truly.


Nay vds blood, their due is to be a the right hair as I am, and that was not
in his fingers to give, but in God a Mighties: Well, I will hire that humorous
and fantastical Poet Master Horace, to break your bald pate Sir Adam.


Break my bald pate?


Dost hear my worshipful block-head?


Patience Captain Tucky, let me absolve him; I mean he shall prick, prick
your head or sconce a little with his goose-quils, for he shall make another
Thalimum, or crosse^tickes, or some Polinoddyes, with a few Nappy-grams in
them that shall lift up hair, and set it an end, with his learned and hearty
commendations.


This is excellent, all will come out now.


That same Horace me thinks has the most ungodly face, by my Fan; it looks
for all the world, like a rotten russet Apple, when tis bruised: Its better
then a spoonful of Sinamon water next my heart, for me to hear him speak;
he sounds it so in the nose, and talks and randes for all the world, like the
poor fellow under Ludgate: oh fie upon him.


By my troth sweet Ladies, it's Cake and pudding to me, to see his face make
faces, when he reads his Songs and Sonnets.


I'll face some of you for this, when you shall not budge.


Its the stinckingst dung-farmer -- foh upon him.


Foh? oundes you make him vrse than old herring: foh? by Sesu I think he's as
tidy, and as tall a Poet as ever drew out a long verse.


The best verse that ever I knew him hack out, was his white necke-verse:
noble Ap Rees thou would scorn to lay thy lips to his commendations, and
thou smeldst him out as I do, he calls thee the burning Knight of the
Salamander.


Right, Peter is my Salamander; what of him? but Peter is never burnt: howe
now? so, go too now.


And says because thou Clipst the Kings English.


Oundes mee^ that's treason: clip? horribl^ treasons, Se^u hold my hands;
clip? he baits mouse-trappes for my life.


Right little Twinckler, right: he says because thou speak no better, thou
can not keep a good tongue in thy head.


By God tis the best tongue, I can buy for love or money.


He shoots at thee too Adam Bell, and his arrows sticks here; he calls
thee bald-pate.


Oundes make him prove these intollerabilities.


And asks who shall carry the vineger-bottle* then he rimes too't, and says
Prickshaft: nay Miniuer he cromplesthy Cap too; and --


Come Tucca, come, no more; the man's well known, thou need not paint him,
whom does he not wrong?


Mary himself, the ugly Po^e Boniface, pardons himself, and t^erefore my
indgement is, that presently he be had from hence, to his place of execution,
and there be Stabbed, Stabbed, Stabbed.


Oh gentlemen, I am slain, oh s^ue art hyt'd to murder me, to murder me, to
murder me?


Oh God!


Ounds Captain you have put all Poetry to the dint of sword, blow wind about
him: Ladies for our Lords sake you that have smocks, tear off pieces* to
shoot through his oundes: Is he dead and buried is he? pull his nose, pinch,
rub, rub, rub, rub.


If he be not dead, look here; I ha the Stab and pippin for him: if I had
killed him, I could ha pleased the great fool with an Apple.


How now? be well good Horace, here's no wound;
You're slain by your own fears; how dost thou man?
Come, put thy* he a^t into h^ place again;
Thy out-side's neither peir'st, nor In-side ^laine.

I am glad M. Horace, to see you walking.


Gentlemen, I am black and blew the breadth of a groat.


Breadth of a groat? there's a teston, hide thy infirmities, my scurvy
Lazaru^, do, hide it, least it prove a scab in time: hang thee desperation,
hang thee, thou know* I cannot be sharpe set against thee: look, feel (my
light-vptailes all) feel my weapon.


O most pitiful a^ (...) as my great thumb.


By Sesu, as blunt as a Welsh bag-pudding.


As blunt as the top of Poules; tis not like thy Aloe, Cicatrine tongue*
bitter: no* tis no s^abber* but like thy goodl^ and glorious nose, blunt,
blunt, blunt: dost roar bulchin? dost roar? you have a good roun^iuall voice to
cry Lantern Candle-light.


Two vrds Horace about your ears: how ch^nce it passes, that you bid God b^yg^
to an ^one^t trade of building Symneys, and laying down Brickes, for a worse
handicraftnes* to make nothing but rai^es; your Mu^e leanes upon nothing but
filthy rotten ^ailes, such as stand on Poules head, how chance?


Sir Vaughan.


You lye s^r varlet sir ^llaine, I am sir Salamanders, ounds, is my man Master
Peter Salamanders face as vrse as mine? Sentlemen, all and Ladies, and you say
once or twice Amen, I will lap this little Silde, this Booby in his blankets
again.


A blanket, these cracked Venice glasses shall fill him out, they shall toss
him, hold fa^t wag^ tai^es: so, come, in, take this bandy with the racket of
patience, why when? dost flampe mad Tambe^laine, do^t ^tampe? thou think
you have Mortar under thy (...), do^*


Come* a ^andy ho.

O hold mo^t sacred beauties.

Hold, ^lence, the puppet-teach^ speaks.

Sir Vaughan, noble Captain, Gentlemen,
Crispinus, dear De^et^us o r^deeme me,
Out of this infamou^ -- by God by l^su --

Nay, swear not so good Horace, now these Ladies,
Are made your ex^utioners: prepare,
To suffer like a galla^, not a coward;
I'll try t'vnloose, their hands, impossible.
Nay, women's (...) ar^ implacable.

Why, would you make me thus the ball of scorn?


I'll tell thee why, because th^a^t en^ed A^lons of assault and battery, against
a company of honourable and worshipful Fathers of the law: you wrangling
ra^call, law is one of the pillars ath land, and if thou be bound too't (as
I hope thou shalt be) thou't proo^e a skip-lacke, thou't be whipped. I'll tell
thee why, because thy sputtering chappes yelp, that Arrogance, and ^mpudence,
and Ignorance, are the essential parts of a Courtier.


You remember Horace they will puncke, and pincke, and pump you, and they
catch you by the coxcomb: on I pray, one lash, a little more.


I'll tell thee why because thou ^ryest ptrooh at worshipful Citizens, and
cal'^ them Flat-caps, Cuckolds, and banckrupts, and modest and virtuous wives
punckes cockatrices. I'll tell thee why, because you have arraigned two Poets
against all law and conscience; and not content with that, hast turned them
amongst a company of horrible black Frye^s.


The same ha^d still, it is your own another day, M. Horace, admonitions is
good meat.


Thou art the true arraigned Poet, and should have been hanged, but for one
of these part-takers, these charitable Copper-lac'd Christians* that fetched
thee out of Purgatory, (Players I mean) Theaterians pouch-mouth*
Stage-walkers; for this Poet, for this, thou must lye with these four wenches,
in that blancket, for this --


What could I do, out of a just revenge,
But bring them to the Stage? they envy me
because I hold more worthy company.

Good Horace, no; my cheeks do blush for thine,
As often as thou speak so, where one true
And nobly-vertuous spirit; for thy best part
Loves thee, I wish one ten, even from my heart.
I make account I put up as deep share
In any good mans love which thy worth earnes,
As thou thy self; we envy not to see,
Thy friends with Baize to crown thy Poesy.
No, here the gall lies, we that know what stuff^
Thy very heart is m^de of; know the sta^ke
On which thy learning grows, and can give li^e
To thy (once dying) baseness; yet must we
Dance Antiques on your Paper.

^a^nius.

This makes us angry, but not envious,
No, were thy warpt soul, put in a new mould,
I'd wear thee as a Jewel set in gold.

And Jewels Master Horace, must be hanged you know.


Good Pagans, well said, they have sowed up that broken seame-rent lye of
thine, that Demetrius is out at Elbows, and Cri^pinus is fallen out with Satin
here, they have; but b^oate-herring dost hear?


Yes honoured Captain, I have ears at will.


Is't not better be out at Elbows, then to be a bond slave, and to go all in
Parchment as thou dost?


Parchment Captain? tis Pe^petuana I assure you.


My Perpetual pantaloone t^ue, but tis waxed over; you are made out of Wax; thou
must answer for this one day; thy Muse is a ^gler, and wears clothes upon
best-be-trust: you are great in some bodies books for this* thou know where;
thou would be out at Elbows, and out at heals too, but that thou lay^st
about thee with a Bill for this, a Bill --


I confess Captain, I followed this suite hard.


I know thou d^d^, and therefore whilst we have Hiren here, speak my little
dish-washers, a verdict Pissekitchins.


Blancket.


Hold I pray, hold, by Se^u I have put upon my head, a fi^e device, to make
you laugh, tis not your fools Cap Master Horace, which you covered your
Poetasters in, but a fine trick, ha, ha* is iumbling in my brain.


I'll beat out thy brains, my whoreson handsome dwarf, but i'll have it out of
thee.


What is it good Sir Vaughan?


To conclude, tis after this manners, because Ma. Horace is ambition, and does
conspire to be more hye and tall* as God a migh^e made him, we'll ca^ry his
terrible, person to Court, and there before his Masestie Dub, or what you call
it, dip his Muse in some liquor, and christen him, or dye him, into colours of
a Poet.


Exceilent.


Super Super-excellent Revellers go, proceed you Masters of Art in kissing
these wenches, and in dances, bring you the quivering Bride to Court, in a
Mask, come G^umboll, thou shalt Mum with us; come, dog me skneakesbill.


O thou my Muse!


Call upon God a mighty, and no Muses, your Muse I warrant is otherwise
occupied, there is no de^ling with your Muse now, therefore I pray marse,
marse, marse, oundes your Moose?


We shall have sport to see them; come bright beauties,
The Sun stoops low, and whispers in our ears,
To hasten on our Mask, let's crown this night,
With choice composed wreathes of sweet delight.

O Night, that Dyes the Firmament in black,
And like a cloth of clouds dost stretch thy limbs;
Upon the windy Tenters of the Air:
O thou that hang upon the back of Day,
Like a long mourning gown: thou that art made
Without an eye, because thou should not see
A Lovers Revels: nor participate
The Bridegrooms heaven; o heaven, to me a hell:
I have a hell in heaven, a blessed curse;
All other Bridegrooms long for Night, and tax
The Day of lazy sloth; call Time a Cripple,
And say the hours limp after him: but I
Wish Night for ever banished from the sky,
Or that the Day would never sleep: or Time,
Were in a swooned; and all his little Hours,
Could never lift him up with their poor powers.
But backward runs the course of my delight;
The day hath turned his back, and it is night:
This nigh^ will make us odd; day made us eeuen,
All else are damb'd in hell, but I in heaven.

Let loose thy oath* so shall we still be eeuen.

Then am I damb'd in hell, and not in heaven.

Must I then goe^tis easy to say no,
Must is the King hims^lfe, and I must go;
Shall I then go? that word is thine; I shall,
Is thy command: I go because I shall;
Will I then go? I ask my self; o ill,
King, says I must; you, I shall; I, I will.

Had I not sworn.

Why did thou swear?

The King
Sat heavy on my resoluion,
Till (out of breath) it panted out an oath.

An oath? why, what's an oath? tis but the smoke,
Of flame blood; the blister of the spirit,
Which rizeth from the Steam of rage, the bubble
That shoots up to the tongue, and scaldes the voice,
(^or oaths are burning words) thou ^wor'st but one,
Tis frozen long ago: if one be numbered,
What Countrymen are they? where do they dwell*
That speak nought else but oaths?

^hey're men of hell.
An oath? why tis the traffic of the s^ule,
Tis law within a man; the seal of faith,
The bond of every conscience; unto whom,
We set our thoughts like hands: yea, such a one
I swore, and to the King: A King contains
A thousand thousand; when I swore to him,
I swore to them; the very hairs that guard
His head, will rise up like sharpe witnesses
Again^t my faith and loyalty: his eye
Would ^raight condemn me: argue oaths no more,
My oath is high, for to the King I swore.

Must I betray my Chastit^? So long
Clean from the treason of rebelling lust;
O husband! O my ^ather! if poor ^,
Must not live chaste, then let me cha^ly dye.

I, here's a charm shall keep thee chaste, come, come,
Old Time hath left v^ but an hour to play
Our part^; b^gin the ^ceane, who shall s^eake first?
Oh, I, I play the King, and Kings speak fir^;
Daughter stand thou here, thou Son Terrill there,
O thou standst well thou I^an'st again^ a post,
(For thou't be po^ed off ^ warrant thee:)
The King ^ill hang a horne about ^hy n^cke,
And make a post of thee; you stand w^ll both,
We need no Prologue, the King entering first,
He's a most gracious Prologue: mary then
For the Cata^rophe, or Epilogue,
There's one in cloth of Silver, which no doubt,
Will please the hearers well* when he steps out;
His mouth is filled with words: see where he stands;
He'll make them clap their eyes besides their hands.
But to my part; suppose who enters now*
A King, whose eyes are set in Silver; one
That blushes gold, speaks Music dancing walks,
Now gathers nearer* takes thee by the hand,
When straight thou think, the very Orb of heaven,
Moves round about thy fingers, then he speaks,
Thus -- thus -- I know not how.

Nor I to answer him.

No girl? know thou not how to answe^ him?
Why then the field is lost, and he rides home,
Like a great conqueror; not answer him?
Out of thy part already? y foiled the Scene?
Disranckt the lines? disarmed the action?

Yes yes, true chastity is tongued so weak,
Tis ouer-come ere it know how to speak.

Come, come, thou happy close of every wrong,
Tis thou that can dissolve the hardest doubt;
Tis time for thee to speak, we are all out.
Daughter, and you the man whom I call Son,
I must confess I made a deed of gift;
To heaven and you, and gave my child to both:
When on my blessing I did charm her soul,
In the white circle of true Chastity,
Still to run true, till death: now Sir if not,
She forfeyts my rich blessing, and is Find
With an eternal curse; then I tell you,
She shall dye now, now whilst her soul is true.

Dye?

I, I am deaths echo.

O my Son,
I am her Father; every tear I shed,
Is three score ten year old; I weep and smile
Two kind of tears: I weep that she must dye,
I smile that she must dye a Virgin: thus
We joyful men mock tears, and tears mock us.

What speaks that cup?

White wine and poison.

Oh:
That very name of poison, poisons me;
Thou Winter of a man* thou walking grave,
Whose life is like a dying Taper: how
Can thou define a Lovers labouring thoughts?
Wha^ Sent hast thou but death? what taste but earth?
The breath that purles from thee, is like the Steam
Of a new-open'd vault: I know thy drift,
Because thou art travelling to the land of Graves,
Thou couetst company, and hither bring,
A health of poison to pledge death: a poison
For this sweet spring; this ^lement is mine,
This is the Air I breath; corrupt it not;
This heaven is mine, I bought it with my soul,
Of him that sells a heaven, to buy a soul.

Well, let her go; she's th^e thou call her thine,
Thy Element, the Air thou breath; thou know
The Air thou breath is common, make her so:
Perhaps thou't say; none but the King shall wear
Thy night-gowne, she that laps thee warm with love;
And that Kings are not common: Then to show,
By consequence he cannot make her so,
Indeed she may promoote her shame and thine,
And with your shames, speak a good word for mine*
The King shining so clear, and we so dim,
Our dark disgraces will be seen through him.
Imagine her the cup of thy moist life,
What man would pledge a King in his own wife?

^ She dye^* that sentence poisons her: O life!
What slave would pledge a King in his own wife?

Welcome, o poison physic against lust,
Thou wholesome medicine to a constant blood;
Thou rare Apothe cary that can keep,
My chastity preserved, within this box;
Of tempting dust, this painted earthen pot,
That stands upon the ^all of the white soul,
To set the shop out like a flatterer,
To draw the customers of Sin: come, come,
Thou art no poison, but a dyet-drinke,
To moderate my blood: White-innocent Wine,
Art thou made guilty of my death? oh no,
For thou thy self art poisoned, take me hence,
For Innocence, shall murder Innocence.

Hold, hold, thou shalt not dye, my Bride, my wife,
O stop that speedy messenger of death;
O let him not run down that narrow path,
Which leads unto thy heart; nor carry news
To thy remoouing soul, that thou must dye.

Tis done already, the Spiritual Court,
Is breaking up; all Offices discharged,
My soul remooues from this weak standing house,
Of frail mortallity: Dear Father, bless
Me now and ever: Dearer Man farewell,
I jointly take my leave of thee and life,
Go, tell the King thou hast a constant wife.

I had a constant wife, I'll tell the King;
Until the King -- what dost thou smile? art thou
A Father?

Yea smiles on my cheeks arise,
To see how sweetly a true virgin dy^s.

Sir Walter Terrill, gallants are all ready,

All ready.

Well said, come, come, wher's the Bride?

She's going to forbid the Banes again.
She'll dye a maid: and see, she keeps her oath.

Fair Caelestine!

The Bride!

She that was fair,
Whom I called fair and Caeles^ine.

Dead!

Dead, sh's deaths Bride, he hath her maidenhead.

Sir Walter Terrill.

Tell us how.

All cease,
The subject that we treat of now is Peace,
If you demand how: I can tell: if why,
Ask the King that; he was the cause, not I.
Let it suffice, she's dead, she kept her vow,
Ask the King why, and then I'll tell you how:
Nay give your Revels life, tho she be gone,
To Court with all your preparation;
Lead on, and lead her on; if any ask
The mystery, say death presents a mask,
Ring peals of Music, you are Lovers belles,
The loss of one heaven, brings a thousand hells.

Why so, even thus the Mercury of (...)*
Ushers th'ambrosiate banquet of the Gods,
When a long train of Angels in a rank,
Serve the first course, and bow their Crystal knees,
Before the Silver table; where Ioues page
Sweet Ganimed filles Nectar: when the Gods.
Drink healths to Kings, they pledge them; none but Kings
Dare pledge the Gods; none but Gods drink to Kings.
Men of our house are we prepared?

My Liege,
All wait the presence of the Bride.

The Bride?
Yea, every senseless thing, which she beholds,
Wil^ look on her again, her eyes reflection,
Will make the walls all eyes, with her perfection:
Observe me now, because of Masks and Revels,
And many nuptial ceremonies: Mark,
This I create the Presence, here the State,
Our Kingdoms seat, shall sit in honours Pride,
Like pleasures Queen, there will I place the Bride:
Be gone, be speedy, let me see it done.
A King in Love, is Steward to himself,
And never scorns the office, my self buy,
All glances from the Market of her eye.

Sound Music, thou sweet suitor to the air,
Now woo the air again* this is the hour,
Writ in the Calender of time, this hour,
Music shall spend, the next and next the Bride;
Her tongue will read the Musicke-Lecture: Wat
I love thee Wat, because thou art not wise;
Not deep-read in the volume of a man,
Thou never saw a thought, poor soul thou think,
The heart and tongue is cut out of one piece,
But you are deceau'd, the world hath a false light,
Fools think tis day, when wise men know tis night.

My Liege they're come* a mask of gallants,

Now -- the spirit of Love ushers my blood.

They come.
The Watch-word in a Mask is the bold Drum.

All pleasures guard my King, I here present,
My oath upon the knee of duty: knees
Are made for Kings, they are the subjects Fees.

Wat Terrill* you are ill suited, ill made up,
In Sable colours, like a night piece dyed,
Come thou the Prologue of a Mask in black;
Thy body is ill shaped; a Bridegroom too?
Look how the day is dressed in Silver cloth,
Laid round about with golden Sunne-beames: so
(As white as heaven) should a fresh Bridegroom go.
What? Caelestine the Bride, in the same task?
Nay then I see there's mystery in this mask.
Prithee resolve me Wat?

My gracious Lord,
That part is hers, she acts it; only I
Present the Prologue, she the mystery.

Come Bride, the Scene of blushing entered first,
Your cheeks are settled now, and past the worst; Vn^asks her
A mystery? oh none plays here but death,
This is deaths motion, motionles; speak you,
Flatter no longer; thou her Bridegroom; thou
Her Father speak.

Dead.

Dead.

How?

Poisoned.

And poisoned?
What villain durst blaspheme her beauties, or
Profane the clear religion of her eyes.

Now King I enter, now the Scene is mine,
My tongue is tipped with poison; know who speaks,
And look into my thoughts; I blush not King,
To call thee Tyrant: death hath set my face,
And made my blood bold; hear me spirits of men,
And place your ears upon your hearts; the day
(The fellow to this night) saw her and me,
Shake hands together: for the book of heaven,
Made us eternal friends: thus, Man and Wife,
This man of men (the King) what are not kings?
Was my chief guest, my royal guest, his Grace
Graced all the Table, and did well become
The upper end, where sate my Bride: in brief,
He tainted her chaste ears; she yet unknown,
His breath was treason, tho his words were none.
Treason to her and me, he dared me then,
(Under the covert of a flattering smile,)
To bring her where she is, not as she is,
Alive for lust, not dead for (Chastity:
The resolution of my soul, out-dar'd,)
I swore and taxed my faith with a sad oath;
Which I maintain; here take her* she was mine,
When she was living, but now dead, she's thine.

Do not confound me quite; for mine own guilt,
Speaks more within me then thy tongue contains;
Thy sorrow is my shame: yet herein springs,
^oy out of sorrow, boldness ont of sham^;
For I by this have found, once in my life,
A faithful subject, thou a con^tant wife.

A constant wife.

Am I confounded twice?
Blasted with wonder.

O delude we not.
Thou art too true to live again, too fair
To be my Caelestine, too constant far
To be a woman.

Not to be thy wife,
But first I plead my duty, and salute
The world again.

My King, my Son, know all,
I am an Actor in this mystery,
And bear the chiefest part. The Father I,
Twas I that ministered to her chaste blood,
A true somniferous potion, which did steal
Her thoughts to sleep, and flattered her with death:
I called it a quick poisoned drug, to try
The Bridegrooms love, and the Brides constancy.
He in the passion of his love did fight,
A combat with affection; so did both,
She for the poison strove, he for his oath:
Thus like a happy Father, I have won,
A constant Daughter, and a loving Son.

Mirror of Maidens, wonder of thy name,
I give thee that art given, pure, chaste, the same
Here Wat: I would not part (for the worlds pride)
So true a Bridegroom, and so chaste a Bride.

My Liege, to wed a Comical event,
To presupposed tragic Argument:
Vouchsafe to exercise your eyes, and see
A humorous dreadful Poet take degree.

Dreadful in his proportion or his pen?

In both, he calls himself the whip of men.

If a clear merit stand upon his praise,
Reach him a Poets Crown (the honoured Baize)
But if he claim it, wanting right thereto,
(As many bastard Sons of Poesy do)
Race down his usurpation to the ground.
^rue Poets are with Art and Nature Crowned.
But in what mould so ere this man be east;
We make him thine Crispinus, wit and judgment,
Shine in thy numbers, and thy soul I know,
Will not go armed in passion against thy foe:
Therefore be thou our self; whilst our self (...),
But as spectator of this Scene of wit.

Thanks royal Lord, for these high honours done,
To me unworthy, my minds brightest fires
Shall all consume themselves, in purest flame,
On the Alter of your dear eternal name.

Not under us, but next us take thy Seat,
" Arts nourished by Kings make Kings more great,
Use thy Authority.

Demetrius.
Call in that self^-creating Horace, bring
Him and his shadow forth.

Both shall appear,
" No black-tyed star must stickein virtues Sphere.

Ounds did you see him, I pray let all his Masesties most excellent dogs, be
set at liberties, and have their freedoms to smell him out.


Smell whom?


Whom? the Composer, the Prince of Poets, Horace, Horace, he's departed: in
Gods name and the Kings I sarge you to ring it out from all our ears, for
Horaces body is departed: Master hue and cry shall -- God bless King
Williams, I cry you mercy and ask forgiveness, for mine eyes did not find in
their hearts to look upon your Majesty.


What news with thee Sir Vaughan?


News? God tis as vrse news as I can desire to bring about me: our
vnhansome-fac'd Poet does play at bo-peepes with your Grace, and cries
all-hidde as boys do.


Stand by, room there, back, room for the Poet.


He's reprehended and taken, by Sesu I rejoice very near as much as if I had
discovered a New-found Land, or the North and East Indies.


So, tug, tug, pull the mad Bull in by the horns: So, bait one at that stake
my place-mouth yelpers, and one at that stake Gurnets-head.


What busy fellow's this?


Save thee, my most gracious King a Harts save thee, all hats and caps are
thine, and therefore I veil: for but to thee great Sultane Soliman, I scorn
to be thus put off or to deliver up this sconce I wud.


Sir Vaughan, what's this jolly Captains name?


Has a very sufficient name, and is a man has do^ God and his Country as good
and as hot Service (in conquering this vile Monster-Poet) as ever did S. George
his horseback about the Dragon.


I sweat for it, but Tawsoone, hold thy tongue Mon du, if thou't praise me,
do it behind my back: I am my weighty Sovereign one of thy grains, thy
valiant vassal; ask not what I am, but read, turn over, vnclaspe thy
Chronicles: there thou shalt find Buffe-Ierkin; there read my points of war; I
am one a thy Mandilian-Leaders; one that enters into thy royal bands for thee;
Pantilius Tucca; one of thy Kingdoms chiefest quarrellers; one a thy most
faithful -- fie -- fie -- fie --


Drunkerds I hold my life.


No whirligig, one of his faithful fighters; thy drawer o royal Tamor Cham.


Go too, I pray Captain Tucca, give us all leave to do our business before
the King.


With all my heart, shi, shi, shi shake that Beare-whelp when thou wut.


Horace and Bubo, pray send an answer into his Masesties ears, why you go
thus in Ouids Morter-Morphesis and strange fashions of apparel.


Cur why?


My Lords, I was drawn into this beastly suite by head and shoulders only for
love I bare to my Ningle.


Speak Ningle, thy mouth's next, belch out, belch, why --


I did it to retire me from the world;
And turn my Muse into a Timonist,
Loathing the general Leprozie of Sin,
Which like a plague runs through the souls of men:
I did it but to --

But to bite every Motley-head vice by the nose, you did it Ningle to play the
Bug-beare Satire, make a Camp royal of fashion-mongers quake at your paper
Bullets; you Nasty Tortoise, you and your Itchy Poetry break out like
Christmas, but once a year, and then you keep a Revelling, Araigning, a
Scratching of men's faces, as tho you were Tyber the long-tail'd Prince of
Rats, do you?


Horace.


Silence, pray let all v^des be strangled, or held fast between your teeth.


Under control of my dread Sovereign,
We are thy Judges; thou that did Arraign,
Art now prepared for condemnation;
Should I but bid thy Muse stand to the Bar,
Thy self against her would give evidence:
For flat rebellion against the Sacred laws,
Of divine Poesy: herein most she mist,
Thy pride and scorn made her turn Sat^rist,
And not her love to ver^ue (as thou Preach)
Or should we minister strong pills to thee:
What lumps of hard and indigested stuff,
Of bitter Sa^irism, of Arrogance,
Of Selfe-loue, of Detraction, of a black
And stinging Insolence should we fetch up?
But none of these, we give thee what's more fit,
With stinging nettles Crown his stinging wit.

Well said my Poetical huckster, now he's in thy handling rate him, do rate
him well.


O I beseech your Majesty, rather then thus to be neted, I'll ha my Satyrs
coat pulled over mine ears, and be turned out a the nine Muses Service.


And I too, let me be put to my shifts with mine Ningle.


By Sesu so you shall M. Bubo; flea off this hairy skin M. Horace, so, so, so,
untruss, untruss.


His Poetical wreath my dapper puncke-fetcher.


Ooh --


Nay your oohs, nor your Callin-^es cannot serve your turn; your tongue you
know is full of blisters with railing, your face full of pockey-holes and
pimples, with your fiery inventions: and therefore to preserve your head from
aching, this Biggin is yours, -- nay by Sesu you shall be a Poet, though not
Lawrefyed, yet Nettlefyed, so:


Sir stincker, you're but vntruss'd now, I owe thee a whipping still, and
I'll pay it: I have laid rods in Peace and Vinegar for thee: It shall not be
the Whipping (...) Satire, nor the Whipping of the blinde-Beare, but of a
counterfeit lugler, that steals the name of Horace.


How? counterfeit? does he usurp that name?


Yes indeed ant please your Grace, he does sup up that abominable name.


He does O King Cambises, he does: thou hast no part of Horace in thee but's
name, and his damnable vices: thou hast such a terrible mouth, that thy beard's
afraid to peep out; but, look here you staring Leuiathan, here's the
sweet visage of Horace; look perboylde-face, look; Horace had a trim
long-beard, and a reasonable good face for a Poet, (as faces go now-a-dayes)
Horace did not screw and wriggle himself into great Men's familiarity,
(impudentlie) as thou do^st: nor wear the Badge of Gentlemen's company, as thou
dost thy Taffeta sleeves tacked too only with some points of profit: No,
Horace had not his face puncht full of Oylet-holes, like the cover of a
warming-pan: Horace loved Poets well, and gave Coxcombs to none but fools;
but thou love none, neither Wisemen nor fools, but thy self: Horace was a
goodly Corpulent Gentleman, and not so lean a hollow-cheekt Scrag as thou art:
No, here's thee Copy of thy countenance, by this will I learn to make a
number of villainous faces more, and to look scurvily vpon'th world, as thou
dost.


Sir Vaughan will you minister their oath?


Master Afinius Bubo, you shall swear as little as you can, one oath shall
damme up your Innocent mouth.


Any oath Sir, I'll swear any thing.


You shall swear by Phoebus (who is your Poets good Lord and Master,) that
heere-after you will not hire Horace, to give you poesies for rings, or
hand-kerchers, or knives which you understand not, nor to write your
Loueletters; which you (in turning of a hand) set your marks upon, as your
own: nor you shall not carry Latin Poets about you, till you can write and
read English at most; and lastlye that you shall not call Horace your Ningle.


By Phoebus I swear all this, and as many oaths as you will, so I may trudge.


Trudge then, pay your legs for Fees, and be dissarg'd.


Tprooth -- run Red-cap, ware horns there.


Now Master Horace, you must be a more horrible swearer, for your oath must be
(like your wits) of many colours; and like a Brokers book of many parcels.


Read, read; th'inuentory of his oath.


I'll swear till my hair stands vpan end, to be rid of this sting, oh this
sting.


Tis not your sting of conscience, is it?


Upon him: Inpri^is.


Inprimis, you shall swear by Phoebus and the half ^ s^re M^ses lacking one*
not to swear to hang your self, if you thought any Man, Ooman or Silde, could
write Plays and (...), as well-fauo^'d ones as your self.


Well, said, hast brought him toth gallows already?


You shall swear not to bombast out a new Play, with the old lynings of
Jests, stolen from the Temples Revels.


To him old Tango.


Moreover* you shall not sit in a Gallery, when your Comedies and Interludes
have entered their Actions, and there make vile and bad faces at every lyne, to
make Sentlemen have an eye to you, and to make Players afraid to take your
part.


Thou shalt be my Ningle for this.


Besides you must for swear to venture on the stage, when your Play is ended,
and to exchange curtezies, and complements with Gallants in the Lords rooms,
to make all the house rise up in Arms, and to cry that's Horace, that's he,
that's he, that's he, that pens and purges Humours and diseases.


There boy, again.


Secondly, when you bid all your friends to the marriage of a poor couple,
that is to say: your Wits and necessities, alias dictus, to the rifling of your
Muse: alias, your Muses vp-sitting: alias a Poets Whitson-Ale; you shall swear
that within three days after, you shall not abroad, in Booke-binders shops,
brag that your Vize-royes or Tributorie-Kings, have done homage to you, or
paid quarterage.


I'll bussethy head Holofernes.


Mo^eouer and Inpri^is, when a Knight or Sentlemen of vrship, does give you his
passe-p^t, to travail in and out to his Company, and gives you money for Gods
sake; I trust in Sesu, you will swear (tooth and nail) not to make sealed and
wry-mouth Jests upon his Knight-hood, will you not?


I never did it by Parnassus.


Wut swear by Parnassus and lyetoo, Doctor Doddipol?


Thirdly, and last of all saving one, when your Plays are misse-likt at Court,
you shall not cry Mew like a Pusse-cat, and say you are glad you write out of
the Courtiers Element.


Let the Element alone, tis out a thy reach.


In brieflynes, when you Sup in Tauer^es, amongst your betters, you shall
swear not to dip your Manners in too much sauce, nor at Table to fling
Epigrams, Embleames, or Play-speeches about you (like Hayle-stones) to keep
you out of the terrible danger of the Shot, upon payne to fit at the upper
end of the Table, a'th left hand of Carlo Buffon: swear all this, by Apollo
and the eight or nine Muses.


By Apollo, Helicon, the Muses (who march three and three in a rank) and by
all that belongs to Pernassus, I swear all this.


Bear witness.

That fearful wreath, this honour is your du^,
All Poets shall be Poet-Apes but you;
Thanks ( Learnings true Mecoenas, Poesies king)
Thanks for that gracious ^are, which you have lent,
To this most tedious, most rude argument.

Our spirits have well been feasted; he whose pen
Draws both corrupt, and clear blood from all men:
(Careless what vein he pricks) let him not rave,
When his own fides are struck, blows, blows, do crave.

Kings-truce, my noble Hearbe-a-grace; my Princely sweet-William, a boon --
Stay first, Is't a match or no match, Lady Furniuall Is't?


A match?


I, a match, since he hath hit the Mistress so often in the fore-game, we'll even
play out a rubbers.


Take her for me.


Take her for thy self, not for me.


Play out your rubbers in Gods name, by Sesu I'll (...) boule more in your
Alley, Iddow.


My Chain.


My Purse.


I'll Chain thee presently, and give thee ten pound and a purse: a boon my
Liege: -- dance o my delicate Rufus, at my wedding with this reverend
Antiquary; is't done? ^ut thou?


He glue thee Kingly honour: Night and Sleep,

With silken Ribands would tie up our eyes,
But Mistress Bride, one measure shall be led,
In scorn of Mid-nights hast* and then to bed.

GEntlemen, Gallants, and you my little Swaggerers that fight lowe: my tough
hearts of Oak that stand too't so valiantly, and are still within a yard of
your Captain: Now the Trumpets (that set men together by the ears) have left
their Tantara-rag-boy, let's part friends. I recant, bear witness all you
Gentle-folkes (that walk in the Galleries) I recant the opinions which I held
of Courtiers, Ladies, Citizens, when once (in an assembly of Friars) Irailde
upon them: that Heretical Liber^ne Horace, ta^ght me so to mouth it. Besides,
twas when stiff Tucca was a boy: twas not Tucca that railde and roared then,
but the Devil his Angels: But now, Kings-truce, the Captain Summons a parley,
and delivers himself and his prasing company into your hands, upon what
composition you will. Are you pleased? and I'll dance Friskin for joy, but if you
be not, by 'th Lord I'll see you all -- here for your two pence a peace again,
before I'll loose your company. I know now some be come hither with cheeks
swollen as big with hisses, as if they had the tooth-ach: vds-foote, if I stood
by them, I'd be so bold as -- entreat them to hiss in another place. Are you
aduiz'd what you do when you hiss? you blow away Horaces revenge: but if you
set your hands and Seals to this, Horace will write against it, and you may
have more sport: he shall not loose his labour, he shall not turn his blank
verses into wast paper: No, my Poetasters will not laugh at him, but will
untruss him again, and again, and again. I'll tell you what you shall do, cast
your little Tucca into a Bell: do, make a Bell of me, and be al you my
clappers, upon condition, we may have a lusty peal, this cold weather: I
have but two legs left me, and they are both yours: Good night my two penny
Tenants God night.



