Stay Taylor, This is the House, pray thee look the gown be not rufled: as
for the Jewels and Precious Stones, I know where to find them ready presently.
She that must wear this gown if she will receive it, is Master Iustinianos
wife (the Italian Merchant) my good old Lord and Master, that hath been a
Tylter this twenty year, hath sent it. Mum Taylor, you are a kind of Bawd.
Taylor, if this Gentlewoman's Husband should chance to be in the way now, you
shall tell him that I keep a Hot-house in Gunpowder Ally (near crouched
Fryers) and that I have brought home his wives foul Linen, and to colour my
knavery the better, I have here three or four kinds of complexion, which I
will make show of to sell unto her: the young Gentlewoman hath a good City
wit, I can tell you, she hath red in the Italian Courtier, that it is a
special ornament to gentlewomen to have skill in painting.


Is my Lord acquainted with her?


O, I.


Faith Mistress Birdlime I do not commend my Lords choice so well: now me
thinks he were better to set up a Dairy, and to keep half a score of lusty
wholesome honest Country Wenches.


Honest Coun^rey Wenches, in what hundred shall a man find two of that simple
virtue?


Or to love some Lady, there were equality and coherence.


Taylor, you talk like an ass, I tel thee there is equality enough between a
Lady and a City dame, if their hair be but of a colour: name you any one
thing that your citizens wi^e coms sho^t of to your Lady. They have as pure
Linen, as choice painting, lou^ green Greese in spring, Mallard and Teale in
the fall, and Woodcock in winter. Your Citizens wife learnes nothing but
fopperies of your Lady, but your Lady or Iustice-a-peace Madam, carries high
wit from the City, namely, to receive all and pay all: to awe their Husbands,
to check their Husbands, to control their husbands; nay, they have the trick
ont to be sick for a new gown, or a Carcanet, or a Diamond, or so: and I wist
this is better wit, then to l^ar^e how to wear a Scotch Farthingale: nay more.

Here comes one of the servants: you remember Taylor that I am deaf: observe
that.


I thou art in that like one of our young ^ull^s, that will not understand any
wrong is done him, because he dares not answer it.


By your leave Bachelor: is the gentlewoman your Mi^tris stirring?


Yes she is moving.


What says he?


She is up.


Wheres the Gentleman your Master, pray you?


Where many women desire to have their husbands, abroad.


I am very thick of hearing.


Why abroad? you smell of the Bawd.


I pray you tell her here's an old Gentlewoman would speak with her.


So.


What, will you be deaf to the gentlewoman when she comes to?


O no, she's acquainted well enough with my kn^uery.

She comes.

How do you sweet Lady?


Lady.


By Gods me I hope to call you Lady ear you dye, what mistress do you sleep
well on nights.


Sleep, Ias quietly as a Client having great business with Lawyers.


Come, I am come to you about the old suit: my good Lord and master hath sent
you a velvet gown h^are: do you like the colour? three p^le, a pretty
fantastical trimming, I would God you would say it by my troth. I dreamt last
night, you looked so prettily, so sweetly, me thought so like the wisest Lady of
them al, in a velvet gown.


Whats the fore-part?


A very pretty stuff, I know not the name of your fore-part, but tis of a hair
colour.


That it was my hard fortune, being so well brought up, having so great a
portion to my marriage, to match so unluckily? Why my husband and his whole
credit is not worth my apparel, well, I shall undergo a strange repo^t in
leaving my husband.


Tush, if you respect your credit, never think of that, for beauty covets tich
appatell, ^hoyce diet, excellent Physic, ^o German Clock no Mathematical
Ingin: whatsoever requires so much reparation as a woman's face, and what means
hath your Husband to allow sweet Doctor Glister-pipe, his pension. I have heard
that you have threescore Smocks, that co^t three pounds a Smock, will these
smocks ever hold out with your husband? no, your linen and your apparel must
turn over a new^lease* I can tell you.


O admirable Bawd? O excellent Birdline?


I have heard he loved you before you were ma^ryed entirely, what of that? I
have ever found it most true in mine own experyenc^, that they which are most
violent dotards before their marriage are most voluntary Coucouldes after. Many
are honest, either because they have not wist, or because they have* not
opportunity to be dishonest, and this Italian your Husbands Countryman, holds
it impo^ible any of their Ladies should be excellent witty, and not make the
uttermost use of their beauty, will you be a fool then?


Thou dost persuade me to Ill, very well.


You are nice and p^euish, how long will you hold out think you? not so long
as Ostend.


What are you? Say ye?


I forsooth.


What my most happy wife?


Why your I^aliousie?


Iealiousie: in faith I do not fear to loose that I have lost already: What
are you?


Please your good worship I am a poor Gentlewoman, that cast away my self
upon an unthrifty Captain, that lives now in Ireland, I am ^aine to pick out
a poor living with selling complexion, to keep the frailty (as they say)
honest.


Whats he? complexion to? you are a bawd.


I thank your good worship for it.


Do not I know these tricks,
That which thou make a colour for thy sin,
Hath been thy first undoing? painting, painting.

I have of all sorts forsooth? Here is the burned powder of a Hogs Iaw-bone,
to be laid with the Oil of white Poppy, an excellen^ ^cus to kill Morphew,
weed out Freckles, and a most excellent ground-worke for painting; Here is
Ginimo^y likewise burnt, and puluerized, to be mingled with the juice of
Lymmons, sublimate Mercury, and two spoonefuls of the flowers of Brimstone, a
most excellent receipt to cure the flushing in the face.


Do you hear, if you have any business to dispatch with that deaf goodness
there, pray you take leave: opportunity, that which most of you long for
(though you never be with Child) opportunity? I'll find some idle business in
the mean time, I will, I will in truth, you shall not need fear me, or you may
speak French, most of your kinds can understand French: god buy you. Being
certain thou art false: sleep, sleep my brain, for doubt was only that,
which fed my pain.


You see what a hell I live in, I am resolved to leave him.


O the most fortunate Gentlewoman, that will be so wise, and so, so provident,
the Caroche shall come.


At what hour?


Just when women vintners are a cuni^ring at midnight. O the entertainment my
Lord will make you, sweet Wines, lusty diet, perfumed linen, soft beds, O most
fortunate Gentlewoman.


Have you done? have you dispatch? tis well, and in troth what was the motion?


Motion, what motion?


Motion, why like the motion in law, that stays for a day of hearing, yours
for a night of hearing. Come lets not have Apri^l in your eyes I pray you, it
shows a wanton month follows your weeping? Love a woman for her tea^es? Let a
man love Oist^rs for their water, for women though they should weep ^cour
enough to serve a Dyer, or a Brewer, yet they may be as stale as Wenches, that
travail every second tide between Graves end, and Billingsga^e.


This madness shows very well.


Why look you, I am wondrous merry, can any man discern by my face, that I
am a Cuckold? I have known many suspected for men of this misfortune; when they
have walked thorough the streets, wear their hats ore their eye-browes, like
politic pen^houses, which commonly make the shop of a Mercer, or a Linen
Draper, as dark as a room in Bedlam. His cloak shrouding his face, as if he
were a Neopolitan that had lost his beard in April, and if he wa'k through the
street, or any other narrow read (as tis rate to meet a Cuckold) he ducks at
the penthouses, like an Ancient that dares not flourish at the oath taking of
the Praetor, for fear of the signe-posts? Wife, wife, do I any of these? Come
what news from his Lordship? has not his Lordships virtue once gone against
the hair, and coveted corners.


Sir, by my soul I will be plain with you.


Except the forehead dear wife, except the forehead.


The Gentleman you spake of hath often solicited my love, and hath received
from me most chaste denials.


I, I, provoking resistance, tis as if you come to buy wares in the City, bid
money fort, your Mercer, or Gold-smith says, truly I cannot take it, lets his
customer pass his stall; next, nay perhaps two, or three, but if he find he
is not prone to return of himself, he calls him back, and back, and takes
his money: so you my dear wife, (O the policy of women, and Tradsmen: theile
bite at any thing.)


What would you have me do? all your plate and most part of your Jewels are at
pawn, besides I hear you have made over all your esta^e to men in the Town
heer? What would you have me do? would you have me turn common sinner, or
sell my apparel to my waistcoat and become a Laundress?


No Laundress dear wife, though your credit would go far with Gentlemen for
taking up of Linen: no Laundress?


Come, come, I will speak as my misfortune prompts me, Iealiousie hath undone
many a Citizen, it hath undone you, and me. You married me from the ^eruice of
an honourable Lady, and you knew what matches I mought have had, what would you
have me to do? I would I had never seen your eyes, your eyes.


Very good, very good.


Your prodigality, your diceing, your riding abroad, your consorting your self
with Noble men, your building a summer house hath undone us, hath undone us?
What would you have me do?


Any thing: I have sold my House, and the wares int? I am going for Stoad next
tide, what will you do now wife?


Have you indeed?


I by this light als one, I have done as some Citizens at thirty, and most
heirs at three and twenty, made all away, why do you not ask me now what you
shall do?


I have no counsel in your voiag^, neither shall you have any in mine.


To his Lordship: will you not wife?


Even whether my misfortune leads me.


Go, no longer will I make my care thy prison.


O my fate; well sir, you shall answer for this sin which you force me to;
fare you well, let not the world condemn me, if I seek for mine own
maintenance.


So, so.


Do not send me any letters; do not seek any reconcilement. By this light I'll
receive none, if you will send me my apparel so, if not choose, I hope we
shall neare-meete more.


So, farewell the acquaintance of all the mad Devils that haunt Iealiousie, why
should a man be such an ass to play the antic for his wives appetite?
Imagine that I, or any other great man have on a velvet Night-cap, and put
case that this night-cap be to little for my ears or forehead, can any man
tell me where my Night-cap wrings me, except I besuch an ass to proclaim
it; Well, I do play the fool with my misfortune very hand somly. I am glad
that I am certain of my wives dishonesty; for a secret strumpet, is like mines
prepared to ruin goodly buildings. Farewell my care, I have told my wife I am
going for Stoad; that's not my course, for I resolve to take some shape upon me,
and to live disguised here in the City; they say for one Cuckold to know
that his friend is in the like head-ake, and to give him counsel, is as if
there were two partners, the one to be arrested, the other to bail him: my
estate is made oue^ to. My friends, that do verily believe, I mean to leave
England. Have amongst you City dames? You that are indeed the fittest, and
most proper persons for a Comedy, nor let the world lay any imputation upon my
disguise, for Court, City, and Country, are merely as masks one to the
other, envied of some, laughed at of others, and so to my comical business.


Moll.


What would hart?


Wheres my Casheire, are the sums right? Are the bonds sealed?


Yea sir.


Will you have the bags sealed?


O no sir, I must disburs instantly* we that be Courtiers have more plac^s to
send money to, then the devil hath to send his spirits: there's a great deal of
light gold.


O sir, twill away in play, and you will stay till to morrow you shall have it
all in new sovereigns.


No, in-troth tis no matter, twill a way in play, let me see the bond? let me
see when this money is to be paid? the tenth of August. The first day that I
must tender this money, is the first of Dog-daies.


I fear twill be hot staying for you in London then.


Scrivener, take home the bond with you. Will you stay to dinner sir? Have you
any Partridge Moll?


No in-troth hart, but an excellent pickeld Goose, a new service: pray you
stay.


Sooth I cannot: by this light I am so infinitely, so vnboundably beholding to
you?


Well Signior, I'll leave you; My cloak there?


When will you come home hart?


In truth self I know not, a friend of yours and mine hath broke.


Who sir?


Master Iustini^no the Italian.


Broke sir.


Yea sooth, I was offred forty yesterday upon the Exchange, to assure a
hundred.


By my troth I am sorry.


And his wife is gone to the party.


Gone to the party? O wicked creature?


Farewell good master Monopoly, I pre-thee visit me of^n.


Little Moll, send away the fellow?


Phill. Phillip.


Here forsooth.


Go into Bucklers-bury and fetch me two ounces of preserved Melounes, look
there be no Tobacco taken in the shop when he weighs it.


I forsooth.


What do you eat preserved Melonnes for Moll?


In truth for the shaking of the hart, I have here sometime such a shaking, and
downwards such a kind of earth-quake (as it were.)


Do you hear, let your man carry home my money to the ordinary, and lay it in
my Chamber, but let him not tell my host that it is money: I owe him but forty
pound, and the Rogue is hasty, he will follow me when he thinks I have money,
and pry into me as Crows perch upon Carrion, and when he hath found it out,
prey upon me as Heralds do upon Funerals.


Come, come, you owe much money in Town: when you have forfeited your bond, I
shall near see you more?


You are a Monky, I'll pay him for's day: I'll see you tomorrow to.


By my troth I love you very honestly, you were never the gentleman offred any
vnciuility to me, which is strange methinks in one that comes from beyond Seas,
would I had given a Thousand pound I could not love thee so.


Do you hear, you shall fain some scurvy disease or other, and go to the Bath
next spring,


By your leave sweet mistress Tenterhooke.


O, how dost partner?


Gentlewomen I stayed for a most happy wind, and now the ^ your sweet, sweet
lips, should set me going: good mistress Honisuckle; good mistress Wafer, good
mistress Tenterhooke, I will pray for you, that neither riuallshippe in loves,
pureness of painting, or riding out of town, not acquainting each other
withit, be a cause your sweet beauties do fall out, and rail one upon another.


Rail sir, we do not use to rail.


Why mistress, railing is your mother tongue as well as lying.


But, do you think we can fall out?


In troth beauties (as one spake seriously) that there was no inheritance in
the amity of Princes, so think I of Women, too often interviewes amongst
women, as amongst Princes, breeds envy oft to others fortune, there is only in
the amity of women an estate for will, and every puny knows that is no
certain inheritance.


You are merry sir.


So may I leave you most fortunate gentlewoman.


Love shoots hear.


Tenterhooke, what Gentleman is that gon out, is he a man?


O God and an excellent Trumpeter, He came lately from the university, and
loves City dames only for their victuals, he hath an excellent trick to keep
Lobsters and Crabs sweet in summer, and calls it a devise to prolong the days
of shel-fish, for which I do suspect he hath been Clarke to some Nobleman's
kitchen. I have heard he never loves any Wench, tell she be as stale as
Frenchmen eat their wild foul, I shall anger her.


How stale good Mistress nimble-wit?


Why as stale as a Country Ostes, an Exchange Sempster, or a Court Laundress.


He is your cousin, how your tongue runs?


Talk and make a noise, no matter to what purpose, I have learned that with
going to puritan Lectures. I was yesterday at a banquet, will you discharge my
roughs of some wafers, and how doth thy husband Wafer?


Faith very well.


He is just like a Torch bearer to Maskers, he wears good clothes, and is
ranked in good company, but he doth nothing: thou art fain to take al, and pay
all.


The more happy she, would I could make such an ass of my husband to. I hear
say he breeds thy child in his teeth every year.


In faith he doth.


By my troth tis pity but the fool should have the other two pains incident
to the head.


What are they?


Why the head-ake and horne-ake. I heard say that he would have had thee nursed
thy Child thy self to.


That he would truly.


Why there's the policy of husbands to keep their Wines in. I do assure you if
a Woman of any markeable face in the World give her Child suck, look how
many wrinkles be in the Nipple of her breast, so many will be in her forheade
by that time twelve month: but sir, we are come to acquaint thee with an
excellent secret: we two learn to write.


To write?


Yes believe it, and we have the finest School master, a kind of Precision,
and yet an honest knave to: by my troth if thou be a good wench let him
teach thee, thou may send him of any arrant, and trust him with any secret;
nay, to see how demurely he will bear himself before our husbands, and how
iocand when their backs are turned.


For Gods love let me see him.


To morrow we'll send him to thee: till then sweet Tenterhook we leave thee,
wishing thou may have the fortune to change thy name often.


How? change my name?


I, for thieves and widows love to shift many names, and make sweet use of it
to.


O you are a wag indeed. Good Wafer remember my school master. Farewell good
Hon^suckle.


Farewell Tenterhooke.


Beniface, make an end of my cloak and Cap.


I have dispatch em Sir: both of them lye flat at your mercy.


Fore-god me thinks my joints are nimbler every Morning since I came over then
they were before. In France when I rise, I was so stiff, and so stark, I
would ha sworn my Legs had been wooden pegs: a Constable new chosen kept not
such a peripateticall gate: But now I'm as Lymber as an Antiant that has
flourished in the rain, and as Active as a Norfolk tumbler.


You may see, what change of pasture is able to do.


It makes fat Calves in Rumny Marsh, and lean knaves in London: therefore
Boniface keep your ground: Gods my pity, my forehead has more cromples, then
the back part of a counsellors gown, when another rides upon his neck at the
bar: Boniface take my helmet: give your mistress my night-cap. Are my Antlers
swollen so big that my biggen pinches my brows. So, request her to make my
head-piece a little wyder.


How much wider sir.


I can allow her almost an y^ch: go, tell her so, very near an inch.


If she be a right Citizens wife, now her Husband has given her an inch,
sheele take an ell, or a yard at least.


Master Parenthesis! Salve, Salve Domine.


Salve tu quo{que} Iubeo te saluere plurimum.


No more Plurimums if you love me, latin whole-meate^ are now minced, and
serude in for English Gallimafries: Let us therefore cut out our vplandish
Neates tongues, and talk like regenerate Brittains.


Your worship is welcome to England: I poured out Orisons for your arrival.


Thanks good master Parenthesis: and Que novels: what news flutters abroad?
do Iack-dawes dung the top of Paules Steeple still.


The more is the pity, if any daws do come into the temple, as I fear they
do.


They say Charing-crosse is falue down, since I went to Rochell: but that's no
such wonder, twas old, and stood awry (as most part of the world can tel.) And
tho it lack vnder-propping, yet (like great fellows at a wrestling) when their
heals are once flying up, no man will save em; down they fall, and there
let them lye, tho they were bigger then the Guard: Charing-crosse was old, and
old things must shrink as well as new Northern cloth.


Your worship is in the right way verily: they must so, but a number of better
things between Westminster bridge and temple bar both of a worshipful, and
honourable erection, are fallen to decay, and have suffered putrefaction, since
Charing fell, that were not of half so long standing as the poor wry-neckt
Monument.


Whose within there? One of you call up your mistress! tell her here's her
writing Schoolmaster. I had not thought master Parenthesis you had bin such an
early stirrer.


Sir, your vulgar and foure-peny-pen-men, that like your London Sempsters keep
open shop, and sell learning by retail, may keep their beds, and lie at their
pleasure: But we that edify in private, and traffic by whole sale, must be up
with the lark, because like Country Attorneys, we are to shuffle up many
matters in a for-enoone. Certes master Honisuckle, I would sing Laus Deo, so I
may but please al those that come under my fingers: for it is my duty and
function, Perdy, to be fervent in my vocation.


Your hand: I am glad our City has so good, so necessary, and so laborious a
member in it: we lack painful and expert penmen amongst us. Master
Parenthesis you teach many of our Merchants sir, do you not?


Both Wives, Maids, and Daughters: and I thank God, the very worst of them
lye by very good men's sides: I pick out a poor living amongst em, and I am
thankful for it.


Trust me I am not sorry: how long have you exercizd this quality?


Come Michaell-tide next, this thirteen year.


And how does my wife profit under you sir? hope you to do any any good upon
her.


Master Honisuckle I am in great hope she shall fructify: I will do my best
for my part: I can do no more then another man can.


Pray sir ply her, for she is capable of any thing.


So far as my poor talent can stretch, It shall not be hidden from her.


Does she hold her pen well yet?


She leanes somewhat too hard upon herpen yet sir, but practise and
animaduersion will break her from that.


Then she grubs her pen.


Its but my pains to mend the neb again.


And where abouts is she now master Parenthesis? She was talking of you this
morning, and commending you in her bed, and told me she was past h^r letters.


Truly sir she took her letters very suddenly: and is now in her Minoms.


I would she were in her Crotchets too master Parenthesis: ha-ha, I must talk
merrily sir.


Sir so long as your mirth be void of all Squirrility, tis not unfit for your
calling: I trust ere few days be at an end to have her fall to her joining:
for she has her letters ad vnguem: her A. her great B. and her great C. very
right D. and E. delicate: her double F. of a good length, but that it straddels
a little to wide: at the G. very cunning.


Her H. is full like mine: a goodly big H.


But her: double LL is well: her O. of a reasonable Size: at her p. and q.
neither Merchants Daughter, Aldermans Wife, young country Gentlewoman, nor
Courtiers Mistress, can match her.


And how herv.


You sir, She fetches up you best of al: her single you she ca^ fashion two or
three ways: but her double you, is as I would wish it.


And faith who takes it faster; my wife, or mistress Tenterhook?


Oh! Your wife by ods: sheele take more in one hour, then I can fasten either
upon mistress Tenterbooke, or mistress Wafer, or Mistress Flapdragon (the Brewers
wife) in three.


Do not thy cheeks burn sweet chuckaby, for we are talking of thee.


No goodness I warrant: you have few Citizens speak well of their wives
behind their backs: but to their faces thei^e cog worse and be more suppliant,
then Clients that sue in forma paper: how does my master? troth I am a very
truant: have you your Ruler about you master? for look you, I go clean awry.


A small fault: most of my schollers do so: look you sir, do not you think
your wife will mend: mark her dashes, her strokes, and her breakings, and her
bendings?


She knows what I have promised her if she do mend: ^ay by my fay Iude, this
is well, if you would not fly out thus, but keep your line.


I shall in time when my hand is in: have you a new pen for me Master, for by
my truly, my old one is stark nought, and will cast no inck: whether are you
going lamb?


To the Custom-house: to the Change, to my VVarehouse, to diverse places.


Good Cole tarry not past eleven, for you turn my stomach then from my dinner.


I will make more hast home, then a Stipendary Swizzer does after hes paid,
fare you well Master Parenthesis.


I am so troubled with the rheum too: Mouse whats good fort?


How often have I told you, you must get a patch. I must hence.


I think when als done I must follow his counsel, and take a patch, I have
had one long ere this, but for disfiguring my face: yet I had noted that a
masticke patch upon some women's Temples, hath bin the very rhe^wme of beauty.


Is he departed? Is old Nestor marched into Troy?


Yes you mad Greek: the Gentleman's gone.


Why then clap up coppy-bookes: down with pens, hang up inckhornes, and now
my sweet Honisuckle, see what goldenwinged Be from Hybla, flies humming, with
Crura thymo plena, which he will empty in the Hive of your bosom.


From whom.


At the skirte of that sheet in black work is wrought his name, break not
up the wildfoule, till anon, and then feed upon him in private: there's other
irons in the fire: more sackes are coming to the Mill, O you sweet temptations
of the sons of Adam, I commend you, extol you, magnify you: Were I a Poet
by Hipocrene I swear, (which was a certain Well where all the Muses watered)
and by Pernassus eke I swear, I would ^ime you to death with praises, for that
you can be content to lye with old men all night for their money, and walk to
your gardens with young men in the day time for your pleasure: Oh you delicat
damnations: you do but as I wud do: were I the proprest, sweetest, plumpest,
Cherry-cheekt, Corrall-lipt woman in a kingdom, I would not dance after one
mans pipe.


And why?


Especially after an old mans.


And why, pray!


Especially after an old Citizens.


Still, and why.


Marry because the Suburbs, and those without the bars, have more privilege
then they within the freedom: what need one woman do ate upon one Man? Or one
man be mad like Orlando for one woman.


Troth tis true, considering how much flesh is in every Shambles.


Why should I long to eat of Bakers bread only, when there's so much Sifting,
and bolting, and grynding in every corner of the City; men and women are
borne, and come running into the world faster then Coaches do into Cheap-side
upon Symon and Iudes day: and are eaten up by Death faster, then Mutton and
porridge in a term time. Who would pin their hearts to any Sleeve: this world
is like a Mynt, we are no sooner cast into the fire, taken out again, hamerd,
stamped, and made Currant, but presently we are changed: the new Money (like a
new Drab) is caught at by Dutch, Spanish, Welch, French, Scotch, and English:
but the old cracked King Harry groats are shoueld up, feel bruzing, and
battring, clipping, and melting, they smoke sort.


The worlds an Arrant naughty-pack I see, and is a very scurvy world.


Scurvy? worse then the conscience of a Broomeman, that carries out new ware,
and brings home old shoes: a naughty-packe? Why there's no Minute, no thought of
time passes, but some villainy or other is a brewing: why, even now, now, at
holding up of this finger, and before the turning down of this, some are
murdering, some lying with their maids, some picking of pockets, some cutting
purses, some cheating, some weighing out bribes. In this City some wives are
Cuckolding some Husbands. In yonder Village some farmers are now-now grynding
the Iawbones of the poor: therefore sweet Scholar, sugared Mistress
Honisuckle, take Summer before you, and lay hold of it? why, even now must you
and I hatch an egg of iniquity.


Troth master I think thou wilt prove a very knave.


Its the fault of many that fight under this band.


I shall love a Puritans face the worse whilst I live for that Copy of thy
countenance.


We are all weathercocks, and must follow the wind of the present: from the
bias.


Change a bowl then.


I will so; and now for a good cast: there's the Knight, sir Gos^n Glo-worme.


Hes a Knight made out of wax.


He took up Silks upon his bond I confess: nay more, hes a knight in
print: but let his knight-hood be of what stamp it will, from him come I, to
entreat you, and Mistress Wafer, and mistress Tenterhook, being both my
schollers, and your honest pew fellows, to meet him this afternoon at the
Rhenesh-wine-house ith Stillyard. Captain Whirlepoole will be there, young
Lynstock the Alder-mans Son and Heir, there too, will you steal forth, taste
of a Dutch Bun, and a Keg of Sturgeon.


What excuse shall I coin now?


Few excuses: You must to the pawn to buy Lawn: to Saint Martins for Lace; to
the Garden: to the Glasse-house; to your Gossips: to the Powlters: else take
out an old ruff, and go to your Sempsters: excuses? Why, they are more ripe
then meddlers at Christmas.


I'll come. The hour.


Two: the way-through Paules: every wench take a pillar, there clap on your
Masks: your men will be behind you, and before your prayers be half don, be
before you, man you out at several doors. You'll be there?


If I breath.


Farewell. So: now must I go set the the other Wenches the self same Copy. A
rare Schoolmaster, for all kind of hands, I. Oh: What strange curses are
powered down with one blessing? Do all tread on the heel? Have all the art to
hood-winke wise men thus? And (like those builders of Babels Tower) to speak
unknown tongues. Of all (save by their husbands) understood: Well, if (as Ivy
bout the Elm does twine)

All wives love clipping, there's no fault in mine.
But if the world lay speechless, even the dead
Would rise, and thus cry out from yawning graves,
Women make men, or Fools, or Beasts, or Slaves.

Her answer! talk in music: Will she come?


Oh my sides ache in my loins, in my bones? I ha more need of a posset of
sack, and lie in my bed and sweat, than to talk in music: no honest woman
would run hurrying up down thus and undo her self for a man of honour,
without reason? I am so lame, every foot that I set to the ground went to my
hart. I thought I had bin at Mum-chance my bones rattled so with iaunting? had it
not bin for a friend in a corner.


Minister comfort to me, Will she come.


All the Castles of comfort that I can put you into is this, that the jealous
wittal her husband, came (like a mad Ox) belowing in whilst I was there. Oh I
ha lost my sweet breath with trotting.


Death to my hart? her husband? What saith he?


The freeze-lerkin Rascal out with his purse, and called me plain Bawd to my
face.


Affliction to me, then thouspak'st not to her?


I spake to her, as Clients do to Lawyers without money (to no purpose) but I'll
speak with him, and hamper him to, if eue^ he fall into my clutches: I'll make
the yel^ow-hammer her husband know, (for all hes an Italian) that there's a
difference between a cogging Baud and an honest motherly gentlewoman. Now,
what cold whetstonesly over your stomacher? will you have some of my Aqua? Why
my Lord.


Thou hast killed me with thy words.


I see bashful lovers and young bullocks are knocked down at a blow: Come,
come* drink this draught of Cynamon water, and pluck up your spirits: up with
em, up with em. Do you hear, the whiting mop has nibbled.


Ha?


Oh? I thought I should fetch you: you can Ha at that: I'll make you Hem anon.
As I'm a sinner I think you'll find the sweetest, sweetest bedfellow of her. Oh!
she looks so sugredly, so simpringly, so gingerly, so amarously, so amiably.
Such a red lip, such a White forehead, such a black eye, such a full
cheek, and such a goodly little nose, now she's in that French gown, Scotch
falls, Scotch bum, and Italian head-tire you sent her, and is such an intycing
shee-witch, carrying the charms of your Jewels about her. O^!


Did she receive them? speak: Here's is golden keys T'vnlock thy lips. Did she
vouchsa^e to take them?


Did she vouchsafe to take them, theirs a question: you shall find she did
vouchsafe: The troth is my Lord, I got her to my house, there she put off
her own cloths my Lord and put on yours my Lord, provided her a Coach, Searched
the middle I'll in Pawles, and with three Elizabeth twelue-pences pressed three
knaves my L. hired three Liveries in Long-lane, to man her: for al which so God
mend me, I'm to pay this night before Sun-set.


This shower shall fill them al^raine in their laps, what golden drops thou
wilt.


Alas my Lord, I do but receive it with one hand, to pay it away with another,
I'm but your Bailey.


Where is she?


In the green velvet Chamber; the poor sinneful creature pants like a pigeon
under the hands of a Hawke, therefore use her like a woman my Lord: use her
honestly my Lord, for alas she's but a Novice, and a very green thing.


Farewell: I'll in unto her.


Fie vpont, that were not for your honour: you know gentlewomen use to come to
Lords chambers, and not Lords to the Gentlewomens; I'd not have her think you
are such a Rank-ryder: walk you here: I'll beckon, you shall see i'll fetch her
with a wet finger?


Do so.


Hist? why sweet heart, mistress Iustiniano, why pretty soul tread softly,
and come into this room: here be rushes, you need not fear the creaking of
your cork shoes. the marks are set up: I'll get me (...) score off, and give
Aim.


Yare welcome: Sweety'are welcome. Bless my hand
With the soft touch of yours: Can you be Cruel
To one so Prostrate to you? Even my Hart,
My Happiness, and State lie at your feet:
My Hopes me flattered that the field was won,
That you had yielded, (tho you Conquer me)
And that all Marble scales that bard your eyes
From throwing light on mine, were quite taken off,
By the Cunning Woman's hand, that Works for me,
Why therefore do you wound me now with frowns?
Why do you fly me? Do not exercise
The Art of woman on me? I'm already
Your Captive: Sweet! Are these your hate, or ^eares.

I wonder lust can hang at such white hairs.

You give my love ill names, It is not lust:
Lawless desires well tempered may seem Just
A thousand mornings with the early Sun, mine eyes have from your windows
watched to steal brightness from those. As oft upon the days that Consecrated
to devotion are, Within the Holy Temple have I stood disguised, waiting your
presence: and when your hands went up towards heaven to draw some blessing
down, Mine (as if all my Nerues by yours did move,)

Begged in dum Signs some pity for my Love,
And thus being feasted only with your fight,
I went more pleased then sickmen with fresh health,
Rich men with Honour, Beggars do with wealth.

Part now so pleased, for now you more Enjoy me.

O you do wish me Physic to destroy me.

I have already leapt beyond the bounds of modesty, In piecing out my wings
with borrowed feathers: but you sent a Sorceres so perfect in her trade, that
did so lively breath forth your passionate Accents, and could draw a Lover
languishing so piercingly, that her charms wrought upon me, and in pity of
your sick hart which she did Counterfeit, (Oh she's a subtle Beldam!) See I
clothed my limbs (thus Player-like in Rich Attires, not fitting mine estate,
and am come forth, but why I know not?


Will you Love me?


Yes,
If you can clear me of a debt that's due but to one Man,
I'll pay my hart to thee.

Whose that?

My Husband.

Vmh.

The sums so great
I know a kingdom cannot answer it,
And therefore I beseech you good my Lord,
To take this gilding off, which is your own,
And henceforth cease to throw out golden hooks
To choke mine honour: tho my husbands poor,
I'll rather beg for him, then be your Whore.

Against beauty you plot treason, if you suffer tears to do violence to so fair
a Cheek. That face was ne'er made to look pale with want. Dwell here and be
the Sovereign of my fortunes. Thus shall you go attired.


Till lust be tired. I must take leave my Lord.


Sweet Creature stay,
My Confers shall be yours, my Servants yours,
My self will be your servant, and I swear by that which I hould^ dear in
you, your beauty (and which I'll not profane) you shall live here as free from
base wrong, as you are from blackenesse, so you will deign, but let me enjoy
your sight, Answer me will you.


I will think vpont.


Unless you shall perceive, that al my thoughts, and al my actions be to you
devoted, and that I very justly earn your love, Let me not taste it.


I will think upon it.


But when you find my merits of full weight, will you accept their worth.


I'll think vpont.
I'd speak with the old woman.

She shall come,
Joys that are borne unlooked for, are borne dumb.

Po^erty, thou bane of Chastity,
Poison of beauty, Broker of Mayden-heades,
I see when Force, nor Wit can scale the hold, Wealth must. Sheel^ ne'er be won,
that defies go^de.

But lives there such a creature: Oh tis rare.
To find a woman chaste, that's poor and fair.

Now lamb! has not his Honour dealt like an honest Nobleman with you. I can tel
you. you shall not find him a Templer, nor one of these cogging Cattern
pear-coloured-beards, that by their good (...) wou^d have no pretty woman escape
them.


Thou art a very bawd: thou art a Devil
Cast in a reverend shape; thou stale damnation!
Why hast thou me intist from mine own Paradise,
To steal fruit in a barren wilderness.

Bawd and devil, and stale damnation! Will women's tounges (like Bakers legs)
never go straight.


Had thy Circean Magic me transformed
Into that sensual shape for which thou Coniurst,
And that I were turned common Veuturer,
I could not love this old man.

This old man, vmh: this old man? do his hoary hairs stick in your
stomach? yet methinkes his silver hairs should move you, they may serve to
make you Bodkins: Does his age grieve you? fool? Is not old wine wholesommest,
old Pippines toothsommest, old wood burn brightest, old Linen wash whitest,
old soldiers Sweet-hart are surest, and old Lovers are soundest. I hatried
both.


So will not I.


Youd have some young perfumed beardless Gallants board you, that spits al his
brains out ats tongues end, wud you not?


N^, none at al, not any.


None at al? what do you make there then? why are you a burden to the worlds
conscience, and an eie-sore to well given me, I dare pawn m^ gown and al the
beds in my house, and al the gettings in Michaelmas term next to a Tavern
token, that thou shalt never be an innocent.


Who are so?


Fools? why then are you so precize: your husbands down the wind and will you
like a haglers Arrow, be down the weather, Strike whilst the iron is hot. A
woman when there be roses in her cheeks, Cherries on her lips, Civet in her
breath, Ivory in her teeth, Lyllyes in her hand, and Lickorish in her heart,
why she's like a play. If new very good company, very good company, but if
stale, like old Ieronimo: go by, go by. Therefore as I said before, strike.
Besides: you must think that the commodity of beauty was not made to lye dead
upon any young woman's hands: if your husband have given up his Cloak, let
another take measure of you in his Jerkin: for as the Cobbler, in the night time
walks with his Lantern, the Merchant, and the Lawyer with his Link, and the
Courtier with his Torch: So every lip has his Lattice to himself: the Lob has
his Lass, the Collier his Dowdy, the Westerne- man his Pug, the Serving-man
his Punk, the student his Nun in white Fryers, the Puritan his Sister, and the
Lord his Lady: which worshipful vocation may fall upon you, if you'll but
strike whilst the Iron is hot.


Witch: thus I break thy Spells: Were I kept brave, On a Kings cost, I am but a
Kings slave.


I see, that as Frenchmen love to be bold, Flemings to be drunk, Welshmen to
be called Brittons, and Irishmen to be Costermongers, so, Cocknyes, (especially
Shee-Cocknies) love not Aq^a-vite when tis-good for them.


Saw you my uncle?


I saw him even now going the way of all flesh (that's to say) towards the
Kitchen: here's a letter to your worship from the party.


What party?


The Tenterbook your wanton.


From her? Fewh? pray thee stretch me no more upon your Tenterhook: pox on
her? Are there no Pottecariesith Town to send her Phisick-bils to, but me:
She's not troubled with the green sickness still, Is she?


The yellow I aundis, as the Doctor tells me: troth she's as good a peat: she is
fallen away so, that she's nothing but bare skin and bone: for the Turtle so
mourns for you.


In black?


In black? you shall find both black and blew if you look under her eyes.


Well: sing over her ditty when I'm in tune,


Nay, but will you send her a Box of Mithridatum and Dragon water, I mean some
restorative words. Good Master Monopoly yo^ know how welcome yare to the
City, and will you master Monopoly, keep out of the City; I know you cannot,
would you saw how the poor gentlewoman lies.


Why how lies she?


Troth as the way lies over Gads-hill, very dangerous: you would pity a woman's
case if you saw her: write to her some treatise of pacification.


I'll write to her to morrow.


To morrow; sheele not sleep then but tumble, and if she might have it to
night, it would better please her.


Perhaps I'll doot to night, farewell.


If you doot to night, it would better please her then to morrow.


Gods so, dost hear, I'm to sup this night at the Lyon in Sh^redich with
certain gallants: cast thou not draw forth some delicate face, that I ha not
seen, and bring it thither, wut thou?


All the painters in London shall not fit for colour as I can; but we shall have
some swaggering?


All as civil (by this sight) as Lawyers.


But I tell you, she's not so common as Lawyers, that I mean to betray to your
Table: for as I'm a Sinner, she's a Knights Cozen; a Yorkshire gentlwoman, and
only speaks a little broad, but of very good carriage.


Nay that's no matter, we can speak as broad as she? but wut bring her?


You shall call her Cozen, do you see: two men shall wait upon her, and I'll
come in by chance: but shall not the party be there?


Which party?


The writer of that simple hand.


Not for as many Angels as there be letters in her Paper: Speak not of me to
her, nor our meeting if you love me: wut come?


Mum, I'll come.


Farewell.


Good Master Monopoly, I hope to see you one day a man of great credit.


If I be, I'll build Chimneys with Tobacco but I'll smoke some: and be sure
Bird. I'll stick wool upon thy back.


Thanks sir, I know you will, for all the kindred of the Monopolies are held to
be great Fleecers.


So draw those Curtains; and lets see the pictures under ^m.


Welcome to the Stilliard fair Ladies.


Thanks good master Lynstocke.


Hans: some wine Hans.


Yaw, yaw, you sall hebben it master:
Old vine, or new vine?

Speak women.


New wine good sir Gozlin: wine in the must, good Dutchman, for must is best
for us women.


New vine? vell: two pots of new vine.


An honest Butterbox: for if it be old, there's none of it coms into my belly.


Why Tenterhooke pray thee lets dance friskin, be merry.


Thou art so troubled with Monopolies, they so hang at thy heart strings.


Pox a my hart then.


I and mine too, if any Courtier of them all set up his gallows there: wench
use him as thou dost thy pantables, scorn to let him kiss thy heel, for he
feeds thee with nothing but Court holy bread, good words, and cares not for
thee: sir Gozlin, will you taste a Dutch whatch you callum.


Here master Lynstocke, half mine is yours. Bun, Bun, Bun, Bun.


Which room? where are they? wo ho, ho, ho, so, ho boys.


Sfoot whose that? lock our room.


Not till I am in: and then lock out the devil tho he come in the shape of a
puritan.


Schoolmaster, welcome? welcome in troth?


Who would not be scratched with the briars and brambles to have such burs
sticking on his breeches: Save you gentlemen: O noble Knight.


More wine Hans.


Am not I (gentlemen) a Ferret of the right hair, that can make three Conies
bolt at a clap into your pursenets? ha? little do their 3. husbands dream what
copies I am setting their wives now? were not a rare Jest if they should come
sneaking upon us like a horrible noise of Fiddlers.


Troth I'd not care: let em come: I'd tell em, weed h^ none of their dull
Music.


Here mistress Tenterhooke.


Thanks good mistress Wafer.


Whose there? Peepers: Intelligencers: E^esdroppers.


Vds foot, throw a pot ats head?


Oh Lord? O Gentlemen, Knight, Ladies, that may be, Citizens wives that are,
shift for your selves, for a pair of your husbands heads are knocking together
with Hans his, and inquiring for you. Omni. Keep the door locked.


Oh I, do, do: and let sir Gozlin (because he has bin in the low Countries)
swear go^z Sacrament, and drive em away with broke Dutch.


Here's a wench has simple Sparks in her: she's my pupile Gallants: Good-god? I
see a man is not sure that his wife is in the Chamber, tho his own fingers
hung on the Padlocke: Trap-doores, false Drabs, and Spring-lockes, may cozen a
Co^y of Constables. How the silly Husbands might here ha been gulled with
Flemish money: Come: drink up Rhene, Thames and Meander dry, There's Nobody.


Ah thou ungodly master.


I did but make a false fire, to try your valour, because you cried let em
come. By this glass of woman's wine, I^would not ha seen their Spirits walk
here, to be dubbed deputy of a Ward, I, they would ha Chronicled me for a Fox
in a Lambs skin: But come: Is this merry Midsomer night agreed upon? when shall
it be? where shall it be?


Why faith to morrow at night.


We'll take a Coach and ride to Ham, or so.


O fie vpont: a Coach? I cannot abide to be iolted.


Yet most of your Citizens wives love iolting?


What say you to B^ack-wall, or Lime-house?


Every room there smells to much of Tar.


Lets to mine host Dogbolts at Brainford then, there you are out of eyes, out
of ears* private rooms, sweet Ly^nen, winking attendance, and what cheer you
will?


Content, to Bramford?


I, I, lets go by water, for sir Gozlin I have heard you say you love to go by
water.


But wenches, with what pullies shall we slide with some ^lenly excuse, out of
our husbands suspicion, being gone Westward for smelts all night.


That's the block now we all stumble at: Wind up that ^ring well, and all the
consorts in tune.


Why then goodman scrape^ tis wound up, I have it. Sir Wafer, thy childes at
nurse, if you that are the men could provide some wise ass that could keep
his countenance.


Nay if he be an Ass he will keep his countenance.


I, but I mean, one that could set out his tale with audacity, and say that
the child were sick, and near stagger at it: That last should serve all our
feet.


But where will that wise Ass be found now?


I see I'm borne still to draw Dun out ath mire for you: that wise beast will
I be. I'll be that Ass that shall groan under the burden of that abominable
lye. Heaven pardon me, and pray God the infant be not punished fort. Let me see:
I'll break out in some filthy shape like a Thrasher, or a Thatcher, or a
Sowg^lder, or something: and speak dreamingly, and swear how the child pukes,
and eats nothing (as perhaps it does not) and lies at the mercy of God, (as
all children and old^folkes do) and then scholar Wafer, play you your part.


Fear not me, for a veny or two?


Where will you meet ith morning?


At some Tavern near the water-side, that's private.


The Grey-hound, the Greyhound in Black-fryers, an excellent Randeuous.


Content the Greyhound by eight?


And then you may whip forth two first, and two next, on a sudden, and take
Boat at Bridewell Dock most privately.


Beet so: a good place?


I'll go make ready my rustical properties: let me see scholar hie you home,
for your child shall be sick within this half howre.


Tis the vprightest dealing man? Gods my pity, whose yonder?


I'm bold to press my self under the Colours of of your company, hearing
that Gentlewoman was in the room: A word mistress?


How now, what says he?


Zounds what she? a Bawd, bith Lord Is't not?


No indeed, sir Gozlin she's a very honest woman, and a Mid-wi^e.


At the Lyon in Shoredich? And would he not read it? nor write to me? I'll
poison his Supper?


But no words that I bewrayd him.


Gentlemen I must be gone. I cannot stay in faith: pardon me: I'll meet to
morrow: come Nurse, cannot tarry by this element.


Mother, you: Grannam drink ere you go. Bird: I am going to a woman's labour,
indeed sir, cannot stay.


I hold my life the blacke-beard her husband whissels for her.


A reckoning: Break one, break all.


Here Hans, draw not, I'll draw for all as Ime true knight.


Let him: amongst women this does stand for law, the worthiest man (tho he be
fool) must draw.


What book is that sweet hart?


Why the book of bonds that are due to you.


Come, what do you with it? Why do you trouble your self to take care about
my business?


Why sir, doth not that which concerns you, concern me. You told me Monopoly
had discharged his bond, I find by the book of accounts here, that it is not
canceld. Ear I would suffer such a cheating companion to laugh at me, I'd see
him hagged I* Good sweet hart as ever you loved me, as ever my bed was
pleasing to you, arrest the knave, we were never beholding to him for a pin,
but for eating up our victuals. Good Mouse enter an action against him.


In troth love I may do the gentleman much discredit, and besides it may be
other actions may fall very heavy upon him.


Hang him, to see the dishonesty of the knave.


O wise, good words: A Courtier, A gentleman.


Why may not a Gentleman be a knave, that were strange in faith: but as I was a
saying, to see the dishonesty of him, that would never come since he received
the money to visit us you know. Master Tenterhook he hath hung long upon you.
Master Tenterhooke as I am virtuous you shall arrest him.


Why, I know not when he will come to Town.


Hes in town: this night he sups at the Lyon in Shoaredich, good husband enter
your action, and make hast to the Lyon presently, there's an honest fellow
(Sergeant Ambush) will do it in a trice, he never salutes a man in Courtesy,
but he catches him as if he would arrest him. Good hart let Seriant Ambush lie
in wait for him.


Well at thy entreaty I will do it. Give me my Cloak there, buy a linck and
meet me at the Counter in Woodstreete; bus me Moll.


Why now you love me. I'll go to bed sweet hart.


Do not sleep till I come Moll.


No lamb, baa sheep, if a woman will be free in this intricate labyrinth of a
husband, let her marry a man of a melancholy complexion, she shall not be much
troubled with him. By my sooth my Husba^d hath a hand as dry as his brains,
and a breath as strong as six common gardens. Well my husband is gon to arrest
Monopoly. I have dealt with a Sergeant privately, to entreat him, pretending
that he is my Aunts Son, by this means shall I see my young gallant that in
this has plaid his part. When they owe money in the City once, they deal with
their Lawyers by atturny, follow the Court though the Court do them not the
grace to allow them their dyer. O the wit of a woman when she is put to the
pinch.


Come Sergeant Ambush, come yeoman Clutch, yons the Tavern* the Gentleman will
come out presently: thou art resolute.


Who I, I carry fire sword that fight for me, hear, and hear. I know most of
the knaves about London, and most of the Thieves to, I thank God* and good
intelligence.


I wonder thou dost not turn Broker then.


Pew; I have bin a Broker already; for I was first a Puritan, then a
Banquerout, then a Broker, then a Fencer, and then Sergeant, were not these
Trades would make a man honest? peace the door opes, wheel about yeoman
Clutch.


And ear I come to sup in this Tavern again. There's no more attendance then
in a Jail, and there had bin a Punk ot two in the company then we should not
have bin rid of the drawers: now were I in an excellent humour to go to a valting
house* I wold break down all their Glass-windowes, hew in pieces all their
join stools, tear silk petticotes, ruffle their Periwigs, and spoil their
Painting, O the Gods what I could do: I could undergo fifteen bawds by this
darkness, or if I could meet one of these Varlets that were Pannier ally on
their baks (Sergeants) I would make them scud so fast from me, that they should
think it a shorter way between this and Ludgate, then a condemned Cu^purse
thinks it between Newgate and Tyburne.


You are for no action to night.


No I'll to bed.


Am not I drunk now: Implentur veteris bacchi, pi^quis{que} Tobacco.


Faith we are all heated.


Captain Whirlepoole when wilt come to Court and dine with me?


One of these days Frank, but I'll get me two Gaunlets for ^eare I lose my
fingers in the dishes, their be excellent shavers I hear in the most of your
under offices? I protest I have often come thither, sat down drawn, my knife,
and ear I could say grace all the meat hath bin gone. I have risen, and
departed thence as hungry, as ever came Country Atturny from Westminster? Good
night honest Frank, do not swagger with the watch Frank.


So now they are gone you may take him.


Sir I arrest you?


Arrest me, at whose suite you varlets?


At master Tenterhookes.


Why you varlets dare you arrest one of the Court.


Come will you be quiet sir?


Pray thee good yeoman call the gentlemen back again. There's a Gentleman hath
carried a hundred pound of mine home with him to his lodging, because I dare not
carry it over the fields, I'll discharge it presently.


That's a trick sir, you would procure a reskue.


Catchpole do you see, I will have the hair of your head and beard shaved off
for this, and ear I catch you at Grayes Inn by this light law.


Come will you march.


Are you Sergeants Christians? Sir thou look like a good pittyfull
rascal, and thou art a tall man to it seems, thou hast backed many a man in
thy time I warrant.


I have had many a man by the back sir.


Welsaide in-troth, I love your quality, las tis needful every man should come
by his own* but as God mend m^ gentlemen I have not one cross about me, only
you two. Might not you let a Gentlemen pass out of your hands, and say you
saw him not? Is there not such a kind of mercy in you now and then my
Masters, as I live, if you come to my lodging to morrow morning, I'll give you
five brace of Angles? good yeoman persuade your graduat here: I know some of
you to be honest faithful Drunkards, respect a poor Gentleman in my case.


Come, it will not serve your turn, Officers look to him, upon your perril.


Do you hear sir, you see I am in the hands of a couple of Ravens here, as you
are a Gentleman lend me forty shillings, let me not live if I do not pay you
the forfeiture of the whole bond, and never plead Conscience.


Not a penny, not a penny: God night sir.


Well, a man ought not to sweat by any thing in the hands of Sergeants but by
silver, and because my pocket is no lawful Justice to Minister any such oath
unto me, I will patiently encounter the Counter. Which is the dearest ward in
Prison Sergeant! the knights ward?


No sir, the Masters side.


Well the knight is above the master though his Table be worse furnished: I'll
go thither.


Come sir, I must use you kindly the Gentleman's Wife that hath arrested you.


I what of her.


She says you are her Antes son.


I, am?


She takes on so pitifully for your Arresting, twas much against her will (good
Gentlewoman) that this affliction lighted upon you.


She hath reason, if she respect her poor kindred.


You shall not go to prison.


Honest Sergeant, Conscionable Officer, did I forget my self even now, a vice
that sticks to me always when I am drunk to abuse my best friends: where
did buy this buff? Let me not live but I'll give thee a good suite of
durance, Wilt thou take my bond Sergeant? Wheres a Scrivener, a Scrivener good
Yeoman? you shall have my sword and hangers to pay him.


Not so Sir: but you shall be prisoner in my house: I do not think but that
your Cousin will visit you there in the morning, and take order for you.


Well said; wast not a most treacherous part to arrest a man in the night* and
when he is almost drunk, when he hath not his wits about him to remember which
of his friends is in the Subsedy: Come did I abuse you, I recant, you are as
necessary in a city as Tumblers in Norfolke, Sumners in Lancashire, or
Rake-hels in an Army*


Buy any small Coal, buy any small Coal.


Collier, Collier?


What say boy.


Ware the Pillory.


O boy the pillory assures many a man that he is no cukold, for how impossible
wear it a man should thrust his head through so small a Loope-ho'e if his
forehead were brauncht boy?


Collier: how came the goose to be put upon you, ha?


I'll tell thee, the Term lying at Winchester in Henry the Thirds days, and
many French Women coming out of the Isle of Wight thither (as it hath always
been seen) though the Isle of Wight could not of long time neither in dure
Foxes nor Lawyers. yet it could brook the more dreadful Cockatrice, there were
many Punkes in the Town (as you know our Term is their Term) your Farmers
that would spend but three pence on his ordinary, would lavish half a Crown
on his Lechery: and many men (Calves as they were) would ride in a Farmers
foul boots before breakfast, the commonst sinner had more fluttering about
her, then a fresh punk hath when she comes to a Town of Garrison, or to a
university. Captains, Schollers, Serving-men, Jurors, Clarks, Townsmen, and the
Blacke-guarde used all to one Ordinary, and most of them were called to a
pitiful reckoning* for before two returns of Michaelmas, Surgeons were full
of business, the care of most secrecy grew as common as Lice in Ireland, or as
scabs in France. One of my Tribe a Collier carried in his Cart 40. maimed
soldiers to Salsbury, looking as pitifully as Dutchmen first made drunk,
then carried to bee-heading. Every one that met him cried, ware the Goose
Collier, and from that day to this, theirs a record to be seen at Croiden, howe
that pitiful wa^tage which in deed was virtue in the Collier, that all that
time would carry no Coals, laid this Imputation on all the posterity.


You are full of tricks Colliar.


Boy where dwells master Wafer?


Why hear! what would? I am one of his Iuvinals?


Hath he not a child at nurse at More-clacke?


Yes, dost thou dwell there?


That I do, the Child is wondrous sick: I was wild to acquaint thy master
and Mistress with it.


I'll up and tel them presently.


So, if al should fail me, I could turn Collier. O the villainy of this age,
how full of secrecy and silence (contrary to the opinion of the world) have I
ever found most women. I have sat a whole afternoon many times by my wife, and
looked upon her eyes, and felt if her pulses have beat, when I have named a
suspected love, yet all this while have not drawn from her the least scruple
of confession. I have lain awake a thousand nights, thinking she wold have
revealed somewhat in her dreams, and when she has begun to speak any thing
in her sleep, I have iog'd he^, and cried I sweet heart. But when will your
love come, or what did he say to thee over the stall? Or what did he do to
thee in the Garden-chamber? Or when will he send to thee any letters, or when
wilt thou send to him any money, what an idle coxcomb jealousy will make a man.



O my sweet Child, wheres the Collier?


Here forsooth.


Run into Bucklers burry for two ounces of Draggon water, so^e Sperma (...) and
Treakle. What is it sick of Coliar? ^ burning Fever?


Faith mistress I do not know the infirmity of it: will you buy any small Coal,
say you?


Prithee go in and empty them, come be not so impatient.


I, I, I, if you had groaned fort as I have done you wold have bin more natural.
Take my riding hat, and my kirtle there: I'll away presently?


You will not go to night, I am sure.


As I live but I will.


Faith sweet hart I have great business to night, stay till to morrow and I'll go
with you.


No sir I will not hinder your business. I see how little you respect the fruits
of your own body. I shall find some body to bear me company.


Well, I will defer my business for once, and go with thee.


By this light but you shall not, you shall not hit me in the teeth that I was your
hindrance, will you to Bucklers burry sir?


Come you are a fool leave yeur weeping.


You shall not go with me as I live.


Puple.


Exc^llent master.


Admirable Mistress, howe happy be our Englishwomen that are not troubled with
Jealous husbands; why your Italians in general are so Sun-burnt with these
Dog-daies, that your great Lady there thinks her husband loves her not if he
be not ^ealious: what confirms the liberty of our women more in England, then
the Italian Proverb, which says if there were a bridge over the narrow Seas,
all the women in Italy would show their husbands a Million of light pair of
heals, and fly over into England.


The time of our meeting? Come?


Seven.


The place.


In Blacke-Friers, there take Water, keep a aloof from the shore, on with
your Masks, up with your sails, and West-ward Hoe


So.


O the quick apprehension of women, the'ile groape out a mans meaning
presently, well, it rests now that I discover my self in my true shape to these
Gentlewomens husbands: for though I have plaid the fool a little to beguile
the memory of mine own misfortune, I would not play the knave, though I be
taken for a Banquerout, but indeed as in other things, so in that, the world
is much deceived in me, for I have yet three thousand pounds in the hands of a
sufficient friend, and all my debts discharged. I have received here a letter
from my wife* directed to S^ode, wherein she most repenta^tly entreats my
return, with protestation to give me assured trial of her honesty. I cannot
tell what to think of it, but I will put it to the test, there is a great
strife between beauty, Chastity, and that which pleases many is neue^ free
from ^emtation: as for Jealousy, it makes many Cuckolds, many fools, and
many banquerouts: It may have abused me and not my wives honesty: I'll try it:
but first to my secure and do^ing Companion.


I beseech you Mistress Tenterhooke,
Before God I'll be sick if you will not be merry.

You are a sweet Beagle.


Come, because I kept from Town a little, let me not live if I did not hear
the sickness was in Town very hot: In troth thy hair is of an excellent colour
since I saw it. O those bright tresses like to threads of gold.


Lye, and ashes, suffer much in the city for that comparison.


Here's an honest Gentleman will be here by by, was borne at Foolham: his name is
Gos^ng Gloo-worme.


I know him, what is he?


He is a Knight: what aild your husband to be so hasty to arrest me.


Shall I speak truly? shall I speak not like a woman.


Why not like a woman.


Because women's tongues are like to c^ocks, if they go too fast they never go
true, t'was I that got my husband to arrest thee, I have.


I am beholding to you.


For sooth I could not come to the speech of you, I think you may be spoken
with all now.


I thank you, I hope you'll bail me Cousin?


And yet why should I speak with you, I protest I love my husband


Tush let not any young woman love a man in years too well.


Why? Mono Because heel dye before he can requi^e it.


I have acquainted Wafer and Honysuckle with it, and they allow my wit for it
extremely.


Welcome good mistress Tenterhooke.


Sergeant I must needs have my Cousin go a little Way out of Town with me and to
secure thee, here are two Diamonds, they are worth two hundred pound, keep
them till I return him.


Well tis good security.


Do not come in my husbands sight in the mean time


Welcome Gallants.


How now Monopoly Arrested?


O my little Honysuckle art come to visit a Prisoner?


Yes faith as Gentlemen visit Merchants, to fare well, or as Poets young quaint
R^uellers, to laugh at them. Sirrha if I were some foolish Justice, if I would
not beg thy wit never trust me.


Why I pray you?


Because it hath bin concealed al this while, but come shall we to boat, we are
furnished for attendants as Ladies are, We have our fools, and our Ushers.


I thank you Madame, I shall meet your wit in the close one day.


Sir, thou know my husband keeps a Kennel of hounds?


Yes.


Doth thy husband love venery?


Venery?


I, hunting, and venery are words of one signification.


Your two husband, and he have made a match to go find a Hare about Busty
Causy.


Theile keep an excellent house till we come home again.


O excellent, a Spanish dinner, a Pilcher, and a Dutch supper, butter and
Onions.


O thou art a mad wench.


Sergeant carry this ell of Cambric to mistress Bird. tel her but that it is a
rough tide, and that she fears the water, she should have gone with us.


O thou hast an excellent wit.


To Boat hay?


Sir Gozlin? I do take it your legs are married.


Why mistress?


They look so thin upon it.


Ever since I measurd with your husband, I have shrunk in the cal^e.


And yet you have a sweet tooth in your head.


O well dealt for the Calves head, you may talk what you will of legs, and
rising in the small, and swelling beneath the garter. But tis certain when lank
thighs brought long stockings out of fashion, the Courtiers Leg, and his
slender tilting staff grew both of a bigness. Come for Brainford.


Good morrow mistress Luce: how did you take your rest to night? how doth your
good worship like your lodging? what will you have to breakfast?


A pox of the Knight that was here last night, he promised to have sent me some
wild foul; he was drunk I'll bestewed else.


Why do not you think he will send them?


Hang them: ^s no more in fashion for them to keep their promises, then tis
for men to pay their debts. He will lie faster then a Dog tro^s: what a filthy
knocking was at door last night; some puny Inn-a-court-men, I'll hold my
contribution.


Yes in troth were they, civil gentlemen without beards, b^t to say the truth,
I did take exceptions at their knocking: took them a side said to them:
Gentlemen this is not well, that you should come in this habit, Cloaks and
Rapiers, Boots and Spurs, I protest to you, those that be your Ancientes in the
house would have come to my house in their Caps and Gowns, civilly, and
modestly. I promise you they might have bin taken for Citizens, but that they
talk more liker fools. Who knocks there? up into your Chamber.


Whose above?


Let me see your face first. O master Honisuckle, why the old party: the old
party.


Pew I will not go up to her: no body else?


As I live will you give me some Sack? wheres Opportunity.


What dost call her?


Her name is Christian, but mistress Luce cannot abide that name, and so she
calls her Opportunity.


Very good, good.


Is't a shilling, bring the rest in Aqua vit^.
Come shals go to Noddy.

I and thou wilt for half an hour.


Here are the Cards? deal, God send me Dcces and Aces with a Court Card,
and I shall get by it.


That can make thee nothing.


Yes if I have a coat Card turn up.


I show four games?


By my troth I must show all and little enough to, six games: play your single
game, I shall double with you anon.

Pray you lend me some silver to count my games?
How now is it good Sack?

There's a gentleman at door would speak with you.


Gods so, I will not be seen by any means.


Into that closet then? What another mufler?


How dost thou mistress Birdlime?


Master Tenterhook^ the party is above in the dining Chamber.


Above.


All alone?


Is he gone up? who wast I pray thee?


By this sack I will not tel you I say that yo^ were a contry Gentleman, or a
Citizen that hath a young wife, or an Inn of Chauncery Man, should I tell
you? Pardon me; this Sack tastes of Horse flesh, I warrant you the leg of a
dead horse hangs in the But of Sack to keep it quick?


I beseech thee good Mistress Birdlime tel me who it was.


O God sir we are sworn to secrecy as well as Surgeons. Come drink to me, and
lets to our game.


Who am I?


You, pray you vnblind me, Captain Whirlpoole, no master Lynstock: pray
vnblind me, you are not sir Gozling Glo-worme, for he we^res no Rings of his
fingers! Master Freeze-leather, O your are George the drawer at the Mitre,
pray you vnblinde me, Captain Puckfoist, Master Counterpaine the Lawyer,
what the devil mean you, beshrew your heart you have a very dry hand, are you
not mine host Dog-bolt of Brainford, Mistress Birdlime, master Honysuckle,
Master Wafer.


What the last of al your Clients.


O how dost thou good Cousin.


I you have many Cousins.


Faith I can name many that I do not know, and suppose I did know them what
then? I will suffer one to keep me in diet, another in apparel; another in
Physic; another to pay my house rent. I am just of the Nature of Alcumy; I will
suffer every plodding fool to spend money upon me, marry none but some
worthy friend to enjoy my more retired and vse-full faithfulness.


Your love, your love.


O I, tis the curse that is laid upon our quality, what we glean from
others we lavish upon some trothlesse welfac'd younger Brother, that Loves us
only for maintenance.


Hast a good ^earme Luce?


A pox on the Term, and n^w I think o^t, says a gentleman last night let
the pox be in the Town seven year, Westminster never breeds Cob-webs, yet
tis as catching as the plagu, though not also general, there be a thousand
bragging lacks in* London, that will protest they can wrest comfort from me
when (I swear) not one of them know wheather my palm be moist or not: In
troth I love thee: You promised me seven Else of Cambric. Wafer knocks and
enters, Whose that knocks?


What, more Sacks to the Myl, I'll to my old retiremet.


How doth your good worship, Passion of my hart, what shift shall I make. How
hath your good worcester. done, a long time?


Very well God ^mercy.


Your good worsh. I think be riding out of town.


Yes believe me, I love to be once a week a horseback, for methinks nothing
sets a man out, better than a Horse.


Tis certain, nothing sets a woman out better than a man.


What, is mist. Luce above?


Yes truly.


Not any company with her.


Company? Shall I say to your good worship and not lie, she hath had no company
(let me see how long it was since your Worcester. was hear) you w^t to a Butchers
feast at Cuckolds-hauen the next day after Saint Lukes day. Not this fortnight,
in good truth.


Alas, good soul.


And why was it? Go to, go to, I think you know better than I* The wench
asks every day when will M. wafer be here: And if Knights ask for her,
she cries out at stayre-hed, As you love my life let em not come up, I'll do my
self violence if they enter: Have not you promised her somewhat?


Faith, I think she loves me.


Loves: Well, wud you knew what I know, then you wud say somewhat. In good faith
she's very poor, all her gowns are at pawn: she owes me five pound for her
diet, besides 40. sh. I lent her to redeem two half silk Kirtles from the
Brokers, And do you think she needed be in debt thus, if she thought not of
Some^body.


Good honest Wench.


Nay in troth, she's now entering into bond for 5. pounds more, the Scrivener
is but new gon up to take ber bond.


Come, let her not enter into bond, I'll lend her 5. pound, i'll pay the rest of
her debts, Call down the Scrivener?


I pray you when he comes down, stand muffled, and I'll tell him you are her
brother.


If a man have a good honest wench, that lives wholly to his use, let him not
see her want.


O, mist. Luce, mist. Luce, you are the most unfortunate gentlewoman that ever
breathed: your young wild brother came newly out of the Country, he calls me
Bawd, swears I keep a Bawdy house, says his sister is turned whore, and that
he will kill, slay any man that he finds in her company.


What conuayance will you make with mistress Birdlime.


O God let him not come up, tis the swaggringst wild-oats.


I have pacified him somewhat, for I told him, that you were a Scrivener come to
take a band of her, now as you go ^oorth say she might have had so much money if
she had pleased, and say, she is an honest Gentlewoman and al will be well.


Enough, farewell good Luce.


Come change your voice, and muffle you.


What trick should this be, I have never a brother, I^e hold my life some
franker customer is come, that she slides him off so smoothly.


The Gentlewoman is an honest Gentlewoman as any is in London, and should have
had thrice as much money upon her single bond for the good report I hear of
her.


No sir her friends can furnish her with money.


By this light I should know that voice, Wafer, od'sfoote are you the
Gentlewoman's Brother?


Are your turned a Scrivener Tenterhooke?


I am spoiled.


Tricks of mistress Birdlime by this light.


Hoick Covert, hoick covert, why Gentlemen is this your hunting?


A Consort, what make you here Honysuckle?


Nay what make you two hear, O excellent mistress Bird. thou hast more tricks
in thee then a Punk hath V^ckles, cousins, Brothers. Sons or Fathers: an
infinite Company.


If I did it not to make your good worships merry, never ^el^eue me, I will
drink to your worship a glass of Sack.


God save you.


Master Iustiniano welcome from St^ad.


Why Gentlemen I never came there.


Never there ^ where have you bin then?


Mary your daily guest I thank you.


Ours.


I yours.

I was the pedant that learnt your wives to write, I was the Colliar that
brought you news your child was sick, but the truth is, for ought I know,
the Child is in health, and your wives are gone to make merry at Brainford.


By my troth good wenches, they little dream where we are now*


You little dream what gallants are with them.


Gallants with them! I de laugh at that.


Four Gallants by this light, My* Monopoly is one of them.


Monopoly? I de laugh at that in faith.


Would you laugh at that! why do ye laugh at it then, they are there by this
time, I cannot stay to give you more particular intelligence: I have received a
letter from my wife hear, if you will cal me at Putney, I'll bear you company.


Od'sfoot what a Rogue is Sergeant Ambush, I'll undo him by this light.


I met Sergeant Ambush, and wild him come to this house to you presently, so
Gentlemen I leave you ^ Bawd I have nothing to say to you now; do not think to
much in so dangerous a matter for in women's matters tis more dangerous to stand
long deliberating* then before a battai^e.


This fellows poverty hath made him an arrant knave.


will your worship drink any Aquavitae?


Apox on your Aquavitae. Monopoly, that my wife urged me to arrest gon to
Brainford.


I am come si^ to know your pleasure.


What hath Monopoly paid the money yet?


No sir, but he sent for money.


You have not carried him to the counter, he is at your house still.


O Lord I sir as melancholic c.


You lie like an arrant varlet, by this candle I laugh at the jest


And yet hes ready to cry.


Hes gone with my wife to Brainford, and there be any Law in England I'll
tickle ye for this.


Do your worst, for I have good security I care not, besides it was his cousin
your wines pleasure that he should go along with her.


Hoy day, her cousin, ^el sir, your security.


Why sir two Diamonds here.

O my hart: my wives two Diamonds,
Well, you'll go along and instifie this.

That I will sir.


Who am I?


What the Murrion care I who you are, hold off your Fingers, or I'll cut them
with this Diamond.


I'll see em in faith,

So, I'll keep these Diamonds tell I have my silk gown, and six else of
Cambric.


By this light you shall not.


No, what do you think you have Fops in hand, sue me for them.


As you respect your credit lets go.


Good Luce as you love me let me have them, it stands upon my Credit, thou
shalt have any thing, take my purse.


I will not be crossed in my humour sir.


You are a damned filthy punk, what an unfortunate Rogue was I, that ever I
came into this house.


Do not spurn any body in my house you were best.


Well, well.


Excellent Luce, the getting of these two Diamonds mai^ chance to save the
Gentlewomens credit; thou heard all.


O I, and by my troth pity them, what a filthy Knave was that betrayed them.


One that put me into pitiful fear, master I^stiniano here hath laid
lurking like a sheep-biter, and in my knowledge hath drawn these gentlewomen
to this misfortune: but I'll down to Queene-hiue, and the Watermen which were
wont to carry you to Lambeth Marsh, shall carry me thither: It may be I may
come before them; I think I shall pray more, what for sear of the water, and
for my good success then I did this tweluemonth.


Have you perfumed this Chamber?


Yes my Lord.


The banquet?


It stands ready.


Go, let music
Charm with her excellent voice an awful silence
Through al this building, that her sphaery soul
May (on the wings of Air) in thousand forms
Invisibly fly, yet be enjoyed. Away.

Does my Lord mean to Conjure that he draws this strange Characters.


He does: but we shall see neither the Spirit that rises, nor the Circle it
rises in.


'twould make our hair stand up an end if we should, come fools come, meddle
not with his matters, Lords may do any thing.


This night shall my desires be amply Crowned,
And al those powers, that taste of man in us,
Shall now aspire that point of happiness,
Beyond which, sensual eyes never look, (sweet pleasure!)
Delicious pleasure? Earths Supremest good,
The spring of blood, tho it dry up our blood.
Rob me of that, (tho to be drunk with pleasure,
As rank excess even in best things is bad;
Turns man into a beast) yet that being gone,
A horse and this (the goodliest shape) al one.
We feed: wear rich attires: and strive to cleave
The stars with Marble Towers, fight battles: Spend
Our blood to buy us names: and in Iron hold
Will we eat roots, to imprison fugitive gold:
But to do thus, what Spell can us excite,
This the strong Magic of our appetite:
To feast which richly, life it self undoes,
Whoo'd not die thus? to see, and then to choose
Why even those that starve in Voluntary wants,
And to advance the mind, keep the flesh poor,
The world Enjoying them, they not the world,
Wud they do this, but that they are proud to suck
A sweetness from such sowrenes; let em so,
The torrent of my appetite shall flow
With happier stream. A woman! Oh, the Spirit
And extract of Creation! This, this night,
The Sun shall envy. What cold checks our blood?
Her body is the Chariot of my soul,
Her eyes my bodies light, which if I want,
Life wants, or if possess, I undo her;
Turn her into a devil, whom I adore,
By scorching her with the hot steeme of lust,
Tis but a minutes pleasure: and the sin
Scarce acted is repented. Shun it than:
O he that can Abs^aine, is more than man!
Tush. Resolu'st thou to do ill: be not precize
Who writes of Virtue best, are slaves to vize,
The music sounds all arum to my blood,
Whats bad I follow, yet I see whats good.

Fair! be not doubly maskt: with that and night,
Beauty (like gold) being used becomes more bright.

Will it please your Lordship to ^it, I shall receive small pleasure if I see your
Lordship stand.


Witch, hag, what art thou proud damnation?


A Merchants wife.


Fury who raizd thee up, what come thou for!


For a banquet.


I am abused, deluded: Speak what art thou?
Vds death speak, or i'll kill thee: in that habit
I looked to find an Angel, but thy face,
Shows you are a Devil.

My fa^e is as God made it my Lord: I am no devil unless women be devils, but
men find em not so, for they daily hunt for them.


What art thou that dost cozen me thus?


A Merchants wife I say: Iustinianos wife. She, whom that long burding piece
of yours, I mean that Wicked mother Birdlime caught for your honour. Why my
Lord, has your Lordship forgot how ye courted me last morning.


The devil I did.


Kissed me last morning.


Succubus* not thee.


Gave me this Jewel last morning.


Not to thee Harpy.


To me upon mine honesty, swore you would build me a lodging by the Thames
side with a watergate to it: or else take me a lodging in Cole-harbor.


I swore so.


Or keep me in a Labyrinth as Harry kept Ro^amond where the Minotaure my husband
should not enter.


I swear so, but Gypsy not to thee?


To me upon my honour, hard was the siege, which you laid to the Crystal walls
of my chastity, but I held out you know: but because I cannot be too stony
hearted, I yielded my Lord, by this token my Lord (which token lies at my heart
like lead) but by this token my Lord, that this night you should commit that
sin which we al know with me.


The^?


Do I look ugly, that you put thee upon me: did I give you my hand to horne
my head, that's to say my husband, and is it com to thee: is my face a filthy^
face, now it is yours, then when it was his: or have I two faces under one
hood. I confess I have laid mine eyes in brine, and that may change the
copy. But my Lord I know what I am.


A Sorceres^e, thou shalt witch mine ears no more,
If thou can pray, doot quickly for thou die.

I can pray but I will not die, thou lie:
My Lord there drops your Lady; And now know,
Thou unseasonable Lecher, I am her husband
Whom thou would make whore, read: she speaks there thus,
Unless I came to her, her hand shou^d free
Her Chastity from blemish, proud I was
Of her brave mind, I came, and seeing what slavery
Poverty, and the frai^tie of her Sex
H^d, and was like to make her Subject to,
I begged that she would die, my suite was granted,
I poisoned her, thy lust there strikes her dead,
Horns feared, plague worse, than sticking on the head.

Oh God thou hast undone thy self and me,
None live to match this piece, thou art to bloody,
Yet for her sake, whom I'll embalm with tears,
This Act with her I bury, and to quit
Thy loss of such a Jewel, thou shalt share
My living with me, Come embrace.

My Lord.

Vilaine, damned merciless slave, I'll torture thee
To every inch of flesh: what ho: help, whose there?
Come hither: here's a murderer, bind him. How now,
What noise is this.

My Lord there are three Citizens face me down, that here's one master
Parenthesis a schoolmaster with your Lordship and desire he may be
forth-comming to em.


That borrowed name is mine. Sh^ft for your selves:
Away, shift for your selves; fly, I am taken.

Why should they fly thou Skreech-owle.

I will tel thee,
Those three are partners with me in the murder,
We four comixed the poison, shift for your selves.

Stops mouth, and drag him back: entreat em enter.
O what a conflict feel I in my blood,
I would I were less great to be more good:
You're welcome, wherefore came you! guard the doors;
When I behold that object, al my senses
Revolt from reason, he that offers flight,
Drops down a Coarse.

a Coarse?

I a coarse, do you scorn to be worms meat more then she?

See Gentlemen, the Italian that does scorn,
Beneath the Moon, no baseness like the horne,
Has powered through all the veins of yon chaste bosom,
Strong poison to preserve it from that plague,
This flesh'y Lord: he doted on my wife,
He would have wrought on her and plaid on me.
But to pare off these brims, I cut off her,
And gulled him with this lie, that you had hands
Dipped in her blood with mine, but this I did,
That his stained age and name might not be hid.
My Act (tho wild) the world shall crown a^ just,
I shall dye eleere, when he lives soiled with lust:
But come: rise Moll. Awake sweet Moll, you have played
The woman rarely, counterfeited well.

Sure sh'as nine lives.

See, Lucrece is not slain,
Her eyes which lust called Suns, have their first beams,
And all these fr^ghtments are but idle dreams:
Yet (before Jove) she had her knife prepared
To let his blood forth ere it should run black?
Do not these open cuts now, cool your back?
Methinkes they should: when Vice sees with broad eyes
Her ugly form, she does h^rselfe despise.

Mirror of dames, I look upon thee now,
As men long blind, (having recovered sight)
Amazd: scarce able are to endure the lig^t:
Mine own shame strikes me dumb: hence forth the book
I'll read shall be thy mind, and not thy look.

I would either we were at Braineford to see our wiue^, or our wives here to
see this Pageant.


So would I, I stand upon thorns.


The jewels which I gave you: wear: your fortunes,
I'll raise on golden Pillars: fare you well,
Lust in old age like burnt straw, does even choke
The kiudlers, and consumes, in stinking Smoke.

You may follow your Lord by the smoke, Badgers.


If fortune had fauord him, we might have followed you by the horns.


Fortune favours fools, your Lords a wise Lord: So: how now? ha? This is that
makes me fat now, is't not Rats-bane to you Gentlemen, as pap was to Nestor, but
I know the invisible sins of your wives hang at your eye-lides, and that makes
you so heavy headed.


If I do take em napping I know what I'll do.


I'll nap some of them.


That villain Monopoly, and that sir Gozlin treads em all.


Wud I might come to that ^reading.


Ha ha, sownd I: come Moll: the book of the siege of Oftend, writ by one that
dropped in the action, will never sell so well, as a report of the siege between
this Gr^e, this wicked elder and ^hy self, an impression of you two, wold away
in a May-morning: was it e^er heard that such tyrings, were brought away from a
Lord by any wench but thee Moll, without paying, unless the wench connycatcht
him? go thy thy ways: if all the great Turks Concubins were but like thee, the
ten-penny-infidell should never need keep so many geldings to ney ouerem: come
shall this Western voyage hold my harts?


Yes, yes.


Yes, yes: Sfoot you speak as if you had no harts, look as if you were going
westward indeed: to see how plain dealing women can pull down men: Moll
you'll help us to catch Smelts too?


If you be pleased.


Never better since I wore a Smock.


I fear our oars have given us the bag.


Good, I'd laughed at that.


If they have, would wheres might give them the Bottle: come march whilst the
women double their files: Married men fee, there's comfort: the Moons up: fore
Don Pha^us, I doubt we shall have a Frost this night, her horns are so sharp:
do you not feel it bite.


I do, Ime sure.


But we'll sit upon one another skir^ith Boat, and lye close in straw, like
the hoary Courtier. Set on to Brainford now: where if you meet frail wi^es,
Ne'er swear against horns, invaine dame Nature strives.


Why Chamberlin? will not these Fiddlers be drawn forth? are they not in tune
yet? Or are the Rogues a afraid ath Statute, and dare not travel so far without
a passe-port?


What Chamberlin?


Wheres mine host? what Chamberlin.


Anon sir, here sir, at hand sir.


Wheres this noise? what a lousy Towns this? Has Brainford no music int.


They are but rozining sir, and theile scrape themselves into your company
presently.


Plague a their Cats guts, and their scraping: dost not see women here, and can
wethinkst thou be without a noise then?


The troth is sir, one of the poor instruments caught a sore mischance last
night: his most base bridge fell down, and belike they are making a gathering
for the reparations of that.


When they come, lets have em with apox.


Well sir, you shall sir.


Stay Chamberlin: wheres our knight sir Gozlin? wheres sir Gozlin.


Troth sir, my master, and sir Gozlin are guzling: they are dabbling together
fathom deep: the Knight hath drunk so much Health to the Gentleman yonder, on
his knees, that he has almost lost the use of his legs.


O for love, let none of em enter our room, fie.


I wud not have em cast up their accounts here, for more then they mean to be
drunk this tweluemonth.


Good Chamberlin keep them and their Helthes out of our company. I warrant
you, their Helthes shall not hu^t you.


I, well said: they're none of our giving: let em keep their own quarter: Nay
I told you the man would soak him if he were ten Knights: if he were a Knight
of Gold theyd fetch him over.


Out upon him?


There's a Liefetennant and a Captain amongst em too.


Nay, then look to have some body l^e on the earth fort: Its ordinary for your
Lief tenant to be drunk with your Captain, and your Captain to cast with
your Knight.


Did you never hear how sir Fabian Scarerow (even such another) took me up one
night before my husband being in wine.


No indeed, how was it?


But I think I took him down with a witness,


How? Good Tenterhooke.


Nay I'll have all your ear^s take part of it.


Come, on then.


Hevsd to freequent me and my Husband diverse times* And at last comes he out
one morning to my husband, and says, master Tenterhooke says he, I must
trouble you to lend mee200. pound about a commodity which I am to deal in, and
what was that comm^dity but his knighthood.


So.


Why you shall Master Scarcrow says my good man: So within a little while
after, Master Fabian was created Knight.


Created a Knight! that's no good heraldry: you must say dubbed.


And why not Created pray.


I well done, put him down ats own weapon.


Not Created, why al things have their being by creation.


Yes by my faith is't.


But to return to my tale.


I mary: mark now.


When he had climbed up this costly ladder of preferment, he disburses the money
back again very honourably: comes home, and was by my husband invited to
supper: There supped with us besides, another Gentleman incident to the Court,
one that had bespoke me of my husband to help me into the banqueting house
and see the revelling: a young Gentleman, and that wag (our schoolmaster)
marster Parenthesis, for I remember he said grace, methinks I see him yet, how
he turned up the white a'th eye, when he came to the last Gasp, and that he
was almost past Grace.


Nay he can doot.


All supper time, my New-minted knight, made Wine the waggon to his meat, for
it ran down his throat so fast, that before my Chamber-maid had taken half
up, he was not scarce able to stand.


A general fault at Citizens tables.


And I thinking to play upon him, asked him, Sir Fabian Scarcrow quoth I, what
pretty Gentlewoman will you raise up now to stal her your Lady? but he like a
foul-mouthd man, swore zounds I'll stal never a punk in England. A Lady, there's
two many already: O fie Sir Fabian (quoth I) will you cal her that shall be
your wife such an odious name! and then he sets out a throat swore again (like a
stinking breathed knight as he was) that women were like horse.


O filthy knave.


Theyde break over any hedge to change their pasture, th^ it were worse: Fie
man fie, (says the Gentlewoman.)


Very good.


And he bristling up his beard to rail at her too, I cut him over the thumbs
thus: why sir Fabian Searcrow did I incese my husband to lend you so much money
upon your bare word, and do you backbite my friends, and me so our faces! I
thought you had had more perseverance; if you bore a Knightly and a degenerous
mind you would scorn it: you had wont to be more deformable amongst women:
Fie, that you'll be so humorsome: here was Nobodie so egregious towards you sir
Fabian! and thus in good sadness, I gave him the best words I could pick out
to make him ashamed of his doings.


And how took he this Correction.


Very heavily: for he slept presently vpont: in the morning was the sorriest
Knight, and I warrant is so to this day, that lives by bread in England.


To fee what wine and women can do, the one makes a man not to have a word to
throw at a Dog, the other makes a man to eat his own words tho they were
never so filthy.


I see these Fiddlers cannot build up their bridge, that some Music may come
over us.


No faith they are drunk too, what shals do therefore.


Sit up at Cards al night?


That's Serning mans fashion.


Drink burnt wine and Eggs then?


That's an exercise for your sub-burbe wenches.


No no, lets set upon our posset and so march to bed, for I begin to wax light
with having my Natural sleep p^ld^out a mineeies.


Agreed: beet so, the sack posset and to bed.


What Chamberlain? I must take a pipe of Tobacco.


Not here, not here, not here.


I'll rather love a man that takes a purse, then him that takes Tobacco.


By my little finger I'll break al your pipes, and burn the Case, and the box
too, and you draw out your stinking smoakeafore me.


Prithee good mist^ (...), I'll ha done in a trice.


Do you long to ha^e me swoune?


I'll use but half a pipe in truth.


Do you long to see me lie at your feet!


Smell toot: ^i^ perfumed.


Oh God? Oh God? you anger me: you stir my blood: you move me: you make me
spoil a good face with frowning at you: this was ever your fashion, so to
smoke my Husband when you come home, that I could not abide him in mine eye:
he was a moat in it me thought a month after: pray spawle in another room:
fie, fie, fie.


Well, well, come, we'll for once feed her humour.


Get two rooms off at least if you love us.


Three, three, mai^er Lynstocke three.


Sfoote we'll dance to Norwich, and take it there, if you'll stay till we
return again? Here's a stir, you'll ill abide a fiery face, that cannot endure a
smoky nose.


Come lets satisfy our appetite.


And that will be hard for us, but we'll do our best.


So: are they departed? What string may we three think that these three
gallants harp upon, by bringing us to this sinful town of Brainford? ha?


I know what string they would harp upon, if they could put us into the righ
tune.


I know what one of em buz'd in mine ear, till like a These in a Candle, he
made mine ears burn, but I swore to say nothing.


I know as verily they hope, and brag one to another, that this night theile
row westward in our husbands whirries, as we hope to be rowed to London to
morrow morning in a pair of oars. But wenches lets be wise, and make Rooks
of them that I warrant are now setting pursenets to conycatch us.


Content.


They shall know that Cit^izens wi^es have wit enough to out strip twenty such
gulls; tho we are me^y, lets not be mad: be as wanton as new married wives, as
fantastic and light headed to the eye, as fether-makers, but as pure about
the heart, as if we dwelt amongst em in Black Fryers.


We'll eat and drink with em.


Oh yes: eat with em as hungetly as soldiers: drink* as if we were Froes:
talk as freely as Iestors, but do as little as misers. Who (like dry Nurses)
have great breasts but give no milk. It were better we should laugh at their
popin-^ayes, then live in fear of their prating tongues: tho we lye all night
out of the City, they shall not find country wenches of us: but since we ha
brought em thus far into a fools Paradise, leave em int: the Jest shall be a
stock to maintain us and our pewfellowes in laughing at christnings, cryings
out, and vpsittings this 12. month: how say you wenches, have I set the Saddle
on the right horse.


O twill be excellent.


But how shall we shift em off?


Not as ill debtors do their Creditors (with good words) but as Lawyers do
their Clients when their overthrown, by some new knavish trick: and thus it
shall be: one of us must dislemble to be suddenly very sick.


I'll be she.


Nay, tho we can all dissemble well, yet I'll be she: for men are so jealous, or
rather envious of one another happiness (Especially in this out of town
g^ssipings) that he who shall miss his hen, if he be a right Cock ^ndeede,
will watch the other from treading.


That's certain, I know that by my self.


And like Esops Dog, unless himself might eat hay, will lie in the manger and
starve: but heel hinder the horse from eating any: besides it will be as good
as a Welch hooke for you to keep out the other at the Staves end: for you may
boldly stand upon this point, that vnle^se every mans heals may be tripped up,
you scor^e to play at football.


That's certaine^ peace I hear them spitting after their Tobacco.


A chair, a chair, one of you keep as great a coil and calling, and as if
you ran for a midwife: tho'ther hold ^y head: whilst I cut my lace.


Passion of me? master Monopoly, master Linstock^ and you be men, help to daw
mistress Tenterhooke: O quickly, quickly, she's sick and taken with an Agony.


Sick? How? how now? whats the matter?


Sweet Clare call up thy spirits.


O master Monop^ly, my spirits will not comet a my calling, I am terrible and
Ill: Sure, sure, I'm struck with some wicked planet, for it (...) my very
hart: Oh I feel my self worse and worse.


Some burnt Sack for her good wenche^: or possit drink, pox a this Rogue
Chamberlin, one of you call him: how her pulses beat: a draught of Cynamon
water now for her, were better than two Tankerdes out of the Thames: how now?
Ha.


Ill, ill, ill, ill, ill.


I'm accursed to spend money in this Town of iniquity: there's no good thing
ever comes out of it: and it stands upon such musty ground, by reason of the
River, that I cannot see how a tender woman can do well int, Sfoot? Sick now?
cast down now tis come to the push.


My mind misgives me that als not sound at London.


Pox on em that be not sound, what need that touch you?


I fear you'll never carry me thither.


Puh, puh, say not so.


Pray let my clothes be utterly undone, and then lay me in my bed.


Walk up and down a little.


O master Lynstock, tis no walking will serve my turn: have me to bed good
sweet Mistress Honisuckle, I doubt that old Hag Gillian of Braineford has
bewitched me.


Look to her good wenches.


I so we will, and to you too: this was excellent.


This is strange.


Villainous spiteful luck: no matter, th, other two hold ^yas.


Peace, mark how hes nipped: nothing grieves me so much as that poor Pyramus
here must have a wall this night between him and his Thisbe.


No remedy trusty Troylus: and it grieves me as much, that you'll want your
false Cressida to night, for here's no sir Pandarus to usher you into your
Chamber.


I'll somon a parley to one of the Wenches, and see how all goes.


No whispring with the common enemy by this Iron: he sees the Devil that sees
how all goes amongst the women to night: Nay Sfoot? If I stand piping till you
dance, damn me.


Why you'll let me call to em but at the key-hole.


Puh, good master Lynstocke, I'll not stand by whilst you give Fire at your
Key-holes? I'll hold no Trencher till an other ^eedes: no stirrup till another
gets up: be no doorkeeper. I ha not been so often at Court, but I know what
the back-side of the Hangings are made of I'll trust none under a piece of
Tapestry, viz. a Coverlet.


What will you say if the Wenches do this to gull us?


No matter, I'll not be doubly gulled, by them and by you: go, will you take the
lease of the next chamber and do as I do.


And whats that?


Any villainy in your company, but nothing out on it will you sit up, or lie
by'te.


Nay lie sure, for lying is most in fashion.


Troth then; I'll have you before me.


It shall be yours.


Yours in faith: I'll play Ianus with two faces look a squint both ways for one
night.


Well Sir, you shall be our dore-keeper.


Since we must swim, lets leap into one flood,
We'll either be all nought, or else all good.

Come, come, come, follow me, follow me. I wa^rant you ha lost more by not
falling into a sound last night, than ever you got at one Iob since it pleased
to make you a noise: I can tell you, gold is no money with ^hem: follow me and
fum, as you go; you shall put something into their ears, whilst I provide to
put something into their bellies. Follow close and sum --


What kin art thou to Long- Meg of Westminster? you are like her.


Some-what a like Sir at a blush, nothing a kin Sir, saving in height of mind,
and that she was a goodly Woman.


Mary Anbree, do not you know me? had not I a ^ight of this sweet Physiognomy at
Renish-wine house! ha last day ith Stilliard ha! whither art bound
Galley-foist? whether art bound? whence come thou female yeoman -- a the
guard?


From London Sir.


Dost come to keep the door Ascapart.


My reparations hither is to speak with the Gentlewoman here that drunk with
your worship at the Dutchhouse of meeting.


Drunk with me, you lie, not drunk with me: but faith what would with the
Women? they are a bed: art not a mid-wife? one of hem told me thou were a
night woman.


I ha brought some women a bed, in my time Sir.


I and some young men too, hast not Pandora? howe now! where's this noise.


I'll commit your worship.


To the Stocks? art a Justice? shalt not commit me: dance first faith, why
scrapers, appear under the wenches Comical Window, byth' Lord! Vds Daggers?
cannot sin be set a shore once in a reign upon your Country quarters, but it
must have fiddling? what set of Villains are you, you perpetual Ragamuffins?


The Town Consort Sir.


Consort with a pox? cannot the shaking of the sheets be danced without your
Town piping? nay then let al hell roar


I beseech you Sir, put up yours, and wee'le put up ours:


Play you louzie Hungarians: see, look the Maipole is set up, we'll dance
about it: keep this circle Maquerelle.


I am no Mackrel, and i'll keep no Circles.


Play, life of Pharao play, the Bawd shall teach me a Scotch Jig.


Bawd! I defy thee and thy Jigs whats^euer thou art: were I in place where,
I'd make thee prove thy words.


I wud prove them Mother best be trust: why do not I know you Granam? and that
Suger-loafe? ha! do I not Magar^.


I am none of your Megges, do not nick-name me so: I will not be nicked.


You will not: you will not: how many of my name (of the Glowormes) have paid
for your furred Gowns, thou Woman's broker.


No Sir, I scorn to be beholding to any Glo-worme that lives upon Earth for
my fur: I can keep my self warm without Glowormes.


Can sing Wood-pecker? come sing and wake them.


Wud you should well know it, I am no singing Woman.


Howl then! sfoote sing, or howl, or I'll break your Ostrich Egshell there.


My Egg hurts not you, what do you mean to fl^rish so.


Sing Madge, Madge, sing Owlet.


How can I sing with such a sour face -- I am haunted with a caugh and cannot
sing.


One of your Instruments Mowntibankes, come, here clutch: clutch.


Alas Sir, I'm an old woman, and know not how to clutch an instrument.


Look mark too and fro as I (...) it: make a noise: its no matter: any hunts
up, to waken vice.


I shall never rub it in tune.


Will you scrape?


So you will let me go into the parties, I will saw, make a noise.


Do then: shatt into the parties, and part them: shat my lean Lana.


If I must needs play the Fool in my old days, let me have the biggest
instrument, because I can hold that best: I shall cough like a broken winded
horse, if I gape once to sing once.


No matter cough out thy Lungs.


No Sir, tho Ime old, and worme-eaten Ime not so rotten --

Will your worship be rid of me now.


Fain, as rich-mens heirs would be of their gowtye dads: that's the
hot-house, where your parties are sweating: amble: go, tell the He parties I
have sent them a Mast (...) their ship.


Yes forsooth I'll do your errand.


Half musty still by thundering Jove: with what wedge of villainy might I
cleave out an howre or two? Fiddlers, come: strike up. march before me, the
Chamberlaine shall put a Crown for you into his bill of Items: you shall sing
bawdy songs under every window ith Town: up will the Clowns start, down
come the Wenches, wee'le set the Men a fighting the Women a scolding, the Dogs
a barking, you shall go on fiddling, and I follow dancing Lantara: curry your
instruments: play and away.


Sergeant Ambush, as you are an honest fellow, scowte in some back room, till
the watch-word be given for fallying forth.


Duns the Mouse.


-- A little low-woman say thou, -- in a Veluet-cappe-and one of 'him in a
Beaver? brother Honny-suckle, and brother Wafer, hark -- they are they.


But art sure their husbands are a bed with them?


I think so Sir, I know not, I left them together in one room: and what
division fell amongst them, the fates can descouer not I.


Leave us good Chamberlaine, we are some of their friends: leave us good
Chamberlaine: be merry a little: leave us honest Chamberlaine -- Brainford
Market; never did the sickness of one belied nurse-child, stick so cold to
the hearts of three Fathers: never were three innocent Citizens so horribly,
so abhominably wrung under the withers.


What shall we do? how shall we help our selves?


How shall we pull this thorne out off our foot before it rancle?


Yes, yes, yes, well enough; one of us stay here to watch do you see: to
watch: have an eye, have an ear. I and my brother Wafer, and May.
Iustiniano, will set the town in an insurrection, bring hither the Constable,
and his Bill^, break open upon hem, take them in their wickedness, and put
them to their (...).


Agreed.


Ha, ha, purgation.


Wee'le have them before some Country Justice of Coram (for we scome to be
bound to the Peace) and this Justice shall draw his Sword in our defence, if we
find them to be Malefactors wee'le tickle them.


Agreed: do not say, but (...) come.


Are you mad? do you know what you do? whether will you run?


To set the Town an an uproar.


An uproar ^ will you make the Towne^men think, that Londoners never come
hither but upon Saint (...) night? Say you should rattle up the Constable:
thrash all the Country together, hedge in the house with Flails, Pike-staues,
and Pitch-forkes, take your wives napping, these Western Smelts nibbling, and
that like so many (...); every Smith should discover his Venus dancing with
Mars, ^ this plaster cure the head-ake.


I, it wood.


Nay it should.


Nego, Nego, no no, it shall be proved unto you, your heads would ache worse:
when women are proclaimed to be light, they strive to be more ^ight, for who
dare disprove a Proclamation.


I but when light Wives make heavy husbands, let these husbands play mad
Hamlet; and cry revenge, come, and (...) do so.


Pray stay, be not so heady at my entreaty.


My wife (...) you, and I entreat you to have mercy on your (...), though you
have none over the women. I'll tell you a tale: this last Christmas a Citizen
and his wife (as it might be one of you) were invited to the Revels one night
at one of the (...) a Court: the husband (having business) trusts his wife
thither to take up a room for him before: she did so: but before she went;
doubts a rising, what blocks her husband would stumble at, to hinder his
entrance, It was consulted upon, by what token, by what trick,, by what banner,
or brooch he should be known to be he when he wrapped at the Gate:


Very good.


The crowd he was told would be greater, their clamours greater, and able to
droune the throats of a shoule of fish wives: he himself therefore (...) an
excellent watch-word, and the sigue at which he would hang out himself, should
be a horne: he would wind his horne, and that should give them warning that he
was come.


So.


The torchmen and (...) had an Item to receaiue him: he comes, rings out his
horne with an allarum, enters with a shout, all the house rises (thinking some
sowgelder pressed in) his wife blushed, the company Jested, the simple man like a
beggar going to the stocks laughed, as not being sensible of his own disgrace,
hereupon the punyes set down this decre that no man shall hereafter come to
laugh at their revels (if his wife be entered before him) unless he cary his
horne about him


I'll not trouble them.


So if you trompet a broad and preach at the market cross, you wives shame,
tis your own shame.


What shall we do then!


Take my council, I'll ask no fee sort: bar out host: banish mine hostess,
beat a way the Chamberlin, let the ost^ers walk, enter you the ch^mbers
peaceably, locke the doors gingerly, look upon your wives woefully, but upon
the euill-doers, most wickedly.


What shall we reap by this.


An excellent harvest, this, you shall hear the poor
mouse-trapt-guilty-gentlemen call for mercy; your wives you shall see kneelig
at your feet, and weeping, and wringing, and blushing, and cursing Brainford
and crying pardona may pardona may, pardona may, whilst you have the choice to
stand either as Judges to condemn them, beadles to torment them, or confessors
to absolved them: And what a glory will it be for you 3. to kiss your wives
like forgetful husbands, to exhort and forgive the young men like pitiful
fathers; then to call for ^ares, then to cry hay for London, then to make a
Supper, then to drown all in Sack and Sugar, then to go to bed, and then to
rise and open shop, where you may ask any man what he lacks with your cap off,
and none shall perceive whether the brims wring you.


We'll raise no towns.


No, no, lets knock first.


I that's best I'll somon a parle. --


Whose there? have you stock-fish in hand that you beat so hard: who are you?


that's my wife; let Instiniano speak for al they know our Tongues.


What a murren ail these colts, to keep such a kicking? Monopoly.


Yes.


Is M. Lynstock up too, and the Captain.


Both are in the field: will you open your door?


O you are proper Gamsters to bring false dice with you fro London to cheat
your selves. Is't possible that 3 shallow women should gul. 3. such Gallants.


What means this.


Have we defied you upon the walls all night to open our gates to you ith
morning. Our honest husba^ds they (silly me) lie praying in their beds now,
that the water under us may not be rough, the tilt that covers us may not be
rent, the straw about our feet may keep our pretty legs warm. I warrant
they walk upon Queen-hiue (as Leander did for Hero) to watch for our landing,
and should we wrong such kind hearts? wud we might ever be troubled with the
tooth-ach the.


This thing that makes fools of us thus, is my wife.


I, I knock your bellies full, we hug one another a bed and lie laughing till
we tickle again to remember how we sent you a Bat-fowling.


An Almond Pa^at: that's my Mabs voice, I know by the sound.


Sfoote you ha spoiled half already, you'll spoil al, if you dam not up your
(...) villainy! nothing but villainy, Ime afraid they have smelt your breaths at
the key hole, now they set you to catch Flouders, whilst in the mean^ time, the
con^piscentious Ma^efactors make 'em ready take Lodo napping.


I'll not be gulled so


Show your selves to be men, and break open doors.


Break open doors, show your selves to be beasts: if you break open doors,
your wives may lay flat burglary to your charge.


Lay a pudding; burglary.


Will you then turn Coridons because you are among ^lowns? shall it be said you
have no brains being in Brainford.


Parenthesis we will enter and set upon 'em.


Well do so: but enter not so that all the country may cry shame of your
doings: knock them down, burst open Erebus, and bring an old house over your
heads if you do.


No matter, we'll bear it of with head shoulders. (...)


You cannot enter indeed la, gods my pittikin our 3 husbands somon a parley; let
that long old woman either creep under the bed or else stand upright behind
the painted cloth.


Do you hear: you Mabel:


Lets never hide our heads now, for we are descouered.


But all this while, my Hony-suckle appears not.


Why then two of them have pitched their tents there yours lies in Ambuscado
with your enemy there.


Stand upon your guard there, whilst I batter here.


Who's there?


Hold, I'll speak in a small voice like one of the women; here's a friend: are
you up? rize, rize; stir, stir.


Vds foot, what Weasel are you? are you going to catch Quails, that you
bring your pipes with you. I'll see what troubled Ghost it is that cannot
sleep.


O May. Monopoly God save you.


Amen, for the last time I saw you, the Devil was at mine elbow in Buff,
what! 3 merry men, 3. merry men, 3. me^ry men be we too,


How does my wife M. Monop.


Who? my overthwart neighbour: passing well: this is kindly don: Sir Gozlin is
not far from you: wee'le join our Armi^s presently, here be rare fields to
walk in-Captaine rize, Captain Lynstock bestir your stumps, for the Philestins
are upon us


This Monopoly is an arrant knave, a cogging knave, for all hes a Courtier, if
Monopoly be suffered to ride up and down with other men's wi^es, hee'le vn-do
both City and Country.


Mol, mask thy self, they shall not know thee.


How now sweet hearts, what make you he^.


Not that which you make here.


Mary you make Bulls of your husbands.


Buzzards do we not? out you yellow infirmities: do al flowers show in your
eyes like Columbines.


Wife what says the Collier? is not thy Soul blacker then his coals? how
does the child? howe does my flesh and blood wife?


Your flesh and blood is very well recovered now mouse-


I know tis: the Collier has a sack-full of news to empty.


Clare Where be your two rings with Diamonds?


At hand sir, here with a wet finger.


I dreamt you had lost hem -- what a profane varlet is this shoulder clapper,
to lye thus upon my wife herrings.


Save you gentlemen;


And you and our wives from you.


Your wives have ^aude themselves for one.


May. Monopoly, tho I meet you in h^e Germany, I hope you can understand
broken English, have you discharged your debt.


yes Sir: with a duble charge, your Harpy that set his ten commandemets upon my
back had 2. Diamonds to save him harmless.


of you Sir.


Me Sir, do you think there be no diamond courtiers.


Sargent Ambush issue forth, Monopoly I'll cut off your convoy may, Sargant
Amb^sh, I charge you as you hope to receive comfort f^om the smell of Mace
speak not like a Sargent, but deal honestly, of whom had you the diamonds.


Of your wife Sir if Ime an honest man.


Of me you peuter-buttoned rascal.


Siria you that live by nothing but the carrion of poult^y.


School Ma^ster hark heither.


Where are my lems and precious stones that were my bale.


Forth coming Sir tho your money is not, your crediter has hem.


Excellent; peace, why M. Tenterhooke, if the diamonds be of the reported
value, I'll pay your money receive em, keep them till May. Monopoly be fatter
ith purse: for May. Monopoly I know you will not be long empty Mast. Monopoly.


Let him have them good Ten^erhooke, where are they.


At home, I locked hem up. --


No indeed for-sooth, I locked them up, those are they your wife has, and those
are they your husband (like a bad liver as he is) would have given to a (...)
of mine, (that lies in my house to take physic) to have committed sleshly
treason with her.


I at your house -- you old --


You perdy, and that honest batchiler, never call me old for the matter.


Motherly woman hes my husband and no Bachelors buttons are at his doublett


las, I speak Innocently and that lean gentleman set in his staff there: But
as Ime a sinner, both I and the young woman had an eye to the mayne chance, tho
they brought more a bout them than captain Candishis voyage came to, they should
not, nor could not (unless I had bin a naughty woman) have entered the straytes.


Have we smelt you out foxes.


Do you come after us with hue and cry when you are the thieves your Selves.


Murder I see cannot be hid, but if this old Sybill of yours speak oracles,
for my part, I'll be like an Almanac that threatens nothing but foulewether.


That bawd has bin damned. 500 times, and is her word to be taken.


To be damned once is enough, for any one of her coat.


Why Sir. what is my coat that you fit thus upon my Scirts.


Thy Coat is an ancient Coat, one of the seven deadly sins, put thy coat
first to making; but do you hear, you mother of Iniquity, you that can loose
and find your ears when you list go, sail with the rest of your
baudie-traffikers to the place of sixe-penny Sinfulness the suburbs.


I scorn the Sinfulness of any suburbs in Christendom tis well known I have
vp-rizers and downe-lyers within the City, night by night, like a profane
fellow as thou art.


Right, I know thou hast, I'll tell you Gentle-folkes, there's more resort to
this Fortune-teller, then of forlorn wives married to old husbands, and of
Greene-sicknesse Wenches that can get no husbands to the house of a wise-Woman.
She has tricks to keep a vaulting house under the Laws nose.


Thou dost the Laws nose wrong to belly me so.


For either a cunning woman has a Chamber in her house or a Physician, or a
picture maker, or an Attorney, because all these are good Cloaks for the rain.
And then if the female party that's cliented aboue-Staires, be young, She's a
Squires daughter of lowe degree, that lies there for physic, or comes up tobe
placed with a Countess: if of middle age, she's a Widow, and has suits at the
term or so.


O fie upon her, burn the witch out of our company.


Lets hem her out off Brainford, if she get not the faster to London.


O no, for Gods sake, rather hem her out off London and let her keep in
Brainford still.


No you cannot hem me out of London; had I known this your rings should ha bin
poxt er -- I wud ha touched them: I will take a pair of Oars, and leave you.


Let that ruin of intemperance be rakt up in dust and ashes, and now tell me,
if you had raised the Town, had not the tiles tumbled upon your heads: for you
see your Wives are chaste, these Gentlemen civil, all is but a merriment, all
but a May-game; she has her Diamonds, you shall have your money the child is
recovered, the false Collier discovered, they came to Brainford to be merry,
you were caught in Bird-lime; and therefore set the Hares-head against the
Goose-giblets, put all instruments in tune, and every husband play music upon
the lips of his Wife whilst I begin first.


Come wenches be it so,


Mist. Iustiniano is't you were ashamed all this while of showing your face, is
she your wife Schoolmaster.


Look you, your Schoole-maister has bin in France, and lost his hair, no more
Parenthesis now, but Iustiniano, I will now play the Merchant with you. Look
not strange at her, nor at me, the story of us both, shall be as good, as an
old wives tale, to cut off our way to London.


Alas Sir, the Knight yonder Sir Gozlin has almost his throat cut by Powlterers
and Townes-men and rascals, all the Noise that went with him poor fellows
have their Fidle-cases pulled over their ears.


Is Sir Gozlin hurt?


Not much hurt Sir, but he bleeds like a Pig, for his crowne's cracked.


Then has he been twice cut ith head since we landed, once with a
Pottle-po^and now with old iron.


Gentlemen hasten to his rescue some, whilst others call for Oars.


Away then to London.


Farewell Brainford.
Gold that buys health, can never be ill spent,
Nor hours laid out in harmless meryment.

Oars, Oars, Oars, Oars:
To London hay, to London hay:
Hoist up sails and lets away,
for the safest bay
For us to land is London shores.
Oars, Oars, Oars, Oars:
Quickly shall we get to Land,
If you, if you, if you,
Lend us but half a hand.
O lend us half a hand.

