IN good faith Gentlemen, I think we shall be forced to give you right Iohn
Drums entertainment, for he that composde the Book, we should present, hath
done us very vehement wrong, he hath snatched it from us, upon the very
instance of entrance, and with violence keeps the boys from coming on the
Stage. So God help me, if we wrong your delights, tis infinitely against our
endeavours, unless we should make a tumult in the Tyring-house.


You much mistake his Action Tyer-man,
His violence proceeds not from a mind
That grudges pleasure to this generous presence,
But doth protest all due respect and love
Unto this choice selected influence.
He vows, if he could draw the music fro the Spheres
To entertain this presence with delight,
Or could distill the quintessence of heaven
In rare composed Sceanes, and sprinkle them
Among your ears, his industry should sweat
To sweeten your delights: but he was loath,
Wanting a Prologue, our selves not perfect,
To rush upon your eyes without respect:
Yet if you'll pardon his defects and ours,
Heel give us passage, you pleasing sceanes,
And vows not to torment your listening ears
With mouldy fopperies of stale Poetry,
Unpossible dry musty Fictions:
And for our parts to gratify your favour,
We'll study till our cheeks look wan with care,
That you our pleasures, we your loves may share.

Come Timothy Twedle, tickle thy Pipe on the green, as I have tipled the Pot
in the Seller, and the hoy for the honour of High-gate, you old Trojan.


And a heigh for the honour of Hygate, Hem, by my holydam, tho I say it, that
should not say it, I think I am as perfect in my Pipe, as Officers in poling,
Courtiers in flattery, or wenches in falling: Why look you Jack Drum, tis
even as natural to me, as brawdry to a Somner, knavery to a Promoter, or
damnation to an Usurer. But is Holloway Morice prancing up the hill?


I, I; and Sir Edward, and the yellow toothed, sunck-eyde, gowtie shankt Usurer
Maman, my young Mistresses and all are coming to the green, lay Cushions, lay
the Cushions, ha the wenches!


The wenches, ha, when I was a young man and could tickle the Minikin, and made
them cry thanks sweet Timothy, I had the best stroke, the sweetest touch,
but now (I may sigh to say it) I am fallen from the Fidle and betook me to
thee.


Sit M. Mamon, ha here's a goodly day nigh.


I thank you Sir, and faith what news at court?


Why by this Bordeaux juice, tis now become
The shewing-horne of Bezelers discourse,
The common food of prate: what news at court?
But in these stiff nekt times when every Jade
Huffes his vpreared crest, the zealous bent
Of Councellors solide cares is trampled on
By every hacknies heals: Oh I could burst
At the conjectures fears, preventions
And restless tumbling of our tossed brains:
Ye shall have me an empty cask that's furd
With nought but barmy froth, that ne'er travelled
Beyond the confines of his Mistress lips,
Discourse as confident of peace with Spain*
As if the Genius of quick Machiauel
Vsherd his speech.

Oh forbear, you are too sharpe with me.


Nay M* Mamon, misinterpret not,
I only burn the bauen heath of youth,
That cannot court the presence of fair time
With ought but with, what news at Court sweet sir?
I had rather that Kemps Morice were their chat,
For of foolish actions, may be they'll talk wisely, but of
Wise intendments, most part talk like fools.
The sum is this, bear only this good thought,
The Counsell-chamber is the Phaenix nest,
Who wastes it self, to give us peace and rest.

Oh a Morice is come, observe our country sport,
Tis Whitson-tyde, and we must frolic it.

Skip it, trip it, nimbly, nimbly, tickle it, tickle it, lustily,
Strike up the Taber, for the wenches favour, tickle it, tickle it, lustily:
Let us be seen, on Hygate Green, to dance for the honour of Holloway.
Since we are come hither, lets spare for no leather,
To dance for the honour of Holloway.
Well said my boys, I must have my Lords liuory, what is't, a May-pole? troth
twere a good body for a courtiers imprezza, if it had but this life, Frustra
florescit. Hold Cousin hold.


Thanks Cousin, when the Lord my Fathers Audit comes, weel repay you again.
Your benevolence too sir.


What a Lords son become a beggar?


Why not, when beggars are become Lords sons, come tis but a small trifle.


Oh sir, many a small make a great.


No sir, a few great make a many small, come my Lords, poor and need hath no
law.


Nor necessity no right, Drum down with them into the Cellar, rest content,
rest content, one bout more and then away.


Speak like a true heart, I kiss thy foot sweet knight.


Sir Edward Fortune you keep too great a house,
I am your friend, in hope your son in law,
And from my love I speak, you keep too great a house,
Go too you do, yon same dry throated husks
Will suck you up, and you are ignorant
What frosty fortunes may benumme your age,
Poverty, the Princes frown, a civil war, or.

Or what? tush, tush, your life hath lost his taste,
Oh madness still to sweat in hot pursuit
Of cold abhorred sluttish nigardise,
To exile ones fortunes from their native use,
To entertain a present poverty,
A willing want, for Infidel mistrust
Of gracious providence: Oh Lunacy,
I have two thousand pound a year, and but two Girls,
I owe nothing, live in all men's love,
Why should I now go make my self a slave
Unto the god of fools; put worst: then here's my rest.
I had rather live rich to die poor, then live poor to die rich.

Oh but so great a mass of coin might mount from wholesome thrift, that after
your decease your issue might swell out your name with pomp.


Ha, I was not borne to be my Cradles drudge,
To choke and stifle up my pleasures breath,
To poison with the venomed cares of thrift
My private sweet of life: only to scrape
A heap of muck, to fatten and manure
The barren virtues of my progeny,
And make them sprowt, spite of their want of worth:
No, I do love my Girls should wish me live,
Which few do wish that have a greedy Sire:
But still expect and gape with hungry lip,
When heel give up his gowtie stewardship.

You touch the quick of sense, but the I wonder
You not aspire unto the eminence
And height of pleasing life: to Court, to Court,
There burnish, there spread, there stick in pomp
Like a bright Diamond in a Ladies brow,
There plant your fortunes in the flowering spring,
And get the sun before you of respect:
There trench your self within the peoples love,
And glitter in the eye of glorious grace,
What's wealth without respect and mounted place?

Worse and worse, I am not yet distraught,
I long not to be squeasd with mine own weight:
Nor hoise up all my sails to catch the wind
Of the drunk reeling Commons: I labour not
To have an awful presence, nor be feared
(Since who is feared, still fears to be so feared)
I care not to be like the Horeb Calfe,
One day adored, and next pasht all in pieces:
Nor do I envy Poliphemia puffs,
Swizars slopt greatness: I adore the Sun,
Yet love to live within a temperate zone,
Let who will climb ambitious glibbery rowndes,
And lean upon the vulgars rotten love,
I'll not coriuall him: The Sun will give
As great a shadow to my trunk as his:
And after death like Chesmen having stood
In play for Bishops, some for Knights, and Pawnes,
We all together shall be tumbled up, into one bag,
Let hushed calm quiet, rock my life a sleep:
And being dead, my own ground press my bones,
Whilst some old Beldam hobbling ore my grave,
May mumble thus: Here lies a knight whose money
Was his slave. Now Jack what news?

And please your Worcester. the Morice have taken their liquor.


Hath not the liquor taken them?


Tripped up their heals or so? one of them hath undertaken to dance the Morice
from Hygate to Holloway on his heals, with his hands upwards.


That's nothing hard.


Yes sir, tis easier for him to dance on his head than his heals, for indeed
his heals are turned rank rebels, they will not obey, but they are tumbling
down the hill a pace.


And I must after then, farewell my souls delight,
Sweet Katherine adieu. Camelia goodnight.

Nay not to London Sir to night, In faith at least stay supper.


Hark you sir, there's but two Lambs, a dozen Capons, half a score couple of
Rabbots, three Tartes, and four Tansies, for supper, and therefore I beseech
you give him Jack Drums entertainment: Let the Iebusite depart in peace.


Why Jack, is not that sufficient?


I for any Christian, but for a yawning usurer tis but a bit, a morsel, if you
table him, heel devour your whole Lordship, he is a quicksand, a Goodwin, a
Gulf, as hungry as the Jaws of a Jail, he will waste more substance then
Ireland soldiers: A Die, a Drab, and a paunch-swolne Usurer, devour whole
Monarchies: Let him pass sweet knight, let him pass.


Peace knave peace.
Daughter, lay your express commandment upon the stay of master Mamon, what
tis women's year,
Dian doth rule, and you must domineer.

No sheele not wish my stay, oh I am cursed
With her inexorable swiftness, by her love
Which dotes me more then new coynd glowing gold,
The utmost bent of my affection
Shoots all my fortunes to obtain her love,
And yet I cannot praise, but still am loathde.
My presence hated, therefore Mamon down,
Farewell sir Edward, farewell beauties Crown.

Faith as it please you for going, and her for wooing,
I will enforce neither.

With your pardon sir, I shall sooner hate my self,
Then love him.

Nay be free my daughters in election,
Oh, how my soul abhors enforced yokes,
Chiefly in love, where the affections bent:
Should wholly sway the Fathers kind consent.
Foregod when I was bachelor, had a friend,
Nay had my Father wished me to a wife,
That might have liked me, yet their very wish
Made me mistrust my Love had not true course,
But had some sway from duty which might hold
For some slight space: but o when time shall search
The strength of love, then virtue, and your eye,
Must knit his sinews: I chusde my self a wife
Poor, but of good dissent, and we did live
Till death diuorc'd us, as a man would wish:
I made a woman, now wenches make a man:
Choose one either of valour, wit, honesty, or wealth,
So he begentle, and you have my heart,
I faith you have: What, I have land for you both,
You have love for your selves. Here's M. Mamon now.

A club-fisted Usurer.


A wealthy, careful, thriving Citizen.


Careful, I, I, let nothing without good black and white, I warrant you.


Yes sir.


No sir.


A little back wind, saving your worcester. sir.


I am scoft at, wheres my man there ho?


Sir you need not take the pepper in the nose,
Your nose is fiery enough.

What Flawne, what Christopher, Hart where's the knave become? Hold sirrah
carry my cloak.


It seems he can scarce carry himself.


He's over the shoes, yet heel hold out water, for I have liquored him
soundly.


Why cannot you come where heady liquore is, but you must needs bouze?
What a man may lead a horse to the water, but heel choose to drink.

True, but I am no horse, for I cannot choose but drink.


A pale weak stripling, yet contend with Ale.


Why the weakest go to the Pot still.


That Jest shall save him. Sir Edward now good day.


Nay sir, we'll bring you a little of the way.


Rely on me Christopher, I will be thy staff,
And thy Masters nose shall be thy lanthorn candlelight

Mistress Camelia, me thinks your eye
Sparkles not spirit as twas wont to do.

My mind is dull, and yet my thoughts are fixed
Upon a pleasing object, Brabants love.

Indeed young Brabant is a proper man,
And yet his legs are somewhat of the least:
And faith a chitty well complexioned face,
And yet it wants a beard: A good sweet youth,
And yet some say he hath a valiant breath,
Of a good hair, but oh, his eyes, his eyes.

Last day thy praise extolled him to the skies.


Indeed he wares good clothes, throws his cloak
With good discretion under his left arm,
He curls his boot with judgment, and takes a whiffe
With graceful fashion, swears a valorous oath,
But o the devil, hath a hateful fault, he is a younger brother.

A younger brother? o intolerable.


No Mistress, no: but there's M. Iohn,
M. Iohn Ellis, there's a Lad In faith,
Ha for a virtuous honest good youth!

Tut he is good, because he knows not how to be bad,
Nor wherefore he is good.

I know not, me thinks not to be bad, is good enough in these days.


Nay he is a fool, a perfect Idiot.


Why all the better. And I'll tell you this,
The greatest Lady in the Land affects him,
Nay doates upon him, I, and lies with him.

What Lady, good sweet Winifride, what Lady say* Faith there be some good parts
about the fool, which I perceive not, yet an other may: what Lady, good sweet
Winifride? say quick good wench.


The Lady Fortune.


Why my name's Fortune too.


Then you must needs favour him*
For Fortune favours fools.

Oh but to hug a fool is odious.


Foul water quenches fire well enough,
And with more lively pallar, you shall taste
The Juice of pleasures fount at private times:
Pish, by my maiden-head, were I to match,
I would elect a wealthy fool foreall,
Then may one hurry in her Chariot,
Shine in rich purpled Tissue, have hundred loves,
Rule all, pay all, take all, without check or snib.
When being married to a wise man (O the Lord)
You are made a fool, a Ward, curbed and controlld, and (O) out upon it.

Believe me wench, thy words have fired me,
I'll lay me down upon a bank of Pinks,
And dream vppont; Sweet fool, I tis most clear,
A foolish bed-mate, why he hath no peer.

Ha, ha, her love is as uncertain as an Almanac, as inconstant as the
fashion, Just like a whiffe of Tobacco, no sooner in at the mouth, but out at
the nose: I think in my heart I could make her enamoured on Timothy Twedle:
well he that fees me best, speeds best. For as it pleased my bribed lips to
blow, So turns her feathry fancy too and fro.


Good speed thee my good sweet Planet,
How doest thou Chuck?

How now Brabant, where have you lived these three or four days?


Ho at the glittering Court my Pytheas.


Plague on ye Pytheas, what have you done there?


Why lane in my Ladies lap, eat, drink, sleep.


So hath thy Ladies Dog done, what art in love
With you Hygate Mammer still?

Still, I still, and still, I in eternity.


It shall be Cronicled next after the death of Banks his Horse, I wonder why
thou love her?


Love hath no reason.


Then is love a beast.


O my Camelia is love it self.


The devil she is: Harther lips look like a dried Neats-tongue: her face as
richly yellow, as the skin of a cold Custard, and her mind as settled as the
feet of bald pated time.


Plague on your hateful humour, out vppont,
Why should your stomach be so queasy now,
As to bespawle the pleasures of the world?
Why should you run an Idle counter-course
Thwart to the path of fashion? Come your reason?
O you are buried in Philosophie,
And there entombed in supernaturalls,
You are dead to native pleasures life.

Let me bus thy cheek sweet Pugge, Now I am perfect hate, I loved but three
things in the world, Philosophy, Thrift, and my self. Thou hast made me hate
Philosophy. A Usurers greasy Codpeece made me loath Thrift: but if all the
Brewers Jade in the town can drug me from love of my self, they shall do
more then e're the seven wise men of Greece could: Come, come, now I'll be as
sociable as Timon of Athens.


Along with me then, you droming Sagbut,
I'll bring thee to a Crewe.

Of Fools wilt not?


Faith if you have any weight of judgment, you may easily sound what depth of
wits they draw, there's first my elder brother.


Oh the Prince of Fools, vnequald Idiot,
He that makes costly suppers to try wits:
And will not stick to spend some 20. pound
To grope a gull: that same perpetual grin
That leads his Corkie Jests to make them sink
Into the ears of his Deryders with his own applause.

Indeed his Jests are like Indian beef, they will not last, and yet he powders
them soundly with his own laughter.

Then there's the Gotish French-man, Mounsieur Iohn fo de King, knowste thou
him?


Oh, I to a hair, for I knew him when he had never a hair on his head.


He is a faithful pure Rogue.


I, I, as pure as the gold that hath been seven times tried in the fire.


Then there's Iohn Ellis, and profound toungd Master Puff, he that hath a
perpetuity of complement, he whose phrases are as neatly decked as my Lord
Majors Hensmen, he whose throat squeakes like a treble Organ, and speaks as
small and shrill, as the Irish-men cry Pip, fine Pip.

And when his period comes not roundly off, takes told of the tenth hair of
his Bourbon locke: as thus. Sweet Sir, repute me as a (Puff) selected spirit
borne to be the admirer, of your never enough admired (Puff).


Oh we shall be ouerwhelmd with an invndation of laughter. Come, where are
they?


Here at this Tavern.


In, in, in, in, I long to burst my sides and tyer my spleen with laughter.


Why dost thou cry?


Why dost thou laugh?


I laugh to see thee cry.


And I cry to see thee laugh.
Peace be to us. Here's our Masters.

You shall see his humour, I pray you be familiar with this Gentleman master
Puff, he is a man of a well grown spirit, richly worth your. I assure you,
ha, ha, ha.


Sir I enrowle you in the Legend of my (Puff) intimates, I shall be infinitely
proud if you will deign to value me worthy the embrace of your (Puff)
better affection.


Speak you from your thought sir?


I, or would my silk stock should loose his gloss else, I shall triumph as
much in the purchase of your (Puff) love, as if I had obtained the great
Elixar: Let us incorporate our affections I pray you: let me be forward in your
favour.


Sir, I pray you let me beg you for a Fool.


I affect no rudeness gentlemen, the heavens stand
Propitious to your fair designs:
As soon as next the sun shall gin to shine,
I will salute the eyes of Katherine.

Of Katherine, M. Planet observe the next,
M. Iohn, what makes you so melancholy?

I do not use to answer questions.


What are you thinking on now?


I do not use to think.


He looks as demurely as if he were asking his Father blessing.


I do not use to ask my Father blessing.


Hart, how chance he is out of his similes?


I have followed Ordinaries this twelve month, only to find a Fool that had
lands, or a fellow that would talk treason, that I might beg him. Iohn, be my
Ward Iohn, faith I'll give thee two coats a year and be my Fool.


He shall be your Fool, and you shall be his
Coxe-come. Ha, ha, I have a simple wit, ha, ha.

I shall crow over him then.


Is there not one M. Iohn Ellis here?


There sits the thing so called.


Now to the last course: Monsieur Iohn fo de King,
I will help you to a wench Mounsieur.

No point, a burn child fear de fire.


As a hungry dog waits for a mutton bone, or as a tattered foote-boy for a
cast suit, even so will I attend on my Mistress.


O my Vinifride, piee you awe, by gor, me ang de for her.


Nay stay, stay, I will help you to a delicate plump-lipt wench.


Toh, phi, phi, your proffer ware stink: stay Vinifride; or by gor die, me die,
me die by gor, me ang so desirous adieu goot Sir.


Oh stay Mounsieur, how do you pronounce Demurra? Ha, ha, I'll plague him.


Grand Sot, my vench is gone, me brule, and me brule, like one mad bule, me go
into de vaterto cool my reine, ang my back made de vater hize again, dus so
brule, me burst for a vench, and yet grand poc on you all, pree you adieu.


As the Jig is called for when the Play is done, even so let Mounsieur go.


He, me teach you much French for dis, I go to Hygate, adieu grand Sors.


As sore eyes cannot endure the Sun, nor scabbed hands abide salt water, so must
I leave all, and see my mistress, and as fair Ladies do use soul foils,
even so do I bid you farewell.


Why this is sport imperial, by my Gentry, I would spend forty Crowns, for
such an other feast of fools. Ha, ha.


I wonder who would be the fool then?


Why tis the recreation of my Intellect, I think I speak as significant, ha,
ha, these are my zanyes, I fill their paunches, they seed my pleasures, I use
them as my fools faith, ha, ha.


Tis a generous honour.


Troth I think you have a good wit, ha? pray you sup with me, I love good
wits, because mine own is not unfortunate: pray you sup with me.


I'll give God thanks sir, that hath sent a fool to feed me.


Come along then, ye shall have a Capon, a Tansey, and some kick-showes of my
wits, ha, ha, some toys of my spirit.


I will eat his meat, and spend's money, that's all the spite I can do him:
but if I can get a Patent for concealed Sots, that Dawe shall troupe among my
Idiots.


Boy whats a Clock?


Past three, and a fair morning.


Burns not that light within the sacred shrine?
I mean the chamber of bright Katherine.

I, should appear by these presence, that it doth.


I wonder that the light is up so soon.


O Mistress Snuff was weary with sleeping in the Socket, and therefore hath
newly put on her stamell petticoat, take her pewter state to give light to
things are in darkness.


And I know that women of gravity and sweetness are soon up.


I see that women of levity and lightness, are soon down.


Boy clear thy throat, and mount thy sweetest notes
Upon the bosom of this sleek cheekt air:
That it may gently breathe them in the ear
Of my adored Mistress: Come begin.

Delicious beauty that doth lie
Wrapped in a skin of Ivory,
Lie still, lie still upon thy back,
And Fancy let no sweet dreams lack
To tickle her, to tickle her with pleasing thoughts.
But if thy eyes are open full,
Then deign to view an honest gull,
That stands, that stands, expecting still
When that thy Casement open will
And bless his eyes, bless his eyes, with one kind glance.
All happiness and vnconceiu'd delight,
Wait on the love of sweet fac'de Katherine.

Good youth Amen: I do return your wish
With ample interest of beatitude.

I do protest, with ceremonious (puff) lips
The purest blood of my affection,
Is even fatally predestinate
To consecrate it self unto your (puff) love.

Unto my love? Oh sir you bind me to you:
Fair Gentleman I have a thankful heart,
Tho not a glorious speech to sweet my thanks.

Reward my love then with your kinder love.


With my love sir, I relish not your speech.


I with your love, in pleasing marriage.


Alas sir, cannot be my Loves a man,
Who hardly can requite the dear protests
Of kind affection, which you seem to vow
Unto his fortunes: kind youth, you did wish
All happiness to wait upon my love:
Well he shall know it when we next do meet,
And thank you kindly: now good morrow sweet.

You take my, my, my meaning (puff.)


Nay if he be puffing once, the fire of his wit is out.


Why she is gone. Hart did I rise for this?


She cannot endure puffing. O you puffed her away


Lets slink along unseen, tis yet scarce day.


Now me thinks I hold the candle to the devil.


Put out the light, the day begins to break.


Would the day and thy neck were broke together.


Oh how the gout and love do tyre me.


Why sir, love is nothing but the very gout.


As how Flawne? as how?


Thus sir: Gout and love, both come with Idleness, both incurable, both
humorous, only this difference: the Gout causes a great tumor in a mans
legs, and love a great swelling in a woman's belly.


Why then o Love, o Gout, o gouty Love, how thou torments old Mamon: good
morrow to the sweet lipped Katherine, eternal spring unto thy beauties love.


Alas good aged Sir, what make you up?
In faith I pity you, good soul to bed,
Troth soon you'll cry, Oh God my head, my head.

No Katherine, the wrinckling print of time
Erred, when it sealed my forehead up with age:
I have as warm an arm to entertain
And hug thy presence in a nuptial bed*
As those that have a cheek more lively red:
And tho my voice be rude, yet Flawne can sing
Peans of beauty, and of Katherine.
List to the Music that corrupts the Gods,
Subuerts even Destiny, and thus it shogges.

Chunck, chunck, chunck, chunck, his bags do ring
A merry note with chuncks to sing*
Those that are far more young and witty,
Are wide from singing such a Ditty
As Chunck, chunck, chunck,
There's Chunck that makes the Lawyer prate,
There's Chunck that make a fool of Fate:
There's Chunck, that if you will be his,
Shall make you live in all hearts blis*
With Chunck, chunck, chunck.
Tis well sung good old man, hence with your gold,
Leave the green fields tis deawy; you'll take cold.

The Casements shut, well here I'll lu^ke stay,
To see who bears the glory of the day.
Hence, hence, to London, Flawne let me alone.

I can hardly leave him alone, for the Devil and double Ducats, still
associate him, but I am gone.


The glooming morn with shining Arms hath chaste
The silver Ensign of the grim cheekt night,
And forced the sacred troupes of sparkling stars
Into their private Tents, yet calm husht sleep
Strikes dumb the snoring world: yet frolic youth
That's lately matched unto a well shaped Lass,
Clippes his sweet Mistress, with a pleasing arm,
Whilst the great power of Imperious Love
Sommons my duty to salute the shine
Of my Loves beauties. Vnequald Katherine
I bring no Music to prepare thy thoughts
To entertain an amorous discourse:
More Musick's in thy name, and sweet dispose,
Then in Apollos Lyre, or Orpheus close.
I'll chant thy name, and so enchant each ear,
That Katherinas happy name shall hear.
My Katherine, my life, my Katherine.

My Ned, my Pasquil, sweet I come, I come,
Even with like swiftness, tho not with like heart:
As the fierce Falcon stoups to rising foul
I hurrey to thee: do not go away,
The place is private, and tis yet scarce day.

Oh these kind words imparadize my thoughts.


Ha, ha, young Pasquil have I found you out*
Is't you must bore my nose, I'll bore your heart:
Why this same boy's as bare as naked Truth.
A lowe ebd gallant, yet sheele match with him:
I'll match him, if his skin be poniard proof*
He may escape the force of gold and murder, if not*
As you return sir, I will pepper you.
And art thou come dear hart, first fee be this,
This kind embrace, and next this modest kis.

This is no kiss, but an Ambrosian bowl,
The Nectar dew of thy delicious soul:
Let me suck one kiss more, and with a nimble lip,
Nibble upon those Rosie banks, more soft and clear
Then is the Ieweld tip of Venus ear.
Oh how a kiss inflames a Lovers thought,
With such a fuel let me burn and die,
And like to Hercules so mount the sky.

Come you grow wanton. Oh you bite my lip.


In faith you Jest, I did but softly sip
The Roseall Juice of your reviving breath:
Let clumsie judgements, chilblaind gowtie wits
Bung up their chief content within the whoopes
Of a stuffed dry Fat: and repose their hopes
Of happiness, and hearts tranquillity,
Upon increase of dirt: but let me live
Clipped in the cincture of a faithful arm,
Luld in contented joy, being made divine,
With the most precious love of Katherine.

Let the vnsanctified spirit of ambition
Entice the choice of muddy minded Dames
To yoke themselves to swine, and for vain hope
Of gay rich trappings, be still spurred and pricked
With pining discontent for nuptial sweets.
But let me live loved in my husbands eyes,
Whose thoughts with mine, may sweetly simpathize.

The heavens shall melt, the sun shall cease to shine,
Before I leave the love of Katherine.

Nay when heavens melted, the sun struck dead,
Even then my love shall not be vanquished.

When I turn fickle, virtue shall be vice.


When I prove false, Hell shall be Paradise.


My life shall be maintained by thy kind breath.


Thy love shall be my life, thy hate my death.


Oh when I die let me embrace thy waste.


In death let me be counted thine and chaste.


Heavens grant, being dead my soul may live nie thee


One kiss shall give thee mine eternally.


In fair exchange vouchsafe my hart to take.


With all my mind, wear this Ned for my sake,
But now no more, bright day malings our love,
Farewell, yet stay, but tis no matter too,
My Father knows I think, what must ensue.
Adieu, yet hark, nay faith, adieu, adieu.

Peace to thy passions, till next interview.


Now Mounsieur be but confident, and hold
There is the price of blood, this way he comes,
Strike home bold arm, and thou shalt want no crowns.

Fear you noting, when he is die, me bring you word.
He, by gor brave crown, brave monney,
Me have here a patent to take up, one, two, treescore
Vench: fine Crown, fine vench, unreasonably fine,
Dis monney is my bawd. Me send a French crown
To fetch a fine vench, de French crown fetch de
Fine vench, de fine vench take de French crown,
And give me de French poc. He excellent, you see
Me kill a man, you see me hang like de Burgullian,
He no poine: He by Gor, me have much vitt,
Ang me much bald, and me ang much bald wit.
Here come de Gentleman metre Pasquill.

Is't possible that sisters should so thwart
In native humours? one's as kind and fair,
As constant, virtuous, and as debonayre,
As is the heart of goodness: the other, proud,
Inconstant, fantastic, and as vain in loves,
As travellers in lies: blessed Katherine,
Camelia's not thy sister, if she be,
She's basterd to the sweets that shine in thee.

Boniour Metre Pasquill, sance Jest, me am hired to kill you, Mounsieur Mamon,
Messier: Iounck, Iounck, give me money to stab you, but me know there is a God
that hate blood, derfore, me no kill, me know dere is a vench, that love Crown,
therefore me keep de money.


Unhallowed villain, that with gold and blood, Thinks that almighty love can
be withstood.

Hold Mounsieur, there are more Crowns, only do this, return to Mamon, tell
him the deed is done, and bring him hither, that he may vainly triumph in my
blood, I have some painting which I found by chance in loose Camelias chamber,
with that I'll stain my breast, go and return with speed.


He, by gor I smell a rat, me fly, me fly, by gor.


Leaud miscreant, that through the throat of hell,
Would mount to heaven, and enjoy love,
Invaluably precious: no rank churl,
Thou wast not made to slaver her fair lips
With thy dead rewmy chops, nor clip her waste,
With thy shrunk bloodless arm, I hear him come.
Now Pasquill feign, o thou eternal light,
Morn that thy creatures should in blood delight.

Now smug faced boy, now nibble on her lips,
Now sip the dew of her delicious breath.
Stink, rot, damn, bake in thy cluttered blood,
Snakes, Toads, and Earwigs, make thy skull their nest,
Engendering deaw-wormes, cling orethwart thy breast.

Hush, hush, leave praying for dead, tis no good
Caluianisme, puritanism. Dissemble, here are company.

Good morrow Sir, who lies there murdered?


Oh Gentlemen, the kindest virtuous youth
That e're adorned London. Damned thieves
To spoil such hopes: the last words that he spake,
Sticks still within the hollow of mine ear.
Katherine quoth he, hold M. Mamon dear,
I know not what he meant, but so he said.
If that you pass to Hygate, tell the Knight,
P^squill is sunk into eternal night.

Faith twas a good youth, come Brabant, come away.


Dead Kate, dead Kate, dead is the boy,
That kept rich Mamon from his joy.

Oh the devil, the ghost of Pasquill, I am dead, if you have any courtesy in
you, believe it. I believed you when you feigned, believe me now, for I am
almost dead, numbed up with fear, give faith sweet gentle youth.


Old wretch, amend thy thoughts, purge, purge, repent,
I'll hide thy ulcer, be but penitent.

Ha, I think twas but his ghost that swept along.

Grand sot Mamo, Pho, phy, phy, phy, a foutra pour vos chuck, chunck. Iohn fo
de King, teach you a ding, Iohn fo de King grand Sot, Sot, Sot.


Death, plague, and hell, how is cursed Mamo vexed?
Scourgde with the whip of sharpe derision:
I'll home, and starve, this cross, this peevish hap,
Strikes dead my spirits like a thunderclap.

Gods precious, I forgot to bring my Page,
To breathe some Ditty in my Mistress ear.

Would have a Ballet to salute her with?


No, but a Song. How would thou court thy Mistress?


Why with the world, the flesh the devil.


Right dog, well thoult swear, that I am blessed
Beyond infinity of happiness,
When thou behold admired Camelia.

And God wold bless me with 3. such mistresses,
I would give two of them to the devil, that he would take the third.

Oh when she clips, and clings about my neck,
And sucks my soul forth with a melting kiss.

Doth she use thee so kindly then, ha?


O I, and calls me dear, dear Brabant, and (o Iesu God)
I cannot express her sweets of entertain,
Sheele so insinuate with chaste amorous speech,
And play the wanton with such pretty grace,
And vows love to me: Oh I'll make thee mad
To see how gracious Brabant's in her eye.
Here is her window, mark but when I call,
How swift she comes, and with what kind salutes
She welcomes me. What ho Camelia?
Faith you'll be taken up, what in bed so late?

And you take her up Brabant, sheele take you down.


Hart they hear not: My Camelia wake?


What harsh uncivil tongue keeps such a coil?


Winifride tis I. Tell my sweet Duck I am here,
Now mark Ned Planet, now observe her well.

She wonders at your rudeness that intrudes
Upon the quiet of her mornings rest,
And she's amaz'de, that with such impudence
You dare presume to intimate some love to her,
As if she knew you more then for a youth,
A younger brother, and a stipendary.

Now mark Ned Planet, now observe her kindness.
Good morrow M. Iohn.

As the Country maid cries to her Cow to milk her, or as the Travailer
knocks with his Hostess for a reckoning, even so do I call to thee o Mistress.


Sweet Iohn my Love, here's thy Camelia:
Hold wear this favour, with this kiss vppont.

Flesh and blood cannot bear such disgrace.


Help, help, help, help, he boxes me that he doth. Help, help.


What outrage have we here so early up?
Sir you do wrong the quiet of my house.
I faith you do, and tis but rudely done,
Go too tis not. Is this a place to brawl?

And please thee knight, I'll tell thee faith troth.


What did he strike thee sweet?


I in good deed law, and a my conscience, I think he hath made my nose bleed.


And would not you draw your weapon out, and to it lustily, as long as you
could stand?


I do not use to draw.


Did he give thee a box on the ear, and would thou take it?


And he be such a fool to give it me, why should not I be so wise as to take
it.


Pure honesty, kind Duck, kiss me sweet Iohn.


Hart Sir Edward, will you suffer this?
Now on my life she is enamord on the fools babble.

Go too sir boy forbear, you wrong my Love,
And you forget your self to use such Jests,
Such nasty rybauldry upon my daughter:
I tell you M. Brabant, doth she love
Any that merits the name of man?

Why he's no man, but a very --


Well, well, no more; my house, my self, my love,
Opens their hearts with liberal embrace
To entertain your presence: I or any mans
So they will be civil, modest, not profane,
Not like to those that make it their chief grace,
To be quite graceles.

Well said honest knight,
We have had blood enough to day already:
Ned Pasquil's slain by bloody murdering Rogues.

Speak softly, God forbid, my daughter hears,
Tell me the circumstance, I pray you Sir.

Eternal death unto my happiness,
My Pasquil slain? Oh God, oh God, oh God.

I, and I think the Usurer made a Tent
Even of his nose it was so red and near:

God for his mercy, what mischance is here?
A good youth, a virtuous modest youth,
I faith he was. And I can tell your sir,
My daughter Katherine, where is she now?
Whithers she gone? Drum call her hither strait.

Your Drum will sound a call sir presently.


And as I told you sir, my daughter Katherine
Affected him right dearly: by my peace of soul,
If he had lived, I could have heartily wished
He had been my son in law, I faith I could:
But see the will of God. How now Drum,
Where's my daughter?

Sir, she is either invisible, or deaf, for I can neither see her, nor she
hear me.


Body of me, my heart misgives me now,
Look, call, search, run all about.
My daughter gone? Go all and search her out.
Here's Pasquil ha? Is this the man that's dead?

Let me entreat this favour, do not search
Or be inquisitive why I fain'de:
Repute me worthy your better censure: and thus think
My cause was urgent, the rest lie buried.

Well, I would you had not fainde.


Why would you have had me dead indeed?


Oh no, but I have lost my child I fear,
By your strange faining, she no sooner heard
The tidings of your death, but gone she was,
And God knows whither. Ha what news now?

Tis easier to find wit in ballating, honesty in Brokers, Virginity in
Shordich, then to hear of my Mistress.


Broach me a fresh Butt of Canary Sack,
Lets sing, drink, sleep, for that's the best relief:
To drown all care, and overwhelm all grief.
Power Wine, sound Music, let our bloods not freeze,
Drink Duch like gallants, lets drink vpsey freeze.

Servant you'll go in too, and stay dinner?


I in truth, for as the Itch is augmented
By scratching, so is my love by seeing my mistress.

How's this, how's this, My Katherin gone hence?
Senses awake, and thou amazed soul
Unwind thy self from out the Labyrinth
Of gaping wonder, and astonishment.
My Katherine departed? how? which way?
Fool, fool, stand not debating, but pursue
Haste to her comfort, for from thee doth spring
(Wretch that thou art) her cause of sorrowing.

Ha, ha, ha, tipsy, tipsy, tipsy, all turned whirlegig, Iohn fo de king,
Drum, and Timothy Twedle, are rare fine, ha for the heavens, In faith: Drums Lyon
drunk, and he dings the pots about, cracks the glasses, swaggers with his
own shadow. Honest Timothy is Mawdelin drunk, and he weeps for kindness,
and kisses the hilts of Jack Drums Dagger. Mounsieurs Goat drunk, and he
shrugges, and skrubbes, and hes it for a wench. Here they come reeling, I
must pack, or we shall swagger, for they having a crack in their heads, and
I afault in my hands, we shall ne'er agree.


A Serving-man quoth you? Hart, and if I serve any that's flesh and blood, would
I might ne'er taste my liquore more: stand bare whilst he makes water, out
vppont, I'll to Ireland, and there I'll Tan, ran, tie, ry, dan, Sa, sa, sa, sa:
Nay tis the only life.


Nay good Thewte hart, good kind Jack, stay, if you would love me, as I love
you, we would live die together: and please God, would I were dead, and you are
gone. And here's M. Iohn so de king, a very honest man too.


I, I, he's a very good honest man: for there's not a hair betwixt him and
heaven.


Heel live with us now teach us French.


I by my trot, ang you help me to a Vench now, me teach you French. 5.
towsand, towsand year, o your Secke is hot, and make me brule, and brule, and
burn, for a ( he) by gor your Seck is hot.


Welcome Basilisco, thou wilt carry level, and knock ones brains out with thy
pricking wit. Kiss me sweet wench, kiss me.


He my Vinifride, by gor you are come, in te very nick to pleasure me, pree
you kiss me, clip me, love me, or by gor me ang die certain.


Out you French Dog, touch my Love, and I'll --


Touch her, by gor me touch her, and touch her, and touch her.


I'll touch you, I'll slash you, I'll vench ye.


Put up, put up, for the passion of God put up, or if you'll needs too it,
sheath both your weapons in me first.


Hart touch my love, touch my Winifride?


Hark you Jack, come to my chamber an hour hence, and you shall have what you
will ask, and I can grant.


Why then my chollers down. Iohn fo de King. Fontra for you.


Fontra for me, futtra, futtra, futtra, five towsand futtra's for you.


Stay friend Jack, I'll reel along with you, if you'll not swagger.


Sweet, sweet Mounsieur, hang you slaves, I love you infinitely.


By gor me teach you French four towsand year dan.


Well Mounsieur, I'll give you pleasure.


But will you presently? quickly, for by gor me am a hot shot.


I so they say, I heard you were under the Torred zone last day.


Pish tis no matter, me am like a Tobacco Pipe, de more me am burn, de cleaner
me am.


Well then, two hours hence come to my chamber, and Timothy Twedle shall give
you me in a sack.


In a sack? Ha very well.


And you shall carry me to my Masters house at Holloway, for in the house we
cannot be private without suspect. Till then, farewell.


By my trot vnreasonablie good, I carry de vench on my back, and devench
carry me on her (he) fine back, fine vench, fine Mounsieur, fine, fine, fine
Knight, all fine, vnreasonablie fine, me sing for joy; by gor me sing la, liro,
liro la, lilo.


Gentlemen, as e're you loved wench, observe M. Puff and me.


What shall we observe you for?


Oh for our complement.


Complement, whats that?


Complement, is as much as (what call you it) tis derived of the Greek word, a
pox ont.


Complement, is as much as what call you it, tis derived of the Greek word, a
pox ont.


You shall see M. Puff and me toss it, In faith mark with what grace I
encounter him.


Hart thy brother's like the Instrument the Merchants sent over to the great
Turk: you need not play upon him, heel make music of himself, and he be
once set going.


M. Puff, I long to do fair service to your love.


Most accomplished wit, exquisitely accoutred, ( Puff) Judgment, I could wish
my ability worthy your service, and my service worthy your ability.


By the Lord fustian, now I understand it: complement is as much as fustian.


I protest your abilities are infinite, your perfections matchless, your
matchless perfection infinite in ability, and your infinite ability,
matchless in perfection.


Good again, rejoice Brabant, thy brother will not live long, he talks Idly
already.


Delicious spirit, disparage not your courtesy, stand not bare to him that was
borne to honour you.


Let us press our hairs then, with an uniform consent.


The pressure of my hairs, or the puncture of my heart, stands at the service
of your ^ollide perfections: my life is bound to your love, your love being my
life, tho my life be not worthy your love, your perfection is the center to
which all the paralels of my affection are drawn: your love my life, your
perfection, my affection, being --


Your Ass, my Fool.


Being chainde by the mighty coplet of inevitable destiny, who sees the
sun, but he must adore it: who sees beauty, but he must honour it: who
views gold, but he must covet it: then, (o then) who can behold your sun-like
beauteous golden beauties, but he must more then adore, much more then honour,
and most infinitely love to be out, out, out.


Out he is indeed.


He's at a stand, like a resty Jade, or a Fiddler, when he hath cracked his
Minikin.


Outrageously addicted to the worthy pursuit of such matchless worth.


Sir, I can rest but truly thankful, for your more then good conceit of my no
less then little worth. And now fir for the consequent hours of the day; how
stands your intention for employment?


I ha taken my leave of Sir Edward, bid adieu to love, my Mistress is gone, my
humour is spent, my joys are at an end, and therefore Gentlemen, I leave love,
and fall to the ( puff) Law, I will inter my self in Ploydens Coffin, and
take an eternal Conge of the world. And so sweet gallants farewell.


Nay I'll follow you to your grave. Gentlemen you'll not accompany the coarse?


No, no, look Ned Brabant, yons a pleasing object for thy eyes.


My Mistress is turned Bucephalus, no body must ride her but Alexander: no
body kiss her but Iohn Ellis. Now stand and list good Planet.


Come sweetest Love, lets give time pleasing wing,
What shall we make some purposes or sing?

I will sing, so you will bear my burden.


Come lay thy head then in my virgin lap,
And with a soft sleek hand I'll clap thy cheek,
And wring thy fingers with an ardent gripe:
I'll breathe amours, and even intraunce thy spirit,
And sweetly in the shade lie dallying.

Now dally sport and play, This merry month of May,
This is the merry, merry month, Sweet time for dallying:
The Birds sit chirping, chirping, The Doves sit billing, billing,
Phillip is treading, is treading, is treading, is treading, is treading,
All are to pleasures willing.
You that are fair and witty, Observe this easy Ditty,
And leave not Natures Natures bliss; Do not refuse to kiss.
The Birds sit chirping, chirping, The Doves sit billing, billing,
Phillip is treading, is treading, c.
Death I can holder: Life of love
Amazing beauty, let not me seem rude,
Tho thus I seem to square with modesty.

Pray you let me go, for heel begin to square, And even as some do wear
Muffes for warmth, some for wantonness, some for pride, some for neither, but
to hide gowtie fingers, so will I get your Fathers consent, and marry you. Fare
you well.


Sir it were good you got a benefice,
Some Evenuch'd Vicaridge, or some Fellowship,
To prop up your weak younger brothership.
Match with your equals, dare not to aspier
My seat of love, I wis Sir, I look higher.

Astonishment of Nature, be not proud
Of Forunes bounties: Brabant is a man,
Tho not so clogd with dirt as others are:
I do confess my younger brothership;
Yet therein lay no such disparagement
As your high scorn imputes unto my worth.
Coach Jade and Dogs, are coupled still together,
Only for outward likeness, growth and strength,
But the bright models of eternity,
Are ioind together for affection,
Which in the soul is form'de. Oh let this move,
Love should make marriage, and not marriage Love.

Woo her no more Brabant, thou'lt make her proud,
You Duch Ancient why should you look higher?
His births as good as yours, and so's his face:
Put off your Iengle, Iangles, and be not as fair,
He shall renounce it, fore this Audience,
Put off your clothes, and you are like a Banbery cheese,
Nothing but paring: why should you be proud,
And look on none but Weathercocks forsooth?
O you shall have a thousand pound a year!
Bar Lady that's a bumming sound. But hark,
Wilt therefore be a slave, unto a slave,
One that's a bound Rogue unto Ignorance?
Well thou'lt serve to make him gellide broaths,
And scratch his head, and may be now and then
Heel slaver thee a kiss. Plague on such marriages.

Rudevnciuile Clown.


Tut rail not at me, turn your eye upon the leprosy of your own judgment,
loath it, hate it, scorn it, and love this young Gentleman, who is a Fool in
nothing but in loving thee: mad in nothing but affecting thee: and cursed in
eternity if he marry thee.


Sir you ha spoke exceeding pleasingly,
For which I love you, as I love a dull dead eye.
Brabant I do conjure thee Court not me,
Do not presume to love or fancy me.

How not presume to love or fancy you?
Hart, I will love you, by this light I will
Whether you will or no, I'll love you still.
Spite of your teeth I will your love pursue,
I will by heaven, and so sweet soul adieu.

Farewell, and never view my face again.


Hark you fair Winifride, sweet gentle maid,
I have but fained with you all this while,
I dote upon the sweet Camelia,
And if your favour will but second me,
I vow when I shall wed Camelia,
To indowe you with a hundred pound a year,
And what I have shall stand at your command.

Sir I will undertake to forward your fair love,
So you'll remember what you here do vow.

If I forget it, heaven forget me:
Do you but praise me, let not her once know
I love, or do affect her for the world.

Well fear no rubs, farewell fair bounteous Sir.


It works, it works, magnificent delight,
Laughter, triumph, for ere the Sum godowne,
Thy forehead shall be wreathed, with pleasures crown.

Now my kind Page, can thou nor hear, nor see,
Which way my Katherine hath bent her steppes?

Sir I can.


What can thou my sweet Page?
What can thou Boy?
Oh how my soul doth burn in longing hope,
And hangs upon thy lips for pleasing news.

Sir I can tell ye.


What* o how my hart doth quake throb with fear.


Sir I can tell you nothing of her in good faith.


Oh thou hast tortur'de me with lingering hope,
Go haste away, fly from the pestilence
Of my contagious grief, it will infect thee boy,
Murder thy youth, and poison thy lifes joy.
Run search out Katherine, in her eyes dwell
Heavens of joy; but in Pasquil hell.
Oh thou omnipotent, infinity,
Crack not the sinews of my patience
With racking torment: Insist not thus to scourge
My tender youth with sharpe affliction,
If I do love that glory of thy hand,
That rich Idea of perfection,
With any lustful or profane intent,
Crossed be my love, murdered be all my hopes:
But if with chaste and virtuous arm I clip
The rarest model of thy workmanship,
Be then propitious: o eternal light,
And bless my fortunes, maugre hellish spite.

Black sorrow, nurse of plaints, of tears, groans,
Evaporate my spirit with a sigh,
That it may hurrey after his sweet breath,
Who made thee dote on life, now hunt for death.

What soul is that, that with her teare-full eyes
Seems to lament with me in miseries?

Here seems to be the pressure of his trunk,
Dear earth confirm my doubt, was this the place
Which the fair body of my Pasquil pressed,
When he lay murdered? See the drooping grass
Hangs down his mourning head, and seems to say
This was the fatal place, where Pasquil lay.
Oh thou sweet print, stamped by the fairest limbs,
The richest Coffin of the purest soul
That ever pressed the bosom of the earth,
First drink my tears, and next suck up my blood.
Now thou immortal spirit of my Love,
Thou precious soul of Pasquil view this knife
Which once thou gave me, and prepare thy arm
To clip the spirit of thy constant Love.
Dear Ned I come, by death I will be thine,
Since life denies it to poor Katherine.

Hold, hold, thou miracle of constancy,
First let heaven perish, and the crazde world run
Into first Chaos of confusion,
Before such cruel violence be done
To her fair breast, whose fame by virtue won,
Shall honour women whilst there shines a sun.

Thrice sacred spirit, why dost thou forsake
Elizeum pleasures, to withhold the arm
Of wretched Katherine? Oh let me die,
Retire sweet Ghost, do not pollute thy hand
With touch of mortals.

Amazement of thy Sex, Pasquill doth live,
And lives to love thee in eternity.
Be not aghast, recover spirit, (Sweet)
Tis Pasquill speaks, tis Pasquill clips thy waste,
Tis Pasquill prints a kiss on thy fair hand.

What do I dream? or have I drawn the sluice
Of life up? and through streams of blood
Unfelt, have set my prisoned soul at large?
Am I in heaven? or in Pasquills Arms?
I am in heaven, for my Neds embrace
Is Katherines long wished celestial place.

Divinity of sweetness, I protest,
If these inferior Orbs were rolled up,
And the imperial heaven bared to my view,
Twere not so gracious, nor so much desired,
As my dear Katherine is to Pasquills sight.

Heaven of Content, Paphos of my delight.


Mirror of Constancy, life-bloud of love.


Center to whom all my affections move.


Renown of Virgins, whose fame shall ne'er fleet.


Oh I am mazed with joy, I pree thee sweet,
Unfold to me, what sad mischance it was,
Forced thy deaths rumour, and such woes disperc'd?
Sad sorrow past, delights to be rehearsed.

It will be tedious, but in brief think thus,
Old Mamons malice was the venombd foam,
That poisoned all the sweets of our content.

Alas dear heart, that love should be so crossed.
Now good Ned fetch my gown, tis at yon house,
I would be loath to turn to Hygate thus.

I am oblig'de with infinite respect, to do you service.
Oh power divine, was ever such a love as Katherine?

Look Mamon, search Mamon, this way she went,
Put on thy spectacles, this way she went:
Blessed, blessed, blessed, be thy nativity,
Yonder she sits, I'll either have her now,
Or none shall e're enjoy her with content.

How loves impatient, when will Ned return?


Tut, tis no matter when, look where thy Mamo is.


Good devil, for Gods sake do not vex my sight:
Did not thou plot the death of my dear Love?

Yes, yes, and wold complot ten thousand deaths,
Even damn my soul, for beauteous Katherine.
My ship shall kemb the Oceans curled back
To furnish thee with brave Abiliaments,
Rucks of rich Pearl, and sparkling Diamonds
Shall fringe thy garments with Imbroadry:
Thy head shall blaze as bright with Orient stone,
As did the world being burnt by Phaeton.

You make me death, for pities sake forbear:
Oh when will Pasquil come? Good Sir depart.
When wilt return? I pray you Sir go hence,
And troth, I will not hate you: nay I'll speak
Against my heart, and say I loath you not.
You vex my patience, gentle sir forbear,
I beg it on my knee, and with a tear.

Tut will you love me, and detest yon boy?


Heaven detest me first, and loathe my soul.


Is it your final resolution?


God knows it is. So good Sir rest content.


I, I will rest, and thou shalt rest thus blurred,
Thus poisoned; venomde with this oil of Toads:
If Mamon cannot get thee, none shall joy
Which he could not enjoy. I fear no law,
Gold in the firmest conscience makes a flaw.
Rot like to Helen: Spittle hence, adieu,
Let Pasquil boast in your next interview.

Be pitiful and kill me gentle Sir.
Heaven my heart is cracked with misery:
Where shall I hide me? which way shall I cleanse
The eating poison of this venomde oil?
Poor wretch (alas) see where thy Pasquil comes.

Here Love put on your gown. How now? good God,
Heave give me patiece: who hath used thee thus?

The devil in the shape of Mamon. Sweet
Touch me not. Pasquil I conjure thee now
By all the power of affection,
By that strict bond of love that lincks our hearts,
Leave and abandon me eternally.
I merit now no love, yet prithee sweet,
Vouchsafe to give me leave to love thee still.
But I do bind thee by thy sacred vow
Of our once happy, and thrice blessed love,
Follow not Katherine: good Ned, do not grieve,
In time just heaven may our woes relieve.

O dira fata, saeua, miseranda, horida
Quis hic Locus? quae Regio? quae Mundi plaga?
Vbi sum? Katherina, Katherina, Eheu Katherina.

My Spectacles will betray me, look
Mamon, search Mamon, here abouts they fell.

Welcome Erra Pater, you that make Prognostications for ever. Where's you
Almanac?


Lord bless my Obligations, Lord bless my bonds, Lord bless my
Obligations. Alas, alas, alas.


Let me see sir now, when will true valour be at the full? Oh there's an
opposition tis eclipsed, Venus, I Venus is mounted. Wheres the Goat now? Kembd,
fine kemd. Oh here are Dog days, out vpont Dog days, Dog days, Dog days,
out vpont.


Alas my Obligations, my Bonds, my Obligations, my Bonds. Alas, alas, alas.


Katherina, Katherina, Ehew Katherina.


Obligations, Obligations: Alas my Obligations, I am undone, undone, undone.


Sir, Sir, Sir.


What sir you for, you Dog, you Hound, you
Crust, whats best news with you now? Out-alas my
Obligations, my Bonds, I am undone, undone.

Sir, the best news is, your ship (the Hopewell) hath hapt ill, returning from
Barbary. Tis but sunk, or so, not a scrap of goods sau'de.


Villains, Rogues, Iewes, Turks, Infidels, my nose will rot off with grief.
O the Got, the Got, the Got, I shall run mad, run mad, run mad.


Amen, amen, amen. But there's other news to comfort you withal sir.


Lets hear them good Flawne. My ship, my bonds, my bonds, my ship, I shall
run mad unless thy good news reclaim me. Lets hear thy news.


Your house with all the furniture is burnt, not a rag left, the people stand
warming their hands at the fire, and laugh at your misery.


I defy heaven, earth and hell, renounce my nose, plague, pestilence,
confusion, famine, sword and fire, devour all, devour me, devour Flawne,
devour all: bonds, house, and ship, ship, house, and bonds, Despair,
Damnation, Hell, I come, I come, so room for Mamon, room for Usury, room for
thirty in the hundred. I come, I come, I come.


Why me thinks this is right now, I'll even lay him up in Bedlam, commit him
to the mercy of the whip, the entertainment of bread and water, and the the
sting of a Usurers Conscience for ever.


Truly Mistress Winifride, as I would be willing to be thankful, and
thankful to find you willing to prostrate your fair parts to my pleasure,
so I hope you will remember your promise, and promise what you now remember, if
you have forgot, I would be glad to put you in mind of it.


Truly friend Iohn, as I would be loath to break my promise, so I would be
unwilling to keep my word to the dishonesting of my virginity. Marry for a
nights lodging or so, I will not be strait laced to my friend. Therefore thus it
must be. To night I must lie at the Farm at Holloway, thither shall you be
conueyed in this Sack, laid in my chamber, from whence you shall have free
access to the pleasures of my private bed.


Well then be constant Winifride, and you shall find me faithful Jack Drum:
and so taking leave of your lips, I betake me to the tuition of the Sack.


Winifride my Mistress Camelia stays for you to attend her to the Green, I
must go and clap my Tabers cheeks there, for the heavens In faith.


Stay a little here, and if Iohn fo de king come, give him that Sack. Oh I
could crack my Whalebones, break my Buske, to think what laughter may arise
from this.


By my trot, dis love is a most cleanly Ientleman, he is very full of shift,
de fine Vench, can invent ten towsand, towsand trick to kiss a men ( he) see
by gor she ha keep her word, she is in de seck already, he, brave by gor, my
blood das sparkle in my vein for joy. Metre Timotty you must give me dat seck
dere.


Owy da Mounsieur, that is well pronounced is it not?


Ritt, ritt, ritt, excellan: excellan: adieu Timothy, me am almost burst for
joy.


Well, I know what the Wenches on the green are saying now, as well as if I
were in their bellies, when will Timothy come, when will honest Timothy
approach, when will good Timothy draw near? Well Wenches now rejoice, for
Timothy Twedle doth come.


Brother how like you of our modern wits?
How like you the new Poet Mellidus?

A slight bubbling spirit, a Cork, a Husk.


How like you Musus fashion in his carriage?


O filthily, he is as blunt as Pawles.


What think you of the Lines of Decius?
Writes he not a good cordial sappy stile?

A surreinde Iaded wit, but a rubs on.


Brabant thou art like a pair of Balance,
Thou wayest all saving thy self.

Good faith, troth is, they are all Apes gulls,
Vile imitating spirits, dry heathy Turfs.

Nay brother, now I think your judgment erres.


Err, he cannot err man, for children fools speak truth always.


See who comes yonder sweating with a pack.


Mounsieur, what do you bear there ha?


Pree you away, you break my glasses der, Ieshu, now me know not what to do,
Zot dat I was to come dis way widd them.


Glasses you salt rheum, come what ha you there?


Trike no more for Ieshu sake, by gor me have brittle var, if you knock it,
it will break presant, pre you adieu.


We must know whats in the bag In faith.


By my trot, me tell you true, will you no trike meden?


No faith, but see you tell us true, or else.


Or else, or else by gor, do wat you please wid me: Sweet Vinifride, my very art
dus first, he by gor, me did not dink to vrong you dus: come out sweet
Vinifrid, me much discredit you.

He Jack Drum. Iesu vat made you dere?


Gentlemen my M. desires you to come supp with him, I was sent to inuit you,
and this itching goat, would needs ease my legs carry me: I hope you'll come,
and so I take my leave. I, I am gulled, but if I quit her not, well.


Come, there's some knot of knavery in this trick.


His culler is not currant, well, let pass.


Come Mounsieur, come, I'll help you to a
Go down the hill before, I'll follow you. Wench,

Me dank you: Mor deu, he mo^ a me, me am trooke dead wit grief, de cock of
my humore is down, and me may hang my self for a Vench.


Gentlemen will you laugh heartily now?


I, and if thou wilt play the fool kindly now.


I will strait frame the strongest eternal Jest
That e're was builded by Invention:
My wife lies very private in the Town,
I'll bring the French man to her presently,
As to a loose lascivious Courtesan:
Nor he, nor you, nor she, shall know the rest,
But it shall be immortal for a Jest.

Farewell brother, we shall meet at Hygate soon.


The wicked Jest be turned on his own head,
Pray God he may be kindly Cuckoled.

Carry this favour to my Ellis straight,
I long to see him, prithee bid him come.

I would be loath to nourish your defame,
And therefore Mistress pray you pardon me.

What is thy judgment of my Ellis chandge?


No that is firm: but your estate is changed.
You know your sister's strangely vanished,
And now the hope and revenue of all,
Calls you his sole, and fair apparent heir:
Now therefore would I have you change your love.
Indeed I yield tis modern policy,
To kiss even dirt that plasters up our wants.
I'll not deny, tis worthy wits applause,
For women on whom lowering Fortune squints,
And casts but half an eye of due respect,
To pin some amorous Idiot to their eyes,
And use him as they use their Looking-glasse,
See how to adorn their beauties by his wealth,
And then case up the fool and lay him by.
But for such Ladies as your self is now,
Whose fortunes are sustained by all the proppes
That gracious Fortune can advance you with,
For such a one to yoke her free sweet youth
Unto a Lowne, a Dane-like barbarous Sot,
A guilden Trunchion, fie, tis slavish vile.
Oh what is richer then content in love?
And will you now having so huge a Ruck
Of heaped up fortunes, go and chain your self
To a dull post, whose very eyes will blaze
His base bred spirit, where so e're he comes,
And shame you with the very name of wife.
No Mistress, no, I have found out a man
That merits you, if man can merit you.

Lord what a tide of hate comes creeping on
Upon my former judgment? Come, the man?

The man? (oh God) the man is such a man,
That he is matchless: oh, I shall profane
His name, with unrespected utterance.

Oh thou tormentst me, dear Winifride the man?


By the sweet pleasures of an amorous bed,
I think you will be deified by him.
O God the most accomplished man that breathes,
And Planet is the man.

Out on the devil, th^res a man indeed.


Nay look you now, you'll straight oreshoot yourself,
You'll say he's sour and unsociable:
Tush you know him not, that humor's forced:
But in his native spirit he's as kind
As is the life of love. And then the clearest skin,
The whitest hand, the cleanest well shaped leg:
The quickest eye: Fie, fie, I shall but blur
And sulley his bright worth with my rude speech.

Well, if he court me, I'll not be much coy.


Court you? nay you must court him for ought I know:
You must not think forsooth, that I am feed
To urge you thus. I solemnly protest,
I motion this out of my pure vowed love,
Which wishes all advancement and content
To attend the glory of your beauteous youth.

O I am Planet stricken Winifride,
How shall I intimate my love to him?

I saw him coming up the hill even now,
Send him a favour, and I'll bear it to him,
And tell him you desire to speak with him.

Do, do, dear Winifride, sweet wench make haste.


Sir, I have her good will, and please you now to give me your consent, and
look you Sir, here I have Item'd forth what I am worth.


Tush show me no Items, and she love you, a God^ name: I'll not be cursed by
my daughter for forcing her to clip a loathed, abhorred match: and see how
fortunate we are; Look where she stands.


Sweet Planet, thou only gouernst me.


Daughter give me your hand, with your consent, I give you to this Gentleman.


Marry phoh, will you match me to a fool?


God pardon me, not I: why M. Ellis ha?
Had you her consent, speak freely man?

Indeed law now; I thought so: by my troth
You sed you lou'de me, that you did indeed.

I as my fool, my I diot to make sport.


Fie daughter, you are too plain with him.
Alas my son Simile is out of countenance.

Truly as a Mill-horse, is not a horse Mill, and as a Cart Jade, is not a Jade
Cart, even so will I go hang my self.


Mary godforbid, what frolic, frolic man, we'll have a Cup of Sack and Sugar
soon, shall quite expel these musty humours of stale melancholy.


Is this the Egg where Castor and Pollux bred?
I'll crack the Bastard in the very shell.

Alas my markets, my markets are clean spoiled.


Vbi Hellena, vbi Troia, is't not true my Ganimede,
When shall old Saturne mount his Throne again?
See, see, alas how bleak Religion stands.
Katherina, Katherina, you damned Titanoies,
Why prick you heavens ribs with blasphemy?
Python yet breathes, old gray hayr'd piety.

Alas kind youth, how came he thus di^aught?


I left him in pursuit of Katherine,
And found him in this strange distemperature.

O Sir, is't you that stamp on litrature?
You are inspired you with Prophecy.

Not I, as I shall be saved, I am M. Iohn Ellis I.


Come, come, lets entice him by some good means,
I'll labour to reclaim him to his wits.
O now my daughter Katherine remembers me,
Where art thou girl? heaven give me patience.

Poor, poor Astrea, who blurs thy orient shine?
Come yons the Capital of Iupiter,
Letts whip the Senate, else they will not leave
To have their Justice blasted with abuse
Of flattering Sycophants. Come lets mount the Stars,
Reverend antiquity go you in first --
Dotage will follow. Then comes pale fac'de Lust --
Next Sodome, then Gomorha, next poor I,
By heaven my heart is burst with misery.

I ha tell you de very trote of the lagg Jest, by gor your England Damosells
are so fear, so vittie, so kitt, by my trote she toss me wish vey she
please der: but pre you were is de Vench? Is dis de house? Ha is dis de house,
pre you tell me ha?


It is, it is, and she is in the Inner Chamber:
Boy call her forth.

By gor den me must needs now sing,
Ding, ding, a ding, Ding a, ding a, ding,
For me am now at pleasures spring.
Ding a, ding, ding, ding a, ding a, ding a, ding,
And a he da vench, da vench, da vench,
Which must my br^ling humour quench. Coma, coma, com.

Now sweet, you kept your promise well last night.


By gorshe give him much kind word already.


Well to make thee amends, boy fetch us a quart of Canary Sack. Pry thee Mall
entertain this French Gentleman.


Sir you are very welcome to my Lodging.


Me danck you, and first me kiss your fingre, next me bus your lip, and
last me clip your vast, and now foutra for de Vinifride.


Sir Edwards Caterer passed by sir, you wild me to remember Lemmons.


Gods precious tis true: Boy go with me to Billings-gate. Mall I'll return
straight.


Will you no Vin sir, he, he is gone purposely, by my trote most kind
Gentleman. Fair Madame pree you pity me, by Gor me languish for your love,
me am a pouera French Ientleman, pree you show me your bed-Chambre.


What mean you sir, by this strange passion?


Nay noting, by Gor damsel, you be so faer, so admirably feer, flesh and
blood cannot endure your countenance, me brule, ang me brule, ang you ha no
compassion, by gor me ang quite languish. Last night me go to bed, ang me put
de candle behind me, and by my trote me see clean torough me. Me ang so dry,
me put a cold plattre at my back, and my back melt de plattre quite, do so
burn. Pree you show me your bed Chambre, me will be secrete constant: I love
you unreasonably vell* unreasonably vell by gor.


In faith you make me blush, what should I say?


Say no, ang take it: Or arc you one ting, Say neder yea nor no, but take it,
ang say noting.


You will be close and secret?


Secred, by gor as secred as your soul, me will tell noting, possible.


Well Sir, if it please you to see my Chamber, tis at your service.


He now me ang brave Mounsieur, by gor ang me had know dis, me wood have
eat some Potatos, or Ringoe: but vell: he. Me will tanck Metre Brabant for
dis, by gor me am caught in heaven bliss.


Oh too unkind, why doest thou scorn my love?
She that with all the vehemence of speech
Hath been pursued, and kneeled too for love,
Prostrates her self, and all her choicest hopes,
As lowe as to thy feet, disdain me not,
To scorn a Virgin, is mans odious blot*

To scorn a man, is Virgins odious blot.
Were thou as rich as is the Oceans womb,
As beauteous as the glorious frame of heaven,
Yet would I loath thee worse then varnished skulles,
Whose ryuels are dawbd up with plastering paint.

O Rocky spirit.


Breathe not in vain, I hate thy flatterings,
Detest thy purest elegance of speech,
Worse then I do the Croaking of a Toad.

Sweet Gentleman.


Peace you Rebato pinner, Poting-sticke,
Y^ bribed corrupters of affection:
I hate you both, by heaven I hate her more
Then I do love my self. Hence pack, away,
I'll sooner dote upon a bleare-eide Witch,
A sapless Beldam, then I'll flatter thee.

Be not too cruel sweet Planet, dear relent,
Compassionate my amorous languishment.

Ha, ha, I pree thee kneel, beg, blubber, Cry,
Whilst I behold thee with a loathing eye:
And laugh to see thee weep.

Look, on my knees I creep,
Be not impenetrable beauteous youth,
But smile upon me, and I'll make the air
Court thy choice ear with soft delicious sounds.
Bring forth the Violls, each one play his part,
Musick's the quiver of young Cupids dart.

Out Siren, peace scritch-owle, hence chattering Pie,
The blackt beakt night Crow, or the howling Dog,
Shall be more gracious then thy squeaking voice:
Go sing to M. Iohn. I shall be blunt
If thou depart not, hence, go morn and die,
I am the scourge of light inconstancy.
Thus my dear Brabant, am I thy revenge,
And whip her for the peevish scorn she bare
To thy weak younger bi^th: o that the souls of men
Were temperate like mine, then Natures paint
Should not triumph over our infirmities.
I do adore with infinite respect,
Women whose merit issues from their worth
Of inward graces, but these rotten posts
That are but guilt with outward garnishment,
O how my soul abhors them. Yons my friend,
I will conceal what I for him have wrought,
Nice Jealousy mistakes a friendly part:
Now Brabant wheres thy elder brother ha?
What hath he built the Jest with Mounsieur yet?

Faith I know not, but I heard he left the
French-man with his wife.

Knew she thy brothers meaning?


Not a whit, she's a mere stranger to this merriment.


Hit and be lucky, o that twere lawful now
To pray to God that he were Cuckoled.
Dear Brabant I do hate these bumbaste wits,
That are puffed up with arrogant conceit
Of their own worth, as if Omnipotence
Had hoised them to such vnequald height,
That they suruaide our spirits with an eye
Only create to censure from above,
When good souls they do nothing but reprove.
See where a Shallop comes. How now, what news?

What might this mean, that Winifrid salutes
The blunt tongu'de Planet, with such private speech?
See with what vehemence she seems to urge
Some private matter. Planet is my friend,
And yet the strongest link of friendship's strained,
When female love puts to her mighty strength.
Mark, Mark, she offers him Camelias scarf:
Now on my life tis so: Planet supplants my Love.

Friend I must leave thee, preethee pardon me,
We'll meet at supper soon with the good knight.

I, I, content: o hell to my delight,
My friend will murder me, thin Cobweb Lawn
Burst with each little breath of tempting sweets.
She entreats you M. Planet, to meet
Her at the Cross stile.

Ha, at the cross stile, well I'll meet him there.
He that's persidious to me in my love,
Confusion take him, and his blood be spilt
Without confusion to the murderer.

So load it soundly, murders great with me,
Go Boy, discharge it, even in Planets breast,
Shoot him quite through, through, thou can not sin
To murder him, that murdered his dear friend
With damned breach of friendship, when he is slain
Bring me his Cloak and Hat, here I will stay
To be imbrac'de in steed of Planet: go, away.
I had rather die with blood upon my head,
Shame and reproach clogging my heavy hour,
Then t'haue my friend still wounding of my soul
With reprobate Apostacisme in love.
O this Sophisticate friendship, that dissolves
With every heate of Fancy, let it melt
Even in Hells Forge* Hark, the Pistol is discharg'de,
The Act of gory murder is performd'e.
Have mercy heaven: o my soul is rent
Planets wound. Come Boy the Hat and Cloak,
Go post to Scotland, there are crowns for thee,
Leave Brabant unto death, and obloquy.
Why now the ulcerous swelling of my hate
Is broken forth: Oh that these women's beauties,
This Natures witchcraft, should enchant our souls
So infinitely unrecoverable,
That Hell, death, shame, eternal infamy,
Cannot reclaim our desperate resolves,
But we will on spite of damnation.
Come ye poor garments of my murdered friend,
Morn that you are compelled to hide his limbs
That slew you Master. See Camelia comes,
I'll stand thus muffled and deceive her sight,
When love makes head, friendship is put to flight.

Persist not still, o thou relentless youth
To scorn my love: what tho I scorned thy friend,
Do not vpbrayd me still with hating him,
Do not still view me with a loathing eye.
For Brabants sake, do you but love me sweet,
And I'll not scorn him. Why should be so nice
In keeping laws of friendship? did thou e're hear
Of any soul that held a friend more dear,
Then a fair woman?

O the sting of death, how hath Brabant erred?
Hence thou vile womb of my damnation,
Oh thou wronged spirit of my murdered friend,
Thou guiltless, spotless, pure Immaculate,
Behold this arm thrusting swift vengeance
Into the Trunk of a cursed damnde wretch.

Heel spoil himself, lets run call for help.


Now have I room for murder, this vast place,
Hushed silence, and dumb solitude, are fit
To be observers of my Tragedy.
Planet accept the smoke of reeking blood
To expiate thy murder. Friend I come,
We'll troop together to Elizium.

Hold hairbrainde youth, what mischief maddes thy thoughts?


Forbear good knight, you never sinned so deep,
As in detaining this just vengeance
To light upon me, but know I will die,
I have infring'de the laws of God and Man,
In shedding of my Planets guiltles blood,
Who I supposed corryuald me in love
Of that Camelia, but injuriously:
And therefore gentle knight, let mine own hand
Be mine own hangman.

Brother I'll get you pardon, fear it not.


You'll get my pardon, brother pardon me,
You shall not, for I'll die in spite of thee.

I am turned wild in wonder of this act.


Come Brabant come, give me my Cloak Hat,
The evenings raw and dank, I shall take cold.
How now? turned mad, why star'st thou on me thus?
Give me my Cloak. Hart is the youth distraught?

Ha, doest thou breathe, lets see where is thy wound?


Doest breathe, my wound, what doest thou mean by this?


Gentlemen I can direct you forth
This Labyrinth of intricate misdoubts,
My M. willed me kill that Gentleman,
Now I thought he was mad in putting me
To such an enterprise, and therefore soothed him up,
With I sir, yes sir, and so sir, at each word,
Whilst he would show me how to hold the Dagge,
To draw the Cock, to charge, and set the flint,
Mean time I had the wit to think him mad,
And therefore went, and as he willed me shot,
Which he God knows, thought pearc'd his deer friends hart,
Then went borrowed that same Hat cloak
Of M. Planet, brought them to my Master,
And so.

No more, no more, knight I will make thee smile
When I discourse how much my friend hath erred.

I will dissolve and melt my soul to night,
In influent laughter. Come' my Jocund spirit
Presages some vnhopte for happiness:
We'll crown this evening with triumphant joy,
I'll sup upon this Green, here's room enough
To draw a liberal breath, and laugh aloud:
Drum fetch the Table: Twedle scour your Pipe,
For my old bones will have a Round to night.
Now by my troth and I had thought ont too,
I would have had a play: I faith I would.
I saw the Children of Powles last night,
And troth they pleased me pretty, pretty well,
The Apes in time will do it handsomely.

I faith I like the Audience that frequents there
With much applause: A man shall not be choakte
With the stench of Garlic, nor be pasted
To the barmy Jacket of a Beer*brewer.

Tis a good gentle Audience, and I hope the Boys
Will come one day into the Court of requests.

I and they had good Plays, but they produce
Such musty fopperies of antiquity,
And do not suit the humorous ages backs
With clothes in fashion.

Well Brabant well, you will be censuring still,
There lies a Jest in steep will whip you fort't.

Gallants I have no judgment in these things,
But will it please you sit? Camelia
Call these same Gentlemen unto thee wench:
O there with thee my Katherine was wont
To sit with graceful presence, well let it pass:
Fetch me a Cup of Sack. Come Gallants sit,
M. Brabant, M. Planet, I pray you sit.
Young M. Brabant, and Gods precious M. Iohn,
Sit all, and consecrate this night to mirth.
Here is old Neds place: Come, sound Music there,
What Gallants have you ne'er a Page can entertain
This pleasing time with some French brawl or Song?
What shall we have a Galliard? troth tis well.


Once more the gracious heavens have renewd
My wasted hopes, once more a blessed chance
Hath fetched again my spirit from the sownd
And languishing despair of happiness.
A skilful Beldam with the Juice of herbs
Hath curd my face, and killed the venoms power,
And now if Pasquil live and love me still,
Heaven is bounteous to poor Katherine.
Yon suppes my Father, but my Ned's not there
I fear, and yet I know not what I fear.

Gallants I drink this to Ned Pasquils health.


I faith I'll pledge him, would he had his wits.


And I my daughter. Fill me one Cup more:
No grief so potent, but neat sparkling wine
Can conquer him: Oh this is Juice divine.

Would he had his wits. Oh what a numming fear
Strikes a cold palsy through my trembling blood.

Virtue shall burst open the Iron gates of Hell,
I'll not be cooped up, room for Phaeton*
Lame policy how can thou go upright?
O Lust, stain not sweet Love. Fie be not lost
Upon the surge of vulgar humours. You Idiot
Riuet my Armour, and Caparison,
A mighty Centaur, for I'll run at Tilt,
And tumble down y on Giantin the dust.
Sit gentle Judges of great Radamant,
Let not Proserpine rule thee. Oh she's dead*
Now thou art right Eacus, I appeal to thee,
Have pity on a wretches misery.

I am quite sunk with grief, what shall we do
To get recovery of his wits again?

Let Music sound, for I have often heard
It hath such sweet agreement with our souls,
That it corrects vain humours, and recalls
His straggling fancies to fair union.

Why the soul of man is nought but simphonies,
A sound of disagreeing parts, yet fair unite
By heavens hand, divine by reasons light.

Sound Music, then pray God it take effect.


Mark with what passion he sucks up the sweets
Of this fame delicate harmonious breath.

Observe him well, me thinks his eye is fixed
Upon some object that seems to attract
His very soul forth with astonishment
Mark with what vehemence his thoughts do speak
Even in his eyes, some creature stands far off,
That hath intranc'te him with a pleasing sight.

Amazement, wonder, stiff astonishment,
Stare and stand gazing on this miracle,
Perfection, of what e're a humane thought
Can reach with his discoursiue faculties,
Thou whose sweet presence purifies my sense,
And doest create a second soul in me,
Dear Katherine, the life of Pasquils hopes.

Dear Pasquil, the life of Katherines hopes.


Once more let me embrace the constant's one
That e're was tearmde her Sex perfection.

Once more let me be valued worth his love,
In decking of whose soul, the graces strove.

Spite hath outspent it self, and thus at last,

We clip with joyful arm each others wast.

O pardon me thou dread omnipotence,
I thought thou could not thus have blessed me.
O thou hast deaw'd my gray hairs with thy love,
And made my old heart sprout with fertile joy.

Forget dear father, that my act hath wronged
The quiet of your age.

No more, no more, I know what thou wold'st say
Daughter, there's nothing but salvation,
Could come unto my heart more gracious
Then is the sight of my dear Katherine.
Son Pasquill now, for thou shalt be my son,
What frolic gentle youth.

Is Mamon here?


Oh Sir, M. Mamon is in a City of Jury, called Bethlem, Alias plain Bedlam:
the price of whips is mightily risen since his brain was pitifully
ouertumbled, they are so fast spent upon his shoulders.


Oh sacred heavens, howiust is thy revenge?


Why? did he cast you in the labyrinth
Of these strange crosses?

Yes honoured knight, which in more private place
And fitter time, I will disclose at large.

Faith Sister, as I am your elder borne,
So will I match before or with you sure,
Young M. Brabant?

By this light not I.


Honest M. Ellis?


No indeed law, not I, I do not use to marry*
For even as black patches are worn,
Some for pride, some to stay the Rhewme, and
Some to hide the scab, even so Iohn Ellis
Scorn her, that hath scorned him.

Virtuous Master Planet.


Errant wandering star we shall ne'er agree.


M. Brabant, M. Planet, M. Ellis, faith I'll have any.


But no body will have thee, this is the plague of light inconstancy.
Go Twedle, bid the Butler broach fresh wine,
Set up wax lights, and furnish new the boards,
Knock down a score of Beefs,
Inuit my neighbours straight,
And make my Dressers groan with weight of meat.
M. Ellis, pray you let us hear your high Dutch Song,
You are admired for it: Good lets hear it.

I do not use to sing, and yet even as when the sky falls we shall have
Larks, even so when my voice rises, you shall have a Song.


Give us once a drink, for an the black Bowl,
Sing gentle Butler balley moy,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler balley moy.
Give us once some drink, for an the pint Pot,
Sing gentle Butler balley moy, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler balley moy.
Give us once a drink, for an the quart Pot,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the quart, the pint Pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink, for an the pottle Pot,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once a drink, for an the gallan Pot,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint
pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once a drink for an the Firkin,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart,
the pint pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once a drink for an the Kilderkin,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the
pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For and the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink for an the Barrel,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Barrel, the Kilderkin, the
Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink for an the Hoggeshead,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Hoggeshead, the Barrel, the
Kilkerkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For
an the black bowl. Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once a drink for an the But,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the But, the Hoggeshead, the Barrel, the
Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot, For
an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink for an the Pipe,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Pipe, the But, the Hogeshead, the Barrel,
the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the quart, the pint pot,
For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Give us once some drink for an the Tun,
Sing gentle Butler bally moy, the Tun, the Pipe, the But, the the
Hoggeshead, the Barrel, the Kilderkin, the Firkin, the gallan, the pottle, the
quart, the pint pot, For an the black bowl.
Sing gentle Butler bally moy.
Well done, I faith twas chanted merrily:
What my Gallants, ne'er a tickeling Jest
To make us sown with mirth ere we go in?

Faith Gent. I ha brewed such a strong headed Jest
Will make you drunk, and reel with laughter:
You know Mounsieur Iohn fo de king?

Very well, he read French to my daughters.


I to gull the Fool, have brought him to my wife, as to a loose lascivious
Courtesan, she being a mere stranger to the Jest, and there some three hours
ago left him: but I am sure she hath so cudgeld him with quick sharpe Jests,
and so batterd him with a volley of her wit, as indeed she is exceeding witty,
and admirable chaste, that in my conscience heel never dare to court women
more. Would to God he were returned.


See even on your wish he's come.


Iesu preserve you sweet Metre Brabant, by gor de most delicat plump vench dat
ever me tuche: me am your slave, your peasant; by gor a votre service
whil'ste I live for dis.


He would persuade you now that he touched her, with an immodest hand. Ha, ha,
ha.


Such her, by Gor me such her, and such her, and me such her, me ne'er such
such a venche, de finea foot, de cleanest leg, de sleekest skin: and me
tell e sure token, she hath de finest little varte you know veare: he by Gor
me ne'er such such a vench.


Pray God he have not brewed a heady Jest indeed.


Why faith Gentlemen I am Cuckold, by this light I am.


By gor me no know, you tell a me twas a Courtesan, prey you pardon me, by
my trote, me tech you French to t'end of de vorlde.


Come here's thy Cap of Maintenance, the Coronet
Of Cuckolds. Nay you shall wear it, or wear
My Rapier in your guts by heaven.
Why doest thou not well deserve to be thus used?
Why should thou take felicity to gull
Good honest souls, and in thy arrogance
And glorious ostentation of thy wit,
Think God infused all perfection
Into thy soul alone, and made the rest
For thee to laugh at? Now you Censurer
Be the ridiculous subject of our mirth.
Why Fool, the power of Creation
Is still Omnipotent, and there's no man that breathes
So valiant, learned, witty, or so wise,
But it can equal him out of the same mould.
Wherein the first was formed. Then leave proud scorn,
And honest self made Cuckold, wear the horne.

Wear the horne? I, spite of all your teethe
I'll wear this Crown, and triumph in this horne.

Why faith tis valorously spoke fair Sir,
Weel solemnise your Coronation
With royal pomp. Now Gentlemen prepare
A liberal spirit to entertain a Ieast,
Where free light Jocund mirth shall be enthroand
With sumptuous state. Now Music beat the air,
Entrance our thoughts with your harmonious sounds,
Our Fortune laughs, and all content abounds.


