KNights, Gentlemen, and Yeomen,
attend her Graces service; sheele abroad.

Be vncoverd Gentelmen.

Rome there, back Beggars.

Bertie, deal mine Alms.

Pray for the Dutch, friends.

Heavens preserve your Grace.

What says thou? from my King? I kiss his (...)
As humbly as my infant penitence,
When due correction threatened mine offence:
I may entreat the Palatine with grace,
All courtesy and favours, for my Sovereigns sake,
I will present him with smooth countenance,
But for the point here touching Marriage,
Beseech my Prince of pardon, since, as yet,
My Widows tears are scarce wiped from my cheek,
Touching the business, bout Sir Roger Willowbie,
My dear near kinseman, I'll not return
You empty handed back, but send
His highness Parram Lordship to dispose,
And thank his gracious providence for him.
Return my salutations on my knee,
And say my whole possessions are all his,
Berty reward his pains, On;
Stay, and know the reason of that guard,
How? give mine eyes the fullness of their wish,
Screen not my Joys, I pray stand all aside,
My Gossip Gardner led unto the Tower,
Tis pity, nay man leave your courtesy,
My passion has no tears to answer you,
Truth now I hope hath got a holliday,
The tyrant Wolf in hold, the Lambs may play,
Forward to Sussex house in Barnisby street:
More objects yet of comfort? what is he?

Bonner commanded to the Martial sie.

Faggots will then grow cheap, they say, my Lord,
That you have bought up all our fire-wood,
To send us in a shining flame to heaven,
But Bertie, see how lean has study made him,
And his care with sweating in repress of errors,
An Ell will hardly girdle his lean wast.
Sands, I'll defer your welcome yet from Cambridge,
To show you here a president of zeal.

Madam (...) scorns live not with charity,
My conscience is cont^nt to bear this cross.

And mine as well content that thou should bear it,
think thou I will disburden thy content,
Good man thou art deceived, my charity
Shuts up the doors against thy misery,
I tell thee, all my sorrows are dried up,
With this sweet breath of comfort, to see thee,
Enfranchise truth by thy captivity.

Time flaters you awhile, heaven has a power,
Can change the White to Sable in an hour,
My welthier thoughts, yet tell me I shall live,
these scorns to quittance, your free heart to grieve,
For time is rich in ransom, she may raise,
the scorned and captived Bonner, ware those days.

If Englands sin deserves that curse again,
Doubtless my life the truth should still maintain.

The grace of heaven make strong that your resolue^

Tut Sands, I am no novice to bear off
The gusty shock of danger, here is proof,
Hath bid the Cannon of rough threatening grief,
The deaths of one dear Husband, and two Sons,
(Regenerate in the fame of their deserts.)
Have made a violent shot against this breast,
But by the manly courage of that joy,
Is knit unto my spirits, to behold
The exild truth, now sojourning with time,
The rage of their repugnancy recoyles,
And I am Mistress of a Virgin heart.

With pardon gracious Madam,
Could Berties rude persuasion please your ears,
I wish it clothed with Hymens royalties:
A husband, like an Ammell, would enrich
Your golden virtues.

How Men can praise themselves.
Marriage is good, but wheres the husband good?
A loving husband, Bertie, true in touch
May swear, so they will be, few prove such.

Durst my opinion venture, but to speak him,
I could commend that merit to your heart,
As I presume, your fancy would embrace.

Void all the Chamber, Bertie, but your self,
The husband now, come man, fear not to speak,
You have absolution, ere you do begin,
The husband can report his true deserts.

As much as observations greedy eye,
Could well retain, keeps warm upon my tongue,
Which to your noblest consideration was in honours womb,
And from her sucked his Nutriment of life,
His spirit like an ensign doth display
The worthiness of his heroic birth,
His more concealed virtues varnish that,
To make his Comet (merit,) wondered at,
Nature in moulding of his lineaments,
Has shamed the cunning workmanship of Art,
That he is Madam, as your wish would make,
The richer in desert for your worthes sake.

You have described the substance of a man,
Such as might ravish the most chastest thoughts,
Virginity could sin in wish of him,
For but on my deceas^d Brandons breath,
Did never wait such rich perfections,
In them I shall but re-espouse mine own,
Marry one Husband twice, embrace the dead,
Hug in mine arms a Suffolke buried*

If honourable Love live in a man,
It guides the vert^es of the Palatine.

The Palatine? has he your wishes voice.

Could it assure him of your fancies choice.

His stately honours are vnmatcht for mine.

His greatness reflects beams into your shine.

That greatness claims a duty from my heart.

No more then his love offers your desert.

Your humble eyes see's merit, his will not,
Our weaker worthes in Marriage are forgot.

Nay rather Madam Wedlock doth inroule,
The special essence of your rare deserts,
Remembering your perfections.

I, they cou^d live in your humility,
And my affections best afford them thee,
Whilst thy sweet tongue solicits for thy friend,
Into thy bosom all my thoughts I send.
Cranwell what news.

The County Pallatine, now king of Poland.

King of Poland?

Madam survey your thoughts,
Master your fears, and crown your happiness,

King of Poland?

You Queen my hopes would see.

Queen of my rich desires in marrying thee*
What of this king of Poland?

He stays your graces leisure,
Accompanied with the Earl of Arundell.

Entreat their presence,
Welcome royal Prince,
My noble Lord.

Madam, my latest service comes to bring
An old affection from a new made king.

My Pristine gratulations thus accept
The humble proffer of your sovereign heart*
But let me tell you, my thrice gracious Lord,
You deal not Kingly, by advantaged means
To set upon my infancy of Love,
To ambush lay it by intelligence:
You know my meaning, there's a privy thief
I know you set to pillage my affections,
He durst not else have broke my secrets up.
His travel has not loitered in your suit,
Nor will I be ungrateful to his pains.
The Duke Northumberland, with the Earl of Erbaigh,
Desire to have access unto your grace.

More suitors? well, they are all welcome; usher them in.

Health and fair fortune
Wait on Suffolks Dutch.

Your wishes return their virtues on your self.

The king salutes you in my vassal breath,
And bad me tell you, he received your gift
With thankful welcome, and bestowed the same*
(Peec'd out with honour, from his noble bounty)
Upon your cousin Sir Roger Willowby,
Creating him Lord Willowby of Parram,
To build remembrance of your gracious gift:
Further he prays you to entreat this Prince,
The Earl of Erbaigh with fair courtesy.

Madam, the love of your perfections*
Hath called me hither, and of them I crave,
A welcome to my loyalty of heart.

I wish sir, my perfections of that wealth
To rate so high a merit as yours is:
But Princes, leave this cheapening of my love,
It is a bad thing dear.
Shall I beseech of you my Lord of Poland, and the rest,
Princes or whosoever tenders me
The humble service of his noble heart
As to digest my choice with patience:
Amongst you I will choose, and at this time
And in his like inter my vviddowhood,
Amongst a throng of merits one but enters,
One wins the Goal still* though a thousand venters,
This man must but poss^sse me, let the voice
Of my affections, please all with her choice.

Pleased or displeased, you women choose you^ (...)
And reason you should have it, or als one
You'll take a fall to have it; fancies force
Makes honest plainness often speed the worse,
Choose Madam choose, and please thine own conten^

The king of Poland Madam.

How this fellow
Wakes my remembrance for the king of Poland,
As though my fancy hung upon his tongue,
I never shot a blunted arrow forth,
Nor shall my choice recoil upon his worth,
Whom I'll call mine; come worst of fate,
Berty I choose thy self my marriage mate,
Upon this low foundation I erect
The Palace of mine honours, on this knee
I place the head of mine authority;
Let hand from hand exchange their offices,
Whats mine is thine, thine mine, sealed with this kiss.

How madcap Dutch; what and join lips
What ere we thought, I see it is a match.

You see blind fancies folly in my choice,
His worth prevails, nor will I change my voice.

By the dear loyalty my thoughts do owe
To this vnmeasur'd grace you heap on me,
And by the virtue of a Christian faith,
The relish of this blessing is so strong,
That when I leave to love, I live too long.

Princes, let your displeasure chide his meri^
Which stole my love your honours would inherit.

My fury thus bursts forth, to wish increase
Of your spouse virtues in your lives sweet peace.

My hatred dies not so, but I would see
Your merits live in your posterity.

Whereat frown you sir?

I hope it is no breach of duty, to conceal
Our close affections, they are privileged,
And I will keep them so, you have my service;
If it may pleasure, so; if not, I care not:
I'll morn mine own sins,
Take your Cloak and spare not.

If you be tired with the wearing it,
Good speed you, I'll not break you back with care.

You have my heart, whilst I an honest ass,
(For so I count all men of patience,)
Have laden it with whole loads of businesses*
With iaunting on your errands, drudgt at home,
With so strong diligence, that sleep could scarce
Approach my eye^lids for a sennights space:
The honour of your Cellar lives in me,
You scarce command a throat can gulp a health,
You think I flatter, take good fellows words,
And him whose merit claims pre-eminence,
By their opinion, deal your recompense.

If you mean me, I will not canvas
With you for the voice of quaint opinion;
You'll way down the scales,
Her honourable love, the gift of fate,
Not due of merit, doth advance my state.

Why sir, might she not bestow her love on me?

She might.

She might, more fool she did not, but al's one
All friends now, here's my hand, my spleens down.

In this embrace I send a general love,
To all my fellow servitors:
I know some lowres upon my happiness,
How undeserved, let my offices
Of love to you, and duty to her grace,
In their impartial verdict render up.

O, take my answer as the general voice,
For from my mouth breathes their opinions:
She lessens not her honours in your choice,
But makes you Lord of her affections,
And them we serve not, but her royalties,
Which, as they are not lessened, why should we
Shrink from their service; whom her love doth hon^
May challenge from us special reverence,
And so shall you, as homage for that love,
Whose soverainty commands our services.

Consent I see is liberal to this match,
And offers frankly my applauding heart,
Wishing of heaven to smile upon your loves,
That from them may grow up such gallant spirits
As may renown this land with honoured merits.

Good morrow to my Lord of Winchester*
How do you like our air in the Marshalseas,
From that ith Tower? welcome toot my Lord.

Oh I thank your love,
But had we once our liberties,
We would set night upon these morning skies.

Oh that that hour were come, the king on^

Whats that my Lord of London?

I, pray man, pray, that heaven would take
Our good king Edward to yon happy land,
He's sick, he's sick, heaven take the ^nfant child*
For this cracked world his virtues are too mild:
Is not this charitable, what say thou man?

But is the king sick?

And princes Mary well,
Oh how I long to hear his passing bell.
Soft who comes here.

Health to my honoured Lords.

That were, thou meanest.

That are, I bring your Lordships from our an (...)

Queen? is Edward dead?

King Edward, of that name the sixth, is dead, and

Who, who I beseech thee, guides the state?

She that repeales you to your former seats,
Royal Queen Mary.

See.

Good hold my back, this sudden blast of comfort
Blows me up, where is my rival Ridley and the rest,
They now shall fire for this.

Sent down to Oxford.

Thence they shall not stir,
Till fire consume them, if I be Winchester.

By me her highness greetes you with that sea,
Adding unto it, high Chancellor of England.

An office good my Lord may coin revenge
With Justice stamp to pay our enemies.

My Lord of London, that's your title now,
Restored unto it with her graces favour.

And if affection ^enifie my duty*
Let me respectless die without her favour.

Where be the Lords of Winchester London?

The good Lord Paget, welcome, pray, what news si^?

Her highness gives us joint commission
By virtue of this Patent to peruse,
And cleanse the state of impious sectaries,
Wherewith it was infected in the days
Of her deceased brother Edwards reign,

Without affection of affinity.

Of any, not her sister is except.

Then let our Suffolkes Dowager expect
Answer for her scorned taunts, she threw on me of late
That hot spirit, fire and flax, Madam faggot stick,
If she recant not I will faggot her,
If all the wood in Middlesex can doo^,
Or Londons Bishopricke have means to pay fort
I'll not niggard her bones and I do, arayne my charit^

I have already sent Process for her husban^
Forth by Cluine.

My man, a trusty fellow
Worthy employment in the Lollards tower,
But here comes Bartie, welcome honest Clunie
It was well done, an honest knave, I'll gratify thy loue^
As I will quittance such malignant hates.

As whose, ant please your Lordship.

A vengeance flatter you,
Your courteous ear, wears daggers in your heart.

My ear, my Lord, is servant to my heart.

They serve ind^ed to guide the envious heart.

Sure I think Bertie be an honest man,
Religious was his education,
With our deceased Chancellor whom he served,
If since his Lady have not weaned him from it.

Your honour still shall find me the same man.

In substance, but how in Religion?

As then a member of the self same Church.

My good Lady your Wi^e sir, she's not so.

I do beseech your Lordships to suspend
And smother your opinions till a trial
Blow up the embers to an open flame,
Then censure as you find, and giue's your doom.

If we but find her answers half so calm.

Yes as thunder, she calm? as a baited Bear,
I will oppose my disputation,
Against a College of best discipline,
Rather then with her brains, she sticks her i^sts*
Like poisoned arrows, in our tender spleens:
Thinking the sanctuary of her high birth*
To privilege her fond presumption,

My credit sir be pawnd.

Your credit^ tut tut, she hangs upon the mercy of the Queen,
But it will cast off her opinion.

Should she be cold, my Lords, or set a frown
Upon the alteration of her faith,
Your Lordships know the somes of money due,
From Charles the Emperor to her in the right,
Of her departed husband, Suffolkes Duke,
Which if your honourable licence would
Assign me a free passage to those parts
To gather up your unexpected love,
Would heate her good opinion with the zeal.
Where now the strangeness makes her somewhat stagger.

Let him go my Lords, you shall go speed him hence
The way is broader unto our revenge,
Which I have sworn to take upon that Dame,
Whose scornful taunts did so deprave my fame.
What says my good Chancellor to this suit.

You have free passage Bertie, when you please.

To escape your envies, if we cross the seas.

Follow him Clunie and when thou think,
The solemn farewell of ^ivorced lips,
Hath part this husband from his honoured wife,
With some especial servants of the Queen
Enter the Dutch house in Barbican,
Take a true inventory of all her goods,
Discharge her household, save a man or two.
One Woman, and the Nurse that suckles her Child,
And say you have commandment from the Queen
To stay there till her highness further pleasure,
That she shall walk the hie-way to the Tower,
Be gon, perform thine Office carefully,
And I will pay thy pains as liberally.

I go my Lord, but do you hear the news?
How Doctor Sands is escaped from the kings bench, and fled.

Send forth our warrants into every Coast.

Towards Kent* towards Kent, post Cluine, run villain
How starest thou? pack.
Live in my bosom if thou bring him back,
This Sands is Chaplain to yon scornful Dutch,
And he has tayne this lesson from her brains,
That house of sly devises, she's all wit,
Nor shall I sleep until I ruin it.

Madam, my promise of your penitence,
Weighed with the puissance of your high birth,
Wherein you are allied unto the Queen,
Calmed the rough Menace of stout Gardner,
And set a reverence on sterne Bonners tongue,
Humbly to wish your reformation.

The Queen is near and dear unto my bl^
In the remembrance of our mothers loves,
Which charge greater sorrow at my heart,
Then the huge shock of their malignant threats;
My ^oule hath lodged the Truth, it shall not thence,
Whilst this weak flesh displays her airy sense.

But Madam, let your wisdom shut her up,
Commit her not unto your state to guard,
But humble your hie spirit, sleike your speech,
That envy may not stumble at mistrust,
Or find a rub to start suspicion:
Wear a smooth brow in presence of your foes,
Be shaken with their threats, retreat your spirit,
Till they insult upon your patience:
The Conquest won in your submission,
They slake the eager pursu^e of revenge,
To give you time to purve^ for your escape;
You know my leave of passage ore the seas,
And with what cunning I have color'd it,
To free my conscience from the gail of fear.

But still leave mine upon the rock of care.

I go to seek releasement of that care,
Freely to spread the ensign of your Faith:
A simple, rustic home of liberty,
Is worth your honours in captivity.

It is, it is, and would befit our ^ues,
To wear them out in contemplation:
There should we read^, upon the naked walls,
The first creation of our wretchedness;
There no intruding objects of gay clothes,
Embroidered hangings, or rich tapestry,
Shall wound the service which we owe to heaven.
Oh M. Bertie, there my wish would be;
Change honoured woe for poor felicity.

I'll lay a Bark at Leigh shall stay for you,
To be transported to me at Midelborow.

But who conducts me to that Bark at Leigh?
Fear is a trusty guide, it is, it is,
She that knows no way, that way will not miss,
I prithee go, my Conscience to set free,
My tender feet shall learn to follow thee.

I go.

Yet stay, nay go, alas which way?
And must we part?

We must,
My bodies hee^e, thou hast my heart along with thee
Make much o'^t prithee, till we m^ete again,
M^ body and my soul you both retain.

Slip not my duty, I beseech your love,
To her for whom my sorrows shed more tears*
Then is my wounded Conscience charged with fears.

Patience, good Madam.

Passion Master Bertie,
M^ spl^ne is wounded with compassionate pity,
I could drop out my Liver, ^ob my life
Of her dear essence, with immoderate sighs,
For that sweet Princes, wronged Eliz^beth*
Now in the gripe of their pernicious hate,
A guard of Angels ring her life about,
From the malicious practise of her foes;
Rebate their furies, cross their treacherous ways,
Let truth in her outlive these bloody days.

Amen, amen, what shall I deliver to her from ^

A comfortable salutation
To that heart sorrowing Lady which my prayer
From heaven has carried to her heart before.

Will you ought else?

A kind embrace from you, exchange a tear, (...)
And so farewell.

Oh this doth clog me more, ways down my sp^
Should bear our fortunes to a soft repose,
Not daring here to peep out of ou^ thoughts,
Without the danger of the Vulters gripe,
Whose watching eyes of inquisition
Steals covertly upon our purposes,
And yet you lag me with your load of griefs.
I could toss woe for woe until to morrow,
But then weed wake the wolf with bleating sorrow.
With what unwillingness I part from you
Let that and these received.
Adieu, adieu.

Madam.

Now Cranwell, what would thou? thy M. go^

I am glad he stayed no^, to piece out our mon^

What heavy thought strains moisture fro thy he^

(...) see your greatness struck with envies da^
Her highn^sse servants have attacht your goods,
Discharging all your household officers.

What remedy? this was my expectation: I was a^
With complete resolution, to abide
The rigorous wrestle of this streame-borne tide.
Faintst thou at this? then thou would swoune to see
My honoured state changed to ragged misery.

I will not line to see that.

Then thy love is tried:
I thought it wou^d have lack^ed by my side.

How mean you Madam?
When it tires in service of your Grace,
May I ne'er more have being on the earth,
Were you to pass th'extreamest of all woe,
Might I be worthy, I would share with you.

Upon thy trust, then I repose my life,
Provide me against this even a Citizens Gown,
Ath meanest fashion, like my present fortunes:
This night I'll hazard to escape from hence,
Putting my fears into the hand of fate,
To trample on or readvance my state,
Wilt thou about it?

With a winged speed:
To cure your sorrows this manly heart shall bleed.

Madam this world is changed.

Change thou with it.

Change, and I did it were no heresy:
These humours grapple with my honesty,
But they are frantic fits, I let them pass.

Sir what are you?

My name is Clunie, and now your graces keeper.

I hear you have discharged my household Servants.

It is her highness pleasure.

Or Bonners hate, but I accept it with a thankfulness.

All are not yet discharged, but your choice
May call two men, a woman, and a Nurse.

Nay, Cranwell is all I will beseech of you.

Why Cranwell, more then Fox?

Because more staid, with him,
Because of most continuance,
And longest wearing in my services.

What mean you by this wearing? I am sur^
My vvits are vvorne as thin as a Paper-leafe:
But tis the fairest end of Serving^men,
When we have spent the pleasure of our youth,
En sweat it out with painful industry,
To have such itching slaves to eat us out,
Do you so light respect me? I as light
Will make of you, and it come within my power*

Farewell, pull down thy stubbornness of (...)
There brea^hes no servant of more honesty*
Wilt please your kindness, keeper, usher me,
To teach my steps to usher misery.

Now Thomas?
What will you do now, Thomas?
Your Mistres has discharged you, and your coat, Tho^
Which was as dear to you, as your skin, Thomas,
It is pulled over your ears, what remedy:
Has Fox ne'er a hole to hide's head in these extremities
Now I remember my Cozen Raynauld lives not far he^
To him I'll make repair, and feed on country poultr^
For a while, till I can cry Vindicta^on this Dutch.
Well what I'll do my thoughts not yet aprooue,
Fox will prove true to trust, not false to love,

Ienkin where art thou, hark what a kenell of (...)
Gives us our welcome into kent, set up, com^ to th^
Stamp the frost out of thy feet into the mortar for me,
I'll catch me a heate or I'll bear it out at'h stones.

A good fire would do better with the fingers ends.

But a pot of Ale and a tossed would do best of all
With a cold stomach, over go to the Cock
And see if he came a'th kind, if his ale will
Make a man crow, we'll leave our implements here
They will not run away, and here's no great crowd
Of People ith town, but if they be stolen, we may find 'em
Come Ienken, nimbly and stay by it.

Whither now wilt thou dispose thy self
From the enraged pursuit of this search
That with their fresh breathings have oft tired thee,
After so many hazards, whence my care
Has sweat in water to redeem my fear,
Must I a^ last be forc'^ to yield and die
Oh grief, but who can slip his destiny
They come and I am tired,
Thank^s heaven I have found a means
I hope to shelter me in these extremes.

Follow, pursue with swiftness and hes ours,
Soft here's a Tiler, we'll enquire of him
Which way he took, sir you Tiler ho
Durtdauber with a vengeance answer me,
^eaue singing of your neck verse, Rogue your best
Lest it prove so indeed, you'll answerer'
Tiler hoe.

Say you sir, say you.

Say you goodman rascal?
Saw you not a man pass this way
With a speedy course but now.

He crossed down that way.

How the devil did we miss him?
Tired I hold my life, and tayne some barn,
Or privy shed; come lets back, search every nook,
Ransack the bushes, in each corner look.

How strong my spirit is to call them back,
Armed with the steeled proof of inocence,
That can rebate the edge of tyranny,
Invulnerable innocence she would go,
But yet this flesh is frail and full of fears,
To keep the soul from yon Celestial spheres,
Thy will be done my maker, whose great hand
Hath now my life from scorching malice fanned.

Come away Hugh ti ti tiler,
Now we have lined our backs,
And warmd our bellies,
Lets do our days work in an hour
And drink our selves drunk all the day after.

Whope, why the Cock ale has spurred thee alread^

Thou art a Coxcomb to say so, I will run up, and Come down my Ladder as
nimble as a Squerrill.


For going up I know not, but thou't come dow^ With thy head forward.


Why then that's a trick more then ever thou sawe^ in thy life, oh in my ale I
can do any thing, tumble like a Eliphant.


Now where's this Tiler.

At hand quoth pickepurse,

Ha you any work for a tiler.
Not so much work sir as you have made for the searcher.
And which way crossed the man?

Should there not be two hundred of slates, say thou?

Answer me hobbihorse,
Which way crossed he you saw enough?

Who do you speak to sir,
We have forgot the hobbihorse.

Yes truly sir,
Look well amongst your selves for him.

The man, the man sir Saunders, that you said you saw.

That I saw said you, all that I saw was a russet
Gentleman with a tosted Cullizance, and he went down
Gutter-lane I assure you.

That's as true as Sands crossed this way, and we not see him.

Did he cross this way and you not see him, the more blind buzzard you.


You told us sir enough, he went this way.


Who I, then I told you a lye, for I was then sipping my morning draught.


Say fellows did not he direct us thither.

I, who I? Ienken the Tiler.

I you.

Bless my slating, is the devil amongst you, that you fall so fast a lying,
if I saw any of you before would every slate I have were in your bellies, why
do you not know Ienken the Tiler.


Nor hugh the good Dutch of Suffolkes man.

The Dutch man, an Heretic.

Nay nay, that's most certain, whats an Erewig sir, a good fellow I hope.


You shall have that defind,
When you come before my Lord*

Oh by no means,
He spits nothing but fire and fagot-sticks.

No matter, I have ale enough in my belly to
Quench um.

So guard them safe, these villains have conveid
That traitor Sands their fellow, hence.

Not I, I desire you, I renounce and confound you.

Dam up the brick bats mouth, convey them henc^
Tis they shall pay the price of Sands offence.

Cranwell.

Madam.

Speak softly, where is Nurse, speak softly pr^ thee Lord, why toyters she,
but call her not: soft, soft, w^ creaking shoes hast thou got Cranw. to betray
our feare^ put off them traitors.


Madam.

Thou speak too loud.

Neither my tongue, nor shoes, can reach an ear^

Yes Cranwell but they do of jealous fear.
My life is on the hazard of this game
And I mistrust each step will cheat the same.

O that the poison of this fear were once remove

We should not then halt here
The poison hath the t^eason of my foes,
I wish but patience to abide their blows,
But who comes here, Nurse, with a candle light
Tis darkness woman must guide out our fear.

What light is that there ho?

Nurse what hast thou done?
Disperse away, to Lyon key begone.

What ho, will none speak there, awake the gua^

What stay you for, for heavens sake will you go^
Good Cranwell, sweet Nurse, linger not my woe.

How will you find that way you yet ne'er w^

I'll 'trust in him that guides the Innocent,
Give me my Child, Mantle, now heavens pleasure:
Frewell, come life or death, I'll hug my treasure,
Nay chide not pretty babe, our enemies come
Thy crying will pronounce thy mothers dome.

She's gone, sh^es gone.

Not far, but be thou still
This gate may shade us from their envious will.

Gone, gone, pursue her or we are undone.

Oh fear what art thou! lend me wings to file,
Direct me in this plunge of misery,
Nature has taught the Child obedience,
Thou hast bin humble to thy mothers wish,
Oh let me kiss these duteous lips of thine,
That would not kill thy mother with a cry,
Now forward whither heaven directs, for I
Can guide no better then thine infancy,
Here are two Pilgrims bound to Lyon-key,
And neither knows one footstep of the way,
Return you, then tis time to shift me hence.

Search every corner, here, behind this gate
Her mantle, oh the luck, had we but staid
To search this nook, when fury bore us hence
With violence to overtake her course,
We had prevented her intended escape
But what heaven would not, could not, tis decreed,
Her innocent life, should not by envy bleed:
But here we stint not, to pursue her flight,
I know twill boyle up Bonners rancorous spite.

Thus far, but Heaven knows where we ha^ esca^
The eager pursuit of our enemies,
Having for guidance my attentive fear,
Still I look back, still start my tyred feet,
Which never till now measured London street,
My honours scorned that custom, they would ride,
Now forced to walk, more weary pain to bide:
Thou shalt not do so child, I'll carry thee
In sorrows arms to welcome misery,
Custom must steel thy youth with pinching want,
That thy great birth, in age may bear with scant,
Sleep peaceably sweet duck, and make no noise
Me thinks each step is deaths aresting voice,
We shall meet Nurse anon, a dug will come
To please my quiet infant, when, Nurse, when?

Who's that calls Nurse?

Aye me I am oreheard.

Master Cranwell.

Who goes there? Nurse?

Cranwell.

Madam.

My sweet Lady.

Whist honest Nurse? how strangely are we (...)

It is the place where you appointed us.

Then heaven is gracious to my ignorance,
For had this night worn on the pride of day,
By I it could not have found out the way.

Are you not weary Madam?

Admit I be, let patience ease all, there's no (...)
Within cry. For Grauesend hoe.

Whats that, he frighted me.

They call for their passengers to Graues-end.

Pass we our fears with them, there stays at Lee
A Bark that will redeem our liberty,
If you dare venture, with my fortunes go,
A tide of Joy, may turn this stream of Woe.

How you resolve of me, I know not, try,
And when I shrink, brand me with infamy.

In heavens name, on then, fellows all in sorrow,
When we stand need, we'll mutual comfort borrow.

My Lord sit down, stand forth thou Ipocret.

I never drunk I pocrasse in my life sir,
Twas strong Ale that I am guilty of.

Clunie give evidence against this wretch,
Hath set his hand to help a traitor hence.

Indeed my Lord I am no Traitor, I am a Tilor,
Clunie tells your Lordship a fable, we saw no such Man, not vvee.


No, wilt thou obstinately stand in it,
Did not thou lend him a disguise, employ him
Amongst other laborers about thy work,
And yet wilt thou deny thou art no Traitor.

Slave, Villain, Dog,
Have we not here the honest testimony
Of mine own Parator, that saw him clothed
In thy apparel, and dare thou deny it,
Faggots, faggots, hence to the stake with him.

Oh good my Lord, I shall never endure it,
I was once but burnt ith hand, and I have bin
The worse fort ever since, do but here me,
Prove that I had any other apparel this seven years,
Then that you see upon my back, and burn me not,
But cut me into rashers, and broil me for Carbonadoes.

My Lords as I am Clunie, and your Parator,
This counterfeit simplicitude was he,
That twixt the hours of 12. and 1. at Noone,
Convayed the impious Traitor from our fearch,
By shifting him into his homely rags.

Twixt 12. and 1. ne'er trust me, but at that (...) time I and my fellow here,
(can thou speak nothing^ thy self) were at dinner at mother Puttocks, with
a pi^ of a Tripe and a blacke-Pudding, by the same token th^ was a candles end
in it as long as my thumb.


So, so, yar a cunning Knave, but sir, sir,
This cannot serve your turn, you rescued him,
And that by the law is held as Capital,
As if thy self were guilty of the crime.

His crime my Lord is it not manifest,
That hes a favourer of these Sismatikes,
And what is that but flat rebellion.

Go too, he must fry fort, he, shall I say the wo^
Bonner that ere long will purge this land with bonfiers,
We come not with the Olive branch of Peace,
But with the sword of Justice, these Hidraes-heads will (...)
Be flourishing, unless at once we giu't a fatal stroke,
Let them convert to ashes, let them burn,
So shall the State be quiet ^ how now, what news?
What have you caught the Dutch.

Most strangely sir, she did escape my hands,
Besides at Billinsgate have I kept narrow search,
Yet for my life could set no eye on her.

But we have all this while taine a wrong cour^
Shall we imagine being hunted thus:
She would commit the safeguard of her life
To common passage, where she was assured
There would be diligent weight laid for her:
No, she's more subtle, all the world, my Lord,
Shall not persuade, but she's in England still,
In Marget, Lee, or some such bordering town.

And in good time I met a man of hers,
One Fox, my Lord, a fellow, as it seems,
Disgrac't by her, that told me we were wide
In that we went about.

Where met you him.

Coming from Algate.

Would he not confess
Which way his Lady Mistress was escaped?

With much a do my Lords, with threars and promises,
At last he told me he would bring
Where we might trace her, and entrap her too.

Why brought you not that fellow to our presence?
He shall have dispensation how he will,
So he be trusty, and perform his word.

He promised faithfully to meet me here.

Well if he come, your ear.

Now Fox devise to qualify
Thy nature to thy name,
These be mere Cannibals
That take no pleasure but in sucking blood,
And though vnluckly it was thy chance,
To fall into their hands, yet be not thou
(How ever outward grievances may urge)
A traitor to thy Lady; smooth with these,
That under colour to betray the Dutch,
She may have safer liberty to pass.

See my Lords, he's come.

Come hither sir, you did serve the Dutch,
And tis no doubt but you can give us notice
Which way she's fled, stand no upon nice terms
As fearing to incur some deadly sin,
But t^ll us plainly which way she is gone.

My Lords, I cannot readily discover
Which way she's gone, by reason I have bin
Long in disgrace, and quite dismissed the house,
But sure it is, she went disguised from hence,
And tis not possible but she must lurk,
Within some Haven town near to the coast.

What Town, as thou imagine?

My Lords I think toward Dover,
Or the Downs of Kent.

Nay that's not likely, soft, some
News I hope.

Health to this honourable presence,
I come to certify your Lordships all,
That as we kept the Ports on Essex side,
Twas credibly reported, that the Dutch
With little or no train, is lodged in Lee,
And for she is disguised, and our Commission
Expired the date, we crave a fresh supply,
And some direction how to intercept her.

No better means then to renew our warrant,
And send this fellow with it that doth know her,
Into what shape so ere she be transformed.
It shall be so, I thank thee Pursyvant
For thy good news, it glads me at the heart,
I shall at length be even with this proud Dutch,
At Lee in Essex, oh tis excellent:
But I will tell you how't shall be my Lord,
Fox shall not go alone, Clunie and I
Will bear him company, and withal, ha, ha,
I cannot choose but laugh to tell the rest,
As she's disguised to hide her from my flght,
So will I be, to take her, in her slight,
Is it not good, is it not rare my Lord,
Nay is it not the best that ere you heard,
When subtilty by fraud shall be debarred,
I warrant you she's ours Clunie, Fox come hither,
Provide you straight, Fox thou shalt go with me,
Ha, wilt thou not.

(A plague upon you,) I must answer, I.
How ere my heart abhor this treachery,
My Lord I will.

Why now thou please me,
And I will richly recompense thy pains,
But for we will not, our affairs at home,
In the mean time be slackt, or intermitted,
You my good Lords shall have a special care
About it straight, Fox, Clunie, follow me,
This is to Bonner chief felicity.

Yes, I will follow,
Though not further ye,
I trust this is a means ordained of Heaven,
To bridle this bloodsuckers cruelty,
But how now, what art thou.

Marry sir an honest man and a Tiler, that was sent for hither to be examined
about wan M. Sands, and it seems for Joy they have to kno where the Dutch
is, they have forgotten me, what were I best to do.


What else but get thee home unto thy house,
Away be packing, since they have forgot thee,
Do not thou tarty to revive their memory.

Nay if I put them in mind on it, let me be chokt,
For want of drink, since Ale thou art so lucky,
I'll take the the other pot while it is nappy.

Most honoured Princes, think your self as sa^
In my protection at this town of Lee,
As in the strongest hold you do possess.

Good M. Goseling now we fly to you
As to our harbour, in your hands it lies,
Either to comfort, or confound our lives?

We now are chased by many savage men,
That with blood-thirstinesse pursue our deaths,
Being yet within the closure of their arms,
And desperate of all hope to you we fly.

Cousin Goseling 'moungst a world of other men
The providence of heaven chose out you,
Either to be made famous for true faith,
Or by disloyal dea^ing infamous,
Presuming on your perfect honesty,
I brought my noble mistress, this grave Doctor,
This infant Lady, and present us all,
To your safe conduct: obetray our lives,
Bonner will give you gold, woe to that good
That bad men get, by selling guiltless blood,
If any such thought have possessed your heart,
Make Merchandise of mine, let these escape,
For these are precious in the eyes of heaven,
Let them depart, lead me to Bonner first,
Happy my blood, to quench his raging thirst.

Cousin I wonder, what desert of mine
Hath bred in you this bad opinion,
But I impute it rather to the zeal
You bear your Ladies safety, then the thought
Of any treason you discern in me,
Madam my life, yet out of dangers gripe,
I thrust into your peril, witness heaven,
I take upon me to conceal your flight,
And now I am as deep in Bonners hate
As near to danger, as the next to death,
Be confident in me, the zeal I bear,
To the sincere profession of the truth,
Is a sure guard for you to trust upon.

The poorest Princes, only rich in faith,
Will pay you a large bounty of her praier^,
Rememb^r then you call me Mistress White,
For by that name I past from Billings-gate,
Thence to Graues-end, and so from thence to Lee,
Where under your protection we remain.

In every place we here the Hue and Cry,
Pursue our fearful flight, in every town
We hear the voice of persecution.

And hark I here the officers within
If we be known, we are but dead.

Tush Mistress White,
That name shall give free scope unto your flight.

Good you, good even M. Gosseling,
Good you, good even.

Welcome good M. Constable,
whats the news with you*

Marry we have a warrant here from the high Commission, to seek for a
Dutch, and certain other People, that are in her company, as Doctor Sands,
and one Master Cranwell, her Gentleman-vsher, we are commanded to search your
house for such suspected Persons.


See M. Constable, with me remains
No more then these, if Mistress White my daughter,
Come with her Child, and Nurse to visit me,
With this her husband, this her husbands father,
If you think her a Dutch, him a Doctor,
Then you may apprehend them at your pleasure,
If not, you had best to make a further search,
For I protest, no stranger more then these,
Harbors within my roof.

I take your word sir, and yet I will not, I will sea
She a Dutch bless her good Woman,
Good Mistress White you're welcome to Lee, as I may say wit^
We have an honest neighbor of your Father,
Is this your Child, heaven bless the little mops,
Alack, alack, it is as like the Grand-sire
As ever it may look, my pretty duck.

Where's M. Constable, have you made search
In these suspicious houses.

Good heaven protect us, now we are betrayed,
This Villain will, I fear, discover us.

I know her, them, and all.

Good M. Goseling stand to us now,
Or we are betrayed.

Get you into my house.

Stand there attend there M. Constable,
My M. Doctor Bonner in disguise,
Stays at the gate, let me survey these parties.

Thou know us Fox, we have bin fellow va^
Confer the years past, with the present times,
And it will make thy flinty heart relent.

I know thee not.

O Fox, she hath bin the most honoured Mistress
That ever servant served, stay me,
And whilst their bloody hands are busied,
With ceising me, let her, and these escape.

Peace fellow, now no fellows, thy Mistr. when (...)
In prosperity, turned me off, and therefore I will not (...)
Her in extremity.

Wilt thou not know her in extremity,
Ungrateful villain.

No sir, I will not, I come to look a Dutch,
Woman be gon, I know thee not, thou a Doct, thou a dunce,
Get thee gon, Cranwell I knew, he was my fellow servant,
Thee I know not, thou art a paultrey fellow,
Away Goseling, take in your geese,
Ship them at your pleasure, when the coast is clear,
I my self will give you a watch-word.

The fellow may mean well, let us withdraw.

I now perceive, I have done his faith much wrong,
His heart has no relation to his tongue.

Away, whers the Constable.
Here's neither Cranwell, Sands, Dutch, nor Child,
Go call in my Lord Bonner.

Fox.

My Lord.

What hast thou found them Fox?

My Lord we had a wrong intelligence,
But thus you shall surprise them, pass they cannot
But by this way, now will we watch these passages,
For now the tide's at height, if they intend
To ship themselves, it must be presently,
Place your self here, directly by this well,
By you Clunie, here I mean to stand,
Guard that place well, by me this shall be mand.

Stand by me Clunie, Fox, i'll pay thee well,
If by thy means we catch these miscreants,
Twill be thy making Fox, M. Cunstable where will you stand.

Let him keep that way, that bears to landward,
That way, I am sure they will not take,
Go make a strong watch there.

I warrant you M. Fox, let us alone to guard that passage.

My Lord, you had best sit for your ease.

Oh I could watch hours, days, nights, months, yeer^
So I might see their hearts weep bloody tears.

Look you stand sure Lord Bonner, for I hope,
Anon you^e need a bucket, and a rope.

Keep close together, lest you loose your train,
My bark is ready to receive you straight,
That way you need must take, I'll not be seen,
Heaven be your guide, with me you have not bin.

Good sir farewell, my prayers on you attend,
I will report you for a Princes friend.

Stand, trust me and keep on,
What ere you see shrink not, away begone,
My Lord they come, they come, away, away.

Help, help, for heavens sake help.

My Lord is in the well.

A rope for Bishop Bonner, Clunie run,
Call help, a rope, or we are all undone.

I'll to the watch for help.

Help, help, good Fox.

Soft Bonner, not too fast
Here is no coming out till they be past,
My arms too short my Lord, a rope is coming.

Here in this well, ropes, ropes my masters.

By this they are far enough,
Well done my Masters, lends your hands,
Draw Du^ out of the ditch.
Draw, pull, help all, so, so, well done.

Oh Fox oh Clunie, oh my Masters all,
I am almost drowned, oh lead me to some fire.
Oh Fox, what meanest thou to rush with such rude force.

What would you have me do, I saw them coming,
And I had not the power to stay my self.

And are they past.

What stand you trifeling here, what seek you for?
If for the Dutch, if for Doctor Sands,
For Cranwell, and the rest, they in disguise,
Are got aboard a Ship, and with full sails,
Fly from the Shore.

Thou telst me a sad tale,
Post Fox, run Clunie, hire a ^arke with speed,
Goseling we were suspicious of thy faith,
But by this message, thou hast cleared thy self,
See Goseling, I am almost drowned.

I am sorry for your honour, that you escaped.

Tush we trifle time in their vain pursuit,
Thou shalt have gold Fox; Clunie, thou reward,
Help me to fire good Goseling, Fox away,
We loose much expedition by thy stay.

I'll after them my Lord.

May all things prosper to thy hearts desire,
Come Goseling, prithee lead me to a fire.

And as I told you sir, with that excuse,
I grounded this my colorable passage,
And sent a ship, which stays for her at Lee,
Where by appointment she had promised meeting,
But She is so watched, so guarded, and so bard,
Of her true servants presence and access,
That I despair of her arrival here.

Good M. Bertie, cheer your drooping thoughts,
We are Walloones, but in subjection,
And strict obedience to the church of Rome,
Rewards and promises, are sent abroad,
To every foreign Prince, and Burgomaster,
To stay the Dutch, for the rumour runs,
She is escaped already from her house.

Tis very certain M. Pericell,
Now shall we hear some news,
Here's Doctor Sands.

News of the Dutch, that will please but ill,
I will forbear to speak of our escapes,
All which were winged, with fortune, and success,
And tell you of one haplesse accident,
We all took Ship at Lee, but not together,
For I alone past in a Hollander,
No sooner did the wind blow from the shore,
But rose a tempest, which dispersed our ships,
And we might see the Bark wherein she went,
By violence of the waives forced back again,
Even to the havens mouth.

Even to deaths lean arms,
Thy tragic news, hath slain me M. Sands,
We are as one, and what be^ide her person,
I feel in a true essence of her grief.

In these exreames, tis good to hope the best.

Oh M. Perecill, the worst of ills,
Falls on her head, and can I hope the best,
She's like a Lamb, trapt with a heard of Wolves,
A harmless Dove amongst a thousand Hawk,
If she returned, what providence can save,
A body doomed already to the grave.

See M. Bertie, lift up your sad eyes.

Bertie.

Madam.

Oh see the meeting of two faithful souls,
What a sweet union it doth make of hearts,
When one another mutrall joy imparts.

Defer the story, of our dangers past,
To acquaint us with some comfortable aid.

Oh pardon me one minute gentle Madam,
If I delay your fair request a little,
To take my fellow servants by the hand,
Good M. Cranwell, the firm loyalty,
You bear you Mistress, in her great extremes,
Shall be recorded in a book of Brass.

Alas I have scanted of my duty much,
My liberal will's joined with unable power,
With my true service I do join my life,
And owe them both, unto your princely Wife.

You are a Mirror, Nurse, so art thou,
Thy noble carriage, thus I Kiss with joy,
Alas poor Lady, thou, ere thou can go,
Art forced to leave thy country, thy return,
Will make them smile, that now are forced to morn,
Thy infancy in Pilgrimage is spent,
Yet thy abode hereafter shall be Kent,
And be an honoured Countess of that name,
For so my true divining spirits do aim.

What Gentleman is that.

Tis a Walloone Feris de Ryviers, alias Perecell.

May we repose with him?

Madam you may not,
Neither in this place may I challenge you,
For I am noted, and your coming hither,
Both promised, and expected by great men,
Who to surprise you, have received reward,
All Ports are laid, all passages are stopped,
Search, and inquiry posts through every town.

Madam tis true, nor would I have you stay,
In Emden long, for you are laid for here.

What shall we then do?

Madam, lets to Santon,
Let M. Berti^ stay with Perecell,
And meet us there hereafter.

Content, let it be so,
Never two lovers, Married to more woe,
Here meet we, and here part we, oh short pleasure,
Which fortune serves us, in too small a measure.

My body is divided in the midst,
That way goes half my heart, and this way the other,
Necessity thy sterne deeds I beshrow,
That thy rude hand, gives us the parting blow,
At Santon I will meet you Madam, here
I dare not know you, so adieu my dear.

Berty farewell, to Santon bound we are,
With these companions, and our conduct care,
You people happy in a land of peace,
That joy your consciences, with the worlds increase,
Look with indifference into my sad life,
Here my poor husband, dares not know his wife,
And I a Princes, to avoid like danger,
Must use my own dear husband, as a stranger,
Towards Santon we, through deserts, any way,
Though all should leave me, I for grief must stay.

Madam, you see what strictnes, we are forced to.
Lets wing our feet, till we can get to Santon,

Madam, let me admire your constancy,
For heaven hath proved your patience every way,
Yet you are confident, and more your zeal to try,
Yo'r forced your loyal husband to deny,

Then what pale trembling cowards heart would faint,
To wade through danger with so pure a saint?

A booty, stend, despoil them, down with them.

We are beset with thieves.

Sands, thou must fly,
For weaponles, thou can no mastery try.

Thieves, thieves.

Pursue them not, lets ceise on them that stay,

Slaves, you have murderd me.

No matter, ceise on her, and rifle both,
Ha, by my faith a gallant lusty wench,
Tis the best booty, that we met this month.

Oh my true servants death, doth grieve me more,
Then all the sorrows that I felt before.

I am jealous of the safety of my wife,
And to escape the better through the woods,
I have clothed my self thus in an Out-lawes shape,
Oh, sight of ruth, my fellow Cranwell slain:
My wife grasped in the arms of ravishers,
Then heaven instruct me with some present means,
That I may find some aid to rescue them,
I have it, a booty, a booty, a brave booty:
But we want help, and aid to compass it,
Four wealthy Merchants, are come down this hill,
Some little aid, and we shall share them all.

Some of you look to see the Woman safe,
I'll help to take the booty.

And so will I.

One bird in the hand's worth two in the bush:
I'll take my present purchase.

We'll share a both sides, come conduct us to them.

I will, stir not from hence with her,
Till we return.

My life for yours, come, will you uncase.

Do not disrobe me of my clothes, as you're a man.

Tut, stand not upon terms,
I love to see a Woman naked.

Defend me heaven.

So ho, ho, I have lost a Jewel,
And left it here behind, when I departed hence.

What value.

More precious then thy soul, and this it is,
Villain, think not to escape, your mates are far enough*

How goodman rascal.

Thus, Villain, for the world,
I would not stain my hands with thy base blood:
But rascal, I will bind you to the peace,
So now, let this ditch shelter you.

My Berty? heaven be praised,
Though I am robbed of all the wealth I have,
I am rich enough, in my possessing thee,

Is M. Cranwell slain?

But sorely hurt, and I am near to death.

Bind up your wounds, with this white hank^ (...)

I am so used to misery, (...)
That it seems nothing, wheres the Nurse and Child?

Oh cross on cross, lets look about the wood^*

My Susan lost, I will not stir one foot,
But to the Villains be a second prey,
Unless I find her.

Lend me your hand dear sir, get I once up,
I'll spend the remnant of my blood that's left,
In search of my young Mistress.

Oh whither shall I fly, to save my life,
From the rude hands of these fell ravishers?
My haplesse Lady, and her husband both,
By this, have felt the cruel stroke of death,
Or which is worse, are captive led away,
And to the Vulters gripes become a prey,
Oh hark, I hear them coming, hence begone,
Hard is thy hap, that must be left alone,
Dear babe forgive me, I am forced for life,
To ease my carriage, leave thee to their strife.
On forwards Madam, this way they are gone,
Heaven be propitions, direct us in our search.

Amen, amen.

Oh I am lost, sink body to the earth,
Ascend my soul, amongst Saints receive new birth.

Help Bertie, help, tis Cranwell faints, oh help.

Speak to me man, look up, some wound belike
Is yet vnstopt, from whence proceeds this large effusion,
Its here, lend me some linen, so, so, he comes again,
And see heavens bounty, he at once hath given,
Your Servant, and your Child: look Madam, see,
Thrown in a bush, and smiles, and laughs at ye.

Having my Husband, Child, and this my servant,
I am the richest Princes on the earth,
But Berty, where's the Nurse, and Doctor Sands.

Both fled, but wherefore Madam look you pale.

Oh Berty, I do feel the time approach
Of my delivery, oh for help of Women.

What shall we do, I am beyond my self.

Cranwell, what town is this that stands before.

Madam, they call it Wezill.

Go, begone,
Thy looks pleads for a cunning Surgeon,
We shall not need, thy help, thy wound is deep,
But stay you Bertie, you the Child must keep.

Madam, this storm, the cold, and my deep wounds,
May well excuse me, till my hurts are dressed.

Be gon I say.

How fare you Madam.

Sick I am, heaven knows,
Ready to die, with these my pinching throws,
It rains, and hails, and snowes, and blows at once,
Where Berty, may we hide us from this storm.

Here in this Church-porch, Madam pray remon^

Help, and lead me thither, now lay the Ch^ down Ber^
Go gather sticks, to help to make a fire,
More plagues my sins do merit year by year,
But these, good heavens, are more then I can bear.

Alas, alas, this is a homely place,
To bring a Princess of such state to bed,
A wide Church-porch, is made her bed-chamber,
And the cold stones her couch, here are no curtains,
But the bleke Winds, could Clouds and storms of hay^
And they begirt her round, heaven for thy mercy,
This poor distressed Princes shield and save,
Whose cold head lies upon some dead mans grave,
Here comes the Sexton, I will speak to him,
It may be, he may help us to relief.

Gods sacrament vat maukt ye dare.

Patience good sir.

Vat bedlers in den kerke, loopt hence strax.

Vncivell fellow, what thou speak, I know no*
But thy ill meaning by thy deeds, I guess:
Take that to teach thee more civility.

Out skellum one hundred towsan divel.

Still fortune is against us, this base fellow
Will raise some tumult to betray our lives,
Yet yonder comes man of gravity,
It may be he can speak the Latin tongue,
In that I'll let him vnderst and my grief:
Optime ornatissime vir, audi quaeso.

Quis es qui tot clamoribus, tanta exclamatione,
Non modo Divinum Cenatorij locum irreverenter
Orrose occupas, at vrbem tam claram cives{que} Senatores,
Propter etates suas adoratissimas tam flactiose disturbas.

Si cum front tam generosa cor tuum humanum consentire
Videtur, infortunij nostri miserere.

Erasmus Roterodamus propter miserias vestras toto corde
Dolet, colo perfectiones virtutes, quas intimo meo animo
Complectar, multi pendo.

Is this Erasmus borne in Roterdam,
He that so highly loved Sir Thomas More?

Portate hanc ad domum Francisci de Ryvers alias Perecell
Sic domino dominae{que} Erafmus Rotero damus omnibus
Officijs est observantissimus.

Within this town hath Perecell a house,
There, by the credit of this learned man*
We have got harbour till the month expire,
In which her heavy burden may be eased,
Good heaven look down upon her misery,
Comfort her in her grief, strengthen her weakness,
Lay not our woes to wretched Bonners charge,
Free her sweet heaven, by thy Almighty hand,
That we may once revisit our own land.

Now cheer your self dear sir, here is a time,
To breath a space, this towne's a quiet port,
From the tempestuous gusts of Bonners hate.

Some refuge I confess, but the distressed Dutch*
In Child-bed torment is a fresh alarm
Of new sprung care, I cannot be at quiet,
Until her safe delivery be past.

Doubt not of that, the powerful hand of hea^
In such extremities is ever strong.

Good heaven, when I recount the miseries
We have already past, me thinks the lottery
Of cruel Fortune, should be quite exhaust,
And yet when I record the name of Bonner,
With his desire to become great by blood,
The greater part of woe seems still behind.

Doubtless hes of a most pernicious spirit,
But he that hath restrained his envious rage,
And hitherto repulsed him, still will curb him.

I trust he will, Cranwell I prithee step,
And listen from the women what good news.

Pray save that labour, we can bring the newe^

Welcome good Doctor Sands,
What; in good health?

Sir, thanks to heaven, who never leaves his o^
Nor suffers them to perish in distress.

How fares the Dutch.
Gentle host resolve me.

Happy and well, cheer your declining thoug^
Well that her perilous conflict hath an end,
And happy that to comfort her withal,
There's borne this day a young Lord Willobie.

A Boy.

A goodly Boy M. Bertie.
And one in whom already doth appear,
These signs of Courage, to revenge your wrongs.

Good heaven I thank thee,
This your news dear friend,
Is as a summons after death to life, the preservation
Of his mother in travel, was wondrous strange,
The place where he is borne is strange,
The loving hands, that did first entertain
His presence to this pilgrimage of life,
Are likewise strange, then as his birth hath bin,
So shall his name, we'll call him Peregrine.

A stranger to his Country by that name,
But by his deeds hereafter time may prove,
None more adventured for his Countries love.

As it please his stars, but soft,
What Drum is this, some gall I fear,
To intermix our sweet,
Some sorrow to confound this sudden jioy.

Your servant Fox did vow to bring you word,
If any hurt were secretly pretended.

Is Fox arrived, upon what cause,
Is Fox arrived, upon what cause
Is he past over, do you know gentle sir.

Himself make answer for himself.

Sir, be not you dismayed, in brief these drums,
And those that after these sad Music dance,
Are none that wish you, nor the Dutch good,
A Captain sent from England, and the bloodhound Clunie,
With them the Duke of Brunswicke, clad in arms,
And at the least, ten Ensigns after him,
These how ere they vizard their intents,
With other colour, as to vex the Emperor,
Yet their whole purpose, is to look for you,
The gates, and walls, are every way beset,
And through the Town, a privy search begun,
And but you presently devise some means,
To escape from hence, they'll take you in your lodging.

Escape, there's now no time to talk of escape,
No, no, the secret providence of heaven,
Hath so ordained, we should be Bonners thrall,
And welcome wished death, the end of all.

My mind presages of a better speed.
What M. Bertie why not now escape,
As well as heretofore.

How can that be,
The painful Dutch, lying now in Child-bed.

Is there no art, no means to blind their eyes.

You are so many of you, tis impossible,
Besides the Dutch, she cannot remove.

Oh, were she safe, I cared not for my life.

Nor I for mine.

Nor I, had I ten thousand lives,

Cease you your passions, my brain hath tuto^ (...)
And in a cunning plot shall set you free.

Do that, and Bertie is for ever thine.

Fox, and his sword, for that will be thy slave.

Thy friendship will I bear unto my grave.

What thou attempt'st,
My prayers shall help to second.

I neither do expect thanks, nor reward,
But what I do is of mere charity,
Then list unto me, there's a friend of mine,
A Country Gentleman, not far from hence,
Whose brother late returned from the wars,
And falling sick, within the City here,
Dyed some few days since, now this Gentleman,
Because his brother shall be buried,
Amongst his Ancestors, decrees this night,
To have his body in a Wagon brought,
Home to the Parish Church, where he remains,
And for that purpose hath his servants sent,
To see it safe conveyed: A waggon like to theirs,
Covered with black, shall be provided straight,
Into the which, by help of Women's hands,
The Dutch, and her Infant shall be lifted,
You, and the rest disguised in mourning weeds,
Shall follow after as the guard,
And in the dead Mans name without suspect,
Pass by the Soldiers, who if they chance,
To question who you are,
The Burgers being by, and made acquainted,
With such a herce, that is to pass that way,
Will quickly answer them, without more search,
How like you this.

It will I hope prove currant.

The pretext is fit, and for the Dutch ease:

Fox has no more sense then a batle-doore,
If in his judgment, we already be not
Delivered from the mischief of their hands.

Come I'll provide you all things necessary.
And after pray for your success therein.

I'll back to them, and help you what I can.

Great Duke of Brunswick, this your flexible,
And courteous disposition of your troops,
To be for Englands service, shall receive
The due belongs to so great a merit.

Noble Captain, I were much to be condemned,
If I neglect my duty to the Church,
But are you sure, these fugetiues are here?

Clunie, thou touldst me, that thou saw a man
Of theirs, since we beset the town wast true?

Yes noble Captain, Cranwell the Dutch usher,
And there's no question, but the rest are here,

Well then Captain, the other Ports being gard^
Here with this company we'll keep our station,
Where is the Portgraue? have you sent abroad,
Sufficient search amongst the private houses?

We have my Lord.

They cannot be in Weasel,
But either coming forth, or lurking here,
They must in all sorts be discovered by us.

Oh they are politic, and passing subtle,
And if or art, or policy, can help them,
There's in their company, an Instrument.
Can plot a hundred wales for their escape.

Let them express their cunning, if they can,
And escape our hands, now we have scented them.

How now my Lord, oh I am out of breath,
In coming to you, yet I hope my hast,
Is little for your purpose, they are coming,
Stand on your guard, for this way they must pass,
There's Bertie, Cranwell, Sands, with them the Dutch,

Twas well done Fox, there's thy reward, stand clo^
Or, now, or never, let us show our care, stand, who g^ther

Some funeral it seems.

It may be some device procured by them,
So to escape the danger of our watch, stand.

I can assure your Lordship, tis not so,
This is the body of young Vandermast,
Whose brother dwelling some four leagues from hence,
Although he died here, yet will have him buried,
Whereas his Ancestors are all entombed,
And for that cause, hath sent his servants for him.

Is it no otherwise.

No mighty Prince,
And would to heaven it had not bin so now:

Pass then, pass, it is not you we look for.

What was this Vandermast, a Citizen?

No my good Lord, he was a Soldier,
A proper Gentleman, and one had served
The Emperor, and others in their wars,
Yet was ordained, to end his days at home.

A thing no more then usual, but how now,
Whats here, an other funeral? nay then
It is a hazard, we are all deluded.

My thoughts began to prophecy as much,
Speak, are not you the parties that even now
Came this way, with a mourning funeral.

Not we my Lord, this is the first appearance,
We made this evening.

What have you there concealed.

Nothing my Lord, but a dead body Coffined,
The brother of our M. late deceased.

I, this is Vandermast, the other past,
Upon my life, was Barty, and the Dutch.

They were unwilling to look up me thought.

And he that spake, spake with a fained voice.

Twas they, twas they, oh, I could tear my hair,
To think we were so grossely overseene.

I said as much, come let us follow them,
Send horsemen out, to every quarter straight,
My Lord of Brunswick.

You need not bid me ride,
This oversight, hath clapped wings to my thoughts.

Now for some pretty policy again,
To lead them forth the way, until the Dutch,
May reach Polonia, and deserve the prize,
Fox play thy part, some stratagem devise.

Where sits the wind, no news from German
If those malicious fugitives be tayne,
Our officers I fear, neglect their charge,
Our Captain deals but coldly with the States.

I dreamt my Lord, that Bertie and the Dutch*
Were both advanced upon a regal throne,
And had their temples wreathed with glittering gold.

That throne do I interpret, is the stage
Of horrid death, these wreathes of Gold, bright flames,
That shall not only circle in their brows,
But wind about their bodies, till they waste,
And be converted to a heap of ashes,
Me thinks this work of ours goes slowly forward,
The air of England freezes for defect
Of burning Meteors, to keep it warm.

See yet my Lord, there hath of late bin sacrific^
In sundry places, many persons, of several qualities,
Whose names were tedious to relate.

Tut this is nothing, every town should blaze,
And every street, in every town look red,
With glowing sinders of the Miscreants:
Till like to Cockle, they were quite extinct,
And nothing seen to flourish but pure Corn:
The morning spends apace, where are these knaves,
Appointed to bring Faggots for the fire,
Wherein bold Latimer, and Ridley must expire.

They come my Lord.

Fie on you loitering knaves,
Why make you not more hast, be gon, I say,
And see the stake, and every thing be ready,
See how I am still procrastinated,
The Mayor of Oxford, means to dine I think,
Before he bring the Prisoners to the stake,
How now? where are they?

Hard at hand my Lord,
But the weak age of Latimer is such,
They cannot come so fast, as else they would,
Besides some disputations as they pass,
Had with the Schollers, hath detayn'd their speed.

He have no disputations, bring them on.

Come brother Latimer, lend me your arm,
The weak, the weak, but not the blind, the blind,
This day in Oxford, shall be seen to guide.

My heart is jocund, brother Ridley, still,
And in my Spirit, I fly unto yon place,
But these weak withered sap^i^ are too blame,
These legs of mine, that having now at least,
Full four score and eight winters done me service,
Should now deceive me trust me, but my soul is
Linct in charity, with all the world,
I could be well content, to chide with them.

These are those self iustifying Publicans,
Away with them, conduct them to the fire.

Come, come, spend no time in talk,
Will you convert, be sorry for your crime,
And you shall yet find favour with the Queen.

Fie, fie, spit at them, offer them no mercy.

Proceed in scorn, so was our Master used,
The servants are (...) better then their Lord,

Drag them away there, hence away I say.

Stay, stay.

Which voice is that.

Some one that's prisoner in Bocardo here,

Oh stay my Lords, whom lead you there (...)
The reverent fathers, Ridley, and Latimer?

I Cranmer, but more favour rests for thee,
Because thou art converted from thine errors.

Did you not tell me, they were likewise change*
And have you falsely circumvented me?
Oh heaven, forgive my ^rayterous revolte,
And you the chosen vessels of his love,
Dear Latimer, sweet Ridley pardon me,
To make am^nds, I'll come and dye with you.

As your revolt, grave Cranmer, was our grief,
So to hear these repentant graceful words,
Infuse our hearts with joy, beyond compare.

Will Cranmer then turn, and return again.

To turn to virtue never comes to late.

Thy recantation underneath thy hand,
Is published, and wilt thou now contradict it.

Bonner, to cut off needless circumstance,
Let this declare my resolution,
This hand that writ that faithless recantation,
Since I am bard from dying with my friends,
Mark how I punish in this lingering flame,
It shall burn off, as an assured sign,
Hereafter of my constant Martyrdom,
No scandal shall be left by my default,
Open you heavens, and entertain my willing sacrifice,
Yet this is but an earnest of that love,
Hereafter shall in greater measure shine.

Iay lor pull down that scismatick,
Lodge him within the dungeon, load his joints
With Iron fetters, let him fast from meat,
And have no comfort, but continual checks, dispatch, I say.

Farewell religious mates,
What earth doth separate, I hope ere long,
Shall meet in heaven, spite of proud Bonners tongue.

Farewell kind brother, ne'er decline no more,
But follow us, as we have gone before.

What stay we for, my quiet thoughts desire,
To cloth this flesh, in purple robes of fire.

You shall not need to urge our expedition,
Lead them away, their Tragedy once ended,
We will prepare attentive ears to hear,
News of the Dutch landing prisoner.

Yet we have escaped the danger of our foes,
And I that meanwhile was exceeding weak,
Through my hard travel in this infants birth,
Am now grown strong upon necessity,
How forwards are we towards Windam Castle.

Just half our way, but we have lost our friends,
Through the hot pursut^ of our enemies.

We are not utterly devoid of friends,
Behold the young Lord Willowhy smiles on us,
And tis great help, to have a Lord our Friend.

Good heaven I pray once sort to happy end,
This dangerous Pilgrimage, here undertook,
Sit on this bank a while, and rest our limbs,
Wearied with travail, as our minds with care.

You are a Captain of the Palsegraues band,
These are the other recreants, cease them both,
The hundred Crowns proposed, are surely yours,
I know him valiant, and therefore I will climb
Up in this tree, to see, and not be seen,
Pray lends a hand, whilst you surprise them,
I will laughing stand.

If I fit you not, ere you come down,
Say Fox is a Goose.

Sir I attach you as an enemy
Unto the Palsegraue, in whose land you are,
You and you ^ull, obey it ye were best,
Or in resistance hazard both your lives.

Attach me sir, I know no reason why,
Nor to my knowledge am an enemy,
Unto the Palsgraue, or the meanest man
Within his confines, were are Travellers,
And will immediately forsake the land.

You are a Lance knight, this your Concubine.
And these your Bastards, that by rapine live,
And thus disguised you come to undermine,
Our Countries government, then yield your selves.

Though misery hath stamped upon out brow
The mark of poverty, yet gentle stranger,
Do not so far forget all manliness,
To be a slanderer of the Innocent.

Term me a slanderer.

And a Villain too, if thou maintain these defamations
Term me a Thief, my wife a Concubine,
My Children base borne; by a soldiers faith,
Were thou the greatest spirit the Palesgraue hath,
I cannot brooke this slavish insolence,
That I am angry, witness this reply,
I will defend mine honour though I dye.

Villains I charge you all environ him,

So many to one silly passenger,
Then farewell woman weakness, welcome sword,
For once I'll play the man, to save my Lord.

Why this is excellent, now I hope to live
To see them apprehended or else slain.

These hopes I'll cross, by cutting down the branch
Whereon he builds this weak foundation.

Oh I shall fall, help me good M. Fox.

I, wherefore Clunie, to betray my Lady?
So hateful Bonner, dived into the well,
So fall this damned Parator to hell,
And now I'll help my Mistress to my power,
Fox, come out a your hole, and take your Cozens part
Or I'll pull you out by the ears.
Help, help, our Captains ^hered, raise the town.

The Captain slain then Fox tis best to fly,
And lest some sad mischance should second them,
I will convey these Children to the Woods,
That borders near at hand, oh heaven I pray,
Make this disastrous time a happy day.


I must down, bless my neck and care not.


Oh, my guts, a vengeance on this Fox.


What cries are these, oh hast thou slain the Cap.

If he be slain, require not heaven his blood,
Of miserable Berty.


A second volley of heart wounding words,
Oh fly my love, fly, fly, and save thy life,
Before the town be raised, shift for your self,
If you be taken, there's no way but death.
Within. Here, here, this way.

Why stir you not, our foes are hard at hand.

I am so amazed I know not where to go,
I'll take this way.

Rather dear Love take this.

That way they come.

What shall we do,
Behold a Ladder raised against this house,
In happy time, mount up and save your life,
I will defend the bottom with my sword,
And though heaven knows I am orelaid with woe,
I'll rather dye then see your overthrow.

But I shall leave thee to thine enemies.

Shift for your own life, take, no care for mine*
For heavens sake quickly, you delay the time.

Fear lend me wings, but oh my griefs so great,
It ways me down, and I must needs retreat.


They are at hand, oh good my love mount up.

See where they are that made the fray.

You fellow, that run up the Ladder,
Down, down, or I'll pull you down in a ropes name.

He is my husband, and a Gentleman,
And I'll defend him from your tyranny.

A Woman fight.

Such are my fortunes now,
Therefore keep off, who ventures on this way,
Treads a path that leads to his death.

My friends what seek you, wherefore com^amm'd

You have slain a Captain of the Palsgraues ^an^
Wounded his soldiers, and besides we hear,
You are a Lanceknight, this your Concubine,
And come disguised to undermine the State,
In whose defence these men have armed themselves.

You seem a Burgomaster, by your habit,
And they that mis-inform'd you were too blame,
Know gentle sir, I am an Englishman,
And on some special business bound this way,
Toward Windam-Castle, till we were disturbed,
By the oppression of the man that's slain.

I wreak not friend of what estate you are,
Nor to what end you travail through these parts,
You have slain a map, and you must answer it,
According to the law of Nations.

Down with him, he shall answer it with death.

Peace there, I charge you, in the Princes name.

It seems these men are thirsty for my blood,
And without law are set to take my life,
Then it were madness for a man to yield,
To abide a trial, and the judgment past:
Since I must dye, I'll choose the death my self,
And that's to stand on a defensive guard,
Except you swear as you're a Christian,
A Magistrate, and one that will do right,
That I shall have due process of the Law
And be defended from the multitude.

Do not, I pray, endanger so your life,
But trust unto the shelter you have got.

A sorry fortress to defend his life.

But will you take that oath.

By heaven I do, and I will see it kept inviolate.

Then work the worst of fate, if right bear sway,
He cannot speed amiss that does no wrong,
Oh, innocence is bold, free, liberal,
Fearless of any danger, that may fall,
I (...) me sir, a Prisoner to the law,
Justice is blind gaze not upon our persons,
Although our birth be near so mean or base,
But fix the eye of judgment on our case.

So, bind their hands, lead them to the statehouse
They shall have justice done immediately,

Oh stay a while, I have lost my little babes,
What savadge hand hath taken my children hence,
Whilst we were busied in this luckless brawl.

My Children borne away! oh then I fear,
It is some treason to abridge our lives,
And that the Captain, that did wrong us thus,
Did it to that intent.

Tis so, till now we ne'er were truly miserable,
Our other miseries were sunneshine days,
Compared unto the greatness of this storm,
Oh suffer me good sir, to seek them out,
For without them, I am but half my self.

A strict enquiry shall be made forthwith,
In every place that borders here abouts,
Grieve not too much, though such are poor men's treasure
What needy thief to steal them would take pleasure.

Right welcome's Erbaigh, to the Poland king,
Nich'as Van hove, our worthy Burgomaster,
What means this concourse of so many men,
And what are they that you lead bound with you.

Strangers, an please your excellence my Lord,
That have committed murder in your realm,
Slain Wisendrop a Captain of your band,
For which offence, our purpose is to lead them,
unto the State-house to receive their judgment.

If I mistake not, I should know that face,
Oh tis the virtuous Lady Katherine,
This M. Berty, her espoused husband,
And has your good stars in your Pilgrimage,
Brought you amongst you Friends?

The Lady Katherine, what the Suffolks Dutch,
My quondam Love, haild through the streets with cords,
And for the murder of a man that lives,
Oh tis uncivil usage, my good Lady,
Yar villains all unto our Sovereignty,
How dare you thus abuse her royal birth.

Pardon my Lord, we did not know her state.

Her heavenly face, then which there's none more fair,
In England, or the World,
Might without other witness of her state,
Suffice to tell you, she was nobly borne,
This is that Dutch, mirror of this age,
She whom the lordly Bishops of the Realm,
Bonner, and Gardner, persecute so much,
Pardon me Madam, that I have so long,
Suffered your excellence to stay in bonds.

This your acknowledgment, most mighty king,
Amazes me, considering my distress,
For tis a common custom in the world,
To take no notice of the miserable.

I stand amazed at this strange accident,
The circumstance whereof we'll hear elsewhere,
Mean time thrice welcome to the Polands king,
And much it grieves me that so great a Princes,
Should be so basely handled in my land.

Oh help dear Lord, and shield us from our fo^*
We are pursued by Brunswicke, and his Captains,
Who seek our lives, we fly to your protection.

Whence are you friends.

The truest friends we have*
Of England mighty Prince, I know them both,
The first is Doctor Sands, a worthy man,
The other Cranwell, and my Secretary.

My Lord of Erbaigh, and the king of Poland,
Shield not those traitors, both to heaven and men,
From the due punishment of their offence,
Behold an Englishman, a Commander of a good esteem*
Has his commission signed to apprehend,
This Sands, and Cranwell, fled to you for help,
Then as you tender the privilege of Princes,
Ore their subjects*
Suffer this writ to have his current here,
As I have done through all my territories.

It ill beseems the noble duke of Brunswicke,
To be a persecutor of good men.

Or you good Captain, agent in this cause.

That's recreant Berty, and the Suffolks Dutch*
They likewise are included in this scroll.

My Lord of Poland, we demand them all,
Then yield them royal sir, unto ou^ hands.

First will I sacrifice ten thousand lives,
Ere suffer these religious souls to dye,
My Lord of Brunswicke, you are over bold,
To make so rash an entrance in my land,
Without our special licence granted first.

The league betwixt us warrants my approach.

The League, for this time, is your priveledge,
But as you dread the Palsgra^es puisance
And fear to violate our wrighten love,
Immediately vntred your forward steps,
Forsake the soil where you have set your foot,
Or look to be withstood with fire and sword,
These Lambs are fled into our foulds for aid,
And we'll defend them, say what may be said.

This disobedience draws upon your land,
Deserved malediction from the Church.

That we'll dispense withal, and to let you know,
How we do slight those stinglesse menaces,
Here I create this noble Gentleman,
Earl of Crozam, an Earldom under us,
Religious Doctor Sands, our Chapleine,
And M. Cranwell our chief Secretary,
So tell Lord Bonner, Gardner, and the rest.

Health and long life unto the King of Poland,
Captain, from Englands queen, I thus salute you,
Here is a countermand for your Commission,
By which you are enjoined to stay the search,
After the Suffolke Dutch, and her friends.

To stay the search? is our dread Sovereign,
Altered in her Religion, or is she dead:

She's dead good sir, Queen Mary is deceas't,
And the most virtuous Lady Elizabeth,
Invested in the regal dignity,
My Sovereign hearing* that the Lady Katherine,
The Suffolke Dutch, her allie in blood,
Did live obscurely in these Provinces,
In want, in misery, and great distress,
Sends to repeal both her, and all her friends,
If such a Lady harbour in your land,
I do entreat her highness Proclamation,
May have his currant course through every town.

In you dear sir the Proclamation ends,
Here is the Dutch, here are all her friends.

I kindly thank you, for your worthy pains*
Hath the director of all humane lives,
Preserved my Sovereign, that heroic Maid,
From the entangling snares of blood and death,
And changed her prison, to a royal Throne?
Here on this ground, where first I heard the news,
I render thanks unto the gracious heavens,
Thou that send Balm of comfort to the wounded,
Joy to the bruised heart, oppressed for truth,
Lengthen her days as long as heaven hath stars,
Or this fair frame foundation for a world,
Or if it be thy gracious providence,
For to remove her to a happier place,
Let in her stead arise, and from her ashes come,
A Phoenix may enlighten Christendom,
Oh, had I now my Children lately lost,
I should survive as I had near bin crossed.

That comfort Madam on my bended knee,
Your servant Fox humbly presents your grace.

My Per^grine, my Susan, then for care
To make a mixture with this too much Joy,
Or I shall surfeit with the raretie.

Justice my Lord, Justice, Fox hath broke my ne^ke

How comes it Fox, that he exclaims on thee?

Marry andt please your Majesty, twas thus,
This villainous rascal, followed to surprise my Lady,
And being afraid to venture himself, set on one of (...)
Palsegra^es Captains to do it, whilst he climbed
Up into a tree and stood laughing, now sir, I cut the bow,
And he fell down, and if you have not broke your neck,
I would you had.

If this be true, he has bought his pleasure dear,
Sir begone, this justice I allow,
For his derision t^en, deride him now.

All things goes backward for our good,
Madam farewell, your punishment is past,
Now set your mind to punish us at last.

Revenge shall be a stranger in my heart,
The tortures I'll inflict upon my foes,
Is kindness, for unkindness, grace for death,
For what's prosperity but a puff of breath,
My Lord of Brunswick, pray let us be friends.

Withal my heart, since every heart befriends you.

It joys me that your sorrows here take end,
Wilt please you Madam, here to stay with us
Or go for England, if you so resolve,
I'll see you furnished with a noble fleet.

To England with full sails, blow gentle wind,
I long to see my Sovereign noble maid,
Princes I humbly thank you for these honours,
Done to your handmaid, far unworthy them,
But time shall testify my thankfulness,
Be smooth rough sea, that I may pass a maine,
To do my duty to my Sovereign.

Down with him, give us leave to be revenged on him.

For all the tyranny that he hath used

What have I done, you should revile me thus?

What hast thou done to deserve our hate?

Defend me Officers, shall I without Law,
Be trod to death by the rude Multitude.

Keep off my Masters,
Tis her highness pleasure,
He shall not be convicted but by Law.

And whether goes he.

To the Marshalsea.

We will not leave him, till we see him in.

This is the Prison, here the Keeper comes,
And with him Master Grindall, Scory, Cox,
Such reverent men as, Bonner, by your means,
These many years have suffered much distress*

But now they are delivered, and their place,
Bonner, you must an other while supply,
So says the strict Commission I have here.

Trust me, I glory not to see his fall.

Believe me* nor do I.

Though we know, had not our Keeper bin mor^ kind to v^
Then you were M. Bonner, we might here,
Have starv^d for want of meat, but heaven forgive you,
We do with all our hearts.

And we will labour too, so much as in us lies,
Unto the Council, you may be favorably
Dealt withal, so fare you well.

Farewell, this course inconstant fortune keeps,
While wan one laughs, an other always weeps.

Such measure as to others he hath met,
The same let him receive, good M. Keeper.

Remember Lollards-tower.

Let his best diet be but from the basket,
Nay, bread and water, is too good for him,
His fat Shroue-tuesday sides may well endure,
A hungry Lent or two, and never hurt him*

Here I deliver up my charge.

And I receive him,
Come M. Bonner, you must go with me

Stay I have bethought me, I'll recant.

It cannot serve your turn.

Recant, he hath already twice or thrice done so.

Tut, he can turn with every weathercock,
Away with him.

Come sir, will you go.

Who wast that said the Dutch came through Southwark.

Twas the Lord Clinton.

I left her Grace now at S. Georges Church,
Accompanied with M. Richard Berty,
With Doctor Sands, Cranwell, and trusty Fox,
And diverse other Gentlemen attendants.

Here at the Martialsea we'll stay her coming,
And hark, her trumpets sounds her near approach,
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, I pray you all
By that dear love you owe her majesty,
To be officious in the entertain,
Of this renowned Lady Katherine.

Your relief to poor Prisoners.

What Prison call you this?

The kings-bench Madam, where all these prisoners,
Are detayn'd for debt.

If they be able to make satisfaction, will not,
They are worthy to lye there,
But if by cruelty of Creditors,
Tis Christian charity to succour such.

I have heard that some lie there in policy,
And have engrossed into their greedy hands,
The goods of divers thrifty minded men,
And though well able, yet they will not pay.

Great pity that such men escape vnpunisht,
But are they in the number that do beg.

No Madan, they are laid on beds of Down,
Fare daintily, and never taste of want,
Except it be the want of Liberty,
And that's no want, because they have large walks,
As yards, and gardens, and fair bouling-allies,
With company at will to spend the time.

To them we wish a better Conscence,
But to the poor, and such as want indeed,
One of you give amongst them 40. Angels,
My troubles make me sensible of theirs:
Distress is sharply set, and bites too sore,
To be endured by such as are true poor,
So forwards Gentlemen.

Room for the Lords.

Thrice welcome is the noble Suffolks Dutch*
To us, and to her royal majesty,
In whose high favour, you are highly plac'^*

In sign whereof her princely Majesty,
Restores you to your ancient Siegnories,
Entitles you, as due to you by title,
Barronesse of Willowby* and Earsbie,
Dutch Dowager of Suffolke,
Her highness nearest and most dearest subject.

Your goods, and lands extracted violently,
Her Majesty restores to you again,
Here's the true inventory of them all,
As they were ceis'd into the Bishops hands.

And that you may build on her Princely love,
It is her pleasure, M. Richard Berty,
The husband of your troubles and your cares,
Should be chief Secretary to the State,
Till higher titles do advance his worth.

An honour my good Lord Admiral,
That I esteem, and yet desire it not,
O be it not offensive to her Grace,
That I have leave to lead a private life,
After my painful travel in strange Lands.

Enjoy your minds contentment with your mind.

You, Doctor Sands, her highness, and the Clergy,
Do consecrate Archbishop of York.

An honour far exceeding my desert.

Master Cranwell Gentleman usher to her grace,
Her highness will retain in self same place,
To attend her Majesty.

Withal my heart, I humbly tender a true subjects
Yet might it please her royal Majesty,
Since I have served my Lady in distress,
Endured so many troubles for her sake
That I may live, and dye in serving her.

A virtuous inclination, hold it still,
It will renown thee more then to be great.

My Lord of Hunsdon, Clinton, Effingam,
I humbly thank her Majesty, and you,
Oh may I live to express a loving heart,
By some good action pleasing to you all.

Madam be good unto a company of poor Prisoners.

What other Prison Cranwell call you this.

This is the Prison of the Marshalsea,
Chiefly pretended for her Highness household,
But there are divers other prisoners.

Tis charity to help distressed men,
Of what estate so ere, cause they be men,
I leave their faults respect unto the Law,
Give them as much as the'ther Prisoners,
But what is he that with a downecast look,
Gives signs of discontentment.

Madam I am a Prisoner here,
But joy to see your Grace at liberty.

That face and voice, I oft have seen and heard,
Did not you sometime make abode in Lee.

Madam I did, and those that knew me called me Goseling.

Then I am sure, you knew one Mistress White,
This is the man that helped me to escape,
When we were near beset with Bonners traynes.

It is my kinseman Madam, now I know him,
What cause hath brought thee to this hard distress.

The cause even now aleaged.

Hath Bonner bin so cruel to my friend,
Before mine eyelids wear the seal of sleep,
If heaven be pleased I will release thee Goseling.
And pay thy charges to the utmost farthing,
Oh my dear friend, it never shall be said
I was ungrateful, where I was befriended,
And now his troubles make me call to mind,
The faithful dealing of my servant Fox,
See Lords, a man whom I dismissed my service,
More through selfe-will, then any just offence,
Yet hath he quitted that disgrace so well,
That I admire the strangeness of his art,
For Bonner used him as a special means,
To seek my life, which oftentimes he saved,
Paying my great unkindness, with kind love,
Many such servants may this land afford,
That use their wits to such good purposes,
Here as a part of thy deserved reward,
I freely give thee a hundred pounds a year,
And when I dye my land shall make it good.

And when Fox fails you, let him dye in a ditch.

Gramercies gentle servant, now my Lords,
Lets bend our pace towards famous London-Bridge,
How pleasing is the prospect of the City,
Now I have bin five years a stranger here,
Thorough the same to White-hall to her grace,
That I may see my loving Sovereigns face.


