ARden cheer up thy spirits and droup no more
My gracious Lord ye Duke of Sommerset;
Hath frely given to thee and to thy heirs,
By letters patents from his Majesty:
All the lands of the Abbey of Feuershame.
Heer are the deeds sealed subscribed with his name and the kings,
Read them, and leave this melancholy mood

Franklin thy love prolongs my weary life,
And but for thee, how odious were this life:
That shows me nothing but torments my soul,
And those foul objects that offend mine eyes,
Which makes me wish that for this vale of Heaven,
The earth hung over my heed and covered me.
Love letters past twixt Mosbie and my Wife,
And they have preuie meetings in the Town:
Nay on his finger did I spy the Ring,
Which at our Marriage day the Priest put on,
Can any grief be half so great as this?

Comfort thy self sweet friend it is not strange,
That women will be false and wavering.

I but to dote on such a one as he
Is monstrous Franklin, and intolerable.

Why, what is he?


A Botcher and no better at the first,
Who by base brocage, getting some small stock:
Crept into service of a noble man:
And by his servile flattery and fawning,
Is now become the steward of his house,
And bravely sets it in his silken gown.

No noble man will countnaunce such a peasant,


Yes, the Lord Clifford, he that loves not me,
But through his favour let not him grow proud,
For were he by the Lord Protector backed,
He should not make me to be pointed at,
I am by birth a gentle man of blood,
And that injurious riball that attempts,
To violate my dear wives chastity,
(For dear I hold her love, as dear as heaven)
Shall on the bed which he thinks to defile,
See his dissevered joints and sinews torn,
Whilst on the planchers, pants his weary body,
Smeard in the channels of his lustful blood.

Be patient gentle friend and learn of me,
To ease thy grief, and save her chastity:
Entreat her fair sweet words are fittest engines
To race the flint walls of a woman's breast:
In any case be not too Ielyouse,
Nor make no question of her love to thee,
But as securely, presently take horse,
And lie with me at London all this term
For women when they may, will not,
But being kept back, straight grow outrageous.

Though this abhors from reason yet i'll try it
And call her forth, and presently take leave: How Ales,

Husband what mean you to get up so early.
Summer nights are short, and yet yo rise ere day,
Had I been wake you had not rise so soon,

Sweet love thou know that we two Ouid like
Have often chid the morning, when it began to peep,
And often wished that dark nights purblind steeds,
Would pull her by the purple mantle back:
And cast her in the Ocean to her love.
But this night sweet Ales thou hast killed my hart,
I heard thee cal on Mosbie in thy sleep.

Tis like I was a sleep when I named him,
For being awake he comes not in my thoughts:

I but you started up, and suddenly
In steed of him: caught me about the neck.

In steed of him? why, who was there but you,
And where but one is, how can I mistake.

Arden leave to vrdge her over far.


Nay love there is no credit in a dream,
Let it suffice I know thou love me well.

Now I remember where upon it came,
Had we no talk of Mosbie yesternight.

Mistres Ales I hard you name him once or twice,


And thereof came it, and therefore blame not me


I know it did, and therefore let it pass,
I must to London sweet Ales presently.

But tell me do you mean to stay there long?


No longer there till my affairs be done,


He will not stay above a month at most.


A month aye me, sweet Arden come again
Within a day or two, or else I die.

I cannot long be from thee gentle Ales,
Whilst, Michel fetch our horses from the field,
Franklin and I will down unto the key:
For I have certain goods there to unload,
Meanewhile prepare our breakfast gentle Ales,
For yet ere noone wele take horse and away,

Ere noone he means to take horse and away:
Sweet news is this, Oh that some airy spirit,
Would in the shape and liknes of a horse
Gallop with Arden cross the Ocean,
And throw him from his back into the waives.
Sweet Mosbie is the man that hath my hart:
And he vsurpes it, having nought but this,
That I am tied to him by marriage.
Love is a God and marriage is but words,
And therefore Mosbies title is the best,
Tush whether it be or no, he shall be mine,
In spite of him, of Hymen and of rytes.
And here comes Adam of the flourdeluce,
I hope he brings me tidings of my love.
Now now Adam, what is the news with you?
Be not afraid my husband is now from home.

He whom you wot of Mosbie Mistres Ales,
Is come to town, and sends you word by me,
In any case you may not visit him.

Not visit him?


No nor take no knowledge of his being haere


But tell me is he angree or displeased.


Should seem so for he is wondrous sad.


Were he as mad as raving Hercules,
I'll see him, I and were thy house of force.
These hands of mine should race it to the ground:
^iles that thou would it bring me to my love.

Nay and you be so impatient I'll be gone

Stay Adam, stay, thou were wont to be my frd
Ask Mosbie how I have incurred his wrath,
Bear him from me these pair of silver dice:
With which we plaid for kisses manya t^me,
And when I lost, I wan, and so did he:
Such winning and such losing, Ieue send me,
And bid him if his love do not decline,
Come this morning but along my door:
And as a stranger, but salute me there,
This may he do without suspect or fear.

I'll tell him what you say, and so farewell.


Do, and one day I'll make amends for all:
I know he loves me well, but dares not come,
Because my husband is so Ielious:
And these my marrow prying neighbours blab,
Hinder our meetings when we would confer.
But if I live that block shall be removed,
And Mosbie, thou that comes to me by stelth
shalt neither fear the biting speech of men,
Nor Ardens looks, as surely shall he die,
as I abhor him, and love only thee.
Now now Michaell, whether are you going?

To fetch my masters nag,
I hope you'll think on me.

I But Michaell see you keep your oath,
And be as secret, as you are resolute.

I'll see he shall not live above a week.


On that condition Michaell here is my hand
None shall have Mosbies sister but thy self.

I understand the Painter here hard by,
Hath made report that he and Sue is sure.

There's no such matter Michaell believe it not,


But he hath sent a dagger sticking in a hart,
With a verse or two stolen from a painted cloth:
The which I here the wench keeps in her chest,
Well let her keep it, I shall find a fellow
That can both write and read, and make rime too,
And if I do, well, I say no more:
I'll send from London such a taunting letter,
As shall eat the hart he sent with salt,
And sling the dagger at the Painters head.

What needs all this, I say that Susan's thine


Why then I say that I will kill my master
Or any thing that you will have me do.

But Michaell see you do it cunningly.


Why, say I should be took, i'll ne'er confess,
That you know any thing, and Susan being a Maid,
May beg me from the gallous of the Shriefe.

Trust not to that Michaell.


You can not tell me, I have seen it I,
But mistres tell her whether I live or die.
I'll make her more worth then twenty Painters can,
For I will rid mine elder brother away:
And then the farm of Bolton is mine own.
Who would not venture upon house and land?
When he may have it for a right down blow.

Yonder comes Mosbie, Michaell get thee gone,
And let not him nor any know thy drifts.
Mosbie my love,

Away I say, and talk not to me now.


A word or two sweet hart, and then I will,
Tis yet but early days, thou need not fear.

Where is your husband?


Tis now high water, and he is at the key.


There let him be, hence forward know me not.


Is this the end of all thy solemn oaths?
Is this the fruit thy reconcilement buds?
Have I for this given thee so many favours.
Incurd my husbands hate, and out alas,
Made shipwreck of mine honour for thy sake,
And doest thou say hence forward know me not?
Remember when I locked the in my closet,
What were thy words and mine, did we not both
Decree, to murder Arden in the night.
The heavens can witness, and the world can tell,
Before I saw that falsehood look of thine,
Fore I was tangled with thy tysing speech.
Arden to me was dearer then my soul,
And shall be still, base peasant get thee gone.
And boast not of thy conquest over me,
Gotten by witch-craft, and mere sorcery.
For what hast thou to countenance my love,
being descend of a noble house,
And matched already with a gentleman,
Whose servant thou may be, and so farewell.

Ungentle and unkind Ales, now I see
That which I ever feared, and find too true:
A woman's love is as the lightning flame,
Which even in bursting forth consumes it self,
To try thy constancy have I been strange,
Would I had never tried, but lived in hope.

What needs thou try me, whom thou never found false


Yet pardon me for love is Ielious,


So list the Sailor to the Marmaids song,
So looks the trauellour to the Bauliske,
I am content for to be reconcilde,
And that I know will be mine overthrow.

Thine overthrow? first let the world dissolve,


Nay Mosbie let me still enjoy thy love,
And happen what will, I am resolute,
My saving husband hoordes up bags of gould,
To make our children rich, and now is he
Gone to unload the goods that shall be thine,
And he and Franklin will to London straight.

To London Ales, if thoult be ruled by me,
We'll make him sure enough for coming there.

Ah, would we could.


I happened on a Painter yesternight,
The only cunning man of Christendoome:
For he can temper poison with his oil,
That who so looks upon the work he draws,
Shall with the beams that issue from his sight,
Suck venomme to his breast and slay him self,
Sweet Ales he shall draw thy counterfeit,
That Arden may by gaizing on it perish

I but Mosbie that is dangerous,
For thou or I, or any other else,
Coming into the Chamber where it hangs, may die.

I but we'll have it covered with a cloth,
And hung up in the study for himself.

It may not be, for when the pictur's drawn,
Arden I know will come and show it me.

Fear not we'll have that shall serve the turn,
This is the painters house I'll call him forth,

But Mosbie I'll have no such picture I:


I pray thoe leave it to my discretion. Now, Clarke
O you are an honest man of your word, you served me well,

Why sir i'll do it for you at any time,
Provided as you have given your word,
I may have Susan Mosbie to my wife:
For as sharpe witted Poets, whose sweet verse
Make heavenly gods break of their Nector draughts,
And lay their ears down to the lowly earth:
Use humble promise to their sacred Muse,
So we that are the Poets favourite,
Must have a love, I, Love is the Painters Muse.
That makes him frame a speaking countenance.
A weeping eye that witnesses hearts grief,
Then tell me Master Mosbie shall I have her?

Tis pity but he should, heel use her well.


Clarke heers my hand my sister shall be thine,


Then brother to requite this courtesy,
You shall command my life my skill and all.

Ah that thou could be secret,


Fear him not, leave, I have talked sufficient,


You know not me, that ask such questions:
Let it suffice, I know you love him well,
And fain would have your husband made away:
Wherein trust me you show a noble mind,
That rather then you'll live with him you hate,
You'll venture life, and die with him you love,
The like will I do for my Susans sake.

Yet nothing could enforce me to the deed,
But Mosbies love, might I without control,
Enjoy thee still, then Arden should not die:
But seeing I cannot, therefore let him die.

Enough sweet Ales, thy kind words makes me melt,
Your trick of poisoned pictures we dislike,
Some other poison would do better far.

I such as might be put into his broth,
And, yet in taste not to be found at all,

I know your mind, and here I have it for you,
Put but a dram of this into his drink,
Or any kind of broth that he shall eat:
And he shall die within an hour after.

As I am a gentle woman Clarke, next day
Thou and Susan shall be married.

And i'll make her dowry more the i'll talk of Clark,


Yonder's your husband, Mosbie i'll be gone.


In good time, see where my husband comes,
Master Mosbie ask him the question your self.

Master Arden, being at London yester night,
The Abbey lands whereof you are now possessed,
Were offred me on some occasion,
By Green one of sir Antony Agers men:
I pray you sir tell me, are not the lands yours?
Hath any other in^rest herein?

Mosby ^at question wele decide anon,
Ales make ready my ^ekfast, I must hence.
As for the lands mosbie they are mine,
By letters patents from his Majesty:
But I must have a Mandat for my wife,
They say you seek to rob me of her love,
Villain what makes thou in her company,
She's no companion for so base a groom.

Arden I thought not on her, I came to thee,
But rather then I pocket up this wrong.

What will you do sir?


Revenge it on the proudest of you both:


So sirha, you may not wear a sword,
The statute makes against artificers,
I warrant that I do, now use your bodkin,
Your spanish needle, and your pressing Iron,
For this shall go with me, and mark my words,
You goodman botcher, tis to you I speak,
The next time that I take thee near my house,
In steed of Legs I'll make thee crall on stumps.

Ah master Arden you have inturde me,
I do appeal to God, and to the world.

Why can thou deny, thou were a botcher once,


Measure me what I am, not what I was.


Why what art thou now, but a Velvet drudge,
A cheating steward, and base minded peasant.

Arden now thou hast belched and vomited,
The rancorous venom of thy mis-swolne hart,
Hear me but speak, as I intend to live
With God, and his elected saints in heaven,
I never meant more to solicit her,
And that she knows, and all the world shall see,
I loved her once, sweet Arden pardon me.
I could not choose, her beauty fired my heart,
But time hath quenched these ouerraging coals,
And Arden though I now frequent thy house,
Tis for my sisters sake, her waiting maid
And not for hers, may thou enjoy her long:
Hell fyze and wrathful vengeance light on me,
If I dishonour her or injure thee.

Mosbie with these thy protestations,
The deadly hatred of my hart is appealed,
And thou and I'll be friends, if this prove true.
As for the base terms I gave thee late,
Forget them Mosbie, I had cause to speak:
When all the Knights and gentlemen of Kent,
Make common table talk of her and thee.

Who lives that is not touched with staunderous tongues,


Then Mosbie, to eschew the speech of men,
Upon whose general brute all honour hangs,
Forbear his house.

Forbear it, nay rather frequent it more.
The world shall see that I distrust her not,
To warn him on the sudden from my house,
Were too confirm the rumour that is grown.

By faith my sir you say true,
And therefore will I sojourn here a while,
Until our enemies have talked their fill.
And then I hope theile cease, and at last confess,
How causeles they have inturde her and me.

And I will lie at London all this term,
To let them see how light I wey their words.

Husband sit down, your brekfast will be could,


Come M. Mosbie will you sit with us,


I can not eat, but i'll sit for company.


Sir Michaell see our horse be ready.


Husband why pause ye, why eat you not,


I am not well, theirs something in this broth
That is not wholesome, did thou make it Ales?

I did, and that's the cause it likes not you,
Theirs nothing that I do can please your taste.
You were best to say I would have poisoned you,
I cannot speak or cast aside my eye:
But he Imagines, I have stepped awry.
Here's he that you cast in my teeth so oft,
Now will I be convinced, or purge my self,
I charge thee speak to this mistrustful man,
Thou that would see me hang, thou M of bye thou,
What favour hast thou had more then a kiss
At coming or departing from the Town?

You wrong your self and me, to cast these douts
Your loving husband is not Ielious.

Why gentle mistres Ales, cannot I be ill,
But you'll accuse your self.
Franckline thou haste a box of Methridate,
I'll take a little to prevent the worst.

Do so, and let us presently take horse,
My life for yours ye shall do well enough.

Give me a spoon, I le eat of it my self,
Would it were full of poison to the brim.
Then should my cares and troubles have an end,
Was ever silly woman so tormented?

Be patient sweet love, I mistrust not thee,


God will revenge it Arden if thou doest.
For never woman loved her husband better, the I do thee,

I know it sweet Ales, cease to complain:
Least that in fears I answer thee again.

Come leave this dallying, and let us away.


Forbear to wound me with that bitter word,
Arden shall go to London in my arms.

Loath am I to depart, yet I must go,


Wilt thou to London then, and leave me here,
Ah if thou love me gentle Arden stay,
Yet if thy business be of great Import
Go if thou wilt I'll bear it as I may.
But write from London to me every week,
Nay every day, and stay no longer there
Then thou must needs, least that I die for sorrow.

I'll write unto thee every other side,
And so farewell sweet Ales till we meet next.

Farewell Husbaud seeing you'll have it so.
And M, Franklin, seeing you take him hence,
In hope you'll hasten him home I'll give you this

And if he stay the fault shall not be mine,
Mosbie farewell and see you keep your oath.

I hope he is not Ielious of me now.


No Mosbie no, hereafter think of me,
As of your dearest friend, and so farewell.

I am glad he is gone, he was about to stay.
But did you mark me then how I brake of?

I Ales, and it was cunningly performed,
But what a villain is this painter Clarke?

Was it not a goodly poison that he gave?
Why he's as well now, as he was before.
It should have been some fine confection,
That might have given the broth some dainty tasty,
This powder was to gross and populos.

But had he eaten but three spoonefulles more,
Then had he died, and our love continued.

Why so it shall Mosbie, albeit he live,


It is unpossible, for I have sworn,
Never hereafter to solicit thee,
Or whylest he lives, once more importune thee.

Thou shalt not need I will importune thee.
What shall an oath make thee forsake my love?
As if I have not sworn as much my self,
And given my hand unto him in the church,
Tush Mosbie oaths are words, and words is wind,
And wind is mutable: then I conclude,
Tis childishnes to stand upon an oath,

Well proved Mistres Ales, yet by your leave,
I'll keep mine vnbroken, whilst he lives.

I do, and spare not his time is but short,
For if thou be as resolute as I,
We'll have him murdered, as he walks the streets:
In London many alehouse Ruffians keep,
Which as I hear will murder men for gould,
They shall be soundly fed, to pay him home:

Ales whats he that comes yonder, know thou him


Mosbie be gone, I hope tis one that comes
To put in practise our intended drifts,

Mistres Arden you are well met,
I am sorry that your husband is from home,
When as my purposed journey was to him,
Yet all my labour is not spent in vain:
For I suppose that you can full discourse,
And flat resolve me of the thing I seek.

What is it master Green? If that I may
Or can, with safety, I will answer you.

I heard your husband hath the grant of late,
Confirmed by letters patents from the king,
Of all the lands of the Abbey of Feuershame,
Generally entitled, so that all former grants,
Are cut of, whereof I my self had one,
But now my interest by that is void,
This is all mistres Arden, is it true nor no?

True master Green, the lands are his in state,
And whatsoever leases were before,
Are void for term of Master Ardens life:
He hath the grant under the Chancery seal.

Pardon me mistres Arden, I must speak,
For I am touched, your husband doth me wrong:
To wring me from the little land I have.
My living is my life, only that
Rests remainder of my portion.
Desire of wealth is endless in his mind,
And he is greedy gaping still for gain,
Nor cares he though young gentlemen do beg,
So he may scrape and hoorde up in his poutche,
But seeing he hath taken my lands, I'll value life:
As careless, as he is careful for to get,
And tell him this from me, I'll be revenged,
And so, as he shall wish the Abbey lands
Had rested still, within their former state.

Alas poor gentleman, I pity you,
And wo is me that any man should want,
God knows tis not my fault, but wonder not
Though he be harde to others, when to me,
Ah master Green, God knows how I am used,

Why mistres Arden can the crabbed churl,
Use you unkindly, respects he not your birth?
Your honourable friends, nor what you brought:
Why? all Kent knows your parentage, and what you are

Ah M. Green be it spoken in secret here,
I never live good day with him alone:
When he is at home, then have I froward looks,
Hard words and blows, to mend the match withal;
And though I might content as good a man,
Yet doth he keep in every corner trulls,
And weary with his trugges at home,
Then rides he straight to London, there forsooth
He revels it among such filthy ones,
As counsels him to make a way his wife:
Thus live I daily in continual fear:
In sorrow, so despairing of redres
As every day I wish with hearty prayer,
That he or I were taken forth the world.

Now trust me mistres Ales, it grieves me,
So fair a creature should be so abused.
Why who would have thought the civil sir, so sollen,
He looks so smoothly now fie upon him Churl,
And if he live a day he lives too long,
But frolic woman, I shall be the man,
Shall set you free from all this discontent:
And if the Churl deny my intereste,
And will not yield my lease into my hand,
I'll paye him home, what ever hap to me,

But speak you as you think?


I Gods my witness, I mean plain dealing,
For I had rather die then lose my land.

Then master Green be counselled by me
Endanger not your self, for such a Churl,
But hire some Cutter for to cut him short,
And here's ten pound, to wager them with all,
When he is dead you shall have twenty more.
And the lands whereof my husband is possessed,
Shall be intytled as they were before.

Will you keep promise with me?


Or count me false and periurde, whilst I live,


Then here's my hand I'll have him so dispatcht,
I'll up to London straight, I'll thither post,
And never rest, till I have compassed it,
Till then farewell.

Good Fortune follow all your forward thoughts
And whosoever doth attempt the deed,
A happy hand I wish and so farewell.
All this goes well, Mosbie I long for thee
To let thee know all that I have contrived,

Now now Ales whats the news,


Such as will content thee well sweet hart,


Well let them pass a while, and tell me Ales,
Now have you dealt, and tempered with my sister,
What will she have my neighbour Clarke, or no?

What M. Mosbie let him woo him self,
Think you that maids look not for fair words,
Go to her Clarke she's all alone within,
Michaell my man is clean out of her books.

I thank you mistres Arden, I will in,
And if fair Susan, and I can make a gre,
You shall command me to the uttermost,
As far as either goods or life may streatch.

Now Ales lets bear thy news?


They be so good, that I must laugh for joy,
Before I can begin to tell my tale,

Lets hear them, that I may laugh for company


This morning M. Green, dick green I mean,
From whom my husband had the Abbey land,
Came hither rattling for to know the truth,
Whether my husband had the la nds by grant,
I told him all, where at he stormd a maine,
And s^ore he would cry quittance with the Churl,
And if he did deny his enter
Stab him, whatsoever did befall him self,
When as I saw his choler thus to rise,
I whetted on the gentleman with words
And to conclude, Mosbie, at last we grew
To composition for my husbands death,
I gave him ten pound to hire knaves,
By some devise to make away the Churl:
When he is dead, he should have twenty more,
And repossesse his former lands again,
On this we greed, and he is ridden straight
To London, to bring his death about.

But call you this good news?


I sweet hart, be they not?


I were cherefull news, to hear the churl were dead,
But trust me Ales, I take it passing ill,
You would be so forgetful of our state,
To make recount of it to every groom,
What? to acquaint each stranger with our drifts,
Cheesely in case of murder, why tis the way,
To make it open unto Ardens self.
And bring thy self and me to ruin both,
Forewarnde, forearmde, who threats his enemy
Lends him a sword to guarde himself with all.

I did it for the best.


Well, seeing tis don, cherely let it pas.
You know this Green, is he not religious?
A man I guess of great devotion.

He is.


Then sweet Ales let it pas, I have a drift
Will quiet all, what ever is amiss.

Now now Clarke, have you found me false?
Did I not plead the matter hard for you?

You did.


And what, Wilt be a match,


A match, I faith sir I the day is mine,
The Painter, lays his colours to the life,
His pensel draws no shadows in his love.
Susan is mine.

You make her blush.


What sister is it Clarke must be the man?


Stresteth in your grant, some words are past,
And happily we be grown unto a match,
If you be willing that it shall be so?

Ah master Clarke, it rests at my grant,
You see my sister's yet at my dispose,
But so you'll grant me one thing I shall ask,
I am content my sister shall be yours.

What is it M. Mosbie?


I do remember once in secret talk,
You told me how you could compound by Art.
A crucifix impoysoned:
That who so look upon it should wax blind,
And with the sent be stifeled, that ere long,
He should dye poisoned, that did view it well.
I would have you make me such a crucifix,
And then I'll grant my sister shall be yours.

Though I am loath, because it touches life,
Yet rather or I'll leave sweet Susans love,
I'll do it, and with all the haste I may.
But for whom is it?

Leave that to us, why Clarke, is it possible*
That you should paint and draw it out your self,
The colours being baleful and impoysoned,
And no ways prejudice your self with all?

Well questioned Ales,
Clarke how answer you that?

Very easily, I'll tell you straight,
How I do work of these Impoysoned drugs,
I fasten on my spectacles so close,
As nothing can any way offend my sight,
Then as I put a lease within my nose,
So put I rubarbe to avoid the smell,
And softly as another work I paint,

Tis very well, but against when shall I have it,


Within this ten days,


I will serve the turn.
Now Ales lets in, and see what cheer you keep,
I hope now M. Arden is from home,
You'll give me leave to play your husbands part.

Mosbie you know whose master of my hart,
He well may be the master of the house.

See you them that coms yonder M. Green?


I very well, do you know them?


The one I know not, but he seems a knave,
Choesly for bearing the other company:
For such a slave, so vile a rog as he,
Lives not again upon the earth,
Black-will is his name I tell you M. Green,
At Bulloine he and I were fellow soldiers,
Where he plaid such pranks,
As all the Camp feared him for his villainy:
I warrant you he bears so bad a mind,
That for a croune heel murder any man.

The fitter is he for my purpose mary.


Now now fellow Bradshaw,
Whether away so early?

O Will times are changed, no fellows now,
Though we were once together in the field,
Yet thy friend to do thee any good I can.

Why Bradshawe was not thou and I,
Fellow soldiers at Bulloine:
Where I was a corporal, and thou but a base mercenarye groom?
No fellows now, because you are a gouldsmith,
And have a little plate in your shop,
You were glad to call me fellow Will,
And with a cursy to the earth,
One snatch good corporal.
When I stole the half Ore from Iohn the vitler.
And domineered with it, amongst good fellows,
In one night.

I Will, those days are past with me.


I but they be not past with me.
For I keep that same honourable mind still,
Good neighbour Bradshaw you are too proud to be my fellow,
But were it not, that I see more company coming down
The hill, I would be fellows with you once more,
And share Crowns with you to.
But let that pas, and tell me whether you go.

To London Will, about a piece of service,
Wherein happily thou may pleasure me.

What is it?


Of late Lord Cheiny lost some plate,
Which one did bring, and sold it at my shop,
Saying he served sir Antony Cooke,
A search was made, the plate was found with me,
And I am bound to answer at the syse,
Now Lord Cheiny solemnly bowen,
If law will serve him, heal hang me for his plate,
Now I am going to London upon hope,
To find the fellow, now Will I know
Thou art acpuainted with such companions,

What manner of man was he?


A lean faced writhen knave,
Hawk nosed, and very hollow eyed,
With mighty furrows in his stormy brows,
Long hair down his shoulders curled,
His Chin was bare, but on his upper lip,
A mutchado, which he wound about his ear,

What apparel had he,


A watchet satin doublet all to torn,
The inner side did bear the greater show,
A pair of thread bare Velvet hose seam rent,
A wosted stocking rent above the shoe,
A livery cloak, but all the lace was of,
Twas bad, but yet it served to hide the plate,

Sir Shakebagge, can thou remember
Since we trould the boule at Sittingburgh,
Where I broke the Lapsters head of the Lyon
With a Cudgill stick?

I very well Will.


Why it was with the money that the plate was sold for
Sir Bradshaw what wilt thou give him
That can tell thee who sold thy plate?

Who I pray thee good Will,


Why twas one Jack Fitten,
He's now in Newgate, for stealing a horse,
And shall be arrainde the next life.

Why then let Lord Cheiny seek Jack Fit forth
For I'll back and tell him, who robbed him of his plate,
This cheers my hart M. Green, I'll leave you,
For I must to the I'll of Sheppy with speed,

Before you go let me entreat you
To carry this letter to mistres Arden of Feuershame,
And humbly recommend me to her self.

That will I M. Green, and so farewell.
Here Will, there's a Crown for thy good news.

Farewell Bradshaw,
I'll drink no water for thy sake, whilst this lasts:
Now gentlemen, shall we have your company to London.

Nay stay sirs, a little more I needs must use your help,
And in a matter of great consequence,
Wherein if you'll be secret and profound,
I'll give you twenty Angels for your pains.

Now? twenty Angels? give my fellow
George shakbag and me, twenty Angels,
And if thoult have thy own father slain,
That thou may inherit his land, we'll kill him,

I thy Mother, thy sister, thy brother, or all thy kin


Well this it is, Arden of Feuershame,
Hath highly wronged me about the Abbey land,
That no reuendge but death will serve the turn:
Will you two kill him, hoeres the Angels down,
And I will lay the platform of his death:

Plat me no platformes give me the money,
And i'll stab him as he stands pissing against a wall,
but I'll kill him.

Where is he?


He is now at London, in Aldersgate street,


He's dead, as if he had been condemned
By an act of parliament, if once Black Will and I
Swear his death,

Here is ten pound, and when he is dead,
Ye shall have twenty more:

My fingers itches to be at the peasant,
Ah that I might be set a work thus through the year,
And that murder would grow to an occupation:
That a man might without danger of law,
Zounds I warrant, I should be warden of the company,
Come let us be going, and wele bate at Rochester,
Where I'll give thee a gallon of Sack,
To hansell the match with all.

I have gotten such a letter,
As will touche the Painter, And thus it is.

My duty remembered Mistres Susan, hoping in God you be in good health, as I
Michaell was at the making hereof. This is to certify you, that as the Turtle
true, when she hath lost her mate, sits alone, so I mourning for your
absence, do walk up and down. Poules, till one day I fell a sleep and lost my
masters Pantophelles. Ah mistres Susan abbolishe that paltry Painter, cut him
off by the shins, with a frowning look of your crabed countenance, think
upon Michaell, who drunk with the dregs of your favour, well cleave as fast
to your love, as a plaster of Pitch to a gald horse back Thus hoping you will
let my passions penetrate, or rather impetrate mercy of your meek hands, I
end.

Yours Michaell, or else not Michaell.

Why you paltry knave,
Stand you here loitering, knowing my affairs,
What haste my business craves to send to Kent?

Faith friend Michaell, this is very ill,
Knowing your master hath no more but you,
And do ye slache-his business for your own?

Where is the letter sir, let me see it,
See master Franklin, here's proper stuff,
Susan my maid, the Painter, and my man,
A crew of harlots all in love forsooth,
Sir let me hear no more of this.
Now for thy life, once write to her a word,
Wilt thou be married to so base a trull.
Tis Mosbies sister, come I once at home,
I'll rouse her from remaining in my house:
Now M. Franklin let us go walk in Paules,
Come, but a turn or two and then away,

The first is Arden, and that's his man,
The other is Franklin Ardens dearest friend,

Zounds I'll kill them all three,


Nay sirs, touch not his man in any case,
But stand close, and take you sit standing,
And at his coming forth speed him:
To the Nages head, ther'is this cowards haunt,
But now I'll leave you till the deed be don:

If he be not paid his own ne'er trust shakebagge,


Sir Shakbag, at his coming forth
I'll run him through, and then to the blackfreers,
And there take water and a way.

Why that's the best, but see thou miss him not.


How can I miss him, when I think on the forty
Angels I must have more.

Tis very late, I were best shute up my stall,
For here will be old filching when the press comes forth of Paules.

Zounds draw Shakbag draw, I am almost killed.


Wele tame you I warrant.


Zounds I am tame enough already,


What trublesome fray or mutany is this?


Tis nothing but some brabbling paltry fray.
Devised to pick men's pockets in the throng.

If nothing else? come Franklin let us away.


What mends shall I have for my broken head?


Mary this mends, that if you get you not away
All the sooner, you shall be well beaten and sent to the counter.

Well I'll be gone, but look to your signs,
For I'll pull them down all.
Shakbag my broken head grieves me not so much,
As by this means Arden hath escaped.
I had a glimpse of him and his companion.

Why sirs, Arden's as well as I,
I met him and Franklin going merrilly to the ordinary,
What dare you not do it?

Yes sir we dare do it, but were my consent to give again,
We would not do it under ten pound more.
I value every drop of my blood at a french Crown.
I have had ten pound to steal a dog,
And we have no more here to kill a man,
But that a bargane is a bargane, and so forth,
You should do it your self.

I pray thee how came thy head broke,


Why thou see it is broke, dost thou not.


Stading against a staule, watching Ardens coming,
A boy let down his shop window, and broke his head.
Whereupon arose a brawl, and in the tumult
Arden escaped us, and past by unthought on.
But forberance is no acquittance,
Another time wele do it I warrant thee.

I pray thee will make clean thy bloody brow,
And let us bethink us on some other place,
Where Arden may be met with handsomely.
Remember how devoutly thou hast sworn,
To kill the villain think upon thine oath.

Tush, I have broken five hundred oaths,
But would thou charm me to effect this dede?
Tell me of gould my resolutions fee,
Say thou see Mosbie kneeling at my knees,
Offering me service for my high attempt:
And sweet Ales Arden with a lap of crowns.
Comes with a lowly cursy to the earth,
Saying take this, but for thy quarterige,
Such yearly tribute will I answer thee.
Why this would steal soft metled cowardice,
With which black Will was never tainted with.
I tell thee Green the forlorn travailer,
Whose lips are glued with summers parching heat,
Ne'er longd so much to see a running brooke,
As I to finish Ardens Tragedy.
See thou this gore that cleaves to my face?
From hence ne'er will I wash this bloody stain,
Till Ardens hart be panting in my hand.

Why that's well said, but what saith shakbag?


I cannot paint my valour out with words,
But give me place and opportunity,
Such mercy as the staruen Lyones
When she is dry sucked of her eager young:
Shows to the pray that next encounters her,
On Arden so much pity would I take.

So should it fair with men of firm resolve,
And now sirs seeing this accident,
Of meeting him in Paules hath no success:
Let us bethink us on some other place,
Whose earth may swallow up this Ardens blood.
Se yonder comes his man, and wat you what,
The foolish knave is in love with Mosbies sister,
And for her sake whose love he cannot get,
Unless Mosbie solicit his suit.
The villain hath sworn the slaughter of his master,
We'll question him, for he may stead us much:
Now now Michael whether are you going?

My master hath new supped,
And I am going to prepare his chamber.

Where supped M. Arden?


At the Nages head, at the 18 pence ordinary,
Now now M. Shakbag, what Black Will,
Gods dear lady, how chance your face is so bloody?

Go too sir, there is a chance in it.
This sawcines in you will make you be knocked.

Nay and you be offended i'll be gone.


Stay michael you may not escape us so.
Michael I know you love your M. well.

Why so I do, but wherefore vrdge you that?


Because I think you love your mistres better,
So think not I, but say, in faith what if I should?

Come to the purpose Michael, we hear
You have a pretty love in Feuershame,

Why have I two or three, whats that to thee?


You deal to mildly, with the peasant, thus it is,
Tis kowne to us you love mosbies sister.
We know besides that you have taken your oath,
To further Mosbie to your mistres bed.
And kill your M. for his sisters sake.
Now sir, a poorer coward then your self,
Was never fostered in the coast of Kent.
Now comes it then, that such aknaue as you
Dare swear a matter of such consequence?

Ah will.


Tush give me leave, theirs no more but this,
Since thou hast sworn, we dare discover all,
And had thou or should thou utter it,
We have devised a complat under band
What ever shall beside to any of us:
To send thee roundly to the devil of hell.
And therefore thus, I am the very man,
Marked in my birth howre by the destynies,
To give an end to Ardens life on earth,
Thou but a member, but to whet the knife,
Whose edge must search the closet of his breast,
Thy office is but to appoint the place,
And train thy M. to his tragedy.
Mine to perform it, when occasion serves.
Then be not nice, but here devise with us,
Now and what way, we may conclude his death.

So shalt thou purchase, Mosbie for thy friend
And by his friendship gain his sisters love.

So shall thy mistres be thy fauorer,
And thou disburdned of the oath thou made.

Well gentlemen I cannot but confess,
Since you have brdged me so aparantly,
That I have vowed my M. Ardens death,
And he whose kindly love and liberal hand,
Doth challenge nought but good deserts of me,
I will deliver over to your hands.
This night come to his house at Aldersgate,
The doors I'll leave vnlockt against you come.
No sooner shall ye enter through the latch,
Over the threshold to the inner court.
But on your left hand shall you see the stairs.
That leads directly to my M. chamber.
There take him and dispose him as ye please,
Now it were good we parted company,
What I have promised, I will perform.

Should you deceive us, 'twould go wrong with you,


I will accomplish al I have reuealde,


Come let's go drink, choler makes me as dry as a dog


Thus feeds the Lamb securely on the down,
Whilst through the thicket of an arber brake,
The hunger bitten Wolf orepryes his hant,
And takes advantage to eat him up.
Ah harmeles Arden how, how hast thou misdone,
That thus thy gentle life is leveled at,
The many good turns that thou hast don to me,
Now must I quitance with betraying thee.
I that should take the weapon in my hand,
And buckler thee from ill intending foes.
Do lead thee with a wicked fraudful smile,
As unsuspected, to the slaughterhouse:
So have I sworn to Mosby and my mistres.
So have I promised to the slaughtermen.
And should I not deal currently with them,
Their lawles rage would take revenge on me,
Tush I will spurn at mercy for this once.
Let pity lodge where feeble womenly,
I am resolved, and Arden needs must die.

No Franklin no, if fear or stormy threts,
If love of me, or care of womanhood,
If fear of God, or common speech of men,
Who mangle credit with their wounding words,
And cooch dishonour, as dishonour buds.
Might soyne repentance in her wanton thoughts,
No question then but she would turn the lease,
And sorrow for her dissolution.
But she is rooted in her wickedness
Perverse and stobburne, not to be reclaimde,
Good counsel is to her as rain to weeds
And reprehension makes her vice to grow,
As Hydraes head that perished by decay.
Her faults me think are painted in my face.
For every searching eye to over reed.
And Mosbies name, a scandal unto mine.
Is deeply trenched in my blushing brow.
Ah Franklin Franklin, when I think on this,
My harts greese rends my other powers,
Worse then the conflict at the hour of death.

Gentle Arden leave this sad lament,
She will amend, and so your griefs will cease
Or else shele die, and so your sorrows end.
If neither of these two do happily fall,
Yet let your comfort be, that others bear
Your woes twice doubled all with patience.

My house is irksome, there I cannot rest.


Then stay with me in London, go not home.


Then that base Mosbie doth usurp my room,
And makes his triumph of my being thence.
At home, or not at home, where ere I be.
Here here it lies, ah Franklin here it lies,
That will not out till wretched Arden dies.

Forget your griefs a while, heer coms your man,


What a Clock is't sir?


Almost ten.


See see how runs away the weary time,
Come M. Franklin, shall we go to bed.

I pray you go before, I'll follow you,
Ah what ahell is fretful Jealousy?
What pity moaning words? what deep fetched sighs?
What grievous groans? and ouerlading woes,
Accompanies this gentle gentleman.
Now will he shake his care oppressed head,
Then sir his sad eis on the sollen earth,
Ashamed to gaze upon the open world.
Now will he cast his eyes up towards the heavens,
Looking that ways for redress of wrong,
Some times he seeks to beguile his grief,
And tells a story with his careful tongue.
Then comes his wives dishonour in his thoughts,
And in the middle cutteth of his tale.
Dowring fresh sorrow on his weary limbs.
So woe begone, so inly charged with woe,
Was never any lived and bare it so.

My M. would desire you come to bed.


Is he himself already in his bed?


He is and fain would have the light away,
Conflicting thoughts encamped in my breast
Awake me with the Echo of their strokes:
And I a judge to censure either side,
Can give to neither wished victory.
My masters kindness pleads to me for life,
With just demand, and I must grant it him.
My mistres she hath forced me with an oath,
For Susans sake the which I may not break,
For that is nearer the a masters love,
That grim faced fellow, pittiles black Will,
And Shakebag stern in bloody stratagem,
Two Ruffer Ruffians never lived in Kent,
Have sworn my death if I infringe my vow,
A dreadful thing to be considred of,
Me thinks I see them with their bolstred hair,
Staring and grinning in thy gentle face,
And in their ruthless hands, their dagers drawn,
Insulting ore there with a peck of oaths.
Whilst thou submissive pleading for relief,
Art mangled by their ireful instruments.
Me thinks I hear them ask where Michaell is
And pittiles black Will, cries stab the slave.
The Peasant will detect the Tragedy.
The wrinkles in his foul death threatening face,
Gapes open wide, like graves to swallow men.
My death to him is but a merriment,
And he will murder me to make him sport.
He comes he comes, ah M. Franklin help,
Call up the neighbours or we are but dead

What dismal outcry calls me from my rest?


What hath occasiond such a fearful cry?
Speak Michaell, hath any iniurde thee?

Nothing sir, but as I fell a sleep,
Upon the threshold leaning to the stairs.
I had a fearful dream that troubled me,
And in my slumber thought I was beset,
With murderer thieves that came to rifle me.
My trembling joints witness my inward fear.
I crave your pardons for disturbing you.

So great a cry for nothing, I ne'er heard.
What, are the doors fast locked? and al things safe?

I cannot tel, I think I locked the doors.


I like not this, but I'll go see my self,
Ne'er trust me, but the doors were all vnlockt.
This negligence not halse contents me.
Get you to bed, and if you love my favour,
Let me have no more such pranks as these
Come M. Franklin, let us go to bed.

I be my Faith, the air is very cold,
Michaell farewell, I pray thee dream no more.

Black night hath hid the pleasurs of yt day.
And sheting darkness ouerhangs the earth,
And with the black fold of her cloudy robe,
Obscure us from the eiesight of the world,
In which sweet silence such as we triumph.
The laysie minutes linger on their time,
Loath to give due audit to the howre:
Till in the watch our purpose be complete,
And Arden sent to everlasting night.
Green get you gone, and linger here about,
And at some hour hence, come to us again,
Where we will give you instance of his death.

Speed to my wish whose will so ere says no,
And so i'll leave you for an howre or two.

I tel thoe Shakebag, would this thing were don,
I am so heavy that I can scarce go:
This drowsiness in me bods little good.

Now now Will, become a precissian.
Nay then lets go sleep, when huges and fears,
Shall kill our courages with their fancies work,

Why Shakbagge thou mistakes me much,
And wrongs me to in telling me of fear,
Were not a serious thing we go about,
It should be slipped, till I had sought with thee:
To let thee know I am no coward I,
I tel thee Shakbag thou abuse me.

Why thy speech betrayed an inly kind offeare.
And favoured of a weak relenting spirit.
Go forward now in that we have begone.
And afterwards attempt me when thou dare.

And if I do not heaven cut me of,
But let that pass, and show me to this house.
Where thou shalt see I'll do as much as Shakbag.

This is the door, but soft, me thinks tis shut.
The villain Michaell hath deceived us,

Soft let me see, shakbag tis shut indeed.
Knock with thy sword, perhaps the slave will hear,

It will not be, the white liuerd peasant is gon to bed
And laughs us both to scorn.

And he shall by his mirriment as dear,
As ever coistrell bought so little sport,
Here let this sword assist me when I need,
But rust and canker after I have sworn:
If I the next time that I mete the hind,
Lop not away his leg, his arm or both,

And let me never draw a sword again,
Nor prosper in the twilight, cockshut light,
When I would sleece the wealthy passenger,
But lie and languish in a loathsome den:
Hated and spit at by the goers by.
And in that death may die, unpitied.
If I the next time that I meet the slave,
Cut not the nose from of the cowards face,
And trample on it, for this villainy.

Come lets go seek out Green I know heal swear


He were a villane and he would not swear,
I would make a peasant swear amongst his boys.
That ne'er durst say before but yea and no.
To be thus slouted of a coysterel.

Shakbag lets seek out green, in the morning
At the Alehouse butting Ardens house,
Watch thee out coming of that prick eard cur,
And then letme alone to handle him.

Sir get you back to billensgate,
And learn what time the tide will serve our turn,
Come to us in Paules, first go make the bed,
And afterwards go harken for the floude.
Come M. Franklin, you shall go with me.
This night I dreamed that being in a park,
A toil was picht to overthrow the dear,
And I upon a little rising hill,
Stood whistely watching for the herds approach,
Even there me thoughts a gentle slumber took me,
And sommond all my parts to sweet repose.
But in the pleasure of this golden rest,
An ill thewd foster had removed the toil,
And rounded me with that beguiling home,
Which late me thought was pitched to cast the dear,
With that he blew an evil sounding horne,
And at the noise an other heard man came:
With Fauchon drawn, and bent it at my breast.
Crying aloud thou art the game we seek,
With this I waked, and trembled every joint,
Like one oscured in a little bush,
That sees a lyon foraging about,
And when the dreadful forest King is gone,
He pries about, with timorous suspects
Throughout the thorny casements of the brake,
And will not think his person daungerles.
But quakes and showers though the cause be gone.
So trust me Franklin when I did awake,
I stood in doubt whether I waked or no:
Such great impression took this sond surprise:
God grant this vision bedeeme me any good.

This fantassie doth rise from Michaels fear,
Who being awaked with the noise he made,
His troubled senses, yet could take no rest.
And this I warrant you procured your dream.

It may be so God frame it to the best,
But often times my dreams presage to true.

To such as note their nightly fantasies,
Some one in twenty may incur belief,
But use it not, tis but a mockery,

Come M. Franklin wele now walk in Pau'es
And dine together at the ordinary,
And by my mans direction draw to the key,
And with the tide go down to Feuershame,
Say, M. Franklin shall it not be so?

At your good pleasure sir,
I'll bear you company.

Draw Shakbag for heers that villain Michael,


First Will lets hear what he can say,


Speak milkesope slave, never after speak.


For Gods sake sirs let me excuse my self.
For hear I swear by heaven and earth and all,
I did perform the outmost of my talk,
And left the doors unbolted and vnlockt,
But see the chance Franklin and my master,
Were very late conferring in the porch,
And Franklin left his napkin where he sat,
With certain gourlo knit mit, as he said
Being in bed, he did bethink himself,
And coming down, he found the doors unshut,
He locked the gates, and brought away the keys
For which offence my master rated me,
But now I am going to see what flood it is,
For with the tide my M. will away.
Where you may frons him well on Kaynum down,
A place well sitting such a stratagem.

Your excuse hath some what molysted my choler,
Why now Green tis better now nor ere it was,

But Michaell is this true?


As true as I report it to be true.


Then Michaell this shall be your penance,
To feast us all at the Salutation,
Where we will plat our purpose thoroughly.

And Michael, you shall bear no news of this tide
Because they two may be in Kaynu down before your M.

Why I'll agree to any thing you'll have me.
So you will except of my company.

Disturbed thoughts dryues me from company,
And dries my marrow with their watchfulnes,
Continual trouble of my moody brain,
Feebles my body by excess of drink,
And nippes me, as the bitter Northeast wind,
Doth check the tender blossoms in the spring.
Well fares the man how ere his cates do taste
That tables not with foul suspicion:
And he but pines amongst his delicats,
Whose troubled mind is stuffed with discontent.
My golden time was when I had no gould,
Thought then I wanted, yet I slept secure,
My daily toil, begat me nights repose:
My nights repose made daylight fresh to me.
But since I climbd the top bough of the tree,
And sought to build my nest among the clouds.
Each gentle stary gail doth shake my bed:
And makes me dread my downfall to the earth,
But whether doth contemplation carry me.
The way I seek to find where pleasure dwells,
Is hedged behind me that I cannot back,
But needs must on, although to dangers gate:
Then Arden perish thou by that decre.
For Green doth err the land and weed thee up,
To make my harvest nothing but pure corn.
And for his pains I'll heave him up a while,
And aftersmother him to have his wax.
Such bees as Green, must never live to sting.
Then is there Michael and the Painter to,
Chrefe actors to Ardens overthrow:
Who when they shall see me sit in Ardens seat,
They will insult upon me for my mede,
Or fright me by detecting of his end.
He none of that, for I can cast a bone,
To make these cures pluck out each others throat,
And then am I sole ruler of mine own:
Yet mistres Arden lives, but she's my self,
And holy Churchrites makes us two, but one,
But what for that I may not trust you Ales,
You have supplanted Arden for my sake,
And will extirpen me to plant another:
Tis fearful sleeping in a serpents bed.
And I will cleanly rid my hands of her.
But here she comes and I must flatter her.
How now Ales? what sad, and passionate?
Make me partaker of thy pensiveness:
Fire divided burns with lesser force.

But I will damn that fire in my breast.
Till by the force thereof, my part consume, ah Mosbie.

Such deep pathaires like to a cannons burst,
Discharged against a ruinated wall,
Breaks my relenting hart in thousand pieces,
Ungentle Ales thy sorrow is my sore,
Thou know it well, and tis thy policy,
To forge distressful looks, to wound a breast,
Where lies a hart, that dies where thou art sad,
It is not love, that loves to anger love.

It is not love, that loves to murder love.


How mean you that?


Thou know how dearly Arden loved me.


And then.


And then conceal the rest, for tis too bad,
Least that my words be carried with the wind.
And published in the world to both our shames,
I pray thee Mosbye let our springtime wither,
Our harvest else will yeald but loathsome weeds.
Forget I pray thee what hath past betwixt us,
For now I blush and tremble at the thoughts,

What are you changed?


I to my former happy life again.
From title of an odious strumpets name,
To honest Ardens wife, not Ardens honest wife,
Ha Mosbye tis thou hast rifled me of that,
And made me slanderous to all my kin:
Even in my forehead is thy name ingraueu,
Ameane Artifiecer, that lowe borne name,
I was bewitched, woe worth the hapless howre,
And all the causes that enchanted me:

Nay if thou ban, let me breath curses forth,
And if you stand so nicely at your fame:
Let me repent the credit I have lost,
I have neglected matters of import,
That would have stated me above thy state:
Forslowde advantages, and spurnd at time.
I Fortunes right hand* Mosbie hath forsoohe,
To take a wanton gi^lote by the lest.
I left the Marriage of ^n honest maid,
Whose dowry would have weighed down all thy wealth,
Whose beauty and demianor far exceeded thee.
This certain good I lost for changing bad,
And wrapped my credit in thy company.
I was bewitched, that is no theme of thine,
And thou unhallowed hast enchanted me:
But I will break thyspels, and excirsimes,
And put another sight upon these eyes,
That showed my hart, a raven for a dow.
Thou art not fair, I vieud thee not till now,
Thou art not kind, till now I knew the not.
And now the rain hath beaten of thy gilt,
Thy worthless copper shows thee conterset.
It grieves me not to see how foull thou art,
But maddes me that ever I thought thee fair,
Go get thee gone, a copesmate for thy hyndes.
I am too good to be thy favourite.

I now I see, and too soon find it true,
Which often hath been told me by my friends:
That Mosbie loves me not but for my wealth,
Which too incredulus I ne'er believed.
Nay hear me speak Mosbie a word or two,
I'll byte my tongue, if it speak bitterly:
Look on me Mosby, or I'll kill my self,
Nothing shall hide me from thy stormy look:
If thou cry war, there is no peace for me
I will do penance for offending thee,
And burn this prayer book, where I here use,
The holy word that had converted me,
See Mosbie I will tear away the leaves.
And al the leaves, and in this golden cover,
Shall thy sweet phrases, and thy letters dwell,
And thereon will I chiefly meditate,
And hold no other sect, but such devotion,
Wilt thou not look? is all thy love ouerwhelmde?
Wilt thou not hear? what malice stopes thine ears?
Why speaks thou not? what silence ties thy tongue?
Thou hast been sighted, as the eagle is,
And heard as quickly as the fearful hare:
And spoke as smoothly as an orator.
When I have bid thee hear, or see, or speak.
And art thou sensible in none of these?
Weigh all thy good turns, with this little fault,
And I deserve not Mosbies muddy looks.
A fence of trouble is not thickened still,
Be clear again, I'll ne'er more trouble thee,

O no, I am a base artificer,
My wings are feathred for a lowly sight,
Mosby fie no, not for a thousand pound,
Make love to you, why tis unpardonable,
We beggars must not breath where gentiles are.

Sweet Mosbie is as gentle as a King,
And I too blind, to judge him otherwise,
Flowers do some times spring in fallow lands,
Weeds in gardens, Roses grow on thorns.
So what so ere my Mosbies father was,
Himself valued gentle by his worth.

Ah how you women can insinuate,
And clear a trespass with your sweet set tongue,
I will forget this quarrel gentle Ales,
Provided I'll be tempted so no more:

Then with thy lips seal up this new made match


Soft Ales for here comes some body.


How now Bradshaw, whats the news with you


I have little news but here's a letter.
That M. Green importuned me to give you:

Go in Bradshaw call for a cuppe-of bear.

Tis almost suppertime, thou shalt stay with us.

We have mist of our purpose at London, but shall perform it by the way, We
thank our neighbour Bradshaw.

Yours Richard Green.



How likes my love the tennor of this letter?


Well, were his date complete and expired.


Ah would it were,
Then comes my happy howre.
Till then my bliss is mixed with bitter gall.
Come let us in to shun suspicion.

I to the gates of death to follow thee.


Come Will, see thy tools be in a redynes?
Is not thy Powder dank,
Or will thy flint stryke fire

Then ask me if my nose be on my face,
Or whether my tongue be frozen in my mouth.
Zounds here's a coil, you were best swear me on the intergatories, how many
Pistols I have took in hand,
Or whether I love the smell of gun powder,
Or dare abide the noise the dagge will make,
Or will not wink at flashing of the fire.
I pray thee shackbag let this answer thee.
That I have took more purses in this down,
Then ere thou handledst pistols in thy life.

I happily thou hast picked more in a throng.
But should I brag what booties I have took,
I think the overplus that's more then thine,
Would mount to a greater sum of money,
Then either thou, or all thy kin are worth.
Zounds I hate them as I hate a toad,
That cary a muscado in their tongue.
And scarce a hurting weapon in their hand.

O Groene, intolerable,
It is not for mine honour to bear this.
Why shakbag I did serve the King at Bulloyne,
And thou can brag of nothing that thou hast done.

Why so can Jack of Feuershame,
That sounded for a phillope on the nose:
When he that gave it him hollowed in his ear.
And he supposed a Cannon bullet hit him.

I pray you sirs list to Esops talk,
Whilst two stout dogs were striving for a bone,
There comes a cur, and stole it from them both,
So while you stand striving on these terms of manhood,
Arden escapes us and deceive us al.

Why he begun.


And thou shalt find I'll end.
I do but slip it until better time.
But if I do forget.

Well take your fittest standings, once more
Lime your twigs to catch this weary bird,
I'll leave you, and at your dags discharge
Make towards like the longing water dog,
That couches till the fowling piece be of:
Then ceases on the pray with eager mood,
Ah might I see him stretching forth his limbs,
As I have seen them beat their wings ere now,

Why that thou shalt see if he come this way,


Yes that he doth shakbag I warrant thee:
But brawl not when I am gone in any case,
But sirs be sure to speed him, when he comes,
And in that hope I'll leave you for an hour.

Twere best that I went back to Rochester,
The horse halts down right, it were not good
He travailed in such pain to feuershame:
Removing of a shoe may happily help it.

Well get you back to Rochester, but siirra see ye overtake us ere we come to
Raynum down,
For it will be very late ere we get home:

I God he knows, so doth Will and shakebagge,
That thou shalt never go further then that down,
And therefore have I pricked the horse on purpose,
Because I would not view the massacar.

Come M. Franklin onwards with your tale,


I assure you sir, you task me much,
A heavy blood is gathered at my hart,
And on the sudden is my wind so short:
As hinders the passage of my speech.
So ferse a qualm yet near assailed me:

Come M. Franklin let us go on softly,
The annoyance of the dust, or else some meat,
you eat at dinner, cannot brooke you:
I have been often so, and soon amended.

Do you remember where my tale did leave?


I, where the gentleman did chek his wife.


She being reprehended for the fact.
Witness produced that took her with the deed,
Her glove brought in, which there she left behind,
And many other assured Arguments:
He husband asked her whether it were not so.

her answer then, I wonder how she looked,
Having forsworn it with such vehement oaths,
And at the instant so approved upon her,

First did she cast her eyes down to the earth,
Watching the drops that fell amain from thence,
Then softly draws she forth her hand kercher,
And modestly she wypes her tear stained face:
Then hemd she out to clear her voice should seem,
And with a majesty addressed her self,
To encounter all their accusations.
Pardon me M. Arden I can no more:
This fighting at my hart, makes short my wind.

Come we are almost now at Raynum down,
Your pretty tale beguiles the weary way:
I would you were in state to tell it out.

Stand close Will I hear them cumming.


Stand to it Shakbag, and be resolute,


Is it so near night as it seems,
Or will this black faced evening have a shower?
What M. Arden, you are well met,
I have longd this fortnights day to speak with you,
You are a stranger man in the i'll of Shepny,

Your honours always bound to do you service,


Come you from London ne'er a man with you?


My man's coming after,
But her's my honest friend that came along with me.

My Lord protectors man I take you to be


I my good Lord, and highly bound to you,


You your friend come home sup with me.


I beseech your honour pardon me.
I have made a promise to a gentle man,
My honest friend to meet him at my house,
The occasion is great, or else would I wait on you.

Will you come tomorrow dine with me
And bring your honest friend along with you:
I have divers matters to talk with you about.

Tomorrow wele wait upon your honour,


One of you staye my horse at the top of the hill
What black Will, for whose purse wait you?
Thou wilt be hanged in Kent, when all is done.

Not hanged, God save your honour.
I am your bedesman, bound to pray for you,

I think thou ne'er saidest prayer in all thy life,
One of you give him a crown,
And sir leave this kind of life.
If thou be tainted for a penny matter,
And come in question surely thou wilt truss,
Come M. Arden let us be going,
Your way and mine lies four mile together.

The Devil break all your necks, at 4 miles end,
Zounds I could kill my self for very anger.
His Lordship chops me in, even when
My dagge was leaueld at his hart.
I would his crown were molten down his throat,

Arden thou hast wondrous holy luck,
Did ever man escape as thou hast done.
Well I'll discharge my pistol at the sky,
For by this bullet Arden might not die.

What is he down, is he dispatcht?


I in health towards Feuershame, to shame us all


The Devil he is, why sirs how escaped he?


When we were ready to shoot,
Comes my Lord Cheiny to prevent his death.

The Lord of heaven hath preserved him.


Preserved, a fig, the L. Cheiny hath preserved him
And bids him to a feast, to his house at shorlow:
But by the way, once more I'll meet with him,
And if all the Cheinies in the world say no,
I'll have a bullet in his breast to morrow,
Therefore come Green and let us to Feuershame.

I and excuse our selves to mistres Arden,
O how shele chafe when she hears of this.

Why i'll warrant you shell think we dare not do it


Why then let us go, tell her all the matter.
And plat the news to cut him of to morrow.

See how the howrs the gardeant of heavens gate
Have by their toil removed the darksome clouds.
That Soll may well deserve the trampled pace,
Wherein he wount to guide his golden car,
The season fits, come Franklin, let's a way.

I thought you did pretend some special hunt,
That made you thus cut short the time of rest.

It was no chase that made me rise so early,
But as I told thee yesternight to go to the I'll of Sheppy:
There to dine with my Lord Cheiny.
For so his honour late commanded me.

I such kind husbands seldom want excuses,
Home is a wild Cat, to a wandering wit,
The time hath been, would God it were not past,
That honours title nor a Lords command,
Could once have drawn you from these arms of mine,
But my deserts, or your deserves decay,
Or both, yet if true love may seem desert,
I merit still to have thy company.

Why I pray you sir, let her go along with us,
I am sure his honour will welcome her,
And us the more, for bringing her along.

Content, sir saddle your mistres nag.


No, begde favour merits little thanks,
If I should go, our house would run away,
Or else be stolen, therefore I'll stay behind.

Nay see how mistaking you are,
I pray thee go.

No no, not now.


Then let me leave thee satisfied in this,
That time nor place, nor persons alter me,
But that I hold thee de rer then my life.

That will be seen by your quick return.


And that shall be ere night and if I live.
Farewell sweet Ales, we mind to sup with thee.

Come Michaell are our horses ready?


I your horse are ready, but I am not ready,
For I have lost my purse,
With six and thirty shillings in it,
With taking up of my M. Nag.

Why I pray you let us go before,
Whilst he stays behind to seek his purse.

Go too sir, see you follow us to the i'll of sheppye,
To my Lord Cheynyes where we mean to dine.

So fair whether after you,
For before you lies, black Will and shakebag,
In the broom close, to close for you,
They'll be your ferrymen to long home,
But who is this the Painter, my corrival,
That would needs win M. Susan.

How now Michael how doth my Mistress,
And all at home?

Who susan Mosbye? sheis your Mistres too


I How doth she, and all the rest?


Al's well but susan she is sick,


Sick, of what disease?


Of a great fear.


A fear, of what?


A great fever.


A fever God forbid.


Yes faith, and of a lordaine too,
As big as your self.

M. Michaell the spleane prickles you.
Go too, you carry an eye over mistres susan.

I faith, to keep her from the Painter.


Why more from a Painter, then from a serving creature like your self.


Because you Painters make but a painting fable of a pretty wench, and spotle
her beauty with blotting.


What mean you by that?


Why that you Painters, paint lambs, in the lining of wenches peticots
And we serving men put horns to them, to make them become sheep.

Such another word wilcost you a cuffe or a knock


What with a dagger made of a pencil?
Faith tis too weak,
And therefore thou to weak to win susan.

Would susans love lay upon this stroke,


I'll lay my life, this is for susans love,
Stayed you behind your M. to this end?
Have you no other time to brable in
But now when serious matters are in hand?
Say Clarke, hast thou done the thing thou promised?

I hear it is, the very touch is death.


Then this I hope, if all the rest do fail,
Will catch M. Arden,
And make him wise in death, that lived a fool.
Why should he thrust his sickle in our corn,
Or what hath he to do with thee my love?
Or govern me that am to rule my self,
Forsooth for credit sake I must leave thee.
Nay he must leave to live, to live, that we may love,
May live may love for what is life but love?
And love shall last as long as life remains,
And life shall end, before my love depart.

Why whats love, without true constancy?
Like to a pillar built of many stones.
Yet neither with good mortar, well compact,
Nor semell, to fasten it in the joints.
But that it shakes with every blast of wind,
And being touched, straight falls unto the earth,
And buries all his haughty pride in dust.
No let our love be roc^es of Addamant,
Which time nor place, nor tempest can a sunder.

Mosbie leave protestations now,
And let us bethink us what we have to do:
Black Will and shakebag I have placed,
In the broom close watching Ardens coming,
Lets to them, and see what they have done.

Of ferry man, where art thou?


Here here, go before to the boat.
And I will follow you.

We have great haste, I pray thee come away.


Fie what a mist is here.


This mist my friend, is mystical,
Like to a good companions smoky brain,
That was half dround with new ale over night.

I were pity but his stull were opened,
To make more Chimney room.

Friend whats thy opinion of this mist.


I think tis like to a cursed wise in a lytlehouse,
That never leaves her husband till she have driven him out at doors, with a
wet pair of eyes,
Then looks he as if his house were a fire,
Or some of his friends dead.

Speaks thou this of thine own experience,


Perhaps I, perhaps no: For my wife is as other women are, that is to say,
governed by the Moon.


By the Moon, how I pray thee?


Na thereby lies a bargane.
And you shall not have it fresh and fasting.

Yes I pray thee good ferryman.


Then for this once, let it be midsommer Moon,
But yet my wife as another moon.

Another Moon.


I, and it hath influences and Celipses.


Why then by this reconing, you sometimes
Play the man in the Moon.

I but you had not best to meddle with that moon
Least I scratch you by the face, with my bramble bush,

I am almost stifled with this fog, come lets away


And sir as we go, lets us have some more of your bold yeomandry.


Nay by my troth sir, but flat knavery.


Oh Will where art thou?


Here shakbag, almost in hells mouth,
Where I can not see my way for smoke.

I pray thee speak still, that we may mete by the sound, for I shall fall into
some ditch or other, unless my seete see better then my eyes.


Did thou ever see better weather to run away with another mans wife, or
play with a wench at potfinger.


No this were a sine world for chandlers,
If this weather would last, for then a man
Should never dine nor sup without candle light,
But sir Will what horses are those that past?

Why, did thou hear any?


I that I did.


My life for thine, twas Arden and his companion
And then all our labour's lost,

Nay say not so for, if it be they, they may happily loose their way as we have
done
And then we may chance meet with them.

Come let us go on like a couple of blind pilgrims


Help Will help, I am almost drowned.


Whose that, that calls for help?


I was none here, twas thou thy self.


I came to help him that called for help,
Why how now? who is this that's in the ditch?
You are well enough served, to go without a guide such weather as this.

Sir what companies hath past your ferry this morning


None but a couple of gentlemen, that went to dine at my Lord cheyneis.


Shakbag did not I tell thee as much?


Why sir, will you have any letters carried to them


No sir, get you gone.


Did you ever see such a mist as this?


No, nor such a fool as will rather be bought then get his way.


Why sir, this is no hough monday, you are deceiud
Whats his name I pray you sir?

His name is black will.


I hope to see him one day hanged upon a hill.


See how the Sun hath cleared the foggy mist,
Now we have mist the mark of our intent.

Black Will and Shakbag, what make you heer
What is the deed don? is Arden dead.

What could a blinded man perform in arms?
Saw you not how till now, the sky was dark,
That neither horse nor man could be decerned,
Yet did we hear their horses as they past.

Have they escaped you then, and past the ferry?


I for a while, but here we two will stay.
And at their coming back meet with them once more,
Zounds I was ne'er so toylde in all my life,
In following so slight a task as this.

Now came thou so beraide?


With making false footing in the dark,
He needs would follow them without a guide.

Here's to pay for a fire and good cheer
Get you to Feuershame to the flower deluce,
Andrest your selves until some other time.

Let me alone, it most concerns my state.


I mistres Arden this will serve the turn,
In case we fall into a second fog.

These knaves will never do it, let us give it over


First tell me how you like my new device?
Soon when my husband is returning back,
You and I both marching arm in arm,
Like loving friends wele meet him on the way.
And boldly beard and brave him to his teeth:
When words grow hot, and blows begin to rise,
I'll call those cutters forth your tenement,
Who in a manner to take up the fray,
Shall wound my husband hornesbie to the death.

Ah fine devise, why this deserves a kiss.


Faith Dick Rede it is to little end.
His conscience is too liberal, and he too nigardly.
To part from any thing may do thee good.

He is coming from Shorlow as I understand,
Here i'll intercept him, for at his house
He never will vouchafe to speak with me:
If prayers and fair entreaties will not serve,
Or make no battery in his flintye breast.
I'll curse the carl and see what that will do.
Se where he comes, to further my intent,
M. Arden I am now bound to the sea,
My coming to you was about the plat of ground,
Which wrongfully you detain from me.
Although the rent of it be very small,
Yet will it help my wife and children:
Which here I leave in Feuershame God knows,
Needy and bare, for Christ sake let them have it,

Franklin hear thou this fellow speak?
That which he craves I dearly bought of him,
Although the rent of it was ever mine.
Sir you, that ask these questions,
If with thy clamarous impeaching tongue
Thou rail on me, as I have heard thou dost,
He lay thee up so close a twelve months day,
As thou shalt neither see the Son nor Moon,
Look to it, for as surely as I live,
I'll banish pity if thou use me thus.

What wist thou do me wrong, threat me too?
Nay then I'll tempt thee, Arden do thy worst,
God I beseech thee show some miracle,
On thee or thine, in plauging thee for this.
That plot of ground, which thou detains from me,
I speak it in an agony of spirit,
Be ruinous and fatal unto thee:
Either there be butcherd by thy dearest friends,
Or else be brought for men to wonder at.
Or thou or thine miscary in that place.
Or there run mad, and end thy cursed days,

Fie bitter knave bridle thine envious tongue,
For curses are like arrows shot upright,
Which falling down light on the suitors head.

Light where they will, were I upon the sea,
As oft I have in many a bitter storm,
And said a dreadful suthern flaw at hand,
The Pylate quaking at the doubtful storm,
And all the sailors praying on their knees,
Even in that fearful time would I fall down,
And ask of God, what ere betide of me,
Vengeance on Arden, or some misevent,
To show the world, what wrong the carl hath done,
This charge I'll leave with wy distresfull wife.
My children shall be taught such prayers as these,
And thus I go but leave my curse with thee.

It is the raylingest knave in christendom,
And oftentimes the villain will be mad,
It greatly matters not what he says,
But I assure you, I ne'er did him wrong.

I think so M. Arden.


Now that our horses are gone home before,
My wife may hapely mete me on the way,
For God knows she is grown passing kind of late,
And greatly changed from the old humour
Of her wounted frowardness.
And seeks by fair means to redeem old faults.

Happy the change, that alters for the best,
But see in any case you make no speech,
Of the cheer we had at my Lord Cheineis,
Although most bounteous and liberal,
For that will make her think her self more wronged,
In that we did carry her a long,
For sure she grieved that she was left behind,

Come Franklin, let us strain to mend our pace,
And take her unawares playing the cooke.
For I believe sheele strive to mend our cheer.

Why theirs no better creaturs in the world
Then women are, when they are in good humours.

Who is that? Mosbie, what so familiar?
Injurious strumpet, and thou ribald knave,
Not wine those arms.

I with a sugared kiss, let them untwine.


Ah Mosbie, perturde beast, bear this and all.


And yet no horned beast,
The horns are thine.

O monstrous, Nay then tis time to draw.


Help help, they murder my husband.


Zounds who iniures M. Mosbie.
Help Will I am hurt.

I may thank you Mistres arden for this wound,


Ah Arden what folly blinded thee?
Ah Ielious harebraine man what hast thou don,
When we to welcome thy intended sport.
Came lovingly to mete thee on thy way.
Thou drewst thy sword enraged with Ielousy,
And hur^e thy friend,
Whose thoughts were free from harm.
All for a woorthles kiss, and joining arms.
Both don but mir^ely to try thy patience.
And me unhappy that devised the Jest,
Which though begone in sporte, yet ends in blood.

Mary God defend me from such a Ieast.


Could thou not see us friendly smile on thee.
When we joined arms and when I kissed his cheek.
Hast thou not lately found me over kind?
Did thou not hear me cry they murder thee.
Called I not help to set my husband free:
No, ears and all were witcht, ah me accursed,
To link in liking with a frantic man,
Hence forth I'll be thy slave, no more thy wife:
For with that name I never shall content thee.
If He merry thou straight ways thinks me light.
If sad thou satest the sullens trouble me.
If well attired thou thinks I will be gadding,
If homely, I seem sluttish in thine eye.
Thus am I still, and shall be whill I die,
Poor wench abused by thy misgovernment,

But is it for truth, that neither thou nor he,
Entendedst malice in your misdemeanor.

The heavens can witness of our harmless thoughts


Then pardon me sweet Ales,
And forgive this fault:
Forget but this, and never see the like.
Impose me penance, and I will perform it:
For in thy discontent I find a death,
A death tormenting more then death it self,

Nay had thou loved me as thou doest pretend,
Thou would have marked the speeches of thy friend,
Who going wounded from the palce, he said
His skin was peirst only through my devise,
And if sad so row taint thee for this fault,
Thou would have followed him, and scene him dressed,
And cried him mercy whom thou hast misdone,
Ne'er shall my hart be cased till this be done.

Content thee sweet Ales thou shalt have thy will
What ere it be, For that I iniurde thee
And wronged my friend, shame scourges my offence,
Come thou thy self and go along with me,
And be a mediator twixt us two.

Why M. Arden, know you what you do,
Will you follow him that hath dishonourd you,

Why can thou prove I have been disloyal.


Why Mosbie traunt you husband with the horn,


I after he had reuyled him,
By the iniuryous name of periurde beast,
He knew no wrong could spyte an Ielious man,
More then the hateful naming of the horne.

Suppose tis true, yet is it dangerous.
To follow him whom he hath lately hurt,

A fault confessed is more then half a mends,
But men of such ill spirit as your self.
Work crosses and debates twixt man and wife.

I pray the gentle Franklin hold thy peace,
I know my wife consels me for the best,

I'll seek out mosby, where his wouud is dressed,
And salve his hapless quarrel if I may.

He whom the devil drives must go perforce,
Poor gentleman how soon he is bewitched,
And yet because his wife is the instrument,
His friends must not be laush in their speech,

Sir Green when was I so long in killing a man.


I think we shall never do it.
Let us give it over.

Nay Zounds wele kill him.
Though we be hanged at his door for our labour.

Thou know Green that I have lived in
London this twelve years.
Where I have made some go upon wooden legs,
For taking the wall on me,
Divers with silver noses, for saying,
There goes blackwill.
I have cracked as many blades,
As thou hast done Nutes,

O monstrous lye.


Faith in a manner I have.
The bawdy houses have paid me tribute,
There durst not a whore set up, unless she have aggreed
with me first, for-opning her shop windows.
For a crosee word of a Tapster,
I have pierced one barrel after another, with my dagger,
And held him be the ears till all his bear hath run out,
In Temes street a brewers carte was like to have run
over me, I made no more ado, but went to the clark
and cut all the natches of his tales,
and beat them about his head.
I and my company have taken the Constable from his watch,
And carried him about the fields on a coltstaffe.
I have broken a Sariants head with his own mace,
And build whom I list with my sword and buckler.
All the tenpenny alehouse would stand every morning,
With a quart pot in his ha^d,
Saying will it please your worship drink:
He that had not done so had been sure to have had tis
Singne pulled down, his latice borne away the next right
To conclude, what have I not done it cannot do this,
Doubtless he is preserved by Miracle.

Hence Will, here comes M. Arden.


Ah gentle michaell art thou sure their friends


Why I saw them when they both shoke hands,
When Mosbie bled, he even wept for sorrow:
And raild on Franklin that was cause of all.
No sooner came the Surgen in at doors,
But my M. took to his purse, and gave him money.
And to conclude, sent me to bring you word,
That Mosbie, Franklin, Bradshaw, Adam fewle,
With diverse of his neighbours, and his friends,
Will come and sup with you at our house this night.

Ah gentle Michaell, run thou back again,
And when my husband walks into the fair,
Bid Mosbie steal from him, and come to me.
And this night shall thou and Susan be made sure,

I'll go tell him.


And as thou go, tell Iohn cooke of our guests,
And bid him lay it on, spare for no coast.

Nay and there be such cheer, we will bid our selves
Mistres Arden, Dick Green I do mean to sup with you,

And welcome shall you be, ah gentlemen,
Now must you of your purpose yesternight?

Twas long of shak^bag that unlucky villain.


Thou doest me wrong, I did as much as any.


Nay, then M. Ales, I'll tell you how it was,
When he should have locked with both his huts,
He to a bravery florisht over his head
With that comes Franklin at him lustely
And hurts the slave, with that he slinks away,
Now his way had been to have come hand and feet,
one and two round at his costerd.
He like a loose bears his sword point half a yard out
of danger, I lye here for m^ life.
If the deui^l come, and he have no more strength then sense
He shall never beat me from this ward,
He stand to it, a buckler in a skilful hand,
Is as good as a castle.
Nay tis better then a sconce, for I have tried it.
Mosbie perceiving this, began to faint.
With that comes Arden with his arming sword,
And thrust him through the shoulder in a tryce.

I but I wonder why you both stood still.

Faith I was so amazed I could not strike.


Ah sirs had he yesternight been slain,
For every drop of his detested blood,
I would cranime in Angels in thy fist.
And kissed thee too, and hugd thee in my arms.

Patient your self, we can not help it now,
Green and we two, will dog him through the fair,
And stab him in the crowd, and steal away,

It is unpossible, but here comes he,
That will I hope invent some surer means.
Sweet Mosbie hide thy arm, it kills my hart.

I mistres Arden, this is your favour,


Ah say not so for when I saw thee hurt,
I could have toke the weapon thou letst fall,
And cunne at Arden, for I have sworn,
That these mine eyes offended with his sight,
Shall never close, till Ardens be shut up,
This night I rose and walked about the chamber.
And twice or thrice, I thought to have murdered him,

What in the night, then had we been undone,


Why, how long shall he live?


Fraith Ales no longer then this night.
Black Will and shakbag, will you two
Perform the complot that I have laid.

I or else think me as a villain.


And rather then you shall want,
He help my self.

You M. Green shall single Franklin forth,
And hold him with a long tale of strange news:
That he may not come home till suppertime.
I'll fetch M. Arden home, we like friends.
Will play a game or two at tables here,

But what of all this?
Now shall he be stain?

Why black Will and shakebag locked within the countinghouse,
Shall at a certain watchword given, rush forth,

What shall the watch word be?


(Now I take you) that shall be the word.
But come not forth before in any case.

I warrant you, but who shall lock me in?


That will I do, thou'st keep the key thy self.


Come M. Green, go you along with me.
See all things ready Ales against we come.

Take no care for that, send you him home.
And if he ere go forth again, blame me,
Come black Will that in mine eyes art fair,
Next unto Mosbie do I honour thee,
Instead of fair words and large promises,
My hands shall play you golden harmony,
Now like you this? say, will you do it sirs?

I and that bravely too, mark my device.
Place Mosbie being a stranger in a chair,
And let your husband sit upon a stool,
That I may come behind him cunningly,
And with a to well pull him to the ground,
Then stab him till his flesh be as a sine,
That done bear him behind the Abbey,
That those that find him murdered, may suppose
Some slave or other killed him for his gold.

A fine device, you shall have twenty pound,
And when he is dead, you shall have forty more.
And least you might be suspected staying here,
Michaell shall saddle you two lusty geldings.
Ride whether you will to Scotland or to Wales.
He see you shall not lack, where ere you be.

Such words would make one kill 1000. men.
Give me the key, which is the counting house?

Here would I stay, and still encourage you,
But that I know how resolute you are.

Lush you are too faint hearted, we must do it.


But Mosbie will be there, whose very looks,
Will ad vnwounted courage to my thought,
And make me the first that shall adventure on him,

Lush get you gone, tis we must do the deed.
When this door oppens next look for his death

Ah, would be now were here, that it might oppen
I shaling more be closed in Ardens arms,
That like the snakes of black Tisiphone,
Sting me with their enbraceings, mosbies arms
Shall compass me, and were I made a star,
I would have none other spheres but those.
There is no nedor, but in Mosbies lypes,
Had chaste Diana kissed him, she like me
Would grow love sick, and from her watery bower,
Fling down Endimion and snath him up:
Then blame not me, that stay a silly man,
Not half so lovely as Endimion.

Mistres my master is coming hard by,


Who comes with him.


No body but mosbye.


That's will michaell, fetch in the tables,
And when thou hast done, stand before the countinghouse door.

Why so?


Black will is locked within, to do the deed.


What shull he die to night?


I michaell*


But shall not susan know it?


Yes for shele be as seereete as our selves.


That's brave, I'll go fetch the tables.


But michaell hark to me a word or two,
When my husband is come in lock the street door:
He shall be murdered or the guests come in.
Husband what mean you to bring mosby home?
Although I wished you to be reconciled,
Twas more for fear of you, then love of him,
Black Will and Green, are his companions,
And they are cutters, and may cut you short,
Therefore I thought it good to make you friends.
But wherefore do you bring him hither now,
You have given me my supper with his sight,

M. Arden me thinks your wife would have me gone.


No good M. Mosbie, women will be prating,
Ales bid him welcome, he and I are friends.

You may enforce me to it, if you will.
But I had rather die then bid him welcome,
Die company hath purchest me ill friends.
And therefore will I ne'er frequent it more.

Oh how cunningly she can dissemble.


Now he is here you will not serve me so.


I pray you be not angree or displeased
I'll bid him welcome seeing you'll have it so,
You are welcome M. Mosbie will you sit down.

I know I am welcome to your loving husband,
But for your self, you speak not from your hart.

And if I do not, sir think I have cause.


Pardon me M. Arden, I'll away.


No good M. Mosbie.


We shall have guests enough, though you go hence


I pray you M. Arden let me go


I pray thee Mosbie let her prate her fill,


The doors are open sir, you may be gone.


Nay that's a lye, for I have locked the doors.


Sir fetch me a cup of Wine.
I'll make them friends.
And gentle M. Ales, seeing you are so stout,
You shall begin, frown not, I'll have it so.

I pray you meddle with that you have to do.


Why Ales? how can I do too much for him,
Whose life I have endangered without cause.

Tis true, seeing twas partly through my means
I am content to drink to him for this once.
Here M. Mosbie, and I pray you hence forth,
Be you as strange to me, as I to you
Your company hath purchased me ill friends.
And I for you God knows, have undeserved
Been ill spoken of in every place.
Therefore henceforth frequent my house no more.

I'll see your husband in despite of you,
Yet Arden I protest to thee by heaven,
Thou ne'er shalt see me more, after this night.
I'll go to Room rather then be forsworn.

Tush I'll have no such vows made in my house.


Yes I pray you husband let him swear,
And on that condition Mosbie pledge me here.

I as willingly as I mean to live.


Come Ales, is our supper ready yet?


It will by then you have plaid a game at tables,


Come M. Mosbie, what shall we play for?


Three games for a french crown sir,

And please you.


Content.


Can he not take him yet? what a spite is that?


Not yet Will, take heed he see thee not?


I fear he will spy me, as I am coming,


To prevent that, creep betwixt my legs


One ace, or else I lose the game.


Mary sir there's two for failing.


Ah M. Arden (now I can take you)


Mosbie, Michaell, Ales, what will you do?


Nothing but take you up sir, nothing else.


Theirs for the pressing Iron you told me of.


And there's for the ten pound in my sleeve,


What, groans thou? nay then give me y^ weapo,
Take this for hindering Mosbies love and mine.

D Mistres.


Ah that villain will betray us all,


Tush fear him not, he will be secrete,


Why dost thou think I will betray my self?


In South warke dwells a bonnie northern lass,
The widow Chambley, i'll to her house now,
Ind if she will not give me harborough,
He make booty of the queen even to her smock.

Shift for your selves we two will leave you now


First lay the body in the countinghouse.


We have our gould mistress Ales, adieu,
Mosbie farewell, and Michaell farewell too.

Mistres, the guests are at the doors.
Hearken they knock, what shall I let them in?

Mosbie go thou bear them company.
And susan fetch water and wash away this blood,

The blood cleaves to the ground will not out


But with my nailes i'll scrape away the blood,
The more I strive the more the blood appears:

Whats the reason M. can you tell?


Because I blush not at my husbands death.


Now now, whats the matter? is all well?


I well, if Arden were alive again.
In vain we strive, for here his blood remains,

Why strew rushes on it, can you not,
This wench doth nothing fall unto the work.

Twas thou that made me murder him,


What of that?


Nay nothing Mosbie so it be not known.


Keep thou it close, and tis unpossible,


Ah but I can not, was he not stain by me,
My husbands death torments me at the hart.

It shall not long torment thee gentle Ales,
I am thy husband, think no more of him.

Now now M. Arden? what aisle you weep?


Because her husband is abroad so late.
A couple of Ruffians threatened him yesternight,
And she poor soul is afraid he should be hurt.

It nothing else? tush heal be here anon.


Now M. Arden lack you any guests.


Ah M. Green, did you se my husband lately,


I saw him walking behind the Abbey even now,


I do not like this being out so late,
M. Franklin where did you leave my husband.

Believe me I saw him not since Morning,
Fear you not heal come anon, mean time
You may do well to bid his guests sit down.

I so they shall, M. Bradshaw sit you there,
I pray you be content, I'll have my will.
M. Mosbie sit you in my husbands seat.

Susan shall thou and I wait on them,
Or and thou saith the word let us sit down too.

Peace we have other matters now in hand.
I fear me Michael al will be betrayed.

Tush so it be known that I shall marry thee in the
Morning, I care not though I be hanged ere night.
But to prevent the worst, I'll by some rats bane.

Why Michael wilt thou poison thy self?


No, but my mistres, for I fear shele tell.


Tush Michel fear not her, she's wise enough.


Sir Michell gives a cup of bear.
M. Arden, heers to your husband.

My husband?


What ails you woman, to cry so suddenly.


Ah neighbours a sudden qualm came over my hart
My husbands being forth torments my mind.
I know some thing's amiss, he is not well.
Or else I should have heard of him ere now.

She will undo us, through her foolishnes.


Fear not M. Arden, he's well enough.


Tell not me, I know he is not well,
He was not wount for to stay thus late.
Good M. Franklin go and seek him forth,
And if you find him send him home to me.
And tell him what a fear he hath put me in.

Ilyke not this, I pray God all be well
I'll seek him out, and find him if I can.

Michaell how shall I do to rid the rest away?


Leave that to my charge, let me alone,
Tis very late M. Bradshaw,
And there are many false knaves abroad,
And you have many narrow lanes to pas.

Faith friend Michaell and thou says true,
Therefore I pray thee lights forth, and lends a linck

Michael bring them to the doors, but do not stay,
You know I do not love to be alone.
Go Susan and bid thy brother come,
But wherefore should he come? Here is nought but fear.
Stay Susan stay, and help to counsel me.

Alas I counsel, fear frights away my wits,


See Susan where thy quandam Master lies,
Sweet Arden smeard in blood and filthy gore.

My brother, you, and I, shall rue this deed.


Come susan help to lift his body forth,
And let our salt tears be his obsequies.

Now now Ales whether will you bear him


Sweet Mosbie art thou come?
Then weep that will.
I have my wish in that I joy thy sight.

Well it houes us to be circumspect.


I for Franklin thinks that we have murdered him.


I but he can not prove it for his life,
Wele spend this night in dalliance and in sport.

O mistres the Mayor and all the watch,
Are coming towards our house with glaues bills.

Make the door fast, let them not come in,


Tell me sweet Ales how shall I escape?


Out at the back door, over the pyle of wood.
And for one night lie at the flower deluce,

That is the next way to betray my self.


Alas M. Arden the watch will take me here,
And cause suspicion, where else would be none.

Why take that way that M. Mosbie doth,
But first convey the body to the fields.

Until to morrow, sweet Ales now farewell,
And see you confess nothing in any case.

Be resolute M. Ales, betray us not,
But cleave to us as we will stick to you,

Now let the indge and juries do their worst,
My house is clear, and now I sear them not.

As we went it snowed al the way,
Which makes me fear, our footsteps will be spied.

Peace fool, the snow will cover them again.


But it had done before we came back again.


Hark hark, they knock,
go Michaell let them in.
Now now M. Mayor, have you brought my husband home

I saw him come into your house an hour ago


You are deceived, it was a Londoner,


Mistres Arden know you not one that is called black Will.


I know none such, what mean these questions


I have the counsels warrant to aprehend him


I am glad it is no worse.
Why M. mayor think you I harbour any such?

We are informd that here he is.
And therefore pardon us, for we must search.

I search and spare you not, through every room,
Were my husband at home, you would not offer this,
M. Franklin what mean you come so sad.

Arden thy husband, and my friend, is slain,


Ah, by whom? M. Franklin can you tell?


I know not, but behind the abbey,
There helyes murdered in most piteous case,

But M. Franklin are you sure tis he,


I am too sure, would God I were deceived.


Find out the Murthrers let them be known,


I so they shall, come you along with us.


Wherefore?


know you this handtowel and this knife?


Ah michael through this thy negligence.
Thou hast betrayed and undone us all.

I was so afraid, I knew not what I did,
I thought I had thrown them both into the well.

It is the pigs blood we had to supper.
But wherefore stay you? find out the murthrers.

I fear me you'll prove one of them your self.


I one of them, what mean such questions.


I fear me he was murdered in this house.
And carried to the fields, for from that place,
Backwards and forwards may you see,
The print of many feet within the snow,
And look about this chamber where we are,
And you shall find part of his giltles blood,
For in his slipshoe did I find some rushes.
Which argues he was murdered in this room.

Look in the place where he was wont to sit.
See see his blood it is too manifest,

It is a cup of Wine that michaell shed.


I truly.


It is his blood, which strumpet thou hast shed,
But if I live thou and thy accomplices,
Which have conspired and wrought his death,
Shall rue it.

Ah M. Franklin God and heaven can tell,
I loved him more then all the world beside.
But bring me to him let me see his body.

Bring that villain and mosbies sister too,
And one of you go to the flower deluce.
And seek for mosbie, and apprehend him to.

The widow chambly in her husbands days I kept
And now he's dead, she is grown so stout
She will not know her old companions,
I came thither thinking to have had
Harbour as I was wount
And she was ready to thrust me out at doors,
But whether she would or no, I got me up,
And as she followed me I spurnd her down the stairs,
And broke her neck, and cut her tapsters throat,
And now I am going to sting them in the Temes,
I have the gould, what care I though it be known?
I'll cross the water and take sanctuary.

See M. Arden where your husband lies.
Confess this foul fault and be penitent.

Arden sweet husband, what shall I say?
The more I found his name, the more he bleeds.
This blood condemns me, and in gushing forth
Speaks as it falls, and asks me why I did it,
Forgive me Arden, I repent me now,
And would my death save thine, thou should not dye,
Rise up sweet Arden and enjoy thy love.
And frown not on me when we mete in heaven,
In heaven I love thee, though on earth I did not,

Say Mosby what made thee murder him,


Study not for an asnwer, look not down
His purse and girdle found at thy beds head,
Witness sufficiently thou did the deed.
It bootless is to swear thou did it not,

I hired black Will and Shakebagge, Ruffynes both,
And they and I have done this murthrous deed,
But wherefore stay we?
Come and bear me hence.

Those Ruffians shall not escape,
I will up to London, and get the counsels warrant to apprehend them.

Shakebag I hear hath taken sanctuary,
But I am so pursued with hues and cries,
For petty robberies that I have done,
That I can come unto no Sanctuary.
Therefore must I in some Oyster boat,
At last, be fain to go a board some Hoye.
And so to Flushing there is no staying here,
At Sittinburgh the watch was like to take me.
And had I not with my buckler covered my head,
And run full blank, at all adventures,
I am sure I had ne'er gone further then that place,
For the Constable had 20 warrands to apprehend me,
Besides that, I robbed him and his Man once at Gades hill,
Farewell England, I'll to Flushing now.

Come make haste bring away the prisoners.


M. Arden you are now going to God,
And I am by the law condemned to die.
About a letter I brought from M. Green,
I pray you M. Arden speak the truth,
Was I ever privy to your intent or no?

What should I say?
You brought me such a letter.
But I dare swear thou knew not the contents.
Leave now to trouble me with wordly things.
And let me meditate upon my saviour Christ,
Whose blood must save me for the blood I shed,

How long shall I live in this hell of grief?
Convey me from the presence of that strumpet.

Ah but for thee I had never been strumpet
What can not oaths and prote stations do?
When men have opportunity to woe.
I was too young to sound thy villainies.
But now I find it, and repent too late.

Ah gentle brother, wherefore should I die.
I knew not of it, till the deed was don.

For thee I morn more then for my self,
But let it suffice, I can not save thee now,

And if your brother and my Mistres.
Had not promised me you in marriage,
I had ne'er given consent, to this foul deed.

Leave to accuse each other now,
And listen to the sentence I shall give.
Bear Mosbie and his sister to London straight,
Where they in smithfield must be executed.
Bear M. Arden unto Canterburye,
Where her sentence is she must be burnt.
Michaell and Bradshaw in Feuershame
must suffer death.

Let my death make a mends for all my sins,


Fie upon women, this shall be my song,
But bear me hence, for I have lived to long.

Seeing no hope on earth, in heaven is my hope.


Faith I care not seeing I die with Susan.


My blood be on his head that gave the sentence,


To speedy execution with them all.


Thus have you seen the truth of Ardens death
As for the Ruffians, Shakbag and black Will,
The one took Sanctuary, and being sent for out.
Was murdered in Southwark, as he past
To Greenewitch, where the Lord Protector lay.
Black Will was burnt in flushing on a stage.
Green was hanged at Osbridge in Rent.
The Painter fled, how he dyed we know not.
But this above the rest is to be noted,
Arden lay murdered in that plot of ground,
Which he by force and violence held from Rede.
And in the grass his bodies print was seen,
Two years and more after the deed was done
Gentlemen we hope you'll pardon this naked Tragedy,
Wherein no filed points are foilted in,
To make it gracious to the ear or eye.
For simple trusth is gracious enough:
And needs no other points of glossing stuff.


