YOur silence and attention worthy friends, (sense,
That your free spirits may with more pleasing
Relish the life of this our active scene,
To which intent, to calm this murmuring breath,
We ring this round with our invoking spells,
If that your listening ears be yet prepared
To entertain the subject of our play,
Lend us your patience.
Tis Peter Fabell a renowned Scholar,
Whose fame hath still been hitherto forgot
By all the writers of this latter age.
In Middle-sex his birth and his abode,
Not full seven mile from this great famous City
That for his fame in sleights and magic won,
Was called the merry Fiend of Edmonton.
If any here make doubt of such a name,
In Edmonton yet fresh unto this day,
Fixed in the wall of that old ancient Church
His monument remains to be seen;
His memory yet in the mouths of men,
That whilst he lived he could deceive the Devil.
Imagine now that whilst he is retired,
From Cambridge back unto his native home,
Suppose the silent sable visagde night,
Casts her black curtain over all the world,
And whilst he sleeps within his silent bed,
Toylde with the studies of the passed day:
The very time and hour wherein that spirit
That many years attended his command;
And often times twixt Cambridge and that town,
Had in a minute borne him through the air,
By composition twixt the fiend and him,
Comes now to claim the Scholar for his due.
Behold him here laid on his restless couch,
His fatal chime prepared at his head,
His chamber guarded with these sable slights,
And by him stands that Necromanticke chair,
In which he makes his direful invocations,
And binds the fiends that shall obey his will,
Sit with a pleased eye until you know
The Commicke end of our sad Tragic show.
What means the tolling of this fatal chime,
O what a trembling horror strikes my hart!
My stiffened hair stands upright on my head,
As do the bristles of a porcupine.

Fabell awake, or I will bear thee hence headlong to hell.

Ha, ha, why dost thou wake me?
Coreb, is it thou?

Tis I.

I know thee well, I hear the watchful dogs,
With hollow howling tell of thy approach,
The lights burn dim, affrighted with thy presence:
And this distempered and tempestuous night
Tells me the air is troubled with some Devil.

Come, art thou ready?

Whither? or to what?

Why Scholar this the hour my date expires,
I must depart and come to claim my due.

Hah, what is thy due?

Fabell, thy self,

O let not darkness hear thee speak that word,
Lest that with force it hurry hence amain,
And leave the world to look upon my woe
Yet overwhelm me with this globe of earth,
And let a little sparrow with her bill,
Take but so much as she can bear away,
That every day thus losing of my load,
I may again in time yet hope to rise.

Did thou not write thy name in thine own blood?
And drewst the formal deed twixt thee and me,
And is it not recorded now in hell?

Why come thou in this sterne and horrid shape?
Not in familiar sort as thou wast wont.

Because the date of thy command is out,
And I am master of thy skill and thee.

Coreb, thou angry and impatient spirit,
I have earnest business for a private friend,
Reserve me spirit until some further time.

I will not for the mines of all the earth.

Then let me rise, and ere I leave the world,
Dispatch some business that I have to do,
And in mean time repose thee in that chair.

Fabell, I will.

O that this soul that cost so great a price,
As the dear precious blood of her redeemer,
Inspirde with knowledge, should by that alone
Which makes a man so mean unto the powers,
Even lead him down into the depth of hell,
When men in their own pride strive to know more then man should know!
For this alone God cast the Angles down,
The infinity of Arts is like a sea,
Into which when man will take in hand to sail
Further then reason, which should be his pilot,
Hath skill to guide him, losing once his compass,
He falls to such deep and dangerous whirlpools,
As he doth lose the very sight of heaven:
The more he strives to come to quiet harbour,
The further still he finds himself from land,
Man striving still to find the depth of evil,
Seeking to be a God, becomes a Devil.

Come Pabell hast thou done?

Yes, yes, come hither.

Fabell, I cannot.

Cannot, what ails your hollowness?

Good Fabell help me.

Alas where lies your grief? some Aqua-vitae,
The Deuil's very sick, I fear hee'le die,
For he looks very ill.

Dare thou deride the minister of darkness?
In Lucifers dread name Coreb comures thee
To set him free.

I will not for the mines of all the earth,
Unless thou give me liberty to see,
Seven fiends more before thou seas on me.

Fabell, I give it thee.

Swear damned fiend.

Unbind me, and by hell I will not touch thee,
Till seven years from this hour be full expired.

Enough, come out.

A vengeance take thy art,
Live and convert all piety to evil,
Never did man thus ouer-reach the Devil;
No time on earth like Phaetentique flames,
Can have perpetual being. I'll return
To my infernal mansion, but be sure
Thy seven years done, no trick shall make me tarry,
But Coreb, thou to hell shalt Fabell carry.

Then thus betwixt us two this variance ends,
Thou to thy fellow Fiends, I to my friends.

WElcome good knight to the George at Waltha,
My free-hold, my tenements, goods, chattels,
Madam here's a room is the very Homer and Iliads of a lodging, it hath none
of the four elements in it, I built it out of the

Center, and I drink near the less sack.
Welcome my little wast of maiden-heads, what?
I serve the good Duke of Norfolke.

God a mercy my good host Blague,
Thou hast a good seat here.

Tis correspondent or so, there's not a Tartarian
Nor a Carrier, shall breath upon your geldings,
They have villainous rank feet, the rogues,
And they shall not sweat in my linen.
Knights and Lords too have been drunk in my house,
I thank the destinies.

Pre'the good sinful Innkeeper, will that corruption thine
Ostler look well to my geldings. Hay, a pox a these rushes.

You Saint Dennis, your geldings shall walk without doors, and cool his
feet for his masters sake by the body of S George I have an excellent
intellect to go steal some venison now when wast thou in the forest?


Away you stale mess of white broth: Come hither sister, let me help you.


Mine Host is not Sir Richard Mounchensey come yet according to our appointment
when we last dined here?


The knight's not yet apparent marry here's a forerunner that summons a parle,
and saith, heel be here top and top-gallant presently.


Tis well good mine host, go down and see breakfast be provided.


Knight, thy breath hath the force of a woman, it takes me down, I am for the
baser element of the kitchen: I retire like a valiant soldiers face point
blank to the foe-man; or like a Courtier that must not show the Prince his
posteriors; vanish to know my canuasadoes and my interrogatories, for I serve
the good Duke of Norfolke.


How doth my Lady, are you not weary Madam?
Come hither, I must talk in private with you,
My daughter Milliscent must not ouer-heare.

I, whispring, pray God it tend my good,
Strange fear assails my heart, usurps my blood.

You know our meeting with the knight Mounehensey,
Is to assure our daughter to his heir.

Tis without question.

Two tedious winters have past ore since first,
These couple loved each other, and in passion
Glewd first their naked hands with youthful moisture,
Just so long on my knowledge.

And what of this?

This morning should my daughter lose her name,
And to Mounchenseys house convey our arms,
Quartered within his scutcheon; th'affiance made
Twixt him and her, this morning should be sealed.

I know it should.

But there are crosses wife, here's one in Waltham,
Another at the Abbey; and the third
At Cheston, and tis ominous to pass
Any of these without a pater-noster:
Crosses of love still thwart this marriage,
Whilst that we two like spirits walk in night,
About those stony and hard hearted plots.

O God, what means my father?

For look you wife, the riotous old knight,
Hath o'rerun his annual revenue,
In keeping jolly Christmas all the year,
The nostrilles of his chimney are still stuffed,
With smoke more chargeable then Cane-tobacco,
His hawks devour his fattest dogs whilst simple,
His leanest cures eato him hounds carrion
Besides, I heard of late his younger brother,
Or Turkey merchant hath sure suck'de the knight,
By means of some great losses on the sea,
That you conceive me, before God all nought,
His seat is weak, thus each thing rightly scand,
You'll see a flight wife, shortly of his land.

Treason to my hearts truest sovereign,
How soon is love smothered in foggy gain?

But how shall we prevent this dangerous match?

I have a plot, a trick, and this it is,
Under this colour I'll break off the match;
I'll tell the knight that now my mind is changed
For marrying of my daughter, for I intend
To send her unto Cheston Nunnery.

O me accursed!

There to become a most religious Nun.

I'll first be buried quick.

To spend her beauty in most private prayers.

I'll sooner be a sinner in forsaking
Mother and father.

How dost like my plot?

Exceeding well, but is it your intent
She shall continue there?

Continue there? Ha, ha, that were a jest,
You know a virgin may continue there,
A twelve month and a day only on trial,
There shall my daughter sojourn some three months,
And in mean time I'll compass a fair match
Twixt youthful Ierningham, the lusty heir
Of Sir Raph Ierningham dwelling in the forest,
I think they will both come hither with Mounchensey.

Your care argues the love you bear our child,
I will subcribe to any thing you'll have me.

You will subscribe to it, good, good, tis well,
Love hath two chairs of state, heaven and hell:
My dear Mounchensey, thou my death shalt rue,
Ere to thy heart Milliscent prove untrue.

Ostlers, you knaves and commanders, take the horses of the knights and
competitors: your honourable hulks have put into harborough, theile take in
fresh water here, and I have provided clean chamber-pots.


The destinies be most neat Chamberlains to these swaggering puritanes,
knights of the subsidy.


God a mercy good mine host.

Thanks good host Blague.

Room for my case of pistols that have Greek and Latin bullets in them,
let me cling to your flanks my nimble Giberalters, and blow wind in your calves
to make them swell bigger: Ha, I'll caper in mine own fee-simple, away with
puntillioes, and Orthography: I serve the good Duke of Norfolke. Bilbo. Tuere
tu patulae recu^ns sub tegmine fagi.


Truly mine host, Bilbo, though he be somewhat out of fashion, will be your
one y blade still I have a villainous sharp stomach to slice a breakfast.


Thou shalt have it without any more discontinuance, releases, or atturnement;
what? we know our terms of hunting; and the sea-card.


And do you serve the good duke of Norfolke still?

Still, and still, and still, my soldier of S Quintus, come, follow me, I have
Charles wane below in a but of sack, 'twill glister like your Crab^fi^h.


You have fine Scholler-like terms, your Coopers Dixionary is your only
book to study in a cellar, a man shall find very strange words in it: come my
host, lets serve the good duke of Norfolke.


And still, and still, and still my boy I'll serve the good duke of Norfolke.


Good Sir Arthur Clare.

What Gentleman is that? I know him not.

Tis M. Fabell Sir a Cambridge scholar,
My sons dear friend.

Sir, I entreat you know me.

Command me sir, I am affected to you
For your Mounchenseys sake.

Alas for him,
I not respect whether he sink or swim,
A word in private Sir Raph Ierningham.

Me thinks your father looks strangely on me,
Say love, why are you sad?

I am not sweet,
Passion is strong, when woe with woe doth meet.

Shall's in to breakfast, after we'll conclude
The cause of this our coming, in and feed,
And let that usher a more serious deed.

Whilst you desire his grief, my heart shall bleed.

Raymond Mounchensey come be frolic friend,
This is the day thou hast expected long.

Pray God dear Harry Clare it prove so happy.

There's nought can alter it, be merry lad.

There's nought shall alter it, be lively Raymond,
Stand any opposition against thy hope,
Art shall confront it with her largest scope.

Good old Mounchensey, is thy hap so ill,
That for thy bounty and thy royal parts,
Thy kind alliance should be held in scorn,
And after all these promises by Clare,
Refuse to give his daughter to thy son,
Only because thy Revenues cannot reach,
To make her dowage of so rich a jointure,
As can the heir of wealthy Ierningham?
And therefore is the false fox now in hand,
To strike a match betwixt her and the other,
And the old gray-beards now are close together,
Plotting it in the garden. Is't even so?
Raymond Mounchensey, boy, have thou and I
Thus long at Cambridge read the liberal Arts,
The Metaphysickes, Magic, and those parts,
Of the most secret deep philosophy?
Have I so many mclancholy nights
Watched on the top of Peter-house highest tower?
And come we back unto our native home,
For want of skill to lose the wench thou love?
We'll first hang Enuill in such rings of mist
As never rose from any dampish fen,
I'll make the brinde sea to rise at Ware,
And drown the marshes unto Stratford bridge,
I'll drive the Dear from Waltham in their walks,
And scatter them like sheep in every field:
We may perhaps be crossed, but if we be,
He shall cross the devil that but crosses me.
But here comes Raymond disconsolate sad,
And here's the gallant that must have the wench.
I prithee Raymond leave these solemn dumps,
Revive thy spirits, thou that before hast been,
More watchful then the day-proclayming cock,
As sportive as a Kid, as frank and merry
As mirth her self.
If ought in me may thy content procure,
It is thine own thou may thy self assure.

Ha Ierningham, if any but thy self
Had spoke that word, it would have come as cold
As the bleak Northern winds, upon the face
Of winter.
From thee they have some power upon my blood,
Yet being from thee, had but that hollow sound,
Come from the lips of any living man,
It might have won the credit of mine ear,
From thee it cannot.

If I understand thee, I am a villain,
What, dost thou speak in parables to thy friends?

Come boy and make me this same groaning love,
Troubled with stitches, and the cough a'th lungs,
That wept his eyes out when he was a child,
And ever since hath shot at hudman-blind,
Make her leap, caper, jerk and laugh and sing,
And play me horse-trickes,
Make Cupid wanton as his mothers dove,
But, in this sort boy I would have thee love.

Why how now mad-cap? what my lusty Frank,
So near a wife, and will not tell your friend?
But you will to this geere in hugger-mugger,
Art thou turned miser Rascal in thy loves?

Who I? z'blood, what should all you see in me,
That I should look like a married man? ha,
Am I bald? are my legs too little for my hose?
If I feel any thing in my forehead, I am
A villain, do I wear a night-cap? do I bend
in the hams? What dost thou see in me that I
should be towards marriage, ha?

What thou married? let me look upon thee,
Rogue, who has given out this of thee? how
came thou into this ill name? what company
Hast thou bin in Rascal?

You are the man sir, must have Millescent,
The match is making in the garden now,
Her jointure is agreed on, and th'old men
Your fathers mean to launch their busy bags,
But in mean time to thrust Mountchensey off,
For colour of this new intended match.
Fair Millescent to Cheston must be sent,
To take the approbation for a Nun.
Ne'er look upon me lad, the match is done.

Raymond Mountchensey, now I touch thy grief,
With the true feeling of a zealous friend.
And as for fair and beauteous Millescent,
With my vain breath I will not seek to ssubber,
Her angel like perfections, but thou know,
That Essex hath the Saint that I adore,
Where ere did we meet thee and wanton springs,
That like a wag thou hast not laughed at me,
And with regardles jesting mocked my love?
Now many a sad and weary summer night,
My sighs have drunk the dew from off the earth,
I have taught the watchful Niting-gale to wake,
And from the meadows spring the early lark,
An hour before she would have rose to sing,
I have loaded the poor minutes with my moans,
That I have made the heavy slow pasde hours,
To hang like heavy clogs upon the day.
But dear Mounchensey, had not my affection
Seasde on the beauty of another dame,
Before I would give over the chase and wrong the love,
Of one so worthy and so true a friend,
I will abjure both beauty and her sight,
And will in love become a counterfeit.

Dear Ierningham, thou hast begot my life,
And from the mouth of he I where now I sate,
I feel my spirit rebound against the stars:
Thou hast conquered me dear friend in my free soul,
Their time or death can by their power control.

Frank Ierningham, thou art a gallant boy,
And were he not my pupil I would say,
He were as fine a metled gentleman,
Of as free spirit and of as fine a temper,
As is in England, and he is a Man,
That very richly may deserve thy love.
But noble Clare, this while of our discourse,
What may Mounchensey, honour to thy self,
Exact upon the measure of thy grace?

Raymond Mounchensey? I would have thee know,
He does not breath this air,
Whose love I cherish, and whose soul I love,
More then Mounchenseyes:
Nor ever in my life did see the man,
Whom for his wit and many virtuous parts,
I think more worthy of my sisters love.
But since the matter grows unto this pass,
I must not seem to cross my Fathers will.
But when thou list to visit her by night,
My horses saddled, and the stable door
Stands ready for thee, use them at thy pleasure,
In honest marriage wed her frankly boy,
And if thou get her lad, God give thee joy.

Then care away, let fates my fall pretend,
Backed with the favours of so true a friend.

Let us alone to bussell for the set,
For age and craft, with wit and Art have met.
I'll make my spirits to dance such nightly Jigs
Along the way twixt this and Totnam cross,
The Carriers Jade shall cast their heavy packs,
And the strong hedges scarce shall keep them in:
The Milke-maides Cuts shall turn the wenches off,
And lay the Dossers tumbling in the dust:
The frank and merry London prentices,
That come for cream and lusty country cheer,
Shall lose their way, and scrambling in the ditches
All night, shall whoop and hollow, cry and call,
Yet none to other find the way at all.

Pursue the project scholar, what we can do,
To help endeavour join our lives thereto.

Take me with you good Sir Iohn; a plague on thee Smug, and thou touch
liquor thou art founderd straight: what are your brains always water-milles?
must they ever run round?


Banks, your ale is a Philistine fox, z'hart there's fire in the tail: out; you
are a rogue to charge us with Mugs in the rereward: a plague of this wind, O it
tickles our Catastrophe.


Neighbour Banks of Waltham, and Goodman Smug the honest Smith of Edmonton, as
I dwell betwixt you bothat Enfield, I know the taste of both your ale houses,
they are good both, smart both: Hem, Grass and hay, we are all mortal, let's
live till we die, and be merry and there's an end.


Well said sir Iohn, you are of the same humour still, and doth the water run
the same way still boy?


Uulcan was a rogue to him; Sir Iohn locke, lock, lock fast sir Iohn: so sir
Iohn, I'll one of these years when it shall please the Goddesses and the
destinies, be drunk in your company; that's all now, and God fend us health;
shall I swear I love you?


No oaths, no oaths, good neighbour Smug,
Weel wet our lips together in hug;
Car rouse in private, and elevate the hart,
And the liver and the lights, and the lights,
Mark you me within us, for hem,
Grass and hay, we are all mortal, lets live till we die, and be
Merry, and theirs an end.

But to our former motion about stealing some venison, whither go we?


Into the forest neighbour Banks, into Brians walk the mad keeper.


Z blood, I'll tickle your keeper.

Y faith thou art always drunk when we have need of thee.


Need of me? z'hart, you shall have need of me always while there's iron in
an Anuill.


M. Parson, may the Smith go think you, being in this taking?


Go, I'll go inspight of all the belles in VValtham.

The question is good neighbour Banks, let me see, the Moon shines to night,
there's not a narrow bridge betwixt this and the forest, his brain will be
settled ere night, he may go, he may go neighbour Banks: Now we want none but
the company of mine host Blague at the George at Waltham, if he were here, our
Consort were full; look where comes my good host, the Duke of Norfolks man,
and how and how? a hem, grass and hay, we are not yet mortall' lets live till
we die and be merry, and there's an end.


Ha my Castilian dialogues, and art thou in breath still boy? Miller doth the
match hold? Smith, I see by thy eyes thou hast bin reading little Geneua print:
but wend we merrily to the forest to steal some of the kings Dear. I'll meet
you at the time appointed: away, I have Knights and Colonells at my house, must
tend the Hungarions. If we be scard in the forest, we'll meet in the
Church-porch at Enfield; is't Correspondent?


Tis well; but how if any of us should be taken?

He shall have ransom by the Lord.

Tush the knave keepers are my bosonians, my pensioners, nine a clock, be
valiant my little Gogmagogs; I'll fence with all the Justices in Hartford shire;
I'll have a Buck till I die, I'll slay a Do while I live, hold your bow straight
steady. I serve the good duke of Norfolke.


O rare! who, ho, ho boy.

Peace neighbor Smug, you see this is a Boor, a Boor of the country, an
illiterate Boor, and yet the Citizen of good fellows, come lets provide a
hen: Grass and hay, we are not yet all mortal, weel live till we die, and be
merry, and there's an end: come Smug.


God night VValtham, who, ho, ho boy.

Nor I for thee Clare, not of this,
What? hast thou fed me all this while wish shalles?
And come to tell me now thou lik'st it not?

I do not hold thy offer competent.
Nor do I like the assurance of thy love,
The title is so brangled with thy debts.

Too good for thee, and knight thou know it well,
I fawnd not on thee for thy goods, not I,
Twas thine own motion, that thy wife doth know.

Husband it was so, he lies not in that.

Hold thy chat queen.

To which I hearkened willingly, and the rather,
Because I was persuaded it proceeded
From love thou bor'st to me and to my boy,
And gau'st him free access unto thy house,
Where he hath not behaude him to thy child,
But as befits a gentleman so do:
Nor is my poor distressed state so low,
That I'll shut up my doors I warrant thee,
Let it suffice Mountchensey, I mislike it,
Nor think thy son a match fit for my child,
To tell thee Clare his blood is good and clear,
As the best drop that pants in thy veins:
But for this maid thy fair and virtuous child,
She is no more disparagd by thy baseness,
Then the most orient and the precious jewel,
Which still retains his lustre and his beauty,
Although a slave were owner of the same.

She is the last is left me to bestow,
And her I mean to dedicate to God.

You do sir.

Sir, sir, I do, she is mine own.

And pity she is so,
Damnation dog, thee and thy wretched pelf aside.

Not thou Mountchensey shalt bestow my child.

Neither should thou bestow her where thou
Mean.

What wilt thou do?

No matter, let that be,
I will do that, perhaps shall anger thee;
Thou hast wronged my love, and by Gods blessed Angel,
Thou shalt well know it.

Tut, brave not me.

Brave thee base Churl, were it not for man-hood sake,
I say no more, but that there be some by,
Whose blood is hotter then ours is,
Which being stirred, might make us both repent
This foolish meeting: but Raph Clare
Although thy father have abused my friendship,
Yet I love thee, I do my noble boy,
I do in faith.

I, do, do, fill all the world with talk of us, man, man.
I never looked for better at your hands.

I hope your great experience and your years,
Would have prou'de patience rather to your soul,
Then with this frantic and untamed passion,
To whet their skeens and but that,
I hope their friendships are too well confirmed,
And their minds tempered with more kindly heat,
Then for their froward parents soars,
That they should break forth into public brawls,
How ere the rough hand of th'untoward world,
Hath moulded your proceedings in this matter,
Yet I am sure the first intent was love:
Then since the first spring was so sweet and warm,
Let it die gently, ne'er kill it with a scorn.

O thou base world, how leprous is that soul
That is once limed in that polluted mud,
Oh sir Arthur you have startled his free active spirits,
With a too sharpe spur for his mind to bear:
Have patience sir, the remedy to woe,
Is to leave what of force we must forgo.

And I must take a twelve months approbation,
That in mean time this sole and private life,
At the years end may fashion me a wife:
But sweet Mounchensey ere this year be done,
Thou'st be a friar if that I be a Nun;
And father ere young Ierninghams I'll be,
I will turn mad to spite both him and thee.

Wife come to horse, and housewife make you ready,
For if I live, I swear by this good light,
I'll see you lodged in Chesson house to night.

Raymond away, thou see how matters fall,
Churl, hell consume thee and thy pelf and all.

Now M. Clare, you see how matters fadge,
Your Milliscent must needs be made a Nun:
Well sir, we are the men must ply this match,
Hold you your peace and be a looker on,
And send her unto Chesson where he will,
I'll send me fellows of a handful hic,
Into the Cloisters where the Nuns frequent,
Shall make them skip like Does about the Dale,
And make the Lady prioresse of the house to play
at leape-froge naked in their smocks,
Until the merry wenches at their mass,
Cry teehee weehee,
And tickling these mad lasses in their flanckes,
Shall sprawl and squeke, and pinch their fellow Nuns.
Be lively boys, before the wench we lose,
I'll make the Abbas wear the Cannons house.

Spite now hath done her worst, sister be patient,

Forewarnd poor Raymonds company to heaven,
When the composure of weak frailty meet,
Upon this mart of dirt; O then weak love,
Must in her own unhappiness be silent,
And winck on all deformities.

Tis well;
Whers Raymond brother? whers my dear Mounchensey?
Would we might weep together and then part,
Our sighing parle would much ease my heart.

Sweet beauty fouled your sorrows in the thought,
Of future reconcilement; let your tears
Show you a woman; but be no farther spent
then from the eyes; for (sweet) experience says,
That love is firm that's flattered with delays.

Alas sir, think you I shall ere be his?

As sure as panting smiles on future bliss.
Yond comes my friend, see he hath doted
So long upon your beauty, that your want
Will with a pale retirement wast his blood,
For in true love, Music doth sweetly dwell,
Severed these less worlds bear within them hell.

Harry and Frank you are enioynd to wane your friendship from me, we must
part the breath of all advised corruption, pardon me.

Faith I must say so, you may think I love you,
I breath not, rougher spite do fever us,
We'll meet by steal sweet friend by stealth you twain.
Kisses are sweetest got with struggling pain.

Our friendship dies not Raymond.

Pardon me:
I am busied, I have lost my faculties,
And buried them in Milliscents clear eyes.

Alas sweet Love what shall become of me?
I must to Chesson to the Nunnery,
I shall ne'er see thee more.

How sweet!
I'll be thy votary, we'll often meet,
This kiss divides us, and breathes soft adieu,
This be a double charm to keep both true. (ting

Have done your fathers may chance spy your par-
Refuse not you by any means good sweetness,
To go unto the Nunnery, far from hence,
Must we beget your loves sweet happiness,
You shall not stay there long, your harder bed,
Shall be more soft when Nun and maid are dead.

Now sir what's the matter?

Mary you must to horse presently, that villainous old gowty churl, Sir Richard
Clare longs till he be at the Nunnery.


How sir?
O I cry you mercy, he is your father sir indeed; but I am sure that there's
less affinity betwixt your two natures, then there is between a broker and a
cutpurse.


Bring my gelding sir.

Well nothing grieves me, but for the poor wench, she must now cry vale to
Lobster pies, hartichokes, and all such meates of mortality; poor
gentlewoman, the sign must not be in virgo any longer with her, and that me
grieves full well.

Poor Milliscent
Must pray and repent:
O fatalle wonder!
Sheele now be no fatter,
Love must not come at her,
Yet she shall be kept under.

Farewell dear Raymond.

Friend adieu.

Dear sweet.
No joy enjoys my heart till we next meet.

Well Raymond now the tide of discontent,
Beats in thy face, but er't belong the wind,
Shall turn the flood, we must to Waltham abbey,
And as fair Milliscent in Cheston lives,
A most unwilling Nun, so thou shalt there
Become a beardless Novice, to what end
Let time and future accidents declare:
Taste thou my slights, thy love i'll only sha^e.

Turn friar? come my good Counseller lets go,
Yet that disguise will hardly shroud my woe.

Madam;
The love unto this holy sisterhood,
And our confirmed opinion of your zeal
Hath truly won us to bestow our Child,
Rather on this then any neighbouring Cell.

Ihesus daughter Maries child,
Holy matron woman mild,
For thee a mass shall still be said,
Every sister drop a bead.
And those again succeeding them
For you shall riug a Requiem.

The wench is gone Harry, she is no more a woman of this world, mark her well,
she looks like a Nun already, what think on her?


By my faith her face comes handsomely to it
But peace lets hear the rest.

Madam for a tweluemonths approbation,
We mean to make this trial of our child.
Your care and our dear blessing in mean time,
We pray may prosper this intended work.

May your happy soul be blithe,
That so truly pay your tithe.
He who many children gave,
Tis fit that he one child should have.
Then fair virgin hear my spell,
For I must your duty tell.

Good men and true, stand together and hear your charge.

First a mornings take your book
The glass wherein yourself must look,
Your young thoughts so proud and jolly
Must be turned to motions holy:
For your buske, attires and toys,
Have your thoughts on heavenly joys:
And for all your follies past,
You must do penance, pray and fast.

Let her take heed of fasting, and if ever she hurt her self with praying, I'll
ne'er trust beast.


This goes hard berladye.

You shall ring the saving bell,
Keep your hours and tell your knell,
Rise at midnight to your matins.
Read your Psalter, sing your latins,
And when your blood shall kindle pleasure,
Scourge your self in plenteous measure.

Worse and worse by Saint Mary.

Sir Hal, how does she hold her countenance? well, go thy ways, if ever thou
prove a Nun, I'll build an Abbey.


She may be a Nun, but if ever she prove an Anchoresse, I'll dig her grave
with my nailes.


To her again mother.

Hold thine own wench.

You must read the mornings mass,
You must creep unto the Cross.
Put cold ashes on your head,
Have a hair cloth for your bed.

She had rather have a man in her bed.

Bind your beads and tell your needs,
Your holy Auies and your Creeds,
Holy maid this must be done,
If you mean to live a Nun.

The holy maid will be no Nun.

Madam we have some business of import,
And must be gone.
Wilt please you take my wife into your closet,
Who further will acquaint you with my mind,
And so good madam for this time adieu.

Well now Frank Clare, how says thou? to be brief,
What wilt thou say for all this, if we two,
Thy father and my self, can bring about,
That we convert this Nun to be a wife,
And thou the husband to this pretty Nun,
How then my lad? ha Frank, it may be done.

I now it works.

O god sir, you amaze me at your words,
Think with your self sir what a thing it were,
To cause a recluse to remove her vow,
A maimed contrite, and repentant soul,
Ever mortified with fasting and with prayer,
Whose thoughts even as her eyes are fixd on heaven,
To draw a virgin thus devoured with zeal,
Back to the world! O impious deed
Nor by the Canon Law can it be done,
Without a dispensation from the Church:
Besides she is so prone unto this life,
As sheele even shriek to hear a husband named.

I a poor innocent she, well, here's no knavery, he flowts the old fools to
their teeth.

Boy I am glad to hear
Thou make such scruple of that conscience,
And in a man so young as is your self,
I promise you tis very seldom seen.
But Frank this is a trick, a mere devise,
A slight plotted betwixt her father and my self,
To thrust Mounchenseys nose besides the cushion,
That being thus debarred of all access,
Time yet may work him from her thoughts,
And give thee ample scope to thy desires.

A plague on you both for a couple of Iewes.

How now Frank, what say you to that?

Let me alone, I warrant thee:
Sir aslurde that this motion doth proceed,
From your most kind and fatherly affection,
I do dispose my liking to your pleasure,
But for it is a matter of such moment
As holy marriage, I must crave thus much,
To have some conference with my ghostly father,
Friar Hildersham here by, at Waltham Abbey,
To be absolude of things that it is fit
None only but my confessor should know.

With all my heart, he is a reverend man, and to morrow morning we will meet
all at the Abbey, whereby th'opnion of that reverend man

We will proceed, I like it passing well:
Till then we part, boy I think of it, farewell:
A parents care no mortal tongue can tell.

Holy young Novice I have told you now,
My full intent, and do refer the rest
To your professed secrecy and care:
And see,
Our serious speech hath stolen upon the way,
That we are come unto the Abbey gate,
Because I know Mountchensey is a fox,
That craftily doth overlook my doings,
I'll not be seen, not I; Tush I have done;
I had a daughter, but she's now a Nun:
Farewell dear son, farewell.

Fare you well, I you have done,
Your daughter sir, shall not be long a Nun!
O my rare Tutor, never mortal brain,
Plotted out such a mass of policy;
And my dear bosom is so great with laughter,
Begot by his simplicity and error
My soul is fallen in labour with her joy
O my true friends Frank Ierningham and Clare,
Did you now know but how this jest takes fire,
That good sir Arthur thinking me a novice,
Hath even poured himself into my bosom;
O you would vent your spleens with tickling mirth.
But Raymond peace, and have an eye about,
For fear perhaps some of the Nuns look out.
Peace and charity within,
Never touched with deadly sin:
I cast my holy water poor,
On this wall and on this door,
That from evil shall defend,
And keep you from the ugly fiend:
Evil spirit by night nor day,
Shall approach or come this way;
Elf nor Fary by this grace,
Day nor night shall haunt this place.
Who's that which knocks? ha, who's there?

Gentle Nun here is a Friar.

A Friar without, now Christ us save,
Holy man, what would thou have?

Holy maid I hither come,
From Friar and father Hildersome.
By the favour and the grace
Of the Prioresse of this place:
Amongst you all to visit one,
That's come for approbation,
Before she was as now you are,
The daughter of Sir Arthur Clare:
But since she now became a Nun,
Called Milliscent of Edmunton.

Holy man, repose you there,
This news I'll to our Abbas bear:
To tell what a man is sent,
And your message and intent.

Benedicite.

Benedicite.

Do my good plump wench, if all fall right,
I'll make your sister-hood one less by night:
Now happy fortune speed this merry drift,
I like a wench comes roundly to her shrift.

Have Friars recourse then to the house of Nuns?

Madam it is the order of this place,
When any virgin comes for approbation,
Lest that for fear or such sinister practise,
She should be forcde to undergo this veil,
Which should proceed from conscience and devotion:
A visitor is sent from Waltham house,
To take the true confession of the maid.

Is that the order? I commend it well,
You to your shrift, I'll back unto the cell.

Life of my soul, bright Angel.

What means the Friar?

O Milliscent, tis I.

My heart misgives me, I should know that voice,
You, who are you? The holy virgin bless me,
Tell me your name, you shall ere you confess me.

Mountchensey thy true friend.

My Raymond, my dear heart,
Sweet life give leave to my distracted soul,
To wake a little from this swoon of joy,
By what means came thou to assume this shape?

By means of Peter Fabell my kind Tutor,
Who in the habit of Friar Hildersham,
Frank Ierninghams old friend and confessor,
Plotted by Frank, by Fabell and my self,
And so delivered to Sir Arthur Clare,
Who brought me here unto the Abbey gate,
To be his Nun-made daughters visitor.

You are all sweet traitors to my poor old father,
O my dear life, I was a dream't to night,
That as I was a praying in mine Psalter,
There came a spirit unto me as I kneeled,
And by his strong persuasions tempted me
To leave this Nunnery; and me thought,
He came in the most glorious Angel shape,
That mortal eye did ever look upon:
Ha, thou art sure that spirit, for there's no form,
Is in mine eye so glorious as thine own.

O thou Idolatresse that dost this worship,
To him whose likeness is but praise of thee,
Thou bright vnsetting star which through this veil,
For very envy make the Sun look pale.

Well visitor, lest that perhaps my mother
Should think the Friar too st^ickt in his decrees,
I this confess to my sweet ghostly father,
If chaste pure love be sin I must confess,
I have offended three years now with thee.

But do you yet repent you of the same?

In faith I cannot.

Nor will I absolve thee,
Of that sweet sin, though it be venial,
Yet have the penance of a thousand kisses,
And I enjoin you to this pilgrimage,
That in the evening you bestow your self
Here in the walk near to the willow ground,
Where I'll be ready both with men and horse,
To wait your coming and convey you hence,
Unto a lodge I have in Enfield chase:
No more reply if that you yield consent,
I see more eyes upon our stay are bent.

Sweet life farewell; tis done, let that suffice,
What my tongue fails I send thee by mine eyes.

Now Visitor how does this new made Nun?

Come, come how does she noble Capouchin?

She may be poor in spirit, but for the flesh tis fat and plump boys:

Ah rogues, there is a company of girls would turn you all Friars.


But how Mountchensey? how lad for the wench?

Sound lads in faith; I thank my holy habit,
I have confessed her and the Lady prioresse hath given me ghostly counsel with
her blessing.

And how say ye boys,
If I be chose the weekly visitor?

Z'blood she'll have ne'er a Nun vnbagd to sing mass then.


The Abbat of Waltham will have as many Children, to put to nurse, as he has
calves in the Marsh.


Well to be brief, the Nun will soon at night turn lippit; if I can but
devise to quit her cleanly of the Nunnery, she is mine own.


But Sir Raymond, what news of Peter Fabel at the house?


Tush hes the only man; a Necromancer, and a Conjurer that works for young
Mountchensey altogether; and if it be not for Fryer Benedict, that he can
cross him by his learned skill, the VVenchi gone.

Fabell will fetch her out by very magic.

Stands the wind there boy, keep them in that key.
The wench is ours before tomorrow day,
Well Raph and Frank, as ye are gentlemen, stick to us close this once; you
know your fathers have men and horse lie ready still at Chesson, to watch the
coast be clear, to scowt about, have an eye unto Mountchensey walks: therefore
you two may hover thereabouts, and no man will suspect you for the matters be
ready but to take her at our hands, leave us to scamble for her getting out.


Z'bloud if al Herford-shire were at our heals, we'll carry her away in spite
of them.


But whither Raymond?

To Brians upper lodge in Enfield Chase, he is mine honest Friend and a tall
keeper, i'll send my man unto him presently t'acquant him with your coming and
intent.


Be brief and secret.

Soon at night remember
You bring your horses to the willow ground.

Tis done, no more.

We will not fail the hour,
My life and fortune, now lies in your power.

About our business, Raymond lets away,
Think of your hour, it draws well of the day.

Come ye Hungarian pilchers, we are once more come under the zona torrida of
the forest, lets be resolute, lets fly to and again; and if the devil come,
we'll put him to his Interrogatories, and not budge a foot, what; s'foote i'll
put fire into you, ye shall all three serve the good Duke of Norfolke.


Mine host, my bully, my precious consul, my noble Holefernes, I have ben
drunk i'thy house, twenty times and ten, all's one for that, I was last night
in the third heavens, my brain was poor, i't had yest in it; but now I am a
man of action, is't not so lad?


Why now thou hast two of the liberal sciences about thee, wit and reason,
thou may serve the Duke of Europe.


I will serve the Duke of Christendom, and do him more credit in his cellar
then all the plate in his buttery, is't not so lad?


Mine host and Smug, stand there Banks, you and your horse keep together; but
lie close, show no tricks for fear of the keeper. If we be scard weel meet
in the Church-porch at Enfeild.


Content sir Iohn.

Smug, dost not thou remember the tree thou felst out of last night?


Tush, and't had bin as high as the Abbey, I should ne'er have hurt my self I
have fallen into the river coming home from Waltham, and escaped drowning.


Come sever, care no sprits, we'll have a Buck presently, we have watched
later then this for a Do, mine Host.


Thou speak as true as velvet.

Why then come, Grass and hay, c.

Frank Ierningham?

Speak softly rogue, how now?

S'foot we shall lose our way, it's so dark, wherabouts are we?


Why man, at Potters gate,
The way lies right, hark the clock strikes at Enfeild; whats the hour?


Ten the bell says.

A lies in's throat, it was but eight when we set out of Chesson, Sir Iohn and
his Sexton are at ale to night, the clock runs at random.


Nay, as sure as thou liu'st the villainous vicar is abroad in the chase this
dark night: the stone Priest steals more venison then half the country.


Milliscent, how dost thou?

Sir, very well,
I would to God we were at Brians lodge.

We shall anon, z'ounds hark,
What means this noise?

Stay, I hear horsemen.

I hear footmen too.

Nay then I have it, we have bin discovered,
And we are followed by our fathers men.

Brother and friend, alas what shall we do?

Sister speak softly or we are descried,
They are hard upon us what so ere they be,
Shadow your self behind this brake of fern,
We'll get into the wood and let them pass.

Grass and hay, we are all mortal, the keepers abroad, and there's an end.


Sir Iohn.

Neighbour Banks what news?

z'wounds Sir Iohn the keepers are abroad; I was hard by'am.


Grass and hay, wher's mine host Blague?

Here Metrapolitane, the philistines are upon us, be silent, let us serve the
good Duke of Norfolke; but where is Smug.


Here, a pox on ye all dogs; I have killed the greatest Buck in Brians walk,
shift for your selves, all the keepers are up, lets meet in Enfield church
porch, away we are all taken else.


Raph hearst thou any stirring.

I heard one speak here hard by in the bottom; peace Master, speak low,
zownes if I did not hear a bow go off, and the Buck bray, I never heard
dear in my life.


When went your fellows out into their walks?

An hour a go.

S'life is there stealers abroad, and they cannot hear of them! where the
devil are my men to night! sir go up the wind towards Buckleyes lodge.

I'll cast about the bottom with my hound, and I will meet thee under
Conyocke.


I will Sir.

How now? by the mass my hound stays upon something, hark, hark, Bowman,
hark, hark there.


Brother Frank Ierningham, brother Clare.

Peace, that's a woman's voice, stand, who's there, stand or I'll shoot.


O Lord, hold your hands, I mean no harm sir.

Speak, who are you?

I am a maid sir, who? M. Brian?

The very same, sure I should know her voice, Mistress Milliscent.


I, it is I sir.

God for his passion, what make you here alone, I looked for you at my lodge an
hour ago, what means your company to leave you thus? who brought you hither?


My brother Sir, and M. Ierningham, who hearing folks about us in the Chase,
feared it had bin sir Arthur and my father, who had pursued us, thus dispearsed
our selves till they were past us.


But where be they?

They be not far off, here about the grove.

Be not afraid man, I heard B^es tongue, that's certain.

Call softly for your sister^

Milliscent.

I brother, here.

M. Clare.

I told you it was Brian.

Whoes that? M. Ierningham, you are a couple of hotshots, does a man commit his
wench to you, to put her to grass at this time of night?


We heard a noise about her in the chase,
And fearing that our fathers had pursued us, severed ourselves.


Brian how hapd'st thou on her?

Seeking for stealers are abroad to night,
My hound stayed on her, and so found her out.

They were these stealers that affrighted us,
I was hard upon them, when they horsed their Dear,
And I perceive they took me for a keeper.

Which way took they?

Towards Enfeild.

A plague upon it, that's that damned Priest, Blague of the George, he that
serves the good Duke of Norfolke.


Peace, that's my fathers voice.

Zownds you suspected them, and now they are here indeed.


Alas, what shall we do?

If you go to the lodge you are surely taken,
Strike down the wood to Enfeild presently,
And if Mounchensey come, I'll send him t'yee:
Let me alone to bussle with your father,
I warrant you that I will keep them play,
Till you have quit the chase: away, away.
Whoes there?

In the kings name pursue the Ravisher.

Stand or I'll shoot.

Whoes there?

I am the keeper that do charge you stand,
You have stolen my D^

We stolen thy Dear? we do pursue a thief.

You are arrant thieves, and ye have stolen my Dear.

We are Knights, sir Arthur Clare and sir Raph Ierningham.


The more your shame that Knights should be such thieves.


Who? or what art thou?

My name is Brian, keeper of this walk.

O Brian a villain,
Thou hast received my daughter to thy lodge.

You have stolen the best Dear in my walk to night, my Dear.


My daughter,
Stop not my way.

What make you in my walk? you have stolen the best Buck in my walk to
night.


My daughter.

My Dear.

Where is Mountchensey?

Wheres my Buck.

I will complain me of thee to the King.

I'll complain unto the King you spoil his game: Tis strange that men of your
account and calling, will offer it, I tell you true, Sir Arthur and sir Raph,
that none but you have only spoiled my game.


I charge you stop us not.

I charge you both ye get out of my ground. Is this a time for such as you, men
of place and of your gravity, to be abroad a theeuing! tis a shame, and a fore
God if I had shot at you, I had serude you well enough.


S'foote here's a dark night indeed, I think I have bin in fifteen ditches
between this and the forest: soft, heers Enfeilde Church: I am so wet with
climbing over into an orchard for to steal some filberts: well, here I'll sit
in the Church porch and wait for the rest of my consort.


Here's a sky as black as Lucifer, God bless us, here was goodman Theophilus
buried, he was the best Nutcraker that ever dwelt in Enfeild: well, tis 9. a
clock, tis time to ring curfew. Lord bless us, what a white thing is that in
the Church porch; O Lord my legs are too weak for my body, my hair is too
stiff for my night-cap, my heart fails; this is the ghost of Theophilus, O
Lord it follows me, I cannot say my prayers and one would give me a thousand
pound: good spirit, I have bowld and drunk and followed the hounds with you a
thousand times, though I have not the spirit now to deal with you; O Lord.


Grass and hey, we are all mortal, who's there?

We are grass and hay indeed; I know you to be Master Parson by your phrase.


Sexton.

I Sir.

For mortalities sake, What's the matter?

O Lord I am a man of another element; Master Theophilus Ghost is in the
Church porch, there was a hundred Cats all fire dancing here even now; and they
are clombe up to the top of the steeple, i'll not into the bellfree for a world.


O good Salomon; I have bin about a deed of darkness to night: O Lord I saw
fifteen spirits in the forest, like white bulls, if I lye I am an arrant
thief: mortality haunts us; grass and hay the devils at our heals, and
lets hence to the parsonages.


What noise was that? tis the watch, sure that villainous unlucky rogue Smug is
taine upon my life, and then all our villeny comes out, I heard one cry sure.


If I go steal any more veneson, I am a Paradox, s'foot I can scarce bear the
sin of my flesh in the day, tis so heavy, if I turn not honest, and serve
the good Duke of Norfolke, as true mareterraneum skinker should do, let me
never look higher then the element of a Constable.


By the Lord there are some watchmen; I hear them name Master Constable, I
would to God my Mill were an Eunuch and wanted her stones, so I were hence.


Who's there?

Tis the Constable by this light, I'll steal hence, and if I can meet mine
host Blague, i'll tell him how Smug is taine, and will him to look to him
self.


What the devil is that white thing? this same is a Church-yard, and I have
heard that ghosts, and villenous goblins have been seen here.


Grass and hay, O that I could conjure, we saw a spirit here in the
Churchyard; and in the fallow field there's the devil, with a mans body upon
his back in a white sheet.


It may be a woman's body Sir Iohn.

If she be a woman, the sheets damn her,
Lord bless us, what a night of mortality is this.

Priest.

Mine host.

Did you not see a spirit all in white, cross you at the stile?


O no mine host, but there sate one in the porch, I have not breath enough left
to bless me from the Devil.


Whoes that?

The Sexton almost frighted out of his wits,
Did you see Banks, or Smug.

No they are gone to Waltham, sure I would fain hence, come, lets to my house,
I'll ne'er serve the duke of Norfolk in this fashion again whilst I breath. If
the devil be amongst us, tis time to hoist sail, and cry roomer: Keep
together Sexton, thou art secret, what? lets be comfortable one to another.


We are all mortal mine host.

True, and I'll serve God in the night hereafter, before the Duke of Norfolke.


Good morrow gentle knight,
A happy day after your short nights rest,

Ha, ha, sir Raph stirring so soon indeed,
Byr'lady sir rest would have done right well,
Our riding late last night, has made me drowsy,
Go to go to those days are gone with us.

Sir Arthur, Sir Arthur, care go with those days,
Let'am even go together, let'am go.
Tis time in faith that we were in our graves
When Children leave obedience to their parents,
When there's no fear of God, no care, no duty.
Well, well, nay nay, it shall not do, it shall not,
No Mountchensey, thoust hear on it, thou shalt,
Thou shalt in faith, I'll hang thy Son if there be law in England:
A mans Child ravished from a Nunnery!
This is rare; well well, there's one gone for Friar Hildersam.

Nay gentle Knight do not vex thus,
It will but hurt your health.
You cannot grieve more then I do, but to what end; but hark you Sir Raph, I
was about to say something; it makes no matter,

But hark you in your ear; the Frier's a knave, but God forgive me, a man
cannot tel neither, s'foot I am so out of patience,

I know not what to say.

There's one went for the Friar an hour ago;
Comes he not yet! s'foot if I do find knavery vnders cowl; i! tickle him: i'll
firk him; here here he's here, he's here.

Good morrow Friar, good morrow gentle Friar.

Good morrow father Hildersham good morrow.

Good morrow reverend Knights unto you both.

Father, how now? you hear how matters go,
I am undone, my Child is cast away,
You did your best; at least I think the best,
But we are all crossed, flately all is dashed.

Alas good knights, how might the matter be?
Let me understand your grief for Charity.

Who does not understand my griefs? alas alas!
And yet ye do not, will the Church permit,
A Nun in approbation of her habit,
To be ravished.

A holy woman, benedicite; now God forfend that any should presume to touch the
sister of a holy house.


Thesus deliver me.

Why Millisent the daughter of this Knight,
Is out of Chesson taken the last night.

Was that fair maiden late become a Nun!

Was she quotha? knavery, knavery, knavery; I smell it, I smell it in faith; is
the wind in that door? is it even so! dost thou ask me that now!


It is the First time that I ere heard of it.

That's very strange.

Why tell me Friar; tell me, thou art counted a holy man, do not play the
hypocrite with me, nor bear with me, I cannot dissemble; did I ought but by
thy own consent? by thy allowance? nay further by thy warrant?


Why Reverend knight?

Unreverend Friar.

Nay then give me leave sir to depart in quiet, I had hopd you had sent for me
to some other end.


Nay stay good Friar, if any thing hath hapd,
About this matter in thy Jove to us;
That thy strict order cannot justify,
Admit it be so, we will cover it,
Take no care man;
Disclay me not yet thy counsel and advise,
The wisest man that is may be orereacht.

Sir Arthur, by my order and my faith,
I know not what you mean.

By your order, and your faith? this is most strange of all:
Why tell me Friar; are not you Confessor to my Son Frank?

Yes that I am:

And did not this good knight here and my self,
Confess, with you being his ghostly Father,
To deal with him about th'unbanded marriage,
Betwixt him and that fair young Millisent?

I never heard of any match intended.

Did not we break our minds that very time,
That our device of making her a Nun,
was but a colour and a very plot,
To put by young Mountchensey; is't not true?

The more I strive to know what you should mean, the less I understand you.


Did not you tell us still how Peter Fabell at length would cross us if we
took not heed?


I have heard of one that is a great magician,
But hes about the University.

Did not you send your novice Benedic,
To persuade the girl to leave Mountchenseys love,
To cross that Peter Fabell in his art,
And to that purpose made him visitor?

I never sent my novice from the house,
Nor have we made our visitation yet.

Never sent him? nay, did he not go? and did not I direct him to the house,
and confer with him by the way? and did he not tell me what charge he had
received from you? word by word, as I requested at your hands?


That you shall know, he came along with me, and stays without come hither
Benedic.

Young Benedic, were you ere sent by me to Chesson Nunnery for a visitor?


Never sir, truly.

Stranger then all the rest.

Did not I direct you to the house?
Confer with you from Waltham Abbey
Unto Chesson wall?

I never saw you sir before this hour.

The devil thou did not, hoc Chamberlain.

Anon, anon.

Call mine host Blague hither.

I will send one over to see if he be up, I think he be scarce stirring yet.


Why knave, did thou not tell me an hour ago mine host was up?


I sir, my Master's up.

You knave, is a up, and is a not up?
Dost thou mock me?

I sir, my M. is up, but I think M. Blague indeed be not stirring?


Why, who's thy Master? is not the Master of the house thy Master?


Yes sir, but M. Blague dwells over the way.

Is not this the George? before God there's some villainy in this.


S foot our signs remooud, this is strange.

Chamberlain, speak up to the new lodgings,
Bid Nell look well to the bakt meats,
How now my old Ienerts bank, my horse,
My castle, lie in Waltham all night, and not under the Canopy of your host
Blagues house.


Mine host, mine host, we lay all night at the George in Waltham, but whether
the George be your fee-simple or no, tis a doubtful question, look upon your
sign.


Body of Saint George, this is mine overthwart neighbour hath done this to
seduce my blind customers, I'll tickle his Catastrophe for this; If I do not
indite him at next assisses for Burglary, let me die of the yellows, for I see
tis no boot in these days to serve the good Duke of Norfolke, the villainous
world is turned manger, one Jade deceives another, and your Ostler plays his
part commonly for the fourth share, have we Comedies in hand, you whoreson
villainous male London lecher.


Mine host, we have had the moylingst night of it that ever we had in our
lives.


Is't certain?

We have bin in the Forest all night almost.

S'foot how did I miss you? hart I was a stealing a Buck there.


A plague on you, we were stayed for you.

Were you my noble Romanes? why you shall share, the venison is a footing, Sine
Cerere Baccho friget Venus: That is, there's a good breakfast provided for a
marriage, that's in my house this morning.


A marriage mine host?

A conjunction copulatiue, a gallant match between your daughter, and M.
Raymond Mountchensey, young Iuuensus.


How?

Tis firm, tis done,
We'll show you a president in the civil law fort.

How I married!

Leave tricks, and admiration, there's a cleanly pair of sheets in the bed
in Orchard chamber, and they shall lie there, what? I'll do it, I'll serve the
good Duke of Norfolke.


Thou shalt repent this Blague.

If any law in England will make thee smart for this, expect it with all
severity.


I renounce your defiance, if you parle so roughly, I'll barricade my gates
against you: stand fair bully; Priest come off from the rereward; what can you
say now? twas done in my house, I have shelter in the Court for it, Dee see your
bay window? I serve the good duke of Norfolk, tis his lodging, storm I care not
serving the good Duke of Norfolk: thou art an actor in this, and thou shalt
carry fire in thy face eternally.


Fire, s blood there's no fire in England like your Trinidado sack; is any man
here humorous? we stole the venison, and we'll justify it: say you now.


In good sooth Smug there's more sack on the fire Smug.

I do not take any exceptions against your sack, but if you'll lend me a pick
staff, i'll cudgle them all hence by this hand.


I say thou shalt into the Cellar.

s'foot mine Host, shalls not grapple?
Pray pray you; I could fight now for all the world like a Cockatrices ege;
shals not serve the Duke of Norfolke?


In skipper in.

Sir, hath young Mountchensey married your sister?

Tis Certain Sir; her's the priest that coupled them; the parties joined, and
the honest witness that cried, Amen.


Sir Arthur Clare, my new created Father, I beseech you hear me.


Sir Sir, you are a foolish boy, you have done that you cannot answer; I dare
be bold to cease her from you, for she's a professed Nun.


With pardon sir, ^at name is quite undone,
This true-loue knot cancelles both maid and Nun.
When first you told me I should act that part,
How cold and bloody it crept ore my hart!
To Chesson with a smiling brow I went,
But yet, dear sir, it was to this intent,
That my sweet Raymond might find better means,
To steal me thence: in brief disguisd he came,
Like Novice to old father Hildersham.
His tutor here did act that cunning part,
And in our love hath joined much wit to art.

Is't even so!

With pardon therefore we entreat your smiles,
Love thwarted turns itself to thousand wiles.

Young Master Ierningham, were you an actor, in your own loves abuse?

My thoughts, good sir,
Did labour seriously unto this end,
To wrong my self ere i'd abuse my friend.

He speaks like a Bachelor of music all in Numbers; knights if I had known
you would have let this couy of Partridges sit thus long upon their knees under
my sign post, I would have spread my door with old Couerlids.


Well sir, for this your sign was removed, was it?

Faith we followed the directions of the devil,
Master Peter Fabell and Smug, Lord bless us, could never stand upright since.


You sir, twas you was his minister that married them.

Sir to prove my self an honest man, being that I was last night in the
forest stealing Venison; now sir to have you stand my friend, if that matter
should be called in question, I married you daughter to this worthy gentleman.


I may chance to requite you, and make your neck crack for it.


If you do, I am as resolute as my
Neighbour vicar of Waltham Abbey: a hem,
Grass and hay, we are all mortal,
Lets live till we be hanged mine host,
And be merry and there's an end.

Now knights I enter, now my part begins.
To end this difference, know, at first I knew
What you intended, ere your love took flight,
From old Mountchensey: you sir Arthur Clare,
Were minded to have married this sweet beauty,
To young Frank Ierningham; to cross which match,
I used some pretty sleights, but I protest
Such as but sate upon the skirts of Art,
No conjurations, nor such weighty spells,
As tie the soul to their performancy:
These for his love who once was my dear puple,
Have I effected: now me thinks tis strange,
That you being old in wisdom should thus knit,
Your forehead on this match; since reason fails,
No law can curb the lovers rash attempt,
Years in resisting this are sadly spent:
Smile then upon your daughter and kind son,
And let our toil to future ages prove,
The devil of Edmonton did good in Love.

Well tis in vain to cross the providence:
Dear Son, I take thee up into my hart,
Rise daughter, this is a kind fathers part.

Why Sir George send for Spindles noise, presently,
Ha, er t be night, i'll serve the good Duke of Norfolke.

Grass and hay, mine host, lets live till we die, and be merry and there s an
end.


What, is breakfast ready mine Host?

Tis my little Hebrew.

Sir ride strait to Chesson Nunnery.
Fetch thence my Lady, the house I know,
By this time misses their young votary:
Come knights lets in.

I will to horse presently sir; a plague a my Lady, I shall miss a good
breakfast. Smug how chance you cut so plaguely behind Smug?


Stand away; i'll founder you else.

Farewell Smug, thou art in another element.

I will be by and by, I will be Sir George again,

Take heed the fellow do not hurt himself.

Did we not last night find two S. Georges here.

Yes Knights, this martialist was one of them.

Then thus conclude your night of merriment.


