I Think as yet all here hath fresh in mind,
a strange adventure past in act of late,
How that a Lady borne nigh to the Inde,
arrived here in quest of loving mate:
Whom she did find by such adventurous sort,
as erst the Hermit showed by large report.
Which Hermit then if you remember well,
requirde the Prince and Lady of this land,
That she with her would let the Lady dwell:
and weighting still on her, attend at hand:
And that the Knight in Court there might remain,
till that they both returned home again.
Which thing consented too by Princes voice,
they have pursued and waited on the train,
Tillate desire hath made them alter choice:
the Ladies heart still longing home again,
And glad to win the Duke her Fathers will:
for moving whom she knows she hath done ill.
For though at first in heat she set him light,
and forced by fathers wrong, went wandering so,
Yet doth she still suspect strong Natures might,
who checking chafe sure works the chafer woe:
Which to appear, is now her chief desire,
and therefore home she means to retire.
Which thing to compass well, and leave no part
of duty vnfulfulfilde both here and there,
She with the fairy Queen is gone apart,
of whom she hopes the rediest way to hear:
How to return with love from whence she came,
as she for love departed from the same.
Now wild she me (as loath to move offence)
if she were called for ere she could come back,
To be in place, and not to part from hence,
that for excuse in me might be no lack:
Till whose return fair Ladies if I may,
among you with your leave I mean to stay.

Now good my Lord let mourning moan have end,
the harm is yours, your self this still to wrack,
The Heavens I trust some better news will send,
the Gods which suffered you these pains to take,
Intend you to behold with cheerful eye:
your help is near, it must of force so be.

In seeking hope, hap flies still away,
my weary corpse is ready for to faint,
Then death, that debt which I at length must pay,
by yielding life receive, and end my plaint.
Now is the time most for to pleasure me,
when I in grief, do crave it thus of thee.
Who hath not heretofore beheld on stage.
the hard conflict which breach of duty breeds,
With natures might in way to vanquish rage,
let him behold me and my daughters deeds:
Twixt whom, as strange contempt hath caused flame,
so nature seeks again to quench the same.
She set her love where she her self likt best,
I much mislikt because her choice did light,
Beneath her birth, though I might like the rest:
to stay this stream I did all that I might.
First with persuasions sweet I did begin,
to try if so my daughter I could win.
The more I charged, the sorer she repeld,
wherefore my labour lost, I changed my way,
And from my Court her Lover I expelled,
thereby in hope to work my daughters stay.
But while I sought to wring her from her love,
love wrought her clean from me, as then de did prove.
No sooner did she find her self alone,
bereft of him whom she a love did choose.
But secretly her self must needs be gone:
her state, her train, her wealth, she did refuse:
And held that hap to be her only bliss,
him to enjoy whom she in Court did miss.
Her parting first, because it did proceed,
from wild contempt of duty to her Sire,
Did stir my choler much, for that her deed,
till nature did arrest, and wrought desire
To have my child restored to me again,
whose absence then had wrought my woe and pain.
Then I began such parents to accuse,
as be too sour to those they have begot,
And found of al, them farthest from excuse,
whose noble state doth make them more of note,
On them and theirs Love hath the greatest power,
therefore on Love they ought the least to lower,
A quiet life where need no labour wills,
A seemly face whereon all eyes be cast,
A diet where desire the heart fulfils,
A world of sport while day, while night doth last,
How can these things but make Love open a way,
and fancy force with her delights to play?
Here did I fail in seeking to withstand,
where I confess the power of love is most,
Hence did proceed the leaving of my land
to find her out which I so lewdly lost.
This is the cause why in such simple case,
I wander seeking her from place to place.
So as I feel my weary bones to shrink,
not able long my fainting corpse to bear,
Sleep doth oppress my limbs which gin to sink,
while slumbering ease relieves my toilsome cheer.
I pray you Sir, depart not hence from me.
your faithful help mainteynes my hope I see.

I will my Lord not once part from your side,
take you your rest, your travels do it crave,
Here fast by you I am resolved to bide,
to guard you so, as nought your rest deprave.
The grief of mind I see works wondrous things,
commanding al estates both Lords and kings.

O Gods what have I heard, O cruel fates,
must that needs fall which you will needs fulfil:
My Lord the Duke to leave his Princely states,
and wandering thus to yield to Fortunes will?
Then do I see that even as you please,
men reap their rest and feel their most disease.
This haughty Duke which set so light by love,
as though he could command him to obey,
Doth now himself by strange adventures prove:
that against Loves force no power bears sway:
For where Love lives at will, he soonest dies,
and where he flaunts at full thence soonest flies.
But yet to learn more certainly whats past,
ere that to him my self I do bewray,
At this good man I mean to have a cast,
of whom I will learn out if that I may:
By way of glance who it is that lies here,
and what might cause this his so ruthful cheer.
If it be not he, then is my labour lost,
and being but few words the cost is small,
If it be he, then hence straight will I post,
and to my Ladies ears report it all:
That she thereby may presently advise,
what good therein may to her state arise.
Good Sir I see you sad which grieves me,
whom curchy makes partaker of your woe,
To ryp your grief unpleasant it will be,
as to all pained souls it is I know:
Yet if I may find such grace in your eye,
tell me what man this is that here doth lie.

Fair Lady this your courteous speech doth crave,
disclose of all that careful breast doth hide,
In him that lies here the world may have,
wherein with maze to let their minds abide.
A Prince he is, whom fortune doth constrain,
with fruitless toil to travel still in vain.

A Prince? I pray you where, and of what land?

An Asian Lord the great Cambaian Duke.

What fate might force him take this toil in hand?

To find his daughter out these pains he took.

Why where is she, how hapt he her to leese?

Because in love her mind he did displease.

Perhaps he did not like where she had loved,

Even so it was: for he from court removed
her friend, for whom her country she forsook,
As not of force her Lovers lack to bear:
which known, the Duke to travel him betook:
To find her out whom Nature made so dear,
With mind resolved if he her met again,
to think such hap sweet pay for all his payne.

And hath he not as yet heard where she is?

Not yet, but that Sibilla bade him go,
to such a soil as I suppose is this,
and there to have his hope and end his woe,

These things be strange, yet stranger things have been
accomplished here, as I my self have seen.
Well Sir, I am to think my self much bound,
for this your curchy showed at my request,
And if your ease may grow within this ground,
by means of me, sure I will do my best.
But Sir, may I desire your Princes daughters name?

Gaudina she is called of worthy fame.

I thank you Sir, I can no longer stay,
but for requite command me any way.

I thank you for your courtesy.

Now to my L. I'll go with speed,
that hearing this she may accordingly proceed.
Ah, ah, it is but vain to hope in sleep,
to purchase ease, where waking fills with care:
In sleep I felt my slumbering eyes did weep,
my heart did pant for grief in mind I bare.
Now let us pass unto our journeys end,
till we find out what chance the Gods will send.

My Lord, if words that pass from faithful heart
may stay your mind, my hope here bids me stay,
For marking all that's here in every part,
and minding that which Sibil once did say:
Me think this place should be the happy land,
where we should rest, as she bare us in hand.
Besides while you took rest, a Lady came
with show of grief, that your mishaps were such,
And learning both yours and your daughters name,
did pass away: all which persuade me much:
That if you stay till she again return,
your heavy heart with joyful news shall burn.

The nearer hope to have that I desire,
to see my child whom I so far have sought,
The more I burn, the greater is my fire,
for fear to fail of that to win I thought,
The wished end requites the toil that's past,
and joy for grief is recompense at last.
What is the force of fathers care I see,
though I my self am father to my care,
To this effect the same hath wrought in me,
that though it be among examples rare:
My self I have disrobed of my state,
to find my child which I did lose of late.

For great offence my Lord the payment great,
the meanest man feels not the greatest fall,
You few with time that you did work in heat,
and yet you find to comfort you withal:
This cost to Sibilles words so doth agree.
But sir behold what Ladies do I see?
A royal blood her virtue will bew ray,
though Fortune seek her near so to oppress,
And noble race will not run far astray.
but of her self will work her own redress:
As I my self even now have found most true,
in this your Ladies case whom I so rue.
She fearing fathers wrath for her offence,
though by constraint unkindly caused to stray,
As she intends with speed departure hence,
so will she not but wisely part away,
And for advise resorted unto me,
to learn what way her best return might be.
My Council was, since fates had found the mean,
the English Queen to make for her defence,
To whose assured stay she might welleane
to swag her fathers wrath, so wrought for her offence:
For none could help her more nor so as she,
if with such suit her grace content might be.
Her credit is so good her fame so flies,
her Honour such, her wisdom so in note,
Her name so known to all men's ears and eyes,
as better mean could no where else be got,
Then if he might at her hands understand,
what she hath heard and seen within her land.
Whereon when we resolved by joint assent,
and I at her request was drawing near,
To move the suit according as we meant,
I met you by the way which had bin here:
By whom I learned a very speedy mean,
to work her weal and void al terror clean.
But maid where is the Duke of whom you spake,
which took this toil for your good Ladies sake?

Yon same is he whose strange attire,
descries his grief and points at his desire.

Well: I'll feel his pulse. Sir knight I hear,
you are inquest your daughter here to find.
In weed disguisd because behaps you fear,
least being known contrary to your mind.
Your seerch might grow too long, yet may it be,
your state descried you may find help of me.

Alas Madam, and must it needs be so?
must grief burst out? and must my careful thought,
Make you by speech partaker of my woe?
wherein the wrong that I have justly wrought
unto my self, shall lead me on along,
till her I find whose wandering is my wrong.
My native Country is, where Indies stream,
doth enter Sea, nigh to the Cambaian cost,
From whence I rome into this famous realm,
to seek my child which by mischance I lost,
There Duke I am, a Lord of fruitful soil,
though Fortunes force now tax me with this toil.

How hap your child did leave you so alone?
was there no help but she must needs be gone?

She would needs love where I misliked much,
a man of mean estate of base degree,
She is my only care and his case such,
as, though well borne, a subject yet to me.
Whom I in heate removed from her: but she
in greater heat removed her self from me.

Me thinks these words in such high state bewray
more egar mind then gift of great conceit,
A Princess peer a Duke should seek to stay,
and not against fume with wit to work debate.
Are you so far misled for want of skill,
as you know not that love will have his will?
He knows no peer: al states stoup to his check,
he spares no prince no more then mean estate,
But makes each one obey him at a beck:
He takes great scorn to hear tell of a mate,
But where he finds such match as he doth like,
without gainsay he bends his bow to strike.
Because you are a Prince of high degree,
in Country where you dwell, you hold it light
That Love should should wound your only heir I see,
but were you of far more puissant might,
And she of price as peerless as may be,
love hath subdu'de far braver Dames then she.

Madam I must confess the force of love,
to be a thing in vain against to bend,
Which blind reason first did after prove,
to set us so as we can not defend,
And so triumphing when we cannot see,
we must confess, who is the God but he?

As who should say, Love never hits aright,
but beetle like bereaved of sight doth run,
Not weighing worth, nor marking where to light,
But love oft times by due desert is won,
And most pressed on in Dames of highest prise,
wherefore judge right, for love oft times is wise.
Perhaps your daughters Love sprang from desert,
perhaps the persons worth procur'de her choice,
Perhaps he was so tied he could not start
from her, commanding him by virtues voice:
And would you seem at such link to repine,
which virtue did with her own fingers twyne?
Therefore make your account this grief you feel,
proceeds from offence against such a power,
And never hope to win your better weal,
till that his wrath appeared, he leave to lower.
Love is a Lord, who lothes, him him he shames,
not sparing Lords, not sparing princely Dames.
And chiefly where with virtue he doth link,
for virtues sake, where love doth like to light.
There can no force enforce his force to shrink,
he trusts so much to his confederates might.
Wherefore your daughters love for virtues sake,
work what you could, no overthrow would take.

I never did repine where virtues love did link,
but where there seemed Disperagement to rise,
As in her match I did and do still think,
his birth to hers in no point did suffice,
A Princes child inheritor to state,
too good I thought so far to vndermate.

Alas good Sir, know you not at these years,
that Love doth always fight on equal ground,
And where he minds match, he makes them peers:
if minds agree the ground of states is found.
A Princely heart in meaner man may dwell,
where, if a Princess like, she doth but well.
For when the ear is fed with worthes report,
when eye beholds what ravishes the sight,
The heart straight to desire yields up the fort:
where if again like liking hap to light,
When virtues join and like with like is knit,
what match is made more excellent then it?
This match should you maintain where love crept in.
not of himself but gesse-waies led by hand,
For virtue was the first that did begin,
against whose force whilst you thought to withstand,
In single terms as not allowing love,
the compound strength of virtue you do prove.
You blame not him for mounting up so hie,
she bears the blame for bending down so low,
Whom fortune bids look up, too blame were he,
if he should quail, and worthy overthrow.
And she too blame, of near so high degree,
not casting Love where virtues doth agree.
Alas whats birth though borne so much in eye,
the only mean to blind who so is borne,
Who looking big with countenance on hye,
with vain conceits holds virtues gifts in scorn,
Unhappy he that brags in that behalf,
where virtue lacks he proves himself a calfe.

You force me sore, yet this you'll not deny,
that though Loves power be not to be withstood,
And that the match of minds be beyond cry.
and they best linked where liking thinks it good,
Yet should my child of me make so small store,
as match her self and not move me before?

If match were made by only mean of man,
you had bin first, as whom the cause concerned,
But what the Gods first move do what you can,
they will pass on though parents be not warnd,
It is but vain to say love shall not win,
unless at your consent he first begin.

But was not that unkindly done of her,
unknown to me to stray from Countries soil?
Thereby her Fathers blood so sore to stir,
which for her sake do take this irksome toil?
In kind a child, unkind to such a Sire,
deserving just revenge of fathers ire.

Nay was not that unkindly done of you,
unknown to her, to send her love away,
To work you both such woe as you feel now,
you for her sake, she for her Love to stray:
In kind a Sire, unkind to such a child,
whose only fault hath child and Sire exiled.

But nature should have borne with parents heat,
since what was meant was meant but for her good,
The Love of kind, such fancy love should beat,
and though she found me for a time in mood.
Time would have turned and caused me to relent,
in that for which from me she slily went.

Where nature doth but warm love sets on fire,
and greater force of lesser is obayde,
For love by choice doth draw more deep desire,
the love of kind, by kind loue's over wayde,
Which master like gives not time to relent,
but on he will or make the man repent.
How could your Tigrish heart by sundring them,
which lived in heaven before you sought their hell,
Defeat the hold where Cupid held his claim?
but in these terms no longer for to dwell:
What if your child were offered to your face,
should she, or should she not obtain your grace?
And if her Love for whom her toil hath been,
should come with her resolved to be her own,
Should not this angry mood of yours void clean?
answer me that, for that thing being known,
Perhaps I would in part procure your ease,
so that their match your mind might not displease.

This compound case doth cause a fight in mind:
to gain my child my grief would soon relent,
Though in her flight she followed not her kind,
but with her match I cannot be content.
But who are you Madam if I may crave,
to know your name which seeks them thus to save.

I am the Fairy Queen.

O noble Dame,
whose skill is such, as nought is hid from you,
Nothing so dark but you do know the same,
I know you know where both they be, and how
I may obtain the thing I have so sought,
whose want I wrought and dearly have it bought.

Well Sir, I do perceive you are content,
to take your child into your grace again,
In hope whereof she shall straight be present,
to please her fathers sight, to stay his pain:
For other things discourse you when you meet,
all will be well since you are won from heat.

I thank you noble Dame for pitying me,
and tendering this my silly daughters state,
Whom if it be my hap again to see,
no such like heat shall set us at debate,
And yet I hope by reason so to deal,
as that her match shall stand to Countries weal.

It will be hard her settled love to shake,
which grounded once is not light to remove,
Yet for your love and for her Countries sake,
it may fall out she will forget her love:
Which being new and young did ravish so,
now being old hath better leave to go,
But yonder comes the maiden which was sent,
and lo my Lady there for whom she went.

It is true my L. your daughter is in place.
perform your speech and let her find some grace.

I must dear father crave here at your feet,
for mine offence your pardon to obtain,
From whom to fly, I yield it was not meet,
yet Love (my Lord) in me so sore did rain:
As victor once repulse he would not bear,
but bade me seek my love in place each where.
You understand my Lord the course I kept,
you see the gods have brought this gear to end,
These fatal lifts could not be over leapt,
but needs my will to their great might must bend:
For fault to you their force I must oppose,
I am your child of me you may dispose.

Small pardon needs where grace is ready found,
upon some better hope you have discharge,
Affection heales where folly made the wound,
but these things are to be discoursed at large.
But now the mean to mend your present case,
is that you yield and gain your fathers grace.
This Lady here the Fairy Queen hath laid,
for your defence in so forsaking me,
As much as may in your behalf be said,
to whom we both are bound exceedingly:
One point remains, wherein if you relent,
to take you home to grace I am content.

I dare my self for her part undertake,
that on her side resistance will be small,
To what request her father here shall make,
the cause once known, and circumstance withal;
To compass your good will is her desire,
wherefore demand the thing that you require.

Gaudina this long time you have given rain,
to serve your choice and feed your fancy still,
Wherein as you have suffered part of payne,
so I became partaker of your ill,
Now is the time to come to reasons school,
which can alone these hot affections cool.
For love to leave the land where you were borne,
to tread your Fathers tears quite under feet.
To stray you wot not where as one forlorn,
to wander stranger like in such a heat:
Doth ill beseem a person of your port,
which being done, to reason now resort.
You are mine only child, heir to my state,
the wealth whereof doth rest upon your choice,
Which will be well if you in taking mate,
do use advise of Fathers careful voice,
Mark well, hereon doth hang your Fathers love,
besides the good by you my state may prove.
I will (considering both birth and your degree,
where at first I cast my chief respect)
To Countries good you chiefly have an eye,
which calls you home, and wills you to neglect,
The Love of him which led you so astray,
and for her sake to take a better way.

A dainty choice my Lord you offer me,
old rooted love still wedded to conceit,
With rueful look appearing in mine eye,
and to your suit presenting still debate,
Whom Countries good and nature bids obey,
whereby my tongue knows not whats best to say.
But good my Lord since you which may command,
do give me leave for my defence to plead,
May it please you in short to understand,
how things have past twixt him and me indeed,
Which being heard, if you be not content,
my will to yours shall presently be bent:
How worth in him did work love first in me,
in Princely state while I did live at home,
Your self therewith displeased did right well see,
which banishing him enforced me to rome,
Because the bait which love for us had laid,
held us so fast as it could not be stayde.
By land and Sea I wandered far and near,
not finding rest till Sibil told me plain,
het hap of that I hoped remained here,
where I should rest and finish al my payne:
Success confirmed her speech, and here I found,
to whom by chained link love hath me bound.
For farther link in marriage to proceed,
because therein I had not your consent,
I followed still Apollos holy reed,
whose priest in that restrained mine intent,
And wild me not to marriage to give place,
till he should like of whom I took my race.
Our state is thus, our love which thus did grow,
stands in these terms, in other terms yet free,
I loved where I likt which reft me fro,
I hasted on the thing I likt to see:
I sought, I found, our love remains still,
so to pass forth, if it be your good will.

If you stand free save only that it pleased
the mighty Cupid this to cause you rome,
Therein I find my heart well easd,
and trust to match you well when I come home:
With love more fit for you then this can be,
where both estate and wealth shall well agree.

Alas my Lord, it is but fortunes gift,
to have descent brought down from Princes train,
The persons worth is virtues worthy drift,
which by desert the highest place should gain.
Care not for birth though it be never so base,
but virtue reke which craves the highest place.

As it is a chance to be a Princes child,
so if you think that virtue is restraind,
To one alone, therein you are beguiled,
she doth refuse of none to be obtained:
And where that royal blood with virtues meet,
doth not such one best seem a Princely seat.
Such one I know in place where you were borne,
more fit for you then this to whom you cleave,
Whefore give your consent, and think no scorn,
at Fathers suit your former love to leave:
For duty so despised for al my payne,
to find you out, I crave this only gain.

But yet my Lord consider al the toil,
which I have past to compass this my love?
Shall old conceit at length receive the foil,
whose force I feel not minding to remove?
When Love forsaken shall revive again,
alas my Lord how sore will be my payne:
To be constrained not once to cast a look,
where I tofore did pitch my whole delight?
To leave him thus, for whom I all forsook,
how can true love abide such poisoned spite?
VVhats to be said in this unequal fight,
where love denies what nature claims of right?
O Cupid be content with that is past,
thus long to thee I have my service vowed,
Let nature now preuaile at last,
what she demands hold it not disalowd:
And shall I then forsake my former joy?
nay my Gaudina death were less annoy.
Plaint hath found mean, and love hath won his right,
from whom but death no force shall sever me,
Dame Nature be content, here in thy sight
my Love I do release and yield to thee,
Yet neither love nor nature may possess,
but only death the mother to redress.

See how this heate doth burst to extreme flame,
see what devise extreme desire hath found,
She loves and cannot leave yet to void blame,
she hath found out another helples ground,
By death to disappoint both our desires:
see reasons check when senseless love aspires.
Yet this I may not leave that is begone,
Madam of you I must crave farther aid,
By whom I trust this fort shall yet be won:
you have perceived by both what hath bin said,
You see the ground whereon my reasons lean,
to work my daughters weal be you the mean.

I see affection armed and loath to yield,
whom length of time and strength of love support,
I see whereon persuasions right doth build,
which hath me thinks possessed the stronger fort:
If love had sight and reason could be hold,
or fiery flame could be subdu'de with cold.
But Lady, give me leave whose friendship tried,
doth bid you bend your ear to that I say,
The truth whereof cannot be well denied,
though flaming love in heate seem to say nay:
Immortal states as you know mine to be,
from passions blind affects are quite and free.
If you may so consent to Parents mind,
(wherewith is joined the wealth of countries soil)
As love cannot accuse you for unkind,
no yet complain himself to have the foil:
Considering he whereon your Love is bent,
may have your love though you herein relent.
If you forsake, not forced by greater cause,
love then of some unkindness might you blame.
But weight of greater worth forbidding pause
if you withstand, you blemish much your name.
It were no love that stood so in your sight:
but might be termed mere madness out of right.
Return again with parent whence you came,
regard the state which birth hath brought you to,
Relent to love that will augment your fame,
and yet this knight cannot, if you so do,
Condemn you much although you him forsake,
since of two gods the greater you do take.
Your Fathers reason springs from such a ground,
as cannot well by reason be denied:
If he for you so fit a match have found,
as for your birth no fitter may be spi'de,
What have you then against him to withstand,
since nought but good can come from parents hand.
Set al aside, and only this observe,
to seek you out, your knight he took no pain,
Yours was the toil, you did from country swerve,
you trauail'de still, in rest he did remain:
So that of you if love crave further aid,
you answer may, he hath his wages paid.
But though you may thus check his love you'll say,
how shall I choke the love which flames in me,
That, do my best, so keeps me at the bay,
as ties me fast when loose I fain would be:
So that I find, the goal must there be won,
where fancy fights, and love the broil begun?
Your countenance seems to yield, debar al dout,
let meaner love to greater quickly yield,
Your good it is these reasons go about,
let common care give private will the field,
Why stand you still as one in sudden trance,
give place to that your honour may advance.

Th'assault is great, yet love bids keep the field,
what al this time hath my long travel won?
If now by light attempt I hap to yield:
these reasons helte before my flight begone:
What is now said but then the same was true?
the ground is old though flowers be fresh and new.
When he by slight was so withdrawn from me,
then did my love condemn these reasons all,
And shall I now since nothing else I see,
by yielding thus procure both present thral?
I rather choose to wander with him still,
then so to change and countermand my will.
I feel a false alarm as though there were,
a fitter match to be found out for me;
No Contarenus no, I smell this gear,
to try if so I would relent from thee:
No our consents have joined this faithful link,
till thou says nay I will not from thee shrink.
And yet in thee if slender shows take place,
I'll never yield for honour of my kind,
Let men remove and slightly turn their face,
in woman's breast more stay they still shall find:
My parents pardon me my country stay,
for what is said from Love I will not stray.

You see how sore my headstrong daughter's bent,
she will not yield for ought that can be said,
Were it not good that to the knight we went,
to see if his desire might be delaide:
I see by him the mean must first begin,
to quench the flame my daughter frieth in.

If it seem good to you as't doth to me,
to him where as he is, we will repair,
For at his hand this must be wrought I see,
if he himself will yield to countries care:
Com Sir, and you Madam, let us retire,
we have to deal with him whom you desire.

You may so with persuasions deal I think,
as he to your demand may seem to yield,
But inwardly that he from me will shrink,
no reason can such ground bring for her shield:
Yet to do that which both you do desire,
apart with you my self I will retire.

But yonder comes the Fairy Queen,
and brings with her in train,
My Lord the Duke with merry look,
I hope weis home again.

You hear Sir Knight the parents just request,
you see the force whereon his reasons stand,
Affections stays what wisdom thinks for best,
the matter rests al only in your hand.
By nature you are farther to foresee,
you are therefore to strike the stroke, not she.

You know of old what led me so to let
the great desire wherewith you both so brent,
Against your worth my will was never set,
to further Countries good was mine intent:
Which since in me so constantly doth dwell,
to yield thereto me thinks you might do well.

Yet Contarenus think what is in you,
if virtues worth and weight in you be great,
And such as none but blind can disallow,
why should persuasions then us two defeat,
As who say, any else might better seem.
then you and I to rule so great a realm,
Birth bears me out, and virtue bears up you,
and why should any then thereof mislike?
As certain proof shall still preuaile I trow,
before that is vncertein how to like.
You are to choose my friend, make answer so
as you do not procure us endless wo.

The choice is hard in midst of such extremes,
my Lord and Prince pretending Countries good,
On the other side affections dazzling beams,
which still will shine though clypsed with a cloud,
Lays in mine eye my Ladies due desert,
which nought but death can sever from my heart.
What flashing flames did she at first abide,
when as on me her love she did bestow?
What constance still in her wrought on my side,
to keep that love whereto my life I owe?
What grief did then consume her careful heart,
when as my Lord wild me from Court depart?
What was the zeal that made her so forsake,
the bliss which princely Court to her could bring,
And for my Love such passing pains to take,
to find me out where bruit of me should ring.
Now should I swerve whom she so long hath sought?
death were too small did I but fault in thought.
How can I leave her thus and not deserve,
to be enrould with those infamous men,
Whom Love, because they did from him so swerve,
hath painted out by Poets public pen:
In hell to have their well deserving hire,
for so defrauding love of just desire?
Yet pardon me Madam for weighing both,
if any harm do rise, the grief is mine,
You to displease the god, know I am loath,
for whom my heart disdains not any pine.
Set love aside till reason hath found out,
what is the best in that we go about.
Against our Love our Countries good is laid,
for whose avail we ought not death refuse,
Then death for love in Countries cause bewraid,
ought to rejoice and seek no other scuce:
Yet leaving Love for countries cause I die,
who will not weep such hap on me to lie.
Because my Lord your father may well know
that virtue is the link of this our Love,
And not affection blind which leads us so,
as being bent we cannot once remove:
Mark Madam what I say, and yield consent,
it is your love that causes me relent.
Without my Lord your parents free good will,
at home with him what can his child enjoy?
And thus to live in state a wanderer still,
as you do now, what more may breed annoy?
Good Madam though I love as no man more,
yield yet to him, withstand him not so sore.
You shall obtain such one by his foresight,
as he shall like, and countries weal shall crave,
You mustregard the common weals good plight,
and seek the whole not only one to save.
If you do well, I cannot do amiss,
though loosing you I lose mine only bliss.
I do foresee the grief that will ensue,
when I shall find my self of you bereft,
When careful mind my late mishap shall rue,
that void of you and of your sight am left.
A double death my doleful days shall feel,
yet I resign my right to countries weal.

A noble speech confirming what was said,
that virtues worth was causer of your love,
For sure my Lord it cannot be denaide,
but that this mind a stony heart might move,
Which to his praise doth yield to Countries good,
the thing which to possess so near he stood.

Well Conta. I must needs esteem,
you of such worth as your estate doth bear,
And if it might so to all others seem,
you best deserve the garland for to wear.
But since the fates against your virtues bend,
your virtue wills you this to condescend.
Whereto this far I yield if that you please
with me again to Country to resort,
You shall in noble state there live at ease,
and spend your days in most delightful sport.
And as for love I banished you my land,
even so for love in grace still shall you stand.

My Lord, what you have done, your state maintains,
exiling me that did offend your eye,
My life must be in course of restless pains,
for her whom care of country doth deny.
Good hap light on the land where I was borne,
though I do live in wretched state forlorn.

Alas that such a spirit cannot persuade,
Alas that state and virtue sunder so,
Alas of worth no more account is made,
but thus from thee my love must I needs go.
Well since he yields which hath most right in me,
Ah Countries good I yield my self to thee.

Now have I that which though I bought with pain,
I think it light, the gain thereof so great,
Now I receive you to my grace again,
whereof before Love sought you to defeat.
The second mends the former fault doth heal,
since you give place to care of Countries weal.

Well now the force where your fate made way
is well expired, you have the heavens to friend,
Who though they saw you run so long astray,
yet have they given your care a joyful end.
Think on and thank, it is a special grace,
first so to stray, then so to end your race.
Your peace is wrought Madam, retire with me,
to place where I do dwell from whence you may
To Country make repair when time shall be.
till when my Lord if you with me will stay,
What things shall need for that your home retire,
I will supply your want to your desire.

Your goodness hath so bound both her and me,
as while we live we be yours to command,
By you is wrought this wished work I see,
by power divine, and by no mortal hand.
Pass on Madam let us be of your train,
the causer of our joy the healer of our payne.

And you sir knight whose honest yielding made
the good consent which past to help this ill.
You may remain as I before have said,
where I do dwell with hearty great good will.
And ever have the Fairy Queen to friend,
for virtues sake which I in you do find.

Madam I am your own still to command,
as one you see of hap bereaved quite,
Resolved not to return to countries land,
since I have lost what was my whole delight:
When resting pause hath stayed my troubled heart,
I will retire and draw my self apart.
And now since cause of such importance moves,
my woeful heart thus to forgo his love,
Most worthy Dame since chance so parts our loves,
that from my sight your presence must remove,
Grant me herein, since now the last I see,
let not your love all whole depart from me.
Weigh well the cause that moved me to relent,
which may perhaps imprint more deep conceit,
What man as I, his love so firmly bent,
would yield the hold once master of the bait?
The gods preserve your honour still in health,
my private good, my common countries wealth.
And if your mind were set that home you will,
it were but labour lost, if I gainsaid,
And absent if your love continue still,
my gain is great who still this ground have laid,
That honest love might think it no disgrace,
though they that love do hap to sunder place.

Well, Contarenus well, what shall ensue?
you are the cause whose yielding makes me yield,
Yet of my word for ever hold this true,
whereon you may assured comfort build:
Till death my soul and body shall depart,
your love shall lodge in some part of my heart.

Such is my recompense.
Now do I feel the pangs the Sea men bide,
which having harbour nigh in hope to land
By turning wind are driven to try the tide,
and trust the Seas thereby to void the sand.
Now do I feel the depth of mothers pain,
for death of child she hoped to see again.
Was ever man more near his haven of bliss?
his ship driven forth with wind that filled the sail,
Had ever man such cause of hopeless miss,
as I which at the fall so soon did fail?
Did Fortune ere so sudden show her power
as in her mirth so soon again to lower?
When I had lived so long in strange exile,
in desert wastes commanded still to dwell,
Disfauored of my prince (alas the while)
and bard my Ladies sight my heaviest hell:
Again at last though to her pain we met,
so Love in her surmounted luckless let,
Which love as it did work in her to ease,
so Fathers search which sought to salve his loss,
Hath bred us both more cause of great displease,
and tied us thus to try more bitter cross:
By duty she is forced to relent,
and leaves to love a leisure to repent.
Yet can I not Gaudina blame therefore,
her hearty love, her toiling tractes bewails,
She is the lodge where virtue makes her store,
it was her sire that bred my doleful days:
Most happy he that on her jove can hit,
most haplesse I for so forgoing it.
And so far went I yet as one that spied,
her whole estate depend upon my grant,
Though my mishap herein be not denied,
yet of her spied my self may justly vaunt.
To work her good my life I would forgo,
as I have done though to my endless woe.

Friend Niphe could we two have ever once surmised,
that such event would fall to this exceeding love,
Or that blind Cupid could so quickly be suppressed,
which to all reason first so strongly gave the glove?

I never thought but that there might fall out some turn,
the stream did run so strong, it threatened still to stay,
The flame so flashing hot could not so always burn,
but being closely kept would burst some other way.

What Niphe, art thou here, and heard my plaint?
with silent voice could thou such grief abide?
Which heretofore when fortune gave the taint,
from sounding shrill could not thine anguish hide?
Oh help in sound to show my sorrowing state,
which seemed to thee most happy but of late.

I will good sir do al that lies in me,
to ease your care whose case doth touch me near,
To find you out by land, and eke by Sea,
my self did toil twixt hope and trembling fear,
Whose shaking off in sort as now we see,
is sour to you, and nothing sweet to me.
But since you may with licence of my Lord,
return again from whence you were exiled,
Why will you not with him therein accord?
me thinks refusing that, you are beguiled,
There whom you love, you may have still in sight,
which step in love was never holden light.

Can I behold another to embrace,
where I my self my Love have always cast,
Would not my grief bewray it self in place,
to see my Love so clearly from me past.
Good Niphe help, this is my last request,
to show my grief good Niphe do thy best.

O silly Bird what feels thy heavy breast,
which seeking food to feed thy young withal,
At thy return doest find thy empty nest,
and none therein to answer at thy call?
How can thy heart but melt away for grief,
forgoing them to thee of late so lief?
How could thou Thisby stay, by trembling hand,
from reauing thee thy then so loathsome life,
When dead on ground thy Pyrramus began stand,
who hoped forthwith to have thee to his wife?
The nearer hope the fuller fraught with gall,
when trust in hope to rest hath sudden fall.
Poor Contarenus how hath Fortune fickle dame,
procured thy grief in offering thee her hand?
Which in thy cause doth now deserve most blame,
when she would seem thy special friend to stand,
O ye that trust the whirling of her wheel,
beware the wrench at turning of her heel.
And you that look aloft beyond degree,
when fairest wind doth fill your flying sail,
Hold fast for fear your footing ficklest be,
when hope will seem to help you to prevail.
So did she here with Contarenus play,
from whom she fled when she made show of stay.
I thank thee Niphe for thy mournful song,
the tune whereof delights the doleful ears
Of such as justly may complain the wrong,
whose grief dams up the flood of trickling tears.
Farewell to both, since I must needs depart,
bear witness of my woe and careful heart.
And tel my Lady dear that I intend,
henceforth to seek if I may meet her friend,
Loricus whom the Hermit did commend,
I'll bid him think and hope one day to find
Reward for that his faithful service long,
till when we both may plain of fortunes wrong.
Yet say, I will abide hers to command,
where so adventures hard shall carry me,
Not leaving love by Sea nor yet by land,
though that I love, I never hap to see.
Oh careful heart oppressed with such desires,
as lacks the joys that liking aye requires.
Yet this I am assur'de her Princely heart,
where she hath loved will never quite forget,
I know in her I shall have still apart,
in honest sort I know she loves me yet.
These thoughts in me maintain the hope of life,
which other ways by death should end the strife.

Well then I see our fortune must divide,
we must again to Countries land retire,
This knight delights in sorrowing to abide,
For missing her which was his whole desire.
My self have felt such travel on their train,
as I am glad home to return again.
The Gods send al good speed that tarry here,
and chiefly her which governs al the rest,
As for my self I will spread far and near,
for princely praise that she deserves best:
And that God loved us which made us stay,
where virtuous Queen doth stately sceptre sway.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman. 1585.


