WHat means fair Britains mighty Conqueror
So suddenly to cast away his staff?
And all in passion, to forsake the tilt.

My Lord, this triumph we solemnise here,
Is for mere love to your increasing joys:
Only expecting cheerful looks for all.
What sudden pangs than moves your majesty,
To dim the brightness of the day with frowns?

Ah: good my Lords, misconstrue not the cause:
At least, suspect not my displeased brows
I amorously do bear to your intent:
For thanks and all that you can wish I yield.
But that which makes me blush and shame to tell,
Is cause why thus I turn my conquering eyes
To cowards looks and beaten fantasies.

Since we are guiltless, we the less dismay
To see this sudden change possess (...) cheer:
For if it issue from your own conceits,
Bred by suggestion of some envious thoughts:
Your highness wisdom may suppress it straight.
Yet tell us (good my Lord) what thought it is,
That thus bereaves you of your late content,
That in advise we may assist your grace,
Or bend our forces to revive your spirits.

Ah Marks Lubeck, in thy power it lies
To rid my bosom of these thraled dumps:
And therefore, good my Lords forbear awhile,
That we may parley of these private cares,
Whose strength subdues me more than all the world.

We go and wish thee private conference,
Public affects in this accustomed peace.

Now Marks must a Conqueror at arms
disclose himself thrald to unarmed thoughts,
And threatened of a shadow, yield to lust:
No sooner had my sparkling eyes beheld
The flames of beauty blazing on this piece,
But suddenly a sense of miracle
Imagined on thy lovely Masters face,
Made me abandon bodily regard,
And cast all pleasures on my woonded soul:
Then gentle Marks tell me what she is,
That thus thou honour on thy warlike shield.
And if thy love and interest be such,
As justly may give place to mine,
That if it be: my soul with honours wings
May fly into the bosom of my dear.
If not, close them and stoop into my grave.

If this be all renowned Conqueror:
Advance your drooping spirits, and revive
The wonted courage of your Conquering mind,
For this fair picture painted on my shield
Is the true counterfeit of lo^ Blanch
Princes and daughter to the King of Danes:
Whose beauty and excess of ornaments
Deserves another manner of defence
Pomp and high person to attend her state,
Then Marks Lubeck any way presents.
Therefore her virtues I resign to thee,
Already shrinde in thy religious breast,
To be advanced and honoured to the full.
Nor bear I this an argument of love:
But to renown fair Blanch my Sovereigns child,
In every place where I by arms may do it.

Ah Marks, thy words bring heaven unto my soul,
And had I heaven to give for thy reward:
Thou should be thronde in no unworthy place.
But let my uttermost wealth suffice thy worth,
Which here I vow, and to aspire the bliss
That hangs on quick atchiuement of my love,
Thy self and I will travail in disguise,
To bring this Lady to our Britain Court.

Let VVilliam but bethink what may avail,
And let me die if I deny my aid.

Then thus the Duke Dirot and Therle Dimach
Will I leave substitutes to rule my Realm,
While mighty love forbids my being here,
And in the name of Sir Robert of VVindsor
Will go with thee unto the Danish Court.
Keep VVilliams secretes Marks if thou love him.
Bright Blanch I come, sweet fortune favour me,
And I will laud thy name eternally.

Come daughter we must learn to shake of pomp,
To leave the state that carst beseemd a Knight
And gentleman of no mean descent,
To undertake this homely millers trade:
Thus must we mask to save our wr^ed lives,
Threatened by Conquest of this haplesse Yle:
Whose sad invasions by the Conqueror,
Have made a number such as we subject
Their gentle necks unto their stubborn yoke,
Of drudging labour and base pesantrie.
Sir Thomas Godard now old Goddard is
Goddard the miller of fair Manchester.
Why should not I content me with this state?
As good Sir Edmund Trofferd did the f^ile.
And thou sweet Em must stoop to high estate.
To join with mine that thus we may protect
Our harmeles lives, which led in greater port
Would be an envious object to our foes,
That seek to root all Britains Gentry
From bearing countenance against their tyranny.

Good Father let my full resolved thoughts,
Wi^h settled pa^iens to support this chance
Be some poor comfort to your aged soul:
For therein rests the height of my estate,
That you are pleased with this deiection,
And that all toils my hands may undertake,
May serve to work your worthiness content.

Thanks my dear Daughter: these thy pleasant words
Transfer my soul into a second heaven:
And in thy settled mind, my joys consist,
My state reuyued and I in former plight.
Although our outward pomp be thus abased,
And thralde to drudging, stay less of the world,
Let us retain those honourable minds
There lately governed our superior state.
Wherein true gentry is the only mean
That makes us differ from base millers borne:
Though we expect no knightly delicates,
Nor thirst in soul for former sovereignty.
Yet may our minds as highly scorn to stoop
To base desires of vulgars worldlynes,
As if we were in our presedent way.
And lovely daughter, since thy youthful years
Must needs admit as young affections:
And that sweet love unpartial perceives
Her dainty subjects through every part,
In chief receive these lessons from my lips.
The true discoverers of a Virgins due
Now requisite, now that I know thy mind
Something enclynde to favour Manuils suit,
A gentleman, thy Lover in protest:
And that thou may not be by love deceived,
But try his meaning fit for thy desert,
In pursuit of all amorous desires,
Regard thine honour. Let not vehement sighs
Nor earnest vows importing fervent love,
Render thee subject to the wrath of lust:
For that transformed to former sweet delight,
Will bring thy body and thy soul to shame.
Chaste thoughts and modest conversations
Of proof to keep out all enchanting vows,
Vain sighs, forced tears, and pitiful aspects,
Are they that make deformed Ladies fair,
Poor wretch, and such intycing men,
That seek of all but only present grace,
Shall in perseverance of a Virgins due
Prefer the most refusers to the choice
Of such a soul as yielded what they thought.
But hoe: where is Trotter?

Wheres Trotter? why Trotter is here.
in faith, you and your daughter go up and down weeping,
And wamenting and keeping of a wamentation,
As who should say, the Mill would go with your wamenting.

How now Trotter? why complain thou so.

Why yonder is a company of young men and m^ydes Keep such a styr for their
grist, that they would have it before my stones be ready to grind it. But
in faith, I would I could break wind enough backward: you should not tarry
for your gryst I warrant you.


Content thee Trotter, I will go pacify them.

I wis you will when I cannot. Why look,
You have a Mill. Why, whats your Mill without me?
Or rather Mistres, what were I without you?

Nay Trotter, if you fall achyding, I will give you cuer.

I chide you dame to amend you.
You are too fine to be a Millers daughter:
For if you should but stoop to take up the told dish
You will have the cramp in your finger
At least ten weeks after.

Ah well said Trotter, teach her to play the good huswife
And thou shalt have her to thy wife, if thou can get her good will.

Ah words wherein I see Matrimony come load^n
With kisses to salute me: Now let me alone, to pick the Mill,
To fill the hopper to take the told to mend the sails,
Yea, and to make the mill to go with the very force of my love.

I come I come, in faith now you shall have your gryst
Or else Trotter will trot and amble himself to death.

Lord Marks Lubecke welcome home,
Welcome brave Knight unto the Denmark King:
For Williams sake the noble Norman Duke,
So famous for his fortunes and success,
That graces him with name of Conqueror:
Right double welcome must thou be to us.

And to my Lord the king shall I recount
Your graces courteous entertainment,
That for his sake vouchsafe to honour me
A simple Knight attendant on his grace.

But say Sir Knight, what may I call your name.

Robert Windsor and like your Majesty.

I tell thee Robert, I so admire the man,
As that I count it heinous guilt in him
That honours not Duke William with his heart.
Blanch, bid this stranger welcome, good my girl.

Sir, should I neglect your highness charge herein,
It might be thought of base discourtesy.
Welcome Sir Knight to Denmark heartily.

Thanks gentle Lady. Lord Marks, what is she?

That same is Blanch daughter to the King,
The substance of the shadow that you saw.

May this be she, for whom I crossed the Seas?
I am ashamed to think I was so fond.
In whom theirs nothing that contents my mind.
Ill head, worse featured, vncomly, nothing courtly.
Swart and ill favoured, a Colliers sanguine skin.
I never saw a harder favoured slut.
Love her? for what: I can no whit abide her.

Mariana, I have this day received letters
From Swethia, that lets me understand,
your ransom is collecting there with speed,
And shortly shall be hither sent to us.

Not that I find occasion of mislike
My entertainment in your graces court,
But that I long to see my native home.

And reason have you Madam for the same:
Lord Marks I commit unto your charge
The entertainment of Sir Robert here,
Let him remain with you within the Court
In solace and disport, to spend the time.

I thank your hightnes, whose bounden I remain.
Unhappy Blanch, what strange effects are these
That works within my thoughts confusedly,
That still me thinks affection draws me on
To take, to like, nay more, to love this Knight.

A modest countenance, no heavy sullen look,
Not very fair, but ritchly decked with favour:
A sweet face, an exceeding dainty hand,
A body were it framed of wax
By all the cunning artists of the world
It could not better be proportioned.

How now Sir Robert? in a study man?
Here is no time for contemplation.

My Lord, there is a certain odd conceit,
Which on the sudden greatly troubles me.

How like you Blanch? I partly do perceive
The little boy hath played the wagg with you.

The more I look, the more I love to look.
Who seyes that Mariana is not fair?
I'll gage my gauntlet against the envious man,
That dares avow there lives her compare.

Sir Robert, you mistake your counterfeit.
This is the Lady which you came to see.

yea, my Lord: She is counterfeit in deed:
For there is the substance that best contents me.

That is my love. Sir Robert you do wrong me.

The better for you sir, she is your Love,
As for the wrong, I see not how it grows.

In seeking that which is an others right.

As who should say your love were privileged
That none might look upon her but your self.

These jars becomes not our familiarity,
Nor will I stand on terms to move your patience.

Why my Lord, am not I of flesh and blood as well as you?
Then give me leave to love as well as you.

To Love Sir Robert? but whom? not she I Love?
Nor stands it with the honour of my state,
To brooke corrivals with me in my love.

So Sir, we are thorough for that L.
Ladies farewell. Lord Marks, will you go?
I will find a time to speak with her I trow?

With all my heart. Come Ladies will you walk?

Ah Em the subject of my restless thoughts,
The Anuyle whereupon my heart doth beat,
Framing thy state to thy desert,
Full ill this life becomes thy heavenly look,
Wherein, sweet love and virtue sits enthroned.
Bad world, where riches is esteemed above them both,
In whose base eyes nought else is bountiful.
A Millers daughter, says the multitude,
Should not be loved of a Gentleman.
But let them breath their souls into the air:
Yet will I still affect thee as my self,
So thou be constant in thy plighted vow.
But here comes one, I will listen to his talk.

Go William Conqueror and seek thy love.
Seek thou a minion in a foreign land
Whilst I draw back and court my love at home,
The millers daughter of fair Manchester
Hath bound my feet to this delight some soil:
And from her eyes do dart such golden beams,
That holds my heart in her subjection.

He ruminates on my beloved choice:
God grant he come not to prevent my hope.
But here's another, him yle listen to.

Nature unjust, in utterance of thy art,
To grace a peasant with a Princes fame:
Peasant am I so to misterme my love
Although a millers daughter by her birth:
Yet may her beauty and her virtues well suffice
To hyde the blemish of her birth in hell,
Where neither envious eyes nor thought can pierce,
But endless darkness ever smother it.
Go William Conqueror and seek thy love,
Whilst I draw back and court mine own the while:
Decking her body with such costly robes
As may become her beauties worthynes,
That so thy labours may be laughed to scorn,
And she thou seek in foreign regions,
Be darkened and eclipsed when she arrives,
By one that I have chosen nearer home.

What comes he to, to intercept my love?
Then hye thee Manuile to forestall such foes.

What now Lord Valingford are you behind?
The king had chosen you to go with him.

So chose he you, therefore I marvel much
That both of us should linger in this sort.
What may the king imagine of our staye?

The king may justly think we are to blame:
But I imagined I might well be spared
And that no other man had borne my mind.

The like did I: in friendship then resolve
What is the cause of your unlooked for stay?

Lord Valingford I tell thee as a friend,
Love is the cause why I have stayed behind.

Love my Lord? of whom.

Em the millers daughter of Manchester.

But may this be?

Why not my Lord? I hope full well you know
That love respects no difference of state
So beauty serve to stir affection.

But this it is that makes me wonder most:
That you and I should be of one conseite
In such a strange unlikely passion.

But is that true? my Lord: I hope you do but jest.

I would I did: then were my grief the less.

Nay never grieve: for if the cause be such
To join our thoughts in such a Sympathy:
All envy set aside: let us agree
To yield to eythers fortune in this choice.

Content say I, and what so ere befall,
Shake hands my Lord and fortune thrive at all.

Trotter where have you been?

Where have I been? why what signifies this.

A kerchief, doth it not?

What call you this I pray?

I say it is an Urinal.

Then this is mystically to give you to understand
I have been at the Phismicaries house.

How long hast thou been sick?

In faith, even as long as I have not been half well,
And that hath been a long time.

A loitering time I rather imagine.

It may be so: but the Phismicary tells me that you can help me

Why, any thing I can do for recovery of thy health,
Be right well assured of.

Then give me your hand

To what end.

That the ending of an old indenture
Is the beginning of a new bargain.

What bargain?

That you promised to do any thing to recover my health.

On that condition I give thee my hand.

Ah sweet Em.

How now Trotter? your masters daughter?

In faith I aim at the fairest,
Ah Em, sweet Em: fresh as the flower:
That hath pour to wound my heart,
And ease my smart, of me poor thief,
In prison bound.

So all your rhyme lies on the ground.
But what means this?

Ah mark the devise,
For thee my louefull sick I was, in hazard of my life
Thy promise was to make me whole, and for to be my wife.
Let me enjoy my love my dear,
And thou possess thy Trottter here.

But I meant no such matter.

Yes woos but you did, I'll go to our Parson Sir Iohn
And he shall mumble up the marriage out of hand.

But here comes one that will forbid the Banes.

Ah Sir you come too late.

What remedy Trotter.

Go Trotter, my father calls.

Would you have me go in, and leave you two here?

Why, dare thou not trust me?

Yes faith, even as long as I see you.

Go thy ways I pray thee heartily.

That same word (heartily) is of great force.
I will go: but I pray sir, beware you
Come not too near the wench.

I am greatly beholding to you
Ah Masters, sometime I might have said my love,
But time and fortune hath bereaved me of that,
And I am abject in those gracious eyes
That with remorse erst saw into my grief,
May sit and sigh the sorrows of my heart.

In deed my Manuile hath some cause to doubt,
When such a Swain is rival in his love.

Ah Em, were he the man that causes this mistrust,
I should esteem of thee as at the first.

But is my love in earnest all this while?

Believe me Em, it is not time to jest
When others joys, what lately I possessed.

If touching love, my Manuile charge me thus?
Unkindly must I take it at his hands,
For that my conscience clears me of offence.

Ah impudent and shameless in thy ill,
That with thy cunning and defraudfull tongue,
Seekese to delude the honest meaning mind:
Was never heard in Manchester before,
Of true lover then hath been betwixt us twain:
And for my part how I have hazarded
Displeasure of my father and my friends
Thy self can witness. Yet notwithstanding this:
Two genlemen attending on Duke William
Mountney and Valingford, as I heard them named,
Oft times resort to see and to be seen,
Walking the street fast by thy fathers door,
Whose glancing eyes up to the windows cast,
Gives testies of their Masters amorous hart.
This Em is noted and too much talked on.
Some see it without mistrust of ill.
Others there are that scorning grynne thereat,
And saith, there goes the millers daughters wooers.
Ah me, whom chiefly and most of all it doth concern
To spend my time in grief and vex my soul,
To think my love should be rewarded thus,
And for thy sake abhore all women kind.

May not a maid look upon a man
Without suspicious judgment of the world?

If sight do move offence, it is the better not to see.
But thou did more inconstant as thou art,
For with them thou had talk and conference.

May not a maid talk with a man without mistrust?

Not with such men suspected amorous.

I grieve to see my Manuiles jealousy

Ah Em, faithful love is full of jealousy,
So did I love thee true and faithfully,
For which I am rewarded most unthankfully.
And so away? what in displeasure gone?
And left me such a bitter sweet to gnaw upon?
Ah Manuile, little wottest thou,
How near this parting goes to my heart.
Uncourteous love whose followers reapes reward,
Of hate, disdain, reproach and infamy,
The fruit of frantic, bedlome ielozie.
But here comes one of these suspicious men:
VVitnes my God without desert of me:
For only Manuile honour I in heart:
Nor shall unkindness cause me from him to start.

For this good fortune, Venus be thou blessed,
To meet my love, the mistres of my heart,
Where time and place gives opportunity
At full to let her understand my love.
Fair mistres, since my fortune sorts so well:
Hear you a word. What means this?
Nay stay fair Em.

I am going homewards, sir:

Yet stay sweet love to whom I must disclose
The hidden secrets of a lovers thoughts,
Not doubting but to find such kind remorse
As naturally you are inclined to.

The Gentle-man your friend Sir.
I have not seen him this four days at the least.

Whats that to me? I speak not sweet in person of my friend,
But for my self, whom if that love deserve
To have regard being honourable love:
Not base affects of loose lascivious love:
Whom youthful wantons play and dally with:
But that vnites in honourable bands of holy rytes,
And knits the sacred knot that Gods.

What mean you sir, to keep me here so long?
I cannot understand you by your signs.
You keep a prattling with your lips,
But never a word you speak that I can hear.

What is she deaf? a great impediment.
Yet remedies there are for such defects.
Sweet Em, it is no little grief to me,
To see where nature in her pride of art
Hath wrought perfections rich and admirable.

Speak you to me Sir?

To thee my only joy.

I cannot hear you.

Oh plague of Fortune: Oh hell without compare.
What boots it us to gaze and not enjoy?

Fare you well Sir.

Fare well my love. Nay farewell life and all.
Could I procure redress for this infirmity,
It might be means she would regard my suit.
I am acquainted with the Kings Physicians:
Amongst the which, there's one mine honest friend,
Seignior Alberto, a very learned man.
His judgment will I have to help this ill.
Ah Em, fair Em, if Art can make thee whole:
I'll buy that sense for thee, although it cost me dear.
But Mountney: stay, this may be but deceit,
A matter fained only to delude thee.
And not unlike, perhaps by Valingford,
He loves fair Em as well as I.
As well as I? ah no, not half so well.
Put case, yet may he be thine enemy,
And give her counsel to dissemble thus.
I'll try the event, and if it fall out so?
Friendship farewell: Love makes me now a foe.

Trust me my Lord, I am sorry for your hurt.

Gramercy Madam: but it is not great:
Only a thrust, pricked with a Rapiers point.

How grew the quarrel my Lord?

Sweet Lady, for thy sake.
There was this last night two masks in one company,
My self the foremost: The other strangers were:
Amongst the which, when the Music began to sound the Measures,
Each Masker made choice of his Lady:
And one more forward than the rest stepped towards thee:
Which I perceiving thrust him aside, and took thee my self.
But this was taken in so ill part,
That at my coming out of the court gate, with jostling together,
It was my chance to be thrust into the arm.
The doer thereof because he was the original cause of the disorder
At that inconvenient time, was presently committed,
And is this morning sent for to answer the matter:
Robert of Windsor how now?

In faith my Lord a prisoner: but what ails your arm?

Hurt the last night by mischance.

What, not in the mask at the Court gate?

Yes trust me there.

Why then my Lord I thank you for my nights lodging.

And I you for my hurt, if it were so?
Keeper away, I discharge you of your prisoner.

Lord Marks, you offered me disgrace to shoulder me.

Sir I knew you not, and therefore you must pardon me
And the rather it might be alleged to me of
Mere simply, to see another dance with my Maistris
disguised, and I my self in presence: but seeing it
Was our happs to damnify each other unwillingly,
Let us be content with our harms,
And lay the fault where it was and so become friends.

In faith I am content with my nights lodging
If you be content with your hurt.

Not content that I have it, but content
To forget how I came by it.

My Lord, here comes Lady Blannch, lets away.

With good will, Lady you will stay?

Madam.

Mariana, as I am grieved with thy presence:
So am I not offended for thy absence,
And were it not a breach to modesty,
Thou shouldest know before I left thee.

How near is this humour to madness
If yon hold on as you begin, you
are in a pretty way to scolding.

To scolding huswife?

Madam here comes one,

There doth in deed. Fellow would thou have any thing with any body here?

I have a letter to deliver to the Lady Mariana.

Give it me.

There must none but she have it.
Go to foolish fellow.
And therefore to ease the anger I sustain,
I'll be so bold to open it, whats here?
Sir Robert greets you well?
Your Maistries, his love, his life? Oh amorous man,
How he entertains his new Masters?
And bestows on Lubeck his od friend
A horne night capp to keep in his wit.

Madam though you have discourteously
Red my letter, yet I pray you give it me.

Then take it there, and there, and there.

How far doth this differ from modesty:
Yet will I gather up the pieces, which happily
May show to me the intent thereof
Though not the meaning.

Your servant and love sir Robert of Windsor
Alius William the Conqueror, wishes long health and happiness.
Is this William the Conqueror, shrouded under
The name of sir Robert of VVindsor?
Were he the Monarch of the world
He should not disposesse Lubeck of his Love.
Therefore I will to the Court, and there if I can
Close to be friends with Lady Blanch,
And thereby keep Lubeck my Love for my self:
And further the Lady Blanch in her suit as much as I may.

Jealousy that sharpes the lovers sight,
And makes him conceive and construe his intent,
Hath so bewitched my lovely Manuils senses,
That he misdoubts his Em that loves his soul.
He doth suspect corrivals in his love:
Which how untrue it is, be judge my God.
But now no more: Here comes Valingford:
Shift him off noww as thou hast done the other.

See how Fortune presents me with the hope I looked for.
Fair Em?

Who is that?

I am Valingford thy love and friend.

I cry you mercy Sir: I thought so by your speech.

What ails thy eyes?

Oh blind Sir, blind, stricken blind by mishap on a sudden.

But is it possible you should be taken on such a sudden?
Unfortunate Valingford to be thus crossed in thy love.
Fair Em, I am not a little sorry to see this thy hard hap:
Yet nevertheless, I am acquainted with a learned Physician,
That will do any thing for thee at my request.
To him will I resort, and enquire his judgment,
As concerning the recovery of so excellent a fence.

O Lord Sir: and of all things I cannot abide Physic:
The very name thereof to me is odious.

No? not the thing will do thee so much good?
Sweet Em, hither I came to parley of love
Hoping to have found thee in thy wonted prosperity.
And have the gods so unmercifully thwarted my expectation?
By dealing so finisterly with thee sweet Em?

Good sir, no more, it fits not me
To have respect to such vain fantasies,
As idle love presents my ears withal,
More reason I should ghostly give my self,
To sacred prayers for this my former sin,
For which this plague is justly fallen upon me,
Then to harken to the vanities of love.

Yet sweet Em accept this jewel at my hand
Which I bestow on thee in token of my love.

A jewel sir, what pleasure can I have
In jewels, treasure, or any worldly thing
That want my sight that should deserne thereof.
Ah sir I must leave you:
The pain of mine eyes is so extreme
I cannot long stay in a place. I take my leave.

Zounds, what a cross is this to my conceit?
But Valingford, search the depth of this devise.
Why may not this be fained subtlety,
By Mountneies invention, to the intent
That I seeing such occasion should leave off my suit,
And not any more persist to solicit her of love.
I'll try the event, if I can by any means perceive
The effect of this deceit to be procured by his means,
Friend Mountney the one of us is like to repent our bargeine.

Lady, since that occasion forward in our good
Presents place and opportunity:
Let me entreat your wonted kind consent
And friendly furtherance in a suite I have.

My Lord you know you need not to entreat,
But may command Mariana to her power
Be it no impeachment to my honest fame.

Free are my thoughts from such base villainy
As may in question Lady call your name:
Yet is the matter of such consequence
Standing upon my honourable credit,
To be effected with such zeal and secrecy,
As should I speak and fail my expectation
I would redound greatly to my prejudice.

My Lord wherein hath Mariana given you occasion
That you should mistrust or else be jealous of my secrecy.

Mariana, do not misconstrue of me:
I not mistrust thee, nor thy secrecy,
Nor let my love misconstrue my intent,
Nor think thereof but well and honourable.
Thus stands the case: Thou know from England
Hither came with me Robert of VVindsor, a noble man at Arms,
Lusty and valiant, in spring time of his years,
No marvel then though he prove amorous.

True my Lord, he came to see fair Blanch.

No Mariana, that is non it.
His love to Blanch was then extinct
When first he saw thy face.
Tis thee he loves: yea, thou art only she
That is masters and commander of his thoughts.

Well well my Lord, I like you, for such drifts
Put silly Ladies often to their shifts
Oft have I heard you say, you loved me well:
Yea, sworn the same, and I believed you to.
Can this be found an action of good faith,
Thus to dissemble where you found true love?

Mariana, I not dissemble on mine honour:
Nor fails my faith to thee. But for my friend,
For princely William, by whom thou shalt possess
The title of estate and Majesty,
Fitting thy love and virtues of thy mind,
For him I speak, for him do I entreat,
And with thy favour fully do resign
To him the claim and interest of my love.
Sweet Mariana then deny me not.
Love William, love my friend and honour me
Who else is clean dishonoured by thy means.

Borne to mishap, my self am only she,
On whom the Sun of Fortune never shined:
But Planets ruled by retrogard aspect,
Foretold mine ill in my nativity.

Sweet Lady seace, let my entreaty serve
To pacify the passion of thy grief,
Which well I know proceeds of ardent love.

But Lubeck now regards not Mariana:

Even as my life, so love I Mariana.

Why do you post me to another then?

He is my friend, and I do love the man.

Then will Duke VVilliam rob me of my Love?

No as his life Mariana he doth love.

Speak for yourself my Lord let him alone.

So do I Madam, for he and I am one.

Then loving you I do content you both.

In loving him you shall content us both.
Me, for I crave that favour at your hands:
He for hopes that comfort at your hands.

Leave of my Lord, here comes the Lady Blanch.

Hard hap to break us of our talk so soon,
Sweet Mariana do remember me.

Thy Mariana cannot choose but remember thee.

Mariana well met, you are very forward in your Love?

Madam be it in secret spoken to your self,
If you will but follow the complot I have invented
you will not think me so forward
As your self shall prove fortunate.

As how?

Madam as thus: It is not unknown to you
That Sir Robert of Windsor,
A man that you do not little esteem,
Hath long importuned me of Love:
But rather then I will be found false
Or unjust to the Marks Lubeck,
I will as did the constant lady Penelope
Undertake to effect some great task.

What of all this?

The next time that Sir Robert shall come
In his wonted sort to solicit me with Love,
I will seem to agree and like of any thing
That the Knight shall demand so far forth
As it be no impeachment to my chastity:
And to conclude, point some place for to meet the man,
For my conveyance from the Denmark Court:
Which determined upon, he will appoint some certain time
For our departure: whereof you having intelligence,
You may soon set down a plot to were the English Crown.
And than?

What then?

If Sir Robert prove a King and you his Queen
How than?

Were I assured of the one, as I am persuaded
Of the other, there were some possibility in it.
But here comes the man.

Madam begone and you shall see
I will work to your desire and my content.

Con. Lady this is well and happily met,
Fortune hitherto hath been my foe,
And though I have oft sought to speak with you,
Yet still I have been crossed with sinister happs.
I cannot Madame tell a loving tale
Or court my Masters with fabulous discoursies,
That am a soldier sworn to follow arms:
But this I bluntly let you understand,
I honour you with such religious Zeal
As may become an honourable mind.
Nor may I make my love the seege of Troye
That am a stranger in this Country.
First what I am, I know you are resolved,
For that my friend hath let you that to understand,
The Marks Lubeck to whom I am so bound,
That whilst I live I count me only his.

Surely you are beholding to the Marks,
For he hath been an earnest spokes-man in your cause.

And yields my Lady then at his request.
To grace Duke VVilliam with her gracious love?

My Lord I am a prisoner, and hard it were
To get me from the Court.

An easy matter to get you from the Court,
If case that you will thereto give consent.

Put case I should, how would you use me than?

Not otherwise but well and honourably.
I have at Sea a ship that doth attend,
Which shall forthwith conduct us into England
Where when we are, I straight will marry thee.
We may not stay deliberating long
Least that suspicion, envious of our weal
Set in a foot to hinder our pretence.

But this I think were most convenient
To mask my face the better to escape unknown.

A good devise: till then, Farewell fair love.

But this I must entreat your grace,
You would not seek by lust unlawfully
To wrong my chaste determinations.

I hold that man most shameless in his sin
That seeks to wrong an honest Ladies name
Whom he thinks worthy of his marriage bed.

In hope your other is true,
I leave your grace till the appointed time.

O happy William, blessed in thy love:
Most fortunate in Marianaes love,
Well Lubeck well, this courtesy of thine
I will requite if God permit me life.

Valingford, so hardly I digest an injury
Thou hast proffered me, as were not that I detest to do what stands
Not with the honour of my name,
Thy death should pay thy ransom of thy fault.

And Mountney, had not my revenging wrath
Incensed with more than ordinary love
been such for to deprive thee of thy life,
Thou had not lived to brave me as thou doest wretch as thou art,
wherein hath Valingford offended thee?
That honourable bond which late we did confirm
In presence of the Gods,
When with the Conqueror we arrived here
For my part hath been kept inviolably
Till now too much abused by thy villainy,
I am enforced to cancel all those bands,
By hating him which I so well did love.

Subtle thou art, and cunning in thy frawd,
That giving me occasion of offence,
Thou pickst a quarrel to excuse thy shame.
Why Valingford, was it not enough for thee
To be aryuall twixt me and my love,
But counsel her to my no small disgrace,
That when I came to talk with her of love,
She should seem deaf, as feigning not to hear.

But hath she Mountney used thee as thou say?

Thou know too well she hath:
Wherein thou could not do me greater injury.

Then I perceive we are deluded both.
For when I offered many gifts of Gold and Jewels
To entreat for love, she hath refused them with a coy disdain,
Alleging that she could not see the Sun.
The same conjectured I to be thy drift,
That feigning so she might be rid of me.

The like did I by thee. But are not these natural impediments?

In my conjecture merely counterfeit:
Therefore lets join hands in friendship once again,
Since that the jar grew only by conjecture.

With all my heart: Yet lets try the truth hereof.

With right good will. We will straight unto her father,
And there to learn whither it be so or no.

Come on my love, the comfort of my life:
Disguised thus we may remain unknown.
And get we once to Seas, I force not then,
We quickly shall attain the English shore.

But this I urge you with your former oath.
You shall not seek to violate mine honour,
Until our marriage rights be all performed.

Mariana, here I swear to thee by heaven,
And by the honour that I bear to Arms,
Never to seek or crave at hands of thee
The spoil of honourable chastity
Until we do attain the English coast,
Where thou shalt be my right espoused Queen.

In hope your oath proceeds from your heart,
Lets leave the Court, and betake us to his power
That governs all things to his mighty will,
And will reward the just with endless joy,
And plague the bad with most extreme annoy.

Lady, as little tarriance as we may,
Lest some misfortune happen by the way.

I tell you sir, it is no little grief to me,
You should so hardly conseit of my daughter,
Whose honest report, though I say it,
Was never blotted with any title of defamation.

Father Miller, the repair of those gentlemen to your house,
Hath given me great occasion to mislike.

As for those gentlemen, I never saw in them
Any evil entreaty. But should they have proffered it?
Her chaste mind hath proof enough to prevent it.

Those gentlemen are as honest as ever I saw:
For in faith one of them gave me six pence
To fetch a quart of Seck. See master here they come.

Trotter, call Em, now they are here together,
I'll have this matter thoroughly debated.

Father, well met. We are come to confer with you.

Nay? with his daughter rather.

Thus it is father, we are come to crave your friendship in a matter.

Gentlemen as you are strangers to me,
Yet by the way of courtesy you shall demand
Any reasonable thing at my hands.

What is the matter so forward?
They came to crave his good will.

It is given us to understand that your daughter
Is suddenly become both blind and deaf.

Marie God for bid, I have sent for her, in deed
She hath kept her chamber this three days.
It were no little grief to me if it should be so?

This is Gods judgment for her treachery.

Gentlemen I fear your words are two true:
See where Trotter comes leading of her.
What ails my Em, not blind I hope?

Mountney and Validgford both together?
And Manuile to whom I have faithfully vowed my love?
Now Em suddenly help thy felfe.

This is no dissembling Valingford.

If ir be? it is cunningly contrived of all sides.

Trotter lend me thy hand,
And as thou love me keep my counsel
And justify what so ever I say, and I'll largely requite thee.

Ah, that's as much as to say you would tell a monstrous,
Terrible, horrible, outrageous lie,
And I shall sooth it, no berladie.

My present extremity wills me, if thou love me Trotrer?

That same word love makes me to do any thing.

Trotter wheres my father?

Why what a blind dunce are you, can you not see?
He stands right before you.

Is this my father?
Good father give me leave to sit
Where I may not be disturbed
Since God hath visited me both of my sight and hearing.

Tell me sweet Em how came this blindness.
Thy eyes are lovely to look on,
And yet have they lost the benefit of their sight.
What a grief is this to thy poor father?

Good father let me uot stand as an open gazing stock to every one,
But in a place a lone as fits a creature so miserable.

Trotter lead her in, the utter overthrow
Of poor Goddardes joy and only solace.

Both blind and deaf, then is she no wife for me?
And glad am I so good occasion is happened:
Now will I away to Manchester
And leave these gentlemen to their blind fortune.

Since fortune hath thus spitefully crossed our hope,
Let us leave this guest and harken after our King:
Who is at this day landed at Lirpoole.

Go my Lord I'll follow you.
Well, now Mountney is gone
I'll stay behind to solicit my love,
For I imagine that I shall find this but a fained invention
Thereby to have us leave off our suits.

Well Lubeck well, it is not possible
But you must be concenting to this act?
Is this the man so highly you extolled?
And play a part so hateful with his friend?
Since first he came with thee into the court
What entertainment and what countenance
He hath received, none better knows than thou.
In recompense whereof he quites me well,
To steal away fair Mariana my prisoner,
Whose ransom being lately greed upon,
I am deluded of by this escape.
Besides, I know not how to answer it
When she shall be demanded home to Swethia.

My gracious Lord, conjecture not I pray
Worser of Lubeck than he doth deserve.
Your highness knows Mariana was my love,
Sole paragon and mistres of my thoughts.
Is it likely I should know of her departure,
Wherein there is no man injured more than I.

That carries reason Marks I confess.
Call forth my daughter. Yet I am persuaded
That she poor soul suspected not her going:
For as I hear: she likewise loved the man,
Which he to blame did not at all regard.

My Lord here is the Princess Mariana:
It is your daughter is conueyed away.

What, my daughter gone?
Now Marks your villainy breaks forth.
This match is of your making, gentle sir:
And you shall dearly know the price thereof.

Knew I thereof, or that there was intent
In Robert thus to steal your highness daughter:
Let heavens in Justice presently confound me.

Not all the protestations thou can use,
Shall save thy life. Away with him to prison.
And minion, otherwise it cannot be,
But you are an agent in this treachery.
I will revenge it thoroughly on you both.
Away with her to prison. Here's stuff in deed?
My daughter stolen away?
It boots not thus to disturb my self,
But presently to send to English William,
To send me that proud knight of Windsor hither,
Here in my Court to suffer for his shame:
Or at my pleasure to be punished there.
Withal, that Blanch be sent me home again,
Or I shall fetch her unto Windsors cost,
Yea, and VVilliams too if he deny her me?.

Could any cross, could any plague be worse?
Could heaven or hell? Did both conspire in one
To afflict my soul, invent a greater scourge
Then presently I am tormented with?
Ah Mariana cause of my lament:
Joy of my hart, and comfort of my life.
For thee I breath my sorrows in the air,
And tyre my self: for silently I sigh,
My sorrows afflictes me soul with equal passion.

Go to sirha, put up, it is to small purpose.

Hence villains hence, dare you lay your hands
Upon your Sovereign?

Well sir, we will deal for that.
But here comes one will remedy all this.

My Lord, watching this night in the camp,
We took this man, and know not what he is:
And in his company was a gallant dame,
A woman fair in outward show she seemed,
But that her face was maskte we could not see
The grace and favour of her countenance.

Tell me good fellow of whence and what thou art.

Why do you not answer my Lord?
He takes scorn to answer.

And take thou scorn to answer my demand?
Thy proud behaviour very well deserves
This misdemeanour at the worst be construed.
Why doest thou neither know, nor hast thou heard?
That in the absence of the Saxon Duke,
Demarch is his especial Substitute
To punish those that shall offend the laws.

In knowing this, I know thou art a traitor.
A rebel, and mutenous conspirator.
Why Demarch, know thou who I am?

Pardon my dread Lord the error of my sense,
And misdemeaner to your princely excellency.

Why Demarch, what is the cause my subjects are in arms?

Free are my thoughts my dread and gracious Lord
From treason to your state and common weal,
Only revengement of a private grudge
By Lord Dirot lately proffered me,
That stands not with the honour of my name,
Is cause I have assembled for my guard
Some men in arms that may withstand his force,
Whose settled malice aims at my life.

Where is Lord Dirot?

In arms my gracious Lord
Not past two miles from hence,
As credibly I am assertained.

Well, come let us go,
I fear I shall find traitors of you both.

In deed sir it would do very well
If you could entreat your father to come hither:
But if you think it be too far,
I care not much to take horse and ride to Manchester,
I am sure my daughter is content with either:
How says thou Elner art thou not?

As you shall think best I must be contented.

Well Elner farewell, only thus much,
I pray make all things in a readiness,
Either to serve here or to carry thither with us.

As for that sir take you no care,
And so I betake you to your journey.
But soft what gentleman is this?

God speed sir, might a man crave a word or two with you

God forbid else sir, I pray you speak your pleasure.

The gentleman that parted from you, was he not
Of Manchester, his father living there of good account.

Yes mary is he sir: why do you ask?
Belike you have had some acquaintance with him.

I have been acquainted in times past,
But through his double dealing,
I am grown weary of his company.
For be it spoken to you:
He hath been acquainted with a poor millers daughter,
And diverse times hath promised her marriage.
But what with his delays and flouts,
He hath brought her into such a taking,
That I fear me it will cost her her life.

To be plain with you sir:
His father and I have been of old acquaintance,
And a motion was made,
Beteewene my daughter and his son,
Which is now thoroughly agreed upon
Save only the place appointed for the marriage,
Whether it shall be kept here or at Manchester,
And for no other occasion he is now ridden.

What hath he done to you?
That you should speak so ill of the man.

Oh gentlewoman I cry you mercy,
He is your husband that shall be.

If I knew this to be true?
He should not be my husband were he never so good:
And therefore, good father,
I would desire you to take the pains
To bear this gentleman company to Manchester
to know whether this be true or no.

Now trust me gentleman he deals with me very hardly,
Knowing how well I meant to him.
But I care not much to ride to Manchester
To know whether his fathers will be,
He should deal with me so badlie.
Will it please you sir to go in, we will presently take horse away.

If it please you to go in
I'll follow you presently.
Now shall I be revenged on Manuile,
And by this means get Em to my wife.
And therefore I will straight to her fathers
And inform them both of all that is happened.

What news with the Denmark Ambassador?

Mary thus, the King of Denmark and my Sovereign
Doth send to know of thee what is the cause
That injuriously against the law of arms,
Thou hast stolen away his only daughter Blanch,
The only stay and comfort of his life.
Therefore by me he wills thee to send his daughter Blanch:
Or else forthwith he will levy such an host,
As soon shall fetch her in despite of thee.

Ambassador, this answer Iretorne thy King.
He wills me to send his daughter Blanch:
Saying I conveyed her from the Danish court,
That never yet did once as think thereof.
As for his menacing and daunting threats
I nill regard him nor his Danish power.
For if he come to fetch her forth my Realm,
I will provide him such abanquet here
That he shall have small cause to give me thanks.

Is this your answer then?

It is and so begone.

I go but to your cost.

Demarch our subjects erst levied in civil broils,
Musterd forthwith for to defend the Realm,
In hope whereof that we shall find you true,
We freely pardon this thy late offence.

Most humble thanks I render to your grace.

Alas gentleman, why should you trouble your self so much
Considering the imperfections of my daughter
Which is able to with-drawe the love of any man from her,
As already it hath done in her first choice.
Master Manuile hath foraken her,
And at Chester shall be married to a mans daughter of no little wealth.
But if my daughter knew so much:
It would go very near her heart I fear me.

Father miller: such is the entire affection to your daughter,
As no misfortune whatsoever can alter.
My fellow Mountney thou see gave quicly over,
But I by reason of my good meaning
Am not so soon to be changed
Although I am borne off with scorns and denial.

Trust me sir I know not what to say,
My daughter is not to be compelled by me,
But here she comes herself: speak to her and spare not:
For I never was troubled with love matters so much before.

Good Lord shall I never be rid of this importunate man?
Now must I dissemble blyndnes again,
Once more for thy sake Manuile thus am I insorced,
Because I shall complete my full resolved mind to thee.
Father where are you?

Here sweet Em, answer this gentleman
That would so fain enjoy thy love.

Where are you sir? will you never leave
This idle and vain pursuit of love?
Is not England stord enought to content you?
But you must still trouble the poor
Contemptible maid of Manchester.

None can content me but the fair maid of Manchester.

I perceive love is vainly described,
That being blind himself,
Would have you likewise troubled with a blind wife,
Having the benefit of your eyes,
But neither follow him so much in folly,
But love one, in whom you may better delight.

Father Miller, thy daughter shall have honour
By granting me her love:
I am a Gentleman of king Williams Court,
And no mean man in king Williams favour.

If you be a Lord sir, as you say:
You offer both yourself and me great wrong:
Yours, as apparent in limitting your love so unorderly,
For which you rashly endure reprochement:
Mine, as open and evident,
When being shut from the vanities of this world,
you would have me as an open gazing stock to all the world:
For lust, not love leads you into this error:
But from the one I will keep me as well as I can,
And yield the other to none but to my father,
As I am bound by duty.

Why fair Em, Manuile hath forsaken thee,
And must at Chester be married, which,
If I speak otherwise than true,
Let thy father speak what credibly he hath heard.

But can it be Manuile will deal so unkindly,
To reward my justice with such monstrous vngentlenes.
Have I dissembled for thy sake?
And doest thou now thus requite it?
In deed these many days I have not seen him,
Which hath made me marvel at his long absence.
But father, are you assured of the words he spake,
were concerning Manuile?

In sooth daughter, now it is forth,
I must needs confirm it.
Master Manuile hath forsaken thee,
And at Chester must be married
To a mans daughter of no little wealth.
His own father procures it,
And therefore I dare credit it,
And do thou believe it,
For trust me daughter it is so.

Then good father pardon the injury,
That I have don to you only causing your grief,
By ouer-fond affecting a man so trothlesse.
And you likewise sir, I pray hold me excused,
As I hope this cause will allow sufficiently for me:
My love to Manuile, thinking he would requite it,
Hath made me double with my father and you,
And many more besides,
Which I will no longer hyde from you.
That enticing speeches should not beguile me,
I have made my self deaf to any but to him.
And lest any mans person should please me more than his,
I have dissembled the want of my sight:
Both which shadows of my irrevocable affections,
I have not spared to confirm before him,
My father, and all other amorous soliciters.
Wherewith not made acquainted, I perceive
My true intent hath wrought mine own sorrow.
And seeking by love to be regarded,
Am cut of with contempt, and despised.

Tell me sweet Em hast thou but fained all this while for his love,
That hath so descourteously forsaken thee.

Credit me father I have told you the troth,
Wherewith I desire you and Lord Valingford not to be displeased
For ought else I shall say,
Let my present grief hold me excused.
But may I live to see that vngratfullman
Justly rewarded for his treachery?
Poor Em would think her self not a little happy,
Favour my departing at this instant,
For my troubled thought desires to meditate alone in silence

Will not Em show one chereful look on Valingford?

Alas sir, blame her not, you see she hath good cause,
being so handled by this gentleman:
And so I'll leave you, and go comfort my poor wench
As well as I may.

Farewell good father.

Rosilio, Is this the place whereas the Duke William should meet me?

It is, and like your grace.

Go captain away, regard the charge I gave:
See all our men be martialed for the fight.
Dispose the VVardes as lately was devised.
And let the prisoners under several guards
Be kept apart until you hear from us.
Let this suffice, you know my resolution.
If William Duke of Saxon be the man,
That by his answer sent us, he would send
Not words but wounds: not parleis but alarms,
Must be descider of this controversy.
Rosilio, stay with me, the rest begone.

All but Demarch go shroud you out of sight,
For I will go parley with the Prince my self.

Should Zweno by this parley call you forth,
Upon intent injuriously to deal:
This offers too much opportunity.

No no Demarch, that were abreach
Against the law of Arms: therefore begone,
And leave us here alone.
I see that Zweno is master of his word.
Zweno, VVilliam of Saxonie greets thee
Either well oryll, according to thy intent.
If well thou wish to him and Saxonie,
He bids thee frindly welcome as he can.
If ill thou wish to him and Saxanie,
He must withstand thy malice as he may.

VVilliam, for other name and title give I none
To him, who were he worthy of those honours
That Fortune and his predecessors left,
I ought by right and human courtesy
To grace his style with Duke of Saxonie.
But for I find a base degenerate mind,
I frame my speech according to the man,
And not the state that he unworthy holds.

Herein Zweno dost thou abase thy state,
To break the peace which by our ancestors
Hath heretofore been honourably kept.

And should that peace for ever have been kept,
Had not thy self been author of the breach:
Nor stands it with the honour of my state,
Or nature of a father to his child,
That I should so be robbed of my daughter,
And not unto the utmost of my power
Revenge so intolerable an injury.

Is this the colour of your quarrel Zweno?
I well perceive the wisest men may err.
And think you I conueyed away your daughter Blanch?

Art thou so impudent to deny thou did?
When that the proof thereof is manifest?

What proof is there?

Thine own confession is sufficient proof.

Did I confess I stole your daughter Blanch?

Thou did confess thou had a Lady hence.

I have and do.

Why that was Blanch my daughter.

Nay, that was Mariana,
who wrongfully thou detain prisoner.

Shameless persisting in thy ill,
Thou doest maintain a manifest vntrothe,
As she shall justify unto thy teethe.
Rosilio fetch her and the Marks hither.

It cannot be I should be so deceived.

I heard this night among the soldiers,
That in their watch they took a pensive Lady:
Who at the appointment of the Lord Dirot is yet in keeping.
What she is I know not,
Only thus much, I ouer-hard by chance.

And what of this.

It may be Blanch the King of Denmarkes daughter.

It may be so: but on my life it is not?
Yet Demarch, go and fetch her straight.

Pleases your highness, here is the Marks and Mariana.

See here, Duke VVilliam, your competitors
That were consenting to my daughters escape.
Let them resolut you of the truth hereing,
And here I vow and solemnly protest,
That in thy presence they shall lose their heads:
Unless I here where as my daughter is.

O Marks Lubeck how it grieves me,
That for my sake thou shouldest endure these bonds.
Be judge my soul that feels the martyrdom.

Duke VVilliam, you know it is for your cause,
It pleases thus the King to misconceive of me,
And for his pleasure doth me injury.

May it please your hightnes,
Here is the Lady you sent me for,

Away Demarch, what tell thou me of Ladies?
I so detest the dealing of their sex,
As that I count a lovers state to be the base
And vildest slavery in the world.

What humours are these: here's a strange alteration.

See Duke William, is this Blanch or no?
You know her, if you see her I am sure.

Zweno I was deceived, yea utterly deceived,
Yet this is she: this same is Lady Blanch.
And for mine error, here I am content
To do whatsoever Zweno shall set down.
Ah cruel Mariana thus to use
The man which loved and honoured thee with his heart.

When first I came into your highness court,
And VVilliam often importing me of love:
I did devise to ease the grief your daughter did sustain,
She should meet Sir William masked as I it were.
This put in proof, did take so good effect,
As yet it seems his grace is not resolved,
But it was I which he conueid away.

May this be true? It cannot be but true.
Was it Lady Blanch which I conueid away?
Inconstant Mariana,
Thus to deal with him which meant to thee nought but faith.

Pardon dear father my follies that are past,
Wherein I have neglected me duty
Which I in reverence ought to show your grace,
For led by love I thus have gone astray,
And now repent the errors I was in.

Stand up dear daughter though thy fault desesues
For to be punished in the extremest sort.
Yet love that covers multitude of sins
Makes love in parents wink at childrens faults.
Suffices Blanch thy father loves thee so,
Thy follies past he knows but will not know.
And here Duke VVilliam take my daughter to thy wife.
For well I am assured she loves thee well.

A proper coniuntion: as who should say,
Lately come out of the fire,
I would go thrust my self into the flame.
Let Masters nice go Saint it where she list,
And coyly quaint it with dissembling face.
I hold in scorn the fooleries that they use,
I being free will never subject my self
to any such as she is vnderneth the Sun.

Refuse thou to take my daughter to thy wife?
I tel thee Duke, this rash denial
May bring more mischief on thee then thou can avoid.

Conseit hath wrought such general dislike
Through the false dealing of Mariana,
That utterly I do abhore their sex.
They are all disloyal, inconstant, all unjust:
Who tries as I have tried,
And finds as I have found,
Will say theirs no such creatures on the ground.

Inconstant Knight, though some deserve no trust
Theirs others faithful, loving, loyal, just.

How now Lord Valingford what makes these women here?

Here be two women, may it please your grace,
that are contracted to one man,
And are in strife whether shall have him to their husband.

Stand forth women and say,
To whether of you did he first give his faith.

To me forsooth.

To me my gracious Lord.

Speak Manuile, to whether did thou give thy faith?

To say the troth: this maid had first my love.

Yea Manuile, but there was no witness by.

Thy conscience Manuile a hundred witnesses.

She hath stolen a conscience to serve her own turn.
But you are deceived, in faith he will none of you.

In deed, dred Lord, so dear I held her love,
As in the same I put my whole delight.
But some impediments which at that instant happened,
Made me forsake her quite,
For which I had her fathers frank consent.

What were the impediments?

Why she could neither hear nor see.

Now she doth both. Maiden, how were you cured:

Pardon my Lord, I'll tell your grace the troth,
Be it not imputed to me as discredit.
I loved this Manuile so much, that still methought
When he was absent did present to me
The form and feature of that countenance
Which I did shrine an ydoll in mine heart.
And never could I see a man methought
That equalled Manuile in my partial eye.
Nor was there any love between us lost,
But that I held the same in high regard,
Until repair of some unto our house,
Of whom my Manuile grew thus jealous:
As if he took exception I vouchsafed
To hear them speak, or saw them when they came:
On which I straight took order with my self
To void the scruple of his conscience,
By counterfeiting that I neither saw nor heard,
Any ways to rid my hands of them.
All this I did to keep my Manuiles love,
Which he unkindly seeks for to reward.

And did my Em to keep her faith with me
Dissemble that she neither heard nor saw.
Pardon me sweet Em, for I am only thine.

Lay off thy hands, disloyal as thou art,
Nor shalt thou have possession of my love,
That can so finely shift thy matters off.
^ut case I had been blind and could not see,
As often times such visitations falls
That pleases God which all things doth dispose:
Shouldest thou forsake me in regard of that?
I tell thee Manuile, had thou been blind,
Or deaf, or dumb, or else what impediments
might befall to man, Em would have loved and kept,
And honoured thee: yea, begde if wealth had faylde
For thy relief.

Forgive me sweet Em.

I do forgive thee with my heart,
And will forget thee too if case I can:
But never speak to me, nor seem to know me.

Then farewell frost:
Well fare a wench that will.
Now, Elner I am thine own my girl.

Mine Manuile? thou never shalt be mine.
I so detest thy villainy.
That whilst I live I will abhor thy company.

Is it come to this? of late, I had choice of twain
On either side to have me to her husband:
And now am utterly rejected of them both.

My Lord this gentleman when time was
Stood some thing in our light,
And now I think it not a miss
To laugh at him that sometime scorned at us.

Content my Lord, invent the form.

Then thus.

I see that women are not general evils.
Blanch is fair: Methinkes I see in her,
A modest countenance, a heavenly blush.
Zweno, receive a reconciled foe,
Not as thy friend, but as thy son in law,
If so that thou be thus content.

I joy to see your grace so tractable.
Here take my daughter Blanch,
And after my desease the Denmark crown.

Now sir, how stands the case with you?

I partly am persuaded as your grace is,
My lord, he is best at ease that medleth least.

Sir may a man be so bold,
As to crave a word with you?

Yea, two or three: what are they?

I say, this maid will have thee to her husband.

And I say this: and thereof will I lay an hundred pound.

And I say this: whereon I will lay as much.

And I say neither: what say you to that?

If that be true: then are we both deceived.

Why it is true, and you are both deceived.

In mine eyes, this is the proprest wench.
Might I advise thee, take her unto thy wife.

It seems to me, she hath refused him.

Why there's the spite.

If one refuse him, yet may he have the other.

He will ask but her good will, and all her friends.

Might I advise thee, let them both alone.

Yea, that's the course, and thereon will I stand.
Such idle love henceforth I will detest.

The Fox will eat no grapes, and why?

I know full well, because they hang too hye.

And may it be a Millers daughter by her birth?
I cannot think but she is better borne.

Sir Thomas Goddard hight this reverent man,
Famed for his virtues and his good success:
Whose fame hath been renowned through the world.

Sir Thomas Goddard welcome to thy Prince,
And fair Em, frolic with thy good father.
As glad am I to find Sir Thomas Goddard
As good Sir Edmund Treford on the plains:
He like a shepherd, and thou our country Miller.

And longer let not Goddard live a day,
Then he in honour loves his sovereign.

But say Sir Thomas, shall I give thy daughter?

Goddard and all that he hath,
Doth rest at the pleasure of your Majesty.

And what says Em to lovely Valingford?
It seemed he loved you well,
That for your sake durst leave his King.

Em rests at the pleasure of your highness:
And would I were a wife for his desert.

Then here Lord Valingford,
Receive fair Em.
Here take her, make her thy espoused wife.
Then go we in, that preparation may be made,
to see these nuptials solemnly performed.


