BUT does the Army march directly hither?

They seem, my Lord, to have no other aim,
For from the Hills I saw their Cavalry
Descend in so much order with their Trumpets,
Haut-bois and Drums in warlike Consort playing
As if instead of fighting they intended
A solemn Triumph in the Plains of Hainault.

'Tis yet preposterous tho, to let such Joys
Soften their Soldiers Minds before Engagement,
Know you the Strength and Number of their Force?

Reports, my Lord, are Various, yet 'tis thought
That Fifty thousand Men compose their Army.

Let Fifty thousand swell to Fifty Millions,
As daring as their General Luxemberg;
And cruel as the Marquess de Bouffleers,
Yet Mons shall stand against their mighty Force,
My Lords, your thoughts of this bold Undertaking?

'Tis what we feared, what did I say we feared it?
Forgive the word -- we know not what it means
This friendly Visit we have long expected,
But yet we hope with interest to repay it;
'Tis kindly done to let us know their coming,
That we get things ready for their welcome,
And not as once in the Disguise of Merchants,
Seize on our Gates, and let the Foes come in,
Mine Heer ( speaking to Fagel) you best the Towns Condition know.

If Art and Nature ever yet contrived,
A place to bear the worst attacks of Fortune,
'Tis surely Mons can make the justest claim,
If Horn-works, Bastions, Counterscarps, Redoubts,'
With the united Force of Germans, Dutch,
Walloones and Spaniards both of Foot and Horse,
Bred in the Art of War and Blood since Infancy
Speak a place strong, then Mons will try their Valour.

Fagel, The Genius of a Martial Soul,
Dictates your thoughts, yet Caution is a Virtue,
For were our Bulwarks strong as walls of Brass,
And Ramparts which to time might bid defiance,
Yet were the Soldiers treacherous or disloyal,
The place would quickly yield to Gallic Force.

The Soldiers false? avert the thought kind Heaven!
My Lord, so very brave and stout the appear,
As if one gallant and Heroic Soul
Did actuate of Men so great a Body,
^he Burghers too have seemed to lay aside
^ll thoughts of getting Wealth, and heaping Riches.
^aily they leave their Shops to handle Arms,
^nd exercise with so much art and skill,
^s Nature seemed to have designed 'em Soldiers.

Fagel you cheer my Soul with the Relation,
^ut we have now no time for long De^tes
^is Action now must make us Formidable,
^y Lords Fontagne and Ravillido, you
^ith your respective Troops take care to guard
^e Magazines, Spinosa 'tis your Post
Upon the Walls to manage all the Canon
To Harcourt I've already given a Charge.

'Tis known you no Instructions want,
Nor does your God-like Virtue need Directions
Let every Man of us although remember
No common Cause we wear upon Swords,
Let each but think that on his single Valour
Depends the Glory or the Fall of Mons
Eternal Honour or perpetual Slav'ry,
If helps to Valour we should stand in need,
Let us reflect upon the breach of Oaths,
Truces and Edicts signed by treacherous French,
Let's think of Phillipsburg, Spire, Worms, and other
Once famous Towns, now heaps of Dirt and Ruins,
Let this within our minds form such impressions
Of French Civility that we may never
Listen to Overtures of tame Surrender.

Surrender -- had I my Lord the least suspicion
That in these Brains of mine such thoughts were lurking
By Heaven I'd dash 'em out against a Mortar-piece,
As soon my Wife and all my little Children,
I'd tamely hold, before a Rugged Villain,
Whilst he with cruel Knife ripped up their Throats,
As yield my Country up to Monsieur's Terms.

Bravely resolved. But Fagels not alone,
There's not a Man that bears Command in Mons,
Who will not wish to loose the use of Hearing
Before he'll listen to such base Demand.

My Lords I pray you let no nice Suspicions
Disturb our Friendships -- Each Man to his Post,
Mean while be Orders sent to all the Convents,
The Monasteries and Religious Houses
Within the City that the Holy Fathers
With Prayers and Tears, long Fastings and Processions
May bribe the Saints t'assist us in our woes,
And turn these threatening Clouds another Day
Spinosa, wait upon me to the Palace.

What e're the Matter is I cannot tell,
I do not love these Priests, for in a Siege,
They are as useless as their Holy-water:
'Tis strange, their Prayers should do no more Execution^
Then we effect with all our Bombs and Canon;
And for their parts, they are unskilled in Arms:
Yet I belly 'em, for these shaven Scoundrels
Know but too well the use of Carnal weapons;
They have more Business with their Female Penitents,
Then hearing them confess and then absolve them.
While we are fighting to defend their Lives,
These holy Rogues are nibbling at our VVives.

( looking up) You Sirrah, untile that House quickly, or I shall ^ntile your
Brain-pan for you -- you Dog.


What's the meaning of your practice Neighbour, do ye think ^he French when
they've taken the Town, will come in at the Top of the House?


No, but they will send their Messengers beforehand to give us ^otice of their
coming, by a very civil Person, in the shape of a Bomb.


And how does he deliver his Message?


Truly in a very passionate manner, he is so very full of rage ^hat he bursts
with it.


Why he speaks his mind very plainly then.


Ay and very loudly too when I was at Genoa, the French Fleet ^ave us a Visit
en passant, and sent us such a number of these fiery Mes^ngers, that the Town
could hardly afford 'em house-room.


Unpave that Quadrangle quickly, we'll endeavour they shall ^ll soft, for they
are very apt to break their Bones when they come ^own.


This new way of House-breaking came up but very lately ^re.


And the Devil on it is, there's no Statute against it, But when are we to
expect this French Visit?


They are now within 4 Leagues of the place and cannot fail Of being here by to
morrow noon.


Well, Heaven be praised we are pretty well provided to entertain 'em, our
Governor is a Wise Discreet Prince, his Officers Trusty, and I hope we have no
Rogues amongst our selves.


Only our foolish pity is apt to betray us in Complacense to the Women; my Wife
does so desire me to keep out of Harms way, that she grows perfectly
troublesome.


For my part I could wish 'em all in Purgatory while the Business is over.


Ay, and the Priests too with 'em, for they are never asunder, since the noise
of the French's coming, the Confessionalls and Churches are so crammed with
'em, that one cannot get a Priest now to a sick man's Bed, and so the poor
Wretch must go out of the World without Extreme Unction.


For my part I have an indifferent Opinion of my Wives Honesty, but I cannot
swear for the Chastity of her Confessor, since by a mistake he showed her
Aretines Postures instead of the Rosary.


Bring 'em along, bring 'em along -- we will give 'em Beef to their Vinegar.


Will nothing go down with you ye Dogs but Gun-Powder Sauce.


The Occasion of this Tumult quickly Sirrah.


Why Sir, these very civil Gentlemen foreseeing the Misery we were to suffer
in the Siege designed to have Blown up our great Magazine of Powder.


Horrible Rogues!


Nay Sir, the very Lighted Match was discovered within 9 inch of the Train.


By which it may be easily guess't they are not 10 inches from Halter.


The design Sir was laid in the Garden of Malheur the Fren^ Lawyer, but he has
troop't off and so saved his Bacon.


Shall Villainies like this remain unpunisht?
Rather then such designing Hell-Born Rogues
Should want due punishment I'd once turn Hang-man,
But lest our Passions should exceed Discretion
Carry the Rascals to the Governor
Who is too prudent and too just a Prince
To let such Treacheries pass unrewarded.

Yes Sir, yes Sir, we will conduct 'em to the Governor, and afterwards hope to
make one Holi-day to see 'em broke on the Wheel: Come away Dogs, Rogues, Sons
of Whores, come away.


A Lucky discovery this -- the whole French Army could not do us half the
mischief as one of these was able to effect --


Yet all this shall not abate one jot of my kindness for the French; Oh
methinks a Monsieurs heart would be a rare Breakfast


Well Peppered and Salted upon a Spanish Gridiron.


Hear you the noise?


I am not Deaf I think -- well now the worst is come to the worst, if you'll
follow my example, Bury your Plate, Lock up your Wives and Children, and with a
Musket on his Shoulder, let every man be the Swiss of his own Family.


Behold behold ye blessed above,
Who have no Passions now but Love,
Behold our sad distressed Town,
And look with tender Pity down.
Look down upon our Virgins Tears,
Look down upon our Matrons Fears,
Regard the cries of Old and Young,
Who daily to the Temple throng,
Your kindest pity we implore
Our wishes cannot hope for more,
'Tis pity pity we implore.
Ha ha ha ha ha --


You're merry Foquet, the Occasion pray you.


Have I not reason? when I see the two Abbots so very piously assisting at a
Devotion when their hearts are quite another way.


How came you by this Intelligence, you are but a Lay-man, and Gentlemen of
their Character seldom make such their Confessors.


Come come Durand, and you Monsieur Ternon, off off with your Disguises, and
show your selves honest men -- that is by interpretation according to the
Spanish Version -- Rogues.


You amaze me for --


Nay never start Ternon, you and I with Durand, are all engaged in one cause.
See you this

Who for such a Sum would not Hang his Father, lye with his Mother, and Crack
his Sisters Maidenhead ha --?


Come, come, I see you have found us out, and for my part my Fortunes having
been at Low Water-mark a long time, I thought a little French Gold no very
unacceptable Present considering my Circumstances.


Well then since we understand one another, let's consult the chief Methods how
to merit more of these Favours.


Our first chief Business must be to magnify the Glory's of the French-King in
all Companies where we can do it safely; then that we may be equally as much at
ease under his Government as under the King of Spain, who is at too great a
distance to take Cognisance of the ill Administration of his Officers.


I had a Letter the other day from a Correspondence of mine in England, who tells
me that Gentlemen there lay Wagers like mad that Mons will be in the French
hands by such a time -- you know our wishes generally command our Purses -- but
hold who are these --


How now, who are you?


We Gentlemen, we are Citizens of Mons.


Are you for the French or no?


For the French, no, no? rot the Rogues, sink, burn and confound 'em -- Heaven
be Deaf to my Prayers.


Come come along with us, along with us.


I'm glad to find that generous Resolution
Appears in both the Soldiers and the Burghers
To keep the Town even to the last extremity.

Never did men appear with greater Brav'ry
In all the Sieges History makes mention
Then this of Mons.

Have the French formed their Camp?

They are very busy in pursuit of Ruin,
Their Horse consist of two and forty Squadrons,
And in fit posts they now their Foot are placing;
Great numbers of the Boors they have compelled
To work upon the Lines and drain the Marshes,
As yet their Bombs and Cannon are behind,
Nor have they given us one kind Salute
From mouth of Gun, but hourly we expect it.

Since in Civility they are so backward,
Let us then first begin -- And you Spinosa
Go quickly then and order Colonel Harcourt,
With a picked number of bold daring Youths
Assisted by some few Dragoons and Hors^,
That instantly they make a furious Sally
Upon the Foe, and Heaven succeed their Arms.

I know, my Lord, the Message will be welcome,
Their youthful Blood is ready to boil over
With Rage against the French, with half that Eagerness
They would not fly to the desired embraces
Of the most charming of their Mistresses
As now they will to Arms.

No Speeches Marshal --
Their Truth I doubt not -- execute your Orders.

I go my Lord.

If my presaging hopes are true propheticks,
Our Enemies will soon repent this Visit.

My Lord, A Messenger from the Enemy:

Your Business, Sir.

'Tis from the noble Marquess de Bouffleers,
Who to your Highness bid me give this Summons.

Read it Captain,

To you the Prince and Governor of Mons,
My Royal Master his kind Greeting sends,
And in his Name commands you to surrender
The Town and Citadel without delay;
Which just Demand, if proudly you refuse,
Himself attended with his Son the Dauphine,
And all the Flower of France will force you to it,

Go tell the Marquess from the Prince Bergue,
The King of France affords me too much Honour
^o come himself in Person to behold
^he brave Defence we are resolved to make.
^urrender Mons, my dear loved Native Town?
^s soon I'd sell my valued Right of Birth
^ith Arms and plenty of Provisions stored,
^e doubt not but to tire the Force of France.
^carce thirteen years are past since they attempted
^o gain the Town, but then they were repulsed
^t height of Noon, and beaten from their Trenches
^y the brave Valour of the great Nassau
^ow Britains Monarch at the Hague Consulting
^he fittest Methods Christendom to free
^om servile Chains and Arbitrary Sway
^hich gladly France would on all Europe lay

A trifling Loss, and scarcely worth the naming,
(...) the whole Action but five hundred slain:
^d we must do our Eemies that Justice,
^ey sallied out like Men inur'd to Arms.

Relieve the Centrys that have watched so long,
^ture must have repose -- this stubborn Town
^l vexes me, yet were our numerous Army
(...) great as e're was chronicled in Story,
(...) should be slain even to a single Man,
^re the Kings Pretentions should be lost.

My Lord, another Sally has been made,
(...) Enemy attempting to demolish
^ind-mill to the Counterscarp adjoining,
(...) in the Action kill two hundred Men.

Let them go on and surfeit with their Glory,
Fortune with these Successes does but flatter 'em,
Like Gamesters they at first have Lucky throws,
This tempts them on to venture deeper still,
Till they at last by one unlucky Chance
Loose all their flattering hopes and store of gain.

Never was better timed this City's Siege,
Secure they lived, not Dreamed of such Attacques,
The Governor of all the Spanish Netherlands
Is at the Hague consulting how to form
The Model of this present Summers War,
His presence wanting to inform their Actions,
Like men just rows'd from sleep they talk and act,
But 'tis with such Confusion that they hardly
Know whether that they act or speak at all.

My Lords, his Majesty is with his Highness
The Dauphin, Conde, and the Duke de Chartres,
Together with the chiefest of the Nobles,
Just now arrived in Person in the Camp,
And your immediate Conference commands.

We go -- This, Boufflers is the Soul of Courage,
When our great Monarch does himself appear,
At head of all his Numerous Troops in person,
This no small Comforts to our hopes does bring,
Cowards will Fight when headed by a King.

Secure the Horn-VVorks, mount the Canon higher,
And Fire so fast upon 'em, that the Enemy
May loose themselves in Clouds of Fire and Smoke,
I hate to Fight in Jest -- How fare the Troops
That you command, are they all brave and lusty?

Like Soldiers in the most exalted sense
They Fight, and if of any fault they are guilty,
'Tis they expose themselves too near to Danger.

A Messenger is (...) arrived in Town
From our Chief Head th^ Marquess Castanaga,
T'inform the Burghers if they still persist
To keep the Town till timely Succours come
They shall be free from Taxes Twenty years:
Had you but seen with what Excess of Joy
The Message they received, you would have smiled;
Fighting tho not agreeing with their Temper,
Yet to be freed from Tribute are Valiant,
For they hate Taxes worser than the French.
Welcome thou Soul of War, what sort of News
From Brussels does the Loved Brannacio bring?

News is a Drug, for all Discourse and Talk
Is laid aside, excepting Mons Beleaguered;
Of this the very Children learn to prattle,
And it is taken and relieved each hour:
'Twas by Disguise my self and some few more
Got into the Town

And how appears the Army?

Dreadful enough in sight and apprehension
^o those who want true Courage to defy
^he Force of such a Formidable Foe.
^met a Gentleman upon the Road,
Going in hast to the Marquess Castanaga
^inform him of the Present State of Mons,
^nd press for speedy Succours for our Aid.

Tho Plenty never was esteemed a Burden,
^t present we no Helps nor Aids require;
^ovisions we have got so great a Stock,
^o last four Months without the least Recruits;
^ur Men are hearty and unanimous,
^ch striving who his Fellow shall out-do
^acts of Valour; nay the very Burghers
^e So^diers too, and hourly on the Walls
(...) Random Bullets do their Breasts expose.

The Prince just now received a haughty Message
From Monsieur Lovis, That for every day
They stubbornly held out (since their great Monarch
Was in the Camp,) they should for such offence
Pay numerous Crowns for each delaying Morning.
Bravado's -- Let them first defend the Claim
They make before they seize upon our Purses.

But hark some Signal, -- Each Man to his Post,
Bravely we must defend, or Mons is lost.
When will my thirst of Glory find a Period?
Since I have aimed at Universal Monarchy,
A restless thought still raging in my Breast,
Makes my Days irksome, and my Nights unquiet:
Whole Provinces already I've laid desolate,
And where so e're I stretched my Conquering Arms,
In Blood and Ruins I make good my Title.

By this, great Sir, your Empire you enlarge.

'Tis my Ambition Lovis to be great;
Men of my rank do seldom think of dying:
But 'tis methinks a kind of satisfaction,
When after Ages seeing Towns destroyed,
Shall say, that Lewis made that Desolation.
Does Mons yet still persist in Obstinacy?

'Tis the old stubborn Town it ever was;
They nothing want to make a brisk Defence.

Vauban you nicely have surveyed the place.
Where lies it's chiefest strength, and where it's weakness?

Great Sir, I must confess their Forts are built
By the strict rules of modern Architecture,
Their Bastions strong, their Horn-works regular,
Their Ramparts good, and the deep Moats and Ditches
Add no small strength to the distressed Town.
Four Days your Royal Troops have Mons beleagur'd,
And if my skill in War does not deceive me,
Before the Sun six times goes round the Globe,
The place will yield to your victorious Arms.

It shall, -- the mighty Lewis says it shall,
If force compel not, then I use my Gold;
No trifling Sum I've brought to give the Soldiers,
Who shall be taken notice of in Battle,
To give the best assurance of their Valour,
Besides some greater Sum for private Service;
I have my Friends in Mons as well as Philip.
Lovis, here, take th^ Gold ( gives a Purse,) and send it quickly
By some bold lusty Officer of yours
In a Deserters habit to the Town,
And to the Abbotts Grimchi and Vaneufe,
Commend my Love, and tell 'em I'm their Friend;
Let this old Gold express my secret meaning,
The best the Language of my Presents know.

I fly, dread Sir, to execute your Pleasure.

How goes the Siege, my Lords? You seem concerned;
I read some strange confusion in your Faces.

Think not, great Sir, that fear or Cowardice,
Makes us thus wear this sadness on our looks;
To both we're strangers. -- 'Tis the great concern
We bear to your Majestic Reputation,
Which we suspect will find some Diminution.
In the Attempts upon the stubborn Mons.

Have I selected out from all my Troops
The choicest Men, and brought my household Guards
Gens d'Arms, Light-horse, and such a Train of Cannon
T'oppose one stubborn Town? and am I baffled?
By all the Saints our holy Church adores,
I swear that no expense of Men or Money
Shall e're be wanting to reduce the Place.

Great Sir, the Soldiers in your Royal Army
Behave themselves with an uncommon Brav'ry;
But there is no defence against our Fate.

Talk not of Fate to me; my Lord, I tell you
I over-rule her closest laid Designs,
And have her at my beck; -- nay more, command her;
And notwithstanding these cross Accidents,
Am certain, that before few days are ended,
This Town of Mons will own me for her Master.
To you Rubenton ( speaking to him) our old trusty Servant,
We give the Government of this Conquered City
When e're it falls into Our Royal Hands;
Mean while, you Luxemburgh, Bouffleers, and all
My Officers relating to the Siege,
Open the Trenches, use your utmost force,
To make the Town comply; but if it still
Resists my Arms, -- by all the Gods I swear,
Within their streets I'll lay a Scene of Blood
Shall make their Dwellings horrible to Nature.
I will -- my Lords, St. Guislan is my Quarters,
Where I with ease refresh my self, still waiting
When the glad News arrives that Mons is taken;
Then with a Grandeur like my self I enter,
As did my Predecessor Julius Caesar
Along the streets of Rome; for 'tis resolved,
Mons shall submit and own my Regal Power,
Or sudden ruin shall the Globe devour.

It shall submit -- for so our Sovereign swears,
I wish it may, but when I make Reflections
With what true Courage they defend the Town,
I know not what to think. --

-- Besides my Lord,
The Prince of Orange at the Hague, is raising
A numerous Army of picked chosen Soldiers
To raise the Siege, or else to give us Battle.

All actions when t'extremity reduced
Require our nicest prudence; we no time
For long set-Speeches and Debates can spare;
It must be Action terminates the War. --

To see the various effects of Fortune!
Thrice has this place been in the Enemies hands,
And thrice they have been beaten out again,
With more then Roman Bravery by the Soldiers.

Major, If any thing of War I know,
I think it is not safe to keep the place
In our own Power; indeed 'tmust be confessed,
To take it, they have now already lost
In their Attaques about Two thousand Men.
A pretty Sum for such a trifling Post.

Your Advice, What must be done?
My orders from the Prince are independent.
He giving me a large and full Commission,
To act as I should judge most proper for the safety
Of Mons distressed; now, Sir, with low submission
To your grave Judgment, I esteem it fittest
That instantly we blow the Wind-mill up.

No flattery, Pedro, I resign my self
And thoughts entirely to your wise directions;
Soldier -- ( speaking to one) how stands the Enemy abroad?

My Lord, they're very busy in working upon the Trenches, little thinking poor
Curs they are digging their own Graves.


Is the Coast free from any straggling Troops?


Yes, my Lord, only half a Dozen or so together, a louzing themselves in the
Sun; I wonder what quarters the poor Vermin can find upon such thread-bare
Coats.


Then March all out, but not in heaps at once.
But three or four together to the Town,
Put on a cheerful look as unconcerned,
The last that stay, are Pedro and my self,
Who with a Train will blow the Windmill up,
Then try our utmost valour in the Siege.

We go, my Lord, we go; but if we should meet with a Party of French in our
way, we cannot forbear boxing 'em for our Lives, poor rotten Rogues; for
the other Day I twanged one of them by the Nose, and with a slight pull it came
off into my hand, I believe all his Carcass was of the same Brittle Ware.


Be cautious, though in all your undertakings. Pedro have you affixt the Train?


I have, my Lord.

Now for the Town, where Fortune seems to vary,
But Heaven forbid our Arms should still Miscarry.

HAve you quenched the Fire in Domingo's- street?


Yes, Sir, but there is another broke out near the Palace.


These Bombs are like Plasters of Cant^arides, they raise Blisters where e're
they are applied.


I think of my Conscience the whole Town is troubled with a Saint Antony's
Fire, for 'tis burning almost in every place.


Ha! what noise is that, Heaven guard our Senses.


Good news, good news, the Windmill is blown up.


Is that such good news, say you?


Yes, Sir, for Major Pedro blew it up to prevent the French making use of it to
annoy the Town; I have but one little Cottage of my own, and I'd make a
Bon-fire on it before the French should have it.


Nay, never fret your self about that Fellow, Soldier, for if they go on as
they began, the whole Town will be but one continued Bon-fire in a little time.


But we have pretty well warmed their fingers for 'em already, they have lost
(if Report be not a damned confounded lying Son of a Whore) above three
thousand Men, and we not too hundred and sifty since the Siege.


How now, in the name of Wonder, who art thou?


Why, Sir, I am a Man and no Man, a Soldier and no Soldier.


Or any thing, or rather nothing; speak quickly, what are you? who are you? and
who d'yee belong to?


Sir, I was a Soldier in the French Camp, and for divers and sundry reasons
have deserted it.


To come to be a Spy upon us -- knock out his brains, knock out his brains for
a Son of an overgrown Moustache.


You wrong me, Gentlemen, I am no Villain,
But one whom just resentment has compelled
To leave the French, my once Tyrannic Masters,
To serve -- Oh I am very faint.

Give him some Brandy, give him some Brandy; a very honest fellow, this of my
Conscience, rubb his temples, rubb his Temples -- so, no now he comes to
himself -- Well Friend, how stands the French Camp?


It moves along in a continued Motion,
First on one side, then by and by on the other,
And whispers hourly, buzz about the Camp,
That a great Army hastens to relieve
Your almost ruined Town, or give 'em Battle.

Courage, Courage, my Boys, cheer up, my little Sons of Fire and Gun-Powder --
here poor Fellow, there's some Money for you -- I am mightily in love with this
Switzer.


Will you affirm all this before the Prince?


Yes and much more, for I have some Reports
Are only fitting for his private Ear,
Which if suspected, let me lye in Prison,
Until the certainty of all's confirmed.

Odd I love the Rogue from my heart, come I'll go along with you to the
Governor, and I'll warrant thee a Gold Chain and Medal.


-- Or if I'm false, a halter.


Where, where?


Every where, every where, in the Palace, in the Market place. The whole Town
is but one great Oven, and I think they design to bake us in it, come away, come
away.


SO great an Army before so small a Town,
Seems that by numbers they design to Conquer;
As yet through all the sad Calamities
Of Fire and Blood, Mons resolutely stands
The Object of their hate -- but Fagel Tell,
What succours from abroad must we expect?

Enough, if timely they assistance lend,
For th'English Monarch our once blessed Deliverer,
With fifty thousand Men of the Confederates,
Lye now encampt near Brussels, thence, to Hall;
They march, where they expect some other Troops
To join them, which, with Regiments of Scotch and Spanish
Expected, likewise will increase the Army
To seventy thousand choice selected Soldiers.
I mention not their Mortars, nor their Cannon,
Which all together make a glorious Army.

May Heaven succeed their Arms; but all this while
How stand Affairs within our selves? I fear
The Soldiers harassed with continual Watchings,
And Burghers with their Losses half distracted,
May have some inclinations to surrender,
To rid themselves of this uneasiness.

My Lord, I only for the Soldiers speak,
They are unanimous, and every Man
Will to the last defend the Cities Glory
Against the bold Encroachments of the French.

The Burghers too my Lord, to all Appearance Are resolutely brave and bold in
Action.

I know not how their Wives Endearments may
Soften their Minds, and lead their Wills astray.

The News.

My Lord, ill Tidings must salute your Ears,
The Half-Moon of the Horn-work next the Gate
Of Barlemont being widened with their Cannon,
Was just now with about Seven thousand Men
Stormed with that fury, that in little time
The French became the Masters of the Fort,
But in the three Attaques they gave the Place;
They lost at several times Three thousand Men.

This sad Relation checks me not at all.

Nor me.

Nor me.

Nor any whose great mind
Is placed above the rude Assaults of Fortune.

Fagel and you Spinosa -- to the City
Hasten with speed and animate the Burghers;
Their Drooping Spirits may perhaps need Cordials.
Harcourt and Pedro -- to your Posts advance,
And let the Soldiers want no due Encouragement,
Whilst I about the Town in different Quarters
Comfort, advise, and order Necessaries;
But stop our Ears to all Capitulation.

Forbid it Heaven! No, first let glorious Mons
Be made the Seat of one continued Fire,
And every Soldier perish in the Flame,
Rather than tamely yield our Lives so, and Fortunes
To French discretion. -- If I hear one whisper,
Wherever I resort, of tame Surrender,
By Heaven I'll split the Skull of such a Man,
Were he my Brother, or what's more my Friend.

Methinks, Brother, you look very cheerfully to day; these pleasing smiles of
yours do not suit with the Calamity of the Times.


What necessity is there, I should be dull and cloudy because the Times are so?


Great reason, our humours should always sympathise with melancholy occasions.


No Brother, I had a Cordial sent me to day from the French Kings own Closet, [
shows a Purse of Gold] smell on it, do ye think 'tis rightly prepared.


I believe I can match it, -- [ shows another Purse] 'tis exactly the same
Colour, and prepared by the same hand, I believe; you know how to use it, I
suppose.


I were a blockhead else.


Oh Lord, Father, I am in such a fright, I shall never be recovered again.


Oh Father, these Guns, these filthy Guns have made me almost distracted.


Oh the Pains and Perils of Child-birth, are but a fleabiting to the Fears I
hourly suffer. Oh! my poor Husband was thrown down in a Crowd, and has bruised
his little Finger, I'm afraid he'll never recover again.


Forbear, Daughters, these sad complaints,
You must look further than the outward cause,
Heaven has a good design in these Afflictions,
To humble us, and make us still more Virtuous.

I shall be humbled I think with a Witness, I have neither washed my face nor
combed my head since the siege began, besides a large Trunk in our Garret took
fire, and burnt all my best Linen.


Nay, a Bomb that fell into our Yard, spoiled me nineteen Dutch Cheeses, and
five Firkins of Butter; Oh Lord, I'm undone, undone, why, I shall never eat a
good Meal again.


Patience, Daughters, patience. 'Tis Heavens High Pleasure, and there's no
contending.


Oh these wicked French, they have killed all my Poultry, and the noise of the
Cannons has sow'rd all the Liquor in my Cellar.


Cease those Complaints, as fruitless all, we charge you, By scratching of the
Wound you make it fester.


I have not seen my poor Husband this three days, I'm afraid he was killed at
the Horn-work.


And mine had been killed too, If I had not locked him up in the Cellar poor
Man.


Oh Lord, I am dead, I am dead, O Jesu Maria, libera^nos.


Hey day, hey day, here's fine doings; my Wife upon the Floor with two Priests,
they talk of Horn-Works in the Town, I believe there has been some Works of
that nature going forward here.


Oh Lord, Hubby, are you alive? -- When the Bomb went off I fell in a Trance,
and fancied your Corps appeared to me, and methought you were so stiff.


Come, come, no more fooling.

After some time, they all get up, and every one bows to the Priests, who bless
them with the sign of the Cross, and sprinkle Holy Water on them.


Will our Misfortunes never have an end? 'Tis now a thing to me indifferent,
whether we keep Mons or no, for my part I'm undone already.


And I too, I am not worth the twentieth part of a Ducat.


Oh, my Husband and I, when we were first married, had a great deal of good
House-hold-stuff, but 'tis all destroyed excepting a hard flock Bed, and a
joint stoc^.


I wish the French had the Town for my part so the Inhabitants were but at
quiet.


And I too, let the Turk have it rather than live this sad noisy Life.


But they say we shall be relieved by the Confederate Army.


Yes, by doomsday in the Afternoon.


Friends, Citizens --


Silence there, silence there, let the Father speak.


Friends, Citizens, Inhabitants of Mons,
By the offended hand of Heaven, you suffer
These sad Calamities of Fire and Sword,
Some very grievous Crimes you have committed;
Which thus has caused the Face of Heaven to frown,
Your Town besieged by the French, has suffered
All the Misfortunes that attend a Siege;
But they are Catholics, and so are you;
Shall these fall out? Forbid it, oh just Heaven,
The Succours which pretend they would relieve you,
Are Hereticks' mark that, my Friends, the'yr Heretics;
Would you to have your Town preserved by Heretics,
Hazard the safety of the true Religion
The Sacred Roman Apostolick Faith?
Consider this, and tell me then ye sufferers,
Whether ye are true Christians, yea or no?

What think you, Neighbour, does Father Grimchi speak truth or no -- ha.


A notable Speech of my Conscience,
But how, Father shall we help our selves?

Will you for once my Ghostly Counsel take
All. Ay, ay, all of us, Father, -- silence.

Then putting on your most dejected looks,
Your selves and Wives shall to the Governor hasten.
But lest through hopes and fears you grow unruly.
The Reverend Father Vaneufe and my self,
Will go before you in a large Procession,
And tell him the Calamities you suffer.
And that 'tis better to surrender far,
Than still to feel the dire effects of War.

A surrender, a surrender, we'll Capitulate.


Let every one by different ways repair
To the Market place in less than half an hour,
Where we'll assist you to our utmost Power.

NO Succours come! Oh most ill timed delay.

Though Succours still we want, yet 'tis a pleasure,
To think how dear our Enemies have paid
For this Attempt upon the Town of Mons;
The Duke de Maine, and the Grand Prior of France,
Killed in the Trenches; Megrim the Engineer
Wounded in both his Arms, and sent to Tournay,
(...) and Vendosme hurt almost to death,
(...) in their Attacques upon the Horn-Works,
(...) lost at least above six thousand Men.
What Tumult can be this, which dares presume,
T'infest the Palace at this time of Day?

My Lord, my Lord, a most confused Rabble,
Of Men and Women, headed by the Abbots,
Old Grimchi and Vaneufe, are pressing forward,
And say that they have business with your Highness.

I never liked the two fat Abbey Lubbers,
They're dangerous I fear -- go, know their Business.
I have a strange suspicion that these Villains
( Forgive the word) have put the unthinking Rabble
Upon the Project of Capitulation.

My Lord, they press upon the place so thick,
They have already filled the outward Courts,
Where loudly, every one of them, bauls out, Surrender,
We'll hold no longer out, let's hear their Terms.

Villains -- but ah I want too bad a Name,
To brand 'em with -- Betrayers of their Country,
What shall I call 'em? -- Oh I am lost in passion;
These Priests have caused this Mischief; oh that Lu^ifer
Had took 'em all into his private Custody
Before the Seige -- the Torrent grows too high,
And faint resistance makes it flow the faster.
Nothing we want; our Arms and our Provisions
Hold out, the Soldiers too are valiant,
And nothing but the Priests and Burghers Cowards;
O Priest-Craft, Shop-Craft! how do ye Effeminate
The Mind of Man.
Hah! do I hear a Drum?
Nay, then 'tis done, and Mons is now no more;
The Plagues which did all Aegypts Land infest,
Are nothing to the single plague of Priest.

My Nobles slain and wounded, with the Deaths
Of such a numerous company of Soldiers,
Besides my Magazines of Forage spent,
And all this loss before a stubborn Town.
Hah! what can this mean -- yet my presaging hopes
Tell me, my golden Plot has taken effect.

Great Sir, the Town despairing of all Succour,
^s beating of a Parley on the Wall
This very instant.

-- Distract me not with Falsehood;
^m glad to hear it tho -- Now famous Mons
(...) mine, and shall continue mine for ever.

And may all refractory Towns that dare
^and out against your most victorious Arms
^eet the like Fortune, or a worser Fate.

This is a glorious opening the Campaign;
^ow am just what a late Motto styled me,
^e against all; since with my single Force,
^id defiance to all Europes Arms.
^alue not their Counsels at the Hague,
^d scorn their most united Power more,
^rd of my self, and all Mankind beside.
^ch day I add fresh Laurels to my Brows;
(...) Poets rack their Brains to make new Triumphs,
^d public Joy resound through all the Camp,
^ilst I my self in Person go to view
The Flag of Truce -- and bless my Eyes! with gazing
Upon the Ruins of a Conquered Town,
Which adds another Ruby to my Crown.

( -- Looking backward,) Command silence there.


First Hostages must be exchanged.


Ours are ready.


And so are Ours.


Where are your Articles of Capitulation?


Here; but with most unwillingness we got 'em.

The Governor was at least two hours before he could be persuaded to set his
hand to 'em.


Would it not vex any Man to set his hand to a writing that conveys his Estate
from him.


None of your Preaching Mr. Burgher, your Guns have spoke too loud already.


Old Fagel would not sign.


'Tis a cross old basket hilted Officer.

And will you now my Lords perform these Articles signed on your part?


Most inviolably.


How could I feast my Eyes with such a sight?
O Mons, thou first-born of this Summers Conquests,
Thy Articles shall be as firmly kept
As all those other Contracts I have made.

Now let all hostile Actions cease between (...) We all are friends, tho with
some kind of sorrow;
The Garrison we view march out to morrow.

Your Highness may believe 'tis with regret
I now surrender up this dear Loved Town;
Had not the Burghers with their Clamours deafened me,
I had not thus been forced to a Compliance.

My Lord, 'tis known you are too brave a Foe
To merit evil usage: We may pity,
But cannot now in justice help your Fortunes.
Your Soldiers fought like Men inspired with Courage;
Who could do less under so brave a General?
Your Conduct in the Siege all Tongues commend,
And pray esteem the Dauphin as your Friend.


