I Smile to think how every One that's here,
Expects Tartuffe or Scrupple should appear;
Who with Religions Twang and Mouth a-splay
Should Conventicle now instead of play:
But 't is the other house, you've lost your way.
Here's nothing like a holy Reformation,
Nor Drum, nor Trumpet, though so much in Fashion
In all admired Plays of the new Translation.
Nay can you Guess what our dull Rogue should mean?
He ha's not left us Room for Gaudy Scene;
Which uses to amuse you for a time,
Whilst Non-sence safely glides away in Rime.
I'll swear I had advised him for the best,
To Lard it with fat Song or bawdy jest
Or write in Verse and huff the Gods at least.
But he was humoursome and bid me say,
He was for plodding in the Ancient way:
Yet he would if this did not please our Friends,
In Rime and Non-sence strive to make amends.
If we procured Noise, Clothes, Scenes, Songs and Dance,
His Siege, or Conquest he can have from France.

BUT that I know thee honest, I could not guess thou had a less design, than
the betraying of this Town of Venice to the Grand Seignior.


Or, since thou hast such an opinion of my honesty, what dost thou think of
the retaking Candy?


In earnest Pedro, thou hast been as musing this two hours, as a Politician
would be thought to be, when he thinks of just nothing; sometimes you stand
cross armed, or biting of your nails; by and by nod, as if it was concluded:
then on the sudden scratch your head, as if some prodigious accident had ruined
the conquest of the Indies.


I am pleased it affords you mirth Antonio.


What a Divel ail man? if it be want of Wench or Money, (as I'm sure thou
can have no other cause of Melancholy) thou hast lived long enough, one
would think, to purchase confidence to tell thy Friend.


You're sure to guess right, without being thought a Conjurer, nay you might
have left one of them out too, for Heaven send me money, and i'll never throw a
way a thought, on any thing that's Woman; whilst I know how to purchase them
from a Ducat upwards.


But it may be you are grown particular; I have known as brawny a Donn as your
Worship, that has shrunk to the thinness of a Bul-rush, in less than two months
time, for this thing called Woman, that you talk of.


Certainly thou hast a better opinion of my understanding; particularly as the
world goes now? Why Antonio, I tell thee, I will sooner turn Pimp to a Suburb
Bawdy House, where there is nothing to be got, but blows, dead Wine, and the
Pox: or Hermit, and forswear the sight of them, another extreme, and as great a
punishment, as --


Not so fierce, good Pedro, it must be money then.


Yes faith, I was thinking, since my Father will not be so civil as to dye,
what I shall do to live.


He begins to grow a little rude now, that's the truth on it, I had one, thank
my Fortune, that came to his Estate betimes, kept it till his Lease of one and
twenty Years was run out, and never thought good to renew.


That was kind, but mine's fourscore, yet thinks as little of Death, as he did
at fifteen: and of my conscience is as far from it; nay that that vexes me I
can't rest for his rules of temperance, and I know not what, and how he lived
when he was a young man.


Pox of their Morals, when they are once past pleasures themselves, they envy
us. They ne'er consider should we all live, as they do now, the World would be
undone, I tell thee Pedro, if it were not for this debauchery, that kicks up
our heels in convenient time, it would not hold half of us.


It would be pleasant, but to hear what cunning contrivances I had to live in
my Melancholy fit.


Will you give me leave to guess? I'll lay my life gaming was the first
proposal.


Right, and concluded on, till I considered there was never a Scriveners Clerk,
or Taylors Prentice about the Town, but understood the trade; nay more, the
very Women get it, and cheat with as much confidence as a Hec. that has but
one stake left, so that design was ruined: my next was a Soldiers Life.


The certain retreat of a broken Gamester.


But methoughts it was a little undecent for a man of my Quality, to walk the
Street with one Leg, it may be never an Arm, and half a Nose.


Thou never think how people would be concerned for thee; one that so proper
a Gentleman should not be able to carry his Drink to his Head, the Women that
your dancing was spoiled; besides the Honour Man.


Pox on it, That signifies just as much as Peoples Pity, when one's certain of
hanging: I'll have none on it: next I was for Poetry.


Why what could put that into thy Head? that's the high way to Beggary.


Not as the World goes now: Besides, believe me, it is an easy Trade to one
that understands a modern language or two, and will translate.


Nay he must rime too, or the Ladies will ne'er be pleased.


Phu! That's but a weeks practice at Crambo, and once obtained saves us pains:
for 'tis impossible to write non-sence in it, some few long words, and half a
score sentences out of Seneca's Tragedies, make an Heroic Poet.


Come, thou hast more wit than to think on it, never trouble thy self, thou
shalt want nothing whilst thy Father lives; and when he dyes, I know it all
secure.


You are still my Friend. That that vexed me was to see that Rogue Pisauro,
thrive by Air, wear his Jewels, variety of Cloths, keep his Lacquais, Horses,
play as deep as any man, and all this out of nothing.


It must be some Woman, the little Rogues are grown so loving since these Wars,
and want of men, that they begin to take it ill to be courted, and provide for
themselves.


I could ne'er discover't, he's as private as a Confessor.


And upon the same account, for he gets money to conceal her vices: nay your
Confessor is like him too in this, that he seldom hides the Women's faults, but
in the same time he saves his own credit. But if it be a Woman, much good may
it do him, I shall never envy him.


Nor I, He had better thrash, or be chained to the Galleys.


No more, here he is.


Save ye Gallants, I interrupt you.


No Pisauro, we were just now guessing how thou did to live.


Faith Gentlemen ye are both my Friends, but we Chemists always conceal our
great secret by which we thrive.


Heaven send the Furnace where you make your gold, don't prove too hot for you.


But why in this Garb? thou use to outshine the Sun.


I am sorry Gentlemen you have hit upon two Questions, I must be so uncivil as
not to answer; but hereafter when things grow ripe..


There needs no excuse Pisauro.


Your design goes forward with Pacheco?


Yes, yes I intend to carry Pedro thither,


And 'tis odds but I'll bring a Friend.


Dost think the Women will come in?


Ne'er fear't they'll not stand out at any thing that makes for pleasure.


These are mysteries Gentlemen.


I'll unriddle all as we go.


We'll all meet anon, for the present I must leave you, and to a patient,
though I think he is past cure.


What's his Disease prithee, that thou art turned Quack?


The Gentile one i'll warrant you, he cures that by his own experience.


No Faith worse, he's taken of the sudden with a love frenzy, and runs mad for a
Wench.


Pox on him, get him one then.


That will not do, I have offered him as fair as any one, but he is come to his
Sonnets, and Serenades, sighs and walks with his Hat over his Eyes in deep
meditation of doggrell love verses, calls her by fine Romantic names,
sometimes she is Celia fair, then Phyllis, Amarillis, Clelia, and the Devil and
all, but her right name, and that I am now going to learn.


Prithee give him a little Ratsbain, or some cold Poison to cool his pluck; in
love; I thought the World had learned more wit above this 12 month.


May we know the man?


I'll try but one Medicine more, and if that cure not, deliver him over to be
baited: In the mean time if you chance to guess, pray conceal it till the game
grows hot. Gallants adieu.


Adieu ^isauro. Come Pedro you won't fail.


I wish she were returned, for I'm impatient till I hear some news, Heaven
send she meet him, and me rid of this fond Husband. I am as weary of him, as a
Woman can be of a Man, she has married for money; I think I hear her.

Oh Lelia did you find him? and will he come?


Yes Madam,


But art sure he said so? for thou art so apt to forget.


As sure Madam as that you long for his coming.


Did remember the hour too?


Lord Madam what makes you so mistrustful? I did, if you'll have me swear --


No I believe thee, prithee Cozen pardon me, and think what a sorment 'tis to
want the thing we love: Alas, now 'tis a whole long VVeek since I saw him: and
besides, all the while to be troubled with a doting Husband, would make any
body impatient.


Is kindness troublesome? I thought no Woman had complained on that side.


O more then any thing, from one I cannot love.


Pray Madam why did you marry then?


Poor innocent, dost think that love's the only cause? there are a thousand
stronger Lelia, that's the very last, in any Woman's thoughts, that's wise.


Pray instruct me then, it may be my fortune one day.


I will and dare with confidence since I know thee private. Before I married
people flattered me, or else they thought me fair, and that little beauty
Lelia, was the greatest of my Fortune.


and trust me Madam, a very great one too.


As it was, it proved of strength to tempt Lysander, who was, and still
continues, one of the richest Merchants of the Town: my Parents thought the
Match so great, that it was in vain for me to seem unvvilling: to be short, I
married him, but not for love Cozen, but to maintain my Dear Pisauro, who long
before had ransacked all my Virgin Treasure, and still enjoys my heart.


I shall endeavour to learn Madam.


Trust me Lelia, no vvay's so direct to Misery as to marry one you love. Love
added to a Husbands power, makes him perfect Tyrant; now let him do or say his
pleasure, all's indifferent.


But is it not as much trouble Madam, to dote on your Gallant?


No Lelia, He has dependence on me, and all my happiness is, I know his
fortune's low; Oh! that he were but here once dearest Pisauro.


Here's your Husband Madam.


Then I have a new Trade.


Come Dearest, I must take leave; what weeping? Thou hast too much love.


If I had thought I could have loved so well, I never should have married sure,
scarce a Week but I am left to misery and solitude, methinks I could curse him
that e're invented your profession.


Brave Woman thou shalt instruct all our Sex.


Cheer up dearest, 'tis but for a few days, and i'll return, and love still
more, if possible.


A day's an age to be from one I love, nay my mind give's me, you'll ne'er come
agan, stay but one day.


Heaven send he does not take her at her word.


Fond Rogue, my word's engaged, I cannot for a World.


No you'll ne'er do any thing I ask you, stay but one hour, come prithee do, let
this beg for me.


Rarely acted, she might deceive an Angel.


Why if I should thou'lt be the same then, and trust me, my time is gone,
nothing in the World should tempt me from thee, but my credit, prithee Dear be
patient.


I have no other remedy, you are always t^us cruel, if you find me sick, or
dead, when you return, it will never trouble you.


Come prithee be not so unkind, thou know I love thee, thou make me weep
to hear thee talk thus.


Loving Cuckold! you would have cause, if you knew all.


Well if we must part for ever.


I tell thee 'tis but a day or two.


Farewell, Heaven prosper you, I must have the last look.


No prithee go, or else you hinder me. Lelia wait on your Mistress.


One kiss more, I'm all obedience, and then --


Adieu dearest.


One look more. VVas't not rarely acted Lelia?


To the life Madam.


She's gone, and faith now I begin to think my self a VVretch, to abu^e her
thus. How easily their good nature is deceived? ^oor doting fool! I dare swear
she loves me, then why should I dissemble thus with her? but hanged let her go,
she's but a Wife, and that's enough to fully all her worth. I'll to Emilia and
there forget her: if I can get loose, I may return a day or two the sooner for
this kindness.

But when a Mistress draws, a Wife must wait.
Your Fishes always choose the freshest bait.

He's gone Madam, He had a grievous conflict betwixt love, and business, talked
a little to himself, gave a kind look or two this way, and Exit.


A fair riddance, Poor Fool* now he's as secure of my love, as he is of being
Cuckold. Well men may talk of their wisdom, conduct of affairs, c. but this
one Woman's virtue of dissembling, out-weighs them all Lelia.


True Madam, were we all as great proficients as your self.


'Tis but getting a husband to Practice on, and thou'lt soon learn. How do I
look to day Cozen?


Tempting fair.


I would be dressed to all advantages, for every time I meet Pisauro, methinks I
make a new conquest. Prithee what did he say to thee?


He talked something of a Reformation was designed very much for our
advantage, I did not well understand him, but you'll here all anon.


I wish* he were here once, is't not the hour yet Lelia^ I'll meet him, if he
comes not quickly, if we chance to miss, he has the key, and knows where to
expect me.


He will be here Madam presently, pray be patient.


To me even time it self does slowly move,
There's no such thing as patience in Love.

Mariana, Ismena, hey days! go seek'em out.


They are not within, Sir.


Not within Sir? This 'tis! Women? I had rather have 40 Cats to look after; and
they all wild too, great, wild, He Cats. I've seen Tigers, Lyons, Wolves cooped
up, and tamed: But let any man prove to me of his own knowledge, two Women that
were so, and i'll believe all Mandevile. Of my conscience I had all bedlams put
together in me, when I got these girls, they make nothing of creeping through
Key holes.


They are only gone to Church Sr.


To Church Sr? what have women to do at Church Sr? can't they say their Prayers
at home, or let them quite alone, and mind their needles? I tell thee there
ne'er comes any good of these holy pretences; were I young I'd as soon marry
one out of the stews as one of these religious gadders: and the truth on it is
it comes much to one, for they meet with Priests at both places. Where's
Pacheco?


Abroad Sr.


There's a youth too, hopeful enough till this cursed voyage: if any man longs
to spoil a son, let him send him into England with an Ambassador. They are
all mad there, and hated the very true Religion, because of Nunnerys and
Covents, that confined People to Sobriety and Chastity. I have a hopeful brood;
would any thing but the down-right divel had'em.

So, are you come gypsyes? not a word, I've rayl'd my self weary at present,
get you in, I'll but take a turn in the gallery, to recover a little, and you
shall have it with a vengeance.


What shall we do sister, my Father's strangely angry?


Why even go abroad again, and run for it, or let him talk out his talk, he's
old and quickly out of breath.


We women are most miserable creatures sister, brought up at first by some
severe Parent, or kinswoman; and when we grow most sensible of bondage,
delivered over to the tyranny of a cruel husband.


Or clapped into a nunnery to spend our lives in thinking, and contemplation,
though I persuade my self there's little of religion in it: but from the small
remembrance we have of men, scratch their pictures on the walls, and wish: and
the first opportunity we have of being sick make use of the confessor.


You're a wild wench, will nothing tame thee?


'Twould make a dog wild to be tied up thus, I wonder we can never muster
courage up for to rebel. I have read of women that have been famous for it, and
I'm persuaded I my self have courage enough to be a general.


My Brother talks of some design he has, I wish he would complete it once.


Were I but a man I'd make my self renowned in the women's quarrel, work them
all deliverance; and then share the best of them.


'Tis the men's interest to keep us thus enclosed Ismena.


None but but a few elder brothers that are husbands Mariana, I dare swear were
it once proposed the young rogues would dye in our defence, 'twould make their
addresses cheap and easy, when as now twenty fees can scarcely purchase a
good look, which falls hard upon the younger brothers. You're Melancholy
Sister.


I dread my fathers anger, and the very thoughts of liberty torment me vvorse,
then this imprisonment. Would my Brother would come home once, that we might
hear the news.


Dread! I'm ashamed to hear you name it, let's in and laug^, and vveary out
this tyranny.


'Tis thy mirth that keeps me still alive.


Come wench,

Our bodies by a father are confined,
But there's no man can rule a woman's mind.

No news of Lysander?


No Madam.


I have not lost my beauty yet, the same lustre sparkles in my E^es; and youth
sits smiling on my cheeks: the same brisk heat runs through my veins, and makes
me warm, and active in my love. Then why should he grow cold? Five days and not
see me? 'tis very strange! He's too wise to have the dotage of a wife seize
him. No, 'tis another love grown happy by my ruin. I'll find out some new way
to sound him, for 'tis fixed. My youth must not be lost in this indifference.
Lucia bid them bring me in a Chair and Table, and do you fetch me the
Prayer-book lies in my closet.


The Play-book Madam?


No the Prayer-book, are you Deaf?


You'd better have the other Madam, that will but make you melancholy.


Go I say, it may be I resolve to be so.


I shall have a sad trade on it if it comes to this once. I wonder who invented
these grave Books! or ever taught any of our profession to read them, I'm sure
they are very much out of our calling.


It shall be so, and if this fail, I'll find some other way to live; there are
more kind men than one.


Here Madam, but I hope you are not in earnest.


Peace Baggage, and if Lysander come, tell him I'm not to be disturbed.


Since you are so serious, you shall have none of my Company: I'll even go sing
a brisk song or two in the next room, and bless the first man that comes to put
you out of this humour.

Oh here's Lysander, then I must run for it.


He's come, now all that's woman help me to dissemble. Yet I can find no Prayer
that's fit for me. Sure never any woman was so wicked.


Come Emelia throw away thy book, and fly to my embraces, thou need not
study any new charms. Come let me see what 'tis that tempts thee thus: some
smutty Novells on my life. How's this? A Prayer book! I should sooner expect to
see the French King turn Calvinist than to find thee in this posture. What sad
affliction has brought thee to this misery? Hast spotted thy new gown? lost thy
little dog? or dost want a new fashioned pair of Pendants? Prithee tell me.


No, No, Sr. None of these. But I have spotted all my life, lost my innocence
which you have robbed me off; and want a new heart*


Hey day! turned Canter? this becomes thee worse than fine dress, and youthful
cloths an old woman: There's scarce a Nun will talk thus through a grate.


But I shall when I'm there (as I resolve I will) and if I can, teach you
repentance.


Pox of this wheadle, I see through it, and will cure her by one as
extravagant.


It is but Just I help to wash away your guilt, who have been the unlucky
cause.


Now for my trade. Oh Emilia from this minute I'm happy: give me your hand, my
bloud's obedient; and I can touch thee now with as chaste thoughts, as Virgins
pray.


If this be real, I'm undone, but I must on.


Methinks I loath my former life. Oh could we but call it back Emilia.


Then we were blessed indeed. But since that cannot be, I'll double all my
Orisons, and that way make up my arrears: And never speak, or think of man, but
when I put up prayers for you, O Lysander.

-- Hang me if I can hold for laughing: if I make a good end of this, if I ever
undertake to Preach again, may I turn Nun in earnest.


She will out-do me; they have the advantage of a voice for whining, but I'll
try. I'll to a cloister too, for 'tis but just the residue of life be spent in
punishing this too much pampered flesh. There in our several cells we'll fast,
and watch, and wash away our guilt, and when we're fit to dye remove to heaven.
Oh Emilia!


This is counterfeit too, but how to come off I can't imagine. Well, dear
Lysander (for now I dare call thee so) since our designs agree, let's time our
Prayers, that Heaven may hear us both together.


We'll rise before the morn.


Out-watch the pale-faced moon.


Nor eat to satisfy our appetite, but lengthen out our lives for our devotion.


We will not drink, but what our tears have seasoned.


Nor sleep.


Nor think.


Nor dream.


Nor live.


Nor any thing but --


I can hold no longer.


Nor I by heaven. You idle rogue, could you imagine I could think thee in
earnest?


I was once half afraid that you was, till I considered how ill it became you.


Now what amends for all this? Will you never leave this jealousy?


You shall find that within. I did it only for to try you after your absence.


No more of these tricks, there needs none, I am as fond as ever, come let's in
and enjoy our selves, and some twenty years hence, we may venture on such a
discourse in earnest.


YEt you resolve to have this wench?


Why I'm sure thou would not have me dye, if it were only to save the
trouble of praying for me.


Faith it would put me a little out of my road, that's the truth on it; but why
must you needs dye? Thou hast not seen her above twice, and that at Church too:
if you had been at your appointment you might have avoided such temptations;
for my part I'm resolved to keep out of harms way.


Away you're profane.


Prithee stay till thy Saint's Canonised, before thou say so; do you think it
religion to kneel squinting at your mistress, two or three hours with your
beads in your hands; and only cast up your eyes, because she's in the gallery
above you?


Heaven made such beauty for to be adored.

And she'll make use of it for to be whored
Why don't you go on? I thought you had a copy of verses on it. Heaven made c.
I shall believe you are in love, when once you talk your sublime nonsense.
Heaven, Beauty, Fate, Adoration, Sun, Divinity and a few such words will make
thee Poet too, and then you're fit to court a Queen.


I was bewitched to tell you, I knew you would but mock at my misfortunes; I
should hardly serve Pisauro so.


Misfortunes do you call it? will you make me believe women can run through
thee, like lightning, and set what brand upon a heart they please? Let me be
thy Doctor and prescribe thee two or three of my infallible cures against this
witchcraft of love. Feed high. Wench discreetly. And go to bed with a jolly
cup. Probatum est -- 'tis as infallible as the Jesuits po^der for a Quart.


I see I must find some other friend to help me in my affairs. Adieu.


I'll be serious. By my troth I had such a qualm came over me once, 'twas
troublesome, and lasted about a quarter of an hour, but since a she friend of
mine taught me to draw the humour downward, I'm free.


I have no patience to bear this fooling.


I have done, pray pardon me; but which way dost thou intend for to obtain
her? The old man keeps her with more care, than he does his gold; He cut of a
dog's ears the other day, to search for lettters: And has a gun ready charged to
kill pigeons, for fear they should be Carryers: He swounds at the sight of a
post, or any thing that runs of errands.


This difficulty makes me need thy help. I know thee expert in all the tricks
of women; art read in their winks and nods, can tell how to answer with a
shrug or sigh, know how to wheadle Chamber Maids, and make love to old
nurses. Prithee be serious and advise me.


Now I see thou art in earnest, I can, and will Leandro.


But how dear Pisauro?


Why thus: old Camillo, Father to thy Ismena, has a son lately returned from
England, whither he went with our Ambassador.


This way I can fores^e no hopes.


Yes very much. You knew him humorsome, and conceited before his voyage; but
this has added to him all the fopperies of that Nation, which they borrow from
the French: so that he's the strangest piece of Fantasticness that can make
droll for a play: in short he is a mere singing switching Fop.


Still you amaze me.


Suffer me. Amongst the rest of the English customs 'tis one, and faith almost
the only one that pleases me, to allow all possible freedom to their women.
This he resolves to bring up in Venice, and will in spite of his father, begin
with his own sisters. There is a Royal society of us, called the Reformers.
Dost thou yet understand me?


Yes, this sounds like something.


We will admit thee into the number, and then shift for thy self. I must leave
you, and to the business that concerns my life (as I was telling you) my little
Merchant adventures, Oh! 'tis the kindest thing, so like matrimony, and yet no
trouble. Now we talk of reforming, could you all thrive like me, and leave off
the damned trade of keeping vvenches, and let them keep you, 'tvvould be a
happy world.


But I'm for neither, I'm for the honest way of marrying.


Heaven forbid, but that somebody should like that dull trade: for if there
were no vvives, there would be no husbands to rob to maintain us younger
Brothers.


You still keep your old humour; but why no better dressed man?


I'll tell you; I serve her, as the vvenches used to serve me; alvvays pretend
to want something: thou shalt see me as glorious as the day at our next
meeting.


Stay, who are these?


Antonio and Pedro, two of the society: I'll admit you presently.


You're a rare rogue: How the Divel could thou find Rhetoric enough to
vvheadle him to this?


He did it himself Sir. And tells me in England, 'tis thought honourable to
bring their sisters acquainted, as they call it, I believe some fashionable
name for Pimping. 'Tis ordinary there to do it for a kins woman, and that may
save a portion. Heaven send them good faces, and they never need work for their
livings. Oh 'tis. --


Save you Gallants, how does the Society go forward?


With full sail, Pisauro.


Shall I beg admission for my friend here?


Leandro! The only man we wished; but he must be sworn according to form.


Your Servant Gentlemen, I shall willingly pass any ceremony.


They are easy, only an oath or two to swallow, and they are gilded.


Lay your hand upon the book. 'Tis Ovid de art amandi, and begin. You shall
swear, to the uttermost of your power to reform Venice according to the Pattern
of Enland in manners and discipline; and that you will, without respect of
persons, endeavour the extirpation of Tyranny, that is, the government of
Husbands and Fathers, by Sisters, Aunts, Nurses, and all other officers
depending upon that Usurpation. And that you will with the same sincerity root
out the spreading errors of Vizards, Masques, Veyles, Padlocks, both for the
restoring of lost pleasures to your self, and the freedom of the distressed
Ladies.

So help you Cupid.


So, now you are a sworn Brother, we need keep nothing secret.


Where's our Grand-master Pacheco?


I left him with his Tutor, the English man, contriving which way to get his
Sisters out of Prison.


That's the English man, I warrant, that pretends so much to Poetry and
breeding; and censures all the old Authors, with as much Authority as if he had
been their School-master.


The same; if he gets but the upper end of a Table at an Ordinary, you shall
have him run them over as fast, as a Dutch-man tells money.


Sometimes he pretends to Plays too, and then he damns French, Spanish, and
Italian in a wind, yet steals out of the very worst of them. He would be
thought to have a little kindness for an Author or two of his own Nation, but
will be sure to ruin their reputation too, with some exception or other, before
he leaves them.


Does he ever write himself?


Yes, Yes; but as all your professed Critics do, damnably ill: To tell you the
truth (for I have made it my business to understand him) the fellow has wit,
but broke with driving a trade too big for his stock; and when Pacheco took him
in, all he had to subsist on, was confidence, and the favour of two or three
fopps.


Faith he's bravely fitted with a Master.


'Tis very pleasant to hear him talk of the advantages of this Reformation, his
Lectures of Repartes, Converse, Regales, and an hundred more unintelligible
fopperies.


To end, he has ordered us to expect him at the old place, where we shall hear
the Result of all.


There you may expect me then an hour hence.


But how shall we find a Mistress for Pacheco?


-- Why faith I have a wench I grow something weary of, he shall have her.


No, that's too cruel.


What think you of my boy finely dressed? The rogue has a smooth face, and sings
well.


Nor that neither. I have a Cozen witty and handsome, whose Fathers fortunes
were ruined in our last wars at Candy: what if we set her up? she may teach him
wit.


As you can agree. But prithee, now you talk of singing, let Leandro hear the
song you made upon the Reformation.


Sing boy.


Beauty no longer shall suffer Eclipse,
Nor jealousy dare to confine
The power of those eyes, or use of those lips
Which nothing but kindness design.
Our Ladies shall be
As frolic as we,
Nor shall husband or Father repine.
We'el banish the stratagems used by the State
To keep the poor women in awe,
Henceforth they themselves, shall rule their own fate
And desire shall be to them a law.
Thus they being free
From Padlock and Key
May with their Reformers withdraw.
Where in private we'el teach them the Mysteries of Love,
And practise that Lecture over,
Till we the fond Scruple of honour remove,
And the end of our passion discover.
No maid shall complain
Or wife sigh in vain
For each may be eased by her Lover.
Away with all things that sound like to Laws,
In this our new Reformation;
Let the Formalists prate, the good old cause
Is a general toleration.
From this time they're free
A veyl's Heresy
And a Vizard Excommunication.
'Tis a brisk design, and must needs take among the Ladies: but are the so free
in England as you pretend?


Freer than you can think Sir. 'Tis mortal sin not to know what's what at
fifteen.


Fifteen! They have lost time at that age; a Maiden-head at thirteen is as
great a rarity in the country as a wolf; now and then in some village there may
be some ugly Monster, that holds out longer upon force, but --


In earnest Leandro, the soberest women there, have more freedom of discourse
and company, than we give to a stale Bawd, or an old Midwife at a Christening:
And yet the men so free from jealousy, that you ma^ as soon persuade one of us
to leave whoring, as them to believe their own eyes.


Nay, they are so contrary to us, that a Vizard Masque is a certain sign of a
free booter, and nothing makes them cover their faces but impudence.


This must needs be the fortunate Island, people talk so much off.


Now after all this, make it a matter of conscience: consider the necessity of
this Reformation, and how damnably we have been wheadled b^ these veils of
ours. After half a years attendance, and courting of some delicate shape, that
would tempt a Hermit in the midst of snow, to lose all our expectation and
compliment, and when we see the Devils face, be forced to fly, and cross our
selves for fear of blasting.


'Tis intolerable. I tell you I resolve to spare no body, a Vizard shall not pass
though it be following her Mother to the grave: nor any face be hid by a veil,
though the woman be to do penance in a Church: The truth on it is, Gentlemen,
there must be no mean, rank rebellion or nothing.


At that I'm with you, and I know not but this may make us as famous, as
inventing a new Religion.


There's no question. Thou art well read, 'tis but finding half a dozen places
in our modern Reformers, to back us, and the business is done.


This design has so tickled me, that I have forgot my assignation. Leandro I
leave you to be introduced by these Gentlemen.


We will all go.


My way lies here, I'll be with you presently.


Let your politic nodles debate
So our women be free,
'Tis nothing to him, to thee, or to me
Who governs the Church or the State.

So my adventures begin already: though two to one be odds, I must board them;
Heaven send they don't prove Fire-ships


'Tis he.


Nay faith Madam, no passing this way without a small Patley, and a kind look
or two.


Sure you're some stranger you're so rude, do you know you are in Venice, Sir?


Yes Madam, but I perceive you don't know the most considerable news of the
place. How the Divel do you two come into these Vizards that have been out of
fashion these six hours?


What Sir? and the men are to wear them to cover bad faces, as the women did to
save good ones?


Well said Spitfire, come, unmasque for fear I call yours in question; for were
you fair, you would be proud too, and we must hire you to keep it on.


Like enough Sir, were the prize worth taking, but what shall I get by
conquering you? You look as if you had nothing about you, but a Surgeons bill,
and it may be a Tailors, which must be worn out with carrying in your pocket
too, if it came home with your clothes.


As I live she g^esses all my treasure within a Ducatoon: Oh for some succour to
relieve the forlorn hope.


Without you repent you shall pine for this, though it be spoke at random.


This is the strangest beggar I ever heard Madam; but you use to be charitable,
give him something to put him into repair, the Gentlemen has been in a Storm.


Do you begin to open too, you pispot-emptier, you must be such by the old lace
shoes, and respect you have to follow the fashion at a distance.


Marry come up! one had better be out of the fashion, than out at the elbows.


Methinks one of your complexion might light upon some wife, or easy fool that
would buy her pleasures at the price of periwigs, or a new suit, you have had
ill fortune Sir. Prithee Lelia help me to abuse him.


Worse and worse she knows me too: yet refuse me, if (except this minute to
Leandro) I ever told it so much as to my Confessor, but most of your women are
witc^es.


Or what do you think of a Gentleman Usher? you have a good fashionable face;
and your Lady will see to bring your legs to a fit size.


No, No; I tell you he scorns any thing of Service. The Ladies dote on him,
'tis ten to one, but that he's just now sent for, you see he's dressed for the
purpose.


Pox on you both, for I have nothing left to say but curses, and they shall be
home: may you be both Padlocked, chayn'd together, and turned upon a Common; or
which is yet worse, may you always gape for meat, and it be death for any man
to feed you.


Nay if you be so good at that, I'll have one for you too; may you have nothing
to maintain you, but the favour of some woman, and she grow weary and discard
you.


Heaven forbid, that bites, I'd give all the world to see this Divel, and will
before I go.


Nay, never take the pains to strive.


How! Juliana! Could you curse with so much cruelty, when you knew me too?


Don't you deserve it? how do you like my wall-eyes now?


Now you're cruel: Good faith I did not know thee, I was just coming.


I have waited above this two hours, but you men when you once get a hank upon
our affections, think you may do any thing.


By this you shall not be angry. I have the pleasan'st story to tell you; come be
pleased Lelia shall engage for me.


Yes I have cause, you did not abuse me?


Peace, I'll stop thy mouth with a husband Girl.


Say you so? I have done.


Well I'll try you once again, but if ever -- I'll only go round and meet you,
you have the key of the back door.


What fool will trust himself to wind and waves?
When thus he reaps the fruit and trouble saves?
A Husband's factor for his wives Gallant,
And till he break, the other ne'er can want.

That was something nigh it, but methinks I had not the right fling yet. I'll
try again.


I here you nicked it. Now for your Virtuoso's Looking glass.



Right Sir, that expresses your design of promoting new experiments. You must
observe it in every thing not so much as a tooth-picker, but must have
something extraordinary.


Would not this show genteel and modish in a Play-house?


This and the managing ^our comb will make you pass for a Critic in the
fashion. The next thing you may practice is some few books, and then you are a
wit too.


That's the only thing I aim at; on good Tutor.


When you come to a new Play, and know the Author is no fighter, and you may
venture to abuse him; first sit grave and unconcerned, and be sure to cast an
eye upon some famed wit of the town, and take him for your pattern.


But how if there be none there Tutor.


Why then if any thing takes in general you may venture to smile a little: if
only amongst some few, and you imagine it not good, cast a scornful look about
you, as if you pitied their ignorance. Above all things commend nothing
without some exception. These few rules well observed, you'll be a standard of
carriage unto others.


Nay, they almost take me for a wit already, I know all the Poets Christen
names; and call Tom and Jack with as much confidence, as if I had been their
God-father.


That's well: There's very much in that. You may take occasion to give them the
familiar shrug, talk aloud, and swear, Tom the humour in thy last Prologue was
high and new. Pox on thee for a rogue, thoul't grow famous. A whisper now and
then, with a great laugh after it does well.


Did not you talk something of a shrug? You promised to teach me the way of
accosting people, that's the word I think in England.


Yes, mark* First take notice of no body in bad clothes, or poor, though it
should be your own Father come out of the country for to see you: or if you
must needs speak to him, withdraw, and after half a score words return, and
tell the company that a Tenant wants dispatch, or a dependant on the family;
and you'll be with them presently.


I shall not forget this, 'tis so natural to me ever since I have been in
England. I can't tell what to say to any one that wants a white wig, and a new
suit.


When you're nigh a person of honour, and one you think it a credit to be
acquainted with, be sure to turn and smile, though it be a secret he's
whispering to another, and you don't hear a word. This makes you be thought
familiar, and a favourite at Court


That's excellent, faith Tutor I'll remember I'll warrant you.


As for your Equals, your shrug, or shaking of the head, as if you had been at
a debauch the night before, is creditable and modish. As to practice: Mounsieur
Pacheco? with the Ladies last night, or a tavern on my life.


That's right, and confirms him, that you drink and wench, things of more
credit, as the world goes, than a Knight-hood, or the command of a Regiment.


Incomparable Tutor! but no more, for fear I forget: besides I fear they stay
for us; and I would not hinder the Reformation, to be great Duke.


In England, where each Writer shares the stakes,
The gains are small, and one the other breaks.
But here alone without control I rule,
His trade can't fail that's Tutor to a fool.

I Tell you truth Sir.


Pisauro? the thing it self does not so much perplex me, as that I'm
over-reacht; and yet it cannot be; she's all fondness.


What greater ground can you propose for your suspicion? Consider Sir, had you
the same design what other way is left to hide it? But I have done the office
of a friend believed or not.


This argument has convinced me, and since thou art so much my Friend, I'll
tell you, I have the same design, and love a Mistress more than twenty Wives,
and by this very means conceal it from her. But People that pretend themselves
to cunning, seldom see through others. Dost think he's there now?


I'm sure he was Sir within this half hour I see him enter.


Then I will surprise them. I know she can't expect me yet a day or two. I'll
only dispatch an hours business


If this project chance to fail, within a day or two I'll find out one that
shall be certain.


Till my one eyes convince me I'll be still the same. Adieu.


Your Servant Sir. Thus far things go well, and here's a good reward. But let
me think. This Gallant keeps his Mistress too. That shall to Juliana. And since
they are so much for Reformation I'll show them one more of our Country tricks.
The taking fees on both sides.


THis England must be a blessed place my Brother talks so much of it.


Would I were there; that I might be acquainted with these men, I have such a
tickling runs through me when I see them.


And there it is commoner for them to go to a treat, than for us to go to
Church; never a day but this Lords or that Knights Coach waits on you and
hurrys you to a Play, thence into the Park, then there's such perpetual
Masquerades and Balls, that 'tis Carnival all the year.


And here if we have a little liberty before Lent we are sure to pine for it, so
that the whole year scarce recruits us again.


They have no such thing there: they account it almost sin not to eat flesh
when 'tis forbidden by the Church.


That's a life worth something, I wonder why these old men live, sure there
they all die when they're young, or else the women never knew their Fathers, for
my part I wish I had never known mine: I'm sure he's grievous troublesome.


Fie Ismena consider he is your Father.


Fie me no fies, Mariana, I wonder who disturbs his telling of money, or any
thing he has a mind to: does he think because he had the pleasure to get us,
we are bound to be his Slaves? if he had not been my Father 'tis odds but
somebody else would, I've heard them say my Mother was a handsome woman.


Peace for shame and be content a while, you know what my Brother promised
us to day.


I wish he would make his words good and bring them once. But I have a
strong fancy we shall quarrel, for I have had a mind to every man I have seen
yet.


I wish it were come to that once, for I am grievous weary of working these
virtuous Stories of constant wives.


Constant! thine I think's Penelope an old withered witch that was forced to
spin ten years to earn money to pay her drudges with; and when she had wearied
them all out, sent to seek her Husband; mine's Lucretia, it may be she was
virtuous but it would never grieve one to kill ones self, so one was well
ravished first.


Now thou art stark mad.


Phu! we may say any thing amongst our selves, if we did not talk merrily how
should we be able to live?


Hark, I hear my Father, Heaven send him in a better humour than when he last
left us.


He'd best look to himself, for such another Scold would cut off two or three
years at least.


So, this I like, if I ever catch you abroad again without my leave, do you
hear I'll have your legs tied together.


We may sometimes go to Church Sir.


No, I'd rather have thee stay at home and be damned; I wonder what 'tis you
do at Church? make mouths at some young fellow, who talks to you all the while
on his beads. Come come, I know all your tricks and will have you stay at home;
nor shall any come to see you, no not your Brother to tell you Stories of his
England voyage: curse on the Nation.


Not my Brother Sir? this is too severe.


No not your Brother Minks; you're like to come to good when you'll be
instructing of your Father. Here Nurse take the Keys, and give no more liberty
than the two next rooms afford without my order.


I warrant you Sir, I'll keep them close.

Now Mrs. Ismena I shall be even with you for all your f^umps.


Nay as long as you are with us we shall want no sport, come Sister help me to
shake her to pieces.


Will you murder me? Oh!


The other shake does it, I heard her bones rattle.


Oh I am dead.


You keep them close you old toadstool! thou art too ugly to be a Bawd.


She had been a Witch Sister, but that the Divel loathed to suck her.


When you are once in your pound I'll make you fast for this, you shall not so
much as see a man this twelvemoneth, nay, I'll have your hands tied behind you,
that you may not scratch where it itches.


That would be hard indeed Sister.


Leave your threats, or you know your old punishment: or what do you think of
tossing her in a blanquet? she's so old and dry she must be light.


Excellent! if we had her in the Garden on a windy day 'twould be a sure
riddance; But now I think on it Sister we will get some packthread and fly her as
the boys do a paper kite with a Candle and Lanthorn at her tail. She'll make a
rare Comet.


'Tis the best use of her, she's like the picture of one of the Sibylls above
in the Dining room, and this is the way to make her prophecy.


Well Mrs. Percks this goes to your Father, with some improvement of my own.


If you dare Keeks, we will in and study a revenge.


Farewell Rattle, and be sure to keep us close.


So, if you will prate, Magpies, it shall be in a Cage. These Gimcracks if they
once come towards fifteen are so gamesome, there's no riding them without a
curb, nay then 'tis ten to one but that they fling the first Adventurer out of
the Saddle too. The Divel's in them I think, I'm sure in my young days. But
I'd as good stop I shall be tempted to lie else. The truth is I hate all young
women that are fair and there's reason for it; if we old ones get a good look
once a twelvemonth, be sure the next young one that passes by robs us.


Come Gentlemen, the old man's safe, enter, and think your selves in England:
there we run about till we find the Ladies Chambers, ransack every thing, and
are never chid except it be for not staying longer. What say you, Tutor?


He tells you truth Gallants, we help to dress and undress faith almost any
thing; yet all the while as Virtuous as two Nuns. More, you'll find there is no
other way but liberty to make us so.


I'm glad to hear the way to Virtue is so easy Sir.


I always thought it, there's none but a company of ill-natur'd morose people
that would have it hard can think it otherwise.


Can any one believe that such a glorious thing as woman is, was made to be
concealed?


No, 'tmust be cursed Heresy, I had rather they should put out the Sun by
half.


That's because you love their company in the dark. Was not that good, Tutor?


Excellent!


Hey day! who have we here? I have heard of Guardian Angels, but never thought
that Devils were so employed before.


You know the fashion Sir of your own Country. This is the sweet-meat keeper,
the preserver of Maiden heads that shall for a Ducat corrupt youth, and teach
them more bawdy in a week than half a dozen years practice; yet is trusted with
as much beauty as is able to make the great Turks Empire run mad, merely for
being old and ill natured. In short Sir here our Reformation must begin.


Come at her then.


What do you mean Gentlemen? I'm only a poor old Servant to the house.


Thy being old is enough to make us hate thee.


Come where are my Sisters? give me the keys.


No such matter, my Master charged me but just now to the contrary, and I will
be true.


Give me them you Witch or --


I'll cry out, will you force me?


Have you got them?


Yes, Yes.


But how shall we stop her mouth? an old woman's tongue is harder to lay than
ten Devils.


Let me alone with her, I go always prepared to stop these noises.


There lie thee there, and dare but so much as think mischief, and do you hear
I'll pull out the two stumps that are left.


Here Gallants take these keys. Now you may enter and catch who catch can a la
mode d' Angleterre, I disturb nobody not I.


A kind Brother this!


My jealousy makes it but too true I am in love, and that with such respect
that 'tis impossible to benefit by this freedom.


Courage Sir, I perceive you are one of the cold contemplative lovers that
follow a Mistress at a distance, and think your self happy if you purchase one
gracious nod, with ten thousand cringes. In for shame.


If you'll carry me to one of your Ladies, I'll soon teach you better courtship.
Or if you'll stay here. You shall see me practise.


I shall be glad to learn Sir.


Come Tutor show me the way of address to a Lady.


Did you never see the Gallants in the Antechamber, how they prepare themselves
before entrance?


Yes I warrant, what was I in England so long for else? but will that do?


The very same.


Then thus.

How do you like this Sir?


Oh Sir much beyond any thing I ever saw. I must have patience with this fool
for his Sisters sake.


Then Sir we don't go your formal old way of making legs, as if we had some
Deity to worship. But knowing they are flesh and blood as well as we approach
briskly.


Begin with an oath or two. I think it is not much matter whether it be to the
purpose or not Tutor.


Not at all Sir, they'll excuse all that follows for the sake of that.


These are great secrets, you improve me Gentlemen.


Nay Sir, if we carry on our Reformation, the whole state will stand engaged to
us, but great designs seldom prosper at the first.


The more's our ignorance, but pray Sir in. If there be such a toy as a Masque
or Fan to play with, or you can find any thing new about her to commend 'tis
modish, and the most gentile subject for discourse.


If you name two or three Ladies of quality familiarly, it sounds well and
brings you in esteem. But most of all if you can learn who she hates (for women
have always little quarrels amongst themselves) and can pick up a story to
their disadvantage, you render your self beyond exception acceptable.


I do it always, but nothing pleases them so much as a little sprinkling of
bawdy Tutor. Only the Devils in it, the rogues perpetually out-do me at it.


No wonder Sir, they practise daily, and no three women that are acquaintance
but make a Bawdy language for their own use.


I wish you had a Sister Sir, or so, that you might see me practise over these
lectures,


'Tis my misfortune Sir.


But suppose for once that you were my Mistress.


Content.


Thus I come up.

And how? damn me Madam all a mort?


Incomparably well!


Must I swear too?


No Sir by no means, if the women once get that (as there is a faction amongst
them that endeavour it) they rob us of half our discourse. But say what you
will I have news from the last Ball, or of some new Beauty kept by such a
one. Or a new Play to find fault with or commend according as I hear who
made it.


And when you once get them into the discourse of Plays they'll run on
themselves. Praise such an Actor for this part, a second for another, a third
for a comely man, a fourth for dancing well.


Nay Sir, if you meet with a woman that does not find you discourse on this
subject, conclude her some Jilt that never had the good luck to be picked up
there, or some poor vvhore that can't purchase a seat.


But what do you do all the time?


Comb my Wig by her glass and tvventy other gentile tricks. But you must have
time to learn, I my self am beholden to travel, and this good man my Tutor
here.


I despair of e're attaining such perfections.


Industry may do much, Sir.


So, here they come; does not this look better than making legs to a balcony
and blowing kisses up and down.


This is right. Blessed Reformation!


I find this English custom will not down with me, I'm too much an Italian not
to be jealous of the thing I love.


You may think us rude for to be thus familiar; but a Fathers strictness, and
my Brothers good lessons have instructed us.


It's nothing Madam but what becomes all People that are Virtuous; 'tis only
such as drive a trade, and gain by seeming nice that should be otherwise.


Phy Sister, you sin against our Covenant to go about to excuse your self; for
my part I think we need none, I'm sure our souls are free as any mans: And yet
forsooth our bodies must be confined, and that by old men and women too, people
by their very natures made unfit for liberty.


Brave Virago! You shall be our Captain Madam in this holy war.


She's my own Sister Sir, you see that.

This is a modest Gentleman of the Reformation, pray bid him welcome. I and my
Tutor have been reading to him and we have hopes of his improvement.


Your friend must challenge welcome here, Brother.


The being a Reformer gives it him in's own right.


You heap your honours too fast on me Ladies, and the obligation is too far
above my merit.


There's stuff indeed. Can't you serve her as I told you I would one of your
Sisters? But the first fault shall be pardoned.


Still worse it gnaws here.


Fie Brother, the Gentleman speaks well.


Yes if he would hold up his head a little, and not begin with such a long word
as obligation.


I have lost all patience.


Mark Sir, you should cringe thus, speak two or three half sentences, as, I vow
Madam, take me but, and all that. And then come up boldly.


'Tis well you are her Brother. I find

I must contrive my ends some other way,
And when she's once a wife she shall obey.

You may end your Lecture, the Gentleman's gone Sir.


Gone! then let him live in ignorance.


If you're always thus exact brother, we shall ne'er increase our Company.


You must pardon him, he was always humorsome.


'Tis strange, when People have such opportunities and wont improve themselves.

Art thou come dear Rogue? let me kiss the. Here Sisters, share him, this is my
second that I told you of. If we meet with any opposition in our great affair.


But that we meet on the design of freedom Ladies, I might easily have been
thought rude to have intruded thus.


Nothing but your free humour can make you welcome here.


'T would be happiness to purchase it at any rate, but this doubles the favour
Madam.


Fie Sir, this sounds too like a Compliment. We should be loath to lose the good
opinion we have of you.


Have done for shame or I shall read you one of your friend Leandros Lectures.


Pray what have you done to make him leave your Company?


Trust me nothing but mirth, but Lovers are humorsome.


Sir, no more.


Come Gallants now we're met, what think you of a Dance?


We want Music and Ladies.


Not so fast good Sir, here's two to four of you, in England 'tis common to go
halfes, and the women never complain neither. No, no. The Music, is the thing.
Oh Tutor for the four and twenty English Violins now. You'd think your selves
in Heaven, Gentlemen, at a new Play. There we stand up with our Mistresses in
our hands, keep time and court them to the humour of the air, have one
particular sort of strain to gripe at, another for a languishing look. We
Italians find fault with your Tramontanes, but we are dull we are dull to them.


Pray let's defer that for our next meeting; if these Ladies will but honour me
to be my guests, I'll take care these wants shall be supplied.


I'll engage for them.


Now we have begun this way of freedom we should be uncivil to deny you Sir.


But how shall we get loose?


That shall be provided for before we part. It is but just the first time be
spent in the public service.


Some Chairs there.


Well proposed, and that the rules of Reformation be decreed by joint consent.


At least that every one should undertake besides the General work, some one
particular for to advance the Reformation.


Let's to the consultation then.


First I propose Pacheco be voted perpetual Chair-man to the Society; as one of
whose faithfulness and zeal we've had sufficient proof.

All. Agreed.


W' accept the honour Gentlemen, and hope we may deserve it by our future
diligence.


Come Ladies will it please you sit.


Do you use to admit of women to your privy counsel?


Yes Madam they still have had the casting vote in every Reformation.


Nay then we'll never lose our Privilege.


First I declare my Tutor secretary.


You've made a happy choice.


Next, as a thing that's very much conducing to the Reformation, I undertake to
regulate and be the pattern of all fashions in the town. To further which my
Secretary shall dispatch and keep a correspondence with our beloved pattern
England.


Why not with France? they borrow all from thence.


True Sir, and I have known some scores of Gallants that sail thither twice or
thrice a year on that design. And are expected by the rest with as much
earnestness as the East- India fleet by those that make the greatest venture.


Yes Tutor, but they make some new additions of their own; as your fringed
glove, curl of the wig, or cut of the belt, which strikes me strangely.
Besides, they much improve the gate and ceremony. And out-do the French in
their own way cringe and wadle.


These are Arguments beyond objection. I undertake t'invent a Language for the
company, I mean some twenty words or more of constant use. Or sense or not,
all's one so long as fashionable.


Good, and the true Genteel English way of wit. You shall have a Gallant pay
his devoirs, testify his amours, and make his assignations some twenty times a
day.


To this I'll add as many stories too. To which we must refer all our
discourse. This serves instead of whispering.


Oh much better; but then the Ladies must engage to seem to understand and
laugh at all you say.


That's easy, for we always do pretend to know more than we do.


'Tis but as all that would be thought great wits do, Sister.


I have a project now on foot which will advance the Reformation, but beg I may
once more try the experiment before I do reveal't.


It's granted. What say you Antonio?


Why I will undertake for to reform all the old men in Venice to the English
way. Expect within a week to see them in their Wigs and with their chins new
shaved, like boys of fifteen. Nay more, I do intend for to begin with old
Camillo too himself.


'Tis a bold project, succeed or not.


For my part I'll stick to my old way and write you Plays and Songs. I know
they never fail. I'll undertake the last new Play or two I writ made the
young Ladies more free, and brought more kind couples together, than all the
old women or Pages in the Country.


Probatum est. I've reaped the benefit of that my self. What say the Ladies
now?


We can only promise for to follow your instructions, Gentlemen.


And that we do in every thing: with a little more experience we may venture
to undertake some project of our selves.


Bravely resolved Ladies. No cause can fail that's backed by two such Champions.


Will you give me leave to give you some advice.


Leave? you're Tutor to the Society.


Then first --


Hark what noise is that, for Heaven sake look out. Oh we're undone Sister.


'Twill be in good company then.


'Tis Antonio's Boy.


Is he coming?


Yes Sir.


Away with these things there quickly.


He is not very near yet.


Go out and give us more notice.


Ladies, if you follow my advice you may have freedom without fear.


We will follow any thing to purchase that.


Here only take this Powder, and when your Father calls for wine mingle it
with this, within an hour it will make him sleep, and you free.


But is there no danger Sir?


A child may take it Madam.


He's just here.


Then we have no time for complement.


You remember your promise Ladies. Come Pacheco you shall go along with me, it
shall be hard but I will have a Mistress for you. This does but set thy teeth
on edge.


This way, this way, by the back door.


Pray Sister let's be very dutiful for fear he should mistrust.


I warrant you; do you think I am to learn to counterfeit at fifteen?


Now I'm pleased, be still thus dutiful, and you shall find me an Indulgent
Father. I am contriving something unto your advantage Mariana, you shall hear
it shortly.


I shall wait your commands Sir.


That was well said, and for you too Ismena.


If it pleases you Sir I must needs be satisfied, I was always taught to be
dutiful.


Thou hast thy Mothers soul. I am o'rejoy'd to find thee thus. Where's the
Nurse?


I forgot to tell you Sir, as soon as you went out, she was taken with a most
violent raving fit. And talked and railed so loud she quite frighted us.


Then on the sudden was struck dumb. And has not spoke one word since.


Poor woman. I'll go see her.


No, pray Sir she's now fast and you'll disturb her.


Well thought on. 'tis only rest that must compose her. But hark what noise is
that! Again!


'Tis the Nurse, for Heaven sake Sister run and ungag her we're undone else,
and leave me to my Father.


What's the house hanted at this time of day?


'Tis only the poor Nurse Sir that wakes in her distracted fit.


Good dear, dear Nurse.


Not I, it shall out.


I'll give you my best Petticoat, good Nurse.


Not all the world shall hire me. Oh Sir!


Pray Sister help me to hold her. Her fit increases, Lord how her eyes roll!
Nurse I'll give thee any thing.


Oh Master! Such a noise, such singing, nay pray Heaven it were no worse, for
they were roaring Boys.


She raves indeed, what dost mean Nurse?


I mean here Sir, with your daughter some five or six of them.


Poor old creature, how strong her fancy is? let's bind her Sir, they say that
that will hinder it.


Here's no body but I and you and my two daughters.


But there was Sir. Heaven grant you have no grandchildren in store, for I
begin to doubt them.


Just thus she talked before she slept, a little Opium would do well to settle
her. (good Nurse.


You think to carry it off, but now my Gag's out it shall be known. And how you
contrived.


I found them here at work alone.


I'm apt to think they're work was done before you came Sir.


Pray Ismena, what does she mean by this?


Heaven knows, some sad distraction Sir, I doubt she has been wicked in her
youth.


Come, Come I doubt you are. I see old Age and Service cannot be believed.


Mark Sister, now she's in her crying fit too. I'll call for help and put her
to bed.


Here's a Gentleman without that calls himself Leandro, Sir, has business with
you.


I come, carry out the Nurse and let the Maids look after her.


I think they had best bind her. Pray Heaven she do no mischief.


Her teeth are all out, she can't bite.


Now what do you think on it Nurse?


I think you're all possessed, for to abuse me thus. All that vexes me, I ne'er
deserved it at my Masters hands. But I will be revenged.


This is beyond expectation. Pray Heaven our next frolic succeed as well.


I'm strangely afraid of this Leandro.


That's the Melancholy man that was with us, is it not?


The same; if he betray us we're undone yet.


Ne'er fear wench, this powder will be one shift more.

And whether Fortune smiles or knits her brow,
We can't be worse than slaves, and so we're now.

I thought my self engaged besides the particular love I bear your daughter, by
my tie to honour to declare this truth.


'Tis very strange.


The Nurse can justify it.


Why, she's distracted Sir.


She might well seem so, abused as she has been.


Come in with me and we'll examine further, and if it does prove true, I stand
obliged.


If not, then take your own revenge.


'Twas well we had this notice, we had been surprised else. What unlucky
business brings him back? Now must I be kissed and hugged by one I hate. Phaugh.
He said Lysander told it him himself, did he not?


Yes, Madam.


Very well, the more he dotes on's Mis, the more time shall I have with my
Gallant, and if he does chance to find me out I have something to cry quit
with. In the mean time I'll seem as fond as ever, lest he should suspect me.


Hark Madam, I think I hear him coming.


Yes, 'tis he.

Next I will have you work the dismal story of poor Ariadnes love, and how the
cruel Theseus left her, 'twas unkindly done Lelia: But men are not so fond as
we.


Pox of your counterfeit pipe, he has been here but fled.


Ar't' come dearest? now you're kind indeed, a sudden joy o'rewhelming me. I
was just talking of the cruelties of men, and pitying our poor sex. But I had
never yet a cause to doubt of thee. Ten thousand welcomes. I have had such
fears.


Lest I should come home too soon


No, you had one that kept you waking


Truth is, no Opium causes sleep so much as such a bedfellovv. -- I hate


Nay I my self have had the strangest dreams too.


I hope they were all pleasant ones.


They were all of you, you night and day dispose my thoughts. One time
methoughts you loved another woman more than me, that troubled me a little, as
it would any wife that loves so well as I do. But I believe there are but
few.


Heaven forbid there should. too much fondness, thou can not have those
thoughts avvake.


No dearest joy, 'tvvas only in a dream.


That's nothing, for I had such a one of you, but when I waked I chid my self.


Nay, then we're even, and must pardon one another.


There's reason for it, for you are both sinners.


I am so far from a mistrust, that I dare swear thou art as innocent, as I my
self.


I dare pawn my innocence for thee too.


And if you ne'er redeem't 'tis no great loss.


But why should we talk thus? it looks too like mistrust. Believe me t'was with
me an Age till your return.


The very last hour before mine, seemed months to me too. I would fain have
taken you napping.


Poor rogue, you're thin since last I saw you, you shall not go again.


A Mistress and a Wife's enough to make any body look so.


Nay dearest but I must, and leave thee for a week or two, an hour is the
longest of my stay.


And of my life. You will kill me.


It shall be with kindness then.


A week! I know you're not in earnest but wilt deceive me thus again, come
prithee do, these surprises make thy coming ten times pleasanter.


That was well nicked, to make sure work.


'Tis too certain, Juliana, that's the least; nay, never cry for it. But let's
enjoy that little time we have, come prithee leave.

They say that married peoples Loves decay,
But mine still grovvs

And mine, -- another way.

COme hanged, why all this mincing? can you imagine I'm so dull as not to see
through it? Ten to one I know the cause of your Mumps; as much, I find the
rise of your sullenness. In short Pedro you have a months mind to measure
lengths with Madam Mariana, and you Antonio have as much to a day to try how
things will fit with brisk Ismena. Come, confess, confess; I see plainly by
your solemn pace and grave contriving looks, you have been running over all the
stories in Romances to accomplish your designs.


I must declare that I have no aversion to the freedom of her humour.


And I have seen some faces and conditions which I have liked much worse. But
--


Pox on you both! don't you think this sounds very prettily to one that has
been an Adventurer, in this trade of love? You must give me leave to know that
your no aversion is the height of desire, and your liking much worse is the
same with nothing half so well. But this silly love still thinks, because he's
blind himself, no body else must see.


Nay, Pray Pisauro, for charity invent some other name, though it should prove
the self same thing, for this is scandalous.


No, No, 'tis so, I plainly see all men have a certain time allowed to play the
fool, and love in, and this is mine.


This is honest and a friendly part. But why the Divel don't you tell them so?
you see we're more put to it to lay the jealousy of old Camillo, than we should
be to raise a Ghost, to gain an hours leisure.


I thought I ventured fair considering t'was the first time.


That's very fine, the first time? is not the Gallant worthy more applause that
hits the mark the first shoot, than he that draws a dozen times and ne'er comes
nigh the spot? I'm sure the Ladies will commend him for his aim.


But you know the Custom does require Ceremony.


As for customs, our Reformation is designed for to destroy them all. And this
first in short Gentlemen, there are but two ways you can design to be
possessors of your hopes: either to persuade them to their fashionable way of
love, or be content your selves to marry them.


But neither of these, I doubt, will do, Pisauro; 'tis certain they are too
wise and virtuous for the first; too brisk and jolly for the second.


Truth is, their briskness makes me fear they are honest.


Could I find them otherwise, I should soon make an end of all my love.


Faith, thought I formerly have had no great opinion of the other, yet I
resolve to try it now, and carry on the Reformation too. Venice shall learn
from me the freedom due to Wives. What say thou, Pedro?


Nay, I am too much thy friend to leave thee in the greatest hazard of thy
life.


Well agreed. I shall give you opportunity anon, if my design succeeds with old
Camillo: though I begin to doubt because the Tutor comes not. By this Pacheco
and his Mistress have changed a broad-side or two; I left them nigh engaging.


There is no danger in the combat I presume.


Faith, not on her side, she has little to lose besides the Vessel, let him
board her when he will.


Have you got the Tutors consent yet?


That I intend to buy with gold and good words, and the money will be well put
out to use too; the fool must needs be rich, and the wench I know has wit
enough to wheadle him.


But do you think he will bite home enough to marry?


Yes, I know she'll stand upon her honour, the unknown value of a woman's credit,
and twenty such common places they all inherit from their Mothers, and if he
once grow hot he will do any thing.


Have you heard any news of Leandro?


Yes, but am loath to tell a story so imperfect; the Tutor will tell us all.


Does that Fellow continue his old humour still?


Without the least change, if not improved.


Prithee put him into 't a little.


You'll repent you, for 'tis intolerable.


No, No, for once we will venture it.


'Tis much that this fellow that has wit, and is company in every thing
besides, should thus besot himself.


Let's work a cure and beat him out of this humour.


If beating would have done he had been well long ere this.


Methinks change of air should work.


No, nothing, he picks out half a dozen young fools where e're he comes, sticks
to them till he has talked over all he has to say, and then changes. But st.

Here he comes, let's dispatch our business first: Welcome Sir, what news? you
look as if you'd had a Play hist, or met with some presumptuous fool that would
pretend to understand the rules of Poetry in your company.


No none of these, but something that concerns you nearer at the present: in
short, Leandro has betrayed all, renounced his covenant, and become Reprobate.


Faith, I expected no better, I knew he must necessarily turn Heretic by this
way of living: alas, he drunk nothing but Penitential water and dangerous
Coffee, half a dozen such Sneaks would ruin the Republic.


Prithee, what new light or Revelation rules him now?


The old flame of Love, and he goes the old Italian way to work too: makes his
addresses to the Father without consulting the woman: Has told of your being
there, the Rules of your Reformation; and by this art so wheadled him that he
resolves to marry one of his daughters to him immediately; to which end he's
just now gone to fetch a Priest. Yonder has been such a Lecture, what between
the old man and the Nurse, that the Poor Ladies have been worried.


Which of the Sisters is't?


Ismena, that's it which vexes me, he has picked the flower out of all our
conquest.


But he shall hang before he e're shall wear her.


No, it must not be; if we let the first rebellion prosper, we betray the
weakness of our Government.


I knew him false before, and therefore promised to assist you in your loves,
from hence I do renounce all friendship with him as a Traitor.


Thou art truly Loyal. Pray let me beg the freedom to contrive his punishment;
if I make him not as wretched and ridiculous as his worst of enemies can wish,
trust me with no more affairs of State.


But how shall we escape this danger?


Has be taken the powder yet?


Yes, that's all our hopes. He railed himself so dry that he was forced to call
for wine If that works before Leandro comes, we should be freed for the
present, the Nurse too has a dose to spoil her talking.


That's well, could we but meet him.


He must come this way, for he went towards the Arsenal.


Then we are safe, let me alone to manage him.


In the mean time let us divert our selves.


I thought to have met Pacheco here, 'tis certain he must not come nigh home
till old Camillo is appeased; nor I neither.


He's in a safer place practising all his Lectures over to his Mistress. I have
a project now on foot which if you'll promise to advance you shall want no gold;
but of that anon.


I shall endeavour to serve you Sir.


Come Sir you are a judge, what opinion have you of the last new Play?


Faith -- well for an essay. I guess the Gentleman's but a beginner. I my self
--


Now he's in.


Writ with the same much success at first, 'twas industry and much converse
that made me ripe; I tell you Gentlemen, when I first attempted this way I
understood no more of Poetry than one of you.


This is strange impudence.


'Tis nothing yet.


There are many pretenders but you see how few succeed; and bating two or three
of this nation as Tasso, Ariosto and Guarini, that write indifferently well,
the rest must not be named for Poesy: we have some three or four, as Fletcher,
Iohnson, Shakespeare, Davenant, that have scribbled themselves into the bulk of
follies and are admired to, but ne'er knew the laws of heroic or dramatic
poesy, nor faith to write true English neither.


'Tis very much, I hope Sir your heroic play goes on.


As fast as a piece of that exactness can. I'll only leave a pattern to the
world for the succeeding ages and have done.


Oh Sir you'll wrong the world.


No faith Sir I grow weary of applause.


Will you give me leave to ask the way for others to attain to your perfection?


I will not say but that it may be done, but trust me you'll find it hard
Gentlemen, and since you are my friends I'll tell you.


You will oblige us Sir.


First I speak of Tragedy, which let the world say what it will and dote on
little things, I scrible now and then, as good faith they do Gentlemen
strangely; you shall have them -- but I don't love to praise my self. Tragedy I
say's my Masterpiece.


Every tthing you do seems so.


Nay, nay, pray forbear Gentlemen -- To go on: I take a subject, as suppose the
Siege of Candy, or the conquest of Flanders, and by the way Sir let it always
be some war-like action; you can't imagine what a grace a Drum and Trumpet give
a Play. Then Sir I take you some three or four or half a dozen Kings, but most
commonly two or three serve my turn, not a farthing matter whether they lived
within a hundred years of one another, not a farthing Gentlemen, I have tried
it, and let the Play be what it will, the Characters are still the same.


Trust me Sir, this is a secret of your art.


As Sir you must always have two Ladies in Love with one man, or two men in
love with one woman; if you make them the Father and the Son, or two Brothers,
or two Friends, 'twill do the better. There you know is opportunity for love
and honour and Fighting, and all that.


Very well Sir.


Then Sir you must have a Hero that shall fight with all the world; yes i'gad,
and beat them too, and half the gods into the bargain if occasion serves.


This method must needs take.


And does Sir. But give me leave and mark it for infallible, in all you write
reflect upon religion and the Clergy; you can't imagine how it tickles, you
shall have the Gallants get those verses all by heart, and fill their letters
with them to their Country friends; believe me this one piece of art has set
off many an indifferent Play, and but you are my friends --


You honour us.


Last of all, be sure to raise a dancing singing ghost or two, court the
Players for half a dozen new scenes and fine clothes (for take me if there
be not much in that too) put your story into rime, and kill enough at the end of
the Play, and Probatum est your business is done for Tragedy.


A'n 't you weary?


No prithee let him run on.


Then as for Comedy, which I was saying my Genius does not lead me to, but
that the world may know I can at idle hours when I please out-vvrite them,
I do venture at.


And with success Sir too, believe it.


And faith Gentlemen I'll tell you, there's your French Nation, Pox on 't a
kind of Jack-pudding wit, yet hang me if their Plays be well picked, as a scene
here and a scene there, it will do it, it will in faith, I have tried it.


Well Sir proceed.


But your true English and my way, is to write your Plays with double sense
and brisk meaning Songs. Take me, you shall have the Ladies laugh at a little
bawdy jest as if they would bepiss themselves, and the young Mounsieurs clap as
if they meant to wear their hands out in the service; and if you consider, this
is easy and a large subject, especially to one that will be at the charge to
keep a wench that understands her trade, you can't imagine what hints and
pretty things she will pick up. Now Sir, if you can but maintain two or three
of those Characters, no matter what your plot is, your love and honour will do
here again, and 'tis but saving alive and marrying those that you would kill in
Tragedy, and you have done.


We give you thanks for these instructions, and shall endeavour to improve Sir.


Nay, I have not done yet, but if you promise secrecy will let you know my
great Arcanum.


We do.


'Tis this, when I have writ a Play, I pick some Lady out of general
acquaintance, or favourite at the Court, that would be thought a wit, and send
it in pretence for to submit it to her judgment. This she takes for such a
favour -- and raises her esteem so much -- she talks of nothing else but Mr.
such a ones new Play, and picks out the best on 't to repeat, so half the town
by this means is engaged to clap before they come.


Excellent!


Besides this, I take some half a dozen youngsters of the town, People that
pride themselves in one of my nods or a shaking by the hand at the
Coffee-house, and let them have a copy of a Song or two, or promise of the
Prologue, which does so much oblige, that I have all the faction of the town
that makes a noise on my side.


Trust me Sir these are very great rules.


And such as never fail, but I am resolved to leave, and having made a pattern
for the world so long deceived in their opinion of wit and Language.


For heaven sake pity us now Pisauro, and persuade him to keep this for his


Not I, since you have wound him up, may you be deaf with noise.


Here comes one that will release us then.


We must keep him in talk a while.

Leandro here! that's a miracle, where hast thou been for heavens sake? thou
might have found the North passage to the Indies since I saw thee.


Troth Gentlemen I have found out as difficult a one to as pleasant a place,
and am just going to reap the benefit of my adventure.


We may all share I hope.


No, I'm for c'd to monopolise for all the sweets and treasures of the place,
if once they're blowed upon or touched by more than one, lose all their value
and delight.


Are you the first discoverer that you challenge such propriety?


I've reason to think so, for the accesses were all guarded by a watchful
dragon.


In plain language Sir.


I'll tell you then because I am in hast; since I left you I have been with old
Camillo, drawn up writings, agreed every thing between us, and only want a
Priest (which is just going thither) to make Ismena mine; was not my passage
shorter than ordinary, Gentlemen, and the Island worth discovery? Pray
Gentlemen how does the Reformation go forward?


But hast thou no remorse, no pricking all this time?


For what prithee?


Is thy zeal for the solemn covenant so soon forgot? how dares thou sin after
this rate and rob a woman of her liberty which thou hast sworn to defend at
least, if not procure?


You are too hasty Pisauro, without question he will give her all she wishes
and the Reformation asks.


No, you're deceived Sir, though I was English when a bachelor, I'll be a
true Italian and my self, when married. I value her credit and my quiet too
much to do otherwise.


Then may all Cupids curses light upon thee.


I dare venture ten times more than that blind boy is able to inflict for such
a prize, farewell Gentlemen.


Nay, stay and take all with you, may thou be impotent in the height of all
thy wishes.


Be jealous, yet never have a cause.


Run mad with dotage and she scorn thee.


Leave, leave I shall grow fat with cursing.


Thou shalt have enough to burst thee then.


May thou have Sons, yet never dare to own them, and they beg their bread.


May thy daughters be so rank to dote on Monkeys.


May thou live to see all this and hang thy self.


I'm pleased to see you envy me; and you have cause, for I shall have delights
lawful and wholesome too, when I shall meet you trailing of your legs after you
or walking upon crutches with but one nose among you. Adieu


We will, lead us; and if fair means don't, force shall.


Come Tutor, as we go I'll tell you my design which you must further.


Come 'tis in vain to whine, I will not sleep till I have don't.


You may be deceived for all this yet.

Courage Sister he begins to yawn already.


I'll see whether a Nunnery and a husband can reclaim you. Nor shall it go much
better with your gewgaw Brother. Are you so rampant, you must make a decoy of
my own house to catch your wild fowl in?


Give me some little time for to prepare my self.


Oh you have done that to the purpose, sinner enough to spend the rest of your
life in penitence.


There's another, it will do.

Pray Sir let me live there and bear her company.


No, though you're both nought, I'd willingly keep one of you to breed on, and
it shall be you, a Nunnery will give you too much liberty.


If I must marry give me leave to chose.


Your choice is likely to be good by the company you keep; but I've provided
for you, you shall be kept so close you scarcely shall have light enough


That's too cruel, I would pray for you.


It must be backward then; thy youth is all the reason I can give to think
you're not a witch; Of my conscience thou can fly, but I'll have your wings
clipped, and you put into a Cage for better security.


They have been wild indeed


Why dost thou yawn so, thou infects me too.


You see Ladies though I have no teeth I can find my tongue.


I prophecy that you will lose it yet e're long, for vvronging of the
innocent.


Welcome Son, I was vvaiting for you.


I've brought my friends along, the Gallants of the Reformation, to see me
happy and to take their leave.


I shall take care to reform my daughters from keeping them company,


Who do you speak Sir to?


To you all.


To you Sir, since you are so brisk


Let's look, thou gap'st as if thou had a gag there yet.


How is't Sir, you look not well; your eyes are heavy too.


Only a little weary and faint


Will it please you sit? A Chair there.


How is't Sir?


Pray take away this gaping woman


Will it please you to have a little


Believe me Madam, it proceeded all from Love.


I must obey Sir.


He's fast, he's fast Madam.


Then I am free.


And I shall scarcely say my Prayers in a Nunnery to day; how lovingly they
sleep!


How's this! you have not murdered him.


Nothing but a gentle sleep Sir, which does our business as well.


Was you so ignorant to think weed let thee carry it thus?


What my wise Coffee-drinker over-reacht?


This is beyond all sufferance, what say you Madam? will you refuse me too?


Oh Sir, I would not marry without my Fathers leave for all the world.


Send you joy Sir, we believe our own eyes.


I'll never stay for to be baited thus.


Nay, prithee stay a while, and let me tell you a secret, you'll want news else.
We gave this sleeping portion to Camillo and the Nurse, to gain an opportunity
of going out to laugh and dance: Remember Sir: and kept you in discourse till
this time, when we were sure it would work, for to prevent your marriage: Do
you mark Sir? some few hours hence he wakes, and then you may come again and
tell your story.


Yes, and be revenged.


If you dare make a second trial, this is but purgatory, you know the next
punishment.


Sunk in the height of all my hopes.


Well Gallants, I'll before and leave you to wait upon the Ladies.


But whither prithee?


To Lysandro's here hard by.


He's not at home.


But his wife is, that's as good.


Nay 'tis much better; does your furnace stand there?


Ladies I shall wait you.


Whose within there?

Pray Tutor call some body to carry these in and set them warm.


Now have I a strange design comes into my head.


What is't?


You know Gallants I promised to reform the old men; what if we should shave
Camillo, head and chin, and let him wake in a great white wig?


For heavens sake, that would make him irreconcilable.


No, No, that's driving on too fast, we're pretty well advanced.


I only do propose. Come Ladies shall we go?


Yes Sir, I wish our mirth ends well.


Fie Sister to think of that before it does begin.


I vow to gad Madam nothing but an affair of this moment and that --


Oh Sir you have honoured me.


Oh Gad Madam the honour -- and but that I know your goodness Dear Madam -- let
me perish but -- one minute returns me as much your humble Servant, as -- your
Servant Madam, your servant.


I'm glad to find your new gallant tickles so.


He would make a Nun laugh that's just professed, and that's the sorrowful'st


What's the matter? did he stand upon his head or conjure, that he's such a
miracle?


I know not what you mean by conjuring, but all the jugglers at a Carnival have
not so many tricks.


I must get some music for thee, Of my conscience thou art stung wench,
prithee leave and speak.


Why Madam all the Painters since the art was found out, ne'er drew half the
postures he was in, in less than half an hour, he goes as puppets do by wiers.
Pray Madam have a little patience and I'll show you. After a shrug and a
salute, which he tells me is the new mode, he gives his little whalebone a
twirl or two.


Well then I make my curtsy.


Right Madam, then the Divel refuse him. But mine's the pleasant'st seat in
Venice, and that gives him opportunity to take as strut or two to view the
room; but all this time the wig and shirt is ordered, and as soon as e're the
looking glass was spied, out comes the comb, and I had twenty tunes begun and
never ended, or ended and ne'er begun.


But what must I do all this while?


Admire Madam, then the posture's altered, and off goes the glove which shovvs
the diamond ring, and out comes the gold Watch, which must be placed with
art, for fear the chain hang not out enough to be seen.


You're a Divel to abuse him thus.


Next he approaches and knows I am a wit by the choosing of my ribbons, and
rails at the poor Country Madam, for making him svveat in Summer with her hot
colours. Next subject of discourse was the alteration of the mode in Laces;
commends my work, and calls all the stitches by their proper names, and in the
midst of this begins a new tune, svvears 'tis good, and from thence takes
occasion to run over all the Plays and his acquaintance with the Poets.


Could thou desire better company?


Nay he has not done yet Madam; then he talks over all the women of the town,
and how Tom such a one, had turned off Betty, and Dick such another kept Mall,
and called them all by their names as freely as if he had been Pimp to all the
company.


And ten to one their names is all he knows them by, but you must know 'tis
modish and a great attainment.


At last when he came into the discourse of travel, I concluded we should ne'er
have done, but all of the sudden he makes me three or four cringes of several
fashions, begs leave for to dispatch some great affair (which I suppose was to
look upon some new wig he had bespoke) and he would be here immediately.


And what dost thou think of him after all this?


You must needs guess Madam, as of a most egregious Fop. I'm beholden to
Pisauro for his good wishes.

And here he comes in time for to receive my thanks.


I am ashamed to hear thee talk thus, what blessing can thou imagine
greater than a husband that's a fool and rich?


Heaven forbid Madam.


You're an Idiot: Is't not better to have him busy himself with points and
ribbons, toys and laces, than to be always grave and melancholy, which in a
while will make him jealous too and mark your very looks.


'Tis odds but that you're locked up, and see the Sun but once a twelvemonth,
and have no other company but some old woman that does the office of a deaths
head and puts you in mind of dying.


You see what arts I'm forced to use to cheat Lysander with, such a man as
this will manage all your purpose himself.


I will be ruled by you Madam.


'Twas well said, how did he behave himself?


I have had that at full, no more now I beseech you.


How did you carry it?


I took your directions, and had as many modish postures as I then could think
on, sometimes thus, then thus.


That must needs take him, did he speak any thing of Love?


I can't tell how to answer you, or what his way of courtship is when he's in
earnest, but he commended me as if I was to sell, grip'd my hand and kissed it,
talked of the power of love and women, and all the time screwed up and down as
if he had been nettled.


These are good signs, I shall know all as soon as e're I see him:


Save you Sir, you're got off alive I see.


Yes faith, and that's all; hang me Pisauro if she is not the first woman that
has moved me on this side England.


I thought 'twas she must nick your humour.


Take me if she has not wit too and demean, understands address and all that.


This character from you will raise her in my esteem.


You must give me leave to understand a little.


You are the only judge, Sir.


Believe me she has the true Court air, takes every thing that's new and
modish. I'll swear to you, I have sometimes cast an afternoon away, run
through all my common places of discourse, and at the last been thought
ridiculous.


You must meet with women that have been barbarous then.


No Sir, 'twas want of breeding and converse, not one in ten that has the least
of it. Alas Sir, there's a particular mine, languishing look, and je no scay
quoy, as we say, and all this she has in perfection. Take me, if I don't think
there is a perfect sympathy between us. But this thing of friends.


You are Melancholy of the sudden.


No Sir, I am only contriving something to advance our Reformation, and to make
us perfect.


It will do.


And it shall be hard but I'll out-do you all.


All the entertainment I can promise is your freedom, Gallants, and that you're
in a house where you have all things at command.


There's nothing can be added Madam.


Now you honour me, I have invited you to an English treat, Ladies, room and
music, you bring the mirth and company with you.

Some Chairs there.


I have been so rude as to increase your company without your knowledge, Sir,
to day I swore a stranger and invited him, he promised me to bring his Mistress
too.


The least acquaintance Sir with you must challenge welcome.


I know you'll like his humour, 'tis free beyond any thing I ever met on this
side the Alps. I in a moment found that we were made for one another
company.


That free humour which you speak of brings a welcome with it.


This looks well, we were made for this.


Methinks we begin to live now, we did but dream away our time before, Sister.


It was not half so pleasant; but now you speak of dreaming, Heaven keep my
Father fast.


I resolve to think of nothing here but mirth.


Bravely said Madam. Come let's be frolic then.


My Tutor has provided us a dance was made to set off his new last Play in
England.


Pray let us have it then, 'tmust be as proper here as there.


I'll step out and get it ready.


Will it please you sit Ladies? Some wine there.


Two women together! let us never begin our Reformation with such a sin, come
I'll teach you better, and as Master will begin an English health. Here, here
stand a Lady and a Gallant. Now Madam a health to my Mis and your Gallant.


Here Sir, here's a health to my Gallant and your Mis.


Right, Right, fill it about.


So now all hands.

Fill round the healths good natured and free,
Let your States-men politic be,
No custom our joys shall defer.
This is bliss.
Each Lady has her Gallant, each man has his Mis,
On this side and this,
Let us kiss, let us kiss, A la mode d'Angle terre.

If this be an English custom, 'tis a mighty kissing country, this is too much.


Right! I knew she that liked it best would be the first that should complain.


Strike up there.


Come Sir have you never another health?


A thousand.


Shall I keep my resolution?


Yes prithee do for my sake.


Dear heart! I wish autority can bid you welcome now.


I thank you Sir, but I can make my self so.


'Slife thou hast undone us man, why this is husband to the Lady in whose house
we are.


What then he's sworn, and 'tis as common for a wife to make a ball without her
husbands knowledge, as for a Nun to say her Prayers; is't not Tutor?


Yes Sir, 'tis nothing, or with their konwledge either:


This must be Lysander, what can this come to?


At the worst we must resolve to carry off the Ladies safe.


'Twas kindly done to comfort up the widow Gentlemen, come ne'er disturb your
selves, I'm a sworn Brother.


Resolve to carryit off briskly, there's no other way left.


Art' come dearest? ten thousand vvelcomes, you thee what shift I'm forced to
make to comfort me in solitude; but all's too little for to make amends for one
Lysander.


Dear rogue thou can not think how much I wanted thee too, you see what
paltry shift I was forced to make.


She's wondrous fair, Madam --


Hold, hold, Sir, though I allovv all freedom with my wife, you know the
English fashion is to keep my Mistress to my self.


I beg your pardon Sir, 'tvvas well remembered.


I see you're angry, but I was forced to seek to ease my grief by any way
when you was absent.


Not I, ne'er trouble your self to make this excuse, I love this mirth; but
prithee chuck tell me, which of these is thy Gallant? or do they take it by
turns, come prithee do, good faith I count my self beholden to him, he eases
me.


I see no faithfulness can e're oblige you.


Now thou art too modest, for shame Pisauro own her, I know I pay for all
that finery.


Nay vve'l be man and wife still in any place but bed, and that want you have
provided for your self, ne'er trouble your self. If you do more than e're I
could Pisauro, and she prove fruitful, I promise here to be a Godfather. If I
have the same success here, I expect the like kindness from you Juliana.


This is true love.


Now our Reformation goes forward in good earnest.


It amazes me; would I were free from hence once.


Come, come, Gentlemen, be frolic, you seem troubled; Is not this better than
slitting of noses or a stab Gentlemen? we can call chuck and joy and twenty
such pretty names still, as well as the very best of them.

Nay faith Ladies one dance more for my sake, I shall grieve that I disturbed
you else.

Music there


Now be but pleased to take a small collation in the next room, and I shall
believe you think your selves welcome.


We will wait you Sir.


Yet I'm impatient till I'm gone.


There's no danger Madam.


I fear none Sir.


Let me perish else.


You make me blush Sir.


Let me die if any thing's more serious.


Come how is't joy?


Thank thee Dearest.


The world may laugh, and names of scorn invent,
But to be Cuckolds nothing if content.

TIs strange that we can fasten no such thing as honour upon the Sex, whereas a
man's lies every where. Twinge him by the nose, his honour's there, and
presently must be redeemed.

Kick him, and 'tis removed to's backside, and must be engaged.

But this of woman-kind is really nothing. For if one unmarried chance to kick
up her heals, the reproach returns upon the family.

Or if a wife prove gamesome more than ordinary, she's thought a wit, and
cunning; and 'tis the husband's branded with the name of scorn.

Now should I go kill Pisauro to redeem my honour: and if I do, die honourably
by an Executioner, or fly my Country: Or if I fall my self, they'll cry there
died a silly cuckold, worth the while. I thank my stars I'm less nice in these
points, and have found out a safer way.

Welcome dearest, I was sending for thee.


I feared you might be angry.


What for such petty faults?


Nay now you speak as if you did not think me honest.


Not honest? Why you know I have no reason to the contrary: Prithee no more
on it, I would make a bargain with thee.


With me Sir? What do you mean?


In short, what is't you're willing to take a year for alimony?


This is harder than the first.


'Tis that, that must be understood, for I resolve to carry on my part in the
Reformation by this means. Consult your self and friends, for I would have you
live in credit still.


Pray Sir be plain.


Why thus.

Write me down so much for clothes, so much for diet, and lodgings: something
too for pleasure I'll allow; 'tis the saving English way, and 'tis but
reasonable when a wife proves false, she should be stinted, and the overplus
should keep a Miss. Come, come, I'm out of my frolic humour now, and am
serious.


Now you are cruel, will you quite ruin me?


No such matter, I'll be as civil too as any man, only retrench some small sums
you used to spend in charitable uses, as forty pound to such a Nunnery, alias
for a new suit; twenty unto such a Monastery, alias a new Wig: why should you
be lavish in your good deeds? There's scarce a Covent in the town but's bound
to pray for you.


Pray pardon me, you used to say you loved me.


I pardon you with all my heart; but I'll take care that you shall sin no more
with my purse, nor let Pisauro brave it with my wealth, as I know he does;
come, it is in vain for to deny.


Nay if you grow angry once, Emilia does so to; why should not I have the same
liberty?


There are some thirty and odd reasons to the contrary, besides the common
practice; but that which must satisfy you is, I will not have it so, and 'tis
in my power to hinder it, remember what I say.


Oh Pisauro, we're undone.


Come, no such matter, I have overheard it all, if Pacheco marry Lelia, as 'tis
almost out of doubt, this sore will soon be healed; besides my fortune's not so
very low, but I can live, and your allowance will be fair, I dare promise.


But will you still love me?


I'll double it if possible.


All that troubles me is, I shall want my wealth to serve you with.


Prithee no more, we lose time, Lelia be careful not to seem too coy, but if he
comes to steal you let him carry off the prize: Friends, or the grave will soon
reconcile Camillo: I must thither and see how affairs go, come courage Madam we
can never want.


I fear nothing but losing my Gallant.


I'm resolved to make sure of mine.


Am I exact in every thing? the colours suited? and my clothes cut with the
modish air?


To a thought: You see what 'tis to employ a Taylor knowing in the fashion.
There's nothing like your French cut Sir, you shall have a country Gentleman
come to town, and throw away a years revenue on a suit on purpose to be laughed
at, hang me if a Livery been it more creditable.


Then there's much in the wearing of them too, why here now, what would this
belt be valued at, without I wore it? Now it employs the hands, and gives a
grace to all the gate.


I joy to see you thus improved, you may read to me shortly. Oh dear Pupil.


Then there's the cock of the hat, tying of the shirt, fashions of crevats, the
wearing of a Wig that's friz'd or curled, things that alter daily, and that
these poor fools can ne'er pretend to.


You amaze me Sir, I shall grow proud of my success.


Take me if I had not rather pass a judgment of a man, from a shake a la mode,
wearing of a Mistresses faver, or the tying of a knot (there's a perfect Genius
shown in that) than from a months converse.


You have reason Sir; these are the things men travel for, trust me you may be
a pattern to the very Author of the fashion. Nay if you're once resolved I know
you must needs carry her, but --


No more objections good Tutor.


Not I Sir, I see she's fair, believe her virtuous and a fortune, but yet --


More but's yet? now I begin to think thou enviest me, 'tis certain I will do
something shall make me chief; truth is, Lysander bid fair for the command, but
at the last I've found it, and defy him, and all the rest, to think of
Conquest.


May I know it?


Yes on condition you'll not speak a word to hinder my design.


Since you are so resolute I engage.


Then thus. I will to Lelia thus dressed as I am, which certainly must do it, and
without the least enquiry after fortune, or consent of friends marry her for
love; the height of Gallantry, and top of Reformation, hah?


I may Sir.


Not a word.


I may go with you Sir.


No, I'll have the honour of the action my self, when I return expect me
conqueror.


No doubt of that, you'll find but little opposition.


I can but think when 'tis done what pleasures I shall have, and blessed
occasions of new words; As, my Joy, my chuck, my dear, my sweet honey-comb, and
she answers in as good a stile; for I resolve to teach her all the English
words. Adieu.


Send you a fair wind, I've gold depends upon your good success.


Well met Tutor, where's Pacheco? we must not let him cool.


There's no fear: he just now left me, with a Resolution to conclude before he
will return.


Then we're happy: his swearing of Lysander was unlucky.


It must be pardoned, 'twas perfect zeal and ignorance.


Save ye Gentlemen: what news from Camillo, Tutor?


They were both fast within this half hour.


'Tis much about the time they are to wake.


Shall we beg a favour from you then Sir?


You may command it Madam.


'Tis that you'd watch my Father, and give us notice when he stirs.


I fly to serve you.


'Twas bravely carried by Lysander.


That, that pleased me was, he nicked the Reformation too.


To a thought: There if the women be displeased, 'tis but finding a pretence of
quarrel, sue their husbands, and the law gives them the thirds of the Estate to
keep Gallants with.


I can hardly recover my self though I know I'm out of danger: I would have
parted with the little of my Estate to any man breathing for a new Song.


Faith at the best 'twas but a lease, and that fairly forfeited to the Lord
too.


What will you take for it now it's renewed Pisauro?


Not renewed upon so good terms as you imagine; but I'll not part with it,
whilst the ground bears any crop.


'Tis strange the very being women should oblige us to dissemble thus.


You see 'tis true, for my part I do confess I love and would give all the
world to marry my Antonio.


I Pedro. Know 'tis the only remedy for our misfortunes, yet must not let them
know it.


Fie Ladies not out of your fright yet!


Yes Sir we were talking of a greater danger; for though I'm naturally devout,
I don't love to say my prayers on force.


And though I have no hatred against mankind, yet to have one thrust upon me
thus, goes a little against the hair.


We have proposed a way, that will prevent both dangers, would you follow it.


I run the same hazard of a husband.


And I one worse than that, of being Nun.


Why Madam, can you think it better to trifle time away in telling beads, and
change your youth and briskness for Melancholy looks and wrinkles?


And you resolve to sigh away your life some three stories high, make
complaints, and talk to the men it'h' Arras? That must be your fortune if you
wed Leandro.


Suppose all this true, how can you have the confidence to ask us for to marry
you? Is it necessary we must break our necks to avoid drowning? Or to shun my
fathers making us slaves go shackle up our selves?


As for liberty, you shall make your own propositions.


Which you will keep religiously until you've married us, and then break at
pleasure.


How can you imagine to avoid this danger?


Pooh, that we will think on when it comes, at present we are free.


But to be serious Ladies be your own Judges, is there not something in the
Society of men you much desire?


Confessed, but ne'er will purchase it at such a rate as marriage.


Why then you must resolve to be kind without it. 'Tis a hard case if you
neither lead nor drive.


That we must be stretched upon a rack, for no fault too, without the least hope
of ease.


What can you desire more than this freedom?


Very much: That is the very thing destroys our hopes, were you but simpering,
mimping, bridling Ladies, you were sure prize; those sort of cattle are so
little used to speak, they think it modesty not to deny you.


Or what do you think of a down demure look?


That never fails neither, I always challenge them, and what they mean for
bashfulness, conclude a certain sign of guilt.


You're obliging Gentlemen, there's half womankind condemned already.


Then there's your devout souls, that sigh and whine, have something of
Religion in their very gate; and never speak but in a tone of zeal and purity.


Pox on them, I must be hungry indeed to feed there; they are too common, and
usually belong to a whole fraternity: If they can but learn to call their sins
by new names, they pass for virtues; and she that sins deepest is the truest
Saint.


No, no, they're your brisk Ladies that are the hardest conquest. 'Tis true you
give us so much freedom, we can't find confidence to ask more, yet when we cast
it all up it signifies -- just nothing.


Or if we do venture to ask, 'tis but lost labour, you'll never understand us,
but wheadle't off with a laugh or some odd story.


Well Gentlemen we're beholden to you that our Honor's safe in your opinions.


And that acknowledgment is all the recompense we're like to have.


For all I can perceive Sir.


But consider a little: is there no little inclinations, no beatings here --
Madam more than ordinary?


No Sir I can find no such matter.


But suppose that to your freedom I should offer that, which uses to be sweeter
to your Sex, Revenge too?


Revenge would do something could I get shut of you once, but I swear you're
grown so troublesome.


In short then, Madam, you resolve to lose both, desert the public cause, and
--


I have no natural in-bred hatred to your person; and Revenge does tempt a
little. But --

Let me die, if I can make objections, I shall hold out no longer.


Whom do you seek Lady?


Antonio Sir.


Your Servant Madam, hang me if I knew you at the first glance. Thou come
luckily: be sure not to be amazed at whatsoever I say or do, but answer me in
my own strain.


Who is this? they're mighty well acquainted Sir methinks.


Faith Madam I can't guess, she's very fair.


But well: I know some Ladies will not be ashamed to show their faces in her
company. Would I could blast that little beauty that she has.


I thought our loves would ne'er admit of jealousy, but thou art too kind.


'Tis you have made me so, I were ungrateful Sir indeed should I not endeavour
to return your love.


Hovv's this? Return his love? then I am wretched.


You seem angry Madam.


Not I Sir, 'tis not in the power of man to make me so,


You think me Sir too free I fear.


No dearest, our old love may challenge this and more.


May they poison thee.


I smell it, 'tis Antonio's Boy he courts. And she must love by her concern.
Now I'll strike home.


You have your story ready for Camillo.


Yes Sir.


And you'll not fail to meet me there Dearest?


I shall ne'er deny my self a happiness.


But are you sure my Sister will be found so easy as to yield?


I only beg the promise that you'll follow her example.


I may have confidence enough in her to grant, and yet show little kindness.


That little's all I ask, Madam.


I'll only end a formal compliment or two.


Treacherous base man!


Pisauro, shall I beg you would conduct this Lady?


You honour me with the trust.


Will you go Sister?


You'll give me leave to wait on you Madam.


No Sir, you have your hands full I see already, and may spare your formal
compliments. Would you fail your assignation with so great a beauty?


As I could wish. She is not ugly Madam.


I don't intend a quarrel on the subject. 'Tis indifferent to me what she is.


I see it is Madam; nor could you blame me for courting her, when I found you
so cruel.


I blame you? Why did you not leave Pisauro here, and go your self? there's no
body so fond of your company. Come Sister.


Nay fie Sister part friends.


I'll take my fortune Madam,


'Tis pretty to fall from the discourse of marriage into this of chiding.


Marriage? I'll rather be shut up with Leandro in a grave, than ever have a
thought of you.


But I'm sure you will; more, know you must. Nay what is more yet, am
confident 'twill be a match.


Now you're impudent. Did I ever show the least kindness to you?


Confessed, but this anger makes me think you have had no unkindness for me.


To vex you, I will confess it true, but add to it, that I hate you now.


'Tis very strange, all that you can say, can never make me believ't.


I tell you I should hate my self, should I ever have the least good thought of
you. Nay I shall hate all mankind for your sake, scarce spare my Brother for
beginning our acquaintance.


This still confirms me more in my opinion.


This is mad courtship.


I know it must succeed, for nothing heightens love so much as a misgrounded
jealousy.


What if I would promise, I would love no woman besides you? is there no hopes
of pardon?


No, I scorn it now.


If I swear I never did love a woman?


Nothing. I know it false, and if I doted on you, should hate you for this
lie.


Ladies, you must thist for yourselves, and that with speed: your Father is
awake, has sent for Leandro; and to the Senate, that he may force you home,
where e're he finds you.


You know your old retreat.


I'll die first.


And I'll be as good as my word, and follow my Sister.


Now I begin to find I'm wretched.

If this unlucky woman had not come I had been happy.


And I more miserable far than now. Come Sister let's fly any whither from
these men.


Pray stay Madam, since I have worked you to a height, and am confirmed you
love me by this jealousy, know that Lady was my Boy, dressed in that habit to
procure your liberty. I knew I had no other way to make this blessed discovery.
Will you yet give me leave?


I am worse angry than before to be betrayed by this trick.


Consider Madam you'd better do it, I'll make good my promise, liberty and
Revenge.


No, no such matter: it may be I'll vouchsafe to hear your story out.


A minutes stay will ruin all.


What do you resolve on Sister?


Only that I will not have Leandro.


My hopes are fair yet Madam.


You know the grounds on which they stand.


Away I say. I easily guess where this quarrel will end.


Never plead for them, to be made the talk and story of all the town, Sung in
Ballads, for it will come to that; The careful father gulled, or old Camillo's
dream, I can, nor will hear no more.


Threatening will but make them fly your fury: whereas a promise of pardon
brings them with submission into your power, and then you may contrive their
punishment.


Contrive? do you hear me?

For the first I'll have a dungeon so dark and straight that she shall grope
the way unto her mouth, and have no other air but sighs to live on. The second
you should never wed, did I not believe you would invent some lasting terrors
unto all that are or shall be Wives.


Trust me with that: but first it's necessary, I seek'em out, and bring them
home.


If they refuse, use force; the Senate cannot deny their power to so just
designs.


I hope we shall not need it.


Never was man at my age so rid.

To be rock't asleep like a great Baby, whilst they are all a revelling. Well,
I shall meet with these dap-chicks: That Jay my son, with the Owl his Tutor,
and if I do --

Hah! who have we here?


You may wonder at a strangers rudeness Sir, and why a woman thus intrudes.


By my troth so I do, but the Divel's in you all for impudence.


When you know I have necessity and Justice on my side, I cannot doubt but
you'll relieve my misery.


A beggar in this garb! be gon, I have no time to hear long stories, nor will
to supply your wants.


To relieve my wants will never make you poorer Sir.


The right religious Cant to? you know the way, be gon.


Pray hear me out, and then I know you will have pity.

If e're you had a Mother, you owed a duty to, or wife you loved.


'Tis a pretty tone this.


If you have daughters, as I know you have, whose honour you'd preserve from
stain: if any thing that's yet more dear, by all I do conjure you to hear me
out.


Now am I such a Coxcomb, that though I know it is a cheat, yet I must listen,
come rise and begin then.


This most unhappy woman that you see, whose little beauty tears and grief have
turned to ruins, yet was once thought fair, till perjury and all that's false
Leandro!


How! was't not Leandro that she named? What can this mean?


Till he false man by force and treachery, had ravished all my wealth, and left
me thus neglected.


Come pray be plain, I'll hear you now with patience.


As soon as grief will let me Sir.


There's no trust in woman kind if this be false.


My Father was a Merchant, and accounted rich, his place of living Candy,
whilst alive, Heaven rest his soul.


This must be true, it moves me too. His name?


Fabricio. When the enemy approached our walls, he was commander for this State,
and in their Services lost his life. 'Twas that unhappy minute, when I saw
Leandro first, whose seeming goodness might have tempted one more wife, than
miserable me.


Pray on. I long to hear thee out.


In short, my Mother trusted him with all concerns, her wealth, her self, and
me. He lived a while a faithful Guardian. And I (for it must out) too soon
loved.


Your name Lady?


Fabia, in a word.

He promised to convey our family, and riches to this town, did so, but in the
voyage, after a thousand vows of Marriage, which we could not then consummate,
stole my honour, and ever since hath left me to my grief.


Blessed discovery, trust me now I pity thee.


If you pity, help me Sir and save your self, this same Leandro still must
needs be false, and will you throw away a Virgin on a perjured man? And if she
marries him, I'm lost for ever.


If I find this story true, I'll promise that your Father's name's Fabritio,
yours Fabia.

Hold, I think I hear him coming.

Away, away, I have nothing to say to you. Nor you neither, you may return.


We have business Sir that much concerns you.


Let it be what it will I have no leisure: if you will stay, come not near my
daughters, but go you to that corner of the room, you to this; so the Divel's
in you if you play tricks at this distance. My business is with Leandro.


Your Pleasure Sir.


Only a little scruple, I remember I have sworn, never to match my daughter
with a man that had not hazarded his life to serve the State.


That can be no Obstacle. I've served it long, and when our Candy was besieged,
sent numbers of the infidels to seek their Prophet in the other world. This my
friends can witness.


You knew Fabritio then?


How it works?


Fabritio was my leader Sir, and trained me up to Arms, many a bold sally has
he made, and brought back Victory, nor did he tamely lose his life, but fell
encompassed with an host of slaughtered enemies.


Thus far we do agree. How fared it with his wife and daughter Sir? I have
heard he left both.


He did, and both patterns to the Sex. They shared the common fortune, and when
the town was yielded up set sail for Venice.


Right yet.

How was the daughter called?


Fabia. (What can all this mean?


I am confirmed.

Do you know this Lady?


No Sir, nor till this minute ever saw her face.


O Perjured man! is Fabia so soon forgot? false, false Leandro.


Pray look again.


May I ne'er enjoy the thing I love on earth, or when I die heaven --


His strong denials make me confident. Consider once again, is not this Fabia?


whom you have wronged?


Neither Sir if you require oaths.


If oaths could have obliged, I never had become thus wretched.


Heavens, that e're such impudence should wear the shape of women! were it thou
not so --


Come, no threats Sir.

She's in a sanctuary in my house. Take her, and make amends for all your
former injuries.


What injuries? you will distract me Sir, give me but a minute for to clear my
self.


No, I am satisfied already, and will not be cheated, nor let my daughter run
her self to certain ruin. I'll in, and fetch the writing you have given.


Hell and Furies.


Save you Sir, how do you like your Island?


Will you never leave your tortures?


This is the hell we told you of, if you ventured to sin again.


As for your new discovery I have taken possession, and it's like to be called
by my name; in short I am married to Ismena, Pedro to Mariana, and this Fabia
is the Boy dressed up to amuse Camillo.


Here take him, you're so much an Italian, you need not lose your Mistress.


You shall find me more by my Revenge.


Thus far our plot succeeds.


do you steal away and get undressed: I would not have Camillo find that cheat
yet.


He's coming: To our places.


Here, here, where's Leandro?


Gone Sir.


And Fabia?


Yes Sir but not together.


Then these must be sent.

Now I have leisure to come to you, Runagates, for though you have escaped this
danger, you must not think to go free. I have provided for ye both, 'tis not
your powder that can find another remedy, I will not eat nor drink till it's
performed. I guess your business Gentlemen, but you may spare your pains.


What can this prove?


We kneel for blessing Sir.


I give it you; but who's this?


Your Daughter, whilst I call her wife.


Still more wretched? Go fool thou hast undone thy self, and shalt live nor
pitied nor relieved by me.

That I should ever be a Father!

But I'll study to forget the name.

These a Nunnery if possible shall save from ruin. In I say.


That we forbid Sir.


What shall I not rule my own family in my own house? In I say.


They may with justice disobey, they leave their husbands here.


Who thus in duty ask your blessing.


Blessing? even the down-right Divel take you all, I am gulled, cheated,
fooled.


Oh Pedro, we can never prosper if a fathers blessing be denied.


Never fear Madam, a little patience reconciles all.


Joy Gallants. Three vveddings in a day? the State can never want Soldiers.


There's little joy belongs to me. The Reformation goes on too fast now; for
though I like this marrying for love, I hate this damned English way of
disinheriting.


What can this mean?


Nay faith the old Gentleman's strangely angry, prithee try what you can do
Lysander, your acquaintance has been great.


I will, I'm confident when once he knows your qualities, he'll think his
daughters well bestovv'd, and an only Sons pardon is soon obtained.


However it succeed, I'd rather run a thousand dangers than be slave to
Leandro's jealousy. This was a brave revenge done like a Master of your Art.


That part of my promise is fulfilled then; but now 't's too late to bargain
for your liberty, you're at my mercy still.


I thought it best to trust you.

I knew a promise was sooner broke, than your good nature turned.


However of my own accord I here engage to be true, until I find you false,
and then I^le take Lysander's pattern.


Then here I promise for you, that you alvvays shall be true. I ever loved the
talk of liberty, more than the thing it self.


You Mariana, may challenge all the freedom that you'll take.


I shall take the less, for your giving me so much.


I have found my tongue again, and if I don't rail you all deaf --


Say you so, I have the other gag for you.


Pray Gentlemen, reckon it a considerable piece of Reformation, that we have
found out two infallible remedies, to cure an old woman's talking.


How is't? where is he?


He's come unto himself again, now he considers who you are, and follows me.

Well met Madam, I hope you're pleased.


Since you are so cruel as to part, I must allow you truly noble.


I doubt Pisauro some of these fine feathers must molt.


You're deceived Sir, with these I intend to purchase a rich wife, and pay some
of my old scores to Juliana.


Heaven bless you; and if you can live on that, do. But I am so much a
Reformer, as not to part with a farthing of money, without settlement,
Gentlemen.


That shall never breed a difference.


I knew your Father well Antonio; if you prove as well, my daughter's happy.

Yours Pedro, for so I 'me told you're called, is my peculiar friend, and if he
likes the match, I will do any thing that's just.

But what can you pretend to, with your Gimcracks and travels, hah?


I married Sir for love and Virtue, and have heard you say it was your fault
(if it may be accounted one) when you took my Mother; I only follow'd your
example.


Well nicked Pupil.


He has found my weak side, it must not be denied. Well, you shall be upon your
good behavior.


If it comes to that I know I shall soon win him.


I'll give you Lectures for it to morrow.

My gold's good Sir.


Yes this little Pinnace sails to fetch it home.


And will bring it too, I'll warrant you.


Come you shall all dine with me, we will be so long friends at least.

If two of these adventures come off well, I have made a saving voyage.


I have something to do still, which is the Reforming of you Mounsieur Tutor.
Nay never shrink, for one of these things must be subscribed to, either choose
to renounce your interest in the Society.


That's hard.


Or your pretence to Poetry, and acquaintance with the Muses as you call it.


Harder yet.


Or engage in three months, to produce a Play which shall have nothing in it
borrowed, nor improbable, nor profane, nor bawdy.


This is almost impossible, but yet I'll venture, and if my Play miscarries
here, set sail for England, where any one of these qualities will make it
famous.


Now it's perfect, Antonio.

We're married, yet can know no jealousy.

And Sister we are wives, and yet are free.


Blessed Reformation!

All's right, we should have nothing left to do,
Could we Reform one English custom too,
That's the damned trade of censuring in you.

HOw do you like our Reformation now?
Come, we're amongst our selves. Here are Wits too.
Or shall's to the Coffee-house and there debate,
Each take his Chair and Pipe and judge in State?
Lord how they wait a Wit that's famed in Town!
He looks about him with a scornful frown,
Then picks his Favourite out and sits him down.
Take me how is't? Have you seen our new Play?
Yes faith; and how? a half Crown thrown away,
Pox on it he cries, I Drolled and Slept it out;
'Twas some Raw Fop: Then proudly stares about;
Then shrugs and whispers, laughs, then swears aloud.
The whilst there's silence kept by all the Crowd.
At length he nods and cocks, is heard to say,
D -- me 'tis true, and thus he damns the Play,
Rises, looks big and combs, then goes his Way.
'Tis strange to think how absolute they are,
When looks, half Words and Oaths, destroy or spare.
We can expect no favour; these are known
Foes unto every thing that's not their own.
And rather too, than that shall want applause,
They'll clap themselves and that way gain the cause.
By such like Arts they rule the stage and you,
And what was Favour first, now claim as due.
For shame use your Authority and free
Your selves from these usurpers Tyranny,
Ne'er wait their censure more, but let them know
You have the power that they pretended to.
They wheadle you to clap bad plays they write:
To be revenged do you clap this to night.
But Ladies you our Author hopes to find
In your own Cause and for your own sakes kind,
Since 'tis the first design of's Poetry
Both how to gain and give you Liberty.

