O Jupiter! what a hard age is this to be a Servant in,
Especially to a foolish Master; if a servant shall
Give never so good Counsel, his word will not
Be taken, his Master thinks himself wiser, and so
His Family is bound to suffer with him; for 'tis the mischief
We are not Masters of our own bodies,
But they that buy us; and not much unlike
This Case of ours, and slavery, is that my Master is in now
By Apollo, with his ambiguous answers from his
Footed throne: Nor is it with in justice I complain of him,
Who though he be counted a great Prophet and a Physician,
Yet he hath sent my Master from him sick,
And I think half mad with Melancholy,
For yonder he follows a blind man step by step;
I have heard of seeing men leading the blind,
But never of blind men leading those that can see before:
And ask him what he means by it,
And he answers you not a syllable;
I can no longer hold my tongue,
Unless you will tell me why we follow this Fellow thus;
Nay, I will vex you, for I know you dare not strike me,
Whilst I carry your Bag.
No, yet if you be troublesome I shall take Away the Bag, and then beat you.


Well, I will not be quieted until I know who this is.


Well, because thou art in my esteem the most Faithful and secret Religiously
with both Gods and Men, and yet always have Lived poor and miserable.


'Tis very True.


And yet they that Rob the very


I grant you.


I went therefore to consult the Oracle about my Son, that since my own
miserable life is now almost Spent,


And what said Phoebus to this?


That you shall hear; he plainly told me,
That whosoever I met first, I should never
Leave him 'till I had got him into my house,
If it were possible.

And this I warrant was he.


The very same.


You need not have obeyed the Oracles Counsel, you Apollo his meaning.


How conjecture you this?


Why a blind man may see it,
For it profits no body in our age
To be
And be as other men are.

This is not all Carrion, we shall better
Know the mind of the Oracle by enquiring
Of this fellow whence he is, and what he wants,
And how he came hither.

Come Sir, let us know who you are.


Yes, and tell us quickly too.


I say to the Parish.


Do you hear him?


He speaks to thee, thou dost question him
Too roughly; Sir, I pray you, if the fair words
Of an honest
Let us know your

I say unto thee


Is this all the


If you do not tell me, you shall have no
Cause to laugh, for I will destroy thee.

I say leave me, get you gone.


By no means.


Master I'll tell you what's best, let me lead
This blind fellow to some
I'll steal from him and let him break
His neck.

do so.


Hold, hold.


Will you speak then?


If you should know what kind a man I am, I know
You would use me cruelly, and not
Let me go neither.

We'll promise you the contratry, if you will speak.


Lay your hands off me then first.


Well said, 'tis done.


Observe me well then, since I am forced
To reveal what I thought to have kept
Secret, I am Plutus.

Then thou art the basest sordid thing alive:
Is it possible, art thou Plutus!

Art thou Plutus with that miserable face
And dirty clothes, Phoebus, Apollo, Gods and Devils!
But art thou he?

Yes surely.


Thou the man?


Even very he.


But whence commeff thou in these
Pitiful

I come from the house of Patroclus, one that Never since he was born could
afford himself water.


But how come thou to suffer all this misery.


Why Jupiter brought all the evils of my life upon me,
Because he envied the good of mankind;
for when I was young I was
Evil company, and live with the just and modest and
The learned, but Jupiter put out my eyes that I might
Not discern them from others, such an ill will
He himself bears to

And yet he himself receives true honour
Only from honest men.

'Tis true.


But if you had your sight again, would you
Hereafter fly such base company?

For certain.


And live amongst honest men?


Without doubt, for 'tis a long time since I saw
Any such.

That's no wonder, for I that have my eye-sight
Scarce ever saw any.

Well, now let me go, for you know all
I can tell you.

No, by Jove, we will now rather embrace you
More Earnestly then ever.

Did not I tell you what trouble you would give me?


Let me entreat you to give your self into my hands For ever, and when you know
me, though I say it, you will Not find an honester man.


Yes, so you all say, but when you have enjoyed me And grown rich, then you
mind nothing but mischief and Malice.


'Tis true, but we are not all alike.


By Jove all one.


A good deed to cudgel him.


But that you may know how much good
You shall have by living with me, you shall
Understand, I hope God willing

Not of all things, I dare not see again.


How is this?


This fellow is certainly born to be Miserable.


If Jupiter should know I were about such a business, He would destroy me.


Can he hurt thee worse then to let thee go wandering Up and down thus?


I do not know what it is, but I fear him monstrously.


Is it possible? thou greatest of all Jove or his thunder would be valued At a
straw


O be not so profane.


Have patience, and I'll make it appear to thee
Thou hast more power then Jove.

Who me?


Yes, for by what dost thou think Jupiter
Commands all?

By


Pray where hath he the money?


Of this fellow.


And with what do men sacrifice to Jove with?
Is it not with this fellow?

And what do they sacrifice for, but to get him?
For all their prayers are to be rich.

Are not you all in all then, and if you say but
The word, all this will be at an end.

How can that be?


Because no body can sacrifice Oxen or Sheep if You forbid them.


Wherefore?


Why, how can he buy any thing to sacrifice with-Out thee, so that you see, if
Jove be troublesome, You know what to do with him.


Is it with me and for me, say you then, that men Sacrifice?


I say so by Jove, and moreover, whatever is famous Or esteemed amongst men,
thou art Author of, For money rules all.


Why, you see with a little money I am bought
And made a Slave of, because I had none my self.

And you know the Corinthian Women when poverty Tempts them are seldom
persuaded, but if money be
To be had, then they are brought to reason
And to be



And the same thing the Boys do for reward,
Not for love.

Nay, but you speak of those that are of low
Quality, for the best sort of these scorn money.

What do they seek else?


Why, a good horse or


They are too proud perhaps to take money, and
Therefore under this pretext hide their
Avarice, but 'tis all one, money and monies worth.

All arts, all cheats are invented for thy sake,
Plutus; the one is a Cobbler, the other a Cutler,
The other a Carpenter, another a
For thy sake even of that gold thou gave him;
And as arts, so are all
For thy sake, men taken in adultery
Have their

What a wretch am I, who till now never
Knew all this!

What makes the King of Persia


What are all


And tell me what mans and furnishes
The Greek Navies that are set out?

Or what sustaines the great Corinthian Armies?


And gives Pamphilus such cause of sorrow?


Yes, and Belonopolus his partner.


What makes Argyrius I pray you fart as he goes Up and down?


And for thy sake Phelisius
Fine stories.

And 'tis thou that aidest the Egyptians.


And for thee Lais Philonides.


You set your shoulder against Timotheus his Tower And threw it down.


Good and bad, all things are done for thy sake.


And in war, on that side the money lies, there goes The Victory.


Can I do all this?


Yes, by Jove, and more, of all other things there Is an end, But of enjoying
thee, and that hath no saciety.


Of bread.


Of Banqueting.


Of Music


Of Ambition.


Of Rule.


But he that hath ten Talents of thee, would then Have twenty, then forty, and
still if he have not more Thinks he lives but languishingly.


Gentlemen, me thinks you discourse well,
I fear but one thing.

What I prithee.


That I shall not be able to exercise all this power You give me.


I see, 'tis a good saying, that money is a Coward.


Nothing so, but a thief that came into my house,
Because he could carry nothing away, reported I locked
My self up, and hid my self for fear, which I did for Providence.

Well, take you no care, if you be but willing,
I'll take order you shall see as well as Lynceus.

How can you do this, being but a mortal man?


Hope well from what I haebus but now said to me, And shook his Laurel at me
too.


Hast thou him of thy Counsel also.


For certain?


Have a care what you do?


Trouble not your self, I'll pawn my head, I
Know how to bring this about.

And I mine too.


We will have help enough too of all those, who Because they are honest men,
scarce have bread to eat.


Those are but pitiful friends though me thinks.


They will not be so thought when we have made Them rich again; but Carrion make
hast, run.


What to do?


Call all my neighbours, you will find them
Perhaps busy at Plow, bid them leave off and be here
Presently, tell them every one shall have a part
Of Plutus with us.

I am gone; but who will take care of this victuals Here, which I have bought
for Dinner.


Leave that to me, and now Plutus the most excellent Amongst all the Gods,
enter here with me, this is my House, which this day thou shalt make rich.


I beseech you excuse me, 'tis very troublesome to Me to go into another mans
house, especially one that I am Not acquainted with; for I never have any good
by it; if I happen into a mans house, why then I am thrust presently Under
ground, and stifled, and if any of his friends come In necessity, and ask for
me to help him, he denies me, and Swears he saw me not of I know not how long,
And if I fall into a prodigal mans hands, why then I am Divided amongst Whores,
or lost at Dice in a moment, And so we are both turned naked out of doors.


You have not met with moderate men, I am one That on occasion can spend, and
then again spare, but pray You enter, I long till my Wife and my Son see you,
who Are two, next to thee, I love best of all the World.


That I easily believe.


Why should I not speak truth?


You, all friends and neighbours, poor and laborious That have lived with us
upon


We are ready you see, and make what hast we can, Considering we are men toiled
with labour and oppressed With Age, you cannot expect we should keep pace with
You, therefore tell us first why your master sends for us?


I have told you this good while, but cannot get you To lift up your long Ears
to it, that my master bid me tell You, that you shall all leave this sorrowful
careful life that You now lead, and exchange it for a pleasant one.


By what means, or from whence does he hope this





O thou art a golden messenger, what brave new Is this? by thy description this
must needs be a heap of


Or rather a heap of all the old


Well, do not think you shall go unpunished* You bring us thus far upon our
Crutches for nothing but to Delude us.


You think me a man naturally so given to jest,
That I can say nothing in earnest.

We shall make your bones ache by and by, you knave


Yes, when you have took your lots out of the Urn, and are Judges in Athens,
and these Cudgels you have In your hands, your wands, but ( g) Charon will have
you in His boat before that day comes.


Come, you are a prating fellow to delude us thus ^ this while; in not telling
plainly why your Master sent For us, especially knowing what business we have,
and yet The hast we have made over hedge and ditch to get hither.


Well, I will no longer conceal the business, my Master hath got Plutus into his
house, and you are all sent For to be made rich.


Is that possible we can be all made rich?


As rich as you would wish, every one a Midas and Such goodly asses as he was,
so you shall have.


How I am delighted with this! I could dance for Joy if I thought this were
true.


Do so, you shall follow dancing like my Sheep, my Kids, or rather like my gray
Bearded lascivious


And we in like manner will follow you our Cyclops; But if we catch you eating
the best Sallats and herbs From us, as you go, and then when your belly is
full fall Asleep by the way, we shall order you with these Cudgels.


Then will I imitate circen, and feed you with Herbs that will metamorphose
you into Swine, and then (as Ulysses did) feed you with


And we seeing our Circen go about to poison us, Will imitate Ulysses, and hang
you up by your two Stones, and slit your Nose, and then anoint it with a Sir
reverence, and you like Aristillus shall laugh and cry, Pigs follow your
mother.


Well, let us leave our Jests, and now we are at our Journies end, every one
put himself into his own shape Again; I'll go in a private way first, and fill
my belly, And then we'll to the great work in hand.


Neighbours, to say you are welcome, is in my Opinion an old dull complement,
therefore I will salute You after a new manner, and with open arms, tell you,
That to recompense the haste and pains you have taken In coming, if you will be
still as diligent in your own Good, you shall enjoy Plutus with me.


Never fear, we will be as laborious and indefatigable As Mars, and sure if we
should stick at Trifles in this Business, we were worthy to have Plutus slip
out of our Fingers.


I see Blapsidamus coming yonder, who by his hast Me thinks comes as if he knew
something of this business That hath happened to me.


What is the matter I pray thee? how comes it to Pass my Cramulus, thou
should be so soon be grown rich? I could not believe it, though it was all
the news At the


Blapsidamus, I will keep nothing from thee, 'Tis true, the World is otherwise
with me to day then it was Yesterday, and you shall find it so, because you are
my friend.


Are you then so rich as it is said?


I shall be presently if it please


What's the danger?


'Tis thus.


Speak On freely as you have begun.


If the matter hit right, we are all Made; if not, all Undone.


That's sad, and pleases me not by no means, For to be so marvellous rich, and
so mavellously afraid is Not the custom of those that get it honestly.


How, not honestly?


I fear. you have robbed Apollo's Temple, And now repent you.


Apollo forbid! I never did such a trick yet.


Come, never trifle with me, 'tis so I know.


Prithee do not think so ill of me.


O Gods! there is nothing but villainy in the world, The hearts


Why, I think you are wild.


How different is this from the manners of the rest Of his Life.


By Heaven! thou art


A man may see by the uncertainty of his countenance, And the rolling of his
eyes, the villainy he hath done.


Now I know why all this is,


How? I rob a thief, what's this?


Well, there is no theft in the business, what I am About is quite of another
kind I assure you.


May be you will say it was not stole but took


Thou art possessed with a


There is a third way yet, have you not cozened
Some body by some notorious

No certainly.


Why, then I know not which way to get the truth Out, unless you will confess.


Why, will you then condemn me before you Hear me?


Not I friend, but on the contrary would have brought You out of your danger
with little cost, and before the Matter had been known amongst the people, we
would Have stopped the Orators


You are a kind friend to me, that for the laying Out of a shilling would look
to get twelve.


Methinks I see thee now with thy Olive branch in Thy hand, and thy wife and
children sitting about thee Miserably prostrate before the Tribunal, We want
Pamphilles to draw this Picture methinks.


I tell thee I am so far from taking any thing from Others, that my design is
to make all honest frugal men Richer then they are.


Say you so, have you stole such abundance indeed?


Will you destroy me with talking thus.


Nay, it seems you will destroy your self.


With what, I tell thee I have Plutus himself at My house.


You Plutus, what Plutus?


Why, the very god Himself.


Where is he?


Why, within there.


Where?


Why, I tell thee at my house.


Plutus in thy house, go hang thy self, I'll never Believe it.


By the gods 'tis true.


Wilt thou swear by Vesta?


And by Neptune too.


What Neptune, of the Seas?


Yes, and by the other too, if there be one.


And will you lend him now and then
To some of your friends?

Soft, yea, it is not come to that yet.


Say you so, must he not stir out of your house?


Somewhat is first to be done.


What is that?


Why, he must be helped to his sight before
He can go abroad.

Is he then blind for certain?


Nothing so Sure.


Somewhat I thought was in it, that he never
Could find the way into my house.

All in good time, he will be there now godwilling Shortly.


Were we not best get a Physician to him?


What Physician is here in this City? here is no art Understood here, because
there ( a) is no reward.


Let us consider.


You will find none but that which I have
Long since thought on is best, which is to carry
Him to Esculapius his Temple.

You have said well, therefore let us make no delay.


I am just now going


O the


Hercules, what have we here?


Nay, I will be the destruction of you both, for You have undertaken that which
neither God nor Man Durst go about.


What art thou that look so pale and lean?


May be it is Erinnis, one of the furies presented In the


No, she wants a torch in her hand.


Nay, then we'll be bold with her.


Whom do you take me for.


A
Or else you would never trouble us thus, that never
Have done you any injury.

Is it no injury (think you) to throw me out of Every house where I come?


Nay, thou art sure to have one house left thee,
The prison, but tell us what thou art.

What punishment do you deserve (think you) for Seeking to take me that am
innocent out of the World Thus.


What will you say if this be a neighbour of mine That keeps a


I am Poverty, you know me well enough sure?
For I have frequented many of your houses a good many
Years I am sure, and waited diligently upon you.

O Phoebus Apollo! whither shall we run,
How shall we get away from thee.

What a pitiful fearful fellow art thou, whither
Dost thou run, stay for shame.

By no means, not I.


Fie on it, what shall one Woman drive away
Two men?

Why, is there any animal so dreadful in the
World, and infectious as Poverty?

Prithee stay.


By Jove not I.


Nay, but let me tell you 'twill be a shamful thing For us to forsake yonder
God within, and run I know not Whither for fear of this old Witch, let us
stand to it.


With what arms I pray you can we defend our Selves, what breast-plate


Take courage, our God will give us


Dare you take of holy


What do you rail at us for thus, that have done You no injury, you old
Divel?


Do you think you do me no hurt in seeking
Thus to get Plutus his eyes again?

What hurt is it to thee to bring all mankind
A benefit.

What good will it bring to men think you?


First of all, we shall throw you out of Greece.


Throw me out? why, what greater hurt can you do In the World.


Why, it would be a greater to let it alone
And not do it.

Then before you go any further I will show you the Reason of this matter, and
demonstrate that I am the cause Of all good to you, and that by my help only
you subsist In this life, if I do not proceed as you will, And use me as you
please.


What an impudent creature art thou to talk thus!


If you will suffer your self to be taught, I will
Clearly show you, you are out of the way
If you would make the just man rich.

O for the Pillory or the


You ought not to complain before you have heard Me.


Who can forbear to cry out miserably that hears This?


No wise man makes such a Noise.


But will you submit to punishment, if you do not Make this good?


Do what you can invent.


'Tis well.


But if I have the better of you, you shall pay for it.


Yes, twenty lives if we had them.


Our two is enough for us to lose I warrant you.


I were too blame to ask more.


Let us now fall to the matter in hand, and decide The controversy by true
reason, laying all jests and Scurrility aside.


In the first place then I think it plain to all men, That it is equity that
Plutus can recover his eyes Again, and not go groping up and down thus; He will
live Only amongst honest men, and such as are


I'll be witness, no body can complain of this.


For if we will but consider, the lives of Mankind, as Things now stand, we
shall find it madness to see how for the Most part the wicked abound with
riches unjustly gotten Whilst honest men are ready to starve, and spend their
Days with this Lady; There is therefore no good to ^ Done, without Plutus have
his eyes again.


O ye most vain and Credulous Plutus should see again, he would ( f) distribute
Equally to all men: and then I pray you who would care To study Arts or Trades?
who would build your Ships or Your Coaches? Nay, you must even mend your own
shoes Your selves, and plow, and sow, and reap, or else you must Not eat, you
thought I warrant you to live at ease and out Of care.


You deceive your self, we will keep servants to do All this you have recorded.


Who will serve you, or whence will you have them?


We'll buy them with our money.


Who will sell them you, when they have as Much money as you?


Some Merchant of Thessaly greedy of gain,
That bring us Slaves from those that steal
Out of the suburbs, and by-places I warrant you
Will furnish us.

Where will you find any body to steal, when no
Body is in want? you may steal your selves too as well as
Work; and thus by being rich, be much more miserable
Then you were before.

May this misery fall upon thine own head for Belying us thus.


Neither shall you sleep any more upon your fine Beds and Carpets, for indeed
you shall have none to lie on, Who will make them? for as you say every body
shall have Money enough: where will you get rich perfumes? you Must not think
then to walk in such pomp in the streets When you bring your Plutus do you
good, and yet From me you enjoy all this and all else you have need of, I am
the imperious Mistress of all Artists, and stand by them Until they are glad to
find any way to support their lives.


Prithee what can thou do for any body, but help Them to Biles

besides this, instead of a whole Cloak thou give them half one, and instead
of a bed to sleep in, a Mat to lie awake on, for curtains and coverlids, rags,
and for a pillow a ^ne, Mallows for bread, and grass instead of Sallets, and ^r
an easy seat, an old barrel with the head beaten out; Have not I now showed at
large the good you do?


No, these are not of my evils, these belong to


Yet we count poverty and beggary are sisters.


You do perhaps, and it may be you compare Dionysius Thrasibulus; but my life
hath none of This in it, it is the beggar that hath nothing to live upon The
poor live sparingly upon what they have, And order so their affairs, that
though they may be said In effect to have


O what a happy life is this! you tell us of poverty If after all our time
spent in labour to get and To keep, there scarce remain enough to bury us.


You spend your time in cavilling and jests, and Not seriously weigh the
matter, nor do you seriously cons^ That I give men better wits and persons too
then Plutus Can; for what does he give, but gouty legs, fat bellies But with me
men are active, and slender-bodied, and of Warlike shape.


And all this they get by being farnished with Hunger.


Moreover, for what concerns the modesty a^ Virtue of living, I can say more
that they only belongs To me, and that from Plutus comes nothing but riots a^
Injuring of others.


What is your modesty, to steal and break


Nay, the modesty lies in hiding himself when I Hath done.


Do but observe the Orators and Rethoricians when They are poor, how equally
and justly they carry them selves between the People and the Citizens, but then
Are no sooner rich, but they lay Plots presently to be^ The lower Sort, and
cause Wars among them.


Though I do not love thee, I cannot but confess this to be true of thee, but
yet you shall not escape us, Going about to prove Poverty better then Wealth.


Yet you disprove it not methinks, but wrangle, Jest and talk Idly.


Why, tell us then if thou be so excellent; Does every body fly from thee
so?


Why? because I would make them better Honester, as Children do that avoid
their Parents, because They give them good Counsel and Correction; 'tis a hard
Thing for any body to distinguish good from bad.


Do you think then that Jove doth not distinguish? You see he is rich, and
gives it to us too as a blessing.


O ye dull Saturnine wits! why Jove himself is A beggar, and that I'll prove to
you; For if he were rich, when he institutes his Olimpick Games in Greece, sure
he would never reward the Conquerors with an Olive branch and a large oration,
But he would give them Gold.


This shows rather how Jupiter loves Gold, by his Parting with it so sparingly;
he gives away things of less Value, and keeps that for himself.


If it be so, you lay a worse fault to him then Poverty Gives any body, having
so much wealth notwithstanding To be still so greedy.


I think Jove will have cause to crown you with That Olive brance you spoke off
for this victory over us.


Well, these jests contradict nothing of what I say, Namely that all good comes
of Poverty.


Ask Hecate then if it be not best to be rich; For the rich make her a feast,
but the poor do nothing but come in and eat it, therefore let's talk no more,
for I am resolved never to yield, though thou shouldest overcome me.


Then Argos


Nay, rather call upon Pausonus thy


Miserable creature what will become of me!


Get thee from me, and I care not.


Whether shall I go, into what Country?


Into the Stocks, or to the Gallows; come away.


The time will come you'll wish for me.


Come not before that day,
Till I am weary of being rich.

Well, when I am once rich, I'll keep jovial company, feast, and bath, and sit
in plenty, and fart at Poverty.


At length we are got quit of this old Woman, and now Blapsidamus let it be our
business as soon as we ^, to carry Plutus unto Esculapius his Temple.


We had need dispatch, lest some body come in and interrupt us.


Within there's Carrion, make every thing Ready and bring Plutus to the Temple,
with the usual Ceremonies.


Come all you happy in your old age Who in the days of Thesius


O the blessed news, that thou art the messenger to thy poor companions!


The business is brought now about by my Master,
For Plutus that you all know hath been so long
Blind, now sees with perfect eyes, and all by the help
Of the most famous Esculapius.

Marry, this is pleasant news.


'Twill make you rejoice whether you will or no.


Praised be the Esculapius Thou great glory to Mankind.


What a noise and knocking is hear to day, I pray
God it be a messenger of some good?
I have been all day at home expecting Carrion,
And now he is come.

Come Mistress, fetch some wine quickly, for I know First 'tis that you love;
and then next, because I bring you such a heap of good news, I deserve some.


Where is it?


I am about to tell it you.


Dispatch in few words.


Hearken well, I will tell you all from head to foot


So it do not trouble my head, I care not.


As soon as we came to the God Esculapius Carrying with us (then the most
unhappy, and now most happy) Plutus if any one were ever so, first of all threw
him into the sea


Would that make an old man as he is happy?
To put him into cold water?

Afterwards when he came before Esculapius, And had laid our Sacrifices on the
Altar, with several Musics playing, we made Plutus lie down every one
assisting in the Ceremony.


Were there any more that sought help from Esculapius?


There was one Heoclides, who though blind 'tis thought in robbing and cozenage
can exceed the theefes that see best, besides many others troubled with all
sorts of evils: now after a little


Thou wretched fellow, wast not thou afraid Of the God when thou did this?


Yes, I was afraid he would have come with his Robe and his


And did not Esculapius yet appear to you?


Not yet: but when he did come, it was my ill luck, my belly growing now
burdened with pudding to fall into such a fit of farting.


Was not that enough to make him destroy thee?


No, only Jaso that followed the Gods blushed at it, and Parocaea stopping her
nose, turned aside: For I must tell you though it were in the Church, I could
not fart ( e) frankincense.


But what said the God?


Just nothing.


Is he so


Alas, he is not only a devourer of farts, but feeds Upon


Thou wicked fellow.


After this was all past being in great fear of the God still, I hid my self,
whilst with great gravity he administered to all the diseased according to their
several necessities, his boy having brought him a little stone mortar, And a
box of Instruments of Surgery.


Was the box


Not the box stone.


You lying fellow, you hid your self, and you
You say you saw all.

Why, I saw all through the Priests gown which
Wanted not loop holes I assure you:
Now to end my story here the oynment was prepared
For Neoclides; of the best
In a mortar as much squils this wet with vinegar,
And this he applied to Neoclides and to the end historment
Might be greater, he lifted up his eye lids, but he
Stamping and roaring thought to run away, but
Esculapius laughing, said, Sit still till I release you,
To delay causes and betray Clients.

What a lover of the Common-wealth this god is, And how wife.


Next to him he went to Plutus, and wiping first his Eyes, and covering his
head and face, he gave a sign with A whisper, and out came two mighty Snakes.


O monstrous!


Plutus arose up with His eye-sight perfect; I in the mean time clapped My
hands for joy, and took my Master up in my arms, The God and the Serpents
vanished into the Temple, And all that were about Plutus fell to embrace him,
And no man could sleep any longer for joy; I all the while magnified the God
that had made Plutus see perfectly, and Neoclide's quite blind.


What a power this Esculapius hath, but where is Plutus?


He is coming this way with a number of honest People about him, that formerly
lived very poorly, But now Mistress Plutus shakes them all by the hands, but
Those that had got wealth unjustly he looks awry upon; But 'tis a wonder to see
how he makes the old fools Leap and frisk before him that can hardly go; And
now let us all dance for no man can now say to us Our Hogheads are empty of
wine, or our Barns of corn.


By Haccata I will crown thee too for thy news.


Well; dispatch quickly, for by this the company is At our Gates.


I'll go home that these eyes of mine may see him.


And I with these legs of mine will come
Marching before them.

First of all we salute the Sun and next this happy Soil of Pallas, together
with all the land of Cereopis That hath thus kindly received me. It grieves us
much to think of our former misery, And the ill company we have kept, and how
we have Wandered up and down; but all this shall be amended And the world shall
see it was much against my will To be kept in the hands of bad men.


Out upon it, what creatures men are that are friends To a man only according to
his succcess, every one I meet Now smiles on me, and my hands are almost shaked
off: Who hath met me in the street to day without a complement? and all the old
fools get about me and frisk.


Right worthy man, blessing attend thee, and us all, According to our Countries
custom I have brought A small banquet to refresh thee with.


No sure, the first house I go with my eye sight into, Ought to receive from
me, and not I from it.


Will you despise our good will.


Within by the fire side, when we are rid of this Rabbel of company, we shall
have more leisure.


Indeed you say well, for they had like to have had Me down for my Nuts and
Apples but now.


What a pleasure there is in living rich, especially to such as we that spend
what we will; have still

The worst is, my Master yonder within with his golden crown On, is sacrificing



Come child, follow me, and let us go to this God.


Who have we here making such hast towards us?


A man formerly miserable, but now happy.


He hath a good honest face.


Yes sure, and am that I seem.


Well, what's thy business?


I would speak with your god a word or two, for I have received a great deal of
good from him; I was left well by my Father, and supplied my friends In their
necessities, and thought that they might be useful To me again in time of need.


And what you fell into want, I warrant presently.


Most certain, I did so.


How did you do then, I warrant you were miserably Used?


Ye hit it right; for I was strongly persuaded That they that had so liberally
tasted of my kindness in My prosperity, would make some return when my turn Of
suffering came, but they all looked awry upon me.


And laughed at thee I warrant.


They did so, when they saw me


They'll do so no more, I warrant thee now.


I am therefore come to thank Plutus for it.


But prithee, what is the reason thy Boy carries this Old torn Cloak after
thee?


I come to consecrate this to the memory of Plutus.


'Tis the Cloak I warrant thou were first


No, not so; but I have suffered cold in it this Thirteen years I am sure,


And what are these old shoes for?


Why, these are a year old too.


And so these are sacred too.


By Jupiter, I think so.


You'll bring him a brave gift.


O


O Apollo and the rest of ye, what doth this fellow ail?


Why, I am undone in this one day, and have lost All, and all by this god of
yours; but if there be any Law left, I'll have him made blind again as he was.


This is some knave I perceive oppressed with ill
Fortune for his ill manners.

Let him deservedly then perish like a thief as he is.


Where is he that hath promised to make us all Equally rich in one day, upon
condition he might have his Eyes again, and hath in doing so, made us ten times
more Miserable then we were before, I'm sure some of us at least.


'Tis because thou art a fool and a wicked fellow.


None of you were counted wise I'm sure till you got money.


How fierce this Sycophant is? his profession now will not get him


You shall never escape me this day, I will have you Before the Justice, and
hear you upon the wrack


Alas, go and lament thy own condition.


And by Jove Plutus be acknowledged of all Greece this day for throwing out all
of your profession.


O wretch that I am, what must I make you sport too? I pray you, where had you
that new Cloak you have on? Yesterday, one


I fear thee not, I have got now a ring of Eudam^ That I wear here as a charm
against thee.


But yet against the biting of a Sycophant, I doubt Man hath no remedy of
prevention.


Are these scorns to be endured! what do you stay here for, for no good to any
body I am sure?


Not to do you any good I am sure.


No, but to live upon me, and sup to night of that Which should have


O then thou wilt split with malice, for thou art Like now to have nothing else
in thy guts.


You say nothing, but all this while I smell a good Supper within of all manner
of


What's this he smells?


I believe 'tis rather hunger and cold that's coming Towards him, that he smells
through the holes of his torn Cloak, then any thing else.


Must I suffer all this reproach, O the gods!
That an honest man and a lover of his Country should
Be thus used.

You a lover of your Country?


Yes, no man more.


Answer me then.


Well.


Are you a husband-man?


Do you think me mad to lead such a painful life?


Are you a Merchant then?


I can counterfeit one, if need be.


Do you then profess any art?


O Jove not I!


Which way dost thou live then, that hast nothing To do?


Why, I take all business both public and private Upon me.


Who entrusts you?


Nay, 'tis my own pleasure.


Thou art always meddling where thou hast nothing To do, and art hated of all
men: with what confidence Can thou then profess thy self an honest man?


Ye


Yes, if meddling with other men's business, and having none of ones own, be a
good quality.


'Tis every mans business to see the Laws obeyed, and punish those that
offend.


The City appoints Judges for that purpose.


Yes, but who shall find them work? that is, bring in Offenders.


He that will for me, for 'tis an Office bad enough.


Well, I am that man, and therefore judge if the whole business of the
Common-wealth runs not through my hands.


This City had an evil


O no, 'tis a sheepish


And wilt thou never change this mind?


Not, if you will give me your Plutus that you have got, Battus his Sylphium to
boot.


Come,


Friend, he speaks to you.


And next your ( f) shoes.


Again he speaks to you.


Will no body help me?


Yes, I am ready to help you off with them.


I am undone.


See now what you get by meddling with others Business is all so just lost
again.


Take heed what you do, I have witness here by How I am used.


Nay, your false witness have now forsaken you.


Wo is me, if I am left alone to you too!


Now howl and roar, dost hear Justus? now give me thy old Cloak, and we'll put
it upon the Sycophants back.


That cannot be, man; I have, you know, consecrated it to Plutus.


By no means, 'twill become this fellow much better, and we'll get a better
Cloak for Plutus.


But what shall I do with my old shoes?


We'll hang those in his fore-head.


Well, I see I must for the present be gone, for ye are too strong for me, but
I'll return and be revenged upon you and your god, for altering the government
of Mankind, thus without asking the Senate or the Towns advice.


Now you are got into my


'Tis his best if he can, but the Bath-keeper will quickly take hold Plutus.


Good honest old Gentlemen, tell me if this be the way to the new god they talk
of.


Ye are now come to the very house, good young Gentlewoman.


May I be so bold to call to speak with some of the House?


That's needless, for I am going in; but what's your business?


I am under a great deal of misery, and have been so ever since this god first
began to have his sight again.


What's the matter, sure this is something amongst the Sycophant is amongst men
and of the same calling.


Alas not I!


Then thou art some she


You jest with my afflictions, and that's worst of all, I am withered away ( e)
with love.


Prithee who hath withered thee?


You must know, there was a young fellow with an honest good face, but poor,
yet the truth is he gave me what I wanted, and I supplied him with his
necessities.


What were they?


Why, truly he was not very importunate, only sometimes he wanted money to buy
him a Cloak, and sometimes a pair of Shoes, and sometimes his Sister and his
Mother wanted clothes, and sometimes bread.


Call you this nothing, this was love indeed.


Yes indeed, for he said he asked these things not for their value, but as they
were mine, and so wore my very shoes for my sake, and to put him in mind of
me.


This was a wonderful lover.


But now alas, his love is quite vanished, for but now I sent him Cheescakes,
and bad the messenger tell him I would see him to night.


And what said he, prithee?


Truly, he sent me my Cheescakes again, and bid me be sure never to come to him
more, and withal added this proverb, that once the Milesii indeed were
Powerful.


A crafty fellow, he scorns ordinary


And yet heretofore this man would be at my Chamber door every day.


To see what he could steal, I warrant.


No, he swore it was only to here my voice.


By which he thought to hear some gift was coming.


And when he saw me sad, he would call me his


This was when he had got thy shoes on, I warrant.


And at Ceres feast, when we were in the coach together, if any body did but
give me a look, I was beaten for it all day, so jealous he was of me.


He would have no body enjoy your goods but he.


He would tell me I had such fine white hands.


When they were reaching him out money.


He said my skin


Then thou had some trick to sweat wine.


He said I had lovely


This fellow is no fool, he knows how to stir up an Old


Now gentlemen consider, whether your god, do not do unjustly, to see a poor
woman under these afflictions, and not help her.


Say what thou would have him do, and we'll send for him.


'Tis just that he should make this young fellow deserve as well of me, as I
have done of him.


Why, he pays thee all at night still I hope.


Alas, he promised whilst he lived he would never forsake me.


He hath kept his word, for I warrant he doth not believe thou art now fit to
be called a living creature.


Indeed I am


Or rather dried up with it and shrunk.


You may draw me through a ring.


That ring must be as big as the hoop of a Sive.


See yonder he comes of whom I complain thus, He's going to some feast I
warrant.


It seems so, for he is very


Save ye Gentlemen.


Let's here what he will say.


O Mistress mine! how suddenly are you altered? Grown gray I protest, since I
saw you.


O miserable woman that I am, how I am abused!


What, is it such a long time since he saw you?


How long think you? he was with me but yesterday.


Then this man differs from all others, for the More drunk he is, the quicker
his senses are.


O no, this is of late his usual humour.


O Neptune, what waves, what wrinkles hast thou got in thy forehead!


Prithee do not bring the light so near.


She says well, for if one spark should chance to fall upon thee, thou would
burn and crack like a piece of an Olive tree.


How say, wilt thou have a bout with me?


Where thou foolish fellow.


Here.


At what game?


At even or odd, how many teeth hast in thy head?


I can divine that, not above three or four, I warrant you.


Still thou art able to crack nuts, for a Mill hath but one tooth.


You are uncivil thus to


You must get some body to make you clean again then.


O wash her not by any means, for if her


For a man of your age you seem not to be very wise methinks.


He hath been


By Venus! never touched me, thou wicked fellow.


No no, I were mad to offer it, that were to make a Quarrel between you and
your Mistress.


Alas, I defy you for that, I love her so it's impossible.


She accuses you though.


Me, of what?


Of all manner of reproaches, and that you hit her in the teeth with that
proverb, that once the Milesii were strong.


Well, you strive to win my girl from me, I see, But I will not contend with
you for her.


You slight her, I see.


No, I reverence her age, or else no man should carry her from me, and so I
give you joy Sir, and farewell.


He's weary of her company.


And yet who is fitter for it then I am?


I'll change no more words with such an old divel, that hath been


Yes, but as they say, now you have drunk the wine, methinks you should be
content with the lees.


Yes, but this lees is fowler and more corrupted then ordinary.


What remedy?


We will try, I am going in to sacrifice to Plutus.


I have a word or two to say to him too.


Nay, then I'll not go in.


Have a good heart man, she cannot ravish thee.


No, I have


Go when you will, I'll follow you step by step.


O Jupiter! how this old woman sticks to him Like an Oyster to a stone.


Who is this that makes such a noise and knocking at door, I can see no body
neither, sure the doors do not make this noise themselves.


Stay Carrion, I say I must speak with you.


O! is it you that have made all this stir?


I could have come in whither you had opened the doors or no; go take your
heels and run and call your Master and your Mistress hither presently, and all
the Servants, nay the very dog and the hog too.


What's the matter?


Jupiter hath given command you should be all tied together and thrown into the
Dungeon.


A blister upon thy tongue for this news, why does Jupiter threaten us so
horribly?


You have committed the greatest of all wickedness; For since Plutus began to
see, men have quite left to offer frankincense, laurel, bread, flesh, or indeed
any kind of Sacrifice.


Nor never shall any more by my consent, for before this day you never made any
provision for us, or gave us a word of true Counsel.


I know not what the rest of the gods will do, but for my part I am sure I am
almost starved.


Why, now you will begin to grow wise, and know the world.


Heretofore, so soon as I was up in a morning all the bawds and whores used to
bring me presents of all manner of good things, nothing was too good for
Mercury, and now I am so ill maintained I can scarce go upon my legs.


Ye are right enough served, for returning evil still to those that you have
received good from.


Alas! what is now become of all those custards that used to be made against my
feast.


'Tis in vain to let your mouth water at those things now they are gone and
past.


O the troops of Victims that used to be brought to my Altars!


Now how will you do to dance upon the


O the warm bowels and entrails I used to devour heretofore.


You have a pain in your own guts to think on it.


What pleasantly compounded draughts I have had.


If thou shouldest taste once again of them, we should never be rid of thee.


Stand my friend then, and help me, I am one that loves thee.


If I knew how, I would.


Help me but to a little of that victuals that you are sacrificing within to
Plutus in such abundance.


I dare not carry any thing out of the house.


If you steal a little out of your Masters cup their's no hurt, I'll cast a
cloud over you, that no body shall see you.


You have been used ye villain I see to pardon and conceal the theft of all
those that would sacrifice half of it when they had done to you, this trick
hath got you all you have.


Is not that fair to divide?


Yes, but you would be loath to take part of the blows I shall have for
stealing it; if I am taken playing the thief there, you all leave us.


O do not torment me thus! now you are hapy your self, you should rather help
me to some place in the house amongst you.


What, would you leave the gods for such company as ours?


Yes, for 'tis much a happier being.


But to run away from them and your Country methinks is not so handsome.


That's a mans Country where he can live happilest.


But prithee if thou were amongst us, what good could thou do, what office
would undertake?


Any thing, I would be porter to look to the gates.


We need not keep any body out now, they that have plenty, bid all welcome.


Make me a Merchant then.


We need not trade, nor soul our fingers with money, we have all we wish,
Mercury is no mineral we stand in Need of now.


Do you want a subtle man to manage your affairs?


We have no need of craft neither,
But rather of Candid people.

Do you not then need a guide in difficult matters?


Why, you forget your self, Plutus sees again now.


Let me then be the inventer of your Plays and Plutus I am sure Will have
need of those delights.


On the contrary rather there will be no need of Men's studying such arts now,
for they are invented to get bread, and a living out off; Though our great men
now adays affect such things to get themselves


Is there no way for me to be brought into the House then?


Yes, now the Sacrifices are past, if you will go to the well and draw water,
you shall have the washing of the Tripes; but see then you be wondrous
diligent.


Who can tell me where Cremulus lives?


Now friend, what's the matter?


Friend said you, in good time, you're my friend indeed to get Plutus his eyes
again, and now I am ready to starve, though I am one of Joves own Priests.


Why, what's the matter?


Why, every body now is got rich, and grown idle, and no body now comes with a
sacrifice for good success in his journey, nor that he may cast his enemy at
law:

We may lock up our doors, Jove will have no more sacrifices, nor no body
comes as I see, except whole troops that come to shit at the doors, that they'll
come out of their way for.


Why, then all they leave there falls to your share by your place.


Nay, I have taken my leave of Jupiter, and mean to come and live here.


Take courage, man, all will be well again I warrant you; for your Jupiter,
your


That's good news.


Stay a little, and you shall see we'll put Plutus in Jupiters Throne, and do
you light the torches and you shall go before him, just as you did the the other,
and all will be well.


This I think very fit to be done.


VVe'l in, and call him out to the Temple.


What shall I do?


Do? why, carry these pots upon your head, and go carefully with them, and set
them upon the Altars read against Plutus comes to the sacrifice, and make your
self as fine as you can.


But what becomes of the business I came her about.


Come come, all shall be according to thy mind; And the young fellow shall be
with thee again at night.


If you will promise me that, I will do any thing.


Other pots use to have their scum upon the top; But these as they stand upon
her gray head look as If they had their scum at the bottom.


All is now done, there only remains now that follow therest of the company
singing dancing.


THE wisdom of the world in all ages, and their precepts of life, lies wrapped
up in their Muthology, even as ours at this present is contained in the Holy
Scriptures; except that God in his mercy to us hath delivered us those truths
of which they had but the the Tips and Figures: But yet of such efficacy we
find their Fables to be, that even in the darkest Times we cannot but say, that
the soul of man had light enough to understand the bounds and rules we ought to
live within, and the end we live for: so that we may truly say, since God made
man, he never left him without such a sufficient Conduct as might well serve
his turn, till in his great grace and bounty he shall think fit to send him a
better; nor was it less then divine wisdom in him at the first to send the
weakest lights to prepare the soul of man for those great ones since delivered
unto them, and to let Gentilisme as it were usher in Christianity, that Mankind
might be prepared with the weight, form, and matter thereof, and want nothing
but the stamp of his Messias upon him for his everlasting perfection. Now
amongst the ancient Fables, I find none that better unfolds the nature and
state of Mankind then this, which Aristophanus takes for the subject of his
Comedy; not perhaps any that comes nearer to our own sacred Scriptures Plutus,
the Tip of Wealth and Plenty, is said by Jupiter to be deprived of his Eyes,
for aspiring to enthrone himself in his power and wisdom, that which at the
first we read threw down the Angels, and next to them him, and in him that
posterity that was created almost as happy as those Angels; so that Plutus with
his eyes open may allude to us Adam in his Innocence, his blindness our fault;
and his being brought to Esculapius his Temple to receive his sight again, may
not unfitly emble to us our seeing of a Saviour to bring us into that State
again we fell from: But yet further then in this consideration, which I hope
will offend no body; we will not use comparisons, but proceed to our
intentions, which are to consider the World as it stood with Plutus his eyes
open, and as it now stands with his eyes out. The law of Nature is, that which
in all ages Philosophy hath aimed to find out; for though the world stands now
upon another bottom, and we live so wholly by our own agreements, that it is
impossible to bring it into the practise of life any more, yet were it of
wonderful importance to every single man, his business in this world being
only to know himself, and his own being, to know what he was before he made
any bargains with other numbers of men, to take what principles they thought
fit to impose upon him; but certainly to find this law of our natures, which
like an old Record hath lain so long in the dust, till the letters are worn
out, and the language forgot, is a thing of great difficulty, especially
considering that our senses and the faculties of the mind that flow from them,
are given us for the use of Life, and not to examine what that Life is; they
can look forth and distinguish of objects abroad, but cannot look back, and
reflect upon themselves: My Eyes teach me to see, but show me not what Seeing
is; and I Hear with my Ears, but cannot hear what Hearing is, nor indeed is
there any thing in this world can teach us by it self what it is; for if it
were not so, I cannot find what bounds could be put to Humane knowledge, the
which both by the failings in our selves, the Muthology of the Ancients, and
even our own sacred Stories, we still find for aspiring beyond its terms hath
been cast into chains: The best way therefore for man to make discovery of his
own simple estate and condition, as it stood before he brought himself into
slavery, will be first to rank himself again with the rest of his fellow
creatures, in their manner of enjoying the benefits of this life, and as they
do, to reckon that divine providence out of that same earth, whence their
generation came, hath likewise without their care provided nutrition to lead
our natural lives on to those terms and limits nature hath set them; and hence
we see the Gospel, that was the second Covenant made with Mankind, for the
restoring him again to his simplicity of life, for illustration of the
excellency of a natural state and condition, brings the Lilly of the field,
that neither toils or spins, to exceed Solomon in all in his glory; and
further argues that the Fowls of the Air neither sow nor reap, nor gather into
barns, and yet your heavenly Father provideth for them; and do not you much
exceed them? that is, are not you much more capable of living contentedly in
common, according to the Law of Nature, upon the fruits and benefits of the
earth, then they; for the truth is, though those words did generally relate to
the casting of Mankind upon the providence of God, and not to rely upon his own
care, yet I doubt not but all his precepts of that kind had also a respect to
that day when Christ shall come and finish the work of a second Adam, when (as
the Text saith) he shall have put down all rule, and power, and authority; that
is, what ever we now call Propriety and Right, except the common natural right
of other creatures; for to the same peace that Mankind at first enjoyed we can
only be restored by being put into the same state and habit of life. Now we
find in Genesis, that the dominion given to man over the world, did not extend
further then the making of food of that which hath sensitive life; I have given
you every herb bearing seed which is upon the face of the earth, and every Tree
in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed, to you it shall be for meat:
Neither was this deed of gift of the fruits of the earth more particularly to
man then his fellow creatures for in the following verse, to every Beast of all
the Earth, and to every Fowl of the Air, and to every thing that creeps upon
the earth wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat:
Neither was this first natural estate of man unknown to many where the Holy
Scriptures never came, for the foundation of Pythagoras Philosophy we find is
the same, and hath had the fortune to continue in the Eastern parts to this
day, when it could not do so with those that had it immediately from heaven;
likewise Haesiod, with a kind of divine spirit tells us, that Humane
sustenance, if there were any Humane temperance, might lie in so narrow a
compass that he should not need to put his Oxen and Mules into the yoke of
slavery, if it were not a curse that Jupiter had laid upon him for Prometheus
bold theft of fire from heaven, the knowledge of good and evil, that is, the
stating of it himself as he thought fit; for we find not that God put any
confinement to the thoughts and soul of man, to the matter of seeking good and
evil in the natural speculation into himself, or any of the creatures, that
were his companions, but on the contrary gave encouragement towards it; for we
see he had leave to call the creatures before him, and give names to them
proper to their natures and habits, and by that means to propogate the art of
Etimology in the world, that being the first principle upon which all Humane
science is built; but so soon as he came to establish his Morals, it was that
unhappy Philosophy that caused both all his own sorrow, and that of other
creatures, for our pride and self opinion first taught us to practise Tyranny
and blood-shedding over other creatures, the next thing that followed was
persecution and slavery of one another; neither did man then only learn to
destroy man, but by his example other creatures learned the same cruelty over
one another; for in the image of the state of innocence, we find it received,
that man did not fall alone, but the whole world fell with him; Cain gave an
example of murder to the next Bird or Beast that was stronger then his Brother;
and I remember it to be an observation of the ever renowned Doctor Hernii, that
those creatures that are most in society with us, learn our lust and habits of
life of us, even to such a degree that we see Dogs and Swine vary from the
appointed times of generation set by other creatures, and are at any time (as
Man is) capable of it; now when man, or a few men, by Strength or Eloquence had
subdued many, the next thing that followed, was that unhappy thing we call
Propriety, to such a part of the world as they could maintain; and here it was
the soul of man, that was born to know only the opposites of pain and
pleasure, as they were confined to his bodily Estate, grew to fix them most
unhappily upon all things without him, until his life became capable to afford
him nothing that was simple, nor is he able to enjoy any thing for fear of its
opposite, that like a terrible shadow (much longer then the substance) walks
still along with his happiness; for so soon as the names of Wealth and Poverty
were defined in the world, all manner of Appetites, like a Sea, when a Sluice is
plucked up, came in upon Mankind: True it is, one would think that the
intentions of Propriety were to keep away the notions of Poverty, till upon
second thoughts we find it impossible that men (having such unequal souls)
should ever be satisfied that they have equal parts in any division, and so
consequently desire to encroach till some where there falls out to be scarcity;
whereas in the life of man, in common right, there is no subjects; for such
passions, or if it were so, that precincts were able to preserve us from one
another, yet Ambition we see teaches us where we cannot enlarge the quantity of
our Territories, to seek still some way to improve the quality thereof, that by
that means when we cannot excel our neighbours in the extent of power, we may
make them stoop to us for ingenuity, the most dangerous and certain rule of
making slaves of one another; and this is not a little evident in the invention
of Tillage, a thing which as the state of the world now stands, is questionless
the greatest of its policies, though if we look back to the first estate of
Mankind, nothing perhaps is a greater mischief to it, for we find not bread to
be such an essential sustenance to the body of man, but that by experience it
can subsist without it; and moreover, we find not by Herodotus and Diodorus
Siculus, that in Egypt, from whence they suppose Mankind at first to have come,
but that it was of late in Custom; nor which is more, do we at this day find
that any of the most Southern Climates have a soil that will bear any of those
grains which we count our life in these Septentrion climates, subsists upon;
and therefore rather for the satisfying of the mind, then other necessity,
those that make voyages thither make some thing as like it as they can of any
thing that comes next. So that I often with my self consider it as the greatest
of our infelicities, when for this thing, and for many more that are of no
greater importance then it is, man hath brought toil and labour and
consequently slavery upon his posterity, and all for the want or fore-sight
what necessities the scarsity of the contents of our proprieties would cast us
upon; men when they grew too many for the spot of earth they were upon having
no other way but by forcing it with seed to feed themselves; and by the eternal
providence of revolution, to turn that food again into nutriment to keep the
womb of the earth still open and prolific to them, so that one in a homely
phrase made a good expression of Humane life, when he said, Our business was
only eating to shite, and shiting to eat. Now though we ought to receive those
curses, that it pleases God to lay upon us for our rebellions, with patience
and submission, yet sure it is a great mistake to call them Blessings, and by
that means exalt our selves from those very means that are given us for our
humiliation; for so is it with us when we admire our selves for our Arts and
Inventions, which at the best are but supports to our infirmities, despising
innocent life wherever we hear of it with the title of Barbarism; insomuch
that I have often thought with my self, that had we now a vision of the garden
of Eden, and Adam feared in it again with all his felicity, we should, for the
poor wretch his good, desire to teach him some of our good manners and good
husbandry: But to cure our selves of this pride of spirit, I know no better an
example then the History of the Reabites Jer. chap. 35. who were Sons, or as
some interpret, Followers of Jonadab and his Philosophy; these people, as is
there expressed, lived in Tents, and by their particular laws were both
forbidden the use of Wine and Tillage; and denied so much as to come into
society with the Jews, when the Prophet pressed them to it, and yet so great a
reward God Almighty thought fit to give to their obedience to their Fathers,
and the temperance of their lives, that he promises them in the end of the
Chapter, Jonadab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever. Neither is
this all the evil consequence that hath followed for the altering and
dejecting the mind and soul of man from its first estate, for if we take
Tillage in its larger sense, for what ever is an unnatural and forced use of
the earth, we may then involve almost all the nutriment to which now the body
of man is habituated, and not only its nutriment, but its luxuries. And having
changed the fruits of the earth, I cannot doubt but we have therein also
changed our own bodies, and consequently making a new digestion, we have now no
longer our first natural thoughts and speculations: I think it therefore no
wonder, that in stead of a natural way of arguing and concluding, men should
take the rule of their lives from Phanatique thoughts: I wonder not at all how
I have got the notion of a Spirit, a thing that is nothing that hath place, and
no dimentions, that is obvious to my sense, and yet is insensible; I wonder not
that my Faith is my greatest certainty, and that the price upon which my Soul
depends, is as the Apostle says, the evidence of things unseen; though all
this be against sense; for all this I will allow the habits of my new education
may have now made to be my nature and constitution; nor do I for this pay a
less reverence and respect to the truths of what I now am bound to believe,
that I come thus to think of them; for the truth it self of these things did
but begin with the change of Humane nature in Paradise; for the truth of our
immortality after death could not commence before we knew we should die, and
therefore not unaptly (in my opinion) have some of the best Philosophers
thought it demonstration enough for supernatural things, that we are able to
think of them, it is evidence enough that the soul is immortal, that the Soul
it self thinks so, its self; and the knowledge of it self were created
together. I know it will be urged here, Is every thing so, because I think it
so? my conception then can give reality to any thing, that hath no being. I
answer to that with another question, Do I believe what I think? I believe, if
I do, I doubt not of the truth of it, for I question not to be able to remove
mountains, when I have faith enough to believe I can; but the difference in
matter of Faith, as I suppose, lies, in that it is one thing to believe a
thing, and another only to believe that we believe it, and a third only to
say we believe it for private cause or interest best known to our selves; and
for the nature of Humane Faith, we have no one more pregnant example then of
the Father in the Gospel, who saw a miracle done by our Saviour upon his own
Son, and moreover received a promise that all other things that concerned his
good should as easily be effected as that, if his faith were perfect, and yet
he confessed in tears that he had belief and unbelief upon him at one time;
Lord I believe, help my unbelief. And the truth is, the state of Faith, even
amongst the most Holy, since the fall of man, hath been much after this manner,
and so until the finisher of our Faith shall come, it is likely to continue:
for we see St. John, even in the midst of his sufferings for Christ in prison,
sent yet two of his Disciples with this message, Art thou he that should come,
or do we look for another? so that it is hard to say whether men themselves
know what they believe. But now to return from this little digression, with an
explanation of my self in these arguments that went before, and sought to
prove, that from natural causes or changes of food and education, man may have
fallen from his first estate and happiness; I would not from hence be thought
to disappoint God of his eternal degree, by which he hath ordained through
several estates and trials to bring us to himself; but on the contrary, I do
conceive those ordinary means to have been the instruments of that decree; nor
do I doubt, but when his will and pleasure is, he may again by ordinary means,
restoring us to our first habits of life, and the Earth to her first Airs and
nutrition, bring the same Mankind back to innocence, and make the same garden
of Eden again Paradise; and an Apple from the same tree, cure the desease that
the first Apple brought into the world. The most learned Physicians of these
late times, are many of them of opinion that the venereal disease that came not
many hundred years since by contagion into the blood, and hath since been
propagated with our posterity, not being a thing inherent to the fabric and
constitution of man, shall in time wear out, and the humour being spent, vanish
at length quite away, with as much wonder as it came at the first; and since
the time that I have lived in the world, which is but a short measure of a slow
revolution, I have observed a sensible decay of it, both in regard that I have
heard many say, It is not so suddenly gotten as it was, and also in that when
it is taken, the Malignity of it is now grown so weak, that every remedy that
before used to fail, is now a certain cure. Now I know no reason nor
contradiction to Holy Writ, that if a disease, that is, a piece of dissolution,
shall have this natural course and termination, why sin and mortality it self
should not have the like: nor can I, when I see the wonderful and various
effects of nutrition in our bodies, but believe the same nutrition as powerful
in our souls; when I put a piece of bread in my mouth, how many several
commissions hath divine providence given unto it? there is not a part in my
little world, but it hath a message to deliver to it, it not only takes care
to support my vitals and limbs, but even my excresences, my hair and nailes;
and sometimes again the same morsel (like the Prophet Jonah, against its will)
is sent to destroy the City: Now, if such be the force of digestion upon the
body, how shall I think it less upon the mind of man? and though the world have
been subject to believe the stars to be the ministers of the divine spirit, in
governing of the world, yet I confess I cannot look over my head but under my
feet for those dispensations; whatever comes not immediately from the throne of
God to me, I expect to receive from his foot-stool the earth: And hence
methinks, by the way, we may find that it hath not been altogether without
ground or reason, that some have thought that after the temporal kingdom which
our Saviour shall hereafter have in this world, mans immortality shall again
begin in the same world where it first failed; St. Paul says, we shall all be
changed, and changed in a moment; or rather indeed, as it is more conformable
to the original, we shall be all reconciled; and these words do not only go
down to our graves with comfort, but likewise to those who at that day shall be
found upon the earth, for these corruptible bodies of ours are certainly as
easily reconciled to the divine will whilst they are in this world, as raised
again to glory hereafter. And here I think it's time to return again to that
which gave the occasion of this discourse, where Man in his own first nature
and his fall from it, is represented in Esculapius his restoring Plutus to his
eyes, where we with great ingenuity find expressed by Aristophanus the sudden
reconciliation of the world, insomuch that the just man changes those rags he
hath so long worn with the Sycophant, for that rich attire his flattery and
lies had got him; and likewise, that after that day there was no possibility of
any longer counterfeiting the passions of the Soul, to give sorrow and pain to
our lives, and bring deceit and a false self-opinion upon others: For we see
the Old Woman in the same minute was put out of countenance, that she should at
her years expect a lover; and likewise concerning Arts, both Speculative and
Mechanic, that Want was the Inventer of them, nothing arising from the mind of
man from any principles of truth, but to make himself acceptable to those to
whom he is now become slave to so high a degree, that like dogs we are fain to
take our bread from the hands of others, and that perhaps such only as they
cannot eat themselves, either through their abundance or curiosity; and, this
men are fain to deserve, either as they can find out something for their
Masters to govern and grow powerful by, or something to entertain and pass idle
hours, when their tyranny and ambition cannot; men have not only Hands of
several Professions, but even their Souls are also of several Trades; some are
Compilers of that they call Law, some Compounders of Medicines, or rather
poison; and, which is worst of all, some are Divinity-makers, and turn oft the
sacred Scripture into all fashions, the which certainly, though it be one of
the best Callings in the world, is yet one of the worst Trades; and accordingly
we find in this Comedy, when Plutus had his eyes again, how soon it was
starved: and the sport of all is, that all this which the Great ones first
invented to govern by, is now by long succession wrought into such a subtilty,
that it is grown to govern them that thought to govern by it; and sometimes
too, not only by necessity, but through real opinion of the thing it self: so
natural is it for men, first to make lies, and afterwards come to believe them
themselves; the which Mountain excellently compares to Boys, that dress up one
of their companions, and black his face, to represent the Devil, to make
themselves sport; and when they have done, run away for fear of him, and forget
that it was the Idol of their own hands: Now notwithstanding that it appears
that men are so wholly cast down from their first natural estate, that our best
friends (our Senses) are no longer to be trusted, a worse condition than which
for a living creature is, sure, not to be imagined: It is wonderful to see for
all that, how that part of the world whose natures are under the bondage of
education, do despise the rest who stand free, with the title of Barbarous;
some out of an intention of charity, and others with scorn and vanity praying
for them as a lost people, wishing to have them brought home to their own
condition; not unlike to a friend of mine who I went to see in the Fleet once,
with intention either to devise a remedy with him, to bring him out, or at
least to comfort him against the misfortunes that had brought him thither; but,
contrary to both those intentions, he began with me, and the many conveniences
and safeties of that life, and by what arts and difficulties I was to get
thither for my everlasting preferment; And certainly, not unlike to this
confidence is that of those who would have us change the principles of Nature
for those of Education, to change our bodies when they are hardened against
wind and weather by the natural armour of our own skins, and reduce them to
such a tenderness, that the robbing of other creatures of all their clothes is
at length scarce sufficient to defend us from the cold; to bring our sensual
pleasures and appetites to such a niceness of food and diet, till it be harder
to supply their luxury for that short time of life we now enjoy, then it was in
the first age to sustain that nature which for its continuance got the name at
least of Immortality. Neither indeed, since the coming in of Propriety, the
first thing that brought want, and consequently traffic, and then war into the
world, do I find that the courages of men have been more tried to supply
necessities than they are in the ventures they have made for their luxuries:
What shall I think of him that first set upon an Oyster, and put the living
fish into his belly, scarce killing it so much as with his teeth? or, that will
eat Frogs, and trust to his judgment in knowing them from their nearest kindred
Toads, or Mushroomes whilst they are called Toad-stools; and for such
inventions as these is it for the most part that men account themselves more
civilized then others; and what is this but to set up our depraved natures to
judge and condemn that truth and simplicity we were first created in? And in
like manner, if that part of men who excel in Arts and Manufacture, shall from
thence extol themselves, and (which is now a common thing) seek conquest over
those who live happy without such inventions, because they feel no such wants,
the very argument they seek to prove their excellence by, discovers their
misery, by so much as it is a happier state of mind not to want, than to have
minds still working how to supply our wants; and therefore here with wonderful
ingenuity Aristophanus, when Plutus is restored to his eyes, finds no office
for Mercury, that before was instrumental to so many actions of Humane life: It
was proverbial in Greece of old, (...), Humane Arts brought in Humane Sorrrow.
And last of all, the strongest argument that men fetch to make conquests over
other nations, is from the necessity of communicating their speculative
Philosophy delivered by their teachers, bringing their Authority from men for
the most part both against nature and experiment, until Humane ratiocination
became nothing but agreement; not much unlike the Art of a Fencing-School,
where the Master teaches both the offensive and defensive part, so that the
Scholars are able to make a good show of learning amongst themselves, their
weapons, and their guards and motions being agreed upon; but if a Country
fellow happen to come in with a Flail, the vanity of that Art is soon
discovered, and he drives the whole School before him; and such (in my opinion)
is the end of the Schools of the Professors of Learning, when men examine their
confidence, as it were step by step, by the grounds of nature, and true
experiments, and not by their own terms and principles, except it be in such
matters as are delivered by a higher Authority than Reason, the which admits of
no discourse, but what is both to the prejudice of the things themselves, and
the destruction of Humane reason, by letting it take a habit in doubtful
principles and false conclusions: the which once got, like an ill disease that
follows us through all Aires and Climates, so doth it go along with us in the
resolution of all the most important questions of our lives to our absolute
destruction: How ungodly a thing then is it for one nation or one man to press
such questions upon another as have no answer, and to impose what we our selves
have received by faith upon the reasons of such as yet by the divine assistance
are not brought further then the degree of natural men? And of this, what cruel
examples have those that are followers of the two eminent Prophets for truth
and falsehood, Christ and Mahumet, brought into the world; so unchristian-like
have been the means of late for the bringing in of Christ, that it is more then
to be feared that those that have brought salvation to others, by it have
brought perdition to themselves; so that, in the conquest over the Moors and
Indians, it is a question whether the Heathens that are saved, or the
Christians that are damned, are most in number; for what can man deserve worse
from God Almighty than in seeking for self-interest to bring in his Prophet, by
means both contrary to the Doctrine of that Prophet, and the example of the
Prophet himself: Ought we to raise war in the behalf of him who to save his own
life might have had legions of Angels to have fought for him, if he would have
prayed to his Father for them? the which, that he might not destroy the
temporal peace of a nation, he refused to do. How slow therefore ought men to
be, till they have certain revelation that they are the instruments chosen for
that purpose, in pressing the conversion of others to the doctrine of their own
Prophet! how fully convinced soever they themselves are that there is no
felicity in the life to come, but what is built and founded upon that Faith;
since, though it be fit for every true believer to have that assurance in
himself, yet is it ill done of them to make desperate conclusions of such whom
God himself sees it not yet time perhaps to require more than an universal
worship from. For, such we see his mercy hath been to the ages past, that we
find in Hebrews 11. where there is a large account of all the degrees and
measures of Faith in the world, both before the Flood and a long time after,
there was a kind of faith rewarded then in such who had not received the
promises; and these were Saints of no less magnitude then Abel and Enoch: the
chief substance of whose Faith, as it is expressed in that Chapter, was, that
the world was framed by the word of God, and that things which are seen were
not made of things which do appear: Now with this Faith the Ancients, whom we
commonly call Philosophers, (and I hope were Divines, and are now Saints,) did
almost in the very words all of them concur; Antiphanus, a Disciple of
Socrates, (...), God is like to no substance, and therefore no man can express
him by any similitude or effigies. Xenophon, (...): He that with such wonder
and, terror moves the world, is notwithstanding himself, how mighty soever,
comprised within no form or substance. Dion. Cassius, (...), not within the
compass of words or eyes. Menander, (...), The knowledge of mortal man lies in
mortal, not immortal things. Act. 17.13. The inscription upon the Altar at
Athens was (...), To the unknown God; the which the Apostle thought so good a
beginning towards the true Faith, that he did not deny even those to be
worshippers of the divine Essence, offering him (whom unknown they worshipped,)
to declare to them: And many more examples of this kind might be brought, if
there were not one most pregnant example both to show the secret mercy of
Almighty God to such who heard not of the Prophets coming into the world; and
likewise to show how great a measure of Faith was possible to be in that Age;
and this is in the example of Job, who is confessed to have lived long before
there was a Jew in the world, whose faith was so great, that he not only knew
the Spirit by the which the world was made and preserved, but he likewise knew
the Spirit who intended the subversion again of it, and of that picture the
Soul, who the Almighty himself had drawn after his own original, and this so
perfectly, that he is chosen as the first example given to Mankind, how to bear
temporal losses for the glories to come. Now if there be any (as very well they
may) who think it possible that the fore-going Patriarchs had a light of the
Prophets to come, notwithstanding we cannot see they had so, let that
possibility serve for the using of those now mercifully, who live yet in the
world without them; and much more let those who are under the Faith of the same
Prophets not be so exact (as in our late days they have been) to prosecute all
the points of their faith with such confidence that every circumstace is now
thought a good ground to invade a neighbour nation, till they are reduced to
that extremity that they have no choice left but either to deliver up their
lives or their consciences; so that such a scandal is brought upon religion,
that it is thought only now to be maintained in the world for self-interest,
especially having such daily example how the Clergy (either to please the
people or the prince, and for preferment) preach up almost any thing, till the
men of sober judgment have great cause to complain that our days are like
those in the days of Moses and Aaron, and the great Idol of the world is still
the Golden Calfe. And here our Author Aristophanus, with his accustomed
excellency of fancy, concludes, that when the Priest's made is so well locked
into that they can no longer get their bread by it, he advises them to use the
same ^ and ^, and assist in the ^ ^ in stead of the Temple of Jove, and the ^
will be as good as they were before.


