LOng, and at vast Expense the industrious Stage
Has strove to please a dull ungrateful Age:
With Hero's and with Gods we first began,
And thundered to you in Heroic Strain.
Some dying Love-sick Queen each Night you enjoyed,
And with Magnificence, at last were cloyed:
Our Drums and Trumpets frighted all the Women;
Our fighting scared the Beaux and Billet Deux Men.
So Spark in an Intrigue of Quality,
Grows weary of his splendid Drudgery;
Hates the Fatigue, and cries a Pox upon her,
What a damned bustle's here with Love and Honour.
In humbler Comedy, we next appear,
No Fop or Cuckold, but slap-dash we had him here;
We showed you all, but you malicious grown,
Friends Vices to expose, and hide your own;
Cry, Dam it -- This is such, or such a one.
Yet ^etled, Plague, What does the Scribler mean?
With his damned Characters, and Plot obscene.
No Woman without Vizard in the Nation,
Can see it twice, and keep her Reputation -- that's certain
Forgetting --
That he himself, in every gross Lampoon,
Her lewder Secrets spread about the Town;
Whilst their feigned Niceness is but cautious Fear,
Their own Intrigues should be unravelled here.
Our next Recourse was dwindling down to Farce,
Then -- Zounds, what Stuff's here? 'tis all over my --
Well, Gentlemen, since none of these has sped,
'Gad, we have bought a share in the speaking Head.
So there you'll save a Sic,
You love Good Husbandry in all but Vice;
Whoring and Drinking, only bears a Price.

Oh! -- Oh! -- Oh!
Oh! -- Oh! -- Oh!

Speak louder Jevern, if you'd have me repeat;
Plague of this Rogue, he will betray the Cheat.
-- Hum -- There 'tis again,
Pox of your Echo with a Northern Strain.
Well, -- -- This will be but a nine days wonder too;
There's nothing lasting but the Puppets Show.
What Ladies heart so hard, but it would move,
To hear Philander and Irene's Love.
Those Sisters too, the scandalous Wits do say.
Two nameless, keeping Beaux, have made so gay;
But those Amours are perfect Sympathy,
Their Gallants being as mere Machines as they.
Oh! how the City Wife, with her nown Ninny,
Is charmed with, Come into my Coach -- Mis Jinny, Mis Jinny.
But overturning -- Fri^le cries -- Adznigs,
The jogling Rogue has murdered all his Kids.
The Men of War cry Pox on it, this is dull,
We are for rough Sports, -- Dog Hector, and the Bull.
Thus each in his degree, Diversion finds,
Your Sports are suited to your mighty Minds;
Whilst so much Judgment in your Choice you show,
The Puppets have more Sense than some of you.


A Curse upon that faithless Maid,
Who first her Sexes, Liberty betrayed;
Born free as Man to Love and Range,
Till Nobler Nature did to Custom change.
Custom, that dull excuse for Fools,
Who think all Virtue to consist in Rules.
From Love our Fetters never sprung,
That smiling God, all wanton Gay and Tongue,
Shows by his Wings he cannot be
Confined to a restless Slavery;
But here and there at random roves,
Not fixed to glittering Courts or shady Groves.
Than she that Constancy Professed,
Was but a well dissembler at the best;
And that imaginary sway
She feigned to give, in seeming to obey,
Was but the height of Prudent Art,
To deal with greater Liberty her Heart.

This does not divert me:
Nor nothing will, till Scaramouch return,
And bring me News of Cinthio.

Truly I was so sleepy last Night, I know nothing of the adventure, for which
you are kept so close a Prisoner to Day, and more strictly guarded than usual.


Cinthio came with Music last Night under my Window, which my Father hearing
sallied out with his Mermidons upon him; and clashing of Swords I heard, but
what hurt was done, or whether Cinthio were discovered to him, I know not; but
the Billet I sent him now by Scaramouch, will occasion me soon intelligence.


And see Madam where you trusty Roger comes.
-- You may advance, and fear none but your Friends.

Away and keep the door.

Oh dear Scaramouch! hast thou been at the Vice-Roys!

Yes, yes. --

And hast thou delivered my Letter, to his Nephew,
Don Cinthio?

Yes, Yes, what should I deliver else?

Well -- and how does he?

Lord, how should he do? Why, what a Laborious thing it is to be a Pimp?


Why, well he should do.

So he is, as well as a Night adventuring Lover can be, -- -- he has got but
one wound, Madam.


How! wounded say you? Oh Heavens! 'Tis not Mortal?


Why, I have no great skill, -- but they say it may be Dangerous.


I Dye with fear, where is he wounded?

Why, Madam, he is run -- quit thorough the -- heart, -- but the Man may Live,
if I please.


Thou please! Torment me not with Ridles.

Why, Madam, there is a certain cordial Balsam, called a fair Lady, which
outwardly applied to his Bosom, will prove a better cure than all your Weapon
or Sympathetic Powder, meaning your Ladyship.


Is Cinthio then not wounded?

No otherwise than by your fair Eyes, Madam; he got away unseen and unknown.


Dost know how precious time is, and dost thou Fool it away thus? what said he
to my Letter?


What should he say?

Why a hundred dear soft things of Love, kiss it as often, and bless me for my
goodness.


Why so he did.

Ask thee a thousand question of my health after my last nights fright.


So he did.

Expressing all the kind concern Love could inspire, for the punishment my
Father has inflicted on me, for entertaining him at my Window last Night.


All this he did.

And for my being confined a Prisoner to my Apartment, without the hope or
almost possibility of seeing him any more.


There I think you are a little mistaken, for besides the Plot that I have laid
to bring you together all this Night, -- there are such Stratagems abrewing,
not only to bring you together, but with your Fathers consent too; Such a Plot,
Madam.


Ay that would be worthy of thy Brain; prithee what --


Such a device.

I'm impatient.

Such a Canundrum, -- well if there be wise Men and Conjurers in the World,
they are intriguing Lovers.


Out with it.

You must know, Madam, your Father, (my Master, the Doctor,) is a little
Whimsical, Romantic, or Don Quick-sottish, or so. --


Or rather Mad.

That were uncivil to be supposed by me; but Lunatic we may call him without
breaking the Decorum of good Manners; for he is always travelling to the Moon.


And so Religiously believes there is a World there, that he discourses as
gravely of the People, their Government, Institutions, Laws, Manners, Religion
and Constitution, as if he had been bred a Machiavel there.


How came he thus infected first?

With reading foolish Books, Lucian's Dialogue of the Lofty Traveller, who flew
up to the Moon, and thence to Heaven; an Heroic business called, The Man in
the Moon, if you'll believe a Spaniard, who was carried thither, upon an Engine
drawn by wild Geese; with another Philosophical Piece, A Discourse of the World
in the Moon; with a thousand other ridiculous Volumes too hard to name.


Ay, this reading of Books is a pernicious thing. I was like to have run Mad
once, reading Sir John Mandivel; -- but to the business, -- I went, as you
know, to Don Cinthio's Lodgings, where I found him with his dear Friend
Charmante, laying their heads together for a Farce.


A Farce. --


Ay a Farce, which shall be called, -- the World in the Moon. Wherein your
Father shall be so imposed on, as shall bring matters most magnificently about.
--


I cannot conceive thee, but the design must be good since Cinthio and
Charmante own it.


In order to this, Charmante is dressing himself like one of the Caballists of
the Rosacrusian Order, and is coming to prepare my credulous Master for the
greater imposition. I have his trinkets here to play upon him, which shall be
ready.


But the Farce, where is It to be Acted?

Here, here, in this very House; I am to order the Decoration, adorn a Stage,
and place Scenes proper.


How can this be done without my Father's knowledge?


You know the old Apartment next the great Orchard, and the Worm-eaten Gallery,
that opens to the River; which place for several years no Body has frequented,
there all things shall be Acted proper for our purpose.


Run, Run Scaramouch, my Masters Conjuring for you like Mad below, he calls up
all his little Devils with horrid Names, his Microscope, his Horoscope, his
Telescope, and all his Scopes.


Here, here, -- I had almost forgot the Letters; here's one for you, and one
for Mrs. Bellemante.


Here, take my Prayer Book, Oh Matres cheer.

Thy Eyes are always laughing, Bellemante.

And so would yours had they been so well employed as mine, this Morning. I
have been at the Chapel; and seen so many Beaus, such a Number of Plumeys, I
could not tell which I should look on most, sometimes my heart was charmed with
the gay Blonding, then with the Melancholy Noire, annon the amiable brunet,
sometimes the bashful, then again the bold; the little now, anon the lovely
tall! In fine, my Dear, I was embarrassed on all sides, I did nothing but ideal
my heart tout au toore.


Oh there was then no danger, Cousin.

No but abundance of Pleasure.

Why, this is better than sighing for Charmante.

That's when he's present only, and makes his Court to me; I can sigh to a
Lover, but will never sigh after him, -- but Oh the Beaus, the Beaus, Cousin,
that I saw at Church.


Oh you had great Devotion to Heaven then!

And so I had; for I did nothing but admire its handy work, but I could not
have prayed heartily if I had been dying; but a deuce on it, who should come in
and spoil all but my Lover Charmante, so dressed, so Gallant, that he drew
together all the scattered fragments of my heart, confined my wandering
thoughts, and fixed 'em all on him; Oh how he looked, how he was dressed!

Chivalier, a Chevave Blond,
Plus de Mouche, Plus de Powdre
Pleus de Ribons et Cannous.
-- Oh what a dear ravishing thing is the beginning of an Amour?


You're still in Tune, when wilt thou be tame, Bellemante?


When I am weary of loving, Elaria.

To keep up your Humour, here's a Letter from your Charmante.

MAlicious Creature, when wilt thou cease to torment me, and either appear less
charming or more kind. I languish when from you, and am wounded when I see you,
and yet I am eternally Courting my Pain. Cinthio and I are contriving how we
shall see you to Night. Let us not toil in vain; we ask but your consent; the
pleasure will be all ours; 'tis therefore fit we suffer all the fatigue. Grant
this, and Love me, if you will save the Life of

Your Charmante.

-- Live then Charmante! Live, as long as Love can last!


Well, Cousin, Scaramouch tells me of a rare design's a hatching, to relieve us
from this Captivity; here are we mewed up to be espoused to two Moon-calfs for
ought I know; for the Devil of any Human thing is suffered to come near us,
without our Governante and Keeper, Mr. Scaramouch.


Who, if he had no more Honesty, and Conscience, than my Uncle, would let us
pine for want of Lovers; but thanks be praised the Generosity of our Cavaliers
has opened their obdurate Hearts with a Golden key, that let's 'em in at all
opportunities. Come, come, let's in, and answer their Billet Deux.



SET down the Telescope. -- Let me see, what Hour is it?


About six a Clock, Sir.

Then 'tis about the Hour, that the great Monarch of the upper World enters
into his Closet; Mount, mount the Telescope.


What to do, Sir?

I understand, at certain moments Critical, one may be snatched of such a
mighty consequence to let the sight into the secret Closet.


How, Sir, Peep into the Kings Closet; under favour, Sir, that will be
something uncivil.


Uncivil, it were slat Trenson if it should be known, but thus unseen, and as
wise Politicians should, I take Survey of all: This is the States-man's
peeping-hole, thorough which he Steals the secrets of his King, and seems to wink
at distance.


The very key-hole, Sir, thorough which with half an Eye, he sees him even at his
Devotion, Sir.


Take care none enter --

Oh, Sir, Sir, here's some strange great Man come to wait on you.


Great Man! from whence?

Nay, from the Moon World, for ought I know, for he looks not like the People
of the lower Orb.


Ha! and that may be: wait on him in.

Doctor Baliardo, most learned Sir, all Hail; Hail from the great Caballa -- of
Eutopia.


Most Reverend Bard, thrice welcome.

The Fame of your great Learning, Sir, and Virtue, is known with Joy to the
renowned Society.


Fame, Sir, has done me too much Honour, to bear my Name to the renowned
Caballa.


You must not attribute it all to Fame, Sir, they are too learned and wise to
take up things from Fame, Sir; our intleligence is by ways more secret and
sublime, the Stars, and little Daemons of the Air inform us all things, past,
present, and to come.


I must confess the Count of Gabalist, renders it plain, from Writ Divine and
Humane, there are such friendly and intleligent Daemons.


I hope you do not doubt that Doctrine, Sir, which holds that the Four Elements
are Peopl'd with Persons of a Form and Species more Divine than Vulgar Mortals
-- those of the fiery Regions we call the Salamanders, they beget Kings and
Heroes, with Spirits like their Deietical Sires the lovely Inhabitants of the
Water, we call Nymphs. Those of the Earth are Gnomes or Fairies. Those of the
Air are Silfs. These, Sir, when in Conjunction with Mortals, beget Immortal
Races. Such as the first born man, which had continued so, had the first Man
never doted on a Woman.


I am of that opinion, Sir, Man was not made for Woman.


Most certain, Sir, Man was to have been Immortalliz'd by the Love and
Conversation of these Charming Silfs and Nymphs, and Woman by the Gnomes and
Salamanders, and to have stocked the World with Demi Gods, such as at this Day
inhabit the Empire of the Moon.


Most admirable Philosophy and Reason. -- But do these Silfs and Nymphs appear
in shapes?


Of the most Beautiful of all the Sons and Daughters of the Universe: Fancy,
Imagination is not half so Charming: And then so soft, so kind! but none but
the Caballa and their Families are blessed with their Divine Addresses. Were you
but once admitted to that Society. --


Ay, Sir, what Virtues or what Merits can accomplish me for that' great Honour?


An absolute abstinence from carnal thought, devout and pure of Spirit; free
from Sin.


I dare not boast my Virtues, Sir; Is there no way to try my Purity?


Are you very secret.

'Tis my first Principle, Sir --

And one, the most material in our Rosocrusian order.

Please you to make a Trial.

As how, Sir, I beseech you? --

If you be throwly purged from Vice, the opticles of your sight will be so
illuminated, that glancing through this Telescope, you may behold one of these
lovely Creatures, that people the vast Region of the Air.


Sir, you oblige profoundly.

Kneel then, and try your strength of Virtue, Sir.
-- Keep your Eye fixed and open.
-- Can you discern, Sir?

Methinks I see a kind of Glorious Cloud drawn up -- and now -- 'tis gone
again.


Saw you no fuger?

None.

Then make a short Prayer to Alikin, the Spirit of the East; shake off all
Earthly thoughts, and look again.


-- Astonished, Ravished with delight, I see a Beauty young and Angel like,
leaning upon a Cloud --


Seems she on a Bed, then she's reposing, and you must not gaze --


Now a Cloud Veils her from me.

She saw you peeping then, and drew the Curtain of the Air between.


I am all Rapture, Sir, at this rare Vision -- is't possible, Sir, that I may
ever hope the Conversation of so Divine a Beauty?


Most possible, Sir; they will Court you, their whole delight is to
Immortallize -- Alexander was begot by a Salamander, that visited his Mother in
the form of a Serpent, because he would not make King Philip Jealous, and that
famous Philosopher Merlin, was begotten on a Vestal Nun, a certain Kings
Daughter, by a most beautiful young Salamander; as indeed all the Heroes, and
men of mighty minds are.


Most excellent!

The Nymph Egeria enamoured on Nama Pompilius, came to him invisible to all
Eyes else, and gave him all his Wisdom and Philosophy. Zoriastes, Trismegistus,
Apuleius, Aquinius, Albertus Magnus, Socrates and Virgil had their Zilphid,
which foolish people called their Daemon or Devil. But you are wise, Sir. --


But do you imagine Sir, they will fall in Love with an old Mortal?


They love not like the Vulgar, 'tis the Immortal Part they dote upon.


But Sir, I have a Niece and Daughter which I love equally, were it not
possible they might be Immortalliz'd?


No doubt on it Sir, if they be Pure and Chaste.

I think they are, and I'll take care to keep 'em so; for I confess Sir, I
would fain have a Hero to my Grandson.


You never saw the Emperor of the Moon, Sir, the mighty Iredonozar?


Never Sir; his Court I have, but 'twas confusedly too.

Refine your Thoughts Sir, by a moments Pray, and try again.


It is too much, too much for mortal Eyes! I see a Monarch seated on a Throne
-- But seems most sad and pensive.


Forbear then Sir, for now his Love-Fit's on, and then he would be private.


His Love-Fit, Sir!

Ay Sir, the Emperor's in Love with some fair Mortal.

And can he not command her?

Yes, but her Quality being too mean, he struggles, though a King 'twixt Love and
Honour.


It were too much to know the Mortal, Sir?

'Tis yet unknown, Sir, to the Caballists, who now are using all their Arts to
find her, and serve his Majesty; but now my great Affair deprives me of you: To
morrow Sir, I'll wait on you again; and now I've tried your Virtue, tell you
Wonders.


I humbly kiss your Hands, most Learned Sir.

So, so, Don Charmante has plaid his Part most exquisitely; I'll in and see how
it works in his Pericranium. -- Did you call Sir?


Scaramouch, I have, for thy singular Wit and Honesty, always had a Tenderness
for thee above that of a Master to a Servant.


I must confess it, Sir.

Thou hast Virtue and Merit that deserves much.

Oh Lord, Sir!

And I may make thee great, -- all I require, is, that thou wilt double thy
diligent Care of my Daughter and my Niece, for there are mighty things designed
for them, if we can keep 'em from the sight of Man.


The sight of Man, Sir!

Ay, and the very Thoughts of Man.

What Antidote is there to be given to a young Wench, against the Disease of
Love and Longing?


Do you your Part, and because I know thee Discreet and very Secret, I will
hereafter discover Wonders to thee. -- On pain of Life, look to the Girls;
that's your Charge.


Doubt me not, Sir, and I hope your Reverence will reward my faithful Service
with Mopsophil, your Daughters Governante, who is Rich, and has long had my
Affection, Sir.


Set not thy Heart on Transitories mortal, there's better things in store --
besides, I have promised her to a Farmer for his Son. -- Come in with me, and
bring the Telescope.


My Mistress Mopsophil to marry a Farmers Son!

What, am I then forsaken, abandoned by the false fain One?

-- If I have Honour, I must die with Rage;

Reproaching gently, and complaining madly.

-- It is resolved, I'll hang my self -- No, -- When did I ever hear of a Hero
that hanged himself? no -- 'tis the Death of Rogues. What If I drown my self?
--

No, -- Useless Dogs and Puppies are drowned; a Pistol or a Caper on my own
Sword would look more nobly, but that I have a natural Aversion to Pain.
Besides, it is as Vulgar as Rats-bane, or the sliceing of the Weasand. No, I'll
die a Death uncommon, and leave behind me an eternal Fame. I have somewhere
read an Author, either Ancient or Modern, of a Man that laughed to death. -- I
am very Ticklish, and am resolved -- to dye that Death. -- Oh Mopsophil, my
cruel Mopsophil!

-- And now, farewell the World, fond Love, and mortal Cares.


Harlequin was left in the Garden, I'll tell him the News of Mopsophil.

Ha, whats here? Harlequin Dead! --


Who is't that thus would rob me of my Honour?

Honour, why I thought you would been dead.

Why so I was, and the most agreeably dead. --

I came to bemoan with thee, the mutual loss of our Mistress.


I know it Sir, I know it, and that you're as false as she: Was't not a
Covenant between us, that neither should take advantage of the other, but both
should have fair Play, and yet you basely went to undermine me, and ask her of
the Doctor; but since she's gone, I scorn to quarrel for her -- But let's like
loving Brothers, hand in hand, leap from some Precipice into the Sea.


What, and spoil all my Cloths? I thank you for that; no, I have a newer way:
you know I lodge four pair of Stairs high, let's ascend thither, and after
saying our Prayers --


-- Prayers! I never heard of a dying Hero that ever prayed.


Well, I'll not stand with you for a Trifle -- Being come up, I'll open the
Casement, take you by the Heels, and fling you out into the Street, -- after
which, you have no more to do, but to come up and throw me down in my turn.


The Atchievment's great and new; but now I think on it, I'm resolved to hear my
Sentence from the Mouth of the perfidious Trollop, for yet I cannot credit it.

I'll to the Gypsy, though I venture banging,

To be undeceived, 'tis hardly worth the hanging.



SO, I have got rid of my Rival, and shall here got an Opportunity to speak
with Mopsophil, for hither she must come anon, to lay the young Ladies
Night-things in order; I'll hide my self in some Corner till she come.


So, I made my Rival believe I was gone, and hid my self, till I got this
Opportunity to steal to Mopsophil's Apartment, which must be hereabouts, for
from these Windows she used to entertain my Love.


Ha, I hear a soft Tread, -- if it were Mopsophil's, she would not come by
Dark.


What was that? -- a Table, -- There I may obscure my self. --

-- What a Devil, is it vanished?


Devil, -- Vanished, -- What can this mean? 'Tis a Mans Voice. -- If it should
be my Master the Doctor, now I were a dead Man; -- he can't see me, -- and I'll
put my self into such a Posture, that if he feel me, he shall as soon take me
for a Church Spout as a Man.


Ha, what's this? all Mouth, with twenty Rows of Teeth. -- Now dare not I cry
out, least the Doctor should come, find me here, and kill me. -- I'll try if it
be mortal. --


Who the Devil can this be? I felt a Poniard, and am glad I saved my Skin from
pinking.


I am in a Belle Humour for Poetry to Night, -- I'll make some Boremes on Love.

Out of a great Curiosity, -- A Shepherd did demand of me. -- No, no, -- A
Shepherd this implored of me. --

Ay, ay, so it shall go. -- Tell me, said he, -- Can you Resign? -- Resign, ay,
-- what shall Rhyme to Resign? -- Tell me, said he, --

Ay, Ay, -- So it shall be, -- Tell me, said he, my Bellemante; -- Will you be
kind to your Charmante?

-- Ha, -- Heavens! What's this? I am amazed!

-- And yet I'll venture once more. --

I blushed, and veiled my wishing Eyes.

-- Wishing Eyes --

And answered only with my Sighs.


-- Ha, -- What is this? Witchcraft or some
Divinity of Love? some Cupid sure invisible. --
Once more I'll try the Charm. --
Could I a better way my Love impart?
-- Impart --
And without speaking, tell him all my Heart.

-- 'Tis here again, but where's the Hand that writ it?
-- The little Deity that will be seen
But only in his Miracles. It cannot be a Devil,
For here's no Sin nor Mischief in all this.

Out of a great Curiosity,
A Shepherd this implored of me.
Tell me, said he, my Bellemante.
Will you be kind to your Charmante?
I blushed, and veiled my wishing Eyes,
And answered only with my Sighs.
Could I a better way my Love impart?
And without speaking, tell him all my Heart.

Whose is this different Character?

'Tis yours for ought I know.

Away, my Name was put here for a blind.
What Rhyming Fop have you been clubbing Wit withal?

Ah, mon Dieu! -- Charmante Jealous!

Have I not cause? -- Who writ these Boremes?

Some kind assisting Deity, for ought I know.

Some kind assisting Coxcomb, that I know,
The Ink's yet wet, the Spark is near I find. --

Ah, Maluruse! How was I mistaken in this Man?

Mistaken! What, did you take me for, an easy Fool to be imposed upon? -- One
that would be cuckolded by every feathered Fool; that you should call a -- Beau
un Gallant Huome. 'sdeath! Who would dote upon a fond She-Fop? -- A vain
conceited Amorous Cocquett.


Oh Madam! hide your Lover, or we are all undone.

I will not hide, till I know the thing that made the Verses.


Bellemante, Niece, -- Bellemante.

She's coming Sir. -- Where, where shall I hide him? -- Oh, the Closet's open!


Oh Niece! Ill Luck, Ill Luck, I must leave you to night; my Brother the
Advocate is sick, and has sent for me; 'tis three long Leagues, and dark as
'tis, I must go. -- They say he's dying.

-- Come Scaramouch, and get me ready for my Journey, and on your Life, let not
a Door be opened till my Return.


Ha! Mopsophil, and alone!

Well, 'tis a delicious thing to be Rich; what a World of Lovers it invites: I
have one for every Hand, and the Favourite for my Lips.


Ay, him would I be glad to know.

But of all my Lovers, I am for the Farmers Son, because he keeps a Calash --
and I'll swear a Coach is the most agreeable thing about a man.


Ho, ho!

Ah me, -- What's that?

The Ghost of a poor Lover, dwindled into a Heyho.

Ha, my Rival and my Mistress! --
Is this done like a Man of Honour, Monsieur Harlequin,
To take Advantages to injure me?

All Advantages are lawful in Love and War.

'Twas contrary to our League and Covenant; therefore I defy thee as a Traitor.


I scorn to fight with thee, because I once called thee Brother.


Then you're a Paltroon, that's to say, a Coward.


Coward, nay, then I am provoked, come on --

Pardon me, Sir, I gave the Coward, and you ought to strike.

-- If you be for dancing, Sir, I have my Weapons for all occasions.


He my Bone Am -- Is not this better than Duelling?

But not altogether so Heroic, (...). Well, for the future, let us have fair
Play; no Tricks to undermine each other, but which of us is chosen to be the
happy Man, the other shall be content.


Cousin Bellemante, Cousin.

'Slife, let's be gone, lest we be seen in the Ladies Apartment.


How now, how came you here? --

I came to tell you, Madam, my Master's just taking Mule to go his Journey to
Night, and that Don Cinthio is in the Street, for a lucky moment to enter in.


But what if any one by my Fathers Order, or he himself, should by some chance
surprise us?


If we be, I have taken order against a Discovery. I'll go see if the old
Gentleman be gone, and return with your Lover.


I tremble, but know not whether 'tis with Fear or Joy.


My dear Elaria --
-- Ha, -- shun my Arms, Elaria!

Heavens! Why did you come so soon?

Is it too soon, when ere 'tis safe, Elaria?

I die with fear -- Met you not Scaramouch?
He went to bid you wait a while; What shall I do?

Why this Concern? none of the House has seen me. I saw your Father taking
Horse.


Sure you mistake, methinks I hear his Voice.

-- My Key -- The Key of my Laboratory. --
Why, Knave Scaramouch, where are you? --

Do you hear that, Sir? -- Oh, I'm undone! --
Where shall I hide you? -- He approaches --
-- Ha, -- my Cousins Closet's open, -- step in a little. --

Here I must have dropped it; a Light, a Light -- there --


Oh this perfidious Woman! no marvel she was so surprised and angry at my
Approach to Night. --


Who can this be? -- but I'll be prepared --

Why Scaramouch, Knave, a Light!
-- Ha, -- a Man, -- and in my House, --
Oh dire Misfortune! -- Who are you, Sir?

Men call me Gog Magog, the Spirit of Power;
My Right-hand Riches holds, my Left-hand Honour.
Is there a City Wife would be a Lady? -- Bring her to me,
Her easy Cuckold shall be dubbed a Knight.

Oh Heavens! a mad Man, Sir.

Is there a Tawdry Fop would have a Title?
A rich Mechanic that would be an Alderman?
Bring 'em to me,
And I'll convert that Coxcomb, and that Block-head, into, Your Honour, and
Right Worshipful.

Mad, stark mad! Why Sirrah, Rogue -- Scaramouch -- How got this mad Man in?


Oh, thou perfidious Maid! Who hast thou hid in yonder conscious Closet?


Why Sir, he was brought in a Chair for your Advice, but how he rambled from
the Parlour to this Chamber, I know not.


Upon a winged Horse, Icliped Pegasus,
Swift as the fiery Racers of the Sun,
-- I fly -- I fly --
See how I mount, and cut the liquid Sky.

Alas poor Gentleman, he's past all Cure -- But Sirrah, for the future, take
you care that no young mad Patients be brought into my House.


I shall Sir, -- and see -- here's your Key you looked for. --


That's well; I must be gone -- Bar up the Doors, and upon Life or Death let no
man enter.


Who the Devil could that be that pulled me from the Closet? but at last I'm
free, and the Doctors gone; I'll to Cinthio, and bring him to pass this Night
with our Mistresses.


Now for this lucky Rival, if his Stars will make this last part of his
Adventure such. I hid my self in the next Chamber, till I heard the Doctor go,
only to return to be revenged.


Scaramouch tells me Charmante is concealed in the Closet, whom Cinthio surely
has mistaken for some Lover of mine, and is jealous; but I'll send Charmante
after him, to make my peace and undeceive him.

-- Sir, Sir, Where are you? they are all gone, you may adventure out.

-- Ha, -- Cinthio here! --


Yes Madam, to your shame --
Now your Perfidiousness is plain -- False Woman,
'Tis well your Lover had the Dexterity of escaping, I'd spoiled his making
Love else.

Prithee hear me.

-- But since my Ignorance of his Person saves his Life, live and possess him,
till I can discover him.


Go peevish Fool --
Whose Jealousy believes me given to Change,
Let thy own Torments be my just Revenge.


HEavens Bellemante! Where have you been?

Fatigued with the most disagreeable Affair, for a Person of my Humour, in the
World. Oh, how I hate Business, which I do no more mind, than a Spark does the
Sermon, who is ogling his Mistress at Church all the while: I have been
ruffling over twenty Reams of Paper for my Uncles Writings. --


So, so, the Old Gentleman is departed this wicked World, and the House is our
own for this Night. -- Where are the Sparks? Where are the Sparks?


Nay, Heaven knows.

How! I hope not so; I left Charmante confined to my Closet, when my Uncle had
like to have surprised us together: Is he not here? --


No, he's escaped, but he has made sweet doings.

Heavens Cousin! What?

My Father was coming into the Chamber, and had like to have taken Cinthio with
me, when, to conceal him, I put him into your Closet, not knowing of
Charmante's being there, and which, in the Dark, he took for a Gallant of mine;
had not my Fathers Presence hindered, I believe there had been Murder
committed; how ever, they both escaped unknown.


Pshaw, is this all? Lovers Quarrels are soon adjusted; I'll to 'em, unfold the
Riddle, and bring 'em back -- take no care, but go in and dress you for the
Ball; Mopsophil has Habits which your Lovers sent to put on: the Fiddles Treat,
and all are prepared. --


Madam, your Cousin Florinda, with a Lady, are come to visit you.


I'm glad on it, 'tis a good Wench, and we'll trust her with our Mirth and
Secret.



'TIs Cinthio -- Don Cinthio --
-- Well, whats the Quarrel? -- How fell ye out?

You may inform your self I believe, for these close Intrigues cannot be
carried on without your Knowledge.


What Intrigues Sir? be quick, for I'm in hast.

Who was the Lover I surprised in the Closet?

Deceptio visus, Sir; the Error of the Eyes.

Thou Dog, -- I felt him too; but since the Rascal escaped me -- I'll be
Revenged on thee --


Ha, -- -- What's the matter here? --

Seignior Don Charmante --

What, Cinthio in a Rage!
Who's the unlucky Object?

All Man and Woman Kind: Elaria's false.

Elaria false! take heed, sure her nice Virtue is
Proof against the Vices of her Sex.
-- Say rather Bellemante.
She who by Nature's light and wavering.
The Town contains not such a false Impertinent.
This Evening I surprised her in her Chamber
Writing of Verses, and between her Lines,
Some Spark had newly penned his proper Stuff.
Curse of the Jilt, I'll be her Fool no more.

I doubt you are mistaken in that, Sir, for 'twas
I was the Spark that writ the proper Stuff.
To do you Service --

Thou!

Ay, we that spend our Lives and Fortunes here to serve you, -- to be used like
Pimps and Scowndrels. -- Come Sir, -- satisfy him who 'twas was hid in the
Closet, when he came in and found you.


Ha, -- is't possible? Was it Charmante?

Was it you, Cinthio? Pox on it, what Fools are we, we could not know one
another by Instinct?


Well, well, dispute no more this clear Case, but lets hasten to your
Mistresses.


I'm ashamed to appear before Elaria.

And I to Bellemante.

Come, come, take Heart of Grace; pull your Hats down over your Eyes; put your
Arms across; sigh and look scurvily; your simple Looks are ever a Token of
Repentance; come -- come along.



I Am extremely pleased with these Habits, Cousin.

They are A la Gothic and Uncomune.

Your Lovers have a very good Fancy, Cousin, I long to see 'em.


And so do I. I wonder Scaramouch stays so, and what Success he has.


you have no cause to doubt, you can so easily acquit your self; but I, what
shall I do? who can no more imagine who should write those Boremes, than who I
shall love next, if I break off with Charmante.


If he be a Man of Honour, Cousin, when a Maid protests her Innocence -- --


Ay, but he's a Man of Wit too, Cousin, and knows when Women protest most, they
likely lye most.


Most commonly, for Truth needs no asseveration.

That's according to the Disposition of your Lover, for some believe you most,
when you most abuse and cheat 'em; some are so obstinate, they would damn a
Woman with protesting, before she can convince 'em.


Such a one is not worth convincing, I would not make the World wise at the
expense of a Virtue.


Nay, he shall even remain as Heaven made him for me, since there are Men
enough for all uses.


Can you forgive us?

That, Cinthio, you're convinced, I do not wonder; but how Charmante's Goodness
is inspired, I know not.


Let it suffice, I'm satisfied, my Bellemante.

'Pray' know my Cousin Florinda.

Come, let us not lose time, since we are all Friends.

The best use we can make of it, is to talk of Love.

Oh! we shall have time enough for that hereafter; besides, you may make Love
in Dancing as well as in Sitting; you may Gaze, Sigh, -- and press the Hand,
and now and then receive a Kiss, what would you more?


Yes, wish a little more.

We were unreasonable to sorbid you that cold Joy, nor shall you wish long in
vain, if you bring Matters so about, to get us with my Uncle's Consent.


Our Fortunes depending solely on his Pleasure, which is too considerable to
lose.


All things are ordered as I have written you at large; our Scenes and all our
Properties are ready; we have no more to do but to banter the old Gentleman
into a little more Faith, which the next Visit of our new Caballist Charmante
will complete.


Your Dancers have performed well, but 'twere fit we knew who we have trusted
with this Evenings Intrigue.


Those, Madam, who are to assist us in carrying on a greater Intrigue, the
gaining of you. They are our Kinsmen.


Then they are doubly welcome.

Hark, what Noise is that? sure 'tis in the next Room.

Scaramouch, Scaramouch!


Ha, -- the Devil in the likeness of my old Masters Voice, for 'tis impossible
it should be he himself.


If it be he, how got he in? did you not secure the Doors?


He always has a Key to open 'em. Oh! what shall we do? there's no escaping
him; he's in the next Room, through which you are to pass.


Scaramouch, Knave, where are you?

'Tis he, 'tis he, follow me all --






Bless me, Sir! Is it you, -- or your Ghost.

'Twere good for you, Sir, if I were a thing of Air; but as I am a substantial
Mortal, I will lay it on as substantially --


What do ye mean, Sir? what do ye mean?

Sirrah, must I stand waiting your Leisure, while you are Roguing here? I will
reward ye.


Ay, and I shall deserve it richly, Sir, when you know all.


I guess all, Sirrah, and I heard all, and you shall be rewarded for all. Where
have you hid the Fiddles, you Rogue?


Fiddles, Sir! --

Ay, Fiddles, Knave.

Fiddles, Sir! -- Where?

Here, -- here I heard 'em, thou false Steward of thy Masters Treasure.

Fiddles, Sir! Sure 'twas Wind got into your Head, and whistled in your Ears,
riding so late, Sir.


Ay, thou false Varlot, there's another Debt I owe thee, for bringing me so
damnable a Lye: My Brother's well -- I met his Valet but a League from Town,
and found thy Rogury out.


Is this the Reward I have for being so diligent since you went?


In what, thou Villain? in what?

Why look you, Sir, I have, to surprise you with Pleasure, against you came
home, been putting up this Piece of Tapestry, the best in Italy, for the
Rareness of the Figures, Sir.


Ha -- Hum -- It is indeed a stately Piece of Work; how came I by 'em?


'Twas sent your Reverence from the Virtuoso, or some of the Caballists.


I must confess, the Workmanship is excellent, -- but still I do insist I heard
the Music.


'Twas then the tuning of the Spheres, some serinade, Sir, from the Inhabitants
of the Moon.


Hum, -- from the Moon, -- and that may be --


Lord, do ye think I would deceive your Reverence?

From the Moon, a Serinade, -- I see no signs on it here, indeed it must be so
-- I'll think on it more at leisure. --

-- Prithee what Story's this?


Why, Sir, -- 'Tis. --

Hold up the Candles higher, and nearer.

Sir. --

What was that struck me?

Struck you, Sir! Imagination.

Can my Imagination feel, Sirrah?

Oh, the most tenderly of any part about one, Sir!

Hum -- That may be --

Are you a great Philosopher, and know not that, Sir?

This Fellow has a glimpse of Profundity --
-- I like the Figures well.

You will, when you See 'em by Day-light, Sir.

Ha, -- Is that Imagination too -- Betrayed, betrayed, undone; run for my
Pistols, call up my Servants Peter, a Plot upon my Daughter and my Niece.


Here, here, fear nothing, hold by each other, that when I go out, all may go;
that is, slip out, when you hear the Doctor is come in again, which he will
certainly do, and all depart to your respective Lodgings.


And leave thee to bear the Brunt?

Take you no care for that, I'll put it into my Bill of Charges, and be paid
all together.


What, by dark? that shall not save you, Villains, Traitors to my Glory and
Repose. -- Peter, hold fast the Door, let none escape.


I'll warrant you, Sir.

Lights there -- Lights -- I'm sure they could not escape.


Impossible, Sir.

Bless me! -- what's here?

Ha, -- Who art thou?

I, who the Devil are you, and you go to that.
-- Mercy upon us! -- Why what is't you, Sir, returned so soon?

Returned!

Ay Sir, Did you not go out of Town last night, to your Brother the Advocate?


Thou Villain, thou question'st me, as if thou knew not that I was returned.


I know, Sir! how should I know? I'm sure I am but just waked from the sweetest
Dream --


You dream still, Sirrah, but I shall wake your Rogueship. -- Were you not here
but now, showing me a piece of Tapestry, you Villain? --


Tapestry! --

Yes Rogue, yes, for which I'll have thy Life --

Are you stark mad, Sir? or do I dream still?

Tell me, and tell me quickly, Rogue, who were those Traitors that were hid but
now in the Disguise of a piece of Hangings.


Bless me! you amaze me, Sir. What conformity has every Word you say, to my
rare Dream: Pray let me feel you, Sir, -- Are you Humane?


You shall feel I am, Sirrah, if thou confess not.

Confess, Sir! What should I confess? -- I understand not your Caballistical
Language; but in mine, I confess that you have waked me from the rarest Dream
-- Where methought the Emperor of the Moon World was in our House, Dancing and
Revelling; and methoughts his Grace was fallen desperately in Love with
Mistress Elaria, and that his Brother, the Prince, Sir, of Thunderland, was
also in Love with Mistress Bellemante; and methoughts they descended to court
'em in your Absence. -- And that at last you surprised 'em, and that they
transformed themselves into a Suit of Hangings to deceive you. But at last,
methought you grew angry at something, and they all sled to Heaven again; and
after a deal of Thunder and Lightning, I waked, Sir, and hearing Humane Voices
here, came to see what the Matter was.


May I credit this?

Credit it! By all the Honour of your House, by my unseparable Veneration for
the Mathematics, 'tis true, Sir.


-- That famous Rosacrusian, who yesterday visited me, told me -- the Emperor
of the Moon was in Love with a fair Mortal -- This Dream is Inspiration in this
Fellow -- He must have wondrous Virtue in him, to be worthy of these Divine
Intelligences.

-- But if that Mortal should be Elaria! but no more, I dare not yet suppose it
-- perhaps the thing was real and no Dream, for oftentimes the grosser part is
hurried away in Sleep, by the force of Imagination, and is wonderfully agitated
-- This Fellow might be present in his Sleep, -- of this we've frequent
Instances -- I'll to my Daughter and my Niece, and hear what knowledge they may
have of this.


Will you so? I'll secure you, the Frolic shall go round.


Scaramouch, If you have not deceived me in this Matter, time will convince me
farther; if it rest here, I shall believe you false --


Good Sir, suspend your Judgment and your Anger then.


I'll do it, go back to Bed --

No, Sir, 'tis Morning now -- and I'm up for all day. -- This Madness is a
pretty sort of a pleasant Disease, when it tickles but in one Vein -- Why
here's my Master now, as great a Scholar, as grave and wise a Man, in all
Argument and Discourse, as can be met with, yet name but the Moon, and he runs
into Ridicule, and grows as mad as the Wind.

Well Doctor, if thou can be madder yet,

We'll find a Medicine that shall cure your Fit.

-- Better than all Gallanicus.


You have your Lessons, stand to it bravely, and the Town's our own, Madam.


Ha, not in Bed! this gives me mortal Fears.

Ah, Prince --

Ha, Prince!

How little Faith I give to all your Courtship, who leaves our Orb so soon.


Ha, said she Orb?

But since you are of a Celestial Race,
And easily can penetrate
Into the utmost limits of the Thought,
Why should I fear to tell you of your Conquest?
-- And thus implore your Aid.

I am Ravished!

Ah, Prince Divine, take Pity on a Mortal --

I am rapt!

And take me with you to the World above.

The Moon, the Moon she means, I am Transported, Over-joy'd, and Ecstacy'd.


Ha, my Uncle come again to interrupt us!

Hide nothing from me, my dear Bellemante, since all already is discovered to
me -- and more. --


Oh, why have you waked me from the softest Dream that ever Maid was blessed
with?


What -- what my best Elaria?

Methought I entertained a Demi-God, one of the gay Inhabitants of the Moon.


I'm sure mine was no Dream -- I waked, I heard, I saw, I spoke -- and danced
to the Music of the Spheres, and methought my glorious Lover tied a Diamond
Chain about my Arm -- -- and see 'tis all substantial.


And mine a Ring, of more than mortal Lustre.

Heaven keep me moderate! least excess of Joy should make my Virtue less.

-- There is a wondrous Mystery in this.

A mighty Blessing does attend your Fates.

Go in, and pray to the chaste Powers above

To give you Virtue fit for such Rewards.

-- How this agrees with what the learned Caballist informed me of last Night!
He said, that great Iredonozor, the Emperor of the Moon, was enamoured on a
fair Mortal. It must be so -- and either he descended to Court my Daughter
Personally, which, for the Rareness of the Novelty, she takes to be a, Dream;
or else, what they and I beheld, was Visionary, by way of a sublime
Intelligence. -- And possibly -- 'tis only thus -- the People of that World
converse with Mortals. -- I must be satisfied in this main Point of deep
Philosophy.

I'll to my Study, -- for I cannot rest,

Till I this weighty Mystery have discussed.



Though I am come off en Cavalier with my Master, I am not with my Mistress, whom
I promised to console this Night, and is but just I should make good this
Morning; 'twill be rude to surprise her Sleeping, and more Gallant to wake her
with a Serinade at her Window.

When Maidens are young and in their Spring
Of Pleasure, of Pleasure, let 'em take their full Swing, full Swing, -- full
Swing, --
And Love, and Dance, and Play, and Sing.
For Silvia, believe it, when Youth is done,
There's nought but hum drum, hum drum, hum drum;
There's nought but hum drum, hum drum, hum drum.
Then Silvia be wise -- be wise -- be wise,
Though Painting and Dressing, for a while, are Supplies,
And may -- surprise --
But when the Fire's going out in your Eyes,
It twinkles, it twinkles, it twinkles, and dies.
And then to hear Love, to hear Love from you,
I'd as live hear an Owl cry -- Wit to woo,
Wit to woo, Wit to woo.

What woeful Ditty-making Mortal's this?
That ere the Lark her early Note has sung,
Does dolesul Love beneath my Casement thrum. --
-- Ah, Seignior Scaramouch, is it you?

Who should it be, that takes such pains to sue?

Ah, Lover most true Blew.

If I can now but get admittance, I shall not only deliver the young Ladies
their Letters from their Lovers, but get some opportunity, in this Disguise, to
slip this Billet Deux into Mopsophil's Hand, and bob my Comrade Scaramouch. --
Ha, -- What do I see? -- My Mistress at the Window, courting my Rival! Ah
Gypsy! --


-- But we lose precious time, since you design me a kind Hour in your Chamber.


Oh Traitor! --

You'll be sure to keep it from Harlequin.

Ah yes, he, hang him Fool, he takes you for a Saint.

Harlequin! -- Hang him, shotten Herring.

Ay, a Gully, a Noddy.

A mere Zany.

Ah, hard hearted Turk.

Fit for nothing but a Cuckold.

Monster of Ingratitude! How shall I be revenged?
-- Hold, hold, thou perjured Traitor.

Ha, -- Discovered! -- A Woman in the Garden!

Come down, come down, thou false perfidious Wretch.

Who, in the Devils Name, art thou?
And to whom dost thou speak?

To thee, thou false Deceiver, that hast broke thy
Vows, thy Lawful Vows of Wedlock --
Oh, oh, that I should live to see the Day! --

Who mean you, Woman?

Whom should I mean, but thou -- my lawful Spouse?

Oh Villain! -- Lawful Spouse! -- Let me come to her.

The Woman's mad -- hark ye Jade -- how long have you been thus distracted?


E're since I loved and trusted thee, false Varlot.
-- See here, -- the Witness of my Love and Shame.

How! with Child! -- -- Out Villain, was I made a Property?

Hear me.

Oh, thou Heathen Christian! -- Was not one Woman enough?

Ay, Sirrah, answer to that.

I shall be sacrificed. --

I am resolved to marry to morrow -- either to the Apothecary or the Farmer,
men I never saw, to be revenged on thee, thou tarmagant Infidel.


What Noise, what Out-cry, what Tumult's this?

Ha, -- the Doctor! -- What shall I do? --

A Woman -- some Bawd I am sure --
Woman, what's your Business here? -- ha --

I came, an't like your Seigniorship, to Madam the Governante here, to serve
her in the Quality of a Fille de Chambre, to the young Ladies.


A Fille de Chambre! 'tis so, a she Pimp, --

Ah, Seignior --

How now, what do you mock me?

Oh Seignior! --

Stay, stay, Mistress, and what Service are you able to do the Seigniors
Daughters?


Is this Seignior Doctor Baliardo, Madam?

Yes.

Oh! He's a very handsome Gentleman -- indeed --

Ay, ay, what Service can you do, Mistress?

Why Seignior, I can tie a Cravat the best of any Person in Naples, and I can
comb a Periwig -- and I can --


Very proper Service for young Ladies; you, I believe, have been Fille de
Chambre to some young Cavaliers.


Most true, Seignior, why should not the Cavaliers keep Filles de Chambre, as
well as great Ladies Vallets de Chambre?


Indeed 'tis equally reasonable. -- 'Tis a Bawd. --
-- But have you never served Ladies?

Oh yes! I served a Parsons Wife.

Is that a great Lady?

I surely, Sir, what is she else? for she wore her Mantoes of Brokad de or,
Petticoats laced up to the Gathers, her Points, her Patches, Paints and
Perfumes, and sate in the uppermost Place in the Church to.


But have you never served Countesses and Duchesses?

Oh, yes, Madam! the last I served, was an Aldermans Wife in the City.


Was that a Countess or a Duchess?

Ay, certainly -- for they have all the Money; and then for Cloths, Jewels, and
rich Furniture, and eating, they outdo the very Vice Reign her self.


This is a very ignorant running Bawd, -- therefore first search her for
Bellets Deux, and then have her Pumped.


Ah, Seignior, -- Seignior. --

-- Ha, -- to Elaria -- and Bellemante? --
-- These are from their Lovers --
-- Ha, -- a Note to Mopsophil, -- Oh, Rogue! have I found you? --

If you have, 'tis but Trick for your Trick, Seignior Scaramouch, and you may
spare the Pumping.


For once, Sirrah, I'll bring you off, and deliver your Letters. -- Sir, do you
not know who this is? -- Why 'tis a Rival of mine, who put on this Disguise to
cheat me of Mistress Mopsophil. -- See hear's a Billet to her. --


What is he?

A Mongrel Dancing-Master; therefore, Sir, since all the Injury's mine, I'll
pardon him for a Dance, and let the Agility of his Heels save his Bones, with
your Permission, Sir.


With all my Heart, and am glad he comes off so comically.


Sir, Sir, here's the rare Philosopher who was here yesterday.

Give him Entrance, and all depart.

Blessed be those Stars! that first conducted me to so much Worth and Virtue, you
are their Darling, Sir, for whom they wear their brightest Lustre.

Your Fortune is established, you are made, Sir.


Let me contain my Joy --
-- May I be worthy, Sir, to apprehend you?

After long Searching, Watching, Fasting, Praying, and using all the virtuous
means in Nature, whereby we solely do attain the highest Knowledge in
Philosophy; it was resolved, by strong Intelligence -- you were the happy Sire
of that Bright Nymph, that had insascinated, charmed and conquered the mighty
Emperor Iredonozor -- the Monarch of the Moon.


I am-undone with Joy! ruined with Transport --
-- -- Can it -- can it, Sir, -- be possible --

Receive the Blessing, Sir, with moderation.

I do, Sir, I do.

This very Night, by their great Art, they find
He will descend, and show himself in Glory.
An Honour, Sir, no Mortal has received
This sixty hundred years.

Hum -- Say you so, Sir? no Emperor ever descend this Sixty hundred years?

-- Was I deceived last night?


Oh! Yes, Sir, often in disguise, in several Shapes and Forms, which did of old
occasion so many Fabulous Tales of all the Shapes of Jupiter -- -- but never in
their proper Glory, Sir, as Emperors. This is an Honour only designed to you.


And will his Grace -- be here in Person, Sir?

In Person -- and with him, a Man of mighty Quality, Sir, -- 'tis thought --
the Prince of Thunderland -- but that's but whispered, Sir, in the Cabal, and
that he loves your Niece.


Miraculous! how this agrees with all I've seen and heard -- To Night, say you,
Sir?


So 'tis conjectured, Sir, -- some of the Caballist -- are of opinion -- that
last night there was some Sally from the Moon.


About what hour, Sir?

The Meridian of the Night, Sir, about the hours of twelve or one, but who
descended, or in what Shape, is yet uncertain.


This I believe, Sir.

Why, Sir?

May I communicate a Secret of that Nature?

To any of the Caballist, but none else.

Then know -- last night, my Daughter and my
Niece were entertained by those illustrious Heroes.

Who, Sir? the Emperor and Prince his Cousin.

Most certain, Sir.

But whether they appeared in solid Bodies, or Fantomical, is yet a Question,
for at my unlucky approach, they all transformed themselves into a Piece of
Hangings.


'Tis frequent, Sir, their Shapes are numerous, and 'tis also in their Power to
transform all they touch, by virtue of a certain Stone -- they call the Ebula.


That wondrous Ebula, which Gonzales had?

The same -- by Virtue of which, all weight was taken from him, and then with
ease the lofty Traveller flew from Parnassus Hill, and from Hymethus Mount, and
high Gerania, and Acrocorinthus, thence to Taygetus, so to Olympus Top, from
whence he had but one step to the Moon. Dizzy he grants he was.


No wonder, Sir, Oh happy great Gonzales!

Your Virtue, Sir, will render you as happy -- but I must hast -- this Night
prepare your Daughter and your Niece, and let your House be Dressed, Perfumed,
and Clean.


It shall be all performed, Sir.

Be modest, Sir, and humble in your Elevation, for nothing shows the Wit so
poor, as Wonder, nor Birth so mean, as Pride.


I humbly thank your Admonition, Sir, and shall, in all I can, struggle with
Humane Frailty.


So, so, all things go gloriously forward, but my own Amour, and there is no
convincing this obstinate Woman, that 'twas that Rogue Harlequin in Disguise,
that claimed me; so that I cannot so much as come to deliver the young Ladies
their Letters from their Lovers. I must get in with this damned Mistress of
mine, or all our Plot will be spoiled for want of Intelligence.

-- Hum, -- The Devil does not use to sail me at a dead Lift. I must deliver
these Letters, and I must have this Wench -- though but to be revenged on her for
abusing me. -- Let me see -- she is resolved for the Apothecary or the Farmer.
Well, say no more honest Scaramouch, thou shalt find a Friend at need of me --
and if I do not fit you with a Spouse, say that a Woman has out-witted me.



HOld, hold, Sir, you, I suppose know the Customs that are due to this City of
Naples, from all Persons that pass the Gates in Coach, Chariot, Calash, or
Siege Voglant.


I am not ignorant of the Custom, Sir, but what's that to me?


Not to you, Sir! why, what Privilege have you above the rest?


Privilege, for what, Sir?

Why for passing, Sir, with any of the before named Carriages.


Ar't mad? -- Dost not see I am a plain Baker, and this my Cart, that comes to
carry Bread for the Vice-Roy's, and the Cities Use? -- ha --


Are you mad, Sir, to think I cannot see a Gentleman Farmer and a Calash, from
a Baker and a Cart?


Drunk by this Day -- and so early too? Oh you're a special Officer; unhand my
Horse, Sirrah, or you shall pay for all the Damage you do me.


Hey day! here's a fine Cheat upon the Vice Roy;
Sir, pay me, or I'll seize your Horse. --
-- Nay, and you be so brisk, I'll call the Clerk from his Office.
-- Mr. Clerk, Mr. Clerk.

What's the matter here? --

Here's a Fellow, Sir, will persuade me, his Calash is a Cart, and refuses the
Customs for passing the Gate.


A Calash -- Where? -- I see only a Carter and his Cart.


Ha, -- What a Devil, was I blind?

Mr. Clerk, I am a Baker, that come with Bread to sell, and this Fellow here
has stopped me this hour, and made me lose the Sale of my Ware -- and being
Drunk, will out-face me I am a Farmer, and this Cart a Calash. --


He's in an Error Friend, pass on --

No Sir, I'll have satisfaction first, or the Vice-Roy shall know how he's
served by drunken Officers, that Nuisance to a Civil Government.


What do you demand, Friend?

Demand, -- I demand a Crown, Sir.

This is very hard -- Mr. Clerk -- If ever I saw in my Life, I thought I saw a
Gentleman and a Calash.


Come, come, gratify him, and see better hereafter.

Here Sir, -- If I must, I must --

Pass on, Friend --

Hum, I'll swear it is a Calash -- Mr. Clerk,
Mr. Clerk, come back, come back --
-- Come Sir, let your own Eyes convince you, Sir. --

Convince me, of what, you Sott?

That this is a Gentleman, and that a -- ha, --

Stark Drunk, Sirrah! if you trouble me at every Mistake of yours thus, you
shall quit your Office. --


I beg your Pardon, Sir, I am a little in Drink I confess, a little Blind and
Mad -- Sir, -- This must be the Devil, that's certain.

-- Well, now to my thinking, 'tis as plain a Calash again, as ever I saw in my
Life, and yet I'm satisfied 'tis nothing but a Cart.



THe Devil's in it, if either the Doctor, my Master, or Mopsophil, know me in
this Disguise -- And thus I may not only gain my Mistress, and out-wit
Harlequin, but deliver the Ladies those Letters from their Lovers, which I took
out of his Pocket this Morning, and who would suspect an Apothecary for a Pimp.
-- Nor can the Jade Mopsophil, in Honour, refuse a Person of my Gravity, and so
well set up. --

-- Hum, the Doctor here first, this is not so well, but I'm prepared with
Impudence for all Encounters.

-- Most Reverend Doctor Baliardo. --


Seignior --

I might, through great Pusillanimity, blush -- to give you this Anxiety. Did I
not opine you were as Gracious as Communitive and Eminent; and though you have no
Cognisance of me, your Humble Servant, -- yet I have of you, -- you being so
greatly sam'd for your admirable Skill, both in Gallenical and Paracelsian
Phaenomena's, and other approved Felicities in Vulnerary Emetics, and
purgative Experiences.


Seignior, -- your Opinion honours me -- a rare Man this.


And though I am at present busied in writing -- those few Observations I have
accumulated in my Peregrinations, Sir, yet the Ambition I aspired to, of being
an Ocular and Aurial Witness of your Singularity, made me trespass on your
sublimer Affairs.


Seignior. --

-- Besides a violent Inclination, Sir, of being initiated into the
Denomination of your Learned Family, by the Conjugal Circumference of a
Matrimonial Tie, with that singularly accomplished Person -- Madam, the
Governante of your Hostel.


Hum -- A sweet-heart for Mopsophil!

And if I may obtain your Condescension to my Hymeneal Propositions, I doubt
not my Operation with the Fair One.


Seignior, she is much honoured in the Overture, and my Abilities shall not be
wanting to fix the Concord.

-- But have you been a Traveller, Sir?


Without Circumlocutions, Sir, I have seen all the Regions beneath the Sun and
Moon.


Moon, Sir! You never travelled thither, Sir?

Not in Propria Persona, Seignior, but by speculation, I have, and made most
considerable Remarks on that incomparable Terra Firma, of which I have the
completest Map in Christendom -- and which Gonzales himself omitted in his
Cosmographia of the Lunar Mundus.


A Map of the Lunar Mundus, Sir! May I crave the Honour of seeing it?


You shall, Sir, together with a Map of Terra La, a great Rarety,
indeed, Sir.


Jewels, Sir, worth a Kings Ransom.

Ha, -- What Figure of a Thing have we here -- Bantering my Credulous Uncle? --
This must be some Scout sent from our Forlorn Hope, to discover the Enemy, and
bring in fresh Intelligence. -- Hum, -- That Wink tipped me some Tidings, and she
deserves not a good Look, who understands not the Language of the Eyes. -- Sir,
Dinner's on the Table.


Let it wait, I am employed --

Ha, -- 'tis so, -- This fellow has some Novel for us, some Letters or
Instructions, but how to get it --


But this Map, Seignior; I protest you have filled me with Curiosity. Has it
signified all things so exactly say you?


Omitted nothing, Seignior, no City, Town, Village or Villa; no Castle, River,
Bridge, Lake, Spring or Mineral.


Are any, Sir, of those admirable Mineral Waters there, so frequent in our
World?


In abundance, Sir, the Famous Garamanteen, a young Italian, Sir, lately come
from thence, gives an account of an excellent Scaturigo, that has lately made
an Ebulation there, in great Reputation with the Lunary Ladies.


Indeed, Sir! be pleased, Seignior, to solve me some Queries that may enode
some apparences of the Virtue of the Water you speak of.


Pox upon him, what Questions he asks -- but I must on -- Why Sir, you must
know, -- the Tincture of this Water upon Stagnation, Ceruberates, and the
Crocus upon the Stones Flaveces; this he observes -- to be, Sir, the Indication
of a Generous Water.


Hum --

Now, Sir, be pleased to observe the three Regions, if they be bright, without
doubt Mars is powerful; if the middle Region or Camera be palled, Filia Solis
is breeding.


Hum.

And then the third Region, if the Faeces be volatil, the Birth will soon come
in Balneo. This I observed also in the Laboratory of that Ingenious Chemist
Lysidono, and with much Pleasure animadverted that Mineral of the same Zenith
and Nader, of that now so famous Water in England, near that famous Metropolis,
called Islington.


Seignior --

For, Sir, upon the Infusion, the Crows Head immediately procures the Seal of
Hermes, and had not Lac Virginis been too soon sucked up, I believe we might
have seen the Consummation of Amalgena.


Most likely, Sir.

But, Sir, this Garamanteen relates the strangest Operation of a Mineral in the
Lunar World, that ever I heard of.


As how, I pray, Sir?

Why, Sir, a Water impregnated to a Circulation with Fema Materia; upon my
Honour, Sir, the strongest I ever drank of.


How, Sir! did you drink of it?

I only speak the words of Garamanteen, Sir.
-- Pox on him, I shall be trapt.

Cry Mercy, Sir. --

The Lunary Physicians, Sir, call it Urinam Vulcani, it Calibrates every ones
Excrements more or less according to the Gradus of the Natural Calor. -- To my
Knowledge, Sir, a Smith of a very fiery Constitution, is grown very Opulent by
drinking these Waters.


How, Sir, grown Rich by drinking the Waters, and to your Knowledge?


The Devil's in my Tongue, to my Knowledge, Sir, for what a man of Honour
relates, I may safely affirm.


Excuse me, Seignior --

For, Sir, conceive me how he grew Rich, since he drank those Waters he never
buys any Iron, but hammers it out of Stercus Proprius.


Sir, 'tis three a Clock, and Dinner will be cold. --

I come Sweet-heart; but this is wonderful.

Ay, Sir, and if at any time Nature be too infirm, and he prove Costive, he has
no more to do, but to apply a Load-stone ad Anum.


Is't possible?

Most true, Sir, and that facilitates the Journey per Visera. -- But I detain
you, Sir, another time -- Sir, -- I will now only beg the Honour of a Word or
two with the Governante, before I go. --.


Sir, she shall wait on you, and I shall be proud of the Honour of your
Conversation. --


Hum -- What have we here, a Taylor or a Tumbler?

Ha -- Who's this? -- Hum -- What if it should be the Farmer that the Doctor
has promised Mopsophil to? My Heart misgives me.

Who would you speak with, Friend?


This is, perhaps, my Rival, the Apothecary. -- Speak with, Sir, why, what's
that to you?


Have you Affairs with Seignior Doctor, Sir?

It may be I have, it may be I have not. What then, Sir? --


Seignior Doctor tells me I have a Lover waits me, sure it must be the Farmer
or the Apothecary. No matter which, so a Lover, that welcomest man alive. I am
resolved to take the first good Offer, though but in Revenge of Harlequin and
Scaramouch, for putting Tricks upon me. -- Ha, -- Two of'em!


My Mistress here!

Hold Gentlemen, -- do not worry me.
Which of you would speak with me?

I, I, I, Madam --

Both of you?

No, Madam, I, I.

If both Lovers, you are both welcome, but let's have fair Play, and take your
turns to speak.


Ay, Seignior, 'tis most uncivil to interrupt me.

And disingenious, Sir, to intrude on me.

Let me then speak first.

I'm Dumb.

I Acquiesce.

I was informed there was a Person here had Propositions of Marriage to make
me.


That's I, that's I --

And I attend to that consequential Finis.

I know not what you mean by your Finis, Seignior, but I am come to offer my
self this Gentlewoman's Servant, her Lover, her Husband, her Dog in a Halter, or
any thing.


Him I pronounce a Paltroon, and an Ignominious Utensil, that dares lay claim
to the Renowned Lady of my Primum Mobile; that is, my best Affections. --


I fear not your hard Words, Sir, but dare aloud pronounce, if Donna Mopsophil
like me, the Farmer, as well as I like her, 'tis a Match, and my Chariot is
ready at the Gate to bear her off, do ye see. --


Ah, how that Chariot pleads. --

And I pronounce, that being intoxicated with the sweet Eyes of this refulgent
Lady, I come to tender her my noblest Particulars, being already most
advantageously set up with the circumstantial Implements of my Occupation.


A City Apothecary, a most Gentile Calling -- Which shall I choose? -- Seignior
Apothecary, I'll not expostulate the Circumstantial Reasons that have
occasioned me this Honour. --


Incomparable Lady, the Elegancy of your Repertees most excellently denote the
Profundity of your Capacity.


What the Devil's all this? Good Mr. Conjurer stand by -- and don't fright the
Gentlewoman with your Elegant Profondities.


How, a Conjurer! I will chastise thy vulgar Ignorance, that yelips a
Philosopher a Conjurer.


Losaphers! -- Prithee, if thou be a Man, speak like a Man -- then


Why, What do I speak like? What do I speak like?

What do you speak like -- why you speak like a Wheel-Barrow.


How! --

And how.

That's well Gentlemen, let's have all Peace, while I survey you both, and see
which likes me best.

-- ha, -- now on my Conscience, my two foolish Lovers, -- Harlequin and
Scaramouch; how are my Hopes defeated? -- but Faith I'll fit you both.


So, she's considering still, I shall be the happy Dog.


She's taking aim, she cannot choose but like me best.


Well, Madam, how does my Person propagate.

Faith Seignior, now I look better on you, I do not like your Physiognomy so well
as your Intellects; you discovering some Circumstantial Symptoms that ever
denote a Villainous Inconstancy.


Ah, you are pleased, Madam. --

You are mistaken, Seignior, I am displeased at your Gray Eyes, and Black
Eye-brows and Beard, I never knew a Man with those Signs, true to his Mistress
or his Friend. And I would sooner wed that Scoundrel Scaramouch, that very
civil Pimp, that mere pair of Chemical Bellows that blow the Doctors projecting
Fires, that Deputy-Urinal Shaker, that very Guzman of Salamanca, than a Fellow
of your infallible Signum Mallis.


Ha, ha, ha, -- you have your Answer, Seignior Friskin -- and may shut up your
Shop and be gone. -- Ha, ha, ha. --


Hum, sure the Jade knows me --

And as for you, Seignior.

Ha, Madam --

Those Lanthorn Jaws of yours, with that most villainous Sneer and Grin, and a
certain fierce Air of your Eyes, looks altogether most Fanatically -- which
with your notorious Whey Beard, are certain Signs of Knavery and Cowardice;
therefore I'd rather wed that Spider Harlequin, that Sceliton Buffoon, that Ape
of Man, that Jack of Lent, that very Top, that's of no use, but when 'tis whipped
and lashed, that piteous Property I'd rather wed than thee.


A very fair Declaration --

you understand me -- and so adieu sweet Glisterpipe, and Seignior dirty Boots,
Ha, ha, ha. --


That I should not know that Rogue Harlequin.

That I should take this Fool for a Physician.

-- How long have you commenced Apothecary, Seignior?


Ever since you turned Farmer. -- -- Are not you a damned Rogue to put these
Tricks upon me, and most dishonourably break all Articles between us?


And are not you a damned Son of a -- -- something -- to break Articles with
me?


No more Words, Sir, no more words, I find it must come to Action, -- Draw. --


Draw, -- so I can draw, Sir. -- --

Hold -- hold -- What mean you Gentlemen?

Let me go, Sir, I am provoked beyond measure, Sir.


You must excuse me, Seignior --

I dare not discover the Fool for his Masters Sake, and it may spoil our
Intrigue anon; besides, he'll then discover me, and I shall be discarded for
bantering the Doctor.

-- A Man of Honour to be so basely affronted here. -- --


Should I discover this Rascal, he would tell the Old Gentleman I was the same
that attempted his House to day in Woman's Cloths, and I should be kicked and
beaten most unsatiably.


What, Seignior, for a man of Parts to be imposed upon, -- and whipped through
the Lungs here -- like a Mountebanks Zany for sham Cures -- Mr. Doctor, I must
tell you 'tis not Civil.


I am extremely sorry for it, Sir, -- and you shall see how I will have this
Fellow handled for the Affront to a Person of your Gravity, and in my House --
Here Pedro, --

-- Take this Intruder, or bring some of your Fellows hither, and toss him in a
Blanket --


Hark ye, -- bring me off, or I'll discover all your Intrigue.


Let me alone --

I'll warrant you some Rogue that has some Plot on my Niece and Daughter. --


No, no, Sir, he comes to impose the grossest Lye upon you, that ever was heard
of.


Hold, hold, -- I'll confess all, rather than endure it.

Hold, -- What will you confess, Sir.

-- That he's the greatest Impostor in Nature. Would you think it, Sir? he
pretends to be no less than an Ambassador from the Emperor of the Moon, Sir --


Ha, -- Ambassador from the Emperor of the Moon --


Ay, Sir, thereupon I laughed, thereupon he grew angry, -- I laughed at his
Resentment, and thereupon we drew -- and this was the high Quarrel, Sir.


Hum, -- Ambassador from the Moon.

I have brought you off, manage him as well as you can.


Brought me off, yes, out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire. Why, how the Devil
shall I act an Ambassador?


It must be so, for how should either of these know I expected that Honour?

Sir, if the Figure you make, approaching so near ours of this World, have made
us commit any undecent Indignity to your high Character, you ought to pardon
the Frailty of our Mortal Education and Ignorance, having never before been
blessed with the Descention of any from your World. --


What the Devil shall I say now?

-- I confess, I am as you see by my Garb, Sir, a little Incognito, because the
Public Message I bring, is very private -- which is, that the mighty
Iredonozor, Emperor of the Moon -- with his most worthy Brother, the Prince of
Thunderland, intend to Sup with you to Night -- Therefore be sure you get good
Wine. -- Though by the way let me tell you, 'tis for the Sake of your Fair
Daughter.


I'll leave the Rogue to his own Management. -- I presume, by your whispering,
Sir, you would be private, and humbly begging Pardon, take my Leave.


You have it Friend. Does your Niece and Daughter Drink, Sir?


Drink, Sir?

Ay, Sir, Drink hard.

Do the Women of your World drink hard, Sir?

According to their Quality, Sir, more or less; the greater the Quality, the
more Profuse the Quantity.


Why that's just as 'tis here; but your Men of Quality, your States-men, Sir, I
presume they are Sober, Learned and Wise.


Faith, no, Sir, but they are, for the most part, what's as good, very Proud,
and promising, Sir, most liberal of their Word to every fawning Suitor, to
purchase the state of long Attendance, and cringing as they pass; but the Devil
of a Performance, without you get the Knack of bribing in the right Place and
Time; but yet they all defy it, Sir. --


Just, just as 'tis here.

-- But pray Sir, How do these Great Men live with their Wives.


Most Nobly, Sir, my Lord keeps his Coach, my Lady, hers; my Lord his Bed, my
Lady hers; and very rarely see one another, unless they chance to meet in a
Visit, in the Park, the Mall, the Toore, or at the Basset-Table, where they
civilly Salute and part, he to his Mistress, she to play.


Good lack! just as 'tis here.

-- Where, if she chance to lose her Money, rather than give out, she borrows
of the next Amorous Coxcomb, who, from that Minute, hopes, and is sure to be
paid again one way or other, the next kind Opportunity.


-- Just as 'tis here.

As for the young Fellows that have Money, they have no Mercy upon their own
Persons, but wearing Nature off as fast as they can, Swear, and Whore and
Drink, and Borrow as long any Rooking Citizen will lend, till having dearly
purchased the Heroic Title of a Bully or a Sharper, they live pitied of their
Friends, and despised by their Whores, and depart this Transitory World,
diverse and sundry ways.


Just, just, as 'tis here!

As for the Citizen, Sir, the Courtier lies with his Wife, he, in revenge,
cheats him of his Estate, till Rich enough to marry his Daughter to a Courtier,
again give him all -- unless his Wives Over-Gallantry break him; and thus the
World runs round. -- --


The very same 'tis here. -- Is there no preserment, Sir, for Men of Parts and
Merit?


Parts and Merit! What's that? a Livery, or the handsome tying a Cravat, for
the great Men prefer none but their Foot-men and Vallets.


By my Troth, just as 'tis here.

-- Sir, I find you are a Person of most profound Intelligence -- under Favour,
Sir, -- Are you a Native of the Moon or this World. --


The Devils in him for hard Questions.
-- I am a Naopolitan, Sir.

Sir, I Honour you; good luck, my Countryman!
How got you to the Region of the Moon, Sir?

-- A plaguy inquisitive old Fool --

-- Why, Sir, -- Pox on it, what shall I say? -- I being -- one day in a musing
Melancholy, walking by the Sea-side -- there arose, Sir, a great Mist, by the
Suns exhaling of the Vapours of the Earth, Sir.


Right, Sir.

In this Fog or Mist, Sir, I was exhaled.

The Exalations of the Sun, draw you to the Moon, Sir?


I am condemned to the Blanket again. -- I say, Sir, I was exhaled up, but in
my way -- being too heavy, was dropped into the Sea.


How, Sir, into the Sea?

The Sea, Sir, where the Emperors Fisher-man casting his Nets, drew me up, and
took me for a strange and monstrous Fish, Sir, -- and as such, presented me to
his Mightiness, -- who going to have me Spitchcock'd for his own eating. --


How, Sir, eating? --

What did me I, Sir, (Life being sweet) but fall on my Knees, and besought his
Gloriousness not to eat me, for I was no Fish but a Man; he asked me of what
Country, I told him of Naples; whereupon the Emperor overjoyed asked me if I
knew that most Reverend and most Learned Doctor Baliardo, and his fair
Daughter. I told him I did: whereupon he made me his Bed-fellow, and the
Confident to his Amour to Seigniora Elaria.


Bless me, Sir! how came the Emperor to know my Daughter?


-- There he is again with his damned hard Questions. -- Knew her, Sir, -- Why
-- you were walking abroad one day. --


My Daughter never goes abroad, Sir, farther than our Garden. --


Ay, there it was indeed, Sir, -- and as his Highness was taking a Survey of
this lower World -- through a long Perspective, Sir, -- he saw you and your
Daughter and Niece, and from that very moment, fell most desperately in Love.
-- But hark -- the sound of Timbrils, Kettle-Drums and Trumpets. -- The
Emperor, Sir, is on his Way, -- prepare for his Reception.


I'm in a Rapture -- How shall I pay my Gratitude for this great Negotiation?
-- but as I may, I humbly offer, Sir. --


Sir, as an Honour done the Emperor, I take your Ring and Gold. I must go meet
his Highness. --


Oh, Sir! we are astonished with the dreadful sound of the sweetest Music that
ever Mortal heard, but know not whence it comes. Have you not heard it, Sir?


Heard it, yes, Fool, -- 'Tis the Music of the Spheres, the Emperor of the
Moon World is descending.


How, Sir, no marvel then, that looking towards the South, I saw such splendid
Glories in the Air.


Ha, -- saw thou ought descending in the Air?

Oh, yes, Sir, Wonders! haste to the old Gallery, whence, with the help of your
Telescope, you may discover all. --


I would not lose a moment for the lower Universe.


Sir, we are dressed as you commanded us, What is your farther Pleasure?


-- It well becomes the Honour you're designed for, this Night to wed two
Princes -- come with me and know your happy Fates.


Bless me! My Father, in all the rest of his Discourse, shows so much Sense and
Reason, I cannot think him mad, but feigns all this to try us.


Not Mad! Marry Heaven forbid, thou art always creating Fears to startle one;
why, if he be not mad, his want of Sleep this eight and forty hours, the Noise
of strange unheard of Instruments, with the Fantastic Splendour of the unusual
Sight, will so turn his Brain and dazzle him, that in Grace of Goodness, he may
be Mad: If he be not; -- come, let's after him to the Gallery, for I long to
see in what showing Equipage our Princely Lovers will address to us.



HA -- Heavens! what's here? -- what Palace is this? -- No part of our House,
I'm sure. --


'Tis rather the Apartment of some Monarch.

I'm all amazement too, but must not show my Ignorance. -- Yes, Elaria, this is
prepared to entertain two Princes.


Are you sure on it, Sir? are we not, think you, in that World above, I often
heard you speak of? in the Moon, Sir?


How shall I resolve her? -- For ought I know, we are.

Sure, Sir, 'tis some Enchantment.

Let not thy Female Ignorance profane the highest Mysteries of Natural
Philosophy: To Fools it seems Enchantment -- but I've a Sense can reach it, --
sit and expect the Event. -- Hark -- I am amazed, but must conceal my Wonder --
that Joy of Fools -- and appear wise in Gravity.


Whence comes this charming Sound, Sir?

From the Spheres -- it is familiar to me.

Methought I saw the Figure of two Men descend from yonder Cloud, on yonder
Hill.


I thought so too, but they are disappeared, and the winged Chariot's fled.


See, Sir, they approach. --

Most Reverend Sir, we, from the upper World, thus low salute you. -- Keplair
and Gallileus we are called, sent as Interpreters to Great Iredonozor, the
Emperor of the Moon, who is descending.


Most Reverend Bards -- profound Philosophers -- thus low I bow to pay my
humble Gratitude.


The Emperor, Sir, salutes you, and your fair Daughter.


And, Sir, the Prince of Thunderland salutes you, and your fair Niece.


Thus low I fall to thank their Royal Goodness.

Came you, most Reverend Bards, from the Moon World?


Most Lovely Maid, we did.

May I presume to ask the manner how?

By Cloud, Sir, through the Regions of the Air, down to the famed Parnassus;
thence by Water, along the River Helicon, the rest by Post, upon two winged
Eagles.


Sir, are there store of our World inhabiting the Moon?


Oh, of all Nations, Sir, that lie beneath it in the Emperors Train! Sir, you
will behold abundance; look up and see the Orbal World descending; observe the
Zodiac, Sir, with her twelve Signs.

LET murmuring Lovers no longer Repine,
But their Hearts and their Voices advance;
Let the Nymphs and the Swains in the kind Chorus join,
And the Satyrs and Fauns in a Dance.
Let nature put on her Beauty of May,
And the Fields and the Meadows adorn;
Let the Woods and the Mountains resound with the Joy,
And the Echoes their Triumph return.
For since Love wore his Darts,
And Virgins grew Coy;
Since these wounded Hearts,
And those could destroy.
There never was more Cause for your Triumphs and Joy.
Hark, bark, the Music of the Spheres,
Some Wonder approaching declares;
Such, such, as has not blessed your Eyes and Ears
This thousand, thousand, thousand years.
See, see what the Force of Love can make,
Who rules in Heaven, in Earth and Sea;
Behold how he commands the Zodiac,
While the fixed Signs unhinging all obey.
Not one of which, but represents
The Attributes of Love,
Who governs all the Elements
In Harmony above.
For since Love wore his Darts,
And Virgins grew Coy;
Since these wounded Hearts,
And those could destroy,
There never was more Cause for your Triumphs and Joy.
The wanton Aries first descends,
To show the Vigour and the Play,
Beginning Love, beginning Love attends,
When the young Passion is all-over Joy,
He bleats his soft Pain to the fair curled Throng,
And he leaps, and he bounds, and Loves all the day long.
At once Loves Courage and his Slavery
In Taurus is expressed,
Though over the Plains he Conqueror be,
The Generous Beast
Does to the Yoke submit his Noble Breast,
While Gemini smiling and twining of Arms,
Shows Loves soft Endearments and Charms.
And Cancer's slow Motion the degrees do express,
Respectful Love arrives to Happiness.
Leo his Strength and Majesty,
Virgo his blushing Modesty,
And Libra all his Equity.
His Subtilty does Scorpio show,
And Sagittarius all his loose desire,
By Capricorn his forward Humour know,
And Aqua. Lovers Tears that raise his Fire,
While Pisces, which entwined do move,
Show the soft Play, and wanton Arts of Love.
For since Love wore his Darts,
And Virgins grew Coy;
Since these wounded Hearts,
And those could destroy,
There never was more Cause for Triumphs and Joy:
-- See how she turns, and sends her Signs to Earth. -- Behold the Ram -- Aries
-- see Taurus next descends; then Gemini -- see how the Boys embrace -- Next
Cancer, then Leo, then the Virgin; next to her Libra -- Scorpio, Sagittary,
Capricorn, Aquarius, -- Pisces. This eight thousand years no Emperor has
descended, but Incognito, but when he does, to make his Journey more
Magnificent, the Zodiac, Sir, attends him.


'Tis all amazing, Sir.

Now, Sir, behold, the Globick World descends two thousand Leagues below its
wonted Station, to show Obedience to its proper Monarch.

ALL Joy to Mortals, Joy and Mirth
Eternal IO'S sing;
The Gods of Love descend to Earth,
Their Darts have lost the Sting.
The Youth shall now complain no more
On Silvia's needless Scorn,
But she shall love, if he adore,
And melt when he shall burn.
The Nymph no longer shall be shy,
But leave the jilting Road;
And Daphne now no more shall fly
The wounded panting God;
But all shall be serene and fair,
No sad Complaints of Love
Shall fill the Gentle whispering Air,
No echoing Sighs the Grove.
Beneath the Shades young Strephon lies,
Of all his Wish possessed;
Gazing on Silvia's charming Eyes,
Whose Soul is there confessed.
All soft and sweet the Maid appears,
With Looks that know no Art,
And though she yields with trembling Fears,
She yields with all her Heart.
-- See, Sir, the Cloud of Foreigners appears, French, English, Spaniards,
Danes, Turks, Russians, Indians, and the nearer Climes of Christendom; and
lastly, Sir, behold the mighty Emperor. --


The Emperor would have you rise, Sir, he will expect no Ceremony from the
Father of his Mistress.


I cannot, Sir, behold his Mightiness -- the Splendour of his Majesty confounds
me --


You must be moderate, Sir, it is expected.

Shall I not have the Joy to hear their Heavenly Voices, Sir?


They never speak to any Subject, Sir, when they appear in Royalty, but by
Interpreters, and that by way of Stentraphon, in manner of the Delphic
Oracles.


Any way, so I may hear the Sense of what they would say.


No doubt you will -- But see the Emperor commands by signs his Foreigners to
dance --


Most Learned Sir, the Emperor now is going to declare himself, according to
his Custom, to his Subjects. Listen. --


Most Reverend Sir, whose Virtue did incite us,
Whose Daughters Charms did more invite us;
We come to grace her with that Honour,
That never Mortal yet had done her,
Once only, Jove was known in Story,
To visit Semele in Glory.
But fatal 'twas, he so enjoyed her,
Her own ambitious Flame destroyed her.
His Charms too fierce for Flesh and Blood,
She died embracing of her God.
We gentler marks of Passion give,
The Maid we love, shall love and live;
Whom visibly we thus will grace,
Above the rest of human Race.
Say, is't your Will that we should Wed her,
And nightly in Disguises Bed her.

The Glory is too great for Mortal Wife.

What then remains, but that we consummate
This happy Marriage in our splendid State?

Thus low I kneel, in thanks for this great Blessing.

Stay mighty Emperor, and vouchsafe to be the Umpire of our Difference.


What are you?

Two neighbouring Princes to your vast Dominion.

Knights of the Sun, our Honourable Titles.
And fight for that fair Mortal, Mopsophil.

Bless us! -- my two precious Lovers, I'll warrant; well, I had better take up
with one of them, than lye alone to Night.


Long as two Rivals we have Loved and Hoped,
Both equally endeavoured, and both failed.
At last by joint Consent, we both agreed
To try our Titles by the Dint of Lance,
And chose your Mightiness for Arbitrator.

The Emperor gives Consent. --

The Emperor pronounces you are Victor. --

Receive your Mistress, Sir, as the Reward of your undoubted Valour --


Your humble Servant, Sir, and Scaramouch, returns you humble Thanks. --


Ha, -- Scaramouch --

My Heart misgives me -- Oh, I am undone and cheated every way. --


Be patient, Sir, and call up all your Virtue,
You're only cured, Sir, of a Disease
That long has reigned over your Nobler Faculties.
Sir, I am your Physician, Friend and Counsellor;
It was not in the Power of Herbs or Minerals,
Of Reason, common Sense, and right Religion,
To draw you from an Error that unmanned you.

I will be Patient, Gentlemen, and hear you.
-- Are not you Ferdinand?

I am, -- and these are Gentlemen of Quality,
That long have loved your Daughter and your Niece.
Don Cinthio this, and this Don Charmante,
The Vice-Roys Nephews, both. -- --
Who found as men -- 'twas impossible to enjoy 'em,
And therefore tried this Stratagem. --

Sir, I beseech you, mitigate your Grief,
Although indeed we are but mortal men,
Yet we shall Love you, -- Serve you, and obey you --

Are not you then the Emperor of the Moon?
And you the Prince of Thunderland?

There's no such Person, Sir.
These Stories are the Phantoms of mad Brains,
To puzzle Fools withal -- the Wise laugh at 'em, --
-- Come Sir, you shall no longer be imposed upon.

No Emperor of the Moon, -- and no Moon World!

Ridiculous Inventions.
If we'd not loved you, you'd been still imposed on;
We had brought a Scandal on your Learned Name,
And all succeeding Ages had despised it.

Burn all my Books, and let my Study Blaze,

Burn all to Ashes, and be sure the Wind

Scatter the vile Contagious Monstrous Leys.

-- Most Noble Youths -- you've honoured me with your Alliance, and you, and
all your Friends, Assistances in this Glorious Miracle, I invite to Night to
revel with me. -- Come all and see my happy Recantation of all the Follies
Fables have inspired till now. Be pleasant to repeat your Story, to tell me by
what kind degrees you Cozened me --

I see there's nothing in Philosophy --

Of all that writ, he was the wisest Bard, who spoke this mighty Truth. -- He
that knew all that ever Learning writ, Knew only this -- that he knew nothing
yet.


WIth our old Plays, as with dull Wife it fares,
To whom you have been married tedious years.
You Cry -- She's wondrous good, it is confessed,
But still 'tis Chapon Bo^lle at the best;
That constant Dish can never make a Feast:
Yet the palled Pleasure you must still purste,
You give so small encouragement for new;
And who would drudge for such a wretched Age?
Who want the Bravery, to support one Stage.
The wiser Wits have now new Measures set,
And taken up new Trades, that they may h^ue,
No more your nice fantastic pleasures serve,
Your Pimps you pay, but let your Poets starve.
They long in vain, for better Usage hoped,
Till quite undone and tired, they dropped and dropped;
Not one is left will write for thin third day,
Like desperate Picaroons, no Prize no Pay;
And when they've done their best, the Recompense,
Is, Dam the Sot, his Play wants common Sense.
Ill natured wits, who can so ill requite
The Drudging Slaves, who for your, Pleasure write.
Look back on flourishing Rome, ye proud Ingrates,
And see how she her thriving Poets treats:
Wisely she prized 'em at the noblest Rate,
As necessary Ministers of State,
And contributions raised to make 'em great.
They from the public Bank she did maintain,
And freed from want, they only writ for Fame;
And were as useful in a City held,
As formidable Armies in the Field.
They but a Conquest over Men pursued,
While these by gentler force the Soul subdued.
Not Rome in all her happiest Pomp could show
A greater Caesar than we boast of now;
Augustus Reigns, but Poets still are low.
May Caesar live, and while his Mighty Hand
Is Scattering Plenty over all the Land;
With God like Bounty recompensing all,
Some fruitful drops may on the Muses fall;
Since honest Pens do his just^ cause afford
Equal Advantage with the useful Sword.

