DEar Alonzo! I shall love a Church the better this month for giving me a sight
of thee, whom I so little expected in this part of the World, and less in so
sanctifi'd a place. What affair could be powerful enough to draw thee from the
kind obliging Ladies of B^abant?


First the sudden orders of my Prince Don Iohn, and next a fair Lady.


A Lady! can any of this Country relish with a man that has been used to the
freedom of those of Bruxels, from whence I suppose you are now arrived?


This morning landed, from such a storm, as set us all to making vows of
conversion, (upon good conditions) and that indeed brought me to Church.


In that very storm I landed too, but with less sen^e of danger than you, being
diverted with a pleasant fellow that came along with me, and who is defign'd to
marry a sister of mine against my will -- And now I think of him, Gload, where
hast thou left this Master of thine?


At the Inn, Sir, in as lamentable a pickle, as if he were still in the storm;
recruiting his emptied stomach with Brandy, and railing against all women-kind
for your sisters sake, who has made him undertake this voyage.


Well, I'll come to him, go home before.


Prithee what thing is this?


Why, 'tis the Cashier to this Squire I spoke of, a man of business, and as
wise as his Master, but the graver Coxcomb of the two. But this Lady, Alonzo,
who is this Lady thou speak of? shall not I know her? we were wont to divide
the spoils of Beauty, as well as those of war between us.


O but this is no such prise, thou would hardly share this with the danger,
there's Matrimony in the case.


Nay, then keep her to thy self, only let me know who 'tis that can debauch
thee to that scandalous way of life; is she fair? will she recompense the
folly?


Faith I know not, I never saw her yet, but 'tis the sister of Marcell, whom we
both knew last Summer in Flandens, and where he and I contracted such a
friendship, that without other consideration he promised me Hippolyta, for
that's his sisters name.


But wo't thou really marry her?


I consider my advantage in being allied to so considerable a man as Ambrosio,
her father; I being now so unhappy as not to know my Birth or Parents.


I have often heard of some such thing, but durst not ask the truth of it.


'Tis so, all that I know of myself is, that a Spanish Soldier, who brought me
up in the Army, dying, confessed I was not his son, (which till then I believed)
and a^ the age of twelve left me to shift for my self; the fortune he enriched
me with was his Horse and Arms, with a few documents how to use them, as I had
seen him do with good success: This servant, and a Crucifix of value.


Honour is the Child of Virtue, and finds an owner every where.


Oh, Sir, you are a Courtier, and have much the odds of a Soldier in parleys
of this nature: But hither I am come --


To be undone; faith thou look ill upon^t.


I confess I am not altogether so brisk as I should have been upon another
occasion; you know Lovis I have been used to Christian liberty, and hate this
formal courtship. Pox on it, would 'twere over.


Where all parties are agreed, there's little need of that; and the Ladies of
Spain, whatever gravity they assume, are as ready as any you ever met withal.


But there's a damned custom that does not at all agree with men so frank and
gay as thou and I; there's a deal of danger in the achievement, which some say
hightens the pleasure, but I am of another opinion.


Sir, there is a female in a vail has follow'd us ever since we came from
Church.


Some amorous adventure: See she


Oh then, I must by no means leave you.


Which of these two shall I choose?

Sir, you appear a stranger.


We are both so Lady.


I shall spoil all, and bring


Would gladly obey your orders.


Nay, I find 'tis all one to you, which you choose, so you have one of us; but
would not both do better?


No, Sir, my commission's but to one.


Fix and proceed then, let me be the man.


What shall I do? they are both well: a Lady of quality and beauty, who
guessing you to be men of honour, has sent me to one of you.


Me I am sure.


Me, me, he's engaged already.


That's foul play Lovis.


Well, I must have but one, and therefore I'll wink and choose.


I'll not trust blind fortune.


Prithee Lovis let thee and I agree upon the matter, and I find the Lady will
be reasonable; cross or pile who shall go.


Go, Sir, whither?


To the Lady that --


Sent for neither of us that I can hear of yet.


You will not hear me out, but I'll end the difference by choosing you, Sir; and
if you'll follow me


Fair guide march on, I'll follow thee.


You are not mad, Sir, 'tis some abuse, and dangerous.


Be not envious of my happiness: Forbear a wench, for fear of danger!


Have a care, 'tis some plot.


No matter where.


At Church, Sir, just now.


I, I at Church, at Church, enough.


What's her name?


Away, thou art fuller of questions than a Fortune-teller: Come let's be gone.


Sure you do not mean to keep your word, Sir?


Not keep my word, Lovis! What wicked life hast thou known me lead, should make
thee suspect I should not. When I have made an interest in her, and find her
worth communicating, I will be just upon honour. -- Go, go.


Well, go your ways, if marriage do not tame you, you are past all hopes: but
pray, Sir, let me see you at my lodgings, the Golden Fleece here at the gate.


I'll attend thee there, and tell thee my adventure: Farewell. Pedro, go you and
inquire for the house of Don Ambrosio, and tell him I will wait on him in the
evening, by that time I shall get my self in order.


I Must remove Marcell, for his nice honour
Will ne'er permit that I should court my Sister;
My passion will admit of no restraint,
'Tis grown so violent; and fair Cleonte's charms
Each day increase to such a killing number,
That I must speak or dye.

What, still with folded arms and down-cast looks?

Oh Francisca!
My brothers presence now afflicts me more
Than all my fears of cruelty from Cleonte,
She is the best, the sweetest, kindest sister --

I, Sir, but she will never make the kindest Mistress.

At least she should permit me to adore her,
Were but Marcell away.
Hast thou no stratagem to get him absent?
For I can think of nothing but my sister.

I know of none, nor other remedy for you than loving less.


Oh 'tis impossible,
Thou know I've tried all ways, made my addresses
To all the fairest Virgins in Madrid;
Nay, and at last fell to the worst debauchery,
That of frequenting every common house:
But souls that feed so high on love as mine
Must nauseate courser diet:
No, I must still love on, and tell her so,
Or I must live no longer.

That methinks you might do even in the presence of Marcell. A brother is
allow'd to love a sister.


But I shall do it in such a way Francisca,
Be so transported, and so passionate,
I shall betray what he will ne'er endure.
And since our other sister loose Hippolyta was lost,
He does so guard and watch the fair Cleonte.

Why, quarrel with him, Sir, you know you are so much dearer to my Lord your
Father than he is, that should he perceive a difference between ye, he would
soon dismiss him the house; and 'twere but reason, Sir, for I am sure Don
Marcel loves you not.


That I excuse, since he the lawful heir to all my Fathers Fortunes, sees it
every day ready to be sacrificed to me, who can pretend no title to it, but the
unaccountable love my Father bears me.


Can you dissemble, Sir?


The worst of any man, but would endeavour it, if it could any ways advance my
love.


Which I must find some way to ruin.
Then court his Mistress.

The rich Flavia?

That would not incense him, for her he is to marry; but 'tis the fair Clarinda
has his heart.


To act a feigned love, and hide a real one,
Is what I have already tried in vain.
Even fair Clarinda I have courted too,
In hope that way to banish from my soul
The hopeless flame Cleonte kindled there;
But 'twas a shame to see how ill I did dissemble.

Stay, Sir, here comes Marcell. I'll leave you.

Kind Messenger of love! thus, thus a thousand times
I bid thee welcome from my fair Clarinda.
Thus joyful Bridegrooms after long despairs
Possess the yielding treasure in their arms;
Only thus much the happier lover I,
Who gather all the sweets of this fair Maid
Without the ceremonious tie of Marriage;
That tie that does but nauseate the delight,
Be far from happy Lovers; we will embrace
As unconfined and free as whispering Air
That mingles wantonly with spreading flowers.

What's all this?

Silvio, the victory's won.
The heart that nicely stood it out so long;
Now yields upon conditions.

What victory? or what heart?

I am all rapture, cannot speak it out;
My senses have carous'd too much of joy;
And like young drunkards, proud of their new tried strength,
Have made my pleasure less by the excess.

This is wondrous.
Impart some of your over-charge to me,
The burden lightened will be more supportable.

Read here, change thy wonders when thou know
How happy man can be.

Marcel, DOrmida will have ^e tell you what effects your vows have made, and
how easily they have drawn from me a consent to see you, as you desired this
night in my chamber: you have sworn to marry me, and love will have me credit
you, and then methinks I ought not to deny you any thing, nor question your
Virtue. Dormida will wait to throw you down the key, when all are in bed, that
will conduct you to

Your Clarinda*

Damn her for a dissembler*
Is this the chaste, the excell^nt Clarinda,
Whom whilst I courted was as cold and nice,
As a young Nun the day she is invested.

How now brother, what displeased with it?

A little, Sir, to see another happiness*
Whilst I where ere I pay my vows and sighs
Get nothing but disdain, and yet this shape
And face I never thought unhandsome.

These be the least approaches to a heart;
'Tis not dull looking well will do the feat,
There is a knack in Love, a critical minute:
And women must be watched as witches are
Ere they confess, and then they yield a pace.

Sir, there is without a servant of Don Alonzo 's, who says his Master will be
here to night.


Alonzo! now I begin to wake
From Love; like one from some delightful dream,
To reassume my wonted cares and shame.
-- I will not speak with him.
Oh Hippolyta! thou poor lost thing Hippolyta!
How art thou fallen from Honour, and from Virtue,
And livest in whoredom, with an impious villain?
Who in revenge to me has thus betrayed thee.
Keep thy self closer than thou'st done thy sin;
For if I find thee out, by all that's good,
Thou had more mercy on thy slaughtered honour,
Than I will have for thee.
And thou Antonio that hast betrayed her,
Who till profaned by thee, was chaste as shrines,
And pure as are the vows are offered there,
That rape which thou'st committed on her innocence,
I will revenge as shall become her Brother.

Stay Marcell,
I can inform you where these Lovers are.

Oh tell me quickly then,
That I may take them in their foul embraces,
And send their souls to Hell.

Last night I made a youthful sally to
One of those houses where love and pleasure
Are sold at dearest rates.

A Bordello; forwards pray.


Yes, at the corner of St. Iero^s; where after seeing many faces which pleased
me not, I would have took my leave; but the Matron of the house, a ki^d
obliging Lady, seeing me so nice, and of quality (though disguised) told me she
had a beauty, such an one, as had Count D^ Oliveris in his height of power
seen, he would have purchased at any rate. I grew impatient to see this fine
thing, and promised largly; then leading me into a room as gay, and as perfumed
as an Altar upon a Holy-day, I saw seated upon a Couch of state --


Hippolyta?

Hippolyta our sister dressed like a Venice Courtesan,
With all the charms of a loose wanton,
Singing and playing to her ravished Lover,
Who I perceived assisted to expose her.

Well, Sir, what follow'd?

Surprised at sight of this, I did with-draw
And left them laughing at my little confidence.

How! left them? and left them living too?

If a young wench will be gadding,
Who can help it?

'Sdeath, you should, were you that half her brother,
Which my Father too dotingly believes you.

How! do you question his belief, Marcel?

I ne'er considered it; be gone and leave me.

Am I a dog that thus you bid me vanish?
What mean you by this language?
And how dare you upbraid me with my birth,
Which know, Marcel, is more illustrious far
Than thine, being begot when love was in his reign*
With all his youth and heat about him?
I like birds of bravest kind was hatched
In the hot Sun-shine of delight, whilst
Thou Marcel were it poorly brooded
In the cold nest of Wed-lock.

Thy Mother was some base notorious strumpet,
And by her witch-craft, reduced may Fathers soul,
And in return she paid him with a b^sta^d,
Which* was thou.

Marcel, thou lie.

Though 'twere no point of valour but of rashness
To fight thee, yet I'll do it.

By Heaven I will not put this injury up.

Hold! I command you hold*
Ah Traitor to my blood, what hast thou done?

In fair Cleontes Arms!
O I could kiss the hand that gives me death,
So I might thus expire.

Pray hear me, Sir, before you do condemn me.

I will hear nothing but thy death pronounced,
Since thou hast wounded him, if it be mortal.
Have I not charged thee on thy life, Marcel,
Thou should not hold discourse with him of any kind?

I did fore-see my fate, but could not shun it.

What ho! Biscay, Surgeon; on your lives a Surgeon: where be these rascals?


I would not have a Surgeon search my wound,
With rude and heavy hands;
Yours, fair Cleonte, can apply the Balsom
Far more successfully.
For they are soft and white as down of Swans*
And every touch is sovereign.

But I should dye with looking on your wounds*

And I shall dye unless you cure them, sister.

With the expense of mine to save your life,
Is both my wish and duty.

I thank ye pretty innocence.

OLinda stays long, I hope she has over-took the Cavalier, Lord how I am
concerned! if this should be love now, I were in a fine condition, at least if
he be married, or a lover: Oh that fear! hang me, if it has not disordered me
all over. But see, where she comes with him too.


Here he is, Madam, I hope 'tis the right man.


Madam, you see what haste I make to obey your kind commands.


'Twas as kindly done, Sir; but I fear when you know to what end 'tis, you'll
repent your haste.


'Tis very likely; but if I do, you are not the first of your sex that has put
me to repentance: but lift up your vail, and if your face be good --


Stay you're too hasty.


Nay, let's have fair play on both sides, I'll hide nothing from you.


I have a question or two to ask you first,


I can promise nothing till I see my reward. I am a base barterer, here's one
for the other; you saw your man and liked him, and if I like you when I see you
--


But if you do not, must all my liking be cast away?


As for that, trust to my good nature; a frank wench has hitherto taken me as
much as beauty. And one proof you have already given of that, in this kind
invitation; come, come do not loose my little new-gotten good opinion of thee,
by being coy and peevish.


You are strangely impatient, Sir.


O you should like me the better for that, 'tis a sign of youth and fire.


But, Sir, before I let you see my face --


I hope I must not promise you to like it.


No, that were too unreasonable; but I must know whether you are a lover.


What an idle question's that to a brisk young fellow? a Lover, yes, and that
as often as I see a new face.


That I'll allow.


That's kindly said; and now do I find I shall be in love with thine, a^ soon
as I see it, for I am half so with thy humour already.


Are you not married, Sir?


Married!


Now I dread his answer.


Why I hope you make no scruple of conscience to be kind to a married man.


Now do I find, you hope I am a Courtesan that come to bargain for a night or
two; but if I possess you it must be for ever.


For ever let it be then, come let's begin on any terms.


I cannot blame you, Sir, for this mistake, since what I've rashly done, has
given you cause to think I am not virtuous.


Faith, Madam, man is a strange ungoverned thing; yet I in the whole course of
my life have taken the best care I could to make as few mistakes as possible,
and treating all women-kind alike we seldom err; for where we find one as you
profess to be, we happily light on a hundred of the sociable and reasonable
sort.


But sure you are so much a Gentleman that you may be convinced.


Faith if I be mistaken, I cannot devise what other use you can make of me.


In short this; I must leave you instantly; and will only tell you I am the
sole Daughter of a rich Parent, young, and as I am told not unhandsome; I am
contracted to a man I never saw, nor I am sure shall not like when I do see, he
having more vice and folly than his fortune will excuse, though a great one:
and I had rather dye than marry him.


I understand you, and you would have me dispatch this man.


I am not yet so wicked. The Church is the only* place I am allow'd to go to,
and till now could never see the man that was perfectly agreeably to me: Thus
veiled, I'll venture to tell you so.


What the devil will this come too? her men and shape are strangely graceful,
and her discourse is free and natural: What a damned defeat is this, that she
should be honest now?


Well, Sir, what answer? I see he is uneasy


Why, as I was saying, Madam, I am a stranger.


I like you the better for that*


But, Madam, I am a man unknown, unown'd in the world; and much unworthy the
honour you do me. -- Would I were well rid of her, and yet I find a damnable
inclination to stay too.

Will nothing but Matrimony serve your turn, Madam? pray use a young Lover as
kindly as you can.


Nothing but that will do, and that must be done.


Must! 'slife this is the first of her sex that ever was before-hand with me,
and yet that I should be forced to deny her too.


I fear his answer, Olinda.


At least 'tis but making a discovery of your beauty, and then you have him
sure.


Madam, 'tis a matter of moment, and requires deliberation; besides I have made
a kind of promise --


Never to marry?


No faith, 'tis not so well: but since now I find we are both in haste, I am to
be married.


This I am sure is an excuse; but I'll fit him for it.

Through the deep wound his eyes have lately made:
'Twas much unkind to make me hope so long.

Sure she does but counterfeit, and now I'll play my part. Madam, Madam!


What wondrous thing is that! I should not look upon it, it changes nature in
me.


Have you no pity, Sir? come nearer pray.


Sure there's witchcraft in that face, it never could have seized me thus else,
I have loved a thousand times, yet never felt such joyful pains before.


She does it rarely. What mean you, Sir?

I never was a captive till this hour.
If in her death such certain wounds she give,
What mischiefs she would do, if she should live!
Yet she must live, and live that I may prove
Whether this strange disorder here be love.
Divine, divinest Maid.

Come nearer, Sir, you'll do a Lady no good at that distance. Speak to her, Sir.


I know not what to say,
I am unused to this soft kind of language;
But if there be a charm in words, and such
As may conjure her to return again;
Prithee instruct me in them, I'll say any thing, do any thing, and suffer all
the wounds her eyes can give.


Sure he is real.
Alas! I am discovered, how came my vail off?

That you have let me see that lovely face,
May move your pity, not your anger, Madam*
Pity the wounds't has made, pity the slave,
Who till this moment boasted of his freedom.

May I believe all this? for that we easily do in things we wish.


Command me things impossible* to all sense but a Lovers, I will do it: to show
the truth of this, I could even give you the last proof of it, and take you at
your word, to marry you.


O wondrous reformation! marry me!


How do you mock my grief!


What a strange dissembling thing is man! to put me off too, you were to be
married.


Hah, I had forgot Hip^olyta.


See Olinda, the miracle increases, he can be serious too. How do you, Sir?


^Tis you h^ve robbed me of my native humour,
I never could think till now.

And to what purpose was it now?

Why, Love and Honour were at odds within me,
And I was making peace between them.

How fell that out, Sir?

About a pair of beauties; women,
That set the whole world at odds.
She that is Honours choice I never saw,
And Love has ^aught me new obedience here.

What means he? I fear he is in earnest.


'Tis nothing but his aversion to marriage, which most young men dread
now-a-days.


I must have this stranger, or I must dye; for whatever face I put upon it, I am
far gone in love, but I must hide it.

Well, since I have mist my aim, you shall never boast my death; I'll cast my
self away upon the next handsome young fellow I meet, though I dye for it; and
so farewell to you loving, Sir.


Stay, do not marry, as you esteem the life of him that shall possess you.


Sure you will not kill him.


By Heaven I will.


O I'll trust you, Sir: Farewell, farewell.


You shall not go in triumph thus,
Unless you take me with you.

Well, Since you are so resolved (and so in love) I'll give you leave to see me
once more at a house at the corner of St. Ieroms, where this Maid shall give
you entrance.


Why, that's generously said.


As soon as 'tis dark you may venture.


Till then will be an age, farewell fair Saint,
To thee and all my quiet till we meet.

THe night comes on, and offers me two pleasures,
The least of which would make another blessed;
Love and revenge, but I whilst I dispute
Which happiness to choose, neglect them both.
The greatest bliss that mankind can possess,
Persuades me this way, to my fair Clarinda:
But tyrannic Honour
Presents the credit of my house before me,
And bids me first redeem its fading glory,
By sacrificing that false woman's heart
That has undone its fame.
But stay, Oh conscience, when I look within,
And lay my anger by, I find that sin
Which I would punish in Antonio's soul,
Lye nourished up in mine without control.
To fair Clarinda such a siege I lay,
As did that traitor to Hippolyta;
Only Hippolyta a brother has,
Clarinda none to punish her disgrace:
And 'tis more glory the defenc'd to win,
Than 'tis to take unguarded virtue in.
I either must my shameful love resign,
Or my more brave and just revenge decline.

But to be thus in love, is't not a wonder Lovis?


No, Sir, it had been much a greater, if you had stayed a night in Town without
being so; and I shall see this wonder as often as you see a new face of a
pretty woman.


I do not say that I shall lose all passion, for the fair sex hereafter; but on
my conscience this amiable stranger has given me a deeper wound than ever I
received from any before.


Well, you remember the bargain.


What bargain?


To communicate; you understand.


There's the Devil on it, she is not such a prise: Oh were she not honest!
friend.


Is it so to do? what, you pretend to be a lover, and she honest, now only to
deprive me of my part, remember this Alonzo.


Did I not hear Alonzo named?

By all that's good I am in earnest, friend,
Nay thy own eyes shall convince thee
Of the power of hers.
Her vail fell off, and she appeared to me,
Like unexpected day from out a cloud;
The lost benighted traveller
Sees not the approach of next mornings Sun
With more transported joy,
Than I this ravishing and unknown beauty.

Hey day! what stuffs here? nay, now I see thou art quite gone indeed.


I fear it, Oh had she not been honest!
What joy! what heaven of joys she would distribute!
With such a face, and shape, a wit, and men --
But as she is, I know not what to do.

You cannot marry her.


I would not willingly, though I think I'm free: For Pedro went to Marcel to
tell him I was arrived, and would wait on him; but was treated more like a spy,
than a messenger of love: they sent no answer back, which I tell you Lovis
angers me: 'twas not the entertainment I expected from my brave friend Marcel.
But now I am for the fair stranger, who by this expects me.


'Tis Alonzo, Oh how he animates my rage! and turns me over to revenge, upon
Hippolyta and her^false lover.


Who's this that walks before us?


No matter who.

I am follow'd.

See he stops.

Let him do what he please, we will out-go him.

This man who ever he be still follows us.

I care not, nothing shall hinder my design, I'll go though I make my passage
through his heart.


See, he advances, pray stand by a little.

Sure there's some trick in this, but I'll not fear it.
This is the street, and here about's the house.
This must be it, if I can get admittance now.

O, Sir, are you come? my Lady grew impatient.

She takes me for some other: this is happy*

Gods! is not that the Maid that first conduct^d me to the fair thing that
robbed me of my heart?


I think it is.

She gives admittance to another man.
All women-kind are false, I'll in and tell her so.

You are too rash, 'tis dangerous.

I do despise thy counsel, let me go.

If you're resolved, I'll run the hazard with you.

BY Heavens 'tis she: Vile strumpet!


Alas, this is not he whom I expected.


Marcel! I had rather have encountered my evil Angel than thee.


I do believe thee, base ungenerous coward.


Take courage, Sir.

Prevented! who ever thou be,
It was unjustly done,
To save his life who merits death,
By a more shameful way.
But thanks ye gods she still remains to mee^
That punishment that's due to her foul lust.

'Tis this way you must make your passage then.

What art thou, that thus a second time
Dare interpose between revenge and me?

'Tis Marcel^ what can thi^ mean?
Dost thou not know me friend? look on me well.

Alonzo here! Ah I shall dye with shame.
As you're my friend, remove from that bad woman,
Whose sins deserve no sanctuary.

What can ^e mean? I dare not sh^w my fa^e.

I do believe this woman is a false one,
But still she is a woman, and a fai^ one*
And would not suffer thee to injure her,
Though I believe she has undone thy qui^t*
As she has lately mi^*

Why dost thou know it then?
Stand by, I shall forg^t thou art my friend else,
And through thy heart reach hers.

Nothing bu^ love could animate him thus*
He is my Rival*
Marcel, I will not quit one inch of ground;
Do what thou dare, for know I do adore h^r,
And thus am bound by love to her defence*

Hold noble stranger, hold.

Have you such pity on your lover, there?

Help, help.

Oh Gods, my brother! in pity, Sir, defend me,
From the just rage of that incensed man.

I know not the meaning of all this, but
However I'll help the Lady in distress.
Madam, you're safe, whilst I am your protector.

I've lost the power of striking where I ought,
Since my misguided hand so lately erred.
Oh rage, dull senseless rage, how blind and
Rude it makes us.
Pardon fair creature my unruly passion*
And only blame your vail which hid that face,
Whose innocence and beauty had disarmed it:
I took you for the most perfidious woman,
The falsest loosest thing.

How! are you a stranger to her?

Yes I am, have you forgiven me Madam?

Sir, I have.

Stay friend, and let me know your quarrel.

Not for the world, Alonzo.

This is unfriendly, Sir.

Thou dost delay me from the noblest deed,
On which the honour of my house depends,
A deed which thou wilt curse thy self for hindering.
Farewell.

What can the meaning of this be?

Oh do not ask, but let us quickly leave this dangerous place.


Does't not belong to you?

No, but you would like me the better if it did: for,
Sir, it is a --

Upon my life a baudy-house.

So they call it.

You do amaze me.

Truth is, not daring to trust my friends or relations with a secret that so
nearly concerned me, as the meeting you, and hearing of a new come Courtesan
living in this house, I sent her word I would make her a visit, knowing she
would gladly receive it from a Maid of my quality: When I came, I told her my
business, and very frankly she offered me her house and service.

Perhaps you'll like me the worse for this bold venture, but when you consider
my promised husband is every day expected, you will think it but just to secure
my self any way.


You could not give me a greater proof than this of what you say, you bless me
with your Love.


I will not question but you are in earnest; at least if any doubt remain,
these will resolve it.


What are these, Madam?


Letters, Sir, I intercepted from the Father of my designed Husband out of
Flanders to mine.


What use can I make of them?


Only this: put your self into a equipage very ridiculous, and pretend you are
my foolish lover arrived from Flanders, call your self Ha^nce van Erel, and
give my Father these, as for the rest I'll trust your wit,


What shall I say or do now?

Come, come, no study, Sir, this must be done,
And quickly too* or you will lose me.

Two great evils, if I had but the grace to chu^e the least now, that is, lo^
her.


I'll give you but to night to consider it.


Short warning this: but I am damnably in love, and ^annot withstand
temptation.


I had forgot to tell you my name's Euph^ia, my Father's you will find on the
Letters* and pray show your love in your haste. Farewell.


Stay fair Euph^ia, and let me pay my thanks, and tell you that I must obey
you.


I give a credit where I give a heart.
Go inquire my birth and fortune, as for you
I am content with what I see about you.

That's bravely said, nor will I ask one question about you, not only to return
the bounty, but to avoid all things that look like the approaches to a married
life. If fortune will put us together, let her even provide for us.


I ^ust be gone: ^arewel, and pray make haste,


There's no resisting those looks, Euphemia: One more to fortify me well; For
I shall have need of every aid in this case.


COme let us has^e, I ^ear we are pursued.


Ah whither shall we fly?


We are near the gate, and must secure our selves with the darkness of the
night in St. Peters Grove, we dare not venture into any house.


Can thou not see hi^ yet?


Good lack-a-day what an impatient thing is a young Girl in love?


Nay, good Dormida, let not want of sleep make the^ testy.


In good time are you ^y Governess, or I yours? that you are giving me
instructions, go get you in, or I shall lay down my office.


Nay, wait a little longer, I'm sure he will come.


You are sure! you have wondrous skill indeed in the hu^ours of men: how came
you to ^e so well acquainted with them? you scarce ever saw any bu^ Do^ M^r^el,
and him too but through a gra^e ^r window, (...) ^t Church, and yet you are
sure. I am a little the eld^ of the two, and hav^ managed as many intrigues of
this kin^ as any woman, and never found a constant just man, as they ^ay, of a
thous^nd, and yet you are sure.


Why is it possible Marcel should be ^alse?


Marcel! no, no, sweet-heart, he is that man of a thousand.


But if he should, you have undone me, by telling me so many pretty things of
him.


Still you question my ability, which by no means I can endure; get you in I
say.


Do not speak so loud, you will wake my mother.


At your instructions again; do you question my conduct and management of this
affair: go watch for him your self: I'll have no more to do with you ba^k nor
edge.


Will you be so barbarous to leave me to my self, after having made it your
business this three months to solicit a heart which was but too ready to yield
before; af^er having sworn to me how honourable all his inten^ were; nay, made
me write to him to come to night? And now when I have done this, and am all
trembling with fear and shame (and yet an infinite desire to see him too)


What you are angry I'll warrant?


I will punish my self to pay thee back, and will not see Marcel.


What a pettish fool is a Maid in love at fifteen, how unmanageable? but I'll
forgive all, go ge^ you in, I'll watch for your lover; I would not have you
disoblige a man of his pretensions, and quality for all the world.


Now do I want Lovis extremely, to consult with him about this business: For I
am afraid the divel, or love, or both are so great with me, that I must ^arry
this fair Enchantress, which is very unluckily; but, since Ambrosio and Marcel
refuse to see me, I hold my self no longer engaged in hono^r to Hippolyta.


above. Whist, whist, Sir, Sir.


Whose there?


'Tis I, your servant, Sir; oh you are a fine spark, are you not, to make so
fair a creature wait so long for you? there, there's the key, open the door
softly and come in.


What's this? but I'll ask no questions: so fair a creature said she? Now if
'twere to save my life cannot I forbear, I must go in: Should Euphemia know
this, she would call it levity and inconstance; but I plead necessity, and will
be judged by the amorous men, and not the jealous women: For certain this Lady,
who e're she be, designs me a more speedy favour than I can hope from Euphemia,
and on easier terms too: this is the door, that must conduct to the languishing
Venus.


Thus far I have pursued the fugitives,
Who by the help of hasty fear and night,
Are got beyond my power; unlucky-accident!
Had I but killed Antonio, or Hippolyta,
Either had made my shame supportable.
But though I have mist the pleasure of revenge,
I will not that of love.
One look from fair Clarinda will appease
The madness which this disappointment raised.
None appears yet: Dormida was to throw me down the key.
The door is open, left so to give me entrance.

NOw am I in a worse condition than before, can neither advance nor retreat; I
do not like this groping alone in the dark thus; whereabouts am I? I dare not
call: were this fair thing she spoke of but now, half so impatient as I, she
would bring a light and conduct me.


'Tis wondrous dark.


Hah! a mans voice that way; that's not so well, it may be some Lover, Husband
or Brother; none of which are to be trusted in this case, therefore I'll stand
upon my guard.


Who's there?

A man.

A man! none such inhabit here.
Thy business?

This shall answer you, fince there's no other way.

This is not just ye gods to punish me, and let the Traitor escape unknown too:
Me thought 'twas Silvio's voice, or else a sudden thought of jealousy come
into my head, would make me think so.


I tell you I did hear the noise of fighting.


Why, between whom should it be? I'll be sworn Marcel came in alone.


Marcel! and wounded too, oh I am lost.


Keep your false tears to bath your lovers wounds, For I perhaps have given
some -- Thou old assistant to her lust, whose greatest sin is wishing, tell me
who 'twas thou did procure for her.


Alas! I cannot imagine who it should be, unless Don Silvio, who has sometimes
made addresses to her: But oh the house is up, Madam, we are undone; let's fly
for heavens sake.


Oh Marcel, can you believe --


Come, come, I'll not be undone for your fidle fadles, I'll lay it all on you if
I be taken.


Sot that I was, I could not guess at this to day, by his anger at the Letter I
foolishly showed him, he is my rival, and 'tis with him she's fled; and I'll
endeavour to pursu^ them.

But oh my strength complys with their


THis Act of mine was rash, and ill natured,
And I cannot leave the Street with a good conscience,
Till I know what mischief I have done.

Hah, Ladies from the same house! these are birds that I have frighted from
their nests I am sure: I'll profer my service to them.

Why do not you make more haste?

How can she go whose life is left behind?
Besides I know not whither we should go.
Ye powers that guard the innocent protect us.

These must be some whom I have injured.
Ladies -- you seem as in distress.

Oh, Sir, as you are a Gentleman assist a pair of Virgins.


What's this, a mumping Matron? I hope the others young, or I have offered my
service to little purpose.


Sir, if you will have the charity to assist us,
Do it speedily, we shall be very grateful to you.

Madam, I will, but know not where to carry ye; my lodging is an Inn, and is
neither safe nor honourable: but fortune fares no less than protect the fair,
and I'll venture my life in your protection and service.


Stay Traitor stay, oh they are out of sight*
But may my curse overtake them in their flight.

FRancisca, thou art dull to night.


You will not give me leave to talk.


Not thy way indeed, hast thou no stories but of love, and of my Brother Silvio?


None that you wish to hear: But I'll do what you please, so you will not oblige
me to ^igh for you.


Then prithee sing to me.


What Song, a merry or a sad?


Please thy own humour, for then thou'lt sing best.


Well, Madam, I'll obey you and please my self.

A Myntas led me to a grove,
Where all the Trees did shade us:
The Sun it self, though it had strove,
Yet could not have betrayed us.
The place secure from humane eyes,
No other fear allows;
But when the winds that gently rise
Do kiss the yielding bo^ghs.
Down there we sat upon the Moss,
And did begin to play
A thousand wanton tricks, to pass
The heat of all the day.
A many kisses he did give,
And I returned the same:
Which made me willing to receive,
That which I dare not name.
His charming eyes no aid required,
To tell their amorous tale;
On her that was already fired,
'Twas easy to prevail.
He did but kiss, and clasp me round,
Whilst they his thoughts expressed,
And laid me gently on the ground;
Ah! who can guess the rest?

My Brother Silvio, at this late hour, and in my lodgings too! How do you, Sir?
are you not well?


Oh why did nature give me being?
Or why create me brother to Cleonte?
Or give her charms, and me the sense to adore 'em?

Dear Brother --

Ah Cleonte --

What would you, Sir?

I am not -- well --

Sleep, Sir, will give you ease.

I cannot sleep, my wounds do rage and burn so, as they put me past all power
of rest.


We will call your Surgeon, Sir.

He can contribute nothing to my cure,
But I must owe it all to thee, Cleonte.

Instruct me in the way, give me your arm,
And I will bath it in a thousand tears,
And breath so many sighs into your wound --

Let that slight hurt alone, and search this -- here.

How! are you wounded there?
And would not let us know it all this while?

I durst not tell you, but designed to suffer,
Rather than trouble you with my complaints;
But now my pain is greater than my courage.

Oh, he will tell her, that he loves her sure.

Sit down, and let me see it.

Oh foolish innocence --

You have deceived ^e brother, here's no wound.

Oh take away your hand --
It does increase my pain, and wounds me deeper.

No, surely, Sir, my hand is very gentle.

Therefore it hurts me sister; the very thoughts
Of touches by so soft and fair a hand,
Playing about my heart are not to be
Endured with life.

Alas, what means my Brother?

Can you not guess fair sister? have my eyes
So ill expressed my soul? or has your innocence
Not su^fer'd you to understa^d my sighs?
Have then a thousand tales which I have told you,
Of broken hearts and lovers languishments,
Not served to tell you, that I did adore you?

Oh let me still remain in innocence,
Rather than sin so much to understand you.

I can endure no more --

Can you believe it sia to love a Brother? it is not so* in nature.


Not as a Brother, Sir; but otherwise
It is, by all the Laws of Men and Heaven.

Sister, so 'tis that we should do no murder,
And yet you daily kill, and I among the number
Of your victims, must charge you with the sin of
Killing me, a Lover, and a Brother.

What would you have me do?

Why -- I would have thee do -- I know not what --
Still to be with me -- yet that will not satisfy;
To let me -- look upon thee -- still that's not enough.
I dare not say to ki^ thee, and embrace thee;
That were to make me wish -- I dare not tell thee what --

I must not hear this language from a Brother.

What a vile thing's a brother?
Stay, take this dagger, and add one wound more
To those your eyes have given, and after that
You'll find no trouble from my sighs and tears.

By this she understands him, curse on her innocence, 'Tis fuel to his flame --



At this hour a Lady! who can it be?


I know not, but she seems of quality.


Is she alone?


Attended by a Gentleman and an old woman.


Perhaps some one that needs a kind assistance? my father is in bed, and I'll
venture to know their business: Bring her up.


'Twere good you should retire, Sir.


I will, but have a care of me, Cleonte,

I fear I shall grow mad, ^nd so undo thee:
Love me -- but do not let me know it too much.

Is't me you would command?


I know not what to say, I'm so disordered.


What Troops of beauties she has! sufficient to take whole Cities in. -- Madam,
I beg --


What, Sir?


That you would receive into protection --


What pray, Sir?


Would you would give me leave to say a heart, that your fair eyes have lately
made unfit for its old quarters.


I rather think you m^n ^is Lady, Sir*


She's heavenly fair too, and (...) surprised my heart, just as 'twas going to
the others bosom, and robbed her at least of one half o^ it.


Madam, I am a Virgin in distress,
And by misfortune forced to seek a san^tuary,
And humbly beg it here.

Entreaties were not made for that ^air mouth,
Command and be obeyed.
But, Sir, to whom do you belo^g?

I belong to a very fair person,
But do not know her name.

But what are you, pray, Sir?

Madam, a wanderer; a po^ lost thing, that none will own or pity.


That's sad indeed; but who ever you are, since you belong to this fair Maid,
you^l find a welcome every where.


And if I do not, I am cashiered.
Madam, if telling you I am her Brother,
Can make me more acceptable,
I shall be yet mor^ (...) of the (...).

What must I call your Sister, Sir, when I would pay my duty?


There I am routed again with ano^her hard question.


Madam, ^y name's Clarinda.


Madam, I'^ take my leave, and wish the heart I leave with you to night, may
perswad^ yo^ ^o suffer my visits to morrow, till when I shall do no^hing b^t
languish.


I know not what los^ you have suffe^'d to night* but since your fair Sisters
p^esence with us allows it, you need not doub^ a w^lcome*


I humbly t^ank you, Madam.

Madam, pray (...), for Don Marcel is come into the house all bloody, enraged
against somebody.


I'm troubled at his hurt, but cannot fear his rage. Good night, Sir.


They are gone; now had I as much mind to have kissed the others hand, but that
'twas not a ceremony due to a Sister: what the Devil came into my head to say
she was so? nothing but the natural itch of talking and lying; they are very
fair; but what's that to me, Euphemia surpasses both: but a pox of her terms of
marriage, I'll set that to her beauty, and then these get the day, as far as
natural necessity goes: but I'll home and sleep upon it, and yield to what's most
powerful in the morning.

To night thes^ strangers do my heart possess,
But which the greatest share, I cannot guess:
My fate in love resembles that in war,
When the rich spoil falls to the common share.

SUre I shall know this house again to morrow,


I wonder what should be become of Alonzo, I do not like these night-works of
his. -- Whose there?


Lovis!


Alonzo!


The same, where hast thou been*


In search of you this two hours.


O I have been taken up with new adventures, since I saw thee; but prithee what
became of thine? for me thought it was a likely woman.


Faith, Sir, I thought I had got a Prize; but a pox on it, when I came into the
Street, ever she had recovered breath to tell me who she was, the Cavalier you
rescued from Marcel laid claim to her; thanked me for her preservation and
vanished. I hope you had better luck with your Female, whose face I had not the
good fortune to see.


Not so good as I could have wish^, for she stands ^till on her honourable
terms.


Of Matrimony, ha, ha, a very Jilt, I'll warrant her; Come, come, you shall see
her no more.


Faith, I fear I must.


To what purpose?


To persuade her to reason.


That you'll soon do, when she finds you will not bit^ at the other bait.


The worst is, if I see her again, it must be at her fathers house; and so
transformed from man to beast -- I must appear like a ridiculous lover* she
expects ou^ of Flanders.


A very cheat, a trick to draw thee in; be wise i^ time.


No on my conscience she's in earnest, she told me her name, and his I am to
represent.


What is't, I pray?


Haunce van Ezel*


Hah; her name too, I beseech you?


Euphemia! and such a creature 'tis --


'Sdeath my Sister all this while: This has called up all that's Spaniard in
me, and makes me raging mad*


Most desperately, beyond all senc^ or reason*


And could you be content to marry her?

Any thing but that -- But thou know, my (...) elsewhere; and I have hope^
that yet she'll be wi^* and yield on more pleasant terms.


I could be angry now* ^ to blame him for this.

Sir, I believe by your treatment from Ambrosio and (...), you may come off
there easily.


That will not satisfy ^ love; that I have ^ own inconstancy, not theirs;
besides this may ^ say.


But does Euphemia love you?


Faith, I think she has too much wit to dissem^, and too much b^auty to need
that Art.


Then you must marry her.


Not if I can avoid it.


I know this Lady, Sir, and know her to be worth your love; I have it in my
power too, to serve you, if you proceed suddenly, which you must do or lose
her; for this Flandrian Boor your Rival is already arrived, and designs to
^orrow to make his first address to Euphemia.


Oh he must not, shall not see her.


How will you hinder him?


With this.

Where is this Rival? tell me: Conduct me to him straight; I find my love above
the common ^ate, and cannot brook this Rival.


So, this blows the ^lame -- His life will be no hindrance to you in this
affair, if you design to love on.


Dost know him?


Yes, he is a pleasant original for you to be copied by: (...) is the same
Fop* I told you was to marry my Sister, and who came along with me to Madrid.


How! Euphemia thy Sister?


Yen, isdend is she, and whom my Father de^igns to cast away upon this half
man, half fool; but I find she has wit to make a better choice; she yet ^nows
nothing of my arrival, and till you resolve what to do, shall not; and my (...)
man does nothing without me.


If thou hast the management of him, he's likely to ^hrive.


(...) no^ in his Amour, (...) you please: In short, Sir, if you do really love
my Sister, I am content to be so ungracious a child to contribute to the
cheating my Father of this same hopeful son he expects, and put you upon him*
bu^ what you do, must be speedily then.


I am obliged to thee for this frank offer, and will be instructed by thee.


If you're resolved, I'll warrant you success.


I (...) I ^m ^solv'd in spite of all ^y i^linations to libertinism.


W^ll, Si^, I'll g^t you such a suit then, as that our Hero mak^ his first
approach in, as ridiculously gay as his humour, which you must assume to^.


Content.


To night I must pay my duty to my Fath^r, and will prepare your way, and
acquaint my sister with it: 'tis but a frolic if we succeed not.


God a mercy lad, let's ab^ut it then ever we sleep, lest I change my
resolution before morning.


VEry Haunce all over, the Taylor has played his part, play but yours as well,
and I'll warrant you the w^nch.


But pre^hee, why need I act the fool thus, sinc^ Haunce was never seen here?


To make good the character I always gave of him to my Father; but here he
comes, pray be very rude, and very impertinent.


Lord, Lord, how shall I look thus damnably set out, and thus in lore*


This, Sir, is Monsieur Haunce, your son that must be.


^e^o lo^ ^ano^ sig^* I^ your name Don Carlo? and are you the gravity of this
House? and the Father of Dona Euphe^i^ (...) and are you --


Sir, I guess by all these your demands at once;
Your name to be Mine heer Haunce van Ezel.

Your judgement's good; but to my questions.

In truth I have forgot them, there was so many.

Are you he who is to be my Father?

'Tis so negotiated -- and if all circumstances con^urr -- For, Sir, you must
conceive, the consequence of so grand a conjunction --


Less of your compliments, Sir, and more of your Daughter, I beseech you.
'Shart what a formal coxcomb 'tis!


Prithee give him way.


By this light I'll lose thy sister first? Why who can endure the grave
approaches to the matter? 'Dslise, I would have it as I would my fate, sudden
and unexpected.


Pray how long have you been landed?


So, now shall I be plagued with nothing but wise questions, to which I am able
to make no answer.

Sir, it is your Daughter that I desire to see impatiently.

Have you no letters from my very good friend your Father?


What if I have not? cannot I be admitted to your Daughter without a pass?


O lack, Sir --


But to let you see I come with full power (though I am old enough to recommend
my self) here is my commission for what I do.


I remember amongst his other faults, my son writ me word he had courage: if
so, I shall consider what to do.


I know that, Sir, but I wa^ told I should express my love in my haste:
therefore outsailing the Packet, I was the welcome messenger my self; and
since I am so forward, I beseech you, Sir --


Spare your words, I understand their meaning, a prudent man speaks least, as
the Spaniard has it; and since you are so forward, as you were saying, I shall
not be backward, but as your Father advises here, hasten the uniting of our
Families, with all celerity; for delay in these affairs, is but to prolong
time* as the wise man says*


You are much in the right, Sir. But my wife, I desire to be better acquainted
with her.


She shall be forth-coming, Sir* Had you a good passage? for the seas and winds
regard no mans necessity.


No, no, a very ill one: your Daughter, Sir.


Pray how long were you a^ sea?


Euphemia, Sir, Euphemia, your daughter. This Don's fuller of questions than of
proverbs, and that's a wonder.


They say Flanders is a very fine Country, I never saw it; but --


Nor 'tis no matter, sir, if you never do, so I saw your Daughter. He'll
catechise me home to my Dutch Parents by and by, of which I can give him no
more account than --


Are they as dissatisfied with their new Governor, as they were with Don Iohn?
for they love change.


A po^ of their government, I tell you I love your Daughter.


I fear 'tis so, he is valiant, and what a dangerous quality is that in Spain?
'tis well he's rich.


Pray, Sir, keep him not long in discourse, the sea has made him unfit for --


Any thing but seeing my Mistress.


I'll have mercy upon thee, and fetch her to thee.


Sir, you must know, that we suffer not our women in Spain to converse so
frequently with your sex, and that through a cautious -- well considered
prudent -- consideration.


But, Sir, do you consider what an impatient thing a young lover is, or is it
so long since you were one your self, you have forgot it? 'Tis well he wanted
words: But yonder's Euphemia, whose


I must not urge him to speak much before Euphe^ia* lest she discover he wants
wit by his much tongue:


Oh, I thank you for that, Sir.


You must be bold, Sir.


Well, Sir, since you command me --


I did not ^ean kissing by saluting.


I cry you mercy, Sir, so I understood you.


Fie upon it, that he should be no more a Master of civility.


I fear, Sir, my sister will never like this humour in her Lover; he wants
common conversation.


Conversation -- ye foolish boy, he has money and needs none of your
conversation. And yet if I thought he were valiant --


I hope, Sir, he does but boast of more of that than he really has.


That fault I my self have been guilty of, and can excuse; but the thing it
self I shall never endure: you know I was forced to send you abroad, because I
thought you addicted to that. I shall never sleep ^in ^quiet -- Valiant! that's
such a thing to be rich or wise, and valiant.


Colonel, pray to the business, for I fear you will betray your self.


But look upon his wealth Euphemia, and you will find those advantages there
which are wanting in his person: But I think the man's well.


I must not seem to yield too soon.
Sir, there be many Spaniards born that are as rich (...) ^e, and have wit too.


She (...) ever very ave^se to this mar^age.


I, Sir, but he is such a fool --


You are a worse, to find fault with that in a husband.


Stand aside, sir, are you ^ your Daughter or I?


I was inclining her --


You inclining her! an old man want's Rhetoric; set me to her.


This capricious humour was tolerable in him, whilst I believed it the effects
o^r folly, but now 'tis that of valour: Oh I tremble at the sight of him.


Now I see you are a Cavalier of your word.


Faith Euphemia, you might have believed, and taken me upon better terms, if
you had so pleased* To marry you is but an ill-favour'd proof to give you of my
(...).


Do you repent it*


Would to God 'twere come but to that, I wa^ just upon the point of it when you
entered. But I know not what the Divel there is in that (...) of yours, but it
has debauched every ^ober thought about me. Faith, do not let us marry yet.


If we had not proceeded too far to retreat, I should be content.


What shall I come to? all on the sudden to leave delicious whoring, drinking
and fighting, and be condemned to a dull honest Wife. Well, if it he my ill
fortune, may this curse light on thee that hast brought me to it: may I love
thee even after we are married to that troublesome degree, that I may grow most
damnable jealous of thee, and keep thee ^rom the fight of all mankind, but thy
own natural husband, that so thou may be deprived of the greatest pleasure of
this life* the blessing of change.


I am sorry to find so much ill nature in you, would you have the c^nscience to
tie me to harder cond^tions than I would you?


Nay, I do ^or think I shall be so wickedly loving; but I am resolved to ^arry
thee and try*


My Father, Sir* on with your disguis^*


Well, Sir, how do you like my Daughter?


So, so, she'll serve for a Wife.


But do you find he^ willing to be so?


'Tis not, a half^ penny matter for that, as long as my Father and you are
agreed upon the matter.


Well Euphemia, setting all foolish modesty aside, how do you like this man?


As one, whom in obedience to you, I am content to cast my self away upon.


How seems his humour to you?


Indifferent, Sir, he is not very courtly, something rough and hasty.


I fear she has found his ill quality of valour too, and since 'tis certain
'tis so, why should it be said that I ruined a child to satisfy my appetite of
riches?

Come Daughter, can you love him, or can you not? For I'll make but short work
on it; you are my Daughter, and have a fortune great enough to enrich any man;
and I'm resolved to put no force upon your inclinations.


How's this! nay, then 'tis time I left dissembling.


Do not dissemble with me, I say do not; for I am resolved you shall be happy.


Sir, my obedience shall --


No more of your ob^dience: I say again do not dissemble, for I'm not pleased
with your obedience.


This alteration is very strange and sudden; pray Heaven he have not found the
cheat.

Love, Sir, they say will come after marriage; pray let me try it.


Few have found it so; nor shall you experience ^ so dear a rate as your ruin.


But, Sir, methinks I am grown to love him more since he spoke to me, than
before.


The effects of your obedience again.


This is a strange alteration, Sir; not all my tears and prayers before I saw
him could prevail with you. I beseech you, Sir, believe me.


Nor should now, had I not another reason for it.


Oh, I fear. -- But, Sir --


Go to, I'll be better satisfied ever I proceed farther; both of your
inclinations, and his courage.


Do you consider his wealth, Sir?


That shall not now befriend him.


Sir, I bar whispering; 'tis not in my bargain nor civil: I'll have fair play
for my money.


I am only knowing my Daughters pleasure, she is a little peevish, as Virgins
use in such cases, but would that were all, and I'd endeavour to reconcile her.


I thank you, Sir; in the mean time I'll take a walk for an hour or two, to get
me a better stomach both to my Dinner and Mistress.


Do so, Sir. Come Euphemia, I will give you a proof of my indulgence, thou
shalt marry no valiant fools, valiant quoth ye. Come, come -- had he been
peaceable and rich -- Come, come --


Well, now I'll go look after my Dutchman, lest he surprise us here, which must
not be; where shall I find you?


I'll wait upon my Prince, and then on you here.


Do so, and carry on this humour.


AH, ah, a pox of all Sea-voyages.
Here Gload, take thee the other soap and then let's home.
Ah, ha, a pox of all Sea-voyages.

Sir, if I may advise, take the other turn in the Grove, for I find by my nose
you want more airing.


How sirrah! by your nose? have a care, you know 'tis ill jesting with me when
I'm angry.


Which is as often as you are drunk, I find it has the same effects on me too;
but truly, Sir, I meant no other than that you smell a little of the vessel, a
certain sour remains of a storm about you.


Ah, ah, do not name a storm to me, unless thou wilt have the effects on it in
thy face.


Sha, sha, bear up, Sir, bear up.


Salerimente, a sea phrase too! why ye rascal, I tell you I can endure nothing
that puts me in mind of that element.


The sight of Donna Euphemia will --


Hold, hold, let me consider whether I can endure to hear her named or not; for
I think I am so thoroughly mortifi'd, I shall hardly relish woman-kind again
this -- two hours.


You a man of courage, and talk thus?


Courage? why what dost thou call courage? Hector himself would not have
changed his ten years siege for our ten days storm at Sea -- a storm -- a
hundred thousand fighting men are nothing to it; City's sacked by fire nothing;
'tis a resistless coward that attaques a man at disadvantage; an unaccountable
magic that first conjures down a mans courage, and then plays the Divel over
him. And in fine, it is a storm --


Good lack that it should be all these terrible, things and yet that we should
outbrave it.


No god a mercy to our courages though, I tell you that now Gload; but like an
angry wench, when it had hurt and blustered it self weary, it lay still again.


Hold, hold, Sir, you know we are to make visits to Ladies, Sir; and this
replenishing of our spirits, as you call it, Sir, may put us out of case.


Thou art a fool, I never made love so well as when I was drunk, it improves my
parts, and makes me witty; that is, it makes me say any thing that comes next,
which passes now-a-days for wit; and when I'm very drunk, I'll home and dress
me, and the Devils in it, if she resist me so qualified, and so dressed.


Truly, Sir, those are things that do not properly belong to you.


Your reason, yo^r reason, we shall have thee witty too in thy drink, hah?


Why, I say, Sir, none but a Cavalier ought to be soundly drunk, or wear a
sword and feather; and a cloak and band were fitter for a M^rchant.


Salerimente, I'll beat any Don in Spain that does but think he has more right
to any sort of debauchery, or gallantry than I, I tell you that now Gload.


Do you remember, Sir, how you were wont to go at home? when instead of a
Periwig, you wore a slink, greasy hair of your own, through which a pair of
large thin souses appeared, to support a formal hat, on end thus --


Ha, ha, ha, the Rogue improves upon it.


A Collar in stead of a Cravat twelve inches high; with a blew, stiff, starcht,
lawn Band, set in print like your Whiskers; a Doublet with small Skirts hookt to
a pair of wide-kneed Briches, which dangled half way over a leg, all to be
dashed and durty'd as high as the gartering.


Ha, ha, ha, very well, proceed.


Your hands defiled with counting of damned dirty money, never made other use
of gloves, than continually to draw them through -- thus -- till they were
dwindled into the scantling of a Cats-gut.


Ha, ha, ha, a pleasant rascal.


A cloak, half a yard shorter than the Breeches, not through lined, but faced
as far as 'twas turned back, with a pair of frugal butter ^ams, which was
always managed -- thus --


Well, Sir, have you done, that I may show you this Merchant reversed?


Presently, Sir; only a little touch at your debauchery, which unless it be in
damned Brandy, you dare not go to the expense of. Perhaps at a wedding, or some
treat where your purse is not concerned, you would most insatiably tipple,
otherwise your two stivers Club is the highest you dare go, where you will be
condemned for a prodigal (even by your own conscience) if you add two more
extraordinary to the sum, and at home sit in the chi^ney corner, cursing the
face of Duke de Alva upon the Juggs, for laying an imposition on Beer: And now,
Sir, I have done.


And dost thou not know when one of those thou hast described, goes but half a
league out of Town, that he is so transformed from the Merchant to the Gallant
in all points, that his own Parents, nay, the Divel himself cannot know him?
Not a young English Squire, newly come to an estate, above the management of
his wit, has better horses, gayer clothes, swears, drinks, and does every
thing with a better grace than he: Damns the stingy Cabal of the two Stiver
Club, and puts the young King of Spain and his Mistress together in a Romer of
a Pottle, and in pure gallantry breaks the Glasses over his head, scorning to
drink twice in the same; and a thousand things full as heroic and brave I
could tell you of this same Holy-day Squire. But come, the other turn, and
the other soap, and then for Donna Euphemia. For I find I begin to be reconciled
to the sex.


But, Sir, if I might advise, let's even sleep first.


Away you fool, I hate the sober Spanish way of making love, that's unattended
with Wine and Music, give me a wench that will out-drink the Dutch, out-dance
the French, and out -- out -- kiss the English.


Sir, that's not the fashion in Spain.


Hang the fashion; I^l manage her that must be my wife as I please, or I'll beat
her into fashion.


What beat a woman, Sir?


Sha, all's one for that, if I am provoked, anger will have its effects on
whomsoe'er it lig^t; so said Van T^mp, when he took his Mistress a cuff of the
ear for finding fault with an ill-fashion'd leg he made her; I liked his humour
well, therefore come thy ways.


AH false Amyntas, can that hour
So soon forgotten be,
When first I yielded up my power
To be betrayed by thee?
God knows with how much innocenc^
I did my heart resign,
Unto thy faithless eloquence,
And gave thee what was mine.
I had not one reserve in store,
But at thy feet I laid
Those arms which conquered heretofore,
Though ^ow thy trophies made.
Thy eyes in silence told their tale,
Of love in such a way,
That 'twas as easy to prevail,
As after to betray.
My grief's too great to be diverted this way.
Why should this villain sleep, this treacherous man --
Who has for ever robbed me of my rest?
Had I but kept my innocence entire,
I had out-brav'd my fate, and broke my chains,
Which now I bear like a poor guilty slave,
Who sadly cries, If I were free from these,
I am not from my crimes; so still lives on,
And drags his loathed fetters after him.
Why should I fear to dye, or murder him?
It is but adding one sin more to the number.
This -- would soon do it -- but where's the hand to gui^e it?
For (...) an act too horrid for a woman.
But yet thus sleeping I might take that soul,
Which waking all the charms of Art and Nature
Had not the power to effect.
Oh were I brave, I could remember that,
And this way be the Mistress of his heart.
But mine forbids it should be that way won;
No, I must still love on, in spite of me,
And wake him quickly, lest one moments thought*
Upon my shame should urge me to undo him.
Antonio, Antonio.

Vile woman, why that dagger in thy hand?

To've killed thee with;
But that my love overcame my juster passion,
And put it in thy power to save thy self,
Thank that, and not my reason for thy life.

She's doubly Armed, with that and injury,
And I am wounded and defenceless.
Hippolyta, why all this rage to me?

Antonio, thou art perjured, false and base.

What said my fairest Mistress?

I said that thou were perjured, false and base.

My dear Hippolyta, speak it again,
I do not understand thee.

I said that thou were perjured my Antonio.

Thou were to blame, but 'twas thy jealousy,
Which being a fault of love I will excuse.
Give me that mark of anger, prithee do,
It mis-becomes thy hand.

I've nothing left but this I can command,
And do not ravish this too.

It is unkind thus to suspect my love;
Will you make no allowance for my humour?
I am by nature rough and cannot please
With eyes and words all soft as others can,
But I can love as truly my blunt way.

You were so soft, when first you conquered me,
That but the thoughts of that dear face and eyes,
So managed, and so set for conquest out,
Would make me kind even to another man;
Could I but thus embrace and hide my eyes,
And call him my Antonio.

Stand off false woman, I despise thy love,
Of which to every man I know thou deal
An equal share.

I do not wonder that I am deceived,
But that I should believe thee, after all thy treachery.
But prithee tell me why thou treat'st me thus?
Why did thou with the sacred vows of Marriage,
After a long and tedious courtship to me,
Ravish me from my Parents and my Husband?
For so the brave Alonzo was by promise.

Why I will tell thee; 'twas not love to thee,
But hatred to thy Brother Don Marcel,
Who made addresses to the fair Clarinda,
And by his quality destroyed my hopes.

And durst you not revenge your self on him?

His life alone could not appease my anger;
And after studying what I had to do --

The Divel taught thee this.

Yes, and you I chose,
Because you were contracted to Alonzo,
That the disgrace might be more eminent.

I do believe thee, for when I reflect
On all thy usage since thou hast betrayed me,
I find thou hast not paid me back one sigh
Or smile for all that I have given thee.

Hear me out.

Most calmly.

From Town to Town you know I did remove you,
Under pretence to shun your Brothers anger:
Bur 'twas indeed to spread your fame abroad.
But being not satisfied till in Madrid,
Here in your native Town I had proclaimed you.
The house from whence your Brothers fury chased us,
Was a Bordello, where 'twas given out
Thou were a Venice Courtesan to hire,
Whilst you believed it was your Nuptial Palace.

Dost think I did not understand the plot?
Yes, and was mad till some young Lovers came.
But you had set a price too high upon me,
No brisk young man durst venture,
I had exposed my self at cheaper rates.

Your price, I pray young sinner?

Thy life; he that durst say Antonio lives no more,
Should have possessed me gratis.

I would have taken care none should have don't;
To show, and offer you to sale, was equally as shameful.

Well, what hast thou more to do? this is no
Place to inhabit in; nor shalt thou force me further;
And back into the Town thou dare not go.

Perhaps I had been kinder to you,
Had you continued still to give me that --
Might have begot a passion in me.

I have too much repentance for that sin
To increase it, at the price of being beloved by thee.

Consider what you do, this place is silent,
And far from any thing that may assist you.
Come lead me to the covert of this Grove.

Hold, hold, Sir, why do you run away?

Thou fool, dost not see the reason?

I see a man and a Lady, Sir.

Why you coxcomb they are Lovers;
Or some that are going to do the deed of love.

How! men here? Your business.

Prithee friend do not trouble your self with ours, but follow your own; my man
is a little saucy in his drink indeed, but I am sober enough to understand how
things go.


Leave us then.


Leave us then -- good words, good words, friend, for look ye I am in a notable
humour at present, and will be entreated.


Yes, Sir, we will be entreated.


Pray leave us then.


That's something -- but hark ye friend, say a man had a mind to put in for a
share with you.


Rude slaves leave us.


Ha slaves!


Slaves said you, Sir? hah --


Oh, as you're a Gentleman assis me.


Assist thee? this fellow looks as he would not have his abilities called in
question; otherwise I am amorous enough to do thee a kindness.


Sir, you mistake me; this is a ravisher --


A ravisher! ha, ha, ha, dost like him the worse for that? no, no, I beg your
pardon, Madam.


Have you no manhood, Sir?


She is in earnest: now if I durst sta^, how I would domineer over my Master; I
never tried perhaps, I may be valiant thus inspired. Lady, I am your champion,
who dares ravish you o^ me either?


Rascal unhand her.


How, how Gload ingag'd^ ^ay I scorn to be outdone by my man. Sirrah, march off
with the baggage; whilst I secure the enemy.


Rash man what mean you?


I say stand off, and let him go quietly away with the wench, or look you --


Unmannered fool, I will chastise thy boldness.


How, how, hast thou no other weapon?


No, if I had, thou durst not have encountered me.


I scorn thy words, and therefore there lies my sword; and since you dare me at
my own weapon, I tell you I am as good at snick a snee as the best Don of you
all --


Can I endure this affront?


The best way to make a coward fight, is to leave him in danger -- Come Lady --



Thou base unmannered fool; how dare thou offer at a Gentleman, with so
despised a thing as that?


Despised a thing? talk not so contemptibly of this weapon: I say do not, but
come on if you dare.


I can endure no longer --
Injustice! can such a dog, and such a weapon vanquish me?


Beg your life; for I scorn to stain my victory in blood -- that I learnt out
of Pharamond.


He does not merit life, could not defend it against so poor and base a thing
as thou: Had but Marcel left me my sword --


O then I perceive you are used to be vanquished, and therefore I scorn to kill
thee, live, live.


How the rascal triumphs over me.


And now like a generous enemy, I will conduct thee to my Tent, and have thy
wounds dressed --

That too I had out of Pharamond.


What if I take the offer of this sott? so I may ^ee ^ippalyta again. But I
forget --


Will you accept my offer?


For some reasons I dare not venture into the Town.


My lodging is at St. Peters gate, hard by; and on the Parol of a man of
Prowess you shall be safe and free -- Pharamond again.


I'll trust him, for worse I cannot be.
Lead on, I'll follow, Sir --

Not so, for though the captive ought to follow the victor, yet I'll not trust
my enemy at my back-side.

Politics too --


you must command --


WEll dear Francisca, will Cleonte come,
And all alone into the Garden?

My Lord, she will, I have at last prevailed, to what intent she knows not;
this is an hour wherein you'll scarce be interrupted: the amorous entertainment
you have prepared for her, will advance your design; such objects heighten the
desire: is all ready on your part?


It is, and I'm prepared for all the resistance she can make, and am resolved
to satisfy my insupportable flame, since there's no other hopes left me.


She's coming, Sir, retire.

Oh how he kills me: Well, at least this pleasure I have whilst I am dying;
that when he possesses the fair Cleonte, he for ever r^ines his interest in her
heart, and must find nothing but her mortal hate and scorn.


Francisca, why art thou so earnest for my coming into the Garden so early?


Because, Madam, here without interruption you may learn what the Lady Clarinda
has to tell you.


Is that all? go wait upon her hither then.


Yes, when you're more pleasant affair is dispatch'd, I will --


Can this be love I feel?
This strange unusual something in my ^oul,
That pleads so movingly for Silvio there;
And makes me wish him not allied to me.
Hah! what pleasant noise is this? sure 'tis in the Air --
Bless me what strange things be these!

HEre at your feet, we tribute pay,
Of all the glories of the May.

Such Trophies can be only due
To vitors so divine as you.

Come, follow, follow, where love leads the way,
To pleasures that admit of no delay.

Come follow to the amorous shade,
Covered with Roses and with Iessamine.

Where the love-sick boy is laid,
Panting for Loves charming Queen.

Come, follow, follow, where we lead the way
To pleasures that admit of no delay.

I am all wonder.

I'm all on fire, till I enjoy my Sister;
Not all the Laws of Birth and Nature
Can hinder me from loving -- Nor is't just:
Why should the charm of fair Cleontes eyes,
Me, less than Aliens to her blood surprise?
And why (since I love beauty every where,
And that Cleonte has the greatest share)
Should I not be allow'd to worship her?
The empty words of nature, and of blood,
Are such as lovers never understood.
Prudence in love, 'twere nonsense to approve,
And he loves most that gives a loose to love.

Silvio here --

Hah -- yonder she's!
And now my passion knows no bounds nor laws.
Cleonte come! come satisfy my flame!
These private shades are ours, no jealous eye
Can interrupt our heaven of joy!

What mean you? do you know I am your sister?

Oh that accursed name -- why should it check me --
Would thou had rather been some mis-begotten Monster,
That might have startled nature at thy birth:
Or if the powers above would have thee fair,
Why were thou born my sister?
Oh if thou would preserve thy soul and mine,
Fly from this place and me; make haste away,
A strange wild Monster is broke in upon thee;
A thing that was a man, but now as mad,
As raging Love can make him.
Fly me, or thou art lost for ever.

Remember Silvi^ that you are my brother,
And can you hurt your Sister?

Should thou repeat those ties a thousand times,
'Twill not redeem thee from the fate that threatens thee.
Be gone, whilst so much virtue does remain about me,
To wish thee out of danger.

Sure Silvio this is but to try my virtue.

No, look on my eyes Cleonte, and thou shalt see them flame with a strange
wicked fire.

Yet do not look, thy eyes increase it,
-- Alas!
And I shall still forget I am thy brother:
Go, go, whilst I have power to take my eyes away;
For if they turn again it will be fatal.

Pray hear me, Sir.

Oh do not speak, thy voice has charms
As tempting as thy face, but whilst thou art silent and unseen,
Perhaps my madness may be moderate;
For as it is, the best effects of it,
Will prompt me on to kill thee.

To kill me?

Yes, for should thou live, adorned with so much beauty,
So much my passion is above my reason:
In some such fit as does possess me now
I should commit a rape, a rape upon thee;
Therefore be gone, and do not tempt despair,
That merciless rude thing, but save thy honour,
And thy life.

I will obey you, Sir.

She's gone -- and now Ambrosio -- Oh that she were in being to confess this
truth, for sure 'tis tr^th, then I might love and might enjoy Cleonte -- enjoy
Cleonte!

Oh that thought! what fire it kindles in my veins, and now my cold fit's gone.
-- I'll after her

For in this ague of my love and fear,
Both the extremes are mortal --

I'm reconciled to you, since your Brother Silvio would have it so.


My blood flows to my face, to hear him named.


Let there be no more differences between you: But Silvio has of late been
discontent, keeps home* and shuns the conversation, which youth delights in;
goes not to Court as he was wont: Prithee Marcel learn thou the cause of it.


I do believe I shall my Lord, -- too soon.


I'm now going to my Villa, and shall not return till night: by the way I mean
to visit your wife that was designed to be, the rich Flavia, and see if I can
again reconcile her to you; for your neglect has been great, and her anger is
just.


I rather wish it should continue, Sir, for I have yet no inclinations to
marry.


No more, I'll have it so, if I can.


I'm silent, Sir.


I am satisfied you knew not of my Brothers being in the Garden.


Clarinda with my sister! and in our house! she's very fair -- and yet how dull
and blasted all her Beauties seem, when they approach the fair Cleontes -- I
cannot shun a tedious compliment: to see the fair Clarinda


Silvio! sure I'm betrayed.


Hah! Silvio with Clarinda in our house:
Oh daring villain, to make this place a sanctuary,
To all thy lusts and treachery.
Now I'm convinced, 'twas he that wounded me,
And he that fled last night with that false woman.

You need not fear me now, fair maid,
I'm disarmed of all my dangerous love.

It was by his contrivance that she came, you become as infamous as she --


Oh how I hate her now I know my Brother Silvi^ loves her.


How every gesture shows his passion, whilst she seems pleased to hear to him.
I can endure no more --


What will you do?


Nothing dear Sister.
But if I can be wise and angry too;
For 'tis not safe t'attack him in the Garden.
How now Silvio -- under the name of Brother:
I see you dare too much.

What mean you by this rude address, Marcel?


I'll tell you, Sir, anon. Go get you in.


Well, Sir, your business now?


It is not safe to tell you here, though I have hardly patience to stay till
thou meet me in St. Peters Grove.


I will not fail you, Sir, an hour hence.


I dare not in this rage return to upbraid Clarinda, lest I do things, that
mis-become man.


HOld, hold, I do not like the salutation* I receive from all I meet in this
house.


Why, Sir, methinks they are very familiar scabs all.


Salerimente, they all salute me as they were my old acquaintance, Your servant
Mine heer Haunce, cries one; your servant Monsieur Haunce, cries another.


Your servant, Sir, you come now indeed like a Bridegroom all beset with dance
and fiddle.


Bridegroom, ha, ha, ha, dost hear Gload? 'tis true ^aith. But how the Divel
came he to know it, man, hah?


My Master, Sir, was just as king for you, he longs to speak with you.


Ha, ha, with me, Sir, why? ha, ha, who the pox am I?


You, Sir, why who should you be?


Who should I be? why who should I be?


Mine heer Haunce van Ezel, Sir.


Ha, ha, ha, well guest, i'faith now.


Why how should they guess otherwise, coming so attended with Music, as
prepared for a wedding.


Ha, ha, ha, says thou so? faith 'tis a good device to ^ave the charges of the
first complements: Hah, but hark ye, hark ye, friend, are you sure this is the
house of Don Carlo?


Why, Sir, have you forgot it?


Forgot it, ha, ha, dost hear Gload? forgot it! why how the Divel should I
remember it?


Sir, I believe this is some new fashioned civility in Spain to know every man
before he sees him.


No, no, you fool, they never change their fashion in Spain, man.


I mean their manner of address, Sir.


It may be so, I'll see farther. Friend, is Don Carlo within?


He has not been out since, Sir.


Since ha, ha, ha, since when? hah.


Since you saw him, Sir.


Salerimente, will you make me mad? Why you damnable rascal, when did I see
him? hah.


Here comes my Master himself, Sir,


How now son, what angry? you have even tired your self with walking, and are
out of humour.


Look there again -- the old man's mad too: why how the pox should he know I
have been walking? -- indeed, Sir -- I have, as you say, been walking,


Sure son you should be a wit by the shortness of your memory.


By the goodness of yours, you should be none, ha, ha, ha. Did not I meet with
him there Gload, hah? But pray refresh my memory, and let me know you, I come
to seek a father amongst you here, one Don Carlo.


Am not I the man, Sir?


How the Divel should I know that now, unless by instinct?


The old man is mad, and must be humoured.


Cry you mercy, Sir, I vow I had quite forgot you* Sir I hope Donna Euphemia --



Oh, Sir, she's in much a better humour than when you saw her last, complys
with our desires more than I could hope or wish.


Why look here again -- I asked after her health, not her humour.


I know not what arts you have made use of, but she's strangely taken with your
conversation and person.


Truly, Sir, you are mightily beholden to her, that she should have all this
good will to your person and conversation before she sees you.


I, so I am, therefore, Sir, I desire to see your Daughter, for I shall hardly
be so generous as she has been, and be quits with her before I see her.


Why, Sir, I hope you liked her when you saw her last.


Stark mad -- I saw her last! why, what the Divel do you mean, I never saw her
in all my life, man. Stark mad, as I am true Dutch --


A lover always thinks the time tedio^s: But here's my Daughter.


I, one of these must be she: but 'tis a wonder I should not know which is she
by instinct.


This is not Alonzo -- has he betrayed me?


Go, Sir, she expects you.


Your pardon, Sir, let her come to me, if she will, I'm sure she knows me
better than I do her.


How should she know you, Sir?


How? by instinct, you fool, as all the rest of the house does: Don't you fair
Mistress?


I know you --


Yes, you know me; you need not be so coy mun, the old man has told me all.


What has he told you? I am ruined.


Faith, much more than I believed, for he was very full of his new fashioned
Spanish civility, as they call it: but ha, ha, I hope, fair Mistress, you do
not take after him?


What if I do, Sir?


Why then I had as leeve marry a steeple with an perpetual ring of bells.


Let me advise you, Sir, methinks you might make a handsomer speech for the
first, to so pretty a Lady -- Fakes an I were to do it --


I had a rare speech for her thou know, and an entertainment besides, that
was, though I say it, unordinary: but a pox of this new way of civility as
thou call it, it has put me quite beside my part.


Though you are out of your complementing part, I am not out of my dancing one,
and therefore that part of your entertainment, I'll undertake for. 'Slife, Sir,
would you disappoint all our Ships company --


That's according as I find this proud tit in humour*


And why so coy? pray why all this di^imulation? Come, come, I have told him
your mind* and do intend to make you both happy immediately.


How, Sir, immediately?


Yes, indeed, nay, if you have deceived me, and dissembled with me, when I was
so kind, I'll show you trick for trick i saith --


What shall we do Olinda?


Why marry Don Alonzo, Madam.


Do not rally, this is no time for mirth.


Fie upon it, Madam, that you should have so little courage; your Father takes
this fellow to be Alonzo.


What counsel are you giving there, hah?


Only taking leave of our old acquaintance, since you talk of marrying us so
soon.


What acquaintance pray?


Our Maiden-heads, Sir.


Ha, ha, ha, a pleasant wench faith now; I believe you would be content to part
with yours with less warning.


On easy terms perhaps, but this marrying I do not like; 'tis like going a
long voyage to Sea, where after a while, even the calms are distasteful, and
the storm's dangerous: one seldom sees a new object, 'tis still a deal of Sea,
Sea; Husband, Husband, every day -- till one's cloyed with it.


A mad Girl this, son.


I, Sir, but I wish she had left out the simile, it made my stomach wamble.


Pray, Sir, let you the Maid alone as an utensil belonging to my place and
office, and meddle you with the Mistress*


Faith now thou hast the better bargain of the two: my Mistress looks so
scurvily and civil, that I don't know what to say to her -- Lady -- hanged,
that look has put me quite out again.


To her, son, to her --


Hark ye Lady -- Well what's next now? Oh pox quite out, quite out; tell me
whether the old man lied or no, when he told me you loved me.


I love you --


Look you there now how she looks again.


She's only bashful, Sir, before me, therefore if you please to take a small
collation, that has waited within for you this three hours


That's strange now, that any thing should wait me, who was no more expected
here than Bethlehem Gaber: Faith now Lady, this Father of yours is very simple.


To take you for his son.


I meant to have surprised you* I vow before you had dreamt of me, and when I
came you all knew me as well as if you had cast a Figure for me.


Well son, you'll follow.


You will not leave me alone, Sir, with a man?


Go your ways, go your ways -- I shall know more of your


You know my secrets! why who are you?


Ha, ha, ha, that's a very good one faith now: who am I, quoth thou, why
there^s not a child* thus high in all your Fathers house would have asked me so
simple a question.


Madam, I find by his man, this is your expected lover, whom you must flatter,
or you are undone, 'tis Haunce van Ezel.


The fop himself.


Oh, do you know me now?


'Tis impossible.


This is an extreme the other way now.

Impossible, ha, ha, ha! No, no, poor thing do not doubt thy happiness: for
look ye, to confirm you, here are my Bills of Exchange with my own natural name
to them, if you can read written hand --


Not love you, I'll swear you lye now, you little Jade, I am now in Masquerade,
and you cannot judge of me; but I am Book-keeper and Cashier to my Master, and
my love will turn to account, I'll warrant you.


There may be use made of him,
I shall think of it. But pray why are you thus accoutred?

Fakes to entertain your Lady, we have brought the whole Ships company too in
Masquerade.


That indeed will be very proper at this time of the day, and the first visit
too.


Shaw, that's nothing, you little think what blades we are mun -- Sir, I'll call
in the fiddles and the company.


Well remembered, faith now I had even forgot it.


What's the meaning of this?


To show you the difference between the damnable dull gravity of the Spanish,
and brisk gaiety of the Dutch. Come, come begin all.

Nay, I'll show you what I can do too, come Gload.

There's for you now, and yet you have not seen half my good qualities; I can
sing the newest Ballad that has been made, so I can.


Be these your friends, Sir? they look as if you had ransacked a Hoy for them.


How? look on them well, they are all States, or States-fellows, I tell you
that now, and they can bear witness who I am too.


Now I'm convinced, and am sorry I doubted my happiness so long: I had such a
Character of you.


Of me, oh Lord, I vow now -- as they say -- I don't know -- ha, ha, --


I heard you were the most incorrigible fool, the most intolerable fop*


Ha, ha, ha, do you hear Gload? -- who I a fop? I vow they were mistaken in me,
for I am counted as pretty a Merchant as any walks the change; can write a very
plain hand, and cast account as well as -- My man Gload -- can't I, sirrah?


Yes indeed, forsooth, can he.


Agad, a fool, a fop, quoth ye --


By all means flatter him, Madam.


I'm satisfied, Sir.


I care not whether you are or no, for I shall have you whether you will or no,
mun.


'Tis very likely; but there is a certain troublesome fellow in love with me,
that has made me vow when ever I marry to ask him leave.


How, ask his leave? I scorn to ask any bodies leave, I tell you that, though
'twere my Mistress --


I cannot marry you then.


How not marry me? look here now Gload, can't you marry, and let no living soul
know it?


Oh no, Sir, I love your life better, which would be endangered.


Why what a cursed ^ustom you have in Spain, a man can neither marry, nor
console his Neighbours Wife without having his throat cut? Why what if he will
not give you leave?


Why then you must fight him.


How! fight him, I fight him!


Why yes, Sir, you know you can fight, you tried but this very morning --


Softly you damned Rogue, not a word of my prowess aloud. Salerimente, I shall
be put to fight when I am sober, shall I, for your damned prating, ye rascal?


I am glad you have that good quality.


I, Madam -- my Master -- has many more: But if you please to tell him his
Rivals name.


I'll have your ears for this sirrah, the next time I'm soundly drunk, and you
know that won't be long.

Ye rascal say I have no courage -- or I will drink my self to the miracle of
valour, and exercise it all on thee.


I know what I do, Sir, you had courage this morning, is the fit over?


Have I not slept since you rogue, have I not?


I have a trick to save your honour, Sir, and therefore I will stand in it you
have courage.


A pox of your trick, the rogue knows I dare not chastise him now, for fear
they should think I have valour.


Madam, my Master's modest, but tell him who 'tis he must fight with --


Oh, for a Tun of Rhenish -- that I might abundantly beat thee --


Your Rival's name's Alonzo, Sir.


Oh the Divel, a thundering name too; but will this same -- Alonzo make no
allowance for necessity -- I vow 'tis pure necessity in me to marry you, the
old men being agreed upon the matter, I am but an instrument -- alas, not I,


Lord, Sir, why do you cry? I meant no harm.


No harm you rascal -- to say I am valiant.


Why yes, Sir, and if you would say so too, at worst 'twas but getting Don
Lovis to have fought for you; you know that's a small courtesy to a friend.


Faith now thou art in the right, he'll do his business for him, I'll warrant
him.

Nay then, Madam, I have courage, and will to this Don -- this Alonzo you speak
of; and if he do not resign you, and consign you too, I'll make him; yes, make
him, do ye see -- If Lovis should refuse me now --


Shaw, Sir, he makes nothing to kill a man, ten or twenty.


Well, since you are so resolved, my Bro^her will tell you where to find this
Alonzo; and tell him I must marry you to day, for I am resolved not to lye
alone to night.


What would not a man do for so kind a Mistress?


Well, get you about it straight then, lest my Fathers coming prevent it.


I am gone -- But if Lovis should fail --


He would beat you, if he thought you doubted him.


I'll keep my fears then to my self.


THus I dare look abroad again:
Methinks I am not what I was,
My soul too is all man:
Where dwells no tenderness, no womanish passions.
I cannot sigh, nor weep, nor think of love,
But as a foolish dream that's gone and past.
Revenge has took possession of my soul,
And drove those shadows thence; and shows me now
Love, in so poor* so despicable a shape,
So quite divested of his Artful Beauty,
That I'm ashamed I ever^ was his votary.
Well, here's my Challenge to Antonio;
But how to get it to him is the question.
Base as he is he'll not re^use to come,
And since he never saw the wronged Alonzo,
Sure I may pass for him. Who's here --

Gload, if it 'twere possible I could be sober and valiant at once, I should
now be provoked to exercise it; for I cannot find Lovis, and then how I shall
come off, the Lord knows. And then again, for letting the Lady go, whom I
rescued in the Grove this morning.


Should I disobey a Lady, Sir? for she commanded me to let her go so soon as
she came into the gate. And, Sir, look here comes Don Lovis.


Oh Brother Lovis, where the Divel have you been all this day, I stayed for you
to go with me to your sisters, as long as flesh and blood could forbear.


Why have you been there without me.


Yes marry have I, Sir.


I am undone then --


I needed no recommendations mun, for when I came they were all as well
acquainted with me -- I never saw them before, but by the way, they are all no
wiser than they should be; except your sister, who is the pretty'st, loving,
sweet rogue --


How's this?


But have you seen my Sister?


Seen her, yes, and will marry her too mun before night, and she were a
thousand sisters -- But hark ye Lovis, the business is this -- you must know
that before I marry her, I am to seek out a certain fellow, they call -- they
call Alonzo, I, I, Alonzo -- a pox on him, a troublesome rascal they say he is,
and his leave, it seems, must be asked to marry your sister.


Well, Sir, and what if he will not give you leave?


Why then you must know I am to get him very well favour'dly beaten.


Sure this is the coxcomb himself.


Now for your sisters sake, who loves me, poor thing; I will not run the danger
of beating him my self, but must desire that small courtesy of thee.


How! I beat him?


You beat him, yes you; what a pox do you scruple such a kindness to a friend;
I know you make no more of killing a man next your heart in a morning, than I
do of eating a pickled Herring.


But she desired you to do it.


That's all one so it be done mun: besides why should I run my self into
praemunire when I need not; your Father is bound by agreement to mine, to
deliver me the wares (that in his Daughter) safe and sound; and I have no more
to do, but to protest against him in case of non-performance. 'Twill be a dear
commodity to me at this rate.


Well, Sir, I'll see what may be done.


Spoke like a friend now: well, you must about it instantly, for I must be
married to day.


Must you so, Sir? --


Yes marry must I, Sir, -- who the devils this now?


That same Alonzo whom you inquire for.


Are you so, Sir? -- Why what then, Sir? -- Lovis, Lovis.


What then, Sir; then I tell you, I will not be beaten.


Look ye here now -- Lovis.


Ha, ha, ha, can thou be angry with him?


I, can you be angry with me?


I know not why an Ass should have more privilege than any other rude beast.


Ha, ha, ha, this humour's so pleasant in thee, I wish thou would pursue it a
little -- Haunce, bear up to him, he's but a mere huff, ha, ha, ha.


I, Sir, as long as Don Lovis is here, you may say what you will.


May I so? -- and why, Sir? -- am I, Sir, -- an Ass, Sir?


'Sdeath you rascal, do you question me?


Oh hold, Sir, hold, not I, God forbid I should question it, Lovis -- is it
indeed Alon^o, hah?


Yes indeed is it.


And wilt thou not do so much as to beat him for me a little?


Not I, I dare not, he's a terrible man.


Why look you here now you damned rogue,


Why, Sir, 'tis but crying peccavi.


Peccavi, and be hanged to you -- Lord, Sir,


You must ask me leave, first.


Yes, yes, Sir, so she said mun; for she must marry me to night.


Yes, you shall have it with this -- too


Why look you here now, here's damned doings. For my part I declare it here
upon my death-bed, I am forced to what I do, and you kill me against my will.


Dost think we are not discovered in our design? I'd kill the dog if I thought
we were.


I believe not, and perceive by my Sisters message, that we are to come to her,
and prevent this fellows marrying her.


Well, Sir, I'll spare your life, and give your Mistress leave to marry to
night.


How, Sir, to night? -- But is he in earnest Lovis?


In very good earnest.


Tan, ta, ra, ra, ra -- hay boys, what a night we will have on it Gload; for
fiddles and dancing.


Tell your Mistress I will dispatch a little affairs and wait on her.


And pray* Sir, may I have leave to marry the Maid too.


We will consider on it.


I am not such a fool to venture though, till I know the coast is clear, for
his very looks are terrible, but go you Gload and tell her what he says.


These be the men that rescued me this morning,
And are not to be employed in my affair.
But yonder stranger has a noble look,
And from him I^l entreat this favour -- Sir --

With me, Sir?


Yes, please you to walk a little this way, Sir.


Well, make you sure of fiddles, for look ye, we will appear to night like our
selves.


It shall be done, Sir.


I am a stranger and a Gentleman* And have an humble suit to you.


You may command me any thing.


Sir, there is a Gentleman, if I may call him so, that dares do ill: h^s put a
base affront upon a Lady -- a Lady whom all brave men are bound to vindicate:
I've writ him here a challenge, and only beg you'll give it him, I will attend
you in St. Peter's Grove, where I desire the perfidious Antonio (for that's his
name, to whom this is directed) to meet me.


I'm pleased to see this gallantry in a man so young, and will serve you in
this, or whatever else you shall command. But where is this Antonio?


That I'll inquire of these. Sir, pray can you give any account of the Cavalier
Peters Grove, that had a Lady with him?


So, now perhaps I shall be hanged for that.

I fight, Sir, I never fought in my life, nor saw no man, not I.


Sha, you may confess it, Sir, there's no Law against killing in Spain.


How? have you murdered him?


This rogue has a mind to have me dispatch'd,


It is the same.


Sir, I shall not fail to wait on you with the Answer I receive --


I humbly thank you, Sir.


So prithee, dear Lovis, go make my excuse to your Sister for a moment, and let
h^r get all things ready against I come; let the Priest too wait, for I see my
destiny, which I can no longer prevent, draws on a pace.

Come, Sir, you must conduct me to Antonio.


So now the work's half done that will redeem
All the lost credit of our Family*
To kill, or to be killed, I care not which,
So one or both expire; be strong my soul,
And let no feeble woman dwell about thee.
Hence fears and pity, such poor things as these
Cannot the storms of my revenge appease:
Those showers m^st from his treacherous heart proceed.
If I can live and see Antonio bleed.

THe hour is almost come which I appointed,
And yet no Silvio appears, the time seems long to me;
But he that's circled in his Mistress arms,
Forgets the hasty hours,
And passes them as unregarded by,
As men do beggars who demand a charity.
Young man, hast thou encountered none within this Grove?

Not any, Sir, -- Marcel! my injured Brother!

Why dost thou turn away, and hide thy face?

'Tis not my face I hide, but sorrow there.

Trust me thou weepst; would I could do so too,
That I might be less angry;
And silence best expresses grief:
But thine's a saw^y sorrow dares approach
A face so fair and young.

If the ingrate for whom I grieve had thought so
I might have spared my tears. Farewell, Sir.

Stay, hast thou been a Lover?

A very, very passionate one.

And were thou not beloved?

At first to draw me in, the cunning Artist,
Made me believe I was.

Oh! I could kiss thee now for the alliance
Between thy grief and mine.
Had thou a loose and wanton Sister too?
Then thou were perfect wretched, as I am.
But prithee leave me, now I think of it:
For should thou stay, you would rob me of my anger:
For since a youth like thee can be unhappy,
With such a shape, and so divine a face,
Methinks I should not quarrel with my star,
But bow to all my faithless Mistress scorns.
Hollowing within. So ho, ho, so ho, ho --

So ho, so ho, ho, ho -- 'Tis my false Rival.
Now leave me, Sir, to reassume my anger.

I will obey -- farewell --
My own despair makes me neglect his life.

'Tis Silvio.

You see I have obeyed you, Sir.

Come, Sir, your sword.

You are my Brother, and 'twere an impious action
To fight you unprovok'd: give me a cause,
Nay, and a just one too, or I shall find it hard,
-- To wound Cleontes brother.

Thou came prepared to talk, and not to fight.
I cannot blame thee, for were I Silvio,
Thus I would do to save a life beloved:
But 'twill not serve you now.

Your reason, Sir, and I'm ready, if it be just.

Oh do not urge me to repeat my wrongs,
For if thou dost, I hardly shall have man enough remain
To fight thee fairly.

Surely he knows my passion for Cleonte --
I Urge the reason still.

Hast thou forgot thy last nights treachery? how like a thief thou stol'st into
her lodging.


'Tis so -- 'tis true Marcel, I rudely did intrude --

Oh quickly haste -- this looks like women's jangling.

Oh is it bravely done Marcel to punish,
A passion which you ought to pity rather?
'Tis what I cannot reconcile nor justify,
And so distracted it has made me too --
I will not fight in so unjust a cause
Kill me, and I'll embrace you whilst I dye;
A thousand wounds imprinted on this body,
Will bring less pain than that her eyes have caused.
Here strike -- Pity my pain and ease me.

I find thou hast a charm about the tongue,
And thou implor'st thy death in such away
I cannot hurt thee; and it gives me hopes
Thou art not yet so blessed to be beloved,
For then thou would not be thus desperate.

Oh yes, I am beloved.

Oh do not say thou art,
Nor take me from a calmness, that may spare thee.

Not say I am beloved! thou can not hire me
With life or fuller joy, to say I am not.
If there be truth, and love, in innocence, she loves me.

Yet, yet ye Gods I can endure -- say but thou art not,
For I would yet preserve thee.

Oh can thou wish that I should fall so low,
To save my life with lies; the poorest sin of all the number.

Then once again thou hast debauched my pity.

Her passion I will justify, but not my own;
Her's as pure as prayers of penitence;
But mine -- I cannot give a name to.

How now, what's here to do Marcel?

Alonzo! the only man I wish to shun.

I'm glad who ever thou be'^t thou hast prevented us.

Thou hast more wit than he then I find: Your quarrel, Sir, may a man have
leave to inqui^e into it.


This is that Silvio; that Noble Youth my Brother, whom thou hast often heard
me name.


An excellant* character for an enemy, Noble and Brother: for shame put up your
swords, and I'll be judge betweeen ye.


The case is soon decided; I will not t^ll you with how tedious a courtship I
won the heart, as I thought, of a young beauty in this Town -- And y^terday
received a Billet from her, to wait on her at night, to receive the r^compence
of all my pains and sufferings -- In this ecstasy of joy I showed him the
paper; and he getting thither before me, robbed me of my prize.


I am so pleased at this mistake of thine,
I can forgive it freely.

Not content with this, most treacherosly, hid in the shades of night, he met
me in the Hall of this false woman, and stabbed me, which did secure his flight
with her; and would thou have me put this injury up?


Faith you must, and your sword too,
Unless you mean to keep it drawn on me.
'Twas I that wounded you in the dark; and it was I
That robbed you of Clarinda

Thou?

I, am I so unlikely a man to do such a feat?

How dare you, Sir, do this?

I dare do any thing, but break my word, as thou hast basely done with me --
But I am now in haste, and should be glad to know where to meet you anon.


I'll wait on you at the farthe^ side of this Grove by the River.


I will not fail you --


Come, Sir, till I can better prove you are my Rival I will believe you are my
friend and brother.


When thou shalt know my miserable story,
Thou wilt believe and pity me.

I wonder this Cavalier stays so long.
Pray heaven he me^ Antonio.
Your Servant, Sir.

The Cavalier to whom you sent me, Sir,
Will wait upon you here.

I humbly thank you, Sir, and should be glad to know how I might pay my
gratitude.


My duty ends not here; I have a sword to serve you.


You shame me with this generosity, but, Sir, I hope my own will be sufficient
in so good a cause.


Though you are young, I question not your bravery,
But I must beg to stay and see fair play,
And offer you my service when you've done.

The enemy appears, Sir, -- and since you are so good, I beg you would retire
behind those trees; for if he see us both, since he is single, he will suspect
some treachery.


You've reason, Sir, and I'll obey you.

SIR, I Desire you to meet me in St. Peters Grove, with your sword in your hand
about an hour hence; you will guess my business* when you know my name to be

Alonzo.

How's that?

I wished had been another enemy,
Since from the justice of his cause, I fear
An ill success; would I had seen Hippolyta,
That ever I died I might have had her pardon.
This conscience -- 'tis ominous.
Sin never appears in any horrid shape,
'Till it approaches death --

You seem, Sir, to be he whom I expect.

I'm called Antonio, Sir --

And I Alonzo; the rest we need not ask,
For thou art well acquainted with my injuries,
And I with thy perfidiousness.

I know of none you have received from me,
If on Hippolyta's account you fight,
She loved me, and believed, and what dull Lover
Would have refused a Maid so easil^ gain'^?

Ah Traitor, by how bas^ a way
Thou would evade thy fate?
Did thou not know she was my wi^e by promise?
Did not Marcel, Ambrosio, all consen^
To make her mine as soon as I arrived?

Who the Divel's tha^ young Bully that takes my name and my concerns upon him?


But why should I expect a truth from thee,
Who after so much time, so many vows,
So many tears, despairs and sigh^, at last
Did gain a credit with this easy fool,
Then left her to her shames, and her despairs -- Come, Sir, --
Or I shall talk my self to calmness --

I'm ready, Sir, to justify the deed.

Hold! hold! fair thief that rob me of my name,
And would my honour too
If thou hast wronged the fair Hippolyta,
No man but I has right to do her justice.
Or you are both my Rival^ -- tell me which,
Which of you is it I must kill -- or both?
I am Alonzo, who dares love Hippolyta?

Let not your friendship, Sir, proceed so far,
To take my name, to take my quarrel on you.

In this dispute none's more concerned than I,
And I will keep my ground in such a cause,
Though all the Rivals that her beauty makes me,
Were armed to take my life away.

Come, Sir, I care not which of you's Alonzo.

This gallantry's too much, brave stranger.
Antonio hurt him not* I am the wronged Alonzo,
And this a perfect stranger to the business;
Who seeing me appear less man than he,
And unacquainted with my deeds abroad,
I^ Bounty takes my name and quarrel on him.

Take heed young man, and keep thy virtue in,
Lest thus misguided it become a crime.
But thou he says hast wronged Hippolyt^,
And I am he must punish it.

Sure it is he indeed --
For such a miracle my brother rendered him.
Hold, hold thou wonder of thy sex --

Stand by, I shall be angry with thee else,
And that will be unsafe --

Sure I heard the noise of swords this way!
Hah, two against one? courage, Sir.

Good Heaven! how just thou art!

What, dost thou faint already? -- Hah, the pretty talking youth I saw but now!



Well, since thy hand has wounded me.

My life is yours, nor would I ask the gift,
But to repair my injuries to Hippolyta.

I give it thee --

How, Antonio! --
What unkind hand has robbed me of the justice,
Of killing thee?

His that was once thy friend Marcel.

Oh dost thou know my shame?

I know thou are false to friendship,
And therefore do demand mine back again, thou'st used it scurvily.

Thou know too much to think I've injured thee.

Not injured me! who was it promised me Hippolyta?
Who his alliance, and his friendship too?
And who has broke them all but thou perfidious?
Come 'tis Hippolyta that I demand,

By this he should not know my sisters shame.
Oh, Sir, you must not have Hippolyta.

How! not have Hippolyta!
Though every step were guarded by a Brother:
Though she were circled round about with Rivals,
Ye should not all have power to keep her from me.
Not have Hippolyta! --
'Sdeath, Sir, because I do not know my birth,
And cannot boast a little empty title,
I must not have Hippolyta --
Now I will have her, and when you know I can,
You shall petition me to marry her,
And yet I will not do it. Come, Sir --

Hold, hold brave man, or turn your sword on me,
I am the unhappy cause of all your rage:
'Tis I generous Alonzo that can tell you
What he's ashamed to own,
And thou wilt blush to hear.

Hippolyta! thou wretched wicked woman:
Thus I reward thy sins --

Hold, Sir, and touch her no^ without my leave,
She is my wife; by sacred vows my wife.

I understand not ridling, but whoever thou be, man or woman, you're worth
our care. --

She faints -- come let us bear her hence.


Oh stay Hippolyta, and take me with thee,
For I have no use of life when thou art gone.
Here kill me brave Marcel; -- and yet you need not,
My own remorse and grief will be sufficient.

I credit thee, and leave thee to their mercy*

That goodness, Sir, has called me back to life,
To pay my humble thanks; could you have mercy too, to pardon me -- you might
redeem my soul.


Some pity I have yet, that may preserve thee too,
Provided this repentance be not feigned.

My life, Sir, is security for both.

Doubt not, I'll take the forfeit, Sir -- Come Hippolyta*
Thy Fathers house shall once again receive thee.

Lean on my arm my dearest.

Sir, by the way, I'll let you know her story,
And then perhaps you will not blame my friendship.

And in return, I'll give you back Clarinda --
And beg your pardon for the wound I gave you.

FEar not, I'll use my interest both with your Mother and my Father, to set your
heart at rest, Whose pain I feel by something in my own.


The Gods reward your bounty, fair Cleonte.


I, I, Madam, I beseech you make our peace with my good Lady her Mother, what
ever becomes of the rest, for she'll even dye with grief --

She had but too fair pledges of her Nuptial Bed,
And both by cruel fate are ravished from her.
Manual a child was lost,
And this; not holy Relics were more strictly guarded,
Till false Marcel betrayed me to debauch her.

Alas, had you a brother once?

Madam, I might have had: but he was lost ere I was born.


Ah would my Silvio had been so.
By what strange accident Clarinda?

Madam, I can inform you best.

Do then Dormida.

Madam, you must know, my Lady Octavia, for that's her name, was in her youth
the very flower of Beauty and Virtue: Oh such a face and shape, had you but
seen her -- And though I say it, Madam, I thought my self too somebody then.


Thou art tedious: Madam, 'tis true my Mother had the reputation of both those
attractions, which gained her m^ny Lovers: amongst the rest, Don Manual, and
Don Alonzo, were most worthy her esteem.


I, Madam, Don Alonzo, there was a man for you, so obliging and so bountiful.
-- Well, I'll give you an Argument of both to me: for you must know I was a
Beauty then, and worth obliging.

And he was the man my Lady loved, though Don Manual were the richer: but to my
own story --


Forward Clarinda.


But as it most times happens,
We marry where our Parents like, not we;
My Mother was disposed of to Don Manual.

I, Madam; but had you seen Don Alonzo's rage, and how my Lady took this
disappointment -- But I who was very young, and very pretty as I told you
before --


Forbear. Madam, 'tis true,
Alonzo was so far transported,
That oft he did attempt to kill my Father;
But bravely though, and still he was prevented:
But when at the entreaties of my Mother,
The King confined my Father,
Alonzo then studied a new revenge,
And thinking that my Father's life depended
Upon a son he had scarce a year old;
He did design to steal him, and one evening,
When with his Nurse and Maid he took the Air,
This desperate Lover seized the smiling prize,
Which never since was heard of.

I guess the grief the Parents must sustain.

It almost caused their deaths, nor did kind heaven
Supply them with another till long after,
Unhappy this was born.
Which just her father lived to see, and died.
Then she was, Daughter, Son, and Husband too,
To her afflicted Mother: But as I told you Madam, I was then in my prime --


Now, Madam, judge what her despair must be,
Who is deprived of all her joys in me.

Francisca, see who is that knocks so hastily.

Oh, Madam, 'tis Don Marcel leading a wounded man.

Oh my fears, 'tis ^ilvi^.

'Tis not Don Silvio.

Alas, what youth is this you lead all bleeding?

One that deserves your care; where's my Father?

Not yet returned.

'Tis well; and you, Sir, I must confine till I know
How to satisfy my honour, and that of my wronged Sister.

The holy man will soon decide our difference*
Pray send for one, and reconcile us all.

I fear Antonio still thou dost dissemble.

So let me find forgiveness when I dye:
If any fear of death have wrought this change:
But a pure sense of all my wrongs to thee,
Knowing thy constant love, and virtue to me.

I will secure your fear -- Francisca, send for Father Ioseph to me, and
conduct these Gentlemen to the Lodgings next the Garden.


Prithee Marcel, are thee and I awake, or do we dream? thou, that thou art in
thy Fathers House; and I, that I see those two fair women there. Pray lovely
fugitive, how come you hither?


I thought thou were mistaken,
'Twas Silvio brought her hither, that false man.
But how came you to know her?

Know her! 'slife I question my sense.
Pray Lady are you flesh and blood?

Yes surely, Sir; for 'twere pity you should have bestowed your heart on a
shadow, and I well remember you gave it one of us last night.


A dream, a dream, but are you indeed the same fair person, and is this the
same house too?


I am afraid your heart's not worth the keeping, since you took no better
notice where you disposed of it.


Faith, Madam, you wrong a poor Lover, who has languished in search of it all
this live-long day.


Brother, I beseech you, receive the innocent Clarinda, who, I fear, will have
the greatest cause of complaint against you.


But pray, fair one, let you and I talk a little about that same heart you put
me in mind of just now.


Surely that's my old Mistress Dormida; twenty years has not made so great an
alteration in that ill-favour'd face of hers, but I can find a Lover there.


Enough Clarinda: I'm too well convinced,
Would thou had still remained a criminal.
Now how can I reward thy faith and love?

I know Marcel, it is not in thy power,
Thy faithless story I'm acquinted with.

Do not reproach me with my shame Clarinda.
'Tis true, to gain thee to consent to my desires,
I made an honourable pretence of loving.
Pardon a Lover, all the ways he takes
To gain a Mistress so beloved and fair.
But I have since repented of that sin,
And came last night for thy forgiveness too.

This is news indeed; 'tis fit I keep this secret no longer from my Master. Don
Manual being dead, my vow's exspir'd.


And do you mean no more to love me then?

In spite of me above my sense or being.

And yet you'll marry Flavia?

Against my will I must, or lose a Father.

Then I must dye, Marcel.

Do not unman my soul, it is too weak
To bear the weight of fair Clarinda's tears.

Why was this secret kept from me so long?

I was obliged by vow, Sir, to Don Alonzo my dead Master, not to restore you
till Don Manual's death; believing it a happiness too great for his Rival, for
so he was upon your Mothers score.


Have I a Mother living?


Here in Madrid, Sir, and that fair maid's your Sister.


I scarce can credit thee, but that I know thee honest.


To confirm that belief, Sir, here are the writings of twelve thousand crowns a
year, left you by your Foster Alonzo, whose name he gave you too.


I am convinced -- How now Marcel, what all in tears? why who the Divel would
love in earnest? Come, come, make me judge between you.


You'll soon decide it then, my heart's Clarinda's;
But my forced vows are given to another.

Vows! dost think the Gods regard the vows of Lovers? they are things made in
necessity, and ought not to be kept, nor punished when broken: if they were --
Heaven have mercy on me poor sinner.


My Father returned!

Sir, this is the gallant man that was desig^'d to be your son-in-Law.


And that you were not so, Sir, was my misfortune only.


I am glad to find it no slight to my person,
Or unknown quality that deprived me of that honour.

To convince you of that, Alonzo, I know my father will bestow this other
sister on you; more fair and young, and equally as rich.


How, his Sister! Fool, that I was, I could not gues^ at this; and now have I
been lying and swearing all this while how much I loved her. Well, take one
time with another, a man falls into more danger by this amorous humour, than he
gets good turns by it.


Pardon me, Sir, I knew not you had designed her elsewhere -- Dear Alonzo, my
Father --


I, Sir, I am much obliged to him. Oh Pox would I were well with Euphemia.


I protest I could wish --


I, so could I, Sir, that you had made a better judgement of my humour: all
must out, I have no other way to avoid this complement else. Why look ye Marcel
-- your Sister is -- Pox I am ill at dissimulation, and therefore in plain
terms, I am to be married this very evening to another.


This was happy, and has saved me an excuse. Madrid?


Destiny, destiny, Marcel, which there was no avoiding, though I mist of
Hippolyta.


Who is it prithee?


A woman I hope, of which indeed I would have been better assured; but she was
wilful. She's called Euphemia.


Our next neighbour, the Daughter of old Carlo.


The same.


Thou art happy to make so good a progress in so short a time, but I am --


Not so miserable as you believe. Come, come, you shall marry Clarinda.


'Tis impossible.


Where's the hindrance.


Her want of fortune; that's enough, friend.


Stand by and expect the best. --


I should be infinitely pleased you could ask me any thing in my power, but,
Sir, this daughter I had disposed of, before I knew you would have mist of
Hippolyta.


Luckyer than I expected. Don Marcel.


Hah, what mean you, Sir! a Sister of yours?


Yes, she will not be unwelcome* -- This is she.


This is the daughter to Octavia -- Her Mother was a Lady whom once I did
adore, and 'twas her fault she was not more happy with me, than with Don
Manual. Nor have I so wholly forgot that flame, but I might be inclined to your
proposal: But, Sir, she wants a fortune.


That I'll supply.


You supply, Sir? on what kind scorce, I pray?


That which you'll suffer without being jealous,
When you shall know she is indeed my Sister.

How! this brave man my Brother?

So they tell me, and that my name is Manual*
Had you not such a Brother?

Oh ye gods, is this the little Manual?

Yes Dormida, and for a farther proof see this.

This I remember well, it is Don Manual:
Pray let me look upon you: Just like my Lord --
Now may the soul of Don Alonzo rest in peace,
For making so hopeful a man of you.

Amen. But, Sir, if you approve of my Sister,
I'll make her as worthy of Marcel, as Flavia.

I've lost the hopes of her -- She's not to be reconciled.
Clarinda needs no more than to belong to you,
To make her valuable -- and I consent with joy.

And I with joys beyond expression, Sir, receive her.


Pedro, there rests no more than that you wait on my Mother, and let her know
all that has happened to my self and sister, and that I'll pay my duty to her ere
I sleep.


The very joy to find her Son again, will get my pardon too, and then perhaps
Pedro and I may renew our old amours.


Sir, I have another request to make.


You must command, Sir.


That is, that you will permit this fair company to honour me this evening at
my Father-in-laws Don Carlo.


How, has Don Carlo married the Lady Octavia?


No, Sir, but a worse matter than that, I am to marry his Daughter.


Oh, Sir, Euphemia has too much beauty and virtue to make you doubt your
happiness.


Well, Sir, I must venture that. But your company I'll expect, the Ladies may
clap on their Vizards, and make a Masquerading night on it: though such freedoms
are not very usual in Spain; we that have seen the world, may absolve one
another.


My Garden joins to that of Don Carlo* and that way we will wait on you, as
soon as I have dispatcht a small affair.


Your humble Servant, Sir.


Sister, go you and prepare my Father to receive Hippolyta, whilst I go see
them married.


Do not Francisca -- do not blow my flame,
The cure thou bring is much the greater Hell.

Hah, Silvio; unseen I'll hear their business.

I would fain shun thee, but this impious weight
Of love upon my soul, hinders my flight:
I'm fixed -- like conscious guilt it keep me here,
And I am now insensible of fear.
Speak on! thou messenger of Sacred Love -- speak on!

The fair Cleonte, Sir, whose soul's inflamed
No less than yours; though with a Virgin modesty
She would conceal it, pitying now your pain
Has through my intercession --

Oh quickly speak! what happiness designed me?

To admit you, Sir, this night into her Chamber.

Death to my soul! what's this?

Her chamber! is that all? will that allay this fever
In my blood? -- No, no, Francisca.
'Tis grown too high for amorous parleys only;
Her arms, her charming bosom, and her bed,
Must now receive me or I dye, Francisca.

I mean no other, Sir; why can you think
A Maid in love as much as you can be,
Assisted with the silence of the night;
(Which vail her blushes too) can say -- I dare not?
Or if she do, she'll speak it faintly over,
And even whilst she so denys will yield.
Go, go prepare your self for this encounter,
And do not dally as you did to day,
And fright your pleasure with the name of sister --

Oh cursed witch!

What say you, Sir?

That name has checked my joy --
And makes it strangely silent and imperfect.

Why do you go, before you answer me?

I'll follow him, and kill them.
Oh who would be allied unto a woman,
Natur's loose handy-work? the slight employs
Of all her wanton hours -- Oh I could rave now --
Abandon sense and nature.
Hence all considerate thoughts, and in their room,
Supply my soul with vengeance, that may prove
Too great to be allayed by nature, or by love.

But will you loose this opportunity,
Her lodgings too being so near your own?

Hell take her for her wickedness.
Oh that ten thousand mountains stood between us,
And seas as vast and raging as her lust,
That we might never meet -- Oh perfect woman,
I find there is no safety in thy sex:
No trusting to thy innocence.
That being counterfeit, thy beauty's gone,
Dropped like a Rose over blown,
And left thee nothing but a withered root,
That never more can bloom.

Alas, I fear I have done ill in this.

I now should hate her; but there yet remains
Something within, so strangely kind to her;
That I'm resolved to give her one proof more,
Of what I have vowed her often, yes I'll kill her --

How kill her, Sir? Gods, what have I done!

Yes, can I let her live, and say I loved her?
No, she shall tempt no more vain yielding men* (...)

Consider, Sir, it is to save your life she does it.

My life!
'Twere better she and I were buried
Quick in one grave, than she should fall to this,
She has out-sinn'd even me in this consent.

Oh here they are. --

My Lord defend your self, you are undone else.

Hah, Marcel! --

Help, help.

Hell take thy throat.

Hold villain, hold!
How dare thou thus rebel -- ungrateful wretch?

This cause, Sir, is so just, that when you hear it,
You'll curse me, that I let him live thus long:
He loves my sister, Sir; and that lewd woman
Repays his lustful flame; and does this evening
Invite him to her bed; -- Oh let me kill him.

That he should love Cleonte I'll allow,
And her returns too, whilst they're innocent.

But, Sir, he does not love her as a Sister.

If that be all his crime, I still forgive him.

Yes, Sir, 'tis true I do adore my Sister,
But am so far from that foul thing he named,
That could I think I had a secret thought
That tended that way, I would search it -- thus --

What me an you by this desperation?

Oh take away this woman from my sight,
For she will finish what this has ill begun.

Thus low, Sir, for your mercy I must kneel;
Which yet I must despair of when you know
How very very wicked I have been.
Cleonte, Sir, is chaste as Angels are.

My Sister innocent! how soon I do believe thee!

Yes, Sir, nor knows of that vile message which I brought you.


What Divel set thee on to tempt me then?

The worst of Devils, hopeless, raging love;
And you, my Lord, were the unhappy object.

Oh sinful woman, what was thy design?

What means all this?

At least to have enjoyed him once; which done,
Thinking it had been the fair Cleonte,
It would have made him hate her.

Should all thy other sins be unrepented,
The piety of this confession saves thee.
Pardon, Cleonte, my rude thoughts of thee,
I had designed to've killed thee --
Had not this knowledge of thy innocence
Arrived before I'd seen thee next.
And, Sir, your pardon too I humbly beg;
With license to depart, I cannot live
Where I must only see my beauteous sister;
That torment is too great to be supported,
That still must last, and never hope a cure.

Since you are so resolved, I will unfold
A secret to you, that perhaps may please you.

Low at your feet I do implore it, Sir.

Your quality forbids this ceremony.

How, Sir!

Your Father was the mighty favourite, the Conte De Olivaris; your Mother,
Spains celebrated Beauty, Donna Margarita Spiniola, by whom your Father had two
natural Sons, Don Lovis de Harro, and your self Don Roderigo. The story of his
disgrace you know with all the world; 'twas then he being banished from the
Court, he left you to my care then very young. I received you as my own, and as
more than such educated you, and as your Father obliged me to do, brought you
always up about their Majesties -- For he hoped if you had beauty and merits,
you might inherit part of that glory he lost.


This is wondrous --


This truth you had not known ^o soon, had you not made as great an interest at
Court as any man so young ever did: and if I had not acquitted my self in all
points as became the friend of so great and brave a man, as Conte de Olivaris,
the Fortune he left you was two millions of Crowns.


Let me embrace your feet for this blessed news.
Is not the fair Cleonte then my sister?

No, Sir, but one whom long since I designed your wife, if you are pleased to
think her worthy of it.


Without her, Sir, I do despise my being: And do receive her as a blessing,
sent from heaven to make my whole life happy.


What ^ay you, Cleonte?


Sir, I must own a joy greater than is fit for a Virgin to express.


Generous Don Roderigo, receive me as your friend, and pardon all the fault you
found in me as a brother.


Be ever dear unto my soul, Marcel.


Now is the time to present Hippolyta and Antonio to my Father, whilst his
humour is so good. And you, dear Brother, I must beg to join with us in so just
a cause.


You need not doubt my power, and less my will.


Do you prepare him then, whilst I bring them in: For by this I know my
Confessor has made them one.


Sir, I've a suit to you.

You cannot ask what I can deny.

Hippolyta, Sir, is married to Antonio,
And humbly begs your pardon for her past fault.

Antonio and Hippolyta! oh name them not.

Pray, Sir, forgive them, your honour being safe,
Since Don Antonio has by marrying her*
^epair'd the injury he did us all,
Without which I had killed him.

Thou art by nature more severe than I,
And if thou think our honour satisfied,
I will endeavour to forget their fa^lts.

We humbly thank you* Sir, and beg your blessing:
At least bestow it on Hippolyt^;
For she was ever chaste, and innocent,
And acted only what became her duty;
Since by a sacred vow she was my Wife.

How ca^'st thou then to treat her so inhumanely*

In pure revenge to Don Marcel her Brother:
And forced my nature to a stubbornness,
Which whilst I did put on, I blushed to own;
And still between thoughts so unjust, and action,
Her virtue would ri^e up and check my soul,
Which still secured her fame.

And I have seen in midst of all thy anger
Thou'st turned away and changed thy words to sighs;
Dropped now and then a tear as if ashamed
Not of thy injuries, but my little merit.

How weak and easy nature makes me -- Rise
I must forgive you both.
Come, Sir, I know you long to be secured
Of what you say you love so much, Cleonte --

But, Madam, have you fully pardoned me?

We will all join in your behalf, Francisca.

I can forgive you, when you can repent.

BUt is the Bride-chamber dressed up, and the bed made as it ought to be?


As for the making, 'tis as it use to be, only the Velvet Furniture.


As it use to be? oh ignorance! I see these young wenches are not arrived yet
to bare imagination: Well, I must order it my self, I see that.


Why Olinda, I hope they will not go just to bed upon their marrying without
some signs of a wedding, as Fiddles and Dancing, and so forth.


Good Lord, what joys you have found out for the first night of a young Bride
and Bridegroom. Fiddles and Dancing, ha, ha, ha! they'll be much merryer by
themselves that Fiddles and Dancing can make them, you fool.

Bless me! what is't I see?


Why? what the Divel means she? Look about me Gload, and see what I have that's
so terrible.


Oh, I have no power to stir, it is a sprite.


What does she mean now Gload?


She desires to be satisfied whether we be flesh and blood, Sir, I believe.


Dost see nothing that's divel-wise about me?


No indeed, Sir, not I.


Why then the wench is tippled, that's all, a small ^ult.


In the name of goodness, Sir, what are you?


I, I, Sir, 'tis that she desires to know.


Who are you, Sir?


Why who should I be but he that's to be your Master anon?


Yes, who should he be but Mine heer Haunce Van Ezel?


What, did you come in at the door?


Yes marry did I, what do you think I creep in like a ^apland witch through the
key holes?


Nay, nay, this cannot be the Bridegroom.


No, for 'tis but a moment since we left him, you know in my Ladies Chamber.


Very drunk by this good light.


And therefore it cannot be My^heer Haunce.


What a Divel will you persuade me out of my Christian name?


The Priest has yet scarce done his office, who is marrying him above to my
Lady.


Salerimente, here's brave doing, to marry me, and never give me notice; or
thou art damnable drunk, or very mad.


Yes, and I am married to you too, am I not?


You? we know neither of you.


Ha, ha ha, here's a turn for you.


Why, Olinda, Dorice, Olinda, where be these mad Girls? 'tis almost night, and
nothing in order. Why what now? Who's here?


So the old man's possessed too -- Why what a Divel ails you, Sir?


From whence come you, Sir? and what are you?


Gload, let's be gone, for we shall be transmigra^ed into some strange shapes
anon, for all the house is enchanted. Who am I, quoth ye? before I came you all
knew me; and now you are very well acquainted with me, you have forgot me.


If you be my son Haunce, how* came you here?


If I be your son Haunce? where should I be else?


Above with your Wife, not below amongst the Maids.


What wife? what wife? ha, ha, ha, do not provoke me, lest I take you a slap in
the face, I tell you that now.


Oh I find by his humour this is he, and I am finely cheated and abused. I'll up
and know the truth.


And so will I.


Why, but Mistress Olinda, you have not indeed forgot me, have you?


For my lover I have, but perhaps I may call you to mind as my servant
hereafter.


Since you're so proud and so fickle, you shall stand hereafter as a Cipher with
me: and I'll begin upon a new account with this pretty Maid, what say you
forsooth?


I am willing enough to get a husband as young as I am.


Why, that's well said, give your hand upon the bargain -- God have mercy with
all my heart i'fais.


Oh I am cheated, undone, abused.


How, Sir, and where?


Nay, I know not how, or where; but so I am; and when I find it, I'll turn you
all out of doors. Who are you, Sir? quickly tell me.


If you be in such haste, take the shortest account* I am your son.


I mean, Sir, what's your name, and which of you is Haunce van Ezel?


I, which of us is Haunce van Ezel, tell us that, Sir; we shall handle ye, in
faith, now --


He, Sir, can best inform you.


Who, I! I know no more than the great Turk, not I, which of us is me; my hat,
my feather; my suit, and my Garniture all over faith now; and I believe this is
me, for I'll trust my eyes before any other sense about me. What say thou now
Gload? guess which of us is thy own natural Master now if thou can.


Which, Sir? -- why -- let me see -- let me see,


Come, come, the cheat is plain, and I'll not be fob'd off, therefore tell me
who you are, Sir.


One that was very unwilling to have put this trick upon you, if I could have
persuaded Euphemia to have been kind on any other terms, but nothing would down
with her but Matrimony.


How long have you known her?


Faith, Sir, too long by at least an hour.


I say again what are you, Sir?


A man I am, and they call me Alonzo.


How! I hope not the great fighting Colonel, whom my son served as a Volunteer
in Fland^rs.


Even he, Sir.


Worse and worse, I shall grow mad, to think that in spite of all my care,
Euphemia should marry with so notorious a man of war.


How! is this Alonzo, and am I cozened? pray tell me truly, are you not me
indeed?


All over, Sir, only the inside a little less fool.


So here's fine juggling -- are not you a rare Lady, hah? --


I assure you, Sir, if this man had not past for you, I had never had him.


Had him! O you are a flattering thing, I durst have sworn you could no more have
been without me, than a Barbers* Shop without a Fiddle, so I did: Oh what a
damnable voyage have I back again without a wife too. --


If that be all, we will get you one before you go: that shall be my care.


A pox of your care; well, I will get my self most soundly drunk to night, to
be revenged of these two damnable Dons. Come Gload, let us about something in
order to it.


Pray, Sir, be persuaded, he's worth your owning.


Tell not me of ^wning: what fortune has he?


His Horse and Arms, the favour of his Prince and his pay.


His Horse and Arms I wholly dislike as impliments of war, and that same
Princely favour, as you call it, will buy no Lands, and his Pay he shall have
when he can get it.


But, Sir, his coming to Madrid was to take possession of a place the Prince
has promised him.


Has promised him? what! I shall marry my Daughter to the promises of ere a
Prince in Christendom, shall I? No, no; promises, quoth ye?


Well, Sir, will this satisfy you?


If it should not, let us consider what next to do.


No consideration Euphemia; not so much as that we are married, lest it lesse^
our joys.


12000 Crowns a year! -- Sir, I cry you mercy, and wish you joy with my
Daughter*


So his courage will down with him now.


To satisfy you farther, Sir, read this.

And now Euphemia prepare your self to receive some gallant friends of mine,
whom you must be acquainted with, and who design to make a merry night on it.


A whole night Alonzo?


By no means Euphemia, for the first too, which if the thoughts of its being
part of my duty do not hinder, will be pleasant enough to me.


So considerable an office at Court too! -- Let me embrace you, Sir; and tell
you how happy I am in so brave a Son-in-law.


With that assurance, Sir, I'll take a more than ordinary freedom with you, and
teach Euphemia a franker way of living, than what a native Spaniard would have
allow'd her.


She shall be what sort of wife you'll have her.


What Musi^k's that?


It waits upon some Ladies and Gentlemen who ask for you, Sir.


Wait them in, they are those f^iends of mine I told you off.


Well, the Divel's in it if we shall not appear ridiculous enough, hah Gload?


I, Sir, the more ridiculous the better.


I was always of that mind. -- Ha, hay Boys, who be all these Dons and Donna's?
-- Hark ye Lovis, I hope the Wife you promised me is amongst these fair Ladies,
for so I guess they are both, fair and Ladies.


You guess right, Sir.


Now Ladies and Gentlewomen command your Music, and do what likes you best.


Here's the Lady I recommend to you, take her, Sir, be thankful.


This is the fool that I am to manage.


And this my lot.


There is within a young Father ready to join your hands: take this
opportunity, and make sure of a Wife.


I warrant you, Sir.


Your Mother, Sir, whom I found more dead than living for the loss of your
Sister, was very near dying outright with joy to hear of your arrival, and most
impatiently expects you.


And are we all forgiven Pedro?


Yes, you and I are like to be fellow Servants together again, Dormida.


And fellow Lovers too I hope, Pedro.


The Divel's in it if age have not allai'd flames of all sorts in thee: but if
you contribute to my allowance --


Thou know I could never keep any thing from thee Pedro.


Come Ladies, there is a small Banquet attends you in the next room.


We will wait on you, Sir.


Hold, hold, and give me joy too, for I am Married, if she has not mistaken her
man again and I my woman.


No, you are the man I look for, and I no cheat, having all about me that you
look for too, but Money.


How Olinda!


Yes indeed, Sir, I served my Lady first, and then thought it no offence to
take the reward due to that service.


Here's a Spanish trick for you now, to marry a Wife before one sees her.


What Dorice Married too?


After your example, Madam.


Yes indeed, forsooth, and I have made bold too after the example of my Master.


Now do they all expect I should be dissatisfied; but, Gentlemen, in sign and
token that I am not, I'll have one more merry frisk before we part, 'tis a witty
wench; faith and troth after a month 'tis all one whose who; therefore come on
Gload.


Monsieur Haunce, I see you are a man of Gallantry. Come let us in, I know
every man here desires to make this night his own, and sacrifice it to
pleasure.

The Ladies too in blushes do confess
Equal desires; which yet they'll not confess
Their's, though less fierce, more constant will abide;
But ours less currant grow the more they're tried.

HIss 'em and cry 'em down, 'tis all in vain,
Incorrigible Scribles can't abstain:
But impudently in the old sin engage;
Though doomed before, nay banished from the Stage.
Whilst sad experience our eyes convinces,
That damned their Plays which hanged the German Princess:
And we with ornament set off a Play
Like her dressed fine for Execution-day.
And faith I think with as small hopes to live;
Unless kind Gallants the same grace you'd give
Our Comedy as Her; beg a Reprive.
Well what the other mist let our Scribe get
Apardon, for she swears she's the less cheat.
She never gulled you Gallants of the Town
Of sum, above four shillings or half a crown.
Nor does she as some late great Authors do,
Bubble the Audience and the Players too.
Her humble Muse soars not in the high-rode
Of Wit transverst, or Bawdy A-la-mode:
Yet hopes her plain and easy style is such,
As your high censures will disdain to touch.
Let her low sense creep safe from your Bravadoes,
Whilst R^tas and Cabals aim at Grenades.

