HOW vain have proved the Labours of the Stage,
In striving to reclaim a vicious Age!
Poets may write the Mischief to impeach,
You care as little what the Poets teach,
As you regard at Church what Parsons preach.
But where such Follies and such Vices reign,
What honest Pen has patience to refrain?
At Church, in Pews, ye most devoutly snore,
And here, got dully drunk, ye come to roar;
Ye go to Church to glout, and Ogle there,
And come to meet more lewd convenient here:
With equal Zeal ye honour either place,
And run so very evenly your Race,
Y' improve in Wit just as you do in Grace.
It must be so, some Daemon has possessed
Our Land, and we have never since been blessed.
Y' have seen it all, or heard of its Renown,
In reverend shape it stalked about the Town,
Six Yeomen tall attending on its frown.
Sometimes with humble note and zealous lore,
It would play the Apostolick Function over:
But, Heaven have mercy on us when it swore.
Whenever it swore, to prove the Oaths were true,
Out of its mouth at random Halters flew
Round some unwary neck, by Magic thrown,
Though still the cunning Devil saved its own:
For when the Enchantment could no longer last,
The subtle Pug, most dexterously uncast,
Left awful form for one more seeming pious,
And in a moment varied to defy us:
From silken Doctor, home-spun Ananias
Left the lewd Court, and did in City fix,
Where still by its old Arts it plays new Tricks,
And fills the heads of Fools with Politics.
This Daemon lately drew in many a Guest,
To part with zealous Guinny for -- no Feast.
Who, but the most incorrigible Fops,
For ever doomed in dismal Cells, called Shops,
To cheat and damn themselves to get their Livings,
Would lay sweet Money out in Sham-Thanksgivings?
Sham-Plots you may have paid for over and over;
But who ere paid for a Sham-Treat before?
Had you not better sent your Offerings all,
Hither to us, than Sequestrators Hall?
I being your Steward, Justice had been done ye;
I could have entertained you worth your Money.

TRouble me no more: for I am resolved, deaf and obdurate, d^ see, and so
forth.


I beseech ye, Uncle, hear me.


No.


Dear Uncle --


No.


You will be mortifi'd --


No.


At least hear me out, Sir.


No, I have heard you out too often, Sir, till you have talked me out of ma^ a
fair thousand; have had ye out of all the Bailiffs, Sergeants, and Constables
clutches bout Town, Sir; have brought ye out of all the Surgeons, Apothecaries,
and Po^ Doctors hands, that ever pretended to cure incurable Diseases; and have
crossed ye ou^ the Books of all the Mercers, Silk-men, Exchange-men, Ta^lors,
Shoemakers, and S^ strisses; with all the rest of the unconscionable City-tribe
of the long Bill, that had Faith enough to trust, and thought me Fool enough to
pay.


But, Sir, consider, he's your own Flesh and Blood.


That's more than I'll swear.


Your only Heir.


That's more than you or any of his wise Associates can t^ll, Sir.


Why his wise Associates? have you any exception to the Company he keeps? This
reflects on me and young Dresswell, Sir, men both of Birth and Fortune.


Why, good Sir Charles Meriwill, let me tell you, since you'll have it out,
That you and young Dresswell are able to debauch, destroy, and confound all the
young imitating Fops in Town.


How, Sir!


Nay, never huff, Sir; for I have six thousand pound a year, and value no man:
Neither do I speak so much for your particular, as for the Company you keep,
such Tarmagant Tories as these,


Death! meaning me, Sir?


Yes, you, Sir. Nay, never stare, Sir; I fear you not: no mans hectoring
sig^ifies this -- in the City, but the Constable's; no body dares be saucy
here, except it be in the Kings name.


Sir, I confess he was to blame.


Sir Charles, thanks to Heaven, you may be lewd, you have a plentiful Estate,
may whore, drink, game, and play the Devil; your Uncle Sir Anthony Meriwill
intends to give you all his Estate too: But for such Sparks as this, and my Fop
in fashion here, why with what Face, Conscience, or Religion, can they be lewd
and vicious, keep their Wenches, Coaches, rich Liveries, and so forth, who live
upon Charity, and the Sins of he Nation?


If he have Youthful Vices, he has Virtues too.


Yes, he had; but I know not, you have bewitched him amongst ye Amen to 'em;
would have done ones heart good to have heard him: -- Wore decent Clothes; was
^unk but upon Fasting-nights, and swore but on Sundays and Holy-days: and then
I ^d hopes of him.


Aye, Heaven forgive me.


But, Sir, he's now become a new man, is casting off all his Women, is ^unk not
above five or six times a week, swears not above once in a quarter of an hour,
^r has not gamed this two days. --


'Twas because the Devil was in's Pocket then.


-- Begins to take up at Coffee-houses, talks gravely in the City, speaks
indalous^y of the Government, and rails most abominably against the Pope and
the ench King.


Aye, aye, this shall not wheedle me out of one English Guinny; and so I told
^n yesterday.


You did so, Sir.


Yes; by a good token you were witty upon me, and swore I loved and ho^r'd the
King nowhere but on his Coin.


Is it possible, Sir?


God forgive me, Sir; I confess I was a little overtaken.


Aye, so it should seem: for he mistook his own Chamber, and went to bed to
Maids.


How! to bed to your Maids! Sure, Sir, 'tis scandal on him.


No, no, he makes his brags on it, Sir. Oh that crying sin of Boasting! Well
fare, I say, the days of old Oliver; he by a wholesome Act, made it death to
boast; so that then a man might whore his heart out, and no body the wiser.


Right, Sir, and then the men passed for sober religious persons, and the women
for as demure Saints --


Aye, then there was no scandal; but now they do not only boast what they do,
but what they do not.


I'll take care that fault shall be mended, Sir.


Aye, so will I, if Poverty have any feats of Mortification; and so farewell to
you, Sir.


Stay, Sir, are you resolved to be so cruel then, and ruin all my Fortunes now
depending?


Most religiously --


You are?


I am.


Death, I'll rob.


Do and be hanged.


Nay, I'll turn Papist.


Do and be damned.


Bless me, Sir, what a scandal would that be to the Family of the Treatalls!


Hum! I had rather indeed he turned Turk or Jew, for his own sake; but as for
scandalizing me, I defy it: my Integrity has been known ever since Forty One;
I bought three thousand a year in Bishops Lands, as 'tis well known, and lost
it at the Kings return; for which I'm honoured by the City. But for his farther
satisfaction, consolation, and destruction, know, That I Sir Timothy Treat-all,
Knight and Alderman, do think my self young enough to marry, do ye see, and will
wipe your Nose with a Son and Heir of my own begetting, and so forth.


Death! marry!


Patience, dear Tom, or thou't spoil all.


Damn him, I've lost all Patience, and can dissemble no longer, though I lose
all, -- Very good, Sir; hark ye, I hope she's young and handsome; or if she be
not, amongst the numerous lusty-stomacht Whigs that daily nose your public
Dinners, some may be found that either for Money, Charity, or Gratitude, may
requite your Treats. You keep open house to all the Party, not for Mirth,
Generosity, or good Nature, but for Roguery. You cram the Brethren, the pious
City-Gluttons, with good Cheer, good Wine, and Rebellion in abundance,
gormandizing all Comers and Goers, of all Sexes, Sorts, Opinions, and
Religions, young half-witted Fops, hot-headed Fools, and Malcontents: You
guttle and fawn on all, and all in hopes of debauching the Kings Liege-people
into Commonwealths-men; and rather than lose a Convert, you'll pimp for him.
These are your nightly Debauches. -- Nay, rather than you shall want it, I'll
cuckold you my self in pure Revenge.


How! Cuckold his own natural Uncle!


Oh, he cannot be so profane.


Profane! why he denied but now the having any share in me; and therefore 'tis
lawful. I am to live by my wits, you say, and your old rich good-natur'd
Cuckold is as sure a Revenue to a handsome young Cadet, as a thousand pound a
year. Your tolerable face and shape is an Estate in the City, and a better Bank
than your Six per Cent. at any time.


Well, Sir, since Nature has furnished you so well, you need but up and ride,
show and be rich; and so your Servant, witty Mr. Wilding.


Whilst I am labouring another good, I quite neglect my own. This cursed,
proud, disdainful Lady Galliard, is ever in my head; she's now at Church, I'm
sure, not for Devotion, but to show her Charms, and throw her Darts amongst the
gazing Crowd, and grows more vain by Conquest I'm near the Church, and must
step in, though it cost me a new Wound.


I am resolved -- Well, dear Charles, let's sup together to night, and contrive
some way to be revenged of this wicked Uncle of mine. I must leave thee now,
for I have an assignation here at Church.


Hah! at Church!


Aye, Charles, with the dearest she-Saint, and I hope sinner.


What at Church? Pox, I shall be discovered now in my Amours. That's an odd
place for Love-Intrigues.


Oh, I am to pass for a sober discreet person to the Relations; but for my
Mistress, she's made of no such sanctified Materials; she is a Widow, Charles,
young, rich, and beautiful.


Hah! if this should prove my Widow now!


And though at her own dispose, yet is much governed by Honour, and a rigid
Mother, who is ever preaching to her against the Vices of Youth, and the other
end of the Town Sparks; dreads nothing so much as her Daughters marrying a
villainous Tory: So the young one is forced to dissemble Religion, the best Mask
to hide a kind Mistress in.


This must be my Lady Galliard.


There is at present some ill understanding between us; some damned Honourable
^op lays siege to her, which has made me ill received; and I having a new
Intrigue elsewhere, return her cold disdain, but now and then she crosses my
Heart too violently to resist her. In one of these hot fits I now am, and must
find some occasion to speak to her.


By Heaven, it must be she! -- I am studying now, amongst all our
she-Acquaintance, who this should be.


Oh, this is of quality to be concealed: but the dearest loveliest Hypocrite,
white as Lillies, smooth as Rushes, and plump as Grapes after showers, haughty
her Men, her Eyes fu^l of disdain, and yet bewitching sweet; but when she
loves, soft, witty, wanton, all that charms a Soul, and but for now and then a
fit of Honour! Oh, damn the Nonsense, would be all my own.


'Tis she, by Heaven!


Ah, Charles, but I am otherways disposed of. There is the most charming young
thing in nature f^llen in love with this person of mine, a rich City-Heiress,
Charles; I have her in possession.


How can you love two at once? I've been as wild, and as extravagant, as Youth
and Wealth could render me; but never arrived to that degree of Lewdness, to
deal my Heart about: my Hours I might, but Love should be entire.


Ah, Charles, two such bewitching Faces would give thy Heart the lye: -- But
Love divides us, and I must into Church. Adieu till night.


And I must follow to resolve my heart in what it dreads to learn. Here, my
Cloak.


What my old Friend and Acquaintance, Sir Anthony Meriwill!


Sir Timothy Treat-all!


When! How long have you been in Town, Sir?


About three days, Sir.


Three days, and never came to dine with me! 'tis unpardonable! What, you keep
close to the Church, I see: You are for the Surplice still* old Orthodox you:
the Times cannot mend you, I see.


No, nor shall they mar me, Sir.


They are discoursing; I'll pass by.


As I take it, you came from Church too.


Aye, needs must, when the Devil drives. I go to save my Bacon, as they say,
once a month, and that too, after the Porrage is served up.


Those that made it, Sir, are wiser than we. For my part, I love good wholesome
Doctrine, that teaches Obedience to my King and Superiors, without railing at
the Government, and quoting Scripture for Sedition, Mutiny, and Rebellion. Why
here was a jolly Fellow this morning made a notable Sermon. By George, our
Country-Vicars are mere Scholars to your Gentlemen Town-Parsons! Hah, how he
handled the Text, and run Divisions upon it! it would make a man sin with
moderation, to hear how he clawed away the Vices of the Town, Whoring,
Drinking, and Conventicling, with the rest of the deadly number.


Good lack! an he were so good at Whoring and Drinking, you'd best carry your
Nephew, Sir Charles Meriwill, to Church; he wants a little Documentizing that
way.


Hum! You keep your old wont still; a man can begin no discourse to you, be it
of Prester Iohn, but you still conclude with my Nephew.


Good Lord! Sir Anthony, you need not be so purty; what I say, is the Discourse
of the whole City, how lavishly you let him live, and give ill Examples to all
young Heirs.


The City! the City's a grumbling, lying, dissatisfi'd City, and no wise or
honest man regards what it says. Do you, or any of the City, stand bound to his
Scrivener or Taylor? He spends what I allow him, Sir, his own; and you're a
Fool or Knave, choose ye whether, to concern your self.


Good lack! I speak but what wiser men discourse.


Wiser men! wiser Coxcombs. What, they would have me train my Nephew up, a
hopeful Youth, to keep a Merchants Book, or send him to chop Logic in a
University, and have him return an ^rrant learned Ass, to simper, and look
demure, and start at Oaths and Wenches, whilst I fell his Woods, and grant
Leases; and lastly, to make good what I have cozened him of, force him to marry
Mrs. Crump, the ill-favour'd Daughter of some Right Worshipful. -- A Pox of all
such Guardians.


Do, countenance Sin and Expenses, do.


What sin, what expenses? He wears good Clothes, why Trades-men get the more-by
him; he keeps his Coach, 'tis for his ease; a Mistress, 'tis for his pleasure;
he games, 'tis for his diversion: And where's the harm of this? is there ought
else you can accuse him with?


Yes; -- a Pox upon him, he's my Rival too.


If that be a sin, Heaven help the Wicked!


But I mean honourably. --


Honourably! Why do you know any Infirmity in him, why he should not marry?


Not I, Sir.


Not you, Sir? why then you're an Ass, Sir. -- But is the Lady young and
handsome?


A^e, and rich too, Sir.


No matter for Money, so she love the Boy.


Love him! no, Sir, she neither does, nor shall love him.


How, Sir, nor shall love him! By George, but she shall, and lie with him too,
if I please, Sir.


How, Sir! lie with a rich City-widow, and a Lady, and to be married to a fine
Reverend old Gentleman within a day or two?


His name, Sir, his name; I'll dispatch him presently.


How, Sir, dispatch him! -- Your Servant, Sir.


Hold, Sir! by this abrupt departure, I fancy you the Boy's Rival: Come, draw.


How, draw, Sir!


Aye draw, Sir: Not my Nephew have the Widow!


With all my soul, Sir; I love and honour your Nephew. I his Rival! alas, Sir,
I'm not so fond of Cuckoldom. Pray, Sir, let me see you and Sir Charles at my
house, I may serve him in this business: and so I take my leave, Sir. -- Draw
quoth a! a Pox upon him for an old Tory-rory.


Who's here? Charles muffled in a Cloak, peering after a woman? -- My own Boy
to a hair. She's handsome too. I'll step aside: for I must see the meaning
on it.


Bless me! how unconcerned he passed!


He bowed low, Madam.


But 'twas in such a fashion, as expressed Indifferency, much worse than Hate
from Wilding.


Your Ladyship has used him ill of late; yet if your Ladyship please, I'll call
him back.


I'll die first. -- Hah, he's going! -- Yet now I think on it, I have a Toy of
his, which to express my scorn, I'll give him back now: -- this Ring.


Shall I carry it, Madam?


You'll not express disdain enough in the delivery; and you may call him back.


By Heaven, she's fond of him.


Oh, Mrs. Closet! is it you? -- Madam, your Servant: By this disdain, I fear
your Woman, Madam, has mistaken her Man. Would your Ladyship speak with me?


Yes. -- But what? the God of Love instruct me.

Command me quickly, Madam: for I have business.

Nay, then I cannot be discreet in Love.
-- Your business once was Love, nor had no idle hours
To throw away on any other thought.
You loved as if you'd had no other Faculties,
As if you'd meant to gain Eternal Bliss
By that Devotion only: And see how now you're changed.

Not I, by Heaven; 'tis you are only changed.
I thought you'd love me too, curse on the dull mistake;
But when I begged to reap the mighty Joy
That Mutual Love affords,
You turned me off for Honour,
That nothing framed by some old sullen Maid,
That wanted Charms to kindle flames when young.

By George, he's in the right.

Death! can she hear this Language?

How dare you name this to me any more?
Have you forgot my Fortune, and my Youth?
My Quality, and Fame?

No, by Heaven, all these increase my Flame.

Perhaps they might, but yet I wonder where
You got the boldness to approach me with it.

Faith, Madam, from your own encouragement.

From mine! Heavens, what contempt is this!

When first I paid my Vows, (good Heaven forgive me)
They were for Honour all;
But wiser you, thanks to your Mothers care too,
Knowing my Fortune an uncertain hope,
My Life of scandal, and my lewd Opinion,
Forbid my Wish that way: 'Twas kindly urged;
You could not then forbid my Passion too,
Nor did I ever from your Lips or Eyes,
Receive the cruel sentence of my Death.

Gad, a fine fellow this!

To save my life, I would not marry thee.

That's kindly said:
But to save mine, thou't do a kinder thing;
-- I know thou wo't.

What, yield my Honour up!
And after find it sacrificed anew,
And made the scorn of a triumphing Wife!

Gad, she's in the right too; a noble Girl I'll warrant her.

But you disdain to satisfy those fears;
And like a proud and haughty Conqueror,
Demand the Town, without the least Conditions.

By Heaven, she yields apace.

Pox on it, would I'd never seen her; now have I a Legend of small Cupids at
Hot-cockles in my heart.


Now am I pausing on that word Conditions.
Thou say thou would not have me marry thee;
That is, as if I loved thee for thy Eyes,
And put 'em out to hate thee:
Or like our Stage-smitten Youth, who fall in love with a woman for-Acting
finely, and by taking her off the Stage, deprive her of the only Charm she
had,

Then leave her to Ill Luck.

Gad, he's in the right again too! A rare Fellow!

For, Widow, know, had thou more Beauty, yet not all of 'em were half so
great a Charm as thy not being mine.


Hum! How will he make that out now?

The stealths of Love, the Midnight kind admittance,
The gloomy Bed, the soft-breath'd murmuring Passion;
Ah, who can guess at Joys thus snatched by parcels!
The difficulty makes us always wishing,
Whilst on thy part, Fear still makes some resistance;
And every Blessing seems a kind of Rape.

He has don't! -- A Divine Fellow this; just of my Religion. I am studying now
whether I was never acquainted with his Mother.


Tempt me no more! What dull unwary Flame
Possessed me all this while! Confusion on thee,
And all the Charms that dwell upon thy Tongue.
Diseases ruin that bewitching form,
That with thy soft feigned Vows debauched my Heart.

Heavens! can I yet endure!

By all that's good, I'll marry instantly;
Marry, and save my last stake, Honour, yet,
Or thou wilt rook me out of all at last.

Marry! thou can not do a better thing:
There are a thousand Matrimonial Fops,
Fine Fools of Fortune,
Good-natur'd Blockheads too, and that's a wonder.

That will be managed by a man of Wit.

Right.

I have an eye upon a Friend of yours.

A Friend of mine! then he must be my Cuckold.

Very fine! can I endure yet more?

Perhaps it is your Uncle.

Hah, my Uncle!

Hah, my Charles! why well said Charles, he bore up briskly to her.


Ah, Madam, may I presume to tell you --


Ah, Pox, that was stark nought! he begins like a Fore-man o^ the Shop* to his
Masters Daughter.


How, Charles Meriwill acquainted with my Widow!

Why do you wear that scorn upon your face?
I've nought but honest meaning in my Passion;
Whilst him you favour, so prophanes your Beauties,
In scorn of Marriage and religious Rites,
Attempts the ruin of your sacred Honour.

Hah, Wilding, boast my love!

The Devil take him, my Nephew's quite spoiled!
Why what a Pox has he to do with Honour now?

Pray leave me, Sir.

Damn it, since he knows all, I'll boldly own my flame --
You take a liberty I never gave you, Sir.

How, this from thee! nay, then I must take more,
And ask you where you borrowed that Brutality,
T'approach that Lady with your saucy Passion.

Gad, well done, Charles! here must be sport anon.

I will not answer every idle Question.

Death, you dare not.

How, dare not!

No, dare not: for if you did --

What durst you, if I did?

Death, cut your Throat, Sir.

Hold, hold, let him have fair play, and then curse him that parts ye.


Hold, I command ye, hold!

There rest my Sword to all Eternity.

Now I conjure ye both, by all your Honour,
If you were ever acquainted with that Virtue,
To see my face no more,
Who durst dispute your interest in me thus,
As for a common Mistress, in your Drink.

A heavenly Girl! -- Well, now she's gone, by George, I am for disputing your
Title to her by dint of Sword.


I wo'not fight.


Another time we will decide it, Sir.


After your whining Prologue, Sir, who the Devil would have expected such a
Farce? -- Come, Charles, take up thy Sword, Charles; -- and, do ye hear, forget
me this Woman. --


Forget her, Sir! there never was a thing so excellent!

You lye, Sirrah, you lye, there are a thousand
As fair, as young, and kinder, by this day.
We'll into the Country, Charles, where every Grove
Affords us Rustic Beauties,
That know no Pride nor Painting,
And that will take it and be thankful, Charles;
Fine wholesome Girls that fall like ruddy Fruit,
Fit for the gathering, Charles.

Oh, Sir, I cannot relish the coarse Fare.
But what's all this, Sir, to my present Passion?

Passion, Sir! you shall have no Passion, Sir.

No Passion, Sir! shall I have life and breath?

It may be not, Sirrah, if it be my will and pleasure.
-- Why how now! saucy Boys be their own Carvers?

Sir, I am all Obedience.

Obedience! Was ever such a Blockhead! Why then if I command it, you will not
love this Woman?


No, Sir.


No, Sir! But I say, Yes, Sir, love her me; and love her me like a man too, or
I'll renounce ye, Sir.


I've tried all ways to win upon her heart,
Presented, writ, watched, fought, prayed, kneeled, and wept.

Why there's it now; I thought so: Kneeled and wept! a Pox upon thee -- I took
thee for a prettier fellow. --

You should a hufft and blustered at her door;
Been very impudent and saucy, Sir;
Lewd, ruffling, mad; courted at all hours and seasons;
Let her not rest, nor eat, nor sleep, nor visit.
Believe me, Charles, women love importunity.
Watch her close, watch her like a Witch, Boy,
Till she confess the Devil in her, -- Love.

I cannot, Sir.
Her Eyes strike such an awe into my Soul, --

Strike such a Fiddlestick. -- Sirrah, I say, do it; what, you can towse a Wench
as handsomely -- You can be lewd enough upon occasion. I know not the Lady, nor
her Fortune; but I am resolved thou shalt have her, with practising a little
Courtship of my mode. -- Come --

Come my Boy Charles, since you must needs be doing,
I'll show thee how to go a Widow-wooing.

ENough, I've heard enough of Wilding's Vices, to know I am undone. Galliard
his Mistress too? I never saw her, but I have heard her famed for Beauty, Wit,
and Fortune.

That Rival may be dangerous.

Yes, Madam, the fair, the young, the witty Lady Galliard, even in the height
of all his love to you; nay, even whilst his Uncle courts her for a Wife, he
designs himself for a Gallant.


Wondrous Inconstancy and Impudence!


Nay, Madam, you may rely upon Mr. Fopington's Information: therefore if you
respect your Reputation, retreat in time.


Reputation! that I forfeited when I ran away with your Friend Mr. Wilding.


Ah, that ever I should live to see Nicholas Gettall, run away with one of the
lewdest Heathens about town!


How! your Friend Mr. Wilding a Heathen; and with you too, Mrs. Clacket! That
Friend Mr. Wilding, who thought none so worthy as Mrs. Clacket, to trust with
so great a secret as his flight with me; he a Heathen!


Aye, and a poor Heathen too, Madam. 'Slife, if you must marry a man to buy him
Breeches, marry an honest man, a religious man, a man that bears a Conscience,
and will do a woman some Reason. -- Why here's Mr. Fopington, Madam; here's a
Shape, here's a Face, a Back as straight as an Arrow, I'll warrant.


How! buy him Breeches! Has Wilding then no Fortune?


Yes, Faith, Madam, pretty well; so, so, as the Dice run: and now and then he
lights upon a Squire, or so, and between fair and foul Play, he makes a shift
to pick a pretty Livelihood up.


How! does his Uncle allow him no present Maintenance?


No, nor future Hopes neither: Therefore, Madam, I hope you will see the
difference between him and a man of Parts, that adores you.


If I find all this true you tell me, I shall know how to value my self and
those that love me.

-- This may be yet a Rascal.

Mistress, Mr. Wilding's below.


Below! Oh, Heavens, Madam, do not expose me to his lewd fury, for being too
zealous in your service.


I will not let him know you told any thing, Sir.


Death! to be seen here, would expose my Life.


Here, here, step out upon the Sair-case, and slip into my Chamber.


'Owns, he's here! lock the door fast; let him not enter.


Oh, Heavens, I have not the Key! hold it, hold it fast, sweet, sweet Mr.
Foping Oh, should there be Murder done, what a scandal would that be to the
house of a true Protestant!


Heavens! what will he say and think, to see me shut in with a man?


Oh, I'll say you're sick, asleep, or out of humour.


I'd give the world to see him.


Charlot, Charlot! Am I denied an entrance? By Heaven, I'll break the door.


Oh, I'm a dead man, dear Clacket!


Oh, hold, Sir, Mrs. Charlot is very sick.


How, sick, and I kept from her!


She begs you'll come again an hour hence.


Delayed, by Heaven I will have entrance.


Ruined! undone! for if he do not kill me, he may starve me.


Oh, he will break in upon us! Hold, Sir, hold a little; Mrs. Charlot is
just-just-shifting her self, Sir: you will not be so uncivil as to press in, I
hope, at such a time.


I have a fine time on it between ye, to have him think I am stripping my self
before Mr. Fopington -- Let go, or I'll call out and tell him all.


How now, Charlot, what means this new unkindness? What, not a word?


There is so little Music in my Voice, you do not care to hear it; you have
been better entertained, I find, mightily employed, no doubt.


Yes Faith, and so I have, Charlot: Damned Business, that Enemy to Love, has
made me rude.


Or that other Enemy to Love, damned Wenching.


Wenching! how ill hast thou timed thy Jealousy!

What Banker, that to morrow is to pay a mighty sum, would venture out his
stock to day in little parcels, and lose his Credit by it?


You would, perfidious as you are, though all your Fortune, all your future
Health, depended on that Credit.


So: Hark ye, Mrs. Clacket, you have been prating I find in my absence, giving
me a handsome character to Charlot. -- You hate any good thing should go by
your own Nose.


By my Nose, Mr. Wilding! I defy you: I'd have you to know, I scorn any good
thing should go by my Nose in an uncivil way.


I believe so.


Have I been the Confident to all your secrets this three years, in sickness
and in health, for richer, for poorer; concealed the nature of your wicked
Diseases, under the honest name of Surfeits; called your filthy Surgeons* Mr.
Doctor, to keep up your Reputation; civilly received your the other end of the^
Town young Relations at all hours; --


High!


Been up with you and down with you early and late, by night and by day; let
you in at all hours, drunk and sober, single and double, and civilly withdrawn,
and modestly shut the door after me?


Whir! The storm's up, and the Devil cannot lay it.


And am I thus rewarded for my pain!


So Tempests are allayed by showers of Rain.


That I should be charged with speaking ill of you, so honest, so civil a
Gentleman --


No, I have better witness of your falsehood.


Hah, 'sdeath, she'll name me!


What mean you, my Charlot?
Do you not think I love you?

Go ask my Lady Galliard, she keeps the best account of all your Sighs and
Vows,

And robs me of my dearest softer hours.

You cannot hold from being kind to him.


Galliard! How came she by that secret of my life?


Aye, that Uncle too --
You swore to me you were your Uncles Heir;
But you perhaps may chance to get him one,
If the Lady prove not cruel.

Death and the Devil, what Rascal has been prating to her!


Whilst I am reserved for a dead lift, if Fortune prove unkind, or wicked
Uncles refractory,

Yet I could love you, though you were a Slave,
And I were Queen of all the Universe.

Aye, there you spoiled all again -- you forget your self.

And all the world, when he looks kindly on me.
But I'll take courage, and be very angry.
Nor does your Perjuries rest here; you're equally as false to Galliard, as to
me; false for a little Mistress of the Town, whom you've set up in spite to
Quality.


So, that was home and handsome.

What damned Informer does she keep in Pension?

And can you think my Fortune and my Youth
Merits no better Treatment?
How could you have the heart to use me so?
I fall insensibly to Love and Fondness.

Ah, my dear Charlot! you who know my heart, can you believe me false?


In every Syllable, in every Look:
Your Vows, your Sighs, and Eyes, all counterfeit;
You said you loved me, where was then your truth?
You swore you were to be your Uncle's Heir:
Where was your confidence of me the while,
To think my Generosity so scanted,
To love you for your Fortune?
-- How every look betrays my yielding heart!
No, since men are grown so cunning in their
Trade of Love, the necessary Vice I'll practice too*
And chaffer with Love-Merchants for my Heart.
Make it appear you are your Uncles Heir,
I'll marry ye tomorrow.
Of all thy Cheats, that was the most unkind,
Because you thought to conquer by that Lye.
-- To night I'll be resolved.

Hum! to night!

To night, or I will think you love me for my Fortune; which if you find
elsewhere to more advantage,

I may unpitied die -- and I should die,
If you should prove untrue.

There you've dashed all again.

I am resolved to keep my credit with her* -- Here's my hand:
This night, Charlot, I'll let you see the Writings.
-- But how, a Pox of him that knows for Thomas.

Hah, that Hand without the Ring!
Nay, never study for a handsome Lye.

Ring! Oh, aye, I left it in my Dressing-room this morning.

See how thou hast inur'd thy Tongue to Falsehood!
Did you not send it to a certain Creature
They call Diana,
From off that hand that plighted Faith to me?

By Heaven, 'tis Witchcraft all,
Unless this Villain Fopington betray me.
Those sort of Rascals will do any thing
For ready Meat and Wine. -- I'll kill the Fool -- Hah, here!

Here, Lord! Lord!
Where were thy Eyes, dear Wilding?

Where they have spied a Rascal.
Where was this Property concealed?

Concealed! What dost thou mean, dear Tom? Why I stood as plain as the Nose on
thy Face, mun.


But 'tis the ungrateful quality of all your sort, to make such base returns.
How got this Rogue admittance, and when in,
The Impudence to tell his treacherous Lies?

Admittance! Why you're stark mad: Did not I come in with you, that is,
followed you?


Whither?


Why into the house, up stairs, stood behind you when you swore you would come
in, and followed you in.


All this, and I not see!


Oh, Love's blind; but this Lady saw me, Mrs. Clack^ saw (...) -- Admittance
quotha!


Why did you not speak?


Speak! I was so amazed at what I heard, the villainous Scandals laid on you by
some pick-thank Rogue or other, I had no power.


Aye, thou know how I am wronged.


Oh, most damnably, Sir!


Abuse me to my Mistress too!


Oh, Villains! Dogs!


Do you think they've wronged him, Sir? for I'll believe you.


Do I think, Madam? Aye, I think him a Son of a Whore that said it; and I'll
cut's Throat.


Well, this Impudence is a heavenly Virtue!

You see now, Madam, how Innocence may suffer.

In spite of all thy villainous dissembling,
I must believe, and love thee for my quiet.

That's kind; and if before to morrow I do not show you I deserve your Heart,
kill me at once by quitting me. -- Farewell. --

My craft will be in catching; which if past,
Her Love secures me the kind Wench at last.

What if he should not chance to keep his word now?


How if he should not? by all that's good, if he should not, I am resolved ^o
marry him however. We two may make a pretty shift with three thousand ^ound a
year: yet I would fain be resolved how affairs stand between the old Gen^leman
and him. I would give the world to see that Widow too, that Lady Galliard.


If you're bent upon it* I'll tell you what we'll do, Madam: There's e^ery day
mighty Feasting here at his Uncles hard by, and you shall disguise your ^elf as
well as you can, and go for a Niece of mine I have coming out of Scotland:
^here you will not fail of seeing my Lady Galliard, though I doubt, not Mr.
Wilding, ^ho is of late discarded.


Enough; I am resolved upon this design: Let's in and and practise the
^orthern Dialect.


But then Diana took the Ring at last?


Greedl^y; but railed, and swore, ^ and ranted at your late unkindness, and
^ou'd not be appeased.


Dresswell, I was just going to see for thee.


I'm glad, dear Tom, I'm here to serve thee.


And now I've found thee, thou must along with me.


Whither? But I'll not ask, but obey.


To a kind sinner, Frank.


Pox on 'em all: prithee turn out those petty Tyrants of thy Heart, and fit it
for a Monarch, Love, dear Widling, of which thou never knew the pleasure yet,
or not above a day.


Not knew the pleasure! Death, the very Essence, the first draughts of Love:

Ah, how pleas^ is to drink when a man's adry!
The rest is all but dully ^ipping on.

And yet this Diana, for thither thou art going, thou hast been constant to
this three or four years.


A constant Keeper thou meanst; which is indeed enough to get the scandal of a
Coxcomb: But I know not, those sort of Baggages have a kind of Fascination so
enticing -- and Faith, after the Fatigues of Formal Visits to a mans dull
Relations, or what's as bad, to women of Quality; after the busy Afflictions
of the Day, and the Debauches of the tedious Night, I tell thee, Frank, a man's
best Retirement is with a soft kind Wench. But to say truth, I have a farther
design in my Visit* now. Thou know how I stand past hope of Grace,
excommunicated the Kindness of my Uncle.


True.


My lewd Debauches, and being o'th wrong Party, as he calls it, is now become
an reconcilable Quarrel; so that I having many and hopeful Intrigues now
depending, especially these of my charming Widow, and my City-Heiress, which
can by no means be carried on without that damned Necessary called Ready Money,
I have stretched my Credit, as all young Heirs do, till 'tis quite broke. Now
Liveries, Coaches, and Clothes must be had, they must, my Friend.


Why dost thou not in this Extremity clap up a Match with my Lady Galliard? or
this young Heiress you speak of?


But Marriage, Frank, is such a Bug-bear! And this old Uncle of mine may one
day be gathered together, and sleep with his Fathers, and then I shall have six
thousand pound a year, and the wide World before me; and who the Devil could
relish these Blessings with the clog of a Wife behind him? -- But till then,
Money must be had, I say.


Aye, but how, Sir?


Why, from the old Fountain, Jack, my Uncle; he has himself decreed it: he
tells me I must live upon my Wits, and will, Frank.


Gad, I'm impatient to know how.


I believe thee, for thou art out at Elboes: and when I thrive, you show i'^h'
Pit, behind the Scenes, and Coffee-houses. Thy Breeches give a better account
of my Fortune, than Lilly with all his Schemes and Stars.


I own I thrive by your Influence, Sir.


Well; but to your Project, Friend: to which I'll set a helping Hand, a Heart,
a Sword, and Fortune.


You make good what my Soul conceives of you. Let's to Diana then, and there
I'll tell thee all. Diana, I was just going to thy Lodgings!


Oh las, you are too much taken up with your rich City-Heiress.


That's no cause of quarrel between you and I, Diana; you were wont to be as
impatient for my marrying, as I for the death of my Uncle: for your rich Wife
ever obliges her Husbands Mistress; and women of your sort, Diana, ever thrive
better by Adultery than Fornication.


Do, try to appease the easy Fool with these fine Expectations: -- No, I have
been too often flattered with the hopes of your marrying a rich Wife, and then
I was to have a Settlement; but instead of that, things go backward with me, my
Coach is vanished, my Servants dwindled into one necessary Woman and a Boy,
which to save Charges, is too small for any service; my twenty Guinnies a week,
into forty Shillings: a hopeful Reformation!


Patience, Diana, things will m^d in time.


When, I wonder? Summer's come, yet I am still in my embroidered Manto, when
I'm dressed, lined with Velvet; it would give one a Feavor but to look at me: yet
still I am flamm'd off with hopes of a rich Wife, whose Fortune I am to lavish.
-- But I see you have neither Conscience nor Religion in you; I wonder what a
Devil will become of your Soul for thus deluding me!


By Heaven, I love thee!


Love me! what if you do? how far will that go at the Exchange for Point? Will
the Mercer take it for currant Coin? -- But 'tis no matter, I must love a Wit,
with a Pox, when I might have had so many Fools of Fortune: But the Devil take
me, if you deceive me any longer.


You'll keep your word, no doubt, now you have sworn.


So I will. I never go abroad, but I gain new Conquest. Happy's the man that
can approach nearest the side-box where I sit at a Play, to look at me; but if
I daign to smile on him, Lord, how the o're-joy'd Creature returns it with a
bow low as the very Benches! Then rising, shakes his Ears, looks round, with
pride, to see who took notice how much he was in favour with charming Mrs. Die.


No more: Come, let's be Friends, Diana; for you and I must manage an Uncle of
mine.


Damn your Projects, I'll have none of 'em.


Here, here's the best Softner of a woman's heart; 'tis ^ld, two hundred Pieces:
Go, lay it on, till you shame Quality, into plain Silk and Fringe.


Lord, you have the strangest power of Persuasion! -- Nay, if you buy my Peace,
I can afford a pennyworth.


So thou can of any thing about thee.


Well, your Project, my dear Tommy?


Thus then -- Thou, dear Frank, shalt to my Uncle, ^tell him that Sir Nicholas
Gettall, as he knows, being dead, and having left, as he knows too, one only
Daughter his whole Executrix, Mrs. Charlot, I have by my civil and modest
behaviour, so won upon her heart, that two nights since she left her Fathers
Country-house at Lusum in Kent, in spite of all her strict Guards, and run away
with me.


How, wilt thou tell him of it then?


Hear me -- That I have hitherto secured her at a Friends house here in the
City; but diligent search being now made, dare trust her there no longer. And
make it my humble Request by you, my Friend, (who are only privy to this
secret) that he would give me leave to bring her home to his house; whose very
Authority will defend her from being fought for there.


Aye, Sir, but what will come of this, I say?


Why a Settlement: You know he has already made me Heir to all he has, after
his decease; but for being a wicked Tory, as he calls me, he has, after the
Writings were made, signed, and sealed, refused to give 'em in trust. Now when
he secs I have made my self Master of so vast a Fortune, he will immediately
surrender, that reconciles all again.


Very likely; but wo't thou trust him with the woman, Thomas?


No; here's Diana, who as I shall bedizen, shall pass for as substantial an
Aldermans Heiress, as ever fell into wicked hands. He never knew the right
Charlot, nor indeed has any body ever seen her but an old Aunt and Nurse, she
was so kept up: -- And there, Diana, thou shalt have a good opportunity to lye*
dissemble, and jilt in abundance, to keep thy hand in ur.

Prithee, dear Dresswell, haste with the News to him.

Faith, I like this well enough; this Project may take, and I'll about it.


Go, get ye home, and trick and betawder your self up like a right City-Lady,
rich, but ill-fashion'd; on with all your Jewels, but not a Patch, ye Gypsy,
nor no Spanish Paint, do ye hear.


I'll warrant you for my part.


Then before the old Gentleman, you must behave your self very soberly, simple,
and demure, and look as prew as at a Conventicle; and take heed you drink not
off your Glass at Table, nor rant, nor swear; one Oath confounds our Plot, and
betrays thee to be an errant Drab.


Doubt not my Art of Dissimulation.


Go, haste and dress --


Hah, who's yonder, the Widow! a Pox upon it, now have not I power to stir: she
has a damned ^ank upon my Heart, and nothing but right down lying with her,
will dissolve the Charm. She has forbid me seeing her, and therefore I am sure
will the sooner take notice of me.


What will you put on to night, Madam? you know you are to sup at Sir Timothy
Treat-all's.


Time enough for that; prithee let's take a turn in this Balcony, this
City-garden, where we walk to take the fresh Air of the Sea-coal-smoak. Did the
Footman go back, as I ordered him, to see how Wilding and Sir Charles parted?


He did, Madam; and nothing could provoke Sir Charles to fight after your
Ladyships strict Commands. Well, I'll swear he's the sweetest natured Gentleman
-- ^as all the advantages of Nature and Fortune: I wonder what Exception your
La^yship has to him*


Some small Exception to his whining humour; but I think my chiefest dislike
is, because my Relations wish it a Match between us.

It is not hate to him, but natural contradiction. Hah, is not that Wilding
yonder? he's reading of a Letter sure.


So, she sees me. Now for an Art to make her lure me up: for though I have a
greater mind than she, it shall be all her own; the Match she told me of this
morning with my Uncle, sticks plaguily upon my stomach; I must break the neck
on it, or break the Widows heart, that's certain. If I advance towards the door
now, she frowningly retires; if I pass on, 'tis likely she may call me.


I think he's passing on,
Without so much as looking towards the window.

He's glad of the excuse of being forbidden.

But, Closet, know thou not he has abused my fame,
And does he think to pass thus unupbraided?
Is there no Art to make him look this way?
No trick? -- Prithee faign to laugh.

So, I shall not answer to that Call.

He's going! Ah, Closet, my Fan! --


Faith, so am I; and you may spare my pains, and send your Woman for it, I am in
haste.


Then the quickest way will be to bring it.


I knew I should be drawn in one way or other.


Stay; I hear you're wondrous free of your Tongue, when 'tis let loose on me.


Who I, Widow? I think of no such trifles.


Such Railers never think when they're abusive; but something you have said, a
Lye so infamous!


A Lye, and infamous of you! impossible!
What was it that I called you, Wise, or Honest?

How, can you accuse me for the want of either?


Yes, of both: Had you a grain of Honesty, or intended ever to be thought so,
would you have the impudence to marry an old Coxcomb, a Fellow that will not so
much as serve you for a Cloak, he is so visibly and undeniably impotent?


Your Uncle you mean.


I do; who has not known the joy of Fornication this thirty year, and now the
Devil and you have put it into his head to marry, forsooth. Oh the Felicity of
the Wedding-night!


Which you, with all your railing Rhetoric, shall not have power to hinder.


Not if you can help it: for I perceive you are resolved to be a lewd
incorrigible sinner, and marry this seditious doting fool my Uncle, only to
hang him out for the ^igne of the Cuckold, to give notice where Beauty is to be
purchased, for fear otherwise we should mistake, and think thee honest.


So much for my want of Honesty; my Wit is the Part of the Text you are to
handle next.


Let the World judge of that, by this one action: This Marriage undisputably
robs you both of your Reputation and Pleasure. Marry an old Fool, because he's
rich! when so many handsome proper younger Brothers would be glad of you!


Of which hopeful number your self are one.


Who, I! Bear witness, Closet; take notice I'm upon my Marriage, Widow, and
such a Scandal on my Reputation might ruin me: therefore have a care what you
say.


Ha, ha, ha, Marriage! Yes, I hear you give it out, you are to be married to
me: for which Defamation, if I be not revenged, hang me.


Yes, you are revenged: I had the fame of vanquishing where-e're I laid my
Siege, till I knew thee, hard-hearted thee; had the honest Reputation of lying
with the Magistrates Wives, when their Reverend Husbands were employed in the
necessary Affairs of the Nation, ^editiously petitioning; and then I was
esteemed; but now they look on me as a monstrous thing, that makes honourable
Love to you; Oh hideous, a Husband-Lover! So that now I may protest, and swear,
and lye my heart out, I find neither Credit nor Kindness; but when I beg for
either, my Lady Galliard's thrown in my Dish: Then they laugh aloud, and cry,
Who would think it of gay, of fine Mr. Wilding! Thus the City She-wits are let
loose upon me, and all for you, sweet Widow; but I am resolved I will redeem my
Reputation again, if never seeing you nor writing to you more, will do it: And
so farewell, faithless and scandalous honest woman*


Stay, Tyrant.


I am engaged.


You are not.


I am, and am resolved to lose no more time on a peevish woman, who values her
Honour above her Lover.


Go; this is the noblest way of losing thee.


Must not I call him back?


No: If any honest Lover come, admit him; I will forget this Devil. Fetch me
some Jewels; the company to night at Sir Timothy's may divert me.


Madam, one Sir Anthony Meriwill would speak with your Ladyship.


Admit him; sure 'tis Sir Charles his Uncle: if he come to treat a Match with
me for his Nephew, he takes me in the critical minute. Would he but leave his
whining, I might love him, if 'twere but in revenge.


So, I have tutored the young Rogue, I hope he'll learn in time. Good day to
your Ladyship; Charles Sirrah -- notwithstanding your Ladyships Commands --
Look how he stands now, being a mad young Raskal! -- Gad, he would wait on your
Ladyship -- A Devil on him, see if he'll budge now -- For he's a brisk Lover,
Madam, when he once begins. A Pox on him, he'll spoil all yet.


Please you sit, Sir.


Madam, I beg your Pardon for my Rudeness.


Still whining? --


Do ye hear that, Sirrah? Oh damn it, beg Pardon! The Rogue's quite out of 's
part.


Madam, I fear my Visit is unseasonable.


Unseasonable! Damned Rogue, unseasonable to a Widow! -- Quite out.


There are indeed some Ladies that would be angry at an untimely Visit, before
they've put on their best Faces; but I am none of those that would be fair in
spite of Nature, Sir. -- Put on this Jewel here.


That Beauty needs no Ornament, Heaven has been too bountiful.


Heaven! Oh Lord, Heaven! a Puritanical Rogue, he courts her like her Chaplain.


You are still so full of University-Complements --


Do ye hear that, Sirrah? -- Aye so he is, so he is indeed, Madam. -- To her
like a man, ye Knave.


Ah, Madam, I am come!


To show your self a Coxcomb.


To tire me with discourses of your Passion. -- Fie, how this Curl sits!


No, you shall hear no more of that ungrateful subject.


Son of a Whore, hear no more of Love, damned Rogue! Madam, by George he lies;
he does come to speak of Love, and make Love, and to do Love, and all for Love.
-- Not come to speak of Love, with a Pox! 'Owns, Sir, behave your self like a
man; be impudent, be saucy, forward, bold, towzing, and lewd, do ye hear, or
I'll beat thee before her. Why what a Pox!


Finding my hopes quite lost in your unequal Favours to young Wilding, I'm
quitting of the Town.


You will do well to do so. -- Lay by that Necklace; I'll wear Pearl to day.


Confounded Blockhead! -- By George, he lies again, Madam. A Dog, I'll
dis-inherit him. George; I've heard him a thousand times swear it. Swear it
now, Sirrah: Look, look, how he stands now! Why dear Charles, good Boy, swear a
little, ruffle her, and swear Damn it, she shall have none but thee.
Devonshire.


Would I could see it, Sir.


See it! look ye there, ye Rogue. -- Why 'tis all his fault, Madam. He's seldom
sober; then he has a dozen Wenches in pay, that he may with the more Authority
break their w^dows. There's never a Maid within forty miles of Meriwill-hall to
work a Miracle on, but all are Mothers. He's a hopeful Youth, I'll say that for
him.


How I have loved you, my despairs shall witness: for I will die to purchase
your content.


Die, a damned Rogue! Aye, aye, I'll dis-inherit him: A Dog, die, with a Pox!
No, he'll be hanged first, Madam.


And sure you'll pity me when I am dead.


A Curse on him; pity, with a Pox! I'll give him never a Souse.


Give me that Essence-bottle.


But for a recompense of all my sufferings --


Sprinkle my Handkercher with Tuberuse.


I beg a Favour you'd afford a stranger.


Sooner perhaps. What Jewel's that?


One Sir Charles Meriwill --


Sent, and you received without my order!
No wonder that he looks so scurvily.
Give him the Trifle back to mend his humour.

I thank you, Madam, for that repromand. Look in that Glass, Sir, and admire
that sneaking Coxcomb's Countenance of yours: A Pox on him, he's past Grace,
lost, gone, not a Souse, not a Groat; good buy to you, Sir. Madam, I beg your
Pardon; the next time I come a wooing, it shall be for my self, Madam, and I
have something that will justify it too; but as for this fellow, if your
Ladyship have ever a small Page at leisure, I desire he may have order to kick
him down stairs. Adamn'd Rogue, to be civil now, when he should have behaved
himself handsomely! Not an Acre, not a Shilling, -- buy, Sir Softhead.


I was sure 'twas Meriwill's Coach at door.


Hah, Wilding!


Aye, now Sir, here's one will waken ye, Sir.


How now, Widow, you are always giving Audience to Lovers, I see.


You're very free, Sir.


I'm always so in the widows Lodgings, Sir.


A rare Fellow!


You will not do it elsewhere?


Not with so much Authority.


An admirable Fellow! I must be acquainted with him.


Is this the Respect you pay women of her Quality?


The Widow knows I stand not much on Ceremonies.


Gad, he shall be my Heir.


Pardon him, Sir, this is his Cambridge-breeding.


Aye so 'tis, so 'tis; that two years there quite spoiled him.


Sir, if you've any farther business with me, speak it; if not, I'm going
forth.


Madam, in short --


In short to a Widow, in short! quite lost.


I find you treat me ill for my Respect;
And when I court you next,
I will forget how very much I love you.

Sir, I shall be proud of your farther acquaintance; for I like, love, and
honour you.


I'll study to deserve it, Sir.


Madam, your Servant. A damned sneaking Dog to be civil and modest, with a Pox!


See if my Coach be ready.


Whither are you janting now?


Where you dare not wait on me; to your Uncles to Supper.


That Uncle of mine pimps for all the Sparks of his Party;
There they all meet and bargain without scandal:
Fops of all sorts and sizes you may choose.
Whig-land affords not such another Market.

Madam, here's Sir Timothy Treat-all come to wait on your Ladyship to Supper.


My Uncle! Oh, damn him, he was born to be my Plague: Not dis-inheriting me had
been so great a disappointment; and if he sees me here, I ruin all the Plots
I've laid fo^ him. Ha^ he's here!


How, my Nephew Thomas here!

Madam, I find you can be cruel too,
Knowing my Uncle has abandoned me.

How now, Sir, what's your business here?


I came to beg a Favour of my Lady Galliard, Sir, knowing her Power and Quality
here in the City.


How, a Favour of my Lady Galliard! The Rogue said indeed he would Cuckold me.


That was my business now, Sir: Having in my possession the Daughter and Heir
of Sir Nicholas Gettall, I would have made use of the Authority of my Lady
Galliard's house to have secured her, till I got things in order for our
Marriage; but my Lady, to put me off, cries, I have an Uncle.


A well-contriv'd Lye.


Well, I have heard of your good Fortune; and however a Reprobate thou hast
been, I'll not show my self so undutiful an Uncle, as not to give the
Gentlewoman a little house-room: I heard indeed she was gone a week ago,

And, Sir, my house is at your service.

I humbly thank you, Sir. Madam, your Servant. A Pox upon him, and all his
Association.


Come, Madam, my Coath waits below.


HEre, take my Sword, Iervice. What have you inquired as I directed you
concerning the rich Heiress, Sir Nicholas Gettall's Daughter?


Alas, Sir, inquired! why 'tis all the City-News, that she's run away with one
of the maddest Tories about Town.


Good Lord! Aye, aye, 'tis so; the plaguy Rogue my Nephew has got her. That
Heaven should drop such Blessings in the mouths of the Wicked! Well' Iervice,
what Company have we in the house, Iervice?


Why truly, Sir, a fine deal, con^idering there's no Parliament.


What Lords have we, Iervice?


Lords, Sir! truly none.


None! what never a Lord! Some mishap will befall me, some dire mischance: Never
a Lord! ominous, ominous! our Party dwindles daily. What, nor Earl, nor
Marquess, nor Duke, nor never a Lord? Hum, my Wine will lie most villainously
upon my hands to night, Iervice. What, have we store of Knights and Gentlemen?


I know not what Gentlemen there be, Sir; but there are Knights, Citizens,
their Wives and Daughters.


Make us thankful for that; our Meat will not lie upon our hands then, Iervice:
I'll say that for our little Londoners, they are as tall fellows at a
well-charg'd Board as any in Christendom.


Then, Sir, there's Nonconformist-Parsons.


Nay, then we shall have a clear Board: for your true Protestant Appetite in a
Lay-Elder, does a mans Table credit.


Then, Sir, there's Country-Justices and Grand-Jury-men.


Well enough, well enough, Iervice.


An't like your Worship, Mr. Wilding is come in with a Lady richly dressed in
Jewels, masked, in his hand, and will not be denied speaking with your Worship.


Hah, rich in Jewels! this must be she. My Sword again, Iervice. -- Bring 'em
up, Sensure, -- Prithee how do I look to night, Iervice?


Oh, most methodically, Sir.


Sir, I have brought into your kind protection the richest Jewel all London can
afford, fair Mrs. Charlot Gettall.


Bless us, she's ravishing fair! Lady, I had the honour of being intimate with
your worthy Father. I think he has been dead --


If he chastise me much on that point, I shall spoil all. Alas, Sir, name him
not; for if you do,


For Heaven sake, Sir, name not her Father to her; the bare remembrance of him
kills her.


Alas, poor Soul! Lady, I beg your Pardon. How soft-hearted she's! I am in
love; I find already a tickling kind of I know not what, run frisking through
my Veins.


Aye, Sir, the good Alderman has been dead this twelvemonth just, and has lest
his Daughter here, my Mistress, three thousand pound a year.


Three thousand pound a year! Yes, yes, I am in love.


Besides Money, Plate, and Jewels.


I'll marry her out of hand:


You see, Sir, now, what Heaven has done for me; and you have often told me,
Sir, when that was kind, you would be so. Those Writings, Sir, by which you
were so good to make me Heir to all your Estate, you said you would put into my
possession, whenever I made it appear to you I could live without 'em, or bring
you a Wife of Fortune home.


And I will keep my word; 'tis time enough.


I have, 'tis true, been wicked; but I shall now turn from my evil ways,
establish my self in the religious City, and enter into the Association. There
wants but these same Writings, Sir, and your good Character of me.


Thou shall it have both; all in good time, man: Go, go thy ways, and I'll warrant
thee for a good Character; go.


Ay, Sir; but the Writings, because I told her, Sir, I was your Heir; nay,
forced to swear it too, before she would believe me.


Alas, alas, how shrewdly thou were it put to it!


I told her too, you'd buy a Patent for me: for nothing woos a City-Fortune
like the hopes of a Ladyship.


I'm glad of that; that I can settle on her presently.


You may please to hint something to her of my Godly Life and Conversation;
that I frequent Conventicles, and am drunk nowhere but at your true Protestant
Consults and Clubs, and the like.


Nay, if these will please her, I have her for certain.


But the Writings, Sir. --


Am I a Jew, a Turk? Thou shall it have any thing, now I find thee a Lad of Parts,
and one that can provide so well for thy Uncle.


Would they were hanged that ^u^t you, that have but the Art of Lejerdemain,
and can open the Japan-Cabinet in your Bed-chamber, where I know those Writings
are kept. Death, what a disappointment's here! I would a'sworn, this Sham had
past upon him. -- But, Sir, shall I not have the Writings now?


What not gone yet! for shame, away: Can thou distrust thy own natural Uncle?
Fie, away, Tom, away.


A Plague upon your damned Dissimulation, that never-failing (...) of all your
Party, there's always mischief at the bottom on it; I know ye all; and Fortune
be the Word. When next I see you, Uncle, it shall cost you dearer.


An't please your Worship, Supper's almost over, and you are asked for.


They know I never sup: I shall come time enough to bid 'em welcome.


I keep you, Sir, from Supper and better Company.

Lady, were I a Glutton, I could be satisfied
With feeding on those two bright starry Eyes.

You are a Courtier, Sir; we City-maids do seldom hear such Language: in which
you show your kindness to your Nephew, more than your-thoughts of what my
Beauty merits.


Lord, Lord, how innocent she is!


Nay, he has often told me, you were the best of Uncles, and he deserves your
goodness; so hopeful a young Gentleman.


Would I could see it.


So modest.


Yes, ask my Maids.


So civil.


Yes, to my Neighbours Wives.


Meaning me, I am sure: If I should marry him now, and disappoint my dear
Inconstant with an Heir of his own begetting, it would be a most wicked Revenge
for past Kindnesses.


I know your Ladyship is studying now who this victorious person should be,
whom I dare not name; but let it suffice she is, Madam, within a mile of an
Oak.


No, Sir, I was considering, if what you say be true,
How unadvisedly I have loved your Nephew,
Who swore to me he was to be your Heir.

My Heir, Madam! am I so visibly old to be so desperate?
No, I'm in my years of desires and discretion,
And I have thoughts, durst I but utter 'em;
But modestly say, Mum --

I took him for the hopefullest Gentleman --


Let him hope on, so will I; and yet, Madam, in consideration of your love to
him, and because he is my Nephew, young, handsome, witty, and soforth, I am
content to be so much a Parent to him, as, if Heaven please, -- to see him
fairly hanged.


How, Sir!


He has deserved it, Madam; First, for lampooning the Reverend City, with its
noble Government, with the Right Honourable Gown-men; libelling some for
Feasting, and some for Fasting, some for Cuckolds, and some for Cuckold-makers;
charging us with all the seven deadly sins, the sins, of our Forefathers,
adding seven score more to the number; the sins of Forty One revived again in
Eighty One, with Additions and Amendments: for which, though the Writings were
drawn by which I made him my whole Executor, I will dis-inherit him. Secondly,
Madam, he deserves hanging for seducing and most feloniously bearing away a
young City-Heiress.


Undone, undone! Oh with what face can I return again!
What man of Wealth or Reputation, now
Will think me worth the owning!

Yes, yes, Madam, there are honest, discreet, religious and true Protestant
Knights in the City, that would be proud to dignify and distinguish so worthy
a Gentlewoman.


Look to your hits, and take fortune by the forelock, Madam.
-- Alas, Madam, no Knight, and poor too!

As a Tory-Poet.


Well* Madam, take comfort; if the worst come to the worst, you have Estate
enough for both.


Aye, Betty, were he but honest, Betty.


Honest! I think he will not steal; but for his Body, the Lord have mercy
upon it, for he has none.


'Tis evident I am betrayed, abused;
He has looked, and sighed, and talked away my Heart;
He has sworn and vowed, and flattered me to ruin.

A small fault with him; he has flattered and sworn me out of many a fair
thousand: Why he has no more Conscience than a Politician, nor no more Truth
than a Narrative (under the Rose.)


Is there no Truth nor Honesty in the World?


Troth, very little, and that lies all in the City, amongst us sober
Magistrates.


Were I a man, how would I be revenged!


Your Ladyship might do it better as you are, were I worthy to advise you.


Name it.


Why by marrying your Ladyships most assured Friend, and most humble Servant,
Timothy Treat-all of London, Alderman.


Aye, this is something, Mistress; here's Reason!


But I have given my Faith and Troth to Wilding, Betty.


Faith and Troth! We stand upon neither Faith nor Troth in the City, Lady. I
have known an Heiress married and bedded, and yet with the advice of the wiser
Magistrates, has been unmarried and consummated anew with another, so it stands
with our Interest; 'tis Law by Magna Charta. Nay, had you married my ungracious
Nephew, we might by this our Magna Charta have hanged him for a Rape.


What, though he had my consent?


That's nothing, he had not ours.


Then should I marry you by stealth, the danger would be the same.


No, no, Madam, we never accuse one another; 'tis the poor Rogues, the Tory
Rascals, we always hang. Let 'em accuse me if they please, alas, I come off
hand-smooth with Ignoramus.


Sir, there's such calling for your Worship! They are all very merry, the
Glasses go briskly about.


Go, go, I'll come when all the Healths are past; I love no Healths.


They are all over, Sir, and the Ladies are for dancing; so they are all
adjourning from the Dining-room hither, as more commodious for that Exercise. I
think they're coming, Sir.


Hah, coming! Call Sensure to wait on the Lady to her Apartment. -- And, Madam,
I do most heartily recommend my most humble Address to your most judicious
consideration, hoping you will most vigorously, and with all your might,
maintain the Rights and Privil dges of the honourable City; and not suffer the
force or persuasion of any Arbitrary Lover whatsoever, to subvert their Ancient
and Fundamental Laws, by seducing and forcibly bearing away so rich and so
illustrious a Lady: and, Madam, we will unanimously stand by you with our Lives
and Fortunes. -- This I learnt from a Speech at the Election of a Burgess.


Philander was a jolly Swain,
And loved by every Lass;
Whom when he met upon the Plain,
He laid upon the Grass.
And here he kissed, and there he played
With this, and then the the other,
Till every wanton smiling Maid.
At last became a Mother.
And to her Swain, and to her Swain,
The Nymph begins to yield;
Ruffle, and breathe, then to it again,
You're Master of the Field.

And if I keep it not, say I'm a Coward, Uncle.

More Wine there, Boys, I'll keep the Humour up.

How! young Meriwill so close ^o the Widow! --
Madam --

Sir Timothy, why what a Pox dost thou bring that damned Puritanical,
Schismatical, Fanatical, Small beer-face of thine into good Company? Give Him
a full Glass to the Widow's Health.


O lack, Sir Charles, no Healths for me, I pray.


Hark ye, leave that cozening, canting, sanctin'd Sneer of yours and drink ye
me like a sober loyal Magistrate, all those Healths you are behind, from his
sacred Majesty, whom God long preserve, with the rest of the Royal Family, even
down to this wicked Widow, whom Heaven soon convert from her lewd designs upon
my Body.


A rare Boy! he shall have all my Estate.


How, the Widow a lewd design upon his Body! Nay, then I am jealous.


I a lewd design upon your Body! for what, I wonder?


Why, for villainous Matrimony.


Who, I!


Who, you? yes, you.
Why are those Eyes dressed in inviting Love?
Those soft bewitching Smiles, those rising Breasts,
And all those Charms that make you so adorable,
Is't not to draw Fools into Matrimony?

How's that, how's that! Charles at his Adorables and Charms! He must have
the other Health, he'll fall to his old Dog-trot again else. Come, come, every
man his Glass. Sir Timothy, you are six behind. Come, Charles, name 'em all.


-- Not ^ate ye an Ace, Sir: Come, his Majesties Health, and Confusion to his
Enemies,


Hold, Sir, hold, if I must drink, I must; but this is very Arbitrary,
methinks.


And now, Sir, to the Royal Duke of Albany. Music, play a Scotch Jig.


This is mere Tyranny.


Sir, there is just alighted at the Gate a Person of Quality, as appears by his
Train, who give him the Title of a Lord.


How, a strange Lord! Conduct him up with Ceremony, Iervice. -- 'Ods so, he's
here!


Sir, by your Reverend Aspect, you should be the Renowned Master de Hotell?


Meter de Otell! I have not the honour to know any of that name; I am called
Sir Timothy Treat-all.


The same, Sir: I have been bred abroad, and thought all Persons of Quality had
spoke French.


Not City Persons of Quality, my Lord.


I'm glad on'^, Sir: for 'tis a Nation I hate, as indeed I do all Monarchies.


Hum! hate Monarchy! Your Lordship is most welcome.


Unless Elective Monarchies, which so resemble a Commonwealth.


Right, my Lord; where every man may hope to take his turn. -- Your Lordship is
most singularly welcome.


And though I am a stranger to your Person, I am not to your Fame, amongst the
sober Party of the Amsterdamians, all the French Hugonots throughout Geneva;
even to Hungary and Poland, fames trumpet sounds your praise, making the Pope
to fear, the rest admire you.


I'm much obliged to the Renowned Mobily.


So you will say, when you shall hear my Embassy. The ^o^anders by me salute
you, Sir, and have in this next new Election, pricked ye down for their
succeeding King.


How, my Lord, pricked me down for a King! Why this is wonderful! Pricked me,
unworthy me, down for a King! How could I merit this amazing Glory!


They know, he that can be so great a Patriot to his Native Country, where but
a private person, what must he be when Power is on his side?


Aye, my Lord, my Country, my bleeding Country! there's the stop to all my
rising Greatness. Shall I be so ungrateful to disappoint this big expecting
Nation? defeat the sober Party, and my Neighbours, for any Polish Crown? But
yet, my Lord, I will consider on it: Mean time my House is yours.


I've brought you, Sir, the measure of the Crown: Hah, it ^its you to a hair.


Hah, at it again! Charles: where stands the Glass? what, balk my Lady
Galliard's Health!


Hah, Galliard -- and so sweet on Meriwill!


If it be your business, Sir, to drink, I'll withdraw.


Gad, and I'll withdraw with you, Widow. Hark ye, Lady Galliard, I am damnably
afraid you cannot bear your Liquor well, you are so forward to leave good
Company and a Bottle.


Well, Gentlemen, since I have done what I never do, to oblige you, I hope
you'll not refuse a Health of my Denomination.


We scorn to be so uncivil.


Why then here's a concealed Health that shall be nameless, to his Grace the
King of Poland.


King of Poland! Lord, Lord, how your thoughts ramble!


Not so far as you imagine; I know what I say, Sir.


Away with it.


I see, Sir, you still keep up that English Hospitality that so renowned our
Ancestors in History.


Aye, my Lord, my noble Guests are my Wife and Children.


Are you not married then? Death, she smiles on him!


I had a Wife, but, rest her Soul, she's dead; and I have no Plague left now,
but an ungracious Nephew, perverted with Ill Customs, Tantivie-Opinions, and
Court-Notions.


Cannot your pious Examples convert him?
By Heaven, she's fond of him!

Alas, I hav^ ^y'd all ways, fair and foul; ^ay, had settled the other day my
whole Estate upon him, and just as I had signed the Writings, out comes me a
damned Libel called, A Warning to all good Christians against the
City-Magistrates; and I doubt he had a hand in Absolon and Achitophel; a Rogue:
But some of our sober Party have clawed him home, i'faith, and given him Rhyme
for his Reason.


Most visibly in love! -- Oh, Sir, Nature, Laws, and Religion, plead for so
near a Kinsman.


Laws and Religion! Alas, my Lord, he deserves not the name of a Patriot, who
does not for the Public Good de^ie all Laws and Religion.


Death, I must interrupt 'em! -- Sir, pray what Lady's that?


I beseech your Lordship, know her, 'tis my Lady Galliard: the rest are all my
Friends and Neighbours, true Protestants all -- Well, my Lord, how do you like
my method of doing the Business of the Nation, and carrying on the Cause with
Wine, Women, and soforth.


High feeding and smart Drinking, gains more to the Party, than your smart
Preaching.


Your Lordship has hit it right: A rare man this!


But come, Sir, leave we serious affairs, and oblige these fair ones.


Heavens, Clacket, yonders my false one, and that my lovely Rival.


Dear Mrs. Sensure, this Favour has obliged me.


I hope you'll not discover it to his Worship, Madam.


By her men, this should be handsome. --


Hah, Wilding! Love can discover thee through all disguise.


Hah, Diana! Would 'twere Felony to wear a Vizard. Gad, I'd rather meet it on
the Kings Highway with Stand and Deliver, than thus encounter it on the Face of
an old Mistress; and the Cheat were more excusable. -- But how --


Nay, never frown nor chide: for thus do I intend to show my Authority, till I
have made thee only fit for me.


Is't so, my precious Uncle! are you so great a Devil in Hypocrisy! Thus had I
been served, had I brought him the right woman.


But do not think, dear Tommy, I would have served thee so; married thy Uncle,
and have cozened thee of thy Birthright. -- But see, we're observed!


By all that's good, 'tis he! that Voice is his!


Hah, what pretty Creature's this, that has so much of Charlot in her face? But
sure she durst not venture: 'tis not her dress nor men. Dear pretty stranger,
I must dance with you.


Gued deed, and see ye shall, Sir, ^en you please. Tho l's not dance, Sir, I's
tell ya that no.


Nor I: so we're well matched. By Heaven, she's wondrous like her.


By the Mass, not so kind, Sir: 'Twere gued that en of us should dance to guide
the other weel.


How young, how innocent, and free she is?
And would you, fair one, be guided by me?

In any thing that gued is.


I love you extremely, and would teach you to love.


Ah, wele aday!


A thing I know you do not understand.


Gued faith, and ya're in the right, Sir; yet 'tis a thing I's often hear ya gay
men talk of.


Yes, and no doubt have been told those pretty Eyes inspired it.


Gued deed, and so I have: Ya men make sa mickle ado aboot ens Eyes, ways me,
I's en tired with sick-like Compliments.


Ah, if you give us Wounds, we must complain.


Ya may en keep out a harms way then.


Oh, we cannot; or if we could, we would not.


Marry and I's have en a Song tol that tune, Sir.


Dear Creature, let me beg it.


Gued faith, ya shall not, Sir, I's sing without entreaty.


Ah, Jenny, gen your Eyes do kill,
You'll let me tell my pain;
Gued faith, I loved against my will,
But wad not break my Chain.
I ence was called a bonny Lad,
Till that fair face if yours
Betrayed the freedom ence I had,
And ad my bleether hours.
But no ways me, like Winter look^,
My gloomy showering Eyne,
And on the banks of shaded Brooks,
I pass my wearied time.
I call the Streem that gleedeth on,
To witness if it see,
On all the flowery Brink along,
A Swain so true as Iee.
This very Swain am I, so true and so forlorn, unless you pity me. This is an
excellently Charlot wants, at least I never heard her sing.


Why Charles, where stands the woman, Charles?


I must speak to Galliard, though all my Fortunes depend on the discovery of my
self.


Come, come, a cooling Glass about.

Dear Dresswell, entertain Charles Meriwill a little, whilst I speak to
Galliard.
By Heaven, I die, I languish for a word!
-- Madam, I hope you have not made a Vow
To speak with none but that young Cavalier?
They say, the freedom English Ladies use,
Is as their Beauty, great.

Sir, we are none of those of so nice and delicate a Virtue as Conversation can
corrupt; we live in a cold Climate.


And think you're not so apt to be in love,
As where the Sun shines oftner.
But you too much partake of the Inconstancy of this your fickle Chmat^
One day all Sun-shine, and the encouraged Lover
Decks himself up in glittering Robes of Hope;
And in the midst of all their boasted Finery
Comes a dark Cloud across his Mistress Brow,
Dashes the Fool, and spoils the gaudy show.

Hah, do no^ I know that railing Tongue of yours?

'Tis from your Guilt, not Judgment then.
I was resolved to be to night a Witness
Of that sworn Love you flattered me so often with.
By Heaven, I saw you playing with my Rival,
Sighed, and looked Babies in his gloating Eyes.
When is the Assignation? when the Hours?
For he's impatient as the raging Sea,
Loose as the Winds, and amorous as the Sun
That kisses all the Beauties of the Spring.

I take him for a soberer person, Sir.

Have I been the Companion of his Riots
In all the lewd course of our early Youth,
Where like unwearied Bees we gathered Flowers?
But no kind Blossom could oblige our stay,
We rifled and were gone.

Your Virtues I perceive are pretty equal;
Only his Love's the honester of the two.

Honester! that is, he would owe his good fortune to the Parson of the Parish;

And I would be obliged to you alone.
He would have a License to boast he lies with you,
And I would do it with modesty and silence:
For Vertue's but a name kept free from Scandal,
Which the most base of women best preserve,
Since Gilting and Hypocrisy cheat the world best.
-- But we both love, and who shall blab the secret?

Oh, why were all the Charms of Speaking given to that false Tongue that makes
no better use of 'em?

-- I'll hear no more of your enchanting Reasons.

You must.

I will not.

Indeed you must.

By all the Powers above --

By all the powers of Love, you'll break your Oath, unless you swear this night
to let me see you.


This night?

This very night.

I'd die first -- At what hour?

O^, name it; and if I fail --

I would not for the World --

That I should fail!

Not name the guilty hour.

Then I through eager haste shall come too soon,
And do your Honour wrong.

My Honour! Oh that word!

Which the Devil was in me for naming.
-- At Twelve!

My Women and my Servants then are up.

At One, or Two.

So late! 'twill be so quickly day!

Aye, so it will:
That half our business will be left unfinisht.

Hah, what do you mean? what business?

A thousand tender things I have to say,
A thousand Vows of my eternal love.;
And now and then we'll kiss and --

Be extremely honest.

As you can wish.

Rather as I command: for should he know my wish, I were undone.

The Sign. --

Oh, press me not; -- yet you may come at midnight under my Chamber-window.

Hold, Sir, hold! Whi^st I am listening to the relation of your French
Fortifications, Outworks, and Counterscarps, I perceive the Enemy in my
Quarters.
-- My Lord, by your leave.

Persuade me not; I burst with Jealousy.

Death and the Devil Clacket! then 'tis Charlot, and I'm discovered to her.

Say, are not you a false dissembling thing?

What, my little Northern Lass translated into English!
This 'tis to practise Art in spite of Nature.
^as, thy Virtue, Youth, and Innocence,
Were never made for Cunning.
I found ye out through all your forced Disguise.

^ah, did you know me then?

At the first glance, and found you knew me too,
And talked to yonder Lady in revenge,
Whom my Uncle would have me marry. But to avoid all discourses of that nature,
I came to night in this disguise you see, to be concealed from her; that's
all.

And is that all, on honour? is it, Dear?

What, no Belief, no Faith in villainous women?

Yes, when I see the Writings.

Go home; I die if you should be discovered;
And credit me, I'll bring you all you ask.
Clacket, you and I must have an odd Reckoning about this nights jant of
yours.

Well, my Lord, how do you like our English Beauties?

Extremely, Sir; and was pressing ^is young Lady to give us a Song.

I never saw this Lady before: pray who may she be, Neighbour?

A Niece of mine, newly come out of Scotland, Sir.

Nay, then she dances by nature. Gentlemen and Ladies, please you to sit,
here's a young Neighbour of mine will honour us with a Dance.

So, so; very well, very well. Gentlemen and ladies, I am for Liberty of
Conscience, and Moderation. There's a Banquet waits the Ladies, and my Cellars
are open to the men; but for my self, I must retire: first waiting on your
Lordship to show you your Apartment, then leave you to cher entire; and
tomorrow, my Lord, you and I will settle the Nation, and resolve on what return
we will make to the noble Polanders.


Well said, Charles, thou leave her not, till she's thy own, Boy. -- And
Philander was a jolly Swain, c.

All things succeed above my wish, dear Frank;
Fortune is kind; and more, Galliard is so:
This night crowns all my Wishes.
Laboir, are all things ready for our purpose?

Dark Lanterns, Pistols, Habits and Vizards, Sir.

I have provided Portmanteaus to carry off the Treasure.

I perceive you are resolved to make a through-stitcht Robbery on it.

Faith, if it lie in our way, Sir, we had as good venture a Caper under the
Triple Tree for one as well as the other.

We will consider on it. 'tis now just struck Eleven: within this hour is the
dear Assignation with Galliard.


What, whether our affairs be finished or not?

'Tis but at next door; I shall return time enough for that trivial business.

A trivial business of some six thousand pound a year?

Trivial to a woman, Frank! no more do you make as if you w^nt to bed. -- Labo^
do you feign to be drunk, and lie on the Hall-table; and when I give the sign,
let me softly in.


Death, Sir, will you venture at such a time!

My life and future hope -- I am resolved,
Let Politicians plot, let Rogues go on
In the old beaten Path of Forty One,
Let City-Knaves delight in Mutiny,
The Rabble bow to old Presbytery;
Let petty States be to confusion hurled,
Give me but Woman, I'll despise the World.

COme, leave your everlasting Chamber-Maids Chat, your dull Road of
Slandering by rote, and lay that Paint aside. Thou art fuller of false
News, than an unlicensed Mercury.

I have good proof, Madam, of what I say.

Proof of a thing impossible! -- Away.

Is it a thing so impossible, Madam, that a man of Mr. Wilding's parts and
person should get a City-Heiress?
Such a bonne Mine, and such a pleasant Wit!

Hold thy fluent Tattle, thou hast Tongue
Enough to talk an Oyster-woman deaf; I say it cannot be. --
What means the panting of my troubled Heart!
Oh my presaging fears! should what she says prove true,
How wretched and how lost a thing am I!

Your Honour may say your pleasure; but I hope I have not lived to these years
to be impertinent: -- No, Madam, I am none of those that run up and down the
Town a Story-hunting, and a Lye-catching, and --


Eternal rattle, peace! --
Mrs. Charlot Gettall go away with Wilding!
A man of Wilding's extravagant life
Get a Fortune in the City!
Thou might as well have told me, a Holder forth were married to a Nun.
There are not two such Contraries in Nature;
'Tis flamm, 'tis foolery, 'tis most impossible.

I beg your Ladyships pardon, if my discourse offend you; but all the world
knows Mrs. Clacket to be a person --


Who is a most devout Bawd, a precise Procurer;
Saint in the Spirit, and Whore in the Flesh;
A Doer of the Devils work in Gods Name.
Is she your Informer? nay, then the Lye's undoubted. --
I say once more, adone with your idle Tittle-tattle, --
And to divert me, bid Betty sing the Song which Wilding
Made to his last Mistress: we may judge by that
What little Haunts and what low Game he follows.
This is not like the description of a rich Citizens Daughter and Heir, but
some common
Hackney of the Suburbs.

I have heard him often swear she was a Gentlewoman, and lived with her
Friends.

Like enough; there are many of these Gentlewomen who live with their
Friends, as rank Prostitutes, as errant Jilts, as those who make open
profession of the
Trade -- almost as mercenary -- But come, the Song.

In Phillis all vile Iilts are met,
Foolish, uncertain, false, Coquette.
Love is her constant welcome Guest,
And still the newest pleases best.
Quickly she likes, then leaves as soon;
Her life on Woman's a Lampoon.
Yet for the Plague of Humane Race,
This Devil has an Angels Face;
Such Youth, such Sweetness in her look,
Who can be man, and not be took?
What former Love, what Wit, what Art,
Can save a poor inclining heart?
In vain, a thousand times an hour,
Reason rebels against her power.
In vain I rail, I curse her Charms;
One look my feeble Rage disarms.
There is Enchantment in her Eyes;
Who sees 'em, can no more be wise.
Twelve was the lucky minute when we met:
Most charming of your Sex, and wisest of all Widows,
My Life, my Soul, my Heaven to come, and here!
Now I have lived to purpose, since at last -- Oh, killing Joy! --
Come, let me sold you, press you in my arms,
And kiss you thanks for this dear happy night.

You may spare your thanks, Sir, for those that will deserve 'em; I shall give
ye no occasion for 'em.


Nay, no Scruples now, dearest of Dears, no more*
'Tis most unseasonable --
I bring a heart full freight with eager hopes,
Oppressed with a vast load of longing Love;
Let me unlade me in that soft white Bosom,
That Store-house of rich Joys and lasting Pleasures,
And lay me down as on a Bed of Lillies.

You're wondrous full of Love and Rapture, Sir; but certainly you mistake the
person you address 'em to.


Why, are you not my Lady Galliard, that very Lady Galliard, who if one may
take her word for it, loves Wilding? Am I not come hither by your own
appointment; and can I have any other business here at this time of night, but
Love, and Rapture, and --


Scandalous and vain! by my appointment, and for so lewd a purpose! guard me,
ye good Angels.

If after an Affront so gross as this,
I ever suffer you to see me more,
Then think me what your Carriage calls me*
An Impudent, an open Prostitute,
Lost to all sense of Virtue, or of Honour.

What can this mean?
Oh, now I understand the Mystery;
Her Woman's here, that troublesome piece of Train.
-- I must remove her. Hark ve, Mrs. Closet, I had forgot to tell you; As I
came up I heard a Kinsman of yours very earnest with the Servants below, and in
great haste to speak with you.


A Kinsman! that's very likely indeed, and at this time of night.

Yes, a very near Kinsman he said he was, your Fathers own Mothers Uncles
Sisters Son; what do ye call him?


Aye, what do ye call him indeed; I should be glad to hear his name. Alas, Sir,
I have no near Relation living that I know of, the more's my misfortune, poor
helpless Orphan that I am.


Nay, but Mrs. Closet, pray take me right,
This Country-man of yours, as I was saying --

Changed already from a Kinsman to a Country-man! A plain contrivance to get my
Woman out of the Room. Closet, as you value, my service, stir not from hence.


This Country-man of yours, I say, being left Executor by your Fathers last
will and Testament, is come -- Dull Waiting-woman, I would be alone with your
Lady; know your Que, and retire.


How, Sir!

Learn, I say, to understand Reason when you hear it. Leave us a while;
Love is not a Game for three to play at.

I must own to all the world, you have convinced me; I ask a thousand Pardons
for my dullness. Well, I'll be gone, I'll run; you're a most powerful person,
the very Spirit of Persuasion. -- I'll steal out. -- You have such a taking way
with you -- But I forget my self. Well, your most obedient Servant: Whenever
you've occasion, Sir, be pleased to use me fr^ely.


Nay, dear Impertinent, no more Complements, you see I'm busy now; prithee be
gone, you see I'm busy.


I'm all Obedience to you, Sir --
Your most obedient --

Whither are you ^isking and gigiting now?

Madam, I am going down, and will return immediately, immediately.

So, she's gone; Heaven and broad Gold be praised for the deliverance: And now,
dear Widow, let's lose no more precious time; we've fooled away too much
already.


This to me?


To you, yes, to whom else should it be? unless being sensible you have not
discretion enough to manage your own affairs your self, you resolve, like other
Widows, with all you're worth to buy a Governor, commonly called a Husband. I
^ook ye to be wiser; but if that be your design, I shall do my best to serve
you -- though to deal freely with you --


Trouble not your self, Sir, to make Excu^s; I'm not so fond of the offer to
take you at your word. Marry you! a Rakes^e, who have not esteem enough for the
Sex to believe your own Mother honest -- without Money or Credit, without Land
either in present or prospect; and half a dozen hungry Vices, like so many
bawling Brats at your back, perpetually craving, and more chargeable to keep
than twice the number of Children. Besides, I think you are provided for; are
you not married to Mrs. Charlot Gettall?


Married to her? do I know her, you should rather ask. What Fool has forged
this unlikely Lye? But suppose 'twere true, could you be jealous of a woman I
marry? do you take me for such an Ass, to suspect I shall love my own Wise? On
the other side, I have a great charge of Vices, as you well observe, and I must
not be so barbarous to let them starve. Every body in this Age takes care to
provide for their Vices, though they send their Children a begging; I should be
worse than an In^idel to neglect them. No, I must marry some stiff a^kward
thing or other with an ugly face and a handsome Estate, that's certain: but
whoever is ordained to make my Fortune, 'tis you only that can make me happy.
-- Come, do it then.


I never will.

Unkindly said, you must.

Unreasonable man! because you see
I have unusual regards for you,
Pleasure to hear, and trouble to deny you;
A ^atal yielding in my nature toward you,
Love bends my Soul that way. --
A weakness I never felt for any other;
And would you be so base? and could you have the heart
To take the advantage on'^ to ruin me,
To make me infamous, despised, loathed, pointed at?

You reason false. --
According to the strictest rules of Honour,
Beauty should still be the Reward of Love,
Not the vile Merchandise of Fortune,
Or the cheap Drug of a Church-Ceremony.
She's only infamous, who to her Bed,
For interest, takes some nauseous Olown she hates:
And though a Jointure or a Vow in public
^e her price, that makes her but the dearer whore.

I understand not these new Morals.

Have patience, I say 'tis clear.
All the desires of mutual Love are virtuous.
Can Heaven or Man be angry that you please
Your self and me, when it does wrong to none?
Why rave you then on things that ne'er can be?
Besides, are we not alone, and private? who can know it?

Heaven will know it; and I -- that that's enough:
But when you're weary of me, first your Friend, then his, then all the world.

Think not that t^e will ever come.

Oh, it must, it will!

Or if it should, could I be such a Villain --
Ah Cruel! if you loved me as yo^ say,
You would not thus distrust me.

You do me wrong; I love you more than ere my Tongue,
Or all the Actions of my Life can tell you -- so well --
Your very faults, how gross soere, to me
Have something pleasing in 'em. To me you're all
That Man can praise, or Woman can desire;
All Charm without, and all Desert within:
But yet my Virtue is more lovely still;
That is a price too high to pay for you:
The love of Angels may be bought too dear,
If we bestow on them what's kept for Heaven.

Hell and the Devil! I'll hear no more
Of this Religious stuff, this Godly nonsense.
Death, Madam, do you bring me into your Chamber to preach Virtue to me?

I bring you hither! how can you say it?
I suffered you indeed to come, but not
For the base end you fancied, but to take
A last leave of you. Let my heart break with Love,
I cannot be that wretched thing you'd have me:
Believe I still shall have a kindness for you,
Always your Friend, your Mistress now no more.

Cozened, abused, she loves some other man!
Dull Blockhead not to find it out before!
-- Well, Madam, may I at last believe
This is your fixed and final Resolution?
And does your Tongue now truly speak your Heart,
That has so long belied it?

It does.

I'm glad on it. Good night: And when I visit you again,
May you again thus fool me.

Stay but a moment.

For what? to praise your Night-dress, or make court to your little Dog? No,
no, Madam, send for Mr. Flamfull and Mr. Flutterbuz, Mr. Lapp-fool and Mr.
Love-all; they'll do it better, and are more at leisure.


Hear me a little: You know I both despise, and hate those civil Coxcombs, as
much as Lesteem and love you. But why will you be gone so soon? and why are you
so cruel to urge me thus to part either with your good Opinion or your
Kindness? I would fain keep 'em both.


Then keep your word, Madam.

My word! And have I promised then to be
A Whore? A Whore! Oh let me think of that!
A man's Convenience, his leisure hours, his Bed of Ease,
To loll and tumble on at idle times;
The Slave, the Hackney of his lawless Lust!
A loathed Extinguisher of filthy flames,
Made use of, and thrown by. -- Oh infamous!

Come, come, you love me not, I see it plain;
That makes your scruples: that, that's the reason
You start at words, and run away from shadows.
Already some pert Fop, some Ribon-fool,
Some dancing Coxcomb, has supplanted me
In that unsteady treacherous woman's heart of yours.

Believe it if you will. Yes, let me be false, unjust, ungrateful, any thing
but a -- Whore --


Oh, Sex on purpose formed to plague Mankind!
All that you are, and that you do, 's a lye.
False are your Faces, false your floating Hearts;
False are your Quarrels, false your Reconcilements:
Enemies without Reason, and Dear without Kindness.
Your Friendship's false, but much more false your Love;
Your damned deceitful Love is all over false.

False rather are the Joys you are so fond of.
Be wise, and cease, Sir, to pursue 'em farther.

No, them I can never quit; but you most easily.
A woman changeable, and false as you.

Said you most easily? Oh, inhumane!
Your cruel words have waked a dismal thought;
I feel 'em cold and heavy at my heart,
And weakness steals upon my Soul apace;
I find I must be miserable. --
I would not be thought false.

Nor would I think you so; give me not cause.

What heart can bear distrust from what it loves?
Or who can always her own Wish deny?
My Reason's weary of the unequal strise;
And Love and Nature will at last overcome.
-- Do you not then believe I love you?

How can I, while you still remain unkind?

How shall I speak my guilty thoughts? --
I have not power to part with you: conceal my shame I doubt I cannot, I fear I
would not any more deny you.


Oh, heavenly sound! Oh, charming Creature! speak that word again, again, again!
for ever let me hear it.


But did you not indeed? and will you never, never love Mrs. Charlot, never?


Never, never.

Turn your face away, and give me leave
To hide my rising Blushes: I cannot look on you,
But you must undo me if you will. --
Since I no other way my truth can prove,
-- You shall see I love.
Pity my Weakness, and admire my Love.

All Heaven is mine, I have it in my arms:
Nor can ill Fortune reach me any more.
Fate, I de^ie thee, and dull World, adieu.
In Loves kind Fever let me ever lie,
Drunk with Desire, and raving mad with Joy.

A Dog, a Rogue, to leave her!

Why look ye, Uncle, what would you have a man do?
I brought her to her Coach. --

To her Coach! to her Coach! Did not I put her into your hand, follow'd you
out, winkt, smiled, and nodded, cried, 'buy Charles, 'buy Rogue; which was as
much as to say, Go home with her, Charles, home to her Chamber, Charles; nay,
as much as to say, Home to her Bed, Charles* nay, as much as to say -- Hum,
hum, a Rogue, a Dog, and yet to be modest too! That I should bring thee up with
no more fear of God before my Eyes!


Nay, dear Uncle, don't break my heart now. Why I did proffer, and press, and
swear, and lied, and -- but a Pox on her, she has the damndest wheedling way
with her, as, Dear Charles, nay pri^hee, he, 'tis late, to morrow, my Honour,
which if you loved, you would preserve; and such obliging Reasons.


Reasons! Reason! a Lover, and talk of Reason! You lye, Sirrah, you lye. Leave
a woman for Reason, when you were so finely drunk too, a Rascal!


Why look ye, do ye see, Uncle, I du^t not trust my self alone with her in this
pickle, lest I should a fallen soul on her.


Why there's it; 'tis that you should adone: I am mistaken if she be not one of
those Ladies that love to be ravished of a Kindness. Why, your willing Rape is
all the fashion, Charles.


But hark ye, Uncle.

Why how now, Jack-sawce, what, capitulate?

Why do but hear me, Uncle: Lord you're so hasty! Why look ye, I am a^ ready,
do ye see, as any man (...) these occasions.


Are you so, Sir? and I'll make you willing, or try Toledo with you, Sir. --
When, what, I shall have ye whining when you are sober again, traversing your
Chamber with Arms across, railing on Love and Women, and at last defeated, turn
whipping Tom, to revenge your self on the whole Sex.


My dear Uncle, come kiss me and be friends, I will be ruled

-- A most admirable good-natur'd Boy this! Charles, know, I have brought thee
now hither to the Widows house with a resolution to have thee order matters so,
as before thou quits her, she shall be thy own, Boy.


Gad, Uncle, you're a Che^bin! Introduce me, do ye see, and if I do not so woo
the Widow, and so do the Widow, that ^re morning she shall be content to take
me for better for worse. -- Renounce me! Egad, I'll make her know the Lord God
from Tom Bell, before I have done with her. Nay, ba^kt by my noble Uncle, I'll
venture on her, had she all Cupid's Arrows, Venus's Beauty, and Ma^alina's
Fire, do ye see.


A sweet Boy, a very sweet Boy! Hum, thou art damnable handsome to night,
Charles. -- Aye, thou wilt do it; I see a kind of a resistless Lewdness about
thee, a most triumphant Impudence, loose and wanton.


Heavens, Gentlemen, what makes you here at this time of night?

Where's your Lady?

Softly, dear Sir.

Why is she asleep? Come, come, I'll wake her.

Hold, hold, Sir: No, no, she's a little busy, Sir.

I'll have no business done to night, Sweetheart.

Hold, hold, I beseech you, Sir, her Mother's with her: For Heavens sake,
Sir, be gone.

I'll not budge.

No not a foot.

The City you know, Sir, is so (...) --

Damn the City.

All the W^igs, Charles, all the Whigs.

In short, I am resolved, do ye see, to go to the Wido^s Chamber.

Hark ye, Mrs. Closet, I thought I had entirely engaged you this evening.

I am perfectly yours, Sir; but now it happens so, her Mother being there --
Yet if you would withdraw for half an hour, into my Chamber, till she were
gone --

This is Reason, Charles. Here, here's two Pieces to buy thee a Gorget.

And here's my two, because ^ i^strious.

What have I done? Ah, whither shall I fly?

Why all these Tears? Ah, why this cruel Passion?

Undone, undone! Unhand me, false, sorsworn;
Be gone, and let me rage till I am dead.
What should I do with guilty Life about me?

Why, where's the harm of what we two have done?

Ah, leave me --
Leave me alone to sigh to flying Winds,
That the infection may be born aloft,
And reach no humane Ear.

Cease, lovely Charmer, cease to wound me more.

Shall I survive this shame! No, if I do,
Eternal Blushes dwell upon my Cheeks,
To tell the World my Crime.
-- Mischief and Hell, what Devil did possess me?

It was no Devil, but a Deity;
A little gay-wing'd God, harmless and innocent,
Young as Desire, wanton as Summer-breezes,
Soft as thy Smiles, resistless as thy Eyes.

Ah, what malicious God,
Sworn Enemy to feeble Womankind,
Taught thee the Art of Conquest with thy Tongue?
Thy false deluding Eyes were surely made
Of Stars that rule our Sexes Destiny:
And all thy Charms were by Enchantment wrought,
That first undo the heedless Gazers on,
Then show their natural deformity.

Ah, my Galliard, am I grown ugly then?
Has my increase of Passion lessened yours?

Peace tempter, Peace, who artfully betray me,
And then upbraidest the wretchedness thou'st made.
-- Ah, Fool, eternal Fool! to know my danger,
Yet venture on so evident a ruin.

Say, -- what one Grace is faded!
Is not thy Face as fair, thy Eyes as Killing?
By Heaven, much more: This charming change of Looks,
Raises my flame, and makes me wish t'invoke
The harmless God again.

By Heaven, not all thy Art
Shall draw me to the tempting sin again.

Oh, I must, or dye.

By all the Powers, by --

Oh, do not swear, lest Love should take it ill
That Honour should pretend to give him Laws,
And make an Oath more powerful than his Godhead.
-- Say that you will half a long hour hence --

Hah?

Or say a tedious hour.

Death, never --

Or if you must -- promise me then to morrow.

No, hear my Vows.

Hold, see me die; if you resolve 'em fatal to my love, by Heaven I'll do it.

Ah, what --

Revoke that fatal Never then.

I dare not.

Oh, say you will.

Alas, I dare not utter it.

Let's in, and thou shalt whisper it into my Bosom;
Or sighing, look it to me with thy Eyes.

Ah, Wilding --

It touched my Soul! Repeat that sigh again.

Ah, I confess I am but feeble woman.

Good Mistress keep-door, stand by: for I must enter.

Hah, young Meriwill's voice!

Pray, Sir Charles, let me go and give my Lady notice.
-- For Heavens sake, Sir, withdraw, or my Lady's Honour's lost.

What will you have me do?

Be gone, or you will ruin me for ever.

Nay, then I will obey.

Here, down the back-stairs. --
As you have Honour, go and cherish mine.
-- He's gone; and now methinks the shivering fit of Honour is returned.

Denied an entrance! nay, then there is a Rival in the case, or so; and
I'm resolved to discover the Hellish Plot, do ye see.

Ha, Wilding returned! shield me, ye Shades of Night.

The back-stairs-door is locked.

Oh, I am lost! curse on this fatal night!
Art thou resolved on my undoing every way?

Nay, now we're by dark, let me alone to guide you, sir.

What, what, all in darkness? Do you make Love like Cats, by Starlight?

Ah, he knows he's here! -- Oh, what a pain is Guilt!

I would not be surprised.

Hah, Gad 'twas a Spark! -- What, vanished! hah --

Nay, nay, Sir, I am for ye.

Are you so, Sir? and I am for the Widow, Sir, and --
-- Hah, why what have we here, -- my none flesh and blood?

Cry mercy, Sir! Pray how fell we out?

Ou^, Sir! Pri^e where's my Rival? where's the Spark, the -- Gad, I took thee
for an errant Rival: Where, where is he?


Whom seek ye, Sir, a man, and in my Lodgings?

A man! merciful, what will this scandalous lying World come to? Here's no man.


Away, I say, thou damned Domestic Intelligence, that come out every half
hour with some fresh Sham. -- No man! -- What, 'twas an appointment only, hum,
-- which I shall now make bold to unappoint, render null, void, and of none
effect. And if I find him here


Oh, what a Coward's guilt! what mean you, Sir?

Mean! why I am obstinately bent to ravish thee, thou hypocritical Widow, make
thee mine by force, that so I may have no obligation to thee, and consequently
use thee scurvily with a good Conscience.


A most delicate Boy! I'll warrant him as lewd as the best of 'em, God grant
him life and Health.


'Tis late, and I entreat your absence, Sir: These are my hours of prayer,
which this unseasonable Visit has disturbed.


Prayer! no more of that, Sweetheart: for let me tell you, your Prayers are
heard. A Widow of your Youth and Complexion can be praying for nothing so late,
but a good Husband; and see, Heaven has sent him just in the crit -- critical
minute, to supply your occasions.


A Wag, an arch Wag; he'll learn to make Lampoons presently. I'll not give
sixpence from him, though to the Poor of the Parish.


Come, Widow, let's to bed.

Hold, Sir, you drive the Jest too far;
And I am in no humour now for mirth.

Jest! Gad ye lye, I was never in more earnest in all my life.

He's in a heavenly humour, thanks to good Wine, good Counsel, and good
Company.


What mean you, Sir? what can my Woman think to see me treated thus?


Well thought on! Nay, we'll do things decently, do ye see --
Therefore, thou sometimes necessary Utensil, withdraw.

Aye, aye, let me alone to reach her her duty.

Stay, Closet, I command ye.
-- What have you seen in me should move you to this rudeness?

No ^row^ing; for by this dear night, 'tis charity, care of your Reputation,
Widow: and therefore I am resolved nobody shall lie with you but my self. You
have dangerous (...) buzzing ^bout your Hive, Widow -- mark that --


To morrow! Oh, I have urgent bu^iness then.

So have I. Nay Gad, an you be for the nearest way to wood, the sober discreet
way of loving, I am for you, look ye.


Hold, Sir, what mean you?

Only to go to bed, that's all.

Hold, hold, or I'll call out.

Aye do, call up a Jury of your Female Neighbours; they'll be for me, do ye see,
bring in the Bill Ignoramus, though I am no very true blue Protestant neither:
Therefore dispatch, or --


Hold, are you mad? I cannot promise you to night.

Well, well, I'll be content with performance then to night, and trust you for
your promise till to morrow.


George, he out-does my expectations of him.


What Imposition's this! I'll call for help.

You need not, you'll do my business better alone.

What shall I do! how shall I send him hence!

He shall never drink small Beer more, that's po^itive: I'll burn all's Books
too, they have helped to spoil him; and sick or well, found or unsound, Drinking
shall be his Diet, and Whoring his Study.


Come, come, no pausing; your promise, or I'll to bed.


What shall I do, here is no Witness near! And to be rid of him, I'll promise
him: he'll have forgot it in his sober Passion.

Hold, I do swear I will --


What?


Marry you.


When?


Nay, that's too much. -- Hold, hold, I will to morrow.
-- Now you are satisfied, you will withdraw?

Charles, Joy Charles, give ye Joy: here's two substantial Witnesses.


I deny it, Sir; I heard no such thing.


What, what, Mrs. Closet, a Waiting-woman of Honour, and ^inch from her
Evidence! Gad, I'll damn thy Soul, if thou dare swear what thou say.


How, upon the catch, Sir! am I betrayed?
Base and unkind, is this your humble Love!
Is all your whining come to this, false man! By Heaven, I'll be revenged.

Nay, Gad you're caught, struggle and ^lounder as you please, Sweetheart,
you'll but entangle more; let me alone to tickle your Gills, ^aith.

-- Uncle, get ye home about your business: I hope you'll give me the Goo^
morrow, as becomes me. -- I say no more -- A word to the Wise --


By George, you're a brave fellow; why I did not think it had been in thee,
man. Well, adieu: I'll give thee such a Good morrow, Charles -- the Devil's in
him! -- 'Buy, Charles -- a plaguy Rogue! -- 'Night, Boy -- a Divine Youth!


Gad, I'll not leave her now, till she is mine*
Then keep her so by constant consummation.
Let Man a God do his, I'll do my part,
In spite of all her ^ickleness and art;
There's one sure way to fix a Widows heart.

NOt yet! a Plague of this damned Widow: the Devil owed him an unlucky Cast,
and has thrown it him to night.

-- Hah, dear Tom, art thou come?


I saw how at her length she lay!
I saw her rising Bosom bare!

A Pox of her rising Bosom: My Dear, let's dress and about our business.

Her loose thin Robes, through which appear
A Shape designed for Love and Play!

'Sheart, Sir, is this a time for Rapture? 'tis almost day.

Ah, Frank, such a dear night!

A Pox of nights, Sir, think of this and the day to come* which I perceive you
were too well employed to remember.


The day to come!
Death, who could be so dull in such dear Joys,
To think of time to come, or ought beyond 'em!
And had I not been interrupted by Charles Meriwill, who getting drunk, had
courage enough to venture on an untimely Visit* I'd had no more power of
returning, than committing Treason: But that conjugal Lover, who will needs be
my Cuckold, made me then give him way, that he might give it me another time,
and so unseen I got off. But come -- my disguise.


All's still and hush, as if Nature meant to favour our design.


'Tis well: And hark ye, my Friends, I'll proscribe you no bounds, or (...)
for I have considered if we modestly take nothing but the Writings, 'twill be
easy to suspect the Thief.


Right; and since 'tis for the securing our Necks, 'tis lawful prise. --
Sirrah, leave the Por^mantua here.


Murder, Murder! Thieves, Murder!


A Plague upon his Throat; set a Gag in's mouth and bind him, though he be my
Uncle's chief Pimp. -- So --


Well, we have bound all within hearing in their Beds, ere they could alarm
their Fellows by crying out.


'Tis well: come, follow me, like a kind Midnight-Ghost, I will conduct ye to
the rich buried heaps -- this door leads to my Uncles Apartment; I know each
secred nook contious of Treasure.


Help, help! Murder! Murder!


What have we here, a Female bolted from Mr. Aldermans Bed?


Ah mercy, Sir, alas, I am a Virgin.


A Virgin! Gad and that may be, for any great miracles the old Gentleman can
do.


Do! alas, Sir, I am none of the wicked.


That's well. -- The sanctifi'd Jilt professes Innocence, yet has the Badge of
her Occupation about her neck.


Ah misfortune, I have mistook his Worships Coat for my Gown.


What have we here? A Sermon preacht by Richard Baxter, Divine. Gad a mercy,
Sweetheart, thou art a hopeful Member of the true Protestant Cause.


Alack, how the Saints may be scandalised! I went but to tuck his Worship in.


And comment upon the Text a little, which I suppose may be increase and
multiply. -- Here, gag and bind her.


Hold, hold, I am with Child!


Then you'll go near to miscarry of a Babe of Grace.


Gentlemen, why Gentlemen, I beseech you use a Conscience in what you do, and
have a feeling of what you go about. -- Pity my Age.


Damned beggarly Conscience, and needless Pity --


Oh fearful! -- But, Gentlemen, what is't you design? is it a genera^
Massacar, pray, or am I the only person aimed at as a Sacrifice for the
Nation? know, and all the World knows, how many Plots have been laid against my
sel^ both by men, women, and children, the Diabolical Emissaries of the Pope.


How, Sirrah!


Nay, Gentlemen, not but I love and honour his Holiness with all my Soul; and
if his Grace did but know what I have done for him, do ye see --


You done for the Pope, Sirrah! why what have you done for the Pope?


Why, Sir, an't like ye, I have done you great service, very great service, for
I have been, do ye see, in a small Trial I had, the cause and occasion of
invalidating the Evidence to that degree, that I suppose no Jury in Christendom
will ever have the impudence to believe 'em hereafter, should they swear
against his Holiness himself, and all the Conclave of Cardinals.


And yet you plot on still, cabal, treat, and keep open debauch, for all the
Renegado-Tories and old Commonwealths-men to carry on the good Cause.


Alas, what signifies that? You know, Gentlemen, that I have such a strange and
natural agility in turning, -- I shall whip about yet, and leave 'em all in the
lurch.


'Tis very likely; but at this time we shall not take your word for that.


Bloody minded men, are you resolved to assassinate me then?


You trifle, Sir, and know our business better, than to think we come to take
your Life, which would not advantage a Dog, much less any Party or Person, --
Come, come, your Keys, your Keys.


Aye, aye, discover, discover your Money, Sir, your ready --


Money, Sir! good lack, is that all?

Why what a Beast was I, not knowing of your coming, to put out all my Money
last week to Alderman Draw-tooth! Alack, alack, what shift shall I make now to
accommodate you? -- But if you please to come again to morrow --


A shamming Rogue; the right Sneer and Grin of a dissembling Whig. Come, come,
deliver, Sir; we are for no Rhetoric, but ready Money.


Hold, I beseech you, Gentlemen, not so loud: for there is a Lord, a most
considerable person and a stranger, honours my house to night; I would not for
the world his Lordship should be disturbed.


Take no care for him, he's fast bound, and all his Retinue.


How, bound! my Lord bound, and all his People! Undone, undone, disgraced! What
will the Polanders say, that I should expose their Ambassador to this
disrespect and affront?


Bind him, and take away his Keys.


Aye, aye, what you please, Gentlemen, since my Lord's bound. -- Oh what
Recompense can I make for so unhospitable usage? I am a most unfortunate
Magistrate! -- Hah, who's there, Iervice? Alas, art thou here too? What, can
not speak? But 'tis no matter and I were dumb too: for what Speech or Harangue
will serve to beg my pardon of my Lord? -- And then my Heiress, Iervice, aye,
my rich Heiress, why she'll be ravished, oh Heavens, ravished! The young Rogues
will have no mercy, Iervice; nay, perhaps as thou say, they'll carry her
away. -- Oh that thought! Gad I'd rather the City-Charter were lost.


(...), do you mutter, Dog?


Not in the least, Sir, not in the least; only a Conscience, Sir, in all
things does well. -- Barbarous Rogues! Iervice; here's the rule of the Sword
now for you: These are your Tory Rogues, your Tantivie Roysters; but we shall
cry quits with you, Rascals, erelong: and if we do come to our old Trade of
Plunder and Sequestration, we will so handle ye -- ^ neither Prince, Peer, nor
Prelate. Oh, I long to have a ^ice at your fat Church-men, your
Crape-Gown-orums.


A Prize, a Prize, my Lads, in ready Guinies! Contribution, my Beloved.


Nay then 'tis lawful Prize, in spite of Ignoramus and all his Tribe. -- What
hast thou there?


A whole Bag of Knavery, damned Sedition, Libels, Treason, Successions, Rights
and Privileges, with a new-fashion'd Oath of Abjuration, called the
Association. -- Ah Rogue, what will you say when these shall be made public?


Say, Sir? why I'll deny it, Sir: for what Jury will believe so wise a
Magistrate as I, could communicate such Secrets to such as you? I'll say you
forged 'em, and put 'em in, -- or print ev^ry one of 'em, and own 'em, as long
as they were writ and published in London, Sir.) Come, come, the World is not so
bad yet, but a man may speak Treason within the Walls of London, thanks be to
God, and honest conscientious Jury-men. And as for the Money, Gentlemen, take
notice you rob the Party.


Come, come, carry off the Booty, and prithee remove that Rubbish of the Nation
out of the way. -- Your Servant, Sir. -- So, away with it to Dresswell's
Lodgings, his Coach is at the door ready to receive it.


Well, you are sure you have all you came for?


All's safe, my Lads, the Writings all. --


Come, let's away then.


Away? what meanst thou? is there not a Lord to be found bound in his bed, and
all his People? Come, come, dispatch, and each man bind his fellow.


We had better follow the Baggage, Captain.


No, we have not done so ill, but we dare show our faces. Come, come, to
binding.


And who shall bind the last man?


Honest Laboir, do ye hear, Sirrah? you got drunk and lay in your Clothes under
the Hall-table; do ye conceive me? Look to it, ye Rascal, and carry things
discreetly, or you'll all be hanged, that's certain.


So; now will I in the morning to Charlot, and give her such a character of her
Lover, as if she have resentment, makes her mine.


Ienkin, Roger, Simon! where are these Rogues? None left alive to come to my
assistance? So ho, ho, ho! Rascals, Sluggards, Drones! So ho, ho, ho!


So, now's my Que -- and stay, I am not yet sober.


Dogs, Rogues, none hear me? Fire, fire, fire!


Water, water, I say: for I am damnable dry.


Ha, who's there?


What doleful voice is that?


What art thou, friend or foe?


Very direful -- why what the Devil art thou?


If you're a friend, approach, approach the wretched.


Wretched! What art thou, Ghost, Hobgobling, or walking Spirit?


Oh, neither, neither, but mere mortal Sir Timothy Treat-all, robbed and bound.


How, our generous Host?


How, one of my Lords Servants! Alas, alas, how came thou to escape?


En by Miracle, Sir, by being drunk and falling asleep under the Hall-table
with your Worships Dog Tory, till just now a Dream of Small-beer waked me; and
crawling from my Kennel to secure the black Jack, I stumb'ed upon this
Lanthorn, which I took for one, till I found a Candle in it, which helps me to
serve your Worship.


Hold, hold, I say; for I scorn to be so uncivil to be unbound before his
Lordship: therefore run, Friend, to his Honours Chamber, for he, alas, is
confined too.


What, and leave his worthy Friend in distress? by no means, Sir.


Well then, come, let's to my Lord, whom if I be not ashamed to look in the
face, I am an errant Sarazan.


Peace, Sirrah, for sure I hear some coming. -- Villains, Rogues! I care not
for my self, but the good pious Alderman.


Wonderful goodness, for me! alas, my Lord, this sight will break my heart.


Sir Timothy safe! nay then I do forgive 'em.


Alas, my Lord, I've heard of your rigid fate.


It is my custom, Sir, to pray an hour or two in my Chamber, before I go to
bed; and having prayed that drowsy Slave asleep, the Thieves broke in upon us
unawares, I having laid my Sword aside.


Oh, Heavens, at his Prayers! damned Ruffians, and would they not stay till you
had said your Prayers?


By no persuasion. -- Can you not guess who they should be, Sir?


Oh, some damned Tory-rory Rogues, you may be sure, to rob a* man at his
Prayers! why what will this world come to?


Let us not talk, Sir, but pursue 'em.


Pursue 'em? alas, they're past our reach by this time.


Oh, Sir, they are nearer than you imagine:

^ each corner of your house, I'll warrant.


Think ye so, my Lord? Aye, this comes of keeping Open House; which makes so
many shut up their doors at Dinner-time.


Good morrow, Gentlemen! what was the Devil broke loose to night?


Only some of his Imps, Sir, saucy Varlets, insupportable Rascals. -- But
well, my Lord, now I have seen your Lordship at liberty, I'll leave you to your
rest, and go see what harm this nights work has done.


I have a little business, Sir, and will take this time to dispatch it in; my
Servants shall to bed, though 'tis already day. -- I'll wait on you at Dinner.


Your time: my House and all I have is yours; and so I take my leave of your
Lordship.


Now for my angry Maid, the young Charlot;
'Twill be a task to soften her to peace:
She is all new and gay, young as the Morn,
Blushing as tender Rose-buds on their stalks,
Pregnant with sweets, for the next Sun to ravish.
-- Come, thou shalt along with me, I'll trust thy friendship.

Methinks I'm up as early as if I had a mind to what I'm going to do, marry
this old rich Coxcomb.


And you do well to lose no time.


Ah, Betty, and could thy prudence prefer an old Husband, because rich, before
so young, so handsome, and so soft a Lover as Wilding?


I know not that, Madam; but I verily believe the way to keep your young Lover,
is to marry this old one: for what Youth and Beauty cannot purchase, Money and
Quality may.


Aye, but to be obliged to lie with such a Beast; aye, there's the Devil


Ah, when I find the difference of their Embraces,
The soft dear Arms of Wilding round my neck,
From those cold feeble ones of this old Dotard;
When I shall meet, instead of Tom's warm Kisses,
A hollow pair of thin blue withered Lips,
Trembling with Palsy, stinking with Disease,
By Age and Nature baracado'd up
With a kind Nose and Chin;
What fancy or what thought can make my hours supportable?

What? why six thousand pound a year, Mistri^s.
He'll quickly die and leave you rich, and then do what you please.

Die! no, he's too temperate. -- Sure these Whigs, Betty, believe there's no
Heaven, they take such care to live so long in this world. -- No, he'll
out-live me.


In grace a God he may be hanged first, Mistress. -- Ha, one knoc (...) lieve
'tis he.


I cannot bring my heart to like this business;
One sight of my dear Tom would turn the scale.

Who's there?


'Tis I, impatient I, who with the Sun have welcomed in the day;
This happy day to be enrolled
In Rubrick-letters, and in Gold.
-- Hum, I am profoundly eloquent this morning.
-- Fair Excellence, I approach --

Like Physic in a morning next one's heart;
Which though 'tis necessary, is most filthy loathsome.

What, do you turn away, bright Sun of Beauty?
-- Hum, I'm much upon the Suns and Days this morning.

It will not down.

Alas, ye Gods, am I despised and scorned?
Did I for this, ponder upon the Question,
Whether I should be King or Alderman?

If I must marry him, give him patience to endure the Cuckolding, good Heaven.


Heaven! did she name Heaven, Betty?


I think she did, Sir.


I do not like that: What need has she to think of Heaven upon her Wedding-day?


Marriage is a sort of hanging, Sir; and I was only making a short Prayer
before Execution.


Oh, is that all? Come, come, we'll let that alone till we are abed, that we
have nothing else to do.


Not much, I dare swear.


And let us, Fair one, haste; the Parson stays: besides, that heap of Scandal
may prevent us, -- I mean my Nephew.


A Pox upon him now for naming Wilding.


How, weep at naming my ungracious Nephew? Nay, then I am provoked -- Look on
this Head, this wise and reverend Head; I'd have ye know, it has been taken
measure on to fit it to a Crown, do ye see.


A Halter rather.


Aye, and it fits it too: and am I slighted, I that shall receive Billet Deux
from Infantas? 'tis most uncivil and ^mpolitick.


I hope he's mad, and then I reign alone.
Pardon me, Sir, that parting Tear I shed indeed at naming Wilding,
Of whom my foolish heart has now taken leave,
And from this moment is entirely yours.

Stay, my heart misgives me I shall be undone. -- Ah, whither was I going?


Do, stay till the news arrives that he is married to her that had his company
to night, my Lady Galliard.


Oh take heed, lest you sin doubly, Sir.


By Heaven, 'tis true, he past the night with her.


All night? what could they find to do?


A very proper Question: I'll warrant you they were not idle, Madam.


Oh no; they looked and loved, and vowed and loved, and swore eternal
Friendship. -- Haste, haste, and lead me to the Church, the Altar; I'll put it
past my power to love him more.


Oh, how you charm me!


Yet what art thou? a stranger to my heart.
Wherefore, ah why, on what occasion should I?

Acquaintance, 'tis enough, I know him, Madam, and I hope my word will be taken
for a greater matter in the City: In troth you're beholding to the Gentleman for
marrying you; your Reputation's gone.


How, am I not honest then?


Marry Heaven forbid! But who that knows you have been a single hour in
Wilding's hands, that would not swear you'd lost your Maidenhead? And back
again I'm sure you dare not go unmarried; that would be a fine History to be
sung to your eternal fame in a Ballad.


Right; and you see Wilding has left you for the Widow, to whom perhaps you'll
shortly hear he's married.


Oh, you trifle, Sir; lead on.


Come, come, Gentlemen, this is the House, and this the window belonging to my
Ladies Bed-chamber: Come, come, let's have some neat, soft, brisk, languishing,
sprightly Air now.


Old Meriwill -- how shall I pass by him?


So, here's Company too; 'tis very well -- Not have the Boy? I'll warrant this
does the business. -- Come, come, screw up your Chitterling.

-- Hold, hold a little, -- Good morrow, my Lady Galliard,
-- Give your Ladyship joy.

What do I hear, my Lady Galliard joyed?


How, married her already?


Oh, yes he has. Lovely and false, hast thou deceived my Faith?


Oh Heavens, Mr. ^opington, she faints -- ah me!


Ah, Music at Galliard's door!


Good morrow, Sir Charles Meriwill; give your Worship and your fair Lady joy.


Hah, Meriwill married the Widow?


No matter; prithee advance and mind thy own affairs.


Advance, and not inquire the meaning on it!
Bid me not eat, when Appetite invites me;
Not draw, when branded with the name of Coward;
Nor love, when Youth and Beauty meets my eyes. -- Hah! --

Good morrow, Uncle. Gentlemen I thank ye: Here, drink the Kings Health, with
my Royal Master's the Duke.


Heaven bless your Honour, and your virtuous Bride.


Wilding! undone.


Death and the Devil, Meriwill above?


Hah, the Boys Rival here! By George, here may be breathing this morning. -- No
matter, here's two to two; come, Gentlemen, you must in.


Is't not what you expected? nay, what you wished?


What then? it comes too suddenly upon me --
Ere my last kiss was cold upon her lips,
Before the pantings of her Breast were laid,
^ais'd by her Joys with me; Oh damned deluding Woman!

Be wise, and do not ruin where you love.

Nay, if thou come to reasoning, thou hast lost me.

I say 'twas Wilding's voice, and I will follow it.

How, Madam, would you after him?

Nay, force me not: By Heaven I'll cry a Rape,
Unless you let me go. -- Not after him!
Yes to th'infernal S^ades. -- Unhand me, Sir.

How, Madam, have you then designed my ruin?


Oh, trust me, Sir, I am a Maid of Honour.


So; a Murrain of your Projects, we're all undone now: For my part
I'll en'^ after her, and deny to have any hand in the business.

Damn all ill ^ck, was ever man thus Fortune-bit, that he should cross my hopes
just in the nick? -- But shall I lose her thus? No Gad, I'll after her; and
come the worst, I have an Impudence shall out-face a Middlesex- Jury, and
out-swear a Discoverer.


Sirrah, run to my Lord Mayors and require some of his Officers to assist me
instantly; and do ye hear, Rascal, bar up my doors, and let none of his mad Crew
enter.


William, you may stay, William.


I say, obey me, Sirrah.

Sirrah, I say -- know your Lord and Master.

I shall, Sir.

Was ever woman teased thus? pursue me not.

You are mistaken, I'm disobedient grown,
Since we became one Family; and when I've used you thus a week or two, you
will grow weary of this peevish fooling.


Malicious thing, I wo'not, I am resolved I'll tire thee out merely in spite
to have the better of thee.


Gad I'm as resolved as you, and do your worst:
For I'm resolved never to quit thy house.

But Malice, there are Officers, Magistrates in the City, that will not see me
used thus, and will be here anon.


Magistrates! why they shall be welcome, if they be honest and loyal; if not,
they may be hanged in Heavens good time.


Are you resolved to be thus obstinate?
Fully resolved to make this way your Conquest?

Most certainly, I'll keep you honest to your word, my Dear, I've Witness --


You will?


You'll find it so.


Then know, if thou dare marry me, I will so plague thee, be so revenged for
all those tricks thou'st played me --

-- Dost thou not dread the Vengeance Wives can take?

Not at all: I'll trust thy stock of Beauty with thy Wit.


Death, I will cuckold thee.


Why then I shall be free of the Reverend City.


Then I will game without cessation, till I've undone thee.


Do, that all the Fops of empty heads and pockets, may know where to be sure of
a Cully; and may they rook ye till ye lose, and fret, and chafe, and rail those
youthful Eyes to sinking; watch your fair Face to pale and withered leanness.


Then I will never let thee bed with me, but when I please.


For that, see who'll petition first, and then I'll change for new ones every
night.


Madam, here's Mr. Wilding at the door, and will not be denied ^

Hah, Wilding! Oh my eternal shame! now thou hast done thy (...)

Now for a struggle 'twixt your Love and Honour.
-- Yes, here's the Bar to all my Happiness,
You would be left to the wide World and Love,
To Infamy, to Scandal, and to Wilding;
But I have too much Honour in my Passion,
To let you loose to Ruin: Consider and be wise.

Oh, he has touched my heart too sensibly.


But when you press indecently to Ladies Chambers, civil
Questions ought to be asked, I take it, Sir.

To find him here, will make him mad with Jealousy, and in the fit he'll utter
all he knows; Oh, Guilt, what art thou?


Prithee, dear Wilding, moderate thy Passion.

By Heaven, I will; she shall not have the pleasure to see I am concerned. --
Morrow, Widow; you are early up, you mean to thrive I see, you're like a Mill
that grinds with every Wind.


Hah, Wilding this, that past last night at Sir Timothy's for a man of Quality?
Oh, give him way, Wilding's my Friend, my Dear, and now I'm sure I have the
advantage of him in thy love. I can forgive a hasty word or two.


I thank thee, Charles -- What, you are married then?

I hope you've no exception to my choice.

False woman, dost thou glory in thy perfidy?
-- Yes, Faith, I've many exceptions to him --
Had you loved me, you'd pitched upon a Blockhead,
Some spruce gay fool of Fortune, and no more,
Who would have taken so much care of his own ill-favour'd
Person, he should have had no time to have minded yours,
But left it to the care of some fond longing Lover.

Death, he will tell him all!

No, but thou art wondrous false,
False as the Love and Joys you feigned last night.

Oh, Sir, be tender of those treacherous minutes.
-- If this be all you have to say to me --

Faith, Madam, you have used me scurvily,
To marry and not give me notice.
-- Curse on thee, did I only blow the Fire*
To warm another Lover?

Perjured -- was't not by your advice I married?
-- Oh where was then your Love?

So soon did I advise,
Did thou invite me to the Feast of Love,
To snatch away my Joys as soon as tasted;
^ was then your Modesty and sense of Honour?

Aye, where indeed, when you so quickly vanquished?
(...) I find are come prepared to rail.

No, 'twas with thee to make my last effort against your scorn.
And this I hoped, when all my Vows and Love,
When all my Languishments could nought prevail,
Had made ye mine for ever.

'Morrow, Charles, 'Morrow to your Ladyship: Charles, bid Sir Timothy welcome;
I met him luckily at the door, and am resolved none of my Friends shall pass
this joyful day without giving thee Joy, Charles, and drinking my Ladies
Health.


Hah, my Uncle here so early?


What has your Ladyship served me so? How finely I had been mumpt now, if I had
not took heart a grace and showed your Ladyship trick for trick: for I have
been this morning about some such business of Life too, Gentlemen; I am married
to this fair Lady, the Daughter and Heiress of Sir Nicholas Gettall, Knight and
Alderman.


Hah, married to Diana!
How fickle is the Faith of common women?

Hum, Who's here, my Lord? What, I see you Lordship has found the way already
to the fair Ladies; but I hope your Lordship will do my Wedding-dinner the
honour to grace it with your presence.


I shall not fail, Sir.
A Pox upon him, he'll discover all.

I must own, Sir Timothy, you have made the better choice.


I could not hel^ my destiny; Marriages are made in Heaven, you know.


Stand off, and let me loose as are my Griefs, which can no more be bounded: Oh
let me face the perjured, false, forsworn!


Fair Creature, who is't that you seek with so much sorrow?


Thou, thou fatally fair Enchantress.


Charlot! Nay then I am discovered.


Alas, what would thou?


That which I cannot have, thy faithless Husband.
Be judge, ye everlasting Powers of Love,
Whether he more belongs to her or me.

How, my Nephew claimed? Why how now, Sirrah, have you been dabbling here?


By Heaven, I know her not. -- Hark ye, Widow, this is some trick of yours,
and 'twas well laid: and Gad, she's so pretty, I could find in my heart to take
her at her word.


Vile man, this will not pass your falsehood off.
Sure 'tis some Art to make me jealous of him,
To find how much I value him.

Death, I'll have the forgery out;
-- Tell me, thou pretty weeping Hypocrite, who was it set thee on to lay ^ me?


To you! Alas, who are you? for till this moment I never saw your (...)*


Mad as the Seas when all the Winds are raging.


Aye, aye, Madam, stark mad! Poor Soul -- Neighbour, pray let her lie in the
dark, do ye hear.


How came you, pretty one, to lose your Wits thus?


With loving, Sir, strongly, with too much loving.
-- Will you not let me see the lovely false one?
For I am told you have his heart in keeping.

Who is he? pray describe him.

A thing just like a Man, or rather Angel!
He speaks, and looks, and loves, like any God!
All fine and gay, all manly, and all sweet:
And when he swears he loves, you would swear too
That all his Oaths were true.

Who is she? some one who knows her and is wiser, speak -- you, Mistress.


Since I must speak, there comes the man of Mischief: -- 'Tis you I mean, for
all your learing, Sir.


So.


What, my Lord!


I never knew your Nephew was a Lord: Has his Honour made him forget his
Honesty?


I have thee, and I'll die thus grasping thee:
Thou art my own, no Power shall take thee from me.

Never, thou truest of thy Sex, and dearest,
Thou soft, thou kind, thou constant Sufferer,
This moment end thy fears; for I am thine.

May I believe thou art not married then?

How can I, when I'm yours?
How could I, when I love thee more than Life?
-- Now, Madam, I'm revenged on all your scorn.
-- And, Uncle, all your cruelty.

Why, what are you indeed my Nephew, Thomas?


I am Tom Wilding, Sir, that once bore some such Title, till you discarded me,
and left me to live upon my Wits.


What, and are you no Polish Ambassador then incognito?


No, Sir, nor you no King Elect, but must even remain as you were ever, Sir, a
most seditious pestilent old Knave; one that deludes the Rabble with your
Politics, then leave 'em to be hanged, as they deserve, for silly mutinous
Rebels.


I'll peach the Rogue, and then he'll be hanged in course, because he's a Tory.
One comfort is, I have cozened him of his rich Heiress; for I am married, Sir,
to Mrs. Charlot.


Rather Diana, Sir; I wish you Joy: See here's Charlot! I was not such a Fool
to trust such Blessings with the Wicked.


How Mrs. Die Ladyfi'd! This is an excellent way of disposing an old (...)*


How, have I married a Strumpet then?


You give your Nephews Mistress, Sir, too coarse a name: 'Tis true, I loved
him, only him, and was true to him.


Undone, undone! I shall ne'er make Guildhall-speech more; but he shall hang
for it, if there be ere a Witness to be had between this and Salamancha for
Money.


Do your worst, Sir; Witnesses are out of fashion now, Sir, thanks to your
Ignoramus Juries.


Then I'm resolved to dis-inherit him.


See, Sir, that's past your skill too, thanks to my last nights Ingenuity:
they're c.


Bear Witness, 'twas he that robbed me last night.


We bear Witness, Sir, we know of no such matter we. I thank you for that, Sir,
would you make Witnesses of Gentlemen?


No matter for that, I'll have him hanged, nay drawn and quartered.


What, for obeying your Commands, and living on my Wits?


Nay, then 'tis a clear case you can neither hang him nor blame him.


I'll propose fairly now, if you'll be generous and pardon all: I'll render
your Estate back during Life, and put the Writings in Sir Anthony Meriwill's
and Sir Charles^ his hands. --

I have a Fortune here that will maintain me,
Without so much as wishing for your death.

This is but Reason.


With this Proviso, that he makes not use on it to promote any mischief to the
King and Government.


Good and just.


Hum, I'd as good quietly agree to it, as lose my Credit by making a noise. --
Well, Tom, I pardon all, and will be Friends.


See, my dear Creature, even this hard old man is mollified at last into good
nature; yet you'll still be cruel.


No, your unwearied Love at last has vanquished me. Here, be as happy as a Wife
can make ye -- One last look more, and then -- be gone fond Love.


Come, Sir, you must receive Diana too; she is a cheerful witty Girl, and
handsome, one that will be a Comfort to your Age, and bring no scandal home.
Live peaceably, and do not trouble your decrepit Age with business of State.

Let all things in their own due order move,
Let Caesar be the Kingdoms care and love:
Let the Hot-headed Mutineers petition,
And meddle in the Rights of Just Succession;
But may all honest hearts as one agree
To bless the King, and Royal Albany.

MY Part, I fear, will take with but a few,
A rich young Heiress to her first Love true!
'Tis damned unnatural, and past enduring,
Against the fundamental Laws of Whoring.
Marrying's the Mask, which Modesty assures,
Helps to get new, and covers old Amours;
And Husband sounds so dull to a Town-Bride,
You now-a-days condemn him ere he's tried;
Ere in his Office he's confirmed Possessor,
Like Trincaloes you choose him a Successor,
In the gay spring of Love, when free from doubts,
With early shoots his Velvet Forehead sprouts.
Like a poor Parson bound to hard Indentures,
You make him pay his First-fruits ere he enters.
But for short Carnivals of stolen good Cheer,
You're after forced to keep Lent all the Year;
Till brought at last to a starving Nuns condition,
You break into our Quarters for Provision:
Invade Fop-corner with your glaring Beauties,
And ^ice our Loyal Subjects from their Duties.
Pray, Ladies, ^ave that Province to our care;
A Fool is the Fee-simple of a Player,
In which we Women claim a double share.
(...) things the Men are Rulers made;
^ Woodcocks is our proper Trade.
If by Stage-Fops they a poor Living get,
We can grow rich, thanks to our Mother Wit,
By the more natural Blockheads in the Pit.
Take then the Wits, and all their useless Prattles;
But as for Fools, they are our Goods and Chattels.
Return, Ingrates, to your first Haunt the Stage;
We taught your Youth, and helped your feeble Age.
What is't you see in Quality we want?
What can they give you which we cannot grant?
We have their Pride, their Frolics, and their Paint.
We feel the same Youth dancing in our Blood;
Our dress as gay -- All underneath as good.
Most men have found us hitherto more true,
And, if we're not abused by some of you,
We^re full as fair -- perhaps as wholesome too.
But if at best our hopeful Sport and Trade is,
And nothing now will serve you but great Ladies;
May questioned Marriages your Fortune be,
And Lawyers drain your Pockets more than we:
May Judges puzzle a clear Case with Laws,
And Musquetoon at last decide the Cause.

