THough Limners in a face the Prospect see
Of Nature, varying in deformity;
The biased Pencil can new-mould the frame,
And set to Venus picture any Name.
Had the Pope bribed me well, I'd done so too,
Not speak the truth so plain as now I do:
Faith, I'd a friend proposed it to a Priest,
And did advise him that he'd grease my Fist.
He did at the propasal smile, and say,
That humour had more wit than all my Play.
But he has found a cheaper way than that,
He'll swear by all the Saints 'tis a mere cheat.
Like the feigned Book of Martyrs; and a blot,
False as the story of the Powder-Plot.
So the Sexton swore his Clock did never lye,
What e're the Sun said to the contrary.

I'Ve so long worn a borrowed Shape, that now
Deception is the only thing I know.
Tracing Religions various Paths, I find
Profit's the Centre whither they're inclined.
But did I fear, Heaven should my Actions know,
I'd Cheat the Devil, and escape his Clutches too.
Those who would thrive in State, must bravely shun
Those Narrow Paths, where Virtue sneaks alone;
And prove new, wilder Ways: Religion there,
Is but Design; what ere it is else-where.
But yet that dark and jugg'ling Mystery,
Must to a Crown, my Grave procurer be:
Nor can the Queen an idle Agent prove,
Whose doting Passion to that height does move;
She'll put off Nature, to promote her Love,
And Kill her Son. --
Tho one would think, she was so parched with Age,
That Cupid could not pierce with all his Rage.
Oh, here she comes! whom I must gently sooth;
And with soft Praise, her Aged Wrinkles smooth:
But know not which the hardest Task will prove,
For me to feign, or she to hide her Love.
Glory of Queens!
I pay this Tribute to your sacred Hand,
And my dear Love to your best Faith Commend.
With too much Ceremony, Sir, we greet:
Kiss a dull Hand, that cannot taste the Sweet!
Loves Vot'ries no such foolish State allow;
Love finds all Equal, or else makes 'em so.

Excuse the awful Distance, which I may
Yet as a Subject, to my Sov'reign pay.
When you Present me Teimurazez Crown,
Then may our Bodies, as our Minds, be one;
And we may Love securely, when he's gone.

Name that no more! But think the Business done!
Yes! I am resolved, -- tho he were thrice my Son.
His Short-lif'd-State, with the next Sun shall Set;
Nor can we fear, that he will rise with it.
E're in these Arms, our Joys their Height commence,
These Arms, --
Which fondly lulled his Infant Innocence,
Now, as gladly, will Conduct him to his Fate;
For, since by the Mother-Church --
Since by this Paper he's Condemned to Dye,

A Mother's Love would Irreligious be.
Besides, my Passion greater Things would do
T'oblige Heaven, my Self, and what's more, You.
'Tis true, he is my only Son, tho he
Has Cancelled Nature by's Apostasy.
But yet we need not want of Issue fear;
For, surely, I am Young enough to Bear:
What do you think, my Lord?
-- By Jove! I thought,
Forty Years since, she had her Sex forgot.
Madam, the Number of your Years, alone,
Are through the Optics of your Reason known:
As if you, God-like, were allow'd to be
Beyond the Reach of Times Artillery.
I do my future Heaven anticipate,
In the Compendium of your Arms; --
Where all the Pleasures of both Worlds do meet.
Beauty's Perfection sits Enthroned in you;
The Architype of Art and Nature too.

All Worldly Greatness constant Tempests drive;
And as in Raging Seas, do Monarchs live.
This Globe we strive for, is a prickly Ball;
Fortune has cozened Fools to play with all:
With labouring Pain the Game is gained and lost,
And they're least Happy, who do win the most.
I do not covet any Neighbours Crown;
Yet I'm resolved, I will secure my own.
Nor all the Thunder, that fierce Bull does bear,
Can make my Reason stoop to servile Fear:
And ere (Proud Rome!) I'll to thy Idol bow,
He shall Kiss mine, as other Slaves his, Toe!

Then will not this? To seek a Son I'll go
To some dark Place, which Nature never saw.
I've yet too much a Careful Mother bin;
And with these Tears, I fear, increased your Sin.
Had not I mixed my Reasons with my Tears,
And tyer'd Heaven, and You, with busy Prayers;
This strong Resistance then less strange would be;
And more Excusable to Heaven, and Me.
Because from your Breasts, I my frail Passions drew,
Would you fain ruin what's Immortal too.
Madam! Seek not to rack me thus anew,
Who am already so much lost in you:
The Roman-Beast has Robbed me of your Heart,
Or razed out Nature's Image from that Part;
Gasping and Cold beneath his Venomed Dart.
Your Looks, methinks, such a new Strangeness wear,
I cannot read one Glimpse of Mother there!

So much a Mothers Grief for you I know,
I wish (ye Gods!) I never had been so.
But Read this Paper! -- My Hearts Winding-Sheet:
Whilst I beg Heaven, it may Convert him yet;
Whilst I beg Heaven, its Venge'nce may be quick,
That I may be --
No longer Mother to an Heretic.
But yet, methinks, there's a more urgent Cause,
Than mere Religion, forcing Nature's Laws:
Here different Passions to one End do move;
I Hate my Son, because Polidore I Love.

The Declaratory Sentence of Pope Paul the Fifth, against Teimurazez, the
pretended Prince of Georgia, and all those who take his Part.

PAul, the Servant of, c. Being moved by the Impieties, which grow daily more
Intolerable by the Means and Working of Teimurazez, the pretended and unlawful
Prince of Georgia; we have by Necessity, taken our Selves to the Weapons of
Justice: And, being strengthened by his Authority, who was pleased to seat us in
this Supreme Throne, we do by the Fulness of our Apostolical Power, declare the
aforesaid Teimurazez, an Heretic; and likewise, those who have taken his
Part, to incur the Sentence of Anathema. And moreover, that he is deprived of
the Right of his said Kingdom; and from all Rule, Dignity, and Pre-eminency,
whatsoever: And also, his Nobility, Subjects, and People of the said Realm; and
all others, that have Sworn unto him upon any account, are Absolved for ever
from such Oaths; and from all Duty of Empire, Fidelity, Obedience, in such
sort, as we do Absolve 'em by the Authority of these Presents. And we do
command and forbid all, and singular of the Nobility, and his other Subjects,
that they presume not to obey his Admonitions, Commands, or Laws: and whosoever
shall do otherwise, we do involve them in the like Curse.

Given at Rome, at St. Peters, Anno Domini, 1614. And in the Tenth Year of our
Papacy.

Can thou suffer this? Or, Has he stolen away
Thy Thunder? Then take heed of thy own Godhead:
For if this Tyrant's Rage, thus Kings pursues,
Sure Thee for the next Sacrifice he'll choose.
Proud Priest! What means such Insolence? Is this
The Humility thy Title promises?
Thou hast forgot to stile thy Self, The Poor
And Humble Vassel of the Emperor.
Such sordid Vapours, if they chance to rise
As Comets, from a Dung-hill to the Skies,
They with their Blaze the higher Orbs offend,
And the Fall of States imperiously portend.

'Twas some Infernal Gulf disgorged this Fury;
Whose poys'nous Pride has swelled him to that Greatness,
That he must either spue it up, or burst.

But dares this Basilisk, thus frown on Kings,
To blast 'em with its Malignant Influence?
Is not their Power on Earth the most Supreme?
Or, Is the Bishop's Chair,
Lately Converted to a Monarch's Throne?
Why thrusts he his Sickle into your Harvest?
Is it an Act of Holiness, to set your Kingdom
On fire, by Seditions flaming Brands?
But was You, as he terms you, an Heretic;
Must he be at once both Judge, and Plaintiff?
Or, why produced he not some Ancient Cannon,
Imposing such a Penalty on Sinners,
That they of Sov'reigns, must become his Vassals?
Do any of the Fathers encourage him,
Thus against Princes, to uncase his Thunder-Bolts?
Knows he not the Date of this Papal Power,
And the Homage they antiently paid their Emperors;
At whose Beck they humbly held their Miters?
And paid at their Investiture, a certain Tribute,
Which was first Released by Confcantine, to Pope Agatho.

Was n't Gregory the Seventh, the first Cyclop,
Who forged these Papal Fulminations?
And after the Gregorian Troubles,
When th'impov'risht Empire grew almost Breathless;
Then the Rebellious Bishop crept into that Greatness,
Which Strength and Policy have yet continued.

What Corner of the Christian, or the Heath'nish World,
Is ignorant of this? Is not History
Glutted with Black Instances of this Nature?
How common is it, under the Pretence of Holiness,
To Arm even Pagans against Protestant-Princes?
Nay, Was not the Pope
The Cause of our late Wars with Persia?
Nor am I yet secure, from some New-born Jealousies,
Has whispered amongst those Credulous Infidels.

And, Sir, believe it, in your own Kingdom too.

For to maintain his Usurped Right, the Pope
May seem concerned, but can no conquest Hope.
Your Subjects Loyalty so well is known,
He cannot think to Corrupt those, --
Whose Hearts are more their Prince's, than their own.
When the glad Crowd did to the Forums thrust,
Each striving who should swear Allegiance first;
I saw non's Conscience struggling in the Face,
No one stood trembling to dispute the Case:
But so much Pleasure in Obedience took,
Their Hearts came to their Lips, to Kiss the Book.
Then let's not fear, United thus at Home,
The Persian-Deity, or that of Rome.

Who may not Treason in this Language see,
And that too daubed with fulsome Flattery?
'Tis strange our Judgments thus should disagree,
Yet both tend to one Centre, Loyalty.
But by your Royal Leave, I'll be as brief, as free:
No Deposed Prince, where Popish Subjects are,
Is in the midst of his own Guards, secure.
Any cursed Villain, may with Ease become
Master of his Life, b'ing careless of his own.
Then for the most obliging Oaths they take,
At their own Pleasures, don't they give 'em back?
They last no longer, than a Syrian Flower,
That's born, and vanishes in the same Hour.
So does the Dev'l, now shining like a Saint;
In the next Scene, wash off the Water-paint:
These are my Thoughts. --

-- Exceeding Good and Brief.

Yet not so short, as is his Thread of Life.

'Tis Councel-time; and I must now desire
Each on's Opinion in this Grand Affair:
For since my Reign, no Subject did afford
More Ample Matter for a Council-Board.

Unhappy Prince! I see, 'twill be his Fate,
Amongst his Councellors, his Death to meet.
Those Traitors sure, can never miss their Ends,
Who can persuade their Prince, to think 'em Friends:
Even they must teach him, to believe me too;
Tho not, Alas, till they have given the Blow.

SUre Heavens Exchequer, must needs Banckrupt be;
For all its Treasures are bestowed on me.
Its easy Powers to my Desires submit,
And seem to lay their Heaven at my Feet.
And Rome it self, dressed me in this Disguise,
That undiscerned, I might to Scepters rise.
The Grecian-Churches Viz'rd, I must wear;
And like an Imp of Hell, in Robes of Light appear.
Scatt'ring, in Private, various Plagues abroad;
And unseen Toils, I spread in every Road.
That sneaking Virtue, Loyalty --
Shall at my Feet a Bloody Victim fall;
And the False King, no longer King I'll call.
He, and his Gang, shall throng the Shades below:
And them the Road, with Bloody Paths, I'll show.
I'll tyre the Destinies, and dispatch more,
Than Charon's Labouring Boat can well waft over.
Then may Religious Fools securely pay
Honours to Heaven, and Rewards to Me.
Thus Happy Angels at a Wish appear!
Hail, most Mighty Polidore!

Hail Rome's great Hopes, and only Favourite!

Hail Noble Sir! and Hail ye Glorious Train!
Which for your Safety, careful Heaven maintain!
Each Guardian there, will interpose a Shield;
And on our Foe's crushed Neck, our Empire build.

Saw you the Prince, since he is Sentence read?
Does he retain the Shape, and Form he had?

But now I from his open Bosom came,
And saw it wounded at the Pope's dread Name:
Fear and Revenge his Thoughts at once did bear;
He fears Assaults, and yet disdains to fear.

Methinks, I see the deposed Monster dead,
And the Crown Flourish on your Royal Head.

Last Night I dreamed, (as he took up and read
The fatal Paper, in his Passage laid)
From his loathed Head, the Crown came tottering down,
Whilst his weak Hand could hardly hold it on.
Orewhelm'd with Fear, methought I saw him stand;
And's Sceptre grew too weighty for his Hand.

After his Death, we'll this Report for true;
And the Ignorant Crowd will soon believe it so.

Whilst with both Hands, he pressed it to his Head,
The enchanted Gem in 'Thousand pieces fled:
At which, methought, the frightened Prince fell dead.
Then of bright Spirits, came a numerous Train;
Who gath'ring up the scattered Parts again,
Artfully reunite the shattered Crown,
And adds a Thousand Jewels of their own:
Then, with just Ceremony, Crowned my Head;
And having sung an Heavenly Anthem, fled.
At this I 'woke; and when I cast my Eye
Towards that part I dreamed the Vision lay,
I saw my Page, who with this Letter came;
Which at first Reading, did explain my Dream.

Beloved Son! Salutation, and Apostolical Benediction, c. -- Having taken into
our Consideration, the late Cruelties inflicted on our Catholics at Georgia;
particularly, that unlawful Oath, of paying Allegiance to an Heretic Prince.
We have therefore not only Issued out our Excommunication against Teimurazez,
but do likewise (in requital of your undoubted Loyalty, and many other
Christian Virtues) use our utmost interest, to place you in his Throne.


Thus does just Heaven Heroic Actions bless!

-- It could not give me more.

-- Nor did you merit less.

And that our Excommunication may not pass unattended by a sudden Omen, the
Persians (by our Insinuation, being raised to an higher Resentment of the late
Injuries offered them) are resolved, within these few days, to visit
Teimurazez; and are sworn by their great Prophet, not to return without his
Head. Nor does this Province seem so difficult, if we consider the profound
Security the Prince is now in; sleeping, and dreaming of no such violent Blow:
And that the most considerable part of his Army, is at present, at Altuncula.
Now, I need not advise you, how to manage your self in this Interval; whether
to secure your self by Absence, or a pretended Fit of Sickness, till this
hazardous Storm be over-past. And when you find the Throne empty, you need not
fear to Ascend it, in the Right of our well-belov'd Daughter, Queen Ceteba; who
I understand, is by Contract, already your Wife. It is our Will, That this
Epistle be Communicated to all Faithful Sons; particularly, to Zolazer, Dubois,
Lucan, Lumbus, and Tyrone.

Farewell. Rome, Anno Domini Papacy.
Who would not think, by this Sublimer Strain,
Ceased Oracles had found their Tongues again?

As long tossed Ships in Sight of Harbour come,
We want but one kind Gale to blow us Home:
And Fortune seems to beg this short Delay,
To reckon what vast Sums she is to pay.
We need no more poorly depend on Fate;
But Wealth and Honours, as our Slaves shall wait.
This Office his, Another that; and all
The Church Revenues to your Shares will fall.
Have you a Friend, you would promote? A Foe,
You would Revenge? the only time is now.
Is there a Famous Beauty, you would woe?
Let the glad Father, or kind Husband know;
They'll boast the Honour of procuring her for you.

We need not then in these strange Shapes appear.
Wear others Looks, or speak in Character:
Nor need we then, like patient Anglers wait,
'Till th'Squeamish Conscience please to take the Bait.
But to our Wears, thousands at once we'll force,
Cull out the Ripe, --
And send the Fry to our own Pools to Nurse.

But what great Things, Zolazer, have you done,
Since you've Governed Georgia's Garrison?
It is the greatest Trust I could bestow;
And an Employment only fit for you:
It does, at least, Ten thousand Arms-contain;
Which I design, shall be our Magazine.
And do expect, that every Soldier shall*
Honour their Prince, less than their General.

Of those two Thousand Soldiers I have there,
Eightscore already of our Party are*
No'ne shall the Offers I propose refuse,
I will such Crafts and Subtle Methods use.
Those Soldiers which most likely seem, I'll try;
Which if the least unwilling to Comply,
They soon shall by some private Torture dye.

Were there in all, one Thousand Faithful found,
Better than Millions we suspect unsound.
One Stragler's Wildeness all the Herd misleads;
One Houses Plague, through a whole Kingdom spreads:
And one that's False, may like small Fire unknown,
Spread its destructive Flames through the whole Town.

Let me desire, this prove no more your Care;
But of th'Event, a good Opinion bear.
I've seen all Countries, can all Humours guess:
And th'Saints ne'er yet denied my Plot's Success.
What flattering Language can't, this Sword shall do:
'Tas cut down Thousands, yet no'ne heard the Blow.
I'll Kill with Poison, yet the Cause conceal;
And's Death, by which I merit Heaven, bewail.
These forty Years, unseen as Night, I've gone
Through snaky Ways; and more strange Shapes put on,
Than Proteus could, with all his Witchcraft guess,
Or Ovid gave his Metamorphosis.
And when our Plot is to a Ripeness grown,
Rome must confess, She never yet has known
So Rich a Conquest, and so Cheap a One.

Th'first Year I did to Artaxissa come,
(Where I a grave Physicians Garb put on)
At least Five hund'red Proselytes I gained,
And done what Poets hardly could have feigned.
A Pestilential Fever raging there,
Which only I did then pretend to Cure:
Those who would turn, and to our Pictures fall,
I Raised again, as by a Miracle.
But Poison was the Physic I did use,
To purge away their Souls, which did my Charms refuse.
So Heretics did in such number Dye,
That Death grew weary of the Slavery:
And Charon's Self, sate sweating at his Oar,
Needing a Fleet to waft my Patients over.

My Conquests in Vasada are well known;
Both Armastic' and Lybium are grown
More supple far: I've taught 'em, by Degrees,
To touch our Beads, and look on Images.

What need I boast? But should I strive to show
Those Deeds twice sixteen Winters saw me do,
You would grow Old with hearing me, and Death,
E're I'd half told you, would demand my Breath.
The Furies were my Slaves, who surely struck
Thousands of Rebels, when my Looks but spoke.
And should I when I Dye, --
For each I Killed, a Marble-Pillar have,
You might walk up to Heaven on my Grave.
Witchcraft I studied, and all Poisons too,
Whose Use, as well as Nature's self, I know*
Augures, who 'f Lives and Deaths could less Divine,
May come and harden their soft Hearts by mine.
Did n't the late King, three Brothers, and one Son,
Fall by my Art?

But Teimurazez is Immortal grown:
Those Poisons which did do their Business, are
To him Familiar, as his other Fare.
A thousand Snares I for his Life have laid,
But some Ev'l Spirit, even my Thoughts betrayed.
Let Mirabilians keep no more ado,
His Life's the only Miracle I know.

Georgia did know no Catholic, before
I with the Queen, Converted thousands more.
Her Love for You, my Praises did Inspire;
I first did Kindle, and then Blowed the Fire.
By me, you Hopes are almost certain grown;
For one un-King'd lies dying in your Throne.

The Gods came short of each of you, when they
Were Candidates for Immortality.
And on your Merits such high Price I lay,
That only those Impartial Powers can pay.

To Arms! To Arms! The Persins are -- To Arms!

What makes this Fool fright us with false Alarms!

Hell is broke loose! and all its Dev'ls appear
In Persian Shapes, to bring their Torments here!
They to our Walls, on Wings of Lightning fly:
Whilst th'wounded Air, touched with a Sympathy,
In Groans of Thunder, bode our Destiny.

To Arms! To Arms! They the South-Gate Attack!
But th'Prince in Person, bravely beats 'em back!

Curse on their Ha^t! 'Tis such a quick Surprise,
I have no time to put on a Disguise.
But since I must appear in Fight, I'll stand
Beyond the reach of Dangers Bloody Hand!

Ye Gods, give Fortune now her Eyes, that she
May see to lead us on to Victory.
Let's not ^ise Fears, to fight with too; but show
What Courage armed by Despair, can do.

BRave Nero, may thy Soul my Breast inspire!
Whose sacred Harp sang Praises to Rome's Fire!
Whilst Buildings in the Sky, like Meteors throng,
And danced Levoltoes to thy Charming Song.
That Childish thing, we Human Nature call,
Pity, Compassion, things we fool withal,
Are given us as our Raiment, or our Food,
To use, or lay aside, as we think good.
That must be Lawful, which does Profit bring;
Cruelty's but a Name, there's no such thing.
What? Tho I see my Country over-thrown,
And its cursed Her'tick Prince, (no more my Son)
Sink in its Ruin: Tho each Persians Hand
Were a Death's-Head, t'un-people this Cursed Land,
And I the Cause; tho Georgia should prove
(Dear Polidore) a Victim to our Love;
Must I be thought Unnatural, or Severe,
Because I only of my Self, and Thee, take care?
No, even Nature justifies me here.
Self-Int'rest, and Self-Preservation,
Is th'only Law of Nature I can own:
That only Just, un-alterable One.
I care not, tho th'whole World to Chaos fall,
So we survive the Mighty Funeral;
And force from thence a better Progeny:
Deucalion you, and Phyrra I will be.

Juno could neither Do, nor Speak, like You,
When her keen Rage did Hercules pursue.
Your Courage Polidore's Affection moves;
That, next your Beauty, and your Wit, he loves.

Courage belongs to Man; and b'ing above
Our Sex, their Envy raises, not their Love.
It is not that I Conquer him withal:
No, I dare swear, he thinks me Beautiful.
How does this Face become me, Girl? Look here!
Does not this VVrincle th'row the Case appear?
The Fucus was not well laid on; nor is
It White enough. --

-- I see, it is amiss.
The Sun has to the Ceruse given a Taint.

To Morrow we shall have another Paint,
Far Richer, and more lasting. -- Prithee view:
Nay, Don't I look as Clear, and Young, as thou?
My Palsy, and my Gout, no longer rage;
And, I believe, Medea has renewed my Age.
I justly may mistrust my Memory,
Which says, These Eyes did threescore Winters see.

Each Feature does a fair Narcissus wear:
And gaze not on that Mirror long, for fear
It should reflect Sparkles of your Beauties Fire;
And like to him, you in Self-Love expire.

did but a Tauny-Gypsie show,
Dirty, and Sun-burnt, when compared with You.
She pines with Grief, seeing You Shine more clear;
And Mars Your Charms, before all Hers, prefer.

Girl! Smell my Breath! How does it Scent to Day?
I hope, the Dentifrice has taken away,
The Hogoe those few Teeth I've left, did --
-- Excellent well!
Odours, chaft by the Sun, less Fragrant smell:
And on your Balmy Lips, both Indies dwell.
I mean, this Carrion smell, which I endure,
Arabia can't, with all its Spices, cure.
Nor can she of her Form, too Curious be,
Who'ld hold the Heart of Polidorus; He
To Heavens bright battlements, his Glories raise;
And strikes the Stars, 'till each rebounds his Praise.
Thrice Happy Queen, in his Embraces! who
Is more a God than Cupid; and can do,
More with one Glance of his All-conquering Eye,
Than all the Shafts of that Blind Deity.

Thou'st spoken well; and I believe thy Mind:
Thou shalt Rewards, great as thy Merits, find.
In the first Place, an Husband we'll procure;
A Doctor, that shall thy Green-sickness Cure.
What think thou of Melanthus?

Melanthus! Force me first to dwell
In a Nun'rys Cloistered Cell:
Where the Sight of some Old Priest
Once a Month, would be a Feast.
I loath that shame-face't, Beardless Thing;
A lazy Drone, without a Sting:
One, a Fever cannot warm,
Nor flaming Poison work upon.
At first, I sent my Choicest Charms,
To bring him fettered to my Arms:
Mustered all our Female Arts,
Our ay'ry Gins, and Traps for Hearts;
Breasts, where Love in Ambush lies;
Killing Looks, and Dying Eyes.
But nought could make his Nature yield;
'Tis frozen to an Icy Shield.
Grief in his Heart, such Root has took,
'Tis mixed with every Word and Look:
Which his fierce Sighs through the Air do strew,
And into Storms, and Tempests blow.

I never did believe the Garb it wears;
Breeches do illy suit with Sighs, and Tears: --
But often Reason had to guess,
'Tis but a Woman in Disguise;
Which Polidore --
These by their Garb, should to the Prince belong,
And here with News from the Engagement come:
But my Prophetic Doubts! He's safe, I fear;
Joy swells their Looks, and Rides in Triumph there.
Is my dear Son! Speak! Is the Prince secure?
Lives yet a Persian, to with-stand his Power?
Those worst of Monsters! --

-- Yes, we Live; and know,
If we are Monsters, you shall find us so!
By our High-Priest, a sacred Oath we've made,
Not to return without the Prince's Head.
But tho his Courage won't of that allow,
Yet yours may in its stead, fulfil our Vow;
And be, perhaps, as Advantageous too.

Then are ye Persians! Were I sure of that,
One Word of mine, would worthier Thoughts Creat.
I hope, you know the End, which brought you here.

That we are Persians, may by this appear.
In vain you strive; For when your Queen is slain,
You in the other World, must bear her Train.
GEorgia, Thou hast too Fruitful been!
Thy Death's by thy own Children sought.
So I've unnat'ral Branches seen,
Drop Venom on their Mother-Root.
Call here Arabia's Savages;
For they can better Doctrine Teach.
Unhappy Prince! Thy Countries Fate,
And Thine, alike in this do show.
She's in her Son's Unfortunate,
As in a Mother's Malice you.
Such Monsters, that against Nature prey;
She a Canibal, and Vipers they.
Damned Pope! What Poisons did infuse,
To stifle Nature's kindly Flame?
Must all Ties of Relation lose,
At thy Approach, its very Name?
Thou, and thy Jesuits, by these Knacks,
Seem Learned Virtuoso Quacks.
VVolves, and Tigers, you prepare
For those of your Religion; who,
With these fierce Monsters, must be sure,
To change their Blood, and Nature too.
And many more of these quaint Tricks,
Make Currant Roman-Catholicks.
Deny this, Jesuit, if you can;
Is your Religion any more,
Than a mere Politic Design,
To Serve the Babylonian-VVhore?
Speak! Is it Heaven, or Golden Heaps,
Thou Huntest in a thousand Shapes?
The Doctrine of Deposing-Kings,
With all its Fatal Consequence;
And ten Thousand as bad Things,
Derive their Bloody Birth from hence.
'Twas only Policy, that could
Create, and now Supports thy God!
Sedition is thy Brat; and Thou
Art th'Cause of almost every War;
Whether they Turks, or Christians are
Thou Arm'st, it is alike to You.
Murders, and Massacres too,
From thy very Nature flow.
Yet whether Prince or People seek,
Or are by thee, forced to Extremes:
Forsooth, 'tis always Conscience-sake,
And Religion are the Themes.
And thus the Highest Things you bend,
To serve the worst, and lowest End.
THose which survived, are to their Country fled,
Swift as the rest, did to the Elizian-Shade.

Mars has resigned his Deity to You;
Pallas her Shield, and Jove his Thunder too.
Mantled in Clouds, they viewed you from a far;
And from your Conquests, learned New Arts of War.
The Souls of Hero's, hovering in the Sky;
Sickened with Envy, at your Victory;
Whose Fame must now, dumb as their Ashes lye.
Th'Immortal Bays, which on their Godheads grew,
Dropped down, and clung to your Victorious Brow.

Tho Fortune's Kindness seemed, at first, so great,
A Mother's Loss does more than Cancel that:
It does my Laurels into Cypress turn,
And seem to teach my Triumphs how to Mourn.
Thus many things must make up Happiness;
Tho only one, will serve to make it less.
But Heaven! How could they steal away the Queen,
Yet unrevenged, and what is more, unseen!

When horrid Shouts bellowed on every side,
And Slaughter stretched its ugly Limbs so wide:
Whilst the Guns roared, till they the Heaven's did rend,
And thither did their Entrails Off' rings send;
The Queen Unguarded, was with Maacla,
By disguised Persians, Conveyed away.

That was the reason, they so soon took wing,
To bear her Trophy to their Pagan King.
I must prepare some fit Ambassador,
To offer Peace, and Ransom pay for her.

This is the Plot, which we so much did feat;
You still did slight, and was so loath to hear.
For such small Numbers, durst not us invade,
Without the Promise of some Traitor's Aid.
But some kind Accident their Purpose broke;
Perhaps the Place, or they the Time mistook:
Or when they saw, we such Resistance made,
The Rebels fainted, and th'Invaders fled.

The Lord Polidore, with all his Popish-Train,
No longer can their Innocence maintain.
We'bserv'd his Party scattered up and down;
And whilst we Fought, stood idle Lookers on.
But when their Drums commanding Voice they heard,
They observed that Call, and to one Bulk repaired:
And in a trice, Two large Battalions made;
Which Percas, and Zolazer, were to Head.
Who without doubt, Yours, and Our Fate designed,
Had not the Persians Quickness stopped their Hand.

No more, my Lords! These large Complaints are vain,
Against these real, harmless, honest Men.
This is the Issue of your Old Deceit,
To stamp the Name of Justice on your Hate.
That Envy's the Soul's Plague, we hence may know;
You open these Ulcers, to infect me too.
Whence else these Guilty Blushes? --

-- If I Blush,
'Tis because you don't, whilst you upbraid me thus!
Who for your Ease, so many Racks have known;
And for your Safety, did no Danger shun.
But if your former Love does weary grow,
And you believe, you've worn me long enough;
I am willing, to be laid aside. --
But the Gods can bear me Witness, that I know
No Hate for Them, besides my Love for You:
Nor can I Love you Both, 'less I could be
Stupid as You, or Treacherous as They.

He speaks not half, what we can make appear;
Too much we know, and yet much more we fear:
Their Absence too, does some Suspicion show;
They fear Guilts past, or else are acting New.
Had n't they been Conscious, they had hastened now,
To help us wreath a Chaplet for your Brow.
But th'know, they cannot, without Blushing, own
Your Courage, since it must Condemn their own.

No more! I cannot yet suspect their Worth,
'Till Time, its wonted Off-spring Truth, brings forth:
But was this true; in the Birth of a Disease,
No'ne uses the Extremest Remedies.

But when that's sudden, so the Cure must be;
When you're surprised, 'twill be too late to say,
Your Fears have been too tardy: For, you know,
Treasons, as soon as thought, to Action go;
Tho few believe it, 'till they feel the Blow.

Keep to your selves, your Fears and Jealousy:
Guarded with Innocence, I stand as free,
As one who from a Rock, on Storms looks down,
And Laughs to see poor Angry Neptune frown.
Since Fear, and Guilt, but the same thing appear,
When we want Guilt, it is a Sin to Fear.

However the Pope's Divinity appear,
I'm sure, his Politics know how to Err:
Else, had our Harvest to a Ripeness grown,
E're he had sent his Slaves to Cut it down;
We had not lost the Queen; Nor had She bin
Her self a Saint, e're she had seen you King.

What may we Trust? we even our selves Deceive;
And Chance is all the Certainty we have.

I'll neither Trust, nor Fear, that Bug-bear, Fate!
That Brat of Fancy! Reason now shall uncreate.
Blindly, at random, she her Arrows throws;
But Man's own giddy Rashness meets the Blows.
Man's Follies are the Lusters of her Crown,
Whose ai'ry Temples now we'll batter down;
And be our selves, what once she seemed to be:
Make Princes Homage to our Altars pay.
We'll by our Plots, and Policy, defeat
Fate; and, in spite of its Decrees, grow Great.
Wonder shall call us Parent; and we will
Extract us Blessings from the worst of Ill.
Some Embalm'd-Head, (as I advised before)
Brought to the Prince --

-- Fear not our Art, or Power.
To manage it, swifter than Thought we'll fly.

Farewell; And may each Saint your Guardian be.

These State-Affairs have so disturbed my Brain.

Which Wine, and Whores, must set in Tune again.

But to Cosmelia, I must first repair,
T'observe how she doth her new Bondage bear.

Zolazer Signs as follows:

COme let's drink, and drench our Souls;
And drown our Troubles in our Bowls!
For the pretty Buds and Flowers,
Ne'er smell Sweet, 'till drunk with Showers.
Come let's Sport, Embrace, and Kiss!
For Nature dictates nought but this:
And she did keep her Maiden-head,
But 'till she was to Ripeness bred.
Look on the little Ant, and Be!
Those Epicures of Luxury!
Who'n Summer toil, and break their Sleep,
That the may a Jollier Christmas keep.
'Tis the Arabian-Bird alone
Lives Chaste, because there is but One:
But had Nature made them Two,
They would like Doves, and Sparrows, Do.
WHat numerous Mountains of Perplexities,
Has every Minute of these Three tedious Winters;
Unloaded on my poor Heart?
Since (my Husband being Compelled to Travel,
By the last Commands of his unkind Father)
Polidorus inveigled me into his Snaky Arms?
Those now-abhord, and loathed Embraces,
Which have blasted all the Title I had to Virtue.
Oh my dear Miletas! Oh thy unfortunate Cosmelia!
Heaven only knows, with what Racks and Tortures,
I now both Forsake, and Pollute thy Bed!
Polidore's Unkindness, mingling with my Guilt,
Feed like Vultures, on my wretched Soul.
For when I grew sensible of my Guilt,
And Polidore understood, I designed to leave him;
Then did he begin to show his Cruelty;
And here Confines me in a Man's Habit.
Ye Gods! Because I Repented me of the Sin,
Must I be thus Punish't?
Have n't yet the Gods all their Revenge employed?
And my long Sufferings, yet their Fury Cloyed?
My Pain does all the World besides, set free:
Envy can have no other Mark, but Me.
What! Always Melancholy! Come Cosmelia, into my Arms!
And there I'll at once, squeeze out all your Sighs;
And mould 'em into pleasant, and airy Raptures.

How vainly does the World Experience prize,
Seeing our own Ruin only, makes us wise!
We rashly purchase Change at any Rate;
Then what that Rashness cause, we call our Fate.
Not Fate, but we procure our wretched Doom:
And Fancy makes our Paradise, our Tomb.
Else had I not been Ruined in your Arms,
Nor suck the Philtre of your cruel Charms;
I'd not been Conquered by your Serpent-Spell,
Whose Venom made this poisoned Belly swell!
But now, too late I see my Crime; and may
Torrents of Tears wash this foul Spot away.

Was not my Iron Heart with Resolutions,
Made inaccessible, and shot-free;
Her Charms of Virtue would Compassion move,
And turn my Lust, into a servile Love.

When first my Heart, and Wealth, you made your Prize,
Made me grow Monstrous under this Disguise;
Your Love and Constancy, your Perjured Oath,
Assured me then, tho now you're False to Both.

These Tears, Cosmelia, unbecoming are;
In these clear Mirrors, your weak Sex appear.
And since you here, a Masc'line Garb put on,
Because I would have you, and your Sex, unknown;
You must throw off the servile Bands of Fear,
And swell your Soul, fit to that Garb you wear.

There's a Messenger below, from a Person of Quality:
'Tis Pedro, Sir, Miletas his Servant.

Heaven forbid! Then surely's Master's come to Town:
My guilty Fears do shrewdly Prophecy.
Now had I rather go to meet a Basilisk,
Or my Old Mothers Ghost.

HOnest Pedro! What News bring thou?

My Master, Sir, is newly come to Town;
And is in hast, to Kiss your Lordship's Hand.

Prithee give my Service to him; and let him know,
I will immediately wait on him.
But what Disgust, Pedro, did Rome give thy Lord?
We wondered, to hear he made such hast from thence.

'Tis so full of Cardinals, Monks, Friars, Jesuits,
And a Damned Company of I know not what, Religious Orders;
That I could find no Place for an Honest Man, there.
The first Thing I took notice of, was
The Cruel Usage of a poor Country-man of ours,
That was Bandied and Blown up, on various Engines
Of Fire-works:
And only for saying, His Holiness was a Cuckold;
Because the Church of Rome, which is called his Spouse,
Is still Committing of Adultery.
Whereas we in Georgia, make nothing of calling him,
The Horned Beast! the Whore of Babylon! Anti-Christ!
And more such Names, than he pretends Right to Kingdoms.

I suppose, young Man, you'll find the Case something altered.

But I wish, some body would call my Master, Cuckold;
So he would inform him, who made him so:
For his Lady (he being Absent) was Decoyed away;
And has taken with her, what e're was Portable.
Vast Sums of Gold, Jewels; and what concerns him most,
The Writings of his whole Estate.
And, Sir, he's now Rich, only in your Friendship.

She Hates me now, more than she Loved me once:
And if she hears, her Husband's come to Town,
She'll use some Stratagem, to Betray me to him.
I must contrive some Means, to stop her Breath;
And my own Safety purchase by her Death.

OH Heaven! Is this the Product of cursed Natures
Cruel Bounty?
Must I pay Homage to her Deity,
For being distinguisht from the Toad, and Adder?
And at once, emulate the Prerogative,
Their uncurbed Career of Pleasures seem to claim?
Had she suffered me to Sleep peaceably,
In my first nat'ral, earthy Being:
And not 'waken'd me, with the Corroding Blisters
Of a Rational Soul; I had not felt
The Thorny Pressures, of th'insulting World;
But with Atlas, been insensible of the Weight of Heaven.
But now, into what rugged Oceans
Of Perplexities, am I still plunged?
And yet Cruel Fortune, will not suffer me
Quite to sink.
Oh, my dear Miletas! Oh, my unfortunate Miletas!
To think of Thee, is all the Taste I have of Pleasure:
And yet, Heaven knows, what a Bitterness that strikes!
Methinks, my Fancy seems to gaze after
The faint Idea of some unusual Rapture;
As if my Guardian-Angel was Conducting
Thee to my Prison.
But tho awake, I can't Enjoy thy Charms;
I'll go to Sleep, and Dream thee in my Arms.

EAch Soldiers Faith's to my Inspection known;
And I've one Thousand of 'em made our own.
Those, Sir, according to your Wise Command,
I've tied fast to us, with an Oaths firm Band.

I've strictly viewed the Products of your Care;
So many I found Safe, and did the rest Cashier:
And to our Party such Directions given,
That by their very Crimes, they'll merit Heaven!
You'll wonder, if I'll make our Wenching be,
Both our Religion, and our Policy.
For when the Women yield their Hearts our Prey,
They'll our Religion too, as soon Obey.
And that, when they are safely made our own,
They'll like the Pox, spread thorough their whole Town.
So shall our Empires un-seen Greatness grow:
Yet that's no Sin, whence good Effects do flow.

You make Hell Heaven; Change the Decrees of Fate,
E're one damned Whores Religion you beget.
Our Plot Discretions, Faith alone should trust;
Not every Drab, and Common-Shore of Lust.
But I must follow, where you're pleased to steer.
I am your Servant, not your Councellor.
But amongst the various Forms of our Designs,
We must contrive Revenge for those Divines;
Sanco, Piazer, Lezdros, and the rest
Of that Black Tribe, which does the Land infest.
Against our Church, they've several Volums writ;
Where Truth and Learning's chequered over with Wit:
And in their Pulpits, all our Cheats display;
Take off our Masks, and show us to the Day.
But we've already Harnessed in our Toil,
Piazer, that great Champion of the Soul.
Oh! Here he comes! You'll see him Court his Doom;
And like the Swan, Sing his own Requiem!

Since you're the Devil's Agent here, in vain,
We'll send you Guilty to him back again.
There, we'll consent, you our Contrivance tell;
And prove, our Tortures Rival those of Hell!

Kind Heaven, which sent me Captive to these Chains;
Has lent me Patience, to o're-come their Pains.
Methinks, I'm now much Livel'er grown; as 'twere
To gain more Time, what Heaven sends, to bear.
I'd wish to Live, but to disclose our Wrong:
But Heaven may give my Martyred Blood a Tongue!

This stupid Heretic, calls Heaven his own;
But we'll find Tortures, which will change his Tone.
Fetch Brimstone! Fire! Gun-powder! Pitch! And all
Death's fierce Ingredients, to his Funeral call!
Thou first shalt Suffer this Worlds Tortures over;
Then headlong fall to Hell, to Suffer more!

Your various Tortures, you prepare in vain;
For they are my Divertisement, not Pain.
I restless lie for lingering Bliss! Thus strange!
Heaven does to Virtue, my Impatience change.
Oh, blessed Disquietness! Such Longings please!
We find in Noble Discontents, some Ease.

E're our Designs on Prosperous 'pinions rise,
Salvirus too, must fall our Sacrifice.

'Tis best, let neither for his Partner stay;
They may walk hand-in-hand, in the Broad-way.

No; we th'Maturity of Things must wait;
And for Salvirus, lay a Private Bait.
A Cottage may, with unheard-Noise, fall down;
Whilst th'Noise of greater Ruins will be known.
There does a Potion in his Chamber lye,
In which I will his speedy Death convey:
That shall all Thoughts of Treachery expel;
And fill that Room, where his Cursed Sold does dwell.

Since this close Place only our selves contain,
Our unheard-Cries but Echo back your Pain!
Come Glorious Soul make hast!
Let me Conduct you to Eternal Rest!
You Linger, as if you despaired to gain
Any other Bliss, besides Content with Pain.
But Heaven, whose chiefest Care you are,
Does all its Happiness prepare,
For to Reward those Torments now you bear.
Such little Pain as this,
Is to give Relish to your Future Bliss!
And your pure Breast lies panting at your Death,
But to improve the Heavens with your Breath.
And Heaven, whose chiefest Care you are,
Does all, c.

What sudden Ecstasy, Sir, has hurried you
Into this wild Demeanour of your Looks?
Was you thus stricken with a Planet? or have you seen
A Gorgon' s-Head? You thus seem Metamorphosed
Into a Marble-Statue.

Do those Mariners, whom a furious Wrack
Has rendered equally Unfortunate;
Demand the Cause of each others Extremity!
Your Eyes and Ears must needs be Witnesses,
Of what you seem to doubt --
And did you retain the least Sense, you may
By your own, measure my Discontentedness.

I've neither heard, or seen any Reason,
Why I should be Discomposed;
Besides the Suspense hanging on your Dubious Lips.

Then angry Heaven did cast a Mist between your Eyes,
And that Glorious Spirit, (which but now
Warbl'd forth an Heavenly Anthem) but to continue
Your Artheistical Opinion, of there being
No such Thing.

What now seemed to represent it self to You,
Was but the Effects of your Distempered Brain.
The nobler Part, our Reason, not blind Sense,
Must be Decider of this Mystery.
And did I seem --
To hear, and see, a thousand such Phantasms;
My better Reason will not let me trust
Such treacherous Witnesses. -- But grant, there were
Such things, this Traitor's Ghost we need not fear;
The Dev'l will find him work enough else-where.
His Corps shall in the Dungeon, Prisoner lye,
Whilst his Damned Soul, shall on Hells Gridir'n fry.
Thus my Designs, by Heaven's kind Influence grow
As undiscerned, as th'Cause which made 'em so.
Blood is the Basis of my Rising-state;
I'm Character'd with Blood, in th'Book of Fate:
So am I free from Anxious Care; who know,
What made me Cruel, will preserve me so.

BE not so passionate, my Lord! Let this suffice!
My opinion of your Love and Loyalty,
Is in my heart so deeply rooted,
That all the Winds of Prejudic want Power
To raise a Storm, to shake it.

-- Hold correspondence with the Pope! conspire your Death!
And by such various means Plot the Subversion
Of the established Church and Government!
What? I'm a Beast, a Villain then! a Traitor!
A Monster Africa would blush to own!
If this be true, why live I yet? or sleeps
Heavens Justice? or are Humane Laws too weak?
If my Offence be public, let my Punishment be so;
Or if you think I'm wronged, let my Accusers suffer!
At least, for injuring you, Sir, in your Friend.
So I dare call my self; for, were I as guiltless
Of all other Crimes as o^ these false Whispers,
Heaven ne'er did entertain more spotless Innocence than mine.
Were their whole Bodies stuck with Eyes, thick as
Was Argus head; And all the walls of my House
Transparent as the Air; nay were their Ears
Long enough to reach my inner Closet,
I would not whisper any Thought, to be
A second Jupiter.

To day they parted from me, swollen with Discontent,
To see me slight their too officious Care;
I calling it Malice or at least Mistake.
And this my Lord I'll promise you; if I find
That Prejudice gave birth to these Reports,
The Authors (were they a thousand times my Brothers)
Should fall a Sacrifice to Justice for you.

Would you but let me know their names -- I would --
But ye, good Gods, resign me all your patience,
And vindicate my Innocence; lest when
My Injuries are heard, the world may think
That you want Will, or Power to do Justice.

Then can't I be believed? --
Phoebus! What harm did I thy Godhead do,
That thus Cassandra's Curse should me pursue?
The Trojans thought she dreamed; nor did just Fate
Revenge too soon, because they believed too late.
But Heaven prevent the Omen here! and call
Back your Revenge; though by a Miracle.
How often have these Knees kissed the cold ground,
Whilst to the Prince I showed my Countries Wound!
Then I even wept, till Showers of Tears did seem
Rather to change my Sex, than soften Him.
They blind his Eyes, and will not let him see,
And Seas and Rocks are far less deaf than he.
What News, my Lord? methinks your Eyes declare
Some Discontent, which almost looks like Fear.
For Passions angry Torrents overflow,
And Neptune sits a storming on your Brow.

Sir! If my Looks such angry Billows wear,
'Tis cause my Shipwrecked Country labours there.
You may the Cause in the Effect descry,
For nothing less could raise my Grief so high.
The Prince still sleeps; a Lethargy like death
Will seal his Eyes, until it stops his Breath.
Polidore's the evil Guardian of his Mind,
Knows his soft hours, and free access can find.
Has fathomed every corner of his Heart.
And new Impressions to his Soul imparts.
Hence through the Court such treach'rous nets are spread,
That only Romans must those pavements tread.
All Offices that Faction has engrossed,
And they grow greatest that can flatter most.
They do with Oaths, and Execrations own
The Truth of our reformed Religion,
Whilst either Rome's they practise, or else none.
Ye Gods! that our unblemished Church should be,
An holy Mask for their black Perjury!
Yet with such Paint they shadow the Deceit,
That the good Prince will not believe the Cheat.
They have such Poison for his Reason found,
No Antidote can reach to cure the Wound.
Corky and light our best Advice appears,
Which fleets but on the Surface of his Ears,
Not reach his Heart --

-- Heaven op'e his Eyes, that he
At once their Treasons, and our Faith may see.

But for Salvirus too, I needs must grieve,
He was too honest, and too good to live.
His Loyalty was all the Fault he knew,
And that will be the end of me and you.
They know we into all their Actions pry,
And Treason through their closest Vizards see.
But Fate does the Prospect of our dangers show,
Not for prevention but to edge the blow;
All care is vain when Power is once denied,
And Courage faints, when all it's hands are tied.

Yet still the Prince with Reverence we must name,
His too good Nature, not himself we blame.
He thinks it near unpossible that they
Who owe him theirs, should take His Life away.
They do with him to our Devotions come,
Droll, and protest against the See of Rome.
And none like them, Faith and Allegiance vow;
Nay seem to pers'cute their own Party too.
But did the Prince believe things as they are,
He'd soon these Vipers from his Bosom tear.
These Vipers, which would Natures Laws betray,
And through their Mothers Bowels force their way.

True; thus disguised they cheat him, for they know
He hates the Papist, when he knows him so.
Nor can they hope to engage him to forgo
That firm Religion, he was born unto.
Whose Ancestors, two Centuries, or more,
Withstood Rome's secret Crafts, and open Power.
But these last Herds increased we know not how,
Grown up like Mushroms in a night or two.
Queen Ceteka was the first one of note,
Georgia produced; cursed Ceteka! that Root!
That Womb of Fiends! a sort of Africa Dung,
From whence so many Thousand Monsters sprung!
Yet she with all her Jesuitick Train,
Could not the Prince to her Persuasion gain.
He stood unshaken, and continues so;
But oh the late ill Action he did do!
Th'Allowance of his Mothers Relic here,
(I would not rail, but yet can scarce forbear)
Was the severest Blow our Church e're felt.
But what could n't Polidore persuade him to,
Zolazer, and the rest of that false Crew?
This is his greatest, nay his only Guilt.
No other Blemish in his Virtue lies,
Though Envy searched it with its thousand Eyes.

Unhappy State of those who Scepters sway!
None are so chained to faithless Friends as they!
That knowledge which does all their Actions guide,
Through the Eyes and Ears of others is conveyed,
And does a Tincture from each Channel take,
Which either private Ends or Flattery make.
Nor is't an easy Province to remove
These spacious Objects of a Princes Love.
For the Politician, like a well-grow'n Oak,
Fixes his Sturdy Root near some strong Rock;
Where firmly placed, it even the Thundrer dares,
And spreads, whilst Tempests rattle round his Ears.

For my long Absence this just Curse I see,
She's either dead, or fled to search for Me.
But that none knew of her, does me amaze;
Can Lamps depart and no one see the Blaze?
If Heaven, when Kings and Kingdoms do expire,
Emblems with blazing-Stars, their Funeral Fire,
Even for her private Fate what could suffice
Less than the Tributes of a thousand Eyes?
Sure, was she murdered, we each Muse might see
Weep on her Tomb, the Aonian Fountain dry.
And the grieved Sun would a black Robe put on,
And such a Loss discover with a Groan.
Yet though my Trouble for her Loss is great,
I hardly can be angry with that Fate
Which was the Cause; and did persuade my Stay;
For thence I saw the Cheats of Popery.
I went and heard what Wonders Rome could tell,
Then came and weighed 'em in an English scale.
England, to thee this happy cure I owe,
And by this means Georgia its safety too.
Thy purer Air my sickly Faith refined
From Popish Superstitions; and I find
Those Characters of Treason disappear,
Which interwoven with my Education were.
Hence on the wings of Loyalty I fly,
For to prevent my Countries Destiny.
I'll to the Prince, and all their Treasons show,
When they design, and how to give the blow.
may I trust my Eves!
A sudden ecstasy dazzles my belief,
And my excess of Joy makes it self less.
Methinks our throbbing hearts meet, and catch at each other,
As if they had an Instinct to incorporate.

Did we longer dwell in each others arms,
Our Bodies, perhaps, might melt; and as
The amorous Nymph and her Hermaphroditus, mix in one.
But nothing can make our hearts more congenial,
Than they are.

To me, this happy interview,
Welcome as that of Blessed Angels is
Who still come loaded with new Heavens of Happiness.
Low as despair your absence made me lie,
Till your kind presence mounts me up as high;
So Flowers in Storms faint on their sickly Beds,
Till Heavens kind Beams prop up their drooping heads.

Sir! If such Charms my welcome Presence wear,
Perhaps 'tis because some happy News sits there.
What Fortune bids me speak, my Looks may show,
Whilst weighty Joys make the right Organ slow.

What! is our Fortune (made by'ts bounty poor)
Yet grown recruited to oblige us more?
Has here the Pope any more work to do?
Does not all Georgia stoop to kiss his Toe?
He (who procured it) does expect to bear
No small advantage from the Persian War.

Though with our private aid, they stormed the Town,
They were repulsed; and Ceteba alone
To Persia was a Trophy brought; where she
For her Religion did a Martyr die.

She was a Saint, whose Soul was so sublime,
That Separation could not more refine;
Her death I fear has weakened our Design.

No, like the Phoenix, she resigned her breath.
Her teeming Dust gave a more active Birth
To new Designs, which I was Midwife to.

With haste the meaning of this Riddle show.

Four Jesuits by my advice a Stranger slew,
Whom not the King from his dead Mother knew.
Each knee this as her Relic does adore,
And most believe the very Touch a Cure.
The Prince its keeping to these Jesuits gave,
Who annual Stipends for their Craft receive.
This Miracle you'll in our Temple see
In Pomp, above the Athenian Deity.
Whose Rays will soon, as far as Phoebus shine,
And draw whole Nations to its painted Shrine.
Thousands already on this Wonder wait,
As an Asylum where they 'll fly from Fate.
Where to these Odours as a Saint they bow,
They 'll strive to tread those ways which made her so.

But how will this pretence the Touch endure?
Or can a mere Belief create a Cure?
Emp'ricks may sooth the Admiring Crowd to buy,
But time and practice will the Cheat descry.

True; but these Doctors for all cures excel;
They'll to its Function the loath Soul compel.
Then into Natures strange Meanders pry,
And her declining frame re-edifie.
Yet all, this Relic as their Doctress greet,
'Tis thought the Centre where all healing Virtues meet.

But some Diseases will all Art overcome.

Such they pretend she with dark threatenings dooms
To die; and Cures long lingering in dispute,
They to their Patients heinous Sins impute.

Like Gods you make the servile World obey,
Frame new Religions, and each conscience sway.

Did Jove the ancient world but thus command,
His Sceptre had not trembled in his hand.
All Nations had not known one Common Grave,
Nor proud Mount I'd been rivaled by a Wave.
These Parts where stiff-neck'd Zealots only grew,
We gently softened, and then thought to bow.
A Cross or Image lately so abhorred,
Is now as much as Persia's God adored.

Hark, Sir! Deaths harsher Trumpet wounds my Ear,
An Engine made to strike the Soul with Fear.
By these Death-Calls I've 'nto such Fits been thrown,
That others Passing-Bells I've thought my own.
They to my Heart such wounds of Conscience bear,
As if not written, but engraven there.

I too did in these Errors run astray,
Till the Pope taught me a more soothing way.
Ensuing Pains all sensual Pleasures bring,
But this has Charms will blunt the sharpest sting.

I bring ill News; Salvirus (Sir) is dead.

Salvirus dead! it is impossible.
I saw him yesternight all Life and Spirit,
As if there were no Empire there for Death.
But, for prevention he designed this Morning,
To take a Potion.

Even that Prevention did include his Death.
And Tobias the Apothecary
Is apprehended for his Poys'ner.
And, (Sir) I'm sent to let you know
His Corps require a speedy Burial,
And wait only on your Coming.

Farewell Salvirus! since it must be so.
Sure none can guess how much I feel thy Blow.
But for thy Murderer I'll soon prepare
Revenge, which shall my Constancy declare.
Zolazer gives what we ask Heaven for
Sure he with Sylla's vengeful Ghost confers
Which might contemplate high'r in Policy;
But none delights in humane Blood like he.
He'll climb up Times Abode, and 's Since command
What Ears to crop and what are fit to stand.

Since we are now in a full Synod met,
Let each relate what News he brings from Fate.
Why the Revengeful Furies are so slow,
Or if the Prince is ripe for Death or no.
Whether the fatal Sisters cease their Strife,
And all agree to cut his thread of Life.

Let this suffice! we do his Death decree,
And Thursday night shall be the Massacre.
I've hired two Ruffians armed with Cruelty,
As well by Nature as, Religious Tie,
Sworn then to give the fatal Stab, or die.
Nor need we fear, he can the Blow escape,
Whilst fettered in the drowsy Arms of Sleep.

To all our Party we've this notice sent,
Then to be armed to expect the Event.
And if the Murder on the Prince succeed,
All Georgia in the same hour shall bleed.
We do expect ten thousand Persians aid;
Which Montaxerxes does design to head.
They'll come with armed Resolutions over,
Now to regain their Credit lost before.
Their Magazine you know we have engrost,
Nor was my pains amongst the Soldiers lost.
So that we need no opposition fear,
Besides the Citt's, made valiant by Despair.
But them whilst flaming Houses do surprise,
We will knock down like Candle-dazled Flies.
Legions of Angels will our Armies lead,
And every Saint by Intercession aid.
Nay, very Pictures will our Cause maintain,
Nor sleeping Heroes wear their Swords in vain.

Our Emissaries scattered up and down.
Assure our work is to perfection grown.
that several thousands are obliged by Vow,
Both to be secret and assistant too.
And those mean few we thought unfit to trust,
We hope to find as forward as the first.

We did the various Seed of Faction sow,
And chose such Soil in which it best might grow.
Whispering Rebellion to each listening Ear,
Rubbed their old Sores, and taught 'em what to fear.
Some Discontents, and Terrors of the Law.
And some fair Prospects of Preferment draw;
Whilst other tossed on Billows of Despair,
Meet serene Thoughts and quiet Harbour here.
Then we have artful Engines framed to squeeze
Large Stipends from their tender Consciences.
And Surgeon-like, corroding Salves apply,
To enhance the value of our Remedy.
Hence came our Wealth, and our proud Colleges
Owe both their Splendour, and their Birth, to these.

To our late wants, above their powers, they bring,
Each one his meritorious Offering:
Misers unlock their Darling Coffers now:
And to our Banks their mighty Treasures flow.
Women with Jewels golden Wedges buy,
Or with their Household Plate our Mints supply.
Tankards, Salts, Candlesticks, and all's our own,
To Baby's little Cawdle-dish and Spoon.
Thus furnished does our vast Exchequer shine,
Inlay'd with our new counterfeited Coin.
Good as the best it will our business do,
And buy what deaths we please, for Kings and Kingdoms too.

Now have I seen the bottom of the Plot.
And Georgia falls, if I secure it not.
So certain are they, so full blown their hope;
They think Heaven can't their Hellish Projects stop.
Yet the Scene must be changed; and they betrayed
To feel those Racks they for their Country made.
Morinus and Brizander I have sent,
To give the Prince notice of my Intent.

The Temple Door immediately will be open,
And thousands of Diseased Persons by this time throng
From all parts of the World to adore our Relic.
We have anointed its Face, and set behind it
A Chaffin-dish of Coals, to make it seem
To sweat, and weep, by melting of the Liquor.
Our Springs, our Wheels, and such like Engines
Are of great Use to make it move, and speak.
We must likewise pretend, that every night,
The Relic, by a Miracle, provides
More Wax, than all the Lights and Flame consume.
So that the Tapers in the Morning weighed,
Prove oft times heavier than before.

That real faith by which we Heaven may gain
Seems placed afar, and Doubts are strewed between.
Whilst things most false, soon our Belief create,
And depraved Nature carries on the Cheat.

If Truth has any Power, or if there be
A Certainty in Demonstration,
Your Reason will not let you doubt that now
Which your belief so long fainted under.

Doubt it? no:
'Tis Truth enough to make an Atheist worship it.
A thousand Circumstances, though 't wants not any,
Offer themselves, to guard your Evidence.
But th'horridness of it so frights my Patience,
That I can't hear the rest without turning Fury.
Ye Gods!
Have I been led so long, so willingly,
Unto the Brinks of Ruin?
Loyalty, whither art thou fled! or was there
Ever any more, than what lives in you,
Since Adam lost his Innocence?
Frail man! what art thou? of what Use thy Reason?
Dote not on that; for 'tis thy only Misery.
'Twas that made envious Beelzebub a Rival
To our first Parent; who searching his ambitious Soul,
Sowed Treason there, not to be rooted out
Whilst yet there lives one Seed of him.
If Polidore is false, whom may I trust?

Even me, Great Sir, and several thousands more,
Who for our Prince and Churche's safety,
Will gladly sacrifice our Lives and Fortunes.
I'm now new framed; and moulded to another Thing.
And I hope my Loyalty may not seem the cheaper
For springing out of Penitence.

It should be dearer rather; and he that but reflects
On the Cause, and Nature of your Discovery,
Must needs confess
You are so far from meriting the least Blame,
That you seem particularly sent by Providence,
To be your Countrey's Guardian Angel.

You've made a full and clear discovery,
And unlock't all their Stygian Secrets.
But how your Lordship came conscious of their Practices,
I have not yet had cognisance.

My Father, some three years since (as Polidore is now)
In Georgia, was the Pope's chief Agent.
And trusted me with all he did of Moment.
But on his Death-bed --
(Reflecting on the horror of his past Crimes,)
In his Conscience felt such Racks and Tortures,
(The wages of his Murders, Treasons, and Perjury)
That he began to question that Religion,
Whose Essence does consist in such black Principles;
And to prevent my being farther interested
In the carry'ng on of this Conspiracy,
On's Blessing, charged me to repair unto
Some Kingdom, where the Reformed Religion flourishes.
Soon after his death, I performed my Promise,
And having slightly viewed some Countries on the way,
I came to England.
Where a years conversation with the Doctors there
Made me become a Proselyte to that Church.
There all the Cheats of Rome I saw displayed,
And the Popish Plots, which fill their Chronicles,
Made me begin to pity this poor Kingdom,
And use what haste I could to stop its ruin.
At my Return I thought it necessary
To wear my former Face, and mix again
With those lost Villains; and run all their Mazes with 'em,
In order to find out their subtle Roads,
And windings into Woods of Night and Darkness,
And I suppose I've don't effectually;
For the Truth of those black Treasons I have told you,
Not my self alone, but two other Conspirators
(Who desire as yet to have their Names concealed)
On the assurance of their Pard'ns will justify.

On a Princes word they shall be given 'em.
But as for you, My Lord, I know not what to offer you.
Ask what Georgia can bestow, 'tis yours.
She cannot be too bountiful to him that saved her.

It was but natural to save a Life, so near
And necessary to us as our Countries.
She is our Common Mother, and commands
Protection from us.
But let's not lose our time in words; the Enemy
Is active, and next Thursday night's the time
Destined for slaughter.
Let Polidore immediately be seized,
Zolazer, and the rest whose Power and Greatness
Render 'em more dangerous.

My Lord! You've spoken my resolution,
A I refer it to your management.
Not only Polydor's Commission,
But after he's condemned, that vast Estate
His Treasons bought, shall help to pay your Loyalty.

Your Bounty, Sir, surprises me, it is
So great, and unexpected.

Your Merits do exceed all Bounty, and this
Is but a glimpse of what your Country owes you.

Miletas! Let me kiss thy hand! thou Saviour of Georgia!
What Honour hast thou purchased? what Voices, Titles,
And Applause through every Street will follow you?
The Citizens will have your Statue raised,
Although thy very name is one; which will be fixed
In the Memory of all succeeding Ages,
And last, whilst Monuments of Brass and Marble
Decay, and crumble to their first Principles.

WHAT soft Ingredients make up Mortality?
Which thus we've Power to melt, and mould into any thing.
Nay, does not Custom teach us to impose
Even on our own belief? and adore Chimera' s?
Methinks 'tis hard to force my self not to acknowledge
A kind of Divinity to that false Relic,
Which owes to our Art its painted Being.

You need not fear to call this Relic as Authentic
As any in Italy, Spain, or Germany can boast of.
What think you of the Hair, Kerchief and Comb,
Nay, the very Shift of the blessed Virgin!
The paring of her Nails, Girdle, Shoes and Slippers;
And all as fresh, as if but new come out of the Shop!

But the several places they are in?

Why? There's the Wonder.
As her Shift in two; and so her Kerchief.
But for her Hair, no body knows in how many.
And of her milk there remains such an Ocean,
That had her Breasts been bigger than a Cowe's,
And plaid the Nurse all the days of her Life,
She could never have afforded so much.

Are not Paul's and Peter's Bodies showed entire at Rome,
One Moiety at St. Peter's, the other at St. Paul's?
Yet all other Churches dedicated to 'em,
Pretend to have some, or other of their Relics.

But of John the Baptist they make a very Cerberus,
For less than three Heads shall not serve his Turn.

Though the Scriptures say they were single hearted,
There's Care taken they should not be so body'd.

Then for the Platter in which the Pascal Lamb was eaten,
What lasting Metal was it made of?
'Tis strange, it being concealed so many hundred years,
It should thus pop up its head on a sudden.
And know as well whose goods it was,
As if the Goldsmith had averred to whom he sold it.
But what is stranger yet, they show it
At Rome, at Genoa, and at Orleanss too.

I've heard of a Monk who pretended,
H' ad brought from the East some of the Sound of the Bells
Which hung in the Temple of Solomon.
And that they show at Jerusalem, a three cornered Stone,
Assuring 'm 'tis the same of which King David said,
The stone which the Builders refused, is become
The head of the Corner.

Hail glorious Mirror! in whose sacred Rays,
Declining Nature basks her sickly Days;
Where Aesculap'e unties Fates strong Decree,
And Doses gives of Immortality.

Hail happy Fair! in whose ennobled Breast,
Kind Heaven was pleased his glorious Shrine should rest:
Where other Saints the bended Clouds convey:
Whose lofty Spire is made a milky way.
The Skilful'st Angels come Physicians here,
And call this their retiring Hemisphere.

'Tis here Apollo rests his weary Car,
Load'n with what Juice all healing Plants do bear.
Physicians vainly into Nature pry,
Since all its Virtues to this Centre fly.

So, let each Suppliant straight approach this Shrine,
And drossy Nature with a touch refine.
Whilst your Devotion willingly does flow,
Either 'twill find, or else will make it so.

Sure with this Sound --
The Heavenly Quire their rival Voices mix,
And with their Concord the charmed Planets fix.
Orpheus who gave Woods Ears, made proud Oaks bow,
And with his Lute pierced the dark Shades below;
Who made Rocks dance, admiring this, would throw
Away his Instrument, and fall a dancing too.

Here are the Gloves of Hildeontus, which (he going to say Mass)
Hung on a Sun-Beam for two hours together.
And mought have hung 'm longer, if 't had pleased him,
For the Sun-Beam waited till he put them on again.

Here's the Jaw-bone of St. Patrick!
He was a notable Saint; and as Jossaline tells us,
Did not only at one time fast forty Days,
But an whole Lent another time.
And grew fatter on it too.

'Tis as pretty a way to gather Flesh,
And save Charges as can be wished.

He had more ways than this one to be frugal;
A pretty Trick of this Kind he learned when but a Boy.
He picked up Ice in his Hat to make a Fire with.
Could feed fourteen thousand men with one Cow,
And that cost him nothing but the praying for.
Nay, there was a Discourse,
That the Cow the next day was alive again.

Here's the Shin-bone of St. David, Patron of the (Welshmen.
It is most credibly reported of him,
That whilst he was preaching in a British Synod,
The Earth rose under's Feet, till it became an Hill,
From whence his Voice was heard like a Trumpet.
Nay St. Ketigern (though a Scotch-man) flying into Wales,
Had the same miraculous Gift of Pulpit-making.
And many are of the Opinion, that Wales at first, became
For this Reason, so filled with Mountains.

This drowns the Noise of Don Quixot's Feats,
And is so extravagant a Romance; that it must owe
It's whole Invention to Bacchus his Orgies.

Here's the Picture of the Vestal Velaria,
Whose one hand seems to hold Water in a Sieve,
Whilst to other with a Girdle makes a Ship follow it.
Then here's the original Picture of St. Dominick,
Who writ Books no Fire could burn.
He could hang in the Air like a Bird,
Transubstantiate Worms into Pearls.
Force the Dev'l to hold a Candle till 't had burnt his Fingers,
And change the Sex of a Girl, into that of a Boy.
Here's the real girdle of the Blessed St. Francis,
Which being dipped in water, cures all Diseases.
Beatrix had an happy Proof of it.
Being delivered of a Boy dead four days in her Belly.
His nimbleness was such that ha's saved many
Who were already fallen from the Top of an high Loft
Before he was sent for.

Here's the Virgin's Image which was brought from Guardia.
It keeps off Whores, and perfumes what comes near it.
There's another of hers, once adored in Sozopolis.
Which sweats out of it's hand a Medicinal Oil,
And discovers it self, by its own Light.
It crookt its Finger to hold this Ring on,
And held out it's hand, to strike a Nun who affronted it.

I hope none here questions but these Relics and Images
Are instrumental to great Blessings.
That our Churches and Altars are consecrated
After such a manner,
That the very Coming near 'em forgives some Sins.
That the Sound and ringing of Bells,
If christened after our way, have much Virtue.
Holy Medals, Agnus Dei's, Blessed Grains,
Privileged Altars, Beads, and Rosaries,
Holy Oil, Tapers, Branches, Ashes, Crosses.
And the three Sorts of Holy Water
Do work supernatural Effects.

These are their Tools and Impliments,
The Rich Furniture of the Roman Church.

You must believe each of these to be happy Instruments
To keep Houses and Vineyards, and to keep off Devils,
To give Women an easy Labour; to procure
Good Husbands for Maidens, and kill them which are not so.
They can sink Ships, rout Armies,
Raise Storms, Thunder and Hail, as there is occasion.

I verily believe their Tricks are as effectual this way,
As any Horse-shoe nailed on the door, is against Witches.
Well! Cornelius Agrippa was but a Bungler to 'em;
So many ways they have to send the Devil packing,
That 'tis a marvel he should e're come near 'em.
But such as these his Juggling Feats appear,
And those he is not such a Fool to fear.

Perhaps, amongst ye, some may yet retain
Imperfect Notions of your former pain.
Know, 'tis your Sins a present Cure impede,
Which by our Prayers, in time, may be allayed.
But you who are; and you --
Who hope to find a rescue from your smart.
First pay your Offerings here, and then depart.

I must implicitly such Virtue own,
By which I'm turned all Admiration.
My Fettered Tongue wants Active Springs to vent
My Bodi's sudden Ease, and Mind's content.

'Twill with Diseases Natures Passions sway,
And quench those Fires which would her Frame destroy.
There does from hence such sacred Magic flow.
It Conquers us, and makes us Conqueror's too.

My captive Heart throws off its Leaden Chain.

Methinks my Wounds slight and forget their Pain.

I know this new Religion's but a Cheat,
Hells Horrors covered with a gaudy Bait.
But does at present my wounded Conscience ease,
And I am cured though with a worse Disease.
In Pleasures Bosom yet secure I lie,
Whilst with their Salves they my sharp Checks allay.

Was ever man perplexed with women so?
The greatest Plague cursed man was born to know.
There is no Hell, there is no Devil more,
One Moments Pleasure damns our future store.
Our Days and Years their wav'ring Motions drive,
And as in Storms we their tossed Vassals live.
The Thoughts of that Cosmelia plagues me more,
Than all those deep Intrigues of State before.
But if not Flattery nor Threats prevail,
I have a Remedy did never fail.
A private Instrument shall her convey,
To some strange Land, or make her here away.
She's changed her Dress because she thinks he's nigh,
But Death is all the Husbands she shall see.
Thus did your Eyes like glorious Tapers shine,
When first they light into Loves fatal Shrine.
That cruel God my Service does despise,
And I'm no more his Priest but Sacrifice.
Was he as Poets fancy, blind, then should
I undiscerned pass Torments various Road:
For I'm all Love, yet such is my hard Fate,
You who enjoy it, I must seem to hate.
In such a winding Labyrinth I move,
I must prove false to Friendship, or to Love.
Think on those Vows I to your Husband made,
And how our Love that Friendship has betrayed!
His Presence does my former guilt renew,
And makes me willing, Dear, to part with you.
Let me secure you in some Foreign Land,
From the Revenge of your raged Husband's Hand.
It is the best expedient you can choose,
Lest whilst you find him, your own Life you lose.
Wait in the passage to observe my call.
Perhaps I may discover more --
Bless my Eyes! my Wife! hold! Heavens 'tis she!
I'll back and unfold this dark Mystery.
Under what fatal Planet was I born,
That my sad Heart must never cease to mourn!
'Tis every hour with thousand Tortures slain,
But like Prometheus, still grows fresh for Pain.
Thrice blessed was Nioke, when senseless made,
Whose Marble heart in vain Griefs Powers invade.
Oh! that I might with Bublis melt to Tears,
And gliding, purge me from these drossy Cares:
I could in Neptunes Arms securer lie,
Or in Sol's fi'ry Chariot mount the Sky.
That happy Mansion does no Envy know,
Or if it does, all shall be poured on you.

Do ye think I'm frightened with your Threatenings? No,
I'll be unjust, since you dare call me so.

I your keen Rage and all its Deaths defy,
'Twas Ease, but can't increase my Misery.
'Twill cut the String which holds my Torments weight;
Lethe will drown my Trouble, and your hate.
Death has put off his frighful vizage now,
Whom here I'll meet, and will no farther go.
My Husbands Stars over mine the ascendant gain.
And here detain me with their secret Chain.

Then since such brave Resolves you're pleased to have,
Here you shall stay, and here I'll make your Grave.

Ye Gods! can you these Actions tamely view?
With-hold your Thunder, and do Justice too?
Or have ye sent Me here to give the Blow?

Heaven does, and you my Innocence shall know.
Yet would I willingly deny to clear
My self of what would be your Pain to hear.
But should you now my guiltless Soul force hence,
Yours soon would follow to excuse the Offence.

Therefore no longer, what you know defer.
Nor let Suspense, and Passion, make me err.
How came Cosmelia in your guilty hands?
Why is she fettered with those watery bands?
Thus does the Dev'l and you both tempt one way,
And punish those who do your Charms obey.

Excuse the Unkindness which to her I show,
Since my Excess of Friendship made it so.
You might suspect, were we surprised in Love,
But 't's strange Unkindness Jealousy should move.
This Act which I'll relate, shall provoke more
Your Thanks, than't did your angry Frowns before.
What shall I say? hold! -- Since feigned words I miss,
The Satisfaction you shall have, is -- This
Mercy, though on the worst of men! even me!

Know, by my hand you merit not to die.

Can what is mortal, so much Goodness show?

Yes to my Country, Traitor, but not you.
Here, seize him Guards! and keep him safe, till we
Give Orders for his father Destiny.

Furies! and Hell! you do mistake me sure.
Am n't I your General? --

-- Once Sir you were.

But now the Lord Miletas you obey.

Come! no Disputes, but take him strait away.
The deep Intrigues of your black Treason's known.
And now a Gaol, must serve you for a Throne,
We've Weighty Fetters that will stop the flight
Of your winged Pride, which raised you to that height.

You speak as if you did your self forget.

In Time I saw my Error, you too late.
I could not see my Native Country fall,
And my own self serve at her Funeral.
But did at once (for they together go)
Put off the Papist, and the Traitor too.

Then I'm betrayed! farewell all Titles now,
And ye cursed Devils of Ambition too.
Your Syrene Musick's but an empty Noise,
Gives real Torments, and but painted Joys.
Hence is vain man drawn up aloft, until
His head turns giddy, and his Footsteps reel:
We't Shadows catch, and let the Substance fall.
At once we covet, and we forfeit all.
May I these Offerings here at least bestow,
To touch your Lips, would but profane 'em now.

Oh wretched Woman! Oh unhappy Fate!
Is this the Comfort I came home to meet?
Was it for this I such strict Searches made?
Such Sighs, and mourning to your absence paid?
No; when I grieved your Loss, I did not fear
My finding you would thus increase my Care.
Now am I troubled, so perhaps are you,
Fate sent me to prevent the Adulterers Blow.
Else to the Shades, you might with him repair,
To mingle Souls, as you did bodies here.
Then fly my Sight. -- lest Passion make me do
What he -- but bless me heaven with Patience now.

I know my Blood is due for your Offence,
But would not have it stain my Innocence.
This hand shall do it, if you speak the Word,
So you at parting one kind Look afford.
But that, alas, I know you will not give
For only that would make me wish to live.

She may repent; and I begin to grieve
For my harsh Language -- Oh she seems to faint.
Rise up Cosmelia! and thy Fears remove.
Thou doest my Pity, more than Anger move.
My absence, and those Flatteres he did frame,
Do at once you excuse, and sentence him.

My parting Soul does to this Sound return,
And all my Faculties revive from their cold Urn.

This is to desire you to give notice to the Prince that his Mother with my
self were no sooner arrived at Persia, but she refusing to own the Mahumetan
Religion, received a Crown of Martyrdom. But her Body by my Persuasion being
permitted to be embalmed, is yet kept unburied in Expectation of a Ransom c.

Her Body in Persia! and by a Ransom
To be redeemed!
To what a Chain of Miracles am I linked!

I know it to be her hands; and searching Polidor's Papers,
I found this wrapped up in the same Packet
With the Bull, and that Letter of the Pope's
Instructions, which before I showed you.
But let's not waste our time in the repetition
Of what we have already heard, nor be
Too prodigal of our Griefs; for wounds
Too oft exposed to the Air are festered by it.

Now am I fully satisfied of the Imposture,
Which to the Flames I have destined, and to Wracks the Authors.
Those Treasons which Miletas swore against 'em,
And Morat and Montaxerxes since confirmed,
Were enough to make the Sun go backward,
And in a Cloud conceal its frightened Head.
'Twas a Conspiracy, to whose composition
All the Ingredients of horror did combine.
So strange and dismal, that Alexander himself
Could scarce have heard it without the danger of a Palsy.
Hercules would have sought his Club, and thinking it
The long-bruing Stratagems of the oldest Fiends,
Have made another Journey to the Infernal World,
Where Cerberus to excuse himself, would prove
That every Head of these Popish Conspirators
Has more of Hell in it, than all this three.
But hold! was'nt this the day Moret and Montaxerxes
Were to have their Pard'ns.

They have received 'em, Sir,
It is to them, next to Miletas, we owe our safety;
Our Lives and Fortunes were scarce our own,
Before they made 'em sure.

I'm far from meriting thus to be circl'd,
And waited on by all the Guards of Providence.
But the Gods do with a more peculiar care
Provide for Princes, their Vice-Gerents here.
Nay, we are Gods, though to a lower Orb confined;
Yet lest we should beyond our bounds aspire,
And vie Greatness with the powr's above,
Heaven thought it Policy to setter us,
With he heavy pressures of dull Flesh and Blood.
Has given us Rassions, Slaves we're Slaves unto;
Yet as if this were not Allay enough,
A sort of politic Court-Syrens are employed
To charm, and so infatuate our Senses,
That only that sound seems grateful to us
Which ushers in our Ruin.
It's an essential Fare to Princes,
And a Disease by it's own extremities
Alone discovered; and that not till it is beyond
The reach of Art for to prevent its ills.
So a Consumption that starved ravening Vulture,
Which at once devours the Nat'ral Body,
Picking it to the very Bones.
And so bewitches the wretched Patient,
He will not trust his tortured senses,
Which still complain of the Diseases tyranny.
He doubts his Doctors skill, which gives him over,
Darts anger on his Friends, and thinks they speak
But what they wish.
I must confess, My Lord,
My politic condition was the same.
I've often been concerned to hear these Traitors,
Mine and my Countries Enemies, spoken against,
They were the only Friends I trusted, or admired,
The only Cabinets wherein I locked my heart:
But now, though by a Miracle, I am my self again,
And enjoy my Faculties as well as ever.
Those passages which interposed, and baffled
My intellcts are now unlock't; and all
Those Vehicles of Sense, the Nerves (being chaft
By the balmy breath of my relenting Stars)
Are 'waken'd from their cold stiff Lethargy.
The cause, those Flatterers; being removed,
My Reason re-assumes its Health; and now,
I see my self a Prince secure, and happy in your Love,
That Love which long and dear experience
Has taught me how to prize; give me your hand!
My best and dearest Friend! and take my Heart.
Your large Rewards shall show I can distinguish
'Tween such a real Honesty as yours,
And the artificial Paint of Friendship.

My Loyalty need no such poor unworthy prop,
But dare defend my Countries Happiness,
Without any other Guerdon than the dangers;
For our Actions either find a full reward
Within themselves, or else deserve not any.

That Virtue is its own reward, is but the airy Thought
Of some Poetical, Contemplative Philosopher.
Morality keeps under her no such starved Virtue.
She's an Indulgent Mistress, and allows her Family
The good Substantial Food of Gold and Silver.
They are Instruments which smooth all the rough paths of Virtue,
And kindle Generous Purposes in the Soul,
To mount above all kind of Obstacles.
For this the Labr'er cultivates the Earth;
For this the Soldier goes to War --

I deny not that Rewards are sometimes necessary
To raise a Covetous Ambitious Soul,
Even to Heroic Actions: their Earthy Thoughts
Will need a dull material Jewel.
But, Sir, there yet do live some generous Tempers,
In whom remains Sparks of the Ancient Virtues.
Fires which are pure, and, like to those of Heaven,
Fed only, and are satisfied with themselves.

I came but now from visiting the prisoners,
And saw 'em burdened with Iron, 'till its Weight
Did seem to draw down their unwilling Souls
From the Imperial Seat,
Which at their Gotuy feet are fettered too.
I first of all discoursed the Jesuits,
And found 'em brazened withso strange a confidence,
And with such bitter Execrations strove
To justify, what they call their Innocence,
That nothing less than a demonstration
Could persuade even me to think 'em guilty.
Heaven they invoked, and all its powers for witnesses;
And sent such wishes to the Stygian World,
That the Furies stood amazed, and could not use
Their Scorpions.
And Sisyphus sate listening on his Stone,
Calling the Gods unjust for so tormenting him,
Whilst these far wickeder, live yet unpunisht.

But what says Polidore? How bears he his restraint?

As a wild Bull, or Lion newly caught,
Endure the Toil which holds 'em.
By all violent means he strives
To anticipate his short-liv'd Destiny;
Foams at his mouth, huge flakes of Sulphur,
And rages with so strange a fury
As if his Breast had been a place prepared
For all the Devils to receive their Tortures.

But pray what temper does Zolazer bear?

Him I confess I could not choose but pity;
He wears at least the Show of Penitence,
Sends up such Sighs that pierce the Heavens,
To call down vengeance on the Jesuits,
Who, he says, brought him to this misery
With the false flattering Charm of temp'ral Profit:
Yet, by the help of his Confession, hopes
To creep beneath the shelter of your Mercy,
And so lift it up above your Justice;
Nor could I stifle easily such grasping thoughts.

Mercy, that lazy Passion, which so long
Sate Empress over the rest, is now deposed,
Startled to hear these Crimes, she dropped her Sceptre;
Which Justice now in its rough crimson hand
Bears as an Instrument of Death, and swears
These trait'rous Slaves shall be the first that feel it,
Lezdras and Sanco I've already sent
To mind 'em of the other world, and let 'em know
Their Sentence is not less irrevocable
Than Years, or Ages past.

He wrongs the Innocent who spares the Guilty.

But lest the Rebels, now made desperate
By their danger, dare any opposition,
In Arms we've fifteen Thousand, besides Citizens,
To wait and guard 'em to their Funerals.

They must not live to see another day;
But shut their Eyes with this. Let's mind our business then*
And now employ their short Remain of Time,
To prepare Tortures equal to their Crime.

Their's is the lawful Issue of Ambition,
That Ignis Fatuus of the mind; which leads
Its ignorant Followers into Bogs and Fens,
Giving 'em Graves there whence it self took Birth.

Ambition may beat and stretch forth its wings,
But can no more exalt it self than the Ostrich:
Honour, its Object, being like a Shadow,
Which flies from its pursuers, and follows those
Which fly it.
But if th'Ambitious chance to rise,
Like daring Icarus, they soar too high;
And being transported --
Both from themselves, and Loyalty they will fly:
Nor are the greatest Politicians free;
As if they prize the name of Traitor more
Than fear those Racks they're certain to endure.
For Princes always prove Heavens chiefest care,
Treasons still punished, or prevented are,


