SInce with Old Plays you have so long been cloyed,
As with a Mistress many Years enjoyed:
How briskly dear Variety you pursue;
Nay though for worse ye change, ye will have New.
Widows take heed, some of you in fresh Youth
Have been the unpitied Martyrs of this Truth.
When for a drunken Sot, that had kind hours,
And taking their own Freedoms, left you yours;
'Twas your delib'rate Choice your Days to pass
With a damned, sober self-admiring Ass;
Who thinks good usage for the Sex unfit,
And slights ye out of Sparkishness and Wit.
But you can fit him -- Let a worse Fool come,
If he neglect, to o^siciate in his room.
Vain Amorous Coxcombs every where are found,
Fops for all uses, but the Stage abound.
Tho you should change them oftener than your Fashions,
There still would be enough for your Occasions:
But ours are not so easily supplied,
All that could ever quit cost, we have already tried.
Nay, dear some times have bought the Frippery Stuff.
This, Widows, you -- I mean the old and tough --
Will never think, be they but Fool enough.
Such will with any kind of Puppies play;
But we must better know for what we pay:
We must not purchase such dull Fools as they.
Should we show each her own partic'lar Dear,
What they admire at home, they would loath here.
Thus, tho the Mall, the Ring, the Pit is full,
And every Coffee-House still swarms with Fool:
Tho still by Fools all other Callings live,
Nay our own Women by fresh Cullys thrive.
Tho your Intrigues which no Lampoon can cure,
Promise a long Succession to ensure,
And all your Matches Plenty do presage:
Dire is the Dearth and Famine on the Stage.
Our Store's quite wasted, and our Credit's small,
Not a Fool left to bless our selves withal.
We're forced at last to rob, (which is great pity,
Though 'tis a never-foiling Bank) the City.
We show you one to day entirely new,
And of all Jests, none relish like the true.
Let that the value of our Play enhance,
Then itmay prove indeed the Luckey Chance.

SURE 'tis the Day that gleams in yonder E^st,
The Day that all but Lovers blessed by Shade
Pay cheerful Homage to:
Lovers! and those pursued like guilty me
By rigid Laws, which put no Difference
'Twixt fairly killing in my own Defence,
And Murders bred by drunken Arguments,
Whores, or the mean Revenges of a Coward.
-- This is Letic^a's Fathers House --
And that the dear Balcony
That has so oft been conscious of our Loves;
From whence she'as sent me down a thousand Sighs,
A thousand Looks of Love, a thousand Vows!
O thou dear Witness of those Charming Hours,
How do I bless thee, how am I pleased to view thee
After a tedious Age of six Months Banishment.

But hark ye Mr. Gingle, is it proper to play before the Wedding.


Ever while you live, for many a time in playing after the first Night, the
Bride's sleepy, the Bridegroom tired, and both so out of Humour, that perhaps
they hate any thing that puts 'em in mind they are married.


RISE Cloris, charming Maid arise!
And baffle breaking Day,
Show the adoring World thy Eyes
Are more surprising Gay;
The Gods of Love are smiling round,
And lead the Bridegroom on,
And Hymen has the Altar crowned,
While all thy sighing Lovers are undone.
To see thee pass they throng the Plain;
The Groves with Flowers are strown,
And every young and envying Swain
Wishes the Hour his own.
Rise then, and let the God of Days,
When thou dost to the Lover yield,
Behold more Treasure given away
Then he in his vast Circle e're beheld.
Hah, Phillis Leticia's Woman!

Fie Mrs. Phillis, do ye take us for Fiddlers that play for Hire? I came to
compliment Mrs. Leticia on her Wedding Morning because she is my Scholar.


She sends it only to drink her Health.

Come Lads let's to the Tavern then --

Hah! said he Leticia?
-- Sure I shall turn to Marble at this News
I harden -- and cold Damps pass through my senseless Pores. --
-- Hah -- who's here --

'Tis yet too early, but my Soul's impatient
And I must see, Leticia --

Death and the Divel -- the Bridegroom --
Stay Sir, by Heaven you
pass not this way --

Hah! what art thou that durst forbid me Entrance?
-- Stand off.

Gayman!

My dearest, Belmour.

Oh thou false Friend, thou treacherous base Deceiver!

Hah, this to me dear Marry?

Whether is Honour, Truth and Friendship fled?

Why there ne'er was such a Virtue.
'Tis all a Poets Dream.

I thank you Sir.

I am sorry for it, or that ever I did any thing that could deserve it: put up
your Sword -- an honest man would say how he's offended, before he rashly
draws.


Are not you going to be married Sir?

No Sir, as long as any man in London is so, that has but a handsome Wife Sir.


Are not you in Love Sir?

Most damnably, -- and would fain lye with the dear jilting Gypsy.


Hah -- who would you lye with Sir?

You catechise me roundly -- 'tis not fair to name, but I am no Starter, Harry;
just as you left me you find me, I am for the faithless Julia still, the Old
Alderman's Wife. -- 'Twas high time the City should lose their Charter, when
their Wives turn honest: but pray Sir answer me a Question or two?


Answer me first -- what make you here this Morning?

Faith to do you Service. Your Damned little Jade of a Mistress has learned of
her Neighbours the Art of Swearing and Lying in abundance, and is --


To be married!

Even so, God save the Mark; and she'll be a fair one for many an Arrow besides
her Husbands, tho he an old Finsbury Hero this threescore Years.


Who mean you?

Why thy Cuckcold that shall be, if thou be wise.

Away --
Who is this Man? -- thou dally'st with me.

Why an old Knight, and Alderman, here of the City, Sir Feeble Fain-wou'd, a
jolly old Fellow, whose Activity is all got into his Tongue, a very excellent
Teaser; but neither Youth nor Beauty can grind his Dugion to an Edge.


Fie what Stuff's here.

Very excellent Stuff, if you have but the Grace to improve it.

You banter me -- but in plain English tell me
What made you here thus early,
Entering yon House with such Authority?

Why your Mistress Leticia -- your contracted Wife, is this Morning to be
married to old Sir Feeble Fainwou'd, induced to it I suppose by the great
Jointure he makes her, and the Improbability of your ever gaining your Pardon
for your high Duel -- Do I speak English now Sir?


Too well, would I had never heard thee.

Now I being the Consident in your Amours, the Jack-go-between -- the civil
Pimp, or so -- you left her in charge with me at your Departure --


I did so.

I saw her every day -- and every day she paid the Tribute of a Shower of
Tears, to the dear Lord of all her Vows,

Young Belmour;
Till Faith at last, for Reasons manifold,
I slackt my daily Visits.

And left her to Temptation -- was that well done?

Now must I afflict you and my self with a long Tale of Causes why;

Or be charged with want of Friendship.

You will do well to clear that Point to me.

I see you're peevish, and you shall be humor'd.
-- You know my Julia --
Played me even such another Prank as your false one is going to play you, and
married old Sir Cautious Fulbank here in the City; at which you know I stormed,
and raved, and swore, as thou wo't now, and to as little purpose. There was but
one Way loft, and that was Cuckolding him.


Well that Design I left thee hot upon.

And hotly have pursued it. Swore -- Wept -- Vowed -- Wrote, upbraided, prayed
and railed; then treated lavishly -- and presented high -- till between you and
I Harry, I have presented the best part of Eight hundred a year into her
Husbands hands, in Mortgage.


This is the Course you'd have me steer, I thank you.

No no, Pox on it, all Women are not ^ilts. Some are honest, and will give as
well as take; or else there would not be so many broke in the City. -- In fine
Sir, I have been in Tribulation, that is to say, Money-less, for six tedious
Weeks, without either Clothes -- or Equipage to appear withal; and so not only
my own Love affair lay neglected -- but thine too -- and I am forced to pretend
to my Lady, that I am in the Country with a Dying Uncle -- from whom if he were
indeed dead, I expect Two thousand a year.


But what's all this to being here this Morning?

Thus have I lain concealed like a winter Fly, hoping for some blessed Sun-Shine
to warm me into Life again, and make me hover my flagging Wings; till the News
of this Marriage (which fills the Town) made me crawl out this silent Hour --
to upbraid the fickle Maid.


Did thou? -- pursue thy kind Design. Get me to see her, and sure no Woman
even possessed with a new Passion,

Grown confident even to Prostitution;
But when she sees the Man to whom she'as sworn so very -- very much, will find
Remorse and Shame.


For your sake though the Day be broke upon us,
And I'm undone if seen -- I'll venture in --
-- Hah -- see -- the Bridegroom!
And with him my destined Cuckold, old Sir Cautious Fulbank.
-- Hah -- what ail'st thou Man?

The Bridegroom!
Like Gorgons Head he'as turned me into Stone --

Gorgon's Head -- a Cuckolds Head -- 'twas made to graft upon --


By Heaven I'll seize her even at the Altar!
And bear her thence in Trinmph.

Ay, and be born to Newgate in Triumph, and be hanged in Triumph -- 'twill be
cold Comfort celebrating your Nuptials in the Press Yard, and be waked next
Morning like Mr. Barnardine in the Play -- Will you please to Rise and be
hanged a little Sir?


What would thou have me do?

As many an Honest Man has done before thee --
Cuckold him -- Cuckold him.

What -- and let him marry her! She that's mine by Sacred
Vow already? By Heaven it would b^ Flat Adultery in her!

-- She'll learn the Trick, and practise it the better with thee.


Oh Heavens! Leticia marry him! and lye with him! --
-- Here will I stand and see this shameful Woman,
See if she dares pass by me to this Wickedness.

Hark ye Harry -- in earnest have a care of betraying your self -- and do not
venture sweet Life for a fickle Woman, who perhaps hates you.


You counsel well -- but yet to see her married! --
How every thought of that shocks all my Resolution --
But hang it I'll be Resolute and Saucy,
Despise a Woman who can use me ill,
And think my self above her.

Why now thou art thy self -- a Man again.
But see they are coming forth, now stand your ground.

'Tis she, support me Charles, or I shall sink to Earth,
-- Methought in passing by she cast a scornful Glance at n^e
Such charming Pride I've seen upon her Eyes,
When our Love-Quarrels armed 'em with Disdain --
-- I'll after 'em, if I live she shall not escape me.

Hold, remember you're proscribed,
And dye if you are taken --.

I've done and I will live, but he shall ne'er enjoy her.
-- Who's yonder, Ralph, my trusty Confident?
Now though I perish I must speak to him.
-- Friend, what Wedding's this?

One that was never made in Heaven Sir,
'Tis Alderman Fainwou'd, and Mrs. Leticia Bredwell

Bredwell -- I've heard of her -- she was Mistress --

To fine Mr Belmour Sir, -- ay there was a Gentleman
But rest his Soul -- he's hanged Sir.

How! hanged?

Hanged Sir, hanged -- at the Hague in Holland.

I heard some such News, but did not credit it.

For what said they was he hanged?

Why even for High Treason Sir, he killed one of their Kings.


Holland's a Common-wealth, and is not ruled by Kings.

Not by one Sir, but by a great many; this was a Cheesmonger -- they fell out
over a Bottle of Brandy, went to Snicker Snee, -- Mr. Belmour cut his Throat,
and was hanged for it, that's all Sir. --


And did the young Lady believe this?

Yes, -- and took on most heavily, -- the Doctors gave her over -- and there
w^s the Divel to do to get her to consent to this Marriage -- but her Fortune
was small, and the Hope of a Ladyship, and a Gold Chain at the Spittle Sermon
did the Business, -- and so your Servant Sir. --


So -- here's a hopeful Account of my sweet self now

Pray Sir which is Sir Feeble Fainwoud's?

What would you with him, Friend?

I have a Letter here from the Hague for him.

From the Hague! Now have I a Curiosity to see it --
I am his Servant -- give it me --
-- Perhaps here may be the second part of my Tragedy.
I'm full of Mischief, Charles -- and have a mind to see this Fellows
Secrets. For from this hour I'll be his evil Genius, haunt him at
Bed and Board, he shall not sleep nor eat -- disturb him at his
Prayers, in his Embraces; and teaz him into Madness.
Help me Invention, Malice, Love, and Wit.
Ye Gods, and little Fiends instruct my Mischief.
Dear Brother, according to your Desire I have sent for my Son from St. Omers,
whom I have sent to wait on you in England, he is a very good Accountant and
fit for Business, and much pleased he shall see that Uncle to whom he's so
obliged, and which is so gratefully acknowledged by --

Dear Brother, your affectionat Brother

Francis Fainwoud.

-- Hum -- hark ye Charles, do you know who I am now?

Why I hope a very honest Friend of mine, Harry Belmour.

No Sir, you are mistaken in your Man.

It may be so.

I am do ye see Charles, this very individual, numerical young Mr. -- what ye
call um Fainwoud, just come from Saint Omers into England -- to my Uncle the
Alderman.

I am, Charles, this very Man.

I know you are, and will swear it upon occasion.

This lucky Thought has almost calmed my mind.
And if I don't fit you my dear Uncle --
May I never lye with my Aunt.

Ah Rogue -- but prithee what care have you taken about your Pardon? ^'twere
good you should seeure that.


There's the Divel Charles, -- had I but that -- but I have had a very good
Friend at work, a thousand Guyneys, that seldom fails; but yet in Vain, I being
the first Transgressor since the Act against Duelling.

But I impatient to see this dear Delight of my Soul,
And hearing from none of you this six Weeks, came from
Bruxels in this Disguise -- for the Hague I have not
Seen, though hanged there -- but come -- lets away
And complete me a right Saint Omers Spark, that I
May present my self as soon as they come from Church.

Did my Julia know how I Languish in this cruel Separation, she would afford me
her Pity, and write oftner. If only the Expectation of two thousand a Year kept
me from you, ah! Julia how easily would I abandon that Trifle for your more
valued Sight, but that I know a Fortune will render me more agreeable to the
charming Julia, I should quit all my Interest here, to throw my self at her
Feet, to make her sensible how am I entirely her Adorer,

Charles Gayman.

-- Faith Charles you lye. -- you are as welcome to me now,
Now when I doubt thy Fortune is declining,
As if the Universe were thine.

That Madam is a Noble Gratitude. For if his Fortune be declining, 'tis
sacrificed to his Passion for your Ladyship.

-- 'Tis all laid out on Love.

I prize my Honour more than Life,
Yet I had rather have given him all he wished of me,
Than be guilty of his Undoing.

And I think the Sin were less.

I must confess, such Jewels, Rings, and Presents as he made me must needs
decay his Fortune.


Ay Madam, his very Coach at last was turned into a Jewel for your Ladyship.

Then Madam what Expenses his Despairs have run him on --
As Drinking and Gaming to divert the Thought of your marrying my old Master.


And put in Wenching too. --

No assure your self Madam --

Of that I would be better satisfied -- and you too must assist me as e're you
hope I should be kind to you in gaining you Diana


Madam, I'll dye to serve you.

Nor will I be behind in my Duty.

Oh how fatal are forced Marriages!
How many Ruins one such Match pulls on --
Had I but kept my sacred Vows to Gayman
How happy had I been -- how prosperous he!
Whilst now I languish in a loathed Embrace,
Pine out my Life with Age -- Consumptious Coughs,
-- But dost thou fear that Gayman is declining?

You are my Lady, and the best of Mistresses --
Therefore I would not grieve you, for I know
You love this best -- but most unhappy Man.

You shall not grieve me -- prithee on --

My Master sent me yesterday to Mr. Crap his Scrivener, to send to one Mr.
Wastall, to tell him his first Mortgage was out, which is two hundred pounds a
Year -- and who has since engaged five or six hundred more to my Master; but if
this first be not redeemed he'll take the Forfeit on it, as he says a Wise Man
ought.


That is to say, a Knave according to his Notion of a Wise Man.


Mr Crap being busy with a Borrowing Lord, sent me to Mr. Wastall; whose
Lodging is in a nasty Place, called Alsatia, at a Black-Smiths.


But what's all this to Gayman?

Madam, this Wastall was Mr. Gayman.

Gayman? Saw thou Gayman?

Madam, Mr. Gayman, yesterday.

When came he to Town?

Madam, he has not been out of it.

Not at his Uncles in Northamptonshire?

Your Ladyship was wont to credit me.

Forgive me -- you went to a Black-Smiths --

Yes Madam; and at the Door encountered the beastly thing he calls a Landlady;
who looked as if she'ad been of her own Husband's making, composed of moulded
Smith's Dust. I asked for Mr. Wastall, and she began to open -- and did so rail
at him, that what with her Billingsgate, and her Husband's Hammers, I was both
Deaf and Dumb -- at last the Hammers ceased, and she grew weary, and called
down Mr. Wastall; but he not answering -- I was sent up a Ladder rather than a
pair of Stairs; at last I scaled the top, and entered the incharted Castle;
there did I find him, spite of the Noise below, drowning his Cares in Sleep.


Whom foundst thou Gayman --?

He Madam, whom I waked -- and seeing me.
Heavens what Confusion seized him! which nothing but my own
Surprise could equal. Ashamed -- he would have turned away,
But when he saw by my dejected Eyes, I knew him,
He sight, and blushed, and heard me tell my Business.
Then begged I would be secr^t: for he vowed, his whole Repose and Life,
depended on my Silence. Nor had I told it now,

But that your Ladyship, may find some speedy means to draw him from this
desperate Condition.


Heavens is't possible!

He's driven to the last degree of Poverty --
Had you but seen his Lodgings, Madam!

What were they?

'Tis a pretty convenient Tub Madam. He may lie along in it, there's just room
for an old Joined Stool besides the Bed, which one cannot call a Cabin, about
the largeness of a Pantry Bin, or a Usurer's Trunk, there had been Dor^ex
Curtains to it in the Days of Yore; but they were now annihilated, and nothing
left to save his Eyes from the Light, but my Land-ladies Blew Apron, tied by
the strings before the Window, in which stood a broken sixpenny Looking-Glass,
that showed as many Faces, as the Scene in Henry the Eighth, which could but
just stand upright, and then the Comb-Case filled it.


What a lewd Description hast thou made of his Chamber!


Then for his Equipage, 'tis banished to one small Monsieur, who (saucy with his
Master's Poverty) is rather a Companion than a Foot-man.


But what said he to the Forfeiture of his Land?

He sighed, and cried, Why farewell dirty Acres.
It shall not trouble me, since 'twas all but for Love!

How much redeems it?

Madam, five hundred pounds.

Enough -- you shall, in some Disguise convey this Money to him, as from an
unknown hand: I would not have him think it comes from me, for all the World;

That Nicety and Virtue I've professed, I am resolved to keep.

If I were your Ladyship, I would make use of Sir Cautious his Cash: Pay him in
his own Coin.


Your Ladyship would make no Scruple of it, if you knew how this poor Gentleman
has been used by my unmerciful Master.


I have a Key already to his Counting-House; it being lost, he had another
made, and this I found and kept.


Madam, this is an excellent time for it, my Master being gone to give my Sister
Leticia at Church.


'Tis so, I'll go and commit the Theft, whilst you prepare to carry it, and
then we'll to Dinner with your Sister the Bride.


welcome Joan Sanderson, welcome, welcome,
Ods bobs, and so thou art Sweet-Heart.

Me-thinks my Lady Bride is very Melancholy.

Ay, Ay, Women that are discreet, are always thus upon their Wedding-day.


Always by Day-light, Sir Cautious.

But when Bright Phoebus does retire
To Thetis Bed to quench his fire,
And do the thing we need not name,
We Mortals by his influence do the same.
Then thou the Blushing Maid lays by
Her simpering, and her Modesty;
And round the Lover clasps and twines
Like Ivy, or the cirkling Vines.
Here Ralph, the Bottle Rogue, of Sack ye Rascal, had thou been a Butler
worth hanging, thou would have met us at the door with it -- Ods bobs
Sweet-Heart thy Health.


Away with it, to the Brides Haunce in ^elder.

Gots so, go to Rogue, go to, that shall be, Knave, that shall be, by the
Morrow Morning; he -- ods bobs, we'll do it Sweet-Heart; here's to it --


I dye but to Imagine it, would I were dead indeed.

Hah -- hum -- how's this? Tears upon your Wedding-day? Why -- why -- you
Baggage you, ye little Ting, Fools-face -- away you Rogue, you're naughty, you're
naughty,

Look -- look -- look now, -- buss it -- buss it -- and Friends, did'ums,
did'ums, beat its none silly Baby -- away you little Hussy, away, and pledge
me --


A wise discreet Lady, I'll warrant her, my Lady would prodigally have took it
off all --


Dear's its nown dear Fubs; buss again, buss again, away, away -- ods bobs, I
long for Night -- look -- look Sir Cautious; what an Eye's there --


Ay, so there is Brother, and a Modest Eye too.

Adad, I love her more and more, Ralph -- call old Susan hither -- Come Mr.
Bearjest, put the Glass about. Ods bobs, when I was a young Fellow, I would not
let the young Wenches look pale and wan -- but would rouse 'em, and touse 'em,
and blowze 'em, 'till I put a Colour in their Cheeks, like an Apple John
affacks -- Nay, I can make a shift still, and Pupsey shall not be Jealous --


Indeed not I Sir. I shall be all Obedience

A most Judicious Lady; would my Julia had a little of her Modesty; but my
Lady's a Wit.


Look here my little Puskin, here's fine Play-things for its n'own little
Coxcomb -- go -- get ye gone -- get ye gone and off with this Saint Martins
Trumpery, these Playhouse Glass Baubles, this Necklace, and these Pendants, and
all this false Ware; ods bobs I'll have no counterfeit Geer about thee, not I.
See -- these are right as the Blushes on thy Cheeks and these -- as true as my
Heart my Girl. Go -- put 'em on and be fine --


Believe me Sir I shall not merit this Kindness.

Go to -- More of your Love, and less of your Ceremony -- give the old Fool a
hearty Buss and pay him that Way -- he ye little wanton Tit, I'll steal up --
and catch ye and love ye -- adod I will -- get ye gone -- get ye gone --


Heavens what a nautious thing is an old Man turned Lover.

How steal up Sir Feeble -- I hope not so; I hold it most indecent before the
lawful Hour.


Lawful Hour! Why I hope all Hours are Lawful with a Mans own Wife.


But wise Men have Respect to Times and Seasons.

Wise young Men Sir Cautious, but wise old Men must nick their Inclinations,
for it is not as 'twas wont to be, for it is not as 'twas wont to be --


Sir here's a young Gentleman without would speak with you.


Hum -- I hope it is not that same Belmour come to forbid the Banes -- if it
be, he comes too late -- therefore bring me first my long Sword, and then the
Gentleman.


Pray Sir use mine it is a travelled Blade I can assure you Sir.


I thank you Sir --
-- How -- my Nephew --
Francis Fainwood?

I am glad he has told me my Christian Name.

Sir Cautious know my Nephew -- 'tis a young Saint Omers Scholar -- but none of
the Witnesses.


Marry Sir, the wiser he -- for they got nothing by it.

Sir I love and honour you because you are a Traveller.

A very proper young Fellow, and as like old Frank Fainwood as the Devil to the
Collier; but Francis you are come into a very lewd Town Francis for whoring and
plotting and roaring and drinking, but you must go to Church Francis, and avoid
ill Company, or you may make damnable Havoc in my Cash Francis -- what you can
keep Merchants Books?


'T has been my Study Sir.

And you will not be proud but will be commanded by me Francis?


I desire not to be favoured as a Kinsman Sir, but as your humblest Servant.


Why thou't an honest Fellow Francis -- and you're heartily welcome -- and
I'll make thee Fortunate! But come Sir Cautious let you and I take a Turn
i'th'Garden, and beget a right Understanding between your Nephew Mr. Bearjest
and my Daughter Dye.


Prudently thought on Sir, I ll wait on you --

You are a Traveller Sir, I understand --

I have seen a little part of the World Sir.

So have I Sir I thank my Stars, and have performed most of my Travels on Foot
Sir.


You did not travel far then I presume Sir.

No Sir, it was for my Diversion indeed; but I assure you I travelled into
Ireland afoot Sir.


Sure Sir, you go by Shipping into Ireland?

That's all one Sir, I was still afoot -- ever walking on the Deck --


Was that your farthest Travels Sir?

Farthest -- why that's the End of the World -- and sure a Man can go no
further.


Sure there can be nothing worth a Man's Curiosity?

No Sir? I'll assure you there are the Wonders of the World
Sir; I'll hint you this one. There is a Harbour which since the
Creation was never capable of receiving a Lighter, yet by another
Miracle the King of France was to ride there with a vast Fleet of
Ships, and to land a hundred thousand Men.

This is a swinging Wonder -- but are there Store of Mad Men there Sir --?


That's another Rarity to see a Man run out of his Wits.

Marry Sir, the wiser they I say.

Pray Sir what Store of Miracles have you at St. Omers?

None Sir since that of the Wonderful Salamanca Doctor, who was both here and
there, at the same Instant of time.


How Sir! Why that's impossible.

That was the Wonder Sir, because 'twas impossible.

But 'twas a greater Sir that 'twas believed.

Enough, enough, Sir Cautious we apprehend one another, Mr. Bearjest, your
Uncle here and I have struck the Bargain, the Wench is yours with three
thousand Pound present, and something more after Death: Which your Uncle likes
well.


Does he so Sir, I'm beholding to him, then 'tis not a Pin matter whether I
like or not, Sir.


How Sir not like my Daughter Dye?

Oh Lord Sir -- dye or live 'tis all one for that Sir -- I'll stand to the
Bargain my Uncle makes.


Will you so Sir, you'll have very good Luck if you do --

Prithee hold thy Peace, my Lady's Woman.

Sir I beg your Pardon for not waiting on you to Church --
I knew you would be private --

You honour us too highly now Madam --

Give you Joy my dear Leticia! I find Sir you were resolved for Youth Wit and
Beauty.


Ay Madam to the Comfort of many a hoping Coxcomb but Let -- Rogue Let --
thou wo't not make me free o'th'City a second time, wo't thou entice the Rogues
with the Twire and wanton Leer -- the Amorous Simper that cries come kiss me --
then the pretty round Lips are pouted out -- he Rogue how I long to be at'em!
-- well she shall never go to Church more -- that she shall not.


How Sir, not to Church, the chiefest Recreation of a City Lady?


That's all one Madam, that tricking and dressing and prinking and patching, is
not your Devotion to Heaven, but to the young Knaves that are licked and combed
-- and are minding you more than the Parson -- ods bobs there are more Guckolds
destined at Church than are made out of it.


ha, ha, ha, he! tickles ye e-Faith Ladies.

Not one chance look this Way -- and yet
I can forgive her lovely Eyes --
Because they look not pleased with all this Ceremony;
And yet methinks some Sympathy in Love
Might this Way glance their Beams -- I cannot hold --
-- Sir, is this fair Lady my Aunt?

Oh Francis! Come hither Francis.
Let, here's a young Rogue has a Mind to kiss thee.
-- Nay start not, he's my own Flesh and Blood
My Nephew -- Baby -- look -- look how the young
Rogues stare at one another, like will to like, I see that.

There's something in his Face, so like my Belmour it calls my Blushes up, and
leaves my Heart defenceless --


Sir, Dinner's on the Table.

Come, come -- let's in then -- Gentlemen and Ladies --
And share to day my Pleasures and Delight
But --
Adds bobs they must be all mine own at Night.

CUrse on my Birth! Curse on my faithless fortune!
Curse on my Stars, and cursed be all -- but Love!
That dear, that charming Sin, tho to have pulled
Innumerable Mischiefs on my Head,
I have not, nor I cannot find Repentance for.
No let me dye despised, upbraided, poor:
Let Fortune, Friends and all abandon me --
But let me hold thee thou soft smiling God
Close to my Heart while Life continues there.
Till the last Pantings of my vital Blood
May the last spark of Life and Fire be Love's!
-- How now Rag, what's a Clock?

My Belly can inform you better than my Tongue.

Why you gormandizing Vermin you, what have you done with the Three-pence I
gave you a Fortnight ago.


Alas Sir that's all gone; long since.

You gutling Rascal, you are enough to breed a Famine in a Land. I have known
some industrious Foot-men, that have not only gotten their own Livings, but a
pretty Livelihood for their Masters too.


Ay, till they came to the Gallows Sir.

Very well Sirrah, t^se'y died in an honourable Calling -- but hark'y' Rag -- I
have Business -- very earnest Business abroad this Evening, now were you a
Rascal of Docity, you would invent a way -- to get home my last Suit that was
laid in Lavender -- with the Appurtenances thereunto belonging, as Periwig,
Cravat -- and -- so forth --


Faith Master I must deal in the black Art then, for no Humane Means will do it
-- and now I talk of the black Art Master, try your Power once more with my
Land-lady --


Oh! Name her not, the thought on it turns my Stomach -- a Sight of her is a
Vomit, but he's a bold Hero that dares venture on her for a Kiss, and all
beyond that sure is Hell it self -- yet there's my last, last Refuge -- and I
must to this Wedding -- I know not what -- but something whispers me -- this
Night I shall be happy -- and without Julia 'tis impossible! --


Julia; whose that my Lady Fulbank Sir?

Peace Sirrah -- and call -- a -- no -- Pox on it come back -- and yet -- yes --
call my fullsome Landlady.

-- Sir Cautious knows me not, by Name or Person.
And I will to this Wedding, I'm sure of seeing Julia there.
And what may come of that -- but here's old Nasty coming.
I smell her up -- hah my dear Landlady --
Quite out of Breath -- a Chair there for my Landlady --

Here's never a one Sir.

More of your Money and less of your Civility good Mr. Wastall.


Dear Land-Lady --

Dear me no Dears Sir, but let me have my Money -- Eight Weeks Rent last
Friday. Besides Taverns, Ale-houses, Chandlers, Landeresses, Scores, and ready
Money out of my Purse; you know it Sir.


Ay but your Husband does not; speak softly.

My Husband! What do you think to fright me with my Husband -- I'd have you to
know I am an honest Woman and care not this -- for my Husband. Is this all the
thanks I have for my Kindness, for patching, borrowing, and shifting for you;
'twas but last Week I pawned my best Petticoat, as I hope to wear it again it
cost me six and twenty Shillings besides Making; then this Morning my new
Norwich Mantue follow'd, and two postle Spoons, I had the whole Dozen when you
came first; but they dropped, and dropped, till I had only Judas left for my
Husband.


Hear me good Landlady --

Then ^'ve past my Word at the George-Tavern for forty Shillings for you, ten
Shillings at my Neighbour Squabs for Ale; besides seven Shillings to Mother
Suds for washing, and do you fob me off with my Husband? --


Here Rag -- run and fetch her a Pint of Sack -- there's no other way of
quenching the Fire in her flaber Chops; -- but my dear Landlady have a little
Patience.


Patience? I scorn your Words Sir -- is this a place to trust in, tell me of
Patience that used to have my Money before Hand; come, come pay me quickly --
or old Gregory Grimes House shall be too hot to hold you.


Is't come to this, can I not be heard!

No Sir, you had good Clothes when you came first, but they dwind'ld daily,
till they dwindled to this old Campaign -- with tan'd-colour'd Lining -- once
red -- but now all Colours of the Rain-bow, a Cloak to skulk in a-Nights, and a
pair of Piss-burn'd shammy Breeches. Nay your very Badge of Manhood's gone too


How Landlady, nay then i-Faith no Wonder if you rail so.


Your Silver Sword I mean -- transmogrified to this twohanded Basket Hilt --
this old Sir Guy of Warwick -- which will sell for nothing but old Iron. In
fine I'll have my Money Sir, or in faith Alsatia shall not shelter you.


Well Landlady -- if we must part -- let's drink at parting, here Landlady,
here's to the Fool -- that shall love you better then I have done.


Rot your Wine -- d'e think to pacify me with Wine Sir.

-- What will you force me -- no -- give me another Glass, I scorn to be so
uncivil to be forced, my Service to you Sir -- but this shall not do Sir --


Ah Cloris 'tis in vain you scold,
Whilst your Eyes kindle such a Fire.
Your railing cannot make me cold,
So fast as they a Warmth inspire.
Well Sir you have no Reason to complain of my Eyes nor my Tongue neither, if
rightly understood.


I know you are the best of Landladys,
As such I drink your Health --
-- But to upbraid a Man in Tribulation -- fie -- 'tis not done like a Woman of
Honour, a Man that loves you too.


I am a little hasty sometimes, but you know my good Nature


I do and therefore trust my little Wants with you.
I shall be rich again -- and then my dearest Landlady --

Would this Wine might never go through me, if I would not go as they say
through Fire and Water -- by Night or by Day for you.


And as this is Wine -- I do believe thee --

Well -- you have no Money in your Pocket now I'll warrant you -- here --
here's ten Shillings for you old Greg'ry knows not of.


I cannot in Conscience take it, good Faith I cannot -- besides the next
Quarrel you'll hit me in the Teeth with it.


Nay pray no more of that, forget it, forget it. I own I was to blame -- here
-- Sir you shall take it.


Ay -- but what should I do with Money in -- these -- damned Breeches? -- No
put it up -- I can't appear abroad thus -- no I'll stay at home and loose my
business.


Why, is there no Way to redeem one of your Suits?

None -- none -- I'll even lay me down and dye --

Dye -- marry Heavens forbid -- I would not for the World -- let me see -- hum
-- what does it lie for?


Alas! dear Landlady a Sum -- a Sum.

Well, say no more, I'll lay about me --

By this Kiss but you shall not -- Assafe^ida by this Light.

Shall not? that's a good one i-Faith: shall you rule -- or I?

But should your Husband know it.

Husband -- marry come up, Husbands know Wives Secrets? No sure the Worlds not
so bad yet -- where do your things lie? and sor what?


Five pound equips me -- Rag can conduct you -- but I say you shall not go --
I've sworn --


Meddle with your Matters -- let me see, the Caudle Cup that Molly's
Grandmother left her will pawn for about that Sum -- I'll sneak it out -- well
Sir you shall have your things presently -- trouble not your Head, but expect
me.


Was ever Man put to such beastly Shifts? 'Sdeath, how she stunk -- my Senses
are most luxuriously regall'd -- there's my perpetual Music too --

The ringing of Bells is an Ass to it.

Sir there's one in a Coach below would speak to you.

With me -- and in a Coach, who can it be?

The Devil I think, for he has a strange Countenance.

The Devil, show your self a Rascal of Parts, Sirrah, and wait on him up with
Ceremony.


Who the Devil, Sir?

Ay the Devil Sir, if you mean to thrive.
-- Who can this be -- but see he comes to inform me
-- withdraw --

I come to bring you this --
-- hah --

Nay view it Sir, 'tis all substantial Gold.

Now dare not I ask one civil Question for fear it vanish all --

But I may ask how 'tis I ought to pay for this great Bounty.

Sir all the Pay is Secrecy --

And is this all that is required Sir?

No you're invited to the Shades below.

Hum, Shades below? -- I am not prepared for such a Journey Sir.


If you have Courage, Youth, or Love, you'll follow me,
When Nights black Curtains drawn around the World,
And mortal Eyes are safely locked in Sleep,
And no bold Spy dares view when Gods caress:
Then I'll conduct thee to the Banks of Bliss.
-- Durst thou not trust me?

Yes sure on such substantial Security.

Just when the Day is vanished into Night,
And only twinkling Stars inform the World,
Near to the Corner of the silent Wall
In Fields of Lincolns-Inn thy Spirit shall meet thee.
-- Farewell --

Hum -- I am awake sure, and this is Gold I grasp.
I could not see this Devil's cloven Foot,
Nor am I such a Coxcomb to believe,
But he was as substantial as his Gold.
Spirits, Ghost, Hobgoblings, Furies, Fiends, and Devils
I've often heard old Wives fright Fools and Children with,
Which once arrived to common Sense they laugh at.
-- No, I am for things possible and Natural,
-- Some Female Devil old, and damned to Ugliness,
And past all Hopes of Courtship and Address,
Full of another Devil called Desire,
Has seen this Face -- this -- Shape -- this Youth
And thinks it worth her Hire. It must be so.
I must moil on in the damned dirty Road,
And sure such Pay will make the Journey easy;
And for the Price of the dull drudging Night,
All Day I'll purchase new and fresh Delight.

Why Madam do you leave the Garden,
For this Retreat to Melancholy?

Because it suits my Fortune and my Humour.
And even thy Presence would afflict me now.

Madam, I was sent after you, my Lady Fulbank has challenged
Sir Feeble at Bowls, and stakes a Ring of fifty Pound against his new Chariot.


Tell him I wish him Luck in every thing
But in his Love to me --
Go tell him I am viewing of the Garden.
-- Blessed be this kind Retreat, this 'lone Occasion
That lends a short Cessation to my Torments.
And gives me leave to vent my Sighs and Tears!

And doubly blessed be all the Powers of Love,
That gives me this dear Opportunity.

Where were you all ye pitying Gods of Love.
That once seemed pleased at Belmours Flame and mine,
And smiling joined our Hearts, our sacred Vows
And spread your Wings, and held your Torches high.

Oh --

Where were you now! When this unequal Marriage,
Gave me from all my Joys, gave me from Relmour:
Your Wings were flagged, your Torches bent to Earth;
And all your little Bonets veiled your Eyes.
You saw not, or were deaf and pitiless.

Oh my Leticia!

Hah, 'tis there again that; very Voice was Belmours:
Where art thou, oh thou lovely charming Shade?
For sure thou can not take a Shape to fright me.
-- What art thou -- speak!

Thy constant true Adorer.
Who all this fatal Day has haunted thee
To ease his tortured Soul.

My Heart is well acquainted with that Voice,
But oh my Eyes dare not encounter thee.

Is it because thou'st broken all thy Vows?
-- Take to thee Courage and behold thy Slaughters.

Yes, though the Sight would blast me I would view it.
-- 'tis he -- 'tis very Belmour? or so like --
I cannot doubt but thou deserve this Welcome.

Oh my Leticia!

I'm sure I grasp not Air; thou art no Phantom.
My Arms return not empty to my Bosom,
But meet a solid Treasure.

A Treasure thou so easily threw away?
A Riddle simple Love ne'er understood.

Alas I heard, my Belmour, thou we^ dead.

And was it thus you mourned my F^neral?

I will not justify my hated Crime.
But Oh remember I was poor and helpless.
And much reduced, and much imposed upon.

And Want compelled thee to this wretched Marriage -- did it?


'Tis not a Marriage, since my Belmour lives:
The Consummation were Adultery.
I was thy Wife before, wo't thou deny me?

No by those Powers that heard our mutual Vows,
Those Vows that tie us faster than dull Priests.

But oh my Belmour, thy sad Circumstances
Permit thee not to make a public Claim.
Thou art proscribed, and dy'st if thou art seen.

Alas!

Yet I would wander with thee over the World,
And share thy humblest Fortune with thy Love.

Is't possible Leticia thou would fly
To foreign Shores with me?

Can Belmour doubt the Soul he knows so well?

Perhaps in time the King may find my Innocence, and may extend his Mercy:

Mean time I'll make Provision for our Flight.

But how 'twixt this and that can I defend my self from the loathed Arms of an
impatient Dotard, that I may come a spotless Maid to thee?


Thy native Modesty and my Industry
Shall well enough secure us.
Feign you nice Virgin-Cautions all the Day:
Then trust at Night to my Conduct to preserve thee.
-- And wilt thou yet be mine! Oh swear anew,
Give me again thy Faith, thy Vows, thy Soul:
For mine's so sick with this Days fatal Business,
It needs a Cordial of that mighty strength;
Swear, -- Swear, so as if thou break --
Thou may be -- any thing -- but Damned Leticia.

Thus then, and hear me Heaven

And thus -- I'll listen to thee.

Let, Let, Let, where are you little Rogne Let.
-- Ha^ -- hum -- what's here --

Oh Heavens, she's gone, she's gone!

Gone -- whither is she gone? -- it seems she had the Wit to take good Company
with her --


She's gone to Heaven Sir, for ought I know.

She was resolved to go in a young Fellows Arms I see.

Go to, Francis -- go to.

Stand back Sir, she recovers.

Alas, I found her dead upon the Floor,
-- Should I have left her so -- if I had known your Mind --.

Was it so -- was it so -- got-so, by no means Francis. --

Pardon him Sir; For surely I had died,
But for his timely coming.

Alas poor Pupsey -- was it sick -- look here -- here's a fine thing to make it
well again. Come buss, and it shall have it -- oh how I long for Night.

Ralph, are the Fiddlers ready?

They are tuning in the Hall Sir.

That's well, they know my mind. I hate than same twang, twang, twang, fum,
fum, fum, tweedle, tweedle, tweedle, then serve go the Pins, till a man's
Teeth are on Edge; then snap says a small Gut, and there we are at a loss
again. I long to be in Bed -- with a hey tredodle, tredodle, tredodle -- with a
hay tredool, tredodle, tredo --


A prudent Man would reserve himself -- Goodfacks I danced so on my Wedding
Day, that when I came to Bed, to my Shame be it spoken, I fell fast asleep, and
slept till morning.


Where was your Wisdom then, Sir Cautious?
But I know what a wise Woman ought to have dove.

Odshobs, that's Wormwood, that's Wormwood -- I shall have my young Hussy set
a-gog too; she'll hear there are better things in the World than she has at
home, and then odsbobs, and then they'll have it, adod they will, Sir Cautious.
Ever while you live, keep a Wife ignorant, unless a Man be as brisk as his
Neighbours.


A wise Man will keep 'em from bawdy Christnings then, and Gossipings.


Christnings, and Gossipings; why they are the very Schools that debauch our
Wives, as Dancing-Schools do our Daughters.


Ay, when the over-joy'd good Man invites 'em all against that time twelve
Month: Oh he's a dear Man, cry's one -- I marry cry's another, here's a Man
indeed -- my Husband -- God help him --


Then she falls to telling of her Grievance till (half maudlin) she weeps
again: Just my Condition cry's a third, so the Frolic goes round, and we poor
Cuckolds are anatomized, and turned the right sides outwards; adsbobs we are
Sir Cautious.


Ay, ay, this Grievance ought to be redressed Sir Feeble, the grave and sober
Part o the Nation are hereby ridiculed, -- Ay, and cuckol'd too, for ought I
know.


Wise men, knowing this, should not expose their Infirmities, by marrying us
young Wenches; who, without Instruction, find how we are imposed upon.


So Cousin, I see you have found the way to Mrs. Dy's
Heart.

Who I, my dear Lady Aunt, I never knew but one Way to a Woman's Heart, and that
Road I have not yet travelled; For my Uncle, who is a wise Man, says Matrimony
is a sort of a -- kind of a -- as it were d'e see of a Voyage, which every Man
of Fortune is bound to make one time or other -- and Madam -- I am as it were
-- a bold Adventurer.


And are you sure, Sir, you will venture on me?

Sure? -- I thank you for that -- as if I could not believe my Uncle: For in
this Case a young Heir has no more to do, but to come and see, settle, marry,
and use you scurvily.


How Sir, scurvily?

Very scurvily, that is to say, be always fashionably drunk, despise the
Tyranny of your Bed, and reign absolutely -- keep a Serag^ (...) Women, and let
my bastard Issue inherit: Be seen once a Quarter, or so, with you in the Park
for Countenance, where we loll two several Ways in the gilt Coach like Janus,
or a Spread-Eagle.


And do you expect I should be honest the while?

Heaven forbid, not I, I have not met with that Wonder in all my Travels.


How Sir, not an honest Woman?

Except my Lady Aunt -- Nay as I am a Gentleman and the first of my Family --
you shall pardon me, here -- Cuff me, Cuff me soundly.


This Love's a damned bewitching thing -- now tho I should lose my Assignation
with my Devil, I cannot hold from seeing ^uia to Night: hah -- there, and with
a Fop at her Feet -- Oh Vanity of Woman!


Oh Sir, you're welcome from Northamptonshire.

Hum -- surely she knows the Cheat.

You are so Gay, you save me Sir the Labour
Of asking if your Uncle be alive.

'Pray Heaven she have not found my Circumstances!
But if she have, Confidence must assist me --
-- And Madam you're too Gay, for me to enquire
Whether you are that Julia, which I left you?

Oh, doubtless Sir --

But why the Devil do I ask -- Yes, you are still the same; one of those
hoiting Ladies, that love nothing like Fool and Fiddle; Crowds of Fops; had
rather be publicly, tho dully, flattered, than privately adored; you love to
pass for the Wit of the Company, by talking all and loud.


Rail on! 'till you have made me think my Virtue at so low Ebb, it should
submit to you.


What -- I'm not discreet enough,
I'll babble all in my next high Debauch,
Boast of your Favours, and describe your Charms
To every wishing Fool?

Or make most filthy Verses of me --
Under the name of Cloris -- you Philander,
Who in lewd Rhymes confess the dear Appointment;
What Hour, and where, how silent was the Night,
How full of Love your Eyes, and Wishing, mine.
Faith no; if you can afford me a Lease of your Love,
'Till the Old Gentleman my Husband depart this wicked World,
I'm for the Bargain.

Hum -- what's here, a young Spark at my Wife?

Unreasonable Julia, is that all,
My Love, my Sufferings, and my Vows must hope?
Set me an Age -- say when you will be kind,
And I will languish out in starving Wish.
But thus to gape for Legacies of Love,
'Till Youth be past Enjoyment,
The Devil I will as soon -- sarewel --

Stay, I conjure you stay --

And loose my Assignation with my Devil.

'Tis so, Ay, Ay, 'tis so -- and Wise men will perceive it; 'tis here -- here
in my Forehead, it more than Buds; it sprouts, it flourishes.


So, that young Gentleman has nettled him, stung him to the quick: I hope he'll
chain her up -- the Gad Bee's in his Qunnundrum -- in Charity I'll relieve him
-- come my Lady Fulbank, the Night grows old upon our hands, to dancing, to
jiggeting -- Come shall I lead your Ladyship?


No Sir, you see I am better provided --

Ay, no doubt on it, a Pox on him for a young handsome
Dog.

Very well, very well, now the Posset, and then -- ods bobs, and then --


And then we'll have the other Dance.

Away, Girls, away, and steal the Bride to Bed; they have a deal to do upon
their Wedding-nights; and what with the todious Ceremonies of dressing and
undressing, the smutty Lectures of the Women, by way of Instruction, and the
little Stratagems of the young Wenches -- ods bobs, a man's cozened of half
his Night: Come Gentlemen, one Bottle, and then -- we'll toss the Stocking.


But dost thou think he'll come?

I do believe so Madam --

Be sure you contrive it so, he may not know whither, or to whom he comes.


I warrant you Madam for our Parts.

How now, what departing?

You are going to the Bride-Chamber.

No matter, you shall stay --

I hate to have you in a Crowd.

Can you deny me -- will you not give me one
Lone hour in the Garden?

Where we shall only tantalize each other with dull Kissing, and part with the
same Appetite we met -- no Madam, besides I have Business --


Some Assignation -- is it so indeed?

Away; you cannot think me such a Traitor; 'tis most important Business.


Oh 'tis too late for Business -- let to Morrow serve.

By no means -- the Gentleman is to go out of Town.

Rise the earlier then --

-- But Madam, the Gentleman lies dangerously -- sick -- and should he die --


'Tis not a dying Uncle, I hope Sir?

Hum --

The Gentleman a dying, and to go out of Town to
Morrow!

Ay -- a -- he goes -- in a Litter -- 'tis his Fancy Madam -- Change of Air may
recover him.


So may your change of Mistress do me Sir -- farewell.


Stay Julia -- Devll be damned -- for you shall tempt no more, I'll love and be
undone -- but she is gone --

And if I stay the most that I shall gain
Is but a reconciling Look, or Kiss.
No my kind Goblin --

I ll keep my Word with thee, as the least Evil,
A tantalizing Woman's worse than Devil.
NO more Lucinda, ah! expose no more
To the admiring World those conquering Charms:
In vain all day unhappy men adore,
What the kind Night gives to my longing Arms.
Their vain Attempts can ne'er successful prove,
Whilst I so well maintain the Fort of Love.
Yet to the World with so bewitching Arts,
Your dazzling Beauty you around display,
And triumph in the Spoils of broken hearts,
That sink beneath your feet, and crowd your way:
Ah! suffer now your Cruelty to cease,
And to a fruitless War prefers a Peace.
SO, so; the'r gone -- Cme Francis, you shall have the Honour of Undressing me
for the Encounter, but 'twill be a Sweet one, Francis.


Hell take him, how he tezes me?

But is the young Rogue laid Francis -- is she stolen to Bed? What Tricks the
young Baggages have to whet a man's Appetite?


Ay Sir -- Pox on him -- he will raise my Anger up to Madness, and I shall kill
him, to prevent his going to Bed to her.


A pise of those Bandstrings -- the more Hast the less Speed.


Be it so in all things, I beseech thee Venus?

Thy Aid a little Francis -- oh -- oh -- thou choakst me. 'Sbobs, what dost
mean --


You had so hampered 'em Sir -- the Devil's very mischievous in me.


Come, come quick, good Francis, adod I'm as yare as a Hawk at the young Wanton
-- nimbly good Francis, untruss, untruss --


Cramps seize ye -- what shall I do -- the near Approach distracts me!


So, so, my Breeches, good Francis. But well Francis, how dost think I got the
young Jade my Wife?


With five hundred pounds a year Jointure Sir.

No, that would not do, the Baggage was damnably in love with a young Fellow,
they call Belmour, a handsome young Rascal he was they say, that's truth on it,
and a pretty Estate, but happening to kill a Man, he was forced to fly.


That was great pity Sir.

Pity, hang him Rogue, 'sbobs, and all the young Fellows in the Town deserve
it; we can never keep our Wives and Daughters honest for rampant young Dogs;
and an old Fellow cannot put in amongst 'em, under being undone, with
Presenting, and the Devil and all. But what dost think I did, being damnably in
Love -- I feigned a Letter as from the Hague, wherein was a Relation of this
same Belmour's being hanged.


Is't possible Sir, could you devise such News?

Possible man? I did it, I did it; she swooned at the News, shut her self up a
whole Month in her Chamber; but I presented high; she sight and wept, and swore
she'd never marry. Still I presented, she hated, loathed, spit upon me, still
adod I presented! till I presented my self effectually in Church to her; for
she at last wisely considered her Vows were cancelled since Belmour was hanged.


Faith Sir, this was very cruel to take away his Fame, and then his Mistress.


Cruel, you're an Ass, we are but even with the brisk Rogues, for they take
away our Fame, Cuckold us, and take away our Wives. -- So, so, my Cap Francis.


And do you think this Marriage lawful Sir?

Lawful; it shall be when I've had Livery and Seisin of her Body -- and that
shall be presently Rogue -- quick -- besides this, Belmour dares as well be
hanged as come into England.


If he gets his Pardon Sir --

Pardon, no, no, I have took care for that, for I have you must know got his
Pardon already.


How Sir, got his Pardon, that's some amends for robbing him of his Wife.


Hold honest Francis; what dost think 'twas in Kindness to him? no you Fool, I
got his Pardon my self, that no body else should have it, so that if he gets
any Body to speak to his Majesty for it, his Majesty cries he has granted it;
but for want of my Appearance, he's defunct, trust up, hanged Francis.


This is the most excellent Revenge I ever heard of.

Ay, I learnt it of a great Politician of our Times.

But have you got his Pardon? --

I've don't, I've don't; Pox on him, it cost me five hundred pounds tho! here
'tis, my Solicitor brought it me this Evening.


This was a lucky Hit -- and if it escape me, let me be hanged by a Trick
indeed.


So, put it into my Cabinet -- safe Francis, safe.

Safe I'll warrant you Sir.

My Gown, quick, quick -- the other Sleeve, man -- so now my Night-Cap; well I'll
in, throw open my Gown to fright away the Women; and jump into her Arms.


He's gone, quickly Oh Love inspire me!

Sir, my Master Sir Cautious Fulbank left his Watch on the little Parlor-Table
to Night, and bid me call for it.


Hah -- the Bridegroom has it Sir, who is just gone to Bed, it shall be sent
him in the Morning.


'Tis ^ery well Sir -- your Servant --

Let me see -- here is the Watch, I took it up to keep for him -- but his
sending has inspired me with a slidden Stratagem, that will do better than
Force, to secure the poor trembling Leticia -- who I am sure is dying with her
Fears.


WHat's here? what's here? the prating Women still. Ods bobs, what not in Bed
yet? for shame of Love Leticia.


For shame of Modesty Sir; you would not have me go to Bed before all this
Company.


What the Women; why they must see you laid, 'tis the Fashion.


What with a Man? I would not for the World.
Oh Belmou^, where art thou, with all thy promised Aid?

Nay Madam, we should see you laid indeed.

First in my Grave Diana.

Ods bobs, here's a Compact amongst the Women -- High Treason against the
Bridegroom -- therefore Ladies withdraw or adod Ill lock you all in.

So, so, now we're alone Letioia -- off with this foolish Modesty, and
Night-Gown, and slide into my Arms,

H'e' my little Puskin -- what fly me my Coy Daphne,
Hah -- who's that knocks -- who's there? --

'Tis I Sir, 'tis I, open the Door presently.

Why, what's the matter, is the House o-fire?

Worse Sir, worse --

'Tis Belmour's Voice!

Oh Sir, do you know this Watch?

This Watch.

Ay^ Sir, this Watch

This Watch -- why prithee, why dost tell me of a Watch, (...) Sir Cautio^
Fulbank's Watch, what then, what a Pox dost trouble me with Watches.


'Tis indeed his Watch Sh^, and by this Token he has sent for you, to come
immediately to his House Sir.


What a Devil art Mad Francis, or is his Worship Mad, or does he think me Mad
-- go prithee tell him I'll come to him to Morrow.


To Morrow Sir, why all our Throats may be cut before to Morrow.


What say thou, Throats cut?

Why, the City's up in Arms Sir, and all the Aldermen are met at Guild-Hall;
some damnable Plot Sir.


Hah -- Plot -- the Aldermen met at Guild-Hall? -- hum -- why let 'em meet, Vll
not lose this Night to save the Nation.


Would you to bed Sir, when the weighty Affairs of State require your Presence.


-- Hum -- met at Guild hall? -- my Clothes, my Gown again Francis, I'll out --
out, what upon my Wedding night? no -- I'll in.


For shame Sir, shall the Reverend Council of the City debate without you?


Ay, that's true, that's true, come truss again Francis, truss again -- yet now
I think on it Francis, prithee run thee to the Hall, and tell 'em 'tis my
Wedding-Night, do ye see Francis; and let some body give my Voice for --


What Sir?

Adod I cannot tell; up in Arms say you, why, let 'em sight Dog, fight Bean;
mun, I'll to Bed -- go --


And shall his Majesty's Service and his Safety lie unregarded for a slight
Woman Sir?


Hum, his Majesty! -- come, hast Francis, I'll away, and call Ralph, and the
Footmen, and bid 'em Arm; each man shoulder his Musket; and advance his Pike --
and bring my Artillery Implements quick -- and let's away: Pupsey -- b^u'y
Pupsey, I'll bring it a fine thing yet before Morning, it may be -- let's away;
I shall grow fond, and forget the Business of the Nation -- come follow me
Francis --


Now my Leticia, if thou^e'r did love!
If ever thou design'st to make me blessed --
Without delay sly this Adulterous Bed!

Why Francis -- where are you ^nave?

I must be gone, lest he suspect us -- I'll loose him, and return to thee
immediately -- get thy self ready --


I will not fail my Love.

-- Old man forgive me -- thou the Aggressor art,
Who rudely forced the Hand without the Heart.
She cannot from the Paths of Honour rave,
Whose Guide's Religion, and whose End is Love.
Stay here, till I give notice of your coming.

Kind Light, a little of your Aid -- now must I be peeping tho my Curiosity
should lose me all -- hah -- Zouns, what's here -- a Hovel or a Hog-sty? hum,
see the Wickedness of Man, that I should find no time to Swear in, but just
when I'm in the Devils Clutches.


Good Even to you, fair Sir.

Ha -- desend me! if this be she, I must rival the Devil, that's certain.


Come young Gentleman, dare not you venture?

He must be as hot as Vesuvius, that does -- I shall never earn my Morning's
Present.


What do you fear, a longing Woman Sir?

The Devil I do -- this is a damned Preparation to Love.


Why stand you gazing Sir, a Woman's Passion is like the Tide, it stays for no
man when the Hour is come --


I'm sorry I have took it at the Turning.
I'm sure mine's ebbing out as fast.

Will you not speak Sir -- will you not on?

I would fain ask -- a civil Question or two first.

You know, too much Curiosity lost Paradise.

Why there's it now.

Fortune and Love invite you if you dare follow me.

This is the first thing in Peticoats that ever dared me in vain. Were I but
sure she were but Humane now -- for sundry Considerations she might down -- but
I will on --


-- Hah, Music -- and Excellent!
Ah Julia, Julia! if this soft Preparation
Were but to bring me to thy dear Embraces;
What different Motions would surround my Soul,
From what perplex it now.
-- If these be Devils, they are obliging ones.
I did not care if I ventured on that last Female Fiend.

Cease your Wonder, cease your Guess,
Whence arrives your Happiness.
Cease your Wonder, cease your Pain.
Humane Fancy is in vain.

'Tis enough you once shall find,
Fortune may to Worth be kind;
And Love can leave off being blind.

You, before you enter here --
On this sacred Ring must swear.
By the Figure which is round,
Your Passion constant and profound.
By the Adamantine Stone,
To be fixed to one alone.
By the Lustre which is true,
Never to break your sa^red Vow.
Lastly by the Gold that's t^y'd
For Love all Dangers to abide.

Once about him let us move,
To confirm him true to Love.

Twice with mystic turning Feet,
Make him silent and discreet.

Thrice about him let us tread,
To keep him ever young in Red.

Forget Aminta's proud Disdain.
Taste here, and sigh no more in vain.
The Joy of Love without the Pain.

That God vepenes his former Slights,
And For^ thus your Faith requir^s.

Forget ^;
Then taste, and sigh no more in vain,
The Joy of Love without the Pain.
The Joy of Love without the Pain.

What the Devil can all this mean? If there be a Woman in the Case -- Sure I
have not lived so bad a Life, to gain the dull Reputation of so modest a
Coxcomb, but that a Female might down with me, without all this Ceremony. Is it
care of her Honour? -- that cannot be -- this Age afford none so nice: nor
Fiend, nor Goddess can she be, for these I saw were mortal! No -- 'tis a Woman
-- I am positive. Not young nor handsome, for then Vanity had made her Glory to
'ave been seen. No -- sinee 'tis resolved a Woman -- she must be old and ugly,
and will not bauk my Fancy with her Sight. But baits me more with this
essential Beauty.


Well -- be she young or old, Woman or Devil.
She pays, and I'll endeavour to be civil.
HAh, knocking so late at at our Gate --

How now, how now, what's the matter here?

Matter, what is my Lady's innocent Intrigue found out? -- Heav'n's Sir what
makes you here in this warlike Equipage?


What makes you in this showing Equipage Sir?

I have been dancing among some of my Friends.

And I thought to have been fighting with some of my Friends. Where's Sir
Cautious? where's Sir Cautious?


Sir Cautious -- Sir, in Bed.

Call him, call him -- quickly good Edward.

Sure my Lady's Frolic is betrayed and he comes to make
Mischief. However I'll go and secure Mr. Gayman.
Dick, Pray Sir go to Bed, here's no Thieves; all's still and well.

This last Nights Misfortune of mine Dick, has kept me waking and methought all
Night I heard a kind of a silent Noise. I am still afraid of Thieves, mercy
upon me to loose five hundred Ginneys at one clap Dick. -- Hah -- bless me!
What's yonder! Blow the great Horn Dick -- Thieves -- Murder, Murder.


Why what a Pox are you mad? 'Tis I, 'tis I Man.

I, who am I? Speak -- declare -- pronounce.

Your Friend old Feeble Fainwood.

How, Sir Feeble! At this late Hour, and on his Wedding Night -- why what's the
matter Sir -- is it Peace or War with you?


A Mistake -- a Mistake -- proceed to the Business good Brother, for time you
know is precious.


Some strange Catastrophe has happened between him and his Wife to Night, that
makes him disturb me thus -- come sit good Brother, and to the Business as you
say --


As soon as you please Sir. Lord how wildly he stares!
He's much disturbed in's Mind -- well Sir let us be brief --

As brief as you please Sir, -- well Brother --

So Sir.

How strangely he stares and gapes -- some deep Concern!


Hum -- hum --

I listen to you, advance --

Sir?

A very distracted Countenance -- pray Heaven he be ^ot mad, and a young Wife
is able to make any old Fellow mad, that's the Truth on it.


Sure 'tis something of his Lady -- he's so loath to bring it out -- I am sorry
you are thus disturbed Sir.


No disturbance to serve a Friend --

I think I am your Friend indeed Sir Cautious, or I would not have been here
upon my Wedding Night.


His Wedding Night -- there lies his Grief poor Heart!
Perhaps she has cuckolded him already --
-- Well come Brother -- many such things are done --

Done -- hum -- come out with it Brother -- what troubles you to Night.


Troubles me -- why, knows he I am robbed?

I may perhaps restore you to the Rest you've lost.

The Rest, why have I lost more since? Why know you then who did it? Oh how
I'll be revenged upon the Rascal?


'Tis -- Jealousy, the old Worm that bites --
Who is it you suspect?

Alas I know not whom to suspect, I would I did; but if you could discover him
-- I would so swinge him. --


I know him -- what do you take me for a Pinip Sir? I know him -- there's your
Watch again Sir, I'm your Friend, but no Pimp Sir --


My Watch, I thank you Sir -- but why Pimp Sir?

Oh a very thriving Calling Sir -- and I have a young Wife to practice with. I
know your Rogues?


A young Wife -- 'tis so, his Gentlewoman has been at Hot-Cockles without her
Husband, and he's Horn mad upon it. I suspected her being so close in with his
Nephew -- in a Fit with a Pox --

Come come Sir Feeble 'tis many an honest Mans Fortune.

I grant it Sir -- but to the Business Sir I came for.

With all my Soul --

Hah -- Sir Feeble -- and Sir Cautious there -- what shall I do? For this Way
we must pass, and to carry him back would discover my Lady to him, betray all
and spoil the Jest -- retire Sir, your Life depends upon your being unseen.


Well Sir, -- do you not know that I am married Sir?
And this my Wedding Night?

Very good Sir.

And that I long to be in Bed?

Very well Sir --

Very good Sir, and very well Sir -- why then what the Devil do I make here
Sir!


Patienco Brother -- and forward --

Forward -- lend me your Hand good Brother -- lets feel your Pulse -- how has
this Night gone with you?


Ha, ha, ha -- this is the oddest Quonundrum -- sure he's mad -- and yet now I
think on it, I have not slept to Night, nor shall I ever sleep again till I have
found the Villain that robbed me.


So -- now he weeps -- far gone -- this laughing and weeping is a very bad
Sign! Come let me lead you to your Bed.


Mad -- stark Mad -- no -- now I'm up 'tis no Matter -- pray ease your troubled
Mind -- I am your Friend -- out with it -- wllat was it acted? O^ but designed?


How Sir?

Be not ashamed -- I'm under the same Prema^ire I doubt, little better than a
-- but let that pass --


Have you any Proof?

Proof of what, good Sir?

Of what, why that you're a Cuckold -- Sir a Cuckold if you'll have it.


Cuckold Sir -- do ye know what ye say?

What I say?

I what you say, can you make this out?

I make it out --

Ay Sir -- if you say it and cannot make it out -- you're a --


What am I Sir? What am I?

A Cuckold as well as my self Sh^, and I'll sue you for Scandalum Magnatum, I
shall recover swinging Damages with a City Jury.


I know of no such thing Sir.

No Sir?

No Sir.

Then what would you be at Sir?

I be at Sir -- what would you be at Sir?

Ha, ha, ha -- why this is the strangest thing -- to see an old Fellow, a
Magistrate of the City, the first Night he's married forsake his Bride and Bed,
and come armed Cap-a-pee, like Garga^ta, to disturb another old Fellow and
banter him with a Tale of a Tub; and all to be-cuckold him here -- in plain
English what's your Business?


Why what the Devils your Businessa and you go to that?

My Business with whom?

With me Sir, with me, what a Pox de ye think I do here.


'Tis that I would be glad to know Sir.

Here Dick, remember I've brought back your Masters Watch, next time he sends
for me over Night I'll come to him in the Morning.


Ha, ha, ha -- I send for you? Go home and sleep Sir -- ad and yo^ keep your
Wife wijubg ti si A little purpose you'd go near to be (...) with (...) of Horns


Roguery -- ^ --
Look ye this was the Message I received --

Now Sir we are two ^o two, for this Way you must pass or be taken in the Ladies
Lodgings -- I'll-first adventure out to make you pass the fafer. And that he
may not, if possible, fee Sir Cautious, whom I shall fright into a Trance I am
sure.

And Sir Feeble the Devil's in t if he know him.

A brave kind Fellow this --

Oh -- andone -- andone -- help help --
I'm dead, I'm dead -- I

As I could wish --
-- Come on thou ghastly thing and follow me --

Oh Lord, oh Lord --

Hah -- old Sir Feeble Fain^ood -- why where the Devil am I? -- 'Tis he -- and
be it where it will I'll fright the old Dotard for cozening my Friend of his
Mistress --


Oh guard me -- guard me -- all ye Poe'rs?

Thou call in vain fond W^otch -- for I am Be^,

Whom first thor^ robst of Fame and Life.
And then what dearer was -- his Wife --
Oh Lord -- oh Lord!

Heavens what Noise is this? -- So he's got safe out I see -- hah what thing
art thou --


Stay Madam stay -- (...) I, 'tis ^a poor trembling Mortal --

Sir Feeble Fa^ood -- rise -- are you both mad? --


No no -- Madam we have seen the Devil.

Ay and he was as tall as the Mohnment.

With Eyes like a Beacon -- and a Mouth -- Heaven bless us like London Bridge
at a full Tide.


Ay, and reared as loud --

Idle Fancies, what makes you from your Bed? And you
Sir from your Bride?

Oh! that's the Business of another Day, a Mistake only Madam.


Away, I'm ashamed to see wise Men so weak, the Phantoms of the Night, or your
own Shadows, the Whimsies of the Brain for want of Rest, or perhaps Bredwell
your Man -- who being wiser than his Master played you this Trick to fright you
both to Bed.


Hum -- adod and that may be, for the young Knave when he let me in to Night,
was dressed up for some Waggery --


Ha, ha, ha, 'twas even so sure enough Brother --

Ads bobs but they frighted me at first basely -- but I'll home to Pupsey,
there may be Roguery, as well as here -- Madam I ask your Pardon, I see we're
all mistaken.


Ay, Sir Feeble; go home to your Wife.

OH are you come Sir, I'll call my Lady down.

Oh haste, the Minutes fly -- leave all behind. And bring Leticia only to my
Arms.

-- Hah -- what Noise is that? 'Tis coming this Way -- I tremble with my Fears
-- hah -- Death and the Devil -- 'Tis he --

Ay 'tis he -- and I'm undone -- what shall I do to kill him now? besides the
Sin would put me past all Hopes of pardoning.


A damned Rogue to deceive me thus --

Hah -- see by Heaven Leticia! Oh we are ruined!

Hum -- what's here two Women? --

Where are you my best Wishes? Lord of my Vows -- and Charmer of my Soul? Where
are you?


Oh Heavens! --

Hum, who's here? My Gentlewoman -- she's monstrous kind of the sudden. But
whom is't meant to?


Give me your Hand my Love, my Life, my all --
-- Alas! where are you?

Hum -- no, no, this is not to me -- I am jilted, cozened, Cuckol'd, and so
forth --


Oh are you here, indeed you frighted me with your Silence -- here take these
Jewels and let us hast away.


Hum -- are you thereabouts Mistress, was I sent away with a Sharn-Plot for
this! -- She can not mean it to me.


Will you not speak -- will you not answer me? -- do you repent already? --
before Enjoyment are you cold and false?


Hum -- before Enjoyment -- that must be me? Before Enjoyment -- Ay ay 'tis I
-- I see a little

Prolonging a Woman's Joy, sets an Edge upon her Appetite.

What means my Dear? Shall we not haste away?

Hast away? there 'tis again -- no -- 'tis not me she means what at your Tricks
and Intrigues already -- yes yes I am destined a Cuckold --


Say, am I not your Wife; can you deny me?

Wife! adod 'tis I she means -- 'tis I she means --

Oh, Belmour, Belmour!

Hum -- what's that -- Belmour?

Hah! Sir Feeble! -- he would not, Sir, have used me thus unkindly.


Oh -- I'm glad 'tis no worse -- Belmour quoth a; I thought the Ghost was come
again.


Why did you not speak, Sir, all this while -- my Lady weeps with your
Unkindness.


I did but hold my peace to hear how prettily she prattled Love: But fags you
are nought to think of a young Fellow -- adsbobs you are now.


I only said -- he would not have been so unkind to me.

But what makes ye out at this Hour, and with these Jewels?


Alas Sir, we thought the City was in Arms, and packed up our things to secure
'em, if there had been a Necessity for Flight. For had they come to Plundering
once, they would have begun with the rich Aldermen's Wives, you know Sir.


Adsbobs and so they would -- but there was no
Arms -- nor Mutiny -- where's Francis?

Here Sir.

Here Sir -- why what a Story you made of a Meeting in the Hall and -- Arms and
-- a -- the Divel of any thing was stirring, but a couple of old Fools, that
sat gaping and waiting for one another Business --


Such a Message was brought me Sir.

Brought, you're an Ass Francis -- but no more -- come, come, lets to Bed. --


To Bed Sir? what by Day-light -- fot that's hasting on -- I would not for the
World -- the Night would hide my Blushes -- but the Day -- would let me see my
self in your Embraces.


Embraces, in a Fidlestick, why are we not married?

'Tis true Sir, and Time will make me more familiar with you, but yet my virgin
Modesty forbids it. I'll to Diana's Chamber, the Night will come again.


For once you shall prevail; and this Damned Jant has pretty well mortified me:
-- a Pox of your Mutiny Francis -- Come I'll conduct thee to Diana, and lock
thee in, that I may have thee safe Rogue. --


We'll give young Wenches leave to whine and blush,
And fly those Blessings which -- ^ads bobs they wish.
HOw now Ralph -- Let your Lady know I am come to wait on her.


Oh why this needless Visit --
Your Husbands safe, at least till Evening safe,
Why will you not go back?
And give me one soft Hour, though to torment me.

You are at Leisure now I thank you Sir,
Last Night when I with all Loves Rhetoric pleaded,
And Heaven knows what last Night might have produced,
You were ingage'd! False Man, I do believe it,
And I am satisfied you love me not.

Not love you!
Why do I waste my Youth in vain Pursuit,
Neglecting Interest, and despisng Power!
Unheeding, and despising other Beauties.
Why at your Feet is all my Fortune laid,
And why does all my Fate depend on you?

I'll not consider why you play the Fool,
Present me Rings and Bracelets; Why pursue me;
Why watch whole Nights before my senseless Door,
And take such Pains to show your self a Coxcomb --

Oh! why all this?
By all the Powers above! by this dear Hand,
And by this Ring, which on this Hand I place,
On which I've sworn Fidelity to Love;
I never had a Wish or soft Desire
To any other Woman,
Since Julia swayed the Empire of my Soul!

Hah, my own Ring I gave him last Night.
-- Your Jewel Sir, is rich,
Why do you part with things of so much value
So easily, and so frequently?

To strengthen the weak Arguments of Love.

And leave your self undone?

Impossible, if I am blessed with Julia.

Love's a thin Diet, nor will keep out Cold,
You cannot satisfy your Dunning Taylor,
To cry -- I am in love!
Tho possible you may your Seamstress.

Does ought about me speak such Poverty?

I am sorry that it does not, since to maintain this Gallantry, 'tis said you
use base means, below a Gentleman.


Who dares but to imagine it's a Rascal, a Slave, below a Beating -- what means
my Julia?


No more dissembling, I know your Land is gone -- I know each Circumstance of
all your wants, therefore -- as ever you hope that I should love you ever, tell
me -- where 'twas you got this Jewel Sir.


Hah -- I hope 'tis no stolen Goods;
Why on the sudden all this nice Examining?

You trifle with me, and I'll plead no more.

Stay -- why -- I bought it Madam --

Where had you Money Sir? you see I am no Stranger to your Poverty.


This is strange -- perhaps it is a Secret.

So is my love, which shall be kept from you.

Stay Julia -- your Will shall be obeyed! --
Though I had rather die, than be obedient,
Because I know you'll hate me, when 'tis told.

By all my Vows, let it be what it will,
It never shall alter me from loving you.

I have -- of late -- been tempted --
With Presents, Jewels, and large Sums of Gold.

Tempted! by whom?

The Devil, for ought I know.

Defend me Heaven! the Divel?
I hope you have not made a Contract with him?

No, tho in the shape of Woman it appeared.

Where met you with it?

By Magic Art I was conducted -- I know not how,
To an enchanted Palace in the Clouds,
Where I was so attended --
Young Dancing -- singing Fiends innumerable!

Imagination all.

But for the Amorous Devil, the old Proserpine.

Ay she -- what said she? --

Not a Word! Heaven be praised, she was a silent Devil -- but she was laid in a
Pavillion, all formed of gilded Clouds, which hung by Geometry, whither I was
conveyed, after much Ceremony, and laid in Bed with her; where much ado, and
trembling with my Fears -- I forced my Arms about her.


And sure that undeceived him --

But such a Carcase 'twas -- deliver me -- so rivelled, lean, and rough -- a
Canvass Bag of wooden Ladles were a better Bed fellow.


Now tho I know that nothing is more distant than I from such a Monster -- yet
this angers me.

Death could you love me and submit to this?

'Twas that first drew me in --
The tempting Hope of means to conquer you,
Would put me upon any dangerous Enterpriser
Were I the Lord of all the Universe,
I am so lost in Love,
For one dear Night to clasp you in my Arms,
I'd lavish all that World -- then die with Joy.

'S'life after all to seem deformed, old, ugly --

I knew you would be angry when you heard it.

-- How, what's here -- my Lady with the Spark that courted her last Night --
hum -- with her again so soon -- well this Impudence and Importunity undoes
more City Wives than all their unmerciful Finery.


But Madam --

Oh here's my Husband -- you'd best tell him your Story -- what makes him here
so soon --


Me his Story -- I hope he will not tell me he's a mind to Cuckold me!


A Devil on him, what shall I say to him?

What -- so Excellent at Intrigues, and so Dull at an Excuse?


Yes Madam, I shall tell him --

-- Is my Lady at leisure for a Visit Sir?

Always to receive your Ladyship.

With me Sir, would you speak?

With you Sir, if your Name be Fulbank?

Plain Fulbank, me thinks you might have had a Sir-reverence under your Girdle
Sir, I am Honoured with another Title Sir --


With many Sir, that very well become you --
I've something to deliver to your Ear.

So, I'll be hanged if he do not tell me, I'm a Cuckold now. I see it in his
Eyes; my Ear Sir, I'd have you to know I scorn any man's Secrets Sir -- for
ought I know you may whisper Treason to me Sir. Pox on him, how handsome he is,
I hate the sight of the young Stallion.


I would not be uncivil Sir, before all this Company.

Uncivil -- Ay, Ay, 'tis so, he cannot be content to Cuckold me, but he must
tell me so too.


But since you'll have it Sir -- you are -- a Rascal -- a most notorious
Villain Sir, d'e hear --


Yes, yes, I do -- hear -- and am glad 'tis no worse.


Griping as Hell -- and as insatiable -- worse than a Brokering Jew, not all
the twelve Tribes harbours such a damned Extortioner.


Pray under favour Sir -- who are you?

One whom thou hast undone --

Hum -- I'm glad of that however.

Racking me up to starving Want and Misery,
Then took Advantages to ruin me.

So, and he'd revenge it on my Wife --

Do you not know one Wastall Sir?

Wastall -- ha, ha, ha -- if you are any Friend to that poor Fellow -- you may
return and tell him Sir -- d'e hear -- that the Mortgage of two hundred pound a
Year is this Day out, and I'll not bate him an Hour Sir -- ha, ha, ha -- what
do you think to hector civil Magistrates?


Very well Sir, and is this your Consoience?

Conscience -- what do you tell me of Conscience? Why what a Noise's here -- as
if the undoing a young Heir were such a Wonder; ods so l've undone a hundred
without half this ado.


I do believe thee -- and am come to tell you -- I'll be none of that Number --
for this Minute I'll go and redeem it -- and free my Self from the Hell of your
Indentures.


How redeem it, sure the Devil must help him then! -- Stay Sir -- stay -- Lord
Sir what need you put your self to that trouble, your Land is in safe Hands
Sir, come come sit down -- and let us take a Glass of Wine together Sir --


Sir my Service to you.

Your Servant Sir. Would I could come to speak to Belmour which I dare not do
in Public, least I betray him. I long to be resolved where 'twas Sir Feeble
was last Night -- if it were he -- by which I might find out my invisible
Mistress.


Noble Mr. Wastall --

Will you please to sit Sir?

I have a little Business Sir -- but anon I'll wait on you -- your Servant
Gentlemen -- I'll to Crap the Scriveners.


Do you know this Wasball Sir! --

Know him Sir, Ay too well --

The Worlds well amended with him Captain, since I lost my Money to him and you
at the George in White Friars.


Ay poor Fellow -- he's sometimes up and sometimes down, as the Dice favour him
--


Faith and that's pity; but how came he so fine o'th'sudden:
'twas but last Week he borrowed eighteen pence of me on his
Wast Belt to pay his Dinner in an Ordinary.

Were you so cruel Sir to take it?

We are not all one Man^ Children; faith Sir, we are here to Day and gone to
Morrow --


I say 'twas done like a wise Man Sir -- but under
Favour Gentlemen this Wastall is a Rascal --

A very Rascal Sir, and a most dangerous Fellow -- he cullye in your Prent^ and
Cashiers to play -- which ruins so many o'th'young Fry i'th'City --


Hum -- does he so -- do hear that Edward?

Then he keeps a private Press and prints your Amsterdam and Leyden Libels.


Ay and makes em too I'll warrant him; a dangerous Fellow --


Sometimes he begs for a lam^ Soldier with a wooden Leg.

Sometimes as a blind Man sells Switches in New-market Road.

At other times he runs the Country like, a Gypsy -- tells
Fortunes and robs Hedges, when he's out of Linen.

Tells Fortunes too -- nay I thought he dealt with the Devil -- well Gentlemen
you are all wide o'this Matter -- for to tell you the Truth -- he deals with
the Devil Gentlemen -- otherwise he could never have redeemed his Land.


How Sir, the Devil?

I say the Devil. Heaven bless every wise Man from the Devil.


The Devil, sha! there's no such Animal in Nature. I rather think he pads.


Oh Sir he has not Courage for that -- but he's an admirable Fellow at your
Lock.


Lock! My Study Look was picked -- I begin to suspect him --

I saw him once open a Lock with the Bone of a Breast of Mutton, and break an
Iron ^ar asunder with the Eye of a needle.


Prodigious -- well I say the Devil still.
Who's this talks of the Devil -- a Pox of the Devil I say, this last Nights
Devil has so haunted me --


Why have you seen it since Brother?

In Imagination Sir.

How Sir a Devil?

Ay, or a Ghost.

Where good Sir?

Ay where? I'd travel a hundred Milo to see a Ghost --

Sure Sir 'twas Fancy?

If 'twere a Fancy, 'twas a strong one, and Ghosts and Fancies are all one, if
they can deceive. I tell you -- if ever I thought in my Life -- I thought I saw
a Ghost -- Ay and a damnable impudent Ghost too; he said he was a -- a Fellow
here -- they call Belmour.


How Sir!

Well I would give the World to see the Devil, provided he were a civil affable
Devil, such an one as Wastalls Acquaintance is --


He can show him too soon, it may be. I'm sure as civil as he is, he helps him
to steal my Gold I doubt -- and to be sure -- Gentlemen you say he's a Gamester
-- I desire when he comes anon, that you would propose to sport a Dye or so --
and we'll sall to play for a Tester, or the like -- and if he sets any Money
-- I shall go near to know my own Gold, by some remarkable Pieces amongst it;
and if he have it, I'll hang him, and then all his six hundred a Year will be
my own which I have in Mortgage.


Let the Captain and I alone to top upon him -- mean time Sir I have brought my
Music -- to entertain my Mistress with a Song.


Take your own Methods Sir -- they are at Leisure -- while we go drink their
Healths within. Adod I long for Night, we are not half in kelter, this damned
Ghost will not out of my Head yet.


Hah -- a Ghost! What can he mean? A Ghost, and Belmour's.
-- Sure my good Angel, or my Genius,
In pity of my Love, and of Leticia --
But see Leticia comes, but still attended --
-- Remember -- oh remember to be true!

I was sick to know with what Christian Patience you bore the Martyrdom of this
Night.


As those condemned bear the last Hour of Life.
A short Reprieve I had -- and by a kind Mistake.
Diana only was my Bedfellow --

I wish for your Repose you never had seen my Father.

And so do I, I fear he has undone me --

And me, in breaking of his Word with Bredwell --

-- So -- as Trincolo says would you were both hanged for me, for putting me in
mind of my Husband. For I have ^'en no better Luck than either of you --

-- Let our two Faces wath your approaching one:
I love young Bredwell and must pl^ad for him.

I know his Virtue ^.
But Pride and Modesty, for ^.

Wrong not my Brother so who dyes for you --

Could he so easily see me given away
Without a Sigh at parting?
For all the Day a Calm was in his Eyes,
And unconcerned he looked and talked to me.
In dancing never pressed my willing Hand,
Nor with a scornful Glance reproached my Falmood.

Believe me that Dissembling was his Master-piece.

Why should he fear, did not my Father promise him?

Ay that was in his wooing time to me.
But now 'tis all forgotten --

How now Cousin! Is this high piece of Gallantry from you?


Ay Madam, I have not travelled for nothing --

I find my Cos^en is resolved to conquer, he affails with all his Artillery of
Charms; we'll leave him to his Success Madam --


Oh Lord Madam you oblige me -- look Ned you had a mind to have a full View of
my Mistress, Sir, and -- here she is

Go -- salute her -- look how he stands now, what a sneaking thing is a Fellow
who has never travelled and seen the World! -- Madam -- this is a very honest
Friend of mine, for all he looks so simply.


Come he speaks for you, Sir.

He Madam, tho he be but a Bankers Prentice Madam; he's as pretty a Fellow of
his Inches as any in the City -- he has made Love in Dancing Schools, and to
Ladies of Quality in the middle Gallery, and shall joke ye -- and repartee with
any Foreman within the Walls -- prithee to her -- and commend me, I'll give
thee a new Point Cravat.


He looks as if he could not speak to me.

Not speak to you? -- yes Gad Madam and do any thing to you too.


Are you his Advocate Sir?

For Want of a better --

An Advocate for Love I am;
And bring you such a Message from a Heart --

Meaning mine dear Madam^

That when you hear it, you will pity it.

Or the Devils in her --

Sir I have many Reasons to believe
It is my Fortune you pursue, not Person?

There's something in that I must confess.
But say what you will Ned --

May all the Mischiefs of despairing Love
Fall on me if it be.

That's well enough --

No were you born an humble Village Maid,
That fed a Flock, upon the neighbouring Plain;
With all that shining Virtue in your Soul,
By Heaven I would adore you -- love you -- wed you.
Tho'the gay World were lost by such a Nuptial.
-- this -- I would do were I my Friend the Squire.

Ay if you were me -- you might do what you pleased; but I'm of another Mind.


Should I consent, my Father is a Man whom Interest sways not Honour, and
whatsoever Promises he'as made you, he means to break 'em all, and I am
destined to another.


How another -- his Name, his Name Madam -- here's Ned and I fear never a
single Man i'th'Nation. What is he? -- what is he? --


A Fop, a Fool, a beaten Ass -- a Blockhead.

What a damned Shame's this, that Women should be sacrificed to Fools, and Fops
must run away with Heiresses -- whilst we Men of Wit and Parts -- dress and
dance, and cock, and travel, for nothing but to be ta me Keepers.


But I by Heaven will never be that Victim.
But where my Soul is vowed 'tis fixed for ever.

Are you resolved, are you confirmed in this?
Oh my Dima speak it over again.
Bless me and make me happier than a Monarch

Hold, hold dear Ned -- that's my part I take it.

Your Pardon Sir, I had forgot my self.
-- But time is short -- what's to be done in this?

Done, I'll enter the House with Fire and Sword d'e see, not that I care this
-- but I'll not be fob'd off -- what do they take me for a Fool -- an Ass?


Madam, dare you run the Risk of your Father's Displeasure, and run away with
the Man you love?


With all my Soul --

That's hearty -- and we'll do it -- Ned and I here -- and I love an Amour with
an Adventure in it like Amadis de Gaul -- harky Ned -- get a Coach and six ready
to Night when 'tis dark at the back Gate --


And I'll get a Parson ready in my Lodging, to which I have a Key through the
Garden by which we may pass unseen.


Good -- Mun here's Company --

A hundred Pound lost already! Oh Coxcomb, old Coxcomb, and a wise Coxcomb --
to turn Prodigal at my Years, whe' I was bewitched!


Sho, 'twas a Frolic Sir, I have lost a hundred pound as well as you. My Lady
has lost, and your Lady has lost, and the rest -- what old Cows will kick
sometimes, what's a hundred Pound?


A hundred Pound, why 'tis a Sum Sir -- a Sum -- why what the Devil did I do
with a Box and Dice? --


Why you made a shift to loose Sir? And where's the harm of that? We have lost,
and he has won, anon it may be your Fortune.


Ay, but he could never do it fairly, that's certain. Three hundred Pound! why
how came you to win so ummercifully Sir?


Oh the Devil will not loose a Gamester of me -- you see Sir.


The Devil! -- mark that Gentlemen --

The Rogue has damned Luck sure, he has got a Fly --

And can you have the Conscience to carry away all our Money Sir?


Most assuredly, unless you have the Courage to retrieve it.
I'll set it at a Throw, or any Way, what say you Gentlemen?

Ods bobs you young Fellows are too hard for us every Way, and I am engaged at
an old Game with a new Gamester here -- who will require all an old Mans Stock.


Come Cousin will you venture a Guinny -- Come Mr. Bredwel --


Well if no Body dare venture on me I'll send away my Cash --


Hum -- must it all go? -- a rare Sum, if a Man were but sure the Devil would
but stand Neuter now --

-- Sir I wish I had any thing but ready Money to stake -- three hundred Pound
-- a fine Sum!


You have Movables Sir, Goods -- Commodities --

That's all one Sir; that's Moneys worth Sir; but if I had any thing that were
worth nothing --


You would venture it, -- I thank Iyou Sir, -- I would your Lady were worth
nothing --


Why so Sir?

Then I would set all this against that Nothing.

What set it against my Wife?

Wife Sir, Ay your Wife --

Hum, my Wife against three hundred pounds? --
What All my Wife Sir?

All your Wife. Why Sir, some part of her would serve my turn.


Hum -- my Wife -- why, if I should loose, he could not have the Impudence to
take her --


Well, I find you are not for the Bargain, and so I put up --


Hold Sir -- why so hasty -- my Wife? no -- put up your Money Sir -- what loose
my Wife, for three hundred pounds! --


Loose her Sir -- why she shall be never the worse for my wearing Sir -- the
old covetous Rogue is considering on it I think -- what say you to a Night? I'll
set it to a Night -- there's none need know it Sir.


Hum -- a Night! -- three hundred pounds for a Night! why what a lavish
Whore-master's this: we take Money to marry our Wives, but very seldom part
with 'em, and by the Bargain get Money -- for a Night say you? -- gad if I
should take the Rogue at his word, it would be a pure Jest.


You are not Mad Brother.

No, but I'm wise -- and that's as good; let me consider --


What whether you shall be a Cuckold or not?

Or loose three hundred pounds -- consider that; a Cuckold -- why, 'tis a Word
-- an empty Sound -- 'tis Breath -- 'tis Air -- 'tis nothing -- but three
hundred pounds -- Lord, what will not three hundred pounds do! You may chance
to be a Cuckold for nothing, Sir --


It may be so -- but she shall do it discreetly then.


Under favour, you're an Ass Brother, this is the discreetest way of doing it, I
take it.


But would a wise man expose his Wife?

Why, Cato was a wiser man than I, and he lent his Wife to a young Fellow they
called Hontens^, as S^ory says; and can a wise man have a better President than
C^o


I say Cato was an Asa Sir, for obliging any young Rogue of 'em all.


But I am of Cato's Mi^l; well, a sugle Night you say.


A (...) Night -- to have -- to hold -- pos^ -- and so forth at discretion.


A Night -- I man have her ran and (...)
Morning.

Safe no doubt in it -- but how sound I --

And for Non-performance, you mast pay me Three hundred puunds, I'll forseit as
much it I tell --


Tell? -- why make your Three hundred pounds six hundred, and let it be put
into the Gazet, if you will man -- but is't a Bargain? --


Done -- Sir Feeble shall be witness -- and there stands my Hat.


-- He that comes first to One and thirty wins --

What are you playing for?

Nothing, nothing -- but a Trial of Skill between on Old man and a Young -- and
your Lady sli^p is to be Judge.


I mall be partial Sir.

Six and five's eleven --

Cater Tray -- Pox of the Dice --

Two fives -- one and twenty --

Now Luck -- Dubles of slxes -- nineteen.

Five and four -- ^itty --

Now if he wins it, I'll ^wear he has a Fly indeed -- 'tis impossible without
Doubles of sixes --


Now Fortune shine -- and for the future frown.

-- Hum -- two sixes --

How now? what's the Matter you look so like an Ass, what have you lost?


A Bauble -- a Bauble -- 'tis not for what I've lost -- but because I have not
won --


You look very (...) Sir -- what think you of Cato now?


A wise man may have his Failings --

What has my Husband lost? --

Only a small parcel of Ware that lay dead upon my hands, Sweet-heart.


But I shall improve 'em, Madam, I'll warrant you.

Well, since 'tis no worse, bring in your fine Dancer
Cousin, you say you brought to entertain your Mistress with

Sir, You'll take care to see me paid to Night?

Well Sir -- but my Lady you must know Sir, has the common Frailties of her
Sex, and will refuse what she even longs for, if persuaded to it by me.


I'is not in my Bargain to folicit her Sir, you are to procure her -- or three
hundred pounds Sir; choose you whether.


Procure her? with all my Soul Sir; alas, you mistake my honest Meaning, I
scorn to be so unjust as not to see you a-bed together; and then agree as well
as you can, I have done my part -- in order to this Sir -- get you but your
self conveyed in a Chest to my House, with a Direction upon it for me, and for
the rest --


I understand you --

Ralph get Supper ready.

Well, I must break my Mind, if possible, to my Lady -- but if she should be
refractory now -- and make me pay Three hundred pounds -- why sure she won't
have so little Grace -- Three hundred pounds saved, is Three hundred pounds got
-- by our account -- Could All --


Who of this City Privilege are free,
Hope to be paid for Cuckoldom like me;
The unthriving Merchant, whom grey Hair adorns,
Before all Ventures would ensure his Horns;
For thus, while He bus lets spare Rooms to hire,
His Wife rackd Credit keeps his own entire.
THe Night is come, Oh my Leticia!
The longing Bridegroom hastens to his Bed;
Whilst she with all the Languishment of Love,
And lad Despa^, casts her fair Eyes on me,
Which silently implore, I would deliver her.
But how! Ay, there's the Question -- hah --
I'll get my self hid in her Bed-Chamber --
And something I will do -- may save us yet --
If all my Arts should fail -- I'll have recourse
To this -- and bear Leticia off by Force.
-- But see she comes --

Lights there Ralph,
And my Lady's Coach there --

Well Sir, remember you have promised to grant me my diabolical Request, in
showing me the Devil --


I will not fail you Sir.

Madam, your Servant; I hope you'll see no more Ghosts, Sir Feeble.


No more of that, I beseech you Madam: Prithee Sir Cautious take away your Wife
-- Madam your Servant --

-- Come Let, Let; hasten Rogue, hasten to thy Chamber, away, here be the
young Wenches coming --


So -- they are gone to Bed; and now for Bredwel -- the
Coach waits, and I'll take this opportunity.
Father farewell -- if you dislike my courst,
Blame the old rigid Customs of your Force.

AH Phillis! I am fainting with my Fears,
Hast thou no comfort for me?

Why what art doing there -- fidle fadling -- adod you young Wenches are so
loath to come to -- but when your hands in, you have no ^.


Why do you talk so Sir?

Was it an angered, at the (...) tum-a-me, I'll undress it, ^


You are so wanton Sir, you make me blush --
I will not go to Bed, unless you to Promise me --

No bargaining my little Hussy -- what you'll tie my hands behind me, will
you?


-- What shall I do? -- assist me gentle Maid,
Thy Eyes me-thinks puts on a little hope!

Take Courage Madam -- you guess right -- be consident.

No whispering Gentle woman -- and putting Tricks into her Head, that shall not
cheat me of another Night -- Look on that silly little round Chity-face -- look
on those smiling roguish^ loving Eyes there -- look -- look how they laugh,
^wire and tempt -- he rogue -- I'll buss 'em there, and here and every where --
Ods bobs -- away, this is fooling and spoiling of a ma^ Stomach, with a
Bi^here, and a Bit there -- to Bed -- to Bed --


Go you first Sir, I will but stay to say my Prayers, which are that Heaven
would deliver me.


Say thy Prayers? -- what art thou mad, Prayers upon thy Wedding-night? a short
Thanksgiving or so -- but Prayers quoth a -- 'Sbobs you'll have time enough for
that -- I doubt --


I am ashamed to undress before you Sir, go to Bed --

What was it ashamed to show its little white Foots, and its little round
Bubbys -- well I'll go, I'll go -- I cannot think on it, no, I cannot --


Stand --

Hah --

and Phil. squeak -- Oh Heavons -- why is it Belmour?


Go not, to Bed, I guard this Sacred Place,
And the Adulterer dies that enters here.

Oh -- why do I shake -- sure I'm a Man? what art thou?


I am the wronged, the lost, and murdered Belmour.

O Lord! it is the same, I saw last Night -- oh! -- hold thy dread Vengeance --
pity me; and hear me -- oh! a Parson -- a Parson -- what shall I do -- oh!
where shall I hide my self.


In the utmost Borders of the Earth I'll find thee --
Seas shall not hide thee, nor vast Mountains guard thee.
Even in the depth of Hell, I'll find thee out,
And lash thy filthy and Adulterous Soul --

Oh! I am dead, I'm dead, will no Repentance save me -- 'twas that young Eye
that tempted me to sin; oh! --


See fair Seducer, what thou'st made me do,
Look on this bleeding Wound, it reached my Heart,
To pluck my dear tormenting Image thence,
When News arrived that thou had broke thy Vow.

Oh Lord! oh! -- I'm glad he's dead tho.

Oh hide that fatal Wound, my tender Heart faints with a Sight so horrid!


So she'll clear her self and leave me in the Devil's Clutches.


You've both offended Heaven, and must repent or dye.

Ah -- I do confess I was an old Fool -- bewitched with Beauty, besotted with
Love, and do repent most heartily.


No, you had rather yet go on in Sin:
Thou would live on, and be a baffled Cuckold.

Oh, not for the World Sir: I am convinced and mortifi'd.


Maintain her fine, undo thy Peace to please her, and still be Cuckol'd on --
believe her -- trust her, and be Cuckold still.


I see my Folly -- and my Ages Dotage -- and find the Devil was in me -- yet
spare my Age -- ah! spare me to repent.


If thou repent, renounce her, fly her sight; --
Shun her bewitching Charms, as thou would Hell;
Those dark eternal Mansions of the dead --
Whither I must descend.

Oh -- would he were gone! --

Fly -- be gone -- depart, vanish for ever from her to some more safe and
innocent Apartment.


Oh that's very hard! --

Blessed be this kind Release, and yet me-thinks it grieves me to consider how
the poor Old man is frighted.


-- He's gone, and locked himself into his Chamber --
And now my dear Leticia let us fly --

Despair till now, did my wild Heart invade,
But pitying Love has the rough Storm allayd.
SEt down the Chest behind yon' Hedge of Roses -- and then put on those Shapes
I have appointed you -- and be sure you well-favourd'ly bang both Bearjest and
Noysey; since they have a Mind to see the Devil.


Oh Sir leave 'em to us for that, and if we do not play the Devil with 'em, we
deserve they should beat us. But Sir we are in Sir Cautious his Garden, will
not he sue us for a Trespass?


I'll bear you out; be ready at my Call.
-- Let me see -- I have got no ready Stuff to banter with -- but no Matter any
Giberish will ferve the Fools -- 'tis now about the Hour of ten -- but Twelve
is my appointed lucky Minute, when all the Blessings that my Soul could wish
Shall be resigned to me.

-- Hah who's there, Bredwel?

Oh are you come Sir -- and can you be so kind to a poor
Youth, to favour his Designs and bless his Days?

Yes, I am ready here with all my Devils, both to secure you your Mistress, and
to cudgel your Captain and Squire, for abusing me behind my Back so basely.


'Twas most unmanly Sir, and they deserve it -- I wonder that they come not?


How durst you trust her with him?

Because 'tis dangerous to steal a City Heiress, and let the
Thest be his -- so the dear Maid be mine --
Hark -- sure they come --
-- Who's there, Mr. Bearjest?

Whose that, Ned? -- Well I have brought my Mistress -- hast thou got a Parson
ready -- and a License?


Ay, ay -- but where's the Lady?

In the Coach, with the Captain at the Gate. I came before to see if the Coast
be clear.


Ay Sir -- but what shall we do -- here's Mr. Gayman come on purpose to show
you the Devil, as you desired.


Shoh! a Pox of the Devil Man -- I can't intend to speak with him now.


How Sir? do ye think my Devil of so little Quality to suffer an Affront
unrevenged?


Sir I cry his Devilships Pardon: I did not know his Quality -- I protest Sir I
love and honour him, but I am now just going to be married Sir, and when that
Ceremony's past, I'm ready to go to the Devil as soon as you please.


I have told him your Desire of seeing him, and should you baffle him?


Who I Sir? Pray let his Worship know, I shall be proud of the Honour of his
Acquaintance; but Sir my Mistress and the Parson waits in Neds Chamber.


If all the World wait Sir, the Prince of Hell will stay for no Man.


Oh Sir rather then the Prince of the Infernals shall be affronted, I'll
conduct the Lady up, and entertain her till you come Sir.


Nay I have a great Mind to kiss his -- Paw Sir, but I could wish you'd show
him me by Day-light Sir.


The Prince of Darkness does abhor the Light. But Sir I will for once allow
your Friend the Captain to keep you Company.


I'm much obliged to you Sir, oh Captain --

-- Haste Dear; the Parson waits,
To finish what the Powers designed above.

Sure nothing is so bold as Maids in Love!

Pshoh! he conjure -- he can fly as soon.

Gentlemen you must be sure to confine your selves to this
Circle, and have a Care you neither swear, nor pray.

Pray, Sir? I dare say neither of us were ever that Way gifted.


Cease your Horror, cease your Hast.
And calmly as I saw you last,
Appear! Appear!
By thy Pearls and Diamond Rocks,
By thy heavy Money Box.
By thy shining Petticoat,
That hid thy cloven Feet from Note.
By the Veil that hid thy Face,
Which else had frightened humane Race.
Appear, that I thy Love may see,
Appear kind Fiends, appear to me!

Oh enough, enough! Good Sir lay 'em and I'll pay the Music --


I wonder at it -- these Spirits are in their Nature kind, and peaceable -- and
you have basely injured some body -- and then they will be satisfied --


Oh good Sir take your Cerberuses off -- I do confess the Captain here and I
have violated your Fame.


Abused you -- and traduced you, -- and thus we beg your Pardon --


Abused me? 'Tis more than I know Gentlemen.

But it seems your Friend the Devil does.

By this time Bredwel's married.
-- Great Pantamogan hold for I am satisfied
And thus undo my Charm --
-- so -- the Fools are gone, and now to Julia's Arms

BUt why to Night? indeed you're wondrous kind methinks.

Why I don't know -- a Wedding is a sort of an Alarm to Love; it calls up every
Mans Courage.


Ay but will it come when 'tis called?

I doubt you'll find it to my Grief --

-- But I think 'tis all one to thee, thou care not for my Complement; no,
you would rather have a young Fellow.

I am not used to flatter much; if forty Years were taken from your Age,
it would render you something more agreeable to my Bed, I must confess.


Ay, ay, no doubt on it.

Yet you may take my Word without an Oath, were you as old as Time, and I were
young and gay as April Flowers,

Which all are fond to gather;
My Beauties all should wither in the Shade,
Ever I'd be worn in a dishonest Bosom.

Ay but you're wondrous free methinks -- sometimes, which gives shrewd
Suspicions.


What, because I can not simper -- look demure, and justifiy my Honour when
none questions it.

-- Cry sie, and out upon the naughty Women,
Because they please themselves -- and so would I.

How, would, what cuckold me?

Yes, if it pleased me better than Virtue Sir.
But I'll not change my Freedom and my Humour,
To purchase the dull Fame of being Honest.

Ay but the World, the World --

I value not the Censures of the Crowd.

But I am old.

That's your Fault Sir, not mine.

But being so, if I should be good-natur'd and give thee leave to love
discreetly? --


I'd do it without your leave Sir.

Do it -- what -- cuckold me?

No, love discreetly Sir, love as I ought, love Honestly.

What in Love with any Body, but your own Husband?

Yes.

Yes quoth a -- is that your loving as you ought? --

We can not help our Inclinations Sir,
No more than Time, or Light from coming on --
But I can keep my Virtue Sir entire.

What I'll warrant this is your first Love Gayman?

I'll not deny that Truth, tho even to you.

Why in Consideration of my Age and your Youth, I'd bear a Conscience --
provided you do things wisely.


Do what thing Sir?

You know what I mean --

Hah -- I hope you would not be a Cuckold Sir?

Why -- truly in a civil Way -- or so. --

There is but one Way Sir to make me hate you;
And that would be tame Suffering.

Nay and she be thereabouts, there's no discovering --

But leave this fond Discourse -- and if you must --
Let us to Bed --

Ay, ay -- I did but try your Virtue, mun -- dost think I was in earnest?


Sir here's a Chest directed to your Worship.

Hum -- 'tis Wastall -- now does my Heart sail me -- a Chest say you? -- to me?
-- so late -- I'll warrant it comes from Sir Nicholas Smuggle -- some
prohibited Goods that he has stolen the Custom of, and cheated his Majesty --
well he's an honest Man, bring it in --


What into my Apartment Sir, a nasty Chest!

By all Means -- for if the Searchers come -- they'll never be so uncivil to
ransack thy Lodgings -- and we are bound in Christian Charity to do for one
another -- Some rich Commodities I am sure -- and some fine Knick-knack will
fall to thy share I'll warrant thee -- Pox on him for a young Rogue, how
punctual he is! --

-- Go my Dear, go to Bed -- I'll send Sir Nicholas a Receipt for the Chest, and
be with thee presently --


Hah, where am I? By Heaven my last Nights Vision -- 'Tis that enchanted Room
and yonder the Alcove! Sure 'twas indeed some Witch, who knowing of my
Infidelity -- has by Enchantment brought me ^her -- 'tis so -- I am betrayed --


Hah! or was it Julia! That last Night gave me that lone Opporunity -- but hark
I hear some coming --


Lifting up the Chest Lid. So you are come I see --

Hah -- he here, nay then I was deceived, and it was Julia that last Night gave
me the dear Assignation.


Within. Come Sir Cautious -- I shall fall asleep and then you'll waken me --


Ay my Dear I'm coming -- she's in Bed -- I'll go put out the Candle, and then
--


Ay I'll warrant you for my Part --

Ay -- but you may over-act your Part and spoil all -- but Sir I hope you'll
use a Christian Conscience in this Business.


Oh doubt not Sir, but I shall do you Reason.

Ay Sir, but --

Good Sir no more Cautions, you unlike a fair Gamester will ^ook me out of half
my Night -- I am impatient --


Good Lord are you so hasty; if I please you shan't'go at all.


With all my Soul Sir, pay me three hundred Pound Sir --

Lord Sir you mistake my candid Meaning still. I am content to be a Cuckold Sir
-- but I would have things done decently, do ye mind me?


As decently as a Cuckold can be made Sir.
-- But no more Disputes I pray Sir.

I'm gone -- I'm gone -- but harky Sir -- you'll rise before Day?


Yet again --

I vanish Sir -- but harky -- you'll not speak a Word? But let her think 'tis
I?


Be gone I say Sir --
I am convinced last Night I was with Julia.
Oh Sot -- insensible and dull --

So -- the Gandle's out -- give me your Hand.

Where are you my Dear?

Where should I be -- in Bed, what are you by Dark?


Ay the Candle went out by Chance.

I'll swear Mrs. Pert you look very prettily in my Clothes; and since you Sir
have convinced me that this innocent Deceit is not unlawful, I am glad to be
the Instrument of advancing Mrs. Pert to a Husband, she already has so just a
Claim to.


Since she has so firm a Contract, I pronounce it a lawful
Marriage -- but hark they are coming sure --

Pull your Hoods down -- and keep your Face from the Light.


Madam I beg your Pardon -- I met with a most divellish Adventure, -- your
Pardon too Mr. Doctor, for making you wait -- but the Business is this Sir, --
I have a great Mind to lye with this young Gentlewoman to Night, but she swears
if I do, the Parson of the Parish shall know it --


If I do Sir, I shall keep Counsel.

And that's civil Sir, -- come lead the Way,
With such a Guide, the Devil's in it, if we can go astray.

NOw cannot I sleep! But am as restless as a Merchant in stormy Weather, that
has ventured all his Wealth in one Bottom. -- Woman is a leakey Vessel -- if
she should like the Young Rogue now, and they should come to a right
Understanding -- why then am I a -- Wital -- that's all, and shall be put in
Print at Snow-hill with my Effigies o'th'top like the Sign of Cuckolds Haven --
hum -- they are damnable silent -- pray Heaven he have not murdered her, and
robbed her -- hum -- hark, what s that? -- a Noise -- he has broke his Covenant
with me, and shall forfeit the Money -- how loud they are? Ay, ay, the Plots
discovered, what shall I do -- Whythe Devil is not in her sure to be refractory
now and peevish, if she be I must pay my Money yet -- and that wou d be a
damned thing -- sure they're coming out -- I'll retire and harken how 'tis with
them.


Oh! You unkind -- what have you made me do?
Unband me false Deceiver -- let me loose --

Made her do? -- so, so -- 'tis done -- I'm glad of that --


Can you be angry Julia!
Because I only seized my Right of Love.

And must my Honour be the Price of it?
Could nothing but my Fame reward your Passion?
-- What make me a base Prostitute, a foul Adulteress,
Oh -- be gone, be gone -- dear Robber of my Quiet.

Oh fearful! --

Oh! Calm your Rage and hear me; if you are so,
You are an innocent Adulteress.
It was the feeble Husband you enjoyed
In cold Imagination, and no more,
Shyly yon turned away -- faintly resigned.

Hum -- did she so --

Till my Excess of Love -- betrayed the Cheat.

Ay, ay that was my Fear --

Away -- be gone -- I'll never see you more --

You may as well forbid the Sun to shine.
Not see you more! -- Heavens! I before adored you
But now I rave! And with my impatient Love,
A thousand mad, and wild Desires are Burning!
I have discovered now new Worlds of Charms.
And can no longer tamely love and suffer.

So -- I have brought an old House upon my Head.
Entailed Cuckoldom upon my self.

I'll hear no more -- Sir Cautious -- where's my Husband?
Why have you left my Honour thus unguarded?

Ay, ay, she's well enough pleased I fear for all that.

Base as he is, 'twas he exposed this Treasure.
Like silly Indians bartered thee for Trisles.

Oh treacherous Villain! --

Hah -- my Husband do this?

He by Love, he was the kind Procurer,
Contri^'d the Means, and brought me to thy Bed.

My Husband? My wise Husband!
What Fondness in my Conduct had he seen,
To take so shameful and so base Revenge.

None -- 'twas filthy Avarice seduced him to it.

If he could be so barbarous to expose me,
Could you who loved me -- be so cruel too!

What -- to possess thee when the Bliss was offered,
Possess thee too without a Crime to thee:
Charge not my Soul with so remiss a Flame,
So dull a Sense of Virtue to refuse it.

I am convinced the Fault was all my Husbands --
And here I vow -- by all things Just and sacred,
To separate for ever from his Bed.

Oh I am not able, to endure it --
Hold -- oh hold my dear --

Stand off -- I do abhor thee --

With all my Soul -- but do not make rash Vows.
They break my very Heart -- regard my Reputation!

Which you have had such Care of Sir already --
Rise, 'tis in vain you kneel.

No -- I'll never rise again -- Alas! Madam I was merely drawn in, I only
thought to sport a Dye or so -- I had only an innocent Design to have
discovered whether this Gentleman had stolen my Gold -- that so I might have
hanged him --


A very Innocent Design indeed.

Ay Sir, that's all, as I'm an honest, man --

I've sworn, nor are the Stars more fixed than I

How! my Lady and his Worship up?
-- Madam, a Gentleman, and a Lady below in a Coach knock^ me up, and say they
must speak with your Ladyship.


This is strange! -- bring 'em up --
Who can it be at this odd time of neither Night nor Day?

Madam, your Virtue, Charity and Friendship to me, has made me trespass on you
for my Lives Security, and beg you will protect me -- and my Husband --


So -- here's another sad Catastrophe!

Hah -- does Belmou live, is't possible
Believe me Sir, you ever had my Wishes:
And shall not fail of my Protection now.

I humbly thank your Lady ship.

I'm glad thou hast her Harry -- but doubt thou durst not own her; nay, dare
not own thy self.


Yes Friend, I have my Pardon --
But hark, I think we are pursued already --
But now, I fear no force.

However step into my Bed-chamber.

Hell shall not hold thee -- nor vast Mountains cover thee, but I will find
thee out -- and lash thy silthy and Adulterous Carcase.


How -- lash my silthy Carcase? -- I desie^ thee Satan --


'Twas thus he said.

Let who's will say it, he lies in's Throat.

-- How! the Ghostly -- hush -- have a care -- for 'twas the Ghost of Belmour
-- oh! hide that bleeding Wound, it chills my Soul! --


What bleeding Wound? -- Heavens are you frantic Sir?


No -- but for want of rest -- I shall ever Morning.
-- She's gone -- she's gone -- she's gone --

Ay, Ay, she's gone, she's gone indeed.

-- But let her go -- so I may never see that dreadful Vision -- harky Sir -- a
Word in your Ear -- have a care of marrying a young Wife.


Ay, but I have married one already.

Hast thou? Divorce her -- fly her, quick -- depart -- be gone, she'll Cuckold
thee -- and still she'll Cuckold thee --


Ay Brother, but whose fault was that? --
Why, are not you married?

Mum -- no Words on it, unless you'll have the Ghost about your Ears; Part with
your Wife I say, or else the Devil will part ye.


Pray go to Bed Sir?

Yes, for I shall sleep now, I shall lie alone; [ Weeps. Ah Fool, old dull
besotted Fool -- to think she'd love me -- 'twas by base means I gained her --
cozened an honest Gentleman -- of Fame and Life --


You did so Sir, but 'tis not past Redress -- you may make that honest
Gentleman amends.


Oh would I could, so I gave half my Estate --

-- That Penitence atones with him and Heaven.
-- Come forth Leticia, and your injured Ghost.

-- HahGhost -- another Sight would make me mad indeed.

Behold me Sir, I have no Terror now.

Hah -- who's that Francis? -- my Nephew Francis?

Belmour -- or Francis -- choose you which you like, and I am either.


Hah, Belmour! and no Ghost?

Belmour -- and not your Nephew Sir.

But art alive? Ods bobs I'm glad on it Sirrah,
-- But are you real Belmour?

As sure as I'm no Ghost.

We all can Witness for him Sir.

Where be the Minstrels, we'll have a Dance -- adod we will -- ah -- art thou
there thou cozening little C^itsface? -- a Vengeance on thee -- thou made me
an old Doting loving Coxcomb -- but I forgive thee -- and give thee all thy
Jewels, and you your Pardon Sir, so you'll give me mine; for I find you young
Knaves will be too hard for us.


You are so generous Sir, that 'tis almost with grief I receive the Blessing of
Leticia.


No, no, thou deserve her, she would have made an old fond Blockhead of me --
and one way or other you would have had her -- ods bobs you would --


Justice Sir, Justice -- I have been cheated -- abused --
Ass assinated and Ravished!

How my Nephew ravished! --

No Sir, I am his Wife.

Hum -- my Heir marry a Chamber-Maid!

Sir, you must know I stole away Mrs. Die, and brought her to Nea's Chamber here
-- to marry her.


My Daughter Die stolen --

But I being to go to the Devil a little Sir; whip -- what does he, but marries
her himself Sir; and fob'd me off here with my Ladies cast Petticoat --


Sir, she's a Gentlewoman, and my Sister Sir.

Madam, 'twas a pious Fraud, if it were one, for I was contracted to him before
-- see here it is --


A plain Case, a plain Case.

Hark'y' Sir, have you had the Impudence to marry my Daughter Sir?


Yes Sir, and humbly ask your Pardon, and your Blessing --

You will have it, whether I will or not -- rise -- you are still too hard for us,
Come Sir forgive your Nephew --


Well Sir, I will -- but all this while you little think the Tribulation I am
in, my Lady has forsworn my Bed.


Indeed Sir, the wiser she.

For only performing my Promise to this Gentleman.

Ay, you showed her the Difference Sir, you're a wise man. Come dry your Eyes --
and rest your self contented, we are a couple of old Coxcombs: d'e hear Sir
Coxcombs.


I grant it Sir, and if I dye Sir -- I bequeath my Lady to you -- with my whole
Estate -- my Nephew has too much already for a Fool.


I thank you Sir -- do you consent my Julia?

No Sir -- you do not like me -- a canvass Bag of wooden Ladies were a better
Bed-fellow.


Cruel Tormentor! oh I could kill my self with Shame and Anger!


Come hither Bredwel -- witness for my Honour -- that I had no Design upon his
Person, but that of trying of his Constancy.


Believe me Sir, 'tis true -- I feigned a danger near -- just as you got to Bed
-- and I was the kind Devil Sir, that brought the Gold to you.


And you were one of the Devils that beat me, and the Captain here Sir?


No truly Sir, those were some I hired -- to beat you for abusing me to day --


To make you 'mends Sir, I bring you the certain News of the Death of Sir
Thomas Gayman your Uncle, who has left you Two thousand pounds a year. --


I thank you Sir -- I heard the news before.

How's this; Mr Gayman, my Lady's first Lover? I find Sir Feeble we were a
Couple of old Fools indeed, to think at our Age to cousin two lusty young
Fellows of their Mistresses; 'tis no wonder that both the Men and the Women
have been too hard for us, we are not fit Matches for either, that's the truth
on it.


That Warrior needs must to his Rival yield,
Who comes with blunted Weapons to the Field.
LOng have we turned the Point of our just Rage I
On the half Wits, and Critics of the Age.
Oft has the soft, Insipid Sonneteer
In Nice and Flutter, seen his Fop-face here.
Well was the Ignorant Lampooning P^ck
Of shatter head Rhi^ ^hipt on Cressey's lack;
But such a trouble Weed is Poetaster,
The lower 'tis cut down, it grows the faster.
Tho Satyr then had such a plenteous Crop,
An After Match of Coxcombs is come up.
Who not content false Po'try to renew,
By sottish Censures would condemn the true
Let writing like a Gentleman -- fine appear,
But must you needs judge too en Cavalier?
These whiffling Critics, 'tis our Authress fears,
And humbly begs a Trial by her Peers:
Or let a Pole of Fools her Fate pronounce,
There's no great harm in a good quiet Dunce.
But shield her, Heaven! from the left-handed Blow
Of Airy Blockheads, who pretend to know.
On (...) Dullness let her rather split,
Than be Fop-mangl'd under colour of Wit.
Hear me ye Scribbling Beaus, --
Why will you in shier Rhyme, without one stroke
Of Poetry, Lady's just Disdain provoke,
And address Songs, to whom you never spoke.
In doleful Hymns for dying Felons fit,
Why do you tax their Eyes, and blame their Wit?
Unjustly of the Inn'cent you complain,
'Tis Bulkers give, and Tubs must cure your Pain.
Why in Lampoons will you your selves revile?
'Tis true, none else will think it worth their wh i'll:
But thus you're hid! oh, 'tis a Politic Fetch:
So some have hanged themselves, to ease Jack Ketch.
Justly your Friends and Mistresses you blame,
For being so they well deserve the Shame,
'Tis the worst Scandal to have born that Nam
At Poetry of late, and such whose Skill
Excels your own, you dart a feeble Quill;
Well may you rail at what you Ape so ill.
With virtuous Women, and all Men of Worth,
You're in a state of Mortal War by Birth.
Nature in all her Atom Fights never knew
Two things so opposite as Them and You.
On such your Muse her utmost Fury spends,
They are slandered worse than any but your Friends.
More Years may teach you better, the mean while,
If you can't mend your Morals, mend your Stile.
LA Montre; or the Lover's Watch: By Mrs. A. Behn, is sold by W. Canning, at
his Shop in Vine-Court, Middle-Temple.


