I Am the Ghost of him who was a true Son
Of the late GOOD OLD CAVSE, Ecliped, Huson,
Roused by strange scandal, from the eternal flame
With noise of Plotts, of wondrous birth and name
Whilst the sly Jesuit robs us of our fame.
Can all their Conclave, though with Hell the agree
Act mischief equal to Presbittery?
Look back on our success in Forty One,
Was ever braver Villainies carried on
Or new ones now more hopefully begun.
And shall our unsuccess our merit lose
And make us quit the Glory of our Cause!
No, Hire new Villains, Rogues without remorse
And let no Law nor Conscience stop your course.
Let Polititions order the Confusion
And let the Saints pay Pious Contribution.
Pay those that Rail, and those that can delude
With scribbling Nonsense the Loose Multitude.
Pay well your Witnesses, they may not run
To the right side and tell who set 'em on
Pay 'em so well, that they may ne'er Recant
And so turn Honest merely out of want.
Pay Juries that no formal Laws may harm us
Let Treason be secured by Ignoramus.
Pay Bully Whig, who Loyal writers bang
And honest Tories in Effigy hang:
Pay those that burn the Pope to please the fools
And daily pay Right Honourable Tools
Pay all the Pulpit knaves that Treason brew
And let the zealous Sisters pay 'em too;
Justices, bound by Oath, and obligation
Pay them the utmost price of their Damnation
Not to disturb our useful Congregation.
Nor let the Learned Rabble be forgot
Those Pious hands that crown our hopeful Plot.
No, Modern States-men cry tis Lunacy
To barter Treason with such Rogues as we.
But subtler Oliver did not disdain
His Mightier Politiques with ours to join.
I, for all uses in a State was able
Could Mutiny, could fight, hold forth, and Cobble.
Your lazy State man, may sometimes direct
But your small busy knaves the Treason Act.

AH Rogues, the World runs finely round, the business is done.


Done, the Town's our own, my fine Rascal.


We'll have Harlots by the Belly, Sirrah.


Those are Commodities I confess I would fain be truck^ing for, -- but no words
of that Boy.


Stand, who go's there?


Who are you for, -- hah?


Are for Friend; we are for Gad and the Lord Fleetwood.


Fleetwood, knock 'em down, Fleetwood that snivelling Thief?


Why Friends, who are ye for?


For? who should we be for, but Lambert, Noble Lambert? Is this a time of the
day to declare for Fleetwood, with a Pox? indeed. in the morning 'twas a Question
had like to have been decided with push a Pike.


Dry blows would ne'er a don't, some must have sweat blood for it, but -- 'tis
now decided.


Decided!


Yes, decided Sir, without your Rule for it.


Decided? by whom Sir? by us the Free-born Subjects of England, by the
Honourable Committee of Safety, or the Right Reverend City? without which Sir,
I humbly conceive, your Declaration for Lambert is illegal, and against the
Property of the People.


Plain Lambert; here's a saucy Dog of a Joiner; Sirrah, get ye home, and mind
your Trade, and save the Hang-man a labour.


Look ye, Friend, I fear no Hang-man in Christendom; for Conscience and Public
good, for Liberty and Property, I dare as far as any man.


Liberty and Property, with a pox, in the mouth of a Joiner; you are a pretty
Fellow to settle the Nation, -- what says my Neighbour Feltmaker?


Why verily, I have a high respect for my honourable Lord Fleetwood, he is my
intimate Friend, and till I find his Party the weaker, I hope my Zeal will be
strengthened for him.


Zeal for Fleetwood, Zeal for a Halter, and that's your due: Why, what has he
ever done for you? Can he lead you out to Battle? Can he silence the very
Cannon with his Eloquence alone? -- Can he talk -- or fight -- or --


But verily he can pay those that can, and that's as good -- and he can pray --



Let him pray, and we'll fight, and see whose business is done first; We are
for the General, who carries charms in every syllable; can act both the
Soldier and the Courtier, at once expose his Breast to dangers for our sakes
-- and tell the rest of the pretending Slaves a fair Tale, but hang 'em sooner
than trust 'em.


Ay, ay, a Lambert, a Lambert, he has courage, Fleetwood's an Ass to him.


Hum -- here's Reason Neighbour.


That's all one, we do not act by reason.


Fleetwood's a Coward.


A Blockhead.


A snivelling Fool; a General in the Hangings, no better.


What think ye then of Vane?


As of a Fool, that has dreamt of a new Religion, and only fit to reign in that
Fifth Monarchy he preaches so much up; but no King in this Age.


What of Haslerig?


A Hangman for Haslerig, I cry, No, no, One and all, a Lambert, a Lambert; he
is our General, our Protector, our King* our Keiser, our -- even what he
pleases himself.


Well, if he pleases himself he pleases me.


He's our Rising Sun, and we'll adore him, for the Speaker's Glory's set,


At nought, Boys; how the Rogue looked when his Coach was stopped?


Under favour, what said the Speaker?


What said he? prithee what could he say that we would admit for Reason? Reason
and our business are two things: Our Will was Reason and Law too, and the Word
of Command lodged in our Hilts: Cobbet and Duckenfield showed 'em Cock-pit Law.


He understood not Soldiers Dialect; the Language of the Sword puzzled his
Understanding; the Keeneness of which, was too sharp for his Wit, and
over-rul'd his Roles -- therefore he very mannerly kissed his hand, and wheeled
about, --


To the place from whence he came,


And e're long, to the Place of Execution.


No, damn him, he'll have his Clergy.


Why is he such an Infidel to love the Clergy?


For his Ends: But come, lets go drink the General's Health; Lambert! not
Fleetwood, that Son of a Custard, always quaking.


Ay, Ay, Lambert I say, -- besides, he's a Gentleman.


Come, Come, Brother Soldier, let me tell you, I fear you have a Stewart in
your Belly.


I am sure you have a Rogue in your Heart, Sirrah, which a Man may perceive
through that sanctified Dogs Face of yours; and so get ye gone ye Rascals, and
delude the Rabble with your canting Politics.


Nay, and you be in Wrath, I'll leave you.


No matter Sir, I'll make you know I'm a Free-born Subject, there's Law for the
Righteous Sir, there's Law.


There's Halters ye Rogues? --


Come Lads, let's to the Tavern, and drink Success to change; I doubt not but
to see 'em chop about, till it come to our great Hero again. -- Come, to the
Tavern.


I'll follow ye Comrade presently.


How is't Corporal?


A brave World Sir, full of Religion, Knavery, and Change; we shall shortly see
better days.


I doubt it Corporal;


I'll warrant you Sir, -- but have you had never a Billet, no Present, nor
Love-remembrance to day, from my good Lady Desbro?


None, and wonder at it: Hast thou not seen her Page to day?


Faith Sir I was employed in Affairs of State, by our Protector that shall be,
and could not call.


Protector that shall be? who's that, Lambert or Fleetwood, or both?


I care not which, so it be a Change; but I mean the General? -- but Sir, my
Lady Desbro is now at Morning Lecture here hard by, with the Lady Lambert.


Seeking the Lord for some great Mischief or other.


We have been there, but could get no Opportunity of speaking to her, --
Loveless, know this Fellow, -- he's honest and true to the Hero, though a
Red-Coat? I trust him with my Love, and have done with my Life.


Love! Thou can never make me believe thou art earnestly in Love with any
one of that damned Reformation.


Thou art a Fool; where I find Youth and Beauty, I adore, let the Saint be true
or false.


'Tis a Scandal to one of us to converse with 'em; they are all sanctified
Iilts; and there can be neither Credit nor Pleasure in keeping 'em Company; and
'twere enough to get the Scandal of an Adherer to their devilish Politics to
be seen with 'em.


What, their Wives?


Yes, their Wives. What see thou in 'em but Hypocrisy? Make Love to 'em,
they answer you in Scripture.


Ay, and lye with you in Scripture too. Of all Whores, give me your z^alous
Whore; I never heard a Woman talk much of Heaven, but she was much for the
Creature too. What dost think I had thee to the Meeting for?


To hear a Rascal hold forth for Bodkins and Thimbles, Contribution my beloved!
to carry on the Good Cause, that is, Roguery, Rebellion, and Treason,
profaning the sacred Majesty of Heaven, and our glorious Sovereign.


But -- were there not pretty Women there?


Damn 'em for sighing, groaning Hypocrites.


But there was one, whom, that handsome Face and Shape of yours, gave more
occasion for sighing, than any Mortification caused by the Cant of the
Lay-Elder in the half Hogs Head; Did thou not mind her?


Not I, damn it I was all Rage, and had not thou restrained me, I had
certainly pulled that Rogue of a Holder-forth by the Ears from his sanctified
Tub. 'Sdeath he hummed and hawed all my Patience away, nose'd and snivel'd me to
Madness. Heaven! That thou should suffer such Vermin to infect the Earth,
such Wolves amongst thy Flocks, such Thieves and Robbers of all Laws of God and
Man, in thy holy Temples. I rave to think to what you're fallen, poor England!


But the she Saint --


No more, were she as fair as Fancy could imagine, to see her there, -- would
make me loath the Form; she that can listen to the dull Non-sence, the
bantering of such a Rogue, such an illiterate Rascal, must be a Fool, past
sense of loving, Free-man.


Thou art mistaken. -- But, did thou mind her next the Pulpit?


A Plague upon the whole Congregation: I minded nothing but how to fight the
Lord's Battle with that damned sham Parson; whom I had a mind to beat.


My Lady Desbro is not of that Persuasion, but an errant Heroic in her Heart,
and feigns it only to have the better occasion to serve the Royal Party. I knew
her, and loved her before she married.


She may chance then to be saved.


Come, I'll have thee bear up briskly to some one of 'em, it may redeem thy
Sequestration; which, now thou see no hopes of compounding, puts thee out of
Patience.


Let 'em take it, and the Devil do 'em Good with it: I scorn it should be said
I have a Foot of Land in this ungrateful and accursed Island; I'd rather beg
where Laws are obeyed and Justice performed, than be powerful where Rogues and
base born Rascals rule the Roast.


But suppose now, dear Loveless, that one of the Wives of these Pageant Lords
should fall in love with thee, and get thy Estate again, or pay thee double
for it?


I would refuse it.


And this for a little dissembled Love, a little Drudgery --


Not a night by Heaven -- not an hour -- no not a single kiss, I'd rather make
love to an Incubus.


But suppose 'twere the new Protectoress her self, the fine Lady Lambert?


The greatest Devil of all; Damn her, dost think I'll Cuckold the Ghost of old
Oliver?


The better; there's some Revenge in it; dost know her?


Never saw her, nor care to do.


Colonel, Do you command me any thing?


Yes, I'll send thee with a Note -- Let's step into a Shop and write it;
Loveless stay a moment, and I'll be with thee.


O, I'm impatient to know his Name; ah, Desbro, he betrayed all my Devotion;
and when I would have prayed, Heaven knows, it was to him, and for him only.


What manner of man was it?


I want words to describe him; not tall, nor short; well made, and such a face
-- Love, Wit, and Beauty reveled in his Eyes:
From whence he shot a thousand winged Darts
That pierced quite through my Soul.

Seemed he a Gentleman?

A God! Although his out-side were but mean; but he shone th'ro like Lightning
from a Cloud, and shot more piercing Rays.


Stayed he long?


No; methought he grew displeased with our Devotion
And seemed to contradict the Parson with his Angry Eyes.
A Friend he had too with him, young and handsome,
Who seeing some disorder in his Actions, got him away.
-- I had almost forgot all Decency,
And started up to call him, but my Quality
And wanting something to excuse that Fondness,
Made me decline with very much ado.

Heavens, Madam, I'll warrant they were Heroics.

Heroics!

Cavaliers, Madam, of the Royal Party.

They were so, I knew one of 'em.

Ah Desbro, dost thou?
Ah Heavens, that they should prove Heroics!

You might have known that by the Conquest; I never heard, e're one o'th
the other Party ever gained a Heart: and indeed, Madam, 'tis a just Revenge, our
Husbands make Slaves of them, and they kill all their Wives.


Hah, what have we here? -- Women -- faith, and handsome too -- I never saw a
Form more Excellent! whoever they are, they seem of Quality, -- by Heaven, I
cannot take my Eyes from her.


Hah, he's yonder, my Heart begins to fail,
My trembling Limbs refusing to support me --
His Eyes seem fixed on mine too; ah, I faint --

My Ladies Coach, William -- quickly, she faints.

Madam, can an unfortunate Stranger's aid add any thing to the recovery of so
much Beauty?

Ah, Would he knew how much!

Support her, Sir, till her Ladyships Coach comes -- I beseech ye.

Not Atlas bore up Heaven with greater Pride.

-- I beg your Pardon, Sir, for this Disorder
That has occasioned you so great a Trouble --
You seem a Gentleman -- and consequently
May need some Service done you; name the way,
I shall be glad to let you see my Gratitude.

If there be ought in me, that merits this amazing Favour from you, I owe my
thanks to Nature that endowed me with something in my Face that spoke my Heart.


Heaven! how he looks and speaks --


Oh, these Heroics, Madam, have the most charming Tongues.


Pray come to me -- and ask for any of my Officers, and you shall have
admittance --


Who shall I ask for Madam? for I'm yet ignorant to whom I owe for this great
Bounty.


Not know me! Thou art indeed a Stranger. I thought I'd been so Elevated above
the common Crowd, it had been visible to all Eyes who I was.


Pardon my Ignorance;
My Soul conceives ye all that Heaven can make ye,
Of Great, of Fair and Excellent;
But cannot guess a Name to call you by
But such as would displease ye --
-- My heart begins to fail, and by her Vanity
I fear she's one of the new Race of Quality:
-- But be she Devil, I must love that Form.

Hard Fate of Greatness, We so highly Elevated
Are more exposed to Censure than the little ones,
By being forced to speak our Passions first.
-- Is my Coach ready?

It waits your Honour.

I give you leave to visit me -- ask for the General's Lady, if my Title be not
by that Time altered.

Pistols and Daggers to my Heart -- 'tis so.

Adieu Sir.

How now, what's the matter with thee?


Prithee wake me Freeman.


Wake thee!


I dream! by Heaven I dream!
Nay yet the lovely Phantam's in my View,
Oh! wake me, or I sleep to perfect Madness.

What ail thou, what did dream of?

A strange fantastic Charmer,
A thing just like a Woman friend,
It walked and looked with wondrous Majesty,
Had Eyes that killed, and Graces decked her Face;
But when she talked, mad as the Winds she grew.
Chimera in the form of Angel, Woman!

Who the Devil meanest thou?

By Heaven I know not; but, as she vanished hence, she bad me come to the
General's!

Why this is she I told thee eyed thee so at the Conventicle; 'tis Lambert, the
renowned, the famous Lady Lambert -- Mad call thou her? 'tis her ill acted
Greatness, thou mistake; thou art not used to the Pageantry of these Women
yet; they all run thus mad: 'tis greatness in 'em, Loveless.


And is thine thus, thy Lady Desbro?


She's of another Cut, she married as most do, for Interest, -- but what --
thou't to her?


If Lightening stop my way,
Perhaps a sober view may make me hate her.

My Lord, now is your time, you may be King; Fortune is yours, you've time it
self by the fore-lock.


If I thought so, I'd hold him fast by Heaven.


If you let slip this Opportunity, my Lord, you are undone -- Aunt Caesar, aut
Nullus.


But Fleetwood --


Hang him soft head.


True, he's of an easy Nature, yet if thou did but know how little Wit
governs this mighty Universe, thou would not wonder men should set up him.


That will not recommend him at this Iuncto, though he's an excellent Tool for
your Lordship to make use of; and therefore, use him Sir as Cataline did
Lentulus; drill the dull Fool with hopes of Empire, on, and that all tends to
his Advancement only: The Block-head will believe the Crown his own: what other
Hopes could make him ruin Richard, a Gentleman of Qualities a thousand times
beyond him?


They were both too soft; an ill Commendation for a General, who should be
rough as storms of War it self.


His Time was short, and yours is coming on; Old Oliver had his.


I hate the Memory of that Tyrant Oliver.


So do I, now he's dead, and serves my Ends no more. I loved the Father of the
Great Heroic, whilst he had Power to do me good: he failing, Reason directed
me to the Party then prevailing, the Fag End of the Parliament: 'tis true, I
took the Oath of Allegiance, as Oliver, your Lordship, Tony, and the rest did,
without which, we could not have sat in that Parliament; but that Oath was not
for our Advantage, and so better broke than kept.


I am of your Opinion my Lord.


Let Honesty and Religion preach against it; but how could I have served the
Commons by deserting the King? how have showed my self loyal to your Interest,
by fooling Fleetwood, in the deserting of Dick; by dissolving the honest
Parliament, and bringing in the odious Rump? how could I have flattered Ireton,
by telling him, Providence brought things about, when 'twas mere knavery all,
and that the hand of the Lord was in it, when I knew the Devil was in it? or
indeed, how could I now advise you to be King, if I had started of Oaths, or
preferred Honesty or Divinity before Interest and the Good Old Cause.


Nay, 'tis most certain, he that will live in this World, must be endued with
the three rare Qualities of Dissimulation, Equivocation, and mental
Reservation.


In which Excellency, Heaven be praised, we out-do the Iesuits.


I'm glad to see you so well employed my Lord, as in Discourse with my Lord
Whitlock he's of our party, and has Wit.


Your Honour graces me too much.


My Lord, my Lady is an absolute States-Woman.


Yes, I think things had not arrived to this exalted height, nor had you been
in Prospect of a Crown, had not my Politics exceeded your meaner Ambition.


I confess, I owe all my good fortune to thee.


My Lord, my Lord Wariston, Lord Hewson, Colonel Cobbet, and Colonel
Duckenfield desire the Honour of waiting on you.


This has a ^ace of Greatness -- let 'em wait a while in the Antechamber.


My Love, I would have 'em come in.


You would have 'em, you would have a Fools Head of your own; pray let me be
Judge of what their Duty is, and what your Glory; I say I'll have 'em wait.


My Lord Fleetwood too is just alighted, shall he wait too Madam?


He may approach; and d' ye hear -- put on your fawning looks, flatter him, and
profess much Friendship to him, you may betray him with the more facility.


Madam, you counsel well,


My good Lord, your most submissive Servant.


My Gracious Lord, I am your Creature -- your Slave --


I profess ingeniously, I am much engaged to you, my good Lords; I hope things
are now in the Lard's handling, and will go on well for his Glory and my
Interest, and that all my good People of England will do things that become
good Christians.


Doubt us not, my good Lord; the Government cannot be put into abler hands,
than those of your Lordship; it has hitherto been in the hard clutches of Iews,
Infidels, and Pagans.


Yea verily, Abomination has been in the hands of Iniquity.


But, my Lord, those hands, by my good Conduct, are now cut off, and our
Ambition is, your Lordship would take the Government upon you.


I profess, my Lord, by ye and nay, I am ashamed of this Goodness, in making me
the Instrument of saving Grace to this Nation; 'tis the great Work of the Lard.


The Lard, Sir, I'll assure you the Lard has the least hand in your good
fortune; I think you ought to ascribe it to the Cunning and Conduct of my Lord
here, who so timely abandoned the Interest of Richard.


Ingeniously, I must own, your good Lord can do much, and has done much; but
'tis our Method to ascribe all to the Powers above.


Then I must tell you, your Method's an ungrateful Method.


Peace, my Love.


Madam, This is the Cant we must delude the Rabble with.


Then let him use it there, my Lord, not amongst us, who so well understand one
another.


Good Dear, be pacifi'd -- and tell me, shall the Gentlemen without have
admittance?


They may.


Guds Benizon light on you, my gued Loords, for this days work; Madam, I kiss
your white Honds.


My Lord, I have not been behind hand in this days turn of State.


'Tis confessed, Sir; What would you infer from that?


Why, I would know how things go; who shall be General, who Protector, or who
King next.


My Friend has well translated his meaning.


Fie, how that filthy Cobbler Lord betrays his Function.


We're in a Chaos, a Confusion, as we are.


Indeed the Commonwealth at present is out at heels, and wants underlaying.


And the People expect something suddenly from us.


My Lords and Gentlemen, we must consider a while.


Bread a gued there's mickle Wisdom i that Sirs.


It ought to be consulted betimes, my Lord, 'tis a matter of moment, and ought
to be consulted by the whole Committee.


We design no other, my Lord, for which reason, at three a clock we'll meet at
Wallingford House.


Nay, my Lord, do but settle the Affair, let's but know who's our Head, and
'tis no matter.


Ay, my Lord, no matter who; I hope 'twill be Fleetwood, for I have the length
of his Foot already.


You are the leading men, Gentlemen, your Voices will soon settle the Nation.


Well, my Lord, we'll not fail at three a clock.


This falls out well for me; for I have Business in Smithfield, where my Horses
stand; and verily, now I think on it, the Rogue the Ostler has not given 'em
Oats to day: Well, my Lords, farewell; if I come not time enough to Wallingford
House, keep me a place in the Committee, and let my Voice stand for one, no
matter who.


A gued Mon I's warrant, and takes muckle Pains for the Gued of the Nation, and
the Liberty of the Mobily: -- The Diel confound 'em and.


Come, my Lord Wariston, you are a wise man, What Government are you for?


En tol what ya please my gued Loord.


What think you of a single Person here in my Lord Fleetwood?


Mary Sir, and he's a brave Mon, but gen I may cooncel, tak't for yar sell my
gued Loord, ant be gued for him, 'tis en gued for ya te.


But above half the Nation are for him.


Bread a gued, and I's for him than.


The Will of the Lard be done; and since 'tis his Will, I cannot withstand my
Fate -- ingeniously.


My Lord Wariston, a Word -- what if Lambert were the Man?


Right Sir, One and ya have spoken and; He's a brave Mon, a Mon indeed gen I's
'ave any Judgment.


So I find this Property's for any use.


My Lord, I perceive Heaven and Earth conspire to make you our Prince.


Ingeniously, my Lords, the weight of three Kingdoms is a heavy Burden for so
weak Parts as mine; therefore, I will, before I appear at Council, go seek the
Lard in this great Affair; and, if I receive a Revelation for it, I shall with
all Humility espouse the Yoke, for the Good of his People and mine: and so Gad
with us, the Commonwealth of England.


Poor deluded Wretch, 'tis not yet come to that.


No my Dear, the Voice will go clearly for me; what with Bribes to some,
Hypocrisy and Pretence of Religion to others, and promised Preferments to the
rest, I have engaged 'em all.


And will you be a King?


You think that's so fine a thing -- but let me tell you, my Love, a King's a
Slave to a Protector, a King's tied up to a thousand Rules of musty Law, which
we can break at Pleasure; we can rule without Parliaments, at least, choose whom
we please, make 'em agree to our Proposals, or set a Guard upon 'em, and starve
'em till they do.


But their Votes are the strangest things, -- that they must pass for Laws; you
were never voted King.


No, nor care to be: the sharpest Sword's my Vote, My Law, my Title. They voted
Dick should reign, where is he now? They voted the great Heroics from the
Succession; but had they Arms or Men, as I have, you should soon see what would
become of their Votes -- No my Love! 'Tis this -- must make me King.

Let Fleetwood and the Rump go seek the Lard,
My Empire and my Trust is in my Sword.

GIlliflower, Has none been here to ask for any of my People, in order to his
approach to me?


None, Madam.


Madam! how dull thou art! wou't never learn to give me a better Title, than
such an one as foolish Custom bestows on every common Wench?


Pardon my Ignorance, Madam.


Again Madam!


Really, Madam, I should be glad to know by what other Title you would be
distinguished?


Abominable dull! Dost thou not know on what score my Dear is gone to
Wallingford House?


I cannot divine, Madam.


Heaven help thy Ignorance! he's gone to be made Protector, fool, or at least,
a King, thou Creature; And from this day I date my self her Highness.


That will be very fine indeed, an't please your Highness.


I think 'twill suit better with my Person and Beauty than with that other
Woman -- what d' ye call her? Mrs. Cromwell -- my shape -- and Gat^ -- my
Humour, and my Youth, have something more of Grandeur -- have they not?


Infinitely, an't please you Highness.


Madam, a Man without has the boldness to ask for your Honour.


Honour, fool!


Her Highness, Blockhead.


Saucily pressed in, and struck the Porter for denying him entrance to your --
Highness.


What kind of Fellow was't?


A rude, rough, Hectoring Swash, an't please your Highness; nay, and two or
three times, Gad forgive me, he swore too.


It must be he.


His Habit was something bad and Cavalierish -- I believe 'tis some poor
petitioning, begging Tory, who having been sequestered, would press your
Highness for some Favour.


Yes, it must be he -- ah foolish Creature! and can he hope Relief, and a
villainous Cavalier? out upon 'em, poor Wretches -- you may admit him though, I
long to hear how one of those things talk.


Oh most strangely, Madam, -- an't please your Highness, I should say.


'Tis he, I'll swear, Gillifl^wer, these Heroics are punctual men, -- how now,
your Business with us, Fellow?


My business, Madam? --


Hast thou ever a Petition to us?


A Petition, Madam? -- Sure this put on Greatness is to amuse her Servants, or
has she forgot that she invited me; or indeed forgot me? --


What art thou?


Shall we search his Breeches, an't please your Highness, for Pistol, or other
Instruments?


No Boy, we fear him not, they say the Powers above protect the Persons of
Princes.


Sure she's mad, yet she walks loose about,
And she has Charms even in her Raving Fit.

Answer me. What art thou? How shall I get my Servants hence with honour?

A Gentleman --
That could have boasted Birth and Fortune too
Till these accursed Times, which Heaven confound,
Racing out all Nobility, all Virtue,
Has rendered me the rubbish of the World;
Whilst new raised Rascals, Canters, Robbers, Rebels
Do Lord it over the Free-born, Brave and Noble.

You're very confident, know you to whom you speak? but I suppose you have lost
your Estate, or some such trivial thing, which makes you angry.


Yes, a trivial Estate of some five and twenty hundred pound a year, but I hope
to see that Rogue of a Lord reduced to his Cobler's Stall again, or, more
deservedly hanged, that has it.


I thought 'twas some such Grievance -- but you must keep a good Tongue in your
head, lest you be hanged for Scandalum Magnatum -- there's Law for ye, Sir.


No matter; then I shall be free from a damned Commonwealth, as you are pleased
to call it, when indeed 'tis but a mongrel, mangy, Mock-Monarchy.


Is it your business Sir to rail?


You raised the Devil, Madam.


Madam, shall I call your Highness Guards, and secure the Traitor?


No; that you may see how little I regard or fear him; leave us all --
We'll trust our Person in his hands alone --
-- Now Sir -- your Business?

Madam, I waited here by your Commands.


How shall I tell him that I love him, Gilliflower?


Easily, Madam, tell him so in plain English. Madam, 'tis great; Women of your
exalted height ever speak first; you have no Equals dare pretend to speak of
love to you.


Thou art in the right -- Dost know my Quality, and thy own Poverty? And hast
thou nothing to ask that I may grant?


Sure she loves me! and I, frail flesh and blood,
Cannot resist her Charms; but she's of the damned Party.

Are all your Party, Sir, so proud?


But what have I to do with Religion? Is Beauty the worse, or a kind Wench to
be refused for Conventickling? She lives high on the Spoils of a glorious
Kingdom, and why may not I live upon the Sins of the Spoiler?


Sir -- you are poor!


So is my Prince; a Plague on the occasion.


I think you are -- no Fool too?


I would I were, then I had been a Knave, had thrived, and possibly by this
time had been tugging for rifled Crowns and Kingdoms.


This Satyr ill befits my present Business with you, -- you -- want some
Necessaries -- as Clothes, and Linen too; and 'tis great pity so proper a man
should want Necessaries. Gilliflower -- take my Cabinet Key, and fetch the
Purse of Broad-pieces that lies in the lower Drawer; 'tis a small Present, Sir,
but 'tis an Earnest of my farther Service,


I'm angry, that I find one Grain of Generosity in this whole Race of
Hypocrites.


Here Sir, 'tis only for your present use; for Clothes -- three hundred Pieces;
let me see you sweet --


Stark mad, by this good day.


Ah Gilliflower! How prettily those Cavalier things charm; I wonder how the
Powers above came to give them all the Wit, Softness, and Gallantry, -- whilst
all the great ones of our Age have the most slovenly, ungrateful, dull
Behaviour; no Air, no Wit, no Love, or any thing to please a Lady with.


Truly Madam, there's a great Difference in the Men; yet Heaven at first did
it's part, but the Divel has since so over-done his, that what with the Visor
of Sanctity, which is the gladly Sneere, the drawing of the Face to a prodigious
length, the formal language, with a certain Twang through the Nose, and the
pious Goggle, they are fitter to scare Children than beget love in Ladies.


You hit the Character of your new Saint.


And then their Dress, Gilliflower.


Oh! 'Tis an Abomination to look like a Gentleman; long Hair is wicked and
Cavalierish, a Periwig is flat Popery, the Disguise of the Whore of Babylon;
handsome Clothes, or laced Linen, the very Tempter himself, that debauches all
their Wives and Daughters: therefore, the diminutive Band, with the Hair of the
Reformation Cut, beneath which, a Pair of large sanctified Souses appear, to
declare to the World, they had hitherto escaped the Pillory, though deserved it
as well as Pryn.


Have a Care what you say, Gilliflower.


Why Madam, we have no Informers here.


Madam, here's Old Noll's Wife desires Admittance to your Hon -- your Highness.


Bid the poor Creature wait without, I'll do her what good I can for her
Husbands sake, who first infused Politiques into me, by which I may boast I
have climbed to Empire.


So, her Madness runs in that Vein I see.


Alack Madam, I think she's coming.





Heavens! I shall be scandalised by the godly, Dear Gilliflower, conceal my
Cavalier; I would not have a Cavalier seen with me for all the World. -- Step
into my Cabinet --


Unhand me Villain -- 'twas not long since a Rudeness Sir like this had
forfeited thy Head.


What would the Woman?


The Knave, the perjured Villain thy Husband, byth' Throat, thou proud,
imperious Baggage; to make me wait? who's Train thou hast been proud to bear --
how durst thou, after an Affront like this, trust thy false Face within my
Fingers reach? that Face, that first bewitched the best of Husbands from me,
and tempted him to sin.


I beseech your Highness retire, the Woman's mad.


Highness, in the Devil's name, sure 'tis not come to that; no, I may live to
see thy Cuckold hanged first, his Politics are yet too shallow, Mistress.
Heavens! Did my Husband make him Lord for this? raise him to Honour,
Trusts, Commands, and Councels,
To ruin all our Royal Family,
Betrayed young Richard, who had reigned in Peace
But for his Perjuries and Knaveries;
And now he sooths my Son in Law, soft Fleetwood,
With empty hopes of Power, and all the while
To make himself a King:
No, Minion, no; I yet may live to see
Thy Husband's Head o'th top of Westminster
Before I see it circled in a Crown.

I pity the poor Creature.

Ungrateful Traitor as he is,
Not to look back upon his Benefactors;
But he, in lieu of making just Returns,
Reviles our Family, prophanes our Name,
And will in time render it far more odious
Than ever Needham made the great Heroics.

Alas, it weeps, poor Woman!

Thou lie, false Strumpet, I scorn to shed a Tear
For ought that thou can do or say to me;
I've too much of my Husband's Spirit in me.
Oh, my dear Richard, had thou had a grain on it,
Thou and thy Mother ne'er had fallen to this.

His Father sure was seeking of the Lard when he was got.

Where is this perjured Slave, thy Wittal Lord?
Dares he not show his Face, his guilty Face,
Before the Person he has thus betrayed?

Madam, I hope you mistake my honoured Lord Lambert, I believe he designs the
Throne for my dear Lord.

Fond Girl, because he has the Art of fawning,
Dissembling to the height, can sooth and smile,
Profess, and sometimes weep: --
No, he will betray him, as he did thy Brother;
Richard the Fourth was thus deluded by him.
No, let him swear and promise what he will,
They are but Steps to his own ambitious End;
And only makes the Fool, thy credulous Husband
A silly deluded Property.

My honoured Mother, I am glad to find you here, I hope we shall reconcile
things between ye. Verily, we should live in brotherly Love together; come,
ingeniously, you shall be Friends, my Lady Mother.


Curse on the occasion of thy being a Kin to me.


Why, an please ye forsooth Madam?


My Daughter had a Husband,
Worthy the Title of my Son in Law:
Ireton! my best of Sons: he'd Wit and Courage,
And with his Councels, raised our House to Honours,
Which thy impolitic Easiness pulls down:
And whilst you should be gaining Crowns and Kingdoms
Art poorly cozening of the World with fruitless Prayers.

Nay, I'll warrant you Madam, when there is any gladly mischief to be done, I am
as forward as the best, but 'tis good to take the Lard along with us in every
thing. I profess ingeniously, as I am an honest man, verily -- ne'er stir -- I
shall act as becomes a good Christian.


A Good Coxcomb.
Dost thou not see her reverend Highness there,
That Minion now assumes that glorious Title
I once, and my Son Richard's Wife enjoyed,
Whilst I am called the Night Mare of the Commonwealth?
But would I were, I'd so hag-ride the perjured Slaves
Who took so many Oaths of true Allegiance
To my great Husband first, and then to Richard --
Who, whilst they reigned, were most illustrious,
Most high and mighty Princes; whilst fawning Poets
Write Panegyrics on 'em: And yet no sooner was
The wondrous Hero dead, but all his glorious
Titles fell to Monster of Mankind, Murderer
Of Piety, Traitor to Heaven and Goodness.

Who calls him so? Pray take their Names down: I profess ingeniously, forsooth
Madam, verily I'll order 'em, as I am here I will.

Thou, alas they scorn so poor a thing as thou.

Do they ingeniously? I'll be even with 'em, forsooth Mother, as I am here I
will, and there's an end on it.

I would there were an end of our disgrace and shame, which is but just begun,
I fear. --
What will become of that fair Monument
Thy careful Father did erect for thee,
Yet whilst he lived, next to thy Husband Ireton?
Lest none should do it for thee after he were dead?
The Malice of proud Lambert will destroy all.

I profess, Madam, you mistake my good Lord Lambert, he's an honest man, and
fears the Lard; he tells me I am to be the man; verily he does, after all's
done.


Yes, after all's done, thou art the man to be pointed at.


Nay, ingeniously, I scorn the words, so I do: I know the great Work of
Salvation to the Nation is to be wrought by me, verily.


Do, Cant on, till Heaven drop Kingdoms in thy mouth: dull, silly Sot, thou
ruin of our Interest: thou fond, inccorrigible, easy Fool.


My Lord, the Committee of Safety waits your coming.


Why, law you now, forsooth, -- I profess verily, you are ingeniously the
hardest of belief -- tell the honourable Lords I'm coming: Go, Lady mother, go
home with my Wife; and verily you'll see things go to your wish. -- I must to
Coach. --


Madam your humble Servant.


Honoured Lady I kiss your hands.


Was this the thing that is to be Protector?
This little snivelling Fellow rule three Kingdoms?
But leave we Politics, and fall to Love,
Who deals more Joys in one kind, happy moment
Than Ages of Dull Empire can produce.

Oh Gods! Shall I who never yielded yet,
But to him to whom three Kingdoms fell a Sacrifice,
Surrender at first Parley?

Perhaps that Lover made ye gayer Presents,
But could not render you a Heart all love,
Or mind embyass'd in Affairs of Blood.
-- I bring no Guilt to fright ye from my Embraces,
But all our hours shall be serene and soft.

Ah, Gilliflower, thy Aid, or I'm lost;
Shall it be said of me in after Ages
When my great Fame amongst Queens shall be recorded,
That I, ah Heavens! regardless of my Countries Cause,
Espoused the wicked Party of its Enemies,
The Heathenish Heroics! ah, defend me!

Nay -- by all that's --

Ah hold! Do not profane my Ears with Oaths or Execrations, I cannot bear the
sound.

Nay, nay, -- by Heaven I'll not depart your lodgings, till that soft
Love that plays so in your Eyes give me a better proof -- by --

Oh hold, I dye, if you proceed in this Abomination!

Why do you force me to it? do ye think to put me off with such a Face -- such
lips, -- such smiles -- such Eyes -- and every Charm -- You've made me mad, and
I shall swear my Soul away, if disappointed now.


Ah, save the Gentleman's Soul, I beseech ye, Madam.


I'm much inclined to Acts of Piety --
And you have such a Power, that however I incommode my Honour --
-- Desbro here! how unseasonably she comes?

Cry mercy, Madam, I'll withdraw a while.

Ah Desbro! thou art come -- in the most lucky minute -- I was just on the
point of falling -- As thou say, these Heroics have the strangest Power --


I never knew a Woman could resist 'em.


No marvel then, our Husbands use 'em so, betray 'em, banish 'em, sequester,
murder 'em, and every way disarm 'em. --


But their Eyes Madam.


Ay, their Eyes Desbro; I wonder our Lords should take away their Swords, and
let 'em wear their Eyes.


I'll move it to the Committee of Safety, Madam, those Weapons should be taken
from 'em too.


Still they'll have some to be revenged on us.


Ay, so they will; My Lord says, a Cavalier is a kind of Hidra, knock him of the
Head as often as you will, he has still one to peep up withal.


Madam, here's Mr. Freeman to speak with your Honour.


That's a Friend of mine Madam, and it would be unnecessary he saw your Highness
and I together: let us withdraw --


Withdraw, why, What will Desbro say?


O Madam, I know your Virtue and your Piety too well to suspect your Honour
wrongfully? 'tis impossible a Lady that goes to a Conventicle twice a day,
besides long Prayers and loud Psalm-singing, should do any thing with an
Heroic against her Honour. Your known Sanctity preserves you from Scandal. --
But here's Freeman --


So Madam -- you are very kind --


My charming Freeman, this tedious day of Absence has been an
Age in love! How hast thou lived without me?

Like one condemned, sad and disconsolate,
And all the while you made your Husband happy.

Name not the beastly Hypocrite, thou know
I make no other use of him,
But a dull Property to advance our Love.

And 'tis but Justice, Maria, he sequestered me of my whole Estate, because, he
said, I took up Arms in Ireland, on Noble Ormond's Side; nay, hired Rogues,
perjured Villains -- Witnesses with a Pox, to swear it too; when at that Time,
I was but eight years old: But I 'scapt as well as all the Gentry and Nobility
of England. To add to this, he takes my Mistress too.


You mistake, my lovely Freeman; I married only thy Estate, the best
Composition I could make for thee, and I will pay it back with Interest too.


You would suspect my love then, and swear that all the Adoration I pay you,
were, as we do to Heaven, for Interest only.


How you mistake my love, but do so still, so you will let me give these --
Proofs of it.


Thus like Atlante, you drop Gold in my Pursuit
To love, I may not over-take you:
What's this, to giving me one happy minute?
Take back your Gold, and give me currant love,
The Treasure of your Heart, not of your Purse, --
When shall we meet Maria?

You know my leisure Hours are when my honourable Lord is busied in Affairs of
State, or at his Prayers; from which long-winded Exercise I have of late
withdrawn my self: three Hours by the Clock he prays extempory, which is, for
National and Household Blessings: for the first -- 'tis to confound the Interest
of the King, that the Lard would deliver him, his Friends, Adherers and Allies,
wheresoever scattered about the Face of the whole Earth, into the Clutches of
the righteous: Press 'em good Lard, even as the Vintager doth the Grape in the
Wine-Press, till the Waters, and gliding Channels are made red with the Blood of
the wicked.


And grant the faithful to be mighty, and to be strong in Persecution; and more
especially, Ah! I beseech thee confound that malignant Tory Freeman -- that he
may never rise up in Judgment against thy Servant, who has taken from him his
Estate, his Sustinance, and Bread; give him Grace of thy infinite Mercy, to
hang himself, if thy People can find no zealous Witnesses to swear him to the
Gallows legally. Ah, we have done very much for thee Lard, thou should
consider us thy Flock, and we should be as good to thee in another thing.


Thou hit'st the zealous Twang right; sure thou hast been acquainted with some
of'em.


Damn 'em, no; what honest Man would keep 'em Company, where harmless Wit and
Mirth's a Sin, laughing scandalous, and a merry Glav, Abomination.


Yes, if you drink Healths my wicked Brother; otherwise, to be silently drunk,
to be as abusive and satirical as you please, upon the Heroics, is allowable
-- for laughing, indeed 'tis not so well; but the precise Sneere and Grin is
lawful; no swearing indeed, but lying and dissimulation in abundance -- I'll
assure you, they drink as deep, and entertain themselves as well with this
silent way of lewd Debauchery, as you with all your Wit and Mirth, your Healths
to the Royal Family.


Nay, I confess, 'tis a great Pleasure to cheat the World.


'Tis Power, as divine Hobs calls it.


But what's all this to Love? Where shall we meet anon?


I'll tell you, that will please you as well. -- Your Friend is within, with
her Highness that shall be, if the Divel and her Husband's Politics agree
about the matter.


Ha, has my cautious Railer managed matters so sleyly?


No, No, the Matter was managed to his Hand: You see how Heaven brings things
about, for the Good of your Party; this Business will be worth him, at least a
thousand pound a Year, or two, well managed. -- But see, my Ladies Woman.


Oh Madam, my Lord!


Death, how shall I bring my Friend off? He'll certainly be ruined.


Madam, he's coming up.


Madam, for my self I care not, but much concerned for you.


Here, take these two Petitions, each of you one, -- Poor Fellows -- you may be
gone, your Petitions will not be granted.


How now, my Dear, what Petitions? -- Friends, what's your Business?


'Tis enough we know their Business Love, we are sufficient to dispatch such
Suitors, I hope.


Pardon me, my Dear, I thought no harm; but I saw you frown, and that made me
concerned.


Frown! It would make any Body frown, to hear the Impudence of Gentlemen, these
Cavaliers; -- would you think it my Dear, if this Fellow has not the Impudence
to petition for the Thirds of his Estate again, so justly taken from him for
bearing Arms for the Man? --


Nay, I 'am informed, that they, but two Nights ago, in a Tavern, Drunk a
Health to the Man too.


How durst you, Sirrah, approach my Lady with any such saucy Address, you have
received our Answer.


Death, I've scarce Patience.


We knew, my Lord, the Influence your Ladies have over you, and Women are more
tender and compassionate naturally, than Men; and Sir, 'tis hard for Gentlemen
to starve.


Have you not able Limbs, can ye not work --


Persons of our Education work!


Starve or beg then.


Education, why, I'll warrant there was that young Creature they call the Duke
of Gloucester, was as well educated as any Lad in the Parish, and yet you see he
should have been bound Prentice to a handy Crafts Trade, but that our Lords
could not spare Money to bind him out, and so they sent him to beg beyond Sea.


Death, I shall do Mischief: not all the Joy she gave me but now, can atone
for this Blasphemy against the Royal Youth.


Patience -- Well my Lord, we find you are obdurate, and we'll withdraw.


Do so: And if you dare presume to trouble us any more, I'll have you whipped,
d'e hear.


Madam, I'll take my leave of your Ladyship.


My Lord, 'twas I that ought to threaten 'em -- but you're so forward still --
what makes you from the Committee?


I left some Papers behind.


And they'll make use of your Absence to set up Fleetwood King.


I'll warrant ye my Dear.


You'll warrant? you're a Fool and a Coxcomb; I see I must go my self, there
will be no business done 'till I thunder 'em together: They want Old Oliver
amongst 'em, his arbitrary Nod could make ye all tremble; when he wanted Power
or Money, he need but Cock in Parliament, and lay his hand upon his Sword, and
cry, I must have Money, and had it, or kicked ye all out a doors: And you are
so mealy mouthed, you cannot Cock for a Kingdom.


I'll warrant you Dear, I can do as good a thing for a Kingdom.


You can do nothing as you should do it: You want Old Oliver's Brains, Old
Oliver's Courage, and Old Oliver's Counsel: Ah, what a politic Fellow was
little Sir Anthony! What a Head-peice was there! What a plaguy Fellow Old
Thurlo, and the rest: But get ye back, and return me Protector at least, or
never hope for Peace again.


My Soul trouble not thy self, go in --
With mine, no Power can equal be,
And I will be a King to humour thee.

COme, Haste, Haste, the Lords are coming; -- keep back there, room for the
Lords, room for the honourable Lords: Heaven bless your Worships Honours.


Bread a gued Gentlemen, I's served the Commonwealth long and faithfully; I's
turned and turned to and Interest and and Religions that turned up Trump, and
one a me, but I's get nought but Bagery by my Sol; I's no put in for a
Pansion as well as rest o ya Loones.


What we can serve you in my Lord, you may command.


And I too my Lord, when the Government is new moulded.


One Sirs, and I's sa moold it; 'twas ne'er sa moolded sin the Dam boond the
Head on it.


I know there are some ambitious Spirits that are for a single Person; but
we'll have hot work e're yield to that.


The faud Diel take 'em then for Archibald; 'tis wars than Monarchy.


A thousand Times: Have we with such Industry, been pulling down Kings of the
Royal Family, to set up Tyrants of our own, of mean and obscure Birth? No, if
we're for a single Person, I'm for a lawful one.


One and ya have spoken and my Lord, so am I.


But Lambert has a busy, haughty Spirit, and thinks to carry it; but we'll
have no single Person.


Nor I, ods Bread; the faud Diel breast the Wem of Lambert, or any single Person
in England. I's for yare Interest my gued Lords.


My Lord Wariston, will you please to assume the Chair.


Ah, my gued Loord, I's yare most obedient humble Servant.


Hum, Hum.


My Lords and Gentlemen, we are here met together in the Name of the Lard --


Yea, and I hope we shall hang together as one man. -- A Pox upon your
preaching.


-- And hope this days great work will be for his Praise and Glory.


Abating long Graces my Lord, we are met together for the Business of the
Nation, to settle it, and to establish a Government.


Yea, verily: And I hope you will all unanimously agree, it shall be your
unworthy Servant.


What else my Lord?


And as thou Lard has put the Sword into my hand --


So put it into your Heart -- My Lord, to do Justice.


Amen.


I'd rather see it there than in your Hand.


For, we are, as it were, a Body without a Head; or, to speak more learnedly,
an Animal, unanimate.


My Lord, let us use, as little as we can, the language of the Beast; hard
Words, none of your Eloquence, it savours of Monarchy.


My Lord, you must give men of Quality leave to speak in a Language more
Gentile and Courtly than the ordinary sort of mankind.


My Lord, I am sorry to hear there are any of Quality amongst this Honourable
Dissembly.


Assembly, my Lord --


Well, you know my meaning; or if there be any such, I'm sorry they should own
themselves of Quality.


How, own themselves Gentlemen? Death Sir, d' ye think we were all born
Cobblers?


Or if you were not, the more the pity, for little England, I say.


Verily, my Lords, Brethren should not fall out, it is a scandal to the Good
Cause, and makes the Wicked rejoice.


One and theys garr the Loosey Proverb on it te, When Loons gang together by
the Luggs, gued men get their en.


He, he, he.


He calls you Knaves by craft, my Lords.


Bread a gued, tak't among ye Gentlemen, I's meant we'll.


I profess, my Lord Wariston, you make my hair stand an end to hear how you
swear.


One, my Loord, I's swear as little as your Lordship, only I's swear out, and
ya swallow and.


There's a Bone for you to pick, my Lord.


He, he, he.


We give my Lord Wariston leave to jest.


But what's this to the Government all this while? a dad I shall sit so late, I
shall have no time to visit my Horses, therefore proceed to the Point.


Ay, to the Point, my Lords; the Gentleman that spoke last spoke well.


Well sed Brother, I see you will in time speak properly.


But to the Government, my Lords?


Put 'em off of this Discourse, my Lord.


My Lord Wariston, move it, you are Speaker.


The Diel a me, Sirs, and no ya talk of a Speaker, I's tell ye a blithe Tale.


Ingeniously my Lord, you are to blame to swear so.


Your Story, my Lord.


By my Solmon, and there was a poor Woman the other day begged ot'h' Carl the
Speaker, but he'd give her nought unlas she'd lat a feart; one at last a feart
she lat, Ay marry, quoth the woman, no my Rump has a Speaker te.


He, he, he.


But to our Business --


Business; ay, there's the thing, I've a world on it. I should go and bespeak a
pair of Mittens and Shears for my Hedger and Shearer, a pair of Cards for my
Thrasher, a Since for my Mower, and a Skreen-fan for my Lady Wife, and many
other things; my Head's full of business -- I cannot stay. --


Fie my Lord, will you neglect the business of the day? we meet to oblige the
Nation, and gratify our Friends.


Nay, I'll do any thing, so I may rise time enough to see my Horses at night.


Damn 'em, what stuff's here for a Council-Table?


Where are our English Spirits, that can be governed by such Dogs as these? --


Clark, Read the Heads of what past at our last sitting.


In the first place, I must mind your Lordships tol consider those that have
been gued Members in the Commonwelth.


We shall not be backward to gratify any that have served the Commonwealth.


There's Money enough; we have taxed the Nation high.


Yes, if we knew where to find it: however read.


Walter Walton Draper, six thousand nine hundred twenty nine pounds six
shillings and five pence, for Blacks for his Highness Funeral.


For the Devil's, put it down for Oliver Cromwel's Funeral: We'll have no
Records rise up in Judgment for such a Villain.


How the live Asses kick the dead Lion?


Hark ye, my Lords, We sit here to reward Services done to the Commonwealth;
let us consider whether this be a Service to the Commonwealth or not?


However, we'll give him Paper for it.


Ay, let him get his money when he can.


Paper's not so dear, and the Clerk's pains will be rewarded.


Right, my gued Loord, 'sbred, that Cromwell was the faudest limmer Loon that
ever cam intol our Country, the faud Diel has taken him by the luggs for robbing
our Houses and Land.


No swearing, my Lord.


Weel, weel, my Loord, I's larne to profess and lee as weel as best on ya.


That may bring you profit, my Lord -- but Clerk proceed.


Walter Frost, Treasurer of the Contingencies, twenty thousand pounds: to
Thurloe, Secretary to his Highness --


To old Nol. --


Nol, ten thousand pound, for unknown Service done the Commonwealth -- to Mr.
Hutchinson Treasurer of the Navy, two hundred thousand pounds --


Two hundred thousand pound; Owns what a Sum's there? -- Marry it came from the
Mouth of a Cannon sure.


Lambert, for Service done the late Protector.


Again -- say Cromwell.


-- Cromwell -- six thousand pound in Iacobus's.


'Sbread, sike a Sum would make me honour the face of and Iemmy.


To Mr. Ice six thousand pound; to Mr. Loether late Secretary to his High --


To Oliver Cromwell say, can you not obey Orders?


-- Secretary to Oliver Cromwell -- two thousand nine hundred ninety nine
pounds, for Intelligence and Information, and piously betraying the King's
Liege People.


Haud, haud Sirs, Mary en ya gift se fast ya'll gif and away fro poor
Archibauld Iohnson.


Speak for your self, my Lord; or rather my Lord, do you speak for him.


Do you move it for him, and I'll do as much for you anon.


My Lord, since we are upon Gratifications, -- let us consider the known Merits
of the Lord Wareston, a Person of industrious mischiefs to the Malignant Party,
and great Integrity to us, and the Commonwealth.


Gued faith an I's ha been a trusty Trojon Sirs, what say you my very gued and
gracious Loords? --


I scorn to let a Dog go unrewarded; and you, Sir, fawn so prettily, 'tis pity
you should miss Preferment.


And so 'tis; come, come, my Lords, consider he was ever our Friend, and 'tis
but reasonable we should stich up one another broken Fortunes.


Nay Sir, I'm not against it.


'Tis reason, 'tis reason.


Damn 'em, how they lavish out the Nation?


Scribe, pretha read my Paper --


Have you a pertition there!


A Pitition, my Lord.


Pshaw, You Scholards are so troublesome.


Read the Substance of it.


That your Honours would be pleased, in consideration of his Services, to grant
to your Petitioner a considerable Sum of Money for his present supply.


Verily, order him two thousand pound --


Two thousand poond? Bread a gued, and I's gif my Voice for Fleetwood.


Two thousand; nay, my Lords, let it be three.


One, I lee'd, I lead; I's keep my Voice for Lambert. -- gueds Benizon light
on yar Sol, my gued Lord Lambert.


Three thousand pound, why such a Sum would buy half Scotland.


One, my Lord, ya look but blindly on it then: time was, a mite on it had bought
and shoos in yar Stall, Brother, though no ya so abound in Irish and Bishops
Lands.


You have nicked him there, my Lord.


He, he, he.


Scribe -- gang a tiny bit farther.


-- And that your Honours would be pleased to confer an Annual Pension on him.
--


Reason, I think; What say you my Lords of five hundred pound a year?


Agreed, agreed.


The Diel swallow me, my Lord, ya won my heart.


'Tis very well -- but out of what shall this be raised?


We'll look what Malignants Estates are forfeit, undispos'd of -- let me see --
who has young Freeman's Estate?


My Lord, that fell to me.


What all the fifteen hundred pound a year?


A dad, and all little enough.


The Devil do him good with it.


Had not the Lard put it into your hearts to have given me two thousand par an
um out of Bishops Lands, and three thousand par an um out of the Marquess's
Estate; how should I have lived and served the Commonwealth as I have done?


A plague confound his Honour, he makes a hard shift to live on Eight thousand
pound a year, who was born and bred a Hedger.


Patience, Friend.


I have been thinking -- but I'll find out a way.


Or betray some honest Gentleman, on purpose to gratify the Loone.


And Gentlemen, I am bound in Honour and Conscience to speak in behalf of my
Lord Whitlock; I think fit, if you agree with me, he should be made Constable
of Windsor Castle, Warden of the Forest, with the Rents, Perquisites, and
Profits thereto belonging, nor can your Lordships confer a Place of greater
Truth and Honour in more safe hands.


I find he would oblige all to his side. Buckingham's Estate already, with
Chelsey House, and several other Gifts?


He has dearly deserved 'em, he has served our Interest well and faithfully.


And he has been well paid sor't.


And so were you, Sir, with several Lordships, and Bishops Lands, you were not
born to, I conceive.


I have not got it, Sir, by Knavish Quirks in Law, a Sword that deals out
Kingdoms to the brave, has cut out some small parcels of Earth for me, And what
of this?


I think, Sir, he that talks well, and to'th purpose, may be as useful to the
Commonwealth as he that fights well; Why do we keep so many else in Pension
that ne'er drew Sword, but to talk, and rail at the Malignant Party; to libel
and defame 'em handsomely, with pious, useful Lies:

Which pass for Gospel with the common Rabble,
And Edify more than Hugh Peters's Sermons?
And make Fools bring more Grist to the public Mill:
Then Sir -- to wrest the Law to our convenience
Is no small, inconsiderate Work?

And which you may be hanged for very shortly --

'Tis granted, my Lord, your Merit's infinite, --
We made him Keeper of the Great Seal, 'tis true, 'tis Honour, but no Salary.

Ten thousand pound a year in Bribes will do as well.


Bribes are not so frequent now as in Old Noll's days.


Well, my Lord, let us be brief and tedious, as the saying as, and humour one
another; I'm for Whitlock's advance.


I move for a Salary, Gentlemen, Scobel and other petty Clerks have had a
thousand a year, my Lord sure merits more.


Why, -- let him have two thousand then.


I profess ingeniously, with all my heart.


I humbly thank your Lordships -- but, if I may be so bold to ask, from whence
shall I receive it?


Out of the Customs.


Brotherly love ought to go along with us -- but, under favour, when this is
gone, where shall we raise new supplies?


We'll tax the Nation high, the City higher;
They are our Friends, our most obsequious Slaves,
Our Dogs, to fetch and carry, our very Asses --

And our Oxes, with the help of their Wives.


Besides, the City's rich, and near her time, I hope, of being delivered.


One a gued, wad I'd the laying o her, she should be sweetly brought to Bed,
by my Sol.


The City cares for no Scotch Pipers, my Lord.


By my Sol, but she has danced after the gued Pipe of Reformation, when the
Covenant Jig ganged maryly round Sirs.


My Lords, here are some poor malignant Petitioners.


Oh, turn 'em out, here's nothing for 'em; these Fellows were petitioning my
Lady to day -- I thought she had given you a satisfactory Answer?


She did indeed, my Lord; but, 'tis a hard Case, to take away a Gentleman's
Estate, without convicting him of any Crime.


Oh Sir! we shall prove that hereafter.


But to make sure Work, you'll hang a man first, and examine his Offence
afterwards; a Plague upon your Consciences: my Friend here had a little fairer
Play, your Villains, your Witnesses in Pension swore him a Colonel for our
Glorious Master, of ever blessed Memory, at eight years old; a Plague upon
their miracles.


Ingeniously, Sirrah, you shall be pilloried for defaming our reverend
Witnesses: Guards take 'em to your Custody both.


Damn it, I shall miss my Assignation with Lady Desbro; a Pox of your
unncessary Prating, what shall I do?


And now, my Lords, we have finished the business of the Day. My good Lord
Fleetwood, I am entirely yours, and at our next sitting shall approve my self
your Creature. --


My good Lord, I am your submissive Vassal.


One my Lord, I scorn any man should be mere yare Vassal than Archibald
Iohnson.


Seized on, secured, was there no time but this? What made him at the
Committee, or when there, why spoke he honest Truth? What shall I do, good
Corporal Advise: take Gold, and see if you can corrupt his Guards, but they are
better paid for doing mischief; yet try, their Consciences are large.


I'll venture my Life in so good a Cause, Madam.


Madam here's Mr. Ananias Goggle, the Lay Elder of Clements Parish.


Dam the sham Saint; am I now in Condition to be plagued with his impertinent
Non-sense?


Oh! Pray Madam hear him preach a little; 'tis the purest sport. --


Peace be in this Place.


A blessed Hearing; he preaches nothing in his Conventicles, but Blood and
Slaughter.


Ah, the Children of the Elect have no Business, but the great work of
Reformation? Yea verily, I say, all other Business is profane, and diabolical,
and devilish; Yea, I say, these Dressings, Curls, and shining Habiliments, --
which take so up your time, your precious time; I say, they are an Abomination,
yea, an Abomination in the sight of the Righteous, and serve but as an Ignis
fatuus, to lead vain man astray. -- I say again --


-- You are a very Coxcomb.


I say again, that even I, upright I, one of the new Saints, find a sort of a
-- a -- a -- I know not what, -- a kind of a -- Motion as it were -- a stirring
up -- as a man may say, to Wickedness; -- Yea, verily it corrupts the outward
man within me.


Is this your Business Sir, to rail against my Clothes, as if you intended to
preach me into my Primitive Nakedness again?


Ah, the Naked Truth is best; but, Madam, I have a little work of Grace to
communicate unto you, please you to send your Page away --


Withdraw -- sure I can make my Party good with one wicked Elder: Now Sir --
your Business.


As brief as you please -- but -- who in the sight of so much Beau -- tie -- can
think of any Business but the Business! -- Ah! hide those tempting Breasts, --
Alack, how smooth and warm they are --


How now, Have you forgot your Function?


Nay, but I am mortal man also, and may fall seven times a day; -- Yea verily,
I may fall seven times a day: -- Your Ladyships Husband is old, -- and where
there is a good Excuse for falling, -- Ah, there the fall-ing -- is excusable.
-- And might I but fall with your Ladyship, -- might I, I say. --


How, this from you, the Head of the Church militant; the very Pope of
Presbytery?


Verily, the Sin lies in the Scandal; therefore, most of the discreet pious
Ladies of the Age, choose us, upright men, who make a Conscien^e of a secret,
the Laiety being more regardless of their Fame. -- In sober sadness, the Place
-- invites, the Creature tempting, and the Spirit very violent within me.


Who waits there? -- I'm glad you have proved your self what I ever thought of
all your pack of Knaves.


Ah, Madam! Do not ruin my Reputation; there are Ladies of high Degree in the
Commonwealth, to whom we find our selves most comforting; why might not you be
one? -- for, alas, we are accounted as able men in Ladies Chambers, as in our
Pulpits; we serve both Functions --


Should I tell this, I should not find belief.


Madam, I have another Errand to your Ladyship. -- It is the Duty of my
Occupation to catechize the Heads of every Family within my Diocese; and you
must answer some sew Questions I shall ask -- In the first place, Madam -- Who
made ye?


So, from whoring to a zealous Catechism -- who made me? what Insolence is
this, to ask me Questions which every Child that lisps out words can answer.


'Tis our Method, Madam.


Your Impudence Sirrah -- let me examine your Faith, who are so saucy to take
an account of mine -- Who made you? But lest you should not know, I will inform
you: First, Heaven made you a deformed, ill favoured Creature, then the Rascal
your Father made you a Taylor, next, your Wife made you a Cuckold, and lastly,
the Devil has made you a Doctor: and so get you gone for a Fool and a Knave all
over.


A man of my Coat affronted thus!


It shall be worse, Sirrah, my Husband shall know how kind you would have been
to him, because your Disciple and Benefactor, to have begot him a Babe of Grace
for a Son and Heir.


Mistake not my pious meaning, most Gracious Lady.


I'll set you out in your Colours: your impudent and Bloody Principles, your
cheats, your Rogueries on honest men, through their kind, deluded Wives, whom
you cant and goggle into a Belief, 'tis a great work of Grace to steal, and
beggar their whole Families, to contribute to your Gormandizing, Lust, and
Laziness; Ye Locusts of the Land, preach Nonsense, Blasphemy, and Treason, till
you sweat again, that the Sanctifi'd Sisters my rub you down, to comfort and
console the Creature.


Ah! Am --


Sirrah, be gone, and trouble me no more -- be gone -- yet stay -- the Rogue
may be of Use to me -- amongst the heap of Vice, Hypocrisy, and Devils that
possess all your Party, you may have some necessary sin; I've known some
honest, useful Villains amongst you, that will swear, profess, and lie devoutly
for the Good Old Cause.


Yea verily, I hope there are many such, and I should rejoice, yea, exceedingly
rejoice, in any Gladly Performance to your Ladyship.


This is a pious Work: You are a Knave of Credit, a very Saint with the
rascally Rabble, with whom your Seditious Cant more prevails, your precious hum
and ha, and gifted Nonsense, than all the Rhetoric of the learned or honest.


Hah ^


-- In fine, I have use of your Talent at present, there's one now in
Confinement of the Royal Party -- his name's Freeman.


And your Ladyship would have him dispatch'd; I conceive ye -- but would you
have him dispatch'd privately, or by Form of Law? we've Tools for all uses, and
'tis a pious Work and meritorious.


Right: I would indeed have him dispatch'd, and privately; but 'tis hither
privately, hither, to my Chamber, privately, for I have private Business with
him: D' ye start? -- this must be done -- for you can pimp I'm sure upon
occasion, you've Tools for all uses; come, resolve, or I'll discover your
bloody offer; Is your Stomach so queasy it cannot digest Pimping, that can
swallow Whoring, false Oaths, Sequestration, Robbery, Rapes, and Murders daily?


Verily, you mistake my pious meaning; it is the Malignant I stick at; the
Person, not the Office: and in sadness, Madam, it goes against my tender
Conscience to do any good to one of the Wicked.


It must stretch at this time; go haste to the Guard, and demand him in my
Husband's Name; here's something worth your Pains -- having released him, bring
him to me, you understand me -- go bid him be diligent, and as you behave your
self, find my Favour; for know, Sir, I am as great an Hypocrite as you, and
know the Cheats of your Religion too; and since we know one another, 'tis like
we shall be true.


But should the man be missing, and I called to an account? --


He shall be returned in an hour; go, get you gon, and bring him, or -- no more
--

For all degrees of Vices, you must grant
There is no Rogue like your Geneva Saint.

BY what strange Miracle, my dearest Freeman, were thou set at Liberty?


On the zealous Parole of Rabbie Ananias; that Rhetoric that can convert whole
Congregations of well-meaning Block-heads, to errant Knaves, has now mollified
my Keeper; I'm to be rendered back within this Hour: let's not, my dear Maria,
lose the precious minutes this Reverend Hypocrite has given us.


Oh! You are very gay, have you forgot whose Prisoner you are, and that
perhaps, e're many days are ended, they may hang you for High Treason against
the Common-wealth? they never want good throw-stitch'd Witness, to do a Murder
lawfully.


No matter; then I shall dye with Joy, Maria, when I consider, that you loved
so well to give me the last Proof on it.


Are you in Earnest, Freeman, and would you take what Honour will not suffer me
to grant?


With all my Heart, Honour's a poor Excuse: Your Heart and Vows (your better
part) are mine; you've only lent your Body out to one whom you call Husband,
and whom Heaven has marked for Cuckoldom. Nay, 'tis an Act of honest Loyalty,
so to revenge our Cause; whilst you were only mine, my honest Love thought it a
Sin to press these Favours from you; 'twas injuring my self as well as thee;
But now we only give and take our Right.


No more, my Husband's old. --


Right my Dear Maria; -- and therefore, --


-- May possibly dye. --


He will be hanged first.


-- I hope so -- either of which, will do our Business: -- Unreasonable
Freeman, not to have Patience till my Husband be hanged a li^tle.


But what if Destiny put the Change upon us, and I be hanged instead of Desbro?


Why then thou art not the first Gallant Fellow that has died in the Good and
Royal Cause; and a small Taste of Happiness will but turn thee off the Ladder
with the sadder Heart.


Hast thou the Conscience, lovely as thou art,
To deal out all thy Beauty to a Traitor?
Is not this Treason of the highest Nature,
To rob the Royal Party of such Treasure
And give it to our mortal Enemies:
For Shame, be wise and just,
And do not live a Rebel to our Cause;
'Tis Sin enough, to have Society with such a wicked Race.

But I am married to him.


So much the worse, to make a League and Covenant with such Villains, and keep
the sinful Contract; a little harmless Lying and Dissimulation I'll allow thee,
but to be right down honest, 'tis the Devil.


This will not do; it never shall be said I've been so much debauched by
Conventickling to turn a Sainted Sinner: No, I'm true to my Allegiance still,
true to my King and Honour. Suspect my Loyalty when I lose my Virtue; a little
Time, I'm sure, will give me honestly into thy Arms, if thou hast Bravery show
it in thy Love.


You will overcome, and shame me every way; -- but when will this Change come?
And till it do, what Pawn will you give me? I shall be happy then.


My Honour, and that Happiness you long for; and take but two Months Time for
their Redemption.


How greedily I'll seize the Forfeiture!


But what am I like to get if this Change do come?


A Slave, and whatever you please to make of him.


Who knows, in such a universal Change, how you may alter too?


I'll give ye Bond and Vows, unkind Maria; -- Here, take my hand -- Be it known
unto all Men, by these Presents, that I Iohn Freeman of London, Gent.
acknowledge my self in debt to Maria Desbro, the Sum of one Heart, with an
incurable Wound; one Soul, destined hers from it's first Being; and one Body,
whole, sound, and in perfect Health; which I here promise to pay to the said
Maria, upon Demand, if the aforesaid Iohn Freeman be not hanged before such
Demand made. Whereto, I set my Hand, -- and seal it with my Lips.


And I, in Consideration of such Debt, do freely give unto the abovesaid Iohn
Freeman the Heart and Body of the abovesaid Maria Desbro, with all
Appurtenances thereto belonging, whenever it shall please Heaven to bring my
Husband fairly to the Gallows.


Amen. -- kiss the Book --


Hah! that's Ananias sure; some Danger's near, the necessary Rascal gives us
Notice of.


'tis so, what would thou have me do?


thou art undone if seen. -- Here, step within this Curtain.


Ads nigs, what a Change is here like to be, -- puff puff -- we have managed
matters sweetly -- to let the Scotch General undermine us; puff, puff.


What's the matter?


Nothing Cockey, nothing, but that we are like to return to our first nothing.


Yea verily, when our times come; but ah, the great work of Reformation is not
yet fully accomplished, which must be wrought by the Saints, and we cannot
spare one of them until the Work be finished.


Yea, yea, it is finished I doubt, puff, puff; fie, fie, what a Change is here!


Patience, ah, 'tis a precious Virtue! --


Patience Sir! what, when I shall lose so many fine Estates which did appertain
to the Wicked; and which, I trusted, had been established ours; and tell
thou me of Patience! puff, puff.


How lose 'em Sir? Handle the matter with Patience; I hope the Committee of
Safety, or the Rump, will not do an illegal thing to one of the Brethren.


No, No, I have been a trusty Knave to them, and so I have found them all to
me: but Monk! Monk! O that ever we should be such blind Fools to trust an
honest General!


Patience Sir, What of him!


I just now received private Intelligence, he's coming out of Scotland. with
his Forces. -- puff, puff.


Why, let him come a Gads Name, we have those will give him a civil Salute, if
he mean not honourably to the Commonwealth. Patience Sir.


But if he prove the stronger, and should chance to be so great a Traitor to us
to bring in the Man -- the King?


How, the King Husband; the great Heroic?


Death, this Woman is a Sybill? Ah, Noble Monk!


Hum -- the King! --


Ah, and with the King, the Bishops; and then, where's all our Church and
Bishops Lands! Oh! undone. -- puff puff.


How, bring in the King and Bishops! my righteous Spirit is raised too: -- I
say, I will excommunicate him for one of the Wicked; yea, for a profane
Heroic, a Malignant, a Tory, -- a -- I say, we will surround him, and confound
him with a mighty Host; yea, and fight the Lards Battle with him; yea, we will.
--


Truckle to his Power. -- puff, puff.


Nay, I say verily, nay; for, in Sadness, I will dye in my Calling.


So I doubt shall I -- which is Plowing, Hedging, and Ditching.


Yea, we have the Sword of the Righteous in our hand, and we will defend the
mighty Revenues of the Church, which the Lard hath given unto his People, and
chosen ones -- I say, we will defend --


Ah, Patience, Sir, ah, 'tis a pious Virtue --


Ah, it is Zeal in one of us, the out-goings of the Spirit.


Sir, Will you go down to Prayers? the Chaplain waits.


No, no, Boy, I am too serious for that Exercise,
I cannot now dissemble, Heaven forgive me.

How, Sir, not dissemble -- ah, then you have lost a great Virtue indeed, a
very great Virtue; ah, let us not give away the Good Old Cause -- but, as we
have hitherto maintained it by Gladly cozenage, and pious frauds, let us
persevere -- ah, let us persevere to the end; let us not lose our Heritage for
a Mess of Pottage, that is, let us not lose the Cause for Dissimulation and
Hypocrisy, those two main Engines that have carried on the great Work.


Verily, you have prevailed, and I will go take counsel of my pillow: Boy --
call my man to undress me -- I'll to bed, for I am sick at heart.


Death, what shall I do now?


You must get my man off, or we're undone.


Madam, be comforted, Heaven will bring all things about for our advantage. --


But he's behind the Curtains man --


Ah, let Providence alone --


Ah do, Mr. Ananias, do, for she's a good and a virtuous Lady, certo she is.


Get ye behind my cloak --


Indeed Sir, your Counsel and Assistance is very comfortable,


We should be helps meet to one another, Madam.


Alack, good man ^


Ay, my Dear, I am so much obliged to him, that I know not without thy thy aid,
how to make him amends.


So this is the first Cloak of Zeal I ever made use of.


Good Lady give him this twenty pieces, a dad he worthily deserves 'em.


Indeed, and so he does, Dear, if thou knew all.

-- What say you now, do I not improve in Hypocrisy? and shall I not in time
make a precious member of your Church?


Verily, your Ladyship is most ingenious and expert,
-- Sir, I most humbly take my leave.

My Lord, my Lord Lambert has sent in all haste for you, you must attend at his
house immediately.


So, he has heard the News -- I must away -- let my Coach be ready --


How unlucky was this that Freeman should be gone -- Sirrah, run, and see to
o'retake him, and bring him back.


Where am I, Gilliflower?


In my Ladies Apartment, Sir, she'll be with you presently; you need not fear
betraying, Sir, for I'll assure you I'm an Heroic in my heart: my Husband was
a Captain for his Majesty of ever blessed memory, and killed at Naseby, God be
thanked, Sir.


What pity 'tis that thou should serve this Party?


Abating her Principles, my Lady has good Nature enough to oblige a Servant;
and truly Sir, my Vails were good in old Oliver's days; I got well by that
Amour, between him and my Lady; the man was lavish enough.


Yes, of the Nations Treasure -- but, prithee tell me, Is not thy Lady mad,
raving on Crowns and Kingdoms?


It appears so to you, who are not used to the Vanity of the Party, but they
are all so mad in their degree, and in the Fit they talk of nothing else Sir;
we have to morrow a hearing, as they call it.


What's that, a Conventicle?


No, no, Sir, Ladies of the last Edition, that present their Grievances to the
Council of Ladies, of which my Lady's Chief, which Grievances are laid open to
the Committee of Safety, and so redressed, or slighted, as they are.


That must be worth one's Curiosity, could one but see it.


We admit no man, Sir.


'Sdeath, for so good a sight I will turn Woman.
I'll Act it to a hair.

That would be excellent.


Nay, I must do it: the Novelty is rare -- but I'm impatient -- prithee let thy
Lady know I wait.


She's in Affairs of State, but will be here immediately; mean time, retire
into her Cabinet, I'll send the Page with Lights, there you may repose, till my
Lady comes, on the Palate.


My Lord Wariston, you are not merry to night.


One Mon, this Monk sticks in my Gullet, the muckle Diel pull him out by the
Lugs; the faud Loone will en spoil ad our sport mon.


I thought I had enough satisfied all your Fears; the Army's mine, that is --
'tis yours, my Lords, and I'll employ it too so well for the Good of the
Commonwealth, you shall have cause to commend both my Courage and Conduct: my
Lord Wariston, will you accompany me?


Ah, my gued Lord, the Honour is too great! 'Tis not but I's dare fight my
Lord, but I love not the limmer Loone, he has a villainous honest Face an's
en; I's kend him ence, and liked him not; but I's drink tol yar gued Fortune;
let it gang aboote, en and ad Sirs.


We'll leave all discourse of business, and give our selves to Mirth; I fancy
good Success from this days Omen.


Waited so long!


And grew inpatient, and please your Highness; must I go tell him you cannot
see him to Night.


Not for the World; my silly Politician will be
Busying himself in dull Affairs of State;
-- Dull in Comparison of Love, I mean;
I never loved before; Old Oliver I suffered for my Interest,
And 'tis some Greatness, to be Mistress to the best;
But this mighty Pleasure comes A propo
To sweeten all the heavy Toils of Empire.

So it does, an't please your Highness.

Go, let him know I'm coming -- Madam, I must beg your Pardon, you hear, my
Lord to morrow goes on this great Expedition; and, for any thing we know, may
fall a glorious Sacrifice to the Commonwealth; therefore, 'tis meet I offer up
some Prayers for his Safety, and all my Leisure Hours 'twixt this and that,
will be too few. -- Your humble Servant Madam. --


My Dear, I'll leave you too, my Time of Devotion is come, and heaven will stay
for no Body; where are my People, is my Coach ready, or may Chair.


Go in your Chair my Love, lest you catch cold.


And light your Flambeaus, -- I love to have my Chair surrounded with
Flambeaus.


Your Chair is ready, Madam.


What think ye now my Lords of settling the Nation a little; I find my Head
swim with Politics, and what ye call ums.


One, and wad ya settle the Nation when we real our selves?


Who, pox shall we stand making Childrens Shoes all the year? No, No, let's
begin to settle the Nation, I say, and go throw stich with our Work.


Right, we have no Head to obey; so that if this Scotch General do come, whilst
we Dogs fight for the Bone, he runs away with it.


Shaw, we shall patch up matters with the Scotch General, I'll warrant you:
However, here's to our next Head. -- One and All. --


Verily Sirs, this Health drinking savours of Monarchy, and is a Type of
Malignancy.


Bread, my Lord, no preaching over yar Liquor, wee's now for a Cup of the
Creature.


In a gladly way you may, it is lawful.


Come, Come, we're dull, give us some Music -- Come my Lord, I'll give you a
Song, I love Music as I do a Drum, there's Life and Soul in it, call my Music.


Yea, I am for any Music, except an Organ.


'SBread Sirs, and I's for a Horn-pipe; I've a faud Thief here shall dance ye
dance tol a Horn-pipe, with any States man a ya'ad.


He, He, He.


I know not what your faud Thief can do; but, I'll hold you a Wager, Colonel
Hewson, and Colonel Desbro, shall dance ye the Saints Jig with any Sinner of
your Kirk, or Field Conventickler.


One, and I's catch 'em at that sport, I's danc^ tol 'em for a Scotch Poond
but farst yar Song, my Lord, I hope 'tis body, or 'tis not w^rth a Feart.


He, He, He.


A Pox of the States-man that's witty
That watches and Plots all the sleepless Night,
For Seditious Harangues to the Whigs of the City,
And piously turns a Traitor in spite.
Let him wrack and torment his lean Carrion,
To bring his Sham-Plots about,
Till Religion, King, Bishop, and Baron,
For the Public Good, be quite rooted out.
Whilst we that are no Politicians,
But Rogues that are Resolute, bare-fac'd and Great,
Boldly head the rude Rabble in open Sedition,
Bearing all down before us in Church and in State.
Your Impudence is the best State trick,
And he that by Law means to rule,
Let his History with ours be related,
Though we prove the Knaves, 'tis he is the Fool.
The Diel a me, wele sung my Lord, and gen and Trads fail, yas make a quaint
Minstrel.


He, He, He.


No Sirs, yar Dance? Archibald.


Here must I wait, to give my Lady Notice when my Lord approaches; -- The fine
Gentleman that is alone with her, gave me these two fine pieces of Gold, and
bad me buy a Sword to fight for the King with-all; and I'm resolved to lay it
all out in Sword, not a penny in Nickers, and fight for the Heroics as long as
I have a Limb, if they be all such fine Men as this within. But hark, sure I
hear some coming. --


This Present's too magnificent: Such Bracelets young Monarchs should put on.


Persons like me, when they make Presents, Sir, must do it for their Glory, not
considering the merit of the Wearer; yet this, my charming Loveless, comes
short of what I ought to pay thy worth; comes short too of my Love.


You bless me, Madam --


This the great Monarch of the World once tied about my Arm, and bade me wear
it, till some greater man should chance to win my Heart:
Thou art that man whom Love hath raised above him;
Whom every Grace and every Charm thou hast
Conspire to make thee mightier to my Soul;
And Oliver, Illustrious Oliver!
Was yet far short of thee.

He was the Monarch then whose Spoils I triumph in.

They were designed for Trophies to the young and Gay.
Ah, Loveless! that I could reward thy Youth
With something that might make thee more than man,
As well as give the best of Women to thee --
-- Behold this Gay, this wondrous Glorious thing.

Hah -- a Crown -- and Sceptre!
Have I been all this while
So near the Sacred Relics of my King!
And found no Awful motion in my blood,
Nothing that moved Sacred Devotion in me?
-- Hail Sacred Emblem of Great Majesty,
Thou that hast circled more Divinity
Than the great Zodiac that surrounds the World.
I ne'er was blessed with sight of thee till now,
But in much reverenced Pictures --

Is't not a lovely thing?

There's such Divinity in the very Form on it,
Had I been conscious I'd been near the Temple
Where this bright Relic of the Glorious Martyr
Had been inshrin'd, 'thad spoiled my soft Devotion!
-- 'tis Sacrilege to dally where it is;
A rude, a Saucy Treason to approach it
With an unbended knee; for Heav's sake, Madam,
Let us not be profane in our Delights,
Either withdraw, or hide that Glorious Object.

Thou art a Fool, the very sight of this --
Raises my Pleasure higher,
Methinks I give a Queen into thy Arms:
And where I love I cannot give enough;
-- Would I could set it on thy Head for ever,
It would not become my simple Lord
The thousandth part so well.

Forbear, and do not play with holy things,
Let us retire, and love as Mortals should,
Not imitate the Gods, and spoil our Joys.

Lovely, and unambitious!
What hopes have I of all your promised Constancy,
Whilst this, which possibly here long may adorn my Brow,
And ought to raise me higher in your Love,
Ought to transform you even to Adoration,
Shall poorly make you vanish from it's Lustre;
Methinks the very Fancy of a Queen
Is worth a thousand Mistress's of less Illustrious Rank.

What every Pageant Queen? You might from thence infer
I'd fall in Love with every little Actress, because
She acts the Queen for half an hour,
But then the gaudy Robe is laid aside.

I'll pardon the Comparison in you.

I do not doubt your Power of being a Queen,
But trust, it will not last.
How truly brave would your great Husband be,
If whilst he may, he paid this mighty Debt
To the Right Owner!
If whilst he has the Army in his Power
He made a true and lawful use of it,
To settle our great Master in his Throne;
And by an act so glorious raise his Name
Even above the Title of a King.

You love me not, that would persuade me from my Glory.

Oh, Madam, the Lords are all got merry, as they call it, and are all dancing
hither.


What at their Oliverian Frolics? -- dear Loveless, withdraw, I would not give
the fond believing Fool a Jealousy of me.


Withdraw, Madam, 'tis impossible, he must run just into their mouths.


Im' ill at these Intrigues, being used to Lovers that still came with such
Authority, that modestly my Husband would withdraw -- but Loveless is in
danger, therefore take care he be not seen.


Heavens! they are coming, there's no retreat --


Lye down on the Couch -- and cover him you with the Foot-Carpet, -- so, give
me my Prayer-Book. -- What Insolence is this? do you not hear me, you -- Sots
-- whom Gaiety and Dancing do so ill become.


Ione Sanderson, welcome, welcome.


No, but 'tis part of a reward for your Insolence, which possibly your Head
shall answer for. --


Pardon him, my dear, he meant no disrespect to thee.


How dare you interrupt my Devotion, Sirrah?
Begone with all your filthy ill-bred Crew.

My only dear, be patient; hah!
Something moves under me! Treason, Treason.

Treason, Treason! my Lord, my Lord!

Lights there, a Plot, a Popish Plot, lights.

The Crown, the Crown, guard the Crown!
-- Here, take this Key, the next room is my Bed-chamber,
Secure your self a moment. --
Lights there, the Crown -- who art thou?

'Tis I.

Ah, my Lord, what's the matter? --

Nay, my Lady, I ask you what's the matter,


Heavens! Dost hear him, Gilliflower? Sure the Fellow's mad.


Alack, my Lord, Are you out of your Honourable Wits?
Heaven knows, my Lady was at her Devotion.

Bawd, come, confess thy self to be one; at her Devotion, yes, with a He Saint.


Ah! Gad forbid the Saints should be so wicked.


Hark ye, thou little snivelling Hypocrite, who hast no Virtue but a little
Conduct in Martial Discipline; who hast by Perjuries, Cheats, and Pious
Villainies, wound thy self up into the Rabbles Favour, where thou may stand,
till some more great in Roguery remove thee from that height, or to the
Gallows, if the King return. Hast thou the impudence to charge my Virtue?


I know not, Madam, whether that Virtue you boast were lost, or only stak't,
and ready for the Gamester; but I am sure a Man was hid under this Carpet.


Oh Heavens, a Man!


A Lord, a Man? Are you sure 'twas a man, my Lord?
-- Some Villainous Malignant, I'll warrant.

It may be so.

Alack, the Wickedness of these Heroics, to hide under Carpets; why they'll
have the Impudence to hide under our Petticoats shortly, if your Highness take
'em not down.


I do believe so; Death -- a Cuckold; shall that black Cloud shade all my
rising Fame?


Cuckold? Why is that Name so great a Stranger to ye,
Or has your rising Fame made ye forget
How long -- that Cloud has hung upon your Brow?
-- 'Twas once the height of your Ambition Sir,
When you -- were a poor -- sneeking Slave to Cromwell:
Then you could cringe and sneere -- and hold the Door;
And give him every Opportunity
Had not my Piety defeated your Endeavours.

That was for Glory,
Who would not be a Cuckold to be great?
-- If Cromwell leaped into my Saddle once,
I'll step into his Throne for it: but, to be pointed at
By Rascals that I -- rule, -- 'tis insupportable.

How got this Fellow drunk; call up my Officers:
Who dur'st deliver him this Quantity of Wine?
Send straight in my Name, to summon all the
Drunken Committee of Safety to my Presence.
By Heaven I'll show you Sir -- yes they shall
See what a fine King they are like to have
In Honest, Gladly, Sober, Wise Jack Lambert.
-- Nay, I'll do it; do ye think to take away my Honour thus?
I, who by my sole Politics and Management,
Have set you up Villain of Villains, Sirrah.
-- Away -- summon 'em all.

Stay -- be not so rash; who was beneath the Carpet?


I will not answer thee.


Nor any living thing?


No Creature in the Room, thou silly Idiot, but Gilliflower and I, -- at our
Devotion, praying to Heaven for your Success to morrow; -- and am I thus
rewarded!


My Soul, I cannot bear the sight of Tears
From these dear charming Eyes.

No matter Sir, the Committee shall right me.


Upon my Knees I ask thy Pardon Dear; by all that's good, I would have sworn
I'd felt something stir beneath me, as I sat, which threw me over.


Only your Brains turned round with too much drinking and dancing, Exercises
you are not used to: -- Go sleep, and settle 'em; for I'll not daign to Bed
with you to Night; -- retire, as here you hope to have my Aid in your
Advancement to the Crown.


I'm gone, -- and once more, pardon my Mistake.


-- So, this fighting Fool, so worshipped by the Rabble, how meanly can a Woman
make him sneeke;


Excellent Creature, how I do adore thee!


But you, perhaps, are satisfied already. --


Never! should thou be kind to all Eternity. Thou hast one Virtue more, I pay
thee Homage for; I heard from the Alcove how great a Mistress thou art in the
dear Mystery of Jilting.


That's the first Lesson Women learn in Conventicles; Religion teaches those
Maxims to our Sex, by this!

Kings are deposed, and Commonwealths are ruled;
By Jilting all the Universe is fooled.

HA Rogues, the City-Boys are up in Arms; brave Boys, all for the King now!


Have a Care what you say Sir; but as to the City's being in Mutiny, that makes
well for us: we shall fall to our old Trade of plundering, something will fall
to the Righteous, and there is Plunder enough.


You plunder Sirrah, knock him down, and carry him into the Guardroom, and
secure him.


They say, the Committee of Safety sat all Night at General Lambert's, about
some great Affair -- some rare Change Rogues!


Yes, and to put off Sorrow, they say, were all right reverendly drunk too.


I suppose so, there is some heavenly matter in hand; there was Treason cried
out at the General's last Night, and the Committee of no Safety all ran away.


Or rather reeled away.


-- The Ladies squeaked, the Lords fled, and all the House was up in Arms.


Yea, and with Reason they say; for, the Pope in diguise was found under the
Ladies Bed, and two huge Jesuits as big as the Tall Irish-man, with
Blunderbusses; having, as 'tis said, a design to steal the Crown now in Custody
of the General. --


Good lack, is't possible?


Nay Sir, 'tis true, and is't not time we looked about us?


A Pox upon ye all, for lying Knaves: -- secure 'em both on the Guard, till
farther Order, -- and let us in to the City-boys: hay for Lumbard-street.


Ay hay for Lumbard-street; there's a Shop I have marked out for my own
already.


There's a handsome Citizens Wife, that I have an Eye upon, her Husband's a rich
Banker, I'll take t'one with the other.


You are mistaken Sir, that plunder is reserved for us, if they begin to
mutiny; That wicked City that is so weary of a Commonwealth.


Yes, they are afraid of the Monster they themselves have made.


Hah, my Noble Colonel; what, in Disguise!


We have made our Escapes, -- and hope to see better times shortly; the Noble
Scotch General is come Boys.


Come my Lads, since you have made me Captain, I'll lead you bravely on! I'll
dye in the Cause, or bring you off with Victory.


Here's a Club shall do some Execution; I'll beat out Hewson's the other Eye; I
scorn to take him on the blind Side.


In the first Place, we must all sign a Petition to my Lord Mayor. --


Petitions, we'll have no Petitions Captain; we are for Club Law, Captain.


Obey, or I leave you.


Obey, Obey.


Look ye, we'll petition for an honest Free Parliament I say.


No Parliament, no Parliament, we have had too much of that Mischief already
Captain.


No Parliament, no Parliament.


Farewell Gentlemen, I thought I might have been heard.


Death Sirs, you shall hear the Captain out.


We obey, we obey.


I say, an honest Free Parliament, not one picked and chosen by Faction; but
such an one shall do our Business Lads, and bring in the Great Heroic.


Ay, Ay, the Great Heroic, the Great Heroic!


A fine Youth, and should be encouraged.


Good -- in the next place, the noble Scotch General is come, and we'll side
with him.


Ay, Ay, all side with him.


Your Reason, Captain, for we have acted too much without Reason already.


Are we sure of him, Captain?


Oh, he'll doubtless declare for the King, Boys.


Hay, Via la Roy, via la Monk.


Next, I hear there's a Proclamation coming out to dissolve the Committee of no
Safety.


Good, good.


And I hope you are all brave enough to stand to your Loyal Principles with
your Lives and Fortunes.


We'll dye for the Royal Interest.


In the next place, there's another Proclamation come out.


This Captain is a man of rare Intelligence; but for what Captain?


Why -- to -- hang us all, if we do not immediately depart to our respective
Vocations, how like you that, my Lads?


Hum -- hanged! I'll even home again.


And I too, I do not like this hanging.


A man looks but scurvily with his Neck awry.


Ay, ay, We'll home.


Why now you show what precious men you are -- the King would be finely hope up
with such Rascals, that for fear of a little hanging would desert his Cause; a
Pox upon ye all, I here discharge ye --

-- take back your Coward Hands, and give me Hearts,
I scorn to fight with such mean-spirited Rogues.
I did but try your boasted Courages.

A brave Boy.


We'll dye with thee, Captain --


Oh, noble Captain, we recant --


We recant, dear Captain, we'll die, one and all.


One and all, one and all.


Why so, there's some trusting to you now.


But is there such a Proclamation, Captain?


There is; but anon, when the Crop-ear'd Sheriff begins to read it, let every
man enlarge his Voice, and cry, No Proclamation, no Proclamation.


Agreed, agreed.


Brave noble Lads, hold still your Resolution,
And when your leisure hours will give ye leave,
Drink the King's Health, here's Gold for you to do so.

Take my Mite too, brave Lads.


Hay! Viva the brave Heroics.


Hum, What have we here, a Street-Conventicle! -- or a Mutiny? Yea verily, it
is a Mutiny, -- What means this appearance in Hostile manner, in open Street,
by Day-light?


Hah! one of the sanctified Lay Elders, one of the Fiends of the Nation, that
go about like roaring Lyons, seeking whom they may devour?


Who, Mr. Ananias the Padder.


Bear Witness Gentlemen all, he calls me an High-way Man; thou shalt be hanged
for Scandal on the Brethren.


I'll prove what I say, Sirrah; do not you rob on the High-way in the Pulpit?
Rob the Sisters, and preach it lawful for them to rob their Husbands; rob men
even of their Consciences and Honesty; nay, rather than stand out, rob poor
Wenches of Bodkins and Thimbles.


I commit ye; here Soldiers, I charge ye in the Name of -- of -- marry I know
not who, in my Name, and the good People of England, take 'em to safe Custody.


How, lay hold of honest Gentlemen! Noble Cavaliers, knock him down.


Knock him down, knock him down.


Hold worthy Youths; the Rascal has done me Service.


London! that ye have changed your Note, like Birds of evil Omen; that you go
astray after new Lights, or rather, no Lights, and commit Whoredom with your
Fathers Idols, even in the midst of the Holy City, which the Saints have
prepared for the Elect, the Chosen ones.


Hark ye, Sirrah, leave preaching, and fall to declaring for us, or thou art
mortal.


Nay, I say nay, I will dye in my Calling -- yea I will fall a Sacrifice to the
Good Old Cause; abomination ye with a mighty hand, and will destroy, demolish,
and confound your Idols, those heathenish Malignants whom you follow, even with
Thunder and Lightening, even as a Field of Corn blasted by a strong Blast.


Knock him down.


Down with Dagon, down with him.


Ah Rogues, have I caught ye napping?


Whoop Cobbler, Whoop Cobbler.


I've had no time to ask your Highness how you slept to night; but that's a
needless Question.


How mean you? do you suspect my Virtue? do you believe Loveless dares attempt
any thing against my Honour? No Gilliflower, he acted all things so like a
Gentleman, that every Moment takes my Heart more absolutely.


My Lord departed highly satisfied.


She is not worthy of Intrigues of Love, that cannot manage a silly Husband as
she pleases -- but Gilliflower, you forget that this is Council day.


No but I do not, Madam, some important Suitors wait already.


Your Servant, Madam, Desbro, thour't welcome --
Gilliflower, are all things ready in the Council Chamber?
We that are Great must sometimes stoop to Acts,
That have at least some show of Charity;
We must redress the Grievance of our People.

She speaks as she were Queen, but I shall put a Spoke in her rising Wheel of
Fortune, or my Lords Politics fail him


Where are the Ladies of the Council? -- how remiss they are in their
Attendance on us?


Us! Heavens, I can scarce endure this Insolence!
-- We will take care to mind 'em of their Duty --

We, poor Creature! how simply Majesty becomes her?


Your pleasure! Is that the General Voice? This is my Place in spite of thee,
and all thy fawning Faction, and I shall keep it, when thou, perhaps, shalt be
an humble Suppliant here at my Foot-stool.


I smile at thee.


Do, and cringe; 'tis thy bu'sness to make thee Popular --
But 'tis not that,
Nor thy false Beauty that will serve thy Ends.

Rail on; declining Majesty may be excused,
Call in the Women that attend for redress of Grievances.
Gentlewomen, what's your Business with us?

Gentlewomen? some of us are Ladies.


Ladies, in good time; by what Authority, and from whom do you derive your
Title of Ladies?


Have a care how you usurp what's not you own?


How the Devil rebukes Sin?


From whom had you your Honours, Women?


From our Husbands.


Husbands; who are they, and of what standing?


Of no long standing, I confess.


That's a common Grievance indeed.


And ought to be redressed.


And that shall be taken into consideration; write it down, Gilliflower, Who
made your Husband a Knight, Woman?


Oliver the first, an't please ye.


Of horrid Memory; write that down -- who yours?


Richard the Fourth, an't like your Honour.


Of sottish Memory; Shall I write that down too?


Most remarkably.


Heavens! Can I hear this Profanation of our Royal Family?


I wonder with what impudence Noll and Dick could Knightifie your Husbands? for
'tis a Rule in Heraldry, that none can make a Knight but him that is one; 'Tis
Sancha Pancha's Case in Don Quixote.


How dare you question my Husband's Authority?
Who nobly won his Honour in the Field,
Not like thy sneaking Lord, who gained his Title
From his Wife's gay Love-tricks,
Bartering her Honour for his Coronet.

Thou lie, my Husband earned it with his Sword, braver and juster than thy
bold Usurper, who waded to his Glory, through a Sea of Royal Blood. --


Sure Loveless has done good on her, and converted her.


Madam, I humbly beg you will be patient, You'll ruin all my Lord's Designs
else. -- Women, proceed to your Grievances, both public and private.


I petition for a Pension, my Husband, deceased, was a constant active man, in
all the late Rebellion, against the Man; he plundered my Lord Capel, he
betrayed his dearest Friend Brown Bushel, who trusted his Life in his hands,
and several others; plundering their Wives and Children even to their Smocks.


Most considerable Service, and ought to be considered.


And most remarkably, at the Trial of the late Man, I spit in's Face, and
betrayed the Earl of Holland to the Parliament.


In the King's Face, you mean -- it showed your zeal for the Good Cause.


And 'twas my Husband that headed the Rabble, to pull down Gog and Magog, the
Bishops, broke the Idols in the Windows, and turned the Churches into Stables
and dens of Thieves; robbed the Altar of the Cathedral of the twelve pieces of
Plate called the twelve Apostles, turned eleven of 'em into Money, and kept
Iudas for his own use at home.


On my word, most wisely performed, note it down --


And my Husband made Libels on the Man, from the first Troubles to this day,
defamed and profaned the Woman and her Children, printed all the man's Letters
to the Woman with Burlesque Marginal Notes, pulled down the sumptuous Shrines
in Churches, and with the golden and Popish Spoils adorned his own Houses and
Chimney Pieces.


We shall consider these great Services.


To what a height is Impudence arrived?


Proceed to private Grievances.


An't please your Honours, my Husband prays too much; which both hinders his
private Business at home, and his Public Services to the Commonwealth --


A double Grievance -- set it down, Gilliflower.


And then he rails against the Whore of Babylon, and all my Neighbours think he
call me Whore.


A most unpardonable fault.


We'll have that rectified, it will concern us.


Then he never kisses me, but he says a long Grace, which is more mortifying
than inviting.


That is the fault of all the new Saints, which is the reason their Wives take
a pious care, as much as in them lies, to send 'em to Heaven, by making 'em
Cuckolds.


A very charitable work, and ought to be encouraged.


The humble Petition of the Lady Make-shift,


Read it.


June 24th against Fornication and Adultery, to the great detriment of most of
the young Ladies, Gentlewomen, and Commonalty of England, and to the utter
decay of many whole Families, especially when married to old men; your
Petitioners most humbly beg your Honours will take this great Grievance into
Mature Consideration and that the said Act may be repealed.

-- a blessing on 'em, they shall have my hand too.


We acknowledge, there are many Grievances in that Act: but there are many
Conveniences too, for it ties up the Villainous Tongues of men from boasting our
Favours.


But as it lays a Scandal on Society -- 'tis troublesome, Society being the
very Life of a Republic -- Peters the first, and Martin the Second.


But in a Free State, why should not we be free?


Why not? we stand for the Liberty and Property of our Sex, and will present it
to the Committee of Safety.


Secondly, we desire the Heroics, vulgarly called the Malignants, may not be
looked on as Monsters, for assuredly they are Men; and that it may not be
charged to us as a Crime to keep 'em company, for they are honest men.


And some of 'em men that will stand to their Principles.


Is there no other honest men that will do as well?


Good men are scarce.


They're all for Heroics, sure 'tis the mode to love 'em -- I cannot blame
'em.


And that when we go to Mornings and Evenings Lectures, to Tantlings or
elsewhere, and either before or after visit a private Friend, it may be
actionable for the Wicked to scandalize us, by terming of it, ^busing the
Creature, when 'tis harmless recreating the Creature.


Reason, Reason.


Nor that any Husband should interupt his Wife, when at her private Devotion.


I have been too late sensible of that Grievance.


And Madam, I would humbly pray a Patent for Scolding, to ease my Spleen.


An please Your Highness, here's a Messenger arrived Post, with Letters from my
Lord, the General.


Greater Affairs -- oblige us to break up the Council.


Hah, bless my Eye-sight, she looks pale, -- now red again, some Turn to his
Confusion, Heaven, I beseech thee.


My Lord's undone! His Army has deserted him;
Left him denfenceless to the Enemies Power.
Ah Coward Traitors! Where's that brutal Courage
That made ye so successful in your Villainies?
Has Hell that taught ye Valour, now abandoned ye?
-- How in an Instant are my Glories fallen!

Ha, ha, ha, -- What, has your Highness any cause of Grief?


Call up your Courage Madam, do not let these things scoff you, -- you may be
yet a Queen: Remember what Lilly told you Madam.


Damn Lilly, who with lying Prophesies, has raised me to the hopes of Majesty:
a Legend of his Devils take him for it.


Oh, have a Care of Cursing, Madam!


Screech-Owl, away, thy Voice is ominous.
Oh I could rave! but that it is not great;
-- And silent Sorrow -- has most Majesty.

One Madam, undone, undone; our honourable Committee is gone to the Diel, and
the damned loosey Rump is and in and; the muckle Diel set it i'solt, and his
Dam drink most fort.


The Committee dissolved, whose wise Work was that? it looks like Fleetwood's
silly Politics.


Mary, and yar Ladiship's in the Right, 'twas en the Work of the faud Loone, the
Diel breast his Wem for it.


So Brethren in Iniquity, we have spun a fine Thread, the Rump's all in all
now; rules the Roast, and has sent for the General with Sissers and Razor.


With a Siserary, you mean.


None of your Terms in Law, good Brother.


Right, but gen ya have any Quirks in Law, Mr. Liar, that will save our Crags,
'twill be warth a Fee.


We have plaid our Cards fair.


Is deny that; Wans Sirs ya plaid 'em foul; a Fule had the shooftling of 'em,
and the Muckle Diel himself turned up Trump.


We are lost Gentlemen, utterly lost; who the Devil would have thought of a
Dissolution?


Is there no Remedy?


Death, I'll to the Scotch General; turn but in time as many greater Rogues
than I have done, and 'twill save my Stake yet. -- Farewell Gentlemen.


No Remedy?


Nene Sirs again the Kings Evel; Bread Sirs, ya's en gang tol yat Stall again:
Is en follow Duckingfield -- Farewell Mr. Leyer.


See the Vicissitudes of Humane Glory.
These Rascals, that but Yesterday petitioned me
With humble Adoration, now scarce pay
Common Civilities due to my Sex alone.

How now Fool, what is't that makes ye look so pertly? Some mighty Business you
have done, I'll warrant.


Verily Lady Mother, you are the strangest Body; a Man cannot please you. --
Have I not finely circumvented Lambert? Made the Rump Head, who have committed
him to the Tower; ne'er stir now that I have, and I'm the greatest Man in
England, as I live I am, as a Man may say.


Yes, till a greater come. Ah Fool of Fools, not to fore-see the Danger of that
nasty Rump.


Good Madam, treat my Lord with more Respect.


Away fond Fool, born with so little Sense,
To dote on such a wretched Idiot;
It was thy Fate in Ireton's days, to love him,
Or you were foully scandall'd

You are not so well spoken of neither, ne'er stir now, and you go to that. I
can be King to morrow if I will.


Thou lie, thou wo't be hanged first; mark that I tell thee so. I'll prove
Cassandra to thee, and prophecy thy Doom; Heaven pays the Traitor back with
equal measure. Remember how you served my poor Son Richard.


She's mad -- Come, my Dear, let's leave the House of this Villain that meant
to have cozened me illegally of three Kingdoms, -- but that I out-witted him
at last.


Imprisoned too, in the Tower! What Fate is mine?


Madam, the fine Heroick's come to wait on you.


Hah, Loveless! let him not see the Ruins of my Greatness, which he foretold,
and kindly begged I would usurp no more.


This News has brought me back, I love this Woman! Vain as she is, in spite of
all her Fopperies of State --


Alas, I do not merit thy Respect,
I'm fallen to Scorn, to Pity and Contempt.
Ah Loveless, fly the Wretched --
Thy Virtue is too noble to be shined on
By any thing but rising Suns alone:
I'm a declining shade. --

By Heaven, you were never great till now!
I never thought thee so much worth my Love,
My Knee, and Adoration, till this Minute.
-- I come to offer you my Life, and all,
The little Fortune the rude Heard has left me.

Is there such god-like Virtue in your Sex?
Or rather, in your Party.
Curse on the Lies and Cheats of Conventicles,
That taught me first to think Heroics Devils,
Blood-thirsty, lewd, tyrannic Salvage Monsters.
-- But I believe 'em Angels all, if all like Loveless.
What heavenly thing then must the Master be,
Whose Servants are Divine?

Oh Madam! all the Heroick-Boys are up in Arms, and swear they'll have your
Highness, dead or alive, -- they have besieged the House.


Heavens, the Rabble! -- those faithless things that used to crowd my Coaches
Wheels, and stop my Passage, with their officious Noise and Adoration.


Loveless, Thy Aid; the City-Sparks are up;
Their zealous Loyalty admits no Bounds.
A glorious Change is coming, and I'll appear now bare faced.

Madam, fear not the Rabble; retire, Freeman and I can still 'em.

My dear Maria, I shall claim ye shortly --

Do your worst, I'm ready for the Challenge

I say we'll have the She-Polititian out, she did more mischief than her
Husband, pitiful, dittiful Lambert; who is, thanks be praised, in the Tower,
to which place, Lord of his mercy bring all the Kings Enemies.


Amen, Amen.


Why how now Captain, what besiege the Women? No, let us lead our Force to
Nobler Enemies.


Nay, noble Chief, your word's our Law.


No, I resign that Title to the brave Scotch General, who has just now entered
the City.


We know it, Sir; Do you not observe how the Crop-ear'd Phanaticks trot out of
Town? -- The Rogues began their old beloved Mutiny, but it would not do.


A Pox upon 'em, they went out like the Snuff of a Candle, stinkingly and
blinkingly.


Ay, ay, let 'em hang themselves, and then they are cold meat for the Devil.


But noble Champion, I hope we may have leave to roast the Rump to Night?


With all our hearts; here's Money to make Fires --


And here's for drink too't, Boys.


Hey -- Via le Roy, via les Heroics!


So, the Rabble's gone: ah, Brethren! what will this wicked World come too?


Alack, alack, to no goodness, you may be sure; pray what's the News?


Anania, Anania.


Who calls Ananias? lo, here am I.


Behold, it is I, look up. How goes tidings?


Full ill, I fear, 'tis a bad Omen to see your Lordship so nigh Heaven; when
the Saints are Garettifi'd.


I am fortifying my self against the Evil day.


Which is come upon us like a Thief in the Night; like a Torrent from the
Mountain of Waters; or a Whirl-wind from the Wilderness.


Why, what has the Scotch General done?


Ah! He plays the Devil with the Saints in the City, because they put the
Covenant Oath unto him, he pulls up their Gates, their Posts and Chains, and
enters.


And would the wicked City let him have his beastly will of her?


Nay, but she was ravished -- deflow'red.


How, ravished! oh, monstrous! was ever such a Rape committed upon an innocent
City? lay her Legs open to the wide World, for every Knave to view her
Nakedness?


Ah, ah! what Days, what Times, and what Seasons are here?


What say you now, Lads, is not my Prophecy truer than Lillie's? I told you
the Rump would fall to our handling, and drinking for: the Kingss proclaimed,
Rogues.


Ay, ay, Lilly, a Plague on him, he prophesied Lambert should be uppermost.


Yes, he meant perhaps on Westminster Pinnacle; where's Lilly now, with all his
Prophecies against the Royal Family?


In one of his Twelve Houses.


We'll fire him out to night, Boy; come, all hands to work for the Fire.


Ah, dismal, heavy day, a day of Grief and Wo,
Which hast bereft me of my hopes for ay, ah Lard, what shall I do?

My Charmer, why these Tears?
If for the fall of all thy painted Glories,
Thou art, in the esteem of all good men,
Above what thou were it then:
The glorious Sun is rising in our Hemisphere,
And I, amongst the crowd of Loyal Sufferers,
Shall share in its kindly Rays.

Best of thy Sex --
What have I left to gratify thy goodness?

You have already by your noble Bounty
Made me a Fortune, had I nothing else;
All which I render back, with all that Wealth
Heaven and my Parents left me:
Which, though unjustly now detained from me,
Will once again be mine, and then be yours.

Come, haste, the Rabble gather round the House,
And swear they'll have this Sorceress.

Let me loose among 'em, their rude officious honesty must be punished.

Oh, let me out, do not expose thy Person to their mad rage, rather resign the
Victim.

Resign thee! By Heaven, I think I should turn Rebel first.

With much ado, according to thy direction, dear Freeman, I have passed the
Pikes, my House being surrounded, and my Husband demanded, fell down dead with
fear.


How, thy Husband dead!


Dead as old Oliver! and much ado I got off with these Jewels, the Rabble swore
I was one of the Party, and had not the honest Corporal convinced 'em, I had
been pulled to pieces: -- Come, haste away, Madam, we shall be roasted with the
Rump else.


Adieu, dear Mansion! whose rich gilded Roofs so oft put me in mind of Majesty
-- And thou my Bed of State, where my soft Slumbers have presented me with
Diadems and Scepters, -- when waking I have stretched my greedy Arms to grasp
the vanished Phantom! ah, adieu! And all my hopes of Royalty adieu. --


And dare you put your self into my Protection? Well, if you do, I doubt you'll
never be your own Woman again.


No matter, I'm better lost than found on such occasions.


Here, Jack, a Health to the King.


Let it pass, Lad, and next to the Noble General.


Ralph, baste the Rump well, or ne'er hope to see a King again.


The Rump will baste it self, it has been well crammed.


Hah, Noble Champion, Faith Sir, you must honour us so far as to drink the
King's Health, and the Noble General's before you go.


Will ya buy a Guedly Ballat or a Scotch Spur Sirs? a guedly Ballat or a Scotch
Spur. -- S'bread, Is escaped hither te we'll enough, Is saved my Crag fro
stretching two Inches longer than 'twas borne: will ya buy a Jack line to roast
the Rump, a new Jack Lambert line, -- or a blithe Ditty, of the Noble Scotch
General -- come buy my Ditties.


How a Ditty of the General? let's see it, Sirrah.


S'bread, Sirs, and here's the guedly Ballad of the General's coming out of
Scotland.


Here, who sings it? we'll all bear the bob.


New Almanacs, new Almanacs.


Hah, who have we here? Ananias Holder-forth of Clements Parish?


Ha, a Traitor, a Traitor.


If I be not mistaken, this blithe Ballad-singer too was Chair-man to the
Committee of Safety.


Is your Lordship turned Peddler at last?


What mon I do no? Lerd, no mere Lerd than yar sell Sir; one Is show 'em a
fair pair a heals.


Play Fortune my Foe, Sirrah.


Who are you, Sir? you have the mark of the Beast.


Who, aye, Sir? aye am a Doncer, that come a merry making among ya --


Come, Sirrah, your Feats of Activity quickly then.


A Cobbler, a Cobbler.


To Prison with the Traitors, and then we have made a good Nights work on it.

Then let's all home, and to the Powers Divine,
Pray for the King, and all the Sacred Line.

THe Vizors off, and now I dare appear
High for the Royal Cause in Cavelier;
Though once as true a Whig as most of you,
Could Cant, and Lye, Preach and dissemble too;
So far you drew me in, but faith I'll be
Revenged on you for thus debauching me,
Some of your pious Cheats I'll open lay,
That lead your Ignoramus Flock astray:
For since I cannot fight, I will not fail
To exercise my Talent; that's to rail:
Ye Race of Hypocrites, whose Cloak of Zeal
Covers the Knave that cants for Common Weal,
All Laws the Church and State to ruin brings,
And impudently set a Rule on Kings
Ruin, destroy, all's good that you decree
By your Infallible Presbitery.
Prosperous at first, in ills you grow so vain,
You thought to Play the Old Game ore again,
And thus the cheat was put upon the Nation,
First with long Parliaments, next Reformation:
And now you hoped to make a new invasion,
And when you can't prevail by open force,
To cunning tickling tricks you have recourse,
And raise Sedition forth without remorse.
Confound these cursed Tories then they cry
Those Fools, those Pimps to Monarchy;
Those that Exclude the Saints; yet open the Door
To introduce the Babylonian Whore:
By Sacred Oliver the Nations mad;
Beloved, 'twas not so when he was Head!
But then, as I have said it oft before ye,
A Cavelier was but a Type of Tory.
The Currs durst then not bark but all the Breed
Is much increased since that good Man was dead,
Yet then they railed against the Good Old Cause,
Railed foolishly for Loyalty and Laws;
But when the Saints had put them to a stand,
We left them Loyalty and took their Land:
Yea, and the Pious work of Reformation
Rewarded was with Plunder, Sequestration;
Thus can't the faithful, nay, they are so uncivil
To pray us harmless Players to the Devil,
When this is all the Exception they can make,
They damn us for our glorious Masters sake.
But why against us do you unjustly erm
Our small Religion sure can do no harm,
Or if it do, since that's the only thing
We will reform, when you are true to the King.

