AS Country Squire who yet had never known
The long expected joy of being in Town;
Whose careful Parents scarce permitted Heir
To Ride from Home unless to Neighbouring Fair:
At last by happy Chance is hither led
To purchase Clap with loss of Maidenhead;
Turns wondrous Gay, bedizen'd to Excess,
Till he is all Burlesque in Mode and Dress:
Learns to talk loud in Pit, grows Wily too,
That is to say, makes mighty Noise, and Show.
So a young Poet who had never been
Dabbling beyond the height of Ballading;
Who, in his brisk Essays, durst ne'er excel
The lucky flight of Rhyming Dogerel,
Sets up with this sufficient Stock, on Stage,
And has, perchance, the luck to please the Age:
He draws you in, like cozening Citizen,
Cares not how bad the Ware, so Shop be fine.
As tawdry Gown and Petticoat gain more
(Though on a dull diseased ill-favor'd Whore)
Than prettier Frugal, though on Holy-day,
When every City Spark has leave to Play,
-- Damn Her she must be Sound She is so Gay.
So let the Scenes be fine, you'll ne'er inquire
For Sense, but lofty flights in nimble Wire.
-- What we Present to Day is none of these;
But we could wish it were, for we would please,
And that you'll swear we hardly meant to do:
Yet here's no Sense; Pox on it, but here's no Show;
But a plain Story, that will give a taste
Of what your Grandsires loved in the Age that's past.

HEreabouts is the House wherein dwells, the Mistress of my heart; For she has
money Boys, mind me, money in abundance, or she were not for me -- the Wench
her self is good natured, and inclined to be civil, but a Pox on it -- She has a
Brother a conceited Fellow, whom the world mistakes for a fine Gentleman, for
he has Travelled, talks Languages, bows with a bone meine, and the rest, but by
fortune he shall entertain you with nothing but words --


Nothing else? --


No -- He's no Country Squire Gentlemen, will not Game, Whore, nay, in my
Conscience you will hardly get your selves Drunk in his Company -- He Treats
A-la-mode, half Wine, half Water, and the rest -- But to the business, this
Fellow loves his Sister dearly, and will not trust her in this lewd Town, as he
calls it, without him, and hither he has brought her to marry me.


A Pox upon him for his pains --


So say I -- But my comfort is, I shall be as weary of her, as the best Husband
of 'em all -- But there's convenience in it; besides, the match being as good
as made up by the old Folks in the Country, I must submit -- The Wench I never
saw yet, but they say she's handsome -- But no matter for that, there's Money,
my Boys!


Well Sir, we will follow you -- but as dolefully as people do their Friends to
the Grave, from whence they're never to return, at least not the same
substance, the thin aerie Vision of a brave Good Fellow, we may see thee
hereafter, but that's the most.


Your pardon, sweet Sharp, my whole design in it is to be Master of my self,
and with part of her Portion to set up my Miss, Betty Flauntit, which, by the
way, is the main end of my ^arrying, the rest you'll have your shares of -- Now
I am forc^d to take you up Suits at treble Prizes, have damned Wine and Meat
put upon us, because the Reckoning is to be Booked: But ready Money ye Rogues!
What Charms it has! Makes the Waiters fly Boys, and the ^aster with Cap in
hand -- excuse what's amiss, Gentlemen -- Your Worship shall command the best
-- and the rest -- How briskly the Box and Dice dance, and the ready Money
submits to the lucky Gamester, and the gay Wench consults with every Beauty to
make her self agreeable to the Man with ready Money. In fine, dear Rogues! All
things are sacrificed to it's power; and no Mortal conceives the joy of, Argent
Content. 'Tis this powerful God that makes me submit to the Devil Matrimony;
and then thou art assured of me, my stout Lads of brisk Debauch.


And is it possible you can be tied up to a Wife? Whilst here in London, and
free, you have the whole World to range in, and like a wanton Heifer, eat of
every Pasture.


Why dost think I'll be confined to my own dull Enclosure? No, I had rather
feed coarsely upon the boundless Common, perhaps two or three days I may be in
Love, and remain constant, but that's the most.


And in three Weeks, should you Wed a Cynthia, you'd be a Monster.


What, thou meanest a Cuckold, I warrant? God help thee* But a Monster is only
so from its Rarity, and a Cuckold is no such^strange thing in our Age.

But who comes here?
Bellmour! Ah my little dear Rogue! How dost thou!
-- Ned Friendlove too! Dear Lad, how dost thou too?
Why welcome to Town i'faith, and I'm glad to see you both.

Sir Tim. Tawdrey! --


The same, by fortune, dear Ned; And how, and how Man, how go matters?


Between who Sir?


Why any body Man: But, by fortune, I'm overjoyed to meet thee: But where dost
think I was going?


Is't possible one should divine?


Is't possible you should not, and meet me so near your Sisters Lodgings? Faith
I was coming to pay my Respects and Services, and the rest -- Thou know my
meaning -- The old business of the Silver World Ned; by Fortune it's a mad Age,
we live in Ned, and here be so many -- wicked Rogues, about this damned lewd
Town, that Faith I am fain to speak, in the vulgar modish stile, in my own
defence, and Rally Matrimony, and the rest.


Matrimony! -- I hope you are so exactly refined a Man of the Town, that you
will not offer once to think of so dull a thing, let that alone for such cold
complexions as Bellmour here, and I that have not attained to that most
excellent faculty of keeping yet, as you, Sir Timothy, have done, much to your
glory, I assure you.


Who I Sir? You do me much Honour: I must confess I do not find the softer Sex
cruel; I am received as well as another Man of my Parts.


Of your Money, you mean Sir.


Why Faith Ned, thou art in the right, I love to buy my pleasure, for, by
Fortune, there's as much pleasure in Vanity and Variety, as any Sins I know;
What think thou Ned?


I am not of your mind, I love to love upon the square; and that I may be sure
not to be cheated with false Ware, I present 'em nothing but my heart.


Yes, and have the consolation, of seeing your frugal Huswifery Miss, sit in
the Pit, at a Play, in a long Scarf, and Night-gown, for want of Points, and
Garniture.


If she be clean, and pretty, and dressed in Love, I can excuse the rest, and so
will she.


I vow to Fortune Ned, thou must come to London, and be a little managed:
'Slife Man, should thou talk so aloud in good Company, thou would be
counted a strange Fellow, Pretty -- and dressed with Love -- a fine Figure, by
Fortune; No, Ned, the painted Chariot, gives a Lustre, to every ordinary Face,
and makes a Woman, look like Quality; ay, so like, by Fortune, that you shall
not know one from the other, till some scandalous,
out-of-favor'd-laid-aside-Fellow of the Town, cry -- Damn her, for a Bitch --
how scornfully the Whore regards me -- She has forgot since Jack -- such a one,
and I, clubbed for the keeping of her, when both our Stocks, well managed, would
not amount to above seve^ shillings six pence a week; besides now and then a
Treat of a Breasto^ Mutton* from the next Cooks -- Then the other laughs, and
cries -- I -- Rot her -- And tells his Story too, and concludes with who
ma^nages the Gilt now? Why Faith some dismal Coxcomb or other, yo^ may be sure,
replies the first: But Ned, these are R^gues, and Rascals, th^ value no Mans
Reputation, because they despise their own: But Faith (...) have laid aside all
these vanities, now I have thought of Matrimony; b^ I desire my Reformation may
be a secret, because, as you know for (...) Man of my Address, and the rest --
'Tis not altogether so Jaunty.


Sir, I assure you, it shall be so great a Secret for me, that I will never ask
you who the happy Woman is, that's chosen for this great work of your
Conversion.


Ask me! -- No, you need not, because you know already.


Who I? I protest Sir Timothy --


No Swearing, dear Ned, for 'tis not such a Secret, but I will trust my
Intimates; these are my Friends, Ned; pray know them -- This Mr Sham and this
-- by fortune, a very honest Fellow Sharp, and may be trusted with a business
that concerns you as well as me.


Me? What do you mean Sir Timothy?


Why Sir, you know what I mean.


Not I Sir.


What, not that I am to marry your Sister Celinda?


Not at all.


O this unsufferable Sott!


My Sister, Sir, is very nice.


That's all one, Sir, the old People have adjusted the matter, and they are the
most proper (...) a Negotiation of that kind, which saves us the trouble of a
tedious Courtship.


That the old People have agreed the matter, is more than I know.


Why Lord Sir, will you persuade me to that? don't you know that your Father
(according to the method in such cases, being certain of my Estate) came to me
thus -- Sir Timothy Tawdrey! -- You are a young Gentleman, and a Knight, I knew
your Father well, and my right worshipful Neighbor, our Estates lie together,
therefore Sir, I have a desire to have a near Relation with you -- At which, I
interrupted him, and cry^d -- Oh Lord Sir! I vow to Fortune, you do me the
greatest Honour Sir, and the rest --


I can endure no more, he marry fair Celinda?


Prithee let him alone.


To which he answered -- I have a good Fortune -- Have but my Son Ned, and this
Girl, called Celinda, whom I will make a Fortune, suitable to yours* your
honoured Mother, the Lady Tawdrey, and I, have as good as concluded the match
already. To which I (who, tho I say it, am well eno^gh bred for a Knight)
answered the Civility thus -- I vow to Fortune Sir -- I did not swear, but
cried -- I protest Sir, Celinda, deserves -- no, no, I lye again, 'twas merits
-- I, Celinda -- merits a much better Husband than I.


You speak more truth than you are aware of.

Well, Sir, I'll bring you to my Sister, and if she likes you, as well as my
Father does, she's yours; otherwise, I have so much tenderness for her, as to
leave her choice free.


Oh Sir you Compliment. Alons, Entrons.


I wonder my Brother stays so long; sure Mr Bellmour is not yet arrived, yet
he sent us word he would be here to day. Lord how impatient I grow.


Ay, so methinks if I had the hopes of enjoying so sweet a Gentleman, as Mr
Bellmour, I should be so too -- But I am past it -- Well, I have had my
pantings, and heavings, my impatience, and qualms, my heats, and my colds, and
my I know not whats -- But I thank my stars, I have done with all those
Fooleries.


Fooleries! --
Is there any thing in life but Love?
Would thou prai^e Heaven for thy Being,
Without that grateful part of it?
For I confess I Love.

You need not, your sighs, and daily (nay, and nightly too) disorders, plainly
enough betray the truth.


Thou speak as if it were a Sin;
But if it be so, you your self helped to make me wicked.
For e're I saw Mr Bellmour, you spoke the kindest things of him,
As would have moved the dulle^t Maid to Love;
And e're I saw him, I was quite undone.

Quite undone! Now God forbid it: What, for Loving?
You said but now there was no life without it.

But since my Brother came from Italy,
And brought young Bellmour to our house,
How very little thou had said of him;
How much above thy praise, I found the Youth?

Very pretty! You are grown a notable Proficient in Love --
And you are resolved (if he please) to Marry him.

Or I must dye.


I, but you know the Lord Plotwell, has the possession of all his Estate, and
if he Marry without his liking, has power to take away all his Fortune, and
then I think it were not so good Marrying him.


Not Marrying him! Oh can thou think so poorly of me?
Yes, I would Marry him, though our scanty Fortune,
Could only purchase us
A loanly Cottage, in some silent place,
All covered o^re with Thatch,
Defended from the outrages of storms
By leafless Trees, in Winter, and from heat,
With shades, which their kind Boughs wou^d bear anew,
Under whose Covert, weed feed, our gentle Flock;
That shou^d in gratitude repay us Food,
And mean and humble Clothing.

Very fine!

There we wou^d practise such degrees of Love,
Such lasting, innocent, unheard of joys,
As all the busy World should wonder at,
And ami^st all the^r Glories, find none such.

Good lack! how prettily Love teaches his Scholars to prattle? -- But hear ye,
fair Mrs Celinda, you have forgot to what end and purpose you came to Town, not
to Marry Mr Bellmour, as I take it -- but Sir Timothy Tawdrey, that Spark of
Men.


Oh name him not -- Let me not in one moment
Descend from Heaven to Hell --
How came that wretched thing into thy Noddle?

Faith Mistress I took pity of thee, I saw you so elevated with thoughts of Mr
Bellmour, I found it necessary to take you down a degree lower.


Why did not Heaven make all Men like to Bellmour?
So strangely sweet and charming.

Marry come up you speak well for your self;
Oh intolerable loving Creature!
But here comes the utmost of your wishes.

My Brother and Bellmour! with strange Men!

Sister, I've brought you here a Lover, this is the worthy person you have
heard of, Sir Timothy Tawdrey.


Yes, ^aith Madam, I am Sir Timothy Tawdrey, at your service -- Pray are not
you Mrs Celinda D^esswell?


The same, but cannot return your Compliment.


Oh Lord, oh Lord, not return a Compliment, faith Ned thy Sister^s quite
spoiled, for want of Town Education; 'tis pity, for she^s Devilish pretty.


She^s modest. Sir, before Company; therefore these G^ntlemen and I will
withdraw into the next Room.


Inhumane Brother, will you leave me alone with this Sott?


Yes, and i^ you would be rid of the trouble of him, be not coy, nor witty; two
things ^e hates.


'Sdeath! Must she be blown upon by that Fool?


Patience dear Frank, a little while.


Oh dear Nurse, what shall I do?


I that ever help you at a dead Lift, will not fail you now.


What a Pox not a word?


Sure this Fellow believes I^ll begin.


Not yet -- sure she has spoke her last --


The Gentleman's good natured, and has took pity on you, and will not trouble
you, I think.


-- Hey day, here^s Wooing indeed -- Will she never begin trow -- This some
would call an excellent quality in her Sex -- But a Pox on^t I do not like it
-- Well, I see I must break silence at last -- Madam -- not answer me -- shaw
this is mere ill breeding -- by Fortune -- it can be nothing else -- Oh my
Conscience, if I should kiss her, she w^uld not bid me stand off -- I'll try --



Hold, Sir, you mistake your Mark.


So I should, if I were to look in thy mouldy Chaps, good Matron -- Can your
Lady speak?


Try Sir.


Which way?


Why speak to her first.


I never knew a Woman want a Cue, for that, but all that I have met with, were
still before-hand with me, in tittle tattle.


Likely those you have met with may, but this is no such Creature Sir.


I must confess, I am unused to this kind of Dialogue,
And I am an Ass, if I know what to say to such a Creature,
-- But come, will you answer me to one Question?

If I can Sir.

But first I should ask you if you can speak?
For that's a Question too.

And if I cannot, how will you be answered?


Faith that's right; why then you must do it by signs.


But grant I can speak, what is't you'll ask me?


Can you Love?


Oh yes, Sir, many things; I love my Meat, I love abundance of Adorers, I love
choice of new Clothes, new Plays, and like a right Woman, I love to have my
Will.


Spoke like a well-bred person, by Fortune; I see there's hopes of thee
Celinda; thou wilt in time learn to make a very fashionable Wife, having so
much Beauty too. I see Attracts, and Allurements, wanton Eyes, the languishing
turn of the Head, and all that invites to Temptation.


Would that please you in a Wife?


Please me, why Madam, what do you take me to be? a Sott? -- a Fool? -- or a
dull Italian, of the humour of your Brother? -- No, no, I can assure you, she
that Marries me, shall have Franchise -- But my pretty Miss, you must learn to
talk a little more. --


I have not Wit, and Sense enough, for that.


Wit! Oh la, O la, Wit! as if there were any Wit required in a Woman when she
talks; no, no matter for Wit, or Sense: talk but loud, and a great deal, to
show your white teeth, and smile, and be very confident, and 'tis enough. --
Lord what a ^ight 'tis to see a pretty Woman stand right up an end in the
middle of a Room, playing with her Fan, for want of something to keep her in
countenance. No, s^e that is mine, I will teach to entertain at another rate.


How Sir? Why what do you take my young Mistress to be?


A Woman -- and a fine one, and so fine as she, ought to permit her self to be
seen, and be ador^d.


Out upon you, would you expose your Wife; by my troth and I were she, I know
what I would do. --


Thou do -- what thou would have done sixty Years ago, thou meanest.


Marry come up, for a stinking Knight, worse than I have gone down with you,
e're now -- Sixty Years ago quoth ye -- As old as I am -- I live without
Surgeons, wear my own Hair, am not in Debt to my Taylor, as thou art, and art
fain to kiss his Wife, to persuade her Husband to be merciful to thee -- who
wakes thee every morning with his Clamour and long Bills, at thy Chamber door.


Prithee good Matron peace, I'll Compound with thee.


'Tis more than thou wilt do with thy Creditors, who, poor Souls, despair of a
Groat in the Pound for all thou ow^st them, for Points, Lace, and Garniture --
for all in fine, that makes thee a complete Fop.


Hold, hold, thy eternal Clack.


And when none would trust thee farther, give Judgments for twice the Money
tho^ borrowest, and swear thy self at Age; and lastly, -- to patch up your
broken Fortune, you would fain Marry my swe^t Mistress Celinda here -- But
faith Sir, you're mistaken, her For^une shall not go to the maintenance of
your Misses, which being once sure of, she, poor Soul, is sent down to the
Coun^rey house, to learn Housewifery, and live without M^nkind, unless she can
serve her s^lf with the handsome Steward, or so -- whilst you tear it away in
Town, and live like Man and Wife with your Jilt, and are every day seen in the
Glass Coach, whilst your own natural Lady is hardly worth the hire of a Hack


Why thou damnabie confounded torment, wilt thou never cease?


No, not till you raise your Siege, and be gone; go march to your Lady of Love,
and debauch -- go -- You get no C^linda here.


The Devil's in her tongue.


Good gentle Nurse, have mercy upon the poor Knight.


No more Mistress, than he'll have on you, if Heaven had so abandoned you, to
put you into his power: -- Mercy -- quoth ye -- no, no more than his Mistress
will have, when all his money's gone.


Will she never end?


Prithee forbear.


No more, than the Usurer would, to whom he has mortgaged his best part of his
Estate, would forbear a day after the promised payment of the money. Forbear --



Not yet end: Can I Madam, give you a greater proof of my passion for you, than
to endure this for your sake?


This -- thou art so sorry a creature, thou wilt endure any thing, for the
lucre of her fortune; 'tis that thou hast a passion for: not that thou care
for money, but to sacrifice to thy lewdness, to purchase a Mistress, to
purchase the Reputation of as errant a Fool, as ever arrived at the honour of
keeping, to purchase a little Grandeur, as you call it; that is, to make every
one look at thee, and consider what a Fool thou art, who else might pass
unreguarded amongst the common crowd.


The Devil's in her tongue, and so 'tis in most Women's of her Age; for when 't
has quitted the Tail, it repairs to her upper Tire.


Do not persuade me, Madam, I am resolved to make him weary of his Wooing.


So God be praised, the storm is laid -- And now Mrs. Celinda* give me leave to
ask you, if it be with your leave, this affront is put ^ of my Quality?


Thy Quality --


Yes, I am a Gentleman, and a Knight.


Yes, Sir, Knight of the ill-favour'd Countenance is it?


You are beholding to Don Quixote for that, and ^tis so many Ages, since thou
could see to read, I wonder thou hast not forgot all that ever belong^d to
Books.


My eye-sight^s good enough to see thee in all thy colours, thou Knight of the
Burning Pestle thou.


Again, that was out of a Play -- hark ye Witch of Endor, hold your prating
tongue, or I shall most well-^avourdly Cudgel ye.


As your Friend the Hostess has it in a Play too, I take it, Ends which you
pick up behind the Scenes, when you go to be laughed at even by the Player
Women.


Wilt thou have done, by Fortune I'll endure no more.


Murder, Murder.


Hold, hold.


Read here, the worst of News, that can arrive,
-- What's the matter here? -- Why how now Sir Timothy,
What up in Arms with the Women?

Oh Ned, i^ m glad thou^rt come -- never was Tom Dove baited as I have been.


By whom? my Sister.


No, no, that old Mastiff there; -- the young Whelp, came not on, thanks be
praised.


How, her Father here to morrow, and here he says, that shall be the last
moment, he will defer the Marriage of Celinda, to this Sott -- Oh God, I shall
grow mad, and so undo 'em all -- I'll kill the Villain at the Altar -- By my
lost hopes I will -- And yet there is some left -- Could I but -- speak to her
-- I must rely on Dresswells friendship -- Oh God to morrow -- Can I endure
that thought -- Can I endure to see the Traitor there, who must to morrow rob
me of my Heaven -- I'll own my flame -- and boldly tell this Fop, she must be
mine --


I assure you, Sir Timothy, I am sorry, and will chastise her.


Ay Sir, I that am a Knight -- a Man of Parts and Wit, and one that is to be
your Brother, and designed to be the glory of marrying Celinda.


I can endure no more -- How Sir -- You marry fair Celinda!


Ay Frank, Ay -- Is she not a pretty little plump white Rogue, hah --


Yes.


Oh I had forgot, thou art a modest Rogue, and to thy eternal shame, had
never the Reputation of a Mistri^s -- Lord, Lord, that I could see thee address
thy self to a Lady -- I fancy thee a very ridiculous Figure, in that posture,
by Fortune.


Why Sir -- I can Court a Lady --


No, no, you're modest; that is to say, a Country Gentleman; that is to say,
Ill-bred; that is to say, a Fool by Fortune, as the World goes.


Neither Sir -- I can Love -- and tell it too -- and that you may believe me --
look on this Lady Sir --


Loo^ on this Lady Sir -- Ha, ha, ha, -- Well Sir -- Well Sir -- And what then
--


Nay view her well Sir --


Pleasant this -- Well Frank I do -- And what then?


Is she not charming Fair -- Fair to a wonder!


Well Sir, 'tis granted --


And can thou think this Beauty meant for thee, for thee dull common Man?


Very well, what will he say next?


I say, let me no more see thee approach this Lady.


How Sir, how?


Not speak to her, not look on her -- by Heaven -- not think of her.


How Frank, art in earnest?


Try, if thou dare?


Not think of her --


No not so much as in a Dream, could I Divine it.


Is he in earnest Mr Friendlove?


I doubt so Sir Timothy.


What does he then pretend to your Sister?


Yes, and no Man else, shall dare do so.


Take notice I am aff^onted in your Lodgings -- for you Bellmour -- You take me
for an Ass -- therefore meet me to morrow morning about 5, with your Sword in
your hand, behind Southamp^on House.


'Tis well -- there we'll dispute our Title to Celinda.
Dull Animal! Ye Gods could ne'er Decree
So bright a Maid should be possessed by thee.

WEll, 'tis an endless trouble, to have the Tuition of a Maid in Love, here is
such Wishing and Longing -- And yet one must force them to what they most
desire, before they will admit of it -- Here am I sent out a Scout of the
Forlorn Hope, to discover the approach of the Enemy -- Well -- Mr. Bellmour,
you are not to know, 'tis with the consent of Celinda, that you come -- I must
bear all the blame, what mischief soever comes of these Night-works.

Oh are you come -- Your hour was Twelve, and ^ow 'tis almost Two.


I could not get from Friendlove -- Thou hast not told Celinda of my coming.


No, no, ee'n make peace for me, and your self too.


I warrant thee Nurse -- Oh how I hope and fear this nights success!


Oh Heavens! Mr. Bellmour at this late hour in my Chamber!

Yes, Madam; but will approach no nearer till you permit me;
And sure you know my Soul too well to fear.

I do Sir, and you may approach yet nearer,
And let me know your business.

Love is my business, that of all the world
Only my flame as much surmounts the rest
As is the Objects beauty, I adore.

If this be all, to tell me of your Love,
To morrow might have done as well.

Oh no, to morrow would have been too late,
Too late to make returns to all my pain.
-- What disagreeing thing offends your Eyes?
I've no deformity about my Person,
I'm Young, and have a Fortune great as any
That do pretend to serve you;
And yet I find my interest in your heart,
Below those happy ones that are my Rivals.
Nay, every Fool that can but plead his Title,
And the poor interest that a Parent gives him,
Can merit more than I.
-- What else my lovely Maid can give a freedom
To that same talking, idle Knighted Fop.

Oh if I am so wretched to be his,
Surely I cannot live,
For, Sir, I must confess I cannot love him.

But thou may do as bad, and marry him,
And that's a sin, I cannot over live
-- No, hear my Vows --

But are you ^ir in earnest?

In earnest? Yes, by all that's good I am;
I Love you more than I do Life, or Heav'n^

Oh what a pleasure 'tis to hear him say so!
-- But pray, how long Sir, have you Loved me so?

From the first moment that I saw your Eyes,
Your charming killing Eyes, I did adore 'em,
And ever since have languished day and night.

Come, come, ne'er stand asking of questions,
But follow your inclinations, and take him at his word.

Celinda, take her counsel,
Perhaps this is the last opportunity;
Nay, and by Heaven the last of all my Life,
If you refuse me now --
Say, will you never marry Man but me?

Pray give me till to morrow, Sir, to answer you;
For I have yet some fears about my Soul
That take away my rest.

To morrow! You must then marry -- oh fatal word!
Another! a Beast, a Fool, tha^ knows not how to value you.

Is't possible my Fate should be so near?

Nay then dispose of your self, I say, and leave dissembling, 'tis high time.


This night the Letter came, the dreadful News
Of thy being married, and to morrow too.
Oh answer me, or I shall die with fear.

I must confess it, Sir, without a blush,
(For 'tis no sin to Love) that I could wish --
Heaven and my Father, were inclined my way.
But I am all obedience to their wills.

That Sigh was kind,
But ere to morrow this time,
You'll want this pitying sense, and fee^ no pantings,
But those which joys and pleasures do create.

Alas Sir! what is't you'd have me do?

Why -- I would have you Love, and after that
You need not be instructed what to do.
Give me your Faith* give me your Solemn Vow
To be my Wife, and I shall be at peace.

Have you considered, Sir, your own condition,
'Tis in your Uncles power to take your Fortune,
If in your choice you disobey his will.
-- And Sir, you know that mine is much below you.

Oh I shall calm his Rage,
By urging so much Reason as thy Beauty,
And my own flame, on which my Life depends.
-- He now has kindly sent for me to London,
I fear his business --
Yet if you'll yield to marry me,
We'll keep it secret, till our kinder Stars
Have made provision for the blessed discovery*
Come give me your Vows, or we must part for ever.

Part! oh 'tis a fatal word!
I will do any thing to save that Life,
To which my own so nearly is alli'd.

So forward Sister!

Ha! Friendlove!

Was it so kindly done to gain my Sister
Without my knowledge?

Ah Friend! 'Twas from her self alone
That I would take the blessing which I ask.

And I^ll assist her, Sir, to give it you.
Here take him as an Honour, and be thankful.

I as a blessing sent from Heaven receive her,
And e're I sleep will justify my Claim,
And make her mine.

Be not so hasty Friend:
Endeavour first to reconcile your Uncle to it.

By such delays we're lost: Hast thou forgot?
To morrow she's designed another Bride!

For that let me alone to evade.

If you must yet delay me,
Give me leave not to interest such wealth without security.
And I Celinda will instruct you how to satisfy my fears.
Bears witness to my Vows --
May every Plague that Heaven inflicts on Sin,
Fall down in thunder on my head,
If e're I marry any but Celinda,
Or if I do not marry thee fair Maid.

Heartily sworn as I vow.

And here I wish as solemnly the same.
-- May all arrive to me,
If e're I marry any Man but Bellmour!

We are Witnesses as good as a thousand.

But now my Friend, I'd have you take your leave, the day comes on apace, and
you^ve not seen your Uncle, since your arrival.


'Tis death to part with thee my fair Celinda,
But our hard Fates, imposes this separation;
-- Farewell -- Remember you're all mine.

What have I else of joy to think upon --
-- Go -- go -- depart.

I will -- but 'tis as Misers part with Gold,
Or people full of Health depart from Life.

Go, Sister, to your Bed, and dream of him.

Whilst I prepare to meet this Fop to fight him.

Hang him, he'll ne'er meet thee; to beat a Watch, or kick a Drawer, or batter
Windows, is the highest pitch of Valor he e're arrived to.


However I'll expect him, lest he be Fool-hardy enough to keep his word.


Shall I wait on thee?

No, no, there^s no need of that -- Good morrow my best Friend.


But e're you go, my dearest Friend and Brother,
Now you are sure of all the joys you wish
From Heaven, do not forgetful grow, of that great trust
I gave you of all mine, but like a Friend
Assist me in my great concern of Love
With fair Diana, your lovely Cozen;
You know how long, I have adored that Maid,
But still her haughty Pride repelled my flame,
And all it^ fierce efforts

She has a spirit equal to her Beauty
As mighty and tyrannic, yet she has goodness,
And I believe enough inclined to Love,
When once her Pride's overcome; I have the honour
To be the Confident of all her thoughts:
And to ^ugment thy hopes, 'tis not long since,
She did with sighs confess to me, she Loved
A Man she said scarce equal to her Fortune;
But all my interest could not learn the Object:
But it must needs be you, by what she said
This I'll improve, and so to your advantage --

I neither doubt thy Industry, nor Love,
Go and be careful of my Interest there,
Whilst I preserve thine as entirely here.

Good morrow Sir Timothy, what not yet ready, and to mee^ Mr. Bellmour at five,
the time's past.


-- Ay Pox on it -- I have not slep to night for thinking on it.


Well Sir Timothy, I have most excellent News for you, that will do as well, I
have found out --


A new Wench, I warrant -- but prithee Sham, I have ^ther matters in hand;
'Sheart I am so mortifi'd with this same though^ of Fighting, that I shall
hardly think of Woman kind again.


You were so forward Sir Timothy --


Ay Sharp, I am always so when I'm angry; had I been but a little more
provoked then, that we might have gone to it when the heat was brisk, I had done
well -- but a Pox on it this fighting in cool blood I hate.


'Shaw, Sir, 'tis nothing, a Man would do it for Exercise in a morning.


Ay, if there were no more in it than Exercise; if a Man co^'d take a Breathing
without breathing a Vein -- but Sham, this Wounds, and Blood, sounds terribly
in my ears; but since thou say 'tis nothing, prithee do thou meet Bellmour
in my stead; thou art a poor Dog, and 'tis no matter if the world were well rid
of thee.


I would do it with all my Soul -- but your Honour Sir --


-- My Honour! 'tis but Custom that makes it Honourable to fight Duels -- I
warrant you the wise Italian, thinks himself a Man of Honour; and yet when did
you hear of an Italian, that ever fought a Duel? Is't not enough, I am
affronted, have my Mistress taken away before my face, hear my self called,
Dull, Common Man, Dull Animal, and the rest -- But I must after all give him
leave to kill me too, if he can -- And this is your damned Honourable English
way of showing a Mans Courage.


I must confess I am of your mind, and therefore have been studying a Revenge,
suitable to the Affront: and if I can judge any thing, I have hit it.


Hast thou? dear Sham, out with it.


Why Sir -- what think you of debauching his Sister?


Why is there such a thing in Nature?


You know he has a Sister, Sir.


Yes, Rich, and Fair.


Both, or she were not worthy of your Revenge.


Oh how I love Revenge, that has a double pleasure in it -- and where -- and
where -- is this fine piece of temptation?


In being Sir -- but Sharp here, and I, have been at some cost in finding her
out.


Ye shall be overpaid -- there's Gold, my little Maquero but she's very
handsome?


As a Goddess, Sir.


And art thou sure she will be Lewd?


Are we sure she's a Woman, Sir? -- Sure she's in her Teens? has Pride and
Vanity -- and two or three Sins more, that I could ^ame, all which never fails
to assist a Woman in Debauchery -- But Sir, there are certain people that
b^long to her, that must be considered too.


Stay Sir, e're I part with more money, I'll be certain what returns 'twill
make me -- that is -- I'll see the Wench, not to inform my self, how well I
like her, for that I shall do, because she is new, and Bellmours Sister -- but
to find what possibility there is in gaining her -- I am used to these things,
and can ^uess from a look, or a kiss, or a touch of the hand -- but then I
warrant, 'twill come to the knowledge of Betty Flau^tit.


What Sir -- then it seems you doubt us?


How do you mean, your honesty or judgment?
I can assure you, I doubt both.

How Sir? doubt our honesty?


Yes -- why I hope neither of you pretend to either, do you?


Why, Sir, what do you take us for Cheats?


As errant, as any's in Christendom.


How Sir? --


Why how now -- what fly in my face? are you^ stomachs so queasy, that Cheat
won't down with you?


Why Sir -- we are Gentlemen -- and though our ill Fortunes have thrown us on
your Bounty -- we are not to be termed --


Why you pair of Hectors -- whence this impudence?
-- De'e you know me ye Raggamuffins?

Yes, but we knew not that you were a Coward before. You talked big, and hurt
where e^re you came, like an errant Bully, and so long we Reverenced you -- but
now we find, you have need of our Courage -- we'll stand on our Reputations.


C^urage and Reputation! -- h^, ha, ha -- why ye lousy Tatterdemallions --
dare ye talk of Courage and Reputation?


Why, Sir, who dares question either?


He that dares try it.


Hold, Sir, hold.


Enough, enough, we are satisfied.


So am not I, ye mangy Mungrels, till I have kicked Courage and Reputation out
of ye.


Hold there Sir, ^tis enough we are satisfied, that you have Courage.


Oh are you so? then it seems I was not to be believed -- I told you I had
Courage when I was angry.


Ay Sir, we have proved it, and will now swear it.
-- But we had an inclination to try Sir.

And all you did, was but to try my Courage -- hah!

On our Honours nothing else Sir Timothy.

Tho^ I know ye to be cursed cowardly lying Rogues,
Y^t because I have use of ye, I must forgive ye.
-- Here kiss my hand, and be forgiven.

'Tis an Honour we are proud of Sir.


Oh is it so Rascallians! then I hope I am to see the Lady without I^dentures.


Oh Lord Sir! any thing we can serve you in.


And I have bribed her Maid to bring her this morning into the M^ll.


Well, let's about it then; for I am for no Fighting to day -- De'e hear Boy --
Let the Coach be got ready, whilst I get my self dressed


The Coach Sir! Why you know Mr Shatter has pawned the Horses.


I had forgot it -- A Pox on it, this 'tis to have a Partner in a Coach; By
Fortune I must Marry, and set up a whole one.


Mr Charles, your Brother, my young Master Bellmour is come.


I^m glad on it; my Uncle, began to be impatient that he came not, you saying
you left him but a days journey behind you yesterday. My Uncle has something
of importance to say to him, I fancy it may be about a Marriage between him
and my Lady Diana -- such a whisper I heard --


I Marry Sir, that were a Match indeed, she being your Uncles only Heir.


Ay but they are Sisters Children, and too near akin to be happy.


'Twere pity my young Master should be unhappy in a Wife; for he is the
sweetest natured Gentleman -- But one comfort is Mr Charles, you, and your
Sister Mrs ^hillis, will have your Portions assigned you ^f he Marry.


Yes, that he can't deny us the very day after his Marriage.


I shall be glad to see you all disposed of well; but I was half afraid, your
Brother would have Married Mrs Celinda Friendlove, to whom he made notable Love
in Yorkshire, I thought; not but she's a fine Lady; but her Fortune is below
that of my young Master^, as much as my Lady Diana's is above his -- But see,
they come -- let us retire, to give 'em leave to talk alone.


And well Frank, how dost thou find thy self inclined, tho^ ^o^'dst begin to
think of something more than Books? Dost thou not wish to know the joys that
are to be found in a woman Frank? I well remember at thy age I fancied a
thousand fine things of that kind.


Ay my Lord, a thousand more perhaps than are to be found.


Not so; but I confess Frank unless the Lady be fair, and there be some Love
too, 'tis not altogether so well; therefore I, who am still busy for thy good,
have fixed upon a Lady --


Ha! --


What dost start? Nay, I'll warrant thee she'll please, A Lady rich, and fair,
and Nobly born, and thou shalt Marry her Frank.


Marry her my Lord --


Why yes Marry her -- I hope you are none of the fashionable Fopps, that are
always in mutiny against Marriage, who never think themselves very witty, but
when they rail against Heaven and a Wife -- But Frank, I have found better
Principles in thee, and thou hast the Reputation of a sober young Gentleman,
thou art besides a Man of great Fortune Frank.


And therefore Sir, ought the less to be a Slave.


But Frank, we are made for one another, and ought by the Laws of God, to
communicate our blessings*


Sir, there are Men enough, fitter much than I, to obey those Laws, nor do I
think them made for every one.


But Frank, you do not know what a Wife I have provided fo^ you.


'Tis enough I know she's a Woman, Sir.


A Woman, why what should she be else?


An Angel, Sir, e're she can be my Wife.


In good time, but this is a Mortal Sir -- and must serve your turn -- but
Frank, she is the finest Mortal --


I humbly beg your pardon, if I tell you,
That had she Beauty such as Heaven ne'er made,
Nor meant again to enrich a Woman with,
It could not take my heart.

But Sir, perhaps you do not guess the Lady.

Or could I Sir, it could not change my nature.

But Sir, suppose it be my Niece Diana.

How Sir? the fair Diana.

I thought you would come about again;
What think you now of Woman-kind, and Wedlock?

As I did before, my Lord.

What, thou can not think I am in earnest, I confess Frank, she is above thee
in point of Fortune, she being my only Heir -- but suppose 'tis she.


Oh I'm undone -- Sir I dare not suppose so greatly in favour of my self.


But Frank, you must needs suppose --


Oh I am ruined, lost, for ever lost.


What do you mean Sir?


I mean I cannot Marry fair Diana.


Death how's this? --


She is a thing, above my humble wishes --


Is that all? take you no care for that, for she loves you already, and I have
resolved it which is better yet.


Love me Sir? I know she cannot,
And Heaven forbid that I should injure her.

Sir, this is a put-off: resolve quickly, or I'll compel you.

You wou^d not use extremity,
What is the forfeit of my disobedience?

The loss of all your Fortune,
If you refuse the Wife I have provided --
Especially a handsome Lady, ^s she is Frank.

Oh me unhappy!
What cursed Laws provided this severity?

Even those of your Fathers disposal, who seeing so many examples, in this lewd
Age, of the ruin of whole Families, by imprudent Marriages, provided otherwise
for you.


But Sir, admit Diana be inclined,
And I (by my unhappy Stars so cursed)
Should be unable to accept the Honour.

How Sir? admit? -- I can no more admit,
Than you can suppose -- therefore give me your final answer.

Sir, can you think a blessing e're can fall
Upon that Pair, whom Interest joins, not Love.

Why what's in Diana that you should not love her?

I must confess she has a thousand Virtues,
The least of which would bless another Man;
But Sir, I hope if I am so unhappy
As not to love that Lady, you will pardon me.

Indeed Sir but I will not, love me this Lady, and marry me this Lady, or I
will teach you what it is to refuse such a Lady.


Sir, tis not in my power to obey you.

How? not in your power?

No, Sir, I see my fatal r^ine in your eyes,
And know too well your force, and my own misery.
-- But Sir -- when I shall tell you who I've married --

Who you've married! -- By all that's Sacred if that be true, thou art undone
for ever.


Oh hear me Sir!
I came with hopes to have found you merciful.

Expect none from me; no, thou shalt not have so much of thy
Estate, as will afford thee Bread.
By Heaven thou shalt not.

Oh pity me, my Lord, pity my Youth;
It is no Beggar, nor none basely born
That I have given my heart ^o, but a Maid,
Whose Birth, whose Beauty, and whose Education,
Merits the best of Men.

Very fine! where is the Priest that durst dispose of you, without my order?
Sirrah you are my slave -- at least your whole Estate is at my mercy -- and
besides, I'll charge you with an Action of 5000 l. for your ten Years
maintenance: Do you know that this is in my power too?


Yes, Sir, and dread your Anger worse than death.

Oh Villain! thus to dash my expectation.

Sir, on my bended knees, thus low I fall
To beg your mercy.

Yes, Sir, I will have mercy,
I^ll give you Lodging -- but in a Dungeon Sir,
Where you shall ask your food of Passers by.

All this, I know you have the power to do,
But, Sir, were I thus cruel, this hard usage
Would give me cause to execute it.
I wear a Sword, and I dare right my self;
And Heaven would pardon it, if I should kill you:
But Heaven forbid, I should correct that Law,
Which gives you power, and orders me obedience.

Very well, Sir, I shall ^ame that Courage, and punish that Harlot, who e're
she be, that has seduced ye.


How Harlot, Sir! -- Death such another word,
And through all Laws and Reason I will rush,
And reach thy Soul, if mortal like thy Body.
-- No Sir, she's Chaste, as are the new-made Vows,
I breathed upon her Lips, when last we parted.

Who waits there?
-- Shall I be murdered in my own House?
'Tis time you were removed --
Go get an Action of 5000 l. entered against him;
With Officers to Arrest him.

My Lord, 'tis my young Master Bellmour.

Ye all dote upon him* but he's not the Man you take him for.

How my Lord? not this Mr Bellmour?

Dogs obey me.

Stay Sir -- oh stay -- what will become of me?
'Twere better that my Life were lost than Fortune --
For that being gone, Celinda must not love me.
-- But to die wretchedly --
-- Poorly in Prison -- whilst I can manage this --
-- Is below him, that does adore Celinda.
-- I'll kill my self -- but then -- I kill Celinda.
-- Should I obey this Tyrant -- then too she dies.
-- Yes Sir -- You may be cruel -- take the Law,
-- And kill me quickly, 'twill become your justice.

Was I called back for this? Yes, I shall take it Sir, do not fear.


Yet, stay Sir -- Have you lost all Humanity?
Have you no Se^se of Honour, nor of Horrors!

Away with him -- go, be gone.

Stay Sir! oh God! what is't you'd have me do?
-- Here -- I resign my self unto your will --
But oh Celinda! -- what will become of thee!
-- Yes, I will Marry -- and Diana too.

'Tis well you will, had I been good natured now,
You had been undone, and mist Diana too.

But must I Marry? -- Needs Marry Sir? --
Or lose my Fortune, and my Liberty,
Whilst all my Vows are given to another?

By all means, Sir --

If I must Marry any but Celinda,
I shall not, Sir, enjoy one moments bliss!
I shall be quite unmanned, Cruel and Brutal!
A Beast, unsafe for Woman to converse with;
Besides, Sir, I have given my Heart and Faith,
And any second Marriage is Adultery.

Heart and Faith, I am glad 'tis no worse; if the Ceremony of the Church has
not past, 'tis well enough.


All Sir, that Heaven, and Love requires, is past.


Thou art a Fool Frank, come -- dry thy Eyes,
And receive Diana. -- Trusty -- Call in my Niece.

Yet Sir relent, be kind, and save my soul.

No more -- by Heaven, if you resist my Will, I'll make a strange example of
thee, and of that Woman, who e're she be, that drew thee to this folly. Faith
and Vows quoth ye.


Then I obey.

Look ye here Frank, is this a Lady to be disliked? Come hither Frank -- Trusty
-- Haste for Dr. Tickletext, my Chaplain's not in Town; I'll have them
instantly Married -- Come hither Diana -- Diana, will you Marry your Cozen
Frank Bellmour?


Yes, if it be your pleasure; Heaven could not let fall a greater blessing.


And you Frank, will you Marry my Niece Diana?


Since you will have it so.


Come follow me then, and you shall be both pleased.


Oh my Celinda --
To preserve thee, what is't I would not do,
Forfeit my Heaven, nay more I forfeit you.

Now Sham, art not thou a damned lying Rogue, to make me ^aunter up and down
the Mall all this morning, after a Woman that thou know in thy Conscience was
not likely to be there?


Why Sir -- if her Maid will be a jilting Whore, how can I help it -- Sharp --
Thou know we presented her handsomely, and she protested she'd do it.


Ay, Ay Sir


Sir, it may be Things have so fallen out, that she could not possibly come.


Things! a Pox of your Tricks -- Well, I see there's no trusting a poor Devil
-- Well, what device will your Rogueship find out to Cheat me next?


Prithee help me out at a dead Lift Sharp.


Cheat you Sir! -- If I been it revenged on this She-Counsellor of the Patching
and Painting, this Letter-in of Midnight Lovers, this Receiver of Bribes for
stolen Pleasures; may I be condemned never to make Love to any thing of higher
quality.


Nay, nay, no Threatening Sharp, it may be she's Innocent yet -- Give her
the other Bribe, and try what that will do.


No, Sir, I'll have no more to do with frail Woman, in this case, I have a
surer way to do your business.


Is not that Bellmour's Page?


It is Sir.


By Fortune the Rogue's looking for me; he has a Challenge in his hand too.


No matter, Sir, Huff it out.


Prithee do thee Huff him, thou know the way on it.


What's your business with Sir Timothy Sir?


Mine Sir, I don't know the Gentleman, pray which is he?


I, I,'t is so -- Pox on him.


Well, Boy, I am he -- what -- Your Master --


My Master Sir --


Are not you Bellmour's Page?


Yes, Sir.


Well, your News.


News Sir? I know of none, but of my Masters being this morning --


Ay, there it is -- behind Southampton House.


Married* this morning


How? Married! 'Slife, has he served me so?


The Boy is drunk -- Bellmour Married!


Yes indeed, to the Lady Diana.


Diana! Mad by Fortune; what Diana?


Niece to the Lord Plotwell.


Come hither Boy -- Art thou sure of this?


Sir, I am sure of it; and I am going to bespeak Music for the Ball anon.


What hast thou there -- a Letter to the Divine Celinda; A dainty Boy --
there's money for thee to buy Nickers.


I humbly thank you.


Well, Sir, if this be true, Celinda will be glad of you again.


Ay, but I will have none of her -- For, look you Sham, there is but two sorts
of Love in this World -- Now I am sure the Rogue did love her; and since it was
not to Marry her, it was for the thing you wot on, as appears by his writing to
her now -- But yet I will not believe what this Boy said till I see it,


Faith Sir, I have thought of a thing, that may both clear your doubt, and give
us a little mirth.


I conceive thee.


I know you're quick of apprehension, Sir Timothy.


O your servant dear Sham -- But to let thee see I am none of the dullest, we
are to Jig it in Masquerade this evening, hah.


Faith, Sir, you have it, and there you may have an opportunity to Court
Bellmour's sister.


'Tis a good motion, and we will follow it; send to the Dukes House, and borrow
some Habits presently.


I'll about it, Sir.


Make haste to my Lodging -- But hark ye -- not a word of this to Betty
^launtit, ^he'll be up in Arms these two days, if she go not with us; and tho^
I think the fond Devil is true to me, yet ^twere worse than Wedlock, if I
should be so to her to.

Though Whores in all things else the Mast'ry get,
In this alone, like Wives, they must submit.

HEre Nephew, I resign that Trust which was reposed in me by your dead Father,
which was that on your Wedding day, I should thus -- make you Master of your
whole Fortune, you being Married to my liking -- And now Charles, and you my
Niece Phillis, you may demand your Portions to morrow, if you please, for he is
obliged to pay you the day after that of his Marriage.


There's time enough my Lord.


Come, come Ladies, in tro^h you must take but little rest to night, in
complasance to the Bride, and Bridegroom, who I believe, will take but little
-- Frank -- why Frank -- what hast thou changed thy humour with thy condition?
thou were not wont to hear the Music play in vain.


My Lord, I cannot dance.

Indeed you're wondrous sad.
And I methinks too* bear thee company.
I know not why, and yet excess of joy,
Have had the same effects with equal grief.

'Tis true, and I have now felt the extremes of both.


Why Nephew Charles -- has your breeding at the Academy instructed your heels
in no motion?


My Lord, I'll make one.


And I another, for joy that my Brother's made happy in so fair a Bride.


Hell take your ignorance, for thinking I am happy,
-- Would Heav^n would strike me dead.
That by the loss of a poor wretched life,
I might preserve my soul -- but oh my erro!
That has already damned it self, when it consented
To break a Sacred Vow, and Marry here.

Come, come begin, begin, Music to your office.

Why does not this hard heart, this stubborn Fugitive
Break with this Load of Griefs; but like ill Spirits
It promised fair, till it had drawn me in,
And then betrayed me to Damnation.

There's something in disorder in his Soul,
Which I'm on fire, to know the meaning of.

The Rogue is Married, and I am so pleased, I can forgive him our last Nights
quarrel; prithee Sharp, if thou can learn that young things name, 'tis a
pretty airy Rogue, whil^st I go talk to her.


I will, Sir, I will.

Nay, Madam, you must dance.

I hope you will not call it Rudeness, Madam, if I refuse you here.
Am I still tame and patient with my ills?
Gods! What is Man? That he can live and bare
Yet know his power to rid himself of grief
I will not live, or if my destiny
Compel me to it, it shall be worse than dying.

What's this?


The answer of a Letter, Sir, you sent to the Divine Celinda; for so it was
directed.


-- Hah -- Celinda -- in my crowd of thoughts
I had forgot I sent -- come nearer Boy --
-- What did she say to thee? -- Did she not smile?
And use thee with contempt and scorn -- tell me.

How scorn, Sir!

-- Or she was angry -- called me perjured Villain --
False, and forsworn -- nay, tell me truth.

How, Sir?

Thou dost delay me -- say she did, and please me.

Sir!

Again -- tell me, what answer Rascal did she send me?

You have it, Sir, there in the Table Book.

Oh I am mad, and know not what I do.
-- Prithee forgive me Boy -- take breath my Soul
Before thou dost begin; for this -- perhaps may be
So cruel kind.
To leave thee none when thou hast ended it.
I Have took in the Poison which you sent, in these few
Fatal words -- Forgive me my Celinda, I am Married --
'Twas thus you said -- And I have only Life left to return --
-- Forgive me my sweet Bellmour -- I am dead.
CELINDA.



-- Can I hear this, and live? -- I am a Villain!
In my Creation destined for all mischief.
-- To commit Rapes, and Murders, to break Vows,
As fast as Fools do Jests.
Come hither Boy --
And said the Lady nothing to thee?

Yes -- e're she read the Letter, asked your health,
And joy dispersed it self, in blushes through her cheeks.

Her b^auty makes the very Boy adore it.

And having read it,
She drew her Tablets from her Pocket,
And trembling -- writ what I have brought you Sir.

Though I before had loaded up my Soul
With sins, that would have weighed down any other,
Yet this one more it bears, this sin of Murder.
And holds out still -- What have I more to do,
But being plunged in, in blood, to wade it through.

There stands the Traitor with a guilty look,
That Traitor, who the easier to deceive me,
Betrayed my Sister; yet till I came and saw
The Perjury, I could not give a Faith to it.
-- By Heaven, Diana, loves him, nay dotes on him,
I find it in her Eyes, all languishing
They feed the fire in his, armed with a double Rage,
I know I shall go through with my Revenge.

Fair Maid --

How do you know that Sir?


I see you're fair, and I guess you're a Maid.


Your guess, is better than your eye-sight, Sir.


What e're you are, by Fortune, I wish you would permit me to love you with all
faults.


You? Pray who are you?


A Man, a Gentleman -- and more, a Knight too, by Fortune.


Then 'twas not by merit Sir -- But how shall I know you are either of these?


That I'm a Man, the effects of my vigorous^ f^ame shall prove -- a Gentleman
my Coat of Arms shall testify, and I have the Kings Patent for my Title.


For the first you may thank your Youth, for the next your Father, and the last
your Money.


By Fortune, I love thee for thy pertness.


Is it possible you can love at all?


As much as I dare.


How de ye mean?


Not to be laughed a^; 'tis not the Mode to love much: A Platonic Fop, I have
heard of, but this is an Age of sheer enjoyment, and little Love goes to that;
we have found it incommode, and loss of time, to make long Addresses.


I find, Sir, you and I shall never agree upon this matter.
But, see Sir, here^s more company.

Oh Heaven! 'tis true, these Eyes confirm my Fate.
Yonder he is -- and that fair splendid thing
That gazes on him with such kind desire,
Is my blessed Rival -- oh he is Married.
-- Gods! and yet you let him live!
Live too with all his Charms, as fine and gay,
As if you meant he should undo* all easy Maids.
And kill 'em for their sin of loving him.
Wretched Celinda!
But I must turn my Eyes from looking on;
The fatal triumphs of my death -- Which of all these
Is my Brother? Oh this is he; I know him
By the Habit he sent for to the Play-house.
And hither he's come in Masquerade,
I know with some design against my Bellmour*
Whom though he kill me, I must still preserve.
Whilst I, lost in despair, thus as a Boy
Will seek a Death from any welcome hand,
Since I want Courage, to perform the Sacrifice.

Enough, enough at this time, let's see the Bride to Bed, the Bridegroom thinks
it long.


Hell! Can I endure to hear all this with patience?
Shall he depart with Life to enjoy my Right,
And to deprive my Sister of her due?
-- Stay -- Stay -- and resign
That Virgin.

Who art thou, that dare lay a claim to ought that's here?

This Sword shall answer ye.

Though I could spare my Life, I'll not be robbed on it.

Oh my dear Bellmour!

Who art thou that thus fondly guard'st his heart?
-- Be gone -- and let me meet it.

That thou may do through mine, but no way else.

Here are too many to encounter, and I'll defer my vengeance.


Stay Sir, we must not part so.
Come back I say.
Slave! dost thou tremble?

Sir, I'm not the Man you look for --
By Fortune, Sham, we're all undone!
He has mistook me for the fighting Fellow.

Villain! defend thy Life!


Who I Sir? I have no quarrel to you, nor no Man breathing, not I, by Fortune.


This Coward cannot be my Brother!


What made thee draw upon my Brother?


Who? I Sir? by Fortune I love him -- I draw upon him!


I do not wonder thou can lye, for thou'^ a Coward!
Did^ not thou draw upon him? Is not thy Sword yet out?
Did I not see thee fierce, and active too, as if thou had dared?

Why he's gone Sir; a Pox of all Mistakes, and Masqueradings I say -- this was
your Plot Sham.


Coward! show then thy face.


I'll be hang^d first, by Fortune; for then 'twill be plain 'twas I, because I
challenged Bellmour last night, and broke my assignation this morning.


Show thy face without delay, or --


My face, Sir, I protest, by Fortune, 'tis not worth seeing.


Then Sir, you are worth a kicking -- take that -- and that --


How Sir? how?


So Sir, so.


Have a care Sir -- by Fortune, I shall fight with a little more.


Take that to raise you.

Nay then I am angry, and I dare fight.

Go, Ladies, see the Bride to her Chamber.

The Knight, Sir Timothy Tawdrey,
-- The Rascal mist me at the appointed place,
And comes to attack me here. --
-- Brave Youth! I know not how
I came to merit this Relief from thee.
Sure you're a stranger to me, you're so kind.

Sir, I believe those happy ones that know you
Had been far kinder, but I'm indeed a stranger.

May thou be ever so, to one so wretched;
I will not ask thy name, lest knowing it,
(I am such a Monster) I should ruin thee.

Oh how he melts my Soul! I cannot stay,
Lest Grief, my Sex, and Business should betray.
-- Farewell Sir --
-- May you be happy in the Maid you love.

Oh dost thou mock my griefs -- by Heaven he did.
-- Stay Sir -- he's gone.

The Rogue took courage, when he saw there was not remedy; but there's no hurt
done on either side.


'Tis fit such as he should be chastised, that do abuse Hospitality. Come,
come, to Bed, the Lady, Sir, expects you.


Gentlemen, good night.


I long to know the cause of Bellmour's disorder to night,
And here he comes.

Shall not we see you laid Brother?

Yes in my Grave, dear Charles,
But I'll excuse that Ceremony here.

Good night, and no rest to you Brother.

Till now my Bellmour, I wanted opportunity
To ask the cause, why on a joyful day,
When Heaven has joined us, by a sacred tie,
Thou droopst like early Flowers, with Winter storms.

Thou art that Winter storm, that nips my Bud,
All my young springing hopes, my gay desires,
The prospect of approaching joys of Love,
Thou in a hapless minute hast took from me,
And in its room,
Hast given me an eternal desperation.

Have you then given me Vows ye can repent of?

I given ye Vows! be witness ye just Powers!
How far I was from giving any Vows:
No, no, Diana, I had none to give!

No Vows to give!
What were they which to the holy Man
Thou did repeat, when I was made all thine?

The effects of low submission! such as Slaves
Condemned to dye, yield to the angry Judge.

Dost thou not love me then?

Love thee! no by Heaven! yet wish I were so happy.
For thou art wondrous fair, and wondrous good!

Oh what a defeat is here!
The only Man, who from all Natures store
I found most charming, fit for my desires,
And now after a thousand expectations,
Such as all Maids that Love like me do hope,
Just ready for the highest joys of Love!
Then to be met thus cold -- nay worse with scorn.
-- Why since you could not love me, did you marry me?

Because I was a Beast! a very Villain*
That staked, a wretched Fortune, to all my joys of Life.
And like a prodigal Gamester lost that all.

How durst you, Sir, knowing my Quality,
Return me this false Pay, for Love so true?
-- Was this a Beauty, Sir, to be neglected?

Fair angry Maid, frown on, frown till you kill,
And I shall dying bless those Eyes that did so.
For should I live, I should deprive the happier World
Of treasures, I am too wretched to possess.
And were it not pity that vast store of Beauty,
Should like rich Fruit, dye on the yielding Boughs.

And are you then resolved to be a stranger to me?

For ever! for a long Eternity.

Oh thou'st undone me then; hast thou found out
A Maid more fair, more worthy of thy Love?
Look on me well.

I have considered thee,
And find no blemish in thy ^oul, or Form,
Thou art all over Divine, yet I must hate thee,
Since thou hast drawn me to a mortal sin,
That cannot be forgiven, by Men, or Heaven:
-- Oh thou hast made me break a Vow Diana,
A Sacred Solemn Vow,
And m^de me wrong the sweetest Innocence,
That ever blessed the Earth.

Instead of cooling, this augments my fire,
No pain is like defeated, new desire.
'Tis false, or but to try my Constancy.
Your Mistress is not so Divine as I,
And should I, against himself believe the Man
Who first inspired my heart with Loves soft flame!

What bliss on me insensible you throw,
I'd rather hear thee swear, thou art my Foe,
And like some Noble and Romantic Maid
With Poniards, would my stubborn heart invade,
And whilst thou dost the faithful Relic tear,
In every Vein thoud'st find Celinda there.

Come, Sir, you must forget Celinda's Charms,
And reap delights within my circling Arms,
Delights that may your Errors undeceive
When you find joys, as great as she can give.

What do I hear? -- Is this the kind relief
Thou dost allow to my despair and grief?
Is this the comfort that thou dost impart
To my all wounded, bleeding, dying heart?
Were I so Brutal -- could thy Love comply
To serve it self with base Adultery?
For could I love thee, could I love again,
Our Lives would be but one continued Sin;
A Sin of that black die* a Sin so foul,
'Twould leave no hopes of Heaven for eithers Soul.

Dull Man* Dost think a feeble vain Excu^
Shall satisfy me for this Nights abuse?
No, since my Passion, thou'st defeated thus,
And robbed me of my long wished happiness*
I'll make thee know what a wronged Maid can do,
Divided 'twixt her Love, and Injuries too.

I dare thy worst
Should Hell assist thy aims, thou could not find
New Plagues, unless thou should continue kind,
Hard Fate Diana, when thy Love must be
The greatest Curse that can arrive to me.
-- That friendship which our Infant years begun,
And till this day has still continued on,
I will preserve, and my Respects shall be
Profound, as what was ever paid by me.
But for my Love 'tis to Celinda due,
And I can pay you ^one that's just and true.

The rest, I^de have thee know I do despise,
I better understand my conquering Eyes:
Those Eyes that shall revenge my Love and Shame,
I'll kill thy Reputation, and thy Name.

My Honour! And my Reputation, now!
They both were forfeit, when I broke my Vow.
Nor could my Honour with thy Fame decline,
Whoever prophanes thee, injures nought of mine.
This night upon the Couch my self I'll lay,
And* like Franciscans, let the ensuing day
Take care for all the toils it brings with it,
Whatever Fate arrives, I can submit.

Not one kind Wound to send me to my Grave,
And yet between their angry Swords I ^an,
Expecting it from Bellmour, or my Brothers.
Oh my hard Fate! that gave me so much Misery,
And dealt no Courage, to prevent the shock.
-- Why came ^ off alive, that fatal place
Where I beheld my Bellmour, in the embrace
Of my extremely fair, and lovely Rival;
-- With what kind care she did prevent my Arm
(Who greedy of the last sad pa^ting twine)
I would have thrown about him, as if she knew
To what intent I made the passionate offer.
-- What have I next to do, but seek a death
Where ever I can meet it -- Who comes here?

I believe this is the Bed-chamber Window where the Bride and the Bridegroom
lies.


Well, and what do you intend to do, if it be Sir?


Why first sing a Bawdy Song, and then break the Windows, in Revenge for the
Affront was put upon me to night.


Faith, Sir, that's but a poor Revenge, and which every Footman may take of his
Lady, who has turned him away for filching -- You know, Sir, Windows are frail,
and will yield to the lusty Brick-bats; 'tis an Act below a Gentleman.


That's all one, 'tis my Recreation; I served a Woman so the other night, to
whom my Mistress had a Pique.


Ay, Sir, 'tis a Revenge fit only for a Whore to take --
And the Affront you received ^o night, was by mistake.

Mistake! how can that be?


Why, Sir, did you not mind, that he that drew upon Bellmour, was in the same
dress with you?


How should his be like mine?


Why by the same chance, that yours was like his -- I suppose sending to the
Play-house for them, as we did, they happened to send him such another ^abit, for
they have many such for dancing Shepherds.


Well I grant it a mistake, and that shall repri^ve the Windows.


Then, Sir, you showed so much courage, that you may bless the minute that
forced you to fight.


Ay, but between you and I, 'twas well he kicked me first, and made me angry,
or I had been ^ustily swinged, by Fortune -- but thanks to my spleen that saved
my bones that ^bou^ -- but then I did well -- hah! came briskly off, and the
rest.


With honour* Sir, I protest.


Come then, we'll Serenade him. Come, Sir, ^une your Pipes, and sing.


What shall I sing, Sir?


Any thing suitable to the time and place.


The happy Minute's come, the Nymph is laid,
Who means no more to rise a Maid
Blushing, and panting, she expects the approach
Of Joys that kill with every touch;
Nor can her Native modesty and shame
Conceal the Ardour of her Virgin flame.
And now the Amorous Youth is all undressed,
Just ready for Loves mighty Feast,
With vigorous haste the Vail aside he throws,
That does all Heaven at once disclose;
Swift as desire, into her naked Arms
Himself he throws, and rifles all her Charms.

God morrow Mr. Bellmour, and to your lovely Bride, long may you live, and
love.


Who is't, has sent that Curse?

What a pox is that Bellmour? The Rogue's in choler, the Bride has not pleased
him.


Dogs! De you upbraid me? ^ll be with you presently.

Will you so -- but I'll not stay your coming.

But you shall, Sir.

Turn Villains!

I'll ne'er demand the cause of this disorder,
But take this opportunity to fly
To the next hands will take me up -- who's here!

Not yet, my sullen heart!

Who's here? one wounded -- alas --

'Tis not so lucky -- but who art thou
That dost with so much pity, ask?

He seems a Gentleman -- handsome, and young --
Pray ask no questions, Sir, but if you're what you seem,
Give a Protection to an unhappy Maid.
-- Do not reply, but let us haste away.

Hah -- What do I hear! sure 'tis Diana.
-- Madam, with haste, and joy, I'll serve you.
-- I'll carry her to my own Lodgings.
Fortune, in this, (...) done my Sufferings right,
My Rival's in my Power, upon her Wedding night.

Lord, Lord, that you should not know, your friend and humble servant, Tim.
Tawdrey -- But thou look as if thou had not been a Bed yet.


No more I have.


Nay then thou lose precious time, I'll not detain thee.


Tho^ art mistaken, I hate all Woman-kind --


How, how!


Above an hour -- hark ye Knight -- I am as lewd, and as debauched as thou art.


What do you mean Frank?


To tell a truth, which yet I never did.
-- I Whore, Drink, Game, Swear, Lye, Cheat, Rob, Pimp, Hector, All,
All I do that's vicious.

Bless me!


From such a Villain, hah!


No, but that thou should hide it all this while.


Till I was married only, and now I can dissemble it no longer -- come -- let's
to a Bawdy-house.


A Bawdy-house! What already!
This is the very qui^tessence of L^wdness.
-- Why I thought that I was wicked, but by Fortune,
This dashes mine quite out of countenance.

Oh you're a puny sinner! -- I'll teach thee Arts* (so rare) of sin, the least
of them shall damn thee.


By Fortune, Frank, I do not like these Arts.


Then you're a Fool -- I'll teach thee to be rich too.


Ay, that I like.


Look here my Boys!
The Writings of 3000 l. a year.
-- All this I got by Perjury.

By Fortune a thriving Sin.

And we will live in Sin while this holds out.
-- And then to my cold Home -- Come let's ^e gone.
-- O^ that I ^e'r might see the Rising Sun.

Celinda, who did Love disdain,
For whom had languished many a Swain,
Leading her bleating Flocks to drink,
She spied upon the Rivers brink
A Youth, whose Eyes did well declare
How much he loved, but loved not her.
At first she laughed, but gazed the while,
And soon it lessened to a smile;
Thence to surprise* and wonder came
Her Breast to heave, her Heart to flame;
Then cried she out, Ah now I prove
Thou art a God! Almighty Love.
She would have spoke, but Shame denied,
And bad her first consult her Pride;
But soon she found that Aid was gone,
For Love, alas! had left her none.
Oh how she burns, but 'tis too late,
For in his Eyes, she reads her Fate.

Oh how numerous are her Charms --
-- How shall I pay this generous condescension,
F^ir lovely Maid --

Why do you flatter Sir?

To say you're lovely, by your self I do not,
I'm young, and have not mu^h converst with Beauty,
Yet I'll esteem my judgment, since it knows,
Where my devotions, should be justly paid.
-- But Madam, may I^not yet expect
To hear the Story, you so lately promised me.

I owe much to your goodness, Sir -- but --

I am too young, you think, to hear a Secret;
Can I want Sense to pity your Misfortunes,
Or Passion to incite me to revenge 'em?

Oh would he were in earnest!

She's fond of me, and I must blow that flame,
Do any thing to make her hate my Bellmour.
-- But Madam, I'm impatient for your Story,
That after that, you may expect my service.

The Treatment you this Night have given a distressed Maid, enough obliges me;
nor need I tell you, I m Nobly born, something about my dress, my looks and
men, will doubtless do me reason.


Sufficiently --

But in the Family where I was Educated, a Youth of my own Age, a Kinsman too,
I ch^nc'd to fall in Love with; but with a Passion my Pride still got the
better of, and he, I thought, repaid my young desires: but Bashfulness on his
part, did what Pride had done on mine, and kept his too concealed. -- At last
my Uncle, who had the absolute dominion of us both, thought good to Marry us
together.


Punish him Heaven, for a Sin so great.
-- And are you Married then?

Why is there Terror in that word?

By all that's Sacred, 'tis a word that kills me,
Oh say thou art not;
And I, thus low wil^ fall, and pay thee Thanks.

You'll wish indeed I were not, when you know
How very, very wretched it has made me.

Should you be telling me a Tale all day,
Such as would melt a heart that ne'er could love,
'Twould not increase my Reason for the wish
That I had died e're known you had been Married.

So many soft words from my Bellmour's mouth
Had made me mad with joy, and next to that,
I wish to hear 'em from this Youth;
If they be real, how I shall be revenged!
-- But why at my being Married should you sigh?

Because I love, is that a Wonder, Madam?
Have you not Charms sufficient at first sight
To wound a heart tender and young as mine?
Are you not heavenly fair? -- oh there's my grief --
-- Since you must be another.

Pray hear me out, and if you love me after,
Perhaps you may not think your self unhappy.
When Night was come, she longed for Night, and all
Retired to give us silent room for joy. --

Oh I can hear no more! -- by Heaven I cannot.
-- Here -- stab me to the heart -- let out my life,
I cannot live, and hear what follow'd next.

Pray hear me Sir --

Oh you will tell me he was kind --
Yes, yes -- oh God -- were not his balmy Kisses,
Sweeter than Licence offered up to Heaven?
Did not his Arms softer and whiter far,
Than those of Ioves, transformed to Wings of Swans,
Greedily clasp thee round -- oh quickly speak,
Whilst thy fair rising Bosom met with his;
And then -- oh -- then --

Alas Sir! What's the matter -- sit down awhile.

Now -- I am well -- pardon me lovely Creature,
If I betray a Passion, I'm too young
To've learnt the Art of hiding:
-- I cannot hear you say that he was kind.

Kind, yes, as Blasts to Flowers, or early Fruit;
All gay I met him full of youthful heat,
But like a damp, he dashed my kindled flame,
And all his Reason was -- he loved another,
A Maid he called Celinda.

Oh blessed Man!

How Sir?

To leave thee free, to leave thee yet a Virgin.

Yes, I have vowed he never shall possess me.

Oh how you bless me -- but you still are Married,
And whilst you are so -- I must languish --

Oh how his softness moves me!
-- But can all this disorder spring from Love?

Or may I still prove wretched.

And can you think there are no ways
For me to gratify that Love?
What ways am I constrained to use to work out my Revenge.

How mean you Madam?

Without a Miracle, look on my Eyes --
-- And Beauty -- which you say can kindle Fires,
-- She that can give -- may too retain desires.

She'll Ravish me -- let me not understand you.

Look on my Wrongs --
Wrongs that would melt a frozen Chastity,
That a Religious Vow had made to Heaven.
-- And next survey thy own perfections.

Hah --

Art thou so young, thou can not apprehend me?
Fair bashful Boy, hast thou the power to move,
And yet not know the business of thy Love?

How in an instant, thou hast chill d my blood,
And made me know no Woman can be good?
'Tis Sin enough to yield -- but thus to sue
Heaven -- 'tis my business -- and not meant for you.

How little Love is understood by thee,
'Tis Custom, and not Passion, you pursue;
Because enjoyment first was named by me,
It does destroy, what should your flame renew;
My easy yielding does your fire abate,
And mine, as much your tedious Courtship hate.
Tell Heaven -- you will hereafter sacrifice,
-- And see how that will please the Deities:
The ready Victim, is the Noblest way,
Your Zeal and Obligations too, to pay.

I think the Gods would hardly be adored,
If they their blessings should unaskt afford,
And I that Beauty can no more admire
Who e're I sue, can yield to my desire.

Dull Youth farewell,
For since 'tis my Revenge that I pursue
Less Beauty, and more Man, as well may do.

Madam you must not go with this mistake.

Celinda, has informed me true -- 'tis she --
Good morrow Brother, what so early at your devotions?

O my Brother's come, and luckily relieves me.

Your Orisons are made to a fair Saint.
-- Pray Sir what Lady's that?
Or is it blasphemy to repeat her name?
-- By my bright Arms, she's fair -- With what a charming
Fierceness, she charges through my body to my heart.
-- Death how her glittering Eyes give fire, and wound!
And have already pierced my very Soul!
-- May I approach her Brother?

Yes, if you dare, there's danger in it though,
She has Charms that will bewitch you.
-- I dare not stand their mischief.

-- Lady -- I am a Soldier -- yet in my gentlest terms
I humbly beg to kiss your lovely hands --
-- Death! there's Magic in the touch.
By Heaven you carry an Artillery in every part.

This is a Man indeed fit for my purpose.

Nay do not view me, I am no lovely object.
I am a Man bred up to Noise and War,
And know not how to dress my looks in smiles;
Yet trust me, fair one, I can love and serve
As well as an Endymion, or Adonis.
Would you were willing to permit that service.

Why Sir? -- What could you do?

Why -- I could die for you.

I need the service of the living, Sir.
But do you love me, Sir?

Or let me perish, flying from a single Enemy.
I am a Gentleman, and may pretend to love you,
And what you can command, I can perform.

Take heed Sir, what you say, for I'm in earnest.

Command me any thing that's just and brave,
And by my Eyes 'tis done.

I know not what you call just, or brave,
But those whom I do the honour to command,
Must not capitulate.

Let him be blasted with the name of Coward,
That dares dispute your orders.

Dare you fight for me?

With a whole Army; 'tis my Trade to fight.

Nay, 'tis but a single Man.

Name him.

Bellmour.

Of Yorkshire? -- Companion to young Friendlove, that came lately from Italy?

Yes, do you know him?

I do, who has oft spoke of Bellmour;
We Travelled into Italy together -- But since, I hear,
He fell in Love with a fair cruel Maid,
For whom he languishes,

Heard you her name?

Diana, rich in Beauty, as in Fortune.
Would she had less of both, and more of pity.
And that I knew not how to wish, till now
That I became a Lover, perhaps as unsuccessful.

I knew my Beauty had a thousand Darts,
But knew not they could strike so quick and home.
Let your good wishes for your Friend alone,
Lest he being happy, you should be undone,
For he and you, cannot be blessed at once.

How Madam?

I am that Maid he loves, and who hates him.

Hate him.

To death.

Oh me unhappy.

He sighs, and turns away -- am I again defeated?
Surely I am not fair, or Man's insensible.

She knows me not --
And 'twas discreetly done to change my shape;
For Woman, is a strange Fantastic Creature,
And where before, I could not gain a smile,
Thus I may win her heart.
-- Say Madam, can you love a Man that dies for you?

The way to gain me, is to fight with Bellmour.
Tell him from me you come, the wronged Diana,
Tell him, you've an interest in my heart
Equal to that which I have made in yours.

I'll do it; I will not ask your Reason, but obey.
Swear e're I go, that when I have performed it,
You'll render me possession of your heart.

By all the Vows that Heaven ties hearts together with,
I'll be entirely yours.

And I'll not be that conscientious Fool
To stop at blessings because they are not lawful,
But take 'em up, when Heaven has thrown 'em down,
Without the leave of a Religious Ceremony.
Madam, this House, which I am Master of,
You shall command, whilst I go seek this Bellmour.

But e're you go, I must inform you why
I do pursue him with my just Revenge.

I will attend, and hear impatiently.

Driver, prithee call for a Glass, that I may set my self in order, before I go
up, for really my Knight has not been at home all this night, and I am so
confused --

Lord Mrs. Driver, I wonder you should send for me when other Wome^ are in
company; you know, of all things in the World, I hate Whores, they are the
pratingst lewdest poor Creatures in nature; and I would not for any thing, Sir
Timothy should know that I keep company, 'twere enough to lose him.


Truly Mrs. Flauntit, this young Squire that you were sent to for, has two or
three persons more with him that must be accommodated too.


Driver, though I do recreate my self a little sometimes, yet you know I value my
Reputation and Honour.


Mrs. Driver, why should you send for us where Flauntit is? stinking proud
Flirt, who, because she has a tawdrey Petticoat, I warrant you, will think her
self so much above us, when if she were set out in her own natural colours, and
her original garments, would be much below us in beauty.


Look ye Mrs. Ienny, I know you, and I know Mrs. Flauntit, but 'tis not Beauty
or Wit that takes now adays; the Age is altered since I took upon me this
Gentile Occupation, but 'tis a fine Petticoat, right Points, and clean
Ga^nitures, that does me credit, and takes the Gallant, though on a stale Woman:
And again, Mrs. Ienney, she's kept, and Men love as much for Malice, as for
Lechery, as they call it. Oh 'tis a great mover to joy, as they say, to have a
Woman that's kept.


Well! be it so, we may arrive to that excellent degree of Cracking, to be kept
too one day.


Well, well, get your selves in order to go up to the Gentlemen.


Driver, what art thou talking to those poor creatures, Lord how they stink of
Paint and Pox, faugh --


They were only complaining that you that were kept, should intrude upon the
privileges of the Commoners.


Lord, they think there are such joys in keeping, when I vow Driver, after
awhile, a Miss has as painful a life, as a Wife, our Me^ ^rink, stay out late,
and Whore, like any Husbands.


But I hope in the Lord, Mrs. Flauntit, yours is no such Man, I never saw him,
but I have heard he is under decent correction.


Thou art mistaken Driver, I can keep him within no moderat^ bounds without
blows; but for his filthy custom of Wenching, I have almost broke him of that
-- but prithee Driver, who are these Gentlemen?


Truly, I know not, but they are young, and fine as Princes; two of 'em were
disguised in Masquing Habits last night, but they have sent 'em away this
morning, and they're free as Emperors -- one of 'em has lost a thousand pounds
at Play, and never repined at it: one's a Knight, and I believe his courage is
cooled, for he has ferretted my Maids over and over to night -- But 'tis the
fine, young handsome Squire th^t I design you for.


No matter for his handsomeness, let me have him that has most money.


Damn it, give us more Wine.
Where stands the Box and Dice? -- Why Sham.

Faith, Sir, your luck's so bad, I have not the conscience to play longer -- Sir
Timothy and you play off a hundred Guineas, and see if luck will turn.


Do you take me for a Country Squire, whose Reputation will be cracked at the
loss of a petty thousand? you have my Note for it to my Goldsmith.


'Tis sufficient if it were for ten thousand*


Why Sir Timothy -- Pox on it you're dull, we are not half d^baucht and lewd
enough, give us more Wine.


Faith Frank, I'm a little mawkish with sitting up all night, and want a small
refreshment this morning -- Did we not send for Whores?


No, I am not in humour for a Wench --
By Heaven I hate the Sex.
All but divine Celinda*
Appear strange Monsters to my eyes and thoughts.

What art Italianiz'd, and love thy own Sex?

I'm for any thing that's out of the common Road of Sin, I love a Man that will
be damned for something! To creep by slow degrees to Hell, as if he were afraid
the World should see which way he went, I scorn it, 'tis like a Conventickler
-- No, give me a Man, who, to be certain of's damnation, will break a Solemn
Vow to a Contracted Maid.


Ha, ha, ha, I thought thou would have said at least -- had murdered his
Father, or ravish^d his Mother -- break a Vow quoth ye -- by Fortune I have
broke a thousand.


Well said my Boy! a Man of Honour! and will be ready when e're the Devil calls
for thee -- So -- ho -- more Wine, more Wine, and Dice.

Come, Sir, let me --

What will you set me, Sir?

Cater Tray -- a hundred Guineas -- oh damn the Dice -- 'tis mine -- come a
full Glass -- Damnation to my Uncle.


By Fortune, I'll do thee reason -- give me the Glass -- and Sham, to thee --
Confusion to the musty Lord.


So -- now I'm like my self, profanely wicked.
A little room for life -- but such a life
As Hell it self shall wonder at -- I'll have a care
To do no one good deed in the whole course on it,
Lest that should save my Soul in spite of Vow-breach.
-- I will not dye -- that peace my sins deserve not.
I'll live, and let my Tyrant Uncle, see
The sad effects of Perjury, and forced Marriage.
-- Surely the Powers above envied my bliss,
Marrying Celinda, I had been an Angel!
So truly blessed, and good.

Why how now Frank -- by Fortune the Rogue is Maudlin -- So, ho, ho, so-ho.


The matter?

Oh art awake -- What a Devil ail thou Frank?

A Wench, or any thing -- come, let^s drink a roun^,

They're come as wished for.

Oh Damn 'em! What shall I do?
Yet it would look like Virtue to avoid 'em.
No, I must venture on -- Ladies you're welcome.

How the Women? -- Hold, hold, Bellmour, let me choose too -- Come, come,
unmask, and show your pretty Faces.


How? Sir Timothy! What Devil owed me a spite.

Come, unmask, I say, a willing Wench would have showed all in half this time.


Wou^d she so Imp^dence!

How! my Betty!

This is the Trade you drive, you eternal Fop, when I sit at home expecting
you night after night.


Nay dear Betty! --

'Tis here you spend that which should buy me Points, and Petticoats, whilst I
go like no bodies Mistress, I'd as live be your Wife at this rate, so I had;
and I'm in no small danger of getting the Foul Disease by your Lewdness.


Victorious Betty, be merciful, and do not ruin my Reputation amongst my
Friends.


Your Whores, you mean, you Sott you.

Nay triumphant Betty, hear thy poor Timy.

My poor Ninny, I'm used barbarously, and won't endure it.

I've won Money to night, Betty, to buy thee Clothes -- hum -- hum -- Well said
Frank, towse the little Jilts, they came for the purpose.


The Devil confound him, what a Prize have I lost by his being here -- my
comfort is, he has not found me out though, but thinks I came to look for him,
and accordingly I must dissemble.


What's here? a Lady all in tears!

An old acquaintance of mine, that takes it unkindly that I am for change --
Betty, say so too, you know I can settle nothing till I'm Married, and he can
do it swingingly, if we can but draw him in.


This mollifies something, do this, and you'll make your peace; if not, you
Rascal your Ears shall pay for this nights transgression.


Come hither Frank, is not this a fine Creature!

By Heaven a very Devil! --

Come, come, approach her, for if you'll have a Miss, this has all the good
qualities of one -- go, go -- Court her, thou art so bashful --


I cannot frame my tongue to so much blasphemy, as 'tis to say kind things to
her -- I'll try my heart though -- Fair Lady -- Damn her, she is not fair -- nor
sweet -- nor good -- nor -- something I must say for a beginning. Come Lady --
dry your eyes.

This Man deserves not all the tears you shed.
-- So -- at last the Devil has got the better of me,
And I am entered.

You see, Sir, how miserable we Women are that love you
Men.

How did you love him! love him against his will.

So it seems, Sir --

Oh thou art wretched then indeed; no wonder if he hate thee --
Does he not Curse thee? Curse thee till you're damned, as I do lost Diana?

Curse me! he were not best in my hearing,
Let him do what he will behind my back.
What ails the Gentleman? --

Gods! What an odious thing mere Coupling is!
A thing which every sensual Animal
Can do as well as we -- but prithee tell me,
Is there nought else between the Nobler Creatures?

Not that I know of, Sir -- Lord he's very silly, or very innocent, I hope he
has his Maidenhead; if so, and rich too, oh what a booty were this for me!


'Tis wondrous strange,
Why was not I, created like the rest;
Wild, and insensible, to fancy all.

Come, Sir, you must learn to be gay, to sing, to dance, and talk of any thing,
and fancy any thing that's in your way too.


Oh I can towse, and ruffle, like any Leviathan when I begin --
Come prove my vigour.

Oh Lord Sir! you tumble all my garniture.

There's Gold to buy thee more --

Oh sweet Sir -- would my Knight were hanged, so I were well rid of him now --
Well Sir, I swear you are the most agreeable person --


Am I? -- let us be more familiar then -- I'll kiss thy hand; thy breast, thy
lips -- and --


All -- you please Sir --


A tractable Sinner!

Faugh -- how she smells -- had I approached so near divine Celinda, what a
natural Fragrancy had sent it self through all my ravished senses!


The Man's ectasied, sure I shall take him.
Come, Sir, you'are sad.

As Angels fallen from the Divine abode,
And now am lighted on a very Hell!
-- But this is not the way to thrive in wickedness*
I must rush on to ruin -- Come fair Mistress,
Will you not show me some of your Arts of Love,
For I am very apt to learn of Beauty -- Gods --
What is it I negotiate for -- a Woman!
Making a bargain to possess a Woman!
Oh never, never!

The Man is in Love, that's certain -- as I was saying,
Sir --

Be gone Repentance! thou needless goodness,
Which if I follow, can lead me to no joys.
Come tell me the price of all your pleasures.

Look you Mistress, I am but a Country Knight,
Yet I should be glad of your farther acquaintance.
-- Pray who may that Lady be --

Who Mrs. Flauntit Sir?

I she? she's tearing fine by Fortune.

I'll assure you, Sir, she's kept -- and is a great Rarity, but to a Friend or
so --


Hum -- kept -- pray by whom?

Why a silly Knight Sir, that --

I, I, silly indeed -- a Pox upon her -- a silly Knight you say --


Ay, Sir, one she makes a very Ass of.

Ay so methinks -- but she's kind, and will do reason for all him.


To a Friend, a Man of Quality -- or so.

Ay s^e blinds the Knight.

Alas, Sir, easily -- he, poor Cully, thinks her a very Saint -- but when he's
out of the way, she comes to me to pleasure a Friend.


But what if the Fool miss her?

She cries Whore first, brings him upon his Knees for her fault, and a piece of
Plate, or a new Petticoat, makes his Peace again.


Why -- look you Mistress, I am that Fop, that very silly Knight, and the rest
that you speak of.


How Sir? then I m^undone, she's the upholder of my Calling, the very grace of
my Function.


Is she so? ee'n keep her to your self then, I^ll have no more of her, by
Fortune -- I humbly thank you for your intelligence, and the rest. Well -- I
see there's not one honest Whore in the Nation, by Fortune.

Hark ye Mistress, what was your business here?

To meet a R^gue! --

And I to meet a Whore, and now wee're well met.

How Sir?

Nay never be surprised, for your Intrigues are discovered, the good Matron of
the House (against her Will) has done me that kindness -- you know how to live
without your Keeper, and so I'll leave you.


You're too serviceable a Fool to be lost so.

Who knows this bold Intruder?

How, Sir, am I a stranger to you! but I should not wonder at it, since all
your last Nights actions betrayed a strange depravity of Sense. -- Sir, I have
sought you long, and wish I had not found you yet, since both the place and
company declare, how grossly you've dissembled Virtue all this while.


Take hence that prating Boy.

How Sir? -- You are my elder Brother, yet I may be allow'd to do the business
that I came for, and from my Uncle to demand your Wife.


You may return, and tell him that she's dead.

Dead! sure, Sir, you Rave.

Indeed I do -- but yet she's dead they say.

How came she dead?

I killed her -- ask no more but leave me.

Sir, this is Madmans language, and not to be believed.

Go to -- you're a saucy Boy.

Sir, I'm an angry Boy --
But yet can bear much from a Brothers mouth,
You've lost your sleep, pray Sir, go home and seek it.

Home! I have no home, unless thou meanst my Grave,
And thither I could wish, thou would conduct me.

Pray Heaven this young virtuous Fellow don't spoil all.
-- Sir, shall I send for a Scrivener to draw the Settlement you promised me.

Do so, and I'll order him to get it ready.

A Settlement! on whom? this Woman Sir?

Yes, on this Woman Sir.

Are you stark mad? -- Know you where you are?

Yes, in a Bawdy-house.

And this Woman, Sir --

A very Whore! -- a tawdrey mercenary Whore!
And what of this?

And can you love her, Sir?

No, if I did, I would not gratify her.

What -- is't in Charity to keep her honest?

Neither.

Is your Lust grown so high --

Take that --
For naming but so base a thing to me.

I wear a Sword, but not to draw on mad Men.
But since you're so free Sir, I demand that Fortune, which by my Fathers Will,
you're bound to pay the day after your Wedding day; my Sister's too is due.


Ha, ha, ha -- Sir Timothy, come hither -- who dost think this is?


A Fiddler perhaps -- let him play in the next Room.


No, my Brother -- come to demand his Portion of me -- he says I am in lewd
company, and, like a Boy, he would correct me.


Why this comes of idleness, thou should have bound him Prentice in time, the
Boy would have made a good saucy Taylor.


Sir, you're a Rascal, whom I must thus chastise.


Hold, hold, I beseech you my dear Masters! oh what a sight is this! two
Brothers fighting with each other! oh, were my old Master alive, this would
break his heart: oh, Sir, you've killed your Brother.


Why then his Portion's paid.


How kill^d? nay 'tis time we departed then, and shifted for our selves.


Oh Sir, shall I send for a Chyrurgion.


No for a Coach rather, I am not wounded much.


How dare thou trust thy self alone with me?


Why should I fear thee?


Because I'm mad.
Mad as a Tigress robbed of her dear young.

What is't that makes you so?

My Uncles Politics, Hell take him for it,
Has ruined me, thou and my sister too.
By Marrying me to a fair hated Maid,
When I had plighted all my Faith before.

Sir, here's a Coach.

Come, Brother, will you go home with me?

Home! -- no, never to that place thou call so,
If when I'm dead, thou would behold thy Brother,
And take the last adieu from his cold lips:
(If those so Perjured can deserve that kindness;)
Inquire for lost Celinda, at who^e feet
Thou shalt behold me fallen a Sacrifice.
Till then, I'll let mistaken Parents know
The mischiefs that ensue a broken Vow.

SUre I rose the wrong way to day, I have had such damned ill luck every way:
First to be ^ent for to such a Man as this Bellmour, and, as the Devil would
have it, to find my Knight there: Then to be just upon the point of making my
Fortune, and to be interrupted by that virtuous Brother of his: Then to have a
quarrel happen, that (before I could whisper him in the ear, to say so much as
meet me here again -- anon) forced me to quit the house, lest the Constable had
done it for me: Then that that silly Bawd should discover all to my Cully; if
this be not ill luck, the Devil^s in it -- But Driver must bring matters about,
that I may see this liberal Squire again -- But here comes my Noddy, I must
pretend to be angry.

Lord, Lord, how you look now, as if you had committed no misdemeanor; alas,
good Innocent, what can thou say for thy self, thou Renegade thou, for being
false to my bosom, say?


False to your bosom! You silly impudent Sott you -- who dares accuse me?


Even your trusty and well-beloved Friend Mrs. Driver the Bawd.


She! she's an impudent confounded Liar -- and because she would have your
Worshipful Custom -- scandalised me, to breed a difference between us.


I, if you could make me believe that indeed, when she knew me not, nor ever
saw me all days of her life before.


I know that Simpleton, but when I went to inquire for you by your name, and
told her my business, our Amours are not kept so secret, nor was she so dull,
as not to understand how matters went between us.


Now, tho^ I know this to be a damned Lye, yet the Devil has assisted her to
make it look so like Truth, that I cannot in Honour but forgive her.


Forgive me! -- Who shall forgive you your debauched Whoring and Drinking --
marry you'd need so you are such a Ruffler, at least if you're everywhere as you
are at home with me -- No, Sir, I'll never Bed with you more; here I live
sneaking without a Coach, or any thing to appear withal; when even those that
were scandalous two Ages ago, can be seen in Hide-Park in their fine Chariots,
as if they had purchased it with a Maidenhead; whilst I, who k^p my self
entirely for you, can get nothing but the Fragments of your Debauches -- I'll
be damned before I'll endure it.


Just as the Bawd said, yet I am mollified -- nay, dear Betty forgive me, and
I'll be very good for the future.


Will you swear to be so?


I, by Fortune I will.


Come, what will you give me then to be Friends? for you won Money last Night.


Ay, that^s it that appeases her highest storms -- here my Jewel, here's a
hundred Guineys to buy thee fine things.


Yes, great store of fine things, indeed, with this pitifu^ Sum, let me feel in
your Pockets, and see if you have no more.


So, 'twas well I laid by the rest, my Peace had not been made under every Rag
on it else; and what I was painfully cheating for all this Night, would have
been laid out at the Mercers and Lacemans in half an hour -- Well, are you
satisfied I have no more?


Have you sunk none indeed, and indeed, my Timmy?


No, I need not, you sink mine fast enough, I thank ye.


Well, get your self ready to go abroad with me.


I have other matters in hand -- now have I Four hundred Guineys in Bank, which
I won last Night of Bellmour, which I'll make use of to debauch his sister,
with whom I'm damnably in love, and long for the return of my two Setting Dogs,
to bring me News of the Game.


Oh are you come.

Ay, Sir, with News worth the hearing; I have been diligent, Sir, and got my
self acquainted with the old Steward of the Family, an avaricious Iudas, that
will betray for Gold.


And that we'll furnish him with -- his Masters Gold, like all other mortal
things, must return from whence it came.


Not all, Sir, for Sham and I have disposed of part.


Indeed you are a little shabby.


Ay, Sir, Fools were made to repair the breaches of us that have Wit enough to
manage 'em.


What -- the Goldsmith paid the Money at sight, without demanding why?


Readily Sir -- he's a brave Fellow, and must not be lost so.


By no means, we must make use of him whilst he's hot, for I doubt the humour
is not natural, and I fear he may cool.


But to our business.


Ay, Sir, this same Sister of his you must have.

If it be but to put that insolent Whore Flauntit out of favour, who manages
this Fop too entirely.


Ay, but art thou sure there is no danger in this Enterprise? shall I not have
my throat cut? and the rest.


We have none of that Italian humour now adays, I can assure ye; they will
sooner with a Brotherly kindness, assist the yielding Sister, to the willing
Gallant.


A good thriving inclination, by Fortune.


And, Sir, you have all encouragement; her Brother, you heard, refused to pay
her Portion, and you know the Fate of a young handsome Wench in this Town, that
relies on weak Virtue -- then because she's in the house with her Uncle, this
same Steward has contrived matters so, to bring you in at the Back-door, her
Lodgings being in the Garden.


This is something -- oh I'm impatient to be with her -- Well, I must in, and
make some Lye to Betty for my absence, and be with you presently.


What design hast thou in hand? for I suppose there is no such real thing, as
the debauching of this Lady.


Look ye Sharp, take to thee an implicit Faith, and believe impossibilities;
for thou and I must cozen this Knight.


What our Patron?


I Sharp, we are bound to labour in our Callings, but mum -- here he comes.


Come, let's away, my Lyoness begins to roar.

-- You Sharp go seek after Bellmour, watch his motions, and give us notice.


He is gone, and I believe


In a Bawdy-house, with Whores, Hectors, and Dice! oh that I should be so
deceived in Mankind, he whom I thought all Virtue and Sobriety! but go some of
you immediately, and take Officers along with you, and remove his Quarters,
from a Bawdy-house to a Prison, charge him with the murder of his Wife.


My Lord, when I demanded her, he said indeed that she was dead, and killed by
him; but this, I guess, was the effects of madness, which debauchery, and want
of sleep, has brought him to.


That shall be tried; go to the place where Charles has directed you, and do as
I command you.

-- Oh sweet Diana. in whom I had placed my absolute delight,
And gave thee to this Villain, because I wished thee happy.
And are my expectations fallen to this?
Upon his Wedding Night to abandon thee!
And show his long dissembled Natural Lewdness.

My Lord, I hope, 'tis not his Natural Temper,
For e're we parted, from a Brutal Rudeness,
He grew to all the softness Grief could dictate.
He talked of breach of Vows, of Death, and Ruin,
And dying at the feet of a wronged Maid,
I know not what he meant.

Ay, there's his grief; there is some Jilting Hussy has drawn him in, but I'll
revenge my self on both.


A Letter for your Lordship.


MY LORD, AS your goodness has been ever great towards me, so I humbly beseech
^ou to continue it; and the greatest proofs you can give me of it, is to use
all your interest to undo that tie between Bellmour and my self, which with
such joy you knit. I will say no more, but as you love my Life, and my dearer
Honour, get a Divorce, or you will see both Ruined in

Your Diana.



A Divorce; yes, if all my Interest or Estate can purchase it -- some joy yet
that thou art well.


Doubtless her Reasons must be great for this Request.


Yes, for she loved him passionately, when I first told her of my desi^ns to
Marry 'em together, she could not hide her joy; which was one Motive, I urged
it to him with such violence.


Persons so near of Kin, do seldom prosper in the Marriage Bed.


However 'tis, I now think fit to unmarry 'em;
And as for him, I'll use him with what Rigour,
The utmost limits of the Law allows me.

Sir, I beseech you.


You beseech me! you, the Brother of the Villain! That has abused the best of
all my hopes? -- no I think -- I shall grow (for his sake) to hate all that
belong to him.


Sir, how have I offended?


Yes Sir, you have offended me, and Nature has offended me; you are his
Brother, and that's an offence to me.


Is that a fault, my Lord?


Yes, Sir, a great one, and I'll have it so; and let me tell you, you nor your
Sister (for that Reason) must expect no more friendship at my hands, than from
those that are absolute strangers to you: your Brother has refused you your
Portions, and I'll have as little mercy as he, and so farewell to you -- But
where's the Messenger that brought the Letter?


Without my Lord.


Here's like to be a hopeful end of a Noble Family. My comfort is, I shall dye
with grief, and not see the last of ye.


No Trusty, I have not been so meanly educated, but I know how to live, and
like a Gentleman: all that afflicts me in this misfortune, is my dear Sister
Phillis; she's young, and to be left poor in this loose Town, will ruin her
for ever.


Sir I think we were best to Marry her out of the way.


Marry her! to whom? who is't regards poor Virtue?


For that let me alone; and if you dare trust her to my management, I'll
undertake to Marry her to a Man of 2000 l. a year; and if I fail, I'll be sure
to keep her Honour safe.


Prithee how wilt thou do this?


Sir, I have served your Family these thirty years, with faith and love, and if
I lose my credit now, I'll ne'er pretend to it more.


Do what thou wilt, for I am sure you're honest,
And I'll resign my Sister to thy conduct,
Whilst I endeavour the conversion of my Brother.

No News yet of my Brother.


None: the next you'll hear is, that he's undone, and that you must go without
your Portions; and worse than that, I can tell you your Uncle designs to turn
you out of doors.


Alas! what should I do, if he should be so cruel? Would I were in Flanders at
my Monastery again, if this be true.


I have better business for you, than telling of Beads -- No, Mrs. Phillis you
must be Married.


Alas! I am too young, and sad for Love.


The younger, and the less Love, the better.


Mr. Trusty, here's a Gentleman would speak with you, he says his name^s Mr.
Sham.


Gud's me Mistress, put on all your Holiday looks, for this is the little
Merchant of Love by Retail, that brings you the Husband I promised you.


Well Mr. Trusty, I have brought Sir Timothy, as I promised, he is at the
Garden door.


The best time in the World, my Lord's out of the way.


But you know our conditions.


Yes, that if he Marry her, you are to have all the Money that he offers to
debauch her.


Right.


Bring him in then, and I'll civilly withdraw.


Well Sham, thou hast prepared all things, and there needs no Ceremony.


None, none Sir, you may fall down-right to the business.


Come, my Phillis, let us improve
Both our joys of equal Love,
Whilst we in yonder shady Grove,
Count Minutes by our Kisses.

What sort of Courtship's this? 'tis very odd!


'Pox on Formal Fopps, we have high-born and generous Souls, and scorn the
common Road -- Come, let's enjoy, whilst Youth and Beauty lasts.


What means this Rudeness? I'll tell my Brother.


Your Brother, by Fortune he's so lewd, that should I be so unconscionable to
leave thee a Virgin but this Night, he would Ravish thee himself, and that at
cheaper Rates than I design to do it.


How dare you talk to me at this rate?


Talk to thee -- by Fortune I'll play the Tarquin with thee, if thou yieldst
not quickly -- for thou hast set me all on fire.


Defend me, Heaven from such a Man.


Then it must defend you from all the Sex, for all Mankind are like me, nay,
and all Woman-kind are, or would be, what I must make thee


What's that, a Wench?


Fie, fie, that's a gross name, no, a Miss, that's the word -- a Lady of
delight, a Person of pleasure, and the rest; I'll keep thee, not a Woman of
Quality shall be half so fine -- Come, dear Phillis, yield* Oh I am mad for the
happy hour -- come, say the word, 'tis but incl^ning thy head a little thus --
the pretty Eyes down, and thy Cheeks all blushes, and fetching a long sigh --
thus -- with -- do -- what you please -- at the end on it -- and I shall take it
for granted.


That, Sir, you'll never hear me say to any thing but a Husband, if I must say
it then.


A Husband! it is enough to spoil a Mans appetite, the very naming on it -- By
Fortune thou hast been bred with thy great Grandmother, some old Queen
Elizabeth Lady, that used to preach warnings to young Maidens; but had she
lived in this Age, she would have repented her Error, especially had she seen
the Sum that I offer thee -- Come, let's in, by Fortune, I'm so vigorous, I
shall ravish else.


Unhand me, or I'll call out. I assure you this is not the way to gain me.


I know there is a way to gain all mortal Woman-kind, but how to hit the
Critical Minute of the Berjere --


Is past your Politics at this time Sir.


I'll try all ways, and the Devil's in it if I don't hit upon the right at
last.

All the soft things I've said --


That a ^night of your Parts ought to say.


Then I have kneeled -- and cry d -- and swore -- and --


And damned your self five hundred times --


Yet still you're impregnable -- I^ll make another Proposition to you, which is
both reasonable and modish -- If it prove a Boy -- I'll Marry you -- the
Devil's in it, if that be not fair.


You get no earnest of me, Sir, and so farewell to you.


Oh Sham, I am all over fire, mad to enjoy! I have done what Man can do
(without doing what I would do) and still she's Flint; nothing will down with
her but Matrimony -- what shall I do? for thou know I cannot Marry a Wife
without a Fortune.


Sir, you know the old Cheat, hire a Lay Rascal in a Canonical Habit, and put a
false Marriage upon her.


Lord, that this should not enter into my Coxcomb before? haste then and get
one -- I'll have it done immediately, whilst I go after her to keep up my
flame.


And I'll fit you with a Parson presently.


I find Diana knows me not, and this years absence, since I fir^ made my
Addresses to her, has altered me much, or she has lost the remembrance of a
Man, whom she ever disesteemed till in this lucky dress, the price of her
Favour is Bellmour's life; I need not have been bribed for that, his breach of
Faith both to my sister and my self, enough incites me to Revenge -- He has not
yet enjoyed her, that blessing is reserved for me alone; and though the Priest
have joined 'em, that Marriage may be disannull'd, and she has a Fortune
sufficient to excuse her other faults.

-- Hah! the Man I seek -- so near my Lodgings too -- Sir!

Sir!

Traitor! thou know me, and my business.
-- Look on this face, if thou dare look on him, whom thou hast doubly
wronged -- and draw thy Sword.


Thou should be Friendlove, Brother to Celinda.

And Lover of Diana too -- oh quickly draw,
Or I shall leave thee like a Coward, dead.

No, rather like a Sacrifice,
And thou should be the Priest should offer it;
But that I have yet
For some few moments, business for my life.

I can allow no time for business now,
My injuries are in haste, and so am I.

Should thou stab here, a thousand gaping wounds,
Upon this false, this perjured heart of mine,
It would not part with life, unless 'twere laid
Near to the Sacred Altar of my Vows.
Lo at the feet of my fair injured Wife.

Ha! -- means ^e his Wife!
Can thou repent thy injuries to her,
And leave the rest of all thy sins neglected?

Those I have done to thee, though soul and barb'rous
May plead the excuse of force -- but those to her,
Not thou, nor I, nor she, or Heaven can pardon.

Heavens!
My sisters wrongs, and mine, may plead excuse,
But those to her alone can ne'er be pardoned.
-- This place, Sir, is too open -- come with me,
For I've desired, and now resolve to kill thee.

And so thou shalt, defenceless, I will yield,
And leave my bosom, open to thy Sword.
-- But first conduct me to my Wife.
For I will see her -- nor can I dye unpardon'd.

See his Wife! -- of whom do you demand her?

Of thee! -- dare thou detain me?

Death how should he know she's here!
-- Stay, Sir, this way our business lies.

I ask not thine, but mine lies only this way.

By Heaven you shall not enter here!

I know thou love her,
And 'tis with reason thou deny an entrance
To one so much unworthy to approach her.

Yes, I do love her, and dare own it too;
And will defend her from one so base and treacherous.

Who dares ^eny thy Reasons?

Sh'as made me take an Oath, to fight with thee.
And every wound, my lucky Sword should make,
She bad me say, was sent thee from her hate.

Oh I believe thee! prithee tell on, young man,
That I may dye without the aid of wounds.

To break thy heart, know then, she loves another.
And has took back the Vows she made to thee,
And given 'em to a Man more worthy of 'em.

Alas! I credit thee -- yet -- then by Heaven she's false!
And I will know, why 'tis she is thus perjured.
-- Nay now -- nor Heaven, nor Hell, shall hinder me.
-- Stand off, or to the number I'll add one sin more,
And make my passage to her through thy heart.

And so you shall Sir.
-- Disarmed! by Heaven you shall not so escape
A Rage that is too just here to give over.

Oh Madam, here's Mr. Bellmour, he has wounded my young Master, who denied him
entrance, and is come into the house, and all in Rage demands his Wife.


Oh Heaven! demands his Wife! is that sad Curse
Added to all the rest -- does he then love her?

Whether do you press Sir? And what's your business?

To see my Wife, my Wife, impertinence.
And must I meet with nought but opposition?

Let him come in.

Marry he lets himself in, I thank him.

What Man art thou thus covered over with horror!

One sent from Hell, to punish Perjury!
-- Where's this perfidious Fair? this blushless Maid!
That has by my example broke her Vows!
A President that Fiends, would shame to follow.

Who is't you mean Sir?

A thing that has no name, she is so bad!
One who so lately gave her self to me,
And now is flown into another Arms.
One that attacks my life, for the same sins,
Which she her self commits -- and thinks to live too.
-- Yet still she is my Wife, whom I have injured:
Till when, she was a Saint -- come lead me to her.
Though she be false as I, yet I'll forgive it.

Heavens! he repents his Cruelty to her,
And never mentions me! Ah then 'tis time to die.
And that I may be sure of death --
Well, Sir, I will conduct this happy Lady to you.

Gods! happy! -- whilst I am wretched.
-- Oh what an Ague chills my shivering Limbs,
Turns my hot rage, to softest love, and shame,
Were I not here to dye -- here at her feet,
I would not stand the shock of her Reproaches.
-- But yet she need not speak, a look's sufficient
To call up all my sins to my undoing --
-- She comes -- Oh Heaven! she comes --
-- Like penitent Criminals thus -- with my Eyes declined,
I bow my head down, for the last sad blow.

Sir, in obedience to your Commands,
I've brought the Lady.

How! the perfidious Bellmour!
The only object of my hate and scorn.

Say on, my angry Deity --
Whilst I thus trembling hear my fatal doom
Like sinners conscious, ne'er to be forgiven,
I dare not lift my guilty Eyes towards Heaven.

Can I hear this? and yet retain my life!

Had I but two days since beheld this Youth
Thus prostrate at my feet, I should have thought
My self more blessed,
Than to have been the Deity he calls me.

Defend me! the Traitor here! and at Diana's feet,
The fittest Altar for my Sacrifice!
-- Turn, turn, from what thou love, and meet my justice!

Oh hold, my dearest Brother!

Nay, now I'm ready for the welcome Sword,
Since my Celinda's false, and cannot pardon.

Oh do not dye with that profane opinion.
Celinda fal^e! or cannot pardon thee!

Stay, generous Sir, my pity has forgiven him.

Thou! why who art thou -- Diana!

Yes, that Diana
Whom maugre all the Penitence thou shew'st,
Can scarce forgive the injuries thou'st done her.

I show a Penitence for injuring thee!
By Heaven I never could do one, or other,
All that I am is the divine Celinda's.

He's stark mad I

But since she cannot pardon, I can dye.

Can thou not credit me! she pardons thee.
Live -- and enjoy -- Diana.

What art thou? who know her heart so well!
Art thou my Rival? the blessed Youth to whom
She has given her Vows? -- live -- and enjoy -- Diana!
-- Yes -- yes -- thou art my Rival, and I'll kill thee.

Do, whilst I meet thy Sword.

Dull -- dull Adorer! not to know my Saint.
Oh how have I profaned? to what strange Idol
Was that I kneeled?
Mistaking it for a Divinity!

To your fair Wife Diana!

Oh cruel Maid!
Has Heaven designed me any but Celinda!

Maid! bless me! -- did I then love a Woman!
-- I am pleased thou should renounce me, make it good,
And set me free from Fetters which I hate.

If all our Laws can do it I will -- for here
Ends all my claim.

Was this the Wife you did demand of me?

Yes, I had no other.

Fair Maid! forgive me all my shameful Passion!
And charge my fault upon your Beauty only.

Excellent Creature! I should sue for that
Which my deceit will never make me hope.

And art thou true to Love, and all thy Vows?
Whilst I to save my Fortune,
(That only which could make me merit thee)
Gave my unwilling hand to this fair Noble Maid.
-- Ah Friendlove, when thou hearst my Story told,
Thou wilt forgive, and pity me.

What was't you said Sir? -- Friendlove.

Yes, Madam, I hope the name can make no difference:
Or hate that still, so you love the Man.

Though I'm again defeated, yet this last
Proves least offensive, nor shall an empty word,
Alter my fixed Resolves, to love you still.

Then I am blessed!

But yet the office of the Priest has past.
What remedy for that?

My Uncle's power; the nearness of our blood,
The contradiction of our circumstances.

And above all that, my Contract with Celinda.
-- Methinks I feel a joy spread over my heart,
The blessed omen of approaching happiness.

I do believe thee, for by sympathy,
Mine takes new fire and hope.

I have already writ to my Uncle, and the Messenger assured me,
he would gratify my desires; that done, I will be yours.

But why thus dressed? it might have led my Rage
Full of despair, and jealousy to have hurt thee,

Sir, when the Letter came of your being Married,
I will not tell you all the effects it had
Upon my desperate Soul;
But this I know, I had resolved to dye.
But first to see you, your Page informed the Nurse,
All that had past, and of the last Nights Ball;
And much concerned, she got this Habit for me,
And informed me how 'twas I was to Act.
And that my Brother (describing of his dress) was gone before;
This made me haste, lest e're I came,
His Rage had done the business which it went for.

And so it had, had thou not hindered me,
For I, Sir, was the Man, who drew on you.

And was it thou that did defend my heart,
That I might live to pay thy goodness back.

It was to save your life, and to expose my own.

Come, let's in, and consult what's best for us to do.

Come my Celinda,
Let us no longer doubt, the Powers above
Will be propitious to United Love.

Sir, my Lord Plotwell is at the door in his Coach.

My Uncle come! Sir, we will not doubt our Fortune.
But how came he to know of my being here?

Madam, I fear he follow'd me, after I had given him the Letter.
-- Rise, the joy I have to see you thus, makes me
Resolve to grant you any thing, and pardon all that's past.

Be not so hasty in your goodness, Sir,
Lest you repent as fast.

Sir, we have an humble Suit to you.

What is it ye can jointly ask, I will not grant?

By all th^t Love you ever had for me,
By all those Infant charms, which used to please you
When on your Lap, you taught my Tongue that Art
Which made those dear impress^ons on your Heart*
Which ever since to my advantage grew,
I do conjure you hear me now I sue,
And grant the mighty grace I beg of you.

What is it you would ask?

Oh dress your Face and Eyes in gentler Looks,
If you would have us hope for any mercy.

Rise, and whatever you ask, I'll freely grant.

That you'll undo that knot, that ties us two.

How! this Request from thee! who loved him once,
And wished no good beyond possessing him.

Heaven has not, Sir, decreed us for each other,
Something of Fate or Chance
Has otherwise disposed those first Resolves.

Too virtuous Maid, I know thou dost but feign,
His wickedness has forced thee to this change.

No, Sir, were he the only Man
Of kind and good, I never would be his.
-- And if you should compel me, I should live
The infamous Reproach of my whole Sex.

Well, and you Sir, that are the cause of this,
What can thou say to move me for thy Pardon?

I am so guilty in your opinion,
My Prayers would but make yours merciless;
I only say Celinda is my Wife,
And I should injure this too generous Maid,
Not to adore her equal to her merit.

I see, Sir, you have found your Wits again.
-- Well, I see there's no opposing Destiny,
And I have still such tenderness for thee,
That had thou pleaded his Cause to me before,
I should have been less cruel to him.
-- Where is that Lady which you so admire,
Whose beauty does eclipse that of Diana.

This, Sir, is she who merits more than I.

She's fair indeed; here Frank,
I give thee thy Celinda, whose beauty
Excuses all thy faults of disobedience.

Thus low, I thank you for this goodness Sir.

There only wants the ceremony of the Law to undo what's between you and Diana,
if she remain a Virgin.


For me by Heaven she is,
And for the rest I do not doubt her virtue.

You may believe him, Sir* and this alone's the Man ^ I will, or never will be
happy.


Mr. Friendlove, I give consent to it, he has a Noble Character, and what he
wants in Fortune, has in Virtue -- take her young Man.


'Tis such an Honour, Sir, that (my Gratitude) without the mighty Passion I
have for her, would make me ever thankful.


This Term, we shall make the former Marriage void, till then love on, and fear
no frowns from Fortune -- but Nephew -- now I hope your Brother shall have his
Portion.


My dearest Charles, forgive me all that's past, And share the Fortune, Heaven
has given thy Brother.


The joy I have, Sir, to be undeceived, is much the greatest blessing Heaven
can send me.


I am pursued by two impertinent Women, prithee Friendlove, tell 'em I am gone
out at the Back-door, and send 'em away.


What's the News here?


How Celinda here, and Bellmour too! nay, now would I compound for my Life, at
any rate, by Fortune.


Sir, this Villain here has abused me, and with a false Marriage has robbed me
of my Honour.


How!


My Lord, I say this young Jilt would rob me of my self, and courting her, and
enjoying her only for a Miss, would persuade me I am Married to her.


Sir, I say, I am doubly wronged; first by this false Knight, who has belonged
to me these three years, which gives me a right to him, as good as if I were
Married to him; who has now unlawfully left my Bed, for that of this Gillflurt,
who on the other side takes away my Knight, and consequently eats the bread out
of my mouth.


What means all this?
Speak some of ye that know.

Oh Lord! who's here? the fine Squire.


Sir Timothy Tawdrey, Sir, is Married to Mrs. Phillis.


How can that be a Marriage, when he who joined us, was but a hired Fellow,
dressed like a Parson?


Sir, 'twas Parson Tickle-text, that Married 'em.


Oh what a damned lying Pimp is this! -- Sham did not thou hire a Fellow,
(because I was damnably in Love, and in haste) to Marry us, that was no Parson?


Why truly Sir -- I did go to hire such an one --


Look ye there now.


But could meet with none; and because you said you should dye if you enjoyed
her not presently, and that she would not yield on any other terms, but those
of Marriage, I even brought the Parson that Trusty had provided for you.


Oh Villain to betray me! and for no Reward!


Yes indeed, Sir, the 400 Guineys you left behind my young Mistresses
Looking-glass fell to his share.


What's my Money gone! and am I Married too! This 'tis not to use to go to
Church; for then I might have chanced to know the Parson.


Death you Dog! you deserve to dye, for your base designs upon a Maid of her
quality -- how durst you, Sister, without my leave, Marry that Rascal?


Sir, you denied me my Portion, and my Uncle designed to turn me out of doors*
and in my despairs, I accepted of him.


Married! and to a Wife of no Fortune! that's the worst part on it -- what shall
I do?


Renounce this lewd Fool, and I'll make thee a Fortune suitable to thy quality.


Say you so? -- Renounce me Sir! I'd have you to know I merit her: and as for
Lewdness, I name no body Bellmour -- but only some have the Art of hiding it
better than I -- but for Whoring, Drinking, Dicing, and all the deadly sins
that thereupon depend, I thank my stars I come short of you: And since you say,
I shall not have your Sister, by Fortune, I will have your Sister, and love
your Sister, and lie with your Sister, in spite of you.


Well Sir Timothy, since my Niece has done amiss, 'tis too late to mend it --
and that you may not repent, I'll take care her Fortune shall be suitable to the
Jointure you'll make her.


With this Proviso that you make no Settlements to Misses, Sir Timothy -- I am
not so unreasonable to tie you up from all of that Profession; that were to
spoil a fashionable Husband, and so put you quite out of Fop Road.


This day we'll set apart for mirth,
And all must make my house their happy home.

To thee, Celinda, all my good I owe,
My Life, my Fortune, and my Honour too,
Since all had perished by a broken Vow.

What am I like to lose my Timy? Can thou have the heart to leave me for
ever? I who have been true and constrant to you.


Alas! now do I melt again, by Fortune -- thou art a Fool, dost think I would
have had her, but for her Fortune; which shall only serve to make thee
out-flaunt all the Cracks in Town -- go -- go home and expect me, thou'lt have
me all to thy self within this day or two.

Since Marriage but a larger Licence is
For every Fop of Mode to keep a Miss.

SIR TIMOTHY, Gallants, at last is come
To know his Sentence, and receive his Doom.
But pray before you are resolved to be
Severe, look on your selves, and then on me;
Observe me well, I am a Man of Show,
Of Noise, and Nonsense, as are most of you,
Though all of you don't share with me in Title,
In Character you differ very little.
Tell me in what you find a difference?
It may be you will say, you're Men of Sense;
But Faith --
Were one of you of the Stage, and I in the Pit,
He might be thought the Fop, and I the Wit.
On equal Grounds you'll scarce know one from the other;
We are as like, as Brother is to Brother.
To judge against me then would be ill Nature,
For Men are kind to those they're like in Feature.
For Judges therefore I accept you all;
By you, SIR TIMOTHY will stand or fall.
He's too faint-hearted that his Sentence fears,
Who has the Honour to be tried by's Peers.
Written by Mr. E. R.

