WE write not Now as the Ancient Poets writ*
For your Applause of Nature, Sense and Wit;
But, like good Tradesmen, what's in fashion vent,
And Cozen you, to give ye all Content.
True Comedy, writ even in Dryden's style,
Will hardly raise your Humours to a smile:
Long did his Sovereign Muse the Sceptre sway,
And long with joy you did true Homage pay;
But now, like happy States luxurious grown,
The Monarch Wit unjustly you dethrone,
And a Tyrannic Commonwealth prefer,
Where each small Wit starts up and claims his share;
And all those Laurels are in pieces torn,
Which did ere while one sacred Head adorn*
Nay, even the Women, now, pretend to reign,
Defend us from a Poet Joan again:
That Congregation's in a hopeful way
To Heaven, where the Lay-sisters Preach and Pray*
Oh the great blessing of a little wit,
I've seen an elevated Poet sit
And hear the Audience laugh and clap, yet say,
Gad after all 'tis a damned silly Play:
He unconcerned, cries only -- is it so?
No matter these unwitty things will do,
When your fine fustian useless Eloquence
Serves but to chime a sleep a drowsy Audience.
Who at the vast Expense of wit would treat,
That might so cheaply please the Appetite?
Such homely fare you're like to find to night,
Our Author
Knows better how to juggle then to write:
Alas! a Poet's good for nothing now,
Unless he have the knack of conjuring too;
For 'tis beyond all natural sense to guess
How their strange Miracles are brought to pass.
Your Presto Jack be gone, and come again,
With all the Pocus Art of Legerdemain,
Your dancing Tester, Nut-meg and your Cups,
Out-does your Heroes and your Amorous fops*
And if (...) chance to please you, by that rule,
He that writes Wit is much the greater Fool.

'TIS much I owe to fortune, my dear Lucretia, for being so kind to make us
Neighbours, where with ease we may continually exchange our Souls and thoughts
without the attendance of a Coach, and those other little Formalities that make
a business of a visit, it looks so like a Journey I hate it.


Attendance is that Curse to Greatness that confines the Soul, and spoils good
Humour; we are free whilst thus alone, and can laugh at the abominable
Fopperies of this Town.


And lament the numberless impertinences wherewith they continually plague all
young Women of Quality.


Yet these are the precious things our grave Parents still choose out to make us
happy with, and all for a filthy Jointure, the undeniable argument for our
slavery to Fools.


Custom is unkind to our Sex, not to allow us free choice, but we above all
Creatures must be forced to endure the formal recommendations of a Parent; and
the more insupportable Addresses of an Odious Fop, whilst the Obedient
Daughter stands -- thus -- with her Hands pinned before her, a set look, few
words, and a meine that cries -- come marry me; out upon it.


I perceive then what-ever your Father designs, you are resolved to love your
own way.


Thou may lay thy Maiden-head upon it, and be sure of the misfortune to win.


My Brother Lodwick's like to be a happy man then.


Faith my dear Lodwick or no body in my heart, and I hope thou art as well
resolved for my Cozen Leander.


Here's my hand upon it I am, yet there's something sticks upon my Stomach,
which you must know.


Spare the Relation, for I have observed of late your Mother to have ordered
her Eyes with some softness, her mouth endeavouring to sweeten it self into
smiles and dimples, as if she meant to recall Fifteen again and give it all to
Leander, for at him she throws her Darts.


Is't possible thou should have perceived it already?


Long since.


And, now I begin to love him, it would vex me to see my Mother Marry him, --
well I shall never call him Father.


He'll take care to give himself a better title.


This Devonshire Knight too who is recommended to my Mother as a fit Husband
for me, I shall be so tormented with -- My Brother swears he's the pertest
unsufferable Fool he ever saw, when he was at my Uncles last Summer he made all
his Diversion.


Prithee let him make ours now, for of all Fops your Country Fop is the most
tolerable Animal; those of the Town are the most unmanagable Beasts in Nature.


And are the most noysie, keeping Fops?


Keeping begins to be as ridiculous as Matrimony, and is a greater imposition
upon the liberty of man, the Insolence and Expense of their Mistresses has
almost tired out all but the Old and Doting part of man-kind; The rest begin to
know their value, and set a Price upon a good shape, a tolerable Face and Mean,
-- and some there are who have made excellent Bargains for themselves that way,
and will flatter ye and gilt ye an Antiquated Lady as artfully as the most
experienced Miss of 'em all.


Lord, Lord! what will this World come to, -- but this Mother of mine, --
Isabella.


Is discreet and virtuous enough, a little too affected, as being the most
learned of her Sex.


Methinks to be read in the Arts as they call 'em, is the peculiar Province of
the other Sex.


Indeed the men would have us think so, and boast their Learning, and
Languages, but if they can find any of our Sex fuller of words, and to so
little purpose as some of their Gownmen, I'll be content to change my
Petticoats for Pantiloons and go to a Grammar-school.


Oh they are the greatest Babelards in Nature.


They call us Easy, and Fond, and charge us with all weakness, but look into
their Actions of Love, State, or War, their roughest business, and you shall
find 'em swayed by some who have the luck to find their feables; witness my
Father, a man reasonable enough, till drawn away by doting Love and Religion:
what a Monster my young Mother makes of him, Flattered him first into
Matrimony, and now into what sort of Fool or Beast she pleases to make him.


I wonder she does not turn him to Christianity, methinks a Conventicle should
ill agree with her humour.


Oh she finds it the only way to secure her from his suspicion, which if she do
not e're long give him cause for, I am mistaken in her Humour, -- but see your
Leander, who seems, poor man, under some great Consternation, for he looks as
gravely as a Lay-elder conducting his Spouse from a Sermon.


Oh fie upon it. See Mr. Fancy where your Cozen and my Lucretia are idling, dii
boni, what an insupportable loss of time's this?


Which might be better employed if I might instruct 'em Madam.


Aye Mr. Fancy, in Consultation with the Ancients, -- Oh the delight of Books!
when I was of their age, I always employed my looser hours in reading, -- if
serious, 'twas Tacitus, Seneca, Plutarch's Morals, or some such useful Author;
if in an Humour gay, I was for Poetry, Virgil, Homer, or Tasso, Oh that Love
between Renaldo and Armida Mr. Fancy! Ah the Caresses that fair Corcereis gave,
and received from the young Warrior, ah how soft, Delicate and tender! upon my
Honour I cannot read them in the Excellence of their Original Language, without
I know not what Emotions.


Methinks 'tis very well in our Mother tongue Madam.


O Faugh Mr. Fancy what have you said, Mother tongue! Can any thing that's
great or moving be expressed in filthy English, -- I'll give you an Energetical
proof Mr. Fancy, observe but Divine Homer in the Grecian Language -- Ton
d'apamibominus, Prosiphe, Podis Ochus Achilleus! ah how it sounds! which
English't dwindles into the most grating stuff: -- then the swift Foot Achilles
made reply, -- oh faugh.


So now my Mother's in her right Sphere.


Come Mr. Fancy we will pursue our first design of retiring into my Cabinet and
reading a leaf or two in Martial, I am a little dull and would fain laugh.


Methinks Madam discourse were much better with these young Ladies. Dear
Lucretia find some way to release me.


Oh how I hate the impertinance of women, who for the generality have no other
knowledge then that of dressing, I am uneasy with the unthinking Creatures.


Indeed 'tis much better to be Entertaining a young Lover alone, but I'll
prevent her if possible.


No, I am for the substantial pleasure of an Author. Philosophemur! is my
Motto, -- I'm strangely fond of you Mr. Fancy, for being a Scholar.


Who Madam I a scholar? the greatest Dunce in Nature, -- Malicious Creatures
will you leave me to her mercy?


Prithee assist him in his misery, for I am Mud, and can do nothing towards
it.


Who my Cozen Leander a Scholar Madam?


Sure He's too much a Gentleman to be a Scholar.


I Vow Madam he spells worse then a Country Farryer when he Prescribes a
Drench.


Then Madam I write the lewdest hand!


Worse then a Politician or a States-man.


He cannot read it himself when he has done.


Not a word on it Madam.


This agreement to abuse him, I understand -- Fancy, let's to my Cabinet --
your hand.


Now shall I be teased unmercifully, -- I'll wait on you Madam.


Hah my dear Isabella here, and without a spy? what a blessed opportunity must
I be forced to lose, for there is just now arrived My Sisters Lover, whom I am
obliged to receive, but if you have a mind to laugh a little --


Laugh! why are you turned Buffoon, Tumbler or Presbyterian Preacher.


No, but* there's a Creature below more ridiculous then either of these.


For loves sake what sort of Beast is that?


Sir Credulous Easy your new Lover just come to Town Bag and Baggage, and I
was going to acquaint my Mother with it.


You'll find her well employed with my Cozen Leander.


A happy opportunity to Free him, but what shall I do now Brother!


Oh let me alone to ruin him with my Mother, get you gon, I think I hear him
coming, and this apartment is appointed for him.


Prithee haste then and free Leander, we will into the Garden.


Yes -- tis the Right Worshipful, I'll to my Mother with the news.


Come undo my Portmantue and Equip me that I may look like somebody before I
see the Ladies. -- Curry, Thou shalt even remove now Curry from Groom to
Footman, for I'll ne'er keep Horse more, no, nor Mare neither since my Poor
Gillian's departed this life.


'Ds diggers, Sir, you have grieved enough for your Mare in all conscience,
think of your Mistress now Sir, and think of her no more.


Not think of her? I shall think of her whilst I live, poor Fool, that I shall,
though I had forty Mistresses!


Nay to say truth Sir, 'twas a good natured Civil beast, and so she remained to
her last gasp, for she could never have left this world in a better time, as
the saying is, so near her journeys End.


A Civil Beast? Why was it Civilly done of her think thou to dye at
Branford, when had she lived till tomorrow, she had been converted into Money
and have been in my Pocket? for now I am to Marry and live in town, I'll sell
off all my Pads; poor Fool, I think she even died for grief I would have sold
her.


'Twas unlucky to refuse Parson Cuffets wives money for her Sir.


Aye, and to refuse her another kindness too that shall be nameless which She
offered me, and which would have given me good luck in horse-flesh too, Zoz I
was a modest fool that's truth on it.


Well well Sir, her time was come you must think, and we are all Mortal as the
saying is.


Well 'twas the lovingst titt, -- but grass and hay she's gon -- where be her
shoes Curry?


Here Sir, her Skin went for good Ale at Branford.


Ah! how often has she carried me upon these shoes to Mother Iumbles, thou
remember her handsome Daughter and what pure Ale she brewed, between one and
the other my Rent came short home there, but let that pass too, and hang sorrow
as thou say, I have something else to think on. Curry, as soon as I am dressed,
go you away to St. Clements Church-yard, to Iackson the Cobbler there!


What your Dog-tutor Sir?


Yes, and see how my whelp proves I put to him last Parliament.


Yes Sir.


And ask him what Gamesters come to the Ponds now adays, and what good Dogs.


Yes Sir.


This is the Beast Lodwick spoke of; how could I laugh were he designed for any
but Lucretia!


And dost hear, ask him if he have not sold his own Dog Diver with the white
Ear, if I can purchase him, and my own Dog prove right, I'll be Duke of Ducking
Pond ads zoz.


But so so Sir, as the saying is, this Suit's a little out of fashion, 'twas
made that very year I came to your Worship, which is five Winters and as many
Summers.


What then Mun, I never wear it but when I go to be drunk and give my Voice for
a Knight of the shire, and here at London in Term time, and that but Eight times
in Eight Visits to Eight several Ladies to whom I was recommended.


I wonder that amongst Eight you got not one Sir.


Eight! Zoz I have had Eight score Mun, but the Devil was in 'em, they were all
so Forward, that before I could seal and deliver, whip quoth Iethro, they were
either all Married to some body else, or run quite away; so that I am resolved
if this same Lucretia prove not right, I'll even forswear this Town and all
their false Wares, amongst which Zoz I believe they vent as many false Wives as
any Metropolitan in Christendom, I'll say that for it and a Fiddle for it i'faith,
-- come give me my Watch out, -- so, My Diamond Rings too, so, I think I shall
appear pretty well all together Curry, hah?


Like something Monstrously Ridiculous, I'll be sworn.


Here's your Purse of broad Gold Sir, that your Grandmother gave you to go a
wooing withal, I mean to show Sir.


Aye, for she charged me never to part with it, -- so, now for the Ladies.


Leander, what make thou here, like Holy-day Fool gazing at a Mother?


Yes, and one I hope I have no great reason to fear.


I am of thy opinion, away, my mother's coming, take this opportunity with my
Sister, she's i*the Garden, and let me alone with this Fool, for an
Entertainment that shall show him all at once, away --


Lodwick, My dear Friend! and little spark of ingenuity! -- Zoz mam I'm but
just come to Town.


'Tis a joyful hearing Sir.


Not so joyful neither Sir, when you shall know Poor Gillian's dead, My little
gray Mare, thou knew her mun, Zoz 'thas made me as Melancholy as the Drone
of a Lancashire Bagpipe, but let that pass, and now we talk of my Mare, Zoz I
long to see this Sister of thine.


She'll be with you presently Sir Credulous.


But hark ye, Zoz I have been so often fob'd off in these matters, that between
you and I Lodwick if I thought I should not have her, Zoz I'd ne'er lose
precious time about her.


Right Sir, and to say truth, these Women have so much Contradiction in 'em,
that 'tis ten to one but a man fails in the Art of pleasing.


Why there's it, -- therefore prithee dear Lodwick tell me a few of thy Sisters
Humours, and if I fail, -- then Hang me Ladies at your door, as the Song says.


Why faith she has many odd Humours hard enough to hit.


Zoz let'em be as hard as Hercules his Labours in the Vale of Basse, I'll not
be frighted from attempting her.


Why, She's one of those fantastic Creatures that must be courted her own way.


Why let's hear her way.


She must be surprised with strange Extravagancies wholly out of the Road and
Method of common Court-ship.


Shaw, is that all, Zoz I'm the best in Christendom at You're out of the way
bus'nesses, -- Now do I find the reason of all my ill success, for I used one
and the same method to all I Courted, whatever their Humours were; Hark ye,
prithee give me a hint or two, and let me alone to manage matters.


I have just now thought of a way that cannot but take --


Zoz out with it man.


Why, what if you should represent a Dumb Ambassador from the Blind God of
Love.


How, a Dumb Ambassador? Zoz man how shall I deliver my Embassy then, and tell
her how much I love her, -- besides I had a pure speech or two ready by heart,
and that will be quite lost.


Phy, phy! how dull you are! why; you shall do it by Signs, and I'll be your
Interpreter.


Why faith this will be pure, I understand you now, Zoz I am old Excellent at
Signs, -- I vow this will be rare.


It will not fail to do your business if well managed, -- but stay, here's my
Sister, on your life not a syllable.


I'll be racked first, Mum budget,


Sister, I here present you with a worthy Knight, struck dumb with Admiration
of your Beauty, but that's all one, he is employed Envoy extraordinary from the
blind God of Love, and since like his young Master he must be defective in one
of his Senses, he chose rather to be Dumb then Blind.


I hope the small Deity is in good health Sir?


And his Mistress Psyche Sir?


He says that Psyche has been sick of late, but somewhat recovered, and has
sent you for a Heart in hand, at thy Command.


Zoz, Lodwick what do you mean? I'm the Son of an Egyptian if I understand
thee.


Come Sir, the Tokens, produce, produce, -- How! Faith I am sorry for that with
all my heart,


Why, the Devil's in this Lodwick, for mistaking my Signs thus, hang me if
ever I thought of Bracelets or a Handkerchief, or ever received a civility from
any Woman breathing, -- is he bewitched trow?


Lodwick, you are mistaken in the Knight's meaning all this while. Look on him
Sir, -- do not you guess from that look and wrying of his mouth, that you
mistook the Bracelets for Diamond Rings, which he humbly begs, Madam, you would
grace with your fair hand.


Ah, now I perceive it plain.


A Pox of his Complement. Why this is worse than the other, -- What shall I do in
this case? -- should I speak and undeceive them, they would swear 'twere to
save my Gems: and to part with 'em -- Zoz, how simply should I look? -- but
hanged, when I have married her they are my own again.


Enough, -- Then Sister she has sent you a Purse of her own knitting, full of
broad Gold, --


Broad Gold! why, what a pox does the Man Conjure?


Which Sister faith you must accept of, you see by that Grimace how much 'twill
grieve him else.


A pretty civil way this to Rob a man, -- Why Lodwick -- why what a Pox will
they have no mercy, -- Zoz I'll see how far they'll drive the jest.


Say you so Sir? Well I'll see what may be done, -- Sister, behold him, and
take pity on him, he has but one more humble request to make you, 'tis to
receive a Gold Watch which he designs you from himself.


Why, how long has this fellow been a Conjurer? for he does deal with the
Devil, that's certain, -- Lodwick, --


Aye do, speak and spoil all, do.


Speak and spoil all quoth he! and the Deuce take me if I am not provoked to it;
why, how the Devil should he light slap dash, as they say, upon every thing
thus? Well, Zoz, I am resolved to give it her, and shame her if she have any
conscience in her.


Now Sister you must know there's a mystery in this Watch, 'tis a kind of
Hieroglyphic that will instruct you how a Married Woman of your Quality ought
to live.


How, my Watch Mysteries and Hieroglyphics! the Devil take me if I knew any
such virtues it had.


Beginning at Eight, from which down to Twelve you ought to employ in dressing,
till Two at Dinner, till Five in Visits, till Seven at the Play, till Nine
in the Park, at Ten at Supper with your Lover, if your Husband be at home, or
keep his distance, which he's too well bred not to do, then from Ten to Twelve
are the happy hours of the Bergere, those of entire enjoyment. --


Say you so? hang me if I shall not go near to think I may chance to be a
Cuckold by the shift.


Well Sir, what must she do from Twelve till Eight again?


Oh those are the dull Conjugal hours for sleeping with her own Husband, and
dreaming of Joys her absent Lover alone can give her.


Nay an she be for sleeping, Zoz, I am as good at that as she can be for her
heart, or snoring either.


But I have done; Sir Credulous has a dumb Oration to make you by way of
farther Explanation.


A dumb Oration! Now do I know no more how to speak a dumb Speech than the Dog.


Oh I love that sort of Eloquence extremely.


I told you this would take her.


Nay, I know your silent Speeches are incomparable, and I have such a Speech in
my head. --


Your Postures, your Postures, begin Sir.


Sir, My Lady desires to speak with you.


I'll wait on her, -- a Devil on it. --


I have command to bring you Sir, instantly.


This is ill luck Madam, I cannot see the Farce out, I'll wait on you as soon
as my good fortune will permit me.


He's going to my Mother, dear Isabella let's go and hinder their discourse:
Farewell Sir Ambassador, pray remember us to Psyche, not forgetting the little
Blind Archer, ha ha ha, --


So, I have undone all, they are both gone, slown I protest; Why what a Devil
ail'd'em? now have I been dumb all this while to no purpose, you too never told
her my meaning right; as I hope to breath, had any but your self done this, I
should have sworn by Helicon and all the rest of the Devils, you had had a
design to have abused me, and cheated me of all my Movables too.


What a hopeful project was here defeated by my mistake! but Courage Sir
Credulous, I'll put you in a way shall fetch all about again.


Say you so? ah dear Lodwick let me hear it.


Why, you shall this night give your Mistress a Serenade.


How! a Serenade!


Yes, but it must be performed after an Extravagant manner, none of your dull
Amorous night-walking noises so familiar in this Town, Lucretia loves nothing
but what's great and Extravagant, and passes the reach of Vulgar practice.


What think you then of a silent Serenade? Zoz say but the word and it shall be
done man, let me alone for Frolics i'faith.


A silent one? no that's to wear a good Humour to the stumps; I would have this
want for no noise, the Extremes of these two addresses will set off one
another.


Say you so? what think you then of the Bagpipe, Tongs and Gridiron, Cat-calls
and loud sounding Cymballs?


Nought, nought, and of known use, you might as well treat her with Viols and
Flute-doux, which were enough to disoblige her for ever.


Why, what think you then of the King of Bantam's own Music?


How! the King of Bantam's Music!


Aye Sir, the King of Bantam's: a Friend of mine had a Present sent him from
thence, a most unheard of curiosity I'll assure you.


That, that by all means Sir.


Well, I'll go borrow 'em presently.


You must provide your self of a Song.


A Song! hanged 'tis but rummaging the Play-Books, stealing thence is Lawful
Prize -- Well Sir Cred. your servant.


I hope 'twill be ridiculous enough, and then the Devil's in it if it do not do
his Business with my Mother, for she hates all impertinent Noises but what she
makes her self. She's now going to make a Visit to your Uncle, purposely to
give me an opportunity to Isabella.


And I'm engaged to wait on her thither, she design to carry the Fiddles too,
he's Mad enough already, but such a Visit will fit him for Bedlam.


No matter, for you have all a lewd hand with him; between his continual
imaginary sickness, and perpetual Physic, a man might take more Pleasure in an
Hospital. What the Devil did he marry a young Wife for? and they say a handsome
creature too.


To keep up his Title of Cuckold I think, for she has beauty enough for
temptation, and no doubt makes the right use on it: would I could know it, that
I might prevent her cheating my Uncle longer to my undoing.


She'll be cunning enough for that, if she have wit: but now thou talk of
intrigues, when did see Wittmore? that Rogue has some lucky Haunt which we
must find out. -- But my Mother expects your attendance, I'll go seek my
Sister, and make all the Interest there I can for you, whilst you pay me in the
same Coin to Isabella.


Trust my Friendship --


ENough my Charming Mistress, you've set my Soul at Peace, and chased away
those Fears and Doubts my Jealousy created there.


Mr. Wittmore's satisfied of your constancy Madam, though had I been your
Ladyship, I should have given him a more substantial Proof, which you might
yet do, if you would make handsome use of your time.


Maundy advises well my Dearest, let's withdraw to yonder Covert Arbour, whose
kind shades will secure us a happiness that Gods might envy.


I dare not for the world, Sir Patient is now asleep, and 'tis to those few
Minutes we are obliged for this enjoyment, which should Love make us
transgress, and he should wake and surprise us, we were undone for ever; no let
us employ this little time we have in consulting how we may be often happy, and
securely so: oh how I languish for the dear opportunity!


And could you guess what torments I have suffered in these few Fatal Months
that have divided us, thou would pity me.


-- but to our business; for though I am yet unsuspected by my Husband, I am
eternally plagued with his company, he's so fond of me, he scarce gives me time
to write to thee, he waits on me from room to room, hands me in the Garden,
shoulders me in the Balcony, nay does the office of my women, dresses and
undresses me, and does so smirk at his handy-work! in fine, dear Wittmore, I am
impatient till I can have less of his company, and more of thine.


Does he never go out of Town?


Never without me.


Nor to Church?


To a meeting-house you mean, and then too carries me, and is as vainly proud
of me as of his Rebellious opinion, for his Religion means nothing but that,
and Contradiction; which I seem to like too, since 'tis the best cloak I can
put on to cheat him with.


Right my fair Hypocrite.


But dear Wittmore, there's nothing so Comical as to hear me Cant, and even
cheat those knaves the Preachers themselves that delude the Ignorant Rabble.


What Miracles cannot your Eyes and Tongue perform!


Judge what a fine life I lead the while, to be set up with an old Formal
Doting sick Husband, and a Herd of snivelling grinning Hypocrites that call
themselves the teaching Saints, who under pretence of securing me to the number
of their Flock, do so sneer upon me, pat my Breasts and cry, fie, fie upon this
fashion of tempting Nakedness.


Dear Creature, how could we laugh at thy new way of living, had we but some
minutes allow'd us to enjoy that pleasure alone.


Think, dear Wittmore think, Maundy and I have thought over all our devices to
no purpose.


Pox on it I'm the dullest Dog at Plotting, Thinking, in the world, I should
have made a damnable Ill Town Poet; has he quite left off going to the Change?


Oh, he's grown Cautiously rich, and will venture none of his substantial
stock in transitory Traffic.


Has he no Mutinous Cabal, nor Coffee-houses, where he goes religiously to
consult the welfare of the Nation?


His imagined sickness has made this their Rendesvouz.


When he goes to his blind Devotion, cannot you pretend to be sick? that may
give us at least two or three opportunities to begin with.


Oh! then I should be plagued with continual Physic and Extempore Prayer till
I were sick indeed.


Damn the Humorous Coxcomb and all his Family, what shall we do?


Not all, for he has a Daughter that has good Humour, Wit, and Beauty enough to
save her, -- stay -- that has jogged a thought as the learned say, which must
jog on, till the motion have produced something worth my thinking. --


Ad's me here's danger near, our Scout comes in such hast.


Roger, what's the matter?


My Master, Madam, is risen from sleep, and is come into the Garden, -- See
Madam he's here.


What an unlucky accident was this?


What shall I do? 'tis too late to obscure my self.


He see's you already through the Trees, -- here -- keep your distance, your
Hat under your Arm, so, be very Ceremonious whilst I settle a demure
Countenance. --


Well, there never came good of Lovers that were given to too much talking; had
you been silently kind all this while, you had been willing to have parted by
this time.


Hum, -- Twelve Purges for this present January, -- as I take it, good Mr.
Doctor, I took but Ten in all December, -- by this Rule I am sicker this Month
than I was the last, -- and good Master Apothecary methinks your Prizes are
somewhat to high, at this rate no body would be sick. -- Here Roger, see it
paid however, -- Ha, hum.


Sir Patient cannot now be spoken with. But Sir, that which I was going just
now to say to you, was, that it would be very convenient in my opinion to make
your addresses to Isabella, -- 'twill give us opportunities. Wittmore.


I profess ingenuously an excellent good Lady this of mine, though I do not like
her Counsel to the young man, whom I perceive would be a suitor to my Daughter
Isabella.


Madam, should I follow my inclinations, I should pay my vows no where but
there, -- but I am informed Sir Patient is a man so positively resolved. --


That you should love his Wife.


And I'll comply with that resolve of his, and neither Love nor Marry Isabella,
without his Permission, and I doubt not but I shall by my respects to him gain
his consent, -- to Cuckold him.


I profess ingenuously a very discreet young man.


But Madam, when may I promise my self the satisfaction of coming again? For
I'm impatient for the sight and enjoyment of the fair person I love.


Sir, You may come at night, and something I will do by that time shall
certainly give you that access you wish for.


May I depend upon that happiness?


Oh, doubt not my power over Sir Patient.


My Lady Fancy, you promise largely.


Sir Patient here?


A Devil on him, would I were well off, now must I dissemble, profess, and lye
most confoundedly.


Your Servant Sir, your Servant, -- My Lady Fancy, your Ladyship is well
entertained I see, have a care you make me not Jealous, my Lady Fancy.


Indeed I have given you cause Sir Patient, for I have been entertaining a
Lover, and one you must admit of too.


Say you so, my Lady Fancy? -- Well Sir, I am a man of Reason, and if you show
me good causes why, can bid you welcome, for I do nothing without Reason and
Precaution.


Sir I have. --


I know what you would say Sir, few words denotes a wise head, -- you would
say that you have an ambition to be my Son in Law.


You guess most right Sir.


Nay Sir, I'll warrant I'll read a man as well as the best, I have studied it.


Now Invention help me or never.


Your Name I pray?


Fain-Love, Sir.


Good Mr. Fain-Love, your Country?


Yorkshire, Sir.


What, not Mr. Fain-Love's Son of Yorkshire, who was Knighted in the good days
of the late Lord Protector?


The same Sir, -- I am in, but how to come off again the Devil take me if I
know.


He was a man of admirable Parts, believe me, a notable head-piece, a
Publick-spirited Person, and a good Commonwealths man, that he was, on my word,
-- Your Estate Sir, I pray?


I have not impaired it Sir, and I presume you know its value? For I'm a Dog
if I do. --


Of my word 'tis then considerable Sir, for he left but one Son, and Fourteen
hundred Pounds per annum, as I take it, which Son I hear is lately come from
Geneva, whither he was sent for virtuous Education. I am glad of your Arrival
Sir, -- Your Religion I pray?


You cannot doubt my Principles, Sir, since educated at Geneva.


Your Father was a discreet Man, ah Mr. Fain-love, he and I have seen better
days, and wish we could have foreseen these that are arrived.


That he might have turned honest in time, he means, before he had purchased
Bishops Lands.


Sir, You have no Place, Office, Dependence or Attendance at Court I hope?


None Sir. -- Would I had, -- so you were hanged.


Nay Sir, you may believe, I knew his Capacities and Abilities before I would
encourage his Addresses.


My Lady Fancy, you are a discreet Lady; -- Well I'll marry her out of hand to
prevent Mr. Lodwick's hopes, for though the young man may deserve well, that
mother of his I'll have nothing to do with, since she refused to marry my
Nephew.


Sir Father, here's my Lady Knowell and her Family come to see you.


How! her whole Family! I am come to keep open House; very fine, her whole
Family! she's Plague enough to mortify any good Christian, -- tell her, my Lady
and I am gon forth; tell her any thing to keep her away.


Should I tell a lye Sir Father, and to a Lady of her Quality?


Her Quality and she are a Couple of impertinent things, which are very
troublesome, and not to be endured I take it.


Sir, we should bear with things we do not love sometimes, 'tis a sort of trial
Sir, a kind of mortification fit for a good Christian.


Why, what a notable talking Baggage is this! How came you by this Doctrine?


I remember, Sir, you Preached it once to my Sister, when the old Alderman was
the Text, whom you exhorted her to marry, but the wicked Creature made ill use
on it.


Go your way for a Prating Huswife, go, and call your Sister hither.


What's the matter Dear, thou dost so fret thy self?


The matter! my house, my house is besieged with impertinence, the intolerable
Lady, Madam Romance, that walking Library of Profane Books is come to visit me.


My Lady Knowell?


Yes, that Lady of eternal noise and hard words.


Indeed 'tis with pain I am obliged to be civil to her, but I consider her
Quality, her Husband was too an Alderman your friend, and a great Ay and no Man
in the City, and a painful promoter of the good Cause.


But she's a Fop, my Lady Fancy, and ever was so; an idle conceited she Fop,
and has vanity and tongue enough to debauch any Nation under Civil Government:
but, Patience, thou art a virtue, and Affliction will come, -- Ah I'm very
sick, alas I have not long to dwell amongst the Wicked, Oh, oh. -- Roger, is
the Doctor come?


No Sir, but he has sent you a small draught of a Pint, which you are to take
and move upon it.


Ah, -- Well I'll in and take it; -- Ah -- Sir, I crave your Patience for a
moment, for I design you shall see my Daughter, I'll not make long work on it
Sir, alas I would dispose of her before I die, Ah, -- I'll bring her to you
Sir, Ah, Ah. --


He's always thus when visited, to save charges, -- But how dear Wittmore
came thou to think of a Name and Country so readily?


Egad I was at the height of my invention, and the Alderman civilly and kindly
assisted me with the rest; but how to undeceive him, --


Take no care for that, in the mean time you'll be shrewdly hurt to have the way
laid open to our enjoyment, and that by my Husbands procurement too: but take
heed dear Wittmore, whilst you only design to feign a Courtship, you do it not
in good earnest.


Unkind Creature!


I would not have you endanger her heart neither: for thou hast Charms will
do it. -- Prithee do not put on thy best looks, nor speak thy softest language;
for if thou dost, thou can not fail to undo her.


Well my pretty Flatterer, to free her heart and thy suspicions, I'll make such
awkward Love as shall persuade her, however she chance to like my Person, to
think most lewdly of my parts, -- But 'tis fit I take my leave, for if Lodwick
or Leander see me here, all will be ruined, death I had forgot that.


Leander's seldom at home, and you must time your Visits: but see Sir Patient's
returned, and with him your new Mistress.


Here's my Daughter Isabella, Mr. Fain-love: she'll serve for a Wife, Sir, as
times go; but I hope you are none of those, -- Sweet-heart -- this Gentleman I
have designed you, he's rich and young, and I am old and sickly, and just going
out of the world, and would gladly see thee in safe hands.


He has been just going this twenty Years.


Therefore I command you to receive the tenders of his Affection.


Sir Father, my Lady Knowell's in the Garden.


My Dear, we must go meet her in decency.


A hard case a man cannot be sick in quiet. --


A Husband, and that not Lodwick! Heaven forbid.


Now Foppery assist to make me very ridiculous. -- Death she's very pretty and
inviting, what an insensible Dog shall I be counted to refuse the enjoyment of
so fair, so new a Creature, and who is like to be thrown into my Arms too
whether I will or not? -- but Conscience and my vows to the fair Mother: No I
will be honest, -- Madam, -- as Gad shall save me, I'm the Son of a Whore, if
you are not the most Bell Person I ever saw, and if I be not damnably in love
with you, but a pox take all tedious Courtship, I have a free-born and generous
Spirit, and as I hate being confined to dull cringing, whining, flattering, and
the Devil and all of Foppery, so when I give an heart I'm an Infidel, Madam,
if I do not love to do it frankly and quickly, that thereby I may oblige the
Beautiful receiver of my Vows, Protestations, Passions, and Inclination.


You're wonderful engaging Sir, and I were an Ingrate not to facilitate a
return for the Honour you are pleased to do me.


Upon my Reputation, Madam, you're a civil well-bred Person, you have all the
Agreemony of your Sex, La Bell Talie, la Boon Mien, reparteet bien, and are
tout one toore, as I'm a Gentleman, fort agreeable. -- If this do not please
your Lady, and Nauseate her, the Devil's in 'em both for unreasonable Women. --



Gemini Sister, does the Gentleman Conjure?


I know not, but I'm sure I never saw a more affected Fop.


Oh a damnable impertinent Fop, 'tis pity, for he's a proper Gentleman.


Well if I do hold out, Egad I shall be the bravest young fellow in
Christendom: but Madam, I must kiss your hand at present, I have some Visits
to make, Devoirs to pay, necessities of Gallantry only, no Love engagement by
Jove Madam, it is sufficient I have given my Parole to your Father to do him
the honour of my Alliance; and an unnecessary Jealousy will but disoblige
Madam your slave -- Death these Rogues will see me and I'm undone. --


Isabella, your servant, Madam, being sensible of the insociable and solitary
life you lead, I have brought my whole Family to wait on your Ladyship, and
this my Son in Futuro, to kiss your hands, I beseech your Ladyship to know him
for your humble servant: my Son and your Nephew Madam are coming, with the
Music too, we mean to pass the whole day with your Ladyship: -- and see they
are here.


Nay since we have met thee so luckily, you must back with us.


You must excuse me Gentlemen.


We will show ye two or three fine women.


Death these Rogues will ruin me -- but I have business Gentlemen that --


That must not hinder you from doing deeds of Charity, we are all come to tease
my Uncle, and you must assist at so good a work -- come gad thou shalt make
love to my Aunt, -- I would he would effectually.


Now I think on it, what the Devil dost thou make here?


Here? -- oh Sir -- a -- I have a design upon the Alderman.


Upon his handsome Wife thou meanest? ah Rogue!


Faith no, -- a -- 'tis to -- borrow Money of him, and as I take it Gentlemen
you are not fit persons for a man of Credit to be seen with, I pass for a
graver man.


Well Sir, take your Course -- but egad he will sooner lend thee his wife than
his Money.


Aunt I have taken the boldness to bring a Gentleman of my acquaintance to kiss
your Ladyships hands.


Thy Aunt! -- death she's very handsome, -- Madam your most humble servant.


Prithee employ this Fool that I may have an opportunity to entertain thy
Sister.


Sir Credulous, what not a word? not a Complement? hah -- be brisk man, be gay
and witty, talk to the Ladies.


Talk to 'em? why what shall I say to 'em?


Any thing so it be to little purpose.


Nay Sir, let me alone for that matter -- but who are they prithee?


Why that's my Lady Fancy, and that's her Daughter in Law, salute 'em Man. --


Fair Lady, -- I do protest and vow, you are the most beautiful of all Mothers
in Law, and the World cannot produce your equal.


The Rogue has but one method for all Addresses.


Oh absurd! this Sir is the beautiful Mother in Law.


Most Noble Lady, I cry you mercy,


Why this is abominable and insupportable.


I find Sir, you can talk to purpose when you begin once.


You are pleased to say so, Noble Lady; but I must needs say, I am not the
worst bred Gentleman for a Country Gentleman that ever you saw, for you must
know incomparable Lady that I was at the University three years, and there I
learnt my Logic and Rhethorick, whereby I became excellent at Repartee, sweet
Lady. As for my Estate, my Father died since I came of Age, and left me a small
younger Brothers Portion, dear Lady.


A younger Brothers Sir?


Ha ha, I know what you would infer from that now; but you must know delicious
Lady, that I am all the Children my Father had.


Witty I protest.


Nay Madam when I set on it I can be witty.


Cruel Lucretia leave 'em, and let us snatch this opportunity to talk of our
own affairs.


For you must know bright Lady, though I was pleased to rally my self, I have a
pretty competent Estate of about 3000 l. a year, and am to marry Madam
Lucretia.


You're a happy man Sir.


Not so happy neither, inestimable Lady, for I lost the finest Mare yesterday
-- but let that pass, were you never in Devonshire Madam?


Never Sir.


In truth and that's pity sweet Lady, for if you loved Hawking, Drinking, and
Whoring, -- oh Lord, I mean Hunting, i'faith there be good fellows would keep
you company Madam.


This is a Plot upon me, a mere Plot. -- My Lady Fancy, be tender of my
reputation, Foppery's catching, and I had as lieve be a Cuckold as Husband to a
vain Woman.


Zoz, and that may be as you say Noble Sir. Lady pray what Gentleman's this --
Noble Sir, I am your most humble servant.


Oh cry you mercy Sir.


No offence dear Sir I protest, 'slife I believe 'tis the Master of the house,
he looked with such authority -- why who cares, let him look as big as the four
Winds, East, West, North, and South, I care not this, -- therefore, I Beg your
Pardon Noble Sir.


Pray spare your Hat and Legs Sir, till you come to Court, they are thrown away
in the City.


O Lord dear Sir, 'tis all one for that, I value not a Leg nor an Arm amongst
Friends, I am a Devonshire Knight Sir all the world knows, a kind of Country
Gentleman, as they say, and am come to Town to Marry my Lady Knowells Daughter.


I'm glad on it Sir.


She's a deserving Lady Sir, if I have any Judgment, and I think I understand a
Lady Sir in the right Honourable way of Matrimony.


Well Sir, that is to say you have been married before Sir, and what's all this
to me good Sir?


Married before incomparable Sir! not so neither, for there's difference in men
Sir.


Right, Sir, for some are Wits, and some are Fools!


As I hope to breath 'twas a saying of my Grandmothers, who used to tell me
Sir, that bought Wit was best. I have brought money to Town for a small
purchase of that kind, for Sir, I would fain set up for a Country Wit -- Pray
Sir where live the Poets? for I would fain be acquainted with some of them.


Sir I do not know, nor do I care for Wits and Poets. Oh this will kill me
quite, I'll out of Town immediately.


But Sir, I mean your Fine railing Bully Wits, that have Vinegar, Gall and
Arsenick in 'em as well as Salt and Flame and Fire and the Devil and all.


Oh defend me! and what is all this to me Sir?


Oh Sir, they are the very Soul of Entertainment, and Sir, it is the prettiest
sport to hear 'em rail and baule at one another -- Zoz would I were a Poet.


I wish you were, since you are so fond of being railed at -- if I were able to
beat him I would be much angry -- but Patience is a Virtue, and I will into the
Country. --


'Tis all one case to me dear Sir, -- but I should have the pleasure of railing
again, cum privilegio, I love sighting with those pointless Weapons -- Zoz Sir,
you know if we men of quality fall out -- (for you are a Knight I take it) why
there comes a Challenge upon it, and ten to one some body or other is run
through the Gills, why a pox on it I say this is very damnable, give me Poets
Licence. --


Take him off in pity.


Indeed Railing is a Coin only currant among the Poets -- Sir Credulous. --


Oh blessed deliverance -- what a profane wretch is here, and what a lewd world
we live in -- oh London, London, how thou aboundest in Iniquity, thy Young men
are debauched, thy Virgins deflowered, and thy Matrons all turned Bawds! my Lady
Fancy, this is not company for you I take it, let us fly from this vexation of
spirit on the never-failing wings of discretion. --


How! marry thee to such a Fop say thou? oh egregious! -- as thou love
Lodwick let him not know his name, it will be dangerous, let me alone to evade
it.


I know his fiery temper too well to trust him with the secret.


Hark ye Sir, and do you intend to do this horrible thing? --


What thing, my Lady Knowell?


Why to marry your Daughter Sir.


Yes Madam.


To a beastly town Fool? Monstrum horrendum!


To any Fool, except a Fool of your Race, of your Generation. --


How! a Fool of my Race, my Generation! I know thou meanest my son, thou
contumelious Knight, who let me tell thee, shall marry thy Daughter invito te,
that is, (to inform thy obtuse understanding) in spite of thee, yes shall
marry her, though she inherits nothing but thy dull Enthusiasmes, which had she
been legitimate she had been possessed with.


Oh abominable! you had best say, she is none of my Daughter, and that I was a
Cuckold. --


If I should Sir, it would not amount to Scandalum Magnatum, I'll tell thee
more; thy whole Pedigree, -- And yet for all this Lodwick shall marry your
Daughter, and yet I'll have none of your Nephew. --


Shall he so, my Lady Knowell? I shall go near to outtrick your Ladyship for
all your Politic Learning. 'Tis past the Canonical hour as they call it, or I
would marry my Daughter instantly, I profess we ne'er had good days since
these Canonical Fopperies came up again, mere Popish tricks to give our
Children time for disobedience, -- the next Justice would have served turn, and
have done the business at any hour, but Patience is a Virtue -- Roger, go after
Mr. Fain-love, and tell him I would speak with him instantly.


Come come Ladies, we lose fleeting time, upon my Honour we do, for Madam as I
said I have brought the Fiddles, and design to Sacrifice the entire Evening to
your Ladyships Diversion.


Incomparable Lady, that was well thought on, Zoz, I long to be jigging.


Fiddles, Good Lord! why what am I come to! -- Madam I take it, Sir Patient
Fancies Lady is not a proper Person to make one at immodest Revellings, and
Profane Masqueradings.


Why? ah 'tis very true Sir, but we ought not to offend a Brother that is weak,
and consequently a Sister.


An Excellent Lady this, but she may be corrupted, Ah she may fall, I will
therefore without delay carry her from this wicked Town.


Come come Gentlemen, let's in, Mr Fancy you must be my man -- Sir Credulous
come, and you sweet Sir, come Ladies, -- Nunc est saltandum, c.


Maundy fetch my Clothes, I'll dress me and out of Town instantly -- persuade
me not. Roger, is the Coach ready Roger?


Yes Sir, with four horses.


Out of Town! oh I'm undone then, there will be no hopes of ever seeing
Wittmore. Maundy oh help me to contrive my stay, or I'm a dead Woman. -- Sir,
sure you cannot go and leave your affairs in Town.


Affairs! what Affairs?


Why your Daughter's Marriage Sir, -- and -- Sir, -- not Sir but that I desire
of all things in the World the blessing of being alone with you, far from the
noise and lewd disorders of this filthy Town.


Most excellent Woman! ah thou art too good for sinful Man, and I will
therefore remove thee from the temptations of it -- Maundy, my Clothes -- Mr.
Fain-love, I will leave Isabella with my Lady Fidget my Sister, who shall to
morrow see you married to prevent farther inconveniences.


What shall I do?


Madam, I have a design, which considering his Spleen, must this time do our
business -- 'tis --


I like it well, about it instantly, hah -- Roger.


My Face! why what ails my Face! hah! --


See Mr. Fain-love, oh look on my dear, is he not strangely altered?


Most wonderfully.


Altered, hah -- why where, why how altered? -- hah, Altered say you? --


Lord how wildly he stares!


Hah, stare, -- wildly? --


Are you not very sick Sir?


Sick! oh heavens forbid -- how does my dearest Love?


Me thinks I feel my self not well of the sudden -- ah -- a kind of shivering
seizes all my Limbs, -- and am I so much changed.


All over Sir, as big again as you were, --


Your Face is Frightfully blown up, and your dear Eyes just starting from your
head, oh I shall sound with the apprehension on it.


My head and Eyes so big say you, -- oh I am wondrous sick of the sudden, --
all over say you -- oh oh -- Ay I perceive it now, my Senses fail me too.


How Sir, your Senses fail you?


That's a very bad sign, believe me.


Oh Ay, for I can neither feel, nor see this mighty growth you speak off.


Alas I'm sorry for that Sir.


Sure 'tis impossible, I'll run and fetch a Glass Sir.


Oh stay, I would not for the world he should see what a Monster he is, -- and
is like to be before to Morrow.


I'll sit him with a Glass -- I'll warrant ye it shall advance our design.


Good Heaven what ails you Sir?


Oh -- oh -- 'tis so.


Lord how he's swoln? see how his Stomach struts?


Ah 'tis true, though I perceive it not.


Not perceive it Sir! put on your Clothes and be convinced -- try 'em Sir.


Ah it needs not, -- mercy upon me --


I'll warrant I'll show his Face as big as a Bushel.


Oh, oh, -- I'm a dead man, have me to bed, I die away, undress me instantly,
send for my Physicians, I'm Poisoned, my Bowels burn, I have within an Aetna,


And all the drunken Universe does run on wheels. ha ha ha.

Ah my dear Creature, how finely thou hast brought him to his journies end!


There was no other way but this to have secured my happiness with thee, there
needs no more then that you come anon to the Garden back-gate, where you shall
find admittance, -- Sir Patient is like to lie alone to night.


Till then 'twill be a Thousand Ages.


At Games of Love Husbands to cheat is fair, 'Tis the Gallant we play with on
the square.


COme one Dance more, and then I think we shall have sufficiently teased the
Alderman, and 'twill be time to part. -- Sir Credulous, where's your Mistress?


Within a mile of an Oak, dear Madam, I'll warrant you, -- well, I protest and
vow, sweet Lady, you dance most Nobly, -- Why, you Dance -- like -- like a --
like a Hasty Pudding before Jove.


SItting by yonder River Side
Parthenia thus to Cloe cried,
Whilst from the fair Nymphs Eyes apace
Another Stream o'reflow'd her Beauteous Face.
Ah happy Nymph, said she, that can
So little value that false Creature man.
Oft the persidious things will cry,
Alas they burn, they bleed, they dye;
But if they're absent half a day,
Nay, let 'em be but one poor hour away,
No more they dye, no more complain,
But like unconstant wretches live again.
Well, have you considered of that business yet Isabella?


What business?


Of giving me admittance to night.


And may I trust your honesty?


Oh doubt me not, my Mother's resolved it shall be a match between you and I,
and that very consideration will secure thee, besides who would first sully the
Linen they mean to put on?


Away here's my Mother.


Madam I beg your pardon for my absence, the effects of my Obedience, not Will;
but Sir Patient is taken very Ill of the sudden, and I must humbly entreat your
Ladyship to retire, for rest is only essential to his recovery.


Congruously spoken upon my Honour. Oh the impudence of this Fellow your
Ladyships Husband, to espouse so fair a person only to make a Nurse of!


Alas Madam! --


A slave, a very household Drudge, -- Oh faugh, come, never grieve, -- for Madam,
his Disease is nothing but imagination, a Melancholy which arises from the
Liver, Spleen, and Membrane called Mesenterium, the Arabians name the distemper
Myrathial, and we here in England Hypochondriacal Melancholy; I could prescribe
a most potent Remedy, but that I am loath to stir the envy of the College.


Really Madam I believe, --


But as you say Madam, we will leave him to his repose, pray do not grieve too
much.


Death, would I had the consoleing her, 'tis a charming Woman!


Mr. Fancy your hand; Madam your most faithful Servant, -- Lucretia, come
Lucretia -- your Servant Ladies and Gentlemen. --


A Devil on her, would the nimbleness of her Ladyships Tongue were in her
Heels, she would make more hast away* oh I long for the blessed minute. --


Isabella, shall I find admittance anon?


On fair conditions.


Trust my Generosity, -- Madam your Slave. --


Madam, I would say something of your Charms and Celestial Graces, but that all
praises are as far below you, as the Moon in her Opposition is below the Sun,
-- and so Luscious Lady, I am yours, -- now for my Serenade, --


Maundy, have you commanded all the Servants to Bed?


Yes Madam, not a Mouse shall stir, and I have made ready the Chamber next the
Garden for your Ladyship.


Then there needs no more but that you wait for Wittmore's coming to the Garden
Gate, and take care no lights be in the House for fear of Eyes.


Madam I understand Lovers are best by dark, and shall be diligent, the Doctor
has secured Sir Patient by a sleeping Pill, and you are only to expect your
approaching happiness.


Leander raise your Soul above that little trifle Lucretia, -- cannot you guess
what better Fate attends you? -- fie, -- how dull you are! -- must I instruct
you in plain rightdown terms? -- and tell you -- that I propose you Master of
my fortune? -- now possibly you understand me.


I wish I did not Madam,
Unless I'd virtue to deserve the Bounty;
I have a Thousand faults Dissimulation hides,
Inconstant, wild, debauched as youth can make me.

All that will not do your business. --

Yet you would have my Daughter take you with all these faults, they're virtues
there, but to the name of Mother, they all turn retrograde, I can endure a man
As wild and as inconstant as she can,
I have a Fortune too that can support that Humour,
That of Lucretia does depend on me,
And when I please is nothing;
I'm far from Age or Wrinkles, can be Courted
By Men as gay and youthful as a new Summer's morn,
Beauteous as the first Blossoms of the Spring
Before the common Sun has kissed their sweets away,
If with salacious appetites I loved,

Faith Madam I could wish, --

That I were but Fifteen? but --
If there be inequality in years,
There is so too in Fortunes, that might add
A Lustre to my Eyes, Charms to my Person,
And make me fair as Venus, young as Hebe.

Madam you have enough to engage any unconquered heart, but 'twas, I thought,
with your allowance I disposed of mine, and 'tis a heart that knows not how to
change.


Then 'tis a foolish unambitious heart, unworthy of the Elevation it has not
Glorious Pride enough to aim at: -- Farewell Sir, -- when you are wiser, you
may find admittance.


Stay Madam. --


For what? to hear your Penitence? Forgive me Madam*
I will be a Villain, forget my vows of Love, made to Lucretia,
And Sacrifice both her, and those to interest.
Oh how I hate this whining and dissembling!

Do, Triumph over a wretched man, Lucretia.


How! Wretched in loving me so entirely, or that you cannot marry my Mother,
and be master of her mighty Fortune? 'Tis a temptation indeed, so between Love
and Interest, hang me if ever I saw so simple a look as you put on when my
Mother made Love to you.


You may easily guess the confusion of a man in my circumstances, to be
languishing for the loved Daughter, and pursued by the hated Mother, whom if I
refuse will ruin all my hopes of thee.


Refuse her! I hope you have more wit?


Lucretia, could she make a Monarch of me, I could not marry her.


And you would be so wise to tell her so?


I would no more abuse her, than I could love her.


Yet that last must be done.


How!


Dost believe me so wicked to think I mean in earnest? No, tell her me a fine
story of Love, and liking, gaze on her, kiss her hands, and sigh, commend her
face and shape, swear she's the miracle of the Age for wit, cry up her
Learning, vow you were an Ass, not to be sensible of her perfections all this
while, what a Coxcomb, to dote upon the Daughter when such charms were so
visible in the Mother? Faith she'll believe all this.


It may be so, but what will all this serve for?


To give us time and opportunity to deceive her, or I'm mistaken.


I cannot teach my Tongue so much deceit.


You may be a fool and cry, Indeed forsooth I cannot love, for alas I have lost
my heart, and am unworthy of your proffered blessings, -- do, and see her
marry me in spite to this Fop Easy, this Knight of Nonsense; no, no, dissemble
me handsomely and like a Gentleman, and then expect your good fortune.


Madam, your Mother's coming.


Away then, she must not see us together, she thinks you gon.


But must I carry off no comfort with me?


Will you expose me to the incensed jealousy of a Parent? go or I shall hate
ye, --


Now am I returned to my old trade again, fetch and carry my Ladies Lovers, I
was afraid when she had been married these night-works would have ended, but to
say truth, there's a Conscience to be used in all things, and there's no reason
she should languish with an old man when a young man may be had. -- The door
opens, he's come, --


This is some one whom I perceive Isabella has made the Confident to our
Amours. --


Oh the agreeable confusion of a Lover high with expectation of the approaching
bliss! What tremblings between joy and fear possess me? All my whole Soul is
taken up with Wittmore, I've no Idea's, no thoughts but of Wittmore, and sure
my tongue can speak no other language, but his name. -- Who's there?


Madam, 'tis I, and your expected Lover here -- I put him into your hands, and
will wait your commands in the next Chamber.


Where are you my dearest Creature?


Here, -- give me your hand, I'll lead you to those joys we both so long have
sight for.


Hah! to joys? sure she doth but dally with me, --


Why come you not on my Dear?


And yet, why this admission? and in the dark too, if she designed me none but
virtuous Favours? -- What damned temptation's this?


Are you bewitched, what is't that frights you?


I me fixed, Death, was ever such a Lover?
Just ready for the highest joys of Love,
And like a bashful Girl restrained by fear
Of an ensuing Infamy, -- I hate to Cuckold my own Expectations.

Heavens! what can you mean?


Death, what's this, -- sure 'tis not Virtue in me, -- Pray Heaven it be not
impotence! -- Where got I this damned honesty which I never found my self
master of till now? -- why should it seize me when I had least need on it?


What ails you? are you mad? -- we are safe, and free as Winds let loose to
ruffle all the Groves, what is't delays you then? Soft.


Pox of this thought of Wife, the very name destroys my appetite,
Oh with what vigour I could deal my Love
To some fair lewd, unknown,
To whom I'd never made a serious vow?

Tell me the Mystery of this sudden coldness? have I kept my Husband in Town
for this? Nay, persuaded him to be very sick to serve our purpose, and am I
thus rewarded! -- ungrateful man!


Hah, -- 'tis not Isabella's voice, -- your Husband say you? --


Is safe, from any fear of interrupting us.
Come -- these delays do ill consist with Love
And our desires; at least if they are equal.

Death 'tis the charming Mother!
What lucky Star directed me to night!
O my fair dear dissembler, let us haste
To pay the mighty Tribute due to Love.

Follow me then with careful silence, -- for Isabella's Chamber joins to this,
and she may hear us.

Not Flowers grow, nor smooth streams glide away,
Not absent Lovers sigh, nor breaks the day
More silently than I'll those joys receive,
Which Love and Darkness do conspire to give.

Well I have no mind to let this dear mad Devil Lodwick in to night.


Why Sister, this is not the first venture you have made of this kind, at this
hour, and in this place, these Arbours were they tell-tales, could discover
many pretty stories of your loves, and do you think they'll be less faithful
now? Pray trust 'em once again. Oh I do so love to hear Mr. Lodwick protest,
and vow, and swear, and dissemble, and when you don't believe him, rail at you,
-- a vads 'tis the prettiest man --


I have a strange apprehension of being surprised to night.


I'll warrant you, I'll sit on yon Bank of Pinks, and when I hear a noise I'll
come and tell you, so Lodwick may slip out at the back gate, and we may be
walking up and down as if we meant no harm.


You'll grow very expert in the arts of Love Fanny?


When I am big enough I shall do my endeavour, for I have heard you say, Women
were born to no other end than to love: And 'tis fit I should learn to live and
die in my calling, -- Come open the Gate or you'll repent it, we shall have my
Father marry you within a day or two to that ugly man that speaks hard words.
-- a yads I can't abide him.


What noise is that?


Why 'tis Mr. Lodwick at the Garden door, -- let him in whilst I'll to my
Flowery Bank and stand Sentinel. --


Who's there?

Speak low, who should it be but the kind fool her self who can deny you
nothing, but what you dare not take?

Not take! what's that? hast thou reserves in store?
-- Oh come and let me lead thee to thy Bed,
Or seat thee on some Bank of softer Flowers,
Where I may rifle all thy unknown store.

How! surely you're not in earnest? -- Do you love me?

Love thee! by thy dear self all that my Soul adores,
I'm all impatient Flame! all over Love!
-- You do not use to doubt, but since you do,
Come, and I'll satisfy thy obliging fears,
And give thee proofs how much my Soul is thine,
I'll breath it all anew into thy bosom, --
Oh thou art fit for the transporting Play,
All loose and wanton, like the Queen of Love
When she descends to meet the Youth in shades.

And are you Sir in earnest? can it be?

That question was severe, what means my Love!
What pretty art is this to blow my flame,
Are you not mine? did we not meet t'injoy?
I came not with more vigorous eager hast,
When our first Sacrifice to Love we paid,
Than to perform that Ceremony now.
Come do not let the Sacred Fire burn out
Which only was prepared for Love's rich Altar,
And this is the Divine, dark, silent Minute. --

Hold Ravisher, and know this saucy Passion
Has rendered back your interest. Now I hate ye,
And my Obedience to my Father's will
Shall marry me to Fain-love, and I'll despise ye.

Hah! Isabella! Death I have made sweet work, -- stay gentle maid, -- she'll
ruin all if she go -- stay -- she knew me, and cunningly drew me to this
discovery; I'll after her and undeceive her.


Pray Heaven I get undiscovered to my Chamber, where I'll make Vows against
this perjured Man; hah, sure he follows still; no Wood Nymph ever fled before a
Satyr, with half that trembling haste I flew from Lodwick, -- oh he has lost
his Virtue and undone me.


It is this Door that opened, and which I thought I had secured.


Oh insupportable, abominable, and not to be endured!


Hah my Father! I'm discovered and pursued, -- grant me to find the Bed.


Heavens 'twas my Husbands Voice, sure we're betrayed. It must be so, for what
Devil but that of Jealousy, could raise him at this late hour?


Hah, where am I, and who is't that speaks. --


So, he must know that I have made a Cuckold of him.


Within, call up my men, the Coachman, Groom, and Butler; the Footmen, Cook and
Gardener, bid 'em all rise and Arm, with long Staff, Spade and Pitchfork, and
sally out upon the wicked.


Short! what a death shall I dye, -- is there no place of safety hereabouts --
for there is no resisting these unmerciful Weapons.


A mans Voice!


I know of none, nor how to prevent your discovery.


Oh oh lead me forward, I'll lye here on the Garden side, out of the hearing of
this Hellish Noise.


Hah Noise -- what means he?


Nay I know not, is there no escaping? --


Who can they be that talk thus? sure I have mistook my chamber.


Oh he's coming in -- I'm ruined, what shall we do? here -- get into the Bed
-- and cover your self with the clothes -- quickly -- oh my Confusion will
betray me.


Pray go back Sir, my poor Lady will be frighted out of her wits at this danger
you put your self into, the noise shall be stilled.


Oh what's the matter with my Love, what, do you mean to murder him? oh lead
him instantly back to his Bed.


Oh oh, no, I'll lye here -- put me to Bed, oh I faint, -- my Chamber's possessed
with twenty thousand evil Spirits.


Possessed! what sickly Fancy's this?


Ah the house is beset, surrounded and confounded with profane tinkling, with
Popish Horn-Pipes and Jesuitical Cymballs, more Antichristian and Abominable
then Organs, or Anthems.


Yea verily, and surely it is the spawn of Cathedral Instruments plaid on by
Babylonish Minstrells, only to disturb the Brethren.


Aye 'tis so, call up my Servants, and let them be first chastised and then
hanged, accuse 'em for French Papishes, that had a design to fire the City, or
any thing -- oh I shall dye -- lead me gently to this Bed.


To hinder him will discover all -- stay Sir. --


Hah my Lady turned rebellious!


A Man, and in my Virtuous Lady Mothers Chamber! how fortunate was I to light
on this discovery!


Well, Sir, -- since you have seen him, I beseech you for my sake, Dear, Pardon
him this one time.


Thou beg his Pardon? oh was ever heard such Impudence!


Indeed my Love, he is to blame, but we that are judicious should bear with the
frailties of Youth.


Oh insupportable Audacity! -- what can thou say false Woman?


Truly not much in his defence my dear.


Oh cunning Devil. --


But Sir, to hide the weakness of your Daughter, I have a little strained my
Modesty. --


Heavens! what says she? --


'Tis Isabella's Lover Sir, whom I've concealed.


A good hint to save both our Credits.


How Mr. Fain-love mean you?


Aye my dear, Mr. Fain-love.


Isabella here! must she know too what a fine inconstant Dog I am? --


Lodwick! and in my Mothers Chamber! may I believe my Eyes?


But how got he hither -- tell me that! oh Youth, Youth, to what degree of
wickedness art thou arrived?


She appointed him to come this night Sir, and he going to her Chamber, by
mistake came into mine, it being the next to her's.


But Lord Sir, had you heard how my Lady schooled him, whilst I ran down to
fetch a light!


Now does my Conscience tell me, I am a damned Villain. --


But the poor Man presently perceived his mistake, and begged my Pardon in such
feeling terms -- that I vow I had not the heart to deny it him.


Oh Traitor! would thou had been that Ravisher I took thee for, rather then
such a Villain -- false! and with my Mother too!


And just then Sir you came to the door, and lest you should see him, entreated
me to hide him from your Anger, -- the offence is not so heinous Sir,
considering he's so soon to marry her.


-- Well Sir, and what have you to say in your defence? -- hah -- how Mr.
Knowell! -- worse and worse -- why how came you hither Sir? hah, --


Not Wittmore! oh I am ruined and betrayed.


Hah, Isabella here too! --


Yes Sir, to justify her Innocence. --


Hah! Innocence! and justify! take her away, go out of my sight thou limb of
Satan, -- take her away I say, I'll talk with you to morrow, Lady fine tricks
-- I will. --


-- And I'll know before I sleep the mystery of all this, and who 'twas this
faithless Man sent in his room to deceive me in the Garden. --


A plague of all ill-luck -- how the Devil came she hither? I must follow and
reconcile her. --


Nay Sir, we must not part so till I have known the truth of this business I
take it.


Truth Sir, oh all that your fair Lady has said, Sir, I must confess, her Eyes
have wounded me enough with Anger, you need not add more to my shame. --


Some little comfort yet that he proved indeed to be Isabella's Lover: oh that
I should mistake so unluckily!


Why, I thought it had been Mr. Fain-love.


By all that's good, and so did I.


I know you did Madam or you had not been so kind to me: your servant dear
Madam, --


Pray Sir let him go, oh how I abominate the sight of a man that could be so
wicked as he has been!


Ha, -- good Lady, excellent woman, well Sir for my Ladies sake I'll let you
pass with this, but if I catch you here again, I shall spoil your intrigues,
Sir, marry shall I, and so rest ye satisfied Sir. --


At this time, I am Sir -- Madam a thousand blessings on you for this goodness.
--


Ten thousand Curses upon thee, -- go boast the ruin you have made.


Come, no more anger now my Lady; the Gentleman's sorry you see, I'll marry my
pert Huswife to morrow for this, -- Maundy see the Gentleman safe out, -- ah --
put me to Bed, ah -- this nights work will kill me, ah, ah --


How, Mr. Fain-love? it cannot be. --


Indeed Sister 'tis the same for all he talks so, and he told me his coming was
but to try your virtue only.


That Fain-love whom I am so soon to marry! and but this day courted me in
another Dialect!


That was my Policy Madam, to pass upon your Father with. But I'm a Man that
knows the value of the Fair, and saw charms of Beauty and of wit in you, that
taught me to know the way to your heart was to appear my self, which now I do.
Why did you leave me so unkindly but now?


Hah, what's this? whilst I was grafting horns on another head, some kind
friend was doing that good office for me.


Sure 'tis Wittmore! -- oh that dissembler -- this was his Plot upon my Lady,
to gain time with Isabella.


And being so near my happiness, can you blame me, if I made a trial whether
your Virtue were agreeable to your Beauty, great, and to be equally adored?


Death, I've heard enough to forfeit all my patience -- Draw Sir and make a
trial of your Courage too. --


Hah! what desperate fool art thou?


One that will see thee fairly damned e're yield his Interest up in Isabella --
oh thou false Woman!


This sure is extraordinary, or the Devil's in it, and I'll ne'er trust Serenade
more. THou grief of my heart, and thou Pearl of my Eyes,
D'on on Flannel Petticoat quickly, and rise:
And from thy resplendent window discover
A face that would mortify any young Lover:
For I like great Jove Transformed do woo,
And am Amorous Owl, To wit to woo, to wit to woo.
A Lover Ads Zoz is a sort of a tool
That of all things you best may compare to an Owl:
For in some dark shades he delights still to sit,
And all the night long he cries Wo to wit.
Then rise my bright Cloris and d'on on ship-shoe:
And hear thy Amorous Owl chant, Wit to woo, wit to woo.
-- Well, this won't do, for I perceive no Window open, nor Lady-bright appear,
to talk obligingly, -- perhaps the Song does not please her, you
Ballad-singers, have you no good Songs of another fashion?


Yes Sir, several, Robin, -- Hark how the Waters fall, fall, fall, --


How Man! Zoz, remove us farther off, sor fear of wetting.


No no, Sir, I only gave my fellow a hint of an excellent Ballad that begins --
Ill wodded joys how quickly do you fade.


Aye, aye that, we will have that, -- Ill wodded joys how quickly do you fade, --
Windows open, now, now show your capering tricks.


Verily, verily, here be these Babes of Perdition, these Children of Iniquity.


A pox of your Babes and Children, they are men and Sons of Whores whom we must
bang confoundedly, for not letting honest godly People rest quietly in their
Beds at Midnight.


Who's there?


There with a Pox to you, cannot a Right-worshipful Knight that has been sick
these Twenty Years with taking Physic, sleep quietly in his own House for you,
and must we be raised out of our Beds to quiet your Hell-pipes in the Devil's
name?


Down with Gog and Magog, there, there's the rotten Bell-wether that leads the
rest astray, and defiles the whole flock.


Hang your Preaching and let's come to him, we will maule him.


Oh Quarter Quarter, Murder, help, Murder, Murder.


Damn these Rascals who e're they were, that so unluckily redeemed a Rival
from my fury, -- Hah, they are here, -- Egad I'll have one touch more with 'em,
-- the dogs are spoiling my designed Serenade too -- have amongst ye, -- Sir
Credulous how is't?


Who's there, Lodwick! Oh dear Lad, is't thou that hast redeemed me from the
enchanted Cudgels that demolished my triumphant Pageant, and confounded my
Serenade? Zoz, I'm half killed man, -- I have never a whole Bone about me
sure.


Come in with me -- a plague upon the Rascal that. escaped me.


Married to morrow! and leave my Mother the possession of Leander? I'll die a
thousand Deaths first, -- How the Fool haunts me!


Nay delicious Lady, you may say your Pleasure, but I will justify the Serenade
to be as high a piece of Gallantry as was ever practised in our Age, though not
comparable to your Charms and Celestial Graces, which should I praise as I
ought, it would require more time than the Sun employs in his Natural motion
between the Tropicks; that is to say a whole Year, (for by the way, I am no
Copernican) for, Dear Madam, you must know my Rhetoric Master, -- I say my
Rhetoric Master who was --


As great a Coxcomb as your self, -- pray leave me I am serious, -- I must go
seek out Lodwick.


Leave ye! I thank you for that I'faith, before I have spoke out my speech,
therefore I say Divine Lady -- because my Rhetoric Master commanded the
frequent use of Hypallages, Allegories, and the richest Figures of that
beauteous Art, -- because my Rhetoric, --


I must leave the Fool, follow if you dare, for I have no leisure to attend
your nonsense.


What, alone Sir Credulous? I left you with Lucretia.


Lucretia! I'm sure she makes a very Tarquinius Sextus of me, and all about
this Serenade, -- I protest and vow, incomparable Lady, I had begun the
sweetest Speech to her -- though I say it, such Flowers of Rhetoric -- it would
have been the very Nosegay of Eloquence, so it would; and like an ungrateful
illiterate Woman as she is, she left me in the very middle on it, so snuffy I'll
warrant.


Be not discouraged Sir, I'll adapt her to a reconciliation, Lovers must
sometimes expect these little Belli-fugaces, the Grecians therefore truly named
Love Glucupicros Eros.


Nay bright Lady, I am as little discouraged as another, but I'm sorry I gave
so extraordinary a Serenade to so little purpose.


Name it no more, 'twas only a Gallantry mistaken, but I'll accelerate your
felicity, and to morrow shall conclude the great dispute, since there is such
Volubility and Vicissitude in Mundan affairs. --


Sir Credulous, whither away so fast?


Zoz, what a Question's there, dost not know I am to untie the Virgin Zone to
morrow, that is, barter Maiden-heads with thy Sister, that is, to be Married to
her man, and I must to Lincolns-Inne to my Counsel about it.


My Sister just now told me of it, but Sir, you must not stir.


Why what's the matter?


Have you made your Will?


My Will! no, why my Will man?


Then for the good of your Friends and Posterity stir not from this place.


Good Lord, Lodwick, thou art the strangest Man, -- what do ye mean to fright a
body thus?


You remember the Serenade last night?


Remember it! Zoz I think I do, here be the marks on it sure. --


Ads me, your head's broke.


My head broke! why 'twas a hundred to one but my neck had been broke.


Faith not unlikely, -- you know the next House is Sir Patient Fancy's;
Isabella too you know is his Daughter.


Yes, yes she was by, when I made my dumb Oration.


The same, -- this Lady has a Lover, a mad, furious, sighting killing Hector,
(as you know there are enough about this Town) this Monsieur supposing you to
be a Rival, and that your Serenade was addressed to her --


Enough, I understand you, set those Rogues on to murder me.


Would 'twere no worse.


Worse! Zoz man, what the Devil can be worse?


Why he has vowed to kill you himself where-ever he meets you, and now waits
below to that purpose.


Sha, sha, if that be all I'll to him immediately, and make Affidavit I never
had any such design. Madam Isabella? ha, ha, alas poor man, I have some body
else to think on.


Affidavit! why he'll not believe you, should you sweat your heart out, some
body has possessed him that you are a damned Fool, and a most egregious Coward, a
fellow that to save your life, will swear any thing.


What cursed luck's this! -- why how came he to know I lived here?


I believe he might have it from Leander who is his friend.


Leander, I must confess I never liked that Leander, since yesterday.


He has deceived us all that's the truth on it, for I have lately found out too,
that he's your Rival, and has a kind of a --


Smattering to my Mistress, hah, and therefore would not be wanting to give me
a lift out of this world, but I shall give him such a go-by -- my Lady Knowell
understands the difference between Three thousand a year and -- prithee what's
his Estate?


Shaw -- not sufficient to pay Surgeons Bills.


Alas poor Ratt, how does he live then?


Hang him, the Ladies keep him, 'tis a good handsome fellow and has a pretty
Town Wit.


He a Wit! what, I'll warrant he writes Lampoons, rails at Plays, curses all
Poetry but his own, and mimics the Players -- ha,


Some such common Notions he has that deceive the Ignorant Rabble, amongst whom
he passes for a very smart Fellow, -- 's life he's here.


Why -- what shall I do, he will not affront me before company? hah!


Not in our house Sir, -- bear up and take no notice on it.


No notice, quoth he? why my very fears will betray me.


Let me alone, -- Lodwick, I met just now with an Italian Merchant, who has
made me such a Present!


What is't prithee?


A sort of specific Poison for all the Senses, especially for that of
smelling, so that had I a Rival, and I should see him at any reasonable
distance, I could direct a little of this Scent up to his Brain so subtlely,
that it shall not fail of Execution in a day or two.


How -- Poison!


Nay should I see him in the midst of a thousand People, I can so direct it
that it shall assault my Enemies Nostrils only, without any effects on the rest
of the Company.


Oh -- I'm a dead man!


Is't possible?


Perhaps some little sneezing or so, no harm; but my Enemy's a dead man Sir,
killed.


Why, this is the most damnable Italian trick I ever heard of; why this outdoes
the famous Poysoner Madam Brenvilliers, well, here's no jesting I perceive
that, Lodwick.


Fear nothing, I'll secure you. Wittmore! how is't friend! thou look cloudy.


You'll hardly blame me Gentlemen, when you shall know what a Damned
unfortunate Rascal I am.


Prithee what's the matter?


-- Why I am to be Married Gentlemen, Married to Day.


How, Married! nay Gad then thou'st reason, -- but to whom prithee?


There's the Devil on it again, to a fine young, fair, brisk Woman that has all
the temptations Heaven can give her.


What pity 'tis they should be bestowed to so wicked an end! Is this your
intrigue that has been so long concealed from your Friends?


We thought 't had been some kind Amour, something of Love and Honour.


Is she Rich? if she be wondrous Rich, we will excuse thee.


Her Fortune will be suitable to the Jointure I shall make her.


Nay then 'tis like to prove a hopeful Match, -- what a Pox can provoke thee
to this, dost love her?


No there's another Plague, I am cursedly in love elsewhere, and this was but a
false address to hide that real one.


How, love another? in what quality, and manner?


As a man ought to Love, with a good substantial Passion, without any design
but that of right-down honest Enjoyment.


Aye, now we understand thee, this is something! ah friend! I had such an
adventure last night! -- you may talk of you intrigues and substantial
Pleasures, but if any of you can match mine, -- Egad I'll forswear womankind.


An adventure! prithee where?


What, last night, when you rescued me from the Billbo-blades? indeed ye looked
a little furiously.


I had reason, I was just then come out of a Garden from fighting with a man
whom I found with my Mistress, and I had at least known who't had been but for
the coming of those Rascals that set on you, who parted us, whilst he made his
escape in the crowd.


Death! that was I, who for fear of being known got away, was't he then that I
fought with, and whom I learnt loved Isabella!


You must know Gentlemen, I have a sort of a Matrimonial kindness for a very
pretty woman, she whom I tell you I disturbed in the Garden, and last night she
made me an assignation in her Chamber: when I came to the garden Door by which
I was to have admittance, I found a kind of Necessary called a Bawdy
waiting-woman, whom I follow'd, and thought she would have conducted me to the
right woman; but I was luckily and in the dark led into a Ladies Chamber, who
took me for a Lover she expected, -- I found my happy mistake, and would not
undeceive her.


This could be none but Lucia.


Do? why what dost think? all that a man inspired by Love could do, I
followed all the Dictates of Nature, Youth and Vigour!


Oh hold my heart -- or I shall kill the Traitor.


Follow'd all the Dictates of Nature, Youth, and Vigour? prithee what's that?


I kissed a thousand times her balmy Lips, and greedily took in the nimble Sighs
she breathed into my Soul!


Oh I can scarce contain my self.


Pshaw, is that all man?


I clasped her lovely Body in my Arms, and laid my Bosom to her panting Breast.
Trembling she seemed all love and soft desire,
And I all burning in a youthful fire.

Bless us, the Man's in a Rapture.


Damnation on them both.


Well to the point man, what did do all this while*


Faith I fancy he did not sleep, Sir Credulous.


No friend, she had too many Charms to keep me waking.


Had she so? I should have begged her Charms pardon, I tell her that though.


Curse on my sloth, oh how shall I dissemble?


Thy adventure was pretty lucky -- but Wittmore thou lost not relish it.


My Mind's upon my Marriage Sir, -- if I thought he loved Isabella I would
marry her to be revenged on him, at least I'll vex his Soul as he has tortured
mine, -- well Gentlemen, you'll dine with me, -- and give me your opinion of my
Wife.


Where dost thou keep the Ceremony?


At Sir Patient Fancies, my Father in Law.


How! Sir Patient Fancy to be your Father in Law?


My Uncle!


He's fired -- 'tis his Daughter Sir I am to Marry. --


Isabella! Leander, can it be? -- can she consent to this? and can she love
you?


Why Sir, what do you see in me, should render me unfit to be beloved?


Married to day! by Heaven it must not be, Sir.


Why Sir, I hope this is not the kind Lady who was so soft, so sweet, and
charming last night.


Hold Sir -- we yet are friends. --


And might have still been so, had thou not basely robbed me of my Interest.


Death! do you speak my Language?


No, take a secret from my angry heart, which all its friendship to thee could
not make me utter, -- it was my Mistress you surprised last night.


Hah, my Lady Fancy his Mistress? Curse on my prating Tongue. --


What a Devil's all this, hard words, heart-burnings, resentments and all that?


You are not quarrelling I hope, my friends?


All this Sir we suspected, and smok't your borrowing Money last night, and what
I said was to gain the mighty secret that had been so long kept from your
friends -- but thou hast done a baseness. --


Hold, what's the matter?


Did you not rob me of the Victory then I've been so long a toiling for?


If I had it would not have made her guilty, nor me a Criminal, she taking me
for one she loved, and I her for one that had no interest in my friend, and who
the Devil would have refused so fine a woman? nor had I, but that I was
prevented by her Husband, -- but Isabella Sir you must resign.


I will, provided that our friendship's safe; I am this day to marry her, and
if you can find a means to do it in my room, I shall resign my interest to my
friend, for 'tis the lovely Mother I adore!


And was it you I fought with in the Garden?


Yes, and thereby hangs a tale of a mistake almost equal to thine, which I'll
at leisure tell you.


I'm glad they're friends, Zoz here was like to have been a pretty business,
what Damnable work this same womankind makes in a Nation of Fools that are
Lovers!


Look ye, I'm a Damned dull fellow at invention, I'll therefore leave you to
contrive matters by your selves, whilst I'll go try how kind fortune will be to
me this Morning, and see in what readiness my Bride is; what you do must be
thought on suddenly, I'll wait on you anon, and let you know how matters go,
-- I'm as impatient to know the truth of this, as for an opportunity to enjoy
Lucia.


Leander what shall I do?


You were best -- consult your Mother and Sister, women are best at intrigues
of this kind: but what becomes of me?


Let me alone to dispatch this fool, I long to have him out of the way, he
begins to grow troublesome -- but now my Mother expects you. --


Prithee be careful of me. --


What was this long whisper, something about me?


Why yes faith I was persuading him to speak to his friend about this business,
but he swears there's no hopes of a reconciliation, you are a dead man unless
some cleanly conveyance of you be soon thought on.


Why, I'll keep within doors and defy malice and foul weather.


O he means to get a warrant and search for stolen goods, prohibited
Commodities or Conventicles, there's a thousand civil pretences in this Town
to commit outrages -- let me see. --


Well I have thought, -- and of such a business, that the Devil's in it if you
don't say I am a man of intrigue.


What is't?


Ha ha ha, I must have leave to laugh to think how neatly I shall defeat this
son of a whore of a thunder thumping Hector.


Be serious Sir, this is no laughing matter, if I might advise, you should
steal into the Country, for two or three days till the business be blown over.


Lord, thou art so hasty and conceited of thy own invention, thou wilt not give
a man leave to think in thy company, why these were my very thoughts, nay more,
I have found a way to get off clever, though he watch me as narrowly as an
enraged Sergeant upon an escape.


That indeed would be a Master-piece.


Why, look ye, do ye see that great Basket there?


I do, -- this you mean. --


Very well, put me into this Basket, and cord me down, send for a couple of
Porters, hoist me away with a Direction, to an old Uncle of mine, one Sir
Anthony Bubleton at Bubleton-Hall in Essex, and then Whip slap dash, as Nokes
says in the Play, I'm gone and who's the wiser.


I like it well.


Nay lose no time in applauding, I'll in, the Carrier goes this morning,
farewell Lodwick. --


By all means Sir, -- Who's there, -- call a couple of Porters.


One word more, the Carrier lies at the Bell in Friday-street, pray take care
they set me not on my head. --


Come hither, cord up this Basket, and carry it where he shall direct --
Leander will never think he's free from a Rival till he have him in his
possession, -- To Mr. Leander Fancy's at the next door; say 'tis things for him
out of the Country. -- Write a direction to him on the Basket lid.


What's this? whither goes this Basket?


Ah Lord! they are come with the Warrant.


Only Books Madam offered me to buy, but they do not please me.


Books? nay then set down the Basket Fellows, and let me peruse 'em, who were
the Authors, and what their Language?


A Pox of all Learning I say, -- 'tis my Mother-in-Law.


Hold, hold Madam, they are only English, and some Law- French.


Oh faugh, how I hate that vile sort of reading! up with 'em again fellows, and
away.


God-a-mercy Law- French.


Law- French! out upon it, I could find in my heart to have the Porters bring it
back, and have it burnt for a Heresy to Learning.


Or thrown into the Thames, that it may float back to Normandy to have the
Language new modelled.


You say well, but what's all this ad Iphicli bonis, where's Sir Credulous all
this while? his affairs expect him.


So does Leander your Ladyship within.


Leander! Hymen, Hymenaee, I'll wait on him, Lodwick I am resolved you shall
marry Isabella too, I have a design in my head that cannot fail to give you the
possession of her within this two or three hours.


Such an Indulgence will make me the happiest of men, and I have something to
say to your Ladyship that will oblige you to hasten the design. --


Come in and let me know it.


Wittmore in the Garden say thou with Isabella! Oh Perjured man! it was by
his contrivance then I was betrayed last night.


I thought so too at first Madam, till going to conduct Mr. Knowel through the
Garden, he finding Mr. Wittmore there with Isabella, drew on him, and they both
fought out of the Garden, what mischief's done* I know not, -- but Madam, I
hope Mr. Knowel was not uncivil to your Ladyship: I had no time to ask what
past between you.


Oh name it not! I gave him all I had reserved for Wittmore! I was so possessed
with the thoughts of that dear false one, I had no sense free to perceive the
cheat, -- but I will be revenged, -- come let me end my Letter, we are safe
from interruption.


Yes Madam, Sir Patient is not yet up, the Doctors have been with him, and tell
him he is not so bad as we persuaded him.


-- And was he soft and kind? -- By all that's good she loves him, and they
contrived this meeting, -- my Pen and Ink -- I am impatient to unload my Soul
of this great weight of jealousy. --


Heaven! here's Sir Patient Madam.


Hah, -- and *tis too late to hide the Paper, -- I was just going to subscribe
my name.


Good morrow, my Lady Fancy, your Ladyship is well employed I see.


Indeed I was, and pleasantly too, I am writing a Love-letter Sir, -- but my
Dear, what makes you so soon up?


A Love-letter! -- let me see it.


I'll read it to you Sir.


What mean you Madam?


It was but yesterday you swore you loved me, and I poor easy fool believed,
but your last nights Infidelity has undeceived my heart, and rendered you the
falsest Man that ever Woman sight for. Tell me, how durst you, when I had
prepared all things for our enjoyment, be so great a Devil to deceive my
languishing expectations? And in your room send one that has undone --

Your --




Sure she's mad to read this to him.


Hum, -- I profess ingenuously -- I think it is indeed a Love-letter, -- my
Lady Fancy what means all this? as I take it here are Riddles and Mysteries in
this business.


Which thus Sir I'll unfold. --


How! undone -- your -- Isabella, meaning my Daughter?


Yes my Dear, going this morning into her Chamber, she not being there, I took
up a Letter that lay open on her Table, and out of curiosity read it, as near
as I can remember 'twas to this purpose, I writ it out now because I had a mind
thou shou'd'st see it; for I can hide nothing from thee.


A very good Lady I profess, to whom is it directed?


Why, -- Sir, -- What shall I say, I cannot lay it now on Lodwick. --
Fain-love, for whom else could it be designed? she being so soon to marry him.


Hah, -- Mr. Fain-love! so soon so fond and amorous!


Alas, 'tis the excusable fault of all young Women, thou know I was just
such another fool to thee, so fond -- and so in love. --


Ha, -- thou were indeed my Lady Fancy, indeed thou were, -- but I will keep
the Letter however, that this idle Baggage may know I understand her tricks and
intrigues. --


Nay then 'twill out: no I beseech you Sir give me the Letter, I would not for
the World Isabella should know of my theft, it would appear malicious in me, --
besides Sir, it does not befit your Gravity to be concerned in the little
quarrels of Lovers.


Lovers! Tell me not of Lovers, my Lady Fancy; with Reverence to your good
Ladyship, I value not whether there be love between 'em or not, Pious Wedlock
is my business, -- nay, I will let him know his own too, that I will, with your
Ladiship's permission.


How unlucky I am! -- Sir, as to his Chastisement, use your own discretion, in
which you do abound most plentifully, -- but pray let not Isabella hear of it,
for as I would preserve my duty to thee, by communicating all things to thee,
so I would conserve my good opinion with her.


Ah, what a blessing I possess in so excellent a Wife! and in regard I am every
day descending to my Grave, -- ah -- I will no longer hide from thee the
provision I have made for thee, in case I die. --


This is the Music that I longed to hear. -- Die! -- Oh that fatal word will
kill me --


Hah, -- now cannot I refrain joining with her in affectionate tears -- no but
do not weep for me my excellent Lady -- for I have made a pretty competent
Estate for thee, Eight thousand Pounds, which I have concealed in my Study
behind the Wainscot on the left hand as you come in.


Oh tell not me of transitory wealth, for I'm resolved not to survive thee,
Eight thousand Pounds say you? -- Oh I cannot endure the thoughts on it.


Eight thousand Pounds just, my dearest Lady.


Oh you'll make me desperate in naming it, -- is it in Gold or Silver?


In Gold my Dearest the most-part, the rest in Silver.


Good Heavens! why should you take such pleasure in afflicting me.


Behind the Wainscot, prithee be pacifi'd, -- thou make me lose my greatest
virtue, Moderation, to see thee thus, alas we're all born to die. --


Again of dying! uncharitable man, why do you delight in tormenting me? -- on
the left hand say you as you go in?


On the left hand my Love, had ever Man such a Wife?


Oh my Spirits fail me, -- lead me, or I shall faint, -- lead me to the Study
and show me where 'tis, -- for I am able to hear no more of it.


I will, if you will promise indeed and indeed, not to grieve too much.


Heaven grant me some kind opportunity to speak with Lucia! hah, she's here, --
and with her the fond Cuckold her Husband, -- Death, he has spied me, there's
no avoiding him. --


Oh, are you there Sir? -- Maundy look to my Lady, -- I take it Sir, you have
not dealt well with a person of my Authority and Gravity.


So, this can be nothing less than my being found out to be no Yorkshire Esq: a
Pox of my Geneva breeding, it must be so, what the Devil shall I say now?


And this disingenuous dealing does ill become the person you have represented,
I take it.


Represented! Aye there 'tis, would I were handsomely off of this business;
neither Lucia nor Maundy have any intelligence in their demure looks that can
instruct a man, -- why faith Sir, -- I must confess, -- I am to blame -- and
that I have -- a --


Oh Maundy! he'll discover all, what shall we do?


Have what Sir?


From my violent passion for your Daughter. --


Oh I'm all confusion. --


Egad I am in the wrong, I see by Lucia's looks.


That you have Sir, you would say, made a sport and May-game of the engagement
of your word; I take it Mr. Fain-love, 'tis not like the stock you came from.


Yes, I was like to have spoiled all, 'sheart what fine work I had made -- but
most certainly he has discovered my passion for his Wife, -- well, Impudence
assist me -- I made Sir a trifle of my word Sir, from whom have you this
intelligence?


From whom should I Sir, but from my Daughter Isabella?


Isabella! The malicious Baggage understood to whom my first Courtship was
addressed last night, and has betrayed me.


And Sir to let you see I utter nothing without precaution, pray read that
Letter.


Hah -- a Letter! what can this mean, -- 'tis Lucia's hand, with Isabella's
name to it, -- Oh the dear cunning Creature to make her Husband the messenger
too.


Yes Sir, you think we do not know of the appointment you made last night, but
having other affairs in hand than to keep your promise, you sent Mr. Knowel in
your room, -- false man.


I send him Madam! I would have sooner died.


Sir as I take it he could not have known of your designs and Rendezvous
without your information, -- were not you to have met my Daughter here to night
Sir?


Yes Sir, and I hope 'tis no such great crime, to desire a little conversation
with the fair person one loves, and is so soon to marry, which I was hindered
from doing by the greatest and most unlucky misfortune that ever arrived: but
for my sending him, Madam, credit me, there's nothing so much amazes me and
afflicts me, as to know he was here.


He speaks well, ingenuously he does. -- well Sir for your Father's sake, whose
memory I reverence, I will for once forgive you, but let's have no more
night-works, no more Gamballs I beseech you good Mr. Fain-love.


I humbly thank ye Sir, and do beseech you to tell the dear Creature that writ
this, that I love her more than life or fortune, and that I would sooner have
killed the man that usurped my place last night than have assisted him.


Were you not false then? -- Now hang me if I do not credit him.


Alas good Lady! how she's concerned for my Interest, she's even jealous for my
Daughter.


False! charge me not with unprofitable sins; would I refuse a Blessing, or
blaspheme a Power that might undo me? would I die in my full vigorous health,
or live in constant pain? All this I could, sooner than be untrue.


Ingenuously, my Lady Fancy, he speaks discreetly, and to purpose.


Indeed my Dear he does, and like an honest Gentleman, and I should think my
self very unreasonable not to believe him, -- and Sir I'll undertake your peace
shall be made with your Mistress.


Well, I am the most fortunate man in a Wife that ever had the blessing of a
good one.


Madam, let me fall at your feet, and thank you for this Bounty.


I profess, a wonderful good natured youth this, rise Sir, my Lady Fancy shall
do you all the kind Offices she can, of my word she shall.


I'm all obedience Sir, and doubtless shall obey you.


You must, indeed you must, and Sir I'll defer your Happiness no longer, this
day you shall be married.


This day Sir! -- why, the Writings are not made.


No matter Mr. Fainlove, her Portion shall be equivalent to the Jointure you
shall make her, I take it, that's sufficient.


A Jointure quoth he! it must be in New Eutopian Land then, -- and must I
depart thus, without a kind word, a look, or a billiet, to signify what I am to
expect?


Come, my Lady Fancy, shall I wait on you down to Prayer? Sir you will go get
your self in order for your Marriage, the great affair of human life, I must to
my mornings Devotion: come Madam.


Alas Sir, the sad discourse you lately made me, has so disordered me, and
given me such a pain in my head, I am not able to endure the Psalm singing.


This comes of your weeping, -- but we will omit that part of th'exercise, and
have no Psalm sung.


Oh by no means Sir, 'twill scandalize the Brethren, for you know a Psalm is
not sung so much out of devotion as 'tis to give notice of our Zeal and Pious
intentions, 'tis a kind of Proclamation to the Neighbour-hood, and cannot be
omitted, -- Oh how my head aches!


He were a damned dull Lover that could not guess what she meant by this.


Well, my Lady Fancy, your Ladyship shall be obeyed, -- come Sir, we will leave
her to her Women.


That kind look is a sufficient invitation. --


Maundy follow 'em down, and bring VVittmore back again, --


Oh my dear Lucia!


Oh VVittmore! I long to tell thee what a fatal mistake had like to have
happened last night.


My friend has told me all, and how he was prevented by the coming of your
Husband from robbing me of those sacred delights I languish for, oh let us not
lose inestimable time in dull talking, but haste to give each other the only
confirmation we can give, how little we are our own.


I see Lodwick's a Man of Honour, and deserves a heart if I had one to give
him.


Roger, is Prayer ready, Roger?


Truly nay Sir, for Mr. Goggle hath taken too much of the Creature this
Morning, and is not in case, Sir.


How mean you Sirrah, that Mr. Goggle is overtaken with Drink?


Nay Sir, he hath over-eaten himself at Breakfast only.


Alas and that's soon done, for he hath a sickly Stomach as well as I, poor man
-- where is Bartholomew, the Clerk, he must hold forth then to day.


Verily he is also disabled, for going forth last night by your commandment to
smite the wicked, he received a blow over the Pericranium. --


Why how now Sirrah, Latin! the Language of the Beast! hah -- and what then
Sir?


Which blow I doubt Sir, hath spoiled both his Praying and his Eating.


Hah! what a Family's here? no prayer to day!


Nay verily it shall all out, I will be no more the dark lanthorn to the deeds
of darkness.


What's the matter here?


Sir, this young Sinner has long been privy to all the daily and nightly
meetings between Mr. Lodwick and Isabella, and just now I took her tying a
letter to a string in the Garden which he drew up to his Window, and I have
born it till my Conscience will bear it no longer.


Hah, so young a Bawd! -- tell me Minion, -- private meeting! tell me truth I
charge ye, when? where? how? and how often? oh she's debauch't! -- her
reputation's ruined, and she'll need a double Portion. Come tell me truth, for
this little Finger here has told me all.


Oh Geminy Sir, then that little Finger's the hougesest great Liar as ever was.


Huzy huzy -- I will have thee whipped most unmercifully: Nurse fetch me the Rod.


Oh pardon me Sir this one time and I'll tell all.


Often! oh, my Family's dishonoured, tell me truly what he used to do there --
or I will have thee whipped without cessation, oh I'm in a cold Sweat, there's
my fine Maid, was he with her long?


Long enough.


Long enough! -- oh 'tis so, long enough -- for what, hah? my dainty Miss, tell
me, and did thou leave 'em?


They used to send me to gather flowers to make Nosegays Sir.


Ah, demonstration, 'tis evident if they were left alone that they were nought,
I know it, -- and where were they the while? in the close Arbour? -- Aye Aye --
I will have it cut down, it is the Pent-house of Iniquity, the very Coverlet of
Sin.


No Sir, they sat on the Primrose Bank.


What, did they sit all the while, or stand -- or -- lye -- or -- oh how was't?


They only sat indeed Sir Father.


And thou did not hear a word they said all the while?


Yes I did Sir, and the man talked a great deal of this, and of that, and of
the other, and all the while threw Jesimine in her bosom.


Well said, and did he nothing else?


No indeed, Sir Father, nothing.


But what did she say to the man again?


She said, let me see, -- Aye she said, Lord you'll forget your self, and stay
till somebody catch us.


Ah, very fine, -- then what said he?


Then he said, Well if I must be gon, let me leave thee with this hearty curse,
A Pox take thee all over for making me love thee so confoundedly.


Oh horrible!


-- Oh I could live here for ever, -- that was when he kissed her -- her hand
only, are you not a Damned woman for making so fond a Puppy of me?


Oh unheard of wickedness!


Would the Devil had thee and all thy family, e're I had seen thy Cursed face.


Oh I'll hear no more, -- I'll hear no more -- why what a Blasphemous wretch is
this!


Pray Sir Father, do not tell my Sister of this, she'll be horribly angry with
me.


No no, get you gon, -- oh I am heart-sick -- I'll up and consult with my Lady
what's fit to be done in this affair, oh never was the like heard of. --


O Madam, Sir Patient's coming up.


Coming up say you!


He's almost on the top of the Stairs, Madam.


What shall I do?


Oh Damn him, I know not, if he see thee here after my pretended Illness, he
must needs discover why I feigned, -- I have no Excuse ready, -- this Chamber's
unlucky, there's no avoiding him, here -- step behind the Bed, perhaps he has
only forgot his Psalm Book and will not stay long.


Oh, oh, pardon this interruption my Lady Fancy -- oh I am half killed, my
Daughter, my Honour -- my Daughter, my Reputation.


Good Heavens Sir, is she dead?


I would she were, her Portion and her Honour would then be saved, but oh I'm
sick at heart, Maundy, fetch me the Bottle of Mirabilis in the Closet, -- she's
wanton -- unchaste, Sodom, fair without and filthy within, what shall we


You said, that with the Red Cork Sir.


I meant the Blew, -- I know not what I say, -- in fine, my Lady let us marry
her out of hand, for she is fallen, fallen to Perdition; she understands more
wickedness then had she been bred in a profane Nunnery -- a Court, or a
Play-house,


I like this well; Ah Sir 'tis very true, therefore receive it plentifully and
thankfully.





Curse on my Dullness, -- oh -- these Sir, they are Mr. Fainloves -- he being
so soon to be Married, and being straitened for time, sent these to Maundy to be
new trimmed with Ribbon Sir -- that's all, -- take 'em away you naughty Baggage,
must I have men's things seen in my Chamber?


Nay nay, be not angry my little Rogue, I like the young mans frugality well,
-- go go your ways, -- get you gon -- and finefy your knacks, and tranghams,
and do your business -- go. --


Heavens, what means he!


Come hither to me my little Apes face, -- come -- come I say -- what must I
come fetch you? -- Catch her, catch her, catch her -- catch her, catch her,
catch her.


Oh Sir I am so ill I can hardly stir.


I'll make ye well, come hither ye Monky face, did it, did it, did it? alas for
it, a poor silly fools face, dive it a blow and I'll beat it.


You neglect your Devotion Sir.


No no, no Prayer to day my little Rascal, -- no Prayer to day -- poor Gogle's
sick -- come hither -- why you Refractory Baggage you, come or I shall touse
you, ingenuously I shall, tom tom or I'll whip it.


Have you forgot your Daughter Sir? and your disgrace?


A fiddle on my Daughter, she's a Chick of the old Cock I profess, I was just
such another wag when young, -- but she shall be married to morrow, a good
Cloak for her knavery; therefore come your ways, ye wag, we will take a nap
together, good faith my little Harlot I mean thee no harm.


No of my Conscience. --


Why then, why then you little Mongrel?


His precise worship is as it were disguised, the outward man is overtaken --
pray Sir lye down, and I'll come to you presently.


Away you wag, will you? will you -- catch her there, catch her.


I will indeed -- death there's no getting from him, -- pray lye down -- and
I'll cover thee close enough I'll warrant thee. -- Had ever Lovers such
spiteful Luck? hah -- surely he sleeps, bless the mistaken Bottle -- Aye, he
sleeps, -- whist, Wittmore. --


Plague of my over Care, what shall I do?


What's that, what noise is that? let me see, we are not safe, lock up the
doors, what's the matter, what Thunder Clap was that?


Pray Sir lye still, 'twas I was only going to sit down, and a sudden
giddiness took me in my head which made me fall and with me the Chair, there is
no danger near ye Sir -- I was just coming to sleep by you.


Go you 're a flattering Huswife, go, Catch her, catch her -- catch her. --


Oh how I tremble at the dismal apprehension of being discovered, had I secured
my self of the Eight thousand Pound, I would not value Wittmores being seen,
but now to be found out would call my Wit in question, for 'tis the fortunate
alone are wise. --


Was ever man so Plagued? -- hah -- what's this? -- confound my tell-tale
Watch, the Larum goes, and there* no getting to it to silence it; -- Damned
Misfortune!


Hah, what's that!


Heavens! what's the matter? we are destined to discovery.


What's that I say, what's that? let me see, let me see, what ringing's that,
oh let me see what 'tis.


Oh now I see my fate's inevitable, alas that ever I was born to see it.


Death she'll tell him I am here! nay he must know it, a Pox of all invention
and Mechanics, and he were damned that first contrived a Watch.


Hah, dost weep, -- why dost weep? I say what noise is that? what ringing? hah*
--


'Tis that, 'tis that my dear that makes me weep, alas I never hear this fatal
Noise but some dear friend dyes.


Hah, dyes! oh that must be I, Aye Aye, oh.


I've heard it Sir this two days, but would not tell you of it.


Hah! heard it these two days? oh, what is't, a death-watch? -- hah. --


Aye Sir, a death-watch, a certain Larum death-watch, a thing that has warned
our Family this hundred years, oh -- I'm the most undone Woman.


A blessing on her for a dear dissembling Gilt -- death and the Devil, will it
never cease?


A death-watch? ah, 'tis so, I've often heard of these things -- methinks it
sounds as if 'twere under the Bed. --


You think so Sir, but that 'tis about the Bed is my grief, it therefore
threatens you: oh wretched Woman!


Aye, aye, I'm too happy in a wife to live long: well, I will settle my House
at Hogsdowne with the Land about it, which is 500 l. a year upon thee, live or
dye, -- do not grieve. --


Oh I never had more cause, come try to sleep; your fate may be diverted --
whilst I'll to prayers for your dear health, -- I have almost run


I'm impatient of Freedom, yet so much happiness as I but now enjoyed without
this part of Suffering had made me too blessed, -- Death and Damnation! what
cursed luck have I?


What's the matter! what's the matter! has Satan broke his everlasting Chain
and got loose abroad to Plague poor Mortals? hah -- what's the matter?


Oh help, I dye, -- I faint -- run down and call for help.


My Lady dying? oh she's gon, she faints, -- what ho, who waits?


Oh, go down and bring me help, the door is locked, -- they cannot hear ye -- oh
-- I go -- I dye. --


Damn him! there's no escaping without I kill the Dog.


Lye still or we are undone. --


Hah, discovered!


Help, help my Lady dies. --


Oh I perceive how 'tis -- Alas she's dead, quite gone, oh rub her temples Sir.


Oh I'm undone then, --


Oh where's my Husband, my dearest Husband -- oh bring him near me.


I'm here my Excellent Lady. --


Oh the dear Lovely Hypocrite, was ever Man so near discovery? --


Oh how hard she presses my head to her Bosom!


Ah, that grasping hard Sir, is a very bad sign.


How does my good, my dearest Lady Fancy?


Something better now, give me more Air, -- that dismal Larum Death-watch had
almost killed me.


Ah Precious Creature, how she afflicts her self for me, -- come let's walk
into the Dining room, 'tis more Airy, from thence into my Study, and make thy
self Mistress of that Fortune I have designed thee, thou best of Women.


HHow came you by this Letter?


Miss Fanny received it by a string from his Window, by which he took up that
you writ to him this morning.


What means this nicety? forbear I say. --


You cannot be too fine upon your VVedding day.


Thou art mistaken, leave me, -- whatever he says here to satisfy my jealousy,
I am confirmed that he was false, yet this assurance to free me from this
intended marriage, makes me resolve to pardon him however guilty. --


Why? Is there any danger, but what's so visible, in those fair eyes?


And there may lie enough Sir, when they're angry. By what Authority do you
make this saucy visit?


That of a Husband Madam, I came to congratulate the mighty joy this day will
bring you.


Thou dare not marry me, there will be danger in it.


Why sure you do not carry Death in your embraces, I find no Terror in that
lovely shape, no Daggers in that pretty scornful look; that breath that utters
so much Anger now, last night was sweet as new-blown Roses are, -- and spoke
such words, so tender and so kind.


And can thou think they were addressed to thee?


No, nor could the shade of Night hide the confusion which disordered you, at
the discovery that I was not he, the blessed he you looked for.


Leave me, thou hated object of my Soul.


This will not serve your turn, for I must marry you.


Then thou art a fool, and draw thy ruin on; why I will hate thee, -- hate
thee most extremely.


That will not anger me.


Why, I will never let thee touch me, not kiss my hand, not come into my sight.


Are there no other women, kind, fair, and to be purchased? he cannot starve
for Beauty in this age, that has a stock to buy.


Why, I will Cuckold thee, look to it; I will most damnably.


So would you, had you loved me, in a year or two; therefore like a kind civil
Husband I've made provision for you, a friend, and one I dare trust my Honour
with, -- 'tis Mr. Knowel, Madam.


Lodwick! What Devil brought that name to his knowledge? -- can thou know
him, and yet dare hope to marry me?


We have agreed it, and on these conditions.


Thou basely injurest him, he cannot do a deed he ought to blush for: Lodwick
do this! Oh do not credit it, -- prithee be just and kind for thy own Honours
sake, be quickly so, the hasty minutes fly, and will anon make up the fatal
hour that will undo me.


'Tis true, within an hour you must submit to Hymen, there's no avoiding it.


Nay then be gone my poor submissive Prayers, and all that dull Obedience
custom had made us slaves to, -- do, Sacrifice me, lead me to the Altar, and
see if all the holy mystic words can Conjure from me the consenting syllable:
No, I will not add one word to make the charm complete, but stand as silent in
th'inchantiug Circle, as if the Priests were raising Devils there.


Enough, enough, my charming Isabella, I am confirmed.


Lodwick! what good Angel conducted thee hither?


Even honest Charles VVittmore here, thy friend and mine, no Bug-bear Lover he!


VVittmore! that friend I've often heard thee name? now some kind mischief on
him, he has so frighted me, I scarce can bring my sense to so much order, to
thank him that he loves me not.


Thou shalt defer that payment to more leisure, we're men of business now. My
Mother knowing of a Consultation of Physicians which your Father has this day
appointed to meet at his house, has bribed Monsieur Turboone his French Doctor
in Pension, to admit of a Doctor or two of her recommending, who shall amuse
him with discourse till we get our selves married; and to make it the more
ridiculous, I will release Sir Credulous from the Basket, I saw it in the Hall
as I came through, we shall have need of the fool.


'Twill do well.


Sir Credulous how is't man?


What am not I at the Carriers yet? -- Oh Lodwick thy hand, I'm almost
poisoned -- this Basket wants airing extremely, it smells like an old Ladies
Wedding-Gown of my acquaintance, -- but what's the danger past, man?


No, but there's a necessity of your being for some time disguised to act a
Physician.


How! a Physician! that I can easily do, for I understand Simples.


That's not material, so you can but Banter well, be very Grave, and put on a
starched countenance.


Banter? what's that, man?


Why Sir, talking very much, and meaning just nothing; be full of words without
any connexion, sense, or conclusion: come in with me, and I'll instruct you
farther.


Pshaw, is that all, say no more ont, I'll do it, let me alone for Bantering, --
but this same damned Rival? --


He's now watching for you without, and means to souse upon you, but trust to
me for your security, come away, I have your habit ready. Isabella. --


Marry Lucretia! is there no Woman in the City fit for you but the Daughter of
the most notorious fantastical Lady within the Walls?


Yet that fantastical Lady you thought fit for a Wife for me Sir.


Yes Sir, Foppery with Money had been something, but a poor Fop, hanged 'tis
abominable.


Pray hear me Sir.


Sirrah, Sirrah, you're a Jackanapes, ingenuously you are Sir, Marry Lucretia
quoth he!


If it were so Sir, where's her fault?


Why Mr. Coxcomb, all over. Did I with so much care endeavour to marry thee to
the Mother, only to give thee opportunity with Lucretia?


This Anger shows your great concern for me.


For my name I am, but 'twere no matter if thou were hanged, and thou deserve
it for thy lewd Cavaliering Opinion, -- they say thou art a Papist too, or at
least a Church of England Man, and I profess there's not a pin to choose, --
Marry Lucretia!


Were I querimonious, I should resent the affront this Balatroon has offered
me.


Dear Madam, for my sake do not anger him now.


Upon my Honour you are very free with my Daughter Sir.


How! she here! now for a Peal from her eternal Clapper, I had rather be
confined to an Iron-mill.


Sure Lucretia merits a Husband of as much worth as your Nephew Sir.


A better, Madam, for he's the lewdest Hector in the Town, he has all the Vices
of youth, Whoring, Swearing, Drinking, Damning, Fighting, -- and a Thousand
more, numberless and nameless.


Time Sir may make him more abstemious.


Oh never Madam! 'tis in's Nature, he was born with it, he's given over to
Reprobation, 'tis bred in the bone, -- he's lost.


This is the first good Office that ever he did me.


What think you Sir, if in defiance of your Inurbanity, I take him with all
these faults my self?


How Madam!


Without more Ambages Sir, I have considered your former desires, and have
consented to marry him, notwithstanding your exprobrations.


May I believe this Madam, and has your Ladyship that goodness! -- and hast
thou my Boy so much Wit? why this is something now, -- well he was ever the
best and sweetest natured youth, -- why what a notable wag's this? and is it
true my Boy, hah?


Yes Sir, I had told you so before had you permitted me to speak.


Well Madam, he is only sit for your excellent Ladyship, he is the prettiest
civillest Lad! -- well go thy ways; I shall never see the like of thee, no --
Ingeniously the Boy's made for ever, Two thousand Pounds a year besides Money,
Plate, and Jewels, made for ever. -- Well Madam, the satisfaction I take in
this Alliance, has made me resolve to give him immediately my Writings of all
my Land in Berkshire, Five hundred Pounds a year Madam, and I would have you
Married this morning with my Daughter, so one Dinner and one Rejoicing will
serve both.


That Sir, we have already agreed upon.


Well I'll fetch the Writings. Come Isabella, I'll not trust you out of my
sight to day.


Well then Madam, you are resolved upon this business of Matrimony.


Was it not concluded between us Sir this morning? and at the near approach do
you begin to fear?


Nothing Madam, since I'm convinced of your goodness.


You flatter Sir, this is mere Adulation.


No, I am that wild Extravagant my Uncle rendered me, and cannot live confined.


To one Woman you mean? I shall not stand with you for a Mistress or two, I
hate a dull morose unfashionable Blockhead to my Husband, nor shall I be the
first example of a suffering Wise Sir; Women were created poor obedient things.


And can you be content to spare me five or six nights in a week?


Oh you're too reasonable.


And for the rest, if I get drunk, perhaps I'll give to you: yet in my Drink
I'm damned ill natured too, and may neglect my duty, perhaps shall be so
wicked to call you cunning, deceitful, gilting, base, and swear you have undone
me, swear you have ravished from my faithful heart, all that could make it
blessed or happy.


How now* Lucretia?


Oh Madam, give me leave to kneel before, and tell you if you pursue the
Cruelty I hear you're going to commit, I am the most lost, most wretched Maid
that breaths; We two have plighted faiths, and should you marry him, 'twere so
to sin as Heaven would never pardon.


Rise fool.


Never, till you have given me back Leander, or leave to live no more, -- pray
kill me Madam; and the same
Flowers that deck your Nuptial-bed,
Shall serve to strew my Hearse, when I shall lie
A dead cold witness of your Tyranny.

Rise, I still designed him yours. -- I saw with pleasure Sir, your reclination
from my addresses, -- I have proved both your Passions, and 'twere unkind not
to Crown 'em with the due praemium of each others merits.


Can Heaven and you agree to be so bountiful?


Be not amazed at this turn, Rotat omne fatum, -- but no more, -- keep still
that mask of Love we first put on, till you have gained the Writings, for I
have no joy beyond cheating that filthy Uncle of thine, -- Lucretia wipe your
eyes, and prepare for Hymen, the hour draws near. Thalessio, Thalessio! as the
Romans cried.


May you be still admired as you deserve!


How Madam Lucretia, and in tears!


A little disgusted Sir, with her Father-in-law, Sir.


Oh is that all, hold up thy head Sweet-heart, thy turn's next, -- here Madam,
I surrender my Title, with these Writings, and with 'em my Joy, my Life, my
Darling, my Leander, -- now let's away, where's Mr. Fain-love?


He's but stepped into Cheapside to fit the Ring Sir, and will be here
immediately.


I have business anon about Eleven of the Clock, a Consultation of Physicians
to confer about this Carcass of mine.


Physicians Sir, what to do?


To do! why to take their advice Sir, and to follow it.


For what I beseech you Sir?


Why Sir for my health.


I believe you are not sick Sir, -- unless they make you so.


They make me so! -- do you hear him Madam, -- am not I sick Sir? not I, Sir
Patient Fancy sick?


He will destroy my design, -- how Mr. Fancy, not Sir Patient sick? or must he be
incinerated before you'll credit it?


Aye Madam, I want but dying to undeceive him, and yet I am not sick!


Sir I love your life, and would not have you die with Fancy and Conceit. --


Fancy and Conceit! do but observe him Madam, -- what do ye mean Sir, by Fancy
and Conceit?


He will ruin all, -- why Sir, -- he means --


Nay let him alone, let him alone, (with your Ladyships pardon) -- come Sir, --
Fancy and Conceit, I take it, was the Question in debate, --


I cannot prove this to you Sir, by force of Argument, but by demonstration I
will, if you will banish all your cozening Quacks, and take my wholesome
advice.


Do but hear him Madam, not prove it.


Sir he means nothing, -- not sick! alas Sir you're very sick.


Aye, Aye, your Ladyship is a Lady of profound knowledge -- why have I not had
the advice of all the Doctors in England, and have I not been in continual
Physic this Twenty years, -- and yet I am not sick! ask my dear Lady Sir, how
sick I am, she can inform you.


She does her endeavour Sir, to keep up the humour.


How Sir!


She wishes you dead Sir.


What said the Rascal? wishes me dead!


Sir she hates you.


How! hate me! what my Lady hate me?


She abuses your Love, plays tricks with ye, and cheats ye Sir.


Was ever so profane a wretch! what, you will not prove this neither?


Yes, by demonstration too.


Why thou saucy Varlet, Sirrah, Sirrah thank my Lady here I do not cudgel
thee, -- well I will settle the rest of my Estate upon her to morrow, I will
Sir, -- and thank God you have what you have Sir, make much on it.


Pardon me Sir, 'tis not my single opinion, but the whole City takes notice
on it, that I tell it you Sir is the effects of my Duty not Interest, pray give
me leave to prove this to you Sir.


What you are at your Demonstration again? -- come -- let's hear.


Why Sir, -- give her frequent opportunities, -- and then surprise her, -- or,
-- by pretending to settle all upon her, -- give her your Power, and see if she
do not turn you out of doors, -- or -- by feigning you are sick to death -- or
indeed by dying.


I thank you Sir, -- this indeed is Demonstration, I take it. --


I mean but feigning Sir, and be a witness your self of her sorrow, or
contempt.


Fain-love, come come you're tardy, let us away to Church.


Sir here is Doctor Turboone, and those other Doctors your Worship expected.


The Doctors already! -- well bring 'em up, come Madam, we have waited for your
Ladyship, -- bring up the Doctors Roger.


Wittmore, I have now brought that design to a happy conclusion for which I
married this formal Ass, I'll tell thee more anon, -- we are observed.


Oh Lodwick's come.


Doctor Turboon your Servant, I expected you not this two hours.


Nor had thee com Sir, bot for this wordy Gentelmen, whose affairs wode not permit
them to com at your hour.


Are they English pray?


Dis is Sir, -- English, bot a Collender born.


What a pox does the Fellow call me a Colander?


He means a High-Dutch man of the Town of Collen, Sir.


Sir I have heard of your Fame, -- Doctor pray entertain these Gentlemen till
my return, I'll be with you presently.


Sir I hope you go not forth to day?


Not far, Sir.


There is a certain Star has ruled this two days Sir, of a very malignant
Influence to persons of your Complexion and constitution, -- let me see --
within this two hours and six Minutes, its Malice will be spent, till then it
will be fatal.


Hum, reigned this two days? -- I profess and things have gon very cross with
me this two days, -- a notable man this.


Oh a very Profound Astrologer Sir, upon my Honour I know him.


But this is an affair of that importance Sir --


If it be more than health or Life, I beg your Pardon Sir.


Nay no offence Sir I beseech you, I'll stay Sir.


How! Sir Patient not see us Married?


You shall excuse me Madam.


This was lucky, oh Madam would you have my Dear venture out, when a malignant
Star reigns! not for the world.


No I'll not stir, had it been any Star but a malignant Star, I had waited on
your Ladyship. But these malignant Stars are very Pernicious stars. Nephew,
take my Lady Knowell; Mr. Fain-love my Daughter, and Bartholomew do you conduct
my Lady, the Parson stays for you, and the Coaches are at the door.


Sir, my Lady has sent for you.


Sir I'll be with you presently, Sir Credulous be sure you lug him by the Ears,
with any sort of stuff, till my return, I'll send you a friend to keep you in
Countenance.


Please you to sit Gentlemen?


Please you Sir.


Oh Lord sweet Sir, I hope you do not take me -- Nay I beseech you Noble Sir --
Reverend Sir.


By no means Sir, a stranger.


I beseech you -- Scavantissimi Doctores, -- incomparable Sir, -- and you -- or
you.


In truth Sir, these Complements are needless, I am something corpulent and love
my ease.


Generous Sir, you say well, therefore Conlicentia, as the Grecians have it.


-- Brother. --


Nay good Brother, -- Sir Patient. --


Ingeniously, not before you, Mr. Doctor.


Excuse me Sir, an Alderman, and a Knight. --


Both below the least of the Learned Society.


Since you will have it so.


Hum -- hum, most Worthy, and most Renowned -- Medicinae Professores, qui hic
assemblati estis; vos altra Mesioris, I am now going to make a Motion for the
Public good of us all, but will do nothing without your Doctorships
Approbation.


Judiciously concluded.


The question then is, Reverentissimi Doctores, whether -- for mark me, I come
to the matter in hand, hating long Circumstances of words; there being no
necessity as our Learned Brother Rabalis observes in that most notorious
Treatise of his called Garagantua, there is says he, no necessity of going over
the Hedge when the Path lies fair before ye; therefore as I said before, I now
say again coming to my Question, for as that admirable Welch Divine says in
that so famous Sermon of his, upon her Creat Cranfather Hadam and her Creat
Cranmother Heeve concerning the Happell, -- and her will warrant her, her will
keep to her Text still, -- so I stick close to my question, which is
Illustrissimi Doctores, whether it be not necessary to the Affair in hand -- to
take -- a Bottle, and if your Doctorships are of my opinion -- hold up your
Thumbs. Cabalists.


Which shall be put in Act forthwith -- I like this man well, he does nothing
without mature deliberation.


By your leaves Gentlemen, -- Sir Crodulous --


Oh -- 'tis Lodwicks Friend, the Rascall's dressed like Vanderbergen in the
Strand: -- Sir Patient -- pray know this glorious Doctor Sir.


A Doctor Sir?


A Doctor Sir, yes, and as Eloquent a Doctor, Sir, as ever set Bill to Post,
why 'tis -- the incomparable -- Brunswick, high Dutch Doctor.


You're welcome Sir, -- Pray sit; ah -- well Sir you are come to visit a very
Crazy sickly Person Sir.


Pray let me feel your Pulse Sir, -- what think you Gentlemen, is he not very
far gone? --


Ah far, far, -- Pray Sir, have you not a certain rambling Pain in your Stomach
Sir, as it were Sir a -- a Pain Sir.


Oh very great Sir, especially in a Morning Fasting.


I knew it by your stinking breath Sir, -- and are you not troubled with a pain
in your Head Sir?


In my Head Sir?


I mean a -- kind of a -- Pain, -- a kind of a -- Vertigo as the Latins call
it, and a Whirligigoustiphon as the Greeks have it, which signifies in English
Sir, a Dizzie-swimming kind -- of a de ye see -- a thing -- that -- a -- you
understand me.


Oh intolerable, intolerable, -- why this is a rare man.


Your reason Sir for that?


My reason Sir? why my reason Sir is this, Haly the Moore, and Rabbie Isack and
some thousands more of learned Dutchmen observe your dull wall Eye and your
Whir -- Whirligigoustiphon, to be inseparable.


A most Learned reason.


Oh Sir inseparable.


And have you not a kind of a -- something -- de ye mark me, when you make
water, a kind of a stopping -- and -- a -- de ye conceive me, I have forgot the
English term Sir, but in Latin 'tis a Stronggullionibus.


Oh Sir most extremely, 'tis that which makes me desperate Sir.


Your ugly Face is an infallible sign, your Dysurie as the Arabicks call it,
and your Ill-favor'd Countenance, are constant Relatives.


Constant, constant.


Pray how do you eat, Sir?


Ah Sir, there's my distraction. Alas Sir, I have the weakest stomach -- I do
not make above four Meals a day, and then indeed I eat heartily -- but alas
what's that to eating to live, -- nothing Sir nothing. --


Poor heart I pity him.


And between meals, good Wine, Sweet-meats, Candles, -- Cordials and
Mirabilises, to keep up my fainting Spirits.


A Pox of his Aldermanship: an the whole Bench were such notable swingers,
twou'd Famish the City sooner than a Siege.


Brothers what do you think of this man?


Think Sir? I think his Case is desperate.


Shaw Sir, we shall soon rectify the quiblets and quillities of his blood if he
observes our directions and diet, which is to eat but once in four or five
days.


How Sir, eat but once in four or five days! such a diet Sir would kill me,
alas Sir kill me.


Oh no Sir, no, for look ye Sir the Case is thus, do ye mind me -- so that the
business lying so obvious de ye see, there is a certain method do ye mark me --
in a -- Now Sir when a man goes about to alter the course of Nature, -- the
case is very plain, you may as well arrest the Chariot of the Sun, or alter the
Eclipses of the Moon, for Sir this being of another Nature, the Nature of it is
to be unnatural, you conceive me Sir? -- therefore we must crave your absence
Sir for a few Minutes, till we have debated this great Affair.


With all my heart Sir, since my case is so desperate, a few hours were not too
much.


Now Sir, my Service to you.


Oh living heart! what do all these men do in our house? sure they are a sort
of New-fashon'd Conventiclers: -- I'll hear 'em preach.


Sir my service to you, and to your good Lady, Sir.


Again to you Sir, not forgetting your Daughters: they are fine Women Sir, let
Scandal do its worst.


To our better trading Sir.


Faith it goes but badly on, I had the weekly Bill and 'twas a very thin
Mortality, some of the better sort dye indeed that have good round Fees to
give.


Verily I have not killed above my five or six this week.


How Sir killed?


Killed Sir! ever whilst you live, especially those who have the grand Verole,
for 'tis not for a man's Credit to let the Patient want an Eye or a Nose, or
some other ting, I have killed ye my five or six dozen a week -- but times are
hard.


I grant ye Sir, your Poor for Experiment, and improvement of Knowledge, and to
say truth there ought to be such Scavengers as we to sweep away the Rubbish of
the Nation.


Nay an you talk of a beast; My service to you Sir -- Devonshire.


And I the finest Spaniel Sir.


Pray what news is there stirring?


Faith Sir, I am one of those fools that never regard whether Lewes or Philip
have the better or the worst.


Peace is a great blessing Sir, a very great blessing.


You are in the right Sir, and so my service to you Sir.


Well, Sir, Stetin held out Nobly, though the Gazetts are various.


There's a world of men killed they say, why what a shame 'tis so many thousand
should dye without the help of a Physician.


Hang 'em they were poor Rogues and not worth our killing, my service to you
Sir, they will serve to fill up Trenches.


Spaniel Sir! no man breathing understands Dogs and Horses better then my
self.


Your Pardon for that Sir.


For look ye Sir, I'll tell you the Nature of Dogs and Horses.


So can my Groom and Dog-keeper, but what's this t'th' purpose Sir?


To the purpose Sir, good Mr. Hedleburgh do you understand what's to the
purpose? you're a Dutch Butter-ferkin, a Kilderkin, a Double Jug.


You're an ignorant Blockhead Sir.


You lye Sir, and there I was with you again.


What, quarrelling, men of your gravity and Profession!


That is to say Fools and Knaves, pray how long is't since you left Topping and
Naping, for Quacking, good Brother Cater-tray, -- but let that pass, for I'll
have my Humour, and therefore will quarrel with no man, and so I drink. --


-- But what's all this to the Patient, Gentlemen?


Aye -- the Wine's all out, -- and quarrels apart Gentlemen as you say, what
do ye think of our Patient, for something I conceive necessary to be said for
our Fees.


I think that unless he follows our Prescriptions he's a dead man.


Aye Sir a dead man.


Please you to write Sir, you seem the youngest Doctor.


Your Pardon Sir, I conceive there may be younger Doctors then I at the board.


A fine Punctilio this, when a man lies a dying -- Sir


I Commenced at Paris twenty years ago.


And I at Leyden, almost as long since.


And I at Bercelona thirty.


And I at Padua, Sir.


You at Padua?


Yes Sir I at Padua, why what a Pox do ye think I never was beyond-sea?


However Sir you are the youngest Doctor and must write.


I will not lose an Inch of my Dignity.


Nor I.


Nor I.


Nor I.


Death what Rascals are these?


Give me the pen -- here's ado about your Paduas and Punctilioes.


Every Morning a Dose of my Pills Merda quecrusticon, or the Amicable Pill.


Fasting?


Every hour Sixscore drops of Adminicula Vitae.


-- Fasting too?


At Night twelve Cordial Pills, Gallimofriticus.


Let blood once a week, a Glister once a day.


Cry Mercy Sir, you're a French man -- After his first sleep, threescore
restorative Pills called Cheatus Redivivus.


-- And lastly, fifteen spoonfuls of my Aqua Tetrachymagogon, as often as 'tis
necessary, little or no Breakfast, less Dinner, and go supperless to bed.


Hum, your Aqua Tetrachymagogon?


Yes Sir, my Tetrachymagogon, for look ye do ye see Sir, I cured the Arch-Duke
of Strumbulo, of a Gondileero, of which he died, with this very Aqua
Tetrachymagogon.


Well Gentlemen am I not an intruder?


Sir we have duly considered the state of your Body: and are now about the
order and method you are to observe.


Aye this distemper will be the occasion of his death.


Hold Brothers, I do not say the occasion of his death: But the occasional
cause of his death.


Why here's no time allow'd for eating Gentlemen.


Sir we will justify this Prescription to the whole College.


If he will not follow it, let him dye.


Aye let him dye.


What have you consulted without me Gentlemen?


Yes Sir, and find it absolutely necessary for my health Sir, I should be
starved: and yet you say I am not sick Sir.


Very well, very well.


No Breakfast, no Dinner, no Supper?


Little or none, but none's best.


But Gentlemen consider, no small thing?


Nothing, nothing.


Sir, you must write for your Fee.


Now I think on it Sir you may eat,


Do you see Sir, what damned canting Rascals these Doctors are?


Aye, aye, if all Doctors were such, ingeniously I should soon be weary of
Physic.


Give 'em their Fees Sir, and send 'em to the Devil for a company of Cheats.


Truth is, there's no faith in 'em, -- well I thank you for your care and
pains.


Sir if you have any occasion for me, I live at the Red coloured Lanthorn, with
Eleven Candles in it, in the Strand; where you may come in privately, and need
not be ashamed, I having no Creature in my House but my self, and my whole
Family. --

Ick quam Van Neder Landt te spreken
End helpen Van Pocken end ander gebreken.
That's a top of my Bill sweet Sir.


Lord, Sir Father, why did you give 'em money?


For talking nonsense this hour or two upon his distemper.


Oh lemini Sir, they did not talk one word of you, but of Dogs, and Horses, and
of killing folks, and of their Wives and Daughters; and when the Wine was all
out, they said they would say something for their Fees.


Say you so? -- Knaves, Rogues, Cheats, Murderers! I'll be revenged on 'em all,
-- I'll ne'er be sick again, -- or if I be I'll die honestly of my self without
the assistance of such Rascals, -- go, get you gone, --


A happy resolution, would you would be so kind to your self as to make a trial
of your Lady too, and if she prove true, 'twill make some kind of amends for
your so long being cozened this way.


I'll about it, this very minute about it, -- give me a Chair. --


So, settle your self well, disorder your Hair, -- throw away your Cane, Hat,
and Gloves, -- stare and roll your eyes, squeeze your Face into Convulsions, --
clutch your hands, -- make your Stomach heave, -- so, very well, -- now let me
alone for the rest, -- Oh, help, help my Lady, my Aunt, for Heavens sake help,
-- come all and see him die.


Leander, what's the matter?


See Madam, see my Uncle in the Agonies of Death.


My dearest Husband dying, Oh!


How hard he struggles with departing life!


Father, dear Father, must I in one day receive a blessing with so great a
curse? Oh, -- he's just going Madam. --


Let me o'retake him in the shades below, why do you hold me, can I live
without him? -- do I dissemble well? --


Not live without me! -- do you hear that sirrah?


Pray Mark the end on it Sir, -- feign, -- feign, --


We left him well, how came he thus of the sudden?


I fear 'tis an Apoplexy Madam.


Run, run for his Physician! but do not stir a foot.


What cries are these that stop me on my way?


They're mine, -- your Ladies, -- oh surely he will recover,


My Wife's my Heir, my sole Executrix.


Hah, is he in's senses? Love, my Life, my Joy, my all,


Do ye hear that sirrah?


Have yet a little patience, die away, -- very well -- Oh he's gone, -- quite
gone.


Look to my Lady there,


Hah, my Lady dying!


Sir I beseech you wait the event; Death! the cunning Devil will dissemble too
long and spoil all, -- here -- carry the dead Corps of my dearest Uncle to his
Chamber. Nurse to your care I commit him now.


Lodwick! the strangest unexpected News, Sir Patient's Dead!


How, dead! we have played the Physicians to good purpose i'faith, and killed
the man before we administered our Physic.


Egad I fear so indeed.


Dead!


As a Herring, and 'twill be dangerous to keep these habits longer.


Dangerous! Zoz man we shall all be hanged, why our very Bill dispatch'd him,
and our Hands are to it, -- oh, I'll confess all. --


Death Sir, I'll cut your Throat if you stir.


Would you have me hanged for company Gentlemen? Oh where shall I hide my self,
or how come at my clothes?


We have no time for that, go get you into your Basket again, and lie snug,
till I have conveyed you safe away, -- or I'll abandon you. -- Leander's Plot.


Oh thank ye dear Lodwick, -- let me escape this bout, and if ever the Fool
turn Physician again, may he be choked with his own Tetrachymagogon.


Go hast and undress you, whilst I'll to Lucia.


Hah, Wittmore there! he must not see my Uncle yet.


Nay Sir, never detain me, I'll to my Lady, is this your Demonstration? -- was
ever so virtuous a Lady? -- Well I'll to her, and console her poor heart, ah
the joy 'twill bring her to see my Resurrection! -- I long to surprise her.


Hold Sir, I think she's coming, -- blessed sight, and with her Wittmore!


Hah, what's this?


Now my dear VVitmore, claim thy Rites of Love without control, without the
contradiction of wretched Poverty or Jealousy: Now, undisguised thou may
approach my Bed, and reign over all my Pleasures and my Fortunes, of which this
minute I create thee Lord.

And thus begin my Homage. --


Sure 'tis some Fiend! This cannot be my Lady!


'Tis something uncivil before your face Sir, to do this.


Thou wondrous kind, and wondrous Beautiful, that Power that made thee with so
many Charms, gave me a Soul sit only to adore 'em; nor were thou destined to
another Arms, but to be rendered still more fit for mine.


Hah, is not that Fain-love? Isabella's Husband? Oh Villain! Villain! I will
renounce my Sense and my Religion.


Another Arms! Oh call not those hated thoughts to my remembrance,
Lest it destroy that kindly heat within me,
Which thou can only raise, and still maintain.

Oh Woman! Woman! damned dissembling Woman!

Come let me lead thee to that Mass of Gold he gave me to be despised:

And which I render thee, my lovely Conqueror,

As the first Tribute of my Glorious Servitude, -- Draw in the Basket which I
told you of, and is amongst the Rubbish in the Hall,


Was ever so prodigal a Harlot? was this the Saint? was this the most tender
Consort that ever man had?


No in good faith Sir.


This is it with a direction on it to thee, whither I designed to send it.


Good morrow to the day, and next the Gold, open the Shrine, that I may see my
Saint -- hail the Worlds Soul --


O Heavens! what thing art thou?


O Pardon, Pardon sweet Lady, I confess I had a hand in it.


In what, thou slave? --


Killing the good believing Alderman, -- but 'twas against my will.


Then I'm not so much obliged to thee, -- but where's the money, the 8000 l.
the Plate and Jewels, sirrah?


Death the Dog has eat it.


Eat it! oh Lord, eat 8000 l. would I might never come out of this Basket
alive, if ever I made such a meal in my life.


Ye Dog you have eat it, and I'll make ye swallow all the Doses you writ in
your Bill, but I'll have it upward or downward.


Hah, one of the Rogues my Doctors.


Oh dear Sir, hang me out of the way rather.


Madam, I have sent away the Basket to Mr. VVittmores Lodgings.


You might have saved your self that labour, I now having no more to do, but
to bury the stinking Corps of my quondam Cuckold, dismiss his Daughters, and
give thee quiet possession of all.


Fair Lady, you'll take me along with you?


My Husband! -- I'm betrayed --


Husband! I do defy thee Satan, thou greater Whore than she of Babylon: thou
shame, thou abomination to thy Sex.


Rail on, whilst I dispose my self to laugh at thee.


Leander, call all the House in, to be a witness of our Divorce.


Do, and all the World, and let 'em know the Reason.


Methinks I find an inclination to swear, -- to curse my self and thee, that I
could no better discern thee; nay, I'm so changed from what I was, that I
think I could even approve of Monarchy and Church Discipline, I'm so truly
convinced I have been a beast and an ass all my life.


Hah, Sir Patient not dead?


Ladies and Gentlemen, take notice that I am a Cuckold, a Crop-ear'd snivelling
Cuckold.


A Cuckold! sweet Sir, shaw that's a small matter in a man of your Quality.


And I beg your pardon Madam, for being angry that you called me so. Isabella,
for desiring you to marry my good Friend there Leander, that I would not take
your Advice long since: And yours fair Lady, for believing you honest, -- twas
done like a credulous Coxcomb: -- And yours Sir, for taking any of your Tribe
for Wise, Learned, or Honest.


Faith Sir, I deceived ye only to serve my Friend, and Sir, your Daughter is
married to Mr. Knowell; your Wife had all my stock of Love before, Sir.


Why God-a-mercy -- some comfort that, -- God bless ye -- I shall love
disobedience while I live for it.


I'm glad on it Sir, for then I hope you will forgive Leander, who has married
my Sister and not my Mother.


How! has he served me so, -- I'll make him my Heir for it; thou hast made a Man
of me my Boy, and faith we will be merry, -- fair Lady, you may depart in peace
fair Lady, restoring my Money, my Plate, my Jewels and my Writings, fair Lady
--.


You gave me no Money Sir, prove it if you can, and for your Land, 'twas not
settled with this Proviso, If she be Honest?


'Tis well thou dost confess I am a Cuckold, for I would have it known, fair
Lady.


'Twas to that End I married you, good Alderman.


I'faith I think thou did sweet-heart, I'faith I think thou did.


Right Sir, for we have long been Lovers, but want of Fortune made us contrive
how to marry her to your good Worship. Many a wealthy Citizen Sir, has
contributed to the maintenance of a younger Brother's Mistress, and you are not
the first Man in Office that has been a Cuckold, Sir.


Some comfort that too, the Brethren of the Chain cannot laugh at me.


A very pleasant old Fellow this faith, I could be very merry with him now but
that I am damnable sad, -- Madam, I shall desire to lay the Saddle on the right
Horse.


What mean you Sir?


Only Madam, if I were as some men are, I should not be as I am.


It may be so Sir.


I say no more, but matters are not carried so swimmingly, but I can dive into
the meaning on it.


I hate this Hypothetical way of arguing, answer me Categorically.


Hypothetical and Categorical! what does she mean now? Iohn A-Nokes of,
Iack-hold-my-staff, a Merry Andrew Doctor to give Leander time to marry your
Daughter, and 'twas therefore I was hoisted up in the Basket, -- but as the
Play says, 'tis well 'tis no worse: I'd rather lose my Mistress then my life.


But how came this Rascal Turboon to admit you?


For the lucre of our fees Sir, which was his recompense.


I forgive it you, and will turn Spark, they live the merriest lives -- keep
some City Mistress, go to Court, and hate all Conventicles.

You see what a fine City Wife can do
Of the true breed: Instruct her Husband too:
I wish all civil Cuckolds in the Nation,
Would take Example by my Reformation.

I Here, and there, o'reheard a Coxcomb Cry
Ah, Rot it -- 'tis a Woman's Comedy,
One, who because she lately chance it to please us,
With her Damned stuff will never cease to tease us.
What has poor Woman done that she must be,
Debarred from Sense and Sacred Poetry?
Why in this Age has Heaven allow'd you more,
And Women less of Wit then heretofore?
We once were famed in Story, and could write
Equal to men; could Govern, nay could Fight.
We still have passive Valour, and can show
Would Custom give us leave the Active too,
Since we no provocations want from you.
For who but we, could your Dull Fopperies bear,
Your Saucy Love, and your brisk Nonsense hear;
Endure your worse then womanish affectation,
Which renders you the Nuisance of the Nation;
Scorned even by all the Misses of the Town,
A sest to Vizard Mask, the Pitt-Buffoone;
A Glass by which the admiring Country Fool
May learn to dress himself en Ridicule:
Both striving who shall most Ingenious grow
In Lewdness, Foppery, Nonsense, Noise and Show.
And yet to these fine things we must submit
Our Reason, Arms, our Lawrells, and our Wit.
Because we do not Laugh at you when Lewd,
And scorn and cudgel ye when you are Rude;
That we have Nobler Souls then you, we prove,
By how much more we're sensible of Love;
Quickest in finding all the subtlest ways
To make your Joys: why not to make you Plays?
We best can find your Feables, know our own,
And Gilts and Cuckolds now best please the Town;
Your way of writing's out of Fashion grown.
Method, and Rule -- you only understand,
Pursue that way of Fooling, and be Damned.
Your Learned Cant of Action, Time, and Place,
Must all give way to the unlaboured farce.
To all the Men of Wit we will subscribe:
But for you half Wits, you unthinking Tribe,
We'll let you see, what e're besides we do,
How Artfully we Copy some of you:
And if you're drawn to the life, pray tell me then
Why Women should not write as well as Men.

