RUN, you Rogue, run, raise the Street, you Son of a careless Whore: Cry, Stop
Thief, stop Thief!


Which way, Sir?


A Pox of ways: Sirrah, cry, Stop Thief, I say.


So we may stop honest men, Sir.


There's no such thing within the Walls of London, ye Rogue; there's nothing
but Knaves, Cheats, Cuckolds and Traitors, Thieves and Pickpockets, tho I be
one of the Livery. A Pox of Honesty, my Plate's gone, the Reckoning unpaid, I'm
cheated and undone! therefore run, ye Dog, run.


Good sweet Husband, have patience.


Patience! yes, so you advised when I found the Alderman and your Ladyship in a
civil posture on the red Couch in the Swan. Patience quotha! Pox of your
Remedies. Get ye in, here's Company.


When! how now, Mr. Dashit, what enraged in Rancor, and the Beauty of the
London-bars, your Lady too, in Tears! What's amiss? unfold thy dismal story.


Only cheated, robbed, abused, and undone, Sir: that's all, that's all.


As how, man! Come, advance thy comely Countenance, and do not let thy
sorrowful Snout bedew thy reverend Jerkin. The reason, my hardly honest Dashit.


Oh Si^, Mr. Trickwell that Knave is this night run away with our great
Gallon-Tankard, six silver Boats, a great Salt, besides Spoons and Forks.


Oh, for some wise man that would but find 'em out presently!


Yes, if a wise man could be found out presently.

Friend. How was this Plate lost? how escaped he unseen with it?


Why, an't like ye, Sir, thus: As I understand, that man, man, quoth I? no,
rather Monster, that t'other-end-of-the-Town-Villain, nay, I believe that
Jesuit in disguise, sent from beyond Sea to ruin honest Citizens; I say, this
Heathen Trickwell comes me into my house th^ evening with a great two-handed
Gentlewoman, or some Priest in Petticoats; they call for a Room, pretend to
send a Porter for some Ladies of delight, bespeak a Supper, but no Ladies came.


My Cockie forgets to tell your Worships, that our house being full, we had no
Room empty but the great Parlour below stairs.


Hold your peace, hold your peace, I say. Am I a Common-Council-man like to be
of the City of London, and cannot tell my Tale my self? Get ye in, I say, and
look to what's left.


Well, Sir, on with your Relation.


Well, Sir, a noble Supper they had of the best in season; I came in, cried,
Your servant, Gentlemen; asked 'em how they liked their Wine, and departed
civilly: Then entered a blind Harper, crie^, Do ye lack any Music, Sir? He
cries, Play: The Harper uncases, the Drawer is nodded out, who obeys, believing
he would be private with the Gentlewoman; and 'tis Sam's part, you know, Sir,
to wink at things.


Right and civil.


Aye, aye, but he shall answer for that winking at the last day, I'll warrant
him.


Well Sir, having eat the Supper, and Trickwell perceiving none in the room but
the blind Harper, whose Eyes Heaven had shut up from beholding wickedness,
opens the Casement to the street, very patiently packs and pockets up my Plate,
unnaturally thrusts the woman out of the window, and himself most
preposterously with his heels forwards follows. The Harper plays on, bids the
empty Dishes much good may do 'em, and plays on still. The Drawer returns,
cries, What do ye lack, Gentlemen? but out, alas, the Birds were flown, Sir,
flown. Laments are raised.


Which did not pierce the Heavens.


Sam cries out; my Wife in the Bar hears the noise, and she bawled out; I heard
her, and thundered; the Boys flew like Lightning, and all was in confusion.


Well, this must be for some great sins committed; the sins of the Bar and
Cellar, unmerciful Bills, and suffisticated Wine, my honest damned Vintner: --
Repent, oh repent and mend, and be sound.


Well, I will hang that Rogue Trickwell, and there's an end on it: I'll do it;
and so Good night to you, Gallants.


Well, dear Jack, Good night: I have a Visit to make before I sleep, and will
take my leave of thee. A found Wench, soft Sleep, and pleasant Dreams, bless
thee, my dear Friendly.


Not so, I'll see thee safe at home; I dare not leave ye to your self so late;
you are warm with Youth and Wine, which may direct you to the undoing of that
body of yours which shortly must be blessed with chaste embraces. These common
women will ruin thee, Frank; Faith leave 'em in good time: come, you shall not
to a Bawdy-house, I hate 'em.


I pray for their continuance and increase ere since I thought of Marriage.


Prithee why?


A married man ought to love a Bawdy-house, as English-men love Flanders; wish
war should be maintained there, lest it should be brought home to their own
doors.


Thou art a worthy Lad, and brave; but this damned Lust has been thy constant
daily vice, the only one you're given to.


Prithee call it a nightly one: But not to trifle with thee, Faith I am going
the way of all flesh.


To a Whore?


One thou call so, a very Publican and sinner.


And can thou, having such an Object before thy eyes as the fair, the chaste
Mirinda, whom you're to marry, give thy self up to the loose, the common arms
of one who loves thee not but for her interest? Damn her, thou shalt not go. I
hate, I nauseate a common Prostitute, who trades with all for gain; one that
sells humane flesh, a Mangonist.


Poor Devils, what would you have 'em do? would thou have 'em get their
living by the Curse of man, the Sweat of their Brows? Egad they dearly earn
what we give 'em. Is Charity grown a sin, or relieving the Poor and Impotent,
an offence? And Faith, Frank, where can we bestow our Money better? In Land
the Title may be cracked, in Houses they may be burnt, in fine Clothes they'll
wear out, in Wine, alas, our Throats are but short, and our heads weak; but
woman, oh dear lovely woman's the lasting true pleasure! Lay it out upon woman,
I say, and a thousand to one, some one of them will bestow that on you that
shall stick by you as long as you live: They are no ungrateful persons, they'll
give Love for Love; do you protest, they'll swear; do you vow, they'll lye; do
you sigh, they'll weep; do you give them English Coin, they'll repay you with
the French -- And they only sell their Bodies: Do not some of our Sex sell
their Souls? nay, since all things have been sold, Honour, Justice, Faith, even
Religion, pray where's the dishonour of selling the Pleasures of a woman's Bed?
Who is't would live and toil, but for a woman? who fights, lies cold and hard
in open field, but to gain Wreaths to lay at a woman's feet?

And 'tis a truth can be denied of no man:

All things were made for man, and man for woman.

-- Give me my Fee.


Well, Sir, I see you are resolved, and I can only boast I love Diana better
than you do her Sister Marinda.


Come, wilt thou go with me?


Whither?


To this house of Salvation.


Salvation!


Yes, 'twill make thee repent. Prithee go to the Family of Love, I'll show thee
my Creature, my Natural, my Mistress, my pretty blue-ey'd Wanton, my honest
fond self-hearted Flatterer, my fair-fac'd, sweet lipped Rogue, that has Beauty
enough for her Virtue, Virtue enough for a Woman, and Woman enough for any
reasonable man, in my knowledge.


What to a Bawdy-house, to visit an impudent Prostitute? Pox on it, 'twill make
me hate the Sex. The worst Object the world can show me, is an immodest vulgar
woman.


No matter, thou shalt go; go as thou love me.


Well, Sir, I'll go to bring you safely back.


Nay, Moll, unreasonable Mary! when, the whole Prize was not above forty pound;
and hast thou the conscience to snack ten only for a good word speaking, a
little holding the door, and bawding? The device was my own too, the hazard
mine, and the hanging may be mine, whilst thou securely filchest under my
conduct. Come, the nest of Cups is fair, you Bitch, be contented; you were
drunk too into the bargain, Moll. Come, bear a Conscience, Moll, and Heaven
will bless our endeavours: besides, Moll, thou hast an honest Calling of
Bawding, which brings thee in a pretty Livelihood, Moll; when God knows I trust
to nothing but my own indurious slight of hand. Come, give me back the Salt.


By Yea and by Nay, Trickwell, I am afraid thou wilt play the Knave, and
restore 'em.


No, by the Lord, Aunt, Restitution is Catholic; and you know Oracles are
ceased. Tempus praeteritum. -- Dost hear, my necessary Evil? -- Thou ungodly
Fire that burnt Diana's Temple, dost hear? make Corina civil, or by the Lord,
Bawd --


Fire! Gad you are the foulest mouthed son of a Whore, the profanest railing
Raskal, call a woman the most ungodly names! I must confess we all eat of the
forbidden Fruit; and for my own part, though I am, as they say, a Bawd that
covers a multitude of sins, yet I trust I am none of the wicked that go to
Steeple-houses with profane Organs in 'em, ye scurvy saucy Jack.


Who, I rail at thee, my industrious Moll, my subtle Procurer? I rail at thee,
my necessary Damnation? I'll make an Oration in praise of thy Modesty, thou
flower of thy Function.


And I think I have deserved it at your hands, Mr. Trickwell; for I have
assisted you early and late, up-rising, and downlying.


Thou hast; therefore listen: A Bawd for her Profession is the most honourable
of all the 12 Companies; for as that Trade is most worshipful that sells the
best Commodities, what must the Bawd be then, my little Moll? For where others
sell silk Clothes, Gold and Silver, Pearls and Diamonds, thou sellest divine
Virtue, Virginity, Modesty, Maiden-heads, Youth and Beauty: And who are her
Customers? not Cits, Grooms, Mechanics, and disbanded Soldiers; but Gentlemen
of the best Rank, Knights, Lords, Dukes, and Squires. Thus she lives, keeps the
best Company, eats and drinks of the best, and domineers when she's drunk,
reigns Queen, Moll, over her adoring Subjects. But hold, here's Wellman and
Friendly! what a Pox does his Gravity in a Bawdie-house?


Come along, yonders the Preface to my Mistress, her Matron, or Bawd, or what
you please. Mrs. Dunwell, your servant.


Your servant, sweet Sir: Ah, you're a pretty man, to neglect a Creature that
loves you thus; in truth you are -- But well, I'll fetch her to you, Sir. --


Do so, sweet Mrs. Dunwell. -- What, Mr. Trickwell, does your Knaveship dare
walk the street? Look to it, Mr. Dashit lies in wait for you.


The more fool he; I can lie for my self: A Pox of the rich Raskal, 'tis no
deceit in me to cheat him; he has cozened me of an Estate of some two hundred a
year, with his damned Reckonings, and then who but honourable Mr. Trickwell,
the noble Squire, and soforth, till he had got all my Land in Mortgage; then
took the forfeiture, and turned me (...) of doors. I'll plague him for it. But I
interrupt your diversion, and will kiss your hands, my noble Patrons.


See, Sir, this the ugly thing you so despise!


This!


This very thing: 'tis but a Dowdy -- but she serves. --


A Whore this! Virtue defend me, what a lovely woman 'tis!


Salute her, man, salute her.


Salute her! yes, and leave my heart upon her lips.


Go, salute my friend; this is my friend Corina.


I care not for you nor your friends; I'm sure you use me scurvily, because you
know I love you: but I shall learn those Arts you men are practised in; and
scorn, and hate, and hide it, when it serves my turn, as you can do. -- I shall
-- but yet I'm true, true as my Virtue when you first seduced it, false as you
are, -- and yet I love you strangely. --


Salute my friend, I say -- go, you fond fool, clasp his neck round, and press
his cheeks to yours; kiss him as you do me, as soft and meltingly: go, you coy
tit, I say you shall.


She'as fired me with that touch: -- there's Witchcraft in it.


Come, kiss her again; by Heaven thou shalt, I'll not be jealous on it: kiss her
more ardently -- So, thou wilt learn in time. Go fetch your Lute, and let him
hear ye sing to it.


I'm all obedience, Sir, when you command; but I have something heavy at my
heart that makes me wish you would excuse me now.


Go too, I say -- what can sit heavy there? I love thee, love thee infinitely,
in faith I do, Corina. Here, here's Gold for thee; the Summer's coming on, and
thou perhaps wants Toys, as Gowns and Points, and Petticoats. I'll have thee
show, Corina, with the best, splendid and gay, my Girl, as is thy Beauty.


I'll take this Gold, but 'tis not that I want: methinks of late there is a
strange decay of Passion in you; you're not so dearly fond as you were wont,
supplying still your want of Love with Gold; your Mirth is forced, your Visits
cold and short, as Winterdays; and when you speak of Love, you do it with
caution. There's some reserve hid in that generous breast, which I would be
acquainted with, yet tremble lest you should betray't too soon.


Corina, you mistake my heart, 'tis thine, entirely thine; but when a Lover's
sure, as I am of thy heart, those little assiduities are neglected which only
hoping Lovers use to pay. I am happy now, and have no need of Vows but those
of Constancy. Go to your Lute.


And have ye none you do design to marry?


Fie, you're a fool to think I be so weak; Marry! I scorn that slavery, whilst
I possess all the delights of it with thee, without its plagues and care. -- Go
to your Lute. Frank, and how dost thou like my Mistress? is she not charming?
do you blame me now? In truth I loved her dearly once, till my Soul showed me
the imperfections of my body, and placed my love on a more worthy object, my
fair Marinda; which if this Baggage knew, there were no being for me, she would
so rave: But faith I think I'm not so criminal as you imagined, hah?


Yet she's a Whore!


A Whore! Oh call her a Miss, a Lady of the Town, a Beauty of delight, or any
thing. Whore! 'tis a nauseous name, and out of fashion now to call things by
their right names. Is a Citizen a Cuckold? no, he's one of the Livery: Is a
great man a Fool? no, he's weak, or led away: Is a Person of Quality pocky?
no, but is not well, has got a Surfeit, or so. Come, she is a Mistress, -- but
hark, she sings!


She's all a perfect Heaven! Oh I adore her!


To obey your commands, I sung, my Love, but I had rather you had pardoned me.


You are a simple Chit; go, get you gone, and let me go; 'tis late, and I am
sleepy.


This Language was not wont to come from thee; take heed, and do not cheat my
easy Faith: for if you do, perhaps 'twill make me mad; and in my wildness some
strange things may do, may ruin both our lives. Take heed; for now I love ye
much above 'em both. Come, you shall stay with me to night.


By no means, my Dear; this Gentleman has vowed to see me chastely laid.


And so ye shall: the Play of Infants shall not be more chaste. I have no wish
to make him break his Vow, and he shall have a Bed.


Peace! that offer will offend him; he's a modest man, one of a professed
abstinence. Good night.


And must you go?


I must.


And will you come to morrow? But oh I did not use to ask such Questions. Will
you be sure?


I will: when did I fail? Good night. Boy, your Flambeau. Good night, Corina.


Why stay you, Sir? you see your friend is gone.


Madam, if he knows not how to prize Heaven, I do; and cannot leave the
pleasure so soon, at least if you would give me leave to gaze, I dare not say
possess, that were a blessing fit only for the Gods; nor knows man how to calm
it. -- That you should throw away such wondrous beauty on the remiss, cold,
and insensible!


Who is it, Sir, that's so insensible?


Death, whither does my passion hurry me? I shall betray friendship of many
years, for a flame which a new lust has kindled in a moment.


Heavens! are you silent, Sir? what made ye talk of one remiss and cold? who
mean ye? Wellman? Oh, if you did --


I meant mankind; for none can merit you. -- Is she unchaste? can such an one
be damned? Oh Love and Beauty, you two eldest seeds of the vast Chaos, what
strong right ye have even in things divine, our very Souls!


Why do you stifle what was so well begun? Unfold; I know you have some
meaning, Sir, in what you have to say: Concerns it Wellman?


No. Answer me one thing, Madam.


I will: for you have something to relate, which I must hear. Demand; I listen.


The Question is but rude.


I care not. -- What means he?


Are you -- You pardon me?


I do. There's something in his heart that I must flatter thence. Be confident.


And are you then -- a -- Whore? You said you would forgive.


I did: and though that question, yet because I know thou hast some reason
for it, I'll answer thee directly, That I am.


Are Prostitutes such things, so delicate? Can custom spoil what Nature made so
good? I never saw a sweet face vicious: it might be proud, inconstant, wanton,
vain.


Oh leave, Sir, to philosophize on Beauty, and tell me why you do so.


Heavens! why could not thou be constant?


Constant! to what? to whom?


To Wellman: he has all the Charms of Nature; and to be false to him, was such
a sin --


Oh Heavens! what base flatterer has traduced me? tell me; who dares report I
am not true, not true to Wellman? I have been false to Virtue, false to Honour,
false to my Name and Friends; but was to Wellman what Heaven is to the Just and
Penitent, all soft, all mercy, all complying sweetness.


By Heaven, I do believe it; and ne'er heard a breath that could profanely say
thou were not: But oh, I thought with reason, if 'twere so, I could not
slightly part with such a Jewel, or, Indian-like, barter this real Gold for
shining jingling Baubles. Marinda! Heaven, you're an Angel to her!


Enough: I know my doom; that word's enough; and I'm betrayed to ruin!
Wellman; or if true, 'twas not thy part to tell it: had thou license for such
a cruel Tale, thou should have spared it to her that loved thy friend. Be
gone, I hate thee, and whatsoere thou meants by such a Lye, I scorn thee for it,
and think thee much unfit for any gallant friendship: I know 'tis truth, and
with the fatal knowledge instruct my heart to break.


Tho I do not care for this woman now, yet some dregs of the old haunt of
Jealousy remain about me still; and I must see what use my friend and quondam
Mistress makes of this kind opportunity. -- Hah! alone, and musing!


'Twas not well done, indeed, to tell her; but Love was raging in me, and I
believed I should insinuate with that secret.


By Heaven, he's caught! Eternal Laughter seize me.


'Twas Love! the very first effects of Love were treacherous and ill: Heaven
guard me from the rest. Yet I must on:

Let Wintered Age dully pretend to prove

That Love is Lust; I know no life but Love.


Is it so, Sweet-heart? how is't? what, is the worst sight the world can
produce, a common woman now?


Hah! will you go home, Sir? 'tis high bed-time.


With all my heart, Sir; only do not chide me. I must confess. --


A wanton Lover you have been.


When Love was raging in me.


Oh leave your rallying; will you be gone?


Let Wintered Age dully pretend to prove That Love is Lust; I know no life but
Love. Go thy ways for an Apostate; I believe my last Garment must be let out in
the seams for you: Is't not so? But come, I must go serinade Marinda; but take
this certain rule along with thee:

Of all the Fools that Ignorance ere nursed,

He that against Nature would be wise, is worst.


WEll, Gentlemen, here's the Window of my dear Marinda: 'tis here, my friends,
resides that lovely Maid, whose beauty chases away those lesser fires that did
infest my heart. Come, gently touch your strings, and call her forth to bless
me ere I go to rest: I'm not half sanctifi'd without a sight.


Who's there, my dear loved Wellman? This was kind.


My generous Marinda! when did I ere approach thee but with kindness, the
fondest tenderest part of kindness too? and when I cease to do so, Heaven
neglect me.


And me, when I but fear the contrary. Would I could let thee in; but oh I dare
not: my Father nicely careful, tho you're mine, mine by a solemn Contract, yet
forbids me to entertain thee with that freedom yet.


But, my Marinda, 'tis a heavenly night, such as was made for Lovers, still and
calm; and I have such soft things to whisper to thee, as pains me to conceal. I
long to touch thy hand, to catch thy sighs, and lean my head upon thy rising
bosom. A freedom now methinks you might allow me: 'tis very hard.


'Tis so; but yet a little suffering, and we may meet with lawful freedom: till
when, continue to be true and kind.


By Heaven, by all the Stars that shine above, and by thy brighter Eyes, I will
be ever true.


I must give faith to what you say; and prithee since, easy Maid, I do believe
so soon, in pity do not cheat me. Here, wear this little Ring; a dying Brother
gave it, and bad me never part with it but to him that Love had made my
Husband: Wear it thou; for you're my Souls best choice.


Which when I part from, Hope, the best comfort of my life, forsake me.


Heavens! what a long tedious Tale of Faith and Troth's here! Could I once see
the man I liked, I'd have done a thousand fine and more material things by this
time.


Madam, here is a Man, whom if you could but pity --


What, my grave Lover Mr. Friendly, who hates a Wencher! no by my Troth, I'm
for no such dull Ingredience in a Lover: I love a man that knows the way to a
woman's bed without instructions. Besides, what should we two do together, get
Fools? no, I hate 'em.


You may be mistaken in your man.


I wish I were: Let him but bring it under the hand of any woman who has been
kind to him, and I'll believe him fit to be beloved by me; till then, I am
obdurate.


Well, Madam, I'll endeavour to obey you.


Let it be quickly then, I hate delays, you know I'm stored with Lovers, Sir
John Empty will be before-hand with you else; you know he's a spruce Spark, and
cannot long lay siege before a heart, but he will force an entrance: he's of my
humour too, gay, loves Fiddles, Wine and Women; a fool and rich, oh heavenly
Quality! Be wise, Sir, and consider 'em, and learn to whore betimes; you know
not what you may come to. Farewell, the day begins to break, and the old man
will wake. Good morrow, modest Mr. Friendly.


Good morrow, mad-cap: Come, shall's go to bed?


No, I cannot sleep; I'll walk a little.


And meditate? Farewell, Sir, I'm for rest.


This woman yesterday was charming to me, and now all that she said, seemed
dull and tedious. What a strange change is here! The light comes on; hark how
the free-born Birds chant forth their untaught Passions, and in those pretty
Notes express their love. They have no Bawds, no mercenary Beds, no politic
Restraints, no artful Heats, no faint Dissemblings; Custom makes them not
blush, nor Sham afflicts their name. Oh happy Birds, in whom an inborn heat is
held no sin! how vastly you transcend poor wretched man, whom national custom,
tyrannous respect of slavish order fetters, calling that sin in us, which in
all else is Nature's highest Virtue. But a Whore! now shame forsake me, whither
am I fallen, one that my friend has had, to live to be a shameful talk to men!


I have a mind to know whether Friendly goes to Corina; when I am absent, 'tis
with some regret I think he should; but present, it so pleases me to see his
modesty in love, I'm ready to resign her. -- He's here still! Good morrow,
Friend, I cannot leave thee thus dissatisfi'd; what art thou studying on?


Love; but it likes me not.


Why?


She is not honest.


What then? should we hate all that are so, some men would hate their Mothers
and their Sisters; a sin against kind.


Is it a wise man's part to be in love?


Let wise men alone; 'twill beseem thee and me well enough.


And shall I not commit a sin against friendship?


What to love where I do? By Heaven, I resign her freely to thee: the creature
and I must grow strangers; and by this time she has heard of my design to
marry, and swears and rails, and cries, and curses me. Come, faith I will
resign her, and you see Diana will like thee ne'er the worse for it.


I'll but embrace her, hear her speak, and at the most but kiss her.


Oh hark, he that could live upon the scent of Meat, would live cheaply.


I shall never become heartily a man of the Town, a kind of flat ungracious
Debauchee; an unsufficient dullness reigns about me.


This Italian breeding has spoiled thee, and stiffened thy behaviour. Come,
come, thou shalt to her, and she shall like thee.


But if she should not, Friend!


Fear her not, 'tis her Trade, and what she'as practised long with many Lovers.


Was she not true to thee?


I do believe she was, whilst she was mine.


Was she a sinner ere you saw her then?


Oh a very Strumpet! Pardon me truth. Come, have a good heart, and thou shalt
possess her, since you're so in love.


Death, man, 'tis Destiny, I cannot help it.


Nay, I hope so. Come, come, she sells but flesh; so that even in the enjoying
thou't regain again thy freedom. Go thy ways.


He that will thrive, must be early stirring, Sir: I am going to get the Penny,
Sir; Aye, Heaven has endowed me with industry, I thank it.


And what good Acquaintance have you, Sirrah? no handsome women?


Faith, Sir, yes, some do start up now and then; but a Pox on it, when they have
run through all the Trades and Degrees of the City, they pass at the other
side of the Town for new Faces, and are caught up by your Courtiers for
innocent and honest, though the Citie-Surgeon have had good Customers of them;
and by my Troth, Sir, I hate to cheat a Gentleman with false Ware. But last
night --


What last night?


I was horrid drunk at Supper with one Sir John Empty, a brave young fool for
my purpose; I brought him a Wench, one Betty Cogit; a Pox on her, a pretty
drunken Whore 'tis, and handsome: if she can serve you, I can bed my Knight
with any other.


Away, you're a Rogue; I'll talk about it another time. Farewell: Have a care of
Mr. Dashit, Sirrah.


Let Mr. Dashit have a care of me; I'll take care he shall be cozened most
plentifully. Now for some new device! what shall it be?


Pray, Sir, which is the way to Cheapside, to the Sun-Tavern?


Sun-Tavern, Child! what would thou do there?


When, Sir, I am sent for to trim Mr. Dashit; and tho he be my God-father, I
know not the way to his house.


Why, art thou a Barber?


A Barber-Surgeon, Sir.


To what Bawdy-house does your Master belong? and what's your name?


John Scour, an't like your Worship.


John Scour! Good Mr. John Scour, I desire your farther acquaintance. Nay, be
covered, my dainty boy. Is thy Master at home?


My Father, forsooth, you mean; but he's dead.


And laid in's Grave, good boy?


Yes, Sir, and my Mother keeps shop.


A good witty boy; thon't live to read a Chapter to the Family, and write
Sermons, John, in time, wo't thou* not?


In grace a God, Sir.


And whither art thou going now, John?


Marry, forsooth, to trim Mr. Dashit the Vintner, He's my Godfather, I told
you, forsooth.


Good boy, hold up thy head. Prithee do one thing for me; my name's Hazard.


He! good Mr. Hazard!


Lend me thy Barbers Implements.


Oh Lord, Sir!


Well spoken, a fine boy! What are they worth, child?


Oh Lord, Sir, worth! I know not.


A witty child! Here's a shilling for thee. Where dost live, John?


At the three Washballs, forsooth, in Mincing-lane.


Aye, I know it; a delicate boy! I have an odd Jest in my head, child, to trim
Mr. Dashit: 'Tis for a wager, boy, a humour; I'll return thy things presently.
Hold, let's see --


What mean ye, Mr. Hazard?


Nothing, child, but a Jest. Go drink a flagon, and I'll return presently.


Pray, Sir, do not stay.


As I'm an honest man -- The three Washbals, John?


Aye, Sir.


Good: And if I do not shave Mr. Dashit, my ingenaity wants an edge. Let me
see, a Barber! My villainous tongue will betray me; I must step in and disguise
a little. For my speech, what if it be broken French, or a Northern or a Welch
Barber? Good, the Widow Scowres man: good, newly hired a Journeyman; very well:
I have my Cue, and will proceed, happy be luck --


Nay, dear sweet child, do not torment thy self thus violently: say Wellman be
to be marri'd, are there no more young Gentlemen, no more both handsome and
rich? Come, come, you could not expect to build Tabernacles with him.


Damn your sententious Nonsense, let me go loose as the winds when mad, when
raging mad. 'Twas you, Heaven curse ye for it, that first seduced me, swore that
he loved me, would eternally; and when my Virtue had resolved me good, damned
Witch, whose trade is Lying and Confusion, you hard besieged it round with
tales of Wellman, repeated all his Charms so often over, my Heart began to
yield, and Virtue fade like flowers with too much heat; which when you saw; a
Curse upon your Tongue, you told him where the part was feeblest here -- told
him my strength, and how he best might conquer: and he, oh lovely Tyrant, found
it true, and never ceased till he had vanquished all. Leave me, thou Witch, that
hast reduced this soul, this body too, to nothing but a Grave.


To nothing! Marry and that's not my fault; I have made as many proffers of
your Virginity since he ruined it, as if you had been my own Daughter a
thousand times, so I have; but you were so peevish, you ever stood in your own
light; nothing would down with you but Wellman.


Hell take thy tongue, or blast it.


Aye, for God forgive me, it has been a thousand times forsworn for you, and
yet I've brought you to nothing. Have I not brought you English and French
Merchants of the best Rank, Jews of the richest Tribes, Irish Lords, Scottish
Earls, and lastly, the Dutch Agent, who offered ye a Tun of money? and is all
this nothing? Come, come, had you had grace, you had made something of all
these; but nothing but Wellman was regarded.


Oh that hated Name, like some black Charm it curdles up my blood.


And yet, a'my conscience the Gentleman's an honest Gentleman, and one you have
got fairly by; I hope him to you, and have I this for my labour? Well, Mary
Dunwell, Mary Dunwell, thy kind heart will bring thee to the Hospital.


I'll be revenged; nothing but dire Revenge shall satiate my Rage. Methinks I
am inspired with manly strength, a bloody courage swells my rising heart, and I
shall act some wondrous dismal mischief. And yet to see him bleed, he that has
sworn so many tender things, and breathed 'em all in kisses on my bosom; but
now all those, and thousands new invented, he pays another Mistress more
beloved. I die, I die, and cannot bear that thought, by which I find I'm
feeble woman still. Why did thou? tell me, for I'll here begin, why did
thou praise this Monster? -- To my soul.


Heavens, Madam, hold and hear me: I did praise him, I confess; I said he was a
fool, a lavish fool, one that loved women more than his Religion, that he kept
high, and loved most ardently: but what of this? the wind you see is turned.


Turn all then to confusion; turn, thou Witch, 'tis I will play the Devil.
Heart, resolve, and set down this decree, never to rest till thou hast made him
equal to me, wretched.


Madam, Mr. Wellman and Mr. Friendly are below, and desire leave to kiss your
hand.


Oh he's grown ceremonious in his Visits. No more, I will be calm, as if my
fortune knew no change; I will dissemble, smile;

I'll show my self all woman in my Art,

But be a very Devil in my heart.


How now Corina, what disorder's this?


Oh my dear life! this woman has displeased me; but one kind look from thee
chases all other thoughts out of my soul.


But what's the matter? do not dissemble with me.


With thee! far be such art from thy Corina's tongue; you've taught her truth
with love. What else should such a Master teach a Mistress? Come, I forgive her
now: Alas, she'as lost the little Dog you gave me. Would it not grieve one to
loose ought of thine?


Fie, fie, cry for a Dog! what would thou do for me that pay'st such tributes
to a poor worthless Animal?


For thee, weep tears of blood; but 'tis impossible I could be robbed of thee
by ought but death. I know thy noble heart -- to be a Traitor.


Thou art so fond, thou mind'st nothing but me; sees thou not my friend?


Yes, and love him too, next to thy self, by Heaven; for he's as great a
Villain, being he's man. Come, Sir, you must not be so sad; I'll sing and
dance, do any thing to make you gay and smile: for trust me, Sir, I hate sad
Company. Heavens, what ails you, Sir? have you the Tooth-ach, Sir? I've many
remedies for that.


No, my pain is at my heart; have you a Cure for that?


A thousand. Kind Eyes, soft Sighs and Kisses well applied.


'Twill but increase the pain: 'twas so I caught it.


Alas, I'll sing then; I have a thousand Songs, so pretty and so loving. --


Still that but hurts me more.


Then I've no Remedies.


No you must not, Love.


Fie, you call me Love, and cry I must not! I say I will. How now, who is't
commands where I am?


You entirely; but this Ring I cannot part with.


'Tis my Rivals: Rot with his finger, how it fires my blood, and the red flame
kindles about my face, and will betray my heart! Come, 'tis a trifle.


I care not for the value.


Has it a worth besides its own intrinsic one?


Nay, you're of late so peevish and so jealous, that you grow troublesome.


Jealous! by this dear mouth not I.


Thou art uncivilly importunate. Go, fool, thou shall it not have it; I care not for
thee nor thy Jealousy.


He speaks his soul in that, which from his mouth destroys all my dissembling.
I know that Ring, thou falser than the Devil; I know it is Marinda's, your new
Mistress: tak^ her, but take her far from me be sure; keep her as thou would
secrets that would damn thee; for if she take but Air, she is no more; it will
be all infected with my Sighs and Curses, and 'twill be catching, Sir: look
to it, it will.


You're grown a hectoring Whore!


Leave me, or such another word from thee will put thee into danger. Dare
thou upbraid the faults thou hast created? Furies possess me, that I may
encounter the like Fate or killing Blasts! Oh I could rave to think I want that
power that might destroy thee!


Do not turn Witch before thy time, Corina.


I would I were, that I might be an age in damning thee: But words are Air that
blow above thy head, and cannot wound nor blast.


Nay, if you rave, I'll leave ye; fare ye well. -- You will not go.


And is it true, hast thou abandoned me? Can thou forget our numerous Blisses
past, the hours we've wasted out in Tales of Love, and cursed all interruption
but of Kisses, which 'twixt thy charming words I ever gave thee; when the whole
live-long day we thought too short, yet blessed the coming night? Hast thou
forgot, false are thy Vows, all perjured, and thy Faith broken as my poor lost
forsaken heart? and would thou wish me live to see this Change! Could thou
believe, if thou had hid it from the talking world, my heart could not have
found it out by sympathy! A foolish unconsidering faithless man!


This is as troublesome as Rage to me.


Some comfort that thou dost confess you're base; and this last blaze of my
departing Love, has but a minutes light, and now 'tis gone.


It went in fume, and leaves a scent behind it which does offend my sense:
Farewell.


Farewell. And dost thou think I'll part with thee thus tamely! Faithless
unthinking fool, by Heaven, no other woman shall possess thee; the perjured
heart you gave, thus I demand:


Pray leave her, Sir, your presence but inflames her.


I will: look to her, prithee. I was too rash, and mist from too much violence
and rage -- I might have more securely done the business.

No, raging Lust my wilful fate does move;

The Gods themselves cannot be wise and love.


This man whom I abhor because his Friend, through all my rage, I see has
passion for me, raise it, ye Powers, till it become so high to be employed to
any use, I'll put it to a fatal instrument of my Revenge.


Loveliest of all your injured Sex. --


You're charitable to the forsaken, Sir, but 'tis alas all thrown away on me;
for I can never more believe there can be honesty in man, since Wellman is all
Vice.


What Devil, envious of his glorious Choice, contrived to make him faithless to
such Beauty! Had I that Blessing, which I dare not name, hardly dare wish, 'tis
so above my merit, I should despise, as useless and unnecessary, all the vast
Joys besides Heaven has in store, and at thy feet lay all my Fortunes down, and
set up my eternal rest with thee.


Just so he spoke, and I fond fool believed, and tired him out with love; but
you're all false, inconstant, faithless Tyrants, and betrayers even in that
very minute that you gain us; we forfeit all our hopes in you for ever. I can
believe no more.


Silence and Modesty were wont to be my two accustomed Virtues; but my Love
grows high and rages in me like a storm: Would you'd believe my Vows; but you
have been deceived that way already: therefore, thou dear, thou lovely injured
fair one, credit my plain Sincerity. I love, and to be short, would have thee
pay my flame, I will be grateful in what way you please. Take me to your
Embraces, to your Bed. I am not used to ask such Questions, Madam, and want
terms fit to dress 'em in.


And do you take me then for such a Creature, that have no sense but Appetite,
the Brutal part of Love? Forbear to name it to me, you offend me.


Forgive me; I would have you love me too: and if I have too hastily run over
what ought to have been said of my vast Passion, and came too rudely on the
wisht-for part, 'tis the effects of youthful ignorance, of hot desire, and
eager to be happy.


How shall I fain to yield!





Shall I, or can I trust again? Oh fool, how natural 'tis for women to believe!
But when you've gained the utmost that you ask, will you not then grow cold?


As soon the Sun shall lose its native heat, denying warmth to Flowers.


I must have more than this: Can you believe this heart that has been used so
ill already, can you trust on feeble Vows? Can you be bravely kind, resolve a
Deed would shake a Soul that is not fixed in Love?


Is it a Deed that I may do with honour?


I did not study that; but if there be any thing that stands in competition
with your Love, it is not worth my owning.


Be it what it will, 'tis for so rich a Prize, without demanding what, I'll vow
it done.


I hate this Wellman: You may guess the rest. Good day to you.


Leaving me! by Heaven we must not part: Love and Desire are madly raving in
me; my impatient Heat admits of no resistance: I cannot-live, without you grant
me instantly that which I dare not ask.


As long as Wellman lives, I've made a Vow never to love again; yet am I
understood.


Will you be mine when Wellman is no more?


By all my hopes, by my last best of wishes.


Be mine, and only mine, for ever mine?


Inviolably yours.


Then hear me, on my knees I make this Vow: Wellman shall die before to morrows
light. Now may I hope my Bliss?


Yes, when the Deed is done. And for a Token that you have dispatcht him, bring
me that Diamond that he wears, and which he did refuse me. -- Do you pause --


Only the manner, Sweet --


Oh you may pick a sudden Quarrel with him, word it to blows, and then take all
advantages.


And will my Vows to kill him, merit nothing?


No, I have vowed, and if you love, you'll yield to it.


Enough: Farewell.

Delays in Love's the Lovers only Hell.

And Vices like to swelling Rivers flow,

The further that they run they bigger grow.

Heaven! how near was I to being undone! I'll fly, lest the temptation
overtake me.


Dashit with a bag of money, Mr. Dashit following.


Well, is the money right?


Just fifty pound, Honey, in good hard Half-crowns.


Well, Mr. Trickwell, 'tis your confounded Worship puts me to this Charge; but
an I catch thee, an I do not charge thee with as many Irons, may thou cozen
me again, Knave, may thou cozen me again. Well, Wife, is the Barber come?
I'll be trimmed, and then to my Neighbour Glistens the Goldsmith to new furnish
my self with Plate.


Truly Husband, surely-Heaven is not pleased with our Vocation; we wink at the
sins of our Customers, our Wines are merely Protestant, and I now speak it with
grief of heart, we fry Fish with salt Butter, to the burden of my Conscience,
calling our Wines by forty heathenish names to disguise truth.


Hold your prating; a Pox of your Conscience, go mind your business in the
Bar, score double, and mend the matter with a vengeance.

How now, Friend, what are you?


A Barber, Sir, the Widow Scowres man, an't like your Worship; my name's
Timothy Hazard, Sir.


Very well, very well; and how does my Godson, Timothy?


Very well, an't like your Worship; he's gone to trim Parson Cuffett.


And how long have you been a Barber, Timothy?


A Year, an't like your Worship, come Christmas.


What, what, and a good Workman, Timothy? And may I trust my self in thy hands,
Timothy?


Oh doubt me not, Sir, I'll shave your Worship as cleverly, as your Worship
shall confess, by that time I've done. -- Hah, 'tis Cash!


Well, Timothy, and what's the News, Timothy? You Barbers are notable
News-mongers, good Commonwealthsmen: You --


Marry, Sir, I know none but of the Speaking Child and the Monster.


How, the Monsters! what Monsters, good Timothy?


Has not your Worship heard of the Monster, the Gravesend-Monster?


By my Troth not I.


Why, Sir, there came ashore last night four and twenty huge horrible
monstrous devouring --


Bless us! what?


Whales, Sir; which no sooner came ashore, but they turned into fearful
Elephants that roared, then into Cockatrices that crowed and frighted all the
Judges out of Westminster-hall.


Good Lord!


And in a moment these Cockatrices were turned into so many huge Giants in
Scarlet, with Triple Crowns on their heads, and forked Tongues that hiss so
loud, the noise is heard to the Royal Exchange; which has put the Citizens into
such a Consternation, that 'tis thought the world's at an end.


Good Lord! And what may this portend, Timothy?


Portend, Sir, Poperie, Sir, Poperie; and these Monsters are called the four
and twenty Whores of Babylon.


Oh monstrous! Four and twenty Whores! the Nation will be over-run with
Poperie indeed, Timothy: Bless us, what monstrous things are these Popish
Monsters! Well, in grace of God my Wife and I will go see these four and
twenty Whores. Nay, nay, God bless little England; this must portend rightdown
Poperie, that's certain. Well, and hast thou no merry News, Timothy?


Faith, Sir, they say that there's five and twenty couple of Bears are to
dance a Dance in Paris-Garden before the King; and four and twenty couple of
French Apes play to 'em upon Flute doux.


Oh Pox, Timothy, this must be a lye, Timothy; and this be not a lye, I am an
Ass efaith: Four and twenty Bears dance to Flutes douxes! Ha, ha, ha.


'Tis credible reported, Sir. -- Shut your Eyes close, Sir, closer yet, Sir,
this Ball will make 'em smart.


Aye, aye, Timothy, I do wink.


Hold, Sir, your head will take cold; Dashit.


Ha, ha, ha! Four and twenty couple of English Bears dance to the Music of
French Apes! Ha, ha, ha! in faith, good Timothy, thou make my Worship smile,
-- But hark ye, Timothy, dost know one Trickwell? a villainous Rogue, Timothy,
cheated me last night of Fifty pound in Plate; but I'll Plate him, with a Pox,
an I catch him. Come, haste, good Timothy. Art thou free, Timothy? I am one of
the Common Council, Timothy, and may do thee good shortly. Why Timothy!
Timothy! dost leave me in the Suds? Why Timothy! I shall be blind with
winking. Timothy! Hah, you -- Wife, my money, Wife!


What's the noise here? you are always bawling.


'Owns, ye Whore, where's Timothy?


What Timothy?


Why the Barber, Jade, the Barber.


The Barber! I saw him go half a quarter of an hour since. Why, are you not
trimmed?


Trimmed, a Pox trim ye; where's the money, the money, the money, ye Jade? I am
trimmed with a vengeance!


What's the money gone! the whole Fifty pound in the bag!


I have winked fair, in the Devils name.


Pray, Godfather, give me your Blessing.


A Pox of Blessing, I am Cursing, Rogue: where's Timothy, thy Mothers man
Timothy?


My Mother has no such, forsooth.


My money! my fifty pound! A Plague of all Timothies; who was't trimmed me?


I know not, Godfather; only one met me and borrowed my Furniture, for a Jest,
he said.


What kind of Fellow was't? Oh --


A little slender nimble well-spoken fellow, Sir.


Oh 'tis Trickwell, that Rogue Trickwell! a black Hair and Eye-brows, and grey
Eyes?


Yes, Godfather.


Aye, aye, 'tis he. Raise the street upon him; I'll hang him if there be Law
for money. Oh I shall faint! Wife, wife, fetch me the Rosa solves.


Good Husband, take comfort in the Lord, I'll play the Devil but I'll recover
it; have a good heart, 'tis but a weeks false scoring in the Parliament-time.


So, some comfort: Wife, when Wife, I say, is there any Music in the house?


Yes, Sweet-heart, Mr. Squeeks Noise.


Bid 'em play then: And John come kiss me now, now, now, and John come kiss me
now. Trickwell, he has shaved me, he has trimmed me! I will go hang my self; but
first let's have a Dance.


COme, prithee Ample, sing the Song Wellman made upon the Kiss I gave him.


No, prithee don't, my stomach turns against kissing extremely.


Why, Diana?


By the faith I have in this Beauty, 'tis the most unsavorie Ceremony, the
most saucy Custom to Ladies; every Fellow now-a-daies with greasy sweaty
Faces, stinking Breath, and nasty Teeth, must take a body over the Lips with
such familiarity; nay they think 'tis grateful to us too. Lord, there was an
old Judge laid me over the face last night, and did so squeeze his grizly
Brissles through my Lips, I'd as live a kissed a row of Pins with the points to
me; and yet I was forced to take it, take it with a Curtsy too: for my part I
had as lieve they should belch in my face.


Fie, what a Comparison's there!


Suitable to the beastly Complement; and yet I love kissing too, if I may choose
my man and place.


Fie, if any one should hear ye!


Let a thousand, I'd not be ashamed; 'tis not those that talk roguishly, that
are to be suspected: you shall have a hypocritical holy Sister mince that
publicly, that she'll receive with open arms privately: For my own part, I
consider Nature without Apparel, without disguising; I give thoughts, words,
and truth, a modest boldness; I love no prohibited things, and I would have
nothing prohibited but by Virtue.


But we must consider the world, who thinks severe modesty a woman's Virtue.


Fie, fie, Virtue is freedom, handsome, cheerful mirth; I hate a severe,
froward, ignorant, ill-bred behaviour in a woman; 'tis uncivil, hanged, I'll
have none on it. Ample, what think you?


Faith, Madam, I can only stand up for Kissing; I never ventured farther, tho
I would fain.


Thou art not of my mind; for I'll ne'er marry.


Marry God forbid! what will you do then?


En strive against the flesh: Marry! no, faith, Husbands are like Lots in a
book, one may prick a hundred times and find all blanks. A Husband! a Hangman:
a careless domineering insolent thing, that grows like Corral, whilst under
water, soft and tender; but married, and above the waves, hard, stubborn, not
to be bowed nor managed: whilst your humble servant, Oh how assiduous,
troublesomely officious and busy; but wed, the worstbred Tyrant and Sloven in
nature. No, no, I'll live my own woman, I -- and let the worst come to the
worst, I had rather be called Wanton than a Fool.


Oh but a virtuous Marriage!


Virtuous Marriage! there's no more affinity between Virtue and Marriage, than
a man and his Horse: Wedlock may manage Virtue in the right way, but 'tis
oftner loose and unbridled. I hate restraint upon my Virtue, or to owe it to
the honour of a Husband; yet I like thy match well enough, a handsome man, good
humour, witty, and wild; but my Sir John is such a tool, fit to make nothing
but a Cuckold of. See if they be not here.


My sweet Marinda!


Good morrow, my little Sooterkin; how is't, my pretty Life? -- Nay, I call
all my Mistresses so.


Indeed! How many Mistresses have you had?


Some Nine, or thereabouts.


Then you have had nine lives, like a Cat.


Mew -- you would be kissed for that.


Yes, if I liked the mouth that offered it.


By my troth, that must not be mine; I do not love to endanger my back with
stooping so low: if you would wear Chipeeners, much might be done. -- Nay, let
me alone to find a Rowland for your Oliver.


Your pestilent wit will never make me ashamed of my shortness: the faults I
can mend my self, I blush at; but those which Nature made, let her bear the
shame for me, I have nothing to do with it; but you never forget to be witty
on my Beauty, Sir Knight, I shall be even with you.


Nor remember, by my troth, but as I do Religion, for Controversy sake only,
no hurt.


But, Brother, for I'll now call you so, since my Father this night resolves to
contract you -- Shall we not have Fiddles and dance? Sir John I'm sure will
make one, and my City Lover the Aldermans son, Mr. Shatter, he's a most spruce
Dancer of the first bench in the School, I'll promise ye.


Fore Gad, and well remembered, he borrowed a Diamond-Ring of me last night to
make a Visit in to a Lady; and was't you? The Devil take me, an I had thought
that, he should ne'er a had it. Adsbud he's here!


Good day to my fair Mistress.


Good morrow, sweet Mr. Shatter.


Sweet Mr. Shatter! Pox on him, is he a Rival now?


You're fine to day, rich in Jems, Mr. Shatter.


A Toy, Madam, I bought to please my finger.


I am more precious to you than your finger; why not to oblige me? Come, I'm no
professed beggar, you know.


Faith and troth, Madam, as I hope to be saved -- Oh Lord, as the saying is --
I protest upon my honour.


Do not pawn it for such a trifle.


As I'm a Gentleman, as God shall sa' me, I'll give a --


Is this yours to give?


Oh Lord, Madam, that's such a thing now, why should your Ladyship -- you're
the strangest Joker, I protest. --


Hum! now I remember, I think I have seen this on a persons hand, an humble
servant of mine, one Sir John Empty.


Pox of her memory! a such another Madam. When, what a Devil's he to her now?


Nay, I'm sure this is it.


Troth, 'tis, Madam: the poor fellow wanted a little money to treat some women
last night, and so he pawned it to me. 'Tis a Pawn, good faith, or else you
should have it.


Hark ye, thou base lying son of a cheating Cit, how dares thy impudence hope
to prosper? Were it not for the respect I bear this noble Company, I would so
bang thee! --


How now, what's the matter here?


Nothing, Madam, nothing. He was a little uncivil with me last night; for
which, because I should not call him to an account, he desired to make me any
satisfaction. The Coward trembles at my very presence; but I have him on the
hip, I'll take the forfeit of his Ring.


Hark ye, Sir, what's that you whisper to her?


Nothing, Sir, but to satisfy her that the Ring was yours, not pawned to me,
but lent to grace my finger; and so I told her I begged your pardon for being a
little too familiar with your Reputation.


Yes indeed, he did; and said you would make him any satisfaction for a
rudeness you did him last night, but he would take the forfeit of the Ring
for it.


How now, ye base Scoundrel!


Hold, hold, my Mistress does but rally, faith.


Thy Mistress! I disown thee; you're a child, I'll give thee to my woman.
Come, Sister, let's make us ready for the Ball anon. Come, you shall be
friends.


He shall renounce you then, and restore my Ring; Adsbud he shall.


With all my heart, to do you service, Sir.


And here I make an offer of it.


Well, I'll take it, Sir, to make me thine to night. Farewell, Brother, till
anon.


To be hurt thus by a Coward, a beaten Coward, what madness has possessed thee?


Aye, but how the Devil did I know he was a Coward? could not you have
whispered me that?


Well, Sir, I'll try to make your peace with Diana. Leave me, I've business
now.


Oh, Wellman! no Age did ere produce so damned a Creature so fair, and yet so
false: had I been vicious, what a desperate wretched thing I'd been!


Prithee what's the matter?


Heaven! I have been tempted to thy death.


What is the Fury mad?


Most damnable!


Hearing I'm to be marri'd.


She raved at first like winds let loose to ruin, But fixed on this resolve,
she calmed again, And listened to my love, my eager love; which when it urged
her to create me happy, she pressed me to this Murder, as the way, the only
means to gain her heart for ever. Mad with my flame, I could deny her nothing,
and then my lawless lust, not I, protested, confirmed it with a thousand Oaths
to kill ye, and bring this Ring to witness you were dead; and then her lovely
body was my hire.


Horrid! nothing's defamed but by its proper self: Physicians abuse Remedies,
Lawyers spoil Law, and woman only is a shame to woman. You've vowed to kill
me?


Most solemnly; for, friend, I must enjoy her. Oh that a man of sense should
fancy pleasure in one whose soul's so black and infamous; but 'tis my fate,
and I must bow before it.


Thou shalt; I will contrive the means to satisfy thee. Come, I give a Ball to
night to my Marinda; thou shalt be there: and by the way, I'll tell thee what
we will do to make a seeming Quarrel, that all the world, as well as this
Corina, may think I'm killed indeed, whilst I, lodged in some place obscure,
may give thee time to cool this feavourish blood. Show her this Ring, protest
me surely dead; and when you're satiated, we'll laugh at folly. Come, let us
go.


Well, Neighbour Glisten, I am beholden to you for this credit till next week,
and I am pleased in my choice of this piece of Plate; a Punch-bowl is a most
fashonable thing, now French Wines are prohibited: I know 'twill please my
Wife. Well, I am forty pound indebted to you for it, honest Mr. Glisten.


Your word's sufficient, Sir, an 'twere for a thousand pound.


A Pox of the Rogue that robbed me! Well, I shall catch him; and if I do, he
shall half rot in Fetters in the Dungeon till he despair; then I'll hire a
Parson on purpose that shall persuade him he is damned; then after see him with
my own eyes hanged without singing any Psalm: Lord, Lord, that he should have
but one neck!


Oh, Neighbour, you must use a Conscience in all things; but do your will.
You'll command me no farther?


No, only lend me your servant to carry this Bowl home to my Peg; I am to
step into Leaden-hall.


Willingly, Sir: Here, Jervice, carry home this Plate.


To my Wives own hands deliver it, good Jervice.


I'll warrant you, Sir.


To her own hand, honest Jervice.


I have delivered better things than this to a woman's own hand, Sir, before
now.


Monsieur, please you to buy a very fine delicate Ball, a sweet Ball, a
Camphere-ball.


Prithee away.


One a Ball to shave, one a Ball to scour.


Name 'em not to me, talk not of shaving; a Pox of the Rogue, I have been
shaved, I have.


I'll shave ye smoother yet: That Bowl, that delicious Bowl, I must be drunk
out of; I have a fancy for it, it is too good for cheating Vintners: I say it
must be mine; therefore, my worshipful Dashit, look to it: What tho there be
rounds in a Ladder, and knots in a Halter? hang the Devil, I'll do it; I must
draw a Lot for the great Punch-bowl.


Nay, Jervice, stay and drink, good Jervice; and how does Mrs. Glisten? I knew
her well, she was a very good patient Creature, efaith; she has born, and born,
and bore again, good woman, as well as I, with a bad Husband; yet I can find
no fault in Mr. Glisten: Here's to him, Jervice, he knew me before I was
married; an honest man he is, Cheapside.


Yes, indeed forsooth, so she is.


She paints now, and yet she keeps her Husband's Customers still. In truth,
Jervice, a handsome Wife in a fine carved seat, is the best Ware in a mans
shop.


Yes, indeed forsooth, so 'tis.


But well, Jervice, remember me to your Master and Mistress, and tell 'em I
acknowledge the receipt of this, acknowledge the receipt. -- This 'tis to have
good Education, and to be brought up in a Tavern; and though my Husband be a
Citizen, all London knows I keep as good Company as any she within the Walls.
Good day, honest Jervice.


Fair hour to you, Mistress.


A pretty Complement! I'll write it down: A beautiful thought to you, Sir.


Your Husband and my Master Mr. Glisten has sent you a Jowl of fresh Salmon,
and they intend to come both to Dinner presently to season your new Bowl,
forsooth, which your Husband entreats you would send back by me, that his Arms
may be engraven on it, which he forgot before.


Are you sent by no Token? Nay, I have a wit.


Yes forsooth, by the same Token he was dry shaved this morning.


A sad Token, but true: here, pray commend me to your Master and Mistress, and
tell 'em I expect 'em impatiently.

Impatient was well again! Sam! why Sam, I say!


Anon, anon, forsooth.


Come quickly, spread the Table, lay Napkins, and do ye hear? perfume the Room
a little; it does so smell of this profane Tobacco! I could never endure this
ungodly Tobacco, since our Doctor told me 'twas a bane to Propagation. -- So
spread handsomely: Lord, these Boys do things so arsie-versie! You show your
breeding. Well, I am a Gentlewoman by my Sisters side, I can tell you: so --
methodically. Hum! I wonder where I got that word! Oh 'twas Sir John Empty bid
me kiss him methodically; 'tis a sweet man!


Well, Tony Dashit, be not discouraged, be not disheartened, thou wilt recover
all.


Oh are you come, Husband? where are they?


How now! how now! how now! what, a Feast towards! and in my private Parlour!
Who treats, who treats, Peg?


Prithee leave fooling; are they come?


Come! who come?


Lord, How strange you make it!


Strange! what's strange? is the woman mad!


Aye strange: You know of none that sent me a Jowl of Salmon, you -- and said
they would come dine with me!


Hah, fresh Salmon! peace, not I; peace, the Messenger has mistaken the house:
let's eat it up quickly, before it be inquired for. Come, come, Vinegar
quickly, Sam. -- Some good luck yet, efaith; I never tasted Salmon that relished
better in my life. Well, 'tis a rare thing to feed at other men's cost.


Other men's cost! prithee did not you send this Salmon?


No, I say, no.


By Mr. Glisten's man?


I say no.


Who sent word that he and his Wife would come to dinner with me?


No, no.


And hancel my new Bowl.


Hah, Bowl!


And withal, commanded me to send the Bowl back.


Hah, back!


That your Arms might be put on it.


Oh!


By the same token that you were dry shaven this morning.


Oh!


And thereupon I sent back the Bowl: nay, and I bear not a brain --


And is the Bowl gone? is it delivered departed? defunct? hah!


Delivered? yes sure, 'tis delivered.


I will never more say my Prayers; and is the Bowl gone?


Gone: God is my witness I delivered it with no more design to be cozened
on it, than the child unborn.


Look to my house, I am haunted with Evil Spirits: hear me, thou Plague to man,
thou Wife thou, if I have not my Bowl again, I will go to the Devil; I'll to a
Conjurer: look to my house, I'll raise all the Wise men in London.


Bless me, what fearful words are these! I trust in God he is but drunk sure.


I must have my Salmon, I cannot afford the old Rogue so good a bit; I must
have it to season my Punch. Now for a Master-piece: Fair Mistress --


Oh have I caught ye! Sam, shut up the doors, Sam.


Peace, good Mistress, I'll tell you all: A Jest, a mere Jest; your Husband did
it only to fright ye: the Bowl's at my Masters, and thither your Husband's
gone, and has sent me in all haste, lest you should be over-frighted, to invite
you to come to dinner to him.


Praise Heaven 'tis no worse!


And bad me desire you to send the Salmon before, and your self to follow: My
Mistress will be very glad to see you.


I pray take it. Well, I was never so out of my wits in my life: Pray thank
your Mistress. Sam, my Hood, Sam, and Gloves, and Scarf, quickly.


How now, whither are you janting, hah?


Come, play the fool no longer, will you go?


Whither, in the name of Madness, whither?


Whither! why to Mr. Glisten's to eat the Salmon. How strange you make it!


Your meaning, Jade, your meaning.


Lord bless me, did not you send for me and for the Salmon, by the self-same
fellow that came for the Bowl?


'Tis well, 'tis wondrous well! and are you in your right wits, Jade, are you?


An you make an Ass of me, I'll make an Ox of you, I tell ye that.


Nay, Jade, be patient; for look ye, I may be mad, or drunk, or so; tho you can
bear more than I, I do well: I will not curse; but Heaven knows my mind. Come,
let's go hear some Music. I will never pray again, that's certain: Let's go
hear some doleful Music. Nay; if Heaven forget to prosper Knaves, the Citie's
like to thrive: I'll go hang my self out of the way.


MOre Lights there, Boy, more Wine and Lights. -- Come, come, son Wellman, for
so I must call you now; in truth you are not merry, Sir, not heartily merry:
Come, we'll have the other Dance, efact we will, Mr. Wellman. Diana, when Girl, I
say! Adsme you're all out of sorts; I thought thy Tongue and heels could never
have been idle: Come, come, hands, hands, for shame.


Come, Mrs. Diana, I'm your man at this sport; I never stand out at these
businesses: Your hand, fair Mistress.


You lie, Sir.


Do I, Sir? I vow to God, I ask your pardon, Sir; I durst to have sworn I'd
been in the right.


What, quarrelling about the Spoil before the Victory!


Nay, Madam, as for that matter, I'm a man of Reason, and Frank Friendly's an
honest fellow, and my friend.


You lie again, Sir.


Well, well, Sir, you are disposed to be merry, or so, but there be more
Ladies -- When, what the Devil ails he, trow?


Pox on it, how rarely he huffs now! Well, it's a most admirable thing this same
Courage, if a man had but the knack on it!


Come, Zouks, you're tardy, villainous: Young Men and Maids, to it, to it, I say,
and do not idle time. Come, Minstrels, play away, efaith my dancing-days are
not done yet.


Friendly, you're out.


Death, you lie!


The Quarrel, Gentlemen, the Quarrel! efaith, here's fine doings!


Oh, Sir, you have the advantage of the place.


I do believe I have; and you're not safe here: I'll meet you, Sir, anon.


Do so. Farewell.


For Heavens sake, Sir, come back -- what would you do? if there be ought that
you take ill from Well man, declare it here, and let us end the Quarrel. I know
'tis some mistake; I know he loves you: let not a trifle set such friends at
odds. Speak to him, Sister.


Why how now, Sir, is this the proof you give me of your Love! Oh you have
showed your self a gallant Spark! I thought it Jealousy, and took it kindly
your rudeness to our Knight here; but to a friend, at least the man you call
so, gives me some cause to fear you're angry at his Contract with my Sister.
Be friends, or I'll believe so.


Do so, I care not.


Hah! do you not love me? Do not make me serious, I shall be out of humour if
you do; and Heaven knows what a strange thing I may prove then; I never tried
it yet.


I care not; pray unhand me.


I will, in spite of all that would detain thee. I never found my self thus
much concerned.


What sudden flaw is this?


By Heaven, I know not, Sir, unless some hidden flame for thee --


It cannot be, I never saw a glance, a look, or smile, could be suspected Love:
'tis some old Grudge. Dear, do not follow him, my heart presages something that
is fatal.


Away, ye fool, persuade him not to fight! away, a Coward! hanged, he were not
worth thy love then.


Honour, my Deer, obliges me to go. Would have the man that has thy heart in
keeping, be pointed out for Cowardice? Away, thou need not fear, we shall at
most only exchange a Wound. Thy sacred Image guards my heart entire, and keeps
it safe from danger. Go to the Banquet, entertain the Ladies, and be merry.


By Cocks bones shall she, and be very merry, to think she's like to have so
brisk a Spark to her Bed-fellow. Go thy ways, William, and God's blessing go
with thee, Boy: if thou wants a second, I can push yet, I'm not so old efaith.


I humbly thank ye, Sir; we shall think better on it perhaps before we fight.


Or shall Sir John go? he's a man of mettle, I assure you, Brother.


What the Devil do ye mean! I have mind to take this opportunity to be with
thee, thou little wanton --


Fear not, Sir, I'll excuse ye.


You little amiable mischievous Ape you, what a seurvie malicious Jest did you
break upon me, to make the Proverb good, You had rather lose your Friend than
your Jest?


A Jest! it was a parlous true one then: I said you were all Mettle; A brazen
face, a leaden brain, and a copper nose and beard.


Wit, Lightning, and Quick-silver, thou little more than Dwarf, and something
less than woman.


A Wasp, a Wasp! Your Wit stings, Sir.


You're plaguy sharp; pray God thou be not too far gone in Love; if thou
should, I must be forced in honour to marry thee, tho introth't would be
hardly brought about.


No matter, Sir; things got by struggling, bring the greater pleasure, when dull
Consent but palls the Appetite. Then you're a fool too, the most admirable
necessary for a Husband in the whole Creation, and the best Block to carve a
Cuckold in.


When, what a tart Monkey's this! By my troth if thou had not so much wit, I
could find in my heart to take thee for better for worse; for I find thou
could bear me with all my faults.


Bear with thee! I wonder how thy Mother bore thee nine whole months about her,
when I'll be sworn I can scarce endure thee in my sight an hour.


Alas for you, sweet Soul, good lack! A pox of your Wit: By the Lord Harry, you
are the proudest, scoffing, scurvy, idle, fantastical, whimsical -- Ads nigs,
because you have read St. George for England, Amades de Gall, and the Legend of
Lies, you are licensed, forsooth, to abuse all the world: Egad, Sir Lyonell,
your Father shall know it.


He must not tho -- Nay, do not go in Rancor, good dear Knight; for I must
confess a secret to you; which if you knew my heart, you would believe there
were nothing so cruel there as you imagine. I speak very kind things of you
between my Maid and I anight as I am going to bed, and next my Prayers too,
Heaven forgive me! I spoke things of you that I would not wish you should know.


Nay, look ye, for my part, if I have not most religiously vowed my heart
yours, been drunk twice a day to your health, swallowed Fire and inches of your
Cuff-strings, eat Candles, pledged your health in Chamber-lie, run Pins into my
Arms, and done all manner of gallant and heroic actions, I'm the veriest son
of a Whore breathing; and yet to tell me after all this, I have a brazen face,
a leaden brain, and a copper nose,


And de ye love me so indeed?


Love you! 'Sbud, whosoever says I do not, and honour you too, Egad; nay, and
if you would, would marry you, is a son of a Whore, and a Scoundrel, by the
Lord.


And let me tell you in return, that -- Heaven forgive me! And my Sister knows
I have took drink and slept upon it, that if ever I marry, it shall be you; and
I will marry, and yet I hope I do not say it shall be you neither. Come, let's
to the Banquet.


Oh, dear Creature, I do not say you do: Lord, how was I mistaken in thy heart!
But will you hereafter cast a kind look at me, to put me in countenance before
Company? That I would be at now.


Much may be done. Come, let's to the Banquet.


And will you, my pretty little Darling of mine eyes, marry me? As I hope to
breath, my Purse, Body, Soul and all, shall be thine.


Most affectionately spoken! Well, get my Fathers consent, and as for mine --
the Devil take me if ever thou gets it.


A Kiss, and 'tis a Match. Thus Hymen should begin; A falling out, sometimes
proves falling in.


Well, my dear friend, tell me with open heart, hath not my Reasoning reclaimed
thy Folly, preserved thy falling Virtue, and secured it?


There is no Virtue in Blood, no Reasoning in Desire: But shall I not in this
fond act of Love, do that which will to thee render my name abhorred, and make
thee hate me?


By Heaven, no.


And shall I then? may I enjoy Corina?


Thou shalt, by all our Friendships. Here, take this Ring, show it to that fair
Devil, it will confirm me dead; which rumour, with my absence, will make good
-- Possess thy Love, grow weary in her Arms, then be thy self again.


But if Report grows strong, and I am seized, where shall I find thee?


At Glistens my Goldsmith in Cheapside, to whom I'll tell our business and
design.


Thither I'll come and tell thee how I thrive. Till when, farewell.


When woman's in (...) heart, the soul's all hell. Now Repentance, the
after-clap of ^ools, light on thee; I have an Art left that may reclaim thee
yet. I'll make thee fall into the vilest dangers, even worse than woman's Lust.
No Goldsmith will I see, or tell my story to, but in some sit disguise I'll
hide my self impossible to be discovered, and leave thee to two friends, a
Whore and Law, that will be plague sufficient for one man; but is this
friendship in me?

No man is purely virtuous, no Virtue purely kind;

The end being good, the way is well designed.


Oh, impudence, am I then fallen so low to be solicited by Pimps and Panders!
Hell take the trade, if this be the effects on it.


Madam, whatever you may think of me, my Present has the show of Quality;
here's Plate, a Present that a Lord might make ye; and I was once a Gentleman,
tho I am fallen so low by faithless Vice, yet tho undone, poor and deprived of
all, I have a heart and will, that still remains, and fain would venture on
when Beauty calls. And if I have a stock, which Heaven and my own industry
has lent, I must employ it still to that dear use. Take first this little
Tribute of my conquered heart; I may in time increase it: were it Crowns, here
they should all be offered.


And thus I'd spurn away: Base servile Villain, who livest by Noise and Riot,
sponging upon the drops that fall from Gentlemen, can thou believe that after
Wellman's love, I could receive a Raskal to my Arms?


If I were there, you'd find but little difference; and possibly the next they
entertain may fail to pay this price I offer ye. This Raskal and that beauteous
haughty thing, bating the Sex, differ but very little. I live by Brauls, by
rapine, and by Spoils, in Fears, Vexations, Dangers, so do you; I eat when I
can get a fool to treat me, and you can do no more: Pox of your pride, methinks
we two might understand each other; you've no Gallant to take your Quarrels up;
you reigned when time was, and I'll do so now, for you have known my love,
shall find my power, tho yet I ne'er durst tell you so.


Nor shall not yet; for tho that Lover's gone, who but to look on would have
made thee tremble, I've Beauty still that may command another Beauty whose
very glance should make thee bow: Gods! and has it lost its awe?


It has, and I'm resolved upon a Conquest.


Death, Sir! stand off, and view my fatal hand, it carries death to the bold
Ravisher, that dares approach unreverendly. A Whore! what tho to her that bears
it 'tis a shame, an infamy that cannot be supported? to all the world besides
it bears a mighty sound, petitioned, sued to, worshipped as a God, presented,
flattered, follow'd, sacrificed to, Monarch of Monarchs, Tyrant of the world,
what does that charming word not signify! And dare thou raise thy hated eyes
so high to gaze on such a Constellation! No, be gone, with all thy base-got
worthless Trisles, quickly pack up, and hence, or I will kill thee.


So, Sir, you had better have looked no higher than Mrs. Mary Dunwell, who can
down with you when money's low; but when once a little in Pocket, you are for
high feeding, forsooth. Go get you gone, I may chance take pity on you when
her passion's over, and do you some service.


No, by Heaven, I'll try my chance this very minute, throw my last Cast, for
the great Stake is set, and will enjoy her now.


Hah! here's somebodie I hope will interrupt you.

What would you, Sir? would you have ought with me? A proper handsome fellow,
but ill dressed.


Madam, I am a Gentleman grown poor, decayed by fortune, and would gladly
serve: I can obey, could you direct me where.


This fellow would serve my turn most admirably! but if I could -- you would
grow proud with feeding well and clean Linen.


I am not bred so ill, but I can tell how to be grateful to you.


In truth he apprehends most discreetly -- but you're too big to wear a Livery.


Not at all; 'tis the fashion now for Ladies to keep tall men in Liveries: your
Page is out of fashion, and your stripling Footman.





Hah, what noise is that!


Heavens! the Rogue sure was ravishing her.


Damned saucy Villain, what was thy pretence?


What's that to thee, bold interrupting Slave, sent by the Devil to hinder my
delight?


Dog --


Hold, do not kill the Raskal; 'tis enough you've saved me from his mischiefs:
pray let him go.


'Tis pity, but I will obey. Take that, and that, that, ye Mongrel Cur; Dogs
should be used so.


Who are ye, pray, to whom I'm so obliged?


One that would gladly serve in any quality.


I'll do thee good; take that.


I wonder whether Friendly has been here!


Madam, one knocks; shall any have admittance?


Only false Wellman's Friend. You may retire, and wait my farther pleasure.


I'll over-hear ye too.


Now, my dear Mistress, Soul of my desires, I come with all the Spoils of
conquering Love, to lay 'em at thy feet. My Stop is dead, the Stop of all my
ravishing Happiness; and here's the witness of my Victory.


Dead! Wellman dead! Oh thou inhumane friend, that bore that title only to
betray him! Dead! and by thee! Heaven, can you let him live! Support me, or I
fall to earth with this sad killing news.


Heavens, Madam, what do ye mean? or shall I vow to you he is not dead?


Hah! not dead!


What would you have me do? When I confirm him dead, you grow enraged; and when
I say he lives, you kill with frowns.


Traitor, and hast thou then deceived my hopes? and is not Wellman dead? Hell,
what is man! how did thou swear, how did thou prostrate lie, and begged to
give me any proof of thy false Passion? I asked thee this; and is it thus you
give it! Oh for a quick revenging Power to kill thee!


Calm that dear angry face, and tell my Love which way it best shall please.


Is't in thy choice, perjured, forsworn, and false, to tell me either? Damn thy
double Tongue, and all this Beauty that mis-led thy truth, if thou had ever
any in thy soul.


Then since it is my destiny to offend, which way soere I take I'll follow
truth, and tell you, Madam, all your strict Commands I did obey, and Wellman is
no more.


No more! why what had thou to do with my Commands? Oh thou hast killed all
that my soul could love! Tho I commanded, yet he was thy friend, and that in
generosity should have saved him. Go from my eyes, far from my thoughts
remain.


Is this then the reward of all my Love? What have I done, but been obedient?
Had I prized my Friendship above that Love, would you have took it well? Yes, I
will be gone, and to the judging world

Prove who's the greater Criminal you or I:

I killed a Friend, you make a Lover die.


I must not let him go, till I'm revenged. Stay, I relent; Oh stay, and give my
heart a little time to take leave of its old acquaintance, ere it'go to make a
new and unknown choice again. Alas, I loved this Wellman, loved him dearly, more
than my life.


Why did you kill him then?


Why, in my own defence; he gave the first, I fear the mortal wound.


Then think it just, and think of him no more, but of the dear reward you are
to give for all my service. Come, will you not?


I will; but you'll receive it decently, and not with hands distained
i'th'blood of him that lately was so dear to me?


Still on that subject? do not put me off; I've left the business of my life
undone, and had not power to go about my Pardon, so hasty for the dear reward
I was; and is it thus you treat me?


You'll find me all you wish, give me an hours time to compose my self; and
all this upon my brow is but a modest decency; one hour of joy will chase it
all away.


Do not you dally with me?


No by Heaven, when you return I'll give ye your reward, and what you most
deserve -- a Halter 'tis,


Here, keep this Ring, and think each minutes absence is a long year in love.
Farewell.


Farewell, vain credulous treacherous fool, farewell. Mischief inspire me now
with all your Arts; methinks the sight of this instructs my Soul in a most
noble piece of Villainy: I will to fair Marinda with this Ring, and frame a
story of so cunning mischief, shall stab her through the ear into the heart.
By Heaven, 'tis greatly brave, and I'll begin it: Then when this false believer
does return, I'll be prepared for him -- What, Hoe, who waits?


Now what a Devil is this woman grown!


My Hoods and Fan, and call a Coach immediately:


Where ever you command. -- This was happy!


Nay, good Sir, be not angry that I sent; I was afraid some harm would come of
it, and so I fear there is.


And did no one hear of him?


None; pray Heaven he be well; my heart misgives me.


Well, if he be lost, there's a brave fellow gone, and in a time the King had
need of Soldiers; there's idle Husbands enough for you, Baggages.


I have a little kind of a scurvy pain too, which I do not use to feel about
my heart, for Friendly -- but none shall see it in my troubled looks: not that
I care who knew the loving secret, but I'll not be laughed at.


Leave your whimpering, do: Would thou had a heart like thy Sister here. When
would she cry for a man thus?


Faith, Sir, when I have as much need of a man as she, that is, when I want
one, I cannot dissemble.


Look ye, Sir, she has need enough, and thanks to fortune she's provided for,
with your good liking, noble Sir Lyonell.


Come, Sir, let's have one Marriage well over, before we think of another.
Would we could hear of these Sparks too; 'tis almost midnight: they might have
staid till day-light, and have killed one another like Christians decently, not
by dark, as Cats and Dogs worry each other. I know not what to think on it.


Here's a Lady in a Coach below desires to speak with you.


A Lady at this hour! she shall be welcome; old as I am, I'll not deny a
Lady.


I hope your business is with me, fair Lady.


It would be but ill dispatch'd then.


I know not, Sir; first let me crave your name, or are you Father to the fair
Marinda?


I am, fair Mistress, for want of a better. By the Mass she's very handsome!


My time's but short, and what I have to say I must dispatch. Madam, you had a
Lover once, Young Wellman!


Had! (good Heavens!) I hope and have.


No, Friendly has basely killed him.


Oh wretched lost Marinda!


Look to my Daughter!


Madam, look up; this great concern he merits not: 'twas pity brought me here
to undeceive ye; his Vows and Soul were mine, entirely mine.


Why did thou call me back to life again, or say in pity that you undeceived
me? If you knew Wellman false, why did you stay me? You should have let me
died, 't had been more charitable; but if, as you affirm, he loved you best,
which I believe from that fair form of yours, whilst I remain I needs must love
you too.


This must be malice sure!


Madam, do ye know this Ring? he gave it me, and told me such things of your
tiresome Passion, as gave us cause of laughter all the evening.


I cannot blame him that he loved me not, when so much Beauty as appears in
you, gave him permission to adore it: but methinks 'twas ungentile to make a
sport of me; he should have pitied follies he created: he loved me first; alas,
I sought him not. Diana, for I feeble grow! To morrow should have been my
Wedding-day, now I invite you to my Funeral; bring Flowers and strew the way to
my cold Grave, and lay me down in peace.


Lead her in, and be careful of her; but, Madam --


I cannot hold, I must reveal my self;


Confessed it, said ye, Madam? and to you? on what Acquaintance, pray?


He was in love with me; and seeing no hope of gaining me whilst Wellman was
alive, he picked a Quarrel with him, and dispatch'd him, and vaunted of the
Villainy to me. Please you to go where I'll direct you, Sir, he shall confess
the Murder.


Madam, I'll go; and you, Sir John must bear me company.


With all my heart, Sir.


Madam, your hand. Roger, go you to Mr. Constable, bid him be ready if I have
occasion, and careful who passes the streets to night.


Say thou, Sam, at one Mrs. Dunwell's house? when, she's a Bawd.


Yes, Sir, or my intelligence is false. There lies a Lady, Sir, with whom he's
desperately in love; and having no purchasemoney, 'tis thought, hires the Bawd
at the price of's own body, to get the young Lady, Sir: They call her Corina.


Lord, Lord, what will this wicked world come to! And there thou say I may
be sure to find this villainous Trickwell.


He never lies from thence all day, Sir, as I am informed; 'tis now about his
hour of departure, and this way he must come.


Get ye home, Sam; I'll en take Mr. Constable and a Watchman or two, and fall
to searching. Get ye home, Sam, thou shalt have a new Suit for this, honest
Sam.

But stay, who comes here? this may be he.


Damn this Corina, this proud scornful Beauty, whom I must humble and enjoy. I
know I am a Rogue not worthy of her love, a Raskal that have no one Good about
me, but that I love: And this damned Bawd, to keep me to her self, disgraces me
to Corina.


Aye, aye, this must be he -- Ware shaving, Sir: What ho, the Watch! the Watch!
Takes hold of Trickwell' s Cloak.


Death! 'tis Dashit's voice!

Thieves! Thieves! stop Thieves!


Who goes there? come before the Constable.


Death, you are a pretty fellow of a Constable, to represent the King's Person
indeed! here's a Watch for the Devil! honest men are robbed under your Noses. A
Raskal in the habit of a Vintner set upon me, cried stand and deliver, in the
Kings Highway; he would have had my Purse, but that my heels saved it: Yet he
got my Cloak of rich Camlet, I'll be sworn, new and fair this morning. If you
light on him, seize him, and keep him in the Stocks till the Cloak will hang
him.


Doubt not our diligence, Master, these dangerous times.


Something to drink, Master, we that take pains for the good of the Nation.


Honest men, watch and sleep not. Good night.


Well, Master, we must watch better indeed. Is't not strange that Knaves,
Rogues, and Thieves, should be abroad, and yet we of the Watch, Scrivenors,
Exchange-men, and Taylors, never stir a foot!


Who goes there?


An honest man and a Citizen.


The Knave's drunk, and speaks Riddles.


Come before the Constable; what art thou?


A Vintner.


Bring him near: Hah, what's here, the Cloak?


Oh, Mr. Vintner! is't you? Hold, a rich Camlet-Cloak; 'tis the same.


Oh thou Varlet, does not thou know the Wicked cannot escape the eyes of the
Constable?


What means all this? as I'm an honest man and a Citizen, I took the Cloak --


As you're a Knave, you took the Cloak; we are your witnesses for that.


But, Neighbours, hear me, hear who I am.


A Thief you are, we know.


My name is Dashit.


I, I, we'll dash ye: in with him to the Stocks there, and lock him fast till
morning, that Justice Lackbrain may examine him.


When, but hark ye --


Away with him.


Mr. Constable --


In, I say.


Am I not stark mad yet, not quite an Ass?


You may be in good time, in grace a God, Sir. Well, what would this City do,
if 'twere not for-such necessary Tyrants as our selves to ride the free-born
Jades, and humble 'em?


Prithee hold thy prating, mind our-duties, and let's go sleep in the fear of
the Lord.


Who's there? So ho! so ho!


'Tis Dashit!
Maids in your Night-rails,
Look to your light Tails,
Keep close your Locks,
And down your Smocks;
Keep a broad Eye,
And a close Thigh.
Good morrow, my Masters all, good morrow.


A Pox of Eyes and Thighs! When, Bell-man.


Dashit! when, what does your Worship in the Stocks? pray come out, Sir.


Out, Sir! when, I tell thee I am locked.


Locked! Oh Men, Oh Manners! Oh Times, Oh Night! that can not discern gravity
and wisdom, in one of the Common-Council too! When, what's your Worship in for?


For? a Plague on it, suspicion of Felony.


Nay, an't be such a trifle, Lord, I could weep to see your good Worship in
this taking: Your Worship has been a good friend to me; and tho you have forgot
me, I have found your Worship's doors open, and I have knocked, and God knows
what I have saved; and do I live to see your Worship stocked?


Hah! alas, honest man, thou knows me then: Prithee call the Watch, and let the
Constable know who I am, prithee do; and here, I have some money about me.


'Tis more than I deserve, Sir; let me alone for your delivery.


Do so, honest Bell-man, and then let me alone with that Knave Trickwell.


Maids in your Night-rails, c.

Mr. Constable, who's in the Stocks?


One Dashit, for a Robbery. Dashit he calls himself: dost know him?


Know him! -- Well, Mr. Constable, what good have you done the City! Know him!
a most notorious Thief; his house has been suspected for a Bawdie-house many a
year; a harbourer of Cut-purses and Night-walkers; he has been a long time in
the black blook, and is he taken now?


How? Burladie, Neighbour, we'll not trust the Stocks with him; we'll to
Newgate with him to rights.


Well moved, Simon. Come, Sir, come, Sir, out with him.


Oh, does your Raskalships know me now? I thought you would know me in the end.


Yes, the end of your worship we know.


Aye, here's an honest fellow can inform ye.


Yes, we thank him, he has informed us you are a Pimp and a Thief. Bind him
fast, and to Newgate with him.


To Newgate! why Bell-man, Rogue, Raskal? To Newgate, amongst the profane
Jesuits too? oh, oh!


So, thou art like to thrive in thy Knaverie: Roguery prospers with thee. To
morrow is the Sessions at the Old-baily; I'll make him shrink with fear, ere I
have done. Could I but be revenged on this Corina,

I should be prosperous indeed;

Some little Devil help me at a pinch at need.


THis is my Lodging, Gentlemen; where, if you'll please to wait a little, you
shall both see and hear the truth of what I've told you.


But, Madam, Did he tell you he had killed his Friend? tell you himself, 'tis
strange!


Sir, If you find I wrong him, let me dye. He came all breathless, panting to
my Chamber, his Sword all bloody, prayed me to conceal him, for he had murdered
Wellman.


Under favour, Madam, what quarrel had they, said he, 'tis a most rare
Creature, I'm half in Love already.


Innocently was the unhappy cause; they loved me, both were Rivals in my
Favour, nor knew I which my heart inclined to most; Wellman had Wit, Youth,
Gaiety and good Humour, lovely, well made, fit to engage a heart; and Friendly
too was handsome, very discreet, very Amorous, soft in his Language, modest in
his Actions; and though their Charms were different, yet 'twas hard to say who
was the greater Conqueror; so I by favouring both, made either jealous.


S'bud, would I had shared of that without the danger?


But Wellman was to have married my Daughter Marinda; to morrow was the day.


To please his Father, Sir, he made you think so, he has oft with sighs to me
confessed he could not love Marinda, I hope she will believe, and dye in rage,
and then I should lye contented in my Grave.


I pity thee, in troth now; but he was such a Villain, that but for his Fathers
sake I'd let him dye unrevenged -- but Sir Jeffery Wellman's my Friend, and
therefore I'll be disposed by you.


Madam, here's the Villainous man come -- as gay as a young Bridegroom.


Pray Sir retire with these Gentlemen into my Closet, and you shall hear he
will confess the murder, and having witness, you may apprehend him, and do you
the while prepare the Watch, and let 'em wait below.


With what a Fury is a Whore enraged?


So now my Revenge grows high, could I but hang this Friendly, which I would
because 'twas Wellman's Friend, and make Marinda mad,

Oh! with what Joy I'd follow -- for 'tis I

Must end the last Act of the Tragedy.


Now, my Corina, now, my Heavenly Fair,
I come to take that Joy which from thy Eyes
I find thou wilt allow my panting heart --
And here upon my knees receive my Vow;
If ever I prove false to so much Beauty
May I be ever scorned by Men and Heaven!
Oh! the excessive Joy that fills my Soul
With thought of my approaching happiness.
Come, lets draw nearer to our bliss, thy Chamber --

But stay --


Oh! do not kill me with that fatal stay.


You have not told me yet how you killed Wellman.


Oh! name him not, some fit of Love or Rage will seize thy Soul at naming him,
and ruin me. My dear Corina, Mistress of my Life, name him no more.


Now, on thy Life, by all I hold most dear, now Wellman is no more, the
repetition will be wondrous grateful. Prithee, how fell the perjured faithless
man? tell it me over again, and I'll resign my self for ever to thy Arms.


Tell thee and take thee! Were each word Blasphemy, would every Syllable betray
my Life, I'd hast to utter it for that Reward: though I can tell no more than
what I've done already -- that we met at a Ball, prepared for the contracting
of Wellman to Marinda; where I being out in a Dance, or I at least pretending
so, I struck him, we drew, but being parted there, I challenged him out, and it
being late, we fought in the street, where I had the Advantage of him and killed
him.


What did you with the Body?


Dragged it into Fleet Ditch, with the next Tide to flote where Fortune pleased,
and slew my dear Corina --


You shall dye for it, fond easy Fool --


Seize the Murderer, Oh wicked Villain, base and treacherous!


Base and perfidious Woman! hold off your hands, and let me ask this Devil, why
she does thus.


Ah fool! that could believe my Love so slight to let thee live, that
murdered him I lived for.


Well ye Gods! you have reclaimed my Wildness, and brought me back to man, --
and now I see the Strong Deformity of sinful Passion.


Come, Come, Sir, we came not here to talk, 'tis Morning already, carry him
directly to the Old Bailey, the Sessions is now, and let him be hanged out of
the way.


You've Reason Sir, and deserve this Usage, but yet unhand me -- thus I'd been
served had I indeed killed Wellman! but Sir he lives, lives at his Goldsmiths,
one Glister in Cheapside.


Heavens! Lives! Lives to be married! Oh --


We are not to believe that Sir, to Prison with him till* he can prove this
true.


No rudeness Sir, I'll go unguarded -- Death! what a vile, poor, degenerate
thing, a Mercenary Woman is --


How, a Mercenary Woman? Where the Devil have I lived, and how past my time, I
knew her not before -- this is her Man -- I must get acquainted with him, --
Friend -- a Word I pray.


How Sir, this Woman set you on! nay then Mr. Constable, pray lay hold of her,
and see her forth coming.


With Joy, since Wellman lives, and lives to be perjured, no matter what
becomes of poor lost me.


No Sir, let me instruct you, take my Word I am a Gentleman, and known to you,
she shall be forth coming if there be an Occasion, though she be false she is a
Woman still, a beauteous lovely Woman -- come Sir I'll follow you.


I've yet a little Pity on my Heart, and that forsaken Beauty I have ruined.


But Sir you do not mind me.


Said you Sir?


I asked you Sir, who this Lady was, to whom I perceive you belong; whether a
man may be welcome for his Money -- you conceive me.


Sir?


Nay Sir, I ask your Pardon Sir, no Offence I hope; I'am a Knight by Birth Sir,
and have Sir, some sixteen hundred a year Sir, no contemptible Fortune for a
Gallant.


A Gallant Sir?


When yes Sir, a Gallant Sir, when what a Devil, I speak no Treason I hope in the
Lord.


But Sir you do as bad, this Lady is of Quality, and has a Fortune too, or if
she had not, she has Beauty sufficient to entitle her to be a wife.


Say you so Friend, I must confess I am very much taken with her Beauty, but
that I have a sort of an Engagement upon my Person, to Mrs. Diana now, but I
like this better by much Sir; and if she can but clear her self of the Business
of this Murder, and has but any reasonable Fortune -- and I get my self off
this Diana --


Who is she Sir?


Sir Lyonel Worthy's Daughter Sir, a little learing Titt as any's in England.


Sir to serve you, could you help me to the Speech of her, I would do much, and
have some artful Cunning.


Help thee, when I'll carry thee immediately man, but do it so, as she may be
very willing to part with me -- or else, poor thing, twill grieve me to
disappoint her.


I'll warrant you for doing that; and clearing this Lady, and securing you a
Portion.


E Gad, and I'm a Man made then -- come along thou shalt have a handsome Reward
for thy Pains too.


But Sister is't a Sin to hang one's self?
Is it a Crime to dye when Life's a Torment?
Methinks Heaven should forgive it.

Prithee leave these Disputes, ye make me sad,
A Humour that I hate, and yet for Friendly,
I've tried to weep and sigh, and have attained to it
With very much ado.

Oh thou art happy, would I were unconcerned,
An even brutal Temper that no Miseries
Could touch, nor Mirth could elevate.

Call you that brutal, give me that solid one;
I hate your thin and unsubstantial Soul
That every ject or small Assault of Grief,
Breaks through and makes ridiculous Mirth and Rage,
For every petty accident: Give me a Soul,
A Humour that's in Grain, not one that
Fades like Colours in the Sun, and changes like
Your Cheeks now pale, now red, and tells the World
The Secrets of your Heart; and yet I must confess I'm
Grieved for Friendly, for you know I loved him,
Yet not so much to whine or dye for him.

'Tis true, when I consider he was false, methinks I should not dye.


Nay, as for that I think you are mistaken, I believe him true enough, and that
was some incensed Mistress, some of his Family of Love, that envied your
Happiness only, and came to put you in Despair, and I believe Wellman is not
dead, nor can I think Friendly could be so base upon any account to kill him;
he's virtuous, has some Religion in him, and much honesty, prithee be pacified;
come sit, you have not slept to night, sit and lets sing to you, and I dare
hold you my Diamond Pendants to fifty Guineas Wellman is alive. Come Ample,
sing a Song.


Look ye, Sir, I have brought you in, now lay your lies as close together as
you please, do you my business, and no matter how: I must to the Sessions house
this morning to give my Evidence against Friendly.


Away! I'll hear no more! I cannot sleep! Alas, there is no Music like my
sighs and groans; leave me, and let me go -- to rest, and Wellman!


Ample, she swoons, help, help --


By your leave, sweet Creatures.


Uncivil Sir, what are you?


One that brings comfort: hah! the Lady dying! stand off, I have a Cordial in
my Voice -- oh! she's gone, cursed be my Trial! See, 'tis Wellman calls.


Wellman! ha, ha, ha! Sister, look up, he's here.


She stirs, give her more Air.


How have I slipped off Life! where am I, hah! in Heaven sure, and this is
Wellman kneeling: Art thou an Angel there?


I would not wish it yet, no; we have an Age to come in love e're we arrive to
that.


You live then!


Call back the Blood into thy paled Cheeks, thou Miracle of Women! I made this
trial only to secure my Faith, and I believe you love, and I am happy; by all
that's good, I never was unjust; that Woman, that beauteous Sinner whom you
saw, I've been to blame with, but you must forgive the Errors of my Youth.


I do! and her! and must love whom you've loved.


I thank thy goodness, but it shall not need, hereafter I'll tell thee all my
Life, but now my time is short, and I must yet remain in this Disguise 'till
Friendly's Tryal's past; for he shall suffer to the last degree, for leaving
thee, Diana, for another.


And has he been so wicked?


Yes, but is now reclaimed, but 'twas but in obedience to your Commands, you'd
have him try to lose his Maidenhead, and he forsooth fell desperately in love,
but I'll return the Penitent into your Arms again.


Faith Brother, I do love the Fugitive, that's flat: and if my Father please,
will marry him; but he's for Sir John Empty.


But Sir John Empty is not for you, his heart's engaged to this Corina, my
quondam Mistress, she strikes all dead that look on her, and I'm to get your
consent he may leave you.


Alas! pray tell him though 'twill break my very heart; yet what must be, must
be, Marriages are made in Heaven, and so forth.


Let me alone: but see where he comes breathless.


News, news, news, news!


Mackerel, Mackerel, Mackerel, fresh come ashore.


When, how now, Mrs. Marinda! when, you look blithe and brisk upon it.


When ay, is not that better than louring, and pouting, and puling, which is
troublesome to the living and vain to the Dead? for my own part, let my Husband
laugh at me when I'm dead, so he smile upon me whilst I live: I love a cheerful
countenance in all conditions.


Ay, but to see a Woman whine, and yet the Devil a tear falls; mourn, and yet
keep her cheeks full.


Ay, there's the Devil.


And yet I was heartily afraid y faith that I should a seen a Garland on that
Beauty's Hearse; but Time, Truth, Experience and variety, have great power over
Woman-kind.


Well Sir, but to the business, the News you were so big with?


Why, 'tis this: the Public Sessions this day holden at the Old Bailey has
condemned poor Frank Friendly.


Hah! When Sir, he offered to produce Mr. Wellman at one Mr. Glisters a
Goldsmiths.


That's all one, when it came to the test Glister denied he ever saw or heard
of him, and his own Confession hangs him without more witness, and with him
Dashit the Vintner is condemned for Robbery, and several others.


How? Dashit for Robbery? and was it proved against him?


Only shrewd suspicions, 'tis thought he'll have a Pardon: a Cloak was stolen,
that Cloak he had. The Justice was in Drink that committed him, the Judges
severe and in haste, the Jury hungry, and so the Knave was cast; but hang him,
he has cheated me with many an unmerciful Bill: but, Lord, to hear his moan,
his wishes, his curses, his prayers, and his ill-tim'd Zeal, by my troth, they
would have made a Comedy. But, Sir, the Lady, the poor Lady you serve, and who
betrayed Friendly, is sent to Newgate; Well, I'll take my Oath 'tis a lovely
Gentlewoman, 'tis a thousand pities; they say she must be tried the next
Sessions.


Let me alone for a neat and seasonable lye;


She that was here, Madam, and gave an account how Wellman was killed.


Heavens, his Sister! Mean you Wellman's Sister Sir?


How, Wellman's Sister?


Wellman's Sister, Madam?


Can you do less for an abandoned Mistress than tell a handsome lye to get her a
good Husband? Say 'tis so, or I'll make mischief.


The Gentleman knows 'tis so: I told him she was of Quality.


A very virtuous Maid; Heavens! that I had but a Brother that would marry her,
and take her part in defiance of the World! Nay Sister, we must in Honour visit
her: poor Innocence!


Hah! Wellman's Sister? When, look ye Madam, though you have not a Brother, I
would have you to know you have a Lover, that will do as much to serve you as
any Lover in Christendom, and as for marrying her, for your sake, Madam, and to
do the Lady good, I'd venture as far as Hercules, de ye see, or Alexander the
Great, that I would.


Most Heroically spoken, the Contents do almost break my heart, yet, Sir, to
let you see I scorn to be out-done in Bravery, I'll -- give you leave -- to
marry her; and I think that's a bold word.


Egad and so 'tis.


Nay if you are so resolved, and keep that Resolution, 'twill not be hard to
bring the Lady off, so many Friends joining to her party.


For my part I'll dye to serve her.


And so will I in blood, now I'm set on it,


Come then, without Delay let's visit her,


Where? At New-gate Sister?


At New-gate: Oh let not that Word fright you, because so many have gone to the
Gallows from thence! martyred Innocence does often dye where Thieves and
Robbers do; a Gallows may be sanctified, why not a Prison? Come Sir John your
hand.


And Sir I must beg yours.


Pray remember the poor Prisoners, the poor Prisoners, pray remember the poor
Prisoners. ho, ho, ho!


Dam ye for a Son of a Whore, how sneakingly do you beg -- Remember the Poor --
ye meeching Bitch, is that a Voice to dive to the Bottom of a Usurers Pocket,
and fetch out Money in despite of his hardened heart? -- Remember the Poor?
Pox of your snivelling, stand by ye Dog, and let me come to the Grate.


Alas, Mr. Shamock, me thinks we should have little Stomach to beg, I hear our
Reprieves are out of Doors, and they talk of a Warrant for Execution, so that
we may be hanged to Morrow.


Why you whining Cur, be hanged to Morrow? when then we have the more need to
beg hard to day, that we may drink at parting; Sirrah beg me heartily and with
a good impudent Grace, I'll beat out your Brains with your own Fetters.


Oh! hold, hold, spare my Life good Mr. Shamock.


So, I see thou bear a Conscience, and wo't not cheat the Gallows of it's
due.


Oh no Sir, I have too much Repentance to wish to dye so wickedly, as I have
lived; I would go out of the World like a good Christian however.


Was there ever such a chicken-hearted Son of a Whore? thou were ever a lazy
Rascal, and I remember when we were getting a painful Living on the Kings
High-way, would sleep the while, yet wake to share the snack, and to be drunk
for Joy of the Prize: Stand away and observe me now, with what a laudable Voice
I'll move Compassion:

Christians pity the poor Prisoners of this loathsome and dismal Dungeon, and
'twill be restored unto you in tenfold; drop your Bounty into this little Box,
the only Support, Relief, and Comfort of twenty wretched Souls.

Noble Sir, Remember the poor Prisoners:

The Lord reward your noble Charity, and restore it to you forty and forty
fold.

'tis an old Oliverian two-pence, a damned Commonwealths pair of Breeches,
confound the mark and your good Worships Bounty, was this all the large Lethern
Purse and your more large Conscience could produce, would I were worthy to have
a Dive or two at your reverend Pockets, I would ease 'em for you with a Pox.

Hah! Ladies alighted --

Most beautiful Ladies, dispense your noble Charity amongst twenty miserable
Wretches, oppressed with Hunger and Cold: Merciful and fair -- pity the Miseries
of unfortunate young men; whose few short hours of Life they've left, shall be
employed in Prayers for you our noble Benefactors: Oh remember the Poor!

Sweet Lady, Heaven reward your Beauty with eternal Bloom and numberless
Adorers.

Hah Gold! 'tis Gold by Jove.

Nay, now a short Life and a merry, we will have it all in drink Boys, and when
the Hour comes, dye like Hero's, sing the Psalm merrily, and then -- be hanged
till we're sober.


Ah! Mr. Shamock 'tis a long Nap we shall take e're we wake again.


No matter, then we shall not be dry next Morning.


Oh this is sad jesting -- Oh, Oh, Oh!


Here's a cowardly Rogue, now Plague on him, he's a shame to the noble Function
of Padding: Sirrah, you shall have no Drink, 'tis thrown away upon the Rascal.


Drink? rot him, let him lap salt Water from his Eyes, like a mangy Dog as he
is.


Come, come, lets in and drink.


Mr. Shamock, you must come down to your Devotion, here's a Parson come; Mr.
Ordinary's sick; come away.


Pox of your Ceremonies, a man cannot be hanged in Peace for your Parson, and
your paltry praying -- but come, hanged since we must obey silly Customs,
let's down, and then -- to drink, my hearts -- go, get ye down.


No Sir, I do not blush, nor are my cheeks grown, pale, though I'm condemned to
dye a shameful death.


No kind of Death is shameful but the Cause.


Which I well know is none, Heaven is my witness, none.


Ah! you are happy Sir! -- happy to quit the World in Innocence, for Innocence
-- is a most heavenly thing -- for Sir, Innocence is all in all; Innocence is
--


Very impertinent in your mouth, Sir, -- you ought to have the manners to
believe a dying man has other business -- than to give ear to what you say; go
preach to the Rabble, Sir, I'm not at leisure.


Ah! -- what is sinful man -- speak to him, Sir, to think upon his Soul, his
precious Soul; ah, his too precious Soul --


Perhaps I'm not of your persuasion, Sir.


Hah! Heaven forbid -- I hope you're not a Papist Sir.


If I am, Sir, what then?


What then? when then Sir, guilty or not guilty, you deserve to dye, and I'll
prove it, and stand to it.


Prithee leave us, we are serious.


Leave ye, yes faith, 'tis-time: you are not worth a Groat.


But is there Sir no hopes of a Reprieve?


I'll warrant you Sir, I've Interest enough for that.


Upon my Honour, Sir, Wellman is but mislodg'd, and l've already satisfied ye
how I came to say what I did of his Death to that fair false one, -- sure some
Lethargy has seized him, that he appears not, or else he's mad, it cannot be
unkindness, and it would grieve you, Sir, to see me dye, and after find me
innocent.


By the Mass, and so it would, Sir; therefore I'll to Court about your Reprieve
immediately; nor need you doubt my Diligence or Success; -- but why, thou
beauteous Hypocrite, did thou betray him thus?


I will not answer thee: I own my guilt, and am ashamed and angry at my
Destiny: Were Wellman dead, I could endure the rest, but would not live to see
him live another.


Well Sir, fare ye well till anon.


Oh! how I hate what once I so adored!
He that's born well, and Nobly Educated,
Blessed with an honest Fame, and worthy Friend,
And would with desperate over-sight love all
And land himself upon this fatal shore,
Let him ne'er kill, or steal, but love a Whore.
-- hah! -- what do I see?
Now everlasting Darkness cover me
From that dear injured killing sight, Diana.

Nay, do not hide your Face, or turn away -- I'm wondrous glad to know where a
Maid may find ye when she has need of you; and though these Chains are something
easier than those of Matrimony, yet, like a malicious Woman, I am for proposing
a change; faith, what do ye think on it? dare ye venture? methinks 'twere no
ungrateful Leap from the Gallows into a fair young Ladies Arms? -- would you
not rather cry, Drive away Carman?


Oh! do not mock my miseries, Diana!


By this hand, not I; You may remember, I swore never to marry, till the man I
liked could give me proofs he was a man; you bowed, and blushed, and talked of
Maidenheads, and modestly protested your Virginity; oh, filthy in a man! a man
of sense too! -- but you're improved, I hear, grown wise of late, and given me
proofs you are no Block-head; and I, to keep my word, am come to challenge you;
-- and to put you out of all these hanging apprehensions, know Wellman's alive.


How! Wellman alive?


My dear, unkind, have you dealt well with me?


I was resolved I would be quits with you for getting my Mistress from me;
which by the way I beg you would forgive. I've a Design to marry her to Empty.


She is a Woman, and I scorn to injure her.
-- And can you, Madam, except this Criminal in Chains?

The sooner for that reason, with my Father's leave, I have a good hank upon
you when you're insolent, to upbraid ye with the place from whence I had ye.


He cannot but commend your Passion for him.


I am ashamed to be so much obliged.


Nay, leave the shame to her.


Shame, I laugh at it, and would have believed none to have married Friendly
under the Gallows -- therefore take my hand, and bind the bargain.


Thou art a Noble Creature, and I am thine forever.


By Heaven, Corina, it was not want of Love, my Fortune did depend upon my
Marriage, but when I saw the Woman destined for me, I must confess I felt new
flames possess me, without extinguishing the old, and I resolved to love her
virtuously, and hold an honest Friendship still with thee -- to raise thee up
above the Worlds contempt, the fickle favours of unconstant man, and love thee
as my Siste.


What powerful Charms dwell in thy tender language! thou melt'st my rage with
every softening look, and lead me a tame Captive to thy will; -- I am still
all thine, dispose me as thou please.


This Knight, Corina, then resolve to marry, I'll make thy Fortune equal to his
Quality, the man is honest, young, and Master of himself. He thinks thou art my
Sister -- nor will I ever undeceive him.


Well -- since I must lose you, and am by your Commands obliged to Life, no
matter how forlorn and wretched 'tis --


By my troth, Sir, you have left her like a man of Honour.


Sir Iohn, you are my Friend, and this my only Sister, for whom I know you
have a Passion; and since Mrs. Diana is disposed of, I am resolved you shall
not be disappointed of a Lady. Take her, and trust my Friendship for her
Fortune, 'twill not be inconsiderable.


Fortune Sir! I scorn she should owe her Ladyship to any Fortune but what my
single Honour can give.

-- therefore Madam, I am your Knight, your Champion, your most humble Husband
and obedient Servant, Iohn Empty, Baronet: but good Brother, let us make haste
out of this scandalous place, it puts me so damnably in mind of mortality, it
will spoil my Wedding-night.


Ay Sir, as soon as Friendly's discharged.


You must give me leave to call Wellman.


Madam, the Generous Pattern that you have set me, I shall be proud to follow.


Hah, Sure that Wench I know, -- 'tis she -- when how how now, Nan, what brought
thee hither?


Before Gad even my kind heart, Mr. Wellman, Love, villainous Love!


Hah, Love! when, what a pox, is that become a hanging matter in our Age?


If 'twere, your Neck's in no great danger.


Good Lord, what I warrant you think I was never in love then? yes faith have
I, and have felt your Flames and Fires, and Inclinations, and Wamblings, as
often as any He that wears a head.


Then you are the first Fool I ever knew inspired.


spare him Nan, he's my Brother, but prithee say how came Love to bring thee to
this fatal end?


Fatal! 'tis my Glory -- and egad my Statue and History ought to be added to
the Gallery of Heroic Women -- why you have heard I suppose, that my Husband
was condemned last Sessions, Mr Shamock.


What the famous Padder? is he thy Husband?


Yes Faith, he had a Reprieve, but now the Warrant's signed for Execution, and
he is to be hanged to morrow.


Well what's that to thee?


When faith, we have lived lovingly hitherto together, and we'll even dye as
lovingly, for I am resolved to be hanged honestly with him.


Honestly hanged -- how so?


When I'll tell you Sir, when the Tidings came to me of poor Iack's being
apprehended, I soon knew which way the World would go with him; I ne'er
snivel'd and nouted like a feeble Woman for the matter, but even resolved
bravely to take a Turn at Tyburn with him.


Lord have Mercy upon us.


In order thereunto, what does me I, but hearing of a Fellow that had lost a
parcel of Goods of value, but goes my ways to him, accuses my self for the
Thief, was sent to Newgate, and to my great Joy and Satisfaction, was condemned
with honest Jack efaith: On my Soul, Mr. Wellman, I trembled for Fear I thou'd
have been acquitted, but the honest Jury took Pity on me, and brought me in
Guilty. When the Devil would any of your Wives of Quality have showed this
conjugal Constancy?


Lord deliver me, what a wicked World is this, that People should have the face
to confess their Villainies! she confesses all now, and some are hanged and
confess nothing.


And wo't thou be so good natured to take a Turn with him at the Gallows?


With as much Joy as e're I kissed him.


When this is the most admirable Proof of Love, I ever heard off.


Proof of Love, proof of the Devil, Man, what to be slain at Tyburn for Love?
when 'tis most damnable and as nonsensical as to be hanged for Religion.


I find by your Principles that you'll keep out of Harms way.


Nay o'my Conscience, I shall ne'er increase the Number of the noble Army of
the Martyrs.


Nan, where are you, here's the Fellow has brought home our Coffin.


Let him bring in my dear, you shall see Mr. Wellman, what a Device I have
found out, never to part with dear Jack: I have bespoke a Coffin to hold us
both.


How a Coffin? Lord have Mercy upon's, how great the Devil is with this Woman!
but what care have you taken of your Soul all this while?


That's the Business of Mr. Ordinary, he has so much a year allow'd him for
managing that Affair, and has undertaken mine: Come bring in the Coffin.


When, what a Coffin's here? Is this a Coffin fit for Christians? -- Do ye see,
and all pitched within too, ye Dog, we shall stick to it, a pox on ye for a
nasty Son of a Whore.


Bless me, sure these Reprobates never think of going to Heaven.


Ay! I gave him two broad pieces in hand too, and two more I have in my Pocket
to give him --


Which I must be acquainted with.


But he shall be damned e're he be so well paid.


Besides, Sirrah, you might have had the Manners to have lined it with a little
Bays this cold Weather, but you have neither Conscience nor fore-cast.


Lord! Brother Wellman, I believe some Priests have been tampering with 'em,
they are so wicked.


Ha, Ha, Ha! a notable Observation.


I'd forgot too, I'll lay my Head to a Halter, this Coffin will not hold us
both.


Hark ye Friend, don't lay with him, for he's of the surer side.


Yes my Dear, as for that I believe we may make Shift, 'tis but my laying my
Arm under thy Head, and thou thine over my Breast, and we shall lye as snug
these cold nights --


When the Devil's in these People.


But I have a cursed Misfortune befallen me.


What's that, my dear Betty?


The Whore the Laundress, who had all the Linen I was to be buried in, like an
ungrateful Baggage, knowing I was to be hanged, and she to have no more of my
Custom, has pawned all, my laced Linen too; so that, dear Jack, I shall come
to thy Arms but scurvily equipped to morrow.


Lets arrest her. Lord, Lord, that People should have no Conscience nor Honesty
in 'em: what will this wicked World come to.


Ay! and to rob the Gallows too, unmerciful Tyrant.


Young Woman, young Woman, this is no time to think of Trifles, and gew gaws;
the best dress is that of Repentance, let your Conscience be clean and neat
within, and no matter for Lace and Tawdrums; dress up your Soul I say.


When what a Pox have we here?


One who has preacht better Doctrine to your Ladyship e're now, [and] one who
am appointed to put you in mind of your long home.


When ye Fool you, have I been taking such pains to prepare my self for this
Journey, and need your Advice in the Devils name? get ye gone ye canting
Rascal, here's honest Jack can teach me how to dye worth a Legion of you formal
Gown-men.


Gad you're a noble Lass.


In Troth and so she is, 'tis Pity she should be damned.


Well Sirrah, here is your two pieces more, because I scorn to be worse than my
word -- Jack Catch too in my Pocket when I came down.


When what a Pox have we Thieves amongst our selves? this is fine doings efaith.


Hanged let it go, they are some poor Devils that wanted it: go out and wait
till I go up, and I'll pay you.


Or let him call again to Morrow in the Evening --


Well Husband, this is a very comfortable man.


He is so. But, good Mr. Parson, leave my Soul a little while to it self, I
pray, and let us have a little of your counsel concerning my Body. I owe Mr.
Glister the Goldsmith 40 l. and suppose, Mr. Parson, when I am going to
Execution he should be so unneighbourly as to set a Ser jeant upon my back --
'twas for a Bowl --


Ah! trouble not thy self, my Christian Brother with transitory matters, but
have an Eye -- an Eye I say to the main chance -- Plinius Secundus, or Marcus
Tullius Cicero, or some body says; that a threefold Cord is hardly broken.


A very Learned man this -- well, I am not the first honest man that has been
hanged, and I hope shall not be the last.


True Sir, therefore have a righteous Stomach: for you perhaps may sup in
Heaven to morrow.


Alas, Sin! I have no stomach to it at all Sir, -- please you to take my
Trencher, I never eat at night.


Ah, Husband, I little thought you should have had need to have thought of
Heaven so soon: oh! -- had you been hanged deservedly it would ne'er have
troubled me: for there's many an innocent man has been hanged deservedly, --
but to be cast away for nothing -- oh, -- oh. --


Comfort your self, good Mistress, moderate Grief is decent, you'll shortly be a
Widow, and I'm a Bachelor; I'll come and visit ye, and give you Christian
consolation.


Ah, Sir! you shall be heartily welcome, and pray make haste. -- oh -- oh --


Well, -- I do here make my Confession before all good Christian People, and do
declare -- that if I owe any man any thing, I do heartily forgive him.


In truth, Religiously spoken. When, this is something.


But -- but, if any manowes me any thing, let him pay my Wife.


A good reason too y faith.


There -- are -- the Writings of that Rogue's Estate who has brought me to this
untimely End -- dear Writings to me, God knows.


Where had you these?


I took 'em out yesterday, thinking to have carried 'em to my Lawyers, in order
to taking the forfeiture of 'em: now thou may do it.


Ay, ay, Husband, I'll warrant'ye, I shall be diligent.


And now, good Yoke-fellow, take leave of thy honest and true Dashet.


No, Husband, an't please the Lord I'll not leave you now, -- I'll see you
hanged first --


Hah, my writings! now for a trick of dexterity to retrieve those, and I'm a
man again -- Babylon: for whereas good Ale, Perry, Cider, and Metheglin, were
the true Ancient British and Trojan Drinks, you have brought in Popery, mere
Popery -- French and Spanish Wines, to the subversion, staggering, and
overthrowing of many a good Protestant Christian; -- oh! remember the Sins of
the Cellar, beloved, the Mid-night sins that have been unsavoury to the tastes
of your Customers, when you put the change upon 'em: remember your double
scorings and long Bills, ah, remember your long Bills.


This is that Rogue Trickwell.


Ah! I confess, I confess, and forgive. Trickwell?


Trickwell; yes, I know him well: a very honest Religious man, and an unright
Dealer with his Neighbours, and their Wives speak well of him.


I'll take it upon my Death he's the cause of my hanging, but I heartily
forgive him; and if he would but yet come forth and save me, I would set him
free from the Law, and discharge him for injuring me.


And would you from the bottom of your Soul forgive him all his cheats and
Rogueries?


I would, and be bound in a thousand pound Bond to save him from the Law: ah!
but 'tis impossible --


Why look ye, Sir, -- behold, your worshipful Friend and humble Servant Thomas
Trickwell.


Hah! discovered by Mr. Wellman.


Trickwell!


Now bawling Mr. Dashet.


Who would have looked for a Wolf in Sheeps clothing? or a Knave in a Parson's
Gown?


No railing Dashet, if you do, I'll swear against you yet.


Ay do, and damn your Soul.


What with a little Perjury? the Lord have Mercy on our Age then: No, no Sir,
I'll retrieve you from the Gallows, but as for your Goods and Moneys it must go
towards the use of my two hundred pound a year, which you have kept me from
this two years, and of which now, thanks to my Dexterity, I stand again
possessed.


How my Writings gone?


Thank God you're so rid of them, for I had been an eternal Rent charge upon
you else, if I had not hanged you: you know you had 'em for a little damned
ballderdash Wine --


Well, I'd better loose my Writings than my Life.


Hold Trickwell; -- yonder Woman I have been obliged to, and you have had
Relief from -- no Writings nor Pardon under marrying Mrs. May here --


Lord, Sir, what a Bawd?


The better Sirrah, she has a good Calling then, when all fails.


Gods Blessing of your heart, Sir.


No grumbling, do it or I'll deliver: -- remember Sirrah how you used my
Mistress last night, and had the Impudence to rival me --


Well Sir of two Evils I'll choose this -- give me thy hand Moll, thou'st been a
loving Soul I must confess.


So there's some Revenge, I could even cry for Joy now,


And so could I too, if I knew for what.


Here, where's Mr. Friendly -- here's your Reprieve Sir, Hah! Marinda and
Diana!


Yet with their Husbands Sir.


How, How? -- hah! Mr. Wellman alive? and with Mr. Friendly -- God bless ye,
God bless ye all, I'm glad on it.


Ay Sir, and I am married to this Lady.


I'm glad of that too.

Here Mrs. Betty, where are you? Here's a Reprieve come for you:


Hah a Reprieve! What Devil owed me this malicious Spite, a Reprieve -- dam
thee, thou ill, thou ominous looking Dog, ever the Messenger of Hellish
Tidings: Oh! I could tear thy hated Tongue out -- Rogue --


Nay, dear, better be patient, and if we must part. --


Art thou turned cruel too, and preach Patience?
Patience with Life -- no, I defy my Fate --
Scorning to live without thee thou shalt see,
I'll find a thousand ways to dye with thee. --

By 'th Mass a hearty Wench I'll warrant her, but come let's away: good Boys
let's home and Dance, but first give Money to these poor Wretches.

From this dire place many to Death have gone,

But to be married, very rarely one.



