INdulgent Parents take what care they can
To breed their Son; but when he once writes Man,
He thinks himself too great to be advised,
And those which took such care, are then Despised:
He sets up for himself, and learns the way
To Whore all Night, to Swear and Drink all Day.
The Spark being thus accomplished, think's he's fit
At a New Play to be a Judge of Wit;
And takes his Place with as much Confidence,
As he that's Master of the greatest Sense;
Sets his Cravat, and then invokes the Powers,
And Swears all Vizard Masks are Common Whores.
So Poets tickled with Applause, they are
Quite altered, and no more the Men they were:
They then grow Proud, and huff their Benefactors,
And Swear the fault's not in the Play, but Actors.
The Music that shall hardly escape his Curse;
The Scenes and Habits he likes ten times worse;
And all to make his Bandy Play go down,
With the more civil Gentry of the Town.
A Smutty Tale will please the Common sort,
His greatest care is how to take the Court,
And get the name of Poet from some Lord,
None dare gainsay, but gladly take his Word.
Our Poet's none of these, all his Intent
Is among Neighbours to make Merriment;
Which if it take effect, he'th gained his ends;
If not, he hopes the Ladies are his Friends,
And backed by them, he cares not who contends.
Our Poet to your Beauties doth submit,
And Humbly offers both himself and it.

RAlph,


Sir.


How goes the day?


The glorious Sun is posting forward to the hour of Nine.


Impertinent Coxcomb, that think to dress thy Speech with flourishes, and set
thy self in more esteem with Men by Rhetoric, tell me directly how the day
goes forward, without the least Addition?


Without Addition, then 'tis near on Nine; the last that struck was Eight.


I think at Ten, Sir Peter Lovejoy said he would be here.


He did so, Sir.


Time runs away; 'tis 20 year since first I knew that Man, the most contented
Cuckold in the World, yet thinks himself a Wit, and will no more believe his
Wife dishonest, than I the Alcoran to be a Truth; such Fools there are in
Nature: But were I he, I would find her haunts, and break them. But speak to
him, and 'tis to no more purpose than grasping the Air. But hark, I hear him
coming.


Good morrow Sir, I see your old Distemper will be your Guest, tho uninvited,
and keep you Chamber-prisoner.


I see Sir Peter you still keep your humour, look Fat and Fair; I hope your
Lady's well.


She is; Let them look Sad that are always out of Humour, those Jealous-pated
Fools, who dare not trust their Wives beyond their sight, but sit uneasy,
sigh, and make complaint, and either Rail at Fortune, or the Priest that joined
their Wives and them; whilst I, like Birds at liberty, sit Chirping, and spend
my hours with Mirth.


You are happy Sir, that can set light by grief; but let me tell you Sir, I
have known as wise a Man as you deceived.


Away thou Fool, go Preach your Rif-Raf to those Jealous-Coxcombs will give you
the hearing of it: so good morrow.


Farewell thou senseless Sot; and now 'tis time for me to use my Legs, and move
to some close Corner of my House, and lay my Plot to compass Lovejoy's Sister;
for Gouty as I now pretend my self, my inclination is still that way given, and
this my borrowed shape to reach my End.


Methinks the hours move slowly forward; for I have rested badly, and in that
seeming Rest I have enjoyed, have been disturbed with Fears and dismal Visions,
such as disturb the Mind, and fill the Heart with Grief.


Come Sister, talk no more of Dreams and Fantasies, which serve for nothing but
to spoil good Company. Let's contrive how to enjoy our selves in the Afternoon,
and spend the day with mirth.


Fie Sister, 'tis not generous thus to triumph over my misfortunes. I have
known the time when I could have been Jovial, and danced all Night without the
least regret.


Sister, I am of your mind, that there's more satisfaction in an hours privacy,
than in the enjoyment of all worldly pleasure a longer space of time.


I still would have all parties pleased; you shall have my Consent to be
Cloistered up in some close Nunnery; and Lattice, if she likes your Choice, to
wait on you.


I like her Choice! No, I would rather choose to show the Tumbler in London
Streets, or in Bridewell beat Hemp, than lose the satisfaction I conceive
there's in a married Life.


Sure you cannot in me perceive such Joy, or such Satisfaction as you speak of.


If e're I marry, all I wish is this, may I meet with just such another as my
Master, who tho I Cuckold him times without number, may still believe me
honest.


Sir Peter hath no other Cause I am sure; but what occasion you may give your
Husband, I am not fit to Judge.


Faith Sister, I believe you ne'er the sooner for the fair Character you give
your self; for I have known those that have made a large Discourse of Modesty,
their Hearts have leaned the quite contrary way.


Fie Sister, how you talk; but you will have your way, there's no opposing you,
tho what you say is altogether false.


Then without Raillery, I yesterday received this Letter from one who speaks
very fair, and Lords his Sentences with Scripture-phrases: There you may see
the Cheat then; vindicate him if you can, from the deserved name of Hypocrite,
which justly he falls under; and I wish such Godly persons as they call
themselves, may meet no better Fate than he is like to do, or else I miss my
Aim.


Sure it cannot be, that Men should try their Wits to Cheat the World in
matters of Religion too: 'Tis false; I know it must be so.


If you dare trust your Eyes, the thing is plain to every person unconcerned,
that will Consult their Reason; but if you still continue obstinate, there's no
reclaiming of you.


Pray read this Libel against this Holy Man; lets hear his Crimes.


Not I, but you may if you please; here, take the Letter.


reads. Madam, Tho Gouty as I now pretend my self, if you please to appoint
your place and time, you shall find me as brisk and lively as your Modish
Gallant. Pray favour me with a Line from your fair hand; for I long to be
employed by your Commands.

Your Humble Servant Serious.




What think you of this Dissembling Wretch?


Ah Sister! You are unacquainted with the World: The Envious still are Virtues
Enemies, while Vice is let alone and unregarded.


I blush to see you thus unreasonable; but if you please to be where I'll
appoint you, I'll make you an Ear-witness of this Truth to which you will give
no Credit: If this won't make you hate such Hypocrites, I'll leave you as I
found you, wedded to your own Will and blind Opinion, and take the sweetness of
this Evenings Air. But if you'll comply with what I propose, and send a Summons
for him, if he disobeys I'll bare the blame, and own I have wronged the
Gentleman.


Pray try your Skill; I am very willing to be undeceived, and not so obstinate
as you would make me.


Now I like you; at Seven a Clock this Night be in your Closet joining to the
Parlour, whither I'll bring him at the time appointed, where you shall hear our
whole Discourse at large, and I'll leave you to be Judge who's in the Right.
Farewell.


Sister, there must be something in this business worth the hearing: Pray let
me be in the Closet with you, 'twill ad^ much to my satisfaction.


You shall Lattice: Pray convey my Sister to me at the time appointed.


I shall. In the mean time my Prayers and Wishes are, that this dissembling
doting Lecher may be unmasked; and shown in his proper Colours; for I love
mischief, especially to those I know are impotent, and will pretend to what
they cannot perform. Were he in Youth and Vigour, 't may be I might help him in
his business, and get a small reward or two for my pains; 'tis part of my
Employment to help a Generous person in distress, and by that means perhaps
oblige both persons, and so be feed on both sides. It sometimes happens so: But
I am sure for him she hath no kindness, nor have I any the least Respect: But I
must in and see how matters go, and wait till Night to know the upshot of it.


Dear Sir, I always took you for my Friend, and therefore always made you of my
Counsel.


And still you found me just to what I promised, and ever will be so.


That good Opinion I have always had of you, and still retain, hath made me
venture to discover to you a matter of Importance. This Paper will inform you
more at large; and I would beg you Judgment.


Reads. Sir, I received yours, and desire you will not fail to come to me at
seven a Clock this Evening to my Brothers, where I have taken care for your
Reception.

Julia.




You are a happy Man: I never heard her talked of for a Gallant; but I'll assist
you what I may, for I am past those things, and may be trusted: And truly I had
thought, time had made alterations in your person, to have made you past
Intrigues; but what would you have me do in this business?


Only keep Counsel, and when you find an Opportunity, give her a Character of
me as best will suit her temper: You know how, better than I can tell you. So
Farewell.


Ralph, Ralph.


Sir.


Who brought this Letter to your Master?


A Lady Sir, I suppose some Attendant; and said there needed nothing of an
Answer.


'Tis well: I wonder much, that this Girl that is under 20, should dote on 73,
for that I am sure he is: There must be more in it than he suspects, or I am
yet aware of; but be it what it will I need not care, nor do I. To morrow I
shall hear how matters go; in the mean time I'll find a Friend and take a
Chirping Cup, and that I think is far beyond Intrigues and Night-Adventures.


If any body comes to ask for me, tell them it will be late e're I return.


I will Sir. A prosperous Journey to him, he hath something in his Head more
than ordinary: I wish him good success, or I shall have a scurvy living on it.


Now we are alone, prithee Lattice lets contrive a way to punish this Old
Fornicator: After we have made him appear to be what he is, and satisfied my
Sister in him, lets satisfy our selves, and have some pastime: Thou hast been
good at it in thy time; lets lay our Heads together.


With all my heart; lets in and think upon it.


I have appointed a Meeting this Evening with 3 or 4 honest Fellows, such as my
self; we'll make the Skies lock Blew and every Man shall bear a Bob i'faith.


Pray don't tarry late, 'twill prejudice your Health; be sides, I love your
Company.


I'll make what haste I can; in the mean time secure your self from harm; I'll
drink thy Health.


Adieu. Now if I had the Company of Mr. Modish in his room an hour or two, I
could dispense with it: But Rome was not built in a day, nor they say wont be
destroyed in a year. I may so carry the matter, that he and I may be better
acquainted: In the mean time I live in hopes of what may be hereafter.


The time draws near; I long to be convinced; I think for my part, we are
always a Longing: Before Marriage we Long to be married; after Marriage we are,
they say, in a Longing Condition; but if I were married, I would be sure to
long for something that were good. I Long too methinks, to be making the
Experiment; and for all my Dissembling, do what I can, my Inclination lies
toward a Man.


Do you think this Plot will take? I fear he will ne'er be brought to undertake
this piece of Service.


Then let him go like an old doting Fool as he is; but I'll warrant you rather
than lose the design he proposes to himself, he'll perform any thing you enjoin
him without the least regret.


I wish it prove so: Methinks I would not lose my expectation, for more than I
will speak of.


Never fear't Madam: But if the worst come to the worst, you will be rid of a
troublesome Customer; for if he refuse your first Command, he can't in Reason
expect after that to be entertained with any Respect or show of Kindness.


I can't but think how like a Fool he'll look when he is Blindfold, and his
Hands tied behind him.


Then he looks as he is; for who but a Fool could think that a Lady of your
years should have any kindness for a Man of his? There must needs be a great
agreeableness between 19 and 73. Hark, my Lady calls, I must away.


If it were not for this Wench, I know not what I should have done. Now must I
humour him, and make him abundance of fair promises, which I never intend to
perform, to bring this business to pass. This is a new Stratagem to get rid of
a troublesome Gallant.


Uncle Friendly, I am Joyed to see you: You are so taken up of late, a Man
knows not where to find you.


I am no Man of business you know; but in the Evening, I am for a Glass of the
best Wine I can get; but in full Quarts, that I may not be cheated of my
Measure. We were at Tom's last Night, Quart after Quart, i'faith, the Kings,
Queens, and all the Royal Family.


Look ye Uncle, as Cunning as you take your self to be, to my certain knowledge
your Cunning hath failed you; for Tom hath never a sealed Quart in his House,
nor hath not had this seven years: Besides, there's difference in the Wine. We
were got in the Garden to the Sealed Bottles, rare Wine i'faith; We Bump't it
away with a Huzzah; did you not hear us Uncle?


Hear you! We took you to be all Mad: I am for quietness and privacy, tho in a
Public House, as you call it.


Well Uncle, if you will Dine with me, well and good; in the Afternoon I am
engaged: Upon my Honour I must at it again; good Wine you know, never hurts a
Man, but makes him Brisk and Airy, Creates an Appetite. I am so hungry now, I
know not which way to turn my self; we'll in and call for Dinner.


Sister, methinks now we are retired and quiet, we have some enjoyment of our
selves, and live like Christians: My Sister Julia's of another Humour, let her
take her Fancy which way it lies; in the end she will repent it, and wish she
had taken my advice.


Truly, I think there is no such Trouble as the World stiles Pleasure; the
Noise and Bustle there is abroad, besides Expense of time, the daily Visits
that are created by it, that one can ne'er be private, nor retired, without
being counted Rude, or at best unmannerly, while we escape their Censure, and
the Charge of giving Entertainments.


You are in the right, I am glad to see that there are yet some left that hold
of my Opinion, and are not glu'd nor wedded to the Trifles this World affords,
which are at best but Transitory, and give no Satisfaction nor Content;
methinks I am weary with the very thoughts on it; but I'll retire, and ease me
on my Couch.


If I am deceived, so be it; but I believe she is a great dissembles; one
Reason is, because I am so my self, and would be private in my undertaking, for
fear of being balkt in my designs; for were I sure not to be denied, I would
quickly change my Note, and try Conclusions; but as it is, I must keep on the
Mask till a fit opportunity.


Madam, How like you now your Sisters Humour? you have her free Confession, tho
in private, and I dare pawn my Life the other's of her Mind, if we knew all.


How luckily we came to hear them? I'm glad to find Flavia is not really what
she seems to be in Public; but, how she carries it to Cheat my Sister Lovejoy!
Lattice, Are all our things in readiness for our design?


Leave all to me, you shall have nothing wanting that is requisite; in the mean
time, do you prepare your self to fit him with Discourse.


I will; but let me dye if I know how to manage my Countenance: The very
thoughts of my Project will betray my Design.


How many Fears she's in! first she fears the Project won't take; the next fear
is, the discovering of it: Had I such a business of my own in hand, I would try
him every way, tho he were the Man I loved above all others: First I would try
his Wit, next his Constancy, next his Courage, next, Bless me! what was I going
to say? But 'tis no matter.

I would know all his Humours e're I'd marry:
And like a Spannel, make him Fetch and Carry.

I Think the time's expired, 'tis 7 a Clock; he won't be long before he is
here: Some body knocks, 'tis he sure. Now to dissemble well, and Cheat this
Fool, and make him think I love him.


Madam, This is a happiness beyond belief, to enjoy your Company, and in
private too; I hope we may be so.


Yes Sir: Lattice withdraw, and leave us.


Yes Madam. But I think my Stars, I shall have the pleasure of hearing all in
private.


Sir, I suppose you had the Note I sent you, by your coming so exactly.


I hope you take me to be a person of better Breeding and Courage, than to be
tardy in such weighty Matters.


I take you to be a person of Discretion, fit to be trusted with a Ladies
Honour. Such Godly men as you are ne'er suspected.


If my borrowed Shape offends you, I'll throw that by, and show you what in
Truth I am, and always have been; my aim and whole desire is, your fair Beauty;
which gained, I am no more the Man I seem, than is your Sister Lovejoy what she
seems.


Is she too one of the Dissembling sort, that Cheats the World in Zeal?


No better, nor no worse; but to our business in hand, the thing we meet for.


Soft and fair goes far: I have several Articles must be agreed to before I
yield the Fort, so long maintained against homebred Enemies, and Foreign Foes.


Before they are named I agree to them, let them be what they will.


This general Consent won't do with me: Besides, I have an odd Humour must be
satisfied. I have made a Resolution never to yield to any Man, without he
Consents to be Blind-folded, and his Hands tied behind him; so to walk from my
House to his, let it be where it will: Now this must be performed before we
proceed any further.


A pretty Frolic: This performed, you say, you and I may come to a right
understanding.


Yes, when we meet again, no question, to your Satisfaction: Do you agree to
this?


'Tis something hard; but rather than lose your Favour, I'll consent to any
thing in Reason: Who must Blind me?


Take no thought for that, I'll see it done.


Well, I commit my self into your hands, use me as you think good: They say,
Lovers are Blind, and I can be no more when this is done; but I fear after all,
I shall be at a loss to find my way home.


Come Sir, let's in and set the project on foot: I Long to see you begin your
Journey.


Mr. Friendly, my old Acquaintance, most happily encountered, methinks 'tis an
Age since last I saw you.


Your Servant Sir, I retain my old Humour still, never trouble my self with
State-Affairs, nor business above my Apprehension: I warrant you you shall
never find me in a Plot, either against King or Government; nor my Name in
Print, to show my Wit and Parts, and undergo the Censure of the World; all my
Aim is to serve my Friend, provided it be not to my own prejudice; and to know
where I may be furnished with a Glass of rare Claret in the Evening; with this
I rest contented.


I like your Humour well: I was yesterday at the piercing of a Hogshead of such
Wine as you speak of; if you please, I have a Bottle of it at your Service.


With all my heart; I am for a Whet, as you call it, before Dinner: Lead on
Sir, I'll bear you Company, provided you don't move too fast for me.


Come on Sir.
Thus various ways the differing World do move,
But without Wine, there's neither Life nor Love.

I am glad Ladies I can contribute any thing to your Mirth; but 'tis not fair
to insult over a Man in his Misfortunes.


The truth of it is, I should not have done it, but you began first with me,
like an untoward Man as you are; so what I do is out of Revenge.


What I do is out of Love, I suppose the Gentleman is satisfied in that.


I did nothing, but what you all Commanded, and he desired; but let me dye, now
'tis done, if I can forbear Laughing, I beg the Gentleman's Excuse.


Faith, I pity the poor Gentleman; but this is the Fate of Lovers, they must
undergo whatever is enjoined them.


Well Mr. Serious, 'tis well 'tis no worse; whatever the Service be, you know
the Reward is sweet, and will answer your Expectation: In the mean time, you
shall have my good wishes for your safe Deliverance; else, for ought I know, I
may be brought in as Contriver of his Murder. Let him have a good beginning,
whatever the end be; prithee Lattice sing him a Song, before he sets onward of
his Journey.


I'll do my endeavour to please you all if possible, but you know I could never
sing well: Besides, I have nothing new to Sing; mine are all old.


TEll me what a thing is Love,
O ye Gods that live above:
You in wanton pleasures rove,
And all its secret Joys do prove:
Whilst we poor Mortals here below,
Scarce a part of it do know;
But linger out a Life in pain,
And nought but scornful Love we gain
Why was Man cut out by Fate,
Capable of better State?
And why was Woman made his Mate
To help him, yet his Toils create?
If we were made the Lords of all,
Must we to our Subjects fall;
And Cringe to that which is our own,
By right of our Creation?
Your Servant Ladies: This is some refreshment in the midst of all my
Misfortunes. Now for my Journey.


Ha, ha, ha, look Lattice, the Gentleman hath left his Dog-trot, and hath found
out a new way of Ambling.


He walks in State; now he may Cock his Beaver, and take the Wall of a Dog.


This is excellent sport; let's in and have our Laugh out.


I wonder Modish what makes you so Melancholy of late, thou use to be of
another temper.


I rather wonder what makes you so Merry. I see no cause for it.


Prithee, what should make me otherwise; I have good Clothes on my Back, good
Victuals in my Belly, and good Money that Commands the World, in my Pocket. I
need want for nothing this World affords: And I know no reason that Noble
Creature Man, the Lord of the Creation, should deny himself any thing; I have
known you of this Opinion formerly, what e're 's the matter with you now.


I have considered of it, and can find no reason, why any Man should, Narcissus
like, be in love with his own Image, but am rather of my Lord Rochester's
Opinion, that a Man had better be a Bear, a Lion, or a Monky, than what he is;
for the Devil, the World, or the Flesh, are always laying Siege to him; and if
he hearkens to their Temptations, they generally Reward him, the Devil with
Shame, a Woman with Scorn, and the World with gaudy Trifles, and gilded
Nothings, and it may be at last with a Halter: Therefore I wonder much, that
any Man of Reason will either follow, or be led by them.


By Heavens, I think thou art beside thy self, to argue at this rate; it makes
me mad to hear thee.


You may when you please go out of the hearing of it; the Door's open; you can
find the way out sure, as well as you found the way in; you need no guide.


Sure thou art not in Earnest; this is but a Copy of your Countenance.


Prithee trouble me with no more of your impertinent Discourse, you hinder me
from my Contemplations; which are more to me than all the World beside.


Rather than hinder you, I'll take my leave, and expect the News will be, Thou
hast hanged thy self, or else thou art put in Bedlam; so farewell.


Sir, There's a Lady below desires to speak with you.


Another Devil to torment me in the shape of an Angel of Light? Conduct her up.


Good morrow Sir, I hope you will pardon my boldnest, for giving you this early
Visit, when you understand the Cause of it.


Such Divine Forms as yours, are never employed but by the Powers above, with
Joyful News to drooping Mortals, oppressed with the weight of Grief and Wo
beyond their strength; such Wretches as I am!


I wish the News I bring may tend to your Relief, and give you Satisfaction and
Content. I hope it will.


Pray let me hear the heavenly News you bring, and keep me not in doubt 'twixt
hope and fear, like Men in Fevers, sometimes intermitting, and then again the
Burning Fit returns, and dashes all their hopes.


First, You must be obliged to secrecy, because a Ladies Honour is concerned;
none of the meaner sort for Beauty, nor for Breeding: But one that may
Challenge Honour and Respect, from Men of the best Rank.


I Vow and Swear, I'll bind my self to secrecy by all you can invent.


Hold Sir, your word's enough, for Persons of your generous Disposition ne'er
break their promise. To keep you then no longer in the Dark; 'tis Madam Julia,
Lady Lovejoy's Sister.


The only Woman in the World I would have wished: Your words Revive my drooping
Spirits, and add new Life, like Oil to Lamps expiring. I from this hour may
date any Happiness, and my new Life is wholly at your Service, to be employed
as you direct and order; for without you, I still am at a loss, like Ships in
Storms, without a skilful Pilot to guide them safe to Harbour.


If I must manage this design, I would have you first acquainted with her
Brother Sir Peter Lovejoy; for you must know, my Lady Lovejoy hath a kindness
for you; so that you must pretend your Love to her, and under that disguise may
reach your End.


I know Sir Peter's Humour, he still believes all Women honest; and therefore
there is no fear of his suspicion: But how will Madam Julia like this Plot,
that I should Court her Sister to Debauch her?


Leave that to me to manage; you see I am free with you Sir: All this I do the
Lady is ignorant of; but I have heard her speak of you with more than ordinary
Respect and Kindness; but you must try your Skill to gain her Favour.


Else I deserve the worst of Characters; that have the Wealth of both the
Indies offered me, that Glorious Creature, more than all the World, should I
stop at any thing to gain her Favour.


Sir Peter Lovejoy Sir, desires to see you.


I'll wait on him; up Madam, be pleased to step into this Closet, there you may
over-hear us; and when he is gone, resolve what Course to take.


How is't Man? I was last Night in Company, where I heard thou were it in a
Melancholy Mode: What's the matter Man! Thou used to be Brisk and Airy with
thy Jokes and Fancies, that a Man had as good be hanged as come near thee.


I am glad to see you hold your old Humour still; one thing or other is always
predominant in us, sometimes Melancholy, sometimes Mirth, sometimes Love; these
take their place by turns, and supply us with matter in our vacant hours to
work upon, and produce different effects, according to the temper of the Person
they have to do withal.


Thou say right; we are all our own Carvers in these Cases; but I never
trouble my self about these matters: If Mirth, I cherish it, if Melancholy, I
presently fly to my old Remedy Wine, and hear no more of it.


You are a happy Man Sir, that can divert your serious thoughts so easily; I
think I must try your Physic, before I shall be perfectly Cured; I'll Visit
you Sir, and drink a Bottle with you.


With all my Heart i'faith, thou shalt be as welcome as any Man I know, prithee
come this Afternoon; there will be a Knot of Honest Fellows; 'tis an appointed
Match to try our Strength.


'Tis ten to one but I wait on you, but you must give grains of Allowance to
Men not well in Health.


Ay, Ay, man, let not that hinder thee from coming; sit next me, I'll favour
thee.


Enough Sir, I'll wait on you.


Give me thy Hand upon the same: We shall be very merry; the Ladies will be
glad to see thee too.


You may trust me with them for any trouble I shall put them too.


Hay day, I think thy Sickness has made thee lose thy memory; dost not know I
vindicate the Reputation of all the Women in the World? There is no such thing
in Nature as a Cuckold; whatever Women are before, after Marriage to be sure,
they are honest, it can't be otherwise.


You have read much, and I'll not dispute it with you.


Nay, 'tis your best way to lay down the Cudgels, for I should have been too
hard for you: Good morrow Sir, I shall expect you.


Your Servant Sir.


Was ever such a confessed Coxcomb seen? But it makes for our Design.


This Visit fell pat for our business; here's our Admittance gained already.


Pray make good use of it; when Fortune favours us, 'tis dangerous slighting of
her.


When we have such a good Opportunity put into our hand, if we don't make good
use of it, we deserve to be slighted by her another time.


I am glad you are so sensible; but I must leave you now, I know you are a
Gentleman of Worth and Honour: I need not mind you of any thing more than what
I have said already; your Servant Sir.


Stay thou blessed Messenger of happy News, and take this small Acknowledgment.


You load me with you kindness.


Desert me if I once ungrateful prove,
I'll part with all I have for Julia's Love.

I Am now in hopes, that Fortune may be kind, for sure by this time she hath
spit her Venom: I have been her Sport this 3 months now, or more, perhaps the
Tide may turn, and I may become her Favourite, that have been her Scorn and
Maygame; whilst others less deserving, are prosperous in all their
Undertakings, and have what e're they wish.


How now Mr. Modish, what are you Railing at Fortune too? I thought all the
World had been at Ease, and only I tormented.


What's the matter man, that makes Fortune and thee differ? Thou art past the
thoughts of Women, and Gaming you never were addicted to.


Matter! There's matter enough to make a man mad, were he never so well in his
Senses; I warrant you I have broke my Shins in 40 places, or rather but in one;
for from my Knee to my Instep, 'tis all as Raw as a galled Horse-back.


Prithee how man, by what misfortune?


Ay, there's the Devil on it, I must be making Experiments, whether a man might
not walk blind-folded with his hands behind him, as well as he that hath his
hands at liberty, and his Eyes to see his way.


Ha, ha, ha, who put thee upon this? Or was't thy own free Choice?


You had need ask that question, whether it were my own Choice or no: You find
many men in this Age willing to break their Necks, if they can find any way in
the World to avoid it.


But how did I know what the Devil might tempt you to do ^


No Sir, 'twas a Woman, and that's as bad I think, to undertake this piece of
Gallantry; but 'tis very well I saved my Neck, my Shins may be Cured; but that
had been an ugly Joint to set again.


I am heartily sorry for your misfortune; but these things are common with them
that have to do with those sort of Cattle.


Common, quoth he; I don't believe the like was ever before heard of in a Civil
Common-wealth: But 'twas my own fault, like a Fool as I was, to undertake it;
and therefore I had as good hold my Tongue.


I am of your mind Sir, therefore lay these thoughts aside, and go with me this
Afternoon, where we'll be very merry.


You may be so, you have no cause to the contrary; but I have Sores enough at
present to hinder my Mirth, which I must take care of, and get some Plasters
for: This comes of it when men won't take warning, tho they have Examples in
the like kind every day.


By what I can gather from all People I converse withal, a man in this Age had
need be endued with a great deal of Constancy and Resolution: I am persuaded,
the Ladies of our times take their measures from the French King, to rule by an
Arbitrary Power, and keep their Subjects continually upon Duty, that they may
be alway's fit for Service and ready upon all occasions.


Modish! Give us thy hand. I come to congratulate thy safe Recovery: I hear thy
Distemper hath left thee, and thou art in thy Right Wits again.


I know no body was ever out of their Wits, except your self; there's a sort of
men in the World that think all men mad that are not of their Principle and
Opinion; like Lunatic Men that call all the World their own, though they have
never a Foot of Land in it.


I believe if thy Distemper were ever off, 'tis returning again; by this
Discourse one would guess so.


Thus formal Fops condemn all sober Persons, while Men of Sense, stand gazing
at such Fools like Men on Comets. Tis strange that the Master-piece of Nature
should so degenerate more than senseless Animals: They keep their Order, and
are are always moving in the Path-way Nature hath ordered for them, and obey
all her Laws she hath prescribed them, with all the Willingness imaginable: But
Man must, like a Clock, be always looked to; or else like Horses, headstrong and
unruly, be curbed to keep them under; the motion of his Will being averse to
what he was designed for.


A very learned Speech; this is only to show thou hast been at the University.
If I should stay long, thou would craze thy self with endeavouring to
persuade me out of my Reason.


I am so far from that, I believe he hath none in him: But those that have
least, are generally most conceited of their own Parts, and are beyond
reclaiming so irrecoverably blinded with self-conceit, that they think they are
arrived to a perfection in Knowledge above the common sort of Men; and therefore
look down as it were on others with Contempt and Scorn, whilst he that is truly
knowing is still desirous to be thought less than what indeed he is, and
modestly refuses the Praises when given him; tho it be no more than he might
justly claim, and doth of right belong to him; while the other sort mistake a
Shadow for the real Substance, and prize false Coin as much as sterling Silver;
as the Indians part with Gold and all they have, for Glass and Gaudy Trifles;
things of no Esteem in better Judgments that understand their Value.

Thus Fops with Noise and Tumults fill the World,
As if that all were in Confusion hurled.

All our business is prosperous hitherto, and every thing is adding to our
Plots beyond Belief or Expectation.


Thou art luckily still in what thou undertakest. I would give something to have
thy Nativity calculated, and know what Planet Ruled when thou wast born.


A fortunate one no doubt, all she doth is so natural; she never studies, but
all her Plots flow free and easy from her, as if all she were made for were
only to help the distressed and raise her Fortune to what height she pleases.


I am glad Ladies it lies in my Power to oblige you; you may be sure I'll never
be wanting in my Duty: The utmost of my Skill and Study is to serve and wish I
could do more.


With thy help we can work Miracles. You say this Afternoon they have
appointed, and Modish will be here.


He hath promised my Master so; I shall get much by the Bargain; when my Master
is in his Cups I must be called in I know to make 'em Sport.


You must rub up your Memory for a Song to please them; for if it be not to
their Minds you will have no Commendations.


I do what I can to please you all: I don't know what you would have more of me:
You can have no more than her Skin, as the old Saying is.


Thou dost so much good while thou livest, 'tis a Thousand Pities thou should
ever dye; but I expect some Good of thee before that time comes.


Pray let your Elder Sister be served; for she hath more Business upon her
Hands already than any one Woman can turn her self to.


Pray don't fall out, I'll please you both if it be possible, one after the
other: There's no time lost, I hope.


I am well enough pleased; only when your Hand's in the Hony-pot I would not be
forgotten.


Nor shall you: but this would be an ill matter at last, if while I am making
Markets for other People, my own should stick a-hand.


Never fear that, so long as there's Money to be had, or Chapmen to buy.


In the mean time if my Lady should turn me out of her Service, between you
both I hope you will give me House-Room till I can provide for my self, or you
for me.


I willingly agree, and think it reasonable.


And I.


Then I proceed, and make it my whole Study to bring every thing to pass to
both your Satisfactions.

The wiser sort first for themselves take Care,
For Want's a Burden that's too great to bear.

Pray S. Peter what makes you so out of humour to day? 'tis something
extraordinary.


Cause enough, I have invited 3 or 4 Honest Fellows this Afternoon; nay, and
they promised to come too; and when I came to examine my Cellar, my Claret's
upon the fret, not drinkable: Would not this vex any man alive?


'Twas well you went down before they came: Now you have time to provide for
them; pray who are they that are to come?


Uncle Friendly, Mr. Sparkish, Mr. Serious and Mr. Modish, all Honest Fellows
and Loyal Men as live.


The Name of Mr. Modish revives my Heart: You see what we Women are; the least
cross Accident throws us into a melancholy Fit, the good News revives us, and
you may know it by our Looks as well as by our Actions, which if Mr. Modish
understands as well as I, he shall read such a Love-Lesson in my Looks, he
shall not forget this Month, if his Memory be but as good as mine. but I must in
and set my self off to the best advantage against their coming.


Now I am in a fine Condition. I could not get rid of Sr. Peter without my
promise to come with him this Afternoon; I am sure this is not the way to cure
my Shins; 'tis well if I don't make them worse: Besides, if Women appear, I
shall be laughed out of my Life.


What Mr. Serious, in Doubts and Disputations with your self? Are you not well?


Indifferent as to Health, but much in pain: I must use Abstinence, I know no
other Remedy.


Away, away: Talk of Abstinence! Give me good eating and drinking, that's a
certain Cure for all Distempers: Your Kitchin-Phisick Sir there's nothing like
it; your Doctors shall never get any Estate by me I'll warrant 'em.


Several men, several minds Sir; what's one man's meat is another man's poison,
Age won't be hid: Do what we can to Cheat the World, we shall find alterations
in our selves as Age grows on.


Shall we so Sir! 'Tis not long since you was of another Opinion, and venturing
at Women.


'Twas all but talk; and to tell you as my Friend, I'll sooner venture at
Hanging, were I put to my Choice; for Women are good for nothing that I know
of, but to bring a man into trouble, and Laugh at him when they have done.


Gentlemen, pray take your feats; here is no Women that you need stand upon
Complements.


I like Sir Peter's free Humour; when we Visit him, we have always a hearty
Welcome, and good Wine.


By the World, thou art in the right; I hate your snivelling stingy Humour that
when a man of parts comes to give him a Visit, denies himself, or else brings
his half Bottle of Claret his Wife and he left the day before, to entertain you
with.


Cousin, pray uncork a Bottle, let's taste the Wine you so much boast of; it
looks well, and tast's well; this will do.


I am glad it likes you Modish; Prithee what News abroad, what Plots, what
Intrigues on Foot?


Mr. Serious can give the best account of Intrigues of any man I know.


Ha, ha, ha, Faith I heard something of it by the by; prithee Serious how was
it?


'Tis not a laughing matter Sir, to have Tricks put on men to endanger their
Lives.


Prithee how man, were they Foot or Horse that robbed thee?


Who talks of being robbed? your Wits are a Wool-gathering, if ever you had
any: Pray trouble your self with what concerns you; pay your Taylor's Bill,
your Surgeon, your Landlady for your Lodgings, your Sempstress, and the rest
you deal withal, and not with me.


What, angry old Friend? I know no cause for it by the World.


His Shins rage, and that makes him Testy; if you must know all, he hath lately
had a Run at Blinds-mans-buff with the Ladies.


I'll warrant they set Joynt-Stools in his way, or some such Trick.


Come leave quarrelling, and mind the work of the day; who pledges a Bumper?


Come this way Sir, if you please; your Right-hand man about, is the best way
that every man may drink alike.


Fill it away.


About with it, never let the Glass stand; we have nothing to pay in a Friends
House.


Said like thy self i'faith, I am more beholding to thee than to all the
Company; they stand sucking their Thumbs, as if I had no Wine in the House, or
were unwilling to part with it, I hate such Milk-sops.


You shall have no reason of Complaint before we part; we'll have the Royal
Health in a Bumper of the largest Size.


Now I like thee, thou savour something of a Gentleman: I am for dealing the
Cards above-board; not like your serious Phanatick, who exclaims against Wine
abroad, but will be as Drunk at home as a Woman at a Gossiping.


Come Gentlemen, since nothing else will give Sir Peter satisfaction, away with
it, all hands aloft: He that denies his Glass deserves to be sewed in a
Hand-Basket, sent to the County-Goal, and bound to answer it at the next
Goal-delivery.


He needs no other punishment; for he must plead his own Cause; a Lawyer dares
not undertake it, lest he be thought to hinder the Kings Revenue.


Right; but give me leave to tell you, if every man pleaded his own Cause,
there would be less Law, and more Honesty than now adays there is.


Come Sir Peter call for a Beer-glass, and let the King's Health go round.


Agreed, with All Joy to great Caesar, that every man may bear a part, and show
his Loyalty by his Singing, as well as by his Drinking or Fighting; a little
Mirth will make the Wine go down the better.


Be sure every man hath his Glass: Mr. Modish, Pray let that be your Care.


I'll warrant you, we'll never wrong our selves; the more we have, the Richer
we are; and who would go home Poor, when he may have Riches more than enough
for carrying away, and the good will of the Donor into the Bargain?


By the World, thou art in the right again; for who would disoblige an old
Acquaintance for not drinking the other Bottle, and lose his Real Friend for a
bare punctilio in Manners?


Away with it Boys, I long till the Glass comes round: You are so tedious in
promoting the design in hand, that a man forgets the taste of the last Glass,
before another comes to his turn to drink: I love to converse with those sort
of men that dispatch business when they are about it; you need never to call
upon them to drink their Glass: 'Tis no sooner said but done; here's one,
there's the other; you can no sooner make a Vie, but 'tis seen and doubled;
there's no going away with whole Stakes, but every man's a sufferer, and all
concludes in Mirth.


I like your Conclusion, and was always of that mind; a little mirth, is worth
a great deal of sorrow.


I am of Opinion, set Wine aside, nothing adds more to mirth than Women, they
have for the most part agreeable Wishes, and then they Dance well; there is no
being without them at a merry-meeting.


I have had too much of them not long since: You that have had the good Fortune
to be kindly used by them may covet their Company.


Never mind what he saith, but come along with me; we will fetch every Man his
Woman, and Sir Peter shall sit as Judge, and see fair play.


Agreed, bring them in Boys.


Now they are all gone, 'tis not amiss to play the good husband, and add the
Remnants of Wine together; so, this will pass for a fresh Bottle.


We have performed our promise with much ado; you see Sir Peter we have
prevailed.


Done like men of Honour; come fill them a Glass.


We beseech you Sir Peter, excuse us drinking; if you are for a Dance, we'll
help you out at a dead lift.


Stay, we are not come to that yet, I am a Cup too low; but if you will in the
mean time oblige us with a Song, 'twill be very acceptable: Come Sister Juliae,
I know you love to show your parts.


I am ready enough to betray my Imperfections, you should not ask me twice, but
I have got such a Cold, and am so stuffed at my Stomach, I can hardly fetch my
Breath; but Lattice here is in good Condition, sound Wind and Limb, and fit for
Service.


Your Servant Madam, I am willing to accept the offer to oblige you, and so
much good Company as I see here met together, and wish I could do better.


Come begin, we are no Critics in these matters: I am for an old Song thou
know.


Phillis for shame, let us improve a Thousand several ways.
These few short minutes snatched by Love from many tedious days;
Whilst you want Courage to despise the Censures of the Grave,
For all the Tyrants in your Eyes, your Heart is but a Slave.
My Love is full of noble pride,
And never will submit
To let that Fop Discretion, ride
In Triumph over Wit.
False Friends I have as well as you,
Who daily Counsel me,
Fame and Ambition to pursue,
And leave off loving thee.
When I the least belief bestow
On what such Fools advise,
May I be dull enough to grow
Most miserably wise.
A very pretty matter this, and well humor'd, let's have one Bumper about, and
then for the Dance you talk of.


With all my heart; the Lady's health that sung the Song.


Well thought on, let it go round, 'tis an obliging Health, and a Dose of
Cantharides will make the Wine relish the better, and show our Acceptance and
liking to the Song.


Now set forward for a Dance.


How think you Mr. Modish, was it not well performed?


Most excellent. You drove the World before you; never were at a stand; you had
it at your Fingers ends, you needed no Instructions.


Come, 'tis time to break up: Let us hinder Sr. Peter and his Lady no longer
from going to their rest.


Ay, ay; let's depart every Man to his own Home.


'Tis some satisfaction that I have had a sight of that Incomparable Beauty I
so much longed to be acquainted with.

Thus step by step we pass from Grief to Joy;
But in an instant all our Hopes destroy.

PRAY Mr. don't make me wait any longer; I have lost my Fare already.


Prithee hold thy peace, thou art more importunate than a Dunning Set on a
Saturday Morning: I must call at the New Bell before I go. Here Tom, find out
Modish and give him that Note; tell him I shall return at Night.


I'll call you, Master.


Half an Hour hence I am for you; don't grumble; I'll consider thee for thy
Pains when I come to London.


I believe no man in England hath such Luck as I to meet with drunken
Customers: When they get into a Tavern there's no getting of them out again
without a Quarrel, and then before I come by the worst of it. Well, God mend
'em I say, and send me better Fortune for the future.


Where's your Master? I must see him before I go to London, and the Coach
stay's.


He is in bed Sir: If you please I'll show you up to him.


Do so.


'Tis very well; if my Occasions be not too urgent I'll meet him in the
Evening.


All I can find by his Note is to let me know he is going to a Whore. This Fool
takes more pains to make himself public than others do to keep themselves from
the Censure of the World But take it for a general Rule, your sly pretending
formal Hypocrite is the greatest Whore Master.


How now Mr. Serious, what turned Nurse in your old Age? or is this one of thy
Frolics to divert thy self for an Ayer^ing after last nights Debauch.


Needs must when the Devil drives. I am in a Strai^ and know not which way to
turn my self without your Advice and Assistance: I have met it seems with a
fruitful Whore and here's the Effects of my Labour: What will you advise me in
this Case?


Cut the Throat or stifel it in the next House of Office 'Tis but venturing a
Swing at Tyburn: I know no quicker way to get rid of it; but you had best keep
your own Counsel.


Pray be reserved Mr. Modish, you see I trust my Honour in your Hands as the
only Friend I dare be bold withal; you are better acquainted here than I am,
therefore pray advise me.


You are mistaken in your Man: I never have any thing to do with Women, and by
that means avoid both the Trouble and Charge that attends on whoring; for if
you dance you must pay your Music.


I know thou understandst the World, the Theorick part at least if not the
practick; like some studious men in the World, who by their reading will give a
better Description of the Ways and Manners of a Foreign Country, than those who
have travelled out of Curiosity to learn their Language.


All this I grant; but I am not bound, as I take it, to make every one as wise
as my self: Your Divine, if he gives you a Sermon, deserves a Reward; your
Lawyer meddles not with your Cause, tho never so good, without his Fee; nor
will your Surgeon perfect your Cure without Money; nor will a Nurse take this
trouble off your Hands without being satisfied how she shall be rewarded for
her Care and Trouble; nor will I venture to pull the Thorn out of your Foot,
and put into my own without a Reward to sweeten the Sorrow I may undergo
before I get it out again


Thou shalt not want for Encouragement; If Gold will purchase thy Assistance
I'll not be ungrateful; here's 100 Guinnea's I design to bestow on that man, be
he whom he will that takes this Burden from me; this from my own Hands.


A shrewd Temptation; the Money is quickly earned: I'll venture on it for once;
it is the first I ever undertook to see disposed of. Who knows what Luck I may
have? Come what will, we shall live well while the Guinnea's last; and before
they are gone I hope to see it well provided for; give me the Gold and Infant:
Dad's own Eyes and Nose, as like the Father as if he had been spit out of his
Mouth, as the saying is.


Nay the Child is well enough, and I think this the best Bargain I ever made in
my life, to quit my hands of it. Fie upon whoring if this be it.


You see Gallants what Gold can make men do: This yellow Earth hath wrought
more mischief in the World than can be numbered up; this hath prevailed on
Widows, Maids and Wives, to undergo Eternal Shame and Infamy; for this the
Father hath betrayed the Son, and brought upon him Mischief worse than Death,
and now hath wrought on me to hide this Wretch's Shame.

Gold saves our Lives, and it can Death procure,
It sets men free, yet nothing binds more sure

Upon examining my Pocket I find I am well paid for my singing, I may afford to
drink Eggs and Muscadine to Clear my Voice against the next Opportunity; this
comes of Diligence; I might have lain still long enough here this would have
dropped into my Mouth; but according to the old Proverb, A wagging Hand gets the
Penny.


My little Mercury of happy News, my Comfort in Distress! What News hast
brought? I read a joyful Message in thy Looks.


I come to let you know the Lady is at leisure to entertain your Suit; but as I
came I met your Rival Serious going to her with a quick Pace, as longing Lovers
use when Opportunity presents it's self; Impatient of Delay think Minutes
Hours, and Hours as long as Years, nay Ages, 'till they compass their Designs
and reach the Happiness they covet after.


If nothing else be in our way but he, 'tis no great matter; I have a Hank on
him.


Pray Sir what is it? Remove but him, you have as free Access as can be wished.


In short then, for I am uneasy till I see her: I eased him of a Bastard Child
this Morning, and had a 100 Guinnea's for my pains; I'll near betray my Trust;
but you I know will conceal it from the World, therefore I trust you.


Be confident I'll never divulge the Secret; but I have a sudden Motion in my
Mind may do me service: What think you if you should employ your Man as an
Apparitor to frighten him and gain you Privacy and Freedom with her?


There's nothing that could be thought on better; had thou studied seven
Years for a Plot to prevent him, this would have taken place.


I'll step and call your Man; do you instruct him how he should behave himself?


I'll warrant you, when you have done all there's nothing like a Woman's Wit;
there's nothing comes amiss to them; I might have studied long enough for this
Stratagem here I should have thought of it; but their Genius never fails them.


What think you Stephen, can you counterfeit the part of an Apparitor and
fright Mr. Serious out of a Distemper lately taken hold on him?


You may trust me to perform a greater piece of service than that comes to.
Give me a few Instructions.


Then know there is lately laid to him a Bastard Child, which doubtless is not
his; if by this means you can divert him for an hour or two, 'twill do me
service.


Leave me to manage him; let me but know where to find him I'll deal with him.


He is now at Sir Peter Lovejoy's House, there you may find him.


I'll instantly be with him; but first I'll write my Summons that must frighten
him, and by that means screw something out of him, or else he will take me for a
Cheat and no Apparitor.


Now I may make my Visit; for besure we shall not be troubled long with him to
interrupt us.


'Twill be worth seeing him in this Convulsion betwixt Love and Fear; but I
must to my Post as if I were not at all concerned.


I hope Madam you will pardon my Rudeness among the rest, for keeping you up so
late last night; I had not been with them but only to behold your Beauty.


Now I am sure you flatter me; but that's the way of the Men now-adays, and you
and I will be in the Fashion.


All Happiness attend you Madam; I was passing by your Door, and could do no
less than give Sir Peter my Thanks; but understand he is not within.


Nor his Lady neither, they are both abroad.


Taking their mornings Walk: A Loving Couple, love to be together.


Is Mr. Serious here? Pardon my Rudeness Madam, I found the Door open, and was
informed he was here.


What's your Business with him, Friend?


I have a little private business to him: Are you the Man Sir?


I am so; what's your Want?


Please to walk aside; my Message is quickly delivered,


I'll send an Answer by you: Where may I see you by and by?


I am just now going to the New Bell to take Horse for London: I am in hast,
Time is precious with me now.


I'll go with you. Madam, a good Morning to you. I have a little earnest
Business must be dispatch'd.


That must not be neglected, I wish you good Success in your Affairs.


Your Servant Madam, Good Morrow Mr. Modish.


Even Sir a good Riddance of a troublesome Companion; I think him so.


And I am of your Opinion; I am a year the older methinks for this little I
have had of his Company.


I am for Company agreeable, that is, I would have the Aged with those like
themselves, declining People; the Melancholy with those who are Enemies to
Mirth; and the youthful with the brisk and airy; for by this equal sorting of
Company all Parties would be satisfied: For as Water savours most of the last
Mineral it ran through; so we retain the Remembrance of the last Company we
converse withal.


What a Consternation of Spirit he was in! Sure the Messenger brought him some
unwelcome News.


If we may judge of the Cause by the Effects, there's no contradicting what
your Ladyship hath said; for he seemed to be in a great Agony.


He was loath to leave you Madam, but was constrained to it against his
Inclination.


Dissembling Hypocrite, would make the World believe that all he does and says
is just and honest, when he means nothing less; he sets a gilded Outside to
the World, when all within is Rottenness and Stench.


Madam, I find you have a piercing Eye, and can discern with Ease 'twixt Truth
and Falsehood; There's that within you that's Divine and Sacred, and therefore
not to be imposed upon.


Be we as careful as we can, we are sometimes outwitted by those we least
suspect.


But we lose Time more precious than the Wealth of both the Indies, while we
discourse of such dissembling Wretches, and may employ it to much better
purpose, now Opportunity presents it self, and Fortune's obliging to lend us
thus much Time and Privacy.


You are now a Sphere above my Apprehension. I am much too young to comprehend
deep Mysteries; be plain in what you say, that I may understand your Meaning.


Ah Madam! I want Words to tell my Story, and let you know the great Esteem and
Veneration I have for your person; but could you draw aside my fleshly Curtain
and view your fair Idea where 'tis seated within my Breast, above my power or
skill to raze out or demolish; perhaps you would have some kind Resentments
then, and bear Compassion for your suffering Slave.


May I believe that what you say is real?


Or may I ever after be suspected, and not believed when I speak greatest
Truths.


I on these Terms accept you as a person I would sometimes converse with when
Opportunity presents it self, and ease a Heart as full of Cares as yours, and
full as richly fraught with virtuous Love.


And when you find me otherwise inclined than wholly to be acted by your Will
and absolute Command, despise me as the worst of human Kind, and stigmatize me
with some Mark of Infamy that I may ever be abhorred by all good meaning
People, and like a place infected by the Plague be shunned by all that know me.


I have been the freer with you, because I expect Sir Peter and my Sister, who
will disturb our Privacy. I know my Sister hath a great Esteem for you, the
which I would have you cherish; it will help much to forward our Design; the
rest I'll leave to your wise Management, and take my leave at present; for if
my Sister finds us both together she will then suspect our Plot.


Like weary Travellers who have lost their Way benighted in some strange and
unknown Country, espy some Light from the next Country Village, and with what
speed they can they make toward it, where being refreshed with Course, but
wholesome Food, forget the Labour of the fore-spent Day; so I with this small
Glimpse of Happiness forget my weary Hours and restless Nights, as if they had
^ver been.

Thus Snowr's and Sunshine, Joy and Grief take place
Like Night and Day which run their constant Race.

This goes as I would wish. This Couple are come already to a ^gh^
Understanding. Would her Sister were as well p^ovided for; ^t that's a Work of
Time, nor will my Lady be a little out of sorts when she knows Mr. Modish hath
been here and she mist the Sight of him; so passionate we are when any thing
crosses our Humour, and how transported with Joy when every thing hits to our
Minds?


You are not fit to have the name of Walkers: I'll undertake in two Miles to
gain one of you, and never put my self in a Disorder. Lattice, hath any body
been here since we went?


Here hath been Mr. Modish to tender his Service.


What an Opportunity is here mist! But it cannot be helped, now if I should
break my Heart.

This comes of your Folly. S. Peter; when you should be at home to entertain
your Friend you are beating the Fields like a Setting-Dog.


Prithee be not so passionate, we shall see him again very suddenly I'll
warrant you.


You warrant. I wonder how long you have been a Star gazer, you can foretell
future Events so well: Never any Woman was so hampered with a conceited Coxcomb
as I am with you; there's no end of your Folly: Wretched Woman that I am!


Nay pray don't weep about any thing that hath happened, we'll set all to
rights again: Upon my Honour I am sorry I led thee so far; thou art weary I
warrant, I cannot much blame thee.


If she be not, I am: When you get me a walking with you again it shall not be in a
Morning, nor in the common Field; the next time you draw me into the Snare I'll
give you leave to laugh at me and call me Fool as long as you know me. Call you
me this walking?


It shall learn me Wit for the future; I am so weary I know not which way to
turn my self. I must in and lye down or else I shall eat no Dinner.


'Tis a strange thing you would have my Lady so far to tire her thus; for ought
I know it may make her miscarry.


'Tis well you are as light heeled as nimble tongued, I should have been on the
Bones of you else; 'twould make a Dog break his Halter to hear these two Women
complain; they are soon out of Humour and as soon in again: I'll lay my life
after Dinner their Tongues will run so fast a Man shant crowd in a Word
Edg-ways if he would never so fain, with them, but they will have all the Talk
tho it signifies no more than a black Pudding.


What's the matter with thee Sparkish, thou look so dull, and rub'st thy
Head this Morning; what offends thee man?


'Tis the Wine I drank last Night lies in my Head. I wonder how you rub through
with it so well as you do; I am as Squeamish as a new married Woman, that's
breeding her first Child; when she is in one of her breeding fits, she resolves
never to have any more Children; and I in one of my sick qualms, never to drink
any more Wine: But you see how quickly we break our Resolutions; the first kind
proffer, and the first good Company, make us run the hazard of a disorder, tho
we have experienced the sad effects before.


Bear up man, ne'er give way, and part good Company for the Head-ach, or
disaffected Stomach; 'tis so Childish, I am ashamed to hear thee name it: One
Bottle sets thee right again, and makes thee as sound as a Roch; there's no
Medicine I know like it, 'tis beyond all the Pills in the World.


I have heard much talk of the Devil of Edmonton, but I think I met with him
last Night. Well Sir, if you will bear me Company, I'll venture at a Dose of
your Physic, and try what effects it will have on my weak Constitution.


Come then, observe but my directions, and if I fail, let me never more be
trusted in the like Case.


Faith Modish, I have been severely Chid for being abroad this Morning when you
called; my Lady was so angry as past; but when she sees you, I hope she will be
reconciled again: You must stand my Friend, and beg my pardon; for I have
appointed a Meeting this Afternoon, but durst as well have been hanged as have
gone, if I had not met with you.


I'll warrant you I'll make you Friends; since I occasioned your falling out,
'tis but reasonable I should perform that Friendly Office.


Mr. Modish, your humble Servant; I have been telling Sir Peter a piece of my
mind; for being out of the way when you called this Morning, I was afraid you
would have taken distaste, and not have seen us presently again.


Madam, you oblige me with your Favours, which I prize more than Life: Besides,
do you think I could forget my generous Friend Sir Peter, and prove ungrateful
under all his kindness? Have better thoughts of your obliged Servant.


I'll as soon suspect thy Loyalty as thy Friendship; but to satisfy my Lady of
it, you must stay and Dine with us, or else all won't be right.


Any thing I'll yield to, rather than have my Lady disturbed, tho I can ill
spare time.


The Obligation is the greater that you will afford us your Company, when you
have Conferences of more Moment lack your Attendance, and wait your care to
manage them.


We must lay aside Interest, Madam, sometimes, to serve our Friends, or else we
live like Savages or Hermits, without Converse and Company; we should turn wild
and barbarous, not value Life nor Wealth, nor Reputation; but like the Bruits,
make Herbs and Roots our Sustenance, Contemn all Laws, and be each others prey.


Said like thy self i'faith, there is nothing like Peace and Quietness when all
is done: I hate to hear of Wars and Tumults; Sedition and Rebellion, are things
I abominate; 'tis against my Natural Inclination, to see our Trainbands in Arms
once a year when they are mustered. I'll warrant you, my Heart would not have
served me to have seen the Camp at Hounslow, if any Man would have given me 100
Guinea's.


Well said Goodman Wiseacre, if you are so Henhearted, can't you keep it to
your self, and not make all the World acquainted with it?


Soft and fair Mrs. Prate-a-pace, since the King hath been pleased to give me
the Title of Knighthood, methinks you might give me the Title of Gentleman;
'tis an Affront to Authority, and give me leave to tell you, I don't see how
you will answer it before your Betters.


You had best turn Informer; 'tis the best employment I know of for you: His
Majesty is well helped up with such Justices of the Peace as you are: There's
too many such, God help us, makes us at that pass we are at; they will Acquit a
Man for House-breaking, and Commit a Man to Goal for taking a lawful Course for
what's his own.


Well, if you were not my Bosom-Friend, this should not pass unpunished; but we
forget our Dinner, that will be spoiled while we stand trifling our time away.


How think you now of my way of Curing the Head-Ach?


I like well enough of it; 'tis soon done, and not very Chargeable, a
Shilling's the most it Costs: Who would not give that for such a Refreshment?


'Tis as certain a Cure for the Head-Ach, as your Jesuits Powder for an Ague: I
have tried all Experiments, and find nothing like it.


It hath one ill property that I know of, it sets a Man in for all day, if he
like his Company.


Who would not bear with a small Inconveniency to get rid of a dolorous Pain?
the Head-ach is as bad or worse than Teethach, and that they say will make a
Dog run mad.


Your Physic makes a Man wanton; even like Opium, it sets a Man a dosing that
he never feels his Pain and knows not whether he be sick or well.


Other Physic makes a Man sick before it works, and that I think no body
likes; besides, 'tis expected you should keep your Chamber with it; this
requires no such Observances, but you are at your Liberty, free and unconfined;
it adds a Beauty to the Face, and makes a Man look as fresh as a Rose in June.


It makes a Man bold I know, and do that which is most against the Bias of his
Will and Inclination at another time: Thus Alexander killed his Friend in his
Wine; an Act which could he have recalled again, he would have given his new
vanquished World, and thought it well bestowed.


I have over stayed my time; come, will you walk, and as we go we'll end this
hot Debate.


I knew she would try your Patience before you got lose from her; for all her
Pretensions I would not be a handsome young Gentleman in her way when she is in
the Humour, for more than I will speak of.


She is as unreasonable as a losing Gamester; there's no parting with her
without a Quarrel; whatsoever Mans Occasions be, she will be first served under
penalty of losing her Favour for the future. Mrs. Lattice, is there no seeing
Madam Julia?


At Eight a Clock this Evening if you come I'll so contrive it you shall be in
private with her, till then farewell.


This Woman, my Lady as you call her, hath put me in a Heat with her Clack; she
will have six Words to your one, make the best use of your time you can; 'tis
an Egyptian Slavery to keep her Company.


Modish your Servant; I have been enquiring for you in all your Haunts, and
could not hear of you to acquaint you with my good fortune. I have received a
Challenge from a person of Honour to meet her this Evening, Eight the time, a
clear Stage, and no Quarter to be given on either side, and without Seconds
Boy.


At this rate you may, for all I know, be glad to turn Child again, and cry
kings-truce for a breathing while; you take like Tinder and are transported
with the Thoughts of your hot Engagement like a raw Soldier, nothing but Fire
and Faggot will content you; but after an Engagement or two, he fights with
Moderation, keeps Rank and File and comes up with his Leader.


I question not to come off with flying Colours: How malicious thou art,
because thy cross Fate will not afford thee one happy Day in a year, thou
would have every body else under the like Circumstances: I hate such
ill-humour'd snarling Companions; and so I leave you to fret in your Grease,
'till you return to a better Humour.


I'll lay my life this Appointment is one of Lettice's contriving, to keep her
Lady employed while we are together in the Evening; how fond the Fool is of it!

Both Plants and Trees their certain Season know,
Rise with the Sun and wither when 'tis low;
Beasts their appointed time to seek their Prey,
They range all Night, and to their Dens at Day:
Yet Man the Lord of all, that's here below
Courts Care and Toil, and will no time bestow
To ease his restless and disturbed Mind;
Courts what is bad, and leaves what's good behind.

AS positive as you are S. Peter, I am not bound to pin my Faith upon any mans
Sleeve in the World, neither will I be persuaded to act against my Reason,
except you can bring better Arguments for what you have affirmed, than I can
against it; I won't be bubbled out of that little Sense I have left me.


What Argument would you have me undertake to gratify your Curiosity? I'll use
my weak Endeavours to give you satisfaction, if that will do.


Pray then make good, if you can, your Maxim, that you are always forcing upon
People to make them believe there's no Whore after Marriage.


If he makes that Argument good, it will go a great way in reconciling the
World, and he will perform a friendly Office to the Public.


To the Point in hand then. First I would know if you take our Lawmakers to be
wise and considerate men or no.


No doubt they were so; who denies that is to blame.


Beyond all contradiction, there's no denying it.


That granted you go a great way in confirming my Argument; for I find by my
reading, that there can be no Bastard born in Wedlock, therefore no Whore after
Marriage. What have ye to say against it Gentlemen?


As I live the Knight speaks reason, deny it who can; I am convinced.


On my word I cannot contradict what he saith, nor will I go about it.


Nay 'tis but a Folly, having granted the Premises, to go about to deny the
Conclusion. Let Reason rule you; and tho it be a vulgar Error which I have here
confuted, sit down satisfied there are thousands mistaken besides your self,
which I hope in a short time to convince and make sensible of their Error.


But in this case where the Husband is beyond the Seas your Argument will not
hold good, the Law is expressly against you.


Right, but there our Lawmakers were short-sighted; for is it reasonable
because the Husband is beyond the Seas the Wife should lose her teeming?
Besides she doth it out of mere necessity, and against that you know there is
no Law.


As I live well answered; he hath both Sense and Reason on his side, and
against that there is no disputing.


This is nothing but what is common that I have made out to you; but I hear the
Virtuoso's are about a Project, which if it take effect, will be worthy their
Pains and Labour, and very beneficial to the World.


What may it be S. Peter, if a man may inquire without offence, this use you
speak of?


I find you are out at Mystery; sure you converse with none but thick-scul'd
Fellows you hear not of it; why they have undertaken, nay upon the matter
brought it to perfection too, to make a Man a Woman.


An excellent Project this. But how is it so beneficial to the World as you
talk of?


There you are short again of your Comprehension: How many great Estates have
been lost for want of an Heir?


This doth not at all mend the matter, the making a Man a Woman; it had been
something to have made a Woman a Man, that might have been of use where an Heir
Male had been wanting.


That's implied, if they compass the one the other comes of Course; for 'tis
less trouble to make a Woman a Man, than 'tis to make a Man a Woman.


I acquiesce Sir, and modestly submit to better Judgments.


But if this Argument prevails among us, where are all the Cuckolds and Witals
the World hath so much talked of? There are no such Creatures; 'tis strange we
should be thus imposed upon, and swallow it for a Truth for divers Ages.


Why they are agreed, and gone a different Voyage, the Witals to seek the
Phoenix in Arabia, and the Cuckolds the Unicorn in the Isle of Pines.


Say you so Sir, then without doubt at their Return, they will make a saving
Voyage of it; for a Phoenix and an Unicorn will be worth the seeing, being such
Rarities as were never yet seen, tho much talked of; they must of necessity
gain abundance of Wealth by them.


No doubt of it, when these things come to pass they need not want Money; for I
look upon a Wital or a Cuckold, to be as strange, or a stranger sight than the
Unicorn or Phoenix, and may as soon be found: But I have Affairs in hand which
must not be neglected, and therefore must beg your Pardon for leaving you thus
abruptly.


On my word, the Knight argues Reason, and by his Reading finds we are imposed
upon, and frankly undeceives the ignorant, and deserves Commendations for his
Care. I find we still may learn, tho we live never so long.


This Fool takes all the other says for Oracles. How some are imposed upon, and
yield to things incredible and non-sense; and are prevailed upon to own
Absurdities and Contradictions, both to Sense and Reason? By which we may see,
there are Bigots in Opinions as well as in Religion; while sober Men abandon
all such. Follies, and laugh at those that are deluded by them.

The Ignorant are thus abused and galled
By those, whose business is to Cheat the World.


Our men we cannot pick and choose,
To him we love we say him no,
And both our time and labour lose.
By our put-off's and fond delays
A lovers Appetite we pall,
And if too long the Gallant stays,
His Stomach's gone for good and all.
Or our impatient Amorous Guest,
Unknown to us away may steal,
And rather than stay for a Feast,
Take up with some course homely Meal:
When Opportunity is kind,
Let prudent Women be so too;
And if the Man be to her mind,
Be sure she do not let him go.
The Match soon made is happiest still,
For Love has only there to do;
Let no one marry against her Will,
But stand off when her Parents woo:
And to the Suitor be not Coy,
For she whom Jointure can obtain,
To let a Fop her Bed enjoy,
Is but a lawful Wench for Gain.
Well thou art as mad a Lass as ever I met withal; fall Back, fall Edg thou
art always merry.


Hang Sorrow, Care will kill a Catt, there's nothing gained by thinking, I say;
it only brings People into Distempers: From a melancholy thinking Life I still
pray to be delivered.


And may thou have thy Wish I say: But how have you ordered Matters for our
Meeting to night in private, as you promised?


Well enough I'll warrant you: I have provided my Lady a Companion, which if
she parts with presently, I have lost my Aim and she her old Wont; when they
are together we are secure for a short Space of time; I Song you the old Song
to put you in mind of what you are going about, that you forget not to make use
of your Time, for that's a precious Commodity as the World goes.


I deserve, if I lose such an Opportunity as this, to be balk't ever after, and
not so much as pitied by thee or any body else.


Come will you move toward your Chamber to receive him when he comes? I'll take
that care of you to bring you together, and leave you to agree the matter
between your selves.


Your Servant Lady, is my Lady Lovejoy within?


Yes Sir, that Door will bring you to the Room where she is waiting your
Coming.

So, there's one Couple provided for according to their wish; my next care is
for the young Couple to see them fitted to their Minds.


My Guide, my Convoy, now I see thee I am safe; I commit my self wholly to thy
Care and Management.


I should fit him finely now, if I should send him to yonder Couple in the
Parlour; but that would so discourage him he would not look a Woman in the Face
this Month, and by that time my Charge above stairs would pine her self to
death. If you please to take the pains to walk up stairs, the first Room on the
Right-Hand you will find the Lady you look for; pray be brief, and let's have
none of your Canterbury Stories; make use of your Time.


As near as I can I will observe your Directions; but still I am of that
Philosophers mind, who blamed Nature, and not without a Cause, who had given
Man so long a Lesson and so short a time to learn it in.


How eagerly he pursues that which now he counts his Happiness! Like Children
who are for the present fond of Trifles, but straight grow weary of them, and
the next pleasing Object makes them quite forgotten; so some years hence
discourse this eager Lover, he will tell you then that Marriage is a burden too
hard for him to bear, and I who am now respected and rewarded for my Service,
may then lie under the bitterest Curses that Malice can invent.

Before Enjoyment Women Angels seem*
But afterwards they are of no Esteem:
Among our Gallants Mistresses are so Common,
They hate the name of Wife or Civil Woman.

Thou art always upon Extremes, sometimes nothing but a Woman can please thee,
at another time, the very sight of a Woman puts thee into a disorder: Is there
no men between Loving and Loathing? But good Counsel is thrown away upon such
obdurate men as thou art.


Now I have the liberty to steer my Course which way I like best, it must be
after the Female Sex still, tho I have suffered so deeply by them: I may talk
of Religion, but that serves only to blind the World.


I have been in all the likeliest places hereabouts, to find this Master of
mine, but can hear no News of him; he's got into some blind Corner or other
with a Female Sinner: It is a strange thing nothing will Cure him of this Itch
of Lechery; for he hath been used badly enough by that sort of Creatures, and
to my knowledge is under Cure for his third Clap: But I must not give over
hunting till I find him, and see him safe in his Lodging.


Madam, the Obligations you have now laid on me, binds me for ever your devoted
Servant; when shall I be thus blessed again? Dear Madam, such Ravishing Delights
as pass belief, dwell ever in your Eyes, and in your Face a Thousand Charms are
moving; the least of which hath force enough to revive Nature settled on the
Lees, and turn old Age to Youth.


Sir, You are maker of your own good Fortune; if you style this your Happiness,
'tis in your power to give a da^e to Love, and make it short or lasting, as you
please; I am but like a Dial in Tempestuous Weather, of no use till you the Sun
appear.


If I may have my wish, we will lose no time, but Husband it still to promote
our Happiness, that after Ages envying our Felicity, shall take their Measures
from us, and Copy what we leave fairly Written.


'Tis still the fate of Lovers to be at first extremely fond and Court-like,
till time that alters all things, makes us Common and Cheap to one another; if
not, Age won't be hid; and then what seemed so fair and lovely to us, is
defaced and blotted* like Garments out of Fashion, not regarded; so Love, as
Age grows on, declines, and nauseates what before it most longed after.


With sickly Appetites all nourishment is loathsome, but you have Charms that
still create more liking, and add a Lustre to your heavenly Form, which
Captivates at sight.


Madam, I hear my Master in the Street, he is coming home; I thought it part of
my Duty to give your Ladyship notice.


'Tis well done, go to Bed, I'll let your Master in* Your absence will now be
necessary.


Madam, Your Servant.


That Door will lead you the Back-way out; your Servant Sir, good Night.

By this means I may make a Discovery, and see what humour my Knight is in when
he is Top and Top-Gallant; for being faulty my self, makes me have a mighty
suspicion of other People.


Well Lattice, Is thy Mrs. safe?


Whist, Whist.


Nay, I can be as silent as any body if that will do; march on tho it be dark,
I shall make some shift or other to follow my Leader.


Transporting Joys are always short and fleeting, not permanent and durable;
the satisfaction scarce balances the loss of parting with them; your beauteous
form hath made such deep Impression in me, that wanting you I want my better
part, and can no more reach Happiness without you, than Fruit in Autumn ripens
without Sun-shine.


This is no time for long Discourses Sir, the Night's far spent, and I am
indisposed, and much disordered.


Come Sir, Face to the Right, and follow your Leader: I'll conduct you out,
'tis time to part.


And must we part? Farewell till next we meet, thou Beauteous Soul: Eternal Love
wait and attend upon thee.


The thoughts of future happiness still make us undergo the greatest Slavery
and Servitude without Repining; but slighted once, nothing exceeds the malice
of a Woman.

We Love beyond belief, but if men prove
Once false, our hatred far exceeds our Love.

So, with much ado they are separated; had I let them alone this month
together, the last Tune would have been Loath to depart: The truth of it is, I
should be of the same mind, were the Case my own, as now 'tis theirs.

Love knows no Bounds, and moves no common Way,
An Age with Lovers seems but a short day.

When every bodies turn is served, it may be I may be remembered, for 'twould be
hard to lye alone all my life-time; but afterwards to lead Apes, is a thing I
abhor the thoughts of.


Urge me no more, you know I am in my Nature reconcilable, and therefore you
use me as you do.


Thou art as Waspish this Morning, as the Barber that killed his Horse, because
he would not stand to be trimmed.


You are as void of Sense as the Woman, that because her Gallant turned her
off, discovered the Intrigue to her Husband, and made a Westminster business
of it.


I think Edmonton Air hath made thee sharp-witted; you are so quick at
Repartee, there's no speaking to you.


There is no Air will alter you from what you are: A dull Drone, that cannot
make a Warrant without the Statute-Book, nor a Mittimus without the help of
your Clark, forsooth.


Prithee be not so angry, we have all our failings; thou know we must bear
with small faults.


Here's another that creates me trouble hourly, but I'll quit my hands of her:
Lattice, I would have you provide your self of a place, for I find you are not
for my turn, therefore pray pack up, and be moving: There's what is due to you.


Short warning, I would gladly know the Cause.


'Tis enough I will have it so.


She hath been a good Servant to thee; don't turn her away for a small fault.


You may do what you please with your Men, pray let me alone with my Maids.


Your Servant Madam, I can dispose of my self without giving you a further
trouble.


Stay, and take that along with you:


Sits the Wind in that Door? then 'tis time for me to be moving, for fear of an
after-Reckoning; in a little time her heat will be over.


You see by this, and find by daily experience, that your sly pretending
Coxcomb, who one would think, had neither Life nor Soul in him, will be as
sweet on a Whore in a Corner, as the daring Hector, who makes it his business
to Debauch himself and others; yet I am still of the Opinion, your half-witted
Men make the best Husbands, because they are fittest to be imposed upon, and
may be wrought into what Form we best like of.

We Marry that our Loves may settled be,
Yet nothing pleases like Variety.

Ladies, You see at last I am deserted by my Lady, who have made it my whole
employment to serve you to the utmost of my power, but am now out of a Capacity
to serve you further.


There can be nothing laid to thy Charge by us; we must own thou hast been
diligent in thy Office: But you must finish the work you have begun, or we are
in a worse Condition than ever.


If she leaves us now in this perplexing doubt, 'tis Inhumanity beyond Example.


Ladies I would not have you despair, but be assisting in contriving your own
good Fortune; there shall be nothing wanting in me to forward it, if it be in
my power.


Set us but in the way; then, if we follow not thy Directions the fault lies at
our Door, not yours.


Do but tell us what we shall do to attain what you have so successfully
hitherto carried on, and leave us to perform it.


If I must still be concerned in your Affair I'll try my Skill; I think this
Plot may take: 'Tis Madam Julia that they all adore, but can but one possess
her; therefore to carry on our Design she must promise them all fair to draw
them into the snare of Matrimony, upon this condition, that they shall be
content to be married after the Masquerading way, in a Disguise; for by that
means we may all be provided for to our wish; for Mr. Sparkish desires this day
to court her for his Wife; the other two you know have long been Suitors: This
will be no great Task to undergo; and this performed we gain what we desire.


True Lattice, still thy Plots are laid above the reach of Fate to frustrate or
prevent.


Now I'll leave you and possess Modish with our Stratagem, and leave the rest
to you.


Now Sister what remains, but that we carry on this Plot with Secrecy so
happily begun?


It must of force be prosperous; you shall have Modish: let Sparkish be my
Prize, and leave the old dissembling Lecher Serious for Lattice to convert.


Agreed, and all are satisfied.
Where differing Humours meet there's always Strife;
But all Contentment in a married Life.

As I have used your Brothers House, I still observed that Sweentness in your
Carriage and such transcendent Beauty in your Face as cannot be resisted; what
I have said of you, is not* strange but common, being the Talk and wish of all
Beholders.


In Raillery and Jest, not Earnest sure.


Such Divine Forms as yours, are rather to be worshipped and adored than made
our Mirth and Pastime.


Now you betray the worst of Natures, Flattery, and think I take what you speak
in Raillery, for real Truth.


You wrong me much, my Heart and Tongue agree: I heard by chance that Modish
long had wooed you, which brought me now to know if my small service and the
Love I owe you may be accepted with you.


Would you be so unkind to wrong your Friend and prove his Rival in the Choice
he hath made?


Would I not? What is't I would not do to gain your Favour? Make me a promise
that I shall enjoy you, impose what here you will I'll undergo it with as much
Willingness as I would eat or drink to strengthen and support decaying Nature.


In that Sir I'll never promise any man, but am resolved who here I marry it
shall be in a Disguise; and that you may know I have no Aversion for your
Person I'll make you of my Council: To Morrow I design to alter my Condition,
if you dare venture to take your Lot or Chance; I am ti'd to make no further
Discovery, you may. I will provide a Non-con shall join us, for here will be
two more of the same Humour to marry in Disguises: Now if you dare to venture,
so; if not, farewell.


Come what may come I'll venture, for I am acquainted with her Sister and
Lattice too, by which means I may inform my self as to her Garb and Dress that
I mistake not this great Concern and hug a Cloud for Juno.


I was just coming to find you out about a matter that concerns me much, my
Happiness depends upon it.


If I can serve you you know you may command me to my power.


Know then to Morrow is the time appointed: I am to take my Choice unsight
unseen, as the saying is: Now if by any means you can inform me which of the
three is Julia, for so many there is to be provided for, you'll eternally
oblige me.


It happens so that I am of the Council, and therefore can inform you; but am
obliged to Secrecy, and 'tis not generous to betray my Trust, nor can I.


Here's Gold for thy Reward; give me some private Mark to know her by is all I
ask.


If I may counsel you, take the middle-most as they stand together; you need no
more direction.


A word's enough to the wise: What Luck had I to think of this kind Creature to
direct me!


Now will he be cousen'd as the Dog who thought he had been going to Breakfast,
and was going to be hanged. But 'tis no matter, what she designed for him will
be good enough and too good without he were better.

Who knows, when married, but his roveing Mind
May keep one center and to one prove kind.

A pretty Frolic this, to be married Incognito, as they call it; but were I
concer'd they should look the Bridegroom where they could find him for me; this
is like buying a Pig in a Poke, as the old saying is. Well I would have you as
my Friend to look before you leap; they will put some Trick upon you, you had
best take heed.


No, no, I am safe enough for that; I have a private Mark to know her by;
besides I have undergon so much to gain her Favour as might fill a small
Romance; and do you think she will after all deceive me? You wrong her much to
start this Question Sir, and me in harbouring such hard Thoughts of her, and
were you not my Friend, I should as old as I am, demand satisfaction of you for
the Affront offered.


I only put the Worst, the Best will help it self; and if for this you are
angry you may turn the Buckel of your Girdle behind you, for any thing I care.


What angry one with another? Let's know the Cause: I'll make you Friends again
or it shall cost me all the Money in my Pocket.


The matter is not worth the speaking of, Mr. Serious can inform you if he
pleases the Reason of our Difference.


I'll as soon be hanged, cant a Man speak a hasty Word but it must presently be
brought upon the Stage? I have no Quarrel with any man living that I know of,
so be satisfied.


I am very well satisfied there is no difference between you; for my part you
are both my Friends and therefore was concerned.


'Twas kindly offered. Where do you dine to day, At home or abroad?


At Tom's, where Modish gives a Venison Pasty, where I am sure your Company
will be as acceptable as any that's there.


I guess no less and shall be glad to wait on you. What say you Mr. Serious?


I think to meet you there, but have some Business of importance must be
dispatch'd first, then I am for you Gentlemen.


Well, we'll expect you Sir. Come Uncle we'll in and drink our
Mornings-draught, and then set forwards.


This World's a Lottery; where still the least deserving are most prosperous,
and the best natured, meet the most Misfortunes. Besides, we are imposed upon,
for to one Prize you will find a thousand Blanks; yet like frank Gamesters
still we will be pushing and urge Ill Fortune to our overthrow, still in
pursuit of that which must torments us, and part with all our Faculties at once
to follow what another shall think equal.


By the World thou art in the right, for in this case there can but one possess
the Lovely Julia, the other two must take what's left; you are contented I
first make my Choice.


We are.


Then here I fix, and laugh to see you Two deceived and cheated, while I
possess the beauteous Julia, in whose Arms I'll sport my self and dare Ill
Fortune to disturb my Peace.


I smile to see how confident the Fool is, but I am on sure ground, and here I
make my Choice, and think my self as happy as Conquering Soldiers laden with
their Spoils, or Shipwreck't Men just landed.


Then what remains, but that I take this Lady, and fancy her to be the Heavenly
Julia? Now to the Priest, who stays in the Dining-Room, where joined, we then
shall know our certain Dooms, who we are tied to lead our Lives withal.


A Masquerading say you? I thought that had been out of Fashion.


In short Sir, they are both gone to be married, and Lattice with them; she's
to have a Husband too among them.


Sir Peter, you have managed your matter finely, to let them be disposed of
unknown to you.


Tricks of youth, tricks of youth: Girls will have their Frolics.


I beg your pardon Sir Peter, for marrying your Sister without your Consent.


What Sister?


Julia.


Lattice if you please, for so I think they call me.


What, Cheated! Put upon!


Then I must beg your excuse, for making bold without your leave, with your
Beauteous Sister Madam Julia.


Hey day, how many Julia's shall we have? Sure they drop out of the Clouds
there is so many of them.


Prepare you to see a Face, though not so Beauteous, yet as true as Julia's.


Tricks as I live! By the World, as Modish says, I think the World is a
Lottery; but we are got among Prizes, I see no Blanks.


Then sure the faithful Julia is my Wife; for yet she is concealed: Come push
aside this Cloud, and show thy Beauty.


Then be it as you wish, you have your Julia, and I the Man I love above the
World.


Come Gentlemen, let discontent be banished from all Faces, and only Joy
appear: You know the old Proverb is, Marriage and Hanging goes by destiny.
Come, the Venison Pasty is ready by this time: Let's Laugh it out, and make a
merry day on it.


First satisfy this good Company how you like your Mornings Work, and then we
are for you.


Agreed: Come Mr. Serious, you were married first, and are the most likeliest
to find fault, therefore pray lead the way.


By me you may perceive as Age grows on,
How we poor Animals are put upon:
Of a bad Chance, 'tis well it proves no worse,
I doubt not but she will make a careful Nurse.

Tho Choosed by Madam Julia, yet I find
Great satisfaction in my roving Mind:
This Flavia proves as Chaste as Babes new born,
And sweet as Rose-buds in a Summer Morn.

My Joy's too great in words to be expressed.
In faithful Julia I am double blessed:
Fortune hath made amends for all her Spite;
Thus after Darkness we rejoice at Light.

Since all seem satisfied, why should not we
With Mirth and Joy conclude this Comedy;
Forget what's past, and let this happy Night
Conclude all Quarrel, and set all things Right.

Could we but hope that you were pleased, we then
Should rest satisfied, like happy Men;
Who what this World affords, they do possess;
But your dislike is our unhappiness.

CVSTOM prevails, and you expect we know
To hear an Epilogue before you go.
Our Poet finds your Appetites are nice,
And dares not rule, but gives you this Advice;
Be governed by the Learned in the Laws,
Who before Judgment always try the Cause,
And afterward, if for the first Offence,
In gentle and kind Terms express their Sense
In hopes of the Offenders Reformation*
At least they will allow him Transpor^ion,
Such is the Goodness of our English Nation.
Then why should you, who here as Judges sit;
Count all but D^oss that is not like your Wit?
Wit may be Wit, tho not so finely dressed,
As Sense without an Oath may be expressed.
Pray tell me Gallants, is the Face the worse
Because the Garment's Country like and Course?
You are for Beauties, as you are for Wits,
Nothing but what's Extreme your Fancy fits.
He that writ best never could please you long,
Sometimes your Humour* lies towards a Song;
But that must be well worded, and refined,
Thus various are the Motions of your Mind,
As Fishmongers say by their Wares, the Play
And Poet too are fresh and new as they.
Novelties use to please you, but of late
Nothing will do, such is your cruel Fate:
We court your Love, but still we meet our Hate.
If you resolve still to be so severe
Thus few will try their Wits to treat you here,
But spend what's left, where Men more kind will prove
At least they will return us Love for Love.
They're void of Care and Strife we'll spend our Days
In Love and Friendship, and ne'er think of Plays.
'Tis the first Fault, and therefore Sirs be kind,
And let the Play a kind Reception find.

