O Stay and hear me speak my noble Friends, my Subjects and my Soldiers hear
your King; in nine set Battles ^gainst the conquering Danes hath Ethelred with
various fortunes fought, to rescue you and England from the spoils of War and
Tyranny: Recall your spirits, this City Winchester is all our strength,

And if you cease to fight, the Foe comes on,
With bloody rage, and sad confusion.

The breach is made, the Danes rush ore the Walls, and like the pent up Ocean
'bove his banks, falls from his height with roaring violence, and drowns us all
in blood.


despair not quite,
We yet may beat 'em back, arm, arm to fight.

The Danes are in the streets, slaughter begins, and execution is their
Soldiers words. O will you lay your throats beneath their swords, or doth your
danger make you desperate? your houses will be preys to fire and theft.


Your Wives and Daughters slaves to Danish lust.

Your Children in their Mothers arms struck dead.

The names of English torn from memory;
Oh let your valors in one chance be buil'd,
Or quite extirpe a Nation from the World.

See, on my knees, I pray you, for your selves; O 'tis for Englands safety not
my own, makes me a Subject to my Subjects thus, pity your King, your Country,
and your selves that now are falling, let your valors rise, and in this last
resist your enemies.


Now by my Princely birth (my royal Brother) His sight amazes more than all the
Danes; rise, rise, and speak no more; put them away, the stones will sooner
yield you aid than they.


Rip up our Breasts, and see our loyal hearts to fight and die for you in this
just cause, But death hath seized us, all our bloods are wasted, and through
our many wounds our souls exhausted.


And since we can no more, O let your swords take swift revenge, and save the
Danes a labour, In killing us you ease our present woes.


Fly royal Princes, save your lives by flight, the day looks clouded, there's
no hope of safety; The traitorous Osbert Duke of Mertia makes Head against you,
and with all his Troops, enters the City gates, guards in the Danes, triumphs
in slaughter thorough every street. The aged Father of St. Swithins Abbey, that
with his holy Cross between his hands, mounted the Walls to cause the Soldiers
on to fight for Freedom and Religion, Seeing this Treason, hath retired
himself, and on the holy Altar heaves his hands, awaiting death; the chaste
religious Maids, with Cartesmunda their fair Governess,

Flock to the Temple as their last defence,
Hoping that place may shield their innocence.

Come, Princely Alured, my noble Brother, lets seek to stop their pressing
through the City, if we must die --.


'Tis but our Fate
Which even till death close by thy side I'll wait.

Seek for your safety, Sir, the King is dead.


See noble Edmond what the Danes have done, a King, by Heaven created for a
Crown, now only made fit for a golden Urn, betrayed to death and slaughter
pittiless.


Curse on the Traitors heart that wrought this Treason, rebellious Osbert that
betray thy Country.


Leave his reward to Heaven that will avenge it, and brave Duke Edmond, since
the times are such, lets take disguise with speed and seek for safety; If
Heaven be pleased, brave Lord, we yet may live, if not, what Heaven has given,
i'll freely give. Hie thee to Thet ford, raise thy friends in Norfolk, If I
escape with life, I'll post to Scotland, Donald the King is of a noble spirit,
and will not slack I know to send his aide against this common Foe to both our
Kingdoms.

There shalt thou meet me, tho our journeys far,
We'll once again renew this dreadful war.

Spoke like the hope of England! Royal Prince! shake hands in this red City,
and then part, for in thy quarrel I will live and dye.


First bear hence this cold clay of Majesty, our hapless Brother, and revenge
his death.


That, and what else may but express thy Worth and Title to the Crown, i'll
still pursue, or may black infamy my baseness tell.


My soul shall quit thy love. Brave Prince farewell.


The Cities won, my Lord, the King is slain, and great Canutus with his Royal
Troops may rake possession of this conquered Town.


Thy love brave Osbert duke of Mertia, revolting from the English to our part,
has overturned the City Winchester, drowned in the blood of Kingly Etheldred
and all his Host. Hie thee Duke Erkinwald, conduct our beauteous Sister to our
Tent: You shall go back Elgina strongly guarded, till with our swords we clear
all passages that may oppose our peaceful entrance.

Stand on you Hill, and hear the English cries;
While Trumpets sound the Da^ish Victories.

I shall, great Prince.


The Gods protect my noble Brothers safety, and crown thy brows with wreathes
of victory.


Duke Harold take our Guards, and march before, ransack the Temple, and each
private house,

Who bears the name of English strike him dead;
This day the Kingdom's wholly conquered.

Long may it so remain to great Canutus; an hundred thirty years the English
Kings have paid just Tribute to the conquering Danes, which now re-conquered,
with assured hopes to hold possession of the State and Crown, see here the
slaughtered Body of a King

(...) and disloyal Etheldred,
Thus ^ his foot upon thy head,
That was a (...) late with precious (...),
Rejoicing (...) by me thy pride is (...).

For bear brave English Lord, remember this, he was a King, let not thy Subject
foot tread on thy Sovereigns head; Take off his Crown, and when the slaughter's
past present it to us, and we will then reward thy faithful service; enter the
Town, spare neither Sex no^ Age,

Whip out this English Race, with iron rods;
The vanquished are but men, the Victors, gods,

Come holy Virgins, hie you to the Altar.


The raging Foe pursues, defend us Heaven, Take Virgin tears, the balm of
martyred Saints, as tribute due to thy Tribunal Throne; with thy right hand
keep us from rage and murder; let not our danger fright us, but our sins:
Misfortunes touch our Bodies, not our Souls;

Keep Faith before us, from Hell none escapes,
Our deaths may be thy will, but not our Rapes.

Fair Cartesmunda, bright illustrious Maid, O be thou constant in this day of
trial.

Virtue is Vice unless it do persevere,
That is true Holiness that lasts for ever.

Upon my knees to you and Heaven I swear, when I do yield my Virgin vow to
lust, in the soft I wines of an insatiate bed, may I give up the treasure of my
youth

To such a man, whose lust and poisoned breath
May soon reward my sin, and be my death.

Such Vows being kept are true religious. Hark, hark, the bloody
Foe has forced the Temple.
Turn boldly and be constant, here's the trial.

To Nature we'll be false, to Heaven be loyal.

On, on, kill all, spare none; this by Canusus dyes; ha!
Who holds my conquering hand? what power unknown,
By Magic thus transforms me to a stone,
Senseless of all the faculties of life?
My blood runs back, I have no power to strike.
Call in our Guards, and bid them all give ore,
Sheath up your swords with me, and kill no more;
Her Angel-beauty cries, she must not dye,
Nor live but mine: O I am taken strangely:
Methinks I lift my sword against my self,
When I oppose her: All perfection!
O see, the pearled dew drops from her eye;
Arise in peace; fair soul, will you be mine?

If you be death not else.

Here is his power, for if my wrath thou move,
This blow shall rid my heart of torturing love;
Pale deaths effect shall take away the cause, and I be (...) as Air: Thou
Sorceress, that stay my hand with Witchcraft, and with Charms: I will unwind
thy cunning Ex^rcismes. Rare beauteous Virgin, Will you love Canutus?


When to these bodies dead, thou give new l^e, I then will love thee.


I'll give thee death, As those in blood have fallen; and thou shalt dye. I cud,
-- We will withdraw; Then kill her.


And I am ready. Ty^ant, do thy worst. O heaven!


Hold Traitor, hold, you have killed thy Sovereign* Does she not bleed? O Love
how strong's thy fear? All England shall not buy this Jewel from me: Did thou
strike her?


I had not drawn my sword, you came so sudden.


Nor never may thou draw it against her life, so she be pleased to love.


To ha^e thee I will love, but never love thee.


Grant me thy Love, my Royalties are thine, and thou shalt strike the Sun blind
with thy lustre, in Ornaments more rich then is the Treasure ^id in the unknown
bottom of the Sea; And for thy pleasures --


Peace, sleek Flattery. Thou seek to violate my Virgin
Vow with thy enchanting tongue, which (...) I break,
The heavens shall fright the earth; Saints prove unjust,
Death lose this power, ere I embrace ma^s lust.

She turns me wild with rage and passion; I'll rip thy bofome up to see that
wonder, a constant woman's heart: Sure thine is f^ne, yet thus I'll pierce it
were it Adamant: Oh!


My Royal Lord.

Great Prince recall your spirits.

I'm struck with lightning from the torrid Zone,
Stand all betwixt me and that flaming Sun;
Yet do not: Let her heat in death be spent.
Go Erkinwald, convey her to my Tent.
Let her be guarded with more watchful eyes,
Then heaven has stars, for fear she be surprised;
If here she stay, I shall consume and dye,
'Tis time must give my passions remedy.
Art thou not gone? Kill him that gazes on her,
For all that see her, sure must dote like me,
And Treason will be wrought against us for her.
Be sudden. To our Tents, Prithee away,
The hell on earth is love that brings delay.

The Duke of Mertia with the English Crown attends the pleasure of my Lord the
King.


Present him to us; O obdurate Maid,
The English Crown is value less to thee,
This thy Idea crowns my victory.

Low, as obedience, thus the vanquished English yields subject duty to the King
of Danes, and with this conquered Crown our lives and honours.


You please us well Duke Osbert; come invest us, thy warlike hand shall crown
Canutus head, For by thy aid, this Realm is conquered.


Long live Canutus mighty King of Danes, of Denmark, Norway, and of England
King.


Thanks Duke of Mertia, We must now remember that by thy late revolt we wan
this City, slew Etheldred the Lord of many thousands.

Now for reward which should have come before,
Thou never shalt crown King or subject more.
Off with his head.

My Lord.


A guard I say, stop up the Traitors mouth: Let us have fear, not love; Mans
nature will be bold where it is liked; A Kingdom got by blood must so be kept:
I will not hear him speak; Away with him; Bring me his wisdoms head into my
Tent, there weel converse.


Heavens wrath is justly sent.


Here was it that I saw that blazing Star whose bright aspect promised a
general peace to this affrighted Kingdom: Torches Slaves, the night comes on
us, we are all in darkness, prepare my bed, weel rest us after toil, and sleep,
thou mother of forgetfulness, drown all my thoughts that ere I saw this Virgin,
make her a stranger to my memory, that I may joy in this, not dye for love.
Hofman, her looks are heaven; her eyes are Cupids darts; Go bring her to me:
Art not gone yet slave? It is an Embassy too good for Hermes, the Herald of
the gods: Thou shalt meet Lightning, yet on thou must, go ask that weeping Nun,
dost hear me? Art not gone? Were Hellen now alive, this Maid alone would stain
her beauty and new Troy should burn, Paris would dye again to live to see her:
O bring me her, Dull slave with reverence; Let not the Sun be more
out-worshipp'd by the tanned Barbarian: Tell her, A bleeding Lover sent thee to
her, and name me if thou chance to see her smile: Tha'st not forgot my name.


No my good Lord.


Let me not spurn thee, Go, Fetch me some Wine, weel war a while with Love.
Fair Phaedra, who in Corinth once was found, compared to her, as different they
wo'd show, as sable Ebony to Alpine Snow; when first I saw her at the holy
Altar, Surely the gods more careful of her life, then of a mass of souls
brought me upon her, and fixed my soul to hers: Let's have some Music.

But thou prevent us with a better sound. The Accent of her Name strikes
Music dumb, for she is Air of all perfection. -- Her Name?


Her three times sacred Name, most Royal King, is Cartesmunda, a Religious Nun.


It needs no Epithet t'express the Name,
For Cartesmunda is the worlds bright frame.
I charge thee Villain, strait conduct her to me. Her sacred Name is
Cartesmunda called; O fairest soul! I fear't a harder Task to conquer thee,
than all the spacious Bounds of Barbary; Had the gods none to take my glory
from me, but a weak woman? O strange destined Fate! Ten Worlds in Arms against
Canutus State.

See the day breaks; Look where Aurora comes, and see the Mornings dew falls
from her eyes, begetting better Flowers than those of May from the glad
ravished Earth: O tell me Fair, Speak English Maid; How came thou to my
sight? What make thou here? Came thou to murder me?


What all my friends have found but wretched I,
I seek for, death to end my misery.

But can not find him, for thou art immortal; Death wud dye for thee, if he
even saw thee, and for thy sake make blunt his Ebon dart; Pray weep no more, He
prays that might command; We will not force the Jewel thou so prize, till,
thou bequeath it freely to my youth. We are of the Eagles kind, and scorn to
stoop to an ignoble Thought: Sweet will you hear me; 'Twas King Canutus fetched
that sigh you heard: Still turn aside! Well, if you loathe me, leave me; there
lies your way: Yet be advised, Fond Maid; No sooner shalt thou pass from forth
my sight, but the base Soldiers will lay hold on thee, and what I value 'bove
Religion, will not be thus much there, They'll ravish thee, and therefore
prithee stay, with tears I pray thee. Thou frosty April, woo't not love for
love? Do it then for Honour, Pleasure, Majesty: Ungentle still? Then get thee
from my sight: Go to the Woods, and learn of wilder Beasts a little pity: You
preserve chastity with a foul sin, Ingratitude: Goodnight; Yet stay, We are
strangers, We may kiss at parting; Thou hast infused Promethean Fires into me:
I have two lives, Yet none of them mine own. Fair Cartesmunda, If thou wilt be
gone, bid me Goodnight, though in some Language that I understand not:


Goodnight, My Lord.


When shall I have thy Love?


When men shall cease to think there is a God, or any thing more strange: Alas,
great Prince!

My Chastity stands at the Bar above,
My Life I owe to you, but not my Love.

So young, and full of grey haired Purity: In vain I shoot against a wall of
brass, that sends mine own shafts back upon my self. I must choose fitter time
to conquer thee. Lights, and a double guard to attend my Love.

(Fairest) Good rest; be duteous in her keeping,
He wake with thought of thee, and then with weeping.

The King is Love-sick Harold; Join thy powers, and round begir^ this City
Winchester; Beset the ways, let not the English escape, That stood the siege
and sack of Winchester.


I think there's few escaped, the King is slain
And England now submits to the conquering Dane.

Prince Alured, the Brother to the King, and Edmond Duke of Thetford both are
escaped and may raise powers afresh: Therefore be careful.


Doubt not my Lord. See here comes the Princes.


Madam, I bring you dear commends from your great Brother, England is won, and
the white flag of peace is reared upon the ruins of this City, King Etheldred
slain, and great Canutus invested with his Crown and Dignity. What conquest can
be more?


That you subdue your thoughts; and sir, give ore, till I have conference with
the King.


And then you'll love?


Till then i'll love no other.


Drag him along, he's English and must dye. Come forward sir.


Ye cannot fright me, 'tis my wish to die,
And I that seek it scoff your Tyranny,
O for fair Englands good and my lost powers,
Mine be the suffering, and the glory yours.

What prisoner have our Danish Soldiers got?

One of the straggling English, my good Lord,
And now are leading him to have him tortured.

Let him come near us, Say, what art thou?

Some God, I think, disguised in humane shape, come down to court us with
bewitching looks,

There's something tells me, if my thoughts speak truth,
To thee I owe the pleasure of my youth.

Was that thy fortune, 'thad been better far
Th'adst fallen amongst thy friends in this dread war
Then live to further shame. Away and hang him.

Stay good my Lord.


Madam forbear, the King hath sworn the deaths of all that bared his entrance
to this City; they scorned his proffered peace, and now must perish. This may
suffice, He's English, and must dye.


If all the English perish, then must I, for I (now know) in England here was
b^ed, although descended of the Danish blood, King (...) my Father, thirty
years governed the one half of this famous Kingdom, where I, that time was born
an English Princess;

Therefore I pray, my Lord, set this man free
Let me bestow his life and liberty;
I'll beg it of the King.

Madam, tis yours, go Soldiers drink this gold, and let our word to you
discharge your Prisoner.


It shall my Lord, wo'd we were rid of all the English thus.


Pray Sir, resolve me, what has your fortunes been?


The most of woes dear Princess, I have lived to see my Country ruined, my
friends murdered,

My self condemned to die, and but for you
I had been dead, that life I have's your due.

Comfort your self, henceforth you shall be mine,
Attend this, noble Lord, 'tis for your good;
Where mildness conquers, we must shed no blood.

You are all compact of Love and Mercy (Lady) attend me sir, and for this
Princess sake, we will prefer thee; come beauteous Madam you now must leave the
Tents to entertain the glorious triumphs of the great Canutus, whom you must
comfort, for the Love-sick King sits sadly doting on a beauteous Nun.


Is't possible (my Lord) the King our brother,
In midst of Conquest sho'd be Cupids prisoner?

Such is loves power, it flies with swiftest wings,
And midst his armed Guards he wounds Kings.

Venus defend me, if he be thus powerful we shall be all Soldiers, and these
stern Wars must be transformed into Loves encounters. Well, my good Lord, we'll
see this English wonder my Brother so admires, call for our Guard and Train.


They are ready (madam)

Go you before then (sir) and I'll not stay,
Look to your Prisoner, lest he ^un away.

O fear not Lady -- Come sir,

Wo'd he wo'd run, so he wo'd take me with him, by Jove I love him, but 'tis
bashfulness, that thus makes women hide their passions, even till we burst and
die; we must not plead love,

Yea, tho't be offered we must still refuse it.
With fo^d denial when we wish to choose it.
I see no sense for this; well amorous youth,
For thy sake I'll teach women what to do,
And spite of custom to begin to woo.

Be gone, be gone, my Juggy, my Puggy, be gone my Love, my Dear, my Money is
gone, and ware I have none, but one poor Lamb-skin here: Why so, and who buies
this Lamb-skin now, A most fine, dainty, nappy Lamb-skin, if a Lady would line
her Petticoat, A sweeter Lamb-skin cannot kiss her Catastrophe: Let me see, how
often do I transform my self in four and twenty hours? First, Here in
Northumberland, mine own native Country, amongst poor people I change these
myllan fustian Needles into eggs, then my eggs into money, and then am I a
Merchant, not of Eels-skins, but Lamb-skins; and thus poor Thornton of
Northumberland, picks out a living in spite of Beggary: Yet this is not the
living that I aim at neither; for I may tell to all men that I have a terrible
mind to be a horrible rich man; nay, I am half assured on it too, for where ere
I go, there's something still whispers in mine ears, I shall be greater, and
here at Newcastle too, into which I am now entering. All which to confirm, a
Witch or a Juggler, has guided my fate in writing, and now I'll read it once
again, that all the World may know my fortunes, and wonder at them. Mark then,
for thus it goes.

Go to Newcastle, take thy fate,
Yet ere thou enter, count thy State,
If service in that place thou get
Thy wealth will rise to infinite,
And Thorntons name in England stand,
The richest Subject in the Land.
O fortune, how hast thou favoured a poor Merchant stranger? I have all this
wealth in conceit already, and all this have I got of cunning man, for two poor
Millan Needles, and one of 'em lacks an eye too. No matter. Hope keeps the
heart whole, and I shall be rich, that's certain; but how I know not* nor care
not, so I come in any likeness; my Fortune says, I must get a service here in
Newcastle, but ere I enter I must count the wealth I have now, and that's soon
reckoned, one poor half penny and a Lambs-skin, is all the wealth I have in faith
and yet for all this my state must stand the richest Subject in the Land; 'tis
certain, my mind gives me it, and I am assured on it, yet I must put my self in
remembrance of my poverty, lest I should forget my self when I am grown so
rich, I will write a note on it ere I enter the Town* and hang it here upon some
tree, to keep it in mind, as long as the River of Tine runs under it. Let me
see, instead of paper this Tile-stone shall serve, and here's and Ink-horn I
stole from my Hostis, a scurvy Quean, if I had not given her money for my Ale,
she would have chalked me presently, this shall serve the turn. I'll sit down
and write, sweet Hellicon inspire me with thy Castalian luck.


Come, come dispatch, the wind is North North West, and blows fair on us; Where
is George my Factor?


Here Sir,


At the next ebb, good George, I and the ship fall down to Tinmouth; are your
books made even, the goods made fit, and all things fitting for the voyage.


All's done sir, the Commodities prized and summed; their value at my back
return from Sea, I hope to treble to you.


Heaven deal in that, or gain, or loss we must be still contented, and
therefore are we called Adventurers, because we know 'tis hazard.


^Tis indeed sir, and I do wonder at this gain of hazard you'll set so great a
state, seeing the time joins with the Sea in danger; the Danish Fleet watches
to pill the English Venturers. Then be advised.


Yet to avoid all dangers Husband, I'd have you do as here my Brother doth,
ve^ture your state in your own Country, tho the gains be smaller, the safety's
not so doubtful.


I, I, Wife, thy Brother Randolfe here is known a famous Merchant for Newcastle
Coals, and England holds the circuit of his traffic, but we that are
Adventures abroad, must fame our Country through all Christendom, nay far
beyond our Christian Territories, to Egypt, Barbary, and the Tawny Moors, Where
not indeed? if Sea and wind gives way unto our dancing Vessels; nay, nay,
Brother, your merchandise compared with us, I tell you, is but a poor
fresh-water venture.


Well brother, well, pursue your Foreign gain, I rest content at home, at the
years end we'll cast the difference 'twixt your far-fetch'd treasure, and our
Newcastle home-bred Minerals, you shall perceive strange transformation, black
coals turned to white silver, that's my comfort sir.


And take it to you sir, with much good I wish it. But stay, slay, who is that?


One that is very brain busy it seems.


Peace, peace, observe him prithee,


Here did Thornton enter in
With hope, a half penny, and a Lambs-skin,
It shall go in faith. I'll never strive to mend it; foot this Poetry, and a mans
brains were not well laid in his head, wooed make him mad, I think if there be
any Hellicon in England 'tis here at Newcastle, I am inspired with it, every
Coal-pit has a relish on it, for who goes down but he comes out as black as
Ink.


Is not this fellow mad?


Good faith I doubt it.


Well this writing will I set up here at the Towns end, that when I have got
all these riches together, and sit amongst my comely Brethren, I then may
staulk the pace of wit, and worship, here to read this Manuscript, then will I
view my Ware-houses, disperse my coin, comfort the poor, I and perhaps build
Churches.


Either he speaks to himself, or he's possessed with some strange talking
spirit, that Dialogues within him.


Then will I have some Fifty Beades-men in my life time, for that's the first
way to be prayed for here, and mourned for when I am gone, and on their Gowns
their Cullisance shall be six millan Needles, and a silver Lambs-skin.


Ha, ha, the more he speaks, methinks 'tis more distracted. Lets question him.


Is he not, think you Husband, one of those Players of Interludes that dwells
at Newcastle, and conning of his Part, for surely these are other men's matters
he talks of? Do you hear honest man, and Friend, let me instruct you to be
wise and sober.


I come not hither for thee to teach,
I have no pulpit for to Preach,
I wooed th'adst kissed me under the Breech,
As thou art a Lady gay.

Marry come up with a vengeance.


La you wife, you see what 'tis to trouble a man in his Meditations, prithee
let him alone, he's not mad I warrant thee.


With hope, a half-penny, and a Lambs-skin, I protest I never pleased my self
better. Let me see, what day's this; O Monday! I shall love Mondays vein to
poe^ize as long as I live, for this trick.


Good speed, Good fellow.


Ha, Whose that? O I thank you Gentlemen; If I have good speed, I'll do good
deeds the sooner: Your sufferance a little I beseech you; Then will I build
some famous Monument.


Thou build'st in the Air I think: Prithee, what Countryman art?


Faith Sir, a poor Northumberland man* and yet I tell ye Gentlemen, not
altogether the poor Fellow, which you behold me; Fortune may change, If you
seek what I shall be, 'Tis infinite, and cannot be summed together: But if you
wo'd know my present store; It is all summed on this Tyle-stone: I shall be
very rich, that's certain; and this Town of Newcastle must be the raising of my
fortune, if there I get service, then are Wealth and Treasure my servants.


And such a servant cannot want a Master. But Prithee tell me, Whence hast thou
these hopes?


Pray Sir, read that, then tell me your opinion.


Prithee let's see it. Go to Newcastle take thy Fate,
Yet ere thou enter, coun^ thy State:
If service in that place thou get,
Thy wealth will rise to infinite;
And Thorntons name in England stand
The richest subject in the Land. -- Excellent in faith. And dost thou believe
all this?


As sure as you live Sir, and all the world cannot drive me from this opinion,
but that I shall be a very rich man.


I like thy confidence: How dost desire to have Employment? Wilt thou go to
Sea.


Sea or Land, Fire or Air; Let Newcastle be my home, and some honest man my
Master. This Halfpenny, and this Millan Needle, shall I multiply to a Million
of Halfpence, and this innocent Lambs-skin to a Magnificent Lordship.


Stay there, I prithee, 'tis wealth enough for a subject, come, I'll give thee
handsel, that's Entertainment, my name is Goodgift a Merchant of Newcastle,
where thou desire to serve, give me thy hand, If I do live to see thee this
rich man, I shall be proud to say, I was thy Master.


I am your servant Sir, and will be faithful.


Obey me then at first, as I'll employ thee: Thou shalt to Sea, I see thou wilt
be thrifty: Come hither George, take him a Shipboard with thee, change his
Apparel strait, and make him handsome; I begin so well to relish his
Plainness that I am half persuaded of his hopes. How say thou wife?


Nay, Nay, He bad me kiss his Breech, B^rlady, but that's no matter Husband,
seeing I see his Fortunes are so hopeful, he shall have my liking: Come hither
Thornton, since thy Master sends thee out to Sea, there's something for thee to
begin thy stock with, and if thou double it, I'll ne'er grudge in faith, So thou't
remember me, when you are a rich man.


Ha, Ha, -- she's confident already.


So shall I ne'er be, till I see it Sir.


Well, Well, Do as I bid thee George, under thy self, let him have charge of
all.


How will he put off these Commodities he has Sir?


Tush, Tush, I'll have an out-cry Fellow George, for so I take it Sir, your name
is now.


Why what's thy Lambs-skin good for?


Marry Muff Sir.


Thou say true indeed Thornton, and I'll purchase it of thee, for that
purpose, I'll give thee a Groat for it to line my Muff withal.


And you shall have it Mistress, It has been lain dead on my hands a great while,
and now it shall be dead on yours, only this, Sweet Master, I must inteat you,
that ere I enter the Town, I may hang up this writing here; I doubt not Sir,
but at my coming home, I shall be able to have it cut in stone.


Agreed, Agreed, an honest Motion. How now, Who's this comes here?


'Tis Grim the Collier, Ist't not brother?


O yes sister, the main Over-seer of all my Coals, I warrant you, his heads
more troubled too, then Thorntons was to count his hop'd-for wealth, and mark
how wisely he proceeds about it.


Let me see now, first five hundred Chaldron of Coals at ten Groats a Chaldron,
that is, in Coals, and money; ten Groats, and ten Groats, is twice ten Groats;
Then take twice ten out of two times ten, and there remains four times ten:
fivescore Chaldron at ten Groats a Coal, comes to five shillings, then take me
thirty Coals out of thirty Chaldron, and put them together, and there's the
whole Voyage, so thirty Chaldron of Coals, comes to five Chaldron of Angels.


O rare! He multiplies bravely.


I told you what a reck'ning he wo'd make on it.


Then to cast how many Fourpence halfpennies there are in a Chaldron of Angels:
Let me see, take half a Chaldron out of a whole Chaldron, and there remains --
No, No, this is not the way; I must begin lower: A Chaldron of Angels, if you
take nothing out, there remains something: This is the honest way for a servant
when he casts up his Masters Reckonings, to take nothing out, and then the
whole Stock remains untouched still.


I marry Sir, I like that well; Why, How now Grim, What art thou doing?


I cry you mercy Master, I am even doing my good will to make your Accounts
right Sir: There's five hundred Chaldron of Coals leaving the River, and shipped
away: They'll be Sea-sick to morrow.


How many for London (Grim?)


Three hundred Chaldron, Sir.


And whither go the rest?


'Twas purposed they sho'd ha gone to Winchester, but its thought since the
Danes came thither, they have little need of Sea-coal, every place is so hot;
they say a Taylor burnt his Goose, and yet no fire came near him.


That's strange* Well Grim, bid them alter their course for Winchester, bid
them put in at Lyn, and Yarmouth, and let London be the farthest of their
journey until these Wars afford us better safety.


Alas Master, if you stow up your ships, you may ee'n hang up your Colliers,
for they'll starve and dye if they come above ground once; you have sevescore
pits, and seven hundred lusty Colliers daily digging in them, and if they come
above ground once -- What Thornton my old Acquaintance! How ist't, How ist't
man?


Never better in faith.


Dost thou know him?


Better then the Taylor that made his Doublet: Know Thornton, the famous
Needle-maker of Northumberland? There's not a Beggar that carries a Patch about
her, but knows him; All our Colliers buy Needles of him for the same purpose:
Many a night has he lain in the Sellerage amongst ^ Thornton, How many Eggs
have you roasted at our fire in the Coal-pits?


Thou posest me now in faith Grim, I have been infinitely beholding to thee, and
when I am a rich man, here's my hand, I'll requite it.


I had rather thou would set a certain day to do it. Dost thou think to be
rich by Peddlers Eggs, and Lambs-skins?


But I have other Employments now Grim.


He is my servant Sir, and is already by my best liking voyaging to Sea.


Does he go a foot Sir?


Sir, Sir, He's a Venturer too, and when you see his safe return again with
wealth from Sea, you'll make legs to him.


How legs to him? I scorn him and his Lambs-skins. No Sir, Thorxton must
remember I am Controler of the Cole-pits, and that many a night I have
committed him to the Hole, and there he lay forty Fathom deep beneath me, where
I co'd have buried him alive, if I had thought on it: Make legs to him?


Come, Come Sir, We'll have you friends at parting; Go George, follow my
directions, and let Thornton have that Employment I prescribed to you; Come
Sir, you shall first erect your Character according to your mind at the Towns
end, to keep a Record of your Entrance in.


With hope, a Halfpenny, and a Lambs-skin, that's all Sir.


Ha, Ha, a brave rich man I promise you.


Is thy name Eldred?


Yes, My good Lord.


Thou art my prisoner still, and we have power over all, thy Life and Fortunes.


I still confess it, Sir.


'Tis well, Can thou guess then, why my love extends it self so lineally
towards thee? Thou know that even from death I have advanced thee close to
my self, and trust thee with my secrets, and one above the rest, requires thy
aid, thy subtle and quick brain can better forge matter of fair discourse than
mine can be, The bright Elgina thou must court for me. In Peace and War she has
been still my aim, for her the tedious night I do beguile, with serious
thoughts of her divinity, and watching till the midnight Chimes be past, have
waked again before the Village Cock had called the Plowman to his early labour.

Go plead my love, yet ere thou go, here swear
(Yet I with love will win thee, not with fear)
Never to injure me in this disguise, Nor with Icarian wing to soar too high.


I were a villain to betray your trust, being so meritless of your great
favours, and therefore vow by all that man may swear by, I'll be as true to you
in this employment, as truth is to the just.


Thou hast said enough, I leave it to thy tr^st -- Go, return and make me
happy, there's gold, spend freely.


Fortune I see thou now art blind, and foolish, and without aim direct'st thy
giddy shafts, these gifts thou give to me, which I despise, what physic
h^lps a man just as he dies? Tis Englands peace that I would live to Court, but
she is fled, and I a captive Prince, slave to my mortal foes, till time release
me, that once I may regreet my English friends, which long ere this, I know
have wished my presence, to join our forces for our Countries freedom.

The trust I have received, I'll court her for him,
And plead my Masters love, though she abhor him.

Who's there, Eldred?


Your pardon beauteous Princess, I must woo you.


But i'll prevent you sir, for i'll woo you.


For noble Erkinwald my warlike Master. All love from him.


Is nothing like to thee,
That conquer'st love, and Cupids Deity.

You do amaze me Lady.

Be not afraid,
But tell me boldly, could you love a Maid
That for thy sake wo'd be a president, and teach all women a new way to win
the often wished desires of stubborn me^? In me you shall observe patience and
duty, tender care, and fear; by thy bright eyes, I'll teach the constant Turtle
truer love, and make the Nuns at Vesta's Altar swea^,

The Virgin state is not so strict to move
As the obsequious life* you lead in love.
And cannot you yet say, you mean to love me.

Beshrew me Madam but you tempt me shrewdly, pray give me leave to think upon it
--. Ha! my vow's not broke yet; for I woo not her, that was my oath sure, and
I think there's no man that can withstand the wooing of a woman. Fond fool, how
quickly youth and blood transform?


Come, What's your answer?


Dearest Lady, There is but one thing in the world that hates me, and you have
brought it with you.


O me! what sho'd it be?


Forgive my rashness, 'tis a thing within you, not you, that charms me from
you.


Be it my heart, i'll pull it out, so thou wilt love me.


O gracious Princess, 'tis your Royal blood, so near allied i^to the great
Canutus

Keeps me at distance, were our states made even
My love sho'd be as strong as zeal to H^aven.
Therefore Imperial Maid --

No more, if that be all, we will dispense with greatness, use me like one that
loves you, I'll Invent a plot that shall in short secure us both; I crave but
this, that thou be true of faith: For by my life I love thee.


And (gracious Princess) since now I see your passions are unfeigned, I vow not
only to requite your love, but with affected and sincere intents to crown your
wishes, though it work my ruin.


Our faiths and hearts are one then, Cupids wings,
Can crown mean births, with joy, make slaves of Kings
Knew Erkinwald my heart, he would change with thee,
And be thy slave to have command ore me.

At it so close? I'll hear their conference, win her, and gain thy Freedom, Love
and Honour. Ha! That kiss (bold slave) past thy Commission; Death and the Devil,
she kisses him too. O fond Erkinwald be blind and do not see them; thy office
was to speak, but not, for thy self.


Natures Divinity is in thy looks, and he an Atheist sees thee, and not loves.
Should Erkinwald now see it, I wo'd love thee, tho for each kiss I had a
several torture, ten deaths for thy enjoying were my Bliss.


So high I pr^ze thee, by this Virgins kiss.


Yet you make shift to reach him with your lips; Degenerate Princess, I suspect
thy birth: Yet well may thou be Sister to thy Brother, For Great Canutus
blood runs low as t^ine, and Love-sick doa^eth on an English Nun.


Then you resolve to ^ly?


Heaven knows I do.


Here's one will stop your Journey. Thunder part ye, slave.


Ha, O me unfortunate!


Tush, fear not Madam. See here I stand my Lord.


A perjured Villain.


That tongue lies that speaks it -- Hea^ me, I courted for thee with my best of
speech, and showed my faith as firm as Adamant, till fate that rules all love,
ore-rul'd her so, that she became a Suitor for my love,

And on my worthless self her smiles hath thrown;
My tongue was yours, but my consent mine ow^.

I'll have that heart she loves -- hold eyes from weeping.


But I shall hate that heart if in thy keeping.

Sheath up thy sword, and hear me Elkinwald, what shall I give thee to renounce
my love?


As much as thou would give to attain Elizium sho'd not avert my love from
these fair eyes, Ioves thunder, or eternal miseries shall never so transform
me.


Yet I cannot love thee.


But i'll remove the cause of that. Villain, thou hast seen our slaves dye, when
their Lords have laughed, Come, run on my weapon, this is Princely favour,

For greater tortures do attend on thee,
But we'll be merciful in Tyranny.

See, on the Earth, thy Sovereigns Sister kneels, to beg thy pity.


There's nothing but thy love can purchase it.


Yet have mercy, the fault in love was thine, thou did betray me when thou
let me see him; and Villain thou, if thou but touch his life, the Great
Canutus shall revenge my wrongs,

For after him Elgina will not live;
Bethink thee then, O yet some pity give!

Do not debase your self, for my poor life,
I dare his worst, my love is constant still,
More resolute to die, than thou to kill.

Tis worthy praise, then see, behold thy death.

With open eyes, as I wo'd view her state,
And like a man thus I pursue my fate.

Hold, hold. O I am slain, farewell dear friend, the loss of thee is Tyranny in
d^ath

And death a dream, so thou but close mine eyes.
Chaste love is born in Heaven, and never dies.

Amazement to my soul, O my Elgina! O I am most accurs^! 'twas this hand struck
thee.


For which I'll be revenged; thus Heaven is just.

Base Villain thou hast slain me.

'Tis thy fate, Farewell.
Oh pure, unspotted Maid, unhappy Princess,
This hand shall keep thy will and close thine eyes,
Let thy soul joy, for here thy Murderer lies
Dead at my foot, and I with thee could die,
Were my poor Country free from misery.
War calls me to the field. O my Elgina. Autume is on thy ch^eks, the
Rose is withered, and thou look like the Alabaster statue,
Upon thy lips I print this parting kiss,
And flying from thee, leave all earthly bliss.

Osrick, we hear the Duke of Thatford raises men in Norfolk.


All England sure, I think will mutiny, if (...) the King neglect his hopeful
Conquest, by doting on a woman's lustful Beauty.


Never was man in love bewitched like him, he will not suffer speech or any
counsel that may dis-swade from her; he bars his fight from any but the Nun,
and his loo^e Panders. Ha! what sight is this? Duke Erkinwald and the Princess
murdered, this sight wo^d sad even Tyranny it self, draw tears from Tigers, and
make wonder dumb.

Oh Great Canutus what por^ents are thes^
This heavy curse lights on thy lust and ease.
Thy sister, and thy best of friends are slain,
And safety now is frighted from thy Throne.
Convey this spectacle of grief aside, and let a guard pursue the m^derer.
I'll hie me to the King, and there relate
Their deaths, his lust, both guided by strong fate.

She is an Angel in the shape of woman, chaster than Dian, colder than
Freezland snow, and yet she burns me; if I miss her now, my death must be the
period of my love; Go, let those Jewels, Cates, perfumes and Music, be all
produced together in one sense.

Unite all raptures, let's have nothing s^ant,
That she may taste at once, what all Queens want.
Strike heavenly Music, with a tuneful measure,
And with thy raptures swell her blood and pleasure.
The star appears, welcome dear soul, to make our joys more full, fit to this
Banquet, Great Queen of my heart, and fully joy thy senses in each part.


My senses are entranced, or do I dream;
O let me back return to hide my shame.

O stay divinest soul, hear me but speak.


O I have lost my sense with these Enchantments; I am I know not how, for all
my powers are useless, but mine eyes to weep.


Make not the earth proud to receive thy tears, lest being subject unto me her
King, I force her to restore again those pearls, more rich than all the Jewels
of our Crown, so high I prize thy tears, yet thee 'bove all.


I am your Servant, Prisoner, Vassal, worse.

Thine eyes upon my freedom laid that curse.
If thou be mine, I do command thy love;
Where Kings of Subjects beg, let pity move.

How can so great a King, be weakness slave?

In doting of those joys I near shall have.

Men that lust women once, no more endure 'em,
In health they loathe the physic that did cure 'em.

When I neglect thy love, or touch thy life, may all my Battles prove
unfortunate, and I lose all the conquering Danes have got, and end my days with
shame and inward grief.


Your words be registered, with hands divine,
O keep your vow (great Prince) for I break mine.
I blush to say, I yield, I'm wholly yours, a spotless Virgin now is in your
power, and as you mildly courted, so this kiss confirms me to you.


And my soul to thee.
Never did man meet more felicity.
Run Vassals run, prepare all sweet delight
For Cartesmunda sleeps with me to night.
England shall sleep in peace, for all my force
On Cartesmunda's love shall now be spent,
Thy Arms shall be my Arms, thy Bed my Tent.

Defend me Heaven, how is this King transformed? my news is not so sad, as is
this sight.


Whose there? Harold? what news?


The English Princes (mighty Sovereign) seeing your Highness thus forsake the
field, threaten fresh war, and England will be lost.


But Cartesmunda won, In thee we have all good that England holds,

All Conquest in these Arms Canutus folds.
Hast more to say?

Yes, but with grief (my Lord) The fair Elgina, your beauteous ^ister, and that
only one that made her Sex admired, is slain, great King.


Give me this Bracel^t, I have begged it long.


And noble Erkinwald lies murd'red too.


Why now you are my pretty one, Come, kiss thy Canutus.


Had you (my Lord) as I, beheld that sight, the Tyranny of death had sure
amazed you.


What does he talk on?


Do you not mark, my Lord; he says, Your Sister's dead.


Let her be buried then: Remove out of mine eye, thou fright'st my love. Some
Music there: Come Cartesmunda kiss me: Go bid our Soldiers hang their Arms
up; Fold up our Ensigns, and unbrace our Drums, England is conquered, all our
Wars are done, and all in this, that Cartesmunda's won. --


O strange Enchantment, the sad news I brought, Though now regardless, meanwhile
would have made his eyes start from their orbs to hear of it: O fair Elgina!
happy now you are dead, and dost not live to see thy brothers folly. This is not
now Canutus, nor his Palace, but rather seems a Roman Theatre, and this young
N^ro acting Comedies, with some light Strumpet in bold scenes of Lust; This
change with wonder I behold, and see

That love is powerfulo're inferior things,
When thus to baseness it transforms great Kings.

Come Bullies, fetch more Coals, and aboard with 'em lustily, show your selves
Newcastle-men, not proud, but honest and humble, and such as do not scorn to
carry Coals.


I warrant you Mr. Grim, We^'l send'em going, Newcastle Coals are Here^icks,
and must be burnt at London.


You say well, We'll put'em to water first, and then let'em put fire in their
Tails afterward.


Well said Grim, I see thou art not idle.


No Master, I am Bailey of your Cole-pits, and your Worships Benefactor: I will
do what lies in a true serva^t; Seven hundred (...) Indians, or Newcastle
Colliers, your Worship keeps daily to dive for Treasure five hundred fathom
deep for you, and as they bring it up, I'll send it out to your profit, Sir.


'Tis well done Grim, thy gains will one day be a Gentleman.


A Gentleman? Nay I hope one day to purchase a Lordship, and all my Colliers
under me shall be Ladies, for I'll maintain'em with black Masks on their faces
already; but do you hear Master? I hear there is some disadvantage towards us,
and it behoves us to look to it, they say there are a new sort of Colliers crept
up near London, at a place called Croydon, that have found out a way by
scorching of wood to make Charcoals, and '^is to be feared this may hinder our
Traffic Master.


How? To make Coals of wood, art sure 'tis so?


Most certain Sir, but never fear it Master, Newcastle Coals shall conquer
Croydon, we can give a Chaldron of Sea-coals for a sack of Char-coals.


Thou say well Grim; but I hear my brothers ship's returned with large
Advantage, I mean to see him, mean time insist upon ^hy care, good Grim.


O sweet Master, Let me go with you, I'd fain see how Thornton our
Needle-merchant has sped, I doubt me, his Lambs-skin is turned to three
Sheeps-skins the wrong side outward.


Come, Let's go; but see they come to us.


Now brother Randolph how is'^ with you Sir?


Glad by the happy tidings of your News Sir; Fame has outstripped the wind that
brought your ships, and tells us of a rich and prosperous Voyage: I'll talk with
your Factor, Sir, and know your Pur^hase.


Do, Do, Mean time I'll talk with Thornton here my honest Merchant of Millan
Needles; How hast thou sped in thy Voyage, how did thou brook the Sea?


I think he was glad to pump over-board; How say you Thornton?


Tush, Tush, Thou art a Fresh-water Fellow (Grim.)


A Fresh-water Fellow? O disgrace to a Collier! If ever I kill a Whale hand to
hand, it shall be thee.


Nay, good Grim.


Mr. Goodgift, I pray pardon me: Shall Grim the Collier that has been thus long
Controler of the Cole-pits, chief Sergeant of the Selleridge, nay the very
Demigorgan of the Dungeon, be called a Fresh-water Fellow?


Quietness, I say, We'll have no quarrelling.


I beseech you Sir* Let's both be let down into a Cole pit five Fathom deep,
and he that kills the other, shall be sti^led with a Damp, and so you shall
never be troubled to hang, nor bury us.


Go to, I say, I'll have ye friends again: Come, shake hands.


Never, unless I may call him, Porpoise, now at single hand, Sir.


I, I, Thou shalt.


Thou? go thy ways, thou art a Porpoise, and now I am friends with thee.


So, So, 'Tis well, and now as I was saying, Thornton, What Voyage hast thou
made to benefit thy hopes, your Halfpenny, and your Lambs-skin? My Factor tells
me here thou hast been careful and diligent, but to the wealth and greatness
you expect, I yet hear nothing.


I marry Husband that's the news I look for; Sir, Come tell us Thornton, How
have you bestowed the money that I gave you?


Faith Mistress, as the rest, my full stock to Sea, you, and my good friends
gave, was five shillings, and putting in at Preston for fresh water, I turned
it there into six Tun of Iron, one of which Tuns I have already sold unto an
Anchor-Smith here in Newcastle for four pound; the rest, if I put off so well,
will multiply my stock most richly, Mistress.


'Tis well, but far from hope of wealth and Lordships Thornton.


Yet that re-multiplied again, good brother, may help his Halfpenny and his
Lambs-skin somewhat.


Well, well Thornton, you are welcome home however; So art thou George; Go see
the ship unl^ded, we'll go before, and view the Ware-houses.


I shall Sir.


Come brother, will you go?


Yes, Sir; You'll quarrel no more, if we leave you together now?


No Sir, I mean to borrow some money of him now.


That's not his way to thrive; Look to him Thornton.


I warrant you Master, we'll agree well enough; Ah Sir, Mr. Thornton, you
have got six Tun of Iron already, you must take heed now that you fall not into
some crafty Ironmongers hand to deceive you of your whole stock; Look too't,
they are hard dealers that deal in Iron, if you be gulled, remember what Martin
said to his man, Whose the Fool now?


Tush Grim, Look there man, my whole stock lies not in Iron; a little stock I
borrowed of my fellow George at Sea, and with it, I have purchased these
Pearls.


Pearls? Prithee tell me true: Are they Pearls in faith?


Pearls? I, and precious ones too, I hope.


Ha, ha, good Oyster Pearl, worth twelvepence a pound, I think.


No matter man, I cannot lose by them howsoever; they cost me little; I have
sent for a Goldsmith a purpose to know the certainty.


That's well, and in the mean time, here comes your first Chapman: How now good
man Iron-fist, Why do you puff and blow so?


O Mr. Thornton, I'm ee'n out of breath with seeking you, unless you stand my
friend, I shall be undone for ever.


Why, what's the matter man?


Your Iron, Sir, your Iron, that I bought of you, is not the mettle I took it
for, 'twill do me no good Sir, there will not a nayl be hammered out of it,
when I heat it, it melts, and when 'tis cold again, it bends like-lead, and if
it lye on my hand, I am undone for ever; I beseech you, Sir, take it again,
though I lose ten shillings in the price I paid for it.


Nay, I must not rise by hurt of any man; I'll take it again, and thou shalt lose
no penny. I prithee let me see it, Is this a part on it.


I, for here's the end of one of the Bars, the poorest piece of Iron I e're
hammered on.


Well, leave this with me, and bear the rest home to my Masters Ware-house,
thou shalt sustain no loss, thou shalt have thy money.


I thank you Sir, I'll bear it back again, and my wife that yet curses you most
terribly, shall pray for you most horribly.


This is strange, my great Venture turned to nothing now?


Faith Mr. Thonton, and your pearls prove no better than your Iron, you were
best turn Merchant of Lambs-skins again.


Well I know the worst on it Grim, see here comes the Goldsmith that I sent for;
if my Pearls prove as bad as my Iron, I am quite begger'd in faith,


Now Mr. Thornton what's your business with me?


Your advice in these few pearls sir, and I would know the value of them.


They are fair and round, are they your own sir?


I'll answer the sail of them.


And have you any more of 'em sir?


Some thirty more, and far more orient than these are too.


I'll give you twenty pound for these two at a venture sir.


You shall have Pearl my dog at that price sir.


What say you Mr. Thornton?


Twenty pound say y'? there's some hope then towards my half-penny, I see. Come
sir, I'll make a rash bargain, you are my first Ch^pman, and shall have first
refusal, both in the price of these and all the rest; and since you give me
this good comfort, sir, pray let me trouble you a little further, you have good
skill in Metals sir, pray look on this; what metal should this be?


Let me see it sir, I'll tell you presently.


A beastly piece of Iron 'tis, it came new from the Forge, old Iron-fist the
Smith has been hammering, but he can do no good on'^.


What think you sir?


Ha! fore Heaven, it touches fair, have you any store of this metal sir?


Yes sir, six Tun I assure you, I brought it for good Iron, but my small skill
has deceived me.


You were well deceived sir, for if the rest*
Of your six Tun with th^s in trial stand
You 're now the richest Subject in the Land,

Ha! Gold? Delude me not I beseech you sir, let me believe you plainly. Y'have
touched this piece, and this I'll give you to make good your word.


Upon my life I will, 'tis perfect gold, and for this Wedge I will refine it
all to its pure lustre, and your infinite profit.


I make that bargain with you, this piece is yours, and since you give these
hopes, I pray conceal it, and meet me at the Warehouse, there I'll show you the
full six Tun I spake of, and confer.


I will a^tend you sir, and tell you thus,
Your For^unes all are rich and wondrous.

I have a thankful heart to heaven for it, that's my comfort: Why how now fellow
Grim, how stand thou man?


Six Tun of Gold? O that I durst but embrace you Mr. Thornton!


Tush man, I prithee do; I'll ne'er foget my self nor thee, I am honest
Thornton, and thou honest Grim.


Poor Grim the Collier sir, but I'll never be your worships equal, you shall be
triumphant Mr. Thornton, and I poor Grim, your honest friend, and quondam
fellow.


Come, come, no more of this, help me to cast my venture honest Grim: Six tun
of gold?


Most right sir.


Three pound an ounce, is threescore pounds a pound.


And that's horrible usury for your worship.


Nay, nay, no worship good Grim, this is Heavens blessing thrown on a poor mans
head.


Wo'd I were thrown into a Coal-pit with such a blessing on my back.


Nay prithee let's reckon further, three pound an ounce, and threescore a
pound, is full sixteen thousand pound a Tun, and doubling that to six times
six, comes near to forty hundred thousand pounds, almost four millions.


O Lord sir! is not that better than twenty millan Needles that your Lordship
had wont to sell amongst the Colliers, and when you came to Newcastle, as your
writing says, Here did Thornton enter in, with hope, a half-penny, and a
Lambs-skin.


True, true, good Grim, and I shall ne'er forget it.


O that my mother had lapped me in a Lambs-skin the first hour of my begetting,
for now I see there is no luck to a Lambs-skin, six Tun of gold at one
purchase, and besides all this your Highness does forget the ^earls too.


Nay, nay, no Titles Grim, 'tis all heavens blessing still.


Tis true sir, and I think your Majesty's the richest man --


Away, away, thou'^t speak Treason anon Grim. The wealth I have I see is
in^inite, and be thou secret and conceal a while, and I'll reward thee with
large recompense.


I am your Vassal sir, and will be obedient to your Excellence in all things.
But see the foolish Smith is returned to see you.


Prithee be silent. How now honest Smith, hast thou sent home the iron?


O yes sir, I thank Heaven I have rid my hands of it, you have made me a man
Mr. Thornton, my house is quiet, my wife silent, I have carried home your
leaden iron, return me my silver back again, and my wife and I shall pray for
you when you are dead and rotten.


Well sir, withal my heart. I received four pound; Look you sir, there 'tis,
all your full sum to a penny.


Sweet Mr. Thornton, shall I not give you four pots for all this kindness? pray
sir, 'tis fit I should lose something.


No, no, I'm satisfied.


Do you hear ancient Iron-^ist, the old Smith of Newcastle, I can tell you one
thing, if the Almanac or Erra-pater be true, you'll hang your self ere to
morrow morning.


How, hang my self!


Nay, prithee Grim, thou wilt discover all anon.


No I warrant you sir, I do it but to work a little profit. Do you hear Smith,
what shall I give you for the ashes and rubbish that came off of that old Iron
that you refused now?


How? the ashes? marry I mean to sweep 'em out of my shop when I come home
in faith, for fear they infect the rest. What wilt thou do with 'em?


That's all one, Let me have all the ashes and the pieces you broke off that
Bar you brought to Mr. Thornton, and I'll give thee five shillings.


Five shillings? I'll not be said to gull you Mr. Grim, but an you'll give me a
groat ready money, they are yours.


A bargain: There's your groat.


The ashes, and all the pieces of iron are yours sir.


Bear witness Mr. Thornton, come, I'll go fetch 'em presently, y'^d best make
haste, your dismal day's to morrow, you know what I told you, and unless you
rid your self of 'em quickly, you will hang your self, that's certain.


Ha! Have my hopes ore-tane me? think on it Thornton, and thank Heaven fo^'^t;
here at Newcastle first

In low estate, did Thornton enter in,
With hope, a half-penny, and a Lambs-skin,
And now my large Accounts, of wealth scarce told,
I keep possession of six Tun of gold.
The blessings strange, and I must now resolve
To tie my vows to my auspicious fate,
Lest the world curse, and Heaven call me ingra^e;
To make of this my gold a household God,
Were mere Idolatry, no'^ shall fly abroad:
Newcastle, to thy good, large sums of love
My promise owes, which i'll pay, and prove,
To grace thy fame, I'll beautify thy ground,
And build a wall that shall embrace thee round.

That Music is too loud, tread softly sirs; How sweetly in his sleep Can^us
looks? I'll not envy thee Iuno, keep thy Jove, here lies the soul of
Cartesmunda's love. Now by this kiss Canutus I do love thee, thou need not
dream it, fie, fie, sluggard fie, beshrew the God of dreams, what, did he
fright thee? Or art thou fighting of some battle now, wherein thou see me
taken prisoner, and startst with fear of that? There's nothing else that could
affright thee, though it came like thunder, for thou were made for Arms, and
for these Arms; and yet thy sword Canutus did not win me. I saw these eyes,
when I refused to love thee, begin to lose their splendour, and in tears drown
their neglected brightness. I have seen this face half dead when I have frowned
upon it, and with my smiles life has returned again; go, go, you wanton, by this
kiss I'll beat you.


How now Sweet-heart?


Art thou awake my Love? then I am well.


Well Cartesmunda, sleep, and I will watch as careful as the tender Pelican
stands by her tender young; give me a kiss potent as Bacchus to raise appetite,
and le^'s go sleep together, if I get a Boy upon thy youth, he shall be King,
and half the world shall be his Dower.


It is Duke Harold, sir, entreats access.


He does not choose his time well. Let him in.


The King is angry sir.


Angry, say thou? holy Saints defend us, 'has foes enough to vent his spleen
upon, and not to shroud himself thus from his friends. Most mighty Prince.


Rise Harold, ^e co'd chide you; But go on.


Pardon (my speech my Lord) it is my duty, and I must needs make bold to tell
your Highness, y're no Soldier but a Love-sick Prince, And while you dally out
your days in love, the English all are raising head against you, the Ga^risons
that kept Northumberland are chased as far as York, two thousand Danes, died in
that bloody slaughter. And now again those warlike Princes all their Forces
join, and seek you forth.


Fetch me some wine, we'll drink to all their deaths that dare disturb us;
Cartesmunda, thou shalt sweetly pledge me, come faster slave.

Thus in this wine we'll wash away all care,
My pleasures and my conquest all are here.
Come pledge me sweet.

The Duke of Thetfords Forces raised in Norfolk, have quite expuls'd the Danes,
the English Nobles bound to your State by conquest and by oath, forsake
Allegiance, and with sound of Drums proclaim Prince Alured the English King.


Ho, ha, ha.


Why laughs my Love?


To see thee pledge me such a hearty draught.


You see my Lord he's careless, and neither minds us nor his persons safety.


Most Royal sir, what order for your forces?


Let's have some music strait; Come Cartesmunda wee^l dance out half this day,
and that being done, we will retire our selves and sleep again. Why, when ye
slaves? do your souls sleep within you? here's good music.


So was the warlike Drum and Trumpet once, great Hardiknute the glory of the
Danes. Thy Son plays now the King.


Hail mighty King.


Thunder to thee; Foot can we not be private?


Alas my Liege my news is of importance.


So is my pleasure slave, avoid our presence, thou and the rest that come to
fill our ears with tumults and with bloody Massacres, frighting m^ heavenly
Love, for whose sweet sake let men fall thicker than the checkered leaves, the
stern winds rend and ravish from the tree^, when yellow Autum turns them into
gold.

Be gone, come Cartesmunda let's retire,
We will not stir were all the world on fire.

Is this the end of all our former conquests? to be re-conquer'd now with wine
and women?


I, this is she that bears so high a stroke, we dare not shake our heads for
fear we loose 'em; if she but dreams a dream that not del^ghts her, next
morning there are some are sure to bleed for it, whose lot so ere it be.


Wo'd it were mine, my Lords, so she co'd dream, and it would come to pass, the
Devil might fetch her.


This twelve month sir, he has not touched his Armour, nor been in the field to
cheer his Soldiers.


We now must make as great a suit to see him, as if we begged for Tips of
dignity.


No more, I see your griefs and all our ruins, if we keep sile^t thus. I'll
speak to him, and venture life for such a general good, if my plots fail, my
tongue shall boldly speak

To touch his baseness, though I lose my head,
I'll die, or win him from this strumpets bed.
Fear not to second me.

Not I, were death assured, I'll first begin,
A Soldiers best fight is to beat down sin.

Double my Guards about her, I will prove
There's no happiness on earth but love.

Most mighty Prince.


Audacious Traitor, wherefore come thou to us, did we not charge thee to
avoid the presence.


Your Father (Royal Sir) knew me a Soldier, and I have fought for you, yet if
you please, so I may speak, make me your humble Martyr.


Slave what would thou say?


That which my life shall prove
You've lost your conquest in a woman's love.
Could you untie the vail Cupid has bound about your eyes and forehead, you wo'd
find she were not all so fair as you esteem her, Nature was never so impartial
to give to one to rob a million, arm but your self and lead your Soldiers
forth to win another City, you shall find her beauty far out-strip'd, sacred
Liege, if like a young man you take counsel ill,

Destroy me quickly, it shall be my fame
I died to win you from a Strumpets shame.

Thou'st spoke enough to damn thee, Impudent Traitor, go dye unpit^ied; Though
thou hast my hate* thou shalt not have the honour of my sword o take away thy
l^fe, you of our Guard; See a base death performed upon this Slave.


Farewell my Liege you once must have a grave.


My Resolution's firm, and I will speak, though hell shu'd gape to swallow me
alive; What's he chat's gon to death my Sovereign?


A Traitor (Harold) to my best content.


O pardon sir, your rage has lost a man of more true worth then all this
Nation; He was not of that strain of Counsellors, that like a tust of Rushes in
a Brook, bends every way the current turns it self, yielding to every puff of
Appetite that comes from Majesty, but with true zeal he faithfully declared the
grief of all: Pardon me (great Canutus) I must speak, and let thy subject on
his knee entreat, the Kingly Lion yet to rouse his strength,

And chase those English that do only wound,
Because out Rescuer will not be found.

Fond man, how dare thou check our Appetite: Hast thou forgot, our frown can
strike thee dead.


I know it, and willingly lay down my head;
For 'tis more honour by thy wrath to dye,
Then living to behold thy misery,
Which sure is coming on.

Let it make haste. We'll beat it back with our triumphant Host.


You cannot, till you beat that wanton hence; She has b^witch'd your senses
(mighty Lord)
Her Tresses, like to Adamantine Chains,
Have let all heat but lust out of you veyns;
When she is gone, your valor you'll assume,
But while she stays, she doth your state consume.

No more: Go bid the Captains meet me in the Hall; Tell'em to morrow early
we'll come down;

And in strange kind to all your eyes we'll show
We can command our self as well as you.

I'll do your will, and hope for good event.


There is no hell on earth but discontent. I feel my blood grows i will, a sudden
qualm in a deep Laethe seems to drown my joys.

But here comes she, by whom those thoughts are gon,
Earths happiness, as whose creation
Nature spent all her stock: Welcome my love to make our joys full, Go adorn
thy self in all the richest Jems my Coffers yields; Wear all the Jewels
purchased with my crown, and out-shine Dian in a Robe of stars.


For what, my Lord?


To please mine eyes, and make all men admire thy Radencie.
Thy Beauty shall out-brave the glorious Sun,
Somewhat Canu't must do to be talked on.

Fie Sister, weep no more, 'tis time to lay by grief, and with the death of
your late husband, now bury your sorrows.


Shu'd I forget so soon so good a husband?


His goodness was your good, your late dead husband has left you rich, and full
Executrix to be over-seen by Mr. Thornton, whose care I cannot pass without
some note; For though his wealth be raised to Infinites, he not forgets a
servants love.


Alas good brother, I have wooed him from it.


How Sister have you wooed him?


I, from civility, Methinks 'tis unmannerly in me, to see a man so much in
state the better, to be so like a servant to me; I tell you I have wooed him
from it.


I think 'twere better far he wooed you Sister.


Wooed me? For what?


For Love Sister.


O ^ie, good Brother: The very word would wrong my husbands grave.


Tush, a Woman's Sorrow, has been in black to day, in green to morrow.


I, but I am none of those: No, no, I'll never marry.


Come, you are foolish, think upon him, Sister, He's rich man, I tell you.
He's now the wealthest subject England hath.


O but my Husband!


Which of 'em? he that's gone, or this to come? Think of Mr. Thornton.


Alas, I am not his equal:


Tush you were once his Better, he's humble still.


Well, I'll speak no more on it.


Well, think on it then.


Hey, ho, He's a very honest man truly, and had my husband dyed but two months
ago, I might have thought on it.


How fare you Sister?


As a green widow sir; Pray if you see Mr. Thornton, say I'd speak with him.


Are you there in faith Sister; See, he's here already.


Spare for no cost, and ply the Workmen hard, I'll pay'em all, they shall not
want for money; have you taken the compass of the Wall?


We have, to a foot sir.


How many Towers of strength may be erected, dividing each distance by a
hundred pace^.


'Tis cast already, and the compass falls,
A hundred fourscore Towers to grace the Walls.

How high de'you raise the Walls?


As you directed sir, full a hundred foot.


Right, and twelve in bread^h.


Just so sir, 'twill be a pleasant walk to view the Town:


So I wo'd have it; And therefore from the highest erect a Battlement above the
Platform four foot high a'both sides, both to secure, and make the place more
pleasant; See it raised so.


I shall sir.


O my dear Husband!


Why, how now Mistress?


O Mr. Thornton, I never see you, but I think of a good husband.


I marry Sister, that's a pretty cast.


Your pardon I beseech you gentle Mistress; Your Factor and my self have summed
your state, and find it cl^erly, all your debts discharged, in complete value
fifteen thousand pound.


Ha, ha, Sister, a good Dowry to get a new husband, trust me.


No, no, I'll ne'er marry again; I'll even follow Mr. Thorntons rule, you see he
lives a Bachelor.


Sir, Methinks' twere good you took a wife, and so leave your own to your own
posterity.


In all, I'll take my Mistress counsel: Pray resolve me, Had I, a mind to marry,
which in your judgement were the sitter, a Maid, or Widow?


Truly, I think a Widow sir, you may imagine, I may speak somewhat inmine own
Flattery; but alas, 'tis a state I shall not change!

'Tis for your good, I speak in love, no hate,
A Widow sir, will best secure your state.

You counsel well Mistress, and I'll think on it.


The sooner the better too, I can assure you; you'll find much comfort in it, you
may elect some young green thing out of a Maiden choice, that may be fury and
froward, she may please your eye a little, and other parts about you, but vex
your heart, and be a gulf to swallow your estate; If you'll deal wisely (as I
hope you will) take me a Widow, that knows how and what to do, that has been
seasoned in a husbands usage, and one that will obey as you shall honour:

He that will quietly lay down his head,
Let him contract a Widow to his bed.
And still I say, take me a Widow, sir.

Why, you say honestly Sister; Do you understand her sir; she bids you take her
a Widow.


You are merry Brother.


Nay you said so Mistress, speak't again then, for by my Faith, were it not for
two things Mistress, I'd come a wooing to you.


Two things? Why three things shall not hinder it; What are they?


My first fear is, the marriage of so much wealth as ours compounded, would
choke all content, and with the superflux change all to cares.


You take good course for that already, sir, your charitable works so well
begun, will help to disperse the o're-plus freely.


You have removed that well, the other is, that the remembrance of my poor
estate, which is so publicly proclaimed to all men, might make my wealthy
Mistress here disdain me.


Nay, that's your glory, sir, and cannot be accounted as your shame.


Why La sir, she has helped that her self now.


In faith, say then Mistress (I am a bad Wooer, 'tis my beginning) shall it be a
match?


I cannot so forget my late lost husband.


Why, this repairs your losses, Sister, you lost a good one, and find his equal
with a wealthy purchase.


Put me in hope that I may once enjoy you.


I will not marry, sir, these seven years, trust me.


How? this seven years Sister* fie upon it, we may be all dead and rotten six
years before it; come, come, speak in compass sister.


Truly Brother under half a year I won't here on it.


I marry sir, that was well bated. Speak again Sister, and let it be a
fortnight.


A fortnight? no, no, not this month, believe me.


Away, away, a months too long, hark you sister, we'll clap it up privately to
night, and the Town shall not know on it till a month hence.


To night? O fie upon'^! an you love me Brother let it not be till to morrow
morning, I beseech you, for the speech of people.


Afraid of wind? tush let it vanish Sister, I say he shall marry thee to night.


Let it be so, and here's an earnest Mistress.


Alas I kiss coldly in a morning Gown sir,


Tush it shall off; we'll marry, then to bed, Wooing is idle, better to be
sped.


Use your own will sir.


Why, so, 'tis as it sho'd be now; embrace him sister,
And live in love and wealth, 'bove all admired,
Here's seven years quickly in an hour expired.

Thus far tryumphantly with good success, my Princely friends we have together
marched, and from the North parts quite dispersed the Danes, alone the City York
holds firm again, whose buildings we will level with the earth, unless they
suddenly yield up the City; give your advice most Princely Alured, on your fair
quarrel all our Fates depend.


Your Highness has been fruitful in your love, bringing the best that Scotland
can afford, in honourable Arms to right our wrong, let's forward then, and dare
'em to the Gates our horses hoofs shall furrow up their Land, and sow the
fields with blood instead of corn.


Spoke like the Brother of dead Etheldred, summon 'em to the Walls. Drums beat a
parley.


The meaning of this Parley.


Danes ye see all hope of Conquest has forsaken you quite, Two thousand of
your stoutest Soldiers are fallen already by our conquering swords, if ye will
yield affirm it, if not death shall in his meagre fury through your Host, revel
and catch your Jubilee. Then tell us, do you resolve to fight it out or fly.


Or stay and have your throats cut in the fight?

Or leap the walls, and break your necks before us?

Resolve so quickly, and save us a labour.

Yes, with immediate speed, set opo the gates
And like a torrent on their heads we'll fall,
The Field and Air shall be their burial.

If there we fall, our fame out-lasts times date
On to the field, blessed with propitious fate.

All earthly honours are thine own, fair Prince, and Heaven fights in thy cause,
the Cities taken.


The Danes are all expuls'd and fled for safety.

The Danes are fled from danger, not from shame
That still pursues 'em wheresoever they fly
And on their Tombs shall live eternally.

Let's seek the Love-sick King Canutus forth,
And in one Battle try his valors worth.

That's our intent most noble Malcome, but we must war securely, all their
strength will now be band^ed to oppose our coming, and therefore whilst you
here refresh your Army, Duke Edmond and my self will try our friends, and in
these North parts gather up new Forces to aid us against all Danish stratagems.


We like it well, assist us gracious Fate,
To seat a true Prince in his Royal State.

You've stolen a wealthy marriage Mr. Thornton unwar^ to all the Town, but we are
glad we are so well deceived.


Faith Gentlemen, it was not to abridge the Nuptial Feast, for that shall have
his full Solemnity, but from some private causes of my Mistress.

Whose power retains all former duty from me,
And as a Servant still she shall command me.

Not so sir, I resign that title now, my self and state are only by your power
to be disposed and swayed.


I, well said sister: This match was richly made, with liking and with joy to
all the Country. And Brother Thornton (so I'll call you now) I came prepared to
give you fit surrender of the last Bargain which you purchased of me.


Your Coal-pits and your Servants Brother Randolf.


Yes sir, and look you, this is the Orator must speak for all, in his mouth
they have put the Law and willingness they have to serve.


Who honest Grim?

Yes sir, and I am the Prologue to the Play,
And for them all I have to say.
Seven hundred men in sable wise,
From forth the Coal-pits shall arise,
Not melting men made out of wax,
But such as use Spade and Pick-ax.
Who when you bid 'em use their skils
Shall make a Dale of Mauburn hills,
Then raise a Mount as high as Poles
And turn it strait to burning coals.

This speech I think was penned on purpose.


I speak deep things, some sir, of 50 fathom deep, I do it de profoundis, and
no disparagement to the Author, that which I have spoken was in as

Good rhyme as entering in,
With hope, a half-penny, and a Lambs-skin.

Ha, ha, thou hit'st me there in faith.


I give you a taste sir, how you shall find me here, and as for my seven
hundred fellowers they are honest Tartarians, and whosoever deals with 'em
shall find them grim fellows I assure you.


Grim thou were always honest, and on my word thy love shall have reward.


Sir, all your works, both finished and in^ended, are pious, holy, and
religious.


And in the goodness if you still persevere
You build your self a house in Heaven for ever.

Heaven have the praise of all, and look ye Gentlemen. Reach me the Table
George, I have here repai^'st the copy of my first arrival here, which yet
hangs up insculp'd on a tileshard; but now 'tis rectifi'd in golden Letters,
with the same phrase still, only thus altered, Here at this West-gate first,
came Thornton in


With hope, a half penny, and a Lambs-skin.
I remember that still sir.

How now Grim, are you so saucy Sirrah?

'Tis well done Grim, I'd ha'^ remembered ever, go place it ore the gate that
all may view it, and witness these great blessings heaven has sent. The reason
why I urge this Register,

To have my memory thus kept in store,
Is not my wealth, but to record me poor.
Go see it done.

For ever may it stand to your renown.

And all succeeding fame,
While this Town stands still honour Thorntons name.

Amidst these poor endeavours of my love, my careful Master must not be forgot,
wh^se Heir I am become, and for his sake, I will reedify Alhallows Church,
where in the peaceful bed of death he sleeps, and build a Tomb for him cut out
in Touchstone, which in our Persian Voyage was returned, from whence my golden
Mineral arrived.


In the likeness of old iron sir.


I, thou say true Grim.


I have wondered a thousand times old Iron-fist the Smith did not hang himself
for refusing the first Tun of it, a whoreson Coxcomb.


They say you got somewhat by it Grim.


Alas Mistress, a few chips or so, some ten pounds worth for a groat, I think I
bought on him,


How now, what mean these shouts?


I think there's some Match at Foot-bal towards, the Colliers against the whole
Country cut, and long tail.


What's the News good George?


Prince Alured and Edmond Duke of Thetford are newly lighted, and desire to
speak with the Town Magistrates.


We shall with joy receive him as our Prince, and wish he had as free
possession of this whole Kingdom, as this Town shall give him.


See where he comes; All duty to your Highness.


Rise Gentlemen, we have your hearts, forbear your knees, your true Allegaince
hath proclaimed it self that never yielded yet to foreign Sceptre, you have
fortified your walls against all invasions

And in that circuit gloriously she stands
With kind embraces to enfold your friends.

Our Town, our selves, our lives are all your homigers, as the most lawful and
indubitate Heir,

To our late Sovereign Lord, and to your Throne.
We fall as Subjects, you we know our own.

My best of thanks is due to my best friends. Which is the man amongst ye
Gentlemen that bears the name of Thornton?


Your Subject and your Servant, Royal sir.


Let me embrace you sir, and tell you this, your goodness speaks you nobly:
England is famed in this fair Town, much honoured by your virtues. Our Countries
conquest by these Danish wars

Have not such blazon from our shame exhaled,
As these your good deeds now have countervailed.

I can do nothing but my duty sir.


'Tis worthy praise in all, and trust me Gentlemen, we have good hope to see a
happy day, and once again make England singular, Free in her self and Princes.
I came now with my best Hors-manship from the Scotch Army, whose Royal King in
Neighbor amity, is armed in my just cause, has past the Tweed with prosperous
forage through Northumberland, all Holds and Castles taken by the Danes
restore themselves to his subjection in our behalf. The City York is won, from
whence I came.


And whilst we forage thus, their King Canutus, doting on the beauties of
Cartesmunda Nun of Winchester,

Of his estate so careless now is grown,
He I put no arms but Cartesmunda's on.

Go forward noble Princes, your work's good, and to encourage it, ten thousand
pounds I'll lend your grace to levy Soldiers, which if you never pay, I'll
never ask, and for my own employment to your aid, I'll lend (if you will honour
me so far) all the full strength Newcastle can afford, I have seven hundred men
that call me Master.


Besides Grim the chief Controler sir.


Very true sir, and these I'll four times double,
And three months shall their charge be mine alone,
To back your Right and seat you in your Throne.

Your bounty and your love exceeds all means of p^esident and recompense.


Tis but my duty still, which I'll not slack, go Grim and muster my seven
hundred Colliers, to them i'll add two thousand more of our Newcastle strength,
and thou shalt be an Officer to conduct 'em.


For a Corporal or so, let me alone with my Squadron, I dare undertake with my
seven hundred Colliers in six days, under ground, to march to London, they
shall dig their way themselves too.


And know 'tis two hundred miles.


That's nothing, I'll march forty miles a day with 'em at pleasure, there is no
Pioneer to be compared to a Collier in his Coal-pit, if you'll have a dozen
Cities as we go, undermined and blown up, give but every man a bushel of Apples
to his Breakfast, and you shall hear the wind roar and shake the ground like an
Earthquake.


Well sir, wee'^ try their valors; go George, get Armour ready, and Grim, get
thou a Drum and Marshal 'em.


If you wo'd rake hell and Phlegitan, Acaron and Barrathrum, all those Low
Countries cannot yield you such a company. Tara, ra, ra, ra, ra, O brave
Master, now for a company of conquering Colliers. Come George.


Now would it please my Liege so far to grace his humble Subjects and their new
built Town to take a homely Banquet, we sho'd think 'twere royal Neighbourhood
to heat our buildings.


We cannot be unkind, though to your hurt, we will dispense with our great hast
so long, and then from Banquets unto Battles fly; Which Heaven (we hope) will
guide successfully.


Go let our Drums and Trumpets spite of fear, thunder aloud in the Air, and tell
Canutus, his Captains do attend to speak with him he promised to come down.


Yes down to the earth.


And in the shameful ruins he prepares with lust, and murder, bury up his name,
he's known by nothing but a large defame, the City York for want of aid is
lost, and still the foe pursues, if thus we stand to sooth him in this sin, our
conquest dies.

And we in blood must end our victories, 'sfoot sound and call him.


Give your attendance Lords, the King is coming.


'Tis time he sho'd, he has been absent long*
And done his honour, fame, and Country wrong,
How did he take your reprehension Harold?

It startled him at first, but when with mildness he did appoint this general
meeting to us, to what good purpose it inclines I know not.


I hope the best. see here he comes, my Lord.


Where are our Vassals, attend your charge, and our delight, with all your best
of care and diligence, or by those s^ars whose influence made me great; you dye
in Torments all, let not the Sun extort from her bright Rays, to give him
lustre (or if inamor'd as we know he is) unless the Alps have frozen up his
Flames.

Let him not on her smooth front dart his heat,
No, not for all his glory or arched seat.

All health and honour to the great Canutus.


Rise in our favour, vail thy face my love, we must not have thee seen too much
by slaves.


Content, attend the King and his fair love.


Long may she be the Mistress of his youth:


And give him heaven on earth.


And hell to boot: S'death shall we flatter thus?


So, now you crouch and fawn like daunted Curs that dare not look the Lion in
the face; Come Cartesmunda mount Canutus Throne.

Let me unvail thy face, and tell me now, which of you all that thus have taxed
my lightness, cu'd (if possessed of such a Jem as this) less value it then I:
What think thou Osrick?


I have not seen the like.


Nor ever shall, what Nature had in store was given to her,
And can one crowned with such a heavenly weight,
Live and forgo this Center of delight.

Let not these vain Affections (Royal Lord) sway you from reason thus.


Ha! What is he?


Do you not know me sir? the time has been, when in thy Battles Huldrick has
been seen knee deep in blood, cutting his way by force, careless of life to
free thy Royal person, and does your Mightiness not know me now? Then hear the
news I bring to comfort you: The Danes once styled by Names of Conquerors, are
now subdued and slain, The King of Scots banded together with the English
forces, have late at York o'^ethrown our Garrisons, and now to London march
victoriously, defacing all, thy conquered Cities burn;

And in their falls, the flames do rise so high,
They seem to light the Tapers of the sky.
And since Fames Trump which of^ hath summoned thee, is not so potent asto draw
thee forth, thy honour bids me dare thee to the Field, if thy high spirit be not
extinct by Lust: Let's arm our selves for shame.


Traitor, thou hast deserved death ere thou die; and this thy proud presume
shall break thy neck, for chasing our high blood; O love thou art unjust, I
feel assaults far sharper in my breast, then all the English Forces, against
this wall; now love and honour, with their opposite powers

Afflicts my soul, and with their virtuous strife,
Plead for my Love, my Honour, Fame, and Life;
With this mans words, my passions strongly move,
He for my honour speaks. Honour, but Love
I am thy Martyr now, and must go on,
For what is Honour but Addition,
Got in our pride of youth; yet stay Canutus, think of thy wonted Fame, go on
and conquer. Give me my horse, and I will quickly quell them.


What will Canutus do?


O Cartesmunda, with that heavenly voice, already I am changed, stern War
remains; Kiss me, and kiss me dead, my best of Loves.


He's changed again.


This Strumpets eye, does sure bewitch him with her Sorcery; I'll not endure
this shame.


Where is my Lord?


Where thou shalt not be long: What would thou Villain?


Arm mighty Prince, we have descried at hand, the Horse and Ensigns of the
English Army, trooped with their Leaders like the gods of War, who in bright
steel, the fields do stoutly bear.


And there seek that which thou vile Dog shalt have; Come thou to fright my
Love?


Do not expose a mighty Nation, thus naked, to the Tyranny of Lust, Canutus.


Traitor.


As thou art great, be just, Let not ^ Strumpets love, work all our Ruins; the
Enemie's at hand, and from thy side; I'll force this painted Whore.


Help me Canutus.


What, can you cry?


Were it thou Ioves Minion, slave, thou thus had died


I'll meet it thus,
And dying so my end is glorious.

Oh I am slain!

I have my happy wish then, Welcome death,
I dyed (Canutus) to preserve thy breath.

Sink down to hell; What has my rashness done?
O Cartesmunda, stay thy fainting breath,
Thou still shalt live with me in spite of death:

My Fate is come, great King, my vestal Vow, that broken, with my wish is fallen
upon me.

For your fair love I failed my faith with heaven,
And from your hand my death is justly given.
Such was my former wish, farewell Canutus.
And with my fall may thy great Fame arise,
Poor Cartesmunda, thus untimely dyes.

May all the world dye with thee; now I see
The heavens envy an earthly Deity.

Brave Huldrick that durst dye for Countries good,
And for our freedom spent thy life and blood.

Ha, sit you weeping there; or has Amazement turned you into stone,
That like men gasping all Medusia's stand,
To see my Love thus fall by mine own hand:
Our Self will instantly be in the Field, and scourge the English pride and
Inhabitants. Sound up our D^um, and call our Troops together, and arm with
speed, I'll to the Field, and fight; Farewell dear Love, whom I of life bereft,
for which unwilling Act, O pardon me;

Canutus arms, a while shall be thy Tomb,
Then gold enclose thee till the day of Doom.

How harsh these Drums sound now, that once like Music, did more delight mine
ear than Orpheus Lute*

Sweet Cartesmunda's death my senses kill,
Like one long sick, I relish all things ill.

Courage my Lord, see where the English stand braving your Mightiness: Let's
set upon 'em, and never leave till to their mother Earth they pay their lives
as Tribute. Now, what says Canutus?


That ye all are Rebels.


Eng. Rebels?


Stay let him speak it out.


An hundred thirteen years, the English Kings have paid to Denmark, and our
Ancestry an annual Tribute of ten thousand pounds, which you unjustly and
rebelliously detain from me, a lawful successor.


'Tis true Canutus, that the Denmark Kings, so long our native Island hath
usurped, and whilst they kept within their Danish bounds, and left us to enjoy
our own in peace, we justly paid our homage F^alty. But since your Father
Hardiknut^ arose, and you succeeding him, neither content with that our
Tribute, but would further seek our utter Extirpation, which five and twenty
years you have attempted, planting here your selves in Norfolk, Suffolk, and in
Cambridgeshire, erecting Garrison^ through all our Kingdom against the Laws of
former Articles, we now resolve to spend our Royal blood, and either
countervail our former loss, or hazard all we hold, by doubtful battle.


That is your answer then?


Resolvedly for all.


Now by the high, and Royal blood of Kings.


Swear by the beauteous Nun of Winchester; you oft have kissed that book.


And that one word, has raised more vigour in my active blood, then ere her
beauty flamed my Appetite to crop the sweets of Love.


It shall be cooled with better spells than erst her wanton Magic could e're
invent to lay thy burning Ardor.


Danes. Parley no more Canutus.


O Cartesmunda from thy gentle Arms,
I fly to conquer in Wars rough Alarms.

Why dost not strike? dost thou not like thy Aim? or dost not know me? I am
the Danish King, that which all Soldiers seek in bloody War, may here be got
on me, eternal honour and easily too, for by the powers that made me, my senses
are benumbed.


I dare not, nor will take no such Advantage, though I on thee could vent my
roughest spleen; pass safe, my Lord, I will not fight with you for your fair
Sisters sake, whose love was to me so high and potent, that it did attract her
Virgin-thoughts to dart Loves joys into me, and for the zeal due to her
Memory, keep what I co'd take from you, Life and Honour.


I prithee take it, I'll yield it willingly, and, for I see thou art religious
in thy love, let me embrace thy breast, and of my Love, bright Cartesmunda Nun
of Winchester, I'll tell so sad a Tale.


I cannot stay to hear it, hark great Sir,
Wars Mu sick summos me, for Elgina's sake,
I slip the Advantage that Fate bids me take.

O for a Midwife, I am big with grief,
And fain would be delivered, tho with death.

See where he stands, secure him Soldiers, Never did man so feebly use his
sword in such sad times of Terror, O my Lord, can you in all this danger be
thus calm?


Though you neglect your self, yet prize your honour, or if not that, yet for
your subjects sake, be pleased to re-assume your wonted valor.


Can he be valiant that's without a heart? or can a senseless
Trunk have sense of Loss?
Such have you made me, therefore share the gain,
And to these English leave your Lives and Fame.

There is no way but Flight.


Thank your selves for it; had Cartesmunda lived, and graced mine Attempts, but
with a smile; these English, would as soon take part with those that from
Olympus strove to pluck down Jove, as look upon Canutus ^ound Retreat, the
blood of Cartesmunda stirs the gods for this Revenge; and if this may appease
her angry soul, we get by losing it; Do what ye will, for I will never more
taste joy on earth; her death makes all things poor.


What shall we do?

What else, but fight and dye,
And in our deaths hide all our Infamy.

Thus from the usurped Temples of Canutus, we take the English Crown and plant
it here, to whom in right it legally belongs. Princes and Soldiers, now with
me proclaim Victorious Alured, Englands Sovereign.


Long live great Alured our lawful King.

First to all-helping heaven due thanks we give,
Then next to you, by whom our glories live.

'Twas I that took him prisoner, my Lord, the Colliers are the Conquerors.


We will reward your Valours.


Propose a ransom Royal Alured, to sad Canutus and his Country-men.


Give me no Ransom sir, O let me dye, in Cartesmunda's death I brake my vow,
and for her sake I have neglected all, and willingly have sought mine own sad
ruin; I'll have no Ransom, Cartesmunda's dead, let me be buried with her,
that's all the mercy I now will beg of thee from all thy Conquests.


No great Canutus, for I pity thee, I call to mind thy Royal Sisters love,
beauteous Elgina, worthier then thy Nun, whose loving heart was once unbosomed
here, and for her ^ake, I'll like a brother use thee, this one condition frees
thee ransomless, that you abate the Fealty we paid you, you shall return unto
your State in Denmark, and henceforth even as brothers we will live,
exchanging Embassies of Love and Honour. And now to you my worthy Country-men it
shall be texted to your lasting fame, that your Newcastle strength set England
free in this days fair and happy Victory, for which, and for thy sake (most
worthy Thornton) we'll give a lasting honour to the Town, now beautified by thee
with Walls and Towers to which we'll add all noble privilege belonging to a
Town Incorporate; and for your former Government of Poretereans, we here
establish it a Majo^alty, and Thornton as the first we here create Mayor of
Newcastle, and give thee the power to elect a brotherhood of Aldermen, with
choice of Sheriffs to assist thy Government, your

Charter shall be drawn wi^h fullest strength,
Even with the fairest Cities of our Land,
This Sword confirms it from King Alureds hand;
Bear it before ye still.

Your Highness gives us honour 'bove our Merits.


We have not yet done all, but what we want, we'll study to requite to thee and
them.


Then since your grace is got into the giving Vain, I beseech you sir, Let
Corporal Grim be bold to put a Colliers request into one of your ears.


What's that Grim?


Only this sweet King, I that for thy service sake was Corporal to be Warden of
your Coal-Carriers, to provide Coals, Surreverence, for your Highness own
tooth, I'll promise you weight and measure, if none of your Officers do purloin,
and warm their Noses at your fires in their own Chimneys.


A reasonable Request: Thou art our Coal-carrier.


Nay, I'll carry no Coals neither, I can tell you, and yet I have another
Chaldron of courtesies to (...) from your kindness, that in remembrance of
Newcastle Colliers that have fought so bravely, we may from henceforth have the
upper shoulder, and the wall of Croydon Colliers, and that if ever they be
found with a Goose in their sacks, they may be made to stand a whole Market day
in the Bakers Pulpit, because they showed themselves Cowards to their Country,
and durst not fight against the Danes, as we have done.


All this is granted sir.


Then stand thy ground, old Coal of Newcastle, and a fig for Croyden.


How now, still sad Canutus? We now must war with love, to raise this siege,
which we will do with Banquets, and with Revels. Great King of Scotland, we are
yet a debtor to your kind love, which thus we 'gin to pay, all those our
Northern borders bounding on Cumberland, from Tine to Tweed, we add unto your
Crown, so 'twas fore-promised, and 'tis now performed; Most fit it is that we
be ever lovers; The Sea that binds us in one Continent,

Doth teach us to embrace two hearts in one,
To strengthen both against all invasion.
Look up Canutus, now all's clear ab^ve,
Let Cartesmunda dye in our^new love;
And let swift fame thy former glories ring,
And hide the sollies of a Love-sick King.


