BEfore I speak, me thinks, I hear some say,
What can there be, to furnish out a Play,
In such a Home-spun Title? -- In a Plain
Poor Country Girl? Such, yields no lofty strain;
No sinewy stuff, extracted from a Mine*
Of deep, and Abstruse reading; no strong line,
No such a strain, and this poor Title, suite
Like old Pan's Bagpipe, and Apollo's Lute.
What must we look for then? A desperate wit?
Scoenes, full of veins, where, without a Hit
No man escapes, comes near it? This indeed
Were to some purpose; and the way to speed.
But this too's from this Title. -- None of these?
Alas poor Girl, where's then, thy hope to please?
What can she sing? and, like the Northern Lass*
(That brave blithe Girl) hope to procure a pass?
Or, can she fight? -- If so so stout, so bold
A brave Virago, like the Girl, worth Gold.
Or is she one; that once a Country Maid,
Cracked in the carriage, is come to Trade,
And set up some new Leaguer? Or suppose
Our Girl, a virtuous Copy, and so close
This inquisition of her, -- She is -- what?
Her own presentment, best can tell you that,
Which be but pleased to grace, with love and favour,
You make the poor Girl rich, and Crown our labour.

Believe me Sir, I have told you what your worship may most certainly trust to.


May I not speak with her?


You know my place.
There's no more hope from the deep pit of grief
To raise in her any conceit of love,
Then there's to raise her husband up again
From the cold bed he sleeps in: from the Grave.
Take this for all: My Lady Sir, has vowed
To live* and die a Widow. -- So I leave you. --

Is't possible, that such a one as she;
So young, so beautiful; so full of blood;
Such lusty blood, as she's? for such a loss,
Should lose that youth; that Beauty, that quick blood
In such a cold retirement? -- Well, I know not!
But if she have made such a vow, and keep it!
To find out such another, and a Phaenix,
Is but an equal labour.

Save you Sir Oliver; save you, sweet Sir Oliver.


As much to you Sir; kind M. Rash.


You have bin with the Widow; this melancholy Lady already. Give you much joy
of your fair hopes Sir Oliver.


As much to your self; to your self Sir, kind M. Rash.


I'll hope as much as I can, though you be a Knight; and I but an honest
Citizen. A Mercer, is a Merchant, and will look for good Ware, for his Money.


If he should enter now? -- I'll see the issue.


You know my coming: to speak with your Lady, M. William.


But she's not at leisure to hear you.


I hope you do but jest.


Believe me Sir, in earnest.


But, I'll not take it in earnest.


But you must. -- Then you'll be Rash indeed Sir.
Though you be a Citizen, you are not free of this Hall,
And therefore must have no admittance.

Give you much joy of your fair hopes.

Another?


Save you Gentlemen: how is't M. Rash?


As well as we may, M. Plush.


You have got the start of me, I see that Gentlemen. A Suit, brought me home
this morning, made me lye so much the longer: but, my Taylors long Bill, like a
Woodcock, as he is, shall be so much the longer a paying. -- You have been
within?


In our time Sir.


I mean, this morning.


But -- the Lady means no such thing Sir.


We heard of your Worships new Suit, and would not go in before it.


I'll lead the way then.

M. William? good morrow good morrow sweet M. William.


That sweet, to your sweetest self Sir.


And where's thy Lady? -- You see, we come, to come to her. --


By your favour Sir, you are too hasty.


Why, is not thy Lady up yet?


Why, do you mean to take her down Sir? -- Buy Sir.


This Fellow's saucy.


Minds not your Worships new Suit Sir. -- But we must be content.


We may be patient Sir, but not content; for nothing contents me, but the Lady.


Nor me, but that beautiful Lady.


Who have we here? Sweet and soft, M. Plush. M. Rash! -- I dare be so bold as
embrace you too. -- But my Noble Sir. My Sir, of a thousand per annum.


Why, I can be a Knight, an I lust Sir.


An I can be a Knight, an I lust Sir.


Dubbed, with the City Dagger. -- Then Rash, would be rash indeed. You come to
see my Sister?


With all our hearts we would Sir.


Alas good hearts.
Me thinks the Gates should of themselves fly open,
To such brave men as you are.

You have the old heart, still Sir.


The young heart still Sir Oliver; -- the mad heart, -- the merry heart; the
light heart, with the candle of conceit, burning in it, as bright as Lucifer,
Hesper, Vesper.

You have not bin within? I will make out this pair of Aces,
And then you shall see my Sister.
I perceive by your melancholy looks,
My melancholy, pettish, peevish Sister,
Is not at this time to be spoke withal.
'Tis such a foolish thing; -- She knows not worth,
Nor how to entertain't: suffice it Gentlemen,
I do; -- And shall not go behind her back
To let her know your merit.

Will you Sir?


And in a just proportion to that merit,
That Mass of Merit, you shall find her favour:
So M. Plush, and worthy M. Rash,
I shall desire you leave us.

You'll remember.


Shall I remember (Gentlemen) to eat?
To drink? to sleep? -- Then I'll remember you.

Then? -- When Sir Robert?


When I am asleep. -- Awake, I shall never mind em. For their Worshipe are
hardly worth it.


Yet in a just proportion, to their merit.


Yes, that's just nothing: -- Hang em gloworms, hang em.


Here's another rub in our Ally Sir.


A Tennants son of mine. -- And how does my honest Abr'am.


The better your good Worship is well Sir. I was to seek your good Worship, at
your Right Worshipful house Sir: but, missing you there, I rejoice I have met
with you here.


Why, what's the matter Abr'am, what's the matter?


In the way of love, as they say: from my father, and my suster; and my the other
suster too; -- You know who I mean, Sir Robert.


Thy scolding sister. Abr. You are in the right, Sir Robert.


And how does Margaret, my pretty Tenant?


That pretty one, is prettily well Sir.


Remember me to her by this. -- A Ring.

Within these two or three days, at the furthest, I should breath a Gelding;
It may be, that ways, and visit my pretty Tenant.


Long may your Worships Gelding breathe, and your Worshipful self also.

I am in hast Sir Robert.


Take your own time good Abram.


Thank your good Worship Sir Robert.


I have done your patience wrong; indeed I have;
But, in the best, that lies in me to right it
You shall command me Sir: Now to my Sister.
Now, where's my Sister?

She's within Sir Robert.


Come then, let's to her.


You must pardon me.
She's so retired to solitude; and set
So deep in grief, that till her sighs, and tears,
Will give her leave to give that entertain
That shall become such worthy Visitants,
(Which yet, they will not) tis her strict command
That no man enter.

Not my self?


Your self,
Sir, if you would not swell her grief too big
For her faint breast to carry, give her way.
A little time may change her.

Tis enough. -- You see Sir Oliver.


Your Love, Sir Robert.


But, as her Gentleman discreetly said,
A little time may change her: We must still
In such a kind humour a woman's will.
But, she's thine own, be bold on it. --

Come, thou make such a Matter, of Nothing.


Nothing, do you call it, Master William? I know not, but I am sure, I feel it
something -- Tis almost, kicking ripe already.


Almost, kicking ripe already, -- Come, come, thou art, A Chamber-maid still;
-- And I prithee, whats this, but a work that belongs to the Chamber? Kicking
ripe already, This is not the first time, that thou hast been kicked with an
urchin. Once, Twice, -- this is the third time of kicking.


Well, you wo'not, marry me?


And hazard my place, wo my Lady? -- and yet, Now I think on it. -- I will --


Marry me?


To some of my old acquaintance. There be a hundred in the City, that have
swallowed worse bits then thou art. Hist.

I know, my danger, and shall have a care, according.


Beseech you. Let the love you seem to show
In these persuasions, be expressed in words,
That better suit with such a robe as this,
And my immutable resolve.

Immutable? -- then we persuade, in vain.


I am bound to say
You have lost a worthy Gentleman; -- My self,
A noble Master; -- one that was a Man
Worth your best memory: the multitude
Of sighs you have sent after him, worth all
The expense of tears, you have bestowed upon him.
But when we look into his Tomb and there
See him locked up in Marble; -- in the still,
And sad imagined language of the Grave,
We are instructed, Nay, commanded Lady,
To period our vain grievings.

He has told you the naked truth on it.
'Tis but in vain to grieve; -- For, is't not sed
The quick must live byth' quick, and not byth' dead?
He's gone, -- Heaven be with him; -- He was a Gentleman;
An honest man; -- and, which is more; -- a proper Gentleman:
But, when Gentility, -- Honesty, -- and proportion,
Lye in the Grave once, I have done with 'em.

Thy tongue's my ceaslesse torment.


Let me tell you,
That infinite of love you seem to have fixed,
Upon the heart of your departed Husband,
Loses no scruple, of the worth it has,
Placed on a second Husband.

Mark you that now?


Nay, I dare tell you, that in a second Match,
You love him more; more love, more honour him,
Then, in your mourning Widowhood.

Mark you that now?


I'll make it open to you: whilst you keep
Encompassed, with this solitude* a Widow,
You seem, to voice, to the ill censuring world,
Some imperfection in your self; some stain
Makes you unworthy of a second Match:
At lest, unworthy, of a worthy Husband,
And in the opinion, (which is easily raised)
Question your Husbands judgement. -- Or, it may be,
The estate he left you Lady; -- pulling so
Upon the Name, you strive to dignify,
Disgrace, defames, and scandal.

Mark you that now?


If you so loved him living, love him dead,
As I advise you Lady.

I, I, do.


'Tis the best Tomb-stone you can lay upon him;
The noblest Monument, you can erect;
And to that Monument, an Epitaph,
Shall make him live for ever.

Law you there now! -- Shall make him live for ever!
You are not dumb trow? -- are you?

Would thou we^'t.
Or I had lost my hearing. -- I can wish
Nothing more adverse to me, then your tongues:
And therefore, if your visits bring with them
Nothing, but these persuasions.

Keep away.


Nay, as good speak't as think it. -- Here's a coil for a Husband, I have had
for mine own part, -- 1. -- 2. -- 3. -- 4. And yet if the fifth come up
handsomely to me, -- I know what I know, I warrant you.


How five?


Fifteen, an the Destinies so have decreed it.


Madame, there be Suitors below would see you: M. Rash, the Mercer; -- one
Plush, a humorous Gallant; -- and a spick and span new Suitor, a Country
Gentleman, -- one, M. Gregory Dwindle.


Spruce M. Rash I know.


And I M. Plush, a notable humorous Coxcomb. But what's that Gregory?


Unknown to me: but believe me, together, They make up, a delicate motion. --
Is your Ladyship pleased to see 'em?


Present your Motion some-where else, our griefs give way to no such
lightness.


Very good. -- I'll tell em what you say:


Pray stay a little.
I know these Suitors are but empty things;
Not worth one serious entertain; yet Sister,
I wo'd not have you beat em back, at door:
Pray let em enter; Let em look upon you.

Still your desire's, my anguish.


Come, come, pray. -- You are so melancholy.


Why, their mirth -- will be a means to cure you.


Kill me rather.


Go, prithee bid em come.


Bid em be gone.


Nay, then, you're too too cruel. -- Prithee stay.


Nay, an you know no other merriment,
Then what you raise from my vexation, take it;
I will not hinder your desires; pray take it.

You will not leave us, will you?


Leave this room.


And go mew your self up in your Chamber?
An you will needs: -- Let me entreat one favour.

Well, what is't?


That, in your absence you'd be pleased to let
Your weighting Gentlewoman, Mistress Barbary,
Appear in your apparel: Tis but slipping off
This upper garment; and this mourning Veil,
And she's my Lady.

How? -- My Bab, my Lady!


It will be sport to us; and to your self
A rare advantage Sister: for this trick
Keeps all your foolish Suitors at that distance,
Their trouble shall ne'er touch you. -- Will you?

Will you?


Though pleasure, be no pleasure to this bosom,
Since you propose th'acquittance of that trouble,
Your desire's granted.

But be speedy then
With your directions for her carriage in it,
And we shall fit 'em neatly. -- Call em in.

Did you ever see such a self-will'd thing as this is? -- a widow these two
months, and yet not hear of a Suitor.


The Gentlemen, an't please you.


Yes indeed, an't please you.


Master Rash.


Your servant, good deed law, Gentlewoman.


Master Plush.


My name is Plush; Master my Title, and Sir, a Title, that may be.


And my name is Gregory --


Fop: thy sound is out of season. -- But where's the Lady?


I, where's the Lady?


We would see the Lady.


I hope she has done mourning now, -- has she not?


Why, dos the Lady morn?


Indeed she dos.


Tis a delicate thing to morn. -- Well, an my Father would but dye once!

Would we could see this Lady.


You have your wish already.


Beauteous Lady!


Most beauteous Lady!


Most beautiful Lady, that may be: for yet, I see no such matter.


Thine eyes are veyl*d with ignorance, or else,
Through this thin veil, thou might, as we, -- behold
Matter of admiration! -- You'll vouchsafe; --
Not yet.

Alas: -- upon their Captive heart,
My sorrows yet have set too strong a Guard
For such delights to enter.

I could wish*
That Conqueror of thy heart, and all his Guard
Were visible, that I might challenge them.

I marry sir; that we^e a challenge indeed.


Me thinks I could -- do --


What, do you think you could do Sir?


O -- my most delicate Lady!


Do, -- his -- most delicate Lady. -- A terrible do, indeed law.


Well Lady; if this be the man shall have you,
You shall have a man, I can tell you.

If I be the man that shall have her,
She shall have a man, I can tell you.

But, he's a fighting man.


A fighting man? -- Let him play at the ancient weapon, an he were a Fencing
man, I'll have a Bout with him.


The ancient weapon? -- What weapon's that?


Why this?


As wise, as valiant! 'tis the ancientst weapon indeed Sir.


And why not this?


I am better acquainted with this.


Well, we shall meet?


And meet again: -- Tell me of fighting Lady!


I see you are valiant Sir; -- and you are happy
In having so much valour as you see
Attend your beauty.

I must confess them, worthy Gentlemen;
But they must pardon me: -- the worth I have lost,
With my dead husband, is so full, and fresh,
Upon my understanding, that all else
Have ^et but homely entertain: -- And yet,
You're welcome Gentlemen. --

For that, we thank you.


We must hope still.


Well, an my Father would but dye once!
I live in hope too Lady.

You see their valour Sir: -- and what's your weapon?


I am no man of the sword; -- I have no weapon.


How Sir? -- No weapon! --


What should you do in Cupids fencing School, And have no weapon?


There was a time, -- I could have crossed a eudgell.


And that you Sir?


Good sooth sometimes I can tell you: -- yet, if any man strike me, I have a
weapon too Sir.


The coldest flint, has fire I see: What weapon?


One, that is indeed, -- All weapons. -- Long-Sword; Sword and Dagger; -- Sword
and Buckler; Single Rapier, Rapier and Dagger; Case of Rapiers; Halberd,
Halfe-Pike; Quarter-Staffe; Short-Sword and Gauntlet; and that terrible
Fly-flap, the Fashion.


All these in on^? --


Or one that's worth all these; -- and that, -- in a word, is the Law Sir.


A terrible weapon indeed Sir.


There, let me firk 'em, and jerk 'em: There, Let me stand upon Terms; --
There, Let me play the Master, and M. Atturny, my Usher, and then, -- with all
the weapons in that School, have at 'em.


This goes beyond your Rapier; or your ancient weapon, the Fist.


Body of me, my husband, and Sir Oliver.


What's to be done?


Do, as thou hast done Wench.


Play the Lady, a little longer.


Handsomely Bab, and I'll promise thee, it shall cost me a Chamble^ Petticoat.


I'll do it as well as I can then.


Come, come, we will speak, and speed too, my Knight, of a thousand per annum
where's this mourning Lady? -- What, my Madonna? -- and my Lady Littleworth.
Hoyday? This Covy of Coxcombs too!


Sir Robert.


One. --


Kind Sir Robert.


Two. --


Worthy Sir Robert. --


Three, yet never a wise word amongst 'em. -- What, still in Du^bs, and dolors?
-- An ye were as heavy as Lead, 'twas but a light trick of you to deny Access
to such a brave man as this is, and allow't to such Mimics as these are. --
Death, ^ could kick em out of the room. And you, though you be my wives
sister, for lodging such baseness within you.


Why, you are not out of your wits?


You have no wit to be out of. Gentlemen, you are all -- Hobbyhorses. An it
please you, to leave the house now; and come again, -- when you are sent for, --
you shall be -- heartily glad, to be welcome.


You see his humour Gentlemen; pray leave us.


There's no resisting of him; for he has Rapier, fist, the law, and all, for
any man, that shall thwart him.


Why, but I hope --


Not one word more, an you love me.


Off, ere the flame grow higher.


Come, take my counsel, and forget him.


Never.


Still looking downward, to your husbands grave?


To those that wear so sad a suit as this,
The Grave's the glass they use to deck em by.
Pray give me leave.

She dos it to a hair.


Prithee look up a little; -- I can show thee
A Glass, shall show thee better things; -- a Glass,
That shall reflect, no such affrighting shadows --

Nor shadows (beauteous Lady) but the same
True, and essential comforts.

O. -- O. -- O.


Excellent, mourning Lady.


The Nuptial knot, binds loving Pairs together,
Only for term of life, has no extent
Over the divorce of Death.

Pray, pray no more.


That only binds the living to the living,
And not the living to the dead.

That flesh that has a soul within it, the endowments,
And excellencies, bounteous Heaven bestows,
To that, has nothing but the frightful shape,
And key-cold figure of a man.

Yet this,
While thus, you dote upon your husbands dust,
You do sweet Lady; and this beauty bind
To stenches, and corruption; so imposing
Upon your self Mezentius cruelty.

You have my resolution; so, pray leave me.


An you be buried in your Husbands grave,
I see my suit must dye too.

Yes, and let it
For ever, Let it die to her, and live
To one that better shall deserve it: come,
I'll bring thee, though she be mine own Madona's Sister,
My Knight, of a thousand per annum, to her betters: -- one that is younger,
fairer, richer, and it may be, -- Honester too Sir.

How Sir Robert? Honester.


Honester?


An she prostrate her self to a set of Morrisdancers; -- and neglect such a
Caesar as this is. -- Come Sir Oliver, come, let's away.


Nay, but hark you, hark you Sir Robert; and worthy Sir Oliver; that you may
see this Lady,
Is not the woman that you take her for;
Look, do you know this Lady?

How, Mistress Bab?


My Ladies Chambermaid!


A trick of mirth they put upon these Coxcombs.


Were you my Lady?


So, your Lady would have it, Sir Robert.


Why, god-a-mercie faith.


There's all the comfort they are like to have.


This cloud's like Iuno; the poor shadow Sir.
The substance, we'll court for you.

My Lady Bab. -- How like you this Sir Oliver?


This change, has put some life into me Sir.
And I must tell you, bettered my opinion
Both of the Ladies wisdom, and her goodness.

But hark you wife, may we not see my Sister?


^aith, yet her temper is not as Weed have it:
But we shall win her by degrees, and turn
Her melancholy to a sprightly humour.

A day, or two days passage.


Come Sir Oliver.
Mean time we'll see what mirth my house can yield
To entertain you with. -- A ha, my Girl!
Why such a Wench is worth her weight in Pearl.

Well, thou hast played my Lady, like a Lady.
I have a trick from this conceit, to do,
Shall make us sport, and help thy swelling too.

Sir, I have spoke my danger.


A dangerous case believe me.
And yet, me thinks, there's no great danger neither.
For, say a man offer to blow thee up with Love-powder,
If his train lie so open, you may see it, you have the wit I hope to shun it;
-- h'an't you.

I have done hitherto.


And doest thou fear, -- thou shalt hold out no longer?


Sir, I do not.
For, all the policies, and power he has,
Can ne'er prevail to conquest. -- No, tho fear
Be to our Sex a common attribute;
In such a fight as this, my resolution
Has that Heroic temper, I dare meet
My death, e're my dishonour: -- my dishonour!
For vertue's virtue, in what breast soere,
And her great splendour, equal.

Splend? -- Heyday!
But to the point, what is he? -- Do I know him?

Yes, if you know Sir Robert Malory, Your Landlord Father.


How Sir Robert?


He. -- Sometimes, -- (tho clouded in a course disguise)
He lays temptations to mine ear himself:
Sometimes by deputy; sometimes by Letters;
And sometimes by rich gifts. -- As if that Gem
(Once gone) can never be bought back again,
Were to be fold so basely. -- Here's my sore,
Assist me in the remedy.

Sir Robert!
He aim against thy chastity? Alas.
Has he bestowed upon thine Infancy,
That care, and cost, that he has done? -- Maintained thee
Among his own? -- Fed thee among his own?
Apparrel'd thee, as he has clothed his own?
In the same School, in the same qualities,
Had thee instructed with his own? -- Has he
So beautified thy mind? -- So graced thy body!
So many years in his own house! -- And now --
(So close his favours follow thee) -- does he
Maintain thee here? -- Here in this homely Roof,
A star to that poor glimmering candle light,
My poverty could afford thee! -- And for this,
Is this the best you can return him?

No -- Father, for these should I forget to pay,
The most obsequious duties I can tender,
'Twere just in heaven I should forget my self.

Had this been spoke of any other man.
I might have lent an ear to it: -- but, Sir Robert!
Noble Sir Robert! -- that brave man, Sir Robert!
Our bountious Benefactor! -- Say he have
Scattered some words in the way of merriment,
Some pleasant, idle, -- wanton, -- what d' ye call it?
Sprinkled a little Bawdry in his speech?
(As Courtiers may, and ne'er be questioned for it)
That cuts not off a May denhead. -- Nay, perchance
The merriment, that you in erpret lust,
Was his mere love to virtue.

Virtue!


Yes. -- Tis my conceit, that all his talk, -- his
Letters, and all the gifts he sent thee, were employed,
(...)' way of trial: -- Not to make thee nought;
But, so to sound thy goodness.

Sound my goodness!


Not to overcome thy chastity; but to try
If any other should assail the Fort,
How stoutly thoud'st maintain it.

Think you so?
I'll think so too then Father: -- Let him try me.
But jest, or earnest, he shall ne'er come ny me.

Why, this is fine, you have the golden time on it.


What golden time? -- You'll still be scolding.


Scolding! -- Mary come up Mistress Jinnie-^innie; We cannot speak to you, but
we scold. -- Well, I say little.


Nothing at all were better.


But I'll say something; Has a woman a tongue to say nothing?


Prithee be patient Sister.


Yes I waun't you. I must wash, and scour; And Brew, and Bake, and do this
thing, -- and do that thing; and do every thing; while such a beautiful
Blowse as you are, must sit still of your tail, and do nothing.


Why, doest thou not see her at her work?


At wo^k! -- A geate peyce o work, a deed law! -- Prick, prick, prick. -- As if
she had nothing in the world to mind -- but Prick, Prick, Prick. -- But 'tis
no matter, -- tis but my hard fortune; I am a fool indeed, and so you make me.


What, what, a shower after this peal of thunder? -- Na^, do not cry good
Gillian.


O, Father, Father.


Now Boy, what news with you now?


Brave news Father, -- News of the brave Sir Robert


Pursue me still? -- Good Father give me leave,
While he's come in, and gone again. --

What leave?


To abs^nt my self; -- but in some neighbours house:
I have a trick to pass him -- You may tell him,
I'm gone to London.

When I have told him already, you are here in the Parlour a sewing.


Come, you're a Baggage; you're a foolish Baggage,
To injure with such frivolous suspi^ions,
A Gentleman of his repute, and goodness!
Come, let me hear no more on it.

Sister Gillian, -- I have the rarest news for you!


For me*tis well;* And what news have you got for me Sir?


Skipping news, lipping news, tripping news.


How, Dancing brother Abr'am? -- Dancing!


Prancing, advancing, dancing!
Nay, 'tis a Match; -- a Match upon a Wager.

A Match. -- Who be they?


Why, all the Maids of our Town Edmonton,
And all the mad Wenches of Waltam.

A Match, and leave me out? -- When, when is't Brother?


Mary, ^e'n this morning; -- they are now going to it, helter skelter.


And leave me out? -- Where brother Abram? where?


Why there, Sister Gillian; there. -- At our own door almost: O^ the Green
there, close by the May-pole. Hark, you may hear them hither.


Ta la la la leero, ta la, la leero -- c.
An I be not one. --

Thou't never be two, I think; -- For on my conscience, there is no man that
knows her, has valour enough, to come near her*


Why, well said Girl, keep but that resolution,
And let his purposes, be what they can,
They cannot hurt thee. -- Look, he's come already.

Good morrow Tenant; -- good morrow beautiful Tenant.


As much to my worthy Landlord.


As much to my worthy Landlord.


My Tenant Abra'm! -- God-a-mercy good
Tenant Abra'm.
I want your welcome fair one.

Sir, you are welcome.


Had this bi^ spoke, with smiles upon thy cheek,
I durst have sworn the Syllables had been
The Language of thy heart; thy heart, sweet Peggy.
What, still so adverse to my pleasure? -- Tenant --
And my young Tenant; -- shall I crave the Room?
I have something to deliver from my Lady,
That she would have a secret to the Ear
Of any, But fair Margaret.

The Room?
Our poverty possesses nothing Sir,
But what is yours; you may command it. -- Come.

I smell my Landlord; but, -- no words but mum.


Still, still this cloud upon thy brow sweet Peg?
You know my mind.

And you know mine Sir Robert.


I mean, I love thee, my sweet Peggy.


Do you? -- Not half so well as I love you.


Love me!
Then there's some hope again. -- Why, god-a-mercy,
Let's see how handsomely thou't give thy body
To my embraces Girl. -- How, fly em Peg?
Not kiss me neither? -- such a thing denied,
How can thou say thou love me?

Yes Sir Robert:
I love you in your Name: your Reputation;
The dignity you carry in your years;
The goodness should go with em; -- In your Lady;
I love you Sir, in the fair Benevolence
You owe her virtues.

Hoyday; -- Love me q^ha! -- Nay, come, come.


I love you in your vows.
Those Nuptial vows, that whilst you live should live
Unstain'd between you: -- In a word Sir Robert,
I love you in that purity, -- that shall,
When death shall threaten your last minute to you,
Make you look boldly on him; smile upon him;
And in conclusion, seal you, one of those,
That, from this veyle of trouble, he conveys
To the purity of Angels: -- Thus, I love you.

This is not that I look for: hark you Margaret;
Your Father is my Tenant.

Sir, he is.


Nay, since you urge it, let me tell you Minion,
He's not my Tenant, neither; but my Beadsman.

And like an humble Beadsman, in his Prayers
Remembers all your Charity.

He does: -- But you forget it fair one.


Then let heaven,
Whence we Petition, the Reward it merits,
Forget me too.

Is't not forgetfulness
When all the love, -- the tender cares, and cost,
That from thy Infancy, to this Ripe grows,
I have bestowed upon you, cannot gain me
Such a request as this is!

This? Alas.
Your greatest gaine's in losing. -- Nay, I'll tell you,
The love, the care, -- that cost, that Noble breeding,
That seems to you a winning Argument,
Is my best Argument against you.

How?


Why Sir, the Education; -- that fair breeding
You have bestowed upon my poverty,
Has made me what I am: -- So copiously
Furnished my soul, with all that best adorns her,
That whatsoere's in opposition to it,
Has no admittance to her; -- Near her; -- No, --
But, -- most deservedly, do rank themselves
With things, that most displease her. -- Such a thing, -- is --

What? -- My Love?


No, but your lust Sir Robert. -- I am bold,
But I can kneel to beg your mercy for it.

What, she imagines water to my flame,
Is oil t'encreas't: the more she puts me off,
The more she pulls me to her. -- Come, come rise,
Though you be so unkind; -- Come, prithee kis me.
Why, God a mercy Peg; -- again, again;
Why, this is somewhat yet: We must not look
At once, to have so great a happiness
As that we aim at. We must use degrees.
Lock me, once more, in thy embrace, and bus me,
And then. --

What then?


For this time Peg I'll leave thee. --
What, leave thee, and leave nothing with thee Wench?
Nay, that were foul play Peggy: there, -- Nay, take it.
Indeed you shall.

Indeed, indeed I wonot:
For any service, I can do you Sir,
Your favour's price sufficient. -- No, not yet?
I see, mine eye's a Remora: -- I have it.
How I forget my duty? -- Here so long,
And ne'er a Chair to ease you? -- Abra'm, -- Brother.
Pray pardon me Sir Robert.

How, a Chair? -- Kinder, and kinder still.


Come, come, a Chair there for Sir Robert.


She pities your standing Sir Robert. -- But I have a Chair,
Almost at my fingers end. -- Look you Sir,
Will it please you. Bum this Cushion?

How, Bum it ^ennant?


Yes, Bum it Landlord: -- Look you Sir, of this fashion.


Come, you'll be foolish still. -- You know my mind. Go, bring ^*m in.


An I bring em not in, let Sir Rob. kick me out.


Lord, how forgetful I have been Sir Robert? But, I beseech your pardon.


Pardon thee?
And seal't upon thy lip; -- Come prithee sit.
Nay, nay, sit by me; -- Ne'er a stool? -- Sit here then.

Be fairly civil Sir; -- Nay, good Sir Robert.


How now, -- what's that?


Music Sir Robert.


Music? -- Rot on their fiddle, and their fiddle strings,
Thou art my Music. -- Hoyday, here's a Morice.

You see we sweat to make your Worship merry.
How do you like our pastime?

I like it so well, I could wish you were further off with it.


Have we this for our kindness Sir Robert?


Mary, come up Sir Robert.


Nay, there's no talking to em.
Come, in the heat, and height, of all her kindness!

Shall I entreat you, Leave the Room?


The Room!


So she sed: but I know she means no such matter, -- only a trick:

Tell her, you wonnot go.


Pray leave the Room.


We wonnot.


Wonnot?


No.


We were sent for in; and we wonot go out again yet.


An your Knighthood were --


-- A 1000 pounds purchase.


Hoyday, they'll bait me, -- and they wonot I must.


Out? -- Marry gip there, ne'er a good inch of a thousand. -- Fiddler, strike.

I strike you else; -- and cut your begging bowstrings.


I must be gone I see: these miserably impudent stallions -- Do but remember
me, as I shall thee; -- and -- Nothing greeves me, -- but --


But what Sir Robert?


That, -- we cannot kiss at parting --


Come, -- we'll even have the the other ^out, -- and then. --


Nay, we'll no more at this time ^here's enough.


For you: -- But 'tis not enough for me then:
You shall command us, shall you?

Nay, be not angry Sister:
'Tis no command, but my entreat: -- Good Sister.

Well, since you entreat me, and seem to know your betters, -- you shall have
your will, for once. -- Fid. lead the way; -- and Wenches follow your Leader.


Leader. -- An scolding were fighting, what a Leader would thou be Gillian?
-- Thoudst bring 'em on, with a powder. O Father, Father.


Ne'er a wise word, for a wager. -- Sir Robert's gone I see.


Yes Sir, he is.


And how dost find him Girl? I do not think
The man, that thy suspicion seemed to make him.

You have a good opinion of him Father,
And, I'll not stand to cross it.

Nay, nay, come;
In plain terms, tell me* how did find him? -- ha?

As good conceal't, and languish, as reveal't,
And find no comfort.

You are a pertish thing:
And -- I'm afraid, have been distasteful to him:
I'm half afraid on it Girl: -- we must be wise;
By's ^own we fall Wench; by his favours rise.

Distilling still, salt water to deface
That Master-peece of Nature? -- Can the heart
Thus feast it self, upon the Bain of hearts?
For such is grief sweet Lady.

Good enough*
To make this flesh as my dead Husbands is,
A banquet to corruption.

Still that Note?
Touch only that dull string of death?

When life
Would willingly exchange it self with Death,
What Music sweeter?

I must tell you Lady,
I thought the Music of your Husbands end,
Those heavenly Notes he entertained it with,
Taught him by Angels, had instructed you,
To look upon that Being that he has,
As he's a glorious Chorister with them!
And not upon that Burden of the flesh
Left in the Grave behind him. -- Or at least,
Not so, to look upon your Husband dead,
As thus, to dye your self. For what is't, while
Of Lifes best hopes, you shall your Life deprive,
But what I tell you? -- to be dead, alive.

Sir, as I am, pray leave me.


Only so? -- Out-ryvald by the dead.


To me he lives:
And in so vive a figure, every houre's
Presented to me, that I feel no less
Command o*re my ^ffections in that shape;
Nor less Attraction of my duty to it,
Then when he had that hear, gave all those parts,
That now ly^ useless, their peculiar motion.
Nay, so that shape*s impressed upon my soul,
That he appears so really mine own,
As, all the embraces of a second March
Would ^ick upon me, like the leaprous staines
Of Lust, and base Adultry. In a word*
That figure (...) his bosom: -- And in this
Pray understand the vainenesse of your suit,
And so* conclude it.

This command upon it,
It dies, though I dye with it. -- Yet thus much Lady,
I have not, in this eagerness of Suit,
Pu^sued, what's yours, But you. -- The gifts of Fortune;
The state your birth allowed you* or th'addition,
By your lost husband, left you; But the endowments
Of your fair soul, -- your virtues, -- And of those
The ampl^st Dower, (I cannot slatter here)
Beauty was ever blessed withal! These Lady
Have been the object of my Love.

A Love,
That, could I love, I should ee'n dote upon;
And in a Title, far beneath your own,
Prefer^t, above all Title; though it came
Roab^d in the state of Princes. -- But --

No more.
I have my answer, and am married.

Married!


As you are Madam; never to be married:
Be that the witness of my Love.

Admired!
I should not be a woman, should I not
Love such a Love as this is!

Do you Lady?
Then, I revoke that Vow, and dare embrace you.

But understand me Sir* I love your Love:
And -- as your self, have pleased to speak of me
Those singular Virtues, it is built upon*
That, I am fixed on; with that estimate,
That, next the memory of my dead husband,
I^ shall be my best comfort. -- Thus I love you;
But, must not marry.

I have done. -- Yet Lady
In this; -- this purest, Imateriall things
There may be made a contract; and the assurance
Of such a Love, as this is, Interchang'd
And fairelie sealed between us.

Sir, how mean you?


Fairest, you have vowed your widowhood to the grave,
At least, you have so protested: yet because
Our hearts, and purposes, are not our own;
And, that no Bosom has that Constancy,
But Heavens may alter, the resolve it has,
And make it follow, what it fled; -- it may.
My Love Petitions, that if ere hereafter,
You find that alteration, in your soul,
And again Fancy Wedlock, -- I -- your servant,
May -- for that second happiness to heaven,
Stand fairest in your Election.

Pray no more.


Give my request an answer: -- If you do.


A fruitless promise: and suppose it made,
This would but --

What? -- I understand you Lady.
It shall not make me bolder, in my suite;
Nor prompt my love, in any treacherous way
To gain, what it so follows. -- No; I know
The man, would basely, compass such a Joy,
Like him that fishes with a poisoned Bait,
Infects the meat should feed him. -- fairest, I wo'not;
Nor vex you with one syllable; but Live,
Vowed, like your self, till such a change shall be
To amorou^ Language, silent. -- Is it granted?
If my b^st thoughts merit but this, express it

That satisfaction take. -- If ere I Marry
It shall be you; so help me heaven.

To which
I am rapt in this sweet tone. -- If ere I know
The sweets of Hymen, I must find'em here;
So help me heaven! -- So, we are married now:
And in this Joy I leave you.

What Sir Oliver? going
As we are entering?

Does your Lady, drive you hence with a frown?


My smiles may tell you, here has bin no frowning.
She's fair and noble; and in these sweet hopes,
That she has given me, I am pleased.

'^is well.


A vengeance of all morris dancers*
I am sure, they h'a mared, my dancing: that delicate dance
That I should have had with my tenant.

All Joy be with you Ladies; I must leave you,


Here's a ^ub in your way a while, my brave
Knight, of a 1000. per Annum.
And how dost find her? -- is she coming? ha?

You see my hop^s set smiles upon my cheek,
Let them resolve you sir.

I understand you:
Why? god a mercy sister: when's the day?

Nay, question that no farther, we shall talk on it.


When a things done, 'tis done.


You'd fain be doing to then.


Wo'd I not?
Do you think I am all dead flesh? -- I warrant you.

Now Mr. William? -- what good tidings now sir?


My news is, worthy sir, that Mullinex
That stout sea Captain, is returned from sea:
Is come to London, and that yesterday*
He was upon the Exchange.

George Mullinex?


That Gentleman: -- and but this morning Lady,
He wa^ seen at the Phaenix, in fleeet-street.

Body o'me I should have told you so -- but, I
Have su^h a Memory --!

How ^'st? -- ha? -- you lose colour (...).


Lady.


Sister


Beshrew the name, and owner of that name
That has disturbed you. -- whats that name to you?

Sir, nothing but my trouble.


A troublesome Captain indeed sir,
A suytor once, in her virgin days
And Rival to her husband, Sir Iames Mosely.
But, mis'd the mark he aimed at -- he shot saire*
But Mosely fairer. -- upon which, Sir Oliver
He went to sea; where having bin three years,
And now Returning, hearing, (as it seems)
That she's a widow, he would renew his suite,
Give her a broad-side sir, and board her! Nay
Yave a hot Ryvall, I can tell you that:
One that will Quarrel; -- fight -- and -- by my fay --
I'm half afraid of danger.

If he be not,
All valour, and no judgement, I fear none;
And yet, that heate, that has not judgement with it,
Cannot be counted valour, but a rash
Unknowing wil^nesse, -- which I wo'not think
Him guilty of; -- But, whatsoe'r he be,
I'll be, but what becomes me.

Leave the Room.


Good truth now, but you shall not.


Leave the Room? -- What fear you Lady?


I have cause enough,
For hee'll but trouble me with that, heaven knows
I have no mind to hear of.

If he have
No power upon you Lady by some promise,
Formerly past between you --

I had never,
That unprepar'dnesse in me, to do that
In cause of such a Consequence as this,
And break it sir.

Such Beauty, and untruth
Were ne'er comoanions: 'tis believed.

Come, come,
It may be, some new Beauty has him now:
Some Foreign Mistress.

Or, it may be sister,
This time of service in the wars, had made him
Only in love, with fighting.

More vexation?


This Mountain, bring forth a Mouse*
Have we talked all this while of a Captain,
And now, must be troubled, with Coxcombs?

The gods, protect you Lady.


Thank you sir.


I spoke to that sweet Beauty.


But I must speak to you sir; for you see she has other employment,
Pray, stand aside a little.

If I must -- I shall attend her leisure.


You must attend her too sir: -- do you not see, she's busy?


I would not interrupt her.


I would not interrupt her? -- Is that the resolution of a Lover?
Let me come to her.

But, you shall not sir.


Why? if I shall not sir, -- I wo'not sir.


Is that the resolution of a Lover?


A man can do, no more then a can do,
But, an my father would but dye once!

Make nice to me of entrance?
Where's the Widow?
For so I hear she's now: what mourning still?
I'm a bold gamester: -- Save you all at once.
All suitors Gentlemen?

Yes indeed sir; we are all suitors.


You're a little too rash in that sir; I am none.


And, what, are you sir?


Why sir, -- I am, -- a Citizen, and a Mercer.


A Citizen, and a Mercer, -- Cheapside?


No Captain; -- but he's perfect in his Pater noster.


One of that row? -- I know it sir.


Not very far from it: -- In Creed sir.


Does he believe? that's seldom found in a Broker.


How sir, -- a Broker?


I know you by this wheel. -- you have a great many Bags, and a great many
buildings to sir. -- But, dare you for all that, presume in the way of
Matrimony, to look so high as a Lady?


He that can purchase a Lordship --


Thinks, he may purchase a Ladyship: -- you my Rival? Can you fight sir?


It may be I, it may be no sir.


Then I'll try, whether you can or no sir.
Not a word, as you love your Coxcomb^.

Nay, let him alone; let him alone, I beseech you,
For hitherto he has done but Justice.

Are you a Suitor too sir?


Too sir?


You're an Ass sir: -- Can you fight?


Fight? in a Ladies chamber?


Why, where would you fight sir?


Why, the truth on it is; -- I would -- fight, -- no where.


Why, I thought as much; -- and therefore, -- I will kick you -- any where;
good master outside of a Gentleman; follow your valiant Leader.


You will not kill him, will you?


Have you so much Tongue, and never a good Tooth, Madam Fumble!


Fumble, fumble! -- you're a most --


Peace, an you love your old Carcass, -- peace.


You bind me to a patience --


Nay, good Sister: -- He does you a great deal a right,
And saves me a great deal of labour.
For I should have don't, if he had not.

One post support another? -- What are you sir?


Why, -- I am -- a Gentleman. --


Will your Arms bear you out in the Title?


My Legs, shall bear me out sir.


Then -- you wo'not be beat out -- as they were?


-- Beat, I should be very loath to be beaten?


-- good truth, I think you would sir.


Do I look like one that would be beaten?


An you stay, you must.


Why therefore, -- I mean, -- to be gone sir. -- But -- If my father, -- would
but dye once. --


You see his rudeness: -- to prevent the danger,
It threatens, and may execute, -- pray leave us.

I will not add to his too prodigal heate.
Nor be so cold to fear it.

'Tis my Love --


And mine to tarry, -- not offending you
In the humble contradiction.

Are these your suitors Lady?


A little in jest; -- but you have paid 'em in earnest.


I did but speak, in the way of compassion pity, -- and your Lordship called
me, -- Madam fumble, fumble, fumble *

Did I ever fumble wo'you sir?


Be wise in being silent,
I hear you have lost a Husb^nd: -- How is't Widow?

You'll quarrel with her too, will you?


You are so nice:
I cannot Complement, kiss your white hand,
And fleare upon ^ou. -- I can kiss thy lip.
Hug thee, and tell thee, I must lie with thee.

There may be those of your acquaintance Captain,
To whom this language would be musique: -- But
To let you know how ill't appears to me,
I'll change my room sir.

But you shall not Madam.


You lay too rude a violence, upon
The tenderness of Ladies.

Do I so sir?
I thank your kind remembrance, -- you the man?
This Ladies only man sir?

My desire's, -- you would not be uncivil.


What so ere
My will produces, I shall justify.

That power maintains offence, is weakness sir,
And has no taste of breeding, or of manhood.

I'll make you taste of something.


But you sha'not
Have we no servants near us?

Save him, help.


O, you're a wicked Captain.


What? naked weapons in a Ladies chamber?


Take her in, -- poor Lady,
How she's frighted?

My Noble Knight and Master.


We have done sir.


An you have done, there's nothing to do; -- If nothing to do, -- the less to
care for; -- the less to care for, -- the ^ounder we sleep: -- and asleep,
we think no body hurt sir. -- And so -- having done, I have done.


You have the advantage of me.


I must tell you,
This rudeness, better would become the field
Then such a place as this.

That you may know,
I know as much, as you instruct me to,
Meet me to morrow. -- You conceive me.

Where?


Where? -- as your self have most discreetly said,
My valour would show better: -- in the field sir.

I understand you; -- understand withal,
A life, a thing too precious, to be put
On such a desperate hazard.

Desperate hazard?


You have not moved me to that heat, shall give you
One mis-beseeming syllable: -- much less
Provoke, to what you urge.

You wo'not?


No.


As good h'a said you dare not.


Dare not? -- What?


Not be a man.


You better might have sed
I dare not, dare my Maker; -- and un-make
My self, or you rash Captain, -- 't may be both;
'Tis to be thought on, if we meet.

It is
Pretty Apology; All Cowards, use it.

How, Cowards?


Coward.


How his lunacy
Has shot it self into my Blood? -- a Coward!
Proclaim me, what you call me, if I be

You'll meet me then?


I will.


Where thou, or I.


Nay, -- if you break so violently out
I shall suspect, 't is to prevent our meeting:
For Manhood covers such intents as these
Under a friendly seeming: -- thus. --

Enough.


I marry Gentlemen, I like this close.


Believe me, I was jealous of worse matters.


And I, ne'er trust me else.


Of what, Sir Robert?


I thought you had made some Quarrel.


Quarrel? no -- this is no quarrelling Posture.


Nay, nay, Gentlemen; so fight and spare not.


I'll so fight and spare not.


You know the place, and time sir.


You shall find I'll forget neither.


You see my length.


Which I shall equal.


So. --

Now, Beauteous widow: -- Is she gone?
I have no Courtship to pursue her with,
Nor will I offer it: -- but, Let me tell you,
He that best hopes her Favour, if he have it;
He must bid fairer for it then this sword,
And so I leave you.

A good riddance of you


How is it sir? -- your eye speaks trouble still.


Sir, if it do, 'tis only what it has,
From your fair sisters trouble, -- I must leave you
Till better hours invite me to return,
My Love and service to you.

Nay sir Oliver,
Our ways, -- a Little way, Lye both together;
And so far, we'll be so

I'st possible?
Be sure, you raise not this suspicion si^
From your own fancy, Look the ground be good;
The matter's weighty; -- Look it be, you're best.

I tell you, but the voice in Edmonton. -- which is
That Mistress Margaret, is his modicum.
His sweet-meat;* his recreation; and the only Instrument,
He loves to play upon.

Indeed sir Robert?


Whether she, like wax
Have t'ane the impression of his seal, or no,
I know not

That he is often at her Fathers house
That he allows his poverty some means:
That he maintains the wench, as one that sometimes
His charity, had taken to protection
I am not ignorant: -- Nor has it bin
More then has gone with my Consent, and passed
Without suspicion of the smallest spark
Of Lust in old sir Robert.

Nay I know not


I will not to be too easy, to believe,
Nor yet too confident. I know there's fire
In such a wenches eye; -- and old dry wood
Will soon be kindled: -- If I find h^ be,
I'll find a way to cool him: coole'em both
We'll all, or nothing, for half shares we Loath.

sir Robert's hand? -- ar't sure on it?


I am too sure,


And sent to thee last night?


I, by this day, was it father* -- I know it to be his hand
What do you think of this now?

I know not what to think.


You see the picture of a lustful heart
Drawn to the life; -- and with it, what a number
Of foul temptations, he has mustered up,
To dim, the star-like purity of mine:
But all, no more, against my Constancy,
Then storms of hail, against a tower; -- or waves
Against a rock, that beating are beat back
As they begin t'assaile 'em.

I believe thee* -- y^t old sir Robert.


Yes, even old sir Robert.
Who have we here? a Beggar?

An she desire any thing here,
I'll desire her to be gone, with a vengeance.
Who would you speak withal? -- Hum.

A poor old woman; be not offended sir.


And what would'^t thou have, poor old woman?


My business, is to you.


To me? what i'st.


I would delyver't to your self


My self?
What ere it be, do not fear to speak it,
I cannot fear to hear it.

What i'st woman?


Indeed my charge is mistress, to delyver't
To your own hearing.

This is strange.


-- what is it?


Though I may speak it; since you fall into
Causeless suspicions of me -- either hear me,
As I am willing to present it to you,
Or -- as I am, I'll leave you.

Leave us? -- Hoydeye -- Mary come up goody tatters*


Your tongue must still be running. -- Hark you woman.


I must be Brief.


You are very tedious me thinks.


Take your own course we will leave you. -- Nay, nay, come.
We shall know all anon. -- thoud'st fain be scolding.
On, or I'll set you forward.

Now to this private business: what is it?


That happiness that to a beauty, set
In a degree, no fairer then your own
Should be exceeding welcome.

Ha, What i'st?


I bring you love: and to assure you 'tis
A love that's worth, the Entertain it seeks
And fit to find repose upon the heart
Of such a Matchless beauty* as your own,
Have brought this witness. -- 'tis a fair one.

Tis -- If no foul end attend it.


come, be wise:
What my poor Artless tongue shall fail in, let
This never failing orator supply,
And with his golden tongue, inform you, (fair one)
That he that sends it, -- for the End he seeks,
Shall tender to you, whatsoever can fall
Within the compass, of your wish.

Good heaven!


A lusty offer for that short delight
The gentleman would purchase.

'Tis indeed; a very bounteous offer.


Take it then.


You have not named the sender.


'Tis, sir Robert.


Sir Robert Mallory!


That Gentleman.
I might renew your memory
His bountyes to your Father: -- and, that bounty
Not dealt by fits, -- leaving between his doles,
Interims of want, and anguish; but the whole,
And total stock he lives on. -- I might too,
Since you so much forg^tt your self --

I do not:
Indeed, I do not; gratitude, ne'er kept,
A ^ruer Register of benefits
Then you may find within this bosom

No? -- come then express it; maked appear,


In what?


Nay, an you mince it so. -- you know my mind! He loves you fair one.


Are you sure he does?


Against so large a testimony of it,
As that you have received, and this is, (fair one)
How can you make that question?

Do his years,
Equal the number, of my years? -- does his
Estate, and mine, lye levell? wears sir Robert,
The snow-white livery, of a single life
Vnsoild, as I do? -- can his heart, and mine,
With heavens applause be made, one heart? -- partake
(As hearts, divinly brought together, do)
One happiness, one sorrow? -- can the hand
Of any man, under yon golden roof
Untie a nuptial gordian? -- loose the knot
Has tied the souls, of him, and his chaste lady
So fast together? -- make but this appear,
And I'll believe thee: -- I'll then say, the Heate
Hi^ bosom carries, is a Holy fire:
A flame, as pure a^ those, are sent to heaven,
From our Religious Altars. -- But till then,
Let him desist, to Robe so foul a sin
In so divine a garment. -- Love? -- 'tis lust,
A sulphurous flame; which, tell him, I shall shu^,
As those dark flames beneath us.

Has he this
For all the cost, that for thy Beauties sake
He has bestowed upon thee?

Help me goodness,
I thought 't had been for heaven sake? -- That some Angel
Had led his Bounty; -- that it had been done
To make his own soul white, -- and not to make
My white soul black, and ugly.

Look upon it; -- 'tis a rich prize.


'Tis; -- yet as much too poor,
Were it ten times trebled, to effect his wish,
As Bribe an Angel to impurity?
So bear them back again, -- and tell thy Master,
(The lustful Knight that sent thee) when we rate
Our chastity, above our life, we wo'not
Sel't, for such toys as those are.

How? -- such Toys? -- are gold and jewels counted toys?


Compared -- with that rich jewell he would have for 'em.


So.


Might the exchange pass currant.


Be advised;
I dare be bold to tell -- you, -- in this Act,
You do not only lose this golden offer,
With' fruitfulness, that you enjoy already,
^'th' shine of his rich favours, -- but, you sink
Into that misery, that to the living
Is, as the Grave is to the Dead: A depth,
No beam of Fortune looks on; for his ^rowne,
Dead all your happiness.

Yet more vexation.
I will not call thee woman; for a woman
Could never labour thus, to infect the Name
With such a sin as this is.

Beauteous Maid.


Foul, and detested Hag, can breath upon me
Those golden Epithets, and with' same breath
Endeavour thus to blast it -- Father, Sister,
For heavens sake help me: -- Father, Brother, Sister.

How now Girl? -- why what's the matter? -- ha?


Examine her.
But she perchance, may tell you, what she does
Is but her duty; -- may be tell you too,
'Tis not so much her duty to the great one
That has employed her, as our love to us.
Her pity to our poverty; -- and that
To make our poor and barren fortunes fruitful.
She comes, to water't with a golden shower. Nay, she can do it.

A golden shower!


O rare! -- and thou can do that old woman,
Long may thou reign, I beseech it.

Thus, she may tell you father, -- but, -- I can tell you that she is --


What is she?


A Bawd.


A Bawd!


Nay, though the brow of such a one be brass,
She dares not contradict it: -- she's no less,
And her employment from Sir Robert.

How? -- Come, come, take heed.


And what should she take heed of? -- an she be a Bawd,
She is a Bawd.

That's certain,
Were her Bawdship employed among Ladies,
But, she shall ride in Triumph*

Such gravity, and such a reverend show,
Guild such a sin as this is?

A Bawd? -- Now Tobacco, and Aquavitae burn thee.


Now the stinking sweat upon thee, thy painted journey-women.


How many Noses do you think have bin lost
In your Bawdships service?

How many Coaches have you Bawdified?


How long ha'you run on in this sin? -- the Coachman wo'you,
And the horses bin whipped, for your pleasure?

was this Sir Roberts bounty? -- I am poor,
And poorer must be; for his frown commands,
All that I have to nothing, -- But this sore
Shall not be cured with such a sin. -- B^se woman;
But we'll reward your labour, -- shall we not?

You lose a daughter o'me else.


And an Abra'm o'me, I can tell you.


I'll go get ^n Officer; Abram, provide a Cart.


And let me alone for a Basin.


Has Love and Bounty this reward?


Such Love,
And such a Bounty, and the best it merits.

These be good Angels, I can tell you. -- Look,


Thy Angels are all Devils; -- and such gold,
But golden Fetters, -- In whose powerful tie,
Rather then I'll lie Captivated, bound
To the hot embraces of a lustful man,
I'll suffer any wretchedness. -- Away,
Thou art a devil, like a woman. --

Thou -- an Angel-like a Woman.
Now I have found thy goodness, know me better.

My ever-worthy Lady.


Come, no more.
Thou see the purpose of that poor disguise.
Now beauteous Maid, fear nothing: -- thou shalt flourish,
And the more Spring, the more his angry storm
Shall beat against thee. -- Here. -- Nay you must take it:
That, seemed to be the hire of lust, shall now
Be the reward of virtue. -- But, you must
Imploy't as I direct you.

But direct. -- If I shall fail in any thing enjoynd,
Let your displeasures (my worst Enemy)
Punish the fault, severely.

This is all:
Against my Husbands coming, -- as I'm sure
He will not long be from thee, -- I would have thee,
With this, -- and more, that I'll supply thee with,
Deck up this homely Cottage; -- and withal
Add to this Beauty beauteous Trimmings, such
As beautify Court beauties.

How?


Nay Margaret,
If you shall stop, at my fair purpose now,
I shall suspect your goodness, -- 'tis my pleasure.

'T must then be mine to serve it.


Preethee do,
I'll have thee brave indeed! How Brave, conceive
From these directions: -- Think thy self at least,
The Heir of old Sir Robert; -- nay, above it;
The Heir of one, owes greater Title; -- and
To such a greatness suite thee. -- Then -- Attend me,
They are returned already: -- the Remains --
Receive in private.

I have told you, what she is master Constable.


A Bawd.


All over, -- we'll not bate you an inch Mr. Constable,
And therefore have a care you do justice.

I have bin among Bawds before now, and whores too:
And I think, I have tickled 'em soundly.

I think so, a Constable?
What whore dares deny him entrance?

For what belongs to this staff -- Let me alone.


Let me alone for the Cart.


And me alone for the Basin.


Come, where's this same Bawd here? where is she?


My worthy lady.


My most worthy lady!


Come, wheres this bawd here? -- my most worthy Land-Lady!


What have I to do wo' Ladies? -- 'tis the bawd
That my authority is to cope withal.

The outside, made this virtue seem that sin
Lies there that garment.

How? that garment,


Virtuous


most virtuous Lady!


Constable, you may make a hobby-horse, of your painted staff, and
Ride home again. -- whip, lie thou there,
And what say you, to your basin?

I say, tis a base one, and the barbarly knave that owes it,
They say his wife had a tooth drawn above, while he was a
Trimming below* let him keep it for her now, an he will
For we have nothing to do with it.

Times earnest with me, to be gone: -- farewell:
You know my mind, perform it. --

With that care -- I labour, my best happiness.


Good Lady -- well well sir Robert


He's a naughty man.
I am enjoynd a task; and to effect it,
Look, she has given us all this gold.

this Gold!


This is that golden shower I told you off:
But falls to better purpose, then, I then
Imagind, father. -- how to be employed,
Lys yet within this bosom: -- but ere long,
The virtuous secret, here involved I'll show.
From such pure fountains, such pure ryvers flow

Heigho! good truth this little practice of my Lady
To stand between her, and her foolish suitors
So to prevent their fopperies, has lulled me
Into so sweet a fancy! -- Mr. William
If all the time I have bin thus accoutred
I have not thought my self a very Lady,
I would I were, a very --

Maid again: -- would thou not Bab?


Well, -- an I be not, I may thank you for it.


What, thank me for it and cry? come come conceal't
A little longer, and I'll warrant thee*
Weell find thee out, a daddy.

Look you do.


Rash, Plush, Gregorie! what says thou to a Citizen?
Then thou hast 2. strings to thy bow.

Two strings to my bow. -- what do you mean by that ^roe?


Why 2. trades Bab, two Trades.


Why what trade, have I, I pray sir?


Why, the old trade. -- thy husbands custom will get thee
Custom; and thine, thy husband, so one helps another,
And then, there's some hope of thryving. -- Let me see 1. 2. 3.
After so many falls this is thy third time of rising
A great piece of matter, i'st not? -- Come, thou shalt cry,
What lack you, show thy ware, Cu^ Privilegio; and
Befreind, thy friend, in a corner
Body of me, one, of the fopps already
Come to your state, and off.

Mr. William, hist do you hear. I have the worst luck
At women. But I'll to her.

What Mr. Gregory!


The very same sir. -- your Ladies new gone in
May a man, be so bold, as go see her?

Faith, not yet.
But, there's hope, you may see her anon sir,

I had a glimpse of her: -- I cannot tell well
An my father, would but die once!

I mary M. Gregory, his passing Bell were music.


The man should ring it, should not sweat for nothing.


A happ^e day Mr. William: and as much (though my ryvall)
To the sweet, Mr. Gregory Dwindle.

Thanks, sweet, Mr. Timothy Lining


Howe's that sir? -- lining!


A conceit he has, witness your worships cloak sir


'Tis lyn'd with plush indeed:
But may lyne a Ladies petty-coate,
When such a simple Gregorie as thou
Shall Dwindle, -- but -- to hear on it.

The diwindle in disgrace.


Tell me of lining!


Why Gentlemen, you come to see my Lady;
Which if you kill one another,
You'll hardly do, believe me.

You have said very right, Mr. William. --
Had it not bin for that
You have spoke to the point Mr. William
Had it, not bin for that! --

A terrible bout, believe me. --
Nay I knew my hat would part'em.
You are valiant Mr. Plush; and you Mr. Gregorie Dwindle

Well; -- an -- my father, would, but by once!


Gentlemen all, -- good day.
May we not, In, to the Lady?

In to the Lady? -- you are somewhat to rash indeed sir.


Enter the house I mean sir*


She is now, going forth sir: -- the truth is -- to dinner
But here into the next street, to her brother, sir Robert Maloryes.
What favours, she may bestow, as she passes, I know not, --
But -- be not too tedious, I beseech you, --
I am to attend her thither.

Well, this melancholy Lady, is a hard piece of matter to Compass


Somewhat, strait laced Mr. Rash.


An I could but come, to unlace her! I should make her.
Forget, her mourning.

We all, aim, at one mark; --
Which only, one must hit -- I hope well*

An I hope, as well, as you sir.


And I, as well as you sir.


Then happy man, by his dole sir.


Well, an my father, would but die once!


Have a care, you know my directions.
But, one at once, I beseech you --
Mr. Plush has the start of you Gentlemen.

We cannot help it, worthy Mr. William.


Hope well, and have well. --
The motto of mine Arms, if ever I lyve, to
Be Knighted -- which, If, my father, -- would but die once.

You would be a Knight in foolio.


She shakes her head; -- What does she mean by that?


To hear him talk, so like, a humorous Coxcomb!
She has shook him off, already.

I'll try my entertainment


Do* sir, -- to her.


Well, I shall have my Turn, I hope anon*


'Twere a very ill turn, an you should not.


No, there's the man; -- see how she smiles upon him!


No, h^res the man; --
See how she points, at you sir.

She points at me indeed: but oh those smiles!


That smiles a laugh; --
A scorn, a mere derision.
Do you note his coming off sir. -- To her, to her.
None sir, what news?

Nay I say nothing; -- what, -- it was -- it was.


And what say you sir?


What, she said, -- she said.


To please you sir, I would she had sung it.


That clapping of her hand, upon her breast, I do not like: --
She has given Me good words; but -- that's a tough bit, --
Of my stomach.

^'ll help you down with that; -- her words, were these
It is very true; you are, a civil gentleman.
And one, above the fortunes, that you seek:
I must protest you are sir. -- but when the heart is promised, and the
Aff^ctions, formerly settled, there's no calling back. -- These were
Her words believe me* --
Did she not shake her head as who should say,
You are the man, must have her?

'Tis enough.


You are must'd up in melancholy to sir --


She gave me comfortable words; -- but that embrace,
And thus, her hand, meeting her heart so oft
Moves m^, a little.

Then, you'll be moved with nothing.
I'll tell you, what she said; beseech you mark me, Sir -- you are
A good man; a Citizen; -- Rich, -- and wise -- though -- these three
Go seldom together; --
But, -- when they do -- 'tis an Aldermans pace, --
I assure you -- Sometimes in a Livery gown; but -- that's but --
On Festival days. -- The May den-head, -- is your Aims, --
In your Arms, -- believe me, I wish one, for -- my widowhood is
Otherwise promised. -- These were her words; --
You are the man must have her -- Did she smile upon you?

that she did.


Why, why, should you be moved then? Look, he's off,
She beckons one of you.

Me, me, I hope, and I'll to her.


You shall not go alone sir


Now, What's the happiness?


My happiness -- but, what she said; -- she said.


You have had, a long; and a very gracious hearing.


I have I ^hanke her; --
A very gracious ^earing, Ha? --
Why, does she laugh so loud? tis not at me, I hope

At you? -- at them. -- laugh, at a civil Cittisen?
I could tell, what she says for a need sir

I should be glad to hear it:


Then, I will make you glad sir. -- beseech you mark me*


You are a proper gentleman; --
Smooth, and soft, -- you have not,
Your name, for nothing. -- I have heard, --
You are vallian^; fear no man,
But -- the m^n, that frights, any man, that -- villainous thing, cald-a
Sergeant, yet you have made some of them,
Run too, two or three at once
Sometimes, and glad, they ^ould overtake you.

This was a Ieere worth laughing at indeed


Now for Mr. Gregory, -- the country Gentleman.
(Good harmless thing) little or nothing to him, --
Only tells him, his fathers old trunks
With a codpeice; -- and his breech, were not both, of a piece:
That hardly worth hal^ a piece; -- this almost, worth half a peck

A half peck, you mean, Mr. William


A bushel of wit believe me. * I ha told you, what she (laughd at:)
You are the man, must have her.

I hope I shall.


Did she not point upon you thus. (making horns) --
My Lady beckons me. -- your pleasure, madam.

I cannot tell; -- If shaking of the head;
And serious shaking of the head, may be
A gracious figne of love; -- I am the man.

O smile; -- sweet smile -- full of splendidious rays;
Such, -- as the Sun, at dinner time displays -- If I do not tickle her.
In figure, -- Let -- me be counted a Cipher.
Well, -- an my father would but dye once; --
I am the man must have her.

But -- o that Hand, -- her hand so white and soft,
In sweet Protests, -- thus -- kissed her breast, so oft,
I could compose me thinks! -- the sweetest! -- Well,
I am the man must have her.

Your will shall be instantly done, sweet Lady. --
Gentlemen -- 'tis my Ladies pleasure, you leave her at this time: --
Nay, nay, keep off I besecch you. -- Mr. Plush, --
You are the man: -- away.

Most beauteous Lady. --


Mr. Gregory, * I have sent him off, with a flea in his ear^
My Lady, is your Lady, -- go.

Well, -- an my father would but dye once, -- then
Farewell, most Beauteous Lady.

Mr. Rash* -- I have given him a Box, to put his pepper in.

You are the m^n shall have her.


In good deed sir?


You'd hear as much from my Lady?


O* ^ight I be so happy.


Why, you shall sir;
I have told the Gentleman, your mind, sweet Lady,
And he's delighted with it: -- But, to hear
Your love delivered, by your own sweet lip
would make his light heart caper.

Master Rash,
Though it scarce suit with modesty, -- my blush --
Veild with this mourning habit, take your wish,
You are the man shall have me.

May I build --


With Brick, according to the Statute sir.


I mean upon this promise.


O, you mean
Upon the Lady sir: you hear you may,
The foundation is laid to your hands,
And the edifice half up already.

With this, I take my leave. --


Dear Master Rash.


You'll make a rash Bargain of this sir:
Who have we here? -- Rawhead and Bloody-bones?
Good madam Bab, walk off, -- what master Cut!

I am Cut: -- but do not you play upon my Cut,
Lest I play upon -- your pate, and cut you, as deep sir.

What me? -- your friends?


No matter, whether you be or no sir: No Hercules contra duos.


Had you two upon you at once sir?


An there were ten upon me at once, --
I did not desire you to help me.

I was not there to help thee.


A pox o'your prating sheeps-head; --
I tell you, I did not desire it.

Nay, -- preethee Cut be patient.


I may choose whether I will or no sir: --
Six, -- like six of the Constables guard,
That a man may beat with a broome-staffe, -- yet
For three p^nce a night they venture.

What, Sir Olivers Hugh? -- in hast.


N^ great hast, for in hast, we run: -- An we run, we may fall
An we f^ll, we may catch a hurt; --
An ^a ^rt will not easily be healed.

An you talk of mine; you're Coxcomb.


Nay, I prithee Hugh say nothing.


(...) a man say, and say nothing? -- Of nothing, comes nothing,
And he that out of nothing, can get something, does something,
More then I can.

You do not, Some-thing, nothing me sir: do you?


Nay, here's no place* to quarrel.


An we quarrel, we must draw, -- an we draw
We must strike; an we strike, -- we shall cut; an we cut, we
Shall bleed; an we bleed, we must to the Surgeons.

An you p^te, I shall knock; -- an I knock,
You must cry; -- and you cry, I must kick; -- An I kick --

I shall kick you again sir, --
If I kick you age^, -- you shall feel it;
If you feel it, * you have as good as you bring;
If you have as good as you
bring, -- why th^n sir, I owe you nothing;
And so master Cu^bert have at you.

Death, are you mad-men? hold, hold, hold, I say. --

Prithee put up.


While he may put up in my belly.


He that does so is a Coward; -- He that's a coward's a rogue,
And he that's a Rogue must be whipped; --
And would I might be whipped an I do so.

Give me thy hand; you are a man*


He, that says I am not a man, -- I may chance.
To make him, a boy sir.

A couple of touchy Coxcombs. But come, this sign,
Of the Hand in Hand is handsome -- Gentlemen,
I have a pretty Project in my pate,
Will you assist me in it?

Name it.


Hark, -- no more but so: -- your Hands.


And our hearts to boot, Master VVilliam.


Nay, there's no parting yet, -- At Buttry-hatch,
In Boules, -- thus deep, -- we'll health it to the Match.

Now Knight, I see, you love a Noble promise
Too well, to Break it: -- you're a Gentleman.

Sir, should I find, that I had lost my self
In any Thing, that should proclaim me less,
I should not hate mine enemy so much,
As such a heady Action.

I am ready.


I see you are: But ere our weapons meet,
Tell me, what seconds have you Captain^?

Seconds? -- A strange demand. -- How mean you?


Why a man,
That may assist you if you fail.

A Second? -- were any such appointed? -- I have none.


How Captain? -- None.


I have not sir: have you?


Believe it, I have; -- I should not else have met
So great a danger Mullynex.

A Second!
Is this the Nobleness you Boast? -- A Knight!
A servile Foot-boy, -- his master ere
Give but one Copy of a noble soul
Would have disdained this cowardice -- a second*

Nay you may term it, what you please: -- no matter,
'Tis my advantage Captain

Ha? where is he


You may as well demand of more, then one
For I have more, stout Captain.

More?


Yes more.
To keep, what lost can ne'er be found again,
We cannot be too Cautelous

A man?
Ensnare me thus?: where be they? If they be
As base as thou art, be they ten to one
I shall not fear the incoun^er.

Think you so sir?
A minutes patience I shall name 'em to you.
And let you see your danger.

Name 'em.


Yes,
The first bold Second, that attends my Sword,
Is thine own Rash, and inconsiderate fury;
For then that foe within a man, -- without
We cannot meet that enemy, that can
Present us with more danger: There's the first,
The next my undertaking, in defence
Of such a stock of goodness in that Lad,
As Envy, n'er durst look on: which who knows not,
So fair, and just, the ever-watchfull eye,
That mid-night Actions are apparent to
Cannot but see, nor that great Ens behold,
But be assistant to it; -- A third (Rash man)
The contumelious, and un*manly darings,
That, to enforce me from the Peacefulnesse,
Ere lived in my calm Bosom, you have most
Uncivilly cast upon me, -- Smile thou?

Yes. -- Are these your Seconds?


Mullinex they are.
Dare thou unarmed? -- Indeed a naked man*
(For he that fights in such a Cause as thine,
With nothing in it, but an impetuous will,
Is little better --) venture all thy blood
Against such a great Advantage?

What I dare,
My Sword shall tell thee Bellingham.

So sudden?
You see, till now my weapon has been used
Merely defensively; -- To guard my self;
Nor point, nor edge, offering their violence
Against thy bosom. -- Were I sure, I could
Put by thy fury, till it has spent it self,
Or tired thy body past the danger of it,
The Fighting part should only be thine own:
Mine only, mine own Buckler.

Slighted? -- death
I'll put your Fence-play to it a little better.

I must not dally then*


Come Bellingham.


Hold Captain, hold, -- you bleed.


As you must do,
Or all my blood's at hazard -- Have I touched you?

You have stout Captain,
Shall we part upon the equality of our hurts?

How, part sir?


Yes, our manhoods, standing in this equal point,
We may do it fairly; slight applyments yet
May make us whole again.

Shall a scratch part us?


How fatal sir another close may be -- we know not,


No, nor do we fear it: Come
Then Mullynex, what following hurts you have,
Call not the work of my unwilling hands,
But thine own frenzy: -- witness heaven they are --
Captain you faint.

Take your advantage then.


Advantage sir, How mean you?


Of my wound:
My weakness Bellingham, -- you see there's now,
No interposed resistance, 'tween my heart
And thy bold weapon -- Come.

I rather wish
That all thy blood were in thy veins again:
Had all the fire, and livelihood it had,
Though with that strength, new courage, and the malice
That but two minutes past, pursued my life,
You should again pursu't, and put it to
Another dangerous hazard.

Thou mai'st wish it;
For 't were no hazard, against the muniment,
And strong defences that Heaven plants about,
A soul so pure as thine is.

How? is this
The language of a wounded man, to him
That made them Mullynex?

What language fitter?
Thou art a noble enemy: -- And now
My troubled understanding's calm again,
I see my self worthy the wounds I have,
And all their Anguish trebled. -- Thou art just.

I am to unmindful, of what most I mind
Thy smarting faintness: -- But, my cares shall now
Only attend thy safety.

Mind thine own: -- fly Bellingham.


Let all my best desires
Be fruitless then. -- Come Mullynex, Let me
Support thy fainting body.

Worthy sir, -- you've a Noble second*


Sir I have, And whosoe're dares be a Duellist
Should have the like;
Should build his Hopes, rather upon his cause,
Then on his strength, -- his skill, -- and hood winck'd fury,
For these are nothing.

You have made me see*
That Braves and Boastings in bad Causes, are
The Dolphins wanton dallying on the waves:
That sore-runs Tempests; This untimely Graves. --

You know my mind, fail not in any thing
That lies in my direction.

Fear not me; -- you have made me brave,
And I'll do my business as bravely.

And so, for your Son and Daughter.


Nay, for my Son, since he put on his Bravery,
For the part of a gallant in jest, -- He will not be persuaded,
But that he's a gallant in earnest; Scorns to think of Canvas,
Course Freeze, -- or a sheep-skin Doublet;
Or to talk but of Lords, and Ladies. -- And as for my Daughters!

Your part. --


Is a Justice of Peace: -- And you are sweet Lady, -- my Lady*


Hark, he's come already.


That's his hum indeed; -- In good Lady,
In, -- when your part comes in,
I'll give you your Qu. to enter. --
An I can but hit, the state of a Justice
Handsomely. He comes, and I go to my station.

Well Edmonton; thou that holdst her, that holds me,
In this strong meshd Net of affection, I am once again come to see thee.
How, in the imagination of this sport,
My old heart capers? -- Well? this little house,
This little Cottage, while it holds my Peg,
Is my best house, -- my Castle; -- Nay, my Palace,
My delicate Palace of Pleasure.

You are welcome honest Gentleman; what would you?


Ha* -- what would you sir?
By his face old Thrashard my tenant:
But, by the reverend outside that he wears,
I know not, with what stile to salute him.

Would you ought, with me or mine, sir?


I would speak with' good man of this house sir.


The Right worsh^pfull, Master of this house, you speak to.


This house?


This house.


What may* I call your name sir?


My name, in common, is Thrashard. --
But with the Gentile Addition, Oliver Thrashard Esquire, --
Justice of Peace and Quorum.

Justice of Peace and Quorum. --
Do not you know me, Master Oliver?

By this Chain, not I sir.


Not me, Master Olyver Thrashard?


Not you, -- Master* what shall I call thee, -- Belike,
We shall know you, whether we will know you, or no sir.

Has not your worship a son, that men call, --
Master -- Abra'm Thrashard.

May a man sir, desire to see him?


He is not afraid to be seen sir, -- Son Abram, Ent. Abram*
Master Abra'm, come -- here's a Gentleman
Desires to see you.

To see me, my Right worshipful Father? --
An he be a Gentleman, we are to be seen, and spoke to. --
Your business to me sir? Hum!

Does your worship know me, Master Abraham?


My worship does know many Gentlemen, -- some Lords,
And some Ladies too sir.

But me, -- your old Land-lord, Sir Robert?


Land-lord? -- to one in Satin?


Your Worship, remembers me sure sir.


My worship remembers you not sir: does not, --
Must not, -- shall not. Land-lord, to one in Satin! --
Did you hear him right worshipful Father?

I hear him, my worshipful son:
Just thus he talked to me too.

Land-lord, to one in Satin?


They talk of a wonderful year; --
But here's a most wonderful Minute, worshipful sir; --
Have not you a Sister, called Gillian?

Called mistress Gillian, I have; --
And you shall know that I have,
Sister, mistress Gillian, Sister.

Now, what's the good news wo' you now?


there's a Gentleman, -- would speak with one Gillian:
No more but so, plain Gillian.

You might have remembered the M. sir.


Which of the Ms -- Madonna, -- Mistress, or Maukin?


Right worshipful Father;
Shall our greatness endure the Maukin?

I confess forgetfulness: -- your pardon, -- your pardon
Sweet Mistress Gillian.

Tis well, you have changed your note sir* -- had you not, --
By this Chain; -- I know, what I know, I do sir.

Did not the Civility of Gentility, stand up, as it were,
Between us, with-holding these two, -- do you see sir?

'Tis well sir, you do not feel 'em.


Do not you know me, Mistress Gillian?


For, a sau^ie companion, I do sir.


Why this is admirable,
What Brokers wardrobe have they met withal,
To meet with me thus? -- Let me not mistake,
And charge a kindness, -- with unkindness though:
For ought I know, this may be some conceit,
That in the close, shall to my entertain
Add more delight and lustre. -- Worthy sir,
May but my boldness, progress to the sight
Of your fair Daughter Margaret I have done,
And rest indebted to your right worshipful self,
With your worshipful, Son, and Daughters.

Son Abram, -- Call in thy worshipful Sister


Now you talk like one of us, --
A Gentle-man, a Gentle-woman
Shall talk with the gentleman, -- And so, -- as the Proverb is, tis
Merry, when Gentle folks, meet
Sister Mistress Margaret Sister

Your business brother.


Ask our right worshipful father.


I there's the star, brighter, then Lucifer,
That ushers in my happiness

With me sir?


My beauteous Margaret: how ere ot'h sudden
changed into these rich ornaments, -- I hope,
You know me, better, then your father does;
Your brother, or your sister?

Know you sir.


I hope you do


Sooth, but I do not sir*


Not know me?


No; -- nor to be brief; and plain,
Do I desire, to know you,

Not my Peg
Not mine own Pegy know me? -- beauteous Peg,
I am sir Robert Malory

Away.


Now in good deed law; -- in good sooth I am.


sir Robert Mallory?-I do not know him:
But I have heard of such a one: -- a knight,
A City knight; -- A peyce of old dry stuff
That's good for nothing but. --

Peg,-beauty, Peg.


And yet, they say, -- in his libidinous heate,
As Rank a Lecher, -- a Baboon, -- a Goat

Peg, beauteous Pegy.


A cock sparrow; -- one
As lustful, as a Satire! out up on him.
Wrong his good lady? -- such a beauteous lady;
Nay such a virtuous lady?*out upon him.

Has her brave suite, made her forget me to.


They say, his lust most eagrely pursues
His tennants daughter: A poor Country wench:
A silly Girl heaven knows; -- yet wise enough,
To make the lecher lose his longing,

Ha? this the delight I* looked for,


'Tis reported,
Ha's done her good; -- settled a poor estate
Upon her aged father; -- and of goodness,
Must the reward be Sin? -- must she for this,
Become his whore? his strumpet?

Peg, -- sweet Peg.


Were I as she is, what so ere she be,
I should so fit his Knight ship; * and so firk
That satire, -- Monky, -- that Baboon, -- that Goat --

Some Conjuration, witchcraft


How he sweats.


Sister, pray call our mother.


Lady Mother.


How now what's the matter?


How's this? her mother? why, this is my
Lady;*or, -- the devil in
My Ladies likeness. -- l'me sure she'll know me.

Desire to speak with me sir?


You forsooth? -- will not she know me.


I cannot stand to talk sir.


Not with me?


With you sir? -- no sir; what are you sir?


Ha? -- do not you know me Lady?


Know you sir?
How? -- when? -- where? -- why? -- for what sir!

How? -- when? -- where? -- why? -- for what sir? why here's
The finest mad fit; -- the most worshipful Piece of Lunacy, that
A man shall desire to look on.
Why, are not you my wife?

Thy wife?


My wife.


I hope -- my right worshipful Husband -- you will not
Seem Ieerd And deryded. --
He challenges me, -- for his Wife!

My Lady, your wife? By this chain; an you play
The mad Alderman here, -- you were better have don't in bedlam
Your wife?
Go to; -- no more but so; -- go to.

Our right worshippfull mother, your wife? --
By this Satin go to; -- no more but so, -- go to

My mother, your wife sir? -- mary come up* for a wife sir;
Were it not, as it is; -- that Gentillity holds my hands-!

Me thinks, in such a gentleman, as you are,
Such sport, -- so old; * and such a Reverend man;
This wildness shows not handsome.

Handsome* quotha!
My wife, my spouse ^eny me! death they kiss:
An I be mad, -- I'll play the mad mans part
A little longer -- hark you gentlewoman;
Are not you my wife? -- are not you my Tenant? --
Are not you Abram Ninne? you Gillian
Of Braineford? -- you pretty Peg of Edmonton?
And this Little house here, mine own sir; -- death, they Ieere me
Is your merry devil -- that cheated the devil; come again to make
Merry amongst you? -- well, I see, how the case stands: this is
A trick of my Ladies, to Rack, -- to deride, -- and shame me:
She has found me out* and there's no houlding out any longer,
Peg, -- wife -- Peg: -- I confess sweet Peg, there stands the Peg,
That I had a desire, to have played at mumble de Peg with all
But -- dost thou hear me? -- lady * madam, Peg

The old mans mad.


I were mad indeed, -- an I should not know mine own
Lady! Preethee torment me no longer, -- good Love, good Honey,
Good Pigs^e, I was wanton; -- I was wanton, -- I confess it, --
But hear what I'll tell thee, in private

When, we walk thus abroad how our once familiar
Acquaintance will Bow and Adore our Satin. --
But, we know the worshipful Nod; -- for a word, --
We shall hardly Afford 'em.

May I believe all this?


Believe it Peg? -- if ere, I be troubled,
With this foolish vagary again;
If there be, to be spied, the least touch of this, Itch about me,
Let those worthy men, with whom I sit, set me beside my seat
And devise, some new Torment, to tame me. -- Nay let my frailty
Be put in Print, -- and sung* that the City, may Ring on it!

You have protested well; and I believe you:
This fault, is pardoned --

You must Seal it then --
How like, the right worshipful, this now?

By this chain, -- exceeding well sir.


I protest, by this satin, it is sir.


Please your worships,
May I possess her now? -- do ye know me now?

Our worthy, -- and right worshipful landlord.


Will your satin, submit to that sir? -- Peg, -- I love the.
Not for thy beauty, -- but thy virtues Girl.
The testimony of it, shall be this: -- your states
Shall be as great, as they appear to be,
I have spare bags, will do it wench. -- Come, we must
Give Virtue now -- what we decreed to lust. --

You have done, to my directions gentlemen.


Have we not, bully Will?


Have we not sir?


I have placed Mr. Rash, -- where he expects his lady,
With a heart, as light, as a bubble.

And I, Mr. Timothy Plush.


And I, Mr. Gregory Dwindle.


Mine like one, that had six pence a day, for his labour,
Stands here at the upper end of Lymestreete.

mine, in the Middle


And mine, at the lower end on it.


But all unseen, -- till they see their times to discover.
Most amiable Lady, cries mine!

Most splendidious Beauty, mine


Odriferous Mistress, mine.


Proceed we now to our purpose, Away to your stands;
And stand to your tacklings tightly.
Now, must I back, for my imagined lady;
Whose amiable Presence, is infinitely wished
And expected --

Sweet Mr. William
Well, the minutes coming,
That is, as 'twere, the crown of all the hours;
Of all the days* the weeks, of all the months:
Nay, in a word, -- of all those many years
That have fore-run it. -- Lady, Lady, come
Sweetest, of all sweet women, come, come quickly.

Come, as you hope to be translated from a fry Chamber-maid,
That is, -- a Maid, no Maid (for so are the most of your function)
To a civil Citizens wife, -- Carry thy self, -- like a woman
Of note and carriage. -- That blows in jest should swell thus!
But, this loose-bodyed black conceals it
Master Rash.

Master William.


Sweet master Rash, your servant.


Lady, -- you shower upon my head all happiness.


Something she may in good time sir. --
A word in private Lady.

It would grieve a man, for one so white as she is to attend
To the middle in snow; -- Nor for one so red as she, to wade to
The chin in blood: -- for her white is whiter then snow, * and
Her red then the blush of Roses.

It is my Ladies pleasure, that you turn up that corner, --
And so go through Allgate to the Tower; -- where -- she,
Having dispatch'd a little business with a Gentlewoman
A little below here, will instantly be pleased to meet you,
To finish the thing you wot of.

Our happy Nuptials sir?


Your happy Nuptials.


The Tower?


The Tower -- Her care has made all things ready.


I shall attend you Lady. --


Is not this handsome, Bab?


It will be anon, Mr* William.


Stand fast master Plush, I beseech you,
While I go look out for the Lady.

Honest Cut Hough-man! -- you know your part.


And shall act it to the life, never fear it.


You are perfect too, I doubt not.


To a Syllable, -- sweet Master william.


We must not word off time thus: -- Now she's mine
Do you stand aside, and observe us. --
So, all the state you can think on.
Sweet master Plush.

Honest Cut, let me be cut into steakes, if I make not thee
A great man, for this piece of service.

I know you a man, of a most magnanimous soul sir.


Thou fairest the Sun ere darted ray upon;
Thou Non-parallel, -- thou jem, thou Paragon,
What shall I call thee? -- Call thee what I can,
I shall but praise thee, -- like a mortal man,
Thou more then mortal woman! -- O, me thinks,
I could so tickle thee in phrase and flash,
Beauty was ne'er so tickled! Let me embrace thee. -- So!
And kiss thee, -- so! -- Nectar, Nectar* Nectar.

He said he would Tickle her, but she has tickled him,
I am sure on it.

Depart so soon, sweet beauty?


You know my heart, and have it: -- I have business, --
But here hard by sir, for an hour, or so;
Which done I shall return.

But will you?


Will I? -- what else do you think I came for?


Queen of beauty.


And then. --


And then, -- I shall attend you Lady!


But to your stand, -- you must be private, -- so sir,
How think you of this Master William?

O, rarely, rarely!


Then Sculke a little longer, and we'll have it rarer yet sir.


Stand fast master Dwindle, I beseech you.
Whilst I go look out for the Lady
Cut? -- And how is't, Madonna Barbara? -- She is now
My charge -- Go, -- back to the stand, you came from, tell
Spruce master Plush, that the Lady is now at her business; and
That you'll bear him company, till her La^iships time of returning.

T^ou hast counselled me right rarely. --


So, -- as your lesson is;
With all the Pride a woman's heart can think on -- Mr. Dwindle*

Honest Hugh, -- well,
I shall think upon thee.

Think? -- Can you think me, a new suit? --
Think me a new Sword? -- Think me a new Belt? --
Think me a new Beaver*? -- or think me a Pouch full of pieces*
I think, -- you think, -- no such matter.

I think thou think right honest Hughkin.


Why then, -- I think what I think,*and
There's an end of our thinking.

Well, an my Father would but dye once.


Your Father dye?


He's threescore years old and upward,
Is't not time he should now, go downward?

And time, that you should go Westward.


How I love you Lady, -- you may see by my eyes: --
Which have nothing else to do, were the day as long as a dozen,
But to gaze up ^n thee, -- and thy Beauty,
O^- by my heart, -- sweet Lady. -- By that lip I do --
By those two lips;*which I take for a Book, -- with two leaves --
And thus -- I take, -- my oath upon it.

But hark you, -- do you hear? -- master Dwindle.
'Slight, there's an oath indeed.

I swear but seldom,*but then I do swear to purpose.


I see, -- you like her;* that liking her, you love her; --
And that loving her, you will lye with her,*and that lying with
H^ you will --

Wh^t sir.


What sir, -- an you know not what sir, you may turn
(...) over to me sir: An^ lye with her, and do not something;
Wh^ th^ let her say, I have -- Nothing.

B^ gone sweet Lady? Why I thought you had come*
To go to Church with me to be married.

You know my heart, and have it: only sir,
I have a little business, -- here hard by;
An hour, or such a thing;* which overpassed, -- I shall Return.

But will you?


By this kiss.


A most sweet oath, I take it.


Betake you to your Stand then, and stand close.


Being so near the place I am to go to,
Till I return, pray keep him company. --

Well, an my Father would but dye once.*


Mistress Barbary, I could praise thee a whole day together,
But, we must follow, what follows. --

Me thinks --
This hour, is a very long hour, Master Cutbert,

A lovers hour, in the presence of his Mistress, is a minute* --
But, in her absence, -- he thinks every minute an hour sir.

Well, she is a wondrous sweet one.


You do not smell her hither, I hope sir?


I mean in her Aspect; -- her countenance.


How blessed shall you be in this Lady?


I thank the Fates* I shall:* thou shalt not be unthought of.


I doubt not your worships bounty. --
Beseech you a word in private. --

You are the most impatient Lover, that beautiful eye ever
Looked on, why half her hour is not out yet.

Well, -- 'tis the longest hour.


But, as you were about to say,
Concerning the choice of a wife sir.

Why, thus I do say, honest Hughkin,-I would have my wife, --
Like Alexanders -- Horse.

How's that? -- Your wife like a Horse sir?


Like Alexanders horse, I would sir.


And why, -- like Alexanders Horse Master Gregory?
Why, as that Horse, -- would let no man ride him, but Alexander?
So, I would have my wife, let no man ride her, but- Gregory.

Good truth, you say right; -- In right there's no wrong;*
No wrong, there's no hurt; -- no hurt, there's no danger, --
No fear, -- and* no fear, -- why so much for that sir.

Byr'lady, as you say, she stays somewhat long indeed sir. --
Pray heaven, your Rivall- Master Gregory Dwindle have not
Met with her.

Dwindle?


He, -- I do half suspect it -- He has been later with her*
Then you imagine, he has sir.

The next time I meet him, -- I will kill him.


I would not have you die sir: -- But --


That Butt, will I Run full Butt at, and broach him.


I do but tell you, what I think, Master Gregorie.


That Plush has met her?


I have seen somewhat more then I'll speak of.


Well, -- an my Father would but dye once.


I talk sir of Plush, your Rival; -- you must fight.


Well, an I must, I must; -- I'll examine my Sword,
And see, how hee'll stand to the Business.

Your Rival sir, your Rival, --
With his Sword stark naked already*

My Sword can go naked too sir.


Your Ryvall sir, -- turn, and defend your self;
You're a dead man else.

Dwindle, thou hast wronged me.


Plush, -- thou hast wronged me.


Thou hast stolen away my Lady from me.


Thou hast stolen away my Lady from me.


For which* -- though I be loath --


For which, though I be loath --


Pox o'you both, for Coxcombs. --
As You're a Gentleman, strike him.

As you're a Gentleman strike him.
An they hurt one another; -- hang me.

Hold, hold, hold,
You are gul'd Gentlemen, you are gulled:
Look there's the Lady you fight for.

Mr. Rash the Mercer.


And the Parson, that Joined together.


Revenge, revenge.


Blood, and Revenge, assist me.


Why gentlemen? -- what mean you, Gentlemen?


Mr. Plush,- Mr. Gregory Dwindle.


Mr. Dwindle; Mr. Timothy Plush.


This-Lady, is for you.


Your Beauty Lady.


Lady, me no Ladies; for I'll be a Lady no Longer, I am,
My Ladies Chamber-mayd; do you know me?

My Ladies Chamber maid?


An you know her not yet, you may know her hereafter, -- by this.


By that sir? -- what sir? Villainy, Villainy, Villainy!


No matter for that; I'll be honest enough to you sir.


Villainy, villainy, villainy*


You cannot fly so fast; but I can follow --


I'll-follow too, -- and use* my best skill to Attone'em*


My Ladies Chamber-mayde?


The Lady her self, is a dish, -- for your self, to feast on.


I'st possible?


As to do thus.


O rare.


Gull him with the maid, -- to help me to the bed of the Mistress?


You see my Love sir. -- foolish Remnant Seller;
A Citizen: -- you are a Gentleman!

Well; an my Father, would but dye once!


That time, will come.


I would it were gone, honest Hughkin.


So much, I know my Ladies Bosom sir.
That what I speak, I'll Justify. -- She's yours.

I think, I have said enough sir.


I shall have her.


Shall I talk? -- shall I walk? shall I eat? shall I drink?
Shall I sleep? -- shall I live? -- shall I dye sir?

But, you must tread the path, I put you in;
An you straye, but a foot, you loose her.

But, -- as I have told you, Mr. Gregory Dwindle,
You must not miss a half of my directions.

Honest Cut^, -- I am for this thing, -- any thing, -- all things,
To compass the Bed of the Lady.

An I do not do as I should do* -- may I never come to do, --
What I wooed do.

You have said enough: -- And go I'll direct you better.


Do this, she's yours: -- As we go I'll direct you better.


Have tender hands upon him. -- so, now Leave us.


Your goodness mixing with those thing^ you apply,
Doubles their virtue, and to all you do
Sets a most wished Conclusion.

See who knocks. --


I make no question, I shall find you such*
Concerning the concealment of my friend,
That worthy Gentleman, Sir Olyver,
As I desire, to find you.

All I am, -- is at your service, Captain. -- Now sir.


Sir, here's the mourning Lady so much talked of*
Sir Robert Mallory, and his Lady sir,
That good, good Lady.

Trust me, y'^re to blame.
They were not entered with you? -- Preethee step
And do it with thy best duty: -- Nay, I knew
The Rumour of our unsuspected Quarrel
So spread, as I have caused it to be spread,
They would not long be from me,
They are come, -- you know my thoughts.

Fear not my care; I do sir,
Ladies, -- and kind Sir Robert, -- you are welcome.

I'st well, to see men Ill sir; -- How I'st Captain?


Faith a weak man Sir Robert.


Nay, nay sister;
Then I shall chide you, weeping? Come come dry
Thou hast wept too much, already.

Had I thought
To come, had bin to meet this new occasion
Of grief, and anguish, I must tell you plainly
You had come alone, for me.

Come, wipe your eyes.


You may as well forbid the Bigswoln Cloud
By the Suns Ardor melted into Drops,
To fall upon the Bosom of the earth;
As my swollen grief (Resolved into these tears)
To fall from their full Fountains. -- Half the Number,
Is for thy wounds (rash Captain) the other Half,
For that sad gentleman, (where ere he be)
Whose hard hap 'twas to make 'em: And, in them,
To make me Author of this Bloody work
And his perpetual Exile

'twas my frenzy,
I, wretched I, was Author.

Interchange
Embraces, congyes; -- and, to our Belief,
The Language of two Brothers; -- And all this
But merely show? -- false colours, -- a fair Masque
Ore the stern; -- Rough, and Formidable Face
Of such a Mortal Envy? -- you were cunning

But, to our purpose sir: -- our coming was,
Hearing that worthy Gentleman, Sir Olyver*
Upon this Bloody Accident, was fled.
(For nothing else, is on the 'voyce of Rumour)
To learn, the certainty of you.

He, fled.
To stop his flight, (though for his safeties sake
He hid himself in some obscure disguise)
I gave him, what encouragement, I could;
Told him, my wounds were nothing: made their depth
Appear, but shallow scratches; -- That the loss.
Of twice the Blood went from 'em, could not leave
My heart so Pale, as to Recoil against
The worst they threatened: -- Have proclaimed the hand
Of Noble Bellingham from all this Blood,
As white as Innocence.

How?


I have,
And taken the purple stain upon my self;
For 'twas my self wounded my self; -- not He.

Your self?


You call me, to a strict account.
For he that's lost in such a storm of fury,
Cannot be said, to be himself.

You have spoke
A noble way to acquit him.

But, it may be
Imagining, we know the Place to which
He has betane him to conceal himself,
You speak all this, in hope we'll name the place,
And so Discover him, to what revenge
Your spleen shall seek upon him.

To revenge?
To any, but your self this harsh Suspicion
Should have as harsh an answer: But to you
I'll thus acquit me: do you see this Ring?
Your Tears, will hardly let you see it: -- yet Lady
Pray look upon it. -- Can* you call to mind
A former sight on it?

I have seen it sure. -- Sir Olyver, I take it.


Lady 'twas.


Now I look better on it, it was indeed.
Thou know it too.

I do sir: -- what of this?


What comfort yields the sight on it?


I have shown
This, to acquit me of those treacherous thought^
That you suspected in me, against the life
Of noble Bellingham; -- Who -- as he parted,
(To take a Journey in uncertain paths,)
Left this Ring with me.

You have charmed us now, -- from all our harsh suspicions.


Till he gave me
This cause to hate him, I ne'er loved him: Now,
I do not grieve so much, this loss of Blood,
Nor all the smart goes with it, as by this
I have lost the sight and the society
Of such a fair example of all Goodness,
As I shall ne'er more look on. -- I could tell you
How much (beyond the sufferings of a Man)
I dared him to the field: -- How meeting there,
He did not look upon me as a Foe;
Or, one that thirsted a Revenge, -- but one
That only met to show he durst, -- and then,
Seemed -- in the language of his look -- at once
To speak the Dreyrie issue of a fight,
And -- to advise to shun it. -- Till he saw
My weapon out, -- His slept within his Scabberd.
Both equally prepared, -- my weapon only
Laboured for blood; -- His, only his own guard
Without desire to touch me. In a word,
What you see done, -- I made him do; -- and done,
His heart wept blood to think on it. -- When another
(Seeing his state thus dangerous) would have fled;
I could not counsel him to it, -- but in this,
As all his Actions, valuing noble things
Above his life -- he took into's embraces
My wounded body; -- Brought me from the field;
And to the diligence, and well known skill
Of thi^ good man has left me: Leaving with him,
(I almost blush, to do him right in that)
His ample satisfaction for my Cure,
Or whatsoever may be demanded.

Sir ya've given him a fair Character,


He were
Baser then Envy would not. -- and all this
He did in the Honour of your Beauty Lady.

Lady.


dear sister. --


Lady.


He loved you dearly: Can his Praises* then offend your ear?


No every syllable
Of his commends is musique. -- But to think,
That, for my sake this much Commended worth,
(Yet much above, the great commends it has)
Should- thus be lost O, I could weep my self,
Into my senseless Statue! -- Bellingham!
O Noble, noble Bellingham!

Sister.


Lady:
If his Commends be music in your ear,
Be patient, and hear more on it. -- once again.
To this: -- 'Twas his; -- and (as I said before)
He left it as he parted: But, not mine,
But thine, -- thou best of women: -- his desire,
You'd wear it for him: -- when, you look upon it,
You'd think upon him; thinking, that you'd give
His wandering steps fair wishes.

As I would
My soul, departing, on her Journey hence
To her eternal dwelling.

Pray observe,
How in this ring, he has emblem'd all the world,
And all her painted glories. -- look you Madam*
A bed of Roses-wither'd. -- And the word,
Caelestia non sic! -- tis not thus in heaven!
There's no decay; no failing, All things there
Their Innate Beauties do for ever wear:
For ever, their full flourish: -- Here below,
Our best Joys wither; All things Ebb and Flow. -- Indeed --
He was not master of that thing, from which
He did not draw, (as out of this small compass,
Sweet and Celestial uses! -- was a man,
As heaven had only made a man to make
By his example, multitudes of men,
Such as it self would have 'em. -- you weep still.

No hope, again, to see him?


Do you wish it?


As life, as health, as Heaven!


You will not then deny one kindness to me?


what i'st Captain?
Now you have left your love-suite sir; -- and seem
To be a spoakes-man, for young Bellingham
She can deny you nothing: -- what i'st Captain?

Faith only this Sir Robert. -- I would Beg
Since She desires to see him, that, for that
She would Let me wear this Diamond but till I find
Fit time to send it to him.

Send it?


Yes -- No strict enquiries of me: I have spoke
If you dare trust me --

But direct me sir -- I'll Bear't my self.


You know my Bosom Lady;
If you will send it.

Take it.


Take it Captain, -- but --


I conceive all that you can urge me to,
And will perform to your own wish. -- My wounds
Call for your help sir. -- I must now desire
You would be pleased to leave me.

Weed be loath
To be a hindrance to the happiness
That we all wish for.

Farewell noble Captain.


Come, shall I look upon your wounds?


No, no:
I feigned my self much fainter then I am,
To hasten them to leave me.
Thanks to your Art; -- and you great Master of it.
I feel my legs sturdy supporters now,
And for a need could travel. -- Bellingham.
You have observed these passages?

I have;
Unseen I have seen, and overheard 'em.

Then -- I hope you have seen, that I have played the part
Of a just Advocate.

Sir, you've done
For me, -- the most unworthy -- such a Love
As I shall ne'er make even with.

No more;
The Exchange is made, Sir Olyver: -- there, -- take it,
She dreams not sir, you have it so suddenly:
But, what's to follow -- I must change my seat,
For this has tired me sir. -- We'll take more hours
Sufficiently to think on.

Noble Captain. --


Will these foolish Suitors be troublesome still?
And still live in hope of my Lady?

Hang 'em Puttocks; you shall hear more of them hereafter.


But how is't with Rash, and his piece of Rash, Mistress Barbary?


Faith, he's not so rash as he was, with some supple persuasions
Of mine; -- her hanging the head, -- beating the breast, wringing
The hands, -- wiping the neyes, -- and lamentably breathing some
Hundred and fifty Heigh'os; he was won in the end to bus her, to
Embrace her, -- to bus her again. -- He buss'd, -- and she buss'd, -- and
they
Both buss'd so long, -- till at last, -- overcome in this conflict of kisses;
He yielded himself her Captive, and has vowed
Till his death to love her as dear as his life.

How now? what Musick's this?


'Tis applied to my Ladies melancholy,
But I fear me to little purpose, -- peace, a Song.

Now, Master William,
How fares my Sister, and your Lady? -- ha?

She's a sad Lady; -- and so sad, Sir Robert,
That no delights, that her most loving friends
Present unto her Senses, from her breast
Can take one minutes anguish.

Well, I fear me,
Shee'll pine her self into her winding-sheet.
Now Peg, how is't? -- how does our sister? ha?
Can smile, and tell me, there's as clear a sky
Upon her beauty? No, that down-cast look
I fear me's her sad picture.

'Tis indeed:
But the occasion of her grieving's changed.

What's the sad matter now then?


Only now, -- young Bellingham's sad absence.


Bellingham?


For which, with many sighs, with many tears,
Many abrupted syllables, extolling
His noble worth and goodness; -- she accuses
Her wretched self; -- making her self the cause
Of that sad fight, and this lamented Issue.
It grieves me thus to see her; -- and as much
To leave her in it, -- I must in again:
Come, will you in, Sir Robert?

Go, I'll follow.
Heaven never pity me, but for the weight
Of sorrow, lies upon her tender heart,
My heart's as full of anguish.
My brave Captain,
Do you so much compassionate the tears
Of my poor sister, as thus weak and ill,
To come to see, and comfort her?

Sir Robert,
I thank my great Restorer, I am well:
But, were I at the weak'st, hearing her grief,
I should forget mine own, and tender that
My best respects, and service.

You are Noble.


Still grieving her lost Husband?


Questionless,
There's some remains of that: -- but with it sir,
Sh'as now th'addition of your blood: with that
The flight of him, that yours commends, -- and his
Better considered worthiness, has made
So noble to her, Noble Bellingham,
For whom, as one by her occasion lost,
Her conscience seems to check her: -- and retired
Into her melancholy chamber, sits
As in a Cell: -- whence all the loving means
That can be used, have not the power to move her.

In her Chamber?
And this strong Passion for young Bellingham?
Pray call a servant.

Some within there.
Bear this to your sad Lady sir, and tell her
The man she grieves for, will not long be from her;
And that the bringer of it does desire
She would be pleased, that he might see her here.

Here, tell her here: -- go, fetch her.


Nay, if that
Be her disease, this is the cure or nothing.

Why, is young Bellingham returned?


You see
The Ring she sent him is returned: from that,
Let me alone to cure her.

Now my Peg,
What comfort brings thy coming?

That my tongue
Were furnished with those words that might delight you:
I know, there's in this wish, and the sad signs
It is delivered with, answer enough
Touching your worthy Sisters heaviness,
To make your hearts as heavy. -- But my charge,
Is from my Lady, to entreat you would
Be pleased to come and see her.

See her wench?
Prithee go in again, and tell thy Lady,
We hope she'll leave her solitary Cell, -- and come to us.

To you sir?


Nay, nay, go, -- and tell her what I bid thee.


Pray sir Robert,
What Beauty's this?

A pretty beauty sir.


But that her wearings are so fair and costly,
I should -- from Fames rich pencilling a Virgin,
That was your foster daughter, take that piece,
And this to be one beauty.

So to take,
Is not to take amiss sir; this is she:
This is that Girl, believe me.

Still a Virgin!


As from her Mother, Captain.


And her heart -- her own sir, and unpromis'd.


Yet believe me,
Dost like her, noble Captain?

To enjoy her,
As the sole mistress of my purest desires,
Is the greatest happiness that I can aim at.

You know her Birth.


'Tis noble in her virtues.


If virtue be the best Nobility,
'Tis so indeed. -- Go, thou shalt have her Captain.
And howsoever, set lightly by, till now,
Sh'as now some weight; -- five hundred Pieces Captain,
Five hundred golden Pieces.

Your Lady Sister's coming sir.


Please you,
I'll in, and try my fortunes with her sir.
What follows of the Ring I sent, -- this Doctor
Can as well finish, as my self were here,
I'll not be long about it.

Say you so sir?
Here, take this Ring, 'twill help you. -- Never not fear her:
Go in and woo her; win her, and then wear her,
I see that Ring has brought her:
How is't Sister?

Revived a little by the sight of this,
But let me see the man I sent it to,
And then that cure upon my grief, -- you wished*
Is to your wish effected.

Master Doctor.


Where is he? -- speak, who brought it?


I did Lady.


You? -- What are you sir?


My Profession Lady,
My habit shows you: I am he that cured
The Captain that he wounded.

Mullynex?


That Captain Ladies.


Is he well?


He is.


As meat can make him; and his flesh as whole as a fish,
Take my word for that Lady sister.

Ha? -- where? where is he?


Faith, somewhere here about the house he is,
And see, he appears in his likeness.
You're as good as your word; -- you have got her.

Not with child yet, but I hope I shall doe-ere long:
Now heaven give us joy, and all's done sir.

Heaven give you joy; -- I'll give you the gold I promised you.
You see the Captain is well Sister.

Why then returns not Bellingham? -- or does he,
(Hearing his goodness has inthrald my heart)
Neglect me now, because I neglected him,
When my fresh griefs enforced me? -- If he do,
I must confess it but a just revenge:
And so (as long as grief shall give me leave)
Shall patiently endure it.

But you shall not,
You have endured beyond a woman's strength,
And shall endure no longer. -- Master Doctor,
You are the man must cure her.

Beauteous Lady,
'Twas your command, I should not trouble you
With any tedious Love-suit; -- and you see
I have done, what you have enjoined me: -- Now I hope
I have your voluntary grant.

I am now,
What Noble Bellingham shall please to make me.

No doubt he'll make much o'thee Sister, -- wilt thou not Knight?
My brave sir, of a thousand per Annum?

She's now mine own; and in this union sir,
The best delights that her desires would have,
Are mine, mine own; -- and I shall so pursue 'em.

And what say you master Captain?


To my Pegge*
I say (as he has said) -- that she's my self,
As you have said; -- that she's my Girl; -- my Pearl;
Her voice, I will hang in my ear: -- Her face in mine eye;
Her pretty little waste in mine arms;
And being in arms, let the Soldier alone to come on sir.

Why god^ mercy Captain. -- Now to Church,
Nay, wee'le not lose a minute.

Beseech you stay a little, there's that mirth in your way
I dare promise will be worth your beholding:
See, see it appears.

Who's this? -- Master Rash?


The very same, an't please you.


Your suit continued still sir?


I have turned up another suit now sir.


Your Wife!


Even so sir.


Verily so sir. -- Do not you know me Lady?


Truth not I.


Nor you, nor you, nor you?


We know thee not.


What art thou?


This 'tis, to put off our vain superfluous colours, and to walk
As becomes the zealously metamorphosed. I was your
Creature Lady.

How? my creature?


In the phrase of the world 'twas so. -- But I am now, -- mine own,
Yet, -- verily -- I do err, -- for -- no wife, -- is her own disposer.
Verily none: -- for we -- to affirm sincerely, are but members
Of our Head, the man; -- our Spouse, -- and our Superior.

How Bab!


That Barbary Button, believe me.


How comes she to speak in the nose so?


The tone of the Brethren, and the Sisters;
But, what do you think of this Member?

Though begot, -- and conceived in vanity: -- being borne in the
State of Matrimony, the offence, -- may no doubt be remitted, and the
Innocent, in time, may prove a most, -- zealous member.

And what think you sir?


I think, as my wife thinks, -- for man and wife are one.


Verily, you have said, said- like a zealous husband.


Give way there Gentlemen.


Why, what's the matter?


Your shadow Lady; -- and your Rival sir:
The prettiest fancy; the most dainty Dream!
Beseech you Madam, stand aside a little,
Much joy betide your worship.

Godamercy;
Having this Beauty, I have all the joys
My Auspicious Stars could give me. Honest Cut;
This service shall not be unthought of Cut.

Well Master Gregorie, -- an you do hang your self.


Why, an he does, he does, -- we cannot help it.


Yet it would grieve a man. --


Grieve a pudding: -- And it grieve not him to do it, it shall never
Grieve me to hear on it. -- We are now man and wife.

For better, for worse sir.


Then, for better, for worse, I will keep her. --
Why, there's another Rival o'mine, -- Sir Oliver, --
Say he should take the same journey, and go to
Heaven in a Halter after him; can I help it?

I confess, you cannot: -- thank you master Plush.


I did but say, -- an -- an you should sir.


No, though the loss be somewhat grievous to me*
The sorrow shall not go so deep: -- she's yours.

As sure as the Church can make her.


What must be, must be sir; -- much joy betide you.


Thank you.


Now Lady,
In spite of all my Rivals, you are mine.

I am sir.


I know thou art, and thereupon --.


Not a kiss, till you come to your Chamber, -- then
She's your own all over.

'Tis enough: Now, an my father would but dye once.


When Plush shall hear of this, -- hee'll hang himself.


An he do -- to make a wry mouth at the match,
I cannot help it; I should not do so by him though. --
Save you gentlemen. We have the Lady Gentlemen.

We have the Lady-gentlemen.


Is my Sister divided between you?


You cannot both have the Lady.


Alas poor Gregorie!


Alas poor Plush!


Alas poor coxcombs! here's a coil indeed
About a worthless shadow: -- What am I sir?

Alas poor Plush!


Alas poor Gregorie!


Why, who have I then?


Why, who do you think you have sir? --
This is no Ivy bush, nor I an Owl. --
D'yee stare upon me? say?

Are you my wife?


I cannot tell, -- how do you think sir? ha?


Having got this Beauty from you, we got this Beauty for you.


You'll think upon me I hope sir.


The Gentlewoman is my Sister; -- I tell you no more but so sir:
She loves no large protests: -- Embrace and kiss,
And 'tis sufficient. -- There's an end of this.

And what say you sir?


Why, I say -- I -- know not, -- what to say,
She -- is not -- very old sir -- is she?

In her Hood, -- some -- 50 -- But in some Dressings she has,
She may pass for a thing of twenty.

Here be some Gutters; -- Channels, -- and Long lanes,
But being filled up, -- with -- a little Plaster of Paris --

Garden.


The Face, -- may pass --


For a Paris-garden face: -- it may sir.


Come, ne'er be melancholy, -- you shall find a woman of me I warrant you.


Thou speak, -- like a good old woman. -- Well --
An my wife would but die once.

How Sweet-heart? -- your Father.


I know what I said, I warrant you.


Nay, pree thee sweet-heart kiss me: -- faith you shall --


There -- Puh! Well, -- an -- my wife would but dye once!


Come, you are so melancholy:
Why here's a man suffers, as much as you;
Or you master Plush, -- and yet you see he's patient.

I thought I had married a Lady too, -- but -- by lady,
There's no such matter. -- We must be contented now though.

Well -- here be three of us.


There be indeed;
Stand together, I beseech you, and be silent.
Come, let's to Church: -- nay, we'll not lose a minute*
Brother; -- Son,
So, now I'll call thee Captain; having got
The inestimable Jewell, treasured up
In this rich Cabinet: -- for such a Gem,
Is the dear heart of Peg my Girl; -- my Pearl;
This beauteous, virtuous, Country Girl: -- And such
The Prize your fortune, -- or, your goodness rather,
Has drawn in this sweet Beauty. -- Many joys,
Heaven send you both.

Many sweet Girls and Boys.


Why, godamercy my old Pegg, -- Away.
In love, and war, no danger to delay.

COme, will you go Gentlemen? --
Nay you must be with us,
And guests at this Wedding dinner.

Must we?


By any means in the world sir. --
Their Cates will not relish without you.

A word or two first, to ease our stomachs here, and our*
Stomachs shall be there in an instant. -- Gentlemen,
You see how we have bin abused, -- Basely abused and gulled.

I, with this -- cracked Commodity.


I, with this -- old Commodity.


And I, -- with this -- scolding Commodity.


How this crack, --


How this face --


How this tongue --


May be soulder'd, --


May be vernish'd, --


May be charmed. --


I, -- any man can, let him tell us -- no; -- no man?


Not one word of comfort.


If not, for us, so cunningly betrayed
To these hard bargains; -- for our Country Maid.

Our virtuous City Dame, be pleased to show*
That you are pleased, --

Though we be hardly so,
These tricks thus put upon's.

And then, this -- Crack.


This -- withered Face -- here.


and my Gillians clack.


I Solder'd.


Vernisht.


Charmed.


Here you may please
To understand, that what's set down, for these
Is spoke for All: that by this part we mean,
All the whole Bulk, and Body of the Scoene
We have Presented: -- which -- or Ebbes, or Flows,
Or stands, or falls, -- withers, or sweetly grows
From the Aspects you give it: -- Let them be,
But gracious, we are yours.

And we.


And we.


The Scoene, London, and Edmonton.


