MAturity and age have now at length
Im posed on me a careful providence
Both for my Dukedoms safety, the good
Of our most hopeful Son Prince Prospero.

My Lord.

You grow to ripeness, and my thoughts are fixed
To have you troth-plight to some noble wife,
That in my aged years I may have comfort
In your fair issue, I would have you marry.

Marry my Lord!

I, marry Prospero.
I have laboured with a neighbour Prince, possessed
Of a fair Daughter, to confirm a match
'Twixt thee and her, and 'tis concluded firmly;
Her name Valentia, she his only child,
By which a settled League grows 'twixt our Dukedoms,
And thou by this art the true hopeful Heir
Of both out rich and wealthy Provinces:
Your answer.

I am free, my Lord, as the uncurbed air,
That comes not within limit, as the light
That nothing can imprison. Shall I truly
Speak my own thoughts, and not dissemble with you?
I that am free amongst men, and uncaptiv'd
To any, save the duty bound to you,
Am loath to make my self a woman's slave,
Briefly, my Lord, I have no mind to marry.

Not marry boy? Oh, knew thou what a sweetness
And harmonie's in loves blessed fellowship
Thou would embrace it gladly; this blessed union,
This true-loves knot the Gods themselves do tie,
And none but death dissolves. And what's Virginity?
A something-nothing, singularity
Unsociable, so slightly reckoned of
That either Sex, but to thy number grown,
Has a desire to leave it; be persuaded boy;
Thou hast beheld the Picture, and it promises
A perfect Lady; had thou seen the substance
Thou would condemn the workman for so scanting
Her rare comparelesse beauty. Marriage,
Why 'tis an honour, Emperors, Kings, and Princes,
From the Palace to the Cottage held it facred
And in a high religious reverence.

Well, my Lord, I will be steered by you;
Even through the turbulent Ocean of this life,
Where many dreadful tempests threaten us,
I shall be swai'd by you, and entertain
This sweet captivity,

Then art thou wise -- the news.

Ambassadors from Mantua crave admittance
Touching affairs of state.

Admit 'em --
Lords, your arrival is in happy season;
The marriage so long treated 'tween the Fathers
Shall by the Children be confirmed at length,
'Tis now on foot.

Your grace mistakes the tenor,
And the strange purpose our Embasie;
The Prince our Master lets know by us
That your alliance highly he disdains,
Contemns your love and near affinity,
And for just reasons, to himself best known,
Desires your opposition; for the marriage
Treated between you, esteems his Daughter
Much undervalued, and not rated truly
To her best worth.

Pause Lord Ambassador,
So high hath thy words incer s'd our spleen,
And set so just an edge upon our wrath
That we want patience to bestow an care
Unto thy harsh conclusion: Tell thy Lord,
We did not so much over-prize his love
As here his hate held in the basest scorn;
Nor can he so much undervalue us
As we his Contracts and Confederacy;
And for thy self-presumptuous Mantuan Lord,
We favour thee to let thee undisgrac'd
Depart our Court, be gone without reply,
Not Matuans, but Mantua we defy.

Let me conclude my Message.

Convey him hence;
Disdain our fellowship! Mantua shall know
His state shall lessen whilst our glories grow.

I, but, my Lord, I hope the match is not broke off
Between me and the fair Valentia.

Oh boy, did thou but know what marriage were,
How full of troubles and contentions,
Thou would forgo it gladly; who that's free
Would be confined to base Effeminacy?

But that which hath made in me the deepest impression
Is the rare Picture of the Lady Valentia.

The Painter flattered her, in having her
Thou hast a painted Mistress, of her self
The Lady is misshapen and deformed.

Nay, take me with you, my Lord,
I have beheld her Picture, and it promises
A perfect Lady; had I seen the substance
I should condemn the workman for so scanting
Her rare comparelesse beauty; these were your own words,
My Lord, or I much misunderstood them.

They were indeed, my Lord, I am witness to them.

Well since your Grace has no purpose to have me marry,
Shall I have your best furtherance to travel?

Yes, any thing to wear out the remembrance
Of Mantuas Daughter.

Another boon, my Lord.

What's that Coz?

That I may be his Partner in his travel, his associate
To bear him company, nothing else my Lord.

Have your desires.

I embrace your fellowship,
I'll travel, but whither? to have a sight of the fair Valentia,
There shall be the period of my Voyage;
What though her Father and mine be opposites, she and I
May happily agree well enough when we meet together.

My Lord, what limit shall we have to play the wandering Knights in? Or how long
shall it be ere we set forward on our Journey? We were best go well provided,
for we must see Spain, France, and England ere we return.


Some ten days hence you shall set forward,
Your stay hath a years limit.

Then come, fair Coz, we must provide our selves;
Her Picture's lovely, and it much contents,
And I must see the face that it presents.

Your youths cannot outstrip my gravity,
I have you boys, and aim at your intents;
This cunning suit for travel is a colour
To some close practice to deceive my age,
But I shall wind them both, Cosmo.

My Lord.

The manage of our State we leave to thee,
Whom we know wise and gravely provident;
Our purpose is to chase these travellers,
Whose voyage we mistrust.

'Tis dangerous
Unto your noble person, full of hazard
And doubtful peril.

I am confident,
Dissuade me not, for my intent is fixed;
In some suspectlesse shape I'll after them,
And sound the inmost of their thoughts, yet pass unknown;
Cosmo regard your charge whilst I provide.
To find that craft they with such cunning hide.

You have breathed defiance then.

I have my Lord.

And how did he receive it?

With such scorn
And proud contempt, that with far greater spleen
He threatened us than we could menace him.

No matter, this late difference pleases us,
You have demeaned your self even to our wish,
Now leave us to our private meditations.
Come hither Sir, I repose in thee
Much trust and much assured confidence,
I have brought thee up of a youth boy, I have.

You have if it shall please your Grace.

Thy Father was a good old servitor,
I loved him well, I did, indeed I did,
Believe it, for I did so.

I believe your Lordship without swearing.

Thou know my Daughter should have been affied
Unto Verona's Son Prince Prospero,
I know thou know it.

I have had, if it please your Grace, such an inkling,

But a difference since
Hath fallen betwixt us, nay, in such a manner
That by our Leagers we have threatened war,
And war is like to ensue to come to thee.

If it shall please your honour, I'll save you that labour and come to you.


Conceive me, I will come to that concerns thee,
Thou know how dearly I affect my Daughter,
I, and how dearly I affect my Gold,
Speak, did I ever yet part with one piece
To guerdon thee, a sign I loved it well.

No, never, if it shall please your honour, I'll do you right in that, you
everlov'd me too well to give me any thing, I have ever heard you reported for
as covetous and niggardly a noble Gentleman as ever bore sway here, you are one
of the most closse-fifted Carpenters that ever bare rule in Mantua.


To keep my Daughter that she marry not,
By which I like wise may reserve her dower,
I have devised this opposition
'T wean Valentia and Prince Prospero;
More Suitors are now resident in Court,
But to prevent them I'll devise a Tower
In which to shut my Daughter so impregnable
And full of doors, of which I'll keep the keys,
That she in vain shall strive to issue out,
Or they to enter in; this strong foundation
Is laid already, workmen are employed,
And all things promise prosperous success;
In this employment thou shalt have a charge,
An overseers place, because I know thee
Simple but sure of faith: we i trust thy reach,
As far from craft as cunning, truly honest
Because not over wise.

I must entreat your Lordship I may have a pair of Chopeens, or some high
Cork'd shoes, or else I shall never play the overseer well; or if your
Lordship will allow me but a Ladder, I warrant you I will oversee your workmen.


No more, there shall be order from our Treasury
To furnish this rich building --

Welcome Lords.

Our welcome would show better,
If we could hear it from the Ladies.

They come well that speed well, if we could find our selves well sped, then we
should not doubt to presume we were well-come.


Lord Julio, are the toils prepared and set for our appointed game.?


They are my Lord.

Then Princes we devote this day to pastime
And chasing of the Stag, these beauteous Ladies,
That must this day take leave of liberty,
Shall in our sport associate us; Valentia,
And you most beauteous, and my dearest Love,
I here protest my self your Guardian,
Hoping to see you, ere two months expire,
The Mantuan Duchess.

I hope no such matter; but my Lord,
Am I your Dear, as you proclaim me?

My dearest Dear.

Then being in the chase I shall fear in the hunting:
To come near you.

Your reason Sweet.

Left being your Dear you should strike me.

Still is this Lady cross to my designs,
But time may work her; Daughter, mount your Steed,
And Lords to horse* the morning grows upon us,
And steals towards midst of day.

We but attend
Your Highness company.

Lady, this day I will not start from your side.

You'll be worse to me than a stitch then.

Nor will I leave you Lady,

And yet you shall have free leave to leave me when you please.


We trifle hours, found out your bugles sh
And the thick air with pleasing echoes fill.

To ring thy knell, for this day thou art doomed
To perish by the hand of Iulio --
The Mantuan Prince
Is now upon the Chase, I hear the cry,
But ere the stagg fall the proud Duke must dye.

Hark what a shrill applause doth welcome us
Unto the Mantuan Confines.

It seems the Duke or some of his train
Are in the Forest chacing some game;
Nay, it must needs be so of necessity, they would not else make
This noise unless they were all horne-mad.

If I should come a wooing, noble Coz,
I should presage the Music of these horns
Might, to my future match, prove ominous;
But now let's mix our selves amidst the Train,
And see what fair adventure may befall us.

Sever our selves, it may be that sweet face
Your Father praised may meet us in the Chase.

I like well this division, come let's part,
And let's be henceforth strangers, thus conditioned,
The first that can prefer himself, or service
Unto the Duke, or gain his sovereign grace
Shall for his friend provide some eminent place.

I am pleased my Lord, then come let's mount away,
The morning's old, and we shall lose much day. Exeunt.

With these Italian tricks villains oft mask
Their grim bloud-thirsty fronts, and when they purpose
To act some horrid murder, if prevented,
Thus pass unknown, these bought I of a Jew,
A fellow that professes villain;
I'll dog the Duke, whom if I can but single,
Or light on from his Train, but thus, 'tis done,
The Dukedom seized, and fair Valentia won;
Auspicious hell I thank: thee, thou art still
True to black deeds, and friend to such as kill --

My horse hathfail'd me, and I forced on foot
To lag behind, my Train have left me all,
Led by the music of so fair a Cry,

To find a place where thou may fitly dye.

Who named death to me?

One whose powerful hand*
Shall guide thy Dukedom, Daughter, and thy Land,
And at one blow gain all --

And we so nigh,
The slave that threatened death himself shall dye.

Prevented.

Courage, my Lord, the traitorous groom is fled,
And you ingirt with safety.

Noble stranger,
The life thou hast given me shall be ever thine,
And thank the stars that brought thee to my rescue,
They owed thee a great fortune, thou hast saved
The Mantuan Duke from death.

Are you my Lord,
The noble Mantuan Prince? what Traitors hand
Durst threat your life?

I know not, gentle sir,
But for your self thus much presume from me,
You shall be ever ours, to none more dear,
By whom I am freed from treason, death and fear.

This way, my Lords, I saw the Duke in perils
An ugly slave, his face much Vizard-like.
Assailed the Duke, and with his weapon drawn
Fled through the Forest, I pursued the Traitor
Whilst I had breath, but fears and guilt of conscience
Gave his speed wings; but see my Lord's in safety,
Whose welfare I salute thus on my knee,
Glad in my soul that he from death is free.

My Father threatened I blessed be that fair hand
That wrought his safety.

Thank this Gentleman,
This noble youth, 'tis he by whom I live,
Never so near my death, never so near it,
So mortal men are still when least they fear it.

Oh do but tell me, thrice renowned sir,
How I may show me thankful to your love,
Whose noble hand preserved my fathers life.

Madam, your grace, your favour and good thoughts
Are gifts above my merit.

Stranger, thou haft won the opinion and suffrage of the whole Court, and
bound the Prince of Florence to be thy grateful debtor.


We made hast
To the Dukes rescue, but it was thy fate
Our valours to prevent, we came too late.

Yet did Lord Iulio, with what speed he might, haste us to this great danger.


'Twas my duty
And service to my Lord, whom thus to see
Secured from death glads, almost frantiques me;
Legs for my life I thank, and thou my brain
For making up this broken flaw again.

We thank you Iulio, chiefly you fair stranger,
Whom for your service we will raise in Court,
And breast next our most dear Valentia;
But she is for the Tower bared with twelve doors,
And this the last day of her liberty,
That's our next business; once more welcome sir,
Attend on us to Court, our happy fate
Hath given me safety, and advanced thy state.

Oh fair Valentia!

My Lord, if you had been born less than a Prince, yet you have wrought your
self into grace.


Here set a period to our travels, make a full point here.

And that, my Lord, is the full end of a sentence; but shall we give over
travel till we have seen something worth seeing.


Worth seeing sai'st thou? what's Valentia?
Travel from Pole to Pole, stand at the Center
And progress round about the spacious signs,
Or, were it possible, sit with the Sun
In his high noon* tide glory, and from thence
Survey the Kingdoms of this lower world,
Thou can not find her match, Apollo's hair
Is dull to hers, her fingers, hand, eye, front.

Take me with you my Lord: This marvellous thing you call her beauty, is it
ought but ordinary flesh and blood? Are those gold wiry hairs with which
Apollo might go string his Harp, are they ought but the plain hairs of her
head? Her Ivory palm, that doth in touching melt, embroidered with blew
artires, is it ought but a Ladies hand and fingers? And this strange thing,
this wonder of the world, whose peer cannot be found between the Poles, are
not all these nine wonders in one, she that was here even now, the Dukes
Daughter Valentia?


Oh my dear Montecelso, this I know,
But such an admiration hath surprised
The freedom of my senses, that it robs me
Of my true judgement.

Be advised by me* you love this Lady, but so strict is like to be her
imprisonment, that you may as easily pass by the gates that Cerberus keeps, as
through the doors of this Castle; you are already in favour with the Duke, do
but prefer me to be overseer of the work, if I do not* work it so that I
will bring you to oversee her, turn me out of my office as one not worthy the
name of an Architecture.


I shall commend thee for a man well skilled a such great structures, it may be
the Duke May trust me on my word.


And if I do not make him dote as much on you for your valour, as you make him
enamoured on me for my skill in building, may this Tower turn to the Tower of
Babel, and make a second confusion between us, there remains for you nothing
but this, to win the favour of the Lady; and for your access to her, if I do
not teach you to counterfeit all the Dukes keys, turn by all the wards of his
locks lay open all the Jurie of his twelve doors that he hath pannell'd
against your entrance, report me to be no man of my trade* Away my Lord* leave
this melancholy, walk by her window* and cast sheeps eyes that way towards
her Chamber, let me alone to stand Sentinel and watch if the Duke come*


Come on my masters, the Duke has appointed me to be Overseer of his works,
the building of this Tower is put to my indiscretion; therefore come every one
of you, and from me take your directions; what are you?


I am a free Mason, and expert in squaring stone.

A good proper square fellow, if your trade be in stone,
I make no question but you will work hard.

I warrant you sir I'll do my endeavour; will you give us directions?


First you must make a fair large post at the entry.

I warrant you I'll make a large porch that any Lady shall go in and out at
pleasure.


To see how you mistake; you must make it that no body can go in and out at
pleasure but only my Lady, it must be too wide for any that's less than she,
and too strait for any that's greater than she, you conceive me.

Oh sir, 'tis not possible.

Tell not me of possible, such directions I had, and such an one I must have
made* Then must I have fair bay windows that must always stand open and give
no light, that they that stand without and look in may see no body within, and
she that stands within and looks out may see no body without* the reason is, my
Lord means to keep his daughter in that Tower, where she must neither see nor
be seen.


Then none must offer to look out from the inside, nor in from the outside,
else 'tis not within the compass of workmanship.


Tell not me of workmanship, such windows I must have made: Now Carpenter for
you, you must make the doors of that fashion that women may go in but men may
not, and they must be of such wood as will not let a Lover come near it, for
my Lord will have no Lovers come near his Castle.


Then you must have some body to keep them out; here are wise directions!


For you goodman Padlock, you must hammer out your Locks and Keys with such
Art, that if the Duke, or any from him, offer to open, the Key may turn at
pleasure, but if any Lover or suspicious person come to enter, Nonsum, non
possum, non Licet esse Domi.


That's as much as to say, they must have no entrance there.


Smith, you have hit the nail on the head; What's your place?


I have the charge of the brick-worke, and must build the Chimneys if you would
give me directions.


Marry will I sir, you must have a special regard in your Chimneys that they
cast heat, though there be no fire in them, and the Kitchen Chimney especially
must every meal yield roast meat without sending to market, and so to work for
a spurt, and after merrily to dinner.


A good motion.

HAve you given charge, Lord Iulio, that my Duchess
Be nobly served as her whom Mantua loves?

I have my Lord.

And that Valentia be enclosed and shut
From all her suitors eyes.

I gave such order.

Enough now my Lords.

You give us fair words; but keep us from the sight of the fair Ladies.


Soft and fair, soft and fair.

We know they are both soft and fair, and that's the reason we desire so much
both to see and feel them.


I would beneath the ground sells of this Castle,
By Miners craft, were placed some strong Petars,
To which I would give fire and blow this structure
Up into air that prisons thus my Love;
But Iulio peace, and some advantage wait
To show to her thy love, to him thy hate.

My Lord, I can compare you to none so rightly as to the King Aerifius, that
shut up his Daughter Danae in a brazen Tower, but you know the end of it, there
was a Jupiter that with a golden pick-lock broke through those brazen gates,
and made the maid a mother. Now if

I were to choose a godhead, of all the gods that are
Would I, for her sake, wish to be a Jupiter.

For men to be made gods it were a wonder,
You Jove, and neither have his power nor thunder?

Shall I bail her my Lord? I'll put you in good security.

But not in better security than I have put her in already,
Yet better would do well; oh for a man
Skilful in Architecture, and composing
Strong frames and forms of building.

Now's my question;
My Lord, there is a stranger in your Court
Whose outside though it promise not much Art,
Yet is he so ingenious, and so apt,
Of such opinion and direction too,
That could you win him to be so employed,
As we shall hardly, for men excellent
Are curious of their skill, you cannot find
A man to match his skill in Italy.

Thou were I see, fair Knight, marked in thy Cradle
To do me all good offices, bring that man
To my employment, I will guerdon him
With more than he can ask.

I, but my Lord,
He is a man always so absolute,
And stands so much upon his excellence
In fine contriving and rare edifices
We shall have much ado to win him to it --
Here comes the man.

Sir, your due praise hath, like a harbinger,
Gone all the way before you to provide you
A place in my regard, you are most welcome,
You have not seen my Castle?

Yes my Lord, I have perused it.

What think you of the work?

'Tis pretty, pretty;
'Tis well for modern builders, homebred workmen,
'Twill serve: Yet let me tell you, worthy Lord,
They never looked on high Mauselus Tomb,
Never beheld a Grecian Pyramid,
Rich Crassus house at Rome, Diana's Temple
At Ephesus, nor the grand City Caire,
'Tis well for them that are no travellers;
Saw you me draw a form, or a fine model,
The Fabric greatly would enamour you,
But yet 'tis well enough, pretty, not famous*

Shall I entreat you to direct my workmen,
And I will weigh your pains down with reward.

Your Tower as 'tis, my Lord, will serve the turn,
Is finely seated, and to keep your Daughter
Close from the eyes of strangers, well contrived,
Yet could I by a plot, but why should I
Engage me in such work? 'tis well already,
Well, very well.

You can contrive it better, noble stranger;
Make trial of my bounty, by mine honour
It shall not fail your hopes.

Did not I tell you at the first, my Lord,
He would be wondrous dainty of his cunning?

So most men are in things they best excel;
Shall I prevail fair sir?

Well, I am won
To end that frame your workmen have begun;
I have perused the situation,
Find it secure and full of able trust,
Yet one defect I find: Could you pick out
Some noble Knight, whose valour did exceed,
To build for him a Lodging near that Tower
Where fair Valentia is to live enclosed,
He, as a Guardian, or a Sentinel,
Might keep continual watch, defend the passage,
And keep the place strong and impregnable?

Where should I find a man worthy that place,
Whose valour might supply this my employment?

Let me engage my person to that business.

Accept of me my Lord, I'll be her Guardian.

Let the Ferrara Marquess be employed
In this adventure.

List to me my Lord:
Amongst other quests, once as I travelled Greece,
There, at the sack of a most famous town,
I saw a Knight, now resident in Court,
Do such high deeds of Arms, that living Hector,
Had he survived to see his Chivalry,
Would from the Worthies nine have raised his name,
To have eternized him with golden fame.

In our Court resident?

Yes, that strange Knight,
What wonders have I seen him do in fight!
Would he attempt it, all the plot were sure,
Your Self, your Daughter, and your Tower secure;
But you shall hardly win him to attempt.

That he is valiant I must needs confess
To my lives safeguard I have proved no less;
Oh every way my friend; renowned Soldier,
Pardon me that I have not done you honours
Worthy your high deserts.

Alas my Lord.

My cares are deaf unto excuse, and shut
Against all denial.

I am exceeding loath.

I shall deserve it, noble Gentleman,
I must not be denied, this skilful stranger
Shall cause my workmen build you a fair Lodging
Next to the Castle, and adjoining close
Unto my Daughters Chamber: this is all;
Can you deny me this?

Your former honours
Bestowed so largely on my mean deserts
Have been with me prevailing Orators
Upon your part, and I at length agree
This skilful Artist shall dispose of me.

Again prevented.

On all sides happy, fortunate, and blessed,
Now my disturbed thoughts attain true rest,
Only one bar unto my best desires
Is the entire affection and true zeal
I bear the beauteous Duchess.

Oh my Lord,
You have entertained the most affecting wooer
In Europe, or the world, therein he's better
Than in his Architecture, he's but young,
Yet Tully ne'er had such a fluent tongue.

Hemmed in with all felicities about,
Having these helps what need I now misdoubt?
You shall sir bear from me most kind commends.

Who, I my Lord? Alas.

Come sir, you shall
Unto the beauteous Duchess whom I love.

You do not know my weakness.

You are strong
In your acute words, and praised for your sweet tongue,
A token I will send by you, that give her,
And in your own sweet words my love deliver.

If need's I'll do it my Lord: upon my life
The provident Duke has found me out a wife.

Follow us Lords, I am full of jocund mirth,
My fears are dead, my joys receive new birth.

Now Prince, was not this wrought out of Adamant?

But what's the mark that all the several arrows shoot at?

This is the mark* mark it, I am made chief overseer of the work, and your
Lodging is directly against the Chamber of the Lady: Now will I appoint a
private door to be made through the wall, by and through which you may have
access, ingress and regress at your pleasure.


Thou hast builded in my heart a Tower already
Of steady and firm hope.

Take my word I am excellent at Architecture.

But touching thy employment with the Duchess,
Art thou so mad to woo her for the Duke?

Yes, I will set him out in his lively colours, deal you as soundly with the
maid as I will work with the widow, and I doubt not but we shall both live to
be in the belief there are no Cuekolds but Batchelours, our stay is
suspicious, be it your charge to hire --

A workman to make the private door through the wall,
And leave it to my wit to cover all.

That be my care*
Thou wooest a widow, but I court a maid,
The way thou tread is easy, broad, and free,
But mine is strait, and danger ushers me.

No marvel though Jove often went disguised,
And in his rural habit traced the earth
To hear and see the affairs of mortal men.
I being a Prince have in these lowly weeds
Seen more than being refident in Court;
But I am now in Mantua, and thus far
I have pursued my Son by common tract;
The Duke and I are dangerously opposed,
And therefore this disguise must shelter me;
The Mantuan Court I'll now search ere I go
For Montecelso and my princely Son --

Let me see, let me see, make a door so broad, I, so broad, and thus wide; now
unless I had the Lady here to take measure of her 'tis impossible that ever I
should make the door fit* if a man take a thing in hand, it is for his credit
to do it workman like; now if I should make the door too straight to pinch
her body, or too wide to sit upon her like a sack, what credit should I have by
my workmanship?


Heaven save you sir.

Et tu quoque my friend; let me see, let me see, now have I forgotten whether
the door must be made for her to come thus, with her arms broad ways,
Pilcher-fashion, and a kembo; or thus side-waies, like a shotten herring.


Sir, without interruption to your business, shall I entreat a few words with
you.


Hold here, hold here a little, thus high, I, thus high, just thus high; but
now my friend, if I should make it just thus high according to my measure, and
then the party being yet but young should grow higher, there were all the
labour cast away* come, come, I must have a new measure.


Sir, what means this? I understand it not*
Pray let me ask you but one question.

Hold again, hold again, say my friend I make it of this breadth according to
my measure, just to a hair; very good my friend, but now the party being yet
but lean that it should be made for, say the party hereafter grow fat, or as
the Fox that when his belly was empty crept through a small hole into a
henroost, and there filled his belly so full, that when he should come out
again, there was no room; Colon was grown so great, and so poor Reynald was
taken in the manner, no, my friend, this must not be.


I pray sir to what end take you this measure?

Why, my friend, because I would do nothing out of measure, I hope you have not
plaid the old caves dropper.


No sir, but if your chief affairs be ended,
Let me discourse with you.

My friend, as you have lent a hand to my Line, so will I lend an care to your
tale.


What's the best news in Court?

Troth sir nothing but this, that the Prince is magnanimous, the Courtiers
egregious, the Ladies beauteous, the place conspicuous, and the building in
hand most sumptuous.


What strangers so journe there, what men of note?

Troth sir there are only two, one is most brave at models and buildings, and
hath undertaken a most brave piece of work.


That's not my Son, he never studied that,
No, not his friend.

But there is another, the finest sweet-fac'd Gentleman, that saved the Dukes
life in the Forest, if you know not that you know nothing, if you know not him
you know no body.


What manner of man is he?

A most dainty man, much of my size, he hath a most leering lip and tempting
eye, there is only this difference between us, for you would take us to be
brothers, but that he has more hair than I, and I more wit than he; Father,
you are not worthy to be held a good Subject, if you love not him that had like
to have killed him that would have killed the Duke, he hath set me about this
piece of work here, let me see, this blockhead of mine will never bring it to
any purpose -- Ent. Prosp. Oh here comes the Gentleman.


He interpose himself and save the Duke*
That look, that face, that gesture is my Sons.

Oh well encountered, tell me honest fellow,
Hast thou dispatch'd the close and secret door?

Not yet my Lord.

What dost thou with that Line?

I am staying here, that if she should come down this way,
I may take measure of her to make the door fit for her body.

Away you ass, thou wilt betray my purpose;
But sirrah on your life use seeresie,
And with all speed dispatch it; but what's he?

A Fellow that wonders so young a Gentleman as your self should take the Dukes
quarrel in hand, and save him from the sword of a Traitor.


'Tis Prospero my Son, shape, gate, and voice,
To hear his valour praised how I rejoice,

This fellow at a blush looks like my Father,
Such settled gravity lives in his eye;
Nor is there wanting ought save power and state,
Attended with the royal name of Duke
To make him the same man; but I digress;
Come to your private task, sirrah be secret,
Or thy life pays for it.

I warrant you sir, I would be as loath to hazard my neck as you the Dukes
favour, his favour once lost may be got again, but my neck once broke, I'll not
trust all the bone-setters in Mantua to have it new set; fear not me.


This aged man is still tossed in my thoughts,
And ever as I cast a look on him,
His face grows more familiar with my eye;
But to our task in hand, why do we stay?
His cloth of state cannot be turned to gray.

Is this your travel Son? Oh heaven to see
The follies and the vain delights of youth,
How headstrong, and how full of violence!
Why should he take this way? why sojourn here
Within my enemies Court? If to revenge
My Injuries, why did he rescue him?
Oh mine own Boy!
I must commend thee yet that could'it win love
Even of thy enemies, and honoured fame
Amongst those, that if they knew thee, hate thy name;
I'll listen further till some fate bewray
The full intent of his enforced stay.

My Daughter is securely closed and shut
In my new Turret, and the noble Knight,
As her bold guardian, hath his place assigned,
Those fears have end; now to my suit in hand,
The stranger whom so late I entertained
Is my solicitor, and is directed
To meet and court the Duchess in the garden,
Where from this place I may behold their gestures,
The manner of his courtship and conceit:
How is my heart disturbed 'tween hope and fear --
Comfort cold spirit, they now methinks appear.

The greatest instance of my love is, that I have given into your hands my
liberty and life; my name is Montecelso, and that noble Gentleman that rescued
the Duke Prince Prospero, Son to the Duke of Verona, it lies in you either to
save me alone, or to destroy us both; give me no denial, sweet Lady, rather
kill me than disclose me to the Duke, so shall you lessen the supposition of
your cruelty.


In that you are a stranger, I can no less in courtesy, nor more in modesty
than to say you are welcome, though I have been trusted by many, I never
betrayed any; I could call you rash to trust so rich a Jewel as your life unto
the breast of a woman, but though you be so over-bold to presume upon me, I will
not prove so over cruel to tyrannize over you.


She talked a great long tale, and loud she spake,

To her again, do not that answer take.

Madam, by all the honours of a Gentleman, my love is as pure to you, and as
free from blemish as is the element of fire, or the white robe of Innocence.


I know it is, I know it is.

All the comfort I can give you is this, the life you have committed to me
shall be kept for you, the love you have proffered to me I will ponder on, I
will never marry till you are bestowed, nor ever assume the name of wife till
you meet with a Lady to call you husband.


Give me your hand of that.

I may well trust you with my hand that have trusted me with your heart.


A match I hope, for see, they now join hands,
My heart for joy upon the tiptoe stands;
Follow it now, strike whilst the Iron's hot,
I ne'er was pleased till now with a fine plot.

But you forget in all this to speak for the Duke.

Madam, 'tis true, I did forget my self, I must entreat you to think of him,
but I do not entreat you to think well of him, as ill as you can possible; I
beseech you love to be out of his sight in any case, and to love him best when
he is farthest off: I would have you in all humility to honour him, but I would
not for a world have you to marry him; have I yet spoke for him sufficiently?


Good, good, well spoken, and well acted too,
He is not half so good to plot as woo.

My Lord, the love we now celebrate betwixt our selves should once have been
solemnised between our parents, before these odds grew between the two Dukes.


Though the Dukes be at odds, let us make even,
Contracts are made on earth, but sealed in heaven;
Madam, let the Dukes love be the colour to our meeting: I must go tell him the
manner, for with much longing he expects my return.
Once more let these our hands our hearts make sure,
So thrive I as my love is chaste and pure.

Again, again, fair fortune be thy speed,
Once more join hands, and then 'tis done indeed;
I knew the good Knight would not choose a man
That should not fit my purpose, heaven I pray.
His place may take effect the other way,
And his intents as prosperously proceed;
But I must hence to meet him with all speed.

You wrong mine honour, and I shall complain,
I charge you get you back the way you came.

Banish ^he heaven if you exile me hence;
My deed, though it seem rash, yet is begot
In as pure birth as truth, and as upright
As is the scale of Justice; I am free
From all mis-thoughts, then do not banish me.

What are you sir? whence are you? what's your name?

I am your friend, should you desire to know
What my name is, alas my name's your foe.

Being my friend, and court me in this kind
You should have come and left your name behind.

I should indeed, my name is Prospero.

Prince Prospero, and the Duke Verona's Son, Our professed Foe?


Give me some other name,
Call me your friend and I am not the same.

You're not the same, you are the advent'rous Knight
That from the forrest-treason saved my Father.

I was Prince Prospero when I resen'd him,
And so continued till I saw your face;
But as my heart within your eye was tossed,
At once my hatred and my name I lost.

It was a kind foes part to save a foe.

That kind foes part performed Prince Prospero

Such a fair foe that no more hurt intends
I should prefer before a many friends.

Lady, we should have been elpous'd together,
But that our Fathers differed in the Dower;
Shall Gold divorce them whom the soul of love
Links in an endless knot? I for your love
First hazarded my life to come disguised
Only to view your face, next I contrived
This private passage, known to none but us;
If this deserve no love, no friendly grace,
Confine my life if banish me this place.

If nothing but the rescue of my Father
Should plead in your behalf; it deserved favour;
But when your travel, and your servant love,
Attended with year feature and rare parts,
Your studious means to compass my consent
And hazard of your fortunes many ways,
When all these plead together forciblie
They draw me in a treble folded chain
Your zealous love to pay with love again.

I left my name behind me at Verona,
And now no more Prince Prospero but your Love;
Wear this for me, and use in these affairs
My art, fear not, I will devise a means
To win your Fathers grant unto this match.

So we, my Lord, shall doubly be made friends,
I take it as an earnest of your love,
And hope of my release from this strict bondage;
Accept of me in interchange this Ring,
My Father gave it me, keep't from his eye,
Or he will end our loves by jealousy --

As I have been, I will be firm and sure,
Long may the date of our chaste love endure --

I prithee, sweet Marquess, since my success is so bad with the Duchess
let's walk by the Dukes new edifice, and see if we can take a view of the
young enclosed Lady.


Content my Lord, the Dukes strictness adds but spurs to my desire; for
commonly what we are most forbid that still we most covet.


Then should you with some engine raze these walls
That interdicts your passage to that Tower;
Had I such power I should enjoy such thoughts,
But Iulio is a Subject.

Now you put me in mind of such generous and noble thoughts, let's take a view
of the Castle, and spy where it is weakest, that there, if hereafter we should
invade, we may give the best and safest assault.


Now you speak like a politics Lover, come lets take a view of the building:
But see, see, do you know him that's talking with the Princess Valentia?


Is't possible, I'll in and tell the Duke.

Nay, leave me not behind, I'll second you.

Intreth Lad art good at that? you are a notable rascal, can you come to it
So closely? is this your courage my courageous Knight?
I'll see how Mantua applauda this fight.

We are descried my Lord, then post away,
Get through the private door.

Fear not sweet Lady, I'll so blind their eyes,
That we will still live free from their surprise.

Ten thousand times adieu, I am full of fear;
Where love inhabits danger still draws near.

ALL is too good to be true, but tell me,
And answer every word upon thy oath.

Upon my oath I will.

Then tell me, tell me,
Did thou with all thy best prevailing words,
With all thy art, with all thy eloquence
Urge her to love? speak that upon thy oath.

Upon my oath I did entreat her love:
With all my art, with all my eloquence.

And did she grant thy suit?

She did my Lord.

Thou honest man, thrice happy be the houte
That I first met thee; now upon thy life
Tell me how speed'st thou?

Well upon my life.

And will she love?

She will.

Thou hast her promise

I have my Lord.

But hast thou, as thou art a Gentleman

As I am a Gentleman I have my Lord,
I should be sorry else.

Did thy word prosper, took thy suit effect*
Will she be won to marry at thy motion?
And did she give her hand unto the bargain.

My suit and words were both effectual,
She's won to marry, and I have her hand
As witness to the bargain.

Friend, swear that.

Upon my life, my Lord, it is most true.

'Tis well, I thank my stars.

I thank my stars too.

I thank thee too, but for thy industry
This thing had never chanced.

Nay, that's most certain,
Had I not took my time and plied it thoroughly,
I had never won her heart.

But thou hast won it.

I, I thank heaven my Lord.

And I thank heaven my Lord.

She hath past her word and her firm promise to me.

It glads me at the heart, the very heart.

Nor have I reason to be sorry for it.

Once more I thank thee friend.

'Tis not so much worth my Lord.

That be my peril, I'll 'bide the venture.

You are like to do that howsoever.

There's gold, gramerey friend, I am thy debtor;
This is but the earnest of those rich rewards
Thou shalt receive from me.

I thank your grace,
And I protest I would not for a million
My labours had been fruitless, trust upon it,
The greatest aim of all my suit is won,
Her heart, her hand, her free consent is won
To match with me.

I thank my fate 'tis so;
But now about my other business friend,
To look unto my works; blessed be the hour
I met thee first, but all is in heavens power.
An honest and a faithful Gentleman
Upon my warrant, and I dare rely
Upon his trust and certain honesty --

My Lord, you are wronged.

Disparaged.

And disgraced.

I bring thee news, thy Castle is surprised,

Thy Fort is taken.

And your Daughter seized.

How may that be Lords? 'tis not possible.

I speak no more, my Lord, than what I saw.

What I beheld.

And what these eyes have seen.

That stranger Knight, in whom thom most aff^st.
I saw in a bay window court thy daughter.

Emrbace her in his arms, and elaspe her waste.

She darting smiles at him, and the other.

Nor did they blush, change face, or cease their Courtship, but stood as at the
gaze.

Iulie, and Lords,
You make me smile; have you so late perused
The situation, and observed the passages,
And can you judge wit or the art of man
Can force access there and not use my keys?
Tush, you deceive your selves --
Ha ha, ha, come hither Knight and laugh with me
At their three follies, they would needs persuade me
They saw thee court my Daughter in her Chamber,
Where thou did publicly discourse thy fill,
And yet these keys here at my girdle still.

They did me the more wrong; I scale your Tower*
It lies not in the reach of humane power.

I know it well, tush, while these (...) here
Were she fair Danae I not Jove would fear.

You Tower is stronger the Aerifius hold.
Besides, I am not Jove to rain down gold.

Is't possible my eyes should deceive me!

Sure 'twas he, or the devil in's likeness.

There's in this some witchcraft.

You might as well say that you see this hand
Reaching as high as unto yonder clouds.

I should have seen that Ring upon that hand
Once in my Daughters Chamber; oh my heart
Why dost thou make such traffic with pale fear?

He hath spied the gift, and knows the Ring I wear.

The same, the same, I will in and see
The issue of my fears, twelve locks, twelve keys,
And every door too double-barr'd with Iron,
She in the inmost rome walled round about,
It cannot be, and yet the Ring I saw
Urges my fears, and forces me withdraw.

I know your, (...) and must your speed prevent,
But I delay; 'tis high time I were gone,
Twelve doors the Duke must pass, and I but one.

Shall I not trust my eyes?

Though mine should fail me I would witness yours.

It makes me past my thoughts.

There's some strange juggling could we find it out;
In all his acts your stranger let us trace,
And if we can, work him some deep disgrace.

What hast thou done Valentia, given thy heart
Unto a stranger, and thy Fathers foe?
I wrong the Prince, who with a heart entire
Pursues my spousal love with chaste desire;
This match successfully begun may move
Our Fathers hard hearts to a League of love --

Wonder not Madam at my serious haste,
Your Father on my finger spied the Ring,
And knowing it, is gone by the known way,
Mark you may hear the doors.

Oh my sweet friend,
Haste through the hidden way, leave it to me
To excuse it, and retort his jealousy.

Adieu sweet Lady,
Hark, hark the last door.

Deceit hath eyes behind, seems blind before --

What so sad Daughter?

Not sad but solitary.

I see no private passage, and my doors
Rank in their wonted order; prithee Daughter
Show me the Diamond I gave thee last.

The Ring my Lord?

I the Ring.

Why, would your highness use it?

She moves a doubt,
I fear there's guile, and I must find it out.

This is the Ring you mean:

I, 'tis the same;
Oh my own Girl, sie my suspicious thoughts
That you should lead me to these jealous fears,
But Rings may be alike; my Dear, farewell,
Thou shalt not long in this close prison d well.

So Prospero hath promised, and I'll rather
Trust him than you, although you be my Father.

I have observed sir in your troubled looks
Much discontentment, you seem in your appearance
To be some man of high and eminent place
With the great Mantuan Duke.

What's that to thee?

Not much sir, yet out of a genetous spirit
In Pilgrims bred, such as I am professed,
I would some cordial counsels willingly
Bestow upon you, did I know your griefs.

I have in me a natural melancholy;
I have long aimed at greatness, but between me
And that high point two strangers stand opposed;
Can play the skilful Surgeon?

Sir I can.
Travel hath taught me much, and though now poor,
Yet in my better days I have conversed
In Courts of Princes; would you grace me then
But to prefer my service to the Duke,
I would not doubt but to remove those objects
That so offend your eyes; what are those strangers?

The one a young Knight that professes Arms:
The other Architecture, both are frequent
In the Dukes ear, and I, that in times past
Had all his bosom and his private thoughts,
Scarce now remember how his Chambers hang,
So seldome's my admittance.

Had you so much interest
In his past favours as to make my tongue
Free to his ear I would remove those flatterers,
And plant you in your first deserved grace;
But might I see these Gallants --

Here they come;
The one I take to be a Conjurer,
The other his Familiar that he works with,
I'll show thee reasons for it.

Observe them sir.

'Tis true my Lord, this night the Duchess lies in the Castle with the Lady
Valentia, 'tis by the Dukes appointment, because she may be a comfortable kind
Companion to his Daughter; now this night I have cast it so, that we will be
merry with them till past midnight.

But are the Ladies pleased it shall be so?

The bargain's made and sealed firm with a kiss,
I set it fast upon the Duchess lips;
But come let's part till the appointed hour,
We must not be seen too familiar together.

Thou art my better Genius, I agree:
I have no good but what I reap from thee.
Mo. Farewell my Lord, only take heed of eare-droppers. Ex.

Did you hear that my Lord?

Yes, and it strikes cold unto my heart;
Must they this night meet in Valentia's Tower)
The Devil hath made them picklocks.

Patience sir.

Bid me be frantic, rather rail and curse; at midnight must they meet?
Enough, at that fixed hour I'll rouse the Duke,
And put the Court in uproar, with his Guard
'Siege round the Tower, and take these Incubus
Amidst their lascivious pastimes.

Hear me sir.

I am deaf to counsel, patience, grace and all,
Till in their midnight rapes these strangers fall.

Oh were I now girt with a potent host
Of mine own people, and my self in Arms
Engaged unto his rescue, I could then
Assure me of my noble Son again;
But I now fear his fall and ominous end,
Whose help bove men to heaven I must commend;
Yet I'll not hence, but note what shall ensue,
Heaven hear my prayers, thou art to just men true.

Madam, this night devote your self to mirth, whilst your Father sleeps secure
in his Palace, Montecelso hath promised to keep his widow waking; I assure
you Prince Prospero will be here too instantly.


He cannot come unlooked for, nor unwished,
So long as their intents are honourable,
So long their welcome is unquestionable.

Troth Madam we have exceedingly forgot our selves, we should have had a
banquet to have entertained them.


Methinkes 'tis better as 'tis without, for the time, that should have been
spent in sweet-meats to taste the Palate, shall be now spent in sweet discourse
to relish the care.


Fie, how long they stay, this hour is as long as three hours: I have
observed one thing in Lovers hours, the time of their absence seems hugely
too long, and the time when they are present is three to one too short.


And three to one is ods, but you are an old woman.

That makes me long so much for a husband to make me even; what not yet come,
nor yet? if they stay a little longer, I shall go near to swoon thrice before
they be ready to enter.


No entrance if you love me.

Yes at the private door --

Madam.

Lady.

Imagine this night to be Saint Valentines day, when every bird chooses her
mate, for that is the season when they couple; I am here.


And I here.

And I am glad, my Lord, that you are here; yet I would be loath, my Lord, have
my Father know that you are so.


That I am so seated, and you upon my knee.

Upon my knees I beg that it may never come to his care.

Come, what shall's do?

Say what you will my Lord, but do nothing I entreat you.

If we should do nothing, of that must necessary come ill, I'll prove it too; of
doing nothing comes Idleness, of idleness comes no goodness, of no goodness
necessary comes ill: therefore if we do nothing, of necessity we must do ill.


How well, my Lord, you can infer ill; but, my Lord, if you should insist much
in this argument, it were more to express your oratory than honesty; but my
Lord, I know your virtues, and the opinion of them hath prepared you a most
kind and loving welcome; we have nothing to entertain you but words, and we
can feast you with nothing but kisses; now you see your fare, fall to and
welcome.


Madam, I could everlastingly feed here, and yet presume never to surfeit, I
can but thank you, and now I have given thanks, I'll even make bold to fall
to.


You say you could find in your heart to offend my father.

I madam, so for my offence he would everlastingly confine me to this prison;
why smile you Lady?


To think if my father should steal upon you, and find you here, what a
cunning picklock he would take you for, he would questionless think you
carried a false key about you.


Tush, he hath made a Jury of twelve doors already to pass upon my cause, and
they have all given my case up not guilty --


Where's the Dukes Guard?

Begirt the Castle round.

Her windows shine with lights like blazing stars.

They are in her Chamber sure.

Heard you that Madam?

We are betrayed.

The Castle round beset.

And hark, above I hear the Dukes keys, down the private way, and leave the
excuse to us.


Nay, when my Lords?

This way my Lord, good night.

Nay, stand not now on trivial Complements,
The Duke's at hand.

Farewell, Ladies adieu.

Nay, if you love us leave us; Madam, how shall we answer this to the Duke?


Now my apron strings if I had one on, Madam take your Chair and counterfeit
your self fast asleep, so will I, not a word now if you love me.


Thy very words are better to me than a Physical potion, for they have cast me
into a sound sleep already; see I am fast --


Soft, make no noise, the Chamber's whist and still,
There's not so much air stirring as would make
The trembling Aspen shake; ha, fast asleep?
Search round the Chamber.

I find no man here.

Here's nought but walls and Arras, and two Ladies
In depth of sleep.

Let's wake them my Lord and question them.

Not for thy head that hast deluded us,
And to this shame and mockery raised the Court,
Would I disturb them of a minutes rest;
Thy envy unto such as we have raised
For their desert in Court hath stretched it self
Even to our high disturbance.

Hell and the furies,
Am I again deluded?

Fie Lord Iulio,
To call us in a mockery from our beds!

Here to hunt shadows, sure the fellow dreamt.

Pray my Lord wake them, and resolve them how Lord Iulio hath possessed you.


Pardon me,
They both are charmed in silence, and their senses
Confused in innocent dreams; I oft have heard
That what a man or woman waking thinks,
If they be questioned in their depth of rest
Their Genius or their soul will answer for them,
As their affections or their hearts inclined;
Of this I'll make a true and prosperous use,
And sound them how their humours are disposed,
And to my Daughter first, Lords stand apart,
How sweetly doth my Girl become her rest!
How sound are her suspites! Valentia.

My Lord.

She answers me, now art thou happy Mantua,
For thou shalt sound the utmost of her thoughts;
Whom doth my Daughter most affect on earth?

I love none but my Father.

Oh mine own girl, and would thou not have a husband?

I'll live and dye a maid.

There's no deceit in this, there's no dissembling,
She cannot study for evasive shifts,
I thank heaven I am resolved: now Duchess
Your turn is next, I'll try how she likes me,
What thinks the Duchess of the Mantuan Duke?

As of a fine grave noble Gentleman.

Now she speaks her heart, this is plain dealing;
And could thou be content to marry him?

That's my desire.

And live his noble Duchess.

I wish no better.

Mine own;
Most sweetly may you sleep, and nightly dream
Of these positions, not for half my Dukedom
Would I disturb their quiet; come let's leave them,
Nay pardon me, I'll see the Chamber cleared.

Could I be possibly thus mocked?

Nay Gentlemen,
I'll be the Porter, see I keep the keys
Of these two Jewels that I most esteem;
Iulio, beware hereafter you incur not
Our wrath by these suggestions of untruths;
Come Lords to bed, I counsel you the best,
Goodnight my girls, and sweetly may you rest.

Are they gone wench?

I, and so gone that till they have slept soundly, 'tis not possible to fetch
them again.


Now Endymions fortune upon them, that being once asleep they may not wake
again this forty years.


Was it not well apprehended of me to say I loved none but my Father?


And was it not as well seconded of me to say in my sleep I loved none but the
Duke? Sure it must be in my sleep if ever I loved him, for yet I could never
endure him waking; but what shall's do?


By my counsel let us even go to bed like loving bedfellows, and see if we can
dream of them that in time may become our loving bedfellows.


With all my heart, now the Duke is confident of our affections, we may be the
freer in the entertaining of those whom we best affect; come, come, let's leave
talking of this counterfeit sleep, and see if we can take a nap in sadness.


content, and let all men learn thus much from us, that sleeping or waking
'tis hard to o're-reach a woman.


Yet all things go currant; if the Ladies were as nimble in their excuse as we
were quick in our passage through the private door, I hope neither the Duke
nor any of his Court can any way trace us in our proceedings; some Lovers would
think me a most happy creature to enjoy the love of so beautiful a Lady, and
for ought I know I may be so; but I have made a Vow never to marry a wife, but
first to make some perfect and sound trial of her affection towards me; but
because there is no woman that loves a man living, but she will infinitely
lament him dead, it shall be thought that I have drowned my self, of which I
will give the Court some assured instance, and afterwards living hereabouts in
some odd disguise, I shall truly understand how she takes my death; if in any
extremity of grief, I will revive her with as great a surplusage of joy; but
if she take it coldly, as a business that little concerns her, I'll leave her
to the mercy of him that bids fairest for her; and to my plot, I stay but for
some company that may see me throw my self desperately into the River, hear
my passion and report it --


My work and every thing belonging to the Dukes building being brought to some
good pass, I will study how to pass the time, and for the better recreation of
my duller spirits take a turn or two here by the Rivers side to contemplate of
the beauty of my Mistress; for indeed I am lately fallen in love.


No fitter man in the world to be the reporter of my death than this Coxcomb.


Upon a morning when I rose to breakfast like a glutton,
I don'd my doublet and my hose, and eat two legs of Mutton;
Her bonny looks forget I not, nor teeth as white as amber,
Her face did shine like pewter-pot belonging to the Chamber;
My lovely Mistress I espi'd as she a milking went a,
But oh me thought at every stride her smock that she had rent a;
Full pale she looked, for on her head a milk-paile was well placed,
Her lips were white, her brows were red, her body was straitelaced;
But shall I now describe her legs, for I durst look no higher,
She went as if she trod on eggs most softly through the mire.

Now to my passion.

But oh a place besides all these above both knees and thighs a,
Which spring, as she looked for fleas, did make my stomach rise a.

Let Jove threat thunder, or bright Juno scold,
Mars threaten Arms, armed in Cyclopian steel,
He to my heels clap Boreas brazen wings,
Or mounted on the back of Mercury
With greater terror scale the Olimpick heaven,
Then when the Giants mustered here on earth,
And darted mountain tops at Jupiter.

What mad fellow's this? he hath driven me quite out of my meditations, pray
heaven I fall not into his fegaries.


But oh my beauteous Duchess, cause of this
My frenzy, lunacy, rage, and despair,
I love thee dearly; yet because my fervor
Shall no way cross the noble Mantuan Duke,
I am resolved to dye.

Of all the trades that are I love not this dying, poor Gentleman, would the
Duke knew as much; but if love put a man into these perplexities, I'll take heed
how I meddle with it, I'll even shake hands with it, and part with it as it
came.


Whom do I see, the Duke of Mantua's Joy,
She whose bright beauty enamours Jove himself,
And makes him from his crystal throne descend
To 'bide with this fair mortal, thou art she.

Not I I assure you, I am a man and no woman, if you will not believe me, I
have a warrant about me to show.


Come, thou art she, wilt thou dissemble love?

I am not she, look here I have a beard.

'Tis but the periwig fallen from thy temples,
And stays upon thy Chin, thou art my Duchess;
But stay, I'll place this border right again,
And set it on thy front where it should stand.

Oh sir, I'll bring the Dukes own barber that shall take his oath upon a
corporal book, that this is a beard and no periwig; I am he that was overseer
of the Dukes work, and not the fair Duchess that you take me for, put on
your spectacles, and you will see I am nothing like her.


Then she is lost, and I undone withal,
Therefore I'll strip me to the Ivory skin,
And as Leander did lively leap in,
My head beneath yon River I will run,
Neptune spread wide thy arms, for now I come.

Oh save the man, save the man, now he flounces, now he flounders, yet he swims
above water like a walnut shell, yet he sprawles like a naked frog, yet he
strives for life, oh save the man, save the man; but now, now, now he sinks by
degrees, now he is swallowed, now he is choked, this is my comfort, he cannot
choose but go with a clean soul to heaven, it will be so washed in the water
before he come thither. Again, again, again; now he lies still upon his back
and floates along with the tide, and now his soul is in the skies, he doth not
offer so much as to strive against the stream, but swims as gently down with
the tide as may be; but what a fool was he, that knowing he should go so long
a journey by water, and the weather so could too, would leave his clothes
behind him? Well, I'll even take up his scattered Apparel, carry them to the
Court, and there report what I have heard and seen, the poor Gentleman is well
onward of his journey by this time, they had need provide him good store of
faggots, for he will be monstrously wet when he comes to his Inn.


LAdy, I understand and good tidings from you.

From me my Lord?

'Tis all one Madam, you at length are won
Unto a second marriage.

Hath Montecelso then told to the Duke
Of my free grant and yielding to his love?

Sir, I must have you freely reconciled
To the Lord Iulio that hath put upon you
Such slanderous imputations.

You my Lord
Can much with me, but were it for the reverence
I owe your Grace my sword had character'd
My wrong upon his body.

Come, all friends.

My Lord, I yield my self, and here confess
In what high measure I have injured you.

That's too much to receive injury and make satisfaction too.

He slandered you most vilely.

Told the Duke
You were safe lodged within Valentia's Tower.

Made us to girt the place with the Dukes Guard.

And at the high'st of night search all her Lodgings
For you and the Architector.

But who found you?

None but two sleeping Ladies* and they fast
Surprised in innocent dreams.

Was this wrong
To be endured?

Where the guilt's confessed
There pardon is soon purchased.

I'll not believe
But there's in this some juggling, some strange feat --

Room for a bringer of ill news, for one that brings a tale will offend all
your noses, and a discourse that will distaste all your ears; who knows this
Hat? who knows this Doublet? who knows this Cloak?


These were Lord Montecelso's; why my heart Art thou struck cold with fear?


These were my friends.

If I mistake not these belonged to him
Whom I prefert'd to over-see my works,
What news of him?

You that loved him, out with your eyes, and wipe your handkerchers, and as you
look upon this Cloak provide for a shower of rain.


Speak, what of him?

He is dead, he is fled, he is not wounded, but he is drowned, he is gone for
ever, for he is leapt into the River.


Dead!

Drowned!

How came he drowned? speak.

Marry with water, belike it got into his mouth and choked him.


There's one gone yet.

I mean discourse the cause that urged him to it.

As I was walking by the Rivers side, musing and meditating on some passions
incident to men of my complexion, I spied this Gentleman stark staring mad,
exclaiming on the beauty of this fair Duchess, saying, that he run mad for
her love; but because he would not be false to the Duke his Master, that put
him in trust, he would rather show himself to be no better than a drowned Rat
than deceive him, and so very courteously casts away his Hat, very dolefully
lays by his Cloak, very dissolutely hurles off his Doublet, very desperately
leaps into the River, and very dangerously gives up the Ghost.


It drives me to amazement,
And I am wrapped in wonder.

Oh my Fate!
I am of all the most unfortunate;
I'll not out-live him.

Wherefore doth my Duchess
Show in her looks such sad distemperature?

I am lost, there steals a coldness through my blood,
The Icy hand of death plays on my breasts,
And where it touches turns all to earth,
And I am doomed --

Look to the Lady, see she faints.

How cheer you Lady?

Ha, am I called again?
Then like a soul disturbed in her departure,
And kept from rest and downy quietness,
Let me proclaim my anguish.

Patience Lady.

I'll not be patient, give me leave to drown
My soul in brine, and in a flood of tears
Swim to my Love.

The Duchess is distracted.

I am so, I am desperate, frantic, mad,
Go call yon Architector from the deeps,
And he shall build a Castle in the air,
Where we will live together amidst the Clouds
And laugh at these poor mortals here on earth.

The Lady's mad.

You are deceived, not I;
Cannot a Lady weep, morn, or lament,
Or spend a few tears over a funeral hearse
But you will judge her frantic, pray give leave,
Which of you here can hinder me to weep?
I am a woman

I am a man.

Women command tears,
Then pray let me bestow some on a friend;
If you will dye go hang or drown your selves,
I'll do the like for you.

Yes, not for me.

Why should I weep for thee if thou did so,
Or thee, or thee, or any dotard here,
Yet if you please you may go try for me,
He clap at that well-acted Tragedy.

Oh save the woman, save the woman.

Follow her Iulio, see her well attended;
Sure she is Planet-struck, or some ill star
Hath in her bosom wrought this mutinous war,

I'll see well to her safety.

Oh my Duchess!

These are but women's passions,
And like a tempest, the more violent 'tis
'Twill be the sooner blown o'r.

So I hope.

Fear not my Lord, perhaps she counterfeits
To know how you affect her, if in this
You will compassionate with her, and partake
In this supposed frenzy.

'Tis like so,
For if a man may trust a sleeping woman,
She loves me 'bove the world.

My Lord I know it.

Nay, I know it too, I'll never else trust dreams.

But leaving this, I have a suit unto your Grace.

Speak and prevail dear friend.

There is a Spanish Lady my first Love,
Who heating of my residence with you,
Is travelled thence to meet me in your Court,
I have notice that she shortly will arrive;
My purpose is to feast her in my Lodging
So lately built, next to your Daughters Tower,
Where if it please you with these Lords to grace (...),
And taste a homely banquet, I shall say
To you I am engaged every way.

I will not fail thee, nor shall these our friends,
We'll grace the Spanish Lady with our presence.

I have a suit to your Grace.

Thy business Groom?

That for the good news I have brought you I may have some guerdon, some
remuneration, as they say.


This thy reward be, since by thy occasion
My Duchess of her best wits is deprived,
Wander for ever like a banished Caine,
Till of her sense she be possessed again
Dare not so near our Court. Come Lords, let's in
To cheer her sorrows, and her fate lament,
But to the man that can her fren^ie cure
We here proclaim what e're he can demand*
If in the compass of our populous Land.

Banish, what's that? can any man tell me what it means? let me see; Banished
sure is some strange language, and for any thing I know the meaning of it may
be, give him a hundred Crowns, or give him two hundred Crowns; and banished the
Court may be come to the Court and there you shall receive them; the Duke was
not wont to give me such hard words; if he had called me Rogue or Rascal, I
had understood him, I had had him to a hair, but the word banished doth a
little stick in my stomach; Banished! I will go feek out some wise man or other
to tell me what the the word means, and what sum of money, I may demand of the
Dukes Treasurer; Banished --


Save you sir.

And you my friend, what are you?

Sir I profess my self to be a wise man.

Then you are the man that I desire to meet, for I was seeking a wise man to
tell me the meaning of a strange word.


Unfold thy mind; I shall resolve thee truly*
Lye it within the power of humane skill.

Thus Stands the case: The Duke entertained a fellow to look to his buildings,
and this fellow drowned himself, it was my fate to bring the news to the
Court, which when the young Duchess heard, she grew presently as mad as a
march Hare; now demanding reward for my news, the Duke out of his bounty said,
be would banish me the Court; now I would fain know what sum of money the word
banished signifies.


It signifies, that if thou dare presume
To come within the Court gate, thou incur'st
The Dukes displeasure, it is present death.

You will not buy my reward sir, will you?

Not I.

Then I see thou art a wise man.

But is the Duchess frantic?

I'll assure you she's a mad wench.

And how did the Duke take it?

Oh very discontentedly: and he hath proclaimed to him that can cure her of her
frenzy to have the next thing he shall ask without exception.


But art thou sure 'tis true?

I assure you my friend as true as I am banished.

That cure I'll undertake, and so prevail,
That I presume my cunning shall not fail.

Now sir I have resolved you of all these doubts, can you tell me how I shall
bestow my self now I am banished?


I can, I am a stranger in this City,
And I profess dark arts, Physic, and Necromancy,
And for a need can conjure; but direct me
Where I may lodge and freely use my Art,
I'll entertain thee and supply thy wants
With all things needful.

As bountiful as wise; I am for you sir so you will teach me wit; I have seen
the Duke and his Court, but never to my knowledge saw a wise-man before, you are
the first of the name that ever I looked on; but if it be nothing but a Lodging
you want, trust to me, I can furnish you with that at an hours warning.


Direct me to the place.

That I will sir as well as I can,
Be you the wise Master, I'll be the wise man.

Attend me then, her choice love I have found,
I made the hurt, and I can cure the wound.

Her fits increase then daily.

They still grow,
Sometimes her eyes with salt tears over-flow;
She fills the house with Musique, and then wrings
Her Ivory hands, she dolefully laments,
At once expressing thousand discontents.

Proclaim to him that can her frenzy cure
The next thing he can ask.

I shall my Lord.

My Lord leave these discontents to some further leisure, we are now at the
strange Knights Lodging to give entertainment to the Spanish Lady.


True, we are his invited guests, and it is not fit that our grievances should
any way appear to a stranger.


You counsel well, behold this is his Lodging --

And here's the Knight himself.

Welcome my Lord to a poor strangers Lodging,
My beauteous Lady and my Love's arrived,
Whose grace I first won in a Tournament,
Bearing the prize from many Knights of Spain;
Please you to grace me at a solemn feast
Which I prepared this day to welcome her,
You shall do much honour.

Knight I will,
And for thy sake respect her to her worth;
How dost thou like thy Lodging built so near
This Castle where Valentia lies enclosed?

My Lord, 'tis well for prospect and for air,
Will it please you enter Lords, where be my servants.

Is this the place?

It is my Lord; but I must crave your pardon,
We want that order, and that entertainment,
That observation and decorum now
That longs to your estate and sovereignty,
Yet our good thoughts above our power are large
And full of zeal.

Come, you are at too much charge.

May it please your Highness to possess your seat,
Homely your Viands, but your welcome's great.

But where's the Lady?
She should be Mistress of the feast to day --

She is not far, see yonder where she comes.

My Daughter.

'Tis Valentia.

Sure 'tis Valentia in this strange disguise*
Or can you once again deceive my eyes?

My Daughter on my life, her eye, her brow,
Her every part; ha, are my eyes my own?
Here hang my keys* the doors fast barred and locked;
Nor is she subtle spirit, composed air,
To creep though key-holes, or to crawl through chinks;
Tush, tush, one Lady may be like another,
And my suspect is causeless.

Let me entreat you
To take your seat, My Lady's but a stranger,
And unacquainted with the Italian guise.

Observe her well my Lords.

She hath her blush.

Her lip, her front.

The right trick of her eye.

But is it she, is't possible the Knight
Would be so bold, she so audacious?
It cannot be; come, now I take my place.

In this your Highness doth your servant grace.

E^ha nos de bener dies benediga toda la Compania seias bien venido.


What says the Lady?

She calls for wine and bids you welcome all.

The very touch and accent of her tongue.

Signeur yo b^ an de buen corac^n.

Her meaning.

She drinks to you with a good heart.

Tell her I pledge gladly.

Doubtless 'tis she, can it be otherwise?

Why spend we time in cups and banquets here,
When fair Valentia must be needs transformed
Unto this stranger-Lady.

Still the more
That I observe her I am more confirmed.

'Tis she, some devil or witch else.

When face, and tongue, and each thing proves her mine,
Why should I doubt to challenge her? I'll suddenly
Call on her name, and if she answer to it
Dobtlesse 'tis she, Valentia -- no.

What means your Lordship?

Nothing, nay nothing; see the very Ring
Upon her finger, I can sit no longer;
My Lords, I must entreat your patience,
I have dropped a Jewell as I came along,
And must find it or it will go wrong.

A Jewell lost.

Let's help his Grace to seek it.

Pray do my Lords.

Some Torches there.

Lights for the Lords, 'twas dropped sure by the way,
Help him to seek it.

Look well there in the Rushes.

Haste through the private door, off with that habit;
If this pass currant we are past all fear,
Your Father's gone in post, why do you stay?

I have the odds, for mine's the nearer way;
Farewell sweet Prospero.

Seek till your eyes be blind,
You shall lose her though you the Jewell find;
How Fortune smiles upon our cunning shifts,
They are busy all at work, the Duke himself
Is like a Jailer jingling of his keys,
Which serves her as a watch-word to uncase;
If now our plot prove, there depends on this
All our succeeding hopes, and future bliss --
Valentia, Valentia.

Here my Lord.

What, at your book already?

Yes sir, to pray
After these tempests for a calmer day.

The Duke's at hand, and seeking how to cross
Our loves hath all his Lords left at a loss --

Body of me she's here; fool that I am
Her loyalty to mistrust, or his good thoughts,
She being chaste, he honest; how now Lady,
What at your book so close?

Books are Companions
To them who are compelled to single lives.

Thou art rank amongst Virgins.

Virgins would be wives -- Why come you sir?

Only my girl to see
How well thou fare, thou one day shalt be free;
Fare well, in this my jealousy appears,
And this one fear begets a thousand fears.

Not without cause, good Father, knew you all;
But I must down the next way through the wall.

By this she's coming, be thou first fair love,
Or else our stratagem is quite o'rthrown,
But if it take place, Valentia is mine own;
How will the Duke look when he finds her here*
And in his heart condemn his needlesle fear!
He hath not wit to trace us in our drifts,
True love is cunning and hath thousand shifts --
Valentia.

Prince Prospero.

And in your habit too, all succeeds happily.

Hark, hark, my Father is at hand my Lord,
I'll keep my place as if I had not moved,
Who ever ventured fairer where they loved --

How now my Lord, what is the Jewell found*

'T was never lost, I left it in my Closet,
Where it was safe, 'twas but my jealous fear
And blind mistake, but now those doubts are past,
For where I found it I have locked it fast.

May it please your Grace to sit --

I have looked my eyes almost blind,
And yet I can no Jewell find.

Sure if it had been a Diamond, or any stone that had had either lustre or
quickness, I should have seen it sparkle.


Lords, you may spare your pains,
The Jewel's found.

Lords, seat your selves, and grace this strangers banquet,
And speak what news is in the City rifest,
For you frequent i^ most.

They say, my Lord, there is a Necromancer,
One of rare art and cunning, that can truly
Tell of things lost, one that hath Ephemerids
At his fingers ends; no frenzy, fever, sickness,
But he hath Cordials for, so his large bills,
Pasted on every post, speak in his praise.

And where resides he?

Here in the City Mantua.

Some Mountebank fellow.

It should not seem so,
For he hath much resort, and every mouth
Proclaims his skill.

I will make trial of him,
To know if my love-sute shall well succeed.

I'll try his cunning.

I'll be his Client.

So will I,
And in my deep affairs his best skill try.

I'll prove him in the beauteous Duchess cure,
In which if he prevail his pains shall be
Paid from the best of all his Treasury;
We sit too long, stranger, we praise thy bounty,
And if in any suit thou wilt use our love,
Suppose it, craved, granted.

I shall find time my Lord.

I cannot he at rest
Till I have once more searched her private Chamber to assure and
Of these doubts; strange: farewell,
Only my keys can these sad doubts expel.

Haste, haste to meet your Father in the Tower.
Shortly will come the long expected hour.

YOu see I have purchased you a Lodging at the house of mine own flesh and
blood, otherwise called my Father; now sir, if you do not show your self a
Master of your Art, or your Crafts-Master, you shall but disgrace your self,
and call the reputation of my Fathers house in question.


Tush, fear not me, what cannot I perform,
A mask of naked wenches I could bring
To dance strange Antiques here, and none but we
To be spectators.

Oh brave man, when shall we see this sport?

Dost thou love sweet meats? I have changed e're now,
Against a Christening day, a shower of hail
To perfect Comfets that have served a feast,
And I can do it again, but tush 'tis nothing.

Oh sweet man, here's one that by his Art is able to undo all the Comfet-makers
in Christendom,


What meat dost thou love best?

I love many meates well, and indeed scarce any comes amiss, if it be come in
his right likeness, when I have a stomach I can eat Capon and Rabit, but above
all meats, not to dissemble, I love a good piece of roasted beef.


I'll tell thee what once I did in Germany.
There was a hill lay just against the Sun,
I by my art changed it to perfect beef*
Which the violent heat of the Sun roasted as
Perfectly as any sea coal fire, and still as it
Was enough the Country people came with their
Sharpe knives and cut it off in slices.

Oh that my journey had lain over that hill.

Now sir a brooke ran by of clear water,
And that I turned to perfect vinegar
For sauce to that rost-beefe, and the small sand
Was changed to perfect pepper; now sir, it
Was but bringing ^ead along with them and flicing away
A piece of the hill, and sitting down by the Rivers side,
And there was as good roast beef, vinegar, and pepper
As any man in Mantua could desire to eat.

This cunning man hath a trade would set any mans teeth a wat'ring that hath
but a stomach --
But soft, here come strangers.

If the wise man be as cunning as rumour reports him,
I'll know what shall betide me in my love-affaires;
This, I this, by my directions should be the house.

My Cousin the Prince, excellent, I'll put him
Into a pitiful perplexity e're we part.

Now will I try whether this fellow have any cunning or no, thou learned man of
Mantua heaven save thee.


Thou worthy Gentleman of Verona, I thank thee,
Nay, I have given 't you, pick out the meaning of that.

He knows me to be of Verona.

I, and an enemy to the Duke of Mantua,

You wrong me sir, I love the Duke.

I, and his Daughter too, pray do you no^?

A rare admirable fellow, he knows all, I must collogue with him, or he will
reveal all my secrets to the Duke.


Nay, herein, most learned, I must needs say you err; and though I will not
say your devil is a Liar, because I am altogether unacquainted with him, yet
in this I must needs tell you he is in the wrong, for this Gentleman is a true
Trojan, a Knight Errant, and one that hath fought at the Tomb of adventures.


Indeed I am a Stranger.

Indeed you are a dissembler.

My name's Antonio.

Otherwise called Prince Prospero.

The rarest fellow in Christendom; upon my life he knows my very thoughts, my
meditations.

Come hither you, you that can gull the Duke,
Make private doors into his Daughters Tower*
And whilst your Noble Father, good old man,
Thinks you abroad in travel to see fashions,
You loiter here about a Ladies love.

Oh wonderful, I never heard the like*

Now wheres the Ring the Duke spied on your finger?
When was the merry meeting with your friend
And the two Ladies when they talked asleep,
And by that sudden shift deceived the Duke?
Where's the strange Spanish Lady? where's the banquet
To which you did invite him?

He knows all, all by this light,
There's nothing left unknown.

Here's no roguery, here's no knavery, here's no villainy, and all confessed too,
I'll even, like a good Subject, make all this acquainted to the Duke.


Sweet Conjurer, good Mephast ophilus,
I'll give thee here a hundred Ducats straight
But keep my counsel.

But if the wise-man will, the fool will not; nay, and there be such knaveries
in hand, you had better never have let them come to my ear, the Duke shall
know all, all by this hand, nay, that's most certain -- trust to it.


Stay sirrah, or I'll bring you back with a whirlwind.

Not I most learned, you shall pardon me, I'll be no Traitor for no mans
pleasure.


Prithee come back.

No such matter, have you such fagaries, I'll tell the Duke.

You doore-maker.

How most wise?

The Duke shall know of making of that door
By which the Prince had free way to the Lady,
You were his Overseer.

No more, sweet Doctor Faustus, no more.

Sirrah, you had better been a door keeper than a doore-maker.


Then I had better be a thief than a knave, silence noble Scholar, and I am
at thy service.


Well sirrah, keep his Counsel and I'll keep yours, and whilst I speak a few
words with this stranger, do thou watch there, and look steadfastly at the
kitchen window, for about dinner time there will fly in Capons, Pigeons, Pigs,
Geese, Larks, Chickens all ready roasted, with every one a knife at his girdle
to cut himself up, do but thou watch and bring me word when they come flying
in and call me; we'll to dinner.


Oh rare, ready roasted! I would I were a wise man too, as I shall never be
whilst I live; it is nothing but spreading a cloth, laying trenchers, setting
a salt, providing of bread, and making platters and sauce ready, and your
roast-meat will come as duly every one flying to his own dish and sauce as
Crows in the evening fly to their own nests; I'll get him to tile our house with
Biscuits, to pave the Kitchen with Custards, to make our Lo^e-walls of
Ginger-bread, and turn our Cheese-trenchers into Wafer-cakes; I'll watch, but
if I bring him word till I have filled my belly, may my girdle break.


Montecelso turned a wise man!

I know that's more than ever thou did look for at my hands.


Beshrew thee Coz, thou hast put me into two pitiful plunges, first thy
death, next for this needless fear.


Not yet!

I thought as surely thou had been in heaven
As I know this is earth: in truth mad Coz,
And hast thou gone beyond me?

Now I hope: no, that was a Crow that flew over our house.


Be confident for I have cast a plot.
How thou shalt steal away thy Love to Church,
And make her Father with his own free hand
Give her to thee in marriage; more than this,
Put strange disgraces on thy opposites
And such as are thy rivals; would thou think
Me a perfect wise man to contrive this well?

More wise than I first knew thee.

For this time part, early to morrow morning
Convey Valentia through the private door
Suited as at the Banquet; next invite
The Mantuan Duke to grace your Nuptials
In Saint Lauretta's Chapel; what remains
Shall all be mine.

My dearest friend adieu,
No cunning head had e're a heart so true.

Hark, some one knocks.

Most prudent.

Leave staring to the kitch. till anon,
And let me in these Gallants.

Beshrew their hearts for me, belike they heard what good cheer was flying
towards our house, and now like bold guests they are come to bid themselves to
dinner; I will let them in, though I could wish them choked for their pains
--


Who takes his turn first?

That will I so please you.

I know them all, their business, their affairs,
And I shall fit them finely; grave old man,
My choicest welcome I bestow on you,
And welcome Lords to all, but first you:
I know my Lord of Florence you affect
The amorous Lady fair Valentia.

Oh marvelous!

But you the frantic Duchess.

Possible.

Come, come, I know the inmost of your thoughts,
Then to be brief and cut off circumstance,
Hark you my Lord of Florence, do but this,
And I'll assure you fair Valentia's love,
Tomorrow morning must the stranger Knight
In Saint Lauretta's Chapel wed his Love,
The Spanish Lady, given him by the Duke,
Whilst they are busied watch the new-built Tower,
In which by Art I will contrive a door,
Which you shall find wide open.

Oh rare man!

Through which pass freely; now to blind suspicion,
Because you may not be descried or known,
Wear some disguise, this paper shall direct you.

Thou most ingenious Artist, take this Gold,
The happy earnest of my future love.

Enough my Lord, now wait upon my skill;
And now to you, I know you love the Duchess,
But she is changed by sickness; yet my Lord
If you will marry fair Valentia,
Who for your love disdains the Florentine,
I'll set you down a course to compass it.

Either will serve my turn, I'm not so curious
To thy my fancy to one woman's face.

Know, through my spirits help, I have dug a door
Quite through the Turrets door, which wall leads straight
Unto the Ladies Chamber, take this note,
This Paper shall direct you.

There's Gold for Paper.

Adieu.

My turn is next;
I am a stranger to thee, learned Friend,
Nor dost thou know my business.

No Lord Julio.

Iulio I'm called indeed.

And love that Lady
Whom these two Princes tenderly affect.

You are something near me.

I'll come nearer yet,
To the two strangers I could tell your hate,
Th'one drowned, the other Guardian of the Tower,
But my Art's no accuser.

Noble Scholar,
Let this Gold bribe thy art to secrecy,
And teach me how I may prevent their plots,
Gain the Dukes Grace, and fair Valentia's love.

This Paper shall do all, peruse it then,
And let it be your Tutor, so now leave me.

with all my art I'll prove thy magic skill,
And to the utmost what thou plot'st fulfil,

Adieu; you sirrah.

Most judicious.

Follow them with speed,
Watch them, and when thou see them near the Tower,
Run to the Duke and call his armed Guard
To apprehend these Miners that have dug
Unlawful passage through his high-built Tower,
See them well beaten, and after come to me,
And I will teach thee this rare Necromancy.

Fear not, Master Doctor, first I'll play my part,
And after come to you to learn your Art.

Now sir to you.

And what to me sir? think not with your tricks
To draw me in opinion you are wise.

Were not your Grace a man I reverence.

My Grace, what Grace? you'd gull me would you not?

Nor can you gull me most excellent Lord,
You are Verona's Duke; nay, never start,
For to your care my tongue's close as your heart;
I know that Mantua loves you not, yet know
Your Son serves Mantua as a friendly Foe.

Pardon me sir, I now approve your cunning,
Conceal my being, and expect reward --
But see the Duke.

What liberal reprover, I perceive
You find some matter in this man of note.

Matter indeed my Lord, this is a man
Exceeding many other private men,
That are indeed but shadows, counterfeits,
This man hath natural gifts joined with his Art.

We like your praise, and will our self applaud
His excellence, if by his grounded skill
He can give case to this fair Duchess grief.

What Mortals can attempt I'll undertake;
This is the Lady, and I know her grief
Arises from a sullen melancholy;
She has lost some friend, the sorrow of whose death
Hath turned her sanguine streams of blood to black.

Black, lost, gone, sunk, fled, adieu, farewell,
The waves have quite undone poor Lucibell.

Tush, I can cure this madness presently.

How learned Friend? restore her to her senses,
And the next thing that thou demand'st is thine.

I know the perfect temper of her grief,
Which that you may perceive I'll cure with Art;
I will raise up the Ghost of him she loved,
So like in all things you your selves shall swear
It is the man.

Shall he appear to us?

Here to you all, but stir not, move no foot,
Take heed you do not question him too far,
But only hear and see, and stand aloof.

But will he not affright us?

Not a jot;
Look to the Lady, I'll about my Art,
And send the Architector presently,

Well, if I see him I will chide him so,
That he shall never drown himself again.

Is't possible this can be done by Art?
Or means he to delude us?

So it seems, for I shall ne'er more see my Love again.

Sweet Lady be content.

You see I am.
The sound may give whole counsel to the sick,
Away, your counsel does increase my pain,
And I shall ne'er more see my Love again --

He's come already.

Lord how like he is!
Would you not swear it were the very man;
An admirable Artist I see he wafts the Lady.

Oh thou dear soul of my sweet Love deceased,
I'll follow thee.

Stir not, it is the Devil.

Spirit or fiend, his amorous shape so charms,
Did he grasp hell I'd fly into his arms.

The Devil hath born her hence, follow and rescue her.

Not I my Lord, your Grace shall pardon me.

Oh what black trespass hath she done against heaven
That she should thus be hurried quick to hell;
Now is she hopeless, past recovery;
I'll hang that Conjurer.

Condemn him not before you see the event.

What can the event be but her utter loss?
Oh my fair Duchess, if thou perish thus,
I'll make that base Enchanter curse this day,
For thy lost blood his traitcrous head shall pay --

How cheers my Lord, did you behold the Ghost?

We saw the Devil, but speak, where's the Duchess?

Safe in my Chamber, where before to morrow,
Your Grace shall see her perfectly recovered,
Doubt not my Art; but there remains, my Lord,
For you a further business, the strange Knight
Expects the Spanish Lady from your hand
In Saint Lauretta's Chapel, whither I promise
To bring your Lady perfectly recovered.

See this done,
And the next thing that thou demand'st is thine.

I shall make bold, my Lord, to claim your promise.

Claim it and take it.

You'll trust her in my Chamber for this night,
For I must physic her.

Do what thou please, it highly shall content me;
Come, let's return to Court, and there attend
Of our precedent fears a fortunate end.

Thou hast no part in that fair fortunate end,
It belongs to me, and to my noble friend: Madam --

Oh my dear Love how could you so delude
A Lady that with such entire affection
And zealous love admired and honoured you!

Of that no more; the Duke for this great cure
Hath promised me what I shall next demand,
I have a boon to ask, I have set on foot
Many strange plots which must their full effect
Receive this night, the Prince is to espouse
The fair Valentia by the Dukes free gift,
Florence, Ferrara, and Lord Iulio,
His Rivals, are about their several tasks;
Something there remains for me, amongst the rest,
And you to act out of these confusions,
We must devise our fortunes to secure,
And save that love that is so chaste and pure.

In this disguise who can know Iulio now.
Or guess the purpose that I have in hand?
This Paper tells me I shall find a door
Left open to Valentia's amerous bed: here I'll wait
The happy end of my auspicious Fate --

So I am fitted so un willingly
That I scarce know my self; yet as this Paper
Gives me directions may I find the Door
Left open to me, I desire no more --

A Carpenter I should be, would this Apron
And Rule bring me to rule in Mantua
By marriage of the fair Valentia,
I should applaud my fortunes, and commend
The wise mans Art; this can imperious love,
Whose power hath oft transhap'd the gods above.

You shall be transhap'd I'll warrant you, we'll teach you to take upon you
other men's trades before you be free of their Companies; if your Rule at your
back will not rule you, we will; stand close Gentlemen, and though we find them
broad awake, let's see if we can take them napping.


The door, according to to the wise-mans words,
I find wide open, I'll enter.

Why pause I being so near?

I'll enter instantly, but soft, I am prevented.

Company, now must I counterfeit to work.

To shun discovery,
I'll see how I can play the Carpenter.

Now to my Masonry.

Would I were ten Leagues off.

Upon them Gentlemen, upon them, these be the underminers I told you of, up
with your Poleaxes and down with them, see they have broken open a door
already, they shall be arraigned of Burglary.


Hold, hold, and hear us.

Bumbaste them Gentlemen, currifeige them bravely, hear them after; palt the
Mason with stones, hammer the Smith, over-rule the Carpenter, come, away with
em.


My Son is married to the Mantuan Princess,
A Lady of that presence and opinion,
That it offends me not; but to prevent
Any offence that may be done to him,
Or injury to me, I have at hand
A Royal Army under Cosmos charge,
Our trusty and approved Counsellor,
To offer War or Peace -- the Duke's at hand.

How naked is our Train, that of our Courtiers,
So few attend this high solemnity?
Where's Florence? where's Ferrara? where's Lord Iulio?
That have not seen us given away this
Daughter I fear, for so my eye persuades;
Had I not in these keys such confidence,
And in the strength of my large edifice,
I should not doubt to swear, but these I'll trust,
When servants fail, keys and stone-walls prove just.

Thrice worthy sir, you have given me such a gift,
Should you impart you Dukedoms large revenue
It could not equal't; now your hand is past,
Which both your word and Church-rights have made fast.

'Twere best that I return to see all safe*
And next enquire how my fair Duchess fares.

Fear not my Lord, you have committed her
To his protection that undoubtedly
Will see to her recovery.

So we hope.

Restore her to her senses and true feeling.

We doubt it not.

And apt her thoughts for love.

That's all we covet.

I have understood
By those that know him, so much he will make good.

Then are we truly happy --

Room for one good Subject that brings three bad Subjects to answer Burglary
before your Grace: see here my Lord, here are three fellows that have good
faces and are ashamed to show 'em, they seem to be sound men, yet see if they
do not strive to look scurvily?


What men are these? or how have they offended?
Why do they turn their heads thus and look downwards?

As if they had stolen a pudding.

These faces I should know, my Lord of Florence,
Ferrara's Marquess, and Lord Iulio;
Is this the cost you have so liberally
Bestowed to grace our feast? my Bride and I
Are much bound to you

These the men, perhaps they have some mask,
If so, let's see it.

Compel me not to answer.

Give me leave
To blush and be ashamed.

Hell take the Conjurer.

My Lords, what means this antique* if you have
Some sport to show us* pray my Lords let's have it.

So, so.

How well this suit becomes you! troth my Lord,
Might I advise you, I would still go thus;
Acquaint me with your Taylor.

Is this the newest fashion?

Would I were in the Indies
Rather than here.

But tell me sirrah, what means this show?

Call you these Lords! no, they are Loones, they look more like Prentices than
Princes; these are they that have beleaguered your new Tower, and dug a hole
through the wall, that an Ox or an Ass, 'blesse us, as big as your self may
creep through; there's a door made into your Daughters Tower where she was
kept, and the door being left open she is flown away: Valantia is gone, she
is gone, and these are they that had their hands in the business.


Valentia gone, and by their practice lost!

By theirs; when they were boring at the hole we took them at it with their
tools out, we took them in the manner before they could put up, and here we
have brought them to answer before your Grace, that you may freely punish their
weakness that would offer to go to your walls.


These injuries severely we'll revenge,
But most on thee false Iulio, for her loss
Thy head shall pay.

Pox of the Conjurer I say still.

Speak, where's Valentia, can you tell me?

No.

Then for her loss your forfeit lives shall go;
Who can advise me best where I may find
Her I most loved, and hath proved most unkind.

Might I advise your Grace, I would have you should do as Archers do, that when
they have lost an Arrow, shoot another after it; so, my Lord, if you have ever
another Lady or Mistress about the Court, shoot her after your Daughter, that
you may either find one, or lose both.


Good Counsel.

To him that can reduce her to her Tower,
Or put me in possession of her hand,
What grace our Power or Dukedom can command
Shall all be his.

I take you at your word, see here my Lord.

This, this is the Spanish Lady.

She that spoke
In Spanish once is forced to change her tongue,
Pardon dear Father.

Ha! am I then o're-reach'd? is't possible
For all my Cost, Charge, Care, and diligence
A Wenches wit out-go me? could her subtlety
Make way through that which not an Army could?
What should I say?

Those Creatures that wear smocks
Will where they love pierce stone-wals, creep through locks;
Why thus you see, as well as we, a great man may be gulled,
Woodcocks are meat, but not to eat until that they be pulled.

That private door, my Lord, I now perceive
Was made by him.

My Lord, remember you
The Ring you spied upon his finger once,
Then think upon the door.

You made us toss the rushes
And seek the Jewell, did you? Speak, what art thou
That thus hast gulled the Duke?

I am a Prince,
And every way thy equal.

I would to heaven it were no worse.

He is no less my Lord, receive him then to grace.

Of Whence?

Verona.

Mine enemy.

Was't not a friendly part
To lodge your only child so near my heart?

My Lord, remember he once saved your life,
And even for that deserves me for his wife.

Now as a friend a friendly League I crave,
Take not away what you so freely gave.

I will pause upon it, although it be past help,
And see what we may punish, what forgive;
But now my only comfort is stored up
In the fair Duchess, if she gain her health --
And here she comes, I cannot choose but fear
So long as I behold you Ghost so near.

That Conjurer
Is a rare Artist that can raise a shadow
So like unto the Substance.

Fair Duchess, art thou recovered, speak?

Thank heaven I am.

'Tis well done to have heaven still in thy thoughts
Being so near a fiend, come from that Devil.

Fear not my Lord, I am so armed with faith,
And love withal, he hath no power to hurt me.

Art thou well?

Yes my Lord, I am well.

Come from him, but art thou very well?

Very well my Lord I thank you.

Perfectly well?

So well you cannot wish me better.

Come hither then.

I was of late but ill,
Then give me leave, my Lord, to keep my self
Well while I am well.

That's with me my Lord.

Can the Ghost speak too.

Speak, and talk, and walk,
Embrace and kisle.

I love no kissing Ghosts.

Believe me, that Magician was a man
Of rare experience, and deserves great praise.

Did he not say before what he should do,
That Ghost doth act his part exceedingly.

I say come from him, he's a spirit.

I do not love to do any thing but with a spirit.

He came out of hot hell.

He will make the warmer bedfellow.

Further than you have been, be not deceived my Lord.

That's far enough already.

I am the man I seem, no Architector,
But Cousin to that noble Gentleman
Prince Prospero, of the Duke Verona's Court,
That for this Duchess love have thrust my self
Into this imminent danger, as the Prince
Hath done the like for his Valentia;
You promised me if I could cure this Lady,
The next thing I demanded, her I crave,
Whom if I truly merit let me have.

I have been gulled on all sides, nor will I
Put up these injurious wrongs, you both shall dye --

To arms, to arms my Lord, for I descry
A potent Army marching before our walls,
And by their Colours flying they should be of Verona.

Be they from whence they will we'll parley them;
Admit their General to an interview
To know their cause of Arms --
Our Clinick turned a Soldier I

Noble Father I crave your pardon.

I the like my Lord.

Stand on our party then whilst I debate
Our purpose with this Duke; these Arms we levied
With no intent of wrong to Mantua,
But to secure our Son, and this his friend,
We do protest it is no work of ours
That he is married, neither did we wished*
But since by heaven and fate they are united,
We rather wish they may their Loves enjoy,
Than what heaven seems to applaud we should destroy.

To plead in Arms (...) best way to prevail,
Where still the weak'st must yield; since our own blond
Hath had an equal share in this our wrong,
Why should we envy strangers, we will strive
From the worlds eye to hide this ominous scarre;
Heaven offers peace, why should we threaten war?
Each where they love join hands.

Our hearts.

A sweet Conclusion.

And now Madam I'll make you amends for mocking you.


Great men are sometimes gulled, but that's not common,
You have done more, for you have gulled a woman.

Your Son, Verona, and his friend hath much
Outstripped us by their wit, but the best is
We are not gulled alone,
You see your greatness is no privilege
From those that have quick brains, but now all friends;
Verona we embrace, and thus atone
All our difsentions; Marriage shall conclude
What Arms hath menaced; our united Dukedoms
Since by this happy fate they are agreed,
We'll strive which most in bounty shall exceed.


