O This old wretched Age, the neighbouring bounds of our last breath, and you
unhappy Fates, long life on us have you bestowed for this? or for these uses:
That we should behold our Temples lewdly, cursedly defiled, our holy things
profaned, our Country slav'd, the Relics of our Fame (which none might
enter) broken before me, and the sacred gold rent from the posts: what ere the
greedy will of stern Gabinius could by Rapine gain, or Anthonies luxurious
power exhaust, all's lost, and we have been a mocking stock (which I abhor to
hear, much more to speak) to Cleopatra's gluttonous desires: and lest we
should not be in every part disgraced and vilified, we now are brought under a
cruel King, the Nephews Son of half Arabian Artipater, Iudaea serves an
Idumaean Tyrant, while an Arabian Lord in Zion Reigns, Gods people and
Jerusalem, a man profane and impious: yet in this distress, among so many
wounds of raging chance, some sparks of ancient honour did remain a pattern of
our Countries Discipline: such as it is, which by our foes themselves is to be
reverenced, the furious Victor, and no small number of his purpled Court, began
to dignify the Jewish Lawe^. We w^h t^is h^pe ^efresht, though well near
tired with misery, had hardly taken heart to re-advance our heads, when out
alas, a heinous matter which we never feared, did suddenly arise a new
Baptizer* whose Pa^entage is holy, who was bred among strange worships, but by
Nation ours, by Stock a Levite given unto God, even from his infant cradle,
being Son of an High-Priest, and shortly to receive that dignity himself,
unless he choose rather to taste false glories bitter fruit, then honours
harvest in due time to reap.

He therefore keeping in the desert soil deceives, with show of sanctity
severe, the simple people, clothed in skins of beasts, his hair uncombed, and
feeding Savage like; by which delusions he draws the looks of all men towards
him, the common sort being poss^st with ignorant belief, that a new Prophet to
the world is sent; And now unto himself he hath reduced an Army of the vulgar
following him. Him only now the people all admire, leaving their Cities,
Noblemen and Kings honour and fear him, where he past with pride through the
madness of the multitude, new laws gives like another Moses, cleansing crimes
with water, and presumes our ancient laws with new Rites to adulterate; and
rends ^he Fathers with reproaches, to enjoy the peoples mad affection with more
ease, who give him gentle hearing; but if none himself oppose against this
theifes attempts, raging and ranging with bold insolence. That sanctity
throughout the world renowned will soon expire, nay, it expires now, or rather
hath expired.


Men of our calling must do nothing rashly, mildness becomes mild Fathers; to
young men, if through temerity they go astray, a pardon may be given, but a
fault by one of us committed, no excuse to veil it can pr^vaile; Be calm a
while, this rage appease, and let your sorrow slaked.


Then you Gamaliel (as it seems) approve this cursed Caitiffs actions.


Malchus, no, I neither do approve, nor yet condemn^, before I know the matter
that concerns this new-come Prophet, who is not a man (so far as I can hear) so
full of ill, nor to be so oppressed with public hate.


O Stars, O Heaven, O Earth! that wicked wretch wants not a Patron here, that
can uphold his manners to be good.


Who vice reproves, good manners teaching, leads the way himself, which unto
others plainly he directs, can you persuade me that this man is nought?


He that our Laws contemns, new Sects doth teach, besides new Ritts, reviles
our Magistrates, and our high Priests with calumny pursues, can you persuade me
that this man is good?


If we were equally against our selves Judges austere, and milder towards
others, then we are oftentimes, our heinous crimes would lye more open unto
public view and sharpe reproaches, howsoever we flatter our selves and are
proclaimed bles^, reputed by the common people, Saints, chaste, pious, and
upright, but of us all, none from t^e greatest fault was ever free,


Gamaliel, that these things may be true, is^t lawful for a vulgar man to
rail against a Prelate? Let the people hear, yielding obedience and sober
live, refuse no reyns by him upon them cast, he can reduce the vulgar if they
are to the right way, let him be as a law unto himself, but if in ought he
chance to go astray, the wicked, God doth see and sharply punish.


And do you conceive this Law is j^st?


I do indeed.


And why? blind ignorance and want of skill.


Because rashness and error commonly are found as proper and peculiar to the
vulgar.


He that to Prin^es wisdom gives not place, is often taken from the vulgar
thrung.


But give we place then in this chair to shepherds.


Moses a shepherd was, and David too.


They were taught all things by the spirit of God.


He that taught them can also tutor this.


Will God instruct him, and relinquish us?


God, neither Sceptre, parents, noble stock, beauty, nor Kingly riches doth
respect, but hearts that no contagion of deceit, of lust, or cruelty doth once
pollute; The holy spirit in this Temple rests.


Surely Gamaliel (to confess a truth) you seem to me of ^ate by your opinion,
a plain approver of that wicked Sec^; I can no longer smother what I think,
seeing you do such things as are unworthy both of your Ancestors and of your
self, you that of all the rest ought to defend, do chiefly our authority
offend, and that in favour of a mad young man: For Gods sake tell me, Whats
your trials hope, what profit do you seek to get by this? Perhaps he will give
you honour or great wealth, who ^tterly destroys our orders, honour, and labours
to undo us.


Truly Malchus, you shoot far from the mark, that you suppose, we can defend
our dignity with pride and arrogance, or with strength of Arms, our parents
were not by such means advanced.


Our ancient Laws and Orders more bec^me us that are ancient, and let each one
live according to the manner of his time.


But rather good things good men still become.


If we had any of our fathers spirit.


Our fathers manners should our lives direct.


This wicked fellow by a speedy death not threatenings had been punished.


^or our order, cruelty is unmeet.


Whats done for God, holy and pious is.


To put to death without desert, is impious piety.


Deserves not he to dye, that all subverts?


If he transgress, why do you not confute him in public view with arguments
and reasons? Why do you not show there your light of wit? you being expert,
learned, and so old, set upon one that's rude, unlearned, so young to the right
way perhaps you may reduce him, and glory to your self, amongst all men gain.


That wound is never to be gently cur^d, but with ^ord, sword, and fire, or if
you know any thing more to ^ormenting.


Be he such as you express him, or worse if you will, yet one thing to your
self you ought to give: that first you freely and in gentle wise admonish him,
least any one do think, that you would rather cast him headlong down, doubtful
of heaven then extend your hand to save him falling; It concerns you much,
that all your Enemies may understand, your will is good to save all, none
destroy, but such a one as with a mind perverse precipitates himself: one
thing at least I crave ere you by wrath be further drawn, consider by this
obstinate condition what you may gain.


Why this, confound a foe, comfort the good, and terrify the shameless,
confirm the wavering mind, and with this blood our Countries Laws establish.


Rather this you shall obtain, to be accounted one, that with all power of
tyranny hath rom'd, until you did a holy man confound, one whom by reason you
could not convince.


Then let him be as holy as he will and grave, Gods spirit doth not him
direct, who does neglect the Fathers ancient Rules, and seeing no redress with
you I find, I'll seek the Kings assistance against Ruin.


Gamaliel in my judgement counsels well, obey him therefore; but I speak in
vain, since wrath, the enemy of Gods advise, darkens his minds clear sight, who
stops his ears to wholesome admonitions.


He's gone in wrath and swelling with disdain; for my part, what was lawful,
to my power I earnestly advised him with mild words, endeavouring to assuage
his raging spirits: I gave him faithful counsel, but so far is he ingrate
from giving any thanks, that he even hates me for my good desert. Such is the
common course, a great fault in our degree is this, that we deceive with show
of sanctity, the common sort, that safely we Gods precepts may despise; but if
against our customs ought they dare, we practise to subvert them with our
gold, or witnesses suborned, and cut them off by secret poison, filling Herods
ears with feigned utterance, what our mind offends, revenging with false
rumours, while his breast with rage affected we the more incense, and arm the
violence of cruel wrath with calumnies. But Malchus now is gone, unmindful of
all modesty, to Court, where he will feign the rising of new Sects, deserting
of the Fathers holy Rites, and that the Kings Prerogative and power lies open
to derision* to conclude, what ere he holds commodions to himself, masking his
wickedness with honest names, if these he finds the King but little move,
another dart more cruel he will invent, he will cry the sworn Bands that attend
the King do secretly conspire, some wicked plot preparing, they digest: Troops
meet by night, their private wealth by ^actions to augment, these he will feign
or worse into his ^ars, these poisons of his wit he will instill. And this in
Princes is a common fault, gently to hearken unto secret Tell-tales, whereby
what is most cruel, though but feigned, they easily believe, and feign vain
fears unto themselves, pursuing the light air of moveable Report, where he
that gives faithful advertisement is holden dull, torped and ^merous: We
change the name of quondam virtue now, now not adorued with any virtue, but
with glorious titles proudly preferrd the Vulgar we beguile.

As for this Prophet, with my soul I wish our Order with more modesty and
wisdom, and would bear themselves, if hither he be sent by ^ods appointment,
there's no power of man that can withstand him, but if he devise mischief by
fraud concealed, with his sword he will soon confound himself, ^et every man
interpret as his own condition guides him: If any here my sentence do allow,
his hands he may keep clear of guiltless blood: Nor let us be profuse of holy
blood, least those examples that in cruel sort we make for others, afterwards
return on our own heads* dwells not in Herods heart immanitie enough, unless
his rage by firebrands added to his wrath, increase?


O what a night of darkness doth possess the minds of mortals! what
Cymerian ^ave do we inhabit, while this brittle life doth swiftly fleet away?

False mod^sty doth screen the brazen face, pieties vale the impious doth
conceal, Litigious men peace in their looks do feign, and the decei^full,
verity in words: The Vissage where sad gravity did dwell, the only Symbol of
a modest life, now turns to cruelty with boiling wra^h, and healdong estautes
with furious ^its.

Even as the vapours of hot Et^a's Furnace with a swift rolling turns the
stones about or into embers, flames Vesveus burn: so the blind fury of revenge
excites this Malchus on a guiltless man to fall, and falsely to accuse poor
naked truth.

Oh thou desire of glory, swo^n with pride, mother of ^o great mischief,
glittering praise of goodness coloured with a show divine; when the minds
Kingdom thou hast once possessed, with flattering poison thou inchauntst our
thoughts, and (reason bani^ht) thou disturbst the Court, the Court within us;
Piety and truth, with shamefa^tnesse and faith, are fled from thee: Faith of
the better Age a common Guest, hath lastly left the vice-dishonor'd earth.

If there were any Artist that could set (the foreheads clouds removed.) our
cares to sight (the breast being made transparent) and disclose our minds dark
inner parts you might perceive monsters there varied into wondrous forms, and
those all stabled in a little Cell, being more than in remote and foreign
parts Nilus and Ganges bear, or all the births that Affrick^ yields, with
furious portents, and those that hored Caucasus affords in his dark Dens; the
cruel Tigers rage would not be wanting there, nor the fierce wildness of the
deep shining yellow Lioness, nor the dire gluttony of ranging Wolves, whose
appetites no slaughter can assuage, nor the fell Basalisk with poisoning
breath, or stinging Asp that brings long lasting ^eepe, or Scorpion dreaded
for his hooky tail, or Crocodile whose voice with feigned tears so sound
through the seaweeds, nor the Foxes wiles, or the Hyenaes ^alse play.

Counter feit piety doth often cloak merciless Tyrants, and the guarded
stol^impiou^ natures; in a homely weed under the Cottage shadow of a swain
virtue obscured, lies nor sells her self for haughty titles, laughing as in
scorn at the mad tumults of our Justice-Courts, and the applause of common
peoples breath, nor Client like sits waiting at the door of a great Patron,
but doth pass away the silent Ages of her blessed life in rural privacy,
being unto none saving her self, or but few others known.


MY Lord, you live secure, and feel not how your Kingly power debayes, nor yet
discern like one that's blind, what snares are daily set to ruin you; for if
that vulgar Preacher breath but anoyeare bonds, prison, cross, in vain you
then may threaten, proudly now his forces he surveyes, your persons Guard his
followers obscure.


What danger fear you from th'unarmed root.


If private Conventicl^s you permit, how can you sleep secure?


But he instructs those that run to him of their own accord.


A wide spread Faction we should fear the more.


His sanctit^ confutes that crimination.


This veil doth cover detestable Acts.


Of purpled Rulers we may stand in dread.


And fear the fraud of gravest hypocrites.


He that is helpless, armlesse, that alayes his thirst with water takes his
food in woods, his lodging on the grass; oh what deceit can he intend a
Serpent!


His attire, his meat and drink you see, but in his breast you see not what he
bears.


A Kings estate is miserable, if he stand in awe of those that are in misery.


If a King through fond security become a prey, he is most miserable.


How then may a King remain in safety?


What withstands his pleasant queit, let him soon extirp.


Surely a Tyrant and a King that's good, differ in this; the one his foes
preserves, the other is a foe to them he Rules.


Either is hard, to perish or destroy; but it is better, if make choice he
must, an enemy to destroy.


Where no necessity the one requires, either is miserable.


Should you in such a tumult use no rigour, the wavering vulgars fury being
raised the Princes, Laws, Religion, Power contemned, is to the base Plebeans
made a scorn; Take heed, that lenities deceitful looks draw not your mind
from equity, what seems a far off mildness, to one near at hand will be the
greatest wildness; while you spare one Factious man that's desperately bad, you
seek to ruin all: whom he to arm against your life endeavours day and night,
what needs must be at length feign to be done; that the inconstant people are
stirred up to arms, that every where they all things burn, with woeful War, and
Villages left wasted, our Virgins ravished and our Cities fire, and with
ambigous fortune Armies joined. When Liberty shall burst the reins of Laws,
that clemency too late you'll then condemn. And here behold that plague and
mischiefs head, This is that high Reformer, question him, and if I do not err,
you shall hear from him much more than fame hath publis^t: nor do I marvel
that there can be some that scorn your Government, when you your self the
wicked sort through lenity provoke.


When a good King is able to do much, his power he ought to moderate.


Say you so? This upstart now will moderate your Sceptre, and you must rule
according to his will, but if you had the spirit of a King --


But get thee gone, and leave these things to me.


And so I will, lest you rail at me as you did before: when Queens yield much
to men of basest kind, what hope of equity will cherish others.


is she gone? she is, now let me tell thee; there's nothing that may move
thee, or that strange thou may conceive, if an offended woman, rich, noble,
potent, finally a Queen, do entertain more anger then is meet. Even thou thy
self may witness it the best how much thy welfare I have still regarded;
for all the people hate thee, and require thee as guilty to be punshed, our
Priests murmur, our Nobles grieve, and surely what it is that may increase the
common sorts complaint, I will relate in brief: In thy Orations, thou all the
Orders openly revilest, the vulgar sort in our old Laws unskilled, thou
cunningly receive the deadly venom of a new Sect dispersing, and impairest
with speeches turbulent, our regal State, with the Republic peace,
prohibiting our men of War their Captain to obey, the people Caesar, while thou
promise new Kingdoms to the vulgar, and to free them of their newforraign
yok, andstir'st them up with a vain confidence, nor doest permit this our
Rebellious Nation to rest: And madmen like us, as if we had endured but small
calamity, thou reinsittest the Romanes a new War against us to make; Nor doubt
I what thou dare do being absent, seeing thou openly dost me upbraid with an
unlawful marriage, and would heap the peoples hate upon me, and attempt'st
all that thou can to make my brother raise unnatural War against me: And as
if thou had done little mischief: for the safety of all alike presuming to do
all things, nowagainst Heaven thou preparest to fi^ht; those holy Rites
attempting to abolish, wherewith this Kingdom hitherto hath stood: These things
the people grudge at, and complain that I am flow to vindicate and right their
Countries Laws, yet have I shown my self in nothing harsh to thee, but all the
favour that a benevolent and friendly Judge can show thee, thou shallt
plenteously receive; For no Assyrian or Egyptian Father hath me begotten a
blood-thirsty Tyrant, who had with you own Country, parent, nurse, I mean the
spacious Earth, so that as oft as any of the meanest People perish, I lose me
thinks a member of my self even from this body torn; Nor thou shalt find of
Herod an upright and gentle Judge: If thou be able falsely to con^ute what other
things are laid unto thy charge, All thou hast uttered against me and mine I
freely pardon, heartily remit, and thou shalt understand that I neglect mine
own and prosecute the public wrong, the people being witness: and I wish
thou may so clear thy self of other crimes, that no occasion of severity be
left me through thy innocence.


Go forwards to be gracious in this, And thou shalt live renowned to thy
successors, not in Gold-ore or Military bands: And think thy Kingdom safe, as
those achieved by equity, which charity and faith do evermore defend.


He unto whom the Almighty doth committ a Kingdoms Rule ought many things to
hear, but all things that he hears to believe, it is not necessary, envy,
fear, grief, lucre, favour, oft suppress the truth. If any of the people or
the fathers think I have uttered any thing against him in rigorous manner, or
ungently railed, Tis necessary, ere he me accuse, that he examine his own
course of life; This hath been ever my care and custom public offences to
reproove in public, nothing in private have I done or taught, Blind lurking
holes I seek not, neither tax men but their v^ces, when the soldiers asked me
how I could serve at once the King and God: To ravish ^ruse violence, abuse or
^ircu^vent the simple with deceit, I utt^rly forbad ^hem: To compose their
sensual desires, I gave them charge, according to the measure of their means:
nor any hope of new things do I preach, but only that which you believe with
me, out of the ancient Prophets; i^h mean time, none of so many thousand is
produced, that through my doctrine hath contemned his Prince. Those matters
whether by uncertain fame to you related, or by hood winkt wrath still raging
head-long with desire to hurt, falsely invented, naked verity will by it self
and easily confute. How piously I prize the holy Rites and ancient
institutions, there's no sign more certain then the impeacher of my crimes,
because he comes not forth to public view, where feigned things be easily
believed, he secretly may murmure. For my denying that your Brothers wife is
yours by right consider with your self whether you ought to serve your carnal
will, rather then your Creator, and I wish all men devoted to the love of Kings
would be in mind alike, to mention things that are both profitable, true, and
good, rather then whas are pleasant and will soon turn to their damage; Then
against how many mischiefs and molestations would the Gate or entrance be shut
up, If heretofore freely and truly I have spoken ought, do you that in your
ways are just and good, (as Equities defenders are obliged) receive it in good
part, and set these bounds to your high potency which are prescribed you by the
Laws measure: For what Law you hold here against others, God the King Supreme
against you and others of your place retains: Then whatsoever you shall judge
of me, believe that God will judge the same of you.


When thou shalt come to Heaven speak heavenly things, but whi^e thou livest on
earth, earths Laws abide.


To earthly Kingdoms reverence I bear, and Kings obey, but those eternal
Kingdoms I hold my Country and their King adore.


The matter even it self i^structs thee how Kings to obey, that doest desire a
King such Laws as thou ordeinest to obey.


If I may Laws ordeine, I would proclaim to Kings, their people should
obedience yield, and Kings to God.


Thou hast enough contended bear him hence, the case is doubtful, nought can I
determine, until all things more ceartainly appear.


Who doth conceive that by a Tyrants words the close or hidden meaning of his
mind, he can perceive let him well underdand, he trusts into a foul deceitful
glass, God prosper and turn all things to the best, what my soul fears, it
trembles to divine.


How wretched and how overwhelmed with care a Kings condition is, no tongue of
man, or politic Oration can express, nor any thoughts attain; the vulgar
hold us only free and happy, that are vexed with terror, and with poverty
besieged, with miserable servitude oppre^t: the people, whatsoever they desire,
or love or dread, they freely dare confess, and modest riches without fear
en^oy: But when we walk abroad we must assume an honest persons habit, and are
forced to promise courteously with gracious looks, our anger to defer and hide
our hate, till a fit season, chiefly then to threat, when greatest cause of
fear our minds torments: A modest Prince the people do desp^e, one rigerous
they hate, the wavering vulgar we are compelled to serve, and can command
nothing to our desire. This new-come Prophet if I cut off, I shall offend the
people, if I preserve him, for my Royal State I little do provide, what shall
I do then? I must regard my Kingdom, none so near as I am to my self, if I
must serve the people for a Sceptre, what's more foolish then, while thou
seek to please the vulgar sort to cast away a Kingdom? Joy and wrath the
people rashly take, and rashly leave: tis now my resolution to conffrm the
Royal power that I hold, with blood: the vulgar will be easily appeased. If by
my sufferance this evil creep a little further, twill be past redress, why he
forsooth durst tell me to my teeth my marriage was unchaste, and if he escape for
this unpunished, his audacious will there will not rest, but Scepters to his
Laws then he will force to stoop, then he will cast his Captives into chains,
then he will seek to rule, and not be ruled, give Laws to Kings, and turn all
upside down, we must apply unto a g^owing evil speedy cure, flames rising must
be quenched ere they increase. By suffering old injuries, we raise fresh
contumelies, new reproachful terms, If with the peoples favour I may gain
some satisfaction by this pun^shment, to wyn their favour I will not neglect:
But if perverse against me they persist, What Malchus of our Laws may freely
babble, what curious questions he may vainly cast with intricate debate, that, I
conceive, concerns not me, and let the people know, this one Law to be kept,
that they may think, All things to me are lawful without Law.


Oh thou Creator of this spacious Orb, whose nod makes all things tremble,
Heaven adorned with glittering stars, Earth variously decked with flourishing
Array, and Seas that swell with raging violent motions, ebbes and floods: Hath
not loud flame that knew the former age, brought to our hearing thy then famous
acts? When thou by vigour of thy puissant arm, proud Kingdoms boasting of
their, gold and wealth hast utterly abolished and exextirped us in their land
to plant, their land to prepared, neither by counsel, strength, nor Arms of
ours. But Heavens Almighty favour safely brought us through the fierce Armies,
art not thou the King of ^? a^t not thou the God of the Iews Nation, by whose
guiding hand (our enemies destroyed) their treacherous Tents we trampled under
foot, con^iding not in our own strength and com^ge; but in thee our most
auspicious Leader, bringing spoils and triumph to our Countrey^ wilt thou now
being once our Father, utterly for sake the people whom thou love? Are we now
left a f^ble for our foes? Religion lies with Piety despised; in purpled
Courts, fraud is predomanant; the holy flock yield as a sacrifice their pious
necks to the ^ell Axe, our Prophets by the sword perish; our Tyrant enemies
rejoi^e in our laments, and they they the Kingdom rule un^er pretext of piety
and zeal, though punishment descr^ing whilst they smart, whose worth deserves
a Kingdom. Ri^e, O Lord, and help thy people, To our Adversaries show thy
sel^e such as Thee our Fathers saw in the Red-sea, confounding Pharao^s Host;
Such as the Prophets boy did thee behold, when to disperse the flames
throughout the Camp. Thou to thy fiery Horses gave the re^gns. The must of
error that obscures the light of humane understanding overwhelmed with a dark
cloud: O Lord: now drive away, let both the Land warmd with the rising Sun, and
that which. doth it in down-going view, confess that only thou c^nst all
things do.


THus truly is the state of humane things, That if God grant that we should
have our wish, we are to seek, uncertain what to choose, what to refuse; we
covet honour, we^lth, Dominion, Heritage for us and ours, which having our
desire, we often lose bondage, imprisonment, and shameful flight unto our foes
we wish, which oft beget their greatest glory, to our bitter shame: And surely
I have learned, that this is true (not go to fetch examples a far off) by mine
own dang^r; for when this Baptizer, living remote from^s on Mountain tops,
bewitched and d^ew with him the ridiculous rout; I only (the rest idle) did
defend the Pharisees, Authority and worth: nor did I cease always and means to
try, until this Adversaries guilty hands were strongly bound, and in the
common Goal, his insolence allayed, and the whole Court his crimes had
knowledge of by my redort; and and yet his c^mes imprisonment, and bonds,
nought in my thog^hts avail, the peoples hearts the horrid power of this
hellish plague hath so possessed, and every one hath quast the deadly poison,
that they all bewail his dangerous condition, yielding honour unto his ^minent
noworthy death. But wherescere he can, let MALCHUS go, their curse^ h: cannot
escape, at me they point, on me they look with a Malignant eye, doing all
favours to that wicked wretch, who hath berest us of all differences in our
a^airs and orders, keeping watch before the Prison. Surely nothing now in
misery exceeds us, that devote our selves (all other business set apart) unto
the peoples profit; he that slaves himself to them, may easily perceive, that
such his favour he hath ill bestowed, as upon those that being ill inclined
th^ough ^nate malice, ever use to bear toward the ^ad, good will, and
to-contemne the chiefest persons of a Commonwealth. Oh whither shall I go? how
first complain, where shall my anger principally light? whom shall I first
assist? the ungodly crew love that false Prophet, and the Rab^es murmure, the
King connives, the Nobles him neglect! I only with these shoulders do support,
even with these, our Countries falling Rites, none lending me a hand; why then
do I, and none but I, the common change bewail? shall I put o^f my office, and
forsake our Orders, dignity, with all our laws and sacred Rites, and suffer my
poor self to be a laughing-stock to those that hate me? I'll do it, i'll suffer
it, I indeed I will; for what else ^m I do? shall I alone bear that my self,
which all refuse to bear? and lay my self fo^th to the public ruin? God keep
his own, ^ith now the world is such, that every man must loc^ unto himself: I'll
do the like, and if the Common-wealth I rule amiss, then let the ruin light
upon my head; those that now while I stand, favour me most, will first when I
am fallen, assault me with their heels; if well I rule, and do ill place my
favour, I shall get nothing but envy: now too lat^ I like GAMALI^S advise,
unless perhaps, no man from error can return too late; I had rather they
should seek me constant here, than when all is done, my indiscretion punish:
what seems good to each man, let him think I'll rid my self of troubles, and
repair my favour with this Prophet; nor will he being a simple hearted man
reject me; But If I find him towards me pe^ver^e, I'll set all engines, lest
the people think he perished by my craft; if they to me be reconciled, the
business will not fall on every side, and here I think he comes, he comes
indeed, see what a company follows the wicked wretch, and we the while sit in
the Cities heart amongst our Chairs, alone and (...) but I first w^ll hear what
this grand Mr. utters.


O thou that (...) things dost make void, judge and rule what ere the air in
its loose b^some bears, what ere the (...) can precreate, ^r sea within its
waters nourish; thee there God all do acknowledge, (...); thee alone find
the^r creation; in a constant way thy laws once given, freely they ob^y; At thy
command the spring with flowers paints the sert^le fields, and fruits the
summer yields, Autumn, pure wine abundantly aff^ds, and winter with white
frost the (...) attires, the crooked Ri^ers roll into the sea huge heaps of
waters, the sea ebs and flows, the silver Moon illuminates the night, the
golden Sun the day, and views this orb with never r^sting brightness; To
conclude, there's nothing whatsoere in heaven or earth that does not willingly
its king obey, its maker love. and towards him declare with all the service
possibly it can its good affection, but only man; Man who is bound far more
than all the rest Gods precepts to delight in and obey, only contemns them,
and rejects the reigns of laws divine; yea, into every sin precipitates
himself, accounts all just in his own strength, and measures right by lust.


Thy fair beginnings as yet well proceed.


Nor do I so much wonder at the Gentiles, that through the world do wander from
the way, as at this people that themselves do boast to be Gods heritage, yet
rail at others, and cry them down as impious, when no Nation on this globe
seated whersoere the sun surveys the earth, lives more licentious.


Surely as yet he hath said no untruth.


Nor is this only the light vulgars fault: The Levite in white v^sture sh^ning
far, and the Law writer of his knowledge proud, and you so reverend for age
mature by oblique error, are drawn out of the way, widows and orphans causes
where you Judge, fall to the ground, the rich oppress the poor, both right
and wrong are set at equal price.


To hear this and be mute, I burst with rage.


But you, the Rabines, that in holy gifts and knowledge fain all oaths to
excel: And you the sacred dignity of Priests, and the chief Prelates of the
sacred Order, tithe all the herbs born of our mother earth, Dill, Mint, Rue,
Garlic, Nettles, or green Hey, does not escape you. But if you should read or
teach the Prophets oracles, and show the track or steps of your own holy life,
then your authority is stricken mute, then like dumb dogs that bark not: here
you fret and fume about your sheep-coats, but the Wolves which of you drive
away? the Wolves said I? you are the Wolves your selves that flee your flock,
clothed with their Woo^, their milk dot slack your thirst, their flesh your
hunger: thus your selves you feed, but not your flock.


Hence Concord with a mischief, can I brooke my Order any longer to be checked
so insolently, with so base reproach? if God from Heaven should send me with
this charge, that these things I should hear such his command, I rather would
decline, than hear so much: I can endure no longer, Ho sir, you master of
misrule, is this doctrine yours? do you instruct the silly people thus?


If you be good, those things that I declare, nothing concern you.


To traduce a Priest, does it belong to thee?


When I reprove a wicked man, I hold it spoken well.


A young man ought his elders to obey.


'Tis rather meet that all should God obey.


Then dost thou speak these things by Gods command?


Truth doth command all men to speak the truth.


It often profits to conceal the truth,


Profit with bad works joined I nought account.


Thou may call goodness what seems bad to thee.


To see (when I am able to reduce them into the way) so many thousands perish,
it seems too bad.


Thou able to reduce them, why are not we the feeders of the flock.


If it be all one both to feed and fley.


Do thine own business and let ours alone,


My neighbours misery is likewise mine.


I pray, who are you with such power endued? Are you that Christ unto our
Fathers promised?


I am not.


Are you then a Prophet?


Neither.


Are you Elias?


No.


If none of these, nor Christ our hope, no Prophet nor Elias, how dare thou be
the author of new Baptism? declare to me, whom shall we say thou art?


I am a voice that one the Mountain tops afar off call and cry, Prepare the
way, make strieght your paths, the Lord is near at hand, at whose first coming
shall the valleys rend, and Mountains will be levied with the plain, I in his
name the people do baptize, whose shoes I am not worthy to pull off, whom none
doth know thoug^ he converse with you.


What snares doth he invent, deluding me with circumstances, by what miracle
prove thou the authority which thus thou claim?


And by what miracle thine can thou prove? I may on the other side thee also
ask.


How obstinate he is, be it ne'er so much that thou concealest, yet all of us do
know, what makes thee mad: Thou surely doest desire to grow up through our
envy, thou would gain glory and mighty riches by our loss, and become
potent by flagitious Acts nor doest deceive us but deceivst thy self: neither
were thou the first that did attempt thus to beguile, yet thee the last I wish,
that may be duly punished, or that thou by my advise thy mind would rather
change, that as thou hast made many go astray through thee, they may into the
way return, I have seen others that have made a show of sever holiness by
outward habit, whereby more easily they might be thought of simple modest mind,
but by such art, honour, and wealth when once they had obtained, their
dispositions by degrees appeared and were discovered, for that pious course,
well clokd before they openly contemned and to their true conditions gave the
Reigns. But if this way thou aim at honours hight, unskilful men blind
ignorance deceives: By that Cross path, to glory none attain, unless
experience that best instructs, and age that such experience doth beget hath
very much beguiled me, for thy fame and livlyhood thou better may provide
seeking rather safety than renown.


If I deliver truth and do what's right, wherefore should any bid me hold my
peace, but if untruth, do you that are so learned declare it to the simple.


Of these things, when thou shalt suffer punishment by death, thou wilt repent
thee.


Threaten that to Those, who fear to die.


But if I live, ere long, I'll make thee muorn for this perverseness, and know
what it is, the Elders to neglect the Scribes, revile and vex the Rabines with
thy saucy Tongue, and happily feel, since thou hast no regard to purchase
friends, the power of old men's hate.


He that himself prepares for secret stealth avoyds the light and Murderers
do hate a burning Torch, that's conscious of their crimes: A child refuses
medicines intermixed with bitter wormwood* a cut wound abhors the wholesome
plasters; and to him whose breast the hidden evils of his soul torments, the
truth is grievous, which doth open lay his troubled heart and his bad mind
bewray. But O you Hypocrites in show severe, whom lawless gain with rugged
brow delights through error of the credulous common sort, how well so ever you
your thoughts conceal: And though the ^oule sink of your impious minds be
closely hid, your gnawing conscience argues your lurking secrets, That
tormenter enclosed within your Entrails eats you up, scourging with cruel
stripes; O three times blessed, and more is he, that being pure within, becomes
not guilty to Domestic Judges, nor by a torturer within his heart, pent up
unseen, endures perpetual smart.


THere is no certain trusting to the King, his and the Common cause, he hath
betrayed through foul ambition, while he bends his thoughts to please the
people, and with favour hunts for airy applause; Me, under show of lenity, he
labours to subject unto the Co^ons wrath, and with my peril would vindicate
his wrongs, even prepared to satisfy the people with my head, as if he saw,
they heavily did bear the Baptists death: But if to have the chief of their
new Faction flaine, they took it lightly; he subtly by the vulgar would be
thought with greatest glory to have taken revenge. Thus to themselves Kings of
their Cities blood exhibit shows by turns, and make a sport of mutual
slaughter, challenge to themselves, and publish, all by them was only done, all
whatsoever the vulgar Votes approve, and attribute our labours industry to
their own praise; but if the uncertain air of popular ^avour otherwise do
turn against their expectation and desire, then on their Officers they cast the
fault, and with a vile breath, their own crime avert from innocent blood. One
only now remains a Partner of our grief, the Queen enraged, much like a Tiger
of her Whelps ^erest, for that the Baptist had before the King accused the
alliance of her former Bed to be polluted, openly condemning the league of
marriage with a Brothers wife forbidden by the Law: now while the fire of
estuating wrath is fresh and hot; I will add fire-brands to her troubled
thoughts, and feed them with fit language: But behold, how oppor^unely she
presents her self.

Now poison comes to poison, flame to flame, now comes the uttermost hazard.


Noble Queen, our Nations glorious honour, who alone in this so great a Kingdom
do deserve the highest place, God save you.


And thee Malchus, the most religious Rabine: but why sad?


For that which I suppose, your mind afflict.


It may be so, but tell me, what is that?


Do you, to see your dignity despised, your royal names authority so sacred
throughout the world to be accounted vile, your Crown made subject to the
vulgars sco^ne, bear it with patience?


What then shall I do? teach me a remedy.


Within your heart conceive so high a wrath, as may be worthy of your Princely
stock, your nuptial bed and bosom.


That's done already, I am burst with ire, weep and exclaim and sharply
reprehend, but no relief by wrath or tears I gain, for all my words are
scattered by the wind.


If with your husband a meet power you had, would he have born your wrongs thus
unrevenged? Or rather (may I speak more truly) his.


Thou feest the people, how they be inclined. Perhaps by this imprisonment the
King, The Baptists eager spirits think to ^uaile, and to allay his boldness?


If you suppose imp^isonment and bonds, Can bridle the fierce spirit of this
thief, Your Highness erres; The rage of savage beasts, That break their Dens
and liberty regain, Is much more vehement them theirs that range, In woods or
desert Mountains: Being freed, What will not he attempt, Whose ^etters now the
people reveren^e, wrath once ^rovokd is kindled not a^laid, by taunts and scorn
^he haughty spirit is (...) f^ry bor^.


This benefit should rather quench it quite, For that by royal mildness he is
free, Who by his own perverseness might have perished.


What your esteem a benefit, he holds an injury, and will more oft remember,
that you imprisoned him, then set him free.


A rough and crabbed na^ure, thou relat'st.


This in most men is naturally graff'd, What favour you afford is quickly lost,
but what disfavor, no man doth forget, Good turns if born in memory with bad,
All men well near do hate, Think that the Baptist, as oft as he remembers
your Desert, will not his crime forget, and still believe, he is not loo^e from
that, But in your thoughts, a guilty man by soul ambi^ion freed, His pain
remitted and you wrath suppressed but for a time.


Yet courtesy prevails to mitigate fierce natures.


What with long use is hardened to the worst, We much more easily may break then
bend.


What, do you then advise me in this case?


I'll show you quickly, may I be believed.


And what your counsel I will not delay.


By seeking, agitating, and providing, (not fitting still) great things are
brought to pass.


If seeking, agitating and providing nought may avail, 'tis better to sit
still, then to make work in vain, and be to others a mocking stock.


Where strength oft cannot, labour overcomes: a tall Oak is not suddenly born
down, nor does the warring Ram at one assault overthrow the walls, what, often
you suppose cannot be finished, is in time dispatched^ And importunity doth
overcome, what reason sometimes cannot; therefore seek, solicit Herod, mingle
tears with suite, wrath with monitions, flattering words with brawls, work and
entreat him by what means you can, embracing all occasions every where; But if
by such plain course you cannot speed, set snares and use deceit, for mine own
part, I am resolved until, we find success in our desig^ments, never to
desi^t.


Envy at length, and bitter grie^e incensed by impious F^ries, on this pious
Prophet have cas^ the venom of their cruelty; from thence fierce calum^ny and
false de^raction joined with fell cruelty, by cursed fraud maintain the
battle, from hence harmless truth s^pported by no guard, their threats
contemns. So many weapons do one head assault; so many su^tle drifts do
menace death to this young man, yet like the hardy Holme, with North-east wi^ds
assaulted, or a Rock, that's ^eaten by the Seas returning flood, ^e with no
fear is moved: O power divine by all men to be hono^'d! candid Truth, whom
neither force of arms with trembling fear, nor fraud with all her projects
can depell from her firm station or unmoved estate. The grievous changes of
unstable fortune th^u only fear not, and dost arm thy breast, obnoxious to
no chances, with a strength insuperable, and th^ impartial hand of the three
Ladies, both of life and death for bid us to begriev'd at. But this Prophet I
am too slow to meet with, and relate the ruthful'st news that ever pierced his
ears; yet see he stands before the prison door. O thou more holy then thy
holy Parents, and th'only ^cred it of old innocence! Now for thy safety in due
time provide: The Rabine Malchus privately intends deceit against thee, and
King Herods wife, unwitting what to do is almost mad; The Courtiers flatter
her, the King diffembles what he conceives, and others twixt the teeth mutter,
as those that dare not speak the truth. Now is your final peril.


And what's that?


To escape death, you shall have much to do.


Of eminent evils, I hold that the sum.


Then which, none greater can a man befall.


As Tyrants power and deceit may cease, Times length may bear it of its own
accord, Which evil men do f^ar, good men do wish.


But your own safety though you do neglect, consider ours, and that high
spirit of yours a while remitting, sue for Herods mercy, and make some friends,
I hope he will not prove inexorable.


Do not I do this?


That mind, God grant you.


To sue there's no need, for that mind ^ath been long now with my blood the
Tyrant hastes to satisfy his wrath: Neither do I rcsist, how am I able rather
to pacify this bloody King, Then when the same things, we will not and will.


Good words I pray.


Why then report you thus, and thus advise me? ^y there are two Kings, and they
on both sides two things bid me do that be repugnant, The one King is earthly
cruel and mischievous, who threatens death, and hath a power my body to
destroy; The other heavenly, merciful and mild, forbids me death to fear, and
a reward proposes to my tourage, being able in flames inevitable to torment
body and soul: Now seeing these two Kings do differ in command, give me
advice. wh^ther I ^all obey.


If now ^ccasion offered you omir. Herod will never after be appeas's, but God
is ever easy to be pleased.


Gods anger, the more gently it doth rage, the more severely punishment
req^ires, being once moved.


So, death which God would have all mortals fear, do you disdain; the body
with the soul, he in a mutual bond of love hath knit, lest unadvisedly some
cause be offred, that may their holy fellowship disjoyne.


Death I disdain nor, but by momentany. shun that erernall, and the use of
light which God hath given me, at his command I willingly surrender.


Will you then, being a Parent thus forsake your Orphans.


He who believes that God his Father is, shall never ^eean Orphan.


Can the tears of all your friends and kindred, whom you leave unto a
spiteful Tyrant move you nothing?


I leave them not, but they me rather leave; for truly unto death I run the
way from the beginning of the world ordained, yea all men that enjoy the gift
of life are born to die, and and we are all restrained with one con^ition, we
tend all to death, and thither every day doth surely lead us; God will have
death a penance to the bad, and to the good a Port, the utmost bounds of a
long journey, and the Gate that leads to the beginning of a longer life, that
sends us rather born again then dead. unto a glorious house of endless light;
This is to man from prison a relcase and a free passage to life wanting death;
this way the whole flock of the Fathers went, and all must follow them: what
man is he, that having once begun a race to run, desires not instantly the
goal to gain? who, by night wandering in the stormy Sea, refuses shelter in a
quiet Port: What exile straying or'c the Desert Hills of a strange Country,
will be discontent into his own to make a quick return? I therefore having
overpassed my way, suppose my self come to the very goal. Now almost quitted
from the sea of life, I view the Haven; from a foreign soil, home I return to
see my heavenly father, that father who with waters bounds the earth; invested
earth with Heaven, he that rules the certain courses of the moving Sphere, who
only all things made, guides and preserves; to whom all things both quick and
dead do live even as the flame it's Globes doth upwards roll, waters
perpetually downw^rd^ fall, and all things do proceed to their own foment; my
(...) from heavendeso^nded, labours now, a habitation in eternal light (...)
gain with him that all things did create, whom not to see, is death, life to
behold. If Caucasus rough-growne with hoary frost, the Air with Tempests and
the Sea with storms, and the whole Region with excessive heate should all
resist me, thither I would go; to see so many Leaders, Prophers, Kings, and
pious Judges, shall I not make way, though, with a thousand deaths I be
opposed? My spirit therefore from this body freed, (this carnal prison)
thither longs to fly, Even whither all the world betimes or late shall be
dispatch'd; For long life I conceive, is nothing, but a gentle Servitude in a
hard painful prison; O sweet death, that art of heavy Toils the sole Release,
the Haven where all grief and trouble cease, yet unto few men profitable known:
Receive this shipwrecked body in thy bosom, and bring it where eternal peace
abides, whither no impious violence, deceit, or ealumny shall follow it.


O thou, thrice happy in this constancy of mind, O wretches that we are, whom
foolish fear debarres the sweet Society and sight of true felicity; Then since
thou hold it what's needful to be done, to thee we wish eternal health and
Farewell. How are the minds of men in ways unlike turned by discordant strite?
of no offence he that is guilty, doth not fear to dye, he that deserves to
dye, if with vain threats death lightly greet him, with degenerate fear
grows pale and trembles; As the wicked wight shuns death with heavy heart,
so he that's good, of death des^ous, thorough flames and floods, over deveous
Rocks, all dangers and E^remes, freely precipitates his noble Soul; For sundry
benefits to death belong to evil men unknown, a happy life is Fates
Associate; neither do the Good totally dye, but still their better part
contemns the greedy fire and Mounts aloft to its own Country, Heaven; Amongst
the Saints a certain Habitation doth attend souls that are harmless, but the
guilty G^ost, by snake haird Furies in a brimstone lake, with greedy C^rberus
his hungry I^ was, and Tan^alus with plenty never filled, is evermore
affrighted, gnawn and whipped; from hence comes fear to evil men; from thence
good hope to good men, even while their minds, appeating prodigal of brittle
breath, hasten to prosecute unfading life; O ^yren! potent in bewitching baits,
Life, that abhorring goodness, dost affect what's fraudulent, and with thy
flattering might precludst the neighbout passage of our sins, and shutst the
Haven of perperuall peace; Where neither Martial clamour doth affright, nor
Trumpets, with hoarse clangor do (...) nor pilling pi^tes terifie by ^e^, nor
cruel thieves beset the silent grove, nor my one made ^ Felix, that alone with
pleasant case he may himself besot the poor and weakeore-whelmes with bloody
flaughter, neither he, that for vain Titles may exchange the lives of the rude
Commons, but where simple virtue with fair prosperity and tranquil rest
possesses all, and day can never learn to end in darkness, nor life ever
know of any fi^erall, nor Joy of grief. O thou sweet friendship of this
carnal house, and thou too lovely prison of our life; Now, now at length free
from bewitching Bonds the heaven-borne soul of man, which too unmindful of
her own Country joyful in the yoke of her d^generate foul nuptial bed, and
with somniferous I ethe^ poisoning sloth inebriated, in thy lapthou huggst. O
thou deceitful covering of day, into thy ashes vanishing return, That to her
country Heaven the soul reslord, may fill it self with becames of purest
light.

So from all sorrow she shall be enlargd.
And of all troubles thou by death discharged.

The Rabine Malchus hath my hopes beguiled, and Herod hath himself with me his
Queen, (fearing the rumours of the babbling crew) through his own yanity alike
betrayed. Next, for my daughter, what she may effect, I greatly fear, the King
did promise herat his great banquet, that he would reward her dancing feats
(which gave him high content) with whatsoever she of him should ask. Now unto
me the girl hath past her word, that she would ask of him none other boon,
but in a dish to have the Baptists head; And she will have it, certainly she
will, If Horods mind be not to me unknown, The peoples hatred I conceive on me
he will divert, himself remaining free: And I will bear it when the deed is
done, and with willing heart: with joy of my revenge weighing their hate, and
with my gain my stain, For women to be cruel 'tis a shame, a shame indeed:
unless more shame it were* that of such nature there are many Kings: But H^rod
and my daughter do appear, the ncor^r my hope is, my fear the ^ doth burn.

And hast thou (...) sufficiently ^


^ enough and royal.


Never fear, things that are (...) establish^ with my faith and before
witnesses, ask half my kingdom, it shall be thine, no power can avert him
that is willing.


We shall shortly see what thing it i^.


'Tis certain, ask it now.


Your Kingdom Sir I need not, which I deem even as mine own while you
possess the Crown, as if I held the Sceptre, but I ask a thing b^th meet and
easy.


Thou thy self (not I) art in the fault thou hast it not.


Give me the Bapists head then in this Charger.


What words are these by thee so rashly vented?


Not rashly neither.


Thou demand'st a gift that ill become a Virgin.


To destroy an enemy is no uncomely deed.


Is therefore he an enemy and worthy of a Kings wrath.


He's worthy of such wrath, who by his crimes deserves it.


What redress may I then purchase for the peoples hate?


The people must obey, and Kings command.


'Tis a Kings duty just things to command.


Kings by commanding, may make those things just which were before uniust.


But Kings commands, the Law doth moderate.


If that be right, which pleases Princes, then they rule the Laws, ^ot the
Laws them.


Then, for a King, a Tyrant the people will divulge me.


But your Sceptre keeps them in awe.


It doth, and yet they'll babble.


Such babbling Sir, by punishment severe is brid^ed.


Kingdoms are ill kept with fear,


And Kingdoms by impunity of crimes are easily subverted.


Yet we find, Kings are securest in the Cities faith.


It is not needful that a King be loved, but feared.


The cruel are or^ whelmed with hate.


A gentle King the Vulgar do^ despise.


My Lord, all you have pleaded only tends, in my opinion, that your promise
past, in vain may pass away, as yet me thinks, you do not know the duties of
a King; if th^se things which the common sort ^uppose hone^t and otherwise;
you, for a King bel^eve to be the same, King Herod erres. Brothers and sisters,
fathers, sons in law, friends, kindred, Citizens, and adverse parties, are
bonds for poor men, but vain words for Kings; Let him that on his head once
puts a Crown, put from him all degrees of Common duty; let him judge all
things honest that conduce to a Kings benefit, and hold no fact to be unseemly,
that he shall effect for his ow^e safety; on the King depends the peoples
welfare; Whosoever then to wards his Prince is pious, hath regard unto the
pecples welfare: shall the blood of this base fellow be so highly prizd, that
for anxiety by day nor night you can repose? release us of this fear, of
shame, your Sceptre, and of waste, your City, of rapine, Arms, and all of
civil war? 'Tis fit by an example new and great, you should ordein that
Kingdoms to all men be sacred and inviolably stand; he has committed an
ungracious act, and by that let him perish; if no crime he has committed let
him seek for me^: Give to your Queen her enemy, your Queen if you neglect,
yet as a King and father your promise to your daughter see performed.


That Promise to perform with my best faith I am determined, but if my advice,
the ^i^le do ask more wisely she will wish.


But if she ask my counsel, yours my Lord she may not change or take.


Is't even so? should I so unadvised have made a vow? thus to a foolish girl
my faith obligd? and thus committed to a woman's ha^ds my Kingdom, safety,
treasure, life, and death?


Kings promises let certain truth confirm.


Well. fifth I may not, what I may deny again I do admonish and entreat; let
not wrath urge you to a bloody act, unworthy of your dignity and sex.


Grant this, and leave all other things to us.


If of the Prophet you determi^e ought more rigorous, the peril, blame, and
shame is only yours.


Now shall we vindicate our royal dignity in future times to be of none
derided, now I'll force the flubborne people to speak well of Kings or learn
it to their grief, and make them hold that all their Kings commands they gladly
must bear and obey though never so unjust.


O thou great City where King David reigned, you Towers of wealthy Salomon and
Salem, from whence against thy Prophets doth arise a rage so terrible, and
cruel thrist of blood so innocent? unhappy thou, whom it becomes to be a
pattern, rule, or helm of pi^ty, art now become the only mirror of a wicked
life: Slaughter with violence, fraud, theft and rapine, are thy chief
exercise, no Godly zeal persuades the Churchman to restrain his hands from
horrible deceits, the people now forsake the Lord, that all things did create,
and worship Idols for God, stone and wood, with Calves and Lambs their Altars
are still hot, and Images the workman doth adore, which he himself hath
wrought, life he requires of a mere stock, and eloquence he craves of a dumb
stone, the rich intereats the poor, the Lo^ the Servant, ancient Rites are
lost; The guiltless Prophets blood brings thee perforce to the Tribunal of
the greatest Judge, The poor exclaim and widows fill the air with their
complaints, for which the fearful pain of just revenge attends the^, unlesses
^ be in my divination much de^eiv'd, for he^ that throws down insolence and
pride, (being the (...) of Neaven, Earth and Seas) views from above
th'oppressed peoples tears, their heav^e prayers never doth forget, and
speedily with a (...) arm, will punish thy unspeak^ble misdeeds: And over
(...) thy Towers, where with thou swelst in silent victor-like, The barbarou
foe, shall all thy Buildings, Farms and Lands possess; The V^neyard Keeper
shall repair his fruit to am Out (...) Master; And where now Salomons Temple
high towards Heaven do th^ise, ^ foreign ru^tick shall his harvest make: O
therefore, while Gods favour to rep^ affords thee respit of thy ill pa^t life
the sins ^ a move those fruitless Images of foreigne Rites: Cu^b thy proph^e
desire of wretched wealth, and greedy thirsting for thy Brot^rs blood; But thou
wilt not repent thy ill past lif^, ^ Rites amove, nor shun the greedy thirst of
brothers blood, not one profane desire of wretched wealth: A vicious P^ague
shall therefore fe^se on thee: Famine and war, with barrenness (...) want,
shall over whelm thee, no^ to be withstood; till thou be quitted with dese^ed
blood.


Where may I find (O who will tell me where?) The Prophets followers, that I
may relate my heavy tidings.


Stay your pace a while, ^ in brief, for what you bear I gladly would
partake.


O but to know, what you to know desire, 'twill not delight you.


Yet your short abode think not too long, how ere the master stands.


Know you what boon the Daughter of our King hath begged of him.


To have the Prophets head given her in a Charger.


And his head, even so she hath obtained.


O horrible and most inhumane act; that heavenly vigour and comely countenance
by rigorous death is utterly decayed, and cruel force with ever during silence
hath shut up those lips that did abound with sacred virtue.


why weep you? cease to pour out vain complaints.


When things to be bewaild I see and hear, why should I not bewail them?


If death be to be bewaild, let us bewail the dead, whose hopes do with their
bodies lye interrd; who do not think, their short sleep being done, their
bones must rise again, and there remains another life, Let wretched men
bewail those that are dead, and only wretched lived; None can be made by
fortune miserable, though the like and of mortal life betide the innocent and
guilty, good and bad, no man shall die ill, that hath lived well: If by the
several manners of their ends you judge men miserable, you will think so many
holy fathers to be such, who dyed by fire, or water, sword or cross, for him
that dyed Defender of the truth, both for Religion and his Country Laws, in
all good things pursuing we should pray, and wish to have like end or funeral
day.


Verily you have uttered nought amiss, but we whom errors and opinion draw,
foolish by flying death with death do meet, the water drowning whom the fire
hath spared; And by the power of contagious air, others are killed that have
escaped the sea, And some, that in the battle have survived, with sickness
pining die; God doth ordeine we may defer, but not our deaths eschew;

And daily we delay our hours of death, yet with
Diseases, danger, troubles, grief:
Long life is nothing, but a brittle chain
Of diuturnall evil, which is knit
With a contiuall course, and speedy race,
Even to the bounds of death: Not do we hold,
(Bound with this bond) our selves to be inthral'd
In misery, but fear the fatal knife,
With deeper horror then a servile life.


