WE might well call this short Mock-play of ours
A Posy made of Weeds instead of Flowers;
Yet such have been presented to your noses,
And there are such, I fear, who thought 'em Roses.
Would some of 'em were here, to see, this night,
What stuff it is in which they took delight.
Here, brisk insipid Blades, for wit, let fall
Sometimes dull sense; but oftener, none at all:
There, strutting Heroes, with a grim-fac'd train,
Shall brave the Gods, in King Cambyses vain.
For (changing Rules, of late, as if men writ
In spite of Reason, Nature, Art, and Wit)
Our Poets make us laugh at Tragoedy,
And with their Comedies they make us cry.
Now, Critiques, do your worst, that here are met;
For, like a Rook I have hedged in my Bet.
If you approve; I shall assume the state
Of those high-flyers whom I imitate:
And justly too; for I will show you more
Than ever they vouchsafed to show before:
I will both represent the feats they do,
And give you all their reasons for 'em too.
Some honour to me will from this arise.
But if, by my endeavours, you grow wise,
And what was once so praised you now despise;
Then I'll cry out, swelled with Poetique rage,
'Tis I, John Lacy, have reformed your Stage.

HOnest Frank! I'm glad to see thee with all my heart: how long hast thou been
in Town?


Faith, not above an hour: and, if I had not met you here, I had gone to look
you out; for I long to talk with you freely, of all the strange new things we
have heard in the Country.


And, by my troth, I have longed as much to laugh with you, at all the
impertinent, dull, fantastical things, we are tired out with here.


Dull and fantastical! that's an excellent composition. Pray, what are our men
of business doing?


I never enquire after 'em. Thou know my humour lies another way. I love to
please my self as much, and to trouble others as little as I can: and therefore
do naturally avoid the company of those solemn Fops; who, being incapable of
Reason, and insensible of Wit and Pleasure, are always looking grave, and
troubling one another, in hopes to be thought men of Business.


Indeed, I have ever observed, that your grave lookers are the dullest of men.


I, and of Birds, and Beasts too: your gravest Bird is an Owl, and your gravest
Beast is an Ass.


Well; but how dost thou pass thy time?


Why, as I use to do; eat and drink as well as I can, have a She-friend to be
private with in the afternoon, and sometimes see a Play: where there are such
things (Frank) such hideous, monstrous things, that it has almost made me
forswear the Stage, and resolve to apply my self to the solid nonsense of your
pretenders to Business, as the more ingenious pastime.


I have heard, indeed, you have had lately many new Plays, and our Country-wits
commend 'em.


I, so do some of our City-wits too; but they are of the new kind of Wits.


New kind? what kind is that?


Why, your Blade, your frank Persons, your Drolls: fellows that scorn to
imitate Nature; but are given altogether to elevate and surprise.


Elevate, and surprise? prithee make me understand the meaning of that.


Nay, by my troth, that's a hard matter: I don't understand that my self. 'Tis
a phrase they have got among them, to express their no-meaning by. I'll tell
you, as well as I can, what it is. Let me see; 'tis Fighting, Loving, Sleeping,
Rhyming, Dying, Dancing, Singing, Crying; and every thing, but Thinking and
Sense.


Your most obsequious, and most observant, very servant, Sir.


Godso, this is an Author: I'll fetch him to you.


Nay, prithee let him alone.


Nay, by the Lord, I'll have him.


Sir, it is not within my small capacity to do favours, but receive 'em;
especially from a person that does wear the honourable Title you are pleased to
impose, Sir, upon this. -- Sweet Sir, your servant.


Your humble servant, Sir.


But wilt thou do me a favour, now?


I, Sir: what is't?


Why, to tell him the meaning of thy last Play.


How, Sir, the meaning? do you mean the Plot.


I, I; any thing.


Faith, Sir, the Intrigo's now quite out of my head; but I have a new one, in
my pocket, that I may say is a Virgin; 't has never yet been blown upon. I must
tell you one thing, 'Tis all new Wit; and, though I say it, a better than my
last: and you know well enough how that took. In fine, it shall read, and
write, and act, and plot, and show, ay, and pit, box and gallery, I gad, with
any Play in Europe. This morning is its last Rehearsal, in their habits, and
all that, as it is to be acted; and if you, and your friend will do it but the
honour to see it in its Virgin attire; though, perhaps, it may blush, I shall
not be ashamed to discover its nakedness unto you. -- I think it is of this
side.


Sir, I confess I am not able to answer you in this new way; but if you please
to lead, I shall be glad to follow you; and I hope my friend will do so too.


I, Sir, I have no business so considerable, as should keep me from your
company.


Yes, here it is. No, cry your mercy: this is my book of Drama Common places;
the Mother of many other Plays.


Drama Common places! pray what's that?


Why, Sir, some certain helps, that we men of Art have found it convenient to
make use of.


How, Sir, help for Wit?


I, Sir, that's my position. And I do here aver, That no man yet the Sun ever
shone upon, has parts sufficient to furnish out a Stage, except it be with the
help of these my Rules.


What are those Rules, I pray?


Why, Sir, my first Rule is the Rule of Transversion, or Regula Duplex:
changing Verse into Prose, or Prose into verse, alternative as you please.


How's that, Sir, by a Rule, I pray?


Why, thus, Sir; nothing more easy when understood: I take a Book in my hand,
either at home, or elsewhere, for that's all one, if there be any Wit in it, as
there is no Book but has some, I Transverse it; that is, if it be Prose, put it
into Verse, (but that takes up some time) if it be Verse, put it into Prose.


Methinks, Mr. Baize, that putting Verse into Prose should be called
Transprosing.


By my troth, a very good Notion, and hereafter it shall be so.


Well, Sir, and what do ye do with it then?


Make it my own. 'Tis so altered that no man can know it. My next Rule is the
Rule of Record, and by way of Table-Book. Pray observe.


Well, we hear you: go on.


As thus. I come into a Coffee-house, or some other place where witty men
resort, I make as if I minded nothing; (do you mark?) but as soon as any one
speaks, pop I slap it down, and make that, too, my own.


But, Mr. Baize, are not you sometimes in danger of their making you restore,
by force, what you have gotten thus by Art?


No, Sir; the world's unmindful: they never take notice of these things.


But pray, Mr. Baize, among all your other Rules, have you no one Rule for
Invention?


Yes, Sir; that's my third Rule that I have here in my pocket.


What Rule can that be?


Why, Sir, when I have any thing to invent, I never trouble my head about it,
as other men do; but presently turn over this Book, and there I have, at one
view, all that Perseus, Montaigne, Seneca's Tragedies, Horace, Iuvenal,
Claudian, Pliny, Plutarch's lives, and the rest, have ever thought, upon this
subject: and so, in a trice, by leaving out a few words, or putting in others
of my own, the business is done.


Indeed, Mr. Baize, this is as sure, and compendious a way of Wit as ever I
heard of.


I, Sirs, when you come to write your selves, of my word you'll find it so. But,
Gentlemen, if you make the least scruple of the efficacy of these my Rules, do
but come to the Play-house, and you shall judge of 'em by the effects.


We will follow you, Sir.


Have you your part perfect?


Yes, I have it without book; but I do not understand how it is to be spoken.


And mine is such a one, as I can't guess for my life what humour I'm to be in:
whether angry, melancholy, merry, or in love. I don't know what to make on it.


Phoo! the Author will be here presently, and he'll tell us all. You must know,
this is the new way of writing; and these hard things please forty times better
than the old plain way. For, look you, Sir, the grand design upon the Stage is
to keep the Auditors in suspense; for to guess presently at the plot, and the
sense, tires 'em before the end of the first Act: now, here, every line
surprises you, and brings in new matter. And, then, for Scenes, Clothes and
Dancing, we put 'em quite down, all that ever went before us: and these are the
things, you know, that are essential to a Play.


Well, I am not of thy mind; but, so it gets us money, 'tis no great matter.


Come, come in, Gentlemen. You're very welcome Mr. -- a -- Have you your Part
ready?


Yes, Sir.


But do you understand the true humour of it?


I, Sir, pretty well.


And Amarillis, how does she do? Does not her Armour become her?


O, admirably!


I'll tell you, now, a pretty conceit. What do you think I'll make 'em call her
a non, in this Play?


What, I pray?


Why I'll make 'em call her Armarillis, because of her Armour: ha, ha, ha.


That will be very well, indeed.


I, it's a pretty little rogue; she is my Mistress. I knew her face would set
off Armour extremely: and, to tell you true, I writ that Part only for her.
Well, Gentlemen, I dare be bold to say, without vanity, I'll show you something,
here, that's very ridiculous, I gad.


Sir, that we do not doubt of.


Pray, Sir, let's sit down. Look you, Sir, the chief hindge of this Play, upon
which the whole Plot moves and turns, and that causes the variety of all the
several accidents, which, you know, are the thing in Nature that make up the
grand refinement of a Play, is, that I suppose two Kings to be of the same
place: as, for example, at Brentford; for I love to write familiarly. Now the
people having the same relations to 'em both, the same affections, the same
duty, the same obedience, and all that; are divided among themselves in point
of devoir and interest, how to behave themselves equally between 'em: these
Kings differing sometimes in particular; though, in the main, they agree. (I
know not whether I make my self well understood.


I did not observe you, Sir: pray say that again.


Why, look you, Sir, (nay, I beseech you, be a little curious in taking notice
of this, or else you'll never understand my notion of the thing) the people
being embarrassed by their equal ties to both, and the Sovereigns concerned in a
reciprocal regard, as well to their own interest, as the good of the people;
may make a certain kind of a -- you understand me -- upon which, there does
arise several disputes, turmoils, heart-burnings, and all that -- In fine,
you'll apprehend it better when you see it.


I find the Author will be very much obliged to the Players, if they can make
any sense of this.


Now, Gentlemen, I would fain ask your opinion of one thing. I have made a
Prologue and an Epilogue, which may both serve for either: (do you mark?) nay,
they may both serve too, I gad, for any other Play as well as this.


Very well. That's, indeed, Artificial.


And I would fain ask your judgements, now, which of them would do best for the
Prologue? For, you must know, there is, in nature, but two ways of making very
good Prologues. The one is by civility, by insinuation, good language, and all
that, to -- a -- in a manner, steal your plaudit from the courtesy of the
Auditors: the other, by making use of some certain personal things, which may
keep a hank upon such censuring persons, as cannot otherways, A gad, in nature,
be hindered from being too free with their tongues. To which end, my first
Prologue is, that I come out in a long black Veil, and a great huge Hang-man
behind me, with a Furr'd-cap, and his Sword drawn; and there tell 'em plainly,
That if, out of good nature, they will not like my Play, why I gad, I'll even
kneel down, and he shall cut my head off. Whereupon they all clapping -- a --


But, suppose they do not.


Suppose! Sir, you may suppose what you please, I have nothing to do with your
suppose, Sir, nor am not at all mortifi'd at it; not at all, Sir; I gad, not
one jot. Suppose quoth a! --


Phoo! prithee, Baize, don't mind what he says: he's a fellow newly come out
of the Country, he knows nothing of what's the relish, here, of the Town.


If I writ, Sir, to please the Country, I should have follow'd the old plain
way; but I write for some persons of Quality, and peculiar friends of mine,
that understand what Flame and Power in writing is: and they do me the right,
Sir, to approve of what I do.


I, I, they will clap, I warrant you; never fear it.


I'm sure the design's good: that cannot be denied* And then, for language, I
gad, I defy 'em all, in nature, to mend it. Besides, Sir, I have printed above
a hundred sheets of papyr, to insinuate the Plot into the Boxes: and withal,
have appointed two or three dozen of my friends, to be ready in the Pit, who,
I'm sure, will clap, and so the rest, you know, must follow; and then pray,
Sir, what becomes of your suppose? ha, ha, ha.


Nay, if the business be so well laid, it cannot miss.


I think so, Sir: and therefore would choose this for the Prologue. For if I
could engage 'em to clap, before they see the Play, you know 'twould be so much
the better; because then they were engaged: for, let a man write never so well,
there are, now-a-days, a sort of persons, they call Critiques, that, I gad,
have no more wit in 'em than so many Hobby-horses; but they'll laugh you, Sir,
and find fault, and censure things that, A gad, I'm sure they are not able to
do themselves. A sort of envious persons, that emulate the glories of persons
of parts, and think to build their fame, by calumniating of persons that, I
gad, to my knowledge, of all persons in the world are, in nature, the persons
that do as much despise all that, as -- a -- In fine, I'll say no more of 'em.


I, I, you have said enough of 'em in conscience: I'm sure more than they'll
ever be able to answer.


Why, I'll tell you, Sir, sincerely, and bona fide; were it not for the sake of
some ingenious persons, and choice female spirits, that have a value for me, I
would see 'em all hanged before I would ever more set pen to papyr; but let 'em
live in ignorance like ingrates.


I marry! that were a way to be revenged of 'em indeed: and, if I were in your
place, now, I would do it.


No, Sir; there are certain ties upon me, that I cannot be disengaged from;
otherwise, I would. But pray, Sir, how do you like my hang-man?


By my troth, Sir, I should like him very well.


I, but how do you like it? (for I see you can judge) Would you have it for the
Prologue, or the Epilogue?


Faith, Sir, it's so good, let it even serve for both.


No, no; that won't do. Besides, I have made another.


What other, Sir?


Why, Sir, my other is Thunder and Lightning.


That's greater: I'd rather stick to that.


Do you think so? I'll tell you then; though there have been many witty
Prologues written of late, yet I think you'll say this is a non pareillo: I'm
sure no body has hit upon it yet. For here, Sir, I make my Prologue to be
Dialogue: and as, in my first, you see I strive to oblige the Auditors by
civility, by good nature, and all that; so, in this, by the other way, in
Terrorem, I choose for the persons Thunder and Lightning. Do you apprehend the
conceit?


Phoo, pox! then you have it cock-sure. They'll be hanged, before they'll dare
affront an Author, that has 'em at that lock.


I have made, too, one of the most delicate, dainty Simile's in the whole
world, I glad, if I knew but how to apply it.


Let's hear it, I pray you.


'Tis an alusion to love. So Boar and Sow, when any storm is nigh,
Snuff up, and smell it gath'ring in the Sky:
Boar beckons Sow to trot in Chesnunt Groves,
And there consummate their unfinished Loves.
Pensive in mud they wallow all alone,
And snort, and gruntle to each others moan.
How do you like it now, ha?


Faith, 'tis extraordinary fine: and very applicable to Thunder and Lightning,
methinks, because it speaks of a Storm.


I gad, and so it does, now I think on it. Mr. Iohnson, I thank you; and I'll put
it in profecto. Come out, Thunder and Lightning.


I am the bold Thunder.


Mr. Cartwright, pray thee speak a little louder, and with a hoarser voice. I
am the bold Thunder? Pshaw! speak it me in a voice that thunders it out indeed:
I am the bold Thunder.


I am the bold Thunder.

The brisk Lightning, I.

Nay, you must be quick and nimble.
The brisk Lightning, I. That's my meaning.

I am the bravest Hector of the Sky.

And I, fair Helen, that made Hector die.

I strike men down.

I fire the Town.

Let the Critiques take heed how they grumble,
For then begin I for to rumble.

Let the Ladies allow us their graces.
Or I'll blast all the paint on their faces,
And dry up their Peter to foot.

Let the Critiques look to it.

Let the Ladies look to it.

For Thunder will do it.

For Lightning will shoot.

I'll give you dash for dash.

I'll give you flash for flash.
Gallants, I'll singe your Feather.

I'll Thunder you together.

Look to it, look to it; we will do it, we will do it: look to it, we will do it.


That's all. 'Tis but a flash of a Prologue: a Droll.


'Tis short, indeed; but very terrible.


Ay, when the simile is in, it will do to a Miracle, I gad. Come, come; begin
the Play.


Sir, Mr. Ivory is not come yet; but he'll be here presently, he's but two doors
off.


Come then, Gentlemen, let's go out and take a pipe of Tobacco.


NOw, Sir, because I'll do nothing here that ever was done before --


A very notable design, for a Play, indeed.


Instead of beginning with a Scene that discovers something of the Plot, I
begin this with a whisper.


That's very new.


Come, take your seats. Begin, Sirs.


Sir, by your habit, I should guess you to be the Gentleman-Usher of this
sumptuous place.


And, by your gait and fashion, I should almost suspect you rule the healths of
both our noble Kings, under the notion of Physician.


You hit my Function right.


And you, mine.


Then let's embrace.


Come then.


Come.


Pray, Sir, who are those two so very civil persons?


Why, Sir, the Gentleman-Usher, and Physicians of the two Kings of Brentford.


But how comes it to pass, then, that they know one another no better?


Phoo! that's for the better carrying on of the Intrigue.


Very well.


Sir, to conclude,


What, before he begins?


No, Sir; you must know they had been talking of this a pretty while without.


Where? in the Tyring-room?


Why ay, Sir. He's so dull! Come, speak again.


Sir, to conclude, the place you fill, has more than amply exacted the Talents
of a wary Pilot, and all these threatening storms which, like impregnant Clouds,
do hover over our heads, (when they once are grasped but by the eye of reason)
melt into fruitful showers of blessings on the people.


Pray mark that Allegory. Is not that good?


Yes; that grasping of a storm with the eye is admirable.


But yet some rumours great are stirring; and if Lorenzo should prove false,
(as none but the great Gods can tell) you then perhaps would find, that --


Now they whisper.


Alone, do you say?


No; attended with the noble --


Who, he in gray?


Yes; and at the head of --


Pray mark.


Then, Sir, most certain, 'twill in time appear
These are the reasons that induced 'em to it:
First, he --

Now the other whispers.

Secondly, they --

He's at it still.

Thirdly, and lastly, both he, and they --


There they both whisper.


In troth, I think it is, Sir. But why two Kings of the same place?


Why? because it's new; and that's it I aim at. I despise your Iohnson, and
Beaumont, that borrowed all they writ from Nature: I am for fetching it purely
out of my own fancy, I.


But what think you of Sir Iohn Suckling, Sir?


By gad, I am a better Poet than he.


Well, Sir; but pray why all this whispering?


Why, Sir, (besides that it is new, as I told you before) because they are
supposed to be Politicians; and matters of State ought not to be divulged.


But then, Sir, why --


Sir, if you'll but respite your curiosity till the end of the fifth Act, you'll
find it a piece of patience not ill recompensed.


How dost thou like this, Frank? Is it not just as I told thee?


Why, I did never, before this, see any thing in Nature; and all that, (as Mr.
Baize says) so foolish, but I could give some guess at what moved the Fop to do
it; but this, I confess, does go beyond my reach.


Why, 'tis all alike: Mr. Wintershull has informed me of this Play before. And
I'll tell thee, Frank, thou shalt not see one Scene here, that either properly
ought to come in, or is like any thing thou can imagine has ever been the
practice of the World. And then, when he comes to what he calls good language,
it is, as I told thee, very fantastical, most abominably dull, and not one word
to the purpose.


It does surprise me, I am sure, very much.


I, but it won't do so long: by that time thou hast seen a Play or two, that
I'll show thee, thou wilt be pretty well acquainted with this new kind of
Foppery.


THese are the two Kings of Brentford; take notice of their stile: 'twas never
yet upon the Stage; but, if you like it, I could make a shift, perhaps, to show
you a whole Play, written all just so.


Did you observe their whisper, brother King?


I did; and heard besides a grave Bird sing
That they intend, sweet-heart, to play us pranks.

This, now, is familiar, because they are both persons of the same Quality.

'Sdeath, this would make a man spew.

If that design appears,
I'll lug 'em by the ears
Until I make 'em crack.

And so will I, i'fack.

You must begin, Mon foy.

Sweet, Sir, Pardonnes moy.

Mark that: I Makes 'em both speak French, to show their breeding.

O, 'tis extraordinary fine.

Then, spite of Fate, we will thus combined stand;
And, like true brothers, walk still hand in hand.

This is a very Majestic Scene indeed.


Ay, 'tis a crust, a lasting crust for your Rogue Critiques, I gad: I would
fain see the proudest of 'em all but dare to nibble at this; I gad, if they do,
this shall rub their gums for 'em, I promise you. It was I, you must know, writ
the Play I told you of, in this very Stile: and shall I tell you a very good
jest? I gad, the Players would not act it: ha, ha, ha.


That's impossible.


I gad, they would not, Sir: ha, ha, ha. They refused it, I gad, the silly
Rogues: ha, ha, ha.


Fie, that was rude.


Rude! I gad, they are the rudest, uncivilest persons, and all that, in the
whole world: I gad, there's no living with 'em. I have written, Mr. Iohnson, I
do verily believe, a whole cart-load of things, every whit as good as this, and
yet, I vow to gad, these insolent Raskals have turned 'em all back upon my
hands again.


Strange fellows indeed.


But pray, Mr. Baize, how came these two Kings to know of this whisper? for, as
I remember, they were not present at it.


No, but that's the Actors fault, and not mine; for the Kings should (a pox
take 'em) have pop'd both their heads in at the door, just as the other went
off.


That, indeed, would have done it.


Done it! Ay, I gad, these fellows are able to spoil the best things in
Christendom. I'll tell you, Mr. Iohnson, I vow to gad, I have been so highly
disobliged, by the peremptoriness of these fellows, that I am resolved,
hereafter, to bend all my thoughts for the service of the Nursery, and mump
your proud Players, I gad.


HOw strange a captive am I grown of late*
Shall I accuse my Love, or blame my Fate?
My Love, I cannot; that is too Divine:
And against Fate what mortal dares repine?
But here she comes.
Sure 'tis some blazing Comet, is it not?

Blazing Comet! mark that. I gad, very fine.

But I am so surprised with sleep, I cannot speak the rest.

Does not that, now, surprise you, to fall asleep just in the nick? His spirits
exhale with the heat of his passion, and all that, and swop falls asleep, as
you see. Now, here, she must make a simile.


Where's the necessity of that, Mr. Baize?


Because she's surprised. That's a general Rule: you must ever make a simile
when you are surprised; 'tis the new way of writing.


As some tall Pine, which we, on Aetna, find
To have stood the rage of many a boisterous wind,
Feeling without, that flames within do play,
Which would consume his Root and Sap away;
He spreads his worsted Arms unto the Skies,
Silently grieves, all pale, repines and dies:
So, shrouded up, your bright eye disappears.
Break forth, bright scorching Sun, and dry my tears.

I am afraid, Gentlemen, this Scene has made you sad; for I must confess, when
I writ it, I wept my self.


No, truly, Sir, my spirits are almost exhaled too, and I am likelier to fall
asleep.


It is resolved.


Mr. Baize, may one be so bold as to ask you a question, now, and you not be
angry?


O Lord, Sir, you may ask me what you please. I vow to gad, you do me a great
deal of honour: you do not know me, if you say that, Sir.


Then, pray, Sir, what is it that this Prince here has resolved in his sleep?


Why, I must confess, that question is well enough asked, for one that is not
acquainted with this new way of writing. But you must know, Sir, that, to
out-do all my fellow-Writers, whereas they keep their Intrigo secret till the
very last Scene before the Dance; I now, Sir, do you mark me -- a --


Begin the Play, and end it, without ever opening the Plot at all?


I do so, that's the very plain troth on it: ha, ha, ha; I do, I gad. If they
cannot find it out themselves, even let 'em alone for Baize, I warrant you. But
here, now, is a Scene of business: pray observe it; for I dare say you'll think
it no unwise discourse this, nor ill argued. To tell you true, 'tis a Debate I
over-heard once betwixt two grand, sober, governing persons.


COme, Sir; let's state the matter of fact, and lay our heads together.


Right: lay our heads together. I love to be merry sometimes; but when a knotty
point comes, I lay my head close to it, with a pipe of Tobacco in my mouth, and
then I whew it away, i'faith.


I do just so, I gad, always.


The grand question is, whether they heard us whisper? which I divide thus:
into when they heard, what they heard, and whether they heard or no.


Most admirably divided, I swear.


As to the when; you say just now: so that is answered. Then, for what; why,
what answers it self: for what could they hear, but what we talked of? So that,
naturally, and of necessity, we come to the last question, Videlicet, whether
they heard or no?


This is a very wise Scene, Mr. Baize.


Yes; you have it right: they are both Politicians. I writ this Scene for a
pattern, to show the world how men should talk of business.


You have done it exceeding well, indeed.


Yes, I think this will do.


Well, if they heard us whisper, they'll turn us out, and no body else will
take us.


No body else will take us.


Not for Politicians, I dare answer for it.


Let's then no more our selves in vain bemoan:
We are not safe until we them unthrone.

'Tis right:
And, since occasion now seems debonair,
I'll seize on this, and you shall take that chair.

There's now an odd surprise; the whole State's turned quite topsi-turvy,
without any puther or stir in the whole world, I gad.


A very silent change of a Government, truly, as ever I heard of.


It is so. And yet you shall see me bring 'em in again, by and by, in as odd a
way every jot.


Hey ho, hey ho: what a change is here! Hey day, hey day! I know not what to
do, nor what to say.


But, pray, Sir, how came they to depose the Kings so easily?


Why, Sir, you must know, they long had a design to do it before; but never
could put it in practice till now: and, to tell you true, that's one reason why
I made 'em whisper so at first.


O, very well: now I'm fully satisfied.


And then, to show you, Sir, it was not done so very easily neither; in this
next Scene you shall see some fighting.


O, ho: so then you make the struggle to be after the business is done?


Aye.


O, I conceive you: that is very natural.


STand. Who goes there?


A friend.


What friend?


A friend to the House.


Fall on.


Hold, hold. Effaut flat, and fall a Dancing. Do you hear, dead men? remember
your Note in Effaut flat. Play on. Harry the Eight, or the fat Spirits in The
Tempest, I gad.


Why, Sir, 'tis impossible to do any thing in time, to this Tune.


O Lord, O Lord! impossible? why, Gentlemen, if there be any faith in a person
that's a Christian, I sate up two whole nights in composing this Air, and
apting it for the business: for, if you observe, there are two several Designs
in this Tune; it begins swift, and ends slow. You talk of time, and time; you
shall see me do it. Look you now. Here I am dead. Effaut flat. Strike up Music.
Now.


By my troth, Mr. Baize, this is a very unfortunate Note of yours, in Effaut
flat.


A plague of this damned Stage, with your nails, and your tenter-hooks, that a
man cannot come to teach you to Act, but he must break his nose, and his face,
and the divel and all. Pray, Sir, can you help me to a wet piece of brown
papyr?


No indeed, Sir; I don't usually carry any about me.


Sir, I'll go get you some within presently.


Go, go then; I'll follow you. Pray dance out the Dance, and I'll be with you in
a moment. Remember you four that you dance like Horsemen.


A Devil! let's try this no more: play my Dance that Mr. Baize found fault
with.


What can this fool be doing all this while about his nose?


Prithee let's go see.


NOw, Sir, this I do, because my fancy in this Play is to end every Act with a
Dance.


Faith, that fancy is very good, but I should hardly have broke my nose for
it, though.


That fancy, I suppose, is new too.


Sir, all my fancies are so. I tread upon no mans heels; but make my flight
upon my own wings, I assure you. As, now, this next Scene some perhaps will
say, It is not very necessary to the Plot: I grant it; what then? I meant it
so. But then it's as full of Drollery as ever it can hold: 'tis like an Orange
stuck with Cloves, as for conceit. Come, where are you? This Scene will make
you die with laughing, if it be well acted: it is a Scene of sheer Wit, without
any mixture in the world, I gad.

This, Sirs, might properly enough be called a prize of Wit; for you shall see
'em come in upon one another snip snap, hit for hit, as fast as can be. First
one speaks, then presently t'other's upon him slap, with a Repartee; then he at
him again, dash with a new conceit: and so eternally, eternally, I gad, till
they go quite off the Stage.


What a plague, does this Fop mean by his snip snap, hit for hit, and dash?


Mean? why, he never meant any thing in's life: what dost talk of meaning for?


Why don't you come in?


But prithee, Tom Thimble, why wilt thou needs marry? If nine Taylors make but
one man; and one woman cannot be satisfied with nine men: what work art thou
cutting our here for thy self, trow we?


Good.


Why, an't please your Highness, if I can't make up all the work I cut out, I
shall not want Journey-men to help me, I warrant you.


Good again.


I am afraid thy Journey-men, though, Tom, won't work by the day, but by the
night.


Good still.


However, if my wife sits but cross-leg'd, as I do, there will be no great
danger: not half so much as when I trusted you for your Coronation-suit.


Very good, i'faith.


Why, the times then lived upon trust; it was the fashion. You would not be out
of time, at such a time as that, sure: A Taylor, you know, must never be out of
fashion.


Right.


I'm sure, Sir, I made your cloth in the Court-fashion, for you never paid me
yet.


There's a bob for the Court.


Why, Tom, thou art a sharp rogue when thou art angry, I see: thou pay'st me
now, methinks.


I, Sir, in your own coin: you give me nothing but words.


Admirable, before gad.


Well, Tom, I hope shortly I shall have another coin for thee; for now the Wars
come on, I shall grow to be a man of mettle.


O, you did not do that half enough.


Methinks he does it admirably.


I, pretty well; but he does not hit me in it: he does not top his part.


That's the way to be stamped your self, Sir. I shall see you come home, like
an Angel for the Kings-evil, with a hole bored through you.


That's very good, i'faith: ha, ha, ha. Ha, there he has hit it up to the
hilts, I gad. How do you like it now, Gentlemen? is not this pure Wit?


'Tis snip snap, Sir, as you say; but, methinks, not pleasant, nor to the
purpose, for the Play does not go on.


Play does not go on? I don't know what you mean: why, is not this part of the
Play?


Yes, but the Plot stands still.


Plot stand still! why, what a Devil is the Plot good for, but to bring in fine
things?


O, I did not know that before.


No, I think you did not: nor many things more, that I am Master of. Now, Sir,
I gad, this is the bane of all us Writers: let us soar never so little above
the common pitch, I gad, all's spoiled; for the vulgar never understand us,
they can never conceive you, Sir, the excellency of these things.


'Tis a sad fate, I must confess: but you write on still?


Write on? I, I gad, I warrant you. 'Tis not their talk shall stop me: if they
catch me at that lock, I'll give 'em leave to hang me. As long as I know my
things to be good, what care I what they say? What, they are gone, and forgot
the Song!


They have done very well, methinks, here's no need of one.


Alack, Sir, you know nothing: you must ever interlard your Plays with Songs,
Ghosts and Idols, if you mean to -- a --


Pit, Box and Gallery, Mr. Baize.


I gad, Sir, and you have nicked it. Hark you, Mr. Iohnson, you know I don't
flatter, a gad, you have a great deal of Wit.


O Lord, Sir, you do me too much honour.


Nay, nay, come, come, Mr. Iohnson, Ifacks this must not be said, amongst us
that have it. I know you have wit by the judgement you make of this Play; for
that's the measure I go by: my Play is my Touch-stone. When a man tells me such
a one is a person of parts; is he so, say I? what do I do, but bring him
presently to see this Play: If he likes it. I know what to think of him; if
not, your most humble Servant, Sir, I'll no more of him upon my word, I thank
you. I am Clara voyant, a gad. Now here we go on to our business.


BUt what's become of Volscius the great?
His presence has not graced our Court of late.

I fear some ill, from emulation sprung,
Has from us that Illustrious Hero wrung.

Is not that Majestic?

Yes, but who a Devil is that Volscius?

Why, that's a Prince I make in love with Parthenope.

I thank you, Sir.

My Leiges, news from Volscius the Prince.

His news is welcome, whatsoever it be.

How, Sir, do you mean that? whether it be good or bad?

Nay, pray, Sir, have a little patience: Godsookers you'll spoil all my Play.
Why, Sir, 'tis impossible to answer every impertinent question you ask.


Cry you mercy, Sir.

His Highness Sirs, commanded me to tell you,
That the fair person whom you both do know,
Despairing of forgiveness for her fault,
In a deep sorrow, twice she did attempt
Upon her precious life; but, by the care
Of standers-by, prevented was.

'Sheart, what stuff's here!

At last,
Volscius the great this dire resolve embraced:
His servants he into the Country sent,
And he himself to Piccadille went.
Where he's informed, by Letters, that she's dead.

Dead! is that possible? Dead!

O ye Gods!

There's a smart expression of a passion; O ye Gods!
That's one of my bold strokes, a gad.

Yes; but who is the fair person that's dead?

That you shall know anon.

Nay, if we know it at all, 'tis well enough.

Perhaps you may find too, by and by, for all this, that she's not dead
neither.


Marry, that's good news: I am glad of that with all my heart.


Now, here's the man brought in that is supposed to have killed her.


What shout Triumphant's that?


Shy maid, upon the River brink, near Twick'nam Town, the assassinate is taken.


Thanks to the Powers above, for this deliverance.
I hope its slow beginning will portend
A forward Exit to all future end.

Pish, there you are out; to all future end? No, no; to all future end; you
must lay the accent upon end, or else you lose the conceit.


Indeed the alteration of that accent does a great deal, Mr. Baize.


O, all in all, Sir: they are these little things that mar, or set you off a
Play.


I see you are very perfect in these matters.


I, Sir; I have been long enough at it to know something.


Villain, what Monster did corrupt thy mind
T'attaque the noblest soul of humane kind?
Tell me who set thee on.

Prince Pretty-man.

To kill whom?


Prince Pretty-man.

What, did Prince Pretty-man hire you to kill Prince Pretty-man?

No; Prince Volscius.

To kill whom?

Prince Volscius.

What, did Prince Volscius hire you to kill Prince Volscius?

No; Prince Pretty-man.

So, drag him hence,
Till torture of the Rack produce his sense.

Mark how I make the horror of his guilt confound his intellects; for that's
the design of this Scene.


I see, Sir, you have a several design for every Scene.


I; that's my way of writing: and so I can dispatch you, Sir, a whole Play,
before another man, I gad, can make an end of his Plot. So, now enter Prince
Pretty-man in a rage. Where the Devil is he? Why Pretty-man? why when, I say? O
fie, fie, fie, fie; all's marred, I vow to gad, quite marred.


What, Sir?


What, Sir? 'Slife, Sir, you should have come out in choler, rous upon the
Stage, just as the other went off. Must a man be eternally telling you of these
things?


Sure this must be some very notable matter that he's so angry at.


I am not of your opinion.


Pish! come, let's hear your Part, Sir.


Bring in my Father, why do ye keep him from me?
Although a Fisherman, he is my Father,
Was ever Son, yet, brought to this distress,
To be, for being a Son, made fatherless?
Oh, you just Gods, rob me not of a Father.
The being of a Son take from me rather.

Well, Ned, what think you now?


A Devil, this is worst of all. Pray, Mr. Baize, what's the meaning of this
Scene?


O, cry you mercy, Sir: I protest I had forgot to tell you. Why, Sir, you must
know, that, long before the beginning of this Play, this Prince was taken by a
Fisherman.


How, Sir, taken Prisoner?


Taken Prisoner! O Lord, what a question's there! did ever any man ask such a
question? Taken Prisoner! Godsookers, he has put the Plot quite out of my head,
with this damned question. What was I going to say?


Nay, the Lord knows: I cannot imagine.


Stay, let me see; taken: O 'tis true. Why, Sir, as I was going to say, his
Highness here, the Prince, was taken in a Cradle by a Fisherman, and brought up
as his Child.


Indeed?


Nay, prithee hold thy peace. And so, Sir, this murder being committed by the
River-side, the Fisherman, upon suspicion, was seized; and thereupon the Prince
grew angry.


So, so; now 'tis very plain.


But, Mr. Baize, is not that some disparagement to a Prince, to pass for a
Fishermans Son? Have a care of that, I pray.


No, no, no; not at all; for 'tis but for a while: I shall fetch him off again,
presently, you shall see.


By all the Gods, I'll set the world on fire
Rather than let 'em ravish hence my Sire.

Brave Pretty-man, it is at length revealed,
That he is not thy Sire who thee concealed.

Lo' you now, there he's off again.

Admirably done i'faith.

Ay, now the Plot thickens very much upon us.

What Oracle this darkness can evince?
Sometimes a Fishers Son, sometimes a Prince.
It is a secret, great as is the world;
In which, I, like the soul, am tossed and hurled.
The blackest Ink of Fate, sure, was my Lot.
And, when she writ my name, she made a blot.

There's a blust'ring verse for you now.


Yes, Sir; but pray, why is he so mightily troubled to find he is not a
Fishermans Son?


Phoo! that is not because he has a mind to be his Son, but for fear he should
be thought to be nobodies Son at all.


I, that would trouble a man, indeed.


So, let me see. Enter Prince Volscius, going out of Town.


I thought he had been gone to Piccadille.


Yes, he gave out so; but that was only to cover his design.


What design?


Why, to head the Army, that lies concealed for him in Knights-bridge.


I see here is a great deal of Plot, Mr. Baize.


Yes, now it begins to break; but we shall have a world of more business anon.


Sir, you are cruel, thus to leave the Town,
And to retire to Country solitude.

We hoped this Summer that we should at least
Have held the honour of your company.

Held the honour of your Company! prettily expressed! Held the honour of your
company! Godsookers, these fellows will never take notice of any thing.


I assure you, Sir, I admire it extremely; I don't know what he does.


I, I, he's a little envious; but 'tis no great matter. Come.


Pray let us two this single boon obtain,
That you will here with poor us still remain.
Before your Horses come pronounce our fate,
For then, alas, I fear 'twill be too late.

Sad!

Harry, my Boots; for I'll go rage among
My Blades encamped, and quit this Vrban throng.

But pray, Mr. Baize, is not this a little difficult, that you were saying even
now, to keep an Army thus concealed in Knights-bridge.


In Knights-bridge? stay.


No, not if the Inn-keepers be his friends.


His friends! Ay, Sir, his intimate acquaintance; or else, indeed, I grant it
could not be.


Yes, faith, so it might be very easily.


Nay, if I do not make all things easy, I gad, I'll give you leave to hang me.
Now you would think that he is going out of Town; but you shall see how
prettily I have contrived to stop him presently.


By my troth, Sir, you have so amazed me, I know not what to think.


Bless me! how frail are all my best resolves!
How, in a moment, is my purpose changed!
Too soon I thought my self secure from Love.
Fair Madam, give me leave to ask her name
Who does so gently rob me of my fame?
For I should meet the Army out of Town,
And, if I fail, must hazard my renown.

My Mother, Sir, sells Ale by the Town-walls,
And me her dear Parthenope she calls.

Can vulgar Vestments high-born beauty shroud?
Thou bring the Morning pictured in a Cloud.

The Morning pictured in a Cloud! A, Gadsookers, what a conceit is there!


Give you good Even, Sir.


O inauspicious Stars! that I was born
To sudden love, and to more sudden scorn!

How! Prince Volscius in love? Ha, ha, ha.


Sure, Mr. Baize, we have lost some jest here, that they laugh at so.


Why did you not observe? He first resolves to go out of Town, and then, as he
is pulling on his Boots, falls in love. Ha, ha, ha.


O, I did not observe: that, indeed, is a very good jest.


Here, now, you shall see a combat betwixt Love and Honour. And ancient Author
has made a whole Play on it; but I have dispatch'd it all in his Scene.


How has my passion made me Cupid's scoff!
This hasty Boot is on, the other off,
And sullen lies, with amorous design
To quit loud fame, and make that Beauty mine.
My Legs, the Emblem of my various thought,
Show to what sad distraction I am brought.
Sometimes, with stubborn Honour, like this Boot,
My mind is guarded, and resolved to do it:
Sometimes, again, that very mind, by Love
Disarmed, like this other Leg does prove.

What pains Mr. Baize takes to act this speech himself!

I, the fool, I see, is mightily transported with it.

Shall I to Honour or to Love give way?
Go on, cries Honour; tender Love says, nay:
Honour, aloud, commands, pluck both boots on;
But softer Love does whisper, put on none.
What shall I do? what conduct shall I find
To lead me through this twy-light of my mind?
For as bright Day with black approach of Night
Contending, makes a doubtful puzzling light;
So does my Honour and my Love together
Puzzle me so, I can resolve for neither.

By my troth, Sir, this is as difficult a Combat as ever I saw, and as equal;
for 'tis determined on neither side.


Ay, is't not, I gad, ha? For, to go off hip hop, hip hop, upon this occasion,
is a thousand times better than any conclusion in the world, I gad. But, Sirs,
you cannot make any judgement of this Play, because we are come but to the end
of the second Act. Come, the Dance.


I don't know 'twill take, Sir; but I am sure you sweat hard for it.


Ay, Sir, it costs me more pains, and trouble, to do these things, than almost
the things are worth.


By my troth, I think so, Sir.


Not for the things themselves, for I could write you, Sir, forty of 'em in a
day; but, I gad, these Players are such dull persons, that, if a man be not by
upon every point, and at every turn, I gad, they'll mistake you, Sir, and spoil
all.


Yes, Sir.


And is the Lance filled with Wine?


Sir, 'tis just now a doing.


Stay then; I'll do it my self.


Come, let's go with him.


A match. But, Mr. Iohnson, I gad, I am not like other persons; they care not
what becomes of their things, so they can but get money for 'em: now, I gad,
when I write, if it be not just as it should be, in every circumstance, to
every particular, I gad, I am not able to endure it, I am not my self, I'm out
of my wits, and all that, I'm the strangest person in the whole world. For what
care I for my money? I gad, I write for Fame and Reputation.


GEntlemen, because I would not have any two things alike in this Play, the
last Act beginning with a witty Scene of mirth, I make this to begin with a
Funeral.


And is that all your reason for it, Mr. Baize?


No, Sir; I have a precedent for it too. A person of Honour, and a Scholar,
brought in his Funeral just so: and he was one (let me tell you) that knew as
well what belonged to a Funeral, as any man in England, I gad.


Nay, if that be so, you are safe.


I gad, but I have another device, a frolic, which I think yet better than all
this; not for the Plot or Characters, (for, in my Heroic Plays, I make no
difference, as to those matters) but for another contrivance.


What is that, I pray?


Why, I have designed a Conquest, that cannot possibly, I gad, be acted in less
than a whole week: and I'll speak a bold word, it shall Drum, Trumpet, Shout and
Battle, I gad, with any the most warlike Tragoedy we have, either ancient or
modern.


I marry, Sir; there you say something.


And pray, Sir, how have you ordered this same frolic of yours?


Faith, Sir, by the Rule or Romance. For example: they divide their things into
three, four, five, six, seven, eight, or as many Tomes as they please: now, I
would very fain know, what should hinder me, from doing the same with my
things, if I please.


Nay, if you should not be Master of your own works, 'tis very hard.


That is my sense. And therefore, Sir, whereas every one makes five Acts to one
Play, what do me I, but make five Plays to one Plot: by which means the
Auditors have every day a new thing.


Most admirably good, i'faith! and must certainly take, because it is not
tedious.


I, Sir, I know that, there's the main point. And then, upon Saturday, to make
a close of all, (for I ever begin upon a Monday) I make you, Sir, a sixth Play,
that sums up the whole matter to 'em, and all that, for fear they should have
forgot it.


That consideration, Mr. Baize, indeed, I think, will be very necessary.


And when comes in your share, pray Sir?


The third week.


I vow, you'll get a world of money.


Why, faith, a man must live: and if you don't, thus, pitch upon some new
device, I gad, you'll never do it, for this Age (take it of my word) is somewhat
hard to please. There is one pretty odd passage, in the last of these Plays,
which may be executed to several ways, wherein I'd have your opinion,
Gentlemen.


Well, what is't?


Why, Sir, I make a Male person to be in Love with a Female.


Do you mean that, Mr. Baize, for a new thing?


Yes, Sir, as I have ordered it. You shall hear. He having passionately loved
her through my five whole Plays, finding at last that she consents to his love,
just after that his Mother had appeared to him like a Ghost, he kills himself.
That's one way. The other is, that she coming at last to love him, with as
violent a passion as he loved her, she kills her self. Now my question is,
which of these two persons should suffer upon this occasion?


By my troth, it is a very hard case to decide.


The hardest in the world, I gad; and has puzzled this pate very much. What say
you, Mr. Smith?


Why, truly, Mr. Baize, if it might stand with your justice, I should now spare
'em both.


I gad, and I think -- ha -- why then, I'll make him hinder her from killing her
self. Ay, it shall be so. Come, come, bring in the Funeral.


Set down the Funeral Pile, and let our grief
Receive, from its embraces, some relief.

Was't not unjust to ravish hence her breath,
And, in life's stead, to leave us nought but death?
The world discovers now its emptiness,
And, by her loss, demonstrates we have less.

Is not that good language now? is not that elevate? It's my non ultra, I gad.
You must know they were both in love with her.


With her? with whom?


Why, this is Lardella's Funeral.


Lardella! I, who is she?


Why, Sir, the Sister of Drawcansir. A Lady that was drowned at Sea, and had a
wave for her winding-sheet.


Lardella, O Lardella, from above,
Behold the Tragic issue of our Love.
Pity us, sinking under grief and pain,
For thy being cast away upon the Main.

Look you now, you see I told you true.

I, Sir, and I thank you for it, very kindly.

Ay, I gad, but you will not have patience; honest Mr. -- a -- you will not
have patience.


Pray, Mr. Baize, who is that Drawcansir?


Why, Sir, a fierce Hero, that frights his Mistress, snubs up Kings, baffles
Armies, and does what he will, without regard to good manners, justice or
numbers.


A very pretty Character.


But, Mr. Baize, I thought your Heroes had ever been men of great humanity and
justice.


Yes, they have been so; but, for my part, I prefer that one quality of singly
beating of whole Armies, above all your moral virtues put together, I gad. You
shall see him come in presently. Zookers, why don't you read the papyr?


O, cry you mercy.


Pish! nay you are such a fumbler. Come, I'll read it my self. Lardella compose,
just as she is dying, with design to have it pined on her Coffin, and so read
by one of the Usurpers, who is her Cousin.


A very shrewd design that, upon my word, Mr. Baize.


And what do you think I fancy her to make Love like, here, in the papyr?


Like a woman: what should she make Love like?


O'my word you are out though, Sir; I gad you are.


What then? like a man?


No, Sir; like a Humble Be.


I confess, that I should not have fancied.


It may be so, Sir. But it is, though, in order to the opinion of some of your
ancient Philosophers, who held the transmigration of the soul.


Very fine.


I'll read the Title. To my dear Couz, King Phys.


That's a little too familiar with a King, though, Sir, by your favour, for a
Humble Be.


Mr. Smith, for other things, I grant your knowledge may be above me; but, as
for Poetry, give me leave to say, I understand that better: it has been longer
my practice; it has indeed, Sir.


Your servant, Sir.


Pray mark it.
Since death my earthly part will thus remove
I'll come a Humble Be to your chaste love.
With silent wings I'll follow you, dear Couz;
Or else, before you, in the Sun-beams buzz.
And when to Melancholy Groves you come,
An Airy Ghost, you'll know me by my Hum;
For sound, being Air, a Ghost does well become.

After a pause. Admirable!


At night, into your bosom I will creep,
And Buzz but softly if you chance to sleep:
Yet, in your Dreams, I will pass sweeping by,
And then, both Hum and Buzz before your eye.

By my troth, that's a very great promise.

Yes, and a most extraordinary comfort to boot.

Your bed of Love, from dangers I will free;
But most, from love of any future Be.
And when, with pity, you heart-strings shall crack,
With empty arms I'll bear you on my back.

A pick-a-pack, a pick-a-pack.

Ay, I gad, but is not that tuant now, ha? is it not tuant? Here's the end.
Then, at your birth of immortality,
Like any winged Archer, hence I'll fly,
And teach you your first fluttering in the Sky.

O rare! it is the most natural, refined fancy this, that ever I heard, I'll
swear.


Yes, I think, for a dead person, it is a good enough way of making love: for
being divested of her Terrestrial part, and all that, she is only capable of
these little, pretty, amorous designs that are innocent, and yet passionate.
Come, draw your swords.


Come sword, come sheath thy self within this breast,
That only in Lardella's Tomb can rest.

Come, dagger, come, and penetrate this heart,
Which cannot from Lardella's Love depart.

Hold, stop your murd'ring hands
At Pallases commands:
For the supposed dead, O Kings,
Forbear to act such deadly things.
Lardella lives: I did but try
If Princes for their Loves could dye.
Such Celestial constancy
Shall, by the Gods, rewarded be:
And from these Funeral obsequies
A Nuptial Banquet shall arise.

Now it's out. This is the very Funeral of the fair person which Volscius sent
word was dead, and Pallas, you see, has turned it into a Banquet.


By my troth, now, that is new, and more than I expected.


Yes, I knew this would please you: for the chief Art in Poetry is to elevate
your expectation, and then bring you off some extraordinary way.


Resplendent Pallas, we in thee do find
The fiercest Beauty, and a fiercer mind:
And since to thee Lardella's life we owe,
We will supple Statues in thy Temple grow.

Well, since alive Lardella's found,
Let, in full Boles, her health go round.

But where's the Wine?

That shall be mine.
Lo, from this conquering Lance,
Does flow the purest wine of France:
And, to appease your hunger, I
Have, in my Helmet, brought a Pie:
Lastly, to bear a part with these,
Behold a Buckler made of Cheese.

What man is this that dares disturb our feast?

He that dares drink, and for that drink dares die,
And, knowing this, dares yet drink on, am I.

That is as much as to say, that though he would rather die than not drink, yet
he would fain drink for all that too.


Right; that's the conceit on it.

'Tis a marveilous good one, I swear.

Sir, if you please, we should be glad to know
How long you here will stay, how soon you'll go.

Is not that now like a well-bred person, I gad? So modest, so gent!


O, very like.


You shall not know how long I here will stay;
But you shall know I'll take my Boles away.

But, Mr. Baize, is that (too) modest and gent?

No, I glad, Sir, but it's great.

Though, Brother, this grum stranger be a Clown,
He'll leave us, sure, a little to gulp down.

Who ever to gulp one drop of this dares think
I'll stare away his very power to drink.
I drink, I huff, I strut, look big and stare;
And all this I can do, because I dare.

I suppose, Mr. Baize, this is the fierce Hero you spoke of.


Yes; but this is nothing: you shall see him, in the last Act, win above a
dozen battles, one after another, I gad, as fast as they can possibly be
represented.


That will be a sight worth seeing, indeed.


But pray, Mr. Baize, why do you make the Kings let him use 'em so scurvily?


Phoo! that is to raise the character of Drawcansir.


Of my word, that was well thought on.


Now, Sir, I'll show you a Scene indeed; or rather, indeed, the Scene of Scenes.
'Tis an Heroic Scene.


And pray, Sir, what is your design in this Scene?


Why, Sir, my design is Roman Clothes, gilded Truncheons, forced conceit,
smooth Verse, and a Rant: In fine, if this Scene does not take, I gad, I'll
write no more. Come, come in, Mr. -- a -- nay, come in as many as you can.
Gentlemen, I must desire you to remove a little, for I must fill the Stage.


Why fill the Stage?


O, Sir, because your Heroic Verse never sounds well, but when the Stage is
full.


NAy, hold, hold; pray by your leave a little. Look you, Sir, the drift of this
Scene is somewhat more than ordinary: for I make 'em both fall out because they
are not in love with the same woman.

Not in love? you mean, I suppose, because they are in love, Mr. Baize?


No, Sir; I say not in love: there's a new conceit for you. Now speak.


Since fate, Prince Volscius, has found out the way
For our so long'd-for meeting here this day,
Lend thy attention to my grand concern.

I gladly would that story of thee learn;
But thou to love dost, Pretty-man, incline:
Yet love in thy breast is not love in mine.

Antithesis! thine and mine.

Since love it self's the same, why should it be
Differing in you from what it is in me?

Reasoning; I gad, I love reasoning in verse.

Love takes, Cameleon-like, a various dye
From every Plant on which it self does lye.

Simile!

Let not thy love the course of Nature fright:
Nature does most in harmony delight.

How weak a Deity would Nature prove
Contending with the powerful God of Love?

There's a great Verse!

If Incense thou wilt offer at the Shrine
Of mighty Love, burn it to none but mine.
Her Rosie-lips eternal sweets exhale;
And her bright flames make all flames else look pale.

I gad, that is right.

Perhaps dull Incense may thy love suffice;
But mine must be adored with Sacrifice.
All hearts turn ashes which her eyes control:
The Body they consume as well as Soul.

My love has yet a power more Divine;
Victims her Altars burn not, but refine:
Amidst the flames they never give up the Ghost,
But, with her looks, revive still as they roast.
In spite of pain and death, they're kept alive:
Her fiery eyes makes 'em in fire survive.

That is as well as I can do.

Let my Parthenope at length prevail.

Civil, I gad.

I'll sooner have a passion for a Whale:
In whose vast bulk, though store of Oil doth lye,
We find more shape more beauty in a Fly.

That's uncivil, I gad.

Yes; but as far a fetched fancy, though, I gad, as ever you saw.


Soft, Pretty-man, let not thy vain pretence
Of perfect love, defame loves excellence.
Parthenope is sure as far above
All other loves, as above all is Love.

Ah! I gad, that strikes me.

To blame my Cloris, Gods would not pretend.

Now mark.

Were all Gods joined, they could not hope to mend
My better choice: for fair Parthenope,
Gods would, themselves, un-god themselves to see.

Now the Rant's a coming.

Durst any of the Gods be so uncivil,
I'd make that God subscribe himself a Devil.

Ah, Godsookers, that's well writ!

Could thou that God from Heaven to Earth translate,
He could not fear to want a Heavenly State.
Parthenope, on Earth, can Heaven create.

Cloris does Heaven it self so far excel,
She can transcend the joys of Heaven in Hell.

There's a bold flight for you now! 'Sdeath, I have lost my peruke. Well,
Gentlemen, this is that I never yet saw any one could write, but my self.
Here's true spirit and flame all through, I gad. So, So; pray clear the Stage.


But, Mr. Baize, pray why is this Scene all in Verse?


O, Sir, the subject is too great for Prose.


Well said, i'faith; I'll give thee a pot of Ale for that answer: 'tis well
worth it.


Come, with all my heart.
I'll make that God subscribe himself a Devil.
That single line, I gad, is worth all that my brother Poets ever writ. So, now
let down the Curtain.

NOw, Gentlemen, I will be bold to say, I'll show you the greatest Scene that
ever England saw: I mean not for words, for those I do not value; but for
state, show, and magnificence. In fine, I'll justify it to be as grand to the
eye every whit, I gad, as that great Scene in Harry the Eight, and grander too,
I gad; for, instead of two Bishops, I have brought in two other Cardinals.


Mr. Baize, pray what is the reason that two of the Cardinals are in Hats, and
the other in Caps?


Why, Sir, because -- By gad, I won't tell you.


I ask your pardon, Sir.


Now, Sir, to the business of the day.


Dread Sovereign Lords, my zeal to you, must not invade my duty to your Son;
let me entreat that great Prince Pretty-man first do speak: whose high
pre-eminence, in all things that do bear the name of good, may justly claim
that privilege.


Royal Father, upon my knees I beg
That the Illustrious Volscius first be heard.

Here it begins to unfold: you may perceive, now, that he is his Son.


Yes, Sir; and we are very much beholden to you for that discovery.


That preference is only due to Amarillis, Sir.


I'll make her speak very well, by and by, you shall see.


Invincible Sovereigns --


But stay, what sound is this invades our ears?


Sure 'tis the Music of the moving Spheres.


Behold, with wonder, yonder comes from far
A God-like-Cloud, and a triumphant Carr:
In which, our two right Kings sit one by one,
With Virgin Vests, and Laurel Garlands on.

Then, Brother Phys', 'tis time that we were gone.

Look you now, did not I tell you that this would be as easy a turn as the
other?


Yes, faith, you did so; though, I confess, I could not believe you; but you
have brought it about, I see.


Now, because the two Right Kings descend from above, I make 'em sing to the
Tune and Stile of our modern Spirits.


Haste, brother King, we are sent from above.


Let us move, let us move:
Move to remove the Fate
Of Brentfords long united State.

Tara, tara, tara, full East and by South,

We sail with Thunder in our mouth,
In scorching noon-day, whilst the traveller stays,
Busy, busy, busy, busy, we bustle along.
Mounted upon warm Phoebus his Rays,
Through the Heavenly throng,
Haste to those
Who will feast us, at night, with a Pigs Petty-toes.

And we will fall with our pate
In an Ollio of hate.

But now supper's done, the Servitors try,
Like Soldiers, to storm a whole half-moon-pye.

They gather, they gather hot Custard in spoons,
Alas, I must leave these half-moons,
And repair to my trusty Dragoons.

O stay, for you need not as yet go astray;
The Tide, like a friend, has brought ships in our way,
And on their high-ropes we will play.
Like Maggots in Filberts, we will snug in our shell,
We will frisk in our shell,
We will firk in our shell,
And farewell.

But the Ladies have all inclination to dance,
And the green Frogs croak out a Coranto of France.

Is not that pretty, now? The Fiddlers are all in green.

I, but they play no Coranto.

No, but they play a Tune, that's a great deal better*

No Coranto quoth a! that's a good one, with all my heart. Come, sing on.


Now Mortals that hear
How we Tilt and Carrier,
With wonder will fear
The event of such things as shall never appear.

Stay you to fulfil what the Gods have decreed.

Then call me to help you, if there shall be need.

So firmly resolved is a true Brentford King
To save the distressed, and help to 'em bring,
That ere a Full-pot of good Ale you can swallow,
He's here with a whoop, and gone with a holla.

He's here with a whoop, and gone with a holla. This, Sir, you must know, I
thought once to have brought in with a Conjurer.


I, that would have been better.


No, faith, not when you consider it: for thus 'tis more compendious, and does
the thing every whit as well.


Thing! what thing?


Why, bring 'em down again into the Throne, Sir; what thing would you have?


Well; but, methinks, the Sense of this Song is not very plain.


Plain? why, did you ever hear any people in Clouds speak plain? They must be
all for flight of fancy, at its full range, without the least check, or
control upon it. When once you tie up spirits, and people in Clouds to speak
plain, you spoil all.


Bless me, what a Monster's this!


Come, now to serious counsel we will advance.


I do agree; but first, let's have a Dance.


Right. You did that very well, Mr. Cartwright. But first, let's have a Dance.
Pray remember that; be sure you do it always just so: for it must be done as if
it were the effect of thought, and premeditation. But first, let's have a
Dance. Pray remember that.


Well* I can hold no longer, I must gag this rogue; there's no enduring of him.


No, prithee make use of thy patience a little longer: let's see the end of
him now.


This, now, is an ancient Dance, of right belonging to the Kings of Brentford;
and since derived, with a little alteration, to the Inns of Court.


What saucy Groom molests our privacies?


The Army's at the door, and in disguise,
Desires a word with both your Majesties:

Having, from Knights-bridge, hither marched by stealth.

Bid 'em attend a while, and drink our health.

How, Mr. Baize, the Army in disguise?

Ay, Sir, for fear the Usurpers might discover them that went out but just now.


Why, what if they had discovered them?


Why then they had broke this design.


That's true, indeed. I did not think of that.


Here, take five Guineys for those warlike men.


And here's five more; that makes the sum just ten.


We have not seen so much the Lord knows when.


Speak on, brave Amarillis.


Invincible Sovereigns, blame not my modesty,
If at this grand conjuncture --

What dreadful noise is this that comes and goes?

Haste hence, great Sirs, your Royal persons save,
For the event of war no mortal knows:
The Army, wrangling for the gold you gave,
First fell to words, and then to handy-blows.

O dangerous estate of Sovereign power!
Obnoxious to the change of every hour.

Let us for shelter in our Cabinet stay:
Perhaps these threatening storms may pass away.

But, Mr. Baize, did not you promise us, just now, to make Amarillis speak very
well?


Ay, and so she would have done, but that they hindered her.


How, Sir? whether you would or no?


Ay, Sir; the Plot lay so that, I vow to gad, it was not to be avoided.


Marry, that was hard.


But, pray, who hindered her?


Why, the battle, Sir, that's just coming in at door. And I'll tell you now a
strange thing: though I don't pretend to do more than other men, I gad, I'll
give you both a whole week to guess how I'll represent this Battle.


I had rather be bound to fight your Battle, Sir, I assure you.


Why, there's it now: fight a Battle? there's the common error. I knew
presently where I should have you. Why, pray, Sir, do but tell me this one
thing, Can you think it a decent thing, in a battle before Ladies, to have men
run their Swords through one another, and all that?


No, faith, 'tis not civil.


On the other side; to have a long relation of Squadrons here, and Squadrons
there: what is that but a dull prolixity?


Excellently reasoned, by my troth!


Wherefore, Sir, to avoid both those Indecorums, I sum up my whole battle in
the representation of two persons only, no more: and yet so lively, that, I vow
to gad, you would swear ten thousand men were at it, really engaged. Do you
mark me?


Yes, Sir; but I think I should hardly swear, though, for all that.


By my troth, Sir, but you would, though, when you fee it: for I make 'em both
come out in Armour, Cap-a-pea, with their Swords drawn, and hung, with a scarlet
Ribbon at their wrists, (which, you know, represents fighting enough) each of
'em holding a Lute in his hand.


How, Sir, instead of a Buckler?


O Lord, O Lord! instead of a Buckler? Pray, Sir, do you ask no more questions.
I make 'em, Sir, play the battle in Recitativo. And here's the conceit. Just
at the very same instant that one sings, the other, Sir, recovers you his
Sword, and puts himself in a warlike posture: so that you have at once your ear
entertained with Music, and good Language; and your eye satisfied with the
garb, and accoutrements of war. Is not that well?


I, what would you have more? he were a Devil that would not be satisfied with
that.


I confess, Sir, you stupefy me.


You shall see.


But, Mr. Baize, might not we have a little fighting for I love those Plays,
where they cut and slash one another, upon the Stage, for a whole hour
together.


Why, then, to tell you true, I have contrived it both ways. But you shall have
my Recitativo first.


Villain, thou lie.

Arm, arm, Gonsalvo, arm; what ho?
The lye no flesh can brook, I trow.

Advance, from Acton, with the Musketeers.

Draw down the Chelsey Curiasiers.

The Band you boast of, Chelsey Curiasiers,
Shall, in my Putney Pikes, now meet their Peers.

Chiswickians, aged, and renowned in fight,
Join with the Hammersmith Brigade.

You'll find my Mortlake Boys will do them right,
Unless by Fulham numbers over-laid.

Let the left-wing of Twick'nam foot advance,
And line that Eastern hedge.

The Horse I raised in Petty-France
Shall try their chance.
And scour the Meadows, over-grown with Sedge.

Stand: give the word.

Bright Sword.

That may be thine,
But 'tis not mine.

Give fire, give fire, at once give fire,
And let those recreant Troops perceive mine ire.

Pursue, pursue; they fly
That first did give the lye.

This, now, is not improper, I think, because the Spectators know all these
Towns, and may easily conceive them to be within the Dominions of the two Kings
of Brentford.


Most exceeding well designed!


How do you think I have contrived to give a stop to this battle?


How?


By an Eclipse: Which, let me tell you, is a kind of fancy that was yet never
so much as thought of, but by my self, and one person more, that shall be
nameless. Come, come in, Mr. -- a --.


What mid-night darkness does invade the day,
And snatch the Victor from his conquered prey?
Is the Sun weary of this bloody sight,
And winks upon us with his eye of light?
'Tis an Eclipse. This was unkind, O Moon,
To clap between me, and the Sun so soon.
Foolish Eclipse! thou this in vain hast done;
My brighter honour had Eclipsed the Sun:
But now behold Eclipses two in one.

This is an admirable representation of a Battle, as ever I saw.


I, Sir. But how would you fancy now to represent an Eclipse?


Why, that's to be supposed.


Supposed! Ay, you are ever at your suppose: ha, ha, ha. Why, you may as well
suppose the whole Play. No, it must come in upon the Stage, that's certain; but
in some odd way, that may delight, amuse, and all that. I have a conceit
for it, that I am sure is new, and, I believe, to the purpose.


How's that?


Why, the truth is, I took the first hint of this out of a Dialogue, between
Phoebus and Aurora, in the Slighted Maid: which, by my troth, was very pretty;
though, I think, you'll confess this is a little better.


No doubt on it, Mr. Baize.


But, Sir, you have heard, I suppose, that your Eclipse of the Moon, is nothing
else, but an interposition of the Earth, between the Sun and Moon: as likewise
your Eclipse of the Sun is caused by an interlocation of the Moon, betwixt the
Earth and Sun?


I have heard so, indeed.


Well, Sir; what do me I, but make the Earth, Sun, and Moon, come out upon the
Stage, and dance the Hey: hum? And, of necessity, by the very nature of this
Dance, the Earth must be sometimes between the Sun and the Moon, and the Moon
between the Earth and Sun; and there you have both your Eclipses. That is new,
I gad, ha?


That must needs be very fine, truly.


Yes, there is some fancy in it. And then, Sir, that there may be something in
it of a Joque, I make the Moon sell the Earth a Bargain. Come, come out
Eclipse, to the Tune of Tom Tyler.


Orbis, O Orbis,
Come to me thou little rogue Orbis.

What calls Terra firma, pray?

Luna that never shines by day.

What means Luna in a veil?

Luna means to show her tail,

Fie, Sister, fie; thou make me muse,
Dairy, dairy down,
To see thee Orb abuse.

I hope his anger 'twill not move;
Since I did it out of love:
Hey down, dairy down.

Where shall I thy true love know,
Thou pretty, pretty Moon?

To morrow soon, ere it be noon,
On Mount Vesuvio.

Then I will shine.

And I will be fine.

And we will drink nothing but Lipary wine.

And we, c.

So, now, vanish Eclipse, and enter the other Battle, and fight. Here now, if I
am not mistaken, you will see fighting enough.


Others may boast a single man to kill;
But I, the blood of thousands, daily spill.
Let petty Kings the names of Parties know:
Where ever I come, I slay both friend and foe.
The swiftest Horsemen my swift rage controlls,
And from their Bodies drives their trembling souls.
If they had wings, and to the Gods could fly,
I would pursue, and beat 'em, through the sky:
And make proud Jove, with all his Thunder, see.
This single Arm more dreadful is, than he.

There's a brave fellow for you now, Sirs. I have read of your Hector, your
Achilles, and a hundred more; but I defy all your Histories, and your Romances
too, I gad, to show me one such Conqueror, as this Drawcansir.


I swear, I think you may.


But, Mr. Baize, how shall all these dead men go off? for I see none alive to
help 'em.


Go off! why, as they came on; upon their legs: how should they go off? Why, do
you think the people do not know they are not dead? He is mighty ignorant, poor
man; your friend here is very silly, Mr. Iohnson, I gad; he is. Come, Sir, I'll
show you go off. Rise, Sirs, land go about your business. There's go off for
you. Hark you, Mr. Ivory. Gentlemen, I'll be with you presently.


Will you so? then we will be gone.


I, prithee let's go, that we may preserve our hearing. One Battle more would
take mine quite away.


Where are the Gentlemen?


They are gone, Sir.


Gone! 'Sdeath, this last Act is best of all. I'll go fetch 'em again.


Stay, here's a foul piece of papyr of his. Let's see what 'tis.

The Argument of the Fifth Act.

Cloris, at length, being sensible of Prince Pretty-man's passion, consents to
marry him; but, just as they are going to Church, Prince Pretty-man meeting, by
chance, with old Ioan the Chandlers widow, and remembering it was she that first
brought him acquainted with Cloris: out of a high point of honour, break off
his match with Cloris, and marries old Ioan. Upon which, Cloris, in despair,
drowns her self: and Prince Pretty-man, discontentedly, walks by the River
side.


Pox on it, this will never do: 'tis just like the rest. Come, let's be gone.


A plague on 'em both for me, they have made me sweat, to run after 'em. A
couple of senseless rascals, that had rather go to dinner, than see this Play
out, with a pox to 'em. What comfort has a man to write for such dull rogues?
Come Mr. -- a -- Where are you, Sir? come away quick, quick.


Sir, they are gone to dinner.


Yes, I know the Gentlemen are gone; but I ask for the Players.


Why, an't please your worship, Sir, the Players are gone to dinner too.


How! are the Players gone to Dinner? 'Tis impossible: the Players gone to
dinner! I gad, if they are, I'll make 'em know what it is to injure a person
that does 'em the honour to write for 'em, and all that. A company of proud,
conceited, humorous, cross-grain'd persons, and all that. I gad, I'll make 'em
the most contemptible, despicable, inconsiderable persons, and all that, in the
whole world, for this trick. I gad, I'll be revenged on 'em; I'll sell this Play
to the other House.


Nay, good, Sir, don't take away the Book; you'll disappoint the Town, that
comes to see it acted here, this afternoon.


That's all one. I must reserve this comfort to my self, my Book and I will go
together, we will not part, indeed, Sir. The Town! why, what care I for the
Town? I gad, the Town has used me as scurvily, as the Players have done: but
I'll be revenged on them too; I will both Lampoon and print 'em too, I gad.
Since they will not admit of my Plays, they shall know what a Satyrist I am.
And so farewell to this Stage for ever, I gad.


What shall we do now?


Come then, let's set up Bills for another Play: We shall lose nothing by this,
I warrant you.


I am of your opinion. But, before we go, let's see Haines and Shirley practise
the last Dance; for that may serve for another Play.


I'll call 'em: I think they are in the Trying-room.


Come, come; let's go away to dinner.


THe Play is at an end, but where's the Plot?
That circumstance our Poet Baize forgot,
And we can boast, though 'tis a plotting Age,
No place is freer from it than the Stage.
The Ancients Plotted, though, and strove to please
With sense that might be understood with ease;
They every Scene with so much wit did store
That who brought any in, went out with more:
But this new way of wit does so surprise,
Men lose their wits in wondering where it lies.
If it be true, that Monstrous births presage
The following mischiefs that afflicts the Age,
And sad disasters to the State proclaim;
Plays, without head or tail, may do the same.
Wherefore, for ours, and for the Kingdoms peace,
May this prodigious way of writing cease.
Let's have, at least, once in our lives, a time
When we may hear some Reason, not all Rhyme:
We have these ten years felt its Influence;
Pray let this prove a year of Prose and Sense.

