SInce Novelties your Palates still pursue,
You have to Night, both Play and Poet new:
From whence alone his hopes of pleasing grew.
For so much this prevailing Passion thrives,
Each for his future Appetite contrives,
New Friends, new Favourites, and of late -- new Wives.
You Critics only keep your Old disease,
When Authors please you least, you're most at ease.
Our Poet's therefore glad of a pretence,
To be insipid, in his own defence,
And if you hiss, 'tis still at your Expense.
Often for change the meanest things are good,
Thus though the Town all delicates afford,
A Kit-cat is a Supper for a Lord.
But if your Nicer taste resolves to Day,
To have no relish for our Author's Play.
Place some diverting Scene before your Mind,
And think of that, to which you will be kind.
So thus when heavily the moments pass,
Toaster's to Circulate the lazy Glass
By naming some bright Nymph their draughts refine,
And taste at once the joys of Love and Wine.

YOU manage this Husband of yours very dexterously.


While you live observe this; that the only way to rule a conceited Fool, is to
seem to be ruled by him.


I am convinced, but still admire by what strange Art you keep him at this
distance, for I have heard that your Old Men, like those that have stinking
Breaths, will always be drawing closer than other Folks!


Why, by a pretended distaste of all Men, I have secured my self against one
that I hate in earnest, so that now --


He avoids you to gain your Esteem!


And 'tis his only way to gain it, for trust me Clarinda, there is nothing so
distasteful as a Husband's fondness, and you had better be hated of the Man you
Love, than Loved of the Man you hate.


Then we must hate if we Marry!


You'll find it difficult to Love, for Marriage sets the Object too near us,
and Love is a fine Flower, that loses its Scent if we keep it always at our
Nose.


Where is the fault then?


Perhaps 'tis in our selves -- our Pleasures languish when they become familiar
to us, and 'tis in Love as in Ambition, our thirst is still for something that
we have not.


I fancy the Dominion they pretend over us, may be one reason, and methinks
the slavery's misplaced, for the Government of Love should be in the Women;
They always make the Lover happy in his Chains; but --


Husbands, alas! Are like other Tyrants, the greatest good we expect from 'em,
is to do no harm.


You indeed have reason to think so, for to a Woman of any Spleen, Sir Soloman
must needs be of a very unlucky temper, and seems to have something peculiar in
him to Create aversion, for he is always talking, and always giving his
impertinent Advice.


And you can't oblige him more than to ask it.


He has all the ridiculous extremes of the Gay and the Grave, but I like
nothing in him so much as his pretending to understand the World -- he is so
wise an Owl!


Nay since he has been, as he calls it, of the party, he has taken new Airs
upon him; all my Family, forsooth, are ordered by rules of State, and he is
grown so important to himself, that he's afraid the Cook or the Butler should
Poison him -- but here he comes.


No, no, no, Friend, I understand the World, I understand the World --.


What's the matter? Sir Solomon.


Nothing Cousin, nothing, only this Fellow (suborned as I guess by the
Ministry) had a mind to corrupt my Judgment, with an Argument for a standing
Army.


Sir Solomon, if you don't like that, I have Books of the other Party.


Hast thou so Friend let's see 'em --


Here Sir!


A Proposal to take the Lace off the Soldiers Clothes, and put it on our Wives
Petty-Coats -- Hah! hah! This is a foolish Project for they'll give it 'em
again.


There may be some danger Sir Solomon.


No, No -- I don't like that, any thing belonging to Soldiers should come so
near 'em -- what's this


I have been persuading her, ever since you went, but she is so unwilling! --
pray, Madam, gratify Sir Solomon, and go to the Play.


Ay do, My Dear, gratify me as my Cousin says, and go to the Play, you must not
deny your self all the Pleasures of the World, for your Love of me, come it
will divert you.


Divert me! Is it possible, Sir Solomon, you should have so little Religion, as
to fancy the Entertainment of that place could give a Civil Woman any Pleasure?
Not that I think, all are otherwise that go there, but the dishonest Liberties
of the Stage are such, that we seldom hear any thing, that diverts without
something that offends.


Poor Fool! But 'tis a wicked place!


But the Moral, Madam, often leaves us a quite different impression.


Nay there you are lost Clarinda, for tell me a Play in which there is not for
a Moral, if you Marry you're a Cuckold, and Woman's Virtue is a Chimara.


Well I am certainly the only Husband in this Town, that is not one -- How
happy am I in a Wife --


The Licence is indeed too great, yet the fault is equal in the Town, and the
Poet who only shows us the World a little too near, for, turn but your Eyes off
the Stage, and you shall see that your agreeable Woman is a Coquette, and your
agreeable Man an Atheist, and the first step to be very witty, is (it seems) to
be very wicked.


Bless us all! But the World Cousin is very bad, very bad ('tis good to
encourage Women in their Innocence) -- but you need not apprehend now Astrea,
for this is a New Play, and the Author advised with me in the thing -- I
protest he's a Pretty smart Man.


I don't understand those things, but am sorry you Converse with such People,
for the next Scandal to the being a Poet, is to keep 'em Company.


Alas, My Dear, you don't take it -- we that would understand the World; must
make it our business to read Men -- I mingle with such People indeed, and can
hear 'em Crack a jest or so, and now and then put in a joke my self, but Sir
Solomon Empty, is not to be fathomed by every Body, I defy 'em to get any thing
out of me!


I'll Answer for it.


I did not apprehend it, but the World, that seldom makes a true Judgment,
content themselves with the appearances of things, and your Character is drawn
from the Airs that you make in make in Public.


Looky' Wife, I would be mistaken in some things, a good States Man, like a
good Wrestler, conceals his strength for an opportunity, and my Capacity is a
Secret -- but you are Women and don't understand things.


Sir, The Coach is at the Door.


Very well -- I don't like that Fellow's Face, he looks as if he was a Spy upon
my Actions -- so now you are kind!


I shall always prefer Obedience to inclination.


I'll lead you to your Coach.


Why won't you go with us?


No, no, my dear, they stay for me at the Fountain, and I would not miss a
Night to be made a Privy-Councellor.


You always find reasons to leave me.


Well thou art a Machiavil, Astrea, I am astonished, she longs to go, and by a
Counterfeit unwillingness makes him against his own inclination press her to
go, and how happy he thinks himself in having persuaded her to do what he would
not have her do.


There is no blessing like a Virtuous Wife! No Comfort beyond it! To see her
fears and her Caution, to tell me I should please her more if I would lead her
to the Church -- Poor fool! She thinks of nothing but me and her Prayer-Book,
then she is so tender of her Fame, that she is never guilty of an indecency so
great as to Kiss me in Company; and this Conduct has prevailed with her so
much, that she has a sort of unwillingness, and fear to do it, even when we are
alone, and so Chaste! -- Well I am the happiest Man! Ha! who have we here my
Noble Captain.


Sir Solomon Empty!


Welcome from Flanders Tom, welcome from Flanders -- What never a Wooden Leg
yet! Why thou art the unluckiest Fellow in the World! Not an Ear, or an Eye, or
a peace of thy Nose off, but return to thy Friends like an ordinary Man!



Come don't be Melancholy but tell us, what weeping Orphans, and smiling
Widows thou hast made, what Towns demolished this Campaign!


Faith, Sir Solomon, I have demolished nothing but my Commission, and made no
Orphans but my self, I am broke that's all.


Ay, and enough too -- but how so Tom! Do you know --


Prithee lay this aside, all I know is, that I am come from starving, in a
Crowd to starve in a Corner.


Starve! A young Fellow, and talk of starving!


I know thou understand Men, make me a little acquainted with my self, and
tell me what I am fit for -- I have been thinking a great while, and can find
no Virtue to lay to my charge.


O! You are modest Tom, you are modest -- but let me see -- fit for! Thou hast
a good Voice, I have heard, upon a Muster, and were of the Temple before the
War -- what dost thou think of the Law.


Very well, but I know nothing of it, but what I have got from being Arrested.


Enough, enough Tom, I knew several Eminent Pleaders that got Estates with as
little -- 'tis but talking on and loud.


But we Soldiers, Sir Solomon, are so used to dispatch a business at a blow,
that I should starve before I could arrive at their secret of perplexing a
matter, and spining out a cause, beside, I want all the requisites, the double
Dealing, the Impudence! The Lungs! The Conscience! --


Conscience! Nay, Tom, if thou hast that in thy Head! -- thou were born to be a
Beggar -- but is there no way -- hark ye, Tom, thou art a very Clean
Shap'd-Fellow, what if you went into the Playhouse, and turned Actor! Ha! ha! I
thought I should make thy Fortune at last! Why thou may come to be a King in
time, and keep Company with Princes! I'll warrant, they shall make thee an
Alderman the first dash.


I'd rather be his Horse.


They'll try your Talent, Tom, not but thou may get as much honour from
acting a Cobbler, as acting a Lord, as an old Moralist said of the World, and I
had rather see a Scaramouch than an Emperor! for there's that Dog! that sly
Rogue, that arch Son of a Whore, that Pinkethman, there's always more in that
Fellows Face than his words, and to see that Rascal Act does me more good than
railing against the Court party -- well, Tom, how do ye like a Player.


As ill as I do a Lawyer, and I am quite as unfit for it, I could no more
listen to the dull Chat of every Fop behind the Scenes, than I could bear his
slinking Breath -- then I should scarce be employed enough to live by it, for I
could not act in a dull Play, because I hate to speak any Bodies nonsense but
my own, and to be Hist off the Stage, or punished for an others Crime --


Is the Devil -- but that would never happen, if these silly Fellows, the
Poets, would be ruled; they are still aiming at Wit -- If I was to write a Play
--


You would not split upon that Rock.


No, no, Tom, I'd have something to divert every Body. I'd have your Atheism to
please the Wits -- some affectation to entertain the Beaux, a Rape or two to
engage the Ladies; and I'd bring in the Bears, before every Act, to secure an
interest in the Upper Gallery.


You have forgot one Range, what would you do for the Cits in the Middle?


Why I'd raise 'em a Ghost to tell their Children of when they come home -- but
now you speak of Cits, Tom, I have an employment that will fit thee. The
Ladies, Tom, the Ladies, there's the Treasure at last --


Ay, such a Treasure as I shall spend my own before I shall find.


Why what charges can there be when you Factor for your self?


O the greater -- He that won't employ a Procuress out of good Husbandry, is
like him that shoots his Wild-fowl to save money, when he reckons the Powder,
the Shot, and other Expenses; he'll find that he might a had 'em cheaper of a
Poulterer.


I see, Tom, thou run'st into the common error of ingenious Men, who think the
World is governed by reason -- you may perhaps come to live happy in it with
your reason; but the way to be a great Man, is to be enterprising.


Indeed I am apt to think he'll never do Miracles that does nothing but what he
should do.


In that thought I leave you, Tom, in this Town, for broken Officers and
Lovers, are the Prayers and the Play, -- go try your Fortune my Hercules! -- I
warrant you're happy -- the Prayers and the Play.


If I was sure of meeting any of thy Relations there, it might tempt me to go
-- Now this old Rascal thinks a Soldier fit for any thing that's mean, and
values himself upon his Riches that we have secured to him with our Blood --
What Gallant Spirit would move a Finger for such Slaves! -- To bear all
hardships, and stand intrepid midst a thousand horrors, where Glory pushes us
beyond our selves to be despised when we return, and among the very People he
has saved, with all his wounds, the tattered Hero starves -- but Ingratitude's
a humane Virtue, no Beast ever pretended to it, and it is so perfectly in our
Nature, that we may observe no People hate so heartily as those that have been
highly obliged -- as for us, it seems there is no Rogue like a Soldier; we are
a sort of Vagabonds, that are fit indeed, upon occasion, to stand between sober
folks and danger, and are used just like a Militia Officer's Sword, when
training day's over 'tis thrown aside -- O such Worthies!


Ha, ha, ha, Woe be to some poor Dog of a Husband -- who knows now whose fate
may depend upon this advice of mine -- some Lord or Alderman, or perhaps some
industrious Merchant, that may be sweating at the Indies, while his Wife -- ha,
ha, ha, -- well, I am a mischievous Dog, but let 'em take what follows.

[Ha, my Friend Cleremont, the Spirit of Mirth and Wickedness!


Drink and drive care away.


Now this Fellow's Merry will I sift him -- 'twas Machiavil's way


Ah don't speak of her, Sir Solomon, don't Name her, 'tis touching upon ones
madness in an interval of Sense, and enough to make me rave in Flames, and
darts and Charms, and so forth -- I have been drinking all day to forget her,
and now you must lay her in my way.


And is this all the use you make of a Lady, that lies in your way? If I was in
thy place!


Ay, thou would lay about thee -- Thou art a Dangerous Fellow -- I find I
must take care when I am Married.


O I never wrong my Friend, never wrong my Friend!


'Tis good to be sure, Sir Solomon, I'll take her out of thy Neighbourhood --
such a vigorous Rogue! Why they say, thou art worse than St. George's Dragon, a
Virgin a day won't satisfy thee, besides Wives and Traders.


Ha! Ha! People will say any thing -- though faith one can do nothing in this
Town, but its presently Whispered about.


here's a Rogue! I find to be unable's ashame at 60.


But these things must not be talked of, Love and Cheating should be always
private -- But prithee tell me something of thy Courtship, does thy Sickly Lady
listen to thee yet?


No, nor ever will, without I could appear to her in the shape of a
Consumption, or Appoplexy -- she's in Love with nothing but Ghosts -- Flesh and
Blood are not gentile enough for her.


You would never be advised -- you should Court her, in her own way, when she
is Grip'd, you should have the Colic, when she begins to faint, you should
fall in a Swoon -- Cough, Sigh and Complain, just as you see her, what doest
ever think to gain a Woman by opposing her?


Ay, ay, the best way to gain her at her own Weapon, Contradiction.


Look ye Friend, be ruled by me -- (there is a Policy in Life, and every Man is
a State to himself) now would I have you be acquainted with her Doctor -- Fee
him as often as she does.


I'd as soon take Physic of him as often as she does, why he's with her
Morning, Noon and Night, and has more Guinea's in a Day than Meals -- No, no,
Sir Solomon, I have taken a Cheaper way, a Poets sooner Fee'd than a Physician,
I'll besiege her so with Songs and Sonnets, that she shall surrender for her
own quiet.


And have you laid in a Magazine of these Stores?


I am providing my self with a Song to day, I sent my Man at Noon to hire a
Poet, and he stay's as long as if he had employed the City Laureate -- but see
the Rascal's come -- well what heavy Rhymer did you meet with that kept you
thus long?


Sir, 'twas a long time before I could find one.


A long time! Why you might a beat all the Garrets, from Will's Coffee-House to
Aldgate in half the time.


Then I was with Three, Sir, before I met One -- that would be at leisure.


What were they doing Ned?


One, Sir Solomon, was writing a Lampoon for a Lady of Quality, in which he was
to commend her and abuse all her Acquaintance.


Nay, she ought to be praised if she paid for it, 'but what were the rest
upon?


One, Sir, was writing a Poem upon the Tiger that was baited, in which he
pretends to prove, that he was of the Court-Party.


Ha! -- that's some Cabal Poet, that's let into the secret of the Government.


The last, Sir Solomon, was making a Prayer for a Religious old Gentlewoman,
but that business not being in much hast, I prevailed with him to do mine.


I can hardly read this Fellows hand --

COrinna with a graceful Air
Her Symptoms does reveal
Such Charms adorn the Sickly fair.
We scarce can wish her well.
How does the pale Complexion please!
Faint looks and Languid Eye!
New Beauties rise with her disease,
And when she's Sick we die.

Very pretty, Faith -- When she's Sick we die.


'Tis very little for the Money!


For five Shillings more, Sir, he would a put in the Similitude of a Be, that
kills while he's a dying.


Pox take him, and his Be -- an unreasonable Son of a Whore, a Crown for a
Be! 'sbud I can buy a Hive for half the Money -- this is some saucy Rogue that
eat's every Day -- well now, Sir Solomon, against these Arms what Woman can
defend her self?


They are unaccountable Creatures indeed, and very likely may be sooner Fidled
than reasoned out of their favours.


There is no best way to get a Woman. Some whine, some dance, some dress, and
some prate; but wiser Women, at last, considers a Man's Make rather than his
words or actions; nay, or his Face.


'Tis your interest they should.


Looky', Sir Solomon, the Woman that falls in Love with a Man for his Face, may
find her self as much disappointed as the Man that believes a Woman for her
Tears -- they are false Signs.


But they are persuading ones.


Pshaw! Pshaw! they move only Children: but come along, and see your mistake.


I vow my heart's at my mouth!


There, let me seize my own.


You are sure he did not see us?


Certain of it.


Then I am happy. 'Twere very unlucky to be surprised the first time we meet.


Fortune, Madam, has a greater care of Lovers.


Now pray let me know how to call you; for in a little time we must begin to
lay aside the Titles of Sir and Madam.


And substitute those of my Dear and my Life! --


Ay! ay! for our Seasons of Love, but what if we should forget our selves, and
fall to the dull indifference of Man and Wife?


Why then I must be called Freeman, and you --


I must not tell him right -- Caelia.


I fancy you're a Coward, my Dear! I observe the first thing you provide for is
a retreat.


I'm afraid, my Hero! you'll have the first occasion to use it.


I don't know what a long War may produce, but --


Have a care Servant, don't soil your Merit with handling it -- I dare not stay
now, but to Morrow


At Six --


I'll meet you in the Field.


Nay, your Honour's at stake, and if you disappoint --


I can't spare a Glove, but be that my security --


Ha! -- but -- remember the Hour.


And you the occasion. Adieu, Servant.


I came! I saw! I conquered! Gold bright as her self! This is the luckyest
adventure! Others Solicit, Bribe, Rise early, haunt Courts and great Men's
Levees, and follow Fortune in the servile Crowd, but I meet the Goddess less
engaged, and court her in her lovelyest shape, a Woman; a Woman too that has
more Wit and Beauty, than Riches ever gave, or Poverty took away -- but what
now can this Woman be! She has too much Wit to come from the City, and too much
Money to come from the Court -- but to Morrow must unriddle all -- I feel my
Soul rise with my Pocket -- Cleremont, the report is true! I see Marriage writ
in thy Face; and after railing at ^ thou art resolved to fall into the Noose at
last.


'Tis the properest time to fall into one.


Then you begin to have nothing in your head now, but ^ Children, and the Main
Chance.


Nothing less, but instead of that, I have Pills, Elixers, Bolus's, Ptizans,
and Gallipots.


Why, is the Lady you court an Apothecaries Widow?


No, but she is an Apothecaries Shop, she holds all his Drugs, she has her
Physic for every hour of the Day and Night -- her Bed is lined with Poppies,
the black Boys at the Feet, that the vulgar employ to bear Flowers in their
Arms, she loads with Diascordium, and other sleepy Potions, that the little
Devils seem to nod over their Charge -- her sweet Bags are not perfumed with
such common stuff, and offensive to the Brain, as Musk and Amber; but they
breath the Delightful and Salubrious Scents of Hartshorn, Rue, and Assefetida.


Why, she's fit to be the Consort of Hippocrates! but what other Charms has
this extraordinary Lady?


She has one, Tom, that a Man may relish without being so deep a Physician.


What's that?


Why 2000 l. a Year.


No vulgar Beauty indeed! but can thou for any consideration join thy self to
this Hospital, this Box of Physic, and be forced to lye all Night like
Leaf-gold upon a Pill?


Alas, Tom, this is not half the Evil, her humour is as strange as her Diet --
all about her must have fine Airs, and if she could, her Postilion should be a
Gentleman -- she settled a Pension upon one of her Footmen for losing a
Foretooth, and said he was maimed in her service.


I'm afraid you'll come to your Pension too for a more considerable maim -- but
what can you do with her, and her Physic; in a little time she'll grow like an
Antimonial Cup, and a kiss will be able to work with you!


The best way to avoid that danger, would be to marry her; for most Wives may
be Antimonial Cups long enough, without being found out of their Husbands; but
to prevent that, Tom, I design to break all the Glasses, and kick the Doctor
down Stairs, on the Wedding day; and so I have told her.


That's very familiar; are you so near Man and Wife?


O! nearer, we begin to hate one another already.


I find then you'd Cure her of her Physic by a Counter-Poyson -- but prithee
Cleremont let me prevail with you to leave this humour of abusing Marriage;
'tis a mean Entertainment, and there's not a Porter in Town but can be too
witty for you in it.


You see then I am of the right side, for their sense can't rise above speaking
Truth.


Then to scorn Marriage while you desire it, is to treat your Mistress like a
common Dame that will be kicked into humour; and you'll be thought to know no
other way that only strive to huff her to it.


Perhaps it might be the best.

For Women born to be controlled,
Stoop to the forward and the bold.

PEace good Impertinence, I tell thee no Woman of Quality is, or should be in
perfect health; hah! hah! -- Tom.


Madam.


Go to my Lady Formals, ask how she rested, and tell her the violence of my
cold is abated --

To be always in health is as insipid as to be always in humour; one is the
effect of too little Breeding, as the other of too little Wit, and sit only for
the Clumsy State of a Citizen -- I am ready to faint under the very Idea of
such a vulgar Life. Hah! hah! hah! -- Will.


My Lady!


Run to my Lady Lovevisit, and tell her Ladyship, that I am so imbarrast with
the Spleen this Morning, I can't tell whether I shall be able to stir abroad;
and know how she rested after the fatigue of yesterday -- hah! hah! hah! hah!


These Ladies make themselves Sick, to make themselves business, and are well
or ill, only in Ceremony to each other.


What doest mutter?


The new Foot-Man is not returned.


'Tis indeed a strange Lump, I wonder the good, Lady Prayseall, should
recommend him to me, he is not fit to carry a Disease to any Body; I sent him
the other Day with the Colic to some Ladies, and he put it into his own
Language it seems, and called it the Belly-Ach! I was under the greatest
Confusion! for the same Afternoon, two or three of 'em, in the Public
China-House, Saluted me upon it, -- I was forced to explain the Booby's
meaning, else I had suffered the imputation of so vulgar a Disease! Hah! hah!
hah!


I wish your Ladyship had not Occasion to send any: for my part --


Thy part! Why thou were it made, I think of the Masculine kind -- 'tis betraying
our Sex, not to be Sickly and Tender! Whence came it, think thou, that we
first were served and attended, by Men of our own Rank, but that it was the
good breeding of our Mothers to be Feeble.


I finding my Mother was a Clown.


Observe but the Families I visit, they have all something derived to 'em, from
the Elegant, Nice State of Sickness, you may see even in the Males, a Genteel,
as it were stagger or twine of their Bodies -- As they were not yet confirmed
enough, for the Rough, Laborious Exercise of Walking; a Saunter in their
Motion, that is, so like Quality! And their Voice, is so soft and low, you'd
think they were asleep, that are so very Delicate.


Methinks, Madam, it would be better if the Men were not altogether so tender.


Indeed, I have sometimes wished that they were not, but, it is to distinguish
'em from the gross Education of the Commons, and it is fit, since they differ
so much by Nature, in their Spirit and their Form; Nay, most of their very
Diseases, are not Profaned by the Crowd, the Apoplexy and Gout, are peculiar
to the Nobility, and I could wish that Colds also were only ours, for there is
something in 'em, so genteel and becoming! -- Hah! hah! hah!


That I hope I shall never be fit for 'em -- Your Ladyship forgot the Spleen.


O my Dear Spleen, I grudge even some of us; that ingenious Disease visits only
the most Delicate.


I knew a Tradesman's Wife, that was mightily troubled with it.


A Tradesman's Wife! Ha! ha! Nay, those little Creatures, like the Monkey among
Beasts, do follow us in every thing -- They Dress! They Game! They have their
Cold-Tea! Give Airs! Intrigue! And go as far as simple Nature can. Hah! hah!
Never think it Cloe, a Mere Commoner could not be so honoured, as a Lyon they
say will Fawn upon nothing but a King; so this Elegant distemper submits its
self to none, but the well descended -- I profess -- I Feel it, while I commend
it --


Will your Ladyship take some Steel drops, or some Bolus! or Electuary! or --


This Wench will kill me with Questions, hah! hah! bring any of 'em.

These healthy Sluts are too Boisterous for the Tender Frame of a Well-Bred
Woman -- I am resolved if there be a decayed Person of Quality to be got in
Town, I'll have her -- ever since this Noisy Creature has been in my House, it
has been taken for an Inn -- Well the Commons of England are the strangest
Creatures! Hah! hah!


Madam, the Doctor, the Apothecary, the Exchange-Woman, and the Cunning-Man;
that your Ladyship calls, Stro-strologer are below.


Bid 'em come up, they may divert my Spleen, better than the Medicine -- Hah!
hah! Well, the regularity of Life is certainly the happiest thing that belongs
to it.

I am glad you 're come Doctor, for to live without you, is Sailing without a
Compass; Mrs Pert, let me see how you have ordered those Ruffles.


Madam, your Ladyship, I am sure will be in Love with 'em, I have made 'em to
the Newest Fashion; some French Ladies were at my Shop Yesterday, and I cut 'em
exactly with theirs.


How did your Ladyship rest?


Never worse Dr. but I know the reason, it was my Visiting-Night, and my Old
Lady Linger stayed after all were gone, and unmercifully kept me up, at least
half an hour beyond my time.


'Twas unsufferable, Madam, but I'll order something to compose your Ladyship,
and repair that misfortune.


I like the Air of this Ruffle mightily -- The French are certainly the most
agreeable People upon Earth -- Do they wear 'em so low?


Exactly, and please your Ladyship -- the Bottom of the Lace must agree with
the Tip of your Ladyship's little Finger -- To wear it higher, would show too
much of your Ladyship's Arm.


Which I would not do by any means -- it looks like a Washerwoman, to bare
above the Ring -- Dr. I long to enter on my New course of Physic, but Pray let
me have nothing in it, that may any way interrupt the order of my Visits, for I
would not purchase health so dear, as with the loss of one Days agreements.


I shall be careful.


Mrs. Pert -- Be sure you get me the Lace, for I'll wear none but what is
Prohibited.


I'll search all the Merchants Pockets, as diligently as their Wives do, but
I'll have it for your Ladyship.


Mr. Rubarb, I must Quarrel with you -- you don't enough disguise the Medicin's
you send me -- I can taste they are Physic -- in a little time, you'll bring me
to take plain Jalap? hah! hah!


To alter it more, might offend the Operation.


I don't care what is offended, so my taste is not.


Hark y' Mr. Rubarb, withdraw the Medicine


And is it possible, Sir, that the Stars should have such Power over us,
methinks they live at too great a distance.


All things here are ruled by unseen ways, and what Physicians vainly ascribe
to Drugs, is done by the Stars.


Well this is a divine Art, but, Sir, have the Stars any respect for a Face, or
a Complexion?


Oh! Madam! More immediately as lying nearest their Orbs.


Well certainly this is the genteelest way of Curing that ever was invented,
and seems designed for the ease for the Nobility -- To take our Medicines at
the Mouth, is indeed so like a Horse! Hah! hah!


I have drained the Catalogue of Diseases already, and can't think what to put
in her Head.


Nay, Sir, if we don't look about us, sh'll grow well upon our Hands.


Never fear that.


So! here's the Levee! Doctor and Apothecary in close Consultation! They are
worse than a Jury upon Life and Death -- But yonders my Engine at Work; the
Stargazer has got her by the Ear -- I must retreat and give him the sign.


Ha! -- 'Tis a good Voice.


(Between the Stanza's) I foresee that some rude influence will suddenly
assault you -- I can't tell in what manner, but the same thing will prove
afterwards very happy to you.


Ay, Sir: How true you speak!


You see, Madam, what pains I take to contrive your diversion.


You take a very Preposterous way.


I can't tell how I succeed, but I am sure I endeavour right, for I study every
Morning new impertinence, to entertain you.


You need not study for it, Nature, Sir, will never fail you.


But if she should one day, the misfortune may be irreparable! You might forget
to faint to be Chagrin, to have the Spleen, and all those agreeable things
that distinguish a Woman of Quality.


I am perfectly confounded! Certainly there are some People too impudent for
our resentment, but I shall leave him.


All this shall not make me out of Love with my Virtue -- Impudence, was ever a
successful Quality, and it would be very unlucky, if I should be the first that
did not thrive by it.


I find then, you are a true Politician, Astrea, and by an extraordinary
Conduct have secured your self against the Curiosity of the World, the
insolence of Servants, and what methinks a Woman most should fear, the Malice
of revolting Favourites.


That indeed is the most certain danger, for its grown the manner of the
Fashionable Men, to recommend themselves to new Mistresses, by a Sacrifice of
the Old, and make other surrender with the Barbarities they use to the
Conquered.


Well! That one Rock now would keep me from venturing to Sea.


You will not be without dangers ashore, for there are some disagreeable
Puppies, that report a Woman ill because she would not be so, but the real
happy, like the real rich, seldom make a noise of it.


At this rate, the only way to preserve our Virtue, is to give it up like
throwing away our Money, for fear we should be robbed of it -- I find in a Poor
Woman's Affairs, the Public are very humorous, if she ventures she's lost, if
she don't she is not safe, well I'm very honest yet, and --


This is not generous, Clarinda -- You see the Confidences I make you -- Tell
me, was you never in Love?


I don't know what Love is, but I like a Fellow mightily, that I saw at the
Play last night.


Ha! What sort of Man?


Nay, I can't tell, but he chased you, for as soon as you went, I missed him.


'Tis too sure -- His Heart failed him if he did, for he never came up with me
-- But where did he sit?


Just before our Box, in Red.


'Tis he, what must I do!


You are Alarm'd!


No, I am thinking if I know him.


He seemed to be an agreeable idle Fellow, and his Conversation I overheard,
was full of unusual Generosity.


I have it, it may help my own design -- What would you give to see him?


Why, is it in your Power?


Very much -- But come into my Room, and there -- I'll contrive your happiness
--

Th^ Nature, Friendship, Honour we remove,
And no regards are prevalent in Love.

Ha, ha, ha, to reach Peru in an hour, my happy Mariner!


My North Star!


Did not I tell you, Tom, I understood the World -- Ha, ha, ha, but thou
think she's a Wife?


Ay, and so Charming, that each Dart she shoots is big with double Death, and
Kills at once with Love and Jealousy -- She's a Blessing too great for any one
Mortal.


Ha, ha, that's pretty plain, Tom.


A pretty Blush still rises in her Cheeks, her looks are Modest, and her Speech
is Comely, a touch of her would move you more than all the soft embraces Venus
used to warm the God of War!


You make my Blood boil with the Description, and throw me ten Years back to
Youth -- but how did attack her, I warrant she was mighty careful of her
Honour?


No, she had too much Sense, for in these matters, those extraordinary Fears
^look more like a Gilt than Piety, and there's none so free of their Honour, as
those that are very tender of it.


Nay, I am apt to think, that the Women that talk of their Honour, like the Men
that talk of their Courage, are the People that least value it -- But prithee,
Tom, how was it then.


Why, I fixed my self near the Box.


Ha! --


Where I met an honest Fellow of our Regiment.


Ha! --


I observed she listened to our talk, and formed my discourse accordingly.


Sly Dog!


She took occasion to go out before the Play was done.


Ha! you Rogue!


And sent a Chair-man to me.


Hark 'ye, Tom, did not I tell you I understand the World --


You did, Sir Solomon.


You'll be ruled by me another time?


Always, always.


Looky, Tom, I am acquainted with these things, and if I please, could tell you
those that have been kept by Countesses -- but let that pass -- I always loved
intriguing -- now what would I give to know who the poor Deary at home is.
Ha! ha! ha! did she tell you that?


No, but I shall know all to day.


I would fain find him out to share with you the pleasure of laughing at him;
ha! ha! who can it be, perhaps some Old --


Paralitick --


Drivelling --


Miser -- that would keep his Wife as he does his Money, as much from other
Peoples use as his own.


But you ask his Pardon there -- I told you how 'twould be! Now, Tom, don't
you, like some Generals, half flushed with Victory, loose the Day by being too
sure of it: There is Conduct to be used in Love as well as War, and you should
pursue as well as Conquer -- It was Pompey's Character, to be able to get a
Battle, but not to keep it; but be you a Caesar in Love, and trust not your
Enemy out of your sight; the next thing you do, is to get acquainted with her
Husband.


That's the Old way; but methinks it is drawing the Danger too near his Eyes.


Ay, so near, that he'll near be able to see it.


Yet it is better done by a Friend -- for first, if I keep him Company abroad,
I but make Opportunities that I can't use.


Then you should drink him down at home.


And so while I am qualifying him for a Cuckold, put it out of my Power to make
him one.


Talk what you will, Tom, ones bosom Friend is the properest Person to make one
a Cuckold: then I'd fain have you acquainted with him, if it be only to see if
there is any truth in that Old saying, that they are always fond -- My dear
Rogue! of them that make 'em -- He'll have an extreme Affection for thee.


I suppose, according to the degree of mine, for his Wife; for Nature, is very
grateful, before it is corrupted with Knowledge.


Ha! ha! Well, certainly the Life of a Cuckold is a very happy one, as long as
he does not know it -- for all that do him the favour, are still ready to wait
on him, and to humour him; and he, without knowing why, is mightily in love
with them -- Well, Tom, you do nothing without you bring this about -- besides,
I would not be so unfashionably wicked, as not to make a Friend where I made a
Cuckold.


Sir, Sir Captain.


Ha, my Volunteer.


Careless here, why thou art as generous as his Dog, and follow him in all
Fortunes -- But one would a thought, though he was broke, you might a' been a
Cadee, and rose in a standing Regiment.


What now there's a Peace, Sir Solomom?


Ay, ay, a common thing, but I see you have business -- your Servant.


Sir Solomon, I Kiss your hands -- What's the matter?


Don't stay a Minute, Sir; your Fortunes made.


Prithee, unriddle first.


Nay, you'll slip the Opportunity.


No matter, I'll hear it.


Why then, Sir, I have been Walking in the Mall -- (as I usually do, till
Dinner time is over) where I over-hear'd a Young Lady commend you at an
unreasonable --

Extraordinary rate I mean, Captain, I took her at first to be one of those
Military Ladies, that used to fight their way through Gowns and Petticoats,
under your Commission; but meeting your Friend, Capt. Blunt, he told me 'twas a
Lady of 500 l. a Year.


500 l. a Year, Come! Come lets go --


Nay, won't you hear it?


S'death, you unseasonable Dog, come along.


Puh! go fetch the Book, then good Cousin!

Love, what a strange bewitching ill art thou! That those who feel thy
Torments, wish no cure -- I am Sick, and all I Hear, or See, or Dream of, is my
Soldier -- Yet I'm to be near him soon -- But if I am, he perhaps may not Love,
or at least may not know that I do -- Or while in tedious Civillities, he Racks
my heart -- it will be Death to me -- Happy ignorant Man! Have you found it?


Yes.


Prithee Sing it, while we walk, for 'tis the only Song I can listen to.


Fond Woman with mistaken Art,
Does on her self impose,
She feels with grief the secret smart,
Nor will the wound disclose.
We Sigh, we Burn, we Rage, we Die,
Yet must the Curse endure,
To see the Loved Physician nigh,
And dare not ask the Cure.

And dare not ask the Cure.

Here, they went this way.


Hold, we'll wait for 'em in this Double -- 500 l. a Year you say.


Ay, besides a great deal of ready Money.


I did not see her Face, but 'tis the Tallest? Pray don't let me fail in Love
with the wrong* Woman.


Never apprehend it -- A Man of your Necessities, methinks might know a Fortune
by instinct -- But hark ye, the Maid I hope is to be my Prize!


No, no, Sir, I won't have my Family Corrupted.


Nay, Sir, I have kept a Plaguy Long-Lent, and it won't be much in danger yet a
while.


Well, Jack, I have a Carnival for thee in my Pocket, and if I succeed in this
Adventure, you shall never know another Lent.


That indeed is Music, and I'm recovered with the Sound -- 'Zbud! We won't
value the Fortune with that about us -- But here they come.


Ha! I have seen that Face.


Here again! Well if he has but Courage to advance, I have at present so little
Hypocrisy about me, I should surrender upon any Terms -- Ha! he comes, my
Resolution totters, and I find the Woman return upon me very Powerfully -- I'm
afraid I shall deny him.


If I were sure the other was not a Servant! I could like him mightily --


Madam, in these Familiar Walks, this Liberty's so common, that had I no
business --


Ay! Business! --


Sir.


You have taken away the Life of an Innocent Gentleman, who can find no quiet
in his Grave, but sends me, Madam, who am all that can appear of him, his
restless Ghost! --


A Ghost! Ha! ha! ha! Pray how long have you been dead?


Ever since last Night at the Play -- I did but see you, and was lost.


Ah, Poor Man! Ghost I mean, but I am idle.


Nay, there you over did it, die in earnest -- What part did you Act?


A Lovers, Madam.


No wonder you're a weary of your Coffin -- But I warrant you would make me
some discovery -- Well, where is your hidden Treasure?


Madam, you must follow me to find it --


O! No I dare not trust my self with a Ghost.


Nay, Madam, though the Captain is, as a Man may say, a Ghost; yet your Humble
Servant, I assure you is Flesh and Blood, and the Worms have not had a Meal of
me yet.


I am sorry for it.


And could you be so Barbarous to wish, This Face* This Shape! These Limbs! To
be thrown under ground.


Ay! For they're fit for nothing above --


Well, that I may not be troubled more with People of the other World -- Say, I
wished to lay you, what should I do?


Oh! Madam, you do it while you wish it, behold the Magic force of one kind
Word, I'm all restored! The Life you give runs thrilling to my Heart, and I'm
no more a shade.


What have I done! Nay, be a Ghost again or we part.


Ah! Madam, don't repent your Bounty, that from a shadow raised a glowing Lover
--


You're afraid I warrant to be talked of, for Loving at first sight -- Come it
will be but a Nine-days Wonder -- I shall see --


All Puppies do in that time.


I find we shall have rare witty Children!


'Twill Cross the Proverb else, if you are the Father.


'Tis likely to be a Match by her Natural aversion to me -- Look ye, Madam, you
may disguise your Inclinations if you please; indeed, if you had fallen in Love
with an Aesop, or a Creon, you might have had scruples to own it, But --


Well, certainly thou art the vilest Ragamuffin, that ever trotted after a
Soldier; Thou not only wear thy Masters old Clothes, but the worst of
Scraps; his ends of Sentences, and cast wit too.


And thou art certainly the most ignorant, Abigal, that ever snear'd behind a
Lady, parts and Learning are lost upon thee, and thou understand nothing but
a Bribe.


I see then I'm in no danger of being talked to in my own Language.


I find we may as soon meet an Ugly Woman without Affectation, as a Pretty one
without Cruelty, let some Passion prevail, be Merciful and hate me.


Nay, I'll rather glory in my indifference, and as a farther Proof of it, I
walk here every Evening, and you shall see that you are not considerable enough
to make me forbear one Day. Adieu!


May you be as Happy as you are Cruel! --


Or as she is Kind.


Farewell Frightful!


Farewell Mopsa!


What's the matter.


All the matter is, that no Woman will be pleased with plain dealing, you have
got a Mistress by being a Ghost, and I have lost one, by being Flesh and Blood,
well, I see he that would get a Woman must --

With her own Arts the Hippocrite betray,
For Woman never was caught but her own way.

HE stays very long -- if Clarinda comes first, I shall not have time for my
purpose -- but what am I going to do? -- to bring my Gallant to one that
admires him -- a pretty undertaking -- but I have engaged, and can't withdraw.
Yet stay, by this I shall lay the Fame of the Intrigue upon her, and like a
wise Monarch, make others fight for what I only enjoy -- 'tis rare -- but if he
should like her I am lost.


Madam, there's a Gentleman below, Mrs. Friendlove calls Captain.


Oh 'tis well -- Hark ye, Fidelia, you must respect this Gentleman.


Certainly my Lady is the happiest Woman in the World, and the greatest
Politician: she does every thing with such an Air, that even I that am privy to
her Intrigues, dare not seem to know 'em; and the Fame of her Virtue protects
her against all discoveries -- She's grown a Proverb, the Citizens preach her
to their Wives, and the Courtiers to their Daughters, and now 'tis granted,
that there is a pitch of Virtue secure against reproach -- but I must go to
divert the Woman of the House; for Lovers are best Company with one another;
and she'll tell 'em a story of her Family, till they wish her at the Devil.
Well! there is one happiness in being a Ladies Woman, it instructs us in the
Fashionable Mysteries of Lying, Hypocrisy, and Intrigue: so that half a Years
Service, I'll maintain, shall teach a Woman to Cuckold her Husband, with more
dexterity, than ten Years practice.


I'm in a Wood.


To bring you out I must tell you -- that 'tis with a great deal of difficulty
I stir abroad, and that I have contrived your acquaintance with her, who is my
Relation, and Neighbour, in order to gain more opportunities for my self, and
under that colour make our affair as lasting as secure.


I begin to understand you -- I must publicly declare my self, Madam
Clarinda's Lover, while -- an excellent Plot -- which if you thought of it?


You are Mad -- I tell you she's in earnest; she saw you, liked you, and would
not rest till I had told her a possibility of seeing you again, which I
promised for the reasons I have given -- now do ye think I have not made a great
venture?


Is she very handsome?


If she were, I find I should be in danger.


No, but I should then convince you, nothing could shake your interest in my
heart.


Well, some People do think her handsome, I wish you may not: but have a care
how you move, I shall be very Jealous!


I'm afraid I shall do it so awkwardly -- she'll find me out.


Trust nature: but I have one scruple just comes into my head that will spoil
all.


Nay then we are lost, what is it?


I'm afraid we shall lose the pleasure of the adventure, to think that it will
not be in our own power to discover it.


That indeed is a scruple I should not have thought of, but we must bear our
misfortune as well as we can; and let us not be the first instance of Lovers
that could not brook adversity.


Madam, Mrs Clarinda is at the Door.


Very well.

Stay here while I prepare her, and in the mean time I'll send Mrs. Friendlove
the Woman of the House, to entertain you with her Pedigree and Impertinence.


This is an Excellent Wench, and I Love her Heartily, but 500 l. a Year I don't
know what to do, let me consider, if I Marry there's a Pretty Woman, and 500 l.
a Year, which are not often together -- Hum! If I don't, here's the most
agreeable Creature in the World, and -- Hum -- A Poor Lover is the Devil -- No
Bankrupt ever found a fair one Kind. Now for this Well-wisher to the
Mathematics:


A lack-a-Day! Here's the Poor Gentleman alone.


This is kindly done, Madam:


You and I Captain must be acquainted it seems.


You make me proud:


I knew one of your Name in Nottingham, I believe we are a little related --
For you must know Captian, as I told you within, I am some way a Kin to most of
the great Families in England, and I never was two Minutes with any Body of
Pedigree, but I found out that I was their Cousin.


Very likely, Madam -- (This is an Original)


For which reason, Captain, out of pure respect to my Relations, I make all my
Servants call me at every Word, My Lady, and your Ladyship.


Your Ladyship is extremely in the right.


Ha! ha! ha! I'll tell you a very pretty Accident, where I was visiting the other
Day, came in three Welch Ladies, who pretend (forsooth) to be above other Folks
for Family, and to be related to none but themselves -- But in a quarter of an
hour's time, Captain, nothing was so great, as I and my Cousins, for upon a
Comparison of our Pedigree, it appeared, that we all came from a Marriage of
the Ap Shinkins, and the Ap Shones, but you don't mind Me, you are thinking of
Miss.


Miss!


Ay, my Cousin Caelia, I call her Miss, because, I knew her from a Child, It
was the neatest best humoured thing -- But pray, Captain how long have you been
in Flanders.


Three Years, Madam --


She always delighted in her Chamber, and placed every thing in such order! I
warrant you have a Mistress in every Town!


Yes, Madam.


Poor Gentleman! You can't think how Miss would work, she made me the Prettiest
Purse, and I lost it, going with some Ladies to a Fortune-Tellers.


This is designed Murder.


But now you talk of Fortune-Tellers, Captain, I know some People laugh at 'em,
but as sure as you are there, he told me every thing so exactly, that I was
forced to give him the other, Shilling to hold his Tongue.


You did very prudently, Madam.


Are the Women in Flanders very handsome.


No, but to make amends they are very Kind.


Huh! Are they so -- Well I Love sincerity.


No Body dies there of any thing but Bullets.


Here's a Man!


Ha! Here will be fine Work!


Come Ladies don't be frightened, here's enough of us to deal with one Man --
'Tis Capt. Freeman, a Cousin of Mine, who has been giving me an account of his
Travels, which is so diverting.


He looks alarm'd, I'll watch Him.


He says the Women in Flanders, Miss, are not half so handsome, as they are
here.


These Ladies will Justify it.


I find there are Courtiers in Flanders, if there are no Beauties.


You're the first Traveller, Sir, that did not heighten the Rarities of of the
Place -- I'll warrant there are handsome Women.


There may, Madam, but they don't do so much mischief as in England -- They
know the danger of letting 'em be seen, and kindly keeping 'em up in Nunneries,
and Convents.


I Love 'em for that truly -- I am glad I was not born there, a Woman must
spend her Youth and Beauty, over a String of Beads, or a piece of Needle-Work,
a pretty diversion, we know better things in England.


It may be a cunning, Sir, to increase that danger you speak of, for what is
always before us, does not affect us so much; and where Beauty is so common, I
fancy it does little harm.


Against that, Madam, you are an instance.


Mrs. Friendlove, your Relation has Travelled farther than Flanders.


Pardon me, Madam, my Cousin knows a pretty Lady, and if he had turned his Eyes
off you, might have seen more instances.


(O dear Madam)


Oh good, Sir --


I must have confessed -- that thou art a Monster.


Sweet, Sir.


So much Youth and Beauty.


Oh dear, Sir --


The most agreeable Air --


The civilest, best bred Gentleman --


And Wit, that would have Killed, without the Assistance of your Eyes.


Well I Love, Truth and Honour!


Ha! ha! ha! He manages it rarely.


The genteelest Woman in the World --


And do you really think so? -- Well, Cousin Clarinda, you'll be reconciled to
the Captain, one would not think he had Travelled at all by his sincerity --
Sweet Captain.


O the Beast!


And were you half so cruel as you are fair, I were lost.


'Twould be pity so worthy a Gentleman.


She'll consent before I have half done -- From the first minute I saw you, you
have been present to my Thoughts.


Poor Gentleman, one does not know one's Power.


And I should think of you, though I were speaking to a Monster.


Well, he is a charming Man! --


I behold that beauteous Face and blooming Youth, though a nauseous Hag, and
withered Age were before me --


I do look killing to day --


Is it possible, my lovely Unbeliever, you should see me, and suspect your
interest in my heart.


I can't bear it though in jest --


'Twould be cruel in her to do so, let me persuade.


One must not believe all that Men say, Cousin, they are very deceitful -- though
I must needs own, the Captain is a worthy Gentleman, and very Judicious.


Oh! Madam, let me Kneel to thank you -- continue, most distinguishing Lady, to
pity me, and move that stubborn Fair One in my Favour. You never pleaded in so
just a Cause, nor is any so fit to argue it as you -- O that I could but
manifest my Breast, you would see the Pains I feel, that I Sigh, that I Burn,
that I could Die, to Merit the Heart of the Lovely Clarinda.


Clarinda!


A Pleasant mistake.


A strange mistake!


'Tis so usual with Lovers, Madam, that I have known some make Love in Jest,
till they forget the Occasion.


A touch for me, I must take care -- And where it was in the Heart before,
Madam, 'tis an easier mistake.


I own it --


I think of you.


You was afraid you should be so awkward.


You can't be jealous --


I don't know what I am, but I'm in pain --


The violence of his Love to you made him forget himself --


Very likely, nay, it must be so.


You are generous, Madam, to excuse an unhappy Lover.


Madam, the Chocolate is ready.


Come, come, Cousins all! We'll talk more within -- Well, I shall not find in my
Heart to let him live in Pain -- Poor Man!


Bring the Wine into this Room, it is more private: soh! leave us --

Now Doctor, you fully know my grief -- There's nought without the Compass of
your Art -- That subtle Art, that pierces deeper than the Skin, and views a
Ladies Mind as well as Body; sees all the secret Motions of her Heart, and
every Passion there: Can direct their violence, or, if it pleases, make new
Impressions -- But first your Health --


Sir, I'll do you reason -- Sir.


If one Deity can inspire another, speak my Oracle, shall I live, or die? --


I have told you, Sir, I cannot help you -- There's not a Lady at Court would
trust me after, Betray the Counsels of my Patients! -- Sir, 'Tis from their
Opinion of our secrecy we live --


And 'tis from a no less confidence of that virtue in you, Doctor, that I open
my self thus, Do ye think a secret of this nature -- but, Sir, my service to
you --


You would doubt it very much if I did this, I dare not venture.


Come, Doctor, you are too Scrupulous --


Alas, Sir, I would do any thing to serve you -- But you cannot blame my fears,
when my Honour, Fame, and future Fortune depend on the success.


Nay, I must needs commend your caution, and blame my self for not considering
that you would use it -- But your secret will be safe -- It is my interest, and
in that Doctor, all Men are sincere.


Worthy, Sir, I am entirely yours, but now, Sir, the first difficulty will be
the greatest -- How to break it.


Oh! there are a thousand ways -- You must think of some Distemper, and
prescribe me to her as Physic: She'll take me as a Potion at least, though she
won't as a Lover -- Come, Doctor, here's to her new disease --


You are pleasant, Sir,


If you could but make her Sick in half the time that you have made me well --


I'll pawn my Art for the success.


Why now, my Doctor speaks like the Off-Spring of Aesculaepius -- This indeed
is Physic -- There's balm in every Word, that new creates my Soul -- But, Dear
Doctor, let me not delay your Art with praising it -- go and be immortal.


I fly; and if I don't effect her way, all my Patients die when I come near 'em
--


Or which is as bad -- may they all grow well with the first Dose -- Few People
know the true use of a Physician, were they well applied -- But how stubborn
this Rascal was, before he felt the Gold -- well there's no Cordial like this
grand Elixir! This is the true Panacaea! The Food of your Physician, which the
unknowing Patint parts with for Drugs and Death -- But I must follow him --


Ha! ha! ha! Was there ever such a Monster!


Not to perceive so plain a Cheat --


It was pleasant enough to see how fast she melted, and how much he laboured to
prevent it --


But the Beast, in half an hour to consent to Marry him.


Old Women are always tender-hearted, and their Experience makes 'em know how
to value Opportunities.


Well, sure I shall never be such a Creature.


You can't tell, Clarinda; for the Opinion of our Beauty is the last thing that
leaves us.


I believe indeed a Woman sees her Decays sooner in the Men's Faces than her
own.


But no Body minds a true Mirror.


Yet sure it must be very unhappy to keep up the Opinion of our Beauty, after
every body else has laid it down: And the Humour of the Town is very quick in
these Cases, for when a Woman is Thirty --


She grows a very discreet sort of a Body! -- Well, it must needs grate a fine
Creature, that is just declining, and still perhaps with all her Loevrs glowing
in her Thoughts, to see the Tide pass by her, and hear the Mortifying Sound --
She was!


Madam, my Lady Dainty is inquiring for your Ladyship.


I hope she will do me the Honour to come up.


My Lady Dainty?


I believe you don't know her Person, but you must her Character.


I warrant this is she that thinks it the truest Mark of Quality to be Nice and
Sickly; and is as much afraid of looking well, as other Folks are fond of it.


Many People are Fops in their Mien and Habit, but her Ladyship is so in her
Understanding, and takes as much Pains to punish her Inside, as to adorn her
Out.


Well, I am the happiest Woman in finding your Ladyship at home!


You do me an Honour -- Madam, a Relation of mine.


I shall strive to be of her Acquaintance --


Your Ladyship makes me proud.


I have made at least twenty Visits to day, and not above Ten were at home,
which I take to be a great good Fortune, in having my Day's Journey so happily
shortened to your Ladyship, for in you I terminate my Evening: And 'tis so
blessed a thing to arrive where one loves, after the tedious Endearments of so
many one hates in a Day's visiting. Huh! Huh! --


Your Ladyship is certainly the most obliging thing!


Meeting with a Reasonable Creature at last, is like unlacing after being
squeezed up in a strait Pair of Bodice. Huh! Huh!


You must needs be very much fatigued.


O quite spent! Not but my Coach is very easy, yet repeating so many How
d'ye's in a Day is enough to kill a Horse.


Pray where was your Ladyship last?


Why, Madam, at my Lady Thrivewell's in the City, who knows no other Happiness,
and thinks there is no other Welcome but Eating and Drinking! At the Sight of
her Table I was ready to swoon, coming out of the Air! Huh!


How was it spread, Madam?


At the upper End sat her Ladyship, and at each Elbow a Daughter with Arms like
Plough-Men, and Cheeks like Milk-Maids -- They were enough to beat one down
with their Breath --


Ha, ha! a goodly Appearance!


The Table, (or rather Larder) was filled with Westphalia Hams, Pullets, and
Turkey-Pies; with a great Cheshire Cheese, that rivaled every one in bulk but
her Ladyship; and a large Tankard of Ale, enough to destroy a Dozen Porters.
Huh! Huh! --


Ha! ha! ha!


She forced me to sit down, and put enough upon my Plate to serve me my whole
Life --


She designed you a Complement --


To see the Titles of Quality joined with such Mob Dispositions! Well, there's
nothing distinguishes the Commons so much as their Eating; and I never knew a
true Plebeian but was a hungry -- Huh! huh!


Your Ladyship knows the Elegance of Life.


I aim at it a little -- But there is one Mark by which you may know such
Creatures, though you don't see 'em; for it is the most Essential Property of the
Vulgar to speak loud; their common Discourse is some Degrees above the Noise of
a Drum. For which Reason, when any raises their Voice above a Whisper, I strait
conclude, That they are either no Quality, or at most but half Blood; and 'tis
likely the Fault might be of the Side of the Mother.


Ha, ha! Your Ladyship is certainly the most entertaining Creature!


But now Ladies, exactly opposite to this, is the Life of the Refined and
Well-bred part of the Creation. The Vulgar, like other Beasts, are up and
Feeding before it is Day; but about a Delicate Creature every thing is slow and
solemn.


The Noises of the Streets, Madam, must be great Enemies to that Quiet.


So great, that I have often wondered why the Government don't provide against
so manifest a Barbarism. They should defend our Ears against offensive Sounds,
and banish all that had the little Breeding to rise before Eleven a Clock.


I should vote for that Law; for I'm a mighty Friend to my Pillow -- But pray,
Madam, go on with your Description.


Here then, Ladies, I must needs lament that we are in some respects not unlike
the Crowd; And that it is still a Custom among us to go upon our own Legs. I
have often admired the Chinese Nobility; who, to prevent the Infamy of so
Vulgar an Exercise, contract the Feet of their Infant-Quality, and keep 'em so
little, that when they are of Age they may not use 'em; and never cut their
Nails that they might not be suspected to work with a Needle -- Is it not a
Scandal to the Nobles of England, to let a Barbarian transcend 'em in so high a
point of Elegance?


That, indeed, is one step to take away the Trouble of moving at all, and make
'em live the Life of a Plant.


Which would be truly, blessed! For methinks People of Quality should be known
more by their Passions than their Figure; and that is always a certain Way: For
our Joy never rises above a Smile, nor our Sorrow above the Decency and Colour
of our Clothes.


So that when a dear Friend dies --


To shed Tears is the Grief of a Peasant.


It discovers our Love at least.


As ill as it does our Breeding; For our Love for the Dead is best shown in our
Respect to the Living, and there the Fashion is against it; besides Tears are
the worst Wash one can possibly use for the Complexion -- Huh, Huh! -- But to
make an end of this Subject; There is one thing that more remarkably
distinguishes Persons of Rank from the Commons, and that is our Natural
Contempt of Business. Now the Vulgar, like a Hackney-Horse, never stir abroad
without something to do; and they visit, like a Merchant upon Change, for their
Profit more than their Pleasure. But it is a Reproach to the Honour of a
Well-bred Woman, to have any thing in her Head but the Fashions, or to know any
Fatigue but (...) Idleness.


Does your Ladyship never go to the Play?


Often, Madam, but not to mind the Actors, for it is common to love Sights --
My great Diversion is to turn my Eyes upon the Middle Gallery; -- or when a
Citizen crowds her self in among us, 'tis an unspeakable Pleasure to
contemplate her Airs and her Dres -- And they never escape me; for I am as
apprehensive of such Creatures coming near me, as some People are when a Cat is
in the Room -- Huh! huh! But the Play is begun, and, if you please, we'll leave
the Discourse, and go to the Things.


We are glad of the Occasion.


For the Audience is much the more Entertaining Sight, and though they call the
Stage the Image of the World, yet the Box and the Gallerys are certainly the
truer Picture; For you may observe, in all Nations, the Mob, when they pl^se,
are uppermost so there.

Those Greasy Rulers sit above, below
The Fine-Nice-Tender-Powder'd Thing, a Beau.

WHy Tom, as great Capacities are required in a Lover as a Privy Councellor,
and nothing looks so dull in a young Man as not to aim at Intrigue in all he
does -- my Rule was always to steal in at a Window and out at a Trap-door.


When there is no other way --


Other way! If there was I would not use it -- tis the Difficulty and the
Danger that make it pleasing and like design -- I'd come if I could through the
Tiles and fall like Jove into her Lap.


Such thundering Gamesters as you and Iupiter, Sir Solomon maybe pleased with
Difficulties, but a Puny Loyer as I am would lose his Stomach if there was any
thing to be done but directly falling to --


Well I see Tom, thou hast not a Spirit, a Genius for Intrigue -- there is
often more Pleasure in the Design than the thing -- now should I never rest
till I had made the Husband accessory, it sweetens the Stealth, and makes it
more secure, or if no Husband a Brother that is Jealous of the Honour of his
Family -- why Tom, I have employed Fathers and Mothers in this Business!


Nay Sir Solomon, there is none so fit to take care of 'em as they that get
'em.


Ha! ha! My witty Rogue -- sure she's mightily pleased with you!


She tells me so.


Ye happy Dog! -- but prithee Tom tell me a little more for I love to find my
Plots Succeed, what sort of Wench is it -- ha!


A Beauty able to renew the long lost Fire in your Heart, and turn you to a
Rival.


Egad sirrah, I'd Cuckold ye if I knew her, for this Libel -- hah! Hem! I'am as
Strong as you are -- but no more of that, kneel down and thank me for my Advice
-- I understand the World Tom! But go on, is she Black or Fair, Tall or Short?
Ha!


She's neither, but agreeably divided between 'em all -- her Mien is easy
without Affectation, and in her Face a pretty Haughtiness appears that melts it
self into a Smile, and every Heart that sees it into Love.


But Dear Tom, how was she set off, what Rigging had she? Ha!


I was not so Idle as to make a Critic on her Dress, but I think she had a
Yellow Gown --


Yellow Gown! -- Pray Heaven it's not my Wife all this time.


Ay Yellow! Why don't you like that Colour?


O very well, very well Tom -- Yellow you say? And what else? -- it must be
she.


And Black upper Petty-coat --


Upper Petty-coat? -- then he has too --


What's the matter Sir Solomon, you're Concerned?


No, no, no, not at all Tom -- Black upper Petty-coat! Tom!


Ay, Sir Solomon, there's the Challenge she sent me next my Heart.


S'death! this is confirmation! The Gypsy's own Hand!

Caelia! Ay that's her Contrivance -- Cockatrice!


There must be something in this Disorder, Cleremont told me he was Married --
I have gone too far --


This is her Devotion! Well I'll know more, and if she has -- Ha! Ha! Ha! Tom,
this is very kind, you must not disappoint her for the World.


No, Sir Solomon, I'm a Man of Honour -- but the unluckyest Dog that ever was.


My Friend and Councellor, Sir Solomon Empty! Ha! Ha! Ha!


Ay I have Counselled --


I follow'd your Instructions and am Happy -- I melted the Doctor, and He my
Mistress; all her Aversions to me are over, her Pukings, her Spleen, her
Swoonings, her Cholick! And now I am as well-come and agreeable to her as a
Dose of Physic -- all this my Councellor and deep Politician in Love I owe to
thy sage Advice -- Thou doest indeed understand the World, and in all Love
Intrigues I'll be ruled by no other -- but what's the matter, are you both
Dumb?


Me?


No, no, I was only thinking of a Business of Freeman's --


Which I must mind Gentlemen, and so your Servant.


And I too --


Hold Sir Solomon you must stay and hear my success.


I can't, I have Business.


A Pox, Of Business -- Ha! Ha! Ha! You can't think what a change of Affairs it
wrought.


Puh! --


I find the Plain Honest Way never does it, and a Man may throw away as much
Money upon a Mistress as a Place at Court, and never be the nearer.


Upper Petty-coat! --


A little bribe well Placed -- but Sir Solomon methinks you are not pleased
enough with the success of your Counsels.


If I an't, I'm in the wrong, for they have took mightily, mightily!


O beyond expectation!


Ay with a Pox! --


She received me with all the Ease and Satisfaction that desiring Lovers use,
all her talk was with regard to me and all her Appeals were to me --


Your Expecting Caelia! --


Could you a' Dreamt that it would come to this?


No Faith I could not -- not in the least Mr. Cleremont, not in the least!


Why thou deserve a Statue to thy Memory.


I do indeed deserve one --


Thou doest -- why some have been worshipped for half thy Sagacity -- you don't
know your self.


Yes, yes, I do, I am wiser than ever, Mr. Cleremont, and know my self
intimately! --


All the distressed Lovers in Town will fly to you for Succour.


Very likely -- The Garden door at Six?


What a Devil's the Matter now? But thou art an Extraordinary old Fellow --


So! My Disguise sits well he'll never know me -- now let me consider -- what
strange Story must I tell him to get him out of the way -- but I shall not want
invention; I'll tickle his Ears as I used to do the Commisarys when we made up
a false Muster.


Jezebel! Harlot! This is her Aversion to Men! Her Praying! Her Piety! -- but
this is my Advice too. I must be giving Counsel! -- hum --

But what Fellow's that? I don't like him -- he may be a Cuckoldmaker too for
ought I know.


Here he is, now for my Plot -- Sir, Is your Name Sir Solomon Empty?


Yes 'tis -- what then? -- Thou art a Rogue I believe.


Do you know one Sir Humphrey Afterwit?


Sir Humphrey Afterwit! -- No not I -- not I Fellow -- I know none of your Sir
Humpherys --


I don't know how 'tis Sir, but he said he was near related to the Family of
the Emptys, and dyed at my House Yesterday.


Why then you must bury him Friend -- don't trouble me with your dead Men --
Upper Petticoat.


But a little before he died, he bid me go to Sir Solomon Empty, and pay him a
considerable Sum of Money that he owed him.


Adds me! -- Harkee Friend -- Sir Humphery Afterwit! -- what an unlucky Brain
have I! Ha! ha! ha! My dear Friend -- Afterwit! that ever I should be puzzled
to remember Thee! -- and I protest to you he was as perfectly out of my Head,
as if he had never been there.


Very likely Sir.


Why we are first Cousins -- but he is not dead sure, he can't be dead!


Indeed Sir he is -- he just came to Town, fell sick and died in two Hours.


Tell me no more! The News goes to my Heart -- poor Have -- Wit!


Sir, he said his Name was Afterwit.


Right, right, Afterwit! But Grief, 'tis Grief makes me forget what I say -- I
have lost the best Friend!


I suppose you know how much it is?


No Friend, I can think of nothing now -- poor Numps Dead! -- go in and pay it
any of my Servants.


Sir, he charged me to pay it none but you, and I was afraid to venture so much
about me, but if you'll do me the Honour to go to my House.


Well, come lets go then, I shall be out of Pain the sooner -- Ho! my dear
Friend gone -- poor Lackwit.


Your too great Care has ruined us! -- had you not concealed your Name --


Who could have thought that Sir Solomon had been your intimate Acquaintance --
I never heard him speak of such a Man -- but I'm undone, past Redemption lost.


Sure there's a way.


O! none, never think on it -- had you not shown the Letter --


That unfortunate Letter!


Cursed Letter! -- if you had delayed your Discovery two Hours, I had prevented
it by telling you all -- I had begun with your Man, and sent him to draw Sir
Solomon out of the way, which now I suppose he can't compass -- and if you had
seen him first.


How unlucky it was!


But we must do something -- let me consider -- He'll certainly be there -- hum
-- O I have it.


How, how dear Creature!


O! Sir you'll tell.


You are unkind, but I deserve it -- yet pray tell me.


I have thought of a Device that must bring us off, let me see the Letter.


Here! here!



I never knew a Woman plunged at an Excuse; now were I to be hanged, I could
not think of an Expedient, I see so many Dangers -- but Woman! --


'Tis well -- leave me -- ( gives him back the Letter.)


Must I not know your Plot?


Ask me nothing, but come at the Hour, and behave your self as you would have
done, had this not happened; leave the rest to me.


I go. --


I'm glad you're here; run immediately and call my Cousin --

I have a thousand Fears -- I wish it were over -- let ^e see -- she loves him
too! it distracts me -- was ever Woman so reduced! -- but there's no other way.
I must lose my Lover or my -- Honour! Quiet! every thing! the fame of so much
Virtue and be exposed -- I can't think on it.


Sir, I plied him every Minute with fresh Stories, and told more lies than are
pardoned at a Jubilee.


I am glad they did not, but how came they not to succeed?


I can't tell what was in his Head, but I had not got half way when he turned
short, and bid me be at home to morrow, for he had extraordinary Business.


Damn his Business.


And him too. Sir for a Dog -- a French Husband would a been better bred than
to look into the Affairs of his Wife -- but we have nothing in that Perfection
as abroad, and our Cuckolds as well as our Grapes are but half ripened.



Nay Sir, the things that are most cultivated, our very Fops in England are not
to be named with theirs -- a true bred English Beau has indeed the Powder, the
Essence, the Tooth-pick, the Snuff-box, and is as Idle, but the fault is in the
Flesh, he has not the motion, and looks stiff under all this -- Now a French
Fop, like a Poet, is born so, and would be known without Clothes, it is in his
Eyes, his Nose, his Fingers, his Elbows, his Heels; they Dance when they Walk,
and sing when they speak --


You're extremely Diverting.


I would fain drive this ugly Business out of your Head, for it puts you as
much out of humour as a Dun in a Morning.


And as much at a loss, as when I have no Money for him.


Never fear Sir, if she has undertook to bring you off.


Why are you acquainted with her Skill in these Matters?


No Sir, but I never knew a Design fail where a Woman was the Ingineer -- the
Plots that don't succeed are made by Men.


Ay, but there is more in that it Thou art aware of -- how if it shake my
Interest with the Fortune?


'Tis impossible, for when once a Woman loves, nothing Cures her but Glutting.


Yet a modest Woman will be startled at such Galantries.


In appearance she may, but a wild Man has always their secret approbation, and
every Woman has the Vanity to think she can keep him to her self.


Do'ye think so?


And hope you'll find so -- I never doubt a thing that depends on a Woman's
Opinion of her self, for Nature has so ordered it that every one is prepared to
believe whatever we can say of 'em.


Did you find her Maid of that Humour?


She would not listen to me because she did not like me (I pity her Judgment)
but I never knew a Woman refuse a Man that she liked -- when they don't Fancy,
they are very Saucy and very Virtuous.


Prithee Careless, leave this Libel and Mind the present Business -- 'tis
pretty near the Time, go to the Mall and wait for orders -- you'll find me in
this Walk.


Yonder's one that will divert you in the mean time, the Charming Mrs.
Friendlove.


Her Impertinence was never so unseasonable.


Faith Sir, according to the present Posture of Affairs, I fancy she might be
very seasonable.


How do ye mean?


Why thus; -- You are not sure they will succeed in their Plot upon Sir
Solomon, now it will at least perplex the Matter if you can draw her thither
about that time, to consummate the Wedding that you have put in her Head.


But if they should succeed it might raise new Jealousies in him.


To prevent that I may be ready to lead her another way.


I like it, let's meet her.


Well, I must confess Mr. Cleremont you are the most Diverting Man in the
World, and the best Company when one has taken the Waters, and I have drank
Epsome this Morning.


His Discourse Madam; seems more peculiar to a Steel Mineral; for Reproach and
Scandal, at which he is very happy, eases us of Spleen and Dissatisfaction with
our selves, and might be very proper to assist the operations of Tunbridge.


You are extremely in the Right, and that must be the reason that makes
Tunbridge so Fruitful of Lampoons, for that Mineral not being strong enough to
make the crudities of Ill-nature pass, they are forced to bring 'em up in
Verse.


Upon which Account Madam, all the Nice Women in the Town go thither to divert
their Spleen, and be abused, for Detraction is always so entertaining to the
Ladies, that rather than want it they will have it at their own Expense.


Well, you are certainly a Living Lampoon.


Since then Madam, you acknowledge me so Medicinal to you, throw away your
Juleps, Cordials, Slops, and take me all at once.


No Mr. Cleremont, that's too Bitter a Potion to be taken so suddenly.


Oh! The rather Madam, the rather; for if you stand making Faces at what goes
against you, it does but increase your Aversion and delay the Cure -- Come, you
must be Advised.


What mean you Sir?


To banish all your Ails and be my self your universal Medicine.


Impudent robust Man! -- I protest did not I know his Relations, I-shou'd think
his Parents had not lived in Chairs and Coaches, but had used their Limbs all
their Lives -- Huh! Huh! But I begin to be persuaded Health is a great Blessing
--


My Limbs Madam, were conveyed to me from before the use of Chairs and Coaches,
and it might lessen the Dignity of my Ancestors no^ to use 'em as they did.


Was ever such a rude Understanding? To value himself upon the Barbarism of his
Fore-fathers? Indeed I have heard of Kings that were bred to the Plough and
fancy you might Descend from such a Race, for you Court as if you were behind
one -- Huh! Huh! Huh! -- to treat a Woman of Quality like an Exchange Wench,
and express your Passion with your Arms, unpolished Man!


I was willing Madam, to take from the Vulgar the only desirable thing amongst
'em, and show you how they live so Healthy -- for they have no other Remedy.


A very rough Medicine! Huh! Huh!


To those that never took it, it may seem so --


Abandoned Ravisher! Leave the room, and see my Face no more --



And harkee Sir (...) Bribes, no Mediations to my Woman.



Thou Profligate! To Hug, To Clasp, To Embrace, And throw your robust Arms
about me like a Vulgar and Indelicate! Oh! I faint with Apprehensions of so
gross Address.


Oh! My offended Fair!


Inhumane! Ravisher! Oh!


Well this is one of the most extraordinary Scenes of Loves I ever saw, I could
never think a Woman's Fantask would ever run so high as to oppose her
Inclination, and believe her Ladyship would be glad to compound for a little of
the Vulgar.


Confounded Jade, to stay all this while -- I shall be too late -- I warrant
the Parson has been there this hour, and 'twas never know that they stayed for
the Bride -- Pin up this Favourite better -- Well these Soldiers are dear
Creatures and I love 'em all!


They'll think your Ladyship was taken by Storm, to dispatch it so suddenly --



They'll rather commend my Conduct, for yielding before I had distressed the
Garrison -- (set this Ribbon right) -- let foolish Maids squander their time
that don't know the use of it, I'll snatch the precious Minutes as they pass,
and ne'er stand shilly shally.


Methinks my Lady Empty takes it very patiently.


She dares not do otherwise, for fear I should make Discoveries to Sir Solomon
-- and truly I think it Just Reprisal, as I used to promote her pleasure, to
make her accessory to mine.


'Twas foolishly done in my Opinion, to trust a Gallant so near your Ladyship.


She grew very presuming forsooth, because one or two of her Fellows had the
little Sense to prefer her to me -- but the Captain knows how to distinguish
Women.


He's a fine proper Gentleman.


So he is indeed -- nay, we shall be a mighty pretty Couple; but he admires my
Wit, it seems, more than my Beauty -- Who'd have thought a Soldier had such
Judgment -- (this clumsy Carrian runs the Pins into me.)


Madam, it bent under my Finger.


Bent under your Finger? -- make hast -- now some People live all their Lives
without making any Conquests, yet they Dress and are Pretty Women too, but I
can't tell how 'tis, they don't please -- there's Mrs. Prim, Mrs. Giggit and
Mrs. Saint Looks.


They want the Freedom of your Lady^ps Air.


Nay every Body does me the Justice, to say that I have very much of Quality in
my Manner -- (this new Tower does not please me)


He's violently in Love with you.


I am no less with him.


Before Marriage


Oh! 'Tis not the Fashion after, except among your ordinary People, as my
Cousin my Lady Dainty says -- no People of Quality go beyond just being Civil
to each other, as My Lady, Your Ladyship, Or so -- Well, now am I Dressed and
going to Execution, but I have resigned my self wholly up to him to do as he
pleases, or since it is a sort of War, as he Dares -- (

But in the World they never can Miscarry,
Who at the Years of full Discretion Marry.

Dishonoured, Ruined, Cuckol'd, and by my own Contrivance? I'll ne'er out-live
it -- Solomon in an Age so full of Plots, how do you know but this may be one
to create Diversion? -- Pardon me Sir, I see no Colour to take it that way --
but tis the part of a wise Man to know the bottom before he Determines, and how
if Sir Solomon Empty should fix himself somewhere to over hear their Meetings
and receive Conviction before he concludes her False --. There you have reason
Sir, and Sir Solomon Empty shall do so, but I have no hope, uot the least
Glymps of Comfort, Oh Woman, Woman, Devil, Devil!


I confess Clarinda, my proceeding does not look very generous, but if you
consult your Heart, you'll find when Love has entered it, 'tis very little in
the Power of Reason.


You need no more Apologies methinks, I should have done so my self.


You fired me with commending him and Love's a catching Disease,


Well it has gone no farther than this Letter?


You are Jealous?


No I would only find the Temper of the Man.


You need not fear it; there's but one way; Generosity will oblige a Man of
Sense, and nothing move a Fool; besides Marriage is a double security, for it
not only is apt to make a Man forget his Galantries abroad but renders him less
acceptable there. -- Few Women choose a Married Man for a Gallant.


Why not, as well as the Men like a Married Woman?


The Cases are very different -- for a designing Woman, though she has Affairs
with twenty Men, desires to keep 'em all to her self but a Man that knows ever
so many Women does not care if he never see any of 'em again.


You talk madly; but from that it appears that the Men are the more reasonable,
for if those Women had their Desires, in a little time three Parts of the Sex
would be forced to die Maids.


To prevent that Calamity Nature, you see, has made the Men very Fickle.


Madam, Sir Solomon is gone into the Garden Room, I saw him look behind the
Tapestry, and believe he designs to fix himself there.


Go, watch when he's hid, and tell me.


Pray let me have my Lesson right -- you say I must take this all upon my self.


Very well.


But harkee! How shall I come off with Freeman? He'll make me stand to my Word?


You'll be pleased with that Force.


I must confess I'm very well inclined to him, but I would not go so fast --
well I have but one Scruple.


What's that?


I'm afraid I shall be jealous.


I'll soon cure you, and if I get safe over this, will never make another
venture.


A very Pious Determination!


You laugh --


For no other reason but because it is my turn.


Not Clarinda that I would have you think that I am just now frighted into this
resolution, or that I have taken it up on the sudden but from a long digested
Thought of such a Life -- for however pleasing it may appear there is something
so Disturbed, so Hazardous, so full of Fears and Disappointments; That the
faint Pleasures that arise don't half atone for the Anxieties that attend 'em,
so that from the sole Motive of good Sense --


We must be Sober -- now let me indeed Embrace you: Astrea, I am glad to find a
Woman of Wit own it, that reason brings her to the Interests of Virtue.


Madam, the Gentleman is at the Garden-door.


Bid him stay, till he has notice to come in -- Clarinda, and then adieu to it.


Thus far 'tis well -- No Body has seen me come in, and here let me fix my self
-- Guild-Hall, as a warning Piece to the rest of the Baggages -- But hark, I
hear 'em coming -- my Heart Sinks, and if it be true I shall run Mad -- Ay,
now:

I'll watch every Motion --


Are you sure you left the Letter?


Yes Madam.


Very well, this is plain -- S'death I've a Mind to go just now and cut her
Throat --


But 'tis hardly six a Clock.


you're very punctual you Whore --


I'm upon Thorns to see her, for I long to know how far this Business is gone.


Ha! What Business? Well I shall find out the whole knot --


You say he was with her here, last Night?


Yes Madam, and seemed mighty loving.


I don't know what to make of this -- but I must have Patience --


I am extremely concerned at her doing so, for it might have drawn a reflection
upon me -- what would Sir Solomon have thought of my conduct if he had found a
Man in the House?


Ha: --


O Madam, she knew Sir Solomon was too well acquainted with your strict Virtue
and unblemished Life, to believe any thing to the Prejudice of your Honour.


Indeed I am pretty well assured of my Husband's Love, and 'tis my care next
Heaven to deserve it; but the World Fidelia is so full of strange Hypocrisies
that such an Accident as this might make him very uneasy.


I'm in Heaven: My Wife's Honest and I am no Monster, -- there must be some
mistake in this Letter --


If my Cousin takes these Liberties I must desire her to forbear her visits; for
it should be very modest Woman's care to preserve the reputation as well as the
Conscience of Innocence, and I would not for all the World have my Fidelity to
my Dear Sir Solomon brought in Question.


Poor Fool: If she had heard of my unmerciful resolution to kill my self,
twou'd have broke her heart.


I am ready to sink with Apprehensions of it --


Dear Madam, don't afflict your self so much, you lay it so near your Heart,
'twill kill you --


Hold me --


What shall I do? But I must not stir yet --


Oh: My good Lady take Comfort -- smell to this Bottle -- Oh, Unfortunate
Accident, Bear forward dear Madam, -- How unhappy would it be now if the most
Virtuous Lady in the World, The Glory of all good Women, And Pattern of
Chastity, should dye here between my Arms: Evil befall Madam, Clarenda for this
-- to disturb my Lady that is so tender of her Fame and so averse to all such
Wicked Practices --


Ay: So my Deary is --


Oh, Look up Madam: -- Will your Ladyship give me leave to Pinch your Nose to
bring you to Life?


Now could I kick that civil Jade, she can't bring her to Life without asking
her leave.


Ho! Ho!


Be Comforted good Madam.


What could we say if Sir Solomon should hear of it? What Excuse could we make?


I can't imagine Madam, for as for my self I could not tell a Lie; No not in
very jest.


And as for me Fidelia, I could not forge or report an Untruth, though my Life
lay on it, and if we can't tell how to hide it, we had better tell him the
naked Truth than be caught in a Story.


Poor Fool! --


Be satisfied Madam, Sir Solomon may never know it, or if he should, Heaven I
hope will favour the Innocent and direct his Heart to suspect them only that
are Guilty.


That may be prayed for, but not hoped, for Sir Solomon is a Man of that nice
Discerning and pierces presently into the most difficult Matters, and what
interpretation can he make from this; a Man in the House and at so unseasonable
a time? It distracts me.


O dear Madam; this is the Gentleman.



Have I surprised you before the time, my Life! My Heaven!


Villain! Dog! Oh that I durst now run him through the Back --


Speak him fair Madam, for we are but weak Women and and don't know what he may
do to us -- he looks like a Cut-throat.


An Age has slipped between me and your Lips.


Ay, Rogue -- but how will it end? --


I am ready to die --


How could you be so surprised my Dear, when you were to expect me at this
hour?


Pray Sir keep off, my Lady never saw you or heard of you in her Life.


Good Mrs. Abigail don't you be so quick, your Lady won't tell me so.


Good Sir, go out of my house, you are mistaken and I don't know you, hoe! --


How not know me Madam, when I was here with you but last Night?


Ha! ^ done very ill, yet I shall own my self obliged to you, if you pursue
your Mistake no farther and leave us.


Nay then I must. --


O good Madam take care of your self, he's going to pull out a Pistol --


Ay Lord, what shall I do? I stand just against him.


Yes, yes, Mrs. Airsmock, I'll spare your Lives -- but not your Shame, Madam --
there's my Invitation, farewell Jilt --


What's this I see, my Note to my Cousin? how, Fidelia, have you betrayed me?


I know nothing of it, indeed Madam; I left it at her House, as I hope to be
Married.


Ay, Mrs. Matchiavel, is this your Contrivance? but thus I'll reward you for
it.


O! Sir Solomon, don't kill her, let us first know the bottom -- but how came
you here?


I saw something towards, and stepped behind the Hangings, and now Astrea I am
satisfied of your Honour, and nothing shall make me question it -- but this
Quean I'll have hanged; corrupt the Wife of my Bosom, and make her false to my
Bed!


Ha, ha, ha, ha, What's the Matter good People?


O pray Madam, satisfy Sir. Solomon who will kill me else, did not you receive
a Note of my Ladies that I left at your House?


Ha, ha, is that all?


That all? ay Madam, and if you are concerned in it, pray let me know the
meaning of it.


Indeed Sir Solomon, I am sorry I was not a witness of the Mirth.


Mirth, Cousin? you would have been disappointed -- but pray bring us out of
this Confusion, here has been a Man here that would have been very free with me.


Ha, ha, why that's it.


That's it, Madam!


And to justify his coming threw me the Note I had sent to you -- I thought I
should have died, and your Mirth as you call it, might have cost me my Life; my
Maid murdered, and Sir Solomon remained assured of my Dishonour.


I'm sorry it had so different Effects -- I find I am to ask pardon for what I
thought you would thank me -- but to set all right again, this Gentleman is one
that I shall Marry to Morrow, and I thought the occasion of a Wedding, and the
season of a Christmas, might justify an innocent Frolic; and observing the
Note you sent me this Morning without out a Superscription to be so worded,
that it might come from me as well as you, and that there was not so much
difference between our Persons and Dress, but might deceive him a Minute or
two, and not fail, I thought of making a very ridiculous mistake.


Ha, ha, ha! a very good Plot In faith, and I'm sorry it did not take; only my
Deary is such a fearful Fool, or it would have made good sport -- you must know
Cousin, I accidentally coming in, had slipped behind the Tapestry and heard all.


Then you had all the pleasure of it to your Self -- I designed to be there
too, but was interrupted by an impertinent Visitor, my Lady Chatt -- but how
came your Sword drawn Sir Solomon, you have not killed my Lover?


No, no, no, he went away before -- but you must know, as the thing appeared
then, I was so foolish as to believe that it was a contrivance of Fidelia's and
in the present Passion Cousin, did'nt know what I did --


I'm glad the Truth's come to Light --


But all's well now Cousin, all's well, and I applaud you for your Plot, I
always took you for a sly Baggage -- but come come, we'll send for the Fiddles,
and you for your Lover, for for ought I know, you have lost him -- he was
plaguily snubbed poor Fellow; come along, we'll have the Business done now --
you shall not lose a Night Coz, besides to keep you in Countenance, my Lady Dainty
is doing the same thing, and we'll be merry together --


Rarely come off, the success of this would almost tempt me to break my Vow.


Well, there is nothing shows so visibly the remaining Footsteps of our
primitive Barbarism as the noise at Weddings; huh! huh! --


It serves to recommend the Pleasures that succeed, and make us taste the Joys
of silence with a higher relish --

Dr. You'll grieve to see your Art out-done; I bring an approved Remedy.


My Lady Dainty, I wish you Joy, and you too, dear Cleremont, an Hour hence you
may wish it these -- we heard of your Ladyship's design for a Wedding-Jigg to
Night, and my Cousin and this honest Captain were resolved to complement your
Ladyship, and join in the same Dance -- I warrant they shake their Heels
rarely. --


Methinks the Stile of Sir Solomon is very extraordinary. --


We wish your Ladyship Joy.


I wonder People of any Rank should use such vulgar Salutations. --


You see Sir Solomon the success of your Counsels.


Why every thing I do is lucky -- I am the most overjoyed Man of this side the
Globe -- but you can't imagine what a sly Rogue the Captain has been in this
Matter shall I tell him Tom?


No, Prithee let it alone till after Supper.


Ay you Dog, your Thoughts ru^ upon nothing but after Supper. -- But Cleremont,
you'll Dye with Laughing, such Plots, and Counterplots. -- Harkee! Tom, not a
word to the Women of our first Contrivance.


No, no.


For if my Deary should but hear of so irreligious a purpose, it would break
her Heart. It seems she is one or other, the most reserved, most pious, of such
nice Honour, and the fearfull'st Fool, -- well, I am the happiest Man in the
World. --


In a Wife.


And next to my own Happiness, I must Congratulate my Friends. -- Dear
Cleremont, I'm overjoyed at thy good Fortune -- why thy Wife looks better
already -- is it not possible to make her speak like one of us?


All things by Degrees, Sir Solomon, I must not over-dose her.


Nothing pleases me so much as to think that all this happened through my
Contrivance -- Tom, Cleremont.


Thou art a great Man that's certain.


For Intriguing --


Truly Madam I wonder how this Ill-bred Custom prevails among People of Figure?
This Singing, this Dancing and this Tumult, is so like the Mob Solemnities of a
May-Day, Huh! Huh! Huh!


And the Bride is used just like their Pole, for all the Town to Dance round.


Directly so; well, certainly if it were not for the Pleasure of ruling after,
no Woman of Quality would suffer her self to be treated so like a Commoner.


The grosser part of the Ceremony is to come Madam, and that is throwing the
Stocking.


That indeed is a thing that insults us so near, that I wonder the Men have not
thought it their Interest to lay it down.


I suppose it is to take away the rem ins of Modesty in a Married Woman all at
once, for they think that Quality is properly the Virtue of a Maid --


Tom, take hold of your Mistress, the Parson's in the next Room -- let's
dispatch that and then for the Supper and then -- for the Posset you Rogue!


Ha! Ha! Ha!

This is his contrivance.


Cousin Sir Solomon, I'm your humble Servant, and Miss my Cousin, Clarinda this
is very kindly done.


what does this old strumpet Mean?


Faith I can't tell I suppose some joke of Freeman's.


My Cousin, my Lady Dainty! This was extemely obliging, to summon all your
Friends to the Celebration of our Nuptials -- I don't know how I shall be able
to return this Favour, but the Captain, Madam, must answer for me --


What Captain, and what Nuptials do you speak of, Mrs. Friendlove?


Your Ladyship has a mind to give me some confusions, but your Ladyship need
not be told that in half an Hour at most, my Name it is to be Freeman.


Freeman!

-- Here's another Plot, another Plot!


Ha! Ha! Ha!


How Madam, are your pretentions to my Husband?


Your Husband? -- why -- am I deceived then? Miss, Captain, pray speak, am I
Cheated? Dear Captain Cousin are you a Rogue? Ha! Are you false to me?


Why what can be said? you stayed so long that I was quite out of Patience, and
seeing the Parson, the Music and all things ready, and this Lady in Humour and
rather than disappoint my Lady Dainty, I engaged my self here -- that's all.


That's all?


Ha! Ha! Ha!


You false ungrateful Fellow, to serve a Woman of my Relations so. ( Aside) But
this damned Jade to make me wait so long: She was an hour looking for my false
Teeth, if I had lain in 'em as I used to do at my Lady Topers, all had been
well -- I'll turn her away immediately -- but first I wish you all jealous,
when you have no reason, and secure when you have, and may every Body think
your Wives Handsome, but your selves; and may your Children be as dull as if
they were lawfully begot.


A heavy Curse.


Farewell Hermaphrodite, -- well this is a night of Intrigues, nothing but
Stratagems; Tom, I begin to be in Love with my self, when I think I was the
first Ingineer.


Nay 'twas all your own Contrivance.


All things break out so, luckily: But stay there's Careless left how shall we
provide for him, he's a very honest Fellow.


Don't Name that Sir Solomon, if you intend to prefer me -- but now I have no
hopes of being a General, I think I must go into the Country, and be my Elder
Brother's Butler.


Ay, thou had always a kindness for the Cellar, but if you would make your
Fortune under him, get to be his Steward, Jack, rather than his Butler, for
then you may come to be richer than your Master in a little time if you have
any Discretion.


Which I never had -- but there's another way I like better, if you would
promise me your Interest.


If it be not to serve the Court-Party, I promise you.


Not in the least 'tis only to persuade that Lady (who I have found is your
Relation) to think better of me than I do of my self, and take me for Life.


That's a long Lease, but she has 200 l. a Year to keep it in repair --


You see Madam, how Ominous it was to begin with a Quarrel, I knew it would be a
Match, by our Scolding before hand.


If we don't after, 'twill be well enough.


We must not be singular -- now and then 'twill be necessary to be like the
rest of the World.


Well Clarinda, I wish you perfect Joy and must own to you, that your life is
the Happiest -- there all is Quiet, all is Peace, there is nothing to steal the
Colour from your Cheeks, or betray you to Surprises, and now I am convinced of
the Folly, the Confusion and the Adversity of Mine.

The Guilty still with anxious Cares are pressed,
The truly Good alone are truly Blessed.

LET none hereafter Plays Ungodly call,
For this was writ to mortify you all.
No Parson's here exposed, no Brothel stormed,
But a kind handsome keeping Wife Reformed.
A sign the Youth the World n'er understood,
Or else he would not dare to be so good.
He must the Fame he aims at quite disown,
Who draws good Characters to spoil his own.
This to excuse I thought a Friend he'd need,
And came -- sick as I am, his Cause to plead:
'Tis the first Visit I protest I've made.
You're sometimes kind to what I do before you;
Pity the Youth, for my sake I implore you,
Hissing to Death my tender Organ Wounds!
And a sick Ear abhors ungrateful Sounds:
Yet can Applause though never so loud give Ease,
For they who flatter Women always please.
Then vain Assistance will I now explore
In Physic and Astrology no more.
You, dear Physicians, must my Health insure,
And the other Visit will confirm my Cure;
Else what's already done -- is all in vain,
And I relapse -- till you come here again.
By you I shall be always to be seen,
For whatever ails the sickly Fair within,
The Doctor at all Seasons is let in.

