SOme Prologues wish their Audience joyful mirth,
Some with Appelles strive to Paint the birth,
Of their inventions; others not only true,
But pleasing to the kind spectators view;
Such would our Author to, had not his Muse,
A mournfu subject whom this age abuse;
Nor can his Novice genius dive unto,
The depth of what he fain would tender you,
Lirenda's Misery, who can forbear,
The Scaene once past from a relenting tear,
When blustering storms of murder, fire and sword
Are the chief Emblems he can best affoord,
Your true compassive fancy, look not then for,
A Poets lofty dazzling Meteor,
That to the vulgar eye might seem more strange
Then fertile Luna, in her often change:
Kind Natives of this poor afflicted I'll,
To your oppressions we address the style
Of this our tragic pen, who in effect,
Are the supporters, of that Architect,
Devised by him that never writ before,
Yet honours you, your miseries adore,
Your faithful service, resolution and
The most accomplished virtues of this land,
Sometime styled Insula Sanctorum,
Now the true touchstone, or decorum,
Of Heroical minds, whom envyes dire intent
Endeavoured to subvert with discontent:
This Noble, worthy, Auditors the scope
Of what we are resolved to show, in hope,
Your frequent goodness with attentive ear,
Our more imperfect lines will mildly bear,
For which the Muses humbly we desire,
Some heavenly rapture may your thoughts inspire.

Must not a Creature pass?


No, that's the the scope of our Commission: Stand; who comes there?


A friend.


The Word;


Marry Sirs, God bless us all;


well spoken, yet you must not pass,


Not pass? then if you be good fellows, let us chat a while* prithee what
means this sudden tumult?


The matter seems so strange to me as yet, we can reurne no other answer, but
the state on pain of death commands all men, (thus ready armed) to stand upon
their guard;


You may be sure there's some rank plot in hand, or would the State at these
unusual hours sit in a private Council else:


'Twish a fable; 'tis but some drunken quarrel thus disturbs our rest: or the
field appointed by some hot furious gallant, whereto the State will not give
way.


Be it the same, we'll not remove from hence, nor you in duty ought to
slight the matter thus, as if your worships wisdom were so ripe to apprehend
the cause;


You cannot give more likelier reasons for it:


You're mistaken friend, the common report's abroad far different from your
conceit; raised to the highest point of a distracted mutiny, we wot not what
to think or speak, such is the horrid treachery intended.


Good Lord forbid; against whom?


This City Castle; and by a few of Romish Recusants think to subvert the true
reformed Gospel:


How? our own fast friends, that were a jest indeed past my belief;


Be not incredulous:


How can I choose, but frame my thoughts like a confused Chaos; to think,
these men who by exterior signs and loving conversations, threw their hearts
into our arms, nay more I might express: but that I see* all proves a fained
friendship, and our joint love's turned to a mortal hate;


'Tis much, much feared, we'll find it so e're long, written in Characters of
blood.


Silence: the Lords themselves do come, to give their best advice;


We called you hither, to make known the danger, that now, even now is
revealed, wherefore so true we conceive you be, that with all speed you go
unto each port, and see them strongly guarded, with strict command that none on
pain of death shall issue forth, until a true perfect search be made
throughout this City, for as we credibly are informed, Guyrva with all his
rude conspirators, are at this instant in a doubtful fear to be discovered;
the guilt of such a heinous fact doubtless betrays them; Worthy friends, then
slake not your endeavours; the hast which this great business now requires,
admits no leisure to stir your willingness with th'effectuall speech of our
just cause; that touches not your persons only; but aims at the Crown of our
dread Sovereign; and to imbase this Kingdoms glory, beneath the hollow
concave of their Popish faction; this we thought fit to add unto your now
intended care, not doubting yours, nor these your brethrens love to him, this
weighty matter most concerns:


Sir, we really intend; (far from vain glory be it spoken) to uphold this
Cities ancient fame, that hitherto hath nobly borne, the title of a pure
unspotted town; when treason came as nie to cut you off, our fidelity did then
expulse your foes and with the trophies of their bloody spoil returned
victorious, this we did, and are as willing yet to manifest the same so far
as heart and life can show the duty of allegiance:


Them Noble acts renders you famous to posterity; nor did th'Angolean princes
prove ungrateful for that service, as your fair City charter can approve,


It is acknowledged their royal bounty, wherefore we that do live will strive
to give as great a lustre to the Angolean nation, as our renowned ancestors
have done, in this we rest, O Lord decree our willing powers may curb this
treachery.


Now kind brother your grave experience must direct, what is most needful to
be done;


The chiefest care whereto our watchful eye should bar from future mischief,
this strong fort by heavens protection is secured, therein disabling our
insulting foes hence forward to proceed:


Then are our fears extinct?


Not so, dear Sir, the tempest threatens our ruin still; for 'tis a maxim
warlike leaders use, not to despise the weakness of their foes, which else
might give advantage to their design as many woeful presidents there are
within the limits of my youthful days: (too tedious now to nominate,) for
sixty odd years past, since first I practised arms, in the Hiberean wars,
when Tyrona led on by some vain prophecy or other, did strive by dint of
sword to assure himself the Northern Crown, with much expense of blood at
length t'h Angolean forces cooled his pride, and made his haughty courage
stoop unto a base ignoble flight, yet now me thinks the terror of this sudden
hell-bred news, strikes near my heart, then all the legions of his furious
train, could at that instant when Black-water-Fort, proved fatal to the most
and best of ours:


We then like prudent Statesmen must observe, some fit occasion may endear the
Palans to side with us, until our powers increase with new supplies from the
grand Parliament


Your advice is good, but we are the valiant stout Osirus here, we then could
best proceed; yet fearing least the pilfring Mountaniers do fire the suburbs,
'twere not amiss, if we employed that warlike Leader brave Carola, Cola, with
whom five hundred of our best and ablest men to front the foe at home; Now
friend; from whence thy news?


From Adrohna*


How fares the Governor?


In health, an please your Lordship.


Is the noble Lord Tigranes in safety?


The same my Lord:


It must not be difer'd a minute longer; go hast thee to the governor again,
and tell him six hundred men completely armed shall forthwith march to
strengthen him, and further bid him be of comfort, he shall not want, what's
needful;


I will not fail to return your Lordships answer,


Brother, we must withdraw to hasten what is promised we should incur a
lasting scandal else:


Now that our army is advanch'd thus far, within the confines of our
trembling foes whilst yet their scattered troupes lye all dismayed, we'll pitch
a field in view of yon proud town, and stoutly summon them Within to yield, or
train them forth, moved which a bold defiance, wherein we may express an
ardent zeal to right our natives slavery, and stop the current of their
puritan design intended for our total ruin;


Brave man at arms, thy invincible spirit adds more fury to the justness of
our cause, then when I recollect a memory of Guyrva's sad misfortune, through
some prodigious star, ominus to poor Lirenda still, yet if undaunted
resolution may advance the drooping state, of this our native Clime, let him
not prosper will not prosecute that base, perfidious, Puritanicall faction,
enemies to God, our mild and gracious Sovereign:


I will not boast what my intentions are, nor derive an active power from my
own self conceit, No Noble friends and fellow peers in arms, my ambition's
fixed on them powers above, from whence I have a heart both true and loyal,
consecrated to the service of this pious war, in proof whereof, (vouchsafe
me but that honour) i'll be the first shall scale those feeble walls and raze
yon lofty turretts to the ground, or dye in the adventure,


Forbear Aretas promise no more then thousands will beside we are departed
from our home, under the conduct of a happy leader, to whom as to the public
good we owe the tender of life, estate and fortune, for royal Carola his just
prerogatives, wrested from him by an elected crew of shameless Round-heads;
wherefore lets once again confirm our vow in his defence, that is most dear
unto us;


The motions good, join hands hearts together Now God defend this kingdom by
our powers whilst we are for our gracious king, and yours: Omnes Crant this, O
Lord Amen, Amen, O Lord.


The squadrons now must quarter in due order, Dora take you the charge thereof,
my self, Mineus, and Aretas will see if threats or promises will best
prevail, th'obdurate Newters to side with us:


Arm Sirs, arm, arm, an army of well appointed Angoleans march directly
hither;


Never more joyful news, come my hearts cheer up; hearken this welcome


What troops will you appoint to give the charge?


Lentimos, and you Theodorike must lead a party forth, we'll follow after with
them we shall conceive expedient


Shine happy stars, propitious fate direct us, Come, lets away, heaven will I
hope protect us


Whither shall we fly, Captain Albinus make hast away, or we are lost for ever,
our ranks are broken by the bloody foe that like so many cruel Tigers rage
and slaughter all they meet, with ruth full groans of dying men the air is
filled, and death in triumph waits upon our vanquished forces.


I scorn to flinch, or leave my harmless men a prey to them whose cruelty
extends beyond the bounds of human nature; of my estate they have deprived me
else, so most of those we have now seen lye dead then to revenge that wrong I
led them forth, and to that end i'll stay; my life's no more but lost a^gments
the sum of their large score:


Our Sergeant Major hath forsook the field,


More Coward he;


Shall we submit or yield;


Neither; you may in that your pleasure do.


As you resolve so I will stand to it to;


See where Albinus stands, as if he meant to conquer all.


Come on Traitor.


Thou lie. base slave, that proud word shall cost thee dearly.


An equal match come, man to man;


Fall back good Sir, do you pursue the rest that flies amain: Tantalus what
is't to strive, against the stream, for which he starves alive.


When first this unexpected news was brought us we little thought it would
clime to that height, or that there were such tyranny intended, against the
miserable Northern Subjects but since we do (unto our griefs) behold the sad
disaster of our dearest friends


Expect no better measure at their hands if their emperious pride be not
abated;


'twill come too late I fear,


'twish a fable, let damned Medaea raise her spiteful charms, from the depth
of the infernal sooty caves, or from grim Pluto's court conjure a number of
armed furies, this horrid crew, were they more strong then hell is deep, our
just cause, cries at th'impartiall throne of God for aide, to affront and
keep in awe, these bold usurpers of our Soveraigne's power;


Most nobly spoken:


To think otherwise we should wrong our selves, had we not lost our
expectations for some private guilt, against the deity my cause of knowledge
being sad and heavy, for the late army we sent forth they say, received a
fatal overthrow,


Be not dismayed, think not the dismal sight of our defeated troupes, shall
strike us silent or rent our fortunes with an odious term of Coward fear,
'tis a base deformed object* a scandal for posterity to blot our fame, No my
Lord, as yet my hopes hath life, by the same president in other stout
commanders, witness Bellona's darling, invincible Caesar (whose fame and
valour did spread over the girdled orb, unto the Antipodes) Darius, Priam, the
Macedonian King, with infinite others impertinent to nominate these potent
conquerors I say, were subject to the like misfortunes, yet notwithstanding
afterwards have been victorious; And why not we?


Our case, my Lord, is weak and desperate;


For shame cast off them looks of sad despair, it ill beseems your calling,
time, or place an occasion seldom less needful, without a further
consultation: come, let's go immediately clasp on our coats of steel, and
dare the traitors to their face, whilst I do animate and lead up the rest of
our decayed forces: Courage as then, a little spark may lighten all again:


Since your undaunted spirit must needs forward, then be as prosperous as
Hannibal when he conveyed his army over the mounting Alps, or like the son of
Jove, when Giants impudence did invade the heavens


My hearts, as good as theirs, had I equal power, i'd tear the fabric of
this world asunder, my fury like Ioves violent thunder should blast the earth
far worse then Phaeton in his heedles course, what would I not have done,
what Kingdoms ransacked till I had my will of these on whom I ground my hatred
still:


To satisfy the nice conceit of those who judge our actions as their fancies
are, our taking arms shall to the world appear a just and natural defence in
us when to His Majesty, there's not the least conceit of any harm once meant,
either in's Royal person Crown or dignity;


So far we still express our selves my Lord, for in this protection is laid
forth the motives whereon we chiefly ground this war next with a tender
care we do reserve all that concerns our sovereigns right, to the Lirendean
Crown, therein excluding all foreign power, all Princes whatsoever:


If such a Covenant we had not made; No Caesar, Scipio, Hanniball, nor that
worlds conqueror proud Macedon, were their expired dates renewed again, could
not, nay should not subdue the gentry of Lirenda from their obedience to the
Angolean King, most firm and true since mighty Cheapstow did conduct us
hither;


Nor do we now intend a base revolt had Rome's majestique throne command it so
my humble answer saith give Caesars due, to God thy heart and faith;


That was indeed the chief occasion first that moved us join with them.


And will maintain it whilst life breathes in this corps of mine,


And mine,


We are resolved to live and die together.


May it please your Lordships, one Theodorike desires admittance to your
Lordships presence:


Go give him entrance, good man his pains, are great to draw the Commons
forth.


Such friends as him we need.


The more his praise.


Welcome Theodoricke.


Then know my Lords, with pains unspeakable I've drawn together, of mine my
near allies their servants, friends and tenants, a thousand able men, at Rufus
quarters, in a fit readiness to do you service, when further know, our scouts
for certain do report, that fifteen hundred desperate bloody rogues under
the command of Sir Daretas, at Medra haven are landed, beside one Collonell
Crambich, (a branch of the cursed tribe in Pickland) is trusted with the
leading of a thousand chosen men, all Citizens, with whom, by true
intelligence, Sir Carola intends t'expulse us from our native dwellings, with
such a savage spleen, men, women, infants on their mothers pape, are vowed to
be killed;


That project crushes all, Notwithstanding cousin, and Collonell (a title not
worth the least of thy applauded meritts,) return, with such small forces as
you have give Cola a manful skermish, and we shall speedily unto your aide.


To my grief I speak it, the camp hath scarce a dozen pound of powder.


Heaven will strengthen thee.


Here take this sword, and use't against our foes.


Upon their carcasses i'll spare no blows, farewell my Lords, Theodorike will
go, expose his fate against your powerful foe;


Yonder they are Madam.


My thinks they lack them pleasant smiles of mirth, that like so many radiant
beams of Sol, gave comfort to the gloomy shade of our disquiet thoughts.


Why therefore we do now presume this visit hoping we may at least disperse
them cares that we suspect doth seize them unawares


Behold my Lords, who comes?


We are discovered; health to your Lorships.


Welcome fair Ladies all.


Must we demand your licence to entrude.


'Twere needless; your beauties are sufficient to claim a greater favour.


Sir you know, 'tis the desire of love, fond women do so much regard, that
overcome with joy, you men esteems it as a needless toy, and may perhaps our
kindness now express in the harsh language of ungratfulnesse:


Your will my dear,


Is only to be merry this new year, for Christmas being now well near expired
without the comfort of your usual mirth, what joy have we, what sorrows can
prevent when in your looks the map of discontent:


It lies beyond the reach of female wit, to sound the cause that doth occasion
it,


Howsoever some short time we'll borrow, to curb the mischief of a sudden
sorrow;


Our music hath of late unto them given, a song, penned by a friend that doth
protest he loves this Nation dearly, in whose breast such deep affection by
their kindness came that he doth honour and respect the name;


This makes you to affect it so.


Love binds us to it.


Will you be pleased to hear it then?


Yes, and with thanks to.


Come away, O come away,
Courageous youths, O do not stay,
Now's the time, brave Mars will prove
More powerful then the god of love.
Cast your Venus sports away,
Valour brooks not long delay,
Gods themselves are up in arms
To protect you from all harms.
He that honour thinks to gain,
Fears no danger, woe or pain,
Death's grim look or bloody scarre,
makes the mind more noble far.
Then make hast O do not stay,
Dally not the time away,
If you mean for to persevere,
Now's the time, O now, or never.
How like you this?


A perfect good one, Lady;


Seeing the Poets fancy hath pleased you thus, we crave the like respect,
which granted us, shall not divert you long from them affairs whereto we see
you are inclined to most how like you of a dance my Lords.


Fairest beauty, none dares deny, when you express the law that keeps
offending lovers most in awe.


It merits not this complement, your love, in this, is that which we desire to
prove, some music there.


believe me this was neatly done,


And gave us much contentment.


Ladies a banquet. after this to entertain our Noble friends.


If that small worth you think will please your friend, lead on the way my
Lords and we'll attend.


Go, go spend the remnant of your happy days, whilst I with silent grief
do vent my thoughts, thoughts able to dismay a mind most resolute if what a
maidens brain conceives will take effect, our woeful hours are posting on;
we may be confident Angolias fury, armed with a mortal hatreds ready bent to
mischiefs, void of pity, with pretence, this cruel rage is in their own
defence, least we who have been still as slaves to them should now endeavour to
regain our own religion, laws, and liberty, this, O this it fears me will
produce more inhuman acts, then ever brutish Nero did invent: oh, oh, silly,
heart, why doest thou figure forth so strange a form? silence no more, no
more, let not the air be private to thy grief, fearing some fatal star,
approves thy speech prophetical; and make these thoughts in fact a mournfu
Chorus to the following act:


This day (dear friends and kinsmen) we must behave our selves like brave
courageous Lirendeans, not regarding the politic stratagems of Cola, wherein
he thinks to find us, in a foul disorder, his Machavillian plots ne'er so
privately contrived, but heaven you see, doth send us timely notice, wherefore
we'll expect him with spirits altogether void of fear; what though we are
not so well armed as he, nor furnished with that plenty of ammunition, the
justness of our cause will shield us from the spiteful fury of his invading
power; be sensible of your wrongs; the infamous disgrace without respect of
birth or person, how odious the name of Catholic, hath ever been unto them? a
hatred there's by inheritance, the loss of your estates by a thousand damned
inventions; beside innumerable edicts against Religion: These torments were not
held sufficient in respect we somewhat yet possess of this our native soil;
wherefore they have contrived the last and worst of evils; to raze us from the
world, No, nor leave so much as one alive, to increase the memory of us
hereafter; (a grudge suitable to hells black purposes.) Reflect I pray, how
near it doth concern us then, to venture our lives and fortunes in a noble
virtuous way; that truly tends, to the safety of your wives, children and
friends: Admit gentlemen of the worst may happen, what an they break on ours;
'tis no dishonour neither our reputations blemished in it when th'advantage of
arms and numbers theirs, May not fortune as well grace our desires when all
her motions are uncertain, should we defeat them now the world would speak
our praise: Come, let's resolve to do them more annoy, then Agamemnon, in the
wars of Troy:


The grave and learned eloquence of Roman Orators (noble Colonel) could not
more perfect a description give, off those insufferable injuries, which
captivated our hearts in chains of ice, that must again (perforce) dissolve in
flames of just revenge:


Our enemies too near approach, else we could enlarge the subject of this
conference with as many material circumstances, which for the present we
abreviate to prosecute our right: lead on Sir, bravely guide the way heaven
will, I hope, grant this our happy day:


Was ever seen or heard, such bold, audacious rogues that dares upbraid my
fury, have not I* to their confused shame and loss, caused many towns and
villages to be destroyed in dreadful flames, themselves like dismal fugitives
compelled to fly, and yet they dare affront me still! O impudence! that with
extracted villainy deserves a total ruin, thy harm I seek, and lunge to
glory in so good an action* motives sufficient doth induce me to it, to hang,
to rack, to kill, to burn, to spoil, until I make this land a barren soil.


Fly Cousin fly, there's no hope of safety else, notwithstanding a stout
resistance, our men (affrighted with the unusual sight of blood and slaughter)
are foully broken on, routed by a number crueller then famished lions in
th'Arabian desert, Cola like a demi-divell or Cannibal, cries out kill, kill,
spare neither man, woman, child regard not age or sex, down, down with them
all


For Christ his passion, do you once more oppose his fury, make good the
trench whilst I persuade our timorous men to face about.


Stand traitor, perfidious traitor, stand.


Thy foe, a loyal subject, and prove it so; on your guard Sir:


Tibernus charge, Crambich post unto the bridge where the most number of the
villens are in strife to pass, let not a mothers child escape, but see due
execution on them all:


Your will shall be observed effectually


What stout Celar killed? O damned bowitching fate: Bear hence this body, then
after take the pillage of the town for your good service.


Now as I live its like to prove a mad world, a desperate time with our
Citizens; and it continue thus, where they did break by dozens heretofore, we
shall have hundreds now at a light rate i'faith; such pretty shifts and
sleights are so cunningly contrived these days, under pretence of safety, as
shutting shops, packing up goods and sent, the Lord knows whither; Coin,
Jewels, plate, houshold-stuffe, every thing vanishes like superfluous clouds,
to the vast center of the hollow earth; my countrymen are styled, to
discontented gentlemen, well, if e're I did intend to make a fortune, now's the
time to stir my self, a fitter opportunity will never offer my acceptance,
ha, the mischiefs ont, I shall be reputed so, a prime promoter: tush a blast
of breath no sooner blown then gone, honesty canno^ thrive at all times, the
proverb says, he must needs dye a beggar that is known too just: wherefore I
will scrue up my wits, to the full height of knavery, whereby I may demurely
insinuate my self, with the good liking of Sir Carola; whom no sooner's made
acquainted with my faculty, but heaps of honour will fall on me straight,
with good Sir, sweet Sir, as I do pass them by, help me says one I am
condemned to dye, there's twenty pieces; another calls kind Sir, remember my
petition you prefer here's expedition for it; thus 'twixt em all, I'm sure to
rise, whosoever chance to fall: Carola; prosperity wait on your noble self
Tibernus:


Thanks honest friend:


I have been since these wars desirous Sir, to do the governor some special
service, but since could not the happiness to impart what I am sure will please
and profit him.


Relate thy mind to me, and thou shalt have a fit reward.


To place my low fortunes on the pyramid of his bounty, were a praise
befitting the worthy motions of a generous soul: This did induce my zealous
love to show, the subtle pranks of some penurious Citizens, that lately
closed up in a wall, at least a thousand pound in plate and cash.


There's some strong hopes in this;


I'll bring you likewise to each papist house, where privately are kept, trunks
wholly laden of rich apparel, coin, jewels, rings bracelets patents of the
rebels lands.


That especially:


What can you think or name best needful for your use, but I will straight
discover?


Surely thou can not miss a brave preferment;


Under pretence of being bred a Papist, I shall without the least thought of
suspicion conduct your guard where Priests in secret are locked up at Mass, or
in the night as they abroad do creeping pass the street, moreover Sir, if the
army be in want, or that of force you ask assistance from the townsmen where
some may better spare more gold then others, let me alone to search the
difference of those men's fidelity, how able, willing, really affected, Papist
above Protestant I am expert in all


Graceless villen that cares not to betray his dearest friends to them wotes
not after he were hanged:


Your constant servant I will still persevere.


Brother Athenio:


What says our dear brother?


Have you not hard of the late proclamation?


Yes Noble Brother, I perused it over, the treacherous model of a rude
invention, Pitho would thousands give for all our heads


No, there's a milder since, full of Clemency, a general pardon,


To whom?


Them will submit to the Lords Justices


On what conditions?


Perverse cruelty?


Perpetual slavery?


And mortal hatred?


Very true: these are the glorious titles every faint hearted native will
revolt shall have, which from my heart I wish it him, but to explain my own
particular intention, may to the wise perhaps seem needles; yet he that loves
his Country, or will profess the Characters of Catholiquo in's heart take
notice oft, our quarrel is religious, in maintenance whereof we are already
sworn without equivocation, and e're I violate that sacred oath, a thousand
deaths shall one by one invade me, if floods of misery, i'll wade them over and
from its raging streams regain the sho^ of blessed fidelity.


May all the world example take by this Lord's goodness;


Under favour: 'twere a folly, a most profound madness to seek our certain
ruin by denial of a benefit, so conveniently proffered; when our wants at the
most extreme: both night and day I posted hence the kingdom over, all parts my
wandering thoughts conceived might best supply our wants, did I return ought
but the fruitless labour of a needful journey; can Stelern now your foes*
increase make up two thousand complete arms in field; your Lordships knows
this is no fable:


Good Sir forbeate, the matter's past dispute.


An please your excellence, several gentlemen of the County, are newly come
in post, with some strange news, it's feared by their sad looks.


Direct'em hither; some straggling troupers that for pillage scout abroad, makes
false alaruins to affright the Country thus:


Your news? What, sad upon it?


Osirus, with a powerful army gathered from all parts at least consisting of
eight thousand foot, and horse, march hitherward; burning of towns,
destroying Castles fair, all to the sword goes that his army meets, and doth
intend (the which good God forbid) to make a fatal conquest of this land.


What strange, dishonest, base device is this, to publish to the world, a
general pardon, before which time appointed is expired, poor harmless
subjects killed, the kingdom fired, O faithless wicked Cruelty!


Shift for your selves in hast, for here will soon arrive more sullen spies,
then Mercury did charm in Argo's eyes; good my Lords dispatch, one minutes
stay too long may yield you prisoners to untimely ends:


Dear friends, we now resemble one at point of death, that must perforce
forsake, what he most dearly loved, life, wealth, fair possessions, pleasures
content exchanged to sad expressions, wife laments, children their parents
moan, each hath occasion then to sigh and groan; so we, distressed we, must
oft among, their doleful ditties tune a mournful song.


Let them whose will stand out, I will submit to great Osirus cause its held
most sit.


Now through the power and help of heaven we are, in safe possession of their
strongest holts, the foe not able to withstand our warlike troupes are fled,
like men full of despair, grief, regardless fury that we are thus strong;
themselves pursued with terror of the times, and fearful shadows of base
acted crimes, wherefore we must then cheerfully advance, not doubting but we
truly shall e're long, revenge sufficiently the Angoleans wrong.


You speak Sir, like your self, full of maturity, the hopeful line, that
guides my confidence from the most intricate labyrinth of despair when Adrohna
was at point to perish, and placed the issue of a far event on more then
mortal comfort: that proposes to the wicked, vice, mischiefs, pains
unspeakable, joined with the grim aspect of blood and terror, more deserving
plagues then wilful Egypt felt, when her miseries were at the height of all
extremes


It needs must follow so, for in all parts they are environed with severe
Commanders, famous for their valour, your Excellence in Stelern, and for the
adjacent Provinces, men of known integrity:


It is our chiefest comfort they go on as prosperous as fair Bellona's
darlings when the gods were threatened by a multitude of foolish mortals.


But none with that Celerity like yours, which far transcend theirs went
before as Sol doth Luna's spangled Orb, or some bright star, when sable
clouds doth veil the sky.


'Tis the noblest of your thoughts are pleased my Lord to speak our
commendations greater then desert can warrant so much goodness:


It cannot be denied; your prosperous fate, fame hath divulged it to the
spacious world, with doubled Echoes of immortal praise; which makes Angolia to
esteem your actions the glory of her Northern Clime.


Believe me gentlemen, this will impair your ripe judgement much, what tidings
brings you from the Camp my friend?


To know your Lordships pleasure concerning a prisoner that immediately is
taken:


How, a gentleman of quality?


He names himself Lieutenant Collonell Rufus a Scot by birth, a Papist by
profession.


Let him be forthwith sent to the Lords Justices,


Behold my Lord, here comes another Post,


Now friend, thy news?


That Lord Sileus, Bathillus, one Cephalon and Sisenna, with many other prime
gentlemen are jointly come to the Camp, in hope of a free pardon


A gibbet fits them better: good my Lord;


Patience kind Sir, when time and place will serve each one may justly have
what he deserve till then remit your censure.


How will your Lordship have them be disposed of?


With a strong Convey, guard them presently unto the Castle:


It shall be duly done.


Now we may say, Heaven favours us.


Nothing more certain Sir, yet I must ask a boon:


'Tis granted, were it my estate Tigranes:


No more then two full Regiments of foot, a troop or so of horse to augment
my former forces, with whom I mean to wast the Kingdom over: chiefly the
Northern quarter, where most my indignations bent, until I pull from those
bold conspirators unsanctified brows the wreath of honour, and force them to
repent, cry, curse the hour, that e're they urged Angolias warlike power.


There needs no language to excite thy valour, nor distrust, but thou may
soon accomplish, that pleasing service both to God and man, come then make
choice thy self of them resolved hearts fit to wait on so brave a leader:
Then you for Vlstrand, we Stelern, clasp hands, when Martial men thus knit,
their party stands:


They call for quarter, and will yield the Castle if we grant it them.


Go, say they shall have it, promise what ever they will demand, until we
gain this place of strength, our loss is much already; when that is done,
gentlemen, and brother soldiers, their lives shall be at each of your
disposalls, as our poor countrymen hath been at theirs.


We'll brush the^r guts i'faith,


You were but fools and cowards else to think the contrary, when heaven cries
vengeance on their sinful heads, nature binds you effect it; were there no
more provoking motions, but the slaughter of your follow soldiers here:


He speaks like a true zealous Protestant:


His words enflames my heart.


Z'blood mine's so too:


And mine is full resolved with this stiff blade, to gore the traitors
throats;


My sword likewise:


Mine shall not sleep when yours is dravvn.


This is as quickly drawn to;


But this did pretty well, and shall again, augment the number of our foes
that's slain.


I must of force be absent now they yield: least your pretence of being ignorant
I granted quarter, might spoil the jest: you know your charge?


You need not doubt, we do: stand; where would these traitors go?


Where God will guide us best.


Where the devil shall your wretched souls molest?


Hold we had quarter promised us.


Believe him not he lies, kill, kill, let not a bastards


Look, yonder runs a score, lets follow, follow.


Heaven grant they perish in the world to come, that were foul actors of this
brutish Tragedy: dear friends and Countrymen, blame not my love, if I bestow
the attribute of Martirs on ye, Martyrs, O Martyrs truly with good reason too,
since for your faith, you suffered thus; live then blessed souls securely in
eternal rest, whilst we lament your too untimely loss; Oh that my wishes
could an army raise for this poor kingdoms safety; whereby such cruelty
might be no more extended, but oh, oh, these, these wishes are in vain when
fire and sword beyond control doth reign Lirenda, poor Lirenda now
farewell, farewell thy former pomp; all's turned to grief attired in crimson
robes of bloody death that none but heavens compassive motions can subdue:
cease then, O cease impatient grief, when God is pleased, we may expect
relief, mean time these breathless corps me thinks do crave that tribute
which we all bring to the grave.


Plague choke him for a graceless villen, not a minutes ease my restless
fancy had, since first I understood my dismal fate, ha, is this your
prophecy, good man halter? is this my fortune? Sir, you will be lost in this
war, by the hands of one you least suspect, before you shall return again:
Must my labour, my zealous labour be, requited with a death I most abhor, not
that I fear grim death base conjurer, but that a Lirendean slave should
vanquish me, and glory in my overthrow, O, O, O, damned devils incarnate, if
die I must my life shall cost ten thousand lives accursed


There's at least a score of arch-traitors sent to town, whereof one Cephalon.


Ha, Brukil^ I hope,


The very same;


God's blessing on thy heart, for this good news; a very rogue in grain.


There is another old Commander, whom they call Lieutenant-Collonell Rufus, one
can disclose more then a hundred more,


I'll scrue it out of his old bones i'faith: good Tibernus fetch them hither.


Them all?


No, none but that pair of cunning rogues: desire the Constable to yoke the
rest, they cannot be secure,


Clear the way there, for the prisoners, ho,


Are you there Sirs? have you brought Magna Charta, to reprive you from the
gollowes? ha


No, His Majesty's more gracious.


What, what, to pardon a rabble of disloyal Cut-throates, a nimble actor of
this bold Commotion?


I never was.


I say thou lie traitor* and sate in chief commission.


Never in my life.


Better confess.


What I did not?


The rack shall force thee then.


Mercy great Sir supports his royal throne from whence your glories are
derived, and is the admired Emblem of heroical virtue dispersed throughout the
world, wherein his highness like a prince composed of goodness, would not his
subjects ruin, but rather have his mercy eminent, as himself is good


Rugh cures, now y' are glad to fawn, when hitherto 'twas lofty brags ye
stood on, a treachery I'll trample into dust, and make you know, before we
part, what homage you do owe:


Sir, for my self thus much I will confess, not that I fear thy rack or
tortures Cola, for why they shall no more then what I freely speak, I was
indeed employed by the stat^ of Lirenda, poor discontented Lirenda; to make
known their woeful grievance to his Sacred Majesty, which had he known,
doubtless his royal soul would grieve to hear th'unheard of cruelty; thy
squadrons exercise:


I tell thee doting traitor they are justly served.


How, traitor?


I traitor to thy face I speak it.


Even to thy self I do return the same.


How captious they thwart me with insulting language; lead them to execution
straight.


First use the rack.


He dyes.


Let me beseech you Sir.


At thy request it shall be so.


The rack sirs, ho:


Before that engine of inveterate malice comes, vouchsafe me hearing; I claim
a double privilege; first the benefit of your late printed Proclamation Osirus
promise next I should have quarter, such as became a martial man to have,
which now we humbly offer your acceptance.


Dissembling Crocodile, thy hidden spleen shall not corrupt justice by
invective flattery, no vipers no, a world of tortures are more requisite.


Let Mercy mitigate your rage.


Presume to speak again, and by my sovereigns hand you both shall hang.


That were an act like thy self.


Come sirs you must unloose with expedition


Is that the recompense of our submission, will neither honour, faith, nor
pity move thee.


He stirs my choler, will none obey my will I'll tear each limb my self
asunder, unless with speed he suffer?


Do not provoke him Sir.


Heaven grant us patience then.


A standish Sirs: take now the examination as he speaks it;


Hold, hold, for Christs sake hold; the torment's great.


Did not thou conspire to surprise the Castle?


Yes, yes, I did.


And went to several parts of the kingdom for powder?


I did, I did.


Wast not thou private to their consultations?


Very true.


Did not you then intend, to extirpate all the Angolean Protestants, to
disposesse our Sovereign of his Crown, to usurp the government of Lirenda?


My conscience cannot accuse them so*


'Tis false thou say:


O no, no, no:


Rack up the villen higher yet, till he confess, confess I bid thee.


Torments force me, to acknowledge that was never done.


How, how?


I do confess what you demand is true.


Write that Tibernus, when thy rebellious kinsmen and thy self, would carouse
and feast, you wished my head among you there,


We did,


For which thou shalt a twist up higher yet.


Then as you hope for mercy Sir forbear, my pains intolerable; oh I die.


Now take him off, your turn comes next.


In vain you seek to force me Sir, since what I speak shall be through fear
not truth: nor will refuse to answer the least syllable you ask.


Expect no favour 'tis denied thee:


Such favour may thou at thy last judgment find:


Better confess, then languish on the rack,


I can no more then what unto the Council else I did.


Higher with him: confess in hast, or by great Jove i'll rack thy life away,


Take it, O take my wretched life away, so it appease thy fury, no toungue can
tell what torments I endure?


He faintes an please you.


Let him faint and hang to, no great matter, a doting proud obdurate fool,
will not confess, go take them hence unto the jail;


Your pleasure shall be done.


Zlid, search their pockets.


'twill make us swill boys, swill boys merrily


Thank me for that, good man dunse, or it should walk to the Constable
again.


His shallow Coxcomb, had not the wit to think on it.


However anon we'll be as jovial lads, as cup and can.


The rest shall be used with like severity.


'Twere wisely done of you.


Who have you there?


Two rogues with each a bag of salt we took, going to supply their wants
abroad,


You have done well, to intercept the knaves: go bid the Provost Marshall
execute them presently:


Come away, come and be hanged.


Where master?


To be hanged that's plain English,


I trow no, for what Agra?


The gallows will instruct you better, come and be hanged, come.


Behold your chief spy is returned Sir Carola. your Argos, your pretty tell
tale Mercury,


First, arm your grave thoughts with attentive patience, least what I speak
might prove offensive to you, your foes do daily expect from Spain, France
and the Low-Conntreyes, plenty of all fit ornaments of war, as powder,
bullet, match, musketts, petternalls, and such like, moreover many valiant
brave Commanders.


Hell take them first, abrood of most disloyal vipers, ha, what peremptory
slave durst tell this fable?


Them who invoke your happy fates, for certain did approve it upon oath, and
further said, one Dictus went for that expected aid:


What is he gone to Sea?


Yes gone to Sea.


A blister build on thy tongue foul serpent Tibernus thou love me,


My heart and life is yours.


Speed after good Tibernus in all post, send forth a power to watch at every
coast, perhaps he lurks in hollow caves abroad, till wind and tide doth
serve, whilst this base rascal, (corrupted with a golden bribe,) will not
reveal his private haunt.


Sir, if I have offended pardon me:


By heavens I will not, put him into the Provost Marshalls custody, till
further order comes from us; Tibernus charge Amphilus on his life to scour the
Seas, and let the harvest be destroyed.


It shall.


What Hercules can remove this mountain of enraged passions from my heart? O
now it nothing fits my care to speak but thunder or take into my throat the
trump of Heaven, with whose determinate blasts the wind shall burst, that
blew his sails aloft, and the enraged Seas consume their foamy waves, that
will not let his vessel sink, whereby my care might be dispersed, void of
suspicion, ascending from, this wicked plot unseen, a poisoned plot sufficient
to infect the world; when they do show themselves the worst of men:


Stay harlot stay, or by the heavens above, I'll neither spare thee for reward
nor love:


Pity oh pity friend my woeful case, my parents are by thee already
slain, what would my loathsome life avail thee then, kind heart relent,
relent if any spark of civil grace be in thee.


Z'blood and wounds, unless thou yields me freely thy virginity I'll pierce
thy breast with this remorseless steel;


I scorn thy hellish motion: hands of rude devil or I'll convince thee with a
chaste denial like virtues darling fair Susanna.


Here's needless fustian trow mistress twitle, twatle, what now? nay frisk
about the sinquapace, all's one; thou strive in vain to hinder my desires,
yield, yield speedily.


Never whilst I live: help, help,


I come to help away your maiden-head, if it be not lost already.


More furies yet,


And more, if need require,


O beastly filthy lewdness, will no compassion move you? O kill me kill me
sooner then bereave me of a modest fame, see these eyes dim with distilling,
tears, that never knew to weep till this sad hour, yet would some pity
crave from your hard hearts, oh honest friends hearken to my griefs, let not
your better sense be deaf unto the woeful plaints of a distressed maiden


Who hath a nimble tongue, and pratles strangely,


And as strong as a witch.


Help, help in time, some help from heaven, help me ye powers divine.


Me thinks I hard not very far from hence some woeful Creatures to lament
and greeve, crying a loud for help, as 'twere,


Help, help;


Some ravished virgin did emplore my aide, I'll therefore search this silent
desert thorough until I find from whence proceeds, this heavy doleful cry:


'Tis shame to use a maiden thus.


Zwounds jade talk not of shame to us,


Stab the queen;


Z'life that's the way this pettish harlot will, affront us else.


Oh stay thy murdering hand: murder, murder:


A she devil by God: can not kill her troe:


Direct me heaven, O that in time I may bestow my help: ha, what base inhuman
fray is this? I did suppose as much, when first, her shrill laments did pierce
the air, and sent into my soul a deep conceit of pity, ha, two to one
weak creature drench in tears, trust me, the odds is much, and marvel she
held out so long; well name of God, i'll forward, fly shameless villens fly,
if not, by heavens I'll force your flight, thus revenge her wrong:


Rascal thou shalt dearly repent that blow.


Release that Lady first, I claim her mine, if not, be sure this blade's as
sharpe as thine.


We mean not Sir at your request to flinch as if we feared thy lofty threats,
no, no proud loitering scab, get thee away in time, or thou shalt rue the hour,
and curse the day, in seeking to deprive us of our pray.


Untie her speedily base pilfring rogues, or by them powers above, you'll soon
repent, the wrong you do this harmless innocent:


Rescue, O rescue Noble Sir, a virgin, ready to be deprived of such a treasure,
once lost, the world cannot repair again.


Fair beauty be of comfort, I'll fight for thee: Come ruffians come, come
quench your bloody thirst, my heart's the fountain drink, drink till you're
burst, if your insatiate lust be not yet cool, I'll soon extinguish that in
human flame, why gape you thus, whilst valour may be had, charge both at once.


Z'life sure the fellows mad,


Let him go to, we'll cure his frenzy fits, or make him be more lunatike
in's wits.

Quarter, quarter, good Sir give me quarter,


The very same that all thy bloody tribe doth give my Countrymen, when they
submit their fainting lives upon a faithless promise: go, meet thy brothers
soul poor naked rogue, where greedy Charon waits to waft him ore, unto
great Belzibubs infernal shore; Now be at liberty: give thanks to God
therefore.


His Majesty I'll praise for evermore, and you for this excessive kindness
thanks, O thanks kind heart, ten thousand thanks I give thee, wishing that
heavens may shower perpetual blessings on thee:


Dear heart relate the legend of thy misfortune.


Sir, my griefs would rent a heart of marble, were it sensible of them gross
abuses done (perhaps) unto your own dear friends as well as mine: oh Cola,
that mounster tyrant Cola, his barbarous command, no civil thought but must
lament to think ont, a Turk could not more brutish villain then he, and to a
kingdom (good God,) that raised both him and his from nothing, my aged Father,
Mother, Brother, Sisters all, all my dear friends were basely murdered by him,
when having notice of there bloody ends, fear lead me hither, supposing I was
free from danger, but oh it almost proved a theater of rape and murder, had not
your valour ransomed my hard fate; To these I did a shower of liquid tears
present in lieu of what they sought, but would not do: when my chief comfort
was the gods, oh they, would then transform me like to Niobes, my griefs I'd
most happy had I been, then Metamorphosed like that mournfu queen;


Fair beauty do not wast them Crystal streams, that to a lovers mind
more precious is then Mida's wealth?


Persuade me not,


I will:


Reason enjoins me to obey your will, with all them dutiful respects I owe,
your most accomplished virtue.


Then you reward my small endeavours highly: come my fair prisoner, wherein
more freedom we may dispense with fullen, grief a while, prithee letts to the
next adjacent garrison and as (without self spraise) I late did shield thee
from the fury of these slaves, so under God I'll be thy safeguard thither,
whence may proceed, some kind refreshment to poor souls in need.


Come along brother Soldiers, the round, the round.


Zlid Sirs, where is the best pillage found?


At hangmans lane end, where market-folks with store of belliware, of force
must pass,


Zlid my teeth waters else, there, let's go there boys,


Mass alls but need never so paid in our days, with mouldy scraps of cheese,
and butter, with as many colours as the rainbow in it: well my heart's in hope
we shall feast merrily anon, let's be jovial, a fit of our own mirth, thento
the work my lads,


What shall we have?


What but Lord Pitho's song?


Your voice is best, begin.


Pitho is doting, we care not who knows it,
The Worst is but thee pence a day if we loose it;
For were he not from God knows whom descended,
He had on poor soldiers more freely expended,
Let us not then boys expect from such men
Any favour whose honour was got with the pen.

Cast away care boys, trouble not your mind,
For we shall be paid, when the devil is blind.

'Tis too well known sirs such men to get pelf
With strange devices rob the common-wealth,
By a colloging crafty kind of stealing
They are made great ones; O fie on false dealing,
Then let us pray boys, for them will thus palter
May justly be served in their kind with a halter.

Cast away cares boys, c.

No marvel then sirs, we seek after pillage,
In City, suburbs, town, or Country village,
When our grave statesman conceives it good pay,
A soldiers allowance but three pence a day,
Then help your selves boys, O 'tweare a bravado
If we, could but see Pitho, in the strapado:

Cast away care boys, c.


Silence gentlemen, stand clear, yonder comes a traveller.


I'll dive into his pocket straight;


His cloak is mine already,


And if his felt be worth the taking, from whence come you Sir?


Who gives authority to question me,


Poverty bids us to examine you, can lend us money friend?


Not a penny.


Wilt thou bestow some on us then?


Forbear, forbear;


We must change cloaks,


Your felt is good I see,


You will not deal thus shamefully I troe?


Get thee gone, begone, or I will make thee go.


With a light purse, and a heavy heart,


See, see, 'tis weighty, silver O my conscience well, we'll share anon, good
luck attend us.

Who comes next?


A maid with something in her lap.


Stir not a foot, she comes directly this way* What hast thou here sweet
heart?


Nothing for you.


What need you be so coy? 'tis ne'er the worse we see it.


Nor much the better neither: lo 'tis bread and meat my mistress sent me for
unto the market.


Your mistress put not a crum of this into her chappes by God.


Thou louzie, filching rogue, let go my meat, or I will to thy captain
presently complain: cannot folks pass the streets for you?


There's thy napkin, we scorn baseness.


Baseness. base rougues, what are you else?


Dost call us rogues.


Your actions speaks it so.


Z'life trull begone or I will kick thee home: an angry spider to grumble for
a little victuals thus:


Get home scold, get home.


A prize, a prize:


Stand close, for if he spies us hee'll drop in some house or other: Save you
Sir.


And you likewise;


Kind Sir, regard a Soldiers want, something to drink, your bounty Sir,


There's twelve pence for ye;


In earnest of a greater sum, your leave Sir;


Keep off, you are too forward Sirs;


Draw if you dare, an thou love thy life stir not:


I am a Protestant.


Be what you will, all's one to us sweet Sir:


Restore my purse, and I'll part with it freely;


An'if we do the King shall know it; ha, ha.


I must share with mine own,


You look to be beaten. I see that, go to the Council complain, tell Pitho
an himself were here I'd do as much.


There's no contesting with these desperate knaves.


Ha ha brother, am not I a nimble lad?


Fackings and that thou art,


Grammercy bully, how has learned the trick ant?


Ah to plunge into a well lined pocket, no art beyond it.


Or to whip off a hat or a cloak and a wey-wit: but say what occupation likes
thee best?


Warr's but a peddling figarie, with a number of lowzie customers, knocks,
hunger, cold, thirst, the captain's-pay, a disease that sore torment us, 'tis a
most unchristian purgation, some vermen too, la, they creep, bite, and keeps
a damnable quarter on my shoulders, an'I could shrug them off, I'd ne'er
desire'em on again.


No better barrel better hearing on us all, we can sing the same song, to the
tune of Lachrimae, but to the purpose.


Faith mine jumpes right with thine Bullie, 'tis a neat kind of trade, we
only borrow from those can spare it: yet I say 'tis more gentill far then
three pence a day,


Has hit the nail in the head, come shake hands, this day we thrive lads, to
morrow again boys, a short life and a merry Sirs, follow your leader.

Omnes O brave Timothy, Orare Timothie.

If ere I did conspire with Cornet Brinfort, or knew of his departure, before I
was inform,d he went; O let me ne'er behold, Sun, Moon, Stars, or any
Celestial power, that keeps due motion in their proper spheres


Perjured slut, thy accomplices are yet extant, whose own confessions do
approve thy crime;


Produce my accusers,


Them gentlemen that now are in restraint for the same fact speaks thy
accomplished willingness,


O no. do not cast that foul aspersion on them, so far I do presume their
worth is such, that death cannot urge them express as much,


This falsehood shall in thy blood appear,


Noble Sir: my fault as you have censured it, never deserved the least of this
God knows: if innocence may plead my cause, no soul more wronged then I;


Them tears resemble Synons treachery against old Priams Troy, wherefore 'tis
said, vice doth her just hate never more provoke, then when she veils it under
virtues cloak: discover Brinsforts plot immediately or as I live I'll spare no
tortures on thee:


Enjoin my sin some other penance, if truth must not appear t'acquit me
from so foul a scandal, hide, O hide, my loathed face, in some nasty gloomy
dungeon; or hang in chains until I eat the flesh, that ne'er offended, here
then my naked breast, ready to receive what you will scribe thereon; my blood
will serve in stead of ink, where if you please record, how willingly I
suffered for my Lord and maker Christ.


For lustful treason rather, until thou dost confess, i'll write in wounds
fit characters to thy rightful sufferance.


O kill me, kill me, do but grant that favour, be no more crueller then death,
feel, O feel, your heart's transformed to stone, let my heart's blood
dissolve your self again, else you'll become the lively portraiture of
tyranny;


Thus I express me yet,


And yet I live:


All the torments hell can boast of shall be inflicted on thee; not suddenly
no, but with a fretting pain vex thy desire,


Thy cruel thoughts to hell's dark plagues aspire, Iesu Redeemer of my soul,
to thee I must address my pitiful complaint, when men rakes less remorse on
contrite tears then Tigers do, thou know, O Lord; whither my thoughts were
ever guilty of that crime deserving this unheard of cruelty, but, O eternal
wisdom my grief cries at thy watchful ear for every, vouchsafe it may,
abate them torments that will last for aye.


How resolute these pettish Papists are,


Who was her sweet heart, and loved him dearly,


Mas lad an seems so;


Speak huswife, speak,


What would you have me speak,


What Brinforts plot was in departing hence


Ask me no more, I am a stranger in it:


Did ever man behold such impudence? I know thou lie;


O be not thus incredulous, Iewes, Turks, Infidells, yes Heathens to, all
nations do commiserate the doleful pains of them like me, nor will not urge
them further, once the fires exposed, but your beliefes more strange then
theirs.


Confess, thou foolish wench confess, or I will cause new match to be
applied:


Do what you please, my God I trust will strengthen me against thy hellish
fury.


'Tis a folly. to compel this slut I see, go, take her off. until some
evidence comes in against her.


O fearful news, news that doth rent my heart to hear it.


Why noble father? you have received as desperate tidings oft before, yet made
your thoughts contemn the worst might follow, and when occasion offered, as
bravely did perform it, rebuke this passion then Sir.


Good father do, our joys in your contentment.


Fond youths your yet unripned years, brookes not the lowering gesture of
deserved sorrows, (how near soever it concerns you,) why your spring
o'retops the Autumn of my years, your griefs a weather-cocke, subject to
change at every blast of youthful pleasure; but when dame nature dyes your
flaxen curls a reverend gray, experience will confute that fond deluding
folly: this is no common toy (like yours) to grive at, no, no, peruse them
mournful lines, where if you find not cause of lamentation, blame me then:


Ha, Lirenda at point to be destroyed! O brother see, that country whence we
are descend, calls for some timely succour: nature must work a true
compassion in us: Father, O Father, by all that is most Dear unto you, regard
this sad complaint:


Now be your selves the judge whether we ought not pity them, or prefer
their safety sooner then all the fortunes mighty Spain will give us, value
the difference pray: here we be indeed accommodated with respect and honour,
wealth sufficient for our betters, with the grace of Spaine's Imperial
Monarch, what do we lack? nothing, but yet compared to the affection of our
Country, not worth the speaking.


Weed' rather forfeit what we have, then stay a minute once our friends do
crave:


That's each of your firm resolution,


We humbly yield to your mature direction,


Go haste to your mother and prevail with her for I must yet a while consult
alone:


See where a second Mars lies, Abner named, fair Nymphs respect him, or you'll
be all blamed of too, too, coy demeanour; Music, some Solemn music.
music or harmonious sphere descend, descend whilst we his virtues do
commend


Fair Queen the gods are pleased you know we should appear unto this
mortal, to unfold their divine pleasure and most sacred will, in heaven
decreed; wherefore we must fulfil the promises of their superior powers
above; and as we do esteem him ours, thus I declare his fortune, in respect
of warlike graces none shall more direct then his mature command: his valour
to, shall make his adversaries blush to know, that from, an infant heaven did
him elect, to be victorious still against their Sect:


Opinion Mistress says, a silent tongue, consents to every thought, then I
should wrong, his happiness, if I did not relate, what I am sure will much
augment his fate, heroic valour, virtue a pregnant wit, are them deportments
we conceive best fit, to crown his future actions; this we give, for an
assurance that his fame shall live,


Grave Matron, from you I must needs borrow leave to speak in's praise, before
to morrow visits the world, this discontented couch whereon he's stretch,
'tshall witness and avouch these promised happiness.


You're all content we see, to raise his fame:


The gods themselves doth honour Abner's name,


Let each of you in Sonnets sound his joy, mixed with a dance or some conceited
toy to pleasure him withal; whilst sleeping thus he may receive a happy fate
from us.


Morpheus we conjure thee hence,
Go to them gloomy shades from whence
All sorts of lurking mischiefs flow
Beneath the infernal depths below*
Go to styx Aver, or whither,
Tell the gods exiled thee thither:
Let no sad thought then mollest him
VVee from sadness dispossessed him
But contrive for him fit praise
With length of many happy days
So loud fame his worth may sound
Through the universal round,
Them bloody troupes that doth destroy
His native I'll, like wretched Troy,
In sad laments shall grieve to see
Henceforward them victorious be,
O thy remorseles rage in vain,
Lirenda flourishes again.
See where the stately Queen of fortune sitts like Ci^herca daughter unto
Jove, to her we must address our best salutes, all hail fair Queen:


Welcome dear sister,


Fair Empress we hard your solemn notes ascend up to the highest point of
heavens great arch, from whence we come to fill an empty sphere with comfort,
the discontented Lirendeans.


The gods and goddesses are wholly bent to vanquish all their former discontent
though hitherto they seemed not to regard 'em, yet notwithstanding they are now
resolved henceforth to let their sorrows be dissolved;


We knew as much good Mercury, and do applaud that act, which argues them
just gods, 'tis fit we publish then, what they decreed: Brother Mars, you must
furnish them with arms, and Palla's wisedome' against intestine harms, our
self and you Bellona, in the field, will make the bloody adverse party yield
to the stout Lirendeans, oft pursued by them unjustly almost were subdued;
Their Sol thus long ecclipst again must shine, to show the lustre of them
lamps divine that best predominate their happy fates, we mean them stars,
which on that Island smile, to see they shoo'd retain their light a while by a
dark cloudy mist that now is spent and forced to vapour in the Orient.
Therefore resolve as we long time did since with your immortal powers for to
convince as many armed furies as will dare repine at Abners deeds, or seek to
share in them adventures we are pleased to give, a good success unto; his
fame shall live, that once it might be said, dame fortunes wheel, became soon
steadfast, when it most did reel.


By Iupiter agreed.


Dear sister come, take


Now your free bounties are bestowed we see* in each respect as we desired
shoo'd be, such thank fullness that to your deities due, fortunes great queen
doth tender each of you, Now gently, gently, wake him as we go, up to our
spheres, thence view his deeds below:


Hence flattering Somnus get away
With thy drowsy leaden mace,
That which makes the brightest day:
Blacker then a Negro's face,
Here's no biding for thee go,
Once the Gods command it so.
Rise from his tempting couch, O rise
Courageous Abner do not stay,
Lirenda calls aloud and cries
Brave Abner come, O come away,
Him Victoria guards still,
Can best assuage our present ill.
Is't in a dream I saw this heavenly vision, or is't vain fancies daseling on
mine eyes, sure I slept sound indeed, but ne'er with so much blessed content
before, a dream it cannot be, a blessed inspiration rather; that yet possess
my thoughts, with a most sweet delightful comfort; well, in few words I am
resolved, propitious heaven, now I emplore thy aid, him thou'lt assist, needs
not to be dismayed.


'Tis more then time we look to right our selves on that foul wretch and
tyrant Cola, least suddenly we forfeit for our slakenes the loss of all our
heads, (if taken by him) for having lost all goodness, and of late grown
desperate mad, through turbulent passions of a distempered soul; cannot
reclaim his wickedness, like one too far engaged, ever to return to
honesty again:


Honesty my Lord's a stranger to him, and minds no more civility, then
Canniballs or Tartars do, being puffed up with pride of them vain praises
falsely given him, by a multitude as basely minded as himself.


How they do glory in his bloody deeds, and styles him truly valiant whom
the world reputes no better, then a monster clothed in human form.


Unheard of madness to betray so many innocents, that but for him and his damned
shameless retinue had not be en executed so;


How shall we then advise to rid us of so dangerous an enemy.


Heaven will, I hope, contrive, his overthrow, in this our expedition though he
securely now abides in garrison guarded with five hundred expert Soldiers
thinks Heaven nor Hell, cannot molest him there, or that we dare not march
within a league of his sterne countenance, such is the foppery of his vain
glorious humour,


Then name of God, This night we will advance our forces where the besotted
tyrant now remains, if we but kill his sentry then, we may more boldly enter
and surprise him napping in his bed asleep:


That were the safest way indeed to venture on him, or preserve our troupes
entire, until our Noble Cousin Abner be arrived


He's long expected,


But will be shortly here,


Who when he comes, comes well appointed to support this pious war, our wants
with his renowned fame beyond Sea.


Let's march directly thither, come loose no time, that in necessities a
wilful Crime:


Furies and plagues torments my restless thoughts with gashly visions of
deformed hags, infernal monsters to my thinking would perforce deprive me of
my vital breath, O that this horrid night were past away, a thousand millions
for one glimpse of day.

Ah, ah, they are come again; it thunders, whither shall I go hide me from the
bolts Tibernus, Morton, why Tibernus will none defend me from these ugly
shapes, O how they press on me, give bake rude furies or by the hand of
Proserpine your Queen I'll force you hence unto the stygian green


I am Revenge roused from my silent cave by justice that revenge on thee will
have, for thy base murdering of man, woman, child, wives, widows, nurses,
virgins defiled, all that a tyrant could invent or do, thou most inhumanly
did put them to, wherefore Revenge, revenge from hell is sent to lead thee
to eternal punishment;


I am the soul of him an thou wilt know that in thy pistol once did force
me blow, gave fire and shot me dead; hell is thy due, for which revenge,
revenge doth thee pursue;


We are them two poor harmless country swains, to get an honest living
spared no pains, we to thy quarters went, and would from thence bring salt
abroad just worth some eighteen pence, thy soldiers took us, stripped us,
shrewdly banged us, then after to the gibbet and there hanged us by thy
command; wherefore we do implore Revenge may take, revenge on thee therefore:


This bloody sword, and flaming torch are them true Emblems of thy furious
stratagem invented chiefly to depopulate destroy, consume, and wast the
regal state of this brave kingdom, or what therein's found, either above or
underneath the ground, such was thy wicked malice, spleen and might for which
we seek a just revenge this night,


This was a plot of some conjuring Papist to vex me with these filthy strange
affrightments, O that I could with mighty Jove rain down a shower of
maledictions on them, cursed wretches they; the name it self doth vex me more,
then all them dismal shapes i've seen before. Tibernus what makes this loud
alarm?


That you may arm your self in hast, the rebels march into the town:


He was a traitor did command the guard this night: go hye thee Tibernus, call
the troupes together, cry but a Cola, Cola, I warrant thee they will fly.


Sa, sa, they break I faith, Cola, Cola, cry out a Cola;


Sir Carola Cola slain, O execrable slaughter! Heaven curse the rascal that
was author on it: bear in the body to be embalmed with tears, that when his
mournful obsequies are ended this Epitaph may on his tomb be engraven,
Angolea's glory, Pickland's wonder, Lirenda's terror lies here under.


Is't the counsels pleasure I shood be removed from hence; prithee whither?


Unto the Castle:


'Tweare as good I dyed, as to be laid in such a loathsome place, where surely
Mumferret must be my keeper: good friend, desire thy master may return his
writ, I'm sickly, and not in case to be removed, if they conceive me not
secure enough, or fears escape, set double locks on, bar your windows
treble over, any thing but departure, so kind each one of you have been unto
me, that my imprisonment's a pleasure rather:


My master's willing to affoord your Lordship all the favour lies in him, but
that he may not,


Why friend? 'twill be no prejudice to him, only his labour to inform the
Court, whom I hope are not so void of reason, but will admit a prisoner (my
inferior,) this poor request:


He dares not do it, once the Judge and Councell's bent against you, for 'twas
their express charge to the Sheriffs thus, beware, your prisoner Caspilona
hath not more freedom given him, then you may answer, at a thousand poundle
piece.


Say thou so Roger? well; if there be no remedy, but needs I must depart:
there's for thy dutiful


Now heavens protect your Lordship, as I live it pities me, this generous


Honest Roger, I am disposed to rest, if any kind friend comes to visit me,
desire they would repair another time


Your will I shall observe my Lord.


Thou art always honest Roger, trusty Roger, this is the course of fickle
fortunes wheel, last week reputed for a loyal subject, now in close prison
as a traitor kept, whose thoughts in that respect, is full as pure as new fallen
snow on mount Libanius; but this corrupted age, declares my dearest friends to
be my prime accusers; well, thou God of justice, whose bright impartial eye,
views the worlds guilty crimes, see an innocent exposed unto a sad disastrous
fate, if thy great mercy helps me not? O then I suffer shall with other
harmeles men:


Cast off that drooping sadness Earl,
Be not dismayed take heart of grace,
Behold a true Ellizean girl
Pityes thy distressed case,
One that will a mortal shape
Take on her for thy escape.
Some voice my thought did whisper in mine ear, a sweet melodious note that
said, fear not thou shalt escape: Alas 'tis but my fancies Wish it had been
so; No that cannot be, for yet my soul retains an inward joy, the motion is
divine, and makes me happy beyond measure; bright Angel of Celestial
Paradise, to whom the safeguarde of my life deputed is, help me, O help me to
get from, this labyrinth of care, otherwise I never shall perfect that
enterprise.


My Lord General of Stelern welcome welcome to Lirenda, thou fair son of
Mars.


My Lord Caspilona, we gratulate your safe escape,


Most hearty thanks,


Now we may boldly coape with our insulting dominiering foes, whose arrogant
pride contemned this nation with an infamous report of cowardice; base
rascals, they shall know we have undaunted spirits left to quell their
treacherous malignant power; their breach of public faith, granting quarter
then after falsely murdering them,


Is't possible, that men who knows the Law of Arms, should be so absurd, so
profane,


The universe cannot parallel like bloody massakers odious to God and man,


Believe me 'twill end shamefully, such actions cannot thrive,


Ought we not deal with theirs we vanquish so*


We scorn to imitate their baseness, what we do shall be in a nobler honest
way, true Martial discipline,


Which they will ne'er observe,


Some news is posting hither,


What tidings Lentimos?


Arm good, my Lord, with speed Marquis Osirus, with a powerful Army, march
hitherward, and hath already been at Motilin where his rude, boy sterous
followers, put men, women, children to the sword, for certain 'tis reported,
they bend their forces thence to Fosse,


Where they, God willing, shall have a bloody banquet, Come cheerfully, my
Lords meet those that came so far to seek your manful blows,


Though we come short in our design of Fosse, or must retreat from that
unlukie town, 'tis not the bruit of Abners hasty march with the whole
strength of Stelern, shoo'd make us stir a foo^, did his numbers equal great
Xerxes army, that drank up rivers dry, the world shall testify our
willingness to meet him when, and where he list;


But not with more hast then good speed sweet Sir


Curse ont for me: 'twas a plaguy skirmish, they fought like devils within,
and ye be wise not a word O fighting more


We need not urge them to an open field for so it might prove dangerous, our
men you see are not themselves, much weakened by this far and toilsome
journey?


Wonder invades me, you should think our forces lost both courage and
experience, as if they had been light brained weakelings, guided by misfortune
where no resistance could secure their lives wast ever known they went a step
to shune their foes, No, nor will not now I hope begin whilst these
undaunted squadrons are reputed Soldiers fit to serve any Prince on earth, men
that regards not toil, travail, penury or sickness, nothing can divert them
from a glorious conquest, the aim a valorous intention levells at:


I would you knew the proudest Monarch of the western globe, hath been as
circumspect as valorous, least some strange accident might drown their
greatness in Lethaes flowing streams, then why not we, since our auspicious
stars, hath made our actions shine like theirs, in equal glory, then I pray;
ought we not be as circumspect as they?


You speak as if you stood in fear of them,


Come leave this different discourse, the question is, whether Marquis Osirus
will towards home, or fall on the next garrisons?


With my consent, there should not be a Castle left unlevell'd with the ground,


Soft and fair: you have gotten guns and powder, will make us smoke in faith;


Deckins take them now of late, they are grown mighty valiant,


Stout fellows,


An I could to my granam once again I'd ne'er come look for land in Stelern
more,


Them wood for me I wish might die a pander,


And with less wit then either goose, or gander.


What serious conference is this between you gentlemen, are you grown faint
of late see the multitude of your increasing foes how earnest they like venomed
spiders hast to take us in a tangled web of woe, and here you stand aloof,
like men dismayed, as if it nought concerned to hear or see, the subject of
Lirendas Tragedy?


We only wait your honours chief command,


For shame speed to your several troops, let not your warm blood freeze in
them active veins, whilst such a noble blessed occasions offered. Come then
courageously, and the day's yours in spite of hell, and all malignant powers.


All, all's lost, our troupes are broken basely; O that I had a pair of
Dedalus wings, or mounted on swift Pegassus to pass from hence invisible, my
thoughts foretold this heavy dismal day, I would begone but that I know not
whither, and want a guide, a guide, a guide, a thousand pound for a guide,
fear makes them deaf, they cannot hear the golden offers of great Lestrell's
son, well then I will proclaim it once again; five thousand pound, ten
thousand for a guide, my whole estate to him will be my guide.


Vive le Roy; advance the artillery is ours.


Not so fast bold Traitor stand:


Traitor Sir, as loyal to my Sovereign as thy self, and to thy face I vouch
it now proud Marquis


Thine? let him perish yields to any of thy faction.


Rescue the generall's in danger;


They cannot boast our reputations blemished in the loss of this late victory
so fair lye ours, No the chance of war's uncertain, and no man ought to
grudge at what is past, since them we did encounter last, are fled, laden with
the luggage of your heavy blows and glad to escape so to; but least some
carping Momu's falsely might, attribute to our actions, what destiny, brings
on the stoutest he that lives; were not the gods constrained to hide themselves
in hollow caves of Egypt, when fierce Typheus, did pursue their deityes; and
mighty Caesar to was glad to fly from stout Lord Nennius in the Brittans war,
then wounded with his own infected weapon: how many like examples could I
mention of powerful armies overthrown by fate; witness Xerxes, Hanniball,
Darius, the Grecian Troupes at Troy, Troyans themselves, Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Dukes, men whose aspiring thoughts mounted above the clouds, yet were
brought low, and raised again, as wavering fortune went, which best becomes a
Soldier, and proves him truly valiant, that will slight, the frowning chekes
of proud Bellona's height: since nothing can be more commendable, then an
undaunted generous spirit, (the square true warlike virtues measured by,) I dare
assure the meanest of this nation will maintain it, that posterity may have a
pattern sit for them to imitate, briefly, let's bravely forward that we may,
regain more then is lost another day;


In days of yore, not long before
The last wars here were ended
with maid and wife, a Soldiers life
was most of all commended:

For why they fought, not then for nought,
Not one among thrice twenty,
But had good drink, with store of chink,
Their pockets seldom empty:

But now adays, that ioviall praise,
Is turned topsy turvie,
To sweat to dirt, to a louzie shirt
To scratching itch, or scurvy,

Nay one thing more, doth grieve us sore,
VVeyes me that I can say,
Sir reverence, without offence,
Tis called the Captains pay,

Which Lord forbid, if our foes did,
Crave vengeance come with quickness
They never could, no if they would,
Wish a more hellish sickness,

If pilliage wood, do us some good,
Commanders, are the boulder,
That plundering Dicke, hath taught the trick
You must not this good Soldier;

Thus we are served, and almost sterv'd,
'Twixt one disease or other,
The best of us, can well sing thus
Shake hands with me kind brother:
hang melancholy, a pound of sorrow will not pay an ounce of debt, so mad cap
so:


Zlid I have sown all my wild oats already:


Wild as a buck, or tame as a duck,
Or sillier then a coxcomb,
No land, no wealth, no thanks, (...) health,
And is't not therefore all's one?

This riming humour likes me well:


News, news,


And what's thy news good-man fool,


Brave news. our general Sir Vavasiro:


And what of him?


Says we shall have old cutting throats anon, and pillage boys, pillage till
ye sweat again,


The Castle is not yielded yet,


Within an hour it will at farthest, where if we do not dance attendance
quickly, others will play at sweep stakes all.


Very true, an honest lad;


A very, very arrant -- honest lad


You see this doleful object gentlemen and perceive what need our friends have
of some swift assistance, that peradventure might redeem more then is held
expedient, we are not therefore come to loose time in a tedious consultation,
seeing your worth and valours known already, then name of God charge home:
lets hast away, Heaven will assuredly grant this our day,


We thought Angolean sparks could not tell how to run before; proud Vavasiro
dyes:


O spare my life victorious Caspilona, and I will faithful submit thy contrite
prisoner.


That but immediately did bucher those, without remorse or pity, go learn
to be a penitent, and know we use mercy to them, doth ours more oft abuse.


Now he perceives his mischievous intention, will not take, makes him the more
adventurous or rather desperate, that no advice (from his best friends) can
persuade him once to slake, what lies in him to execute, though it sink him
deeper then the worst of evils, or that he may be disapointed, yet will not
seem to know it, so far, a bloody passion doth transport him, that he
reflects on nothing but revenge; whom to surprise or murder, (though innocent,)
he makes no scruple on it more then Cola did before he fell under the weight of
his own vices:


A Tiger, truly by name and nature, a slave too, that torments himself worse
then he can do us, how good a face soever he puts on, or that rude multitude
doth follow him: we are become their betters in the field heaven favouring us
with good success, that now their malice shows not half the violence that
hitherto it did, though no good will be wanting to effect it, if they could,
wherefore 'tis certain then, he that will steer black envies bark, in a
warm Sea of blood, must justly perish in that fatal flood


To witness this let me present unto Your memory a few in Stelern only, that
like a torrent of impetuous fury went raging down the steep descent of death:
and lost themselves therein; Albinus, Celar, Daretas, Philanax, with their
Rabi, ringleader, Sir Carola Cola, (for whose dear sake they yet lament,
whereby 'tis palpable, heaven grieves at our reproach.


We could rehearse as many more sufficient to amaze the most obdurates
Round-head of them all, but to express; that we regard Tygranes forces less,
then may be spoken of, whilst we can wield these arms, such cutting weapons
that can soon decide, the best of eithers right


Behold Lentimos with some sad news it's feared


It shall not work in us the worst may follow, Now Cuze, how goes squares
abroad?


That Lord Tigranes with his army doth commit all kind of cruelties, and march
directly hither:


What strength can you discover him to be?


About five thousand, horse and foot,


Were he ten thousand strong it matters not we'll expect him at Lesterne
passage, go take a hundred musketeers along with you, and make it good before
his van arrives: we'll follow after in all convenient


Where lies their Camp?


At Lestern passage some some three miles distant hence,


Are they strongly fortified.


Impregnable, and hardly can be forced, without great loss of ours,


Have they artillery think you,


Yes some small piece they have,


Which shall be mine, or mine theirs ere bright Titans rays decline, go, bid
the officers be ready, for intend to march against them presently


All will not do, some horrible wicked destiny befriends them, our men drop
down on every side, whereat they seem to scoff, and flout, not giving
ground an inch, well, well, Tigranes shall not be affronted thus I'll sooner
die, and fight it out to the last man, death shall not hold me.


Remove your standing Sir, I do beseech you Sir withdraw your person to some
other place: for hence I can descry a piece right levelled to give fire at
you;


That man is cursed in his mothers womb, will shun a Canon shot * ah, I am
wounded, wounded, Tigrane's fall;


Heaven's blessed messenger, receive thy soul.


But is he dead indeed?


As cold as stone;


We that have loved him when he lived, found his open heart, a Magazine of
bounty, must (if nature be not too ungrateful,) shed brinish tears,


That were effeminate, and indiscretion too, Now he's lost, if in the view of
our adversaries we seem to grieve, it may occasion greater evils, having the
advantage of our general loss; then silence best becomes you, for the present
all that is requisite must be to bear his body hence unto his tent; so sadly
on, that when true sorrow's in the hearts of all his Corps may have a noble
funeral:


Thus through the help, and furtherance of heaven our most malignant enemy's
overcome glad to play least in sight, went sneking home, who not long since,
for oaths, and threatenings might terrify the gods, or subdue the world, that
neither Heaven nor Hell was thought on once, or what was spoken of them were
but fictions which lead them to the gulf of desperation.


We must pursue this blessed victory, making our withered hopes, bud forth in
blessomes of never fading honour:


It adds unto our comfort Noble friends, that Caspilona goes on bravely to,


Yes, and God willing we intend so to, until we purge the Kingdom of these
drones, them viperous Locusts; Come follow me,


But stay my Lord, here comes a Post with letters to your Lordship;


How letters? let me see; had they deferred it but one fortnight longer,


What news do them import?


A proclamation, for one whole twelve month and a day's Cessation,


This works in us a greater admiration that being in the full height of our
conquest as prosperous as might be expected brave Abner's shining virtues like
the Sun out of a new Horizon, all the graces delighfull Mars could give, or we
deserve, must through this needles fond cessation, rest on the drowsy Couch of
dark Oblivion; it is a pill few Soldiers can digest;


Which best approves our loyalty,


But you. and we must yield obedience to it, though not so well contented;
howsoever your forces must unto their garrisons, And if our wrongs be not
repaired thereby we will again, renew this Tragedy.


Peace to this bright resplendent sphere
Blessings numberles be there,
Endless joys that doth abide,
In Elizeum too, beside
Nothing present may defile
This victorious sacred I'll.
Come ye Gods and Goddesses,
That affects Peaceful bliss,
Help Victoria to disperse,
Each blessing on this Universe,
That dissentious broils and jars,
May end with these uncivil wars.
Haste, O haste delightful Queen,
With your Lawrells fresh and green,
Grace this nation with a Crown,
Of perpetual renown,
Since their warlike merits are,
Past the limits of Compare.
LEast any worthy here misliks this play,
Our Author for himself desired me say,
That wilful error made him not ascend
PARNASSVS or mount IDA, to offend
Or give the least distaste; his thoughts are free
And void of such a gross impurity,
Desire of your contentment was the cause,
If he did violate the Muses Laws:
But such a Noble, worthy Audience
In their grave judgments will I hope dispense
With such, if any be, since true affection
Submitts before it traverse a correction:
All we request then, as the case thus stands,
In token you are pleased, do but clap hands.

