IN this grave Age, improved by States-mens Art,
Who ever can think you'll like a Misses Part?
Time was, when Rosamond might shine at Court;
These are no days for Ladies of that sort.
How strangely Time does Human Things decay!
Four Centuries past, as ancient Writers say,
She that we represent bore mighty sway:
Her Beauty wondered at, her Wit extolled,
Her yellow Locks were called too Threads of Gold.
But now should that Complexion use the Trade,
Each puny Fop the Town has newly made,
Would cry, Confound the Carrot-pated Jade.
Misses in times of War and Jeopardy,
Like Armourers in days of Peace must be;
His Swords and Helmets rust, and so will She.
What sort of Critics then must I endear
To favour this abandoned Character?
The French fatigue too much, to mind Amour;
The Italian's Bigoted; The Spaniard Poor;
The Clumsie Lover, with his Northern Sense,
Would have the Yo-Frows, but would spare the Pence:
Rav'nous of Beauty; But when Purse should open,
Mine Heer is either deaf, or Drunk-aslopen.
Thus all over Europe, as the Scenes are laid,
War and Religion have quite spoiled Love's Trade.
Since then from Courts her Part must hope no pity,
I'll try ths English Lovers of the City;
Kind Souls, who many a Night over Toast and Ale,
Have wept at reading Rosamond's famed Tale,
And will, we hope for Beauties sake, to day
Confront the Wits, and save a harmless Play.
So may you thrive, your Wagers all be won;
So may your Wise Stock-jobbing Crimp go on;
So may your Ships return from the Canaries,
And stolen French Cargoes in your Johns and Maries.
Stand Buff once for a Mistress: Think what Lives
Some of you daily lead with scolding Wives.
And though she fell by Jealous Cruelty,
For Venial Sin 'twas pity she should die.
Ah! should your Wives and Daughters so be tried,
And with her Dose their Failings purified,
Lord! What a Massacre would maul Cheapside!

YOU do mistake the Cause, and your Opinions
Too easily comply with what you wish;
Like young Physicians, pass a hasty Judgment,
Thinking the Patient's well, because his looks
Are seeming healthy, streaked with cheerful Red,
While some unnat'ral Fire preys on his Heart,
And drinks up all the moisture of his Life.

Excuse our Unexperience, and direct us
How we may solve the Error of our Thoughts.

My Age, and long Attendance on the King,
Makes me no Stranger to the Mystery.
But would to Heaven it never had been my Fate,
Since I've beheld the Troubles of my Master,
And want the Power to ease his Misery!

I thought this sudden Alteration
Proceeded from some Change of Government;
Believed the head-strong Normans
By Innovation wrought these Fits of Spleen.

Like a Disease it has been growing on him
For many years; and now 'tis fixed so fast,
So deeply in him, he cannot shake it off.
Love wrought the Change at first,
And with its Magic quite o'r-power'd his Reason,
Blinded all his Senses,
Till he sunk quick into the Gulf of Wedlock.
From the unlucky moment that he joined
With Eleanor, the Repudiated Leavings
Of the French King, Lewis, his mortal Foe,
Strife and Disorder has o'er-spread the Realm:
Our sad Divisions speak our coming Mischief.

From whence must rise this Danger,
You seem so very apprehensive of?

Here, in his Court at Oxford; here, in his Bed and Bosom;
His jealous Wife, and disobedient Sons.
Is there a day's cessation from Debate;
An intermission from their Wilds of Nature?
When will it cease? Not while the Mother's fondness
Upholds their fiery Youth, smiles on their Insolence,
Clapping their Cheeks, to show how she approves it.

Is then the Lion's Voice so soon forgot?
'Twas not long since they trembled at the sound,
And their Knees shook with terror of the Accent.

The haughty Queen was forced to rein her Heart,
And one might read her Passion in her Tears.

Most of that Sex,
Whenever they fail of wished Success,
Their Blood turns Gall, and flashes through their Eyes:
And if a Shower does fall --

'Tis the hot Stream of Anger boiling over,
Which shows how much the Spleen and Mother governs.
I'll tell you what befell of late,
And then give me your Censures.

We attend you.


I have observed the Crowd of fawning Wretches,
Which servilely attend the Queen's Apartment,
Watching the early opening of the Door,
To show their forward Zeal.

The Fathers and the Priests you mean.


You hit me right.
These holy, pious, seeming godly Men,
Swarm not for nothing: Either there's Revenge
Or Interest stirring, when Church-mens diligence
Haunt Majesty so much.
I have observed how grossly they have flattered,
Yet she hath swallowed up their nauseous Phrases
Fast as their utt'rance, while they praised her Person,
Or loaded with Hyperbole's her Son.

You speak of what is natural to Women.


But when they'd gained attention, and wrought her
To admiration, then the Fane was turned,
And their soul Breath pointed against the King.
Then Becket's Death, that Patron of Rebellion,
That Traitor to the King and all his Interest,
Was introduced; and with such doleful Accents,
As if the Life of the Church expired in His.
Here Henry was forgot, her Lord and Monarch;
Instead of punishing the saucy Gown-man,
She mourned the Fall of the aspiring Prelate;
Would cast her Eyes, almost eclipsed with Tears,
On the young Race of Heroes standing by,
Insinuating their Father was too Guilty.

Nay, they are always ripe for Mischief,
Whenever the Power of the Crown checks that of the Church;
And the World knows too well, if they had Power.

If they had Power! Why, have they not, my Lord?
Divide the Globe, and you will find a Third
Are Men in Orders, or the Slaves to them.
I tell you, Sirs, they are a dreadful Host;
And should the Pulpit sound to an Alarm,
I question much whether our Hercules
Could cope this Hydra. 'Tis a horrid Tale
They have possessed th'unthinking Crowd withal,
Concerning Becket's Death.

Would the whole Tribe had met the Traytor's Fate,
Since they aspire to fetter Monarchy,
Nay the Nobility must sink with him.

Whilst every Pedant which can gain the Rochet
Must Lord it over us, we shall be like Beasts
Pegg'd on the Common, there to graze our Round,
And must be thankful, though the Soyl's our own.

Surely at last the Royal Soul will rouse,
And free Himself and People from the Yoke*
Oh how I covet such a Jubilee!

I find we centre in Opinion, and shall be
Glad to join in such a Cause. -- --
We're interrupted, the Court breaks in upon us.

Sir Thomas Vaughan! Now dare I pawn
My Life, some Petticoat Embassy.

That old Gentleman.


Ay, Sir, upon my word the best of his
Qualifications consist in acting the part
Of Mercury to our Iupiter.

That's of old Date.


But may be renewed again,
If Majesty have occasion. -- Let us observe.

This is the second time I have been s^nt of this Errand; pray Heaven I'm more
successful than I have been, I shall go near to be discarded my Office else.
One would not imagine what Pains, Care and Understanding are required to make a
complete Pimp.


Very pretty!


None but this Virgin of Honour will down with Majesty. She's a fine Woman,
that's the truth on it; but a Pox of her Chastity: what a damnable pother she
makes to preserve that, which half the Women in the Town would be glad to be
rid of! Had she been my Kinswoman now, I had been made for ever. There's no
Court-Bribe in the World like a Female-Relation, for a speedy Advancement.


Suppose, after all our suspicions, it should
Be Love that has wrought this Alteration
In the King.

I suspect it shrewdly.


I am damnable afraid the Termagant Queen should come to the knowledge of it,
she has such a plaguy number of Spies abroad. Well, Sir Thomas, you are in, and
must even through; 'tis too late to repent. Send thee good luck, old Boy. -- --
Basta! Who's there?


Friends.


Not Eve-droppers I hope. Ha! my good Lord Verulam, your Lordship's most humble
Servant.


What, in a Sweat, Man?


A little warm, my Lord. Who would be a Courtier, that has any regard for his
Carcass? This toiling and moiling does not agree with my Age; I must even leave
it off, and betake to my Prayers in time.


What, a Favourite, and talk of leaving the Court?


I a Favourite! your Lordship's most humble Servant.
But I take all things in good part from my Friends.

Have you seen the King to day?


I just parted with him; he's a very honest Gentleman, the most accomplished,
gallant, sweetest natured person in Europe: He has found out something
extraordinary in me, for which I am eternally engaged to him*


You're disposed to be merry.


I would I could: But the King's Melancholy strangely discomposes me. Poor
Prince! never was Mortal so afflicted.


Nothing that's new, I hope.


The Devil and all of Mischief. Yonder Knaves have been at it of the other side
of the Water, helter skelter; fight Dog, fight Bear; nothing but Mutiny,
Mutiny. -- Gad, if the King would follow my Advice, we'd maul 'em.


What, you mean the Religious Fathers? --


Religious do ye call 'em? I don't know what Religion they have, but they have
very good Livings: They have made a fine piece of Work of their Religion.


About what?


Why about the Gentleman at Canterbury, that had his Brains beat out to inform
his Judgment.


The Prelate Becket?


Ay, ay: They have dignified and distinguished him from the infamous Title of a
Traitor, to the spiritual one of a Saint.


You should speak more respectfully of the Clothing.


Why Black never blushes, you know, say what you will on it.


Would you have us be without 'em?


Why when were they ever with us? Did you ever know them join with the People,
unless 'twas a Mischief of their own making? We may groan under Misery and
Slavery, grumble and complain; but, if the Churches Rights be not invested,
they tell us, We must bear it, and submit to the Higher Powers. But if a single
Egg of their Tyths were cracked, and not made good to 'em, you should hear them
bellow against Power and Dominion, make the Cause of the Church the disquiet of
Heaven; tell you, Horror and Plagues will come from above; that the just Divine
Wrath will punish your Sacrilege: So destroy you themselves, to preserve you
from Judgments.


Sure they have done thee some mortal injury.


Let 'em forbear the King then, and Peace follows; for they're so constantly
teasing him about their Religion, the Man can't enjoy himself for 'em: besides,
should they biggotize the King to admire Abstinence and Chastity, poor Sir
Thomas is kicked out; for Praying and Pimping can never agree -- Ads me! my
Lords, I forgot to tell you the News; The King's reconciled to the Prince* who
must go to Normandy; and the Queen's pleased. There's a Miracle, my Lords! The
Queen's pleased! Nay, she's pleased with me, that she has not spoke to this
Month! Such a Favour she has done me!


What is't?


Your Servant.


Pray what is't?


You'll tell on it.


Think better of us.


If the King should know on it*


Never for us.


Last night at Supper --


What then?


Nothing, only the Queen's pleased, that's all* Again your Servant, my Lords,
your Servant.


The Prince to France! this is a sudden motion
I know the Provinces are Malecontent,
Apt for Commotion, ready for Rebellion:
But they require a sharp and steady hand,
One of Experience -- Ha! the King alone!

Oh Love! Oh Rosamond! Why do I name
That Cruel Maid? But yet alas! I must
Spite of my fixed Resolves; She grasps my Heart,
And turns it with each motion of her Eyes:
If there were hopes; Why, Am I not a King?
But what are Kings in Love? Like Lyons Chained
We Roar, but cannot reach what we would Prey on:
Why else, ye Gods, do ye with-hold your Bounty?
Or is this single Beauty thought too much
For a Reward of all my Sufferings?
If so you think,
Take back this Crown and Dignity you gave,
Confine me to some Corner of the Earth
Where abject Poverty does make abode;
Bless me with Rosamond; and even there
I'll thank your Providence for the Exchange:
But, Oh! I Rave, and must recall my Senses,
Business comes forward, cursed business haunts me.
With what a weight does that poor Monarch move,
That's Clogged with Business, and perplexed with Love!

Your Majesty!


Thou art the only Man of all the World
I coveted to see; Come near me Verulam,
I shall have need of your assistance shortly,
Your Counsel now.

You doubly Honour me.


Upon mature Advice, I have resolved
To send my Eldest Son to Normandy;
And, to engage his Duty, will Invest him
With* all the Royal Dignities belonging
To both the Dukedoms; since he longs for Power,
I'll Load him with the Weight of Government.

None better can direct the Rounds of State
Than Sacred Majesty; It is in you
From vast Experience grown to certain Judgment.
Yet -- --

Let me tell thee Verulam,
I have examined, with the strictest care,
What Consequences may attend this Act;
You must allow Youth are most prone to Covet
What is debarred 'em: Give 'em full possession
They soon grow weary of the Toy they Longed for.
But to prevent all danger, 'tis Resolved
That you attend him; the Commission's ready:
I know thy Loyalty admits no scruple.

I'm all obedience to your Royal pleasure.


All is forgot: Thy Fathers Memory
Bears thy good Deeds in sight; but ne'er looks backwards.

You are all Goodness, Tenderness and Mercy.


I know 'tis want of Action caused the Surfeit,
The Riots, and the Luxuries of the Court;
But now an opportunity's at hand
To Wash away the Stains of Idleness.
Read that.

This Purports that the Normans are in Arms.


It does.


Are they so Pampered with their fullness, Sir?
These wresty Slaves, like Horses wanting use,
Must be kept to it, Rid hard, and exercised;
Must feel the Bit and Curb, to let 'em know
They're under Government.

Why thou hast spoke it, and shall see it done:
For from this moment do I constitute
Thee equal sharer with me in my Sceptre*

My Royal Father.


I have said the Word; Hence be Convinced,
A Parents Love can bear, forget, forgive,
And wait the gentle Season when Penitence
Shall spring; and shower a Blessing
That may encourage Virtue as it grows.

My thanks to Heaven and you; Oh! you have made,
New-moulded up this Mass, and breathed a Soul
That longs for Action, and the toil of War:
If I not strive to merit this great Blessing,
If I not Honourably discharge the Trust,
Endeavour Nobly; may I sink with shame
As great as my worst Foes would wish,
Best Friends lament: For France my Father,
Where I will season this my Infant Sword,
To Dedicate to you who taught it Glory.

This sounds well Harry, as it should be Boy;
And I foresee Englands good Genius Dancing
In thy Spirit, and pleased with the young Mars
It has begot. My Lord of Verulam.

Your Majesty?


Here, as a Pledge of Love,
Accept this Man; I give him
As a Guardian Angel to thee:
His Courage shall assist and strengthen thine,
His Judgment in the Field shall guide thy boldness;
And if Fate should approach thee, clap between ye:
His Care shall lessen thy Fatigue in War;
In Peace his Diligence shall give thee Pleasure.

Sir, you are mine; your Character is great,
And I will show how I esteem its worth
In choosing your Opinion.

Oh Barbarous King! was there no other way
To reach my heart, but thus to snatch him from me?
Look on him well, Are these young tender Limbs
Fit to endure the hardships of a Camp,
The Cares of War, and Dangers that attend it?
It shall not, must not be and I alive.
Oh Harry! hang upon thy Mothers Love,
And shun thy Father's Cruelty.

Well, Madam, have you done? Are you at ease?
Has the fierce Whirlwind of your Passion vent?
If not, Enlarge after your wonted method.

Ungrateful King, Do you upbraid my fondness!
Think thou this Breast is hardened like thy own?
I bore him, bred him, felt the rack of Nature;
Many long Winter Nights have watched his slumbers,
When the sad hand of Sickness was upon him;
While you, encompassed round with all your Friends,
Forgot my Care, and the poor Infant's danger.
He minds me not: Oh wretched Majesty!
See Reverend Fathers, Is this humane usage?

Let me beseech you, Madam, calm this Passion:
The King designs my Greatness.

Deluded Fool, away; Fly, fly betimes
To Sanctuary, where these good Men's assistance
May break the Philtre, and dissolve the Magic
Which blinds thy sense, and sets thee mad for Glory:
Behold, this Holy Man, thy careful Tutor,
Whose studious diligence first taught thee Knowledge,
With Art and Patience cleared thy erring Soul,
And made it Master of Imperial Wisdom;
Take his Advice: Be deaf to the harsh King's,
Which would destroy thee, by removing thee.

Contemn her fondness, and consult thy Honour
This Passion flows from an unruly Will:
I tell thee, Harry, all the Sex are thus,
And Contradiction's their Original Sin;
For Woman was the first in Disobedience.
When they were molded first into a Form,
And the Almighty liked the great Design,
Pleased with the Work, withdrew; and in th'Interval
The Fallen Angel crept unseen and viewed it;
Saw that Man's Happiness would be complete,
And from his Gall a drop of Spleen dashed in,
Which sowr'd the whole Creation:
'Tis that affects her now; give it but scope,
And when she sees it moves us not, 'twill down.

If to my Mother's Will I should submit,
Glory will shun me, Honour fly me,
And all Brave Men contemn me.

Most Gracious Majesty, vouchsafe attention
To the humble Speech of your poor Beadsman:
I am bound in duty to offer my assistance,
And to mediate where persons of such near Affinity
Have different Passions which o'ercloud the Soul,
Soyling Perfection.
See your Royal Partner overwhelmed with Tears,
From the harsh words you've uttered!
That Noble Graft buried in deep amazement
Oh! Let this Discord end in Harmony!
Lull the harsh Note, and raise her up to Life.

Who asks Advice from you, my Reverend Sir?
Who sent for you to make up Royal Breaches?
Because you are th'Examiner of her Sins,
Must you pretend Dominion over my Actions?
Go to; We know ye: Preach to those who do not,
And let their Ignorance support your Cunning;
Thou Pander of the Court!

Your trusty Knight there
Becomes the Title better.

Ha! what said you?


This Accusation does not suit my Function,
Nor well become the Mouth of Dignity:
If We, the Pillars of the Holy Church,
Are thus calumniated, 'tis easy guessing what
Will follow: You set an ill Example.

You seldom show us good ones.
Come come I know you better than your selves,
Your proud, ambitious, haughty, daring Tempers:
The God you Idolize is Interest;
Which to obtain you'd bridle all Mankind,
And ride 'em to the Devil.

Oh Blasphemy!


Alas poor Queen! how must he use your Goodness,
If he reviles the Church thus!
Atheists would blush at this.

Is there no way to Heaven without these Fellows?
Try me, and judge me, Oh thou awful Power,
If I not reverence and adore thy Laws!
But why through such hard hands are they delivered?
How is't you make us Kings, whilst these prescribe us?
Our Actions must be governed by their Consciences,
Our own has no Pre-eminence nor Judgment.

Reason is weak, where Passion is so strong:
Your Arbitrary Power would tire the World,
Did not Heaven bless you with our Guiding Virtues.

Yet, with your leaves, Kings may indulge themselves,
Violate Laws, Disfranchize all their Subjects,
Provided that your Government's untouched:
But, should we look
A-squint upon the Failures of the Church,
The holy Rooks and Daws betake to wing,
And fill the Air with Clamour.
Hence! Be gone, on forfeit of your Lives!

He shall pay dear for this.
Come, Brothers, let's to Council.

That's to Mischief.
Now will the Church fall in a Fever,
And want his Blood for a Cordial.

Now, Eleanor, to you: Beware these Men;
You're but a Tool to them, to fashion me,
And work my Actions suitable to theirs.
Shock not thy Husband's Power, to strengthen them;
For, credit me, I know their inward Cunning:
They called my Father in, to serve their Interest;
And, when he had nobly ventured Life and Power,
Removed th'Oppressions under which they groaned,
They grew so weary of Security,
They would have changed again.
Observe this, Boy* Seem with the Church to join,
Hearken and weigh whatever they design,
But never let their Knowledge fathom thine.

But why must he to th'War?
Oh! Can you love, and put him into danger?

Hear me;
And what I say, I hope, will make impression:
If to divest my self, and place on him*
A Sov'reign Power, be not the Marks of Love,
Then I have none: If to advance my Son
Into an equal share of Empire with me,
Be not Affection, what then is Affection?

But yet --


Come, Eleanor, be calm, cease all suspicion;
And if I sallied out in rash expressions,
Wink at my Failings; For, Oh my Queen!
The Cares that tend upon a Crown are great,
And do sometimes distract.

Is there no danger of his Life?


None that I know of.
My Lord of Verulam I join to his assistance:
But if the Sceptre be too ponderous,
I'll aid the Prince till strength shall reach his Arm,
And be a Shield 'twixt him and all Invaders.

Dear Madam, hear the King, let him prevail;
You would not have me stay and wield a Distaff,
When Honours Trumpet sounds so brave a Charge,
When all my Royal Father's great Intentions
Aim only at th'increasing of my Glory.

It shall be so: But, my dear Child, take care;
Oh Verulam! be watchful in the War;
The Comfort of my Life lies all in him.

I bless thee from my Soul, and wish thee well.


How I'll deserve that Blessing, time shall tell.
If I return, Conquest and Peace I'll bring;
If not, just Fame shall, to my Glory, sing,
I suffered for my Country and my King.

DID you not mark with what a sprightly Joy
The Youth took fire when we saluted him?
The Blood flew up, and almost burst his Cheeks;
His Eyes did sparkle round unwonted Lustre;
His faltering Tongue could not express his Soul,
But with a pleased and eager stammering
Hinted the wondrous Transport he was under;
Then with a Bridegroom's haste he clasped us round,
Called us his Friends, and kissed our Lips with as
Much warmth as each had been a Mistress.

Nay, though the Queen had sent to take her leave,
How slowly did he quit our Company!
The falling Showrs gushed from his longing Eyes,
And spoke the wreck he felt in the Separation;
Then on his Knees with humble Adoration
Besought our guardian Prayers and Benizons.

It almost made me weep for Company,
But that the Fire which burns within this Bosom
Called back the Sap for a more Noble Use.
Now, should I speak my Thoughts,
I must declare this early pious, worshipping
Young Prince, deserves the Crown.

What says my Lord?


Since his ill Father stands accursed for shedding
Most sacred Blood, and in a holy Place,
He is divested by his Holiness
Of Power and Royalty,
And only bears an empty Title now.

But which of us dare to tell him so?
He has a damnable Spirit, and values
Hanging a Church-man no more than a mutinying Soldier.

Weakmen! whose Senses are o'er-whelm'd with Ease;
Think you there goes no more to this great Work,
Than barely talking? I tell you, We must first
Join all the Power and Interest we can make,
To undermine this vast Colossus.
'Tis of Consequence sufficient to engage
The whole Profession,
And call the scattered Levi of the World
To one entire and absolute Assembly.
Oh Becket! Oh thou Martyr for our sakes!
The only Patron of our humble Labours!
Have you forgot? Speak, has Remembrance left you?
Are all his Favours buried in Oblivion?

No, 'tis to him and you we owe our being.


And shall We tamely let his Murderers sleep,
Sit down in silence to behold their Triumph?
Oh! never let Ingratitude so foul
Be laid at the Church door: Think of his goodness,
He took me when a Boy from my poor Parents,
Pleased with a forward Spirit which he saw;
And at his Charge, with Cost and Diligence,
I was instructed in Divinity;
Preferred me early into Holy Orders,
And made me in my Six and Thirtieth year
One of the Confessors to Majesty:
And though in different ways his Love did move,
You shared his Bounty, and to good advantage.

'Tis true; and we no less than you Repine,
For want of means to show how we'd Revenge.

Oh, wonderful stupidity! Is't possible!
What have we all this time been talking of?
Was it not of the Prince, the King that must be?
Does not Heaven give the Power into our hands?
And by the Gift, plainly direct us how
To Right the Impious Murder of the Saint?

I understand you now:


You are his Tutor, Becket gained you that.


'Tis true.


Thou say he is ambitious; be it so:
Nourish the growing Plague, Temper the mischief;
Of Power and Sway the cunning Compound make;
On the prevailing fuel of his Pride
Set the Infection; his Spleen will feed the Fire,
Till wild Ambition blazes to Rebellion.

The task is easy; for in his eager Soul
His Fathers Errors bear Pre-eminence,
With all his Mothers positive ill Nature.

Blessings upon thy Zeal! this plainly looks
Like Inspiration, and foretells success:
Few words, and I have done.
When thou shalt reach the Prince's Court,
Thou wilt be swarmed to for News,
And principally from the Men in Orders;
None carry Ears more itching than
The Clothing.

Give me your full desire; tell me
Your heart, and if I fail my Trust,
Cunning forsake our Tribe.

Then plainly thus:
Lay all the Churches sufferings on the Rack,
Let every scratch appear a mortal Wound;
Breath to their fickle Souls desire of change,
And never quit the Subject: Extol the Prince
With all the Rhetoric Interest can invent;
Paint the vile King upon the stretch of Fancy,
Attempt the Root of his Prerogative,
And load with endless fears each branch of Power,
Till we have stripped him naked of all Trust.
Observe the Factious Chiefs, and there enlarge
Thy well wrought Sophistry.
If thou should find 'em start into a Curse,
Say thou Amen.

My zealous Spirit glows to be at work.


When e're thou come among the Female Sex,
Bemoan the dreadful prospect of our Woes,
Work 'em to Tears, melt 'em with Apprehension;
For none engender mischief like that Sex:
Enquire amongst their Sins, And those
Thou find still most accountable and fearful,
Work up with dreadful Industry and Terror;
Sigh out Damnation with prodigious Accent,
And tell 'em nought can stop such festring wounds,
But being mighty forward in this Cause:
Oh, thou shalt see 'em work their Husbands up,
And teach their lisping Babes to Curse the King:
They are the Train by which we Blow up Fools;
There's nothing worthy Note is done without 'em.

Let me be gone; I'm eager to be at it.


Get all things ready; at Night meet
Me at home, in the Morning you set
Forward; away I must; to the Queen.

Success attend you.


Now Becket, if thy Ghost
Will look so low as us that will revenge thee,
Dart from thy Saints bright Rays, a Providence
That may encircle and protect our Actions:
If Souls which from the Worlds rich Arms are forced,
Torn from their Right in Nature by Oppression,
And sent unjustly, unprepared, away,
To give an Answer at a moments warning
To a long Scrowl of all their ill-spent Lives,
Be not a Barbarity abhorred by Christians,
Morality good night;
Conscience and Equity be ever Banished:
And Arbitrary Strength officiate Justice.
No, Becket, thou shalt have full revenge,
If Blood can give it measure.
I've traced his Lust,
Where he supinely does indulge himself;
Found out his Paramour, and the Queen shall
Know it.
Thus my Revenge I'll back with Jealousy;
A Rival is a plague that tortures Woman
Worse than her being crossed in her Ambition.
And Oh, what a charming mischief must that prove,
That's Got by a Church Hate, and Nursed by Injured Love!

Was there ever so perverse a Baggage! Hast thou neither respect to my Age nor
my Person? Who am I? what am I? Tell me quickly, or I shall grow very furious,
I shall.


Sir, I neither regard your Age nor your Person: And your Anger would do better
to be shown among them that fear you, than here, where you're so little
welcome.


Why Hussy? I'm a Gentleman.


'Tis a very improper employment this, if you are so.


Look you, my Lady's Gentlewoman, I will not be popped off with the flap of a
Fox Tail, I come with a Message from the King, do you mark? I must have an
Answer from your betters e're I return.


I think you have had Answers enough to have put any Man out of Countenance
that had a grain of Modesty in him.


Tell the Wind where it shall blow Child; I'm a thorowpac'd Courtier, used to
denials, but that never disheartens me; he that sits down contented with a
Lady's answering Nay, twice or thrice, will be Cursed by the Woman, and Laughed
at by the World. Importunity and Impudence are the Supporters of our Coat of
Arms; indeed our Argent is somewhat scandalous; but our Rampant is very
ancient; It came in with Infidelity, and always had the upper hand of Honesty
in this World.


I don't understand your Heraldry Sir.


I am an unlucky Dog, never eloquent but among the vulgar; and there it's
always thrown away: Come Rogue, I must needs see your Lady.


Her positive Orders were to see none; and I will not infringe 'em to merit
your thanks and her displeasure.


To see none? If she means of the Common sort she's much in the right on it, I
commend her Judgment: But I come from the King, Child.


There's the more danger: But I tell you she makes no distinction.


Why, 'tis impossible; a Pox on thee, thou hast mistook her Orders; if she is
resolved to see no body, let her come and tell me so her self: What, does she
think she was made for no other use than our Shrines are, to be shown upon
Holidays only?


I am the Servant of her pleasure, Sir.


So am I of my Masters: prithee let them put their pleasures together, and come
to a right understanding. A young Woman, a handsome Woman, a brisk Woman, of a
yielding Complexion, a sappy Constitution, a languishing Nature, turn Recluse?
Why the Devil would as soon turn Tailor, and be bound to Thread his Needle in
the dark always. Why, she's good enough for Nuns-flesh Thirty years hence, when
she's weary of the World, satiated with Flesh, and sit for no other thing, but
a Friar to mumble his Matins over.


What do ye mean Sir?


Why Child, I know 'tis against the Grain of any Woman in the World to be
locked up, even in Spain it self, Love. But see, Rogue, see what the King has
sent thee, all Yellow, prevailing Yellow, undeniable Yellow; this will dye
Honour, or Conscience, Chastity, Friendship of any Colour whatsoever; and make
Adultery look as Beautiful as the Snow-driven Sheets of a Virgin Sacrifice in
Wedlock. Besides, he has provided for thee a Husband, a huge feeding Fellow,
and as tuff as Whalebone.


You have such pleasant humours -- but I dare not take it -- my Lady is so --


If thy Lady's such a Fool to stand in her own light, must the Maid follow the
example? Be wiser Child; for let me tell thee, a Stale Waiting-woman is a
scurvy Commodity; refuse but the Market, and 'twill hang on thy hands long
enough.


If I must take it: But I can do nothing for it.


Pshaw, pshaw, say what thou wilt; but do as thou think fit.


But she has sworn never to see the King.


What! not see the King! O Lord! O Lord! she's in the state of Damnation; I'll
get a Father presently; but now I think on it, there's none can Absolve her
better than himself he'll take pains to Convert her.


She comes.


Let me alone with her. -- How does my sweet Lady, Nature's Pride, Pleasure of
all our Senses, the Day's Comfort, the Night's Enlightener?


Away, thou venerable Bawd, thou shame
To Age and Sanctity.

A very hopeful beginning!


The Badge of Years, which should be Honourable,
In thee appears a Mark of Infamy.
Leave me! Be gone! Thy sight does strike a Horror,
Such as if Hell should yawn the Tempter up,
To second thy Delusion.

She'll make me believe I'm a Fury anon,
Oh! 'tis well your Majesty has relieved me;
I'm schooled to a fright, and give like a
Tomb-stone against rainy Weather, Dew all over; Come, Charge, come; 'tis not
for you and I to listen to State-affairs; he's a going to swear her of his
Cabinet-Council.


Why dost thou shun my Love, thou Charming Maid?
Why turn away thy Eyes, now they've undone me?
Thou should have hid their killing Fires before:
Too well thy conscious Soul their Lustre knew,
Foresaw the Adoration they'd* beget;
Thou should have ever kept 'em from Mankind,
Or mingled Pity with their barb'rous Power.

Why will you thus perplex your self and me?
How often have I begged you to desist!
Methinks the many times I have denied,
Might satisfy you your Attempts are vain.

Judge rightly of the Patience of my Love,
With what a meek untired Zeal 't has waited,
Born all the cold Rebukes of rigid Virtue,
The harsh Denials of a vigorous Honour,
Still creeping up to what I knew would crush me:
Like the weak Reed against the blust'ring North,
That nods and crouches to each angry Blast,
Sinks down o'er-press'd by the insulting Storm;
Yet still it swells, and slowly strives to rise,
To be blown down again.

Oh! why do you pursue me?


Because my Peace has took her flight that way,
And I must follow through this rugged Road
To find it out, though every step I tread
Brings my strict search but nearer to Destruction.

No, King, in vain you lay a Siege;
The Fort's impregnable.

You think my Power's the less because I sue,
Begging that Blessing which I might command.
How easy might I seize the long'd-for Joy;
But Force dissolves the sweetness of the Charm.
Let then my Sufferings urge at last some Hope,
Let cruel Virtue yield but to a Parley,
Grant my Request, and make thy own Conditions.

What can you hope from such a wretched Conquest,
Where all the Spoil is Infamy and Shame?
Why would you soil the Glories of your Life,
In mingling with the Creature you have made?

Nature may boast Thee as her Master-piece;
You're the result of vast and long Contrivance;
She practised hard ever she could reach her mind.
And when she formed thee from Original Thought,
The Copy struck her with amazing Pleasure,
And full Perfection recompensed the Toil.

Would I'd been born a Leper,
And all those Graces which have wronged my Virtue,
By breeding this Infection in your Heart,
Had been consumed or blasted in their Bud.

Oh fearful Blasphemy!


I have reason to curse all Charms that do attract
Your Eyes: But should I once encourage your
Attempts, you that are Wedded, out of all Power
Of making recompense for what you must destroy;
How will the World censure my senseless weakness!
I must expect the Brand of Infamy,
All good Men's Curses, and be truly wretched.

No, Rosamond, I'll place thee in a Sphere
Above the reach of foul-mouth d*Envy,
Or the blackest Malice; where, like a Deity,
Thou may look down, and either pity
Or revenge thy Wrongs.

Yes, by committing greater.
Therefore upon my Knees let me entreat,
That you would cease this most ungrateful Suit,
Or kill me, that will be a deed of Mercy.

Would thou command me to commit Self-murther?
My Life's in thine, and must partake its Fate.
Inexorable Fair! why were thou made
So wondrous charming, yet in Love so cruel?

I must be gone; he gains upon my Heart,
My Resolution thaws before his Heat,
And the rich Treasure of my spotless Honour
Will moulder into Dross.

No, 'twill be refined,
And, like the Ore torn from the fertile Womb
Of the rich Mine, suffer a noble Trial,
Gaining the Royal 'Say.

Impossible!
There's such antipathy 'twixt Vice and Virtue,
They will run counter, never incorporate.

You are become a glorious Disputant,
A hardened Rebel against the Cause of Love.

I am no Enemy to Love, my Lord;
Far from the Title, I admire the Deity,
Could pay him Homage: But you are so far,
So infinite above my humble State,
Ruin attends the minute I comply.
You, like the Sun, while in its mid-way Path
Of Heav'n's bright Arch, do with your Rays call forth
The Trees to bloom, the Earth to yield her Fruits:
But when you draw too near the lower Orb,
Heat shoots too fierce, and withers all around.
Let me go hence.

Not till you see me dead,
My Heart-strings broke, and this half-dying Body
Become a Victim to your Cruelty.

Oh I am lost!
My thirsty Soul drinks up his Words,
And, pleased with the rich Philtre, craves for more.

She's at a stand.
Must we then part for ever, Rosamond?

For ever.


Oh hard sound! For ever, said you?


If you still love me, as you say you do,
Unloose my hand.

Bid the poor dying Wretch quit his Reprieve,
Or tell the hunger-starv'd he must not eat,
Both will obey like me.

You have undone a miserable Maid.


Ha! What do I hear! Is pity entered?
Am I called to Life?

No, I will not hear you, see you, mind you,
Know you; My heart beats false, and if my Eyes
Tell Tales, believe 'em not.

You must not go.


I will, and follow if you dare; for I
Will never yield.

Nay, I must follow.


Must you? then I'll stay.


Do.


No.


May I not follow?


I will not speak;
You grow too strong, Oh do not tempt the weak!

Her Virtue gives apace.
Be bold my Love, pursue her while she's warm;
An easy Rape will now dissolve the Charm.

HOW dull is all this World without my Child!
My Nature sickens, all my Senses droop;
Each wresty Faculty disordered grows,
And every Vessel through which Life does play
Its feeding Blood, to hearten and refresh
The Limbs and Spirits to obey the Will,
Like Pipes choked up, no longer can supply,
But backward run, and burst for want of passage.
Could I but find the honest, pious Abbot,
He'd free me from this Labyrinth of Fear,
Resolve my Doubts, and give me Peace again.

Who the Devil put it into his Lordship's head to employ me in State affairs? I
shall mar all, for want of a Memory; and he might as well have attempted to
make a Sieve hold Water, as trusted me with his Councils: It is certain I was
never cut out for a Politician. This Reverend Abbot has engaged me in a fine
business. When Rosamond told me in Confession of the King's Address to her, and
I acquainted his Lordship with it, he obliged me to persuade her she ought not
to resist the Importunities of her Prince, lest her Obstinacy should occasion
his Death, and Royal Murder was a dreadful thing: But what's the reason of his
making me tell the Queen of it? He says 'tis to revenge our Patron Becket: I
know not what it may come to; he has promised me Preferment, and my Conscience
must submit to my Ambition. -- Oh she's here. -- How shall I deliver my self?
-- I'm a cursed Orator. -- I'll put some hard words together, which will sound
like Rhetoric, and that may pass for Learning if she understands 'em not. --
Hail, Sacred Majesty.


The sound of Health to a departing Wretch
Is not more welcome than such happy Company,
The true Restorative to a sick Mind,
Since all the Physic which the Soul requires
Dwells in your Breasts.

I shall believe anon I'm not the person I took my self for.


Where have you left the Abbot?


In his Cell,
Where on the cold hard Pavement he was paying
His zealous Orisons to all the Saints
For the Prosperity of the Illustrious Prince,
Your Royal Son.

How much he binds me to him!


Now for my lofty Style.
If the Nation may it please August Majesty,
Could but comprehend the unaccountable Qualifications
Of his indisputable Understanding, they would
Venerate the indulgence of his Sanctity.

I do believe you, Father.


Nay I dare be bold to say; nay more, affirm;
And what is more, confirm, That if the
Worthy President he sets Mankind were follow'd,
There would be vast sincerity of Conscience,
And the Age or World (which you please) would not
So transcendently abound with Knaves and Villains.

Go on, Father.


Whether I can or no? -- No Abbot yet! -- I shall be baffled presently.


Why do you pause? why are you thus concerned?


How should it be otherwise, with profound submission, when the sacred
Ornaments of your Countenance appear not so sublime as usual; but the Rays of
Dignity suffer as it were under the repugnance of an Eclipse? hum, hum.


The absence of the Prince is grievous to me.


Ay; Madam, you have mentioned the only Star that graced our Horrizon; to be
deprived of him, is enough to put the considerating part of the Nation into
Lacrimary showrs, and stupefying sadness. Enter Abbot, or I must Exit.


I am amazed!
You seem to hint at dangers, and call up
My Blood which crowds too fast about my heart,
And makes it pant with an unusual terror.
No pain is sure like that of Apprehension:
Therefore, good Father ease me of it quickly;
Pour in a Balm upon my bleeding wounds,
Restore my Health, and give my Tortures ease.

He's come in good time; for I am hared with the apprehension of the fury of
her displeasure.


The hours of Peace, Eternal Blessings wait you;
May all your Prayers be heard, your Wishes Crowned,
And constant happiness attend 'em both.

'Tis kindly wished; but answer me, my Lord,
Pray, and be sincere; wave Holy niceties,
And tell me plainly, whither you good Man
Is not distempered in his mind?

Far from it, on my Word.


Nay, if she thinks me mad for a little impertinence,
What will she think of the Church that's never at quiet!

He has shot too far, I find it by his looks;
So it is always when he does amiss.

How could I help it? You might have come sooner, before my Rhetoric tyred,
and have hindered the stumbling of my understanding.


Be silent; I'll fetch you off.
Your Majesty it seems is ignorant of what
This Holy Man is blessed withal:
His Fasting, Watching, Praying, constant Penance,
Pulled down from Heaven the gift of Prophesy.

Indeed, my Lord!


I did Prophesy a Lye must help me truly.


He seemed concerned for my Son's safety.


I feared as much: Then all the Truth is out.
Why did you not avoid the Royal presence?
It was not fit the Queen should know it yet;
Babble no more, 'tis of ill consequence.

What, has he lost his Beads he's so testy?
Did not you tell me the Queen --

Peace.


Good Lord, what's the matter now! 'Tis hard that one Churchman can't know the
bottom of another.


Why do you rate him thus? Is it not fit,
If ought concern my safety, that I know it?
Be quick, and do not trifle with my expectation;
I shall forget the Sanction of your Robe,
And slight what I esteemed.

Pardon me, Royal Mistress;
I would not for the World offend that goodness:
But this is such a Tale, which I must tell,
Will chill and stagger every sense about you:
Therefore if I do lagg in my Confession,
Think it not want of Duty, but of Courage;
For, O, I dread the fatal consequence
Which must attend the impression it will make.

Go on, and fear not;
For I've a Soul so near Divinity,
I can behold the worst that Fate can do,
And Laugh at the Decree.

Then listen, for I talk of wondrous things;
When Kings, to prove their fondness of a Son,
Expose him to the Toil of Camps and Wars,
And danger is a mark of their esteem.
Then yours is much beloved.
If, when a Prince has got the Peoples Love,
And all their Jubilees express his Name,
The Father, to indulge their kindness to him,
Sends him abroad to keep him in their mind,
Then ours is strangely worshipped.

Ha!


What a rare pair of Bellows is a Canting Priest!
She blazes already.

If when a King with Sacred Marriage tired,
To show how much yet still he hugs that chain
On a fresh Beauty pours his longing Soul;
And jealous of her Rage whom he has wronged,
Removes all means by which she might Revenge;
If this be proof that Wedlock he admires,
Then you are justly used.

How now; what say thou! Is my Bed abused?
Or is my Son removed least he should right me?
Lay by thy cunning Rhetoric, and be plain;
Wind not my Weakness up with Preparation,
To make my Passion more extravagant,
It needs it not; I want no Fire to keep my Anger up:
A Royal Spirit has a Pride that feeds it.

'Tis a sad Truth indeed; but so it is,
The Lord of Clifford's Daughter, Rosamond,
Wears the King's Heart, and you are but a Cipher.

How know thou this, what certainty? ha! speak.


This Holy Father is her Confessor.


What will become of me!


With vast reluctance he did reveal it,
Upon my promise I would ne'er disclose it;
And now he shakes to find himself betrayed.

Come hither Priest.


Oh, Lord!


Come hither; what dost start at?
Can thou conduct me where these Lovers meet?

Not for the World.


Better thy Soul were out on it.
Come Abbot, make him guide us
Where in each others Arms this pair are clasped,
That I may cut the twisted folds asunder.

Oh! I shall be hanged for being of their Council, and betraying it afterwards.


Oh, give not way to this destructive Rage;
We shall be all undone by this rash act:
Have Patience, and see further.

What! dost thou lay my body on the fire,
And bid me bear its flames with whining Patience,
When I may quench it with a Rivals Blood?

O horrid Resolution!
Would you add Murder to Adultery,
And make your self as wicked as the King?

Why did thou tell me then this cursed story?


Let Heaven Revenge you.


I'll not stay so long.


The Church shall Right you.


Both are too tedious for me:
Besides you fear (although you hate) the King,
And as your Interest leads, you will direct.
No, you have light the Brand, and shall partake
The heat on it.

Is't fit our Piety should be exposed in such a shameful cause? Upon our Knees,


Ay, upon our Knees,


Is't fit your Piety should be exposed?
Is't fit my Dignity should be abused?
Thus still your Churches Credit you'll maintain,
No matter what we suffer, if you Reign:
But since my Soul you've set upon the Rack,
And touched my Love, I'll my own measures take,
Give my Eyes proof of what your Tongues have told;
Think not to shun me, by your Robes I'll hold;
And if I find my Peace you have abused,
Never were Heretics so basely used
By your Church Tyranny, as you shall be by me;
Away, be gone, lead on, avaunt Hypocrisy.

How am I altered! how estranged of late!
Virtue has taken her flight, and Innocence,
The bright, the only Jewel of the Sex,
Flies this polluted place as from Infection.
Oh! Honour, what a dreadful loss thou art,
And yet how hard to keep from what we Love!
How dismal 'tis to think of what I've done!
Should he prove false now, change like other Men,
And only Triumph over his Wretched Conquest,
How much more dreadful will my loss appear!
Oh! could Men guess the terror we endure,
What 'twixt our Honour and our Love we suffer,
They sure would prize each generous Maid much more,
And, as their Souls, indulge them to the last.
Aspatia.

Madam.


Sing me that Song I gave thee the other day,
And if thou can, charm me into a slumber.

Behold your Rival, and survey her glory;
But not a word of Bertrard, or of me.

Be gone.


No; I'll behold the rancour of thy Malice,
Thy thirst of Blood, and most insatiate Fury.
Now Rosamond thou die, or else Revenge
Lags in its Course; No, run thy full career,
The master stroke of my designs lie here.

What do I see! or is't an Apparition!
My Blood runs backward to my frightened Heart,
And something tells me that my Fate is near.

Appear thou Fairy Queen, and summon up
Thy Host of Spirits to defend their Charge;
For I am come to snatch away thy Glories,
Dissolve thy Charms, and hurl thee to destruction.

Why, Madam, this to me? What have I done
To move those Frowns, or urge these angry words?

You to my Anger are it seems a stranger,
But with my Rights are very intimate:
What can thou see defective in this Face,
That you dare vie for Place, or hope for Conquest?

You plunge me still in wonder and amazement!
I ever paid that awful Head such Duty
As is expected by a Crown from Subjects:
But if some evil Tongue has blackened me,
To make me odious in your Royal looks,
I cannot help the baseness of my Foes;
But I shall still adore, though I am scorned.

Oh! that this wretch, this indigested heap
Of crowding Beauties, which do each outvie
For Place and Praise from the admiring World,
Should have a Soul so unworthy of its Frame;
How poorly dost thou strive to hide thy Faults,
And shake for what the better part of the Sex would boast of.
Last Night, last Night, can thou deny the Blessing,
When in the Arms of my most Treacherous Lord
You Laughed and Revelled the short hours away,
Whilst I in ignorance expecting lay?

Oh, I am lost!


Thou art indeed:
But my Revenge is starved;
Thy Life's too little to appease its hunger:
I would contrive some way, if possible,
To be as long in torturing thy Soul,
As the Remembrance of thy Crimes will mine.

Will you not hear me speak?


What can thou plead,
What urge in thy Defence, thou guilty fair one?
Hast thou not Robbed me of my Souls best thought?
For ever torn my interest from his Love?
Stripped me of all my Wishes, all my Joys,
Deafened his Ears to my complaining Soul,
And locked up every passage to his Heart?

I shunned him, long was deaf to his desires,
Avoided him as an approaching Plague,
For well I saw the fatal consequence:
To an excess of Rudeness I abjured him;
Nay, yet have only listened to his Love.

By Hell 'tis false: thou hast enjoyed it to.
Think thou to blunt my Rage by this denial?
No, I am too well convinced of what is past:
Therefore prepare thy self for what's to come.

Oh! Mercy.


Mercy,
Can thou desire to live, and I in being!
Methinks thou should entreat me to dispatch,
Considering what a Plague I shall be to thee:
When first I heard the Name of Rosamond,
I thought to find an Amazonian Spirit,
One there dared Cope with injured Majesty,
And stand the proof who best deserved a King:
But I have erred, for he has chosen one,
The Relic of some poor half starved Plebeian,
Dressed up with Pageant greatness, to allure
the Roving Appetite of a loose King.

I held as Rich, as Pure, and Noble Blood
As any of my Sex, till this Cursed change
Sullied my Veins, and stained my Family.

The Sacrifice will be the Nobler for it:
Prepare.

Must I then dye?
Is there no pity left?

Banish the thought, Mercy and I are Strangers:
Yet e're thou go, I charge thee to abjure his Name,
Quit all Pretensions to him,
Curse him before the Pangs of Death come on,
For hurrying thee to Hell before thy time.

No, I will bless him to my utmost gasp,
Groan forth his Name, as he has sighed out mine;
Think on the Kneeling hours he has wept away,
The many charming words that moved my Heart,
The mighty changes that my Smiles and Frowns
Have raised in his expecting, doubtful Soul;
The Transports of his Trembling, Fierce Embraces,
And hug him with such eagerness to Heaven.

Then Face thy Doom.


I do:
I have invoked the Patron of my Love,
And now the weakness of my Sex has left me;
Since I must die for Love, my Love shall arm me,
I know his hatred must pursue thee for it;
Nay, I believe he will Revenge me too:
But since I know this Act will Curse thee from him,
Live, and be wretched in his Scorn.

So Arrogant! Sink Towering Sorceress,


O, hold! it must not be.


Why dost thou barr the stroke, ungrateful Man,
Unless thou would employ the point on me;
Here, strike, I know thou hate me Henry;
Rip up this Bosom, mangle my fond Heart
That bleeds for thy unkindness; do it quickly,
And show you have some sparks of pity left.

Be calm, my Queen, hush up these jarring Passions;
Let not thy Jealousy exceed thy Reason,
Lest blab-tongu'd Fame should tell the envious World
The frailties of us both.

Would I were dead.


Banish that wish for ever; Oh, Eleanor,
If I have Sallied from great Hymen's Laws,
And surfeited on strange forbidden Fruit,
'Tis I must answer for the great offence;
Why should you seek to stain your purer hands
In Violence and Blood? Why so pollute
Thy Innocence with Infamy and Shame?

What is't I hear! Nay, then would Death had reached me.


How can you flatter thus, and she in hearing?
I know 'tis only to delude my Rage,
'Tis Nobler killing me, than thus to cheat me;
When I am gone, without control
You and your Paramour in Sin may triumph,
While poor neglected I, your slighted Queen,
Sleep quiet in the cold and silent Earth:

Oh, dreadful Trial,
How can I comply with Justice here,
And not destroy what most I covet there?

He's at a stand, his Love has time to think;
Nay then, I find he cools, and I am lost.

I do but hinder you from your desires,
And though my Soul is put upon the wrack
When I lose any share in your affection,
Yet since you covet it, I will retire.

Stay, Eleanor, and be convinced at last
Thy Power is Absolute, and yields to none;
That I have Loved her, with a blush I own;
Nay, doted to, with vast excess of longing;
But sure it was some vile Enchantment rid me:
The Spell's dissolved by thy more powerful Charms,
And I'm ashamed of my Infatuation.

Oh, faithless, perjured, and ungrateful Monster!


Can this be real?


By Heaven the Tide of Love has run its highest,
And all Desire is Ebbing.

But the next flood the torrent will return,
And Rosamond break down your Resolution.

Impossible:
There is more pureness, sweetness, true delight
In thee, my Queen, than e're I found
In all the Wilds and Salleys of my Life.

Oh, blessed sound!


The World has not thy worth; for in thee
All that thy Sex can boast of is entire.

I do believe you, though I know 'tis feigned,
Yet I will seem transported with the change,
And stab my Rival with the sight of it.

Come let us hence, and leave this hated place.


I know this sight must make you envy me;
But I, in kind return, will pity thee.

Oh King, farewell.


O! help, she Swoons.


Ha! What is that!


Only a trick to bring you back again:
A fit of the Sullens; come my Lord away.

What! leave her dying, 'twere unnatural.


Oh, cruel Man!


The Siren now begins to tune her Magic,
And betray your Promise.

Oh, Rosamond!


Is this well done, my Lord?


'Twas but the Blair of Love as it expired,
And now 'tis gone for ever: Heart keep thy bounds,
And do not show my falsehood at my Eyes;
This is the rigidst Task I ever met with:
I Torture all the Comfort of my Life,
To please the most vexatious thing, a Wife.

Madam, Madam, won't you speak? The King's gone,
Be not frigtned so, 'twas only to blind the Queen;
He Loves you still above all.

Why have you called me back to misery,
To endless trouble, and eternal sorrow?

Nay, I don't know what to think on it;
I fear we're undone.

Cursed be the chance that spared this hated Life:
Cursed be the hour when first my Soul gave way,
And drank the Philtre of his baneful Tongue:
May Night for ever cloud me from the World;
May the vile wretched name of Rosamond
Sink through the Leaves of Memory for ever.

Be comforted, good Madam;
(Oh, what will become of me!)
All may be well yet.

Hence Bawd, thou Pensioner of Hell,
Betrayer of all Innocence and Virtue,
Thy Soul must answer for the wrack mine suffers:
Oh, Flattering King! Oh, Cursed dissembling Sex;
That can for Months and Years lye at our Feet,
And Sigh and Swear, Adore us, and Entreat;
Promise whatever we'll Impose, Invent,
And look as what they said they really meant;
But when our frail and tender tempers move
To Recompense with what their Souls most Love;
So quickly with the longed for Feast they're cloyed,
That always she that gave it was destroyed.

So, now have I time to repent before
I'm hanged; and that's all.

Confusion on this Reconcilement! all's undone!
Who's that? Sir Thomas Vaughan? Oh, I'll work him.
How is't, Sir Thomas?

Why, preparing for the other World, Father,
And you are come to give me a helping hand:
'Tis very hard, we can neither live without you,
Nor die without you.

Oh, I guess what you mean; the Discov'ry
Of Rosamond, and the King being reconciled
To the Queen, makes you apprehend her Anger
May be fatal: but fear not, I'll make your
Peace there.

Why you might do a good thing for once in your life.


I will. But do you think this Change in the King is real?


I hope not.


I'm sure not; he's gone into his Closet,
And has left the Queen abruptly; follow him,
And I'll attend the Queen; we'll meet an hour
Hence, and then confer.

With all my heart. I'm more glad to hear they're parted already, than the
Queen could be at his leaving Rosamond. Cheer up, Sweet-heart, he's thine
still: What a Pox! be hanged in the first year of my Pimping! How should
Favourites get Estates at that rate? For all this, I don't like this same
Abbot: I thought there was no good towards, when I saw Him and the Queen coming
to this place; and therefore called the King to prevent the Mischief I feared.
This may be a Lye of his and only a design to send me to the King just now in
his rage, to dispatch me immediately. No matter, I'll venture.

For if the King holds his honest Intention,
I'll thank him to hang me, for I'm sure of no Pension.

THus to be shipwrecked in the sight of Harbour,
Just when I'd perfected my great Design,
Throws up the Gall with that impetuous force,
I burn, I rave, I shall grow made with Anger.
Had she been murdered, what a Scene had follow'd!
What wild Distractions, and ungoverned Rage!
All would have been embroiled. Should now the King
(As possibly he may) find out the drift,
Ruin, Eternal Ruin were my Doom.
I was afraid of Bertrard; but he's firm,
Fixed to my Cause, and yielding to my Will.
Let me consider. -- Ha! the King!

Are all his Vows of Duty, Loyalty,
Obedience come to this; Surely the Clime's Infected,
The Witchcraft of Rebellion taints the Air,
And all who breath it suck the foul pollution.

Sure there is mischief towards, ha! Verulam!
Nay, then my Friends in France have matched my wishes.

The whole design was formed long since in Hell;
It was so black, the Instruments so many,
We scarce had Landed, when the factious People,
Headed by their Officious, Fawning Guides,
With Universal Acclamations welcomed
His safe Arrival; Every one outvied
Which should be foremost in his Adoration:
They looked upon him as one sent from Heaven
To be their Patron, their Deliverer.

Go on.


Still as we past through any Town or Village,
The Windows, Tops of Houses swarmed with people
To gaze upon the entrance of their Deity.

The usual method of the Giddy Rabble.


When we had reached the City, at the Gates
A Train of sleek, smooth, beauteous Youths appeared,
The Ganimedes and Hylasses of the Covents
Arrayed like Angels all in purest white:
These past; a numerous Host of Lazy Singing-men
Chanted out Io Peans, in his praise:
Behind, in Ranks, the Jolly well-fed Brothers
Of the several Orders, in their Sacred Vestments,
The Banners of their Founders still displayed;
Trudged heavily along; each lolling on his Fellow
With Reverend Waddle, blowing as they stalked,
Puffed out his Name, and blessed the good young Prince.

Ten thousand Devils tear 'em for it.


Ten thousand Angels hug 'em for it.


Thus it continued till we gained the Palace,
Where a new Scene begins; The Crowds of Gentry!
That waited there to offer Fealty,
Would poze Arithmetic to sum 'em up.
These offered him the Crown.

How now!


Why, now 'tis as it should be.


He thankfully accepted the kind offer,
Embraced 'em, spoke 'em fair, and promised fairer;
Nay, at their parting, servilely attended 'em,
Even to the outward Gate of the thronged Court.

Blessed be the Priests that taught him so much breeding.


The Ceremonious day now being ended,
And he withdrawn to rest, I thought it time
To speak my Soul, and let him know his Error.

How did he bear it from you?


Knitting his Brows, with a Majestic Frown
He told me, I was Saucy, Malapert,
And bordered upon Treason; He was of Age,
Nor did he want a Tutor; Bad me be gone
On forfeit of my Life: Then laying his hand
Upon his Sword, he let these words escape:
Think thou I will refuse the gift of Heaven,
And what the People court me to possess?
No: I'll assert my Right against the World:
And here shake off all curbing ties of Blood.

No more;
He shall be whipped into his Duty, Verulam,
What! dare me to the Combat, Insolent Boy;
He shall not find I am enervated,
Let all the Ports immediately be stopped,
Set up the Royal Standard, Summon all into the Field,
'Tis I, your King, Command it.
I'll face this Rebel, meet this young Usurper;
Scourge from the Earth this Pest of Human kind,
And be a Terror to the Universe.
But haste, see all things got in readiness,
I will set forth to morrow.

I fly, my Lord.


Oh Rosamond!
The Wrongs that I have done thee, cry aloud;
The horrid Vows and fearful Imprecations
By which I won thy Virtue to compliance,
Have made Appeal to a more righteous Judge,
And fall in Showrs of Vengeance on my Head.

This is above my Wishes. Up, Dissimulation;
Sweet Flattery, with all thy Pomp attend my words,
That I may gain belief.

How! can he weep? are Miracles not ceased?


Who can forbear, that shall behold you thus
Loaded with Grief, o'er-press'd with Miseries?
The most invet'rate Heathen to our Faith,
The Stranger to Humanity or Pity,
Would grow a Statue, turn a Niobe,
If he but knew how much the King was injured.

Oh wondrous Conversion!


I came to gratulate the Victory
Over your unlawful Love,
And thought to find you bright, serene and gay,
Shining with Lustre, crowned with a Reward;
Not all the Noble Virtues of your Soul
Hurried into a Storm. Oh dismal sight!

Am I so altered then from what I was?
Look, view me well; I find no alteration;
My Pulse keeps time, my Vigour is the same,
And I am now as much the King as ever.

Your looks are still August, your Person Sacred:
Yet, when the Sun is mantled up in Clouds,
And day shuts in before the wonted Hour:
People are struck with Wonder and Amazement,
With Fear observe, and doubt the dreadful Change.

You would infer, it seems, I am eclipsed:
But as that Sun you mentioned does regain
From dismal Darkness a more splendid Light;
Even so will I, spite of the United Power
Of Hell and Earth, conspired against my Crown,
Though my rash Son heads their Rebellious Rage.

What says my Lord?
Sure the sweet Prince is innocent.

Thou seem a Stranger to it.


I heard that Mutiny was on the Wing,
And Treason Lacquey'd it on every side;
But that your Son, Him whom you made so Great,
Should side with 'em, is most Unnatural.

He is proclaimed their King, and I a Tyrant.


Indeed! Is't possible! O piercing Sound!
My trembling Knees give way, they shake with Horror.

If this bare Tale can pierce thy flinty Breast,
Call up Remorse and pity to those Eyes;
If thou should know the Burden of my Life,
'Twould sink thee quick into eternal Darkness.

Alas! I pity you! Indeed I do.
Heaven knows how much I grieve for your Afflictions.

Do I not stand accursed at Rome for Murder,
Though all good Men do know my Innocence?
My Son Rebels, and an unnat'ral War is at the door,
While wild Distraction reigns within my Palace.
But these I could endure:
But, Oh! the loss of Rosamond! that's Mortal.

Indeed, my Lord, it is a mighty Trial,
Thus to cast off the lovely beauteous Creature,
Whose Soul was fraught with Dotage on your Person,
Whose all of Study was your Royal Pleasure.

Has Beauties Power then influenced thy Breast?


I would not soil that Beauty with Detraction;
Nay, I must pity, though I dare not help her;
Could almost wish I were of Temporal Kind,
To show how I would strive to serve you both.

Oh charitable Father! now thou work me;
Preach on this Subject, I will ever listen:
My Soul as to an Oracle shall trust,
And with implicit Faith I'll ever serve thee.

As I'm a Man, I must confess
I do admire the Sex, though I'm denied 'em;
Pity the tender Fair, when in distress,
And fancy, if I had ever Loved,
'Twould have destroyed me to have lost the Charmer:
But Rosamond, indeed, she is a wonder;
The Single Fondling of the Universe:
Her Sexes envy, and the Pride of Heaven.

Wonder on, wonder still.


I said, the Fondling of the Universe.
The senseless Babe, when in its Nurses Arms
He sees her pass, springs forward towards the fair one,
Leaves the loved Breast to gaze upon her Face:
Nay, even the withered, Antiquated Sire,
Half dead with Age, and hanging on his Crutch,
If he beholds her, feels new Sap shoot up,
His shrivell'd Veins enlarge, and Strength comes on;
Forgets his Props, and Limps to worship her.

Art thou my Rival, ha?


Who? I my Lord!


None but a Lover could describe her thus;
And yet thy praise falls short of her perfection:
Thou yet hast only touched her outward Charms;
But, Oh! the inward beauties of the Mind,
The temper of her Soul, sure none can match:
So mild a Nature, and so soft a Frame,
So sweet a Spirit, so secure from Anger,
That even Oppression scarce can taint her calmness:
One would believe Patience and Courtesy
Had left the rest of the World, and centred there.

Yet after all these Graces which you've named,
To leave her, 'tis a matchless Virtue sure.

Ha! Leave her said thou? Is't possible?
Speak Father, and be merciful a little,
'Tis not a dreadful Sin to Love this Angel?
Heaven should be worshipped.

You are Married.


Curse on the horrid Yoke.


And yet --


What? Oh, Comfort Priest, and I'll resign my Crown;
The Church shall govern all.

'Twas a strange Marriage; She only was Divorced
When you espouz'd her, -- She partly was another.

Nay, I did never think our Marriage Lawful;
What think you Holy Sir?

I dare not Answer.


Nay, do not leave me here thus doubting.


'Tis not an Office suiting with my Function,
To sow a difference. --

No, make up one, where Love is most concerned.


Ask a Civilian.


Ha!


What have I said! alas, I meant not so. --


Nay, fly not back, By Heaven I've caught thy words,
And hold 'em fast in memory: I will have ease immediately.

Have patience, Sir, let not my folly --


In vain you urge; By Heaven I'll know how far
I can be free:
Why have I cherished up this Plague so long?
I coupled with a fury when I Married,
Compared to Rosamond, that All of sweetness:
We have engendered Vipers, which dire brood
Sucked from the Mother Gall instead of Milk;
They thirst for Blood, and hunger after Life,
But I will shake 'em from me, yes, I will:
This storm once past, all shall be hush and calm.

I have out-gone the Rules of Holy Orders;
My over Zeal made me forget my self.

Lose not the Reputation you have gained,
Nor strive to alter what I have decreed,
She shall be mine; the Goddess shall be mine,
Though half the Isle fall as a Sacrifice.
Spite of all Laws both Human and Divine,
I'll win my Love, or perish at her Shrine.

He's caught:
The great Leviathan is caught;
Now let him Roar, and fill the Air with clamour,
Spout up an Ocean, lash himself with Rage,
And Foam with smart of his deep piercing Wounds.
Oh! thou dear Manes of my Patron Becket,
If what I'm doing's worthy in thy Eye,
Smile on thy Vassal toiling for Revenge.

He is abused, some Villain has abused him,
His Temper's easy as the Down of Turtles,
Fitter for Dalliance and a Lady's Chamber,
Than the rude hardships of destructive War.
What say you, Father, is he not imposed on?
Some Parasite, some most officious Knave,
Whose Trade of Life is falsehood, has been busy
About the King, and whispered his undoing.

I wish I knew the Villain for your sake;
But there's no hopes appearing,
A fearful Combination holds against us,
Of many Heads and Hands in this design,
All which are Rivitted to our Destruction.

Dost thou suspect my Son?


Not for the World.
I have examined thoroughly the Cause
Of this Disorder, and I find, or else
My Judgment errs, His being well received
By the kind Normans was the source of all:
And envious Verulam, who was imposed
Over the Prince to snub him like a School boy.

What says the Father. Was he planted with him
To overlook, and govern all his Actions?

So the King designed;
But the Brave Youth finding his insolence,
Discharged his Diligence, sent him fretting home,
Fraught with Complaints, for being justly slighted;
Nor has he wanted to incense the King,
With a feigned Tale, larded with suppositions,
That he aspires the Sovereign Power of Rule.

But sure, good Father, this is not all,
There's some more powerful Cause;
Why else this noise of Drums, and sound of Trumpets?
This hurry and confusion in the Court?

Ah, Madam, there's a Mystery in that
Which few Men knows, and those can't prevent it.

Do not conceal a tittle from me.


The Subject will offend you.


Nothing but silence can.


Pray give me leave humbly to ask a Question,
How parted you this Morning?

With all the kindness, tenderness imaginable;
The long Arrears of Love are fully paid,
And I suspect no more.

Then I have done.


'Tis possible you thought
He longed and hankered after Rosamond;
No: His Hearts mine, he gave me full possession;
And I'll secure none shall invade the Trust.

What pity 'tis such Goodness should be wronged!


Ha! said thou?


Nothing.


Nay, there is something in thee which must out:


Why, would you know what would destroy your rest?


I charge thee by the Sanction of thy Robe
Speak, tell me quickly, think thou he is false?

Where did you leave him?


Going to Council.


He by this, no doubt, has both received and given good Advice.


Of whom? To whom?


Of Rosamond, his Minion,
Who sits enthroned, and shining like a Goddess
Within the Glorious Mansion he has built
At Woodstock: There uncontrolled she dictates,
And he as readily obeys the Task.

She chose that place for her Retirement.


A Cloister had been fitter.
There with strict Discipline she might be humble;
But here she Riots in Excess.

That I should spare her Life.


It was good Nature, but not Policy.
I cannot speak for Tears when I behold you,
To think what Villainies are hatched against you;
You and your Royal Issue are undone,
Unless the Gods be kind.

Is't possible!


All of us are Embarked in one Calamity;
The Church, as well as you, must bear her share.

How! Where? In what?


He cannot introduce his innovation,
His cursed design of Modelling the Church,
Without Divorcing you.

Why dost thou fear it?


If he returns Victorious, as well he may,
Since the Designs his own, then comes the Trial,
And Rosamond succeeds Queen Eleanor.

I shiver with the dreadful apprehension;
But sure, how ever I suffer, he will not ^ong hi^ Children.

He that will do the one, may do the other,
While his Lust flames high:
You see already, what a specious means
He takes, to blast their growing Reputation.
Come, let me tell you, that it seems to me
To be the Prelude of their Sacrifice.

No, Rosamond, the King, my self, and thee;
Nay, all the World shall perish, ever that happen.
I shall grow Wild; I feel Distraction pressing:
I'll Stab her instantly.

You must not;
'Tis a noisy Death, 'twill make a Clamour
Amongst the common People, and fully your good Name.

Why, would you have her Live?


No, by no means.
She's a rank Heretic, deserves to suffer
The worst of Deaths, and feel severest Torments;
Why do I side thus with you else, but to
Inform you how to prevent yours,
And the Churches Fate? 'Twill be a Meritorious Act,
A Glorious Deed, and Heaven must, sure, Applaud,
Its Ministers of Justice.

How! Shall she dye then?


As Vermin do by Poison:
It makes no noise, and is a certain Servant.

But when?


Not till to morrow,
When the Kings absence will Assist
The Undertaking.

How shall we gain Admission to the Bower?


Leave that to me: Bertrard, her Confessor,
Who time from time has been my Tool, my Engine,
Shall be the Instrument to Dole the Bane,
And we, as standers by, behold the Deed.

By Heaven! I'll have the pleasure on it my self;
From my own Hand she shall the Potion Drink,
For being my Rival, 'twill torment her more.
And I will Triumph o'r her sinking Soul,
Disturb her Dying with my Husbands Name,
Plague her with thinking she must leave him mine;
And lest the Poison too much haste should make,
I'll Henry Sing to keep her Pains awake.

And if her Vengeance from its purpose start,
Stars! 'tis your fault, I'm sure I've done my part.

Is't possible, that such a cruel Thought
Could ever harbour with my Rosamond?
Did you not see constraint in every part?
The Agony that Nature suffered under,
Fearing the Jealousy of an Incensed Queen?

Away.


As one who views his Friend, seized for a Crime
Which he himself was equal Partner in,
He cunningly insinuates to the Crowd,
Sides with their Prejudice and Clamours loudest,
Till by degrees he moulds 'em to his purpose,
And, as a Stranger, pitying the Offence,
Flatters their surly Natures to dismiss him:
So I, by seeming to abhor thy Guilt,
Sheltered my own, and screened thee from her Rage.

You saved me from the Rack to Dye by Fire;
Preserved me only from her Jealousy,
To suffer by your greater Perjury.
No; I'm convinced you never loved at all,
Or else so little, you your self scarce knew it.

By Heaven, I Love thee more than Love can speak;
My Soul's uneasy with the vast excess.
It fain would throw its fondness in thy Bosom:
It languishes with pain to tell its Pleasure.
It swells with every touch as it would burst:
It longs to speak what it can ne'er express.
Desire is over-taken by Desire;
Like Waves they swallow up each other still,
And Wishes, like the Sands, are numberless.

With Words, like these, you first over-power'd my Weakness,
Drew me to base compliance with your Falsehood,
To loss of Honour, Kindred, Friends and Fame,
And yet, methought, I never should have missed 'em.
I found no want whilst I had Henry's Love,
But wanting that, the World is Barren to me:
Love, like a rough bred Warrior, almost starved,
So full was bent on one reviving Meal,
It satiated with greediness, not seeding,
And being in haste forgot its Benefactor.

But Gratitude has met me in the way,
And sent me back to pay my Thanks to Love:
Oh! Pardon then those Errors fear Created,
And let the inward Friendship of my Soul,
Plead for the outward coldness of Behaviour.

Oh Flattering Sex! whose Tongues are at Command
To Conquer still, what ever their Hearts desire!
Why, why, ye Powers, did you on Man bestow
Such an unbounded sense, to win our fondness,
And yet so little Honour to Indulge it?
His Tongue has Charms equal to his Embraces,
And one is by the other still relieved,
That there's no end of Pleasure where he is.

Relentless Creature! Is this Woman's usage?
Can that Divinity hear so unmoved?
Some cursed Fiend has stolen upon thy Sleep,
And changed the Nature of my Rosamond.
What is it you could think to ask of me,
But I'd have granted it before 'twas Named?
Wilt thou not speak? Must I begone for ever?
What! Not a look to tell me I may stay?
If thy proud Heart's too stubborn to express it,
Give me a doubtful glance to keep me here.
All! All are shut against my entreating Prayers!
Farewell then, since there is no glimpse of Comfort.
My Soul's turned Woman, I must ask again.
Yet, Rosamond, one Word. She's fixed!
Oh that some Power would Rivet us for ever
Within each others view,
That she, like me, might have no other Object.
Yet ever I go, for ever Rosamond --

What is it you would have me speak?


Why any thing that will excuse my staying.


I cannot look upon you.


Then turn away, talk to thy self:
Let me but hear thee, if I must not see thee.

Why should you tempt me to believe again,
Only to load me with a new affliction?
Could I be satisfied -- but 'tis impossible,
So we must part; there is no Remedy.

'Tis a sad Truth indeed: Part! 'tis resolved!
Alas, I only came to take my leave,
But fain I would have parted Friends with thee,
Because I thought I had no Friend beside.

And could you think parting would make us Friends?


No, but I thought our meeting might.


Then why do ye talk of parting?


I know not what I talk of; any thing, let us but talk.


Better be silent, sure, than talk of that.


Why must we not then part?


Oh never, Henry! I can hold no longer!
Be false, or faithful, I must love thee ever.
If we must part, be it all upon thy Head!
For thus I am resolved to live or dye.

Then let thy Arms grow round me:
Into thy Soul press-mine: Tie 'em so fast,
That one may never stir without the other.
Oh! now my Trial comes. Heart, bear this shock,
And nothing, sure, can hurt thee.

Why do you tremble?
Your Blood is Summoned from your Cheeks
By some strange Call; or have I pressed too hard,
And kissed it from 'em?

It will not out.


What will not?


Fate has so ordered.


How has Fate ordered? Oh! my Soul boads Ruin!


I'll call it by a gentler Name than parting.


Nothing that's gentle is allied to it.


We must separate.


Not when my Arms grow round thee.


My Stars have loosed 'em.


'Tis false, they clasp thee still.


My Son, in whom I placed entire Repose,
Has cast off Duty, and now Heads Rebellion!
The Factious Clergy all applaud the Act!
His Mother knows, but softens the vile Treason!
And if the Current be'nt with speed turned off,
'Twill burst the Barriers of our Love for ever.

Let me go with you.


Impossible!
Thy tender Body cannot brook such usage,
As the Necessity of War throws on us.

I'll like a Page attend you where you go,
Run by your side, and Watch your Sleeping hours,
And in the Fight I'll always meet your Danger.
I'll step before you as your Fate approaches,
That when the God of War beholds my daring,
And sees he must through me create his Conquest,
Honour shall find it self out-done by Love,
And blushingly reverse your Destiny.

Oh wondrous Constancy!
Heaven! Art thou not ashamed to let us want each other?
But we must bear it:
Our present pain will make our future Joy,
And to show much of Love is much to suffer.
Within this Bower, which purposely I framed
For thy security, thou shalt remain;
The Labyrinths conveyance none does know
But Vaughan,
He, and thy Confessor, are all shall wait thee.

Alas, I shall not need 'em.


Why?


Oh! I shall never see thy Face again*
An evil Dream this Morning entertained me,
And now it is confirmed.

Divert those fears, for I shall come again:
I've made a vow to Heaven, in thy behalf,
And sure 'twill Guard us till it is performed.
I'm called; once more into thy Arms, and
Then to War. Farewell.

Nay, let me see thee to the Gates.
Let my fond Eyes the most of the Object make:
Oh that they could such a long slumber take,
That I, thy absence, might in sleep beguile,
Then wake to run with a transported smile,
And meet thee at thy last returning Mile.

IT must be done; there is no other way:
We must launch out, or split upon the Rock
Of her Displeasure.

Ay, but the King!


Fear not; the Wind sits fair, and the auspicious Gale
Will in few hours waft him to Normandy.

Ay, ay; You've fed me up all along with Fancies, and made me believe the Lord
knows what, that I should be promoted and advanced: I'm in a very fair way
indeed, if Hanging will do it.


The lucky hour is come, accept the Offer,
And be what thou desire.

What, because I'm Rosamond's Confessor, and have the Privilege of the Bowr,
you persuade me to make my self a Property to the Queens Revenge, and be
accessory to the Death of my sweet Charge?


You take me for a Villain then, it seems.


It seems somewhat scurvily; Not that I take You for one, but I'm afraid I
shall be so.


Go to; you are to blame, and I must chide you.
What, think you I'd impose a Falsehood on you,
Upon the Man I love, my Confident?

Oh, she's a furious Queen! I shall never forget what a fright she put me in; I
am not come to my self yet, nay, 'tis a question whether ever I shall.


I tell thee, she's a perfect Convert, Brother;
Moves with my Will, and acts as I direct.
Come, shall I tell thee why she courts this visit?
I have enjoined it as a Penance to her,
To mortify her Pride, and haughty Humour,
And work, if possible, a Change in Nature.
Where thou fear Danger, thou shalt find it calm
As Peace it self.

This is wonderful!


The timorous Rosamond shall be surprised,
And with the Arms of Clemency embraced;
The Lioness and Lamb shall yoke together.

Ay, but can it be lasting?


My Life for it.
Mark what I say, and thou shalt find it Truth:
This Queen thou dread'st, shall daily visit her,
Condole their sep'rate Loss in Henry's Absence;
Nay, with the Bowl of Plenty shall caress her;
Each day shall still beget new marks of Friendship,
As this must usher in the happy Union.

Why this is from one Extreme to the other:
Can Magnificent Majesty condescend to this?

You soon shall be convinced: See there,
I've been her Purveyor already:
Choice Wines and Fruits, the best of Nature's Store,
Are ready to Regale the fair Recluse.
Come, will you do the Office of a Friend,
Or shall I tell the Queen of your refusal?

Oh, no, no, by no means. (I believe he's in earnest, and I will not baulk my
Fortune. Aside.) But do you really think in your Soul I shall ever live to be
an Abbot?


The Mitre waits thy own acceptance, Bertrard.


Why truly a Mitre's a fine thing; next to a Crown there's nothing above it;
nay, I have often known the Mitre govern the Crown; and really 'tis great to
govern a Crown; 'tis part of the Churches Prerogative: and though I am but a
little Abbot, I shall be a tight Abbot, and the World is not over-stock'd with
tight Abbots. Well, Father, I am all Obedience, I'll do it.


About it then.


What just now at this minute! ha!


Why dost thou tremble so?


Cold, only Cold, nothing else. There's no going back now, I have given my
promise; but my mind misgives me plaguily. If she murders Rosamond, I must
certainly make up the Chorus: and if, instead of a Mitre to enlighten my Brow,
I should have a Halter to encircle my Neck, Oh Lord!


Who waits?


Who are these, ha? They look terribly. That Fellow has a dreadful Cut-throat
Countenance.


They are my Servants.


I never saw 'em before.


What then?


Nay, be not angry, I'm ready. -- Sure this Abbot cannot have the heart to
murder one of his Brethren, when I am no hindrance to his Preferment. Aside. --
My Lord!


What say you?


Is the Queen ready?


At hand.


Sir Thomas is devilish Jealous; you must keep out of sight till I've secured
him; if he sees us, I'm undone*


Oh! fear not.
The Fool's grown troublesome and dangerous,
Too fearful, too inquisitive to live.
Therefore I've sent him on this speedy Errand.
I hope his Curiosity will tempt him
To taste both Wine and Fruit; all which are poisoned
Beyond the reach of Art to remedy.
'Tis not improbable but he may urge her
To follow the Example of her Granum.
But say this Project fails, what then must second?
A Dagger must complete the erring Potion.
Removed she must be, let come on it what will;
There is no middle Course in doing ill.

What, at a loss, my Friend, my Oracle?
Is this a time for thinking?

'Twas for your Service, Madam.


I believe you, but cannot brook delay:
My Rage boils over, and Nature's in a flame;
Fierce as a Tigress that has lost her Young,
I thirst for the Pursuit of the Destroyer.

Your Guards must stay behind.


Why so?


They are too numerous, and will breed suspicion.
Besides, I have provided Hands enough,
And nothing's wanting but your Royal Presence
To grace the Scene.

Now, Rosamond, thy last of Life is run:
Since thy Ambition levels at my Crown,
Swift as the first Usurper thou shalt down,
To Molten Seas, and Lakes of Sulph'rous Fire,
Whose Flames are restless as thy own desire;
Seem always dying, but shalt never expire.

Oh, yonder he is. What, ho! Sir Thomas!


The Devil's in the Fellow: If a Man were not deaf, here's noise enough to make
him so.


'Tis I, your Friend.


Father Bertrard?


The same.


What Wind drives you hither?


A Message from the King, and a Present for the Lady.


I'm coming, I'm coming.


My Heart beats still; I sweat with apprehension: I should make but an ill
Martyr for Religion; and to die for these Lovers would be ten times more
terrible.


What have we here, ha! I should have thought a present of Jewels had been more
proper than Wine; but may be he thinks it fit she should be kept Maudlin till
he return: In with your Luggage Friends.


What, before you?


This is no place for Ceremony, I take it therefore.

Troop, or --

There must be something more than ordinary in this, for he never mentioned a
syllable to me; yet now I think on it, Lovers are very apt to forget, and the
poor Gentleman was in a strange confusion at parting: Well I'll in and examine
the whole. Ha! who comes yonder! the Queen! Gods Life, there's Villainy, I'll
House presently and secure my Charge.

Murder, Murder.


Drag him to yonder Thicket. Now, Madam, all is safe, and we may enter.


Pity me rather than condemn my frailty,
And spare the rigid censure I deserve;
I cannot rest, some Devils haunt my Soul:
When late last Night I sunk to my repose,
A dreadful Vision entertained my slumber;
Poor Rosamond methought was all on fire,
And as I strove to quench the raging object,
The Queen threw Oil on the expiring Flames,
And made 'em blaze afresh with fiercer fury*

'Tis but the restless passion of your Love.


I started from my Dream, and called to thee,
Bad thee get Horse, attend me instantly,
And thus unknown we've posted from Southampton;
Methinks we have Rid upon the Wind, ha, Verulam,
I scarce could feel the speed my Spurs created,
And yet methoughts 'twas a slow pace to Love

It is not fit that I dispute your will,
Though I could wish, nay, do with all my Soul,
This Ague fit of Love had never seized you;
For by it, you may lose the blessed occasion
That time e're offered to surprise your Foes.

Tell me no more of Foes while she's in danger,
For, oh my Soul is Wedded to the Fair,
Whose Power is boundless as her Beauties Charms;
When I would go, there's something holds me back;
Even while I talk, my boding Heart, with more
Than usual fierceness, beats its time,
As if that Life were on the hurry.
Why this cold Dew, which flows from every Pore?
Why do I tremble thus?
Surely the Earth suffers the throws of Labour,
And some strange Birth starts forth to view the World.

Imagination gains upon you, Sir.


Ha! Is't not Blood?
By Heaven a mighty Tract! Where is the source?
Search! find it out! I'm on the Rack!
Am I to blame now, Verulam?
Oh, speak! Where is my Soul? my Love? my Rosamond?

I shall never recover.


Say, is she living? Answer me quickly,
If you would save the King.

The Queen and Abbot --


The Devil.


Ay, and his Dam too, they have mauled me.


Force open the Doors.


Impossible! the means are wanting.


Would I have answered so to Verulam?
To thy Relief I would have added Wings.
Would I had Men, not Walls, to Combat with!
With my keen Sword I'd hew a passage through!
Spite of all opposition force my way,
And from the Harpies Talons snatch the Prey.

Gently, gently, good Gentlemen, I shall reach my Journie^ end soon enough. If
the King does force in, and my Life keeps m^ company so long, I would fain see
my self Revenged on this Damn'^ Abbot.


Will you not be dressed, Sir, you may recover?


No, I'm past the Cure of a Salve-dauber, would I had the Grace to ask Pardon
for my Sins: But I have put off my Repentance as I used to do my Business, till
the last hour, and now I'm hurried to the Devil at a moments warning! Softly,
good Sirs, softly.


You have removed the Mist of my Offences,
Which, like a Cloud, ascended up to Heaven,
And hindered all my Prayers from being heard.
How willingly could I relinquish Life!
Part with this wretched Being! and for ever,
Within the Earth's cold Womb, contented lye?

Have you a mind to destroy your self? Go to, you're to blame; by my Order you
are. What! spoil that pretty face with whimpering, and crying, for a little
Absence?


I am miserable, Father! A lost Creature!
For all the comfort of my Life is gone!
The Sun has left the Horizon, and I,
Like those who live under the Frozen Pole,
Am now all Darkness, Horror and Confusion.

He'll return, I warrant thee, speedily; he can't live without you. You're the
Apple of his Eye, the Joy of his Heart, the Lamp of his Life, and he'll bring
Oil to feed it, I'm certain -- If the Queen should bolt upon us, while she's in
this humour, it would scare her out of her Wits; there's no persuading her to
Reason: I'll see what a Comfortable Dram will do. Why, Madam! Madam! you have
forgot what the King sent, he foresaw there would be occasion, and, like a
prudent Man, provided against a Rainy Season; see how it sparkles, 'tis as
bright as your Eyes:


Heaven say, Amen.


'Thas an odd sort of a Farewell -- I can't imagine what growth this Grape is of
-- 'tis not Burgundy. Gad shall save me, it warms one strangely; such a twang I
have not met with: I must cover His Majesties Health with your Ladyships. Come,
bless both! bless both!


What stately Rooms! what glorious Apartments!
How Furnished! how Adorned! These show a Grandeur,
Fit for the Empress of the Universe.

Love always serves his Minions at this Rate,
And 'tis her turn to be ascendant now.

Not, and I live, my most Officious Sir.


The Queen!


Ha! how terrible she looks.


An unexpected Visitorit seems.


Where is my Guardian? Where my Servants?


They're gone before to Usher you the way.


I am Betrayed! Undone!


Thou art, indeed.
Thy Guilt arraigns thee, and thy Conscience has
Pronounced against thy self the fatal Sentence:
Here all thy Glories mingle with the Dnst.

Oh Lord! what will become of us, she's got into one of her mad Fits again? I'm
ruined! A lost Man!


What means my Queen?


No, you mistake, I am the Slave, you are the Queen,
For all of Majesty, of Power, and Pomp,
Are Centred by my Lord, the King, in you;
I servilely attend your leisure hours,
And humbly wait upon his idle pleasures.

Here will be Murder; I'm in a Sweat already.


Peace, Fool.


Peace Fool! Where is't? here's no likelihood of Peace; here's nothing but Fire
and Tow, and I burn already.


Will you but hear me?


No, 'tis in vain, thy bounds of Life are set;
Thou die Usurper.

Yet stay, one Word before you strike the blow.


She is not fit to live, therefore dispatch:
Strike home, and while she's studying for a Lye,
Let her sink quick to Hell and tell it there.

The King.


Ha! where?


Is upon Entrance.


Has mischief plaid the Jilt?


Oh luckily Minute!


Welcome, dear King; but I burn confoundedly.


Thou shalt not escape.


You will not Murder me!


Had thou ten thousand Lives, here they should end.


We trifle time away.


To let thee see I yet am Charitable,
And would not kill but on Necessity,
Here, take thy choice, Drink this, and linger out
A moments space.

Yet Mercy!


Here's all I have.


Oh, hold! Give me the Cup! The Dagger gives
Immediate Death, and I shall perish ever I see the King*

What, will you spare her?


No -- Drink or --


I do. Thus I submit, and Drink the Bane of Life;
The Bane of Love. Oh Henry! thus I fall thy Sacrifice.

What! Do I see the same Wine I drank? Oh! My Bowels!


Rise, Rosamond.


Only to fall again? No, I am down for ever.


Is the Wine Poisoned, no help?


None; you must be tasting, fall to your Prayers.


I've none of my Beads: Oh! I'm gone! I'm dying! I'm dead!


Lead the Fool out; let not his noise disturb us.


Oh, Gentlemen, what will become of my Soul? What will become of my Soul? Take
notice, Friends, that I dye in doubt! I dye in doubt! for I don't know where
I'm going.


Am I then come too late? And is my Rose,
My lovely Rose, torn short from off the Stalk?
Look up my Love, and bless me with thy Eyes;
Oh, gaze upon me while their lustre last,
And when they close, I'll sink in darkness with 'em.

I do, I must while I have any being;
But, Oh, the date is short, yet I am blessed
That I expire within your Royal Arms.

Open the snowy Mansion of thy Breasts,
Where Natures everlasting matchless sweets
Shoot forth, to bless the sense that can approach 'em.
Oh, show me where the bleeding sluices are,
That I may piece-meal tear my trembling Flesh,
To stop thy flowing Life.

I have no wounds.


Why then dost thou talk of dying?
Why stretch my Soul upon the Rack of Tortures?

Oh, most detested sight;
Curse on my Hand that spared the Object
Which so much torments me.

Help me to rear her.


Oh, If I stir I die, my Dear, Dear Henry.


What?


I'm Poisoned; Let me embrace you for the time
I stay, and breath my Soul out here, for 'tis on wing.

Some run with speed, and call assistance hither,
My Crown to him that saves her.

Thank you Gentlemen for your good company hither, I am travailing; the Abbot,
that Spiritual Guide, has given me a wrong Pass, a Pox on him.


While Fate is busy, I will shift the place,
It grows too hot for me.

Your Pardon Sir,
We must not part yet.

No, hold him good Verulam; let not the Layety be ever the sufferers; let the
Church have her share of this mischief, that she may not laugh at us always.


An Ax, a Gibbet, or a Wheel; Oh, scandal of my Tribe, to be thus caught.


Have I your hand?


Why, dost thou question it?


A sudden mist intrudes upon my sight,
My Limbs grow numb; I shiver with the cold,
Cold touch of Death; Oh; help me, clasp me hard;
A tall lean shade is plucking me away:
I must along with him.

Oh, dreadful sound!


Remember me a little amidst your Joys her eafter,
Indeed I'll think on you; Oh, in my Grave, when you
Expire, be laid; I'll keep it warm against your coming.
I'm very sick -- my pain's exceeding great --
But yet I love, believe me that I love, Farewell.

Oh, one word more, my Rosamond, one more,
She's gone, the Beeuteous frame's dissolved,
Life is no more; And what is Life without her?
Now for Medusa's Head to work a change,
That I might grow a Statue by her side,
And be each others Monument for ever.

My Royal Lord,


What wondrous sweetness dwells upon her Lips?
Though Death has Ravished hence the blooming Rose,
The Lillies spring afresh -- but a pale yellow
Steals upon their Beauty, and, with the Setting-Sun,
They seem to wither.

Sir, I beseech you;


Oh, Verulam, behold! how Nature struggles,
The Red again seems to assume her Cheeks,
And Death's unwilling to perform his Office;
He's stepped to Heaven to beg her a Reprieve:
Life, like a Lambent Glory, Dances round her,
And waits for fresh admittance.

Will you not hear me Sir?


The Gods were deaf to me when I complained,
And I will now be so to all the World.

May I not speak?


And justify the Murder: Hence, begone.


No; as an expiation for the fact,
Here take my Life, but spare my Children.

Ha! what say you?


Our easy Natures were imposed upon,
Abused by yonder. Villains sophistry;
Had he ne'er blown the Embers of Suspicion,
That you designed to Ruin them and me,
These Hands had ne'er been stained with Blood.

Speak Fury, What could urge thee to this deed?


Remember Becket- and then shake with horror.


Away with him to death.


Thou dare not kill me Henry;
Too much of the Churches Blood hangs on thy Head:
If thou take mine 'tis multiplying Murder.

Thou shalt not live, though I appeal unto his Holiness.


That's asking my Fellow if I'm a Thief. --
There's Justice cheaper for you:
Sink Pulpit-Furniture.

'Tis done, and all your torturing Projects are prevented: But Monarch, here I
Prophecy thy Ruin! To Becket's Shrine thou must a Pilgrim go, the Church has
vowed it; shun it if thou can. And next thy Son; Thy Son shall wear thy Crown
in thy own Life time. Becket, thy Hand, and Guide me, for I'm coming.


Can Wickedness, like thine, ever hope for Heaven?


No matter what I hope for, this I know,
Thy Plagues on Earth will equal mine below.

So, here's a Temporal Pimp by a Spiri^ual Knave, and how to get to Heaven
without him will be hard.


Poor Sir Thomas.


As rich as I was Born, the Earth has her own again, and I owe the World
nothing.


Behold what thou hast done, unthinking Woman!
Thou wretched Instrument to yonder Villain!
Prithee begone, lest that my trembling Hand
Rush on a Deed unworthy of my self.

I go, and if thy Rage will banish me for ever,
It will some pleasure to my wrongs appear,
As I must ne'er have thee, thou can not her.

Oh, Rosamond!
What Wonders would I do to purchase thee again!

Take Comfort, Sir, since she is past restoring:
Let War, and thoughts of Conquest, drive her from you.
Your Country wants you, and your Honour calls,
If you'd do something to Revenge her loss,
Now is the time; your Son invites you to it.
We'll raise a Funeral Pile of Norman Rebels,
And burn 'em to the memory of her.

I thank thee, Verulam, thou hast awaked me;
Let's hasten to Erect that Monument.
Oh Rosamond! thou shalt be Nobly follow'd;
Of my own Bowels I will make Atonement!
And my Cursed Queen shall find her Rage outdone,
For I'll Revenge thy loss upon her Son.


