Spoken by Mr. Powell.

I Can but think how many here are come,
Prepared to give the Ensuing i lay i'ts Doom:
But like the Gordian-^ not this Play was made,
By one who Brought it us in Masquerade;
Plays were at first designed to Lash the age,
By showing all its Vices on the Stage,
As in a Glass there each might see his own,
And being Conscious bl^sht at what he'd done;
The Fool, the Knave, the Villain they exposed
And the Blood-thirsty Politician nooz'd;
But Virtue, though she suffered long at last,
Was Crowned with a reward for what was past;
The honest-thinking Heathen showed the way,
And handed Down the Moral called a Play:
Old Ben. and Shakespeare copied what they writ,
Then Downright Satyr was accounted wit;
The Fox, and Alchemist exposed the Times,
The Persons then was loaded with their Crimes;
But for the space of Twenty years and more,
You've hissed this way of Writing out of door,
And kick and winch when we but touch the sore.
But as some Fashions long since useless grown,
Are now Revived and all the Mode of the Town.
Why may not the Ancient way of Writing please,
And in its turn meet with the same Success?
The Story's true if you'll believe Record,
Edward the Third has stamped it on his word:
Here English-Men with pleasure may behold,
How much their Liberties were priz d of old.
How hard this Prince for's Countries freedom strove,
And how both Prospered in each others Love.

IT much disturbs me Delamore, that thou
Of all Mankind should think my temper frail;
What hast thou ever seen in Montacute,
Or read in the Annals of his Ancestors,
To fear him or suspect his Resolution?
Proclaim me Bastard if my blood proves base,
I tell thee good old Friend;
I'll banish sleep and Pleasure till I've found
A means to set my bleeding Country free;
And in the fury of this Noble heat,
Plunge through a Sea of blood for her deliverance.

I Question not your Spirit, But --

What?

Pray give me leave:
Nay, I must chide you, for you give the Reins
To such a Passion may undo us all;
Are there not sharp observers placed about us,
Who if'twere possible would search our Souls?
This eager Fire will quite forestall our purpose.

Well! I am husht.
But pray propose some means may please my thoughts,
Since you'll confine my tongue.

Nay, I'm for urging of our wrongs, but calmly,
There is a time
When Heaven will do us Right for all our Woes,
And if the Orphans cries or Widows tears,
The Blood of Innocents which stains the Land,
Can hasten Vengeance, sure 'tis drawing nigh.

'Tis full three years since Mortimer began
To Lord it over us by the Queens vile favour;
He stalks as on a Mountain by himself,
Whilst we creep humbly in the Vale below,
And Eye, and Curse, what we're afraid to reach at

In this short space, he and his Brother-Devil
Have made, undone, new framed, shuffled and tossed
The Ancient Customs of our Native Soil
So very often, that the Kingdom staggers
Under the heavy Burden of her change.

What are our Princes? what the Nobles now?
Are they not Vassals to this upstart's State?
No more the same of our Nobility
Be called in mind; who when Usurping Powers
Did but attempt to Innovate, our Laws
With their keen Swords like Guardian Angels stood
And kept the Harpy's from the Sacred Fruit.

Is it not fatal to resist his Will?
Nay none must smile if Mortimer be sullen;
Curse on his Pride: why should we brook it longer?
Why don't we boldly tell the King our thoughts,
And make him Great in spite of evil Counsel?

There will be Mortimer in every State;
Some Favourite Villain to oppress the Subject,
Who fell to Knaves what honest Men should have,
Which loose their Right only for being poor;
The largest bribe is still his dearest Friend,
And values not the Credit of his Prince,
Therefore 'tis just
The King should know how much he is Ecclips't,
Who 'tis that grasps the Sceptre in his stead,
And how his Mother lavishly doth waste
The best of his Revenue on this March.

It rests not there, she Prostitutes her self,
Pardon me, for I will not gived no better name;
Is she not grown the Common tale of all?
One Palace holds 'em both, one Table feeds 'em,
Nay, I will speak it, Sir, one Bed contains 'em:
The Brawny Minion's dieted on purpose
To do the Drudgery of Royal Lewdness.

How are we managed by a pair of Knaves:
March rides the Privilege of all the Peers;
For who in Parliament speaks not his thoughts
Must never have a good look from the Court:
Whilst Hereford the Reverend Chancellor,
Persuades the Queen she may dispense with Laws,
And renders 'em according to her purpose.

If as sometimes he meets a knotty point
Which will not stretch to what his need requires,
He Summons the most Learned of the Robe,
Begging their kind Interpretation of it,
Telling how necessary, nay how Loyal 'tis
When the Prerogative of the Crown is pinched
Within the Clutches of the Griping Law
To ease the Royal Power, and give it freedom
If they Comply not, then his Greatness Culls
From out the Scum of the Inns of Chancery,
A Set of Poor necessitated Rogues,
Who've Run through all the Judgments of each Court:
And these he makes his Learned Expositors,
These as they steadily perform their task,
He puts into their Places who refused him:
Some have the fortune to ascend the Bench,
But then they're such Profficients in their Art
They'd bafflle truth though never so well backed,
And dare the Devil in his own Profession.

Justice and Honesty have left the Robe,
For since the Prelate Hereford is chosen,
(Under pretence that Piety best suits
To adorn the Person of a Chancellor)
Because on Conscience Equity depends:
The Ancient Practicers refuse to Plead
Balkt with his over-ruling Clamorous tongue;
They tell you with a heavy heart and look,
That after many years of constant Practice
They must to School again and learn the Law.

Come, come, it never was a prosperous World,
Since Priests were Judges made of Temporal matters:
Why should we wonder People grow Profane,
When Mitred-Heads lead 'em the way to Hell;
The Customs of their Ancestors they slight,
Have changed their Shirts of hair for Robes of Gold:
Thus Luxury and Interest Rules the Church,
Whilst Piety and Conscience dwells in Caves.
Let's stem the Current of this furious tide,
Our Country is the Parent of us all;
And shall we talk away the precious hours
Whilst these vile hangmen stretch her on the Rack?
Let's force young Edwards safety by our Swords,
And cut off all the holds which bar his Glory.

Blessings upon thee for this generous heat,
From hence my fears and Jealousies, be gone;
Thou art the Soul of Honour new revived,
Which for some years, as once the Romans did,
Withdrew thy self into a willing Exile
Action, there will be fuel for thy Fire,
Great as thy Spirit Courts and worthy of thee,
The matters ready and the Engines fixed,
Many prepared and eager for the work,
But Place and time forbid the telling more:
The Darling Comes.

Make way there --

Room for his Lordship:

See how the Toad swells with his own applause:

My Lord you do forget.

I'm silent:


Turrington:


Your pleasure:

What are those Men which bend their knees to us?
They seem as Supplyants.

So they are indeed from several Towns,
Cities and Burroughs they are come,
Humbly Imploring you would Intercede
For their lost Charters to the Incensed Queen.

That is the Chancellours business.

They know your Interest greater and entreat it;
The Judges have annul'd 'em; and unless
Your Goodness can prevail, many a Town
By their own faults Incurred will fall to ruin,
And be a Wilderness; Thousand of Families
Now in the way of Life must starve and Perish.

Their Ancient Cha^ers by the Law are forfeited,
But I will Study how to get 'em new ones:
Our time is spent in telling things aright,
This Kingdom wants it, and I am its Friend.

Was ever Pride or Arrogance like this?

Nevill, what would those People have?

May it please your Honour,
They are Inhabitants of the adjacent Corporations
They all of'em have voices at Elections,
And promise for the Parliaments to come,
They will choose none but what the Court shall like.

'Tis well, and we take notice of their Wisdom,
See that you give 'em welcome as becomes us;
Such Subjects must not want Encouragement,
And March be Living.

Unheard of Impudence.

My Lord, we are observed, see how he eyes us;
Nor are we safe whilst we stand trifling here.

Why let him eye us till his balls grow stiff.
His looks may fright those have dependence on him,
I slight the worst and best of 'em:

Ha! what said he?

Sir;

Lead on.
Ha, Jostled!

I find the man is greater then the Room;
Sure else he might have strutted clear of me.

Thou art a froward Peer;

Thou art a vain one; Nay, frown not March
Thy terrour's lost on me:
Look big upon those bastard English-Men
Who tamely yield their Rights and Charters up,
And swear to pick a Parliament
Shall sell our Freedoms, Persons and Estates,
To gain a short-liv'd smile --
They probably may dread thee.

Rash youth, no more, lest thou provoke my anger,
Till I forget the Palace that Protects thee;
But the Eagle seldom condescends, I think,
To Combat with the Passion of a Wren.

I tell thee Boaster, that my veins do hold
A Nobler, Richer, Purer blood then thine.

Thy word's are air which no Impression make,
So boys hurl stones in Water and so lost:

So Men shun Provocations under Proverbs:

Shun thee, poor Wretch, I pity thee:

I scorn thy pity, and contemn thy hate.

Nay Mountacute.

Rot his proud Spirit -- oh that I had thee forth
On some wide Plain to Hunt thy haughty Soul,
Distant from all Protection but thy Swords,
There thou should find --

A Prattler;
Thy Mother's folly dwells upon thy tongue,
Thou came from School too early,
Fie Boy, fie:

Statesman, Statesman, thou Engineer of hell:

Rail on, and spend thy Gall, malicious thing,
Whose Nurses Milk still hangs upon thy Lips,
You should be scourged to manners.

The King shall know thee,

Then he will know himself:

Arrogance, I shall meet thee;

Beware the Thunder Child, 'tis dangerous.

If thou art so, like Lightning, I'll fore-run thee,
And if thy self thou dare a Thunder Prove,
Follow me Mortimer and I'll think thee Jove.

Had you not Patience as you have the Power
Of an offended Deity, this language sure had been his last;
I watched, my Lord, your eyes,
And ready for the Signal of dispatch,
Had laid his Reeking heart beneath your feet.

You are too merciful, too full of goodness,
Such high Indignities call for Resentments
No less then Death; Pardon my plainness Sir,
For here I Prophecy, unless you break
This Serpents Egg before the Monster's hatched,
'T will bring Destruction on your self and friends

I thank ye, and am happy in your service;
The Babbler I despise, he shall be punished,
The Envy that his Cankered breast is big with,
By Preying on its self shall work his Ruin:
So Dogs behold the Lustre of the Moon,
And so run yelping backward into madness.

The Queen:

Retire, meet me anon, and we will consult what's best.
My Lovely Queen, my charming Isabella,
The Empress of my Soul, and balm of Life,
Ten thousand Cupids play within those Circles,
And dart the Rays of Love so quick and fast,
That all my Spirits leap to meet thy Glories.

I find my Soul so near resemble thine,
That when you speak it hastes to catch thy words;
So when some Curious Artist strikes the Lute,
The Harmony excites the Astonished Sense,
And to the Face conveys the sudden Transport
When thou dost offer up this Sacrifice;
Like Cynthia to her Loved Endymion,
I must descend and thus Caress my Charmer.

To you alone I own my Second being,
And can I pay my life to other use
Then the adoring of my saving Goddess?
Well I remember when Carnarvex, Edward,
By Spencers Art lodged me within the Tower,
Where every minute boaded still my last,
Amidst of despair; 'twas thou my better Genius;
Contrived the means to save thy Vassal's Life:
A sleepy mixture artfully conveyed
Into the Wine, the greedy Warders Drank.
While by a Friend that thou had made with Gold
I past the Guards and fled the hated Place.

Could I do less then that for him I loved,
He who in Steel had fought my Battles over
Against the false Spencers, and worse Gavestone;
He who all danger in my ^use defied,
Was my best Friend against a Host of Foes:
Oh Mortimer how happy had I been
If'stead of Edward thou had been my Lord,
Then Innocent and Pure as Vestal flames
I had come unspotted to thy wishing Arms,
And left no stain upon my Memory.

Beauty like yours was ever absolute,
Crowns should not Awe, nor should the Throne Command,
But he that's bravest best deserves the blessing;
Was Edward fit to reap such joys as these?
Ungrateful Edward who received a Prize,
Heaven could not match in all its wondrous store,
And for return instead of Prayers and Incense
Slighted the Giver and the glorious Present:
A Minion Spencer must supply the Place,
A Ganemede, a Hylas, senseless Prince,
The Gods Reprisall gave for the Contempt,
And for reward of all my Cares and Toils
Decreed this slighted Beauty should be mine.

You Men are skilful in the Trade of Love,
You found our Souls and Catch our Weaknesses,
Apting your words still to the Theme we're fond of,
And we believe 'em to our own undoing.

Whilst thus I press, I feel a kindly heat
Glow in my heart, urging to eager Bliss:
Sweets let me sip from these Immortal Springs;
Youth we will renew, and humane nature change,
Making the Ecstasy a Paradise.

May thou for ever feel this Pleasing Fire,
May fears ne'er cool it, time or Age decay it,
Desire for ever wait upon our Joys,
And may the last be ever thought the best.

What Brainsick Priests do in their Raptures tell
Of the Elizium endless happiness
Falls short of what each minute I enjoy;
But oh my Care, our Paths of Love are strewed
With Briers which Thwart and Cross us in our Pleasures:
Young Mountacute with Delamore and Holland,
Those subtle Bellous which keep in his fire,
And raise and calm it as their Work requires
Must be removed, Their Interest is great,
Their Prudence strict, Mountacutes Courage firm,
Their Fortunes able to maintain their measures,
Which strikes for thy Sons Greatness and our Ruin.

The Boy is Pliable to all my wishes,
'Tis a half Soul bred in the Lag of Love,
And Spiritless as the Desire which got him;
We will think of them at Leisure.

No more then now.
Let us Retire to our Delights, unutterable Joys,
Oh! why should Death for ever part such Lovers
Fate; when your pleasure comes that we must fall,
Let us together mount the Ethereal Region:
But oh I fear my Soul's too poor for thine,
Qeens have peculiar stations sure above;
I tossed and shattered must remain below,
Ever Imploring for my heaven in view.

No, if the Powers despise my Mortimer,
Their Care of me alone's not worth my Thanks.
Single a Paradise I could not bear,
Heaven would be Hell were Mortimer not there.

WHere have I been, or what is't I have seen?
'Tis said the Soul while the Tyred body sleeps,
Her Mansion often leaves and Roves abroad,
Sometimes to Groves and Solitary Cells,
Sometimes to Courts, to Cities, and to Camps;
Mingling with Crowds, then strangely left alone:
But mine has fallen down dreadful Precipices,
Walked in the Charnell-Houses of the dead:
My Fathers Ghost stalked thus before my eyes,
Cried out Revenge, then shreik'd and disappeared,
With so much hast, as if it seemed to dread
The hand of Murder did pursue it still;
Yet, as it fled it forced the yielding Air,
To Echo back, beware of Mortimer,

Lord Mountacute, Sir Robert Holland, with Sir Thomas Delamore,
Wait for admittance to your Majesty.

They're welcome, bring 'em in;
Then headless Kent my once beloved Uncle,
Led on a Train of miserable Shades,
Who seemed bewailing their untimely deaths.
With uplift hands they begged as for relief,
And in sad postures told their several Fates:
Then Mortimer Led in my wicked Mother,
Who Snatched the Crown from me and gave it him,
At which the numerous Crowds of Ghosts looked paler,
Their mangled Limbs broke out afresh with blood,
And the Surprising horror shook off sleep;
What is it, oh ye Powers, that ye decree?
Am I designed to fall a Sacrifice
To the Ambitious Lust of this fell Monster?
If Dreams Presage, Or Visions can forebode
The Fate of Edward, Edward must succeed,
If so you've fixed it, yet I'll face this storm,
Stand like a King against my Rellious Doom;
And Perish worthy of my Dignity.

Health to your Majesty:

The like to all of You, ye are good men;
My Worthy Uncle Edmond when alive
Bad me select and value ye as Jewels,
When Dying, as a Legacy Bequeathed
Your Faiths and Service;
I am too Young to know the Arts of Men,
But by my hopes I think ye mighty honest.

Our happiness Lies only in that thought:

Tell me my Friends, and with that honest Plainness
As suits the Character I have of you:
Why is it that with folded Arms of Late,
And heavy Eyes which speak distempered minds,
Ye measure out your steps?
Seeming like Statues more then Councellors,
As mourners wait upon the Dead remains
Of some loved friend to his eternal home.

Most Royal Prince, my honoured Liege and Master.

Honoured, my Liege, my Prince and Royal Master.
How Like this sounds to Mortimer;
I find he's grown the President o'th Court,
The Star by which each Courtier guides his hopes.

Rather a Meteor or some Exhalation
Raised by the Sulphurous vapours of the Earth,
Which borrowing of a Blaze from Real Lights
Attracts the eyes of Fools to Gaze on it.

No more on your Allegiance, to the Point:

You have touched us home Sir now, and we obey
The Secrets of our hearts shall be unlocked,
Where you may read yours and the Nations doom;
It is the Man you've named which rides our Spirits
Oh my Loved Lord!
Why is this Viper harboured in your Bosom,
Which (...) insensibly upon your honour?
Why p^pher'd with the Worship of men's Knees?
You are our King, Ro^se sleeping Majesty,
Awake and view the Souls which wait your rising,
To pay their Long kept Homage where 'tis due.

Where now is Right? to whom shall we Appeal?
The Queen has placed her Power on Mortimer:
Whilst the Laws edge is Ground but on one side,
Nor that employed unless to Lop your Friends:
The man who dare reflect on his Proceedings,
Or pity but the Circumstances of Edward,
Is straight beset and sworn into some Plot:
His Life or Fortune's seized, it may be both
Jurys and Witnesses are kept in pay,
Which have agreed his Ruin e're he's heard.

Thus your good Subjects daily are Oppressed,
Which Perish by Consent of Perjury.

Thus whilst these vile Possessors wrack the Land,
Your Worth decays and Glory runs to Ruin:
It can't last long they think, so make the most on it,
Assume your Right, or we must all submit,
Our Country Like Estates held in dispute,
Fertile in Woods and Parks the Pride of Wealth.
If he that's in possession thinks it short,
He Cuts down all the Pomp of's Ancestors,
Which many years their Diligence Improved
So Worthy men the prop of future hopes,
By this Usurper Mortimer are Lopped,
Their Fortunes torn by 'th' Roots form long Succession;
And scattered to maintain Voluptuousness.

Is't Possible! I always thought him ill,
But you Decipher him a very Devil:
Filling my thoughts with horror of his Crime.

Each Magistrate which should administer
Justice Impartial, why all are made by him
Which Ruin others to preserve themselves;
The Clergy and the Law are both his Creatures,
The Bishop Chancellor takes Care of that;
Places of Trust and Profit are all Sold:
'Tis Practised from the Mitre'd holy head
To'th Needy Starving Verger of the Church:
You can't serve Heaven on Cushions but you pay for 't,
Or Blister your Numbed Knees upon the Marble;
Then from the Scarlet and the Purple Gown,
Down to the very Crier of the Court.

Well may the Nation Groan while such as these
Sit at the helm, and what expect but shipwreck.

Now by my Honour I'll no Longer bear
The Ignominious hand of a Control;
I find my self enlarged, Each Artery
Beats double time, as if my Spirits strove
To be in Action; My Fathers Soul
Shoots in my blood, and Prompts to Resolution:
Thus I Cast from me
The Name of Duty and the Tie of Son,
Since thou art dead to shame, be so to me.

Ay, now my Lord you speak your self a King:
Do but appear with that Authority,
The Praise of Edward Every tongue will sing,
While Ravished heaven does echo back the sound;
You can't want hands for such a Noble Work,
A Cause like yours would summon the Just Gods
With all their Thunder to the Royal Aid:
Oh let me Kiss your Sacred feet dear Prince;
These Words have added years to my sick Life.

He Weeps, indeed the honest man
Does weep; Rise Delamore for I will be my self,
And this Usurper March shall down to Hell,
All spare the Tree whose Branches serve as shade,
Till the spread mischiefs kill the under-Plants,
Then every Man assists to fell it down,
So this Colossus of the English Isle,
Under whose Legs the Tallest Ships must Pass,
E're they gain harbour shall to Seas be hurled,
And in their Bottom find a Monument:
My Dream comes on apace, and I foretell
This meeting Ominous to March for it Portends;
The Wardship of the Queen, and he expires,
He seeks my Life, and Crown: ha! is't not so?

Right Sir, that must be surely the design
By his removing you to his Residence:
Why was not Salisbury as good a place,
Oh! there you Lived surrounded by the Peers
And Loyal Commons, 'twas a place too safe:

Possibly he did it Sir to show the State
Your Royal Mother keeps -- But then
Why was not his fair Castle made your Palace?
No, your eyes would Pierce too deep in his design,
For there he Lives in Grandeur,
In Masks and Revels every night he reigns
While alls Barred up as if he feared a spy.

You now are open to each Traitors shaft,
And in the very midst I dare avouch it,
Of those who long to taste your Royal Life.

Thanks my Good Angel, thou hast turned my fears,
The Chillness of my Blond now Ebbs apace,
My shivering Nerves shake their Convulsion off,
And ye have Roused the youthful Lyon up;
Oh that I had the hearts of these Bloud-hunters,
This Pious Chancellor and Treacherous March;
Like young Alcides would I Gripe the Snakes;
My worthy friends be still about my Person,
Send Instantly to Berkly, Salisbury,

You withdraw with me;
Business I have requires your best advice,
For like the Mariner I see from far
A Storm is gathering in the distant Sky;
But with these Vessels I can fear no Sea,
The utmost Rigour of the Clouds I'll stand
Safe as the Souls which pity us from Land.

I beg your Lordship would accept of this poor offering,
I have had but a bad Term; as the times mend
My Acknowledgments shall grow greater.

Three broad Pieces

This fellow will come to nothing, I remember him an Attorney, you know him
Secret.


Yes, and Please you, he was once of the house of which I'm President, he
always shunned coming into Commons, and used to Dine at a three-penny Cellar,
always went to bed by day-light, Stole Paper and Pens, and begged Ink, he had
but one Band which he washed himself at the Pump, and then dried it by the
Hall-fire.


If your Lordship be at Leisure --


Councellor Dunderpate, I am glad to see you, I hope your family is well:


At your Lordships Service:


You're a sensible man, 10 Pieces -- well I never forget my friends.


There is a Cause will come before your Lordship between Pluckat and Holdfast
-- now I am for the the Defendant -- Holdfast and the Case is thus --


Why you rascal, are you going to Corrupt me with prepossession of the Cause
e're I've heard --


With your Lordships permission --

Sirrah, I will have nothing to do with it till it Lies before me; Why you
Jackanapes because I indulge your Presents d'yon think I take 'em as Bribes --
ha!


I beg your Lordships pardon, thus I confess my Error.


This makes some atonement, but d'hear, if ever I catch you at the like, as
opening the merits of the Cause in Private again -- I'll make you such an
Example, that that -- Sly take Councellor Dunderpate into the Buttery, and give
him a bottle of Sack.


Your Lordships Devoted Slave.


If it please your gracious Lordship.


Why, lay down what you have, I cannot look over it now.


Sergeant Eitherside, how do you? I hope your Brother-in-Law Sergeant
Huddle-Cause is well: I am glad to see you, you are my old Friend and
Acquaintance, (let me see) above 20 years standing: ha is't not so?


Your Lordship hits the mark of time Exactly, and I Protest the Honour you have
done me requires Acknowledgment beyond the Talent I am endowed withal; Let me
therefore, avoiding Prolixity, Profoundly Celebrate your Lordships Praises, and
acquaint the World, the favours you have placed on me your Creature, Exhalts me
to the Pinnacle of Ambition, and as an Incumbent duty obliges me to Consecrate
my self and Posterity to your Lordships Pleasure: Give me admittance therefore
most humbly to pay this Tribute of Duty, and with it the Orisons of many happy
years.


The Man speaks well (


My Lord.


How does your Niece, I say, what art thou deaf?


She's well my gracious Lord, and happy that your Emminence takes notice of
her.


I never saw her, but am told she's a notable baggage, a tight Lass and a pretty
one:


Fetch her whilst his bloud's warm, I see it glow through his Praises.


Lay it down I say, why I won't forget ye.

If this trade were to last the year round, I should have a fine time on it,
Gold in abundance, without which (as Anthony said) the world's not worth my
Care: 'tis great Pity the first of January comes but once in a twelvemonth.
Every one of these Crouching Fawning Snivelling Sons of Perdition expect I
should do wonders for 'em, but I know none of 'em; as I Lock up their Presents
I bury their memories: -- nor can I recolled 'em under under fresh ones --
Secret. I am but a man, yet am glad to do good in my Function when the Persons
are truly sensible.


'Tis a great goodness in you then.


Why there's that old spawn of the Serpent; Eitherside, a fellow of rare parts,
eminent Practice; I have known him undo twenty People, and they never the wiser
-- a very wicked fellow -- but then on the other hand his Repentance is always
so hearty, so Substantial and feeling, that my nature is overcome with his
Penitence, and I can no more chide him then I can refuse his Oblation.


Such men are wanting to fill the Bench withal, and I hope he may stand fair
in your Lordships opinion in the next remove, he'd perform his part rarely,
he's no Charitable Conscientious Timorous Fellow, but a Thorough-pac'd Lawyer,
and mighty hearty in the Cause --


Say 'it thou so man, and by my Troth it was well thought on; if these Peuking
velvet-hearted Wary Knaves that pretend to Scruples and seem averse to comply
with the Queens desires hang an Arse any longer, they shall make room for more
deserving Persons -- I do admire they can have so little Grace as to receive a
Plentiful Salary and make no return for it.


I'll pawn my Soul for him -- his temper may be moulded to what use occasion
shall require; besides his wants will prompt him to comply, his Gains are not
sufficient to maintain his family as his Wife would have it, for she loves to
go fine as most of 'em do; and for a new gown would make him give away the
Justest Cause in the world; his Estate too is mortgaged past recovery, to
maintain her pride.


But his Niece Seeret his Niece.


Oh she's the Prettiest Creature, my eyes e're looked on, such a Composition of
flesh and blood, so Witty, so Modest, so Alluring --


And such a Servant I want, for I am grown of late so melancholy, I am not
what I was -- we are all flesh and blood Secret, if she's of a coming-nature
she's made for ever, I grow aged, this Turmoiling in the Government, what with
my affairs o'th State, and bustling on the Bench, bandying about Equity and one
thing or other, wearys me out strangely -- I want like the Heathen Monarchs, my
Saraglio, to refresh me after the business of the day, but I must keep that to
my self -- and is she tractable?


Easy as Innocence it self; he's gone to fetch her.


Say thou?


He's gone to fetch her:


Hither.


Hither to your Lordship


He shall be a Judge, let him bring her instantly; I am much refreshed with the
thoughts that I can serve the Nation and my self so Luckily -- go and bid the
Sergeant prepare for his advancement.


I shall my Lord


Will it please your Lordship to peruse these Papers?


No Sir, I design to peruse something else I thank you, I will not have my
Imagination disturbed, nor my fancy palled; tell me of Papers when I'm to give
my Judgment upon flesh and blood: what do you take me for nothing but
hurry-durry all my life long: thou think my brains are taken up like thine
who's to be fined next: no, thou half-skin of Parchment, I hate the Sin of
being Covetous, though I love Gold Extremely, not altogether in regard as it is
money, but because Physicians have told me 'tis a great Restorative, you
Varlet.


I beg your Lordships pardon.


Pardon, why you Jack-Call to the Law, did think I was angry, angry on a
New-years day, angry when Riches and Love is towards me, no, no -- but hark
you Sirrah:


What is your Pleasure?


That shall be nameless -- Sirrah, was ever such a Question asked a man in my
office? why, you Saucy Impertinent --

Ha! is she coming rogue, say you? you little sucking Devil, by the Mass I'm
strangely altered within this half hour -- Look you, I am not angry Secret, as
I said before -- but, is she such a pretty sweet dapper Peace of beauty? I will
make thee a great man shortly by the Mass.


My Lord, she's whatsoever you can fancy, nor can you stretch your thoughts
into Imagination, but she Exceeds it in substance; her Uncle overjoyed at the
Good Office brings her himself.


He shall be a Judge -- shall -- he is already.


See, they are here my Lord.


Leave us.

A glorious Woman: how her eyes sparkle, and how the blood juts in and out upon
her cheecks, as if it hoped some good were coming toward her -- come, sweet
one,

Her lips are made of Velvet, smooth, soft, and pliable, I'll lip her and eye
her, and every thing her. -- Sergeant, as I told you before, I have a great
kindness for you, and hearing that you had a Niece of worthy Education, whose
merits spoke her praise (oh you little baggage) I can do no less, having your
Preferment in my eye, then while I was doing good for you in some measure, to
advance your Nieces fortune, my House wants such a sober discreet young Woman
to manage it, and by the way I must call you my Lord.


Oh Sir!


Indeed I must -- the Queen upon my Request doth confer the office of Judge on
you, as you deserve; that for ought I know you may be in a little time Chief
Justice -- This I have done my friend to serve you: But to the matter, what say
you Mr. Sergeant (my Lord, I beg your pardon) are you willing to put your Niece
under my care and Protection? ha!


My Lord you so highly oblige me, I am struck silent with the manner of it -- a
Judge, Chief-Justice, I am confounded with the honour -- My Lord, the Maid is
whatever you please to make her.


Then I'll make a Woman of her speedily: What say you pretty Lady, are you free
to take the trouble upon you? I am a weak man and have but few Relations -- If
I do well I'll make your fortunes: If I dye, you shall have no Cause to repent.


Would thou were dead already; must I then be the Sacrifice to my Uncles
Ambition? be steady Virtue, and assist me Heaven, though poor, I'll not be base
-- Oh Mountacute.


What say your fair one?


In any honest way I should be proud to serve your Lordship, and obey my Uncle.


Pretty Innocence, I am but twenty -- not so much I believe, I know not what I
am.


He may in time make her his Heir, at least her fortunes made, and I am freed
of a Burden -- My worthy Lord, her mind and mine are all one, she is the
Creature of your Pleasure, and will take any Impression your Lordship shall
stamp on her (a Judge --) Wife be of Comfort, thy Chariot shall be turned into
a Coach; Thy Pew at Church be stripped of Baise, and lined with Velvet, and thou
shalt take place of my Lady Mayoress Niece; you were born under a happy Planet,
fortune throws her self into your Lap, make use on it while 'tis offered, a Lord
-- oh lack a day, I can't contain my ecstasy.


Have you considered little one of the offer? you shall Command in Chief, and
be esteemed as if my Sister:

No harm shall come to you.


I hope not.


Fear it not.


I trust in your honour, your Robe's too worthy sure to harbour ill.


Niece, you must not talk so Impertinently: Incline your mind and body as his
Chancellorship and holiness shall think fit.


Hold there, good Uncle.


I am mightily o'rejoy'd it should fall out so pat that I can serve my old
Friend: 'Tis an Angelical Jade, and I grow very warm: well Child, I will take
care of you: My Lord, within two days your Patent shall be ready; I would
discourse a little with your Niece in Private -- I protest things fall out so
lucky.


I'll leave her with your Lordship.


Pray call me Brother-Lord, we are both Judges now and Lords alike.


Then Brother-Lord -- oh pretty -- I'll leave her with your Brother Lordship.


Do, do.


How will you leave me alone with a man Uncle?


Peace baggage -- Uncle -- I'm a Judge.


Why are you afraid of an old man?


I'll make the Knaves that brought the extent against me smoke -- a Judge --
I'll feague the Rogues -- Brother, I am your Lordships most humble and
eternally engaged servant and Judge.


Oh my Lord Judge your friend:

Ha! What now! I find here will be sport,
But Mountacute I will not wrong my love to thee,
I have kept it Pure unsullied hitherto,
And will, spite of this mighty man,
And mightier Villain Uncle.

My Dear Child I shall respect thy Uncle infinitely for thy sake, thou hast the
Inticing'st Look with thee -- I must peep in thy face and admire thy features
-- nay, be not bashful, I am thy friend, thy Governor, and thou art become my
particular Care.


Nay, fie my Lord;


By the Mass I have a greater kindness for thee then I can express; why you
little Cherubim, what a pair of pretty swelling pouting bubbies hast thou got,
they play in and out as they were at bo-peep. I must initiate 'em into my
favour.


Nay, my Lord for Shame.


Sweeter then Iessamin or Honey-Suckles, she has called my heart up to my Lips,
but I'll make her draw it down to its place: come child.


Nay, pray my Lord, do no Violence;


Why you baggage, if to look Babies in your eyes, to play with those Lilly white
snow-Balls, and to smother thee with kisses be to use violence, I cannot
forbear it.


Does this become your Coat my Lord?


No matter for my Coat child, it agrees with my body, nay, I must Plunder.


Help, help, within there.


Hush huswife, here here's Gold for thee, thou shalt have more then thou can
carry.


I never can deserve this bounty, nor can I guess why 'tis you bribe your
Servant thus, indeed you make me blush.


^ me again, such another Glance and I am a dead ^ a bribe, a paw-word: Why I
have given thee my heart al^nd going to put my body into thy Possession.


For Heaven's sake are you Pious?


I am not Pious, nay, hang not back, for I will rifte thy sweets, and bury my
self in thy bosom, I will, I will.


Help, Murder, Uncle, what shall I do?


My Lord, Lord Chancellor, ha! are you at it?


Sir, Sir, My Lord the Earl of March is coming.


Let him go to the Devil, could he find no other time but now, I never
disturbed him at his Recreations.


What shall I say my Lord?


Say any thing, and be damned: Why, you Rascal, you a Lawyer, and to seek for a
Lye.


When Priest, when come you?


This is lucky.


I must to him, the Devil fetch him, go, go, into that Room, I'll be with you
presently; nay, go, all shall be well, and I'll be civil.


'Tis some earnest business in the Law he says.

Why Chancellor?

Well, well, I'm coming,
And when I have dispatch'd him I'll withdraw,
And read another Lesson then the Law.

AFFairs seem veering, and the Fane of Edward
Which hitherto has pointed to our wishes,
Is turned against us; out of what corner
Comes this blast of change? 'Tis sudden,
All are as hush as Murderers when escaping.
Privacy the waiting-womans Virtue is in use,
And the young Prince has left his darling Sports
For closer Studies.

'Tis odd, and we must arm against it, just now
I would have passed the Anti-Chamber,
And a Starched fellow grimly stopped my Passage;
I asked the Knave by whose Authority
He barred my Entrance, he replied morosly
'Twas by my betters, and he would obey 'em;
Then I demanded if the Rascal knew me.

What said he then?

He answered better then I knew my self,
Bid me return, there was no room for Scouts;
The ill-bred Dog had stood corrected,
Had not old Leicester, Berkley, Salisbury,
With buisy faces come into the Room;
To these he turned the Key, said they were staid for.

These froward Peers Envy our Masters fortune,
Some of' em have been faulty against the Queen,
For which they were forbid her Royal Presence,
And with a sulliness withdrew from Court:
What brings 'em hither now is worth enquiry,
Unsent for I am sure they did not come:
For March and they, like jarring Elements
Have Constant Enmity and must keep distance:
But see he comes, with him the Chancellor,
He glows, the Prelate made him wait,
And we shall hear how he resents his State.

Must I attend your leisure, wait your hour,
And herd among your slaves, thou clod of earth,
Whom I have worked and moulded up to form,
And breathed a Soul into?

Why, my Lord, my Lord,

Thou hast forgotten thy Original;
When Pensive in a poor thatched homely Cell,
Lonely and Destitute as want could make thee;
No Wine nor Flesh to Nurse a loose desire;
Thy lust was more to food then woman then,
The Suns hot season scarce could taint thy blood,
Or if it did thou crep'st to thy Turf-bed,
Which quickly damped the Carnal Exhalation.

What will become of me?

How would thou bless the founder of a Loaf,
So needy thou would plunge the deep mired road,
To hold the Stirrup of a Passenger,
While with expecting eyes you watched his hand,
And with a face of sorrow begged relief.

Do but hear me.

Pitying thy abject State I took thee hence,
Clothed, fed and raised thy drooping Spirits up,
Placed thee where thou grow fat with saying Prayers,
But quickly found that Virtue was thy Burden,
Thy Piety grew faint with Nourishment,
Thy Carcase was the hoard of Luxury,
Where each variety came tumbling in;
The profits of the Church thou still would glean,
But never did a moments duty for it,
Picked up a Mendicant of thy old Trade,
He was sufficient for the work of Heaven:
Your Clergy's grown so lazy with their wealth,
'Tis Drudgery if they Preach 'bove once a Year;
And if you're Chose in Lent you call it thrashing,
Because you think there's nothing to be got;
Like Sheriffs then you had rather fine then stand.

Your Lordship is pleased to be somewhat free with the Church, If it knew you
so sharp an observer, the Members of it would Contribute towards your Removal.


I raised thee, I preferred thee,
And as thou did improve in serving me
From all the vile necessities I've mentioned,
Advanced thee to the highest place of trust,
Exhalted thee from the Meager dregs of man,
To be a Saucy, Proud, Lascivious Prelate.

Nay my Lord, I must confess you have done me many signal favours, but I
beseech you, however you Load my Person, have a regard to my Function,
Lascivious -- revile me at your Pleasure, but forbear Scandalizing the Gown, you
may talk of what you please, and my Gleaning the Profits of the Church, but
what can be Glean'd out of him that fasts four days a week, and when he does
eat, takes no more then what will Just keep Life and Soul together?


'Tis false:
You pamper your varatious Appetites,
Indulge Praedominance to that degree,
You exceed the very Sultan of the East;
But with this Difference, he at vast expense
Keeps his Seraglio: you have all in Common,
Under the holy Covert of Confession:
You shroud the Priest and Sanctify the Whore,
Did I not holt upon your Rank Devotion:
And caught you acting Tarquin on Lucretia.

I could give him a rub of Majesty if I durst.

As the Casuists says, -- I confess to Ravish is a heinous Crime in the Sex
that puts us to it, But if it raises their affections the more, then it may be
palliated; but as for simple Fornication, there's not a Novice in any
University or College in Europe but is allow'd it, provided it be used as the
Cannon expresses -- medicinally, and for healths sake.


Leave guilding Vices with the Cant of Virtue,
The time calls on for business; for the offence
You have committed merit the forgiveness.
Read that, and as you love your safety see it done.

-- By formal process.
Let Mountacute be speedily dispatch'd say you -- is it thereabouts, I perceive
who has nettled him, and I must smart for't-but I have a fetch -- dispatch'd:
ha dispatch'd!


Why do you hesitate, I say dispatch'd,
Are you so squeamish you can't digest the term?

No my Lord, not I, but you ferrit me out of the few senses I have --
dispatch'd -- murdered -- 'tis not my profession -- I will not turn Cutthroat
for any mans pleasure, if the lodging him in a Jail for his Life will serve so,
if not --


Away Trifler:

I am confounded; why, you have no sooner done Chiding me for a little humane
frailty, but you hurry me on to a Crime with a Vengeance.


Do you make Scruples, let me but hear Another Syllable that contradicts what
I've decreed, and thou art lost for ever -- I will divest thee of thy
Pageant-Greatness, expose thee as a Sacrifice to'th Rabble, and how they'll use
thee thy Conscience best can tell.


The Devill's in him, I must submit, I have run my self like Thieves, so far
into ill company, that now I would reform, my associates won't let me; my Lord
I beseech you be not angry: I did this only to found the depth of your
Lordships intentions, and since you are resolved, he shall be dispatch'd -- I
have light on the rarest fellow, one that will go through-stich in the Law, he
must be a Judge.


Who is it?

Why Sergeant Either-side.

That's a dull wretch;

Ne'er the worse for a Judge, they sleep half their Lives out -- but he has a
vast assurance and tho'he cannot speak much to the purpose he has rare lungs,
and will let no man he heard but himself.


Well, work him, and make him what you will:

I was born to serve your honour, I will retrieve your favour, though it be by
turning executioner my self, and for this fellow he'll prove the miracle of the
Bench as to your use, and will truss up your enemies with as little regret as a
Farmer does the Moles which molest his Ground -- it shall be done my Lord.


This fellow came from Proteus, the Caemelion change not faster.
How now, your business:

'Tis of Importance, stand upon your guard,
For Berkly, Salisbury, and many others
Who not long since were banished from the Court,
Are now with Edward close Locked up with him.

Ha!

By heavens 'tis true, we saw 'em enter:
We would have follow'd 'em, but were denied,
Nay ordered to retire -- and the out-Courts
Are filled with rough-hew'd slaves who guard the Lords.

Withdraw to my Apartment, I'll come presently;
How's this, so Cunning Boy, Damnation:
Salisbury, Berkly and Exeter, I warrant too are there:
Are ye upon the Catch my Politicians?
That Exeter's the Devil for a Statesman, and
Must be the Guide o'th Council too or nothing:
The subtle fiend has Left and sought more parties
Then all the Cabinet Pack shuffled together:
He was for us but faltered when he found
My Interest Greater in the Queen then his;
He had rather be the foreman of a Jury
Then second in the Council of four hundred:
Why Salisbury and he were ever foes,
Constantly Jealous of each others greatness,
And though they both have liked each others measures,
Still Contradiction was their practiced spite.
But in this Cause 'tis probable they'll Join,
And to secure it give their spleen Cessation:
What's to be thought on?

What always musing, ever melancholy,
Beware of the infection, none so wretched
As those whom Jealousy and Doubts possess:

But Madam, mine's a subject calls for thought,
No vain Chymaera but a just occasion,
Nevill and Turrington have brought advice,
And I am sorry I must tell it you;
Those saucy Peers who villifyed your Crown
Not sparing Censure of your private Actions,
Are giving vile instructions to your Son;
Learning the Pliant Youth how he may shake
The fetters of Obedience off betimes,
While eagerly he listens to the Charm,
And smiles to hear himself saluted King.

Is't possible?

Be you the Judge, for you it most concerns,
Since Delamore has whistled to this Sterlin,
All his Apartments have been closely kept,
New waiters placed, those you put in discharged;
Left they might do their duty and inform,
Tell me (my Royal Mistress) can you bear
The hand of Limitation, or Control,
Can you with ease resign the Glorious Throne
Into the hands of Salisbury and Leicester?

Distraction's in the Thought --

Can she Obey who allways did Command?
Can she Retire who ever lived in splendour?
Nay thought the world too scanty for her Greatness,
Accept a Private Pension, small attendance,
And live by him whose Soul from hers took being,
Whilst I must to their long-grown malice bow,
Which their believing Life must be a plague,
Will give it me on Scandalous Conditions;
Nay blush not Madam, this must all be done,
And more when these be Edwards Governors:

That ne'er shall be, and Isabella Living:
Be thou as once when Spencer Gaveston
The minions of my husband did attempt,
To Curb my Will, and I defy 'em all,
No March, If I for Love could give him death,
Think thou this Feeble spawn his slender offspring
(Bred when I wished a Barrenness upon me
So Irksome and insipid was the Pleasure)
That he shall baulk the measures of my Soul.

She fires:

Can the froward Chitt believe because my Son
I'd still him with a play thing called my Crown,
And live my self on Courtesy of state:
The Fragments of the Grandeur I had left
Perish ten Sons e're such a fit possess me.

There spoke a Queen; this is true Majesty,
Appear and like the Planet of the day,
Disperse these sullen Fogs which Cloud your Lustre,
Since Delamore and Holland, Exeter, and the rest
Have Soared like Iearus beyond their bounds,
Their waxen wings shall melt in thy Bright beams,
Finding in the floods reward for their Ambition.

They fall my Mortimer, they sink for ever,
I'll visit straight these close Conspirators,
Who think themselves so hushed in their designs;
As for this Rebell-Son he's a disease,
And I will purge the venom from my blood,
As if a Leprosy had compased me;
I will have no Competitors in Power,
If in the Fathers time I ruled alone,
I'll never yield that honour to the Son:
Hard shall he tug if he will have the sway,
And if at last 'tis forced and Rack't away,
As I shall scorn the Conquest to out-live,
This shall a Period to his Triumph give.

Come, come in, come in you baggage, you run-away Thief; 'Tis well I met you, I
would not have had you gone home for 5000 l. gads my life I had been Unjudg'd
before my Taylor had finished my Robes, I should not have had the Satisfaction
of seeing how scarlet becomes me, and your Aunt would have turned you out of
doors.


Why would you leave me then alone with him?

Chamber-practice like that of Confession admits of no ears, but the Parties
concerned -- therefore be ruled, I have not seen my wife since, but had you
gone home as I said, and she had known the occasion, and my preferment had
fallen upon it, she had turned you out to have got a Livelihood by the same
means you shunned, which would not have turned to so good account.


But Sir, he would have forced me --

To have pleased your self, come, come, no more words, away with your buts,
your ifs, and your yets, and joyu Issue immediately, or you're non-suited; mnst
I be forced to use my Authority? do not provoke me, lest you sink under the
weight of a Judges Displeasure, we are dreadful fellows in Power, therefore
have a care.


This new honour has certainly crazed my Uncle: In my conscience rather then be
degraded he would stand himself by this Devil of a Chancellor till he
performed the deed of Darkness; Pray Sir let me go home:


If you will go to the place from whence you came, you shall thence to the
Place of Execution, where you shall be hanged till you're half-dead, and then
be cut into four Quarters, and your bowels burnt for high swinging
High-treason in rebelling against the Sovereign Authority of my unspotted
Ermine.


This Crime will make it foul:
Black as hells Practice or the trade of perjury:
What to do I know not; if I refuse I loose his favour, and that's my bread; if
I comply, then farewell Reputation, let me be never so innocent the living with
this Goat is sufficient Scandal to any honest Person.


What again at a stand? why you perplex the Cause worse then an Evidence that's
deaf and dumb, and is only to be under stood by signs -- Go to, and know your
duty, for I expect an obedience as if I were your father, you're my adopted
Child, and are bound to submit to my Commands; if the Ancient Measures of
Divine and humane Laws are of any Force, and if they are not, I'll make new
ones on this Occasion.


Command my Life and I will freely give it: But this is such a task I cannot
think upon it, but horror seizes me.


Whence comes these fits in the Devils name, they're not of the Mother i'm
sure, she would have swallowed such an offer and have made no bones on it.


Dispose of me any ways but this, though it be to my Death I'll thank you for it,
but to give my self up to the Lewd Embraces of a person I mortally hate is far
more terrible, and I had rather starve then gain a fortune on such base
conditions.


Conditions -- why thou perverse chit of a wanton Generation, how came thou
thus bastardiz'd? huswife, huswife, if you won't Lye with him you will with
somebody you like better, and I'll make you accept of my choice, or turn you
out of doors with your Load of virtue instead of a Portion, and see how the
starving your Spirit will agree with the Pride of your flesh.


What shall I do? what Courses shall I steer?

Those which tend to the making you rich and happy.

I shall be ruined:

You shall be made,

A Whore:

Why you peremptory Carrion who thrives that are otherwise? is there any
pleasure like that of a long Mace and a Purse, when you have the Broad-Seal for
your Vindication? he's a wise man and will be careful of your honour, in
regard of his own, and to my knowledge 'tis safer Trusting your virtue in his
hands, then money in a Bankers -- true, he is a little waggish or so; alas
child that's nothing, Learned men are of opinion, that warming the blood by
being now and then Facetious is very conducing to health, possibly he follows
the Maxim:


He's gone and left me:
What shall I choose to save my honour?
There is no scaping, hea'ven Inspire me best:

I am strangely discomposed, I shall hardly be settled these two ^ours, what a
damnable fright has this termagant Lord put me in; he's ^s faucy with me now he
has got me in his net as a servant-maid to her Master when she has lain with
him: A Disappointment on both sides with a vengeance, had I but enjoyed the
little rogue, I should not have mattered, but not only miss the opportunity but
also loose the Person; I must send for the Pimp her Uncle, a Pox of these
papers: too hasty, I was too Rash; we old men are so seldom visited with the
effects of Love; we make too much of the Guest, because we know it's short. Ha!
What do I see?


I am discovered, now fortune stand my friend -- Dissimulation help me, and all
the Cunning of my Sex attend me.


What my little wandering Jew, are you here? you had like to have made fine
work, 'tis well you came back as you did, you had lost a lover else; my heart
was just breaking, I was sending in hast for a Master in Chancery to make my
Will -- I designed to have given all I had in the World to a certain Person
that shall be nameless, but one so very like thee, that a man might safely
swear you were twins.


I should be sorry if I should any way discompose your Lordship in my leaving
you so Abruptly, for which I beg your Pardon:


Say thou so? 'gad child, and I am very good-natur'd and heartily forgive
thee, but you shall give bond to perform Covenant for the future, you shall:


It can be only your opinion Sir, I know no quality I am endowed with unless
your favour.


You cog, you cog, what? not know where your Magic Circle lies, no Quality;
why thou hast beauty enough to merit an Empire: I am thy vassal, I who
command this Nation am Commanded by thee: Come hither and answer me a question,
wilt thou my Damsel? ha!


To any thing as may become your Servant.

Good, very good, dost thou love me child? answer me quickly, I am under an
Agony of suspicion, and must be resolved, or I'm a dead man.


My ready Services shall always demonstrate the high respect I have for you.


Respect, Twist a Whip, tell not me of respect, I hate the expression, 'tis
like giving the Cheek instead of the Lip upon a Salute -- torture me not with
Delay, but give me a cordial of thy kindness or I sink, I perish, I'm no man:


My Lord, indeed I honour you, indeed respect you, and I have often heard it
said, respects the younger brother sure to love:


I desire none of his company, if the elder be present come near me, I must
look on my Care, my Jewell, how those eyes sparkle, why they out-lustre this;
let me see, place it before those white little Panting, pouting, swelling
throbbing, heaving -- ah Rogue!


My Lord, you throw your favours so very fast upon me, I sink under the
Consideration of my Gratitude.


A good child, a very good child, why they're trifles to what I design thee,
thou shalt be covered all over with Gold and Jewels; such things I have
bespoke for thee, thou shalt out-shine an Indian Queen: say, can thou love
me? speak, my honey suckle, and make me happy and thy self Illustrious, speak
my blossom of a Colly-flower, my cherry-colour'd-bean with a black eye.


However furious my Gallants Inclinations are, I find my beauty awes him, I am
Master of his heart, and may be of all he has (oh Mountacute should thou do
thus I fear my Chastity) however I'll seemingly comply, but nothing more.


What, another eye shot,
come out with it Lamb, never mince
the matter, my doom, my doom.

Good Sir, spare the trouble, and let my blushes speak my heart.


What! must I then be forced to bribe my Judge e're she will give her opinion:
here, here's Gold for thee -- nay, nay, take it -- she has nicked me faith, my
way exactly, the method I use to follow to a tittle: my Sentence --


I am not as I was, yet cannot tell my ailing; since I have seen you Sir, my
heart doth throb and beat as if it 'twould have liberty.


Caught by St. Winifred: she s in.

And when you speak of Love your words pierce through me, I find a pleasing
shivering seize on me, yet covet still to hear you, and when you catch me in
your arms, I am like one half waking from a sleep; I know not how to term it, a
pleasant fleeting transport comes upon me, my eyes are dozed and I grow giddy
with the unusual joy.


In Love, the Experience of 30 could not have demonstrated better: come child,
I will repay it with double interest, I have a thousand fine Curiosities within
my closet which thou shalt be Lady of Immediately.


Oh Heavens! what have I done? I have fooled my self into the spare.

Blessed deliverance my Uncle,

My most Illustrious prop of preferment:

A Plague of this Rascally Sergeant, I perceive the fellow has forgot all
manners since I have made him a Judge, but I'll send him packing -- oh! brother
Judge, you are Welcome, never more welcome, rare news, rare news; The Queen
and the Earl of March have by me put an opportunity into your hands of being
suddenly a great man.


How does her Majesty think upon her lowest of her Subjects, I shall never be
able to repay the Goodness: can I serve her my Lord?


Why no body else, she has tried the Judges already, and they are wresty like
so many tyred horses, they will not budge a Jot.


What is it my Lord, what is it? -- how does your Lordship like my Niece? is
she courteous?


Charmingly, charmingly -- but to our business: there are a Parcel of froward
persons that stand upon their Privileges because they're Peers, and between
you and me brother, are very unmannerly, both to the Queen and the Earl: now
they were ordered to be prosecuted, and the Knaves in Scarlet refused,
pretending they were above their Cognisance.


How! above their Cognisance, who are they? let me know 'em, and their Crimes,
and if I do not case 'em up, uncase me, -- but what will become of me if a
Parliament should be Summoned?


O fear it not, the Queen will never call a Parliament, lest they might
question her as well as you, therefore be stanch.


Twist a whip as your Lordship says, I'll go through-stich.

There's that Prating fellow Mountacute, and

Ha! what said he? oh how my fears comes thick on me:

But I'll tell you as I go here; my Charge, take these Keys, they'll open the
doors of my Cabinets; there, there, feast thy eyes, and take what thou wilt,
I'll but speak a word with thy Uncle, and come and settle some Jewels and
precious Stones upon thee.


My Lord the Earl of March desires your speedy Presence at his Apartment.


The Devil boil him, again, what shall I do?

My Lord, I find you are uneasy at your being so open to business, nor indeed
can you be private here as Love requires -- what thinks your Lordship of my
house? there you may be secure.


A Pimp of a thousand; you say worthily, nothing better, go, get you in, and
take what you find on the Squab under the window, and go home to your Uncles,
where I'll come and sup, as soon as I've Dispatch'd this business, I must talk
with you as I go, nay, a Kiss, a kiss at parting: I'm in Paradise: Come, come
along brother, or I shall, oh! -- (...) along, come:


They're gone, and left me wretched, the darling of my soul, my virgin Love, my
Dear-priz'd Mountacute they have in chase, eager as blood-hounds when upon full
scent: could I but Interpose 'twixt him and fate, I should be blessed in Dying,
pitied by him: ha! what paper's this, Mountacute and others -- be but
Propitious Stars, and I will make this Instrument of Villainy the Guide by
which I'll steer this almost sinking bark through all the Rocks which threaten
his Destruction, 'twill bring me to his sight -- blessed accident.

And though my fortunes can't expect his Love,
My Generous care of him he must approve.

ALL things move forward with a Prosperous Breeze
And we shall reach the Harbour of Success
Sooner then we believed, 'tis now in view,
Heaven seems as if it took Peculiar Care,
Promising safety to the Royal Cause,
Inspires the King who steers the mighty Bark,
Keeping him steady in his Resolution:
This night but over we have gained the Bay,
Safely we Ride Contemning future Storms.

'Tis Wonderful indeed, it shows the hand
Of Providence is with us, never Prince
Was Graced with so much Knowledge as young Edward;
Considering his years 'tis wonderful,
He weighs with all the Gravity and thought
Of an Experienced Statesman what's proposed;
Still as he speaks, the Accent of each Word
Keeps proper time, and points to his Revenge.

Ay! there it Centers, nothing is more sweet,
It is the Choicest Dainty of the Gods,
With which they feast themselves on Solemn days;
And 'tis but Just their Representative
Sold Diet on the same when injured with 'em.
He Credits now the Baseness of his Mother
Her Rank familiarity with March:
Oh Murdered Edward -- Doubly Massacr'd,
Whose Honour suffered with thy Innocence,
While thy Adulterers thrive in the Eye of Heaven
They magnify their mischiefs by Success
And Cuckold every hour thy memory.

Tax not the Powers above left we'r forsaken,
They often suffer what they do not like:
Their Vengeance makes us think why we are punished,
Such visitations whets our Penitence:
Creates reflections on the inward Cause,
For Conscience is the mirror of our Souls,
Which represents the Errors of our Lives
In their full shape.

But tell me friend, what message is returned
From Exeter and Berkly, will they come,
Or choose they rather tamely to be nooz'd?

Be not too rash for they are men of Worth,
Do not believe because they left the Court,
Retreating to their Quiet Rural Seats
Where they might gorge the Vulture of their minds;
They are cold or stupid when their honour calls;
No Mountacute, believe me they have heard
That in the Roll of Fame there yet remains
One Chance, one Glorious Lot that's worthy hazard
Whereby the Kingdoms fate may be retrieved,
Roused with the Summons they have winged their hast,
Vying who shall become the second Curtius.

Why so 'twas with Salisbury when first
I told the Glorious Action now in hand,
He like some Lyon almost stiff with ease,
Loiling at length within his Antic Cave,
Takes the Alarm of the Huntsmans found,
At which he stretches out his well-grown Limbs,
Brustles his horrid Main and furls his Tail,
Whetting his Crooked Talons on the Rock,
Staulks to the Field, and swells to meet the Foe.

They meet this Night at Council, where they'll find
Matter prepared sufficient to inspire 'em.

All join the Nobles, Gentry and the Commons,
The Chain is Rivetted, the wresty People
Whose Rights and Privileges are usurped
No longer free, but all in Vassalage
Are ripe for Mischief, ready for Rebellion;
They wait from us the Signal when to Dole
The Act of Justice; would the cry were up
That I might see these Manglers of the Realm
Drove to the Shambles, and exposed as Beasts.

My Lord a Gentlewoman waits to speak with you.

I'te take my leave, at six we meet again.

I shall not fail -- Conduct her in.
Your business fair one;

When I shall tell the Subject of my errand,
Possibly it may deserve attention;
But I must request your Privacy.

You are obeyed, by Heaven a charming Creature;
Now, speak your pleasure, Madam;

I come, my Lord, a Supplyant from a Maid,
Who for some years has eyed your noble worth,
And though her birth, nor Fortune can pretend,
To merit that return she long has sighed for,
Yet so her Partial Destiny has ordered,
She still admires your Person and your Virtues.

Well, my fair suitress, whither does this tend?
Lovely deportment, and Enticing Innocence.

With silence hitherto she has concealed
The saucy flame oft strove to stifle it
While in its Infant-Growth; but 'twas in vain,
For daily it increased to such a strength,
As did o're-power the weakness of her Sex;
Maintained the Conquest spite of Resolution;
Yet rather then her folly should be known,
She let it Prey upon the Vital Parts,
Hoping at last 'twould end the uneasy days,
And her Ambitious Love dye unrevealed.

That was unkindly done, she could not doubt success
When she had one so fair to plead her Cause.

The disproportion is so vast between ye,
That she must still despair and still Love on:
Fortune has placed her where you most abhor
Diseases, Infamy, or Death it self:
You would not shun with more precipit hast
If I should name the Person, yet even there
Amidst of the Toil and Anguish of her life,
A happy moment did present it self
To make her be the lucky Messenger
Of health to you, though she must linguer ever.

I'll spare the trouble of your Blushes, Lady,
For I've a Soul so tender of the Sex,
(Skilled in the little Niceties of Love)
As shall prevent the torture of Confession,
And do you Justice.

You wrong your Judgment, and you censure ill,
I came not hither, Sir, on that Account,
No loose desires the Product of ill blood
Can blast the Reputation of my Life;
My Honour guards me from that Infamy;
But I am hurried hither by my Fate,
And bring a secret of that great Importance,
The service possibly may merit pity;
Which if I meet with, I am well rewarded.

I do believe it, and accept the offer;
Come, wave this woman's method to allure us,
You're safe and secret here, none can disturb us;
And I will give you such returns of Love,
Such hearty Proofs thou shalt be soon convinced:
Though it be Infant-born it Rivals thine.

Away, How have I erred? Are all Men thus,
Thus full of Guilt, my senses do recover,
And I begin to loath the Tempters charms:
Read that
For I must leave you, -- oh my heart!
If thou would be my friend, beat faster on,
And force thy Passage through these feeble walls.

Yet stay -- What have I here Proscribed?
By all that's Sacred, Peremptory Orders
For my Destruction; March's hand is to 't:
How came she by this? now I recollect,
She told me that her fate had fixed her where
I should deteit the naming, if I knew it.
It must be so, well my Deliverer
I thank you -- by my honour I'm sincere,
This Scroll which thou hast given speaks thy kindness,
And says, thou art all Goodness, though the Place
Of thy abode be with the worst of Men;
Nay, though it were the Chancellor himself;
Nor will I lag in making a return,
Though at the present I am lost in thought.

I am rewarded Sir, and have my end,
If you apply this Caution
To the right use, you may escape the snare,
But if you slight it, then I know the worst;
And though I am no suitable Companion
In Life, yet in the Grave, we undistinguish'd
May mingle ashes, though our souls are distant.

You must not leave me, I have much to say;
The Injury I have done you by suspicion,
When my rude thoughts led me into an error,
I must atone.

Fie, 'tis too gross!
This Language does not suit my humble Character,
Nor is it Noble to despise my sufferings.

By all my hopes of Credit I am real,
There's something from my eyes have shot my Soul,
And I could gaze for ever on such Goodness;
Thy Tempers worthy, if thy Birth be not,
Distinction never had a Power over Love;
Cause Nature placed me in the Womb of Honour
She has adorned thy humbler Clay with Graces,
Which seldom go with Greatness with Wealth;
And 'tis but common Justice I repay,
A Love where love has merited so far:

It cannot be:
Your Dignity and Honour intervene
Which bar the Banes for ever.

What, will not Gratitude with Love conjoined
Remove? tell me no more of Honour, Dignity;
When charms like thine appear all must give place.

My Lord, I had a Father and a noble one,
Whose memory yet lives though he is dead
Men spoke him Brave if Loyallty can plead In his behalf;
'Twas Collonell Stapleton:
The unhappy Brother of the Bishop of Exeter,
Who by the Citizens was put to death
For favouring the Cause of Carnarvan, Edward.
But oh, when Royal Edmond
The Uncle and the Guardian of the King
Was taken off, under pretence of Treason,
Mine suffered with him, what he had of Honours
Or of Estate the Law has since made forfeit,
And mean Orphan, given into the hands
Of a time-serving Family.
Alas! I blame my self, Condemn my madness,
My ill-match'd passion, and I'll strive
To Curb it's Power. I only Crave your Pity,
Nor dare I hope for more, and yet I swear,
Your Flattery, though known, is grateful to me.

Thou charm'st me still, why Loyallty's a Jem
Fit for a Princes Crown,
I knew thy Father, a Gallant and a worthy man he was,
His suffering was remarkable and noble,
And thou art Richer
Sprung from that, then had a Traitor
Blessed with millions got the e:
Thou dost increase the fire within my Breast,
Pouring in Oil instead of Quenching it,
Let me upon this Bosom print my vows,
And swear my self thy Beauties Votary.

I know not where I am, the thrilling Joy
Creeps through each part and ecstasies my Soul:
If this be true, what Queen is half so happy?

Give not Distrust to the Reins because you find
The Change is sudden, The effects are true;
By Heaven I have more Pleasure in this Chance,
Then e're I tasted since I first viewed Light.

I know not what to say my joy's so great,
My senses are Confused, all Crowed to meet you,
The welcome Guest for whom so much they wished,
But little thought it was so near at hand.

Believe me, oh thou Star whose Influence
Has made me happy, that my vows are true:
I'll to the King, Acquaint him with thy goodness,
His safety is procured by this Precaution,
And sure he will recompense thy Loyalty;
With his Consent we will for ever join:
Thy Virtues will in future Ages shine,
While untired Fame her matchless worth shall sing,
Who saved her Country, Lover, and her King.

To Night will it be done?

This Night; The Queen's gone to her Son,
Who is in Council with these Men we've mentioned;
At Dead of Night the Guards shall seize 'em,
And when they once are Prisoners, see you take care
That nothing frees 'em but an Ax or Gibbet.

But pray, what Evidence has your Lordship against 'em?

Dull Wretch, have I against 'em?
Law and Religion sure are useless grown,
When Priests want Vouchers, or a Judge Informer,
Think of the management in Edmonds Trial,
And give these Lords his Fate.

Well, well, my Lord, their business shall be done.

Or they'll do ours, I know their Subtleties,
They're silent setters all, and close,
Not apt to quest and give their quarry notice:
'Tis then the ^et draws certain to destruction.

But, my Lord, Judge Either side must be the Man,
And you must make him Chief-Justice to go through it.

Could not thou do it?

I, why I'm a Priest, besides Lord Chancellor, and Equity ^ never used in
Cases of Life and Death.


Well, loose no time, but instantly prepare for it.

Fear not my Diligence in dispatching an enemy, But 'twould do well to get the
Queen to pass an order under the Broad-Seal for the speedy removing 'em to
London, and let her Son be kept here till they're dispatch'd.


It shall be done, is there ought else?

That's all, and I'll send up my Creatures before-hand to purchase a Jury for
'em: As for Evidence, there are Poor Rogues in abundance, and the larger the
Bribe: the stronger the Oath; Adieu, my Lord, I'll give you an account how my
Emissaries Fadge


This is a true Compound of Justice and Piety,
For one's guided by Interest, and the other by Ambition:
This fellow hopes to be the head o'th Church,
As much as I hope to be King of England,
And whilst he serves my Ends, Perferment's his:
A Crown, oh the Delightful sound!
If Isabella Thou would keep me thine,
Thy Son must wait upon thy sleeping Husband:
She's fond and Languishes; why should I doubt?
Oh Love, thy Power has Compassed wondrous things,
Drove out, Restored, Destroyed, and set up Kings.

WHat will ye further? This Scroll of Mountacutes,
Fully expresses the dire Fiends designs:

Time must suit the Rest --
Nor may we trifle Dangerous Distempers,
If they not meet a sudden opposition,
O'repower the application when too late,
Rendering Art useless:

'Tis thoroughly advised, pursue it Sir.

Your Father whom we oft admonished,
Nay told him plainly what hath since ensued,
Laughed at our Cautions; Sir, you must be careful,
Or all is lost beyond recovery.

If you Persist in what you seem to like,
Safety and Glory you will find attend it;
But if your Mother change you, farewell Power:
Let Mortimer the place of Edward fill,
We are content to fall if you are so.

I will observe Directions, weigh each word,
Not vary from a tittle; my safety
Is with yours as yours with mine;
Sure, never Prince was saved from greater hazards:
What must I call you, friends, that name's too poor,
But yet a friend will venture wondrous things,
When what he Loves is compassed round with danger;
Let me embrace ye all, and tell the world,
No Prince can match the Council I am blessed with:

I must acquaint the Prince e're I admit your Majesty.

Traitor:

What means this noise?

The Rumour then is true, I find it now,
But I much wonder ye Audacious men,
That ye Assemble here without my leave;
You who had fell and Justly for your crimes,
Had not my Clemency excused your Lives,
Has mercy hardened your Presumptuous hearts,
Or are ye past reproof?

Madam, what we have done --

There is a better man to answer me
Then Delamore thou Usher to these Schoolmen,
Which in their absence sets my Son such lessons.

Then since your Majesty --

Boys I could never listen to,
Go Prattle with my Pages.

If I may speak --

Thou Driblest on thy beard, Age is a Changeling,
And Languishes for Hospitals: You Sirs, I speak
To Salisbury and Exeter, who draw together
In the Team of Politics, Who sent for you?
Be brief and answer Justly, as you love your Lives.

That we esteem our Lives is very plain,
Our Care of the King's confirms it:
It is by his Command we here are met,
To Argue his Proposals, solve his Questions,
And to the utmost of our thoughts and Duty
Preserve the King in Grandeur, Peace, and Safety.

The King.

The King, your Majesty can be no stranger
Being so near related.

Unheard of Insolence, Why who am I?

His Mother:

Traitor, there is another name and title due to me.

None that we know of.

Thou lie, and I will stamp the falsehood down thy Throat -- Unthankful Boy,
how can thou suffer this, and hear thy Mother talked so to by Slaves?


Madam, your passion makes their duty stagger,
You use 'em not like Noblemen but Pedants;
Though Subjects, they have no dependence on us,
And Majesty's adorned and served by them,
Much more then is at all times fit to own;
'Tis true they are not safe, but under Kings,
Nor Kings can't flourish but by such assistance.

Indeed Sir, are you grown a Disputant,
And Jabber Politics so Learnedly?
Thou Tool, thou Instrument of self destruction,
Dost think these State-worms mean thee further good
Then what may serve to Introduce their own?
I ^ell thee, Councellors are all alike,
And Princes know no more then they think fitting;
So whilst his Glory does not injure theirs,
They are content, they may grow great together.

Madam, this Doctrine may be Proved elsewhere
Where Powers unjustly used by sad Permission:
We have no Ends nor Aim but the Kings safety,
'Tis true so far our own depends upon it;
The King's our Shepherd, born to protect his People,
And as the Lamb flies from the Wolf to him
That Guards the Flock, so we seek refuge here:
Life's all we hope for; indeed Life's all in all;
And 'tis so sweet that all are fond to save it.

Mother, in short, I am of Age to Govern,
And here assume the Right my Father left me:
These I have chose to be my Worthy Guides,
I have resolved this and will make it good.

Have I no place? am I a Cipher grown?
Will none afford a place for Dignity?

Accept of mine:

No, this may serve your Mother,
I will sit here with this good mans allowance:
Come l'e be Governed too -- Pray be my friends
As well as his for once.

Nay Madam, this we must not suffer neither:

What am I left alone?
Am I infectious? dare none sit near the Plague?
Ungracious Boy is this thy filial Love?
This the return for all the Pangs and Throws
I suffered at thy Birth? this the reward
For all my Sorrows, Cares, Anxieties,
Which through thy sickly Infancy possessed me,
When many a weary night bereft of Rest,
I've slumbered over thy Cradle, and bemoaned
My own hard fate? now it proves so indeed:
I've nursed a Viper, given an Adder warmth;
Which having grown to strength forgets its parent,
And Covets Preying on her Entrails; oh! monstrous Crime.

Nay Mother, mother --

Be not caught Sir, these tears like those of Sirens
Entice you but to Leap to sure Destruction.

Must he alone have credit? am I nothing?
Return e're 'tis too late, I do conjure thee,
By all the Comforts thou hast e're received,
By all thy Duty due, which heaven Commands,
Attend my Prayers, and throw the Envenomed Robe
Off from thy Person ere the Poison fix,
Or else thou art lost for ever:

Oh Sir, be steady, or you ruin all:

I must retire or I shall melt to folly, Madam,
I'm Indisposed and must withdraw:

Come hither Child, and rest upon my bosom,
I'll hush thy Cares and quiet thy Disturbers,
As when I lulled thee first:

Away Sir,

My Son,

Be Deaf Sir,

Edward my only Edward hear thy Mother:

Force me away if you regard my Glory.

That shall not be wanting:

My Child, my Comfort, darling,
Prop of my Life,
I shall grow mad, I find the fury seize me;
My Gall boils up, and I am all on fire,
Come then, revenge, thou Banquet of the Gods,
And let me Gorge my Ravenous Appetite;
Inspire me Nemesis thou subtlest fury,
Drive from my Soul the Weakness of my Sex,
And make me Masculine in my Attempts:
Some women have done Wonders in their Rage,
Why should not I, for I have cause Prodigious?
Nature for ever here I banish thee:
Remorse and Conscience, Pity, all farewell,
Instruct me Malice, and assist me Hell.

MY Fears are Past, the noble Treasons signed,
And Edward I will mount into thy Throne;
By Heaven she was so eager in her Vengeance,
She never read the mischief she has Granted:
Oh how she Raved! Cursing her Son and Peers,
Resolving not to rest, till she had Revenge:
Now Chancellor be Staunch in this main Cause,
And thou shalt thrive for thy dear wickedness,
Who waits?
Wait on the Chancellor with this, and let it
Pass the Seal, with his utmost Speed:
I'll Instantly be with him too my self,
My Glories are in view, Fate be my Friend,
In their behalf some kind assistance lend,
'Twere hard my hopes should fail so near their end.

Have you dispatch'd the Paper which I signed?

I have, and these couched Lyons who shrink their Claws
Till they may Grasp our Lives with firm security,
Fall in our Toil this night:
I have Intelligence your Son has Summoned
His Trusty Loyal Lords to Sup with him,
And when they're careless in their Luxury,
We will bolt upon 'em with such sure Destruction,
Nor Edward, nor the World shall rescue 'em

Sure when their busy Souls are sent abroad,
Their harmless bodies will let ours alone.

Hold but this noble Resolution, you are secure:
The Rebel Lords have printed and dispersed,
A formal Proclamation in your Sons name,
In which he does Convene a Parliament,
To meet the following month at Salisbury,
There to debate on proper means and ways,
How to secure the Nations future peace;

A Parliament, oh Insolence!
He shall be whipped to manners: foolish Boy:
His Learned Council too shall be rewarded:
If Axes, Gibbits. Racks, severest Tortures,
Can be produced sufficient for their number.

Ay: now we're right, be firm and we will be great,
Else we must fall a public spectacle,
To every vulgar villainy:
For Princes like the Sun when in Eclips:
Call up the eyes of many to behold 'em,
Who should have none in their full noon of Glory:
Shine out, and you will be too bright for
The low Crowd to gaze at.

Thy pleasing Accent thrills into my breast,
Not the parched Earth when the hot Dog-Star reigns,
Sucks up refreshing showers,
With half the eagerness as I thy well-tun'd speech:
Oh had thou seen their Insolence my March,
To thy soft Queen, thy tender Isabella,
I'm sure thy Zeal had sent 'em from the world
Though every heart thou had struck had been a Kings.

By all thy mercies and thy dearer favours,
So much I am a slave to thy Desires,
I should not spare a Saint that wronged my Love:
Stars let me but enjoy this heaven on earth,
Keep yours above, for Creatures lesser blessed.

Thou art the Utmost limits of my Wishes,
And oh how dull would seem the Pomp of Crowns,
If mightier Love make not Ambition easy
So hear my Soul, so rooted in my heart,
That were my Son and Mortimer Condemned,
And I should have the choice of saving one,
I know not where my Nature would plead stronger.

Most condescending Brightness how thou charm'st me,
Why was not I a match for such a prize?
Oh Partial heaven, unjust distributer,
That give us Monarchs Souls so poorly clothed,
Why hast thou made distinction in the blood,
And none at all in the mind?

It is enough that we concur in Soul:
I think thee worthy to partake my Love,
And thou may think thy self a King in that.

Thus Blessed then I am one, and envy none,
And to remove all fears that Curb my Joys,
I'll instantly dispatch thy Sons Instructers;
Then when our enemies to Love are hushed
We will pay our thanks to Love in Love,
Thou shalt the Alter of the offering be
And I the Sacrifice which here shall dye.

Ay my Charmer, these Clothes become thee,
Now thou look like what thou art; but what thou
Shalt be the Event must tell.

I know what you design me, my Reverend
Equity; but I think I shall be armed against it.

This night but over child, we will Revel without Measure, no interrupting
business shall torment us; the authors of that Plague shall be removed, and
then my little armfull of comfort.


What then Sir.

Nay, would thou have me tell thee, what then child, no, guess Love, guess,
and tickle thy self with the thoughts on it; such things I will do for thee,
thou shalt be the Darling of the Nation, all hands shall honour thee, and all
eyes admire thee.


Shall I be this, Sir?

More child, more, whoever has ought to beg of Tarleton, shall come to thee;
thou shalt prefer, take down, do as thou wilt; have a greater Court then the
Queen -- and be more thronged then a Country Church, when a Bishop preaches: In
short I will set thee against the Proudest Minx that's kept either by Lord
Spiritual or Temporal.


But Sir --

Not a word more, I expect the Earl of March each minute, and when this night
is over, all the rest of my nights and days shall be at thy Devotion; give thy
Uncle this; 'tis a Commission to take the Lives of six Rank, Stubborn, Loyal
Rogues, which when dispatch'd --


Are they your Lordships Enemies?

I know not what prejudice they have to my Person, but they're Enemies to my
Interest, and that's a Statesmans Cause at all times: Their's Mountacute, and
Delamore, Holland, and others: what faces the Knaves will make at the Gallows
when they are Bowels are burnt under their own noses? go Love, go, if thou
stayst thou'lt set me so a-gog for thee; and I shall be baffled: as I always
have been by this troublesome March.


Mountacute's Death, no Villain, no,
His fate shall be reverst if this can plead,
And fall cursed Chancellor on thy own head.

'Tis a sweet little Rogue, in what a comfortable manner shall I spend the
latter part of my Life, my pieth grows cold for want of a bed-fellow: what though
I am a Father of the Church; as to that point the world will say, I am debarred
from the Sex; But then again, I am a Father of the Law, and I never read of a
Judge or a Chancellor that was ever deprived, or suspended for satisfying the
curiosity of Nature, and according to the Rules of Equity, ergo, I ought to
have the same Privilege as the best of the long Robe: In short, I will enjoy
this Woman as I am Chancellor, and those days wherein I cannot behave my self
to her as a Chancellor, I will dedicate to devotion and Sanctity. March, your
Lordships most diligent and sincere humble Servant.


I'st signed;

It is, and these wise Councellors shall rue they are Politics.

Where is it?

I have dispatch'd it to Judge Eitherside, he will make 'em smoke, I warrant you.


Hell and the Devil; did thou read it?

No, for I concluded what it was.

Shame on thy negligence; why 'twas an order for the Kings Confinement, his
Mothers hand to make him a Close Prisoner.


There's no harm done, I warrant you, were it an Order for his head, this
fellow would put it in Execution.


Send for it, he must not be concerned in it,

I will, I will.

But hark you my Lord Chancellor;
Suppose, when we have lopped these Branches off,
The Trunk remains from whence will grow fresh mischiefs;
I find the Boy is fond of Sovereign Sway,
Fond of the lofty sound of Majesty;
His Soul is tuned to absolute Prerogative,
And all his Consort Strike that pleasing air.

Look you, my Lord, let us deliver him out of this Evil, and I'll take care he
falls into temptation no more.


Thou know him not,
He has a weyward Soul, and Stubborn temper,
The Pride and Spirit of the mother swells him,
With all his Fathers positive revenge:
He affects a mildness for the want of Power,
But when he once has conquered his restraint
We must expect to pay for these men's Lives.

Nay, 'tis good to be sure my Lord, that's certain, and if I thought his Reign
would put an end to ours, Charity begins at home, and I beg the young Princes
pardon, I would not tamely resign I tell him that.


This Parliament that's summoned will be dangerous,
The Commons hate the Nobles, envy Us,
And if we find not means to Curb these Measures,
We shall too late repent our follys, Tarleton,
Our heads, our heads, must answer for our actions.

Our heads! I'll send him to his Father first.

Ay, there you're right, what say thou to another Edvardum, Occidere nollite
tumere bonum est.


Say to it, why if he persists he must have it: I'll consider it my Lord, I'll
weigh it maturely, and if it be requisite --


If it be requisite dull thing it is, he once removed, the Queen we Rule at
Pleasure,

And Mortimer and Tarleton will have both
The power of Kings though not the Glorious Title.

Well, well, my Lord, these Knaves dispatch'd, we shall not boggle at a greater
matter, I'll to the Judge and we will consult the best.

A decayed Statesman is a wretched thing,
'Tis flattery and ill actions which prefers us
And we have flatterers too which thrive by us;
For the same reason we do by our Prince,
Power makes us Knaves we're honest out of Service,
But when our Princes favours fall away,
Nothing so despicable or so unregarded,
Therefore 'tis Policy when once we're in,
To finish by those Rules we did begin.

Nature which gav'st me Soul so long for Power,
Accomplish what is promised by this night,
And whilst my Creatures act this Murdering Scene,
I'll Revel in the Arms of the fond Queen.
A Crown thou Centre of Ambition, Lust,
You're the reward o'th brave as well as Just,
And let the Factions against my Title roar,
I'll quickly quell Disputes when once I've Power.

Was ever Treason so unnatural?
A mothers hand to sign her Sons Destruction,
Now I'm convinced who set my father going.

Fate Sir, has put your Life in your own hands,
And shows by this discovery how 'tis prized,
Neglect not such a blessing but improve it,
Strike Early or you may repent your sloth.

Good heaven! how much I owe you for this safety,
And the kind Instrument you choose to work it;
Oh Mountacute I stand so much indebted,
I fear I want rewards to recompense,
Yet I'll consider till I've tyred thought
To gratify thy Love and Loyalty.

The Virgin who preserved you Sir, you owe it to,
Make her amends, my Duty is my payment;
But Sir, resolve apace, each moment is Important.

I will, we will force the Castle.

Hold Sir,
When I was Governor I found a Place,
Which now may be of admirable use,
There is a Private, deep, but narrow Vault,
Whose Dismal rough unshapen way,
Was surely torn only with hands by a dark guess,
For 'tis so strange no light could guide the making,
'Twas worked by Prisoners sure for Liberty,
For in the lowest Dungeon it begins,
And has a passage out just by the River,
There we must enter, and when we have reached the Jail,
The part o'th Palace over it is Mortimers.

What follows?

In the Caeling is a place with rusty bolts,
Which formerly no doubt was a trap-door,
But for what use they best must know who made it,
This we may force, and so surprise the Villain.

'Tis a good Stratagem.

Let's Instantly about it.

I think 'twere better that your Majesty
With some of the Lords, and me, secure the City,
While Mountacute and Delamore with a good guard
Pass this same Vault.

'Tis Prudently advised.

Each to his Task then, Mortimer we come,
This Night begins my Reign and Seals thy doom.

Thus soft and secure we taste the Joys of Love,
Whilst buisy Politicians plot for Interest,
Whose akeing Brains Dances the Rounds of State,
And all to get the Title of a Knave:
The Soldier now lies hard for Gaudy honour,
Endures the raw rough blast of Winters Season,
With all the harsh necessities of Camps;
And for the name of Gallantry and Great,
After a long escape Provokes his Fate:
But Love.

Ay, that my Mortimer's above 'em all,
Who envies honour that is rich in Love,
Mercy which is the Attribute of Heaven,
The first Creator of it sure was Love,
And pity is the Instinct of its passion.
Love makes the Vulgar proud, the Noble Gods,
The Gods themselves if Strangers to Love's Joys,
Their much admired Elizium is Imperfect.

Some Music for my Charmer, let us indulge
And gratify our Souls Luxuriously:
Raptures unknown the harmony shall raise,
Our hearts shall beat the measures of the time,
And tender sighs echo each artful note,
Till our soft murmurs fall by soft degrees,
And dye like o're-charg'd Flutes with too much playing.

I cannot answer as I ought but thus.

Now let's to our Repose my softest Love,
This Night ends all our fears, and I have those
Whose ^ands before the Moon has gone her Race,
Will have our Enemies all in Possession;
Young (...) Montacute, that hot-bred boy
With his old Councellor, close Delamore shall
Smart, my Isabella.
Ha! what means this noise my Guards: what ho --
Death, it grows louder, are they all engaged?
Treason, Treason.
Why that dismal object?

Shift for your self, Sir, all's betrayed and lost
The King and Leicester have cut off your Guards,
The City's at the Gates and shout him King.
Burn Mortimer, fire the Queen -- I can no more,
But that I ever loved you, let this witness.

Oh Heavens! what shall we do?
Here, my best life, there is a Vault
That will convey thee.

We will convey him, Madam, to a place
As safe as he designed us!

Horror and Hell!

Oh spare my Mortimer, my gentle Son.

Madam, you are deceived, he is not come yet.

Well, haughty E. of March, what think you now?

That I shall dye, thou'st answered to thy mind.

O, ye malicious Powers!

Sir Tho. let's withdraw:
No doubt these Lovers have a leave to take,
We will not separate 'em too abruptly;
Call when you're teady, Sir, I shall not be out o'th way:
You Sirs, secure the Vault.

I scorn thy Insolence,
And Mountacute, I'll fall so nobly
That thou shalt loose thy ends in my calm sufferance.

Oh Mortimer!

Oh Isabella!

I know not how to look or speak,
For I have brought this on thee,
My Love has tempted thee to taste Ambition,
And thou hast follow'd me in all thy actions.

Thus the first pair their miseries surveigh'd,
When from their blessed Eden they were driven;
Their eyes seemed to accuse 'em of the fact:
But Love in each pitied the Crime in both:
She tempted him to make him blessed like her.
And when he found her Ruin, urged his own:
But oh much happier was their Punishment,
Their both were cursed, but they were cursed together,
And suffering both alike, neither were wretched.

I will not long out-live thee, for I cannot,
Thou were the prop on which my hopes did hang,
Like curious Buildings wrought by wondrous Art,
Where the vast frame's supported by one Pinn,
But that struck out I shatter all to ruin.

No, live my Queen, thou may be happy long,
'Tis only I must bleed, my bloud's the cure,
And 'tis Impossible it can be spared;
But Isabella when thou shalt retire,
For oh I fear too much they will confine thee,
Think on thy March, and pardon his Ambition,
For nothing but my fondness has betrayed thee,
A vast excess of Love to make thee great,
To set thee out of the reach of thy Sons Power,
Lest he might slight thee as his Father did.

Oh angry heavens you've punished us severely,
The prospect of our greatness has undone us;
The Glittering show has drawn us out too far,
And we're surprised just as we thought to grasp it,
Like Voyagers seduced by a fair Sea,
A temperate Air, the Sky Serene and clear,
Just as they have their wished for shore in view,
By sudden Storms the tattered Bark is tossed,
And all within the sight of Land are lost.

He comes, thy Son approaches;
Farewell to all that's dear,
I leave a certain Heaven to go I know not where.

Seize the vile Traitor, hurry him down the dungeon,
There let him groan till day, and then he dies.

Oh spare him, spare him, banish us together,
But do not take his life, thy Mother pleads.

Thou Scandal of my blood -- remove the Queen.

The Queen, am I not thy Mother?
Oh hear me.

I'm deaf, away.

May heaven forget thy Prayers when thou shalt plead,
And may thy Mothers Curse hang on thy head.

Now Chancellor for thee.
Thou shame of Church and Justice,
What can thou say?

Nothing but beg for Mercy; for if your Majesty considers I have been but a
Tool, and am not the first Statesman that has been Compelled to be a Knave by
Court-Minions.


No Hereford, my Fathers blood requires thine;
Away with him, unfurnish him of all those Robes,
And give him such as fit his wickedness:
The Nation must be satisfied, and thou must dye.
Prepare for it, Prelate^

This 'tis to be too Eminent in State mischiefs,
Others that wished as well to the Cause as I,
Will escape for not acting so publicly

Ay! that Chancellor I'm afraid will not dye alone; I am Damnably afraid his
Grace to make up his Equipage must have a Chief-Justice that we may Swing in
Figure.


Now Sir, I claim your promise,
This Virgin is what we owe our Lives to,
Her birth you've been acquainted with,
And by what means she was compelled to live with the Chancellor;
And sure 'twas Providence which placed her here for all our Benefits:
I beg her for my Wife.

She's Yours, and to make her welcome,
I Invest her with all the Chancellor's Estate,
And Viscount Mountacute be Earl of Salsbury.

Thus let us thank your Majesty

Rise both;

No Royal Sir, I have one boon to beg,
That old mans Life my Uncle, though an ill one,
Nor has he Acted ought what e're was purposed,
And since my being has made me the Instrument,
Of what's discover d: I humbly would Entreat --

Thou shalt not plead in vain, he's safe, and if he can be honest we may in
time take Care of him.


I humbly thank your Majesty, and will study to deserve this Mercy; I am not
the first Knave that has turned honest man when he found his Roguery would do
him no good.


My Lord of Leicester, Delamore, Exeter and
Holland, and all shall share our favours:
May you continue as you have begun,
The Parliament's at hand: If they Encourage me
As I Expect; they shall be satisfied how (...) love 'em.

Doubt not their Duty Sir.

To Scotland first I will an Army Lead,
And Check the Growing Mischeifs which are spread;
That done to France I will in Person go,
The Flower D'Luce shall to the Lyon bow,
If my kind Commoners are just and F^e
I'll loose my own or fix their (...)
Long have they suffered by their Foreign Foes;
And Evil Kings I fear has been the Cause,
Heaven Guide my Steps that our Records may tell,
How Edward did the Insulting French Repell,
How English-men with Glory did Return,
Whilst Gallic Ruins did our Conquests Mourn.

Page 2. line 31. for who, read which. line 32. for which, read who. Page 12.
line 15. for which, read who. line 17. which, read who. Page 46. line 35. for
Villainy, read Villain. line 38 for should, read would. Page 48. line 34. for
Pieth, read Piety.


