AS Cowards pushed into a desperate fight
Move slowly forwards like their appetite;
Yet when they feel the blows, filled with despair,
Oft beat the brave, or battle with the Air:
So our Gallant forced by his Friends to write,
Now dreads his Fate which must be known this Night;
Stormed by his Friends they swore him into rage,
And forced him fight the Hydra of the Stage:
Compelled he sighed and said like Phaeton,
He aims at Wit, as the other at the Sun,
That he relies on what so oft is told,
Fortune assists the brave, and Court's the bold;
But if from Fortun's slippery Wheel he's hurled
From Wits vast Empire to the lower World,
Fate was unkind she would no pity show,
Be doomed by her, but doubly damned by you.

CEASE, you Celestial Powers, and give that ease,
Which to obtain, I, with repeated Prayers,
The blood of Hecatombs, and Incense smoke,
So oft have filled your Heavens; and bless the Man
Which, from his Infancy to Autumn years,
Subject to every blast, has known the Fate
Of greatness, or abjected Poverty.
Oh, Marius, through what paths Ambition led!
But you're no more; and Hell has left behind
A Ianus Fury, who, with Sword and Pen,
Or Stabs, or to enevitable Fate thrusts on,
Doomed by Proscription, numbers to attend
On ghastly Death: while Slaughter, big with blood,
In Sanguine hue, and a Tyrannic pace,
Sweeps, like a Plague; and makes Rome's Senate look
Like Sons of Earth, escaped from Deucalion's flood.
Oh, when I call to mind Rome's base neglect,
Though with this light I bought their Suffrages,
Damned up for ever in the Marsian War;
When Parents, with distended arms, lift up
Their crying Infants, while the ag'd bestrid
The tops of Houses, filled the Heaven with Shouts,
The plaudits of my Triumphs; yet gave way
To deeds ingrate, when Barbarous Sylla spoke,
Denied the Tribuneship, and Exile made:
Yet, not content with miseries, they hurl
Repeated Plagues, and hunt me like a Beast.
Yet, Gods, be kind, and Sylla's brood shall know,
He that, with Patience, can endure like Me,
May weather out the Storm, and Victim make
The over-daring Fool, who hastes to meet
(In Pompey) certain Fate; or Knowledge bought
At dear expense. Down, you rebellious wrongs;
Incite me not to acts, that misbecome
A Roman mind to bear: Take flight, my Soul,
Into a Sphere like thy Essential make;
That I may scatter into open Air
The envious mischiefs which environ me.
HAIL Noble Patriot of a happy State,
Blessed in the Guardian! Lusitania owes,
As to the Gods, from undigested ways
Of Brutal living, unto nobler formed,
Her Reformation. Why's obscured that brow?
What doubts can cause such gloomy fancies rise,
As in the hue of melancholy men?
Pensive with thought, thou shun'st Society.

Know, brave Sertorius, that we all in thee
Wind up our Clue of life: as men devote,
To the Infernals, humane Sacrifice.
Thy breath, when formed into a sound, is Law:
And not the dead shall, at the day of Doom
Called to appear, in mightier numbers rise,
Hudled to form from out their quiet Urns;
Than Lusitania, from her wide extents,
Crowd to attend Sertorius God-like call.

Gods glory in thy make, thou man Divine,
True Similar to Rome's first Founder made;
Excellent Roman! Patron unto all
That's Great, or Good! Not Mars himself on Earth,
When Illion Field's Divinities were Armed
For Troy or Greece, wrought wonders with his Sword
Out-doing thine; which Fame as loudly speaks
To the Extremes of the Universe yet known:
Chose out by Fate, Elected by the Gods,
To free thy Country from Tyrannic Rule;
Though to the eye of Mortals Heaven obscures
The mystic Writ, till Fate unloose the hours
Which guide the Day to Rome's delivery.

Heaven owned thy birth; and pleased was mighty Jove,
When, in the Characters of Fate, he saw
A man so God-like, that should know the change
Of Earthly joys, as he of those Divine,
When Sons of Earth made War against his Heaven,
And climbed Olympus; else, in Infant years,
weighed down with Iron: Under Coepio's charge,
When Chance unjustly Crowned the painted Gauls,
Thou swam'st the Torrent of impetuous, Rhine,
And lived to gain new glories by their spoil.

Fame loudly speaks the Action of that Day,
When Celtiberians broke their solemn Vow,
And, in Castula, called the Gryseans in,
To Martyr Rome, in slaughter of her Sons;
As angry Powers ruffle their Sky to Storms:
Here, Sun-shine; there, upon the Northern Pole,
Destroying Flames make big the Elements
With Fate inevitable: so did Thou;
When, in the height of their vain glorious hope,
With speed of Hurricanes thy Sword destroyed;
Consumed the Villains e're a thought could rise,
And plucked a Laurel from the Victor's brow.

Amongst men, for deeds so great, we court thy Rule;
And glory in thee: nay, the Vulgar Crowd
Pay adoration to thy just desert;
And blaze aloud that Fate attends thy Sword,
Edged sure by Death: for, when thou heav'st thy arm,
So Plagues devast, as thou make void the space;
When throngs of Foes with Javelins fill the Air,
And Thunder with the Rattling of their Shields,
The frightened blood starts back into the heart,
And makes the Soul, with Terror, fly its Seat.

If Gods have formed me as you say; I live
Wholly devoted yours. The Roman name
Shall, with her Eagles, take a flight to you;
Perch in your Temples; and a terror be
To Rome's ill Genij, which have ruined all:
That from the Ashes, like the Phoenix,, may
Arise a greater, nobler Nation here.

Worthies of men, when Sylla's bloody hands,
Embrued in Slaughter, threatened Death and Fate;
When all the terrors froze us up with fear;
Thou sav'dst our Country, and dispersed the Foe,
Did Acts beyond belief, secured us all:
And, with the Thunder of thy mighty deeds,
Scattered that storm which did obscure our day.
Now, fafe in thee, we Sylla's power defy;
Covet to Arm, when great Sertorious calls.

Who would refuse to spend his dearest blood
When gratitude requires? Oh, Friends, I find
The deep impression which your loves have made;
Sole help to raise my Soul, with thought depressed.
Nor can I fear, thus circled by my Friends,
Vain glorious Sylla, who delights in blood:
Rapine, and Spoil, wait his Triumphant Car;
And, where he comes, like angry Fates, he breaks
Handfuls at once, not cuts 'em thread by thread.
Fearless of him, all others I despise;
And his new Pupil Pompey, big with threats:
His School-boy's rage, to call us on to Arms.
So the young Huntsmen, fearless of success,
Dart distant weapons against the dreadful Beast,
Till some barb'd Pile pierces his tawny side;
Lashed by his tail to rage, he bellows out
Destruction, and lays waste the Armed Troop:
So (...), so Armed, by our just Cause, we'll on.
We fight for Liberty, and for our Gods;
They, for a Tyrant, who contemns all good,
Who all the Temples of the Graces shuts;
Virtue and Peace are strangers to their breasts:
For them we Fight, and they must Crown our Swords.

Noble Sertorius! Lusitania's Patron!

Rome's Fame shall bow to you; no longer blessed;
For all her Ornaments, her Arts, her all,
To Osca shall be led; the noble youth
There Educated in the Roman way;
So Habited, when riper years come on:
That, in the compass of an Age, the World
Shall see Old Rome the shadow of this New.

Hail, great Sertorius; Hail, thou mighty man,
Whom Gods, in absence, fight for! thus adorned,
We greet thy Genius; and here offer up
These Laureate Wreaths, appropriate to thee.

So Armed, so Crowned, the Roman Senate fought,
When the rough Sabines did invade their Rule,

Five Legions fell beneath our conquering Swords,
Secured by Fate: Nor could Metellus help;
His rage was vain. So Surges dash to Air,
Against Rocks opposing. Like the Giants fixed,
We bore his Charge, and pressed him fiercely on:
When brave Aquinius, to complete the day,
Bedy'd in gore, compassed with numerous Foes,
Fell, with the number of his Wounds, our Captive*
So angry Bores their Tushes whet in vain,
Fume oft, as oft assayed, as did their Chiefs
When old Metellus sounded the Retreat:
And, e're the setting Sun adorned the East,
And on our Banners darted his bright Rays,
Our Friends, immured for many months, were free:
Broke was the Roman Camp; and left behind
Engines of War; and mighty heaps of Arms,
Forsook by haste, as Trophies we have taken.

The Sword of Justice has a vast extent,
Is moved by Heaven, and guided sure by Time,
Whose Sythe's not keener; there Astrea views
The Crimes of Earth, and pours her vengeance forth:
While the just Arms are Crowned with Victory.
What can Aquinius say, to calm our rage?
Can Rome's ambition never quiet know?
Or must she restless as those Atoms be
Which the fierce Winds subject unto their Rule?
If so, by blood we must appease the slain;
And think our selves, as by the Gods, set forth
To kill this second Python of the World.

Cursed be the man, that, to the Roman name,
Dares blemish Honour with the thought of fear:
I superate it; and, like Sylla, am
When most endangered, most a Roman Chief:
Bred in his Cause, and nourished in his Arms,
Filled with the glories of his mighty deeds,
He wan me to him. Let severest Fate
Speak loud her Doom; to hear I stand unmoved:
For, if I fall, Sylla will 'venge my death;
The brave Metellus, or fierce Pompey, shall
Offer a Sacrifice to still my Ghost.

Spoke like a Roman; gallantly and bold.
But that I scorn to soil my fame with blood,
Here thou should fall; then let thy Ghost complain
To barbarous Sylla for redress: Did he,
Sided by Pompey, fenced by old Metellus,
The two supporters of this lofty Oak,
Dare meet me face to face, and stand my Ire;
Like angry Jove, I'd rive him to the waist,
Spite of his Shields unto his heart convey
This fatal Steel. Haste; tell the Boy, I wait
To scourge his rashness. Let Metellus know,
If he dares meet us, he shall feel again
The Thunder of this arm upon his Cask:
And need a Shield of Vulcan's tempering,
To guard this deadly weapon from his heart.
Sucron's the noble Field of Liberty,
Where Death shall glut upon the bodies slain:
And all the Furies, gorged with Roman gore,
Grow fat with Slaughter, and press down the Earth
With humane weight. O that it were my Fate
To meet this Pompey, Rome's Anteus, now:
Like Hercules, I'd grasp him in my arms,
And make his Tyrant rue his forward heat!

Thou shalt be fought with, if not foiled, Sertorius,
The chance of War may leave thee destitute,
And us adorn: then, in the brunt of Arms,
I'll court thy sight; and on thy Casket pay
A Roman thanks, for Liberty and Life.

Guard well the last; for, by our Gods, I swear,
Or thee, or I, will measure out the ground
If e're we meet. Conduct him on the way,
Which gives a birth to Fate, and mighty deeds.
But the Celestial Powers have left their Heaven,
And fill the Temples with their Deities:
'Tis Incense they expect, and Sacrifice.
You four Patricians shall attend on me,
Clad in the Garb of Numa's Pontifies,
While I officiate Maximus to Jove:
With heaps of Spice, we'll cloud the Altars round;
Seven Heifers offer, beautiful and young,
To Iupiter the Stayer. Hence, my Friends;
See all things ready for the Sacrifice.

Yet melancholy! when both Gods and Men
Strive to out-vye in gifts? Stretch out thy arm,
Like angry Jove, to those who envy thee:
VVe'll be thy Elements, to execute.

Thy loss, Terentia, does depress my Soul:
I grovel in the dark; and, when light comes,
Behold the falsehood of my flattering Stars.

When Heaven is kind, and pours his blessings down,
Not Miser-like, but with a bounteous hand;
Who knows, but Fate reserves this to the last,
To make invalid all the other gifts?
Distrust is worse than Death; and blind the sense:
So Night, to the dull Phlegmatic, creates
The Aerie nothings which fancy rise;
But when the warring Senses rouse the Soul
To active heat, straight the Chimoera's fled:
Then let not thought, formed from despair, give birth
To Beings far unworthy of your breast.

What means this rudeness, in our privacy?

Some Strangers new arrived do beg admittance.

Conduct 'em in.

Art thou Sertorious?

Men do call me so. Art thou a Roman?

View well my face; then judge.

By Heaven, 'tis Cassius!
That noble Roman, who appears to me
As the last remedy to dying men;
Or life, or death, attend as the effect.
When Rome, in Sylla, made me Exile; Thou,
In my necessity the only Friend,
I left as Guardian to my Life, my Soul;
Four Suns have past the Zodiac, since to me
They've blessed this eye with my Terentia's sight:
Say, Cassius, lives she? or to blessed Shades,
Doomed by the Gods to an untimely Fate,
She has changed for Immortality? Yet hold!
Dead is the Fatal period of thy words:
Night is not more allied to Chaos, than
This dismal sound, if uttered, is to Death.

She lives, Sertorius: lives, to bless thy sight;
To banish into Air thy doubts and fears.

I ask no other Heaven, you Gods, than this;
For joys of Paradise, Elizium Shades,
Are Fictions to the real bliss she brings.

So breaks the Sun, from out the Artic Pole,
And with it Day, banishing Night from thence.
My past misfortunes, whose obdurate Sense
Sat heavy here, now vanish at thy sight:
Long absence, winged by noblest Fire, sets on;
And the great ecstasy of flowing joys
Lethe past dangers with the present bliss.

Thou all of excellence! how shall I pay
The mighty debt! for, by my life, I swear
The Sense of Seeing to the Center moves,
And makes a mutiny of thought, within
The Organ of my speech. Let me admire;
And by my Eye, which greedily delights
To meet each glance, judge of the Power Love.

Leave, my Sertorius, this Courtly Stile;
And, in such words with which thou won'st my breast,
Say I am welcome.

Gods and Men, stand mute,
While, both to Heaven and Earth, Sertorius owns
Life, Health, and Happiness, without thy sight
Dwindle to nought, and fill an Airy sound:
Not absent Gods, from their Ethereal Thrones
Frightened by Typhon, did with greater joy
Again possess their Heaven, than I my fair.

No Music of the Spheres could raise my Soul
Into a height like this. Gods, on my knees,
I offer up my prayers of Sacrifice;
Contemn the many dangers I have past:
Since, from those clouds which veiled my happiness,
The Sun of comfort ushers on a Calm.

Heaven has restored the Treasure which I soug^
Given over, as Shipwrecked upon Sylla's Rock:
While pressed with grief, beneath the mighty loss,
A happy moment makes me bless the Day,
In giving back the All that I admire;
For, by thy self, on thy fair hand I swear,
I would not change for a Celestial Seat.

And by my life, wound up within thy Fate,
The joys of Heaven, Society of Gods,
Are not so charming as thy best-lov'd self.

Blessed Lady, which to Lusitania brings
The peace our Country has so often sought,
So oft with piles of Incense filled the Air,
And with the prayers of Nations in the Cloud
Arrived, and gained acceptance from the Gods.

Oh, Cassius, this noble man has spoke,
At once, her Virtue, and thy Worth. What man
Was ever blessed like me, from Time and Chance,
Through the dark Labyrinths of mystic Fate,
To taste of joys like mine, and live? You Gods,
Allay the Ecstasy; which grows so fast,
That life, in motion, flags to keep its pace.

I tread on Air; and view around the Days,
Which fleet, like Shadows, tho they harbor'd Death*
Like Prophets, lightened by the Sacred fire,
Forget the giddy Chance, and to the God
In rapture celebrate the turns of Fate:
Thus, blessed by Love, I fly into thy arms.
Where thy sight mesures, there's the blessed place;
And in that Circle joys of Heaven are found.

I am all Rapture; and will hence remove,
To pay the Tribute of an ardent Love;
Gaze on those eyes which do these joys create,
And view the charming object of my Fate:
Then, extasy'd, to greater bliss I'll fly;
Contemn the gaudy Mansions of the Sky,
And wrapped in thy embrace for ever lye.

HELL, and Confusion! how they rend the Air
With endless clamours! Angry Elements,
When meeting, cannot form a sound, that bears
More horror in it: No voice but cries aloud,
Lead to Sertorius! which the Traitoress echo
From off the Hills reverberates, and makes
No sound but his combat the yielding Air.
Oh, giddy Fortune, and uncertain Chance,
Upon whose slippery path I've trod so long,
Into what Maze you've led me! Must I live
To see my self bereaved of Fame, to plume
The Minion that I hate? -- Ha! who art thou,
That bring a terror with thee?

A Friend, Perpenna:
Who bids his General fly; or else submit
To lay the Storm, by your consent to march.
All arguments are vain; wounds but inflame
Their burning rage, and turn into despair
What hope could form. Hark how the Tempest roars,
As if they meant to force consent from Jove!
By strenuous voices so impulse the Air,
As make Convulsions in his Starry Orb!

Cease to consider, if you mean to live.
So breaks the Sea, through the opposing banks,
And with its Torrent headlong rushes Fate:
Your Friends are, to their fury, Sacrificed;
No argument but Swords, no speech but Blows,
Plead resolution to go on through Fate.

Perpenna, so I was commanded call thee,
For the incensed Soldiers swear to choose,
From out the Legions, Chiefs, and form a Head
That shall to Osca lead their Warlike Bands.
Metellus, and young Pompey, they despise;
And to Sertorius fame are Prosetytes:
Say, whether Concord to the Armed crowd
Thou send in salutation, or Neglect?

If that my memory fails not, thou art he,
When all the Cohorts bent to mutiny
In the Apulian fields, killing the Slave
Ambitious to be heard, did lay the Storm:
How art thou changed! how lost from what thou were!
Those Silver hairs, wain'd in the Roman Camp,
Should be example of her Discipline;
Not head of factious Slaves against their Lord,
Who made 'em what they are.

Thus low, I bow
To great Perpenna, as my General.
When the rash Crowd moved with the Face of Death,
Lest some Officious Slave, inur'd to noise,
Plebeiac sport, wrought up the mischief higher;
I took this shape upon me, and must beg
(Hower'e the boldness they compelled me to
Relish your sense) you would give way to join
Whom public Fame speaks loud: They all concur,
If you resist, to give you bound and chained
Unto the Lusitanian General.
Be speedy, e're the happy hour is fled.

Necessity compels; you must obey.

Did I not fear (for I'm my self secure)
My Fulvia's harm, the insulting Slaves should feel
Alcides labours dwelt upon my Sword:
But, since ill Chance sits heavy on my Fate,
Fly hence, my Friends, use all your art and power,
Let Hermes dictate, and the Gods inspire;
Take with you this good man, and tell the Throng,
Perpenna condescends to lead 'em on:
Speak all the taking words that can be thought,
And Reign for ever in Perpenna's breast.

Fear not success: this news, like Balm to wounds,
Will lay the anguish, and set free their doubt.

Was there no way to pass the Labyrinth?
No subtle Clue the mystic path to find?
You partial Gods, why Crowned you with success?
Was it to add to the Laurels which he wears?
Now, by the juster Powers that war within,
And make a Tempest in my Soul, he dyes.
Not angry Daemons, to subvert the World
To ancient Chaos, and enlarge their Rule,
Wrapped in the darkest Clouds too strong for light,
The ample Character of Hell's design:
Mine greater, more secure. Hypocrisy,
Thou smoothest Devil that can Gods beguile,
Rule in my brain; and dictate to my sense
Mischiefs, excelling Heaven or Hell to forge.

Why all this Tempest, Cneius? Look over Fate;
And, from the Brazen Volumes, race the hour
That threatens ruin. Are you mute at this?
Could you, like Hercules, perform anew
His Hydra-labour, it were certain hope;
But against the VVinds and Seas usurping rage,
Like Mariners within the giddy Bark,
Mix words with Air, and execrate in vain,
To great men is ignoble: Ebs and Flows
Of Earthly bliss, should to the noble prove
Like the fixed Rocks in the VVatry Element.

So fired Prometheus Image with the Flame
Stolen from Apollo's Car, as at this sound
Those wave'ring thoughts which mutinied within
Vapor to Air, as Mysts before the Sun:
Thou chide my Fair; but with the famed art
That Orpheus drew Eurydice from Hell;
Thy words, like Charms, make me adore thy form,
And pay thee, Mortal, worship that's Divine.
Say, thou, my life, and be as Oracle;
While thy Perpenna, substitute to thee,
Grows with the sound.

Must I then Counsel give,
And form the thought that must evade ill Chance?
Since Heaven and thee concurring will it so,
Unite Sertorius power, and dissipate
Those clouds of Fury which usurp thy Face:
Ill Angels hover over despairing men
And breed a mutiny within the Soul;
While the good Spirits act in will alone,
Sigh out their woes and lose their words in Air,
Imperfect sound. None but the wretched feed
On abject hope: for God-like men create,
From the extremes of ruin, certain bliss.
So the skilled Sea-man, at vast distance knows
When the Salt Surges war the Element:
Incluse within the noble Vessel, braves
The angry Seas, tho ruffled to a storm.

Oh Fulvia, 'tis the torture of the damned
To rack with thought of Paradise that's lost;
But thou, as when the spangled lights are hid,
And all the Heavens in darkness are arrayed,
Mortals distract with fear of endless night,
Till the bright Sun does usher in the day:
Half dead, twixt doubt and fear, thou give new life,
And call from exile all my Reason back.
There's something thunders in my Ears, revenge,
Pierces like Lightning; but has left its fire
Fixed in my breast, which like to Aetna burns.

Let it burn on; it is a noble fire;
And, in the blaze, let the great Hero fall:
Make Lusitania the Funeral Pile,
Her Cities, Sructures Temples, perish all,
And from the fire let greatness take its birth.

Let me embrace thee, O thou Excellence!
Whose words have raised a fury in my breast
Prompt to revenge; but yet so formed, so wrought,
That Gods may wonder, and not Fate prevent.
Yes, we will meet Sertorius; to his bane;
And in a dubious language wrought with guile,
Merit belief: till, most secure, he falls.
So when Serenity of air by heat
Becomes perspicuous, and the azure sky
The jarring Element of Fire reflects;
Through subtlest wounds the Soul her passage takes
And leaves the Body senseless of her flight:
So shall Sertorius fall, such is his Fate,
No Thunder shall fore-run the deadly flash.

Now thou art worthy of my love, and court'st
In Treasure that surmounts a Danae's shower:
My soul's transplanted in thy breast, and forms
A God-like thought, apt to a Power supreme:
Seated by thee, I view the lower World.
The brood of Chance, like giddy Atoms reel;
While, like the Gods, we scatter, or collect,

What strange Infection rules within my breast,
And Riots in my blood? Not liquid fire,
By its first cause fomented, burns more fierce
In the Earths Center, than I flame within.
'Twere better, Cassius, to unsheathe thy Sword,
And open all the fluces of thy life;
That, in a deluge to the other world,
Thy blood may still the Furies, and thy Soul
VVander an Exile in Elizium shades.
'Sdeath, how was it begotten? so impure,
I dare not give it name. You Fates unkind,
Why doomed you love in so sinister way?
Now, my ill Daemon whispers in my Soul
I must love on, and live. Ha! see, she coms!

Are you not well, my Lord, that you retire
From the society of Friends? we're now
Beyond the barbarous extents of Rome;
Forget the base Proscribing City, and
W' inhabit, and enjoy a Paradise.
What sullen thought can then usurp your breast?
If in Sertorius power, or mine, it lies,
Your merit pleads, and Friendship bids command.

Nor you, nor he must grant; the gift's so great,
And my ambition swelled to such a height,
None but the only Jewel of his Crown
Will calm the rage of warring passions here.
(What have I said? what Devil did inspire
With words so killing to my Fame? I'm lost;
Hurried to ruin, by resistless Charms.)

Ransack his Tresury, and call it yours;
Did it contain more wealth than India knows:
No gift can equal such a Friend as you.

Ah, Madam, you're so excellently good,
Placed in a Sphere remote, beyond the World;
But wretched I, wander in endless night,
And hate the Day, which brought my misery.
In vain I hope redress; in vain complain
Unto the Air; large floods of brinish tears
With sighs, commix: -- (Heaven, strike me dumb for ever,)
Or I shall tell the Cause of all my griefs;
And, with it, bring inevitable Fate!

'Tis wondrous strange! But; Cassius, I must know
From what hid Spring these mighty Torrents rise.
I always thought you worthy, and would strive,
Knew I but how, to ease these fits of grief:
You said, a Jewel; can a Toy, like that,
Render confused the nobleness of mind?
Cassius is wiser; and, I fear, has felt
The change of quiet, by his Country's change^
Met some obdurate Fair, inur'd to scorn,
Stranger unto your worth. Is't not from thence?
Tell me; and, by our Friendship, were she Flint,
Harder than Adamant, I'd melt her breast;
Infuse into her Soul the pangs of Love,
And make her proud to merit such a choice.

(Something I fain would say; but when my words
Do crowd for utt'rance, they're confused and lost.
I will -- yet I will not -- Death here shall rule,
E're I the fatal Secret do reveal.)
Your pity, Madam's ill bestowed on me,
Who labour under the extremes of Fate,
Foresee the Goal which I shall ne'er arrive,
And languish in the sight of Heaven I wish:
Yet, there is something, in your words, creates
A kind of quiet here, and rest unknown,
Allays the mutiny of warring thoughts,
And breaks, like light, thorough my Chaos sense.

Give me your hand; consider as we go;
If I am worthy of the secret Cause,
Fear not success; I'll be your Advocate:
Or, if a Kingdom's loss can buy your peace,
Sertorius, to regain a Friend like you,
With hands profuse would slight the gaudy Rule,
And, in the extremes of Friendship, prove a Friend.

Upon the utmost rim of Earth I stand;
And, the least motion, down the Precipice
Headlong I fall, giddy with doubts and fears:
I see my Fate, but cannot Fate prevent.

Health to Sertorius, Perpenna sends,
Union, and Concord, Palms, and Olive-Crowns,
Trophies and Spoils, taken from the tawny Gauls:
The pledge of Friendship, bonds of Unity.

A Roman constancy and Faith, commends
The great Sertorius; proud of such Ally.
Open the Phalanx; sound the voice of War:
And fill the Heavens with Battel-harmony.

Fame, which to mighty deeds extends her wings,
Has, from the Confines of wide-spreading Gaul,
To view a Man famous as ancient Gods,
Drawn me Perpenna, to admire thy Fate.
Nor find I less than what I sought; a Man,
Great as the Founder of Imperial Rome:
Who, like a God, does with his presence awe.
Give here our Standard, now no more our own;
Lictors, your Fasces prostrate at his feet;
And all your Chiefs, which owned me for your head,
Pay here Allegiance: for Perpenna vows,
By the blessed light which guilds the Day, he lives
Wholly devoted to Sertorius will.

You make me blush through all my honoured Scars,
Naming my deeds, which are by yours eclipsed;
The Starry Light, to Cynthia's Orb compared:
Believe me, noble Roman, I'm more proud
Of this Days honour, by so famed a man;
That all the glories of my life fall short,
When this is named. Bear high the Fasces still,
and let the lofty Eagle raise her Crest;
For, by the loves and lives of all my Friends,
Sertorius bows to so much Fortitude.

Now, by the God which bears the name of War,
His mighty Soul's transplanted in thy breast:
The Shields of Rome, are forged, Metallic dross;
Thou only Patriot, exiled in a Storm
Of Brutal rage: Fabius, Camillus, all
The noblest Spirits inhabit in thy mind;
And, while I praise thy Virtue, thoughts Divine
Possess my Brain, and elevate my Soul.

We're Men, Perpenna; Men, by Fate chose out
To launch through all the Terrors of the World;
Frail, mortal Men, subject to every Chance:
And while we praise our selves, we rob the Gods,
Let it suffice I am thy Virtue's Creature:
For, by the Gods, I covet to be thine.
Bebricius, Cassius, noblest Friends, come on,
And, with the Gordian-knot of Friendship, tie
This mighty Union -- Now, let Pompey come,
Metellus, or the source of Civil War,
Sylla, attended with his dire effects;
Like angry Gods, we will hurl destruction down;
Blast all their hopes, and scatter all their power:
For Heaven in this secures the worst of Fate,
And marks it out the Raising of our Swords.

Where e're Sertorius leads, so winds break loose;
Both Air and Earth suffer Convulsive fits:
Not angry Parcae, mounted on a Plague,
In greater numbers kill, than where thy Sword
Points out the fatal compass, and makes way;
Like loudest Bolts forged by the Cyclops hands,
The mighty-weapons of an angry Jove.
Proud to obey the Legions stand; their Chiefs
Glow Aetna like, and courage fills the Nerves,
While the hot-Will only the Signal waits.

When brave Perpenna leads the coldest Soul
With Emulative Virtue Flames, and courts
The dismallest objects, and the sharpest fights;
And when the noble Bird of Jove soars high,
The Pies, and flocks of chatt'ring Jayes disperse,
Beat on the wing, and court the Mountains womb,
And Rocky Cliffs, for Shelter, Give command
The Salij enter, to perform those Rites
Apt to the will of Heaven, and lives of Men.

In Erebus, and in the lowest shades,
Of ancient Chaos, and old Kingdom Night,
Where the fierce Element of Fire ne'er fades,
Where horrors, and the Terrors of the sight
The Powers Immortal, tho secure, affright:
Thou, in the Genius of Alcides, Reigned,
And made the God-like Labours soon obtained.
Son of Juno, God of War,
Who in blood and death delights,
Wbich still adorn thy mighty Car,
And fire the brave in fiercest fights:
From Thrones Ethereal, see, O see,
The strictest bonds of unity,
Through Death and Wounds offered to thee.
Bebricius, hast to Osca; Summon all
The Roman Orders, to the Sacred place
Of Iupiter Feretrius: There assembled,
In a full Senate, tell the Conscript Fathers,
Sertorius leads their Power to Sucron Fields;
And Heaven indulgent, with a mighty force
Whom famed Perpenna to their Army joins,
Eager for fight, as famished men for food,
Hastes to revenge on the Tyrannic Fo.
Then, to Terentia thy self address;
Say, that Sertorius invocates the hours
Swiftly to move the Orb which rules the Day,
And fleetest Time counts tardy in his flight,
Till the longed minute ushers my return.

None more can covet to obey, than I;
Tho the great Goddess I adore comes on,
Fiercest Bellona, whom in blood I court:
But, such the Magic is which Friendship holds,
I'll fly to Osca and neglect the Day.

Cneius speaks.
Bring Fulvia hither, thou my best of Friends,
In Battle often tried, as Gold by fire,
But far out-stripping Plutus Mines of Ore.
Let me entreat the mighty man of War,
When he the weakness of Perpenna knows,
That he'd forget the frailty of that man
Whose silent hours (if such the Great can know)
Are fettered with the Charms of powerful Love:
Our Patron Mars oft, from his Seat of War,
To Revel with the beauteous Queen of Love,
Forgets his best-lov'd sound for soft embrace.
But see, she coms! now let her beauty plead.

By Venus self, there's more than mortal in her!
Perpenna cannot err; for joys he reaps,
The Amorous Gods would slight their gaudy Sky,
And covet to enjoy her Heaven of Love.

So Mortals to the Sacred Fane resort,
Latona's Son Invoking for success;
With greater heat, when Battle calls, go on,
As in thy presence: such the powerful sway
Of Beauty's Empire. Doubtful of my Fate,
And from thy Tongue, as from an Oracle,
Expect my Doom: Pompey, Metellus, brave
The noblest Roman; to whose Fate's allied
All the remains Perpenna can command.

Absence, my- Cneius, is the Lover's curse;
The Rack of Torture: yet, when Honour calls,
Thy Fulvia's Rival, sense of Fame grows high,
Pleads in thy cause, and for a space keeps down
A flood of tears, which take their source from Love.
The fate of Lovers should inseperate be;
But thou, the killing Terrors to our Sex
Make thy Companions; and, in Arms, forget
Thy sorrowing Fulvia: who, like Niobe,
Could weep away the Being that I have.

Give not a birth to thoughts like these, my life;
For, when the Trumpet hastens to the Charge,
Death broods upon my Sword, till from the Field
Spread over with slain, with Laurel Crowned I hast
To pay the glories at my Fulvia's feet.
Thou, as the Tresure of my life, my Soul,
Must hence to Osca: this brave Stranger here
And stout Grecinus wait the way.


Have given the happy minute from my hope.
Oh, my Terentia! blood nor death can lay
The mighty anguish that thy eyes have made.

One look, before I go, and that's the last:
The taste of parting joys so much increase,
That I could gaze my very Soul away.

Such power, the God pointed within that Ray,
Has changed the thought of Battle to desire,
And a few minutes would transform me quite

Sound Drums, and Trumpets; Rise, you noble Souls,
Fired with the harmony of sounds so sweet:
Let courage dictate, and your Swords out-do
The angry Fates. To Arms, my Friends; to Arms:
Oh, may the Fortune of the Day lay wast
The many mischiefs which attend on War,
While the kind Gods auspiciously afford
A blooming Peace, to Crown the Victor's Sword.

NOT subtle Fire, from Iove's Olympus hurled
In Airy tracts to mortal eyes recluse,
Can be more deadly than the Plots I've formed;
The old, the young, the dull Saturnine Soul,
And him whose lightness is Silenus like,
Wander the pleasant Maze; so formed by thought,
And by the Magic of my beauty Charmed:
So the dull Pilot from the Helm is drawn;
Rapt with the Ecstasy of sound, which bears
Inevitable bane, from Syrons Tongues.
Greatness, in my Perpenna, 'tis I aim;
And, while in Fields he steals the Soldiers hearts,
I'll make a greater conquest here at home.
Like Travellers, by light delusive led,
I've wandered from my reason, and have trod
The mystic Labyrinth of mighty Love.
Say then; Bebricius, she be virtuous, good,
Stranger to thy requests, and cold as Ice!
Let her be so; the coyest may be won:
And shall I faint, when Paradise falls short
To the blessed joys which dwell upon her lips?
Ha! she is here! I grow unto the Earth;
And the unruly Devil promts my Tongue.
Had I the Charms that Youth and Beauty bring,
The power of Gods, or of their Substitutes;
To the Divinities which habit there,
And make a Throne Celestial in those eyes,
I'd prostrate all, and, with the gift, my self:
But, void of these, how shall I frame my speech
To merit pity? Say, thou beauteous Creature,
If I offend, in saying that I love?
For, If I do, the World must err, like me;
Worship those Eyes, as Persians do the Sun,
And justly Idolize thy excellence.

Bebricius turned a Lover, at these years!
Does the soft God captive the Man of War?

Madam, he does; at vast expense he rules;
Tributes my being, makes my heart his Seat:
Ill Chance, to Camps and Martial deeds inur'd,
Has taught my Tongue a harsh unpolished way;
Yet Truth and Honesty, absent from Courts
Where gaudy Birds with borrowed Feathers wing,
Dwells in my language. Possibly you may,
For I expect it, use me with neglect;
Do more than Daggers points could, wound:
But I have said, and wait my Destiny.

Are you then serious? Was not all this formed,
Invented, to delude the hours away;
The tedious hours? For, Since Perpenna's absence,
Each day's delay appears an Age to me.

Even from the first which blessed me with your sight,
I've felt the power of Beauty in my Breast,
Languished in Torture, and have hugged my chain:
Morpheus could ne'er close up my eyes with rest,
But your Idea Reveled in my Soul.

Hold, Sir. This dialect does ill become
The Tongue of him I always thought a Friend.
Thus far, my Innocence will guard it self;
But farther, were a crime that unbefits
Perpenna's choice. Leave me, thou wretched man:
I will not punish thee with ought, but Love.

Know, cruel Fair, life without hope is Hell;
Wretched, as they who dwell in endless night:
I dreaded the ill Fate, which did compel
This doom from you. See, thou cruel Woman,
And judge, by this, the wondrous power of Love,

What means Bebricius?

Say, when I am dead,
Bebricius Life and Love were so unite.
That Death it self fell short to seperate.
If there be paths the Soul when banished treads,
Whether on burning Phlegeton, or Styx;
Upon the flaming Shores I'll call on thee,
And make thy Spirit lose all mortal bliss,
Racked with the Sympathy of pains like mine.

Hold, barbarous man. Is't not enough I heard,
And in it suffered; but thou threat'st my Fame:
When vulgar crowds, not promt to judge, speak loud,
Enlarge Report, spread wide her Airy wings,
With seeming Subjects blazing Infamy?
If thou dost love, in death it self, the Soul,
The essential Seat of the Divinity,
Still cares, with danger of the living's fate:
And wilt thou wound in death, what living thou
Ador'st?

Rather than suffer pains beyond all speech,
Languish in Torture to Eternity,
I'll live to merit: but when stranger thoughts
Do find a gentle passage in your breast,
Oh, let the memory of your Slave appear
A pitying object, suing for relief.

Death waiting on a Lover's words, till now
I've been a stranger to; you've taken a way
To merit pity: what the effects may be,
I dare not guess; but Time will lighten all.

So Gods, when mortals doomed to Shades below,
Revoke the Sentence of the sinking Soul,
And give a glimpse of Heaven unto their sight,
To banish from the thought the fears of Night.

From Fortune's Minion, sorrowing Cassius coms,
Where Slaughter gluts upon the Bodies slain,
Pastime and sport, to the rough Sons of War;
Senseless to me the gaudy feast appeared;
For here, within my breast, I feell a grief
That makes a Fiction of the Vulture's gripe:
Yet, when Sertorius spoke, with hast I fled,
To pay the duty of a Friend and Lover;
And felt a kind of ease in his Commands.

Has the indulgent Gods then heard my prayers?
Lives he, secure of wounds from envious men?
Say, noble Cassius, and delight my sense.

None worthy fear; the badges of his Fame,
Which marked him Hers; then took an Airy flight,
Swelled with the Greatness, mesures out the Earth,
And makes the Heavens too little for her head.

How has the Ignoble passion froze my blood;
And, from the height of joys, hurled headlong down
Too forward Hope! Gods, is he wounded then?
His mind's so great, slighting the honoured breach,
Death, like a Thief, may steal away his life.

Oh, Madam, doom me not the Harbinger
Of woes so killing, 'less within my self:
His Fate's beyond the reach of vulgar men;
Who suffer, meriting a kind belief,
But vanish at his Name: As when the Sun
Mounts up Olympus hill, the spangled Lights
Shrink in their Beams, and disappear, till Night
Calls forth her Ornaments.

Let's hast; let's fly;
Add wings unto our steps: forget the name
Which breeds Impatience in a Lover's breast.

(To the wide Region of the Air I speak:
Like Tantalus, see that which flies my taste,
And leaves me Tortured with the cruel thought.)

Why stay we here, and not attend the Triumph?
Press to his sight, and use a Lover's hast.

We, Madam, move within a different Sphere;
A Venus, you; and a dull Saturn, I:
Yet willingly, to meet a Friend like him.
Swift would the motion be; but all within
Is lost, in viewing of an object, hid
To vulgar eyes: but, to my Optics, plain
As Night from Day. (Her Innocence destroys,
Faster than thought can form a glimpse of hope!)

You speak a Dialect that's mystic, Cassius;
And show the mighty change from what you were:
For words confused betray an inward grief.
Now, by Sertorius, pity rules my breast;
And, did not expectation of his sight
Raise high my Soul, I should Conjure thee now
By the strict bonds of Friendship, to reveal
What works this change: for, Cassius, I perceive
That words imperfect habit in thy speech.
Sometimes, thy blood flushes upon thy cheeks;
Seeming to speak, thou check'st the hasty sound,
Change complexion to the palest hue.

The Gods themselves may, from Divinity,
Unfold the Adamantine leaves of Fate;
But there the name of Cassius is impressed
So light, that wandering Powers the object view,
Shunning the Sight, sinks through the mystic Writ.
Each hour I languish, and my pain's confined
To the Center of my Sense; Racks torture less:
Yet, such the will of Heaven, that I must live,
Still view at distance all the Heaven I wish,
Dumb to request a helping, pitying hand,
Whose very touch would, by a power Divine,
Pass through it's virtue to a bleeding heart.

What God hast thou offended, who should thus
Command Megaera to let loose a Snake?
But tell me, Cassius; when my Quintus coms,
From the ^tes to the Sylvan crowd,
Or from the height of Heaven to the depth of Hell,
Not one we will leave unsought, or uninvok'd.

Nor Gods, nor Men, did Cassius e're offend,
In Honour, or in Virtue: should I loose
The stubborn Reins which guide our human will,
I might have ease; but on it there attends
A greater plague; Death, which gives ease to all,
Will leave me restless in my Urn. But see!
The Lusitanians crowd to wait his sight.
Now must this light of mine for darkness change.

Such is the power of Friendship, that I've lost
The splendid thought which brings Sertorius home.

The Gods the justness of our Cause have shown,
And made the Air direct the Darts we flung,
While Victory did hover o'r our Arms.
Pompey, whose rashness spurred him on to fight,
Thinking that Fortune, which he elsewhere found,
Lacquy'd him here; but the constant Da^e,
Viewing the mighty havoc that we made,
Slighted his youth, and fled unto our Camp.

Memnius no more shall boast his mighty deeds,
Unless in the Infernal Shades, whose Shores
Swarm with the wretched Ghosts of Romans slain;
That Charon, groaning with the mighty toil,
Calls for more aid of Pluto, and bemoans
His endless labour. Where's Rome's General now?
Where fled to hide himself? He's bound to bless
The gaudy Trappings which adorned his Horse,
Whose sparkling Gems dazzled the barbarous eyes
Fixed on the object; h'had been Captive else:
Metellus force came timely to his aid.

It did, Perpenna; else we' had whipped him home,
Wailing his loss, unto his Patron Sylla.
But, when he views the Slaughter we have made,
The num'erous Slain, which lie as Autumn leaves;
He'll find destruction waits upon our Swords,
And, when he fights with us, he Combats Fate.

Welcome, thou great Triumpher over Rome,
Whose Sword chastises her Tyrannic brood;
The Hinds of Fortune, when thou sound'st to Arms:
See how thy Fame has winged, and won the breast
Of Mithridates, who thy Friendship courts;
That untamed Prince, made for the Roman Scourge,
Whose Empire's spacious, and his power as great.

Hail mighty Warrior! great as Hanibal!
Thy Name at distance does such terror breed
As when his Camp was in the sight of Rome.
The Lord of Kingdoms does, by us, entreat
Sertorius to his aid: which if he gains,
Pyrrhus, whose deeds were dreadful in the East,
Shall prove but Infant to his killing Sword,
Inur'd to battle, and to Slaughter bred;
Witness the dreadful days when it appeared.
Say thou accept'st this offer, it again
Shall act new wonders, and make big the Air:
Then, meeting with the sound thy deeds create,
Unite into a Terror, dread as Death,
And threaten everlasting night to Rome.

If Asia, torn by Siylla from his Rule,
Thou wilt give back again to his command;
Five thousand Talents of the purest Gold,
And forty Sail of well-built Ships of War,
Whose Prows are Armed with mighty beaks of Steel,
Shall plough the Atlantic Ocean. and be thine:
Under thy Banners shall his Subjects march;
And Mithridates, proud of thy Ally,
Own thee Superior both on Sea and Land.

Tell Mithridates, Cappadocia,
And the Bithynian Realms, are his again;
But what the Romans won by force of Arms,
I cannot in my Honour give away;
Or, from that Empire, lop a member off
Which Fimbria won: I'll pledge my faith to him
As far as Honour will permit, no more;
For I will cease to be, e're do a deed
That may disgrace the actions of my life.
Bebricius, see 'em honourably used.
If, on the Terms proposed, your King agrees,
Or your Commissions authorize your power,
We shall assist him as our Friend: This day
We give our selves to pleasure; but the next
Is for the safety of this Common-wealth.

(Surely the Gods strive to out-vye in gifts;
And all Mankind, not worthy of their care,
Must climb the Precipice of Fortune's wheel,
While blindly here she largely gives away.)

More pleasure Gods, you by this object give,
Than all the glories that I've won in fight!
To know I'm loved by thee, exceeds the joys
Of bliss eternal. 'Twas to Heaven thou pray'dst,
And the just Powers could no denial make;
From the Olympic Mansions of the Sky,
Dropped down a Laurel to adorn my Fair.

Let it find credit in Sertorius breast,
That in thy absence, as bereaved of Soul,
My spirit hovered round about thy head:
Still begged of Jove, in an Ethereal sound,
To break the edge of every Sword, that bore
Death in it's point. Oh, my Sertorius! now,
If tongue can utter, or delight can form,
I feel an Ecstasy above all thought.

Roman Friends!
Do not their plaudits grow within his breast?
By Heaven, we attend, like Slaves, upon this Tyrant,
Unworthy notice: while the vulgar crowd
Shout up his name to Heaven, and frighten Jove.

Fulvia, Perpenna, sorrowing thy delay,
Has felt the stroke of sickness; but thy sight
(So she commanded tell thee) brings her health.

Ha! is she ill? (She has the Signal sent
Of her success; but I must hide my joys!)
You Gods, averse to all that's great in me,
Why wound you so? Let Triumph, Honour, all
Perish within the thought, e're I delay
A minute longer. 'Sdeath, my Gall will burst!
Aufidius, Manlius, sound the depth of Fate;
Take all my wishes with you: from this hour
We ether make, or lose all future joys.

What makes you study, Crassus? Is't this sight?
Or is it that the Crowd, neglecting us,
Pay all their Vows to him?

I know not what
Tumults within; but yet 'twere not amiss
They thanked us, for the wounds we got in fight.

Ligurius! Decius* why do ye bite your lips?
Why writh your looks into an angry frown?

'Twas nothing, Manlius, but a sullen thought.

Mine was the same; but, see, we are observed!

You noble Lusitanians, all are bound
To pay the glories of the Day to him,
The brave Perpenna, who deserves your vows:
Not in the War of Heaven, when Godheads Armed
And shook the mighty Empire of the Sky,
Did the Cyclopian bolts out-do his Sword.
Terentia, thou, whose longing eyes behold
Thy Quintus safety, ought to thank him for it.
When bold Aquinius, circled round with Fate,
Like the Controller of the Destinies,
He forced his way: and the ambitious man,
Proud of the growing Glories of the Day,
Fell from the usurped Chariot of the Sun.

'Tis thou, my life, that dost inspire my tongue
With thanks, as to a saving Power. Oh, where
Had thy Terentia been, when Heaven and Earth,
One trembling, the other Echoing with fierce sounds,
And Gods impartial thronged to view the fight,
If the barbarity of him thou sav'dst
Had made a breach in life? Show me the man,
That with an obligation infinite
Has freed my fears, and blessed my eyes again.

Proud of the honour, fighting by thy side,
And glorying in the objects formed by thee,
A servant to thy Fame; Perpenna said,
When hasting to embrace whom sickness made
A stranger to the splendid Scene, his Fulvia:
That nought but all the Tresure of his love
Could, in the lucky minute of his life,
Cause any separation from his Friend.

What said Aufidius? is Fulvia sick?
Can so much beauty temt the Gods to Fate?
Appollo Pythius, minister her health;
Summon the followers of the Delphic God,
And, with them, tell Perpenna how I grieve
At this sinister period of our joys.

Good Heaven, defend! what is't I hear? you Gods,
Can then Sertorius bow to any Shrine
Than what so oft he' has sworn by? am I then
Lost in the novelty? So bliss, when reaped,
Serves only to delight in absent thought.

By Heaven, the Vestal fire is not more pure,
Than what my heart does offer up to thee,
The Altar of thy Love, thy Beauty's Throne;
Where thoughts take birth, as Gold by fire Refined.
Can I in Friendship then commit a crime,
Sorrowing that loss which might have been our own?
Honour commands a Sympathy in grief:
But Love, the noble passion of the Soul,
Does in the glass reflect upon it self,
And while it views inflames the Element.

Forgive me, Quintus: such the tender seat
Where Love's enthroned, such jealousies, such cares
Attend on the Passion, that we tread the Maze,
And wander in the Labyrinth of thought,
When the Idea by our Fancy raised
Proves Rebel, and with Jealousy unites:
But now, inlightned by thy words, I feel
Joy in thy presence; with thee Sympathize.

Lead forward, Friends, you Sinews of the War,
In shape like Men, but in your deeds like Gods;
Divide the Spoils, and Reign for ever here:
While to the Powers Divine we celebrate
Thanks, suiting to the Glories we have won;
Perfume the locks of the now setting Sun.

I FIND my self o'r-pow'r'd, my Reason gon,
The Magic of the Soul has left its found;
Bereaved of all the noble Roman, now
I walk, and breath pollution to the Air;
Such as might well infect the Antidote:
But like that Roman, viewing round his Fate,
Suddenly down the dreadful Gemonies,
Preventing the defame of common hands,
Met boldly with his Fate, and brave in death;
Thou, Cassius, must at once, (hard Fortune thine!)
Be thy Accuser, Judge, and Murderer,
In death to wipe the scandal from thy Fame:
That, when thy Earthly part's sublimed with Fire,
Thy Spirit rarify'd, may see thy Urn
Watered with tears, and hear thy story told.
Trust me, thou Roman, I lament thy Fate,
Which hurries thee, in paths obscure to us,
Thus to consume: thou seem a walking Ghost,
And, like a Spirit, covet'st lonely Shades;
There breath complaints; while thy lamenting Friends
Beg, and entreat thou would admit of cure:
With folded arms, and looks which shoot themselves
Into the Earth, thou sigh denial out.
Hither I've traced thee, and resolve to know
If there be Power in Friendship; or the Name
But Fiction.

Oh, thou excellently Fair!
Yet from that excellence my griefs proceed.
Did I not feel my Fate grasp fast my life;
Dumb to my woes, as they by Nature made,
I'd sink into my Urn.

Bless me, you Powers!
What have I done? what horrid crime committed,
To make a Friend wither, with thought, to shade;
The gift of Gods in life? Oh, Cassius, tell;
That, with the hast of Penitents, I fly
Unto the pitying Gods, which hover o'r
Their holy Mansions: say what Sacrifice,
What Vows, what Incense may atone their Ire;
For I shall never taste of peace or rest
Till I, the Cause, have quieted thy grief.

White, as the thought of Innocence, thou art;
Pure, like the first Creation, from all guilt;
That takes it source from the internal frame:
Yet, tho attended, circled round with gifts,
The only Jewel of Heavens Tresury,
Such is the violence of head-strong Fate,
I covet -- (Oh, how the unwilling Soul,
Just on the brink of ruin, all confused,
Casts a sad look upon her long-lov'd seat,
E're for Immortal change she takes her flight!)

Oh, free me, Cassius, from these doubts and fears,
Which make a Winter's storm within my blood.
Did I not call upon Sertorius love
To raise my Soul, depressed with such a weight,
Sure I should sink in Sorrow's vast Abyss,

You have commanded, and I will obey:
Free you from this; but fear a second storm,
More dreadful, and more just. You called on Love!
That raises you; but sinks me down to Hell:
For what, but Love, could thus effect a change;
Transform me from the being that I had?

I am amazed! what is't that Cassius means?

But, oh! when, naming Love, I view that face,
Like him who, gazing on the works of Heaven,
Lost life in admiration of the Object!
Pity me, Fair; tho justly you condemn:
And, when I say 'tis you that I adore,
For you thus wither, -- and thus lose myself;
Say, in my death, That Honour to my Friend
Held a contest with Love, and mastered it.

Help, help the wretched; who, distract with pain,
Has sheathed his killing Dagger in his breast.
Oh, run, Camilla; call the Sons of Art,
To stay this deluge; in which Life does hast
To find a passage.

In vain is human help.
Let me, in death, Adore; and shoot my Soul,
Viewing thy face, into Elizium sh^des.
Forgive the boldness of my love: tho Death
Coms swiftly on; yet, ere the latest blast,
Let me entreat you'll to my memory
(How-e're you hate me now) be pitiful.

Who was't that called for help? -- Ha! 'tis my self,
To bear with patience such a sight as this!
Gods, you're unkind; more cruel, than she's false!
By Heaven, She weeps, and baths him with her tears!
Oh, the inconstancy of all the Sex;
That damns the living, and torments the dead!
I will retire from hence; and wish I could
Forget I e're had being.

Oh, my Lord,
Stay you so long without a helping hand?

Ha! by Heaven, she'd make a Property of me!
Death, Hell, and Furies, 'tis too much to bear.

See here, my Lord, the noble Cassius slain.

What said thou? Cassius dying? How the word
Has calmed the passion, at the name of Friend!
So the Earth's vapors, when the Sun appears,
Dissolve to Dew. Oh, Cassius! Oh, my Friend!
Tell me, how came this wound imprinted here?

Give me your hand; and swear forgiveness to me.

By all the Gods, I do.

Then I shall die
Freed of the bitter anguish of the mind.
I have offended, but it was in thought;
'Twas the ill blood rebelled within my Veins:
But from the sluices I have loosed the slave,
And die a Roman; yet my Rebel eyes
Will fix upon the Object of my Soul,
Now plunging o'r the mighty Main of Death.

Forbear, thou saucy Tyrant, for a while;
If thou want Subjects for thy eager maw,
I'll give thee thousands, spare me but this one.
He's gon, he's gon; the fleeting Soul has past
The bounds of life! Night, out of Chaos take
The blackest of thy Wardrobe, thrust back day,
That all the World may mourn in endless Darkness.
Weep on, Terentia: for thy tears, like Balm,
Will please his Manes, and allay my grief.
Takeup the Body, and erect a Pile
Great as a Pyramid: from the blessed, look down,
And see thy last of Rites. Oh, might there rise
Another Phoenix from the Sacrifice.

The angry Fates now crowd to serve our will;
Lest they should want in mischief, as in power:
Ligurius, Decius, are my Proselytes,
Greedily swallow up the gilded bait,
And hurry on to ruin. But, I fear,
Bebricius Friendship will admit no change
For, tho he loves, and to the height of passion,
In his rough Soul such Honour is impressed,
He'll sooner turn Apostate unto Love
Than derogate from him who fills his praise.

Crassus, Norbanus, and Tribunius com;
With many more inclined unto our Faction.
The lightest Souls thou hast already fired,
While the consid'ering Fools are caught by me:
Norbanus honour, nor the Tribuneship
Which Crassus has, nor famed Tribunius charge,
Are strong enough against the assaults I make.

What doom you of Bebricius?

He must die.

Then, let him die: but shall he fall, before
The Tragedy intended?

Yes, he must:
Lest he betray us to that Fiend Sertorius.

I think, 'twere better that you let him fall
Associate with the mighty Deity
He Idolises: let 'em mount together;
And, erring from the slippery paths of Heaven,
Sink headlong down, into eternal Night.

Retire, my Fair, and invoke of Chance
To cease the motion of her giddy Wheel,
Till I have fixed the Engines of his Fate.
Answer me, Jove, in Thunder, if that man
To greatness born, by interposing Fate
Headlong flung down the aspiring Precipice,
Yet labouring to regain the mighty top,
Views round the spacious Empire of his toil;
Can any guile or fraud as perse his fame
Who makes his opposite his step to mount?
If thou dare answer me, I will speak aloud
That Romulus, the man thou snatched from Earth
To Deify, forgetting ties of blood,
Removed his Brother, to secure his Rule.
I dare as much, and court thee in my deeds,
Tho Ill, yet great, and offer 'em to thee;
For thou, with thoughts Olympic fir'st the brave,
Lifts 'em from Earth into the middle sky,
And points 'em out the Regions of the World:
'Tis thee I invoke; and wish I could
(As once unto Lycaon's House thou did)
Turn all into a Flame, and Nature change.

Sir, there are many Gentlemen without
That wait admittance.

Go, conduct 'em in:
They're the Conspirators.

Hail, noble Roman!

Hail noble Cneius!

Hail the great Perpenna!

Hail the great Perpenna!

Hail the great Perpenna!

The Omen's well, that, with a mind unite
To carry on this great deliv'ering work,
We here are met, as at a Signal given:
Tribunius, Crassus, and Ligurius,
Norbanus, and good Decius, use no speech;
But seat your selves. Now, Roman Lords, and Friends,
Once great in Fortune, not in emty sound;
The all that we enjoy; tho we may feign,
Like melancholy men who Reign in thought,
Revel in joys, the mere Idea's formed
From Fancy, wrought into a height by words,
But the effect is Air: Can you, my Friends,
Tho we may credit, in our fulness, things
Which stupid ease creates, be or secure or great?
We call our selves a Senate, and beget
Thoughts we are truly so. Sertorius says,
When barbarous Gaul's sacked Rome and laid it wast,
Camillus unto Vei made retreat,
Gave out, that Rome it self was thither moved;
And, for the confirmation, added this:
"Where e're the Senate was, there Rome was still;
Alluding to our abject States, to please
A few, once Senators, now Exiled men.
Say then, if Cneius may be bold to speak
The plainest of his thoughts.

You have, Perpenna.

VV' expect from thee, as from an Oracle.

Speak free, Perpenna; for thou art our Fate.

Say we have fought, and gained a Victory,
If I may call it so; but which of you,
From public hands received the benefit?
Or did the Crowd echo your names from far;
Or to your Houses carry you with shouts?
If any such be here, then I am mute.

None; none, Perpenna.

Know you why it was?
For great Sertorius, like a boundless Sea,
Swallows the many Riv'lets in his Main.
Which of your Swords cut not as deep as His?
I saw you fight, and stood amazed at it.
What have the Barbarous given you in return
For such expense? If praise will cure your wounds,
The Soldier's purchase; whether since, or no,
They've thought you worthy merit?

We all fought:
They looked upon us, raised a shout, and cried,
The Gods reward the noble Roman Chiefs.

I, there it is; the Gods must pay you thanks,
While, like a Tyrant, he ingrosses all;
And leaves us not our fame. But now I'll hast
To search our hidden griefs. Sertorius says
Sylla's a Fury; truly, so it seems,
For, maugre all opposers, still he Rules;
His Fame mounts with the Chariot of the Sun,
Rises and sets with his Ethereal light:
Yet we despise him, and contemn his power,
Content with sound, and lulled with flattery.
Is not the beaten Pompey at our walls?
Has not Metellus joined him? nay, has not
Sylla threatened to be here? yet we sleep,
Surrounded with these dangers. Noble Friends,
If any of you think I use this speech
To alienate your Loyalty; of form
Language that bears a bane unto your worths;
Speak, and Perpenna shall be ever mute.

The hast freed us from the Lethargy, and added
Long-absent heat: Go on, thou noble Roman,
Who, while we slept, beheld our certain Fate.

This City, which, to Rome, is like a Star
In magnitude, unto the Moon at full,
He calls New Rome; the Superstitious Crowd,
Pleased with Novelty, count him a God:
And pay him Adoration. Don't we find,
While we exclaim against Sylla, Sylla here?
Here, in Sertorius? is he not Lord of Rule?
Does he not write himself Dictator too?
Saves, or destroys? are not his words as Laws?
And, tho he Lures us with the name of Friends,
Are we not under his Authority?
When I consider, noble Romans, Jove
Rive me with Thunder, if it irks me not,
To see our selves thus, by our selves, deceived.

Thoust read the mystic Character of Fate,
And found the number of the Sacred Writ:
Now lead the path, remote from Slavery.

I were not, Romans, worthy of your loves,
Could I not shun, as well as see the danger.
Consider, Friends, now, as your latest choice;
For Freedom is't, or Slavery we toil?
If Freedom we desire, as I believe
No Roman breaths a Soul, or holds a Life
Worthy enjoying, without the blessed Name;
It must be (pardon me, for Gods command)
By blood: Nay, start not, worthy Roman Friends;
We all must suffer, if he lives; if dyes,
We've all the World to rove in, or divide
The Provinces amongst us. Old Metellus
Will sign our own Conditions; Sylla courts us:
Lest, staying in their power, we join with Pompey;
Whom, well I know that, he both hates and fears.
Speak then, my Friends, and ease me from my doubts:
If, by my freeness, I am odious grown;
This hand, which willingly should aid your cause,
Shall ease me of the weight of life I bear.

Oft have I served him, in the fiercest fights,
And think no man e're courted more his love;
But, since the general good requires his fall,
I willingly assent to it.

So do I.

And all.

And all.

And all.

Give me your hands. First yours, Ligurius;
Now, noble Tribune, yours; honoured Norbanus;
Tribunius, tho last, yet Chief of all.
Since Heaven has put into our hands a Shield,
To ward the body from distress, Oh, Friends,
Watchful with cares, retiring to the Cave
Sacred to Fortune, which in Gaul I found,
Off'ring the Sacred Rites, lo, from her mouth
This sound was heard: "Awake, thou sleepy man,
"And dissipate those heavy clods of Earth;
"Whose pitchy vapors do, like Meteors, hang
"About thy Soul; Gods have decreed the fall
"Of proud Sertorius, and have chose thee out
"To free the Romans from their Slavish State:
"I'll move before thee, and prepare thy way;
"Into their minds instil the lost desire
"Of Liberty. This said, the God was mute.
By the concurrence, well I know the power
That the indulgent Gods unto our Fates
By this effect have given. Death is the word;
But how, and when, and where, you noble Romans,
Shall this great Act which gives us Liberty,
By Gods commanded, be by us performed?

Fortune has chose thee out to lead us on:
Thou, who conversest with a Deity,
In my opinion, ought to be our Head.

Perpenna's thoughtful, wise, and valiant,
Bends all his Study for the Roman good;
And, in this cause, must lead us forth to act.

Do, noble Cneius; for we're vowed to thee:
Point out the way, tho circled with the Fates,
We'd gain the prize, or perish in the attemt.

Secure in all your loves, I dare disclose
The secrets of my breast; and form a way
Subtle and sure, as what the Gods Decree.
What think you, Friends, if that he fall this night,
Deluded with a Tale of Victory?
I have the Engines ready for the work;
The fire is kindled, and the Forge complete:
And we the many hands to batter down
This vast Colossus. But, with him, must fall
Bebricius; who, with jealous eyes, inspects
Into the very marrow of our Plot:
The real Argus; and a trusty Villain.

Delay is dangerous; since we are confirmed,
Why should our Swords, ready to act our wills,
Grow to the Scabbards? Freedom is the prize
For which we fight: now, in the face of Day,
The Sun should view the glory of the deed.

Brave Spirit! that's so forward in the Cause,
Signal from Heaven to fan us into flame!
But that the Gods decree it otherwise,
Blessed would my Optics be, to see thy Sword
Hew Slavery in pieces. This I've thought;
When high in hope, pleased with the splendid Tale
Of Vict'ry, won from Sylla's Officers:
He sups with me to night; and that's his last.
The Lusita nian who admires him so
As the dull Clown the Thunder-making God,
Not knowing that the warring Elements
Create the same without the Thund'rer's hands,
Must with him fall. Draw all your Swords. Now swear,
By all the Powers which sat when Man was made;
By all the Beings abstract from those Po'wrs,
Sea, Air, and Fire; by day, and Erebus;
And by the Eternal Flames of Pluto's Realm:
When Time the happy minute points out,
You Swords cut deep into the Monster's heart.

We swear.

Methinks, I see the Landscape of his Fate,
By angry Daemons, stretched to a full length;
While the pleased Gods their heavenly Curtains draw,
And from the Crystal Casements of the Sky
With purer light Illuminate the Moon,
Pale with the greatness of the glorious deed
Which makes an Empire, and subverts a State,
And, from my breath, forms the Decrees of Fate.

IF the Decrees of Jove, in Thunder spoke,
Or the sad Character of warring Gods,
In ample Prodigies enlarge themselves;
You must not hence, unless unto your Fate:
Osca, till now, was stranger to these sights,
Which fright the vulgar, and confound the wise.
Last night, when Horror did in darkness Reign,
When Graves gave up their dead to trace the Earth,
And the unquiet Ghosts, as robbed of rest,
With horrid Schreams and howlings of the Damned,
Filled every Soul with terror of the change:
Our Priests (as when Neptune his Trident struck
The angry Element, and called the Springs
To vomit up a Deluge over the Earth,)
To every Power Divine they Sacrifice;
While angry Heaven in Thunder drowns their Prayers
And with repeated Storms, does threaten end
To the World's frame.

'Tis strange indeed, Bebricius;
But, if the Gods Decree the final change,
Why should we dread what first or last will com?
Jove, from the Earth, formed us to what we are;
Infused a noble fire within our Souls,
Whose heat gave life, and wrought our stupid Sense
Unto the glorious actions, which create
Envy in Gods, and Honour in us Men,
And makes our Fame out-live us in our deeds.

That Glory is the Soul of noble men
Living to merit, justly I believe;
But when on Earth, as once was against the Heavens
The Beings which from Chaos were produced
Rose in Rebellion against the Lord of all:
The kinder Gods, by glorious actions won,
Speak loud, as far as Fate will give 'em leave,
To save the mortal loved from sudden harm.

Thou would persuade me then, that this portends
Danger to me; pointed to me alone?
Would in my breast infuse I know not what,
And make me Subject to an idle fear?

The Gods declare, that we may shun that Storm
Which gathers in the Wind, and threats from far:
Not with a Natural war divides the Clouds;
But, speaking, forms a Thunder with his voice;
Which, did not Fate oppose, would Echo here
The Revolutions known in Skies above.
I, as a Prophet, and by Friendship fired,
Swell with the object; which my thoughts unravel:
And now, the visits, veiled by Night and shame,
Appear at full; made by Perpenna's guile:
Crassus, Ligurius, could not shun my sight,
Tho winged by fear, and muffled with their Cloaks;
'Twas there I housed 'em; and am confident
A nest of Villains brood within the walls.

It is impossible. Can they, my Friends,
Equal in greatness and in power, as when
Marius did awe in Rome, contrive the fall
Of him who raised 'em to that height of power
They now enjoy? Persuade me to believe
The melancholy which Norbanus bears
Deep in his blood, promts him to change! Oh, no:
They court the lonely places, and do hate
Human Society, the joy of Earth!
Or that Ligurius lightness in discourse
May give occasion to distrust him! I've,
In numerous dangers, seen him act as far
As the loud-talking Hero of the Field.
Tribunius merit raised him to that seat
Which now he holds; next thee, and my dead Cassius,
The man I prize; Can these my best of Friends,
Conspire against the man that they divide?

Pray Heaven the Nation feel not the effects.
This I am sure, There is no good intended;
For, when I was devoted unto Love,
Admired the beauteous creature of her Sex,
That Sodom Apple, whose fair outside temts
Death in the taste, Plots and contrives like Fate,
Has numerous visitants of hot-brain'd youth,
Coveting danger for a smile from her;
Decius, the chief, who leads the pleasing Maze;
While she, adorned like Venus, shoots her beams
Into their Souls; which in a mighty blaze,
As subject Flames commanded by the Winds,
Threatens destruction: Can Sertorius think
Perpenna ign'orant of this work of Night?
No; I have seen him, unconcerned, behold
Such amorous glances, and such liberty,
With his fair Wife; that, were it not designed
To lure 'em with the specious bait of Beauty,
It were above an honest man to bear.

The ag'd, Bebricius, always look on youth
With thoughts of danger and of Jealousy;
And, from the gayness (which they think adorns,)
That makes 'em light and Airy in their Men,
Take too severe a judgment. Oh, Friend! in Love
We know not what we say; but if the Sex
Command a deed ignoble, then the brave
Shake off the Fetters of the Amorous God,
And loath the object which affected change.

'Tis fixed in Fate. Sooner the Adamant,
By vernal dew, shall all its hardness lose;
Than the lost minute call from hoary Time,
Whose Scythe has cut deep into ignorance.
'Tis not my fault, you Gods; for, as a Friend,
And called to speak, I've uttered every thought.
Hast then, Sertorius, struggle with thy Fate,
Roar like a Lyon caught within the Toil,
Neglecting the poor Beast that gave him warning:
Then, when enclosed, I'll summon all my strength;
Or set thee free, or perish in the Snare.

Something thou'st said, like Ice, sits chilling here;
And the rash thought, tho light as Air before,
Now, like a weight hurled in some quiet stream,
In many circles wreaths the adjacent flood,
And from the bottom raises flakes of Ouze:
The clearness of my mind, once void of fear,
Thou hast infected with the poys'nous sound.
Oh Doubt, that tortur'st more than points of Swords!
By Heaven, these shapes of fear, these dreams of night,
Thus I discard, for ever banish hence,
And live above the reach of envious men.

Thou must not pass, unless upon my death;
Which I oppose, to fill the breach of Fate.
Can (Oh the cruel question to be made!)
Sertorius love, love his Terentia still?
If I have power, or if these tears prevail,
Oh; let my words find credit in thy breast.

By Jove, my manhood fails; I grow to Earth:
Speak and release the Agony thou'st made.

By all the joys of Hymen, all the sweets*
That wait on Love; nay, by the secret bliss
That happy Souls enjoy, Oh, stir not hence.
Swift, as a Pile hurled by the Delphic God,
Barb'd with destruction, coms our ruin on:
Aurelia is no more; I saw her Ghost,
The dear remembrance of a Friend and Mother,
Thrice cry Cursed Rome! then, from her eyes, burst forth
A flood of tears, which ushered on her woes:
" Sertorius is no more, she often said;
"I saw the Fates busy about his life,
"The thread exposed on the immortal Sheers,
"And all the lesser Messengers on wing:
This spoke, she vanished into Air again.

Sure, my Terentia, thou but dreamed the while;
And this the product of thy fear!

Oh, no.
Scarce recollected, viewing round the space,
Too true I found the Vision, which out-fled
Report it self: a Messenger arrived,
With Letters, which confirm the fatal chance.

Oh, Mother, art thou com, to warn my Fate?
Left the possession of thy quiet Urn,
And thy distracted Spirit hovers here?
Speak loud, you Gods; for I'm prepared for change:
Why all these horors? is it to amate
The wandering Soul, when she her mansion leaves?
Loose all your Bolts, bury me quick in Earth,
Rather than Rack with sounds exceeding death.

Hail, mighty Lord! Imperial Conqueror!
Great in thy deeds, as Phoebus is for light!
Give leave, that we attend thee to the Feast:
While that Perpenna of the favour proud,
Envies the Thrones of Friendship that we have.

I will not go: do not inquire the cause;
Let it suffice it is my will.

'Tis true
That people whisper; here I find it now;
Sertorius doubts the constancy and faith
Of men, devoted wholly to his Fame;
Men, which have sworn in death to follow thee;
Men, which have left the Roman State for thee:
To ashes turned the Tables Sylla sent,
With ample restitution, and full honour.
I see the hate thou bear us, in thy eyes:
Oh, would they had the power of Basilisks,
To kill the Villain who infected thee!

Mistake me not, Tribunius: I'm not well,
And do not like the fierceness of the Air.

Mistake me not, Sertorius; nor believe
Thy secret thoughts are hid: I see 'em there,
There, in thy eyes; and hear 'em in thy words;
And curse my Stars I ever lived to hear.
Crassus, Ligurius, and Norbanus, com,
Draw all your Daggers, and complete our doom:
To live suspected, by the man we love,
Is worse than death.

What means Tribunius?

Thou shalt read here, and glut thee with the Character,
Writ with these Pens of Steel, upon our hearts.
But, Oh! the wretched State of human things!
On what false Basis do we build our hopes;
Thus subject to the blast of every wind?
Know, thou Sertorius, that I hate to live
Under the very Igno'miny of thought.

View all these Scars, the badges of my love,
Gained by thy side, in Battle; call to mind
How oft I've interposed 'twixt thee and death:
This single arm, as glorying in thy sight,
Has made a Lane in the opposing Foes.
What have I ever don, to merit this?
What action, in my life has made a crime?
Did I but think my Soul could harbour one
Against my Friend, by Heaven I'd stab that too.

Believe me, General, that I court thy worth,
A Servant to thy Virtue; and this Steel,
Hasting to let out life when so reviled,
Shall pierce as deep into a Loyal heart:
Nay, I believe, that man, who loves me not,
Would be a pledge in Honour for my faith.

Why nam'st thou me, Ligurius? well thou know,
When darkness summons all the World to rest,
You're waking at Perpenna's, loath all sleep,
And there confederate: at such hours of Night,
No good can e're be hatched; but Treason may.

Thou lie, base man. Now, by the Thunderer,
Were thou not safe within this sacred place,
Had thou as many lives as Hydra heads,
I'd kill 'em one by one. From hence it springs,
Here takes it Source; and, like a Plague, Infects.
Bind me, Sertorius; lead me where no light
E're shot its Beams; and, if you find it truth,
Invent a Torment new, and terrible,
Exceeding all the labours of the Damned:
But, till I'm justly doomed, believe my breast,
Like Crystal, casts this poison in his Teeth.

What thinks Terentia now? how can I doubt
Such Friends as these? Com, we will go, my Fair:
Banish distrust; and think the Prodigies
Were only to amuse, not to Predict.
Let not these men know of our inward grief;
But bear it with the patience of a God.

Yet there is something dictates in my breast
This visit will be fatal; and I see,
Like dying men, prospect of mighty things:
From fear they cannot com; to me, they seem
Like Meteors fixed, not flying forms of Air.

Com, my Bebricius, do like me, believe
Not one of all these Romans can be false.
Ligurius, com, forgive the hasty words;
Age has its faults, as well as fiery youth:
The one must bear the other's Infirmities.
And credit me, such is the great esteem,
If in the scope of Rule you cast an eye.
To any part which raises strong desire;
Command Sertorius, who no Tresure knows
Beyond the intrinsic value of a Friend.

I grow in love with mischief; and the Gods,
Envying like me, consent unto his fall.
If there's a Fury greater than I feel,
A subtle Daemon that I have not sought;
Let him expand his wings, and habit here.
Dull Fools they were that sought eternal Fame
By deeds not worthy naming: He that fired
Diana's Temple; or that stupid Ass
Who headlong fell in flaming Aetna's womb,
In hopes to cheat the Vulgar, lost himself.
I mount a Sphere above 'em. As, in Hell,
The lesser Fiends are Slaves unto their Lord,
And band the fiery Surges to his will:
So I, on Earth, would with this arm control;
And, if the disobedient Clods rebelled,
Find the Connexion of the Globes above,
And with this Sword divide the mighty tie,
That headlong with its weight it sunk to Hell,
And made the Furies groan beneath its Orb;
While, from the Region of the Sky, I saw
Its mighty dissolution, unconcerned.

You seem exalted with success, Perpenna;
Tread upon Air, and breath a Soul all fire.

Yes; and behold my Iuno fixed by me:
While the connected Atoms, Statue-like,
Know nether life nor motion, till we speak.

How if, Ixion-like we 'embrace a Cloud?

Why, then that Cloud shall hide us both for ever:
Slighting the Earth, we will put our beings off,
And wing for the Society of Gods.
I hear the noise of many feet: let's hence,
And meet the Victim.

Such was the time, in the La^tean way,
When frightened Gods, by Sons of Earth besieged,
Sat there in Council with Immortal fear,
Till all the fainting Powers, by Bacchus fired,
Forced Jove unto his Thunder: Here we sit,
While Pompey's Rams are storming at our walls;
Whose Blows are Harmony unto our Feast.

It is, Perpenna, and a God-like sound,
Enough to sink the fearful into Earth;
But we, as seated on a Throne, behold
Ruin spread wide the Terror of its wings:
They, like Cambyses, rage against the wind,
Till wearied with the object; then we hast,
Mounted on Death, give Reins unto the Sword,
And glut the Furies with whole Seas of Gore.

When great Sertorius speaks, he should, like Jove,
Have Thunder ready; all the Elements
Ready to make a second Chaos stand;
And all the World, as dreading the fierce change,
Become aghast: But, viewing round, I see
The Cyclops wanting Bolts for such a work;
Nor has old Vulcan captived Time, or yet
The fatal Sisters taken 'em to their Sheers.

Ha! means he me, by Vulcan? captived Time?
By Heaven, my fears I find now are not vain.
How dares Perpenna thus abuse the Gods;
And in a language strange, unto a Friend,
Dost call the Son of Anthropos a Jove,
Yet mock his wanting Ministers of wrath?

No more, Bebricius; he is hot with wine:
Give him his liberty; he is our Friend.

Let not Sertorius doubt the proof of it.
Free men have Liberty; 'tis Slaves have Chains:
And well I know Quintus will ne'er impose
Upon a Roman, what a Roman hates.
For Liberty, Sertorius knows, we've fought;
And we would do it again, knee-deep in blood:
Let's see that Talker fight, instead of speak;
Let Oratory hang upon his Sword;
But, till the Field sets forth his mighty worth,
Confine that Gall which dwells upon his Tongue.

It is unkind, Perpenna, thus to rate him;
He is a worthy man, and bears a Soul
Great, as the proudest Roman: I have seen
Wonders performed where ever his Sword has com,
And death before the blow has made its way:
Such worthy actions in my Camp has don,
That nether Pompey, nor Metellus, can't
When he is named but reverence the sound.

Now, Romans, be you Judges of the change
So long I warned you of: See, see our Fates;
See all the merits that our wounds have got;
That now, when Pompey girts us in our walls,
He dares prefer this man the only Friend,
This gray-beard Villain, who contrives our fall,
That when the danger which invades is past,
'Tis he must Lord it over our Liberties.

Speak thou for me how much I loath a Chain.

Ha! Sure 'twas deadly. Ho! my Guards, my Guards!

Be not deluded with so false a hope;
There's not a Soul that dares but think relief.

Thou see I've yet that strength within my arm
To turn thy Dagger's point upon thy self.
There is no safety here: I'll hast away,
And com attended with Revenge e're Day.

Oh, Barbarous Vaillains! Treason; help.

'Tis here,
Sertorius, on this point: despair, and die,
Thou base, ungrateful man: had thou survived,
We'd been thy Slaves; but, thank our Swords, we're free.

Yet I dye pleased, to know thy sudden Fate;
I see it now before me; view the man:
Pompey revenges me. I see these men,
That shame the name of Friend to that degree,
In so deplorable and lost a state;
That their own Souls begin to loath their make,
And curse the hour when first they saw Perpenna.
Oh, my Terensia! thy Prophetic fear
Is now accomplished. Oh, uncertain Chance,
How subtle are thy ways that Greatness tread!
Which guides us on unto our certain Fate,
And never leaves us till our life is fled!

Die, Wizard. Think thou that I fear my Fate?
No; 'tis on thee I build the mighty frame,
And seem a Body second unto Atlas:
Thus grasp a Sceptre, and thus rule my Stars;
Since, by thy death, our Liberty is gained.
Shout, till your voices burst the Clouds to Air;
That with the violence of meeting sounds,
The Globe grows giddy, and inconstant Fortune
No longer can command her fickle Wheel.

Cursed be the sound for ever; ever cursed
The cruel Villains! why is't you delay?
Sheath all your murderous weapons in my breast?
And show your selves Masters in Villainy,
That know no bounds in blood. Oh Sertorius,
How have the Gods ordained our Destinies!

Terentia, oh --

Sertorius; Lord; 'tis thy Terentia calls.
He's gon, he's gon; and summoned me away,
To shades remote; which happy souls enjoy:
Yet, my Sertorius, stay thee in thy race,
Hover a minute over Terentia's Fate;
See with what swiftness I'll pursue thy shade
To its Immortal Mansion! -- Flow swift, my blood;
That, from this passage, like a Sea broke loose,
My Soul shall mount; still calling, as it flies,
Justice from Gods, Revenge for perjured men,
Quintus, I com: From Earth I now remove,
And seek the Ghost of an Eternal Love.

Some Devil sure resides within my breast;
I ne'er knew pity, till I saw this sight:
Nor will I now. Remove these Bodies hence:
Place 'em within; that, viewing our disgrace,
When coward thoughts dare give themselves a birth,
Look on the Tyrant, call to mind his deeds;
And if the Gods dare put a cheat upon us,
We will wait not Death, but make him attend on us.

Farewell, thou noble Roman; we shall meet
In happy shades: while thy blessed soul delights
In the success that waits upon our Swords.
Speak then, Perpenna; shall we sally out,
Or send to treat with Pompey?

Noble Friends,
It will disgrace the glory of our deeds,
Sully our Fame achieved in fiercest War,
To lay those killing weapons at his feet
Whose edg has forced him from the Field retreat.
Are not our Legions full? their souls of fire?
This City ours, to back us in the fight?
While in their Camp, Famine and Sickness Reigns,
Let's out, and chase these Specters from our Walls,
That fright us like the shadows of the night,
Whose withered substance much resembles theirs.

Lead on, thou Soul of all the noble Romans.
Alarms and shout within.

What dreadful message dwells upon thy tongue?
Why thus confused? Call back thy frightened sense,
And tell us what's the meaning of this sound.

Pompey is entered Osca; all is lost:
Bebricius, scaping from the bloody Feast,
Turned all into Sedition; for the Crowd
No sooner heard their loved Sertorius dead,
Quitting their several stations, op'd the Gates
To Pompey's Soldiers, fired with strange desire.
Both parties now are one: Bebricius leads
The num'erous bands, and has begirt us round.
There is no scaping hence with life.

Hence, slave;
And preach to Furies, in the other World.
'Sdeath, am I caught! betrayed by Jilting Fate,
When the full Scene of Greatness was in view!
It is too late to talk. Com, let our Swords
Hew out a passage to our former state:
And make the wondering Gods call back their Ire,
To see how Slaughter does pursue our blows.

Such is the Fortune of Imperial Rome,
VVhen-e're her Sons against her do rebel,
To turn the lot of ruin on their heads.
Thou feared Sertorius, Rival to my Arms,
Famed Soldier once that was, now you're no more;
By Heaven, it grieves me that I meet thee thus:
In Battle, to complete my Victories,
Bowing beneath the keenness of my Sword,
Thou should have fell, not by a Villain's hand.

Forgive me, Oh thou Manes, this delay;
I only live, to see thy death revenged.

Where was thy sense of Honour, cruel man?
Scythia, in falsehood, does fall short of thee:
Not the contriving Furies of the deep
Could e're invent a greater Villainy.

Hold, Beardless Boy; thou Novice in a Camp,
That oft has fled my Sword, as School-boys Rods:
Think upon Sucron Fields, and then be mute.
Thou say that Hell could not afford a Scene
Of greater mischief: I am proud of it.
Empire I aimed at; had it once in sight;
Till the cursed Gods cast in their bar between.
In me, 'twas great; but it was base in these:
And, if that Chance had blessed me with a Throne,
Their heads had been the steps to mount upon.

Dog, Son of Night, engendered of the foam
Of Cerberus, and Hell's contagious Dew.

Oh, I could eat my Chains, to com at thee!

Tribunius, please me with a Mask of Death:
Knock out thy brains against those Ornaments,
And let me see how bravely thou wilt die.

Blessed Fortune! -- Take that, Paricide. When Hell's.
Capacious Kingdom does confine our Souls,
There, in the Infernal Lake, I'll plunge thee in;
Sink with thee to Perdition; and, in pain,
Take pleasure in thy Conquest. Lead me on;
The Gemonies, Tarpeian Rock is bliss,
And death, which sets me free, a Paradise.

Room, room, you Slaves! 'tis Fulvia coms, your Queen;
Bow to the Earth your stubborn knees; shout up
Reverberated voices: For I'm grown
Equal with Fame, and fill a mighty space.
What means that abject posture? art thou chained?
Chained to a Throne? Why flies not my Perpenna?
Hast thou the World of business at thy heels,
The Type of Empire? hurl it into Night,
And free the Gods from their Eternal doom.

I thank thee, Tyrant, and obey thy power:
Thou ne'er could visit in a better time.
Take her away: by my lost hope, this sight
Is worse than Hell; and bands my wretched Soul,
Like angry Furies in the other World.

He's struck; he's struck: ha! how it streams apace!
'Tis the first present of my Love I make:
Now, glory of it in the other World.

Seize on her, Guard: This is a bloody Night:
The Moon hid her self behind a Cloud;
And all the Stars, as tho afraid, retire.

I thank thee; thou hast saved me from a deed
This hand e're day had don. I feell my end
Move swiftly forwards; and a glimmering light
Now shuts up day, and makes it ever night.

Where were your safe-guards now, you envying Powers?
See, how we've snatched revenge from out your hands,
And breath defiance! Could I pluck from time
A minute longer, Pompey, thou should feel
There was no safety in Perpennas reach.
It pleases me to think, when I am dead
The mischief I have don will sfartle thee,
And all the World name me a glorious Villain:
And, when to Pluto's Region I arrive,
The Gods will doubt more from my single Brain,
Than all the Furies met against their Heaven.
Oh, Fulvia! Death does hasten me away:
I'm now his subject, and I must obey.

I feel the mighty frame now goes to rack:
My heart's divided with the deadly blow,
And all my Senses at vast distance roam*
'Tending the Soul unto Eternity.
Stretch wide your Kingdom, Furies, to receive
Her, whom the World could not contain alive*
For my receptance, let whole Legions wait;
That Pluto, wondering at the mighty State,
Scorning his Queen, may place me in her Seat.

Remove the Bodies. To Sertorius Pile
Add all the Ornaments that Soldiers boast:
Break all your Shields; there all your Ensigns lay;
And mourn that loss which sheaths your Swords again.
Let him have common Burial. May the Gods
Forget his Crimes; while Rome no Equal knows,
Nor none contend against her Sovereign power:
But to her Vengeance, as the Ire of Heaven,
Wast into former Chaos, and forget
That being which they had. Spread wide thy Gates,
Oh Guardian Angel of the Gods abode;
Let Fame, from Pole to Pole, her Echo sound:
While the whole World, obedient to her Power,
Submit to Rome, as to her Emperor.

OUR Poet to the learned Critics does submit,
But scorns those little Vermin in the Pit,
Who noise and nonsense vent instead of Wit:
Those Aerie empty Sparks that know no more
Than how to dress and railly with a Whore;
Nay all they say to 'em is perfect cant,
And Vizord still runs down the weak Gallant:
Vexed at her Repartee, he strokes his Wig,
And cries, Dam me, you Whore you, I'll unrig:
Then cursing her, he leaves her to the rest
Of the Fops --
Or tears a Hood and Scarf to make a jest.
Whence have these silly Monsters their pretence,
That they should Judges be of Wit and Sense?
These Gnats about a Poets Ears may swarm,
But want a Sting to do him any harm.

