THe palace being hung with rich Babylonian tapestry, of various shapes
wrought by the needle of Semyramas, and perfumed with the wealthy gums of
Parchica, such as the Arabian bird fills her nest with, when she prepares to
sacrifice her self, and their Majesties (clothed in the precious skins of
Ermynes, wearing crowns, whose lustre dim'd Ariadnes coronet embellished with
the glorious Olympian lamps) being seated, the first thing obvious to the
sight, was a rich ornament that enclosed the Scene, on the one side stood a
man, bearing a Sceptre, with a hand, and an eye in the palm, in the other hand
a book, on his head a chaplet of Amaranthus, his curace was of gold, with a
palludamentum of blew, and antique bases of crimson, his foot trampled on the
head of a Serpent, by him was imported just Government, opposite to him stood
two young women in draperies, with their arms joined, the one denoting the
glory of Princes, the other mansuetude. The curtain was white, and a pale red
in panes, which suddenly flying up discovered a fair prospect of the palace,
and the city Nicosia, which being the Metropolis of the Kingdom, might
(Synechdocally) be taken for it all.

The Genius of the Country warned by a loud masick descended, and entered.

WHen Jove, and nature metamorphosed
The undigested lump, (which was the bed
Of indisposed confusion) a rude load
Where scuffling seeds of things misplaced abode.
Where springs, ponds, lakes immense and hewtes curled
Were with things hot, dry, humid, frigid hurled.
So when the game is played, the Chessmen be
Though dignified with names of majesty,
Though God-like Kings, or reverend Bishops they,
Or honourable Lords be called in the play,
Or Knights errand or worthies of the grown,
They're altogether into one bag thrown.
But to our task, when out of this dull mass
By heavenly Alchemy extracted was
A world well ordered, and methodical,
The fire and thin air were highest placed
The solid self clogged earth did lowest fall
And was by the vast Ocean embraced,
In whose large precincts many sea-girt lands
And Islands fenced by salt water stands,
Which Amphitrite with her cripst locks hem
So various jemmes inlay a diadem,
Neptune his tributary gods that graces
Gives them the government of these small places,
And let them wear their saphrie crowns, and wield
Their little tridents in their watery field;
But this fair Isle which of its self affords
Matter to build an Ocean furrowing ship
From the top gallant to the keels low bottom,
And furnish it with tackling, and munition
Without the help of exotic addition.
Unto his blew haired deities he quarters,
And he himself with a brave flying guard
Of winged coursers, her ingarison.
Then her indulgent guardian provided
A ruler worthy of so rare an Isle,
But Jove observing his just government
Took him to his Olympus there to be
His colleague, vicegerent, deputy,
His life we loved, and wished, but he expired
Your happiness is of our hearts desired.
And you the orb where power, and beauty move
Fair Queen of Amathusia, and love,
Each Subject hath erected on his heart
A vestal flaming Altar, to offer up
A thankful sacrifice for your arrival,
At this white hour, t'inclose so fair a guest
Our Land waxed proud, and I the Genius
Am by so great a presence weakt, and glory
To bid you welcome in your subjects names,
Whose hearts dance in their eyes for joy of you,
Their pulses all beat musique, and their blood
Beat in their blew-rooft channels a soft measure,
Even as the radiant Olympic cole
Whose heate thawes annually the icy pole,
By his coruscant beams correct the sight,
Of mortals eyes that dare gaze on light,
Even so you move in so sublime a sphere
With awful reverence, and regal fear,
Majestic Queen, your sacred majesty
Fires kindled by your eyes do qualify,
For you (Adored Cypria) had been
The whole worlds Mistress, if no Cyprian Queen.
Phoebus and Cynthia of our hemisphere,
Father, and Mother, of our fertile I'll,
May your admired court, and reign become
The pattern for all Princes imitation
And be the copy Kings strive to write after,
Heaven crown my wish, whilst earth concur to sing
Kind fortune fan you with a courteous wing.

Translucent twins of Love, and majesty
I that of things ad libitum dispose,
And this man elevate, and that depose,
I that advanced Servus Tullius
That tumbling came into the spacious world,
A vassal cadit or cosmopolite.
Even to the Apex of all mundan honour,
I that cast Mustapha the Idiot
From the Ottoman throne, sealed Osman there
And dandled him in my lubricious arms,
Till weary of my dalliance I threw him down,
Invested Mustaph in his pristine state,
Reducing Osman to such penury
He begged a draught of water at a fount,
Then out of cruel pity I commanded
An obscure Ianizary to dispatch him,
I, that made Arlots Illegitimate son
To sway the sceptre of rich Albion,
I have deposed my variableness
And sworn alleagence to fair constancy,
I'll never interrupt your happiness
By any churlish or disastrous frown,
Which oath is as irrivocable as
The strict law of the Meedes and Persians was,
About your palaces the yellow streams
Of Tagus, Isberus, and Pactolus,
Shall run meet there with the Indian Ganges.
Little petty homagers all stubborn Princes
Shall prostrate their shining scepters at
Your most majestic feet and gredily
Shall glory in your royal servitude,
Crowns piled on crowns shall pave your happy paths,
And Captive Kings wait on your chariot.
And erect statues to your memories
Which shall survive Egyptian Pyramids,
And last when Hymns hath frozen up the world,
And when old palsy time shall droop, and halt
Being ore worn, and moatheaten with years.
Your joys still bud, and grow, and gemminate
And not be capiable to terminate.

Before Joves spangled portals (with a crew
Of bright aerial souls) I dwell insphear'd
Chanting the conquests of the son's of valour
And magnifying their great names, which last
Unbitten by the canker worm of time,
I near can take a trump to carroll forth,
Some royal Potentates heroic name,
But Mars still rounds me in the ear, and says,
Fame sing Flaminius worth, whose mighty facts
Hath made the world a register of's acts,
Whose manly heart propitious Jove doth bless
With haughty spirit, that spirit with success,
Victorious success with lasting glory
Which glory makes his martial feats a story,
Whose spreading fame with gray haired time shall vie
And be companion of eternity.
When I would blaze a beauty Uenus comes
And with her fatal magic charms me thus,
Hark thou repositor of comeliness,
From Albions Isle where silver Thames dos dally
With the even bosom of the spungie sands
And often wash the fructifying sides
Of her beloved banks, with wanton tides,
I have transplanted to my Cyprian Isle
Clorinda, from whose fair sun bright eyes
Issue such sparkling heart surprising rays,
As proclaim her the wonder of her days,
Her brow excell's the Rodopeian snow,
Her silken hair which in curled ringlets grow
Might make so many strings for Cupids bow.
Her eyes can make a stubborn soldier melt
Although his heart be hearder then his shield,
Each smile of hers hath a magnetic force
To attract souls, her Angels voice can charm
A Satire rude, and rock his wanton soul
Into Elizian slumbers, let her be
Genophilus the subject of thy song.
Erect a temple to her honoured name
The Virgin quire shall make it their devotion
To pay her grateful Paeans, and to crown
With ever springing garlands her fair statue;
I have descended through the silver orbs
To satisfy these deities, I've taken
A shrill resounding trumpet, new, and clean,
Lest it it should taint my breath, whilst I blaze forth
Your names which as in deep graven characters
Shall last for times immortal process sure,
Whilst Phoebus, Phaebe, and nights fry endure.

Bright ornaments of the heaven covered world
To whom the far famed Cyprian nation bow
I'ts most obsequious, and willing knees,
On whose illustrious fronts the regal crown
Imprint no rigorous, and austere frowns
Your subjects hopes of joy to batter down.
But whose auspicious, and calmer eyes
Pronounces omens of ensuing joy,
And defuse hopes of safety to their hearts,
Which pious reverence doth thaw to streams
Flowing in the current of obedience.
Your Raigne's become a lecture of piety
Which transfuse through your court an admiration,
And Zealous ardour of its imitation,
Nay the high towering flames do penetrate
The dappled sky, and make Gods emulate,
Jove envy your rare virtues (Potent Prince)
And Juno (Mighty Queen) your share of graces,
Which make you so resplendent in all places.

With gentle stars I will concur in influence,
On you of all joys to confer the confluence.

With every jocand spring your fames shall bud, and grow,
No envious gust your fragrant names can make to blow.

Your loves I'm tried in hard assays Majestic pair
Now shall a crown of deathless praise adorn your hair.

Your joys which on a Helix move no evil shall cross
Till Lachesis webs preys do prove to Atropos.

Then Royal Sir, and Regal bride my golden key
Shall open the palace where abide Eternity.

Your days shall dane with every day and shine, and glow
Tributes of praise each age shall pay yet still must owe.

Let us leave these Potentates in their Court, the mansion of flourishing
pleasure, (where delight in all her shapes, and studied varieties, every minute
courted their souls to actuate their chief felicities) and step over the Sea
to Ameindes, who at his landing fell down (by his foot slipping) and brought
up some earth in his hand, as if he had taken livery and seisne of the
Country, he soon stormed the ancient seat of the Sicilian Kings Palermo the
happy (so sir-named for the delightful situation) but Lilenus came quickly
down, with a resolute legion, who made a hedge with their own bodies to impede
the progress of Amenides, and finding him possessed of Palermo, he then
besieged him: but he, because he could not take a sound sleep: but
Hercules-like with club in hand because of the befiegers, challenged his
enemies to let fortune decide the controversy in a pitched field; which being
assented to, and his army marshalled because he was to venture all his stock
in one bottom, and to stand to the success of one Croysado, he sharpened and
festinated his Armies animosity with Brachylogie.

My heroic Heroe's, and courageous Compeers, my intention is to cuspidate and
set an edge upon your magnanimity, and to cause an ebulition and boiling up of
our high wrought spirits to the height, now when you had need of Robor aes
triplex circa pectus, a breast plate of adamant, a burganet of steel, to make
you impenetrable, against the hail shot of impugnation.

We must not expect that this honourable prize, this (...) will be Salmacidum
spolium sine sanguine, (...), no, no, (...) the gods sell all for sweat, a
Philomacoy comes not to his existency, nor obtains any competency of skill in
the Encyclopaedie without many nocturnal lucubrations, Mutla tulit fecit puer,
sudavit, alsit. He must suck in the smoke of many candle lights studies,
before he can perform any thing that savours of the lamp.

A mechanical Artificer cannot thrive in his vulgar station without more then
vulgar sedulity, what running velletation, combats, and contentions were in
the Pythian and Olympicke games to obtain the Chaplet, and shall we think
that the Crown of the Queen of the Mediterranian Islands will come dropping
into our laps if we be remiss and perfunctory in our proceedings. No, no, a
Throne is not got with a wish, nor a Sceptre obrepted with a Song. Non est a
terris mollis ad astra via.

We must not with Marcus Lepidus stretch our selves upon the grass, and say o
utinam hoc esset laborare, our intention must rather be as stable, and
unmovable as the Roman Fabritius of whom it was said, that one might with as
much facclity obvaricate the Suns progress as cause him to digress. Il faut
semer devant qu' ou puisse moissouner, we must sow before we reap, we must
conquer before we triumph, win the Garland before we wear it; timidity and
consternation will hold out a Gorgon head of encumbrances, and tell of
Chimaeras, and Fantasies of determents: but let not these dash our hopes, melt
our courage, or emasculate our resolutions, for believe (...) the hyperbolical
game will quit the cost, our noble reward is that great knot of strength which
Cato called the granary and nurse of the people of Rome. Cicero terme'd it the
treasury and life of the City, a Land deliciously fertile, and wonderfully
productive, humectated with winding catracts, and small sluices, this will be
an opulent purchase, and a good penny-worth at my rate; Imperia pretio la
constant been. Agrippica esteemed the Roman Empire well bought, though she
purchased it for her Son Nero with the loss of her own life, Occidat modo
imperet. Let us then oppugn all obstrigillations, which are but as steps for
us to ascend to honour, and when the names of our conspirgated antagonists
shall rot above ground, and they themselves be rung down to the dust with a
peal of satyrs, ours shall be odoriferous to posterity, and succeeding
generations shall enbalm them with honour. This dulciloquie inspired the
faintest hearts with freshest courage, and made them impatient of delay, they
and their horses too, with a clamour militaris, and loud acclamations assented
to their Generals Oration.

Silenus also was encouraging his Soldiers when the classicum of their enemies
was rhetoric enough to invite them to their tasks. The black clouds poured
down upon the Sicilians store of Funeral tears: and shoal of Ravens and
other birds of prey) as predicting the harvest of carcasses at hand) flew over
their host.

A sore Battle was begun, and with equal success a long time maintained,
where the grass became grayheaded for want of moisture, it was sprinkled with
a sanguilent Nectar. Here was a Father divided from his Son, here a Husband
from his Wife, and yonder where there was no Kin they be joined in blood.

But because that Cato the Censor that taught the young men to preliate with a
steady foot, would often say, that words and shoutings had more power to amaze
and put enemies to the rout, then hand, strokes, wherefore Amenides host did
amaze their adversaries with a shrill clamour, whereas the Cicilians (as if the
whole army had had but one heart) let all their courages fall into their feet,
which now they altogether trusted to.

Amenides who knows as well how to use as gain a victory, pursued his
dissipated foe-men to Mount-royall their chief Asylum, which place being
reduced to the height of penury by the multitude of the Garrison, and deprived
of supplies from the adjacent and conterminent Villages, by its cautelous
besiegers. Silenus in a disguise fled, and got to the Academy at Tolouse, where
he changed his royal Ermynes for sables, and became a fantastical Scholar,
spending the residue of his life in enigmatical disputations, as whether or no
Cassandra was troubled with the tooth-ache, how many knots were on HERCULES
Club, of what colour ACHILLES Beard was, he studied himself half bleareey'd
to know the true sementry of Caesars nose by a Shooing-horne, and all to be
dignified with the name of a speculative man.

But the Citizens considering ameux vaut plier rompre, its better to bow then
break, and seeing that their egress afforded no hope of regress, of fear of
their foes ingress, and perceiving no happy help, for their helpless hap,
had wit enough to set their sails that way that the wind blew, and to wheel
about as they saw occasion, that they might be of the prevailing side. Much
like the man in Macrobrius, who during the Civil War between Augustus
Caesar and Antonius, had taught two Crows their several notes, the one to say
Aue Imperator Antoni: the other to say Aue Imperator Augusti. That so when the
Controversy was determined, what side soever prevailed he might have a Bird
for the Conqueror.

So Silenus being fled, his Subjects subjected themselves to the Victor, and
framed themselves to call Vivat Rex Amenides, who soon adorned his Royal
brows with the Regal Circle, the Gates were opened to entertain his Army,
and the peoples hearts were opened to entertain himself.

But those which ingenuity prompted not to love him, he taught to fear him,
knowing primus in orb deos fecit timor. But it was as possible for Phoehus to
find new paths to drive his Chariot in, or for the Loadstone to forget its
faith to the North, as for Amenides to turn Loves Apostate, and be unmindful
of Dionella, by the air of whose Blessed name, Chamelion-like he lived,
having taken fealty of his Subjects, steered his course to Naples. At his
presence Dionella was revived, as a starved fly is when the Sun get out, after
their Epithalmie, they repaired to Sicilie.

Now these Potentates, Flaminius and Clorinda, Amenides and Dionella, after
they had a long time Monarchised in the highest degrees of Sovereignty (having
left a numerous off-spring to sway their Scepters whom I wish a
Chrysostomaticall repositor of their virtues) yielded rather to a gentle
dissolution then death. Their Bodies are interred in the most magnificent
Cathedralls in their Dominions where the sumptuonsnesse of their Monuments
proclaim their extrinsicall Fortunes, and their ever-living Fame their
intrinsical endowments. But when their Statenesse and Tombs, composed and
erected of Gold, Marble, or Ivory, shall drop down into ashes, and crumble by
peece-meale into non-entity and be found as ARCHIMEDES his Tomb (by CICERO)
in Vepretis, crowned with moss, and over-growne with briars, and thorns, I
wish they may survive in this Monument of their Fame.


