when gaudy Flora in her prime
Observing it was Summer-time
With fragrant flowers of each day
Had made our mother Tellus gay,
The new borne plumed minstrills fills
The si^iling heaven and echoing hills,
With chirping music, every groan
Was made their quire. -- Olympic Jove
Commanded Aprels balmy shores,
To refresh the March bred flowers,
And May perfection in each field
To Aprels suckling babes to yield.
The spring p^umed this brood, whose sm^
The Phoenix nest might paral^ll.
Now did approach the festival
Of god Silvanus nuptial
To his grove haunting Clarida,
Then all the Faun^s kept holiday.
The nimble faries danced, and all
The deities agresticall.
Cl^ius and kind Phisipile
Vowed loving Man and wife to be.
So Clodin did to Colatine,
So Serin to his Eglatine,
So Cloris did to Coridon,
And so dealt shepherd many a one.
At length imploring love to be
So propitious unto me,
To Mira the fair sheapheardesse
In courteous wise, I did address
My hand, my heart, my cap, my coin,
With all the good I could conjoyne,
But she coy thing, refused to prove
What gentle Hymen is, or love.
As peevish Daphne fled away
From the illustrator of the day;
Even so my sight coy Mira flies,
My sighs she slights, my suit denies.
When glorious Sol hath turned his back,
And all the world is hung with black.
Sleep (natures soft-nurse) flies my eyes,
My mind's ore-cast as are the skies.
(...) I'd rather fill a barn full then a bed;
More profit tis to have a crooked plough
Still going, then a tottering cradle rock.
But more then that, these I term foolish men,
(But foolish is the Amorists ep^hite,
Ou peut a peine aymer ensemble estre sage,
One scarce can be both wife, and love, together)
That ere will trust their honour in a Bark,
Made of so ^ight weak bulrush as woman,
Apt every fleeting minute for to sink it.
And how can^ thou expect fidelity,
In the disloyal sex called feminine.
Remember fifty sisters, Belus daughters,
Who all (save one) made of their husbands slaughters.
And both the Atrides had their envied lives
Endangered by the falsehood of their wives.
Euriphile (false Hag) her husband sold
To Polinyces for a chain of gould.
And Queen Euridice conspired
How to deliver to grim visaged death
Her re^all Lord, and husband, to enthrone
In his void room her fancied Son in Law.
The fierce Medea did delacerate
Absyrtus tender members, to escape
Her Fathers pursuit, if we may rely
On the report of sage Antiquity.
Thou pleadst against thy self, I'll turn the point
Of thy last daggar into thine own breast.
Thou say Medea tore in twain her brother
Absyrtus, tis confessed, 't^as to discover
Her ardent, and firm settled desire
To follow Jason, ungrateful Jason,
Who after that, left her and all her charms,
To clap another Lady in his arms.
So have I seen a Horse-leach oft embrace,
Cleave to and hang upon some bloud-swoln face,
Till its own turn be served, it holds fast,
Until his paunch be full, then drop at last.
But to our ta^ke. Penelope lived chaste,
Though twice five years her royal Lord was gone.
Did not Aeneas fly, and leave his sword
To let out over-credulous Dido's blood.
When as Hiero blamed his wife, because she,
Never informed him of his stinking breath.
I thought (quoth she) that all men's breaths smelt so.
Arria when Petus was condemned to dye,
First stabbed her self, then giving him the steel,
This wound (dear Petus grieves me not quoth she)
But that which thou must give thy self grieves me.
The Minians wives having obtained leave,
To say valet to their dying Lords,
Exchanged their habits, and exposed themselves
(In their escaped Spouses rooms) unto
The penalty of the offended Law.
Dona the partner of her husbands woe,
With him a long way (as his Page) did go.
When Conrad gave the Matrons leave to bear,
From Weinsberg foe-girt town what best they liked,
Each took up her own husband on her back.
Cornelia Annia did prostrate lye,
On her defunct Lords Sepulchre, and dye;
For this cause annually a pair of Doves
Are sacrificed to their firm settled loves.
And happy Phillacides loyal wife,
From death redeem^d him with the loss of life.
But many uncertain ways hath Phillis gone.
To find her runagate Demop^oon.

Humanum est errare, I confess,
Both sexes then are faulty; but what else
Do thy deluded eyes discover in
Thy Mira, that thy heart should fancy her.
Is't for her skin-deep beauty (her chiefest pride)
That's but times fading flower, which as tis
Most delicate, is as volatious.
Its like unto the Colours Phidias drew,
Which seemed most admirable to the view,
But suddenly did vanish and impair,
At the weak puff of each aerial breath.
A wife is but a fair affliction.
Symonides reputed her to be,
The Shipwreck of a man, the tempest of
A house, the troubler of quiet rest.
A prison of life, a plague assidual,
A sumptuous conflict, a necessary evil,
A horrible care, an ordinary battle,
A sayly hinderance, the humane slavery,
A fair Asp, an inevitable pain,
A pleasant damage, a domestic strife.
If then coy Mira scorn with thee to dwell,
On earth leave her to lead bruit Apes in hell.

Quote not these Accherontick Anchorites.
Those stollid moatheaten Foolosophers,
That libel against Angels, those night-birds
That do defile even their own nests, nay worse,
That strangle sacrilegiously the fames
Of their own mothers; Those ungracious brats
That impiously requite with Stygian Ink
The Nectar which indugently they lent them.
Heed not the hissing of that viperous brood
Of Parricides to their own mothers names.
A female is the second part of man,
She is a male in the the newest edition,
A wife's the best of her Lords movable.
For such a one fierce Champions have proved tame,
The stoutest Soldiers trembled, and look wan,
Ready to give their ghost up at a frown,
The oracles of wit and Philosophy,
Have been loves fools, and bent their litterature,
But to express great loves Supremacy,
And the extent of its Dominions.
Nay under Venus sacred Ensigns march,
Ethereal troops of high mounted gods.

Well, each man as he likes, but should the mad
Disloyal Sycophant, whose sphere is woe,
Attempt to shoot a raving shaft at me,
In's many pieces I would maked recoil
Upon his corps, as there be golden sands,
In the Pactolian or Tagean shores.

Cease, cease, good Hegio, to repine at love,
Atlantas pace was staid by golden balls.
And gods themselves are oft ensnared by love,
For they have slipped beyond their skill in that,
They have made beauty of a greater force
Then they themselves are able to resist.
For Laeda, Jove became a wandering Swan,
And for Europia a loud lowing Bull,
And for Antiopa a Satire rude,
And for bright Danae a storm of Ore.
Did not Apollo leave his burnished throne,
Lay by his tresses? and in humane shape,
Most humbly beg a boon at beauties gate?
Did not Alcides for Jole's sake
With huge oft draw the slender thread.
He was taken captive by his captives look,
She took the Conqueror that had her took.
Kind Paris for to steal his dainty piece,
Travelled as far as betwixt Troy and Greece.
And Perseus amongst the Negroes sought,
And fair Andromade from Inde brought.
Cupid can make the Regal Lyon sport,
In amorous dalliance with the frisking Kid.
Venus can yoke the ravenous and fell kite,
With milder Swans in the same Chariot;
Immane rapacious Eagles she can linck
And timorous silver-brested Doves together.
When she commands all animals lay by
Their contrarieties, and antipathy.

Enjoy, sir, your conceit, but for my part,
I am invulnerable, thou blind Boy
Shalt never take me captive, I am like
Achilles dipped in Styx, nor do I fear
Thy boy-ships shafts, go play with angry Bees
And painted Butterflies, and at the Wasps nest,
And when you are stung, in thy mams lap go rest.

Hark Cupid and revenge, this profane Swain
Does slight thy quiver, and blaspheme thy bow,
He says he's shot-proofe, scorns thy archery,
Scoffos at thy skill.
I'll penetrate his heart,
I'll make him be an earnest Votary
Unto a marble-hearted female Saint.
I'll melt to amorous thoughts his soul of stone,
I'll torture 'm in loves torrid, frigid Zone.
I'll make him in the same flames freeze, and fry,
The world shall be enamoured of his woe,
I'll find a Shepherdess in whom he will joy,
And this his darling I will soon infect
With coyness and with niceness, for her sake.
His morning Orisons shall nothing be
But numbers of innumerable sighs,
Which he shall count by pearly tears, not beads.
I'll make the cherries of her ruby lips
The only cordials for to sustain
His loathed life, and those shall be like to
Fugacia poma, which like Tantalus
He always shall desire, and always miss.
I'll make him view the place where she hath set,
And thither he shall repair, as if he thought,
The place some sovereign virtue did contain
To ease him, and to cure his gnawing pain.

Let him not wander far from home to seek
Deep streams in which to wash his frisking flocks.
Let such uncessant floods flow from his eyes
As may supply the want of rivulets,
Let his pined cheeks and hollow countenance,
Affight all wolves from his secure sheep,
Let him spend all his days in pinching grief,
And melancholy discontents; and look
Like to a withered tree o're-growne with dross.
Let his illetable and pensive sighs,
Scare all rapacious, and omenous Ravens
From picking out the eyes of his young Lambs
Bleating for nutriment unto their dams.

Innumerable such effects as these,
Shall all be caused by this keen pointed dart.
When as the long-tongu'd Lord of envious light,
Whose presence make the day, whose absence night.
Betrayed my mother, and the god of war.
Unto the sooty, black, club-footed dolt,
As he was tempering of a thunder-bolt,
For to revenge this wrong, I made him prove,
The power of my golden shaft and love.
And I will make this Hegio soon confess,
I am a god, and of the starry race.
Now lay thy hatred down, thy spite decline,
And prove a votary at Daris shrine.

BUt sure I was not borne Minerva-like?
Nor did fond Paracelsus teach my Sire
To make a man without conjunction,
What furious madness did possess my breast
To flout at love? and wrong the female sex?
And to requite in a sharpe Satyrs strain,
The roundelays, and charming lullabies,
That my indulgent genetrix did warble?
What are my brains grown dry, or my blood cold?
Or am I on a sudden waxen old?
I thought, though Cupids aire-deviding shaft,
Soon penetrated the well tempered
Corslet: which the hot-halting god of fire,
Made for his boisterous rival, it should not find,
Or make a way to vulnerate my mind.
And therefore Venus I blasphemed thy son,
But now I sing a Palinode.
Alas I have heheld that lovely face
That from her eyes shot Cupids into mine.
T'abuse my sight, and work upon my frailty,
With their smooth oratory to undo me,
Among thy other trophies let me be,
Kind Cupid, Hertan Porrigo to thee.
Me thinks soft love hath lately made a breach
Into the battered bulworks of my breast,
And there commands all my yielding powers,
Which now insulteth in their vassalage.
One look hath struck my soul into a fever,
Me thinks affection whispers in my care
Fair Daris name, Daris the shepherdess;
An object beautified with the choice gifts
Of liberal nature, and of virtue too,
My wandering eye hath made my heart receive
So good opinion of the forenamed Nymph,
And hourly it solicits my tongue,
To try my fortune, and to let it know,
Whether its like in Daris love to rest
In happy bliss, and blissful happiness;
Which if denied, its suddenly prepared,
To leave my skelliton unto grim death.
But courage Hegio, let not cold despair
Chill thy green, and wide-gaping wounds too fast;
She is a woman, and she may be won,
Venus Adonis loved, why may not she
Prove love-sick too, and at length fancy me:
Shall I be bashful then, and so expire
With grief; fie, fie, what shall a woman's eye
Prevail so far over me to cause me dye,
And leave my name in the fools Callender,
And there be noted with a ruby letter,
For a supereminent Festival;
No, I am loath to leave earth yet, I'll try
If I may live, and find a remedy.

BRight Phoebus who with morning light
Put Hesperus twinkling train to flight,
When as thou rowzest, and display
Thy golden locks, and summon day;
Thou who dost rest thy drowzie-head,
In aged Thetis froathy bed:
When as thy gilded Car of day,
His glowingaxle doth allay.
Thou who in twice 6 Months fulfil
Thy journal on th'Olympian hill,
Illustrious Lord of light, in vain
Thou bragg'st with arrows to have slain
Thy Python sterne, whose massy bones
Were Iron bars, like congealed stones
His knotty sinews were, the boughs
Wer's shady covers; his great troughs
Deep Rivulets, which he (well nigh)
Caroused at one watering dry:
His belching shot forth flames, his eye
Shined like the dappled morning sky.
Fair Venus thy young hoodwinkt son
More glorious trophies oft have won,
Thou that crown'st thy loves with baize,
Inventer of mellodious Lays.
Thou left'st Pernassus biforked hill,
And Tempe thy fair domicill,
At loves command, and all to be
At Daphne's shrine a Votary.
Thou that did by virtual heat
The happy plants, and herbs create,
Could find no plant, or herb to be
A medicine for loves malady.
When thou commandst the birds to bring,
In triumph to the world, the Spring,
The new-clad earth hath quickly lost
H^r Snow-white robes, no chilly frost
Candies the grass, no icy cream
Congeal the lake, or pearly stream;
No snow lies sheltered in the shade,
The earth is thawed and tender made:
For all thy heat, thy love doth lower,
Nor had thy scalding rays the power
To thaw h^r Marble ice, and this
T'was caused her Metamorphosis.
Large limbed Hercules trebly blessed
With fame, thou who in youth expressed
Deeds of honour, thy cradle's crowned
With brave achievements, which renowned
Thy name; thy valour was supplied
With strength, thy haughty spirit defied
An host of men, Heaven ne'er conjoined
So strong a body, or so stout a mind.
Brag not cause you flew and withstood
Within the thick Naemaean wood
A beast, the temper of whose heart
Was like a nether Millstone; Dart,
Nor threatening Sword, nor frightful Spear,
Could terrify it with Panick fear:
Like knotty wreaths of craggy brass
His sinews were, a noise did pass
From his mouth, which might strike deaf the cares
Of mortals, and affright the Spheres,
You wore his rugged shaggy hide
About your shoulder, and left side.
The Hydra by thy hand was slain,
Whose heads lopped off sprouted again.
The mud was made his downy bed.
The stones were pillows for his head,
His speckled jaws which hideous were,
Thy brawny arms did bodly tear.
Thy club made th'Erymanthean Bear.
Lye weltering in his ruddy gore,
His sharpened tusks shall spoil no more
(As it was wont to do before)
Arcadia, which in antique days
Did warble out her well-tun^d Lays,
And sing loves on her oaten reed,
Whilst her secure flocks did feed.
The Centaur thou subdu'st by force,
Half like a man, half like a horse.
Swifter then wind you ran, or thought,
On foot a running Stag you caught.
Rapacious bird Stymphalide,
Were made a prey to death by thee.
Thou mighty Scavinger wertable
To cleanse the foul Augean stable,
You made a Bull to cross the Maine,
And graze on Neptunes liquid plain.
And Diomedes fell monster,
Who made his captives provender
To his proud pampered steeds, by thy
Revengeful hand did justly dye.
False Cacus thou did crush to death,
And 'twixt thy arms squeeze out his breath:
Cease the adjuring world to tell
Of thy forced entrance into Hell.
You swaddled Charon with his oar,
The triple-headed ban-dog roar,
And yell: you Pluto ere you're gone
Confronted on his jeaty throne.
Hesperides fruit, sweet and gay,
By thee were stolen, and borne away.
By Juno's labours you warrant broke,
And yet you yielded to loves yoke.
Thus Love made Hegio to epsy
Sweet Daris Physiognomy,
And prove close prisoner to that eye,
Whose frowns make him prepared to dye,
Love wound her too, that we may all
Keep holiday at their Nuptial.


