O^ Author thinks 'tis not in the power of Wit,
Invention, Art, nor Industry, to fit
The several fantasies which in this age
With a predominant humour rule the Stage.
Some men cry out for Satyr, others choose
Merely to story to confine each Muse;
Most like no Play, but such as gives large birth
To that which they judiciously term mirth.
Nor will the best works with their liking crown,
Except 't be graced with part of fool or clown.
Hard and severe the task is then to write,
So as may please each various appetite.
Our Author hopes well though, that in this Play,
He has endeavoured so, he justly may
Gain liking from you all, unless those few
Who will dislike, be it ne'er so good, so new;
The rather Gentlemen, he hopes, cause I
Am a main Actor in this Tragedy:
You've graced me sometimes in another Sphere,
And I do hope you'll not dislike me here.

NO murmurings, Noble Captains.


Murmurings, Cousin? this Peace is worse to men of war and action then fasting
in the face of the fo, or lodging on the cold earth. Give me the Camp, say I,
where in the Sutlers palace on pay-day we may the precious liquor quaff, and
kiss his buxom wife; who though she be not clad in Persian Silks, or costly
Tyrian Purples, has a clean skin, soft thighs, and wholesome corps, fit for the
trayler of the puissant Pike, to solace in delight with.


Here in your lewd City, the Harlots do avoid us sons of the Sword, worse then
a severe Officer. Besides, here men of the Shop can gorge their musty maws with
the delicious Capon, and fat limbs of Mutton large enough to be held shoulders
of the Ram anco^ge the 1^ Signs, while for pure want your soldier oft dines at
the charge of the dead, among tombs in the great Mo^que.


'Tis believed Coz, and by the wisest few too, that in the Camp you do not feed
on pleasant: po^lts; a ^allad, and without oil or vinegar, appeases sometimes
your guts, although they keep more noise then a large pool full of engendering
frogs. Then for accoutrements, you wear the Buff, as you believed it heresy to
change for linen: Surely most of yours is spent in lint, to make long tents
for your green wounds after an onslaught.


Coz. these are sad truths, incident to frail mortals!


You yet cry out with more eagerness still for new wars, then women for new
fashions.


'Tis confessed, Peace is more opposite to my nature, then the running ach in
the rich Usurers feet, when he roars out, as if he were in hell before his time.
Why, I love mischief, Coz, when one may do it securely; to cut throats with a
licentious pleasure; when good men and true o'th Jurie, with their frosty
beards shall not have power to give the noble wesand, which has the steel
defied, to the hanging mercy of the ungracious cord.


Gentlemen both, and Cozens mine, I do believe 't much pity, to strive to
reconvert you from the faith you have been bred in: though your large discourse
and praise, wherein you magnify your Mistress, War, shall scarce drive me
from my quiet sheets, to sleep upon a turf. But pray say, Cozens. How do you
like your General, Prince, is he a right Mars?


As if his Nurse had lapped him in swaddling clouts of steel; a very Hector and
Alcibiades.


It seems he does not relish these boasted sweets of war: for all his
triumphs, he is reported melancholy.


Want of exercise renders all men of actions, dull as dormise; your Soldier
only can dance to the Drum, and sing a Hymn of joy to the sweet Trumpet:
there's no music like it.


I'll know the cause, he shall deny me hardly else.


His melancholy, known whence it rises once, 't may much conduce to help our
purpose.


Pray Coz. what Lords are these? they seem as full of plot, as General^ are in
Siege, they're very serious.


That young Stripling is our great Emperors son, by his last wife: that in the
rich Imbroidery's, the Court Hermes; one that has hatched more projects, then
the ovens in Egypt chickens; the other, though they cal friends, his mere
opposite Planet Mars, one that does put on a reserved gravity, which some call
wisdom, the rough Soldier Mura* Governor ^'th' Moroccos.


Him we've heard of before: but Cozen, shall that man of trust, thy tailor,
furnish us with new accoutrements? hast thou taken order for them?


Yes, yes, you shall flourish in fresh habiliments; but you must promise me not
to engage your corporal oaths you will see it satisfied at the next press, out
of the profits that arise from ransom of those rich yeomans heites, that dare
not look the fierce foe in the face.


Doubt not our truths, though we be given much to contradictions, we will not
pawn oaths of that nature.


Well then, this note does fetch the garments: meet me Cozens anon at Supper.


Honourable Coz* we will come give our thanks.


My gracious brother, make us not such a stranger to your thoughts, to consume
all your honours in close retirements; perhaps since you from Spain returned a
victor, with (the worlds conqueror) Alexander, you greive Nature ordained no
other earths to vanquish; if it be so, Princely brother, we will bear part in your
heroic melancholy.


Gentle youth. press me no farther, I still hold my temper free and unshaken,
only some fond thoughts of trivial moment, cal my faculties to private
meditations.


Howsoe're your Highness does please to term them, 'tis mere melancholy, which
next to sin, is the greatest malady that can oppress mans soul.


They say right: and that your Grace may see what a mere madness, a very
mid-summer frenzy, 'tis to be melancholy, for any man that wants no money, I
(with your pardon) will discuss unto you all sorts, all sizes, persons and
conditions, that are infected with it; and the reasons why it in each arises.


Learned Selinthus, Let's taste of thy Philosophie


Pish, 'Tis unwelcome to any of judgment, this fond prate* I marvel that our
Emperor dos permit fools to abound in the Court!


What makes your grave Lordship in it, I do beseech you? But Sir, mark me, the
kernel of the text enucleated, I shall confute, refute, repel, refel, explode,
exterminate, expunge, extinguish like a rush candle, this same heresy, that is
shot up like a pernicious Mushroom, to poison true humanity.


You shall stay and hear a lecture read on your disease; you shall, as I love
virtue.


First the cause then from whence this flatus Hypocondriacus, this glimmering
of the gizard (for in wild fowl, 'tis termed so by Hyp^crates) arises, is as
Averroes and Avicen, with Abenbucar, Baruch and Aboflii, and all the Arabic
writers have affirmed, a mere defect, that is as we interpret* a want of --


Of what, Selinthus?


Of wit, and please your Highness, That is the cause in general, for
particular and special causes, they are all derived from several wants; yet
they must be considerd, pondered, perpended, or premeditated.


My Lord, y'ad best be brief, your Patient will be weary else.


I cannot play the fool rightly, I mean* the Physician without I have licence
to expalcat on the disease. But (my good Lord) more briefly, I shall declare to
you like a man of wisdom and no Physician, who deal all in simples, why men are
melancholy. First, for your Courties,


It concerns us all to be attentive, Sir.


Your sage and serious Courtier, who does walk with a State face, as he had
dressed himself in the Emperors glass, and had his beard turned up by the irons
Royal, he will be as pensive as Stallion after Catum, when he wants suits,
begging suits, I mean* Me thinks, (my Lord) you are grown something solemn on
the sudden; since your Monopolies and Patents, which made your purse swell like
a wet sponge, have been reduced to the last gasp. Troth, it is far better to
confess here, then in a worser place. Is it not so indeed?


What ere he does by mine, I'm sure he has hit the cause from whence your grief
springs, Lord Simanthes.


No Egyptian Soothsayer has truer inspirations, then your small Courtiers from
causes and wants manifold; as when the Emperors countenance with propitious
noise does not cry chink in pocket, no repute is with Mercer, nor with Tailor;
nay sometimes too the humor's pregnant in him, when repulse is given him by a
Beauty: I can speak this though from no Memphian Priest, or sage Caldean, from
the best Mistress (Gentlemen) an Experience. Last night I had a mind t'a comely
Seamstress, who did refuse me, and behold, ere since how like an Ass I look.


What, at your Counsels, Lords? the great Almanzor requires your presence,
Mura; has decreed the War for Persia. You (my gracious Lord) Prince
Abilqualet, are appointed Chief: And you, brave spirited Abrahen, an Assistant
to your victorious Brother: You, Lord Mura, destined Lieutenant General.


And must I march against the foe, without thy company? I relish not the
employment.


Alas, my Lord, Tarifa's head's grown white beneath his helmet; and your good
Father thought it charity to spare mine age from travel: though this ^ase will
be more irksome to me then the toil of war in a sharp winter.


It arrives just to our wish. My gracious brother, I anon shall wait on you:
mean time, valiant Mura, let us attend my Father.


Good Selinthus, vouchsafe a while your absence, I shall have employment
shortly for your trust.


Your Grace shall have as much power to command Selinthus, as his best fanci'd
Mistress. I am your creature.


Now, my Lord, I hope you're clothed with all those resolutions that usher
glorious minds to brave a^chievements. The happy genius on your youth attendant
declares it built for Victories and Triumphs; and the proud Persian Monarchy,
the sole emulous opposer of the Arabic Greatness, eourts (like a fair Bride)
your Imperial Arms, waiting to invest You Sovereign of her beauties. Why are
you dull (my Lord?) Your cheerful looks should with a prosperous augury presage
a certain Victory: when you droop already, as if the foe had ravished from your
Crest the noble Palm. For shame (Sir) be more sprightly; your sad appearance,
should they thus behold you, would half unsoul your Army,


'Tis no matter, Such looks best suit my fortune. Know ( Tarifa) I'm undispos'd
to manage this great Voyage, and must not undertake it.


Must not, Sir! Is't possible a love-sick youth, whose hopes are fixed on
marriage, on his bridal night should in soft slumbers languish? that your Arms
should rust in ease, now when you hear the charge, and see before you the
triumphant Prize destined to adorn your Valour? You should rather be furnished
with a power above these passions; and being invoked by the mighty charm of
Honour, fly to achieve this war, not undertake it. I'd rather you had said,
Tarifa lied, then uttered such a sound, harsh and unwelcome.


I know thou love me truly, and durst I to any born of woman, speak my
intentions, the fatal cause which does withdraw my courage from this
employment, which like health I covet, thou should enjoy it fully. But (
Tarifa) the said discov'ry of it is not fit for me to utter, much less for thy
virtue to be acquainted with.


Why (my Lord?) my loyalty can merit no suspicion from you of falsehood:
whatsoere the cause be or good, or wicked, 't meets a trusty silence, and my
best care and honest counsel shall endeavour to reclaim, or to assist you if it
be good, if ill, from your bad purpose.


Why, that I know ( Tarifa.) 'Tis the love thou bear to honour, renders thee
unapt to be partaker of those resolutions that by compulsion keep me from this
Voyage: For they with such inevitable sweetness invade my sense, that though
in their performance my Fame and Virtue even to death do languish, I must
attempt, and bring them unto act, or perish in the pursuance.


Heaven avert a mischief so prodigious. Though I would not with over-sawcie
boldness press your counsels; yet pardon (Sir) my Loyalty, which ^imorous of
your loved welfare, must entreat, beseech you with ardent love and reverence,
to disclose the hidden cause that can estrange your courage from its own Mars,
with-hold you from this Action so much allied to honour: Pray reveal it: By all
your hopes of what you hold most precious, I do implore it; for my faith in
breeding your youth in wars great rudiments, relieve Tarifa's fears, that
wander into strange unwelcome doubts, left some ambitious frenzy against your
imperial fathers dignity has late seduced your goodness.


No, Tarifa, I ne'er durst aim at that unholy height in viperous wickedness; a
sinless, harmless (ift can be truly termed one) 'tis my soul labours even to
despair with: t'faine would out, did not my blushes interdict my language:
'tis unchaste love, Tarifa; nay, tak't all, and when thou hast it, pity my
misfortunes, to fair Caropia, the chaste, virtuous wife to surly Mura.


What a fool Desire is! with Giant strengths it makes us court the knowledge of
hidden mysteries, which once revealed, far more inconstant then the air, it
fleets into new wishes, that the coveted secret had slept still in oblivion.


I was certain 'twould fright thy innocence, and look to be besieged with
strong dissuasions from my purpose: but be assured, that I have tired my
thoughts with all the rules that ^each men moral goodness, so to reclaim them
from this love-sick looseness; but they (like wholesome medicines misaplied)
faced their best operation, fond and fruitless. Though I as well may hope to
kiss the Sun-beams because they shine on me, as from her to gain one g^ance of
comfort; yet my mind, that pities it self with constant tenderness, must needs
revolve the cause of its calamity, and melt in the pleasure of so sweet a
sadness.


Then you're undone for ever; Sir, undone beyond the help of council or
repentance. 'Tis most ignoble, that a mind unshaken by fear, should by a vain
desire be broken; or that those powers no labour e're could vanquish, should be
overcome and thral'd by sordid pleasure. Pray (Sir) consider, that in glorious
war, which makes Ambition (by base men termed ^in) a big and gallant Virtue,
you've been nursed, lulled (as it were) into your infant sleeps by the surly
noise of the trumpet, which n^w summons you to victorious use of your
endowments: and shall a Mistress stay you! such a one too, as to attempt, then
war it self's more dangerous!


All these persuasions are to as much purpose, as you should strive to reinvest
with peace, and all the joys of health and life, a soul condemned to
perpe^uity of torments. No (my Tarifa) though through all disgraces, loss of
my honour, fame, nay hope for Empire, I should be forced to wade to obtain her
love; those seas of mischief would be pleasing streams, which I would hast to
bath in, and pass through them with that delight thou would to victory, or
slaves long chained to'th' oar, to sudden freedom^.


Were you not Abilqualit, from this time then our friendships (like two rivers
from one head rising) should wander a dissever'd course, and never meet again,
unless to quarrel. Nay, old and stiff, now as my iron garments, were you my
son, my sword should teach your wildness a swift way to repentance. You're my
Prince, on whom all hopes depend; think on your Father, that lively Image of
majestic goodness, who never yet wronged Matron in his lust, or man in his
displeasure. Pray conjecture your Father, Country, Army, by my mouth beseech
your piety to an early pity of your yet unslain Innocence. No attention!
Farewell: my prayers shall wait you, though my Counsels be thus despised. Farewell
Prince!


Alas good man, he weeps. Such tears I've seen fall from his manly eyes once
when ye lost a battle. Why should I put off my Reason, Valor, Honour, Virtue,
in hopes to gain a Beauty, whose possession renders me more incapable of
peace, then I am now I want it? Like a sweet, much coveted banquet, 'tis no
sooner tasted, but it's delicious luxury's forgotten. Besides, it is unlawful.
Idle fool, there is no law, but what's prescribed by Love, Natures first moving
Organ; nor can ought what Nature dictates to us be held vicious. On then, my
soul, and destitute of fears, like an adventurous Mariner, that knows storms
must attend him, yet dares court his peril, strive to obtain this happy Port.
Mesith^s (Loves cunning Advocate) does for me besiege (with gifts and vows) her
Chastity. She is compassed with flesh, that's not invulnerable, and may by
Love's sharp darts be pierced. They stand firm, whom no art can bring to Love's
command.


My gracious brother!


Dearest Abrahen, welcome. Tis certainly decreed by our dread Father, we must
both march against the insulting foe. How does thy youth, yet uninur'd to
travel, relish the Employment?


War is sweet to those that never have experienced it. My youth cannot desire
in that big Art a nobler Tutor then you (my Brother^) Like an Eglet following
her dam, I shall your honoured steps trace through all dangers, and be proud to
borrow a branch, when your head's coverd ore with Laurel, to deck my humbler
temples.


I do know thee of valiant active soul; and though a youth, thy forward spirit
merits the Command of Chief, rather then Second in an Army. Would heaven our
Royal Father had bestowed on thee the Charge of General.


On me, Sir! Alas, 'tis fit I first should know those Arts that do distinguish
Valour from wild rashness. A General (Brother) must have abler nerves of
Judgment, then in my youth can be hoped for. Your self already like a
flourishing Spring teeming with early Victories, the Soldier expects should
lead them to new Triumphs, as if you had vanquished fortune.


I am not so ambitious ( Abrahen) of particular glories, but I would have those
whom I love partake them. This Persian war, the last of the whole East left to
be managed, if I can persuade the great Almanzor, shall be the trophy of thy
yet maiden Valour. I have done enough already to inform Succession, that
Abilqualit durst on fiercest foes run to fetch Conquest home, and would have
thy name as great as mine in Arms, that History might register, our Family
abounded with Heroes, born for Victory.


Tis an honour, which, though it be above my powers, committed to my direction,
I would seek to manage with care above my years, and courage equal to his, that
dares the horridest face of danger: But 'tis your noble courtesy would thrust
this mas^'line honour (far above his merits) on your regardless Brother; for my
Father, he has no thought tending to your intentions; nor though your goodness
should desire, would hardly be won to yield consent to them.


Why, my Abrahen, we're both his sons, and should be both alike dear to's
affections; and though birth hath given me the larger hopes and Titles, 'twere
unnatural, should he not strive to indow thee with a portion apted to the
magnificence of his Off-spring. But thou perhaps art timorous, lest thy first
essays of valour should meet fate disastrous. The bold are Fortunes darlings.
If thou hast courage to venture on this great employment, doubt not, I shall
prevail upon our Father to ordain thee Chief in this brave hopeful Voyage.


You imagine me beyond all thought of gratitude; and doubt not that I'll
deceive your trust. The glorious Ensigns waving in the air once, like so many
Comets, shall speak the Persians funerals, on whose ruins we will build to Fame
and Victory new temples, which shall like Pyramids preserve our memories, when
we are changed to ashes.


Be sure, continue in this brave mind; I'll instantly solicit our Father to
confirm thee in the Charge of General, I'll about it.


Farewell gracious Brother. This haps above my hopes. Alas, good dull fool, I
see through thy intents, clear, as thy soul were as transparent as thin air or
Crystal. He would have me removed, march with the Army, that he mean time
might make a sure defeat on our aged fathers life and Empire: 't must be
certain as the light. Why should not this with equal heat, be like my
thoughts, ambitious? Be they as harmless as the prai'rs of Virgins, I'll work
his ruin out of his intentions. He like a thick cloud stands 'twixt me and
Greatness: Greatness, the wise mans true felicity, Honour's direct
inheritance. My youth will quit suspicion of my subtle practice: then have I
surly Mura and Simanthes, my allies by my dead Mothers blood, my assistants,
his Eunuch too Mesithes at my service. Simanthes shall inform the King, the
people desire Prince Abilqualit's stay; and Mura whose blunt demeanour renders
him oraculous, make a shrewd inference out of it. He is my half Brother, the
other's my Father; names, mere airy titles! Soveraigntie's only sacred,
Greatness goodness, true self-affection Justice, every thing righteous that's
helpful to create a King.


My trusty friends, you're welcome: our fate's above our wishes; Abilqualit by
whatso'ere power moved to his own ruin, would fain enforce his charge of
General on me, and stay at home.


Why, how can this conduce to advance our purpose?


Tis the mainest engine could ever move to ruin him. Simanthes, you shall
inform our Father, tis the people out of their tender love desires his stay.
You ( Mura) shall infer my Brothers greatness with people; out of it, how nice
it is and dangerous. The air is open here; come, we'll discourse with more
secure privacy our purpose. No^hing's unjust, unsacred, tends to advance us to
a Kingdom; that's the height of chance.


HOw? not go, Simanthes?


My dread Sovereign, I speak but what the well affected people out of their
loyal care and pious duty enjoined me utter: they do look upon him as on your
eldest Son, and next Successor, and would be loath the Persian War should rob
their eyes of light, their souls of joy and comfort, this flourishing Empire
leave as it were widowed of its loved Spouse: They humbly do beseech your
Majesty would therefore destine some more fitting General, whose loss (as
heaven avert such a misfortune) should it happen, might less concern the
State.


'Tis not the least among the blessings Heaven has showered upon us, that we are
happy in such loving Subjects, to govern whom, when we in peace are ashes, we
leave them a Successor whom they truly reverence: A loving people and a loving
Sovereign makes Kingdoms truly fortunate and flourishing. But I believe (
Simanthes) their intents, though we confirm them, will scarce take effect: My
Abilqualit (like a Princely Lion, in view of's prey) will scarcely be orecom to
leave the honour of the Persian War, in's hopes already vanquished by his
valour* and rest in lazy quiet, while that Triumph is ravished by another.


With the pardon of your most sacred Majesty, 'tis fit then your great
commands forbid the Princes Voyage: boldness enforces youth to hard
achievements before their time, makes them run forth like Lapwing^ from their
warm nest, part of the shell yet sticking unto their downy heads. Sir, good
success is oft more fatal far then bad; one winning ^st from a flattering Di^
tempting a Gameste^ to hazard his whole fortunes.


This is dull, fruitless Philosophy, he that falls nobly wins as much honour
by his loss, as conquest.


This rule may hold well among common men, but not among Princes. Such a prince
as ours is, who knows as well to conquer men's affections as he does enemies,
should not be exposed to every new cause, honourable danger. Prince
Abilqualit's fair and winning carriage has stolen possession of the peoples
hearts, they dote on him since his l^te Spanish conquest, as new made brides
on their much coveted husbands; and they would pine like melancholy turtles,
should they so soon lose the unvalued object both of their love and reverence:
Howsoe're, what ere your awful will (Sir) shall determine, as heaven, is by
their strict obedience held sacred and religious.


Good Simanthes, let them receive our thanks for their true care of our dear
Abilqualit. We'll consider of their request, say.


Your highness humblest creature.


I do not like this.


Like what? Valiant Mura, we know thy counsels so supremely wise, and thy true
heart so excellently faithful, that whatsoere displeases thy sage Judgment,
Almanzor's wisdom must account distasteful. What is't dislikes thee?


Your Majesty knows me a downright Soldier, I affect not words; but to be
brief, I relish not your son should (as if you were in your tomb already)
engross so much the giddy peoples favours. 'Tis neither fit for him, nor safe
for you to suffer it.


Why, how can they, Mura, Give a more serious testimony of reverence to me,
then by conferring their affections, their pious wishes, zealous contemplations
on him that sits the nearest to my heart, my Abilqualit, in whose hopeful
virtues my age more glorious then in all my conquests?


May you prove fortunate in your pio^s care of the Prince Abilqualit. But (my
Lord) Mura is not so prone to idle language (the Parasits best ornament) to
utter o^ght, but what (if you'll please to give him audie^ce he will show you a
blunt reason for.


Come, I see into thy thoughts, good Mura; too much car^ of us, informs thy
loyal soul with fears the Princes too much popularity may breed our danger:
banish those suspicions; neither dare they who under my long reign have been
triumphant in so many blessings, have the least thought may tend to
disobedience: or if they had, my Abilqualit's goodness would ne'er consent
with them to become impious.


'Tis too secure a confidence betrays minds valiant to irreparable dangers. Not
that I dare invade with a foul thought the noble Princes loyalty; but (my
Lord) when this same many headed beast (the people) violent, and so not
constant in affections, subject to love of novelty, the sickness proper ^'all
humane specially light natures, do magnify with too immoderate praises the
Princes actions, dote upon his presence, nay chain their souls to th'shadow
of his foot-steps, as all excesses ought to be held dangerous, especially when
they do aim at Scepters, their too much dotage speaks, you in their wishes are
dead already, that their darling hope the Prince might have the Throne once.


'Tis confessed, all this a serious truth.


Their mad applauses oth'noble Prince, though he be truly virtuous, may force
ambition into him, a mischief Ceasing the soul with too much craft and
sweetness, as pride or lust does minds unstay'd and wanton: 'tmakes men like
poisoned rats, which when they'ave swallowed the pleasing bane, rest not until
they drink, and can rest then much less, until they burst with it.


Thy words are still oraculous.


Pray then think with what an easy toil the haughty Prince, a demi God by the
popular acclamations, nay, the world's Sovereign in the vulgar wishes, had he a
resolution to be wicked, might snatch this diadem from your aged temples? What
law so holy, tie of blood so mighty, which for a Crown, minds sanctified and
religious have not presumed to violate? How much more then may the soul dazzling
glories of a Sceptre work in his youth, whose constitution's fiery, as
overheated air, and has to fan it into a flame, the breath of love and praises
blown by strong thought of his own worth and actions.


No more of this, good Mura.


They dare already limit your intentions, demand (as 'twere) with cunning zeal
(which rightly interpreted, is insolence) the Princes abode at home. I will not
say it is, but I guess, 'tmay be their subtle purpose while we abroad fight for
new kingdoms purchase deprived by that means of our faithful succours, they may
deprive you of this crown, enforce upon the prince this Diadem; which however
he may be loath to accept, being once possessed of't and tasted the delights of
supreme greatness, he will be more loath to part with. To prevent this, not that
I think it will, but that may happen, 'tis fit the Prince march. I'ave observed
in him too of late a sullen Melancholy, whence rising i'll not conjecture;
only I should grieve, Sir, beyond a moderate sorrow, traitorous practise should
take that from you which with loyal blood ours and your own victorious arms
have purchased. and now I have discharged my honest conscience censure on it as
you please; henceforth I'm silent.


Would thou had been so now, thy loyal fears have made me see how miserable a
King is, whose rule depends on the vain people suffrage. Black now and horrid
as the face of storms appears al Abilqualits lovely virtues, because to me they
only make him dangerous, and with great terror shall behold those actions which
with delight before we viewed, and dotage; like Mariners that bless the
peaceful seas, which when suspected to grow up tempest^ous, they tremble at.
Though he may still be virtuous, 'tis wisdom in us, to him no injustice, to
keep a vigilant eye over his proceedings and the wild peoples purposes.


Abilqualit! come to take your leave, I do conjecture.


Rather, Sir, to beg your gracious licence, I may still at home attend your
dread commands, and that you'd please to nominate my hopeful brother Abrahen
(in lieu of me) chief of your now raised Forces for the Persian expedition.


Dare you (Sir) presume to make this suit to us?


Why? (my royal Lord) I hope this cannot pull your anger on your most obedient
Son: a true affection to the young Prince my brother, did beget this my
request; I willingly would have his youth adorned with glory of this conquest.
No tree bears fruit in Autumn, 'less it blossom first in the Spring; 'tis fit
he were acquainted in these soft years with military action, that when grown
perfect man, he may grow up too perfect in warlike discipline.


Hereafter we shall by your appointment guide our Counsels. Why do you not
entreat me to resign my Crown, that you the peoples much loved minion may
with it impale your glorious brow? Sir, henceforth or know your duty better, or
your pride shall meet our just waked anger. To your Charge, and march with
speed, or you shall know what 'tis to disobey our pleasure. When you're King,
learn to command your Subjects; I will mine (Sir.) You know your Charge,
perform it.


I have done. Our hopes (I see) resemble much the Sun, that rising and
declining cast large shadows; but when his beams are dressed in's midday
brightness, yields none at all: when they are farthest from success, their
guilt reflection does display the largest shows of events fair and prosperous.
With what a settled confidence did I promise my self, my stay here, Mura's
wished departure? when stead of these, I find my fathers wrath destroying mine
intentions. Such a fool is self-compassion, soothing us to faith of what we
wish should hap* while vain desire of things we have not, makes us quite forget
those we're possessed of.


Alone the engine works beyond or hope or credit. How I hug with vast delight,
beyond that of stolen pleasures forbidden Lovers taste, my darling Mistress, my
active Brain! If I can be thus subtle while a young Serpent, when grown up a
Dragon how glorious shall I be in cunning practise? My gracious brother!


Gentle Abrahen. I am grieved my power cannot comply my promise: my Father's so
averse from granting my request concerning thee, that with angry frowns he did
express rather a passionate rage, then a refusal civil, or accustomed to his
indulgent disposition.


He's our Father, and so the tyrant Custom doth enforce us to yield him that
which fools call natural, when wise men know 'tis more then servile duty, a
slavish, blind obedience to his pleasure, be it nor just, nor honourable.


O my Abrahen, these sounds are unharmonious, as unlooked for from thy
unblemished innocence: though he could put off paternal piety, 't gives no
privilege for us to wander from our filial duty: though harsh, and to our
natures much unwelcome be his decrees, like those of Heaven, we must not presume
to question them.


Not, if they concern our lives and fortunes? 'Tis not for my self I urge these
doubts; but 'tis for you, who are my Brother, and I hope, must be my
Sovereign, my fears grow on me almost to distraction: Our Father's age
betrays him to a dotage, which may be dangerous to your future safety; he
does suspect your loyalty.


How, Abrahen?


I knew 'twould start your innocence; but 'tis truth, a sad and serious truth;
nay his suspicion almost arrived unto a settled faith that you're ambitious.


'Tis impossible.


The glorious shine of your illustrious virtues are grown too bright and
dazzling for his eyes to look on as he ought, with admiration; and he with fear
beholds them, as it were, through a perspective, where each brave action of
yours surveyed though at remotest distance, appears far greater then it is. In
brief, that love which you have purchased from the people that sing glad Hymns
to your victorious fortunes, betrays you to his hate; and in this Voyage which
he enforces you to undertake, he has set spies upon you.


'Tis so: afflictions do fall like hailstones, one no sooner drops, but a whole
Shower does follow. I observed indeed, my Abrahen, that his looks and language
was dressed in unaccustomed clouds, but did not imagine they'd presaged so
fierce a tempest. Ye gods, why do you give us gifts and graces, share your own
attributes with men, your virtues, when they betray them to worse hate then
vices? But Abrahen, prithee reconfirm my fears by testimonial how this can be
truth; for yet my innocence with too credulous trust sooths up my soul, our
father should not thus put that off which does make him so, his sweetness, to
feed the irregular flames of false suspicions and soul tormenting jealousies.


Why, to me, to me (my Lord) he did with strong Injunctions give a solicitous
charge to overlook your actions. My Abrahen (quoth he) I'm not so unhappy,
that like thy brother thou should be ambitious, who does affect, before thy
ag'd Fathers ashes, with greedy lust my Empire. Have a strict and cautious
diligence to observe his carriage, 'twil be a pious care. Moved with the base
indignity, that he on 'me should force the office of a spy; your spy, my noble
and much loved brother: my best manhood scarce could keep my angry tears in; I
resolved I was in duty bound to give you early intelligence of his unjust
intentions, that you in wisdom might prevent all dangers might fall upon you
from them, like swift lightning, killing because they invade with sudden
fierceness


In afflicting me, misery is grown witty.


Nay besides (Sir) the sullen Mura has the self same charge too consigned and
settled on him; which his blind duty will execute. O brother, your soft passive
nature, does like jet on fire when oils cast on it, extinguish: otherwise, this
base suspicion would inflame your sufferance, nay make the purest loyalty
rebellious. However, though your too religious piety forces you 'ndure this
foul disgrace with patience, look to your safety, brother, that dear safety
which is not only yours, but your whole Empires: for my part, if a faithful
brothers service may ought avail you, tho against our father, since he can be
so unnaturally suspicious, as your own thoughts, command it.


Come, I know, although you have lost some implements of manhood may make thee
gracious in the sight of woman, yet you have a little engine, called a tongue, by
which thou can overcome the nicest female, in the behalf of friend. Insooth,
you Eunuchs may well be styled Pimps-royal, for the skill you have in quaint
procurement.


Your Lordship's merry, and would enforce on me what has been your office far
oftner than the cunningest Squire belonging to the smock transitory. May it
please your Highness.


Ha! Mesithes.


His countenance varies strangely, some affair the Eunnch gives him notice of,
't should seem, begets much pleasure in him.


Is this truth? Mes. Else let me taste your anger.


My dear Abrahen, we'll march to night, prithee give speedy Notice to our
Lieutenant Mura, to collect the forces from their several quarters, and draw
them into Battalia on the plain behind the City, lay a strict command he stir
not from the Ensigns till our self arrive in person there. Be speedy, brother,
a little hasty business craves our presence. We will anon be with you, my
Methises.


Can your grace imagine whether his highness goes now?


No, Selinthus; can thou conjecture at the Eunuchs business? what ere it was,
his countenance seemed much altered: Il'd give a talent to have certain knowledge
what was Mesithes message.


I'll inform you at a far easier rate. Mesithes business certes concerned a
limber pett^coate, and the smock soft and slippery; on my honour, has been
providing for the Prince, some female that he takes his leave of Ladies flesh
ere his departure.


Not improbable, it may be so.


Nay, certain (Sir) it is so: and I believe, your little body earnes after the
same sport. You were once reported a wag would have had business of engendering
with surly Mura's Lady: and men may conjectute you're no chaster then a vot'rie:
yet though she would not solace your desire^, there are as handsome Ladies will
be proud to have your Grace inoculate their stock^ with your graft-royal.


Thou art Selinthus still, and wilt not change thy humour. I must go and find out
Mura; so farewell Selinthus, thou art not for these wars, I know.


No truly, nor yet for any other, 'less't be on a naked yielding enemy; though
there may be as hot service upon such a foe as on those clad in steel: the
little squadron, we civil men assault body to body, oft carry wild-fire* about
them privately, that ^indges us in the service from the crown even to the sole,
nay sometimes hair and all off. But these are transitory perils.


It is Cousin, something of the soonest; but we are prepared at all times for
the journey.


To morrow morning may serve the turn though. Hark you, Cozens mine; if in
this Persian War you chance to take a handsome she Captive, pray you be not
unmindful of us your friends at home; I will disburse her ransom, Cozens,
for I've a months mind to try if strange flesh, or that of our own Country has
the completer relish.


We will accomplish thy pleasure, noble Cousin.


But pray do not take the first say of her your selves. I do not love to walk
after any of my kindred in the path of copulation.


The first fruits shall be thy own, dear Couz. But shall we part (never perhaps
to meet again) with dry lips, my right honoured Coz?


By no means, though by the Alcharon wine be forbidden, you Soldiers in that
case maked not your faith. Dr^nk water in the Camp, when you can purchase ^o
other liquor; here you shall have plenty ^f wine, old and delic^ous. I'll be
your leader, and bring you on, let who will bring you off. To the encounter,
come let us march, Cozens.


No more, my gracious Lord, where real love is needless are all expressions
ceremonious: the amorous Turtles, that at first acquaintance strive to express
in murmuring notes their loves, do when agreed on their affections change their
chirps to billing*


And in feathered arms encompass mutually their gaudy necks.


How do you like these love tricks, Perilinda?


Very well; but one may sooner hope from a dead man to receive kindness, than
from thee, an Eunuch.^ You are the coldest creatures in the bodies, no
snow-balls like you.


We must needs, who have not that which like fire should warm our
constitutions, the instruments of copulation, girl, our toys to please the
Ladies.


Caropia, in your well becoming pity of my extreme afflictions and stern
sufferings, you've shown that excellent mercy as must render what ever action
you can fix on, virtuous. But Lady, I till now have been your tempter, one that
desired hearing, the brave resistance you made my brother, when he wooed your
love, only to boast the glory of a conquest which seemed impossible, now I have
gained it by being vanquisher, I my self am vanquished your everlasting
Captive.


Then the thraldom will be as prosperous as the pleasing bondage of palms,
that flourish most when bowd down fastest; Constraint makes sweet and easy
things laborious, when love makes greatest miseries seem pleasures. Yet 'twas
ambition (Sir) joined with affection that gave me up a spoil to your
temptations. I was resolved, if ever I did make a breach on matrimonial faith,
't should be with him that was the darling of kind fortune as well as liberal
nature; who possessed the height of greatness to adorn his beauty; which since
they both conspire to make you happy, I thought 't would be a greater sin to
suffer your hopeful person, born to sway this Empire, in loves hot flames to
languish, by refusal to a consuming fever* then t'infringe a vow which ne'er
proceeded from my heart when I unwillingly made it.


And may break it with confidence, secure from the least guilt, as if 't had
only in an idle dream been by your fancy plighted. Madam, there can be no
greater misery in love, than separation from the object which we affect; and
such is our misfortune we must ith'infancy of our desires breath at unwelcome
distance; ith'mean time, lets make good use of the most precious minutes we have
to spend together.


Else we were unworthy to be titled lovers; but I fear loathed Mura may with
swift approach disturb our happiness.


By my command he's mustering up our forces. Yet Mesithes, go you to Abrahen,
and with intimations from us, strengthen our charge. Come my Caropia, love's
wars are harmless, for who ere does yield, gains as much honour as who wins the
field.


Open the door, I must and ^ill have entrance unto the Prince my brother, as y^
love your life and safety and that Ladies ^nor, whom you are lodged in amorous
twi^s* with, do not deny me entrance to you, I am Abra^n, your loyal brother
Abrahen.


'Tis his voice, and there can be no danger in it, Caropia, be not dismayed,
though we're to him discovered. your fame shall taste no blemish by it. Now
brother, 'tis something rude in you, thus violently to press upon our
privacies.


My affection shall be my Advocate, and plead my care of your loved welfare, as
you love your honour, haste from this place, or you'll betray the Lady to ruin
most inevitable. Her husband has notice of your being here, and's coming on
wings of jealousy and desperate rage to intercept you in your close delights.
In brief, I over heard a trusty Servant of his ith'Camp come and declare your
highness was private with Caropia: at which tidings the sea with greater haste
when vexed with tempests, so sudden and boisterous, flies not towards the shore,
then he intended homewards. He by this needs must have gained the City; for
with all my power I hasted hitherward, that by your absence you might prevent
his view of you.


Why? the slave dare not invade my person, had he found me in fair Caropias
arms: 'twould be ignoble, now I have caused her danger, should I not defend
her from his violence. I'll stay though he come armed with thunder.


That will be a certain means to ruin her: To me count that cure, I'll stand
between the Lady, and Mura's fury, when your very sight, giving fresh fire to
th'injury, will incense him against her beyond all patience.


Nay, besides his violent wrath breaking through his allegiance, may riot on
your person. Dear my Lord withdraw your self, there may be some excuse when you
are absent thought on, to take off Mura's suspicion: by our loves, depart I do
beseech you. Hapless I was born to be most miserable.


You shall over-rule me* Better it is for him with unhallowed hands to act a
sacriledg on our Prophets tom then to profane this purity with the le^ offer of
injury; be careful Abrahen, to thee I leave my heart. Farewell Car^ia, your
tears enforce my absence.


Pray hast my Lord lest you should meet the enraged Mur. now Madam where are
the boasted glories of that v^tue, which like a faithful Fort withstood m^
bat^ries? demolished now, and ruined they app^r; like a fair building toter'd
from its b^ by an unruly whirlwind, and are no instead of love the objects of
my pity


I'm bound to thank you Sir ^et credit me; my sin's so pleasing't 'cannot meet
re^ntance. Were Mura here, and armed with al^ the horrors ^age could invest his
powers with; n^t forgiven Hermits with greater peace shall hast t^ death, then I
to be the Martyr of this cause, which I so love and reverence.


'Tis a noble and well becoming constancy, and merits a lover of those Supreme
eminent graces, that do like full winds swell the glorious Sails of Abilqualit's
dignity and beauty! yet Madam, let me tel you, though I could not envy my
brothers happiness, if he could have enjoyed your priceless love with safety,
free from discovery, I am afflicted beyond a moderate sorrow, that my youth
which with as true a zeal, courted your love, should appear so contemptible to
receive a killing scorn from you: yet I forgive you, and do so much respect
your peace, I wish you had not sinned so carelessly to be betrayed in the first
fruitions of your wishes to your suspicious husband.


'Tis a fate Sir, which I must stand, though it come dressed in flames, killing
as circular fire, and as prodigious as death presaging Comets: there's that
strength in love, can change the pitchy face of dangers to pleasing forms,
make ghastly fears seem beauteous; and I'm resolved, since the sweet Prince
is free from Mura's anger, which might have been fatal if he should here have
found him, unresistless I dare his utmost fury.


'Twil bring death with it sure as stifling damp; and 'twere much pity so
sweet a beauty should unpitied fall, betrayed to endless infamy; your
husband knows only that my brother in your chamber was entertained; the
servant that betrayed you, curse on his diligence, could not affirm he saw you
twined together: yet it is death by the law, you know, for any Lady at such an
hour, and in her husbands absence* to entertain a stranger.


'Tis considered Sir, and since I cannot live to enjoy his love, I'll meet my
death as willingly as I met Abilqualit's dear embraces.


That were too severe a cruelty. Live Caropia, till the kind destinies take the
loathed Mura to their eternal Mansions, till he fall either in war a sacrifice to
fortune, or else by stratagem take his destruction from angry Abilqualit, whose
fair Empress you were created for: there is a mean yet to save the opinion of
your honour spotless, as that of Virgin innocence, nay to preserve, (though he
doth know (as certainly he must do) my Brother have enjoyed thee) thee still
precio^s in his deluding fancy.


Let me adore you if you can give effect to your good purpose. But tis
impossible.


With as secure an ease 't shall be accomplished as the blessed desires of
uncross'd lovers: you shall with one breath dissolve these mists that with
contagious darkness threaten the lights both of your life and honour. Affirm
my brother ravished you.


How my Lord?


Obtained by violence entry into your chamber where his big lust seconded by
force, despite of yours and your Maids weak resistance surprised your honour:
when 't shall come to question, my brother cannot so put off the truth, he owes
his own affection and your whiteness, but ^o acknowledge it a rape.


And so by saving mine, betray his fame and safety, to the laws danger, and
your fathers justice, which with impartial doom will most severely sentence
the Prince, although his son.


Your fears and too affectionate tenderness will ruin all that my care has
builded. Sure, Mesithes has (as my charge enjoined him) made relation
Abilqualit's action. See your Husband, resolve on it, or y' are miserable.


Furies, where is this lustful Prince, and this lascivious Strumpet? ha
Abrahen, here?


Good^ Cozen Mura, be not so passionate, it is your Prince has wrought your
injury; resolve to bear your crosses like a man: the greatest afflictions
should have the greatest fortitude in their sufferings from minds resolved and
noble. Alas poor Lady, 'twas not her fault; his too unruly lust 'tis, has
destroyed her purity.


Ha, in tears! Are these the livery of your fears and penitence, or of your
sorrows (minion) for being robbed so soon of your Adulterer?


Fie, your passion is too unmannerly; you look upon her with eyes of rage, when
you with grief and pity ought to surveigh her innocence. My Brother,
degenerate as he is from worth, and merely the beast of lust, (what ^fiends
would fear to violate) has with rude insolence destroyed her honour, ^y him
inhumane ravished,


Good Sir be so merciful as to set free a wretch from loathed mortality, whose
lifes so great and hateful burden now sh'as lost her honour: 'Twil be a friendly
charity to deliver her from the torment of it.


That I could contract the soul of universal rage into this swelling heart,
that it might be as full of poisonous anger as a dragons when in a toil
insnar'd. Caropia ravished! Me thinks the horror of the sound should fright to
everlasting ruin, the whole world, start natures Genius.


Gentle Madam, pray withdraw your self, your sight, till I have wrought a cure
upon his temper, will but add to his affliction.


You're as my good Angel, I'll follow your directions.


Cozen Mura, I thought a person of your masculine temper, in dangers fostered,
where perpetual terrors have been your play-fellowes, would not have resented
with such effeminate passion a disgrace, though ne'er so huge and hideous.


I am tame, collected now in all my faculties, which are so much oppressed with
injuries, they've lost the anguish of them: can you think, Sir, when all the
winds fight, the enraged billows that use to imprint on the black lips of
clouds a thousand briny kisses, can lie still, as in a lethargy? that when
baths of oil are pou^'d upon the wild irregular flames in populous Cities, that
they'll then extinguish? Your mitigations add but seas to seas, give matter to
my fires to increase their burning, and I ere long enlightened by my anger shall
be my own pile, and consume to ashes.


Why, then I see indeed your injuries have ravished hence your reason and
discourse, and left you the mere prostitute of passion. Can you repair the
ruins you lament so with these exclaims? was ever dead man called to life
again by fruitful sighs? or can your rage reedify Caropias honour, slain and
betrayed by his foul lust? Your manhood, that heretofore has thrown you on all
dangers, me thinks should prompt you to a noble vengeance, which you may safely
prosecute with Justice, to which this crime, although he be a Prince, Renders
him liable.


Yes, I'll have justice or I'll awake the sleepy Deities, or like the ambitious
Giants wage new wars with heaven it self, my wrongs shall steel my courage, and
on this vicious Prince like a fierce Sea-breach my just waked rage shall riot
till it sink in the remorcelesse eddie, sink where time shall never find his
name but with disgrace to taint his hateful memory.


This wildness neither befit your wisdom nor your courage, which should with
settled and collected thoughts walk on to noble vengeance. He before was by our
plots proscribed to death and ruin to advance me to the Empire; now with ease
we may accomplish our designs


Would heaven I ne'er had given consent, overcome by love to you to have made a
forfeit on my allegiance, tis a just punishment, I by him am wronged, whom for
your sake I fearless sought to ruin.


Are you repentant grown, Mura? this softnese? ill suits a person of your great
resolves, on whom my fortunes have such firm dependence. Come, let Caropia's
fate in^ke thy vengeance to gain full mastry over all other passions, leave not
a corner in the spacious heart unfurnished of a noble rage, which now will be
an attribute of glorious justice: the law you know with loss of sight doth
punish all rapes, though on mean persons; and our father is so severe a
Justicer, not blood can make a breach upon his faith to justice. Besides, we
have already made him dangerous in great Almanzors thoughts, and being
delinquent he needs must suffer what the meanest offender merits for such a
trespass.


I'm awake now, the lethargy of horror and amaze that did obscure my reason,
like those dull and lazy vapors that o'reshade the Sun, vanish, and it resumes
its native brightness. And now I would not but this devil Prince had done this
act upon Caropia's whiteness, ^nce't yields you free access unto the Empire,
The deprival of's sight does render him incapable of future sovereignty.


You're in the right, and hast put on manly considerations: Caropia (since
she's in her will untainted) ha's not forgon her honour: he dispatc'd once, as
we will have him shortly,'t shall go hard else* a tenant to his marble, thou
agen^ wedded in peace may be to her pure virtues, and live their happy owner.


I'll repair to great Almanzor instantly, and if his partial piety do descend
to pity, I will awake the Executioner of justice, death, although in sleep
more heavy than he can borrow from his natural coldness; on this good sword
I'll wear my causes justice till he do fall its sacrifice.


But be sure you do it with cunning secrecy, perhaps, should he have notice of
your just intentions, he would repair to the Army, from which safeguard our best
force could not pluck him without danger to the whole Empire.


Doubt not but I'll manage with a discreet severity my vengeance, invoke
Almanzors equity with sudden and private haste.


Mean time I will go put a new design in practice that may be much conducing to
our purpose. Like clocks, one wheel another on must drive, affairs by diligent
labour only thrive.


No quarrelling good Cozens, le^ft it be with t^e glass, because 'tis not of
size sufficient to gi^e you a magnificent draught. You will have ^ighting work
enough^ when you're in the wars, do n^t fall out among your selves.


Not pledge my peerless Mistress health? Soldier, thou'^t mortal, if thou
refuse it.


Come, come, he shall pledge it, and 'twere a Tun. Why, we're all as dull as
dormise in our liquor: Here's a health to the Prince Abilqualit.


Let go round: I'd drink't, were it an Ocean of warm blood flowing from
th'enemie. Pray, good my Lord what news is stirring?


It should seem, Soldier, thou can not read; otherwise the learned Pamphlets
that fly about the streets, would satisfy thy curiosity with news; they are
true ones, full of discreet intelligence.


Cousins, shal's have a Song? here is a Soldier in's time hath sung a dirge
unto the foe oft in the field.


Captain, I have a new one, the Soldiers Joy 'tis called.


That is an harlot. Preethee be musical, and let us taste the sweetness of
thy voice.


Whist, give attention.


How does your Lordship like it?


Very well. And so here's to thee. There's no drum beats yet, and 'tis clear
day; some hour hence 'twill be Abrahen, and trim Mesithes with him! what the
divel does he make up so early? He has been a bat-fowling all night after those
Birds, those Ladie-birds termed wag^ails; what strange business can he have
here, trow?


'Twas well done, Mesithes! and trust me, I shall find an apt reward, both for
thy care and cunning. Prithee hast to Lord Simanthes, and deliver this note to
him with best diligence, my dear Eunuch; you're half the soul of Abrahen:


I was borne to be entitled your most humble vassal; I'll hast to the Lord
Simanthes.


How he cringes! These youths that want the instruments of Manhood, are very
supple in the hams.


Good-morrow to noble Lord Selinthus: what companions have you got here thus
early?


Blades of metal, tall men of war, and't please your Grace, of my own blood and
family, men who gathered a ^allad on the enemies ground, and eaten it in bold
defiance of him; and not a Soldier here but's an Achylles, valiant as stoutest
Mirmidon.


And they never had juster cause to show their valor; the Prince my dearest
brother, their Lord General's became a forfeit to the stern laws rigour; and
'tis imagined, our impartial father, will sentence him to lose his eyes.


Marry heaven defend, for what, and 't like your Grace!


For a fact which the severe law punishes with loss of natures precious lights;
my tears will scarce permit me utter 't: for a rape committed on the fair wife
of Mura.


Was it for nothing else, and please your Grace? ere he shall lose an eye for
such a trifle, or have a hair diminished, we will lofe our heads; what,
hoodwink men like sullen hawks for doing deeds of nature! I'm ashamed the law
is such an Ass.


Some Eunuch Judge, that could not be acquainted with the sweets due to
concupiscencial parts, invented this law, I'll be hanged else. 's Life, a
Prince, and such a hopeful one, to lose his eyes, for satisfying the hunger of
the stomach beneath the wast, is cruelty prodigious, not to be suffered in a
common-wealth of ought but geldings.


'Tis vain to sooth our hopes with these delusions, he will suffer less he be
reskued. I would have you therefore if you ow any service to the Prince, my much
lamented brother, to attend without least tumult about the Court, and if there
be necessity of your aid, I'll give you notice when to employ it.


Sweet Prince, we'll swim in blood to do thee or thy brother service. Each man
provide their weapons.


You will win my brothers love for ever, nay my father, though he will seem angry
to behold his justice deluded, afterwards when his rage is past, will thank you
for your loyalties: Pray be there with all speed possible, by this my brothers
commanded before my father, I'll go learn the truth, and give you notice: pray
be secret and firm to your resolves.


For him that flinches in such a cause, I'll have no more mercy on him. Here's
Tarifa Mura with him a walking towards the Court, let's take no notice of them,
lest they discover our intentions by our grim looks. March fair and softly
Cozens, we'll be at Court before them.


You will not do this, Mura!


How Tarifa? will you defend him in an act so impious? Is't fit the drum should
cease his surly language, when the bold Soldiers marches, or that I should
pass over this affront in quiet silence, which Gods and men invoke to speedy
vengeance? which I will have, or manhood shall be tame as Cowardice.


It was a deed so barbarous, that tr^th it self blushes as well as justice to
hear it mentioned: but consider Mura, he is our Prince, the Empires hope, and
pillar of great Almanzors age How far a public regard should be preferred
before your private desire of vengeance! which if you do purchase from our
impartial Emperors equity, his loss of sight, and so of the succession, will
not restore Caropia to the honour he ravished from her. But so foul the cause
is, I rather should lament the Princes folly than plead in his behalf.


'Tis but vain, there is your warrant, as you are high Marshal, to summon him
to make his speedy appearance before the Tribunal of Almanzor; so pray you
execute your office.


How one vice can like a small cloud when't breaks forth in showers, black the
whole heaven of virtues! O my Lord,


Willingly, what's my offence, Tarifa?


Would you knew not, I did presage your too unruly passions would hurry you to
some disast'rons act, but ne'er imagined you'd have been so lost to masculine
honour, to commit a rape on that unhappy object of your love, whom now you've
made the spoil of your foul lust, the much wronged wife of Mura.


Why, does Mura charge me with his Caropia's rape?


This warrant sent by your angry father, testifies he means to appeach you of
it.


'Tis my fortune, all natural motions when they approach their end, hast to
draw to it with accustomed swiftness. Rivers with greedier speed run near
their out-falls, than at their springs. But I'm resolved, let what happen that
will, I'll stand it, and defend Carpoia's honour, though mine own I ruin; Who
dares not dye to justify his love, deserves not to enjoy her. Come, Tarifa,
what e're befall, I'm resolute. He dies glorious, that falls loves innocent
sacrifice.


NO more Tarifa, you'll provoke our anger, if you appear in this cause so
solicitous, the act is too apparent: nor shall you need (injured Mura) to
implore our justice, which with impartial doom shall fall on him more
rigorously, then on a strange offender. O Abilqualit, (for the name of Son,
when thou forsookst thy native virtue, left thee;) Were all thy blood, thy
youth and fortunes glories of no more value, then to be exposed to ruin for
one vice; at whose name only the furies start, and bashful fronted justice
hides her amazed head? But it is now bootless to show a fathers pity, in my
grief for thy amiss. As l'me to be thy Judge, be resolute, I'll take as little
notice, thou art my off-spring, as the wandering clouds do of the showers, which
when they've bred to ripeness, they straight disperse through the vast earth
forgotten.


I'm sorry Sir, that my unhappy chance should draw your anger on me; my long
silence declares I have on that excelling sweetness, that unexampled pattern
of chaste goodness; Caropia acted violence. I confess, I loved the Lady, and
when no persuasions served to prevail on her, too stubborn, incenss'd, by force
I sought my purpose and obtained it; nor do I yet (so much I prize the
sweetness of that unvalued purchase) find repentance in any abject thought;
what ere falls on me from your sterne rigour in a cause so precious, will be a
pleasing punishment.


Yon are grown a glorious malefactor, that dare brave thus the awful rod of
justice! Lost young man, for you're no child of mine; dost not con^der to what
a state of desperate destruction thy wild lust has betrayed thee! What rich
blessings (that I may make thee sensible of thy sins by showing thee thy
suffering) hast thou lost by thy irregular folly! First my love, which never
more must meet thee, scarce in pity; the glory flowing from thy former
actions stopped up for ever; and those lustful eyes, by whose deprival (you're
deprived of being capable of this Empire) to the law, which will exact them,
forfeited. Cal in there a Surgeon, and our Mutts to execute this act


O my Lord, that which on others would be fitting justice, on him your hopeful
though offending son, will be exemplar cruelty; his youth Sir, that hath
abounded with so many virtues* is an excuse sufficient for one vice: he is not
yours only. he's your Empires, destined by nature and successions privilege,
when you in peace are shrouded in your marble, to wield this Sceptre after you.
O do not, by putting out his eyes, deprive your Subjects of light, and leave
them to dull mournful darkness.


'Tis but in vain, I am inexorable. If those on which his eyes hang, were my
heart strings, I'd cut them out rather then wound my Justic^; nor dos't befit
thy virtue intercede for him in this cause horrid and prodigious; the crime
against me was acted; 'twas a rape upon my honour, more then on her whiteness;
his was from mine derivative, as each stream is from its spring; so that he has
polluted by his soul fact, my fame, my truth, my goodness, stricken through my
dignity by his violence: nay, started in their peaceful urns, the ashe^ of
all my glorious Ancestors; defiled the memory of their still descendent
virtues; nay with a killing frost, nipped the fair blossoms, that did presage
such goodly fruit arising from his own hopeful youth.


I ask but justice; those eyes that led him to unlawful objects, tis fit should
suffer fo^'t a lasting blindness; the Sun himself, when he darts rays
lascivious, such as engender by too piercing fervence intemperate and
infectious heats, straight wears obscurity from the clouds his own beams
raises. I have been your Soldier Sir, and fought your battles; for all my
services, I beg but justice, which is the Subjects best prerogative, the
Princes greatest attribute; and for a fact, then which, none can be held more
black and hideous, which has betrayed to an eclipse the brightest star in the
heaven of virtues: the just law does for 't ordain a punishment, which I hope
you the laws righteous guider, will according to equity see executed.


Why! that law was only made for common malefactors, but has no force to extend
unto the Prince, to whom the law it self must become subject. This hopeful
Prince, look on him, great Almanzor; and in his eyes, those volumes of all
graces, which you like erring Meteors would extinguish* read your own lively
figure, the best story of your youths noblest vigour; let not wrath (Sir)
overcome your piety, nay your humane pity. 'Tis in your breast, my Lord, yet to
show mercy; that precious attribute of heavens true goodness, even to your
self, you^ son! me thinks that name should have a power to interdict your
Justice in its too rigorous progress.


Dear Tarifa, I'm more afflicted at the intercessions, then at the view of my
approaching torments, which I will meet with fortitude and boldness, too base to
shake now at one personal danger, when I've encountered thousand perils
fearless; Nor do I blame my gracious fathers Justice, though it precede his
nature. I'd not have him (for my sake) forfeit that for which he's famous,
his uncorrupted equity, nor repine I at my destiny; my eyes have had delights
sufficient in Caropia's beauties, to serve my thought^ for after
contemplations; nor can I ever covet a new object, since they can ne'er hope to
encounter any of equal worth and sweetness. Yet hark Tarifa, to thy secrecy I
will impart my dearest, inmost counsels; if I should perish, as 'tis probable I
may, under the hands of these tormentors; thou may unto succession show my
innocence; Caropia yielded without least constraint, and I enjoyed her freely.


How my Lord?


No words on it, as you respect my honour! I'd not lose the glory I shall gain
by these my sufferings; come grim fures, and execute your office. I will stand
you, unmoved as hills at whirlewinds, and amidst the torments you inflict,
retain my courage.


Be speedy villains.


O stay your cruel hands, you dumb ministers of injured Justice, and let me
speak his innocence ere you further afflict his precious eye-sight.


What does this mean, Tarifa!


O my Lord, the too much bravery of the Princes spirit 'tis has undone his
fame, and pulled upon him this fatal punishment; 'twas but to save the Ladies
honour, that he has assumed her rape upon him, when with her consent the deed
of shame was acted.


Tis his fears makes him traduce her innocence: he who did not stick to commit
a riot on her person, can make no conscience to destroy her fame by his untrue
suggestions.


'Tis a baseness beyond thy other villainy (had she yielded,) thus to betray
for transitory torture, her honour, which thou were engaged to safeguard even
with thy life. A son of mine could never show this ignoble cowardice: Proceed
to execution, I'll not hear him speak, he is made up of treacheries and
falsehoods.


Will you then be to the Prince so tyrannous? Why, to me just now he did confess
his only motive to undergo this torment, was to save Caropia's honour
blameless.


I am more troubled* Sir, with his untimely frenzy, then with my punishment;
his too much love to me, has spoiled his temperate reason. I confess Caropia
yielded! Not the light is half so innocent as her spotless virtue. 'T was not
well done, Tarifa, to betray the secret of your friend thus: though She
yielded, the terror of ten thousand deaths shall never force me to confess it.


Again, my Lord, even now he does confess, she yielded, and protest^ that death
shall never make him ^ay shee'^ guilti^: the breath scarce passed his lips yet.


Haplesse man, to run in^o this lunacy! Fie Tarifa, so treacherous to your
Friend!


Again, again. Will no man give me credit?


Where is our royal fathe?: where our brother? As you respect your life and
Empires safety, dismiss these tyrannous instruments of death and cruelty
unexemplified. O Brother, that I should ever live to enjoy my eie-sight, and
see one half of your dear lights endangered. My Lord, you've done an act,
which my just fears tells me, will shake your Sceptre! O for heavens sake, look
to your future safety; the rough Soldier hearing their much loved General, My
good Brother was by the law betrayed to some sad danger, have in their piety
beset the palace; think on some means to appease them, ere their fury grow to
its full unbridled height; they threaten your life, great Sir: pray send my
brother to them, his sight can only pacify them.


Have you your Champions! We will prevent their insolence, you shall not boast,
you have got the Empire by our ruin. Muts, Strangle him immediately.


Avert such a prodigious mischief, heaven. Hark, hark


To that which whosoever murmurs at, is a faithless traitor


My Lord, the City is up in arms, in rescue of the Prince; the whole Court
throngs with Soldiers.


'T was high time to cut this viper off, that would have eat his passage
through our very ^owels to our Empire. Nay, we will stand their furies, and with
terror of Majesty strike dead these insurrections.


O dear Soldiers, your honest love's in vain; my Brother's dead, strangled by
great Almanzor's dire command, ere your arrival. I do hope they'll kill him in
their hot zeal.


Why do you stare so, traitors? 'twas I your Emp'ror that have done this act,
which who repines at, treads the self same steps of death that he has done.
Withdraw and leave us, wee'ld be alone. No motion* Are you statues? Stay you,
Tarifa here. For your part, Mura, you cannot now complain but you have justice;
so quit our presence.


Faces about, Gentlemen.


It has happened above our wishes, we shall have no need now to employ your
handkercher. Yet give it me. You're sure 'tis right, Simanthes.


Tarifa, I know the love thou bear Prince Abilqualit makes thy big heart
swell as 't had drunk the some of angry Dragons. Speak thy free intentions,
Deserved he not this fate?


No: You're a Tyrant, one that delights to feed on your* own bowels, and were
not worthy of a Son so virtuous. Now you have ^ane his, add to your injustice,
and take Tarifa's life, who in his death, should it come flying on the wings of
torments, would speak it out as an apparent truth* the Prince to me d^cla^'d
his innocence, and that Caropia yielded.


Rise Tarifa; we do command thee, rise: a sudden chillness, such as the hand of
winter casts on brooks, thrils our ag'd heart. I^ll not have thee engross
sorrow alone for Abilqualii's death: I loved the boy well, and though his
ambition and popularity did make him dangerous, I do repent my fury, and will
vie with thee in sorrow. How he makes death lovely! Shall we fix here, and weep
till we be statues?


Till we grow stiff as the cold Al^bl^sters must be erected over us* Your
rashness has robbed the Empire of the greatest hope it ere shall boast again.
Would I were ashes.


He breathes (me thinks:) the over-hastie soul was too discourteous to forsake
so fair a lodging, without taking solemn leave first of the owner. Ha, his
handkercher! You're liberal to thy Father even in death, leave him a legacy
to dry his tears, which are too slow; th^y should create a deluge. O my dear
Abilqualit!


You exceed now as much in grief as you did then in rage, One drop of this
pious paternal softness had ransomed him from ruin. Dear Sir, rise: my
grief's divided, and I know not whether I should lament you living, or him
dead. Good Sir, erect your looks. Not stir! His sorrow makes him insensible.
Ha, there's no motion left in his vital spirits: The excess of grief has
stifled up his powers, and ^rack'd (I fear) his ag'd hearts cordage. Help, the
Emperor, he Emperor's dead; Help, help.


What dismal outcrie's this? our royal father dead! The handkercher has wrought
I see.


Yes; his big heart vanquished with sorrow, that in's violent rage, he doomed
his much loved son to timeless death, could not endure longer on its weak
strings, but cracked with weight of sorrow. Their two spirits, by this, are met
in their delightful passage to the blessed shades; we in our tears are bound to
cal you our dread Sovereign.


Long live Abrahen Great Caliph of Arabia.


'Tis a title we cannot covet, Lords, it comes attended with so great cares and
troubles, that our youth start at the thought of them, even in our sorrows
which are so mighty on us; ou^ weak spirits are ready to relinquish the
possession they've of mortality, and take swift flight after our royal
friends. Simanthes, be it your charge to see all fitting preparation provided
^or the funerals.


Where's great Almanzor?


O Selinthus, this day is the hour of funerals grief; for his cruelty to my
brother, has translated him to immortality.


Hee'll have attendants to wait on him to our great prophets paradise, ere he
be ready for his grave. The Soldiers all mad with rage for the Princes
slaughter, have vowed by all oaths Soldiers can inve^t, (and that's no small
store) with death and destruction, to pursue sullen Mura.


Tarifa, use your authority to keep their violence in due obedience. We're so
fraught with grief, we have no room for any other passion in our distracted
bosom. Take these royal bodies and place them on that couch; here where they
fell, they shall be imbalm'd. Yet put them out of our sight, their veiw^ draw
fresh drops from our heart. Anon we will show our selves to cheer the afflicted
Subject.


Long live Abrahen, great Caliph of Arabia.


And who can say now, Abrahen is a villain? I am saluted King with acclamations
that dea^ the Heavens to hear, with as much joy as if I had achieved this
Sceptre by means fair and ver^uous. 'Twas this handkercher that did to death
Almanzor; so infected, its least insensible vapour has full power; applied to
the eye, or any other Organ, can drink its poison in to vanquish Nature, though
ne'er so strong and youthful. 'Twas Simanthes devised it for my brother, and my
cunning transferred it to Almanzor; 'tis no matter, my worst impiety is held
now religious. 'Twixt Kings and their inferiors there's this ods, These are
mere men, we men, ye^ earthly gods.


'Twas well the Muts proved fai^hful, otherwise I'd lost my breath with as much
speed and silence as those who do expire in dreams, their health seeming no
whit abated. But 'twas wisely considered of me, to prepare those sure
instruments of destruction: The suspicion I had by Abrahen of my fathers fears
of my unthought ambition, did instruct me by making them mine, to secure my
safety. Would the inhumane Surgeon had taken these blessed lights from me; that
I had lived for ever doomed to perpetual darkness, rather then Tarifa's fears
had so appeach'd her honour. Well, villain Brother, I have found, that by my
seeming death, which by my lives best arts I ne'er should have had knowledge of.
Dear Father, though thou to me were pitiless, my heart weeps tears of blood,
to see thy age thus like a lofty pine fall, eaten through by the gin from its
own Stock descending: He has agents in his ungracious wickedness: Simanthes he
has discovered: Were they multitudes as numerous as collected sands, and mighty
in force as mischief, they should from my Justice meet their due punishment.
Abrah^n by this is proclaimed Caliph, yet my undoubted right* when 't shall
appear I'm living, will reduce the people to my part; the armie's mine, whither
I must withdraw unseen: the night will best secure me. What a strange Chimera of
thought possesses my dull brain! Caropia, thou hast a share in them: Fate, to
thy mercy I do commit my self; who scapes the snare once, has a certain
caution to beware.


Your Lord is not returned yet!


No, good Madam: pray do not thus torment your self, the Prince (I warrant you)
will have no injury by saving of your honour; do you think his father will be so
extreme outrageous for such a trifle, as to force a woman with her good liking?


My ill boding soul beats with presages ominous. Would heaven I'd stood the
hazard of my incensed Lords fury, rather then he had run this imminent danger.
Could you ne'er learn, which of the slaves it was betrayed our close loves to
loathed Mura's notice?


No indeed could I not; but here's my Lord, pray Madam do not grieve so!


My Caropia, dress up thy looks in their accustomed beauties, cal back the
constant spring into thy cheeks, that droop like lovely Violets, over charged
with too much mornings dew; shoot from thy eie^ a thousand flames of joy. The
lustful Prince, that like a foul thief, robbed thee of thy honour by his
ungracious violence* has met his royal fathers Justice.


Now my fears carry too sure an augury! you would fain sooth me, my Lord, out
of my flood of sorrows* what reparation can that make my honour, though he have
tasted punishment?


His life is fallen the off-spring of thy chastity, which his hot lust polluted:
nay, Caropia, to save himself, when he but felt the torment applied to his
lascivious eyes; although at first he did with impudence acknowledge thy rape,
he did invade thy spotless virtue, protested, only 'twas to save thy honour, he
took on him thy rape, when with consent and not constrained, thou yeildedst to
the looseness of his wild vicious flames.


Could he be so unjust, my Lord?


He was, and he has paid for it; the malicious Soldier, while he was a losing
his eyes, made violent head to bring him reskue, which pulled his ruin on him.
But no more of such a prodigy; may his black memory perish even with his
ashes. My Caropia, the flourishing trees widowed by winters violence of their
fair ornaments, when 'tis expired once, put forth again with new and virgin
freshness, their bushy beauties; it should be thy emblem. Display again those
chaste immaculate glories* which the harsh winter of his lust had withered; and
I'll again be wedded to thy virtues, with as much joy, as when thou first
enriched me with their pure maiden beauties. Thou art dull, and dost not
gratulate with happy welcome* the triumphs of thy vengeance.


Are you sure, my Lord, the Prince is dead?


Pish, I beheld him breathless. Take comfort best Caropia, thy disgrace did
with his loathed breath vanish.


I could wish though, that he had fallen by your particular vengeance, rather
then by the laws rigour; you're a Soldier of glory, great in war for brave
performance: me thinks 't had been far nobler, had you called him to personal
satisfaction: had I been your husband, you my wife, and ravished by him; my
resolution would have armed my courage to've stroke him thus: The dead Prince
sends you that.


O, I am slain!


Would it were possible to kill even thy eternity. Sweet Prince, how shall I
satisfy thy unhappy ruins! Ha,^ not yet breathless! To increase thy ang^ish
even to despair, know, Abilqualit was more dear to me, then thy foul self was
odious, and did enjoy me freely.


That I had but breath enough to blast thee.


'Twas his brother (curse on his art) seduced me to accuse him of my rape. Do
you groan, prodigy! take this as my last bounty.


O Madam, Madam, what shall we do? the house is round beset with Soldiers;
Madam, they do swear they will tear my Lord, for the sweet Princes death, in
pieces.


This hand has saved their fury that just labour: yet I'll make use of their
malice, help to convey him into 's Chamber.


Where is this villain, this traitor Mura?


Heaven knows what violence their fury may assault me with; be it death, 't
shall be as welcome, as sound healthful sleeps to men oppressed with sickness.
What's the matter? what means this outrage?


Marry, Lady gay, We're come to cut your little throat; pox on you, and all
your sex; you've caused the noble Princes death, wild-fire take you fort, weel
talk with you at better leisure: you must needs be ravished! and could not like
an honest woman, take the courtesy in friendly sort!


We trifle: her husband may escape us. Say, where is he? or you shall die, ere
you can pray


Here, here I have found the vallain! what, do you sleep so soundly? ne'er wake
more, this for the Prince, you rogue: let's tear him piecemeal. Do you take
your death in silence, dog!


You appear endowed with some humanity, you have ^ane his life; let not your
hate last after death; let me embalm his body with my tear^, or kill me with
him.


Now you 've said the word, we care not if we do.


Slaves, unhand the Lady, who dares offer her least violence, from this hand
meets his punishment. Gaselles, Osman, I thought you had been better tempered,
then thus to raise up mutinies. In the name of Abrahen our now Caliph, I
command you, desist from these rebellious practises, and quietly retire into
the Camp, and there expect his pleasure.


Abrahen Caliph! There is some hopes then, we shall gain our pardons: Long
live great Abrahen. Soldiers, slink away, our vow is consummate.


O my dear Lord!


Be gone.


Yes, as quietly as if we were in flight before the foe; the general pardon at
the coronation, will bring us off* In me sure.


Alas, good Madam! I'm sorry that these miseries have fallen with so much rigour
on you; pray take comfort* your husband prosecuted with too much violence
Prince Abilqualit's ruin.


It appeared so! what worlds of woes have hapless I given life to, and yet
survive them!


Do not with such fury torment your innocent self. I'm su^e the Emperor
Abrahen, will number 't amongst his greatest sorrows, that he has lost your
husband. I must give him notice of these proceedings. Best peace keep you, and
settle your distractions.


not until I'm settled in my peaceful urn. This is yet some comfort to me,
amidst the floods of woes, that do overwhelm me for the Princes death, that I
revenged it safely; though I prize my life at no more value then a foolish
ignorant Indian does a Diamond, which for a bead of Jet or glass, he changes:
Nor would I keep it, were it not with fuller, more noble bravery, to take
revenge ^or my Lord Abilqualit's timeless slaughter. I must use craft and
mystery. Dissembling is held the natural quality of our Sex, nor will it be
hard to practice. This same Abrahen, that by his brothers ruin weilds the
Sceptre, whether out of his innocence or malice, 'twas that persuaded me to
accuse him of my rape. The die is cast, I am resolved to thee my Abilqualit ^
will come. A death for love, 's no death but Martyrdom.


NO more, good faithful Soldiers; thank the powers divine, has brought me back
to you in safety; the traitorous practises against our life, and our dear
fathers, poisoned by our b^other; we have discovered, and shall take just
vengan^e on the unnatural paricide: Retire into your tents, and peacefully
expect the event of things, you Osman and Gasselles shall into the City with
me.


We will march through the world with thee, dear Sovereign, great Abilqualit.


Selinthus, give you our dear Tarif^ speedy notice we are again among the
living: pray ^im to let our loyal Subjects in the City, have sure intelligence
of our escape; and dearest friends and fellows, let not your too loud
expressions of your joy, for our unlooked for welfare, subject to discovery
our unexpected safety.


Never fear: they are trusty M^rmidons, and will stick close to you their dear
Achilles; but my Lord, the wisest may imagine it were safer for you to rest
here among your armed legions, then to entrust your person in the City, whereas
it seems by the passed story, you'll not know friends from enemies.


Selinthus, Thy honest care declares the zealous duty thou ow'st thy Sovereign:
but what danger can assault us there, where there is none suspects we are
alive? we will go surveigh the state of things, in the morning we will seize the
Palace, and then proclaim our Right. Come, valiant Captains, you shall be our
companions.


And w^'l guard you safe, as you were encompassed with an Army.


You guard your own fools heads: Is 't fit his safety, on which our lives and
fortunes have dependence, should be exposed unto your single valour? Pray once
let your friends rule you, that you may rule them hereafter. Your good brother
Abrahen has a strong faction, it should seem in the Court: and those these
Blood-hounds follow'd the sent ho^ly till they had worried Mura He has other
allies of no mean consequence; your E^nuch Mesithes his chief Favourite, and
Simanthes.


It was that Villain that betrayed my Love to him and ^laught'red Mura.


Very likely. An arranter, falser Parasite, never was cut like a Colt. Pray
Sir, be wife this once, at my entreaties; and for ever after use your
discretion as you please: these night works I do not like; yet e're the morning
I will bring Tarifa to you.


You shall over rule us. Poor Caropi^, these thoughts are thy vot'ries; love
thy active fire, ^ames out when present, absent in desire.


What State and Dignitie's like that of Scepters? With what an awful Majesty
resembles it the Powers above? the inhabitants of that Superior world are not
more subject to them, then these to us; they can but tremble when they do speak
in thunder; at our frowns these shake like Lambs at light 'ning. Can it be
impie^y by any means to purchase this earthly Deity* Sovereignty* I did sleep
this night with as secure and calm a peace, as in my former innocence.
Conscience, thou'^t but a terror, first devised by the fears of Cowardice, a
sad and fond remembrance, which men should shun, as Elephants clear springs,
lest they behold their own deformities, Mesithes!


My Royal Lord!


Call me thy Friend, Mesithes, thou equally dost share our heart, best Eunuch;
there is not in the stock of earthly blessings another I could wish to make my
state completely fortunate, but one; and to atcheive possession of that bliss,
thy diligence must be the fortunate Instrument.


Be it dangerous as the affrights Sea men do fain in Tempests, I'll undertake
it for my gracious Sovereign, and perish, but effect it,


No, there is not the least show of peril in it; 'tis the want of fair Caropia's
long coveted beauties that doth afflict thy Abrahen. Love, Mesithes, is a most
stubborn Malady in a Lady, not cured with that ^elicity, that are other
passions, and creeps upon us by those ambushes, that we perceive our selves
sooner in love, then we can think upon the way of loving. The old flames break
more brightly from th'ashes where they have long lain hid, like the young
Phoenix that from her spi^le pile revives more glorious. Nor can I now
extinguished; it has passed the limits of my reason, and intend my will, where
like a fixed Star 't settles, never to be removed thence.


Cease your fears; I that could win her for your brother, who could not boast
half your masculine Perfections, for you will vanquish her.


My Lord, the widow of slaughtered Mura, fair Caropia does humbly entreat
access to your dread presence; Shall we permit her entrance?


With all freedom and best regard. Mesithes, this arrives beyond our wish. I'll
try my eloquence in my own cause; and if I fail, thou then shalt be my
Advocate.


Your humblest vassal.


With-draw and leave us, and give strict order none approach our presence till
we do call. It is not fit her sorrows Caropia, welcome; and would we could as
easily give thee comfort as we allow thee more then mod'rate pity. In tears
those eyes cast forth a greater lustre, then sparkling rocks of Diamonds
enclosed in swelling seas of Pearl.


Your Majesty is pleased to wanton with my miseries, which truly you, if you
have nature in you, ought to bear equal part in your deer brothers untimely
loss, occasioned by my falsehood, and your improvident counsel: 'Tis that calls
these hearty sorrows up, I am his Murdresse.


'Twas his own destiny, not our bad intentions took him away from earth; he
was too heavenly, fit only for the society of Angels, amongst whom he sings
glad hymns to thy perfections, celebrating with such eloquence thy beauties,
that those immortal essences forget to love each other by intelligence, and
dote on the Idea of thy Sweetness.


These gentle blandishments* and his innocent carriage had I as much of malice
as a Tigress robbed of her young, would melt me into meekness. But I'll not be
a woman.


Sing out, Angel, and charm the world (were it at mortal difference) to peace
with thine enchantments. What soft murmurs are those that steal through those
pure rosie organs, like aromatic west-winds, when they fly through fruitful
mists of fragrant mornings dew, to get the Spring with child of flowers and
spices? Disperse these clouds, that like the vail of night, with unbecoming
darkness shade thy beauties, and strike a new day from those orient eyes, to
gild the world with brightness.


Sir, these flatteries neitheir befit the ears of my true sorrows, nor yet the
utt'rance of that real sadness should dwell in you. Are these the funeral
rites you pay the memory of your royal Father, and much lamented Brother?


They were mortal, and to lament them, were to show I envi'd the immortal
joys of that true happiness their glorious souls (disfranchis'd from their
flesh) possess to perpetuity and fullness. Besides, (Caropia) I have other
griefs more near my heart, that circle 't with a sickness will shortly number
me among their fellowship* if speedier remedy be not applied to my most
desperate malady.


I shall (if my hand fail not my determined courage) send you to their society
far sooner then you expect or covet. Why, great Sir, what grief, unless your
sorrow for their loss, is't can afflict you, that command all blessings men
witty in ambition of excess can wish, to please their fancies?


The want only of that which I've so long desired; thy love thy love, Caropia,
without which my Empire, and all the pleasures flowing from its greatness, will
be but burdens, soul-tormenting troubles. There's not a beam shot from those
grief drowned Comets but (like the Sun's, when they break forth of showers)
dart flames more hot and piercing. Had I never doted before on thy divine
perfections, viewing thy beauty thus adorned by sadness, my heart, though
marble, actuated to softness, would burn like sacred incense, it self being
the Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice.


This is as unexpected, as unwelcome, Sir. Howere you're pleased to mock me and
my griefs with these impertinent, unmeant discourses, I cannot have so prodigal
a faith, to give them the least credit; and it is unkindly done; thus to deride
my sorrows. the virgin Tur^les hate to join their pureness with widowed mates;
my Lord, you are a Prince, and such as much detest to utter falsehoods, as
Saints do perjuries: why should you strive then to lay a bait to captivate my
affections, when your greatness conjoined with your youths masculine beauties,
are to a woman's f^ailtie, strong temptations? You know the story too of my
misfortunes, that your dead brother, did with vicious looseness, corrupt the
chaste streams of my spotless virtues, and left me soiled like a long plucked
rose, whose leaves dissever'd, have forgon their sweetness


Thou hast not (my Caropia;) thou to me art for thy sent still fragrant, and as
precious as the prime virgins of the Spring, the violets, when they do first
display their early beauties, till all the winds in love, do grow contentio^s,
which from their lips should ravish the first kisses. Caropia, think thou I
should fear the Nuptials of this great Empire, because it was my brothers? As I
succeeded him in all his glories, 'tis fit I do succeed him in h^s love. 'Tis
true, I know thy fame fell by his practise, which had he lived, he would have
restored by marriage, by it repaired thy injured honours ruins. I'm bound to
do it in religious conscience; It is a debt his incensed ghost would quarrel me
living for, should I not pay't with fullness.


Of what frail temper is a woman's weakness! words writ in waters, have more
lasting Essence, then our determinations.


Come, I know, thou must be gentle, I perceive a combat in thy soft heart, by
the intervening blushes that strive to adorn thy cheek with purple beauties,
and drive the lovely livery of thy sorrows, the Ivory paleness, out of them.
Think, Caropia, with what a settled unrevolting truth I have affected thee; with
what heat, what pureness; and when upon mature considerations, I found I was
unworthy to enjoy a tre^sure of such excellent grace and goodness, I did
desist, smothering my love in anguish; anguish! to which the soul of humane
torments, compared, were pains not easy, but delicious; yet still the secret
flames of my affections, like hidden virtues in some bashful man, grew great
and ferventer by those suppression^. Thou were created only for an Empress;
despise not then thy destiny, now greatness, love, Empire, and what ere may
be held glorio^s, courts thy acceptance like obedient Vassals.


I have considered, and my serious thought^ tel me, tis folly to refuse these
proffers: to put off my mortality, the pleasures of life, which like full
streams, do flow from greatness, to wander in the unpeopled air, to keep
society with ghastly apparitions, where's neither voice of friends, n^r
visiting suitors breaths to delight our ears, and a^l this for the fame of a
fell murdress. I have blood enough already on my soul, more then my tears can
e're wash off. My royal Lord, if you can be so merciful and gracious, to take a
woman laden with afflictions, big with true sorrow, and religious penitence for
her amiss, her life and after actions, shall study to deserve your love. But
surely this is not serious.


Not the vows which votries make to the powers above, can be more fraught with
binding sanctity. This holy kiss confirms our mutual vows: never till now was I
true Caliph of Arabia.


Ha, what tumult's that! Be you all furies, and thou the greatest of devils,
Abrahen will stand you all, unmoved as mountains. This good sword if you be air,
shall disinchant you from your borrowed figures.


No, ill-natur'd monster, we're all corporeal, and survive to take revenge on
thy inhumane acts, at name of which, the bashful elements do shake as if they
teem'd with prodigies. Dost not tremble a^ thy inhumane villains? Dear
Caropia, quit the infectious viper, lest his touch poison thee past recovery.


No, she shall not; nor you, until this body be one wound. Lay a rude hand upon
me! Abilqualit, how ere thou scapst my practises with life, I am not now to
question; we were both sons to one father, whom, for love of Empire, when I
believed thee strangled by those Muts, I sent to his eternal rest; nor do I
repent the fact yet, I have been titled Caliph a day, which is to my ambitious
thoughts, honour enough to eternize my big name to all posterity. I know thou
art of valiant noble soul; let not thy brother fall by ignoble hands, oppressed
by number; draw thy bright weapon; as thou art in Empire, thou art my rival in
this Ladies love, whom I esteem above all joys of life: for her and for this
Monarchy, let's try our strengths and fates^: the impartial fates to him, who
has the better cause, in justice must needs design the victory.


In this offer, though it proceed from desperateness, not valor; thou showst a
masculine courage, and we will not render our cause so abject as to doubt, but
our just arm has strength to punish thy most unheard of treacheries


But you shall not be so unjust to us and to your right, to try your causes
most undoubted Justice, against the despairing ruffian; Soldiers, pull the Lady
from him, and disarm him.


Stay! though he doth merit multitudes of death, we would not murder his
eternity by sudden execution; yield your self, and we will allow you liberty of
life, till by repentance you have purged your sin; and so if possible, redeem
your soul from future punishment.


Pish, tel fools of souls, and those effeminate cowards that do dream of those
fantastic other worlds: there is not such a thing in nature; all thesoul of
man is resolution, which expires never from valiant men, till their last
breath, and then with it like to a flame extinguisht'd for want of matter, 't
dos not die, but rather ceases to live. Enjoy in peace your Empire, and as a
legacy of Abrahens love, take this fair Lady to your Bride.


Inhumane Butcher! has slain the Lady. Look up, best Caropia, run for our
surgeons: I'll give half my Empire to save her precious life.


She has enough, or mine aim failed me, to procure her passage to the eternal
dwellings: nor is this cruelty in me; I alone was worthy to have enjoyed her
beauties. Make good haste Caropia, or my soul, if I have any, will hover for
thee in the clouds. This was the fatal engine which betrayed our father to his
untimely death, made by Simanthes for your use, Abilqualit: and who has this
about him and would be a slave to your base mercy, deserved death more than by
daily tortures; and thus I kissed my last breath. Blast you all.


Damned desperate villain.


O my dear Caropia, my Empire now will be unpleasing to me since I must lose
thy company. This surgeon, where's this surgeon?


Drunk perhaps.


'Tis but needless, no humane help can save me: yet me thinks I feel a kind of
pleasing ease in your embraces. I should utter something, and I have strength
enough, I hope, lest yet to effect my purpose. In revenge ^or your supposed
death, my loved Lord, I slew my husband,


I'm sorry thou hast that sin to charge thy soul with, 'twas rumoured by the
soldiers.


Cozens mine, your necks are safe again now.


And came hither with an intent to have for your sake slain your brother
Abrahen, had not his courtesy and winning carriage altered my resolution, with
this poniard I'd struck him here about the heart.


O ^ am slain, Caropia, and by thy hand. Heavens, you are just, this is revenge
for thy dear honour which I murdered, though thou were it consenting to it.


True, I was so, and not repent it yet, my sole ambition was to have liv^d an
Empress, which since fate would not allow, I was resolved no woman after my
self should ere ^njoy that glory, you dear Abilqualit: which since my weak
strength has served me to perform, I dye willingly as an infant. O now I
faint, life's death to those that keep it by constraint.


My dear Lord, is there no hopes of life? must we be wretched?


Happier, my Tarifa, by my death: but yesterday I played the part in jest which
I now act in earnest My Tarifa, the Empire's thine, I'm sure thou'lt rul't
with justice, and make the subject happy. Thou hast a Son of hopeful growing
virtues to succeed thee, commend me to him, and from me entreat him to shun the
temptings of lascivious glances.


Alas good Prince! heel die indeed. I fear, he is so full of serious thoughts
and Counsels.


For this slaughtered body, let it have decent burial with slain Muras, but let
not Abrahens corps have so much honour to come in the royal monument: lay mine by
my dear fathers: for that treacherous Eunuch, and Lord Simanthes, use them as
thy justice tells thee they have merited; for Lord Selinthus, advance him (my
Tarif^) ^'s of faithful and well deserving virtues.


So I am, I thought 'twould come to me anon: poor ^ince, I even could die with
him.


And for those soldiers, and those our most faithful Muts, that my life once
saved, let them be well rewarded; death and I are almost now at unity.
Farewell.


Sure I shall not survive these sorrows long. Muts, take those Traitors to
prison; we will shortly pass their sentence, which shall be death inevitable.
Take up that fatal instrument of poisonous mischief, and see it burned,
Gaselles. Gentlemen, Fate has made us your King against our wishes.


Long live Tarifa, Caliph of Arabia.


We have no time now for your acclamations* these are black sorrows Festival.
Bear off in state that royal Body; for the other, since twas his will, let
them have burial, but in obscurity. By this it may, as by an ev'dent rule be
understood, they're only truly great, wh' are truly good.


I'M much displeased the Poet has made me
The Epilogue to his sad Tragedy.
Would I had died honestly amongst the rest,
Rather then live to the last, now to be pressed
To death by your hard Censures. Pray you say,
What is it you dislike so in this Play,
That none applauds? Believe it, I should faint,
Did not some smile, and keep me by constraint
From the sad qualm. What power is in your breath,
That you can save alive, and doom to death,
Even whom you please? thus are your judgme^ts free,
Most of the rest are slain, you may save me.
But if death be the word, I pray bestow it
Where it best fits. Hang up the Poet.

