WHat's here? never Acted before, Hey-day!
This certainly is some insipid Play.
Wits lead by the Nose, I Gad I'd best retire,
They will find me out to be some Country Squire;
And then for certain though I'm not a Wit,
They will thrust me amongst my Brethren in the Pit;
Where with Debauches, Noise, and little Miss,
I shall be Martyred worse then Poet is,
And be obliged for Company to hiss.
To shun the Danger of the admiring Crew
B'w'y Miss, Boy, House, and Brethren all Adieu.
Gad should I stay, they'd cheat me with pretence
Of a new Play called Country Innocence,
Or what was worst of all, the Devil take her,
A Debauched Chambermaid forsooth turned Quaker.
These little Tricks, so often put on Wits,
Made me forswear to come in either Pits.
Midnights Intrigues, and Conjerer de France,
Insipid fribling and unruly dance
So turned my stomach --
I talk, as if concerned at what they do,
I Gad Dear Brethren 'tis for none but you.
It grieves my heart to see you yawn in the Pit,
As if you came for sleep, and not for Wit.
Another Crew, with good diverting Play,
Passes the tedious hours of Show away,
Pumping for wit to manage him next day.
Gad what with that, ill nature, and worse, W --
The Actors are quite Acted out of Doors.
Disease, Impotence, and endless Rage,
Have been the ruin of this noble Stage.
I shunned the danger, Gad with much ado,
To be a Country Wit like some of you.
The Civil Wars betwixt the Blew, and Red,
Was but a spice of Pride stolen from the head:
In Imitation of such growing men,
They've got the Knack to be undone again:
Ruin's Triumphant, and in Masquerade
Appears in every Corner to invade
The easy natured fools, and spoil the trade.
And will you hear how 'tis? The house is grown
So out of date to the ruling Fops of the Town,
That in a Month, I Gad, you scarcely come
To applaud, but to debauch in the tyring Room;
Where having whispered your Harmonious Miss,
You creep into the Pit, and frame a Hiss.
You think new Plays, such as can please the Age,
Are not the work of this, but the other Stage:
Let us provide even the best we can,
Here they will scarce please a Country Gentleman;
Much less those Huffing Wits, who sans remorse,
Make down right railing here their common course,
And Jockie-like, dam the best running Horse.
In former Ages you came here for Wit,
Glean'd what best pleased, and then forsook the Pit:
You think us Barren, and to others steer,
And gape for Wit, but find no more then here.
S'death, not to Plays but Puppet shows you run,
Sure you're in Love with dear Mrs. such a one,
And court her shadow ere the Play's begun.
When you're come here, as Gad 'tis very rare,
You serve us like the Monsters of the Fair;
Hiss without reason, dam without control,
As if you meant to Sacrifice the Soul.
This strange unkindness has our Stage undone,
And all that you thought Actors faith are gone:
The men to Misses, Places, or Estates,
The Women to their kind and welcome Fates;
Thus both at once retiring from the Stage,
Have left us here the Objects of your Rage.
To court your kindness were alas but vain,
You must be Damming though you Dam in pain.
Amongst the hard hearted, I good natures spy,
And kindness dancing in each Ladies eye;
They to commiserate, not hate, were born,
I know you are too kind and fair to scorn;
Your blushing Cheeks good Nature doth betray,
It lies on you to save, or Dam the Play;
Our unlearned Author to your doom submits,
Desirous to be tried by Female Wits:
If you applaud him all his pains are crowned,
And he'll defy the huffing Critics round.

SIR Symon, without this Letter your self had been most welcome, and I am bound
in honour to your Father (besides the great Engagement of your presence) to do
whatever he commands me.


Sir, I cannot but thank you, our English way admits of but few Complements,
and those are grown so tedious to me since I left the Clime, I purpose to
forget 'em.


Plain down right dealing's the Sicilian fashion, and that I count the best
too. But dear Sir Symon make me happy in the knowledge why you left your Nation.


A toy -- a frolic -- a mere trick I Gad, a vain desire to see this other
World, and know what difference is between the Natures of such different
Kingdoms.


Your Curiosity ought Sir to be commended and encouraged; but sure some other
Reason urged you to Travel, Love, Love, I'll warrant you?


I Gad Love is the only thing I hate, 'tis more offensive to my Constitution,
then Arsnick to an Ague. I Gad we are cloyed with it in England; and that which
makes me hate it more* is, my last Amoret in the very height of her Embraces
not only pi^ke my Pocket, but dealt unkindly by me, and all that. Love, oh out
upon it, 'tis the greatest Monster Sir in Nature.


I'm sorry you are so averse to what we count a pleasure; and more since the
great hopes I had in such a noble Son, are blasted in their early spring.


I find by my hand, and all that; this old man intends to push a fortune on me.
--

It is my fate Sir, at first I loved like Plato, then like all the World, that
is every pretty yielding Beauty; at last by too many enjoyments --

Pox on 'em I may say --

I grew so dull, so wearied and so senseless, I Gad I resolved never to love
again.


'Tis very strange.


Nor never will, unless Sir to oblige my best of friends, your noble self.


I rest engaged to you. I must confess Sir I have a Daughter, and one whom
Nature has rather been prodigal then backward in bestowing Graces. My mind ever
designed her (Sir) for you, and to complete what I so long had wished, even
from both your Infancies, I let your Father know my whole design, whose heart
with mine did willingly agree; there wanting nothing but your riper years,
which Heaven bestowing on you both, your Father according to his promise, and
my great desire, has sent in you the Center of my hopes.


I find my self betrayed, betrayed to love I Gad, and whealed already into the
bonds of Matrimony, and that's a dangerous task for a Gallant of the times to
undertake, especially for one who hath bin caught by that religious cheat of
Wedlock at least fifteen times; but the best is, the Sicillian and our Laws
differ as much as their Constitutions, and for those facts committed there a
Gentleman in honour cannot suffer here. --


Had not the great deserts Sir of your Father, besides equality of birth, and
friendship, translated to my Soul your noble virtues, this first encounter
would have given me sufficient satisfaction of your merits.


My Lord, your praises rise to Ostentation; and to requite you for this noble
kindness, if recommencing love will ought oblige you, you may command your
Servant.


You make me happy; this grant of yours, pulls back some years from age; my
Daughter will be overjoyed at such a Husband, and meet you with the best
respects of Love.


Let her be swift in granting, for I Gad if she holds out long, my affections
will melt away, and turn into down right hatred, mere slight, neglect, scorn,
and so forth.


She's half prepared already, there wants nothing but the grant, the word, I
Love, and then the deed is done.


I but that word I have known extended to such a length, that it was impossible
to find an end of the resolve. I since my fit of Love's returned, hate all but
yielding Females, and to those I fly with as much vigour, as a Novice in the Art
of Courtship to his new gained Mistress.

Let her be pliant, and my fit will last;
If not --
As it came swiftly on, it flies as fast.

Come Son, for so I'll call you now; after your tedious journey, rest is
needful, then you shall see the only joy I have,

And from her eyes receive so sweet a fate,
You'll bless that power, which first did Love create.

My Kings Commission gives me not only orders to dethrone brave Zannazarro, but
to demolish all, to burn his factious Town, and in its Ruins bury the thoughts
of Usurpation.


Heaven crown the action with success.


My gratitude divides it self amongst you all; the only way of recompense,
until some happy beam of opportunity shall light my wishes to a requital of
your early loves. -- Summon the Rebel.


What means this hasty Summons? Is your anger so swift in motion, that it not
admits due rites unto the dead? and though our griefs sit heavy on our Souls,
'tis not of Kin to fear, but we dare draw our Swords ere we have wiped our
eyes, and in a peal of Cannon, thunder his Funeral.


'Tis pity a resolve thus fortified, should unravel all its glory, in an
unlawful cause.


Oroandes, you may spare your labour, though we have lost the strongest
Citadel of all our hopes, in our dear Fathers death, yet we will sell our
Lives, at honours dearest rate, and not fall an humble Sacrifice to death.


I am sorry Sir, that my advice, proceeding from the love I bear your worth,
has missed its wished for ends: Farewell, all happiness but that which waits on
victory attend you.


The like to thee brave Soul, since part we must;
When next we meet, 'twill be in blood and dust.

Where's Zannazarro?


Received into the Town, in spite of all our Force.


S'death, their Army beaten, and cannot he be Conquered? scale the Walls, kill
and burn all, till death be tired with Conquering.


Fly dearest Lady, fly, the day is lost, your noble Brother taken, Wars furious
Goddess, fierce Enyo stands over your battered Gates, a dropping pine about her
Tresses lends with its dismal light an entrance to the Messengers of Death, the
Battlements sweat all in flames, whilst loud confusion fills the enlightened
air.


Weep not my dear companions, you have shared alike with me in every change of
fortune, if fate ordains this the Catastrophe of all those Tragic Scenes; to
us our Virgin innocence shall be protection, safer then the united Swords of
Earths most powerful Monarchs.


Oh they are entering, entering, lets fly dear Madam.


Whether? When slaughter runs through all, where can we find protection?


Ha! -- what place is this? -- with what an awful Majesty it looks! -- sure it
inshrines Deity -- what's she? -- Troy's tutelary Angel looked, when all her
Crown of Turrets dropped their flaming heads.


What ere thou art, that in this dreadful shape come to profane this
hallowed place with blood; if in your breast, there dwell a human thought,
telling you that a Woman was your Mother, for her sake pity a distressed
Virgin.


A chilling frost unnerves my joints, sure 'tis Divinity or Magic that hath
thus deposed my Reason, to let rebel passion triumph in the injured Throne. --
Rise Lady, there's a Religious ice about my heart, that chains up all my fury:
-- I shall rather slight the commands of a much injured Prince, then violate
ought which the dictates of my Soul proclaims for sacred.


Oh lead me then to some polluted place that's grown drunk with blood, and
there let mine increase the purple deluge; I shall not always be protected by
this place's sanctity, or if I were, find few of so much virtue, to be with a
Religious reverence awed.


Do not dear Soul too much afflict your self, my Power secures you from all
future violence, each tear you shed drops from my heart in blood, I'm conquered
in this victory, and become a Captive to my prisoner: fear nothing Madam, for
your Guardian Angel roab'd in virginity is not whiter then those thoughts which
cloth my Soul, when they reflect on so much suffering virtue: Oh give my
passions leave to move within the Orb of your Celestial Beauty, while no line
-- tends to the Center of a thought unchaste.


Alas my Lord, this is no time to play with Love, when War and Death sit by and
hold the stakes.


If all my service to my Prince hath merited ought worth requital, he must show
it in mercy to you, or by a blacker doom shake my obedience off; but only grant
me thus much satisfaction, that when time redeems you from these cruel frowns
of fate, you would with pity then on my afflictions look.


I were ungrateful else, noble Sir; I so much prize your virtues, that if ere
my frowning stars smile on my fate again, their powerful influence shall
reflect on you, in so much thankful gratitude, you shall acknowledge it the
eldest Child of Love.


My joys grow equal with my wishes;

Banish all fear since fate so kind doth prove,
Thus to reward Wars mighty toils with Love.

Son, you're most nobly welcome, my Daughter I thank my Stars accepts the
proffer, and no doubt but both parties will be agreed.


I hope so too Sir, for as I said before I hate a tedious Courtship.


Daughter this is the Gentleman I spoke of, is he not in every thing complete
to my description?


Yes Sir, -- If gaudy Clothes, Powder and Paint can make a Lover, this Monster
wants no Graces.


Madam, having the honour to be introduced into your noble company, I hope I
shall not appear rude in thus presuming to kiss your hand, and all that. [I
Gad, she is very handsome, and hath conquered my heart at this first entervieu.
--


'Tis strange Sir you can admit at once of love and hate.


In their degrees Lady, but sometimes they are inseparable, for I can at once
hate and love, love and hate, and all that, but the present cause which may be
easily avoided is a tedious Courtship.


I'm glad I know your mind Sir, and shall strive to please in expedition.


I vow to Gad and all that, you are the sweetest lovingest Lady, and so forth,
in all Europe.


I told you Son she would be all obedience, and to preserve your Loves entire
for ever, prepare against to morrow for the Wedding.


To morrow Sir?


Yes Daughter, so I've said, a days loss begets an age of sorrow, to morrow is
the ultimate.


The warning Sir's too short, I cannot in one night consent, to the great loss
that fatal day will bring; defer it Sir a week.


By Heaven, I shall forget to love by that time, alas Madam my love comes on by
fits, and if you refuse me while it reigns upon me, I Gad and all that you may
go seek your Husband.


Dispute no more, to morrow is the day, till then I give you leave to think
upon it.

He must be taken in the height of love,
Or else the effects in pallid fear will move:
Delayed affection many ills produce,
And love may lose its power for want of use.

Ha! that's more then I expected, this is sure a Rival, and one of the newest
stamp, pox on this love I say, a man is never free from one danger or other;
now am I in a great Quandary, whether I had best go forward or backward, if I
go forward there's a Rival, if backward there goes a Coward, and to stand still
is worst of all.


Sir what do you mean? Did you come out with an intent to see your Mistress,
and stand disputing what you'd best to do.


Do, why what you would have me do? Did you not see a Rival with my Lady, and
let me tell you there's danger in those Creatures, pox on 'em they are as
common as Cuccolds, but not half so loving.


That's as they are used, if they discover the least spark of fear, they are
valiant then as Lyons, but if you bear up Briskly, swear Neatly, and huff
Completely, they sneak away, just like insipid Asses.


Nay if swearing and huffing would overcome, I think none dare pretend to have
any courage but my self.


As for example, suppose you were my Rival, thus I come to you, Umh, Umh, Umh,
Dam me Sir, you are an Insipid, Excommunicated, Rascullian Son of a Whore, and
my Rival.


Pox on your Rival ship, if this be the fruits on it, you may keep your Lady and
be damned; was that Alamode to make fire fly out of both the eyes of a
Gentleman?


I used you kindly in it, you should in answer to the affront, have drawn your
Sword, and --


Run away I'll warrant you.


No Sir, fought him Gently, and with a decent thrust pushed his Soul into
another World.


I marry Sir, that's a good way to be hanged, and all that


Phu, I am ashamed of you, and your conversation, a Gentleman and be hanged,
'twas never heard of, I knew a Squire after he Cowardly had killed a Score, had
leave to maked up Forty, and you being a Knight, I hope you may have more
power.


Say you so, nay if I may kill Cum privilegio, woe be to the next I meet, my
anger's up, and murder will ensue; but to our business, suppose you were my
Rival, thus I come up to you, Umh, Umh, Umh, Dam me Sir, you are an Insipid,
Excommunicated, Rascallian Son of a Whore, and my Rival.


So this was well done, and like a lover.


Nay let me alone for huffing.


What mean you Sir?


Nothing, but to kill that Monster, I have sworn, and a Gentleman should not
break his word.


But that's a woman Sir, a very old woman.


If she were a very old Devil I would kill her, my angers up, and murder will
ensue.


Oh Lord Sir hold, put up your Sword Sir, I have not seen a naked thing of that
length this forty years, help, help, murder, murder.


Pox of her old bones, could she not stand to be killed decently.


She thought 'twas better living Sir; but lets begone, her mumbling chaps will
raise the streets upon us.


Withal my heart.

Since want of Huff and Dinging, makes a Cully,
I'll Rant, Roar, Swear, and Curse to be a Bully.

FOllow your Leader Rascals, this is the House, undermine it first with a noise
of vocal Music, and then blow it up with a whirlwind of Fiddling.


THus like a Spark and a Bully of the Town,
I Ramble in the Streets, and Roam up and down.
No Lover so decently ere made approach,
But first he debauched his dear self in a Coach;
The act being done, to his Miss with a noise
Of scraping dull Rascals, and rabble of boys,
In Nonsense he chatters the height of his joys.
But your Knight Alamode, your man of pretence,
Who comes armed all over wtth nothing but sense;
With Gaudy rich Cloths, Perfume, Patch, and Paint;
Can't such a Lover be less then a Saint?
For they dressed all Airy, and Purity prove,
No blessing so great, so great as your Love.
Your Love, that chief bliss of our Mortal Estate,
Though oftentimes Clouded with envy and hate,
We Slaves must admire, and gladly pursue,
Yhough we lose both our senses, our pleasures, and you.
What man that's a Lover, and boldly dare move,
But durst for enjoyment, forsake all above,
Though that minute he's damned, and damned for his Love.
Sir, there's your Rival.


Dam me Sir, you are an Insipid, Excommunicated, Rascallian Son of a Whore, and
my Rival.


What my Quondam friend and noble acquaintance Sir Jasper Sympleton.


My Right Worshipful, and Pomathematical Bully, Sir Symon Credulous.


Cully Drayner.


Bully Slywit.


And how, and how is't? I Gad who thought to have seen you here? the last time
we saw each other, I pawned you at the Rose for a Guinny, that little Debauch
made a Divorce betwixt us, and have I met thee here? --


A slight way of Complement to a Rival, but dear Rogue let me kiss thee, -- I
Gad I joy to see you. --


This is a Rival by his fawning, for I believe a Sicilian Rival, and an English
Cuckold, are much of a Nature, both loving the man that most injures them. --
Sympleton what made you here so early, bin upon the Ramble I'll warrant you,
and so came and paid your devoires to the Lady of your best affections.


Rot me, if I'm in love with any body but my Laundress; these are only some of
my flashes of Gallantry, to let the City know my merits; but what made you here
Bully Credulous? To Court a Lady I dare swear.


By my honour no, an unlucky Horse of mine as I was riding to view the Country,
stood still with me seven miles together, which forced me to be beholding to
the Gentleman of this House for a nights Lodging; This will do or nothing. --


This may be, but I Gad 'tis very impossible.


Zounds here comes my Lady, now dare I as well be hanged as speak to her, for
fear of having my threat cut. --


What a pox shall I do now? if I speak, I discover my affections, and create a
Rival; and if I say nothing, I lose my Mistress. Oh valour, oh valour, what's
become of you? --


Sir, why do you not speak to the Lady, she expects you. --


She may expect me if she pleases, but I think I shall not speak to her. --


Sir, are you not ashamed to stand gaping as if you had lost your speech?


I Gad I had better lose my speech, then lose my life: for if I speak to her,
he'll speak to me, and above all things I hate an angry Rival.


Good Sir recollect your self, your Rival is an arrand Coward, and dares not
own before your face his love to Theocrine, and should you refuse to Court her
now, she's lost for ever, --


I Gad I'll venture too, Drayner get your Sword ready, and if my Rival offers
to draw, dispatch him decently.


Honourable Madam.


Lovely Lady.


Most Aromatic Beauty.


Divine, Celestial, and Odoriferous Venus.


The glory of your presence, makes me stoop thus low to kiss your hand. --


The glory of your presence makes me bold to kiss your L -- and so forth. --


What mean you Sir? --


Ay* what mean you Sir?


Nay, nay, no huffing Bully, no harm upon my honour Madam.


You're bold Sir, and intrude too far upon the privilege my Father gave you; but
that you are a stranger and a Gentleman, I should chastise the Insolence.


I would not lose the honour for a Kingdom, he's my Rival, and that's
sufficient, hum, hum. -- Credulous you are my friend, --


Agreed. --


Madam your Servant, such saucy actions must and shall be punished, farewell.


Your Servant Madam; if I fall, say you lost one who loved. --


The Coxcombs will not fight sure?


You need not fear it Madam, their Spirits are too dull for such brave Actions.


I do not much, yet something troubles me, and what it is I know not.


Love for Vanlore Madam; 'tis true, his virtues merit all your noble thoughts,
but his mean fortunes so enrage your Father, I fear you'll ne'er enjoy him.


Fathers are Cruel when they think they are Kind, and more disturb our rest by
forcing Love, then when they rob us of the Author of it.


Madam, a Messenger from Ardenna desires to speak with you.


Some news from Vanlore, now Heaven I hope is kind.


WHen first our full spread sails were Pregnant grown, and all our hopes grew
equal to our wishes, a spiteful Storm stretched on the wings of all the
Clamorous Winds, scattered our Fleet, whose Ruined sails hang on the top of
Rocks, the darkened Sky proclaims a dissolution, and the angry Waves assault our
sinking Ships: Some hours this Tempest held, and on a sudden the face of the
Heaven was clear, the Seas grew Calm, and light appeared, just like a new born
day, that we might see the dreadful Ruin's of our scattered Fleet, and what
bred most distraction, the Prince's Ship was lost.



How full of fatal changes are our Lives, what is't to be a Monarch, and yet
live to be a trembling at every breath of passion? thus when all my thoughts in
the fair hopes were calmed of Heroina's safe Arrival, then, even then to have
'em smothered in this Cloud of cursed Intelligence.


Your grief is yet but weak suspicions birth, and happily may prove abortive
Sir.


Oh Glorianda, thou fain would flatter me to comfort, but the malignity of
sorrow can admit no Cordials; there, there,


Sir th'information is most sad, if true.


Oh, 'tis too true, too true my Glorianda, devouring Seas have cous'ned our
Embraces; but shall I lose her thus? Go gather all those Ships that owe
obedience to this life; and let their Squadrons scour the Seas until you find
her out, or else by all that's good, your lives, though an unworthy Sacrifice,
shall fall an offering to her Fathers loss.


Thus only may your Enemies Encounter those Beams of sacred Majesty, that
shine through you from the Sicilian Diadem.


Rise Oroandes, high in our love as wonder; thus joy encounters grief, but is
too weak for such a foe.


I more then doubt poor Zannarro's safety.
Loves secret flames, teach me the way to fear,
And when he moves from life, my death draws near.

Why so much woman Glorianda? Thou but mispendest thy pity on an object, which
if not removed, will soon Eclipse the brightness of our Stars. --

Go call the Priests of Mars and Pallas hither.


What might this Rage Portend?


Here take the Prisoners to your charge, and let those Ceremonies be performed,
by which the tainted blood of Sacrifices, are made Incense for the Gods; see
'em prepared ere the next Morning guilds the Earth.

-- Delay
Shall pluck no feathers from the wings of Day,
Ere vengeance meet the Rebels.

Oh they are lost, for ever lost.


Is't Grief or Reverence that unnerves me thus? Oh my Soul -- thou art too
weak, too faintly weak, to move beneath the Chaos of these woes.


Now Oroandes I have time left to Embrace thee, and hug this Cabinet of virtues
yet, I have not in all thy absence let thy goodness slide out of my thoughts,
witness this Lady, in whose virgin breast, I've strove to plant thy worth.

Fight like a noble Soldier, and so move,
Till noble virtue Conquer Glorious Love.

Whither starts my degenerate Spirits? I was born free as Sicily's King, and
though he is my Brother, sure I may be allow'd the freedom of my Choice. --


She weeps.

There's more in this then yet my thoughts can fathom, pardon Lady my
unbecoming rudeness, I have sorrows which like an evil Genius on my Soul sit
clothed in sables, and obscure the light of your bright Glories.


This is no time to flatter Sir, or move
In these disorders tow'rds the Throne of Love:
A general sweetness should about us wait,
And not the surly frowns of angry fate.
To quench those flames so newly are begun,
I'll weep down floods, and drown the rising Sun.

To Court your tears, argues a fatal end,
And love thus planted, never can extend.
In Glorious paths of mutual happiness
We treat the fancy, and expect success;
But when before the heart is gone astray,
Our Monarchs gifts doth but our lives betray;
And to refuse what he so kindly gave,
Were but to Ruin what we hoped to save.

Though our affections variously do move,
In different forms of Gratitude and Love;
Yet they are perhaps of kin, did you but know
From whence the Original of Grief doth grow.
My Lord I blush not to relate, these eyes
Drop tears to mollify the Deities,
Those stubborn Gods which sway the reeling State
Of Zannazarro, and Amasia's Fate.
For him my cares, for her your fears are strong,
Yet they must suffer for their Fathers wrong.

Oraculously spoken, her great Charms,
Have bound me in the Circle of her Arms:
In height of Conquest they surprised my Soul,
Her Glories all my Laurels did control;
My growing fortune stopped at her bright eyes,
And she commanded all my victories:
To her great Charms my Conquest soon did bow,
And Lillies sat triumphant on her brow.
The Warlike Eagle, and the Phaenix may
Fly to a Wilderness and shun the day:
While she invested in the Robes of Love,
Darts fiercer Beams, as she to the East doth move.

And can you then see so much goodness fall?
Rather turn Rebel, to save them lose all.

I have an Army yet, 'tis true, but when
I think on Treason they will shun me then.
My blood shrinks to its Center at a Rebels name,
Scattering a death-like Ague through each vein;
My Nerves shrink back at any thing that's ill:
We dam our selves when we a Monarch kill.
If all our prayers cannot satisfy
An angry King, we will both Loves Martyrs die.

I will do something too, something that may
Preserve my fame as glorious as the day.
Perhaps Sir, our united prayers may move
Heaven to Compassion, and the King to Love.

My prayers shall wait on yours, and if denied,
Dying for love with them shall be my pride.

Pox this is better then fighting: What should a man of honour that hath an
Estate, and so forth, venture his life for? 'tis enough for poor pitiful
little inconsiderate Rascals, that have no other dependency, but Murder and
Hanging.


True Bully, Pox of fighting I say, there's no sport in it, whoring and
drinking I am for, but I hate fighting.


Come lets sit down then, Sirrah, some Wine, here's a health to my Lady, Madam
Theocrine.


Done, I'll pledge it, and begin another; here's a health to my Lady, Madam
Theocrine.


Is she your Lady then?


My Mistress Sir or so, if her Father may be believed, I thank him he has
confir'd that honour on me.


Why Bully, she is my Mistress too, her self I thank her, confir'd that honour
on me. --


Her self Sir?


Yes Sir, so I said, her self.


Nay Pox on it be not angry Bully, give me thy hand, let's drink away sorrow,
and a Pox of Quarrelling.


Quarrelling Sir, I scorn quarrelling as much as any man, but I hate to be
abused.


Abused, and so do I, my Mistress is my Mistress, and so forth, and no Rival
shall get her from me, I will fight for her in Verse.


And so will I, and I think for Poetry no man can outdo me.


Was ever seen two such inconsiderable Asses, men that have no more sense of
honour then a Wood-cock; for my part though I as much abhor fighting as either,
yet the fault in them appears so odious, I hate my self for being such a
Coward.


In London I durst be a Bully, when incompas'd with an host of Hectors, who
have no more honour then courage, yet impudence enough to keep a man out of the
honourable path of fighting; grinning Honour is as loathsome to 'em as a
grinning Bailiff, and they had rather kill themselves with Nautious Physic,
then hazard the breathing of a vein in a just Quarrel.


It becomes neither you nor I to rail at Cowards, having so great a share in
Cowardice, but rather to be patient and bear our sufferings (I mean our
beatings) without noise, that the World may think us men of Wit and Prudence.


Since we came hither, Sir Jasper with his insufferable Impertinence, and his
unreclaimable Arrogance, has brought me into at least sixteen Quarrels, of
which the least had made us Mortal, had not I by my fawning and extreme art in
wheedling got clear, which makes me cry Pox of fighting, the very thought on it
proclaims me Mortus est.


I fear my life's at stake too, for my quarrelling Coward like a true Bully,
Tanndy, always sneaks away and leaves me to Capitulate with the Enemy, or else
Engage to fight, which neither of us have any stomach to.


For my part I commonly swear a Quarrel out, not fight it; or take a beating,
though with an Oaken Cudgel. This tilting is more dangerous then Morbus
Gallicus a dose of Mercury is; Heaven to the point of a Sword.


By my Fathers Soul I've done, and without Ostentation, to as great a height,
as -- When the Sons of the Muses grew Numerous and loud, and so forth.


And by your favour I think I have done to a mighty height, and to a greater
height then a Lampoon; I have done to the height of Allebabbela su, and so
forth.


Thou hast a notable Paw for Scribbling; but for Lampoon, Joak, Jest, Jear, and
so forth, I have the Brain.


And I have a Brain too, but let that pass; to the verses, to the verses, come
Bully lets hear the verses.


Divine --


-- He has made an Angel of her already. Divine, -- Oh horrid, there's an
Epithte for a Lady, pray when did you hear that a Divine was a Lady, or of a
divine Lady? ha, ha, ha.


Sir, 'tis a flight, and a great deal better then Diabollical.

Divine, Celestial, and Soul Charming fair,
Why were it thou made so glorious and so rare,
Only to run us Mortals to despair?
How dost like 'em Bully?


They are very rare, monstrous fair, and damnable despairing verses indeed, but
is here all?


Yes and enough too, a man that writes sense should not write above three lines
a day. Give me Premeditation, I say Premeditation, for that's the staff of
Poetry.


But by your favour I think my Song here without Premeditation, is as good as
your Divine Celestial and Soul Charming business. Bully, your Judgment.

THE joys of Debauch in the Night are most sweet,
When Pashion and Guinnies with a Doxy we meet;
Though she plies up and down
Like a Miss of the Town,
To oblige every Cully will give her a Crown,
Yet I Gad she'll be kind to him she approves,
And deposit her dust to the man that she loves.
Oh the pleasant Harang of a Citizens Wife,
Who loves to oblige a dear Spark with her life,
Her Husband poor Cully,
For fear of the Bully
Sits Mumping at home,
While abroad she doth Roam.
At Night being Cloyed by Debauch and its Charms,
She's asleep when the Cuecold should melt in her Arms.
I think if Wit, Sense and Judgment, be commendable in an Author without
Premeditation, I have it to excess.


But where's the business?


What business?


Why the Lady.


Pox of business and the Lady too, do I look like a man of business?


Then by my Fathers Soul you're a dull senseless Rascal, and have no more Wit,
then a Poetical Thief, for your Song is mere Nonsense.


I Gad who can help it? if it is Nonsense, it is Nonsense; but in my mind 'tis
admirable good sense, you shall hear it again.


I'll have no more Reading of Songs, dull witless Songs, that have no more
sense in 'em then I have.


Now has he spoiled a Copy of the hopefullest Verses in Europe, and an Original
too.


Here, here, are the lines, these are the moving lines, and so forth.


Yes they are moving lines, see how they flutter.


Villain you have abused Poetry it self, and I will be revenged, I will have a
Session of Poets shall dam thee Ibraimattically, lead thee to School by the
Nose and Chastise thy Insolence.


And I will have -- your obliging and faithful Servant to command, and so
forth.


You are not going Sir, are you?


Yes to Challenge him, we Poets dare not fight, do you hear Bully, I hate to be
abused, and so forth, meet me to morrow.


Where?


Any where.


What hour?


Any hour.


The weapon?


What weapon you will.


I shall not fail.


Farewell. --


Is he gone?


Yes, and hath left you to pay the Reckoning,


'Tis no matter, it shall be the last I'll warrant you; to morrow is the day,

Yill then rich Wine shall my dull brains inspire,
Cowards are Valiant when the head's all fire.

This fair Amasia was a happy hour.
To Rescue thee from such a Villains power.
Lust in these Robes so dreadful did appear,
Beyond an Armies strength it made me fear.

The Impious Villain in such Crimes did move,
Striving to force what he at first called Love;
That I almost mistrusted Heaven, who gave
Such saucy Boldness to the injurious Slave,
Till you my chief Protector came with aid,
And the injurious Mass of sin displayed.

Under this Masque of Heaven, and Silver age,
The impious Rebel amongst his sins did rage.
The blooming beauty of a fragrant flower,
To crop, and kill, while it was in his power.
The Slaves confession may perhaps engage
Our King in Clemency to cease his rage.
Those Counterplots laid to prevent your fall,
Though seeming Ominous, may save us all.
These Robes which he has so abused, shall prove
The Guardian Angel to preserve my love.

Run not such dangerous hazards for her sake,
Who knows no way to pay your favours back.
By the King, Vow and Laws, I'm doomed to die,
A minute cuts off my Mortality;
And then my Gratitude and Debts remain
Too Great and Vast, ere to pay back again.

All the return I ask for, or desire,
Is but your equal love, and equal fire:
Grant I in death may so much comfort meet,
To fall a Lover at Amasia's feet.

You had my word before, and if ere Fate
Changes my doom for a serener fate,
Before the Gods and you, I vow, that hour
Amasia* shall submit to your great power.
Your Chains I'll wear, and give up Victory,
The toils of War, for brave Captivity.
To be overcome by one, so truly brave,
Makes a most Glorious Captive of your Slave.

Those noble Chains I'll wear, and triumph more
Then ere I did in Conquering before.
To be your Slave is such a pleasing fate,
The mighty blessing doth my fears rebate.
In Life, or Death, or smooth faced Victory,
No pleasures like this sweet Captivity.

We soon must part with all those joys and breath,
How e're I shall be happy in my death.
If Life with you be bliss, Death must be more,
Since real happiness is there in store
For all who do a true Loves fate deplore.

Think not of death, first see Oroandes fall,
And let a sigh attend his Funeral:
For whilst I live, no force shall reach thy heart.
When I am wounded in each mortal part,
And bleeding death about my Soul doth wait,
Prepare Amasia to receive thy fate:
Till then my power and this disguise believe
Either of these may bring a safe repreive.

Thus to profane the holy Robes, will be
A greater trouble then the loss of me.
Heaven will be angry at your strange pretence,

Heaven cannot frown to save such innocence;
They what we Sacrifice injustice call,
Else virtue would be banished from us all.
Virtue expatiates to blot out Vice,
Reaching her Glorious Arms to Paradise:
And if we root that Angel from the Earth,
Our weak humanity is out of breath:
For that conducted by the Powers above,
Teaches the way to Duty and to Love.
Come my fair Sacrifice, these Robes can be
Never profaned, worn to deliver thee.

URge me no more, the Gods have so decreed,
Amasia and her Brother both must bleed.

Consider Sir the Nature of the Crime,
And for my sake withdraw your Rage this time;
Look on Amasia's Charms, and then declare,
If Zeal and Beauty are not both at War.
The Cruel Tyrant to secure his own,
Usurps this beauty to enrich his Throne.

You sue in vain for what must be denied,
The Gods prescribed this way to scourge their pride.

Call not that Pride which was Revenge alone,
Nor is it Justice Sir to Kill the Son.
Your veng'ance scourged the Rebels as they flew,
And every factious man your Valour slew:
You strong Rebellion hunted out of breath,
Which Sir expired in brave Zoranzo's death.

The fathers fall did but foment him more,
Proving a greater Rebel then before;
Still he grew on and in Rebellion moved,

Your self Sir by a Son would be beloved:
His Fathers Death new veng'ance did implore,
Could he do less for one had sought before:
Rebellious Nature did the faction head,
And he fought only to revenge the Dead:
His Army weak, wounded on every part,
Fought not to Conquer, but Revenge their smart.

Why for the bold Usurper do you move,
I shall grow angry, and believe you love.

You gave me leave, and made a worthy choice,
Brave Oroandes had my Brothers voice;
But he, as well as I, preserves a flame
For dead Zoranzo's Issue.

-- Dare you name
An Act so base, to love your Countries foe,
He dies, and never shall your pashions know.
The Gods expect their Sacrifice with care,
And because you shall not languish in despair,
Against to morrow for their Deaths prepare.

What have I said that should your anger move?
If you will save his Life, I will not love;
Let him but live, and I'll forget the wrong,
Though love is grown too powerful and too strong
With ease to be removed; in youth when first
Kind conversation in each eye had nursed
A gentle Cupid, and our hearts though poor,
Wanting the effects of love could love no more;
Down with content we by each other sate,
Weeping to think upon our Childish fate,
Till he, forced by a Fathers pride did fly
From me, and honour to your Enemy:
Though then he lost obedience to the Crown,
A mutual love did our Souls Current drown
Within one Silver stream; and shall I now
Cause his dejected state to fate doth bow
Kill him with pride, whose noble growth would be
A joyful Harvest of felicity?
No, let his Titles Sacrifices fall
To his first Guilt, his Virtue merits all.

Call Treason Virtue, and the Traitor just:
Rebellion's a desire to Rule, and Lust
Of Empire makes 'em break their trust.
ill Acts committed, by success made good,
And Nations staggering for want of blood
Drawn out by Civil strifes and unjust fears,
Are only debts to Nature in Arrears:
You know my Vow which I will ne'er evade.

Heaven blushes when that bloody Vow is paid:
If he must fall, the worthiest of men,
Heaven will be pleased with Sacrifices then;
My blood and his shall mount up to the Skies,
And feed the Nostrils of our Deities,
Till they in Rage to see such goodness fall,
Rain down our blood on veng'ance on ye all:
Amasia's Charms shall with such swiftness move
The Gods out of mere pity from above
Shall plague you all, when 'tis too late, with Love.

Amasia 's Charms shall with such swiftness move
The Gods out of mere pity from above
Shall plague you all, when 'tis too late, with Love.
What can she mean? 'Twas spoke as she did spy
The little Tyrant dancing in my eye.
Something unruly doth about me wait,
Like hidden Charms my anger to rebate;
The surly motion tells me I do ill,
Can I pretend to be a King and kill?
Amasia was no Rebel to the State,
Why therefore should she share a Brothers Fate?
'Tis true, her life did from that spring take head,
And she may own those factions which they bred;
How ere --
If she can love she lives, if not she dies,
Bring then a Rebel fit for Sacrifice,
Call in Amasia, -- though her Charms appear
So uncontrolled, they must submit to fear,
Fearful to try what joy or bliss would be
Found while they are strangers in Eternity.
Having considered Madam your Estate,
And how each Title now submits to Fate,
I could not choose but rob the Gods of one,
One only fit for Siracusia's Throne.

To say I've no desire to live, would prove
A Barren Gratitude for Royal Love;
Death though a debt, which is to Nature due,
We all would fain prolong, and so would you:
But how I am thus blessed, being so nigh
The welcome brink of Immortality,
Staggers my Faith and strikes my Reason blind.

You'll make all perfect by your being kind.


I know so well you love that Conqueror,
Who made us Captive to your mighty Power;
You'd not deny, might it with safety be
My Brothers Life, my Love and Liberty.

Your Liberty without dispute I grant,
Yet all those Graces must your Brother want;
His Life must be to Heaven a Sacrifice,
Your own is Ransomed by your Charming eyes.

What have I heard, shall Zannazarro find
His Sister proved so weak to stay behind?
Must he alone stoop to the Cruelty?
I was a Rebel Sir as well as he.

In acts of Love you but a Rebel prove,
Conquering the Conqueror, yet scorn to Love:
He --
Wading through blood to Massacre did run,
Outdid the Father, to undo the Son.

My Fathers Crimes he never did partake,
Kill me, and spare him then for Honours sake:
Nature can never consent to stay behind,
He is my Brother, and in that I find
Some secret motion, though my love be strong,
Which tells me that I needs must go along:
Thus Love and Nature struggle in desires,

Consider Madam who it is admires,
And the vast gift I give to quench my fires.

You give me life which I would gladly take,
(Might he live too) for brave Or'andes sake:
Affections 'twixt the Victor and the Slave
So strong are knit, they both will share one Grave;
Then if he die, Or'andes too must fall,
And Heaven will blush to see the Funeral:
The Gods made drunk with such a vast expense
Of Royal blood, will pardon us from thence.

You love Or'andes then, and for his sake,
This tedious Pilgrimage of Death will take;
Charmed by your Charms, I gave Reprieve for life,
In hopes you would consent to be my Wife;
But since to him your faith's already given,
This day you keep your Nuptial feast in Heaven;
You by the Law must fall a Sacrifice;
He only out of duty to your eyes,
May if he please translate himself from hence,
Death will confirm what now is but pretence.
Guards bring this Prisoner to the Temple straight,
My Love shall end when she receives her Fate.

Go Cruel Brother, who at once withstood
His Friend, his Sister, and his Countries good,
And all to satisfy the Gods with blood.
You weep Amasia, and those pearly tears
Confirm my Brothers rage, and my own fears;
His Cruel heart will no impression take
From bended Knees, kind Words, or Natures sake.

Yes he is kind, too kind alas for me,
He gen'rously gave me Liberty,
Urging, my Crime so little did appear,
Heaven could not see it, and he'd forget it here;
But then the recompense I was to give,
Proved so severe, my Justice could not live.
Brave Oroandes I must dispossess,
And make him rich in my unhappiness,
Which once denied, he then my Death decreed.

The Chaste Amasia not alone shall bleed,
For Zannazarro I, Oroandes You,
Dying together will proclaim us true;
He in our fall shall so much virtue see,
When we'r extracted from humanity,
As Heaven shall turn to smooth felicity.

My Cares are many for your noble life,
Since you ought not to suffer in the strife,
Earth will be Robbed when so much goodness dies,
And Heaven be too much stored with Sacrifice.
Live and be happy in a second choice,
Or'andes once has had your Brothers voice;
Let him possess in Zannazarro's stead,
All the enjoyments of a Nuptial Bed;
I can resign that blessing up to you,
And I am sure you're satisfied he's true.

In Life and Death so generous you prove,
In Heaven you'll be rewarded for your Love.
Know fair Amasia, though you did resign
Your interest, I can never remove mine;
Death's but a toy, a moments fear, and then
We Launch into a World of Bliss again.

I for that World must instantly prepare,
And how to know you there shall be my care.
Shrouded in Clouds of glorious innocence,
And Angels waiting on each petty sense,
Shall draw our Souls through Clouds of bliss from hence.

Believe me Sir, 'tis true.


I fear him not, I am intolerable, this case of Steel makes me as free from
wound, as if enchanted.


Yet Sir there is a greater danger near, the Wood is lined with men in Arms,
whom he hath hired, if you should be the Victor, to cut your throat; if he
survive, to drag your Body to the Sea, and there entomb it, that your name and
actions may be lost to future ages.


How! is he so great a Villain?


He Killed his Father, Ravished his Sister, Poys'ned the Great Turk, and has
committed outrages innumerable.


Then I think it fit to forbear the honourable employment of fighting for this
time, and go home, rather then stay to meet with these unavoidable dangers.


Sir I love you, and I cannot see so much virtue perish, fight him in spite of
all, and at convenient time fall down; Sir Jasper imagining you are dead, will
fly; behind the Castle waits your Father with Officers to seize him, and hurry
him to Prison, to give you the more privilege and uncontrolled freeness to
Marry his Daughter.


Can this be true?


Upon my honour Sir, my love to you forced me to be a Traitor to my Master, and
relate this secret.


It shall not go unrewarded.


You won't walk long before my Mistress meet you, farewell.


Nay he has vowed to kill you; your Armour were it more impregnable, the
Mambrosia's Helmet, his Sword will find a passage through.


Tell Sir Symon I am Armed all over: if Wine, Steel, and Impudence, are not
enough t'oppose one single Hector, Rot me for a Wigeon; I am come with a
fighting Resolution, and will not be appeased, tell this thy Master.


I'm sorry Sir you will not take my Counsel. Farewell.


Counsel when a man is come to fight for honour! here is the only counsel a
Knight Errand ought to take --


How in Armour, Zounds this is hard, he is walled in as well as I am, and the
Devil cannot kill him, drinking too, nay then Valor assist me.


Hold Sir, hold, a fair Capitulation before fighting is as good as Tent and
Eggs before Matrimony. Are you disposed to fight?


Yes.


Then Sir begin.


You'll take the Law then, for most Cowards when they think they cannot
overcome, either take that for Sanctuary, or pretend your Enemy is not Gentele
enough to fight with a man of honour, and thus you Cowardly shun the danger of
a fight.


Sir your affront's unsufferable, prepare.


Ha dead, nay then 'tis time to prepare for safety.


Fly Sir, fly, the Officers and Guards of the City, like blood-Hounds bend their
Course this way, therefore begone or else expect to meet a shameful Death.


If this be honour, the Devil take fighting for me, grinning honour I defy
thee. --


So, thou art safe, now for the other.


I am not dead yet, thanks to my Case of Steel; how like an Ass Sympleton will
look when he shall hear I have Married Madam Theocrine, ha, ha, ha, --


Fly, fly Sir Symon, my Masters men are eager to find your Body, search up and
down the Wood, under pretence of following the Murder, that they without the
least suspicion may convey it to the Sea.


Zounds I'm not dead yet, what's to be done in this case.


Fly to the City Sir with expedition, there for a time shelter your self, till
the noise of this fight be over, and Sir Jasper imprisoned; then break out like
the Sun slipping from behind a Cloud, and Comfort your Dear Lady.


Was ever Conquest easier gained, or Conqueror thus treated?


Now both shift for your selves, this noise has raised the Town, and 'twill be
hard to escape the Inquisition.


Follow, follow, follow, now the Devil follow you, cannot a man Conquer
decently, but he must have those blood Hounds after him. Where am I?


Confusion take you all for me, can a man of no honour be safe? this 'tis to
pretend to fighting; I see there's more safety in being a Cowardly Gentleman,
then to be an honourable Commander, in salve Custodius presently, what's here,
escape the Inquisition.


What's the matter here I wonder, these Citizens are afraid of their own
shadows, one runs this way crying a Devil, a Devil, a Devil, a second this, a
third, a fourth, and a fifth this way, all running and roaring as if they were
possessed with a Devil indeed, a company of Cowardly Rascals, had they no more
money then valour I might properly say, they were Beggarly Cowards; ha there's a
brace of Devils indeed, -- in the name of -- the Devil, the Devil, the Devil.
--


Search the House, here they went in for certain, leave not one Room unlooked
in, while my Brother and I solace our selves with a Bottle of Wine, --


Withal my heart, and see how fortune blesses us, here is plenty of the thing
we ask for: Brother a health to our happy success in finding out the Murderer.


Agreed.


Another health to the Gold which perhaps they will give us to blind our eyes.


Agreed.


Ha what means this, we are Enchanted sure.


What, Bully Sympleton?


What Bully Credulous? are you alive still?


Yes, as sure as we are both Cowards; I see 'tis more dangerous for Gentlemen
to fight, then for Church-wardens to rob the poor; we may be hanged yet if we
are taken.


For that trick, to avoid trouble, I'll go home, 'tis dark enough to keep
suspicion off.


And so will I,

From hence forth, honour I'll no more pursue
Then she doth Cowards, that's both I and you.

Had we been valiant we had bin no more,
Death saved our lives, that we might save a score.

Thou look too sadly Glorianda; though Funerals do attend the day, we'r not
to wear the sables on our Souls.


My sadness Sir only proceeds from fear, how my frail temper may endure a sight
so full of horror.


My Rage begins to melt, I could even wish they might survive the rigour of
their doom.


Must I see this and live? No Zannazarro, here's my Convoy to thee.


So now Amasia, we have ended all our employments on the Earth: the wheels of
Time worn on the road of Age, will lose their motions, ere we shall again meet
in the Robes of flesh: Farewell,

Though in a Moment here our Bodies die,
Our Souls shall meet in vast Eternity;
Inseperably in the Clouds we both shall move,
Treading on Air teaching the Gods to love;
There walking hand in hand such tales we will tell,
As shall Immortalize our joys -- Farewell.

Farewell dear Brother; if thy Soul do move,
And take thy flight ere mine to dwell above,
Stay for me in the thin unmoulded Air,
For fear your loss should kill me with despair.

SEE each wind leaves Civil Wars,
And Heaven approves the Sacrifice;
Whilst to behold it all the Stars
Glitter to light the Deities.

Whilst this blessed pair to Heaven are sent.
Sparta's fair Ephigenia died
A spotted Sacrifice to this,
Bright Nymph compared, whose Virgin pride
Says Nature nought hath done amiss.

Confounded in Eternity.
Prepare, prepare, the fatal stroke
Which Life and Soul must seperate,
Goodness may pity not revoke
The firm Decrees of certain fate.

And lead 'em through the pathless Air,
Lead 'em to live where Time shall be
Confounded in Eternity.
What horrid Prodigies are these? The Gods are sure grown angry with our
Prayers.


I have bin long attendant on these Powers, yet never saw the Gods thus moved
before.


They are sure displeased with Offerings so Pure, or else some hidden Charms
unknown to us hath wrought this Miracle.


Here, here lies the guilt of our impieties; 'tis I deserve the utmost of your
rage.


Ha! Oroandes what dammed Imposture's this?


The argument of Mercy from the Gods emboldens me to seek the like from you. My
violent passions forced my love into strange labyrinths of attempts; but what I
first trembling with guilt did undertake, these Miracles have proved
Legitimate. When Amasia into the inmost Room was of the Temple brought,
resolved to bear her from the Rigour of her doom, I had thither in private first
conveyed my self, attending on the hour when the Priest with his sad charge
should enter, which arrived, I that came there to offer Sacriledg saw my self
ordained the Instrument of Heaven, to free her from the hands of a fowl
Ravisher.


This dreadful story strikes trembling Earthquakes throughout all my Limbs.


That this is true, witness those Powers which owned that cause, which I
(though rashly) undertook.


Pardon me ye Diviner Powers, -- I have been too neglective of the charge you
gave me, but will redeem it in my future Zeal: that Villains blood forced out
by Tortures, shall begin the Purple Deluge.


Mountains of grief fall from my burdened Soul in their delivery; but your
Soverain Mercy must either with one Cordial more relieve my sickly hopes, or I
am lost for ever.


Thy actions speak thy wishes -- Here Oroandes take from my hand this gift from
Heaven, she's thine by their decree.


Ere your extended Mercy shall contract it's liberal hand, let me be happy in
the full fruition of my joys; my love to Glorianda, though long smothered in my
fates security, must now break out.


Thy thoughts arrive clothed in the Robes of joy: Rise Zannazarro -- Embrace in
her thy happiness.

And it shall struggle with the Storm to show
To show how much we to this days deliv'ry owe.

COme Lady, you must now inhabit here
In silent shades and solitary Groves,
Where Rustic sweetness makes us void of fear,
And harmless Nature teaches harmless Loves.
The Morning Dew drawn up by Sols strong Charms,
Is not more safe when locked within his Arms,
Then you protected by our Innocence.

Sir, if these words prove not a bare pretence,
I shall have cause to thank your care, and be
Happy amongst you, though clothed in misery.

Time will wear out the thoughts of dangers past,
And you may be released from griefs at last;
Though in the Storm you left Estates behind,
Your life secures the safety of your mind:
A troubled fancy Robs the Soul of rest;
That man may be secured, but never blessed,
For they who do within such Wars maintain,
Distract their Reason to secure their Pain.

But pains like mine do seize on every part,
Ensnares the Soul to Captivate the Heart;
My many troubles like a Clouded Sky,
Declare some sudden Storm of dangers nigh.

You but suspect those ills you need not fear,
And danger Madam's unacquainted here.

Wealth I have none to lose, or to bestow,
My Gratitude is all, and that I'll owe;
Which may in time to such a greatness rise,
I shall return those thanks you'll not despise.

I wish the Curtain of your Fate may be
Drawn from the face of smooth felicity:
Wounds are not cured by Grief, nor Fate made less
Or more by hopes of harms or happiness:
Let Madam all our Vows disperce your fears,
Time lost can't be pulled back by sighs or tears.

Yet silent Griefs a troubled heart may ease,
And Passion vented mittigates disease.

Sir, to your charge I do commit the Fare:
Be her safe conduct, she'll reward your care.

For Valore's sake my duty I'll express,
Nor Madam for your own could I do less.

I can but thank you, yet in time I may
Find out a means your services to pay;
My Gratitude till then you shall employ,
Take that, and lead me to a World of joy.

So thus far I'm right, and all my plots thrive equal with my wishes; I have
persuaded Sir Symon, Sir Jasper's in Prison, and that I have got Theocrines
consent to Celebrate the Marriage this Morning; a Bride I have provided, and
such a one as (Heaven knows) are too common in this Age, a debauched
Chamber-maid, one as fit for Sir Jasper's humour, as a Taylor for a Cowcumber;
he promised to meet me here, but has not kept his word, I hope he has not found
the cheat, but here he comes.


But --


But me no Buts, but get you gone I say; delay a minute and you're undone for
ever. Drayner's ready with his Mask to entertain'em; and if that and Sir
Jasper's Wife make not Matrimony odious, I'll never plot again.

Wives just like Fools, are only kept to please,
Delight dull Appetites, and bring us ease;
Their various ways to Pleasure we adore,
Which once seen over, we admire no more.
Things oft repeated, though they pleasant prove;
Nautiate and dull the stomach like fond Love.
Things in extremes are ills to every sense,
And though a while they please us with pretence,
Both once enjoyed the prudent banish hence.

This is the day, Son, makes us happy, you in the hopes of such a virtuous
Wife, and I to see both Married. And Daughter (since your duty speaks you so) I
hope this joyful day will Crown your Loves, and add Eternal Comforts to your
Lives. Lead to the Altar.


1 Spi. MAke hast, make hast,
The time doth wast
And flies too fast.
Cho. Therefore Remove
These sinners from their bliss Above,
For they must share
With us in Everlasting Care.
2 Spi. Remember old man, and ye sprightly young Blade,
The Lover, the Lover, to death was betrayed;
At Ardenna by you he was strangely removed,
Because he too fondly pursued what he loved.
3 Spi. For which you shall be
Tormented by me,
For ever, for ever, by him, and by me.
Cho. For which, c.
1 Spi. Come let's remove.
2 Spi. Come let's remove.
4 Spi. This lump of Diseases and scandal of Love,
Let's bear'em from hence to their Torments below,
Where Lavishing Souls are wrapped up in woe;
There to Tortures they shall for their mischiefs be sent,
Yet never, Oh never, Oh never Repent.
Cho. There to, c.
Are they gone? Vanlore, could I recall thy Soul, I willingly would give my
Daughter to you to satisfy the injuries I did you, but 'tis in vain, the
Bloody deed is done, I shall grow mad, my Son and Daughter and my Wits are
lost, lost past Redemption,

However I'll spin my Life out, though my Grief
Burden my Soul till it is past Relief.

Meet me at Nine behind the Hermits Rock. I have not mist in either
Circumstance, unless my hast Anticipated Time -- It yet is not full Nine.


Oroandes you are now a Loyal Subject.


All my Ambitions ne'er flew higher, Sir, then in that Region of your thoughts
to thrive.


There it was grown to full Maturity: But I must like wanton Nero either Ruin
all the Glorious Structure of thy hopes, or live Impris'ned in thy Loyalty: thy
Life (till now my strongest fortress) is become the fatal Engine of my Ruin.


Heaven! what have I done to merit this?


Nothing but bin too Virtuous, and by that centred affections which I must
remove, or shake thee into Chaos.


This Language blasts me, sure I have no sin ponderous enough to buoy your
Veng'ance up. Did I but think one Viper Lodged in my remotest part, I'd tear
each Fibre of my heart, to find the Monster out, and in my blood Imbalm'd throw
it as far as Lifes short span can reach. But Heaven my witness is no flame of
Zeal, but has bin yours in the second Magnitude; my Vows of Kin to those I
paid the Gods, my Prayers but Love and Duty fired into a holy Calenture.


Thy Virtue fathoms not my debt of Guilt; such a prevention of my Anger, would
only change the active passion for sorrow as insupportable: those Characters
which must uphold the sables of my Soul, are in dark Hieroglyphics hid,
through which thy strength of Judgment cannot pierce.


You speak in misty wonders Sir, such as lead my apprehension into wild
Meanders.


This will unriddle all our doubts, -- draw.


Against my Sovereign! an Act so wicked would retort the guilty steel into my
breast: fear never yet Marbled a Cowards heart more then Obedience mine.


Will you deny when I Command?


Pardon me Royal Sir, I would bestride a Cloud with Lightning Charged in's full
Career, affront a Thunderbolt, leap into the Clefts of Earthquakes, or attempt
to prop the Ruins of a falling Rock,

Yet count all this my happiness, so I
Met Death in the white Robes of Loyalty.

Are my attempts prized at so weak a rate? wears not my Sword a danger on its
point as well as thine? -- Draw -- or I shall conclude 'tis fear, not Loyalty,
that Charms thy hand, which speaks thy Soul a Traitor.


This stirs my blood, were you a private man that only had his better Genius to
defend him, and though Allied to me by all the ties of Nature, and of
Friendship, yet being thus far urged, our Swords long since had shown whose
Stars had brightest Influence.


I have unfetter'd all those legal bonds. Draw -- for thy denying now but
slights my power.


Then since there's no Evasion, --
Witness ye Gods my Innocence is wronged.
But Gracious Sir, --
Before I fall, or stand less fortunate, to see you overthrew, Oh let me know
what Fate, what Cruel Fate has Robbed me of the Treasure of your Love.


And must such goodness die? Know noble Youth, I am so far from calling it
desert in thee, that hath unsheathed my Sword, that in this midnight storm of
fancy I can shed some drops of Pity too. I come not rashly to attempt thy
life, but long have struggled with my hot desires, stood fiery Trials of
temptations. I am diseased, and know no way to health but through a deluge of
thy blood, -- there is a cause.


Dear Sir reveal it, that e're I fall, my penitential tears may cleanse my Soul
from such a Leprous Crime.


Alas brave Youth, thy thought's white as the Robes of Angels are, I know thy
Love to fair Amasia inseparable, as goodness from a Deity, yet I must deprive
thee of this Darling of thy Soul.


With pardon Royal Sir, I cannot think the Cyprian Princess is so soon forgot,
with whom Amasia Sir compared is nothing.


Dare thou affect her, yet dispraise a Beauty that in its Orb contracts
Divinity? This Profanation what had else bin sin will render Meritorious, --
Guard thy Life.


What have I done?


The Business that we met for, now we are friends again, friends until Death.


Oh do not faint, call up your spirits Sir, there's hopes of Life.


My Vital Powers fail, my Eyes are bowing to Eternal night.


And I grow wild with Horror, -- milder then a Flame provoked by angry Winds;
what shall I do, or whither shall I fly, to leave behind me this pursuing
Guilt?


Oh, Oh, -- be gone, be gone my Oroandes, some Company draws near. May thou
live long and happily in the Embraces of her whom I unjustly strove to have: my
dying wishes wait upon your joys.


Angels attend your latest hour, I go
From hence to meet my Everlasting woe.

I thought I heard the unruly noise of Swords,
And Clashing Murmurs of unfriendly words,
Besides the Echo of a hollow Groan.

I heard the dismal noise, and fear the event,
These wild Bandetties live by spoils alone,
Run on in sin, and fear no punishment.

Oh, Oh, Oh.


-- What noise is that?


-- Some newly Slain
By these untamed Bandetties of the Plain.

And here lies one breathing his latest breath,
His face is cold, and all appears like Death;
Let's Bear him off
Within for his Recovery all means I'll try,
For something prompts me, that he must not die.

My dearest Theocrine, in all, you prove
Your Honour great, as is your Real Love.

My Vanlore, sure I may believe my eyes,
Or doth the sudden Joy my sense surprise;
The Cruel pleasures steal so sweetly on,
Makes me mistrust the Bliss I run upon.

Your Bliss is Real, and my Joy's Complete,
Heaven could not give a happiness more great.

Through doubts and fears I have attained my will,
But 'twas unkind to let me Languish still.

That only cast a Cloud on the design,
That with more ease you might to Love incline.
And I to live alone retired with pain,
Expecting still this happiness to gain;
Which thus possessed, more perfect Bliss I find,
Then in the various pleasures of the mind.

Love like the wind oft shifts and seems to cease,
As if each minute lulled it into peace;
Sweetly it breaths upon the flowery Plain,
And yet a moment pulls it back again.
From Calms to Storms the unruly Gust doth rise,
And scatters all the Clouds about the Skies;
So we neglectful, now our Bliss is near,
By staying, threaten dangers we should fear:
My Lovers Anger, and my Fathers Age,
With Thunder will pursue us in his Rage.

Thou art the Loadstone, and my Soul shall be
Directed only by thy Charms and thee.
Amongst harmless Sheep, and solitary Bowers,
We will wast the tedious Time in pleasant Hours*
There Love and Pleasure we will at once possess;
Who wades through Crosses meets true Happiness.

How sad a change is this! This morning was appointed for more joyful
Enterviews.


When last nights slumber robbed our wakeful hopes of the delicious births of
fancy, 'twas with fairer promises: Amasia, I fain would comfort thee, but my
own griefs make me a stranger to that balmy Language.


Dear Sister, thy Passions are too violent; the Messengers are not yet all
returned, nor have we seen Arratus.


And here he comes.


My Lord, you either come to share in Grief with us, or ease ours by some blessed
discovery.


My Lord, my Son, my Daughter, and my --


Peace, no more, mix not theirs with a Sov'raigns loss, whose least drop of
Blood is worth a Thousand Lives, speak thy intelligence.


My Largest lies within the City walls, and there he has not yet bin heard of;
is none with him?


Yes, Oroandes,


Not good my Lord, we've travest all the Fields that Circles lofty Erix, and
yet see no beam of blessed Intelligence; all we found worthy to fix an
Observation on, was a place beneath the Hermits Rock all stained with store of
Blood, and near the foot this token of our Grief.


Oh my Prophetic fears!


Our sorrows are confirmed!


They are in Bloody Characters!


I'll go and secure the Citadel, and cry Treason.


Sorrow out-grows all my Resolves, this is an Act so full of Horror 'tis
terrible to name it; but if the Force of Syracuse can scourge the Traitors,

-- We will have
Their Heads to build a Temple over his Grave.

I'VE now got strength enough to render to you the fair preserver of my Life;
my Spirits stir, as if they would shake off the sluggish weight of weakness.


How much in every twinkling of the eye doth he resemble my Heroic Love.


You're sad sweet Lady.


I have a Cause, and such a one, that did you know, your Goodness would
Commiserate my wretched Fortune.


Reveal it Lady, I perhaps may be enabled then to dissipate your Griefs.


I was resolved to weep away my Time in private sorrow; but discovery cannot
aggravate my woe; besides I may venture to lodge a secret, where I have found
such temperate virtues. I'll only with this Question Usher in my own discovery;
is Sicily your place of Birth, or not?


It is, and Breeding both.


I will not ask what were the Parentage, where I find Virtues plant Nobility,
yet would be loath to a Plebeian breast to trust what I must now divulge.


You may be confident I am a Gentleman, as well by Birth as Education, Lady.


I do presume it Sir, and therefore wish of all I now remain amongst to be
known unto you alone. You never had Relation to the Court?


There was my Breeding Lady.


Near the Person of the King?


One of his Bed-Chamber, and 'tis no boast to say, as well beloved by him as
any, there being in the opinion of the Court, a near Resemblance of our looks.


Then sure my name is not a stranger to you, have you not heard Sir of the
Cyprian Princess.


The Beauteous Heroina.


The wretched Heroina, such I'm sure is my condition in my present State.


Pardon the Child of Ignorance, my wild, and unbecoming Rudeness.


Rise Sir, we are Companions yet; and hope we shall be till your Royal Master
possess what was long since intended his. By what Disaster, I was cast upon
this dreadful Precipice of Danger, as we are walking I'll Relate.


A prize, a prize, a noble prize, seize you upon that pretty Shepherdess, while
I dispatch the Guardian.


'Tis not so quickly done, and though as yet unable to defend, hither I'll fly
for Rescue.


This was a timely Rescue, and has by the fair Redemption of my Honour bound me
to give you thanks.


I merit none; my Duty urged me to preserve that Life which they strove thus to
Ravish. The brightest Stars that Ruled my Fate, did light me to this blessed
Employment; but had all set, e're their Influence had attained its end, had not
this Gentleman's assistance lent new Vigour to their fading Beams.


I must confess a debt of thanks to him, which if Irregular Humanity prove no
Rebel to my safety, shall be suddenly discharged: Let this Villain attend us
to the Court, there you'll find a Prince to be entreated, when your Advocate
bears Heroina's name. I can forgive, and so I hope can you, although his Crimes
merit a lasting punishment.


Pardon me best of Women, and impute


Your hopes of safety prompts me to believe you: Come Sir, you and that
Gentleman shall attend me to the Court.


We are your Vassals Madam, proud to have such a Command to Usher our desires.


And you Sir.

There I'll complete that cure so well begun,
And raise your fading hopes for what you've done.

Come, come along Sir, is't not enough to kill an honourable Gentleman, but you
must Lampoon him when you've done, and wound his fame in Verse.


Dam-me if ever I writ a Verse in my Life, or any thing like it, alas I have no
more wit then a Goose, and writing's as disagreeable to my Nature, as Hanging:
I must confess I have often had an Itching mind to Poetry, but could never
obtain it.


And what makes your name Sir, crowded on the Title Page of several Plays in
splendid Characters, as if that Ostentation did proclaim thee a man of wit and
merit?


I see you are Ignorant of the English Customs; their men of Wit and Sense
inclined to Poetry, have such a little share in the Worlds Treasure, their
works and them alike go both a begging, and scarce a morning but we Easie-men
(who rather then our lives would be accounted the Zanies of the Age) are
troubled with their Visits, where for a Guinny we purchase the Labour of three
Months, and then by our Authority, with the Acting Females (who do at upon us
Gallants of the Times) the Play in our name's Acted, and by Consequence, because
all the World should be acquainted with our Folly (which we think Wit) some
Greedy Bookseller pays dear for the Copy, and by his means 'tis Ushered into
the World; those Dedications writ by us (small Critics) never are honoured by
a Noble Patroness, tending to down right railing at the Age, or finding fault
perhaps with the best Poets.


This makes you Guilty of the last Lampoon, in which you have not only abused
him who never was a Poet, but all the Poets of the Age; and therefore if you
give us not (in the behalf of our dead Friend) sufficient satisfaction, you die
immediately.


This 'tis to pretend to Poetry in a strange Country: I Gad in London, a man of
Nonsense is as safe (amongst the Crew of Critics) as in a Hollands Leaguer,
for they are more given to the Spirit of Contradiction, then that of Fighting.


Come Sir, dispatch, we are in hast.


So am I to be gone.


Swear Sir.


Swear what?


Either you did, or did not write the Verses.


I vow to Gad, and all that, I am Innocent.


That's but a weak Oath, and shows too must of Cowardice to gain belief, swear
me a full mouthed Oath like a true Englishman.


Then on the Virtue of a Gentleman, and Honour of Sir Symon Credulous, I am not
Guilty.


Honour and Virtue are two mighty strangers to an Ignoble breast; I cannot in
the least Imagine they are lodged in yours. Come Gentlemen, here's Pen Ink and
Paper, write every Letter that we shall command you, or die in disobeying.


Was ever poor Pretended led by the Nose before? Honour begone, to save my Life
I'll do it; we are ready Sir.


Write this then, -- I am a Coward.


All the World knows that already, it needs no publication.


Write I Command you.


I am a Coward. --


An Arrand stinking Coward.


An Arrand stinking Coward. --


A Poetical Thief.


Not I by Heaven.


Write I say.


A --


And a dammed Son of a Whore, if ever I writ these Verses.


And a --


All this I Gad is true Gentlemen, have you done?


Not yet Sir, one word more, and I do here promise to receive into my Arms, the
Lady yesterday Married, to have and to hold, for better for worse, and so
forth, with a promise to make her a Jointure of Three Hundred a Year; to keep
(and never to part with) her, as being a Match only fit for me -- Jasper
Sympleton.


Withal my heart.
Now Sir Symon I think I am even with you.
Here Sir I deliver this to you as my Act and Deed.

So this is well. And now Gentlemen, because you shall be eased of all your
fears and miseries, all disputations 'twixt you two must cease; the Lady, the
Beauteous Lady Theocrine by Nuptial tie is yours, and as your Wife receive her.


Withal my heart, now you have plaid the part of honest men, welcome into my
Arms.


Pray Heaven you find us so, do you know me Sir?


What Drayner, Servant to my Rival Sir Symon Credulous, nay then I fear the
worst.


I am the honest man you talk of Sir, and because you shall not dwell in
Ignorance too long, behold whom you have Married.


Cheated, Gul'd, abused by Heaven; have I Married this Chamber-maid?


This Chamber-woman you have Sir, I was a Maid until you made me otherwise; and
afterwards you would persuade me to have bin as false as Dunkirk, and in one
hour have received English, Dutch, French, and abused them all; but you see the
Fates decreed it otherwise, I am now your Wife.


The Devil shall be mine as soon; go home to your old Office, keep the Door,
and let in every paltry Knight or Squire, that gives a Guinny and a Kiss for
Entrance, who being slighted by your Peevish Lady, falls foul on you, as being
loath to lose the Imagination of Enjoyment, though with her meanest Servants.


Good Bully Sympleton, how like an Ass you look now, I must confess you have
such a smart way of Courtship, such taking Charms, such sweet Devices, no Woman
can hold out. Wish you much Joy Sir. Gad Drayner let's serenade him with the
second part to the same Tune.

I had a Miss, a Dainty, Dainty Miss,
Who could at once, Dissemble, Cog, and Kiss;
This Miss I Gad grew weary of the Life,
Jilted Sir Jasper, and became a Wife.
How do you like it Bully, Ha?


Come, come Sir, be patient, you are now a Knight Alamode, a Courtier of the
Fashion, for scarce one of them but Marry some Debauched Lady or other, and
count it happiness if but three Nations have enjoyed her; and this Pasty is of
your own Cutting up, and no doubt will prove a Virtuous Wife.


A Virtuous Devil she may: Pox of the Sex in general, and in particular thee:
farewell Wife, farewell Bully; may thou Love on, till thou Reelst like a
Drunken Dutchman, and in that Humour Commit Adultery with some Gotish Citizen,
till the hot Pestilence of Pleasure sink thee into another World.


Stay Sir, stay, I have your hand here to confirm a Contract, which I give up
to Julia, and here I vow by all those Plagues you heaped upon her head, to kill
you instantly, unless you take her to your Arms.


Why this to your friend Drayner? Pox you'^ a man of Wit, and Merit, and I know
have more discretion, then to Bubble your Obliging Friend and Servant.


I am resolved nothing shall stop my fury; take her, or --


Pox on ye, come, had I Courage enough to die, I would be hanged before I'd
have a Chamber-maid.


A Chamber-maid, Ha, Ha, Ha; give me thy hand Sympleton, give you much joy, a
Chamber-maid, Ha.


Well, well Sir, let nothing trouble you, my Chamber-maid may be a Lady as soon
as your Lordship.


Give you much joy, I say no more Bully, but now I hope I may Court my Mistress
without the trouble of Poetising, Drinking, or Whoring, Ha, Bully Sympleton.


You may Sir, but she's Married.


The Devil she is, to whom?


A Shepherd Sir, one poor but honest, and such a one as Nature only made equal
in Graces to compare with her, won by her prayers and tears; I stole her hence,
and gave her to a faithful Shepherd, who was her Conduct to him.


S'death am I gold by Shepherds? the base Slaves shall die: who was the
Principal?


One though unfortunate, may boast himself a Soldier and a Gentleman, one whom
she thought was Dead, the worthy Vinbore.


A very honest fellow I Gad, and one I love extremely, though I never saw him;
he shall enjoy her, my blessing wait upon him, that is, continual Love, and
want of Women Kind, light on him.


There, there are the Murderers, seize on 'em all; if they refuse, knock'em
down, we have the Law on our sides.


Draw Gentlemen, they b^e the sight of a Sword.


Not I by Heaven.


Not I by Jove; what Draw against a Constable?


What Brother Constable, are you here?


Keep off Sir, how came you to be my Brother?


When you were hot upon the search for my Master, this Gentleman's Murderer, I
to secure his Person which might casually fall into your hands, and to create a
Jest, disguised my self into the shape of an Officer, and coming into your
Company, I carried you to the Tavern, where both the Murderer and Murdered
stood like Images, and to maintain the Jest, I appeared as fearful as your
Worship, giving the first start at what I knew so well, Sir Symon Credulous in
Armour.


What Sly, my subtle serving-man?


The same Sir, born to bring you out of these dangerous troubles.


Was there no Ghost in the Tavern then?


None I assure you, unless these Gentlemen are Devils.


Oh dishonour to our Office, and stain to this staff of Dignity, seize upon 'em
all, I'll teach you to abuse Authority, you are as wicked as Players, who make
no more of a Constable, then of a Cobbler.


The Cause you seize us for's so means we scorn to stand against it, -- here we
all yield our selves, do what you can, or dare.


Nay now you are Civil Gentlemen, and were it not that I have another Warrant,
which is too great to disobey, I'd give you all your Liberties; the King is
lost, and 'tis to be supposed Murdered, upon which I have Order to secure
every suspicious Person*


How the King lost?


And Murdered!


Oh Horror!


Nay now we may be hanged indeed, but sure the King had more wit then to die of
his own accord, 'tis mere Treason by Jove.


It can't be les^, therefore Gentlemen till news comes of our Sovereign, this
Tavern shall be your Goal, to no worse place I'll carry you.


I Gad thou art the merriest Constable in Europe; come along Brother Traitors,
Madam Sympleton you are a Conspirator too, come along Boys:

When sparkish Bacchanalians Traitors ^urn,
We will swim through Fire, and in Canary burn.

So now we are Revenged, and Profits grow
More great, then e're this Fop^ has to b^stow,
When Profit and Revenge together meet;
Each hour successes Crowned fall at our feet:
How bright each Motion to that Bliss doth prove!
Revenge once Compassed, tastes more sweet then Love.

The best of welcomes this sad place affords wait on your Grace's
Entertainment.


I thank you Sir, but must first Employ your service in declaring, what these
silent Emblems of a sorrow means?


Wilt please you Madam, lend your attention to the saddest Story that e're did
yet Seicilia's Annals Blot; Syracusias Monarch.


Help, help the Princess.


Madam, dear Madam.


Oh, Oh, Oh.


Bear her forth, and give her more Air.


Hold, I am better here; if any thing revive my Spirits, 'twill be this that
puts me in mind of my deceased Lord. Why stand you thus amazed?


Pardon us Madam; had the united dust of some dead friend, whose memories ne'er
forgot, visited Earth in his own shape again, our wonder could not have arrived
unto a higher Pitch. Let me Embrace thee friend.


Stand off, yet farther off, -- you know not what you touch; you safer far may
grapple with a flame; or in his midnight walks, affront a friend armed with
full Vials of destructive wrath: the Graves Inhabitants, when folded in
Corruption, are not more defiled then I.


What tends this Language to?


Destruction, Zannazarro.


How hast thou lost thy Temper Oroandes, prithee look on me friend, am I grown
a stranger to thy knowledge?


Leave me Amasia, thou art of kin unto those hollowed Angels that did once
attend my Actions, and must now with them a stranger to thy Oroandes grow.


You are to me a stranger Sir, yet in your looks something I read, that may
concern your absent Prince.


I do, and would Relate it, but that it hath a sound so full of horror, I
tremble to Relate it; yet I must, no other way can lead my Soul out of this
wilderness of flesh; he's Murdered.


How?


By whom?


By me, do ve start? 'twas I, 'twas I, that when your blooming hope cheered
with the Sun of Majesty, were grown big with expected favours, did Eclipse the
Glorious Light in a Black Cloud of Death; I cut the heart-strings of the Land,
and fed the Groaning Land with Blood, whose Purple had bin by an Ancient Stock
of Ancestors died into Royalty.


Ungrateful Slave, why are our Swords so slow to Execute the Villain?


Oh hold, believe him not, he Raves.


Thou hast but injured me Amasia, in staying their just fury.


Oh Brother if this be true, thou hast undone us all.


True, do not think this any Natural Distemper, that spreads this Malignant
Vapour through my Veins, which nought but the Poison of my Guilt Corrupts; yes
I have done it Brother, and you are all bound, as you love your Prince, to
see it Revenged with Torments; here's a Note will when I'm dead, direct you
where to find him.


One that here may claim a privilege.


Our Gracious Sovereign!


Welcome, Oh welcome Royal Sir.


You are all my much loved Subjects, such in whom never was King more Blessed;
Madam your presence Crowns our Joys, now I stand Exalted in the Zenith of my
Fate; who would not pass a Stormy Night, to be thus Courted by a Glorious Day?
You all are sharers in my heart, but thou my Love


My Joys are now Completed, and I find a Sea of Pleasure Crowns my Dangers
past; what those were, at your leisure I'll Relate.

Now Joy and Thanks alike my Breast possess,
Which leads me to a World of Happiness.

Hymen shall light us to that World of Joy,
Which once possessed, shall all our Cares destroy.

I should chide you, but 'tis no time to wear an angry brow, although the Crime
was monstrous,, to hier two wicked Slaves to Murder Vanlore, who then lay
Leaguer at Ardenna, but by Miracle preserved, to save mine and Heroina's Life,
for which all he desires, is your free Consent to Marry Theocrine.


My Lord he has it and I Joy to hear his Life was saved to Act (...) brave a
^eed, Rise and receive my Blessing, you are a worthy So^.


To add a Title to that Honour, I here Create him (...) you Oroandes to a Place
of greater worth, and nearer to our (...), thy Loyal (...) merits it.


Long live Ante^ and Heroina, King and Queen of Scicily.


My Debts are great to all, but must remain in full Arrears until my Off'rings
pa^'d to ^air Heroina give me liberty:

Then lulled in Peace* and by this ^rize se^ down,
We'll find new ways past Victories to Crown.
The mighty Bliss about my Soul doth move
In different forms, like unknown Joys Above,
B'ing Crowned at once with Loyalty and Love.

WHAT strange unkindness doth amongst you Reign,
Sure you will ne'er leave off this Damming strein;
You Sans remorse, like Cruel Victors kill;
Both Friend and Foe must suffer by your will,
And all you do is good, though ne'er so ill;
Your Native sweetness sure is from you fled,
And all kind Nature is Extinct and Dead;
Like Miss Enjoyed, you lead us to the Door,
Quite Cloyed, you thrust us out, and Love no more,
Leave us like her to all Ensuing harms,
And Curse the ill, because you hate her Charms:
By Instigation, or by Precept led,
You that are Wits the Guiddy faction head;
And taught by them, ill Nature and their spite,
Y' Explode what they call wrong, though ne'er so right.
Like Massanello's our kind Judges sit,
Cry down the Play, because they hate the Wit;
Dam me says one, why so Satyrick here,
What means the Fop to Ramble from his sphere,
And Carp at things, the gravest Poets fear?
Troth 'twas Invention, though he mist the way,
He writ, and hoped to please as well as they,
But he misto^k, and Jaded his poor Muse,
And what he though Jocose, proved mere abuse.
The Drudging Scribler quakes within, for fear
You should turn Hectors and dissect him here;
His little frailty sure you can forgive,
And Impudence you know deserves to live;
You may be merciful, though you are Foes,
Since to your Rage at once he did Expose
All he held dear, to Lead you by the Nose.

