LOng have we strove, with Passion and Grimace,
To show you Vice and Vertue's differing Face:
Vertue's Reward has wooed you to its Charms;
And Vice exposed, should laugh you from its Arms.
Virtue we vainly offer to your Taste;
Tired with Instruction, and Agog for Jest,
Y' abhor the wholesome Plainness of the Feast.
In vain on Pois'nous Vice would Satyr trample;
For what you should contemn, is your Example:
In vain we wear the Buskin, or the Sandal;
Your judging false makes our Instruction Scandal.
The Wife provoked to wrong her Husband's Bed,
Was meant his Cure, by punishing his Head:
But you from hence, not kind, but jealous grow;
Think all Wives false, when Usage makes 'em so:
Reform the Brute, you keep the Woman true.
The Powdered Fop, for Drawling Speech, and Dress,
Exposed, shall laugh: But then so likes his Face,
He dresses in the Stage's Looking-Glass.
The High-kept Miss, when shown the Fate of Iilting,
Smiles! Gets a new Spark -- sets Fools a Tilting.
A second Time she's warned, and so improves,
Till in due Time about the Pit she roves,
Reduced to Doily's Stuff, no Stays, and dirty Gloves.
Thus even sage Collier too might be accused,
If what he has writ's through Ignorance abused.
Girls may read him, not for the Truth he says,
But to be pointed to the Bawdy Plays:
Far be it to think such his Intention was.
Thus even sound Physic, if wrong taken, shall
Inflame Diseases, which it meant to heal:
Now; though Men die, Physic has Virtue still.
Would you but come with Minds attentive bent
To laugh at Follies, Vices to resent;
Warned by the Dangers painted, would you learn
To shun abroad what's here the Wise Man's Scorn;
Calm would he then the Zealot's hasty Rage;
And good Men, Fearless, might support the Stage:
Then, as at Athens, to learn Vertue's Rules,
Crowds might we hope for from deserted Schools,
To see our Labours, by just Laws allow'd;
And Public Treasures pay for Public Good:
Like them encouraged, we like them might write;
Athenian Hearers raised Athenian Wit.
In favour then of us, begin to day
To make a just Construction of a Play:
So shall the impious Xerxes Terror move
The chaste Tamira's Tears from Ruined Love.
His first Attempt for Virtue you approved;
But now, fair Nymphs, by nobler Passion moved,
Our Author has to your just Praise designed
A brighter Image of your Sexes Mind.

HAVE Patience, brave Mardonius.

Patience! 'Tis the Coward's Virtue.
I'm a Soldier brought up in Arms;
And when the noble End of Life is gone;
My Country's Honour lost; my King with shame repulsed;
Our Foes insulting; we still hopeless of Revenge;
Where is there room for Patience?

I am a Soldier, Sir.

Then talk like one.

I would not talk; the Tongue's a Woman's weapon;
While there's a Greek on Earth, my Arm shall speak my Thoughts.

Why did thou mention Patience then?

Because I knew 'twoud Anger you.
I bat opposed you, like a rapid Stream,
To make you Foam and Roll with double force.

Over whom?

The Athenians! Think on Salamis;
In that deep Sea, the Persian Honour sunk.
'Twas there our dazzling Sun, Great Xerxes Glory, set for ever.

Confusion!

Does then the Name of Salamis offend you?

Furies and Hell! Can thou be pleased to hear it?

I am -- To hear it does offend you.
And now I've raised you to my End proposed,
Iv'e that shall keep your brave Resentment warm.
Read there the List of our surviving Troops,
Which I with utmost care have joined;
If yet you think it not too late to Head 'em,
To Morrow's Sun shall see a General Muster,
Where every Face will speak an Heart resolved:
'Tis true, they're scarce an Handful
To the Numbers we set out with; yet still
A brave Revenge, Revenge for Glory lost,
Is such an animating Cause,
As must inspire our Arms with double Fury.

Ay, now the Soldier speaks! This Talk becomes thee;
Methinks the Voice of Fate informs me now*
That proud Themistocles shall dearly buy
His boasted Spoils of Persia.
My Heart's on fire at the reviving Thought,
And bounds to be in Action.
No more remains, but that we seek the Drooping King,
And Form him for the vast Exploit.

Brave Artabanus is in search of him;
'Tis said, on Information, that the Enemy
Had a Design to hinder his Retreat;
He Posted privately to the Hellespont,
But ever he could arrive a furious Storm
Had quite dispersed his Bridge of ships,
And that way stopped his Passage;
How he Escaped, I hear not.
See, Sir, Artabanus comes;
We probably may learn of him.
My Lord! You're Welcome! Doubly Welcome now, but say,
How have the Gods disposed our Master Xerxes?

If thou can utter'ought,
That may advance our eager Hopes, be bold,
And let thy Words come forth, as if the Fate
Of Greece were lodged upon thy Tongue;
For know Mardonius stands with you resolved
On brave Revenge, or Death.

Then Welcome Death, for brave Revenge is lost.

What! while our Lives are Ours?

Nothing is ours: Xerxes is no more Himself.

I grant Thermopylae and Salamis
Have Altered him --
But yet he lives, and while he lives there's hope.

Far less, than even his Death could give us:
'Tis true his Body crawls, and drags
A Frantic Being, his Soul is drowned in lethe
Insensible, and deaf to Glory, or Dishonour,
O! were it possible my Silence could
Conceal his shame; By Heaven
This loyal Hand should stop my Tongue for ever.

Amazement seizes me, relate the Scene,
For my impatient Soul's all Ear to know
The Worst, that Fate can Threaten.

Behold him then this fatal Monarch Xerxes
Late Universal Master of the Earth and Seas:
First of so Formidable, so vast an Army,
That as they moved, whole Rivers still were drained,
To quench 'em on their thirsty March.
The or'e-bunden'd Earth grew weary of her Load,
And when they closed their Squadrons groaned to bear 'em.

By Arms a glorious Host, and wanting nothing but an Head.

And that, Alas! grown weak the noble Body dies:
Even by an handful at the Famed Thermopylae.
(Famed indeed to Grecian Glory) 'twas mangled All,
Most shamefully subdued, and lost.

Nothing, but a Xerxes, could have lost 'em.

Behold him yet a second time,
The Master of his Fate: A Fleet so numerous,
Their vast Provision left a raging Famine on
The Neighbouring Coasts: The spacious Earth
Was stripped of Men, and Women till'd the Ground,
Even the wide Element of Air could scarce
Afford 'em Breath to fill their swelling Sails:
By Arms a glorious Body too; Invincible
To Mortal Thought: But conscious Heaven
Foreseeing, while it thus bestrid the Seas,
It must in Time have led the Earth in Chains,
Decreed it Xerxes for the fatal Head,
And that way Tottered it to Ruin:
And now behold the amazing Change of Greatness!
By Heaven, it strikes my Soul to think
This awful Man, that Mustered half the World
In Arms, at Salamis should be Reduced
So low, that even a common Fisher-Boat
Without one Slave, to wait his Nod was All
He could Command, to save his Person in a shameful Flight.

Were it not for shame, my Eyes would melt to hear
The moving Tale: But Tears are too Effeminate, No!
Let Girls, and Lovers weep! A Soldier should
Resent his Fate: Why doest thou fold thy Arms,
And sighing shake thy Head? Is there beyond
This shameful Flight yet more of shame?
For that's the only pain, that galls a Soldier.

There is (alas!) and a severe one too! His Vain
His Proud, (and what the History of Man
Could never Parallel) his Monstrous Resolution
After Flight: He says he made the Athenians Fly,
He lost no Battle! Greece still Trembles at his Name,
In Arms more Famed than ever,
And that the Envious World should know,
And when amazed I urged the contrary,
He turned away, and talked to Sycophants
Who as I spoke, still soothed his lethargy:
To sum the Tale, in spite of all Opposing sense,
He has resolved to enter Persia,
In a splendid Triumph, I saw him move
Amidst his shameful Pageantry, in all
The Haughty Pride, and State of an Insutling
Conqueror; Poor Slaves, and Vagabonds are Hired,
To Personate the seeming Captives of
A Real Victory; vast Empty Coffers,
Supposed of Treasure taken from the Enemy,
High Castled Elephants, Rich Gilded Trophies,
Spoils, and Armour, Trumpets, and Songs prepare his way,
The People stare upon the Gaudy show,
And Rend the Skies with Echoed Wellcomes:
While he in solemn Pace stalks Proudly on,
And even out swells the Hero of a Theatre.

O Vile Disgrace of Arms! A Triumph! Hell!

Impossible!

Then it can't be true: Would it were not.

Gods! -- No more! I'll hast, and stop this Vile Procession,
Charge his Folly home; my Honest Tongue,
Even from this Precipice of Towering Pride
Shall break his Fall, and catch him back to Glory.

Yet stay, my Lord, this Rashness may be Fatal;
'Tis Madness to oppose the Mad, (For so
Indeed you'll find him) let this Fit of his
Wild Frenzy pass; (I'm sure 't must have an Interval)
Let's take him in his cooler Thoughts;
To Morrow were a fitter time.

You have Instructed me: 'Tis well! To Morrow then.

What if we mingled with the Crowd to see him pass?

I think 'twere well, to observe his Actions,
That we know to chide him.

Do you your Pleasure:
For me, I dare not trust my Temper.
I know it would burst, and ruin all: Farewell.

Hark, the Trumpets speak him near at hand;
And see the Pageantry appears!

What are these?

The same I told you were so busy with the King,
While I exclaimed against this Mad Solemnity:
That cringing Spark, now the Rough War is done,
Has purchased a Commission in the standing Guard;
The other is a Mongrel Poet,
That never writ a Verse he did not like,
Nor ever liked any more, than those the World had damned:
The Vulgar with his Madrigals are caught by the Ears,
Excessive Impudence thrusts him into the Court:
And there they laugh to hear him praise himself.

Him I guess to be the Orderer of this Days Foolery;
What a Chorus too: We shall be entertained anon!

Peace, lets observe 'em,

O Glorious Day, were ever seen such Crowds
Of pleased Spectators!

Ah! Happy People! Happy Xerxes!
Now we shall turn the Glass of Time,
And make it run the Golden Age again.

Now Merit will have leave to show her Head,
All Arts and Industry, the Heav'n-born Gift
Of Poetry shall Flourish,
And Men of Wit, like you, shall be rewarded:
Believe me, Sir, You Grace the Laurel,
Great Xerxes did it Honour, when he placed it there.

I think so.

You'll be the Envy of Parnassus.

I always was, Sir: For do ye observe me,
While other Fools were drudging, to acquire
A Name by the Pathetic, and the Dull sublime:
I unthought of, over a Bottle, would now and then
Surprise them with my Madrigals, my Songs,
My Whimms, and Knick-Knacks
Carried the Vogue of Town and Court before me;
Whipped off the Laurel from Despairing Brows,
And by the Hand of Merit fixed it on my own.

Were it not time the Paean should be Sung?
Wee're just upon the Palace.

Yes, Sir, it shall be sung, and Gloriously,
When I give the Word: I love to have 'em
Wait a little, it makes 'em take
The more notice of me -- Now sound, ye Slaves!
That all the World may Hear -- my Words.

Prepare, the King approaches.

PRepare, blessed Sons of Art, prepare
To Raise the Thundering Voice of War:
Sing! sing! and sound the Hero's Fame,
Let Warlike Notes, his Warlike Deeds Proclaim.

Sing, sing, c.

Now cease the Noise, and while we meet him,
Let Love and softer Joys make haste to greet him.

Welcome Hero from the Toils of War!
Welcome! as Rest to Pains and Care:
Welcome! as kind returning Day,
To Souls that door the Night away!
Welcome! as Hope to Lovers in Despair.

Welcome Hero from the Toils of War!

See! see! what softer Blessings wait
The Happy Triumph of the Great;
Peace and Plenty fly before him;
Peace and Plenty make Mankind adore him;
Peace and Plenty Tune his Soul to Love,
And give below, a Taste of Joys above.
Give him on Earth ye Powers, long Love and Peace,
And after Death Immortal Bliss.

Thus in despite of their resisting Fate,
The unwilling Gods, those busy Rivals
In my Rising Glory, are forced
With sullen Envy to behold my Triumphs:
Look from your Crystal Battlements! look down
Ye Powers amazed, to view a Soul unshaken
By these baffled Storms of Chance! A Soul!
That dares resolve to bear your utmost wrongs,
And grapple with opposed Omnipotence.

Thou Deity Adored! Immortal Xerxes Hail!
To Thee are held the lifted Hands of Persia
When War or Tumult would molest her Quiet;
To Thee she bends her Knee, in humble Gratitude
For Foes subdued:
Let every Head bow down, and kiss the Earth
That bears him to our view: Soldiers and Children
Virgins and Lovers! All without distinction kneel
Yet lower, prostrate as the Vail of Night,
That wraps the Globe in Darkness: Down! Bow down,
And kiss the Earth with Adoration.

O shame to Glory!

Incredible Stupidity!

Now by my yet untasted Joys of Power,
This looks a God -- It is!
For see! The dazzled Sun contracts
His Golden Beams, he hides his Face and Blushes
To behold a Rival Power above him.

Gods! How his drunken Fancy swells him.

Ha! What means this sudden Face of Death?
How fell these heaps of prostrate Bodies?
O Spleenful Fate! They are dead! Malicious Planet!
Am I left alone to Rule, the Monarch
Of an Un-peopled World? -- 'Tis well ye Powers,
Your dire Decrees shall be obeyed! Up! Up!
From your sleepy Graves! Rise all! Revive and take
New Life, from Power to give it.

Amazing Frenzy!

Dread Sir, the Reverend Magi are at hand,
And come with Pious Joy, to Gratulate your Triumphs.

Let 'em come on, and we approve their Zeal.

Long live Victorious Xerxes!
Thou Dread Commissioner of Fate, in whom
The Allknowing Gods repose, the Care and Business
Of the World below: From thee, Mankind receives
Its Happiness so fast, our Prayers to Heaven
Are still but Thanks, for Benefits enjoyed.

Thou Sacred Head! Instruct us to be Grateful
Both to the Gods, and Thee; What Hecatombs
Are due for this Auspicious Day?
How shall we thank the ever Glorious Sun,
For such a King? What Vows? What Offerings too
Are due to Neptune?
Who through the dangerous Seas,
Has thus returned thee safe to Persia?
O say: Where shall we find out Victims
Worthy of their Altars?

How now! Priest-hood? Is this the way,
Your fawning Piety would sooth an injured King?
Have not those Powers Alarmed by Sea and Land,
Opposed my spreading Glory? Am I not
Xerxes still, and must at last ignobly sue
For Peace, by a precarious Sacrifice?
Yes Slaves, I'll Feast your Gods Adored;
They shall have Offerings Priests! they shall!
The injurious Sun, the Seas and Wind that saw,
That sunk and scattered my stupendous Navy,
Shall feel the Vengeance of a Rousing Deity.
Give Order that the Wind receive Three Hundred Lashes,
Let Fleeting Aeolus be whipped from Pole to Pole,
Then drive him to some hollow Cell confined, and tell
The Roaring God, his Master Xerxes is revenged!

O Impious Thought! Avert this Madness, Heaven!

How now! What would your Grave Devotion startle me?
Away draw out an able Band of Archers,
Mount 'em on the Battlements of you lofty Tower,
And let 'em shoot a Thousand Arrows against the Sun.

O Blasphemy!

As many Chains be thrown into the Sea,
And bind the Blue haired Neptune to a Rock!
Prepare an hundred Bars of vast hot glaring Iron,
Then plunge 'em hissing down
Into the burning Bowels of the Deep;
And while his scalding Billows, boil and foam
With raging Torture;
There let him Rave, and dash his battered Limbs,
Like a despairing Slave for ever.
Away! Take all the Wings of swift Revenge,
And see my Will performed! Now Priests!
Are these fit Offerings for your Mighty Powers?
I could not stay to send 'em with your lazy Prayers
To Heaven, your wanton Thoughts have dipped their Wings
Too deep, in Pleasures of the Earth, to let 'em mount so high.
Where's all their Idle Bolts, their brandished Lightning now,
To blast the Man that dares oppose 'em?

While Frantic Passions talk so wild and loud,
The Voice of Reason is of little force:
But still remember, King,
Though while you live the Gods retard your doom,
Yet after death, a sure Revenge will come.

Away! ye senseless Dreamers of the World to come,
Who dare pretend to fright Mankind with Tales,
Of what shall happen after Death:
But yet can give us no account of what
The Soul endured, before it put on Flesh!
Hence from my Sight and Thoughts for ever!
Begone ye expensive Lumber of the World!

Behold Great Sir! A Thousand skilful Archers,
From you High Spacious Tower,
A loud Proclaiming War against the Sun:
They brace their stubborn Bows, and look
Resolved, to make their Arrows reach him.

By Jove they are there! Ha! what means this Rising Storm?
By all my Power unshaken, my Foes above are startled
At my daring Fury; I'll stand and view
The Godlike War? See! how the Fleeting Winds
Are posted to the Sun, with Tidings of
Impending danger! Hark! the dreadful News
Is told, in Peals of bursting Thunder! Ha!
By Arms the Noble Charge is given!
For see! the Alarmed God retires!
He dares not climb the Skies, he Reins his fiery Steeds!
He stops! he turns 'em back, and rattles down
The Eastern Hill of Heaven! see! see!
How the foaming Coursers Flounce and Tear,
And dash the spangled Skies behind 'em!
Now by my own Immortal Soul: I'll mount
The burning Car my self. I'll have it drawn
By slow-pac'd Elephants, and every gladsom Day
Shall shine a Year:
New Order, new Seasons shall be born,
Even from the womb of this stupendous darkness,
New Nature shall arise, and bless the World
With one Eternal Spring!

Ha! The Sun appears again! I'll Humour his Extravagance.
See, Sacred Sir, 'tis done! Behold
A new born Light adorns the Skies,
And seems t'applaud your vast Creating Thought.

Ha! 'Tis so! The harassed Gods are weary of the Fray:
Why, let 'em rest, and now alone
The business of the Earth shall fill my Thoughts:
Draw near, ye Royal Captives of my Terestial War,
And listen to pronouncing Fate! No longer now,
The Chains of Victory, shall gall your Valiant Minds;
Your future Bonds shall all be Love;
For ever now be free! be safe! Xerxes
Is no more your Foe!
No more the Toils of War shall break my Slumbers,
The Lust of Conquest shall Inflame me now no more,
Nor Fate shall dare to cross my Will, which thus
Resolves to give Mankind a General Peace,
And roll the wanton Globe in Pleasure.
And now to spread my Resolution through
The spacious World, here I Proclaim, to any Head
That shall invent a new untasted Draught
Of Luxury, Rewards unlimited,
The Earth and Sea, shall throw their Treasure up
To make him Happy -- --
Let Young Fledged Heroes court the noise of War,
And starve their Pleasures: But to feed their Care,
Let fond Ambitions Wing still scorn to rest,
Still soar to Prey, without desire to taste:
For me more solid Bliss my Days shall Crown.
I'll taste the Pleasures which my Arms have won;
Eternal Spings of Love, and Gustful Joy
Shall feed my ravished Sense, without the power to Cloy.

YOur Fortune rises, Sir, Your Muse has Charmed the King;
After the Banquet, he intends to see
The Mask performed: But what's a fairer Demonstration
Of his Favour, I am commanded to entrust you
With his secret Love -- He much relies on you.

Possible! O ye Gods! A Pimp!
Then my Prayers are heard! The Devil's in it
If I don't thrive now!
Her Name, Dear Sir?
Her Name and Quality: I'll melt her down
With a Distich: She shall be Rythm'd to Raptures.
Her Name, Sir:

Her Name is Virtue, Sir.

Virtue! She does not belong to the Court, Sir, does she?

That must be our care to find out: You know
The King resolves to taste no common Pleasures;
His Fancy therefore leads him to enjoy
A Married Beauty, of untainted Virtue;
One that dares defend her Honour,
Against the utmost Storms of Fortune:
Whom neither Threats, or Bribes of Power can shake,
Nor all the subtle Arts of Languishing Desire.

Look you (not that I believe we shall) But
Suppose we should find such a Lady? Pray
What would his Majesty do with her?

He'd first use all his Arts and Power to bend her Virtue,
And if he found it yield, despise her;
But if she stood his Love unmoved,
Then Force should give him a Delight,
Which her consent would Ruin.

O ho! Then it seems, his Majesty would
Only have a Slash at her Virtue! Very Good!
A Married Lady you say, that won't Cuckold
Her Husband for Love or Money! Why now,
After all, that must be a very odd

Yet such a one there may be found, Sir.
You know the Fair and Famed Tamira,
The Wife of Noble Artabanus:
The King, before her Marriage, was in Love with her,
And often made Attempts upon her Honour:
But meeting still severe Repulses,
Offered her at last his Crown, and even That,
She with the same Indifference rejected.
The General on this was Banished, she follow'd him,
And to the hazard of her Life, embraced his Fortune.
The King at last, with Absence cured his Love;
And wanting Soldiers for the War with Greece,
Called Artabanus home, restored him to his Honours,
And gave Tamira to his Arms: But he
Remembers now afresh her former Cruelty;
And resolutely Vows to satisfy
His old Revenge, and the Remains of Love.

A satisfaction for the Gods above!
But hark you Sir! Are you sure 'tis Artabanus's Wife?

The same, I mentioned several,
But most the King inclines to her.

By Jove we'll Dub his Lordship then! we'll Dub him:
Now my Revenge is perfect: He gave me
Nothing for my last Dedication.

I guess the King expects her at the Mask.
But see our General, and Artabanus with him,
I like 'em not, they are Enemies to you and me.

Oh! Let me alone with 'em!
You say the King has Positively
Commanded none shall pass his Presence Armed?

He has -- I'll retire, and Inform him
They are here, while you demand their Swords.

What mean these double Guards?

Safety, Sir, Safety!

What art thou?

I am a Wit,

I'll not take your word, Sir.

O 'twere Charity, my Lord, since he can't keep it.

I'll write no more Dedications, my Lord!

'Tis well resolved. 'Twere Insolence
To Libel Men of Honour: For what were it else,
To tell the World they like a Muse,
Which just before the world had Damned.

Your Lordships Picture was not ill drawn before it.

'Twas every where unlike me;
Thou drew my Honours all over white,
Without one touch of shade to heighten it;
It looked to me a flat insipid nothing.

The very Image of your Lordships Gratuity.

'Tis a vain Pride, not Gratitude Rewards
The Undeserving; to Encourage thee
Were an Affront to Real Merit.
To the Presence -- on my Lord! --

You must leave your Sword, Sir.

Who demands it?

Your Humble Servant, Sir.

Here, Take it Slave!

Auh! not by the wrong Handle! I beseech you, Sir.

The meaning of this Insolence! You Gentlemen,
Is it the King's Command?

My Lord, it is.

'Tis likely, dispute it not my Lord! There Gentlemen!

Gods! That a Man so great in Arms,
Should ever know the guilt of Fear! See where he comes,
Amidst his Court of Women now! O shameful Change.

Did you see her say you?

She follows in the Train, my Lord.

Let her be near us at the Mask; I would
Appear a gentle Lover first, and try
The force of Passion, and Heart wounding Eloquence;
I know though Real, they would plead in vain;
But, that 'tis heightens my delight: For when
She thinks the Lamb-like Lover, dying
In the vain pursuit: The bounding Lyon then
Shall start, and drag the unwilling Prey.

Health to your Majesty.

Aranthes welcome! welcome Artabanus,
Valiant Mardonius welcome!

I never durst be a Coward, Sir -- But now
Methinks you should not know me for Mardonius.
I used to wear a Sword!

O! 'Twere needless, unless you had Enemies.

There still are Graecians Living, Sir.

And they were born to live.

Yes, and Conquer too! Your Pardon, Sir,
I love 'em not, though they deserve my Love.

Ha!

Take heed, my Lord, your words have moved the King

Then does yours soften him? For I want Temper.

I'll find a fitter time to silence him.
Such Men are hateful, and will oppose my Pleasures.

We came to Entreat a private Hour with your Majesty.

The Court at present is disposed to Mirth
And Pleasure: After the Mask I'm yours.

We'll Attend your Majesty.

Your Entertainment shall be soft
And pleasing, what the Music wants, may be
Supplied in Love: But that's a Feast, my Lord.
You never seek abroad, that are so sure
A welcome Guest at home.

I owe that Blessing, Sir, to your Indulgence;
And see she's here! Your Majesty will pardon me?

'Tis your Duty, Sir: By Heaven
He loves her, after four Years Enjoyment!
Had she been mine, ever this I'd loathed
The Sight of her -- Not but she's Fairer, than the Beams of Day!
Softer than a Lovers hope, -- and Virtuous, -- to an Insolence.

I hope you'er not displeased, my Lord.

No! But what was it brought you hither?

Indeed the hopes of seeing you.

Do ye not fear the King should Gaze upon you?

If you fear it, I'll retire.

No, it would be observed: But yet beware of him.
He often dwells upon your Praise of late.

Indeed I'm sorry if it troubles you,
Else could hear it with Indifference.

Come Sirs, our Entertainment waits us.
Artabanus! You'll trust me near your Lady.

That Trust will be her Protection, Sir.

Begin the Mask.

Awake soft Luxury, awake
The smiling Gods befriend thee,
And with Pleasures here attend thee;
Now Feast thy Senses, and Receive
The sweetest Joy, the Gods can give.
Awake, c.

With me, these Rival Gods contend,
And Each asserts his Power to bless;
Thy Voice alone the strife must end,
Who know all Pleasures in Excess:
And wanton Cupid comes to prove,
Life has no Joy like Lawless Love.

What kind Reward shall I receive
From them, to whom my Voice I give.

That thou Unbrib'd may give thy Voice,
Eternal Freedom to possess thy Choice.
Mars advances to a Warlike Symphony.

Sound! sound! the Trumpet sound,
The Warriors Soul Alarm!
He Fights! -- They Fly! -- and now with Conquest Crown
What God can give a Nobler Charm?

No more! no more! Ah throw thy Arms away:
For with 'em Love shall Sport and Play;
The Trumpet now shall softer sound,
And swell, and weep, and gently wound.
Hymen Descends.

If softer Love can make thee Blessed,
That Bliss in Marriage is possessed.
Indifference Interrupts him.

Away! away! no Life can be
Like that, Mankind enjoys in me:
Indifference is the happiest State,
On which no Care or Sorrows wait,
Nothing hating, nought admiring,
Never Wanting, ne'er Requiring;
Never Pining for Possession,
Nor yet slighting kind Occasion;
Joy is welcome still to cheer me,
Sorrow never shall come near me.

If Peaceful Iows can make thee blessed,
In him, or me they are possessed.

Begone! Dull Pair, I cannot take,
Or grant a Joy in either:
Be chained for ever Back to Back,
And wander through the World together.

Begone Dull Pair, he cannot take, c.

Would you know the sweetest Joys,
Which Virtue wisely keeps from Fools;
Then steal a Mistress, Break all Ties,
That would confine your Love to Rules.
From Vulcan forct to hide my Charms,
I Modest still, and Cold must prove:
But Ah! when in my Warriors Arms
I live! and give a loose to Love.

All other Loves but faintly taste,
Or still repeated fly too fast.
But the Lover
Will Discover.
Changing
Ranging
Makes the Bliss for ever last.

True Joy is now revealed,
Come Pleasures Dance and Play.
All! All! To Venus yield,
Fair Venus Wins the Day.

Now, my Lords, what think you of these softer Pleasures?
Is not a peaceful Court adorned with Beauties?
Far beyond the Prospect of a dusty Camp?
Show me an Army now, that dares resist 'em!
That could Unconquered view their Charms!

I could have shown you one, Sir, your Pardon, Ladies!

What! -- They were valiant old Soldiers!

No! Young and Lusty, in their Prime of Years and Health;
I dare allow the Ladies each to Conquer seven Men,
But Seven Hundred Thousand would have held 'em to it.

You are allow'd, this Liberty, my Lord,
Your Years Excuse you.

I have lost no Taste of Manly pleasures.

How did the Music take you?

Though it were loose, I could have liked it
In a proper Season, to me 'twas harsh
And out of Time, when I have nothing else
To do, -- I'll have a Mistress, and a Lute.

Why, what have Men to do on Earth
But to Indulge their Appetites? How should
We stop the swift Career of Time, unless
We load him well with Pleasures ever he flies away?
Old Men I find can be content to Dream
Of Happiness: Away! Some Fruit and sprightly Wines!
Conduct the Ladies to the Grove of Jessamines,
And strew the best Perfumes of Nature as they Pass,
Your Ear Aranthes.

Pray, my Love, Excuse me! I dare not follow 'em,
During the Mask, the King let fall
Some wanton Words, that Trouble, and Offend me,
Forgive this Fault, I'll ne'er be seen at Court again.

This Prudence has Obliged me: Farewell.

Nor e're in Common talk speak slightly of my Triumph?

My Royal Lord his Private Thoughts I know not,
If they were ill, he ne'er would utter 'em,
I have indeed observed him Thoughtful when
We speak of You, and he has sought
This Opportunity to tell

I can Ill spare it now, my Pleasures Wait,
And they Brook no Delay.

Beseech Your Majesty but a Moment.

A Moment! 'tis an Age! Let him be short.
Too Plain I read his sullen Thoughts,
He takes an Ill time to Thwart me!
Let him be ware my sleeping Will,
For if it wakes Disturbed, it may be Fatal.
Now Sir! Your Greivances!

Are they not Written in my Face?

I read nothing there but Age,
And that indeed's a Greivance!

Sir, You love me not!

Go on! have you any more?

Gods!

Speak lower.

Forbear, my Lord, you'll Ruin All!

Speak you then, that can be Master of your Passion.

My Royal Lord, may I entreat Permission,
I unload that Grief, which Heavily
Has brought us to the Court?

You have our leave, the rest be silent,
'Till I commission 'em to Answer.

I submit.

I'll do my best.

Then thus, my Lord.
We Grieve to think your late Expensive Triumph,
Was not worth the Sums it Cost You: That all
Your Trophies, Spoils and Treasure taken from Greece,
Are now thrown by for Lumber:
That even Your Royal Captives led in Golden Chains,
Were Abject Slaves before they wore 'em:
That a Benumbing Lethargy has seized Your Soul,
And sunk your Glory in Unmanly Pleasures:
That Women, Flatterers, and servile Poets are
Your only Favourites now: That we
Whose Loyal Swords have ev'er been Your Guard,
E're we can gain Admittance to your Sight,
Are Forced to give 'em up to base born Slaves,
Least we should sheath 'em in Your Jeasous Heart.
We Greive, that your surviving Soldiers are
So little known, the many Thousands
In Your Service Dead, so soon Forgotten.

Proceed.

You may remember, Sir,
In Your Prosperity of Arms, when once
You drew Your Hardy Millions up, and saw
The Amazing space of World was taken.
To contain their Numbers,
You then bedewed Your Cheeks with Tears to see
So many Gallant Souls in perfect Health,
Which You was sure in One short Age of Man
The Inevitable Throat of Death must swallow.
If then so late, because a certain end
Could move Your Soul so far, what Floods of Grief,
What Raving Madness should Possess you,
When You reflect, that they were all Devoured
At a Meal:
One Fatal Battle slew 'em for the Tyrants Feast,
And for his Table spread the Earth with Slaughter.
By Heaven our Foes Report, they are ashamed,
To have Conquered Men, that can so tamely bear their Losses;
Others less insulting say, (and that indeed does wound us)
That we stand ready all, and raving for Revenge,
But want an Animating King to lead us.

Nay, Sir! they talk yet worse than this --

'Tis not yet your time to speak.

Would it were! -- I have done.

Have you any more?

No more my Lord, but that
You would believe my Words, the Dictates of
A Loyal Heart, that bleeds to serve you.

Aranthes, You!

My Lord, my Griefs are told by Artabanus.

Now Sir, you have leave.

I am unarted, Sir, in any grace of Speech
To stir the Soul! my words are plain and honest,
Too short to hide a Crime with Eloquence;
I'm down-right angry I, where ever I see
The Face of Shame: Ye Gods! had I but taken
The Cue to have spoke, the half what he has uttered,
Ye had appeared a -- I want a Name to call a King by:
But come, Sir, I'll return the Music you have given:
I've yet a Tongue will better speak
My Thoughts; a Voice, that once could warm you faster
Than a Silken Mistress, and was, perhaps,
As loath to let you sleep a'Nights.

Where is this Powerful Orator? Let's hear him!

Bid the Trumpets Enter.

Now you strike him home, my Lord.

Here! here's the harmonious Tongue shall plead my Cause,
And rouse your startling Soul to Glory! Sound a Charge.

Yet hold! By Heaven, I plaud my Fellow Soldiers heat!
And see, my Lord! what hardy Squadrons join to back him.
Look! how they move! what, what a Martial Grace and Order!
Gods! Victorious Terror's in their Eyes, and now
Suppose within a well pitched Field,
The swelling Foe, advancing to our Foremost Ranks;
We fix our chosen ground, and stand impatient
To receive 'em! The Neighing Steeds too foam and champ!
And tear the Earth, and show a noble lust of War!
And see they come! the glowing Soldiers shout;
The Signal's given, and Death in ghastly wounds
Deals various Fate around him!
While Clashing Armour, Spears, and Rattling Shields,
Drums, Fifes, and Trumpets, (Glorious Horror!)
With their stupendous Clangor crack the Skies!
Now stretch the Alarming Voice of War! Sound, till
From your swollen Veins, the Springing Blood gush forth!
Imagine now, the eager Arms of Victory
Extending to embrace us! sound! as if
The Glorious Scene were here in real Action!
Sound! and wake the Ghost of this departed Hero.

O Glorious Harmony!

O Powerful Charm!

By Arms, it sets my glowing Veins on fire!
I burn! my Spirits rave with fury for the War!
Away to Horse! to Arms! why stand you, Sir, unmoved,
As if a low born Fear, had fixed you here Inanimate?
Can you be deaf, when great Revenge and Honour call?
Are there such Charms in a detested Sloth and Ease?
God's where have you Tameness lest, to stand thus long
Suspected, not to dare? Sound a fresh Alarm!
And let the Martial Din ungrave the Dead
To rouse him!

On Forfeit of your Lives, forbear your Insolence!
Audacious Traitor! thus to Brand
My Hallowed Pleasures, with the Name
Of Slothful, Ease and Fear! I'll have thee think,
Unknowing Slave! That nothing in it self
Is Good or Ill, but as it pleases me.

I say no! There will be shame in Cowardice,
Though Xerxes were a Soldier!

Ha!

Forbear, my Lord, consider 'tis your King that hears you!

I have no King, 'tis Merit, not a Crown
That makes a King, when Pride and Sloth debase
The Soul of Majesty: The Crown's a Toy,
No more in Worth, than what it weighs in Gold:
I scorn a King, whose Robes can only speak him Royal.

Witness ye Gods! How loath I am to wake,
And crush this Slave, who like a Crawling Insect dares
Disturb the sleeping Lyon --

A Lyon!
By Heaven I've seen a Hare, a Woman's Courage
Dare beyond thee; the Martial Artemisia,
Whose Aiding Arm in Fight, supported and disgraced thee:
The Warlike Woman showed a Manly Rage,
The Courtly King a Woman's Trembling Fear:
Ever were it thou last in Battle, foremost
In the Flight, humble in Danger, and when
Thy Danger's past, Insulting!

Seize the Traitor! hence! and bear him to a Dungeon!
There let the surly Lyon Growle and Champ,
His Galling Chains in vain! I'll try him in the Den;
Hard Fare, perhaps, Darkness and Gives may tame him.

A Dungeon! Now by the Power of Arms, thou'st found
The only place, an honest Man can bear in Persia!
Thou poor Inverted King, whose Favour is Disgrace,
Whose Frowns are Honour now; Thou can not raise
My Glory more, than thus proclaiming to the World
Thou hate me: But when
This Lyon grumbles over his Chains alone; Beware
Thou send no Persian Fools to gaze at me;
Lest in my round of thought, I should believe 'em Greeks
That keep me there; and bounding from my Couch,
Grasping with Fury the mistaken Prey,
With Flaming Eyes, should stare their Souls away.

To the Dungeon hence, and load him down with Massy Fetters.
By Heaven I'll find a way to take
An undisturbed Repose: I'll have my Streams
Of Crystal Pleasure, cleared of all these Martial Weeds,
I'll tear 'em by the Roots, and throw 'em useless by.

My Lord, Hower'e your Soldiers heat --

I'll have no more to do with saucy War!
Were now Ten Thousand times the Millions
I have lost in Arms, Entreating, Begging as for life,
One animating Word to bid 'em move,
I'd not unsheathe my Sword, to be Enthroned with Jove.

Why! why ye Powers! has such a tainted Soul
The Care of the Empire? Or if the Gods have stamped
Divinity on Kings, fixing them far above
The Reach of Common Men; why then have we
The Eyes of Reason to Inspect their Faults?
Why are we Born with Souls to loath Dishonour,
And yet by Honour bound to bear it?

How! To bear it! No! That Loyalty's Dishonourable,
That bids me bear Dishonour: When Subjects
Are no more the Care of Kings, we then
Have only left the Laws of Nature to Protect us,
And Nature ties us all to Self Defence.
We must in time resent the Blows we've taken:
Mardonius's Freedom must be sought, and suddenly:
The Current of our Treasure ebbs too fast;
It must be stopped by Right and Privilege:
The late Expenses of our Gaudy Shame,
Exceeds the Account of Necessary War:
And shall we sleep, when from our Hands by Force,
The Gripe of Tyranny has wrung our Fortunes.
More I could say,
If I believed that Words could win you to
An Honourable Action.

Aranthes, I was never slow to such a Call,
Nor needs the Cause a Tongue,
But yet the Undertaking's difficult,
And will require our Friends best Counsel
To Night at my own House I'll Summon 'em,
There speak our Griefs at large.
And may the Blessed Event to Ages prove;
No Crown sits safe without the Peoples Love.

HOnesty's a Notion, and only Reigns
Like Women's Chastity in cold Untempted Minds:
It must be so! I ever thought that Villainy
Had an ugly Face; but now I view it
In the Flattering Glass of Interest, it seems
No Monster! -- Of a fairer form than half starved Virtue.
-- Yet let me think a little --
Here I am trusted with the Names of several Men,
Who have combined to free the Imprisoned General,
To seize the King, and force him to renew
The War with Greece! Nay, I've subscribed my own,
T'assist 'em too, and now am going to inform
The General of it: The Undertaking is but Just;
For Old Mardonius loved the King, and lies
In Chains, because he offered proof on it: Xerxes
Is unfit to hold the Reins of Empire;
He throws 'em loose, and lets it run to shame,
And Luxury -- Why don't I haste to stop him then?
And by the Execution of what I've sworn to act;
Prevent my Countries Ruin -- But stay! suppose
I fail in my Design, (as sure 'tis dangerous)
If I am taken, can my Country save me?
Or if I succeed, am I sure my Country
Will be grateful? They'll say perhaps 'twas Interest
Led me on:
And let me starve, while they partake the Blessing!
They may be base, and probably they will!
Then 'Tis not safe to trust 'em, nor can I
On the other side be sure of Life, if I delay
This great Discovery: -- Why then 'Tis fixed!
I'll take the surest way to find Reward from Xerxes:
And when my Pardon, and Reward are signed,
Then let 'em call me Fool, or tell the King
I am a Villain.

Never was Cause, my Friends, more cheerfully
Embraced, never were Hands more fit for Action,
Nor ever greater Glory waiting on success:
'Tis not the Thirst of others Wealth, or Dignities,
Nor Envy of a favoured Faction, that inflames us,
No Mercenary end: 'Tis Bleeding Honour calls us
To revenge her Wounds; 'tis Xerxes, not the King
That stands accused: If Xerxes can relent,
Still let him wear the Crown; if not, the Crown
By us removed, can dignify
Another Head for Empire.

'Tis not who Reigns, but who Reigns well is King.

He that neglects the Regal Office,
Should be compelled to lay it down;
And we who feel the smart of that neglect,
Are only proper Judges, where to place it.

Let us but once more see Mardonius Sworded,
We shall not be long to seek a Man, that's fit
To wield a Sceptre: I long
To hear how he receives our Undertaking!
Why lingers Memnon thus? may we believe
He's not refused Access to him.

You may, I have unbarred the Prison Gates with Gold.
Come Gentlemen, the Night begins to wast,
Our Small Collation waits us: Aranthes,
Pray conduct our Friends, I'll give some Orders
In the House,-and follow You.

What mean these Tears Tamira?

O can you love like me, and ask that Question.
Tis true, I counselled what you have undertaken,
Yet cannot help my Woman's Fears: Not but
I love your Honour more, than both our Lives;
Yet when I run over the Frightful Hazards,
The Dangers imminent you meet
To purchase and preserve it, than I could wish
Some Humble Shepherd were my Love,
Whose sole Ambition were a Rosy Chaplet,
Not a Crown:
Who in some sweet Retreat of blooming Nature,
Naked of Honours, but Enriched with love
Might give, and take delight unknown to Crowns,
And drive with undisturbed Repose,
The melting Hours before us.

Be witness Heaven, how these words Transport me!
For still thy Fears I know are born of Love,
And Love's of Kin to Honour. -- Could thou behold
Even in the softest Moment of our Joy,
Our Native Country in Distress, The Bloody Arm
Of Tyranny just raised to give the Wound;
And not with Horror throw me from thy Arms
To stop the Blow? Think what a Glorious Tale,
Futurity shall Register of him,
That first stepped out to save her!
And if opposing Death should cross the Brave Attempt,
Then shall it farther still be said for thee,
This Man, this honest Man, the Memorable Artabanus,
Beyond his Life, his Country Loved,
Yet equal with his Country loved Tamira.

O shall it then be said Tamira's Fears,
Opposed this Glorious Enterprise? Perish
That Wife is so Impatient of her Joys;
That to Indulge her Love at home,
Would turn her Husband's Honour out a starving! No!
Go on my dearest Lord! leave me, and cheer,
Those Gallant Friends have sworn to assist you:
If you return wtih Life, my Love will find
A thousand thousand ways to welcome you -- Hark!
What knocking's that? who can it be thus late.
Do you expect more Friends, my Lord?
Pray Heaven no ill be towards us!

Be not concerned, my Love, I guess
'Tis Memnon from the General, -- within there!
Hast to the Portal, know first their Business
Ever you give admittance, unless it be
To my Lieutenant Memnon: Be calm, my Love.

I cannot while this Noise continues!
You shall not stir, my Lord; Heavens! How I tremble!

Now! who is it?

My Lord, your Steward.

The News!

Defend your self, my Lord! Some Danger's towards you.
Going to my Rest, within the outward Lodge,
I heard the thronging tread of Passengers,
Whom from the Window I discovered
To be the Guards:
They now are Marching round the Orchard Wall,
In Order to beset the House;
I heard 'em say too, as they passed along,
Kill none, let 'em be taken all alive.

Death and Horror! we are betrayed!

O Fly, My Lord!
Let me conjure you by the Pangs
Of my distracted Love, fly! fly! ever yet
A moment can befriend you.

Impossible! I leave my Friends in danger!

Run! hast, and rouse 'em from the Jaws of Ruin.
O Fatal Enterprise!

That we may gain some time to think, lead you
The Servants to the Eastern Gate,
Command 'em on their Lives to keep it Barred,
Against all would force their Entrance, Gods!
Was ever Noble Action so untimely born;
O Tamira!

What Power, what Fate can stop our headlong Ruin?
Some pitying Gods look down, and stretch an Arm,
To keep our Lives and Love unparted!
O that the Earth would open wide, and take us thus,
Thus undivided to the Centre!

If we deserve your Rage ye Powers!
Now hurl your Thunder to destroy us:
But strike us closer, not asunder with your Bolts.
O! must we part Tamira!
Cursed be the Hell born Slave that durst betray
Our Honest lives: Ill rest betide his Frighted Soul,
Devouring Guilt,
Like the Promethean Vulture know his Perjured Heart,
And mark him for the Carrion of Mankind.

Ruined! betrayed, and lost!

O my Friends!

Distraction! Memnon!

Ha! what of him!

He! He! That cursed, that Cankered Slave for fear,
Or base Reward has sold us all: I now
Descried him by the Distant light of Torches,
In Conference with the King, who Smiling comes
'Ith Rear to catch us in the shameful Toil!

O that a curse would kill the Villain!

Let's send it then upon our pointed Sword,
Since w'have no hope of safety left,
Here! let us fix our stand, and if the Villain
Dares to Face us, rush all at once to reach his Heart,
And die like Men, Revenged upon our Ruin.

Impossible to escape such Numbers: No!
Let's down to the Postern Gate, and try
To leap the Orchar'd Wall, or now the Darkness of
The Night Befriends us; Mingle with the Guards
That are in search of us, seem Hot as they
In the pursuit, and that way take our chance,
To escape 'em Undiscovered.

A way! they are upon us:
Succeed or not, we know at last to die.

I follow you.

My Lord! my Love, I cannot leave you!
O let me part with you, and life together!

This is no time to part like Lovers,
Nor yet to tell thee half my Fears!
The King! Revenge! and lust! I can no more
But should thy Frighted Virtue call for help
Let this speak for me.

By Heaven it shall, and Home: But do not Venture
To the Orchard: Here in the House below there lies
A Secret Vault, in former Times of some Religious use
And now is only known to me: There I conjure you lye
Concealed till safety call you forth: Nor Hell, nor Envy can
Betray you thence, unless I prove Unfaithful.

O might we never part till then!
Hark! They are Entering! show me!

Where! Where's this, Infernal Brood of Traitors;
By Heaven I'll Crush 'em in the Nest! Away!
Look out! Search every Hole, that Fear can Creep into:
Nor Earth, nor Hell shall Hide 'em from my Vengeance!

Here! This way, show the Bodies to the King!
Great Sir! two of the Conspirators,
This Moment Breathed their last.

Was't not my strict Command to take 'em all alive?
Who was it dared to kill 'em?

My Lord! it was their own Despair,
For e're we could beset the Orchard,
These two, with several more, who just before Escaped us,
Made an Attempt to leap the Wall;
We Interposing in the Moment,
Demanded 'em our Prisoners;
At this, they looking round with hopeless Eyes,
To one another Breasts their pointed Swords advanced,
And rushed at once to an Embrace
Of Friendship and of Death.

O spiteful sullen Traitors! Bring in the Torture!
By Heaven I'll have 'em Racked to Life again!

My Lord, these Wretches are but the Limbs
Of the Conspiracy, it only halts for want of them!
If you would have it husht for ever,
Cut off the Head, their Artabanus!

Thou hast informed my Rage: Say Slaves,
Among those that fled, saw you Artabanus?

No, my Lord, we rather choose to let them fly,
Than give him time to escape, while we pursued em.
If with the rest he was, he's still in the House, my Lord.

Then we are secure of him: I left him here;
But see, they've found his Wife,
If he lies yet concealed, she must of course
Be privy to the Place.

Now! Is Artabanus found?

My Lord, we've left no place unsearched
That Jealousy can enter; but can no where find him:
And when we urged his Lady to discover him,
She called us Fools, and said we asked her Idle Questions.

So brave! But this is done in spite to me:
The Traitoress knows I love, and therefore she insults:
But thus I tear the Passion from my Breast,
And in its room, take fell Revenge and Hate!
Bring in the Rack! I'll try if that can make
A Woman speak her Mind.

'Tis here, my Lord.

See you that, Lady?

Yes, and feel it in my Thoughts.

What think you of it?

That I could bear it, Sir, t'avoid a greater pain.

What's that?

Disloyalty to my Husband, and my Love.

That shall be tried: Where is your Husband?

I have hid him, Sir.

Where Traitoress?

I dare not tell you, Sir; he has commanded me I should not.

He then commands thee to the Torture!
If thou would escape it, speak! for I will know.

You shall! You ask to know
Where I have hid my Husband.
Then I must tell you, Tyrant, in my Heart,
Where you* nor yours can enter to remove him*

Put her to the Trial, Sir! the Rack keeps no Secrets;
Women are so impatient of a little pain,
That only squalling in their Natural Labour.
They'll forswear Mankind.

By Heaven, I'm pleased to see her Folly rave,
Thou talk as if the Rack were but a sport! Hast thou
Been ever sensible of any pain like this?

Ten thousand times a greater: I have known
The pains of hopeless Love: Nay, after that,
The Agonies of Blushing to Reward
The Man that loved me.

How feelingly she talks of Love, even in
The Face of Horror: Art thou not afraid of Death?

No! This Moment from my Window I beheld
These two unhappy Wretches run into
His Arms, and see! how soon they're quiet! Death!
Alas! He's now my nearest Friend! look here!
I wear him in my Bosom, Sir,
My Husband placed him there.

Thy Husband! To what end.

During his Absence to keep Dishonour from me.

O the Inveterate Slave! Memnon, Walk unobserved
Behind, and rest the Dagger from her.

I shall, my Lord.

That Whisper has a Meaning I am jealous of;
By Heaven 'tis so! The Villain meets my purpose!

Once more! Where is thy Husband?
Confess, and yet preserve thy Life.

Thus far I will confess: That I am now indeed
Almost afraid of Death: For it would grate my Soul,
To leave my Husbands Ruin unrevenged;
(For I despair again to make him happy)
And that the only wish, that makes me fond of Life.
Forgive me Duty, if I mistake the Breast;
But great Revenge and Love, Instruct me here!

Disarm her! Seize her Slaves!
I'll trust the Tigress loose no more.

Furies and Death, she'as reached my Heart.

So may all Traitors dye! 'Tis done!
The Noble Task, that Love had set me
For the Remains of Life, is nobly ended;
And now I am at leisure for
The Idle Holy day of Death.

No sullen Traitoress! thou shalt be Years a dying.

Let me be Ages, Sir!

Begin the Torture!
I'd have my Glory live for ever!
By Heaven she mocks my Vengeance!
Now, where are your smiles of Scorn, Lady?

Here! in my Soul, which thus contemns the Tyrant.
Thinking to bow it down to Baseness.
Alas, my Body now would sink to the Earth,
With horror of yon Agonizing Tortures;
But that my daring Soul, shoots like a tempered Spear,
Quite through the falling Trunk, and give it power to stand.
Now satiate thy Rage, strip off my trembling Flesh,
And when thou'st Piece-meal torn these frailer Limbs away,
Still shalt thou leave unmoved a naked Mind
Erect to Heaven.

Away! and drag her to her Fate!
My stern Revenge will brook no more defiance.

My Gracious Lord, might your poor Slave advice --

Preserve thou thy own Life, and tempt me not,
I tell thee Vengeance takes up all my Soul.

But yet, you see, my Lord, she minds it not!
You are not thus revenged! -- she mocks the Torture.
Now, Sir, may I Advise --

Advise me! What? Not even the damned can Groan,
With more variety of Pain -- Look there!

I see, my Lord, and plainly see from this,
Were she in your Arms, she'd feell at once,
A greater Pain, and you a sweeter Vengeance.
Methinks she's lovely yet! Her Charms new pointed!
See! How her Snowy Bosom heaves and swells
With Inward Pains, Disdaining to confess 'em.
O Miracle of distressful Beauty!

Not yet a Groan! No Sigh! or Tear for Mercy!
Reveal thy Husband yet, and I forego
My Justice! -- By yon' Heaven she's Dumb and dauntless!
See! How she knaws her Lips, and firms her Brow,
With sullen Virtue she supports her Soul,
And bears it with unheaded Resolution!

Stupendous Woman!

Forbear a while --

With half this Pain, I've seen a Malefactor
Make the Torturer tremble with his Groans!
Can all this Fortitude be born of Love!

If it be --
What Mortal Man can Merit such a Love?
If Love can make her smile in such a raging Pain?
What must he do, when wrapped in real Pleasure?
What Racks of Blissful Joy, what Raptures must she give!
By Heaven they must be tasted --
Unloose, and seat her by me.
I'm now a Convert to her Undaunted Virtue.
Thou Glorious Woman, whose Unconquered Soul,
Inspire of Wrongs, resolves my Rage to pity.
For ever now, thine and thy Husbands Injuries
(...)
Too little to Reward thy Constancy;
But if thy Husband's Life and Safety can,
Nay, and his Friends too, they are thine,
Thy Goodness has redeemed 'em.

What said you, Sir? You do not flatter me!

Search round my Kingdom for a Wish, 'tis thine.
Or Wealth, or Empire, all too poor a Gift,
For such exalted Virtue!
But ask! O speak! and teach me to be grateful!

O my cheered Heart! Shall I not ask in vain?

Speak, and enjoy thy Wish!

Indeed it is an humble one: I ask
Not Wealth or power, I ne'er was fond of Dignity.
Nature and Reason ever taught me to believe,
No taste of Life could be, but in the Free,
The entire Possession of the Man that loved me.
Give me his Life, and him the Life of those
Unhappy Friends, his rashness has engaged,
And I am more than happy.

All this I had resolved unasked;
Can nothing more be given to cheer thy Life?

A little more, If I might speak!

Speaking is to enjoy.

Then give us leave, my Husband, Sir,
Our little Infant, and my self, with the Remains
Of our Inheritance, to seek Retirement,
On some remote and unknown Clime,
Where Power and State, may never more
Disturb the Peace of our unmurmuring Love.

Draw up a Pardon strait for Artabanus,
And those with him concerned in this Conspiracy.
Here! Fair one, take this Ring! Give it thy Husband,
Be that thy Triumph, and his Passport through the World:
Now gently raise, and bear her to the Palace,
And let our own Physicians have the care of her.

Alas, my Lord, I want no Art, such words as these
Wo'd heal a Wretch expiring of his Wounds!
O let me kiss your Sacred Feet,
And thank you with my grateful Tears of Joy;
Thus let me weep, and wash your cruel Guilt away,
Till Gods and Men, stand wondering at your Virtue!

Rise, Fair Creature! Live, and enjoy the Man that loves thee.

Now you indeed have raised me, raised me, Sir,
From Death to Life, to Love, and to my Husband!
But hast! O lead me to him, e're my Wounds are cold,
That I may fold his Body in these Bleeding Arms,
And print it over with Crimson Characters
Of Eternal Faith!
And now let base Detraction blush
To call us Cowards, or Inconstant Souls,
Since every Drop that falls from me
May to our injured Sex's Glory prove,
That Racks nor Hell could shake a Woman's Love.

Then you're the first that never could be won,
And therefore only fit to feed a Love
Luxurious as my own: Now follow her;
Seize her Husband the Moment she discovers him,
And bear him to the Scaffold.

You gave your Royal Word to spare him, Sir.

No, Fool; I gave my Word to find him out!
Justice demanded him, and since the Rack
Produced him not, I might with Justice then
Make use of Policy; and now I'm both
Secure of my Revenge and Love!

Then she must not die, Sir!

Oh! no! she lives, and shall be loved to Ruin!
I've proved her Virtue now, and find
It worthy of a Siege: I'll further try
If all the moving Penitence of Love can take her:
If (as I would) she still resist that Power,
The noblest Way to conquer is to storm.
'Tis Opposition gives the Victor Glory!
Oh! what a noble Gust will swell my Soul
When she lies drowned in Tears, and trembling in my Grasp!
Nay, after my abhorred Possession I'll hold her down
With smiling Spite, and talk my Raptures over;
In her unwilling Ears I'll pour such Tales
Of Loose Desire, her very Soul shall feel the Rape.
And though --
Her Words may beg I would her Life destroy,
I'll make her Eyes confess that she partakes the Joy.

WAit on me to morrow!
I'm not at leisure now for Business.

To morrow, Sir, may be too late;
They're of Importance, and concern
The Safety of your Royal Person.

I tell thee, Slave, my Will's my Safety:
When Danger dares to face me,
I'll command it from my Person.

But, Sir --

No more! My Pleasures wait*
Now, my Cleontes; What News from Love?
How does Tamira bear her heavy Change of Fortune?

Oh! never, never did the weeping Eyes
Of Pity view a Scene so mournful. When first
We seized, and forced her Husband from her Arms,
She wrung her Hands, and shrieked, and tore her flowing Hair!
Beating her Breasts; and in her wild Despair
She broke through all the Guards, with an amazing Force,
And strained her Arms once more around him.
We strove to part him from her Hold; but she
Still clung, and clasped with such Convulsive Force,
That from her half-heal'd Wounds the starting Blood
Again sprung forth --
And sprinkled those with Pity that opposed her.
Moved by that Sight, we stopped a while,
To let her take a short, a last Farewell.
Quite Breathless now, her Head upon his Bosom leaned;
She wept, and spoke with dying Eyes
The tender Anguish of her Soul.
He pressed her close, and called, My Life!
She sighed and groaned, and offered an Embrace;
But there, alas! her wasted Spirits sunk,
And left her on the Floor, expiring.

Extravagance of Love!
If only to behold her parted from a Husband's Arms
Were such a mournful Sight,
Oh! what a Beauteous Ruin will her Sorrows make
When rifled of her dearer Honour!
She weeps and wails; with swollen Eyes looks up to Heaven,
And chides the Neuter-Gods for their Neglect of Innocence!
But say! How have you disposed her Husband?

While she lay fainting on the Ground
We hurried him to Prison, then used all our Care
To bring her back to Life.

Is she then recovered?

To Life she is, but hardly to her Senses.
She speaks to none, nor minds another Speech:
Pensive she sits, with folded Arms,
Fixing to the Earth her Blood-shot Eyes, and looks
The piteous Image of true Mourning Misery.

How are her Wounds?

By virtue of an Arabian Plant, she has
Already lost the Pain: They were at first

Use all the Power of Art to cheer her Spirits,
But keep her still within the Palace.
When you perceive she is inclined to talk,
Let me hear of her --

I beg your Majesty --

Again this Plague! Whence are these Letters?

From my Master, Sir, the Governor of your New erected Fort.

Ha! He tells me here some Rebels are in Arms,
-- That you are able to inform me farther!
Say! Who, what are they?

Most of 'em are those the Grecians left unslaughter'd.

In Arms!

Yes, Sir, and in Order too: They have been
Long used to War: You taught 'em first the Trade,
And now they say, they'll set up for themselves.

So blunt?

They talk but little, Sir; they look their Thoughts,
And threaten in their Silence.

Aranthes at the Head of 'em?

I saw, and spoke with him.

What said the Traitor?

He bid me tell you, Sir, Unless the General
Were free to morrow, he'd himself find Hands
To force the Prison-Gates.

So Resolute? What was their Number?

When first I viewed 'em they appeared
Not above Ten Thousand: But in Four Hours
I perceived 'em doubled.

Ha! It may be dangerous then too far
To incense a gathering Power -- It must be so!
Here, take the Royal Signet; haste, and stop
The Execution of Artabanus.
Nor is it Fear that makes me do it;
But, on my second Thoughts, it may advance
The glorious Project of my loose Desire:
(For she'll believe, when I protest it so,
That Love of her has made me pitiful.)
Beside, the News will call her Spirits home,
And make her fit so much the sooner for my Arms.
Post to thy Master, back: Bid him draw out
Those Forces under his Command, and meet the Rebels.

The Rebels, Sir, are more than thrice his Number.

No more! But let him do it, or die!

I am gone, Sir. And if he takes my Counsel,
His few shall make their Number greater.

I'll think no more, nor shock my Ease,
To entertain a Thought of Toilsome Arms!
But yet, I am not safe till these are quelled --
Let Hood-wink'd Fortune use her Senseless Will!
Man sees in vain, and does in vain oppose her:
Fight, or neglect 'em, still my Fate's decreed*
Nor is't in me to shun a future Ill,
Unless, with Power to act, Heaven gives me Will.
Yet thus to live in Doubt a Torment is!
Then Magic Art shall set my Mind at Peace:
I'll to the Magi's Cave, whose Charms shall prove
What Fate's designed my Empire, and my Love.

Come forth, ye Powers on Futurity:
You, that with Powerful Charms unlock
The Cabinets of Heaven, and steal from thence
The hidden Fates of Kings and Empires,
Haste from your gloomy Cell, and summon all
Your Art to wait a Monarch's Pleasure.

Command us, and our Art obeys.

Tell me what End my Empire is decreed,
If I by Foes, or Foes by me shall bleed.
Tell me what Pleasure I in Love shall know;
If Love, or Force, shall make the Fair One bow.
Exert your Art, and prove what Spells can do.

Prepare the Charm: The Charm must be
To Sophiel, who delights in Harmony.
Sophiel! Old Sire of Early Fate,
Who see before the Gods debate;
That know of yet Unbeing Things,
The Fates of Uncreated Kings,
Of Men, of Empires, and the Doom
Of Thousand Thousand Years to come:
1st Mag. Appear! 2d. Appear! 3d. Appear!
By the Moon's pale Beam,
That faintly glimmers over the Stygian Stream,
Appear, c.
By the Ocean's Ebb and Flow,
Whose Hidden Cause we never could know,
Appear, c.
By the Subterraneous Winds, that make
The trembling Earth and Centre shake,
Appear! Thrice! Thrice! invoked, appear;
Whether in Air thy Form does stray,
Or under Earth by Charms is bound,
Swift! swift as Lightning, dart away;
Or fierce as Thunder, tear the Ground.

Too curious Man! Why dost thou seek to know
Events, which, good or ill, fore-known, are Woe?
The All-seeing Power, that made the Mortal, gave
Thee every thing a Mortal State should have.
Fore-Knowledge only is enjoyed by Heaven,
And, for his Peace of Mind to Man forbidden.
Wretched were Life, if he fore-knew his Doom;
Even Joys fore-seen give pleasing Hope no Room,
And Griefs assured are felt before they come.
Yet loose the Charm, be wise! O send me back;
And what's decreed by Fate, with Patience take.

Thou beg in vain to cross our Monarch's Will:
What he commands, Spirit, I charge thee Fell,
Speak, or I'll bind thee in an Everlasting Spell.

O! spare me, and I speak; nor blame my Care:
I thought, in Kindness, I might say, Beware.
Know then, rash Man, thou'st lost the happy Hour
Which fav'ring Fate once gave within thy Power.
While thus thou liv'st in Thoughtless Luxury,
Slighted of Friends, of Foes despised, thou'lt die;
In Madness only famed to late Posterity.
But thou in Love a stranger Fate shalt know;
The Fair One shall, but shall to Virtue bow,
With humble Love pursue, and thou shalt find
Thou art deceived, Alas! in Woman-kind.

Spirit, thou lie; I never despised shall die:
I'll change my Death, to prove that Fate can lye.
Should Fortune threaten what thy Words declare,
I'd free my Soul, to be revenged on her.
And for my Love, I will the Raptures know;
She shall to Love or Force, not Virtue, bow.
Virtue may please, and give dull Souls a Feast;
But Ravishment's a Joy for Gods to taste.

Dispatch, dispatch! the King approaches.

I guess the meaning of this Preparation!
But is the Lady in a Condition, think you,
To be entertained?

Her Husband's Liberty and Pardon have re-call'd her Spirits.

Has she seen him then?

She has: I saw there first Meeting here, in the Palace.

Sure 'twas a joyful one.

It was, indeed! Joyful, even to a Face of Sorrow:
So movingly she wept her Griefs away,
'Twere hard to judge which seemed the greater Pain,
The Terror of his Death, or the distracting Joy
Of his Return to Life: For even there she fainted.

Where is her Husband now?

After the Hurry of their Joy was over,
He begged her Leave to visit brave Mardonius;
She, loath to part, but more unwilling to deny,
Dismissed him on his Promise of a quick Return.
That Visit was the only thing could part 'em,
And now the King's secure of Opportunity:
If in the Interim her Husband should return,
Your Orders are, to give him no Admittance.
See all the Anti-Chambers cleared! Away! she's here!

How tedious are the absent Hours of Love!
Life's an unpleasing Dream when he's not with me;
'Tis worse! 'tis Death, and wishing to be born again!
I am impatient of my State! -- When! when, my Love!
Sure Time stands still, to fly the faster at our Meeting!
Our Hours in Love have Wings; in Absence, Crutches.
What can this Music mean? -- Addressed to me?
Good Heaven! the King! and yet I read no Terror
In his Looks! -- Innocence should never know
The Guilt of Fear: I'm yet --
To thank him for my Husband's Life!
[To Xerxes.] When bounteous Heaven gives a surprising Joy,
We bend our grateful Knees to thank the Gods;
Kings are their Images: Such Thanks as Heaven.
Accepts, (the humble All that Man can pay,)
Receive, O sacred Prince, from me; who, like a God,
Have given me Life restored, and more than Life, -- my Husband!
Nor would I have you think that any Power on Earth
But a resistless Love, could ever have forced
My honest Heart to brave my Prince's Anger!

Ay! there, indeed, thou'st named a Motive
That might excuse the foulest Crime,
And wash it fair as Innocence!
Unconquerable Love! Oh, who can brave his Power?
A Power! that braves the eldest Law of Nature:
Even Self-defence is lost, where he exerts his Sway:
For, who'd not rather die in Proof of Love,
Than suffer Life, untasting of his Joys?
When Jove created Love!
He made a greater God than Jove!
Had thou designed the Ruin of my Empire
At Love's Command, 'twere Treason not to obey!
(...) him alone our Hells or Heaven we prove:
He bids the Damned despair! -- the Happy, love!

Defend me, Heaven! Whither would he drive!

Riches, Ambition, Glory, Pride, may boast
Their several Charms to raise our Souls aloft;
Yet from the Height of all their towering Thoughts,
When on the eager Stretch to kiss the Skies,
Thus do we see 'em lured to Earth, like me,
And rest their wearied Wings upon the Hand of Love!
Why dost thou turn away? Is it such Pain
To be beloved! to be adored!
Can Penitence and humble Tears offend thee?
The Gods are not averse to those. We kneel
To Heaven, and taste of Mercy!
O why! why! did thou take an Angel's Form,
Without the Softness of an Angel's Mind?
Can thou not pity me?

Alas! it is not in my power:
Still as my Thoughts grow soft, my Husband steals 'em from me!
And he's so greedy of the Joy, he strips my Soul,
And leaves me cruel to the World beside.

Be cruel still, yet will I still love on: I have
Considered all the vain Impossibles of Despair,
Yet have resolved to use no other Help but Love!
But such a Love! fed with so soft a Flame!
So fond of Misery! so impotent of Hope!
It must be inoffensive to the chastest Ears!

Why do you hold me like a frighted Dove,
That trembles in your Hand, and murmurs for its Mate?
'Tis most Inhumane to be cruel because you may.
'Tis true, I am your Slave, and in your Power.

Behold, I throw it off! Be free: I scorn
All Power but humble Passion,
Which thus disrobes the Purple King,
And strips him to the starving Lover.
-- But shall I, must I starve before so fair a Banquet?

I have no Room
To entertain another Guest. You may
Disturb my Love; but never can be welcome to it.

I'll bring with me a tender sighing Heart;
A Lover's Heart, that bleeds, that languishes,
And dies, to make me welcome.

Give it to those that starve; on me 'tis lost;
I, in a faithful Husband, have Eternal Plenty.

Husband's the grossest Food of Love;
The Ignorant and Vulgar have their Share of him:
The poor contented Drudge of idle Nature;
Cheated of Bliss, to be the Tool of Propagation.
But did thou know the Joys a Lover brings,
Thus would thou clasp me in thy willing Arms.
And, mad with wild Desire, confess
Thou hast been fed, but never knew to taste before.

Strike! strike me deaf, ye Gods! O Violence!
To the Ears of Virtue!

Vertue's the Bane of Bliss, and while it checks.
The Husband's Love, Love leaves the Lover free.
The Miser Husband starves a generous Flame;
He thinks you lavish, when you most are kind;
And even fears to ask --
What with a Loose the happy Lover takes.
He's still impatient of unknown Delight;
Begs with unfated Longings to improve the Bliss,
And adds, by asking, to the Store of Love.
By Heaven, she must be mine! my Soul's on fire!
And while I grasp her thus, she must dissolve, or burn!
She melts! she pants! her Conscious Eyes confess the Joy,
And sparkle from her Flames within!
The God of Love lays prostrate all her Charms,
And thus I seize her, yielding to my Arms.

Tyrant! 'tis false I either melt, or burn:
Exerting thus the Strength of Innocence,
I dash thee from thy Lustful Hopes for ever!
Stand off! approach me not! for if thou dost
By all the Wrongs of my undaunted Love,
These Hands, resolved with horrid Force,
Shall tear my guilty Eyes away, and pash
The reeking Balls upon the Ground before thee.

Why then the Spirit lied
That said, I was deceived in Woman-kind.
I knew my Hopes to conquer thee were vain:
I now despair, and that secures my Pleasure!
Women that yield to Love, or vile Reward,
Are Things below the Passion of a Monarch's Soul:
But she that can, like thee, be deft to Power,
To conquering Love, yet bear the Rack for Love,
She is, indeed, a Banquet for the Gods!
I'll be their Taster now --
And serve up in Ravishment to them.
Had thou submitted to my eager Love,
Perhaps in Heat of Blood I had enjoyed thee,
And after left thee like a common Thing,
Despised and hated for thy easy giving.

O happy Thought! he teaches me to escape him!
Forgive me, Love, if now I seem the Thing
That Love should most abhor.

Now, where's that Hand will hurt those Beauteous Eyes?
Srive not! nor think thy Cries can move! yet do!
Resist me still! still Curse my hated Flame!
'Twil burn the fiercer when opposed:
Methinks thou art not cold, as I could wish.
By Heaven, I'll grind thy sullen Hate to Love,
And glut my Vengeance with abhorred Possession.

And why Abhorred?
Can there be Horror in so sweet a Pleasure?
Can Force be needful to the yielding Fair?
I find, you think me, what I seemed, all Ice!
Ah! little! little do you know of Womankind!
Our Lives! Our Thoughts! Our very Souls are Love.
Our Tears are Softness, and our Coyness Fear;
Our Frowns Affected, and our Smiles decoying;
Our Hearts are Tender, and our Tongues belie 'em;
Our Wishes secret, and our Eyes betray 'em:
We must be Cruel, e're we can be kind;
And use Resistance to be more Desired:
But when our Cruelty has done its Part,
And kindly proved how Ill the Wretch can bear,
Then! Then! Our Joy's secure -- A look can cure Despair!

Amazement!

You thought perhaps, because I bore the Rack,
That I could only bear an Husbands Love?
Alas! I suffered that in spite to you,
Not love to him: For you were then my Foe!
My Interest Bribed me there to suffer:
My stolen Pleasures now are all secure,
The Rack has fixed my Reputation fair,
It now shines out with such a glaring Light,
It blinds the Eyes of Jealousy.
By Heaven I know, were you unkind, or base,
And should divulge the Joys, I now resolve to give,
(So fair my Honour stands) it would not be believed.

Nay, then the Spirit did not lye: For I
Confess, I'm now deceived in Womankind.

And why deceived?
Could you believe these Eyes, the Stars of Love
Were fixed? Not Planets wandering round the World
To search and taste of sweet Variety?
A Husband's Love! perish the stupid Wretch,
Whose Heart once fired, seeks not to burn for ever,
And has an Husbands Fuel to Maintain the Flame?
I ne'er could find it so: For me! I own?
An Hundred Eager Lovers have supplied his room,
Youth's formed to melt, and Charm a Woman's Heart,
While he abroad has fought his Country's Dause,
I've still been raising Love Recruits at home.

By all my Hopes a Strumpet!

But all the Conquests, that my Eyes have won,
Are Poor and Low, Compared to you: To make
The Monarch of the World Despair, and Weep!
Is something sure beyond the Power of Love:
It Prides my Soul, to think my Frowns have force,
And charms me now, to dress my Heart in Smiles.

Thy Frowns were Smiles to me: Thy Smiles are common:
A Monarch cannot Feed, on what has palled his Slaves.

You seem uneasy, Sir, permit me touch your Hand,
To taste your Kisses! Now you're grown so cold.

Gods! That a Strumpet could appear so Chaste!
Why did I form such Monstrous hopes, to taste
A Woman's Virtue -- 'Tis Notion all!
Lewdness and Life, are what they take together:

And why! Is that a Name to Fright you?
Why did you woo, unless to win my Love?
How could I yield, unless I turned a wanton?

But you're so Foul, I loath thee:
With looser Beauties to delight my Blood;
Such as will sell their Honour for a Price,
I'm hourly served, and palled! 'Tis Vulgar! No!
My Hope was here --
To taste thy Beauty, and thy Virtue too:
But know, that Royal Appetite's above
The Handled Offals of a Common Love;
Thy Virtue Tainted, thou hast lost thy Charms;
I now condemn thee to thy Husband's Arms:
But since thy Lust my Furious Love has tamed,
As a Reward, take all my Guards inflamed:
Or if they fail to slake thy loose desire,
So I am free, set all the World on fire.

Gods! can it be? Is then the Face of Vice,
So loathsome even to the Vicious?
Triumph you Guardian Powers of Virtue!
And let your Case of Innocence this Day,
To your Eternal Glory be Recorded;
For this Escape shall tell the World a Tale,
To make your Precepts more adored, than ever.
The looser Beauties now shall blush to hear,
In what disgrace their lewd Embraces are.
A Tyrant Lustful, and Debauched with Power;
In search of Bliss, an Humble Passion wore,
Concealed his Lust, his slighted Crown threw by,
And only hoped from Loves Authority:
But when he found his subtlest Art was Vain,
Unveiled his Soul, and showed the Brute again.
The Trembling Nymph Inspired, for succour flies
To loose Desire, safe in that foul Disguise,
She Palls his Flame, he starts, and dooms her Back
To all, that Life can give, or happy Lovers take.

THrough all th'unmeasur'd Bounds of Wild Delight,
I never yet could taste substantial Joy,
Or know one Pleasure more than Common Men.
If I indulge my Appetite, I'm cloyed;
Uneasy now, with what I lately longed for:
If when my Blood is high I taste of Beauty,
I loose the Bliss, because my Power Commands;
The Peasant there takes more delight than I
That Travels through Despair to sweet Possession.
When Deaf to Injuries, I make my way
Through others Ruin,
Stern Conscience stops me short, and will be heard,
She keeps me waking, when the World's at Rest,
And stuffs my Pillow with a thousannd Thorns!
Ha! what mean those shouts! they found of Mutiny!

Arm! Arm, my Lord! the City's in a Tumult;
Aranthes having forced the Prison Gates,
Has freed Mardonius from the Dungeon,
Who drags his Chains along the Crowded Streets,
And calls 'em brave Rewards for Loyalty.

Insulting Traitor!

Another Party here produced a Rack,
Stained with the Blood of fair Tamira's Wounds!
Here in another place
Three dead Virgins, whom you had lately Ravished,
In spiteful Pomp were carried round the Streets,
To turn the Peoples Hearts against you;
And I much fear, their Fury will be fatal.

Meet they no Opposition?
The Magistrates, do they stand Idle?
They are out indeed; but show an Hollow-hearted Power,
Unarmed, and unresolved to quell 'em:
'Tis said that Artabanus too,

Let him, Mardonius and Aranthes be prescribed,
Set on each Head an Hundred Talents:
Mean while, to make the Rabbel ours, let 'em
Have leave to Plunder every Rebels House,
Then set 'em all on Fire.
If Children, Wife or Servant there have shelter,
Let none escape, but bury all in Flames.
Alarm the Guards! Bar up the Palace Gates, and follow me.

Fellows in Arms, and you my Friends of Peace,
Both equally oppressed beneath a Tyrants Yoke,
Behold our Liberty in Chains;
This Loyal Arm and Head busied in Wounds,
And watching for our Countries Peace and Honour,
Half starved, and Fettered like a common Traitor;
Unasked, and unadvised of you, have we presumed
(Presuming first, you'd not condemn the Action)
To force the Prison, and set free this Man,
Free from a Tyrants Power, but still in Chains;
If you pronounce 'em worthily put on,
Him, and his Sword to your discretion we surrender,
To arm, to execute, or free himself and you.
Is it your Will he be remanded back,
To end his Life in shameful Bonds?
Or shall he take that Sword, inur'd to Action,
And lead you forth to brave Revenge, and Liberty?

Arm him! Arm him! Liberty! Liberty! c.

If supple Words
My Noble Country-men must speak my Thanks:
I shall appear ungrateful for this Trust Reposed:
If Blows have Eloquence, I'll be a Talker:
Let it suffice, that I am free and Armed.
Not my own Wrongs; but yours shall edge my Sword,
Your Liberties Infringed, your Rights destroyed,
Your ancient Glory sunk in Sloth and Tyranny;
Your Ransacked Houses, and exhausted Treasure,
Your Tender Virgins, and your Wives deflower'd,
The public Wrongs, and poor Tamira's Rack,
Are Stings too venomed, not to swell Resentment,
Even to your Wishes Height! Once more, I'm Yours;
Let Heaven but smile though Persia's Head lye low,
I've yet an Arm to ward the Tyrant's Blow.

Liberty, c.

Here Gentlemen.
Place your Selves at the Corner of this Street,
While I go privately to the House;
If we can bring his Lady safely to him,
He'll not be wanting to Reward our Care.
Hark! the Tumult's near us!
Ha! What means you Glaring Light! -- It seems some Fire!
By Heaven! the House of Artabanus all in Flames!
Nay, 'tis the same! I know it by the Portal! look!
Look! How the Rabble scramble for the Plunder?
What thankless Care they take to save
The Plate and Furniture! see! how some venture
Burning to be Rogues, and yet would Tremble
Should an Honest Cause Require 'em.

Away with her, c,

And see the Torrent Rowles this way.

Ha! By Heaven the Lady too! Tamira
And her Child rudely Dragged along the Streets.

Away with her! to the Palace! to the King! away with her!

What's to be done? We are no number to oppose 'em.

Let us run back to Artabanus, and if
Possible, bring him down to her Relief,
Before they carry her to the King! Run,
They are upon us.

O Barbarous Cruel Men!
If you are Men, be touched with Human Pity;
If you seek Blood take mine, but spare
That harmless Babe! Tear not my Heartstrings from me!
You once were Young and Innocent your selves,
And now perhaps have Children of your own.
O! Could you bear to see 'em torn by Cruel Hands,
From off their tender Mothers Breasts?
Would it not make you Bleed, and tear your Hair,
And pierce the Heavens with your shreiking Sorrows?

Come! I say give her the Child, it has done us
No harm, and will do us no good!

The Child's my lawful Plunder, and I will keep it.

Dear Sir, You look with Eyes of Mercy on me;
If you have Power Command, if Pity speak him fair,
So at your latest Hour, may you sweet Mercy find
Of Heaven, as now you show it me.
But see! His Bloody Arm is Raised! O stop
The Fatal Blow! O hold! For pity hold!
See, Sir, I've that will charm you to Compassion;
This Diamond --

Ay! That Diamond --

The first dear Pledge of my Unhappy Love,
To save a more Endearing One;
Weeping I bestow you: 'Tis all in the World
Of Value I have left me:
And were I starving now for want of Food,
If this were only left to feed me, would I starve,
So much beyond my Life I prize its worth!
But oh! so far beyond 'em both I love my Child.

Ay! now I feel thee Woman! let's see the Ring.

Here, Gentle Sir, and with it take
Ten Thousand Prayers -- Sir --

You must have no Child, till I have such another Diamond.

By all my Woes I am a Beggar!
You cannot be so Cruel to refuse me now;
Believe me! search! take all! strip me
To pinching Cold, to every thing but shame.
Tear off this Idle Robe, it misbecomes me
While that tender Infant needs it.

Pshah! away with her! must we stand to hear
A Woman Prate?

Ay! Ay! away with her! c.

My Child! O Savage Creatures!

To the King, to the Palace! away with her.

Ha! The King! Not all your force shall drag me;
Thus will I Dash the Ground, and tear a Passage
To escape him! Fierce Thunder strike me to the Grave!
Gape Earth, and take me living down to Horror!
Torments! any Hell! But Life and Shame! O!

Drag her! away with her, c.

O Cruel! Cruel Men!

What means this strange Disorder Friends?
Why swarm you thus like angry Bees unhiv'd,
That sting in wild Revenge, or Friend, or Foe?
Is it because you want a Head to lead you?
Or do you blindly serve a Tyrant's Will?
Why is this Woman rudely dragged along?

Relieve me Heaven!

Now by my Soul! the Fair Tamira. Help ho!

Protect me, Brave Mardonius!

Protect! Yes, and Revenge thee too; Villains!

Hold! I conjure you hold -- Good Sir, be mild,
And speak 'em fair, or that Revenge
May cost me dearer, than my Life -- my Child!

Ha! Forego the Infant, Slaves!
Or by the lifted Fury of this Arm --

Oh! do not fright 'em Sir! see! they're merciful
And kind! they will not hurt the Babe!

Whence comes this Insolence, you Hounds!
You hungry yelping Curs, that run at all
Whence Mischief cries Halloo!
Is Innocence your Game? Hence! to your Kennels Dogs!

Fly! Fly! c.

Let 'em run on, they are not worth pursuit,
Their Fear will soon disperse 'em.

But where's my Lord, my Artabanus, Sir!
Why is it he's not with you!

Having expected him ever this to join us,
We sent to know the occasion of his delay,
And every Moment wait his Answer.

And see, Sir, the Messenger is returned!

Now! Have you seen the General?

My Lord, I found him Posted on a little Hill
Without the City;
From whence, Enraged, he saw his House in Flames,
And led his Men with Fury down to join you:
As he was Marching on,
An Officer (whom just before h'had sent
To find, and bring his Lady to him)
With breathless haste Informed him that the Rabble,
Were that very moment dragging her to the Palace;
At this he Trembled, and his Lips grew Pale;
But on a sudden, starting from the Fit,
He Marched his Numbers in disordered haste,
Strait on to the Palace, resolving there
To force the Guards, to Dye, or Rescue her;
And this delays him, Sir.

Ill Timed and dangerous Error!
But hast! away again, and tell him
His Tamira's safe with me -- If he should force
The Guards, he runs into the Jaws of Death.

O! Fly before the Danger meets him.

Some on before to stop the Fire!
Tamira be your Care Aranthes,
While I with these March on to his Assistance.

Arm! Arm!

How now Soldier! What mean these Wounds?

My Lord, they faintly speak our General's Danger.

Where is he?

This Moment Storming at the Palace Gate,
I left him there demanding his Tamira,
And threatening if refused* to bury it in (...)
At which the King in mad Revenge grown desperate,
Threw him an Handkerchief Distained with Blood,
And cried, take there! There's all that's left
Of thy Tamira now, the rest of her is Cold.
Swelled with that Sight, he flew with Fury on the Guards,
And now Impatient of Revenge, like Wildfire throws
Destruction round him for a Time;
But must at last Expire, and let his curious Foes
With safe Amazement, view the wondrous shell that held it.
Alas! I fear you'll be too late: But yet
There's Hope in haste, my Lord, to stem this Flood of Ruin.

O Fatal Error! on to the Palace! March!

Fly! Fly! they are Entering! they are upon us: Fly!

Confusion! How the Slaves forsake me!
They've caught me in the Snare! Nor can I escape 'em now.
Let 'em go all! I'll stand the shock alone!
The fearful Stag at Bay will Fight,
Will dye revenged upon his Hunters;
And the fierce Lyon's wilder in the Toil:
Shall Danger shake a Monarch's Soul?
Now by my Crown's Right Royal Majesty
I will not fall! What Hoa! my Beaver Slaves!
I'll put the Godhead on, and Destiny
Shall tear her Idle Scrolls of Fate decreed;
For she has written false of me! I will not dye,
Nor shall my Foes have power to Face me!
Thus with this Awful Front,
I'll look the Raging God within,
And Frown 'em into Fear! -- Thou Pale faced Slave!

My Lord, Your Guards are half destroyed,
The rest Revolted all to Artabanus,
Who like a Deluge, with his Force comes Rolling in.

Let him Roll on!
He meets a Rock will stand unmoved his Roar,
And dash him into Dew.

On pain of Death let no Man follow me!

How dare thou Slave!
With that Rebellious Face Confront-thy King,
Or Tempt the Vengeance of a waking Deity?

When Kings are Cast in Molds Divine,
We find their Actions Great and Pitiful:
Pity's the Noblest Composition of a God.
But thou hast none! No soft Compassion ever touched thee.
Tigers and Wolves, to thee, are tame! See here,
The ruful Flag proclaims thee worse than Tyrant:
Or if a nearer Name can reach thee -- Devil!

Traitor --

From any Mouth but thine, would shock my Soul.
Or if I am a Traitor*
Even those just Powers that gave me Virtue,
When they behold the Wrongs that raised my Arm,
Will sure allow, I was not prompt to Ill,
Not easily disloyal -- My Virtue did its part:
If held, it struggled stoutly to be tame.
But here's a Force would break the strongest Hold,
And turn even Pity to Revenge and Rage.
If yet the Horror of the Deed
Has left thee Temper, speak! What had the poor
Tamira done, to merit such a Death?
Why hast thou killed --
The tendrest Mother, and the softest Wife?

But that I know to say, will gall thy Heart,
I'd spurn thee, Traitor, for this bold Demand;
Daring to ask a Reason of thy Monarch's Will:
But, as a God, to Thunder-strike thy Soul,
I tell thee, Slave, I Whored her to a Dis-liking,
And then she was unfit for Life:
Nor could I brook to let her live for thee,
After the Stamp of Royal Love was on her.

O savage! bloody Tyrant! The Horror of his Words
Has numm'd my Senses, and drowns my weak Revenge in Tears.

Now, By my Glorious Brother in the Skies,
My Words have more than Power of common Kings;
They're something near! 'Tis Second Fate
To strike this hardy Soldier pale with Fear!
He weeps! he dies! -- I've looked him to a Ghost!

And art thou dead! Our Infant-Love for ever parted*
-- No more of Woman now! -- Farewell!
Nor need I this to dry my Tears,
The Thirst of Vengeance rages in my Blood,
And drinks 'em faster than they flow --
Hear, hear me, Gods! Revenge your Heads profaned;
And as the Cause, the woeful Cause, is yours,
So from this Arm (your not unwilling Instrument)
Hurl swift Destruction to the Tyrant's Heart --

I laugh at all that Fate can do* Come on, rash Fool!
And if thy Life's a Pain, (as, sure, a Rebel's ought,)
Thus Hand to Hand opposed, Death never took
A Nobler Form to face thee --

Now, By the Sun's Refulgent Ray,
I meet thee worthy of my Rage.
Oh! I could thank thee that thy Blood's so high:
That Manly Fury in thy Eyes transports me!
It sets the Noble Front of Honour in my View,
And heightens my Revenge with Glory.

Confusion! How he dallies with my Fury!
But thus I pour it all at once
And certain send thee to the Shades.

And thus the Gods re-pay thee --

Furies! and Hell! They've struck me now indeed!
But if there be Hereafter, I'll revenge it still:
Rebellion from the lowest Shades shall rise,
And give 'em fresh Alarms of War,
More dreadful than their puny Giants Rage:
The desperate Fiends, by me to Freedom led,
Shall dash their Chains against their Crystal Towers,
And shake their Heaven to Horror! -- Oh! I am faint!
My gushing Blood flows inward to my Throat.
And drives out Life before it! Ha! 'tis false!
I am not dying! No! I'm weary of the World,
And now will sleep for ever! --

When I behold this Sight, I wish to follow thee:
Death cannot be more terrible;
His Hand is on me, and his Looks are mild.
To be no more, is now to be most happy.
Oh, for a Friendly Witness of my Glory! Hark!
My Fortune's kind, I hear 'em coming!
Oh! welcome Friend! My Fellow-Soldiers, welcome!
See there the Wounds of Persia cured, the Tyrant's dead:
By me he fell, and poor Tamira is revenged.

Horror on Horror! Thy Tamira lives!
And comes with eager Love to meet thy Arms:
Oh! rather had she died, than thus to meet thee!

What means my Friend? Tamira living?

Run! Haste, and tell her of this bloody Chance!
If she would see her Husband, she must fly.
Alas, my Friend! That Gory Handkercher
Was only by the Tyrant thrown to gall thee:
Thy poor Tamira lives! This Moment dragged along
By the rude Rabble, I redeemed her safe.
But hark! Aranthes brings her on! He faints!
O Cruel! Gods! can you not lend one Hour
To a departing Lover!

Grieve not for me! Give to my Wife thy Tears;
She'll need a Friends Compassion: Let not her Sorrows
(For I know she'll mourn my Fall) be desperate:
Her little Infant will require some Care;
I charge her, live for that --
Commend me to her Heart, and let her know,
My latest dying Words, and Thoughts,
Confessed her Loving, more than Life beloved --

He's gone! O Freedom dearly bought!
Unwelcome Peace! Without the Life that gave it.
But see, his frighted Widow comes! O mournful Thought!
O piteous Woman!

Where! where's my bleeding Lord? Stand off!
O give him to my Arms! Hah! -- Speechless! and pale! Oh!

Help ho! she sinks; lets raise her from him.

Oh! we must never part,
But with more Pain than Bodies lose their Souls.
Dear Sir, for Pity's sake oppose me not:
Even in your Eyes I read a Friend's Concern;
But mine's a nearer Tie! a Wife! Alas!
I was his Wife, his tender Wife beloved.

Indeed, I pity thee: But yet, call Reason to thy Aid.

Ah! Do I not, my Lord? Are not my Tears my Duty?
Have I not Cause to tear my Flesh, to bleed,
And dash me on the Ground? --
Oh! could my Tears but fall like Showers from Heaven,
This dismal Object, sure, would drown the World.

Be comforted, fair Creature!
Nothing is ours: Nature but lends us Life.
Since Death's a Debt that all must pay --

Since he is dead, is there a Comfort left me?
Oh! I could out-weep the Southern Clouds! Away,
And give my Sorrows Room: Stand off!
And let me fill my Arms with Woe:
Grudge me not this! This Ease of Misery indulged,
Let me but talk a while, and gaze, and kiss
His cold, unfeeling Lips, and you shall see me quiet;
Hushed as the Cradle-Babe,
When chidden by its angry Parent to a Slumber.

Give her her Way, my Lord!
Her Grief swells higher when opposed.

By Heaven, this stubborn Heart, that has, unmoved,
Walked by a Heap of groaning Foes,
At this sad Sight is melted down to Woman.

Hush! -- Who's that, weeps so loud! -- You'll wake my Lord!
He is not well, -- he slumbers, and a cold,
Damp Sweat is on his Brow! O my poor Love!
Hark! hark! He calls me in his Sleep! He chides;
Says I am unkind and fear to follow him!
As if the Terror were not in Life behind him! Ha!
What means this Friendly Weapon at my Breast?
It looks not, sure, as if the Hand of Chance,
But Love, had laid it, to relieve my Woes!
-- 'Tis so! -- 'Twas Love: -- and Love applies it here!

O fatal Deed!

O rash Despair!

Call it not rash, when there's such Ease in Death.
But Death, alas! is never wholly kind,
For though I'm pleased to think I had not Power*
To out live my Lord, yet, Oh! it grieves my Heart
That I have robbed an Infant of its Mother.
Oh! be a Friend to that; and teach him, Sir,
To keep the Middle-Paths of Active Life,
When wild Ambition, or too powerful Love,
With eager Heat would drive him blindly on;
Be kind, and warn him with his Parents Ruin.

There broke
The tend'rest Heart that ever sighed in Love:
But Love was her Undoing; for once,
In wild Revenge, to right her Love betrayed,
She struck a Poniard to the Villain Memnon's Heart.
The Gods have frowned; but Men must pity her:
Nay, Heaven but half resents her Fault, gives her
A kind, a not untimely Death: 'Twas then
Too late to live, when all she loved was gone.
Remove the Bodies, never more to part:
Living, one chaste Bed; now one Grave shall hold 'em.
But here, the Gods with Terror strike Mankind.
Let Kings and jarring Subjects hence be warned,
Not to oppress, or drive Revenge too far:
Kings are but Men, and Men by Nature err,
Subjects are Men, and cannot always bear
Much should be born before Revenge is sought:
Ever Revenge on Kings is dearly bought.
Yet, to our Woes, the Gods this Comfort give;
From those that die, the Living learn to live.


