WIT bears so thin a Crop this Duller Age,
We're forced to Glean it from the Barren Stage.
Even Players Fledged by Nobler Pens, take Wing
Themselves, and their own Rude Composures Sing.
Nor need our Young one Dread a Shipwreck here;
Who Trades without a Stock has nought to fear.
In every Smile of yours, a Prize he draws,
And if you Damn him, he's but where he was.
Yet where's the Reason for the Critic Crew,
With Killing Blasts, like Winter, to pursue
The Tender Plant, that Ripens but for you?
Nature in all her Works requires Time,
Kindness, and Years, 'tis makes the Virgin Climb,
And shoot, and hasten to the expected Prime;
And then, if untaught Fancy fail to Please,
Y'instruct the willing Pupil by Degrees;
By Gentle Lessons you your Joys improve,
And Mold her Awkward Passion into Love.
Even Folly has its Growth: Few Fools are made,
You Drudge, and Sweat for it, as it were a Trade.
'Tis half the Labour of your Trisling Age,
To Fashion you fit Subjects for the Stage.
Well! If our Author Fail to Draw you like,
In the first Draught, you're not to expect Vandike.
What, though no Master-stroke in this Appears;
Yet some may find Features Resembling Theirs.
Nor do the Bad alone his Colours share;
Neglected Virtue is at least shown Fair;
And that's enough of Conscience for a Play'r.
But if you'd have him take a Bolder Flight,
And Draw your Pictures by a Truer Light,
You must your selves, by Follies yet unknown,
Inspire his Pencil, and Divert the Town.
Nor Judge by this, his Genius at a stand;
For Time, that makes new Fools, may mend his Hand.

SIrrah! leave your Preaching -- your Counsel's like an ill Clock, either
stands still, or goes to slow -- you never thought my Extravagancies amiss,
while you had your share of 'em; and now I want money to make my self drunk,
you advise me to live sober, you Dog -- They that will hunt pleasure, as I have
done, Rascal, must never give over in a fair Chase.


Nay, I knew you would never rest, till you had tired your Dogs -- ah Sir! what
a fine pack of Guineas have you had! and yet you would make them run till they
were quite spent. -- Would I were fairly turned out of your Service -- here we
have been three days in Town, and I can safely Swear I have lived upon picking
a hollow tooth ever since.


Why don't you Eat then Sirrah?


Even, because I don't know where, Sir.


Then stay till I Eat, hang-dog, ungrateful Rogue! to murmur at a little fasting
with me, when thou hast been an Equal partner of my good Fortune.


Fortune! -- It makes me Weep to think what you have brought your self, and me
to! How well might you have ivl'd, Sir, had you been a Sober Man -- Let me see!
I have been in your Service just ten years -- In the first you Married, and grew
weary of your Wife; in the Second you Whored Drank, Gamed, run in Debt,
Mortgaged your Estate, and was forct to leave the Kingdom; in the 3d, 4th, 5th,
6th and 7th, you made the Tour of Europe, with the State and Equipage of a
French Court Favourite, while your poor Wife at Home broke her heart for the
loss of you. In the 8th and 9th you grew poor, and little the wiser, and now in
the 10th you are resolved I shall starve with you.


Despicable Rogue, can not thou bear the Frowns of a Common strumpet Fortune?


-- S'bud I never think of the Pearl Necklace you gave that Damned Venetian
Strumpet, but I wish her hanged in it!


Why Sirrah! I knew I could not have her without it, and I had a Night's
Enjoyment of her, was worth a Pope's Revenue for it.


Ah! you had better have laid out your money here in London; I'll undertake you
might have had the whole Town over and over; for half the price -- Beside, Sir,
what a delicate Creature was your Wife! She was the only Celebrated Beauty in
Town; I'll undertake there were more Fops and Fools run mad for her, odsb^d she
was more plagued with 'em, and more talked of than a good Actress with a
Maiden-head! Why the Devil could not she content you?


No Sirrah! the World to me is a Garden, stocked with all sorts of Fruit, where
the greatest pleasure we can take, is in the Variety of Taste: But a Wife is an
Eternal Apple-tree, after a pull or two you are sure to set your Teeth on Edge.


And yet I warrant you grudged another Man a bit of her, though you valued her no
more, than you would a half Eaten Pippin, that had lain a Week a Sunning in a
Parlour Window -- But see, Sir, who's this -- for methinks I long to meet with
an old acquaintance!


Ha! I gad he looks like one, and may be necessary as the case stands with me
--


Pray Heaven he do but invite us to Dinner!


Dear Wontby! let me embrace thee, the sight of an old Friend warms me, beyond
that of a new Mistress.


S'Death, what Bully's this? Sir, your pardon I don't know you!


Faith Will, I am a little out of repairs at present: But I am all that's left
of honest Ned Loveless.


Loveless! I am amazed! what means this Metamorphosis? -- Faith Ned, I am glad
to find thee amongst the Living, however -- How long hast thou been in Town?


About three days -- But prithee Will, how goes the World?


Why like a Bowl, it runs on at the old rate, Interest is still the Jack it
aims at, and while it rowles, you know, it must of necessity be often turned
upside down -- But I doubt Friend, you have bowled out of the Green, have lived
a little too fast, England?


Why my last hopes faith, which were to persuade Sir Will Wisewood, (if he be
alive) to whom I Mortgaged my Estate, to let me have Five hundred pounds more
upon it, or else to get some honest Friend to redeem the Mortgage, and share
the over-plus! Beside, I thought that London might now be a place of
uninterrupted pleasure, for I hear my Wife is dead; and to tell you the Truth
'twas the stalene's of her love, was the main cause of my, going over.


His Wife dead ha! I'm glad he knows no other, I won't undeceive him least the
Rogue should go and risle her, of what she has, Ned, she died with Grief! your
wild courses broke her heart.


Why Faith! she was a good natured Fool! that's the truth on it, well! rest her
Soul.


Now, Sir, you are a single Man indeed,; for you have neither Wife, nor Estate.


But how hast thou improved thy money beyond Sea? What hast thou brought over?


Oh! a great deal of Experience.


And no money?


Not a souse, faith, Sir, as my belly can testify.


But I have a great deal more wit then T had!


Not enough to get your Estate again, or to know where we shall dine to day --
(O Lord he don't ask us yet!)


Why your Rogue's witty, Ned, where did thou pick him up?


Don't you remember Snap? formerly your Pimp in Ordinary: But he is much
improved in his calling I assure you, Sir.


I don't doubt it, considering who has been his Master.


Yes, Sir, I was an humble Servant of yours, and am still, Sir, and should be
glad to stand behind your Chair at Dinner, Sir.


Oh! Sir, that you may do another time: But to day I am engaged upon business,
however, there's a meals meat for you?


Bless my eye sight, a Guinea -- Sir! is there ever a VVhore you would have
kicked, any old Bawds windows you would have broken, shall I beat your Taylor
for disappointing you? or your Surgeon that would be paid for a Clap of two
years standing? if you have occasion, you may command your humble Servant --


Sweet Sir, I am obliged to you! but at present am so happy, as to have no
occasion for your assistance -- But hark you Ned! Prithee what hast thou done
with thy Estate?


I pawned to buy pleasure, that is, old Wine, young VVhores, and the
conversation of Brave Fellows, as Mad as my self; Pox! If a Man has Appetites,
they are Torments, if not indulged! I shall never complain, as long as I have
Health, and Vigour; and as for my Poverty, why the Devil should I be ashamed of
that, since a Rich Man wont blush at his Knavery.


Faith Ned, I am as much in Love with Wickedness, as thou can be, but I am
for having it at a Cheaper rate, than my Ruin! Don't it grate you a little to
see your Friends blush for you?


Tis very odd, that People should be more ashamed of others Faults, then their
own; I never yet could meet with a Man that offered me Counsel, but had more
occasion for himself.


So far you may be in the right: For indeed good Counsel is like a home Jest,
which every busy Fool is offering to his Fellow, and yet won't take himself.


Right -- thus have I known a jolly Red-Nos'd Parson, at Three a Clock in the
Morning, Belch out Invectives against late Hours, and hard Drinking: And a
Canting Hypocritical Sinner, protest against Fornication, when the Rogue was
himself just crawling out of a Flux.


Tho these are Truths Friend, yet I don't see any Advantage you can draw from
them. Prithee how will you live now, all your Money's gone?


Live! How dost thou live? thou art but a younger Brother I take it.


Oh! very well, Sir, (tho faith my Father left me but 3000 l.) one of which I
gave for a place at Court, that I still enjoy; the other two are gone after
pleasure, as thou say. But beside this, I am supplied by the continual
bounty of an indulgent Brother; now I am loath to load his good Nature too
much, and therefore have even thought fit, like the rest of my raking
Brother-hood, to Purge out my wild Humours with Matrimony: By the way I have
taken care to see the Dose well sweetened, with a swinging Portion.


Ah! Will, You'll find Marrying to Cure Lewdness, is like Surfoiting to Cure
Hunger: For all the Consequence is, you Loath what you Surfeit on, and are only
Chaste to her you Marry -- but prithee, Friend, what is thy Wife that must be?


Why faith, since I believe the matter is too far gone for any Man to Postpone
me, (at least, I am sure, thou wilt not do me an Injury to do thy self no good)
I'll tell thee -- you must know, my Mistress is the Daughter of that very
Knight to whom you Mortgaged your Estate, Sir William Wisewou'd.


Why, she's an Heiress, and has a 1000 l, a year in her own Hands, if she be of
Age* But I suppose the Old Man knows nothing of your intentions. Therefore
prithee how have you had opportunities of promoting your Love?


Why thus -- you must know, Sir William (being very well acquainted with the
largeness of my Brothers Estate,) designs this Daughter for him, and to
Encourage his Passion offers him, out of hi^ own Pocket, the Additional
Blessing of 5000 l. This Offer, my Brother, knowing my Inclinations, seems to
embrace; but at the same time, is really in Love with his Niece, who lives with
him in the same House, and therefore to hide my design from the Old Gentleman,
I pretend visits to his Daughter, as an Intercessor for my Brother only, and
thus he has given me daily opportunities of advancing my own Interest. -- nay,
and I have so contrived it, that I design to have the 5000 l. too.


How is that possible, since I see no hopes of the Old Mans consent for you?


Have a Days patience, and you'll see the effects on it; in a word, 'tis so
sure, that nothing but delays can hinder my Success; therefore I am very
earnest with my Mistress that to Morrow may be the Day. But a Pox on it, I have
two Women to prevail with, for my Brother Quarrels every other Day with his
Mistress, and while I am reconciling him, I loose, Ground in my own Amour.


Why, has not your Mistress told you her Mind yet?


She will I suppose, as soon as she knows it her self, for within this Week,
she has changed it as often, as her Linen, and keeps it as secret too; for she
would no more own her Love before my Face, then she would shift her self before
my Face.


P'shaw! She shows it the more, by striving to conceal it.


Nay, she does give me some Proofs indeed, for she will suffer no body but her
self to speak ill of me, is always uneasy till I am sent for, never pleased
when I am with her, and still Jealous when I leave her.


Well. Success to thee Will; I will send the Fiddles to release you from your
first Nights Labour.


But hark you! Have a care of disobliging the Bride, tho -- Ha! Yonder goes my
Brother! I am afraid his walking so Early proceeds from some disturbance in his
Love; I must after him, and set him right -- Dear Ned you'll Excuse me; shall I
see you at the Blue Posts between Five and Six this Afternoon?


With all my Heart -- but dee ye hear -- can not thou lend me the fellow to
that same Guinea you gave my Man, I'll give you my Bend if you mistrust me.


Oh Sir! Your necessity is Obligation enough -- there 'tis, and all I have
faith, when I see you at Night, you may command me farther -- Adieu at Six at
farthest.


Without fail -- so! Now Rascal you are an hungry are you! Thou deserve never
to Eat again -- Rogue! Grumble before Fortune had quite forsaken us!


Ah! Dear Sir, the thoughts of Eating again, have so transported me, I am
resolved to Live and Die with you.


Look ye, Sirrah, here's that will provide us of a Dinner and a brace of Whores
into the bargain, at least as Guinea's and Whores go now.


Ah! Good Sir! No Whores before Dinner. I beseech you.


Well, for once I'll take your advice; for to say Truth, a Man is as unfit to
follow Love with an empty Stomach, as business with an empty Head: Therefore I
think a Bit and a Bottle won't be amiss first.

The Gods of Wine, and Love, were ever Friends;
For by the help of Wine, Love gains his Ends.

How hard is it to find that Happiness which our short sighted Passions hope
from Woman? 'tis not their cold disdain, or Cruelty should make a faithful
Lover Curse his Stars, that is but reasonable; 'tis the shadow in our Pleasures
Picture! Without it Love could never be heightened! No 'tis their Pride, and
vain desire of many Lovers, that robs our hope of its imagined Rapture: The
Blind are only happy! For if we look through Reason's never erring Perspective,
we then Survey their Souls, and view the Rubbish we were Chaffring for: And
such I find, Hillaria's mind is made of. This Letter is an Order for the
knocking off my Fetters, and I'll send it her immediately.


Morrow Brother! Hillaria taken Snuff from? What Fool has led her from the Box
to her Coach? What Fop has she suffered to read a Play or Novel to her? Or
whose Money has she indiscreetly woh at Baffet -- come, let's see the Ghastly
Wound she has made in your quiet, that I may know how much Claret to prescribe
you?


I have my Wound, and Cure from the same Person I'll assure you; the one from
Hillaria's Wit and Beauty, the other from her Pride and Vanity?


That's what I could never yet find her guilty of: are you angry at her Loving
you.


I am angry at my self, for believing she ere did.


Have her Actions spoke the contrary? Come you know she Loves.


Indeed she gave a great proof on it last Night here in the Park, by fastening
upon a Fool, and Caressing him before my Face, when she might have so easily
avoided him.


What! And I warrant interrupted you in the middle of your Sermon; for I don't
Question but you were Preaching to her. But Prithee who was the Fool she
fastened upon?


One that Heaven intended for a Man; but the whole business of his Life is to
make the World believe, he is of another Species. A thing that affects mightily
to ridicule himself; only to give others a kind of necessity of praising him. I
can't says he's a Slave to every New Fashion, for he pretends to be the Master
of it, and is ever reviving some Old, or advancing some New Piece of Foppery;
and tho it. don't take is still as well pleased, because it then obliges the
Town to take the more notice of him: He's so fond of a Public Reputation, that
he is more extravagant in his Attempts to gain it, then the Fool that Fired
Diana's Temple, to Immortalize his Name.


You have said enough to tell me his Name is Sir Novelty Fashion.


The same; but that which most concerns me, is that he has the Impudence to
Address to Hillaria, and she Vanity enough to discard him.


Is this all? Why thou art as hard to please in a Wife, as thy Mistress in a
New Gown: How many Women have you took in hand; and yet can't please your self
at last!


I had need to have the best Goods, when I offer so great a price as Marriage
for them: Hillaria has some good Qualities, but not enough to make a Wife of.


She has Beauty!


Granted.


And Money.


Too much: Enough to supply her Vanity.


She has Sense.


Not enough to believe I am no Fool.


She has Wit.


Not enough to deceive me.


Why then you are happy, if she can't deceive you.


Yet she has Folly enough to endeavour it: I'll see her no more, and this shall
tell her so.


Which in an Hour's time you'll repent, as much as over.


As ever I should Marrying her.


You'll have a damned meaking look, when you are forced to ask her Pardon, for
your ungenerous Suspicion, and lay the fault upon Excess of Love.


I am not so much in Love as you Imagine.


Indeed, Sir, you are in Love, and that Letter tells her so.


Read it, you'll find the contrary.


Prithee I know what's in it, better then thou dost: You say, 'tis to take your
leave of her; but I say 'tis in hopes of a kind Excusive Answer: But Faith you
mistake her and your self too; she is too high Spirited not to take you at your
word; and you are too much in Love, not to ask her Pardon.


Well then, I'll not be too rash: but will show my resentment in forbearing my
Visits.


Your Visits! Come, I shall soon try what a Man of resolution you are -- for
yonder she comes -- now, Let's see if you have power to move.


I'll soon convince you of that -- farewell.


Ha! Gone! I don't like that? I am sorry to find him so resolute: But I hope
Hillaria has taken too fast hold of his Heart, to let this Fit shake him off. I
must to her, and make up this breach: For while his Amour stands still I have
no hopes of advancing my own.


Well, dear Amanda, thou art the most Constant Wife I ever heard of: Not to
shake off the Memory of an ill Husband, after 8 or 10 years absence; nay, to
Mourn for ought you know for the Living too, and such an Husband, that tho he
were alive, would never thank you for it: whyd'ye persist in such a hopeless
Grief?


Because 'tis hopeless! For if he be alive, he is Dead to me; his Dead
Affections not Virtues self can ever retrive; would I were with him, tho in his
Grave!


In my mind, you are much better where you are! The Grave! Young Widows use to
have warmer wishes. But methinks the Death of a Bich old Uncle, should be a
Cordial to your Sorrows.


That adds to 'em; for he was the only Relation I had left, and was as tender
of me, as the nearest! He was a Father to me.


He was better then some Fathers to you; for he dyed, just when you had
Occasion for his Estate.


I have an old Father, and the Duce take me, I think he only lives to hinder me
of my Occasions; but Lord bless me, Madam, how can you be unhappy with 2000 l.
a year in your own Possession?


For my part, the greatest Reason I think you have to grieve, is that you are
not sure your Husband's dead, for were that confirmed, then indeed there were
hopes, that one Poison might drive out another, you might Marry again.


All the Comfort of my Life is, that I can tell my Conscience, I have been true
to Virtue.


And to an Extravagant Husband, that cares not a Farthing for you. But come
let's leave this unseasonable Talk, and pray give me a little of your Advice!
what shall I do with this Mr. Worthy? would you advise me to make a Husband of
him?


I am but an ill Judge of Men; the only one I thought my self secure of, most
cruelly deceived me?


A losing Gamester is fittest to give Counsel; what do ye think of him?


Better then of any Man I know: I read nothing in him but what is some part of
a good Man's Character.


He's Jealous.


He's a Lover.


He Taxes me with a Fool!


He would preserve your Reputation, and a Fool's love ends only in the Ruin of
it.


Methinks he's not Handsome?


He's a Man, Madam.


Why then even let him make a Woman of me.


Pray, Madam, what do ye think of his Brother?


I would not think of him.


Oh dear, why pray?


He puts me in mind of a Man too like him, one that had Beauty, Wit, and
Falsehood! --


You have hit some part of his Character, I must confess Madam; but as to his
Truth, I'm sure he loves only me.


I don't doubt but he tells you so, nay, and swears it too.


O Lord! Madam, I hope I may without Vanity believe him.


But you will hardly without Magic secure him.


I shall use no Spells, or Charms, but this Poor Face, Madam.


And your Fortune, Madam.


(Senseless Malice!) I know he'd marry me without a Groat.


Then he's not the Man I take him for.


Why pray -- what do you take him for?


A wild young Fellow, that loves every thing he sees.


He never loved you yet.


I hope, Madam, he never saw any thing in me to Encourage him.


In my conscience you are in the right on it, Madam, I dare swear he never did,
nor ever would, tho he gazed till Dooms-day.


I hope, Madam, your Charms will prevent his putting himself to the Trial, and
I wish he may never --


Nay, dear, Madam, no more railing at him, unless you would have me believe you
love him.


Indeed Ladies you are both in the wrong, you, Cousin, in being angry at what
you desired, her Opinion of your Lover; and you, Madam, for speaking truth
against the Man she resolves to Love.


Love him! prithee, Cousin, no more of that old stuff.


Stuff! why? don't you own you are to marry him this week -- Here he comes, I
suppose you'll tell him another thing in his Ear.


Mr. Worthy, your Servant! you look with the face of Business, what's the News,
pray?


Faith, Madam, I have news for you all, and private news too: But that of the
greatest consequence is with this Lady: Your pardon Ladies, I'll whisper with
you all, one after another.


Come, Cousin, will you walk, the Gentleman has business, we shall interrupt
him.


Why really, Cousin, I don't say positively you love Mr. Worthy, but I vow this
looks very like Jealousy.


Pish! Lord! Hillaria, you are in a very odd humour to day. But to let you see
I have no such weak thoughts about me, I'll wait as unconcerned as your self
(I'll ratile him.)


Not unpleasing say you? pray, Sir, unfold your self, for I have long despaired
of welcome news.


Then in a word, Madam, your Husband Mr. Loveless is in Town, and has been
these three days, I parted with him not an hour ago.


In Town, you amaze me! for heaven's sake go on.


Faith, Madam, considering Italy, and those parts have furnished him with
nothing but an improvement of that Lewdness he carried over; I can't properly
give you joy of his arrival: Besides, he is so very poor, that you would take
him for an Inhabitant of that Country. And when I confirmed your being dead, he
only shook his Head, and called you good natured fool, or to that effect Nay,
tho I told him his unkindness broke your heart.


Barbarous Man! not shed a Tear upon my grave? But why did you tell him I was
dead?


Because, Madam, I thought you had no mind to have your house plundered, and
for another reason, which if you dare listen to me, perhaps you'll not dislike.
In a word 'tis such a Stratagem that will either make him ashamed of his Folly,
or in love with your Virtue.


Can there be a hope, when even my death could not move him to a relenting
sigh! Yet pray instruct me, Sir.


You know, Madam, 'twas not above four or five months after you were Married,
but (as most young Husbands do) he grew weary of you: Now I am confident 'twas
more an Affectation of being Fashionably Vicious, than any reasonable dislike,
he could either find in your Mind or Person: Therefore could you by some
artifice, pass upon him, as a new Mistress, I am apt to believe you would find
none of the wonted coldness in his Love; But a younger heat, and fierce desire.


Suppose this done! What would be the consequence!


O your having then a just occasion to reproach him with his broken Vows, and
to let him see the weakness of his deluded Fancy, which even in a Wife, while
unknown, could find those real Charms, which his blind, ungrateful lewdness
would never allow her to be Mistress of. After this, I'd have you seem, freely
to resign him to those Fancied Raptures, which he denied were in a Virtuous
Woman* who knows but this with a little Submissive Eloquence, may strike him
with so great sense of shame, as may reform his thoughts, and fix him yours?


You have revived me, Sir: But how can I assure my self he'll like me as a
Mistress?


From your being a new one -- Leave the management of all to me; I have a trick
shall draw him to your Bed, and when he's there, Faith even let him Cuckold
himself, I'll engage he likes you as a Mistress, tho he could not as a Wife. At
least she'll have the pleasure of knowing the difference between a Husband and a
Lover, without the Scandal of the former.


You have obliged me, Sir; If I succeed, the Glory shall be yours.


I'll wait on you at your Lodging, and consult how I may be farther serviceable
to you: But you must put this in a speedy Execution, least he should hear of
you, and prevent your designs, in the mean time, 'tis a secret to all the
World, but your self and me.


I'll study to be greateful, Sir.


Now for you, Madam.


So! I am to be last served: very well!


My Brother, Madam, confesses he scattered some rough Words last Night, and I
have taken the Liberty to tell you, you gave him some provocation.


That may be; but I'm resolved to be Mistress of my Actions before Marriage,
and no Man shall Usurp a power over me, till I give it him.


At least, Madam, consider what he said, as the effects of an Impatient
passion, and give him leave this afternoon to set all right again.


Well, if I don't find my self out of Order after Dinner, perhaps I may step
into the Garden: But I won't promise you neither.


I dare believe you without it -- Now, Madam, I am your humble Servant.


And every body's humble Servant.


Why, Madam, I am come to tell you --


What Success you have had with that Lady, I suppose, I don't mind Intrigues,
Sir.


I like this Jealousy however, though I scarce know how to appease it. 'Tis
business of Moment, Madam, and may be done in a Moment.


Yours is done with me, Sir, but my business is not so soon done as you
imagine.


In a word, I have very near reconciled my Brother, and your Cousin, and I
don't doubt but to morrow will be the day, if I were but as well assured of
your consent for my Happiness too!


First tell me your Discourse with that Lady; and afterwards if you can, look
me in the Face -- Oh are you studying, Sir?


S'Death! I must not trust her with it, she'll tell it the whole Town for a
Secret -- Pox, never a lye!


You said it was of the greatest consequence too!


A good hint Faith. I was unworthy of you: Was not this of consequence, Madam?


Nay, now I must believe you, Mr. Worthy, and I ask your pardon, for she was
just railing against you for a Husband, before you came.


Oh! Madam, a favoured Lover like a good Poem, for the malice of some few,
makes the generous temper more admire it.


Nay, what she said, I must confess, had much the same effects as the Coffee
Critics ridiculing Prince Arthur, for I found a pleasing disappointment in my
reading you, and till I see your Beauty's Equalled, I shall not dislike you for a
few faults.


Then, Madam, since you have blessed me with your good Opinion, let me beg of
you, before these Ladies, to complete my Happiness to morrow. Let this be the
last night of your lying alone.


What de'e mean?


To marry you to Morrow, Madam.


Marry me! Who put that in your head?


Some small Encouragement which my Hopes have formed, Madam.


Hopes! Oh Insolence! if it once comes to that I don't question but you have
been familiar with me in your Imagination. Marry you! What lye in a naked bed
with you! Trembling by your side, like a tame Lamb for Sacricrifice! De'e think
I can be moved to love a Man, to kiss him, toy with him, and so forth!


I gad! I find nothing but down right Impudence will do with her. I'm there
already, Eager and Impatient of approaching Bliss! Just laid within the Bridal
Bed, our Friends retired, the Curtains close drawn around us, no light but
Caelia's Eyes, no noise but her soft trembling words, and broken sighs, that
plead in vain for mercy: And now a trickling Tear steals down her glowing
Cheek, which tells the Rushing Lover at length she yields: Yet vows she'd
rather dye. But still submits to the unexperienced Joy.


What Raptures Mr. Worthy!


Only the force of Love in imagination, Madam.


O Lord! dear Cousin! and Madam! let's be gone, I vow he grows rude! Oh! for
Heavens sake, I shant shake of my fright these ten days, O Lord! I will not
stay -- begone! for I declare I loath the sight of you.


I hope you'll stand my Friend, Madam.


I'll get her into the Garden after dinner.


I find there's nothing to be done with my Lady before Company, 'tis a strange
affected piece -- But there's no fault in her 1000 l. a year, and that's the
Loadstone that attracts my heart -- The Wise, and Grave, may tell us of strange
Chimaera's called Virtues in a Woman, and that they alone are the best Dowry;
but faith we younger Brothers are of another mind.

Women are changed from what they were of old:
Therefore let Lovers still this Maxim hold,
She's only worth that brings her weight in Gold.

OH! for Heavens sake! no more of this Gallantry Sir Novelty: For I know you
say, the same to every Woman you see.


Every one that sees you, Madam, must say the same. Your Beauty, like the Rack
forces every beholder to Confess his Crime -- of daring to adore you


Oh! I ^an't Patience to hear all this! if he be Blind I'll open his Eyes -- I
vow Sir Novelty, you Men of Amour are Strange Creatures: You think no Woman
worth your while, unless you Walk over a Rivals Ruin to her Heart; I know
nothing has encouraged your Passion to my Cousin more, than her Engagement to
Mr. Worthy.


Poor Creature now is she Angry* she have not the Address of a Fop Inauseate!


Oh! Madam, as to that, I hope the Lady will easily Distinguish the Sincerity
of her Adorers. Tho I must allow Mr. Worthy is Infinitely the Hansomer Person!


O! fie Sir Novelty, make not such a Preposterous Comparison!


Oh! General! Madam, there is no Comparison*


Pardon me Sir! he's an unpolished Animal!


Why does your Ladyship really think me tolerable?


So! she has Snapped his Heart already.


Pray Madam, how do I look to day? What, Cursedly? I'll warrant with a more
Hellish Complexion, than an Stale Actress at a Rehearsal -- I don't know Madam
-- tis true -- the Town does talk of me indeed -- but the Devil take me in my
mind I am a very ugly Fellow!


Now you are too severe, Sir Novelty!


Not I, burn me -- For Heavens take deal freely with me, Madam, and if you can,
tell me -- one tolerable thing about me?


T'wou'd pose me, I'm sure.


Oh! Sir Novelty this is unanswerable; tis hard to know the brightest part of a
Diamond.


You'll make me blush, stop my Vitals, Madam -- I ga'd I always said she was a
Woman of Sense. Strike me Dumb, I am in love with her -- I'll try her farther
Worthy -- not that he is any Rival of mine, Madam, For I can assure you my
Inclinations lye, where perhaps your Ladyship little thinks.


So! now I am rid of him.


But Pray tell me, Madam: For I really Love a severe Critic, I am sure you
must believe he has a more happy Genius in Dress: For my part I am but a
Sloven.


He a Genius! unsufferable! why he dresses worse than a Captain of the Militia:
But you Sir Novelty are a true Original, the very Pink of Fashion; I'll warrant
there's not a Milliner in Town, but has got an Estate by you?


I must Confess Madam, I am for doing good, to my Country: For you see this
Suit, Madam, -- I Suppose you are not ignorant what a hard time the Ribbon
Weavers have had since the late Mourning: Now my design is to set the Poor
Rogues up again, by recommending this sort of Trimming: The Fancy is pretty
well for second Mourning, -- By the way Madam, I had Fifteen Hundred Guineas
^id in my hand as a Gratuity to encourage it: But I gad I refused 'em being too
well acquainted with the consequence of taking a Bribe, in a National concern!


A very Charitable Fashion indeed Sir Novelty; But how if it should not take?


Ridiculous! take! I warrant you in a Week the whole Town will have it: Though
perhaps Mr. Worthy will be one of the last of 'em: He's a mere Valet de Chambre
to all Fashion; and never is in any till his Betters have left them off.


Nay General now I must laugh, for the Devil take me, if I did not meet him, not
above Fortnight ago, in a Coat with Buttons no bigger than Nutmegs.


There I must Confess you out-do him, Sir Novelty.


Oh dear, Madam, why mine are not above three Inches Diameter.


But methinks, Sir Novelty, your Sleeve is a a little too Extravagant.


Nay, Madam, there you wrong me, mine does but just reach my Knuckles. But my
Lord Overdo's covers his Diamond Ring.


Nay, I confess, the Fashion may be very useful to you, Gentlemen, that make
Campaigns; for should you unfortunately lose an Arm, or so, that Sleeve might
be very convenient to hide the defect on it.


Ha! I think your Ladiship's in the right on it, Madam.


Oh! such an Air! so becoming a Negligence! Upon my Soul, Sir Novelty, you'll
be the Envy of the Beau Monde!


Mr. Worthy! a good Fancy were thrown away upon him! But you, Sir, are an
ornament to your Cloths.


Then your Ladyship really thinks they are -- Bien Entendue!


A Mervielle, Monsieur!


She has almost as much Wit as her Cousin -- I must confess, Madam, this Coat
has had a Universal Approbation: For this, Morning I had all the Eminent
Taylors about Town at my Levee, earnestly Petitioning for the first Measure of
it: Now, Madam* if you thought it would oblige Mr. Worthy, I would let his
Taylor (...) it before any of 'em.


See here he comes, and the Duce take me, I think it would be a great piece of
good nature; for I declare he looks as Rough as a Dutch Corporal -- Prithee,
Sir Novelty lets laugh at him.


O God! No, Madam, that were too cruel: Why you know he can't help it -- Lets
take no no^ice of him.


Wretched Coxcomb.


I find my Resolution is but vain, my Feet have brought me hither against my
will. But sure I can command my Tongue, which I'll bite off* ere it shall seek
a Reconciliation, Still so familiar there! But 'tis no matter, I'll try if I
can wear. Indifference, and seem as careless in my Love, as she is of her
Honour, which she can never truly know the worth of, while she persists to let
a Fool thus play with it. -- Ladies, your humble Servant.


Now can't I forbear fretting his Spleen a little Worthy, we are admiring Sir.
Novelty, and his new Suit, did you ever see so sweet a Fancy? He is as full of
variety as a good Play.


He's a very pleasant Comedy indeed, Madam, and dressed with a great deal of good
Satyr, and no doubt may oblige both the Stage and the Town, especially the
Ladies.


So! There's for me. --


O General! Nay prithee, Tom. know my Humour, -- Ladies! Stop my vitals! I don't
believe there are five Hundred in Town that ever took any notice of me.


Oh, Sir, there are some that take so much notice of you, that the Town takes
notice of them for it.


It works rarely.


How of them, Tom, upon my account! O General, I would not be the Ruin of any
Lady's Reputation for the World: Stop my Vitals, I am very sorry for it; Prithee
name but one, that has a favourable Thought of me, and to convince you that I
have no design upon her, I'll instantly visit her in an unpowder'd Periwig.


Nay, she, I mean, is a Woman of Sense too.


Phoo! Prithee, Pox, don't banter me: 'Tis impossible! what can she see in me?


Oh, a thousand taking Qualities! This Lady will inform you -- Come, I'll
Introduce you.


O General no! Prithee! -- Hark you in your Ear -- I am off of her! Demmy if I
be not, I am, stop my Vitals!


Wretched Rogue!


Sir!


This Gentleman humbly begs to kiss your Hands.


He needs not your Recommendation, Sir.


True! a Fool recommends himself to your Sex, and that's the Reason Men of
common Sense live unmarried.


A Fool without Jealousy, is better than a Wit with Ill-nature.


A friendly Office, seeing your Fault is Ill-Nature.


Believing more than we have is pitiful, -- You know I hate this Wretch, loath,
and scorn him.


Fools have a secret Art of pleasing Women: If he did not delight you, you
would not hazard your Reputation, by encouraging his Love.


Dares he wrong my Reputation?


He need not; the World will do it for him, while you keep him company.


I dare answer it to the World.


Then why not to me?


To satisfy you, were a Fondness, I never should forgive my self.


To persist in it, is what I'll never forgive.


Insolence! is it come to this? Never see me more.


I have lost the sight of you already; there hangs a Cloud of Folly between
you, and the Woman I once thought you.


What to our selves in Passion we propose, The Passion ceasing does the Purpose
lose: Madam, therefore pray let me engage you to stay a little till your Fury
is over, that you may see whether you have reason to be angry, or no.





Mr. Worthy's Brother, Sir, a Gentleman of no mean parts, I can assure you.


I don't doubt it, Madam, -- He has a very good walk.


To be jealous of me with a Fool, is an affront to my understanding.


Tamely to Resign your Reputation to the merciless Vanity of a Fool, were no
proof of his Love.


Tis Questioning my Conduct.


Why you let him Kiss your Hand last Night before his Face.


The Fool diverted me, and I gave him my hand, as I would lend my Money, Fan, or
Handkerchief to a Legerdemain, that I might see him play all his Tricks over.


O Madam! no Juggler is so deceitful as a Fop; for while you look his Folly in
the Face, he Steals away your Reputation, with more Ease, than the other Picks
your Pocket.


Some Fools indeed are dangerous.


I grant you, your design is only to laugh at him: But that's more than he
finds out: Therefore you must expect he will tell the World another Story: And
'tis Ten to One, but the consequence makes you repent of your Curiosity.


You speak like an Oracle: I tremble at the thoughts on it.


Here's one shall reconcile your Fears -- Brother I have done your business:
Hillaria is convinced of her Indiscretion, and has a pardon ready for your
asking it.


She's the Criminal, I have no occasion for it.


See she comes toward you, give her a Civil word at least.


Mr. Worthy, I'll not be behind-hand in the Acknowledgment I owe you: I freely
confess my Folly, and forgive your harsh Construction of it: Nay, I'll not
condemn your want of good Nature, in not endeavouring, (as your Brother has
done,) by mild arguments to convince me of my Error.


Now you vanquish me! I blush to be out done in Generous Love! I am your Slave,
dispose of me as you please.


No more, from this hour be you the Master of my Actions, and my Heart.


This goodness gives you the Power, and I obey with Pleasure.


So! I find I have not preach't to no purpose! Well Madam if you find him Guilty
of Love, even let to Morrow be his Execution day, make a Husband of him, and
there's the Extent of Loves Law.


Brother I am indebted to you.


Well I'll give you a discharge, if you will but leave me but half an hour in
private with that Lady.


How will you get rid of Sir Novelty?


I'll warrant you, leave him to me.


Come, Mr. Worthy, as we walk, I'll inform you, how I intend to sacrifice that
Wretch to your laughter.


Not, Madam, that I want Revenge on so contemptible a Creature: But, I think,
you owe this Justice to your self, to let him see (if possible) you never took
him for any other, than what he really is.


Well! Pox of you Politics, Prithee consult of 'em within.


We'll obey you Sir.


Pray, Madam, give me leave to beg a word in private with you; Sir if you
please --


Ay Sir, with all my heart.


Sir. --


Nay, 'tis right, I'll assure you,


Ay Sir -- but now the Lady would be alone.


Sir!


The Lady would be alone, Sir.


I don't hear her say any such thing.


Then I tell you so, and I would advise you to believe me.


I shall not take your advice, Sir: But if you really think the Lady would be
alone, why -- you had best leave her.


In short, Sir, your Company is very unseasonable at present.


I can tell you, Sir, if you have no more Wit, than Manners, the Lady will be
but scurvily entertained.


Oh fie, Gentlemen, no Quarrelling before a Woman, I beseech you. Pray let me
know the Business.


My business is Love, Madam.


And yours, Sir!


What, I hope you are no stranger too, Madam: As for that Spark you need take
no Care of him, for if he stays much longer I will do his Business myself.


Well, I vow Love's a pleasant thing, when the Men come to cutting of Throats
once: O Gad! I'd fain have them fight a little -- Methinks Narcissa would
sound so great in an Expiring Lover's Mouth -- Well, I am resolved Sir Novelty
shall not go yet; for I will have the pleasure of hearing my self praised a
little, though I don't marry this Month for it -- Come, Gentlemen, since you
Both say Love's your business, even plead for your selves, and he that speaks
the greater Passion, shall have the fairest Return.


Oh, the Devil! now is she wrapped with the hopes of a little Flattery! There's
no remedy but Patience. S'Death, what peace have I to work upon!


Come Gentlemen, one at a time, Sir Novelty what have you to say to me?


In the first place, Madam, I was the first Person in England that was
complemented with the name of Beau, which is a Title I prefer before Right
Honourable: For that may be Inherited: But this I Extorted from the whole
Nation, by my surprising Mien, and unxampled Gallantry.


So, Sir!


Then another thing, Madam, it has been observed, that I have been Eminently
successful in those Fashions, I have recommended to the Town, and I don't
question, but this very Suit will Raise as many Ribbond-Weavers, as ever the
Clipping, or Melting Trade did Gold-Smiths.


Pish! what does the Fool mean! he says nothing of me yet.


In short Madam, the Cravat-string, the Garter, the Sword-knot, the Centurine,
the Bardash, the Steinkirk, the large Button, the long Sleeve, the Plume, and
full Peruque, were all created, cried down, or revived by me; in a word Madam,
there has never been any thing particularly taking, or agreeable for these ten
Years past, but your humble Servant was the Author of it.


Where the Devil will this end?


This is all Extravagant, Sir Novelty; but what have you to say to me Sir?


I'll come to you presently Madam, I have just done: Then you must know my
Coach, and Equipage are as well known, as my self; and since the convenience of
two Play-Houses I have a better Opportunity of showing them: For between every
Act -- Whisk -- I am gone from one to the other -- Oh! what Pleasure 'tis at a
good Play, to go out before half an Act's done!


Why at a good Play?


O! Madam it looks Particular, and gives the whole Audience an Opportunity of
turning upon me at once: Then do they conclude I have some Extraordinary
Business, or a Fine Woman to go to at least: And then again it shows my
Contempt of what the dull Town think their chiefest Diversion: But if I do stay
a Play out, I always set with my Back to the Stage.


Why so Sir?


Then every Body will imagine I have been tired with it before; or that I am
jealous who talks to who in the Kings Box. And thus, Madam, do I take more
pains to preserve a Public Reputation, then ever any Lady took after the
Small-Pox, to recover her Complexion.


Well but to the Point, what have you to say to me, Sir Novelty?


Now does she expect some Compliment shall out-flatter her Glass.


To you Madam, -- Why I have been saying all this to you.


To what end, Sir?


Why all this have I done for your sake.


What Kindness is it to me?


Why, Madam don't you think it more Glory to be beloved by one Eminently
Particular Person, whom all the Town knows and talks of; than to be adored by
five Hundred dull Souls, that have lived Incognito?


That I must confess is a prevailing Argument, but still you have not told me why
you Love me?


That's a Task he has left for me, Madam.


Tis a Province I never undertake, I must Confess, I think tis sufficient if I
tell a Lady why she should Love me?


Hang him! he's too conceited, he's so in Love with himself, he won't allow a
Woman the bare Comfort of a Cold Compliment: -- Well Mr Worthy,


Why, Madam, I have observed several particular Qualities in your Ladyship,
that I have perfectly adored you for, as the Majestic toss of your Head --
Your obliging Bowed Courtesy -- your Satirical Smile -- Your blushing Laugh --
your Demure Look -- the careless Tie of your Hood -- the Genteel flirt of your
Fan -- The designed Accident in your letting fall, and your agreeable manner of
receiving it from him that takes it up.

They both offer to take up her Fan, and in striving
Y. Worthy pushes Sir Novelty on his Back.




Oh! Sir, Mrs. Flareit. --


Ha! speak lower, what of her?


By some unlucky Accident has discovered your being here, and raves like a
Mad-woman: She's at your Lodging Sir, and had broke you above Forty Pounds
worth of China before I came away; she talked of following hither, and if you
don't make haste, I'm afraid will be here before you can get through the House,
Sir.


This Woman is certainly the Devil; her Jealousy is Implacable, I must get rid
of her, though I give her more for a separate Maintenance, than her Conscience
demanded for a Settlement before Enjoyment. -- See the Coach ready, and if you
meet her, be sure you stop her with some pretended business, till I am got away
from hence -- Madam, I ask your Ladyship ten thousand Pardons: There's a Person
of Quality expects me at my Lodging upon extraordinary Business.


What, will you leave us, Sir Novelty?


As unwillingly as the Soul the Body: But this is an Irresistible Occasion! --
Madam your most Devoted Slave. -- Sir your most humble Servant. -- Madam, I
kiss your hands. -- Oh General, no farther dear Sir, upon my


Nay then Sir, Your humble Servant: So! this was a lucky Deliverance.


I over-heard the Business. -- You see, Mr. Worthy, a Man must be a slave to a
Mistress sometimes, as well as a Wife; Yet all can't persuade your Sex to a
favourable Opinion of Poor Marriage.


I long, Madam, for an Opportunity to Convince you of your Error; And therefore
give me leave to hope to Morrow you will free me from the pain of farther
Expectation, and make an Husband of me -- Come I'll spare your Blushes, and
believe I have already named the day.


Had not we better consider a little?


No, let's avoid Consideration, 'tis an Enemy both to Love and Courage; They
that consider much, live to be Old Bachelors, and Young Fighters. No! no! we
shall have time enough to consider after Marriage -- But why are you so
serious, Madam?


Not but I do consent to Morrow shall be the day, Mr. Worthy* But I'm afraid
you have not loved me long enough to make our Marriage be the Town-talk: For
'tis the Fashion now to be the Town-talk, and you know one had as good be out
of the World, as out of the Fashion.


I don't know, Madam, what you call Town-talk, but it has been in the
News-Letters above a Fortnight ago, that we were already married. Beside, the
last Song I made of you, has been sung at the Music Meeting; and you may
Imagine, Madam, I took no little care to let the Ladies and the Beaux know who
'twas made on.


Well, and what said the Ladies?


What was most observable, Madam, was that while it was singing my Lady Manlove
went out in a great Passion.


Poor Jealous Animal! on my Conscience that Charitable Creature has such a Fund
of kind Compliance for all young Fellows, whose Love lies dead upon their
hands, that she has been as great a Hindrance to us Virtuous Women, as ever the
Bank of England was to City Gold-Smiths.


The Reason of that is Madam, because you Virtuous Ladies pay no Interest: I
must confess the Principal, our Health is a little securer with you.


Well, and is not that an Advantage worth entering into Bonds for? not but I vow
we virtuous Devils do love to insult a little; and to say Truth, it looks too
Credulous, and Easy in a Woman to Encourage a Man before he has sighed himself
to a Skeleton.


But Heaven be thanked, we are pretty even with you in the End: For the longer
you hold us off before Marriage, the sooner we fall off after it.


What then, you take Marriage to be a kind of Jesuits Powder, that infallibly
cures the Fever of Love?


'Tis indeed a Jesuits Powder; for the Priests first invented it: And only
abstained from it, because they knew it had a better Taste: Then gilded it
over with a pretended Blessing, and so palmed it upon the unthinking Laity.


Prithee don't scrue your, Wit beyond the compass of Good Manners -- Dee think
I shall be Tuned to Matrimony by your railing against it? If you have so little
stomach to it, I'll even make you fast a Week longer.


Ay, but let me tell you, Madam, 'tis no policy to keep a Lover at a thin Diet
in hopes to raise his Appetite on the Wedding-Night, for then

We come like starving Beggars to a Feast,
Where unconfined we Feed with Eager Haste,
Till each repeated Morsel palls the Taste.
Marriage gives Prodigals a Boundless Treasure,
Who squander that, which might be lasting Pleasure,
And Women think they never have over Measure.

MY Dear, I have News for you.


I guess at it: And would be fain satisfied of the Particulars: Your Husband is
returned, and I hear knows nothing of your being alive: Young Worthy has told
me of your design upon him.


It is that I wanted your advice in; what think you of it?


O! I admire it: Next to forgetting your Husband, tis the Best Council was ever
given you; for under the Disguise of Mistress, you may now take a fair
advantage of Indulging your Love, and the little Experience you have had of it
already, has been just enough not to let you be afraid of a Man.


Will you never leave your Mad humour?


Not till my youth leaves me: Why should Women affect Ignorance among
themselves, when we converse with Men indeed? Modesty and Good Breeding Oblige
us not to understand, what sometimes we can't help thinking of.


Nay I don't think the worse of you for what you say: For 'tis observed that a
Bragging Lover, and an over shy-Lady, are the farthest from what they would
seem; the One is as seldom known to receive a Favour, as the other to Resist an
Opportunity.


Most Women have a wrong Sense of Modesty, as some Men of Courage; if you don't
Fight with all you Meet, or Run from all you see, you are presently thought a
Coward, or an ill Woman.


You say true, and tis as hard a matter now a days for a Woman to know how to
converse with Men, as for a man to know, when to draw his Sword: For many times
both Sexes are apt to over-act their Parts: To me the Rules of Virtue have been
ever sacred; and I am loath to break 'em by an unadvised Understanding:
Therefore, dear Hillaria, help me, for I am at a loss -- Can I justify, think
you, my intended design upon my Husband?


As how, Prithee?


Why, if I Court and Conquer him, as a Mistress, am not I accessory to his
violating the Bonds of Marriage? For though I am his Wife, yet while he Loves
me not as such, I encourage an Unlawful Passion; and though the Act be safe,
yet his Intent is Criminal: How can I answer this?


Very Easily, for if he don't intridgue with you, he will with some Body else
in the mean time, and I think you have as much Right to his Remains as any one.


Ay! but I am assured the love he will pretend to me is vicious: And tis
Uncertain, that I shall prevent his doing worse elsewhere.


Tis true, a Certain Ill ought not to be done for an Uncertain Good. But then
again of two Evils choose the least; and sure tis less Criminal to let him love
you as a Mistress, than to let him hate you as a Wife: If you Succeed I suppose
you will easily forgive your Guilt in the Undertaking.


To say truth, I find no Argument yet strong enough to conquer my Inclination
to it. But is their no danger think you of his knowing me?


Not the least, in my opinion: In the first place he confidently believes you
are Dead: Then he has not seen you these eight or ten Years: Besides, you were
not above sixteen when he left you: This with the alteration the small-Pox have
made in you, (though not for the worse,) I think are sufficient Disguises to
secure you from his knowledge.


Nay and to this I may add the considerable amendment of my Fortune; for when
he left me I had only my bare Jointure for a Subsistence: Beside my strange
manner of receiving him.


That's what I would fain be acquainted with.


I expect further instructions from Young Worthy every Moment; then you shall
know all, my Dear.


Nay he will do you no small service: For a Thief is the best Thief-catcher.


Madam, your Servant is below, who says Young Mr. Worthy's Man waits at your
Lodgings with earnest business from his Master.


Tis well -- Come, my Dear I must have your assistance too.


With all my Heart, I love to be at the bottom of a Secret: For they say the
Confident of any Amour, has sometimes more pleasure, in the Observation, than
the parties concerned in the Enjoyment: But methinks, you don't look with a
good Heart upon the Business.


I can't help a little concern in a Business of such Moment: For though my
Reason tells me my Design must prosper; yet my Fears say 'twere Happiness too
great. -- Oh! to reclaim the Man I'm bound by Heaven to Love, to expose the
Folly of a Roving Mind in pleasing him with what he seemed to loath, were such
a sweet Revenge for slighted Love, so vast a Triumph of rewarded Constancy, as
might persuade the Looser part of Womankind even to forsake themselves, and
fall in Love with Virtue.


Sir Novelty Fashion is below in his Coach, Madam, and enquires for your
Ladyship, or Madam Narcissa.


You know my Cousin is gone out with my Lady Tattle-tongue: I hope you did not
tell him I was within!


No, Madam, I did not know if your Ladyship would be spoke with, and therefore
came to see.


Then tell him I went with her.


I shall, Madam.


You must know, my Dear, I have sent to that Fury Mrs. Flareit, whom this Sir
Novelty keeps, and have stung her to some purpose with an account of his
Passion for my Cousin: I owed him a Quarrel for that he made between Mr. Worthy
and me, and I hope her Jealousy will severely revenge it; Therefore I sent my
Cousin out of the way, because unknown to her, her Name is at the bottom of my
Design. -- Here he comes, Prithee, my Dear, let's go down the Back-Stairs, and
take Coach from the Garden. --


Both the Ladies abroad say you? I Sir William within?


Yes Sir, if you please to walk in, I'll acquaint him that you expect him here.


Do so Prithee -- and in the mean time let me consider what I have to say to
him -- Hold! In the first place his Daughter is in Love with me! Would I marry
her? Noh! Demm it, 'tis Mechanical to marry the Woman you Love: Men of Quality
should always marry those they never saw -- But I hear Young Worthy marries her
to Morrow! which if I prevent not, will spoil my design upon her? Let me see!
-- I have it -- I'll persuade the old Fellow, that I would marry her my self!
upon which he immediately rejects Young Worthy, and gives me free access to
her! Good! What follows upon that? Opportunity, Importunity, -- Resestance,
Force, Entreaty, Persisting! -- Doubting, Swearing, Lying -- Blushes, Yielding,
Victory, Pleasure! -- Indifference, O! here he comes in ordine ad. --


Sir Novelty, your Servant, have you any commands for me, Sir?


I have some Proposals to make, Sir, concerning your Happiness and my own,
which perhaps will surprise you. In a word Sir, I am upon the very brink of
Matrimony.


'Tis the best thing you can pursue, Sir, considering you have a good Estate.


But whom do you think I intend to marry?


I can't imagine, dear Sir, be brief, least your delay transport me into a
Crime I would avoid, which is Impatience. Sir, pray go on.


In fine, Sir, 'tis to your very Daughter, the Fair Narcissa.


Humh! Pray, Sir, how long have you had this in your head?


Above these two hours, Sir.


Very Good! then you have not slept upon it?


No! nor shall not sleep, for thinking on it; did not I tell you I would surprise
you?


O! you have indeed, Sir, I am amazed! I am amazed!


Well, Sir, and what think you of my Proposal?


Why truly, Sir, I like it not: But if I did, 'tis now too late; my Daughter is
disposed of to a Gentleman, that she and I like very well; at present, Sir, I
have a little Business, if this be all, your humble Servant, I am in haste.


Demmee! what an insensible Blockhead's this? Hold, Sir, dee hear -- is this
all the Acknowledgment you make for the Honour I designed you?


Why truly, Sir, 'tis an Honour, that I am not ambitious of: In plain terms, I
do not like you for a Son-in-Law.


Now you speak to the purpose, Sir: But prithee what are thy Exceptions to me?


Why in the first place, Sir, you have too great a Passion for your own Person
to have any for your Wives: In the next place you take such an Extravagant Care
in the Clothing your Body, that your Understanding goes naked for it: Had I a
Son so dressed, I should take the liberty to call him an Egregious Fop.


I Gad thou art a Comical old Gentleman, and I'll tell thee a Secret:
Understand then, Sir, from me, that all Young Fellows hate the name of Fop, as
Women do the name of Whore: But I'Gad they both Love the pleasure of being so:
Nay Faith, and 'tis as as hard a matter for some Men to be Fops, as you call
'em, as 'tis for some Women to be Whores.


That's pleasant, I Faith, can't any Man be a Fop, or any Woman be a Whore,
that has a mind to it?


No Faith, Sir; for let me tell you, 'tis not the Coldness of my Lady
Freelove's Inclination: But her Age and Wrinkles that won't let her Cuckold her
Husband: And again, 'tis not Sir Iohn Wou'dlook's Aversion to Dress; but his
want of a fertile Genius, that won't let him look like a Gentleman: Therefore
in Vindication of all well dressed Gentleman, I intend to write a Play, where
my Chiefest Character shall be a down-right English Booby, that affects to be a
Beau, without either Genius, or Foreign Education, and to call it in Imitation
of another famous Comedy, He would if he could, and now, I think, you are
answered, Sir; have you any Exceptions to my Birth, or Family, pray Sir?


Yes, Sir, I have, you seem to me the Off-spring of more than one Man's Labour:
For certainly no less, than a Dancing Singing, and Fencing-Master, with a
Taylor, Milliner, Perfumer, Peruque-Maker, and French Valet de Chambre, could
be at the Begetting of you.


All these have been at the Finishing of me since I was made.


That is, Heaven made you a Man, and they have made a Monster of you: And so
farewell to ye!


hark ye Sir, am I to expect no farther satisfaction in the Proposals I made
you?


Sir -- Nothing makes a Man loss himself like Passion: Now I presume you are
Young, and consequently Rash upon a Disappointment, therefore to prevent any
difference that may arise by repeating my refusal of your Suit; I do not think
it convenient to hold any farther Discourse with you.


Nay Faith thou shalt stay to hear a little more of my mind first.


Since you press me, Sir, I will rather bear than resist you.


I doubt, Old Gentleman, you have such a Torrent of Philosophy running throngh
your Pericranium, that it has washed your Brains away.


Pray, Sir, why do you think so?


Because you Choose a beggarly unaccountable sort of Younger Brotherish
Rake-hell for you Son-in-Law, before a Man of Quality, Estate, good Parts and
Breeding, Demmy.


Truly, Sir, I know neither of the Persons to whom these Characters belong, if
you please to write their Names under 'em, perhaps I may tell you, if they be
like or no.


Why then, in short, I would have been your Son-in-Law; and you, it seems,
prefer Young Worthy before me. Now are your Eyes open?


Had I been blind, Sir, you might have been my Son-in-Law, and if you were not
blind you would not think, that I design my Daughter for Young Worthy -- his
Brother, I think, may deserve her.


Then you are not Jealous of Young Worthy! humh!


No really, Sir, nor of you neither.


Give me thy hand, thou art very happy: Stop my Vitals: For thou dost not see
thou art blind: Not Jealous of Young Worthy? Ha! ha! How now!


Sir, here's a Porter with a Letter for your Honour.


I was ordered to give it into your own hands, Sir, and expect an Answer.


Excuse my dear Sir Novelty the forced Indifference I have shown you, and let
me Recompense your past Sufferings with an hours Conversation, after the Play
at Rosamond's Pond, where you will find an hearty Welcome to the Arms of your
Narcissa! Unexpected happiness! The arms of your Narcissa! I gad and when I am
there, I'll make my self Welcome!

Faith I did not think she was so far gone neither! But I don't question there
are five Hundred more in her Condition. -- I have a good mind not to go Faith!
Yet hang it, I will though only, to be revenged of this Old Fellow! Nay, I'll
have the Pleasure of making it public too: For I will give her the Music, and
draw all the Town to be Witness of my Triumph! Where is the Lady --


In a Hackney-Coach at the Corner of the Street.


Enough, tell her I will certainly be there --


You have your Answer, Sir, you shall be on Kin to me.


Farewell Old Philosophy: And do ye hear, I would advise you to study nothing
but the Art of Patience: You may have an unexpected Occasion for it. Hark you!
would not it nettle you damnably to hear my Son call you Grandfather?


Sir -- Notwithstanding this provocation, I am calm; but were I like other Men,
a Slave to Passion, should not for-bear calling you Impertinent! How I swell
with rising vexation -- Leave me, leave me; go Sir, go, get you out of my House


Oh! have a care of Passion, Dear Diogenes, ha! ha! ha! he!


So!


Dam your House, your Family, your Ancestors, your Generation, and your
Eternal Posterity.


Ah! -- A Fair Riddance; how I bless my self, that it was not in this Fools
power to provoke me beyond that Serenity of Temper, which a wise man ought to
be Master of: How near are men to Brutes, when their unruly Passions break the
Bounds of Reason? And of all Passions, Anger is the most violent, which often
puts me in mind of that admirable Saying,

He that strives not to Stem his Angers Tide,
Does a Mad Horse without a Bridle ride.

What a Sweet Evening tis -- Prithe Ned, lets walk a little -- Look how
lovingly the Trees are joined, since thou were here, as if Nature had designed
this Walk for the private Shelter of forbddien Love.

Look here are some for making use of the Convenience.


But, hark ye Friend, are the Women as tame and civil as they were before I
left the Town? Can they Endure the Smell of Tobacco, or Vouchsafe a Man a Word
with a Dirty Cravat on?


Ay, that they will; for Keeping is almost out of Fashion: so that now an
Honest Fellow with a Promising Back need not fear a Nights lodging for Bare
Goodfellowship.


If Whoring be so poorly encouraged, methinks the Women should turn honest in
their own Defence.


Faith I don't find there's a Whore the less for it; the Pleasure of
Fornication is still the same; all the Difference is, Lewdness is not so
Barefaced, as heretofore, -- Virtue is as much debased as our Money; for
Maldenheads are as scarce as our Milled Half-crowns; and Faith, Dei gratia is
as hard to be found in a Girl of Sixteen, as round the Brims of an Old
Shilling.


Well, I find, in spite of Law and Duty, the fish will get the Better of the
Spirit. But I see no Game yet. -- Prithee Will, let's go and take the other!
Bumper to Enliven Assurance that we may come downright to the Business.


No, no; what we have in our Bellies already, by the help of a little Fresh
Air, will soon be in our Pericraniums, and work us to a right pitch, to taste
the Pleasures of the Night.


The Day thou mean; my Day always breaks at Sun-set. We wise Fellows, that
know the Use of Life, know too that the Moon lights Men to more Pleasures than
the Sun, -- the Sun was meant for dull Soul of Business, and poor Rogues that
have a mind to save Candles.


Nay, the Night was always a Friend to Pleasure, and that made Diana run a
Whoring by the light of her own Horns.


Right: And, prithee what made Daphne run away from Apollo, but that he wore so
much Day-light about his Ears?


Ha! Look out Ned, there's the Enemy before you!


Why then, as Caesar said, come follow me.


I hope 'tis his Wife, whom I desired to meet me here, that she might take a
View of her Soldier before she new-mounted him.


I wonder, Madam, Sir Novelty don't come yet: I am so afraid he should see
Narcissa, and find out the trick of your Letter.


No! No! Narcissa is out of the way: I am sure he won't be long; for, I heard
the Hautbois, as they passed by me, mention his Name; I suppose to make the
Intrigue more Fashionable, he intends to give me the Music.


Suppose he do take you for Narcissa, What Advantage do you propose by it?


I shall then have a just occasion to Quarrel with him for his Perfidiousness,
and so force his Pocket to make his Peace with me: Beside, my Jealousy will
not let me rest till I am revenged.


Jealousy! why, I have often heard you say, you loathed him!


'Tis my Pride, not Love, that makes me Jealous: For, though I don't love him,
yet I am incensed to think he Dares love another.


See! Madam, Here he is, and the Music with him.


Put on your Mask, and leave me. --


Here, Gentlemen, place your selves on this Spot, and pray oblige me with a
Trumpet Sonata


Dear Sir, this place is too public for my Acknowledgment, if you please to
withdraw to a more Private Convenience.


What say you Ladies, shall we walk Homewards? It begins to be dark.


Prithee don't be so Impatient, it's light enough to hear the Music, I'll
warrant ye.


Mr. Worthy, you promised me a Sight I long for: Is Mr. Loveless Among all
those?


That's He, Madam, a surveying that Masked Lady.


Ha! Is't possible! Methinks I read his Vices in his Person! Can he be
Insensible, even to the smart of Pinching Poverty? Pray, Sir, your Hand, -- I
find my self Disordered. It troubles me to think I dare not speech to him after
so long an Absence.


Madam, your staying here may be Dangerous, therefore let me Advise you to go
home, and get all things in order to Receive him: About an hour hence will be a
convenient time to set my Design a-going; till when let me beg you to have a
little Patience: Give me Leave, Madam, to see you to your Coach.


I'll not trouble you, Sir, yonder's my Cousin Welbred, I'll beg his
Protection.


I vow it's very fine, considering what dull Souls our Nation are: I find 'tis
an harder matter to reform their Manners than their Government, or Religion.


Since the One has been so happily Accomplished, I know no reason why we should
despair of the Other: I hope in a little time to see our Youth return from
Travel Big with Praises of their own Country. But come, Ladies, the Musicks's
done I suppose, shall we walk?


Time enough, why you have no Taste of the true Pleasure of the Park: I'll
warrant you hate as much to ridicule others, as to hear your self praised: for
my part, I think a little harmless Railing's half the Pleasure of ones Life.


I don't love to create my self Enemies by observing the Weakness of other
People; I have more Faults of my own than I know how to mend.


Protect me! How can you see such a Medley of Human Stuffs as here is, without
venting your Spleen? -- Why look there now, is not it Comical to see that
wretched Creature there with her Autumnal Face, dresft in all the Colours of
the Spring?


Pray, who is she Madam?


A thing that won't believe her self out of date, though she was a Known Woman
at the Restoration.


O! I know her, 'tis Mrs. Holdout, one that is proud of being an Original of
Fashionable Fornication, and values her self mightily for being one of the
first Mistresses that ever kept her Coach publicly in England.


Pray who's that Impudent young Fellow there?


Oh, that's an Eternal Fan-tearer, and a constant Persecuter of Woman-kind: He
had a great Misfortune lately.


Pray what was it?


Why, impudently presuming to Cuckold a Dutch Officer, he had his fore-teeth
kicked out.


Ha, ha, ha!


There's another too, Mr. Worthy, do you know him?


That's Beau Noisy, one that brags of Favours from my Lady, though refused by her
Woman; that Sups with my Lord, and borrows his Club of his Footman; that beats
the Watch, and is kicked by his Companions; that is one day at Court, and the
next in Jail; that goes to Church without Religion, is valiant without Courage,
witty without Sense, and Drunk without Measure.


A very Complete Gentleman.


Prithee Cousin, who's that over-shy Lady there, that won't seem to understand
what that Brisk young fellow says to her?


Why, that's my Lady Slylove: That other Ceremonious Gentleman is her Lover:
She is so overmodest, that she makes a scruple of Shifting her self before her
Woman, but afterwards makes none of doing it before her Gallant.


Hang her, she's a Jest to the whole Town: For, though she has been the Mother of
two By blows, endeavours to appear as Ignorant in all Company as if she did not
know the Distinction of Sexes.


Look, Look! Mr. Worthy, I vow there's the Countess of Incog out of her
Disabillee, in a high Head, I protest!


'Tis as great a wonder to see her out of an Hackney Coach, as out of Debtor
--.


Or out of Countenance.


That, indeed, she seldom changes; for she is never out of a Mask, and is so
well known in it, that when she has a mind to be Private, she goes Barefaced.


But come, Cousin, now let's see what Monsters the next Walk affords.


With all my Heart, 'tis in our way home.


Ladies, I must beg your Pardon for a moment, yonder comes one I have a little
business with, I'll dispatch it immediately, and follow you.


No, no; we'll stay for you.


You may, if you please, Cousin; but, I suppose, he will hardly thank you
for it.


What, then you conclude 'tis a Woman's business, by his promising a quick
dispatch!


Madam, in three minutes you shall know the Business, if it displease you,
condemn me to an Eternal absence.


Come, Madam, let me be his Security.


I dare take your Word, Sir --


Well! how go matters, is she in a Readiness to receive him?


To an Hair, Sir, every Servant has his Cue, and all are Impatient till the
Comedy begins.


Stand aside a little, and let us watch our Opportunity.


Two, at the Gridiron.


To morrow with all my Heart, but to Night I am engaged to the Chaplain of
Colonel Thunder's Regiment.


What, will you leave me for a Mutton-chop, for that's all he'll give you, I'm
sure.


You are mistaken, faith he keeps me.


Not to himself, I'll engage him: Yet he may too, if no body likes you no
better than I do. Hark you Child, prithee when was your Smock washed?


Why dost thou pretend to fresh Linen, that never wore a clean Shirt but of
thy Mothers own Washing?


What, no Adventure, no Game, Snap?


None, None, Sir, I can't prevail with any from the point Headoloths to the
Horse-Guard-Whore.


What a-Pox! sure the Whores can't smell an Empty Pocket.


No, no, that's Certain, Sir, they must see it in our Faces*





Odsbud, Sir, follow him, he takes you for another.


I-gad, it looks with the face of an Intrigue --, I'll humour him --: Well,
what, shall we go now?


Ay, ay, now it's pure and dark, you may go undiscovered.


That's what I would do.


Odsheart, she longs to see thee, and she is a curious fine Creature, ye Rogue!
such Eyes! such Lips! -- and such a Tongue between 'em! ah, the Tip of it will
set a Mans Soul on fire!





Come, come, the Key, the Key, the Key, you dear Rogue!


O Lord, the Key, the Key!


The Key: why sh -- sh -- sh -- shu'd yo -- yo -- you have it?


Ay, ay! Quickly, give's it!


Why -- what the Devil --, sure I have not lost it --; oh! no Gad, it is not there
--;What the Devil shall we do?


Oon's, ne'er stand fumbling; if you have lost it we must shoot the Lock I
think.


I-gad, and so we must, for I have not it.


Come, come along, follow me.


Snap, Stand by me, you Dog.


Ay, ay, Sir.


Ha, ha! the Rogue managed him most dexterously; how greedily he Chopped at the
Bait? What the Event will be, Heaven knows; but thus far 'tis Pleasant; And
since he is safe, I'll venture to divert my Company with the Story. Poor
Amanda, thou well deserve a better Husband: Thou were never wanting in thy
Endeavours to reclaim him: And, faith, considering how a long Despair has worn
thee,

'Twere pity now thy Hopes should not succeed;
This new Attempt is Loves last Shift indeed.

DAmme! Jack, let's after him, and fight him; 'tis not to be put up.


No! Dam him! no body saw the affront, and what need we take notice of it?


Why that's true! -- But Damme! I have much ado to forbear cutting his Throat.


Pray Gentlemen, what's the matter? Why are you in such a Passion?


What's that to you, Sir? What would you have?


I hope, Sir, a Man may ask a Civil Question.


Damme! Sir, we are Men of Honour; we dare answer any Man.


But why are you angry, Gentlemen? Have you received any wrong?


We have been called Rascals, Sir, have had the Lye given us, and had like to
have been kicked!


But I hope, you were not kicked, Gentlemen.


How, Sir! we kicked!


Nor do I presume, that you are Rascals!


Blood! and Thunder! Sir, let any Man say it that wears an head! we Rascals!


Very good! since then you are not Rascals, he rather was one, who maliciously
called you so: -- Pray take my Advice, Gentlemen; never disturb your selves,
for any ill your Enemy says of you; for from an Enemy the World will not
believe it: Now you must know, Gentlemen, that a Flea-bite is to me more
offensive, than the severest Affront any Man can offer me!


What, and so you would have us put it up! Damme! Sir, don't preach Cowardice
to us, we are Men of Valour: you won't find us Cowards, Sir.


No, Sir! we are no Cowards, though you are.


Hang him* let him alone, I see a Coward in his ^ce.


If my face make any Reflection, Sir, 'tis against my will.


Prithee Tom, let's Affront him, and raise his Spleen a little.


Raise my Spleen! that's more than any Man could ever boast of.


You Lye.


I am not angry yet, therefore I do not Lye, Sir: Now one of us must lye, I do
not lye, Ergo --


Damme! Sir, have a care! Don't give me the Lye, I shall not take it, Sir.


I need not, Sir! you give it your self.


Well, Sir, what then? if I make bold with my self, every old Puppy shall not
pretend to do it.


Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!


Damme, Sir, what do you laugh at!


To let you see, that I am no Puppy, Sir, for Puppies are Brutes, now Brutes
have not Risibility: But I laugh, therefore I am no Puppy, ha! ha!


Blood and Thunder, Sir! dare you fight?


Not in cool blood, Sir, and I confess 'tis impossible to make me angry.


I'll try that! Hark ye, don't you know you are a snivelling old Cuckold?


No, really, Sir.


Why then I know you to be one.


Look you, Sir, my Reason weighs this Injury* which is so light, it will not
raise my Anger in the other Scale.


Oon's! what a tame old Prig's this? I'll give you better weight then. I know
who got all your Children.


Not so well as my Wife I presume -- Now she tells me, 'twas my self, and I
believe her too.


She tells you so, because the poor Rogue tha^ got 'em is not able to keep 'em.


Then my keeping them in Charity.


Blood and Thunder, Sir, this is an Affront to us, not to be Angry after all
these Provocations -- Damme! Jack, let's souse him in the Canal.


S'Death, what's here? Sir William in the Rogues hands that affronted the
Ladies -- Oh, forbear, forbear --


So, Gentlemen, I thought you had fair warning before, now you shall pay for it.



Damme, Sir! we shall expect satisfaction.


Oh dear Gentlemen, I am obliged to you, for I was just going to the Canal my
self, if you had not come as you did.


Pray, Sir, what had you done to 'em?


Why, hearing the Music from my Parlour Window, and being invited by the
sweetness of the Evening, I even took a Walk to see if I could meet with you,
when the first Objects that presented themselves were these Bullies, threatening
to cut some bodies Throat: Now, I endeavouring to allay their Fury, occasioned
their giving me scurrilous Language: and finding they could not make me as
angry as themselves, they off'red to fling me into the Water.


I am glad we stepped to your deliverance.


Oh, I thank you, Gentlemen. -- I'll even go home, and recover my fright. Good
Night, Good Night to you all.


Harry, see Sir William safe to his Lodging. Well, Ladies, I believe it's time
for us to be walking too.


No, pray let me engage you to stay a little longer: Yonder comes Sir Novelty
and his Mistress, in pursuance of the Design I told you of; pray have a little
patience, and you will see the effect on it.


With all my heart, Madam.


Generous Creature! this is an unexampled condescension to meet my Passion with
such early kindness: Thus let me pay my soft Acknowledgments.


You must know he has mistaken her for another.


For Heaven's sake let me go, if Hillaria should be at home before me, I am
ruined for ever.


Hillaria! what does she mean?


Narcissa's Reputation shall be ever safe, while my Life and Fortune can
protect it.


O Gad* let me go, does the impudent Creature take my Name upon her -- I'll
pull off her Head-cloaths.


Oh! fie! Cousin, what an ungenteel Revenge would that be! have a little
patience.


Oh! I am in a flame.


But will you never see that common Creature Flareit more?


Never! never! Feed on such homely Fare after so rich a Banquet?


Nay, but you must hate her too.


That I did long ago for her stinking breath! 'Tis true, I have been led away;
but I detest a Strumpet: I am informed she keeps a Fellow under my Nose, and
for that reason, I would not make the Settlement I lately gave her some hopes
of: But even let her please her self, for now I am wholly yours.


Oh, now you charm me! but will you love me ever?


Will you be ever kind?


Be sure you never see Flareit more.


When I do, may this soft Hand Revenge my Perjury.


So it shall, Villain!


Ha! ha! ha!


Flareit, the Devil!


What, will nothing but a Maidenhead go down with you! Thou miserable conceited
Wretch -- Foh! my breath stinks does it! I'm a homely Puss! a Strumpet, not
worth you notice! Devil, I'll be revenged.


Damn your Revenge, I'm sure I feel it.


Really, Sir Novelty, I am obliged to you, for your kind thoughts of me, and
your extraordinary care of my Reputation.


S'Death, she here! exposed to half the Town! -- well, I must brazen it out
however!


What! no Pretence! no Evasion now!


There's no occasion for any, Madam.


Come come, swear you knew me all this while.


No, faith, Madam, I did not know you: For if I had, you would not have found
me so furious a Lover.


Furies and Hell! dares the Monster own his guilt! this is beyond all
sufferance! thou Wretch, thou Thing, thou Animal, that I (to the everlasting
forfeiture of my Sense and Understanding) have made a Man. For till thou
knew me, 'twas doubted if thou were of Humane kind. And dost thou think I'll
suffer such a worm as Thee to turn against me! No! when I do, may I be cursed
to thy Embraces all my Life, and never know a Joy beyond thee.


Why -- wh -- wh -- what will your Ladyship's Fury do, Madam?


Only change my Lodging, Sir.


I shall keep mine, Madam, that you may know where to find me when your fury is
over -- You see I am good natured.


This Bravery's affected: I know he loves me, and I'll pierce him to the quick:
I have yet a surer way to fool him.


Methinks the Knight bears it bravely.


I protest the Lady weeps.


She knows what she does, I'll warrant you.


Ay, Ay, the Fox is a better Politician than the Lion.


Novelty, pray Sir, let me speak with you.


Ay, Madam.


Before we part (for I find I have irrecoverably lost your Love) let me beg of
you, that from this hour, you never will see me more, or make any new attempts
to deceive my easy Temper: For I find my Nature's such, I shall believe you,
though to my utter Ruin.


Pray Heaven she be in earnest.


One thing more, Sir; since our first Acquaintance, you have received several
Letters from me; I hope you will be so much a Gentleman as to let me have 'em
again: Those I have of yours shall be returned to Morrow Morning. And now, Sir,
wishing you as much Happiness in her you Love, as you once pretended I could
give you -- I take of you my everlasting leave -- Farewell, and may your next
Mistress love you till I hate you.


So! now must I seem to persuade her. Nay, prithee my Dear! why do you struggle
so? whither would you go?


Pray, Sir, give me leave to pass, I can't bear to stay.


What is't that frightens you?


Your Barbarous Usage: Pray let me go.


Nay, if you are resolved, Madam, I won't press you against your will: Your
humble servant.


Ha! not move to call me back! so unconcerned! Oh! I could tear my flesh, stab
every feature in this dull, decaying Face, that wants a Charm to hold him! Dam
him! I loath him too! But shall my Pride now fall from such an height, and bear
the Torture unrevenged? No! my very Soul's on fire, and nothing but the
Villain's blood shall quench it. Devil, have at thee.


Have a care, Sir.


Let her alone, Gentlemen, I'll warrant you.


Prevented! Oh! I shall choke with boiling Gall. Oh! Oh! uumh! let me go; I'll
have his blood, his blood, his blood!


Let her come, let her come, Gentlemen!


Death and Vengeance, am I become his sport! he's pleased, and smiles to see me
Rage the more! But he shall find no Fiend in Hell can match the fury of a
disappointed Woman! -- Scorned! slighted! dismissed without a parting Pang! Oh
torturing thought! May all the Racks Mankind ever gave our easy Sex, Neglected
Love, Decaying Beauty, and hot Raging Lust light on me, if e're I cease to be
the Eternal Plague of his remaining Life, nay, after Death:

-- When his, his black Soul lies howling in despair,
I'd plunge to Hell, and be his Torment there.

Sure Sir Novelty, you never loved this Lady, if you are so indifferent at
parting.


Why Faith Tom, to tell you the Truth, her Jealousy has been so very
troublesome and expensive to me of late, that I have these Three Months sought
an opportunity to leave her; but Faith I had always more respect to my Life,
than to let her know it before.


Methinks, Sir Novelty, you had very little respect to her Life, when you drew
upon her.


Why what would you have had me done, Madam? Complemented her with my naked
Bosom! No! No! look ye, Madam, if she had made any Advances* I could have
disarmed her in Second at the very first Pass -- But come, Ladies, as we walk,
I'll beg your Judgments in a particular nice Fancy, that I intend to appear in,
the very first Week the Court is quite out of Mourning.


With all my heart, Sir Novelty. -- Come Ladies, considering how little rest
you'll have to morrow night, I think 'twere Charity not to keep you up any
longer.


Nay as for that matter, the night before a Wedding is as unfit to sleep in, as
the Night following: Imagination's a very troublesome Bedfellow: -- Your
Pardon, Ladies, I only speak for my self.


See the Coaches ready at St. Iames's Gate


Come, come, make hast; is the Supper, and the Music ready?


It is, It is: Well! is he come?


Ay, Ay, I came before to tell my Lady the News; That Rogue Sly managed him
rarely, he has been this half hour pretending to pick the Lock of the
Garden-door: Well poor Lady! I wish her good Luck with him: For she's certainly
the best Mistress living. Hark ye, is the Wine strong, as she ordered it? Be
sure you ply him home: for he must have two or three Bumpers to qualify him
for her Design. See here he comes: Away to your Post.


Where the Devil will this Fellow lead me -- Nothing but Silence, and Darkness!
-- sure the House is haunted, and he has brought me to face the Spirit at his
wonted hour!


There, there, in, in, -- Slip on your Night-Gown, and refresh your self; in
the mean time I'll acquaint my Lady, that you are here.


Snap.


Ay, Ay, Sir, I'll warrant you.


Ha! what sweet Lodgings are here? where can this end?


I gad, Sir, I long to know -- Pray Heaven we are not deluded hither to be
stan'd -- Methinks I wish I had brought the Remnants of my Dinner with me.


Hark! I hear some body coming! Hide your self* Rascal; I would not have you
seen.


Well Sir, I'll line this Trench in case of your being in danger.


Ha! This Night-Gown and Peruke don't lye here for nothing. -- I'll make my
self agreeable. -- I have baulk't many a Woman in my time, for want of a lean
Shirt. --


Ha! a Supper! Heaven send it be no Vision! If the Meat be real, I shall
believe the Lady may prove Flesh and Blood. -- Now am I damnably puzzled to know
whether this be she, or no^ Madam --


Sir, my Lady begs your pardon for a moment.


Humh! her Lady! Good. --


She's unfortunately detained by some Female Visitors, which she will dispatch
with all the hast imaginable; in the mean time, be pleased to refresh you self
with what the House affords. -- Pray Sir sit down.


Not alone; Madam, you must bear me Company.


To oblige you, Sir, I'll exceed my Commission.





Sir, my humble Service to you.


Madam, your humble Servant: I'll pledge you. Snap, when there's any danger
I'll call you; in the mean time lye still, d' hear.


Igad I'll shift for my self then: (snatches a Flask unseen) so, now I am
armed, defiance to all Danger.


Madam, your Lady's Health.


Ay, Ay, let it go round, I say.


Well really Sir my Lady's very happy, that she has got loose from her
Relations: for they were always teasing her about you: But she defies 'em all
now. -- Come Sir, Success to both your Wishes.


Give me a Glass; methinks this Health inspires me -- My Heart grows lighter
for the Weight of Wine; -- Here, Madam, -- Prosperity to the Man, that ventures
most to please her.


What think you of a Song to support this Gaiety?


With all my Heart.


You have obliged me, Madam; Igad I like this Girl! she takes off her Glass so
feelingly, I am half persuaded she's of a thirsty Love: If her Lady don't make
a little hast, I find I shall present my humble Service to her.


Sir I ask your Pardon, my Lady has some Commands for me, I will return
immediately.


Your Servant. -- Methinks this is a very new Method of Intriguing!


Pray Heaven it be N^w! for the Old way commonly ended in a good beating! But a
Pox of Danger I say, and so here's good Luck to you, Sir.


Take heed, Rogue, you don't get drunk, and discover your self.


It must be with a fresh Flask then; for this is expired Supernatulum.


Lie close, you Dog; I hear somebody coming* I am impatient till I see this
Creature. This Wine has armed me against all thoughts of danger! Pray Heaven
she be young, for then she can't want Beauty. Ha! here she comes! Now!
never-falling Impudence assist me.


Where's my Love? O, let me fly into his Arms, and live for ever there.


My Life, my Soul!


Look up, my Lord, and bless me with a tender look, and let my talking Eyes
inform thee how I have languished for thy absence.


Let's retire, and chase away our fleeting Cares with the Raptures of untired
Love.


Bless me! your Voice is strangely altered! Ha! defend me! who's this? help!
help! within there?


So! I am discovered! A Pox on my tattling! that I could not hold my Tongue till
I got to her Bed-Chamber.


Did your Ladyship call help, Madam, what's the matter?


Villain! Slave! who's this? what Ruffian have you brought me here -- Dog, I'll
have you murdered!


Bless me! O Lord! dear Madam, I beg your Pardon; as I hope to be saved, Madam,
'tis a mistake, I took him for Mr. --


Be dumb! Eternal Block head -- here! Take this Fellow, toss him in a Blanket,
and let him be turned out of my doors immediately.


O Pray! Dear Madam, for Heavens sake, I am a ruined Man --


Ah! Snap, what will become of thee? Thou art fallen into the hands of a
Tigress that has lost her Whelp; I have no hopes, but in my Master's Impudence!
Heaven strengthen it!


I'll hear no more! away with him!


Now, Sir, for you* I expected --

A Man, Madam, did you not?


Not a Stranger, Sir; But one that has a Right and Title to that welcome, which
by mistake has been given to you.


Not an Husband, I presume he would not have been so privately conducted to
your Chamber, and in the dark too!


Whoever it was, Sir, is not your business to Examine: But if you would have
Civil Usage, pray be gone.


To be used Civilly, I must stay, Madam: There can be no danger with so fair a
Creature.


I doubt you are mad, Sir.


While my Senses, have such luscious Food before 'em, no wonder if they are in
some Confusion, each striving to be foremost at the Banquet, and sure my
greedy, Eyes will starve the rest.


Pray, Sir, keep your distance, lest your feeling too be gratified.


O Lord! would I were 100 Leagues off at Sea!


Then briefly thus, Madam, know I like and love you: Now if you have so much
Generosity as to let me know, what Title my pretended Rival has to your Person,
or your Inclinations: Perhaps the little hopes I then may have of supplanting
him, may make me leave your House. If not, my Love shall still pursue you, though
to the hazard of my Life, which I shall not easily resigh, while this Sword can
guard it, Madam.


Oh, were this Courage shown but in a better Cause, how worthy were the Man
that owned it! I did expect a Lover, a Man perhaps more brave than you: One,
that if present, would have given you a shorter Answer to your Question.


I am glad to hear he's brave, however; it betrays no weakness in your Choice:
But if you'd still preserve, or raise the Joys of Love, remove him from your
thoughts a moment, and in his room receive a warmer Heart, a Heart that must
admire you more than he, because my Passion's of a fresher Date.


What de'e take me for?


A Woman, and the most Charming of your Sex; one whose pointed Eyes declare you
formed for Love, and though your words are flinty; your every look and motion all
confess there's a secret Fire within you, which must sparkle, when the Steel of
Love provokes it. Come, now pull away your hand, and make me hold it faster.


Nay, now you are rude, Sir.


If Love be Rudeness, let me be Impudent* When we are Familiar, Rudeness will
be Love. No Woman ever thought a Lover Rude after she had once granted him the
Favour.


Pray Sir, forbear.


How can I? when my desire's so violent: Oh, let me snatch the Rosie Dew from
those distilling Lips, and as you see your power to Charm, so chide me with
your Pity. Why do you thus cruelly turn away your Face? I own the Blessing's
worth an Ages Expectation, but if refused till merited, 'tis esteemed a Debt.
Would you oblige your Lover, let loose your early Kindness.


I shall not take your Counsel, Sir, while I know a Woman's early Kindness is
as little sign of her Generosity, as her Generosity is a sign of her
Discretion: Nor would I have you believe I am so ill provided for, that I need
listen to any Man's first Addresses.


Why, Madam, would not you drink the first time you had a Thirst?


Yes; but not before I had.


If you can't drink, yet you may kiss the Cup, and that may give you
inclination.


Your Pardon, Sir, I drink out of no body's Glass but my own; as the Man I love
confines himself to me, so my Inclination keeps me true to him.


That's a Cheat imposed upon you, by your own Vanity; For, when your back's
turned, your very Chamber-Maid sips of your leavings, and becomes your Rival.
Constancy in Love is all a Cheat, Women of your Understanding know it: The Joys
of Love are only Great when they are new, and to make 'em lasting, we must
often change.


Suppose 'twere a fresh Lover I now expected.


Why then, Madam, your Expectation's answered; For, I must confess I don't take
you for an Old Acquaintance, though somewhere I have seen a Face not much unlike
you. Come, your Arguments are vain; for they are so Charmingly delivered, they
but inspire me the more, as blows in Battle raise the brave Man's Courage.
Come, every thing pleads for me, Your Beauty, Wit, Time, Place, Opportunity,
and my own Excess of Raging Passion.


Stand off: distant as the Globes of Heaven and Earth, that like a falling Star
I may shoot with greater force into your Arms, and think it Heaven to lye
Expiring there.


Ah! ah! ah! Rogue, the day's our own.


Thou sweetest, softest Creature Heaven ever formed; Thus let me twine my self
about thy beauteous Limbs, till struggling with the Pangs of painful Bliss,
motionless and mute we yield to Conquering Love, both Vanquished, and both
Victors.


Can all this heat be real? Oh, why has hateful Vice such power to Charm? while
poor abandoned Virtue lies neglected.


Come, let us Surfeit on our new-born Raptures, let's waken sleeping Nature
with Delight, till we may justly say, now! now! we live!


Come on, let's indulge the Transports of our present Bliss, and bid defiance
to our future change of Fate. Who waits there?


Bring me word immediately if my Apartment's ready, as I ordered it. O, I am
charmed, I have found the Man to please me now: One that can, and dares
maintain the Noble Rapture of a Lawless Love: I own my self a Libertine, a
Mortal Foe to that dull thing called Virtue, that mere Disease of sickly
Nature. Pleasure's the end of Life, and while I'm Mistress of my self, and
Fortune, I will enjoy it to the height. Speak freely then, (not that I love
like other women the nauseous Pleasure of a little Flattery) but answer me like
a Man that scorns a Lye: Does my Face invite you, Sir? May I from what you see
of me, propose a Pleasure to my self in pleasing you?


By Heaven you may; I have seen all Beauties that the Sun shines on, but never
saw the Sun out-shin'd before: I have measured half the world in search of
Pleasure: But not returning home, had never been happy.


Spoken like the Man I wish might love me -- Pray Heaven his words prove true.


O! would the blinded world, like us, agree to change, how lasting might the
Joys of Love be? For thus Beauty, though stale to one, might somewhere else be
new; and while this Man were blessed in leaving what he loathed, another were
new-Ravish'd in receiving what he never enjoyed.


Madam, every thing is according to your Order.


Oh! lead me to the Scene of unsupportable Delight, Rack me with Pleasures
never known before, till I lye gasping with Convulsive Passion: This Night let
us be lavish to our unbounded wishes.

Give all our Stock at once to raise the Fire,
And Revel to the height of loose Desire.

Ah! what an happy Creature's my Lady now! There's many an unsatisfied Wife
about Town, would be glad to have her Husband as wicked as my Master, upon the
same Terms my Lady has him* Few Women I'm afraid would grudge an Husband the
laying out his stock of Love, that could receive such considerable Interest for
it! Well -- Now shall not I take one wink of sleep for thinking how they'll employ
their time to Night -- Faith, I must listen if I were to be hanged for it.


So! my Master's provided for, therefore 'tis time for me to take care of my
self: I have no mind to be locked out of my Lodging: I fancy there^s room for
two in the Maid's bed, as well as my Lady's -- This same Flask was plaguy
strong Wine -- I find I shall storm, if she don't surrender fairly. By your
leave, Damsel.


Bless me! who's this? O Lord! what would you have? who are you?


One that has a Right and Title to your body, my Master having already taken
Possession of your Lady's.


Let me go, or I'll cry out.


Ye Lye, ye dare not disturb your Lady: but the better to secure you, Thus I
stop your mouth.


Humh! -- Lord bless me, is the Devil in you, tearing ones things!


Then show me your Bed-Chamber.


The Devil shall have you first.


A shall have us both together then: Here will I fix,


Foh! how he stinks. Iacobite upon a day of ill News. I'll ha nothing to say to
him -- let me see, how shall I get rid of him -- O! I have it! I'll soon make
him sober I'll warrant him: So ho! Mr. What de'e call'um, where do you intend
to lye to Night?


Humh! why, where you lay last Night, unless you change you Lodging.


Well, for once I'll take Pity of you -- make no noise, but put out the
Candles, and follow me softly, for fear of disturbing my Lady.


I'll warrant ye! there's no fear of spoiling her Music, while we are playing
the same Tune.


Where are you? lend me your hand.


Here! Here! make hast, my dear Concupiscence.


Hold! stand there a little, while I open the Door gently without waking the
Footmen.


Come along softly this way!


Where abouts are you?


Here, here, come strait forward.


O Lord! O Lord! I have broke my Neck.


I am glad to hear him say so, however I should be loath to be hanged for him.
How de'e, Sir?


De'e, Sir! I am a League under Ground.


Where abouts are you?


In Hell, I think.


No! No! you are but in the Road to it, I dare say: Ah dear! why will you
follow lewd Women at this rate, when they lead you to the very Gulf of
Destruction? I knew you would be swallowed up at last. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Ah, ye sneering Whore!


Shall I fetch you a Prayer-Book, Sir? to Arm you against the Temptations of
the Flesh!


No! you need but show your own damned ugly Face to do that -- Hark ye, either
help me out, or I'll Hang my self, and swear your Murdered me.


Nay, if you are so bloody-minded, Good Night to ye, Sir.


Ah! Ah! Ah! have I caught you! Igad we'll Pig together now.


O Lord! Pray let me go, and I'll do any thing.


And so you shall before I part with you,


ARE the Ladies ready?


Hillaria is just gone up to hasten her Cousin, and Sir William will be here
immediately.


But hark you, Brother! I have considered of it, and pray let me oblige you
not to pursue your design upon his Five thousand Pound: For in short, 'tis no
better than a Cheat, and what a Gentleman should scorn to be guilty of. Is not
it sufficient that I consent to your wronging him of his Daughter?


Your Pardon, Brother, I can't allow that a wrong: For his Daughter loves me,
her Fortune, you know, he has nothing to do with; and it's a hard case a Young
Woman shall not have the disposal of her Heart. Love's a Fever of the Mind,
which nothing but our own wishes can assuage, and I don't Question but we shall
find Marriage a very cooling Cordial. -- And as to the Five Thousand Pound,
'tis no more than what he has endeavoured to cheat his Niece of.


What de'e mean, I take him for an Honest Man!


Oh! Very honest! As honest as an Old Agent to a New-Rais'd Regiment -- No
Faith, I'll say that for him, he will not do an ill thing unless he gets by it.
In a word, this so very honest Sir VVilliam, as you take him to be, has offered
me the refusal of your Mistress; and upon Condition I will secure him Five
Thousand Pound upon my day of Marriage with her, he will secure me her Person,
and Ten Thousand Pound, the remaining part of her Fortune! There's a Guardian
for ye! What think ye now, Sir?


Why I think he deserves to be served in the same kind! I find Age, and Avarice
are inseparable! therefore even make what you can of him, and I will stand by
you. But hark you, Mr. Forge, are you sure it will stand good in Law if Sir
William signs the Bond?


In any Court in England, Sir.


Then there's your Fifty Pieces, and if it succeeds, here are as many more in
the same Pocket to answer 'em: But Mum -- here comes Sir William and the
Ladies.


Good morrow Gentlemen! Mr. Worthy, give you Joy! od so! If my heels were as
light as my Heart, I should have much ado to forbear dancing -- Here, here,
take her, Man,


You must ask me leave first.


Odso! is the Lawyer come?


He is, and all the Writings are ready, Sir.


Come, Come, let's see, Man! What's this! Odd! this Law is a plaguy troublesome
thing; for now adays it won't let a Man give away his own, without repeating
the Particulars 500 times over: When in former times a Man might have held his
Title to Twenty thousand pound a year, in the compass of an Horn-Book.


That is, Sir, Because there are more Knaves now adays, and this Age is more
Treacherous and Distrustful than heretofore.


That is, Sir, because there are more Lawyers than heretofore: But come, what's
this, prithee?


These are the Old Writings of your Daughter's Fortune; this is Mr. VVorthy's
Settlement upon her, -- and this, Sir, is your Bond for Five thousand pound to
him: There wants nothing but filling up the Blanks with the Party's Names; if
you please, Sir, I'll do it immediately.


Do so.


May I crave your Daughter's Christian Name, the rest I know, Sir.


Narcissa! prithee make hast --


You know your Business --


I'll warrant you, Sir.


Mr. Worthy, methinks your Brother does not relish your Happiness as he should
do: Poor Man! I'll warrant he wishes himself in his Brother's condition!


Not I, I'll assure you, Sir.


Niece! Niece! have you no Pity? Prithee look upon him a little! Odd! he's a
pretty young Fellow -- I am sure he loves you, or he would not have frequented
my House so often! De'e think his Brother could not tell my Daughter his own
Story without his Assistance! Pshaw! waw! I tell you, you were the Beauty that
made him so assiduous: Come, come, give him your Hand, and he'll soon creep
into your Heart, I'll warrant you: Come, say the word, and make him happy.


What, to make my self miserable, Sir, Marry a Man without an Estate?


Hang an Estate! True Love's beyond all Riches! 'Tis all dirt -- mere dirt! --
beside have not you Fifteen Thousand Pound to your Portion?


I doubt, Sir, you would be loath to give him your Daughter, though her Fortune's
larger.


Odd, if he loved her but half so well, as he loves you, he should have her for
a word speaking.


But, Sir, this asks some Consideration --


You see, Mr. Worthy, what an extraordinary Kindness my Father has for you!


Ay, Madam, and for your Cousin too: But I hope with a little of your
Assistance we shall be both able very shortly to return it.


Nay, I was always ready to serve Hillaria; for Heaven knows I only Marry to
Revenge her Quarrel to my Father: I cannot forgive his off'ring to sell her.


O, you need not take such pains, Madam, to conceal your Passion for me; you
may own it without a blush upon your Wedding-day.


My Passion! When did you hear me acknowledge any? If I thought you could
believe me guilty of such a Weakness, though after I had married you, I would
never look you in the Face.


A very pretty Humour, this faith!


Which if I don't give, you'll take I suppose.


Well, Uncle, I won't Promise you, but I'll go to Church and see them married;
when we come back 'tis ten to one but I surprise you where you least think on.


Why, that's well said! -- Mr. Worthy, now! now's your time; Odd! I have so
fired her, 'tis not in her power to deny you, Man -- To her! to her! I warrant
her thy own, Boy! You'll keep your word, Five Thousand Pound upon the day of
Marriage.


I'll give you my Bond upon demand, Sir.


O! I dare take your Word, Sir. -- Come, Lawyer, have you done? Is all ready?


All, Sir! This is your Bond to Mr. Worthy: Will you be pleased to Sign that
first, Sir?


Ay, ay; let's see! Worthy, I deliver this as my Act and Deed to you, and
Heaven send you a good Bargain -- Niece, will you Witness it?


Now, Sir, if you please to Sign the Jointure.


Come on -- Sir VVilliam, I deliver this to you for the use of your Daughter.
Madam, will you give your self the trouble once move?


You may save that Charge, I saw your own at the Door.


Your Pardon, Sir, that would make our business too Public: For which Reason,
Sir VVilliam, I hope you will excuse our not taking you along with us.


Ay, ay, with all my heart, the more Privacy the less Expense. But pray, what
time may I expect you back again? For Amanda has sent to me for the Writings of
her Husband's Estate: I suppose she intends to Redeem the Mortgage, and I am
afraid she will keep me there till Dinner-time.


Why, about that time she has obliged me to bring some of her nearest Friends
to be Witnesses of her good or evil Fortune with her Husband: Methinks I long
to know her Success; if you please, Sir VVilliam, we'll meet you there.


With all my heart --


It is at the Door, Sir.


Come, Gentlemen, no Ceremony; your time's short.


Your Servant, Sir VVilliam.


So! here's Five Thousand Pounds got with a wet finger! This 'tis to read
Mankind! I knew a Young Lover would never think he gave too much for his
Mistress! Well! if I don't suddenly meet with some misfortune, I shall never
be able to bear this Tranquillity of Mind.


Thus far my hopes have all been answered, and my disguise of Vicious Love has
charmed him even to a Madness of Impure Desire: -- But now I tremble to pull
off the Mask, lest bare faced Virtue should fright him from my Arms for ever.
Yet sure there are Charms in Virtue, nay, stronger, and more pleasing far, than
hateful Vice can boast of! Else why have Holy Martyrs perished for its sake?
While Lewdness ever gives severe Repentance, and unwilling Death. -- Good
Heaven inspire my heart, and hang upon my Tongue the force of Truth and
Eloquence, that I may lure this wandering Falcon back to Love and Virtue -- He
comes, and now my dreaded Task begins!


How fare you, Sir? De'e not already think your self confined? Are you not
tired with my easy Love?


O! never! never! you have so filled my thoughts with Pleasures past, that but
to reflect on 'em is still new Rapture to my Soul, and the Bliss must last
while I have Life or Memory.


No Flattery, Sir! I loved you for your plain-dealing; and to preserve my good
Opinion, tell me, what think you of the Grapes persuading Juice! Come, speak
freely, would not the next Tavern-Bush put all this out of your head?


Faith, Madam, to be free with you, I am apt to think you are in the right
on it: For though Love and Wine are two very fine Tunes, yet they make no Music,
if you play them both together, separately they Ravish us: Thus the Mistress
ought to make room for the Bottle, the Bottle for the Mistress, and both to
wait the call of Inclination.


That's Generously spoken -- I have observed, Sir, in all your Discourse you
confess something of a Man, that has thoroughly known the world! -- Pray give me
leave to ask you, of what Condition you are, and whence you came?


Why, in the first place, Madam, -- by Birth I am a Gentleman; by ill Friends,
good Wine, and false Dice, almost a Beggar: But by your Servants mistaking me,
the happiest Man, that ever Love and Beauty smiled on.


One thing more, Sir! Are you married? -- Now my fears.


I was, but very Young.


What was your Wife?


A foolish loving thing, that built Castles in the Air, and thought it
impossible for a Man to forswear himself when he made Love.


Was she not Virtuous?


Uumh! Yes faith, I believe she might, I was never Jealous of her.


Did you never love her?


Ah! most damnably at first, for she was within two Women of my Maidenhead.


What's become of her?


Why, after I had been from her beyond Sea, about Seven or Eight Years, like a
very Loving Fool she died of the Pip, and civilly left me the world free to
Range in.


Why did you leave her?


Because she grew stale, and I could not Whore in quiet for her: Besides she
was always exclaiming against my Extravagancies, particularly my Gaming; which
she so violently opposed, that I fancied a Pleasure in it, which since I never
found; for in one Month I lost between Eight and Ten Thousand Pound, which I
had just before called in to pay my Debts. This Misfortune made my Creditors
come so thick upon me, that I was forced to Mortgage the remaining part of my
Estate to Purchase new Pleasure, which I knew I could not do on this side the
Water, amidst the Clamours of insatiate Duns, and the more hateful Noise of a
Complaining Wife.


Don't you wish you had taken her Counsel though?


Not I, faith, Madam.


Why so?


Because 'tis to no purpose: I am Master of more Philosophy, than to be
concerned at what I can't help -- But now, Madam, -- Pray give me leave to
inform my self as far in your Condition.


In a word, Sir, till you know me thoroughly, I must own my self a perfect
Riddle to you.


Nay, nay, I know you are a Woman: But in what Circumstances! Wife, or Widow.


A Wife, Sir; a True, a Faithful, and a Virtuous Wife.


Humb! truly, Madam, your Story begins something like a Riddle! a Virtuous Wife
say you! what, and was you never false to your Husband!


I never was by Heaven! for Him, and only Him I still love above the World.


Good again! pray, Madam, don't your Memory fail you sometimes? because I fancy
you don't remember what you do over night!


I told you, Sir, I should appear a Riddle to you: But if my Heart will give me
leave, I'll now unloose your fettered Apprehension -- But I must first amaze
you more -- Pray, Sir, satisfy me in one particular -- 'tis this -- What are
your undissembled thoughts of Virtue? Now, if you can, shake off your loose
Unthinking Part, and summon all your force of manly Reason to resolve me.


Faith, Madam, methinks this is a very odd Question for a Woman of your
Character. I must confess you have amazed me.


It ought not to amaze you! why should you think I make a mock of Virtue? But
last night you allow'd my understanding greater then is usual in our Sex: if
so, can you believe I have no farther sense of Happiness than what this Empty,
Dark and Barren World can yield me! No, I have yet a prospect of a sublimer
Bliss, an Hope, that carries me to the bright Regions of Eternal Day.


Humh! I thought her last nights humour was too good to hold. I suppose by and
by she will ask me to go to Church with her -- Faith, Madam, in my mind this
discourse is a little out of the way. You told me I should be acquainted with
your condition, and at present that's what I had rather be informed of.


Sir, you shall: But first, this Question must be answered; your thoughts of
Virtue, Sir? -- By all my Hopes of Bliss hereafter, your answering this
pronounces half my Good, or Evil fate for ever: But on my knees I beg you do
not speak till you have weighed it well -- Answer me with ^he same Truth, and
sincerity, as you would answer Heaven at your latest hour.


Your words confound me, Madam; some wondrous Secret sure lies ripened in your
Breast, and seems to struggle for its fatal birth! What is it I must answer
you?


Give me your real thoughts of Virtue, Sir; can you believe there ever was a
Woman truly Mistress of it, or is it only Notion?


Let me consider, Madam,


May I believe that from your Soul you speak this undissembled truth?


Madam, you may. But still you rack me with amazement! why am I asked so
strange a Question?


I'll give you ease immediately. -- Since then you have allow'd a Woman may be
Virtuous -- How will you excuse the Man who leaves the Bosom of a Wife, so
qualified, for the abandoned pleasures of deceitful Prostitutes! Ruins her
Fortune! contemns her Counsel! loathes her Bed, and leaves her to the lingering
miseries of Despair and Love: while in return of all these wrongs, she his poor
forsaken Wife meditates no Revenge, but what her piercing Tears, and secret
Vows to Heaven for his Conversion yield her: yet still loves on, is constant
and unshaken to the last! Can you believe, that such a Man can live without the
stings of Conscience, and yet be master of his Senses! Conscience! did you
never feel the Checks of it! did it never, never tell you of your broken Vows?


That you should ask me this, confounds my Reason -- And yet your words are
uttered with such a powerful Accent, they have awaked my Soul, and strike my
thoughts with horror and remorse. --


Then let me strike you nearer, deeper yet: -- But arm your mind with gentle
pity first, or I am lost for ever.


I am all Pity, all Faith, Expectation, and confused Amazement: Be kind, be
quick, and ease my wonder.


Look on me well: Revive your dead remembrance: And oh! for pity's sake I shall
die in quiet.


Hah! speak on!


I wonot be! -- The word's too weighty for my faltering Tongue, and my Soul
sinks beneath the fatal Burden. Oh!


Ha! she faints! look up fair Creature! Behold a Heart that bleeds for your
distress, and fain would share the weight of your oppressing sorrows! Oh! thou
hast raised a thought within me, that shocks my Soul.


'Tis done! Amanda's Arms -- I am your Wife.


Hah!


For ever blessed or miserable, as your next breath shall sentence me.


My Wife! impossible! is she not dead! How shall I believe thee?


How Time and my Afflictions may have altered me I know not: But here's an
Indelible Confirmation


Hah! 'tis here -- 'tis no Illusion, but my real Name; which seems to upbraid
me as a witness of my Perjured Love -- Oh I am confounded with my Guilt, and
tremble to behold thee -- Pray give me leave to think.


I will. sure the Tenderest tale of Love to tell, that ever Misery, at the dawn
of Rising-Hope could utter.


I have wronged you. Oh! rise! basely wronged you! and can I see your Face?


One kind, one pitying look cancels those wrongs for ever: and oh! forgive my
fond presuming passion; for from my Soul I pardon and forgive you all: all, all
but this, the greatest, your unkind Delay of Love.


Oh! seal my pardon with thy trembling Lips, while with this tender Grasp of
fond reviving Love I seize my Bliss and stifle all thy wrongs for ever.


No more; I'll wash away their memory in tears of flowing Joy.


Oh thou hast roused me from my deep Lethargy of Vice! For hitherto my Soul has
been enslaved to loose Desires, to vain deluding Follies, and shadows of
substantial bliss: but now I wake with joy to find my Rapture Real. -- Thus let
me kneel and pay my thanks to her, whose conquering Virtue has at last subdued
me. Here will I fix, thus prostrate sigh my shame, and wash my Crimes in never
ceasing tears of Penitence.


O rise! this posture heaps new guilt on me! now you over-pay me.


Have I not used thee like a Villain! For almost ten long years deprived thee
of my Love, and ruined all thy Fortune! But I will labour, dig, beg or starve,
to give new proofs of my unfeigned Affection.


Forbear this tenderness, least I repent of having moved your Soul so far: you
shall not need to beg. Heaven has provided for us beyond its common care. 'Tis
now near two years since my Uncle Sir William Wealthy sent you the news of my
pretended death, knowing the Extravagance of your Temper he thought it fit you
should believe no other of me; and about a month after he had sent you that
advice, poor man, he dyed, and left me in the full possession of two thousand
pounds a year, which I now cannot offer as a Gift, because my Duty, and your
lawful Right, makes you the undisputed Master of it.


How have I laboured for my own Undoing, while in despite of all my Follies,
kind Heaven resolved my Happiness.


Madam, Sir William Wisewoud has sent your Ladyship the Writings you desired
him, and says he'll wait upon you immediately.


Now Sir, if you please to withdraw awhile, you may inform your self how fair a
Fortune you are Master of.


None, none that can outweigh a Virtuous Mind, while in my Arms I thus can
circle thee, I grasp more Treasure, than in a Day the posting Sun can travail
over. Oh! why have I so long been blind to the Perfections of thy Mind and
Person! Not knowing thee a Wife, I found thee Charming beyond the wishes of
Luxurious Love. Is it then a Name, a Word, shall rob thee of thy Worth? Can
Fancy be a surer Guide to Happiness than Reason? Oh! I have wandered like a
benighted wretch, and lost my self in Lifes Unpleasing Journey.

'Twas heedless Fancy first, that made me stray,
But Reason now breaks forth, and lights me on my way.

Prithee Tom make hast below there; my Lady has ordered Dinner at half an hour
after one precisely: look out some of the Red that came in last.


Come Sir, come out here, and show your face. Women. Oh I am undone; ruined!


Pray Sir, who are you, and what was your Business, and how in the Devil's Name
came you in Here?


Why truly, Sir, the Flesh led me to the Cellar-Door; but I believe the Devil
push't me in -- that Gentlewoman can inform you better.


Pray Mrs. Anne how came you two together in the Cellar?


Why he -- he -- pu -- pu -- pulled me in.


But how the Devil came he in?


He fe -- fe -- fe -- fell in.


How came he into the House?


I don -- do -- don't know.


Ah! you are a Crocodile; I thought what was the reason I could never get a
good word from you! What, in a Cellar too! But come, Sir, we will take care of
you however. Bring him along, we will first carry him before my Lady; and then
Toss him in a Blanket.


Nay but Gentlemen! dear Gentlemen.


This is indeed a joyful Day, we must all Congratulate your Happiness.


Which while our lives permit us to enjoy, we must still reflect with Gratitude
on the generous Author of it: Sir, we owe you more than words can pay you.


Words are indeed too weak; therefore let my Gratitude be Dumb till it can
speak in Actions.


The success of the Design I thought on, sufficiently rewards me.


When I reflect upon Amanda's past Afflictions, I could almost weep to think of
his unexpected Change of Fortune.


Methinks her fair Example should persuade all constant Wives never to Repine
at unrewarded Virtue. Nay even my Brother being the first promoter of it, has
atoned for all the looseness of his Character.


I never can return his kindness.


In a short time Sir, I suppose you'll meet with an Opportunity, if you can
find a Receipt to preserve Love after his Honey-Moon's over.


The Receipt is easily found, Madam; Love's a tender Plant, which cannot live
out of a warm Bed: you must take care with undissembled Kindness to keep him
from the Northern Blast of Jealousy.


But I have heard your Experienced Lovers make use of Coldness, and that's more
Agreeable to my Inclination.


Coldness, Madam, before Marriage, like throwing a little Water upon a clear
Fire, makes it burn the fiercer: but after Marriage you must still take care to
lay on fresh Fuel.


Oh* fie, Sir! how many Examples have we of Men's hating their Wives for being
too fond of 'em?


No wonder Madam: you may stifle a Flame by heaping on too great a Load.


Nay Sir, if there be no other way of destroying his Passion; for me he may
love till Doomsday.


Humph! don't you smell Powder, Gentlemen? Sir Novelty is not far of.


What not our Fellow Collegian, I hope, that was expelled the University for
Beating the Proctor.


The same.


Does that Weed grow still?


Ay faith, and as rank as ever, as you shall see, for here he comes.


Ladies your humble Servant; Dear Loveless let me Embrace thee, I am o'er-joy'd
at thy good Fortune: stop my Vitals -- the whole Town rings of it already -- my
Lady Tattletongue has tired a Pair of Horses in spreading the News about.
Hearing Gentlemen that you were all met upon an Extraordinary good Occasion, I
could not resist this opportunity of joining my Joy with yours: for you must
know I am --


Married, Sir!


To my Liberty, Madam, I am just parted from my Mistress.


And pray Sir, how do you find your self after it?


Th ehappiest Man alive, Madam, Pleasant! Easy! Gay! Light! and Free as Air:
hah;


Are you so indifferent Sir?


Oh! Madam she's engaged already to a Temple Beau! I saw 'em in a Coach
together so fond! and bore it with as unmoved a Countenance as Tom Worthy does
a thundering Jest in a Comedy when the whole House roars at it.


Pray Sir, what occasioned your Separation?


Why this Sir, -- you must know she being still possessed with a Brace of
Implacable Devils, called Revenge and Jealousy, dogged me this Morning to the
Chocolate-house, where I was obliged to leave a Letter for a young foolish
Girl, that -- (you will excuse me Sir) which I had no sooner delivered to the
Maid of the House; but whip! she snatches it out of her hand, flew at her like
a Dragon, tore off her Head-Close, flung down three or four Sets of
Lemonade-Glasses, Dashed my Lord Whiffles Chocolate in his Face, Cut him over
the Nose, And had like to have strangled me in my own Steinkirk.


Pray Sir, how did this end?


Comically, stop my Vitals! for in the Cloud of Powder, that she had battered
out of the Beaux Periwigs I stole away: After which I sent a Friend to her,
with an Offer, which she readily accepted: Three hundred pound a year during
life, provided she would renounce all claims to me, and resign my Person to my
own disposal.


Methinks, Sir Novelty, you were a little too extravagant in your Settlement,
considering how the price of Women is fallen.


Therefore I did it -- to be the first man should raise their price: For the
Devil take me, but the Women of the Town now come down so low, that my very
Footman, while he kept my Place the other day at the Playhouse, carried a Mask
out of the Side-Box with him, and stop my Vitals, the Rogue is now taking
Physic for it.


Come bring him along there.


How now! hah! Snap in hold: Pray let's know the business; Release him
Gentlemen.


Why, an't please you, Sir, this Fellow was taken in the Cellar with my Lady's
Woman! she says he kept her in by force, and was rude to her: she stands crying
here without, and begs her Ladyship to do her Justice.


Mr. Loveless, we are both the occasion of this Misfortune, and for the poor
Girl's Reputation-sake, something should be done.


Snap, answer me directly, have you lain with this poor Girl?


Why, truly Sir, Imagining you were doing little less with my Lady, I must
confess, I did commit Familiarity with her, or so Sir!


Then you shall marry her, Sir! no reply unless it be your Promise.


Marry her, O Lord, Sir! after I have lain with her? why, Sir! how the Devil
can you think a Man can have any Stomach to his Dinner, after he has had three
or four Slices off of the Spit?


Well Sirrah! to renew your Appetite, and because thou hast been my old
Acquaintance, I'll give thee an 100 l. with her, and thirty Pound a Year during
life, to set you up in some honest Employment.


Ah! Sir, now I understand you, Heaven reward you! Well Sir, I partly find that
the gentile Scenes of our lives are pretty well over; and I thank Heaven, that
I have so much Grace left, that I can repent, when I have no more Opportunities
of being wicked, -- come Spouse!


Brother, stand upon your Guard! here comes Sir William.


Joy, joy to you all! Madam, I Congratulate your good Fortune. Well, my dear
Rogue must not I give thee Joy too? ha!


If you please, Sir: but I confess, I have more than I deserve already.


And art thou married?


Yes Sir, I am married!


Odso, I am glad on it: I dare swear, thou dost not grudge me the 5000 l.


Not I really Sir: you have given me all my Soul could wish for, but the
Addition of a Fathers Blessing.


Humh! what dost thou mean? I am none of thy Father.


This Lady is your Daughter, Sir, I hope.


Prithee get up! prithee get up! thou art stark mad! true, I believe she may be
my Daughter: well, and so Sir!


If she be not, I'm certain she's my Wife, Sir.


Humh! Mr. Worthy, pray Sir do me the favour to help me to understand your
Brother a little -- do you know any thing of his being married?


Then without any abuse, Sir William, he married your Daughter this very
Morning, not an hour ago, Sir.


Pray Sir whose consent had you, who advised you to it?


Our mutual Love and your consent Sir, which these Writings, entitling her to
a thousand Pound a year, and this Bond, whereby you have obliged your self to
pay me five thousand Pound upon our day of Marriage, are sufficient proofs of.


He, he! I gave your Brother such a Bond, Sir.


You did so! but the obligation is to me; look there Sir.


Very good! this is my hand, I must confess Sir: and what then?


Why then I expect my five thousand Pound, Sir: pray Sir, do you know my Name?


I am not drunk Sir, I am sure it was Worthy, and Jack, or Tom, or Dick, or
something.


No Sir, I'll show you -- 'tis William, look you there Sir: you should have
taken more care of the Lawyer Sir, that filled up the Blank.


So now his Eyes are open!


And have you married my Daughter against my Consent, and tricked me out of 5000
l. Sir?


His Brother, Sir, has married me too with my Consent, and I am Not tricked out
of 5000 l.


Insulting Witch! look ye Sir! I never had a substantial Cause to be angry in
my life before: but now I have reason on my side, I will indulge my Indignation
most immoderately: I must confess, I have not patience to wait the slow redress
of a Tedious Law-Suit! therefore am resolved to right my self the nearest way
-- draw, draw Sir, you must not enjoy my five thousand Pound, though I fling as
much more after it in procuring a Pardon for killing you.


O fie, Sir William, how monstrous is this Passion?


You have disarmed me, but I shall find a time to poison him.


Think better on it Sir William, your Daughter has married a Gentleman; and one
whose Love entitles him to her Person.


Ay, but the 5000 l. Sir! why, the very report of his having such a Fortune,
will ruin him, I warrant you, within this week he will have more Duns at his
Chamber in a Morning, than a gaming Lord after a good Night at the Groom
Porters, or a Poet upon the fourth day of his New Play. I shall never be
pleased with paying it against my own Consent, Sir.


Yet you would have had me done it Sir William: but however I heartily wish you
would as freely forgive Mr. Worthy, as I do you Sir.


I must confess this Girls good Nature makes me ashamed of what I have offered:
But Mr. Worthy I did not expect such Usage from a man of your Character: I
always took you for a Gentleman.


You shall find me no other, Sir: Brother a word with you!


Sir William, I have some Obligations to this Gentleman, and have so great a
confidence in your Daughter's Merit, and his Love; that I here promise to
return you your 5000 l. if after the Expiration of one year, you are then
dissatisfied in his being your Son in Law.


But see Brother, he has forestall'd your purpose.


Mr. Loveless, you have been before-hand with me, but you must give me leave to
offer Sir William my joint-security for what you have promised him.


With all my Heart Sir! Dare you take our Bonds, Sir William?


Hold Gentlemen! I should blush to be obliged to that degree: therefore Sir
William, as the first proof of that respect and duty I owe a Father, I here
unaskt return your Bond, and will henceforth expect nothing from you, but as my
Conduct shall deserve it.


This is indeed a generous Act, methinks 'twere Pity it should go unrewarded.


Nay, now you vanquish me! after this I can't suspect your future Conduct:
there Sir! 'tis yours, I acknowledge the Bond, and wish you all the Happiness
of a Bridal Bed. Heavens Blessing on you both, now rise my Boy! and let the
world know 'twas I set you upon your Legs again.


I'll study to deserve your Bounty, Sir.


Now Sir William; You have shown your self a Father. This prudent Action has
secured your Daughter from the usual consequence of a stolen Marriage; a
Parents Curse. Now she must be happy in her Love, while you have such a tender
Care on it.


This is indeed a happy Meeting, we all of us have drawn our several Prizes in
the Lottery of Human life: Therefore I beg our Joys may be united: not one of
us must part this day. The Ladies I'll entreat my Guests.


The rest are mine, and I hope will often be so.


Tis yet too soon to dine: therefore to divert us in the mean time, what think
you of a little Music, the Subject perhaps not improper to this Occasion!


'Twill oblige us, Madam, we are all Lovers of it.


HAil! hail! Victorious Love!
To whom all Hearts below,
With no less Pleasure bow,
Than to the Thundering Jove,
The Happy Souls above.

Hail, c.

Cease, cease fond Fools your Empty Noise,
And follow not such Joys,
Love gives you but a short-liv'd Bliss,
But I bestow immortal Happiness.

Rebellious Reason, talk no more,
Of all my Slaves, I thee abhor:
But thou, alas! dost strive in vain
To free the Lover from a pleasing Chain,
In Spite of Reason, Love shall live and reign.

In Spite, c.

What Wretch would follow Loves alarms.
When Honours Trumpet sounds to Arms:
Hark! how the Warlike Notes inspire
In every Breast a glowing Fire.

Hark how it swells with Love and soft Desire.

Behold, behold the married State
By thee too soon betrayed,
Repenting now too late.

O! tell me cruel God of Love,
Why did thou my thoughts possess
With an Eternal Round of Happiness,
And yet alas! I lead a wretched Life,
Doomed to this Galling Yoke -- the Emblem of a Wife.

Ungrateful Wretch! how dare thou Love upbraid?
I gave thee Raptures in the Bridal-Bed.

Long since alas! the airy Vision's fled,
And I with wandering Flames my Passion feed.
O! tell me pow'rfull God
Where I shall find
My former Peace of Mind!

Where first I promised thee a happy Life,
There thou shalt find it in a Virtuous Wife.

Go home unhappy Wretch, and mourn
For all thy Guilty Passion past,
There thou shalt those Joys return,
Which shall for ever, ever last.

'Twas generously designed, and all my Life to come shall show how I approve
the Moral. Oh! Amanda! once more receive me to thy Arms; and while I am there,
let all the World confess my Happiness. By my Example taught let every man,
whose Fate has bound him to a married Life, beware of letting loose his wild
desires: for if Experience may be allow'd to judge, I must proclaim the folly
of a wandering Passion: the greatest Happiness we can hope on Earth,

And sure the nearest to the Joys above,
Is the chaste Rapture of a Virtuous Love.

1. THE Boarding-School; a Comedy, written by Mr. D'urfey.

2. Sophonisba, or Hannibals overthrow, by Mr. Lee.

3. The Mock-Marriage, a Comedy, written by Mr. Scott.

4. She Ventures, and He Wins, a Comedy, written by a young Lady.

5. The Comical History of Don Quixote in 3 Parts: Also Mr. D'urfey's Songs
set to Music by Mr. Henry Purcell, Dr. Blow, Mr. Eccles, Mr. Courtivil, Mr.
Akeroyde, and other eminent Masters of the Age, in 3 Parts.

6. Phyrrus, a Tragedy; acted at the Theatre in Lincolns-In-Fields, written by
Mr. Hopkins.

7. The Richmond-Heiress, a Comedy, written by Mr. D'urfey.

8. The Marriage-Hater, a Comedy, by Mr D'urfey.

9. The Wives Excuse, a Comedy, by Mr. Southern.

10. The Country Wife, a Comedy, by Mr. Wicherly.

11. The Very Good Wife, a Comedy.

12. The True Widow, a Comedy, by Mr. Shadwell, Poet-Laureat.

13. Traitor, a Tragedy, by Mr. Rivers.

14. Agnes de Castro, a Tragedy, written by a young Lady.

15. Fatal Mistake, or the Plot's Spoiled, by Io. Haines.


