LOst -- By heavens -- all lost,
All our hopes blasted
By Jove, without hope of recovery.
O gods, commiserate our despicable estate.
Oh heavens! this day were we at push of pike
For our public liberty -- Now we are at our wits end
For our private safety. --
Hark, what a hideous noise -- this fatal day
Hath cancelled all our former victories,
Never to be remembered -- in this hour.
Our ancient splendour suffers sad eclipse.
-- They fly -- They fly -- Oh what a dismal word!
How unaccustomed -- Siennois to fly;
True Siennois -- such as had vowed their lives.
A victim for their public liberty,
To fly, like dust before mechanic slaves;
Such as while now never knew other arms,
Then forks or shovels -- Do the gods intend
To revel in our miseries! -- and prove
Strange paradoxes to the credulous world!
That abject, base, unmannag'd Varlets thus
Should overcome the Cavalry of Siena:
A thing unheard of! O! accursed wretches,
Whose too politic pates first hatched these wartes;
You are least sharers here. My Prince and I
Must suffer this reproach -- I slight my wounds;
-- But O! my honour lost. -- I'll bear it stoutly:
-- Up then my spirits, be not you dejected;
There's something yet to care for -- there's no time
Now to complain: heavens know what just designs
We undertook; though with unequal success.
Wee've done what lay in humane power -- Pistoia
Bear witness, where so many insolent rebels
Have found this day their sepulchre: thy fields
Can testify how dear some sold their lives.
And thou, the Ensign of all noble souls
Make affidavit of this days behaviour.
-- Now to my generous Prince, whom cruel fates
Have levelled with my self -- Him will I search,
That if my fates require my quick departure
For Stygian lakes: as in my life I've been
Eminent in his service, I may now,
Dying courageously in his presence, have
His royal Pass-port and Testificate,
To raise my honour, and condole my fate.

SO now the day's our own -- but yet the Duke
Escaped -- Marciano not prisoner!
The victory is not such as I expected.
But come, my Mirmydons, -- we'll not give over;
Let's, with a party of our choicest horse,
Make narrow search for Marciano:
For, if we find him not, we must not think
To gain the Generals favour. -- Come, my Boys,
He hath attempted oft to strip the Senate
Of their new power, and so destroy us all;
Whose hopes are nourished by the present wars:
So that if you shall catch him, you may sure
Expect a great reward: -- his excellency,
The brave Lord Barbaro will hug you for it.

O Florence! don't insult at this days success,
This unnatural victory over thy lawful Prince
Will quickly make thee sensible of unnatural
And intolerable Tyranny: that Ichneumon,
Who now tickles thee in all thy desires
Will stop thy breath at length, whilst thy good Prince,
Whom thou can blame for nothing but misfortune,
Shall yet be more unfortunate in seeing
Thee too unfortunate. -- But, I perceive
The main design of this preposterous war,
Love and ambition muzles humane souls;
So that when private Subjects covet honour
And power, their lawful Prince must quit his Throne,
No matter for what reason, since they mean
Some reformation; as if private preferment
Were inconsistent with all Monarchy.
-- But what! 'tis unseasonable for me t'expostulate.
My noble Prince (goodness protect him still)
Is gone for Savoy; I am here commanded
To rally those few forces I can find,
With slender hopes -- but yet I'll do my best
To prosecute his Royal orders -- so,
Good Subjects votes assist me -- 'tis resolved,
For while Dame nature does allow me breath,
I'll serve my Prince -- nought shall excuse but death.

O! Leonardo -- How dost do Boy?


Cassio -- thou art the man I was seeking, welcome effaith, and how Prithee?
Cass Well.


As well as the Ladies will permit thee? -- ha.


Yes indeed -- but how goes all with you -- what news dost hear.


Bad news effaith, all our hopes are now perished, it is for certain that the
Duke is beat at Pistoia; whether he hath escaped or not himself, is not yet
known.


Sad -- trust me 'tis most sad, but, prithee, who shall be Duke now dost
think, when they have rejected him, who by law of inheritance was their lawful
Prince.


Why -- thou, -- if thou be weary of thy life; for a Prince now a days
must reign no longer, then his Subjects please his government -- men now begin
to act real Tragedies.


Good; but how does thy learned cocks-comb judge of the event of all our
present broils?


Why, just as a sober Drawer does of a company of young gulls inflaming the
reckoning beyond the faculties of their pockets: -- they will look pitifully,
when the bill is produced -- for they must pay for all.


How! ^ dost think our state-mountebanks will not agree?


Yes, for a while they may, like heissers in the yoke, but when once got loose,
they'll push at one another.


Well -- no more of that string; these distracted times, I fear, will afford
such discourses every day -- how does thy Mistress, the Lady you know of, --
ha?


-- Why, faith as unreasonable as ever.


How! unreasonable --


Yes -- unreasonable, she will admit of no terms whatsoever, so that I fear I
shall be forced to storm her: 'slid, I can have scarce liberty to survey her
very parapet and out-works, for fear of a thing (I do not know what they mean
now a days) suspicion, I think she calls it; and for thee, I believe thou art
in no better condition, for her Sister, thy Mistress (otherwise in my opinion
pliable) is ruled by her, and both by an old urinal-peeping, onyon-breath'd
hag, whom they call the Countess of Saromanca forsooth, so that now she is
impregnable.


A devil she is, 'slid, I think it is become an epidemical disease amongst that
sex, they intend, I think, to imitate the times, and erect a new Commonwealth
of themselves, excluding all masculine society, and so be called the new
assembly of zeal-copyholders.


Yes, yes, for now they hold it a crime to court.


Since Monarchy fell, that trade is totally decayed, thou must now either Marry
at first sight or else march off; as if who should throw the Dye for a
maidenhead, Boy.


Goodness, I think, by and by, we shall be constrained to make love to one
another, and so thou shalt be my Mistress, Cassio; for our modern Critics will
not allow us women's flesh, even upon holy-dayes.


True -- for all the Ladies in Florence have a spice of this disease is there
no remedy for it, dost think?


None but patience, stay while Fortune turn up her wheel again, and then the
Ladies may turn up.


What! their Petticoats?


No -- I have not said that yet, I mean may smile upon us more then they do:
for now we must not so much as see any Lady.


No -- why I hope they will yet admit of a visit in civility?


No -- by no means, Cassio, thou must not name such a heresy as a visit, for
thou may hinder other suitors: Remember that, Boy.


You say right -- But who comes here?


I think they are women.


Or else two things shuffled in the form of women: dost know 'em Leonarde?


Know 'em, why, who can know them thus, such masquerades under their veils are
like nuns at the grate, they may see us, but we cannot see them.


True, for there is no way else to discover them, but by smelling; and what
smell women have now a days, faith, I cannot tell.


Smell, say thou; they have a most acute smell, a woman can now a days
smell a mans love to her, before ever possibly he be in love with any; I was
rejected by a lady last day, before ever I knew her well; yet such was the
imagination that she had of my respects, that she entertained her companions
with the relation of my adventures for her -- you will think that strange.


-- Strange! -- No faith, I hope, by progress of time, they will conceive by
the mere wind of report, and so we shall have a hopeful race of young
Florentine-jennets, as light-heel'd as those of Spain, I warrant you: but,
prithee, what was that Lady, you talked of?


Why, the little handsome Donazella, what do you call her, on the other side of
the river?


Ho -- Ho -- I know her, a noble Lady effaith, but I am sorry, that she is
infected with that disease, she seems to have a spark of wit.


Tush, 'tis become a plague, Cassio, a very plague; dost not know the
gentelman, who was rejected of a Lady, having no other evidence of his
affection then the carrying of a letter from one of her friends to her, wherein
he was recommended to her acquaintance, which as a trophy of her conquests she
did impar to her hearts-conquerour -- and yet a Lady of admirable qualities. --
Men now a days breed their female children, as the Chinese do their wives, or
the Grand-signior his concubines, close at home.


But, prithee, did know that same piece of foppery, who attended them who by
his garb would seem to challenge the title of a man?


Know him, why, who does not know him; 'tis Signior Pantaloni, the rich
city-gull, whose golden fleece dazzles the eyes of all the Ladies in Toun, to
whose chamber he is almost as welcome as a young bachelor of Divinity, who
hath lately past his trials, is to a zealous widow of ten months standing,
that would fain repeat her former allegiance, and taste the game again -- But
come, you shall go along with me to the Lady Chrysolina, there I hope we shall
have some favour, if we get access, I mean.


-- I, with all my heart, but that's the question.


I take it so indeed, Ladies, you must excuse me if I do you the honour to
visit you sometimes; for my mother says, Son, saith she, it is high time you
were married -- I hope you know my meaning.


Sir, you shall be welcome.


I hope so indeed: -- For, I vow I would never desire a handsomer wife then you
are. -- I protest, Mistress, you are very handsome, though I say it that should
not say it.


You flatter highly, Sir.


Not indeed.


Well, Sir, as for your visit, I shall admit it; but for marriage -- you know
--


Ho -- I know well enough, you are governed by your friends; but I shall tickle
them I warrant you, let me alone for that.


It is the safest way, Sir.


So -- then forsooth, since I know the way to your Chamber, I will come and see
you every day; now because my mother is sick and taking physic, I must go home
and keep company with her, else I'll assure you, I would not leave you thus --
farewell.


You see them Gentlemen, Cassio and Leonardo, as we passed along, Sister?


But I hope they did not know us, Sister, 'tis not fit we entertain them, they
are not matches for us.


But I warrant you, they'll render us a visit shortly.


I should rather wish they would abstain, Sister, you know our friends will not
relish it well; I should be very well content of this Signior Pantaloni for my
husband; I hope no body hears us.


True, for although the others may be Gentelmen of good parts, yet I know we
are designed for them Signiors; so the Lady Saromanca told me last day.


And we must follow their advice you know Sister.


Yes indeed, and reason for it.


Hum -- etiam confabulantes inveni? I have it in my pocket, that will afford
them new cogitations,


Mr. Manduco, you are welcome, pray, how does my aunt?


I have a little negotiation with you in private; for I am legate from Signior
Becabunga, (my sometimes pupil) as more amply shall briefly appear. And how
think you -- marry thus, here's a letter for you --


I hope he is in good health, Sir.


O! yes, he is valetudinary, herein he presents (as I co^jecture) his amorous
servitude to you both; he will be in Town next week, for I'll assure you he
flagitates to see you: I hope you will afford him gracious entertainment -- hum
-- hum --


He shall be welcome, Sir.


I will assure you, Ladies, he is an adolescent of eximious candor and
egregious integrity: I have been at much pains and labour in educating him, I
may say, ever since his pubertie: but now that he is come to the years of
intelligency, I have given him over --


He will make us in love with him e're we see him.


But, for your further satisfaction, I shall, paucissimis, insinuate to you the
method of his education. -- Primo, then, when he came under my gubernation,
which was about the year of his age, Anno Domini, (let me see) mill^simo,
sexcente simo, quadragesimo sexto, it being then Leap year; he was, inquam, a
very perverse youth, vitiat in his behaviour, knowing nothing but what he had
learned amongst the ancilla's (what do you call 'em) Chambermaids.


Now, Sister, you shall have him anatomized to you.


But, so soon as I took him in hand, I did so belabour his na^es with my
ferula, that profecto I have whipped him, whipped him thus -- for half an hour
together, until his abundant lachrymation had moved compassion: but, I knew
that was the only way to discipl^ate him --


Indeed Sir --


-- So, I say, having taught him his Orthographia, Etymologia and Prosody,
having always a fellicitous eye over his behaviour: I did learn him to make
his (...), not as your Monfieurs do, but more gravely, ^ how to (...), c. take
a Lady by the hand^; -- do -- (...) how to kiss, -- in this fashion --


A pretty ^


I gave ^ caution, instructions, and now and ^ Primo, Not to ^ Vir sap^, qui ^
you are always wisest when you hold your pe^ And then with what gesture to
discourse, gravely; ^ and like a School-man; (for, I have been sometimes
Hypodidasealus in the great School of Florence, im^ Hypodidasculus, Ladies)
but, as I said, I learned him to be concinne and terse in his habit, with hair
in the same longitude, as you see mine. Secundo, How to keep a clean m^ndified
nose, not with his sleeve, but with his sudarium, or handkercher --


He intends to weary us I think.


Tertio, As I said -- (hoc agatur serio) tertio, as I said, tertio, inquam, to
eat his meat with a great deal of circumspection and neatly; that is to say,
with one finger and his thumb -- thus -- Quarto, To contain himself a capite
scalpendo; from scratching of his head, (give ear I beseech you, Ladies, for it
concerns you.)


He thinks we are his Scholars.


Peace, Sister, let us hear him out.


Quarto, As I said, (take heed) Quinto, I say, and maxim a crepitando
eructando; that is, from emitting ventosities or flatuosities from his
concavities: with several other admonitions, according to the dictates of
Joannes Sulpitius, and Guili^lmus Lillius, my two very good and learned friends
--


Will he never make an end?


But, above, all, Ladies, for respect to his friends (because I am incarcerate
with obligations to all his paternal Relatiosn) I did always exhort him to
abstain from tripudiation or danncing, gladiation or fencing, lusitation or
gaming, equitation or riding, sic de caeteris; So that now he is one of the
best educate youths in Florence, else Ego operam oleam perdi^i.


He is very much obliged to you, Sir.


Now, I will not molest you with a more ample relation of his good
qualifications; but, he is a friend to modesty and chastity, an enemy to
superbity, in potu moderatus; but, not andum -- he is most locuplete both in
argentary and frumentary rents -- not given to luxury or venery -- ^o, not at
all to venery --


What a tedious ^arangue for nothing.


But, (to conclude, because now the time is gone) as I said before, as I say
now, and I hope your intelligence does comprehend when he comes into Town, I
shall concomitate him to your domicile, diversory, chamber, cubicular, or what
you please, and -- so farewell.


What a mere Bedant!


As ever lived, Sister, I cannot love him.


Peace, Sister, let us appear civil before him; for, he is employed by that
Gentleman B^ab^g^'s friends, to sound our humours I warrant you --

And what our friends have ordained, we will do,
What e're it be, there's reason for it too.

TOo true -- I feared it always; -- now frail woman,
Has thou no eyes? Art thou not sensible
Already of our slavery? -- Barbare,
A Florentine, a professed enemy
To all Siennois, will become our Master.
-- But hold -- imagine (...) Marciano,
As gods know, and I fear, a (...),
Consequently thy heart in (...) with him,
-- Pray, what would do? Resolve, poor Arabella,
Would not go search him? or would rather stay
Thou at Siena here, he, God knows where.
Love prompts the first, honour pers^des the last,
This fear advises that hope strongly presses;
Fear tests me, I should err; for, may be he
Whom in pr^perity, I did (...) esteem,
May now forget me too, (a (...) our Sex
Oftimes commit more through infirmity
Then malice^ yet, were I assured he were
Prisoner in Florence, I'd no more debate,
But search and find him, at whatever rate.

-- THis Inn is good -- now late -- I might have here
Convenient lodging, if I durst but stay --
-- Sirrah, go see my horses --
Good gods! is't come to this? -- must we behold
Rebellion in it^ full Epitasis?
No antidote to save th'empoysoned State? --
-- Those forces, I had rallied, now undone,
Routed, quite routed -- what shall I resolve --
I've overcome a tedious voyage -- O!
If I could now have but one half hours rest,
That with good news from my Prince would refresh
Both body and soul -- But yet how can my eyes
Receive their lawful tribute, when my heart
Is tos'd 'twixt hope and love? -- hope bids me live
To see a blessed Catastrophe yet to all
Our present tumults -- love persuades me rather
To dye, then see the virtuous Arabella,
(Although unkind to me, as yet despising
My ardent suit) become a prey to such
As know no love, but in their tyranny.
O heavenly, divine creature -- would thou know
My present flames -- were it possible those sig^hs
My troubled heart sends forth, might be condensed
Into one body: -- sure they could inform
Those very stones with breath, those stones should move:
Those stones should speak; and as they are become
The only witnesses of my complaint,
So be the true Ambassadors of my sorrow;
To show the virtuous Arabella -- that --
Thus -- for -- her love --
My Lord -- the enemy -- the enemy -- Fly -- Fly -- Fly.
Fly! Fly! avaunt with that base cowardly gibberish;
That Algebra of honour; which had never
Been named, if all had equal courage -- what?
I fly! Poor rogue, had as good bid me dye.
I'll force my way, or make a noble end,
Valour does sometimes humane wit transcend.

This way -- 'tis he -- take quarter.

Quarter! -- no slaves -- I'll see your entrails first.
Thus Dogs --
The hounds are now at a bay --
-- No way t'escape -- fortune, if not me,
Commiserate at least my Prince -- I prize not
My life, if I must dye, transform my soul
Into some loyal breast, -- I dye contented.
There again -- villains, are you so bold
-- This Sword shall tame you --

Sir, your noble courage hath obliged our care,
The terms of your surrender shall be observed
Faithfully -- now to horse --

I do obey, Sir, for with such as you
A word does more* then oaths with cowards do.

HO -- who is within there?

Your servant Gentlemen.

Is the Lady Marionetta within?

Yes Sir, Pray what are you, who demands?

Why, here is Signior Becabunga newly come to town -- But hark you, is she
occupied?

How Sir.

Profane Fellow -- I mean, is she not busy -- that is to say, at leisure?

O, yes -- please you walk in.

Yes -- yes -- heus -- ingrediamur.

Please you to walk here a little, while I go can the Ladies


Remember now, when you are in private to propone matrimony with a great deal
of ceremony, and for your complements, you may call her the Lady that triumphs
in the Coach-box of your affections, a bewitching Siren, a beautiful Tha^, and
so forth, as occasion offers. Praise her hair, her eyes, her ears, her breasts,
c. There is abundance of choice epithetes to be had; you may say her face is
like a Print-book of divers characters, that puzles the reader, her nose like
the style of a Dyal, her eyes like Stars, her hair like Gold, her teeth like
Ivory, her veins like silk, and her breasts like milk, and so forth, as I said
before: -- you'll remember on this now.


Yes, yes, I warrant you, I shall remember -- let me see now, her breasts, her
shoulders, her toes, her fingers, her nails and her nose -- But hark you, must
I say nothing of her clothes?


How come you to ^

Why? her nose makes me remember on it.

-- So -- so -- come, fall upon the
Ladies -- go -- I say.

Ladies, I am indeed glad to see you now.

Ladies, I am your devotionated devotionary.

You are welcome to Town Sir.

Protest, Ladies, I am your humble servant.

As before, nam ^oelum non ani^um mutas.

As before, nam coelos non animus mutat.

You are wrong -- Say -- I did long vehemently to see you -- as one in
child-bed.

I did long vehemently to see you in child-bed.

A mere brutum animal.^

What's the matter, Sir, did not I say very well now.


No -- it was altogether sinistruous, I have effo^iate the treasure of my brain
in educating you, -- and yet for all that you are a mere ignoramus.


O -- I will do well enough yet -- Pray, tell me what I should say, for the
Ladies are waitting upon me.


No -- I will complement them my self -- speak not you -- no vel unum gru.

Ladies, This gentelman is newly arrived at Florence the desuetude of amorous
conversation, with the assnetude of rural exercises have so, as I may say,
confounded his intellectuals, that if he hesitate in the pronunciation, he
hopes you will merely attribute it to his campestriall, trimestriall
perigri^ation.


We not only excuse you, Sir, but likewise account our selves honoured by your
visit -- Pray sit down Sir.


Yes, yes, without ceremony.

Why -- I think, you are silent, Madam.

I love not to prate Sir.

Nor I either.

Nay so long as he was under (...) I did labour to coerce in him that
loquacious verbosity, o^ rather ve^ bosious loquacity, with which most part of
the perverse temporary adolescency is contaminate, for I hate garrulity, as I
am facundious, I do.


I vow, Madam, you are very bony, since I see you last --


What should we have done in the country, Sir, hunted, and hawked as you do?


I hope this does not offend you, Madam. Chris. Not at all, Sir.


I should be loath to offend any man, but I am without ceremony.


Use your own liberty, Sir.

Nay, I do it to draw down reuthm from my brain, with which my lungs are much
infested: for, do you see, 'tis a very salutiferous herb: it disposes the mind
for study, and moves in several places; I will show you what by it's help I
made last night; marry a sonnet upon a Lady, whose beauty had almost tempted me
to affect her. -- She walked ^sings. N^y; hold, I have a good voice for
writing, but not for reading. I will read then.

She walked along with such a grace,
And such a catching eye.
That, had her Masque not hid her face
Then -- certainly --
In some degree,
I had become a lover certainly.
I had become
Both blind, and dumb,
For Cupids thundering dart
Had pierced my heart.
It had -- by my facunditie.
But I more prudent was then so
As soon as she drew nigh
I turned my back to her, and lo
She glided by.
Immediately.
Then I began to ruminate, and say,
Whit is wo -- man?
Even no -- man.
Why then should we love her,
Seeing we are above her,
And she, at best, mans hacqueney?
-- But hark you, Madam* I believe 'tis now time we should leave them to
their private confaabulation.


Yes Sir, with all my heart.


One word then with this Gentelman, and I am gone -- Heus, be attentious and
circumspectious in your be aviour, remember on those elegantes ^hrases I taught
you when you came in: so I will retire, and (...) you for a space.


Now we ^ Madam, I hope you know my errand.


Not well Sir.


I am sure, my Father ^ the Lady Saromanca speak to you, or else I am ^


But you had ^ my Uncle, Sir; I am at his disposal.


You are very modest.


And I hope that is a virtue ^ maid, Sir*


As I am a virgin, it is; I love you ^ll the better for it: and I'll assure you
so long as you are modest, you can never be impudent.


Madam, Signior Pantal^ is below; shall I tell him you are within?


Yes, yes, by all (...), you must not deny us to such a Gentleman of quality as
he is.


Signor Pantaloni, say you, my old comrade, I would be very glad to see him.


He is in suite of my Sister, a Gentelman of a great estate, I am much for the
match; I'll go cause my Sister come hither.


Signior Pantaloni!


Signior Becabunga -- welcome to Town in good faith. -- You are very gallant.


-- It is my winter suite, Sir, it cost my Father a good deal of money, more
then the price of ten bolls of wheat, or barley, I warrant you.


I am sure, you have had brave sport in the country all this while.


O yes; you know my dog Springo?


Yes, and Gasto, gray bitcho, brounhoundo, and all the tribe of them: I knew
them all since they were puppets, and your self too.


Why, I will let him loose with any his match in Tuscany.


O what a fool was I, might not I have been with you all this while, if it had
not been for this baggagely Mistress of mine, Madam Chrysolina, call you her,
whom my Mother will have me to woo whether I will or not, I may say; I had been
in the country all this harvest. -- But, what shall I tell you, have not I
learned since I see you to dance forsooth coupee -- that's a circumflex pas:
that's a transverse pas c.


O brave Pantaloni!


I, but I can fence too -- zeest -- zeest -- zeest


Ladies, I hope I have not comed in into you as I may say intrusiously, or
intrusively.


Not at all Sir, you are very welcome, pray how does your Lady mother, and your
Sisters?


All in good health, Madam, at your service -- Signior Manduco, you are welcome
to Town.


Signior Pantaloni, I am yours integrally, and quasi exulto in the prosperity
of this our congression.


Madam, the two Gentelmen you call Casio and Leonardo desire ^o see you.


Go tell them we are not within.


Tell them we are not at leisure, Sirrah.


What are they?


Ranting, young blades, like the times, I warrant you, two fellows, that have
frequented all your Stage-playes in Italy, and I heard our Chaplain say; and my
Sister too (which is more) that Plays were very unlawful and impious. --


Plays are indeed profane, scelerate, abominable, yea, abominably abominable
-- which I will maintain multis argumentis.


Besides, they are great mockers of such Gentlemen as us, who are better then
themselves.


Are they of the Dukes party?


Yes, I warrant you.


Hoc satis est -- odi totam gentem: Ladies, you do well not to converse with
them -- but no more of them: Ladies, what would you think of a perambulation in
this calid, aestivous season?


But whether shall we walk, Sir?


Any where, Madam* I shall wait upon you.


And, I shall stick close to my Lady, forsooth.


We'll have a coach then.


By all means -- call a Coach.


Let us then pass the Pomeridian hours in obambulation: for I am defatigate
with session.


GOod my Lord, for the respect to honour,
Prove courteous to a poor distressed Lady,
And now your prisoner --

My prisoner -- Not, by this hand, so much,
As I am yours.

I should belie my passion, Sir, if I,
Next to the public destiny of my Country,
Did not resent my own calamity;
But yet your undeserved clemency
Does moderate my misfortunes --

How! undeserved -- when even Cannibals,
Tamed by the aspect of your radiant eye,
Would quit their barb'rous, superstitious rites,
And offer, what their gods usurp, to you.

Sir, I owe much, I must confess, to nature,
But your applause inflames the bill more high,
'Tis now our common fate to be imprisoned,
But not so common to be thus respected.

Lady, what the Lord Barbaro hath ^
I hold it always justice -- but because
Your face does speak you one, whom all should honour,
That e're have known what love is, I regret
This your confinement; the causes of which
Are only known to his excellency,
Time will discover all -- but here he comes
Who must be your guardian -- Sirrah --

Your pleasure, my Lord?

By order from the Senate, you're commanded
To take this Lady in your custody --
See you respect her, Sirrah, -- let her not
Be used, as other ordinary prisoners.
Mark what I say, you varlet -- serve her well.

I shall, forsooth, my Lord, she shall be as well used as any Lady can be in
prison.


Madam, I'll visit you sometimes, and see
You treated, like an honourable Lady.
This Fellow shall have special care of you,
Command him at all times; and for my service,
Pray spare it not -- farewell -- she is my prisoner,
I shall have fit time yet t'impart my flames.

Now, forsooth, Madam, will you be pleased to walk -- I'll conduct you to as
neat, a wel-swipp'd, wel-trimm'd Room, as you can have in many parts of
Florence: My Lord Borasco, is a very obliging Gentleman, and I'll assure you,
he loves to be courteous; I will have a care of you for his sake; my Wife, and
I (I must have you acquaint with her, Madam) for she is one of the loving'st,
dutiful, old Sluts, that you have known --


Come then, let's go --


-- My Wife and I, I say, Madam, shall serve you to a hair, for she loves to be
courteous, as well as my self,


Where are my Countrymen lodged? I rather
Be with them, as elsewhere --

A Pisan, Madam?

No -- a Siennois.
There are many (...) Nobles in my custody.

The Lord Marciano: since 'tis my misfortune
To be his Fellow-prisoner.

Madam, you shall see him, for I love to be courteous, especially to strangers,
Madam*


How did you like our last entertainment, Sister?


Indifferently well; I love that same Gentleman, Signior Besabunga: he is none
of your ranting young Gallants, but a sober youth as is in all Florence.


'Tis true, but yet --


-- What -- don't you love him, Sister? you are a fool if you let such a fair
occasion slip -- such a fine Woodcock is not start every day: -- he hath a
great Estate, Sister, remember that.


'Tis all true --


I, and he will not readily spend it; his Tutor, Manduco, hath bred him very
sparingly -- honest man, I protest he is an honest man: -- yea, a very honest
man.


He is indeed --


And then, Sister, you may have a very contented life with him; he is a
good-natur'd, sweet youth, he will give you all your will, and I'll assure you
that is a great property in a man.


-- And what think you of your own Suitor, Pantaloni, all this while?


Why -- I know not what I shall say of him yet.


Goodness! how came they here?


Nay, my pretty Daph^e, fly not my embraces, I know we have surprised you now.


What pretty intrigue of love was the object of your discourse, pray let us be
sharers with you in your entertainment.


My life for it, you were devising some stratagem, how to cross the designs of
some affectionat Votary: you have no pity on our Sex now a days, Ladies.


None, indeed, if you were not visible in this age, then we should not love:
but, when we once conceive flames of affection for you, in lieu of fomenting us
in our delights, you make love a disease to us by your unmerciful nicety,
which deprives us altogether of your conversation: this is sad, Ladies; trust
me 'tis sad.


You wrong our Sex, Sir.


But, do you hear, Sir, seriously I entreat you would forbear such visits; for,
you will but give people occasion to talk of what we never thought on.


And besides, Sir, those who challenge power over us will be offended at this
entertainment: we entreat you then, Gentlemen, to leave us.








Farewell my ranting gamsters, we are not meat for your mouths. -- What foolish
people have we in our house, Sister, to admit them Gentlemen? -- why, they came
in upon us while we were serious.


Yes, Sister, and if one of us had been commenting on the Piss-pot, it had been
all one to them, when doors are left open.


And knowing that our friends cannot endure them, they should, at least, in
conscience, have denied them access. O! how I shall baffle them same wenches
that did not look to our Chamber door better.


I protest, Sister, we must marry quickly, otherwise we shall be constantly
infested with such importunate Suitors; and that, in my opinion, is no great
pleasure to a woman, it distracts their spirits, me thinks.


You say right, Sister, we shall never be well, until we be even well
married.


LAdy, I have at length obtained that favour
Of the Lord Barbaro, you may go abroad
To any part o'th city that you please.
Providing you return hither at night --

My Lord, I thank you kindly, I find you (...)
Exceeded in your favours, since I came
Into this prison: you have (without flattery)
Even overacted courtesy to me --

I plead not so for every one, but you
May challenge my respects: -- the power ^
As captain of the Guards, shall be employed
To serve you, Madam, as you please command me.

Then 'pray, my Lord, amongst others, grant me this,
To see the Lord Marciano.

Madam, I shall conduct you to his Chamber*
Or, if you please, he shall come hither to you.

No, I will go to him.

A Lady, say thou?

Yes, my Lord, a young Lady.

A Lady, and a Siennois, -- strange!
Who can this be! -- but now I have a thought,
Yet I dare not express it -- can it be!
No, sure -- impossible -- prithee begone,
And leave me to my self --

She will be here by and by, my Lord.

Well, who this Lady is, I cannot think,
But in a dream: -- O, may I yet imagine,
'Tis she -- Nay, hold -- my hope cannot support
Such a strong thought of bless! I shall offend
Even in thinking --
-- A cheat -- a mere cheat -- eyes do not gull me.
The Lady Arrabella! -- No, unless
I hear her talk, -- I'll think it still a phantasm
-- Speak fair ghost -- is it thee?

Marciano, it is I, the unfortunat Arabella.

Then it is no more I -- O -- how I am
Transported! how that divine voice hath ravished
My duller senses! -- is't possible, you weep
In sympathy with my afflictions?

Yea altogether.

Good gods! it is she -- O does Arabella*
Who, while I was in full prosperity,
Did frown upon my Passions: stoop so low,
As see me now in misery -- unless
She mean, as children, with their hobby-horses,
T'unravell me, that she may thereby see
What stuff I do contain: -- dare I presume
To think that love to me hath brought you hither?

Most true -- nought else --

Fair innocence, whose presence does revive
My spirits in this agony of sorrows,
While I am cooped up, as a parrot, here,
Expecting every day, when Atropos
Shall cut my thread of life; that you should deign
To visit me! had your fair hand dispatch'd
One word in post, it had been too great honour.
But thus to be thy own Ambassador,
^Tis a bewitching happiness; no tongue
Can well express my passion -- good, my stars
Preserve me from an ecstasy! --

You wrong me, Marciano, I left Siena,
Hearing of your bad success; thence I came
To Luca; there not finding you, to Florence,
To see if I could purchase your enlargement,
Either by art, or favour: but no sooner
Was I come hither, when I was suspected
As one, who keep't secret intelligence
With the Dukes party here, and so committed --

Committed -- how! -- committd -- heathnish wretches!
Barbarous Rebels! to imprison one,
Whom Indians had spared, -- By Mar; -- unheard of
Even amongst Turks, and Tartars!

Nay forbear,
I am not so unfortunate, as you think,
The Senate meaning thus to punish me
Have rather cherished me: -- your company
May well allay my griefs.

By this -- and this --
You honour me too much, but which is sad,
I never shall be able to repay
That love to you, which I owe, seeing every hour
I do expect my sentence --

Alas! harsh fates! O frail reward of courage!

Madam, my duty bears me to conduct you to your
Chamber, it is now high time.

My Lord, adieu, I shall see you to morrow.

Farewell, my souls delight, -- O unkind Stars!
A fit theatre for such entertainment!
An emblem of our love! -- But I exclaim
Unseasonably. -- O how prettily
Fortune hath tied me, as a Shrove-tide bird,
While Saturne, Mars and Cupid levell at me:
-- A fig for all her tricks -- I scorn her frown,
She can win nothing, while my hearts my own.

IS he sentenced already?


No, not yet; but he must die.


Well -- let him go, 'twill learn others to be wise, friend* for, Soldiers
have but shrewd arrears paid them now for their service.


I am really sorry for him; as I am true Florentine he is a noble Genteman, and
loves to be courteous --


But, do you hear, Mr. Jailer, shall we have the other cup the night?


I -- at the Siena Tavern, Signior Strenuo, where we may have a cup of good
Canary; I am for you there, Signior Strenuo, and will spend my checquin most
heartily, Signior; for, I love to be frolic as well as courteous, especially
with strangers, Signior.


-- Come then, brave old Boy, we'll have a cup o'th best on it. Will you go
along now and I'll give you your morning draught?


No -- not now; I must wait upon my Lord Borasco, he sent word that he would be
here by and by.


Farewell then -- at night -- old Hary -- at night.


Yes, yes, I shall not fail you Signior, I warrant you. This same Strenuo is a
notable fellow, as ever I knew of a Siennois: he loves to be courteous,
effaith.


See it be done, I say, the Senate means
To whip most of your stubborn Siennois,
By his example -- sirrah, Jailer.

My Lord.

My Lord Marciano is condemned to die --

The time, my Lord --

Within six days, no more respite --
Here are the Generals orders for it.
-- Sirrah, look to your prisoner, watch him well.
I'll double all the ordinary guards
About the prison; place my Sentinels
In every corner --

I shall watch him, my Lord, I'll assure you,

As you will answer us: now he shall die.
Although he hath escaped sometimes before,
His worship shall play fast and loose no more.

I Profess ingenuously, Sister, I am ashamed of it.


And I likewise; for people give easily credit to any report now a days.


Let's rather be uncivil as admit them next time, Sister: I love no such
company, I'll assure you.


Ladies, I am come to wait upon you again -- according to my duty -- as in duty
I am bound to undertake.


Sir, you are very welcome, I hope your mother is well.


Yes, forsooth, Madam, how does your self?


In very good health, Sir, I thank you.


I am very glad -- But, hark you, Madam -- one word in private with you --

Ha^k you me now -- my mother and I were sitting by the fire-side last night,
as it is our custom, you know, in the winter-nights after supper; and -- I do
not know what we were talking of: but, amongst the rest I remember, if I have
not forgot, -- that she said -- she said, says she -- Now -- whether this be
true or not, I cannot tell; you know best your self: but, I am sure she said
it.


What, pray Sir?


Now -- I vow -- if it were true, I would be as glad of it, as ever I was of my
break-fast in a cold day: -- for, I protest ingenuously, I am sure you know, I
love to be serious.


Pray what's the matter, Sir?


Why -- I vow I know you would blush now, else I would tell you it.


I beseech you resolve me, Sir.


I vow, I can hardly do it now, I am so stupefied -- with the rarity of the
object of your person.


I can have no longer patience --


-- Nay, hold -- here's it now -- I hope you will not tell it again; for it was
told me as a great secret -- why says she -- but, as I told you, I know not
surely if it be true or not: but, shall I tell you what I answered -- Marry,
Lady mother, says I -- I fear you are but scorning me.


But, what was it that she said, Sir?


Why -- I vow -- she -- even said -- that -- you loved me -- and O but I was
blithe --


Hum -- and is that all? keep such a long discourse for nothing.


O! -- I hope you are not angry.


No, no, Sir.


Why -- you might have said all that in three words, Sir.


Nay -- but prithee tell me if it be true: for, (...) it be not, I shall win
two Ryals from my mother: for, she and I ^a^d a wager upon it, and I am come
here for nothing else but to be resolved of it.


Well -- then, you have win, Sir.


Nay -- do not mock me now; I profess, I had rather lose a dozen of Ryals
before she should not love me: for, I am sure -- as sure as this glove is upon
my hand -- I love her.


Madam, dinner is ready.


We come. Signior, will you dine with us, and -- afterwards we shall talk of
that at more leisure.


With all my heart, fair Ladies, If you please, I will sup with you, and lye
with you too -- I love your company so well.


Laden with cares: o'rewhelmed with misfortunes!
Can female shoulders bear my heavy crosses --
I left my native country of Siena.
To find out Marciano here at Florence:
Now have I found him: but O! how, God knows,
And I too well perceive: -- unhumane fates,
Whether, ah! whether will you hurry me?
No end to your severity: -- Ay me!
What have I done? pray let me know my crime:
As yet I plead strong innocence: unless
It be a crime to love: pray show my faults,
Or else suspend my pains --
Now (which is sad) I can scarce have repose
For sighs and cares: and when I once awake*
Borasco, therein my true Jailer, waits me,
With fresh solicitations: -- thus my heart
Is rent in pieces; th'one half sorrow claims,
The other love -- Ay me! what shall I do?

She's discontent already: but those news
I bring, will make her sadder: I dare scarce
Declare them, least she swoon -- Madam.

Welcome, dear Strenuo, pray how does thy Lord?

Well, Madam, -- but e're long, if fates prevent not --

How -- that again, -- me thinks, thou looks not cheerful
As thou were wont, -- how does my Lord, I say?

(If I dare tell you) he's condemned to dye.

-- To dye! -- Ay me -- be merciful, and kill me
Good Strenuo, honest friend -- prithee dispatch --

Stay Madam, you are mad --

-- Condemned to dye --
O how my heart strings, by that pin of grief,
As by an unexpert musicians hand,
Who strives to raise his Lute to highest notes,
Tuned up above the nick begin to crack.

Forbear, fair, Lady, 'tis no time to weep,
Now we must do; now we must muster all
Our wits to plot his escape --

As how -- Alas fond Strenuo: -- escape!
Dream not on that, rather invent some means,
How we may dye together, like true lovers.

Madam, you wrong your self, I'll undertake.
By your assistance, to effect my purpose.

By my assistance, prithee doubt not that,
What will I not do, if I can, to save him?

Then, Madam, here is aquafortis for you.
Look -- this will do it, Lady, this applied
To th'iron grate o'th window, will consume it
In a short space; then in the silent night
By help of a small rope he may escape.

'Tis well, but all depends on the aquafortis,
I cannot safely carry it to his chamber;
That Cerberus, that ugly cat-e'yd Jailer
Will sure discover me --

Nay, as for him,
I'll keep the villain tippling all the while
He never shall suspect you; I've provided
A soldiers habit for my Lord, in which garb
The devil himself shall never smell him out.
I'll so disguise him: -- go good Madam, go
Tender my love to him, and press him by
All means to use it quickly I'll wait on him
At th'hour appointed --

I go, pray heavens, it may succeed.

Fear not.

SO -- you intend thither again, Leonardo, you were highly entertained, Boy.


And I believe, Cassio, you had but small encouragement.


Small encouragement indeed; but you must know, love is never in it's height,
so long as limitate within the sphere of reason: I love her so much the more
that she appears unreasonable, as you call it.


But, aside, here comes Don Quixote and Sancho Pancho.


'Slid, let's accost them.


No, let's first observe their behaviour.


Say you so: O! I long furiously to travel.


I mar'le you delay so long.


Why, I vow my trunk hath been twice a ship-board for Marsei^es, and my self at
Ligorn, but, I vow my mother wept so, that I could not find in my heart to
leave her.


And it may be the Lady Chrysolina would not permit you.


O -- no; I know she would wait upon me some half year, or so yet while I saw
France and came back again; although I vow, she's a pretty, pretty, pretty
Gentlewoman, as I know betwixt me and her.


You will have her yet, I warrant you.


I hope so; for I am sure she loves me, or else I have no skill.


Does she so, and that is some encouragement though.


Prithee let's interrupt them, enough of such discourse in all conscience.


Yes, now we will accost them -- Gentlemen, the general character of you in
this City, hath rendered us ambitious of your acquaintance.


Signior Becabunga, you are most auspiciously returned to the City.


Your humble servant, Sir; your extollation of me is undeserved.


Sir, I do but what all ingenuous persons should do, no question you are
conscious of your own merits.


Sir, the faculty of my expression -- is not capable to entertain -- as I may
say -- or express the motion of my affection, to uphold -- as I may say,
acquaintance, familiarity with you -- I hope you understand me, Sir.


Yes, and admires your wit too, Sir.


Sir, I am your very humble servant; I hope I need not back it with an oath;
nam, nemo tenetur (you know) jurare in suum detrimentum.


Good, and what said they?


Why, they said you were a couple of idle youths.


How! -- Cass. Prithee let me hear out this discourse.


-- Ho, ho, very true, I protest I think they wronged you: for, for my own
part, as I am Gentleman, I think you are very civil, although I say it in your
face.


Good, and no more prithee?


Nay, now I have not leisure, Manduco will be seeking me through all the Town;
O he will chide me, if he find me not.


Hang him a Loggar-head.


A Loggar-head, I would not for never so much he heard you say that; he thinks
himself no small man I'll assure you.


Sir -- Pantaloni, will you go?


Annon, Sir -- Gentlemen, I shall be very willing and desirous that we may
entertain our present conversation willingly: and, for my part, I have the
honour to drink one cup of wine with you. I will wait upon you at any time or
place convenient, if there be no lawful impediment why these parties may not
be joined -- Oh, I crave you pardon, Gentlemen, -- Lapsus linguae non est
atramentum. Farewell.


Now, go thy ways, Signior Pantaloni, thou art this day as complete a gull as
lives in Florence, without disparagement of any Gentleman whatsoever.


He hath discovered all to me, Leonardo, I never read of such humourous Ladies.


And they will be so always, while we can render them gulls despicable in their
sight.


Let's think then how to affront them.


I'll rack my invention, but I will set them by the ears together.


That were good, if you can do it handsomely.


I'll do my best; come -- let's go consult upon it.


Persuade me not, I cannot but abhor
Such a preposterous attempt --

My Lord --

Dear soul of sweetness, do not torture me
With fruitless plots -- within four days I die --
Should I escape and leave you prisoner --
-- Think, think on that --

You may escape, my Lord;
I have brought hither t'you, some aquafortis
Which your friend Strenuo gave me this morning;
You may apply it to the grate o'th'window --

And what then --

Your friend assures me 'hath a Soldiers habit
In readiness for you. This same aquafortis
Will do the business -- quick, apply it quickly --
Look to your self, now it grows late, my Lord.

May I trust this --

You may, indeed, 'tis true.
Now, now, or never, you must soon apply it --
This night you may as easily escape.

I'll try this trick for once --

Fear not the Jailer; he is foxed already,
So Strenuo did assure me --
Apply it then, and if you don't escape --

I'll undertake it then -- leave this with me,
I'll go about it presently -- mean time,
I'll cause put all in order -- you must return
Within an hour hence: -- and cause Strenuo
Be ready at the window --

Fear not that.

Farewell then.

May my choicest prayers assist you.
And if this fail, what can a woman's wit
Invent, that will succeed? -- Alas, I fear,
Still, still, I fear, while he be safely hence.
I have used all means, nothing left untried
For his enlargement; yet could not prevail.
-- O love! -- who can define thee -- hopes and cares,
In constant balance; hovering up and down --
Here's a poor heart, within this troubled breast;
That like a malefactor at the bar,
Trembles at this design: -- O powerful love --
What hast thou not persuaded me to do --
-- But hark, a song, I will give ear to it,
I know Borasco hath ordained it for me --

So, so,
Lo Lillies fade, before the Roses show
Themselves in bow-dye, summers-livery.
Feasting the curious eye,
With choice variety,
While as before
We did adore
Narcissus in his prime.
Now Roses do delyte
The nycer appetite:
Such is the vast disparity of time.
So, so,
One woman fades, before another know
What 'tis to be in love; but in a trice
All men do sacrifice
To th'latter, and despise
Her, whom before
They did adore
Like Lillies in their prime.
Since now her sparkling eyes
Are darkened in disguise:
Such is the sad disparity of time.
A proper simile -- now I see in what
Article his pulse beats: -- no Siren shall
Bewitch my soul to love: -- O Marciano,
How I lament thy fate: heavens lend me tears,
Since by my prodigal expense of sorrow,
I'm become banquerout: or else I beg
A period to my days: since certainly,
Life without love, is but calamity.

CAn he not speak for himself, Sir? he must court by his ambassadors,
forsooth.


The reason is, in promptu, Madam; for the youth is endued with pudicity: he
cannot be his own buccinator, or Trumpeter of his own fame; but he bid me
assure you that he (...) vehemently, imo toto corde affect you. And so it may
appear by his own manuscripts; as, exempli gratia, read the 3, page, (...) line
of that luculent Epistle of his to you, dated, 1. Cal. Mart^* You wil^* find
that a man cannot express himself more lovingly: (...) calls you, enim, the
prototype of all beauty, the Archetipe of modesty, the source from whence all
other rivulets of chastity d^ Scaturiat, c. Is not that amantissimum?


No, 'tis not enough Sir.


No -- why he told me, that you would not permit osculation, and what else can
he do when he is in private with you, for I taught him not to be loquacious --


Be merry, Sister, you are happy, you are a Lady, Sister --


A Lady! -- quid sibi vult, to whom is she desponsat, Madam?


The business is now at a close, Sister, Cassio may go to his travels now, he
dare trouble you no more, Sister.


What do you mean? shall I be married, and not know to whom?


Yes, Sicuti nunc mos est, you may be colloc^te in nuptials, before you know
cui, quando, quomodo. a est, to whom, how, or when.


Don't you know, Sister, Signior Becabunga?


Is he the man?


Who else do you think?


Ho now omnia recte again -- Lady, I congratulat the immense, ineffable
felicity and secundity of your sagacious election --


Hath not he been wooing you all this while? who else should be your husband
but he, pray? Man. Hum --


Well I am content. Man. Recte --


Content, -- marry I should willingly change conditions with you. Man. Been
habet.


He is a good match, I'll assure you.


I can add a jurament to that.


Mr. Manduco, she owes much to you for it.


To me, Madam: O I am obligate to your ingenuity.


She does indeed, Sir: -- Come, Sister, let's in, and devise what rare fancies
we must have against the wedding, we'll send to the Mercers presently, and
have the best Satins, taffatas, ribbons and such other toys, that can be had
for money, come, come, -- Farewell good Sir -- honest friend Manduco, farewell.


Well, he may be a good husband yet for all that --

Friend Manduco, saith she, notatu dignum: now am I their friend, their amicall
relation: so, this matrimony is, I may say, now almost, very high, altogether
consummate: for which I expect a large honorary from both parties: O the
pregnant wit of an intelligent Scholastic! now if I can effectuat the like for
Signior Pantaloni, I shall have likewise aliquid amplius: so that I must at
length provide for a matrimonial relation to my self: for, although, I be
quinquagenarius, or fifty years of age, yet what Virgin in Florence will
respuat me when I abound in riches, and shall be -- Dives agris, dives, positis
in foenore nummis.


NOw, Madam, since I have got you all alone, I protest, I must make a little
bold with you --


How Sir!


In civility only, I mean in civility, Madam, for I would only ask you one
question, and that's not two, videlicet, whether or no, that is, when we may be
Joined in the lawful band of matrimony, betwixt these parties following, to
wit* for you see Becabunga has not been long a doing, he has taken your Sister
to be his lawful spo^se already, I hear, although he has been but a fortnight
a wooing of her, and yet I have been wooing you one time with another these
three months, I wot well, and I am sure that you love me -- Chris. Are you
sure, Sir?


Yes indeed, and I think there is as much reason for the one as for the other:
and to be free with you, a my conscience I might have had a bony Gentlewoman
(just such another as your self) with twelve thousand Ducats in portion, a
month since, had it not been for you: consider, pray you, what you promised to
my mother last night.


You will allow me a time to consult with my self, Sir, will you not? --


That's a strange consulting! what have you been doing ever since I see you
first? I am sure you have had time enough to consult all this while: and I'll
tell you now, when your friends and mine have agreed, there's no time to
consult, but presently to be matrimonyed; you know that as well as I now.


You will do well to press me no further at this time, Sir.


I'll let you alone for once then; but, the next time I shall come to see you,
you must not consult any: for, to test you truly, as I heard my mother say, you
may be glad of me for your husband -- Chris. Pray, no more, Sir.


And then, when I have spent so much money in wooing you, you will yet go, may
be, and marry another. ^y for shame.


I shall not marry while I give you an answer, Sir.


I, but as my mother says, it is good to be sure, if any other man should beat
me out of my st^rrops now: I would come to a peeled egg, would not I? Chris. No
more of that, Sir.


I'll refer my self to your own discretion then -- but, O! -- I had almost
forgot, I vow, that's very well remembered; was not I mounted on Peg-a-sus last
night? (now this Peg-a-sus is the muses horse, he has wings and flies, God
bless us) and what think you I have done? marry you shall hear what rare Verses
I have made. O! Madam, are you there? you are come in very good time; I was
just a going to read

Chrysolina (Anagram)
You're even like a cherry.
I'll be judged if that be not pretty now: for, do you see, I have only borrowed
some four letters, or so* out of, Madam, your Sisters name, here, because she
is a nigh relation and may spare them; and I have added two (I think) out of
the quickness of my self.


Excellent indeed, Sir. Mar. Good, upon my word.


I, but you have not seen all yet; here are brave Verses upon your name, Madam
Chrysolina.


An acrostick, Sir.


I, I, an accurstick, the same. And thus it is -- take notice now. C. now.

Can thou not see, Pantaloni,
How thy Mistress is so bony?
Now I am speaking to my self, as't were.
Revera, she is even such,
You cannot match her, and that's much.
Now there is C. H. R. Y. that is Chry.
She is handsome, neat and fine,
O, now if she were but thine.
There's S. O. now that's Chryso: now I am speaking to my self you must
understand all this while.

Live then in hopes, and know it is constantly thy duty,
Is always, everlastingly, to extol and upbraid her beauty.
But, now take heed, here comes the tongue of the trump --
Nar^issus, Roses, and every flower,
All must yield to her fair, rare, bright, sparkling colour.
That's Chry-so-li-na: Now, is not that right now? say any of you, if you dare,
if these Verses be not as good as any you have seen.


Mar. They are extreme good, Sir.


So, so, tell him I come: -- Ladies, I must leave you, but I will not go home
yet: Becabunga hath sent for me to a collation; we will drink both your healths
e're we go to bed yet, and to morrow I shall see you e're you can get on your
petticoats, Madam Chrysolina: for, I must be more familiar with you, since I
have got such a good commodity of frequenting you -- I shall show my mother all
that has past betwixt us, Madam; So farewell.


How do you like him, Sister?


As formerly, I find him a very discreet Gentleman.


I would you had him for your husband.


I should wish that same, in a fair way, Sister.


Considering especially, 'tis best to marry while you are now in your prime.


Right -- for old maids are mere dogs-meat, they spoil the trade of wooing --
Go by -- go by.


'Tis true, my Lord; yet, I don't much approve
Your Dukes severe proceedings; Florence will not
Endure the lash of Monarchy, like France
Or Spain: -- No, they must be their own carvers.
-- I hope the Lord Barbaro, who is now
President of the Senate, will reform
Many of our abuses -- Marc. Well, you will
Come all to taste of your own vintage yet;
So I believe: for, never yet, rebellion
Escaped unpunished: -- But, you remember
You promised that the Lady Arabella
Might see me e're I dye. Bor. She shall, my Lord;
-- So -- by this hand, a plot,
A very plot: he is my Rival sure --
But shortly, Signior, you shall carry your head
Upon a Seaffold; and then, who dares
Claim her, besides my self.

When men begin to quarrel with their Prince,
No wonder if they crush their fellow Subjects.
We are eye-sores to th'State: their black designs
Are crossed by us; and therefore we march off. --

Am I not yet sufficiently plagued
With crosses: but you must add one, which is
Heaviest of all, -- why weeping -- prithee cease
To vex thy self: I am all resolution,
And long to show my courage: since my stars
Have ordained my departure: rest contented.

Alas -- and is my plot thus come to nought --

Peace, prithee, for although I am not able
To pay what your perfections claim, yet sure
All generous souls (my true executors)
Shall pay my debt, fair Nymph.

My Lord, your death can be no more courageously
Endured by you, then deplored by me --

Tush, as for death, I fear the varlet not,
I've often stare'd him out of countenance:
I have considered, that love to my Prince,
Should over-sway all others: have chosen
Rather t'endure one stroke, and dye, then live,
And undergo the censure (of all crimes,
The most detestable) Disloyalty.

Ay me! incensed heavens, can nothing else,
Appease your wrath but such an offering?
O, cannot I, (speak) I, although a woman,
Supply his place: I'll be an Amazon,
Expose my naked breast to steel, and show
All women are not fettered to the distaff.

Be not so cruel: all good things forbid,
The world should see such a fair soul expire,
And not dissolve it self: thou cannot dye,
(Although thou would) and Marciano live,
No, no more then a watch can move, if once
The cord be broke; can I live after thee*

Alas, Alas, unheard of tyranny!
Unjust, even in injustice: thus to be
So cruel, as to murder him, and yet
Spare me; as much as if I should become
My own soul murderer; villains, how unjust!
-- But here's my passing bell.
I must away -- farewell -- Oh, oh, my heart,
My heart dissolves, my Lord, I must away.

Away -- farewell bright love --

Farewell, my Lord --

Farewell -- now all good things preserve thee here,
The gods hereafter: thus -- and thus I leave
My heart in legacy: -- thus, I take my last
Morsel of pleasure: never shall my lips
Kiss any thing hereafter, save the block --

So, thus -- and thus, I willingly resign
All, what is yours, this heart: and so farewell.
Farewell for ever -- oh -- Farewell, my Lord.

-- So, down goes dust and ashes, powers and honours,
Riches and joys, the smoke of our desires,
With all we can call ours: our youth, our strength,
Fly like the sullen clouds, when Boreas swells
Their entrails with his breath: we, suddenly,
Like wilde-fire, disappear, and straight another
Steps in our place; and so we are no more --
-- Then heart, as thou hast still afford me courage,
Inspire me now, that I may valiantly
Act the last part of this my Tragedy.

WHere is this same unhappy Boy? this Signior Becabunga I have been making
investigation, scrutination, exploration, and speculation for him this hour,
and yet I cannot find this in dividuum vagum, as I may say -- so, what are
(Enter Cass. Leon you, boni viri, I know, you have hurried this Gentleman for
who^ I search to some compotation, or else ad lupanar; yea, I am sure o (...)
-- how sad it is to see young men, even, impuberes adolescentes, ^ndulge
venery, and ebriety so much, quid Venus ebria curat? ^s a friend of mine says.


The fellow's drunk, sure --


-- Drunk! O pervicacem hominis indolem! accusing ^ne of ebriety, when I am,
even in sana mente constitutus, constitute in san^ty of mind: 'tis true,
indeed, I have been drinking; out it was with some of my brethren, imo fratres
fraterrimi.


What were they?


Why, there was Light-body, Laurie, Latie, Cheisly quo{que} Brounie, Bowi{que}
Hi enim sunt Tuscanii gloria summa soli: besides our hospes, what do you call
him, Architabernarius, or Arch-taverner, who is one of the commissioners for
administration of -- drink -- to the people of Tuscania.


Don't you enquire for Signior Becabunga, Sir.


Yes, the very same, where is he? ubinam est?


You will find him at the Verona^tavern, hard by, with some of his comrades.


Say you so, I will go find him then, profecto I think I could scarce abstain
from vapulating him for this his contumacy.


Now Leonardo, 'tis time we were stirring, if we do not, this match will go on.


Nay, I'll do any thing for thee, e're thou lose her, Cassio,

Come then; I have almost gulled Pantaloni into a belief, that Becabunga wrongs
him, for which he swears he will be revenged: now, if you can do the same with
the other, our design may succeed yet.


Well, go you about your business then, fear not me.


Now, wit and art assist us both, I'll search my gamester and accomplish the
trick.


MAdam, I will conduct you to him once again, but you must be very secret, for
I hazard my life and reputation, if my Lord Borasco have intelligence of this,
for he gave me strict command this morning, that I should admit none to him but
his confessor.


I shall be very secret, I warrant you.


Come then, soft Madam, soft.


For heavens sake good my Lord,
Upon my knees I beg it --

This is impossible; I cannot do it;
Prove not a sweet Remora any more,
I'm now resolved: look to thy self, fair gem.

Cannot the tears of innocence prevail.
Where is your courage now? what? are you cool?
Is all that noble blood, that formerly
Run in your veins exhausted? must a woman
Become your Trumpeter, and stir your spirits
Since 'tis but death at all hands --

Prithee hold,
I would most willingly (as what man will doubt)
Procure my liberty by what ever means
But -- O here lies my fear, thou, thou bright love,
May come to suffer by it --

Ah my Lord.
Consider pray that I have liberty
To go abroad at pleasure: I have gained
The Lord Borasco's favour: he will grant me
That which some dare not ask, nay must not think on.
I'll follow you without the least suspicion.
Consider that -- Strenuo hath promised
To entertain the Jailer in his cups,
While you be safely escaped.

I'll hazard then:
Bright angel of my fancy, see you follow
Immediately, for e're you should endure
The rebels censure, I would rather forfait
A thousand lives.

Doubt not of that, my Lord.

Then once for all -- O my good stars direct me.

Farewell, my Lord, goodness protect you still

Farewell pure quintessence of my affection
Farewell, pray heavens grant us a joyful meeting.

Now, now at length, I hope he shall escape;
O supreme powers, assist him now, or never,
And ease my soul of its long burning fever.

SIr, (as your friend, I speak it) Leonardo and he have joined their wits
together to affront you; and you will not believe what impression their false
suggestions of you have taken upon the Lady Chrysolina.


I! So I thought, when she told me last day that she would consult forsooth: A
pox take all your consulting tricks, say I, for I never knew any good come of
women's consultations yet.


Right Sir, you might easily smell Leonardo's plot in that same word, for he
intends that Becabunga shall have Marionetta, and he himself Chrysolina: for
which Becabunga does solicit your Mistress all this while: if you look not to
your self quickly you are undone, Sir.


I, so I guessed always, for, do you see, some women, are the most humourous
little creatures, a man shall not know when he is in their favour, and when
not: but as for Becabunga -- I'll say no more at this time: but I vow I'll
cudgel him to death so soon as I can see him.


And please but command me, you shall not want my assistance, I'll assure you.


No^ Sir, I shall not need your help to beat such a puppet as he is: what would
you think to write a challenge to him, Sir?


So you know, I advised you at first, when I sent for you to the Taberna del.
Reina, while you believed that Becabunga had sent for you.


Hang him, I will hear no more of him: I will write a challenge to him
presently.


And if you'll please to take my advice in pe^ning on it, I will so terrify
him.


With all my heart, Sir, for I would have it such language as might make him
hang himself for fear: and for Leonardo, after I have discussed Becabunga then
have at him.


If you please to employ me to carry it to him?


Yes Sir, you shall go along with me, and help me to write it, for the truth is
I am not much used with such challenges, and my mother bid me always have a
care of quarrelling, but an she were burned I'll fight with that rascal, who
has affronted me so.


A most generous resolution.


Come with me Sir.


Now, Leonardo, play thy game, or never.


-- THanks to my stars! as yet unknown
I have cheat all the sentinels; and now
I suck free air again: -- you powers above
Direct my sudden course: and save my love.
Within.

Ho, wher's the pisse-pot there.

Sirrah drawer, tother quart of sack, you ragamuffin you.


You shall do me reason Signior Strenuo: -- 'tis my noble Generals health,
Signior Strenuo -- Ho, where's the piss-pot there? -- you shall drink it,
Signior --


Come then, we'll drink his good health, although he has but two days to live.


No matter for that, I love to be courteous to the last breath, Signior; come,
give me the cup: Signior Signior.


Come then -- Here's a health to the pretty little thing,
With the bony, bony radiant eyes,
And the bony, bony, plump, round thighs;
Let us sing -- let us sing --

Let us sing, let us sing -- O brave Strenuo, here's a cup to thee for thy
catch.


He is escaped.


'Tis good, no more, silence I command you.


He waits for you.


Plague on you, no more I say.


My Lord is escaped I say.


Pox take you, hold your peace, or you'll spoil all I say.


Come young-man, how does my noble General? you are his servant, I know --
here's to him, a brimmer of Sack.


Drink and be gone, you cocks-comb you --


You shall pledge me neighbour.


I shall, Sir.


My Lord has ordained me to present his love and respects to all friends at my
return to Siena -- get you gone whoreson, get you gone, or you'll spoil all.


Well, he's a noble Gentleman, Signior, although I dare not say it: but, no
more of him, this cup is yours, Signior, we'll have the other fl^ggon of Sack
e^re we part; for I love to be merry as well as courteous, especially amongst
strangers, Signior -- Ho, drawer, Sirrah, Loggar-head, the piss-pot, Bastard,
shall a man spoil his breeches, you son of a whore you.


You puppet you, could not you hold your peace when I bid you -- come, where is
my Lord?


At the Colonna in the Strada del Popolo, there he lurks quietly while you come
to him.


Let the rogue the Jaysor slip then, and we'll bid adieu to Florence; come,
come quickly.


-- SO, now he's gone: O! how my heart does leap,
My pulse begins to move, since now I know
He's past the rebels reach, before this time.
All's well: this day, by order of the Senate,
Am I to be enlarged: had Marciano,
Whose understanding soul, dived in the deepest
Gulfs of suspicion, even but conjectured,
How e're they could accuse me for his flight.
Had rather died, e're he had condescended
To any such attempt -- but now he's safe,
I'll follow close my self: So hope assist me.

A pox on all your Stennois tricks, say I, plague on that villain Strenuo: my
noble General's gone, fled, gone: what shall I do? How the devil came I to be
gulled by that ^ame Strenuo! The last night while he and I were deep in our
cups, my noble General breaks the prison and escapes. O! plague on his crazy
cocks-comb, I could have trusted him as soon as any in Florence, and yet he hath
played me such a trick as may bring me to a ropes end yet --

Hark -- my Lord Borasco searching me, I shall be hanged without doom or
sentence --


Where is this villain?

Here am I my Lord.

You ugly scarabe, what do you deserve?
Sirrah, you shall be hanged.

Alas! my Lord,
I was deceived, grossly cheated, gulled,
Foxed and what not, by Signior Strenuo;
A plague on him, may I say --

Peace, you wretch,
My Lord Barbaro will cause punish you
For your neglect, For he had ne'er escaped
Had he not bryb'd you --

I never see his coin.

Good gods! this day was he to be beheaded,
Now none knows where he is -- this Siennois Lady
Will be examined: for she seemed to carry
A great respect to him: and (this I know)
The Senate will suspect her accessory,
No doubt: So she shall be condemned to die:
But I'll prevent their severe resolutions
By all means possible -- Come, you Scoundrel, come
You may be hanged yet, Sirrah, e're all be done.

O! no more of that word hanging, my neck itches already.

CAn you desire any more? look you, Sir, a direct challenge.


I know not what belongs to your challenges; but I am sure, as you say, he has
affronted me.


Sir, the very words of this challenge would encourage one; considering
especially, that he is the basest coward that ever breathed for all this.


Think you so?


Yes indeed, Sir, I warrant you he dare never appear in field against you: he
is but a bragging fellow.


Nay, if I thought he would not appear, I might say something.


Trust me, Sir, he dares not.


I, but do you hear, Sir, if we can be handsomely reconciled, what needs
fighting?


Fie, Sir, you cannot honourably refuse, when he has writ a challenge to you.


Not, Sir, why cannot I write another to him, and cal him a coward, a rascal, a
slave, a villain, and what not, and still preserve my honour, as you call it?


Alas! good Sir, there's no time now to talk, now you must fight, and I will
assist you.


I, if you will hold him to me while I beat him, there may be something on it
too.


Doubt not, Sir; but, as I told you, he dares not appear, you have no more to
do, but come armed to the fields, and if you find him not, brandish your Rapier
in the air thrice, proclaim him a coward, and so return.


With my honour, Sir?


Yes, Sir, with your honour entire.


Well, I see I must fight; but if he doth not appear now, I shall be in a brave
condition: for, then I will swear, rant and domineer, by my word of honour, as
my fathers foot-groom does. But will he not come, think you?


My life for it, he dares not appear; courage, we will out-dare both him and
Cassio.


Well, but when all's done, Sir, betwixt you and me, were I at home in the
Country again, all your honour, and honour above honour, should not cause me
fight: for, Pantaloni has learned to fence, Sir, and I know not what belongs to
fencing, not I.


Tush, fear not him, I tell you, he dares not appear, and if he does, I'll fight
him my self.


Will you do so, Sir, and I will be your tres humble serviteur Monsieur: for,
do you see, Sir, I am to be married shortly, now if I should chance to be
killed, (as who knows but I may) you know then, Sir, I cannot be married; why?
because I shall be dead, that's a good reason, Sir.


Plague on him for a coward, how he talks; I shall have more ado to allure him
to this duel, then a cracked Courtier has to persuade an Usurer to become
surety for him.


And then you know, Sir, Pantaloni is to marry the one Sister, and I the other:
now it is not fit that we should fight together, who are to be brethren
shortly, for I know not what.


Why, Sir, you must resolve to fight: go along with me to the field: and if he
offer to thrust at you, I'll step in betwixt, and save you both.


Will you be as good as your word, Sir? Leon. I will indeed.


Then have at him -- But hark you, Sir, you must have a special care he touch
not my face, for so he may put but my eye (God bless us) and then where is
your honour forsooth?


He shall not touch you Sir, come, delay is dangerous.


You may stand by, and see fair play, Sir, I shall beat him to some purpose:
Cass. As you think fit, Sir.


Come on then -- O Becabunga! thou knows not how nigh thy fatal hour
approaches -- for I am sure he dares not appear.


O gods! is this the height of all your wrath:
May I expect a requiem in this stroke?
Yes sure -- then graciously be pleased to hear
My ardent votes: -- O may my blood appease
Your incensed minds: restore my lawful Prince:
Let Marciano live: Let nothing hurt him:
O hear him, hear him, if there be a faith
Able to reach your mercy, let him have it.
I plead none for my self: -- O love assist me,
Courage, beyond the ordinar of my sex,
Support my spirits in this agony:
Death's but the thaw of all our vanity.

Nay now my soul dissolve: 'tis but a trouble
To keep thy quarter in this perplexed body.
O unkind Se^ate! eyes have not seen a fairer
Model of beauty -- Sure, no hatchet dares
Be horse-leech to her veins: or if it does,
All iron shall be quite accursed hereafter.
-- No, there's an angel keeps that paradise
A fiery angel guards her: Virtue, virtue,
Ever, and endless virtue! O rare beauty!
The nearest to her maker, and the purest,
That ever dull flesh showed us: such another
Could make atonement for half her sex.
-- See how she weeps --

-- So, now my torturer comes --

Now all good angels bless thee, fairest, truest
Heart-ravishing beauty: cruel, yet lovely tyrant.
Why still in sorrow? shall I never have
One gracious smile -- A las, how willingly
To save thy precious life would I submit
My neck to cruelty -- by this hand, I would --

Since it is ordained, Sir, I'll not endeavour
To prove a male-content. Sir, I have done
What I intended; she's a cowardly Girl,
Who cannot endure one stroke for him, whose safety
Is so dear to his prince and country, vex not
Your self for my misfortunes: nothing can
Affright my resolutions --

Strange love! not to be paralleled?

Pish -- I contemn the fury of your base,
Malicious senate: reason does disdain
To dwell with such, whose souls are stiffled with rage,
They sentence, whom they will, no matter why,
Since innocent, or guilty, we must dye.

Madam, you shall not dye I will solicit
The Senate for you: if I cannot prevail
As I expect, before it come to th'worst
I'll set you free, although their fury reach

To serve his fancy, must all fears despise.

Ah vain fomenter of vain, fruitless hopes,
Thy windmill-thoughts will break their axel-tree:
Go foolish enterpriser: hope no favour
From one, who e're she suffered thy embraces,
Would rather undergo a thousand tortures.
-- No, if e're woman was, or may be found,
That for fair fame, unspotted memory,
For virtues sake, and only for it's sake
Dares challenge room in history: O love
Let me be only Martyr in the case.
O Marciano, were it not thy safety
That did support my soul, I should prevent
The executioner: but since thou art
Free from the rav'nous clutches of the rebels,
Poor Arabella from that spark alone
Derives her present courage --
-- Then blessed hour approach, I'll boldly show
That for his life, I can endure one blow.

THis is the place, this is the hour appointed.


Yes, Sir, but, you see, he has not appeared, may not I put up my rapier now,
and go home again with my honour, may I not?


Not Sir: you must have a little patience.


Ho, Ho, that's very true, I must proclaim Leonardo and him both cowards --
Oyes -- Oyes --

But (a pox) I hear them coming hither. Come, Signior Cassio, we have tarried
too long, we will now return.


No, no, stay a little yet.


I see this fellow has a mind I should be killed: would I had that unlucky
challenge in my pocket again.


'Slid, here they come; to your posture, Sir.


O! look you there's Pantaloni, Sir, and Cassio too, you said he durst not
appear.


Nay faith, now I see 'tis no more jesting, there they come both with their
Rapiers drawn.


Courage, Signior.


What shall I do now, Sir?


Fight, what else?


We'll fight all four at once.


Yes, yes, by all means:


Have at thee then, villain, Leonardo.


At you, Sir.


Come, to it Becabunga.


Not I, Sir; as I am honest I will fight none at this time: for I have some
business to do in the City, Sir.


What, you sneaking gull, will you not fight for your Mistress, Sirrah.


No, Sir, I will fight for no Mistress at this time; I must go about business of
more importance, Sir --


Not for the Lady Marionetta, Sir?


No, Sir, I will renounce all the right I have to her, before I fight, at this
time at least.


I like that well.


'Slid, shall we come to the fields with you, and return thus affronted? fight
it out bravely, or by this hand I'll run you both thorough.


Nay, it shall not be so, Sir, you see we cannot fight at this time: for, the
truth is, (now when I remember) I have an appointment too, within less then a
minute of an hour hence, with some Ladies of my acquaintance.


That's all one to us, Sir.


I see I must do it, there is no way else to escape -- Becabunga says, I will
renounce all the right I can have or claim in the Lady Chrysolina.


Good --


For, do you see, Sir, I care no more for her, then a Roarer does for his old
Punk.


Excellent.


I protest to you, Sir, I think they are fools that fight for women, let them
fight for themselves a Gods name, it is sufficient we love them.


Admirably good!


So I say too Sir, and if you have wronged me, I here freely forgive you.


Sir, that's not enough, you shall both seal this paper, that we may testify
to other Gentlemen, how we were ready to fight.


What paper, Sir?


No matter for that, Sir, you shall both seal it, or by these hilts --


Nay hold, good Sir, I shall seal it -- what terrible oaths these fellows use.


Come, you must seal too.


Yes, yes, Sir.


Now get you gone both of you for a brace of infamous puppets, cowardly
cocks-combs, you arrogant, empty-skull'd wittals, not worthy of the least
favourable smile from any Lady: you have resigned your interests in two
honourable Ladies, and therefore deserve no less then to be kicked -- thus to
be kicked --


What do you mean, Sir?


Thus to kick you, you brace of bastardly Baboons --


And so we leave you as we found you, a pair of impudent filchers of
reputation, not worthy the name of Gentlemen.


Farewell my Cob-webs --


Farewell good Spaniels, farewell --


Marry pox take you both, what notorious rascals are they.


Come, come, we must be friends again; let them go hang themselves if they
please.


If I had them in another place --


But hark you, what if they show the Ladies that we have renounced our
interest in them? what will you say then? think you that ever the Lady
Chrysolina will look upon you again.


I should have made them both black and blew.


Will you let's go and prevent them, I say.


By all means -- this trick shall do Leonardo no good, what a fool was I to
believe Cassio?


So I say always: but come, quick -- he that speaks first is always best
heard.


I'll to them yet, for all this, he has not beat me out as I thinks.


-- HEart! art thou thunder-proof? can nothing break (...)
Shall Arabella die, and tho ^still live?
-- Burst stubborn piece of flesh -- O! heavens forbid,
Those eyes may live to see the world without her.
-- The Senate hath condemned her -- O! base wre^
Unhumane Tyrants; Monsters of this age;
O! barbarous villainy; what bloody thoughts?
It is not because she was accessory
To my escape: No sure, but because I love her,
That she must die; as if those hell-hounds meant
To strike the Stars, and all good things above,
Regardless of her deity: no devil
Could be more cruel -- But, hold, Marciano,
Thou ar't the executioner: thou alone.
Say, wretched man, was thou afraid to die?
Could fear prevail so far? Alas! thy fame
Has lost it's right wing by thy too rash flight,
Leaving so rare an hostage in thy place.
Yet, who had said, or who had ever thought,
A thing so closely carried could have ever
Thus come to light. She was to be enlarged
That very day: for so she did assure me,
Else had my wearied soul resigned it's casket,
And I, by this time, sleep'd with blessed shades
Of my Ancestors, maugre all her tears.
-- But what, I dream, I must do something more
Then only mourn for her: if art assist,
^l study to preserve her; either return,
Submit my self to mercy of the Rebels,
^f otherwise those goblins cannot be conjured,
Or else by open force, or private means.
What e're be th'event, I'll procure her freedom:
May be the gods are more propitious
Then I imagine. Come -- it is resolved

Griefs but concealed are never desperate.

NAy hold, my spleen; do not burst yet --
How this same Lady hath abused my favour,
Escaped, no man knows how; gone, God knows whether.
If I fly not, I shall supply her place,
That is resolved I know -- Fortune, you shall not
Play upon me; although you now begin
To frown upon most of our Senators:
For, since the brave Lord Barbaro is dead,
All such as were his creatures are discarded;
Amongst whom, I am one -- a plague on all
Your base seditious cocks-combs: your proceedings
Will strengthen Cleons interest. Hell-hounds, Tygars,
Adieu base Elves: I'll post to Venice straight,
And there evite the ruin of your State.

TUsh, these are all but stories, Madam, I was but jesti^ with them when I did
it.


Sir, I will hear no excuse.


I vow 'tis true, Madam


Nay, but hark you, Madam Chrysolina, if you come to that with it, I can make
you love me yet, whether you will or no.


Will you, Sir? Chris. Pray, how do you that, Sir?


Why, thus I instruct it, Madam; I can show you several Letters under your own
hand and seal, day and date, c. that you are my humble servant, which you dare
not for your ears deny, dare you? Chris. You had best be silent.


Nay more, I know you love me yet, because the last time I was with you, you
gave me a knot of Ribbons, which my mother keeps well locked up in her Cabinet
yet, as a love-token: and moreover, when I said I will come and see you again
to morrow, you said, says you, you shall be welcome.


This will not do it, Sir, you have renounced us, and therefore --


Nay hold, Madam, we were but in jest.


And then they forced us to do it.


I, and if we had not done it, they swore (God bless us) that they would kill
us.


And then, you know, it was better to seal a piece of paper then to be killed.


What strong arguments they use.


Sister, we must shake em off now or never.


And then, Madam, if we had been killed --


Yes, if we had been killed, it had been small advantage for you.


Manduco were here to plead for me now.


Nay, if you will not hear us, take your pleasure.


No more, Sir, get you gone, henceforth I disclaim you.


And I you too, do you see; I care no more for you, Miris, then you do for me: I
am as good a Gentleman as your self; ^nd if you were not a woman I would tell
you more of my mind.


I knew it would always come to this at length, I vow; think you Gentle women
do nothing but entertain us with vain ^opes for a while, and then cast us off.


M^stris, shall I tell you, there are more Ladies in Florence ^he^ you that
will be blithe of me yet; and so long as I have ^oney in store, I am sure to
have Mistresses in store.


Are you so, Sir?


I that I am; but I will complain to your Uncle, to the Lady Saromanca, and to
all your kindred, that you have cheat me, for all your fair promises.


You are a prating fool.


I am no more prating then your self, Mistress; but if there be justice to be
had of you, I'll have it.


Come, let us leave them, Sister, else they'll both fall a weeping.


For whom, for you, Mistress? I'll let you know we are no such children.


No, but, I protest, I cannot but weep though.


Mar. Farewell, farewell, march to your travels my Gamesters, farewell.


Peugh -- Farewell; I believe you are the greatest fool of the two, Madam
Chrysolina, call they you.


I protest, Pantaloni, I am very sorry for the loss of this bony Lady though.
O! how my father will chide me now: for he had given Manduco orders to provide
my Wedding-cloaths, and now all's blown up.


Come, come, we know the worst on it: let them go, we will never want great
matches yet; let us think now to be revenged on them villains, Cassio and
Leonardo: the first time I meet any of them, I will cut the tongue out of their
heads that they shall never talk more.


I, so will I too: but we must have Manduco with us then, for he will make them
stand in awe of him.


THat she's escaped, that, I know certainly,
So letters from Siena have informed me.
But by what means, or where she is, I know not.
Never remembers him, who, if he should
Forget her but one hour, would think he had
Offended highly, yet she's silent still.
If I receive no letters from her, shortly,
I'll become jealous of her, sure; that she,
Who was all love, is now so quickly cold
In her affections. -- But what! I blaspheme
The virtuous Arabella, she's all virtue,
And cannot prove unconstant --
Now let me meditate on what my Prince
Hath ordered me to do: He's still the same,
And bears a mind, that floats above the waves
Of all adversities, as who should say,
Fortune, even do thy worst. His Counsellours,
Like to wise Mariners, affray'd to stretch
The top sails of their courage in this tempest,
Least both they, and their Prince should suffer shipwreck.
Only was I commanded some years since
Upon an expedition to Siena,
Encouraged by th'affectionate expressions,
And actions of the valiant Cassanaeo,
And others of our loyal country-men.
But fortune crushed our enterprises, so
I did return to Savoy, where my Prince
Did then reside: and now, I am commanded
To second here an enterprise at Pisa,
Which whether it succeed or not; my duty
Is yet at least to prosecute it --
How's this -- a post-horn: good --

All's well, my Lord, now do our joys begin.
To flourish after such a tedious winter.
The Duk's restored, and now intends at Florence.
Here, here's a letter for it, from himself.

Restored! -- Nay hold my heart -- I'll read this letter.
-- True, True: -- O fortune how I hug thee now.
And thou my good friend Strenuo --

Brave days, my Lord; the Court does fill apace,
The Ladies crowd in throngs: the glory of
Her sex, your darling, the fair Arabella,
Since clouds of melancholy are overblown,
Does now appear in loves full horizon.

O how propitious! lend me moderation,
Reins to my joy, as well as to my sorrow,
Else, I shall quickly burst to death: this blessed,
And unexpected Tarantula: of news
So ticles all my senses: -- joyful tidings!
My Prince restored! my dearest Arabella
At Court I now my felicity lacks nothing
But sight to be complete: that my eyes may
Persuade my yet almost incredulous soul,
To what my fancy never durst have prompted
-- To horse -- To horse, I'll post to Florence quickly.

O Tempora! O mores! O the effraenate, licentious perversity of untamed
adolescency! what a villainous, scelerate attempt to entice two young Gentlemen
to a Duel: who besides, that they are both innocent Boys, why, their very
Uncles and other friends, are employed in serious negotiations of the Senate.
Prob Deum, atque hominum fidem! Is all my industry in solicitation, my immense
study and lucrubrations for framing familiar epistles, my oratory in private
commendations and exhortations for both these Gentlemen come to nought! -- Proh
facinus ingens!


Peace, Mr. Manduco: you must not only teach us how to beat, but likewise
assist us in beating these dissolute fellows; for I have sworn, Sir, and that
is enough --


I, so I say too, for, you know we wear our swords here for no other end; look
you, are not my hilts very handsome, O now, I will swear, By these hilts, as
well as Leonardo himself.


And for that effect, I have got my sword too: I am lenis in puniendo: but when
I am provoked, invenient me ^onem, they shall find me a very Lyon: my scholars
at Santo Burgo, where I was sometimes ludimagister, can yet testify that: and
for my severity in castigando -- Probatum est.


Although Leonardo has got my Mistress, yet I'll have about with him, albeit he
be a Senators son in law, with a mischief to his heart, when such Gentlemen of
estates as I, am shook off.


And for me, since Cassio has got my Mistress: let him keep her: I must look out
for some other great match in time; for they say, Manduco, that now since the
^uk's restored, they who were active in the late rebellion, must be forfeit of
their estates: and what will become of my Patrimony then: for you know my
father has been a great man all this while, (I fear he never be so again) now,
you know, if I loss my Estate, how shall I have a wife then? what think you,
Pantaloni?


Nay, I can think on nothing now, but how to thrust at Leonardo.


So, I will draw too, if you come to that with it.


And for me -- I love no dimication -- but when I am provoked, I will assist
you -- Et sic arma amens capio, nec sat rationis in armis.


Madam, my resolution was always unfeigned to serve you: your coy refusal
diminished nothing of my affection, but did rather incite me the more to love
you.


I did always esteem my self honoured in your love, S^r, though the capricious
humours of my self-seeking friends did countermand my desires,


Nay then, unspotted beauty, answer those gracious obligations your self: it
passes the activity of my invention. I have been always your devout admirer;
but now I am so much bound to love you, that although my affection should
super-erogat, yet I can plead no merits.


Sir, your merits have made conquest of my affections --


Prithee, Leonardo, would see good sport --


As how?


Nay, you must stay, I will not fight alone.


Fie, not before women, Sir, that were unhandsome --


Keep off, boni viri; for, if you approach, you shall find the vinegar of my
wrath. I have chastised many such in my time, I'll make you know what it is rem
habere cum Professore, to bell the cat with one to whom you owe respect.


Thou slovenly, greasy Pedant, glass-gazing, superfi^ial affected piece of
ignorance, get you gone, speak no more ill of Gentlemen; or if you do, you may
come to carry your joints in a box yet --


Never again, Sir --


If you do -- Man. Ita me Deus amet, never, Sir.


We'll put you to the stripado, if you don't behave your self more civilly.


Never again, as I am erudit^ -- So help me, God -- never.


Poor fellow, he must have his humour.


If he could hold his peace sometimes, he is a good honest fellow; but he can
speak good of no man, but those of his own profession.


We have punished him sufficiently, let's think no more upon him.


Nor upon our quondam Rivals either. Come, we'll continue our progress to
Court.


NOw breaks our day,
Fairies away,
Pack hence, I say,
Your power's undone.
Room for Jov's progeny,
Full of divinity.
Cleon, brave Cleon, natures Paragon,
Rebellion breathless lies,
Hell sings her obsequ^s,
Usurping Traitors quick be gone.
Now, Cleon, divine Cleon mounts His Throne,
Room -- room -- room -- room for Him alone.
Heavens yet are just: they now have paid us home
Our former losses with large interest --
-- A good while lost is never known to many,
An ill while feel'd is scarcely known to any:
For men, like butter-flyes, rush on the candle
Of war at all occasions, until some
Are burned to ashes: others hurt their wings;
Then they recoil amazed, and not while then,
They blame the projects of their troubled brain.
-- Now (gods assume our thanks) we, who before,
Were tossed in waves of war, are so no more --
-- Florence, take heed, jest not with supreme Powers,
'Tis hard to thrive, when heavens do countermand
Thy foul designs: -- But wisely learn to know
Thy former errors, and commit no more.

-- A Prince's word is good divinity --

-- While Subjects oaths are down-right perjury,
And serve for nothing but to feed Rebellion.

How! Marciano, you seem discontent,
What sullen cloud amidst this calm of joys
O'^casts you noble soul? -- Marc. Not I, dear Prince,
I am not discontent.

Come, Marciano, you shall feast your senses
On what we know your soul entirely loves.
-- Now let us in, 'tis time we were at counsel.

Dull man, dost not see in his countenance
Such rare becoming grace,
As one might freely say he did enhance,
Majesty in his face.
Why art become
So grossly dumb?
Cannot thy tongue pay tribute to his praise?
Hark how all Florence sing,
In such a cheerful spring,
And every one their voices raise.
Why silent then, when after all our tears,
Clouds which did shroud the light, our Sun appears?
Appears -- Appears
Dissolving all our jealousies and fears.
ALl now rejoice, but I: my former griefs
Still dwell with me, until the noble, constant,
Generous Marciano doth appear --
-- Goodness! 'tis he -- O!
how my heart begins,
Even as a murdered carcass, to distill
Gross drams of blood at sight o'th murderer.

-- Cold virtue guard me -- if I dream not -- 'tis she.
-- Merciful heavens, can Marciano see
His very soul? yet not in ecstasy.
-- O! Arabella, fairest, ever worthy,
I offer thus my heart -- thus -- thus -- and thus --
O! art assist me -- sudden joy had never
Sudden expression --

Sure, my Lord, you cannot
Be more surprised then I am; pray imagine
A heart abstract from cares, and hoised in high
Raptures of joy; even such you may define,
Mine-thine -- thine-mine -- the gods could ne'er have been
More gracious then now --
thus, my Lord, pray let me evidence
The temper of my heart, since you went hence.

O! thou, the loadstone of my else-wandring fancy,
That keeps my soul still fixed -- what can I render
Conform to thy fair merits --

Love, my Lord,
-- Love, love -- I say, I cannot ask for more.
Next, if you will oblige me, prithee honour
Our friend Falasse, one deserves your favour.
-- He entertained me kindly in your absence,
During your long exile.

Heavens thank him for it,
I shall esteem him highly, and recommend
Him to the Duke -- But now, my heart's in flames --

Then I in mine -- Such Mistresses are rare --
You were my fellow-sufferer; sprightly Nymph,
If love connive, would you not willingly
Be sharer with me in my prosperity?

Those, who know all things, know my great ambition.

No more -- no more -- we wrong our joys to stay
On such discourse -- 'tis time we supplicate
The gentle Hymen, he shall us unite,
That Florence may behold our joys complete.

COme, Come, all things will now resume their ancient splendour.


Yes, yes, now we begin, like Mariners after a tempest, to suck our bottles at
ease again.


O brave days! who would have dreamed on this sudden revolution some years
since.


No more of that discourse, look to the Court-gates, for there shall be such a
crowd of Gallants with their Ladies, Apprentises with their Wenches, Citizens
with their Wives, and all the confused rabble, by and by, that we shall have a
great labour on it to keep the half on'em out.


Right, for the Lord Marciano is to be married to night, and we shall have a
Masque, I warrant you.


I believe we shall have a merry night on it.


You are welcome, my masters, walk towards the further corner, pray you, there
you shall have best room.


The Duke will be here by and by. 1. Part. We expect so Sir,


Come then, we'll aside, Cassio.

Clear the way, the Dukes a coming.

-- Remember no more, fair Lady,
O^ by gone miseries --

May it please your Highness --
This was my friend, my very trusty friend
In all my exigencies, very kind
To both me and the Lady Arabella.
Here only, I present him to your Highness --

Whatever favours were bestowed on you,
We do account them done to our selves --
-- You are his friend, so, Signior, you are ours.

May all the blessings of the heavens combine
To raise your highness to a pitch divine --

My Lord Marciano, we have always had
A narrow eye over all your proceedings,
Wee've found you loyal, without spot or blemish,
Val^ant, at all adventures, ever faithful,
And therefore after mature deliberation,
We here entrust the Government of Siena,
Your native country, to your managing --

Our honour, and the humours of Siena.

Great Prince, whose daring eye strikes traitors dumb,
Revives all loyal souls: disperses all
Rebellions foggy mists: you have this day
Conferred such honour on your highness servant,
As were I a base Infidel, vowed persuade
My heart to faith, my tongue to oratory --
-- Thus -- thus, dear Prince, I tender solemnly,
All homage to your highness, while I dye.

Arise, enjoy those honours, and approve
Your self a pattern of both fear and love.

-- Sere^ssime, Augustissime -- dux

-- Remove, remove that fellow.

-- Come -- come S^rrah, you think you are in your school. Man. Dux --


Come you villain.

Princeps -- Tus -- Tus -- caniae.

What an impudent rogue is this?

-- As for this Lady, whom thy gentler fates
Have still reserved for your chaste embraces,
We still will honour her, as having seen
Evident signs of her affection,
And loyalty to us --

And still shall be,
Dear Prince, so much as in a Woman lies,
I'll offer prayers and tears, and sacrifice,
The first fruits of my wishes; I'll implore
Such blessings, as the gods have heaped in store,
May rain upon your royal highness head,
That in your eyes heavens favours may be read --

May foreign Princes his great power envy --

May he his treacherous enemies plots defy --

May he restore our former happiness --

And Medicis great princely house increase --

While all his faithful Subjects long to see
The royal hopes of his posterity --

-- Long live our Prince, and may he still appear,
The brightest Star in all our Hemisphaere.
A joyful noise within, c.


