Trappolin creduto Principe. OR TRAPPOLIN Supposed a Prince. An Italian
TRAGE-COMEDY. The scene part of Italy. Written by Sir ASTON COKAIN.

LONDON Printed by WILLIAM GODBID 1658.



GAllants, be it known as yet we cannot say
To whom you are beholding for this pla^;
But this our Poet hath licensed us to tell,
Ingenious Italy hath liked it well:
Yet is it no translation; for he ne'er
But twice in Venice did it ever hear*
There it did take, and he doth hope (if you
Have your old humours) it will please here too
He swears he hath not spoiled it, and protest
We think it good, though he doth none ot'h best
You often have heard worse it'h house before,
And had we made the Prologue weed say more
That labour he hath saved us, cause he wood
No partial friend should cry it up for good;
An excellent new Comedy as you say,
When you have seen't, he so will judge his pla^
He is not peremptory, like to some
Who think that all is best from them doth come
Ladies and Gentlemen, you that do know
To censure rightly as you think so do:
Our Poet scorns to beg your hands, yet saith,
That at the end if he the favour hath,
This shall not be his last, that he'll endeavou^
To gratify you shortly with another:
How ere it takes, he for your presence sends
His thanks by me, and hopes we shall par^ friends.
MY wench Flametta is a dear rogue, the pretty fool dotes on me; my Lord
Barbarin can do nothing with her; his pistols and jewels she cares not for. And
tis a handsome thing: no Pomatum ere touched her lips, or painted her cheeks,
yet are they cherries and roses; I am most happy to be what I am, and to have
the love of such a one as she.


Good morrow Trappolin, how does my Love?


First let us kiss, and after I will tell,
For ever thine Flametta.

O thanks my dear.


The villain Trappolin has a handsome wench, and (which angers me) an honest
one; I have spent many weeks about her, but could never do any good, she will
not neither for love or money; and see where they are a talking together.


Yonder is my Lord Barbarino.

My dear Flametta, I am your Honours servant; this free promise of thine, I can
never enough thank thee for -- at your Lordships command. How happily shall we
live together in marriage, both loving so well and truly? Your Honours humble
slave. Let us kiss again -- your poor vassal my Lord, thus will we spend our
days in these delights; so will we kiss Flametta -- I beseech your Honour to
pardon me: we ne'er will be a weary of our selves, if thou dost sigh, thy
Trappolin will weep, -- your Honour shall command me always; and when thou
sing thy Trappolin will dance.


And I am thine my honest Trappolin,
And ever will be constant unto thee.

I'll attend your Honour presently.

There's no man alive shall make me prove
Unfaithful unto thee, so much I love.

Your Lordship must pardon me a little,
I am something busy.

My Trappolin shall not bestow a kiss,
But I will pay it him with usury;
It is impossible for thee to be
More thy Flametta's then Flametta's thine.

I will come to your Honour presently.

Pardon Sweetheart that now I must be gone,
My stay another time shall make amends:
A kiss my dear, my lovely Trappolin;
With such I shall be never satisfied.

Farewell my dear rogue; my Lord I come,
Your Honour must pardon me, you saw how I was employed, I could not leave the
poor fool, your Lordship sees she loves me, and protest her labour is not lost:
now if your Honour hath any thing to command me, I am ready Trappolino, your
poor servant.


You are a saucy peremptory villain,
And I have well perceived your base demeanour;
Although I see the wench is yours, you shall
Repent the freedom of your evil language,
Be sure you shall.

Good morrow my Lord,
Let him do his worst I care not a rush for him; he would ha my wench, and I am
glad I abused him, I ha made his Honour something choleric, let him digest it
how he will.


The Tuscane glory have we yet upheld,
And from the fierce assaults of enemies
Rescued our cities, set them in a peace
As happy as the Gods did ere vouchsafe.
Sforza the Duke of Milain our old friend,
Who hath in all our wars still sent us aide,
Hath promised me the matchless Isabella
His sister for my wife; and seeing now
We have no more to do with enemies,
I will to Milain go and marry her,
And quickly unto Florence will return,
Where I will celebrate our nuptial
With that magnificence becomes our state.
You, whom I ever have found faithful to me,
Lord Barbarino, and Lord Machivil,
To you I do commit the government
Of Tuscany until I return;
And full commission to do what you shall
See necessary for the good of Florence:
My dear Prudentia, the only joy
Of our deceased Father, the last Duke,
Live happy, and enjoy thy own desires,
Which I do know are virtuous all.

Most noble Sir, it is impossible
That I should happy be, and you not present:
But I am unworthy to beseech your stay;
Go and be fortunate in a worthy choice,
While I to heaven pray for your safe return.
Dear sweet Prudentia, and also Lords,
Look well unto my prisoner Brunetto;
Yet let him want nothing but a free release,
For sure he is more then he seems to be.
I have been long about this journey; now
All things are ready, my Prudentia
Farewell; and sister, be not melancholy,
For in few weeks I will return, and bring
A sister home to keep thee company,
The beauteous Milanes.

And may she prove
According to your wishes, noble Sir.

And be a joy unto the Florentines.

And be a happy mother, that there may
Not want an heir unto your Highness.

Our thanks;
Onward, tis time I were upon my way.

Now will I be revenge;d of Trappolin,
Who hath so boldly to my face abused me;
I have authority to do it withal,
I'll make him to repent his sauciness.
He's here, but I will do it as if by Justice.

I can think of nothing but my pretty villain Flammetta; O 'tis a dear rogue,
and she says she loves me, and I know she does: when I have married her I will
betake me to the country, where we will live as jovial as the day is long. --


I'll fight for Florence while I have a vein
To hold my heart from falling unto death;
Nor shall the Longobardy Mantuaus
Ere win a Flag while I am in the field;
I'd make the Tuscan Duke to know the man
Whom he hath trusted to conduct his troops,
Durst but Gonzaga ever stir again.
Methinks there is no nobler thing on earth,
Then to see hills of bodies, lakes of blood:
No braver Music then the Martial Drum;
Nor Diapasons sweeter to the ear,
Then unto it the Warlike Trumpets make;
When I but hear this harmony, I could,
Full of delight, venture my single person
Against an armed Troop. Away with peace,
It is the Canker and the bane of minds;
'Tis that which makes us to forget our selves,
And spend our lives in sensuality.
Then glorious war advance thy armed arm,
That soldiers may have ways to show themselves;
Wo'd Gothes and Vandals once again would come
Int' Italy, or Moors into our Spain,
That Mattemores might wear out his sword
With hewing bones, and cleaving armed men:
Each thing doth to his centre fall, and I
Would unto mine, which is to fight or die.
Who art thou?

I!

I you! what are you to good to be asked?

I am Trappolin.

By that I know not, art thou a man of war?
Is Trappolin in any Captains roll?
I'st writ?

Yes (Seignior Captain) in the Parsons book,
The day thereof my baptism is set down.

And in that honour oft hast thou ere fought
With Infidels, and slain a score or two?

Not I, Heavens be praised, a score or two said you Captain? then should I sure
never escape, for I promise you many an one is hanged for killing of one.


Fie, what an ignorance is this! hast thou a mind to become now a soldier?


Indeed, Seignior Captain, I cannot resolve you as yet, I am about a wife, I'll
ask her if she will turn soldier too, and then if I like it there's an end. But
I pray you Captain what is a soldier?


A soldier, Trappolin, is he that does
Venture his life a hundred times a day,
Wood in his countries, and his Princes cause
Stand canon shot, and wood of steeled pikes*
Wood when his bodie's full of wounds all night,
Lie in the field and sleep upon his helm.

Good Captain pardon me, neither I nor Flametta will be soldiers; heavens
defend, venture my life so many times a day! there is more safety and gain in
turning thief: I love my country and Prince well, but my self better; 'tis
good sleeping in a whole skin, tis better lying with Flametta in a warm bed;
marry I had thought a soldier had not been such a fool.

How many of them might there be in Florence, Sir Captain?


Thou coward, many hundreds.


The Gods send them more wit, that's even all that I can say: but I pray you Sir
Captain, now I think ont'^ persuade my Father and mother, sisters and uncles,
and aunts, and all the kin I have to turn soldiers, that they may be killed
quickly and I be their heir; I swear Captain you should lose nothing by it, I
would give you a good present for it.


Base coward.


Good Captain, what is the meaning of coward? I have often heard that word, and
would fain know the true meaning of it.


A coward is a fellow base as thou,
One that doth spend his precious time in sloth,
Cares not what alterations kingdoms have,
So he at home may welter in his pleasures;
A fellow that had rather sit all day
Drinking tobacco, and carousing cups,
Then die his sword in blood of enemies.

Why then Captain, in faith I am a very coward; tis better by half then a
soldier, I know there is far more pleasure in a glass of good wine and a pipe
of true Varines, then in bullets whizzing about ones ears, and pikes or
halberds, or what you will abeating out ones teeth.


Thou dunghill wretch.


Seignior Captain, be not angry, for I vow I mean earnest, I should never
digest the soldiery life, nor am I sure wood Flametta, and the Gods help them
that do.


Thou earthen-minded slave, tis pity thou shouldest eat or drink that hast no
better thoughts,


Not as long as I pay for it; what the Devil have I to do with your soldiery Sir
Captain? give me leave to be of my own mind, and a Coward; for i'm sure no
wise man but wood say as I do, let those follow your wars that are weary of
their lives.


Thou art as dunghill a minded Rascal as ere I heard in my life; I would not for
any thing thou wast a Spaniard, thou would be a slander to the whole Nation.
And Villain, I tell thee if thou were one, I would kill thee; Mattemores would
do it, and so I leave it.


Farewell my Sir Don, go hang your self, what have I to do with your wars trow?
for nothing would I venture to fight but Flametta, and for her I durst not
exceed about it fifty Cuffs, or about with a little pair of Cudgels at the
most: I should never endure to shoot off a Gun, not I, the very noise of it
would make me endanger my Breeches,

Brunetto, honest Brunetto, how dost do? be merry man, this time will have an
end man, and till it come be as jovial as thou can, thou would en a ble^
thy self to a seen how I vexed the patience of my Lord Barbarin.


You have not sure.


Marry but I have, and to the purpose too.


Then you are undone Trappolin.


Why man?


The Duke has left him and the Lord Machavil governors till his return,


The Devil he has.


Tis very true.


Troth then I am but little better I fear.


That's he,


Lay hold on him.


Brunetto, I am und^n, thy Trappolin must to the Jail, pray you my small
friends give me leave to speak but one word, Remember me to my sugar-candy
Flametta.


Away with him.


To prison with the saucy Rogue.


I came to Mantoa to aid the Duke
My Uncle against his foes the Florentines,
Where hearing every man to praise the beauty
Of sweet Prudentia, the report did win me;
Being taken in the wars, I was not sad,
Because I was to go where she did live:
But seeing so many Princes all desirous*
To marry her, I knew the great Duke never
Would bestow her on Savoyes second Son.
And therefore yet I have concealed my self;
Nor doth she know I am Horatio:
For want of opportunity I yet
Could ne'er so much as sigh within her hearing.

The Lady Isabella, by her picture,
May be supposed to be a matchless fair one;
Each feature of her face is wondrous good,
And her fine head of hair's a curious colour.

In her we shall be happy all, for she
The world reports hath equal to her form
A noble and a virtuous mind; Whose that?

He is your brothers prisoner, called Brunetto,
That in the wars of Mantoa was took.

Tis a handsome man.

And thought by all the Court a Gentleman
Of good descent, but he hath not disclosed
His parentage to any.

Why doth he not?

That no man knows yet besides himself.

How melancholy he doth seem?

He hath good cause for it Madam:
Who can be merry in Captivity?

Tis true;
A Gentleman of good descent supposed,
I never saw a man of braver Carriage,
Nor one that pleased me better then he doth;
Aha!

Why sigh you Madam?

To think of fortune; perhaps this prisoner
Is of a house as good as the Medices,
Hath lived before the wars of Mantua,
In all the happiness you could desire,
And now we see him thus.

Methinks I hear him sigh.

And so do I.

He's gone.

But with how sad a gate?
Methinks I am not as I was before.
Hipolita.

Madam.

Preethee go tune my Lute, I have a mind
To sing a little, I shall forget to play
If I so seldom use it.

I go Madam.

I have sent her hence that I might search my heart,
For sure it is not as it lately was;
It is so full of thoughts, I cannot find
The free access into it I had wont:
What should the reason be, what have I don
To breed this alteration? nothing I,
Ere I came here I felt my self as free
From this strange -- what it is I cannot tell,
The place is not bewitched sure, nor have
I seen ought but this hapless prisoner.
'Alas poor Gentleman, (for in his looks
And in his carriage I can guess him such)
How little to the fates art thou beholding
To let thee live a prisoner thus? how now!
What i'st I say, talk of Brunetto? Oh,
I am in Love, the Gods will have it so.

This man, Lord Machavil, is one of those
That doth in Florence nourish vice, he is
A pander, one that if he sees a stranger,
Straight makes acquaintance with him, for what end
Your self may guess; so he may gain thereby
He would betray our daughters, lead our sons
To Brothels, vicious and full of rottenness.

I wonder how the Divel he came to know any thing that I did.


This writing yesternight was presented to me:

Here you may see what enormities he is guilty of.


His Lordship would show himself a great hater of bawdery.


Tis good we did examine him.


And there is not such a coward in Tuscany; He's able to corrupt an army.


Seignior Captain, never fear it, for I ne'er mean to come into one.


Bring him before us.


Ah that I durst tell my Lords Excellence why he deals thus with me, tis for a
wench, and yet how eager he is against bawdery.


Forward Trappolin, go before their Excellencies.


Sir, this paper doth not only show
You are a rogue, your looks declare you one,
Thou hast as ill a face as ere I saw.

And yet Flametta think as good as his,
I did not lie and if I said a better.

Ere we come to his pandarisme, I'll examine him about other matters;

Sir, do you never use to carry pistols about you?


Sometimes and please your Excellence I do.


Write down that Notary.


What does your Lordship mean, I did not steal them.


I know well enough what I do; sir, you went to shoot some body.


Beseech your Honour to take me along with you, I mean money.


That's vain, then Notary tear it out.


Do you ne'er carry other arms neither?


Many times my Lord.


Nota^ie down with it, he shall be talked with for that.


Your Honour is deceiv*d again, I mean only arms upon seals, or scutchions
from the Heralds.


This is nothing Notary, tear it out.


A pimp I'm sure he is.


Do you never carry no Love Letters, as from a Gentleman to a Lady, or a
Gentlewoman to a Cavalier, or so?


O very oft my Lord.


Do you so indeed? Notary write it down.


Your Honour must understand me, Letters of Love, of friendship, as when a Lady
writes unto her brother at Siena, a wife to her husband at Pisa, a son to his
mother at such a place, a father to his daughter married at such a town, I am
often hired, and carry them to the Post.


Notary, you must tear out this too.


But sir, to come nearer to the matter,
Do you not keep intelligence with Whores?
Have you ne'er plaid the Ruffian? by your means
Hath no man been provided of a lodging?

This I have no excuse for, the whole city knows me a pimp.

And that it is very nigh my living.


What say you sir?


My Lords, I am but a poor fellow, and must live.


By Bawdery?


Tis but a friends part.


A wicked ones, Notary down with this at large.


Alas my Lord, what hurt is it, if I help a Gentleman to a sound wench, where
is there any fault? good your Honours, consider me, think not I am a man alone
in this business, that many others live by it as well as I.


What an impudency is this?
Not only to do ill, but to defend it,
Is a transgression exceeds forgiveness.

Good my Lord take pity on me, well a day what should I do!

I have not only done a favour in it for my self, but also a courtesy for
many a Gentleman.


Do not tear out that, Notary.


Beseech your Honours let him tear't out.


What shall we do with this villain?


Why let's hang him and there's an end of him.


That's true I faith, consider my Lords, that never man was put to death for
such a matter, but rather that they have been beloved, and well paid by noble
men and cavalieres.


Had we not best to condemn him to the Galleys? or lets banish hm.


I that's the best.


Beseech your Honours pity me.


After to morrow, Trappolin, if thou be seen in Florence thou shalt die, be
hanged; we banish thee for term of life, therefore prepare against to morrow to
be gone.


Pray your Honours.


Notary, write down he's banished.


You rogue, it is irrevocable, and therefore make you ready.


I think I am the first man that ever was banished for such a matter; were all
of my profession in the City served so, I think we should make an Army Royal of
us.


This matter is concluded, Trappolin;
Go seek your fortune. My Lord Machavil;
We may depart.

Thou man of dirt, had thou a Soldier been,
This banishment had never been pronounced.

But Sir Captain, I fear I should have been killed, which is worse.


If for thy Country, to had been a noble death.

I had rather live Cap. then die nobly.


Thou man composed of sand, in vain I spend
My breath to talk with such a slave as thou;
Go and be hanged, for ^o thou do dost deserve,
And might I judge thee, it should be thy end.

Thou brazen-headed Coxcomb, may thou go to the divel with a Drum before
thee; I had as leeve be banished out of my Country and walk in peace, as be out
on it in the wars.

Brunetto, O Brunetto, I must leave thee, I must be gone Man to morrow,
farewell Florence.


Why, whats the matter Trappolin?


Why, I have banished the Lord Barberino, and the Lord Machavil.


How! you banished them?


They have banished me, or I them, 'tis all one, I must be gone, and the divel
a bit a money I have: shall I help thee to a Wench Brunetto? Or if thou hast no
mind to one, know thou any body that has? I'd fain be earning a little
money.


I wish thee well, live honest Trappolin,
And so thou shalt be sure to prosper better;
This Ring I give thee, sell it, and the money
Spend to maintain thee.

Honest Brunetto, faith
An ere I can I will requite thee fully;
Farewell, I must also take my leave
Of my Flametta* we shall cry together
Like unto School Boys that are to be whipped.

Alas poor simple Trappolin, I pity
Thy fortune, yet 'tis better far then mine;
Of all mankind I am most miserable,
And lead a life would make a soul prove mortal,
Yet do I not repine: Most dear Prudentia,
I never can endure enough for thee,
So that at last I may attain my wishes:
There's not a grief mankind did ever suffer*
Nor pain, I would not pass to make thee mine;
Thou art the Centre of my wishes, all
Horatio's thoughts upon thy beauty fall.

O Heavens, be merciful, and if I tell
Him I am his, let him say he is mine*
I have a fire within my breast must out,
Longer I cannot hide it, if he now
Does not woo me, I shall solicit him.
How sad a pace he walks? how melancholy
Does he look? Love compels us unto things
In others we would scorn; I'll speak unto him,
Because I fear he dares not unto me.
Brunetto.

Divinest Lady.

I thought a Gentleman (for so I guess you)
Could have endured affliction better far,
That in the wars durst venture so his person.

Most Excellent Princess, many thousand men
Can suffer well the dangers of a battle,
But there are few or none at all that can
Bear out the passions of a mind afflicted.

Then you are discontent: Alas, you long for
Your liberty, and (truth) I cannot blame you.

Then should I hate my self, being a slave to one
Whom I desire evermore to serve.
Ye that command the destinies of men,
Now let me die, and if I shall not prosper:
Know, Noblest Lady, that the prisoner
That speaks unto you is a Prince by birth;
I am Horatio, second son unto
The Duke of Savoy, and the Piemondt Prince;
At Mantoa the fame of your perfections
Captived my soul, and when that I was took,
I did account my self a happy man,
Being to go where you did live; I know,
Most dearest Princess, that I am unworthy
So great a happiness as is your love;
Yet if you deny me, witness heaven,
I never will return unto Turin,
But here die languishing for your refusal.
The Duke my father soon would pay my ransom,
But thraldom for your sake I have esteemed
Above liberty and pleasures of a Court.

My thanks, most gracious heavens -- Brunetto is
A Prince, most worthy brave Horatio,
I scorn to dally with my happiness,
Like some that love to counterfeit their joys;
Know I do love thee dear as my own soul,
And that if thou had now been silent, I
My heart unto thee had disclosed, live happy,
And if it in my power lies thou shalt.

Doubt, fear, despair be gone, I am a man
That envy not the blessed lives of Kings;
Now she hath deigned to say these happy words,
I care not though all mankind threaten me.
Most excellent and mercifullest Lady,
You've raised me to a joy beyond my thoughts,
May all the Gods requite you for this goodness,
And I wear out my life to do you service.

My dear Horatio enough, I doubt not
Thy affections equal unto mine; we will
Love while we live, and may we dye forgotten
When we do cease to love, say I not well?

Admired Princess, you out-speak me much,
But never shall out-love me.

Heavens be kind,
And make us in two bodies have one mind.

THis banished life is very doleful, I walk I know not whither, and every step
I go Flametta comes into my mind, I think how she cried when we parted, and
swore that she would go too, and certainly so she wood, if I had not told her
she was not banished, and might not. Farewell my true Flametta; and the Divel take
the two scurvy Lords Barbarino, and Machavil, for Captain Mattemores he is a
prattling ass; but by my conscience, he could ne'er ha turned me loose for such
a matter. Farewell my draughts of Montefiascone and Bologna Sausages, me thinks
this is a very melancholy place: I have not seen a living body these two
hours, but they had wings, or four legs: let me bethink me whither to betake
my self; for in Tuscany stay I must not, I'd to Rome and turn Friar if I had
any Latin in me; there is nothing of Millain or Naples, without I mean to turn
soldier for one dinner a day. Farewell all my good suppers I was wont to have,
the wenches I helped Gentlemen to: Venice, I that's the likeliest place of all,
and there I'll follow my own trade, I love to be fingering of Mons, and Polax
Ryals, well then I'll to Venice, and turn pimp; it is a good gainful life in
Italy, full of ease and pleasure, especially if the flesh be young and
handsome. Methinks I hear a busling in yon trees, I hope it be not a thief; for
then I shall lose the ring Brunetto gave me, and may go hang my self. Yon's an
old man, an he be one I care not, for sure I shall be good enough for him.


Son, you are banished, I know all the matter.


Tis true, old friend, I am indeed; but how the Divel came you to know it?


Why the Divel told me.


Alas that ere I was born! I pray you father conjurer do not hurt me.


Son Trappolin, I am so far from hurting thee, that thee I do intend to make a
Prince.


I pray you pardon me father conjurer, I have no mind to domineer or swagger in
hell.


You understand me not, thou shalt return to Florence.


And be hanged there for my labour.


Be honoured there, and be supposed the Duke,
Who now in Milain is about his wife.

Faith if you can bring this about, father conjurer; I should laugh indeed; but
suppose it could be done, when his Highness comes

Woe be to my neck.


No fear at all, leave all to me, and but remember what I say and thou art
safe.


Faith I know not what to think of this; but Conjurers can do much.


I'll do it never doubt, come near to me, within this circle go, and do not
fear though thou see devils skip about thee.


Father Conjurer farewell, I had rather live in banishment then see the Divel.


Thou silly fellow do not fear, in this
Myriades of fiends dare not, nor can they hurt thee;
Here thou shalt stand as safe from any danger
As ever thou did yet in any place.
Think thou I have so little power over spirits,
As they dare disobey what I command?
Tell me thy wish, and if thou hast it not,
Before thy face I'll sink away with fear.
Give me thy hand and come.

Father conjurer, I faith I wish nothing more then what you have promised me
already; could that be done I need ne'er be a pander again.


Why do you stay?


Shall I be safe?


As free from peril as you can desire.


Why then I'll venture, being for such a matter;
But honest father Conjurer, if for fear I chance
To die, let not your devils take my body.

Come, do not fear at all, there is no need.

I will venture, but I pray you let not the devils come too near me.


You that below frequent the Stygian lake,
And in Cocytus waves do bathe yourselves,
You that upon the strands of Phlegetov
Do use to walk, attend unto my charms,
Appear, I charge thee to appear, thou fiend,
Thou that over mans head power hast, appear
Eo thou spirit come, --

Good father conjurer
Let not the Devils be too ugly, lest
I play the sloven and annoy your nose.

Fear not.

Honest Master Counjurer, yonder comes your Divel, pray you circle me once
more, for I'm afraid he'll be too bold with me.


Not all the fiends that are in hell can do
The least annoyance to thee, Trappolin:
Thou art safe, and so believe thou art, come Eo
Give me that hat unchanted.

Here it is,
Command me ought else.

No, vanish now:
Son Trap. observe me well, this hat
Keep always on thy head, 'tis Eo called,
One of the things will make thee thought a Prince.

Tis none of the handsomest, mine's of a better block, I think some Naples
Devil made it, tis so high crowned,^ one that saw me in this would rather think
me a fool then a duke.


Meo thou spirit of magic glass appear,
I charge thee in dread Plutoes name to come;

More Devils yet! is the Circle sure, Father Conjurer? and to be not I pray you
take an order with it, I have no mind at all to venture my self against the
Devil.


Have I not told thee thou art safe? fear not,

Yonder's another Devil I think of M^ran, for he brings a looking glass with
him.


Deliver it, be gone.

I thank you for it, (besworn) for in good earnest father Conjurer I would have
as little the company of your Devils as is possible.


But before I give you this mirror (Son)
Receive this powder by Magic art composed,
And secret spells; he upon whom thou flingest it
(It hath such hidden virtue in it) will
Be took by all for Trappolin.

For me?


Yes certainly for thee.


Say you so? why then I faith with all my heart: Give it me, I swear unto you
(old father) the very best man in Tuskany shall be Trappolin.


Here put it up and keep it safe.


And I do not hang me.


Now are you ready for the looking glass?


I am very ready indeed.


Son Trappolin, this looking glas^ was wrought
In the deep Caverns of the dark Abyse, I
Composed of the mud of Phlegeton,
And with the blood of tortured Miscreants,
It is a Mirror I have studied long
And now have brought unto perfection:
This upon thee I do bestow, a gift
Such as the Crowns of Emperors could not buy.

And yet Father Conjurer, I have seen half a dozen better sold for a pistol.


They were the works of mortals: When thou hast
A cloak I'll give thee two: but look in this
And thou shalt see thy self the Duke; and if,
When he returns again, thou meetest him
(But throw the powder on him first) and he
Begins to rage, bid him look in it, and it
Will show him the reflection of thee.

Say you so? why then give me the glass.

Here, stand still, I will now raise up the fiend
That hath the Cloak which I have promised thee.

Father Conjurer, as you love your son Trappolin, give me another
Circle or two, for I promise you I fear this almost worn out,

Still thou dost fear; be bold and confident,
Hell cannot hurt thee as thou standst.

Why then let him come.

In Proserpin's dread name our Sovereign Queen,
Areto, I do, ^ge thee to appear;
Thus by th^croast of this enchanted Wand
I do command thee fiend unto this place.

No more Father Conjurer, hold, here comes the Devil, he's a Taylor in hell
sure, for he brings a cloak.


Thou against whom fierce Cerberus dares not bark,
Here is the Cloak, which, to obey thy will,
We (that thy servants are) have made.

Tis well:
Be gone, I licence thy depart; this Cloak,
Son Trappolin, doth perfect thee the Duke.

I know not, but on my conscience the poorest of his Highness servants near
wore a worse, it seems to me to have been made of these miserable thefts of a
beggarly Taylor, it is of so many Colours; and for the fashion of it (by your
leave Father Conjurer) tis very clownish, and something inclining to the fools
fashion.


Thy words, Son Trappolin, are vain. Those Counts
And Marquesses that swagger it in Gold,
Shall not appear so glorious to the eyes
Of men as thou in this.

Father Conjurer, I'll be ruled by you, put on.

Thou art the great Duke now in show, the wisest
Judgements will believe thee so, now take the glass and see thy self in it.

Beseech your Highness pardon me, I am
A poor subject of yours, for a small matter
Banished by envious Lords.

Why Trappolin what folly is this?

Besworn to you Father I thought I saw his Highness, and was a begging to be
pardoned:


Away with ignorance, twas thy Reflection,
As thou did seem unto thy self, so thou
Shalt likewise to the world appear; now mark me,
Not one of these can make thee like the Duke;
They altogether do: ne'er leave them off
Without thou art secure, for one but missing
Thou wilt appear thy self: The Hat is called
After the Devils name that brought it, Eo,
The Looking Glass Meo, the Cloak Areo,
And there are fiends within them.

Father Conjurer, I thank you for your kindness, take all your ware again; carry
so many Devils about me? so I shall be sure to be carried to the Devil by um.


Suspect no hurt, they can as well destroy
Their immortality as do thee harm.

Why then (honest father Conjurer) I'll venture my self among them, but I swear
unto you if they begin to stir I'll en fling them all away without more a do.


Farewell son Trappolin, return to Florence,
And flourish in the pleasures of the court:
Other affairs command me to be gone,
Give me thy hand; farewell son Trappolin.

Be not so hasty (my dear old father) one word before you go: how shall I say,
that I bring not my Duchess with me, but come alone?


Why any thing, what you will.

I'll make um believe then that I licenced her to stay as long as she pleases,
and that I came alone to see how they governed in my absence.


'Twill do, now have you done with me?

I have: I thank you for all your things here, fare you well honest father
Conjurer.


Now Trappolin is no more Trappolin,
What I am in my glass I'll look again:
The great Duke, ha! tis well, 'tis very well;
This scurvy Cloak doth seem his gallant one,
And this base Hat his Highness Beaver; my face,
My body, legs and all seem changed; I faith
The Conjurer is a wondrous learned fellow.
You scoundrel Lords that banished me, I'll make
Sport with your scurvy Honours, that I will.
Eo, Meo, and Areo attend
Not ^ your offices well, and guard your friend.

Most noble brother (for so the Temple Rites
Of Hymen done do licence me to call you)
Honour our entertainment one half hour
Longer, and we will leave you with your Bride.

Great Prince, the glories you have done me here
I leave to future Chronicles to tell,
And still you do increase them; sure no man
In Milain ever did receive such honours;
You always shall command me.

Sir, we deserve no complements, we have
Our wishes, if you but rest satisfied
Of our good meaning.

Most gracious Madam, the Roman Emperors
Would have wondered at your Court had they but known it:
Which of them all would not have blessed his fates
For the fruition of so rich a Beauty,
As is the matchless Lady Isabella?

Sir, of your own you may say what you please,
But I am sure you over-praise me much.

Dearest of all the world, thou dost deserve
Princes and Poets both to speak thy worth.
Blessed be the powers divine, that me of all
Mankind did choose to make most fortunate,
In giving me the glory of the earth.

Sit down most noble brother, from your Bride
We will not part you: sister, this place is yours;
So let them now begin.

Hither we are descended from above,
To gratulate your nobly grounded love;
That you most worthy happy pair should know
The Gods themselves are pleased with what you do.
Me you have honoured, and to honour you,
I have brought the Deities along, which do
Command and rule the days, that they may bless
You all the year with plenteous happiness.
May Tuscanes Cities boast of Milains Spouse;
And future Ages, when they would compose
One graced with all the virtues, her express
To be a Lady like this Milaness.
And may the most ingenious Florentines,
Your Citizens (Great Duke) busy their minds
In writing, and in singing Marriage-songs,
Delectable Epithalamiums.
While you do live love ever, and may you
Continually your generous heats renew.
Thus Hymen wishes, and it will go hard
If what a god says gods do not regard.
Thus I could spend the night, but that would prove
A wrong unto my Rites and to your love.

Cynthia I am, that with my borrowed light
Out-shine the Stars, and do command the night:
Many a time, when else I veiled would ride,
I will appear to see you with your Bride.
Lamps nor wax lights you shall not need, for I
Instead of them will ever more be by.
And may you in this life you have begun,
Equal in love me and Endymion.

Though my aspect be fierce, and wars presage,
To you they shall be such as Lovers wage*
Sweet kisses, soft embraces, and such things
As amorous Queens enjoy and amorous Kings.
You therefore without pity both may fight
Battles, not full of danger but delight:
And may they last until I part you two;
Which I do promise I will never do.

Hermes I am, Maja's winged Son, and shine
Among the Planets in a Globe of mine:
And though 'tis true I favour thefts and sleights,
Yet will do none to diminish your delights.
Love therefore, laugh and kiss, embrace, and be
Secure, nothing can hurt you without me;
And if I ever do, may I forgo
My Sphere, and live among the fiends below.

Of all the Gods and Goddesses I am
The most supreme, and bear the chiefest name*
For Love what is it that I have not done
To bring my wishes to conclusion?
I for my self have done no more then I
Will do for you, to make you live in joy.
Therefore most happy pair of Lovers, fear
Nothing, since Jove himself doth hold you dear;
Live merrily, and let this be your mover,
That Iupiter himself was once a Lover.

Since in my Orb I shined fair,
And Lovers did befriend,
(The morning and the evening Star)
I never could commend
(Heaven blessed pair) none like to you,
Whom time shall never make untrue.
May Hesperus and Vesper lose
Their lights, fair Venus fall;
If all her power she doth not use
To prosper you withal.
May other Deities grant you life,
I'll make you loving man and wife.

Though I am old and rigid in aspect,
And cold and youthful sports do not affect;
And though my influences many ways
Adverse to others be, and cross their days:
For you, heaven-loved pair, my self I'll force,
And run a milder and a gentler course;
His ancient custom Saturne will forget,
Rise for your pleasures, for your pleasures set.
Doubt me not therefore, for my vow is strong,
That for your sakes again I wish me young.

Phoebus I am, the glorious guide of day,
That all the Planets lighten with my ray:
I am the brightsome, lightsome Charioteer
That heaven and earth adorn within my Sphere;
And know what 'tis to be in love since I
Followed my Daphne, who from me did fly.
May I lose all my glory, all my Beams
Fall like my Phaeton int' Ocean streams,
If all my faculties I do not try
To make you live in joy, and love in joy.
In Summer time when you int' Arbors go,
I will not shine to trouble you below,
Will only peep to see you kiss and smile,
To make me think, this I have done ere while.
In Winter season when the Frost doth stay,
And hinder Rivers to go on their way;
When flakes of Snow do cover earths green face,
I for your sakes will thaw off both apace.
In pleasures evermore you shall accord;
Apollo cannot falsify his word.

The gracious Planets which command the days
By powerful influences, you have heard
To bless you both according to their ways,
Vowing to be your keepers and your guard.
Them for your sakes with me I brought along,
That they might prosper you as well as I,
Because this marriage knot I'd tie so strong,
That it there nothing ever should untie.
You whom the heavens will prosper all your life,
You whom on earth there's nothing can offend,
Most happy pair, most happy man and wife,
Your lives in love wear out and in love end.
Nor shall a Poet hired for his gain,
Upon your Tomb a feigned verse engrave;
Men's tongues and tears shall make you both remain
Above the power of an Epitaph.
But may you live till you weary be,
Not of your selves, but of these earthly sports;
And the eternal joys above would see,
Which ever are in joves immortal Courts.
Thus unto you do gods their wishes give,
And unto them may you according live.

I think, Hortentia, now the Mask is done,
Our brother gladly would go to his rest.

And it is time, most noble brother, when
You please we will attend you to your Chamber,
And sister, we will see you laid in bed;
Methinks it is a very pretty thing
To see a Virgin blush, look pale and blush.

'Tis sport to others, to the Maid 'tis none.

Most excellent, Princess when you please let's go,
For now each minute is as tedious to me
As years have been, so much I do desire
The chaste embraces of my matchless Spouse.

And worthy friend, let us entreat your stay
As long in Milain as is possible;
You cannot be in Florence more beloved,
Nor by the better nor the meaner sort.

What I can do you know you may command
Unto my utmost power.

Lights.

My fairest, dearest love, your hand, this part
Of happiness makes me suppose the rest.

Those lazy times that do degenerate minds,
And breed new thoughts in most Heroic hearts,
By noble spirits are to be abhorred,
And loathed as the ruin of their souls.
Whilst I did follow the Triumphant War
Through fire and blood, I was a happy man;
I thought no pleasure was a parallel
To the loud cry of mortal wounded foes:
But now I am transformed from my self,
Hipolita hath charmed me with a look;
May I but hear her speak, how I rejoice*
M ay I but hear her sing, I think me blessed.
O how my heart's ashamed of my tongue,
W hich never until now effeminate thoughts
C old win upon. O would to heaven this Lady
W ere but a man, and circled round with death,
That I might kill her, and release my self:
Or were she like the Warlike Amazon,
With whom renowned Theseus did contend,
That with my honour I might challenge her
For an enchanter, and a witch. How fondly
And foolishly I rave! strongest resolutions
A woman's powerful beauty doth destroy;
He that can conjure men, unpeople towns,
Cover the sea with Fleets, drink rivers dry
With armed squadrons he conducts to fight,
Whom potent monarchs fear, and Emperors wish
To make their friend, a Ladies smile, or eye
Subdues above resistance, and makes die.

Most dearest worthiest Princess, I am blessed
Above the proudest of my former wishes;
Your love to me was like a thing desired,
But far from expectation: as men
Forlorn and wretched, being content to die,
And sure to suffer, wish to live, although,
They fully do despair of life; of late
Even so was it with me, I loved you
Above my lives expression, but did ever
Despair the blessedness of such an honour.

My dear Horatio, I cannot speak
So well as you, but I can love as truly.

A strange discovery! I will retire
More close and hear the rest.

And ^ Sir,
Because I know my brother the Great Duke
Will not at all, or scarce allow this match,
I will with you whenever you command
Leave Florence, and what fortune it shall please
The Gods to send us, bear with cheerfulness.

Excellent merciful Prudentia,
I must pray Heaven make you a full requital,
For I shall ever be unable.

I cannot stay longer with you now, at our next meeting I'll cloy you with my
company. A kiss.

Farewell my hearts best pleasure.

Let others travel Italy all over,
To talk of such a City, such a place:
Go to magnificent and holy Rome,
Once the sole Empress of the conquered world;
To Venice ^i^h, commanding, politic;
Unto sweet Naples plenteous in Nobility;
Unto great Milain; unto sat Bologna,
Civil Ferrara, Arriostoes town,
Strong-walled Padua which Antenor built*
The Trojan Prince, and Titus Livius fames
For his nativity and sepulchre;
To subtle Burgamo, most highly honoured
For near relation to Tarquato Tasso;
To proud and ^a^ely Genua renowned
By her seafaring citizen Col^mbo;
Worthy Varona, old Catulius city;
Bloody Peruggin, warlike Bessia,
Glorious Man^ua, Virgilius Maro's birth-place,
Good Rimini, iron Pistoya,
Fine languag'd Siena, and industrious Luca,
Odd-humor'd Forly, honest old Ravenna,
Ill-aired Simegallia, Capua
Effeminate and amorous, wherein
The Carthaginian Captains Soldiers were
Spoiled and debauched with pleasures; Pisa hanging,
Pesaro a garden of best fruits, Ancona
Prays'd for the Port Loyal, and true Urbino,
Round Ascoli* long Recanati, built
Upon a steep hills slage, Foligno full
Of sugry streets, among the Ap^nnine,
Faro for handsome women most extolled,
And Modena happiest of them all*
From beauteous comely Florence when I part
Without Prudentia, thunder strike my heart.

A gallant resolution; for the man
I cannot blame him, but the Princess, she
To look so low, and dote upon a s^ive,
Seems very strange, and full of wonder to me.
Had Dolphian Oracles, ever adored
For uttering truth, spoke this, I should have doubted:
She whom we thought? Saint^ pattern for Nuns,
Thus to forget her self, it doth amaze me.
O women, I could rage against the sex!
And loved I not Hipoli^a I wo^ld.
She cannot hear me, and I needs must speak
A word or two, they are all false and fickle all,
The poison of men's happiness, within
(Though they are fair without) most full of sin.

Good morrow Captain Mattemores.

How do you Captain?

Your Honours humble slave, I am well, but sad;
And so had all the Court good cause to be,
Did they but know so much as I.

Why Captain,
What's the matter?

I'll not be silent for her Honours sake;
Prudentia the Princess is in Love,
With whom do you suppo^e my Lords?

I think with none, for we all know, she yet
Hath slighted Modena's and Parma's Duke,
And seemed careless of mankind.

Alas!
She were most happy were it one of them:
It is Brunetto she's in love withal.

How?

Impossible!

It is a thing most true, my eyes and ears
Have seen and heard it, while I stood unseen.

You amaze us.

It is a thing I never should have thought,
Though spent my life in fond imaginations.

As I have seen an amorons cloud receive
A stately hill into her lovely breast,
And of his lofty head our eyes bereave,
And seem to lull his senses unto rest:
So did the scornful Lady daign to leave
All her majestic state, and sore oppressed
With inward flames, her eager arms she cast
About his neck, kissed and embraced him fast.

Wonders.

How the Great Duke will rage?

And do you not my Lords in time prevent them,
They'll steal away I fear, for so she vowed,
When he but said the word she wood.

By his imprisonment we will hinder that.

Here is the man we spake of.

For the Princes honour let us keep it close
As possible we can. You of the guard.

Seize on Brunetto, carry him to prison,
Bid Puchannello keep him safe,
Tis our pleasures.

What violence is this? O had I been suffered to wear a sword, some of you
should pay dearly for it*


Away with him.

My Lords, you have done wisely to prevent
So great a dishonour as might have ensued
Tainted the family of the Medices,
And been a lasting sorrow to the Duke.

His Highness is returned.

Great Sir, upon our knees we welcome you;
You come unlooked for, we did not expect
This happy time so soon by fourteen days.
Where is our Duchess?

Your Duchess will not come till the Gods know when, for I do not, I have gin
her leave to stay as long as she will, but besworn I fear you have governed
but s^rvily in my absence* I hear that you have banished an honest poor man
called Trappolin* is it true?


So please your Highness he deserved no less.

Why what hurt had he done, had he knocked any body oath the head?

What was his fault?


He was a pander, and corrupted youth.

You lie Sir not panders but whores do that, and not they neither if they be
sound: banish one of my subjects for such a matter? besides were there no more
in Florence but he?


Be not displeased we humbly pray your Highness,
For we did think we did it for the best.

I wonder at our Duke in this.

Well, I am very weary, I left all my train behind with my wife, and rid as
fast as I could drive that I might come unlooked for the better to see now you
behaved your selves, which you have done bad enough. When I was almost at
Florence a saucy Varlet robbed me and stole my horse from me, so that I was
beholding to my legs to bring me hihither. Barberino and Machavil come you
hither both of you.


What is your Highness pleasure?

Sir Barberino hold by Mach's breeches, and stoop, for on thy back I will
ride to my Palace.


I'll go fetch a Coach for your Highness.

The Devil take your Coaches, stoop I say without more ado: where is your
obedience?


I think the Duke's run mad, or foxed soundly at the least I know not what to
think of this.


You Sir Don, run by my side, supply my Lackeys office, wonder not but obey.


There is no remedy: heaven be merciful, I think his Highness run mad for fear
when he was robbed.


Now on and do not loiter:
Thus like the Roman Emperors will I ride
To triumph through Florence; stumble not you had best,
Chariots them carried, a Tuscan Noble me; mine is the starelier and the braver
way;
Eo, Meo and Areo thanks.

He jeers us and miscalls us.

On apace,
That I may quickly be in my Palace.

UNto the man enthral'd black and obscure
Is the clear beauty of the brightest day;
Through Iron Grates he only sees the light,
And thereby doth increase his misery;
Those whom he doth perceive in joy to pass
Augment his wretchedness, by making him
To think that thus I lately was my self:
But admirablest Lady of the world,
Divine Prudentia, may I die abhorred
By all mankind, if I repine at all,
Seeing for thy sake I do suffer this;
The exquisitest tortures curious inventions make,
For thee I would think sports, and undergo;
May thou live happily and free from care,
And all my miseries of no moment are.

Eo, Meo and Areo, faith you are all brave Devils all on you, and my father
Conjurer an excellent fellow; I love to see my self, Meo thou art not the work
of Moran; No, the Duke himself I seem. I now must learn to walk in state, and
speak proudly, I'll play such tricks with my Lord banishers, shall make me sport
enough: banish a poor man for doing courtesies! it is against the law of
friendship, I am supposed a Prince, the Florentines acknowledge me the great
Duke; what ever I do tho never so bad passes with approbation: poor Trappolin
turned Duke! tis very strange, but very true;

Would the fates favour panders in this wise,
He were a fool besworn would not turn pimp,
Seeing Pandors Dukes become, he is an ass
That may hav't will let the office pass.
O me Brunetto, alas for thee man! how came thou there? I think in my heart an
there be a mischief in the world thou wilt be at one end orother on it,

So ho Pucchanello, Pucchanello!

Who calls:

That do I Sir, let me Brunetto out presently, and bid him come to me.


Your Highness pleasure shall be done.

Alas poor Brunetto! marl what he has done to be locked in such a place, I think
in my conscience tis not for any Lechery, for I could never get him to it, and
many a time I have offered him many a good bit: Brunetto to come into the
Jail! I cannot tell what to think of it, but be it for what it will out he
goes; my good friend Brunetto who gave me a Ring shall not lie there;

Honest Brunetto.

Great Prince:

He makes a very low leg, but I will not be out-gone in courtesy;

Dearest Brunetto.


Your Highness doth forget your self exceedingly, I am your prisoner.


My best friend good Brunetto.


Beseech your Highness to remember your self.


So I do but never must forget thee. I am glad to see thee in good health, dear
Brunetto.


I shall fall to the ground even now in this salutation; beseech your Highness,
I am your prisoner, your slave.


I am thy servant Brunento.


Wonders! I am astonished; upon my humble knees I do congratulate your safe and
speedy return.


And upon my knees I do embrace thee Brunetto, thou art an honest man* my most
sweet Brunetto.


I know not what to think, nor what to speak;
Beseech your Highness rise.

Not without thee, up Brunetto, honest Brunetto up I say.


Beseech your Highness, I am your humble slave.

I am thy servant Brunetto, and as long as thou lie on the ground so will I
too; up therefore, let us rise and talk, away with your complements; I cannot
abide them, up I say, lets rise; thou shalt not stay I swear.


I am amazed, by force I must obey: Great Sir, I know not what to think, you
honour me above all expression.


Honour a fig, I love thee Brunetto, thou art a good honest fellow, I love thee
with all my heart: Complement with me, and I will be very angry; without more
ado I tell thee I love thee. Puchanello so ho!

Sir Puchanello, bring two chairs hither presently.


Your Highness.


Away with Highness, I say away with it, call me Lavin Duke, plain Medices, I
cannot abide your Highness, your Excellency, your Worship. I hate such idle
slimflams, dear Brunetto, how I love thee I faith I do with al my heart, and if
I lie unto thee I would I might be hanged.


Sure I am awake, this is no dream.

We will live merrily together, I faith we will Brunetto, how glad I am to see
thee in health! come Sir, what a while ha you been a bringing a couple of
chairs! set them here Sir and be gone.

Brunetto, sit thee down, sit down man I say.


I will attend your Highness on my knees.

Why I am not thy Father, am I? leave fooling and sit thee down, that we may
talk together, sit thee here I will have it so,


I am astonished, I humbly pray your Highness.

Pray me no praying, but sit thee down, sit thee here man.

Brunetto be ruled.


On the right hand, I know not what to think*

I am something weary Brunetto, and will not not sit without thee, therefore I
pray thee make me stand no longer; obey, me for I am the Duke.


Here then so please your Highness.

Why an thou wilt have it there, there let it be, but I am mistook that's on the
left hand, what do you think me a clown and without breeding, that I ha no more
manners in me? for shame of the world, sit thee down Brunetto, sit thee down
without more bidding, without thou wilt ha me lie on the ground, for I am so
weary I can scant stand.


There is no remedy, I must obey.

So, well done, sit still man, what art doing, art afraid of me?


What does your Highness mean?

Marry and thou drawst back I'll draw back too; Brunetto sit thee still and let
us talk.


I will obey your Highness.

Highness me no more highness, I cannot abide it, my name is Lavin, call me
Lavin Duke, and tis enough a conscience.


Great Sir, I am far unworthy of these honours,
The noblest Florentines would be most proud
To be thus graced by their Prince.

I like not these set speeches neither, let us talk as we were companions in a
Tavern together, and notafter the Court fashion, I am as weary of it as a Dog,
I am Brunetto; prithee man how came thou into the Gaol?


O pardon me Dread Sovereign.

On thy knees man? what meanest thou by this, dost take me for Mahomet? as well
as I can pardon thee I do, any thing what ere it be, though thou hast killed
every body; rise therefore I say Brunetto, and set thee in thyplace again or
I'll kneel too.


Most merciful Prince, hear me before, lest you
Repent your kindness towards me afterward.

Up I say Brunetto, up, I pardon thee any thing, upon condition thou wilt rise
and sit thee down.


It is your Highness will.

Now good Brunetto without any fear (for I swear unto thee I do not care what
thou hast done, and forgive thee whatsoever it be) tell me the cause.


Dread Sovereign, I was for love put in.

Who put thee in?


Your Highness Governors, Lord Barberino, and Lord Machavil.


They are a couple of Coxcombs for their pains; who art in love withal?


O pardon me.


Sit still or I will not, and if thou dost I will.


Your Highness Excellent sister -- O great Prince!

Sit still Brunetto, wast thou laid up for that?
Alas for thee, hast thou married her?

So please you Highness no.

It doth neither please my Highness nor Lowness neither, I wo'd thou had, and
that's all the hurt I wish thee: co ldst thou think I that loved thee so would
be angry with thee for this, hast thou her consent?


I have.

I am very glad of it, and I here give thee mine too: prithee Brunetto do me
the favour to go and bid Barberino or Machavil come to me, I'll send for my
sister presently, and if she says so to me, I'll soon have you married.


You Highness shall command me to my death,
More willingly unto my life, for so
This business doth importt; he heavens be praised,
And ever be propitious to you, bless you
According to your own and my desires.

This Brunetto is a good honest fellow, and hath always behaved himself very
well, and whatsoever he be I'll give him Prudentia for the Ring he gave me, I
will not be ungrateful; he said he was in love with my sister, and if he had
them all, I wo'd even say much good do his heart with them* but he means the
Princess, and though I have little to do with her, yet if I can give her him I
will, Brunetto's Ring I shall never forget.


Your Highness pleasure.


My Highness pleasure, Sir Lord, is, that you go and tell my sister Prudentia
I would speak with her presently, I will expect her here: be gone.

The Dukes life is very pleasant, I take great content in it, and were it not
for one thing I were most happy, which is, I dare not disclose my self to my
dear Flametta, for she is a woman, and full of title tatle as the rest are; nor
if I could win her without making my self known, durst I lye with her, by
reason of putting off Eo, Meo, and Areo; otherwise sure I should get her; for
sure she would not refuse a Duke.


Here is the Duke alone, whom I so long
Have sought for to petition for the repeal
Of my dear Trappolin. Great Prince, as low
As truest humility can make a Suitor;
Before you I prostrate my self; Most excellent
And merciful Sir, pity a loving Maid,
Who is bereaved of her joys; I beg
Poor banished Trappolin might be recalled,
Whom (when your Highness was to Milain gone,)
Was by those cruel Lords whom you did leave
Our Governors, sent into banishment.
Great Duke, you that have noble thoughts, and sure
A heart full of commiseration,
Kill me not with a cruel hard denial.

Ah Eo, Meo, and Areo, hinder me! I must counterfeit with her; fair Maiden
rise.


O let me kneel (Great Sir) until you say
My Trappolin shall be repeal'd.

Rise I say, we will talk of it; I cannot abide to see any body kneel unless
they are in the Church that have legs to stand on: how may I call you Maiden?


So please your Highness, my name is Flametta.


Mris. Flametta, I say give me your hand, rise without more ado, rise without
you mean to say your Beads over; Mris. Flametta be ruled, good Mris. Flametta
be ruled, wo'd I were hanged i^ ever Trappoline come home and you get not up;
up I say therefore.


I must be most rude.

Why that's well done Mris. Flametta: Trappolin for whom you are a petitioner,
young Mistress, is banished you say, for what it matters not, tell me what you'll
give for his repeal.


Even any thing I have, all that I have.

Are you a Virgin? tell me true, if you are not* it is no wonder besworn, it is
more wonder by the half if you are, for I think there be not two of your age in
the City that be.


May I not prosper in my wishes Sir,
If I be not a Maid.

And will you give your Maidenhead to have him recal'd from banishment?


To him when he comes home, and we are married.

Well said Mistress, But tell me now what will you give me for to have him come
home? --


Even any thing I have.

I am a great man, and like them, will not do favours for nothing; will you
give me your Shoos?


My Shoos! your Highness jests.

I swear unto you (Mistress) but I do not, and if you do not give me what I ask
(how ridiculous soever it seems to you) Trappolin ne'er comes in Florence again.


I wonder at the Duke, but will obey him;
Here are my shoes dear Prince.

Well done I say, but I must have your Stockings too off with them therefore
without any more arguing.


My Stockings with all my heart to have my Trappolin.


Very well done Mrs Flam. you do very well, give me your gown too; Do not
wonder, these will do nothing without it.


Then shall your Highness have it.

I see you love that fellow well, 'tis well done of you, I think he be an
honest man, which makes me the willinger to yield to his repeal; I say I must
have that Petticoat too, else all this is not worth a rush i'faith.


I think the Duke's mad -- And will you give me then your Highness word?


I will.

I cannot help it, here it is.

I swear unto thee, young Wench, give me thy under Petticoat and thy Smock, and
I will give thee my word, and send for him presently to night^ this Wench makes
me curse Eo, Meo, and Areo.


Most excellent Sir, there is not in the world
The thing that in my power lies I wo'd
Deny to do for my dear Trappolin,
But modesty forbids me to do this.

I shall not have them then?

I beseech your Highness pardon me.

I am very sorry I could not see her naked, but it cannot be helped; well how
many kisses will you give me my young Mistress?


Kisses?
Most Gracious Prince, a thousand and a thousand times.
I'll kiss your hand upon my humble knees.

I have no pleasure in that: how many kisses upon lips will you give me?


For Trappolins sake, I'll do any thing that modesty will give me leave; do
what you please Sir.


Ah honey sweet Flametta, how I love thee* prithee kiss better: dear lips! I
could almost wish Eo, M^o, and Areo in the fire; again, again, again, sweet
Flametta.


Shall Trappolin come home?

Do but let us kiss, and thou shalt have any thing.

O me! what a misery 'tis to be a great man? again, again Flametta, Trappolin
shall come home.


I am weary.


So shall I never be; again, again.


The Princess, your Highness sister:
You have gin your word.

Young Mistress, I have not leisure to answer you now, come to me some other
time, and I'll talk with you further: now take up your things and be gone.


I am assured I shall prevail: heavens guard your Highness.


Now I expect my brothers rage, for sure
(Though ne'er so secret kept) my Love unto
My dearest Horatio by some uncouth means
Is known: say what he will, or can, I am
Resolved, and my affection's settled.

Fair Lady, come hither, you are my sister, are you?


I am your sister and servant Sir.

Complement with me no more then I complement with you; good Madam sister sit
you down, I would talk with you a little.


He talks as though he were distracted. I obey you Sir.


Tis well done, good Lady sister.


I never saw my brother thus before;
Sir, I am exceeding glad to see you
Returned in safety out of Lombardy; but should have been more joyful had you
brought your Duchess with you.


She'll come soon enough ne'er fear't; but sister, I must be something brief, for
I am a hungry; as soon as I came home I saw Brunetto in the Gaol, who after
many circumstances and fears, told me 'twas for love of you that he was put
there; tell me sister Prudentia, do you love him? I'll besworn the man is a
good honest fellow, if you have a mind to him I'll give you my consent with al
my heart: I vow as I am an honest man, and the Duke, I do not jest.


Most worthy brother, thanks; I do confess
I love Brunetto, and were very guilty
Of cruelty if I did not; for he
Loves me I know as his own happiness:
Nor, Sir, have I placed my affections
Unworthy; Brunetto is a Prince,
His name is Horatio, and he's second son
Unto the Duke of Savoy; for my sake
He changed his name and lives a prisoner.

How's this! is Brunetto a Prince? you love him Lady sister you say.


Most truly Sir I do.

Are you content to marry him?

I do desire no greater bliss on earth,
So that your Highness will consent thereto.

Lady sister, here is my hand, I am content i'faith, without more words I am.

^ am an hungry now, and would be brief, sister mine I say marry him when you
will, beshrew my heart and I be not content;

I had rather you had him then any man in the world.


I know not what to think, he's strangely changed.

Let this suffice Madam sister; I am very hungry I say, have you any good store
of meat in the house? I could eat soundly now sister of a dish of Sausages:
come Lady sister, lets to dinner, be gone, I have a good stomach as I am an
honest man.


I that have led a life until of late
In spite of death, passed through the dangers of it
Dreadless without regard; whom never men
Conducted by brave Captains to the field,
Did yet withstand, am won and vanquished:
Hipolita, heroic Amazon,
In Love hath conquered me with amorous smiles;
Methinks it is a thing most full of wonder,
That what not massy pikes, nor murderous guns
Could ever do, a Ladies smiling eyes,
The beauty of a timorous woman should;
Her eyes have darted fire into my breast,
Which nothing but her kindness can extinguish,
And be she cruel I shall soon be ashes.
Do I thus yield? shall I forget the sound
Of martial Drums, the warlike noise of Trumpets,
To list to the lascivious harmony
Of instruments touched by Hipolita's hand?
Shall I forget the ordering of a Camp,
To ride great horses, to besiege a city,
To undermine a Castle, to raise Bulwarks,
All for the love of a fair fearful woman?
It must be so; these legs that wont to lead
Armed men to battle, I must use in dances:
This hair that used to be covered with a helm,
Cloggy with sweat and blood, I now must powder:
These hands that wont to wave a dreadful sword,
Instead of iron gauntlets now must wear
Perfumed gloves: I that had wont to be
Under the Chirurgions hands to cure my wounds,
Must have a barber now to keep me neat:
O Love! thou art divine, and can transform
A man from what he was: it is in vain
To think to shun the thing thou dost constrain.

Tis idleness that is the cause
We lose our liberties:
The busy Cupid never draws
To yield unto his vice.
Away with love, it is a thing
I hope I ne'er shall know;
When many weep so I shall sing,
Have joy while they have woe.
The happiness of love is poor,
Compared to liberty;
Blessed lovers do hard things endure,
Their pleasures to enjoy.
May I live ever as I do
Free from that foolish pain;
I wish that no man may me woo,
Until I love again.

O Heavens, is thus her mind composed! if I
Can win this Lady, it will be a conquest
Deserves a Trophy far above my best
Of Victories, I will go try her: hail
Glory of Italy, compared to whom
The famed Egyptian Queen would yield, sweet Lady,
Most excellent Hipolita vouchsafe
To hear me tell your conquest and my foil;
Whom the Great Dukes greatest foes could never vanquish,
Your powerful beauty hath; know Mattemores,
(Whose valour Spain not only doth report,
But Mantoa hath proved your matchless eyes
Transcendents of the brightest lightest stars)
Have wounded fatally unto the heart,
Unless you prove as kind as you are fair.

Do you jest with me Captain?

My hearts delight, sweet centre of my thoughts,
I vow by your rich beauty, if my heart
Could speak, it would agree full with my tongue,
I would tell my lover more then I can express.

What ill fortune, good Seignior, you have had,
To fall in Love with one deserves it not,
Nor doth not care for you? and I do hope
I ne'er shall bear affection unto man.

Patience assist me mightily; not all
The murderous canon bullets I have heard
Fly buzzing by my ears, nor dismal cries
Of dying soldiers, nor the horrid noise
Of rough tempestuous seas have ever moved me,
Only your harsh unkind reply hath struck
Unto my very soul.

I cannot help it;
Had you now, Captain been abroad it'h field,
This ne'er had happened to you; and to cure you
The field will be the best; go to the wars,
Busy your self in fights, and you will soon
Forget you ever saw Hipolita.

Most cruel fair one, be assured that ere
I would forget you (which I know's a thing
For me impossible to do) I would
Into oblivion cast my best of pleasures,
Even all my pleasures, I would forget to use
My sword, and all the Military science;
Witness triumphant Son of Jove, Great Mars,
I vow by all the Honours of a soldier
I love thee dear as mine own heart, but this
Admirable Lady much above it:
Nor do I displease thee in it, I know that thou
Preferd'st the embraces of the Cyprian Queen
Above the glorious battles of the field.
Therefore (dear Lady) be most confident
While I have memory, above all things,
Your beauty will be fixed in it.

Good Seignior,
Trouble me not to answer you again;
Let this suffice, I wish you liked me not,
Because I neither would have you nor any
To love a woman will not return affection.

O Heavens!
Will you continue thus obdurate ever?

Always believe it Captain.

I have not patience to contain my self;
An angry cloud full fraught with thunder bolts
Worked by the Cyclops on Campagnia's Stithy,
Now hanging ore my head, menacing death,
Presaging speedy sad destruction,
Could not compel my silence, 'tis decreed
By my adverse malignant stars that I
Shall die destroyed by a fair cruel woman;
Which ere I do, I will a little ease
My troubled heart of woe: hear merciless woman:
(Whom I do curse because I love so dearly)
Hear me, and afterwards go glory that
Your wondrous beauty, and your savage heart
Hath made a man distracted, killed a soldier.

A Captain and be thus moved by a woman's refusal!


Sweetest Hipolita, be merciful, and save
His life that honours you above the world.

Pray you Seignior be answered.

You are resolved then to ruin me:
Cursed be those battles all that I have fought
And conquered in, it had been more honour for me
To have been slain by my incensed foes
Which were brave soldiers, then to die in peace
By the unkindness of a proud fair woman.

Beseech you leave your rage, and leave me Captain.


More cruel then Hyrcanian Tigers, hear
Me take my leave before I go.

Proceed.

Thou God of love, and if thou art a God
Revenge thy self and thy wronged deity
On this unmerciful Lady; make her fall
In love with the basest of all mankind,
A man so full of ignorance, that he
In shape alone may differ from a beast,
Not know that she is fair and slight her beauty;
And he himself the most deformed thing
That ever burdened our mother earth
With his unworthy steps: Cupid attend,
And yield unto my just request; make this
Lady run mad for such a monster, shed
A thousand thousand tears upon her knees,
While he stands laughing at her: may you die
Raging for love, Hipolita as I.

I do begin to pity him; sure I never
Shall have a man to love me better, and though
I once intended always to live single,
His words have altered my resolution:
Nor, if I take him, shall I do a thing
Will misbecome me, for he is a man
High in the Great Dukes favour. Noble Captain,
It is your happy fate to conquer always;
I vow unto you by my honour, I think
Most seriously, no man upon the earth
Besides you could have won; I'm the last
Of all your victories, Theseus like you have
Overcome Hipolita.

And will you love me then?

I do and always will.

Blessed be the stars that shined at my nativity,
I want words to express my joys; but dearest Lady,
My sweet Hipolita, my forward actions
Shall make you know my heart above my tongue;
I am a soldier, and was never wont
To speak amorously.

You have said enough.

Love is but thought by words, by deeds tis known;
Show me you love me, and let words alone.

Worthiest of Ladies, when I cease to do
All that I can, then may your love cease too.

HE cannot counterfeit so much.

I know not,
But if he do not surely he is mad;
What wild fantastic things he does, and talks
Of Eo, Meo, and Areo, names
Unheard in the the Court before!

Some Milain Counts
I warrant you he means by them.

The strangest thing of all is the release
Of Brunetto, and his extraordinary love unto him,
Whom he hath caused richly to be clothed.

And uses him as if he were his better.

Yonder's the man we talk of; what a change
We see! A prisoner but lately locked up safe,
And now to be the wonder of the Court.

Next Eo, Meo, and Areo, the Duke
Doth swear he loves me; but who those are
I cannot tell nor learn: my Lords, good day,
Saw you his Highness lately?

No sir.

You speak as tho you were displeased.

We are not well contented Sir.

The Duke is noble, utter your grievances to him.


So we will Sir.

And now Sir,
Know worthy Prince we are your loyal subjects,
And what we say is for your honour.

If it be for my honour I'll hear you,
But be as brief as you will.

Your Highness hath lately released Brunetto.

Tis a thing very certain.

We doubt not but done out of clemency,
Not knowing why he lay there.

Well, why was he put there?

Even for your Honour sake (most Gracious Sir) The Lady Prudentia your sister
loves him.


Say you so? So ho Puchanello, So ho!

Who calls?

His Highness; come hither presently.

Bid the guard enter.

You say Brunetto was put in prison because my sister loved him, you think it
good and fitting he were there again.


So please your Highness, yes.

Puchanello take me these two Coxcombly Lords into your Custody; they are never
well but when they are banishing some body, or doing some mischief or other:
Brunetto was laid in prison because my sister loved him, and lay me these there
because I love them.


Beseech your Highness not to deal so hardly
With us whom you have known so faithful to you.

Puchanello, away with them I say: you of the Guard see them in.


Most worthy Prince be merciful, if we
Have done amiss twas out of ignorance.

Sir rogue away with them, or I'll lay up you too.


Your Honours must have patience and walk.

There is no remedy.

The heavens be merciful to Florence;
What ill malignant star hath so deprived
Our wise and noble Duke of all his reason,
That he remembers not who are his friends?

The Gods be ever most propitious;
Great Sir, unto you, and continue long
Your life, chief honour of the Medices.

Prince Horatio I am your servant, I pray you forgive me my calling of you by
your nick-name of Brunetto; my sister hath told me you are the Son of the Duke
of Savoy, besworn unto you I am very sorry I have not used you as befitted you,
but it was your fault that told me not who you were: I have talked with
Prudentia, and she loves you she says, which I am glad on, and I'll marry you
as soon as you will


Sir, it is true I am Horatio,
Son of the Piemond Prince; but being his second,
I durst not think me worthy of such honours
As your Highness hath do no me; and therefore told
None but your beauteous sister who I was.

Enough my friend; and Prince Horatio,
Could you suppose I would deny my sister,
Though she were made of Gold and precious stones,
Unto your Highness, and to such a friend?
You do deserve a better wife then she;
She's not half good enough for you, and if
I had another sister, you should have them both.
My friend a Prince! I'm very glad in faith,
But sorry that I did not know you such,
That I might have done you right: wood I were hanged
If you are not far a better man then I.

Great Prince, you do forget your self.

Your Highness must pardon me, I do remember my self well enough, yet Eo, Meo,
and Areo, have made me something proudish, but howsoever I am your servant,
Prince Horat. in faith I am your very dutiful servant: how sa you now, the Duke
of Savoyes son! in faith I am your poor servant Lavin the Duke of Florence.


I am amazed; he's mad:
Beseech your Highness leave, I pray you Sir.

What have we here now, does the Captain bring us Morris-dancers? what lobs are
these trow?


So please your Highness, being importuned much these I have brought before
you, that you might, do justice.


Captain Mattemores, justice I'll do with all my heart, but execution let do
who will for me.


Great Duke of Tuscany, vouchsafe to hear me,
For what I speak is out of conscience;
This fellow Mr. Bulflesh a Butcher, I saw
Verily with mine own eyes even yesternight
(When he was drunk) to kill my man, which he
Swore was good Beef, and he would sell it dear.

Sir Puritan you are a base scoundrel, was not I drunk in your company to
make you merry?


But Mr. Bulflesh, you do know, and that full well, that I prayed you on my
knees for your own souls sake to drink no more, and professed to you that it
was a great abominable sin in you to fox your self, or be foxed.


Goodman Calfeshead, you are a base scurvy Companion; do you not know that for
your sake I killed your man, (yet I meant but only to beat him soundly) because
he poured not the wine into your Codpiece? did not I do it out of friendship
unto you? did I not you puritan you, and you to complain? O the ingratitude of
Puritans!


Peace both of you. Master Puritan hold your tongue I say: will not Calfeshead
be drunk Bulflesh?


So please your Highness no, he will let a man sooner hang him then make him
drunk; Besides, he is a fellow of strange opinions, and hath sent his son to
Geneva, to hear Jack Calvin preach. He stole a Surpless to make his Amorosa a
Smock of; and hath writ a paltry Book against the Bishops, printed at
Amsterdam in Decimo sexto. He will lie and steal without comparison; is both
for Boys as well as Queens when he hath money* And like a true Italian
Hypocrite, is for any sin or mischief but our Drinking.


Then know I very well how to do justice: Mr. Calfeshead, you say the Butcher
killed your man when he was fox't, be you fox't when you will and then kill him
for'^*


Heavens defend, I ne'er was drunk yet, and never will be.


There is mad justice; he doth increase my wonder.


Bless me, murder! I would not do it for the world.


This is strange justice, the Butcher doth very well deserve to be sent into the
Galleys at Ligorn.


I have done with you Mr. Puritan, you may be gone to the Tavern; and Bulflesh
you may get you to the Shambles as soon as you will, for I have no more to say
to either of you.

I am ready for the next; speak therefore.


Most excellent Prince, pity a childless father;
As yesterday my only Son did walk
Under an house, this fellow Gaffer Tiler,
Who was a working on it, did fall down
Upon my son, and killed him with his fall.

Mr. Barn be not so eager, you know I bore your son no malice, and that it was
a hundred to one I broke not my own neck.


This is an easy matter to conclude;
Friend Barn, you say this Gaffer Tiler
Fell off a house, and so did kill your son;
I will be very upright in my justice,
Go you upon the house from whence he tumbled,
(And he shall stand beneath) and fall on him.

And the Duke be not stark mad, I am to think him so.


So I may break my own neck.

He strangely is distracted.

Neighbour Barn, get you about your business, for I have done with you.


I must have patience.

Now let me make an end with these, and I have done.


Daign, Noble Duke, to hear my just complaint,
I am a poor and an unfortunate widow;
This man Dick Whip, as the other day he drove
His coach, run over a little child of mine
That was playing in the street, and killed it.

Sir Whip, is this true?

So please your Highness I confess it is.

It doth not please me, nor displease me, for I neither did it, nor was the
child mine.


It was against my will, a thing of chance, Mrs. Fine cannot deny it.


Mrs. Fine, you are a widow you say?

A poor unhappy one I am.

You say that Whip the coachman hath killed your child; and how he did it I have
understood.

This is my justice, I will do you right;
Whip shall lie with you until he get you another.

Madder and madder.

I cannot choose but smile.

Most willingly, so please your Highness I am well content to do her that
satisfaction.


You shall be hanged first, that you shall, is thus my expectation failed?


Mrs. Fine be ruled, I will have justice done, Whip shall lie with you; you may
marry him and you will: he killed your child, and he shall get you another, I
say but right, and Sir Whip look unto't, and you play the bungler and fail,
you shall to Ligorn and learn to row: Mrs. Fine be contented, and you do not
like him you might have held your tongue, for I know no body that sent for you,
and so get you both gone.


The Heavens preserve your Highness.

My friend and Prince Horatio, go unto
My sister, bid her to prepare her self,
I'll have you married within this day or two;
I long to see you both in bed together.

Most willingly I will do such a message,
The Gods preserve you happily.

A strange discovery if true.

Seignior Captain, I say I have done very good justice, and in a little time
too, I am not like your scarlet coats that will do nothing without money; a
company of fellows they are whose beards and hearts agree not together.


Your Highness doth dispatch things very soon.


Though I am the Duke yet I love to do no hurt, as other men in authority
would, I hate to banish men as Machavil and Barb. ha done: alas poor Trappolin,
I hear they have banished an honest poor man called Trap. what the Divel Seignior
Mat. came in their heads to send a poor fellow away out of his country without
any money? though men may sometimes gather a reasonable Sallet abroad, he shall
get no oil to eat it withal.


Great Duke of Tuscany, our noble Master,
That Trap. of whom your Highness speaks,
Had little fault in him, (good faith) at all
Saving he was a most notorious coward.

Why you Don of guns or pikes, do you think every mans mind is given to the
wars? Trap. was addicted to the peace, a poor fellow full of courtesies; one
that will never deny to do a favour for a friend* I will have a little sport
with my Don of the wars; O me, Sir Captain, look yonder: Eo, Meo and Areo, I
will put you off for a while, I will try some conclusions.


Your Highness! wher's the Duke gon I marle;
What Trappolin, art thou come again?
Faith many a wench in Florence will be glad;
Follow thy old trade, be a Pander still.

Seignior Captain I am your humble slave, and if I can do you any kindness at
any time, i'faith Don Mathemores you shall command me -- and if you have but a
mind to any Beauty in Florence, pay but me well for my pains, and her well for
hers, and I will not fail you; and Captain I can give you a delicate poison to
dispatch any enemy with whom you dare not fight.


I see thou art resolved to be a rogue,
Tis pity that his Highness did repeal thee;
Next time I see him, sir Pimp, I will
Make suit to have you sent into Ligorn.

You Spanish coxcomb, go hang your self, do your worst.


Were it thou a soldier I wood fight with thee,
Being a rogue thou dost deserve my foot;
Take this you rascal.

I will presently be out of his debt -- who's yonder? it is the Duke or I am
deceived; Eo, Meo, and Areo, on again, my hat, my glass, and cloak, sit close:
how now sir Captain, where are your manners? what do you think of me, who am
I trow? I am not your Lieutenant am I? stoop and take up your hat, and let me
see if it will not become your hand as well as your head in my presence.


I did not see your Highness.

Will you lie too? take that and learn to speak truth.


Most Noble Prince, and my most royal Master,
Pardon the error which unwillingly
I have committed; in Tuscany there lives not
A man that freelier for your sake would lose
His life then I.

Well, get you gone, I do
Forgive you; but my Don at arms, remember
The Duk's to be observed, he is the man
That doth maintain you.

And most worthy Prince,
Did but occasion show it self, I would
Venture and lose my life to do you service.

And my Father Conjurer would come into Florence, I would make him the next man
unto my Highness; he is a good man, and it is great pity that he should go to
the Divel, as they say Conjurers and Witches do: well, I am a brave fellow, I
love to see my self in my glass, I am the Duke in faith, the very Duke, I see me.


I will go and petition him again.

My rogue Flametta, I could kiss her to pieces, bite off her lips, and suck out
her eyes I love her so well.


The great Duke of Tuskany the gracious heavens
Prosper your Highness ever, I am the same
That lately did entreat for the repeal
Of my Beloved sweetheart Trappolin:
Most excellent Sir, pity my earnest suit,
And let me have my Trappolin recal'd.

This is a very precious villain, how she loves me! and I ever marry while I am
a Duke by Eo, Meo and Areo's leave I will have her, -- your name little maid,
is Flametta, as I remember?


So please your Highness, yes.

You sue to have banished Trappolin come home?


Most humbly, most excellent Sir, I do.

Well 'tis all as please Eo, Meo and Areo, I can do nothing witho t them, and
(my young Mistress) as long as they are in authority, I can do little for you.


Then by your Highness leave, do I wish Eo, Meo, and Areo in the fire.


Methinks they should be enough in that already, for the Divel made them all;
now I think well on it, sometime when I have good opportunity I will off with my
things and have a little sport with her: since, fair Maid, you are so earnest
for your sweetheart Trappolin, he shall come home very shortly, he shall
believe me, but upon condition I will do it.


On any condition except my honour Sir.

That he shall lie with you.

Were we but married, most willingly.


If he gives you his oath to have you, will not that suffice?


I had rather we had married before.


You need not fear, should he swear unto you and break his oath, I would hang
him, and yet (though I ne'er mean to break my word with her) I faith I should
very hardly hang my self for any thing; the rope is a very dismal thing.


Shall he come home, say the word Noble Prince.


Well on my word he shall* as soon as possibly I can, but on that condition
that you will accept of him without marriage, upon his oath to have you.


I see his Highness is mad (as every body says) otherwise what should ail him
to talk thus? most excellent Prince, he and I would not disagree.


Well here is my hand, he shall come home shortly, now I must have a kiss and
leave you: I am very hungry, I ha been so long a doing justice that I am very
hungry, give me a buss sweetheart.


Heaven bless your Highness.


My hearts sweet solace, my dear Isabella
You are most welcome unto Florence;
Live according to your wishes happily,
And may I perish if I do not strive
In every thing to please you to my power;
I'm sorry at my coming home I find
Such strange and unexpected alterations,
That for to quiet them I must deprive
My self some hours of your company.

Most Excellent Sir, I do account my self
Most highly blessed, that am not only married
Unto a Prince, but one that can
And doth vouchsafe his love unto me, being
Defective of those beauties should deserve it.
To your affairs betake you Worthy Sir,
I will expect you till your leisure serves.

You are good unto a miracle
Sweet Isabella -- attend the Dutch in;
Adieu my Love, some few but tedious minutes
Past over I will come unto you.

I will await your leisure.

What mad fantastic humours have possessed
In general the heads of the Florentines?
They have amazed me, speak as if I
Had been with them before my Duchess came.

You great commander of the Tuscan Cities,
Pity your subjects, and your loyal servants;
In what we sued for we had no design,
Neither the least intent for to offend.

Be merciful therefore most gracious Prince,
Let not the noblest of the Florentines
Wear out their days and thraldom in a Prison,
Being men not long ago high in your favour.

I am lost within a Labyrinrh of wonders,
I know not what to think, the chiefest of
The Florentine Nobility in prison,
And sue to me as if I had commanded
Them to this place; sure some ill spirit hath
Possessed men's minds while I was absent: do you
Know me?

Your Highness is the Duke our Master.

Are you not called Barb. and you
Macha. the Lords unto whom I left
The government of Tusk any in
My absence?

We are your loyal subjects though your prisoners; and were left your Deputies
when your Highness went to Milain.


How came you there?

Great Sir, you know most well,
At your command.

I must be satisfied in this:
Puchanello so ho!

Who calls? whats the matter I wonder.

Release me the Lords presently, and send them
To me hither:
The more I think of these accidents,
The more I marvel how they come to pass;
The men whom I did leave here governors
Are prisoners (and which increases more
Amazement in me) they say it was I
That made them so; some unheard malady
Unknown unto the world before it seems,
Hath infected all my subjects with a frenzy.

He hath changed his humour it seems.


And may he continue in this if it be a good one.


I am astonished to see the things
I every minute do, especially
You two (to whom I left the weighty charge
Of rule) in prison; resolve me for heavens sake
How you came there.

Sure he doth jest with us.

Your Highness is disposed to be merry;
You know (most excellent Sir,) full well that none except your self could do
it.


I do it?

He doth things in his madness he remembers not when he's in's right senses it
seems.


Florence I left a wise ingenious City;
But I have found it now at my return
Possessed with a strange unheard of madness:
Who put you in prison? collect your wits in it order
And answer wisely.

I vow by the prosperity of Tuscany,
Your Highness.

Most strange! Why did I so?

Because we did (most gracious Sir) give notice
Unto you how the Princess Prudentia,
Your machless beauteous sister loved Brunetto.

Whom? what Brunetto!

Your prisoner taken in the Mantoan wars.

My sister so forget her self! I am
Full of amazement: she that had refused
The youthful Dukes of Modena and Parma,
Dote on a slave slighted by all the stars!
My sister also so to lose her senses,
She that was wise, and honoured for her virtues!
Sure also this same strange infection
Of madness wood ha seized upon my self
If I had stayed at home. I will not now
So marvel at the common people, seeing
The most discreet of the Nobility,
And my own sister equally distracted.

I hope he comes to himself again, he talks something more wisely then of late.


It is a frequent thing to see a City
Miserably groan under a heavy sickness,
To have the Plague, or fierce diseases full
Of danger, rage and even unpopulate places;
But such a general frenzy to possess
And to distract all Florence, is a wonder,
A miracle unmach'd in history.

How he talks as if all we were mad, and he had done nothing!


Are you sure you are both in your right senses?


Did once your Highness know us so?

Yes.

We are as free from any distraction
As ever yet we were since we were born.

You must both of you tho give me leave to think what I know.

I^e try an he be mad too. Cap. these Lords say I put them in prison, how say
you?


So your Highness did -- he's distracted another way.


Good Gods be merciful. Why?


Because they spoke against Brunetto's liberty.

He's in the same tale;
Though they are all deprived of their senses,
They do not differ.
But why (good Cap.) answer me a little,
Should I desire Brunetto's freedom, being
Beloved by my sister as they say?
Wood it not be a great dishonour, think you,
Unto the Family of the Medices,
That she should cast her self away upon one
We do neither know whom, or whence he is?
I pray you Captain, if that yet you have
Any small remnant of your wit remaining,
Reply according to it.

And he be grown wise again, Heavens be praised.
It is a certain truth your Highness speaks,
That if your sister should bestow her self
(Being a Princess meriting so much
For her unequalled beauty, and her virtues)
Upon a man such as you pleased to mention,
It would be a great weakness in her; but you
Your self I heard (most excellent Sir)
To call Brunetto Prince Horatio,
The second Son unto the Duke of Savoy.

How, I call him so! truth Captain you
Have heard these things which I did never say.

You never heard him call Brunetto so.

Never, this is the first time I ever heard of it.

My wonder is so great, I do want words
Whereby to give it vent; I see that all
My subjects being distracted think me mad.

And more, so please your Highness, you did send
Brunetto, whom you Prince Horatio called,
Unto your sister, to bid her prepare
Her self; for you within a day or two
Would see them married.

Enough,
Captain, I swear unto you by my Dukedom,
That rather I would send Brunetto (though
He were the Duke of Savoys second son)
To have his head struck off, then on that message
You say I did.

He doth remember nothing.

If the Duke be come to his right senses again,
I beseech the Gods keep him so.

And I.

Beseech your Highness look, let your own eyes
Be witness of their mutual affection;
Behold the Princess your sister and Brunetto:
Let us withdraw where we may stand unseen,
And you shall hear them talk what I have said.

Dear Lady, you have raised me to a fortune
So high, that when I look upon my self
I am amazed, and wonder at your goodness.

Most noble Prince, let my unfeigned love
Excuse the weak expressions of my tongue;
I'm glad my Brother bears so noble a mind,
As to be willing to unite our bodies
As we have done our hearts.

Not only willing, divine Prudentia,
But earnest for us; he doth seem to grieve
That two such faithful lovers as we are
Should live so long a sunder.

It is a worthy nature in him.

I can contain my self no longer: though this
Be out of madness done I will not suffer it.
Sister!

Live long most worthy Brother happily.

So should I wish for you, bore you a mind
Deserved your self.

What mean you Sir?

Good Heavens be kind, and do not now undo
What you have almost brought unto perfection;
I fear his m adness that once favoured me;
Hath changed his mind to my undoing.

I will but spend few words; are you a Son
Of the Duke of Savoys?

Your Highness knows I am his second.

Whether
You are or no I care not; and if you be,
My sister once deserved a better husband,
And she shall rather in a Monastery
Spend all her future days then be your wife:
And be you what you will Sir, I will show you
That you have wronged me, and I do not fear
The Duke of Savoy if he be your father.
Puchanello, Puchanello come hither.

I like this.

He's wonderfully distracted -- most worthy Brother,
Be not so much unmerciful.

Peace Prudentia, I never thought
You had so weak a reason.

He's mad to my undoing; gracious Gods,
Soon make him leave this humour.

I hope he's come unto himself.

Sir, convey Brunetto into prison,
Lock him up close.

Here's do and undo -- Will our Duke ne'er be in his
Right senses again?

My dear Horatio, love me still, for I
Unto thee will be constant though I die.

Though I be tortured unto death my Dear.

I know not what to think of these alterations.

Thus (but the heavens assist) I hope to bring
Int' order from confusion every thing.

THe Duke is come home, and therefore my hardest part is behind; Father
Conjurer and you be not my friend now I am undone; Eo, Meo, and Areo sit you
all close and lose not a jot of your virtue: happen what will as soon as I meet
him his Highness, I will try the virtue of my powder on him, let him take it
how he please.


Here is my brother, I will try him, perhaps
He may have changed his sullen humour now,
And set the Prince Horatio at liberty.
Most excellent noble Sir.

My dear sister, how dost thou do? why look you so sad, ha you got the green
sickness to night with lying alone? and you have I will take an order for your
cure very shortly, and to your liking too, I'll have you married within these
two days at the furthest.


Married Sir! unto whom?

Unto my friend your lover, Prince Horatio*

I am glad of this: Alas Sir, why then have you
Made him a close unhappy prisoner?

I see the Duke hath met with him:
You do deceive your self Lady sister, indeed
You do* put up my friend in prison? heaven defend.

Sir, pardon me for speaking truth, I heard
When you commanded it.

Sister mine, if I did I was drunk, and now I am sober I will let him out.
Sir Pucchanello, so ho.


May he continue always in this vein
Of kindness; thus his madness is not grievous.

Madam sister, I am very sorry I was such a beast as in my drink to commit such
a fault; I pray you forgive me.


What is your Highness will?

It is that you set Prince Horatio at liberty, and send him hither presently.


I wonder -- most willingly.

You are a gracious Prince, and the high Gods
Will recompense your pity unto lovers.

What a Swine was I do such a thing! I am ashamed as often as I think on it, I
shall be ashamed to look on my friend; sister, you must pray him to forgive me.


Sir, trouble not your self, and be assured,
Unless you part us, you can never do
Offence either unto the Prince or me.

It seems his mind is changed, the heavens be praised.


Prince Horatio, an you do not forgive me my locking of you in prison, I shall
never be merry again; I did it when I was drunk, and my sister knows that as
soon as she told me on it, I sent for you; I pray you therefore forgive me good
Prince Horatio.


Most excellent Sir, I was a man unworthy
Of this sweet Ladies love, did I not freely.

I thank you i'faith Prince Horatio with all my heart I swear unto you, here
take you my sister, take her by the hand, lead her whether you will, and do
what you will unto her with her consent: I am very sorry I parted you so long;
I know Lovers would be private, though they do nothing but talk, therefore I
will not hinder you: fare you well both my Princely friend and Lady sister.


The Gods preserve you.

And reward your goodness.

Thus what the Duke doth I will undo -- such excuses will serve my turn well
enough.

Here are my Lord banishers, it seems the Duke hath set them at liberty, but in
they go again as sure as the cloaks on their backs.


May the good angels that attend upon
Princes on earth, defend your Highness always
From every offensive thing.

And may you live
A long and happy life, enlarge your state,
Excel in fame the first great Duke.

Your good wishes I like, but credit me my Lord Banishers, neither of you. Who
let you out of prison?


He's mad as ere he was -- your Highness Sir.

You lye Sir: Pucchanello come hither quickly.

Heavens be merciful, we must in again I see.
He does and undo's, and remembers nothing.

Sir Rogue, why did you set these two at liberty?


Your Highness did command it.

If our Duke must be mad, the Gods grant him
That which he had the last.

You ill-fac'd rascal you lie.


Beseech your Highness remember your self, it
Was at your command.

It may be so, but I am sure I was drunk then, and now I am sober they shall in
again; therefore take them with you, be gone I say.


There is no remedy.


Good gods pity Florence.


Eo, Meo, and Areo, thanks i'faith* yet I am supposed the Duke, Father
Conjurer, by thy Art I am supposed a Prince; stick to me still and be my
friend.

Here is the Duchess! Eo, Meo, and Areo, be true to me, and I'll have a kiss
or two at the least.


Sir you are fortunately met.

Who are you Lady Madam?

Do you not know Sir?

I'd have you tell me.

I never knew him so before, I am your Wife.

I'm glad on it I promise you, come and kiss me then.


You are wondrous merrily disposed.

Madam Duchess I am something jovial indeed, I have been a drinking
Montefiascone very hard, kiss me again my dear Lady wife.


He's drunk.

You are a handsome woman I promise you: prithee tell me my Lady Duchess, am I
a proper handsome fellow?


Do not jest with me Sir, you know you are
Him whom above the world I do esteem.

Well said my Lady wife.

I ne'er saw him so distempered before.

Have you nothing yet in your belly?


You know I am with child Sir.

Faith but I do not, for your belly swells not.


I am full of wonder.

Lady wife get you in, I am half drunk, and now am unfit for you, but give me
a kiss or two before, -- Madam Duchess fare you well.


I had thought he had not been addicted to
A vice so loathsome as drunkenness.

Yet all happens very well; protest the Duchess is a gallant woman, I almost
like her as well as Flametta; I could lie with her and I wooed, but I am half
honest, and will not wrong the Duke nor Flametta. Why is not my wench as good
as she? wherein do they differ, but only in clothes? Flametta's a woman as
right as she, and perhaps naked as handsome: what good in the night do jewels
and fine clothes to a woman when she hath them not on? besworn I am very merry;
Eo Meo and Areo are brave tame Devils, and my Father Conjurer an excellent
learned fellow.

Vienca wine, and Padua bread,
Trivigi tripes, and a Venice wench in bed.

YE glorious Planets that do rightly guide
The giddy ships upon the Ocean waves,
If some of your malignant influences
Have raised this madness in my subjects heads,
Let some of your benign influences,
Again restore them to their former senses:
Those Florentines whom all their enemies
Could not impeach, could not withstand in arms,
Suffer not, you immortal powers divine,
Thus to be ruined, by distraction.
I am astonished, O Heavens, I know not what to think!

Puchanello, Puchanello, let me out the two Lords, and send them to me
presently, I'll talk unto um here at large.


His ill fit's off.

The goods be praised.

I do not think that since the infancy
And first creation of the world, a madness
Pestiferous and equal unto this
Was ever known; good Heavens reveal (and soon)
The cause, that I may do my best to help it.

Long may this fit continue.

If it hold always, sure he's in's wits again.

I wonder, Lords, and justly, that you whom I have known to have the noblest
judgements, should thus become distracted; you in your fits of frenzy run to
prison of your selves,

And think I sent you.


Most royal Sir, we grieve to see these days;
You did command us thither.

I?

Your Highness self.

You are both deceived; to do such idle errors,
And lay the blame on me doth more amaze me.
Puchanello how came these in prison?

So please your Highness, you were angry with them
And did commit them.

I commit them?
That thou art mad is not so great a wonder;
I tell you both with sorrow, witness heaven,
You are strangely bereaved of your reason.
Well, go ye in, and pray unto the Gods
That they hereafter would be kind unto you
And keep you from relapse.

Heavens bless your Highness.

And be unto you a perpetual guard.

Famine, plague, war, the ruinous instruments
Wherewith the incensed deities do punish
Weak mankind for misdeeds, had they all fallen
Upon this city, it had been a thing
To be lamented but not wondered at.
O my dear Isabella! I have brought thee
From Milain flourishing in all delights,
Into a city full of men distracted.

He is not sober yet. Go in and sleep Sir,
You do not well thus to bewray your weakness
Unto the public view.

My wife and all! O heavens!

What say you Sir?

My Isabella, thou hast cause to curse me
For bringing thee into a place infected:
The air is sure pestiferous, and I wonder
Now how I have escaped.

Good Sir, I pray you sleep.

Wherefore my Isabella?

Why you have drunk too much.

Madness unmatched!
Dear Isabella, withdraw thy self into
Thy chamber, I will presently come to thee,
There we will pray unto the angry Gods
That they would from his remove this heavy ill.

I will obey you Sir to get you home;
Good Gods ne'er let him thus offend again.

What have I done so much offensive to
The supreme powers, that they should punish me
Not only with the madness of my subjects,
But the distraction of my wife and sister!
What do I see? they do embrace and kiss:
My sisters madness will undo her, how
He came at liberty I marvel much;
Whom I would have to lie in prison, walk in freedom, and whom I would have
in freedom run of themselves to prison.


Most noble Brother.

Sister, I grieve to see thee thus.

Excellent Prince!

Sure the good Angels that had wont to guard
The Medices in all their actions,
Have for the horrid sins of Florence left us,
And fled to Heaven.

His mind again is altered.

Dear brother, do not frown and look so angry.

Peace sister, I'm ashamed to hear you speak,
Each word you say is poison in my ears.

Jailor.

I come.

What mean you Sir?

I must again to prison, fickle fortune,
How soon a happy man thou make wretched*

Sir, why did you set this man Brunetto,
Or this Horatio (I know not what to call him,)
At liberty?

Will he ne'er be wise! your Highness bade me.

I! Bethink you, and answer truly.

Your Highness knows I durst not for my life
Ha don't without your licence.

Sweet Brother.

Silence would become you better far.

Life of my heart, do not disturb your self,
I am unworthy you should speak for me.

Sir, take him again, and look to him better then you have; your madness
shall not excuse you, if once more you serve me thus.


I must be patient: good Heavens, soon alter this sullen fit into his former
kindness:

Farewell my sweet Prudentia.

I wonder Brother, what pleasure you take
In crossing me after this sort.

It is in vain to answer frantic people.

I, I am mad, 'tis your perverseness makes me.

YEt I cannot meet with the Duke, I long to see him look like me, I would fain
powder his Highness. Eo, Meo and Areo, I thank you faith, my hat, my glass, and
cloak; honest Father Conjurer, I will love thee while I live.

Hel's broke loose again, I do what the Duke undoes, and he undoes what I do.


Long live your Highness.

Amen.

And happily.

Amen I say; but how my small friends came you hither? I thought you had been
under lock key.


I fear he's ill as ere he was.

Sir Puchanello, so ho, so ho! come hither you rogue.


We must in again.

Good Gods, will this frenzy never leave him!

Goodman durty-face, why did you not keep me these in prison till I bid you let
them out?


So please your Highness so I did.

Dare you lie so boldly? you take me for a Doctor, Gracian of Franckolin I
warrant you, or a fool in a play, you're so saucy with me.


Good Gods!

Was ever heard the like?

Beseech your Highness to remember your self.

Now I bethink my self, perhaps I might do it when I was drunk; if I did bid
you give them their liberty it was when I was fox't, and now I am sober lay
them up agin; walk my good Lord Banishers, your Honours know the way.


Will this humour never leave him?

We must endure it.

There is no remedy.

My Lord Prisoners get you gone, I am an hungry and cannot stand to hear any
supplication.


You must obey my Lords.

Yet all goes well, all goes exceeding well;
My wil's obeyed, I am supposed the Duke;
My hat my glass and cloak retain their force,
And Father Conjurer does not forsake me.

THough horrid War, thou bear a bloody sword,
And march over the world in dreadful arms;
Though fearful mankind on their humble knees,
Beseech the Gods to keep thee from their homes,
Yet art thou (when tricked up in dismal robes,
Presaging death and ruin to a State)
More lovely to a valiant soldiers eyes,
Then are the pleasures of a wanton Court.
And sure if our great Duke Lavinio
Had been in the field expecting of a foe,
He ne'er had been distracted as he is:
'Tis peace that doth bewitch us from our selves,
Fills most Heroic hearts with amorous toys,
And makes ^s to forget what honour is;
But for Hipolita's sake I must not speak
Any thing ill of Love; Love I must say
Is good, but war leads the more noble way.

How do you Captain?

I am your Highness creature.

Saw you not lately Barbar* or Maccha?

Yes.


Where are they?

Your Highness knows in prison.

O heavens, in prison again! Good gods, when will you remove this frenzy from
the Florentines?


I see there is little hope on him.

Why are they in prison?

Because your Highness did command.

Never, Captain, I never did command it; go and bid Pucchanello let them out.


Sir, he dares not at my bidding.

Here take my Ring and do it.

One humour in the morning, and another in the afternoon, will it never be
better?


Wo'd I did know what heinous sin it is
I have committed that is so offensive
Unto the Gods to cause this punishment,
That I might sue unto them for forgiveness,
And they be reconciled and pity Florence.
I'm f^ll, and full of wonder; perhaps some fiend,
Permitted by the heavens, assume's my shape,
And what I do undoth; was ever known
Such a distraction in the world before?

At last I have found him.

This the Impostor is that hath deceived
The eyes of all, it can be nothing else.

I vow and swear I am something afraid, but will be bold; Eo, Meo and Areo, sit
close, come out powder, come out, father Conjurer I rely on your powder;

Take that for my sake.


What rudeness is this?

I have don't i'faith, Trap. I have repealed thee for Flametta's sake.


How is this?
If thou art a fiend, the gracious heavens be kind,
And give a period to thy wild proceedings;
But if thou art a Conjurer, I'll have thee
Burnt for thy Magic, as thou dost deserve.

Trappolin talk wisely.

Why dost thou call me so?

Aha! A man forget himself so! art thou not he?

I am the Duke.

Beware of treason; do you know your own face if you see it? look here; what say
you now?


I am bewich't, thou art a Conjurer,
And hast transformed me to a banished Rogue.

For Flametta's sake I pardon thee this language, but learn to speak better
lest you walk again.


Heaven, earth and hell, have all agreed together
To load me with a plague unknown before
Unto the world: The heavens have given consent
Unto my misery, hell hath plotted it,
And the deceived earth believes me mad,
And now will take me for a banished Rogue.

O joy above expression! behold
My Trap. is come; Love, welcome home;
Thou art beholding unto me (my Dear)
'Twas I that won the Duke for thy repeal.

I am amazed.

Give me a hundred kisses; let us spend
An hour in kissing, afterwards we will talk.

Away.

Have you forgotten me so soon? I am
Thy true Flametta (lovely Trap.)

Be gone I say.

Dost thou reward me thus for all the pains
I've took to get thee home again?

Leave me
Thou impudent whore, or I will kick thee hence.

O faithless men! Women, by me take heed
You give no trust unto this perjured sex.
Have I all thy long banishment been true,
Refused Lord Barbarino with all his gifts;
And am I slighted thus? I will complain
Unto his Highness of thee.

Have you don't?

What?

Have you let the Lords at liberty?

What's that to thee?

Give me my Ring.

He has heard the Duke sent me with his Ring, and this impudent Rogue dares
think to get it. Sir, is it not enough to be a Coward and a Pander, but you
wo'd be a thief too?


I am bewitched.

I fear my Trappolin is turned mad man.

Suffer not this ye Gods.

I have set the Lords Barbarino and Macc. at liberty according to your Highness
order; and here is your Ring again.


Better and better -- I ma^le where the Prince Horatio is.


He forgets every thing, he's in prison.


Sure he is not.


How this Impostor divel acts me!


Your Highness did commit him.


Fie upon it, what things do I do in my drink? here take my Ring, go and set him
out, and come hither with him presently.


I am the Duke, and will be obeyed,
Go not upon your life, he shall lye there.

Sure my Trappolin's run mad for grief in his banishment.


Peace (frantic) peace, do not disturb his Highness.

Regard not mad men, go.

I'm gone.

Thou traitor.

Dear Trappolin be silent, regard my tears, thou wilt undo thy self.


Maiden and your Sweet-heart continue thus, I'll have him sent abroad again.


Sweet Trappolin for my sake hold thy tongue*

I rage in vain, good heavens be merciful.

Dear brother pity me, regard my sorrow,
Release the Prince Horatio, and no longer
Separate their bodies whose hearts the Gods have joined.

Sister, have patience a little, a very little, Prince Horatio will be here
presently, and I'll make an end with you.


Prudentia, art thou not ashamed?

What sawcines is this*
Most worthy noble Brother all my heart is full o^ thanks for you: wood I'd a
tongue could utter them.


Your Highness ring.

Tis well: Captain, Sister, and Prince Horatio,
Here take my signet, by the warrant of it, go
And get you married,

Our humble thanks.

I do want patience.

Tis best to do it while he's in's good humour:
Are you content Sweet Princess?

With all my soul I go.

Sister, sister.

Peace lest you be soundly punished Sir.

Good Trappolin be quiet.

I am the Duke, I am Lavinio;
This is a fiend of hell or an Impostor.

Will your Highness suffer this?

I pity him, he knows not what he says.

I am bewitched.

I am sure thou art distracted.

A done you had best.

Thou enemy unto our happiness,
Know the Gods will relent; in time be wise.

There is no remedy, he must go to Puchanello: so ho, Pachanello, so ho.


I come.

There could come no better of it, beseech your Highness pardon him, he's
distracted.


You are all distracted, all bewitched.

Sir take Trap. and lock him up safe.


You'd take no warning.

O Florence, how I pity thy decay.

Away with him.

Puchanello take him, and be gone.

You of the Guard see him laid safely up.

I will not go.

We then might force you.

Alas poor Flametta! Thy Trappolin cares not for thee, I beseech the Gods to
give him his right senses again.


Come Captain.

I attend your Highness.

The strange distraction of our Duke will give
Sufficient matter unto Chronicles
To make whole volumes of him.

Yet he believes himself right in his senses
And we out of our wits think him mad.

Wood I had been born to a mean estate,
So in it I might have lived happily.
The greater honours that men have, the greater
Their troubles are; the beggar that hath nothing
Lives a more quiet life then Monarchs do.
Lord Barbarino* and Lord Machavil,
Get me released, I am the Duke Lavinio,
Bewitched as you are by an Impostor.

Go Trappolin and sleep: we have heard al l,
Thou art run mad.

Go sleep poor Trappolin.

Be kind good Gods, pity our miseries.

Leave talking and go sleep.

His Highness.

How fares our noble master?

I have not been sober a day together this good while; Eo Meo and Areo have
made me fox't, but now I will leave it.


Who are they?

I know not.

It's in vain to lay them up any more, I having had sport enough with them.
Trappolin whom you banished is come home stark mad.


Exceedingly.

And raves most strangely in prison.

Here is his Highness, I will not leave him till
He doth release from prison Trappolin.
Most excellent Sir, perfect your noble kindness;
Give liberty unto poor Trappolin.

With all my heart I would, wood he be quiet.

Alas he is distracted, and doth not know
What he says; and therefore why should you regard him?


Well, fair maid, for thy sake that love him so he shall come out. Puchanello
so ho! come hither.


He will do any thing, and undo any thing.

Sure there was never such a Duke in the world.

Welcome Sister and Brother (I hope I may say,) are you married? are you
content? tell me if any thing remains that I can do for you, speak it, for I am
ready, the Duke

Your servant.


Most worthy brother, you have perfected our joys, for we are married.


I am very glad Lady sister that you are so.

Here is your Highness ring.

You Sir of chains and keys set me Trappolin at liberty presently, and send
him hither.


Will he never be wise? I wood he wood make another Jailer, I am weary of the
place, I can never be at quiet for putting in and setting out.


The Heavens reward your goodness.

Brother and Prince Horatio, I am something given to be drunk, Eo, Meo and Areo
are good fellows: but I pray you pardon me.


Sir, you wrong your self.

My friend, and Prince Horatio, I'll ne'er wrong my self I warrant you; but you
I have, and my sister Prudentia: but it was when I was fox't, and I will never
be so again.


I am glad he will once let us be quiet.

I should be very glad if he would continue it.

Ho now Seignior Captain* ha you got a sweetheart?


A fair Mistress so please your Highness.

I see, my Don at Arms, when you cannot follow the wars of the field, you will
of the bed.


Prithee my Trappolin, now hold thy tongue.
Be wise sweet Love.

Leave me thou frantic fool.

For Flametta's sake I have given you your liberty, use it well.


O Heavens, endure not this impostor thus
With his enchantments to bewitch our eyes.

Will he suffer him?

Perhaps one mad man will pity another.

Ye Florentines, I am Lavinio,
I am the Tuskan Duke, this an enchanter,
That by his magic Art has raised all
These strange chimeraes in my Court.

Your Highness is too patient, it were more fit he raved in Prison.


Sweet Trappolin be ruled.

Hold your tongue I say.

Poor Trappolin, art thou distracted too?

You Lords of Florence, wise Machavil, and
You Lord Barbarino, will you never come
Out of this frenzy? Valiant Mattemores,
I am the Duke, I am Lavinio:
This whom you do suppose is me, is some
Hellish Magician that hath bewitched us all.

He will not be ruled: Puchanello take him again*


Beseech your Highness: Trappolin, come away.


Was ever seen the like?

Ah my poor subjects! how I pity you,
That must obey the monstrous wickedness
Of one that works by Necromantick means,
And is forsaken by the blessed Gods!

Away with him.

Stay.

Yon's Father Conjurer.

What new accident is this!

I hope he'll do no hurt.

What will the event be (marle?)

What old Long-beard's this?

A word with you,
Will you, if I clear every thing,
Pardon what's past?

Do you know me then?

You are the Duke.

Father Conjurer, do no hurt, and I'll give you a hundred pistols to buy you
sallets and oil it'h wood.


I'll talk with you even now;
Will you promise me?

I swear by all the honours of my state,
By both my Dukedoms, Florence and Sienna,
I will forgive what ever's past.

Him and all?

Him and all.

Good Father Conjurer, remember your son.

What will come of this?

Be not affrighted.

Never, not I.

What ere you see,
Fear not, nothing shall hurt you.

This is a Conjurer.

Sweet Captain stand close by me.

What strange events are these!

Eo, Meo, and Areo, appear.

I am undone I fear.
Father Conjurer, remember your son, I'll give you two hundred pistols.


Appear I say.

Alas!

Fear nothing.

Oh me!

Be bold, I am here Hipolita.

Go take the hat, the glass, and cloak from him.

Ah me! Ah me! here, here, here, here, come not too near me.
Eo, Meo, and Areo, farewell all on you; Father Conjurer has undone me.

Trappolin.

Two Trappolins.

I know not which is mine.

Attend a while.
Thus with the waste of this enchanted wand
I do release your Highness.

The Duke.

Wonders.

You have engaged your word, you've pardoned all, me who have done and undone
every thing, and him, and every body.


I have.

The Heavens be praised; long live your Highness.

Long live the Duke.

What will become of me?

I'll perfect every thing;
Brave Prince Horatio, your elder Brother,
Prince Filberto is dead. Sir, you cannot,
With reason dislike this match, they are
Married, and your consent doth perfect it.

Now I am assured he is a Turin Prince*
Heir to the Dukedom of Savoy, I am glad
They are espoused: sister I wish you joy;
Sir, I entreat forgiveness for what's past.

All's forgotten.

Thanks gracious Heavens.

I'll have your wedding solemnised with state.

I am glad this Gordian knot's untied.

I shall be hanged Father Conjurer.

The Duke hath pardoned you and me all.

Then let Eo, Meo, and Areo go to the Divel from whence they came. Flametta, I
am thine.


Ah my dear Trappolin!

Here is your Highness ring.

From henceforth I abjure my wicked art.

I for thy love to me will send thee into
Piemondt, and give thee an Earldom in Vercelly.

The Heavens reward you: you know I always made much of your Highness Majesty.
Flathou shalt be a Countess.


Son Trappolin, I am thy natural father, twenty years since banished ten years
from Florence: through my misfortune I have served the Turk in his Galleys.


By your leave Father you have served the Divel too I'm sure: for you are one
of the best Conjurers in the world. Welcome unto the Court, your son of Honour,
and to Flametta's Earlship: will your Honours forgive me too?


Yes.

For the Princes sake I do.

I thank you both: now all's well again, henceforth I will live honestly and be
the Devils Butcher no longer.


My Isabella welcome; every thing
That did molest our happiness in Florence
Is took away, now we will spend our time
In Courtly joys; our famous Tuskan Poets
Shall study amorous Comedies and Masks,
To entertain my beauty ous Millaness:
I have a story full of ridiculous wonders,
Within to tell thee at our better leisure.

The weaker side must yield unto the stronger,
And Trappolin's supposed a Prince no longer.

LAdies and Gentlemen, you that now may
Approve (or if you please) condemn our Play,
We thank you first; for here it was not writ
In sweet repose and fluencies of wit;
But far remote, at Rome begun, half made
At Naples, at Paris the conclusion had.
Yet the perfection is behind, which (if
You give's a Plaudit) you in England give;
Our Nation's courteous unto strangers, nor
Should you refrain unto this Traveller.
I must not sue; There's nothing now remains,
Saving the Guerdon of our Poets pains:
He for himself is careless, only wo'd,
That for the Actors sakes you'd say 'tis good.
We are doubtful yet, your hands will set all right;
Do what you please, and (Gentlemen) Good night.

