THE OBSTINATE LADY A COMEDY Written by ASTON COKAIN.

LONDON Printed by WILLIAM GODBID, 1658.

BRave crown of Gallants welcome! May this place
Meet expectation; you afford us grace:
We joy that such a multitude divine
Of Planets in our little Spheres do shine;
And that besides our Horizon is stuck
With lesser lights, we do esteem't good luck.
For the great favour, may each several scene
Affect you more, then Hebe's Nectar Heaven.
We can but wished: for if you're come to day
In expectation of a faultless play,
Writ by learned Johnson, or some able pen,
Famed, and approved of by the world, you then
We disappoint: our Poet had never yet
Hisses condemn, or hands commend his wit.
Troth, Gentlemen, we know that now a days
Some come to take up wenches at our plays;
It is not our design to please their sense,
We wish they may go discontented hence.
And many Gallants hither come (we think)
To sleep, and to digest their too much drink:
We may please them; for we will not molest,
With drums or trumpets, any of their rest.
If perfumed wantons do for eighteen pence,
Expect an Angel, and alone go hence,
We shall be glad withal our hearts, for we
Had rather have their room then company:
For many an honest gentleman is gone
Away for want of place, as look ye you:
We guess some of you Ladies hither come
To meet your servants wh' are at dice at home;
You'll be deceived, and therefore will dispraise,
And say this is the worst of all the plays
You ever saw: but keep your censures (pray)
Until you meet them here another day.
Our Poet is not confident, nor doth
Distrust his work, but labours 'twixt them both:
He hopes it will be liked, and well; if not,
'T can be but hissed at worst, and soon forgot*
SHe has out-gone my belief by it,
I did not think that project would have failed;
I cannot speak her.

The Alpian snow is not more cold.

Her disposition is most strange.

'Twere easier far
To spurn the sultry Cyclops Anvil down,
And kick it thus into Atoms in the air,
Then to obtain her love;
It were, my dear Falorus.

O think not so Carionil.

Have I not cause?

At last after a constant and a brave pursuit
She may be won.

Could I but hope so much,
Did all the stars malignant influences
Threaten fate opposite to my happiness,
I would not deem them worthy my observance,
But persevere till I obtained, or fell.

Conjecture still the best.

Tis easier to advise then to perform;
Had you, Falorus, been so oft dismissed
Comfortless, scornfully sent away,
By her own lips, (O heavens!) you could not think it.

I could and would.

With hope friend?

Yes with an assurance.

Upon what ground would you build it?

Upon a woman's frequent dissimulation.
Can you believe, when envious clouds deprive
Your eyes from the suns beams, that it shines not?
In these times young Ladies for a while
Do mantle their affections in dislike:
Let not an ignorance of Virgins wiles
Disturb your noble breast with weak despair;
Carionil assume a confidence,
Were you inferior unto her in blood,
Or any whit deformed, after her nayes
You might suspect the period* but seeing
'Tis known, as noble blood runs through your veins,
And that nature composed you in a mould
As excellent as she was formed in, and
With substance of as beauteous a gloss;
You need not let doubts puzzle you.

Stay and admire with me; exalt your eyes to happiness.

Your Mistress and her Woman, my Carionil.

Lucora, She's a transcendent of Epithets.

I see a Lute: let us escape their sight,
And it is likely we shall hear her sing.

Now give it me. Is it in tune?

Yes Madam.

Forbear awhile to play upon the spheres,
Ye servants to the Deities: the Gods
Will blame you, if your music keep the air
Of her all-ravishing harmony from their ears.

Sweet Diana, virtuous Queen,
By heavens edict Guide of night,
That dost affect the meadows green,
And dost in fresh-leav'd woods delight;
Like to thy Nymphs, suffer me
To consecrate my self to thee.
Thou that for lust did transform
Rash Actaeon to a Hart;
Either most strongly Maidens charm,
That men may never them divert
From purity, or else make
Them other Harts for virgins sake.
How! a votaress to Diana,
The heavens forbid that injury to earth.
Had the deceitful Sirens such a voice,
And bodies of so rare a form, I would
Ne'er come on shipboard, for fear of being drawn
To drown my self by swimming after them.

I do not like her Madam.


Who ever yet spoke ill of Daphne? fie!
Banish such impious censures from you.

Troth, Madam, I should have been glad to a been my Lady Apollo.


O relish more of purity Nentis. Alas, 'tis a frail comfort can come with a
husband.


I think otherwise indeed Madam.


Be all such thoughts remote from my breast,
My resolution shall be never to marry.

Now you have heard her thoughts Falorus.


That she disguises not her love you mean.


True, and I am most miserable.


My happy friend you will be.

Tis an ignorant common custom among young ones to do so.


But she's a fixed star, and cannot move.

Fixed in your heart tis likely,
But otherwise I doubt, nor do you.

You've s^ird a feeble belief within me, Friend,
That the excellent Lucora may be won,
And I will nourish it unto some height.

A necessary that none must want, which do
Desire fruition of those whom they woo.

O honest Iaques!


My Lady presents her service to your Lordship.


She is in health I hope.


Very well. And I am glad to see your Honour so, though I say it.


She is not towards another husband yet?


No certainly.


Methinks her fortunes should give her a various choice. You are elsewhere
employed I perceive: remember my best respects unto your Lady.

You've heard of my cousin Vandona, Falorus?


But very little.


She's the most fantastic piece of womankind I ere changed breath with, but a
young one, wealthy, and truly not unhandsome.


Lorece does intend to make love unto her.


Your brother, my Falorus?


Yes, so he told me.


May he obtain her if you wish it.


Her estate would make the match a good one.

Is this the boy you so commended to me?


'Tis he, and think him you worthy the praise I gave him.


He'll come and wait upon you at night, my Lord.


'Tis well Anclethe.


You spoke him not unto his merits.


You are beholding to my friend (Ancleth.)


Your Lord's in health?


And desires to speak with your Lordship,


Where may I find him?


He'll be at his lodgings these two hours.


I'll wait upon him presently.

I am his servant. Carionil, I must take my leave.


The Gods go with you. He may be my father in law, but will not if he can
prevent it: Adieu friend.

O my Anclethe! thou can not guess the world of torments I nourish here; I
cannot number them my self, and because I cannot, I fear the Gods will not.


What can you ail my Lord?


Can thou imagine me free from misery?


Indeed I did.


No, there's a Lady (she's above all Ladies,
And were she pitiful, I should swear a goddess)
That does deny me happiness.
As thou hast me, Italian Archer, so
On her use thy eternal stringed bow:
Draw to the head thy shaft, and let it fly;
For love but love there is no remedy.

Wretched Cleanthe! to what a multitude
Of woeful sighs my destinies have driven me!
Could all the tears that I abundantly have wept,
But find that recompense I dare not look for,
O they were showers to be beloved like those
That deck the spring with bravery! Carionil
(For whom I languish in disguise) it seems
Hath settled his affections on a Lady
Does not return him love. May she continue
Obstinate ever: but I must blame her judgement,
Who can behold a man (with all the art
Of nature) framed to curiosity,
And hear the world report his virtues equal
Unto his form, and not admire and love him.

Now my young sweet face! what pretty foolish whimsies trouble thy pate, that
thou look so composedly?


Sir, I am as I use to be.


Then you use to be scurvy. Use the Tavern once or twice a day. You must not be
so melancholy.


It best becomes me.


Can thou swear?


The Gods forbid.


Can thou sing.


Not worth your hearing Sir.


Say thou so! Then will I something worth thine.


Of six shilling beer I care not to hear,
A barrel's not worth a carret,
I as others think, that there is no drink
Like unto Sack, White wine, and Claret.
Diana's a fool, and me shall not rule
To live a bacheller ever;
For I mean not to tarry, in her livery, but marry,
And quickly, believe me, or never.
And I and my wife will lead such a life,
As she shall think well befell her;
For throughout the year we will tipple March-beer*
And seldom be out of the Cellar.
All Sto^ical prate, and Diana I hate,
With her maidenly scurvy advices:
Green sickness upon her, sweet Venus I honour;
For wenches and wine are not vices.
Wooed Baceus the knave had met with this brave
Diana, this whey-blooded Lady;
For the credit of 'th grape he had made a rape,
And got a puissant baby.
Y' are not melancholy Sir, your brother is more solemn.


I melancholy! I scorn it boy. Yet I'm not so merry as I was wont, the young
gunner Mr. Cupid had somewhat tamed me: but I am good mettle still (thank my
jovial fates) and will sound melodiously, my young Paris.

Welcome to Hercules noble Theseus. Good boy,

Go wait on thy master.

How dost, thou old magazine of precious knavery?


I am glad to see your Worship well.


My noble milner of words, thou that dost grind thy speeches with a merry
pronunciation, wilt be my bosom, my cabinet, my friend Iaques?


I will obey your good Worship.


Liberally spoken! when I have opened me, will you be privy?


Very secret and officious: it is good manners in me, your command shall wedge
my tongue, hedge my heart, and tie a true lovers knot upon it with the strings
of it.


Thou art an honest clod of earth, Iaques.

Tis pity the malicious sun-shine warmed thee not into a diamond.


Your Worship speaks above my brains.


I am marvellously enamoured on your Lady, Iaques. Vandona is my Mistress.


Wonderful news! Is my Lady your Worships sweet-heart?


Yes. But ignorant of my affection yet.


I could be drunk were you my Master, Sir.


I would have a Wine-cellar o'th purpose. My estate Iaques is but mean: It must
be craft must get her: Know thou any possible way to win her?


Sir, I am passing empty of invention, but wherein I can pleasure you, tell me
at any time, and I will not fail you. But the Gods bless your good Worship:
Sir, would you marry her?


Yes my old trusty Perithous. Why dost wonder at it?


She does nothing all day but read little Comedies, and every night spendstwo
or three hours on a great Tragedy of a merry fellow Dametas, and a company of
strange-nam'd learned Lovers, she's no more housewife then you or I Sir, on my
own proper knowledge, I swear, vow and protest it.


Thou art too earnest my old-fac'd Saturn, I think her not the worse woman.
Houswifery is the superficies of a genteel female, and the Parenthesis of a
Lady, which may well be left out.


You are a Scholar, your bookship shall direct me.


Who's that? know thou him Iaques? He walks corantoly, and looks big.


And like your Worship, this tide first brought him to my eyes.


He came not by water, did he old Boy?


I meant Time Sir, the London word.


When we this passion into us receive,
Our former pleasures we do loath and abandon*

Leave, by your leave.


If it were foolishness in us to take
Affection, why did heaven two sexes compose?

Make, would make Rhyme.


Why Period to the Phoenix doth fire give,
But because it doth against nature consist?

Live, he should say. This is some very small Poet.


I'll on, and am resolved to prefer
My life to be a service unto her.

What an affected utterance has this fellow!


He'll ne'er make good Ballad warrant him, that will not rhyme when he may.


The Catastrophe was in ^hime though. He would be liked for a stage Poet.


Noble Heroes! the Gods intend your fortunes to your thoughts.


An Academical Idiom: enquire his name Iaques, he delivers his mind after the
garb of a Signior.


Have you a name friend?


I answer to Draculemyon.


Good Sir, let's trudge hence; this is some great Conjurer.


Are you a Necromancer?


Mr. Lorece, I fear he is some Saracen, he looks so dismal.


Art thou a Panim, speak?


For all your great looks Termegant is an Idol.


I am nor one nor other, but your Honours vassal, and a poor Englishman. Wilt
please you to hear the Music of Helicon?


Law you now Sir, how one may be deceived! I believe the whoreson is a Fiddler.
Can you sing (sir?) answer me.


I am no Fiddler; but live by my tongue and legs: will you hear me (noble Sir)
speak a Parnassian Oration, or see me measure the ground with a dance?


What says thou Iaques?


Why now Sir, tis dinner time with my Lady, and I dare not neglect her, neither
will I my own stomach, and therefore for me he may show us a fair pair of
heels, and be gone.


Well then -- spend this for me.


You're, Sir, the best part of a moralist: you are most liberal.


Come Iaques.


I follow you Sir, farewell goodman Draculemyon.


The Gods bless me, there's a name!
Proceed Phyginois, and be fortunate;
This project will furnish me with money to cloth me
Both fashionably and rich enough, and then
I dare assail my Nentis with some confidence:
Politic Lovers seldom miss.
Smile heaven upon my plot, that there may be
A crowned Period to my policy.

HOw do you like Lucora?


She's a Lady above my thoughts, much more my tongue.


Could not you wish her yours? I have a desire to make her so.


Ambrosia Hebe's Cates are for the Gods:
Princes she doth deserve to woo her love.

You undervalue her my Lord;
The best is not too good for him that gets her.
Your breeding has been worthy your descent;
I've known you from your Infancy, and am
Desirous to make you mine.

He enforces me to an acceptance. I must temporize with him,

Most worthy Polidacre, I cannot attain to a greater happiness on earth, then
to bear the name of your Son in law.


I thank thee my Falorus. I'll go presently, get my daughters consent. As you
shall not want beauty with her, so you shall not money. I'll take my leave.


I am your most humble servant, my Lord.
What envious Star when I was born, divined
This adverse Fate, who having such a beauty
Proffered him, would refuse it? The pined man
Whom Poets fantasies have placed in Hell
With fruit before him, had not such a cross.
The true regard I bear unto my friend.
The brave Carionil must not be slighted;
The sacred truth of friendship ever shoo'd
By force enfeeble all rebellious blood.
Well met my dear Carionil.

I am happy in your company: you're my hearts best treasury, Falorus.

But give me leave my friend.

O! I see the cause; your Mistress.

Retire ye Clouds, and weep out showers of woe,
Because ye may no longer stand and gaze
On her, for whom the heavens their circuits go,
That they may see, and wonder at her face.
Dear Falorus withdraw your self awhile.

The Gods assist your suit.

Thanks worthy friend.
Hail natures most perfect work, and the continual Idea of my admiring Soul,
for whom (if it be your will) I must dye, and by whom (if it is your pleasure)
I shall live, live in an unspeakable felicity by enjoying you, who shall dye
happily for wanting you, and I cannot live in such a penury.


VVoo'd I had such a servant: I should not serve him scurvily.


Honour your poor adorer, Lady, with a gracious look of your beloved eyes, and
my misery for you, both with commiseration and remedy.


My Lord, if you presume upon a woman's
Feigned carriage to her wooers, leave it now.
For (if you'll give me leave) I'll call to witness
Every particular Deity we adore,
That I will never have a husband: and
For your saying you must dye for me, I hold it
A common Complement of idle Lovers;
And wish you so much happiness, that you
May live well without me.

O be not so unmerciful!
Let not that tongue err into virulent words,
Which could have called Euridice from Hell.
Had your most excellent mother (fairest Lady)
Inexorable been, you had not been,
Nor Crimson Roses ever spread upon
Your lovely cheeks, nor had the world discovered
Two Planets more: hath nature liberally
Heaped the rarest perfections (she could give
Mortality) upon you to no end?
No surely, not can I believe that she
Meant to enclose a mind infractible
Within a body so powerful to subdue.
As you (even your dear self) was daughter to
A beauteous mother, so you also should
Indebt the world unto you by your issue:
Be not so cruel therefore (dear Lucora)
Let not your tongue degenerate from your form.

Sir, you have heard me speak what I intend.

Be not a Tigers Lady.

Any thing but a wife:
Sir, I must leave you, and leave you this humour;
The Court hath many Ladies, take your choice.
Nentis!

Mad am

Come my Lord take my counsel.

I could use him kindlyer.

What say you Lady?

Nothing my Lord.

Doth a fair face presage a cruel heart?
I'st not a mere full contrary in Nature,
That the softest body should be hard'st to win?
Nature is grown decrepit, and all things
Sublunary err against her rule of order.
Stir not then thou glorious Fabric of the heavens,
And periodize the Music of the spheres.
Thou ever yet fast fixed Globe of earth,
Whirl round in a perpetual Motion.
Ye Stars and Moon that beautify the night,
Change rule with clear Hyperion, and so cast
Succeeding time into another mould.
Then with thy powerful beams, Apollo, draw
The Ocean into clouds, and drown the world:
So there a new creation may befall,
And this life be a life celestial.
O all my happiness on earth, my true Falorus!
Lucoraes beauty triumphs in my breast,
And shortly will destroy me: There's no beast
That haunts the vastest African wilderness,
Of such a merciless constitution.
She'll never marry man.

She will Carionil. Her father would have her, and she has not so much evil to
contradict his will: where then can she make such a choice as you? that in a
duel, your Grandfather did kill hers, y'v e heard her oft protest she valued
not.


Does he desire it, or does your love flatter me into a little possibility of
obtaining her? Alas, if she could like me, her father would very difficultly
consent. He loves not my family.


Polidacre could not hinder you, were she willing. But (friend) her father
means to marry her. His own lips offered her to me.


O ye just heavenly powers! then I am lost,
Sunk into misery beneath a spark
Of this lives happiness.
Falorus, you shall not have her.

I would not wrong my noble friend so much.

A puff of wind and gone. For her who would not
Do all mankind an injury, and out-act
In horrid deeds all those that ere professed
Licentious Atheism? unsheathe your sword;
I will not take that life basely away
Which next unto Lucoraes I esteem,
Yet stay.

He's frantic! withdraw this frenzy O ye Gods.

You are my friend?

I have been so accounted by you.

Let me consult it out, shall one word.
Na (which is less) one syllable (friend extract
Out of me all the interest that I
Have to Lucora, by affecting her:
But this is a safe medium, a true friend
Exceeds all words, and syllables at height;
A man may, nay he should poise equally
His love, and part unto his friend the justice of it,
Which is the full half; so that it appears
They should be loved by's as we love our selves.
But to a Mistress who would not give more?
Who can choose to give more? the love that we
Bear to a friend, it is an accident, a mere one:
But tis our nature to affect a woman,
And 'tis a glory to preserve a Mistress
Entire to ones self without competit ors.
My reason's satisfied: no friendship can
Keep in the sword of any rivaled man.

Collect your self Carionil.

You'll fight with me?

I do not wear a weapon for such a Quarrel.

What more affliction! yet tis against manhood,
(A most ignoble murder) to take his life
Who makes no opposition. And yet if death
Prevent him not she will be his. Sad fates!
You shall not have Lucora.

You wrong our amity by this suspicion:
I swear I will not.

How!

Consider (dear Carionil) I grieve
To see my friend so over-passionate,
It is a weakness in you to be pitied.

My love ore-sway'd my reason: pardon me
My best Falorus, I believe your virtue
Would not act such an injury against
Your own Carionil.

Shall we walk? and I'll tell you all that passed
'Twixt me and Polidare.

I am a thousand ways obliged yours.

You are my Carionil, I wish no more
From you then a perpetuity of love,
And that our hearts may never be untied.

You are too worthy for my friendship.

Fair Antiphila hath hair
Would grace the Paphian Queen to wear;
Fit to tune Heavens Lute withal,
When the Gods for music call;
Fit to make a vail to hide
Aurora's blush each morning tide;
Fit to compose a crafty gin
To take the hearts of lookers in;
Able to make the stubborn kind,
And (who dislike it) t'be judged blind:
Though it is soft and fine, it ties
My heart, that it in fetters lies.
It is a great I know not what. I have not Poetry enough in me to give it a
name. These Lovers are the prettiest fools (I think) in the world. And 'twere
not for them I cannot tell what we women should do. We desire nothing more then
to be praised, and their love to us will do it beyond our wishes. I gave
Philander upon his long importunity a lock of hair, and see into what a vein it
has put him! I'm sorry he had it not a week sooner, I should then perhaps a
had a Sonnet-book ere this: 'tis pity wit should lie obscurely in any, if a
lock will give it vent. I love him not; I shood rather choose his father, who
is as earnest a suitor to me as he: yet I know, because of his age, very few
Ladies wood be of my mind; but as yet I care for neither of them.

Now I must expect an assault, 'tis in's ear already, he's very fine.


My dear Anniphila, you have received.

Your verses (Sir?) I have.


I am your true adorer for them Lady.

Wood your white hand had done me the honour it did them!


In what Sir you must explain.


That a touch of your skin might have ravished me into happiness.


The Lock has altered your discourse, I wood it had shut your mouth.


There's no need of that (excellent Antiphila) I wood rather deprive my self of
my tongue, then that any word of mine should be offensive unto you


You relish too much of the Court.


Polite words can never misbecome a speaker who hath such a subject.


Am I your subject? you have called me Mistress.


You are my Saint Lady, and I must pray to you.


Saints hear no prayers some say.


Pray you show otherways by granting mine.


Have you any more papers?


My mouth shall speak mine own errand.


You must pardon me now Sir, I must leave you.


She yet is obstinate: but I am free
From doubt she will continue in that way;
There is no cause of fears in women's nayes,
For none of that sex means the thing she says.
Now Tandorix! where's my father?


Faith I know not Sir.


You are one of the melancholiest servants he keeps.


It pleases you to say so Sir.


They all report so of you.


I cannot tell Sir.


You're overlonely: be merrier, you shood put your self into more company, you
should Tandorix; I respect you for my mothers sake, for whose last sad letter
you was entertained here.


I thank you (Sir) for your kindness.


Farewell Tandorix.


My son perceives my sadness, but the cause
Deserves it fully; tis now above a year
Since I did write that I did drown my self,
And bare the Paper to my husband, when
I thought his memory was somewhat lost,
And I inur'd unto this habit, drawn
To it by a fond desire to know if he
Would keep his promise to me, with which oaths
He oft hath made, that never (if he should
Survive me) he would take another wife;
But he (as other men) esteems no more
Of perjury then common breath; 'twere fit
That husbands vows upon the sands were writ.

I Am beholding to thee Iaques.


I will be dutiful to your Worship.


I should be glad to cope with your Lady, now methinks I am of a prompter
expression then usual: Lovers and the Muses are cater-cousins.

My Vandona, Iaques.


I must vanish like a mist.


Farewell grave Titan.
I'll out with a Poetical Soliloquy in her hearing for my Preludium.
The gaudy Stars are not more full of glee,
When golden Phebus sets in the West;
Nor do the cheerful Birds with more delight
Rejoice at the new Livery of the spring;
Then I to have this miracle of beauty
Enter within the knowledge of miue eyes.

He speaks well, I wooed he meant earnest. The Gentleman seems very deserving:
but he is something wild.


She shall be stoutly accosted. Impudency is a very happy quality in a wooer.


A comes.


Lady, you are not a puny in the Court of Cupid, and therefore (I hope) need
not the tedious circumstances of an annual service. I am bold to tell you
plainly, I love you, and (if I find occasion) I will maintain it boldly.


I pray you (Mr. Lorece) desist.


Never my sweet Vandona; my descent (I know) you doubt not, and my affection
you need not. Whilst I live I shall love you, and (if you die) your memory.


I shall be caught. We widows are glass mettle, soon broke.


I can do no more Lady, and I will do no less.


Your habit, carriage, and discourse, Sir, show you a Traveller.


My boldness she means. Sweetest Vandona, I have been one. The habits,
conditions, and situations of many great kingdoms I have exactly gathered into
my table-books: and also my fortnights observation of the Antipodes.


O strange! have you been there? I wonder how you came thither.


I will tell you Lady. When I was bound thither, I was in Asia at Taxcallau;
there we took ship, and in a pair of Oars sailed to Madrid, the Catholic
Kings Court. From thence to Naples in Savoy, from Naples to Crenia, and thence
to Alexandria, where against a tree we suffered shipwreck. Into a new Phaluk
therefore we got us, which was rigged for Frankfurt, where shortly after we
arrived, victual'd our Gondalo, and threw away our fresh water.


Tis a great way thither.


Thence we went to Lisbon, and after to Mantua, and the next morning we came to
the Antipodes, at twy-light in the afternoon.


What sights saw you there Sir?


So many sights (dear Lady) that they almost made me blind.


Relate a few.


First, Lady, the King is no man.


I believe you Sir, for it never could enter my mind that any man inhabited
there.


There they have no houses, but the Emperors Palace, where Sir Francis Drake
was entertained, after he had shot the Pyraenaean Gulf, upon the Mediterranean
mount in Russia.


Where then lies all the Court, I wonder?


In the Court Mistress.


I guess hem but cold lodgings.


Your Ladyship is mistook: they are never a cold; For the Sun, being never
above a hundred degrees above Saturn, makes that Climate as hot as Norway. They
at the Antipodes hear with their noses, smell with their ears, see by feeling,
but taste with all their Senses: for they are the most insatiable gluttons
under the cope: and feel not any thing;

For they cannot be hurt.


This is wonderful. And I cannot imagine how their senses can be so contrary to
ours.


No! did you never hear (excellent Vandona) that they are opposite to us?


O yes! I have indeed.


I will now tell you Madam something of the South Indies.


Has not the Mogul of Persia his bread thence?


The King of Spain hath his gold there, of which the Hollanders took a great
prize, when they won the silver Fleet.


How I was mistook!


I will give you the situation of the Country. Some of the ancient
Geographers, as Heliodorus, the Knight o'th Sun, Amadis de Guale, and Palmerin
de Oliva, affirm it to lie a thousand Italian miles from the Isthmos of
Corinth^ but some modern writers, as Don Quixote, Parismus, Montelion, and
Mervin, say it is a Peninsula in Arabia Foelix, where the Phoenix is. But
learned Hollinshed affirms, the South Indies are separated from Armenia by the
Calidonean Forest, from Asia Minor by the Venetian Gulf, and from China by a
great brick wall. There instead of Chery-stones children play with Pearls: and
(for glass) the windows are of broad Diamonds. Hunters there have no horns but
the Unicorns; no water runs there but Scamander, Simois, Aganippe, Hippocrene,
and the like. There are no hills but Olympus, Ida, and Parnassus. No valley but
Tempe of Ascra and Margiana; no men but of the off-spring of Scipio African,
Iulius Caesar, Alexander the Great, Hector, Hanibal and Hercules.


It is a pleasant Country sure!


I will now tell you the conditions of our neighbour Nations. The Spaniards are
humble, the Italians chaste, the French peaceful, the Dutch sober, and the Irish
cleanly. I came at last to Virginia, where I saw nothing more worthy mention
then an honest woman who cast her self into the sea because no body would lie
with her. In conclusion; at Iames Town Port I took horse, and the next morning
(after a long and tedious journey) arrived in Wales.


And what did you there Mr. Lorece?


As soon as I could I went to Merlins Cave, which is obscurely situated on the
top of a Beech, where all the night he lay on the ground.


What was he Sir?


He was an intricate Prognosticator of firmamental Eclipses, and vaticinated
future Occurrents by the mysterious influences of the sublime Stars, and
vagabundical Planets; generated he was by the inhumane conjunction of an
Incubus; And was immured alive in a cave, by the preeminent Magic of the Lady
of the Lake.


You frequent Plays, do you not?


They are most commonly my afternoons employment.


I like him the better for it.


And you have read many Histories?


Many, Lady. I am a worm in a book, I go through them.


This pleases me too

Farewell Sir.


Admired Philoclea, leave me not so.


What would you have?


Your consent Lady.


Expect that a month or two hence.


Dear Vandona, sweet Mistress!


Indeed you must.


Nay, sweet Oriana.


You're two importunate.


Excellent Claridiana, Polinarda, Taurana, Bradamant.

It makes no matter, I am sure to have her: how some women are taken with
strange tales!

Next time we meet I do not doubt to get her,
Hercules could not woo a Lady better.
Now my old Anchises! how dost true penny! Be merry Iaques.


Is she tender-hearted?


Respectful and pliant.


Good truth I am glad on it Sir; my Lady (though I say it) is of a very good
nature, my mind always gave me she would be coming on.

I beseech your Worship to be a good Master to me.


Thou shalt find me so.


IMperious Love (that hate whom thou wound, and love those best thou
dost let alone)

If my obsequious duty unto thee
Can move thee to commiseration,
Instruct me how to win him, and (when I
Disclose my self) assist a wretched woman;
For it is in thy power to work my bliss.
He dotes upon a Lady that regards
None of those miseries he undergoes
By languishing for her, with one fair stroke
Thy ignominy redeem: thou art called blind,
Because how thou dost shoot thou dost not mind.
But what availes it me thus to implore,
Or rather to reiterate those deep wishes,
Millions of hours can witness I have said,
And yet find no help? Ah my dear, and ever
Most loved Carionil, would thou were so
Strongly inflamed as I, or did conceive,
Truly did know, what misery lies here!
I think (though thou had sucked a ravenous Wolf)
It would overcome thy nature, and thereby
Transform my sorrow to felicity.

I cannot hope, a letter I have writ
To my Lucora, can find that acceptance,
And bring so good success I wish it may:
Sure never man so passionately ado'rd
A Lady of so froward a disposition;
If I could know the cause she is unkind
I would destroy it, or destroy my self.
Anclethe! art thou there my boy? alas!
Why dost thou weep?

To see the sorrow you are always in,
And not to know wherefore. Though I(Sir)am
Both young and little, I both dare, and would
Venture my life to do your any service
That may redeem you happy days again.

Alas poor boy! it is past thy redress;
Yet I do thank thee for thy love unto me.

My Lord, a servant of my Lord Polidacres.

Tandorix! what news?

The Lady Lucora commanded me to deliver this Paper to you.


Tis most welcome, would my heart could read it.


I wish he had my daughter: for he's a noble gentleman.

My Lord, command you me any service?


Only my dear respects unto the Lady that sent you.


Farewell Anclethe.


SIR, I am sorry that (against my use) I cannot answer you more civilly; but I
am blameless: The fault being in your foolish passion, and not my desire. If in
fairer terms you should receive my reply, I am sure you would think it some
beginning of love to you; according to your desire I have none, and I wish your
love was so as mine, so we might be friends: yet I love you as a Gentleman of
my acquaintance; but if any more you rouble me with letters or courting, I will
hate you. So I end,

Her own, Lucora.

^er own Lucora! I cannot now conceive
This Lady of a humane nature, sure
A woman cannot have so harsh a mind,
So I end! what will she end so always?
O then that I might end even now! that all
The sorrow that possesses my whole body
^n every member, would mutiny against
My heart, that so I might die speedily!
s it not miraculously strange, that this
^oor microcosm, this little body, should
Contain all the sorrow this great world can
nflict upon it, and not sink beneath
o huge a burden? one hill does overcome
The struggling of Enceladus a Giant,
And yet I stand, I live: what, am I of
Lucora's temper, impregnable? oh, oh, oh!

Alas my Master! good my Lord, collect
Your strength, and be not thus effeminate.

I'm manly boy: for women cannot tell
What thing affliction is, their stony hearts
Relent so little at it in their lovers.
Oh! I shall never have her! now I give
Liberty to a just despair to wrack me:
And it must ever do so. What a Chaos
Of misery* is an unfortunate Lover!

I pray you (Sir) put off this vehemence of passion, she will relent.


Never whilst I live.


She will indeed, I know she will.


Wooed she would love me after I am dead for her:
It were some happiness to think that, Anclethe.

I doubt not but she will shortly be yours (my Lord)
And weep for joy to hear me make relation
Of this same violent passion you are in now.

Thou art a good boy, but this Lady, O my heart!
Could sitting down in Cassiopeia's chair,
And kicking proud Arctophylax from the sky;
Could stopping the Septentrian sevenfold team,
And putting out the starry Eagles eyes;
Could swimming violently up those Rocks
From which the Memphian Nilus tumbles down;
Could the compelling of rash Phaetons Sire
To change his course, and run from north to South*
Could the adventuring to undertake
A journey through Affrickes dread'st wilderness,
When the Aeolians do loudest breath,
And vale the Sun with sandy mountains height;
Enforce her to repent the Tragedy
By these attempts drawn on me, she should find
What truth of love was in her servants mind.

Keep back his hands, O heavens, from violent deeds,
Let him not offer injury against
His own dear life.

I have prattled too much: but I ha done.
No longer shall my happiness be delayed,
Nor the displeased destinies any more
Jeer the sad depth of wretchedness I live in,
Thus -- Here I fall her cruel sacrifice.

Hold, for heavens sake hold.

Tis too late to prevent:
Patience Anclethe! commend me to Lucora,
That Angel beauty without Angel pity:
Tell her my woeful story, how (ere since
Thou knew me) I have languished for her;
That I have spent whole nights in tears and sighs,
What days in solitude to think of her;
That I did suffer her unkindness, while
I had a dram of patience left within me:
Tell her how her most cruel letter raised
A despair higher then my strength, and that
Under her strange unkindness I am fallen.
Weep not Anclethe! I am faint, struck dumb.
Fly passionate soul into Elizium.

O my dear Lord, brave young Carionil,
I'll wash thy wound with tears, stop it with sighs:
Unkindest day that ever wore the sun!
Thou art accursed for giving light unto
His hand to guide it to an act so much
Beneath manhood. O me! I am undone!
What now will my disguise avail me,
Foolish sister Lucora! O ye heavens,
Where lies our difference? are we not the same
By birth on both sides, of one sex? sure nature
Degenerates against it self, or this
Untimely -- O ye Gods I dare not name it,
Nor will I believe it; he is alive,
So suddenly the world cannot be ruined,
Which is if he be lost; all virtue gone,
All valour, piety, and every thing
Mortality can boast of. My Lord, noble
Carionil! he doth not hear me, alas!
I am for ever most desolate of women*
Injurious heart-strings break, why do you tie
Me to a life millions of degrees more loathsome
Then the forgetful sepulchre of death?
Would some commiserating benevolent star
(Which carries fate in it) would in pity to
My misery, take me from it: for love he
Lies here this bemoaned spectacle; and shall
My passion be undervalued? tears, nor sighs,
Nor Dirges sung by me eternally,
Can parallel our loves at full, 't must be
The same way, and it shall; the same blade
Shall be the instrument, and I receive it
Tragediously here on my knees; wood some
Kind body would inter us in one tomb:
Be firm my hand, and bold.

Anclethe!

My Lord Carionil calls, is^t you! then --

But I must hold you, and bereave your hand.

And you may also die, your friend is slain;
My noble Lord Carionil is dead,
The paper in his left hand yet, that brought
His reason into such subjection,
That he even frantically did stab himself.

I will extend my life till I have read it.
This Lady is a rough blown sea, on which
His worthy life has foully suffered shipwreck:
I have her! not Mercury pleading in her defence
With Oratory able to stint Ioves wrath
(When he has bespoke thunderbolts of the Cyclops,
To wreak some injury) should ever win me
To her bed. Polidacre, mew her up
Like Danae in a brazen fort, or else
Make her to answer with her life this murder
She's accessory to: proud piece of vanity!
I do want words to give my thoughts expression;
So much I hate her. Prithee Anclethe pardon
My injury against thy rest, for holding
Thee in a life so loth'd as this is to thee:
I'll lead thee.

Oh, oh!

Withhold awhile my Lord: he groans.

Thou art the cause Lucora, and I must not
I blame thee:
I struck not that blow right, but this shall do it.
Wam fainter then I guessed, I have not entered.
B hat! who has stole the Stilletto from me?
oy! Anclethe, restore it as thou love me.

Carionil, I joy you are recovered:
Death is grown courteous, or by this you had
Been wandering in the Elizian groves.

My friend Falorus!

Your loyal friend. Give me your hand and rise:
-- I'm glad to see
Your wound no worse. Twas care and willingness
To die bereft you of your Senses. I will show you
How you may win your Mistress -- you hear me.

I like it we I: it may prevail, I hope
It will.

Anclethe had slain himself had I not come.

Good boy, thou were too kind.

Indeed my Lord I never shall desire to survive you.


Divulge my death.

I will not fail.

Why (my Carionil) would you engage
So much your self to any of that sex,
As for a disrespondency to lay
Violent hands upon your self?
In truth (my friend) I wonder at it justly*
You merit more then they can satisfy
With their endeavours all of them.

Proceed not (good Falorus) in this language.

What good do women! old Amphitrite's face
Is not so full of wrinkles, as they are Of*vices.

No more, as you regard (what always yet
You have professed) our long continued friendship.
O women, most admired Creatures! how
Can the just heavens these speeches so allow?
What good do women! I do say what ill?
Who do perform what men can only will.
Why have we ears, if not to hear the sound
And sacred harmony their tongues compound?
Why have we tears, if not to weep when we
Do chance a woman discontent to see?
Why have we eyes, if not to look upon
Their beauties, natures high perfection?
Why have we tongues, if not to praise them, when
They slandered are by railings of ill men?
Why have we reason all, if not to deem us
Happy, because some women do esteem us?

You are their worthy champion: what I said
Was out of passion for Lucora's dealing.
I will report you're dead.

I shall be obliged unto you by it.

My clothes are almost made, and every thing
That does belong unto the habit of
A gentleman, I have prepared me richly;
For in these garments I dare not accost her.
I had good fortune to come with Cleanthe,
Who hath been very bountiful unto me.

Lady, I take it very kindly you
Would do me such an honour as visit me:
It shall be my study to deserve it.

My Lord, this is too ceremonious:
Pray you let us walk.
I much approve of this Air:
I know no place so sweet about the City.

How observant he is! he would fain make it a match, and I think she is willing
enough. But I shall prevent them with amazement.

I will see further in it first.


The heavens (worthy gallants) be serene as long as you presume under the
safety of them.


Know you this fellow Tandorix?


His name is Draculemion.


O! I have heard of him.


Tis some frantic.


What wind brought you hither?


That which (noble Sir) shall blow me all over the Universe to do you service.


I thank you for your complement, your Captainly protestation.


Brave Bevy of gallants, my purse being Millions of degrees voyder of money
then my heart of courage, I desire to empty my mouth of words, to fill up the
vacuum of it, if you please to lend me your attention, and afterwards to
commemorate (with munificence) the worth of my Oration.


Sweet Antiphila, what say you?


He speaks so strangely I would hear him.


Draculemion, you know what to do.


Hail (but fair weather) I that have been the favourite of inconstant fortune,
and termed worthily by the worshipful title of a gentleman, am now debased
into an humble fugitive. Commiserate this wonderful change (most excellent
Auditors) and let your recompense be a help, again to restore me, and a story
to exalt me towards the fastigium of my pristine felicity, and (at your
connivence) I will post afoot to Mexico, drink your healths till I'm sick,
and kill any I hear speak irreverently of you. These, and more then these will
I accomplish, though to my perpetual ignominy, or dissolution of my life,
conditionally you will bestow fluently upon your slave so undeserving a little.



Here's for all the company.


Will you give me leave to be grateful?


Yes surely.


I'll not desire the Muses to replete
My willing genius with poetic heat:
This subject doth transcend them: I'll desire
Apollo to this Lay to touch his Lyre.
Thou Charioteer of heaven, that dost invest
Thy swift-hoof'd Coursers in the dewy East
(With harness worked by Mulciber) to light
The world, and dissipate the clouds of night;
For Phaetons sake (not unto me unlike)
Thy sweetest notes unto this ditty strike.

If the Exordium be so long, 'twill be tedious before the conclusion.


Dismiss him therefore.


Farewell Draculemion.


Would I might kiss thee before, Nentis.

Madam, how do you like the Lord Falorus?


Very well my Lord.


Him I have often motioned to Lucora,
And he hath consented to marry her, would it not
Be a good fortune for her think you?

Indeed I think it would.


How say you now Lucora?


For he is a much applauded gentleman,
Of good conditions, and of sweet behaviour,
Whose company is every where acceptable;
He deserves a good match, such a one as your daughter is.

How say you girl! was any thing I told you
Of Falorus, a falsehood? Come prithee do thy self a good turn,
And take him, do Lucora.

Dear Father, pardon me, indeed I have not
Any desire yet to marry.

Sure you have! Bethink you, and speak wiser.

Truly I have not Sir,

You're a stubborn wench, and I am sorry
It was my hard fortune to be thy father:
Your shrewdness shall not carry you through so freely
(As you believe it will) it shall not maiden.

Do not chide her. She will be ruled by you.

Indeed Madam I had rather live as I do.

No I believe not that. There is some one
Or other far inferior unto him
Whom she's in love withal, perhaps some vile
Scum of the Town.

Dear Sir, you conceive amiss of me; for I
Love no man yet, and hope I never shall
Be of another mind.

Tis false, I cannot believe you.

If ever I should Id'e hate my self to place
Affection on a man of base birth, or
Unseemly qualities.

Be not angry Sir.

I pray you marry (Madam) for it is
A state wherein one may securely kiss.

Leave thy foolery,

O tis a fine thing to have a coach of ones own, to go to a play when you will,
And be restrained from nothing you have a desire to do.

Marriage is no such liberty as you make it.

Think of my will: I give you time.

They have hard fortune (which the Gods remove)
That (where they cannot) are compelled to love:
I wooed she had Carionil; I esteem not the ancient Enmity
Between the families.
Now Draculemion, how do you?

At your beck, and in good health, brave sparks of generosity.


I must needs attend my Lord, otherwise
We would have had one pint together.

Thou art a jovial Lad. Farewell.
O my Nentis! thou art a worthy Andromache, and dost deserve Hector the
courageous Trojan Wagg.


They are not here.

I must to my trick again.
Divine Apollo, and the Muses nine,
Can ye behold his ruin, unto whom
Ye have vouchsafed sacred Poesy?
Or see him sleep under a hedge in the field,
Who hath so often on Parnassus lain?
Or seek the River for to quench his thirst,
Who at Boeotian Hippocrene hath
Pledged Mnemosyne in full-fraught Cups?
Or wander bareleg'd, who upon the Stage
Hath acted oftentimes in Sockes and Buskins?
Or see him tanned for want of an old Hat,
Whose Temples (unto his immortal praise)
Ye have so richly viewed begirt with Baize?

Daculemion! I am glad to find thee: l'^e have a speech.


Your Worship shall.

As yet the contentious night has not exterminated Hyperion from the celestial
Globe; who daily uses to hawke with the firmamental Eagle, and to hunt Ursa
Major round about the Forest of the sky, to go to plow* when he wants Corn
with Taurus, and (when he is hungry) to eat Aries, and at night (when he comes
'ith West) to court the Lady Virgo to be his bedfellow, whom because he cannot
obtain, he lashes on his horses, and goes and reports his stubbornness to his
friends at the Antipodes. Nor as yet hath the Trumpeter Boreas blown stormy
Clouds into our Horizon to deprive our eyes from the powerful radiance of his
orbicular and refulgent head. Nor as yet am I weary to do you service, nor will
be while I am able.


Here's for you.

What a wordy nothing thou hast spoken?

You have given me current silver for it.
You're a bountiful gallant.

My father is my Rival, and I find
To him Antiphila is most inclined.
What the Fates will we never can prevent,
And (till the end) we know not their intent.

A Potion he hath took, and is overcome
By the deceitful working of't, and lies
As if he had no interest in this life.
Lucora I have sent for, that we may
See how she'll take it, for by her carriage now
We shall perceive if there be any hope.
What will the Lady deign her presence here?

She will my Lord.

Tis well.

And is at hand of entering.

Prithee Anclethe, bid them bring out my friend.
Though once Carionil did not believe
My protestations to him to relinquish
All title to Lucora, yet I meant it:
Were she a Lady far more excellent,
And richer in the ornaments of Nature;
Did she exceed the fairest of her Sex
More then fine-featur'd Mars the ugliest Satire;
Were her tongue Music, and her words enchanting,
And her conditions gentle like a Goddess.
I'd rather carry Aetna in my breast,
Then be disloyal to my friend, far rather.
Thou art most dutiful, Anclethe;
O Art! Natures most curious imitatresse,
How like a body late deprived of life
Does he lie sleeping without motion!

My Lord, the Lady Lucora,

Draw back:
But stay you here Anclethe.
I thank you Lady for this favour to us;
Were Carionil alive he would requite it.
He would unto the utmost.

My Lord,
I'm sorry that a gentleman reputed ever
Most wise, and voyced by a general fame
To be complete and perfect in all goodness,
(The which Carionil was) should thus destroy
The great opinion all the world had of him:
His depriving himself of his own life
For that foolish affection he bare me,
(I having often told him that he spent
His service barrenly, and that it would
Yield him no fruit) was such a weakness in him,
That his lives honour his deaths shame hath ruined.
Hither I came at his dying request,
Which (his Boy told me) was to have me see
What my obdurateness hath urged him to;
For so he termed it: his desire is satisfied:
Were he alive again I could not love him.
Si^, I should love him less for the poor weakness
This act accuses him of, I should, believe me;
And so my Lord I take my leave.

Had I been his Mistress he had lived.

Stay Lady,
Show more respect, for truly he deserved it.

But kiss his lips, if you will do no more.

The Boy and all.

Speaks reason.

His will I have accomplished. Farewell Sir.

Hath she a heart? or if she have, what mettle or stone is it of?
Dost thou not think (Anclethe) that man happy
Who's free from all the molestations
That are concomitants to affection,
And to the grievous bondage of a woman?

My Lord contingently.

Thy timeless inexperience doth deceive thee.
Believe me boy, there does not live a woman
Who more then complementally is my Mistress.

Sir, you do not fear to love one of them?

Yes: and the Gods keep me still in that fear.
Sure such another as Lucora put out Cupids eyes.
O women, women!

Truly my Lord I do believe all Ladies
Are not cruel; indeed I do.

Thou art too young to be suspected, otherwise
I should think that some subtle false one had
Beguiled thy youth. Nature has worked the Potion out.

My Lord recovers strength.

How is't?

How does my friend?

Repeat my destiny.

Receive it with as calm a quietness
As I deliver it: your ear!

Vouchsafe him patience, O ye Gods.

When huge-wav'd Rivers from the earths high banks
Precipitate themselves into the Ocean,
Will stillness follow? Can you think then, can you,
I may be quiet? was Jove so, when the great
Brood of the Earth, the Giants did assay
Olympus conquest? Can I then a poor
Dejected man be calm; when all the misery
The world can send it pours on me fully?
Aeolus, run thy venturous sword again
Into the Rocks, and give an Issue to
The winds, that they may with their ireful blasts
Remove the world from off it's steadfast hinge.
Or blow the Pole-Stars out, and so let fall
This Globe we breath on. Or (by whirlwinds force)
Both Sexes collect together, and carry them
In it places opposite; The one into
The Arctick, the other the Southern Regions,
And let them of themselves propagate the like:
So women's Tyrannies can do no ill,
And men perform what one another will.

This favours frantically.

Deprive him not of reason, but exalt
Him to himself, O heavens! Ah me!

Tis true. The sea is always full of water,
(The Lands do relieve it) and yet has no cause
For lamentation, but woeful man
Hath but a few, indeed a very few
Salt tears to mollify the burdenous draught
Of misery which his malignant Stars
Compel him to endure.
What? his Mistress venom obstinacy? not possible,
Tis unsufferable, above our frail carriage.

The word friend, ways all titles of honour down,
And therefore not by them, but that I beseech you
Not to neglect your self. I've lately known
The time when death almost inevitable
Could not unfix your thoughts. This cause is weaker.

How!

Believe me friend.

Believe you! I would believe thee friend,
Did thou affirm absurdest contraries:
That the Sun was extinguished, and the bright
Moon was blown out, and all the Stars were fallen,
And nature (yet harmonious) disordered
Into another Chaos, I would believe you:
For rather then you should pronounce a falsehood,
Things that are not would be.

Alas! you are distempered;
I grieve to see you so for so poor a cause.

It is a weighty one, and if the brave
Famed off-spring of Alcmena had endured it,
He had enlarged his labours to thirteen,
And been another wonder to the world.
But (noblest friend) you know the History,
How he the knotty club did lay aside,
Put off the rough Nemaean skin, and don'd
Maidens apparel, for the love he bore
To ruined Picus daughter, young Iole.

But he ne'er offered violence to himself.

He did not Sir, be counselled by your friend,
Do my good Lord.

He had not cause, she did return him love;
And (except in this case) I would suffer
Beyond expression from another hand,
Without a thought to use my own. But you
May say I'm passionate: tis right, I am so
I know it, and you cannot expect less from me.
Were I as free from love as you have known me.
You should not tax me with that fault, although
Unstable fortune made an Irus of me:
But you may call this boasting.

Far be it from me, tis a perfect truth.

Ah, Alas!

Leave sighing boy prithee.

Come,
You shall be temperate again (my friend)
And have fair likelihood to obtain your Lady.

Impossible!

I've formed the plot already, you must be, draw near.

How a Negro, an Ethiopian! it is frivolous.
She is too obdurate, most obstinate.

Hath she not refused the bravest and handsomest gentlemen of this kingdom?
You cannot deny it. Be therefore counselled,
She that cannot love a man of a better complexion,
On one of them may settle her affection.

I have some hope again, you shall stay with my friend, refuse it not I
prithee.

For many conveniences it is necessary; I every day shall see thee, and shortly
will take thee again.


My Lord, I beseech you.

Nay, my Anclethe let me not use words,
As thou dost love me deny me not.

Sir, I am charmed, and will obey you.

Come, lets walk, and I'll instruct you fully.

THis London wine is a parlous liquor; twill turn you a mans head so long
round, that at last 'twill set it where his heals should be: another glass ont
had proved me a reeler, a cotqueane, which I was never brought up to; I learnt
a song of my old gra^am, many a good ballad she would have sung me by the fire
side ore a black pot, but your city wine is a more stinging liquor. She left me
a very fair cow, but a villainous thief stole me her, (foul cheeve him for it)
and escaped I know not whither: but alls won, much good do him with it, my
Ladies Worships service is better then a team of oxen. But the song must not be
forgot.

All that about me sit,
Laugh at my pleasant wit,
And neither cough nor spit,
Till I have done a.
For I will sing a song,
That fitly shall be long,
To a cow and not wrong
Mount Helicona.
Don Quixots Rosinant,
And Sancho's ass errant,
And Banks his horse do want
What she may brag of.
They would ones breech much gall,
And give one many a fall,
Sufficient therewithal
To break ones crag off.
That Jove did love a steed,
I yet did never reed;
But by all tis agreed
Io he loved.
No beast upon the field,
Doth man more profit yield,
Whither alive or killed,
As may be proved.
Well, I'll to my chamber and sleep awhile, otherwise I'st ha a foul deal of
do to keep me on my legs this afternoon,

Iaques is now a very Barnabey!


Iaques! so ho my boy!

His ma^ch is extraordinary, sure the rogue's drunk,

He's so very deaf --

The report is that Doctor Aristotle cast himself into the sea, because he
could not (with all his rambling Philosophy) find out the natural cause of the
ebbing and flowing of it: but (had his good scholarship been troubled with my
Mistress) he might a jolted out his brains against a rock, for his dullness in
inventing a method of wooing to win her Ladyship withal. I here will sit and
muse.


Indeed Madam I will be very serviceable unto you, if now and then you will
suffer me to be blithe and full of merry moods.


Iaques! where ha you been?


At the spigget. Is it not a very rainy wet day?


Thou art well washed within.


Tis a very dark day: the sun shines clear tho.


T'hast a light head Iaques.


And yet I cannot bear't steadfast on my shoulders, wine's monstrous strong.

Let me see who am I?


You are a fool.


The play's the better for it.


You're a drunken coxcomb, go.


Thou captive Greek, I am a Beglerbeg.


Thou woot be a beggar and thou leave not thy drinking.


Thou me Roxalana! am not I the great Sultan?


A booby.


You show your breeding to upbraid the Majesty of the Grand Signior.


Peace, no more fooling.


You are drunk with north country Balderdash, you keep no wine, water your
kitlings with beer, nothing but wine shall be drunk in my court.


I shall be troubled with him else. Ambassadors wait your return at your
Palace.


We will withdraw: send the Bashaes after me, they shall present me wine.


Is he here?

I shall be courted certainly, and perhaps shall yield.


Most welcome happiest Genius of my life,
Dearest Vandona, let your lilly hand
Enrich my lips.

You're very complemental, servant.


Mistress, faith I love you, as for millions of causes,
So also for a natural demeanour,
It shows you are no of-spring of the City.

You would marry none, servant?


No, six thousand pounds cannot hide a squint eye, a crooked back, or a red
head, or a muddy face, though they may gild them.


This is very Satirical, but there be Beauties of all coloured hair, eyes, and
complexions.


I at any time will carry you to a Play, either to the Black Friars or Cockpit.
And you shall go to the Exchange when you will, and have as much money as you
please to lay out, you shall find me a very loving husband in troth dear Lady.


But servant, you have been a very deboist gentleman.


Forget what you've heard, and you shall hear no more on it. But we are
extravagant, come, let's to'th joiner.


To whom, and for what Mr. Lorece?


To Hymen in his saffron coat, to be married.


Some other time, a month hence will serve.


Then must I court another bout.


What you please Sir.


O Cupid the Bow-man,
I am not thy foe man;
For I love this woman,
As well as I know man.
And therefore I pray thee,
From mischief to stay me;
And quickly to lay me
In bed with this Lady.

What call you this Sir?


Tis my imploration, and ode.


You're very fluent Sir.


And yet neglected. But I'll make Cornelius Gallus speak English, and he shall
woo for me.


What say you servant?


Be you attentive, and you shall hear.
My sweet Vandona, fine and comely lass,
(Whose beauty Milk and Lillies doth surpass,
And the sweet Roses, both t^ white and red,
Or Indian Ivory new polished)
O spread, O spread abroad thy yellow hair,
Like glorious gold, shining all out as fair:
Thy purest Alabaster neck, and show's
Which (from between thy graceful shoulders)
Open thy Starry eyes, and let us view (grows;
Their brows above them of a Sable hew:
And both thy Roseal cheeks let us epsy
Beautified with a natural Tyrian die.
Put forth thy lips, their Corral let us see,
And (Dovelike) gentle kisses give to me.
Of amorous life my breath did draw out part:
Those kisses pierced meto the very heart.
Why did thou suck my blood (O cruel she?)
Henceforth thy dugs (like Apples) hide from me,
Which with Ambrosiack cream shall swell thy breast,
Discloses Cynamon I yield, and best
Delights arise from thee: yet thy Paps cover,
Whose growth, and beauty, do make me a lover:
For see thou not, that languishing I lye?
A man half dead how can thou thus destroy!

This is mere flattery.


Tis but a spark (Madam) an almost invisible atom of truth, which can scarce
be discerned in the Sun-shine of your perfections, credit me Madam


They are most childish will believe all that their servants say, my most
poetical Servant.


Most obdurate Lady.


Will you wrangle?


Was ever Widow so hard to win? Sure your husband got not your maidenhead you
are so backward.


Adieu Sir.


Not yet I pray you sweetest Lady, if --

Pray you trouble me with no more speeches.


O cruel reply to a Lovers suit!
If ever you have felt this passions pain,
If ever you would pitied be your self,
Or if you know that Love hath power to kill;
For all these (which you heretofore have been
Subject unto) commiserate a heart
So full of love for you that it will break.
If you deny:
But if you will remain inexorable,
And frown on him who ay must fawn on you,
I wish my fortune may be yours, and that
If ere you love you may be served so.

I'm but a woman, and these words would move
A stupid rock to pity, Sir I can
Resist no more, your tongue has magic in it:
You have overcome me, and enjoy your conquest.

My dear widow, let me kiss thee for this! thy dare of wearing black is almost
out. O my joy! methinks I could out-sing old Homer, the nine Muses, and put
their Patron Apollo our of fame.

My Vandona, yonder is my brother, he will be glad to hear of my good fortune.


Who's he?


A friend of mine (my Lord)


I shall be desirous (Sir) both for your own, and for Anclethes sake, to be
better acquainted with you.

May I demand your name?


Your servant is called Phyginois.


How have you sped brother?


She will be called your sister: salute her, go kiss her for it.


Lady, I hope my brother will deserve you,
By proving an affectionate husband to you.

Madam, I am a stranger, but will endeavour to make my self known unto you by
any service I can do you.


Thank you Sir.


My Nentis doth excel her sister


Come brother, will you go with us?


I'll wait upon your Mistress.


My faithful friend, may all thy wishes prosper,
And a fair end crown them most happily.

Sweetest of Ladies!


Thou did prefer goodness before the raising of thy house.


It grieved me to think so noble a Lady should be so poorly disposed of;

My brothers birth, nor forunes could deserve you.


I was ignorant, and might have undone my self.


I did pity you.


And ever have obliged me to you for it.


If your sisters woman Mistress Nentis be obstinate, and you prosper;

Hereafter you may do me a multitude of favours.


I ne'er will fail to do the best I can; now let us follow them.

Love is a passion not to be withstood;
And (until hearts be mutual) never good.

AN hours life is like the various year,
Which hardly bears one form a fortnights space:
He sure deserves respect that to obtain
His Mistress, thinks all trouble a content.
These two years have not had so many quarters
As I disguises, scarce as many days
As I devises, and yet to no purpose:
What I may do in this I cannot guess;
But for mine own purpose must hope the best.
My late long residence ith Spanish Court, when I lay there Leiger Ambassador,
Hath made me speak the Castilian language perfectly;
Which will be my great furtherance, because
Polidacre affects that tongue exceedingly;
And I know will gladly give me a free access
Unto his house at all times.
Estoy yo (como deue) muy lobrego;
Porque de mi, Lucora haze un Negro.
They shall not see me yet.
Sir, your daily importunities have so moved me that I must yield unwillingly,
only I request to have our marriage deferred a month dear Sir, do not deny me
this.


I thank thee girl.

Welcome Falorus: my daughter's yours after four weeks be past.


Worthy Sir, you're too bountiful. Most excellent Lady, you will make my fortune
envied. I must dissemble yet, for I will not wrong Carionil.


I like this well.


But I will rather die then have him


I do not doubt my friend.


I have laboured much for you.


Now I'll disclose my self, and counterfeit the Negro as well as I can.

Y pues en todos triempos, y occasiones
Por la causa comun sin cargo alguno,
En battallas formadas, y esquadrones
Puede usar delas armas cadauno:
Por las mismas ligitimas razones
E's licito combat de uno a uno,
A pie, a cavallo, armado, disarmado
Orasea campo, abieto, or a estocado.
Don Carionil, would I could hear of thee!

He is the brav'st proportioned African I ever saw.


I will speak to him.

Habla (voste) yngles?


Yes Sir I learnt your language at Brussels.


I shall be most glad (Sir) to be acquainted wi^ you.


Grave Nelides years be doubled (most honourable Hero upon you; your courtesy
has won one of the greatest Ethiopian Lords to become your servant.


What an unequalled carriage he is of!


You look, Sir, like a noble Gentleman, I salute you.


Well, Don Carionil may thou prosper, your Mistress has consented a month
hence to marry me, but doubt me not my friend.


According to the Ethiopian custom,
Great Lady, I adore your pantofle.

You are a worthy, and a noble Moor.

This is your shadow; you shall command me fair one.


Thank you Sir.


I heard you mention Carionil.


Tis true,
When we were in the Spanish Court together,
I being commanded thither an Ambassador
From the Emperor of both the Ethiopias
And of the mighty kingdoms and vast countries
Of Goa, Caffares, Fatigar, Angote, Xoa,
Barn, Balignazo, Adea, Vangue and Goyamine,
He wronged me, and I am come hither to seek him;
And with my sword to punish his rude language.
If you will tel me (Sir) where I may find him,
You shall eternally oblige me to you.

He is lately dead Sir.


You do but jest.


I was with him when he died.


Then he had not so honourable an end as I intended him.


If I should not seem too inquisitive, I would desire to know your quarrel.


I am much taken with this object


You may command me any thing.
We meeting in the presence one afternoon
(Amongst many things) did happen to discourse
Of Ladies; he said that none of all the world
Were so beautiful as the Spanish:
I that had read in many histories
The English have the best and loveliest faces,
Did tell him so, yet could not change his mind;
After long altercations he grew hot,
Gave me the lie reprochfully; which forced me to tell him, that though I owd
so much honour to both the Majesties of our great masters, as not for private
wrongs to disturb our Embassies: I meant before I died to visit his country,
and call him there unto a strict account.


I thank you for your free relation;
While you intend to stay in England, use
My house at your pleasure, I pray you do,
Your company will be always welcome to me;
And I love the Castilian language, which
You speak both readily and purely:
May I demand your name?

Tis Tucapelo, and I'm subject to
Great Prestor Iohn (whose powerful Sceptre awes
Sixty two Kings) and in Garama live
Magnificent for silken palaces.

His behaviour is without suspicion


Tis dinner time or nigh, pray you be my guest; You shall be very welcome (Sir)
both now and at all times.


I'll wait upon you.


Falorus, let me entreat your stay.


You shall command me.


Injurious tyrant Love! Nentis!


Madam.


Stay a little.
How frail is any woman's resolution!
I that so seriously have often thought
Never to change my name, am now become
A slave unto a Moore; I feel the mighty
Fabric of all maiden virtue totter.
What may befall me worse? but I may as well
Withstand a volley of shot, and as easily,
As resist these new desires: tis very strange
That I who have denied the earnest suit
Of so complete a Gentleman as was
Carionil, and neglected his friend,
(For I will rather steal away, and do
Mean services to my inferiors,
Then be his wife) should dote upon a person
Some Ladies scarce dare look upon, a Moor,
A sun-burnt Moor I'm ^tter stranger to.
What would my father say if he should know
My thoughts? banish me ever from his sight,
And never more think of Lucora's name.
But Love is not confined to the opinion
Of others. O this is a revenge for my
Slighting of brave Carionil; yet if
He were alive again I could not love him.
Alas I am undone! O that my Fates
Had been so kind as to have wrought my heart
Fit and propense to have requited him?
Nentis, will you be silent of my love?
Be so good Nentis.

Why, Madam, will you have this Blackamoor? me thinks my Lord Falorus is a
handsomer man by much. Alas! he will take you beyond sea.


Nothing is strong enough to divert me.


Your secrets (Madam) are as safe in my breast as yours.


Befall what will, I am resolved.
Affection that doth tend
Not crookedly, but to a noble end,
Is worthy; and they stubbornly repine
At their creation who from it decline.

SWeetest Antiphila!

I wonder Sir, in what I have so forfeited my faith that I cannot be credited.


Urge me not, Lady, unto a belief,
That will be my destruction:
Delay me rather with a little hope,
And save me from despair.

I can but say what I have said already.
You do not trust my tongue; Pray take a parchment,
And there inscribe a sad and solemn Oath;
And I'll subscribe that I will never have you.

The fatal Ravens hoarse crying
Is Thracian Music unto your reply.
Would I had heard a thousand Mandrakes groan,
So you had left me in silence.

I pity you, but did you know me truly, you would bless my denial (young
Philander.)


Bless it! O Lady,
Durst I but be so horribly profane
As to curse any thing you please to do,
I would go study imprecations, and
Vent them in places that are haunted by
Wild walking devils; but my grand affection
Condemns that violence. Do not then suppose
That thongh you were a Suc^ubus, I durst
Utter such impious breath. Be all the faults
(That either truth or Poets fictions
Have shown in women) in you, I will love you
With serious admiration.

Sir, I will release your affection.

Impossible.
^ot the fairest creature (by diligent search picked out
Of all the infinite Myriades of beauties,
Selected from the spacious kingdoms of
The Earth, and I might choose her freely)
Should win upon my heart to dispossess you;
She should not Lady.

You will not hear me.

Then may eternal deafness seize upon me:
Speak Lady, and though you do say the last
Word I shall ever hear, I will with joy
Be most attentive. The dark cave of sleep
Is not more quiet.

I am contracted.

You are not Lady.

I am Sir.

Unto my father?

No.

Then sentence his sure death by naming him.

Will you destroy the man I love?

And you him that loves you?

What is done cannot be undone*

It shall*

You must not know his name therefore.

If there be any manhood in his breast,
He shall dispose himself: I'll challenge him
By such sure circumstances (and set the papers
On public places by the Play-Bills) that if
He dares but use a sword he will be known.

So you will publish my disgrace.

Too true, O Lady, dear Antiphila,
Give me his name. I will not kill him foully,
We will meet fairly: I may die upon
His sword, and you thereby be freed from my
Unworthy suit.

Sir, promise me one thing, and I will tell you.

Here is my hand, you shall charm me.

I must lye, and grossly, to be rid of his Courtship.
It is Tandorix. You must not speak it unto any, or quarrel about it.


Tis not: you mock me (sweet Antiphila.)

Indeed Philander I do not.
You will be secret for my sake, until
I do release you of your promise.

You've had my hand: silence must be my death.

I'll leave you Sir, and build upon your word,
For I perceive you are displeased.

This tis to be a fool: which is the truest,
And briefest definition of a Lover.
What fury fascinated so my senses,
As wilfully to make me become a slave
Unto the childish passions of a woman?
On this occasion wood I understood
The saddest Epithets of Necromancy,
That I might join them to this sex: O my heart!
I am overcome with rage, and will be rather
A perjured Mahumetan, and wade
Through streams of blood into her arms, then a
Soft-conscience'd ass, and let this villain have her:
Could envious hell suppose a body of
So delicate a composition, cood
Within it lodge a mind so poor and worthless?
This is a woman's weakness* no, tis a baseness
Cannot be matched in all the faults of man.
But why am I so angry? I will show
My fury, not in idle breath but deeds.
And this shall be the time; thou base ambitious
Slave, before we part thou die.

O good Sir, why? I ne'er offended you,
Heaven knows I love you best of all the world,

Thou art the hinderance of all the bliss
I could expect or wish for upon earth.

Sir, let me hear the reason of your rage,
And (if you find that I have injured you)
I will not beg for life.

Find it! I know it clearly,
And will not honour thee, vile man, so much
As't let my tongue join such unequal names.

I understand you not: Dear Sir, be plain.

Art thou prepared to die? if not, kneel here,
And pray thy self into a readiness.

Be not so violent.

Repent.

Let me understand my offence; the chrysome child
Is not more innocent of wrongs to you,
Then guiltless I.

The tears of Crocodiles!

I humbly do upon my knees implore you
That you thus rashly will not take away
The life you never can restore, and will
Bewail for in an overlate repentance.

To heaven, and not to me make orisons.

I am resolved.
For your deceased mothers sake (at whose
Sad funeral letter I was entertained
Into your fathers family) and for
Those tears and sighs, and sorrows she did weep,
Groan, and express at her delivery of you,
Be merciful unto a faultless stranger.

A tedious and an exquisite torture for
Thy death* should not deter me from it. My mother
(Could she arise out of her watery grave,
Appear in both our views, and be an eloquent
Suppliant unto me for thy life) should not
Prevail to win me to it.

Then nothing will satisfy, keep in your sword;
I am your mother, draw off this Periwig,
And my face will establish your belief.

It does indeed; here prostrate on my knees
For my rude language I do crave remission.

And you obtain it and my blessing too;
But you deserve blame for your violent fury.
O let me kiss your gracious hand, and seal
My pardon on your happy lips.
Why did you grieve us for the sad report
Of your untimely end?

You shall know all anon. But yet conceal
My being, till your fathers love be ripe,
And grown mature for a second marriage;
I pray you do.

Mother, I will.
Now I've good hope Antiphila will be mine.

And Lady you shall not wish any thing
(If that an humane power can obtain it)
But I will make it yours. I hope you do
Not wrong my love with a suspicion
That I cannot perform what ere I promise.

I do not, Sir, distrust your affection:
But give me leave to doubt I shall not live
According to my content in Aethiopia.

Most noble Lady, I that have seen both places,
Dare promise you, you will.

I cannot tell Sir, I must believe you.

For these few words (whose sweetness doth exceed
Vast and elaborate volumes of eloquence)
May all the joys that ever have made happy
The numerous Queens and Empresses that have
Been ornaments and glories to the world,
Meet unto their perfection in you.

My Tucapelo! when I did see you first,
I fell in Love as deep as Lady could.

And may I dye when (in unperfect thoughts)
You do repent your choice: Mistress, I can
Make famous Gamara as pleasing to you
As is your native Country: You shall find
Delights above, not equal to your mind.

Sir, your company shall be all things unto me.

You shall not touch one drop of water, but shall
Be of more virtue then the Thespian spring,
Where reverent Poets of the former times
Quaft off huge bowls to great Apollo's health.
Young virgins (whose sweet voices do exceed
Mnemosyne's daughters) shall sing you a sleep
Each night, and (when you grace the happy woods
With your rich presence) they shall make a consort
With the innocuous queristers of the spring,
To entertain the Mistress of my life.

And I go thither they shall teach me to sing --

The Jewel-tippets of your ears shall weigh
The curious points of precious Isicles,
When Leo breathes hot vapours on the earth.
Your sedulous slaves (enriched by noble blood)
Shall bear your Litter through the tedious streets
Of Gamara, while all the gallant youth
Within it runs to wonder at your beauty.

I do believe you love me so much Sir,
That you will show it all the ways you can:
And I do thank you for it, and love you,
And I will show it all the ways I can.

O happiest speech my ears did ever hear! --
Amphions music made not such a sound;
Nor Orpheus Lute that tamed the stubborn spleen
Of hells inhumane dog, when he did play
For the redemption of his ravished spouse;
Nor Phoebus (when unto his gold-strung Lyre
He for superiority did sing
His sweetest Anthems and best Madrigals
Against ambitious Pan) made harmony
To parallel the sweetness of your tongue.

If that all my endeavours can deserve
At this height your affection, by my fault
It never shall decrease.

You over-act me much, but never shall
Have thoughts beyond me.

I pray you spare my company a while;
A while I would be private with my woman.

Lady, I will do things unwillingly
At your command: but give me leisure (fairest)
To print my heart upon your heavenly lips,
Ere my departure hence -- The Ottoman Emperors
In their immense Seraglio never saw
Your matchless features in their numberless
Successive multitudes. I am so blessed,
That my excessive joys cannot be guest.

Nentis!

Madam.

Unfold thy heart unto me: Let me know
What thoughts thou hast of me.

I may offend.

Indeed thou shalt not.

Then I do wonder (Madam) that you will
Bestow your self (I think) unworthily.

How!

This is unpleasing to you, I will be
Hereafter silent: I have offended you.

No: proceed.

You are a Lady until now unstain'd
With any blot (save obstinacy to
The brave deceased Carionil) and will you
Give the world reason, a good one (pardon
My honest boldness (Madam) to tax your judgement;
And (which is worse) your virtue for this choice?
Is not Falorus far more worthy of you?
Marry him (Madam) and live still in England.
I'm sure my counsel would be seconded
By all the friends you have, did they but know
As much as I. But (Madam) if you have
Settled your affection past recall, and are
Resolved, I will be most obedient
And secret unto all your purposes.

And wilt thou go to Aethiopia with me?

If I do get no Servant before, and if
You will (if I dislike the country) give
Me liberty to return home.

Most willingly.

My Lord Falorus.

Where?

If I can find the least opportunity
I will try (Nentis) of what mettle you are made.

I hope (Mistress) our company
Is not unwelcome to you.

By no means Sir.

How gently it past her tongue!
For that sweet word I kiss your hand, dear Lady.

Where did you leave my father my Lord?

Above a reading Guicciardin.

Sir, I can perceive when I am flattered.

Earnest expressions of love deserve a better name.


Why Sir, I cannot believe you love me.

You need not doubt of that, Mistress, I do
With as much fervency as servant can;
I do beseech you Lady to believe me.

They are of easy faiths that believe all their servants say.


What ail you my Lord? you are not well.

Unwelcome guest away -- I was thinking of --

Of what?

I ha forgot -- would they would all love me --
I am most strangely altered on the sudden:
My friendship (I fear) will be too weak a tie
To make me silent.

My Lord!

Thou had a Master did deserve thee better.

But he is dead, and I am yours by his
Last Legacy.

What would thou say?

I hope you're well.

He has found out an alteration in me:
I must beware of public signs. I was Privately*
Full of Carionil; my thoughts were busy
Concerning him:
Madam, I pray you pardon my neglect
Of frequents visits; I have been too guilty.

You have not offended.

Tis your great goodness to say so.

This, Sir, is too importunate.

To slack (dear Mistress) but wink at my insufficiency.

You said, you love no woman in the world
But me.

And may you hate me if I do.

As I see you ready to give me full satisfaction that you mean faithfully, so
shall you find me willing to requite you.


No man can boast such happiness.

Sir, be moderate; you're not so sure of me, but (upon occasion) I can retire;
neither would I have the company take notice of us.


You shall command me (Mistress)

These passions are new to me: wooed I were private.

I never did observe her so well before.


My Lord!

What say you (Madam?)

You saw not my brother Philander to day?

No truly Lady I did not.

Your brother (Nentis says) shall shortly be married to
The rich widow her sister.

So he doth hope.

Madam, dinner stays of you.

You hear my Lord.

Nay Anclethe, stay not for me, wait on the Lady: I'll follow immediately.

What ails me? let me see
What is the cause of such an alteration
I find within me: doubtless it is Love.
To whom? to whom but to the worthiest
And sweetest Lucora? Take heed, tis dangerous*
A sudden ruin so will seize my friendship,
And prove my former protestations
Feigned untruths. Cannot the noble name
Of young Carionil prevent me? No,
Nor certainty of all the evil wills
Of all the friends I have;
Were both our better Genius Orators,
And here embraced fast my knees, and wept
Miraculous tears (to quench the rising flames
Lucora's irresistible eyes have kindled
In me, or to drown this late impression Love
Hath sealed upon my heart) I'd be as remorseless
As the most stern and unremoved Scythian,
And deafer then the people that inhabit
Near the Egyptian Cataracts of Nile.
But I am base, base to infringe the knot
Of amity a long and serious knowledge
Of each other hath tied betwixt us. Twere safer
Sailing with drunken Mariners between
Hard Sylla and Charybdis, then to suffer
My much divided thoughts, and forth of them
To work such a conclusion to my passions,
As might hereafter confirm me noble in
The opinion of the world: but I'm most ignorant,
And know not what to do. Wood I were so
Distraught, that my own self I could not know.

Sweet Mistress, your bounty will become
An envy unto future times.

So let your love Sir.

But speak (my Dear) what happy day shall give
A fair conclusion unto all my wishes?

What haste good servant?

Nay be not angry Sweet.

Madam (and please you) your own good servants desire to show your Worships
some pretty pastime.


It pleases us well: when begins it?

Even presently; I'll go and tell them all what a good woman you are.


This is not usual with you?

Indeed Servant so seldom, that I remember not the like:
Sure tis for your entertainment; they think I have
Been a niggard of it, and help to make it out.

You are too good.

So you can never be.

And yet I will not fail to do my best.

I pray you do not (dear Lorece) for tis a good resolution.


I see we shall have some odd thing.


I wish Sir* it may prove worthy your laughter.


My fair Vandona, I believe you will have your desire.


Iaques is among them: he may move you.


An'ether of you ask what's here, tis a Mask
Which we Actors do hope will content you:
If not, when it ends let us all part friends,
And of your attention go in and repent you.
I hope your Worships will say I have pronounced this well enough.


To my content honest Iaques.


I'm glad you like it.


Come Hymen, thou fellow that always wear yellow,
Draw near in thy Frock of Saffron;
Once more I say appear before this gentleman here,
And this Lady in the white apron.
If the boy thou dost bring hath a voice fit to sing,
Lets have a merry new Ballet:
Begin thou the Song, and it will not be long
(We hope) before he will follow't.

Say, Boy, who are fit to be
Joined into an unity?

They that will permit their wives
To live pleasant quiet lives,
And will never entertain
Thoughts of jealousy, if vain.

Now Boy let this couple hear
What should be the woman's care.

A wife should be secret, true,
Most obedient, and no shrew;
Should obey her husbands will,
While therein she finds no ill.

Such a Wife and husband too
We do wish both him and you.

Prithee Sweet lets be married this afternoon, and this shall be our
Epithalamion.


Stay my leisure good servant: 'twill not belong.


Now if you please to cast a glance Hither, ye shall see us dance:

Fiddlers play, begin and strike: What ye see do not dislike.

What a mad toy tis Mistress!


Iaques! this day use my wine-cellar, you and your company
May be as free in it as you will.

Her Ladyship says well: Good now ho lets go thither,
Without more ado.

Goodman Wedlock, where was your mind marle? Is there not a piece behind yet?
I'll not budge a foot till I have discharged it.


Out with it then.


Mr. Marriage, put me not out with your grining: for an you do all's spoiled.


Gentleman and Madam, you have seen
What our Mask and performance hath been:
If you like both tis well; and if but one,
Of the other wood we had done none.
For clapping of hands we care not two chips;
We are satisfied if you join your lips.
I thank you all.


And so do I: you now may go.


And so we must, for I ha done. All's done: this last (what do you call,) was
the full end of it.


Why go we not?


I am very dry with singing and dancing.


Follow me to the wine-cellar.


You must keep your promise: you are expected by this.


Lady, I ki^ your hand: This is my vale as often as I come.
I'll seal my welcome on your lips. Farewell widow.

Remember my service to your brother.


Command me any thing.


The tedious winter of my many griefs
Her calmer heavenly breath hath now blown over;
And all my tears and sighs are now converted
Into a happiness will soon be perfect.
The gallant Courtier Paris Alexander
(When he had stole the young Atrides Bride,
The sister of the two Tindarides,
And with great triumphs entered into Troy)
Was sad and melancholy unto me.
How wise the Fates are! Ere we can obtain
Perfect frnition of the thing we love,
We must break through great difficulties tedious,
Unto the end that we may more esteem
And prize our happiness when we achieve it.
Thanks (excellent Lady) for your gracious promise:
May every Lover henceforth bless your tongue.
^he hath prefixed this hour to be the time
Wherein I shall out-grow all hope, and fix
Upon the proudest height of fortunes wheel.
Hail happy hour! This is her chamber window,
And this the door whereby she must escape.
Shine well ye stars, and let this project find
Your influences to a lover kind.

See Madam, he is come: My Lord Tucapelo has not trespas'd on a minute.


Then is our parting near: your new servant hath prevented your journey.


Nentis!

Most honoured Tucapelo, I am here
In presence to give answer to my Love.

Are you ready worthiest Lady?

I am, my Love.

Neglect your Jewels: Gamara shall supply you.


I care for nothing if I have but you.

Descend (my Dear) each minute is an age
Until I crown my joys with your possession.

I come. Nentis farewell: report that my
Escape was uuto thee unknown, and that
I stole away when thou wast fast asleep:
I would not have thee blamed for me. Excuse
Me to my father all the ways I have
Instructed thee in.

Cynthia, triumph; and let thy brother hear
His eyes did never witness such a stealth:
Be proud in thy pale lustre, and make known,
Apollo doth tell tales, but thou relst none.
Not yet! how tedious seems a moment!
Delays in Love
Would raise impatience in Olympic Jove.
But she is entered! welcome sweet Lucora,
Above expression welcome, my crown of joy
I would not change for an imperial Sceptre.

I am most happy in your love (dear friend)
Thanks good Nentis: My woman cannot go with's.


Then farewell Nentis.


May the propitious heavens crown both your heads with all fair fortune.


Our thanks go with you.

It is your promise, Sir, that I shall live
Without contradiction in my Religion,
Enjoy my conscience freely: your vow was solemn.

I do acknowledge it, and will perform it.
-- True -- not to be denied, what a great frost chils my affection!


Then I'll be confident.

You may:
I am amazed, and lost within a wonder.
Let me consider; have I cause to love
A Lady that hath so much neglected me,
That she hath preferred a Negro? And tis likely
(When she knows me) will care as little for me
As ere she did, and (if she meets with one
Of this complexion I feign) confer
Her perfect love upon the slave? Tis clear,
I have no reason to do it, neither will I;
For I am free, know liberty again:
This poor unworthiness in her hath loosed me.
Would it not be a weakness in me (let me argue it)
To bestow my self upon a woman of
So obstinate a nature, that she loved me less
When she believed that for her sake I had
Done violence upon my self? It would be
A matchless one, beyond example, and which
Future times would admire, but not parallel.

Come, shall we hence? delay is dangerous.

No; be it what it will.

We must not stay here long.

Nor will we.

Alas! what ails my noble Tucapelo?
You had not wont to answer me so slightly.
Do you not love me still?

No.

The heavens forbid! I am Lucora.

I do confess you are, but must deny
I love you.

I could endure your Sword with better ease:
Us't, and revenge what ignorant ill I have
Committed against you. I had rather dye
By your dear hand, then to return from hence
With this strong poison in my breast.

Kill you!
Lady, I would not do it to obtain
The Sovereignty of the Sea-parted Earth*
Live many years in happiness: I wish it
With all my soul, else may I dye unwept for.
But give me leave to leave you, and bestow
Laughter, not tears for my inconstancy.
Think me unworthy of your worthy self;
For I cannot love you, nor will marry you.

Surely you will. Have you a cause to be
So merciless unto a passionate Lady,
One that so truly wonders at your worths?
I pray you (Sir) jest not so solemnly:
Thunder is Music in my ears to this.

I do not: credit me (most fair Lucora)
I am in earnest, nor would I spend the time
In words. Shall I call Nentis?

Rather call Basilisks to look me dead
Then her, to help to mourn your unkind parting.
O! do not thus: wherein am I deformed
So suddenly, that you so soon should leave me?

This is a trouble to your self: you cannot
Speak words enough to make me yours.

Can I not speak sufficiently! Then I
Will try if there be Magic in my knees:
Look (Sir) a Lady kneels to you for love, She kneels.
To whom the noblest in the Realm have sued.

All is in vain.

Thou man (that art more lasting in thy fury
Then the Egyptian wonder through the storms
Of many bleak tempestuous winters)
Say worthless man, if it becomes thee well
To let a loving Lady kneel to thee,
And thou be merciless and not raise her ^p.

I pray you rise.

And will you then be reconciled unto me?

No I cannot.

Then I will turn a Statue.

I pray you leave me and forget me ever:
Henceforth you shall not see me any more,

Not see you any more!
O faithless man and full of perjuries!
Thy nature is transparent, thou art false
As is the smooth-fac'd Sea, which every wind
Disturbs; a false Barbarian, and born under
Deceitful Mercury. A Britain would
Rather have died then thus have wronged me:
Thou art inhumane, and may boast the conquest.
Tell your most salvage countrymen this Act,
(If the just God of Seas revenge me not)
And number it amongst your proud cruelties.

Be pacifi'd: I pray you leave this rage.

When I am dead I shall, and not before,
And that shall not be long; For thou shalt see me,
Merciless man thou shalt, and add that to
Thy bloody conquests; boast how a slighted Lady*
For thy unkindness made her self away.
This hand (wherewith I would have given my self
To thee) shall take me from my misery.

Hold: I am Carionil.


How! say that again.


I am Carionil.


That breath hath raised me, and made me my self.

I counterfeited the Negro to obtain you,
The wished period of my griefs; and might,
But will not love that woman that shall scorn
All my endeavours, and entertain a stranger,
An Ethiopian, and prefer him, no:
Judge (fair Lucora) if I have not cause.

Yes, yes you have: But now you do not need
More of your Rhetoric to dissuade me from you.
There are not in the world temptations
Can make me yours: I cannot give a reason,
Tis in my nature, and a secret one.

I am glad it is so.

This is the happiest hour
My life did ever pass, and quickly changed.

I rejoice at the alteration: Madam, you shall
Command me to do any thing but marry you.

Then I command you never move me more.

I will obey you.

Now you may call Nentis:
She is not yet in bed; I see a light yet.

Most willingly.
Nentis, Nentis.

What's the matter, marle.

Come down.

I wonder much: I come (Madam.)

You will be secret, Sir, of what hath past?

You may be confident I will.

I else shall suffer much in my honour.
Women! take heed: the men whom you deny
May win you to be theirs by Policy:
They Proteus-like will vary shapes, until
Beyond their wishes they have placed their will.

Your woman's come: Good night.

Good night (Sir)
Nentis, I now will never pass the Seas:
Tucapelo is become Carionil.

Amazement cease me!


Anon thou shalt know all.


I hope that now you will be ruled by your friends, and take the Lord Falorus
to your husband.


Hang husbands!


The Gods bless them all I say, and send me a good one.


Let's to bed: lock the door after you.


How joy fully the birds salute the morn,
Warbling a welcome from their gentle throats!
But I am of another mind (poor maid!)
Aurora doth no sooner blush upon
The world, but I make my complaints afresh.
I am in love, and for my wretched State
Can blame no body but sinister Fate.

Well met (Anclethe) I will hide no longer
My self in this disguise. Again thou shalt
Be my Anclethe: wilt thou be my Boy,
And sing me songs, as thou had wont to do?

You have obtained your Mistress I see, my Lord.

I have not (boy) nor will I seek her more:
Some other time thou shalt receive the story.

My hour is come: dear Cupid be my aid.
And will you never have another Sir?

I do not know Anclethe, but if I have,
She must not be so obstinate as this.

But say a Lady of a noble house
(One that is not unhandsome) were in love
With you, did love you violently (my Lord)
Would you not pity her, but be unkind?

Boy, I do know what tis to love in vain
So well, and what a misery is in it,
That if she were but reasonably well,
She should not grieve for me, indeed she should not.

You are most noble: old Philosophy
Never defined a virtue which you want.
There is a Lady Sir, and not ill-favour'd,
Born of an ancient honoured family,
So much in love with you, that if you do
Refuse her (my Lord) you do deny her life.

What is she called Anclethe?

My Lord, my Commission doth not reach so far;
She'd have her name concealed until you've seen her.
Tomorrow morning you may meet her here:
She with a gentleman (a friend of hers)
Will here expect you about ten a clock.

Well, I will see her (boy) and if I find
Her answer thy report, I will be kind.
He that neglects a loving Lady for
Weak causes, may the Gods that man abhor.

YOu will pardon a sudden entertainment.

I hope we need not complement.

You do instruct me.
Sit down (my sweet Antiphila) and taste.
Fill wine:
All health and happiness to you (dear Mistress.)

A true return of loyal thanks.

Play a more merry tune: I do abhor
What ever relishes of melancholy.
Sing, the spheres are dull --
Apply it to your self that best deserve it.

The Spheres are dull, and do not make
Such Music as my ears will take:
The slighted Birds may cease to sing,
Their chirpings do not grace the spring:
The Nightingal is sad in vain,
I care not to hear her complain:
While I have ears and you a tongue,
I shall think all things else go wrong.
The Poets feigned that Orpheus could
Make stones to follow where he would:
They feigned indeed, but (had they known
Your voice) a truth they might have shown.
All instruments most sadly go,
Because your tongue excels them so:
While I have ears, and you a tongue,
I shall think all things else go wrong.
Tis pretty.

Reiterate again your yielding, Lady,
And once more let your breath perfume those words.

Sir, I am yours.

And I my fair Antiphila's, your tongue
Hath made me happy.

May your joy last long.

How glad I am to see you like your self!
Dear mother; pardon an excess of joy.

Such signs of true affection need no pardon.

Sir, here's a Letter for you.

For me! from whom? the hand resolves me;
Present my service to the Lady that sent it.
Tell her, ere long I will come kiss her hands.

I will Sir.

Mother, I writ unto Antiphila,
And did desire her (for guerdon of my love)
To hold me second in her thoughts, and (if
She married not my father) to have me.

She may perform
What she believed would never come to pass.

SIR, I confess I am not contracted, and that I told you so to make you desist.
I should be exceeding ungrateful to deny you so small a request. There is
nothing hinders me from being yours, but your Father: And I solemnly vow unto
you, that (if I have not him) you shall have me. But let not this beget any
hope in you; *for (if I be not his) it shall be his refusal. Let it only
manifest so much, that (had I never seen him) I could have loved you most
truly. I pray you, let this suffice, and use me so. Choose another Mistress, and
let me be her second: You will love me well enough, if you love another better.
Farewell.

Your Fathers Antiphila.

What writ you to her (Son) concerning her
Pro^ssing a contract betwixt us two?
^ my rage I met with Tandorix,
^ him of his life;
^ he was a woman*
And for a Gentleman called Perimont,
(Who often had denied to marry her)
That habit did assume, thereby to learn
More easily what did prevent her joy,
And whether he affected any other.
Thus I your being kept unknown.

I'm gald you did so.

You do well, Mother, to wear a mask: you shall
Thereby be sure to be concealed until
You find the fittest opportunity
Your self (unto my Father) to reveal.

What will become of me (unfortunate man)
Who needs must live in fire* or live in shame?
I know not what to speak nor what to do,
Both fear and grief do so confound my senses*
I fear to wrong Carionil so much
As to be traitorous against our friendship;
And griefs unsufferable endure for the
Fairest of Ladies, incomparable Lucora:
I would she had been kind unto my friend,
Unto him then I never had proved false;
Nor will I: I will rather search out frozen
Climates, and lie whole nights on hills of Ice,
Or rather will take powerful potions, and sleep
Out those unpleasant hours I have to live;
But then I shall not see that beauty: who
But senseless frantickes would have thoughts so poor?
My reason forsakes the government of this
Weak frame, and I am fallen into disorder.
Oh! I could sigh my body into air,
And weep't into a Lake, if merciless nature
Had made it of a substance suitable
Unto my wish now: methinks I could level
A Promontory into a Province, and tread
The centre through to read the destinies
Of southern stars, and bless their fortunes that
Are born under their light; for (I am confident)
Their influences are more mild then ours.
There is no other Fate can fall on me
Shall awe me now; I will be proud and daring
As the ambitious waves, when wrathful blasts
Of Northern winds do hoist them violently
Against the highest clouds, and rather will
Destroy my self then wrong Carionil.

And served my sister well to leave her so.

How much (dear Madam) have you impoverished
Men's cies, by hiding your perfections
In their apparel? indeed I flatter not,
I do not know the Lady owns so much beauty.

If my Carionil will like me, then
I shall attain the end of my desires:
May I appear but lovely in his eye,
And what I seem in others I will slight.
But (good Phygionis) tell me I prithee
In your affection what success you have.
Is Nentis won, or do you hope she will?

She's mine, we are contracted.

Joy wait on you,
And make your lives of many years pass pleasant.
Is it not ten? are all the clocks grown envious
Against my bliss, and will not let me know
How nigh his coming is? for I esteem
My self most happy in his company.

This is the place Anclethe named.

Madam he's here.

Be friend me my good stars!

Here is a Lady and a matchless one!
Wood two years since I had beheld this beauty,
When first I came from Spain and had my heart free,
Then many a sad day had been merry unto me,
For unto her Lucora should have yielded.
Sweet Lady, you that are the fairest creature
Nature did ever form, vouchsafe so much
Of happiness unto me as to give
Me liberty to touch your lips -- do you
Know me? and have your ears ere heard
So poor a name as is Carionil?
But I am much mistook; you are not she
Whom here I was to meet: I needs must doubt
The fates did not intend me such a joy.

I am.

Deceived Pythagoras! had thou but dream't
The sweetness of this voice, the music of
The Spheres thou never had recorded. Speak,
Fairest and best of Ladies, let me hear
If you have so unmatched a pity in you
As to look on me with a friendly eye.
Can you love me?

Most noble Sir, I do most violently.

If that to live with you detained me not,
I should be grieved that my joy for so great
A fortune did not stupefy my senses,
And cast me into an eternal sleep.
Where is Anclethe? he is much to blame
In not attending you.

Whom speak you of dear Sir?

My boy.

I do not know a boy of that name truly:
Nor (I think) is there.

You do amaze me.

You may believe me, Sir, for I am he.

Wonders in Riddles!

I am your Page Anclethe, and sister to
Lucora, who for love attended you
Disguised, because (I found) for the great enmity
Between our families) my father never
Would give me where I would bestow my self.

Your Nurse did steal you when you was a child?


Most true: This gentleman her son, my friend,
Occasioned my escape, by giving me
A knowledge of my birth. His true relation
Can vindicate me from suspicion.

I need it not:
Were you not she (as I believe you are)
And mean of birth, I should account my self
A gainer by you. Sir, you have done that
Hath placed you in my heart among those friends
For whose sakes I my life will sacrifice.

My Lord, you do indebt me to your service:
In your acquaintance I shall be most honoured.

Sir, if you please he will relate my Story.

By no means: keep it for your father, when
You do disclose your self. But can you pardon
Those incivilities I did commit
When you was Anclethe?

Wrong not your self: you did make more of me
Then I deserved, or could.

But why, my sweet Cleanthe, would you not
Let me know who you was before?

Dear Sir, I saw how violent you was
In your affection to my careless sister,
And had no hope you would leave her for me:
And (if you did obtain her) meant to do
What my disastrous fate should prompt me to.

Sweetest of all your sex.

But (if you never got her, and orecame
Her obstinacy) to declare my self;
If not (but Love had triumphed in your fall)
I'd not have lived to see your Funeral.

The Gods requite this goodness, and make me worthy
Of you, my dear Cleanthe; I contract
My self upon your lips: which we will perfect
Ere you own publicly your Father, for
The enmity will make him charge you otherwise.

I pray you let us.

A thousand thanks, come shall we walk (fair Mistress)?

Conclusions fair the fates to them do give
Who constant in their loves, and faithful live.

Stay, dear Cleanthe, here is my friend, he shall
Partake my joy; well met my best Falorus.

It seems you are not Tucapelo now:
Where is Lucora? have you married her?

No, I have not, friend.

Refrain:
I am your enemy, embrace me not,
Receive my sword, and peace this heart (Carionil.) Gives his sword.

He hath not yet descried you:
Withdraw a little (dear Mistress) Sir, I pray you
To bear her company, for who can tell
What in this frenzy he may do?

Hereabouts we will await your leisure.

What ails my friend? let me but know the man
Is cause of this disorder in you, and
He shall not see the gray-ey'd morning break
From the oriental Mountains any more:
Let me partake of that unwieldy grief
Hath bowd my friend so much beneath himself.

Leave complements Carionil, and make
A passage for my soul, that it may leave
So vile a habitation as this body;
And (when I'm dead) rip out my heart and in it
Survey my fault, for I want words, and have
Not impudence enough to tell it you.

O what might be the cause this matchless frame
And worthiest Cabinet that ever man
Enclosed his secrets in, is so disturbed!
Noble Falorus, think to whom you speak,
It is Carionil, whose life you do
Make burdenous to him by the suspicion
Of wronging him whom you have ever loved.

You do deceive your self; I lately have
Transgres'd against our league of amity:
If you desire to be a happy man,
And to enjoy what most you seek, be kind
Unto your self, and run my body through.

Can I be happy and Falorus dead!
No, I should live a desolater life
Then ere the strictest Anchorite hath done,
And wear my body to an Anatome,
For real sorrow at such a dire mishap:
Live then (my friend) and may you number days
Until Arithmetic grow faint, and leave you.

You know not how much hurt you wish your self.
Would you torment me twice? If not, forget
Falorus utterly, and let me dye.

I understand you not.

Would you have me blast my own fame by speaking

My fault? And have me Executioner

Unto my self?


Release your Soul of all her griefs, and say
From whence your sorrows have original.
Have you not oft told me of my impatience?
Give me now leave to be as plain with you:
The angry winds never enraged the seas
So much as some small grief hath done my friend.
I do conjure you by our former loves
(For sure not long since we were friends indeed)
To let me know why you are thus distempered:
I do not fear but I shall free you from
This passion so precipitate and dangerous.

You are most good, and get your self, Carionil,
A name above the ablest character,
None (like it) can decipher you; and would
I always had continued Falorus,
Then I yet had remained your friend. But (if
You needs will know the reason of my fury)
Draw out the sword, that (when you have received it)
Your hand, and not your words may strike me dead.

Be not importuned longer; ease your heart:
For (credit me) I grieve to see you thus.

I am in love, suppose the rest, and kill me.

With Lucora?

Too true, now curse me into dust, and with
Your breath disperse me into air: but spare me,
Chide me not for my falsehood, and inflict
But one punishment on me, and be that the sword;
Yet hear me speak one word or two before.
I have not wooed her, nor have sought performance
Of that free promise that her father made me,
But faithfully have temporiz'd with him;
Nor did I willingly consent unto
This passion, it did seize me violently.

Be you more calm, take her (Falorus) you have
A liberty for me, I speak in earnest.

Then all is well, return my sword (dear friend)
Carionil, I will not hinder thee:
My name shall not be blasted in thy sighs;
Fall worthless man, tis pity I should live.

What mean you (my Falorus?) for heavens sake leave,
And your own light rashly extinguish not:
I for Lucora do not care, and have
All my affection unto her recal'd,
And am engaged unto another Lady;
I stole her from her chamber in my disguise,
And then (bethinking me how she had used me)
I told her that I would not have a Lady
Who would prefer a Moor before me. Her
Slighting of me made me to leave her so.

Is this not policy to delay my death?

If ere you found me false, believe me not.

It then is true?

Most true, Falorus.

Licence me (friend) now to embrace you; well met
(Carionil) and welcomer indeed
Then ever yet man was unto me: I
Will live and owe my life unto you, and (when
You please) I for your sake will lay it down:
Freely I may Lucora now adore;
And (rather then to lose her) I will try
All ways that are contained in policy.

But say she never will consent?

I am
Most confident she will to please her Father:
But (if she should not) I could suffer it;
'Twas not my Love made me thus passionate,
It was because in it I wronged you.

Did you not mark (when you did see me first)
A joy unusual sit upon my brow?

I had so much of sorrow in my heart,
That with it all my senses were possessed.

But you perceived I had left my disguise;
What out of it did you collect?

I thought
Lucora had descried you, and you had
A peremptory denial to your suit.

Sir, seeing you had made a fair conclusion,
And measuring each minute for an hour
Until I were with you, I rudely come
Uncal'd for to you.

Ever most welcome my Cleanthe; friend,
This is the Lady I did mention to you,
She was Anclethe, b^t is sister to
The Mistress of you^ thoughts, and called Cleanthe,
Whom long since all her friends believed lost,
And have these many years left mourning for.

A strange discovery and admirable!

Some other time command the history;
This mutually among our selves we will spend.

Lady, account me servant to your virtues,
And you, Sir, may command Falorus always.

Your love will honour me (most noble Lord.)

Sir, I for you will intercession make
Unto my sister, and do hope shall prosper:
I will make known how much you are her servant,
And what affection my ears have witnessed;
For I (unseen to you) did hear what passed.

You will oblige me everlastingly.

Now let us walk.

Whosoever loyal friendship doth regard,
With fair events the Gods will him reward.

I have a Licence for my Lady, the brave gallant Mistress Lorece, But it cost
too much a conscience, I wood a writ five times as much for half I gave for
it: But it is the fashion among great ones, so they have their wills they care
not at how dear a rate they buy them. This marriage is like Christmas, when it
comes it brings good cheer with it, we have fat Venison, hold belly hold: and
wine I am sure we shall want none, for the Vintner had twenty pounds on me this
morning. I ha bespoke a merry company of Fiddlers; O they are boon fellows! and
there will be old dancing, for I mean to sweat my doublet quite through ere I
leave.

Madam, her'es the License your Worships sent me for, the Parson and this will
make all sure.


Tis well done Iaques, for this, be thou the Neptune of the Cellar, raise a
tempest, and drown who ever doth go down the stairs;

Like old Silenus behave thy self.


When we have dined, lets go to my Lord Polidacres, and invite that house.


We will (my dear Widow.)


Twill be a merry time I see.


I wonder we have not seen the Ethiopian Lord to day.


He'll not be long absent.
Lucora, thou hast my heart for thy consent:
Falorus is a worthy Gentleman,
And one of an approved fashion,
He doth deserve a Princess; my Lucora,
I know his nature is most noble, else
I would not move thee for him, and (although
The time is not expired) will you steal
So much from age, and be his wife? I long
To see thee well bestowed.

What ere you please t'command I will perform.

Here is Falorus! welcome my Lord, I shall
Shortly say my son; my daughter I have won,
And when I please, unto you she will give
Away herself.

You are most noble:
But can you (fairest Lady) look so low
As is Falorus? can there be such a virtue
Of rare humility within you, that
You thus confer affection upon me?

My Lord, my father desires to make me yours;
And I have learnt so much obedience,
As willingly to do what he commands.

I wish I could (most excellent Lucora)
Thank you in all the languages are worth
Your dear attention, you have made me so
Exceeding happy, I envy not his wealth
That owns the inhaustible mines of famed Peru.

I thank you for this love, and have a hope
Requite you Sir.

My joy hath dul'd my senses.

Now brother! have I not ended happily?
Vandona is my own: We only want
The ceremony Eclesiastical.
My Lord, I am your servant.

I have a Mistress got, the richest beauty
Great Brittain ever was renowned for.

Much, very much y faith; have you won her
For whom hopeful Carionil did dye?

I won her not (Lorece) her fathers desire
Meeting with her consent, have made her mine.

Sister, you have been a stranger to me, I pray you be not so.


You shall see me oftner.


Thou may be Mercury, and I will glory

Thou art my brother.


Madam, I'm very glad to meet you here.


And I as joyful of your company.


Wonders* Carionil's alive again, and here.

For some strange end he did give forth his death:
But what young beauteous Lady's that?

It is a face worthy of admiration.

Rise Lady: kneel not unto me.

Then I were most unfit to be your Child.

How* my daughter that was lost?

Yes my Lord, and beg your blessing.

May the good heavens make of thee (my daughter)
(If you be she) an old and happy woman.

I am a Sister to you: Spare some time
For me to show how much I do rejoice
At this unlooked for good: none of your kin
(Fair Sister) are more glad then I to see you,
Whom we had never hope to see: I am
Most proud to be alli'd unto
So excellent a creature as you are.

I am most joyful of your love.

We are most glad to see you safe.

As if you were our Sister.

My thanks (sweet Ladies)

Dearest Cleanthe, confirm thy father in
His joy: relate thy life, that out of it
I may grow confident thou art my daughter.

Lady, leave that to me: My Lord (and if
You with her silence can so long dispense)
I would do that.

He is my Nurses Son, to whom (my Lord)
I owe all thanks for my escape.

Sir, when you please you may begin.

What, not a gentleman! I am undone,
But must be secret in it.

My Lord.
This Ladies Nurse, my mother, had a Son
Older then the Lady Cleanthe is by seven years;
Whom she did love so extraordinarily,
That for his sake she foully er'd from virtue:
She thought it was an easy thing for her
(If that their lives attained to those years)
To make your daughter wife unto her son;
Which is the cause she privily escaped.

Most strange!

By chance I heard this of my brother, who
Told me (against my mothers strict command)
What a great marriage he should have, and that
Cleanthe was the daughter of a Lord,
Your Honours child,
Whom all we thought but of a mean descent:
(For she had won the country to believe
That she did find her in the open field:)
I pitying her hard chance, did tell her all,
And promised her I would attend upon her,
Until she had her parents happy made
With knowledge of her safety.

The rest I must relate:
Dear Sir, be kind, and (if I have done ought
You shall dislike) pardon my first offence;
I was no sooner come to town, but saw
This noble Gentleman, with whom so violently
I fell in love, that for his sake (pray pardon me)
My own apparel I did lay away,
And did become his Page: And (when I did
Disclose my self) he kindly did requite me.
In brief we are contracted,
I did not well without you to do thus;
But your forgiveness, Sir, I cannot doubt:
He told me that there was a difference
Between our families, and therefore you
(If your consent was asked) would never yield.

Wood I were it'h Cellar, I care not for these dry and tedious tales.


Whether I should or no I cannot tell,
But I am glad that it hath chanced thus;
This match an ancient discord will conclude,
And may the Gods be favourable to it.

Most Worthy Lord, my faithful thanks.

Here also is a ring which by
Your Father (my Lord Falorus) was given her,
When at the Font he for her answered;
She wo'rt about her neck when she was stolen.

I know it well, and am confident
Thou art my lost Cleanthe: Be his wife,
And may the heavens make up the match most fortunate.
Carionil, I now am glad I have
A man so honoured to my son in law.

My Lord (if that I can perform my will)
You never shall repent your daughters choice.

I do not doubt I shall. Now I would know
Why your death was reported.

I was in love long which your eldest daughter*
The fair Lucora, but could never win her;
Brought almost to despair I did assume
The habit and colour of a Negro.

Then you was Tucapelo.

I was indeed*
Knowing she had refused the greatest Marriages,
And many of the handsomest of the Kingdom,
I fully did believe she never would
Like any man of this Complexion,
And therefore feigned my self an Ethiopian.
But first gave out my death, and that unto
My self I had done violence, for her.

Surely, he will not do so unworthily
As to make mention of my fond affection.

But all could not prevail.

I am glad he ends so.

And therefore I desisted wholly: which when
Anclethe saw (my sweet Cleanthe now)
She did disclose her self.

I do perceive the Heavens intended you
Should reconcile our Families.

Her's love, and love again: I wood some body would love me.


My dear Sister, you must not think me rude
Because I do express my love so fully.

Be my Carionil;
All that ^e mine respect this Lady: For
I do intend to make her so.

We are her Servants, and most joyfully
Shall kneel unto a Lady of her virtues.

What Lady's that?

She's masked, and I cannot guess.

Philander, this Lady is thy Sister, the lost

Grow not to weak, my body, to contain (Cleanthe.
My soul within thee at these joys:
Fair Sister, I am glad that I can name
So beauteous a Lady as you are so;
For you the heavens be thanked.

Carionil's alive, and must be styled your brother,
Cleanthe him hath chose:
Perfect thy joys (Philander) when thou wilt,
And hear their Histories;
This Lady you must call mother.

But I must not.

How!

This here I will;
Dear mother, now confirm my words.

Welcome to life Rosinda: Thy face and beauty
I do remember well: But wherefore did you
Raise the report of your untimely death?

That at a fitter time. This give me leave
To spend in joy.
My dear Cleanthe (for I do believe
Because thy father doth acknowledge thee,
Thou art Cleanthe my so long lost daughter)
Never was mothers heart so light; I cannot
Utter my joys, my tears must witness them.
To time I am indebted, that he hath
Spared my life until I see thee safe.

I want expression: But my life shall be
A comment on my heart, wherein you shall
Perceive what your Cleanthe is.

Now you are mine (fair Antiphila.)

I will perform my promise.

Both your consents I beg.

How's this!

I did engage my self,
That (if I were not yours) I would be his.

Then may the knot prove happy, and continue
A firm one, while the Gods do lend you breath.

It is my wish.

Was you her servant too? Wife, chide me in secrer, I was forsworn.


We all are frail; Mortality may boast
Of strength, but many conclusions deny it.

Away, I will have none of you, I will not beg.

You shall not need, I (for his love and care
Unto my daughter) will give him means befitting
A Gentleman, which shall descend unto
His posterity, poverty shall not spoil his fortune.

'Tis nobly said, If you do like him, take him sister.

Now I'm content.

My joy is great: My thanks (sweet Mistress) My Lord Polidacre, I am your
grateful, though unworthiest servant. Now, Mistress, you shall know the policy
I won your affections with; my affections being settled so high, and I poor, I
made my self Draculemion; But your promise, worthiest Lord hath now enriched
me.


O me! Was you that merry fellow? you have a parlous wit.


One thing I must crave of you.


You shall obtain Sir.


That you will pardon my Mother.


I do for your sake.


Since I perceive you in the bounteous way
Of granting Boons, Sir, I assume the boldness
To become a Petitioner to you.

My dear Lucora freely ask, for I
Doubtlessely shall consent to thy demand.

Seeing the gracious Heavens have blessed our house
With the recovery of my long lost Sister;
And since the powers divine have linked her heart
To the affections of a noble Gentleman,
A marriage like to grace your honoured Age
With hopeful Nephews; I humbly crave your licence
To enjoy the freedom of a single life;
For I've no inclination to become
A subject unto Hymens glorious bondage.

Remember (my Lucora) all your promises,
And suffer not your obstinacy to cloud
The happiness of this Evening.

My excellent Mistress, you have raised me near
The Zenith of all happiness, and will you
Now leave me on that mighty precipice,
To fall into a sad Abyss of misery?

My dear sweet Sister, give me leave to trouble you
With a few words aside;
I saw the Lord Falorus for your sake
(Between a great affection and firm friendship)
In as high a passion as you can imagine.
A noble and a faithful Lover to you;
He in his soul adores you, I am confident;
And I'm obliged by promise to become
His Intercessor for your kind affection:
I do beseech you therefore grace your Sister
(Though bold, being younger, to importune you thus)
T'honor the Lord Falorus with your Love.

I dare not (my fair sister) be so cruel
As to deny you in your first request;
I'll entertain his flame and be his Bride.
I will be plain with you, had you been silent,
In a ship bound for Spain I had gone to night
With some Ladies of our near kindred towards Lisbone,
And so avoided the Courtship of Falorus,
And all my Fathers continual importunities.
To make this escape more unexpected, and
The better to provide me for this journey,
I had consented when my father pleased
To marry him; but your entreaties have
Prevailed above all my resolutions.

Dear Madam, let me beseech your assistance.

My Lord, I will desire her, and am confident
I* shall obtain. I pray thee (my Lucora)
Submit to the entreaties of thy friends,
And let not thy refusal of Falorus
Beget a sad look on this happy evening.

Madam, you and my sister shall overcome;
And though (my Lord Falorus) you may tax me
For an obstinate disposition, you shall find me
Throughout my future days) to made amends,
And prove a very loving wife unto you.

Now you have fixed me in a fortunate
And glorious life.

I thank thee my Lucora.

Every body has his Sweetheart but I; one or other take pity on me, and let me
not be a Cipher and stand here for nothing. I see the fault is in my years,
otherwise Serving-men are not so slighted by Ladies.


Let us withdraw; you all
Shall sup with me to night, and we will design
The happy day that shall each couple join.

You that have Mistresses, do not despair
To get them, be they ne'er so proud and fair;
One way or other (you have seen it done)
The Obstinatest Lady may be won.

THe obstinate Lady yet is obstinate,
And (careless either of your love or hate)
She dares continue so: Nor will I beg
Some friend within to come with his low leg,
And's hat in's hand to woe your praise: It is
So poor, that I had rather hear you hiss.
Our Poet bad's be bold, For's Play was good,
And that 'twould take, if it was understood;
And so we are: For what's our fate we must
And will endure, be it lawful, or unjust.
Unto your justice we appeal, which lies
Within your hands: Do what you please, and rise,

O sister! This is likely to spoil all:
Gentle Spectators, also give me leave.

Ladies and Gentlemen, if we have said
Ought that hath pleased your ears, or pastime made*
Our time we have spent well* but if that we
Have tedious been, and you did sit and see
With we ariness, our Poet will repent
That you this Comedy we did present.
You've paid the Actors well, we thank you know it,
And wish that you would gratify our Poet*
He wants no money as the case now stands,
Yet ^rayes you to be liberal of your hands.

