TO you great Lord, and you most excellent Lady,
And all this wel-met, welcome Company,
Thus low I bow: And thank, that you will grace
Our rude Solemnities with such a presence.
BEtter then I could wish! Superlative
To all relations, not examples now!
I've known the Household Gods of Rome Greece,
And all the good Penates of famed Troy,
Heard what they could triumph in, of their Fates;
Tell jovial stories of the frolic Greek^,
And the great Banquets of famed Ilium;
Have been informed of Egypt glorious Feasts
To entertain the Courtly Anthony:
Yet was there or Necessity, or pride,
Or empty prodigality in all.
Here is a Course steered even, and voluntary;
And I rejoice, as much as Ganymed,
Olympus Nectar, and Ambrosia Keeper.
Here I grow fat with plenty of all sorts
That either Seas, or Land, or Air can yield;
And here I live as well admired, as envi'd
By all the Lares of all other Places:
For there's a Constancy in my delights,
A blessed Elyzium where I do not want
The tithe of any wish I ever thought.
The proudest Lares of the greatest Princes
May boast of state, and languish in a noise,
Whilst here I live secure, and do enjoy
As much of every thing, but fears and dangers.
And may it last while Fate attends on time,
Until the supreme Deities of Heaven
Think you too worthy to adorn the earth,
And mean to fix you glorious Stars in Heaven:
And whiles there's air but to receive a Sound,
May your Names busy it to speak your praise?
Continue ever matchless, as you are
A Pair without Compare, and but a Pair,
What means this bold Intrusion?

Friend, forbear,
Though I was born in the Woods, and rudely bred
Among the Salvages, I have a mind
Aspires the knowledge of great Princes Courts,
And to what end aims all this jollity
In yours as well as others Palaces.

Dost thou approach to censure our delights,
And nip them in the bud? Satire! take heed
We will hunt you hence through al the woodslauns,
And over all the brooks thine eyes have seen.

You threaten more perhaps then you can do:
What art?

I am this Palace Deity.

I wish tho^ were a Servant unto Pan,
Or any God that doth frequent the Fields.

So would not I: I'm better as I am.

Thy Ignorance bewitches thee to this:
Thou liv'st among all fears, all noise, all cares,
While I walk merry under heavens bright eye.
We in the Fields are free from any Sin
Against th'almighty Deities of Heaven:
We know no Law but natures; do not tremble
At Princes frowns; have neither fear nor hope;
And are content, a State the Gods exceed not.
You languish in a perpetuity
Of thoughts as unconfined as are your ends
You truly lavish all your faculties
In getting covetous wealth, which we contemn.
Your sleeps are starting, full of dreams and fears;
And ours as quiet as the Barks in Calms.
The youthful spring makes us our Beds of flowers,
And heaven-bright summer washes us in springs
As clear as any of your Mistress's eyes:
The plenteous Autume doth enrich our Banquets
With earths most curious fruits, they unbought:
The healthful Winter doth not pain our bones,
For we are armed for cold, and Heat in Nature.
We have no unkind loves in meads or fields,
That scorn our tears, or slight our amorous sighs.
Nor are we frantic with fond jealousy,
The greatest curse Jove could inflict on's Queen,
For all her curious search into his Life:
We in the woods esteem that Beast the stateliest
That hath his head the richliest spread with horns.
The Golden Age remains with us, so famed
By your Athenian and Roman Poets.
Thus we enjoy what all you strive to get
With all the boundless riches of your wit.

Satire! When I but say you are Ignorant,
Thy flourishing Boast is answered at the full.

But I desire a larger way.

And take it.
Can thou compare the Rags of nakedness
Before the studied dressings of these times?
And can thou like a cold and stony Cave
Before the perfumed Beds of Palaces?
Admire the Melancholy falls of waters,
Or whistling Music of the inconstant winds,
The chirping discords of the wanton Birds,
Above the Angel-voices of our Ladies,
And th'exquisite variety of Music
Ordered to thousand several Instruments?
Content to cloy thy homely Appetite
With Crabs, and Slows, and Nuts, and rude mixed herbs,
Before the stately Banquets of the Great?
How can thou like Beasts inarticulate voices
Above the Heaven-given eloquence of men?
Forsake the Woods (fond Satire) and but try
The unthought difference 'twixt them and us.
The Hills are fit for Beasts: Converse with men,
And thou wilt never like thy Cause again.

Thou almost dost persuade me: but then I
Shall leave mine old, and honest Company.

Thy new Ones shall exceed them. Her's a
Will give thee wine as rich as is thy blood:
And her's a Cook will clothe thy bones with flesh Butler
As rich as was young Jason's Golden Fleece.

Well: I will live with thee.

And welcome Satire.

Spite of the Fates, and Grecia's best Protector,
I'll be Achilles, and overcome by Hector.

A resolution worthy thy Sylvanus.

But for my last Farewell unto the Woods,
^'le show you a wild Dance of nimble Satyrs:
For we do dance as much as they that live
In Princes Courts, and Tissue-Palaces.

YOU Satyrs that in Woods
Have frozen up your bloods,
Advance your selves, and show
What great Pan's men can do;
Appear.
Here you had need beware,
And move as swift as Air:
These are not Sylvane Swains,
But Courtly Lords and Dames Sit here.
What do you mean (sweet Boys) to interrupt
Our sports? I pray you leave your wrestling thus,
And do not strike your skins, too soft for blows.

He would out-run me, and be kissed before me.

And he leave me among these dreadful Satyrs.

Whence come you?

We both were left in the woods, and tempted by
Such things as these to live abroad with them.

What would you have?

I would go to my Father.

And I unto my Mother.

Who is your Father?

The ever honoured Earl of Chesterfield,
Worthy of all his Titles by his virtues;
And full of Noble thoughts. A great maintainer
Of our great Grand-Fathers virtue, Hospitality:
The Feeder of the poor; whose Gate's so open,
It doth not need the Office of a Porter:
Whose House is now Delphian Apollo's seat:
For he's the Patron of all Arts and Wit.

And who is your Mother, pretty One!

She is the Countess to that Noble Lord;
A Lady worthy more then earth can give her:
Rich in those virtues make her Sex admired;
A fair exceeder of the best examples
That Greek or Roman stories e're produced:
Goddess of Tame, of Anchor, and of Trent.
She's such an one as hath none equal to her,
And therefore you may very easily know her.

I know them both, and honoured in my knowledge:
Sweet youth! yon'd is your Father, kiss his hand:
And that (fair little One) th'unequal'd Lady
You asked for: go, and beg a kiss of her.

Fellows, since you have done, Farewell: I'll leave you
And all the rural Pastimes of the woods:
I like this noble Company so well,
That I hereafter here intend to dwell.

Now (Satire) I will let thee see how far
The Palace-pleasures do exceed the Woods.

IT is unfit we should be dumb,
When beauties like to those of Heaven
To grace our mirths are hither come,
And help to make our measures even.
Then let us dance, and let us sing,
Till Hills and Dales with Eccho's ring.
Now it is fit our Souls should know
No thought but what is full of pleasure;
That we our sorrows should out-go,
And tread them down in every measure,
Then let us dance and let us sing,
Till Hills and Dales with Eccho's ring.
'Tis mirth that raises up the Mind,
And keeps Diseases from the Heart:
Sports harmless never were inclined
To cherish vice, but to divert.
Then let us dance, and let us sing,
Till Hills and Dales with Eccho's ring.
Satire sit, and observe a while alone:
For I do mean to mix with these in Dance.

COme Ladies rise, and let us know
Now you have seen, what you can do;
Hark how the Music doth invite
All you to Solemnize this Night:
Then let the Sounds that you do hear
Order your feet unto your ear.
O rise! rise altogether,
And let us meet:
Musick's Divine, and well may join
Our motions rude unto a sweet.
The Figures of the Magic Art
We will equal in a better part:
Judicial Astrology
Cannot cast such an one as we:
Add but your skill (as we desire)
And we'll keep time to Phoebus Lyre.
O rise! rise altogether,
And let us meet:
Musick's Divine, and well may join
Our Motions rude unto a sweet.
Ladies enough; we dare not
Tempt you to more then this;
Now may your Servants spare not
To give each of you a kiss:
If we were they you should have them
To recompense your pain:
O happy they that gave them,
And may give them again!
'Tis late; Goodnight: go sleep, and may
Soft slumbers crown your eyes till day.

