THe City reekes with the warm blood of murdered Christians whose avarice hath
made them their wealth our prey. Sword! thou hast shed much blood, and of the
first and noblest: not added by this arm; for thou to it lentst vigour: a
virtue thou retainst, since Melcoshus my great and royal Master buckled thee
on my thigh, for which so unaccustomed favour and many other, when I forget
still to adore him equal to our Prophet, may my death quickly follow; now if
any thing


Villain hold off thy hands, she's my prize; what though thou first seizedst
on her, is she a prey for so base a slave?


How, slave! I'll prove my self thy better.


Unhappy maid, must I become the cause of bloodshed, tho even of Tartars our
Enemies, heavens forbid; hear me, you wrathful men, by your great Prophets
name, I charge you: we Christians pacify our rage for our dear Masters; sake
make a division of me and of my clothes, he to whose lot I fall, I'll be his
faithful slave.


I am content; so I who am a Janisarie may have the better share of her person.


No, I'll have that, take thou her clothes and Jewels.


Then I'll have all.


Alas, why strive you for this worthless person, so far as lies in my ability
i'll serve you both.


A good kind wench.


I am agreed; so I may first lie with her, to share her clothes and jewels.


How, lie with me?


We'll cast lots.


Agreed.


Divinity assist me, what mean these men? went I about to save their lives
for this?


I am first.


You lie, she's mine.


Oh I fear! Would that sword that pierced my Noble Fathers heart, had cut me
from the world, e're this unhappy hour of my dishonour.


Leave her or thy life.


Thus Soldiers, though cold hunger, and all impediments of war seem to block
up our way, we have made passage by our unwearied valour: the gods were forced
to give us victory, and such a victory as makes your King an Emperor, and you
in honour and riches equal to Kings, I mean our Chams; each private soldiers
wealth equals some Christian Lords.


Our riches, lives, and honour we hold from our magnificent Emperor great
Melco^us, and as his slaves, thus low prostrate, we kiss his happy feet.


You see, dogs, it is not with us, as with your ruined Master; who when he
pleaded with his best eloquence, as I have heard, to make his greedy Subjects
open their Confers for their own safety, could not prevail with them: for they
both base and foolish, rather chose to perish with their Idols, than to relieve
the general necessity, and so have hazarded saving both life and honour, which
makes me not restrain the Soldiers from any insolency, though I know a city
taken by assault to be the only stage, where rape, murder, and sacrilege is
acted to the life.


Melcoshus is godlike-wise in all; those who forget their Emperor under whom
they live, deserve no pity from a conquering Enemy; our prophet hath
appointed you his scourge; mercy unto his Enemies were cruelty to him.


Haly, do not incite to blood, he is nearest faultiness that way of any:
should he grow thirsty by custom, we have not Christians enough always ready
to quench that thirst; or, glutted with these, our own blood may be found
perchance more sweet, if we grow rich or popular.


Captain, it is true; the fox would rather strive to abate than increase the
Lyons fierceness, since forced to obey and serve him.


Honest Odmer, thou careful servant of thy Masters honour and safety, their
taxes shall be lessened, though their revolt cannot fright us: let all the
Greek Prisoners of note be at our banquet that These are base traitorus,
betrayers of their country, selfe-murtherers by their own avarice, away with
them, and let the Soldier exercise his rage upon them.


We are justly punished.


Dread Lord, behold a present which the meanest of your slaves intends to make
you.


Is't a boy or a woman, unvaile and show me?


Sir, a while your pardon, until I let you know that ignorantly I part not
with this jewell, for I so well do understand the value, that were the
citty-spoiles laid in one balance, the Empire too, and but this in the other,
nay an assurance of a happy reign added to that, and on the other side but to
enjoy this creature (to whom no attribute of excellence can be given high
enough) one year, here were my choice.


Osmond, tho I have loved thee of a child, yet do not tempt that frown that's
death: think not that state that I am now possessed of, admits any comparison of
happiness, yet not content with this thou dost contemn my fortune; show me
that argument of thy presumption, though excellent, but if not worthy our
longing expectation, perhaps the cause of thy destruction: Majesty delights
not to be plaid with.


Pardon, dread sir, that man who shall affirm he hath an humbler soul towards
great Melcoshus then Osmond, I dare him to the trial with this sword or
faithfuller, which makes me sir assure you, you are in danger of your liberty,
see not her face, for it is a woman so far I'll warn you, a weeping one, until
you do withal consider she's your slaves slave, I mean my prisoner: were
she less worthy; she had been my Mistress, but being thus excellent who can
deserve to look on her but you, let her be covered still, for if I draw this
veil, you then must yield, the thought of all your glories laid asside, and in
her heavenly eyes read your aptivity.


Osmond, I see thou doatest thy self, and think we must do so: delay no
longer.


Prepare then for a bondage which will bring delight above all freedom.


More, more, by all my glories, than was delivered! Osmond so well I like,
cover her April breaks through the clouds, so does the lightening of her
glorious eyes break through their watery circle, and grow more powerful by
that opposition; so powerful, that a conquering Prince descends his throne and
begs that he may hear you, whom fortune hath made his slave, yet to command
both him and fortune; for sure your tongue cannot be less powerful then your
eyes.


Ah me unhappy Despina.


Divinest creature! rise and know thy happiness, thou shalt command Melcoshus,
King of the Tartars, who not content with that, intends to make all Asia the
subject of his victories.


Sir, fear and amazement have not yet forsook her, let her be kept by your
Eunuchs, till time and they make her more capable of your desires.


Thou counsellest well, see it performed: but let entertainment be such as may
most delight, and soonest free her from her grief, I shall but languish till I
may enjoy her.


Lady, you may boldly promise to your self all joy the earth affords.


The Gods reward your piety in saving of my life and honour; but joy be ever
far from me.


Tell me thou noble youth, how did thou find this glorious creature, and
what her name is?


She calls her self Despin. I found her so near being unworthy of me to
give, or you to accept, that being saved it does increase her value; Two
Soldiers being fired with lust, strove which should first enjoy her, but
seeing her a creature of such excellence, I thought my sovereign only worthy
her embraces, and she a fit present for me to offer, which made me to oppose
them both; and my intention being nobler gave victory to my weak arm, aided
by this your gift.


Had they not perished so, they should have found a death with studied
torments; name some Province thy reward.


Other reward then your acceptance would mark me for the server of your
pleasure, an Eunuchs office, and soil my act of duty: when I shall overthrow
an enemy in field, or in some doubtful battle guard your sacred person then
Sir, advance me to some honour if you please, for so I shall become the
powerfuller to serve you; but for Despina think not of any recompense to me,
for, by the Gods, the Empire were too little, did not my love and adoration of
your sacred person force me to think she was created for You, not for a
subject.


This freedom in any other had bin death, in thee it but augments our love, be
near Us.

From whence?


From your Son Orcanes who is arrived.


We have already appointed Callibeus for his host, to morrow he shall kiss
Our hand.


Our Great Cham out of his love appoints his son Orcanes to be my guest; this
were an honour I confess to one that were not old and had a beauteous wife,
such as my Ozaca is: but when the Prince shall view her, and she him, their
very eyes shall speak to my dishonour, conclude me a Cuckold in their desires,
though they should ne'er converse. I'll let her know his coming hither, and from
her behaviour gather how she approves of it: Ozaca.


Your will.


Ozaca, the Prince Orcanes will strait be here, he for whose sake 'tis thought
nature will turn a bankrupt, she hath in every part of him so plaid the
prodigal; his face such as might make you take him for the beautifullest of
women; yet through that beauty shines his fathers spirit Great Melcoshus [how
her blood boils!] a personage equal to that; but then so courteous, though a
Prince eloquent with all, that every woman that but hears him speak, modestly
thrown by, woes him to acts of love, in which he far outgoes belief [by all my
hopes my fears are true, I see a lustful languishing in her eyes] speak
Ozaca, could you not be content (I being absent) to pass an hour in conference
upon your couch with this young Prince, speak, could you not, ha?


Oh sir, your needless jealousies do make me miserable, but your self more.


I see thy heart, strumpet, and it writes a resolution to dishonour me, and so
revenge that which thou call a needless jealousy in me, but, by our sacred
Prophet, if thou shalt see this Prince except by chance, I'll pull thy eyes out;
if converse with him, thy tongue; or write, thy hand is forfeit;


I find I am a woman, I long extremely,


It shall be so* go walk in the back garden I charge you, till I send for
you. I would not have him see her, nor she him, no not at a window: it may be
the Emperor will send him away ere long, but should he see Ozaca, I fear he
would never leave my house: about this hour I expect him.


My Lord, you see this back way, you are free from the multitude of people, by
whom I would not have you seen, till you appear to morrow like your self; I
have sent to advertise your host Callibeus, that you are entered this way by the
back-garden.


Tis well; they say this Cham is most extremely jealous of his wife, we shall
not see her sure.


She's wondrous handsome, he hath reason --


O that I might but see this Prince.


Whose's that, sure 'tis the Lady of the house.


My wish -- 'tis certainly the Prince, I'll seem to go away.


Nay, fly not Lady:


If you're the Prince Orcanes which I believe, my duty is a warrant for my stay.


Lady, I am Orcanes who come to be your guest.


Sir, that assurance warrants me this further expression of my duty.


The Painter was a niggard of his skill, or grossely ignorant that drew your
picture, but Art must ever yield to Nature in a peace so excellent, and come
far short, since 'tis but imitation. Rise beauteous Lady, my father would not
suffer this.


Hell and confusion, what's this I see; peace, he's thy Soveraign's.


My husband.


Behold your humble servant, who yields up the power both of himself and all
that's his to your command.


Thanks, Callibeus.


I am sorry your Highness came the worst way into the house.


I did it to avoid the press of people, but trust me I found the passage very
pleasant.


He means his kissing you, but, whore, thou hast a life to lose.


I never saw a Garden where I received greater content, the Roses and the
Lillies are so finely mixed, that I could stand a year only to gaze on them.


By Mahomet, he means the beauty of my wife, which is my curse, Oh that she
were a Negro.


What's that you say, a Negro.


I say my Lord, those flowers you like were planted by a Negro, a skilful
Gardiner.


There are some other rarities, that I would praise, but that I want words to
express them, they are so excellent, I wish I did possess some such.


Palpable, by all my fears! she conceaves his meaning too, and with the joy of
it, I see her lustful heart leap in her bosom, but hush: will it please your
highness enter the house.


The superstitious More, Callibeus, does not behold the rising sun with greater
reverence, than I his setting in a bright evening like to this: who knows when
we shall have the comfort of his glorious beams again? either some envious
clouds may interpose themselves betwixt us; that bright planet, jealous that we
are not enough thankful may withdraw his comfortable heat, without which I
would not wish to live.


'Tis true indeed, the Sun gives life to all and the most witty and industrious
men make great profit by him; those who prepare the soil, apt it for his
beams receive greatest increase. Your highness, I fear, takes occasion by the
Evenings brightness to excuse your entering under so mean a roof; but since the
great Cham appointed you my guest to honour me; go Ozaca, and let the
diligence of Servants strive to supply every defect, I'll send way the Sun he
means.


Nay, Callibeus, I would not have you think that we misdoubted your lodging or
entertainment, we'll enter when you please, there is a cloud ready to oppose it
self betwixt the Sun and us.


The Prince in his discourse makes the Sun his bawd, his father I think did
intend to torture me, no house but mine, you must be walking, whore, and
entertain the Prince, but by our prophet thou shalt see no Sun.


What shall I say, I find I am a weak unconstant woman, sure I have lost my
self, at least my grief; how pleasure and greatness gains upon our natures!
I who wept at first each time their Eunuchs did me reverence, thinking they
mocked me, now take a great delight in their observance: sent you for Osmond?


He waits without to know your pleasure, tho seldom hath been permitted by the
great Cham that any should enter here, but he intends not to deny you any
thing.


Bring him in and leave us.


Thus low as to my Princes Mistress! what was it you intended?


That which civility tied me to, the offer of my lips, and not my robe to
kiss, you saved my honour, a modest kiss to you could not impair it then.


Should I have kissed you been seen, death was my sure reward, nor had the
purchase been too dear, if so I had not been a traitor to my self and virtue
in my disloyalty unto my prince.


Think it no immodesty in me but ignorance of your strict customs: a
salutation amongst Christians breeds no suspicion of ill.


Did ever any under the degree of a prince receave that honour?


They have if you call that an honour.


Then it cannot be in me presumption to kiss your hand, yet I in this too
far do stretch my duty.


You Tartars bear a greater reverence to your earthly Lords then Christians,
though you neglect him that should be most honoured; but this is from the cause
I sent for you: In all that you have done or said that did concern me* if I be
not an ill observer of mans passion you have expressed a love not to be equalled,
withal so great a spirit, that even in midst of all my griefs your merits
found a passage to my heart, and tho I see I shall be able to command
Melcoshus, and in him the world, yet if you dare apply your courage to the
performance of what I shall offer, and that effected become a Christian, I
shall think my self happy, to be again wholly at your disposing, as I was
when you did unkindly to your self and me, bestow me on another.


The Great Cham.


Despina, accuse thy own excellence that makes me interrupt thy privacies,
rather then me; for I so wholly am become thine, that but to live a minute from
thee is a torment; Say beauty abstract, shall this day be more favourable then
many that are past, may he who can command all, yet hope to obtain his suite?


Could you command all, you would command that passion in your self, which
makes you strive to ruin my honour.


Can it be ruin to your honour, to set you on the highest point of honour, to
make you the possessor and disposer of all that your imagination can propose.


How can this be, when I cannot dispose of my poor unworthy self; give me my
liberty.


You should have liberty, were you what you allege, unworthy; but it is your
inestimable value, makes you a prisoner; what all Poets have feigned sweet or
lovely in other women, is truth in you; these do so tie you to my heart, that
should I grant you liberty, you would bear it a long, so all the empire
should be governed by a heartless man: yet bribe me with one loving kiss and
try. With how much scorn you turn away. I wrong that power that's given me
from above, it was ordained I should command, not sue to any. Woman, beauteous
woman, for more thou art not, what ere my dotage makes thee think thy self,
consider I who may command, entreat, but if refused the violence of my
affection will compel me to use force.


I know you will not, you have too much praised Osmond for relieving me from
rape, your self now to perform it; tho you now seem cruel, yet do I hope
you are just, for I have heard the world esteem you so.


The act will not be wholly mine; your not to be-resisted beauty first made a
rape on me, enforcing me to love you; that love made me desire to enjoy the
happiness of your embraces, which you denying reason steps into right my wronged
affection, and bids me force you, assuring me, that nature who does nought in
vain, had never taken such pains in framing you so sweet and lovely, but that
she meant some one or other should enjoy that sweetness; and shall I so far
yield to any others merit, or wrong my fortune which bestowed you on me, as not
to think I am the happy man appointed by wise nature to enjoy you; the Gods
cannot in justice, after so great victories, appoint Melcoshus the office of a
slave to be the keeper of such dainty fruit for any other man, and he
himself Tantalus, for he was forced to fast, but foolishly I starve having my
hands at liberty, and in my power that which will satisfy beyond expression.


Oh Sir, consider ever you go about a deed of so much baseness, how will this
rank amongst your noble acts to be a murderer, for do not think I will out
live my fame; for your own sake be wise then, if you love me, and do not rob
your self of the content you may hereafter find, if you take noble ways and
make my heart yours, then you may have a lasting pleasure


Who would not threaten rape to hear such pretty arguments against it. No
Despina I have no faculty which is not more obedient to thy will then to my
own, each threatening word I uttered was to my self a torment: dry those
bright eyes that never shall have use of tears again, if not for their own
cruelty against Melchoshus; consider but my power, and thy own beauty which
would inflame old age, and from thy justice my temperance must needs find some
reward.


If thus you woe me, I dare not say but time and woman's weakness may make me
love you, and for your this days temperance, this kiss be your reward.


I am transported, force can bring no such pleasure, kiss me again and by
our Prophet, it shall seal, your honours freedom by an oath: my blood is fired,
one such kiss more would make me break that promise, for making which this
kiss was given me.


Oh Sir.


But fear not, base passion shall not overthrow my wise and nobler resolutions,
for since I love you as you are altogether excellent, I must enjoy Despina, not
Despina's person only that's not half your self; I will not look on you,
your eyes tho chaste may more increase my lust, which my minds pure love makes
me now know to be a crime;

And hold our Prophet Mahomet unjust,
That made no laws against a Princes lust.

Hosa: is Callibeas gone to court?


He is my Lord.


Is there no means think thou to see his wife?


It is impossible, his jealousy makes him set spies in every corner.


I see thou art not read in tricks of love, I have made use of all that art and
nature hath bestowed upon me; youth and beauty what woman can resist? or were
these wanting, yet a Princes name is a powerful advocate, I never yet laid
siege to any female Fort, but either by assault or policy I found a way to
conquest yet am I careful of their honours I enjoy, and so dissemble my
affection, that each Lady thinks I only am her servant; would my youth and
beauty ever last, I would not wish to change the life I lead now, to enjoy the
Kingdom; although my father possess the greatest beauty of the world, yet is it
not by stealth: security takes from the pleasure 'tis dull so to enjoy a
beauty.


You'll find your present task full of difficulty if you delight in that, I
do not think you'll ever see her more, Callibeus having taken notice of your
love.


He sees, but will not say he sees, being my father's slave, he dares not find
the least fault: me thinks she should corrupt some Eunuch that attends her,
or from her window drop a letter to express the love I am sure she bears me.


How are you sure she loves you?


Sure she loves me, as sure as if she had told me so, nay, surer; her eyes
spoke plainly, which I will trust in women more then their tongue: but I am so
experienced, I cannot well miss in either.


My Lady doth entreat your Highness, not to walk before her window for, if my
Lord return, and see you, he'll be with her offended.


Return, and tell your Lady, I shall be ready to obey any command of hers,
though to my own torment.


I shall.


Sir, it appears, she loves you


This letter lay not here, last turn we made; before I open it, to let thee
see, I am the Master of my Art, though here's no superscription, I now tell
you, this Letter is to me, and from Ozaca, full of affection too.


I shall another time believe you, if it be; retire your self here out of
sight, and read it.


The Sun, though clouded by jealousy, Hosa, besides beauty. No fair Ozaca, not
in word, but thus I do express my zeal. Hosa, she's at the window, but dares
not open it, for the Eunuch. I have a plot, which thou must needs assist me in,
and then she's mine, spite of her husbands jealousy.


How in silence he wooed her, and thanks was given for her Letter, as he
thought. Was't not a good device in me, to be assured of his intentions; he
shall break through forty doors, ere he plant here. Now to Ozaca, which I
removed into another Chamber, whilst I supplied her place.


It was a happy fate, that brought the Emperor so to cross my yielding; how
could I have resisted such a motion, coming from her that I adore. Let me
consider, become a Christian, fly, and marry me: What a temptation's this? I
gave this Beauty to Melcoshus, and shall I childishly recall my gift, nay,
basely steal the jewell of his life, in whom the Kingdoms weal consists?
'twere unexampled treason. Hence thou enticing charm, whose witchcraft almost
does enforce me, to forsake my faith and virtue. Stay, become a Christian,
that's but to be as she is; and can the heavens be cruel to such, such,
sweetness? shall not their providence preserve what they have framed so
excellent, and me, for serving her? Say I forsake our Prophet, and trust upon
that Power which she adores, then must I basely fly, forsake Melcoshus my
dread Lord; and what can recompense that loss, or seem a plausible excuse for
such a falsehood? Oh yes, to marry fair Despina, which she offers, is to be
happy in so high a nature, that it would stop the mouth of churlish censure;
all would excuse a fault, that brought so great contentment to the guilty, as
her embraces must be.


Osmond, thou hast undone me in thy rich gift.


How, Sir?


She does, and may, so justly glory in her own purity, that she disdains to mix
in love with me; and yet, till her denial taught me to know I was defective,
my very thoughts, much more desires, did never meet a check: Whose wife or
daughter that I should covet, would not the husband or glad father bring me?
or, if their honour mastered their love or duty, what could resist my power?


Nought, but such another excellent creature as Despina, she can oppose your
will against your power, and make, both wait her pleasure.


Oh Osmond! could she be equalled, my love and admiration would grow less; but
as it is, I languish in desire, and must do ever: Should I use force, my royal
word were broke to her, whose good opinion I strive more to gain, than all the
world's; and by those Christian virtues that she proposes too, Faith and
Temperance.


Sir, since you find so much affliction, would I had never presented her.


Osmond, thou art a traitor in thy wish, and nothing could preserve thee from
my rage, but that thou did what now thou wished thou had not; should my
beloved son Orcanes but say, he wished, that I had never seen Despina, by
Mahomet, his life were forfeit: For, though I for the present find some
torment in her denyalls, yet, by one smile, she may advance me to a happiness,
above all earthly Monarchs; what will her kisses do then, I mean, when she
shall give them freely, uncompelled, transport me from my self, the mere
imagination does almost perform it; and see, amazement leave me, that I may
express some part of the content I feel, in viewing this deer object, thus to
approach me, smiling, nay, as if she meant to make me happy, by commanding
something.


I am indeed a suitor, but cannot hope I shall prevail yet, piety commands me
to make trial, since 'tis for some of my religion, and your enemies.


Though they had plotted against my life, I freely pardon them; you cannot ask
me that I will not grant you; and in your servant, all that's mortal shall
obey you; nay, Mahomet himself shall cease to be adored, if he be not
assistant to your wishes.


I have no further suit, only let Osmond see performed, what I shall now
direct him.


On thy allegiance, Osmond, that, and all she shall command thee else: with
greater care, and more devotion, I should perform it than ere I offered yet at
Mecha.


The Emperor speaks, dear Osmond, as if he knew what I intend to command you.


Divinest Lady, what's the occasion, wherein your trembling Vassail may
express his care and duty.


Dear Osmond, look not pale, nor shake so, but mark those few words, which this
short time will suffer me to speak. I so much love thee, that again I offer to
fly, now when opportunity presents it self: For, my suit unto Melcoshus,
which you must see performed, is, to set free a Christian Merchant, with his
ship and men, with whom, we being both disguised, may escape away; or should we
be discovered, to die would not much grieve me. Your answer in a word.


Could paradise be gained by crooked paths, I would not tread them. I grant, to
be your husband, were to enjoy a heaven upon earth; for the danger in attaining
that, would but add unto the happiness. I should a thousand times repent me of
my gift, did not he prise you to your value, if it be possible; but since he
does, and only can continue you in your full lustre, making you shine a wonder
to the world, far be it from the thought of Osmond, to yield so far to passion,
as to destroy his Masters happiness, and his own faith. For you, if you shall
but in thought continue this design, the Gods will punish you, for offering to
oppose their sixth decrees, since 'tis apparent by your equal merits, you only
were appointed for Melcoshus, and he for you.


Do you refuse me then?


Ha^ dares Osmond expect to live, after refusing what she shall command.


I do not wish it, Sir.


My passion made me to forget, Sir. Osmond is the noblest of your servants, and
ready to obey me.


To show the power you have over me, I freely pardon him, nor shall your
commendations light in vain on any much less on Osmond; I here create thee
Bassha of Aleppo.


Sir, you will but in this, forestall my future services, and rob me of desert
to climb by a way I rather should have wished to tread. But when I do consider,
Madam, 'tis your praise, no other woman's, that advances me, it shows, my merit
was not small, since I attained your good opinion, which fully satisfies.


'Tis nobly said of Osmond; yet, since his denial, I look on him with other
eyes. Melcoshus greatness, and his love exceeding that, makes some impression
in me.


Say thou bright Angel is there ought wherein Melcoshus may express his love.


Your humble vassail's too much honoured, who rather does deserve your frown
for her presumption.


There are some sports, which you perchance have heretofore deigned to behold.


You see the Emperor throws by all care of Subjects, addicting himself wholly
to pleasure; days, weeks, and months he spends with Despina, that painted
Sorceress; and when he hears of any revolted Province, or of preparing
enemies, he asks, how fair Despina slept that night, affirming, that in her
alone, was loss or victory. Revolt of subjects! I oft have heard him wish,
that all his subjects love were turned to hate, so that his goddess would but
favour him: Was't not a Kingly wish?


'Tis strange, our Emperor should thus dote upon a captive, a Christian too.


Aye, fellow soldiers; but consider to what a pass we now are grown, to be
thus governed; we, who have power to make the world ours, all Kings obey us,
thus to be led to ruin, nay, to a ruin that we see apparent: I dare not say,
but I could wish, that we did not quite forget the power of Soldiers. We had
power, when 'twas to raise Melcoshus for his virtues.


'Tis true, his virtues made him Emperor (rather his seeming virtues, more
they were not) and they being counterfeit, if we be firm to him that's fallen
into vice and imbecility, we forsake virtue and our own strength: Some in the
Camp equal his former worth, then far outgo his present.


Odmer, and some other of the Captains, will straight be here.


'Tis well, I know you are friends to those that love the Soldier; for my
part, I will not promise much, yet, if the gods shall breed a change, and think
me worthy of advancement, virtue shall steer me wholly.


We know it shall, most noble Haly; and when the time grows ripe, expect our
utmost aid.


We'll not be found here, lest Odmer should suspect our friendship to you;
we'll rather seem to come by accident, hearing of his being here.


You shall do well: By seeming virtuous, I have the faith corrupted of many
others in the Army; but these, though they perceive that I aspire, yet for
their own ends, they'll assist my plots, pretending, as if Melcoshus is careful
of the soldiers good, and most ambitious of their love. I have so wrought upon
them by flattery, that he not once suspects, how they distaste his easy
pleasant life, their bane; nor shall he know it, until the error ruin him, in
all opinion, and make me powerful. I will observe and flatter him in smallest
things, all must run smooth and eeven; he shall not see, at least not hear, a
discontented man, yet underhand, by injuries, I'll make the greatest so; then
by my instruments so work them, that they shall fix their eyes on me as their
sole remedy, being the only man that loves his Country. True, the masque of
virtue I put on, must be worn cunningly indeed. Odmer, that Fox too I must
ruin, by his own honesty and faith unto his Prince; I cannot be secure of any
plot whilst he hath breath; and here he comes.


According to your desire I am come and pray Mahomet our present meeting may
produce some happy issue for the good of our Sovereign.


Amen, good Odmer, sit, sit, most noble friends, you the Pillars of the Empire,
upon which the huge Colossus of our Princes same was raised: here is not at
this Table (I to my comfort speak it to be so honoured) a man that does not
merit to lead himself an Army, I being exempted. What victory did our
Melcho^hus get, that some brave Arm here did not act wonders, I dare not say
equal to what he did? yet to continue doing bravely still, is fair for
Soldiers: for Kings sometimes slack in their worth. But Ours you'll say is
gracious, careful of the State and soldiers.


I know not what they'll say, but I must say so, and withal add if you think
not so too, you are a flatterer: for have not I heard Haly with fair words
smooth over the errors of the King small in themselves at first, but by your
conformation still continued not amended, as not thought wrongful actions.


I grant good Odmer when I have seen the Emperor enraged not to be
contradicted but with danger, I have applied my self to serve his humour for
the present, hoping my reason afterwards might better overthrow his error,
when it should be forsaken by his passion, nor failed I of't; but were it not
madness in any that should tell him, that this his dotage on Despina makes him
neglect his office? how all the Soldiers that have any spirit or sense of
their vast wrongs talk of electing them another Emperor who better shall
distinguish betwixt their honoured scars, and upstart Ignorants, who ne'er
shed drop of Enemies blood, or had their own spilt to advance his glory? would
you have me tell him this, though all yet know, this is truth.


Though I know this is false, how e're opinion sway the envious and ignorant;
yet did you think it true; were you true subjects you would tell it him: but he
that fears his loss of life more then his loss of faith and honour, thinks no
reward can equal such a hazard.


Then Odmer, yo'u would seem as if your faith and love so far transport you,
bove your reason that you durst tell the Emperor this.


No Odmer, twere' folly.


Haly, to you it may appear so; but may Odmer be as cold in duty as you, and
find what it deserves, some heavy punishment: if he do not make known e're
long, unto his Sovereign how he daily loses his Soldiers love, for that I
grant is truth though undeserved from him; for he hath still desired to give
them all their dues, nay bin more liberal then his Ancestors how ere false
servants and corrupted ministers have deceived his trust: the sweetest and most
plentious springs passing through noisome and straight passages may lose their
comfortable qualities; even you my Lord (I must be plain) have wrought your
self to such a power by the advantage of your birth and his employing you that
all depend on you more then on him: all that you think will please the
Soldiers you make your Act, the Emperor by you induced to it, and by you
performed; but what may give them cause of murmur or discontent, that you give
out that you persuade him from: thus do you rob him of his greatest wealth the
Soldiers love, and in the stead of it procure their hatred for him, which
justly you deserve. But would that tyrant, Love, release him, that he might
show himself again in Arms, and look about him, he soon would know, that
Haly his most trusted councellor hath abused his trust, whilst he hath bin
fast lulled asleep with pleasure.


Zealous Odmer, what you have spoke might seem an injury not to be borne, to
those that did not know us both: who would think I could suffer in my own house
my loyalty thus to be called in question nay condemned? for you have spoke no
less then what might brand me for a Traitor. But know good Odmer your zeal
thrice heated by your envy, to see me greater then your self not only in my
place but in the soldiers love, can no way singe my reputation, or make my
faith mistrusted by my Prince; and since I know you cannot hurt, my own power
guarding me, but most that innocence which I have ever borne as the best shield
against all slanders; I am so far from being angry, that I profess I love
you, and will advise you for your honours sake, which else might suffer since
you are honest Odmer To tell the Emperor all things are amiss; the greatest
danger that can arise to you, he being of a gentle nature, will be but
strangling; or, may be, for the kind office you shall take upon you to be his
tutor, (for it was never known that any yet counselled him unasked) his fashion
may be employed that he may view your brains who would be wiser then your Lord.


Faith Odmer, tell him: my Lord counsel's well.


First let him know (my faults) if you intend I should be punished; you'll have
no time when you have told him (his.)


Haly, you speak to me in scorn; but I perchance shall do that which would
fright thee even to death only to think on it.


Odmer, your blood is stirred and you are angry.


If thou had given me any real cause, this place, nor these, should not
protect thee; but since I know thy plotting brain to be thy only weapon, thou
can not move me, and so I leave you.


My Lord, will you endure this?


Let him alone, the honest fool is running to his ruin.


As how, what danger?


Danger enough, Melcoshus frown, for he'll inform him what he hath promised.


By Mahomet, he dares not.


He will, I know his humour best, or if you please to call it simple honesty,
you may, which I have wrought upon by opposing; so shall his faith serve my
aspiring ends.

Odmer once sacrificed for truth, who'l be Melcoshus's friends?


'Tis strange, my Father should so dote. I thought in time, the force of his
affection would have abated; but on the contrary, his love increases, never was
such a change. What poor things are we, when our lust hath once overthrown our
reason! that any man of spirit should so far yield to passion, as to become his
captives captive! and all this coil only for obtaining that, which in the
enjoying does not yield a minutes pleasure: How happy am I, that have no such
desires.


Oh hypocrite!


Have you done what I bad you?


Yes, you shall see the effects on it immediately.


The truth is; our Laws gives us too great a liberty that way; how much better
were it, might every man only enjoy one woman? for, lust doth both corrupt the
bodies and the souls of men.


What means this seeming sanctity? it does indeed my Lord, it is a most ugly
vice, though to the great ones tolerated.


I do protest, my Father's error doth so much lessen him from what he was,
that I'll forswear the very company of women; bewitching Sirens, that confounds
our judgments.

Fire, fire, fire.


What noise is that, ha, fire!


My Lord, I'll to the Court this morning. Finis Actus secundi.


SIr, I beseech you think not meanly of me; for having won me thus, thus
without parley, I freely must confess, the force you used did not displease me,
whatsoever I seemed; for, I did something love you, before mine eyes were blessed
with viewing your perfections; yet, modesty or fear to be contemned, would have
for ever closed my lips.


Why, fair Ozaca, did not you by a Letter dropped from your window one day make
me know my happiness, in your requital of affection, in the same phrase, to
that I spoke at first in, to let you know, I was your servant, though your
husband then were present, I doubting a second opportunity.


Alas, my Lord, I did not know your meaning, if you spoke to that effect; but
it may be, my husband prompted by a just fear, did understand you; for you are
made up of sweetness, that might tempt an angel.


My behaviour gave him no cause of suspicion sure.


His jealousy proceeding from his excess of love to me, made him believe, it
seems, I was an object worthy of your eye, when indeed the god of love
pitying my silent languishing, did rather wound you, to show his power, than
that my beauty could command affection from one, so far in all respects above
me: And if you did receive any Letter to that effect, he writ it as from me,
none else durst have presumed.


'Tis certain, and he himself hath been the unhappy happy instrument, to make
me now enjoy the miracle of nature; for, had I not been so encouraged by that
Letter, I should not have thus ventured on this rash attempt, of firing the
house.


Sweet Prince, I fear some jealous pang may take my husband, and he return
before the fire be quenched, and find you; at least the Eunuch may.


Shall I then so soon leave you?


Oh yes, you must; yet do not, except you every day could set a Garden-house on
fire; for, without some such extraordinary means, we hardly shall again enjoy
each others company, which how sweet it is to me, let this kiss witness,
being more then ever yet I offered to my husband.


Let us not part, what danger can be equal to this happiness? By Mahomet, I
ne'er till now did find content with any woman. Why should a subject be thus
blessed. Let this make all my other conquests be forgotten, over other women; for
I am now what I have often seemed, but never was in earnest, in Love, nay taken
after the enjoying.


Oh me, we are undone, one knocks, I fear my husband's Confusion on them.


Ho Ozaca, Ho Ozaca.


'Tis he: what will become of me?


Spare those tears, or rather let them fall to save your honour, by seeming, as
if I had used violence. To say, that I at all have not injured you, were to no
purpose, he'll ne'er believe it: Put your self in such a posture, as may beget
belief. My birth shall save me from all danger; or should I perish, so I save
your honour, it matters not.


What, asleep Ozaca, and such a fire. I'll use my private key. The Prince! now,
all the furies, had the house been burnt, ay, all the house, nay, all that's
in it, my self, I had been far less miserable. For ever let all comfort cease,
Ozaca is a strumpet, I am dishonoured, the boys will hoot at me as I pass the
street. Sensibly I feel my self transformed from man to beast.


You're too much honoured slave: that I should take so much pains, and only
once enjoy that, which thou may possess at ease, and often! For her, she is
so far from being a strumpet, that she's chaster in thought then thou could
wish her, how e're her person suffered violence. Behold an object, if any thing
could move me to repent so soon of that, wherein I lately took such pleasure,
those lovely cheeks bathed in her tears, my friends it seems, who by their
quantity, would wash from off her face those bloody stains, the witnesses of my
rude act.


Hence from me, Serpent.


Oh, leave my house, lest I forget you are Melcoshus son: but for thee,
strumpet.


Build not on my ill laid foundation, make not the rape I have committed, the
cause of any future injuries to her, for so you shall on me lay greater weights
of sin, which I'll revenge on thee. And Lady, though I know I do appear to you
a devil, nay worse; yet, when you shall consider your own beauty, you'll excuse
me something. -- What, spit at me Basilisks, do strike me dead. Remember
Callibeus.


Abused and threatened! I am too tame, I'll after him; rather, revenge me on
this whore that did allure him.


Do, you cannot add unto my misery: I am already made unworthy of your bed,
dishonoured, ravished; and you that should revenge the wrong, are cold in
taking vengeance, though in hot blood: You that could let him part, having a
sword so near your hand, and such a cause to use it in, will shortly bring me
to him, nay, be assistant, whilst he ravished me again; but you would rather use
it against me than him: if so, behold this breast, sometime the subject of your
praise; employ it then, and take away the cause of your dishonour; No? give it
me


Hold* what would thou do?


Free my self from misery, since you refuse to do it.


Ozaca, I confess I was too cold in my revenge; indeed I doubted, whether thou
had yielded willingly or not; but now that I do know thy virtue, and am my
self collected by my reason, I find indeed, there was no cause of jealousy in
thee at all, how e're my extreme love made me suspicious: I shall forgive the
offence, I hope, nay, 'twas none, since 'twas against thy will; and after some
small time, receive thee to my bed: For my revenge I have a way, that without
blood I'll find my satisfaction.


For that, Sir, as you please; but never will I come within your bed, I am not
worthy: as a soyl'd garment, throw me by, seeing another man hath used me.


Not for the world, my Ozaca, thou art still worthy.


Too worthy, since Orcanes loves, to be enjoyed by thee.


Oh my dear Osmond, grant me but one request.


you may command, Sir.


Become my partner in the Empire, for thou hast given me more then the whole,
in my most kind Despina: for she's no longer cruel, I have enjoyed her
freely, by her own consent, which does express more happiness, then all the
tongues of men can utter.


You owe me nought for this. When I presented her, then she was coy and cruel;
if by your noble usage you have won her to crown your wishes, the debt was due
unto your sufferings, and you now are paid, which I rejoice in.


The joy, my Osmond, is so great, that if I do not by communicating delay it
something, it will be dangerous.


Sir, I believe there is none living, that sooner could conceive your
happiness than I, since none doth more admire and reverence Despina^ For, were
a love from me to her as warrantable, as 'tis from me to you, grounded on
virtue, I sure should equal, if not exceed you in affection; nay, could she
love again, be happier: for all the love that she can render you, is to your
merits and your fortunes due; But if she that's above me shall descend, my
happiness beyond yours must extend. This, Sir, I speak only, to let you know, I
see the way, which the gods by chance had left open, to my happiness in Despina;
but knowing that it was by chance, and that they did not intend to any subject
such a beauty, I forbore, nay thought my self most happy in that they chose
me for their instrument to salve the error by presenting you with what they had
provided for you, and which it seems they meant to crown your conquests with.


Osmond, in all thy words and actions thou are perfect: next her that now
appears, I do esteem thee, for if there be one corner in my heart, that is not
filled with her, thou dost possess it, nay thou art mingled with each loving
thought of her. Oh my Despina, how glorious thou appear'st! the Sun is but a
cold and obscure lamp compared with thy two heavenly eyes, from whose
sparkling fires all that behold except my self must perish, but I by their
more gentle influence breath-in a temperate pleasant air, or should I be
consumed with others, yet it is permitted me to kiss these lips which might
restore me but should this more inflame me, which is possible, yet would those
eyes produce such pearly drops for their own cruelty in having so consumed
their faithfullest adorer, that it would quench even their own fire, and so
preserve me still the happiest of men.


May I prove worthy of your favours, and in my future love and service make
satisfaction for the time of ignorance, and disobedience that's past; my
present happiness, best makes me see my error.


No more, least I do surfeit: had you killed my father, nay revild our Prophet
the highest crime, this were too much.


Our Prophet should have appeared unjust, if he had made Melcoshus so far in
worth above all other men, not rewarded that unequalled merit: which what could
so well do as this rare creature? The Prince Orcanes.


Now my son Orcanes, are all things ready for our sports?


Sir, all attend you.


Orcanes, tell me had thou a beauty like to this, would thou go hunt and
leave her tho but for an hour, could all variety of pleasures else be joined,
and in one minutes time their quintessentiall part enjoyed, I would not lose her
company that minute: nor would thou, had thou once tasted my delights; but
as it is, hunt, my Orcanes, and in that enjoy the greatest delight of mortals:
but for me, I have pleasure in my divine Despina, far above sense, tho sense
convaie it to my understanding, and am immortalizd by my vast joys?


Was ever such dotage, is this a man to govern us? no, fellow soldiers, no.


He must not long, if we be men, and have but sense to see our miseries in
him, and what a happy people we should be under some other.


Farewell most trusty friends.


We shall rule the world, we that are soldiers.


Who can tell, Haly being advanced may grow as lazy.


Then down with him, and choose another.


Is that the friendship you bear him?


My profit and my pleasure are those with whom I only keep friendship, nor
have you, on my knowledge, any other resolution; each man pursues his own
desires, there's no such thing as faith left in the world but amongst our
Mufti.


Are they there?


Yes, in their books, and now and then upon occasion we hear on it.


Do they no more? we speak of virtue too, and seem to show our love too't,
our present designs are to be sheltered under a pretence of love to our
country.


And so tis, man: come near, examine these things. Haly hath power and will
advance us with himself, let that satisfy: The Emperor and Callibeus: stand
close, we may perhaunce hear some thing that will avail us the Emperor
trusts him much.


Now, Callibeus, what's the important cause that you thus press upon my
privacies, have you receav'd intelligence of any foreign Enemy, or that our
person here at home's in danger; say, if not so, you have presumed tho we
esteem you much, to rob us of Despinaes company a minute.


Dread Sir, your pardon then, I come for justice.


Justice Callibeus? to whom is it denied within our kingdom?


The person against whom I must complain, Sir, is exempted from all
punishment, excepting, that which your self shall lay upon him.


Name him.


The act, Sir, is so foul that I dare name him, it is your son Orcanes whom I
accuse as a guilty person, I beseech you look on him, and do me justice; my
wife by him is ravished, dishonoured: the laws of hospitality were of no other
then only to perform his wickedness: oh Sir, consider that you lodged him in
my house and if you punish not, you shall appear an accessory.


What proof of this?


Oh Sir, too much, I took him all most in the violent act; besides he glories
in it too.


Degenerate bastard, for could a son of mine commit so base an act; had I used
force, where had my joys in Despina bin? but yet I must not seem as if did
intend to punish, for the injurer is my son, the injured but my slave.


Oh justice, Sir.


Why Callibeus, art not thou my slave, and if my son have forced thy wife, is
she not more my slave whom thou command; twas disobedience, either in h^r,
or thee, that did not offer, what he was pleased to like: he too much honoured
thee, and like a common guest fed of the same dish with thee; go, be gone, and
hold thy self happy, that I do not inflict a punishment upon thee, both for
the evil thou wished upon my son, and for thy present troubling.


You Gods! is this Melcoshus justice, for which he hath bin so renowned? but
his fond love hath ruined all his virtue: farewell all faith and duty which
hitherto hath bin by me inviolately kept.


Lose not this opportunity, he's discontented, let's strive to make him ours;
my Lord, by accident we overheard your injuries, and grieve so much that we
will assist you to redress them, you know we still have honoured you.


I know you are my friends, tis true that I am injurd, past sufferance.


We will give you ease.


I Was too scrupulous, my duty did not bind: me to give that to another
without the which I could not live my self; 'twas against reason I was drunk
with zeal, else I had never done it: I with the danger of my life did purchase
her, and heaven did ratify, it seemed, the conquest, since they made, her love
equally: she is not wanting in affection, yet, for ought I know, she now
sent for me to tell me; although her person be the Emperors yet her heart is
mine, nay both by stealth this, this corrupt flesh blood would basely have me
think, but virtue honour which must rule my soul tells me these are ignoble
thoughts, and ill befit the faith of Osmond, who allwaies hath applied himself
to virtue, how ever weak in his performances; nay something noble bids me arm
my self so strongly in my virtue, that tho she should become a suitor, yet not
to grant and, by our Prophet if my flesh against my faith rebel and she
consent, He free my nobler soul, and send this trunk to hell -- but all these
fears are needles for so much goodness shines in her face that sure her heart
is far from being empty rather a magazine from whose abundance all that do
want, might be supplied could they be sensible of their poverty: According to
your command, behold your slave.


Osmond how ere the Emperor, in my command ore him, makes all the empire
subject to my will, yet if you kneel I must not be exempt: for well you know I
love you.


I fear.


Yet not so as heretofore, tis now a sisterlie affection.


Thanks heaven.


Which that I may witness more then in words accept this from me, not as they in
themselves are rich, but as they are made so to you in being my gift; and let
them tell you when you look on them, that there is nothing in Despinas power,
her faith kept sacred to Melcoshus, whom now I in my soul adore, but that you
may command as freely, as you might a sister that entirely loves you.


Virtue I see is ne'er without reward: how far I am exalted in this joy above
what sin could have produced: your pardon, madam, though my thanks come slow,
yet they are sure, I am overjoyed and want words to express my self, not in
the riches of what you have given but in your protestation that you love me so,
as my own soul desired.


The emperor knows I love you more then any, and is pleased it should be so,
nor need you keep that distance that all others do, but freely visit me. I
have a suit concerning the releasing some poor prisoners for which you from
the Emperor must receave order, who strait will visit me.


I am too happy to continue long so.


Did not my love unto your sacred self make me prefer duty before danger, I
should as others do in silence only mourn, the ruins of your state and
murderd honour.


Ha.


But though I know that he which thus undermines you, hath power to give me
death with studied torments, by turning that which loyalty makes me utter, to
rash presumption in your acceptance, yet i'll become a zealous priest and
sacrifice my self to show your danger; what though your passion will not let
you read a faithful warning writ in my bloody intralls, and so you'll think
the sacrificer mad, I from the Gods shall find a recompense; having discharged
a faithful Subjects part to heaven and you, th'end of my creation.


Odmer, thou still hast found belief, nor have thy fears at any time bin
idle: name what thou mean.


First draw your sword, then promise you will hear me out ere you make use of
it, for I shall move you highly; the sore I come to launch is too much festerd
to be cured with flattery.


Tis strange, I promise thee, how? is my honour tainted, or my state in
danger?


I should not need to let you see the peril and dishonour that attends your
too much Love (I dare not call it dotage) on Despina, if your own judgment
were at liberty that better could inform you.


Traitor thou can not speak eternally, then I shall be revenged for
blasphemy and break no oath: Can love to her be dotage?


Consider, Sir, what you have lost by loving her, oh could you see, but you are
hood winck'd by your lust, from what a pitch of honour you are fallen, you would
find that word too little to express it; consider what you were at taking of
the city, to you accursed though gotten by a glorious victory; all neighbour
Princes feared you so as does the lesser hawke the Kingly Eagle when he takes
his flight no one durst keep the skies to search a prey, but glad to flag their
fearful wings, and seek the obscure earth for safety: for your own subjects
they so honoured you that daily they committed blasphemy, making you, equal to
our Prophet in all that could immortalize a man; now each Prince seems to
scorn you and your power, knowing your noble faculties are asleep nay murdered
by your lustful passion. What need they care to do you injuries that cannot
leave your Mistress to revenge them; your Soldiers that from your examples
had their valours steeled against their enemies only seeing you undermine your
self and them in your ill government, turn likewise traitors to themselves and
you, swearing a captive shall not govern them, they must have one to lead them
forth to war; nor is this only the common Souldier's saying, apt after ease to
mutiny, but even the greatest Captains hold this resolution.


Peace, No more.


If not for shame yet for the dangers sake bethink your self; in you the
kingdom suffers; struggle a little but for liberty; our Prayers shall untwist
your bands; and, once free, your virtues soon will shine again; so shall you
make the world believe it was no fault of yours, rather the envy of the gods
that kept you in obscurity so long; for had your virtues not bin thus eclipsed,
you might have darkened theirs: Now Sir if you mistrust the truth of what I have
delivered, or that my zeal hath made me to deliver truth unreverently, behold
my heart which may for both or either satisfy; and if you search each corner
you shall find that envy moves me not, nor fear to lose my power by her
ingrosing all your favours: no my soul bears witness with me, your safety
and the general good did only prompt my tongue, in what I uttered.


Odmer, thou hast presumed above that freedom that even dull Christians do
allow their servants, but thou borne my slave thus presumptuously to enter into
my greatest secrets, to rip up my faults before my face, and as it were by
force pull from out my arms my dearest Despina, what can thou hope for but
death by some unheard of torments?


Sir if you intend still to pursue your pleasure selling your honour and the
kingdoms safety for a few wanton kisses, I can expect no less; but if the
spirit of great Melchoshus, strangled by sloth and wantonness, again respire
by a true servant's zealous conjurations making his body move to noble deeds
such as may even out shine his bravest ancestors, then I may chance to die a
gentler death, a nobler can I never. I rather would be sacrificed for truth and
loyalty, then be rewarded for base flattery.


Because thou were brought up with me a child, and many ways approv'dst thy
self faithful; I pardon thee this presumption, and ere long thou and those of
thy opinion shall know that I am able to govern my passion, perhaps, to their
amazement.


So soon returned from hunting Sir.


What comfort can it be for me to follow beasts, having such a beauty in
pursuit, for know, my friend, that my affection is more violent than it was
before I did enjoy her. In that I imitate my father who now dotes more upon
Despina than ever. But, know you, what the Basha hath complained unto my
father, that I have forced his wife; we so well did dissemble; but such an
answer did my father give him, that thou shalt see he will bring Ozaca to me, nay
be content to hold the door, whilst I again enjoy her.


But do you think my Lord he will endure it, will he not by some private means
seek a revenge.


He dares not, he is too tame: but stood my Father as strictly on the point of
justice, as heretofore, ere love had softened him, I should fear his frown,
but feeling daily the force of beauty in Despina, he will look upon my act
with favourable eyes.


My Lord the Emperor seeing you return desires your company.


I'll wait upon him, Hosa, this night I have contrived a way, if 't be
possible, at least to see Ozaca.


My valour, vigilance, and justice made me Commander over this numerous people,
with when I have acquired an Empire, and made the neighbour world stand amazed
fearing my fierce invasion; but by my sloathfull life I am become hated; nay
worse, contemned by my own subjects, as thought unfit to govern, but since by
the goodness of our blessed Prophet my eyes are opened, and I see my error,
I'll tread those virtuous paths again that did advance me, and the first act
that must incite to look with favourable eyes on my proceedings, shall be the
justice I'll perform on my degenerate Son Orcanes. What though he were, next my
Despina the comfort of my life, I can know no partiality to him, nor to my
self, in prejudice of justice; yet it may falsely brand me with the name of
cruel and unnatural. My Son Orcanes, I hear you have a Mistress, fair I
confess and chaste most certainly: for you did gain her by a boisterous way.


Sir it were in vain for me to deny it, since Callibeus hath informed you, Sir
'tis true her beauty did compel me.


It was impossible thou should believe Ozaca to be more beautiful then
Despina in my temperance, then although my cause of passion far outwent thine,
behold how far thou art from being the son of my virtues, to show thy baseness
I extol my self. I being a Monarch free from the check of any but our
divinest Prophet, having a made within my power, a captive maid, whose only
friend or aid was her own innocence, no husband to complain or seek redress of
any, she being wholly mine, given to me for my pleasure too, yet all these
motives could not so far prevail as once to make me offer brutish violence,
though even from her refusals my desires increased: but thou whose base desires
hath killed all thoughts of virtue or humanity, imployedst that force lent thee
for nobler ends against a silly woman: and when thou had enjoyed what could
thou boast, but tasting of a fruit, wherewith her husband often had bin cloyed?


Sir, as affection cannot be created where we list, it cannot be removed where
it is formed: having at first sight taken possession of the heart, I did yet,
faintly I confess, check my fond passion, it being unlawful to love another
wife; but alas her eyes were much too powerful to be so resisted; besides
imbred corruption in my self told me, it was nothing to enjoy her, were she
free, and at her own disposing, but having such a watchful dragon to orelook
her as her jealous husband, his care made me believe the treasure was more
rich, so better worth the stealing.


It was to him indeed a treasure that possessed it lawfully, though being gained
by thee, it makes thee poor, to the condition of a slave: his honour suffers
through thy violence, nay bleeds until my justice makes thee bleed to cure it.


I hope you will not be so cruel for an offence like this, committed through
the heat of youth, since you your self even at these years add to Love's
triumphs.


Degenerate bastard, can thou hope that an excuse like this, will pass with
me for currant, who still hath bin a severe punisher of unjust acts? it seldom
hath bin known that such a wrong was e're appeased but with the offenders
blood, or else the partial judge within whose power it was to punish, he hath
paid for it; or if they could escape the hands of men, yet sure the gods will
find them out, and I that do intend to be a punisher even of my self, for my
least follies, dare not suffer, lest I offend against heaven thy heinous crimes
to pass unscourg'd; and therefore mark thy sentence.


O Sir, Remember who I am.


Whilst thou wast what thou oughtst to be thou need not bid me to remember
that thou were my son, but since thou art become a stranger to that nobleness
that should accompany thy birth, like a corrupted branch I'll cut thee from the
stock, lest I for my injustice by the justice of the heavens should perish with
thee, nor shall my subjects be a loser in it, one of more virtue shall succeed
me, that will not ravish women.


Sir, I am miserable, and must implore your mercy; for in your eyes I read my
death or something near it, oh speak then, your tongue cannot pronounce like
cruelty.


I find I am a father, and if I hear him longer, pity will overthrow my
justice, and therefore I pronounce.


Oh hold, what Sir, my death or banishment I have bin all my life until this
present hour your hopeful son, for so you oft have called me, your heir, and
shall I now inherit nought but death or else a thousand deaths, in being
banished from your presence: which of the two to wish, I know not.


Oh that I might lay by the office of a judge, or else put off the nature of a
father: for I in this distraction suffer more then he can do in death; even
injured Callibeus self would be content with a less punishment, and the
severest powers of heaven will call me cruel in execution of what I intend,
rather then partial, since he is my son.


Oh speak not Sir, if you intend my death; rather by signs make me know


In this behold it then.


Nay then Ozaca, either thy honour or my life is forfeit, these tongue-lesse
men do yet pronounce my death certain as fate: I see my end, Sir, but what the
passage to it is I know not.


A dark passage trust me thou must have, but longer much then thou expect,
thou shalt not die.


Not die, her honor's safe, prison or banishment I will endure.


These eyes the causes of thy ill, least they again betray thee shall for ever
loose their light.


Is that your mercy? rather take my life.


If thou had bin a private man, thou should have died, but being a Prince
and my son, this is more just, and natural, however for the present thou
think is greater cruelty, for thou shalt live by sorrow to appease our
Prophet.


Oh Sir your mercy reaches to the highest point of cruelty, 'twere better not
to be at all, then not have the comfort of the light: what can life profit me a
Prince, if made incapable of government?


Dispatch, it is decreed.


Hold, hear me sir, I have endured enough to show, I prise Ozaca's honour, one
eye is lost. Sir I have belied my self; for know, Ozaca was more willing to
meet my wished embraces, then I to offer them.


Now I repent my pity, thou wretch made up of baseness would thou to save
that other wicked eye increase the villainies thou did commit against Ozaca:
thou only did before defile her person, now thou dost murder her, and her
husband, both alive but I in their behalf and justice pronounce thy death for
should thou live, thou would infect the world with baseness yet unheard
of: bear him from my sight and strangle him, lest as I am a Father, Pity
confound my Justice.


By Mahomet, Sir, father hear me.


Away with him, the fear of death would make him heap more perjuries upon his
soul.

A Prince that for the loss of sight dares lie.
Deserves death here, hereafter infamy.

ODmer, you that have all the favours of the time can surely tell, if you will
honour us so much, for what great cause it is, that we, and all the Captains
are commanded to assemble here.


Great Haly, who thinks all not done by him ill done, and who envies the
smallest grace that any other shall receive, though their deserts perhaps may
equal his, can even as well inform himself he thinks as Odmer can, and out
of scorn does only ask the question, but know, my Politician, that ere long
you'll find some alteration that you dream not of.


Odmer, is this your change you talk of?


Why, Haly, in his eyes you may read something if you'll observe not usual, I
have not seen him look like himself since he forsook Mars to become the
slave of Venus.


I hear that there are some amongst you that dare take upon them to maligne my
pleasures, and tax me for my easy life, alleging that I have forgot the
duty of the gods, paying all my devotions to this Saint; nay some have gone so
far as to affirm, I have given ore to be a King, making my self my captives
slave, and so deserve no longer to bear Rule. Although I need not make
Apologies (for none can call me to account but heaven) yet I'll so far descend
from that high pitch of Majesty whereon I am seated, as in familiar terms to
question with you, and by the honour of a King, which I have yet kept pure from
stain, however some have by their divellish cunning striven to blot it, I'll
give you liberty to answer, in what I shall ask you, with as much freedom as
if you were all Kings, or I your fellow subject.


What can this mean?


I know not what will follow, but well I understand what's past, and will
prevent him since he hath found me out, I shall be caught in mine own snare
else.


Tell me and tell me truly, which of you that had a beauty like to this, but
sometimes would to enjoy her company neglect our greatest business, view her
well for I'll make no description; only let me advise you fix not your eyes at
first upon her eyes if it be possible, least their brightness should strike
you blind before you had observed her other beauties, and when you have beheld
her outward form, know that her mind as far exceeds that, as the soul is more
worthy then the body, which does indeed admit of no comparison.


She is more excellent then can be spoke, and all that should but tax you, if
you should even adore her, deserve death for their gross ignorance.


Haly hath spoke what all confess, and we have too unjustly murmured at your
pleasures.


No man could go abroad to War, that might enjoy such happiness in peace.


Who would not for her sake neglect even heaven it self?


Unto her excellence add the consideration of the difficulty I had in obtaining
her, which ties mans nature faster to the object.


We all acknowledge that your joys are infinite in her, and that it lies not
in the power of man to quit such happiness.


To make you know the difference then twixt you and me, and that I value the
good of you my subjects and my honour far above fading pleasures, be this my
witness, thus cut I from my self such a content, that Mortals ne'er enjoyed.


Oh me, my fault lay in my blood, let that expiate my sin against heaven,
mercy, mercy.


Oh cruelty.


An act noble above example yet it moves my pity, this was no end of mine,
heaven knows.


Now by this act judge whether your Emperor be able to govern his passions or
no, when they oppose themselves against his honour, and that you may know that
pleasure hath not changed my nature, prepare for war, and what the neighbour
Princes whilst we slept by stealth obtained.

By force which interest back shall be regained.

See the body nobly intumb'd, I dare not view it


Now Haly was not this unlooked for?


Yes Odmer, on the first opportunity we are lost else.


It must be so, this act will gain the people.


It must be so.


What meant the Emperor to send me from this meeting on such a sleevless
errand: ha what bloody object is this, I hope I dream, if not, may I be blind
for ever, 'tis she: which of the gods fearing to be transplanted by her greater
excellence hath done this? no mortal man durst, or could have the heart to
execute such mischief: lay down the sacred load and let me know the bloody
villain; art thou gon? say whose hand was it, that let out her pure soul at
these grim wounds, and in the bloody act parted more excellence, then ere shall
meet again.


One that dares justify it.


Villain thou lie he dares not, though thou and all thy generation should
assist him who wast?


I am a soldier, take your lie again, for know it was Melcoshus.


Slave, dost thou mock my griefs?


Hold, noble Osmond, and know we manifest our love unto your virtues in
forbearing to cut you all in pieces for daring to offer this violence: for by
the honour of soldiers he tells you truth, the Emperor with his own hands here
performed it, before all chief commanders with an intent I think to get
again the soldiers love, which he had lost by her.


I do confess my rashness, let my cause of rage excuse it: the Emperor do it,
say you? it is impossible* now, by Mahomet, you are all traitors, and by some
bloody statesmen are subornd to do this wickedness, and being found to save your
guilty selves from justice, you lay it on the Emperor, you might as well make
me believe that he had pulled his eyes out, or his heart, for she was far more
dear, and therefore He defer revenge no longer.


Wound him, not only defend your selves, hes mad with passion.


Hold noble friend, what means this?


These villains here have killed the Emperors Mistress and would escape by
laying it on him; when he, when he shall know it once, will wish no longer
life.


Pacify your rage and hear me by Mahomet, what you have heard is truth, and
never was there act gained more applause amongst the old soldiers, whose loss
of blood hath quite extinguished the desire of women: but for my part me
thought, though it be brave in the consideration* yet it was a horrid spectacle
to see.


Is't even so? then had he taken a surfeit by being too happy?


No sure he loved her, when he killed her.


Shall I die with thee, my deer sister, for so it was thy will I should esteem
thee: oh look upon this face and tell me, if there remained the least spark of
humanity in him, that could but once have said, that she should thus be
murderd; what was he then that could himself perform it! horrid, horrid deed:
she in whose arms he slept the night before, and had no doubt more joys then
tounges can utter: but if there be those Gods, which punish villainies, he may
hereafter pay for it.


Osmond, this ill becomes your duty, which hitherto hath led the way even to
the forwardest in zeal.


Why friend, I speak not of Melcoshus, he could not do it, some fury entered
him.


Sir I love you: so well, that I dare not stay to hear you: bear off the
body.


Oh stay, good soldiers, let me take my last leave: what shall I say, she
cannot answer, it may be her fair Soul hovers about to see how they will use
her dear Companion: if so, oh let it hear my vow by Mahomet and all the
powers of heaven I swear with speed to be revenged upon thy cruel murderer,
all his brave former acts are by thy innocent blood washed from my remembrance:
for his love to me and payment of my duty they in it are cancelld, I was not
more his slave then he was thine; confirmed with many thousand oaths, and most
unjustly he hath not only broke those bands, but with thy dear blood died his
villainy in grain, so that they cannot change their horrid colour in my
memory, till I take equal vengeance, but I must needs come short both that I
am by his example taught, and that I shall but kill a murderer when thou died
innocent.


We in this stay, hazard our lives.


I have done, now let me after death do that which love and duty to Melcoshus,
whilst she lived, would never suffer me: these pale cold lips have yet the
power to make me burn in revenge, and these dear eyes sometimes the master
piece of nature can yet command me to extinguish their extinguisher. Now
soldiers take her hence, and I will bear you company to see her buried, the
passion I have showed, you may excuse, since all know I did first present her
to Melcoshus; for which of you, that had but given a horse or dog, excellent in
their kind, and seeing it at first as it deserved loved and cherished by him
that did receave it, and after thus used without a cause, but would grieve
something; deal freely, would it not move you, ha, if so, then think what I
now suffer, who heaven knows did love this Lady, as my sister.


Sir we grieve with you, and wish the Emperor had not bin so cruel.


Thanks soldiers, but where wishes fail, we must apply our reason to ease our
grief.

My ease alone consists in shedding his heart blood.
That gained, and then destroyed, earths chiefest good.

Shall I rejoice, or shall I grieve my present fortune? rejoice most certainly,
though all difficulty and danger attend my love; for my Orcanes is a Prince so
excellent in all, that though I ne'ere again enjoy him, yet am (...) happy:
but his affection sure which seemed to equal mine will make him study some way
how we again may meet, but soft here comes my husband with a joyful
Countenance.


My dear Ozaca, I bring ease to thy vexed soul, I had bin here long since, but
that the Emperors express command upon affairs with held me, and far too
happy was the news for any other but my self to bring: kneel down with me
and pray the Gods to prosper long Melco^hus.


Why Sir, what's the occasion? speak I pray you.


I knew his justice could not slack what ever he emd.


What justice? speak, oh my fears!


The Prince.


Speak, what of him?


The lustful Prince, my dear Ozaca, hath by his blood washed clean thy
stain.


Ha.


Ozaca, my Ozaca, oh speak; the joy of her revenge overcomes her know my deer
wife the Prince Orcanes for his foul rape on thee is by his noble father
justly put to death: oh praise Melcoshus in thy soul, who would not be unjust
to save his son being a villain.


Is the Prince dead then?


I, my best love to my great comfort, now I may kiss thee joyfully, the wound
thy honour did receive is cured.


Forbear, I must not kiss you, till I know by whom the cure was wrought, if
any other then your self informed against O^canes, and so provoked the father
to kill his son; nay, if you did not extol justice, and cry down mercy quite,
though it be the greatest attribute belonging to the gods, hope not that I
should ever look on you with love, or come within your bed.


Thinks my Ozaca, I so little love her, that I did sleep in my revenge: How
often did I urge unto Melcoshus all arguments, that might incense him against
his son, nay, told him, as I well might do, O^canes could not be his Offspring
that had so basely given himself to vice: However, I alleged in putting him
to death, he should perform a justice, that would make him famous through the
world, since natural affection, the gods appointing him to hold the balance,
could not yet weigh down justice.


Did you allege all this, and did this move him to put the Prince to death?


It did. Me thinks thou look not kindly on me for all this.


And shall I live after Orcanes? No.


What says Ozaca?


Nothing, but is he dead, dead certainly, and by your means?


He is.


Umh, umh, gone, for ever gone.


Ozaca, speak to me.


He died to save my honour, and shall I live behind him, and live with him
too, that triumphs in his death? It must not, it shall not be; I am too far
indebted, I'll first make eeven with some. Oh husband, if you had killed Orcanes
your self, then the revenge had stood more noble. You should


Ozaca.


And then your self to escape shameful death.


What can this cruelty in thee, Ozaca, mean?


Know, thou dull beast, I was so far from being forced, that I did burn in a
more ardent flame then he: Yet, had thy jealous brain not taught thee, to frame
that Letter for thine own dishonour, I had been innocent in act perhaps, how
ere my will had horned thee. But having once enjoyed a Prince so perfect, I
never would admit thy loathed embraces, and so have rather chose death, with
revenge on thee too boot, who were the cause Orcanes suffered death. Being thus
divorced from thee, I hope I in Elizeum shall enjoy him


Help ho, help ho, I find that this is truth, my wounds are witness, and that
there is no trusting women's tears I durst have sworn thee more innocent, than
now I see thee wicked; yet, however live, and repent thy sins, for I can
forgive thee, nay, perchance never cease to love thee.


D^ll fool, can thou believe my resolutions are so weak, as for the fear and
pain of death, to give them over, less for the love of thee; were it thou the
Monarch of the whole world, I would not live after Orcanes, to be the partner
of thy glories; but as it is, this knife is far more welcome to me; than thy
sight* fly, my soul, fly, and leave this loathed prison to meet Orcanes. So,
so, let this witness, I for thee die, Orcanes, and hope I have revenged thee.


My wound is far more dangerous than I thought, and I, for ought I know, may
bear thee company; but we shall soon part ways, if there be any justice in the
gods. I would live, bear me to my chamber; and for that wicked woman, one my
wife, let her be buried honourably.


Night, dark thoughts, and justly so, since by my cruelties, obscured that
light, which was my only comfort. Oh Despina, pardon me most penitent and now
no more afflict me in my dreams; if thou be merciful. I will erect an Altar
in this obscure Walk, and in the dead of night offer thee sacrifice; nay, even
at noon day would I perform it, and in the sight of all, but that I know it
must appear too plainly, that I to thee performed all rites with greater
reverence, than to our sacred prophet and so the people might rebel, for fear
of which, and loss of my neere-fading honour, I did become thy cruel butcher.
Bear me, cold earth, till I have some way reconciled my self to my dear saint.


Are they come over?


They are. How are we sure he's here now?


'Tis not so dark, but we shall find him; stand close a little, perchance he's
not come down yet.


You just powers, be this night auspicious in aiding my revenge; guide you this
instrument as right unto his tyrant heart, as I will give it strength to pierce
it: but soft, by the Moons light, I see some men before me, what can it mean?
'tis death for any but Melcoshus to enter here. 'Twould grieve my soul to die,
and miss revenge too. Behind this bush unseen, I shall observe.


Oh my Despina.


He's in the Arbour, I heard him groan; let's lose no time, but strike him
dead, before he draw his sword, or call for help; if he see to morrow's Sun
he'll know too much of our designs ere night, for us to see it set Odmer
suspects our conspiracy shrewdly, and suddenly will find the truth.


Delay no time then.


What's this I hear, how ere in me it is but justice to take Melcoshus life in
them 'tis damned treason, which I'll prevent; nor shall they frustrate me of my
revenge their hands are far too base.


Draw, and dispatch him.


Sink down to hell, Haly, thou root of treason, with these thy cursed branches.


Osmond, let me embrace thee in these wounded arms, I fear, to death. Thou
were ordained to be the lasting pattern of love and duty.


Forbear this kindness, for know, how e'rel did preserve you from their
swords, I come my self to kill you for Despina's sake, her innocent blood
cries for revenge; and by those powers I am ordained to see their j^stice
satisfied, by taking life from him, who cruelly extinguished that pure light,
which for a long time they intended should have been a comfort to the world,
and a great witness of their power.


Nay, if my Osmond be a traitor but in thought once, he shall not need to use
his sword, I would not wish to live beyond his faith; for, can there be a love
or truth left in a subject, when 'tis not to be found in him. Now I perceive
the murder I committed was most horrid, since he that loved me more then her,
she she being alive, would now rob me of life to revenge her.


Know, Tyrant, I loved thee once, when thou were worthy to be my Prince and
Master, more than my self: But thou, when thou had satisfied thy beastly
lust, to please the ignorant multitude, thou made a sacrifice of her to them,
to whom thou rather should have made them offer sacrifice, on peril of their
lives.


Osmond, thou art here more cruel in thy accusation, then in thy intent to
kill me: For, from the danger of thy sword, there's a divinity that waits upon
the person of a Prince, that would protect me; but against the thoughts of thy
unexpected treason, there is no armour; for thy unkindness so invades my soul,
that all that blood that should supply these nerves, flies to my heart to tell
it, Osmond no longer does wish to have a being there, if so, to split it will
be kindness,


Me thinks I find my resolution of revenge begin to bate its force.


If the consideration of your faith and love to me, so far prevail above your
own affection, that you dispensed with it to make me happy; believe likewise,
from the consideration of that care a King should have over his subjects, which
wholly was, and ever should have been whilst she did live by me, neglected, I
rather killed her, than that my love was ought diminished; for had I loved her
less, she might have lived; but I believing her to be so excellent, could
think of nothing whilst she lived, but her embraces.


And therefore would you make her suffer for your fault, was that the justice
of Melcoshus? Your Son offended, and you punished him; but here you spared your
self, striking an innocent.


'Tis true, I struck her being innocent, yet did not injure her or any, but my
self: I broke no Laws of Gods nor men: to prove which, I ask no more of
heaven, but that the taper of my life, which now grows dim, may burn some
minutes longer; then shall I show my Osmond, by their light of reason, that my
unhappy Stars are rather guilty of Despina's death, than I; she was a Captive,
and a Christian, which by our Laws, we freely may dispose of as we please; her
death then, had I been but a subject, was no breach of them.


She was a creature, for whose sake you would have once have broken all Laws.


I could break none, my power being unconfined. But interrupt me not, lest I do
faint, ere I can make an end. The Soldiers were so far from being displeased,
that they acknowledged her death a Jubilee. Our prophet Mahomet might most
rejoice to see her breathless, whose perfections, being a Christian, so far
out-went all those that honoured him, that some in time might justly doubt our
God to be less powerful than theirs, and so the reverence we now pay, grow
cold.


All this I grant; but for your injuries to her, what art can salve them?


She was the advocate of all those of her faith, and at my hands procured much
mercy for them. The perfect Christian is so proud of nought as Martyrdom, and
the more innocent from crime, the greater joy they take in death. Although
Despina was not martyred for her faith, I grant, but by the force of her
unequalled beauty, made a sacrifice to save my honour; yet amongst those of her
sect, she cannot miss the adoration of a Saint: And so I only sent her to a
greater happiness. You may allege it was a happiness.


Oh divine Despina.


She did not yet desire, to die but rather wished to live with me, she loved. To
this again I answered, that I so much did dote upon her excellence, that I
should have forgot to rule; and she must then have lived, to see me miserably
deprived of state and honour. Yet, as it now falls out, my fortune then had
been more favourable; for, then had Osmond's love been left a pattern to
posterity, and I should sure have found the comfort of his faith, when all men
else were traitors. But now --


He hath delivered this Apology with so much grief, majesty, and love, that
my own reason makes me know 'tis truth, and bids me justly turn that hatred,
which I hither brought against him, upon my guilty self, for I have been a
heinous traitor. Oh dread Sir, your pardon. But why should I once hope, I that
have stood so strictly on my faith, and by a thousand obligations, been fast
tied in bands of duty, yet thus to break without a just cause, just cause, as
if there could be any pretence for treason: Shall injuries make men cease to be
virtuous?


Let my soul part with joy, since Osmond sees his error; thy love to me, to
virtue, and Despina, have fought so nobly, that it still overcames; which was
most virtuous? thy love made thee present her to me, thy faith made thee refuse
to take again what thou had given, when she did offer it; and when thou
thought, that cruelly and most unjustly I had killed Despina, thy noble
anger made thee pursue revenge; but now, that thou dost find that anger was
unjust, thy faith overthrowes it, nay, turns it on thy self, since 'twas my
fate, not I, was guilty of her death, which let my pardon mitigate, so at my
death thou shalt express obedience, for now I feel his messenger approach; nor
does it grieve me now so much to die, as to have lived, and thou been false. If
Lovers meet in Elizium, and enjoy each other, there will thy virtues gain
Despina from me.


Stay, he's gone, and shall I live, he and Despina dead? 'twere madness; for
what is in the world left that's worthy; or, if there be two such, it is not
like, that I shall love the one, and serve the other. The fates ordained me
only for this end, he nursed and bred me, to wait upon him here, and in the
other world. But should I stay, until the Soldiers know he's dead, some one
of greater faith and courage may, by a voluntary death, seek to prevent me;
besides, Despina, and the expiation of my intended treason, urges me to die
Come my dear friend, perform thy latest service, in sending me thy Master to
Elizium. So, me thinks I see Despina stand ready to embrace me, but for
Melco^hus sake, even there again I will refuse her. Here at his honoured feet
I'll lay me down. You gods, let not the noble affection of our soul change
after death, let us remain all three so linked together in affection, as we were
before this bloody separation.


Be favourable, you gods, and grant, that the clashing of swords we heard
within Melcoshus's private walk, have not prevented us; my heart misgives me
that we come too late: Treason is swift in execution, the devil thrusting on
to mischief; and see a bloody witness, that my fears are true, 'tis Haly.
Mahomet, defend the Emperor.


See, here are others dead, the Emperor I think.


Ha! what say thou, screetch Owl?


Alas, and noble Osmond too.


Cold as earth. You gods, was this your justice? could you suffer this royal
building, which you had raised unto a glorious height, to show your power on
mortals, to fall to earth again in such obscurity, as none could be witness
of his ruin. But pardon me, you powers, I have profaned* we may conclude from
these witnesses, he nobly fell, and died not unrevenged. He ever walked alone,
how then comes Osmond here; one to suspect him for a traitor, were a sin
against Virtue, his very posture witnesses his love, kissing his Masters feet,
but more his faithful hand assures me, that his wounds are from himself, as
scorning the world, since it no longer did contain Melcoshus, who gave it
lustre. And shall so young years show the way of love and duty, yet old Odmer
fear to follow him? No, Boy, thou shalt not so outstrip me.


Hold, noble Odmer, will you forsake us too? then must the Tartar cease to be a
people: Who shall command us? all will run to ruin. Accept the Empire rather.


Hail Odmer, King of the Tartars.


Tempt not my faith so: shall hope of honours make me live after Melcoshus? Be
this my witness to the contrary.


Odmer till now did never show, he was a greater lover of himself than virtue;
he would sleep quiet in his grave, rather than by a little trouble in the
world, preserve us all from ruin. But in the name of Mahomet, I charge you
forsake death, and accept the Empire.


Grant, that Melcoshus's son, the dead Orcanes brother, when he's of age, may
take my place, and I'll obey the gods, in yielding to your desires.


Long live Odmer, King of the Tartars.


By whom you were inspired to teach me this more reasonable way of duty, take
up this noble Coarse; for which I will erect a Tomb, shall make his name live
to eternity, in which the faith and love of Osmond shall not be forgotten.



