MOors, have this way (as Story tells) to know
Whether their Brats are truly got, or no;
Into the Sea, the New-born Babe is thrown,
There, as instinct directs, to Swim, or Drown.
A Barbarous Device, to try if Spouse,
Have kept Religiously her Nuptial Vows!
Su^h are the Trials, Poets make of Plays:
Only they trust to more inconstant Seas;
So, does our Author, this his Child commit
To the Tempestuous Mercy of the Pit,
To know, if it be truly born of Wit.
Critics avaunt; for you are Fish of Prey,
And feed like Sharks, upon an Infant Play.
Be every Monster of the Deep away;
Let's have a fair Trial, and a clear Sea.
Let Nature work, and do not Damn to soon,
For Life will struggle long, here it sink down:
Let it at least rise thrice, before it Drown.
Let us consider, had it been our Fate,
Thus hardly to be proved Legitimate!
I will not say, we'd all in danger been,
Were each to suffer for his Mothers Sin:
But by my Troth I cannot avoid thinking,
How nearly some Good Men, might have escaped Sinking.
But Heaven be praised, this Custom is confined
Alone to the Offspring of the Muses kind:
Our Christian Cuckolds are more bent to pity;
I know not one Moor-Husband in the City.
In the Good Man's Arms, the Chopping Bastard thrives,
For he thinks all his own, that is his Wives.
Whatever Fate is for this Play designed,
The Poet's sure he shall some comfort find:
For if his Muse has played him false, the worst*
That can befall him, is, to be Divorced;
You Husbands Judge, if that, be to be Cursed.

NED, Ned, whither so fast? What, turned flincher! Why, you wo' not leave us?


Where are the Women? Pox I'm weary of guzling, and begin to think them the
better Company.


Then thy Reason staggers, and you're almost drunk.


No faith, but your Fools grow noisy -- and if a man must endure the noise of
words without Sense, I think the Women have the more Musical Voices, and become
Nonsense better.


Why, they are at that end of the Gallery; retired to their Tea, and Scandal;
according to their Ancient Custom, after Dinner. -- But I made a pretence of
following you, because I had something to say to you in private, and I am not
like to have many opportunities this Evening.


And here's this Cox-Comb most Critically come to interrupt you.


Boys, Boys, Lads, where are you? What do you give ground? Mortgage for a
Bottle, ha? Careless, this is your trick; you're always spoiling Company by
leaving it.


And thou art always spoiling Company by coming into 't.


Pooh, ha, ha, ha, I know you envy me. Spite, proud spite, by the Gods! and
burning envy. -- I'll be judged by Mellefont here, who gives and takes Raillery
better, you or I. Pox, Man, when I say you spoil Company by leaving it, I mean
you leave no body for the Company to Laugh at. I think there I was with you
(...) Mellefont.


Of my word, Brisk, that was a home thrust; you have silenced him.


Oh, my dear Mellefont, let me perish, if thou art not the Soul of
Conversation, the very Essence of Wit, and Spirit of Wine, -- the Deuce take me
if there were three good things said; or one, understood, since thy Amputation
from the body of our Society. -- He, I think that's pretty and Metaphorical
enough: In Gad I could not have said it out of thy Company. -- Careless, ha?


Hum, ay, what is't?


O, Mon Coeur! What is't! nay gad I'll punish you for want of Apprehension: The
Deuce take me if I tell you.


No, no, hang him, he has no taste, -- but dear Brisk excuse me, I have a little
business.


Prithee get thee gone; thou feest we are serious.


We'll come immediately, if you'll but go in, and keep up good Humour and Sense
in the Company, prithee do, they'll fall asleep else.


I'gad so they will -- well I will, I will, Gad you shall Command me from the
Zenith to the Nadir. -- But the Deuce take me if I say a good thing till you
come. -- But prithee dear Rogue, make haste, prithee make haste, I shall burst
else. -- And yonder your Uncle my Lord Touchwood swears, he'll Disinherit you,
and Sir Paul Pliant threatens to disclaim you for a Son-in-Law, and my Lord
Froth won't Dance at your Wedding to Morrow; nor the Deuce take me, I won't
Write your Epithalamium -- and see what a condition you're like to be brought
to.


Well, I'll speak but three words, and follow you.


Enough, enough, Careless, bring your Apprehension along with you.


Pert Cox-Comb.


Faith 'tis a good natured Cox-Comb, and has very Entertaining follies -- you
must be more humane to him; at this Juncture it will do me Service. -- I'll
tell you, I would have mirth continued this day at any rate; though Patience
purchase folly, and Attention be paid with noise: There are times when Sense
may be unseasonable, as well as Truth. Prithee do thou wear none to day; but
allow Brisk to have Wit, that thou may seem a Fool.


Why, how now, why this extravagant proposition?


O, I would have no room for serious design; for I am Jealous of a Plot. I
would have Noise and Impertinence keep my Lady Touchwood's Head from Working:
For Hell is not more busy than her Brain, nor contains more Devils, than that
Imaginations.


I thought your fear of her had been over -- is not to Morrow appointed for
your Marriage with Cynthia, and her Father Sir Paul Pliant, come to settle the
Writings, this day, on purpose?


True, but you shall judge whether I have not reason to be alarmed. None
besides you, and Maskwell, are acquainted with the Secret of my Aunt
Touchwood's violent Passion for me. Since my first refusal of her Addresses,
she has endeavoured to do me all ill Offices with my Uncle; yet has managed 'em
with that subtilty, that to him they have born the face of kindness; while her
Malice, like a Dark Lanthorn, only shone upon me, where it was directed. Still
it gave me less perplexity to prevent the success of her displeasure, than to
avoid the importunities of her Love; and of two evils, I thought my self
favoured in her aversion: But whether urged by her despair, and the short
prospect of time she saw, to accomplish her designs; whether the hopes of her
revenge, or of her Love, terminated in the view of this my Marriage with
Cynthia, I know not; but this Morning she surprised me in my Bed. --


Was there ever such a Fury! 'tis well Nature has not put into her Sexes power
to Ravish. -- Well, bless us! Proceed. What follow'd?


What at first amazed me; for I looked to have seen her in all the Transports
of a slighted and revengeful Woman: But when I expected Thunder from her Voice,
and Lightning in her Eyes; I saw her melted into Tears, and hushed into a Sigh.
It was long before either of us spoke, Passion had tied her Tongue, and
Amazement mine. -- In short, the Consequence was thus, she omitted nothing,
that the most violent Love could urge, or tender words express; which when she
saw had no effect; but still I pleaded Honour and nearness of Blood to my
Uncle; then came the Storm I feared at first: For starting from my Bed-side
like a Fury, she flew to my Sword, and with much ado I prevented her doing me
or her self a mischief: having disarmed her; in a gust of Passion she left me,
and in a resolution, confirmed by a Thousand Curses, not to close her Eyes,
till she had seen my ruin.


Exquisite Woman! But what the Devil does she think, thou hast no more Sense,
than to get an Heir upon her Body to Disinherit thy self: for as I take it this
Settlement upon you, is, with a Proviso, that your Uncle have no Children.


It is so. Well, the Service that you are to do me, will be a Pleasure to your
self; I must get you to engage my Lady Pliant all this Evening, that my Pious
Aunt may not work her to her Interest. And if you chance to secure her to your
self, you may incline her to mine. She's handsome, and knows it; is very silly,
and thinks she has Sense, and has an old fond Husband.


I confess a very fair Foundation, for a Lover to build upon.


For my Lord Froth, he and his Wife will be sufficiently taken up, with
admiring one another, and Brisk's Gallantry, as they call it. I'll observe my
Uncle my self; and Jack Maskwell has promised me, to watch my Aunt narrowly,
and give me notice upon any suspicion. As for Sir Paul, my wife Father-in-Law
that is to be, my Dear Cynthia has such a share in his Fatherly fondness, he
would scarce make her a Moment uneasy, to have her happy hereafter.


So, you have Manned your Works: But I wish you may not have the weakest Guard,
where the Enemy is strongest.


Maskwell, you mean; prithee why should you suspect him?


Faith I cannot help it, you know I never liked him; I am a little
Superstitious in Physiognomy.


He has Obligations of Gratitude, to bind him to me; his Dependence upon my
Uncle is through my means.


Upon your Aunt, you mean.


My Aunt!


I'm mistaken if there be not a Familiarity between them, you do not suspect:
For all her Passion for you.


Pooh, pooh, nothing in the World but his design to do me Service; and he
endeavours to be well in her esteem, that he may be able to effect it.


Well, I shall be glad to be mistaken; but, your Aunts Aversion in her Revenge,
cannot be any way so effectually shown, as in bringing forth a Child to
Disinherit you. She is Handsome and cunning, and naturally wanton. Maskwell is
Flesh and Blood at best, and opportunities between them are frequent. His
Affection to you, you have confessed, is grounded upon his Interest, that, you
have transplanted; and should it take Root in my Lady, I don't see what you can
expect from the Fruit.


I confess the Consequence is visible, were your suspicions just, -- but see
the Company is broke up, let's meet 'em.


Out upon it, Nephew -- leave your Fatherin-Law, and me, to maintain our ground
against Young People.


I beg your Lordships Pardon. -- We were j^st returning. --


Were you, Son? Gadsbud much better as it is -- good, strange! I swear I'm
almost Tipsy -- the other Bottle would have been too powerful for me, -- as sure
as can be it would. -- we wanted your Company, but Mr. Brisk -- where is he? I
swear and vow, he's a most facetious Person -- and the best Company. -- And, my
Lord Froth, your Lordship is so merry a Man, he, he, he.


O foy, Sir Paul, what do you mean? Merry! O Barbarous! I'd as lieve you called
me Fool.


Nay, I protest and vow now, 'tis true; when Mr. Brisk Jokes, your Lordships
Laugh does so become you, he, he, he.


Ridiculous! Sir Paul you're strangely mistaken, I find Champagne is powerful.
I assure you, Sir Paul, I Laugh at no bodies Jest but my own, or a Ladies; I
assure you, Sir Paul.


How? how, my Lord? What, affront my Wit! Let me perish, do I never say any
thing worthy to be Laughed at?


O foy, don't misapprehend me, I don't say so, for I often smile at your
Conceptions. But there is nothing more unbecoming a Man of Quality, than to
Laugh; Jesu, 'tis such a Vulgar Expression of the Passion! every body can
Laugh. Then especially to Laugh at the Jest of an Inferior Person, or when any
body else of the same Quality does not Laugh with him. Ridiculous! To be
pleased with what pleases the Crowd! Now when I Laugh, I always Laugh alone.


I suppose that's because you Laugh at your own Jests, I'gad, ha, ha, ha.


He, he, I swear though, your Raillery provokes me to a smile.


Ay, my Lord, it's a sign I hit you in the Teeth, if you show 'em.


He, he, he, I swear that's so very pretty, I can't forbear.


I find a Quibble bears more sway in your Lordships Face, than a Jest.


Sir Paul, if you please we'll retire to the Ladies, and Drink a Dish of Tea, to
settle our Heads.


With all my heart. -- Mr. Brisk you'll come to us, -- or call me when you're
going to Joke, I'll be ready to Laugh incontinently.


But does your Lordship never see Comedies?


O yes, sometimes, -- but I never Laugh.


No?


Oh, no. -- Never Laugh indeed, Sir.


No, why what do ye go there for?


To distinguish my self from the Commonalty, and mortify the Poets; the Fellows
grow so Conceited, when any of their foolish Wit prevails upon the side Boxes.
-- I swear, -- he, he, he, I have often constrained my Inclinations to Laugh.
-- He, he, he, to avoid giving them encouragement.


You are Cruel to your self, my Lord, as well as Malicious to them.


I confess, I did my self some violence at first, but now I think I have
Conquered it.


Let me perish, my Lord, but there is something very particular and novel in
the Humour; 'tis true, it makes against Wit, and I'm sorry for some Friends of
mine that Write, but -- I'gad, I love to be malicious. -- Nay, Deuce take me,
there's Wit in it too -- and Wit must be foiled by Wit; cut a Diamond with a
Diamond; no other way, I'gad.


Oh, I thought you would not be long, before you found out the Wit.


Wit! In what? Where the Devil's the Wit, in not Laughing when a Man has a mind
to it.


O Lord, why can't you find it out? -- Why there 'tis, in the not Laughing --
don't you Apprehend me? -- My Lord, Careless, is a very honest Fellow, but
harkee, -- you understand me. Somewhat heavy, (...) little shallow, or so. --
Why I'll tell you now, suppose now, you come up to me -- nay, prithee Careless
be instructed. Suppose, as I was saying, you come up to me, holding your sides,
and Laughing as if you would bepi^s your self -- I look grave, and ask the
cause of this Immoderate Mirth. -- You Laugh on still, and are not able to tell
me -- still I look grave, not so much as smile. --


Smile, no, what the Devil should you smile at, when you suppose I can't tell
you?


Pshaw, pshaw, prithee don't interrupt me. -- But I tell you, you shall tell me
-- at last. -- But it shall be a great while first.


Well, but prithee don't let it be a great while, because I long to have it
over.


Well then, you tell me, some good Jest, or very Witty thing, Laughing all the
while as if you were ready to die -- and I hear it, and look thus. -- Would not
you be disappointed?


No; for if it were a witty thing, I should not expect you to understand it.


O foy, Mr. Careless, all the World allow Mr. Brisk to have Wit; my Wife says,
he has a great deal. I hope you think her a Judge?


Pooh, my Lord, his Voice goes for nothing. -- I can't tell how to make him
Apprehend, -- take it the other way. Suppose I say a witty thing to you?


Then I shall be disappointed indeed.


Let him alone, Brisk, he is obstinately bent not to be instructed.


I'm sorry for him, Deuce take me.


Shall we go to the Ladies, my Lord?


With all my heart, methinks we are a Solitude without'em.


Or, what say you, to another Bottle of Champaign?


O, for the Universe, not a drop more I beseech you, O Intemperate! I have a
flushing in my Face already.


Let me see, let me see, my Lord, I broke my Glass that was in the Lid of my
Snuff-Box. Hum! Deuce take me, I have encouraged a Pimple here too.


Then you must mortify him, with a Patch; my Wife shall supply you. Come,
Gentlemen, allons.


I'll hear no more. -- Y' are False and Ungrateful; come, I know you false.


I have been frail, I confess, Madam, for your Ladyships Service.


That I should trust a Man, whom I had known betray his Friend!


What Friend have I betrayed? Or to Whom?


Your fond Friend Mellefont, and to me; can you deny it?


I do not.


Have you not wronged my Lord, who has been a Father to you in your wants, and
given you being? have you not wronged him in the highest manner, in his Bed?


With your Ladyships help, and for your Service, as I told you before. I can't
deny that neither. -- Any thing more, Madam?


More! Audacious Villain. O what's more, is most my Shame, -- have you not
Dishonoured me?


No, that I deny; for I never told in all my Life: So that Accusation's
Answered; on to the next.


Death, do you dally with my Passion? (...) Devil! But have a care, -- provoke
me not; For, by the Eternal Fire, you shall not escape my Vengeance. -- Calm
Villain! How unconcerned he stands, Confessing Treachery and Ingratitude! Is
there Vice more black! -- O I have Excuses, Thousands for my Faults; Fire in my
Temper, Passions in my Soul, apt to every provocation; oppressed at once with
Love, and with Despair. But a sedate, a thinking Villain, whose Black Blood
runs temperately bad, what excuse can clear? one, who is no more moved with the
reflection of his Crimes, than of his Face; but walks unstartled from the
Mirror, and straight forgets the hideous form.


Will you be in Temper, Madam? I would not talk, not to be heard. I have been


Necessity, Impudence! Can no Gratitude incline you, no Obligations touch you?
Have not my Fortune, and my Person, been (...) to your Pleasure? Were you not
in the nature of a Servant, and have not I in effect made you (...) of all, of
me, and of my Lord? Where is (...) humble Love, the Languishing, that
Adoration, (...) once was paid me, and everlastingly engaged?


Fixed, Rooted in my Heart, whence nothing can remove 'em, yet you. --


Yet, what yet?


Nay, Misconceive me not, Madam, when I say I have had a Generous, and a
Faithful Passion, which you had never favoured, but through Revenge and Policy.


Ha!


Look you, Madam, we are alone, -- pray contain your self, and hear me. You
know you Loved your Nephew, when I first Sighed for you; I quickly found it, an
Argument that I Loved; for with that Art you veiled your Passion, 'twas
imperceptible to all but Jealous Eyes. This discovery made me bold; I confess
it; for by it, I thought you in my Power. Your Nephew's Scorn of you, added to
my hopes; I watched the Occasion, and took you, just Repulsed by him, warm at
once with Love and Indignation; your Disposition, my Arguments, and happy
Opportunity, accomplished my Design; I pressed the yielding Minute, and was
blessed. How, I have Loved you since, Words have not shown, then how should Words
express.


Well, mollifying Devil! -- And have I not met your Love with forward Fire?


Your Zeal I grant was Ardent, but misplaced; there was Revenge in view; that
Woman's Idol had defiled the Temple of the God, and Love was made a
Mock-Worship, -- a Son and Heir, would have edged Young Mellefont upon the
brink of Ruin, and left him nought but you to catch at for Prevention.


Again, provoke me! Do you wind me like a Larum, only to rouse my own stilled
Soul for your Diversion? Confusion!


Na, Madam, I'm gone, if you Relapse, -- what needs this? I say nothing but
what your self, in open hours of Love, have told me. Why should you deny it?
Nay, how can you? Is not all this present Heat owing to the same Fire? Do you
not Love him still? How have I this day Offended you, but in not breaking off
his Match with Cynthia? Which e're to Morrow shall be done, -- had you but
Patience.


How, what said you Maskwell -- another Caprice, to unwind my temper.


By heaven, no; I am your Slave, the Slave of all your Pleasures; and will not
rest till I have given you peace, would you suffer me.


Of Maskwell, in Vain I do disguise me from thee, thou know me, know the
very inmost Windings and Recesses of my Soul. -- Oh Mellefont! I burn; Married
to Morrow! Despair strikes me. Yet my Soul knows I hate him too: Let him but
once be mine, and next immediate Ruin seize him.


Compose your self, You shall Enjoy and Ruin him too, -- Will that please you?


How, how? Thou Dear, thou precious Villain, how?


You have already been tampering with my Lady Pliant?


I have: She is ready for any Impression I think fit.


She must be thoroughly persuaded, that Mellefont Loves her.


She is so Credulous that way naturally, and likes him so well, that she will
believe it faster than I can persuade her. But I don't see what you can propose
from such a trifling design; for her first Conversing with Mellefont, will
convince her of the contrary.


I know it. -- I don't depend upon it. -- But it will prepare some thing else;
and gain us leisure to lay a stronger Plot: if I gain a little time, I shall
not want Contrivance.

One Minute, gives Invention to Destroy,
What, to Rebuild, will a whole Age Employ.

INdeed, Madam! Is it Possible your Ladyship could have been so much in Love?


I could not sleep; I did not sleep one wink for Three Weeks together.


Prodigious! I wonder, want of sleep, and so much Love, and so much Wit as your
Ladyship has, did not turn your Brain.


O my Dear Cynthia, you must not rally your Friend, -- but really, as you say,
I wonder too, -- but then I had a way. -- For between you and I, I had Whimsies
and Vapours, but I gave them vent.


How pray, Madam?


O I Writ, Writ abundantly, -- do you never Write?


Write, what?


Songs, Elegies, Satyrs, Encomiums, Panegyrics, Lampoons, Plays, or Heroic
Poems.


O Lord, not I, Madam; I'm content to be a Courteous Reader.


O Inconsistent! In Love, and not Write! if my Lord and I had been both of your
Temper, we had never come together, -- O bless me! What a sad thing would that
have been, if my Lord and I should never have met!


Then neither my Lord and you would ever have met with your Match, on my
Conscience.


Of my Conscience no more we should; thou say right -- for sure my Lord
Froth is as fine a Gentleman, and as much a Man of Quality! Ah! Nothing at all
of the Common Air, -- I think I may say he wants nothing, but a Blue Ribbon and
a Star, to make him Shine, the very Phosphorus of our Hemisphere. Do you
understand those Two hard Words? If you don't, I'll explain 'em to you.


Yes, yes, Madam, I'm not so Ignorant. -- At least I won't own it, to be
troubled with your Instructions.


Nay, I beg your Pardon; but being Derived from the Greek, I thought you might
have escaped the Etymology. -- But I'm the more amazed, to find you a Woman of
Letters, and not Write! Bless me! how can Mellefont believe you Love him?


Why Faith, Madam, he that won't take my Word, shall never have it under my
Hand.


I Vow Mellefont's a pretty Gentleman, but Methinks he wants a Manner.


A Manner! what's that, Madam?


Some distinguishing Quality, as for example, the Belle-air or Brilliant of Mr.
Brisk; the Solemnity, yet Complaisance of my Lord, or something of his own,
that should look a little Iene-scay quoysh; he is too much a Mediocrity, in my
mind.


He does not indeed affect either pertness, or formality; for which I like him:
Here he comes.


And my Lord with him: pray observe the difference.


Impertinent Creature, I could almost be angry with her now.


My Lord, I have been telling my dear Cynthia, how much I have been in Love
with you; I swear I have; I'm not ashamed to own it now; ah! it makes my heart
leap, I vow I sigh when I think on it: my dear Lord! ha, ha, ha, do you
remember, my Lord?


Pleasant Creature! perfectly well, ah! that look, ay, there it is; who could
resist! 'twas so my heart was made a Captive first, and ever since 't has been
in Love with happy Slavery.


O that Tongue, that dear deceitful Tongue! that Charming Softness in your Mien
and your Expression, and then your Bow! Good my Lord, bow as you did when I
gave you my Picture, here suppose this my Picture --

Pray mind, my Lord; ah! he bows Charmingly; nay, my Lord, you shall not kiss it
so much; I shall grow jealous, I vow now.


I saw my self there, and kissed it for your sake.


Ah! Gallantry to the last degree -- Mr. Brisk, you're a Judge; was ever any
thing so well-bred as my Lord?


Never any thing; but your Ladyship, let me perish.


O prettily turned again; let me die, but you have a great deal of Wit: Mr.
Mellefont, don't you think Mr. Brisk has a World of Wit?


O, yes, Madam.


O Lord, Madam --


An infinite deal!


O Jesu, Madam --


More Wit than any Body.


I'm everlastingly your humble Servant, Deuce take me, Madam.


Don't you think us a happy Couple?


I vow, my Lord, I think you the happiest Couple in the World, for you are not
only happy in one another, and when you are together, but happy in your selves,
and by your selves.


I hope Mellefont will make a good Husband too.


'Tis my Interest to believe he will, my Lord.


D'e think he'll Love you as well as I do my Wife? I'm afraid not.


I believe he'll Love me better.


Heavens! that can never be; but why do you think so?


Because he has not so much reason to be fond of himself.


O your humble Servant for that, dear Madam; well, Mellefont, you'll be a happy
Creature.


Ay, my Lord, I shall have the same reason for my happiness that your Lordship
has, I shall think my self happy.


Ah, that's all.


Your Ladyship is in the right; but I'gad I'm wholly turned into Satyr. I
confess I Write but seldom, but when I do -- keen Iambics I'gad. But my Lord
was telling me, your Ladyship has made an Essay toward an Heroic Poem.


Did my Lord tell you? Yes I vow, and the Subject is my Lord's Love to me. And
what do you think I call it? I dare Swear you won't guess -- The Syllabub, ha,
ha, ha.


Because my Lord's Title's Froth, I'gad, ha, ha, ha, Deuce take me very a
Propos and Surprising, ha, ha, ha.


He, Ay, is not it? -- and then I call my Lord Spumoso; and my self, what d'e
think I call my self?


Lactilla may be, -- 'gad I cannot tell.


Biddy, that's all; just my own Name.


Biddy! I'gad very pretty -- Deuce take me if ^ur Ladyship has not the Art of
Surprising the most Naturally in the World, -- I hope you'll make me happy in
Communicating the Poem.


O, you must be my Confident, I must ask your Advice.


I'm your Humble Servant, let me perish* -- I presume your Ladyship has Read
Bossu?


O yes, and Rapine, and Dacier upon Aristotle and Horace. -- My Lord you must
not be Jealous, I'm Communicating all to Mr. Brisk.


No, no, I'll allow Mr. Brisk; have you nothing about you to show him, my Dear?


Yes, I believe I have. -- Mr. Brisk, come will you go into the next Room? and
there I'll show you all I have.


I'll walk a turn in the Garden, and come to you.


You're thoughtful, Cynthia?


I'm thinking, that though Marriage makes Man and Wife One Flesh, it leaves 'em
still Two Fools; and they become more Conspicuous by setting off one another.


That's only when Two Fools meet, and their follies are opposed.


Nay, I have known Two Wits meet, and by the opposition of their Wits, render
themselves as ridiculous as Fools. 'Tis an odd Game we're going to Play at:
What think you of drawing Stakes, and giving over in time?


No, hanged, that's not endeavouring to Win, because it's possible we may lose;
since we have Shuffled and Cut, let's even turn up Trump now.


Then I find its like Cards, if either of us have a good Hand, it is an
Accident of Fortune.


No, Marriage is rather like a Game at Bowls, Fortune indeed makes the match,
and the Two nearest, and sometimes the Two farthest are together, but the Game
depends entirely upon Judgment.


Still it is a Game, and Consequently one of us must be a Loser.


Not at all; only a Friendly Trial of Skill, and the Winnings to be Shared
between us. -- What's here, th^ Music! -- Oh, my Lord has promised the Company
^ New Song, we'll get 'em to give it us by the way.

Pray let us have the Favour of you, to practice the Song, before the Company
hear it.


CYnthia frowns when e're I Woo her,
Yet she's vexed if I give over;
Much she fears I should undo her,
But much more, to lose her Lover:
Thus, in doubting, she refuses:
And not Winning, thus she loses.
Prithee Cynthia look behind you,
Age and Wrinkles will o'retake you;
Then too late, desire will find you,
When the power does forsake you:
Think, O think of the sad Condition.
To be past, yet wish Fruition.
You shall have my thanks below.


Gads bud! I am provoked into a Fermentation, as my Lady Froth says; was ever
the like read of in Story?


Sir Paul have patience, let me alone to rattle him up.


Pray your Ladyship give me leave to be Angry -- I'll rattle him up I Warrant
you, I'll firk him with a Certiorari.


You firk him, I'll firk him my self; pray Sir Paul hold you Contented.


Bless me, what makes my Father in such a Passion! -- I never saw him thus
before.


Hold your self Contented, my Lady Pliant, -- I find Passion coming upon me by
inspiration, and I cannot submit as formerly, therefore give way.


How now! will you be pleased to retire, and --


No marry will I not be pleased, I am pleased to be angry, that's my pleasure
at this time.


What can this mean!


Gads my life, the man's Distracted, why how now, who are you? What am I?
'Slidikins can't I govern you? What did I Marry you for? Am I not to be
absolute and uncontrollable? Is it fit a Woman of my Spirit, and Conduct,
should be contradicted in a matter of this Concern?


It concerns me, and only me; -- besides, I'm not to be governed at all times.
When I am in Tranquillity, my Lady Pliant shall Command Sir Paul; but when I am
provoked to fury, I cannot incorporate with Patience and Reason, -- as soon may
Tigers Match with Tigers, Lambs with Lambs, and every Creature couple with its
Foe, as the Poet says. --


He's hot-headed still! 'Tis in vain to talk to you; but remember I have a
Curtain-Lecture for you, you disobedient, headstrong Brute.


No, 'tis because I won't be headstrong, because I won't be a Brute, and have
my Head fortified, that I am thus exasperated, -- but I will protect my Honour,
and yonder is the Violater of my Fame.


'Tis my Honour that is concerned, and the violation was intended to me. Your
Honour! You have none, but what is in my keeping, and I can dispose of it when
I please -- therefore don't provoke me.


Hum, gads bud she says true, -- well, my Lady, March on, I will fight under
you then: I am convinced, as far as Passion will permit.


Inhuman and Treacherous.


Thou Serpent and first Tempter of Womankind. --


Bless me! Sir; Madam; what mean you?


Thy, Thy, come away Thy, touch him not, come hither Girl, go not near him,
there's nothing but deceit about him; Snakes are in his Peruke, and the
Crocodile of Nilus in his Belly, he will eat thee up alive.


Dishonourable, impudent Creature!


For Heaven's sake, Madam, to whom do you direct this Language!


Have I behaved my self with all the decorum, and nicety, befitting the Person
of Sir Paul's Wife? Have I preserved my Honour as it were in a Snow-House for
this three year past? Have I been white and unsulli'd even by Sir Paul himself?


Nay, she has been an impenetrable Wife, even to me, that's the truth on it.


Have I, I say, preserved my self, like a fair Sheet of Paper, for you to make
a Blot upon --


And she shall make a Simile with any Woman in England.


I am so amazed, I know not what to speak.


Do you think my Daughter, this pretty Creature; gads bud she's a Wife for a
Cherubin! Do you think her fit for nothing but to be a Stalking-Horse, to stand
before you, while you take aim at my Wife? Gads bud I was never angry before in
my Life, and I'll never be appeased again.


Hell and Damnation! this is my Aunt; such malice can be engendered no where
else.


Sir Paul, take Cynthia from his fight; leave me to strike him with the remorse
of his intended Crime.


Pray, Sir, stay, hear him, I dare affirm he's innocent.


Innocent! why heark'ee, come hither Thy, heark'ee, I had it from his Aunt, my
Sister Touchwood, -- gadsbud he does not care a Farthing for any thing of thee,
but thy Portion, why he's in Love with my Wife; he would have tantalised thee,
and made a Cuckold of thy poor Father, -- and that would certainly have broke
my Heart -- I'm sure if ever I should have Horns, they would kill me; they
would never come kindly, I should dye of 'em, like any Child, that were cutting
his Teeth -- I should, indeed, Thy -- therefore come away; but providence has
prevented all, therefore come away, when I bid you.


I must obey.


O, such a thing! the Impiety of it startles me -- to wrong so good, so fair a
Creature, and one that loved you tenderly -- 'tis a barbarity of barbarities,
and nothing could be guilty of it --


But the greatest Villain imagination can form, I grant it; and next to the
Villainy of such a fact, is the Villainy of aspersing me with the guilt. How?
which way was I to wrong her? for yet I understand you not.


Why, gads my life, Cousin Mellefont, you cannot be so peremptory as to deny
it; when I tax you with it to (...) face; for now Sir Paul's gone, you are
Corum Nobus.


By Heaven, I love her more than life, or --


Fiddle, faddle, don't tell me of this and that, and every thing in the World,
but give me Mathemacular Demonstration, answer me directly -- but I have not
patience -- oh! the Impiety of it, as I was saying, and the unparalleled
wickedness! O merciful Father! how could you think to reverse Nature so, to
make the Daughter the means of procuring the Mother?


The Daughter procure the Mother!


Ay, for though I am not Cynthia's own Mother, I am her Father's Wife; and that's
near enough to make it Incest.


Incest! O my precious Aunt, and the Devil in Conjunction.


O reflect upon the horror of that, and then the guilt of deceiving every body;
Marrying the Daughter, only to make a Cuckold of the Father; and then seducing
me, debauching my purity, and perverting me from the road of Virtue, in which I
have trod thus long, and never made one Trip, not one faux pas; O consider it,
what would you have to answer for, if you should provoke me to frailty? Alas!
Humanity is feeble, Heaven knows! very feeble, and unable to support it self.


Where am I? sure, is it day? and am I awake, Madam? --


And no body knows how Circumstances may happen together, -- to my thinking,
now I could resist the strongest Temptation, -- but yet I know, 'tis impossible
for me to know whether I could or no, there is no certainty in the things of
this life.


Madam, pray give me leave to ask you one question. --


O Lord, ask me the question, I'll swear I'll refuse it; I swear I'll deny it,
-- therefore don't ask me, nay you shall not ask me, I swear I'll deny it. O
Gemini, you have brought all the Blood into my face; I warrant, I am as red as
a Turky-Cock; O fie, Cousin Mellefont!


Nay, Madam, hear me; I mean --


Hear you, no, no; I'll deny you first, and hear you afterwards: For one does
not know how ones mind may change upon hearing -- hearing is one of the Senses,
an^ all the Senses are fallible; I won't trust my Honour, I assure you; my
Honour is infallible and uncomatible.


For Heaven's sake, Madam. --


O name it no more -- bless me, how can you talk of Heaven! and have so much
wickedness in your Heart? May be you don't think it a sin, -- they say some of
you Gentlemen don't think it a sin, -- may be it is no sin to them that don't
think it so; -- indeed, if I did not think it a sin, -- but still my honour, if
it were no sin, -- but then, to Marry my Daughter, for the Convenience of
frequent Opportunities, -- I'll never consent to that, as sure as can be, I'll
break the Match.


Death and amazement, -- Madam, upon my knees. --


Nay, nay, rise up, come you shall see my good Nature. I know Love is powerful,
and no body can help his passion: 'Tis not your fault; nor I swear it is not
mine, -- how can I help it, if I have Charms? And how can you help it, if you
are made a Captive; I swear it's pity it should be a fault, -- but my honour --
well, but your honour too -- but the sin! -- well but the necessity -- O Lord,
here's some body coming, I dare not stay. Well, you must consider of your
Crime; and strive as much as can be against it, -- strive besure -- but don't
be melancholy, don't despair, -- but never think that I'll grant you any
thing; O Lord, no; -- but besure you lay aside all thoughts of the Marriage,
for though I know you don't Love Cynthia, only as a blind for your Passion to me;
yet it will make me jealous, -- O Lord, what did I say? Jealous! no, no, I
can't be jealous, for I must not Love you, -- therefore don't hope, -- but
don't despair neither, -- O, they're coming, I must fly.


So then, -- spite of my care and foresight, I am caught, caught in my
security, -- yet this was but a shallow artifice, unworthy of my Matchiavilian
Aunt: There must be more behind, this is but the first flash, the priming of
her Engine; destruction follows hard, if not most presently prevented.

(...), welcome, thy presence is a view of Land, ap^ to my Shipwrecked hopes:
The Witch has raised (...) Storm, and her Ministers have done their Work; you
^ee the Vessels are parted.


I know it; I met Sir Paul towing away Cynthia: Come, trouble not your head,
I'll join you together e're to Morrow Morning, or drown between you in the
attempt.


There's comfort in a hand stretched out, to one that's sinking; though never so
far off.


No sinking, nor no danger, -- come, cheer up; why you don't know, that while I
plead for you, your Aunt has given me a retaining Fee; -- nay, I am your
greatest Enemy, and she does but Journey-Work under me.


Ha! how's this?


What d'e think of my being employed in the execution of all her Plots? Ha, ha,
ha, by Heaven it's true; I have undertaken to break the Match, I have
undertaken to make your Uncle Disinherit you, to get you turned out of Doors;
and to -- ha, ha, ha, I can't tell you for Laughing, -- oh she has opened her
heart to me, -- I am to turn you a Grazing, and to -- ha, ha, ha, Marry Cynthia
my self; there's a Plot for you.


Ha! O I see, I see my Rising Sun! Light breaks through Clouds upon me, and I
shall live in Day -- O my Maskwell! how shall I thank or praise thee; Thou hast
outwitted Woman. -- But tell me, how could thou thus get into her
Confidence? -- Ha! How? But was it her Contrivance to persuade my Lady Pliant
to this extravagant belief?


It was, and to tell you the truth, I encouraged it for your diversion: Tho it
made you a little uneasy for the present, yet the reflection of it must needs
be entertaining. -- I warrant she was very Violent at first.


Ha, ha, ha, I, a very Fury; but I was most afraid of her violence at last, --
if you had not come as you did; I don't know what she might have attempted.


Ha, ha, ha, I know her temper, -- well, you must know then, that all my
Contrivances were but Bubbles; till at last I pretended to have been long
Secretly in Love with Cynthia; that did my business; that convinced your Aunt,
I might be trusted; since it was as much my interest as hers to break the
Match: Then she thought my Jealousy might qualify me to assist her in her
Revenge. And, in short that belief, told me the Secrets of her heart. At length
made this agreement, if accomplish her designs Cynthia with all her Fortune
into my Power.


She is most gracious in her Favour, -- well, and dear Jack, how hast thou
Contrived?


I would not have you stay to hear it now; for I don't know, but she may come
this way; I am to meet her anon, after that I'll tell you the whole matter; be
here in this Gallery an hour hence, by that time I imagine our Consultation may
be over.


I will; till then, success attend thee.


Till then, Success will attend me; for when I meet you, I meet the only
Obstacle to my Fortune. Cynthia, let thy Beauty gild my Crimes; and whatsoever
I commit of Treachery or Deceit, shall be imputed to me as a Merit --
Treachery, what Treachery? Love cancels all the Bonds of Friendship, and sets
Men right upon their first Foundations.

Duty to Kings, Piety to Parents, Gratitude to Benefactors, and Fidelity to
Friends, are different and particular Ties: But the Name of Rival cuts 'em all
asunder, and is a general acquittance -- Rival is equal, and Love like Death an
universal Leveller of Mankind. Ha! but is there not such a thing as Honesty?
Yes, and whosoever has it about him, bears an Enemy in his Breast: For your
honest man, as I take it, is that nice, scrupulous, conscientious Person, who
will cheat no body but himself; such another Coxcomb, as your wise man, who is
too hard for all the World, and will be made a Fool of by no body, but himself:
Ha, ha, ha. Well for Wisdom and Honesty, give me Cunning and Hypocrisy; oh
'tis such a pleasure, to angle for fair-faced Fools! then that hungry Gudgeon
Credulity, will bite at any thing -- Why, let me see, I have the same Face, the
same Words and Accents, when I speak what I do think; and when I speak what I
do not think -- the very same -- and dear dissimulation is the only Art, not to
be known from Nature.

Why will Mankind be Fools, and be deceived?
And why are Friends and Lovers Oaths believed;
When each, who searches strictly his own mind,
May so much Fraud and Power of Baseness find?

MY Lord, can you blame my Brother Pliant, if he refuse his Daughter upon this
Provocation? The Contract's void by this unheard of Impiety.


I don't believe it true; he has better Principles -- Pho, 'tis nonsense. Come,
come, I know my Lady Pliant has a large Eye, and would centre every thing in
her own Circle; 'tis not the first time she has mistaken Respect for Love, and
made Sir Paul jealous of the Civility of an undesigning person, the better to
bespeak his security in her unfeigned Pleasures.


You censure hardly, my Lord; my Sister's Honour is very well known.


Yes, I believe I know some that have been familiarly acquainted with it. This
is a little Trick wrought by some pitiful Contriver, envious of my Nephew's
Merit.


Nay, my Lord, it may be so, and I hope it will be found so: but that will
require some time; for in such a Case as this, demonstration is necessary.


There should have been demonstration of the contrary too, before it had been
believed --


So I suppose there was.


How! Where? When?


That I can't tell; nay, I don't say there was -- I am willing to believe as
favourably of my Nephew as I can.


I don't know that.


How? Don't you believe that, say you, my Lord?


No, I don't say so -- I confess I am troubled to find you so cold in his
Defence.


His Defence! bless me, would you have me defend an ill thing?


You believe it then?


I don't know; I am very unwilling to speak my Thoughts in any thing that may
be to my Cousin's disadvantage; besides, I find, my Lord, you are prepared to
receive an ill impression from any opinion of mine which is not consenting with
your own: But since I am like to be suspected in the end, and 'tis a pain any
longer to dissemble: I own it to you; in short I do believe it, nay, and can
believe any thing worse, if it were laid to his charge -- Don't ask me my
Reasons, my Lord, for they are not fit to be told you.


I'm amazed, here must be something more than ordinary in this.

Not fit to be told me; Madam? You can have no Interests, wherein I am not
concerned, and consequently the same Reasons ought to be convincing to me,
which create your satisfaction or disquiet.


But those which cause my disquiet, I am willing to have remote from your
hearing. Good my Lord, don't press me.


Don't oblige me to press you.


Whatever it was, 'tis past: And that is better to be unknown which cannot be
prevented; therefore let me beg you rest satisfied --


When you have told me, I will --


You won't.


By my Life, my Dear, I will.


What if you can't.


How? Then I must know, nay I will: No more trifling -- I charge you tell me --
by all our mutual Peace to come; upon your Duty --


Nay, my Lord, you need say no more, to make me lay me heart before you, but
don't be thus transported; compose your self: It is not of Concern, to make you
lose one minutes temper. 'Tis not indeed, my Dear. Nay, by this kiss you shall not
be angry. O Lord, I wish I had not told you any thing. -- Indeed, my Lord, you
have frighted me. Nay, look pleased, I'll tell you.


Well, well.


Nay, but will you be calm -- indeed it's nothing but --


But what?


But will you promise me not to be angry -- nay you must -- not to be angry
with Mellefont -- I dare swear he's sorry -- and were it to do again, would not
--


Sorry, for what? 'Death you rack me with delay.


Nay, no great matter, only -- well I have your promise -- Pho, why nothing,
only your Nephew had a mind to amuse himself, sometimes with a little Gallantry
towards me. Nay, I can't think he meant any thing seriously, but methought it
looked oddly.


Consusion and Hell, what do I hear!


Or, may be, he thought he was not enough a-kin to me, upon your account, and
had a mind to create a nearer relation on his own; a Lover you know, my Lord --
Ha, ha, ha. Well but that's all -- now you have it; well remember your promise,
my Lord, and don't take any notice of it to him.


No, no, no -- Damnation!


Nay, I swear you must not -- a little harmless mirth -- only misplaced that's
all -- but if it were more, 'tis over now, and all's well. For my part I have
forgot it; and so has he, I hope -- for I have not heard any thing from him
these two days.


These two days! Is it so fresh? Unnatural Villain! 'Death I'll have him
stripped and turned naked out of my doors this moment, and let him rot and
perish, incestuous Brute!


O for Heaven's sake, my Lord, you'll ruin me if you take such public notice
of it, it will be a Town-talk: Consider your own and my Honour -- nay, I told
you you would not be satisfied when you knew it.


Before I've done, I will be satisfied. Ungrateful Monster, how long? --


Lord, I don't know: I wish my Lips had grown together when I told you --
almost a Twelvemonth -- nay, I won't tell you any more, till you are your self.
Pray, my Lord, don't let the Company see you in this disorder -- Yet, I
confess, I can't blame you; for I think I was never so surprised in my Life --
Who would have thought my Nephew could have so misconstrued my Kindness -- but
will you go into your Closet, and recover your Temper. I'll make an excuse of
sudden Business to the Company, and come to you. Pray, good dear my Lord, let
me beg you do now: I'll come immediately, and tell you all; will you my Lord?


I will -- I am mute with wonder.


Well but go now, here's some body coming.


Well I go -- you won't stay, for I would hear more of this.


I follow instantly -- So.


This was a Master-piece, and did not need my help -- though I stood ready for a
Cue to come in and confirm all, had there been occasion.


Have you seen Mellefont?


I have; and am to meet him here about this time.


How does he bear his Disappointment?


Secure in my Assistance, he seemed not much afflicted, but rather laughed at
the shallow Artifice, which so little time must of necessity discover. Yet he
is apprehensive of some farther design of yours, and has engaged me to watch
you. I believe he will hardly* be able to prevent your Plot, yet I would have
you use Caution and Expedition.


Expedition indeed; for all we do, must be performed in the remaining part of
this Evening, and before the Company break up; lest my Lord should cool, and
have an opportunity to talk with him privately -- my Lord must not see him
again.


By no means; therefore you must aggravate my Lord's Displeasure to a degree
that will admit of no Conference with him. -- What think you of mentioning me?


How?


To my Lord, as having been privy to Mellefont's design upon you, but still
using my utmost Endeavours to dissuade him: Though my Friendship and Love to him
has made me conceal it; yet you may say, I threatened the next time he attempted
any thing of that kind, to discover it to my Lord.


To what end is this?


It will confirm my Lord's opinion of my Honour and Honesty, and create in him
a new Confidence in me, which (should this design mis^arry) (...) be necessary
to the forming of another Plot that I have in my head -- to cheat you, as well
as the rest.


I'll do it -- I'll tell him you hindered him once from forcing me.


Excellent! your Ladyship has a most improving Fancy. You had best go to my
Lord, (...) him as long as you can in his Closet, and I doubt not but you will
mould him to what you please; your (...) are so engaged in their own Follies
and Intrigues, they'll miss neither of you.


When shall we meet? -- at eight this Evening in my Chamber; there rejoice at
our success, and toy away an hour in mirth.


I will not fail.

I know what she means by toying away an hour well enough. Pox I have lost all
Appetite to her; yet she's a fine Woman, I loved her once. But I don't know,
since I have been in a great measure kept by her, the case is altered; what was
my Pleasure is become my Duty: And I have as little stomach to her now as if I
were her Husband. Should she smoke my design upon Cynthia, I were in a fine
pickle. She has a damned penetrating head, and knows how to interpret a
Coldness the right way; therefore I must dissemble Ardour and E^stasie, that's
resolved: How easily and pleasantly is that dissembled before Fruition! Pox
on it that a Man can't drink without quenching his Thirst. Ha! yonder comes
Mellefont thoughtful. Let me think: Meet her at eight -- hum -- ha! by Heaven I
have it -- if I can speak to my Lord before -- Was it my Brain or Providence?
No Matter which -- I will deceive 'em all, and yet secure my self, 'twas a
lucky thought! Well this Double-Dealing is a Jewel,

Here he comes, now for me --

Mercy on us, What will the Wickedness of this World come to?


How now, Jack? What so full of Contemplation that you run over!


I'm glad you're come, for I could not contain my self any longer: and was just
going to give vent to a Secret, which no body but you ought to drink down.

Your Aunt's just gone from hence.


And having trusted thee with the Secrets of her Soul, thou art villai^ously
bent to discover 'em all to me, ha?


I'm afraid my frailty leans that way -- but I don't know whether I can in
honour discover all.


All, all man, what you may in honour betray her as far as she betrays her
self. No tragical design upon my Person I hope.


No, but it's a Comical design upon mine.


What dost thou mean?


Listen, and be dumb, we have been bargaining about the rate of your ruin --


Like any two Guardians to an Orphan Heiress -- well.


And whereas pleasure is generally paid with mischief, what mischief I shall
do, is to be paid with Pleasure.


So when you've swallowed the Potion, you sweeten your mouth with a plumb.


You are merry, Sir, but I shall probe your Constitution. In short, the price
of your Banishment is to be paid with the Person of --


Of Cynthia, and her Fortune -- Why you forget you told me this before.


No, no -- so far you are right, and I am, as an earnest of that Bargain, to
have full and free possession of the person of -- your Aunt.


Ha! -- Pho, you trifle.


By this Light, I'm serious; all raillery apart -- I knew 'twould stun you:
This Evening at eight she will receive me in her Bed-Chamber.


Hell and the Devil, is she abandoned of all Grace -- Why the Woman is
possessed -- --


Well, will you go in my stead?


By Heaven into a hot Furnace sooner.


No, you would not -- it would not be so convenient, as I can order Matters.


What do ye mean?


Mean? Not to disappoint the Lady I assure you -- Ha, ha, ha, how gravely he
looks -- Come, come, I won't perplex you. 'Tis the only thing that Providence
could have contrived to make me capable of serving you, either to my
Inclination or your own necessity --


How, how, for Heaven's sake, dear Maskwell?


Why thus -- I'll go according to Appointment; you shall have notice at the
critical minute to come and surprise your Aunt and me together: Counterfeit a
rage against me, and I'll make my escape through the private passage from her
Chamber, which I'll take care to leave open: 'twill be hard, if then you can't
bring her to any Conditions. For this Discovery will disarm her of all Defence,
and leave her entirely at your Mercy: nay, she must ver after be in one of you.


Let me adore thee, my better Genius! By Heaven I think it is not in the power
of Fate to disappoint my hopes -- my hopes, my certainty!


Well, I'll meet you here, within a quarter of eight, and give you notice.


Good Fortune ever go along with thee.


Mellefont, get out of the way, my Lady Plyant's coming, and I shall never
succeed while thou art in sight -- though she begins to tack about; but I made
Love a great while to no purpose.


Why, what's the Matter? She's convin'd that I don't care for her.


'Pox I can't get an Answer from her, that does not begin with her Honour, or
her Virtue, her Religion, or some such Cant. Then she has told me the whole
History of Sir Paul's nine years Courtship; how he has lain for whole nights
together upon the Stairs, before her Chamber-door; and that the first Favour he
received from her, was a piece of an old Scarlet Petticoat for a Stomacher;
which, since the day of his Marriage, he has, out of a piece of Gallantry,
converted into a Night-Cap, and wears it still with much Solemnity on his
anniversary Wedding-night.


That I have seen, with the Ceremony thereunto belonging - for on that night he
creeps in at the Bed's Feet like a gulled Bassa that has married a Relation of
the Grand Signior's, and that night he has his arms at liberty. Did not she
tell you at what a distance she keeps him. He has confessed to me that but at
some certain times, that is I suppose when she apprehends being with Child, he
never has the privilege of using the familiarity of a Husband with his Wife. He
was once given to scrambling with his hands and sprawling in his Sleep; and
ever since she has him swaddled up in Blankets, and his hands and feet swathed
down, and so put to bed; and there he lies with a great Beard, like a Russian
Bear upon a drift of Snow. You are very great with him, I wonder he never told
you his Grievances, he will I warrant you.


Excessively foolish -- But that which gives me most hopes of her, is her
telling me of the many Temptations she has resisted.


Nay, then you have her; for a woman's bragging to a man that she has overcome
Temptations, is an argument that they were weakly offered, and a challenge to
him to engage her more irresistibly. 'Tis only an enhancing the price of the
Commodity, by telling you how many Customers have underbid her.


Nay, I don't despair -- but still she has a grudging to you -- I talked to her
the other night at my Lord Fr^th's Masquerade, when I'm satisfied she knew me,
and I had no reason to complain of my Reception; but I find women are not the
same bare-faced and in Masks, and a Visor -- disguises their Inclinations as
much as their Faces.


'Tis a mistake, for women may most properly be said to be unmasked when they
wear Vizors; for that secures them from blushing, and being out of Countenance,
and next to being in the dark, or alone, they are most truly themselves in a
Visor Mask. Here they come, I'll leave you. Ply her close, and by and by clap a
Billet doux into her hand: For a woman never thinks a man truly in love with
her, till he has been fool enough to think of her out of her sight, and to lose
so much time as to write to her.


Shall not we disturb your Meditation, Mr. Careless: you would be private?


You bring that along with you, Sir Paul, that shall be always welcome to my
privacy.


O, sweet Sir, you load your humble Servants, both me and my Wife, with
continual Favours.


Jesu, Sir Paul, what a Phrase was there? You will be making Answers, and
taking that upon you, which ought to lie upon me: That you should have so
little breeding to think Mr. Careless did not apply himself to me. 'Pray' what
have you about you to entertain any bodies privacy? I swear and declare in the
face of the World I'm ready to blush for your Ignorance.


I acquiesce, my Lady; but don't snub so loud.


Mr. Careless, If a person that is wholly illiterate might be supposed to be
capable of being qualified to make a suitable return to those Obligations which
you are pleased to confer upon one that is wholly incapable of being qualified
in all those Circumstances I'm sure I should rather attempt it than any thing
in the World

But I know Mr. Careless is so great a Critic and so fine a Gentleman, that it
is impossible for me --


O Heavens! Madam, you confound me*


Gad's bud, she's a fine person --


O Lord! Sir, pardon me, we women have not those Advantages: I know my own
Imperfections -- but at the same time you must give me leave to declare in the
face of the World that no body is more sensible of Favours and Things for with
the Reserve of my Honour, I assure you, Mr. Careless I don't know any thing in
the World I would refuse to a person so meritorious -- you'll pardon my want of
Expression --


O your Ladyship is abounding in all Excellence, particularly that of Phrase.


You are so obliging, Sir.


Your Ladyship is so charming.


So, now, now; now my Lady.


So well bred.


So surprising.


So well dressed, so boon mean, so eloquent, so unaffected, so easy, so free, so
particular, so agreeable --


Ay, so, so, there.


O Lord, I beseech you, Madam, don't --


So gay, so graceful, so good teeth, so fine shape, so fine limbs, so fine
linen, and I don't doubt but you have a very good skin, Sir.


For Heaven's sake, Madam -- I'm quite out of Countenance.


And my Lady's quite out of Breath; or else you should hear -- Gad's bud, you
may talk of my Lady Froth.


O fie, fie, not to be named of a day -- my Lady Froth is very well in her
Accomplishments -- but it is when my Lady Pliant is not thought of -- if that
can ever be.


O you overcome me -- that is so excessive --


Nay, I swear and vow that was pretty.


O, Sir Paul, you are the happiest man alive. Such a Lady! that is the envy of
her Sex, and the admiration of ours.


Your humble Servant, I am I thank Heaven in a fine way of living, as I may
say, peacefully and happily, and I think need not envy any of my Neighbours,
blessed be Providence -- ay, truly, Mr. Careless, my Lady is a great Blessing,
a fine, discreet, well-spoken woman as you shall see -- if it becomes me to say
so; and we live very comfortably together; she's a little hasty sometimes, and
so am I; but mine's soon over, and then I'm so sorry -- O, Mr. Careless, if it
were not for one thhing --


How often have you been told of that you Jack-anapes?


Gad so, Gad's bud -- Tim. carry it to my Lady, you should have carried it to
my Lady first.


'Tis directed to your Worship.


Well, well, my Lady reads all Letters first -- Child, do so no more; do ye
hear, Tim?


No, an please you.


A humour of my wife's, you know women have little sancies -- But as I was
telling you, Mr. Careless, if it were not for one thing, I should think my self
the happiest man in the World; indeed that touches me near, very near.


What can that be, Sir Paul?


Why, I have, I thank Heaven, a very plentiful Fortune, a good Estate in the
Country, some houses in Town, and some money, a pretty tolerable personal
Estate; and it is a great grief to me, indeed it is Mr. Careless, that I have
not a Son to inherit this -- 'Tis true I have a Daughter, and a fine dutiful
Child she is, though I say it, blessed be Providence I may say; for indeed, Mr.
Careless, I am mightily beholding to Providence -- -- a poor unworthy Sinner --
But if I had a Son, ah, that's my affliction, and my only affliction; indeed I
cannot refrain Tears when it comes in my mind.


Why, methinks that might be easily remedied -- my Lady's a fine likely Woman
--


Oh, a fine likely Woman as you shall see in a Summers* day -- indeed she is,
Mr. Careless, in all respects.


And I should not have taken you to have been so old --


Alas, that's not it, Mr. Careless; ah! that's not it; no, no, you shoot wide
of the mark a mile; indeed you do, that's not it, Mr. Careless; no, no, that's
not it.


No, what can be the matter then?


You'll scarcely believe me, when I shall tell you why my Lady is so nice --
it's very strange, but it's true: too true -- she's so very nice, that I don't
believe she would touch a Man for the World -- at least not above once a year;
I'm sure I have found it so; and alas, what's once a year to an Old Man, who
would do good in his Generation? indeed it's true, Mr. Careless, it breaks my
heart -- I am her Husband, as I may say, though far unworthy of that honour,
yet I am her Husband; but alas-a-day, I have no more familiarity with her
Person -- as to that matter -- than with my own Mother -- no indeed.


Alas-a-day, this is a lamentable story; my Lady must be told on it; she must
i'faith, Sir Paul; 'tis an injury to the World.


Ah! would to Heaven you would, Mr. Careless; you are mightily in her favour.


I warrant you, what we must have a Son some way or other.


Indeed, I should be mightily bound to you, if you could bring it about, Mr.
Careless.


Here, Sir Paul, it's from your Steward, here's a return of 600 Pounds; you may
take fifty of it for your next half year.


How does my Girl? come hither to thy Father, poor Lamb, you're melancholy.


Heaven, Sir Paul, you amaze me, of all things in the World -- you are never
pleased but when we are all upon the broad grin, all laugh and no Company; ah,
then 'tis such a sight to see some teeth -- sure you're a great admirer of my
Lady Whifler, Mr. Sneer, and Sir Laurence Loud, and that gang.


I vow and swear she's a very merry Woman, but I think she laughs a little too
much.


Merry! O Lord, what a character that is of a Woman of Quality -- you have been
at my Lady Whifler's upon her day, Madam?


Yes, my Lord -- I must humour this Fool.


Well and how? he! what is your sense of the Conversation there?


O most ridiculous, a perpetual consort of laughing without any harmony; for
sure, my Lord, to laugh out of time, is as disagreeable as to sing out of time
or out of tune.


He, he, he, right; and then my Lady Whifler is so ready -- she always comes
in three bars too soon -- and then, what do they laugh at? For you know
laughing without a jest is as impertinent; he! as, as --


As dancing without a Fiddle.


Just 'ifaith, that was at my tongues end.


But that cannot be properly said of them, for I think they are all in good
nature with the World, and only laugh at one another; and you must allow they
have all jests in their Persons, though they have none in their Conversation.


True, as I'm a Person of Honour -- for Heaven's sake let us sacrifice 'em to
mirth a little.


'Gads so -- Wife, Wife, my Lady Pliant, I have a word.


I'm busy, Sir Paul, I wonder at your impertinence --


Sir Paul, harkee, I'm reasoning the matter you know; Madam, -- if your
Ladyship please, we'll discourse of this in the next Room.


O ^o, I wish you good success, I wish you good success. Boy, tell my Lady,
when she has done, I would speak with her below.


Then you think that Episode between Susan, the Dairymaid, and our Coach-man is
not amiss; you know, I may suppose the Dairy in Town, as well as in the
Country.


Incomparable, let me perish -- but then being an Heroic Poem, had not you
better call him a Charioteer? Charioteer sounds great; besides your Ladyship's
Coach-man having a red face, and you comparing him to the Sun -- and you know
the Sun is called Heavens Charioteer.


Oh, infinitely better; I'm extremely beholding to you for the hint, stay we'll
read over those half a score lines again.

Let me see here, you know what goes before, the comparison, you know.

For as the Sun shines every day,
So of our Coach-man I may say.

I'm afraid that simile wont do in wet Weather -- because you say the Sun
shines every day.


No, for the Sun it wont, but it will do for the Coachman, for you know there's
most occasion for a Coach in wet Weather.


Right, right, that saves all.


Then I don't say the Sun shines all the day, but, that he peeps now and then,
yet he does shine all the day too, you know, though we don't see him.


Right, but the vulgar will never comprehend that.


Well you shall hear -- let me see.

For as the Sun shines every day,
So, of our Coach-man I may say,
He shows his drunken fiery Face,
Just as the Sun does, more or less.

That's right, all's well, all's well.

And when at night his labour's done,
Then too like Heavens Charioteer, the Sun:
Ay, Charioteer does better.

Into the Dairy he descends,
And there his whipping and his driving ends;
There he's secure from danger of a bilk,
His fare is paid him, and he sets in Milk.
For Susan, you know, is Theti^, and so --


Incomparable well and proper, Igad -- but I have one exception to make. --
don't you think bilk (I know its good Rhyme) but don't you think bilk and fare
too like a Hackney Coach-man?


I swear and vow I'm afraid so -- And yet our Iehu was a Hackney Coach-man,
when my Lord took him.


Was that he then, I'm answered, if Iehu was a Hackney Coach-man -- you may put
that into the marginal Notes, though to prevent Criticisms -- only mark it with a
small asterism, and say, -- Iehu was formerly a Hackney Coach-man.


I will; you'd oblige me extremely to write Notes to the whole Poem.


With all my Heart and Soul, and proud of the vast honour, let me perish.


He, he, he, my Dear, have you done -- wont you join with us, we were
laughing at my Lady Whister, and Mr. Sneer.


-- Ay my Dear -- were you? Oh filthy Mr. Sneer; he's a nauseous figure, a most
fulsamick Fop, Foh -- he spent two days together in going about Covent Garden
to suit the lining of his Coach with his complexion.


O silly! yet his Aunt is as fond of him, as if she had brought the Ape into
the World her self.


Who, my Lady Toothless; O, she's a mortifying Spectacle; she's always chewing
the Cud like an old Yew.


Fie Mr. Brisk, 'tis Eringo's for her Cough.


I have seen her take 'em half chewed out of her Mouth, to Laugh, and then put
'em in again -- Foh.


Foh.


Then she's always ready to Laugh when Sneer offers to speak -- -- And sits in
expectation of his no Jest, with her Gums bare, and her Mouth open. --


Like an Oyster at low Ebb, I'gad -- ha, ha, ha.


Well, I find there are no Fools so inconsiderable in themselves, but they can
render other People contemptible in exposing their Infirmities.


Then that the other great strapping Lady -- I can't hit of her Name; the old fat
Fool that Paints so exorbitantly.


I know whom you mean -- But Deuce take me, I can't hit of her Name neither --
Paints de'e say? Why she lays it on with a Trowel -- Then she has a great Beard
that bristles through it, and makes her look as if she were plaistred with Lime
and Hair, let me perish.


Oh you made a Song upon her, Mr Brisk.


He? e'gad, so I did -- My Lord can sing it.


O good my Lord let's hear it.


'Tis not a Song neither -- it's a ^ort of an Epigram, or rather an
Epigrammatick Sonnet; I don't know what to call it, but it's Satyr. -- Sing it
my Lord.


Ancient Phillis, has young Graces,
'Tis a strange thing, but a true one;
Shall I tell you how?
She her self makes her own Faces,
And each Morning wears a new one;
Where's the Wonder now?

Short, but there's Salt in it, my way of writing I'gad.


How now?


Your Ladyships Chair is come.


Is Nurse and the Child in it?


Yes, Madam.


O the dear Creature! Let's go see it.


I swear, my Dear, you'll spoil that Child, with sending it to and again so
often, this is the seventh time the Chair has gone for her to Day.


O-law, I swear it's but the sixth, -- and I have not seen her these two hours. --
-- The poor dear Creature -- If wear, my Lord, you don't Love poor little Sapho
-- Come, my dear Cynthia, Mr. Brisk, we'll go see Sapho, though my Lord wont.


I'll wait upon your Ladyship.


Pray, Madam, how old is Lady Sapho?


Three Quarters, but I swear she has a World of Wit, and can sing a Tune
already? My Lord wont you go? Wont you? What not to see Saph? Pray, My Lord,
come see little Saph. I knew you could not stay.


'Tis not so hard to counterfeit Joy in the depth of Affliction, as to
dissemble Mirth in Company of Fools -- Why should I call 'em Fools? The World
thinks better of 'em; for these have Quality and Education, Wit and fine
Conversation are received and admired by the World -- If not, they like and
admire themselves -- And why is not that true Wisdom, for 'tis Happiness: And
for ought I know, we have misapplied the Name all this while, and mistaken the
thing: Since

If Happiness in Self-content is placed,
The Wise are Wretched, and Fools only Blessed.

I Heard him loud as I came by the Closet-Door, and my Lady with him, but she
seemed to moderate his Passion.


Ay, Hell thank her, as gentle breezes moderate a fire; but I shall
counter-work her Spells, and ride the Witch in her own Bridle.


It's impossible; she'll cast beyond you still -- I'll lay my Life it will
never be a Match.


What?


Between you and me.


Why so?


My Mind gives me it wont -- because we are both so willing; we each of us
strive to reach the Gole, and hinder one another in the Race; I swear it never
does well when the Parties are so agreed -- for when People walk hand in hand,
there's neither overtaking nor meeting: We Hunt in Couples where we both pursue
the same Game, but forget one another; and 'tis because we are so near that we
don't think of coming together.


Hum, 'gad I believe there's something in it; -- Marriage is the Game that we
Hunt, and while we think that we only have it in view, I don't see but we have
it in our power.


Within reach; for example, give me your hand; why have you looked through the
wrong end of the Perspective all this while; for nothing has been between us
but our fears.


I don't know why we should not steal out of the House this moment and Marry
one another, without Consideration or the fear of Repentance. Pox o'Fortune,
Portion, Settlements and Jointures.


Ay, ay, what have we to do with 'em; you know we Marry for Love.


Love, Love, down right very Villainous Love.


And he that can't live upon Love, deserves to die in a Ditch -- Here then, I
give you my promise, in spite of Duty, any temptation of Wealth, your
inconstancy, or my own inclination to change. --


To run most wilfully and unreasonably away with me this moment and be Married.


Hold -- Never to Marry any Body elf.


That's but a kind of Negative Consent. -- Why, you wont baulk the Frolic?


If you had not been so assured of your own Conduct I would not -- But 'tis but
reasonable that since I consent to like a Man without the vile Consideration os
Money, He should give me a very evident demonstration of his Wit: Therefore let
me see you undermine my Lady Touchwood, as you boasted, and force her to give
her Consent, and then --


I'll do it.


And I'll do it.


This very next ensuing hour of Eight a Clock, is the last Minute of her Reign,
unless the Devil assist her in propria persona.


Well, if the Devil should assist her, and your Plot miscarry. --


Ay, what am I to trust to then?


Why if you give me very clear demonstration that it was the Devil, I'll allow
for irresistible odds. But if I find it to be only chance, or destiny, or
unlucky Stars, or any thing but the very Devil, I'm inexorable: Only still I'll
keep my word, and live a Maid for your sake.


And you won't die one, for your own, so still there's hope.


Here's my Mother-in-Law, and your Friend Careless, I would not have'em see us
together yet.


I swear, Mr. Careless, you are very alluring -- And say so many fine things,
and nothing is so moving to me as a fine thing. Well, I must do you this
justice, and declare in the face of the World, never any body gained so far
upon me as your self, with Blushes I must own it, you have shaken, as I may
say, the very foundation of my Honour -- Well, sure if I escape your
Importunities, I shall value my self as long as I live, I swear.


And Despise me.


The last of any Man in the World, by my purity; now you make me swear -- O
Gratitude for bid, that I should ever be wanting in a respectful acknowledgment
of an entire resignation of all my best Wishes, for the Person and Parts of so
accomplished a Person, whose Merit challenges much more, I'm sure, than my
illiterate Praises can description.


Ah Heavens, Madam, you ruin me with Kindness; your Charming Tongue pursues
the Victory of your Eyes, while at your Feet your poor Adorer dies.


Ah! Very fine.


Ah why are you so Fair, so bewitching Fair? O let me grow to the ground here,
and feast upon that hand; O let me press it to my heart, my aching trembling
heart, the nimble movement shall instruct your Pulse, and teach it to alarm
Desire.


O that's so passionate and fine, I cannot hear it -- I am not safe if I stay,
and must leave you.


And must you leave me! Rather let me Languish out a Wretched Life, and breath
my Soul beneath your Feet.


I swear I am ready to Languish too -- O my Honour! Whither is it going? I
protest you have given me the Palpitation of the Heart.


Can you be so cruel. --


O rise I beseech you, say no more till you rise -- Why did you kneel so long?
I swear I was so tranported, I did not see it. -- Well, to show you how far you
have gained upon me; I assure you if Sir Paul should die, of all Mankind
there's none I'd sooner make my second choice.


O Heaven! I can't out-live this Night without your favour -- I feel my Spirits
faint, a general dampness over spreads my face, a cold deadly dew already vents
through all my Pores, and will to Morrow wash me for ever from your sight, and
drown me in my Tomb.


O you have Conquered, sweet, melting, moving Sir, you have Conquered -- What
heart of Marble can refrain to weep and yield to such sad Sayings. --


I thank Heaven, they are the saddest that I ever said -- Oh!


Oh, I yield my self all up to your uncontrollable Embraces -- Say, thou dear
dying Man, when, where, and how -- Ah, there's Sir Paul.


'Slife yonder's Sir Paul, but if he were not come, I'm so transported I cannot
speak -- This Note will inform you.


Thou art my tender Lambkin, and shalt do what thou wilt -- But endeavour to
forget this Mellefont.


I would obey you to my power, Sir; but if I have not him, I have sworn never
to Marry.


Never to Marry! Heaven forbid; must I neither have Sons nor Grandsons? Must
the Family of the Plyants be utterly extinct for want of Issue Male. Oh
Impiety! But did you swear, did that sweet Creature swear! ha? How durst you
swear without my Consent, ha? Gads-bud, who am I?


Pray don't be angry, Sir, when I swore, I had your Consent; and therefore I
swore.


Why then the revoking my Consent does annul, or make of none effect your Oath:
So you may unswear it again -- The Law will allow it.


Ay, but my Conscience never will.


Gads-bud no matter for that, Conscience and Law never go together; you must
not expect that.


Ay, but Sir Paul, I conceive if she has sworn, do ye mark me, if she has once
sworn: It is most unchristian, inhumane, and obscene that she should break it.
-- I'll make up this Match again, because Mr. Careless said it would oblige
him.


Does your Ladyship conceive so -- Why I was of that Opinion once too -- Nay if
your Ladyship conceives so, I'm of that Opinion again; but I can neither find
my Lord nor my Lady to know what they intend.


I'm satisfied that my Cousin Mellefont has been much wronged.


I'm amazed to find her of our side, for I'm sure she loved him.


I know my Lady Touchwood has no kindness for him; and besides, I have been
informed by Mr. Careless, that Mellefont had never any thing more than a
profound respect -- That he has owned himself to be my Admirer 'tis true, but
he never was so presumptuous to entertain any dishonourable Notions of things;
so that if this be made plain -- I don't see how my Daughter can in Conscience,
or Honour, or any thing in the World. --


Indeed if this be made plain, as my Lady your Mother says Child --


Plain! I was informed of it by Mr. Careless -- And I assure you Mr. Careless
is a Person -- that has a most extraordinary respect and honour for you, Sir
Paul.


And for your Ladyship too, I believe, or else you had not changed sides so
soon; now I begin to find it.


I am much obliged to Mr. Careless really, he is a Person that I have a great
value for not only for that, but because he has a great veneration for your
Ladyship.


O las, no indeed, Sir Paul, 'tis upon your account.


No I protest and vow, I have no title to his esteem, but in having the honour,
to appertain in some measure, to your Ladyship, that's all.


O law now, I swear and declare, it shall not be so, you're too modest, Sir Paul.


It becomes me, when there is any comparison made, between --


O fie, fie, Sir Paul, you'll put me out of Countenance -- Your very obedient and
affectionate Wife; that's all -- and highly honoured in that Title.


Gads bud, I am transported! give me leave to kiss your Ladyships Hand.


That my poor Father, should be so very silly.


My Lip indeed, Sir Paul, I swear you shall.


I humbly thank your Ladyship -- I don't know whether I fly on Ground, or walk
in Air -- Gads bud, she was never thus before -- Well, I must own my self the
most beholden to Mr. Careless -- As sure as can be this is all his doings --
something that he has said; Well, 'tis a rare thing to have an ingenious
Friend. Well, your Ladyship is of opinion that the Match may go forward.


By all means -- Mr. Careless has satisfied me of the matter.


Well, why then Lamb you may keep your Oath, but have a care of making rash
Vows; Come hither to me, kiss and Papa.


I swear and declare, I am such a twitter to read Mr. Careless his Letter, that
I can't forbear any longer -- but though I may read all Letters first by
Prerogative, yet I'll be sure to be unsuspected this time. -- Sir Paul.


Did your Ladyship call?


Nay, not to interrupt you my Dear -- only lend me your Letter, which you had
from your Steward to day: I would look upon the Account again; and may be
increase your Allowance.


There it is, Madam; Do you want a Pen and Ink?


No, no, nothing else I thank you, Sir Paul, -- So now I can read my own Letter
under the cover of his.


He? And wilt thou bring a Grandson at 9 Months end -- He? A brave Chopping
Boy. -- I'll settle a Thousand pound a Year upon the Rogue as soon as ever he
looks me in the Face, I will Gads-bud. I'm overjoyed to think I have any of my
Family that will bring Children into the World. For I would fain have some
resemblance of my self in my Posterity, he Thy? Can't you contrive that affair
Girl? Do gads-bud, think on thy old Father; Heh? Make the young Rogue as like
as you can.


I'm glad to see you so merry, Sir.


Merry, Gads-bud I'm serious, I'll give thee 500 l. for every inch of him that
resembles me; ah this Eye, this Left Eye! A 1000 l. for this Left Eye. This has
done Execution in its time Girl; why thou hast my Leer Hussy, just thy
Father's Leer. -- Let it be transmitted to the young Rogue by the help of
imagination; why, 'tis the mark of our Family Thy; our House is distinguished
by a Languishing Eye, as the House of Austria is by a thick Lip. -- Ah! when I
was of your Age Hussy, I would have held sifty to one, I could have drawn'my
own Picture -- Gads-bud I could have done -- not so much as you neither, -- but
-- Nay, don't Blush --


I don't Blush Sir, for I vow I don't understand. --


Pshaw, Pshaw, you fib you Baggage, you do understand, and you shall
understand, come don't be so nice, Gads-bud don't learn after your
Mother-in-Law my Lady here: Marry Heaven forbid that you should follow her
Example, that would spoil all indeed. Bless us, if you should take a Vagarie
and make a rash Resolution on your Wedding Night, to die a Maid; as she did.
All were ruined, all my hopes lost -- My Heart would break, and my Estate would
be left to the wide World, he? I hope you are a better Christian than to think
of being a Nun; he? Answer me?


I'm all Obedience, Sir, to your Commands.


O dear Mr. Careless, I swear he writes charmingly, and he talks charmingly,
and he looks charmingly, and he has charmed me, as much as I have charmed him;
and so I'll tell him in the Wardrobe when 'tis Dark. O Crimine! I hope, Sir
Paul has not seen both Letters. Sir Paul, here's your Letter, to Morrow Morning
I'll settle the Accounts to your Advantage.


Sir Paul, Gads-bud you're an uncivil Person, let me tell you, and all that;
and I did not think it had been in you.


O Law, what's the matter now? I hope you are not angry, Mr. Brisk.


Deuce take me I believe you intend to Marry your Daughter your self; you're
always brooding over her like an Old Hen, as if she were not well hatched,
I'gad, he?


Good strange! Mr. Brisk is such a Merry Facetious Person, he, he, he. No, no,
I have done with her. I have done with her now.


The Fiddles have stayed this hour in the Hall, and my Lord Froth wants a
Partner, we can never begin without her.


Go, go Child, go, get you gone and Dance and be Merry, I'll come and look at
you by and by. -- Where's my Son Mellefont?


I'll send him to them, I know where he is --


Sir Paul, will you send Careless into the Hall if you meet him.


I will, I will, I'll go and look for him on purpose.


So now they are all gone, and I have an opportunity to practice. -- Ah! My
dear Lady Froth! She's a most engaging Creature, if she were not so fond of
that damned coxcomly Lord of hers; and yet I am forced to allow him Wit too, to
keep in with him -- No matter, she's a Woman of parts, and I'gad parts will
carry her. She said she would follow me into the Gallery -- Now to make my
Approaches -- Hem hem! Ah Madam! -- Pox on it, why should I disparage my parts
by thinking what to say? None but dull Rogues think; witty Men like rich
Fellows, are always ready for all Expenses; while your Blockheads, like poor
needy Scoundrels, are forced to examine their Stock, and forecast the Charges
of the Day. Here she comes, I'll seem not to see her, and try to win her with a
new airy invention of my own, hem!

I'm sick with Love, ha ha ha, prithee come walking about.. Cure me.
I'm sick with, c.
O ye Powers! O my Lady* Froth, my Lady Froth! My Lady Froth! Heigho! Break
Heart; God's I thank you.


O Heavens Mr. Brisk! What's the matter?


My Lady Froth! Your Ladyships most humble Servant; -- -- The matter Madam?
Nothing, Madam, nothing at all I'gad. I was fallen into the most agreeable
amusement in the whole Province of Contemplation: That's all -- (I'll seem to
conceal my Passion, and that will look like Respect.


Bless me, why did you call out upon me so loud? --


O Lord I Madam! I beseech your Ladyship -- when?


Just now as I came in, bless me, why don't you know it?


Not I, let me perish -- But did I! Strange! I confess your Ladyship was in my
Thoughts; and I was in a sort of Dream that did in a manner represent a very
pleasing Object to my imagination, but -- But did I indeed? -- To see how Love
and Murder will out. But did I really name my Lady Froth?


Three times aloud, as I love Letters -- But did you talk of Love? O Parnassus!
Who would have thought Mr. Brisk could have been in Love, ha ha ha. O Heaven's
I thought you could have no Mistress but the Nine Muses.


No more I have I'gad, for I adore 'em all in your Ladyship -- Let me perish, I
don't know whether to be splenetic, or airy upon it; the Deuce take me if I can
tell whether I am glad or sorry that your Ladyship has made the Discovery.


O be merry by all means -- Prince Voscius in Love! Ha ha ha.


O barbarous, to turn me into ridicule! Yet, ha ha ha. The Deuce take me, I
can't help laughing my self neither, ha ha ha; yet by Heavens I have *violent
passion for your Ladyship, seriously.


Seriously? Ha ha ha.


Seriously, ha ha ha. Gad I have, for all I Laugh.


Ha ha ha! What d'e think I Laugh at? Ha ha ha.


Me I'gad, ha ha.


No the Deuce take me if I don't Laugh at my self; for hang me if I have not a
violent Passion for Mr. Brisk, ha ha ha.


Seriously?


Seriously, ha ha ha.


That's well enough; let me perish, ha ha ha. O Miraculous, what a happy
Discovery. Ah my dear charming Lady Froth!


Oh my adored Mr. Brisk!


The Company are all ready -- How now!


Zoons, Madam, there's my Lord.


Take no notice -- But observe me -- Now cast off, and meet me at the lower end
of the Room, and then join hands again; I could teach my Lord this Dance
purely, but I vow Mr. Brisk, I can't tell how to come so near any other Man. Oh
here's my Lord, now you shall see me do it with him.


-- Oh I see there's no harm yet -- But I don't like this familiarity.


-- Shall you and I do our close Dance to show Mr. Brisk?


-- No, my Dear, do it with him.


-- I'll do it with him, my Lord, when you are out of the way.


That's good I'gad, that's good, Deuce take me I can hardly hold Laughing in
his Face.


Any other time, my Dear, or we'll Dance it below.


With all my heart.


Come my Lord, I'll wait on you -- My charming witty Angel!


We shall have whispering time enough, you know, since we are Partners.


O Mr. Careless, Mr. Careless, I'm ruined, I'm undone.


What's the matter, Madam?


O the unlucki'st Accident, I'm afraid I shall not live to tell it you.


Heaven forbid! What is it?


I'm in such a fright; the strangest Quandary and Praemunire! I'm all over in a
Universal Agitation, I dare swear every Circumstance of me trembles. -- O your
Letter, your Letter! By an Unfortunate Mistake, I have given Sir Paul your
Letter instead of his own.


That was unlucky. --


O yonder he comes reading of it, for Heavens sake step in here and advise me
quickly, before he sees.


-- O Providence, what a Conspiracy have I discovered -- But let me see to make
an end on it. --

Hum -- After Supper in the Wardrobe by the Gallery. If Sir Paul should
surprise us, I have a Commission from him to treat with you about the very
matter of Fact. -- Matter of Fact! Very pretty; it seems then I am conducing to
my own Cuckoldom; why this is the very traitorous Position of taking up Arms by
my Authority, against my Person! Well, let me see -- Till then I languish in
expectation of my Adored Charmer.

Gads bud, would that were Matter of Fact too. Die and be Damned for a Iudas
Maccabeus, and Iscariot both. O friendship! What art thou but a Name!
Henceforward, let no Man make a Friend that would not be a Cuckold: For
whomsoever he receives into his bosom, will find the way to his Bed, and there
return his Caresses with interest to his Wife. Have I for this been pinioned
Night after Night for three Years past? Have I been swathed in Blankets till I
have even been deprived of motion, and rendered incapable of using the commo^
benefits of Nature? Have I approached the Marriage Bed with reverence as to a
sacred shrine, and denied my self the enjoyment of lawful Domestic Pleasures
to preserve its Purity, and must I now find it polluted by* Foreign Iniquity? O
my Lady Pliant, you were Chaste as Ice, but you are melted now, and false as
Water. -- But Providence has been constant to me in discovering this
Conspiracy; still I am beholden to Providence, if it were not for Providence,
sure poor Sir Paul thy Heart would break.


So Sir, I see you have read the Letter* -- well now, Sir Paul, what do you
think of your Friend Careless? Has he been Treacherous, or did you give his
insolence a License to make trial of your Wives suspected Virtue? De e see
here? Look, read it? Gad's my Life if I thought it were so, I would this moment
renounce all Communication with you. Ungrateful Monster! He? Is it so? Ay, I
see it, a Plot upon my Honour; your guilty Cheeks confess it; Oh where shall
wronged Virtue fly for Reparation! I'll be Divorced this instant.


Gads-bud, what shall I say? This is the strangest Surprise! Why I don't know
any thing at all, nor I don't know whether there be any thing at all in the
World, or no.


I thought I should try you, false Man. I that never dissembled in my Life Yet
to make trial of you, pretended to like that Monster of Iniquity, Careless, and
found out that contrivance to let you see this Letter; which now I find was of
your own indicting -- I do Heathen, I do, see my Face no more; there has hardly
been Consummation between us, and I'll be Divorced presently.


O strange, what will become of me! -- I'm so amazed, and so overjoyed, so
afraid, and so sorry. -- But did you give me this Letter on purpose he? Did
you?


Did I? Do you doubt me, Turk, Saracen? I have a Cousin that's a Proctor in the
Commons, I'll go to him instantly. --


Hold, stay, I beseech your Ladyship -- I'm so overjoyed, stay I'll confess
all.


What will you confess, Jew?


Why now as I hope to be saved, I had no hand in this Letter -- Nay hear me, I
beseech your Ladyship: The Devil take me now if he did not go beyond my
Commission -- If I desired him to do any more than speak a good word only just
for me, Gads-bud only for poor Sir Paul, I'm an Anabaptist, or a Jew, or what
you please to call me.


Why is not here Matter of Fact?


Ay, but by your own Virtue and Continency that matter of Fact is all his own
doing. -- I confess I had a great desire to have some Honours Conferred upon
me, which lie all in your Ladyships Breast, and he being a well spoken Man, I
desired him to intercede for me. --


Did you so, Presumption! Well, remember for this, your Right Hand shall be
swathed down again to Night -- and I thought to have always allow'd you that
Liberty --


Nay but Madam, I shall offend again if you don't allow me that to reach --


Drink the less you Sot, and do it before you come to Bed.


Sir Paul, I'm glad I've met with you, 'gad I have said all I could, but can't
prevail -- Then my Friendship to you has carried me a little farther in this
matter --


Indeed -- Well Sir -- I'll dissemble with him a little.


Why faith I have in my time known Honest Gentlemen abused by a pretended
Coyness in their Wives, and I had a mind to try my Ladies Virtue -- And when I
could not prevail for you, 'gad I pretended to be in Love my self -- but all in
vain, she would not hear a word upon that Subject: Then I writ a Letter to her;
I don't know what effects that will have, but I'll be sure to tell you when I
do, though by this Light I believe her Virtue is impregnable.


O Providence! Providence! What Discoveries are here made? Why, this is better
and more Miraculous than the rest.


What do you mean?


I can't tell you I'm so overjoyed; come along with me to my Lady, I can't
contain my self; come my dear Friend.


So, so, so, this difficulty's over.


Maskwell! I have been looking for you -- 'tis within a Quarter of Eight.


My Lady is just gone down from my Lords Closet, you had best steal into her
Chamber before she comes, and lie concealed there; otherwise she may Lock the
Door when we are together, and you not easily get in to surprise us.


He? you say true.


You had best make haste, for she's but gone to make some Apology to the
Company for her own, and my Lords absence all this while, and will to her
Chamber instantly.


I go this moment: Now Fortune I defy thee.


I confess you may be allow'd to be secure in your own Opinion; the appearance
is very fair, but I have an After-Game to play that shall turn the Tables, and
here comes the Man that I must Manage.


Maskwell, you are the Man I wished to meet.


I am happy to be in the way of your Lordships Commands.


I have always found you prudent and careful in any thing that has concerned me
or my Family.


I were a Villain else -- I am bound by Duty and Gratitude, and my own
Inclination, to be ever your Lordship's Servant.


Enough -- You are my Friend; I know it: Yet there has been a thing in your
Knowledge, which has concerned me nearly, that you have concealed from me.


My Lord!


Nay, I excuse your Friendship to my unnatural Nephew thus far -- but I know
you have been Privy to his impious Designs upon my Wife. This Evening she has
told me all: Her good Nature concealed it as long as was possible; but he
perseveres so in Villainy, that she has told me even you were weary of
dissuading him, though you have once actually hindered him from forcing her.


I am sorry, my Lord, I can make you no Answer; this is an Occasion in which I
would not willingly be so silent.


I know you would excuse him -- and I know as well that you can't.


Indeed I was in hopes 'thad been a youthful Heat that might have soon boiled
over; but --


Say on.


I have nothing more to say, my Lord -- but to express my Concern; for I think
his Frenzy increases daily.


How! give me but Proof of it, Ocular Proof, that I may justify my Dealing
with him to the World, and share my Fortunes.


O my Lord! consider that is hard: besides, time may work upon him: then, for
me to do it! I have professed an everlasting Friendship to him.


He is your Friend, and what am I?


I am answered.


Fear not his Displeasure; I will put you out of his, and Fortune's Power, and
for that thou art scrupulously honest, I will secure thy Fidelity to him, and
give my Honour never to own any Discovery that you shall make me. Can you give
me a demonstrative Proof? Speak.


I wish I could not -- To be plain, my Lord, I intended this Evening to have
tried all Arguments to dissuade him from a Design, which I suspect; and if I
had not succeeded, to have informed your Lordship of what I knew.


I thank you. What is the Villains Purpose?


He has owned nothing to me of late, and what I mean now, is only a bare
Suspicion of my own. If your Lordship will meet me a quarter of an Hour hence
there, in that Lobby by my Lady's Bed-Chamber, I shall be able to tell you
more.


I will.


My Duty to your Lordship, makes me do a severe Piece of Justice --


I will be secret, and reward your Honesty beyond your Hopes.


Pray Heaven my Aunt keep touch with her Assignation -- Oh that her Lord were
but sweating behind this Hanging, with the Expectation of what I shall see --
Hist, she comes -- Little does she think what a Mine is just ready to spring
under her Feet. But to my Post.


'Tis Eight a Clock: Methinks I should have found him here. Who does not
prevent the Hour of Love; outstays the Time; for to be dully punctual, is too
slow. -- I was accusing you of Neglect.


I confess you do Reproach me when I see you here before me; but 'tis fit I
should be still behind hand, still to be more and more indebted to your
goodness.


You can excuse a fault too well, not to have been too blame -- a ready Answer
shows you were prepared.


Guilt is ever at a loss and confusion waits upon it, when Innocence and bold
Truth are always ready for expression -- --


Not in Love, Words are the weak support of Cold indifference; Love has no
Language to be heard.


Excess of Joy had made me stupid! Thus may my Lips be ever closed.

And thus* -- Oh who would not lose his Speech, upon condition to have Joys
above it?


Hold, let me Lock the Door first.


That I believed; 'twas well I left the private passage open.


So, that's safe.


And so may all your Pleasures be, and secret as this kiss --


And may all Treachery be thus discovered.


Ah!


Villain!


Nay then, there's but one way.


Say you so, were you provided for an Escape? Hold, Madam, you have no more
holes to your Borough, I'll stand between you and this Sally-Port.


Thunder strike thee Dead for this Deceit, immediate Lightning blast thee, me
and the whole World -- Oh! I could rack my self, play the Vulture to my own
Heart, and gnaw it piece-meal, for not boding to me this misfortune.


Be Patient. --


Be Damned.


Consider I have you on the hook; you will but flounder your self a weary, and
be nevertheless my Prisoner.


I'll hold my breath and die, but I'll be free.


O Madam, have a care of dying unprepared, I doubt you have some unrepented
Sins that may hang heavy and retard your flight.


O. What shall I do? say? whither shall I turn? has Hell no remedy?


None, Hell has served you even as Heaven has done, left you to your self. --
You're in a kind of Erasmus Paradise; yet if you please you may make it a
Purgatory; and with a little Penance and my Absolution all this may turn to
good account.


Hold in my passion, and fall, fall, a little thou swelling Heart; let me have
some intermission of this rage, and one minutes coolness to dissemble.


You have been to blame. -- I like those Tears, and hope they are of the purest
kind -- Penitential Tears.


O the Scene was shifted quick before me -- I had not time to think -- I was
surprised to see a Monster in the Glass, and now I find it is my self; Can you
have mercy to forgive the faults I have imagined, but never put in practice --
O Consider, Consider, how fatal you have been to me, you have already killed
the quiet of this Life, the love of you, was the first wandering fire that e're
misled my steps, and while I had only that in view, I ways betrayed into
unthought of ways of ruin.


May I believe this true?


O be not cruelly incredulous -- How can you doubt these streaming Eyes? Keep
the severest Eye over all my future Conduct; and if I once relapse, let me not
hope forgiveness, 'twill ever be in your power to ruin me -- My Lord shall sign
to your desires; I will my self create your Happiness, and Cynthia shall be
this night your Bride -- Do but conceal my failings, and forgive --


Upon such terms I will be ever yours in every honest way.


I have kept my word, he's here, but I must not be seen.


Hell and Amazement, she's in Tears.


Eternal Blessings thank you -- Ha! my Lord listening! O Fortune has o'repaid me
all, all! all's my own!


Nay, I beseech you rise.


Never, never! I'll grow to the Ground, be buried quick beneath it, e're I be
consenting to so damned a Sin as Incest! unnatural Incest!


Ha!


O cruel Man, will you not let me go -- I'll forgive all that's past -- O
Heaven, you will not ravish me!


Damnation!


Monster, Dog! your Life shall answer this --


O Heavens my Lord! hold, hold, for Heavens sake.


Confusion, my Uncle! O the damned Sorceress.


Moderate your rage good my Lord! he's mad, alas he's mad -- indeed he's my
Lord, and knows not what he does -- see how wild he looks.


By Heaven'twere senseless not to be mad, and see such Witchcraft.


My Lord, you hear him -- he talks Idly.


Hence from my sight, thou living infamy to my Name; when next I see that Face,
I'll write Villain in it with my Swords point.


Now, by my Soul, I will not go till I have made known my wrongs -- Nay, till I
have made known yours, which (if possible) are greater -- Though she has all
the Host of Hell her Servants; Though she can wear more shapes in shining day,
then fear shows Cowards in the dark -- --


Alas he raves! talks very Poetry! for Heavens sake away my Lord, he'll either
tempt you to extravagance, or commit some himself.


Death and Funes, will you not hear me -- Why by Heaven she laughs, grins,
points to your Back, she forks out Cuckoldom with her Fingers, and you're
running Horn mad after your Fortune.


I fear he's mad indeed-Let's send Maskwell to him-


Send him, to her.


Come, come, good my Lord, my Heart aches so, I shall faint if I stay.


O I could curse my Stars, Fate, and Chance; all Causes* and Accidents of
Fortune in this Life! but to what purpose? yet, 'sdeath, for a Man to have the
fruit of all his Industry grown full and ripe, ready to drop into his mouth,
and just when he holds out his hand to gather it, to have a sudden Whirlwind
come, tear up Tree and all, and bear away the very root and foundation of his
hopes; What temper can contain? They talk of sending Miskwell to me; I never
had more need of him -- But what can he do? Imagination cannot form a fairer
and more plausible design than this of his which has miscarried. -- O my
Precious Aunt, I shall never thrive without I deal with the Devil, or another
Woman.

Women like flames have a destroying power,
Never to be quenched, till they themselves devour.

WAst not Lucky?


Lucky! Fortune is your own, and 'tis her interest so to be; By Heaven I
believe you can control her power, and she fears it; though chance brought my
Lord, 'twas your own art that turned it to advantage.


'Tis true it might have been my ruin -- but yonders my Lord, I believe he's
coming to find you, I'll not be seen.


So; I durst not own my introducing my Lord, though it succeeded well for her,
for she would have suspected a design which I should have been puzzled to
excuse. My Lord is thoughtful -- I'll be so too; yet he shall know my thoughts;
or think he does --


What have I done?


Talking to himself!


'Twas honest -- And shall I be rewarded for it? No, 'twas honest, therefore I
shall not; -- Nay, rather, therefore I ought not; for it rewards it self.


Unequalled Virtue!


But should it be known! then I have lost a Friend! He was an ill Man, and I
have gained; for half my self I lent him, and that, I have recalled; so I have
served my self, and what is yet better, I have served a worthy Lord to whom I
owe my self.


Excellent Man!


Yet I am wretched -- O there is a secret burns within this Breast, which
should it once blaze forth, would ruin all, consume my honest Character, and
brand me with the name of Villain.


Ha!


Why do I love! yet Heaven and my waking Conscience are my Witnesses, I never
gave one working thought a vent; which might discover that I loved, nor ever
must; no, let it prey upon my Heart; for I would rather die, than seem once,
barely seem, dishones: -- O, should it once be known I love fair Cynthia, all
this. that I have done, would look like Rivals Malice, false Friendship to my
Lord, and base Self-interest. Let me perish first, and from this hour avoid all
sight and speech, and, if I can, all thought of that pernicious Beauty. Ha! but
what is my distraction doing? I am wildly talking to my self, and some ill
Chance might have directed malicious Ears this way.


Start not -- let guilty and dishonest Souls start at the revelation of their
thoughts, but be thou fixed, as is thy Virtue.


I am confounded, and beg your Lordship's pardon for those free discourses
which I have had with my self.


Come, I beg your pardon that I over-heard you, and yet it shall not need --
Honest Maskwell! thy and my good Genius led me hither -- mine, in that I have
discovered so much Manly Virtue; thine, in that thou shalt have due reward of
all thy worth. Give me thy hand -- my Nephew is the alone remaining Branch of
all our ancient Family; him I thus blow away, and constitute thee in his room
to be my Heir --


Now Heaven forbid --


No more -- I have resolved -- The Writings are ready drawn, and wanted nothing
but to be signed, and have his name inserted -- yours will fill the Blank as
well -- I will have no reply -- Let me command this time; for 'tis the last, in
which I will assume Authority -- hereafter, you shall rule where I have Power.


I humbly would petition --


Is't for your self? --

I'll hear of nought for any body else.


Then witness Heaven for me, this Wealth and Honour was not of my seeking, nor
would I build my Fortune on another ruin: I had but one desire --


Thou shalt enjoy it -- if all I'm worth in Wealth or Interest can purchase
Cynthia, she is thine. -- I'm sure Sir Paul's Consent will follow Fortune; I'll
quickly show him which way that is going.


You oppress me with Bounty; my Gratitude is weak, and shrinks beneath the
weight, and cannot rise to thank you -- What, enjoy my Love! Forgive the
Transports of a Blessing so unexpected, so unhoped for, so unthought of!


I will confirm it, and rejoice with thee.


This is prosperous indeed -- Why let him find me out a Villain, settled in
possession of a fair Estate, and full fruition of my Love, I'll bear the
railings of a losing Gamester -- but should he find me out before! 'tis
dangerous to delay -- let me think -- should my Lord proceed to treat openly of
my Marriage with Cynthia, all must be discovered, and Mellefont can be no
longer blinded. -- It must not be; nay, should my Lady know it -- ay, then were
fine work indeed! her fury would spare nothing, though she involved her self in
ruin. No, it must be by Stratagem -- I must deceive Mellefont once more, and
get my Lord to consent to my private management. He comes opportunely -- now
will I, in my old way, discover the whole and real truth of the matter to him,
that he may not suspect one word on it.

No Mask like open Truth to cover Lies,
As to go naked is the best disguise.

O Maskwell, what hopes? I am confounded in a maze of thoughts, each leading
into one another, and all ending in perplexity. My Uncle will not see, nor hear
me.


No matter, Sir, don't trouble your head, all's in my power.


How? for Heaven's sake?


Little do you think that your Aunt has kept her word, -- how the Devil she
wrought my Lord into this dotage, I know not; but he's gone to Sir Paul about
my Marriage with Cynthia, and has appointed me his Heir.


The Devil he has! what's to be done?


I have it, it must be by Stratagem; for it's in vain to make Application to
him. I think I have that in my head that cannot fail: Where's Cynthia?


In the Garden.


Let us go and consult her, my life for yours, I cheat my Lord.


Maskwell your Heir, and Marry Cynthia!


I cannot do too much, for so much merit.


But this is a thing of too great moment, to be so suddenly resolved. Why,
Cynthia? Why must he be Married? Is there not reward enough in raising his low
Fortune, but he must mix his Blood with mine, and Wed my Niece? how know you
that my Brother will consent, or she? nay, he himself perhaps may have
Affections otherwhere.


No, I am convinced he loves her.


Maskwell love Cynthia, impossible!


I told you, he confessed it to me.


Confusion! how's this!


His humility long stifled his Passion: And his Love of Mellefont would have
made him still conceal it, -- but, by Encouragement, I wrung the secret from
him; and know he's no way to be rewarded but in her. I'll defer my farther
proceedings in it, till you have considered it, but remember how we are both
indebted to him.


Both indebted to him! yes, we are both indebted to him, if you knew all,
damned Villain! oh, I am wild with this surprise of Treachery: Hell and Fire,
it is impossible, it cannot be, -- he Love Cynthia! what have I been Bawd to
his designs? his Property only, a baiting place to stay his stomach in the road
to her; now I see what made him false to Mellefont, -- Shame and Destruction! I
cannot bear it, oh! what Woman can bear to be a Property? To be kindled to a
flame, only to light him to another Arms; oh! that I were Fire indeed, that I
might burn the vile Traitor to a Hell of Torments, -- but he's Damnation proof,
a Devil already, and Fire is his Element. What shall I do? how shall I think? I
cannot think, -- all my designs are lost, my Love unsated, my Revenge
unfinished, and fresh cause of fury from unthought of Plagues.


Madam, Sister, my Lady Sister, did you see my Lady my Wife?


Oh! Torture!


Gad'sbud, I can't find her high nor low; where can she be, think you?


Where she's serving you, as all your Sex ought to be served; making you a
Beast. Don't you know that you're a Fool, Brother?


A Fool; he, he, he, you're merry -- no, no, not I, I know no such matter.


Why then you don't know half your happiness?


That's a jest with all my heart, faith and troth, -- but harkee, my Lord told
me something of a Revolution of things; I don't know what to make on it, --
gad'sbud I must consult my Wife, -- he talks of disinheriting his Nephew; and I
don't know what, -- look you, Sister, I must know what my Girl has to trust to;
or not a syllable of a Wedding, gad'sbud -- to show you that I am not a Fool.


Hear me; consent to the breaking off this Marriage, and the promoting any
other, without consulting me, and I'll renounce all Blood, all relation and
concern with you for ever, -- nay, I'll be your Enemy, and pursue you to
Destruction, I'll tear your Eyes out, and tread you under my feet. --


Why, what's the matter now? Good Lord, what's all this for? Pooh, here's a
joke, indeed -- why, where's my Wife?


With Careless, in the close Arbour, he may want you by this time, as much as
you want her.


O, if she be with Mr. Careless, 'tis well enough.


Fool, Sot, insensible Ox! but remember what I said to you, or you had better
eat your own Horns, and Pimp for your living; by this light you had.


She's a passionate Woman, gad'sbud, -- but to say truth, all our Family are
Choleric; I am the only peaceable Person amongst 'em.


I know no other way but this he has proposed; If you have Love enough to run
the venture.


I don't know whether I have Love enough, -- but I find I have obstinacy enough
to pursue whatever I have once resolved; and a true Female courage to oppose
any thing that resists my will, though 'twere reason it self.


That's right, -- well, I'll secure the Writings; and run the hazard along with
you.


But how can the Coach and six Horses be got ready without suspicion?


Leave it to my care; that shall be so far from being suspected, that it shall
be got ready by my Lord's own order.


How?


Why, I intend to tell my Lord the whole matter of our Contrivance, that's my
way.


I don't understand you.


Why, I'll tell my Lord, I laid this Plot with you, on purpose to betray you;
and that which put me upon it, was, the finding it impossible to gain the Lady
any other way, but in the hopes of her Marrying you. --


So. --


So, why so, while you are busied in making your self ready, I'll wheedle her
into the Coach; and instead of you, Borrow my Lords Chaplain, and so run away
with her my self.


O I conceive you, you'll tell him so?


Tell him so! Ay, why you don't think I mean to do so?


No, no; ha, ha, I dare swear thou wilt not.


You may be deceived -- Therefore, for our farther Security, I would have you
Disguised like a Parson, that if my Lord should have Curiosity to peep, he may
not discover you in the Coach, but think the Cheat is carried on as he would
have it.


Excellent Maskwell, thou were it certainly meant for a Statesman or a Jesuite,
but that you're too honest for one, and too pious for the other.


Well, get your selves ready, and meet me in half an hour, yonder in my Lady's
Dressing-Room; go by the back Stairs, and so we may slip down without being
observed. -- I'll send the Chaplain to you with his Robes; I have made him my
own, -- and ordered him to meet us to Morrow Morning at St. Albans; there we
will Sum up this Account, to all our satisfactions.


Should I begin to thank or praise thee, I should waste the little time we
have.


Madam you will be ready?


I will be punctual to the Minute.


Stay, I have a doubt -- upon second thoughts, we had better meet in the
Chaplain's Chamber, here the corner Chamber at this end of the Gallery, there
is a back way into it, so that you need not come through this Door -- and a Pair
of private Stairs leads down to the Stables -- it will be more convenient.


I am guided by you, -- but Mellefont will mistake.


No, no, I'll after him immediately, and tell him.


I will not fail.


Why, qui vult decipi decipiatur. -- 'Tis no fault of mine, I have told 'em in
plain terms, how easy 'tis for me to cheat 'em; and if they will not hear the
Serpent's hiss, they must be stung into experience, and future caution, -- Now
to prepare my Lord to consent to this. -- But first I must instruct my little
Levite, there is no Plot, public or private, that can expect to prosper
without one of 'em have a finger in it, he promised me to be within at this
hour, -- Mr. Saygrace, Mr. Saygrace.


Sweet Sir, I will but pen the last Line of an Acrostick, and be with you in
the twinkling of an Ejaculation, in the pronouncing of an Amen, or before you
can --


Nay, good Mr. Saygrace do not prolong the time, by describing to me the
shortness of your stay; rather if you please, defer the finishing of your Wit,
and let us talk about our business, it shall be Tithes in your way.


You shall prevail, I would break off in the middle of a Sermon to do you
pleasure.


You could not do me a greater, -- except -- the business in hand -- have you
provided a Habit for Mellefont?


I have, they are ready in my Chamber, together with a clean starched Band and
Cuffs.


Good, let them be carried to him, -- have you stitched the Gown Sleeve, that
he may be puzzled, and waste time in putting it on?


I have; the Gown will not be endued without perplexity.


Meet me in half an Hour, here in your own Chamber. When Cynthia comes, let
there be no Light, and do not speak, that she may not distinguish you from
Mellefont. I'll urge haste, to excuse your silence.


You have no more Commands?


None, your Text is short.


But pithy, and I will handle it with Discretion.


It will be the first you have so served.


Sure I was born to be controlled by those I should Command: my very Slaves
will shortly give me Rules how I shall govern them.


I am concerned to see your Lordship discomposed --


Have you seen my Wife lately, or disobliged her?


No, my Lord. What can this mean?


Then Mellefont has urged some body to incense her -- something she has heard
of you which carries her beyond the bounds of Patience.


This I feared.

Did not your Lordship tell her of the Honours you designed me?


Yes.


'Tis that; you know my Lady has a high Spirit, she thinks I am unworthy.


Unworthy! 'tis an ignorant Pride in her to think so -- Honesty to me is true
Nobility. However, 'tis my Will it should be so, and that should be convincing
to her as much as reason -- by Heaven, I'll not be Wife-ridden; were it
possible it should be done this night.


By Heaven, he meets my wishes

Few things are impossible to willing minds.


Instruct me how this may be done, you shall see I want no inclination.


I had laid a small design for to morrow (as Love will be inventing) which I
thought to communicate to your Lordship -- but it may be as well done to night.


Here's Company -- come this way and tell me.


Is not that he, now gone out with my Lord?


Yes.


By Heaven there's Treachery -- the Confusion that I saw your Father in, my
Lady Touchwood's Passion, with what imperfectly I over-heard between my Lord
and her, confirm me in my fears. Where's Mellefont?


Here he comes.

Did Maskwell tell you any thing of the Chaplain's Chamber?


No; my Dear, will you get ready -- the things are all in my Chamber; I want
nothing but the Habit.


You are betrayed, and Maskwell is the Villain that I always thought him.


When you were gone, he said his mind was changed, and bid me meet him in the
Chaplain's Room, pretending immediately to follow you, and give you notice.


How!


There's Saygrace tripping by with a bundle under his Arm -- he cannot be
ignorant that Maskwell means to use his Chamber; let's follow and examine him.


'Tis loss of time -- I cannot think him false.


My Lord musing!


He has a quick invention, if this were suddenly designed -- yet he says he had
prepared my Chaplain already.


How's this! now I fear indeed.


Cynthia here; alone, fair Cousin, and melancholy?


Your Lordship was thoughtful.


My thoughts were on serious business, not worth your hearing.


Mine were on Treachery concerning you, and may be worth your hearing.


Treachery concerning me! pray be plain -- hark! what noise!


Will you not hear me?


No, Monster! H^llish Traitor! no.


My Lady and Maskwell! this may be lucky -- My Lord, let me entreat you to
stand behind this Screen, and listen; perhaps this chance may give you proof of
what you ne'er could have believed from my suspicions.


You want but leisure to invent fresh falsehood, and sooth me to a fond belief
of all your fictions; but I will stab the Lie that's forming in your heart, and
save a Sin, in pity to your Soul.


Strike then -- Since you will have it so.


Ha! a steady Villain to the l^st!


Come, why do you dally with me thus?


Thy stubborn temper shocks me, and you knew it would -- by Heaven, this is
Cunning all, and not Courage; no, I know thee well: but thou shalt miss thy
aim.


Ha, ha, ha.


Had do you mock my Rage? then this shall punish your fond, rash Contempt!
Again smile.

And such a smile as speaks in Ambiguity!

Ten thousand meanings lurk in each corner of that various face,

O! that they were written in thy heart,

That I, with this, might lay thee open to my sight!

But then 'twill be too late to know --

Thou hast, thou hast found the only way to turn my Rage; Too well thou know
my jealous Soul could never bear Uncertainty. Speak then, and tell me -- yet
are you silent? Oh, I am wilder'd in all Passions! but thus my Anger melts.

Here, take this Poniard, for my very Spirits faint, and I want strength to
hold it, thou hast disarmed my Soul.


Amazement shakes me -- where will this end?


So, 'tis well -- let your wild fury have a vent; and when you have temper,
tell me.


Now, now, now I am calm, and can hear you.


Thanks, my invention; and now I have it for you. -- First tell me what urged
you to this violence? for your Passion broke in such imperfect terms, that yet
I am to learn the cause.


My Lord himself surprised me with the News, You were to marry Cynthia -- that
you had owned your Love to him, and his indulgence would assist you to attain
your ends.


How, my Lord.


Pray forbear all Resentments for a while, and let us hear the rest


I grant you in appearance all is true; I seemed consenting to my Lord; nay,
transported with the Blessing -- bu^ could you think that I who had been happy
in your loved Embraces, could e're be sond of an inferior Slavery.


Ha! O poison to my Ears! what do I hear!


Nay, good my Lord, forbear Resentment, let us hear it out.


Yes, I will contain, though I could burst.


I that had wantoned in the wide Circle of your World of Love, could be
confined within the puny Province of a Girl. No -- yet though I dote on each last
Favour more than all the rest; though I would give a Limb for every look you
cheaply throw away on any other Object of your Love; yet so far I prize your
Pleasures over my own, that all this seeming Plot that I have ^aid, has been to
gratify your taste, and cheat the World, to prove a faithful Rogue to you.


If this were true -- but how can it be?


I have so contrived, that Mellefont will presently, in the Caplain's habit,
wait for Cynthia in your Dressing-Room: but I have put the change upon her,
that she may be otherwhere employed -- do you procure her Night-Gown, and with
your Hoods tied over your face, meet him in her stead, you may go privately by
the back Stairs, and, unperceived, there you may propose to reinstate him in
his Uncle's favour; if he'll comply with your desires; his Case is desperate,
and I believe he'll yield to any Conditions, -- if not, here take this; you may
employ it better, than in the Death of one who is nothing when not yours.


Thou can deceive every body, -- nay, thou hast deceived me; but 'tis as I
would wish, -- trusty Villain! I could worship thee. --


No more, -- there want but a few Minutes of the time; and Mellefont's Love
will carry him there before his hour.


I go, I fly, incomparable, Maskwell!


So, this was a pinch indeed, my invention was upon the Rack; and made
discov'ry of her last Plot: I hope Cynthia, and my Chaplain will be ready, I'll
prepare for the Expedition.


Now, my Lord?


Astonishment binds up my rage! Villainy upon Villainy! Heavens, what a long
track of dark deceit has this discovered! I am confounded when I look back, and
want a Clue to guide me through the various mazes of unheard of Treachery. My
Wife! Damnation! my Hell.


My Lord, have patience, and be sensible how great our happiness is, that this
discovery was not made too late.


I thank you, yet it may be still too late, if we don't presently prevent the
Execution of their plots; -- ha, I'll do it, where's Mellefont, my poor injured
Nephew, -- how shall I make him ample satisfaction? --


I dare answer for him.


I do him fresh wrong to question his forgiveness; for I know him to be all
goodness, -- yet my Wise! Dam her, -- she'll think to meet him in that
Dressing-Room, -- was't not so? And Maskwell will expect you in the Chaplain's
Chamber, -- for once, I'll add to my Plot too, -- let us haste to find out, and
inform my Nephew, and do you quickly as you can, bring all the Company into
this Gallery, -- I'll expose the Strumpet, and the Villain.


By Heaven's, I have slept an Age, -- Sir Paul, what a Clock is't? past Eight,
on my Conscience, my Lady's is the most inviting Couch; and a slumber there, is
the prettiest amusement! but where's all the Company? --


The Company, gad'sbud, I don't know, my Lord, but here's the strangest
Revolution, all turned topsy turvy; as I hope for Providence.


O Heaven's, what's the matter? Where's my Wife?


All turned topsy turvy, as sure as a Gun.


How do you mean? My Wife!


The strangest posture of Affairs!


What, my Wife?


No, no, I mean the Family, -- your Lady's Affairs may be in a very good
posture; I saw her go into the Garden with Mr. Brisk.


How? where, when, what to do?


I suppose they have been laying their heads together.


How?


Nay, only about Poetry, I suppose, my Lord; making Couplets.


Couplets.


O, here they come.


My Lord, your humble Servant; Sir Paul yours, -- the finest night!


My dear, Mr. Brisk and I have been Star-gazing, I don't know how long.


Does it not tire your Ladyship? are not you weary with looking up?


Oh, no, I love it violently, -- my dear you're melancholy.


No, my dear; I'm but just awake. --


Snuff some of my Spirit of Hartshorn.


I've some of my own, thank you, my dear.


Well, I swear, Mr. Brisk, you understood Astronomy like an old Egyptian.


Not comparable to your Ladyship; you are the very Cynthia of the Skies, and
Queen of Stars.


That's because I've no light, but what's by Reflection from you, who are the
Sun.


O Jesu! Madam, you have Eclip^'d me quite let me perish. -- I can't answer
that.


No matter, -- heark'ee, shall you and I make an Almanac together.


With all my Soul, -- your Ladyship has made me the Man in it already, I'm ^
full of the Wounds which you have given.


O finely taken! I swear, now you are even with me, O Parnassus, you have an
infinite deal of Wit.


So he has, gad'sbud, and so has your Ladyship.


You tell me most surprising things; bless me who would ever trust a man? O my
heart aches for fear they should be all deceitful alike.


You need not fear, Madam, you have Charms to fix Inconstancy it self.


O dear, you make me blush.


Come my dear, shall we take leave of my Lord and Lady.


They'll wait upon your Lordship presently.


Mr. Brisk. my Coach shall set you down.


What's the matter?


O I'm betrayed, -- save me, help me.


Now what Evasion, Strumpet?


Stand off, let me go, and Plagues, and Curses seize you all.


Go, and thy own Infamy pursue thee, -- you stare as you were all amazed, -- I
don't wonder at it, -- but too soon you'll know mine, and that Woman's shame.


Nay, by Heaven you shall be seen, -- Careless, your hand; -- do you hold down
your head? Yes, I am your Chaplain, look in the Face of your injured Friend;
thou wonder of all Falsehood.


Are you silent, Monster?


Good Heavens! how I believed and Loved this Man! -- Take him hence, for he's a
Disease to my Sight.


Secure that manifold Villain.


Miracle of Ingratitude!


This is all very surprising, let me perish.


You know I told you Saturn looked a little more angry than usual.


We'll think of punishment at leisure, but let me hasten to do Justice, in
rewarding Virtue and wronged Innocence. -- Nephew, I hope I have your pardon,
and Cynthia's.


We are your Lordships Creatures.


And be each others comfort; -- let me join your hands. -- Unwearied Nights,
and wishing Days attend you both; mutual Love, lasting Health, and Circling
Joys, tread round each happy Year of your long Lives.

Let secret Villainy from hence be warned;
How e're in private, Mischiefs are conceived,
Torture and shame attend their open Birth:
Like Vipers in the Womb, base Treach'ry lies,
Still gnawing that, whence, first it did arise;
No sooner born, but the Vile Parent dies.

COuld Poets but foresee how Plays would take,
Then they could tell what Epilogues to make;
Whether to thank or blame their Audience* most:
But that late knowledge, does much hazard cost,
Till Dice are thrown, there's nothing won, nor lest.
So till the Thief has stol^'n, he cannot know
Whether he shall escape the Law, or no.
But Poets run much greater hazards far,
Than they who stand their Trials at the Bar^;
The Law provides a curb for its own Fury,
And suffers Judges to direct the Jury.
But in this Court, what difference does appear!
For every one's both Judge and Jury here;
Nay, and what's worse, an Executioner.
All have a Right and ^itle to some part,
Each choosing that, in which he has most Art.
The dreadful men of Learning, all Confound,
Unless the Fable's good, and Moral sound.
The Vizor-Masks, that are in Pit and Gallery,
Approve, or Damn the Repartee and Raillery.
The Lady Critics, who are better Read,
Enquire if Characters are nicely bred;
If the soft thing^ are Penned and spoke with grace:
They Judge of Action too, and Time, and Place;
In which, we do not doubt but they're discerning,
For that's a kind of Assignation Learning.
Beaus Judge of Dress; the Witlings Judge of Songs;
The Cuckold^m, of Ancient Right* to Cits belongs.
Thus poor Poets, the Favour are denied;
Even to make exceptions, when they're Tried.
'Tis hard that they must every one admit;
Methinks I see some Faces in the Pi^,
Which must of Consequence be Foes to Wit.
You who can Judge, to Sentence may proceed;
But though he cannot Write, let him be freed
At least from their Contempt, who cannot Read.

