THus the Repose which I but now enjoyed,
Is by the malice of my Fate destroyed:
And it is false Perdiccas, who has been
That Traitor, to the quiet of his Queen.

But are these Sisters then preserved alive?

Yes, He did my too credulous eyes deceive,
By the blood of two condemned Slaves he spilt:
The just reward of their unpardon'd guilt
But did my Int'rests and his Oaths despise,
To pay his Tribute to Statira's eyes,
Whom he adored: -- Her Sister did partake,
His Mercy only for my Rival sake,
But though he, to establish his design,
Did build his fortune on the wrecks of mine;
Yet now the Powr's above have overthrown.
Them both, in the advancement of their own.
Sending their Brother and their Lover's Arms,
To give to our proud walls their fierce alarms:
And they his Prisoner with such power demand,
As He, nor Babilon can long withstand:
And this unwelcome noise I fear declares,
They and the Empire are already theirs.

Madam, We know not what the Fates have done,
Perhaps they have confirmed you in the Throne
Oh! how her Jealousy with Rage now burns!
Love and Ambition torture her by turns. --

They must be taken prisoners first, for we,
Till then, can never hope for Victory:
Fortune their Arms with blessed success does guide,
And Conquest, like a Slave, attends their side.
Methinks, I see. sierce Oroondates now,
Triumphant with wreathed Laurels on his brow,
Advancing to me in an angry form,
And speaking in the Language of a storm.

Prince Oroondates, Madam, --

-- What's our doom?
And has he -- tell us -- Are we overcome?

Dispel such goundless fears, causeless alarms,
Success, and Victory wait on your Armrs.

Kind Fates! Ohgood Arbates soon declare:
Oh! speak, and free Roxana from her fear!

Great Oroondates's taken. --

-- Is it true?

Neander's bringing him to wait on you.

Ah! To what Miracles are we obliged,

So soon as e're our Rampires were besig'd,
We on our Foes our barbed darts did pour,
Thick as driven Hail in a tempestuous shower.
Long time they did support the violent shock,
The Tempest beat, as on a senseless Rock,
Upon their shields, then broke, and downards fell,
As if their shields had born Fates strong-wrought spell.
Yet with a courage that still dared their Fat,
They to our Battlements clapped Ladders stra it;
Strait mounted, but on them such stones we hurled,
As numbers headlong sent to the lower world;
Whose ponderous load on the Assailants bent,
Bestowed at once both Death and Monument.
Great Oroondates then, whose glorious Fame
Proclaimed his sword as dreadful as his Name;
Brake through the crowds, and with his voice did breath
Thunder, and 's arm at every stroke gave Death.
Then --

-- Relate what that Prodigious Prince did do:
I know Fate's wonders must his arms pursue.

Ran up his Ladder --
And on the walls, himself he nimbly throws,
In spite of the resistance of his foes.
Our soldiers strait fell back at sight of him,
Amazed to see a valour so sublime;
The undaunt'd Prince rushed on, and could afford
No time of pause to his insatiate sword:
And though with ods surrounded, yet did show
Himself still dreadful by some slaughtering blow.
But lifting up his mighty arm to deal
His fury on a Casque of well-wrought Steel;
His sword proves false at that revenging stroke,
And short in two the treach'rous weapon broke.

In what strange wonders is his Fate involved!
Wonders that have my fears for him dissolved.

The disarmed Prince enraged at this surprise,
Shot Dragon-like, fierce lightning from his eyes:
The pressing Crowd strait bore him to the ground,
His Sinewy arms pinioned behind him bound.
I asked the soldiers greedy of their prey,
Whither they meant their prisoner to convey;
Some to Perdiccas cried, -- But I besought,
That he might to Perdiccas Queen be brought:
'Twas granted, and I hither came to know,
If you would have him brought before you now.

Ah! my Hesione, it is not fit
For us to see this dangerous Conqueror yet.
In the Interim the Prince shall be your care;
And all things worthy his high birth prepare.
His Lodgings shall be over our Palace Gate,
And half our guards shall on his person wait.
Go, be his conduct thither, and be sure
To keep him from all Visitors secure, --
Till you have orders from me, for I mean,
He shall not by Perdiccas yet be seen.

I've heard our Enemies have quit the ground,
And that your Arms have been with Conquest crowned:
Thanks to your Valour with the God's success;
We now, I hope, shall live a while in Peace.
Brave Oroondates's taken. --

-- How! Is He?

Yes, and become a prisoner too to me.
On us kind Fortune equallydoes shine,
For I your Rival have, as you have mine,
Forget not our agreement then, what e're
Of claim you have in him, I have in her.
As I have never yet a trouble been,
To you in your designs upon the Queen;
So I expect you should as little be
Mine, in what may concern the Prince and Me.

He, who with hazard of his life would do
You service, Madam, ne'er will trouble you.
Nor can I less then Oroondates give,
To Her, who me does fair Statira leave.
May Heaven make him to you be much more kind,
Then yet to me I can the Princess find:
She after all does unrelenting prove,
But may he have a value for your Love.

If you are generous, you will forbear
A Visit to him, and a while defer:
His presence may in you a passion move,
He is your Rival, -- but he's one I love.

To your commands I due regards shall give,
And will not see him till I have your leave.

Madam, our foes have great Seleucus sent
And with him Valorous Nearchus, --
They wait without. --

Go, good Perdiccas, and to them declare,
We earnestly desire to see them here.

You're welcome back, my Lords, your Chains, I see,
Are now struk off. --

-- Thanks to the Enemy.

We solemnly vowed your deliverance,
But were controlled by the mere spite of chance:
Which ne'er to us would so much power allow,
As to enable us to perform that Vow.

Yes, Madam, wishes do suppose a want,
But idle power betrays the will is scant.

Our will was strongly, for your interest bent.

Small force is strong, where that is violent.

We had designed too morrow for the day.

Great ills might come by such a long delay.
Too day is only ours, too morrow light.
Might see us buried in eternal night.

We in your cause, it seems, have moved too slow.

Much danger from protracting time does grow.
We have great Reason, Madam, to resent.

Well you shall have your wishes complement.
Sit down, my Lords, and tell us your desires,
And what of us the Enemy requires.

We do demand the Prince, your prisoner,
And, Madam, that's the business brings us here.

Cruel Selucus! you more Barb'rous prove,
Than can our foes, -- thus for the Prince to move.

Madam, I think their satisfaction must
Not be despised, but given them, 'tis just.
And though you know how much my interest does
Decline his freedom, and his fetters choose;
Yet is their Virtue and high Merit such,
To grant all they can ask is not too much.
And, Madam, if you please, I willingly
Consent the Oroondates should be free.

Begin with yours, Perdiccas, and let go
Statira, -- you don't know what I may do.

Madam, for her release they do not treat. --

No; if they did, I'd easily submit.
She would as weak before our walls appear,
As now she does, being your close prisoner:
But Oroondates is a Scythian born,
And One our absolute defeat has sworn:
The greatest of our enemies will be,
And we are ruined, if we set him free.
But whilst as prisoner we the Prince detain,
We may an advantageous Treaty gain
From their extremity. -- and let their fate
More slow, -- I'm sure Necessity can't wait.

By keeping him, we may more damage do
Unto our selves, than did we let him go.
Madam, --

It is my pleasure that He stay.

If you decree it so, then I obey.

Do you no more our services regard?
Are slights for loyalty the due reward?
Is it because among the dead we lay,
Mangled with wounds, and near as cold as they;
Whilst those, who now dispose of us, did fly,
And found these Walls their only sanctuary?
When all their spirits drooped, and almost dead,
Against a conquering Army to make head,
Alone I rallied our defeated Troops,
And fleshed their flagging courage, with fresh hopes.
Did e're Seleucus such a fear declare,
As might persuade his flight in either war?
He singsly did against your foes dispute,
And Conquest made to waver in a doubt.
Are his deep wounds grown shallow in your eyes?
His bleeding scars how eas'ly you despise!
And can you think to meet his friendship still,
After you have rewarded it so ill?

No I perceive you with the Foe would join,
And only to their fortunes yours incline:
And since, Seleucus, that's your wished desire,
When e're you please, you freely may retire.

We must observe the solemn Vow we past;
-- But there's no need to keep the Prince so fast.

The Foe in vain of his Return does boast,
To get him they shall be at greater cost.
And yours more easily we can allow,
Than the exchange, to which you'd have us bow.

Since rashly thus our loyalty you scorn,
We'll go, but with our forces we'll return;

Then, Madam, you may wish perhaps, too late,
That you had used us at a kinder rate.

They threaten hard, my Lord, but let them do
Their worst, -- They can but turn unto the Foe.
I'll trust my fate, and all their aids defy:
Power ne'er is strong, that's built on treachery.
Let them take heed, -- They to their cost shall know
What fury sharp'ned by contempt can do.

But should these Lords t'our Enemies retreat,
We ill can bear a loss that is so great.

What's to be done their passion to abate?

With some kind message try to moderate
Their swelling rage; --
If that works not, we their request must yield,
Or else prepare for a more bloody field.

Alcetas then shall go on this affair,
And to regain them ply his utmost care.

Grief must not sit so heavy on your brow,
For Love's sake to those tears some truce allow:
While thus our sorrows we anticipate,
We load our shoulders with a double weight;
One is the allotment of the heavenly Powers,
But the other our fore-stalling care procures.

'Tis true -- but then when Angry heaven shrouds
Its glory up in dark and fullen clouds,
We ought to fear least from those clouds should break,
Such storms as may a fatal vengeance speak.
And now my Oroondates is in arms,
Nothing but tears can give me pleasing charms.

Sister, just tears you do not hear me blame,
'Tis only the excess which I condemn:
I have as great a cause to mourn as you,
For I've a Brother, and a Lover too;
And some few tears I do my eyes allow.
But --
Such floods as yours no grief can justify;
They prove like oil, and make the flame burn high.

Yet they'll prepare me better to submit
To all that in the Book of Fate is writ.

The Gods, who find more justice in our prayers,
Then, Madam, in the torrent of your tears;
Have from our walls our Enemies at length
Repulsed, and quite defeated all their strength.
But, Madam, as this news may make you grieve,
I bring you something may your fears relieve:
Prince Oroondates now, from whom alone
Y' expect 'deliv'rance, is in Babilon.

His party routed? --

Yes.

And is he here?

Madam, he is, -- But as a prisoner.
Though justly yet you may suspend your fear.
Since in Roxana's hands he is secured;
You know how much she has for him endured.

At his Captivity you may be glad,
Whilst he a Foe, you little safety had:
But should this news prove false, your Policy
Is used in vain; -- neither his liberty,
Nor fetters, e're shall so effectual prove,
To make me my resolved thoughts remove.

From his bonds I do not think your change to meet,
Yet from it I may hope this benefit;
If to Roxana's Love he first comply,
You're disobliged from further constancy,

If Oroondates could his Vows decline,
It ne'er should give Authority to mine.

But you may then more mild and gentle prove,
To him, who, adores you with the greatest Love;
Love's fire within me does so fiercely glow,
My heart flames out in Sacrifice to you:
Grant it some favour, Madam, in your breast,
And entertain it as a welcome guest.
Your pity, which can never do you harm,
Will keep me from consuming, like a Charm.

If common pity will your pain relieve,
That is an Alms I'll not refuse to give.
But could I, Sir, resemble your desires,
In answ'ring them with the like scorching fires;
We our own Executioners should prove,
And burn up one another with our Love.
Throw water on the flame, and you'll no doubt
Quickly get Master on it, and put it out.

The flame of Love no water can assuage,
It makes it blaze, and roar with fiercer rage.

'Tis cause you don't --
Fling on fresh buckets at a faster rate;
A close supply its fury would abate.

I'am quite tired out, just like an o'r-wrought Beast
That's sinking, being with too much weight oppressed.

Then you should out aloud for succour cry,
To ease you in this sad Necessity.

Oh! 'tis you only that can succour give,
And reaching out to death can make me live.

Speak then, and you shall see that I will prove
So kind, to give you any thing, -- but Love.

But Love! -- and that's the only thing I crave,
Without it I were better in my grave.

From me you n're must look to have that grant,
I am resolved not to supply the want.
Perdiccas shall not, with his subt'lest art,
Succeed the King in his Statira's heart.

Gods! is't so great a crime as you abhor,
To love that Beauty I should but adore?
Why did you give her such resistless fire,
And me but with a tinder soul inspire.
You are unjust to make it be my Fate,
To perish by those flames which you create.
Though your disdains be great, I'll not neglect
T'oblige you still with a most high respect:
And if my service: can powerful prove,
They shall advance the Interest of my Love.

How do the Gods this wretched life pursue,
Afflicting still, as I overcome, a new!
But what offence has Oroondates done,
Those powers require such an Oblation?

We should not his Captivity suspect,
To be of his misfortune an effect:
For now he is Roxana's prisoner,
The safety of his life you need not fear.
She too much loves him, --
Not to divert what mischiefs ever may rise
Against him, from his Rivals, or his Enemies.

Ah! Sister, is it possible that you
Roxana's spirit should no better know?
Our own ill fortune speaks it but too plain,
After all gentle ways sh'as tried in vain
With him, there is not that extremity,
To which she is not blindly like to fly.
But she, perhaps, the Prince may soon oblige,
Then there will be no need to raise a Siege.
If against her Charms he should himself oppose,
His love for me he by hard Fate may lose.

'Tis an unpardon'd injury you've done
The Prince, whose faithfulness so long you've known;
Are these ungrateful fears the due rewards
Of his high merits, and devout regards?

My Crime's confessed, dear Sister, for I know
^rince Oroondates's Virtue cannot bow;
His constant Love for me his Actions show.
This is the only happiness I meet,
Of which my fortune has not robbed me yet:
But when Fate shall me of that Bliss deprive,
May Heaven then grant that I no longer live.

Ah! Let this day henceforth ne'er know a name,
Which only served to light me to my shame.
Madam, Grief racks me so I cannot tell
The sad confusion that our Arms befell.
But Fate has so malicious to us been,
Would I were nothing, rather than have seen.
It* took our men away so thick and fast,
That Death himself seemed out of breath with hast.

But this is not the utmost you can tell,
I fear yet worse, -- speak, -- is my Brother well?
Oh! by your silence you so much have sed,
That does, oh Heavens! convince me he is dead.

Madam he lives, -- but by his Destiny,
He's made a prisoner to the Enemy.

Oh, treachery of Fortune! to appear
Smiling, and yet be tyrant-like severe.
Thus is my life still by fresh griefs prolonged,
As waves by waves, and stiffning gales are thronged*
Too fatal is the News that you impart,
It rends, and sure will burst my labouring heart.

Let not these transports carry you too far;
There is no room so early to d^ir.
Chance, Madam, like the God of Love, is blind,
And in swift motion does out-ride the wind:
To day it did to th'adverse party lean,
But it will quickly tack about again,
And come to us; -- its chief Prerogative,
Is, what it takes this hour, the next to give.
I'll with our Foes once more for Fight prepare,
And from their hands I'll Oroondates tear.
Yes, I can do it, inspired by your bright Charms,
I'll bring him back a present to your Arms.

But do not you become like Fortune blind,
First cool this boiling passion of your mind:
I fear the event of what you'd now perform,
And that it threatens a more fatal storm.

Fatal! what can to her more fatal prove,
Excepts she fears the ruin of her Love.
Ah! Madam, I was born for your Commands,
Each word you speak will bind, or loose my Hands:
But may I still retain a Lovers Name,
Though no new Trophies do enlarge my Fame?

How can you, Sir, in this misfortune prove,
So much at leisure to discourse of Love?

Love's the great business of this World below,
To that all other interests must bow:
The Mightiest Monarchs lay their Greatness by,
To Court more tempting Glories in an Eye:
Love makes them soon their Majesty forget,
And to its Power, like creeping Slaves, submit.
But Madam --
At my return you made a Sacred Vow,
That upon me you would your Love bestow.

But your requests how shall I learn to grant,
When the performance of your Vows I want?
Go, by discharging your important trust,
Acquit your self, and teach me to be just.

Madam Seleucus and Nearchus are
Gone to the En'mies Camp bout this affair;
They have resolved his Liberty to gain,
Or else no longer on their side remain:
But they their Forces will with ours unite,
To rescue him, and their own wrongs requite.

-- Araxis. Sir is come,
And does without the Camp your presence wait.

Madam, he will their whole Success relate.
But since they're not returned, I hope to hear,
That Oroondates from his Chains is clear.
Heaven sometimes hid in thickest masks of night,
Breaks suddenly in pointed Rays of light.

PRince I am coming now to render you,
What to your Birth and Virtue is a due.
And Since the Gods you to our power commit,
Your Fortune shall not be the worse for it:
Tho you could not expect i^ as you are
Our Enemy, and Pris' ner too of War.

Your Majesty does take a care too great,
Which I have never merited as yet:
And undeservedly this Favour show
To him, who both your Prisoner is, and Foe.

Though you declare your self my Enemy,
Yet, Oroondates, yours I cannot be:
That Name's too cruel for Roxana's Breast,
'Tis only gentle Love must there be guest:
And shall your thoughts keep still in their first state,
Unchangeable, like the Decrees of Fate?
Are you resolved my slame shall fruitless prove,
And never in the least have power to move
Your hard remorseless heart? -- there might be seen,
Methinks, some small compliance for a Queen.

I thought in the condition I am now,
I should be free from being reproached by you:
But Madam, since so freely you've made known,
Your Actions, give me leave to speak my own.
Your Enemy I still declare I am,
And hate the very mention of your Name:
You've torn away my happiness, and are
Of all my Joys the cruel Ravisher.
By your Inhumane Cruelty and Pride,
Statina, and her Sister too, had died;
But that Perdiccas, through the Flame he bore
My Princess, did so foul a deed abhor.
And can you now my just resentments blame,
After these gallant Marks of your high flame?

Cease your reproaches, Prince, for what I've done,
As Actions that are worthy me I own:
If they were common to inferior Blood,
I would not Act them, nor could they be good.
But now so much above my Sex I go,
(Yes, and perhaps above my Humour too)
That to the World does evidently prove,
They are the marks of my excessive Love.

That Heart which you by kindness cannot win,
You ne'er must think by Sieges to get in:
To use such Cruelties and Arts, does show,
What you have done, none but your self would do.

Have you forgot how she her self withdrew,
And from her haughty presence banished you?
Then when you came her liberty to get,
And, daring Fortune, ventured life for it.

'Twas you, Tyrannic Queen, past that Decree,
Roxana, not Statira, banished me;
'Twas a high Act of Generosity!

For my Repose, and for my Honour too,
I've had a value; but too great, for you.
For you (I blush to speak it) I did burn,
Who requites Love with an ungrateful scorn;
When you, though for our ruin armed, did fight
Before our Walls --
I could not wish you further out of sight:
But when against me you took up your Arms,
In them Roxana for your sake found Charms.

Far different are these proofs of Love you show,
From those Statira would on me bestow;
And my Queen's Virtue is so pure, that she
Merits a service of Eternity.
Oh! I'm too proud by this advantage grown,
Another joy or happiness to own.

If your esteem's so great, ne'er hope that she
Will, kindly to acknowledge it, get free:
She's in Perdiccas power, who does declare,
He'll rather perish, than abandon her:
And you your self, Sir, may remember this,
That you my prisoner are, as she is his.

Madam, This Body is so, but the Soul
'S above the reach of any to control:
Or if it be imprisoned, 'tis in one
That can, or will, not give 't exemption.
Though thus confined, to heighten your despair,
On Wings of Sighs I'll send my Love to Her;
Our Souls shall meet and mingle in the Air.

Desist, vain Man, henceforth if you betray,
Your Love in sighs to the Princess to convey;
I'll spoil the Amour, and stab 'em in the way.

Though she's my Qveen, yet none can nobler love;
My patience and submission that does prove.
I've served her with the most extreme respect,
She from the meanest Lover could exact,
Yet still Roxana does my flame reject.
E're Alexander died, she Love did bear
To Oroondates, which still reigns in her;
And for a Captive must I slighted be,
Who proudly boasts in Chains his Victory?
-- No, -- the Usurper of her Love shall die.
But here she comes with such a Charming Men,
Rage quits my Breast, and gentle Love gets in.

Madam, You come from doing such a grace,
The Action speaks you generous to excess:
But it your Majesty this day had seen
The Posture which your Prisoner was in,
As I saw him; when at our Walls he stood,
Dreadfully fighting, all besmeared with blood:
Strength'ning his Men, when all their hearts were down,
With an astonishing courage of his own;
Perhaps, you'd have resented more his Crime,
And not been in such haste to visit him.

His Quality exacted has from me,
What you miscall a Generosity,

That he is worthy of it, is most true;
But chiefly cause he is beloved by you.
Yet, Madam, you could not have honoured one,
More fiercely bent to your destruction.

So Generous an Enemy as He,
In whatsoe'r condition he can be,
More grateful and more lovely does appear,
Then can a base and cow'rdly friend, by far:
And I blush less, that to the Prince I bend,
An Enemy, than unto you, a friend.

Queen, since your Captive you so highly prize,
Your Love becomes his Crime, and for it he dies.
Rather than slights endure, or quiet lose,
His blood shall be the price of my repose.

Alcetas, Madam, has sometime been from
The disobliged Seleucus Lodgings come.

My Lord, How were our reasons by him heard?

With but a mean, and very slight regard.
He says their Friendship which we did despise,
Has made them now become our Enemies.
And though so quickly we could change our mind,
Like Weather-cocks which turn with every wind,
Yet their resolves, as firm as Fate, they bind.
They 've kindly sent us notice to prepare
For the worst miseries that attend on war.

Ah! What Perdiccas, had we best to do?
Thus we're not able to withstand the Foe.
Our strength is weakened, but theirs double made,
They'll beat us with those powers should be our aid.

Madam, if it be so designed by Fate,
We must submit to be unfortunate:
But if their now lost Friendship you'd retrieve,
You Oroondates must resolve to give.

What is't you say? -- the Scythian Prince restore?
Oh! good Perdiccas, let me hear no more!
I ne'er shall of so soft a humour prove,
To please them with the Shipwreck of my Love.

Then we must dare our Fortune, and be brave,
For it is all the Refuge that we have.
Madam, my Life, and all's at your Command,
Whilst I've a Sword, I will their power withstand.
I'll do my utmost to preserve him yours,
Fate may be kind, and send us happy hours.
But first I'll to my Princess go and try,
If she still keeps in her proud constancy.

Though my misfortunes do appear so great,
Roxana cannot yet her Love forget:
If I could once get Mistress of my soul,
And from my Breast this sturdy passion pull;
Proud Oroondates soon should mere his Grave,
Who triumphs that he makes a Queen his Slave.

Madam, I'm come to wait upon you now,
That I your last Resolves might fully know.
My pow'r's unbounded, and will reach too far,
If once you stir it up unto despair.
Then feed my Love, least my just rage should prove
Fatally pointed against Him you love.

Fate both our Lives has twisted in one twine,
And when you cut off his, you'll cut off mine.

Death dares not seize your life --

-- that hour he dies,
My Soul shall take a hasty flight to his.
Ah! Prince has Heaven brought you so near to me,
To make you fall by your worst Enemy!
After so many dangers you did escape,
Must you meet Death at last by such a Rape?
Ye Gods! have pity on him I adore,
And since you have done this, do something more.

So great a passion for the Prince to show,
Was the worst Office you for him could do:
For now, though I was sure to have my fall,
And with me crush to dust this mighty Ball;
The prince I would not suffer to survive
My hopes, when once they've lost their power to live.
Yet through that great respect to you I bear,
I for a while shall my revenge defer:
And with obliging actions still pursue,
To try if they have power to soften you.
But if in vain all my submissions prove,
He shall not triumph o'r my slighted Love.
And if I fall, my Rival shall fall too.

Go, act the utmost that thy rage can do.
But by the Gods I swear the Prince's death,
Shall make you see expire my latest breath.
Yes, and this too shall the last minute be,
Till I see him, that you shall ever see me.

How, Madam, see the Prince? it cannot be.
Gods, it must not --

-- Do it, or ne'er see me more.

I cannot deny the Princess I adore.
Madam, this hard request you shall obtain,
If possibly Roxana I can gain.
But you may fear that from the Interview,
There will but small advantage to you grow.
'Tis on that usage you to me shall give,
His hinge of Fate does turn, to die, -- or live*
If Reason rules his Love, th'request he'll make,
You would his Interest and his Love forsake:
And upon that success depends alone,
Either his Death, or Preservation.

Unkind Oroondates! must I be
The subject of your scorn and cruelty?
Does making love my gift deserve such slight,
That it no other way you will requite?
I'll be revenged --
But -- something does within me countermand:
Alas! I find my heart restrains my hand.
In vain are all my hopes to meet relief,
Since I'm my self the cause of all my grief.
To gain a power, we should a passion hide,
But I made love, and that has raised his pride:
And 'tis Statira does the Scale o'rpoise,
Whilst she's alive, I must not look for joys.
No, it is by her death I ease must have;
I'll either give her, or my self a Grave.

My Lord, I hope you have my Rival seen,
And pray, what news is from that haughty Queen?
Will you relate to me the passages?
The Gods as yet have given but ill success.
But, Madam, I have hopes, if you will prove
But kind to me, that I may gain her Love.

If your good fortune does on me rely,
Perdiccas, doubt not but that I'll comply.

Statira, Madam, does demand of me,
That she this night may Oroondates see.

Ha! is my Rival grown so insolent?
Let her take heed she don't at last repent.
My Lord, I cannot grant an Interview,
That will prove fatal both to me and you.
Alas! already but too much he has
Been with her, for the quiet of our days.

Madam, my Guards I've ordered to be there,
To mind their Actions, and Discourses hear.

How readily you have found out a way,
Both to deceive your self, and me betray I
Do ye think that so imprudent they will prove,
In loud Discourses to declare their Love?
No, when they find they have such careful spies,
They'll speak to one another with their eyes.
Each sigh they fetch, its meaning will betray,
And every tear explain what it would say.
You know not the effect of such a deed.

When we oblige, we may some merit plead.

But o'r the will that has not any force.

Yet obligation never made one worse.

Of my deserts in Love, if I might boast,
I best deserve him, cause I love him most.

And, Madam, if your Love for him be such,
Can you for him think any thing too much?

On this a dangerous consequence ensues,
Therefore, my Lord, I justly may refuse. --
He to destroy my Love, this Boon required.

Was then this favour by the Prince desired?

Yes, but I did deny him that request,
So much destructive to my Interest.

At first demand of it my Love did start,
And all my blood went to support my heart.
But forcive reason me did plainly show,
There could no disadvantage from it grow.
To fair Statira's will I did submit,
And promised her I would endeavour it.
-- Madam, my hope's from you, --

-- My Lord, I'll try
With your desires to make my heart comply.

Worse than our Fate is now it cannot be;
By these Reflections --

-- You have conqu'red me.
But in what order would you have me go?

Let him your mind in a short Missive know.
Pray trust the rest unto my management,
My Interest equals yours --

-- I am content.
This Act being great, perhaps, his mind may move,
And be a prosperous Agent in my Love.

How many dangers have I safe out-run,
And yet the worst I have but just begun!
Here I am kept a prisoner by the Queen,
Who hopes by this way she my Love may win.
I would be kind and grateful, but shall ne'er
Unfix my Love, to place it upon her.
If I could turn it unto her I hate,
It would be then but a mere Love of State.
Besides, could I a flame for her admit,
Roxana but by halves would cherish it.
How she denied, (a sign she sighs for me!)
I but one moment should Statira see?
And against her she did such threatenings breath,
As did determine in no less than death. --
But here Arbates comes, her Confident.

Sir, By the Queen Roxana I am sent,
Who says that in this Letter you will find
The settled resolution of her mind --
Ah! how my Virtue yields to Jealousy!
And fain, into what most it fears, would pry.
Restless, I'm tossed betwixt despair and hope;
This sinks me low, the other is my prop:
But I must know my doom; -- so great a fear
Is the worst torment Flesh and Blood can bear.
My LORD! YOu are permitted to see my Rival, according to your desire, but it
is not meant you should make use of the favour to the Ruin of those who grant
it you. It is in your power to turn it to your advantage, if you use it as
prudence would advise you; and in councelling Statira not to think of you any
more: You ought to receive the counsel she will give you to loose all thoughts
of her. This is the way you ought to follow, if you love her life, since it
shall merely depend upon the success of this Interview.

ROXANA.

Ye mighty Powers! how subtle are your ways!
How are they all encircled in the Rays
Of richest Mercies! --
As glist'ring Stars which oft obscured we find,
Yet still remain the same the Clouds behind:
Your Judgments are severe, -- but die withal;
And frequently in tenderness they fall.
Ah! and shall I this blessing now obtain,
Shall I my fair Statira see again!
I fear my Soul will with a joy so great
Sink, not being able to bear up the weight.
It must: -- for it will come with such effort,
No humane strength its violence can support.
ANd they have them put off with such disgrace,
As if their powers they never durst outface.
Seleuchus and Nearchus could not brook
Such high contempts, but has their side forsook.

How ere to day Fate gave their Arms success,
It made no future conquests ore by lease:
No, they will find the next ensuing war,
Shall bring their triumphs to the last despair.

Yes, our Assurance of those friends is such,
That from their Arms we may expect it much.
For their resentments swell them up so high,
They are resolved to conquer or to die.
And who dare Fate, but seldom vanquished are;
They prove Victorious through their brave despair.

Lysimachus, my Lord, can never doubt
The Victory, since you're to lead us out.
Heaven has determined Babilon should bow,
And for that purpose has made choice of you,
For our too morrows Leader -- where you'll move
In Paths of Honour, and Commanding Love.

'Tis True, too morrow's the decisive day,
That will the ruin of one side display.
The Laws of Honour I shall then fulfil,
And yet obey my Berenice's Will.
Our Soldiers shall too day be all my care,
To animate their Spirits for the War:
Which will I hope conclude these Martial Toils,
And load our Laurels with Luxuriant Spoils.

Whilst on the Army you your care bestow,
Lysimachus a greater work must do.
The thoughts of high placed Love so swiftly roll
Thorough each passage of his Captive Soul;
That he can take no rest, till he does prove,
Himself confirmed in Parisatis Love.
But in this enterprise --
How many dangers must I undergo?
I may be taken by my greatest Foe,
Or else expect, but Coward as I am,
To show such Fears, and wear a Lovers Name!
Let Dangers fright weak Souls, True Lovers should,
Despising Dangers, wade through Seas of Blood.
The desp'rat'st Acts, do meet the bravest end,
And when Love calls, Glory does still attend.
Well, to my Princess then my steps I'll guide,
I'll leap the Ford, though it be ne'er so wide:
And Let what will be the intent of Fate,
This Resolution nothing shall rebate.

Repell these doubtful Sentiments of yours,
Fate may be kind to your unseign'd amours.
Perdiccas said, he to the Queen would sue,
That Oroondates might come wait on you:
You know his power is with her so great,
That her Compliance may not be hard to get.

These Fears, which have such Empire o'r my mind
Will prove to be but too too just you'll find:
The Queen, 'tis true, Perdiccas does esteem,
But ne'er in that request will yield to him:
Since to her rising jealousies 'twill prove,
Contrived but for the ruin of her Love.
You cannot then condemn the pain I bear,
Till I the Queen's reception of it hear.

Ah! If such Fears can make you to despair,
You'll never be victorious in Loves War:
Resume your Courage, and take firmer hold,
You'll out-brave Fortune, if you dare be bold.
How can Roxana his desires blame,
When all his sufferings are with hers the same?
Nor can you think she will her fury turn
Against him, for whom she does so fiercely burn.
For though Revenge and Pride in her do sway,
She'll not her Reason, and her Love betray.

If Oroondates had requested it,
She to oblige him might perhaps submit:
But when it threats her Love so great a wreck,
She'll shun the danger of it by the check.

Lovers, like Gamesters, Sister, ne'er are seen,
To count their losses o'r, but what they win:
And you like them, all thoughts of Fear should hide,
And always reckon on the advantage side.

Sister, 'tis true, but yet we must not be,
So blind to fall into Temerity:
Delib'rate Reason should our Actions mark,
Who walk without it, walk but in the dark.

Madam, my Lord Perdiccas has obtained
The Queen's Compliance to your last demand.
And a Diversion has designed to show,
Till he can bring the Prince to wait on you.
He has prepared it in the usual place,
And hopes you'll with your Presence give it Grace.

Go, and inform your Lord I will be there

Surprising Joys does all my Blood alarm,
And gives to every Sense a Conquering Charm.
Fortune her greatest kindness now has shown,
And I'm all happy in one moment grown.
Shall I once more my Beloved Lord Embrace?
Heavens! how you overwhelm me with your Grace!
Let Coward fear to Noble Love give place.
Fears, Sister, are the Hags of Souls, which still
Disturb and fright us about some future ill.
Like Guilty Consciences, they entertain
Us with the Horrors of an endless Pain;
And do our very Reason so destroy,
We cannot find we have a Soul for joy.

How nimble did the hasty minutes move,
That made us happy in each other's Love!
Fleet as the Lightning cutting through the Air,
Only to show its self, and disappear.
But oh! how slow this lazy time has gone,
Whilst w'ave been under this privation!
It seemed with such a heavy pace to creep,
As though 'twere jaded or over clogged with sleep.
Propitious hours! avaunt, be dull no more,
But fly as swift as ever you did before:
Unite our Arms again; -- then take your ease,
And crawl away as Snail-like as you please.

Madam, A Gentleman without does sue,
That he in private may discourse with you.

-- Let him appear.

Ye Heavens! Is it Lysimachus that's here!
Yes Madam, Your Lysimachus is come,
Before he Fights, to know of you his doom.
You are the Oracle that tells his Fate:
Oh! pity him in this deplored Estate.

Ah! Sir, How strangely you my heart surprise!
How durst you venture in this loose disguise?

What is there, Madam, that Love dares nor do,
When 'tis engaged about the seeing you?
But coming through the Guards I met a Friend,
Did me this Garb for my safe Conduct lend*
And still to pass the more securely on,
Gave me the word, by which I was not known.

Your Courage I can ne'er enough admire
It raises still my Obligations higher,
But --
I dread to think the danger which you dare, --
If any should discover who you are!

A Lovers Fate is ruled by's Mrs. Eyes,
Unconstant Chance I boldly will despise,
And if I die -- I'll fall your Sacrifice.

We have so long been absent that I thought,
You now had Parisatis quite forgot.

Ah! Madam, absence does like Wind Conspire,
To make a Lover burn in fiercer Fire:
You are the Saint to whom I always pray,
I could for ever at this Altar stay:
But such blessed Visions, do like Judges prove,
They smile, and yet pronounce the death of Love.

Your Honour now does call you to prepare
Your Arms for this last Fortune of the War.
Why then my Lord, do you so slowly move,
When you're to Fight for Liberty and Love?

May I not Madam, beg you would foretell,
Whether my Sword shall be invincible?

Your Arms will never fail to meet success,
Fate does entail on you that happiness.

Armed with my Love I will to Fight retire,
And prove that Courage which your Charms inspire.
This Sword shall, like a Comet in the Air,
Portend their Fates, who shall my Fury dare.

And that your Arms may most Victorious prove,
I will solicit all the Powers above.

THat heart that bows to the power of Love,
In the happiest Empire is found;
No joys so sweet, or so ravishing prove,
As the joys with which True Love is crowned.
They are mixed with such heightened Raptures and Bliss,
That the Soul is all lost in its own Ecstasies.
Sometimes, 'tis true, the pleasure, by fears,
Is allayed, and sighs sadden the heart:
But Loves pains are soft, and we by our tears,
Find a way for the ease of our smart.
All their Stages are short, and they're hurried along,
Making way for new Pleasures that come in a throng.
Our Charms come most from the wounds of our Love,
And its Lances make sweet our desires;
The pains we bear, so delightful do prove,
That they raise our Joys higher and higher.
Oh! no happiness e're can these Pleasures exceed,
Which we still by our fears, and our jealousies feed.
A Dance, which ended,
-- Madam,
To show you what the power of Love can do,
Iv brought my Rival Prince to wait on you:
I hope the greatness of the Act will plead,
The awful Flame your Charms in me have bred.
And wish this Visit you may so improve,
As not to make it fatal to your Love.

My dear loved Lord!

-- My Soul's Eternal Bliss!
My heart's o'rewhelm'd with Loves sweet Ecstasies.
But I'm your Criminal, therefore desire
That at your Sacred Feet I may expire.
My Love, and Life too long have Rebels been,
For the Repose of my Soul's Charming Queen;
But Life I'll give to expiate the Sin.

Ah! My Loved Lord, my Oroondates, rise --
Pardon this blind distraction of my Eyes.

Ah! Madam, I all over so guilty am! --

No, you are now by me exempt from blame.

Then do not, let me a fresh guilt contract,
By swerving from what Dutie's Laws exact.

But you more from the Laws of Duty go,
When such neglect to my Commands you show.

If by my Zeal I an offender prove,
Forgive the effects, of which the cause is Love.
Madam, It was your Beauty's influence,
That made me give this Reverent Offence.
Alas! the Gods (to whom poor Souls with low
Prostrations at their Sacred Altars bow)
Do want such high Devotion to receive,
Which at the Altar of your Eyes I give.
I my Idolatry to you do pay,
But 'tis with a less fervour that they pray.

My Life! my all! -- I want words to express. --
My Soul's resentment of this happiness.
The greatest Fortune or the Queen could give,
To see my Oroondates does still live,
And live for me! --

Or may I cease to be:
Linked in these Arms, I scorn base Liberty.
Ah, Madam! was it then at your request,
That I became thus gloriously blessed?
How did my Heart with trembling lose its form,
For fear my sight should swell you to a storm:
And I did now before your Justice come,
But to plead guilty, and receive my doom.

'Twas my desire, but I ne'er thought so sweet
A Blessing in my miseries to meet:
Therefore being toiled with grief, oppressed with care,
My Soul was taking flight with my despair.

Ah! Madam, at the rumour of your death,
You know how near I was my latest Breath;
Yet (may I be permitted to complain,
And use reproaches against my Sovereign Queen?)
My cruel Fair, unknown to me, stood by,
Disguised, to see her Oroondates die.

Those, who did give you this Relation,
(If e're to them I did my thoughts make known)
Might with the reasons have acquainted you;
Which made me take that course I did pursue,
And how my Dutie's Laws, 'twas to fulfil,
I used such rigo'rous force upon my will.
Alas! 'tis true, I did your sight forbear,
Yet the Gods know to me 'twas very dear;
Yes, and those sufferings too for me you bore,
With broken heart, and sighs I did deplore:
But then my King just dead, so much was due,
To's Memory, I could not think on you,
Without committing such a horrid Crime,
As would have lost me Heavens, and your esteem.

Ah, Madam! --
Too much of the Divinity you share,
To make me think that you can ever err.
And you resolve, I see, to use your Power,
And all ways prove your self my Conqueror,

No, Sir, your Merits are so vastly great,
More than all I can pay you is your Debt:
Tis only they, which flood in their Excess,
And being so high, to you do seem the less.

You load me now with such a Glorious Fate,
I reel for want of strength to bear its weight.
You give me Death, when you such Bounty give,
And place me in too high a Sphere to live.

What your Humility won't hear me name,
You by the title of desert do claim.

Madam, This Blessing which to me you've given
Transcends the petty Gifts sent down from Heaven.
Life, Riches, Honour, -- all must yield -- your Love
Makes me immortal, as the Gods above.
Fate, do thy worst: my Life I'll not regard,
Since such a Heavens at th'end for my reward.

Ah! Sir, We must not rashly run to Death,
Heaven is to rule our Fate, as well as Breath.

Madam, My Fortune to your Will shall bow,
You are my Heaven, and I'll be ruled by you.
The chance of War, durst not your power dispute,
You, and the Gods, are alike absolute.
But yet --
Roxana still my dismal rack does prove,
And I am tortured by her hated Love.
She would have me adore her, and despise
The powerful Charms of your triumphant Eyes.
But by the Gods I swear, I ne'er will do,
What base Roxana would persuade me to.

Nor I, my Oroondates, ne'er will prove,
True to Perdiccas, to be false to Love.
What I decree, no power shall ever shake,
I fix the Resolutions that I make.
Perdiccas too, shall see I can despise.
His hated Love, in midst of Cruelties:
And Death from him I shall more highly prize.

Ah! My Fair Queen, rather than see you die,
I would bequeath you as a Legacy,
And with my Life my Rival satisfy.

But in my Breast a different flame I've bred,
I'd rather, than unfaithful, -- see you dead.
Live then, dear Prince, either for none but me,
Or die, and that way prove your constancy.
E're to my Rival I could you bequeath,
I could commit you to the hands of death:

And can you fear to find me e're untrue,
Since I have all my life, and hopes from you?
You may be sure I'll die, but that I'll prove
My due regards to all the Rights of Love.

The Queen has sent me, Sir, to let you know,
She your Converse no longer will allow.

Ah! Madam, We our Masters must obey,
Though they command us cruelly away:
But it is with this firm resolve I part,
Fixed to your Breast, its Sphere, to leave my heart.

And this assurance of my Love I'll give,
Never for any, but for you to live.

Ah! Madam, From your presence now I go,
As the Religious from their Temples do,
When hauled, and driven by the rude profane;
The Sacred Place they leave their thoughts retain:
So where my Fortune ever me shall bear,
My Breast shall always your Idea wear.

Cassandra here! -- ha! -- how his Eye-balls roll;
Those looks denote a Tempest in his Soul.

Make good this place -- by Heavens if you permit
One to come in, your Lives shall pay for it.
Swell big with joy, my Soul, for thy kind Fate
Has brought thee here to make thee Fortunate.

Ha! Your distracted looks make me incline
To think you have a treacherous design
Upon some Life, speak, Traitor, is it mine?

Yes, Prince, for my Resentments have decreed,
Together with your Fate, that you shall bleed.

Come on, thou kind promoter of my Love,
I gain Eternal Bliss by this remove:
In the other World I'll wander till I find
My Fair Statira, has by death proved kind:
Then in the Heavens we will enjoy our Love;
But if the Ambitious Gods my Rivals prove,
I'll act the Phaeton of my Mrs Eyes,
And with her Rays I'll fire their Palaces,
And make one Comet of the spacious Skies.
That done, --
Out of the Chaos of the Heavens I'll make,
One Glorious Structure for my Princess sake:
She then shall reign, and th'Under-world no more
Shall any other Deity implore,
But my Statira's Beauties power adore.
Strike, strike, thou welcome Minister of Fate.

That future Bliss, he aims at, does abate
My swelling Rage: -- He happiness will gain
By's death -- and th'Queen for his sake may disdain
My excessive Love: Rival, could I but win
My Queen without thy Death --
By me your happiness should ne'er begin --
But --
Thy Life has been my Fate, my Love has crossed,
That on the Billows of despair 'tis tossed:
But thus, thy Soul shall steer me to my coast.

And thus, bold Traitor, I'll thy Life remove;
How dare y'invade the object of my Love?

Gods! is Roxana here!

To be relieved by her whom most I hate,
How am I still tormented by my Fate!

Guards, seize the Villain.

-- Cassandra, wake,
Thy Love, Repose, and Life are all at stake.
Proud Queen, your scorns my fury shall enrage,
And did the Gods with you against me engage:
Backed with Revenge I would their power despise,
Chasing them through the Regions of the Skies:
I'd force them to yield up their Deities.

Now Prince -- how must this Obligation be
Received, -- still as a Fatal Courtesy?
Where had you been but in the Shades below,
If I had not kept off that dreadful blow.

was so resolute to give?
Remember, Sir, by whom it is you live.

I must confess, if I that life did prize,
Which you preserve but for new Cruelties;
The Obligation would be then so great,
That, Bankrupt-like, I could not pay the Debt.

Yet Bankrupts, as in Justice they are bound,
Do first with their Chief Creditors Compound.

That Madam, I most willingly will do,
You shall have all I'm able to bestow.
I own Cassandra did my Life pursue,
And I acknowledge 'twas preserved by you:
And now I would (witness y' Eternal Powers,)
Give back that Life again to rescue yours.

And is this all? -- this, Sir, does only prove
Th'effects of Generosity, not Love.

If Love y' expect, another right y'invade:
Heaven, and my vows have me Statira's made,
And could I now, swerve from those vows I've given,
I should alike be false to Her, and Heaven --
Madam, I cannot that desire fulfil.

The cause springs only from your stubborn will.
And since my Fate is thy proud scorn t'indure,
Ungrateful Prince, revenge shall be my cure.
Revenge against my Rival I will bear,
Attended with the raging of despair. --
If of thy heart I can't the Empire get,
Yet I'll dethrone my Rival from its Seat:
Assure thy self that she shall never live
Another Visit from thee to receive.
No, -- ill take care since you are lost to me,
To make her by her Death be lost to thee.

Perdiccas ne'er can yield you shall enjoy
Him, who would all his hopes and life destroy.

Inhumane Monster, if thou hast decreed,
The Prince, to satisfy thy rage shall bleed:
Pursue, and execute that black design;
But if thou art his death, -- this shall be mine.
Thus armed, your Love and Threatenings I despise,
For I can act my Death when e're I please.

Madam, You treat me in so ill a sort,
As does demonstrate that my Love's your sport.
I've paid as great Devotion to your Eyes,
As Heaven receives from its chief Votaries:
And to your will my strict regards have born,
Yet your return has been with pride and scorn.
But since from you my wretched Fate I bear,
It will be just if you the like shall share.
Your Loved Prince Oroondates I'll remove,
His Life's the Barr that keeps me from your Love.
Yet, Madam, you his Ruin may recall:
Oh! Grant me Love, and you'll prevent his fall!

No, use thy utmost tricks of Power and Art,
Yet thou shalt never gain Statira's Heart.
Thy Rival, unto whom my Vows l've given,
Shall either here enjoy me -- or in Heaven.
Go on, but know I my own Fate command.

You doom his death, and he shall not escape my hand.

Madam, My Loyalty has ever been,
Just, as it ought, to my Dead Soveraign's Queen.
Your will has been my Law, and your Command
Did my own private Interest disband.
To fix your Crown all dangers I despised,
Above my Life, Roxana's Peace I prised:
Now if past Actions for reward can plead,
All, Madam, I desire --
Is that you'll pardon what I have decreed,
That Oroondates by my hand shall bleed.
There's nothing can my Death anticipate,
Unless I am Prince Oroondates Fate.
Then blame not my Resolves, -- for he must die: --
None can condemn what's a necessity.

My Lord, from your discourse this I infer,
You've saved my Life to be my Murderer
Should the Prince die, I should not long survive,
Yet you an act of Grace would have me give:
'Tis granted, seeing --
After your bold request I let you live. --
For the ungrateful Captive shall not fall,
'Tis, I, your Queen, his Sentence will recall:
But e're this Sun does in the Ocean set,
Statira shall pay Nature her last debt.

Though she deserves not for her proud disdain,
The least protection from my Sword to gain;
Yet, Madam, with the utmost of my power,
I will defend her to my latest hour.
'Twixt her and death my Life I'll interpose.

But I've decreed that she her Life shall lose:
And if Perdiccas dares dispute my will,
I'll through his Heart my Rival Princess kill.

Such matchless pains my Tortured heart does bear;
I would court death in the worst form of fear.
Fortune has been resolved by me to prove,
No wrack so great as that of hopeless Love.
I never must possess whom I adore,
Roxana loves; -- but HER I most abhor.
Whose rage is to my Princess so severe,
That she must die, -- to give her Empire
Prodigious Fate! my mis' ries wanted yet
But this one curse to make 'em all complete.
My vows and heart I to Statira gave,
And Oroondates must his honour save.
When promises are to each other given,
They instantly are ratified in Heaven:
And to be perjured to them is to prove
Blasphemous against the Sacred Ties of Love.
I to the Gods my Princess will resign,
Sure to their power they will their justice join,
To guard the innocent --
And will not tamely lay their thunder by --
For with her all the Virtuous World would die.
My Princess safety to their care I'll trust,
As they are Gods, they cannot be unjust.
Villains, from whence proceeds this insolence?
Say, what's my Fate? --

-- Our Queen, Sir, has decreed.

And must I then for my dear Princess bleed?
Such Glory by my Death I shall receive,
That greater here would foil Heavens power to give,

Or live, or die, I know not; -- but you must
Along with us. --

If its to death, 'tis just*
For should I live I'd still her Love despise,
But dying --
Fall a Victim to Statira's Eyes

What horrid Vision does my sight surprise,
Or is't the abusive couznage of my Eyes?
Ah! By what Barb'rous Inhumanity,
Do I my Prince's Hands in Fetters see;
Which were for Scepters destined by the Gods,
And not to feel the weight of Iron Loads.

Gods! Am I once more to my Princess brought!
Your powers this Blessing for our Loves have wrought.
Your Oroondates Madam, in these Chains,
More Glory far, than in a Sceptre, gains.
And these which on your Lover's hands appear,
But poorly bind, to those his heart does wear.

Madam, I come not now the time to waste,
With long excuses for my Actions past;
Or seek out power full reasons to convince
The Justice of this dealing towr'ds the Prince;
[Because my powers the Justice of my will,
That's above Law, and can do nothing ill.]
But 'tis to tell you --
Though by your death there would to me survive
A double interest -- I have let you live,
To the destroying of my own repose; --
Which act the height of my compassion shows.
Yes, and my kindness I could still improve,
If you would yield me up the Prince's Love:
'Tis only that, and his Repentance shall
Proclaim his safety, and your fate recall.

And, Oroondates, if you don't resign
Up your pretensions, to make way for mine,
To the Divine Statira, and despise
The attractive influence of her charming Eyes;
You shall the Fury of a Rival bear,
Keen as an Ev'ning's Wolf in her despair,

Madam, Your Beauty and your Mind are still,
Like Tyrants, never pleased but when they kill.
Yet, Cruel Queen, your Menaces pursue,
Life I despise, if I must live by you?
And in my Death not all the Gods above,
Shall for one moment make me quit my Love.

This course, by which you would my Princess get,
Is for the greatness of your Courage fit:
And brave Perdiccas Nobly does aspire,
To gain those charms he does so much admire;
Setting his Valour forth in its full power. --
Against one, who is a fettered Prisoner:
But yet a Man that often made thee fly,
And twice reprieved thy Life from destiny.

I those good Offices, my Lord, disown,
Which you so proudly boast for me to have done;
But here's no place that question to debate, --
Besides thy Breath is of too short a date.
You must your Life, or Fair Statira lose,
Advise with her which Destiny to choose:
If she the Sentence of your Fate would bar,
She must resign your Love, and mine prefer.

And you this hour Statira's Fate must give,
I know you would decree that she should live,
She shall --
If with this one request you will comply,
Quitting her Love, you will not mine deny,
For that will but reverse her doom, -- to die.

You, for your safety, may consult your Breast,
And take the way which shall displease you least:
But to be just, I must my Life pursue,
For if it reach not me, 'twill light on you.

Hold, Oroondates, I'm resolved to die,
Statira means that Justice to supply.
But though I would have you my Death survive,
'Tis not that you should for Roxana live.

Her Tyrant passion I as much despise,
As my Statira's generous Love I prize:
And if so base I prove t'out-live your Fate,
May Heaven, my sin the more to aggravate,
Curse me, and join me to the Queen I hate.

Captive, desist, and with my Love comply;
Or by the Gods --

-- Before I'll love, I'll die.

Then thus, rash Man, my just revenge I'll take,

And I with joy --
Welcome my Death for Oroondates sake.

Gods, but that must not be --

-- Traitor, how dare
Y' oppose my will, -- be prudent, and forbear,
Or thus expect in my revenge to share.

Thy Female rage I slight, and with this hand,
To guard her Life, I'll all your arms withstand.

-- Guards

Ah! Do not such apparent dangers run,
By thus dividing you are both undone:
Your Common Foes will at a breach so great,
An easy Conquest in your Ruins get;
Your Kingdom too will feel a killing smart,
For you your selves do stab it at the heart.

Conduct the Prince to his Apartment strait,
And then, Arbates, for our Orders wait.

Farewell my Love, --
Yet e're I go, this solemn Oath I make,
Never to live, but for Statira's sake.

The same make I to you: -- death shall relieve.
Us both, if in our Loves we cannot live:
Then shall our Souls together mounting fly,
Into the Regions of Eternity;
And in those Aerie Circles as we go,
We'll reap that Love we could not here below.
And in that Heavenly Orb, like Stars, we'll move,
To teach the World true constancy in Love,

Oh! My Statira --

My Soul, my Life, my Love! --

Oh, Madam, Fly, our Foes like Torrents come,
Rolling upon us to our certain doom:
Seleucns and Nearchus both are met,
The Palace with their Forces to beset:
Besides without the City's to be seen
Long Troops of Horse and glittering Armour'd Men:
And all do seem as if they would engage
Against us the sharpn'd fury of their rage.

My Lord --
Resume your Loyalty, your Rage defer,
And against approaching Foes let us appear --

No, Queen, Revenge my Boiling Breast controlls;
Hence Loyalty; -- the, Curb of fearing Fools.
When Monarchs Tyrants prove, their Subjects rage
Is justified by the Gods --
Against Tyrant Force they will their power engage.

Rebels to mask their Treasons want no plea,
They'll with Religion cloak their Infamy:
And cry --
'Tis Zeal for Heaven to pull down Tyranny,
But in the affront to Crowns Heaven bears a part.
The Gods by us --
Redress their wrongs upon disloyal hearts.
In vain, proud Lord, All-mighty Aids you boast.

To me, and all the World Roxana's lost,
Urged by your Tyrant Will and Fury too,
What is it that Perdiccas dares not do?

I can do more by my Resentments led,
Strike with my looks thy slender Squadrons dead.
Defend my Rival with thy utmost power,
Yet she and you shall find a Conqueror.
For from your Captives boasted Power and Charms,
I'll borrow strength to kili her -- in thy Arms*

Retire, proud Queen, and for the Fight prepare.

You for your Fate -- I for the Spoils of War.

HOw am I now to all good Fortune lost!
Which way so e're I turn I still am crossed:
My Enemies together do combine,
And for my Ruin all their Forces join.
Their Standards planted on each side my Walls,
Call me and mine to Deaths and Funerals:
Great Artaxerxes at my Gate is seen,
And Powerful Lysimachns: -- within
Perdiccas and Cassandra do engage,
Against me with a Rival's utmost rage.
There's Strong Seleucus and Nearchus too; --
To all I am become the hated Foe.
Such Oppofition I can ne'er Withstand,
Against such power what is a single hand?
Ye Gods! if to your Justice I must fall,
Sink all these Traitors in my Burial.
One Tomb for me and Babilon erect,
And like your selves a Sacrifice exact.
And then I shall with some Contentment die,
When all with me in death and ruin lie.

Madam, We know not yet the God's decree,

An! my Hesione, --
I'm on the Fatal Rocks of Ruin cast,
Not the least glimpse of hopes but what is past.

One way I still perceive may you protect; --
Yet I much fear my Counsel you'll suspect.

Ah! do not, Friend, my miseries increase,
But speak, -- if what you know can give me ease.

'Tis then to set the Prince of Scythia free.

Oh, Heavens! and art thou too my Enemy!

His Foes with Madness for his Death do rave;
You'll make your Palace be his certain Grave:
But were he free, he soon would let 'em know,
What 'tis t'ingage against an uncommon Foe
His oft experienced Vertue's known so great,
That this Obligement He can ne'er forget.

Haste to the Prince, and his Opinion Learn, --
Tell him his safety is your Queen's concern:
And if you think my passion may him move,
Tell him all can be said by one in Love.

Madam, Your Enemies come on a-pace,
And will within few hours fill all this place:
You may their strength on yonder Turret see,
As they come marching up along the Key.
Like a long Train of Clouds they do appear,
And with their Dust they thicken all the Air.

What is't, Arbates, we had best to do?

Set free the Prince, whose Life they do pursue.

My Blood I'll give for his --

-- that won't suffice: --
They have designed the Prince their Sacrifice.
Making outrageous Clamours as they're led,
They cry, now, now for Oroondates Head.

Rather than they his Life from me shall tear,
These Hands shall be his Executioner.

Yet this way we their Fury must control,
Expose the Body to preserve the Soul.
Madam, Restore his Arms -- and set him free:
Should he revolt -- his Generosity
Will make him prove a Noble Enemy.

Whilst I consider what I'd best to do,
Lead you my Men, and let your Valour show,
At least you can resist, if not o'rethrow.

Madam, with joy I do this charge receive,
And hope such proofs of my large power to give,
As may the Justice of your cause express,
And silence all their boastings of success.
I'll go where most your Interest shall call, --
And come with Conquest back, or not at all.

The powr's of Heaven against me now declare,
Leaving me to the effects of my despair:
And if the Gods our Ruin have decreed,
In vain we strive against Fate that will succeed.

What mind found you the Scythian Captive in?

He still remains what ever he has been.
To have a timorous thought of Death he scorns;
A Nobler Courage his great Breast adorns.
And did he once your treach'rous Friends assail,
He'd show the World and them who should prevail.
Perdiccas then under his Sword should bow,
His Death should pay the Forfeit of his Vow:
And he would make Cassandra too declare,
Who was Great Alexander's Murderer. --

Hesione, Conduct him hither straight,
Tell him Roxana will pronounce his Fate. --

But she'll take care it such a one shall prove,
As may be most conforming to her Love.
Perhaps the Act that I'm about to do,
Will at once please him, and oblige him too.
'Tis vent'ring my last stakes: -- the Gods may be
So kind, -- to make the Dice fall fair for me.
Will you for ever, Prince, ungrateful prove,
Still to prefer thy Death before my Love?
I have, till now, secured thy Life, 'tis known,
Against thy Foes with hazard of my own:
And still I wish that I could something do,
(So well I love) both for my self and you.

Your kindness will prove Mortal at this rate,
And bring your Lover his Apparent Fate:
You see with how great strength my Foes appear,
Only their Rivals from your Arms to tear;
And yet my Sword you can to me deny,
Wherewith I could defeat my Enemy.
But this Act, Madam, from your Love does come,
I know it, -- you would see my Martyrdom.

No, you should find I would preserve you still,
Were but my power as strong as is my will?
There, Prince, thy Arms I freely do restore;
Go, Fight, and Conquer; -- but remember her
Who for thy safety makes her Interest bend: --
Lets go her Love to be so good a Friend.

Ah! Madam, let me now embrace your Feet,
So high a Favour speaks you truly great:
And to the Sacred Gods I make this Vow,
(If they on me the Victory bestow,)
Although my self to you I cannot give,
To serve your Int'rests I will ever Live.

Something restrains me bidding him farewell,
Yet what that something is, I cannot tell;
It wounds and tortures with so great a smart,
As though it aimed to break my tender heart:
Yet I must speak to him e're he does go; --
Love, -- I obey you; -- since you'll have it so.
Farewell dear Prince, -- ha! where is he become?
He has not sure already left the Room?

Madam, He thought you turned your Eyes away,
On purpose that he might that time obey:
Had he not took it he had never gone,
I'm sure you could not let him, and look on;
But he expressed, though in such haste he went,
He did your Bounty, as he ought, resent.

Gods! I have now pulled down upon my head,
Even all the Vengeance that your powers can shed.
This Act will give Mortality I fear,
To all that both to Heaven and me is dear.
Ah! Oroondates will too surely die,
And amidst the heaps of Common Rubbish lie: --
What wracking pains I feel within my Breast,
Too strong to bear, or be by words expressed!
But, Prince, since to thy Life I've been unkind,
When e're thou die, I will not stay behind;
But bid to Empire, Life, and all adieu:
Oh! Death will then be sweet to come to you.

All's lost, and we are ruined in the heat,
They've blocked up all the ways of our Retreat:
Unless you will your Courages recall,
We by their Fury must expect to fall.

Follow, brave Friends, your Valour re-assume,
You come not here to die, but to overcome.
Then to the thickest of the Foe prepare,
And with your Noble Acts your Cause declare:
Conquest's of right the Loyal Subjects due,
With Courage then your Enemies pursue,
But should you fall in this so brave a Cause,
The Gods and World would give you just Applause.
Who for his Monarch's safety Life does give,
Though Dead, his Name, and Loyalty shall live.
This Act, Brave Queen, past Cruelties out-vie,
For which I'll fix you in your Throne, or die.

Hold, hold, Perdiccas, here's a Nobler Foe,
You have before you Oroondates now:
The Gods by the Queen have given this happy hour,
Which must decide who shall be Conqueror.

Those Gods you mention have to me proved kind,
Since thus my hated Enemy I find.
And they've decreed, I plainly now descry,
'Tis I that must this Gordian Knot untie:
And thus thy Death shall give me Victory,

In vain they Fight, for we are Conquerours made, Since Brave Seleucus comes
unto our Aid.

Such dismal Fears my Senses do invade,
That, Sister, of my self I am afraid:
Before my Eyes, continually there swims,
Objects as dismal, as Sick persons dreams;
Which way so e're I turn I still do hear
Distracting Noises heightening my despair.
Were Oroondates safe, I'd Death defy.

Oh! Do not, Sister, with base fears comply.

Hark, hark, --
Ah, Prince, for thee I'd only wish to Live
But if you're Dead, I shall not long survive;
For I'll not intercede for a Reprieve.

They come, they come, the Ministers of Fate,
At last they've forced their Entrance at the Gate:
Their haste and rage declare our Lives must be
The Sacrifice to crown their Victory.

Who e're thou be that from the Queen art come,
About the Execution of my Doom;
Pause not upon the horror of the thing,
That I'm the Wife of him who was thy King,
Least you strike not, and that your Fate should bring.
Here sheath your Sword, your Tyrant Queen obey,
And let not pity loyalty betray:
For I'm prepared to die --

The Gods defend Lysimachus should come,
The Minister of such a horrid Doom.
Live, Live, Fair Queen, to re-possess your Throne,
For you are Sovereign now in Babilon.

Par. Heavens! Lysimachus! --

We only could for our deliverance hope,
From your great Virtue, which can Ruin stop.
We owe our Lives, Lysimachus, to you;
But yet from Parisatis there is due,
(Beside the general Obligation,)
A greater Sense of this last service done.

Yes, this last Action does oblige me more,
Than any that you ever did before.
And I shall have as great a Sense of it*
As your Desires, and Honour can admit.

Of all the Glory in the World possessed!
Oh how magnificently am I blessed!

But, my Lysimachus, oh! let us know
How we were made so happy by you now.

The Gods your safety by this Sword designed,
Which with the Prince, your Brother, then was joined,
When I received your first Intelligence --
Of your Detention here, and how the Queen,
To seize your Person, brought down all her Men,
Quitting their Force, I was resolved to come,
Either to Conquer, or to share your Doom:
And Heaven has made me now so Fortunate,
As to dispose you to a better Fate.

But in what posture did the Princes seem,
To be, when you did come away from them?

Such, as (I question not) will soon declare,
To them belongs the Triumphs of the War:
For when your Brother and the Prince I left,
The Enemy was of all hopes bereft;
Perdiccas then desired the Liberty,
His Fortune singly with the Prince to try:
For being Rivals, 'twas but just, he said,
You should the merit of their Sword be made:
Great Oroondates, Madam, who was born
Not to be frighted, but all dangers scorn;
Just as I came, begged the same freedom too,
From all his Friends, of Fighting with his Foe:
Strait by consent they did a Circle draw,
To give each Combatant his equal Law.
And Madam, We've no cause to fear the effect;
We know who 'tis the Gods ought to protect.

Let's go, and of the dangers then partake,
Which those brave persons suffer for our sake.
And stay no longer in a place, where we,
Have met with so much inhumanity.

Great troubles height'ned still by more distress,
Prepare the way to future happiness.

I cannot tell what course to follow now,
In this Distraction under which I bow:
Yet suddenly I some resolve must make,
Or swift-wing'd Vengeance will my Crimes o'retake.
Deaths my desert, I know, -- but that will be
Too great a pleasure to my Enemy:
Living, I must expect the shame to bear,
They, to reward my Cruelties, prepare.
Resolve, Roxana, bravely then to die,
And show them, -- this shall cure thy misery, --

Both sides the Palace are to me alike,
And each with equal Fear my Soul does strike:
Methinks Perdiccas should be coming there,
And from this part I should Roxana hear.

Rival, since thou so happy art become,
Look up, look up, and see Roxana's doom.
Those Charms which Oroondates now obtains,
Which I've so long opposed but yet in vain;
I will not envy them I shall not see,
Death from all troubles now shall set me free.

Hold, hold, Roxana, I conjure thee stay,
By all the powers you ever did obey;
By Alexander's Sacred Memory,
Your Love to the Prince, and Cruelties to me.

What makes my Rival thus Importunate,
To have me give my self a truce from Fate?

As thou the Mercy of the Gods Would have,
Oh! Envy not the Glory that I crave;
Live, and repay thy Cruel Wrongs to me,
I'll not pretend right to thy Liberty:
Nor shall you a reproach from me receive,
Which may be in the least to make you grieve.

You such a Heaven of Mercy now express,
As makes the Hell of my despair increase:
But to requite the kindness which you show,
I'll leave you Oroondates -- with this blow.

For Heavens sake, Madam, this rash Act forbear,
Gods! is Roxana her own Murderer?

Would Oroondates too my Death defer?

Oh! Live, Roxana, I'll your Throne restore,
Since I've obtained the Princess I adore:

Oh! 'tis too late, -- yet I could wish that Death,
Would not too suddenly demand my Breath;
Since thou art present, Prince, to see me die,
My Death's rewarded with the sight of thee.
But, Queen, though Dead, I still your Rival prove,
And ever will attend on him I love:
And when his Soul, like mine, shall be set free,
I will enjoy it to Eternity, -- oh! --

Unbridled passion did her Life betray,
And hopeless Love her Reason did o'resway:
And now, my Fair Statira, I restore
You to your Liberty, and former Power.
The Gods would not Perdiccas Fate recall,
But did decree he by my Hand should fall:
Thus with his Life I Victory did meet,
And now am come --
To lay my new gained Laurels at your feet,

Ah! My Loved Lord, our mis'ries are no more,
Through many storms we've safely reached the Shore:
Your Valour to my forrows gave an end,
And you are a Queens preserver and best Friend.
Receive the Debt which has been long your due,
Statira wholly gives her self to you.

How Glorious is my Fortune now become,
Since in your Breast I shall possess a Room!
My happiness does from my crosses flow,
As Saints to Bliss through Scorching Flames do go.
The Clouds of sorrow are all blown away,
And show the Glories of a peaceful day,

to Par. And Madam, Shall my hopes this Blessing find,
That Heaven and Parisatis will prove kind?

My Lord, they shall -- your Services are such,
Nothing can for their Merits be too much.
'Tis Parisatis boast that she can give,
A Heart which you so willingly receive.
But that she grieves Heaven will not let her bring
Something more worthy of an Offering.

A Greater Blessing, Madam can't be given,
You do at once possess me of all Heaven.

Since Brother (by the Goodness of my Queen,)
Our Nuptials shall with the next Light begin;
I can't but wish our satisfaction should
Be equal in our Loves, as in our Blood.
And since my Sister Berenice does prove
Worthy of the Brave Artaxerxes Love:
Your worth that confidence in me procures,
Which prompts me to conclude she will be yours.

Ah! Madam, What must I expect from you?
Now Heaven does smile, let Berenice smile too.

Since the Heavenly Powers now have restored us peace,
This day shall crown each others happiness.
For now you've kept your Vows, I will not start
From mine, -- but give you Berenice's heart*

I wish, my Lord, I could your Throne restore,
And with her give you up your former power.
But since I can't -- you in all mine shall share;
Two Monarchs may, when Friends, shine in one Sphere.

After the matchless Gift of Berenice*
The Empire of the World I would despise:
Yet Bravest Friend, for Berenice's sake*
I accept the offer you so nobly make.
And since the Gods have given us this success*
I'll live with you, and keep my happiness.

But first our Thanks we to the Gods will pay,
For all the Glorious Fortunes of this day:
The gentle Calm of Peace from Heaven descends,
And all those Sacred Powers salute us Friends.
They call us now to lay aside these Arms,
And to contemplate on Loves soften Charms.
The High Transports and Ecstasies of Love*
Are the next Pleasures to the Joys above.


