IT is high-colour'd, shows the blood's inflamed,
Yet pretty clear. The Evil may well be named
Without offence. Something I find of weight
Sink to the Deep; which Mist-like, rises straight,
And clears again. I cannot rightly call
This a Distemper, when I judge of all.
Gentlemen, help a little, look with me,
Whose Water judge you this I cast to be?
You know not. No? Nor shall I tell in hast,
Lest then perhaps the man himself be cast,
More than his Water. This I freely say,
The Poets Water 'tis that made the Play.
And yet no Water-Poets. The Play then,
Is high, and clear, and deep, and clear again,
Just as the Poets Water. Who indeed.
Had he not been a Patient forced to bleed,
Had never Poetiz'd. By this I know
He's rendered Poet from this Comic Show.
He courts you all by me, and recommends
His Jesuit in the Play, to you as Friends.
For him abroad: He gives you notice how
The Dev'l himself is turned Jesuit now.
Yet thus declares; He quarrels not with all,
Only with Devilish and Pragmatical
Church-Empericks. As he is, be you mild:
He kills the Dragon, but he spares the Child.


LUcifer, Be not retrograde to my Commands.


Agrippa, I must be true and constant to my self. Your Commands are destructive
of Arcana Imperii, the fundamental Secrets of our Kingdom.


Lucifer, I presume not to refine or advance thy Knowledge; I acknowledge the
old Angel in thee. But if thou dost not answer with obsequious and rigorous
obedience to these my Sacred Charms, acted on the Spire and Pinnacle of Magic,
thou wilt unhinge the Master-piece of Combination betwixt thee and the learned
and high-flown part of the world, besides other evils that are ancillary and
dependent.


Great Sir, Speak your Commands more at large, more circumstantially.


Give attendance. Look about thee. These are persons whom I devoutly reverence,
who sit high and enthroned in my thoughts and estimation. They hear every day
from all parts much of thee in the world, and of thy Serpentine and Dragonish
Cunning; and the reports of thy deceit, lubricity, policies, continually crowd
in their ears for entrance. Hither they have retired to receive right,
downright, and candid Information. Here stands my charge. Discover here
theatrically, the most deepbottom'd and profound contrivances, by which thou
dost amuse, imperil, ensnare the world, and involve it in thy dragonish tail.
My Charge does not out-walk it to thy quotidian windings; and petty
tumbling-tricks. These Heroic Spirits are circled here, to take-a near view of
the great Wheel in its motion, upon which the lesser wheels and weights wait
and attend.


This would untwist my great work, unwind and unravel all.


Thou speak under thy self. Thy Policies have been abundantly dismantled
amongst men, and yet thy Kingdom is not unbottom'd, shakes not yet; yea, stands
upon a firmer Basis and Pedestal than formerly. Howsoever most men's
understandings are illustrated, their blind Wills will always be prepossessed,
obstinate and deaf to goodness. We bandy words. Thou, though the grand Emperor
of infernal Spirits, art not exotic and eccentrical from my Commands. Be
pliable, be conformable, or praestat componere fluctus.


Mighty Sir, I compose my troubled and tempestuous thoughts: I strike sail, and
submit.


Enough. I go. I have omitted no tittle of observance in the steerige of my
Charge, no sacred Character, Word, Ceremony. Slignot thou in the least Atom or
Punctisio of performance. Exit Agrippa.


This proud Agrippa fancies he wields and commands me by a Magical power merely
natural, as a Prince his Slave by a Despotical Dominion. There is no such power
in Rerum Natura. I hold him by the secret Nerves Ligaments of a traditional and
implicit Compact: and therefore must obey, or discharge my Hold, damp and dead
my Title. Lucifuga.


Your Pleasure, great Prince of Night.


I am engaged by some Reasons of State, for a time here at London. Follow me in
the dress of a Page, and be ready to be visible or invisible as I shall design.


I am, high Sir, your both visible and invisible Servant, to be seen and not
heard, heard and not seen, neither heard nor seen, both seen and heard; to be
felt and not smelt, smelt and not felt, both felt and smelt, neither smelt nor
felt; when, where, how, or in what shape you shall direct.


This is the Sacred Grove, this the newest Spring-Garden: Here she dwells. A
solitary place, shaped and carved by Nature into a fit Receptade for such and
so sublime a person. Surely, she understands the language of Birds, the Songs
of the Wood-Quiristers, and is promoted in her Knowledge by them. And here the
free and open Air allows her a more liberal Prospect towards Heaven, when she
looks beyond the Birds, and the Sea-Stargazer the Vranoscopus. Who gives Answer
here?

I most humbly desire access to the Lady of this Place.


How do you call her?


She is universally known by the name of Lady Devotion.


Here she resides indeed. But access to her is not rashly suddenly granted. You
must begin at me: my name is Fear. When you are initiated by sufficient and
inward acquaintance with me, I shall with due Fear give you up into the chaste
hands of Innocence; Innocence will innocently endear you to Simplicity;
Simplicity with an unleven'd Simplicity will resign you to Knowledge; Knowledge
will knowingly prefer you to Prudence; and Prudence will prudently conduct you
to the Lady Devotion, who will devoutly receive you.


I most humbly desire admittance.


What is your Name?


Aristotle Junior. I am a Graduate in the University, intending by a right Line
forward.


You may enter: But first, with a reverent Fear hear your Welcome.

Welcome, Scholar, whose Desire,
Kindled with Celestial Fire,
Prompts thee to a Pious Motion
In quest of sublime Devotion.
And points with Pyramidal Love
(Flame-like) to the things above.
Leave thy Body where thou art:
Enter thy Spiritual Part.
Then shalt then be installed Angelical,
Above thy mortal self, Seraphical.
After, the Virtues here, composed into a Ring,
Shall all encircle thee, and to thy Laurels sing.
First, Fear lays thee in the dust,
And presents a Power just:
Which awes, and commands thy Soul
Not to act without control:
Bends thee to a Law that binds,
And a chiding Conscience finds,
If ought be indirect: and so
Humbles thee thy self to know.
Then shalt thou be --
After, the Virtues --
Innocence stamps thee good,
Checks the Sallies of thy Blood:
Signs thee moral; and refers
Thee to him that never errs,
Moving him to recommend
Thee to the sublimest End.
And the Means in their Degrees,
As he most expedient sees.
Then shalt thou be --
After, the Virtues --
Simplicity states thee pure
From false-dealing, and the lure
Of base Lucre, singles Tongue,
Gesture, Forehead, Hands from wrong.
Tutors thy Life; guards all free
From taint of Hypocrisy:
Renders all thy doings even,
Clean as Flower untouch't of Leven.
Then shalt then be --
After, the Virtues --
Knowledge doth adorn and clear
The Soul in her highest Sphere:
Brings high things near to our sight,
Sees the darkest things in light;
Solves doubts, and removes offences,
Our greatest of Goods commences:
Teaches us what should be done
To end where we first begun.
Then shalt thou be --
After, the Virtues --
Prudence, salt-like, seasons Life,
Parting, as the Surgeons Knife,
Sound and unsound: holds the Reins
Of Virtues: holds Vice in chains.
To Practicks allowance brings,
Prescribes manner, measure, things.
Enter then, as you desire,
Tow'rds the Queen your Thoughts admire.
Then shalt thou be --
After, the Virtues --

Ignoro, Our very knowing (if I may so speak without prejudice to your Name)
and long-sleev'd Lawyer by Statute; and Magnifico, our magnifying and
multiplying Soldier, be not so readyfooted. By Justice, which you ought to
maintain with your Tongue, you defend with your Sword, the Precedence belongs
to me. It is my part; first to salute the Lady.


I am the right owner though not in possession. My very Vocation gives it me to
have and to hold by firm Tenure. I defend man, and his Heir, and his heirs
heirs to the worlds end in their just and lawful Rights, secundum aquum bonum,
with respect to all their outward Goods.


You deal abroad. I come near to him: I maintain him in his inward health, and
soulder up his Body in case of sickness.


And I defend and maintain the Common-wealth, and general Good. By how much
therefore the General Good is more divine than a Good which is particular and
private, by so much is my Work and Employment more worthy, more noble, and more
exceilent than yours or yours. Upon this your Ground I challenge both the
Place, and him that claims it before me. And my Sword shall uphold my Right
founded upon the public Good. Stand off.


The second Place is due to me. I am sure I am the better man of the two.
Ignoro, stand thou off. Lawyers of all others are farthest from Devotion.


Unhand me. Gentlemen, bear witness: A mere Action of Battery secundum statuta.
The next Water is brought to thee to be cast, in my own defence I will break
the Urinal about thy head, yea though it contain the Poets Water. For the
present, I am a Sufferer.


Within there.


What demand you, Gentlemen?


Hither we have marched to visit the Lady Devotion. My name is Magnifico. I am
a Soldier. Little Devotion will serve my turn.


My name is Galen junior, I am a Physician; and though most of us be Atheists,
a little Devotion is a healthsom Ingredient in some kind of Medicine.


My name is Ignoro, I am a Lawyer, I desire to take all my Fees, lawful, or
unlawful, a little devoutly.


Gentlemen, True Devotion is not little. But as Wheat passes through many hands
and offices before it comes to the Table in pure Manchet: So before ye can be
admitted into the Royal presence of Lady Devotion, ye must here employ some
time in learning and imbibing the directions and documents, first, of Fear,
afterwards of Innocence, then of Simplicity, then again of Knowledge, and
lastly, of Prudence.


How? Gentlemen, Heard ye this Lecture? Have we Novitiats and Pupillages to
undergo? We must be set back to School again. A Soldier should not fear,
neither be innocent, much less simple.


Sir, Once more, My name is Ignoro. A Lawyer is the Phoenix of his age, if he be
knowing above the common level of Noverint Vniversi and false Latin.


Nor should a Physician be prudent. I must kill unadvisedly, and without
justifying what I do with a Probatum est.


Adieu Friend; Tell your Lady we return, and go in search of another Mistress.

Gentlemen, Let's be Friends, and hew out our way to better Fortunes. Devotion.
does not become us: It is not in fashion within our Territories.


The first thing I do, shall be this: I'll take a Vomit, and fetch her out of
my Stomach, that I may have no more appetite to her.


And thou shalt give me a scouring Purge, and I'll send her nimbly going ^ther
way, that I may take Bribes cleanly, nimbly, and with activity.


Pretty.


Madam.


Well and wittily answered: That put together, is Pretty Madam. Thou art Pretty
and witty too. I know that I am beautiful, and I know thee to be Pretty.


I am your Servant Pretty, Madam.


Good again. I am pretty outwardly, and inwardly pretty. I am pretty and holy
too.


Madam, you are more than pretty and holy, you are exceedingly holy.


Girl, thou say truth: I exceed in my kind of Holiness, or I should not be
the Lady I am, Madam Hypocrisy. Well: Call my three English Scholars forth,
that I may see what Progress they have made in my kind of Holiness.

Yonder peevish Lady Devotion lives retired, as if she feared Mankind, or that
a Kiss would blast her. I am hospitable: I reject no man. She prepares all
persons by Influence from her inferior Servants: for her presence; as men are
prepared in Turkey for the Baths: I receive all at their first entrance, into my
near Embraces.


Here they are, Madam.


'Tis well. Mr. Complement my both stately and Coutreous Courtier, Mr. Demure
my moraliz'd and civil Citizen, and Gaffer Highshooe my bondst Countryman, or
Countryman of the honest party: I am desirous to behold some fait fruits of
your Proficiency in my School. First, Should your Affairs urge you to profess
love where ye do not, or cannot love, to countenance your profession, how would
ye look in such a case, how behave your selves, with what sweet words would ye
accost the person, what would ye say?


Our honourable Mistress, I would look thus.


And I thus, or thus.


And I thus, and thus, and thus again.


My behaviour should be this.


And this mine.


And mine as you see.


And I would say, Noble Sir, I do love you beyond the faint apprehension of
humane capacity, beyond what all Orators can speak, and beyond what any man can
do but my self; and then in an holy manner, I would swear toot, and second my
Oath with are eye towards Heaven.


I would say, Dear Brother, I do love you with as much zeal as my poor heart is
able to hold without breaking: my love to you, is just weight according to the
balance of sincerity: yea, I profess, and again profess, and profess again,
that I love you without the Leven or taint of any kind of Impurity.


And I would say, Master, indeed and in truth now I do love your Worship: In
good sooth I do. I have loved you, I do love you, and I will love you now and
anon too.


This is Scholar-like. If your necessities should require that ye cheat a man,
how then?


Then would I look him in the face with a smiling and amiable countenance, with
all the Graces dancing on my Forehead and Cheeks: I would join eye to eye; I
would open my cherry lips, and show him my white and ivory teeth in token of my
innocence: I would salute him with an earthquake of my head: and afterwards,
bow my body to him thus low, and speak all the fairest words that Cicero could
have uttered when his wits were most fresh in a Sun-shiny morning.


I would embrace him, and gently pull his body close to my heart-side; I woul
music this action with a groan, after the accent of Mahomets Pigeon: I would
speak whiningly, and be ready to weep, and then wipe-mine eyes very painfully
and industriously from the tears which were not. Afterwards, I would
conscientiously do my best endeavour, as your Ladyship fables it, to cheat him.


And I would first stand aloof off, and strive to look paleas if I feared him,
and send half a score of long-Legs before me: then would I move devoutly by
little and little, every step should zignifie a man of Worship, towards him: I
would no go close, but hold off, as if he were some fine thing that had wrought
false Miracles: I would look very simply and innocently, after the manner of us
honest Countrymen, or like our country Lombs: I would scratch my head on this
side and on the the other; as if I had a mind to dig up a nest of good words with
my nails: And then, acting prettily with my right hand betwixt my mouth and my
heart, I would say something which I neither meant nor understood; and cheat
him purely.


Your Judgment of this, Pretty.


'Tis pretty well, Madam.


Superlatively well: I my self could not soar higher. How would ye walk the
streets in a City as this is? Have ye learned all your postures of Godliness,
all your traverses of Salutation, your pious Gestures of Reprehension, that ye
may be thought irreproveably holy, to be performed, as ye go, on every side?


I would walk, salute, and reprehend thus.


I after this manner.


And I so, in City and Country.


Excellently! Ye all in your kinds, merit a Garland of Preferment. Pretty;
Introduce my three Out-landers: If they have thrived as thoroughly, I am rich in
Agents and

Mr. See Senior, my Spanish Scholar; Mr. Signior See, my pure Italy; and
Monsieur Kickshaw, my Scholar from France; My thoughts triumph in the Climax,
to the top of which my English Scholars have risen: there wants but the other
Wing on your side, and I fly.


Madam, See Senior will not be dropping or dropping on his part. I have learned
exactly to kneel upon one Knee, and to draw part of my long Rapier in my
public Devotions, to signify my readiness to defend the truth: to praise the
mildness and modesty of the Inquisition, though it be cruel above the Galleys:
to pretend fulness from a Bunch of Grapes, and a Clove of Garlic, beyond what
all the varieties of England afford. I often pray to the powers in Heaven, but
I swear by them oftner. My heart is most zealous towards the She-Saints above;
but I am yet more servant towards the pretty hearts beneath, and if they fail,
the Beast falls even to my desires. I more love the Image in holy things, than
the Substance: I can be cruel to the raising of horror and trembling in the
hearers, as I have been in the Indies: and leave the Jesuits to colour and
cover it with a godly reason; as something may be studied in the favour of all
things, though never so barbarous and horrid: I can bring torturing whips for
England in a Navy, and delegate the Jesuits to forge that I brought them to
whip and discipline my self in the Raptures and Ecstasies of my Devotion: I am
a true servant to the Jesuits in the promotnig of their ends; but I falsely
forget that the end should be good, and the action agreeable: I work mischief
slowly, but surely: I shall perform incomparably more: Let this suffice to be
spoken.


Madam, you will not find me empty; a man so near the Fountain-head and so
wax-like to the Impression of high things: I abound with all the possible garbs
of Devotion, and with Bell-conceptos to garnish them: My Soul is enticed forth
every day at my ears, and I am carried wholly out of my self, with the Music
of the Churches; but I direct little attention to the thing signified: I have a
Seraglio of women in my thoughts: but the for Boy waits there as most
delicious: May it please your Madam-ship; the Turk himself is not so frolic in
this kind of Devotion as I am. I stile my self much an admirer and honourer of
the Jesuits: but for the ancient Father of the Society in the casa professa; he
is the man in my breast: I dure let him loose to combat with the old Devil
himself in Matchevelism: I own the holy Monuments of the good men in old time;
and those are abundantly sufficient to save me: to the which I add a few dull
and scanty Devotions; As, once in a hundred years I convert a Jew, and perhaps
a whore when she is rotten, old, and past pleasure: I pass and repass many
godly Legerdemains in the Inquisition; but I seldom convert any there, except
it be into ashes by fire: and if any man prevent me by death, I make a
flame-offering of his car case, as I did of Spalato's in Campo di fiori; and
that believe me, Madam, was a fat one, I had a godly English Friend, who came
from England to Rome, the other day, and there mournfully complained with much
of your spirit, that he had been horribly persecuted by the wild and savage
English: and in the Rant of his Tavern-devotion, came headlong down the Tavern
Stairs, and broke his neck, beyond the skill of the Bone-setter, so his
hypocritical mouth was stopped. It belongs to this Story, Madam, that a devout
Spaniard came a while ago into England with intention to convert it, as having
heard that the people were wild, and lived in Woods, and Caves of the earth:
but arriving at Canterbury, and by most plain and manifold experience finding
it otherwise, he fairly, but not softly, returned from thence wiser than he
came. Truly, Madam; we do hatch patch together many precious godly Stories in
Italy, which though they be somewhat near to good ends, are very wide of truth;
and yet good Ends must be fought by proportionable means, and Truth wants not
the helping hand of Falsehood to support it: I am your Vassal at hand to act the
rest.


Madam, I do not implunge my self over head and ears into Devotion; because as
the Veretians and other high-moving and Eagle-wing'd Italians, I have a noble
part of the Atheist within me: but I can play the devout fool prettily and
modishly at set times: And of all Nations, I do you most humble service, Madam.
For, such a monstrous and long-sided: P^, such a changeling and fantastical
dress, such a Pedlars-pack of Ribbands, concurring with an outward form of
Devotion, is the top and top-gallant of Hypocrisy. Besides, the modes and
numberless number of Fashions, that never Flanders-Horse was sick of so many,
in benevolous Conjunction with Godliness, pencil forth and give Hypocrisy in
her full splendour. Afterwards, the Complements a la mode de France, which
multiply words beyond limit, and above Arithmetic, and recount to a Lady her
both invisible and impossible Perfections, when they meet in the same point
with a scarlet Tincture of Piety, degenerate into perfect Hypocrisy. Madam, I
pretend to Valour and a generous heart: and indeed, when I was a Boy in long
coats, I rode upon a Bear, as our honourable custom is in Paris, led by the
Bear-hood to my Fathers Door; and thence it came, as the speech of the Vulgar
goes, that I could never be afraid afterwards of man or beast. And in Paris,
the Captains of our Trained Bands are for the greatest part Taylors, Madam, as
I am, not only because they rode upon Bears when they were in Coats and bare
behind, but also because they are nimble at their weapon, and to put them in
mind of going through-stitch with their work when they fight: And yet, I
confess to you, Madam, that when I am well beaten by a Spaniard or an
Englishman, I cry Mon dieu, Mon dieu: and this is Hypocrisy too, though of a
lower Orb. We plead all with one mouth against the Inquisition; but par ma Foy,
we have a French Inquisition in Paris, otherwise called the Bastille, which is
not paralleled by either Italian or Spanish Inquisition: And is it not exalted
and sublimated Hypocrisy, when we bear a superlative name near to him above
the world, as if we were most abstracted from the world; and yet we teach the
world, and all the Phantasmes and lying Legends of the world to all the world.
Madam, I am old excellent in the practise of a singular virtue which the
precise part of people call Lying: Indeed I can scarce tune my mouth to speak
Truth: And I can swear such Oaths, as would blister an ordinary mans ears: I am
very quick and pliable at stealing: and then I can salve it, daub it, and guild
it over with a Lye: To tell all, is beyond all my power: For the rest, I rest
your Tres-humble and restless Serviteur, Monsieur Kickshaw, of Paris, Taylor.


Europe is mine; the other three Parts are within my Verge: My hopes are high
as the Firmament. My Servants, hombred and foreign, are men of all hours,
weigh all the moments and niceties of Policy, know all the private Overtures
and Inclinations of Opportunity, all the knacks of Hypocrisy; and are able to
vie cunning with all the simple, lean, and fagg end of the world. Scholars and
Friends; howsoever we must bear before us a plausible out-side, a fair Forehead
of Carriage, a Gloss of Demeanour; yet inwardly, amongst our selves, we may be
free and jolly; and as the Brethren in private, turn Wine down by the Tail into
the belly of a fat Capon, at a Merchants Table, to compose good Sauce; in like
manner, we may rejoice at due times, with, in, and over the Creature. Let's
have a Dance in the venturous aspirings of our Hopes, and the soarings of our
present Joys.


Madam, I hear the motion of some approaching persons.


Let's withdraw.


Still my Stomach is upon a blabbing account, it utters all: It disburses
faster than it receives: I think my Vomit will never leave giving, till it
gives up stomach and all. I mixed it very high, and it works accordingly.


And my Belly tumbles and tumbles without end, after this puissant Chemical
Purge: I fear, I shall purge my guts forth. Certainly, I was full of Devotion:
I had more matter in me than I was aware of: O, I must go.


The Lawyer has a motion. This falls right: Now we cannot jar in contest for
precedence: the place is peaceably delivered up to me: and I will not disband,
or give a pass to the present opportunity.


Good Sir, speak not except your business be both weighty and godly; I am
engaged in my Devotions.


A Maid as fair as may be, as fair as May is, as fair as a Morning in May: I am
sorry she's bookish: yet our most free, blithe and buxom Girls here, expose
commonly a godly Book on the Cupbards head in their Chambers, where they
continually sacrifice to Venus. Sweet Maid, are you the Lady of this fair
Building? If it were assigned to the fairest of Maids, it would be yours.


Sir, I may not dispense with my mouth to answer your vain and impertinent
discourse otherwise than thus: You stile me Sweet; this Book is sweeter than
all Nature's Wardrobe of sweet things; and for the fair building, this little
Book builds fairer. The fairest of Maids is Virtue; here she dwells, and here.


This Maid transports me. Sweet and fair, beyond compare.


I beseech you, Sir, be not grievous to me.


The Music invites me: I must sit down, hood mine eyes, and set my thoughts
flying upon high things, with my Arms pleated in this devout Knot.


Having transported me, her self is now transported.

Sans doubt, this holy Creature lives many degrees above mortality.

I have met with one in History, that desired, and very much endeavoured to see
himself sleep; but could never bring both ends of his desire together. Such a
sleep as this in such a Creature, would keep me awake without sleeping.


O, I am heart-sick still. And no marvel: For the Intention of the Vomit was,
to fetch all Devotion out of my heart. But the sight of this pretty Heart
somewhat eases my dull heart, and relieves me. Sleeps she?


No. She meditates.


I have been so liberal in purging, that I am persuaded I have left my Soul
behind me: O my sweet Soul, Have I then lost thee?


Your Soul is not so sweet, if you have left it behind you. Look hither,
Lawyer, the sweet Soul's before you.


She is an Angel.


Lawyer, You are without circumlocutions, a Dunce. Who ever read of a
She-Angel? or, of an Angel that put on the shape of a woman? I is enough, that
an Angel and a woman concur in some point of similitude.


She is such an Angel that I should not refuse for a Fee.


She is warm, as we are: and soft as the finest Persian Silk.


Be not rude, Gentlemen: Ye have chas't away my purest and divinest thoughts.
Now I am bold, with direct language to demand your business.


Our business, Fair-one, is; we are ambitious to submit our selves to your
Tuition, and enter here as Scholars.


Say ye so? Then I in the Madams name, pronounce your Welcome: Pray, enter.


My Charge sits heavy on my heart; but I must amand it to execution: The grand
Machine by which the world wheels towards me, is; when the leading Clerks
abandon candor, plain-dealing, and simplicity, and evade profoundly
hypocritical. For they governing others as the Shrubs of people, by virtue of
the reverent opinion which men have traditionally received, concerning their
Power, Holiness, Abilities, draw them like inferior wheels into a combination
and subordinate motion, conformably to their Ends. The Habit I wear, is the
Dress of an English Jesuit, as he commonly appears in his Country. I will not
delegate the acting of the Part, to any: I scarce presume upon my own
sufficiency, as equal to the Magisterial height of their Performance: Page,
Give notice to Madam Hypocrisy, that I come to take a sensible view of her
Scholars, and adopt the ripest of them into my Service. If all things fall
pliable, because I greatly cover Honour and Adoration, let me be honoured
before these people with her loudest Music in my entrance: I follow
immediately.

No Power so mighty, where their Lore is Law,
As this of Jesuits. They hold men in awe,
As thought, thoughfalsly, wiser than the rest,
More learned, more Scholastic, and the best
Of mortal men. It follows what what they do
Must have the Plaudit of all others too.

HAving orderly performed the Injunctions prescribed to you according to the
Method and Economy of this House, I am ordered, as you have heard, by Lady
Devotion, to render you to the place where I first received you. We all hope,
that you will retain the scarlet Dye wherewith you are imbued: Besides, It is
our order, that as we sing the Introit of him that enters, so we give a Musical
Farewell to him agreeably in his dismission. I take my leave, and leave you to
your attention.


I am humbly thankful.

Scholar: although you do depart,
Carry us with you in your heart
For after practise: Have a care
That you remember who you are,
What you have learned, and how you may
Stand ever steadfast in the way,
Which we have taught: Those gradual stairs
Well practised, will adorn your hairs
When white with Age, and bring your head
With solace to your earthy Bed.
Then will the joyful Angels
Then will the joyful Angels
Then will the joyful Angels meet you
And with their Songs of triumph greet you.
Then will the joyful Angels
Then will the joyful Angels
Then will the joyful Angels say
Welcome t'our endless Holiday.
Snares will be laid on every side:
Be sure that Prudence be your guide
In all your motions. Look before
You place your foot on any shore.
In every place the Net is near:
It will be needful that you fear.
In every place Hypocrisy
Seeming far off, is then most nigh
In real Truth. By a right line
You shall attain to things Divine.
Then will the joyful Angels --
The real Good must first be known,
Then the apparent to disown
Evil completely, and assent
To Virtues crown us innocent
In perfect Morals. When you spy
The first approaches of a Lie,
Step back, then fly for Virtues sake,
As if y' had trod upon a Snake.
Go on with Courage: and your youth,
As with a Gem, enrich with Truth.
Then will the joyful Angels --

The blessed Angels constellate here: Yea Heaven it self is translated hither:
Nothing sublunary is more divine: I owe my true life, and all that is
consequent to it, to this place: I must now think my self the last, and least,
and lowest of all men: Speak in the abstract from the Lists, Lines, and Limits
of all Hypocrisy; and act agreeably to the Commutations and Distributions of
Aristotelical Justice: It remains, that I wait continually the falling of the
Dew: The Shell wherein the Orient Pearl is born, opens it self towards Heaven,
begging as it were, one clean drop of prolisical and procreating Dew: which
having obtained, it presently shuts, keeps the door against all outward things,
and secretly transforms and ripens that heavenly drop into a precious
Margarite.

May all my Reason owns, hereafter show
The Orient Pearl born of Celestial Dew.

Devotion has been long filing and polishing him: Madam, you must needs intend
and bend your utmost skill to reduce him.


Sir, I shall walk up close to what your Commands impose upon me: I will not
lagg behind them, if my power faints not, and except I be arrested by
necessity.


Devotion in all her aims drives at this, to bring you and your Art and Power
to nothing. A thing will run away through many changes, and put on many strange
shapes if the Chemist or Alchemist pursues it, and endeavours the reduction of
it to nothing: This way he comes: I will be near in ambush, that if your Plot
flag and hang down the head, I may discharge my strongest Machine upon him.
Lucifuga, Wait you invisibly at his Elbow, on his heart-side.


Sir, I will have him on the left side, the right side, the wrong-side, the
inside, the out-side, the fore-side, the backside, every side.


Pretty, Let us now sweetly touch all the most Musical strings of Hypocrisy.


Madam, Pretty will do all things handsomely.


Maid, durst I be angry, I would chide you.


Madam, durst I be stubborn or proud, I would excuse my fault: yet, prompted
from within, I humbly say, that when I omitted my duty towards you, I was
otherwise busied.


How mean you busied?


I am very loath to answer, lest I should seem vain.


I charge you, answer me.


It comes with leaden heels from my own mouth. In the contemplation of heavenly
things.


I forgive you. Thou art as virtuous as fair.


Now Madam, durst I be angry, I would chide you.


Why, prithee?


You call me virtuous: a name which unbecomes you to badge me with, or me to
hear assigned to my self without a deluge of tears. O Madam, what have you
done?


Amiss, dear Maid: I can mingle an Ocean of Tears with your Deluge, in
expiation of my Crime: Forgive me Maid.


Forgive me, Madam.


Your ear: Pretty, Dost thou act the Crocodile best now, or I?


Both are as like to the Crocodile as the Crocodile is like to himself: All
Preambles to the devouring of this Scholar.


Let's change the Humour: Maid, where shall we select and pick forth a
Meditation for the present?


We have Matter enough every where, Madam. Those two Turtles that stand billing
yonder, are an Emblem of chaste Love.


A most happy Subject: Let's part a little, and retreat inwardly.


I have discovered their several glances towards me: Prudence, assist me
farther. Yonder pretty party-colour'd Adder, watching in the greenest grass, is
truly emblematical to me: I like not these affected Pageants of Devotion, these
painted Sepulchers, these Dunghills covered with Snow as with a fair sheet.
Devotion in the Majesty and Royalty of it, is inward: In the outside, 'tis like
a modest face, abused if painted: The more sublime the Star is, it appears the
lesser: Deep waters are silent: The rich Ears of Corn, and the Boughs
heavy-laden with fruit, bow and humble their heads towards the earth that bears
them. Chafe and Straw ride upon the Superfice of the waters to be seen, when
heavy things sink, hide, and conceal themselves: The Silk-worm folds up and
houses it self in the little Ball of Silk which it makes, and that from its
inwards: Gold is modest in its shining: Jewels, though shining, are small: The
Air is that by which ut medium diaphanum, all things here are seen, but the Air
it self is not seen. The Empyreal Heaven, though so shining, that it is able to
make a continual day amongst us, is hidden: Nihil in mari eminet praeter saxa:
Nothing holds up the head at Sea, but Rocks. The Sun declining, the shadows
increase: Cernendi vis in albugine sita non est: the white of the Eye sees not.
The Seminal and Medicinal Virtues are inward: The Soul is invisible.


Good Mistress, assist with your Charity a poor, old, lame man.


A poor man. A meditation of chaste Love, is agreeably perfected by the practise
of Charity: Old man, I am tender-ear'd: You must not beg of me twice at the
same time. Because you are poor, I give you this; because you are old, this;
and this, because you are lame.


Alas poor man! I have no worldly goods to give you: I am a Servant. Yet,
because you are poor, I give you readiness of good-will, and compassion;
because you are old, and suburb'd near your grave, you shall partake of my best
Devotions: and because you are lame, I give you tears, weep over you, cry with
you.


God bless you both, good Mistresses I thank you.


Methinks, this Charity is too full of words, too circumstantial.


O profane! This is the Music of the Bear-Garden, and of the
Counttey-Alehouse: not heavenly Music: Maid, chide him hence.


Depart, O thou profane Person.


Desist: It may be this is his way of begging. Sometimes the poor call at the
doors of rich men after this Piping manner: Give him this Alms.


Friend: Madam gives you a liberal Alms. He both plays and dances now. He
doubles his Profaneness.


Let him alone. Having received a large Alms, the poor man is overjoyed. We
may stop our ears, and look another way.


In rich-furred beasts their Cases are far better than their Bodies: and in the
Cinnamon-Tree the Bark is much dearer than the Bulk: Suavius olet flos, cum
folia nihil oleant: The Flower is more sweetsented, where the Leaves cannot be
scented, as in the Violet, the Rose; scarlet, purple, or the fine
crimson-Violet, is a royal Cloth, not by reason of the Wool but the Dye: In
our actions the Bias wheels the other way. These hypocritical Juggles are
execrable in themselves, and adverse to me: I cannot endure the presentation of
them longer.


Now the grand Genius of our Society be propitious, or I forfeit my much
desired Prey. Honoured Sir, what do you here? This Woman is no suitable Consort
for you. Madam, I know you, and your fair Fairy Waiting-maid. Quit the Place.

Sir, This was Madam Hypocrisy, her own and very self; and the other was her
acting Girl, her play-maid.


I divined some such thing: Truly Sir, whosoever you are, I have a reserve of
Honour for you as you profess against Hypocrisy. But pray Sir, let not my
question be unpardonable: who are you?


I am forsooth, a Father of the Society. You see forsooth, what Swarms of
Schismatics we have in these parts; and how forsooth, that in all Meetings
scarce two men appear, as the Schools speak, of the same numerical Judgment.
Forsooth, the Truth is, the Nation is like a Forest on the Coasts of Barbary;
where every Beast proudly forrageth for himself according to the latitude of
his strength, and combats with every living thing he comes near, either upon
the account of Offence or Defence: So that forsooth, this may truly be called,
and in civil terms, as the Civilians speak, Religio Deserti, the Religion of
the Forest or Wilderness, or the wild Boar's and Bear's Religion.


Sir, I find you are knowing: Hither I subscribe to your Discourse: And indeed
I would steer any Discourse, that I might be set in as much distance from
Hypocrisy as the Globe of the earth would permit. But you know how harshly and
untuneably change sounds in the ears of all men.


Pray forsooth, courteously lend an ear: Then only Change is a Defect, when it
is opposite or falls cross to the well-being or perfection of the thing changed,
and is in some kind a degradation of it: This is forsooth, as the Rhetoritians
speak, ipsa luce lucidius, clearer than the light or Sun: because the Heavens
and heavenly Bodies are incessantly changed in their motions: We are changed
for the better in our growings outward and inward: Every season of the year
revels, and causes many changes in the world: which forsooth, cannot be imputed
to the things changed as defects, but adhere to them as legitimate perfections
of their Natures and Beings.


Holy Sir, I do most highly value your Holiness, and your Learning: and humbly
require of you more particular Information.


Child, give me leave, forsooth, to call you so: For now forsooth, you are, and
shall be my Ghostly Child: I see forsooth, you are ingenious. I will send you
first to Flanders; afterwards to Spain; then to Italy; to sublimate and
heighten your Learning and Experience; and that you may learn the Arts and
Sciences where they are best taught. More of this betwixt us in private.


The Field is ours: We have at last wrought him to us: Open Hypocrisy,
Strumpet-like, is too palpable. I am now visible to you.

The Stratagem is then exalted high,
When the Hypocrite reviles Hypocrisy.

I have bound him by Command, and by Promise I my self am bound to secure with
my presence the execution. Anguilla est, elabitur: If we give him his head, he
slips. My Presence will keep him fixed.

What seeks this Maid here? Fie on you; so bold? 'Tis a Spirit: and I must lay
it.


The Affair refers me to you: and you are here.


Be thou Spirit, or Flesh, thou hast no part in the Comedy.


But I have Sir. No long part you would say; but a necessary part I have.


Your place is the Pit: and your Business is to wait there.


And from thence I came.

The Gentlemen there are perplexed and troubled: They complain, that your
Jesuit sends a chief Actor beyond the Seas; and that either your Scene must be
preposterously changed, or they shall be deprived of the principal Occurrences
which happen to him.


Neither: by virtue of my first and fundamentel Promise, my power shall bring
him hither at due times, to act over again the most remarkable Occurrences: and
he shall neither know where he is, nor what befalls him. Return this Answer,
with my devoutest Respects.


I shall. If you will civilly take your leave of me, I shall present you with a
Sevil-Orange.


Is this your custom?


No, Sir: but it was in my desires to teach you manners.


The Matter partly travels: you shall find,
As Friends, all brought before you to your mind.

Well, Madam; I have dispatcht my Scholar to St. Omers, you may now enter your
whole Tribe. Every one shall receive his Charge, and I will discharge you of
their persons. Mr. Complement, your charge is, that you stow fire in the Court:
Speak every where of Abuses; and of a singular discerning Spirit, and a
Holiness which you have, but others are naked of, as profane: Turn up the
white of your eye, and show it, as if that were the outside of your Soul,
according to the Naturalist, Profecto in oculis animus inhabitat; truly the
Soul dwells in the eyes: Draw every word through your Nose, as if it past
through a middle sort of cracked Organ-Pipe: and lift up your hands towards
that which scrupulous men call Heaven, and close them when they are extended,
as if you had fast hold of Heaven. Pretend always like an Apton in the first
onset, true things, and such as are in use with holy men: those delude
irrefragably: The people regard not the tail of the Business: The Snake having
past his head, draws his body after him into the Faction. Tell the people, that
by how much an Element is more near to Heaven, it is by so much the more pure,
^ctive, noble: that the Water is more pure than the Earth, the Air than the
Water; and Elementary Fire than the Air: That the higher the Air is, it is the
purer still, and more subtle: That in a Limbeck the things of greatest purity
and virtue, are sublimated, that is, hast to the top of the Limbeck; the drossy
matter falls. Let there be a new shaped Achates in every period. It is not
necessary, that one experiencing if Sea-water be salt, should drink up: the
whole Sea: nor that I should foot it over every particular: your own Genius
will direct you forward. There is no more excellent manner of cozening and
gu^ling the simple Herd of people, than with the specious Mantle of Religion,
because Religion out-powers, and, overswaies all in mankind. Mr. Demure, and
Gaffer High-shooe; you for the City, and you for the Country, are charged
accordingly. Galen junior, when you are called to sick persons, and find that
their sicknesses lay close siege to their bodies, first prepare them by some
eloquent Preamble. Say, if you see the water in a calm Ser troubled, and rise
high into the Air, take heed, there's a Whale near. Turn it homwards thus;
Sickness disturbing so highly the peace and tranquillity of the Body, Death is
imminent. Then make reverend mention of the Society, and recount the numerous
Conversions that we have wrought in the world, and press it home to their
Consciences, that they leave us honourable Legacies according to their
Conditions, yea though they beggar and leave succourless their own dear
children: We are not their Heirs at Common Law, but upon a higher account: Tell
them, otherwise they are near to a Gulf, a Precipice: Then while the Iron is
hot, and upon the Anvil, send for us. If need urge, we shall use you in
Deletories, vulgarly called poisons, when we prosecute a pious End. But if any
of our holy Society be sick, they pay you not, because they pray for you: The
Prayers of the Society are above price, and cannot be valued. Ignora, you must
wirebind and enchain your self to the common Rabble in the Decisions of
Law-cases: affect the names of popular and Patriot: desert noble Interests,
though never so just: and though you take Fees on both sides, be sure you herd
it with the Rascal Deer; they couch the safest; they are the more numerous, and
clamorous. If any case offer it self, wherein the religious profit and
emolument of the Society is involved, take all shapes, as the Chameleon at Land,
the Polypus in the sea; all colours, as the Tarrand in the Garden; before you
let your Cause fall: Regard not the poor standing in competition with us; in
balance with us, they are the German Bishops Rats: We are poor, and entangled
in debt; though in truth we were never yet acquainted with debt; that's our
Pretence, enfranchised, guided and guarded with a religious Equivocation; as
far as you know to the contrary, we are in debt. Magnifico, Your charge is
clear: you know your ma^ch: The Word is enough to a Soldier. My three
outlandish Imps, ye must away, each with all expedition to his Country. Your
Business wherein ye concenter, is, to debase and vilify the English Nation in
all your Discourses, all places: Tell your Countries, that they are a people of
degenerous and ungarrison'd Souls, Adamites in understanding; and if they have
any, have but a surface-knowledge, and that most paradox to Truth: That they
live altogether in Forests and Caves, and in the white Rocks from which
England was named Albion; and eat raw flesh, and oftentimes the flesh of
Children: That they are a timorous and soft-fac'd people, unapt for wars; yea
ready to entertain a conquest with most humble submission. Mr. See Senior, Give
your people to understand, that they are the most credulous, and the most
noble-soul'd Nation of all others: That if at any time they design another
Armado for England, they take a special care they do not provide such an other
holy Nun to give a solemn blessing to it; she was afterwards solemnly proved to
be a Witch. Pray them, that when they work their false Miracles, they will
carry their hands, and their invisible juggling-Hair more covertly and
cleverly: The falsehood of some these times, hath been Chrystal-clear in the
view of Reason: the most learned Laureat's of Spain it self, were confounded in
the sight of them; and the Inquisition it self was angry, because they were not
acted with more nimbleness. Tell them, their most profane and bawdy Comedies
in their Processions on their greatest days, are not convenient. I cannot be
infinite. Commend my brotherly Respects to Father Escobar at Valladolid: Tell
him, his Morals thrive wonderfully: The Mystery of Jesuitisme is little
available against them: they have overturned all Law, Right, Honesty, and
deified the Jesuit, made him the great God of Nature, all cases of Conscience
answering, turning, and returning to him, whenas they should return, turn, and
answer to him above. Mr. Signior See, Recommend my most humble Vassallage to
the grand Signior at Rome: Pray his Holiness, that there be sudden provision by
pension made here, for the poorer and scabbed sort of Priests; they are in the
Antecamera to a falling condition: Ascertain to him, that some of the most
active and unquiet Spirits amongst them, have taken Pensions here, to discover
the Mysterious Intentions and Actions of Rome and Spain, and at the same time,
the very very same, have remained pensioned by his Holiness to betray the
Affairs of their own Country to him: Insomuch that of late, one of them heated
and heightened in his Cups at a Tavern, and his Friend desiring to depart, said
with Cynic Modesty, Stay, Friend, the Pope and the Rebel in England (he named
him) shall pay for all: Fail not to lay this at his Holiness his Feet when you
kiss them. We of the Society are glued by a particular vow of Obedience to his
Holiness: It was the Wisdom of our Patron did it, that our advancements might
be jointly conserved: our Interest is closely twisted and pleaced with his.
Signify to his Holiness, that his wicked Priests get Bastards a pace here; and
then, having been overdoers, and overdone themselves, pretend to be only
Overseems to the Children: So far forth, that one being demanded why he knav'd
it for a Bastard, defended his Act and Monument scholastically with Aristotles
Ipse dixit; who says, that then a living thing is perfect, quando general sibi
simile in Natura, when it begets a like to it self in Nature. Pray him to keep
the Rithm if not the reason, and uphold constantly the Jews and the Stews; that
we may have more honourable Examples of Jewish women turned Christians, to the
end they may turn whores; which amongst the Jews is highly punishable. Tell him
likewise that false Miracles are greatly advantageous to the Cause, if they be
done as the Roman School-men speak, et si non caste, tamen caute; although not
chastely and truly, yet warily to prevent scandal; wherein our own Honour is
more considered, than the Honour of him who is most honourable. Monsieur
Kickshaw; Load and physic this Nation as far as possibly you can, with the
pretty Muld-sack or Don Quickshot, of your new Fashions: And as old Rome did
abound with the gods of all the Countries they conquered, introduce the Folsies
and Drolleries of all the world hither: That best suits with you, that have the
best name in the superlative degree: And still wiredraw the people here, with
forestalling and diverting their Trade. Forgive my length: My Matter, like an
Ocean, had I given way, had over-towr'd me. Let's privately rejoice a while, as
Witches have their private Revellings, and then we'll take our Leaves.


Most gladly, Reverend Father.

Reverend Father, they all crave your holy Benediction, in lieu of a choice
Viaricum before they depart.


O, I give it most willingly. Go, my Children, and may your Foreheads be as
walls of Corinthian Brass, and may your tuus lead all Europe.

Madam, In certain concurrences of particulars, to prevent suspicion, I shall
need a Lady to sustain the person of my Wife: Therefore to palliate my own
Person, I retain you and your Maid.


You honour us, Reverend Father.


Sweet Nice, unhinge your heart from that low-orb'd Religion of Popery, which
thus imperils both your Soul and Body.


My Lord, I cannot. All which that Religion proposes, goes parallel with the
most pure, chaste, and refined Truths. If you do not relinquish me to my own
liberty, I shall weep, until I have not another little drop to stagnate in my
eyes as wanting strength to follow the rest.


What a deep-wrought and rooted Delusion is this? If Ignorance hath not
uncoyn'd your Soul, and rendered you unreasonably renacious of your own
Judgment; If your heart be not in a total Eclipse and Epilepse by the vigorous
reverberations of self-Opinion, you will book it there, that all your noble
friends are otherwise devoted.


My Friends are not competent Presidents to me for the carriage of my own
heart. Noble Uncle, If you take me off from this divine foundation, I shall
ever be in a rolling condition, ever like a floating Island, or the Sea-weed,
and never securely know where to take or keep root.


They are the Jesuits that have done this: they have out-channel'd their
Talents; led them through all the Meanders and Labyrinths of Error, and stated
them incompatible and inconsistent with Truth. Dear Cozen, I pity you; you have
taken a wandering Star for the Pole.


Noble Sir, you borrow your name from the Nobleness of our Family: I conjure
you by all the lineal and collateral descents of it, to allow me liberty of
Conscience.


I may not: My Conscience sways me the other way. You want nothing: No
Pleasures are denied to you; of which my House flows with Variety. you are in
the Milky way to peace of mind, if you can bend your heart to walk in it.


There is no peace without the quiet enjoyment and exercise of Religion.


Madam, I belong to a most Reverend Father of the Society, to whom your most
distressed condition is made known. He will be here quickly, and you may have
the benefit of Confession.


Dear Boy, that cannot be; I am not permitted to speak with any person in
private.


Madam, the Father is wise: he will find a way.


Poor Girl! I bleed inwardly for her: Before she fell into this Trance, her
Soul was encaged and engaged like a Bird of Paradise in a pure Body; like the
Bird which the Indians call in their Language Manuco Diata, Aviculam Dei, the
little Bird of God, because it is never seen on the ground, but dead: She was
dressed modestly, and like one of the Sister-hood: Now her hair is mathematically
trimmed, curled figure-fashion, and with exquisite Artifice woven into Nets and
Snares. Howsoever her heart is qualified, she hath more of the world upon her
back, than formerly. It is a notorious folly, to be proud of a rich Scarf
holding up a lame Arm, or of a gay Garment covering our Nakedness. Escobar the
Spanish Jesuit hath opened a broad way to these loose and heathenish Dresses. O
the Jesuits! Surgeons are modest-handed, wary, and soft in their touches, but
Murderers care not where they strike, cut, wound. What's he? A little Devil.
Cozen, are you a Witch too, Do you deal with the Devil and all? What are you,
Sirrah? Whence came you? and to whom do you pertain?


Good my Lord, Speak not so much beneath your Blood and Education. It is a
Blackamoor Boy: Do not such obtrude themselves to us every day in the Streets?


O Cozen: the Jesuits have bemir'd your Affections: and the Will being
surprised with a Passion (be it Love, Anger, or any other) the Understanding in
a Soul divested of Prudence, easily condescends, and represents all things of
the same colour, the same dimensions with the passion. Troubled water renders
not the Sun-beams, though most right and pure in themselves, but distorted. The
Crystalline humour wherein the visive power is Queen Regent, is ^ot coloured.
Winnow and sift your heart, to find and single out that which threw you into
this Abyss. He that falls into the water by the breaking of the Ice, must rise
where he fell, or he is lost beyond recovery.


My Lord, I am your Votary, but I am grounded; I stick close to my Root.


Pray come up to my Proposals: I will send for one who shall free the Honour of
all our Doctrines, which your fancy either from the multiplying or extenuating
Glass, mishaps to you.


Your Lordship may send for him, but I shall not entertain him: He will be as
unwelcome unto me as a Spectre.


Then let some of your own Learned Acquaintance be called, to plain as with a
Roller, a Cylinder, the way before you: or, be your own Physician: Cozen, clean
the Gold and keep it: Select the Gold, and throw aside the drossy part: and
amongst other things you find, find your Error: You see, sweet Cozen, that I
desire to descend into your heart gently, as the Sun-beams into a Chamber
through the window, without opening the Casement, or breaking the Glass.


My Lord, you miscenter your hopes. Your Lordship will never be able to pull
the Thorn of scruple out of my Conscience. Good my Lord, surrender me to my
Meditations. Solitariness is my best Companion.


I do, but with some kind of Regret.


We who are upon the earth, determining and sentencing from the verdict of
Sense, fancy, at the least in our first Apprehensions, these things below to be
great, and the glorious and shining Bodies above, to be small: If we were
advanced to the place where the Stars are, these things would appear to us very
small, if seen at all, and those would show themselves: It sticks in the
narrowness of my mouth; I put it over to my thoughts. O the littleness and
vileness of these inferior things! In natural things, the higher the Sun
mounts, the less shadows it casts: and in artificial things, the Pyramid
ascending higher and higher, is lesser still and lesser: So mannered ought we
to be in our outward deportment.


Act it to the life now, and you fasten her. A young Maid believes and loves
with equal readiness.


Maid: Heaven greets you: I come not to way-lay your Devotions, but so raise
and perpetuate them. Let not your Uncle with his out-stretch't persuasions lay
or alhy your Zeal. Heretics are merciless, Iron-breasted, Rock-hearted, and
people of hardened and petrified Bowels: There is no seed, no footstep of Mercy
in then; only perhaps now and then certain arreptitious emications and
Star-twincklings of natural, moral, and old- Roman tenderness. If any of these,
walking in the painted Galleries of their Imagination, fancy they do works of
mercy, when they do thus and thus because others have done so and so before
them, they miscarry; For their Mercy is as their Belief, is beleper'd by it;
and the stream cannot be cleaner, clearer, higher than the Fountain, or the
Branch purer and more generous than the Root. The Magnetisme of Piery hath
wrought upon you; and the Torpedo and Remora, the World and Heresy, the Devils
Factors, should act no farther by their secret Influx upon your Breast: You
have given your Faith to the Firmament, and you must not follow in the train of
the Planets; that is, move on, and retreat in the same Line, and in going
forward be sometimes periodical and stationary. You are Heaven-sixt: beware of
sublunary Divinity. Relapses are dangerous: because Nature after a sickness is
unarmed, and left unable to resist their Assaults. You must pass as a beloved
Mirror of Patience, through all the Topicks and Tacticks of Affliction: which
like Galilaeus his Glass, brings most remote things near to you.

Fear not: He that exhorts to what you do,
Joins two in one, exhorts and praises too.

I am scarce yet recollected. O now for an eye-cataclysme, till I go to the
place where this Angel dwells, by water in mine own Tears.

Religion that calls Angels from above,
Shows the divinest Intercourse of Love.

I present my self now, that I may begin to fall quadrate or into a punctual
Cone with my promise. I have brought St. Omers hither; Here you shall see
deciphered and shadowed what was there actually and substantially done: We will
not miss in an Hebrew Point or Tittle of Truth. I should afterwards translate
our Scholar hither from Spain, but I cannot: Time out-runs us. Where our Matter
is infinite, we must circumscribe our selves. Howsoever, as in the turning of an
Artificial Globe, new shapes and Figures continually appear, so Changes and
Varieties encounter you continually. The Poet hath encharged upon us to make
hast, or you would see nothing answerable to such a vast Orb of Matter.


The Jesuits here have set me under Lock and Key, and curtained all the
Windows. I have no benefit of Light, but in one corner, where a little Ray
peeps in upon a Picture. And the Picture represents the Hollanders as having
taken a Ship, wherein were many Jesuits, and thrown them overboard into the
Sea: but in vain, for the Jesuits lie all upon the Surface of the water, with
their faces looking comfortably towards Heaven, and cannot sink, but are all
sustained by Miracle: It is strange that the Jesuits being men so weighty in
worth, should now be so light, and not worth their weight either in Gold or
ought else. I hear likewise, that they use dark Chambers, and Pictures
presenting Homicides, to sad and tragical ends: It is whispered by their own
Pupils here. This my present Employment they call their exercise: And it was
imposed upon me in my entrance, to search my Inwards whether I have a Call to
be a Jesuit or no. I do not like these quotidian and ubiquetary Miracles; nor
this warping of divine things to self-ends. Hypocrisy haunts me still: The
Picture, Image, or the Representation in a Looking-glass, that shows a Face
less than it is, may happily be like the Face it shows, and symmetrical with
it; but the Representation, Image, or Picture that swells up the Face, and
allows it greater, except it be wrough so for the suppliance of what is lost by
distance, attempts above it self, is monstr ous, and cannot be like its
Archetype; because Proportion is retained in Representations which are lesser
than the life, but in such as are greater, the Composition is discomposed, and
the Proportion seatter'd.


I wish forsooth all happiness to you: Child, how fare you forsooth in your
heavenly Meditations? I have brought you a Relic here of most high
consideration; a, Feather forsooth of the wing of an Arch-Angel. Look not upon
it but with due reverence.


Father forsooth, my Meditations gain and win much upon me: But when I was a
Cantabrigian, as having been matriculated in that University, my Master taught
me that Angels were immaterial and incorporeal; and that they appear in the
shapes of young men, to signify their strength, virtue, and power, and that
they are winged in the Picture, to set in view their readiness and quickness in
their moving from one place to another.


Your Cantabrigians forsooth, are fallen as from Religion, so from Learning. We
of the Society are Antistites, Atlantes, Heroes Literarum, the most learned of
all the world.


This is a Feather from a West-Indian Bird, which the good Father would entitle
to Heaven.


And Child forsooth, how stand you affected to our Vocation?


Father, I have a special observance for your Order (I must speak here after
this Dialect) but I desire to be more experience-proof, before I determine upon
a settlement.


Child forsooth, you fear want perhaps, because we are vowed away to poverty.
We have always a secular Priest attending upon us, that purchases Lands for us
in his own name.


And is not this Hypocrisy, which put me upon the wing, and engaged me to fly
our of England?


Besides, we of the English Society, have a Ship that trades betwixt London and
Flanders; in the which we continually receive and return the best Goods at the
best advantage: and we in these parts, receive ten thousand Pounds in ready
coin every year out of England. You stand upon a broad bottom, if you join with
us: We are above him that wrote, Ego Rex meus; I and my King: Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Cardinals, Dukes, Generals of Armies by Land and Sea, fear us, and
therefore court us: We are furnished with secret Engines, able with ease to
subdue them and their Families: The Pope himself in the traverse of the
Business, is our Vassal: he loves us outwardly above all others, because he
inwardly fears us more than he fears all others. If any Cardinal or other
person grow into a Favourite, we send from some part of the world, one of our
Order that is allied to him, to reside near him in his Orb, and maintain him
ours. No Prince in the world feeds fuller and higher than we, if you consider
Nature in her ordinary Demands: Be ours Child, and we will hug thee thus, and
thus.


Father, I am yours; though not declaratively, yet affectionately: I humbly
desire to remain free a while.


Be it so. You are ours then, in Affection, not in present manifestation,
implicitly, not explicitly, as the Schoolmen speak. Forsooth, I set you free. I
forsooth, will call a Council of our Fathers, who shall dispose of you ad
melius esse, that you may return to us in the Rebound.


NOw the many-wir'd Plot works. My Engineers from the School of Vain-Glory,
have wild-fir'd all Places. The Soldier shines gloriously in the Field under
my Standard: The Lawyer tongue; it nimbly at the Bar in my Cause: The Physician
gains upon dying people, and extorts Moneys and Gifts to foment the Combustion:
The Preacher is altogether declamatory and fulminating against mine and his
Enemies. The Courtier, Citizen, Countryman nobly maintain their Triangle. My
Out-landers have spurred up the Spirits of neighbouring Nations, from the earth
into theayr, where they sly (like the Vulture hovering over the Lion and the
wild-Boar in their combatings, as hoping to devour the Carcases of both.) In
this Tropic of things, I have seated the Provincial of our Society here with
his Council, in a Noble House near to London-Wall; whence they dispatch every
day the most nimble-witted Members of our Society, into the Conventicles, and
Army. When the people are pulled up by the root from Religion, they must needs
fall back upon ours.

Come, come: Are ye fitted in all Points?


We are, Most Reverend Father.


Thou and thy Maid look as innocently as a placid and fair Child pressing the
Teat. Let's away.


Come, Sr. John Wit-little; This is always the merriest day of the week with
us; though indeed mirth cannot well temper it self to these new-born
Troubles: but we hope the storm will not long rage, it is so violent. The
Transision in Music from a Discord to a Concord, is very swee^: from a Concord
to a Discord, harsh and unpleasant.


My Lord: I could wish you would conclude a final and happy Concord betwixt me
and Mrs. Dorothy.


That will never be concluded, Sir John Wit-little.


And pray, why, fair Mrs. Dorothy?


Because you are Sir John Wit-little.


I am sure, there is not only Wit-little, but also little Wit in that Answer.


Let her be as free as Air in her Speeches: you shall have her in the Exit of
the Business.


But he shall never hold her.


Mrs. Dorothy, it will be your securest way to take me. I'll be a Papist or
Atheist or any thing to please you.


You have not understanding enough to be a Papist, nor sufficient Wit to be an
Atheist.


I have understanding enough, to adore you as my Saint, wit enough to worship
you as my Image.


Fie, fie, Sr. John; You are profane.


I will not be profane to please you: and to please you, I will be profane
again; if you please, that I will.


Sr. John, Let her abound in her own sense.


Sense! I am almost in a mind, she's deprived of all her Senses, that cannot
see, nor hear, nor smell, nor taste nor touch enough in me to make her love me:
Madam, Speak punctually, and to the Needle's point, Will you have me?


I shall then speak sharply: No.


Why then, I'll marry thy Wir.


Sr. John, you must first find another Wit to match it.


Must I, whether I can or no?


Wher's this Noble Lord, whose nature so perfectly consorts with his name? and
who is so large-handed and boundless in his Entertainments, the Lord Liberal?


Sir, I am the Master of this Place.


In a good and auspicious hour you speak it: My Lord, we understood, that this
was your weekly day of Jollity, and I was bold to bring my wife in my hand with
me; that we might ^ive up the rich experience of your Noble Entertainment.


Ye are welcome. This can be no Priest or Jesuit, he has a Wife. We stand out of
the Gun-shot of danger. Sir, our Manner and Economy is, first to dance, and
then to banquet. We excuse no Gentile Person that enters.


My Lord, I run all honourable hazards among Friends.


Madam, This is a good man, as they are called, a Priest, and Father of the
Society: now time, and opportunity invite you to Confession.


But I want the convenience of privacy.


Madam, you may do it in the Dance: It hath been practised by the Learned
Society, in case of Necessity.


I thank you: I shall not fail to embrace the present occasion.


Come, Gentlemen, and Ladies, sort your selves.


This is a Child worth Gold: Her hand was double-pav'd with twenty Shilling
Pieces: This Golden Girl must not be neglected: Give her notice, that I will
visit her often: the manner thus.


Friends, and Strangers, the Banquet attends you within.


In eighty eight (mark well my Song,)
The Spaniards were so bold a,
They came with an Armado strong,
To kill both young and old a,
They brought their Swords, Guns, Pikes, and whips,
To make us all confess a,
Our hidden Gold, to load their Ships,
Then kill us nevertheless a:
Take heed, poor Spaniards, stay and muse,
The water's not your Friend a,
Ye will be used as ye use,
If you with us contend a:
This failing, Jesuits laid a Plot,
To blow up Parliament a,
A thing can never be forgot,
That was so bloodily meant a,
They thought to roast us all alive,
And send us to Heaven flying a:
But we it seems do them survive
Here miserably dying a:
Take heed; poor Jesuits, stay and muse,
The Fire is not your Friend a,
Ye will be used as ye use,
If you with us contend a:
At length all Priests become so rude,
So fraught with Spirit and life a,
That they mix with the multitude,
And blow the Coals of strife a:
They babble in the Conventicle,
And Quake it in the Field a,
To make the minds of men so fickle,
Resign to them and yield a:
Take heyd, poor Priestlings, stay and muse,
The Field is not your Friend a,
Ye will be used as ye use,
If you with us contend a.

Sir, a Pursevant having received Information that you are a Jesuit, pursues
you neat at hand: You are visible, though I am not.


Inspire me, thou quodlibetical Spirit of our Society:


Sir: You must be as quick as Lightning: he is very near: I almost see his
shadow.


What shop is that?


A Cobblers: they call him the singing Cobbler: and most commonly his Songs
inveigh against the Papists.


Friend, There's an Angel for thee, lend me thy Apron, Cap, and Tools; and stand
thou aside a little: I am in danger to be arrested.

Alas poor Gentleman!


The English Monks are merry men,
They drink till they are dry a,
They laugh at the poor women then.
that gave them Charity a:
They are so drunk they cannot say,
Their Vespers in the Quire a;
So drunk they cannot find the way,
From Dinner to the Fire a:
Ye Monks for sooth, reform your lives,
And now more sober grow a;
Leave Cups of crimson, and men's wives.
And let the Maidens go a:
Good Father Elpheg was so drunk,
He could not find his Bed a,
Beneath his Bedstead there he sunk,
There lay all night and bled a,
Peer Boniface strong water sups,
Three or four times a day a,
Until he has often in his Cups
Be carried drunk away a:
Ye Monks for sooth --
These Monks ambitious to be rich,
Do silver falsify a,
How ill becomes this covetous Itch
Those that vow Poverty a?
In public they look like their Sables
They meditate all kneeling a:
In private, play at Cards and Tables,
Fight, curse, swear, and go reeling a:
Ye Monks for footh -- --
Are they past beyond ken?

They are.


Friend, Happiness attend you.


Many Thanks to your Worship: What pity 'tis, so proper a Gentleman should be
arrested?


Gentlemen, I have now cited Rome hither, the seven Hills and all: when you have
seen our Scholar there; my helm will be needless; he will presently do his own
Arrint, and himself return to you. Observe him with a near eye; because the
place is esteemed as Caput Orbis, the Head of the world.


Child, forsooth, Approach not too near; that Image works Miracles: It hath
cured the lame and the blind, indeed all kinds of Infirmities: and which is
most miraculous, it hath spoken like one of us.


Father Tompson, This puts my Belief upon the Rack: And I will ingenuously give
you my Reason; because the devil spake first in the old heathenish Images, and
this is faced like an apish Imitation of the Devil.


Pray forsooth, Child, doubt not: you must believe it.


It stands out of the Zodiac of Reason, out of the Horizon of Science.


Forsooth, so do all Miracles: If you were not Aristotle Junior, and a
Philosophical Pygmie, but the Aristotle and a Giant amongst Philosophers, you
must immovably believe what we reach you. This Backwardness attests to a
Dyscrasie in your Soul, a Peacokness in your heart; we may not pride it,
especially in matters concerning our adhesion to Religion. Aristotles Image in
the Vatican, is more obedient than you.


But less intelligent. Father Tompson, I put upon me the name of Aristotle
Junior, only to plain it, that I was a young Aristotelian in the University of
Cambridge, and opposite to the Ramists.


I see forsooth, that you have Paroxysmes still with reference to the old
Heretic in you; We of the Society, in whom Learning and Industry, as necessary
searchers into the Languages Oriental and Occidental, the Heptarchy of Liberal
Sciences, Arts, and all the rich Armories, Closets, and Cabinets of Knowledge,
are met and married, believe it. And I desire, that your heart be fidus
Achates, a faithful Achates to the Cause you have undertaken.


And I desire, that solid Truth remain implanted in me. Truly, Father, it was
reported in England by our Miraclemongers there, that all the Pictures in a
Priests Chamber, the night before he was taken, sweat; and it made me sweat
ever after when I thought on it.


Child forsooth, I fear that you will miscarry hereafter: The Sieve put into
the water, is full: Remove the Sieve out of the water, and the water is out of
the Sieve. I know not, with what heart you have come amongst us. The Abyssin or
Ethiopian goes into the Bath black, and black returns out of it.


Father, I did not take up this Religion, as those who were born of Parents
steering this way; and agreeably educated; who therefore suck so strongly, that
they draw blood in place of Milk, and promiscuously swallow all, because their
Friends were all of the same Feather. I embraced it upon a pious and virtuous
account. I may as well bring the Arctick and the Antarctic, the two Poles of
the world together, as enforce my heart to close with impudent Falsehood, with
fallacy that is pellucid and transparent. You may drop this, if you please,
into your own heart like Arabian Gum, and let it congeal and stick there,
that your Soul may be there entoom'd, as the Fly or Spider in the Gum or
Amber. My heart will not receive it: May that be always deep-inlaid and
enamelled with known truth: I'll tell you, Father; I saw an Image the other day,
that was removed with a Procession, to a better lodging, because it wrought
infinite Miracles; and the Image was all over most miserably worm-eaten. Me
thinks the Power, if it be a good one, that works these wnoders with reflection
upon the Image, should also preserve the miraculous Image from Rottenness, and
from the Common people of Creepers the worms. I speak the Dictats of an
unbiased heart; pray interpret all according to the Algebra of Candout.


Chrissime fili mi, Cred.


It speaks: A Miracle, a Miracle, in a fit time, in its proper season.


Dear Father, what said it?


Chrissime fili mi, Cred: my most dear Child, believe: You believe now, I
hope. O, I am rapt, I am in a Trance.


The good old Father is transported in earnest, or he deeply dissembles.
Whosoever thou art, if thou wilt gain me, speak my Language: He cannot. This
Image is back-fastned to the Wall: I have read of private doors in the old
Paganish Images. English; and perhaps no more Latin. Still I am
Pearl-and-Coral seeking in the bottom of the Ser.


A Cunning Youth! What a precious Father of the Society would this man make? I
will hereafter deal more candidly with him.


O Father, I am abundantly satisfied.


I am abundantly glad of it, my most dear Child; that's your Name now: We
consume our selves like Candles, in our giving light unto others.


Father, what man is this that so strangely varies and multiplies his faces,
and Postures?


It is, my most dear Child, a man possessed with a Devil: The virtue of the
Image works this extravagant effect upon him. But I shall be plain with you: I
have something within me; it burns and moves like Thunder in my Breast, and I
cannot hold it from you, except I should cry fire. These dirty people that
receive Alms under the name of people possessed with Devils, are most exact
Counterfeits: if they were truly possessed, they would speak all Languages: The
Devil is a prime Master of Languages: He is no Alien from any kind of natural
Knowledge. The permission of these, and the like, are piae frauds, pious and
holy Cousenages; Thus Images and Relics are worshipped with a more large
measure both of inward and outward Worship. We have here in the Market,
Relique-sellers; and they are continually in fee with such a man as this, who
by his Mimical, Antic, and Tragical Gestures, reconciles those vendible
Relics with the Belief of the People, before whom they are exposed to sale. A
thing being set like a Pillar, supposed like a Mathematical Principle or
Postulate, and granted as undeniably true, we may defend and uphold it by all
kind of means.


But, Father, this is not ut Scholastici loquuntur, as the Schoolmen speak, who
always prescribe, that we should proportion the Means to the End, and that
Bonum ex integra causa, Good is from an entire Cause, sejoyn'd from all
admixtion of evil.


My most dear Child: The Books of the ancient Schoolmen are crowded with
polygeneous, impertinent and impervious Doctrines of no worth or weight, not
one Grain heavy, as being mere ebullitions of over-wrought, and Feaver-tired
Brains: from the which our modern Divinity is separated by an Ecliptic, as
being transacted in Regulam Plumbeam or Lesbiam, a Leaden Rule; and bowed
appliably to all our purposes: This Rule then obtains, when the Judge bends the
Law to the Cause, and not the Cause to the Law: The things we believe and do,
are infallibly true and good: and the Law must be bended to them by a pliable
Interpretation.


This Divinity is not divine.


My most dear Child: The posses't man expects an Alms: Give him one.


Notwithstanding all his various and indefinite Motions, his right hand
balanced with an Alms, finds the way readily to his Pocket. How comes it that
he foames at the mouth so liberally?


That Legerdemain is advanced from the Apothecaries Shop: And use hath apted
his Face, Eyes and Mouth to these horrid Representations. He roars only, when
the holy thing is near, or set in view; and then he expects to be loaded with
Alms.

Having all he can expect, he is gone. My most dear Child: You have seen Mrs.
Ward and her Jesuitrices, as tender-headed people call them.


I have Father. We were six Scholars of us; and they set us at a round Table,
so placed, that we sate a Scholar and a Maid, a Scholar and a Maid: and which
way soever we turned our faces, to the right, or to the left, we had a pretty
Maid, a Quicksilver-tongu'd Girl to face us. They told: us in the Crowd of
other things, that they wrought Miracles in Germany, a great way off.


Maids do you call them? They were English Chambermaids indeed. And the
Miracles they wrought in Germany, were, Three or four of them were there got
with child, and afterwards, they miraculously became Maids again. But there is
a Bull in agitation, to come forth with a roaring and raging noise, in
opposition to Mrs. Ward and her licentious Crew, against which there is no Ward
nor Guard. My most dear Child, I am forsooth, very desirous, that because you
are upon your Mission for England, you should see Father John Barnes, a Learned
Englishman, and a Benedictine Monk, sent to Rome, and committed to the
Inquisition here, by his own Order and Countrymen. This place belongs to the
Inquisition: I will presently speak with the Fathers of the Inquisition, and
give you a call from yonder Window.


The Sun in Egypt after the Inundation of Nile, heating the Mud, quartermakes,
half-makes, and when it perfectly makes, makes but imperfect Creatures, as
Frogs, Serpents, and such like. I have read in my Name-sake, every man by
nature desires to know: This muddy forging of Miracles will never promote a
desiring heart to perfect Knowledge. The Naturalists have found by curious
Inquisition, that if a Pearl which is foul, be swallowed into the womb of a
Dove, and remain there some while; the Dove will give it again most pure and
orient: Every thing must be tried and examined, according to my Lesson
treasured up from the School of Devotion, in the womb of devout Simplicity,
which womb will free it from spots, clouds, deformity. Yet I find that in all
these erroneous deviations, there is some colour or semblance of Truth, or
something like an Asteriske, or finger pointing to past truths. Thus did the
Devils Oracles deliver many sound Truths, the better, under such palliations,
to disseminate and publish their most unsound Errors: Thus doth a stink offend
us more, when concomitant with some weak Perfume which it hath pro vehiculo,
than if it singly sets upon us; the perfume procuring for the stink, easier
admittance into our sense: Thus Poisons are most dangerous and irremediable,
when joined in commission with a Cordial that is not able to resist them; it
serving to conduct them to the heart, and being unable to vanquish their
malignity: Thus the old Fowlers deceived Pigeons by showing an exoculated
Pigeon leaping and dancing in a Net.


St. From the other

My most dear Child, I have procured a Convenience from the good Fathers here:
and we shall see more than ordinary.


The better to discern the Arteries and the Vital Spirits in them, Vesalius the
Anatomist was wont to cut up men alive: in these they observe the beating of
the Pulse. My torturers are more cruel: they search me through and through
every day, and yet, I live to see my self out-live my self.


Father, I hear him, but, I see him not: Darkness interposes it self; the place
is as dark as Hell.


You shall see him presently.


Some hold that the soul is extraduce; and that one man begets another, Body
and Soul; and that the Soul is enlightened from the Father, as a Candle from a
Candle; otherwise, say they, a man begets but half a man, and stands many
stairs lower than a Beast, that begets the whole Beast; and that the three
Faculties of the Soul should be infused in man, whereof the two inferior are
begot in Beasts, seems not to be a well-cemented Truth.


He talks idly.


They have designed him for madness; because he was Master of a dangerous
Head-piece.


O Barnes, Barnes, The torments that I feel, are most unsufferable: and
outstrip, out-run, out-fly humane Apprehension. Thou wilt quickly be in the
same Circle of Condition with me.


Who art thou?


A Damned Spirit; who when I was a Passenger in the world, was affected as thou
art, and affianced to the Religion of wicked and abominable England. I was
commanded to tell thee, that two deaths stand gaping for thee with open jaws
in thy way; and it is recorded in the black and fatal Volume of Destiny, that
both shall swallow thee: The Funeral fire shall resolve thy Body into ashes;
and thy soul widdow'd of understanding, shall everlastingly be bedded with me
in Hell. Hogs and Dogs, Cats and Rats are more happy than thou and I. I must
not stay longer, for fear of discovery. I go: my Tormentor calls.


All things fall out perpendicularly to my fears. I shall be burnt here at
Rome: and I shall be damned hereafter in Hell: These two, like malevolous and
malignant Planets, are in conjunction: I have oculos pumiceos, eyes of
Pumice-stone: I cannot weep. These desperate Tormentors have sunk me into
desperation: O!


The wise Alchemist, in the whole progress of his Art, extracts things purer
and purer from grosser things.


My Lord, the Gentleman's Wife that yesterday was your Guest, promised me the
sight of a Quaker this day: I have a great mind to see a Quaker. Their outward
appearance is highly commended.


Sr. John: Toads and Serpents have been found in the midst and heart of the
fairest-colour'd Stone or Marble being hollow. I love to be like the Pearl,
which is united in it self, and called Vnio. If I should put my heart upon the
Wheel, to run round, the sequel would be dangerous, and perhaps like the
famous, or infamous rather, motion of the Wheel, which was first set on going,
and then carried about and about, round and round, with Bags of Sand tide to
the Wheel, and falling still as the wheel moved more and more forcibly, until
the violent motion kindled fire in it, and burnt it out of all Motion, but what
the sporting wind bestowed upon the cold ashes.


Madam: You are welcome to my Father-in-Law's house: by that name I commonly
stile him: I see you stand close to your word.


Else I were not enstated in that Honesty which I pretend to.


Is this your Quaker?


Yes, Sr. John: This is the Mufty and Head of the Sect.


My Lord, pray speak to him: I am not wife enough.


Friend: What is your Judgment concerning Religion!


Thou man, who gave thee Authority, thus to question me, thy Fellow-Creature? I
am free, and unquestionable in the matter of Religion.


Quaker, You should uncover your head: This is a Lord.


Man, thou art deceived: I will not put off my Hat, though he be a Lord: He is
but a man as I am, and my Fellow by Birth.


What is your Profession?


I am a poor ingerant Countryman, a Cobbler by Trade, that profess the
knowledge of Truth in a larger size, than ordinary.


How attained you to this Knowledge of so large a Circumference, if you be
ignorant of Learning?


By Inspiration.


My Lord, he is inspirited of entimes, and speaks beyond a man.


The Comet is perfectly circular, except where it blazes: yet wants the
Perfection and perfect Influence of a star: though because it is nearer, it
seems fairer: Besides, it is an Upstare, and risen out of gross Matter. Our
Quaker blazes only in the business of Religion.


Now his Fit enters upon him. Maid, give him a Chair.


This is fine sport.


The Ague shakes him.


He returns to himself.


The Nightingale growing fat, cannot sing: I have long fasted. According to the
multitude of Operations (be they of the same or a different nature) in which
the Soul doth busy her self, she performs each particular Operation with
less obsequiousness and ability, and therefore less perfectly. Because the Soul
being finite and limited, her active virtue is also limited and finite; and so
fitting and applying her activity to divers operations, she gives the cause
that each participateth a less portion thereof. It is not within the Sphere of
humane power, that one should at the same very time, observingly contemplate
the Feature of a mans face, beheld with his eyes, and judiciously bend his
Thoughts to the curious and bewitching Strains of Music intruding upon his
Ears; nor in the same instant attentively discern the Differences and several
Garbs of Colour and Figure. Had I a hundred Understandings, and as many
Tongues, I have Matter wherewith to lade and load them. Man, there is yet Terra
La, a Land unknown to thee, with respect unto knowledge and Religion.
The truly knowing people, wheresoever they are, are infallible. He that thinks
such a People can fall, fears the ruin of the Firmament, and is more than
somewhat like him, who-being Galens Patient, and very sick, told him demanding
in the morning how he did; that he had been restless and without sleep all the
nigh^; heaving himself from side to side, and heavily groaning; and had been
grievously troubled in seriously thinking, what should become of him (sick man)
if Atlas, weary now at last, should steal away his out-worn shoulder, and
Heaven, with all the Larks in the Air, fall upon him lying weak in his Bed.
Without Infallibility, there is no certainty, no security. And what are all
Professors, compared to us? They are decked like heathenish Indians, with fine
Feathers; filch't from Birds, that when they were alive, flew near Heaven;
while these, because their feathers are ascititious, cannot fly, can scarcely
creep. If they raise an old Truth, like the shape of a fair plant or flower in
a Glass, they suddenly draw the flame or Candle away, and let it fall to dull
Ashes again. Other men are petty Chapmen, and Peddlers of Divinity: Man, if thou
wilt know, know that I am the knowing man: And man, thou may know it by
this: of a simple and ignorant man, I am suddenly exalted above my self by
Rapture. Persons ill-affected in their eyes, many times see two things, when
but one presents it self: every man in their seeing, hath two heads, four eyes,
two Mouths, two Bodies, four hands, as many feet; and is twice himself, and a
double man. Man, thou may think me double and deceitful, but the fault is in
thy Eyes, not in me.


Now he goes back to the simple man he was.


This begets wonder. But he that is red through blushing, cannot be said to
have a red face: He that is pale through fear, cannot be said to have a pale
Countenance. As one good or evil Act renders not a man morally and thoroughly
good or evil: we being truly named good or evil, just or unjust, from the
Habits and the multiplication of Acts issuing from them: so a Fit of Knowledge,
fits not a man for the Name of a knowing man.


O Sweet-heart, Had you been here, you had seen a Quaker in his Fit: He quakes
and shakes like the Leaves of a tree in a fresh wind.


Such sights are not pleasant to me, Sr. John Little-Wit.


My Lord, she speaks with the Quaker.


It matters not: I had rather she were a Quaker than a Papist. Tender Infants
are most subject to fascination; she has Age.


Madam, Your Portion being in your own hands; bag it; and I will find ways to
fetch it: Afterwards, I shall convey you to a Nunnery.


You will make me happy.


Come, loving Guests, receive the Civility of the House.


Madam: You have signed us yours by this Favour: How does your husband?


Well, I hope, Sr. John.


Come Quaker, go with us.


Man, I follow thee.


I was directed hither by a Friend belonging to the House, to see a Jesuit in
his Habit, who will presently pass this way. I am an Exerciser amongst the
Brethren of the Separation: My Name is Abram Ninny: and it would be a
consolation to me, to know by sight of the eye, what manner of man a Jesuit is,
and how he goes orderly dressed in private.

This is not he.


I am newly returned from Rome by Sea to London; and I would fain see the
Father that sent me over, and debate the business with him, because it answered
not in all Angles to my Expectation. This is the Jesuits House in the Savoy,
that secretly beats the name of their Founder. One thing more, lies gnawing at
my heart: I find a strange fall of the Leaf in my own Country: Every man has
moulded a new Religion to himself. I have a Vision: I am haunted with Visions,
being newly come from Rome: Me thinks, this House is like a Theater, and
thronged with people. Gentlemen: I'll open to you a Secret, locked up in the
close Cabinet of my Thoughts. But, I pray, keep it as a Secret, and tell it not
abroad: neither let it pass into the cold air: We experimentally find in the
world, that Princes have their Jail; for Offenders, and their Bedlams for mad
people: And I know, that -- I dare better show towards him with my hand, than
name him here, is the greatest of Princes; and that Hell is his Jail. And in
good sooth I never heard or read of storied forth, never beheld a place, which
can now more appliably be called his Bedlam than England. But ye will say, How
so? England a Bedlam? the great Bedlam of the world? Are all the people of
England mad? Soft and fair. I Answer: No. For in a Bedlam-house, the mad people
have their sober Keepers, their wise Physicians, their civil Waiters and
Servants; and also those, whose Office it is to whip them, and thereby to awake
and recall their senses; and one of the last, I hope I shall be. Thet's the
Secret.


O I am robbed, I am robbed; I had a Purse of Gold given me this morning by a
Noble woman-penitent, which she stole from her Husband; and another he-penitent
coming afterwards, has picked my pocket and robbed me of it; O Villain,
Miscreant, Caitiff! According to Learned Father Escobar, he is damned already.
The Rogue came to Confession to me, kneeled humbly at my feet, confessed with a
sad voice, an humble mouth, sighed, sobbed, groaned, shook his head, looked
like a Carcase, and with a face equally divided and shared betwixt sorrow and
care: he cried too; the vile Knave wept, as I thought, heartily; the tears ran
hastily down his Cheeks, as if there were a modest contention, or striving
betwixt his Cheeks, which should* deliver his tears soonest to his bosom: he
kept his Right and righteous hand acting tabering at his heart, while with his
other hand, his unrighteous hand, left-handed Rascal, he picked my Pocket, and
got away my Purse, my Purse of Gold, containing as much pure Gold, as being
well husbanded by our secular Procurator, would have given our Body here a full
and copious Dinner every Thursday at our Garden-house of Recreation, I mean,
every one six Dishes, whereof one should have been a fat plump Partridge, or
something, as the Logicians speak, equipollent, to the worlds end. The Curse of
our General, and of all our Sociey be upon him: The Curse and the Firebrand
thrown down from the top of the Great Church at Rome, follow him.


Father, Father, this Passion does not become you, sits not well upon your
forehead.


Are not you the Thief? you are like him.


Look upon me well, good Father, and with unpassion'd eyes.


O my good Child, are you come again? Forsooth, I am glad to see you. How
relish you the good things in foreign Parts?


Father, tanquam in tabella, in brief. First, you sent your Letter of
commendations by me, and it had certain private Marks in the bottom, according
to your private Book of Rules, Politic rules, printed at Rome, and no where
else, which I have now seen; and this was to signify to the Jesuits, that if I
refused to be a member of your Society, they might use me ad libitum, at their
pleasure. Secondly, You sent Letters every Month to the English Colleges at
S. Omers, at Valladolid in Spain, and at Rome where I was, to be read in the
hearing of all the Scholars; and these Letters recounted wondrous things as
done in England, disgraceful to the English, though conducing to the
confirmation of the Scholars in their Judgments, which things were neither
done, nor feasible. The Business of Garnets Straw was meet Forgery; the Painter
afterwards discovered his own Folly, and yours; and your different Pictures of
the Straw (I have seen them) gave evidence against you. Fox, the Author of the
famous Martyrology, never believed his Head was an Urinal. The Learned
Church-man of England, did not die a Papist. I could exasperate your ears with
a thousand of these. Thirdly, I never yet saw a Jesuit or other Priest, of whom
I could honestly say, this is a just man, his Heart and his Tongue concur,
Truth and his Tongue are Unison: They are Mountebanks in Religion, and have
Spawns of Deceit and Equivocation in their Mouths: they religiously keep
Matchavels Rule; Bespatter thy Adversary with all sorts of Dirt and filth,
aliquid for sit an adhaerebit; it is likely that somewhat of it will stick close
to him. Fourthly, --


This is the Jesuit, in the Habit of his Order: a very passionate man: And now
I look better upon him, this man exercised in our Chair the other day, habited
as I am. Jesuit, I defy thee.


Who are you?


A Brother of the Separation. I defy thee, Jesuit.


How came you hither?


Upon my Legs. Jesuit, I defy thee. Thou art an Impostor, a Deluder: thou hast
polluted and contaminated our Chair, and I will burn it. I defy thee, Jesuit.


Cnipperdoling, vanish. Thee I defy.


Romes Janizary, I defy thee.


Gentlemen, I defy you both. But you two are not so tender-hoof'd, but you may
stable closer together, if you please. You both know, or have reason to know,
that I know you both. Come, come, stand as far off as you can one from the
other: I'll bring you together, I warrant you. Jesuit, and Brother of the
Separation: First, Are ye not both wild-fire-heated, and contemners of
Government, if heteroclite from your Designs? This cannot be denied: the
meridian Sun is not more visible. Come both a little nearer, for this first
reason. Again, you brother of the Separation, have not you kicked against
lawful Government, instigated by the Grounds and Reasons of the Jesuits, their
Schoolmen, Controvertists, Casuists; have you not copied your Motives and
Arguments out of their Champions? do not I know you have? Nearer now on each
side. Yet again. Do you not both in all Nations, where there is an overswaying
and prevalent party, consociate, side, vote, and dance in the same Fairy Ring,
against the party authorized by the swaying Power? Ye do, ye do: Nearer, nearer
yet. I have brought you to half-way Tree on both sides. Still on. Vox populi,
the voice of the people who best know you, as with an irresistible charm will
bring you nearer on both quarters. Are not you named the Puritanical Jesuit,
and you the Jesuitical Puritan? Nearer again. I follow the chase. Are ye not
both so fevere and rigid in your Directions, Instructions, Counsils, as if ye
were both Enthusiasm'd with a singular spirit above all others? Now ye are
within the stretch of arms. Do ye not both with the same quibble of cunning
insinuate into houses by men's wives, and there Lord it over their Husbands and
the whole Family? I must not exceed my portion of time, and speak from the
Center beyond the Periphery. Now come close together, join hands, embrace
according to the Jesuitical Hug. Why now ye are friends. O let poor deluded
England, be now ashamed of what is past, be provident and circumspect for
hereafter. All was Jesuitical: the Jesuit as the evil Genius, was the true and
only Malignant: In all the combination and complication of the many-headed
Factions, he had access by him self or his Agents to the chief Actors while he
blew the coals, with Julian, at the Devil's Altar. And now ye are coupled I'll
tell you a Story; it hath, Janus-like, two faces, as looking Romeward and
hitherward. Rome was with Child, and she brought forth her eldest Son, the
Benedictine; to him as the Heir she gave her Lands: She remained free a while;
at length was with child again, and brought into the light two children, the
Dominican and the Franciscan; to the first, having given away her Lands, she
gave certain Houses and monies in a Pensionary manner; to the other, having
nothing left, the Wallet, and set him out of doors a begging. She stood clear
again, till at last she was mountain-big with child; She longed, she groaned,
she drew her breath short, she made store of outlandish faces: In the
conclusion she gave into the world a lusty Boy, who being newly born uttered
from behind the Midwifes lapfull, a sign of good luck; this was the Jesuit: His
Mother having given away Lands, Houses, Wallet, took him up, gave him a smart
clap on the right buttock, and said, My dearling, shift for thy self; and he
did so most accurately. Turn the story hither: Our Mother here was with child,
and with child, again, and again. I so much honour the first-born children,
that I shall not name them in this Comical Air; the Presbyterian himself shall
pass by me, without a glance upon him: questionless he means well, though he
deserves not this Elegy from me, yet I am so sick of the Jesuit and Monk, that
I must praise him. But Brother of the Separation, you were the last-born, have
run with the Torrent, and shifted for your self, to rejoice over the Creature;
and therein you and the Jesuit are uniform. This is all, I take my leave.


And I likewise. Farewell Brother.


Brother, Farewell. I must proceed to a new leven. The name of Jesuit is now
grown ragged, rugged, odious. His murders, equivocations, coosenages, and the
like, are over-palpable. I must translate my Crown, Empire, and Person to an
Order, having more of pious outside. Let me see: there 'tis: the blessed
Benedictine is the man: he that in public looks not beyond the length of his
grave. His antiquity, and the opinion of the people will assist me.

The Principle stands firm, nothing more neat,
Than to delude you with a holy Cheat.

YOur Scholar and ours has put to Sea again for France, Mr. Hugh the
Comedian-Preacher, came from his Master Fieri-facias to him with such a hanging
message, that it discomposed and tempested his thoughts, put him into a shaking
fit: and not without right reason: for one of his Coat and Constitution was
left shorter by the head the other day. He has desired of me to render him once
again to you from Paris; and I shall do it Presto. But I promised him to present
you first with a Dance of Spanish Clowns, as he has seen them Dance in the
Church, by Order from the Inquisition, and as the manner is, upon the most
festival Days, in the Spanish-Churches, before the highest Altar: this passing
with them for a part of devout Worship, and a most excellent work of Devotion.
They come: judge you.


This Bell calls us to Counsil. Come Father Robert: but where's F. Prior?


He comes.


Reverend Father Prior, having lodged this Meteor of a man in the Bastille, we
must secure him there by plausible reasons dispersed amongst the people.


Yes, Father Prior, our soundest and profoundest way of proceeding will be, to
give amongst the people, that he is an Intelligencer and Spy from the Rebels in
England, and that there has been a continual intercourse of Letters betwixt
them and him.


But Fathers, I have heard from persons of untainted reputation that he has
been seven times Imprisoned, and twice Plundered to the last farthing, in the
defence and favour of the Royal Party.


It slenders not our cause. The business is agitated here, whither such a
report can not easily reach; I have otherwise posses't and filled the
Chancellor; and ordained by his Order and Sanction, that besides his being
Dungeon'd, he shall be punished beyond humane sufferance; for, as the honest
English Taylor holily and cross-legged says: he deserves to be stabbed or have
his throat cut.


Reverend F. Prior, you have Capitulum lepidissimum, a notable head-piece; and
you look so like a carcass, and with such a mortified countenance, so like the
ghost of Godliness, that whatsoever you countenance, will pass for pure and
holy. Licence me to speak a free word: you remember, that a Noble Frenchman
said to you, Had he but your face in the forefront of his head, he should be
able to cozen the whole world.


Verily, I was made for my Priorship: I am called to it, and my parts are
consonant and agreeable. I look like an Anatomy, I speak humbly and with a
dying man's voice, like a Saint, and I do like my self. I declare to you,
Fathers, I love not the Prisoner, because my Brother the Franciscan conspired
with him in England, professing, that had he been enabled with his parts, he
would have turned heretic as he did.


Fathers, I am your Definitor: let me define for you. We will out-wait this
hard Winter. If there be not a settlement in England before the Summer visit
us, we will send him to the Inquisition at Rome, and there burn him alive to
vile ashes.


Father Bennet Nelson, you speak like an Orthodox Brother, rightly descended
from Bishop Bonner. I will procure in England sufficient provision of Monies
from the Catholics there for this godly purpose, who will gladly contribute to
such a meritorious work. He is our deadly enemy: he has wrought against us
mischiefs without president, beyond example, above parallel. He wrote a Book in
England, and entitled it, The Serpent and the Dragon, or, The Jesuit and the
Monk, or, Profession and Practice: the Jesuite was but the Serpent, and the
Monk was the Dragon. Now the Author is both Serpent and Dragon, and deserves to
be burnt beyond ashes if it were possible. Plangenti nemo condolet Draconi: No
man condoles with a mourning Dragon. And before this Book he set his Picture,
fetching the Devil out of a Monk in the form of a Pig: Hog as he was.


I received a Letter from St. Malloes, signifying, that he with certain English
Merchants visited our Fathers there, every one bringing his Bottle of Wine,
otherwise, as our Fathers there innocently call it, of Crimson; and our holy
Fathers there drank so fully, plentifully and rejoycingly of it, that they told
him in the ecstasy of their joy, he did in very deed deserve to be Canonised by
his Holiness for his charity towards them; and yet, both he and the Merchants
reported, the good men were drunk, crimsonfac'd, and drunk with crimson: a very
plot.


Truly, Father, there was a noble Personage from England here in Paris, that
numbered this Varlet amongst his Friends, he called him his Chaplain; and one
Winter night, they congealed into company with a good Father here in Town: he
had an imperfection, that he would be drunk every day: in fine, he was
overtaken with drink that night, and slept in a chair: and presently they sent
for a great Glass of Oil, (sit down here Father Robert, and I will show the
manner,) and powered it upon the bare, bald, and holiest part of his head,
saying, O Priest, we anoint thee King of drunkards; and leave thee drunk with
Wine and drowned in Oil.


Father Prior, and Father Nelson: I did but kiss a Woman in the Old-Baily at
London, and do a little something more to her; and as you shall believe me to
be a true child of the Church, I had but one child by her, a dainty Boy, and as
like my self, as if I had spat him out of my mouth; and this vile fellow set it
going upon wheels through City and Country.


He is a most pernicious man.


Fathers, this our Convent of Paris excepted, (and he has been in Paris many
times, and once resided here four years together,) he has lived in all our
Monasteries through the whole Christian world: he lived in our Abbey at
Lambspring in Germany, in our Monasteries at Doway in Artois, at Dulewart in
Lorain, at St. Malloes in Britanny: he knows all our secrets, and all the
secret conveyances betwixt the Rebels and us, and has heard from us uncomely
words lackying thereunto. None of our Fathers in their Monasteries would
receive him into the Habit, lest he should know more of our inside, and bemire
us further: Father Cressy whispered to him in his ear, that he was sick of all
our Monasteries, and he presently talked it abroad. He fancies to himself a
perfection according to the Primitive Model; and he desires and seeks according
to this his Platonical Idea. F. Prior: It is the settled doctrine of the
Jesuits, That he who threatens or intends to publish the secrets of a
Religious-House may be lawfully killed. Now there is a two-fold manner of
killing: we may kill directly as the Jesuits do, (which is too public,
incurres too much upon the senses,) or indirectly as we. Let those sufferances
be multiplied upon him in the Bastille, that no ordinary man can endure without
death, (which is a kind of indirect killing:) If his body be of heart-oake, and
he scapes this, to the fire and faggot with him at Rome.


Fathers, I approve and sanctify your counsel. Here let us center: The cause
is good, the end excellent: the affair must and shall prosper.


One word in the by. We have money of his which hath remained dormant in our
hands these two years: but he must not have it, lest it should serve to manage
him into England, if he should break Prison. And whereas he is upon our account
unraveld three hundred pounds and upwards, besides all sorts of clothes and
other goods which he gave us, and of which we have milkt and gelded him,
heretics would say, defrauded him; now the matter moves upon another hinge. O
the brave Goose-pies that we begged him out of.


My brain is in labour. Perhaps I shall bring forth another way, a way more
compendiary, to shorten his life in the Bastille. He is there the most part of
his time in pitchy darkness: a Spider in his salt, and there entoomb'd in her
own venom, would be thought to destroy him casually; and then we may exalt
Providence.


Fathers, It will not be cross to our design, if we likewise inform the
Chancellor that he is a Monk: The Chancellor knows a Monk should not abide
out of his Monastery: This will fortify and confirm the Chancellor in his
honourable act of imprisoning him. For set aside his Priapisme, the Chancelour
carries the face of a conscience.


It would not be amiss.


Thus then. We have decreed, and the plot is modeliz'd, let us proceed to
performance, and go on upon this Helix, wider and wider.


O Father, you have dignum caput cui posterit as devoveat capitolium, anserina
opera praeservandum, a reverend head, to the which posterity may worthily
devote a Capitol, to be preserved afterwards by Geese.


F. Robert, you are always merry. Come let us go, and hammer the iron while it
is incorporated with fire.


The Monk that is most cunning, and most quaint,
Our Maxim says, must be declared a Saint.

O Torment! The pangs of Death cannot be more grievous: and my pangs are
notoriously more grievous to me than the pangs of Death, because mine are
continual. The whole Fabric of my body is so stifned and benumbed with cold, so
bruised and sor'd with the hardness of the rocky ground, that I cannot use a
limb without excessive pain, and shaking of the whole frame. They have detained
me here in the Bastille the space of fifteen Weeks, without Bed, Covering, Cap,
Waistcoat, Shirt, or other Linen, (the French, my Executioners, robbed me of
all,) without Chair, Stool, Table, Fire, Candle, Water, Knife, Spoon; without
any succour for the necessities of nature, further than the floor of this close
and dark Dungeon or Cave where I lye: and by a little peeping-hole I have
discovered a Sentinel continually standing with his Musket, to receive me, if I
should appear in the least part of me. Dare these blessed-nam'd Benedictines
ever profess, that they are flesh and blood? the wild Indian man-eaters are
not more barbarous; nor the bruit beasts of the wilderness more savage. Can
it now be denied from the consequents of this cruelty, that their lives in
their Monasteries are absolutely dissolute, when they endeavour by such unhew'd
and Scythian means to forestall the discovery of them. It is likely they will
pull to themselves in the covering of their nakedness other pretences, that as
Tiberius the Emperor abused the vestals, they may first render me
dishonourable, and then miserable: But here, two things obtain no small
surplussage of confirmation; two things which walk it and stalk it as open
truths in England, though contradiction be much obstreperous: The first, The
people of this Gang, this sharppointed fang, are most horribly Cruel: The
second, Rome cannot stand without the prop of a Lye. I never hammered any thing
against them, but Truth: a Goldsmith is a Smith, but a Gold-smith. I wonder not
now, that they are so debauched in their Monasteries, and that their old Monks
talk of the evils they committed in their youths, with such high merriment and
complacence: for cruelty supposes many great sins, hath many foul enormities
that forerun it. They now act upon the very Life-blood of me. Nothing more puts
me upon the rack, than that I suffer all this from the immediate hand of a
walking Peddlers Pack, a Periwigged people; a Nation of Antics; a people
terrible to none but to one another, as fearing amongst themselves Morbum
Gallicum, the French Pox; exuberant in their outward and croutching Spaniel
Complements, but wretchedly destitute of all truly-gentile and solid civility;
A barbarous extract of Gauls, Huns, Goths, Vandals, Longobards; Men that have
always their Master the Devil in their mouths; quick to strike and kill, but
slow to do it nobly. Let them go as they are, the Indian Birds or Butterflies
of men. May the noble Castilian, and brave Englishman in a fit time revenge my
wrongs upon them. Rejectus a Servis puerulus, in Matris redit ruit amplexus:
The Child roughly treated by the Servants whom he fondly loved, returns and
runs into the embraces of his dear Mother. O dear England! I have been so long
watching and waking, that neither my fancy nor eyes perform faithful service
to my understanding. It seems to me, that I see strange things, Pigmies,
Giants, strange Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Serpents, Monsters. All extraordinary
stories that I have read or heard of, show themselves to me, besides portents
and prodigies. I hear whatsoever my fancy delivers to be said. I dream that I
sleep, sometimes bedded in Snow, sometimes in the Waters, in the Field
sometimes, where I am pelted with hail. They will not allow me pen, ink,
paper, or light: yet I have made and recorded in my memory a Latin Epistle,
which I will commend to paper, and perhaps devote to the Press, if ever good
Heaven indulge freedom to me. In this Epistle there is a Latin Hymn: My fancy
sings it oftentimes to me. I wish for symmetry-sake, and because it contains my
sad story, that some propitious and unseen mouth might sing it, reprive and act
the part of my fancy, whilst I intend a little to slumbering.

In stramineo pulvereo Cumulo
Hic jaceo sine tegmine aut Tumulo:
Oblatus Morti, somno vix aut no vix devotus,
Relatus Morti, Mortuique instar firm totus.
Supulchrum pulchrum vere putans,
Et nec id moribus refutans.
Re, ore, non sane plane idem,
More, Amore qui fui pridem.
Christo, non vero Satanae dicandus,
Huc trador, spero, sordibus purgandus.
Una in occasum Vergens, oriensque;
Nascens, simul denascens, moriensque.
Vt aegrotus, frigens, dolens:
Vt Cadaver, rigens, olens.
Vi ablatus, vi delatus:
Vi Mortis Portis alligatus.
Vagari liberum non est Menti,
No Corpus desit revertenti.
Pulso Scabello, fluens, fruens
Augustis Throni Bonis, Donis.
Non flens ipse, video in Scala
Mentes deflintes mea Mala.
Me flente, confluunt gaudentes,
Descendentes ascendentes.
Sublatus in Coelum, eo liber eo,
Liber in eo cum Deo-versor meo.
Ignobilis per Somnia, pariensque deformia:
Immobilis ad omnia, patiensque enormia.
Et nunc velut elatus, vermibusque rite datus,
Cum Vivendi peritis Primitivis Eremitis.

Monsieur Englishman, you are free from the Dungeon, and have the liberty of
the Common Prison.


I most humbly thank you, Monsieur: you are a good Angel. Pray be a little
charitable, and help me to rise: O, gently, gently: for charity sake, gently. O
my poor legs, they refuse to support my body. I can scarce enforce my arms to
the least duty. There is a Conjuration of Aches through my whole body.


Signior Englishman, I am glad you are dismised and rescued from your Dungeon.
Prisoners love here, as being in cadem navi, in the same ship. I am a stranger
as you are, a noble Italian; and therefore, more particularly sympathised with
you. I am commonly called Don Lewis.


Noble Sir: I am affectionately yours. You will favour me to descend beneath
your self, and acquaint me why you are detained here.


Precisely and nakedly, for the speaking of naked Truth: There is an Italian
Bishop here in Paris, a man of sublime power, but of a leaden heart: He
privately professes against the Immortality of the soul; and uses, against all
the Sallies of Nature, a Boy every night, (such is the vile extravagancy of our
Nation.) This I spake into the open air: And though the Truth of it is as well
and thoroughly known to me, as that I walk and talk, yea, although they
thought so worthily of me here, as to send me their Ambassador to Naples, yet
they imprisoned me. The grand affair of your Country is settled en su ser y
puesto, (I doubt not but you understand Spanish;) or you had been sent to the
Inquisition, and your body had made a Bone-fire there: I am a Roman born, and
know the manner of it; your Ashes should have been thrown into the River Tiber,
to feed the Water-snakes. But your enemies here, were big with hopes, that the
Dungeon would have murdered you. Your own Country Monks were your Hangmen; we
know all here.


I considered them as being in the condition of Angels, that Sun-beamlike
attend to the world, as helpers of others towards Heaven, and in themselves are
separate from it, and united with Heaven as the beams with the Sun. I fancied,
that as Stars which have the least Circuit, are nearest the Pole; so men who
are least perplexed with business, are nearest to Heaven, because we cannot
remove a thing from earth, but we must exalt it nearer to Heaven.


You have been much entangled in the love of them: but as businesses commonly
move now, it is a putrified course of life in many parts, and respects. A
corrupted Monk is like the reflection of the great Angel-Image from a Steepletop
in Millan, which at one stroke, limbed it self on the Clouds in the Air, of
themselves prepared for such an impression, and only amazed and amuzed the
vulgar heads, who vainly took the vain reflection of an Image on the Clouds, for
a most heavenly Saint or Angel. But when the Monks come down out of the Clouds,
we know them better, because they are near to us: we never find abroad, men so
passionate, so profane: besides that they are commonly drunken Beasts, and lazy
lousy belly-gods; these their mysteries I inwardly know: in many Monasteries
they study Magical and Demoniacal Arts; they learn the Art of compounding
Philters, and thereby draw Nobles to love them above their own children; they
compose poisons of all sorts; they destroyed Henry the seventh, Emperor, with
a subtle and most sacrilegious poison in a Church, and your King John in a
Monastery; the Monk is the Jesuit's great Grandfather; the Monks coin false
money; they falsify stones of middle rank into Pearls, and Jewels; by the
transmutation of Metals, they raise them into a kind of counterfeit silver.


This I knew done by Father Broughton, an English Monk, at Lambspring in
Germany, amongst the Woods there, who, had he not been a Monk, had ended his
life at Brussels on the Gallows for the like forgery.


They leave the Friar many akers behind them, that was the casual author of
Gunpowder: they make powders, the smell of which procures lust, and sets body
and soul on fire: they mix the purest paint for women: their abundance of idle
time incites them as to monstrous evils, so to marvellous curiosities.
Trithemius, a famous Abbot, showed Maximilian the Emperor his wife, even long
after her death, and Verrucam in collo ejus, the very Wart in her neck, by
which the Emperor particularly knew her. I could recount a hundred of these:
There was a kind of mortal punishment amongst the old Jews, badg'd with the
title of Combustio anima, the burning of the soul, wherein they powered scalding
Lead into the mouth of the condemned person, by the which his inwards were
consumed, the shape and outward bark of his body, remaining still with due
proportion. The body of the Monk is extant still, his soul is burnt forth:
Trithemius satisfied royal curiosity, and I have complied with yours. I am a
child of Rome both in birth and belief; but abuses are now grown into a wild
Forest, and men are become as the wild Beasts. It hath oftentimes pleaded
against me in my heart, Are there no true worshippers in all the world, but the
three wickedest Nations of all the world? Time will open it self, that I may
happily have place to give you the Story of Rome according to my knowledge, and
the Chronicle of my own memory, from Urban the eighth, and the childhood of
his Popedome, to Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus; the Mountains bring
forth, and the ridiculous Mouse is born. I will not now disease you further;
your indisposition admonishes me.


Your servant, noble Don. The Novilships in the Monasteries, are but idle,
inauspicacious, impertinent, and trifling merriments, put in comparison with
what I have suffered; and yet they would have delivered me up for fuel to the
most implacable revenge of the Inquisition. Graft a Rose-tree, then convey a
grain of Musk into a cleft in the stock, and all the Roses that come of the
stock, will carry Musk about them. I hope that all my after-actions will be
steeped in this affliction. I must withdraw.


Sir John, You gave me amongst your commands, to provide for your use a small
quantity of Love-powder; and here I present it to you in this little bag of
silk.


Madam, You oblige me beyond world without end, but I must retaliate, and
return you satisfaction. Madam, pray what cost it?


It will be abundant satisfaction if you shall please to accept it, and that it
will cost you if you have it.


Dear Madam, I would I were wiser and more knowing, that I might thank you more
learnedly; but I will give your Boy something, and something to your Maid. And
how must I use this Love-powder, Madam?


Sir, You must apply the Bag a few minutes, to the Nose of the person whom you
desire to fire with the love of you.


Very good: this I shall dexterously do.


That Powder hath no such power attending upon it; my Mistress trifles with
him: but I have a perfume here, sufficiently operative, accordingly as it is
presented. Noble Sir, Pray license a poor servant from the Blacks, to present a
poor something to you as an Emblem, Flag, Ensign, Obelisk, Pyramid, Trophy, of
his most humble service; and vaslalage. You were pleased even now to give me
gold; and I desire to be your grateful servant, and return your gold presently
in a Present.


O brave black Boy! What hast thou there that thou would sacrifice to me?


Only a pair of Gloves, Sir.


A fair pair indeed.


Their greatest fairness is, that they were presented with a grateful heart.


Where were these Gloves made, Boy?


In Italy, Sir John, and there perfumed in a Monastery.


I know not what a Monastery is, but I believe 'tis a sweet place, for the
Gloves are wondrous sweet.


The more you acquaint them with your Nose, and smell of them, Sir John, if my
Augury deceive me not, the sweeter you will find them.


Boy, I would fain put my powder upon experience, before I prove it on my
Mistress.


You may, Sir, with expedition. Which of these, my Mistress of her Maid, do
you desire should love you?


I know not which, they are both comely. I could love them both: let them both
love me.


Why then it shall be so.


But how shall I apply the Bag to their Noses?


O Sir, I can lay them both to sleep in a moment.


That will be fine indeed. But how, prithee?


By murmuring a certain magical word in their ears. I shall effect all this
presently. Madam, The fat Valleys are low and humble: I humbly desire leave to
deliver an humble word to you in your ear.


Do so, Boy.


And another to you, Mistress Pretty, preambled with a loving kiss.


Contented, so that you leave behind you, none of your Blackamoreship upon my
lips.


Fear not; I'll not part from any of it.


Sleep takes me by storm.


That's my first and last Peal to sleep.


Now Sir John, use your silken Bag.


Thou art a rare black Boy. My House here in London shall be prefaced with the
Sign of the black Boy, for thy sake.


I shall be rarer presently, if I fail not in my Prognostics. Sir John, with
your other hand ward the sent from your own Nose, by applying your Gloves to
it.


Thy counsel's seasonable. I am tickled with the thought, how vehemently these
two fair-ones, this pair of Beauties will love me.


Now remove your siege to the other. Sir John, they will love you most
amorously; love you above themselves; above whatsoever is most dear to them, or
the world calls precious Enough; now conceal your Bag.

On with your Gloves Sir John, and avert the smell of the Powder.


Sir John, you are natures Masterpiece, the world's chief Jewel, and earth's
prime Perfection; the Sun it self is not more radiant.


Egregious Powder; pure Italy.


Sir John, This Lady is my Mistress indeed; but you are the grand Duke and
Master of my affections.


Poor Heart. I have powdered you both.


Sir John, you are like the Herb called the Tartar-Lamb, that with secret
pullings attracts the juice and virtue of, and seems, like our Lamb in the
fields, to put a mouth to, and openly feed upon the Plants and Herbs on every
side of it. You have attracted both our loves to your self, and we fade and
wither, as being so near you without enjoyment.


A certain learned Physician was of the mind, that the world would thrive
better, if none but young, strong, and healthful persons should be parents, and
procreate children. Sir John and I are healthful, strong, and young.


Distressed Girl.


I hope and fear, and after the first lineaments of my fear, wipe all away and
hope again, and in the strength and puissance of this last hope, I will go to
him courageously. Pray Sir John, salute me.


Most willingly, sweet Lady.


His language is direct, and hath no enormous obliquity in it; it is of the
finest silk, the softest feather. I presume he will answer me with like
civility. Sir John, I am my Mistresses Ape, and would fain imitate her: pray
give me your blessing, I mean the blessing of your warm lips.


Sweet Maid, I bless thee. O Paragons, thou of Women, she of Maids! In my
Fancy, I am now kingdom'd, crowned, sceptred, throned, and footstool'd.

What means this? My Heart, and Head are both dart-wounded together.


My love of Sr John, is not an earthy passion, it is rather a celestial flame
kindled at the Planet Venus. Prett. Every thing grows vile when it is joined
with a thing beneath it self, as silver combined with lead: but a thing is
dignified and exalted, when united with a better thing, as lead commixed with
silver. I should receive worth, lustre, and splendour, if joined with Sir John
Wit-little; and I should be the Lady Wit-little.


Dregs of women-kind, I abhor you both: I abominate all your sex: the Toad is
not so loathsome to me. Here is my Joy: most beauteous Boy, my only Joy, I love
thee; love thee with weight, and without measure.


Now you are fast, Ha ha he. Laugh Pretty, Ha ha he.


Ha ha he. My Mistress laughs so heartily, that I am her Echo.


Had we brought him true love-powder, he would have played false with his
Mistress, whom we destin and shall quickly make over to a Nunnery. Now he
feels the virtue of Italian Gloves.


Who stuck those Lillies in thy face? What Artist so knowingly mingled the
Lillies and Roses there? O my white Boy, my Angelical Boy, I have a triangular
glass in my Fancy, and mine eyes act after it, and behold all rich colours in
thy face. Thy face is like, and not like the Rainbow; in thy face, there is
both Bow and Arrow; from thy face I am shot; I am on fire with such a
conflagration of love towards thee, that I can scarcely contain my self from
falling down before thee and adoring thee.


If you love me, follow me.


He must follow thee who cannot live without thee, or love any but thee?


Now the work is upon the wheel, and runs on apace, It grows high, a short time
will ripen it.

She whispers to Pretty.


Sir John Wit-little, where is he? Where is Sir John, Madam?


He was here, my Lord, and here he walked and talked, and all-bepassion'd
himself in the uproar of his own thoughts, as pretending that your Noble
Kinswoman did not look favourably upon him: on a sudden, he caught himself
away, without any civil adieu, vowing at the threshold, that he would
immediately travel beyond the bounds of this Island, and never turn his foot
again towards this House, or Country.


Upon my Honour, I am sorry. This is your fault, Nice.


My Lord, It is my happiness that I am delivered from a Fool.


But Nice, That Fool came of wise parents, and is a large-landed Fool; he is
worth a thousand-wise-men of ordinary condition.


True worth, my Lord, is not measured by the false rule of Riches.


Cozen, Cozen, Where there are riches without measure, education will fashion a
child begotten by a Fool, into a person of true worth.


The short and the long is, If I should have loved him in short for your sake,
for my own sake I could not have loved him long.


Why smile you, Maid?


There is a Changeling at the door, who begs with a basket hooked on his arm:
He talks and behaves himself so strangely, that he would raise a spirit of
laughter in a stone.


My Lord, pray let me see him. A little Recreation unbends, and eases me.


Let him be called hither.


Maid, call him.


This Changeling is your Ghostly Father: from a Jesuite he is new-alchymiz'd
into a Benedictine: such a Gradation being lawful, because the Benedictine is
the more perfect. And your experience will plain it to you, that he is the far
more perfect, I dare say to my self, Knave. He brings the Basket, therein to
carry away part of your portion.


A Changeling cannot endanger my Cozen within the circle of my fears.


O rich Cozens, rich Cozens, how do ye all here? how do you? Rich Cozens, give
something to your poor Cozen; some bread and cheese, or eggs, or pie, or bacon,
or what ye please, rich Cozen. Ha, ha, he. O, that's my Lord-Cozen: what an
unmannerly fool am I? I should stand a great away off, I should not come near
my Lord Cozen. Good day to you, Lord Cozen. My Lord Cozen is a jolly fine old
man: Ha, ha, he.


Friend, come near, what hast thou in thy basket?


My basket is therefore shut, because you should not see what I have there,
Lord Cozen: Ha, ha, he. But in earnest Lord Cozen, I have nothing there yet, I
thank you.


Dost thou thank me, that thou hast nothing there?


I, Lord Cozen, I thank you for nothing, Ha, ha, he.


You shall thank me for something, anon.


So I will when I have it, Lord Cozen, Ha, ha, he.


Nice, I commit the storing of his basket to you: let it be well filled.


I undertake it as a work of Charity.


Thank you heartily, pretty Cozen: you are a very pretty Cozen: and I love a
pretty Cozen heartily: Ha, ha, he. And Cozens all, if you be good Cozens, help
me to a Wife amongst you. Lord Cozen, I want a Wife: Ha, ha, he.


Thou know not how to use a Wife.


To use a Wife is a natural work, Lord Cozen: and a Natural knows it best. Ha,
ha, he.


He says true. But why does he pull up his right leg hastily in that manner?


My Lord, it is the custom of Changelings. I should think it were, because he
belongs to other Parents, and his right foot intends a nimble motion towards
them.


Pretty Cozen, Is that your Mother?


No: She is a Gentleman's Wife in the City here.


Gentleman's Wife, and my loving Cozen, how do you? Ha, ha, he.


Well I thank you, fool.


Cozen, Cozen; have you made a fool of me, that you call me so? Ha, ha, he.


No, no: I am thy Friend. I shall help to the filling of thy Basket.


I thank you, Cozen Fool.


I perceive, we must not call him fool.


No. The veriest Fools think themselves the wisest.


I, I, Lord Cozen; that's the reason that so many rich and great men think
themselves so wise. Lord Cozen, let me ask you a simple question without
offence.


Speak freely.


I will, Lord Cozen. My simple question is: whether it be possible to make a
fool of a Lord? Ha, ha, he.


Why truly, a man may make a Lord of a Fool: But it is not ordinary to make a
Fool of a Lord, except it be of such a Lord as was made a Lord of a Fool.


Right, Lord Cozen, very right. My back-part itches, Lord Cozen: some good is
coming towards me.


Thou art a Fool in grain, an unmannerly Fool. He comes a gooding. Nice, Take
in the fool with you, and load his basket with good Provision; then send him
packing. Madam, pray refresh your self a little farther before you leave us.


My Lord, you are noble.


Come, Cozen.


I, I, pretty Cozen. Pretty Cozen, I will follow you close. Mrs Dorothy, a word
of advertisement: the next time, I come as a Chimny-sweeper; afterwards as a
Tinker.


I understand you. And you shall only sweep my Chimney, mend and scour my
Kettel.


I am restored hither from Paris. And though the Jesuits, Jesuitically call me
the Benedictines Carrier; because I convey Boys and Maids out of England to
holy places, that is, Monasteries and Nunneries, yet in truth I am an
honourable Procuratour for the Benedictines. I have put on my habit here, that
I might appear the more venerable to this Knight, whose vast Estate we sit
brooding upon, that we may bring it into the light ours. The Writings are here
drawn, and he is answerable to us, by the procuration of this good Boy, both in
Religion, and all our other Desires. We intend him for one of our Monasteries
abroad: that he, like the Eagle hovering over the Emperour's Corps, yielded up
and exposed to the funeral Flames, may be elevated from the Earth towards
Heaven, while his Estate perishes from him under him. It will suit more
analogically, according to Logic with us, than with him. Our Vocation is more
high, our lives are more holy, our Persons are sacred. Besides, we have
reformed his Soul; for the which, his Estate, though great, is but a small
payment: If he were able to exonerate both the Indies into our laps, he could
not require us worthily. Our Abbey of Lambspring we subtly recovered from the
Lutherans: we fooled a doting old Abbot with false Alarms out of England, till
he invested us in our College at Doway: Our Parisian House we purchased by
setting a Death's-Head, or the Head of a carrion Calf, upon a Man's Body: Our
House at Dulewort we bought with a portion of a Ghost-led Maid, who now lives
near us there, afflictedly upon our alms, and repents of her mistaken Charity.
Our Priory at St Malloes came feathered by a French Merchant, whom we piously
inveigled to his undoing, and afterwards inserted, though aforreign Plant, into
our holy Congregation. And if this fair Estate be added upon a particular and
enclosed account, it will nobly support us in England: and we shall be
congenerous and homogeneous (I never went beyond Logic) with our selves.


Sr John, you have well slept.


My Angel-fac'd Boy, I dreamt of thee; thou take up all my Thoughts; thou
begin'st, thou endest, and thou art my whole Business.


Reverend Father, pray show Sr John the Writings.


Here they are, Sr John.


I, I, I, take all, and more than all. I'll set my Hand and Seal to the
Writings.


Good Sr John grants all, while you syllogize: I speak not beyond Logic; when
I had learned the Fallacies, I had learned enough.


My only bliss is to move after the steerige of my dear Boy.


Sr John, when you are dead, you will find your Lands again in another Country
with advantage.


I doubt it not, Reverend Father; you speak Oracles, I sacrifice to you. Take
all, reserved that I may not dis-anchor from the love of my snow and
milky-fac'd Boy: His face is the milky way that leads to Jupiter's Throne.


Sr John, our most charitable, and our most noble Benefactour, by virtue of
these writings, when they have their Pass from your hand and seal, your whole
Estate is by you given and made over to a faithful friend of ours, that
negotiates for us.


Even to whom you please.


Had I the least dram or grain of Conscience, this should not be done. The man
is Civiliter mortuus, as the Lawyers tongue it, defunct and dead in Law: he is
not himself. If one write a Will or Testament, and hold the Pen with a dead
Man's hand, that Will will not hold in Law: It was not his Will; because it was
not written by him, with Virtue derived from any principle of life in him. Some
Law I have: No man can cheat ad unguem, quickly and neatly, without a little
knowledge of Law. But peace barking Dog, Conscience, Peace; check me not.
Quodibetical Brains have Consciences of all sorts and sizes, large, little,
short-wasted. Then Sr John, you will ratify and confirm these Writings before
witnesses.


Yes, if my dear Boy speak Angel-lik, and say I.


And you will retire immediately to a Monastery.


I remit all to my fair Poy's can, did Breast.


Then I have well preached: enough for this time. As the great Scarlet-traind
Cardinal at Rome, the Son of a Fisherman, when he had gained possession of the
Porphiry-Chair, removed the Net, which he had formerly set in view, as a
Memorial of his low Parentages mottoing his action with these pithy words, The
Fish is caught.


Delicious London, once more I salute thee. Thy buildings are now glorionsly
beautiful, if my eyes may sentence for thee. Here dwells Simplicity, here
Justice is enthroned. O People of England, learn your own Happiness, your
earthly Happiness drops and distils from your own hands. Be obedient, and
conform to the good and easy Laws here; and you comprise more than the
Happiness of all the other Fortunate Lands; Arabia the Happy is not so happy,
and fragrant as your Country. Knew ye the slavish condition of France, the
beggary of Spain, the buggery of Italy, Spain, and France, the general
wickedness of all the world, ye would quietly sit down, every one at his own
Door, and calmly say, Heaven be blessed that I was born in little England. Here
all Persons are free, breathe freely, eat comfortably, use freely and fully
their own. Where is it so besides here? Now ye are in joint again, stand
Atlas-firm, bear up your little Heaven of quiet here: or as ye are now the most
happy, ye will be otherwise the most despicable and most unhappy of all
Nations. The natural desire a man has of self-preservation, like adverse Wind
and Tide, lately cast me back into France, and the English Monks there, the
sordid idle Monks, more than impaled me in the Bastille, because I threatened to
impound them here, as detaining from me a fair Sum of my own Monies most due to
me. And to guild, to varnish, to burnish this their unhew'd, ragged, and ragged
Action, they plyde my story with lies of Defence, lies of Offence, lies with
heads, but not with feet, lies with feet, but not with heads; lies with neither
head nor foot; lies whispered, and loud lies. Oy Scholars of our most renowned
Universities, set bounds to your feet, and limits to your Thoughts: I was my
Fathers eldest Son, and Heir to a comfortable Estate of Houses and Lands; and I
threw all behind me, to be cheated, most religiously cheated by secular
Priests, Jesuits, Monks, Friars; but amongst all these godly Cheaters, the
Monk is the Grandee, the Pontifex maximus, the first and Universal Bishop. Two
years he held me now fast in Prison, in a loathed Prison: and after the
Business was made public here by my private Letters, cleared me of the Prison,
but unwillingly, but conditionally that I should be confined there all my life:
I consented in the lip: Afterwards pleading that my Body was greatly disordered
in respect of health, desired a few days wherein to physic it (I meant with a
better Air;) and in that little Tract of Time wherein it was supposed I took
Physic, hasted privately to Diep, a Port-Town in France, where I found sixteen
English Monks attending the Passage-Boat: they prevented my Passage with them,
and posted away Letters to Paris, soliciting that I should be stopped; but the
Hugonots of Diep past me over the night following. In all their Houses in those
transmarine parts, there are none left but boys and old Men; hither they are
all come. The greatest Crocodile was at first harboured in an Egg, which is
Paulo majus anserino, a little bigger than a Goose-egg. And yet, the Crocodile
is a Devourer of Men: and when, being horrour-struck, these cannot weep for
themselves, mockingly weeps over them; grows huge, and on to the last period of
life; and is different, not a little from the Goose, in shape, substance,
colour, manners; though they favour one another in the Egg. No sensual Creature
spreads to so vast a bigness, from so small beginnings, as this Egg-Crocodile.
In two years I had not the benefit of a fresh Shirt. I had preserved some rich
Goods from the ravenous Officers who took me: And John Baptista Palliot, the
President of Noury in France, my fellow-prisoner, who desired and undertook to
secure them for me at his own house, secured them there indeed, but from me,
and for himself, he, being in account a person of Honour, and I indeed a
wrongfully and poor imprisoned stranger. Another French Prisoner wearied me
oftentimes, with desiring me that he might use my body Sodomitically. The
Frenchmen say: Omnis Jesuita aut Magus aut Sodomita, Every Jesuite is a
Magician or a Sodomite: This I know not; the other, experience brought home to
me. Upon composed and most deliberate thoughts, I set up this resolution like a
Colossus: I will yield up my life on a Gallows here, before I will set my foot
again where proud Rome does Mistress it: because her Vassals are more than
heathenishly cruel, more unclean than Turks and Indians. London, I joyfully
kiss thy ground, which others kick and tread upon: allow me a Grave here: Thy
air seems to me perfumed: and I am now, as it were, born again.

Distressed Body, Rack of the Bastille,
Now ware the Monks and Jesuits that kill.

THe good man, and my blessed Father, now a Benedictine, has been twice more
with me, first Chimney-sweeper, then Tinker-like; he has performed his part to
the last and least point of Action; and all the money is gone with him, by a
most cleanly conveyance. In my thinking, since he went Benedictine, he has
publicly more of of Saint in his face, and reaches farther and is more active
privately. This is the Now of Time, wherein he promised to come, and divert our
household here, that they being held by the eyes, and amused in their Fancies, I
might make my escape, and steer towards a Nunnery.

There he comes. Blessed Man, he keeps close to his Time.


The Silk-Worm, swept away; the work of the Silk-Worm is a Courtier, and
acceptable to Princes. I deal in Thousands; I work for the Religious Brethren
in our Abbey of Lambspring, and in our Monasteries of Doway, Paris, Dulewart,
St. Malloes: These will feed fat, and pray for me when I am lean and rotten.


A walk to the Royal Exchange and home again, will beget me a good appetite to
my supper. Now Friend, what's your business here?


My very good Lord, no great business: But, if it please you, my Lord: that is:
if it be not offensive to your Lordship: that is: if your good Lordship thinks
it convenient: that is: if your Honour deem honourably of it: that is.


Speak, friend, leave shaking of thy head, and speak.


That is.


Away with that That is, do not retard your business.


I would make your Honours Servants a little Pastime, my Lord: I, and my bonny
Beast here. An old Ape has an old eye, my Lord.


Well, well, if this be all, we shall agree. The Times are now quiet again, I
thank Heaven: and my House is a house of singular freedom, and of Entertainment
as free as Noble. But what can you and your Ape do?


Do? Rather, what can we not do, my Lord? We can Dance, Caper, Curvet, show
Tricks of all sorts, fashions, conditions; drink whole Boles, play at Cards,
Dice, Tables; fight at back-Sword, single-Rapier, at Sword and Dagger,
quarter-Staff; (my Ape's an expert Fencer, my Lord;) run a Tilt; sing
Prick't-Song; show you a Maid (and that's a wonder, my Lord,) and show you a
Maid that goes for a Maid, and is not a Maid, (and my Lord, that's no wonder at
all:) If your Lordship has a Thief or a Drunkard amongst your Servants, my Ape
will bring him forth. An old Ape has an old eye, my Lord.


A nimble-pated Fellow. Go in, Friend: Tell my Servants I gave you leave to
enter my house. I intended a walk: but if I hear my Servants are pleased with
your Pastime, I'll come and be your Spectator my self.


My Lord, your more than thrice humble servants, I and my Ape. An old Ape has
an old eye, my Lord.


Go thy way: thou dost outwit the Ape, I warrant thee. O my poor Nice, if she
were reduced, I should be mertier, more debonair, and more delighted with
such sights than I am. Men have learned the way of changing bitter Almond-trees
into sweet ones: which is: they pierce them near to the root, and let forth the
bitter juice: so these bitter-hearted Romanists should let their perverse and
sower inclinations forth, at the root of their Hearts; and become of bitter,
better. The Priests, whose actions are as dirty as their thoughts are foul,
have wrought this irrecoverable mischief in my house. The Physicians, that they
may draw the vapours from the head of the Patient, apply Pigeons to the soles
of his feet: If these seven-hill'd Saints would walk innocently, and with
Pigeons at their feet; they would not be troubled with such gross and idle
fumes in their Brains as they are. They do not consider, that the Life of man
is a very Bubble: A Bubble puts on the form of an Hemisphere: And shadowing
half the world, as being an Hemisphere; it accordingly consists of two
Elements; It is Air within, which is invisible for its Rarity; and without, a
thinne-shap'd Skin of Water: and there is all the Bubble. The Air deciphers
our soul; and the watery skin, our body: the skin presently breaks: the Air as
presently breaks loose; and there is a present end of the Bubble.

There's my invitation. I would not let desire loose to range through the
world, like a wilde-Ass in the Arabian Desert; but honest recreations are the
Didacticks of humane providence.


The servants are all met to view the Sport which the Ape and his Master make;
and I must be their Ape, imitate them, and add to the number.


This idle Page obstructs my way.


Mrs. Dorothy, with your fair leave, you know that all the Servants are
charged to acquaint my Lord, if you stir out of the house, as now you have, or
beyond the Garden.


Pretty Boy hold thy peace, thou were always my friend, there's a piece for
thee. Delay the search after me, till I have passed this street and the next.


Madam, I shall not be wanting to your design.

She's gone. I must keep silence now, or go too.


Page, where are you?


Here, my Lord.


Call my Nice down: tell her, here's very pretty sport.


I go, my Lord, I move as quick as lightning. I have read in an English Author
of a melancholy-she that thought she could break to pieces, the whole world
with the motion of one short finger; and crush it into a Miscellany with the
clintching of her little hand. Mrs. Dorothy thinks now, that she has the great
world in her little maiden hands, to dispose of as she list. Liberty is sweet,
especially after a long and tedious time of restraint. The Bird out of the
Cage, is like the Bird that saw the Sea, turned and made a long flight the
clean contrary way: she wings it in the Air, at length, weary, pearches upon a
Bough, and sings for joy, she is not bounded.


Page, why Page, Page I say.


My Lord.


Where's my Nice? why comes she not?


She is not in her Chamber, my Lord. I am going to the Garden: she's there, my
Lord, I think.


Make hast, Page.


All the hast I make, shall not overtake Mrs. Dorothy. And hast thou given me a
twenty shilling piece, sweet Virgin? I'll keep it for thy sake: and it shall
conserve the Idea of thee in my thoughts. She must be now out of reach, or in
some nearness to it.


Page.


Let him call again, 'twill open his pipes.


Page you Rogue.


I will not answer to the name of Rogue: let him call once more.


Page, my Nice.


My Lord, I cannot see her in the Garden. The Privy door is shut. But I shut
it.


How? is she not in her Chamber? nor to be seen in the Garden? She never staid
so long in the little House there, Servants, search all the house. Go page,
kick forth that rascal-fellow with the Ape O my Nice, my Nice. A noise within
of searching.

Servants, search every corner, every Ratand Mouse-hole.


Good Mr. Page, kick not so hard.


Not just so hard, but harder if I can. Out, you ditch and dunghill rascal;
foh; I have kicked him till he stinks again.


Let me give him one kick. He is a Rogue by Act of Parliament: foh: He or his
Ape stinks, or both.


Good my Lord, spare me. Why then did your Lordship admit a Rogue into your
house.


Take another kick for that, you profes't Rogue.


I must bid you farewell with a parting kick.

From within, She is not in this Chamber. Here she is not. I cannot find her
this way.


Poise her Trunks, and answer presently what weight they bear.


That's done already, my Lord: there's nothing in them.


I am undone: my Nice is lost, she is lost. Had she the invisible Ring? or did
she send her money away by night through the Air, as Witches ride? I'll search
all the house my self, and add the evidence of my own senses. O this cursed
Ape-Carrier; he has embroiled us all; he was at least the occasion of her
escape, if she be gone.


Mrs. Dorothy, I speak your welcome to this house, I dare say, with a matchless
affection. Here you may dilate your heart. Such dangers as you fear, cannot
reach hither. And you will find no rigid Uncle here.


Madam, I equally rejoice in my own liberty and your love. But whereas I had so
much of the Scholar given to me in my breeding, that I understand above the
plain of learning, and therefore have long ago done with legitimating heresy,
or crutching it up, or skinning it over with hypocrisy; whereas I cannot
converse with Blackamore-soul'd Atheists, or with Dwarf-devotion'd Hypocrites:
cannot attend to Pulpit-Cymbalists, (let them stand for me in a perpetual
Pancrasie, in the Solstice of their Honour;) nor to the Tub-Prophets, living
under the Meridian of bitter-sweet, under the Equinoctial of good and evil; nor
disquiet the Crasis of my Soul with the new-fangled Presbyter and his painted
Pageantry, and manifold Antics: Whereas I cannot embalm him, nor pity and
condole with his surviving Amorosos and Fantasticks: it rests in the
Repository, that I give life to my zealous Determinations, and repair to a
Nunnery, to the which the beauty of that state lures me.


Mrs. Dorothy, The Angels sit on your lips, and speak from your mouth, or the
Nightingale sings there. Bring your thoughts forth, while they are warm. The
image of a Prince is then impressed upon the Gold, when it is melting soft. I
see, that you are excellently skilled in the sacred Optics; and have a seeing
soul, that hever knows night. A Looking-Glass set against the Sun, not only
receives the Beams of the Sun, but also the Image of it.


Madam, the Ostrich leaves her Eggs on the Libyan-shore, to be hatched by the
Sun, but I must concur to my own happiness. Besides, In the Nunnery I shall
be wholly disenchanted from these fears, and from communication with those
heady people, who precipitate themselves into more changes than the Beast and
Herb-Chameleons in the Naturalist, or Proteus in the Fiction; yea, become as
the soul of man in the opinion of some great Pretenders to learning; which is,
say they, round and globous in the head, long in the arms, broad in the breast;
and as the light is indeed, round in the Sun, in the fire Pyramidal. Now they
have no reason to object change against me, because they have so often changed
from themselves.


Mistress, There are in view as many subjects of change, as there are creatures
under the Moon: Because earthly and inferior bodies are by the Laws of nature,
subjected to the bodies that are superior and heavenly: which being in
continual Motion and Revolution, and continually changing in their Positions
and Aspects; and moreover, darting as they move with and in their spheres, new
influences upon the Sublunaries, make new impresses upon them accordingly. But
your change was effected from above the Moon, and was Heavenly in the highest
degree.


Madam, I perceive that our breeding hath encircled us in a like proportion of
knowledge. The soul it self is changed from without by the presentation of
external and occasional Objects; and from within by the Passions, and is driven
every way by them, as the Waves by the Winds; indeed, primordially and
principally by love, the Amazon-Queen of the Passions; afterwards by her
Bridesmaids, Desire and Hope; yea, by Anger Love's-Champion. And then the
changes are good or evil, as the objects are evil or good, concerning which
these Passions are excited; and as the carriage of the Passions in their
tendencies, is ordinate, (managed by a prudent and pious Ordination) or
disordinate: The Sea breaking its bounds, is boundless in mischief. To wade
nearer our affair: The best change of the soul, answerable to man as a
reasonable creature, and within the Dominions of nature; is, when the moral
virtues in it, are directed and guided by Prudence, and every Action tutour'd
by some virtue, because the Passions are obedient to reason. Nature is higher
perfected by degrees: but of that I will speak in the Nunnery.


You give plentiful testimony, that you understand the business before you,
and that you are well rooted and grounded in it.


O my most sugar and honychild, my spirit leaps in my body like the Lambs in a
good Pasture, to find thee here. Thy Gold is all safe: The entire sum, my
pretty Duckling, amounts to five thousand pounds. But I have a request to thee,
Fair one; a most humble request, imcomperable beauty. (It is a Rule we have,
and we act by it, good words put us to no charge: hence we get all we can, but
we part from nothing.) What say thou, fairest of Maids, Saint upon earth,
can thou grant me a reasonable request?


Reverend Father, I shall grant it, if it fall within my Verge: I am ready to
give it passage by my ears to my willing soul.


Why this it is then, devout Mrs. Dorothy, (that name most proportions your
condition, (you go now to undergo a poor life; and it is essential to your
future state, that you vow poverty: The Nuns seldom receive with a Novice
above five hundred Pounds, (it is a great sum for them) you have five
thousand: Divine Mrs. Dorothy, give us the rest: and we will found a new
Monastery; you shall be set up before the Gate as the Foundresse of it, I mean
your Image; and the Monks there shall continually pray for zealous Mrs.
Dorothy, now, hereafter, and to the worlds end.


Reverend Father, your Request is, as you languag'd it, reasonable: it is
granted.


O heavenly creature, I adore thy Devotion. O that we were all, or the best of
us, so devout as thou art. Thou make the tears go ambling down my ctheeks:
tears of Comfort. I am comforted, that thou hast one foot in Heaven already. I
am Mathematically certain, as the Schools speak, that the the other will follow; I
am more than morally certain, and almost certain by physical certitude; and I
cannot but leap for joy, for joy that the the other foot will certainly follow. To
Heaven, to Heaven, 'tis even so, a Maid to Heaven dos easily go, for joy what I
say I scarcely know. I forget. Mistress of my heart, give way to my expression,
I have given order to Father Robert to go to your Uncle in the disguise of a
Seaman; and to say that he saw you take Shipping at Gravesend, and Sail under
the Conduct of a good Wind for France: Otherwise, Sweetheart, pardon my
boldness, he will lay wait for you at the Port-Towns: when he shall believe,
and is satisfied, that you are gone, and the search is blown over, you shall
away indeed with safety.


This invention is steeped in Prudence. Reverend Father, I am a great admirer
of your wisdom.


In fine: We must now be merry. It is reckoned amongst our customs, that when
we send any to Monasteries, Nunneries, or the like, they take their last leaves
of the world with extraordinary jollity; and so must you: We'll be jovially
merry before we part. Madam, where's your little Cozen? (the Girl that I begot
of thy body, when I kept my Rule, and looked not beyond my own length, or the
length of my Grave;) let us begin our Carnival with a Song.


Pretty, Call my Cozen.


They may honestly be merry, who afterwards presently renounce all mirth. He
who says, that fraud cannot be pious, nor piety fraudulent, is an Ass, a short
eared Ass, and was never bottomed in School Divinity.

My little Cozen, pleasure us now with a Song, and you bind us over to kiss
your hands. (She sings.) As much to the purpose as you can.

Farewell
Vain pleasures, and short lasting joys farewell,
The sacred Bell
Calls to repair unto the holy Place.
The Peace
Of quiet Conscience gives a full release
From Care. Then cease
To love the Things, have nothing but a face.
Hear how
The blessed Angels sing, and us invite
To their desire.
The Birds are here, yea, very near,
And call us to the Quire*
For if
We are estranged from these earthly Things,
Our Hearts will rise,
Our Hands
Will also move and raise our Love
Above the starry Skies.
All Things are fading here, even as the Flower,
In one short hour.
And glide away: but Heaven doth not so.
There look:
There read as in a golden-letter'd Book,
How you mistock,
And did misconstrue all the Things below
You know.
Then better mind your lessen here on earth,
That you may see,
How vain they are, who only care
For this mortality.
And now
Examines all your Actions from your Birth,
With joy, with grief:
It is a Heart, that feels some smart,
Which farther seeks, relief.
Hence Cares.
Go search into the Secrets of Affairs:
No man more shares
Of Heaven and Things above the Firmament,
Than those
Who do themselves within themselves enclose,
As the Chaste Rose:
Blushing outright even when no ill is meant,
Or said;
Feuring to be beheld in open Air:
And therefore shut
Abroad all sin; themselves within,
As Kernel in the Nut.
And thus,
Such souls and Heaven aspiring people are,
An^e^'r will be,
Like Pearls in Shells: in Churches Bells.
Be heard, not seen, or see.

Directly to the purpose.

Mistress Dorothy, England's Helen for beauty: my Cozen levels at your favour.


She has her aim. She sings like a little Nun.


Three or four days we consecrate to mirth.


Our Prologue to it has been sweet.


To singing, dancing, feasting.


Betwixt fasting and feasting, there is but the difference of one poor letter;
we may readily slip out of one into the other.


Come dear Friends, follow me merrily, merrily.


My Cozen is uncag'd, and I fear flown beyond catch, beyond recovery. Had she
been within my Walls, and but as big as a new-born child, or a childe's Baby, I
had found her; but she cannot here be found, who is not here. What shall I do?
No, that will be to Inn at the Labour in vain: Something I have brought forth;
under what Star I know not: I will send to all the Port-Towns that are near,
chance may be so gracious to me, that I may take her in one of them at the
rebound, at the second run. If I catch her, I shall cage her companions.


My Lord, A poor Sea-man at the door, is very earnest to speak with your
Lordship. He talks of business, and that of no small importance; and he says,
he must not, as being a poor man, send his business by an Interpreter.


A Sea-man? and with important business? send him to me.

Most certainly, my Cozen cannot reach the Sea so soon: she is not winged at
her feet like Mercury. He may be a poor man, that has had great losses at Sea,
and comes a begging; if so, he will be a fit Subject of charity, and
liberality: indeed the winds have chid and bellowed loud alate.

Seaman, What wind blew you hither?


May it please your Lordship, an angry wind, may it please your Lordship; a
roaring and raging wind, may it please your Lordship, may it please your
Lordship.


I thought so, I did imagine it was a begging business: it pleases not me,
that you were molested with an angry wind, endamag'd by a roaring and raging
wind. But what's your present condition?


May it please your Lordship, I did belong, may it please your Lordship, to a
Vessel called the Virgin, may it please your Lordship, may it please your
Lordship.


The Virgin? 'Twas not the Virgin Martyr, her name was not Dorothy, was it?


May it please your Lordship, no, not so, may it please your Lordship.


O, on with your Story. The fellow's distracted with his losses, or very sick
of the Simples.


May it please your Lordship, In this weak Vessel called the Virgin, may it
please your Lordship, we made notwithstanding a Voyage to the West-Indies, may
it please your Lordship, may it please your Lordship; and after some length of
time, may it please your Lordship, we returned in due time, may it please your
Lordship, rich-laden, may it please your Lordship. We were bound, may it please
your Lordship, I say, may it please your Lordship, we were bound in our return
for London, may it please your Lordship, and at the River's mouth, may it
please your Lordship, our weak Vessel known by the name of Virgin, may it
please your Lordship, by reason of that angry, roaring, and raging wind, may it
please your Lordship, I cannot tell it without weeping, may it please your
Lordship, foundered like a tyred Mare, like old Hobson's Mare, may it please
your Lordship, and we all that were in the Vessel named the Virgin, were cast
away and lost, may it please your Lordship, may it please your Lordship. I my
self was quite cast away with the rest, may it please your Lordship, as far as
I can remember, may it please your Lordship, but here I am again, I think, may
it please your Lordship, or, I am sure, my Ghost, may it (...) your Lordship,
to beg your be^, may it please your Lordship, may it please your Lordship.


But how came thou to shore?


May it please your Lordship, I know not whether I am at shore yet or no, may
it please your Lordship, but if I am at shore, may it please your Lordship, I
came to shore, like Bacchus astride upon a Hogshead, may it please your
Lordship, may it please your Lordship.


Were none saved but thee?


May it please your Lordship, again I say as I said before, I do not as yet
well know whether I am saved or no, may it please your Lordship, may it please
your Lordship.


Alas poor simple fellow, the fright his dazzled his understanding. There are
twenty shillings for thee, to recruit and refresh thee after thy sorrows and
losses.


May it please your Lordship, I thank your Lordship, may it please your
Lordship, may it please your Lordship, may it please your Lordship, may it
please --


No more of that, may it please your Lordship.


Pardon me, my Lord, my purpose was to say it twenty times over, because your
Lordship gave me twenty shillings, and I desire to be hired so, may it please
or not please your Lordship.


Sea-man, you have your alms.


May it, or may it not please your Lordship, if you are pleased, I am pleased,
pleased I am not if you are not pleased, may it please or not please your
Lordship, twenty-score thanks for your twenty shillings, may it please or not
please your most liberal Lordship.

I had forgot half my Arrant, may it please your Lordship. I lost my memory
when I was cast away, may it please your Lordship. We having lost one Virgin at
the Rivers mouth, may it please your Lordship, I found another at the tail of
the salt water, may it please your Lordship. Now I come to Mistress Dorothy,
may --


My Cozen Dorothy, what of her?


May it please your Lordship.


No, no, she does not please my Lordship. Once more I tell you, lop that off.


Then I shall speak no more of her, may it please your Lordship.


Again? yes, yes, on with Mistress Dorothy.


Why then, may it please your Lordship.


Yet again?


My Lord, in good earnest, my Lord, I am but a simple Idiot: I cannot tell you
the Story, except you suffer me to tell it after my manner: I must go in my
beaten road, steer my own course, my Lord.


Tell it then after thy manner.


May it please your Lordship, Mrs Dorothy took shipping at Gravesend, yesterday
morning at five of the Clock, may it please your Lordship. The Seamen, my
Brethren that belonged to the vessel, presently weighed Anchor; the wind was
fair for her, as fair as she, may it please your Lordship; and so it has held;
and by this time she must needs be in Holland, or in France, may it please your
Lordship, may it please your Lordship.


But how came thou to know she was my Nice Dorothy, and to be directed
hither?


May it please your Lordship, I begged of her, as I now do of your Lordship,
and told her I was going beyond London a great way to my Friends in the
Country, may it please your Lordship; and presently she put her white hand
into her pocket, and pulled forth two half crowns, and gave them to me, may it
please your Lordship, and made me promise her, that I would bring hither her
Duty to your Lordship, and this news with it, may it please your Lordship, may
it please your Lordship. Moreover, she gave me a Token for your Lordship.


A Token? thou gav'st me no Token: where's the Token?


May it please your Lordship: a Token, by the which your Lordship should know,
that it was she, concerning a strange man and an Ape, but that I have almost
forgot, because the best part of my memory was cast away when I was drowned,
may it please your Worship, Lordship I should have said. Now you have both ends
of my Story, there is all, if it like your Lordship, if it like your Lordship.


None of it likes me. By all signs and tokens this must be she. Then all
farther enquiry will be vain, and run upon a false Bias. Seaman, here, I give
thee a Crown more for thy fidelity.


May it please your Lordship, I came with Fidelity, and I shall depart with
Fidelity, and perhaps that will deserve a Crown more, may it please your
Lordship, and it like your Lordship. My Lord frowns. I must be gone.


My Cozens last from me, found by a Sect:
I'll live hereafter my own Recollect.

I have seen a Sight here, perhaps not unusual, yet strange to me: a Mountebank
in this blind and uncouth part of the Suburbs, upon a common Stall. I took him
for a Ballad-singer, till I came near him: but finding him afterwards to be a
Mountebank, I waited upon the sequel. He had his paints, his white and red for
women; his powders of all colours; his perfumes, mixed and simple; his salves
for all fores and griefs; he could abate the Drunkards redness, and fire in
his face, and raise a pale colour to beauty, from within: he could awake
Appetite, set a man to sleep, bias nature as he pleased: He could furnish a
man or woman with new teeth, new eyes, new ears, new noses, new arms, new legs:
I expected when he would have said, new Heads, new Hearts. If my Ears scout it
rightly for my Soul, I heard him say, that he could restore a lost Maiden-head.
He spake contemptibly of drinking poisons: that, said he, the common Rabble and
Rubbish of Mountebanks, the vile Offal of Quacksalvers can do. He suppled us
with a Story of one Barthochabas an Author of Sedition amongst the old Jews,
who so medicin'd his mouth, and managed a device in it, that he seemed to vomit
fire; and he profes't upon the Reputation of a Gentleman, that he had the
Receipt: He put on with another Example of a man at Millan an Italian City, who
washed his face and hands with scalding lead, as carelessly and as confidently,
as a man washes his hands and face with ordinary water; having first washed
them with an extraordinary, new-found, and hardening water of his own: And of
this water he protested as he was an Artist, he had a great Quantity. We had
from him a whole farthel of such stuff. To all People that bought of his Trash
to the value of Twelve-pence, he gave a printed Bill, designing the Place where
he lies, and the manifold motions and out-walkings of his skill. I stood in the
crowd while he staid upon the Stall; and when he came down and leyel'd himself
with the People, I observed that speaking with several Persons, he did
insinuate these or the like words; All men have a natural care of their Bodies,
but who regards his own Soul? If a simple Ass falls in the streets, many wise
men run to lift the simple Ass up; but if a Man's Heart or Soul lies wallowing
in the dirt, such a Soul or Heart is not regarded; pray, come to my lodging:
these words had their mysterious aim. Now this metaphysical Doctor, this
all-able Mountebank with all his packs, and his knacks, is the
Benedictine-Jesuite, whom I have used, and by whom I have been manifoldly
abused. As I take it, he takes this way. The Bastille has changed me, and I
believe he knows me not. I'll toss a word or two with him as he passes.


Our Army is vanished, our Conventicles are quelled and suppressed: and we must
be doing, be Soul-catching: By idleness the dead Sea has been long found
dangerous. The Intelligencies always move the Heavens: the Winds the Air and
Sea: Fire is never out of Action. Besides, Vespatian the Emperor was wise; Dule
is odor lucri ex re qualibet: Thus always something comes in; and something
has some savour. The Spaniards wittily, and with a Sarcasm call the Jesuits,
Los teatinos, y los Padres Teatinos, the Teatines, and the Teatine Fathers;
from this Account: A Spanish Painter being scandal-struck by the Covetousness
of the Jesuits, drew a Picture after this manner: He hung in the uppermost Part
of his Table, a vast Purse of Money: He set round about it, in the lower parts;
one of every sort of Mendicant Friars; who looked upwards willingly, yea
devoutly upon it, but durst not touch it, as being forbidden by the Rules of
their several Orders: He painted a Jesuite in some distance, armed with a Bow
and Arrows, and looking over (and indeed over-reaching) the poor Mendicants:
For, he held up his Bow, and had let his Arrow fly, which had struck the Mark
(the Purse) and now stuck in it; he still keeping a fierce and eager eye upon
the Mark: And the Painter had learnedly derived these Latin words from his
mouth, hanging, as if the cold Air had frozen them into a Record, To attingo, o
Purse, I reach thee, I hit thee, I have thee: whence the Spaniards, being
edified by the devotion of the Painter, and the holiness of the Picture,
presently called the Jesuits, Los Teatinos, the Spanish word coming up as
nearly as it may, to the Latin, from which the Spanish Language hath deviated:
But the Painter had excellently completed his Piece, had he pictured our
modern English Monk catching away the Purse, for which all the others gaped,
and which the Jesuite thought he had heart-struck.


Sir, I am a most humble Petitioner to you.


Where's your Petition?


My mouth presents it, Sir.


My ears are open to receive it.


That I may have leave to love you, and be your Scholar. I have been your
Hearer, and you have transformed me into a great Lover and Honourer of you.


What are your wants?


I am wanting both in Soul and Body, Sir.


I can supply the wants of both: both I cure.


Divine Mountebank!


Come to my Chamber.


Pray, favour me with leave to wait upon you thither.


Most willingly.


Ye are both apt Scholars. But you, Boy, must learn to open your mouth wider,
when the fit's upon you.


I open it as wide as I can, good Father.


Take this Apple, and extend your mouth to the wideness of the Apple: 'Tis of a
fit bigness. And you, Woman, when you act the possessed person, do not stare
enough: your eyes must always be rounded into a larger Circle, but then
especially. And if any be immodest towards you, you must not take notice of it,
at such a time, but rather show willingness, because the Devil, under whose
power you are then conceived to groan and lie grave^'d, is delighted with
wantonness.


Reverend Father, you have taught me obedience, and I shall practise it.


Boy, I am very much pleased with your vomiting of nails, crooked pins,
needles, hair, pibble stones, and the like: Your conveyance is nimble. Both of
you must be careful, that ye do not go aside into any strangeness of Action,
except a Priest, or at least some devout Person of our Religion offer himself.
The Devil is not roused up with the presence of Heretics. In the company of
such, and none but such, you should demean your selves quietly and cheerfully.


I understand your condition. You are an Heretic: you shall know better within
a Cubit of Time. This is my dwelling; and that my loving Brother. Father
Robert, this Gentleman is an Heretic, and a Scholar, but a kind of Seeker.


Woman, Boy, the Stranger is an Heretic: while we are here, you know your
parts.


This is Father Robert: but I thank the Bastille (against my will) he knows me
not. What strange and unreasonable carriage have this Woman and Boy.


Alas, miserable and unhappy Creatures, they are possessed.


How possessed?


Possessed with Devils.


Sir, you seem in the shell, in the face or fore-head, to be well affected
towards us, or at least less ill-affected, and less indisposed to Goodness. I
confess to you, as to a Friend, prompted by the Bird of good Omen within me,
that I and my Brother there, have been eatechiz'd at Rome, and that we are
Benedictine Priests. Sir, our Order is the most ancient, and most holy of all
others: the Devil is troubled that we are stationed so near him: If you were
here alone, the Devil would lie down, leave barking, and be quiet as a Lamb,
because you are yet abstracted from the lines of Communication with us.


I am as much Priest as they; for Priesthood cannot be lost, but they are
ignorant of it, because they have lost my face out of their remembrance. In
good time, Sir. But under favour, I have read in your Authors, that the
occasion other Orders rose, was, because the Monks were defective in that part,
which the new rising Order most professed: as that the Dominicans rose, because
the Monks were Kitchin-bound, and their mouths were stopped, they became dumb
and muzzl'd in public; good men, they dealt out their time in eating, hunting
both Hare and Fox, and purging their reins according to lease: The Franciscans
came, because the Monks were proud; and the Bernardines for the same reason,
because the Monks were fat and stately: the Jesuits came shoving in at last,
because the Monks had long desisted from the teaching of Children, and thereby
engaging rich Parents, and from the recovering of Nations, and thereby obliging
the most rich Parent of all at Rome: and so in others. Whom did, or do the
Jesuits and they love, but in order to their own ends, and for gain-sake? Who
have been more scandalous in all the wanderings of wickedness, than the Monks
with their poatch'd Eyes in their Meditations? The worst of Geneva-Jesuites
might better and more justly be canonised after the Age is passed wherein he
lived, than the best of Monks in these parts. And I have read in a learned
Monk, that as Rivers after long running run slender and muddy, so the best
things gather dust, and contract corruption in length of Time. Your Pontifices
maximi, grand Fathers at Rome, have commonly most excellent Resolutions and
Actions at their first entrance into their Irish-wooden Chair; but they soon
Reed-like hold down their Heads: The Italians jest it notably, though
profanely. If you censure me, that I whip the Monks too hard, blame me, scourge
me; but then, you must blame and scourge with me holy Writers in all Ages, the
learned Angel of Hippo, divine Salvianus, our English Gildas, and a thousand
worthy Rabbis more. Had they seen our days: --


They are Scandals you stumble at.


You must abjure those, if you enter our list.


Father Robert, let us leave him: that the Miracle of the Woman and Boy may
further convince him.


Sir, you may repose your self, if you please, a while here. A little remnant
of business in the house, summons us. Our stay shall be short.


I shall patiently wait your leisure. How now? Exeunt Luc. and Rob. A clear
case, The Devil dreads not me. A sudden change indeed: This Miracle is but of
the lower Classis. Woman and Boy, away with this Hocus and Pocus his Kinsman,
let them praesto be gone, this thread bare kind of Juggling; (I have been used
to this Pass and Repass-Part of Bartholomew Fair:) Let me tell you in a single
Word, if you do not both confess to me your double-dealing, I'll instantly
fetch a Constable, and ye shall be soundly whipped in Bridewell till ye do
confess, and perhaps Justice will not stop or pause there. I'll do it
immediately.


O good Sir, come back. I am a poor Widow, and have nothing wherewith to keep
life and soul together.


And I am a very poor Boy. Sir, I was a Beggar-Boy, and begged from door to
door.


I am satisfied. Not a word of what has happened, as you love your own safeties.


Boy, we must not say a word of this to the Fathers: if we do, we shall be
turned forth a begging.


Is the Gentleman gone?


Yes, reverend Father: but thunder-struck with the Miracle: He will, he says,
wait upon you an other time.


So, so: come, supper attends us.


They within depend upon me to begin this last Scene with a Dance fashionable
to our Matter: and they will not be denied. The Dancers commence their
entrance.

This is the Monk that Poisoned Henry the seventh Emperor, in a Church, being
devoutly on his knees: In what manner he poisoned him, it is profane to name,
and therefore was most impious and most execrable to do. Andreas Lampugnanus, a
Courtier of Millan, nearly followed him, in Time, with respect unto the Place,
and in the substance of Practise; but the Devil could not have screwed a
Wickedness higher than the Monk did. Rottennes follow both their memories.

This is the Monk that Poisoned John King of England in a Monastery, and that
he might accomplish his mischievous work without suspicion, first poisoned
himself, drinking a health to the King in a poisoned Cup. Let his Name be
thought as poisonous as his Poison.

This is Clement the Jacobin Friar, that murdered Henry the third, King of
France, by searching into his body with a sanctified Knife; to whose Pralse
Sic Cinque, the great Caliph at Rome, a kind of almighty Favourer and Patron
of the Jesuits, dedicated a Panegyricall Oration; May he and his Patron be
never remembered, but under the notion that the Devil was Patron to both.

This is Barrier, that attempted the murder of Henry the fourth, the late
famous King of France, with a poisoned Altar-Dagger, a Poisoned Dagger
consecrated on the Altar. May he and his Dagger be odious to the whole Mass of
Mankind.

This is Raviliack, Barriers Executor; animated thereunto by Varad a Jesuit:
Let him and his Counsel our be so loathed and abhorred by all men, that
afterwards the very Toad may seem amiable to us.

This with his dark Lanthorn is Guido Vaux. His horrid attempt and compliance
with Garnet and Oldcorn Jesuits, and others is not forgotten; though the Age
now declining, the Friends of that Faction report it a mere Fable: In the Age
following, they will infallibly declare it a Fable ex Gathedra. Father Tompson,
our Scholars Ghostly Father at Rome, boasted that he was an Actor in the
Powder-Treason, and that he then dug many times under our Parliament-House
till every thread of his shirt was wet. All those horrid Plotters were
afterwards chronicled for Martyrs, in the English Martyrologie printed Anno
Doom. 1608, and Garnets Picture exposed to sale, was adorned with Rays about
the Head, signifying his Glory and Saintship. May all good People lay the
memories of these Saints beneath them, when they go to the little House in the
Garden.

This is Tony, a young extract of Romish blood, that wounded our Poet in the
face with a Knife of the Dagger-Fashion, intending to kill him. Let him pass as
the simple Tony, and Fool of the Company. If any one hath incurred that wicked
Name of Rebel, let him behold here with horror, whom he hath imitated: The
Monks have imitated the Devil, the first and grand Rebel; the Jesuits have
imitated the Monks, and the Devil; and Rebels imitate the Jesuits, the Monks,
the Devil.


Sir, will you buy a Book, a Godly Book?


What Books have you?


Books of Devotion, Sir: you may take your choice of English or Latin.


Are you a Booksellour?


Yes, Sir, a poor one: but my Books are not sold publicly.


Your Books, I see, belong to the the other side of the great Pond.


They do, Sir: therefore they bear the higher price here.

Madam, will your Ladyship be pleased to buy a Book?

Sir, I have good Books to sell.


Are you there again. He sells his Books as a Peddling sort of men sell base
Tobacco; in the streets, but without public notice.


One short word with you, Sir: You remember the most heavy charge you laid upon
me.


I do.


I have done what lies on my part. If there were an Ocean of Time, I could meet
it with a Sea of Matter: But all things have their assigned limits: and by the
foot of Hercules, Pythagoras his Scholar may proportion the whole Body. I have
carried you up to the highest Orb of my Policies: which is: to disguise the
most innocent and most simple Persons into the most busie-witted and most
pragmaticall: and thereby, to turn virtue in her native white, and her
unmingled colour, forth into contempt: So that all true Piety comes into the
gripe of Scorn; and all Truth within the censure of Suspicion: only Politic
Knaves thrive, and poor Honesty is neglected and rejected. Now Sir, having done
my work I expect my wages.


What wages?


Your self.


I renounce you.


I shall not easily renounce my Right in you. Look you, Sir. I can appear like
my self at my pleasure.


Heaven shield us: Is our most reverend Father turned Devil? Father Robert help
us. Lend me a godly Book.


And me another. O good lack, I have been at confession with the devil many a
time. I fear he will not keep counsel.


This is strange in a high and mighty measure. Yet Mistress. Few there are of
your reverend Fathers, that would not shrink into Devils, if they should appear
in their own likeness.


I am amazed. What! Is my reverend Brother a Devil? Thou foul fin: would
thou be so limit-less, as to take our holy Habit upon thee? how durst thou
presume to touch it?


Sir, he claims me too; because I commanded him by the Power of natural Magic:
and for this he would spoil our Comedy.


I have rather conserved your Comedy: who should otherwise have introduced the
Monks poisoning their Adversaries, and the Jesuits lessoning their Scholars at
the sight of Pictures, and the stabbing of Images, to stab and kill.


Let me see, where is my Flagellum Daemonum? Thou hellish Dog, Depart, or I
will amand, ablegate, and send thee to some vast and horrid Desert, where in
all thy Apparitions thou shalt fright nothing but contemptible Flies, ignoble
Serpents, and the like. Thou hast long been wandering, and here thou art out of
thy proper Place, and I arrest thee. Thou go: I have it here. Ego te,
Bestiam infernalem --.


The Magician is but one. I may gain thousands by relinquishing him, and plying
the credulous world with a belief that I fear such bug bears. O, O.


Once I have said, and I say the second time, Ego te Bestiam infernalem --.


O, no more of that, good Sir: I'll leave the Magician behind me, and go
quietly away, if you please to loose me.


Well done, Reverend Father: your Books are formidable: the Devil fears you,
and them.


I fear not this Monkish Devil. Sir, what shall I give you for your Flagellum
Daemonum? It will be helpful to me in scourging the Monks: I doubt not but I
shall find more Devils amongst them.


How say you, good Sir, shall I depart quietly?


Quietly, and quickly.


Wife, shall I not kiss before I go?


I abhor thee. I confess I had a child by thee thou cursed Incubus, but I was
never married to thee. The name of Husband and Wife with us, were but words, I
abhor thee.


As my Mistress abhors thee, so do I abhor thee. Whatsoever I confes't to thee,
I'll confess again to a lawful Priest.


And I.


My Lord, O my Lord Lucifen: Order you had, or you could not have conserved
your Government: now All's out of all Order. The Monks and Jesuits in your
long absence have set all Hell on fire: they differed at first amongst
themselves, and now they have stirred up, and set all Hell against you. Your
very Seraglio of Vestals are wrought and brought into the Combustion.


O, Now am I sick indeed, and beyond Legerdemain. You are the sinister cause of
all this, Agrippa.


Touch him not. Ego te, Bestiam infernalem --.


I swell into the Mountain Olympus. O, how I swell! I shall burst asunder: And
there's a dreadful tempest in my stomach. How, and where shall I empty my
self? I know not where to bestow my troubled stomach, and my seditious belly. O
good Females help me. O some kind body, point me to a secret place. O.


Help the Devil? Not I.


Your helping hand Lucifuga.


O Juno Lucina fer opem. Noise of straining.


Sir: I admonish you in private, to guard your Person: the Monks and Jesuits
cannot observe a distance; they will endanger your life by themselves or their
Abettors.


I am in your opinion: but if they kill me, they will immortalize the settled
opinion the world hath of them; and I shall appear before him who knows that in
all the story, I have kept the path of substantial Truth; and always like
Timanthes the Painter, covered more than I showed. I may have misplaced and
miscenter'd an Action, but in the substance I have been quadrate with Truth.
Beyond this, These Renegades expose our Nation, being also their own,
ridiculous in their Colledg-Comedies beyond the Seas: why should not we then,
within our own Sphere and Region, pay them with the Law of Talion, especially
after such most abusive, and most injurious Transactions?


I side with you.


And now, if Archimedes were alive, be would sooner undertake to number the
sands of the Sea, than to sum up the lies that will Epilogize to the Epilogue
of this Comedy.


My Lord's well amended. He has both vomited and gone to the stool. He spewed
a proud Jesuite: and was brought to bed backwards of a drunken Monk. Here he
comes in the midst of them.


The Jesuire is as like him as if he spat him out of his mouth.


The Monk is a Reverend Monk of a little one.


A Sir Reverence Monk, you should have said.


I have suffered thee too long. Depart: Ego te --


Lord, and Prince: your presence in Hell will soon allay this Insurrection.


Be gone. Ego te Bestiam --


I go.

Jesuits and Monks: within I take an oath,
I'll lay you low, and be revenged of both.

Farewell, Agrippa: I'll weave out the little parcel of my life, in the good
old Garden-house of Devotion.


I and my Maid will setup School again: we shall never want Scholars. But
Pretty, we must have a special care to keep the Devil out of our Quarters.


Madam, every man that offers himself at the Door, shall there bare his feet:
we'll see if he be cloven-sooted or no.


I'll join my forces with Father Robert, my zealous Defender against the Devil.
Sir, I shall buy Books of you.


And I shall further instruct you.


Vrinal, stand by: the Mark's out of your Mouth.
Gentlemen: Did ye call? The Authour's near,
And Drinks your Healths. His Epilogue is here.
Welcome Men here's, and if our lang be soamy,
The Italian Tongue welcomes you tuttie quanti.
He humbly throws himself beneath your feet;
Believe it, pray, although you do not see it.
Accept his first poor Industry: and know it.
Your kind Acceptance may create a Poet.
A Jesuite he regards as Garnet's Straw,
A Monk as Sergius, who proud Mahomet's Law
Did first invent: He was a Monk, and yet
To the Alcron he shared his hot-cold Wit,
What such do mouth, our Author will not mind:
He fears least Beaux Espirits be unkind.
Obedience is a virtue, low in show,
The worth of which we cannot see, but know.
Good Men good Subjects were, the Field is ample:
The Monk or Jesuite's no good example.
Now Peace and Plenty sing a Requiem to us,
Nothing but Disobedience can undo us.
May then all honest Hearts or say or sing,
Vivat Rex, Viva le Roy, God save the King.
All's paid, and ye are most kindly welcome, Gentlemen.


