AND what! you stick upon a Woman's Dreams?
Can such weak Subjects trouble this great Soul?
And this heart so approved in War, can it
Receive Alarm from an idle Fantasy?

I know what a Dream is, and what belief
We ought to give to its extravagance,
That a confused mass of Nocturnal Vapours
Forms vain Objects, which at waking vanish;
But you know not, Sir, what a woman is,
Nor the just power she takes upon a Soul,
When having long time found the art to charm us,
Bright Hymens Torches flame about our Beds.
Paulina without reason plunged in grief,

Fears and believs already that she sees
My death, which she hath dreamed; she doth oppose
Her tears to my design, and labours
To hinder me from going forth the palace;
I slight her fears, but yield unto her tears;
And my heart tender, but not terrified.
Dares not displease the eyes have conquered it:
Nearchus, is the occasion so pressing
That it may not a little be deferred
Upon a Lovers sighs? let us a while
Wave this design which burdens her with grief,
To morrow we can do it a swel's to day.

Yes, if you were assured to live so long,
And to persevere in your faith; that God
Which houlds our soul, and numbereth our days,
Hath not engaged himself that you shall see
The morning break; he is all just and good,
But his effectual grace descends not always
With the same efficacy; after certain moments
Which we lose by delays, she quits those darts
Which penetrate our souls, the arm that freely
Dispensed her unto us, stops his bounty;
As being offended, our dull heart is hardened;
That holy heat which carries us to good,
Falls on a Rock, and operates no more.
That zeal which pressed you to have recourse
To sacred baptism, languishing already,
Ceases to be the same; and for some sighs
Which you have heard, its flame doth dissipate
It self; and is upon the point to vanish.

You know me ill, the self same heat still burns me,
And the desire increases when the effect
Recoyls; those tears which with a Husbands Eye
I look upon, leave me as good a Christian
In heart as you; but to receave the seal
And sacred character thereof, which washes
Our sins in saving water, and in opening
Our Eyes with a divine Ray, doth restore us
Unto the first right which we had to Heaven,
Though I prefer it before all the greatness
Of Empires as the supreme good, and that
Which I alone aspire to, I believe
I may, to satisfy a lawful love,
Defer this sacred baptism for a day.

Thus the malicious enemy of man
Abuses you, what he can't do by force,
He doth attempt by policy, still jealous
Of good designs, which he endeavours
To shake; when he can't break them, he put^ on
With all the power he can to stop their course.
With obstacle upon obstacle he is coming
To trouble yours, to day by tears, to morrow
By something else; this dream so full of horror
Is but the slourish of his first illusions,

He sets all things a work, both prayer and threatening,
He assaults always, and is never weary,
He thinks to do at last what yet he cannot,
And what we do defer, concludes half broken.
Destroy his first strokes, let Paulina weep:
God would not have a heart that the world rules;
Who looks upon him when his voice doth call him
At distance, and as doubtful in his choice,
Hearkens unto another voice then his,

To give our selves to him, must we love no body?

We may love all, he suffers, he ordains it;
But this great King of Kings, this Lord of Lords
Will have the first love and the chiefest honours.
As nothing's equal to his supreme Greatness,
So nothing must be loved but after him,
And in him; we to please him must neglect
Wife and wealth, friends and fortunes; for his glory
We must not stick t'expose our selves to dangers,
Yea, even to death, to pour our blood forth for him;
But how far are you from this perfect love
Which I could wish you as so necessary
To your salvation, and eternal good?
I cannot speak unto you, Polyeuctes,
But with tears in mine eyes; now that we are
Hated in every place, that all believe
They serve the State well when they persecute us,
Now that a Christian is exposed a butt
Unto the sharpest torments, how can you
Or'ecome the grief on it, if you can't resist
A Woman's tears?

You do'nt astonish me;
The Pity that doth wound me doth proceed
From a great courage rather then from weakness;
Nearchus, on my equals a fair eye
Hath had much force, he fears to offend it,
That dreads not death; and if we must affront
The cruel'st punishments, to find delights
And pleasures there, your God whom I dare not
Yet to call mine, in making me a Christian,
Will give me strength enough to undergo them.

Haste then to be one.

Yes, I fly, Nearchus,
I long to bear the glorious mark of it,
But my Paulina doth afflict her self,
And can't consent, so much this dream doth trouble her,
To leave me to go forth.

Your safe return
Will be more pleasing to her; in an hour,
Or little more you shall wipe off her tears,
The happiness will seem again to see you
More sweet, by how much more she hath lamented
So dear a Husband. Come, we are expected.

Appease her fear, and calm her sorrow then,
She comes again.

Fly, fly.

Alas! I cannot.

You must, Sir, to be safe; Oh fly an Enemy
That knows your weakness, that doth find it easily,
That wounds with the eyes, whose stroke doth kill
And please, because receav'd not against your will.

LEt's fly then, since we must, adieu, Paulina,
Adieu, within an hour, or little more
I will return again here.

What occasion
So pressing doth invite you to go forth?
Doth it concern your honour, or your life?

Much more then either.

What's the secret then?

You shall know one day, I am loath to leave you,
But yet I must.

Do ye love me?

Witness Heaven
A thousand times more then my self I love you,
But --

But you care not for my discontent;
Should you have Secrets that I may not know?
What proof of love is this; in the name of Himen,
Give only to my tears this fatal journey.

A dream makes you afraid!

I know those presages
Are vain, but I do love you, and I fear.

For an hours absence fear no hurt; adieu,
Your tears prevail too much upon me, and
I feel my heart even ready to revolt,
There's no resisting her but in my flight. --

GO, and neglect my tears, hast to precipitate thee
Before the death, which the Gods have predicted
Unto me, follow that same fatal Agent
Of thy ill destinies, who, perhaps may give thee
Into the hands of murderers. See, Stratonica
In this sad age wherein we live, what Empire*
We have upon the stubborn Spirits of men;
See what is left us, and the ordinary
Effect of that love which they offer us,
And of the vows they make us; whilst they are
But Lovers, we are Sovereigns; and until
They've gained the conquest, we are used as Queens,
But after Marriage they are Kings by turn.

Sure Polyeuctes, wants no love for you;
Though with full confidence he treat you not.
In this affair, though he depart in spite
Of all your tears: it is a part of prudence;
Without afflicting you presume with me,
That it is fit he should conceal the cause,
Assure your self he hath just reason for it:
A Husband must not tell us every thing,
Let him be sometimes free, and not abase him
To render us account still of his steps.
We both have but one heart, which feels the same
Traverses, but this heart hath notwithstanding
Its divers functions; and the Law of marriage
Which holds you together, ordains not
That he should tremble when you tremble, Madam,
What makes you afraid, troubles not him,
He's an Armenian, and you are a Roman,
And you may please to understand that our
Two Nations ha'nt the same impressions
Upon this subject. A dream p^sseth with us
For a ridiculous fancy, it doth leave us,
Nor hope, nor fear, nor scruple; but it carries
Authority in Rome, and passes for
A faithful mirror of fatality.

Mine's very strange, and though Armenian,
I believe that thy fear would equal mine,
If by my bare recital such like horrors
Had struck thy Spirit.

To recount our evils,
We ease them oftentimes.

Attend me then;
But I must tell thee more, and that thou may
The better comprehend this sad discourse,
I will discover unto thee my weakness
In the relation of my first amours;
A woman that loves honour may confess
Without shame those surprises of the senses
Which reason doth or'ecome, chiefly it is
In these assaults that virtue doth break forth,
We doubt that heart that hath not combated.
In Rome where I was born this wretched face
Captived the courage of a Roman knight
Called Severus. Pray excuse the sighs
Which yet a name too dear to my desires,
Snatches out of my bosom.

Was it he
That not long since at th'expence of his life
Saved th'Emperour Decius from his enemies;
Who dying drew the victory from the Persians
And turned the chance upon the Roman Eagles?
He that amongst so many bodies sacrificed
Unto his Master, could not be found out,
Or at least known, to whom Decius at last
Made sumptuous monuments to be raised in vain?

Alas! it was the same, and never did
Our Rome produce a greater heart, nor saw
A braver man since thou hast understood him,
I'll speak no more of him; Statonica,
I loved him, he deserved well; but whereto
Serves merit where blind fortune is defective?
The one is great in him, the other weak
And common, too invincible obstacle,
Over which a virtuous Lover very seldom
Triumphs with a father.

Fair occasion,
And worthy a rare constancy!

Rather say
An overnice, foolish and base resistance;
What ever fruit one might receive from thence,
Tis not a virtue but for who would fail:
In this great love which I had for Severus,
I still expected from my Fathers hand
A Husband, and my reason never owned
The amiable Treason of mine eyes.
He did possess my heart, my thought, my wishes,
I hid not from him how much I was wounded,
We sighed together and wept our misfortunes,
But he in stead of hope had nought but tears,
And notwithstanding his sweet sighs and prayers
My Father and my duty were inexorable.
Lastly I left Rome, and this perfect lover,
To follow here my father in his government,
And he, even desperate, went unto the Army
To seek the illustrious fame of a fair death.
Thou know the rest; my coming to this place
Made me see Polyeuctes, and I pleased
His eyes; My Father finding that he was
The chief of the Nobility, was ravished
With joy that he should take me for his Mistress,
And he believed himself by his alliance
Sure to be more redoubted and considerable.
He liked his love, and did conclude the marriage.
And I seeing me destined to his bed
Gave unto his affection through duty
All what the other had through inclination;
If thou can doubt thereof, judge by the fear
Wherewith for him thou see my soul is troubled.

You love him, I believe, as well as one
Can love, but after all what dream could have
Disturbed you?

This last night me thought I saw
The unfortunate Severus with revenge,
In hand, and with an Eye flaming with anger;
He was not covered with those sorry rags,
A desolate shade doth bring with it from graves,
He was not pierced with those glorious strokes
Which cutting off his life assure his memory;
He seemed triumphant like unto our Caesar
When on his Chariot he victoriously
Doth enter Rome; after a little fear
Which his sight gave me, carry unto whom
Thou wilt the favour that is due to me,
Ungrateful, (said he) and this day expired,
Lament at leisure him thou hast preferred
Before me. At these words I trembled,
My soul was troubled; afterward an impious
Assembly of the Christians to advance
The effect of this fatal and sad discourse.
Threw Polyeuctes at his Rivals feet;
Forthwith I called my Father to his aid.
Alas! 'tis this that most doth trouble me,
I saw my Father enter with a Poniard
In hand, and his arm raised to pierce his bosom*
There my grief too strong hath conceived those Images,
The blood of Polyeuctes hath contented
Their furies, I know neither how, nor when
They killed him, but I know that to his death
All have contributed. Behold my dream.

'Tis true, tis sad, but your soul must resist
Those fears, the vision of it self may give
Some horror, but no just fear unto you.
Should you a death fear from a Father, who
Doth love your Husband, and doth honour him.
And whose just choice hath given you unto him,
To make himself thereby here in this Country
A sure and firm support?

He hath himself
Told me as much, and laughed at my alarms,
But I do fear the Christians plots and charms,
And that upon my Husband they'll revenge
The blood my Father hath so freely shed.

Their Sect is mad, impious, and sacrilegious,
And in their Sacrifice use sorcery;
But this their fury goes no further then
To break our Altars, its pursues the Gods,
But reaches not to mortals, whatsoever
Severity our anger doth display
Upon them, they do suffer without murmur,
And die with joy, and since the time they were
Treated as criminals of State, one cannot
Charge them with any murder.

Peace, my Father.

DAughter, thy dream hath plunged me in strange fears
Since yesterday, I doubt the effects thereof,
Which seem t'approach.

I do beseech you, tell me
What is't you feel?

Severus is not dead.

What evil doth his life do unto us?

He is the Favourite
Of the Emperor Decius.

After having saved him
From the hands of his Enemies the hope
Of such a rank justly might be allow'd him,
Thus Fortune to great hearts so often cruel,
Resolves her self sometimes to do them justice.

He's coming here himself.

What? is he coming?

Thou shalt receive his Visit.

That's too much;
But how do you know this? Sir.

Albin met
In the adjacent field, a troup of Courtiers
Attending him in crowds which showed plainly
His rank and credit, but Albinus tell her
That which his People told thee.

You know, Madam,
What that great Expedition was, which made us
So fortunate by his loss, where the Emperor
A Prisoner, dis^ingaged by his hand,
Confirmed again his almost conquered party;
Whilst that his virtue fell amongst the number,
You know the honours that he caused to be
Done to his shadow, when his body could not
Be found amongst the dead. The King of Persia
Witness of his high acts, though to his damage,
Caused him to be carried off, and brought
Into his Tent, he did desire to know
His face though dead, every one did lament him,
Covered with wounds, though jealous of his glory.
Within a while he showed some sign of life:
This generous Monarch was over joyed therewith,
And though overcome, thought not of his misfortune;
To honour virtue in its very Author,
He caused that special care should be taken of him;
His cure was secret, and at a Months end
His health was perfect, when the King, to gain him,
Offered him dign^ties, alliance, treasures,
And used a thousand means: when all things failed,
After high praise bestowed on his refusal,
He sent to Decius to propose exchange,
And presently the Emperor transported
With pleasure, offered to the Persian
His Brother and a hundred chiefs to choose.
So came unto the Camp the valorous
And brave Severus, to receive the recompense
Of his high virtue: Decius favour was
The worthy price thereof: we fought again,
And were surprised, yet this misfortune served
T'increase his glory, he alone restablish'd
The order, and recovered the victory,
So fair and plain, and by such glorious feats,
That our stout Enemies offered us tribute,
And made us peace; The Emperor expressed
An infinite love unto him, and being ravished
With the success, sent him into Armenia;
He comes to bring the news into this Country,
And by a sacrifice to render thanks
Unto the Gods,

O heaven! to what estate
My fortune is reduced!

I learned this
From one that doth belong unto his train,
And hasted here, Sir, to acquaint you with it.

Oh without doubt he comes to marry thee,
Daughter, the order of a sacrifice
Is a small thing to him, not worth his presence,
It is a false pretence, whose cause is love.

It may well be, he loved me very dearly.

What will not he allow to his resentment?
And to what point will not his anger carry
A just revenge with so much power to prop it?
He will destroy us, daughter.

He's too generous.

Thou wilt in vain flatter a wretched Father;
He will destroy us, daughter. Oh regreet
That kills me now, in that I loved not
The naked virtue. Oh Paulina really
Thou hast too much obeyed me, thy courage
Was good, but thy nice duty hath betrayed thee.
How thy rebellion had been favourable
Unto me, how it would have privileged me
From a deplorable condition!
If any hope rests with me, it is now
No more but in the absolute power which he
Gives thee upon him: Husband in my favour
The love that doth possess him, and from whence
My evil doth proceed, produce the remedy.

Shall I, Shall I see such a Puissant Conqueror?
And expose me unto those eyes that pierce
My heart? Father, I am a Woman, and
I know my weakness, I perceive my heart
Already to be interested for him,
And will without doubt in spite of my faith
Thrust forth some sigh unworthy both of you
And me, I will not see him.

Re-assure
Thy soul a little.

He is always lovely,
And I am always firm, in the power which
His looks have had upon me, I can't answer
With all my virtue, therefore I'll not see him.

Daughter you must, or you'll betray your Father*
And all your Family.

It is my duty
To obey since you command, but see the perils
Wherein you hazard me.

I know thy Virtue.

Without doubt it will vanquish, the success
Is not the thing that my soul doubts, I fear
This stubborn combat, and puissant troubles
That makes my senses to revolt already;
But since I must combat an Enemy
I love, permit me t'arm against my self,
And give me some time to prepare to see him.

Without the Ports I'm going to receive him,
In the mean time call home your straggling force,
And think that in thy hands thou holdst our destinies,

True, I am born to sacrifice me still*
In serving as a victim to your will.

WHilst Felix gives order for the sacrifice,
May not I take a time to see Paulina,
And render to her fair eyes that high homage
Is due unto the Gods? I have not kept
From thee, that it is this which brings me hither;
For the rest I'm not troubled much, I come
To sacrifice, but tis unto your beauties,
Whereto I dedicate all my devotions.

Sir, you shall see her.

What joys do I feel!
Doth this adorable object give consent
That I shall see her? have I any power
Upon her soul yet? hast thou seen in speaking
To her of me, that she was troubled,
Or what transport my coming causes her?
May I hope all things from this happy sight?
For I would rather perish then abuse her
With Letters recommendatory, which
I have to marry her, they are for Felix,
Not to triumph of her, my heart was never
Rebellious unto her desires, and if
My evil fortune should have changed hers,
I would vanquish my self and pretend nothing.

Sir, you shall see her, I can say no more.

How comes it that thou tremble and sigh?
Doth she no longer love me? clear this point.

Sir, I could wish you not to see her more,
Carry unto some higher place the honour
Of your Caresses, you shall find at Rome
Ladies enough that will be proud to be
Your Mistresses, and in this high degree
Of power and glory wherein now you are,
The greatest will esteem your love a happiness.

What should my soul stoop to such humble thoughts?
Should I esteem Paulina as inferior
Unto my fortune? she hath better used it,
I ought to imitate her, I love not
My happiness but for to merit her.
See, Fabian, thy discourse doth trouble me:
Come, let us go to cast this haughty fortune
Even at her feet, I found it happily
In fights seeking a death worthy her Lover,
So then this rank is hers, this favours hers,
And I have nothing that I hold not off her.

No, Sir, but once again pray do not see her.

Oh! 'tis too much, at last clear me this point;
Hast thou seen coldness when thou prayd'st access?

I tremble to declare t'ee, she is --

What?

Married.

Sustain me, Fabian, this thunder-clap
Is very great, and strikes so much the more,
As more it doth surprise me.

What's become, Sir,
Of that brave generous courage?

Constancy
Is here of little use, when such displeasures
Burden a great heart, the most masculine virtue
Soon loses all its vigour, and when souls
Are taken with so glittering a fire,
Death troubles them far less then such surprises.
I can scarce yet believe thy sad discourse.

Paulina's married; fifteen days have passed
Since Hymen did appear in saffron robes
To solemnize the nuptials; Polyeuctes,
One of the chiefest of the Armenian Lords
Doth taste the infinite sweetness of her bed.

I cannot blame her of an evil choice,
The name of Polyeuctes is esteemed,
As being descended from the blood of Kings.
Weak comfort for a cureless misery!
Paulina, I shall see thee by another
Possessed! Oh Heaven! that spite of me did send me
Unto the light again! Oh fate! that gav'st me
A new hope of my love, take back the favours
Which you have lent me, and restore me death
Which you have taken from me; yet let's see her,
And in this sad place make an end to die
In bidding her adieu, that my heart carrying
Her Image to the dead, where I do go,
With its last sigh to her may homage do.

Consider, Sir.

All is considered.
What inconvenience fears a desperate heart?
Consents she not?

Yes, Sir, but -- --

'Tis no matter.

This lively grief will thereby become stronger.

'Tis not an evil I intend to cure,
I only will but see her, sigh, and dye.

You will break forth without doubt in her presence;
A Lover that doth lose all hath no more
Complacence, but in such despair he follows
His passion which doth thrust him on to injury,
And imprecation.

Judge otherwise
Of me, my respect doth continue yet;
My despair, violent as 'tis, adores her;.
What reason have I to reproach this Lady?
Wherewith can I accuse her who hath promised
Me nothing; she's not perjured, she's not light;
Her duty hath betrayed me, her Father,
And my misfortune; but her duty was
Just, and her Fathers reason guided him;
I impute all the treason unto my
Misfortune; somewhat less of prosperous hap,
And arrived sooner, would have gained one
By the other, and conserved me; too happy,
But too late, I could not have gained her, I,
Leave me to see her, then to sigh and dye.

Yes, I will go t'assure her that you are
In this extreme misfortune strong enough
To overcome your self, she fears like me
Those first provoked motions which a sudden
And unexpected loss raises in Lovers,
The violence whereof excites much trouble
Without the presence of the object to*
Redouble it.

I see her, Fabian.

Remember, Sir --

Another is her Husband,
Alas, my sad fate! she doth love another;
It is impossible my grief to smother.

TIs true, Severus, I do love another,
And plead not here for it, every one
Except my self do flatter and abuse you;
Paulina hath a noble soul, and speaks
With open heart, the report of your death
Is not that which destroys you, if just heaven
Had put my marriage to my choice, I should
To your sole virtues, Sir, have given my self,
And all the rigour of our former fate
Against your merit had made vain attempts;
I saw in you Illustrious marks enough
To give you worthy preferrence even before
The happiest Monarchs; but since other Laws
My duty did impose, what ever Lover
My Father had assigned me, though your valour
Had added to this greatness which it gave you,
The splendour of a Crown, though I loved you
And hated him, I should have sighed at it,
But yet I should obey, and over my passions,
My reason being Sovereign, should have blamed
My sighs, and dissipated all my hatred.

How happy are you that a sigh or two
Can easily acquit you of your troubles!
So always absolute Queen of your desires,
The greatest changes find you still resolved;
Your spirit is carried in the strongest love
Unto indifference, and perhaps to scorn,
And your stout firmness without trouble makes
Favour succeed contempt, and love disdain.
Oh how a little of your humour, or
Rather your virtue would comfort the evils
Of this dejected heart! a sigh, a tear
Shed with regret, would have already cured me
Of losing you, my reason would prevail
Upon enfeebled love, and from indifference
Would go even to oblivion, and my fire
Henceforth commanding over yours, I should
Esteem me happy in another arms.
O too too lovely object, that hast charmed me!
Must we thus love? is't so that you have loved me?

I loved thee Severus, and if I
Could smother in my soul the flame remains there,
What rigorous torments, Gods, should I avoid!
'Tis true, my reason tames my passions,
But whatsoever Authority she hath taken
Upon them, she raigns not, but tyrannizeth;
And though the outside be without commotion,
The inside is but trouble and sedition.
A certain charm, I know not what, inclines me
Towards you yet, your merit sure is great,
Although my reason's strong, I see it still,
Such as it lights my fires, so much more strongly
To work on my affections, as it is
Environed with puissance and glory;
I see that in all places after you
It draws triumphant victory, that I
Best know the price on it, and that it hath not
Deceived the generous hope I conceived of it.
But that same duty which in Rome subdued it,
And makes me subject to the Law of Man here,
Repulses still so strongly the assault
Of so many allurements, that it tears
My soul, but doth not shake it; 'tis that virtue
Even cruel to our own desires, which you
Should praise when you blaspheam it; if you please
You may complain on it, but yet praise its rigour
That triumphs over you and over my heart
At one time, lower thoughts could not have merited
That perfect love which you have born unto me.

O sweet Paulina, pardon a blind grief,
Which knows nothing but excess of misery.
I named it inconstancy, and took
For crimes th'indeavours of a virtuous duty.
I do beseech you show less to my senses
The greatness of my Loss, and of your worth,
And so through pity hiding this rare virtue,
That feeds my fires even when she separates us,
Make some defects appear that may successively
Weaken my grief together with my love.

Alas! this virtue, though invincible still,
Makes but appear a soul too sensible,
These tears are witnesses thereof, and these
Effeminate sighs which stir up the remembrance
Of our first fires, too rigorous effects
Of a beloved presence, against which
My duty hath too little of defence.
But if you do esteem this virtuous duty,
keep me the glory on it, and cease to see me,
Spare me those tears that trickle to my shame,
Spare me those tears that with grief I or'ecome,
Lastly spare me those sad discourses which
Do but stir up your torments and mine own.

So shall I rob my self of the sole good
That remains to me.

Save you from a sight
Fatal unto us both.

What recompense
Of all my love? what fruit of my devotions?

That's the sole remedy that can cure our evils.

I'll die of mine, Oh love my memory.

I'll cure mine, they would sully my fair glory.

Oh! since your glory doth pronounce the sentence,
My grief must yield unto its interest,
From such a heart as mine what is't that it
Cannot obtain? you do awake the cares
Which I owe to my glory; farewell, Madam,
I go to seek in honourable combats
That immortality which a fair death
Doth give, if I after this mortal stroke
Of fate, have life enough to seek a death.

And I, whose punishment your sight increases,
Intend to avoid it even in Sacrifice,
And alone in my Chamber shutting up
My sorrows, I will make my secret Orisons
Unto the Gods for you.

May righteous Heaven
Contented with my ruin heap up happiness
On Polyeuctes and Paulina's heads.

May brave Severus find after so much
Disaster, a felicity that may be
Worthy his valour.

In you he could find it.

I depend of a Father and a Husband.

Oh duty that destroys, and makes me desperate!
Adieu too virtuous and too charming object.

Adieu, adieu, thou too unfortunate
And faithful lover.

I Have bewailed you both, and cannot choose
But shed tears, yet your spirit, I do believe,
Is free of fear now, for you plainly see
Your dream is vain, Severus comes not
With revenge in his hand.

Leave me to breath,
At least if thou hast (as thou say) lamented me,
Thou call again my fear unto the Fort
Of all my grief, suffer my troubled spirits
To take a little rest, and lead me not
By those redoubled evils.

What! fear you yet?

Stratonica, I tremble,
And though I am apaid with little justice,
This unjust fear continually produces
The Image of the sad misfortunes which
I saw last night.

Severus is most generous.

Notwithstanding
His staydness, Polyeuctes all in blood
Strikes still my sight.

You are your self a witness
Of his devotions for him.

I believe
He would be his support upon occasion,
But whether this belief be false or true,
His abode in this place doth make me fear,
To whatsoever his virtue may dispose him,
He's strong, he loves, and comes here to espouse me.

YOu shed too many tears, 'tis time to dry them,
Let your grief cease, and your vain fears fly hence,
You see me living. Madam, in despite
Of the false intimation of your gods.

The day is long yet, and what most affrights me
Is, that the half of the Advertisement
Is found already true, I did believe
Severus dead, but he was here just now.

I know it, and am nothing troubled at it;
I am in Militene, and let Severus
Be what he will, your Father doth command here,
And I'm considerable. Besides I'm confident
That from a heart so generous as his
A Treason cannot spring, I was informed
He gave a visit to you, and I'm come
To render him an honour he deserves.

He is gone very sad, and much confounded,
But I've prevailed with him that he will
See me no more.

How! Madam, do ye suspect me
Of jealousy already?

I should do
Unto all three too sensible an injury,
I assure my repose which his looks trouble;
The firmest virtue still avoids hazards
Wo doth expose himself to danger, would
Meet with his ruin, and to speak to you
With open soul of him, since a true merit
Could have inflamed us, his presence always
Hath right to charm us. Besides that one must*
Be out of countenance to leave ones self
To be surprised, one suffers to resist,
One suffers to defend, and although virtue
Triumphs over these fires, the victory
Is painful and the fight dishonourable.

Oh Virtue, if 'twere possible, too perfect,
And duty too sincere! what sad regrets
'Cost you Severus! how at the expense
Of a fair fire you render me most happy!
And to my Amorous heart how sweet are you!
The more I see mine own defects, and do
Contemplate your perfections, the more
I do admire. --

My Lord and Master Felix
Hath sent me to desire you to make hast
Unto the Temple, for the Victime's chosen,
And all the People on their knees; there wants
But you, Sir, to begin the Sacrifice.

Go, we will follow thee, will you along, Madam?

Severus fears my sight, it stirs his flame,
I'll keep my word with him, and will not see him;
Adieu, you'll find him there, think of his power,
And the great favour that he hath.

I fear not
His credit nor his power, and as I know
His generosity, we shall encounter
Each other only in civility.

Where do you think to go?

Unto the Temple,
Where I am called.

What, to join your self
To the Devotions of a company
Of Infidels, have you forgot already
That you are Christian?

You by whom I am so,
Do you remember it.

I hate false Gods.

And I detest them.

I do hold their worship
Most impious.

And I take it for abominable.

Fly then their Altars.

I will overthrow them,
And in their Temple die, or drive them thence.
My dear Nearchus, come, lets brave Idolatry
Before the eyes of men, and show us Christians;
Heaven doth expect it, and we must perform it:
For my part I do promise, and am going
T'accomplish it: I thank God that hath given me
This opportunity to express my zeal,
Wherein his goodness ready even to crown me,
Deigns to approve the faith that he will give me.

This zeal, Sir, is too ardent, moderate it.

We cannot have too much on it for the God
Which we adore.

It will procure your death.

I seek it for him.

If this heart should shake?

He will be my support.

Tis not his pleasure,
We should precipitate our selves therein.

If we die willingly, the more's our merit.

To wait and suffer is sufficient,
We need not seek out danger.

We suffer with regret when we dare not
Offer our selves.

But in this Temple Death
Is most assured.

But in Heaven the Palm
Already is prepared.

A holy life
Must merit it.

Living, perhaps, my crimes
May take it from me, wherefore should we hazard
What death assures us? When she opens heaven,
Can she seem hard? I am a Christian,
Nearchus, and I am so altogether;
The pure faith which I have received, aspires
To its effect; who flies believes faintly,
And hath but a dead faith.

Know that your life
Imports God himself, live to protect
The Christians in this place.

The example of my death will better fortify them.

You will die then?

And you desire to live?

To tell you truly, I've no mind to follow you.
I fear to fall under the horror of
The Torments which they will inflict upon us.

Who goes on boldly needs not fear to sall,
God doth impart at need his infinite force;
Who thinks he shall deny him, in his soul
He doth deny him, he believs to do it,
And doubts of his faith.

Who fears nothing
Presumes too much upon himself.

I expect all things from his grace and mercy,
And nothing from my weakness; but in stead
Of pressing me, it is fit that I press you,
Whence doth proceed this coldness?

God himself
Hath feared death.

He offered himself;
Let's follow this divine instinct, and raise
Altars unto him on the heaps of Idols;
We must not (I do remember yet your words)
Neglect to please him; wife, and wealth, and rank,
We must not stick to expose our selves to dangers,
Yea even to death, to pour our blood forth for him;
Alas! where is that perfect love which you
Wished to me, and which I now wish you?
If it remains yet with you, are you not
Jealous that I scarce Christian yet, should show it
Stronger then you?

You come immediately
From baptism, and the thing that animates you,
It is his grace, which yet no crime in you,
Hath weakened, yet it acts fully in you.
And to its vehement fire all things seem possible;
But this same grace in me diminished,
And by a thousand sins continually
Extenuated acts with such faintness
In hazardous attempts, that all things seem
Impossible unto its little vigour;
This base effeminacy, and cowardly
Evasions are the punishments which my
Offences do draw on me, but our God,
Whom we must ne'er distrust, gives your Example
To fortify me; Come, dear Polyeuctes,
Let us go before the eyes of men to brave
Idolatry, and to show who we are;
May I to suffer give you the Example,
As you have given me that of offering you?

By this most happy transport which Heaven sends you,
Again I know Nearchus, and I weep
For joy on it, come, let us not lose more time,
The Sacrifice is ready, let's uphold
The interest of the true God, lets tread
Under our feet this feigned Thunderbolt,
With which th'abused and too credulous people
Arm a corrupted piece of wood; let's go
To make this fatal blindness manifest,
Those gods of stone and mettle, let us break
In pieces, and lets dedicate our days
To this celestial heat, and so let's offer
A triumph unto God; let him dispose
The rest.

Come let us make his glory to break forth
Unto the eyes of all, and for him dye,
Who for us suffered death and infamy.

WHat floating cares! what confused clouds
Present inconstant images to mine eyes!
Sweet rest, which I dare not so much as hope,
Send thy divine Ray speedily to clear them;
A thousand diverse thoughts which my sad troubles
Produce in my uncertain heart, are lost
In wishes; no hope flatters me, not where
I dare persist, no fear affrights me not
Where I dare fix my self, my spirit embracing
All what it doth imagine, would sometimes
My happiness, and sometimes my destruction;
Both one and the other strike it with so little
Effect, that it can neither hope nor fear.
Continually Severus troubles
My fantasy, my hope is in his virtue,
I fear his jealousy; and I cannot think
That Polyeuctes with an equal eye
Can see his Rival heer; as between such
The hate is natural, the interview
Soon ends in a quarrel; the one sees
In the hands of the other what he thinks
He merits, the other sees a desperate
Would take it from him; whatsoe'r high reason
Raignsin their courage, th'one conceives envy,
The other jealousy: the shame of an
Affront, which each of them fears to see,
Either received of old, or at this present,
Destroying all their patience from the first,
Forms choler and distrust, and seizing on
The Husband and the Lover both together,
Whether they will or no delivers them
Over to their resentment, and their passion:
But what a strange Chymera do I fancy
Unto my self! and what an injury
Do I to Polyeuctes and Severus?
As if the virtue of these famous Rivals
Could not triumph over those common evils.
The minds of both, Mistresses to themselves
Are of too high an order for such baseness;
They shall see one another in the Temple
Like generous men; but alas, still I fear:
What is th'advantage that my Husband hath
To be in Militene, if Severus arm
The Roman Eagle against him, if my Father
Command here, and doth fear this Favourite,
And doth repent already of his choice?
The little hope I have is with constraint,
And born it is abortive, and gives place
To fear; what ought to fix it, doth but serve
To dissipate it. Gods! grant that my fear
Be false, and my sad fancy, a Chimere.

BUt let us understand the Issue on it.
Now my Stratonica what's the conclusion
Of this great Sacrifice.

Alas Paulina!

Have my Prayers and Devotions been frustrate:
I see an ill sign of it in thy face,
Have they unfortunately quarrelled?

Nearchus, Polyeuctes, and the Christians --

Speak then, the Christians.

I cannot speak.

Thou dost prepare my soul for strange afflictions.

You ne'er could have a juster cause of grief.

What have they murdered him?

That had been nothing
Your dream is all true, Polyeuctes is
No more.

What is he dead?

No, he lives, but
(O fate to be lamented!) this great courage,
This divine soul is no more worthy of
The light, nor of Paulina, he is no more
That Spouse so charming to your eyes, he is
The common enemy of the gods, and State,
An infamous, a Rebel, a perfidious,
A Traitor, Villain; a base Particide,
An execrable plague to all good men,
An impious and a sacrilegious Wretch,
In a word, Madam, he's a Christian.

This word would have sufficed without that torrent
Of Injuries.

Can there be any titles bad enough
For Christians?

He is what thou say, if he
Embrace their faith, but he's my Husband, and
Thou speak to me;

Consider him no more
Then the God he adores.

I have loved him
With duty, and this duty still continues.

At present he doth give you cause to hate him
Who doth betray the gods, would make no scruple
To betray you.

Although he should betray me,
Yet I should love him. And if thou, Stratonica,
Dost wonder at this love, know, that my duty
Depends not of his, let him fall in it,
(If he be so disposed) I will do mine.
What if he loved elsewhere, should his example
Persuade me to embrace unlawful heats?
Let him be Christian, I'm not troubled at it.
I love his Person, and I hate his error.
But what resentment hath my Father of it?

A secret rage, and an excess of choler
Possesses him, though yet for Polyeuctes
He shows some; he'll not let his justice
Fall upon him before the punishment
Of false Nearchus be presented to him
To see how that will work upon his spirits.

What is Nearchus Christian too?

'Twas he
Seduced him; see the unworthy fruit.
Of their old amity; this perfidious
Taking him lately from us against his will,
Drew him to baptism: now you have the secret
That seemed so mysterious, which your love
Could not draw from him.

Thou did blame me then
For being too unfortunate.

I foresaw not
Such a misfortune.

Ere I will give up
My soul unto my griefs, I'll try the force
Of my laments, in quality of Wife
And Daughter, I hope to persuade a hu^band,
And pacify a Father: if I fail
With both of them, I'll take no other Counsel
But what despair shall give me: tell me now
What did they in the Temple?

The impiety
They acted there was such as 'tis without
Example, I can't think on it without trembling:
And fear, I should commit a crime but in
Relating it; in few words understand
Their beastly insolence. Scarce had the Priest
Obtained silence, and towards the East
Settled his countenance, but their small respect
Appeared plainly, both of them expressed
Their madness at the ceremony, they mocked
Aloud the sacred mysteries, and despised
The gods that were invoked; all the people
Murmured thereat, and Felix was offended;
But both of them carrying themselves with more*
Irreverence, what, said Polyeuctes, raising
His voice, adore you gods of stone or wood?
Dispense me from recital of the blasphemies
They vomited' against Iupiter himself.
Adultery and Incest were the least
Crimes they objected to him. Hearken Felix.
Pursued he, and hearken all ye people;
The God of Polyeuctes and Nearchus
Is absolute Monarch both of heaven and earth,
Of Destiny sole Master, and the only
Being that's independent, substance which
Never receives change; it is the God
The Christians adore that we must thank
For victories he gave the Emperor Decius;
He in his hands holds the success of battles,
With him are (saith the sacred Text) the issues
Of life and death, his power, his infinite goodness,
His justice is immense, 'tis he alone
That punishes, alone that recompenses;
You vainly do adore inpuissant Monsters.
Casting themselves at these words on the wine
And Incense, after they had thrown against
The earth the holy vessels without fear
Of Felix, or of Thunder, with like fury
They ran unto the Altar. Heavens! was ever
The like seen? there you might behold the statue
Of the chief god o'rethrown by impious hands*
Lye at their feet, the mysteries disturbed,
The Temple sacrilegionsly profaned,
The fl^ght and clamours of a mutinous people,
That fear' the anger of offended heaven*
Felix. -- but here he comes; the rest he'll tell you*

How sullen is his countenance and full
Of trouble! he expresses much of sadness
And indignation.

DUrst such an insolence appear! in public too, and in my sight?
He shall die for it, the Traitor.

Suffer me
T'embrace your knees.

I speak not of your Husband,
But of Nearchus, Polyeuctes hath
Too near relation to me, though his crime*
Deserves no favour, to be banished
My love for ever.

I could not expect
Less from a Fathers goodness.

I could sacrifice him*
To my just anger, for you are not ignorant
To what a height of horror the blind fury
Of his impiety hath boldly mounted,
You might have understood it from Stratonica.

I know tis fit he see Nearchus punished.

Hereafter he shall better be instructed
In taking Counsel, when he shall behold
Him punished that seduced him to this evil;
The bloody spectacle of a friend, whom he
Must follow, will so work upon his soul
That he'll repent his wickedness, and renounce
His new faith, an example more prevails
Then Threatening; this mad heat will suddenly
Turn into ice, cheer up your drooping spirits.

You hope then that his courage will come down?

He should be wise, sure, at Nearchus cost.

He should be so, but alas! I do fear
There must be time to work it, may I hope
To obtain this favour from your goodness, Sir?

I do him too much favour in consenting
That he shall lie upon a quick repentance:
Like punishment is due to like offences,
Yet I have put a difference between
These two equally guilty, and thereby
Betrayed Justice to paternal love,
I've made my self a Criminal for him,
And did expect from you more thanks then plaints.

First give me, then I'll thank you; I know well
The honour, and the spirit of a Christian;
He doth continue obstinate to the end,
He'll dye before he will repent.

His pardon
Is in his hand, let him consider on it.

Give it him fully.

He may finish it.

Give him not over to the furies of
His sect.

I'll give him up unto the Laws,
Which I ought to respect.

Is this all the support a Son-in-Law
May hope for from the Father of his Wife?

Let him do for himself as much as I
Have done for him.

Alas! Sir, he is blind.

It pleases him to be so, he that cherishes
His error never will acknowledge it.

In the name of the gods. --

Invoke them not.
The interest of the gods requires his death.

They hear our prayers.

Well then, Petition them.

In the name of the Emperor whose place
You hold.

'Tis true, his power is in my hand,
But if he hath committed it unto me
'Tis to display it against his enemies.

Is Polyeuctes so?

All Christians are
Rebels.

Hear not these cruel maxims for him.
In marrying Paulina he's become
Part of your blood.

I look upon his fault,
Not on his quality, where a crime against
The State, is mingled with black sacrilege,
No^ amity nor blood have any privilege.

Excess of rigour!

Less then his offence.

Oh effect too true of my fearful dream!
Know, that with him, Sir, you destroy your daughter.

My Family is not so dear to me
As the gods and the Emperor, are honoured.

Cannot the ruin of us both arrest you?

I fear the g^ds add Decius both together;
But we need doubt no sad thing yet; think you
He will persist in his blind error? if
He seemed to us to run to his misfortune,
It was but the first heat of a new Christian.

If yet you love him, have not that opinion
That he will change belief twice in a day:
The Christians are more constant, you expect,
I doubt too much Legerity from him;
'Tis not an error sucked in with the milk,
That his soul hath embraced without examining:
No, Polyeuctes is a Christian,
Because he would be so, and brought with him
Unto the Temple a resolved spirit.
You may presume of him as of the rest,
Death's neither fatal to them, nor dishonourable.
They seek for glory in despising of
The gods, for earth blind, they aspire to heaven;
And thinking that death opens them the gate,
Torment, dismember, murder them, they care not;
Tortures and racks are the same unto them
That pleasures are to us, and bring them to
The Butt where their desires and wishes tend;
They call the cruel'st and most infamous death
Sweet Martyrdom.

Well, Polyeuctes then
Shall have what he desires, no more of him.

My Father.

I Sit done, Albin?

Yes Sir, and Nearchus
Hath paid for his fault.

And Polyeuctes
Hath seen him?

Yes, but with an envious eye;
He was on fire to follow him, far from
Retreating, and his heart was firmly fixed,
In stead of being shaken.

Oh! my Father,
I told you so; once more I do beseech you,
If ever my respects gave you content
If you esteemed them, if you ever loved them. --

Paulina, you love an unworthy husband
Too much.

I had him from your hand, my love
Is without crime, he was your worthy choice,
And for him I have quenched the fairest fires
That e're were kindled in a heart; I beg
In the name of that blind and quick obedience,
Which I have always rendered to my duty,
Since you had all power on me and my love,
That I at my turn now may prevail with you.
By this just power too much now to be feared,
By those fair sentiments which I must smother,
Take not your presents from me, they are dear
Unto mine eyes, and have cost me too much
Not to be precious to me.

You are troublesome.

Good gods! what do I hear!

I love not pity
But at the rate I would receive thereof,
To touch me with it whether I will or no
By so many vain trials, is to lose
Time and your tears, only to anger me:
You gave it me, but you must understand
I disavow it when you snatch it from me:
Prepare to see this miserable Christian,
And use your best endeavour to persuade him,
When I have used mine; go, and no more
Provoke a Father that doth love you tenderly:
See if you can by your perswasion^ gain
Your Husband to himself, presently
I'll cause h^m to come hither, in the mean time
Leave us, I'll try what my discourse can do.

Suffer, I do beseech you. --

Once again
Leave me alone your grief offends me
As much as it afflicts me, all your industry
Must be applied to gain you Polyeuctes,
The less you do importune me, the more
You shall advance.

ALbin, how died he?

Like a Beast, like an impious desperate wretc^
In braving torments* in despising death,
Without regret, astonishment, or murmur,
In obstination, and insensibility;
Lastly, he dyed like a Christian
With blasphemy in's mouth.

What did the other?

I have told you already, nothing touched him,
So far was he from being dejected at it,
That his heart grew more lofty: they enforced him
To quit the Scaffold: he is now in Prison.
Where I saw him conducted; are you ready
To entertain discourse with him a litt^e?

Oh! how unfortunate am I?

You are
Lamented every where.

None know the evils
Wherewith my heart's oppressed, thoughts upon thoughts
Trouble my soul, cares upon cares disturb it:
I find that love and hate, that fear and hope,
That joy and grief by turns, press and provoke it.
I enter into sentiments that pass
Belief, I have some that are violent,
And others that are pitiful, some generous
Which dare not act, and likewise some ignoble
Which make me blush. I love that wretched man.
Whom I chose for my Son-in-Law, I hate
The blind and dangerous error he is in;
I do deplore his loss, and being willing
To save him, I must look too on the gods,
Whose injured glory I must vindicate:
I fear their thunderbolts and Decius wrath;
It is my charge, my life depends upon it.
Thus sometimes for him I expose my self
To death, and other times I expose him
To save my self.

Sure Decius will excuse
A Fathers amity, besides Polyeuctes
Is of a blood that should be reverenced.

His order for the punishment of the Christians
Is very rigorous, and the more the example
Is great, the more 'tis dangerous and dreadful.
There's no distinction when the offence is public;
When we connive at a domestic crime,
By what authority, by what Law can we
Punish that in another which we suffer
Amongst our selves?

If you dare not to have
Regard unto his person, write to Decius
That he ordain his pardon.

Should I do so,
Severus would destroy me, tis his hate
And power that make my greatest care, if I
Should but defer to punish such a crime,
Though he be generous, though he be magnanimous*
He is a man, and sensible, and I
Disdained him formerly, his spirit offended
With those received contempts, and desperate
Through the unexpected marriage of Paulina,
Will from the anger of the Emperor
Obtain my ruin. Every thing seems lawful
To revenge an affront, and opportunity
Tempts the most remiss, perhaps (and this
Suspicion is not without some appearance)
He in his heart conceives again some hope,
And thinking to see Polyeuctes punished
Recalls a love with much pain banished:
Judge if his anger in this case implacable
Would hold me innocent to save a Criminal,
And if he'd spare me, seeing his designs
Twice made abortive by me. Shall I tell he
A base, unworthy, and low spirited thought?
I smother it, it springs up again, it flatters,
And angers me, ambition still presents it
Unto me, and all that I can do is
But to detest it; Polyeuctes here
Is the prop of my Family, but if
The other by his death espouse my daughter,
I should acquire greater advantages,
Which would raise me a thousand times more high
Then now I am. My heart thereat by force
Takes a malignant joy, but rather let
Heaven strike me with a Thunder-bolt, then that
I should consent unto so base a thought,
Which hitherto my glory hath belied.

Your heart is too good, and your soul too high;
But do ye resolve to punish this offence?

I'll use all my endeavour to subdue
His error by the fear of death, but if
I can't prevail, then I will afterward
Employ Paulina's power.

What w^ll you do
At last, if he continue obstinate?

Press me not on that point in such displeasure,
I can't resolve, and know not what to choose.

Sir, like a faithful servant I am bound
To advertise you that the Town murmurs
In his behalf already, and is even
Upon the point to mutiny, if you
Proceed against him further, I perceive
The Inhabitants are all resolved to oppose you,
And will not see their last hope, and the blood
Of their Kings pass the rigour o the Laws:
Besides his pr^son is not very safe.
I left about it but a pitiful troop*
I fear they will be forced*

Then take him thence,
And bring him here, where we will be sure of him.

Then take him thence your self, and with a hope
Of pardon, pacify the fury of
The multitude.

Come let us go, and if
He still persist to remain Christian,
We will dispose of him, and carryit so
That what's resolved upon, they shall not know.

WHat would you with me, Guards?

Paulina, Sir,
Would speak with you.

Oh how I dread her presence!
This combat will be hard; Felix* o^'e thee
I triumphed in Prison, and despised
Thy threatening, I beheld thee without fear,
I see, that to revenge thy self thou take
Stronger a mes then thine own her tears do terrify
Mo^e then thy Execution^rs; O Lord,
Thou see here the danger that I run,
In this my pressing need double thy force;
And thou my dear Nearchus, coming forth
Lately from a Triumphant victory,
Look on my travel, from thy glorious residence,
Lend me thy hand from Heaven to overcome
So strong an Enemy. Guards, da^e you do me
One civil office?

Sir, we have strict order
To render you no service.

You mistake me,
I have no purpose to apply my self
Unto you as a means for my escape,
But I desire that one of you (three being
Sufficient to guard me) would oblige me
To seek Severus, and entreat him here;
This might be done with safety, I presume.
If I could tell him an important secret,
He would enjoy more happiness, and I
Should dye content.

Since it is for Severus,
I will dispense with all things.

He himself
Will recompense thy pains, if I should fail.
The sooner that thou go, the better 'tis,
Dispatch.

I fly, and you shall have me here
In less time then a moment. --

DElicious Spring of love, yet fruitful still
In misery, of me what is your will?
Y^ flattering pleasures, ba^ts of flesh and blood,
Why fly you not, since I esteem you mud?
Vanish vain honours, worldly glory pass,
Which shines, and is as brittle too as glass:
Hope not that I'll sigh after you at all,
It is in vain your weak charms to estall.
Why show you me Gods enemies in state
And flourishing? he doth reserve a fate
That shall confound those great ones, and the sword
Suspended over their heads, at his least word
Shall fall on them, so much more heavily,
As that they dream't not of their misery.
Thou cruel Tiger Decius that dost thirst
For blood, thou shalt be glutted till thou burst:
That God, which we adore, hath for a while
Permitted thee, wild forest Boar, to spoil
His lovely Vineyard, but thy fearful fate
Draws near which will thy glory terminate.
The Scythian comes like an impetuous flood,
To revenge Christian and Persian blood:
A little yet, and then thy hour is come,
When thou shalt sleep until the day of doom
In body, not in mind, out of the name
Of Christian, that is fed still with a flame,
Which never dies. Nothing can warrant thee,
The thunder's ready in the cloud, I see;
And will no longer hold in expectation
Of thy repentance, wretch in obstination!
In the mean time let Felix sacrifice
Me to thy rage, my Rival blind his eyes,
And make himself his Son-in-Law, I yield
Unto my loss, rather I win the field:
Vain baits, I slight you and despise your art,
For in this Christian and Regenerate heart,
I feel a divine flame, whose Ray will dim
Paulina's beauty in her brightest trim.
I look upon her now but as a toy
That would detain me from my heavenly joy.
Adoreable Idea's, sweets above
You fill a heart that's capable to love;
The souls Possessed with your sacred fire
Fix there, and firmly settle their desire
Never to change; you promise, and give more,
Your benefits do still increase your store:
The happy death which I expect, to me
Is a sweet passage to eternity.
'Tis you, O divine flame, which nothing can
Extinguish, that make me more then a man
Look on Paulina's face, and never fear;
Her assaults and temptations I can hear;
I see her, but my heart inflamed now
With holy zeal, to her charms cannot how,
And my eyes cleared with celestial light,
Hers appear clouded in a vail of night.

MAdam, what's the design that brings you hither?
Is it to fight me, or to second me?
And the fair proffer of this perfect love
Comes it to aid me, or to overthrow me?
Bring you here with you hate, or amity
As enemy, or as my dearest moiety?

You have no enemy here, Sir, but yourself
Every one loves you, none but Polyeuctes
Hates your virtue, it is he alone
That executes my dream, do not destroy
Your self, and you are safe; how great soe'r
Your crime be, you are innocent, if you grant
A pardon to your self; deign to consider
The blood from whence you're sprung, your noble actions,
Your rare endowments; think, Sir, that you are
Beloved by all the people, favoured of
The Prince, and Son-in-law unto the Governor
Of the whole Province, the name of my Husband.
I reckon t'ee as nothing, that's a happiness
Only for me, which is not great for you;
But after your exploits, after your birth,
After your power, look upon our hope,
And give not up unto the hangmans hand*
What to our just desires so fair a fortune
Doth promise.

I consider more, and know
My advantages, and the hope which on them
Great courages do frame, they aspire not
But unto transitory good, which cares
Disurb, which dang^s follow, and which death
Take from us, fortune makes her sport with them,
To day in the throne, to morrow in the dirt.
Their greatest glory never is without
Some discontent, few of our Caesars have
Enjoyed it long, this greatness perishes;
I have ambition too, but mine's more fair
And noble, for I seek immortal glory,
A happiness assured that hath no end
Nor measure, far above the reach of envy,
O^ destiny; and is a sorry life
Too de^r a purchase for it which immediately
May be taken from me, which makes me enjoy
But even the flying instant, end's not able
T'assure me that which follows?

See the dotage,
And the ridiculous dreams of you fond Christians;
Behold how their lies have seduced you!
You think that all your blood is not enough
For a felicity so sweet; but, Sir,
This blood is not yours to dispose of it;
You have not life as an inheritance,
The day that gives it you at the same time
Engages it, you owe it to the Prince,
Unto the Public, to the State.

I would
Lose it for them in honourable fight,
I know what is the happiness thereof,
And what's the glory, you do boast the memory
Of Decius Ancestors, and this name yet precious
Unto you Romans, put into his hands
At the end of six hundred years the Empire.
I owe my life unto the peoples good,
To the Prince and his crown, but I do owe it
Much more unto the God that gave it me:
If to dye for ones Prince be held to be
A glorious fate, when one dies for his God
How shall his death be crowned?

What God?

Peace, Paulina,
He hears your words, for he is not a God
Like your false gods, insensible and deaf,
Weak, made of wood, of marble, or of gold,
Even as you please: he is the God of the Christians,
He is mine, he is yours, the heaven and earth
Acknowledge him, who made both them and us.

Adore him then in mind, and outwardly
Express it not.

Oh no! I should be then
Idolater, and Christian both together.

Dissemble for a moment till Severus
Be gone, and let my Fathers goodness work.

The goodness of my God is to be cherished
Much more, he doth remove me from the dangers
I would have run into, and without suffering
Me to look back, his Favour crowns me
Entering in the career, with the first wind
He brings me to the Port, and coming forth
From baptism, he doth send me unto death.
If you could comprehend the little worth
Of this frail life, and the eternal sweets
That follow after death -- But to what end
Is it to speak of those concealed treasures
To souls whom God hath not inspired yet:

Cruel! for it is time my grief break forth,
And that a just reproach oppress a soul
Ungrateful; Is this that fair fire thou boasts of?
Are these thy oaths? expressed thou for me
The smallest sentiments? I speak not to thee
Of that deplorable estate, wherein
Thy death will leave thy poor disconsolate Wife,
I think that love should speak enough of that:
But that love so firm and so well deserved
Which thou did promise me, and I bare thee,
When thou wilt leave me, when thou make me dye,
Can it not draw one sigh, one tear from thee?
Ungrateful, thou dost quit me, yea, with joy,
Thou hid'st it not, but wilt that I should see it,
And thy hard heart insensible to my sad
Attractions, figureth unto it self,
A happiness that I shall never see;
Is it then the disgust that Marriage brings?
Am I grown odious after having given
My self unto you?

Alas!

How that alas came hardly forth!
Yet if it happily showed any sign
Of a repentance, Oh how charming were it
Although enforced! but courage, he is moved,
I see he sheds tears.

True, I weep, Paulina,
And would to God that therewith this heard heart
Might happily be pierced, the sad estate
Wherein I leave you doth deserve the plaints
My love doth give me, and if one can carry
Griefs unto Heaven, I carry them to see
The excess of your misfortunes; but if in
This luminous abode of highest glory,
This God all just and good, allow my Prayer,
If He vouchsafe to lend an ear unto
Conjugal love, He will display his light
Upon your blindness; Lord, I do beseech thee
Let me obtain this of thy goodness, she
Hath too much virtue not to be a Christian,
It pleased thee to give her too much merit,
Not to know Thee, and to adhere unto Thee,
To live still an unfortunate Slave of hell,
And to die as she's born under that yoke.

What say thou, miserable, what dare thou wish?

That which with all my blood I fain would purchase.

That rather. --

Tis in vain to make resistance,
This God touches the heart when least we think on it;
That happy moment is not yet arrived,
It will come, but the time's not known unto me.

Leave this Chymera, come and love me still.

I love you much more then my self, but, pardon me,
Less then my God.

In the name of that love,
Forsake me not.

In the name of that love,
Follow my steps.

Dost thou not ear to quit me, wilt thou then
Seduce me?

Care thou not to go to Heaven?
I will conduct you there.

Imaginations!

Celestial truths.

Strange blindness.

Rather everlasting lights.

Thou prefer'st death before Paulina's love.

You the base world before the divine goodness.

Go, cruel, go and die, thou never lov'dst me.

Live happy in the World, and suffer me
To die in peace.

Yes, I will leave thee, trouble not thy self,
I go --

BUt what design Severus brings you here?
Is this done like a generous Cavaleer
To come to brave here one in misery?

Paulina, you treat ill so rare a merit,
At my sole prayer he renders me this visit.
I have committed incivility,
Noble Severus, which I know you'll pardon,
And impute to my want of liberty.
Being possessor of a Treasure which
I was not worthy of, before I die
Suffer me to resign it unto you,
And to leave the rar'st virtue that a Woman
Could e're receive from heaven unto the hands
Of the most valiant and accomplished man
The earth hath honoured, or Rome hath produced.
You're worthy of her, she is worthy you:
Refuse her not, Sir, from a Husbands hand;
If he hath dis-united you, his death
Will make amends, and join you both again:
Let not a fire which sometimes was so fair,
Become less now, give her your heart, and take
Her faith to you, live happily together,
And dye like me, it is the glorious good
Which Polyeuctes wishes to you both:
Guards, lead me to my death, I've nothing more
To say; come, all is finished.

I Am confounded
In my astonishment to see his blindness;
His resolution's so unparalleled,
That scarce can I believe mine ears; a heart
That holds you dear, (but what heart is so low
That could have known you, and not cherished you?)
A man beloved by you, as soon as lie
Possesses you, without regret he leaves you,
Nay he doth more, he doth resign you over;
And as if your fires were a fatal present,
He himself makes a gift on it to his Rival:
Surely the Christians either have strange whimsies,
Or their felicities must be infinite,
Since to pretend thereto they dare reject
What one should purchase at an Empires price.
For my part, if my destiny a little
Sooner propitious, had been pleased to honour me
With your fair Nuptials, I should have adored
No glory but the lustre of your eyes;
I would have made of them my Kings and gods.
They should have first reduced me to dust,
Before that --

Sir, no more of this discourse,
I fear I've heard too much, and that this heat*
Should thrust forth some unseemly consequence
Unworthy of us both. Severus, know
My Polyeuctes wholly doth take up
Paulina's thoughts, he hath but a short moment*
To live, you are the innocent cause thereof:
I know not if your soul might have presumed
To frame some hope to your desires upon
His ruin, but assure your self, there is*
No death so cruel whereunto I would not
With fearless steps address, nor in Hell horrors
So dreadful which I would not rather suffer,
Then fully my fame to espouse a man,
After his sad fate, who in any kind
Might cause his death, and if you should believe me
Of so unsound a mind, the Love I bear you
Would turn all into hatred; you are generous,
Be so unto the end; My Father is
In a condition to deny you nothing;
He fears you, and I will be bold to add
This word, that if he doth destroy my Husband,
It is to you he sacrifices him;
Save this unfortunate, use your interest for him,
Endeavour, pray, to serve him as a Prop;
I know tis much what I demand of you,
But how much greater the endeavour is,
So much more is the glory on it, preserve
A Rival that you're jealous of, it is
A tract of virtue which belongs not
But unto you; if this be not sufficient
Renown unto you, tis much that a woman
Sometimes beloved, and yet perhaps whose love
May touch you, should owe that to your great heart
Which she esteems most dear. Lastly, remember
You are Severus, after this Petition
I'll go without an Answer, and if you
Be not the same which I'll presume to vaunt,
To prize you still, I will be ignorant. --

FAbian, What feel I? what new clap of Thunder
Falls on my fortune, and reduces it
To dust? the more I do esteem it near
The farther 'tis, I find all lost, when I
Think all is gained, and envious Destiny
Resolved to hurt me still, cuts off my hope*
As soon as it is born. Before I offer
My fair devotions, I receive refusals,
Sad always and ashamed to see that basely
It durst spring up again, that yet more basely
It durst appear, and lastly that a Woman
In an afflicted state should give me lessons
Of generosity. Your fair soul, Paulina,
Is as high as it is unfortunate,
But tis as cruel too as generous,
And your griefs tyrann ze with too much rigour
Upon a Lovers heart that's wholely yours.
Tis not enough to lose you then, unless
I give you, I must serve a Rival when
He doth abandon you, and by a cruel
And generous trial, to give you unto him,
Must snatch him from his death.

Leave this ungrateful family to their fate,
Let it accord the father with the Daughter,
The Husband with the Wife, and Polyeuctes,
With Felix; What reward hope you to have
For such a cruel trial?

Only Fabian,
The glory to show to this beauteous soul,
Severus equals her, and doth deserve her,
That she was due unto me, and that Heaven,
In taking her from me was too injurious.

Without accusing Heaven, or Destiny
Think on the danger you draw on upon you
By such an Act, you hazard very much;
Consider well, you enterprise to save
A Christian, you cannot be ignorant
What is, and always was the hate of Decius
Unto that impious Sect; tis unto him
A crime so great, so capital, that even
To you his only Favourite may be fatal.

This were good counsel for some common soul,
Though he hold in his hand my life and fortune,
I am Severus still, and all this great
And mighty power can nothing on my glory,
Nothing upon my duty; honour here
Obliges me and I will satisfy it;
Let fortune afterward show her self kind
Or cruel, as her nature's still inconstant,
Dying in glory I shall dye content:
I'll tell thee more, but with some confidence,
The Christian Sect is not the same we take it,
We hate them, and the reason for it I know not,
And I can see Decius unjust in nothing
But in this point; for curiosity
I fain would know them; they are held for Sorcerers,
Whose Master Hell is, and on this belief
The secret mysteries, which we are not able
To understand, are punished with death:
But Ceres, Eleusina, and the goddess
Bonna at Rome, and in Greece have their secrets
Like them; we suffer likewise in all places
All kind of gods, their God only excepted:
All the Egyptian Monsters have their Temple
In Rome; our predecessors, as they liked,
Made a god of a man, and their blood with us
Retaining still their errors, we fill Heaven
With all our Emperors; but to speak truly
Of so much Apothaesis, the effect
Is very doubtful of these Metamorphoses:
The Christians have but one God, absolute Master
Of all, whose only will doth execute
What he resolves, but if I durst to speak
Between us what I think, ours very often,
Me thinks, agree together very ill,
And should their anger crush me before thine eyes,
I must speak this, we have too many of them
To be true gods. Perhaps these public faiths
Are but inventions of wise Polyticks,
To keep the People under, and to awe them,
And to establish their power on their weakness.
Lastly the manners of the Christians
Are innocent, virtues do flourish with them,
Vices appear not; never an Adulterer,
A Traitor, Drunkard, Murderer, or Thief
Is seen amongst them, there is nothing else
But love and charity, they live together
Like Brothers, they pray for us that do persecute them;
And have we ever since the time we first
Tormented them, seen them in mutiny?
Have we seen them rebellious! have our Princes
Had Soldiers more faithful; fierce in war
They suffer our tormentors patiently;
Lions in fight, they die as meek as Lambs.
I've too much pity for them not to help them:
Come, let us find out Felix presently,
And so by one sole action satisfy
Paulina, my compassion, and my glory.

ALbin, perceiv'st thou Severus plot?
See thou his hate, and my sad misery?

I see nought in him but a generous Rival,
And in you nothing but a rigorous Father.

How ill thou know him? all he doth's but show,
In heart he hates me, and disdains Paulina,
And though he sometime loved her he esteems now
A Rivals Relic too unworthy of him.
He speaks in his behalf, prays, threatens me,
And says he will destroy me, if I grant not
Pardon unto him, p^ssing from generous
He thinks to fear me, but the Artifice
Is too gross not to be discovered:
I know the Court, and all its subtle windings
Before him, I'm acquainted with its plots,
And all its practises, it is in vain
For him to storm, and faign to be in fury,
I see what he intends to the Emperor,
Of that which he requests me, he'd accuse me,
Sparing his Rival, I should be his Victim;
And if he had to do with some young Novice,
The plot is well laid, without doubt he would
Destroy him easily, but an old Courtier
Is not so credulous, he sees well
When one's in jest, and when he is in earnest;
And for my part, I've seen so many of them
Of all kinds, that if need were, I could give
Lessons even unto him.

Gods! how you torture
Your self by this distrust?

To stand in Court
It is the highest skill; when once a man
Hath cause to hate us, we ought to presume
That he seeks all the ways he can to ruin us;
Then all his friendship is to be suspected;
If Polyeuctes forsakes not his Sect,
What ever his Protector intends for him
I'll boldly follow the order is prescribed me.

Pardon, Sir, pardon, let Paulina's prayers
And tears obtain it.

The Emperors pardon, Albin,
Shall not come after mine, and so far am I
From drawing him out of this perilous pass,
As not to do what will destroy us both.

But Sir, Severus promises --

I mistrust him,
And know better then he the hate of Decius,
In favour of the Christians if he should
Oppose his anger without doubt he would
Ruin himself with us, I will try yet
Another way. -- Bring Polyeuctes here, -- --
And if I send him back again, if he
Remain insensible of this last attempt, --
At his departure hence he surely dies.

Your order is too rigorous.

I must follow it,
If I'll prevent disorder which may happen;
I see the People moved to take his part,
And thou thy self lately advertised me;
In the zeal which they do express for him,
I know not how long he may be within
My power; perhaps this evening to night,
To morrow I may see the effects I fear;
And suddenly Severus flying to
His vengeance, may go to calumniate me
With some intelligence, I must break this stroke,
That would be fatal to me.

What a strange evil is this diffidence?
Every thing hurts and ruins you, gives you shadows,
But see you not, Sir, that his death will put
This people into rage? tis a wrong way
To cure them, for to make them desperate.

After his death it is in vain to murmur,
And if they dare proceed to any violence,
Tis but to give way for a day or two
Unto the insolence, I shall have done
My duty whatsoever may arrive;
But Polyeuctes comes, let us endeavour
To save him, retire Soldiers, and guard
The port well. --

HAst thou then such a hate to life, unfortunate
And wretched Polyeuctes, and the Law
Of Christians? doth it thus enjoin thee to
Forsake thy friends?

I hate not life, and love
The lawful use of it, but without dotage,
Which savours of slavery, always ready
To render it to God* from whom I hold it,
Reason ordains it and the Christian Law,
And thereby I instruct you how to live,
If you have but the heart to follow me.

To follow thee into the Gulf, where thou
Wilt cast thy self?

Rather unto the glory
Where I am going to ascend.

At least
Let me have time to know it, to make me Christian,
Be thou my guide, and be not scrupulous
T'instruct me in thy faith, if thou refuse,
Tis thou shalt answer't to thy God for me.

Felix, Jest not, tis he shall be your Judge,
There is no flying from him, Kings and Shepherds
Are of one rank with him, he will revenge
The blood of his upon you.

I'll shed no more,
And come what will on it, in the Christian faith
I'll suffer them to live and will protect them.

No, no, proceed to persecute, and be
The Instrument of our felicities;
A Christian is at best, when he doth suffer;
The cruel'st torments are but recompenses
Unto us; God that renders the Centuple
Unto good actions gives persecutions
To make up the full measure, but these Secrets
Are very hard for you to comprehend,
Tis but to his Elect that God reveals them.

I speak to thee unfeignedly, and would
Be a true Christian.

Who can then retard
Th'effect of such a great and signal happiness?

The presence --

Of whom? of Severus?

Only
For him I've feigned so much anger against thee.
Dissemble for a while, till he be gone.

Is it thus, Felix, that you speak unfeignedly?
Bear to your Pagans, carry to your Idols
The impoysoned honey which your words power forth:
A Christian fears nothing, knows not
How to dissemble, to the eyes of all
The world, he's still a Christian.

This zeal
Of thy faith serves thee but to seduce thee,
If thou run to thy death before thou dost
Instruct me.

I should speak unto you here
Unseasonably, it is a gift of Heaven,
And not of reason, there it is that I
Seeing God face to face shall obtain for you
This Grace more easily.

In the mean time
Thy loss will make me desperate.

You can
Repair it; free of one Son, you may have
Another when you please, whose quality
Answers yours better; my loss, Sir, would be
But a change advantageous unto you.

For bear to injure me with this discourse,
I have esteemed thee more then thou deserve,
Bt in spite of my goodness which increases
When thou provok'st it, in the end this insolence
Would make thee odious and revenge me on thee
As well as our gods.

How? do ye change so soon
Honour and Language? doth the zeal of your gods
Enter again into you? and to be
A Christian vanishes? was it by chance
That you said you would speak unfeignedly?

Go to, presume not, whatsoe'r I swear
Unto thee, that I'll follow the imposture
Of thy new Doctors, I but flattered
Thy madness, to the end to snatch thee from
The fearful precipice whereinto thou art
Ready to fall, I would gain time to Husband
Thy life after that Decius Favourite
Were with-drawn hence, but I have done too great
An injury to our omnipotent gods.
Choose whether thou wilt give thy blood unto them.
Or incense?

I'm not doubtful in my choice,
But, O heaven! see Paulina.

WHich of you two do murder me to day?
Is't both together, or each at his turn?
What? can I neither bend nature, nor love?
And shall I obtain nothing either from
A Husband, or a Father?

Speak to your Husbond,

Live with Severus.

Tiger, murder me
Without this injury.

My pity seeks
As much as possible it may, to comfort you.
Our love doth carry you to such true griefs,
That nothing but another love can cure
Those wounds; since then so great a merit could
Inflame you, his fair presence hath a right
To charm you, you did love him, he doth love you,
And his augmented glory. --

Cruel, What have I done unto thee that
Thou treat'st me thus, as to reproach me with,
In contempt of my faith, so great a love
Which I've subdued for thee? see now, to make thee
Vanquish so strong an adversary, what attempts
I was to make against my self, what combats
I had to give to thee a heart, so justly
Due to its first subduer; if ingratitude
Sway not my heart, make some attempt upon thee
To give thee to Paulina; learn of her
To force thy proper sentiment, take her virtue
For guide unto thy blindness, suffer her
T'obtain thy life from thee thy self, to live
Still subject to thy laws; but if thou can
Reject such just desires, at least regard
Her tears, attend her sighs, and make not desperate
A soul that doth adore thee.

I've said to you already, and Paulina,
I say again to you, live with Severus,
Or die with me, I despise not your tears,
Nor yet your faith, but henceforth I must have
No commerce with you, nor know you no more
Unless you be a Christian. Felix, 'tis
Enough on it, take again your anger to you,
And on this insolent revenge your gods
And you.

Oh Father! I confess, his crime's
Scarce pardonable, but if he distracted,
You, Sir, are reasonable; nature is too strong,
And its fair characters imprinted in
The blood are ne'er defaced, a Father is
Always a Father, and on this assurance
I dare hald up some small remains of hope:
Cast a paternal look upon your daughter,
It is decreed my death shall forthwith follow
The death or this dear Criminal, and the gods
Will find her punishment unlawful, since
She'll mingle innocence and crime together,
And so by this redoublement will change
Into an unjust rigour, a just chastisement.
Our destinies made by your hands inseparable,
We ought to make happy or miserable
Together, and you should be cruel even
Unto the extremest point to dis-unite
What you have joined, one heart to another
United once, never retires it self,
You cannot seperate them unless you tear them;
But you are sensible of my just griefs,
And with a Fathers eye behold my tears.

Yes, Daughter, it is true, a Father is
Always a Father, nothing can raze out
The sacred character thereof, I carry
A sensible heart, and you have pierced it,
I join me with you against this distracted.
Unfortunate, and wretched Polyeuctes,
Art thou alone insensible, and wilt
Thou only make thy crime unpardonable?
Can thou hear so many heart-breaking sighs
From such a tender breast? can thou behold
So much love, and be nothing touched with it?
Acknowledge thou neither Father-in-Law
Nor Wife, without amity for the one,
Or love for the other? to resume the names
Of Son and Husband, wilt thou see us both
Fall at thy feet, and so embrace thy knees?

Oh! how unhandsome is this artifice,
After twice having tried threatening,
After making me see Nearchus dying,
After employing love, and its effort,
After declaring to me that great thirst
Of baptism to oppose to God the interest
Of God himself. You join your selves together?
Oh policy of Hell! must we overcome
So many times before we triumph? sure
Your resolutions are so slow, take yours
At last, since, I've already taken mine.
I adore but one God, the Master of
The Universe, under whose feet, the Heaven,
The Earth, and Hell doth tremble, one God which
Loving us with an infinite love, died for us
With ignominy, and which by an excess
Of that same love will every day be offered
As Victim for us; But I am too blame
To speak of this to those can't understand me:
See the blind error that you dare defend;
You defile all your gods with foulest crimes,
You punish not one sin whose Master's not
In the heaven by your account,
Adultery, Incest, Prostitution,
Theft, Murder, and what ever we detest,
It is the example which your Deities
Give you to follow; I've profaned their Temple,
And broken down their Altars, I would do it
Again, if I could reach them, even before
The eyes of Felix, yea, before Severus,
And more, even in the presence of the Senate,
Or of the Emperor himself.

At last
My goodness gives place to my just fury,
Adore them, or thou dy'st.

I am a Christian.

Thou impious wretch, I say again, adore them,
Or renounce life.

I am a Christian.

Art thou? O heart too obstinate! Soldiers, execute
The order that I gave, --

Where lead you him?

To death.

To glory.
Adieu my dear Paulina, love my memory.

I'll follow thee throughout, and even to death.

Forsake your error, or not follow me.

Take him away, and see I be obeyed,
Since he desires to dye, 'tis fit he perish.

ALbin, I do me violence, but I must,
My gentle nature would have easily
Dest oy'd me, let the peoples rage at present
Display it self, and let Severus thunder,
And f^et with fury having performed this
I am secure; but art not thou surprised
With this unshaken constancy? sees thou
Impenetrable hearts like his, or such
Horrid impieties? I have satisfied
My grieved heart, and have neglected nothing
To make his soft and yielding; I have feigned
Before thy eyes base wickedness, and surely
Had it not been for his last blasphemies,
Which filled me suddenly with fear and anger,
I should have scarce triumphed o'r my self.

You'll one day curse perhaps this victory,
Which savours of I know not what an action
Too black, unworthy Felix, and a Roman,
Shedding your blood thus by your proper hand.

So sometime Brutus, and stout Manlius shed it,
Which added to their glory, far from lessening it;
Never have our old Hero's had ill blood,
But they have opened their proper bowels
To let it out.

Your hea^ seduces you;
But whatsoe'r it tell you, when you once
Shall find it cold, when you shall see Paulina,
And that her sad despair expressed by
Her cries and wailings shall come forth to move you. --

Thou make me to remember that she follow'd
That Traitor, This despair which she will show,
May interrupt the effect of my command;
Go therefore, and give order it be done,
See what he doth, break any obstacle
Her griefs may give unto it, and withdraw her
From that sad spectacle, if thou can endeavour
To comfort her; go then, who holds thee?

There is no need, Sir, she returns her self.

BArbarous Father, finish thy black work,
This second sacrifice is worth thy rage,
Join thy sad Daughter to thy Son-in-Law,
Why tarry'st thou? thou see here the same crime,
Or the same virtue; thy barbarity
In her hath the same matter; my dear Husband
Left me his lights in dying, his just blood,
With which his Executioners are coming
To cover me, hath opened mine eyes:
I see, I know, I do believe, and am
Free of mine error, I am undeceived,
Thou see me baptis'd with that blessed blood;
Lastly, I am a Christian, have I not
Spoken enough? keep in destroying me,
Thy rank and credit, fear the Emperor.
And doubt Severus, if thou wilt not perish,
My death is necessary, Polyeuctes calls me
Unto his happy death, I see Nearchus
And he both stretching forth their hands unto me:
Bring me to see thy gods which I detest,
They broke but one, I will break all the rest,
There you shall see me brave all that you fear,
Those silly Thunder-bolts which you depaint
Within their hands, and holily rebellious
Unto the Laws of birth, thou once shalt see me
Fail in obedience to thee; it is not
My grief that I do make appear therein,
Tis grace within me speaks, and not despair.
May I say it again? Felix, I am
A Christian, settle by my death thy fortune
And mine, the stroke to both on's will be precious,
Since it assures the one earth, and lifts me
Unto the Heavens.

Unnatural Father, wretched Politician,
Ambitious slave to a Chymerick fear,
Is Polyeuctes dead then by your cruelties,
And think you to conserve your sorry dignities?
The favour which for him I offered you,
Instead of saving him, hasted his death;
I prayed, threatened, but I could not move you;
You thought me false, or but of little power,
But you shall know at your cost that Severus
Boasts not of any thing but what he can
Perform and by your ruin he will make you
To judge that he who can destroy you, could
Have protected you; continue to
The gods this faithful service* by such horrors
Show them your zeal, adieu, but when the storm
Shall break upon you, doubt not of the arm
From whence the strokes shall come.

Severus, stay,
And with a quiet mind suffer that I
Give you an easy vengeance, by my cruelties
Cease to reproach me more, I do endeavour
To keep my sorry dignities, I dispose
Their false deceitful lustre to your feet;
That glory whereunto I dare t'aspire
Is a rank more Illustrious, I do find
My self forced to it by a secret bait,
I yield to those transports I do not know,
And by a wo^king which I understand not,
I from my fury pass unto the zeal
Of my blessed Son-in-law; tis he no doubt,
Whose innocent blood prays an Almighty God
For me his Persecutor, his love spread
On all the Family, draws after him
As well the Father as the Daughter, I
Have made a Martyr of him, and his death
Hath made me Christian, I procured his bliss,
He will work mine, so is it that a Christian
Is angry and revengeth, happy cruelty
Whose event is so sweet! Paulina, give me
Thy hand, bring fetters here, and sacrifice
Unto your gods these two new Christians
I am one, She is so, observe your anger.

How happily at last I find my Father!
This blessed change makes my joy complete.

Daughter, it doth belong but to the hand
That doth it.

Who would not be touched with
A spectacle so tender? I believe
Such changes come not without miracle,
Your Christians without doubt, which we in vain
Do persecute, have something in them which
Surpasses humane, they do lead a life
With so much innocence, that Heaven doth owe them
Some great acknowledgement; to show themselves
More strong the more they are oppressed, is not
The effect of common virtues; I still loved them,
What ever might be said on it, I ne'er saw them
To dye, but this heart sighed for it, and perhaps,
I shall one day be better known unto them:
In the mean time I like that every one
Should have his own gods, and that he should serve them
After his own way without fear of punishment,
If you are Christians, fear no more my hate,
I love them, Felix, and from their Protector,
I will not make a Persecutor of them
In you: guard well your power, take it again,
Serve your God, serve your Monarch, I will lose
My credit with his Majesty, or he
Shall shake off this severity, by his
Unjust hate he doth too much wrong himself.

Daign gracious Heaven to end his work in you,
And one day to give you what you deserve,
T'inspire into you all his sacred Truths:
For us we bless this fortunate adventure,
Come, let us go to give our Martyrs burial,
To kiss their precious bodies, and to put them
In holy place, in consecrated ground,
Then let us make the name of God resound.


