HOw strangely does thy News perplexme, Shift?
Art sure 'tis true?

Beatrix tells me so, and then I must believe it.


Is she your Oracle then?

But is it possible that my Clarinda should --

No, that it is not, she should ever love,
You I mean; for there may be perhaps --

Nay, nay, I guess the reason of her scorn,
She loves else where.

Even like enough.
She'd ne'er hold her self at so high a rate to you,
Had she not other Chapmen.

I smelt some such thing in a certain Conference, I had with my Princess
to'ther day; and had not her doting old Master come by in the nick and spoilt our
sport, I was within two kisses of all her Mistresses secrets.


Is Beatrix such a tell-tale?

Tell-tale, and Wag-tail. Why, is she not a Woman? and is that Sex made for
Privy Councellors? 'tis true, Chambermaids, I think take an oath of Secrecy as
they do; and might do well to keep it too, as some of the others do: but alas!
--


Saving your mock-Morals and mongrel-Comments
On the whole Tribe, tell me of Beatrix, Sir,
What of her? what says she?

What says she? why she says any thing; she can no more keep a secret than
another woman, she is no more able to digest it; 'twill up Sir, 'twill up when
occasion serves.


Let Shift alone to manage her Evidence,
He'll pump her dry, I warrant you.

Sure enough: for whether it be my Person, my nimble dapper Person; or my Wit,
my fooling Wit she's taken with, or talking humour, in which we most
Sympathize, I know not: but I'm sure, I taste more of her kindness then you do
of her Mistresses:

However, our way of Love is nothing troublesome, tis free, and without any
tie, we aim not at Hymen, we; as long as we like one another, so; when we are
weary; so.


A pretty modern Method.
But prithee tell me Endiminion, art not thou sick of thy Constancy? hast not
loved Clarinda long enough? to every fair one you were wont to cry, I love you;
and scarce a whole day loved the same.


And yet Clarinda now with all her scorn
Has held him to it a Month;
'Tis a strange Metamorphose in your Worships humour.

I break custom, I confess it, for Clarinda's sake:
Yet let it not amaze thee, Bernard,
To see me burn so long in the same flames;
For if Love at first made me her Servant,
That Love is now to a Gaprichio vanished,
A mere peevish obstinacy:
Her want of complaisance for my Amours
Is the only reason why I haunt her now:
Not that I value her person, but I take
A pleasure in displeasing her; nor but
By vexing her can I wipe off the shame
This seeming Constancy would blast me with.

What a wrong sense I took you in all this while?

Why, you love her not then?

Not I, I thank my Stars.

Why do you visit her then? why write? why send?

What in the name of Madness makes you
That you are not in Love, play the fool, as those do that are?

Peevishness, I tell thee, mere peevishness;
Had she, when first I courted her,
With less severity welcomed my Affection,
The fit had soon been over;
And in my way of making love, to another
E're this I had made offer of my heart;
But to knit one's brow, and look wise so out of season,
To fume and fret at every merry word,
And pay with frowns instead of smiles
A whole day together;
Then do I make love in despite.

Marry, you're a terrible Lover indeed!

I see 'tis dangerous for a Woman to have to do with you; why? would you have
'em love you whether they can or no?


Is it so unpard'nable a Crime not to make much of you, that the punishment
must never have end?


But when will your Inconstance-ship get a new Mistress, and think of this no
more?


As soon as thy dexterity has sifted out
Who I am slighted for?

Why, for Bellamy perhaps

For Bellamy?

Yes, for that very Bellamy
That has Courted her, you know, these Twelve Months
Do ye laugh?

That were a fine Match indeed!
Of all the gay men that frequent her
I ne'er was jealous of him yet.

Why, he's a proper Gentleman, though but a poor one.

Clarinda is too proud to look so low
A mind like hers on state and bravery set,
Is with a Fortune not a Person taken;
This Bellamy too has ever been her scorn.

What, if that were but a trick?
A mere dissembling trick, to cousin the old Man?

They have more tricks then one then; for Bellamy
A week since left the Town;
Nay's shipped for France ever this,
And yet you'd have 'em smitten still.

There may be a trick in the Journey too, for --

Peace, yonder's Beatrix, feel her pulse a little,
Enquire, enquire how matters go; we will step aside.

'Tis enough, I have my kue.

Let's give him opportunity. --

What art thou thinking of now?

Who I? I'm thinking of nothing.

What? in your dumps, when I come? when your Love comes?


My Love? I have no Love, not I;
My Master loves no more, and I love no more neither.

In earnest, Shift?

Yes in good earnest, Beatrix.

What, wilt thou forsake me now?
Thou can not be so hard hearted sure?

But I can, and will.

This is but to try the constitution of my heart,
And peradventure to morrow.

Nay, there is no peradventure, nor no to morrow;
Is it not always like Master, like Man?
Make thy Mistress love him, and then --

Thou must not request impossibilities at my hands,
Likely things I would do.

Why? is Clarinda such a Love-hater? --
Is she so inflexible?

Not so much; but --

But? but what?

My poor Shift, thou hast so often promised me.

Let us come to the But; go on with your story.

What should I tell thee?

Why Clarinda uses Endimion with such base neglect?
And whether or no to love her still
Be operam oleum perdere?
Thou may smell my meaning, for Lamp-oyl has a strong sent.

I could tell thee all this and more; but --

But what again?

I'm forbidden.

I'm glad o'that; she'll tell therefore.

Yet if thou would swear not to tell again --

Why I can be as silent as the silent woman;
I'll be a dumb show; or the Chorus to it at least,
I'll tell but all I see: judge by my taciturn aspect.
I never tell but one thing at a time.

Thou wilt not tell then?

Not I; what I do not know.

But swear to keep counsel.

By my shifting faith, I will. Is not that well sworn?

Shifting faith? heyday! what faith's that?
This is an oath of a new fabric sure,
What anvil came it off? prithee did thou forge it?

The faith of Shift is a shifting faith:
But let not that stick with thee;
Men shift their faith now-a-days, as often
As they did their Trenchers, when this old Cap was new.
But to the point.

You must know then that Clarinda, my Mistress --
But you must not tell your Master, Shift.

You would fain shift by your story,
But 'twill not be: let me have it then, and quickly; for now I observe you
better, I find by your simpering, and by the fumbling of your apron (that's a
main sign) that if I long to hear it, thou dost even twitter to tell; leave
your halting then before as very a Cripple as your self, and come roundly to
the business.


Why, I must tell thee then --

No Prefaces, nor Preambles.

That if thy Master be unkindly dealt with,
The reason is Clarinda

Has another Love.

You are even in the right on*t.

Well, his name, his name? go on.

Must you know more yet?
You're very inquisitive into Women's matters.

I do not talk like a man-midwife? do I?
His name, I say, his name?

Bellamy.

That poor Cavalier?

'Tis a noble complete Gentleman.

And with his complete Gentility
Thy Mistress will send thee to market? yes, she may;
But then must thou pawn thy coif and pinner,
Or come home without Eggs and Butter.

She dot's on him, who can help it?

All the dotage is on her side belike,
He would ne'er leave her sure to go for France,
Did he dote too.

That Journey on design is given out;
But to speak truth, should he fall into the freebooters hands
We were in some danger.

He's safe then, and on this side the sea?

Yea, and in London too, as I may tell you.

In London?

And ne'er was out on it.

Who the devil taught him to Romance so finely?
To delude all the town, but Clarinda,
And you their confiding Mopse,
He has taken as solemn a leave
As he had been going to Tangler, or to Tyburn.

By this means he sees Clarinda every night, by her appointment too, and has
done this week: and while his friends pity him, and think him sea-sick, he's
Land-sick, and Love-sick, good Gentleman. There's but small hopes, thou see st,
for thy Master.


So me thinks.
But is not your Lady afraid of the Lampon-makers?
Has she a mind to be in a Ballad?
There are some Women have had whole bundles made of'em
Upon less occasion, (as they say themselves.)
Hoard up smooth faces, keep 'em leiger in a garret all day
To play at bopeep by night.

Alas! thou art too severe, to young Ladies especially;
The nights the only time for their recreation:
But we have a care of our ways,
And make a Conscience of being taken in 'em,
I'd have you know.

Just as the Lacedaemonians did of pilfering.

Why 'tis not a blot till it be hit, Man.
This night-work is so contrived.
That Bellamy steals into the garden by a back-door,
Which I leave open for him, and so to an arbour,
Where she waits his coming.

An excellent Rendez-vous for a midsummer Moon,
But this hot weather won't last always.
Where shelters he all day?

At Gratian'S, as close as he that fears an Execution,
And that's the reason too perhaps he gives his friend
Of this concealment, for he's not of the Council,
Nor should I have been, I think;
Could they have carried businesses without me:
But I am right necessary Woman sometimes.
Fare thee well, give me thy hand;

Farewell, farewell.

Thou dost promise me, Shift?

Promise thee? what?

Marriage, and't shall please thee.

Go thy ways, I do; when we are at age.
Is this the honour they vapour with?
This the reputation they are so shy of?
How many are there of this deceitful sex,
That wear Virtue enough all day,
And lay it by at night with their black patch;
And the rest of their superfluous ornaments?
Has Clarinda her Love-qualms too? well, the
Best of 'em have their failings, that I see.
But now am I as over-loaden with this secret;
Oh, how heavy it is? I shall shrink under the burden
An I carry it any further; I'm sure I'm sick on it already.
O here's my Master, he'll cure me.

Hast thou found out the reason of my disgrace?
Is Clarinda engaged else-where?
Is it pride, is it hate makes her so coy?
What other Gallants has she? why dost not speak?
Art deaf? or hast thou lost thy tongue?

Why standst thou making faces thus, and clutching thy fist?

Why doest thou squeeze thy fingers so? speak.

O good Sir, let me alone.

Let thee alone? why what art doing?

You'll put me out now;

Put thee out? of what? the art out of thy wits already sure.

Now was I striving all this while to hold my peace;
I was bid; but the truth is, I am so far
From doing as I was bid,
That I'm even weary of striving already: hark you then
That Spruce, Complete out-sided Gallant, he that of all
Her gay frequenters ne'er gave you Jealous pang,
That very Bellamy, I told you of before,
That gives out he's gone for France,
By Clarinda's own contrivance is concealed at Gratian's.

Bellamy in town still?

As sure as you are; and see's her every night.
Alas, he had no arrant into France,
But to make an ass of your Worship,
And that it seems he can do better at home.

One of 'em shall dearly pay for it though.

Why, what do you mean to do?

Nay, I'm resolved, I'll to Clarinda again.

Oh poor Beatrix, you'll tell Sir now,
And then is she undone for ever.

No, no, ne'er fear it.

What good will it do you to see her then?

I mean to laugh at her, and for a full revenge
With deep protests will I renew my suit
If slighted, in the same coin I'll pay her instantly,
And give her scorn for scorn;
A biting jest or two, and I am even with her.
When she peceives my Vows were raileries,
Which merely to divert my self I passed upon her,
'T will shrewdly pinch her, that I'm sure of,
For she that thinks she's fair indeed,
Will ne'er endure to have been told so but in jest.
But prithee the whole story of this fine Amouretta,
Bellamy sees her every night, it seems.
I cannot wish 'em joy yet heartily,
There are some dregs of Love still lurking under my anger.

Lewis sir is here. End. 'tis well.

You shall know more anon.

Go thou, and warily sift out
Of some Neighbour or so, if I may see Clarinda.
That is whether --

I understand, you are afraid of the old Man,
You would have him safe.

smiling. The art in the right
That's a stumbling block must be removed.

May a friend be partaker of your Mirth?
Or know but whence it springs?
Clarinda without doubt
Has better thoughts of Love then she was wont,
'Tis not an unbecomming weakness now, I hope,
Y' have wrought a cure upon her, I see it in your looks.

Nothing less; she never was more avers'd, nor I
More lost to all hopes of ever being favoured by her.

In what terms then must one condole your loss?
Or with what Arguments. --

Nay, never set your Rhetoric of the Tenterhooks for the matter,
Not quicken your invention with your nails,
He can live without her.

I praise my manly temper.
The loss Lewis I do not much regret;
And were thou fit for such a secret now --

You do me wrong to doubt my keeping it.

I would acquaint thee with my whole Adventure:
I have discovered how the Market goes,
And see why I am not thought to bid fair,
The scorns Clarinda heaped on me
Were favours she obliged a Rival with;
She's in love man, desperately in love
See how the World's mistaken in her,
And how groundless my pretensions are.

Clarinda in love? versed with that subtilty too
In his dissembling Maxims to carry it thus?

Nay, 'tis a wonder; she that stood upon her guard
And kept us at such distance, to be taken?

She that set Love and Lovers at defiance,
And seemed so scrupulously modest, that to name
I ut Venus to her or Cupid, was talking bawdy.

But who's the lucky Woodman has struck this fair Do?

That's the wonder of all wonders, Bellamy.

Away, away, now I see you jest.

It is a serious and a sober Truth, sir,
A sad one too it might prove for some body,
Had not I more discretion then all Lovers have.

The French journey's but a fiction, Man,
A mere slight to make their meetings
Private and unsuspected.

But see what a goodly choice she has made,
What a happiness she refuses me for;
A Man of no Fortune, Estate I mean,
For luck he has enough to fool me;
If 'twere wit he out-did me at,
He'd do it above board, and by day-light.

You're misinformed, I'm sure on it;
I know Clarinda better then so, besides Bellamy
For another Beauty burns, though't flame not out.

For who?

For Celia.

Have you acquaintance with her?

Not much; this I know, she's a great Gallant,
L^ves in the Fields here, with a Widow-Aunt
And is Courted by him; 'tis true, Gratitude
As much perhaps as Love, may draw that Courtship
For his engagements to the Lady are great,
His bosom friend has told me all,
One that were happy could your surmise prove true.

I go upon sure grounds, Beatrix is my Author,
And not to tell you a secret by the halfes
He keeps close at a friends house of yours all day,
At Gratian's-

See where he comes; give me leave, and I'll know all;
He'll make no secret of't to me, I'm confident,
Nor will I to you of what I learn from him.
What pensive still?

And miserable still.

What new misfortune causes this complaint?

'Tis an old grief mine, Lewis; how often
Have I told you with what passion
I burn for Celia, and with what violence
Done to my self I do forbear all words
That might disclose that passion a friend
Is Rival in? judge of my misery then,
For sure no torments equallize his pain,
That dyes for love, yet dares not once complain.

How out of season these respects are now?
When Bellamy's absence gives you place;
Take the opportunity,

I'm ne'er the happier for a Rivals absence.

No? that's strange; but I hear, let me tell you,
His French Journey's laid aside, nay, was ne'er intended.

Who tells you so?

Nay more, 'tis whispered he lies private at your house,
Ne'er seem amazed, but deal ingenuously.

I did not think it had been known abroad.

Not is it generally; but what is his design?
Or what can he aim at by this stealth?

I never dived so far into his breast:
I only understood it did concern his life,
Or what was dearer then his life, his Love,
To disappear some time:
All I can guess besides, (and that
But by some words he does drop forth by chance)
Is, that some jealous thoughts disturb his mind,
And that to try his Celia's real kindness,
He spreads this feigned report of travel,
That as his absence proves to this fair one
Irksome or indifferent,
He may see the power of Rivalling Pretensions.

'Tis hotly rumoured though he loves Clarinda.

That's the town-trick:
Because he's young and courtly, Clarinda handsome,
He cannot visit her, but straight
He's thought in love; nay, though she be not
Beyond common Civility regarded by him,
Yet People need's will have him her Adorer.
The news with Celia too has wrought so far,
'Thas cost her tears; but he in such persuasive terms
Still vindicates his constancy,
She cannot long believe him false.

Is she so much his then still?

Too faithful to him ever, too fond indeed:
Though without taking leave he stole away,
She seeks her self pretences to excuse him,
And with such care does palliate his neglects,
As stops my mouth, and frustrates all my hopes.
While I (and that's my height of misery)
To make him happy, court my own ruin,
Visit her at his request, woo her for him,
And improve each minute to discourse his Love,
Fanning their heats thus, and childishly
Playing in a flame that must consume me.
She, with the very name of Bellamy ravished,
To sit and chat of him entreats my visits:
I must comply.

'Tis something a severe compliance.

Thus keep I still some interest in the family,
And have access to her; and if by some
Capriciousness of fate, which oft breaks kindest leagues,
They chance to jar, she may perhaps reflect
A faithful friend seldom proves faithless Lover.

I wish it may be so.
But you'd be visiting this cruel fair one.
May she with justice balance both your services,
And then yours will be crowned.

See where she comes the fair Cause of all my grief;
No more then let the fear of displeasing her keep it in,
For though I should fall under her disdain,
Her beauty is concerned I make it known
Her eyes have captived her more slaves then one:

How happily do I meet you?
Sure Bellamy is landed long ere this?
A letter from Callis now me thinks, to make his peace.

Madam, I expect some by the French post.

Why writ he not from Dover? nay,
From Canterbury, from Rochester, from Graves-end?
Are they not all post-towns?
Oh! I could have found twenty ways to send to him.

How well my Cozen knows the road?
Yet I dare swear she ne'er was further
That way, then Southwark-fair.

Oh this Love is a subtle teacher, Mris Fannie.

Has it taught you any thing, Luce?

Nay, I have reason to be angry with him,
To steal away thus, and never bid adieu.

Thence you may judge how great his passion is,
That fatal word, Adieu, had he but spoke it,
Must have been his last; of so much beauty,
So much kindness too, who without dying
Could have taken leave?

I'm easily won, Gratian,
To a favourable construction of all he does;
My love indeed pleads for him still: and yet
What ere the reason of his absence be,
I might, me thinks, have been acquainted with it.

Nay, Madam, I excuse him not, he is too guilty;
I know what courtesies he is indebted to you,
With what a liberal hand you ever poured them on him,
And that when --

No more of that, I pray;
A Courtesy looses its merit if published once;
Would I be minded oft, I did deserve
He should forget it. Besides if I may
Freely own the motive of those actions
I pleasured my self most in obliging him,
I did but justice to his fair desert:
And yet I'll not acquit him neither, I'll think
As you would have me more deservingly
Of what I did; there's no gift though he's bound
To me for, saving that of my heart, my
Love I'd have requited, then all is paid.

That is the gift too he does value most:
And that he might not all Ungrateful seem
To the fair giver, when a necessity
Sudden as unwelcome forced him from what he loved,
He sought to leave you one half of himself
Gratian, to fill his room.
And friendship now making but one of us,
If among your discontents you reckon his absence,
It shall be my care to supply his place;
With tears and sighs I'll figure you his grief,
And will (to act your Bellamy to the life,)
Forget I am not he; from the same Eyes
I'll draw my warmth, with the same passions burn,
And in this personated Love outvie --

Enough, enough: for I begin to fear
Least the pretence of speaking for another
Should urge you further then a friends interest
Usually does, friendship transports you, Gratian;
Temper its heat a little.

A forward Proxy! hee'ld wed, and bed her
For his friend, would she but let him.

But she's not so coming; though he
Would fain take himself for Bellamy,
She'll not mistake him so too.

My silence argued me remiss and slack,
And venture at a word, I'm beaten back.

BY my modesty, Madam, I'll keep your Counsel: Alas
I stand in need of the like good office my self sometimes,
And they that tell deserve to be told of, I say.
Yet could I but understand what you drive at
I might be more serviceable.

What account can I give thee?
In such perplexity my mind's involved,
I know not what I would my self.

You love Bellamy though,

Oh Wench I do.

And that's it puzzles me now, to see so high an affection
Mushrom-like sprung up o'th sudden, Bellamy
Has courted you, and recourted you sighed sobbed, again again,
Yet all would not do, you were as coy still and as calm,
As nothing had been; nothing but frumps
Could he get of you in a whole years time,
Nothing but No's, and I wo' not's, and I cannot's,
And now in one week you're so strangely altered,
As you were turned the wrongside outward;
You're got into the loving extreme now.

Alas! I loved him all that while;
Though knowing how much a Wealthy fathers bent
Against Pretenders of so small a fortune,
Set cold neglect and rigour in my eyes,
While my heart even melted with hot love.
This seeming cruelty had driven him into France,
Could I have worn it still, but thou saw me
Beaten from that ward; and yield, though he
Gave out he went, he should not go indeed.

Truly you're to be pitied: but what good
Can this counterfeiting of a Journey do you?

His intentions for travel were too well known abroad,
To have the Journey broken thus o'th sudden;
And sifting out the cause, perhaps
Something of the truth of it might have been found.
'Tis safer to keep close by day awhile,
And then pretend some reason for's return.

Endimion, Madam.

His importunity will ne'er have end.

Is it not just I quarrel with my Stars
That I can never see you? will you keep home always?
Must none enjoy you, but your self?
I shall grow jealous of yourself at last.

Home is most pleasing to me, and retired thus
I see but what I like, and will my self;
What moves you to press on my retirement?

Will you never take pity of my sufferings?

Bewail your self some where else, I'm ignorant of your griefs.

Love. -- Clar. Never name a Tyrant I abhor.

But a Lover that suffers. --

Leave out that name of Lover,
There is such a discord in the sound, I hate it.

Unjustly though, methinks;
For sure with fewer charms Nature does frame
What she means not the object of our Loves.

Will you never leave this odious talk?

Will you be lovely thus, and cruel still?
Oh what Flames do those Eyes kindle in my breast!

What aversion does this discourse beget in mine!

Heavens! how they sparkle? how many deaths
They shoot, those Star-like twins?

Oh, I could hate the Sun, whose light I see you by.

The Moon indeed is something kinder to you,
No doubt, but to her light
You are beholding for a lovelier sight.

I understand you not.

You will not.

You think to fright me with this obscure discourse.

I can clear it, if I am put to it.

Nay, 'tis time to be gone then;
I see you're angry, and might use me worse,

staying her Without hearing my reasons?

I care not for 'em:

But you must hear 'em though; 'tis a Love-suit
I am concerned in, you shall be judge in the case;
Y'have heard my Adversary at leisure,
And taken perhaps some prejudice against my right;
'Tis my turn now to have an Audience of you,
Since he has it by night, I may well
Claim one by day; not that I do expect
A Garden door should be left jarr'd
For me to slip in, nor Beatrix there
Confidingly to watch, none interrupt my story;
Much less that you your self should wait
My coming in an Arbour.
Were I supposed in France, and yet in spite of Seas
Could meet you at an hours warning, then indeed
I might deserve a kin^ welcome.

A pox on's memory! he has not left out a tittle,
What a speech has he made here?
Could I find no body else to tattle too?

What have I heard?

Oh Sir! what have you done?

'Tis but a just revenge of her unjust
And undeserved scorn.

to Be. Thou hast betrayed me,

Believe me, Madam. --

Away thou faithless wretch, thou hast sold me;
Unhappy she, that trusts such mercenary souls.

to End. Now will poor Beatrix be turned away.

I would to Heaven you did not with your anger
Avow your self what I had still concealed,
And this reproaching me did not confirm. --

Peace Impudence: justifying yourself?

to End. I had need of a good back now,
'Twill all fall upon me.

'Tis past now, who can help it? but for my interest,
For thine own, for Beatrix sake, for all; prithee Shift
And thou can, piece it up again; make any shift.
Invent, Frame, Lye, Swear, anything, I'll second it.

Nay, 'tis resolved, ne'er speak on it more:

Well, I must pack then, since you'll have it so
But may I now before your face, if ever I told tale. --

Oh, 'tis an innocent piece!

I have much ado sir, to make a good lie of the sudden;
But this shall serve for want of a better.

Good or bad, let's have it; I'll help thee out.

And you turn me away to morrow sir, I will tell
I'll speak the Truth in spite of all Masters, I:

Madam, put up your anger, or turn it the right way:

Nay, never wink on me, nor frown,
Nor make me signs to hold my peace;
Truth must be heard, and shall.

Beatrix never betrayed your secrets,
Nor does she prattle of your Love,
The Stars, the Stars themselves discovered all.

What means the Fellow?

You don't believe me now?
But I must tell you though, and you'll find it true too,
That this Master of mine (as out of countenance as you see him)
Has not stowage for his great Capacity,
Nor the World his fellow in Astrology,
The Man in the Strand was an Ass to him, when he was at best,
He can make the Brazen head speak at this hour,
Spirits he could raise Sans nombre
And make them talk too,
Till we were all weary of their company.
If ever an Endimion slept in the Moon's lap,
This is he, for he has as much familiarity with her,
To my knowledge, as that comes to.

Thy Master an Astrologer?

I, Twenty.

What Twenty Astrologers, and but one Man?
Thou wilt tell a lie anon.

I mean, he casts Figures, and raises Appearances
As fast as Twenty;

This story'll cry me up for a fine fellow.

What sirrah? Sh. Yes sir.

If she would but believe him now!

Nay, you are an Astrologer if ever man was:
I know I loose my place, and forfeit my no small
Arrears of wages too in discovering it,
But I love Beatrix, Queen of Beatrixes.
And ought to free her from the suspicion

Her Mistress has conceived; he has made me mad
This week with his Ovals and his Circles,
He contemplates the Stars in nights so dark
They dare not appear, and is staring abroad,
When the dogs will not peep out.

Well said, Bull-dog!

By Moon-light, by Owl-light, by any light,
By no light; and in his Chamber
Continually poaring on a great black Book
Full of pot-hooks of all sorts and sizes,
The Inventory of the Devils Kitchen, 'tis I think:
And thus has he discovered your Amours
But in what Devils name, or which leaf of the Book
You're written in, truly that I cannot tell you yet.

This is a jesting Knave, and yet
There may be some Truth in what he says too;
Stranger things have been found out by that Art.

Why, thou everlasting prittle prattle!
Will it never have done? who has hired thee here
To tell a story of a Cock and a Bull?

I* I, Cocks and Bulls; those are some of your Familiars.
Madam, I have not said a word, but what is true.
I'll justify it, let him raise as many devils as he will,
What I have said will shame 'em all.

Meaning, 'tis truth he has spoke;
Which is not the least of his lies.

Did not you show me a Garden.
Last night, in one of your enchanted Glasses,
And bid me mark an Arbour to the West of that Garden?
I know not West from East, not I;
But I perceived it stood in one corner of the Garden,
And marked it so well, I can tell you
What 'twas made of too, of Lauretine.

There is such an Arbor in the Garden.

Yes Madam, there is indeed:
God-a-mercy though, that he saw it once,
When I took him into the Garden,
His Master's glasses had ne'er showed it him else.

But that you chiefly bade me observe,
And were your self so vexed at heart to see,
Was the Lady Clarinda here sitting in that arbour;
In a melancholy posture you were, I'll assure you, Madam,
Thus with your hand supporting of your head,
And looked, in my eye, as you had waited
For something, made you think the time long ere it came;
And so it proved indeed; for casting by command my eye
To another side of the Mirror, I spied a Gallant
Entered the Garden make straight up to the arbour,
And saw your first salute; 'tis true, I could not
Hear him what he said, (and by that I guess
The devil's not so great with the ears as with the eyes.)
But I suppose he did excuse his coming late,
And took such special notice of his garb,
I'd know him in a crowd of Courtiers,
Amongst clowns any one might discern him,
I could describe his habit too for need --

Oh! you have said enough, Sir, you have said enough;
And more then will stand with my credit, Madam,
To have believed, I'm worse then an Astrologer then,
He makes me conjure too: but since it is not
For my honour now to hide the truth from you;
I must confess that in my travels
'Twas my fortune to grow intimate with a learned Man,
Sometime a Scholar to the famed Nostredamus,
Who took some pains with me, my aptness
To his impressions making him with pleasure, as he said,
Impart his secrets, nor knew he ought
In Physiognomy, Palmistry, Astronomy,
Nor hardly in all the Mathematics
He read not to me; what ere belongs, I'm sure,
To the Optics or Mechanics he did disclose.
Thus came my skill.

I never heard this so perfectly before.

I don't think thou did.

But to own it publicly
I know too well the disrepute 'tis in
Amongst the Vulgar, too apt to give events
(Whose cause their dull capacity cannot reach)
To the black Art, and think the devil author
Of all subtleties above 'em; which makes my man
Talk of familiars, and take (dull brain!)
Our Optic glasses for enchanted one's.

Besides the wrong some late Professors too
Have done that art, by prostituting it
To men in power.

A servile flattery!

Made him more cautious in such times as those,
When it was dangerous not to be base,
How he seemed knowing.

But tired out at last with
Your too rigorous usage, your servants all
Too trusty, or too ignorant to betray me
The cause on it;
I was resolved to find it out my self
In that great book, where truth's so fairly writ
For those have studied the bright Character:
I did consult the stars,
I found the garden, and the arbour too,
Bellamy's real happiness, and supposed absence.
But let not this discovery trouble you,
For my own interest I must keep your Counsel,
Our fortune is the same, 'tis but one secret for another,
My Man has told you mine, I found out yours,
Keep you but one of 'em, and I warrant you for the other.

'Tis an able Man, I promise you!

You'll believe me another time, I hope,
I was in the right, you see.

The truth, I trow, does justify me now, Madam.
I had heard it muttered indeed, he took upon him
To tell fortunes, interpret dreams, or so;
And could have made Almanacs too, for his skill,
But that he thought it a discredit to his youth,
To grow weather-wise so soon: but I had sold you,
I had betrayed you, I; he knew all from me.

Truth, I was loath to suspect thee,
I had no former grounds for it;
Had it not been for his Astrology though,
What could he have known, unless I had been betrayed.

You may, remember too, if any Incredulity remain,
How much my old Master talks of Astrology,
And what feats he was wont to do in's youth,
As he tells us, by the Virtue of Mars and Venus.

My father talks much of Astrology indeed,
What I have heard from him, helps to persuade,

Thou could not pitch upon a quainter fancy.

Twas extempore, Sir, remember that,
And may give some small hint of my faculty;
A little premeditation had afforded you a better.

It needs not, this fable is as currant with her.

Nay, she is finely fooled; you shall
Have her in such a suppliant Style now,
She's sore afraid of you, I see by her eyes.

Noble Endymion, whose clear-sighted mind
Is only parallel to your generous heart.

Did I not tell you?

Hear her Apology.

A slighted Lover's anger I should fear,
Were the excuse I am now to make you,
Due to any other, but you that know
The Influence of the stars, and force of destiny,
Will not deem it a Crime in me, to act
What they decree: when great ones can't eschew
What they portend her, what should weak women do?

Peace, peace, your father's coming,
Your father's coming; 'tis his hem.

Would he would hem some where else,
We did not want him here.

Now, what's the business with this young Gallant?

'Tis Curiosity, Sir, I must confess;
I heard not long since by a friend of mine,
He was most knowing in Astrology,
And having by her means wrought his acquaintance,
A Maiden-longing, which I blush to own,
Made me now question him about my husband's name,
And when I should be married.
I'll try your skill though for once good Mr Astrologer.

The old man will have him into the Star-chamber presently.

She doubts my science, sets him on to make trial of't to Sh.
I le bear up bravely, and 't shall go hard,
But I'll beat that old tired Cock out of the pit.

Are you a fortune-teller? do'e make Almanacs? hah!

Montelions perhaps, or so.

He's the sprucest truly o'th trade, I ere yet saw.

How rudely the man begins? this is no fair disputant.

What does he tell thee troubles thee thus?

I told her, Sir, of some hard fortune, which
By the malign aspect of an inauspicious Planet
I find her threatened with.
She takes it somewhat to heart, as you see.

Thou art too blame, thou art too blame
To be so much concerned.
In so short a time what could you discover?

That she's decreed
To make the fortunes of a younger Brother,
Or some such wanting Gentleman;
For he whom she's to marry
Is rich in person only, and a comely mine.

Who would not think he spoke truth now,
He delivers himself with such confidence?
The good Gentleman out-lies his man,
Foils him at his own weapon, Impudence.

Fear it not upon such slight grounds,
'Tis but one Doctors, opinion, I warrant you.

I would I had not heard it though;
The Prediction has made strong impressions on me.
Would it did so on you too, that you might be persuaded
There were no remedy, but I must have Bellamy,
The fine wanting Gentleman he points at.

My Daughter meat for younger Brothers?
Fear 'em not I say again, let me alone
To stave them off, and wanting Heirs are as bad to me
As a poor Cadet, I'll beware of them too.

Endimion, though that reads my destiny thus,
Is a knowing Man, Father, one never yet mistaken,
Nor ever saw he, as he protests
The Stars on any one Event six'd so unanimous;
This would work, I think, on any one,
It falling so right with my own desires.

She takes more pains to delude her Father,
Then I did to gull her: I shall be an Astrologer
At this rate, whether I will or no.

Many Men have employed all their Lives
In this Study, and yet died short
Of the excellence of it too; and how this Man
Should arrive at the height of it so young,
I wonder much, I promise you.

It is with Scholars, I have heard, Sir,
As with Travellers; not always he that first sets forth,
But he that takes the nearest way, gets soonest home.

And what of him that's best horsed?

He out-rides his fellows.

Why, thou art a parcel wise Man too.

Certes Astrology is a noble Science,
Worth the application of ingenious minds!
If you are such a Master of her secrets,
Few that pretend to the name come near
Deserving it so well; all men
Are not fit for speculation now a-dayes,
Youth especially, is all on Action bent;
So young therefore, and so learned, deserves
All Honour and Applause; and I am heartily yours.
I ever was affected to Men of merit,
A lover of Learning always, I:
And to speak truth, in my younger days
I was a dabler this way too, my self;
But marrying too soon, marred my Study,
My Wife burnt all my Books, and I soon fell
From casting Figures, to cast up accounts;
Domestic care, Law-suits,

And good-fellowship too a little.

Kept me from excelling* but tell me Sir, I pray;
Are not those Planets (Mars and Saturn excepted)
Of the happiest influence, whose Paralels are the greatest?
How like you Mercury beholding Venus,
With a trine Aspect? or, what think you,
Of the same Mercury in conjunction with Hecate?

The Man speaks Hebrew sure;
And he would take his answer in Gibberish now,
'Twere some thing:

Here are words as able to fright away an Ague,
As Voiture's Abracadabra

He had need be an Astrologer now indeed

I'll have one push for it.

Hark, he has provided an answer

to Sr Chr. Those Planets I account the happiest, none excepted,
Whose influence on Man and Woman pour down
What each desires most.

Learnedly answered!

Venus, you know your self, (but that you're pleased
To try my younger skill;) to Lovers does presage all bliss,
As Mars has a kindness for the Men of War;
Saturn is powerful with the Saturnians:
Marry, if Mercury eye Venus once,
There are Cuckolds made in the City:
Some false Dice* may be abroad too,
For he was a wag both ways, you know.

But what if with a trine Aspect, what then, Sir?

That's worst of all, Sir; then are the Cuckold-makers at work
In City, Court, and Country: if with a trine Aspect,
Then let all Men look to their Wives,
Their handsome Wives especially.
Oh, 'tis a Cornuting Constellation!

And governs this Cornuting age.

I never heard why we had so many Cuckolds before.

Indeed, indeed, law-Daughter, I would
He had told thee thou should have
A rich old Knight, or some Alderman;
For sure enough he had reason for what he said,

No question but he had, though neither she,
Nor you, know what reason

But what of the Conjunction, Sir,

Of Mercury with Hecate?
I have much ado to speak the Goblin-words after him,
It is a very critical one.

Is it so? is it so? indeed?

Have at him now with down right non-sence.
Triplicity of it, as well as the Union
Of Hecate with Mercury, being Retrograde,
Or in combined Aspects, in the Horizon
Of a cross Ascendant, on such weak brains
Might paralax at last. --

You're too high for me, I promise you;
This is all out of my reach; if you would descend
To somewhat a more vulgar and intelligible phrase.

These are terms of Art, Sir.
I thought I should pose you.

Pardon my age, Sir; 'tis so long since I
Broke Correspondence with the Art, the terms
Are as strange to me now, as I ne'er had heard 'em;
And methinks too, they hardly were in use
When I was at the University:
But time that alters us, will alter Science too,
It has a daily increase, though we decay,
And other Countries may have other Methods.

Of late years, Sir, in the Mathematics
There are great alterations, they erect Schemes
A new way now, and have new names
Belonging to the Horoscope, Nostradamus him self,
Whom my Master follow'd, had his terms
And rules apart, wherefore the phrase
I'm studied in, may well seem strange to you.
But School-men are like Carriers-horses; We plod on
In our old pad; like us, or understand us, who will.

Do you so? do you so? That's something strange methinks,
Yet amongst friends, you might vouchsafe, Sir, to be understood.

To Sr Chr. A word vis your Vorship.

How now? what's the matter, Lagripe?

You claw it away with hard words.

Thou see, I sweat for it;
But for a friend now at need, relieve me
With an errand, or find some trick or other
To take off this old Lover, of he knows not what

Your Pardon, Sir, it is an earnest business,
I should not leave you else, I'm even full loath as, 'tis,
For I did long to understand those new terms,
That I did: but we shall meet again
And discourse these learned Mysteries, we will try
Some Mathematical experiments too;
Nay, I have some Secrets worth your knowing:
But farewell farewell for this time.

I had rather believe you, then stand to sift 'em out.
I'm rid of him without thy help at last.
Lewis, Bernard, I have had the finest adventure,
The prettiest part put upon me.

Shift has made us laugh at it already,

We stood aloof off all the while, and heard
How astrologically the old man questioned you:

And as Astrologically I answered him, I hope:
But he could not follow through the houses of the Sun
The pace I led him, he lost sight of me presently.

You did not vanquish him fairly, he understood you not.

It had been much he should,
When I did not understand my self.

'Tis fit you take some pains in both,
He'll expect an expounding visit.

Bless me from undesigned Encounters,
Such as this day's; and if by my good will
I visit him, let him plague me with non-sense;
Let him retaliate, and spare not.

Do ye mean to trade in non-sense still?
A great Astronomer, or one taken for such --

He will quickly find how I played upon him,
For what questions did he put to a Man,
That knows neither Signs nor Planets?

With your bold answers you so mall'd him though,
He's yet well stunnied, and with as much ease
I durst wager, you'll foil him next encounter.

Give him the other fall, complete your Victory,
'Tis for the credit of learning
The work be not left imperfect.

We will be the trumpet of your fame,
And sound your skill throughout the town.

What think you of posting up bills?
As others of the profession do.

And give some at the Play-house doors
As they do for a match at the Bear-garden.

Or get him put into the Gazette
By way of Advertisement for the public good
Of what a Mine of Learning is discovered.

Either will convince the old knight,
And if besides, by strangers we shall have prepared,
The amazing rumour of your daily wonders
But reach his ear, as I'll be sure it shall;
Being full already of this first interview,
He'll be so gulled, as ne'er old dotard was.

That I believe; but this fine pastime
Venture's me a little too far;
You consider not the danger may ensue,
Engaging thus my credit, and my quiet too; for 'twill
Draw all the curious fools of the town about my ears.

So we shall know how full the town is of fools,
And should they find, you're but a counterfeit,
'Twill pass but for a trick of youth at worst.

What sport soever we may fancy thus,
It cannot last long; for if it be
So generally bruited, I shall have questi ns
Put me hourly, and then my answers.
Must doubtless get me great repute.

What matter? you'll answer as other Pretenders do,
Sometimes I, sometimes no; be it favourably,
Or fatally; have some respect to age and sex,
And for the rest, happy be lucky.

A fortune-teller never warrants any thing;
You answer not upon oath, Sir; and then you know,
One may strain a little, without venturing ears.

In Astrology the best of 'em does as much
By chance as skill: 'tis mere hab-nab.

What if you throw Cross or Pile, whether you say,
I, or no. or tell your buttons, I, no; I, no:

There are ways indeed.

Why, 'tis an even lay, you hit right either way,
When there is but a right and a wrong in the case.

Have I not read of a judge was swayed by
Cast of Dice in trials of Life and death?

The high fulloms saved some, the low hanged the rest.

Right.

This remember; never to affirm any thing
With certainty, with what is past or present
Be very cautious how you meddle,
'Tis as dangerous in this Profession
As speaking treason; of the future it self
Speak but obscurely neither, to your Consulters
'Twill pass for learnedly, they must
Allow you to be in the clouds a little.

Let your Answers be like Oracles, wondered at,
Not understood, foretell more good fortune
For the most part then bad,
That will send 'em away pleased at least:

And in that good humour they'll remember
Your poor servants; our Wages may be earned this way.

Thou Mercenary fool.

Here's Gratian; be gone,
We'll begin with him, he's credulous.

I leave it t'ee, Gentlemen;
Manage the device as you will your selves,
Come Shift.

Who would have thought it?

Who can well believe it yet?

'Tis strange.

'Tis beyond imagination.

How is it with you, Gentlemen?

We hardly know our selves;
We are wrapped in such a cloud of Wonders;

Most miraculous!

May not I know what? I would fain wonder too.

I fear least --

You need not; here's none to over-hear us.

But it requires a secrecy.

Trust me.

Endimion declared even now,

Declared? what?

And did before our face things so incredible
Almost to eye-witnesses, I'm loath to speak 'em.

What did he do?

I never met with, nor indeed heard of his fellow.
He is so highly knowing in Astrology,
And shows his skill in practises so admirable,
I could suspect he conjured.

He told me passages of my life, and almost in an instant,
Which without Enchantment, I know not
How he should discover: yet all he did,
Was by Conjectures from my palm and face,
And certain figures drawn of the sudden;
For he is also a Chiromancer, and a Physiognomist.
Who could imagine, seeing him so spruce, so gay? --

Is it not Endimion the Wit, that travelled Monsieur,
Whose Gallantry and Conversation are so much cried up:
He's of the Society too, I think.

Yes, yes, an eminent member: he has some rare secret sure
Which other Artists are not yet arrived at.

I ever took him for a well-willer
To the Mathematics indeed; Some twice or thrice,
I think, I have conversed with him,
And found him then, both by his Countenance and discourse
An Astrologer, I will not say,
For that great knowledge he took care, belike,
To hide from all, but bosom friends;
But a person of sharp wit and excellent understanding
I clearly saw he was;
A Man addicted too to curious sciences.

What will you say, if I carry you with me
Some day, that he has undertaken
To show me a Beauty, had some kindness for me
In Paris? the French Mistress y'have heard me speak of.

Is't possible he can? --

That's nothing to what he can do.
He made a Picture speak before us,
And that's the Cause of this astonishment.

May I believe this?

You have both Eyes an Ears, will you believe them?

Dear Lewis, make me better acquainted
With this rare Man; he*l tell me
Whether Bellamy be jealous, or no; and why. --

I have enquired that out for you already:
He meets Clarinda by night, and abuses Celia.

He does go out by night indeed

And to that purpose; never doubt it.

I'm overjoyed, if it be so.

But not a word, dear Gratian, as you love me,
Of Endimion; he would be Lamm'd
If what we know were spread abroad.

Here's one in the snare already.

Endymion an Astronomer, and Bellamy faithless!
Love give thee thanks, the opportunity's a fair one;
I le straight to Celia, there I'll boast his Art,
By which, (if Love and I can make her bold enough)
She may discover how she is abused.
Then dispossessed
Of the fair thoughts she holds of this false Man,
Her heart for me becomes an easy prize.
Nor can he tax me with a breach of trust
That to his Mistress is much more unjust,

FAmous Astronomer, most admired Genius,
You that are now the only Town-talk grown,
As never plot was half so well contrived,
So never any yet took as this does*

No Man, but is persuaded of your skill,
No Man, but with respect does gaze upon you;
And it some cross accident spoil not the sport,
You will be taken for a Prophet shortly.

And to preserve that good opinion, Sir,
See, I loose no time.

Witness my burden here.

Why, what hast thou got there?

His Worships Library.

I think I may be worthy to carry
Books after him, as famous a Man as he is.

A Lillie's Almanac.

And a Whartons.

There's the Pro and Con
That will make him a good Disputant.

Wings Ephemerids! I marry Sir,
Here's an Airy Author indeed.

My Master soars as high as the loftiest of 'em.

You know the houses of the Sun, I hope, by this.

As well as any man here does Coffee-houses or Bawdy-houses.

Peace Scurrility; that he had houses I knew before:

I ever held him a mighty Prince,
And did believe he was well lodged.

But now I know his Risings and his Settings too, Heliack, Cosmick, and
Acronick; the number of the Spheres, both Tropicks, that of Cancer, and of
Capricorn, the Arctic and Antartick-Poles, the Paralels, Ecliptick-line, the
Climate, Point-Vertical: and what not.


Nay then, I'll lay aside this superfluous Learning,
He has enough without book.

Alas Sir, Mercury in conjunction with Hecate.
Or beholding Venus with a trine Aspect,
Thanks to my Almanac here, is not Hebtew now,
'Tis but a labour, though of memory yet,
My Judgement is not much improved,
And I must shun Sir Christopher a while;
But what progress have you made with the Pageant?

A fair one, I think, for the time,

Such as you'd laugh to trace us thorough.

My first station was to a house where I
Was sure I should meet company, and of
The best; a kind of Lady-ordinary,
Where they were beasting it, for that game's in
Fashion still, though Hombre be more Courtly.
To the standers by, I whispered first my news,
Then amongst the Bettors it began to spread,
At last it wrought the Gamesters too, and found
Even amongst the losers such concern,
They could sit still, and question me about you;
They must play on though, but they were so full
of Signs and Planets, that in stead of Play
A Madam cried out Venus, and a Man
Of War for Counter, straight cried Mars.

I fear 'twas I beasted her.

When I saw t work so well, I left 'em, and to the play;
Where to disseminate my story best,
In the pit, I whispered it from ear to ear;
And thus confidingly it spread so well,
That by the end it was in every mouth:
Going out, (I laugh still at the conceit)
A friend rounds me in the ear with my own lye,
Which with so many oaths he vouched for truth,
I made some scruple not to believe him.

A most excellent progress!

Is it not?

But prithee Bernard, where hast thou preacht me up?

To Court, I; for that's the staple of news.

I'll see what they say of my Master at the Bake-house,
For that's my staple of news.

But peeping by the way into the Exchange,
I met with one did lye for you the heartiliest,
Relating twenty monstrous things y' had done,
To which he swore himself a witness too:
Some five or six had hemmed him in,
And hung upon his tongue, his lying tongue,
With an attention great as his impudence;
I hearkened too a while, (then to try his mettle)
Took on me to contest some points he had averred:
But he, full fraught with wrath and indignation;
I speak but what In ve seen, and you perhaps
Gain-say't for want of knowledge of the person,
Or else you envy men of worth and parts.
When I, seeing him so fierce, for fear of being beaten,
Even sneaked away to laugh at him at leisure.

What impudent fellows there are about this Town?
Travellers and Falk oners are modest to this vap'ring, Sir,
'Twere an excellent Genius to write Diurnals;
Is he not something a kin to old Politicus, think you?

He would out-lye him some furlongs

Novelty has its Sectators every where
As gross lies pass for currant truth daily.

They did indeed.

But why balked you Grays-Inn-walks, the Coffee-(houses or some sage Club.
There your grand News-mongers confer.

Retailers of grave, serious lies, they:
But mine was for the young, the gamesome ones.

And with what credit they receive it!

Were I sure, lying would always thrive thus,
I'd make a vow never to speak truth more.

But at Court, Bernard.

A Lady, Sir, a handsome Lady too,
though her hoods hide part of her beauty,
Would fain have you to her self a while.

To her self? why, what would she do with me?

Was that a fit question for me to ask?
As if they would tell servants,
What they do with their Masters;
They are not so immodest, I hope.

Some of their stories would make me blush.
But this Lady looks with some honesty,
And desires to speak with you in private.

Wait on her in.
Step you two into that drawing room a little.
If there were some Astrology in the visit now.

I hope 'tis the Astrologer the Lady makes it to.
You want such Visitants.

You must wittily and boldly chiause two or three,
And then you'll be in Vogue indeed.

What ere it be from hence you may observe us.

Are you not surprised at the confidence of such a visit?

I'm honoured with it, Madam, beyond measure honoured.
Beshrew me 'tis a fair Lady indeed, a very fair one.

I hope, Sir, I have not so little skill in beauty,
But you may take my word for a good face.

Trust me, I do not see a better.
How may I serve you, Lady? how may I deserve
The pains y'have taken thus, to find me out?

To see Endimion I would have done more;
With such impatience did I long to be
Acquainted with the Genius of the age;
The learned'st Man our England ever bred.
Oh Luce! I tremble; I shall never have courage
To utter what I come about.

What need you speak at all? he can understand you
By signs and tokens, as well as he were deaf and dumb.

Madam, I want expressions to return
A Complement so ill-deserv'd, 'tis true
I have some slight tincture of knowledge, but --

Nay, nay, your modesty is fruitless, I know your abilities.

This esteem is too obliging, Lady; but could I serve you,
I should value my self too.

Oh Endimion!

What means that sigh?

You might save me the shame of being truch-man to it.

She's in love w'ee.

By my Astrology I would she were,
On condition I had forfeited all my Interest in the stars.

The knowledge you're so envied for
Of my desires cannot leave you ignorant.

S'lid, would you have her make love t'ee down-right?
And she'd say but half as much to me,
I'd understand her, I warrant you:
You're the strangest Man.

So you would have had her-a-told us her errand too:
Yes, I warrant you.
Women love to do that they won't say;
Some pretty things have but course names.

By that very reason, Lady, that you give
For your silence, you ought to speak your mind;
If I know a'ready what brings you hither,
Your free declaring it to me ought not
Add any thing to your confusion.

Excellently well argued! what fending proving here is?
He's cried up for a wit, and the Wench
Will laugh at him for a fool, a dull one.

I had best talk to her for the credit of the house.
That she may see there's some quickness
Of apprehension in the family, some feeling left.

What can the hearing of my weakness avail you?
You know the languishing desires I'm pressed withal,
My coming t'ee, my standing thus before you,
Thus blushing and discountenanced, does speak my mind;
Use me not then with so much cruelty, but since
Bashfulness hinders me naming my request,
Do what I would have you, without my saying what.

Pray do, Sir, without more bidding.

I see, you are not free to strangers, Sir,
I could have made an Interest you would not have refused
Any courtesy the stars make you Master of.

'Tis clear now; some Astrological question
She has to put me.

You're even well enough served, and't be,
That would not understand her other meaning.

She'I shift her arrant now, and invent something
To plague you with, I hope.

Would she had made Shift her arrant,
She had sped better.

Very likely.

Is she mad, to expect I should know her thought?
Am I a Magician, or am I the devil himself to do it?

If it be Astrology, some bombast words
She cannot understand, will quickly put her out of play,

Unmannerly fellows, they are these Conjurers,
They will not satisfy a Lady without so much entreaty.

I'Id even leave him, Madam, and go to another*
What little pied devil's that, whispers with him?

'Tis his Man.

His Zany, his Jack-Pudding;

'Tis some quack this, I warrant you, some Mountebank.

Peace, he comes towards us.

Wrap your Answer in Fustian, Sir, 'tis a warm wear,
And will look gravely.

Not to belie my science, Madam, or uncivilly pretend
An ignorance, you'll not believe me guilty of,
I must confess, 'tis easy scrutiny for me
To dive to the bottom of your heart, and read
What's most abstruse.

Do ye see now? I knew he could tell.

Yet 'twere in vain I should Endeavour ought
For you, unless by a Declaration
Free and sincere, you testify
Your sull consent to what I go about;
You would try my skill first; but take heed this
Diffidence you shroud with modesty,
Do not impede the compassing your wish;
A Frank confidence, a strong credulity
Is required in those apply themselves
To such as I am for relief; my art's
Beyond the Vulgar of Judiciary Astrologers:
Which clearly to evince, I will (if you
Desire it) tell you what your thought is, now,
This very minute; what brought you hither,
Whether your heart be free, or if engaged,
To whom, how long y'have lived so; or what else
You think or wish most secret: but this done,
No more; I can do nothing for you then.

How I shall blush at this recital, you
Condemn me to?

I'd tell him nothing, and 'twere to me;
Are you sure he'I keep your counsel?

What do I save by that, when he can know it however?
I love, Endimion; and he that captives me,
Having by Amorous duties won my heart,
Forsakes me then to travel into France,
So scornfully, he never takes his leave;
This Letter though I have just now received,
As kind as he was wont to be himself,
Which new assurance of his love, makes me
Passionately now wish his return;
I burn to see him, and though what I long for
Seem impossible, yet am I well assured
To you 'tis so facile, you may this night
Feast my sad Eyes with that beloved sight.
If ever Love then warmed your youthful heart,
As your own flames may kindle mutual fire,
Deny not my request.

Here's a request with a vengeance,
Would gravel all the Conjurers of the Realm.

It had been as easy, I should think now,
Taking her up at her first weapon,

I thou dost run on still with thy own conceit,
And never think of helping me out of the mire.

Shall I fetch Charles his Wain to draw you out?

And yoke Phaebus's horses to it,
That the Teem may be strong enough.

Call upon Nostradamus, Sir, he was your Master, ^ (removed
He's bound to help you for his own credit.

The old Man with his hard words was not half so terrible.

Tell her, she must make a pact with the Devil,
That will scare her.

I know not, Madam, who you take me for,
Nor what you may imagine of my Art,
For where is't like that I this night should find
A Man, that you your self tell me's in France?

That's a matter of nothing to you,
You do things more prodigious hourly,
I know that, to make one long since deprived
Of life, both speak and move, is slight
And easy t'ee; I have it, from good hands.

No doubt but you have; and I durst have sworn.
You'd bin an eye witness yourself too
Of some of these Miracles.

I had rather talk to her o'th influence
Of her Eyes now, then of that o'th Stars.

Oh, had you so?
But you are not to choose your own Text by
Your favour, Sir, she has set you a Theme.

The impossibility of your request pleads my excuse,
There is no power in all my Art to serve you,
If you command the presence of an absent person.
Such things are not done by pure Astrology,
Spectres and Phantasms move by Magic only,
Which black and dismal study, as it lies,
Within the compass of the Law, ne'er is the application
Of a noble mind; besides a Ghost or Vision
Clothed in a fantastic body, is too melancholy
For your Sex and Age, such dire Apparitions,
As they are full of horror in themselves,
Strike pale with it, the stoutest looker on,
Your courage would fail you too at such a sight,
And you'd repent the courtesy obtained.

Oh never, Sir, if the kind Specter have
My beloved's shape; be it but like him,
And the sweet vision will more please then fright,
But you mistrust me still, and think a Woman
Unfit for such a secret.

He has been very cautious hitherto
Of trusting the Sex with any of that Nature,
And I think he has not many of 'em for you neither.

Nothing less, Madam, and since you urge me to it,
I have, perhaps, skill enough for what you desire.

Oh Luce, 'twill come at last.

Hang him, Wizard, I'd see him swim to the Devil
With a Millstone about his neck, e're I would Court him thus,
Or be beholding to him indeed.

If I did at first plead an impossibility
To obey you, 'tis for a certain obstacle
I find in it, a main one too, your Lover, you tell me,
Is in France, and there's the mischief on it,
The Sea divides us, and I have no power
Beyond my own district, the wild Element
So uncontrouledly opposes all my charms
My hands are tied; and that's the true
And only cause, I've dallied we'e thus long.

Nay, if that be all, th'impossibilitie's none,
That obstacle of the sea is easily removed,
So the fresh water hinder not, and if it do,
We will cross the River, this Letter here
Is dated from Dover, see.

Nay, I believe you, Madam. worse and worse.

From whence he writes, he'll not stir of some days,
He wav'd the Packet-boat, and waits a Man of War;
He has some business too in Kent, some friends to see.

I am gone; this bold Wench with her mettle
Has conjured that Devil out of me, others
Think I have at my fingers ends.

Does my Master think they take him for a Taylor?

I know he's not shipped yet;

Would she were sunk some Fathoms with her fellow,
To cool her courage, 'tis such a Virago.

Bellamy's supposed on's way for France,
What if 'twere he now she longed for a sight of?

That's not unlikely, this may be Celia too;
I'll sift it out, e're I engage too far.
If he be yet on English ground, let me
But know his name, for in that Circumstance
Your Confession's yet defective, not that
I'm ignorant of't, for let me tell you,
Though his Birth be good, his Name as ancient,
The Familie's decayed in Means, his personal
Gallantry making good the worth of Ancestors
Whose I and he ne'er inherited.

That is his Character.

Nor do we differ much in age, though he
Perhaps, be something of the fairer stature.

It is most true.

Nay, then I'm well enough.
You'll think it strange now, when I know the Man,
I should ask you his name, but I have reasons for it;
Such, as unless I have it from your mouth,
I can't comply with your desires; 'tis an Essential
Ceremony, a kind of deference our Art expects.

How pleasing 'tis to me to speak that name!
Bellamy, now you have it; what else
Must I do, or say to obtain my suit?

The sea not awing then my charms*
There's no pretence left to deny you now;
And were the Task yet harder then it is,
Your Confidence would win me to it,
So daring a Spirit, that seeks what hardiest Men
Durst not attempt, would ever make me try
My utmost, look me full in the face.

Oh happy Celia!

Let me see your hand, what day were you born on?

The Tenth of May.

What day of the week?

On a Saturday.

She does not look, Luce, as she had bin made up
On a Saturday in the afternoon.

You must see your Sweet-heart then,

To night, if it be possible,
The very thoughts of it transport me so. --

You must make me a Covenant with his Idea now.

Oh Cousin! will you turn Covenanter now?

When they that set the Idol up
Have pulled it down themselves.

Nay, 'Tis burnt, they say, 'tis burnt.
He'I make you a Phanatick in the end
And you hearken to him, with his idle Idea's.

As I am here, this is one of the Devils Trapanners,
And has a standing Fee of so many fresh
Familiars per annum from the Prince of darkness.
To wheedle young ones in.

This malapert tongue will draw a vengeance on it,
If you beware not, Minion.

You must excuse her* Sir, 'tis a mad Wench,
She will talk thus of her Mistress, or my
Mother, or any one sometimes.

Your tongue's but little better governed neither
For all your excuses.

Let em talk their fill here among friends,
But not a word of Conjuring abroad*
Do ye mark me, Gentlewoman, not a word,
Or by my Jacob's-staff -- but go to.
The Covenant I desire is wholly harmless,
An innocent Charm, and I must needs have
A ticket written with your own hand.

In blood, Sir? End. No, no.

Can I refuse any thing that may contribute
To what I so much long for?

My figure once made, and the Mystery finished,
I'll tear your note, indeed I will;
My Standish here, and some Paper.

What think you now, Luce?

I think he's a Conjurer still, as I may tell you,
Amongst our selves, for I dare call him so
Aloud no more, he swears by such a strange thing,
The Prime Minister of State to the subterranean Monark.

But what say thou to my note?

This very night will he carry it to the
Meeting-house, and pin it to the goat's tail.

You are sure in the next Lampoons to be coupled
With Lucifer, you shall be the sole couple in hell
For me, I'll ne'er write to him.

Flat and plain, Mistress, he should have
Nothing under my hand, I say.

Away, away, thou art too scrupulous.

Write, as I'll dictate t'ee.

Shall you I chop a little Logic now,
My blowing bud of beauty.

Even as little as you please, Sir.

My most undelicate Chambermaid.

On further acquaintance, you'I say, the more the better; for though I serve
such a terrible Master, I can be as familiar, as impudently familiar as any
little Rogue of 'em all.


Thou hast thy sinful extreme too, I see.

Yet their Talent lies the more natural way,
I should like it the better of the two,
But thy Master is so dreadfully learned.

Beyond all thou see yet;

One must carry their body swimming
With him that knows the heart By looking in the face.

If he hear but one's name, 'tis enough.

That's stranger yet.
Know people's thoughts, and hear but their names?

He never goes without a little devil in's pocket
For that purpose, which he calls his Vade mecum:

A devil always about him, and you serve this man?

Why not? the devil's no ill company sometimes,
I mean a familiar one:

Alas, we have whole Covies of tame fiends;
Why there's the devil of Mascon,
Would you wish a more sociable Goblin?
You have heard of him, the storie's in English.

I have not seen it.

Why, then I'll tell thee, 'tis a smug young fiend
Made love to a Parson's daughter.

Or his Maid,

True, for in that particular Authors disagree.

As they do about Statira the Wife of Alexander, whether she were the Daughter,
or Widow of King Darius.


Thou art read in History too.

Not much.

But prithee how did the devil court his Mistress,

Would he do her work for her, as the tales
Go of sprights and fairies?

That I have forgot, but I'll give you the book to satisfy your Curiosity:
This I remember, he had a damnable mind to a certain red ribbon she wore
somewhere; but the niggardly old Parson would not let her give it him, for
which don devil most zealously reproved his want of Charity.


But what if thy Master's devil should creep to my Cousin now?


How should we be troubled with her at home?

That need's not.
A handsome Woman's devil enough of her self,
Besides by her sharp look I guess her a shrew,
She needs no devil to teach her to scold.

She did so jet it too as she came in,
So eye her self, I see she's proud;
There's another of the devils good qualities,
She's not beholding to my Master for.

Why, thou studiest the black art too then?

Physiognomy a little, 'tis Physiognomy tells all this.

Your name is wanting still, subscribe it, and I've done.

And is this all?

All, Madam.

I leave it w'ee: think on me, Endimion;

I never yet broke promise to handsome Lady,
Nor will I now begin with you, fair one.

Pray, Sir, don't tell my Cousin, 'twas I had her Apricots; and I'll steal you
some to morrow, and sing you a fine song too.


Nay, without a bribe I can keep counsel, pretty one.

I'm undone, if he look me in the face now;
I have angered him, and these Witches are
So revengeful.

You hide your face from me now, and I see your heart.

Oh, Sir, I'll never call you Conjurer more,
Nor speak true word of you again, but if
You know what I now think, as you are frail
Your self, keep it from my Mistress, she'd turn
Away Ralph infallibly, and she knew it.

How much ado have I had to shake her off?

You have been something long about it indeed.

This bold cheat will fame you straight
For eminently skilled;
And your renown will every where increase.

I never suffered so hot a persecution.

Nor I so tedious an Expectation.

I'm sure I sweat for it again.

I durst not laugh neither.

How modestly he declined her commendations? and yet the very carelessness you
received 'em with, persuaded her, you thought you well deserved 'em.


Why harped you not on the Ceremonious string still?

I saw she came not for a Compliment.

Why struck you not in, in your advisor's way?

Less on that account too.

That was the Common road.

It was not hers, you see.

I never was so put to it contain my self,
As when she proved her Lover was on English ground,
And whipped off the salt water.

I confess, I was put to it my self then;
I was almost non-plust.

I hearkened still when she'd bespeak a bridge
Over to Callice; but what if we had
Not been in an Island now? what if there
Had been some way over Land into France.

If there had, 'tis odds she'd not find it out;
For 'twere I think another wonder, she
Should be more knowing in Cosmography,
Then I am in Astrology:
At worst I had found out some other Evasion,
Pleaded the difference of Religion --

Marry, and a good plea too.

Or I know not what my self now.

I think so; but the letter, what's that?

No secret; but prithee
Who should this Mother be the young one mentioned once,

Oh the Widow Aunt, I told you Celia lived with.
Bellamy I know where you are,
Pretence of travels, vain and light.
And you are not yet got so far,
But I may see you here this night.
Celia.

A most elaborate Epistle, full of rithme and reason:
And much you can do with it no doubt.

We must convey it into Bellamy's hands,
Who suspecting by 't he has been dogged, or
Is found out indeed, will hast to Celia
For his vindication, and so betray
Himself; I am revenged by this means of
Clarinda, whose night-works I destroy: and
If it happen that Celia full of spirits still
And apparitions, take him for one, and
Dare not give him hearing, no trick, no plot
We could contrive, will add more credit to
What's of my Astrology already spread.
All the business is to deliver this note.

Leave that, Sir to my care

Your care? is that a fit Province
For a Raw-man? I'll take charge on it my self.

Nay, no Vying; I must use you another way,
But it must be delivered to his own hands.

So I intend it shall. End. But how?

Without much cunning thus: Clarinda waits
Him in her garden to night, tis near the
Hour too, in's road I'll lye perdu, and if
I do not make lam change his Rendezvous.

No better way could be imagined.

Dispatch then, and bring us tidings on it.

That I shall speedily, and good one's too, ne'er fear it.

GOod Sir, nay, but consider.

The more I do, the more I find you a trouble some fellow.


But I always was of your midnight Counsels,

And that blazes 'em abroad at noon-day.

Was I ever heard to say, my Master has left such a Lady, such a one's his
Mistress now; he treated this Madam at that place, and the other Madam at the other
place? --


If you had, sirrah, I had been seen to beat you.

Nay, nay, I don't talk o'that; there's no body questions your aptness that
way.


Will you get you home?

After you is manners, Sir.

I shall beat you home.

What again beating? some other time, some other time may serve, you have
business of more concern in hand now to my Knowledge.


Your Knowledge?

You sleep not all day, to ramble all night for nothing.

Ramble, sirrah?

Nay, I observe you, when I don't follow you? 'tis for no good you hide your
self from Madam Celia thus. She has deserved Better of you; who did I bring you
the Two hundred pounds from, when you were snapped at Mr Grogram's suit of
Pater-Noster-Row? Or who fills your Pockets again when your Dice run the
children of lee, or Deuce ace is your Comfort? Many a Lady has more comfort of
a cheaper Gallant.


Are you that Lady's Dun, Sir?

Her kindness will soon ha* done, and 't be no better requited, then are we
undone.


Excellent! quibbles too.

You may get preferment however in the next forlorn expedition: 'twill be sad
reducing your Coach, Horses, and Lackeys to a sixty pound per annum Equipage.


Thou art my Pedagogue sure, my Tutor.

I am your poor Valet de Chambre, Sir; one that would gladly have his Master
wise enough to grow rich, that he may thrive under him: refuse a handsome
Lady, and a good fortune, when they are offered, to ferret after Je we scay
quoy's?


Thou hast not thy name for nothing, I see; the art e*en the Rude Serving-man,
it speaks thee.


I am honest, Sir, if I am bold, I do not flatter and cheat you.


One of 'em I'll swear thou dost not; but for the other, Rud, I'll swear,


I shall not be rid of this fellow now, and


Oh any thing, Sir, to make one.

This fellow's one of those are scandalised at all wickedness they have not a
hand in, and cannot abide any Man should Drink or Wench without 'em.


And some such exploit, I suspect you bound for now.

I should guess you do by your earnestness to make one.
Nay, this way, this way.

I Long to have done my arrant now, to see how heartily, how gamester like,
he'll fret to loose the kisses he thinks himself so fair for to night? how many
ten groats will he swear himself out of, if any of the godly be but within
hearing? I must pack as soon as I have delivered the Letter, for coming in
Celia's name, the thanks he'd give, won't be worth staying for. I cannot be far
from the Garden now, here will I stand sentinel: he knows me not, and so there
is no danger of an after-beating.

I hear some body, 'tis he certainly.


Nay, if Clarinda love you too, I'm satisfied, she's rich enough to do our
business, but here's a father's good will to get; the other's at her own
dispose.


Time may work him* who's there?

A friend, Sir, that waited your coming:
This note from Celia speaks my business,
She earnestly desires your Company to night:
And I am your Worship's servant.

An unserviceable one, he thinks, at this time.

What cursed Encounters this? honest fellow, Friend, prithee a word. Rudeman,
stay the fellow.


He's gone, he's out of my reach; but that's no hard matter indeed, for I never
had any great reach with me.


Venturing at wit, when I am thus perplexed.

The night's so dark too, he's as soon out of sight.


Again?

What devil has discovered you were in town?

Or what faithless confident rather betrays
My secret? 'tis Gratian, it can be none
But he, I trusted none else, and he loves
Celia too,
In whose affection to supplant me now,
He has betrayed my privacy:
I have deserved no less to trust a Rival;
That title once succeeding dissolves
All former ties of friendship.

To be snapped here too at the garden door
Brings Clarinda in question.

That's mere accident; Gratian, though he knew
I concealed my self, knew not wherefore,
And she would ne'er betray me.
Some speedy balsam though I must apply
Where he has used such Corrosives: I will
To Celia, she loves me, with ease I can
Pacify her, and destroy those rash hopes
A false friend has conceived.

But what is this note were not from Celia now?

The Messenger I know not,
Nor had he any mind I should.

So far it smells knavishly.

First let me see, if it be her hand, and then
With all the kind words, Credulous Maids lend
Greedy ear unto, I will make my peace.
If light discover it a mistake, or trick,
I'll forward to Clarinda, where
A thousand kisses shall make amends
For staying thus beyond my hour?

Marry, would I were to do the penance for you.

CAn you imagine this star-wright with all his hard words, should bring Bellamy
so far on such a sudden?


Silly wretch! thy shallow understanding
Cannot reach the bottom of his Capacity,
Which, (so the sea lye not in's way) will do
A thousand things harder and stranger, he'll
Come then, never doubt it, not he himself
'Tis true, but his similitude,
Something resembling him so perfectly,
Love it self could not make a distinction.

What good will that Copy of his Countenance do you?

Ask Love if thou be ignorant, for he is
The reason of all he forces us to,
Nor is the Curiosity so strange,
In me, nor so particular;
I've heard of many Women use the like.

'Twere a strange thing indeed Women in this town would not venture upon. I
have heard too of the Woman of Billeter-Lane, and of her of Grub-street.


And of Ladies that go into Chancery-Lane to know when their husbands will die,
whether their next will be kinder.


And what day of the week is best to be married on: but bless me from such
pranks, they are no handsome


But, Madam, you are heavy, the very thought
Of this apparition, works upon you
Like the expectation of an ague-fit.

Shall I sing you a song, Cousin, to divert sad thoughts?

I prithee, Fannie, 'twill cheer thee,
However it work on me.

What strange disguises Lovers wear?
Misshapen shapes they still affect,
Thus the white bull that does Europa bear
Shrouding Jove's person does his Love defect:
Thus the same overruling power
Send him to Danae in a shower.
If among the gods he bear this sway,
What can he not over Mortals do?
He that with Deities thus dares to play,
Will govern sure Mankind as strangely too:
Nor is the fairer sex more free
From Metamorphoses then we.
For women once: --

I'll hear no more; there's none so strange as mine,
As that my Bellamy's expected in,
Others had the substances they loved, though
Clothed with accidents they were not used to,
But I must be content with th'outward shape
Of what I love, shrouding I know not what
Substance or reality.

But if it be a Phantasm, a body
Patched up of air or grosser Vapours,
Will not you be afraid, think you?

Not in the least.

I'm sure but I shall then.

Hark, some body knocks at door.

Some body, quoth you?
We neither look for bodies nor souls here,
What if 'twere the I know not what now?
The strange thing you'll call Bellamy?
You grow pale already, you sigh too.

Is this the Courage love puts into his?
I think he's a Coward himself for my part
And he back you with no better mettle now in time of need.

You think 'tis he now.

I am not certain, but see who ere it be.
I'm strangely changed of the sudden, I feel not
That firm resolution now, my soul is
Seized with horror, that strikes a shivering cold
All over my body, something there is in
Nature still repugns against these Visions,
Maugre the love or humour sets one on.
But what need I fear?

Oh Madam, Madam, 'tis he, 'tis Bellamy,
But that he's twice as tall as he was wont to be.

Ay me! Ay me!

What means this shrieking and this running about?

Now am I well paid for my Curiosity, I have Bellamy's Voice, but I have not power
to answer him.


I'm nothing mistaken in my self,
I knew I should be afraid, and my Cousin
For all her cracking proves as very a Coward.

When I besought the Astrologer to send him to me,
I wished to see him only, not to speak with him.

Send for me, Celia, and use me thus. 'tis something strange?

If the thing should find me under the table now.
I'll pray hard.

Could you find no body else to practise
These Exotic fits upon? must I be
Your ridiculous mirth, that bring my Celia
New assurances, 'tis she alone
Has power in Bellamy's heart?

I'll ha none of thee, nor thy heart,
I abhor the power, 'tis the true Bellamy I had a mind to see.

She suspects my inconstancy;
I am to Celia the same Bellamy still,
My thoughts of thee are nothing changed, I vow.

Fiend keep off, avaunt Phantasm; get France again, or into Lapland, from whence
thou came, I think.


Hear but my reasons. is't rallerie this?
Or some trick devised on purpose to make
Trial of me? Fannie, what doe'st thou there?

Help, help, I'm killed, I'm done to death

Was ever Gallant thus gallantiz'd?
The devil o-love, and this be it, I say.
Fiend, and Phantasm, and Lapland! I am not
Mad sure, though they be; I'll try'em again;
Luce, Celia, why Luce, prithee prevail with
Thy Mistress to hear me. Celia, Fannie,
Pretty, Sweet Fannie: 'tis labour lost;
I shall not be answered, unless there be an
Echo within hearing, the dumb devil
Possesses 'em, and I am left in the dark
To grope out the meaning of this frolic.
Well, let her have her humour, I must to
Clarinda, and prevent what ill offices may be
There intended too, I am discovered
In town, and need not now keep out of sight,
Pray heaven the morn prove kinder then the night.

SO deep a melancholy does both surprise,
And grieve me, Sweet; what makes these sighs so frequent?
Can you doubt my fidelity?

I'm full of fears, I must confess it, Bellamy;
Nor can I, when I think what enemies we have,
Though you are present, force a cheerfulness.
What will not Endimion, knowing all
We thought most secret, attempt to ruin us:

He can do nothing, if you love me still.

Would I could say so of Celia too!

Oh Madam! you are too injurious --

Our first affections ne'er loose all their power;
Call your kindness for her a civil devoir,
A gratitude if you will; she is lovely still,
And Civility forces you to see her:
Then smothered flames too-easily break out.

Wrong not your own charms, and my affection
With so unjust a Jealousy:
If you can so much slight Clarinda's power
To fear Celia; I'll not see her at all.
But I am not without my fears neither,
For who loves tenderly, and thinks himself secure?
What will your father say, when once he knows
You suffer Bellamy's love, or what will
He not do to ruin a happiness
He thinks me not rich enough to deserve?
He'll chide, he'll school Clarinda, he'll threaten her,
If she neglect his lessons, will she not
Fear his anger? and in that fear, in that
Fear perhaps she will forsake me,
And wrought of his own mind, hold it
A madness where an Estate is wanting,
To value Birth, descent, or Breeding --

Think better of me, then so. Know that the
Virtue of the beloved object alone
Is enough to make me constant, that worth
Which first made me love, makes me persevere.
Nor is my heart so much a slave to fear,
That Menaces can blot out an Image,
A noble affection had drawn in it.
No Bellamy, I shall wear yours here still.

I am too happy then.

Accept this pledge of my fidelity,
And be assured I'm yours;
Let friends, let fortune smile or frown,
Never shall Celia's constancy equal mine.

My Joy is now so great, I am lost in it.
Unable to speak, unable to keep silence --

You must keep it a while; here's my father --

Is not that Bellamy? what returned already?

An unexpected Law-suit forces me back,
I am sub-pena'd up again, and must
Till after term at least lay by all thoughts
Of seeing France; I was at Canterbury.

And how does my Nephew Manly?

He may as well ask me.

He entertained me nobly at his house.

Has not the young-squire written to me? ha?

He had, and gave me his letter, but a
French Lackey I took here for the Journey,
When he saw me turn back, run away with
My Vallize, and your letter was in it.

That Lackey saves thy credit now,
It must have been said to thee else.

You have made but an ill journey on it then.

Thus are my stars still inauspicious to me.

Endimion Madam at your request would
Tell him to his Vallize again.

Away thou cruel Wench, thou see the pangs
This discourse gives me, and can raise mirth out of it?

My ownloss I should not value,

'Twas not so great indeed.

But the Letter was merely writ on my behalf,
And did implore your aid in my affairs.

You may command me, and my interest.

If you Espouse his Cause, he need not fear being cast.

If the old Man Espouse his Cause,
The young one will Espouse you.

And that's it she would be at.

Would 'twere come to it once for me,
That I might have some quiet among 'em.

On your favour then I build my hopes, but this
Law-business draws me uncivilly away,
Pleaders are not Masters of their own time.
Your pardon, Sir.

Business must be waited on;

May I presume you'I mind your father
Of my suit, Madam, and contribute
To the continuance of his favours?

I'll do my best, Sir, to possess him with
The justice of your cause; his Example
Authorizes me to own your interest too.

But wilt thou be thus melancholy still?
What is the cause? tell me, good Clarinda.

I know no reason for it.

She dreamt of a younger brother, Sir, to night,
Which, reflecting on Endimions prediction,
Seems ominous.

Your bolt is soon shoot still.
Art indisposed in health?

I feel no alteration;
And yet it may be some natural overslow
Of a dull humour in the body causes this heaviness.

Ah Clarinda! my tenderness of thee
Is ill requited with this sullen reserve
Of thy sick thoughts..

To speak truth, I have lost some toys, and that's
The only reason I can give for this damp
My mirth is struck withal.

Why, what hast lost?

That which does vex me much.

But what?

The Rose-diamond you gave me.

Let not that trouble thee, it may be found again.

I have small hopes on it, I have sought every where.

I was carelessly laid by perhaps,
And opportunity makes a true man a thief:
But the loss is easily repaired, there are fairer rings in town, I'll go buy
thee one presently.


That were a slight reparation of my loss;
I fancied this.

What a fondness is here? though I give her
A better ring, she'll loose by the bargain:
Well, set thy heart at rest,
Thou shalt have thy own again, for I will
Just now to Endimion about it.

Now you are in a fine Pickle!
To excuse these dumps you're fallen into,
Y'have gone and spoilt all.

So I have indeed.

Peace, peace; he's coming back.

Tell me, when was this ring lost?

I mist it but to day.

So, so, 'tis not gone far, I warrant you.

Further I hope, then your discovery will reach.

The old man's here again.

But about what a clock was it lost? for I shall be asked all these questions,
that I shall; therefore I must be prepared.


Between eight and nine.

Oh 'tis well, 'tis well, eight and nine, eight and nine;
Let me not forget eight and nine.

How he maunders it, eight and nine, eight and nine; he'll Con his lesson nine
times over, but he'll have it perfect.


What shall I do, Beatrix? advise me, good Beatrix.

'Twere well and you would be adviz d, before*
You do it, then Beatrix could say something,
But to be put still to an after-game,
You are so wilfully fore-handed:
This scurvy Astrologer now will tell him all.

Endimion is the Man indeed undoes me*
But let him do his worst, my love stands not
In awe now of a father's check, 'tis of
So fair a growth his frowns cannot nip it,
My heart is Bellamy's, nothing can force it from him,
Endimion and his Stars are all too weak?

The devil is not so head-strong as these young Wenches, when they have got a
bit of a Man; but 'tis I must lay the storm for all her vapouring; I must let
Shift know how things go, least his Master be put to it beyond his skill, and
shaking hands with Astrology, be forced to tell our old man the plot.


WHat a perpleity am I reduced to?

Why, 'twas with your consent,

Nay, by your own order we raised the report.

Yes of Astrology, but of nothing else,
And yet they think abroad, I have all hell
At command: They point at me in the streets,
So noted a person I am.
There goes the learned Man, says one; oh the
Astrologer, says another, that comes
And peeps me in my face to know me again.
In some places they stare at me,

As they would have done at the hairy woman,
Had she not cased her beard up as she went about.

Right -- or as they did at the Hermophrodite The other day at the play.


The Prophet, says a precise one, and lifts
His hands and eyes to Heaven in admiration,
That one so young should be so knowing.

Children run away, and cry the Witch, the Witch, the Witch; because at home
their Mothers fright them with him.


Thou boy, Rawman!

Some understanding ones there are, (and those
I forgive, because they are in the right)
Believe me guilty of no Magic, but
A mere Impostor, for such contemn me,
Laugh at me, and those that think me other.
Thus am I entertained in the streets;
Or thus at least I interpret their looks
And actions that I meet in the streets.

Some skill you have in Physiognomy,
It seems, (if you have none in Astrology)
That can read all this in Men's faces.
But fame, you know, loves to augment every thing.

Nothing to the People is a little rare,
They will hyperbolize, and screw all novelties
To the highest Key: a lye with them
Snow-ball-like rowles about, and gets in every place,
Each teller of't adds something of his own,
To shape it to his fancy.

If you are thus plagued abroad, you must keep
Home a while; the Wonder will be over.

We cannot do that neither in quiet,
So many have found his Lodging out;
And now Moll Cut-purse that Oracle of felony
Is dead, there's not a pocket picked,
But he's acquainted with it.

That's much indeed.

Nor a silver hilt pinched away, but they come
To the figure-flinger for it.
He hears of every Wedding, Christening, City-feast, by the Butlers recourse to
him for Plate and Linen they lost at 'em.


That's more yet.

Alas, I am a kind of grandissime Jurie, and have all thefts brought before me,
before they go to Hicks-hall, or the Old Bailey; marry, could I help the Man to
his Mare again, they would never go thither, and I might take much of the
matter out of the Lawyers hands: but all Trades must live, I'll not spoil
theirs. I shall have the Country-fellows too with the savoury questions that
poz'd old Noll's star-peeper, then am I in a sweet condition.


The World is satisfied with your skill, 'tis grown a full and general
persuasion.


I see nothing but mirth the stratagem has yet produced.

What? to have Sir, and Madam; Cut and Long-tail put me a hundred several
questions, as if I were Jupiter hammon, or Diana's spokes-man at Ephesus? you
reckon this nothing? I never had too much of nothing till now.


Your Mistress by this fiction's awed,
Your Rival fears you too,
Their pleasures are disturbed,
And all succeeds as you could wish it should.

Believe it Lewis, 'tis without regret
That I give Bellamy place, the disturbance
I bring his pleasures, yields me no content;
My own flames extinct, it concerns not me
Whether Clarinda meet his love, or no.

Here's an indifferency I looked not for.

In affairs of love I measure ever the Esteem I make of Women, by that they
make of me; where they incline to kindness, I can love too: if they withdraw
once, or refuse their favours, my flexible and obedient heart, Lewis, can soon
imitate: nor ever need I four and twenty hours to cure my self of that
disease.


I did mistake your temper; but since 'tis so convenient, why owned you not the
truth of all at first, without taking the Astrologer upon you?


You'll wonder at my stupidity;
Nor can I now my self conceive, why I
Run my neck into this noose, when all the danger
That threatened, was but the turning away
Of a Chamber-maid.

Ne'er let it trouble you now, we bear our
Share of all, and owe a helping hand to
Bring you out, We helped to plunge you in, and
Half the shame will fall on the divulgers.

I have a quarrel to you, Endimion.

Here's my Virago again, 'tis the importunest
Wench this, she'll never be answered. How can
I since last night have deserved your anger?

If Bellamy has not been absent, why
Would you, whose rare knowledge extends it self
To secrets more remote, make me one of
His being in town?
Why dealing with that candor you seemed to
Promise, did you not tell me where he was?

What reason shall I give her? oh! I knew
It not my self till I made my figure;
Yet what if I had known it sooner? I
Promised but a sight of Bellamy, and
Did you not see him? consider but with
Equal Eyes the whole adventure,
No part of it but to my credit turns;
For if in lieu of an illusion, Madam,
A shade, a Phantasm you expected,
Spite of the care he took to hide himself,
I forced him though in person to appear,
Does it not prove the certain influence
Of an art.
You cannot now with want of power tax?

It does, I must confess, it does; this reason
Destroys all Jealousies I had of it.

You may be sure 'tis the best
He could find out for you of the sudden.

But give my passion yet some further ease;
This Bellamy, this fair friend plays me fowl,
Those Vows forgot, I too much credited,
Pays a new Mistress what is due to me.
I have the story of their close Amours,
And know the stars alone, which you command,
Witness their meetings and their kindnesses:
Break me this league then learned Endimion,
You that ne'er meet with obstacle to your will
But what your art orecomes;
Cancel the bonds she has my faithless in,
In the midst of her Caresses force him from
Her eyes; restore him to his true Mistress.

No evasion does the Learning she so much admires
Inspire me now, but to persuade her she's mistaken.

Something from the learned Endimion will
Be expected, but that I think may serve

Take better thoughts of your Lover, Madam:
Though in his carriage he may be too blame,
Yet are you misinformed of what keeps him
In town, you are the cause of it your self,
To cure his Jealousy he thus plays least in sight,
And to observe you does pretend this Journey;
But since you are thus constant to him still,
Fear not his leaving you:
And should you of his Love want other proofs,
Let this suffice, that he is Jealous grown,
With a seeming coldness,
Or neglect perhaps he may dissemble
A while, but let it not disquiet you,
For 'tis you he loves, I say again,
And passionately.

Pleasing hopes! comfortable assurance?
Pardon dear Bellamy if without Cause
I questioned thus thy faith; if Jealousy
Must prove thy Love, let my fears assure thee of mine,
I feared to loose but what I love to keep.
The heavens, kind Endimion, power as many
Blessings on you, as y'have assured me of.

She pays you in your own coin; as you have
Pleased her with an assurance of nothing,
She requites you with a wish of as much.

'Tis as believing a good Soul
As you'd wish to preach to.

And as well satisfied y'have sent her away,
Her heart I dare swear's as light as her head.

Her request did not much fright me this bout,
I knew that for a few fair words I should
Be rid of her credulous Ladieship.

But how intend you to make good your word
To Gratian? it seems already broke by
The hopes y'have given Celia.

Why perceive you not those hopes are airy
Nothings with which I flatter her forwardness
To be fooled? I know Clarinda
Has Bellamy too fast, to think
He ever will be Celia's, and this knowledge
Made me speak my own belief to Gratian.

Nay, he believes you too, and looks on me
His Introducer t'ee, as bound in honour for your performance,
Yet how you will, or can, I'm still to seek.

In Love you are indeed.
Would you not judge else, that Celia
Needs must see at last how Bellamy fools her,
That she'll grow weary of being thus abused?
If your friend then prove constant and persevere;
Will not his services reach her heart in the end?
Now if he give my art the honour of an
Event, is due to his own industry
And the common Course of things,
The stars be praised for it,
But now we are free from these fortune seekers,
Let's breath a while, and talk of something else.

Not so free as you think neither; here's one --

Is worse then twenty Celia's.

Master Endimion.

Oh Sir! what wind blows you hither?

An ill wind sure.

I thought so.

But you will make it take about, and blow
Every one their own again, I must entreat
One Courtesy of you, kind Gentleman.

What is it?

Excuse my boldness if I deal thus freely with you, and come to the point
without any further compliment or preamble, I use no Ceremony amongst friends?


I commend you for it, a civil freedom is much better.

The loss of a certain Diamond has caused great disorder at home, my servants
are suspected, and the whole family being in disturbance about it, my humble
request is, you'll help me to set the saddle on the right ho^se, that is you'll
cast a figure for it, and tell who has it.


The old Man comes in very good time to


I must break all commerce with it,
The cheer s too gross to last above a day;
I ever told you so.

He's musing on my request now.

The trade he drives requires great recollection, 'tis a speculative trade, and
I have often seen him on such occasions in so deep a study, you'd think the
soul did quite forsake the body, 'tis lest so void of action.


He had more need to set all wheels awork, he must climb up to the heavens for
my ring, he'll ne'er find it here below else.


I am not quit now for gulling an Amorous Maid, and will discover my ignorance
as soon as I pretend to knowledge. No, no, 'tis my own undoing to


See but what pains he takes.

He's about your business all this while.

He begins to look something seriously upon the matter.


Having no Interest to delude you, Sir;
I must confess there is much more believed,
Or said of me, then I deserve: 'tis true,
I have read something of Astrology,
And viewed the grounds your Artists work upon,
Which makes some talking friends boast they have seen
Experiments beyond the common, though indeed
I ne'er gave the least sign of a skill, they
Needs will force upon me, unless in words
Sometimes, yet sparingly, when their Example
Forced a compliance: but with you
I protest again, the reputation
This fiction gets me, nor all the merry
Consequences of it, can ne'er force me
To such forgery; as for your Diamond then,
In vain expect you tidings of't from me,
'Tis out of my reach believe it, Sir.

He will fall to his natural Level
Of ignorance, I see, do what we can.

And yet he cannot resolve to confess himself
An Impostor neither; he minces it a little.

Did I not know by the report of others, you are this day the Phoenix of
Astrologers; this very humility with which you depress you abilities, would
raise you in my Esteem above the common rank of Scholars.


Leave an opinion, I m not so happy
To deserve, I know nothing in the stars.

Who could forbear laughing at this old fellow,


This very earnestness with which you decline
The title of a knowing Man, tells me
Tis your due, and confirms me more and more
In the belief of your capacity.
Thus modest, thus discreet are they always
Who know much, nor will they, by assuming
Worth unto themselves, derogate from what
They do deserve, or by such gross Vanity
Eclipse the Lustre of their rare Endowments.

Our Astrologer has a fine time on it.

You wish your self in his place, I warrant.

No, no, I have my share of the pass-time,
Where I am.

Were I indeed the Man you take me for,
Though I had reason to conceal my self from others,
Here I would yield my interest up to yours,
And with candour lay open all my skill,
But I have none, none at all to merit
The honour you do me.

I tell you again, that this humility alone is more commendable in you, then
all your learning; he that knows most knows himself too well to be proud of
what he knows, he sees too much daily to learn, to think that much he has
already learnt: and thus what art soever one pretend to, he that dares boast
himself a Master of it, knows nothing in it at all.


Liars, they say, loose credit even for the few truths they utter; but mine is
a stranger punishment, when I lied I was credited; and now I speak truth, I
cannot win belief.


But to come to my ring again, I must tell you (if that be a necessary
Circumstance* 'twas a gift of my poor Wife's, for whose sake I long kept it,
till at last Clarinda got it of me, and she bas lost it this morning, as she
thinks, 'twixt eight and nine.


You shall have the other too at night, Sir.
Hark hither, this is but a pretext.

Why makes he so fine of it?

He's afraid perhaps of being suspected of Witchcraft; 'tis a detracting age,
and he had need be cautious.


He's over-nice with me, I can keep Counsel, and would conceal what were not
fit for every Ear.


This did Beatrix tell me just now.

The intelligence comes luckily, I was caught else.
Pardon the freedom, Sir, I take, to leave you
For an account of business I had sent
My man about, I should not trespass thus,
But that it did require some hast.

Would you had trespassed, that you might expiate it With the Courtesy I
request.


I am provided for him now,
And since he has a mind to 't, have at him;
Had I but skill enough.

Skill enough for a ring? away, away;
There's nothing easier, then to help one again to such a toy as that, I could
have don't my self at your years:


I must yield by degrees, he'll suspect me,
If I pass suddenly from one extreme
To another. Sir, I protest again
Without dissimulation --

Without dissimulation, or procrastination,
Good Sir, tell me to my ring again;
For I know you can, if you list now?

I did but spare you some trouble, declining
Thus to tell you what I find;
But since you needs will have it,

Tell me, tell me, 'tshall ne'er trouble me, I warrant you.


He that this morning saluted you in
A riding garb, is the Man; he has it.

Who would have suspected him of all the world? that a Man of his birth and
breeding should play such pranks, Necessity perhaps drives him to it;

And that We know having no Law it self, makes those that feel it, Lawless too.
You see Endimion, how much in vain you go about to hide that, which in your
very looks I read; when once, I say, That Man's a Wit, a Scholar, he's one
indeed. But fare you well Sir, I'll go after my ring.


You stuck scurvily, till Shift helped you out.

Never more, I swear; I knew not what shift to make.

'Twas well for you there was one made to your hand.

Marry, was it.

But what if he fall out with Bellamy now,
As having stolen his ring?

Nay, what if he charge him with felony?

And the Constable with him?

That were a jest indeed.

What matter whether he take him for a son-in-law, or a thief, 'tis much at
one; both lye at the catch for the old Man's Money, both (if 'tis not otherways
to be had) watch his death for it.


Though hitherto the sport does mainly thrive;
Checked by no obstacle but such, as the
Removal of, turns to increase of mirth,
I'm weary of a trade I ne'er was apprentice to;
To leave it then with credit as I drive
It on, since the persuasion of my
Knowledge makes this old Man believe
What e're I say, I'll work on his facility
To a noble end, and far from Jealous
Of a Rivall's fortune, will crown his Love
With the good Knight's allowance of Clarinda's.

Hey day! all this bustle for a Willow Garland?

If I must wear one, I will have added to it, both Groom and Bride's free and
grateful acknowledgment, 'tis I unite them, and that to my pretended skill
in the stars they owe their happiness.

But who have we here? a new Consulter?


An old one, I think.

Nay! We have more Chamber-practice then half the Lawyers in town; yet the
devil a fee or feeling I get amongst all our Clients:


This 'tis to serve a Generous Gentleman.


That does all for God-a-mercy, and the credit of doing it, and cries a good
deed carries its own reward along with it.


Peace Preacher.


Prithee what old Don is it?


'Tis a Monsieur, Man, has served Sr Christopher Credulous ever since his
travels, he brought him a young fellow out of France with him, Monsieur
La-gripe.


A griping Sir, I warrant him,

Ah Monsieur de Astrologue.

Monsieur La-gripe.

For Clarinda sake, Clarinda our common Mistress


Has he not made it good?

Not good English, Sir.

Good Pedlar's French, Sir, and that's better for Variety.

Hear out his story.

If I did dare pray you of one faueur.

What is it?

Very small petite chose, de no tingue.

But what? I'll do any thing for thee, honest Monsieur,

Do that den, I pray you.

That? what? I will and I can.

Oh if you can; Vraiment it is no if's nor Ans.

Can I unless you tell me what you would have done?

No laugh at me, one poor old French man, pourquoy demand Vat, Ven you can as
Vell tell, Var I say have done, as you can do.


May be so too.

Vat you tinke me no know Vat you can do? as if me no hear my old Master, my
fellow Beatrige, and all te town besides talk of you.


But do you hear I can know another
Thought without his intimation?

I hear no intimation; Vat I hear, I know;
I no know dat.

Can a man divine your meaning?

Divine my mean? you look in my visage, you know all, and yet I tell you
notingue; you be no man to tell long story to; therefore no ask me Vat I
uould, but do vat I uoude.


I shall be hard enough for thee yet, old fox.
'Tis not with thee Monsieur I would dissemble
My knowledge or my power; such palliations
Of an unkind repulse derogate --

Ah Monsieur! no hard words, I pray you, Pallashons! de gros cat! Vat te devil
is dat to me? Plain English is hard enough for me, I promise you. How you think
I entend dose sayings? I have no devell but thirty years in dis Contry.


Why, plainly thus then; I know what brought thee hither, and what thou wilt
request of me!


Oh, oh! look you dere den! me know very vell vat I say, I varrant's you; me no
drunk.


But soft: though I do, I must not tell, nor use that knowledge for ought thou
seekst of me, the reason's this; I can do but one thing for thee at a time: if
then to read or tell thy thought be it, never expect me serviceable to the
procurement of that wish, that is a second act, my hands are tied from at this
t me.


Nay den, me tell you.

Discover his wish to day, and help him to it to morrow. Where were you now Sir,
if my Monsieur should come upon you thus?


A French man, and stay till to morrow? That's a thing was never heard of;
delays are not for them, they ne'er got by 'em.


I be quite tired out uitte service here in England, tired as one Jade,
uerefore me have a great mind, to return to me own poor Contry again, to lay it
my bones at home, and te money me scrape up in dis; but begare it be one very
Long Journey, and very dangerous too, danger upon te Sea, danger upon te Eaise;
I be rob here or dere, no like dat very uell, be killed, assassined, or drown
in te sea, begare like that very uorse: an dat is te reason I come pray you, to
secure my personne, and my purse, by some Enshantement, I no know how, to
transport me at my home in one minute.


Oh Excellent Monsieur!

You see by this what they think of me


And so become a wise man by fancying


As, they say, they do Witches, by strongly conceiting themselves Witches,


I have skill enough for this feat without my Master's meddling in it, I'll
convey thee into France.


Prepare your self against night, Monsieur for the Journey; Shift shall be
ready too with what on our part is necessary.


I no dare trust him, little Coquin delny,
Play me some tricque or toder.

No, no; his fellow Rawman there shall go
Along too, and see fair play. Let's leave 'em
To their work, and laugh at him a little.

Mister sirrah, do for me vat must be done
Fair and honest, your Master command;
You meddell in dis business de juggle too den.

I'm half a Conjurer, since I serve him,
And yet I came to him but a Rawman the other day.

An he parboil your Coxcomb?

Pickle him a little in the black art, or so.

Indeed? but is he so knoing, tey say?

Hear him talk of a Man
You'd think he had bin in his belley,
He's so acquainted with every cranie of his heart.

I no please me serve souche Master, a
Valet no pass vell his time vit him.

Why? I have a good place on it.

Place Vat you Will, I no be bound serve one,
I no dare tell lye to sometime.

'Tis somewhat a hard case, but it must be so here.

If he send you of arrant, you stay a great vile, you no dare make excuse;
extend what I mean by excuse? Sh. Ouy, ouy.


I meet a friend by de Vay, I stay trink vit him a little, one, two, three,
four hours (dat I learn in England tough) one no dare tell souche Man,
Monsieur, make me stay for one answer, yet Company come, no can write; or I
cherche him in several places, before I find: call at te tailleur's, see your
suit be make. An oder Man satisfy vit one of tese, he know te contrary, he no
satisfy vit 'tis nor notingue else, Vich de fear of put away, or receive
distribution -- you understand.


Ouy, ouy. La-g. on te head and shoulders put in one Mouse; you no dare go to
de Cabaret, Ven he at the Comedy, nor make good shear vit the Maids at home;
no, nor go to one bordell, Vile he at an oder.


Unless I knew he had such great business in hand, as lest him no leisure to
think of me.


And so I say again, me rader beg, steal, do any hardeship, ten serve one
Master, I no dare tell lye to.


This necessity of speaking truth was something hard to me too at first, but I
was forced to betake my self to it, and use, thou know, brings perfectness.


Dou dare not, (tough among discreet bodies, dat will keep Counsel) tell tales
of him, or recount his secrets.


No marry, dare I not; secrecy is that he chiefly requires of a servant.


And vat is vorse, if loosing his money, or some todre ill humeur, make him
Choleric, an he Vell-come you home Vit Coups de pied.


How now? La-g. or one good soufflet, or two.

Nay, nay; one's enough.

Dere is no complaining, 'tis so mouche for you; and fear of more, you must
bite your tongue, and swallow your choler, as they say in my Country.


I, sure enough.

Vat Consolation 'tis Monsieur Sift to swear and curse at souche Master? my
bones no ache more* Ven mong my Camarades, I can give him heartily to all te
devils.


I have got the length of his foot now,
And seldom am in this predicament.

Besides he's good conditioned.

Good or bad, one fair morning I vould
Pack up my nawles and be gone for all date.

Would not he know my mind, and so prevent me, had I any such intention?


Vhy dere's todre ting I no speak. You no dare run vaye neither, no dare think
of it, nor find one oder Master in secret, if dis fall out vis you.


'Tis a common trick indeed of servants, that grow weary of one Master, to
have another in reserve:


Like Women who (for fear of wanting) provide a second husband, before the
first be dead; but that Providence We are debarred of too.


An odre incommodite I no reckon, an te gran incommodite of all; how you pick
up money in 'tis service? a Man get no more but bare vages? Pewh! it is no
Vorth Vile, I should be sorry to rob any body; begarre I make conscience of
dat: but if Largent go torow my hands, 'tis like meal, flower, Vat you call?
someting stick, stick still to de fingers.


Ah sirrah! you go snip in your Master's money then, you take toll, you black
Miller, you, you more Vnavoidable thief then his Worship's tailor.


You make a Conscience of robbing, but you filch, you pilfer* you purloin
unmercifully.


Thou hast a fine time on it, that we want; and Enjoy'st a revenue, We dare not
pretend to.


My Master hates theft beyond imagination, and I think that for a Tester
(merciless as he is) he could find in's heart to have us taught to dance in a
rope.


I'm sorry for thy sake thou came to him, since thou art given that way; for
finding it out (as doubtless he would by thy looks) he may very well tell thy
Master.


Tell my Master? oh me lost, me lost! vat I do?

Why, thy worst is but to be hanged.

And is no dat bad enofe, my friend?

Perhaps thou may be quit for a singing
Or so: thou can read?

Yes, yes; if he did need to know one name, to tell one's fortune, or doings,
den me attrappe him very vell, for La-gripe no me true name, me take datte,
because me Vould gripe vell good moneys here, and leave my own name Vit my
Country, for one blow I do, how you call? a ting, Vich make me leave France;
I no come into England, no, vitte Sr Christophore else.


Though he could not; yet knowing our names y'have told all this to, he cannot
when his list but know what has past amongst us.


How could he else discover to the full what concerns him, or me: thou shalt
find no ease on that side neither.


No, no; We will keep his fears up to the height still.

Dat very true too; but my good Sift, if it be possible, make he no tell.


Hast thou filcht soundly?

Not mouch at a time.

But often?

Teuenty or tirty a monts, but little, little every one, dat he no find: you
call at Sessions Petty Larcenie.


Then a whipping perchance may serve.

A Vippingue? vhy many little tefts no amount to a great teft.


But they make thee a great thief;
And may mount thee to the gallows.

Saving that, I know no way but one.

Oh good Sift, tell dat toder vay, I take dat rader.

My Master's head's so full now thou may get out of town, and he ne'er mind
thee; go thy ways then presently, and pack up; if the old Knight should hear
of thy pranks, he'll not send into France after thee.


If I be dere once, I no care dis for him; but I no dere yet.


Fetch but thy things, We will set thee going.

'Tis great vay.

Were it further yet, We will have thee thither to day.

But thou must be well provided against the cold; there blow certain winds at
Sea, thou wilt not like.


Vat? at Mid-summer?

I; as hot as 'tis at Land.

That's the only inconvenience of the Journey,
But thou'lt be over in a hour or two.

I fear no Vindes nor Veader; I fear my Master more, and dine too: but how I
be carried?


At ease, as e're thou were.

Meet me in thy Master's garden,
I'll be there presently.

Let it be no long present, nor no perhaps.

Be you but ready.

If you no come, me very angry.

I will come, I tell thee.

He's of the house of the Credulous too:

In the Lime already, boy.

There let him flutter.

BEllamy, I have been seeking you;

Me Sir? I have my wish if I can serve you;
Lay your commands upon me.

A Courteous Gentleman, and a handsome one!
Who would take him for a Pick-pocket now
By his looks? but fronti nulla sides.

What means he talking to himself to eye
Me thus? has he already discovered
Our Love, the art We used to hide it too?
Cruel fates! so speedy in your malice?

Foolish man that I am! I can scarce find in my


How soon are all my hopes blasted?

How he is struck? his very Countenance pleads guilty.

This the fair success I flattered my self with?

I do not say, Bellamy, you are faulty,
But the party you have it by.

With what obstinacy are we persecuted?

Trouble not your self; 'tis the hand alone
You have it from is guilty;
You are otherwise justifiable enough.

I have the Diamond, Sir, I can't denie't,
And here am ready to restore it you.
You're prepossessed, I fear, by some, with a
False story of the means I wrought it by;
But if truth may be heard, as sure it ought
In spite of their insinuations, the guilt
Is all mine, I have no Accomplices;
Rather die, then Peach Clarinda.

I seek to excuse him, and he fondly accuses himself

Let's clear her, all we can. I tell you, Sir,
What e're y'have heard, I am in all the fault,
Nor do I plead ought to attenuate. --

How strangely does a guilty Conscience wring him?
I palliate his fault, he exaggerates it.

I seek not therefore to attenuate
A Crime, which when I first designed. --

I am not ignorant of the Fact, Bellamy, set no misseeming gloss upon it, I know
the naked truth; but though I do, the knowledge of it shall not hurt you.


There's no dissembling with you then;
Plain-dealing, now is best I do confess. --

Oh, Do you so, Sir? Do you so? but look to it another time; for, Confess and be
hanged, Do ye mark? that's the Word.


I do confess my furtive actions then,
My Stealth, my Clandestine approaches, and
The surprise* of a Jewel, which I see,
I am in your opinion too
Unworthy of: 'tis true, I am too bold,
Nor can I ought in my defence now plead:
'Twas the predominance of some ill Star
I'll say, since it brings your displeasure,
Forced me to what is past.

I am not so severe a Judge neither;
I have been young my self, and can not now
Be ignorant what youth is subject to;
And some occasions seem to force our will,
Such powerful allurements they tempt it with.

Yet though my indesert seem to forbid
All hope of pardon, by your own goodness
Sir, I dare Conjure you. --

Yes, yes, I am merciful, I tell you,
And can excuse: having my Ring too, I
May hold my peace; 'tis an ordinary course
When a Man has his Good's again,
To wave the prosecution.

I must not lose this opportunity,
I shall not take him in the mood again.
Since you with so much goodness can excuse,
Be good still, Sir, and to justify me
Thoroughly, Authorize my crime,
And give Clarinda leave
To crown my passion with approved consent;
Permit me, Sir, to Marry her.

Marry my Daughter? for what acquaintance troe?
The Man's mad sure, or I am mad my self;
He thinks me so at least, he'd ne'er talk thus else.

Though my means are small, I have a heart yet,
No frowning fortune, no adversity
Can bring under; and am of a Family
From which some richer ones may receive no
Small lust^e; look on me then, Sir, with eyes
Not inte^ss'd, or greedy of more wealth;
And you will see no cause to scorn the alliance.

I^ cannot be in earnest sure all this,
Or with the least thought of persuading me:
Finding some danger in the Trade of Cut-Purse,
He's now fallen to, he will grow wise, and take
I^p^a^ my cost for which purpose he must
Needs marry my Daughter forsooth; this is
One of the finest Fools.

He's something long-a-considering on it.

Let him steal, let him pick, let him cut, as many Pardonnez moy, Monsieur;
well, Bellamy, I promise you, what ever you have said.


Your Daughter, Sir?

Secrecy, Sir, secrecy; I'll keep your Counsel,
And that's no small courtesy, I hope.

Was ever Man in such a maze as I?
His fav'rable construction of what's past,
Seems to invite a full Confession:
And when he knows my passion for his daughter,
He promises secrecy, and cries, he
Will keep Counsel. 'Tis the crossest this of
All my cross fortunes.
This importune Woman is another;
Let's give her the slip.

Stay, Bellamy, and be civil at least,
If you cannot be kind.
Is that heart then I have so long thought mine
An others Captive now?
Inconstancy and breach of Faith, it seems,
Are pleasing grown to him, so often Vowed
The Virtues contrary; the change it self
Is ordinary enough, nor am I
The first forsaken she.
But yet to shun a sight, you once
Swore, pleased you 'bove all others, is too strong
An effect, methinks, of a new passion;
'Tis past indifferency this, even to scorn;
You might remember that you loved me once.

Say, I esteemed you, Madam: Love
In the respects I paid you, had least share;
My obligations t'ee were great,
And so I strove to bear a mind
Full of resentments for your noble favours,
A grateful, though not passionate heart.
But 'tis no time for such disguises now,
'Tis fit each action wear it's proper name,
Own it's true motive;
Lay your credulity then aside,
For love has bound me in those fetters now,
Must ne'er be cut but with my thread of life.

With what art this studied declaration
In such ambiguous terms is couched,
It may be made for me as for another?
He neither named Celia, nor Clarinda.

'Tis as plain though, he means her, as if he had.

But you are so credulous, as he tells you.

This night I waited on you by your own appoinment, what my reception was, you
cannot have forgot, the affront was to premeditate; you could not afford me one
serious word, no, nor your ear a minute: think not the return I make you
strange then, nor wonder, that I shun you now, as you did me; t'was your
command I should, and I obey you, Madam.


He's in love w'ee, you will believe it still?

He does, he does love me, I tell thee, strangely.

'Tis strangely indeed, if he loves at all;
And as strangely he shows it.

'Tis but a trial when he slights me thus,
'Tis then he loves me passionately;
This sense of my odd carriage in the night
Is most becoming, and I take it kindly:
We're indifferent to him, he would mind it less,
Loving me, as he does, he must resent it thus.

With an other, you see, he does himself
Confess he is in love.

For trial still, I tell thee, he affects
Inconstancy, as he does scorn;
And for revenge perphaps a little too
He seeks to vex me thus; all's dissembling,
Nor does he strive to make me Jealous, but
To discover at full the kindness I have
For him; 'tis that, I see, he aims at,
Endimion told me 'twould be so.

Nay, for him, he's a cheat, I'm sure, what ever the other be.


He has abused you, Madam, all-a-long,
His predictions are mere fictions,
Mere impostures.
You might (but that you were before you spoke with him, strangely persuaded of
his skill) have seen it in his whole proceeding.


He but deludes you with vain hopes,
Bellamy does forsake you.

Can you be ignorant he adores Clarinda?

Gratian assures you of it too.

I trust not to what Gratian says; he has
Cast off all thoughts of friendship, and without
The least regard to Bellamy, or his love,
Is hourly troubling me with his own,
You see he is.
I give no credit to a Rivall's story.
For whatso're of Bellamy he says,
I've cause to fear, but reason still to doubt.

Rather believe him, Madam; for you'll find
Gratians Story is a true one. His love
Though violent, can hear some reason yet,
And keep within the bounds of honour; think
Not then, he seeks by treachery to win you,
By base suggestions to supplant his friend.

While I thought him worthy of you,
Or could on any grounds believe him yours,
What did I, Madam, or what said I, to
Cross your fair affections?
I was all friend then, moved not one step
Out of my Confident's path, for him was
All I spoke, my own cause I pleaded but
With silence, allow'd it not the least complaint,
But what was fair from reaching him, or you;
Or if some time a sudden sigh broke through
The care I used to keep 'em in, how soon
Like to some blusht-at, or unlawful issue,
Did I disavow it, nay, lay it to
Another? but the concealment
Of my sufferings and his injuries t'ee,
Would not a kindness now to Bellamy prove
That false Bellamy?

How loath am I yet to believe him such?
Can he be false to Celia, that thought so
Well of him? She that so truly loved him?

'Tis strange a heart once yours, should ever own
An other Conqueror: but he is false, false
To the fairest Celia, false, as miserable
In this Exchange.

Bellamy forsakes me?

Perhaps 'tis with regret, a sharp remorse
Perhaps poisons all the sweets he leaves you Sir
Yet he forsakes you still; and with his own
Consent I tell you so.

And 'tis Clarinda
Robs me of this beloved Perjurer?

But now We left him at Sr Christopher's.

And least we should mistake him any longer
Gratian, (cried he to me, as he went in)
I know your passion, and cease t'oppose it,
I quit all claim to Celia; for if love
Have happiness for me, 'tis in Clarinda's Arms.

May I believe all this?

A greater truth ne'er challenged your belief.

Alas! he never left the town, but lurked
At my house for private meetings
With Clarinda, whom he saw night by night.
A truth though, no Interest of my own
Had e're extorted, did not yours claim it,
And his allowance Manumize the secret.

No more; my doubt is over, and the mist
Love cast before my eyes thus vanished, more
Hatesul, as more hated does he appear,
Then ever he seemed lovely, nor was my
Affection ever half so strong, as now
My anger is* Gratian, do you love me?

Oh Madam!

How can I ever believe Man again,
When Bellamy is false? yet follow me,
If your affection be sincere, as you
Protest; Celia is yours; but bring me to
Clarinda's, and make my own eyes witness
His crime, that I may do you Justice there
Before his face; serve my anger so far,
And second the revenge I do intend,
That he may see himself forsaken, as he
Forsakes, and there (if I may have my wish)
Shall he repent his perjury,

That I believe too.

Yet all in vain.
Lost to all hopes of e're recovering
What he so basely does renounce; there let
Him pine to find me in another arms,
And without hopes of either Mistress, see
Clarinda scorn him, as he now does me.

A fine humour this, Luce;

An 'twould hold.

Oh, it must hold.

Whether Love will or no?

A Dieu, London, adieu; I go see my own natural Contree again: an France be
ne'er so bad, or England so good, better be alive dere, den hang here.


How now, art ready?

Dou see, te good Capotte, Vit my bottes ala Candalle


'Tis well, 'tis well, thou hast clad thy self warm; the Journey's something
bleak, as I told thee.


I putt tis hood over my face, for fear te cold, and some todre ting make me
loose my nose quite.


I think indeed 'tis something loose set on.

Zymar, Haly, Behemoth, Albenzera.
Get into this Circle.

Vat dou Mumble, mumble in te teeth?
Say te devils Pater noster, I tinke.

Words of art, words of art: but 'tis done already. Thou must be hoodwinked
now.


Pourquoy?

There are reasons for it, I warrant you.

Your Jockeys, I hear say, ride temself blind,
But for uate I be make blind, before I ride.

With the great light, and that prodigious height thou wilt be mounted to thy
eyes would be dazzled, and thou giddily come tumbling down.


Who knows too how near thou may come to the Sun, thy Lids would not save
'em from scorching then, nor the distillations still overflowing quench the
fire.


That briny dew would add more fury to it.

Then thy nose would melt off indeed,
But this muffler saves all.

Indeed me have grand distraction, to see all te World at one time, I can no
hinder my self from be peeping in every corner; I tinkue I mind me business
better, and see noting, deresore blind me, I am content: but how I ride? Vat
be carried on? uere dat?


I need but whistle, and 'tis here.

Is it a saddel horse, or one Coche?

No, no; a pad-nag.

A bad nag? begare me uill have a good nag, or no go at all your Vay.


Thou shalt have a good one;
I say, a pad-nag, a fine gentle pacer.

Oh cry you mercy, Understand now; my Master ride souche one himself, 'tis
very easy for us old Men: but Vho be my guide? Vat if I loose my vaie? it
very like; for I no travel dat rode before.


There's a question indeed! thou shalt have a little Orengetawny devil to
lackey by thy side.


A devil lackey? I no hear of souch before.


Why, half the lackeys about the town are devils, Man, and in thy Country they
are ten times worse.


Dat's true indeed; but I always hear say, te devil very proud, and think he no
take so mean place.


Some of 'em I grant are above it, but there are enough to supply all places, and
he will put on any shape, rather then not make one.


Which is to play at small game, rather then sit out.


Shall I tell thee? there are devils of all functions and qualities, trades and
callings whatsoever.


Alas, the Mystery of every trade is knavery,
And that leads directly to him.
There are Sergeants, and Bailiff-divils.

And divillishly are they used, when they meddle with a guard-man, or any of
the Boulley Rocks indeed.


Some neat, dapper, well-handed fiends are cut out into Barbers, Tire-women,
and Valets de chambre;


Of which there come such shoules out of thy Country:

Your nimbler handed ones make Tailors, and Weavers.

Thieving devils: he devils, and she devils.

Vat Woman devils?

Oh sans nombre: and they make cuckolds.

Te devil Cuckold too?

How should he come by his horns else?

And for more fiendly variety, there are sage devils, and mad devils; hectoring
devils, and cowardly devils; quaking devils --


Yes, in frost and snoe; I have bin such one my self, before I come to good
Anglish Cole fires.


But these quake now, at Midsummer.

Begare trow 'em in te river, and make
Quake for some ting.

Come, thou stay a devilish while here,
'Tis time thou were goue.

There are water-devils too; but those we call dippers.

Rumpers and thumpers. Raw. Zealous and impious.

Precise and profane.

Merry devils, and very devils, commonly known by the name of Phanaticks.


But thine's come; get up, get up.


Oh undo, undo; I see if mine be a horned devil; your men Cuckolds hide teir
horn so, you no see a great manies; I long to see how te devil wear his.


'Twere worth seeing indeed: but let every Cuckold wear his own horns, and as
he pleas himself: this is a bachelor devil; one though that having no apes to
lead in hell, comes to lead a baboon into France.


Vat's dat? Vat's dat? I have great Curiosity
To look him in face.

Take heed, 'tis dangerous; he has a more dreadful countenance ten times then
thy old Master.


Gar, and he one I no mouche care for see now.

'^is sufficient he conduct thee into France;
Then see him, and spare not.

I look him out of Countenance, Ven I am dere.

Come, get up, get up.

Vell Monsieur te devil, do not quit me, Ven you get me in one strange
place, bring me safe in my country, and den I can do vell enof vit out you.


Ne'er fear him, he'll not leave thee so,
Thou art too good a bit for him.

For Vat you tie so hard, Master Sift?
is it you, or te devil?

He's afraid thou wilt slip from him.

No, no, I varrant's you, if he no run
Way from me.

If he does, ride after him;
Thou art damnably well mounted.

Is't easier now?

I, I, now 'tis vell; but vho untie me, Vhen I come home, I can no do it my
self, I no see.


It shall be done to thy hand,
When thou art at thy Journey's end.

O Sift, Sift, I forgot; Will tis Jade carry in crouper, Vat you call in
England? double, double, carry double?


Why doe'st ask?


I take my felloe Beatrige along Vit me, she ride behind; very good company
for te devil, and for me too, very good in te vay.


Yes, too good for thee, old Jew; what ride double?


Vell, vell, 'tis no matter; I get an odre in France.


By this token know thou art within ken; a doleful Voice thou shalt first hear;
at thy arrival, wrangling or confused talk, then louder Lamentations; but fare
thee well, set forward.


Commend us to our friends in Paris.

Yes, yes; dat I will.

Adieu, Monsieur La-gripe, adieu.

Adieu, La-gripe, adieu; with what speed thou fly?

How he cleaves the air? he's gone, hes gone;
I can scarce discern him now.

I do perceive I fly very fast indeed, for now I hardly hear teir Voice, my
Ears take but te last Accents, as of one very remote.


A right Frenchman! bread in's pocket;

Where's the Cheeze?

Oh, that's at his Toes to haut-goust.

Which he calls refining.

I be in France presant, I drink good Claret Vine, pure, pure; no mingle
mangle, red and white, as here in England.


Do, fuddle thy Nose, and if they pick thy pocket I'll pay the reckoning.


I take Sift for one little Quenave,
And he prove honest little Fellow.

Yes, I warrant you.

Rawman too, very well versed, experienced --

In thy Pockets.

Te beast tey set me upon, go as easy
Too, as no stir at all.

If it does, they are mistaken.

No shake, shake me; need no spur neither.

The ill mannered Jade would hardly answer to it.

I be as still as in me Bed, sure I very good Horseman.


For the Woodden-Horse.

I no loose in te Saddel.

Nor in the Hilts?

'Tis very wholesome air, I grow very hungry.

You stuffed your Pockets, as if you'd known you should --


But Vat Find tis? stinking Find too,
Tell me dere blow,
One Find very cold, and so 'tis indeed,
I see he know all tings in te vay, as
He go it himself.

An other gale, an other gale.

Te Find turn; sure my Beard freeze wit tis blow, blow. I fear my Nose too for
all tis good Capotte, I no dare feel how tis neither.


There's company come in to the garden,
We must away.

Jog on, jog on good Antiquity.

You're almost at your Journeys end.

Discovered already? So soon betrayed
Unto my Fathers knowledge?
What hard fates, Bellamy, attend our Loves?

You stand yet* blameless in your Father's eye;
I wholly drew the Crime upon my self,
And rather chose to pass for a suborner,
Then you should forward seem, in the disposal
Of that he claims it is his right to give.

No, no; We do but fool our selves with hopes,
There is no ground left for that self-flatterie.

Soon as he taxed me with the Ring, I rendered it,
That precious pledge of thy unmatched affection:
Let not thy grief precede our misery though,
He neither showed, nor threatened any rigour,
He spoke but in his wonted tone, rather
Amazed then angry, and used me (trust me
Sweet he did) with much mildness still; and seemed
(By arguing the business with himself)
Something irresolute what course to take;
And I dare hope, if from thy self he hear
Thou doest affect me, it may incline him
To allow thy choice.

I that will do it, I'll dry my eyes again,
We will ne'er be wretched sure, when speaking truth
Can make us happy. If this may win him,
Clarinda's yours; once more I tell you so.

What grief is proof against this joy?
Or what misery has a name, which these words
Clarinda's mine, would not charm into happiness?

I'm yours for ever, or no Man's; he that can debarr me of this felicity,
shall not add to my affliction, being an others.


Such bliss in silence still is best received,
I want words to give full thanks.

I understand some noise of Tongues, some People talking a great way of, sure I
ride over some great City; Is it Canterbury? no, no, I hope I be pass te Seas.


How now? Is there any body come in?


Oh yes, Sir Christopher, and the Astrologer forsooth; he's no body without him
now: he was wont to dote upon wealth, and then our House was nothing but
Aldermen, and Citizens, that write themselves Esquire, and Country Knights,
that never came to Town, but for a new Purchase: but that fit's over now, and
learning is his babble.


They interupt us too soon, I would not
Have him see you yet, Endimion being with him too.

Can I not slip out?

No, I know his walks, he uses at his entrance to take that, should now lead
you out; but step aside, in the close walk he'll not discover you: and there, if
boldly speaking in our cause may carry it, you'll hear me plead for you as you
were here your self.


You are all goodness, Madam.

Good Devil, look to me, if I be at Sea, for I can no swim.


A most delicious garden this!

'Tis my Whore, Sir, 'tis my Whore;
Here I delight, and consume my self.

That's even a Whore's trick indeed

Here, Clarinda, here's thy Ring again.

Must I endure that object in my Eye?

What so coy, Mistress? Will you not parley unveiled?


The Sun's too hot, Sir, I never walk in it
Without my Hood, I shall be tanned.

And you be, and you be, 'tis but one


I longed to see how Clarinda did behave her


She's too much discomposed;

She is, and I too well revenged; I pity her.

'Tis not a civil welcome this, of a person thou art so lately, and so much
obliged too; 'tis to him thou art engaged for the recovery of thy Ring; I
thought thou would have slown into his arms, had helped thee to it again,
thou were so lost for want of it.


Gladly into his, that had it.

Your Father, Madam, is pleased to name an Obligation So slight, I dare not
think it one.


'Tis one indeed, she con's you little thanks.

But if kind Heaven prosper what I intend,
A solid and important service shall
Prove the Zeal I have to please you.

You have already, Sir, obliged me, more
Then I can thank you for.

By te different noises I find I pass from place to place; and now I think I am
at Calais; gar te Steeples, if I be.


Here's more Company, What Lady's that? or what would she?
She looks with an earnest, and a busy face.

With an angry one, methinks.

'Tis a pretty little angry Rogue,
Would I had the pleasing of her.

You please her? please me? and hear the Lady.

Wonder not Sir, at so abrupt a visit,
I come for Justice t'ee; We are both wronged,
Both abused by one unconstant Man; one
That when a thousand Oaths had made him mine,
Your Daughter has stolen from me; nay, start not,
She loves him infinitely; he ne'er had left
Me for an unkind one, no, no they burn
In mutual flames; and in your house, or Garden
Is he now concealed, now, this very minute:
Do me reason then, and your self Justice.

I wish he be here, for I begin to fear,
Finding Clarinda without him.

Sure tis is te doleful Voice, te lamentation; good sign, good sign, I be
almost come home.


How! a man hidden in my house? a plot, a plot; fetch me my rapier there, I'll
poak him out of his hole; a plot upon my daughter.


Your daughter's plot upon you rather.

'Tis an increase of misery this, I never feared;
She's very handsome; what then? nay, I think
Bellamy did love her once; no matter:
Coming just in the nick too, when he is here,
Silence my Jealousy,
I've trouble enough without thee.

Pox of this bussle, 'twill land our Travellour too soon.

My father, I hope, suspects not me
In any close contrivance --

Nay, nay, 'tis best for you be clear; I will think well of thee so long as I
may; but if thou be faulty, th hast lost a f iend of me: I le rage no
higher, till I see th'accusation proved.


Poor Clarinda!
With what increase of trouble I see thine?

They are all to pieces now indeed.

I have a soder for em yet.

I am come home sure, I hear such confused tones, and lamentable voices.


Come, Madam, first let's make the garden sure,
This way -- hah! what have we here?
This is a skare-crow --

Tis is te very noise, Sift tell me of; devil, devil, Vere be you, my
Lacquey-divell? untie, untie me.


What Pageant's this: 'tis La-gripe's dialect.

'Tis our Travellour, Sir.
He thinks himself in France already.

A hasty Monsieur indeed; but
'Tis no time for this mirth now: help him down.

Now I be come, now I be come; never make


Why how now?


You be got into my Country too? but ease me of one scruple, how you come? he
lend you one pad-nag too? vat co*lour your Vorship's devil? mine Orenge-tawny,
dat his colour^ of old, you know: I dare swear now my Master's be one


He's mad sure; see where thou art, in London,
In my garden; see thy young Mistress too, Beatrix. --

Begare I be so indeed. I be base besheat, France, or some Vere else ah dou
dog-rogue Sift, I have thee by the ears present.


If the devil pick thy pocket, can I help it?

This is not the concealed Lover, you mean, Madam;
'Tis a disguiz'd one rather I think this.

I look after no such mouldy ware, Sir.
'T was not this. I hope, you brought me to see.

Madam you'll find things yet, as I gave 'em out t'ee.

If they would search no further now.

You'll pardon, Sir, my Man's boldness, I hope,
That plays the knave thus with yours.

'Tis easily pardoned to preserve your friendship:
But to our other business, our serious trouble.

They turn this way; better show my self,
Then be found sneaking here.

Let's seek this way.

Seek him no further, Madam, here he is.

Ungrateful, faithless Man!

Hah! Is it he?

You perjured man, you; have we found you?

Nay, never rail, nor throw at me those undeserved
Reproaches; there is a Lady here, can vouch my constancy.

What Planet was my Girl born under troe?
I seek her Lover, and find a thief, a Pick-pocket.
You lay perdu upon some new design now, there are more Jewels in the house,
Cabinets unrifled; I pray God there be.


The Man's beside himself sure, to wrong a Gentleman thus barbarously; though I
have reason not to think him innocent, yet I dare pawn my life, the base guilt
you charge him with, is none of's crime. What mean you then by this abusive
Language?


Alas! he understands me, Madam.

Not very well, Sir.
What draws this scandalous reproach?
I am no thief, my Enemy, I dare swear,
If I have any, will answer for me:
My mind is set on nobler objects far,
My name and family free from the least stain
Of such ignoble ways; nor have you ought
In all your vast possessions I value,
But your daughter.
'Tis her I love, this year and more she has
Bin Mistress of my life and hopes; the Ring
You taxed me with, from her hand I newly
Had received: and if the sternness of a
Father's brow fright not a timorous Maid from
Free discovery of such thoughts, ask her, and
What she makes not good of all my story,
Repute me liar in; a name
I would not for your wealth deserve.

Speak, Clarinda, says he true? dost love him?
Speak boldly, and the truth, what ere it be,
It shall be welcome to a father's ear.

Heaven knows I need not blush to own it,
And yet I do, I love him, Sir,
And have done this --

Nay, nay, then the rest is plain enough: well
We must make the best of a bad market.
Endimion your advice.

Ne'er advise with him, he's a mere impostor.

Now will he raise a new storm.

Never fear him, his Astrologie's well worn out by this.

Let my Poniard prevent his malice.

He's born to be hanged I see; because he proves no thief, he'll commit murder.


Celia's yours, I tell you; Endimion
Has no love for Clarinda, I know he has not.

That assurance revives me.

Assist me now, kind Stars,
To put a period to these Lovers pains,
And I'll ne'er trouble you with an other Suit.

My honour lies at state; what shall I do?

A fatal chain these several accidents
Are linked together in, no breaking;
Yield, yield to what heaven has decreed, and
Is indeed above half done to your hands;
These Lovers were made for one another,
I almost told you so before, in the
Description of the Man she is ordained for;
And since one rich in Virtue, not in Land,
Must be your Son in Law, where could you better choose,
Frank Bellamy is nobly bred, as born:
Give free consent then to their happiness,
Let it a fruit of your indulgence to 'em,
And not a forced allowance now appear;
That mingled with the joys we shall wish them,
Our thanks to you on their behalf may flow.

Well, what must be, must be; I cannot fail however in following that path
Heaven has traced out for me. Bellamy, I embrace you as my Son, my Daughter's
yours.


And I for ever to your goodness bound.
Oh my Clarinda, now you're mine indeed.

Is it thus you keep your promise, Sir Christopher?
This the Justice I looked for?
My honour suffers still.

There was no other salve for mine; and Charity begins at home, good Lady;
remember that still. As much reason, for ought I know, to Marry, as to Christen
my own Child first.


to go, follow that misleading light,
Triumph in thy inconstancy, and let
Thy now-Mistress taste of it in time too;
'Tis that, 'tis that will do me right.
Come, Gratian, I'll keep my word with you;
We will straight to Church.

Most willingly; sweet Lady, I must take her in the fit.

'T would soon be over else.

Nay, let's not part in anger, Madam; there
Are Weddings towards, We should be friends,
And merry then; Lewis call Gratian back.

Stay.

A Woman's anger is soon over.

And a Lad's Love as soon out.

Or let it last, who cares?

Or the other, who's the better for it?

Come, let's hear now, what fine new device you stay me for; Oh! you are a
sweet Gentleman, to pass for an Astrologer, and have no more skill then my
Chambermaid, or Fannie there.


Truly nor so much, for we began to smell him out.

When the fit takes you next to make love, Sir,
Trust to your merit, and not your science,
That you see has deceived you; the match is made now
You set all your Engines a work to break.
How shallow is this art you bragged of?
Or, How little are you versed in it?

You told me 'twas but to make trial of me,
Bellamy courted Clarinda, and that
'Twas I he loved, when the first sight of him
Proves the contrary; the Stars lend you but
A dim light, it seems, that can no better
Read our destiny by it.

Did you not persuade me too, that Celia
Ceased to love Bellamy? when Heaven knows
What torture the continued expressions
Of her kindness to him, have put me to.
Burn your books, Sir, burn your books for shame,
Your lying books.

'Tis well for him now, I ne'er was curious
Enough to peep into my destiny,
Nor given that inquisitive way;
I must have had a fling at him too,
Which needs not; there are male-contents enough
To worry him without me.

If te Damoisells have done vit teir tale, please you have mine, It is a foul
tale, I assure you, of accusation against tis Astrolog too, Did you no promise
send me into France fine new way, and me be here in London still? I be Judge by
all te Company, if me no here: and vat is very worse, you say I go wit out
Robbing, and begare me loose my Purse.


Your grievance is of weight indeed.


Of veight? gar my grievance be, you make me lighter by all my Money.


That's easily redressed, give him his Purse again;
And no more of these slippery tricks.

'Twas but a trick of wit, Sir;
I hope you'll remember the Ensurer, Monsieur.

Yes, I assure you one halter, if you play more such trick of vit.


Now to my pretty chiders:
For even in that, Ladies, you upbraid me with,
Have I matter enough to make my peace.

With help of some strange hard non sense,
Your Worship's terms of Art.

In plain English, but first your pardon, Sir,
That I durst play the Astrologer with you,
When ne'er in all my Studies, nor my Travels
I spent a serious minute to become one.

You are no Astrologer then?

None, in good sooth, Sir.

You told me so before indeed;
Though my itch of Learning would not let me
Credit it: but now I do believe you*
He'd ne'er degrade himself in public thus,
Could he maintain the height
My credulity had raised him to.

And thus may you the better now forgive
The error y'have been in, that still were deaf
To whatsoere I said to disabuse you.
If sooner, Madam, then you durst expect,
A Father's liking crown your Love, and his,
You may thank me for it; your ma^ch had ne'er been
Clapped up thus of the sudden, had he not on my
Insinuation believed it made in Heaven.

Truth, I think it had not.

Nor have I done less for you, if well considered,
Was it fit so fair a stock of beauty
Should lie begging of a beggar still?
I ve placed you where you'll brightest shine,
Where love with interest will be paid you back,
Kiss for kiss were poor retaliation.
Bellamy, whom I saw adore Clarinda,
Was not an Idol fit for you to worship;
While Gratian's heart became a burning sacrifice
With fire shot from your killing eyes.

Now he tickle's her.

She'll forgive all her enemies
For such another clawing speech.

Let them complain that suffer, I have my wish;
Nor is your share, I see, so small in the
Procurement of't, but it has made me yours.
I might have percht in Gratian's Cock-loft still,
But for Astrology.

As you have made me no less happy, with
As sincere affection, I vow my self
Your servant: yet let me tell you,
I began to think there was not
Much Astrology in the business neither,
What ever we conceited of you.

Happiness, Gentlemen, is happiness still,
I take it, which way so ere arriv d at.
Something in every design we stalk with
To take the Vulgar eye, when that which does
The work indeed, being unperceived,
It often is ascribed to a wrong Cause.
I designed both these matches, Lewis and
Bernard there can witness for me,
And to your joys and mine I see 'em made,
Be it with real or fained skill in
What I took upon me, that matter's not.
The pleasures you reap from it are no fictions,
That we all see.
And I expect my thanks accordingly.

And you, Sir travellour, that were promised you should not be robbed by the
way; prithee, how could, if thou had gone thy Journey, when I had secured
thy money here before?


Vell, vell, vit one bottle or two de Vine, tis shall be satisfaction; and
sirrahs, keark you, no tell my master, you know vat.


No, no; we would not hang thee.


Bellamy might think that were not my felicity, he has acknowledged you a
furtherer of, did I not pay my thanks too; you have obliged us both, Sir.


If my Compliment be somewhat colder, Sir, then others you have had from this
thankful Company, impute it to a certain blindness, allows me not yet a full
view of the happiness y'have placed me in; but as my sense of it increases, so
shall my Gratitude.


I would fain thank you too, Sir; but truly I m beholding t'ee for nothing, but
frighting me with the vision of Bellamy.


Now for our squeakers.


Why I passed for an Astrologer, or how, without being one, I knew enough of
your adventures to make the opinion good a while, Beatrix can partly tell.


The distaff was of Counsel.

The rest may better come from Lewis there, or Bernard; and be part of their
Apology.


They in the Intrigue too?

Grand Intriguers.

All this we will hear at leisure; 'twill make an excellent story, when we have
it all together: but now let's in, the air grows cold, though love and youth
keep you from feeling it -- what fiddlers?


Yes in truth, Sir; I saw there would be a Wedding or two, and made bold to
invite 'em in; there's no mirth without Music, Sir.


Why God-a-mercy; come, strike up there,
A kissing dance to please these Wenches.

A kissing dance! nay then, I will make one,
I'm resolved on it. Come Beatrix.

You may dance, Sir; but we will have no kissing,
'Tis not come to that yet.

You are not quite come to 't indeed;
But here are riper lips.

She tells you true, Sir; 'tis not come to that yet.

Play my delight.

Thy Mistress forbids no kissing.

No, I warrant her.

She goes to it with a better stomach.

And they wont kiss
They shall dance by themselves for Shift.

And for Beatrix too.

Brisk youths on my credit: come, to supper; nothing but welcome can I promise
though of the sudden; but when my Girl is married

I'll feast you all, and nobly, that are here;
So your dislike blast not our Wedding cheer.


