HAst done my Message?

Yes, Sir,

And conveyed
My Letter to the hands of the fair Maid?

To her own, Sir,

And she, I'll warrant paused
E're she would read the torments her eyes caused,
Would have returned it coldly back, -- and feigned....

Quite contrary, -- Without being constrained;
Without demur's, or if's, -- or And's, -- or stops,
She read it thr'ough.

This was above my hopes!
'Tis more then my fond heart could dare believe;
And she scorns not, for ought I can perceive.

Cupid, with's keenest Shaft, her heart did hit,
And you have, this time, more Success then Wit.

'Bove expectation!

In what you designed,
You have the Tide both for you, and the Wind:
You sail in a smooth Sea, and may go far,
Unless some Rival-Pyrare prove a bar.

Thou know what Wracks my Vessel's subject to.

From all poor fears, here's that will secure you.

What is't?

Letter for letter, Favour for
Favour.

What hath she answered?

Yes, Sir, -- or
I'm much mistaken, -- for I long did stay,
Till this kind Paper brought me glad away.

Let's open it, -- all my hopes I here shall see.
I wrote in Verse, in Verse she answers me:
She's skil'd in all perfections the world knows.

Yes, -- Ladies now can do it in Verse or Prose:
They handle any good -- thing well of late;
So great perfection's in our Female state.

In barture of your Love, which you do prize so high
Orontus, you have dared presume to ask me mine;
Tho I sometimes admit of Love, indeed, yet I
Mean it shall cost me nought, else I should soon decline.
To give you heart for heart, such an exchange would be,
No merit ever durst aspire so high before:
You proffer homage here, because you my worth do see:
And I your service own, -- Why should you whyne for more?
I shall not value yours, at any higher rate.
Can it be justly thought, your Love should be more great;
Then let us cast account exact without deceit,
That neither be Trapand and after, cry, -- a Cheat!
If those heart-renting sighs, which you do breathe so oft,
Do flatter you with hopes, I shall your Suit approve;
Believe me, when I say, my breast is not so soft;
Nor does a thousand sighs weigh one poor grain of Love.
How-ever let us try, -- put your sighs in one scale,
And in the other lay, the honour of my Chains,
Swear to abide the teste, -- if my weights chance to fail,
I'll add my heart thereto, and ease you of your pains.
DOROTHEA.

Her Answer is as subtle as 'tis witty;
Such superficial arrogancy's pretty.
This charming pride of her affected stile,
Throws as strong Chains upon me, as her smile.

Your Song was shrill, the Echo answers loud.

Nor is it strange to me, that she seem's proud:
'Tis like to like, my Letter boasted mine;
And she in her's, makes her own Merits shine.

Strange, or not strange, you're paid in your own Art.

It was the surest way to take my heart.
Presumption, in a Woman that begins.
To wield Love's Sceptre, best her Subjects wins:
It speaks her power and grandeur, puts her Worth
Upon it's Throne; sets all her Glories forth:
Teaching us, we must humbly wait below,
And e're a favour she on us bestow,
By fair degrees of service, we should strive
Unto some height of Merit to arrive.
So 'tis no fault; brave Spirits count it none;
Or else they find it a most pleasing one.
My humour's such, that as I had before
Prized my self much, I'd have her prize her more.
I like they should, in a slight fashion
Look coyly in Our new-born passion;
An show us 'tis no easy task to win
The Fort, nor should One summons let us in:
Those that meet no resistance on one part,
Not bravely gain, but poorly beg a heart;
And she whose easiness takes up no shield,
Rather to pity does, then merit yield.
I scorn so tame a purchase, -- for in short
There most I love, where I have paid most for it.
All cheap Commodities I still despise.

Strange Trader in these Love-commodities!
But Flora, -- what of her?

She's ill attended,
Her froward humour hath her Reign soon ended.

And yet, Sir, you love to be roughly used?

Yes, -- but provided I be not abused,
No Rival set above me; -- Or if she
Seem scornful, let her scorn still noble be:
Let her reproach my want of worth or fame,
So to increase, not quench the growing flame.
But Dorothea, though a while she may
Dissemble openly, -- Her heart does say
In secret, -- I do love: -- Though she deny
It to the world; 'tis women's policy
To appear nice. -- So though she'll not avow
Her heart submits, I'm sure she loves me now.
The title of invincible's laid down;
I measure her thoughts as I do my own.

No doubt, you think so, -- You have Faith good store,
And thanks to heaven! one exc'lent Virtue more!
You stoop at all Game.

I!

Yes, you, -- pray be
Not Angry, for all this I know and see:
And is not this a Prize of great regard,
Part of One heart amongst a thousand shared?

Nay, -- that's too many.

Reckon, -- let me see.

Why, then i-faith, I've this day loved -- but three --
And of those three, that thou may be disprov'd,
This being loveliest, Now -- is only loved.

If so, Nay then her fortune's very fair:
But three, -- and --

Peace! -- I spy Erastes there

Something of moment leads him here apace.

FRiend, I read Joy upon your tell-tale face.

There's much more in my heart, I've got the day
Of a stern beauty; after much delay,
And fierce repulses, my most faithful flame
Will crown me with her happy Bridegrooms name.

What, have you loved and kept the fire so hid?

Discretion does discoveries forbid.

Yet, friendship somewhat claims.

'Tis very true,
It does, and warrants this address to you,
Whereby I shall this mystery unlock,
And give you the full knowledge, ere you knock
At my hearts closet. -- Know, the Lady, then,
Whose love makes me the happiest of men:
This morning as a favour sent to me
A Letter, -- which, although it dubiously
Does seem to speak, -- Yet nothing less then Love
Could dictate it, or her quaint Pen thus move,
For she that writes in such a pleasant stile
Is yielding, -- though she parley yet a while.

So that your courtship shall it's ends acquire?

Let me obtain of you but one desire,
And it completes my Wishes.

Sir, to doubt
My readiness would wrong me.

Hear me out.
This Embassie's un-answer'd yet, -- and will
Without assistance be un-answer'd still:
'Tis writ in drolling Verse, and such a strain
As does surpass the reach of my weak brain.
Pray write it for me.

Sir, -- my former care
In often serving you, shall make me spare
All complement: -- I never could deny
To do a friend so slight a courtesy.
I'll do it, and try my skill in Poetry.

This speaks you noble, and obliges me.
Adieu.

A Fine request, i'faith I say.

Next this, -- may I not hope himself, one day
Will come and court me, to make Love for him?
O, What a brave condition am I in!
Have I not reason confident to be
Of my own Suit, when such crave help of me
To write Epistles: -- What think thou of it?

Why, Sir, I think, if it be want of Wit
In him to ask, 'tis worse in you to do.

Thou speak freely.

Shall I tell you true,
Now I perceive how wildly you engaged
Your Talents for another, I'm enraged.
-- When near some Beauty, I oft hear you swear
Your heart's possessed only by her, -- though there
Are forty more, have more room there then she
Whom you court only for Variety;
Meaning with Complement her Wit to prove,
Or rather show your own Wit, in the Love
You do but feign for pastime. -- Here, now I
Your Lies approve, cause for your self you lie.
This I'm content with. -- But when there's no end
Except the feeble interest of a friend,
That you should lye for them! -- as if before
You had not sins enough upon your score!
For to say truth, how can you know his heart
That never knew your Own? -- Yet on his part
You'll write he loves, -- are you sure this is truth?
May he not feign? -- Yet you'll swear for this Youth.

I might have wav'd it very easily,
And any else had been denied; -- But I
Knowing him Lucia's brother, One of the three
Whose almost equal Beauties tempted me:
And also knowing, he a neighbour dwells
Near Dorothea, who somewhat excels
At present, because most kind, -- could not refuse
Him, whom sometimes as Brother, I may use,
Sometimes as Neighbour.

This was well fore-seen,
And a far off!

The dullest souls have been,
Sometimes most useful: -- And 'twas this indeed
Made me so soon resolve to help his need.
-- But, -- whilst I talk, my Task I quite forget;
-- Come, -- let's examine how she does him treat.

Perhaps she jeeres him.

I dare swear it almost
Or if she sooths him 'twil be to his cost.

In barture of your Love, which you do prize so high
Erastes you have dared presume to ask me mine;
Sometimes I may admit of Love indeed, yet I
Mean it shall cost me nought, -- else I should soon decline.
To give you heart.....
Have I took one for the other?
Yes, sure, -- for Twinns are not more like each other.

Ne'er did my Optics meet the like surprise;
'Tis word for word the same, if I have eyes.
-- Nay, -- having well examined, -- Now I see
If mine's the Original, this must Copy be:
Both writ by the same hand i-faith....

And troth,
She finds one block doth fit the heads of both;
No matter though; Your Dorothea may
Dissemble, -- well guessed, -- Yet her Heart does say
In secret, (as this plainly now does prove)
ORONTUS IS THE ONLY SPARK I LOVE.
The Pride of her affected Lines, -- you know, --
Was the best snare to catch your Heart, -- for though,
She seemed to Droll with Love in a New style,
It was true Love did Dictate all the while.
O! -- Might I laugh before my Master now?

Do, I'll not hinder -- prithee laugh on -- do,
Laugh loud, -- I'll laugh my self, -- and ne'er be sad.

Off with your Vizard, -- why, it makes me mad
For your sake; -- And can you set this good face
On such ill luck! Curse her! for in this case,
Constraint will sorrow swell. -- Oh! 'tis most rare;
Good lord, Sir, -- how contented you still are!
A subtle Woer, Fox-like's full of Wiles:
But she is subt'ler far, that him beguiles.
No Wit to Woman's, -- Where you thought to take,
Your self's beguiled. -- This were enough to make
One hang himself,

'Tis somewhat odd, -- and I
Confess a Puny, might sigh dolefully;
Then thump his breast, Void of experience;
Accuse his squinting Planets influence*
But, I, who understand the ways of Love,
Such trivial chances never shall me move.
If every object please, -- What loss is One?
I'm ne'er enslaved, my heart still keeps it's own;
To give or take, -- To gain or else to loose,
Prepared; -- Then at the least Repulse I choose
A new; -- Nay whatsoever I proclaim
To them, I still am Master of my flame.
Thus divers objects every day does bring
Fresh satisfaction to my Mind, -- The thing
I solely aim at. -- And let none explode
Me for it, tho it seem strange, -- 'Tis a la mode*

Preserve this humour, you may need it still.

My crosses ne'er sunk deeper, nor e're will.
If one prove false, -- mothers Love is sure:
And I for every grief do find a eure,
Hence comes the gain to have Mistresses in store.

Hylas, when living understood not more.

His Fancy, tho differed from mine, for I
Love where I'm loved without inconstancy:
But if their lightness make them in the end
Love change, -- In troth, -- I'm so much my own friend*
I dare not harbour trouble in my breast;
But, without whining, keep my heart at rest,
By filling up, the vacant place again,
With new Ones, -- So 'tis all one, shine or Rain.

Your heart at this rate yields a good Rent, Sir,

It does, -- Now Luce has half, -- I've given't her:
And such as 'tis, there's many envy me.

But why divided; good Sir, let it be
Entirely hers, -- Or give her no room there,
Least she neglect your flame too, -- for I fear
This Madam Lucia, tho as yet she smile,
May like the other in the end beguile.

I have no cause to doubt this should prove so;
Lucia did still with judgment act, you know.
Her conduct's regular; she's Modest, Wise,
Above the fears of paltry jealousies.
I only find in her one grand default.

What is't?

Why, she loves Me, more then she ought.

A grand default indeed!

'Tis I declare,
For Lovers quarrels ever Lovely are:
'Tis pleasing when the object we do love
Seems to suspect our Vows, our faith to prove:
By this our interest is more fortified,
Love's born a new, when newly justified:
So that whatever Storms such doubts can breed,
The Calme's more sweet, when Pardon does succeed.
And then, fresh Favours meeting in the close,
Needs must the accused gain, more then he can loose:
But where a Lovers Wishes glutted are,
No Peace is made, because there was never War.
A dull and sated Lover, lives at's ease,
Serves but by habit, takes no thought to please;
Keeps the old Road, -- but strives for nothing new,
'Tis ever -- You love me, And I love you.
Who would not hate that gross and vulgar Trade?

Rare are the Observations you have made;
You studied this Point well it does appear,

FRiend, I am happy thus to find you here,
I sought you all about,

What would Florame?

Tell you the Secret of my Amorous flame.

Some Love intrigue?

It is so, -- I am now
Destined to Marriage by a Fathers Vow;
And though he found me irresolv'd to this,
In secret it by him concluded is.
The Party's Gallant, -- of a Noble Strain;
But, -- Oh! another in my Soul doth Reign.
And whatsoever obstacles arise,
My Heart's not mine, but while 'tis Lucia's prize.

Lucia's?

There's reason why you should admire.

There's my brave Gallant out of the Pan in the Fire.

The old contest which from her brother parts
My company, might well divide our hearts.
But all such slight impediments are vain,
T'oppose his Laws, who is sole Sovereign.
Love by his Tyranny subdues us still,
Summon we yield; Obey, ask what he will:
Who as he list, tho blind and young, yet knows
When, and to whom our Hearts he will dispose.
Thus spite of interest, Love my hate dismissed,
Nor can I longer Lucias charms resist:
Tho, to attain unto my wished End,
Time is my greatest hope, and surest friend.

That may alone her brothers hate subdue;
Time stranger things effects.

It's very true,
I do expect that Miracle from it.
In the mean while, this Night the time is set
By Lucia's Maid, who at my Rendez-vous,
Upon a sign, let's me into their house:
Where, by her sweet converse, she'll bless my flame.
But, since the place suspicious is, -- I came
To beg your company, -- Say? shall I speed?

You shall, -- I never failed a friend at need.

At your own home I'll call.

SHe's Modest, Wise,
Above the fears of petty jealousies:
Her Conduct's regular; and bating this
Grand fault, That she too much your Lover is;
She's exquisite in other Qualities.

Now you'll repeat twenty new fooleries,

None other ever her esteem could get.
Say, now, Sir, Does it make you stark Mad yet?

What?

So disguiz'd, Sir, will you ever be?
You're Mad, I say, Or else the Dev'l take me:
Not Mad, and lose two Loves both in one Day?

This only sets me a New Game to play:
And soon as e're Lucia or Doll, I see.

What you'll speak to'um.

Yes, infalliblie:
I long to meet'um, -- Then will I set forth
My Passion to the height of Zeal and Worth:
First, shall my Sighs begin to charm their Ears*
And if they fruitless prove, -- I'll use my Tears:
Ten thousand Sobs, next, shall them entertain;
Yet all this while, my Heart shall feel, no pain:
Last, Death I'll summon too, for my redress;
Yet, Joy to see another them possess.

Tho ever with you, you're above my ken.

Patience a while, thou't know me fully then.
In th'interim, this place is not so ill,
But I know where to play my Rest on still.

And you think some will hear, and yet give ease?

Yes, Cliton, with much gladness, when I please.
Last night a certain Brown-Lass took my Eye,
And was the object of my Gallantry
For a long space, whilst we walked in the cool
Shade of St. James's, where so much a Fool
I was to proffer her my Diamond Ring:
My new Acquaintance soon accepts the thing:
Tho all, I from this Beauty could command
Then, -- Was to wait her home, and kiss her Hand.

And you went in?

No, -- she for reasons, then
Forbid, -- but, bid me this day come again.
It satisfied me, I her house did know;
Now she expects my Visit, and I'll go:
She might unkindly take it, should I miss.
Follow, -- this Turning brings us where it is.

E're you go further, One word, good Sir, yet.
She's blithe?

Yes, wonderful

And called?

Lyset.

March off, march off, your Visit's at an end.

Rascal.....

March off, I pray; None can pretend:
None has to do with her.

Why?

Sir, I know.

She promised me this day.....

'Twas craft, if so*

You know her well, then?

Yes, too well for me,
She is my Mistress, Sir, she is my She.

She has a Lady's Dress, and Garb.

To my sorrow
Her pride confounds all I can beg, steal, borrow;
And having found my Purse now ebbed too low,
To serve a Lady, she this day did go.

What Lady?

This night, Sir, she will me tell.
Mean time, -- changing your Course you would do well:
For if your hopes are all on Lyset placed,
Indeed 'twill prove, labour in vain, at last.
Your heart being vacant, therefore, you may hire
It out again, to she, shall first inquire.

Spite of the fatal shock, thy news does bring,
Soon shalt thou see it, well furnished agin.

A thousand new Ones, may solicite-yee,
But who believs't not, shall not damned be.
Pray vaunt not* though, your great skill any more;
This morn, you had three Mistresses in store;
The ^ seemed engrossed by you alone;
A^ all are gone!
^

^ Judgment on appearance give.

Sir, you do well, yet upon hopes to live:
Troubles are light to those thereon can feed.

'Twere ill done to reject hope in my need,
Since to regain the two first, -- happily,
Suspicion does combine with Jealousy:
And to bring Lyset to my Lure, -- This Spell
Of Gold and sparkling Jewels promise well.
These oft work Wonders, more then you expect.
-- But -- stay, -- Eraste's Letter I neglect.
I must go home and Write. -- Come.

Now I say,
If I know ought, you'll vanquish every way.

Let Time work out my Ends, -- swear not at all;
Expect the Issue, 'Tis the End Crowns all.

MEet my respects with so severe an Eye?

To you Florame, 'tis due severitye.

When will you treat with more compassion?

When you cease off'ring me, what's not your own.

My Love-sick-Heart gains little, all this while.

I'll not enrich my self with others spoil.

How shamefully you do my Faith suspect.

Inconstant men, no better can expect.

What, have I dared some other Face adore?

It is not fit that I should tell you more.
Tho indiscreet our Sex esteemed be,
Florame, I promised strict secrecy.

Some person near you does me an ill turn,
But all is vain against me, -- still I burn
For you, Dear Lucia, Heaven's my Witness, I,....

When I require, your self then justify.
Pray leave me now, for many eyes do see
Us here, and that may much discredit me.
More talk at present in this place may prove
Loss to my Honour, No gain to your Love.

This coyness quells my Joy's, and makes me griever.
Yet I obey, -- but, What must I believe?

That I not cruel am, but still preserve
As much esteem for you, as you deserve.

To this esteem add but some Love withal.

Pretend to others right were criminal;
I told you that before.

Would you speak clear......

I do believe this may obscure appear:
But if your soul herein it's troubles find,
Consult but Dorothea to ease your mind,
She knows the Mystery, -- Adieu.

ALl's lost!
Whence knows she this intended Match, that crossed
My will so much, tho by a Father pressed?

Is ought so secret, it may not be guessed?
It may be Dorothea brags through pride.

No, she the issue dreads too, on her side:
For if the troubles on her face speak true,
Not Love, but duty makes her yield thereto.

What are your hopes, Sir, then?

Love still, and dye,
Rather then Change shall stain my constancy.
My mournful Story yet may Lucia move.

True, -- But -- Where can you meet to tell your love,
And not be spied? Her Brother and you are
At enmity, so that must be a bar
To keep you from the house; And should you meet,
Guided by Love, at Church, or in the Street,
The many Witnesses at th'interview,
Would scarce oblige her to hear all from you,

All this I know, too well, and 'tis my grief:
Nor is it thus, I do expect relief.
Who can presume, since this Denial, she
Would openly give willing ear to me.
But, with great Presents, I her woman late
Have bribed, who now is my confederate,
And this night, th'rough a back door brings me, where
I'll hast my Triumph, or my Doom to hear.
There in my Transports, at her feet, I'll lye,
And beg her Sentence, Or to live, or dye
So this night Love, or Hate shall me befriend,
If Love, it ends my griefs; Hate -- life shall end.

But, -- should your two hearts join to one intent,
How can you hope Erastes shall consent?

Those petty Quarrels, haste does oft engage
Us in, -- are best made up by Marriage.
Lycas, if I could bring it but so near?

But -- then again......

Thou But'st it every where.
Allow some hopes, at least, with all thy talk.
Stay, -- Who leads yonder Lady down this Walk?
It's Dorothea! Gods! let's steal aside.

THis pleasant Walk shew's Nature in her Pride.

About this time the Gentry use to appear.

This is their Rendez-vous, they all flock here;
Especially those Gallants, who each night
In telling their Amours take great delight*
Which is to say, Lyset, so many Lies.

Indeed, I think, the are most but Rallaries,

True, -- Here they come, and their Love-tales relate;
And I, like others, come to hear'um prate:
But, -- So deceitful they are, 'tis Loves disease!
Yet we must quit the World, or strive to please.
For Beauty a sad Ornament would prove,
Did it not others charm, and gain their love.
The sweetest Features which a face adorn
Without this quality, lives but forlorn:
Like hidden Treasures, they for nothing serve,
While Miser-like, the rich, they pine and starve.
I have my Method, and I like it well,
I study to please all, if possible;
Endeavour by all means so fair to be
That they may like me well, and tell it me.
Those prccious quality's I little prize,
Whose hidden Luster dazzles not all Eyes.
Not, that I am so easy to be won;
Whining ne'er moves me to soft passion.
Affected sadness is a fruitless art;
Their sighs do much more cool, then warm my heart
My Courage, Prompted by our Sexes Pride,
Makes me maintain the advantage on Our side
By my imperious carriage, and some Scorn;
For knowing We to give men Laws were born,
I make those feel the weight that wear my Chain*
Imposing on them, as their Sovereign.
Or if their griefs I flatter, -- I near stoop,
But make them court long for a little Hope;
And that's the grand reward they gain at last,
For all their Passion, and their Service past.

Strange kind of Method this must surely prove?

'Tis now in use, and as we ought to Love.
If we bend ne'er so little we expose
Our hearts to the proud Triumph of our Foes.
A flattered Lover swelled with Victory,
Blots all Submission out of Memory:
To keep him still our slave, he must be crossed,
And frowned upon, -- These Fetters off, he's lost!

And with such Empire you rest satisfied?

I shall confess, -- what yet some shame would hide.
But since one day gains thee so much good will,
Hear all discreetly, -- but be secret still.

If one day be too short my Faith to try,
More time shall make good my fidelity,
And show your secrets safe with me remain.

Then know -- That men are now become so vain,
That for this Month, -- nay more I might have said,
Hardly three Lovers have me Homage paid.
Of these, The one woos me to be his Wife;
Which I so fear, it makes me hate my life;
My Father for Florame, consent would get;
The man I prize for wealth, for Men, for Wit:
But whatsoever Plea's Hymen can bring,
I dread that Slave, that should become my King!
Next, -- there's Erastes a brave Gallant, whom I
Think for a need, for constancy would dye.
But, -- he so out of Mode and Courtship is,
He may compare with any Amadis.
'Tis true, -- since that, Orontu's late defeat
Makes his low Triumph up, he's so complete.

That Blade your servant?

Is he known to thee?

I've heard him praised.

O! how he pleases me!
An Air so noble, Garb so full of state;
So gay a Humour, ne'er importunate.
His Voice so charming, his Converse so rare,
Speaking so well, yet Writing better far.
His glory all to his own Virtue owes,
Knows his great Worth, not proud of what he knows.
Somewhat for him I feel, -- more then I'll tell,
And would he still sigh for me it were well.
Although I dearly love to keep my heart,
I might at length resolve with it to part.
From whence, judge what condition I am in.

One of these Tickets, came not then from him?
Since you neglect to read it all this while.

Give me'um, Lyset, and prepare to smile.
(Which just delivered as from home I came
I had not time till now to read the same.)
And though Orontus is concerned in the jest,
It well deserves our laughter, I protest.
He and Eraste's here send their Loves; -- And troth
'Tis the same Letter they do Answer both.

How?

'Tis an accident may breed delight.
This morning I did to Orontus Write;
When finding it would fit the other, -- straight
(Glad to oblige him at so cheap a rate.)
I did Transcribe it, without more ado,
And so dispatch'd him with that Copy too.
What Answer, now, his slender Wit does give
I long to read.
Ha! Verses, as I live!
I knew not he could Rhyme.

Some end's of Plays.
Or Leaves dropped from old Poets withered Baize.
Wherewith each youngster now does Deck his head;
To be on all occasions furnished.

Transparent Beauty, whose most open Heart! That's such a conjuring Phrase it
makes me start!
Your Soul unto the bottom makes me see. 'Tis well begun, -- Ridiculous
Poetry.
But leave that there, -- The other I'll peruse;
Orontus, Answers with a smoother Muse,
And I dare wager, e're I look there-on
Each Line will claim our Admiration.
How different from that his style will be?

How well this thought of his Transparancy?

Transparent Beauty.

Then 'tis good and new,
If wise Orontus use Transparent too.

Whose open heart*
Ha! what have I got here!
This speaks the same!

I think 'twill so appear.

No matter, I'll see all; let us compare;
Read you Eraste's, this will show what they are.

TRansparent Beauty, whose most open heart
The bottom of your Soul does make me see,
Now I confess, of me you have the start,
Since in your breast my Heart lives doubtfullie.
I thought it should have found it's Palace there,
Where you did mean to treat it as your King;
But I have mourned, sobbed, sighed, dropped many a Tear,
And still have languished without profiting.
Yet will I not account at all with you,
What you propound will be but to your shame:
Should you for every sigh, and shower that's due,
Stand debtor, it the Reck'ning would inflame.
My doleful Sighs do ever make you smile.
Tho like a Tempest in my breast they throng:
Your Heart my weights disdains; take heed the while,
Light as they are, the out-weigh not yours e're long.

This was designed, -- it does appear, too plain;
And 'tis Orontus only laid this Train.
Erastes is too dull.

I'm of that mind:
But, now what difference of style do ye find?

Well, this same day without much more ado^ --
But, Gods! -- My Fathers here!

Orontus too,
With him.

He knows thee not, -- then prithee stay,
Whilst I aloof watch till he goes away;
Then when the old man going hence you see,
Speak to Orontus, that he stay for me.

She leaves me here a pretty Part to Act.

IN fine, I've passed my word for the Contract*
With Dorothea; and by Hymen she
Must to another Will subjected be.
In the interim, it seems, you love her well,
And near my House oft stand as Sentinel:
A neighbour notes it, and does seem to scoff
At your vain Love, -- Pray therefore break short off.
The honour had been mine, if you, dear friend.
My son had proved; but now, you can't pretend.

If by your house I every day appear,
A hundred others I oft speak wit^ere
Of Love, and they are no mean Beauties, too.
But to explain.....

I know they talk how you
Love Lucia still, our neighbour; but since we
So tender of our Credit ought to be,
Pray do not force me, Sir, against my choice*
By such deportment to make further noise.
Only forbearing eight days to appear,
Would stifle all the Whispers you bred here.
Adieu, -- Pray study to give this content.

A fair Remonstrance, and to good intent.
How many Visions, does that age attend?

SSst Ssst...
My Cavalier, turn this way friend.

Who calls me?

Sir, 'tis I, -- do you not see?

An Envious Cloud eclipses you from me.
This Hood to me, does a strange torment prove;
Should we Act thus? We, who each other Love?

A pretty Complement, and shows much wit;
We Love each other then?

No doubt of it.

Well, I believ't for once, -- since you say so, --
And sure our equal Merits bred it; -- Tho --
Till now I ignorant hereof did live.

Nay I my self this scarcely yet perceive.
But Love's Almighty Power, as 'tis said,
E're we can think on it, does our hearts invade.
And grant this Maxim true, you must allow't,
We may each other Love, Yet hardly know it.

You never want a paint to make all fair:
But e're this time I knew, Sir, what you were;
And how your best Affection most times is
Subject to caution; -- But to clear all this,
Am I deceived?

Is't thou? ah! sweet Surprise!
Lyset, how Heaven does this day bless my Eyes!
To meet thee I esteem such bliss, -- that --

.....soft.
I know what fuel heats your breast too oft:
Hear but my hasty Message, e're you stir?

A Message, and from whom?

Your Mistris^* Sir.

'Tis then from thee*

That's good, -- but I must tell
How Dorothea. --

O, I know it full well.

Permit. --

No, no, your cause of plaint I see,
You think her Beauty only Captives me;
But n're all-arm thy self, nor credit it.
I value less her Beauty, then her Wit.
Her counterfeited Graces less then these,
Whilst thou art worth fifty such Dorothoe's.

You think to jeer me thus, -- but really,
I'm worth another, that's less worth then I

Thy Eyes have gained such power on me this day,
That --

I believe, yet more then you would say.
And will not now dissemble, you shall see it.
For tho some Features here may seem less sweet:
Yet, hath my face enough to breed delight,
And more inclines to tempt, then to affright.
This Air, nor Port is like a Common Clown:
And I'm like some body, when my Hood's down.
Look!

Thy gay humour makes thy Face more fair.

IS't not my Master with my Gossip there?

What will he say, if Cliton know 'tis I?

He shall let go his Prize, or tell me why.

Quick, Sir, Quick, Quick, -- lord, I am out of breath.

What ailst?

Sir, they are gone into the field of death.

Who?

They will fight unless your succour come.

What are they?

Florame and Erast. --

I run.
A Moment brings me back.

-- Gypsy! must you,
Because new clothed, play with these Feathers too?

Come, Cliton, come, their steps let's follow.

-- Sir,
One is enough. --

Come!

Not I, -- I'll not stir.
Should we be forced to draw.

Rogue, -- must I drive?

You escape it fair, I'll teach you how to live.

His anger he will hardly long refrain.
But, -- Wher's my Mistress, she comes not again?
I'll seek her out, and know what stops her there.

NEither Orontns nor Lyset appear?
What strange capricious Fate guides me this day?
A Father frights me hence, -- Who, when away,
By some mistake, I cannot apprehend.
Orontus, he, vouchsafes not to attend.
-- But he returns.

RAscal, if e're again.

But, Sir, if Lucia. --

But's, and if's, are vain.

What then? could I think that you could divine
She'd this night see y' at Window, -- by a sign?
And if I had not thus all-arm'd you, what --

And why not stay?

So I might have forgot:
You know my Memory's short, and will forgive.

Peace!, -- stay you there.

May I these eyes believe?
The Slut yet waits him? shall I suffer all!

Excuse that heat, which you blind Zeal might call.
The Alarm was false, -- And I return once more
To swear I dye for you, -- whom I adore,
To tell you Dorothea needs must be
An object of disdain, whilst I know Thee:
For she's so dull a Beauty, I scarce come
Into her sight, but I am like to swoon.

The devil a word before me, she can find!

This severe silence shows you too unkind:
And without much more cruelty beside,
You cannot still your Beauteous Face thus hide.
Should my weak eyes grow dazzled with the light,
I must. --

Take heed you faint not at the sight!

Madam, is't you?

Became your Hate you sed.

Ha! -- Ha! -- Why, Lyset's Metamorphosed!

Heaven knows. --

It knows, but what it ought to know;
I see, but what I thought to see; -- And so
You now appear, but what you should appear,
A gross Deceiver, such I find you here.
This at your birth, your Sex by oath, doth seal.

I from your Judgment justly might appeal:
But if sometimes, the effects belie our hearts;
Frequenting much your Schools we learn those arts.

Should I relate; or weigh your lightness well.

Perhaps, some truth's we might each other tell:
But I'll ne'er mind what anger now brings forth:
You know what such a man as I am worth,
Speak not of hate, nor lightness, -- wave self-ends;
Let's quit each other, and become good friends.

Shall I forget so soon your late affront?

You run the hazard else, to lose more on it.
Should you refuse 't agree, -- I'll tell thee plain,
It would be hard to woo me back again.

'Twere fit, indeed, that I should satisfy.

When I do proffer Peace thus handsomely.

My anger justly does revenge pursue.

I have some reason to complain of you.

Yes, witness what your late Discourse did say.

And witness also what you Wrote to day.

You thought to Court another to my shame.

You, with your double Letter mocked my flame.

Do not object, that harmless Plot, whereby
I of your weakness made discovery:
Believing that betwixt Erast and you,
Nothing was hid; I tried and found it true:
Whose vanity, and poor injustice did
Bring that to light, which else, had yet lain hid.

And I, even now, did rude disdain express,
Not but I knew to whom I made address:
But purposely dissembling, lay at watch,
To show you oft Deceivers meet their match:
And that if you the Trappan did intend,
I would be sure to fit you in the end.

The Excuse is cold enough.

Examine yours.

But your late carriage your great Crime assures.
Which Lovers Laws call Treason against their State;
So that your guilt deserves no more debate.
To satisfy my Honour 't shall suffice,
I banish you both from my Heart and Eyes;
And yet am milder then those Laws were meant.

We shall resolve upon this banishment.
-- But, -- by so great a Subjects loss we may
Foretell, your Empire quickly will decay.

I'll rais't again, take you no care for us.

'Tis but your interest makes me speak thus.
In fine, I love you, and have no desire
But to obey your will, till I expire.

Who shall secure this?

You, if you will hear.

Let's know then wherefore you so scornful were?

Our Innocence is ne'er so manifest
As --

This night, at my house, I'll hear the rest:
And to confirm your fair intents, -- expect
Your due submission joined with true respect.
Adieu.

This strange retreat does much surprise,

Upon the point to yield, away she flies:
Believing it were better stay till night.
-- But, -- I begin to find what caused her flight;
Eraste's coming hither, drove her hence.

FRiend, may I speak to you with confidence?

You know me.

I have partly likewise known
Florame is late a secret Lover grown:
And I, for weighty reasons, fain would come
To find the object of his Martyrdom.
Now, since to watch him still, might trouble breed,
Do not refuse assistance at my need.
He haunts, and Loves you, and can never hide
That long from you, which is his joy and pride:
Pray, in my favour, seek to dive into it.

I'll go, just now, and try if I can do it.

Adieu, -- I'll leave you then.

IS't your Will, Sir,
He know, Florame's Lucia's Idolater?

No, -- but to meet Florame, -- fright him, -- and say
Her Brother knows, he burns for Lucia.
-- This night, -- thou say, Fair Lucia does expect
My coming; Now, if she through fear, suspect
Erastes watches him, -- Keeping away,
I shall have freedom what I please to say.

But the other Rendez-vous, -- How goes that on?
For Dorothea looks. --

Let me alone
And, Cliton, thou shalt find things ordered so,
Had I a hundred, -- I through all would go.

NOt one word now, -- What Melancholly's this
Lock's up thy folly, which so pleasing is?
I here thee sigh, and oft bemoan thee, too.

Ah! Sir, -- why am I not content like you?

Truly, -- being freed from waiting on Florame,
Who dares not go, where summoned by his flame?
I'm very well content, my Fortune's such.

I wish that I could likewise say as much.
But, -- a strange Malady does me attaque.

What is't?

My honour's Hypocondriaque.
And this so much the more torments my heart,
Because few to Cure our Honour have the Art.

That I believe; -- But say, Where did it get?
Art angry, because thou see me serve Lyset?

Not because you serve her, I'll tell ye true;
But I'm displeased more, because she serves you.

Fool, dost not thou, thy own advantage see?
Whilst she receives homage thus from me,
Her Merits in an higher Orb do move,
My Passion more ennobling thy mean Love.

That's it, -- I fear, -- least by your courtship -- I --
Receive my Patent of Nobility!
I've no ambition for it; -- I confess, --
I should do well without such Nobleness.

So great a Favour, you but ill repay.

You do for me, much more, then I do pray.

Go, never grieve thy self, e're a Week's spent,
Perhaps, I may leave her, to thy content:
That time may Wonders work, to satiate Me,
And then I'll prove no obstacle to Thee,

Mean while, -- to oblige me, till that happy day
You will my Sove Ennoble, Sir, you say.
I shall be much engaged.

More then I'll tell.

The favour will deserve the Chronicle.

Cliton, I'll tell thee, without Raillery,
Lyset has Charms would tempt the chastest Eye;
Whose Beauty I above all else prefer,
She having all, a heart can wish, in her:
So that believe me, I deal modestly,
To borrow her, only eight days of Thee.

Since you such treasures find there, if you will
But give me double wages, keep her still.
As well, I'm quite disgusted with her now:
And you have puffed her so with Pride, -- I vow
Out of mere Scorn, the Baggage, when I came,
Forgot, or would not tell, her Mistress name*

Villain, how dare thou so profane to be,
As to mis-name who's Worshipped by me?

Pardon me Sir; -- But though such honour's due
To this new Saint, thus famed for -- blessing you.
And though at such a height she now doth stand,
I must not speak, but with my Cap in hand:
-- If in some House alone, we chance to meet,
Or Fortune lead me to her in the street,
May, I not then -- with all humility,
And those respects due to her quality,
As a return of thanks, for what I hear,
Give her in Love, one or two Cuffs of the Ear?

Consult with Reason, then -- what that says, choose.
-- But, here's the place of my two Rendez-vous.
And, if I am not much deceived, -- See there!
Lucia does at her Window now appear.
Oh! how she pleases me!

But -- Lyset more?

Not for the present.

Wondering I'll give over!
Why -- butfair Dorothea?

Less then she.

Then cannot I guess, what your heart can be.
Just now. --

'Tis thus, -- I love for Recreation,
And seldom feed on bare Imagination.
The greatest Beauty, be it ne'er so bright,
Tempts me no more, as soon as out of sight;
A thousand lovely Charms, may wound me, -- when,
In thirty paces all is healed again.
The present Beauty, tho inferior far,
Makes me forget the Sun, to adore a Star:
And since what ever object does me move,
Is loved by me, only out of self-love;
It leaves my heart to all Impressions free,
And she still fairest seem's, whom last I see.

Then Lyset ceasing in your Eve to appear?

The next I meet, -- will please me more -- I'll swear.
But I must go, and with an Amorous Tone,
Tell Lucia that my heart loves her alone.

But whilst you tune your Tongue to speak her fair,
Do you remember that you Jealous were?

Thou make me timely recollect my part.
I'^o shape my speech with a Complainants art.

ARe you there Madam?

Is't Orontus?

-- I.
Who should reproach your Infidelity,
Did I not think you were so just withal
Net to condemn, were I not criminal.

Orontus, this Alarm, shows very ill.
Can I betray you? -- I not love you still?

Oh! do not think that I shall dare complain:
My Tongue shall with respect its griefs refrain!
And though, that must increase my sufferings too,
Yet they are welcome, because they come from you.
I gloried to possess your Heart; -- but then
Not being worthy, -- you resume't again.
Now from your Mouth the Sentence I would hear,
And sacrifice what I do hold most dear.
Happy, -- if ill Success no crime you deem,
And *tho I lose your Love, keep your Esteem

What killing Accents do your Lips express!
Raving of Crimes, and of Unhappiness!
Oh! do not hold me longer in suspense;
But pray, unfold this Riddles dubious sense.
And that your Moans, may Cause or Colour show,
Declare this guilt, and this Misfortune too.

A Rival's entertained in secret, Lo
That's my Mis-hap, -- my Crime I do not know
Yet I must say, -- since you love him, and hate
Me, -- I'm as Guilty as Unfortunate:
For to suspect you of injustice, I
So heinous hold, I should deserve to dye.
Oh! lay the cause, then, of your Change on me
Which must bejust, tho I no reason see.

This strange Reproach puts me into a maze. --

Ah! why should Misery meet such delays!
Torments are but increased, that are deferred.
Say, then, a Nobler Rival is preferred;
That my Defects adds glory to his name,
That his bright Lustre, dimm's my dying flame.
That to inform me of this choice, you here
For the last time summon me to appear:
While, afterwards, to end this Amorous strife,
In absence, I must linger out my life.
'Tis too severe, will Love-sick Judges say,
Yet, tho I perish Lucia, I'll obey:
With so much care, that my sad presence sha
Ne'er mind you of your first-faith's Funeral

Did I Act well my Part?

Rarely, indeed!
You'd make a quaint Comedian for a need.

This Story so confounds me, to say true,
I scarce have Reason left to answer you.
Nor can I plead my Faith to justify,
Which you accuse, but nothing specify:
-- Yet, if I freely may declare my sense,
Your grief Orontus speaks such Eloquence
That I believe it less; -- how e're it hit,
A Real grief, then wantonness of Wit.
A Lover, who with real sorrow's struck,
Uses no Rhet'rique but a Dying Look.
Waves all fine words, No Advocate will Fee,
Only deep Sighs whispers his Misery.
Yet, if you know, I thus ungrateful prove,
Name me this Rival that usurps your love?
Leave nothing to Evince my breach of Faith:
Declare what Favours he received hath.

Those bosom Secrets, long may keep at home
If they must be concealed till Florame come.
Who, though he fondly hug his passion,
This night will fail your assignation.
Some Remora, unlooked for, keeps him hence;
To morrow, you may know the consequence.

So, so, 'tis this begets your Jealousy,
Florame was this night to have met with me?

He's ravished with the Joy he feels within!

You heard this from himself, -- no doubt?

-- From him:
But, ah! -- how far would your blind Rigour go?
Must I have seen your Heart yield to my Foe?
Was't not enough to satiate him with bliss;
But to Damn me, too, I must witness this?

Since your Suspicions have no Wiles refused.
You little merit to be disabus'd.
And any other, after so great wrong. --
But -- stay -- I see a Man sure come along,
I'll change my Note, for 'tis my Brother's come.
My Brother is not here, Sir, he's from home.
Nor do I know exactly, to say right
At what time he's used to return at Night.
'Tis often late, -- Wherever he does go.
Adieu.

What Counter-talk?

'Tis pleasant -- tho.

The more I study, less I apprehend.

You're crafty, -- yet still over-reach't in the end.
They find you but dissemble -- and so forth.
And here they plant ye, just for what you're worth.

Peace! here comes one.

WHo's there.

-- Orontus's Friend
Florame.

The worse for me, ill luck's attend.
What make you here, -- had we not late agreed
That --

'Tis but Curiosity, indeed.
A certain Fancy guided me this way,
Without design to speak with Lucia.
-- But, -- sure, I heard some one bid you adieu.

Yes.

What design makes me, here meet with you
Thus late.

My great desire to meet Eraste
And ease your Mind, transported me with haste,
Being confident, how e're he doubts your Love,
A little talk, would all his Fears remove.
But this my diligence is fruitless grown,
His Sister telling me, he's still in Town.

Do not deny I Love, -- there's ways enough,

What?

I am thinking.

Cliton, there's it now!
Lucia Loves Florame, and t'avoid being caught
She spying him, feigned, I her Brother sought.
Inconstant Sex, -- Who can rely on such?

The best of them, indeed, are not worth much.

To fix his thought's some other way, -- I'll choose
Rather fair Dorothea's Name to use*
Tell him, 'tis Love ofher feeds my desire.

What can that do?

Much, if he should inquire.
He may discover, how I ought to Wed --

-- Her, -- is't She's destined to your Nuptial Bed?

The same. -- Now judge, if this be not the way.

Friend, they from Lucia's can hear all we say:
Let's go from hence, I'll speak my Mind elsewhere.

You'll miss your second Rendez-vous -- I fear,
Think on it, Sir.

Take you no care thereof,
E're I go twenty steps, I'll shake him off.

THis must discover, -- be he false, or true.
But, -- how -- he stay's

The Door stands open too,
And from above, the Light will guide his Eye.
Do you believe he will come, or else pass by?

If he want Innocence to plead his Cause,
He may --

If Mute, then he's condemned by the Laws.
He has too much Wit to want's Apology.

What said he, Lyset, -- When he talked with thee?

For you he languished, and for you did look:
And, I believe he wilfully mistook.
What do you think?

I know no more then you.
But -- he's excusable if he spake true.
If he plaid false, -- 'twas managed with such Wit,
That I do long to see the Event of it.
In the interim, not knowing what will be,
My heart affects only Neutrality.
-- But the Door creaks.

Orontus, -- Never fear*

Shut the Door after him, that none may hear.

To see me with her, will his thoughts perplex.

MAdam, The greatest glory of your Sex --

What brings you hither with so bold a Face.

Here's work indeed! -- a wrong man takes his place!

Finding the Door not shut, you talking by,
At that sweet Voice, Love lent me wings to fly.

We wait my Fathers coming home, -- and see
You haste away, or else you Ruin me:
He's hard by, -- pray be gone.

My Joy, -- and Sorrow!
Alas --

O! Keep alas, Sir* for to Morrow.

What! -- No compassion?

Yes, -- towards my self,
My Honour else is wracked upon this Shelf.
Time presses, -- go, go forth pray, -- 'tis my will
Sure, you were born to persecute me still!
Will you for ever gaze, -- and not reply?

O! Spell my Sighs, -- and read my weeping Eye!

'Tis not the season now to count your tears
When pity has resigned my heart to fears.
Pray, Sir, haste forth* -- look warily before --
But 'tis too late, -- ah! me! He's at the Door
He Knocks, where will ye go? -- there's no way forth.

I'm ready, if you please, to meet his wrath.

Rather a thousand times. --

To prevent all
I'll lead him to the Garden, th'rough the Hall.
There he's secure.

The advice is good I'll swear.
Go, -- open as you pass.

CLiton, stay there.
What, -- is all vanished? this seems strange to me,
I heard much noise, -- yet can no body see!
To use me thus, is ill, I tell you true,
I neither came to scare, -- nor hinder you.

Surely yo've taken me to task, this day.

No, -- but free humours hate such boe-peep play.
And 'tis my trouble, that with so much care
You should disguise your self from what you are.
What ever Gallant 'tis, -- let him come forth:
My Passion dares all Eyes, to try its worth.
Nor shall my Zeal wax less on such a score,
I love a Mistress, all men do adore.
And I had little hopes in this Essay,
Should I not court you, now, in your own way.
Variety's the Heaven of your bliss;
Then must I cherish what your Humour is.
Did I oppose the Freedom you like best,
That were to seek mine, not your Interest:
And would pervert the noblest ends of Love;
Instead of Subject, I should Tyrant prove.

A neat evasion, made to this intent,
By taxing me, to show you innocent.
This is smart Policy, -- worthy your fame.

So mild a Censure, cannot be your shame.

This good opinion of me's noble too.

I find you act, but as you ought to do.
The best of Men have not a hope so vain,
E're to confine you in a shorter Chain;
They, from all parts in throngs to you do press,
Whilst you alone share out their happiness.
Were not this glory then, diminished,
Should you heap all these Favours on One head?
So great a Treasure, such a plenteous Feast,
Was never, sure, meant for one Miser guest.
For, tho, I do adore, what is so rare,.
And favour crave, -- yet not above my share.
I'll not aspire, (tho in your flames I burn)
To enjoy you solely, -- I'll but take my turn.

What means all this, speak plain and tell me true?

That here, -- some secret Rival courted you.
And if you further conference desire,
I would not hinder, -- but shall soon retire.

This weak suspicion is the Child of fear.
That any other. --

I've a faithful Ear,
That perfectly discerns every Voice.
If. --

'Tis most like, -- this time was a fit choice,
And you no promise had to day before?

Oh! you have Wit can go th'rough this and more.
Who with one Letter Answer's two, -- Allow's
One night's enough to exalt as many Vow's.

Your false conjectures, then, are raised from thence.

No, no, I speak on clearer Evidence.
Knocking at Door, -- some noise made me begin
To doubt whether 't might please, should I come in:
Some I heard walk and speak, and midst the noise,
Unless I'm much deceived, I heard a voice
Say, There he's come, What shall we do with this!
Yet, I'll believe but what your pleasure is.

This I should ne'er endeavour to confute,
Did it not stick some shame on my Repute;
But really to undeceive you, know
That having bid my Woman wait below,
Whilst I above stood as my Father's spy. --

But here she comes will clear the Mystery.

Come hither Lyset.

Gods, what is't I see!
Lyset serves here!

Take the whole fault on thee:
No matter.

All my Pranks will now come forth.

Now, -- am I fifty Dorothea's worth?

Who was't spake with you, when Orontus Knocked?

With me?

Yes, you? -- believe I'll not be mocked.

What do ye take me? --

No excuse, Unless --

Dear Madam,

Some Gallant

I must confess.

'T was one that loves me without complement,
And I love him, faith, with no ill intent.

He'll be my Husband.

HA! good Hypocrite,
Your Husband.

Cliton.

Whither with that light?
Say. --

To find out this Husband she will have,
I'll bring again, when I have killed the slave.

Keep back your folly.

Ah! in my distress.

Take comfort Cliton, that will make it less.

This satisfies?

Yes, if you please, and more.

Lycante we are robbed! stand at that door.

Sir, -- now we're caught!

O! infinite disgrace.
My Father comes here, hye away apace.

Take up the Candle, -- slip in here with me.

Save, you my honour.

Devil, but who saves me?
We're left alone.

My honour now lies on it
To see. --

Let's fly, -- and think no more upon it,
For fear some ranting Hector, otherwise
Should come, and this love-folly so chastise --.
But -- 'tis too late.

Don't I Orontus see?
O Daughrer! whose wild love dishonours me.
Dye thou vile tempter.
Hold your threatening sword!

Before you kill us, good Sir, hear one word!

What vain excuse, --

Mine, is both just and true,
For, tho unhappy, -- I am guiltless too.
Being, fair Lucia's fond idolater,
Her Brother, this night found me there with her.
And having no way left to escape him there,
I leaped his Garden wall, and got in here.

In so short time, I never made more way.

I heard some stir in the Garden, as you say,
And from my Window, did perceive one go
With haste enough, who 'twas I could not know.
But, tho there be some colour, Sir, in this
Excuse, -- yet so great the importance is
To my whole Family, e're I proceed
This truth upon my daughters face I'll read.
Her looks will bring the certainty to light.
I'll straight return.

Ah! Sir, bid him good night.

Doest fear?

I? no, but I small courage have:
You, like a Torch in the wind, all storms out-brave
And may escape, But -- (Oh! the Colic gripes.)
Poor Cliton shall be sent to bed with stripes.

Hark! for they talk.

Pray, Sir, do you stay there.

He locks this door! Oh! how I quake for fear.

Go, Sir, make haste, for your relation's true.
Your enemy! -- I shake.

What?

Does pursue.

Who is't?

D'yee ask? Erastes.

-- Ha.

-- Again?
I met him there.

Then, that's the stratagem.
By what strange paths this truth comes in my way.

You both are ruined if ye longer stay.
Make quick dispatch.

See, Women's fickleness.

Take comfort Sir, 'twill make your griefs the less.

This danger was prevented well in troth,
I'll send this after, then good night to both.

ERastes.

Who can guess this mystery?
Surprise me here, yet deal thus lovingly.

What brought you here, I pardon, for your sake;
But no noise on it, if you my counsel take;
Upon such accidents, wise men should wink.

Think not. --

I know Sir, what I ought to think,

I doubt that --

No, no, I shall let it sleep.

Perhaps. --

-- Be sure, I shall the secret keep:
Adieu.

But --

'Tis high time, be gone I pray.
Make haste.

I understand not what he'd say.

Tho, now I'm freed, I tremble yet for fear.
How timely these by me discovered were,
-- Now in the street, fight, or embrace at ease:
Long may they scuffle e're it me displease.
If they each other drill till I go forth,
Their skins to morrow will be little worth.

HOw ill thou argu'st! what, thou think then?

But, Sir, it puzles me above all ken
'Till dooms-day, I might thus be arguing,
Yet still in the dark for all my reasoning.

Confess then, I know how one ought to live.

Such are your flights, that none can you retrieve.
For my part, I renounce. -- After the abuse
You late received at your two Rendez-vous,
Who would not swear, that in your choler, you
Should blinking Cupid curse, -- and his Mam too:
Sigh, groan, sobb, howl, and tumble all the night,
And from your nest, in three days make no flight;
Your brain's unhinged, your heart consumed with care,
Whereas you sing and frisk more gay then c're;
Nay, Rant, -- and in all company laugh most*
And bear't as you had neither won nor lost.
Most Heteroclite does your carriage seem!

And wher's the wonder? they leave me, -- I them.

If towards you, some Fickleness they show,
They but return you back, a quid pro quo.
For Mistress, waiting-Maid, Fair, Black, Red, Brown
You fear no colours, but storm every Town!
Your eager Appetite with all makes bold,
And to your Stomach, none's too hot or cold.

There's all the pleasure that in Love I find!

And they begin to love you in your kind.

I'm not displeased.

Then, must I say, indeed,
I think your Love's but some new bastard-breed.

And thus I whip him to my own desire.

More I examine, I the more admire,
Sometimes, you play the sprightly Gallants part;
Then, nought but sadness sits about your heart.
A Jovial air, amongst these disbands all fears;
The next you Court, -- you soften with your Tears.
So to the life, my self deceived I find.
You, groan, and sing, and sigh, -- and all's but wind.
What juggling tricks!

And this does wonder breed?

I ne'er knew such Chameleon Love indeed,
At each new Face it's hue so changed to be!

This but prevents Love, from in-slaving me.
I dare him thus, -- make all his Plots prove vain,
So I the pleasures taste, without the pain.

At once to give and take a Heart in jest,
Is this Love?

This is Love, and 'tis the best.

But, is not Love, Sir, a controling heat*
(For I'm a Scholar since I served Lyset.)
A frying in the Frost, freezing in Fire,
Which storms the Brain, and Fetters the Desire
To one alone; Pleasing, tho Incomode?

It was of old, -- but, now 'tis out of Mode.

'Tis out of Mode!

And dull, as shall be tried.

How must we do, to have it Modify'd?

My conduct will instruct thee in the right.
Examine't well.

'Tis beyond my dull sight.
If you'll instruct me, you must bring it near.

Listen, and the whole secret will appear.
"To every She, the like complaisance pay;
"Swear Love by rote, not minding what you say.
"Court out of custom for diversion's sake.
"Speak much of grief, but let your heart ne'er ache.
"Your Face (the Index) much of Love must show;
"But what you promise, let your Breast not know.
"Of an Un-truth, a Verity compile,
"At need, and weep, (tho in your thoughts you smile,)
"Raving of Passion, pain, troubles of Mind.
"And not to hazard ought by woman-kind,
"Pay the whole Sex, your Adoration
"In gross, -- but singly, -- slight them one by one.
This is my Rule.

The Science I approve,
You thus extract the Quintessence of Love.
-- But, -- as for Lyset, be it understood
You take or leave her quite, for both our good.
Otherwise. --

Without wrangling, -- I yet may
Leave thee sole Tenant e're we pass one day.
For now again Fortune does me provide,
Since Dorothea's true, I'm satisfied.

Erast' being there hid, tho, shew's some Ginn?

I know the whole Intrigue.

From whom?

-- From him.
Who walking home, late, when our Plot was laid,
Passed by their door, where by some hazard staid
Finding it open, and she standing by,
Surprised her out of curiosity.
Believing with her Maid, -- she had intent
To pass some moments there in merry-ment.
His pleasing converse hardly did begin
When he must hide, -- the Father coming in.
And, now, what scruple can there be in this?

Born under some Smock Star.

-- The best on it is,
Florame, that sought who held Erastes heart,
Found Dorothea claimed his Sisters part.
When, he expressing by what rigour they
Forcing his will, tore him from Lucia:
So won upon him, he consent did speak,
Provided they the first Contract would break.
They straight embrace, and both this Match approve,
Which turns their hate into a nobler Love.
Thus Florame and Erastes are agreed
To banish Feud, and let kind Peace succeed.

So Florame, now, his promise has obtained?

Th'rough my endeavour, full consent was gained.

You'll no more see her?

I! -- as oft as e're.

She sooths you still with flat' ring hopes, I fear*
And while she to another destined is,
Makes you. --

Did I not think as much as this
Of Dorothea yesterday? -- yet I
Mistook.

This gulls you more apparently*

Why I may err as much in this perchance*

Sure you believe Florame.

He does advance.
Now I shall know the truth, how he proceeds*

You're satisfied, I hope, now all succeeds?

Yes, -- but to gain the brother will not do
Alone, -- Your help is necessary too.
In vain, -- I thought the other Match unknown,
Since Fame the News over all this place hath blown;
And with fair Lucia so much credit gained,
She swears my flames for her, are only feigned.
But, -- you, -- whose friendship dives into my heart,
And knows its closest Projects, take my part;
Wait on that Beauty, -- Woo her not to shun
Such real Love, -- Complete what you begun.

Is not this Raillery you speak, -- tell true?
If you love Lucia, does not she love you?
To give you meeting e're Erast consent,
Does make her Love appear most Evident:
Yet you suspect? Ah! what must I suppose.

How slyly does he squeeze the worm from his Nose.

Since to hide ought from you, a crime I deem,
Know her love yet, resides but in esteem.
And that appointment, you so happy guess,
To confidence, had owed for it's success.
Since I th'rough favour had in vain assayed:
And then with Presents had suborned her Maid;
Who, still unknown to her, engaged last night
To gain me admittance to her sight.
This was the reason, made me think it vain,
Head-long to run, where was more loss then gain:
You otherwise had ne'er dissuaded me.

Good-faith, I thought 'twas better then I see.
But -- having gained what was most difficult,
The Oracle we need no more consult.
The Victory is Ours, -- I'll bring about.

You being Second, 'tis a sin to doubt.
Mean while, I'll try what is her temper, now
Her Brother's ours, and what hope she'll allow.

WEll Cliton.

I conceive. --

'Twas I conceived
The right.

'Tis true.

Your doubt.

Had me deceived.
Lucia is wholly yours -- say what they can,
For Politiques you are a dreadful man!
And if that Devil, who writes your sins down,
Omits not One, he has a shrewd head on's own.
We're Stratagems who lies within your power.
Lucia, in fine. --

I'll love more from this hour.

,Tis well, and Dorothea.

More and more.

Then, sure, you'll quickly give poor Lyset over.

Yes, she's too lean a thing to satisfy:
She may pass Muster in a vacancy,
For want of better.

Better! -- ah speak well.
A Goat, set Horns aside, would her excel.
If she pass Muster, 'tis for want indeed!

TRuly, Sir, Cliton's Manners now exceed.
The Dev'l, lay's horns away, like thee'd appear.

Now I am muzled.

Leave that Puppy there,
Who jealous cause I love thee, -- thus the Elf
Would black thee?

Love me?

Yes, in-troth, thy self.

Mark but the Juggler.

Thus. --

-- On Cliton's faith.

Go, go, I heard too well.

What is't she saith?

There's want indeed, when I can Muster pass.

I sung a Mean, -- and you interpret Base.

If you give ear, he'll ne'er have done his part.

Command me. --

Silence.

Now begins his Art.
Lay on, my back is broad.

Still dear Lyset
My real love does little faith beget.
In thy long absence, I have torments tried.

I must believ't.

Ware being Noblyfy'd.

My pleasant humour thinks all's Raillery;
But falsely you believe 'tis flattery.
For when an object, like thee, charms this breast,
I think on it more then once.

And love't at l^
I'll help ye out.

Ah! thus to doubt my flame!
Is. --

No, I think I highly cherished am.
But since your Love with me's but left in pawn;
'Tis ten to one it will be soon with-drawn.
My Mistress --.

Thou believe she blows my Fire?
Go, if my heart to serve her e're aspire,

Last Night, you saw her, then, for the last time?

Drawn for thy sake, that Obligation's thine*

Mine?

Dost thou doubt?

Most like you, Sir, it is.

What, not believe?

Yes, I know more then this.

Prithee, once more, my Oath upon it take,
I went last Night but only for thy sake,
Her entertainment's hateful to my ear;
But having learned thy Residence was there,
Tho sure to have that odious Object by
I ran, in hopes to Woe thee with my Eye.
That Language Lovers ever held the best.

How you're composed of Subtilty and Jest.
You found her tho, alone.

At which being sad,
I studied in Revenge to make her Mad;
Paid her Respects were much more strange, then true,
Contemned, her most, when I most Praised her too.
But my high Style, lost her in the Mid-way.

You may repair that fault again to day.
She must speak with you. This I'm sent to tell.
Make haste, and follow.

Thou love'st Mirth so well*

Faith, -- she expects you, and will let you know
When you come there. --

I'll not consent to go.

You must, -- What will you make her else suspect,
That I omit her Message, th'rough neglect?

I shall have much ado.

I'll take your part*

I'm loath to go, I speak it from my Heart,
And I believe you think so, -- seriously;
But at the Enter-view, observe my Eye.
At the least word of Love, look you on me
And what I say to her, -- take all for thee.

I shall not fail, -- 'tis done, -- do but proceed

You Jibe?

Like you.

Faith I Love thee, indeed
And to make good, in thy Society
My dearest Pleasures Sovereign Bliss does lie.
That thy commands are my chief glory, too,
Here --

You at length, may make me think all true,

Time, will discover, what as yet lies hid

My Nobleness goes on, the Price is bid.
I cannot hold. -- Hola!

-- What Devil's Cry?

Against all Events, having a Remedy,
Vouchsafe one Favour, now my Heart's so sad?

What i'st?

Sir, keep me pray from running Mad!

If -- but, who's this I see?

-- Good, -- here's relief

Ah! he put's up his Purse again, the Thief!

What e're I say, -- let it create no doubt,
We'll laugh anon.

Now, I must stand it out.
Hopes of his present does invite my stay.

Blessed with your Presence, once more Lucia.

A common joy, -- But with regret, Sir, I
Thus interrupt your wished Secrecy.
Surely you treated with great Confidence.

What, you suspect I held Intelligence.
And think design, what accidental proves?
Cliton knows. --

Yes, he's honest, where he Loves.
Though this fresh* Object, to my shame, I see --

He Courted her, indeed, but 'twas for me,

If you believe that Fool --

What I behold,
I dare believe, -- but not all I am told.

Then on your part, my Ruin is assured?

What Persecution, I for you endured.
Whilst a harsh Brother for Florame, this day --

I more deserve then he, -- so to obey.
Much your own loss, and prejudice would be,
And you oblige your self, whilst just to me.

Take heed! least this presumption to reprove,
I yield him up -- at last -- my faith and love!

'Tis but three sighs more, added to the heap.
But, -- e're you do it consult, look e're you leap.
And get your heart's consent to it before

What! would my loss affect you then no more?

What? you'll betray your self, and therefore I
Must yield my self a prey to grief -- and dye!
Let it sting those it does most nearly touch.
Grief almost killed me last night 'twas so much;
For having known how well Florame was used
By you, I hasted to you much confused:
There wept and wail'd, and all sad means did try,
Low at your feet, to break this heart and dye.
But since I find it inconvenient prove,
I'll blow it off, and try new fashion love.

Your fashion, -- to deceive, and be ingrate.

That love's most pleasing, is least delicate,
And where we once resolve, no Jealousy,
Should

Without reason then it ceazes me?
Nor may I credit give to my own eyes.

You should pass by such things, if you were wise.
Let's make the agreement thus, 'twixt you and me:
To have no jealous thoughts, -- but ever free
From all vain fears, think either's faith most true,
And if you ne'er doubt me, I'll ne'er doubt you.
Thus when I swear, believ't I love you well:
I'll do the same, when you Love-stories tell*
All this observed, our Contract shall remain;
But the least tripp, infringes it again.

True love, sublimed, will all this disavow,
He makes a Monster on it, does this allow.

Allowing what we like, but makes us find
The troubles less, -- pleasures more un-confin'd.

No, he that can divided Love endure,
And not dye rather, has small courage sure?

If, in effect, this Maxim bare the sway,
Men were in danger to dye every day.
Can any lightness with your own compare,
Last night one, -- now another, -- so y'all are.

The better to delude us, thus ye plead:
But, think how many th'rough such grief are dead.
And oft have had the applause of learned men.

The example's dangerous, I renounce it then.

Your heart's too cold, where such brave dangers are.

Let, who's will do it, and take my honours share.
Should I expire your Martyr, -- for a day
Or two, perhaps, the world should hear you say
He was a Faithful Lover, -- I regret
For me he died! -- Much I by this should get.

Is an an illustrious Memory no gain?

Heavens grant my Epitaph less sad, and vain!

And yet you'll say; you love men'eretheless.

Ask but my heart, my heart which you possess.

THey do adore each other, -- I am told.

My Brother's here, -- O Gods!

I see him, -- hold!

A Lady with him.

Then it must be she*
'Tis Dorothea.

Think of leaving me.

This night with her, he through the Garden went;
I know her --

What? and must I then consent?

Yes, for I dare not go, till after you;
Pray lose no time, be gone, -- bid me adieu.

I do obey you. -- Cliton!

Sir, what now?

Stop Lyset here, but stop her mouth close too,
Promise her any thing, -- do it e're you stir.

She goes

Ungrateful! but I'll follow her.
For without doubt, her woman does abide,
That if we ask who 'tis, she be denied.
But, following after, I her plots destroy.

HOw shall I act the part of the angry Boy?

Cliton.

No quarter.

Such severe ill will?

Provide elsewhere.

Dost keep thy anger still
Cliton?

Yes still I keep't, and keep it shall.

Look up?

-- No. --

But --

I'll bate thee nought at all.

What you'll forsake me, -- You, whose grizled Pate,
And snuffling Nose, proclaims ye out of date?
You will forsake me, -- Me, who more or less,
The whole Town dotes on, for my prettiness.
Me, whose dear Love so hotly they pursue,
It makes them look on Thee, with envy too.
Who thus abase my thoughts. --

Yes, -- you, -- you, -- you?
Who squeezed my Purse, and then laughed at me too.

Your gifts, I'll warrant, Trick me up thus brave.

Pox, Now I apprehend this Female knave.
Before my face, your liberty's so bold
'T has made my wonted charity catch cold.
-- Every one Courts you now.

-- Yes, and those words
Alone a daily Revenue affords*

And this to me, you think must comfort bring?

Cliton, speak wisely, and leave quarrelling.
You knew my humour, and my Method knew,
That I loved clothes in fashion, -- often new.
Each day I purchase somewhat, and protest
What I do cut or sow, -- is of the best
Either the Draper or the Mercer sells.
And whilst my Cash holds, I do little else.
Now, -- think what this must cost? For, to go neat;
Wishing, nor Witch-craft, will not do the feat:
Your Wages, whatsoever, -- hardly brings
Enough for Gloves, and such small trifling things.
So that to prove too Coy, would prove my shame,
My Pride would fall, -- And then Adieu -- Fine Dame.

'Tis right, -- but come -- to wave all you have said,
What have I reaped for all my Wages paid?
From day to day, my Passion has encreast;
Yet with my finger ne'er durst feel your -- Breast.

I loved thee, -- that's sufficient I conceive.

Loved me!

To doubt, your self were to deceive;
You know.

I'm left in Hell, Loves Barly-break*

Does not six sighs a Day, my true love speak?

Great comfort that, to troubled Souls does prove.

Do you so light esteem those mark's of Love?

Just next to nothing, so I find, -- And sure,
Since Love was ever held an Epicure
And glutton, when the Boy you thus do Treat,
Sighs cannot nourish they are such hollow Meat.

I lose my time here, you but love to prate;
And thy weak reason turns my love to hate.
Adieu. --

But stay, if not for Love, for Gold;
For twenty Crowns, can you One Secret hold?

One, yes a score.

Hold! that's too much for Thee!

I'll do it, I'll warrant, let it rest on me.
Can you disburse-em?

Yes, -- but prithee hear!
Keep but your Tongue, out of your Mistriss' Ear.
My Master. --

I'll conceal his Pranks, -- ne'er doubt.
Let's see the Money?

'Tis not yet told out.

Your promises on hopes, will ill succeed.

I'll pawn my Honour.

A fair pledge indeed.
Go, I'll discover all that ever past.

Beware he do not Noose you, too, at last.

AT least defer it, till my troubled mind
Composed, -- to this sad Hymen be inclined.
Do not precipitate --

You hope in vain*
By prayer to blast, my just design again:
Yours I perceive, I read it in your soul:
But Florames Father now has my Parol,
Which I must keep, -- he claims you thereupon,
And so to morrow Hymen makes you One*

But he so little values me, you see
He hardly. --

That, but an effect may be
Of what's reported, by Orontus, who
Is said to have pretences for you to.
Florame alarm'd therewith, does colder prove,
Fearing his Rival, more then him you love.
From his disturbed thoughts I gather it,
Which since a mis-report does thus beget,
I ought to hasten on this Nuptial Tie,
To set all right, and them to satisfy.
Think on it, Adieu. -- I'll to his Fathers run,
And there consult what more is to be done.

In vain this Man, for Husband you'd prefer;
My Eyes herein, shall be my Counseller.
But, Lyset comes, Love take thou my defence.

I Staid thy coming with impatience.
Well, -- is he found, what's his reply, tell true?

I have at once both found and lost him too.

How, did he slight the Message thou did tell?

You do not know him yet; sure, very well.
He's too much versed in's way to blanch at that.

Then prithee let me know how 'tis, and what?
Did say I wait him? -- Shall I see him here?

No doubt he'll come, -- but pray beware a snare.
If you'll believe me, give him word for word;
Pay him in's own coin, but no more afford.
Engage no farther, then you find him go.

What does induce thee to speak of him so?
Is he inconstant, false?

That shall appear,
Be Judge your self, pray, Madam do but hear.
In the street I met him in a certain place,
Who smiling, when he first beheld my Face,
Approached me with such joy, as made me deem
His Love was noble, and deserved esteem.
This did his words confirm, for he did say,
He ever would to you obedience pay.
Scarce were these words pronounced, when I protest
A Lady coming, -- Here's the main of the jest, --
-- He without why, or wherefore, durst presume
To sing her the same Song, to the same Tune:
And without blushing, tho I stood close by,
Discoursed of Love to her most pleasantly.

Unworthy Man, -- had he the confidence
Before your Face to own a new pretence,
And mention Love to her?

Yes, in my sight.

Dissembling Traitor!

'Tis his whole delight.

But, then the Lady, what became of her?
Go on.

A long while they did there confer,
When, suddenly, ('twas plotted I dare say)
They part, and each retired a several way.

And you ne'er follow'd to enquire her name?

I would, and much I longed to know the same;
But, then Orontus servant made me stand,
Who having popped some Sweet-meats in my hand,
In earnest of some better thing e're long,
Promised me Mountains for to hold my tongue:
But I, -- what do you think I am so base?
Then throwing all the Sweet-meats in his face,
Sir (cried I) -- I'll ne'er prove false for these,
Nor do I use to sell my Mistresses*
If I need Money, she such plenty hath
In store for me, I need not break my Faith.
Then did my courage prompt me to engage. --

Thy Zeal does ravish me.

I swelled with rage.
What, I betray you? -- Sell you? Wher's his wit?
He proffer. --

Go, -- thou shalt not lose by it.
In the mean time, see my unhappy Fate?
And with what reason I did all men hate:
Since this Orontus, for whose Love, -- my Pride
And noble Haughtiness I laid aside;
Like a Dissembler does me slight and brave,
And puts on others Chains, who was my slave.
But, -- truly this was timely brought to light,
Ere I consulted that false Man to night;
Or how to break this other Hymen asked
Advice.

You hope in vain, there's promise past:
Your Father urges it, and having power.

Let him urge still, I'll quash all in one hour.

But Florame has his word, his heart, his love.

Florame, at need, my help herein would prove,
Since to endeavour this our union he
Too much aversion ever met in me.
In vain these impotent old Parents try
Upon our wills to act their tyranny.
Each others coldness being mutual,
We dread not their authority at all.
But, -- who is't locks that door? what is't they do?

PRotect me, from a brother does pursue
To find me out, -- whose wrath and jealousy
For walking forth, will harshly light on me.
In vain, by twenty turns, from street to street
I sought to steal away, and he not see it.
He follow'd still, and keeping me in sight
Constrained me now, lest on me he should light
To step in here, where I your aid implore.
For shelter, till -- this danger may blow over.
See who 'tis begs.

Ah! Lucia is it thee?

'Tis I, whose cruel Brothers jealousy --
But, there he knocks, -- to save me from his frown
Pray, feign you just now come in from the Town.
My Hood, I'll leave you.

Hide you quickly, do.

In here!

Dy'e know?

Open the door, go, go.
Make haste.

No matter, she shall make it good.

What will he think on it?

LYset, take my Hood.

Pardon the intrusion; you may well suspect,
Void both of Love to you, and of respect.
I follow my despair, and with much pain
The storms of my just anger now refrain.

Your humour's much disturbed to day, I find:
I thought so smooth a Calm reigned in your mind,
That still immovable at all events,
Your soul no anger knew, nor discontents.

None, but for you, caused by my too great Faith
And Love --

Then I'm the object of this wrath.

Deny, ungratefully you scorn my flame;
Deny, my Rivals happiness, your shame;
What yet I saw, must treason be confessed?

Believe me, Sir, you rave!

But yet, at least
You will agree, since many eyes did see it,
You held discourse with him in the open street.

I? --

Whom I follow'd after your adieu's,
Believe --

Your eyes. --

These eyes ne'er bring false news*
But clearly to evince, and tell your shame,
It will suffice, when I Orontus name.

Orontus!

Yes, -- that Gallant was there, to,
Whom you gave audience while he courted you.
Can you deny it still?

In troth 'tis fine,
I serve my Rival, -- was ere Fate like mine?

Your silence is confession. -- All desires
I henceforth banish, quenching all my Fires.
A most Unfaithful She, I did adore;
But Heavens discovery bids my heart give over.

This is too rash, -- yet still my goodness see?
(For sure you neither know, nor speak to me.)
I pardon your blind rage, tho gone so far
As to mistake both me, and who you are*
Think on me, whilst your tongue you fiercely whet,
And think how much you do your self forget.

I've thought too long, and Justly have accused --

What you proceed? -- This makes me more confused,
Your words so discomposed at random fly.
-- But, pray, let's know, what makes you speak thus high?
Orontus, say you, hath my heart obtained.
Is it a Crime that Man my love hath gained?
What had I promised you, should hinder me?
I brake no Oaths, nor Vows, my soul was free,
If from one Letter, you this inf'rence make,
Your easiness that favour did mistake.
I love to jest, if that will do the deed,
I'd write a hundred more such for a need.
That Paper showed in Mirth I much delight,
And you will find so, if you spell it right.

What, mock me thus? -- Is this the fruit at last
Of all my hopes, and all my service past?
After two years, spent in devoirs and love?

Such devoirs sometimes do but trouble prove.

Now your proud mind does cast off all disguise.
This shows my error, and unseals my eyes;
Go, take your swinge in your unconstant will.
Leave me, -- and live for your Orontus still.
Those fetters once so soft and dear, I break,
And to keep nothing that of you does speak.
That Letter, whose allurements made me burn,
Tho once my treasure I will back return.

You will oblige me, do, kind Sir, 'tis fit*

Yes, I'll restore it, make no doubt of it.
I'll haste home for it, Madam, stay that while.

IN fine; heaven now begins on you to smile,
The Rival Lady, -- she to whom I said
The false Orontus new addresses made
Is in your power, what more could fortune do?

I know, yet have maintained her quarrel too.

I suffered hitherto, but now she must,

Speak softly, else she hears, and may distrust.

I'll warrant her from being now so near,
She fled into the Garden out of fear.
And to return you thanks there waits thus long.
I came now thence.

To avenge my love and wrong,
And blast his base design, this remedy
I quickly; -- stay -- what's that appears to me?

Lyset.

'Tis Cliton. -- Is your Master there?

May he come in?

Yes.

But --

Let him not fear,
The good man's forth, tell him.

See now Lyset.
How both of them do fall into my net.
If from disdain of me their love take root,
One stroke may lop them both, and I will do it.

Let not fierce jealousy bear so great a sway,
But seek --

Go back, and find out Lucia.
And when you guess Orontus may be here
Lead her this way, till she approach so near,
That having stopped her, on some other score
She may hear all we say, from yonder door,
His tongue must prate of Love when he comes in,
And I'll return as good as he can bring.

The bait's so tempting -- he will bite anon.
I think I hear him.

Quickly then, be gone*
He's here.

HOw Sir?

I tell thee, I, in fine
Have quitted her, and Lyset's henceforth thine.

In earnest?

And in earnest shall be still.

Thank's Sir -- Now push your fortunes where you will.

How dear soever I this favour prize,
Yet, from your goodness this regret does rise.
That here expected by you, it may chance
Breed doubt which brings me, love -- or complaisance
For your commands may seem to make it prove
More my obedience then an act of love.

Madam, a Gentleman is there you see.
Stay.

'Tis Orontus, Ah! false man, 'tis he!

While you surprise me by your Complement
With art enough, you my complaints prevent.
But, say your self, what shall I now believe?

My Joy's so great, you may the truth perceive.

I doubt 'tis art.

Small reason in this case.

A treacherous soul oft hath a smiling face.

To be secure, this a safe way will prove,
Ask your own heart, that knows how I do love.

It owns no secrets.

More then you confess,
Vouchsafe to hear it, it will speak no less.
Besides which, my Devoirs my love sets forth.

Which being forced, are but of little worth.

The Homage paid those Eyes, which rule my heart,
Are they esteemed a force then, on your part?
That love which no self-interests defile,
That has no dross, no mixture, nought that's vile.

You set it highly forth.

Have I not cause,
Since 'tis your Virtue only gives it laws?
Your worth, the only motive comprehends,
Of my true love, -- And such love's without ends.

I may presume it then, to be long lived;
This rare, this noble birth from me derived;
For though, the power of time most powerful be,
Can that e're make me cease from being me?

It were great wrong both to my Faith and Will,
To doubt my Love were not immortal still.

You speak so lavishly, I justly fear,
Least some surprise you intended here.

Does my Sincerity suspicion give?

They hazard much, that lightly do believe*

Hopes founded on great Merits, may be said
By being limited to be betrayed.
Such ought from so firm rules not to depart,
Which lays a claim to every noble heart.

From thence it comes, soon as your Eyes give fire
You conquer every object you desire.

From hence it is with little fear I do
See others under-hand, attempting you.
I serve you out of love, -- Erastes out
Of gain, -- your Eye-sight's good, what need I doubt?

Your merits do presage you cannot fail,
Set against him, you must o'reweigh the scale.

Go as it will, my self I'll satisfy.
Those shall deserve my care, that will comply:
Or if another choice they shall pursue,
Th'rough their own folly. -- My Faith bids adieu.

Such weakness in my choice shall never be;
This fly reproach is it addressed to me?

Your lov's too scrupulous, I'll tell ye true.
Such general terms, do not reflect on you.
-- But, I hear noise!

Where is't?

You seem to fear,
And look --

I looked about for Lyset here.
I thought I saw her.

So you might. I say --

What is become of her?

She's gone this way;
I'll go and call her.

Gods! what would you do?

Show a small proof, of my great Zeal for you.

Still with your Love suspicion does appear.
But, know, if any person were hid there
Without my leave, perhaps my woman may --

That you are guilty, Madam, who dares say?
This time you speak against your self, I see.

I've cause to fear your prying jealousy
Since yesterday you stuck the same reproach.

Pray do but cause your woman to approach.

And under that pretence your doubts begin
To --

Then permit --

Erastes is within.
Put on Sir, make the naked truth appear;
Perhaps 'tis Lysets the other Husband's there!

Well, do your pleasure, Sir, but after this.

You're much alarmed. -- Lyset!

AH! here she is!
Take courage man, Fate cannot be withstood.

Cheapners enough, -- this Market must be good.

What unexpected Labyrinth am I in!

Your Wit's a Clue, will guide you out agin.

Well, Faithless Lover?

Lover so untrue!

What turn by turn your heart thus shared 'twixt two?

Inconstant!

Perjured!

Scornful!

Flat'^ing! -- Nay --

Ungrateful!

Traitor!

Have ye more to say?

After so many Vows, without pretence --

Master, for fear of the worst, let's ee'n pack hence:
Should these fly on's, as some she Dragons do;
Adieu, Gallants, to Man and Mounsir too.

In fine, the truth, in spite of all your skill --

Pray, let me hear the Indictment, if you will?

Can you demand, yet, what your Crime should be?

Yes, having not the gift of Prophecy.

Deny these Treasons, are so Evident,
Shows you not falser now, then impudent.

Do not pass sentence, e're you name the Crime.

You never told me, that your heart was mine?
That you those Oaths and Vows would ne'er forget?

I'll swear all this again, I love ye yet,

Can you love her, false Man, so oft did say,
Nay swear, your heart did yield to Lucia?
And that --

All this I'll still make good, and more.

Love me?
Yes, you

And me?

I still adore.

Mark but his confidence, though both are by?

In vain my love for you, I should deny,
Too well you know me not to claim a part.

Why Court you me then, if she have your heart?

For love.

-- What love?

-- True love

True love, -- how so?

Why, true love, Madam, does from Reason flow.
And Reason tells me wheresoever I see
Beauty (like power) it must adored be.
Thus whilst in each of you such Charms I meet,
I equally am drawn to baits so sweet.
Nor can you blame me for it, since whilst I do
Her beauty prize, I pay yours worship too.

But, since you first, or last, must choose, let's see
Who you'll prefer?

That still must secret be.

Come, come, you must declare.

No, -- for in brief
I fear the she I leave would dye for grief.

Sir, you may choose elsewhere, as you like best*
Truly, you well deserve all this contest.

Nay, if you're thus indiffrent. Here I'll vow
My constant Love. I'm Dorotheas now.

The mighty prize I yield with willing mind.

Had I declared for you, youl'd speak more kind.

Her Fortunes great, it cannot be denied.

Disgrace is still attended with false Pride.
And yet the loss perhaps breeds trouble too.
You to whom henceforth, all my love is due,
Believe --

This sudden change admits of doubt.

Your Wit, on second thoughts will make it out.
Since your more great deserts do you prefer.

Your various humour makes me fear you err.
You swear to every one.

The Mode, -- you see:
But as I am, -- try how you like of me?

HEre is your Letter, which I would allege,
-- But -- how -- my Sister here?

Her faith I'll pledge,
I'm Father.

O! but rather then constrain --
Your coldness gives me just cause to complain.
If false repotts alone disturb your mind;
Or cause Orontus, you in presence find:
Know, that which brings him's Lucia's love, for I --

Sir, what you speak of me, I must deny.
My love's beyond Orontus hopes so far --

Then suffer me, at this time to declare,
That having dared at Lucia's Bed to aim,
The honour of your Sonship would be vain.
Nor can I, Sir, accept of it at last.
But here's Erastes --

No the Dice is cast;
To love that false One, I shall ne'er accord.
But, Sir, to you, that I may keep my word,
Lead home my Sister -- You the effect shall see.

Adieu, -- Don't envy my prosperity.

WHat means all this; Does Lucia Florame love?
And is not she the object you approve;
With whom this night caught in your Love design,
You leaped their Garden wall, and came to mine?

Sir, -- 'tis high time, I should you disabuse;
Know therefore, only Love shaped that Excuse.

What meet my Girl by night* and both to dare --

Pray make no trouble.

You shall Marry her.

I must consent to Wed at last, for I
Have no way else to End this Comedy?

Bring you to Marriage! Who could this fore-show?

This ends my Part, and it must needs be so.

Yet the Conclusion will imperfect be;
To wind up all, Lyset should Marry me.

Dost love her?

I dye for her.

Then she's thine.

My pretty One --

Not yet, -- the choice is mine;
Can thou maintain me, like a Dam'sel fair?

Yes, sure.

Hast thou wherewith?

-- Take you no care*

Who will secure me?

He,

I'll do it, -- give over.

First lets the Money Count, -- Then I'll say more.


