A Pprove my weakness, and suffer my grief, It is but too just in so great a
misery; such storms as these ready to power upon them, will shake the stoutest
courages; the least dejected masc'line Spirit without disorder can't exercise
its Virtue; although mine receive amazement at these rude alarms, the trouble
of my heart can nothing work upon my tears, and amongst all the sighs it
send's to Heaven, my constancy reigns still over mine eyes. When one doth stop
the course of the Souls sadness and affliction, though it be less then man,
'tis more then woman: in this extremity to command tears, is to show strength
enough in our weak sex.


Enough, and too much for a common Soul, that from the meanest danger doth
expect but one misfortune; a great heart doth scorn such an abasement, it
despairs of nothing, though in occurrents doubtful; the two armies stand in
battalia before our walls; but Rome knows not yet how to lose a field, we need
not fear her, rather lets applaud her; since she goes forth to fight, she goes
to conquer: then banish, banish quite so vain a fear, and conceive brave
desires worthy a Roman.


I am a Roman, since my Husbands is so, marriage makes me embrace Romes
interest; but it should hold my heart like a chained slave, if it did make me
to forget the place where I was born. Alba, where I began to breath my first
air, Alba, my dear Country, and my first love, when between us and thee I see
the war commenced, I fear our Victory as much as our destruction. Rome, if
thou complain'st that I am partial herein, fix upon enemies that I may hate:
When I see drawn up'fore thy walls both Armies, my three brave Brothers in the
one, and my undaunted Husband in the other, can I pray for thee, and without
impiety importune Heaven for thy felicity? I know thy State, yet in its
infancy, cannot without war fix its puissance: I know it must grow great, and
that thy destinies will not at home be bounded with the Latins; I know the Gods
have promised to thee the Empire of the Earth and that thou can not See the
effect of it, but by the war: so far am I from off'ring to oppose this thirst
of Glory, which obeys so readily the Gods decrees, and posts to thy
greatness, that I would see thy Crowned Troops already pass the Pyrenees, carry
thy battalions into the East, plaint thy Pavillions upon the banks of Rhine,
make the proud columns of Hercules to shake under thy feet: But love a town to
whom thou owe Romulus: Ingratful, know that from her Kings rich blood thou
take thy name, thy walls, and thy first laws: Alba is thy original; stay, and
wisely consider that thou carryest the sword into thy Mothers bosom; turn
elsewhere the force of thy triumphant arms: her joy will break forth in her
childrens happiness; and overcome with a maternal love, her prayers will be for
thee, if thou art not against her.


This discourse surprises me, since from the time that we first armed against
her people, I have seen so much indifference in you for her, as if you had been
born within our walls: I admired in you the virtue that reduced your dearest
interests unto your husbands, and did pity you in the midst of your plaints,
as if our Rome had caused all your fears.


Whilst they encountered but in light skirmishes, not strong enough to cast
each other down; whilst a glad hope of peace flattered my trouble, it is true,
I took a vanity to be all Roman: if I saw Rome prevail, with some regret I
suddenly condemned this secret motion; again, if I resented in her contrary
success any malignant joy in favour of my three brothers, suddenly to smother
it, calling my reason to me, I lamented when Glory entered into their house.
But now alas! that one of them must fall, that Alba become slave, or that Rome
sink, and that after the battle there remain no obstacle more to the
conquerours, nor hope unto the conquered, I should show an unnatural hate unto
my Country, if I could be all Roman yet, and should ask of the Gods your
triumph, at the price of so much blood which is so precious to me. I tie me not
so strictly to the interest of a man, that I should forget my Country: I'm not
for Alba nor am I for Rome; I am afraid for one, and for the other, in this
last conflict, and must be of that side which fortune shall afflict;
indifferent to both until the Victory, I will participate the ils without
assuming any thing of the glory, and will keep my tears in store for the
conquered party, and my hate for the conquerours.


How often we see such traverses as these arise* in diverse spirits diverse
passions! In this Camilla acts clean contrary; her brother is your Husband;
yours, her Lover* but she sees with an eye far different from yours; her blood
in one camp, and her Love in the other; when you did conserve a spirit all
Roman, hers irresolute and fearful, uncertain, feared the storm of the least
mixture, of either party hated the advantage, to the misfortune of the
vanquished still gave her plaints, and so she nourished eternal griefs; but
yesterday when she understood that the Armies did advance resolved to join
battle, on her brow a sudden joy appeared.


Oh Julia, how I fear so quick a change! Yesterday in her fair and pleasant
humour she entertained Valerius; without doubt she quits my brother for this
happy rival; her spirit shaken by the present objects finds nothing amiable in
an absent one after two years. But pray excuse the heat of a fraternal love;
the care I have of him, doth make me fear all things from her; I frame
suspicions from too light a subject, The day of battle is unfit to change, with
a new dart few hearts are wounded then, in so great trouble one hath other
thoughts: But who can have such pleasant entertainments, and such contentments
as may equal hers?


The causes are as obscure unto me as unto you, I can't he satisfied by any
thought, any conjecture on it; 'tis constancy enough in so great danger, to see
it, to attend it without grief; but surely 'tis too much t'expresse it further
even unto joy.


See how a gentle Genius hath fittly sent her to us! Try to make her discourse
upon this point, she loves you too well to conceal any thing from you: I leave
you, Julia, entertain my Sister. I am ashamed to show so much of melancholy,
and my heart hurthened with a thousand fears, seeks solitude to hide its sighs
and tears.


Why flies she, and would have me entertain you? thinks she that my grief's
less then hers, and that as more insensible of such misfortunes, I should mix
less plaints with my sad discourse? My soul's affrighted with the same alarms.
I shall lose in the one and the other army as well as she; I shall behold my
Lover, nay more, my only Joy die for his Country, or ruin mine; and this dear
object of my love become for my afflicting punishment, or worthy of my tears,
or of my hate. Alas!


Yet she is more to be lamented then you: one may change Lover, but not
Husband; leave Curiacius, and receive Valerius, so shall you fear no more for
the adverse party, so shall you be all ours, and your ^pirit released of it's
trouble, shall have nothing to lose more in the camp of the Enemy.


Give me advises that may be more lawful, and, without proposition of crimes,
wail my misfortunes; although I can scarce resist my evils, yet I would rather
suffer, then merit them.


How, Madame! do you call a fair and reasonable change a crime?


What? think you that the breach of faith is pardonable?

Towards an enemy what should oblige you?

Who can absolve us from a Solemn vow?

'Tis to no purpose to disguise a thing that is so clear: I saw you yesterday
receive Valerius court-ship, and the favour which he received from you, gives
him encouragement to nourish a sweet hope.


If yesterday I entertained him with a pleasing countenance, think nothing on it
but to his disadvantage; of my content another was the object. But to remove
your error, know the cause on it; I look on Curiacius with an amity too pure to
suffer my self longer to be thought perjured. About five or six months after my
Brother married his Sister ( Julia you know it) he obtained of my Father that I
should be his Wife. This day was prosperous and fatal to us both at once,
uniting our houses, it did disunite our Kings; our marriage and the war were
both concluded at the same instant, our hope as soon dead as born, all promises
lost as soon as made: Oh how extreme then were our miseries! how many
blasphemies did Curiacius Vomit forth against Heaven? how many Rivers flowed
from mine eyes? I need not tell it you, you saw our farwels; you have since
beheld the troubles of my soul, you know what prayers my flame hath made for
peace, and what sad plaints at every encounter I have uttered, as fate disposed
it; sometime for my Country, and sometime for my Lover: my despair at last
constrained me to have recourse Unto the Oracles. Hearken unto the voice that
yesterday they gave unto me, and give me your opinion, whether I have reason
thereupon to reassure my dismayed spirit. That Greek so much renowned, who for
so many years foretold our destinies at the foot of Aventine, he I mean, that
inspired by Apollo ne'er spake false, doth promise in these verses a quick end
Unto my travels.


Thy prayers are heard, Alba and Rome shall be to morrow in a fair
confaederacy, and thou with Curicius shalt be joined never to part, so have the
Gods enjoined.

Upon this Oracle I ground a firm belief, and as the success passed may
hope, I gave my soul over to ravishments, which passed the transports of the
happiest Lovers: Judge you of their excess. I met Valerius, and he could not,
as he was wont, displease me, he spake to me of Love without my trouble; I
perceived not that I discoursed with him, I could not show him coldness, nor
contempt; all that I saw seemed Curiacius to me, all that he said unto me,
spake his fires, all what I said assured him of my love. A general fight to day
is doubted much, I heard the news on it yesterday, and was not troubled at it,
my Spirit did reject these fatal objects, charmed with the sweet thoughts of
marriage and peace: But this last night hath dissipated those so charming
errors. A thousand fearful dreams, and bloody Images, or rather heaps of
slaughter and of horror snatched my joy from me, and filled me with fear: I
saw dead bodies, blood, and nothing else, a spirit appearing suddenly took
flight, they defaced one another, and each fantasme redoubled my fear by its
confusion.


A dream for the most part should be interpreted in a contrary sense.


I should believe it so, since I desire it; but notwithstanding all my prayers
and wishes I see a day of battle, not of peace.


Thereby the war will end, and peace will follow.

Last still the ill, if this must be the remedy! Whether Rome fall, or Alba be
o'rthrown, dear Lover, think no more to be my Husband: my heart (how great
soever the fire be that doth consume it) will not have the conqueror, nor
Slave of Rome. But what new object here presents it self? Is it thee,
Curiacius?


Camilla, doubt it not, behold a man who neither is the conqueror, nor yet the
slave of Rome: fear not to see my hands blush with the shameful weight of
Irons, or the blood of Romanes; I believed you loved glory and Rome enough for
to despise my chain, and hate my Victory, and so in this extremity I equally
feared captivity and Victory.


It is sufficient, Curatius, I do divine the rest, thou fly'st a battle so
fatal to thy wishes, and thy heart wholly mine, to the end thou may not lose
me, denies to lend thy arm unto thy Country: let who will herein look on thy
Renown, and blame thee to have too much loved me, Camilla must not disesteem
thee for it; the more thy Love appears, the more she ought to cherish thee: and
if thou owe much unto the place that gave thee birth, the more thou quit'st
for me, the more thy Love appears, But hast thou seen my Father? can he suffer
thee in his house thus? doth he not prefer the State before his private
Family? regards he not Rome more then his daughter Lastly, is our good
fortune well assured? hath he beheld thee as a Son in law, or as an Enemy?


He looked upon me as son in law with tenderness and love, which witnessed
enough an entire Joy: but he beheld me not, by any treason unworthy honour,
enter in his house: I give not up the interest of my town, I love my honour
yet, though I adore Camilla; so long as the war hath lasted, I have approved my
self as good a Citizen, as faithful lover. I would with my Love reconcile
Alba's quarrel, I sighed for you in combating for her; and if we must yet come
to strokes, I should, alas! fight for her, and sigh for you: in spite of the
desires of my charmed soul, if the war should continue, I should be in the
Army: it is peace that gives me a free access unto you, peace, unto which our
love owes this happiness.


Peace! by what means may one believe this miracle?


Camilla, at the least believe the Oracle, and know we fully by what blessed
effects the happiness of a battle hath produced this peace.


Ye Gods, who even could have thought it! Already the two Armies animated unto
the combat, with an equal heat threatened each other with their eyes, and
fiercely advancing, looked for nothing but the signal to give the charge, when
our discreet Dictator putting himself some distance fore the ranks, demanded of
your Prince a minutes silence; it being granted him, What do we, Romans, (said
he) what divel provokes us to arms? let reason rule, and clear your
understandings. We are your neighbours, your fair daughters are our wives, and
ours are yours; Hymen hath joined us by so many reciprocal strong knots that
there are few of our sons which are not your Nephews; and to speak the truth,
we are but one blood, and one people in two Towns; why should we tear our
selves by civil wars, where the death of the conquered weakens the
conquerors, and the most beauteous triumph is watered with tears? Our common
enemies expect with joy, when one of us defeated, shall leave the other as a
prey unto them; they have too long enjoyed the benefit of our divisons: let us
for the future join all the forces that we have against them, and let us drown
these petty differences forever in Oblivion, which make so ill allies of such
good Warriors: but if th'ambition to command each other makes your troops and
ours to march to day, if we would but appease her with less blood, she will
unite, far from dividing, us. Let us name Combatants for the common cause,
each people fix it self unto their own; and as the chance of Arms shall dispose
of them, the weakest party shall obey the strongest; but with this reservation,
that the conquered without indignity to such brave Warriors, shall not be
slaves, but subjects, free from tribute or shame, without other subjection then
to be bound to follow in all places the Colours of the Conqueror. Thus our two
States will make but one resplendent Empire. He ended here, every one figh'd
with joy, and looking each into the others ranks, knew there a friend, a cozen,
or a brother: they wondered how their hands, greedy of blood, flew rashly to so
many parricides, and showed a face at once covered with horror of battle, and
with ardour for this choice: At last the offer was accepted, and the desired
peace on those conditions was swore of both sides, three should fight for all:
but for to make the better choice, our Chiefs will take a little leisure. Your
election is in the Senate, our within a Tent.


O Gods, how this discourse contents my mind!


Within three hours or there abouts, by common accord, the fortune of our
warriors shall rule our fortune; in the mean time all are free, expecting
when they shall be named; Rome's in our Camp, and our Camp is in Rome; free
access being allowed of both sides, every one goes to find his ancient friend,
and to receive his Love; for my part, Madame, my passion made me seek your
noble Brothers, and my desires met with so good success, that the Author of
your days hath promised to give me the unparalleled happiness of your fair
hand to morrow; you will not, I hope, become a Rebel to his power.


The duty of a daughter is obedience.


Come then, receive that sweet command which must heap up my happiness to its
full height.


I follow you, but for to see my Brothers, and to know the end too of our
miseries.


Go, whilst that I at the foot of the Altars, freed so propitiously from their
feirce rods, give thanks for you to the immortal Gods


THus Rome hath fitly placed her esteem, she should have chosen otherwise
unworthily; this City proud in you and in your brothers, hath found three
warriors, which she doth prefer before all others, and opposing to us no
other arms but yours, braveth all ours with one sole house: we will believe
that, seeing all is committed to your hands, there is no Roman besides Horace
and his Sons: This choice can fill three Families with Glory, and consecrate
their names to future ages: Oh yes! the honour which your doth receive by this
choice, can immortalize all three; and since with you my fortune and may flame
have made me place my Sister, choose my wife, that which I ought to be, and what
I am to you already, makes me take your part as much as possibly I can: But
sadly another interest doth restrain my Joy, and mingles bitterness amongst
those sweets; the war hath cast such a refulgent ray upon your Valour, that I
shake for Alba, and foresee its misfortune; since you combat, her ruin is
assured; in making you the choice, even destiny her self hath sworn it. I see
herein too plain her fatal projects, and do already count my self your
subject.


So little reason have you to lament for Alba, that Rome rather should be
pitied, seeing those she rejects, and the three she names; alas! it is a
fatal blindness for her, in having so many brave Hero's to choose, and yet to
take the worst; a thousand of her fair Children, far more worthy of her then
we, could better have sustained her quarrel: But though this combat points me
out a grave, the Glory of this choice doth swell me up with a just pride, my
spirit doth receive a masculine assurance by it, I dare by virtue of it to hope
much from my small Valour, and what ere the projects be of envious fortune, I
do not account me it'h' number of your subjects: Rome hath too much attributed
to me; but my ravished soul shall satisfy her expectation, or lose its life;
he that resolves to die, or overcome, is seldom overcome; this generous
despair doth hardly perish: but come what will, Rome shall be free, not subject
until my last gasp assure my defeat.


Alas! how much am ^ here to be pitied! that which my Country will, my Amity
forbids: Cruel extremities! to see Alba enslaved, or her Victory bought at the
dear rate of a life so precious, and the chief good whereto her wishes tend,
purchased at the price of your last sighs: What prayers shall I form? what
happiness expect? on every side I must shed tears; on every side my desires
are betrayed.


What! would you weep me dying for my Country? Such a death for a generous
heart hath charms; the glory that attends it doth allow no tears; and I should
bless my fortune, if the State and Rome could lose less by my death.


How ever, Sir, permit your friends to fear it, they only in so fair a death
as this are to be wept, the glory ont's for you, the loss for them: it
makes you immortal, and renders them miserable; what is it one loses not in
losing of a friend so faithful! But I see Flavian approach, he brings me here
some news. Hath Alba yet made choice of her three combatants?


I come to tell you of it.


Well, who are the three?


You, Sir, and your two brothers.


Who?


You, I say, and your two brothers. But why this sad countenance and this
severe look? doth the choice displease you?


No, but it doth surprise me, I thought my self unworthy of so great an honour.


Shall I tel (Sir) the Dictator that sent me to you, with what little joy you
do receive it? This cold entertainment doth make me wonder.


Tel him, that Amity, Love, and Alliance can't hinder the three Curiatii to
serve their Country against the three Horatii.


Against them! oh! it is too much for me to speak in few words.


Carry him my answer, and leave us in repose.


How heaven* hell and earth conspire against us, and make us war! Gods, devils,
men, and fortune prepare a general assault against us; in the condition that we
are, I dare them to do their worst now, what so ever they have of horrible and
cruel, is much less then the honour which they do unto us both.


Fortune, that opens us the lists of honour, offers a glorious matter to our
constancy, she draines her force to strengthen a misfortune. To measure her
self better with our Valour, as she esteems us not common souls, she doth
exclude our fortunes from the common. To fight an enemy for the general safety,
and to expose ones self alone to strokes against a stranger, is but the effect
of a simple virtue, thousands have already performed it, thousands can perform
it still: to lay ones life down for his Country, is so fair a fate, so worthy
an exposure, that all should strive to purchase such a death: But to be willing
for to sacrifice unto the public that which we do love, to tie us resolutely
to the combat against our other self, to assault a party that takes the Brother
of a wife, and Lover of a dear Sister for its sole defender, and breaking all
these knots, to arm for's Country against a blood which one would purchase
with his life, is such a virtue as belongs not but unto us: The glorious lustre
of its great name makes but few jealous of it; very few men have so imprinted
it in the heart, as to dare to aspire unto so much renown.


'Tis true, our names henceforth shall never dye, the occasion is fair 'tis
fit we cherish it, we shall be held the mirrous of a virtue very rare. But for
all that, our constancy and courage savours a little of barbarity: few even of
the great hearts would be proud to go this way to immortality; at how high
price soever we do set such a smoke, such vanity; obscurity is better then so
much renown: for my part, I dare avouch it, and you might have seen it, that I
consulted not upon my duty; nor our long amity: Love, nor alliance could ever
suspend my spirit a moments space; and since by this choice Alba shows indeed
that she esteems me as much as Rome doth you, I think to do as much for her as
you for Rome; I have as good a heart: but lastly, I'm a man. I see your honour
consists in shedding of my blood, that all mine doth depend on piercing of your
body: ready to espouse the Sister, I must kill the Brother, and all for my
Countries sake; although without fear I fly to my duty, my heart is fiercely
angry, and I tremble for horror on it; I cannot choose but pity my self, and
cast an envious eye on those whose lives our war hath ravished, yet without any
desire to retreat, or relinquish; this sad and Violent honour moves me, but
shakes me not; I love that which it gives me, and wail that which it takes
away from me: and if Rome doth demand a higher virtue, I thank the Gods that
made me not a Roman, to conserve yet something of humane in me.


If you are not a Roman, make your self worthy to be so: if you equal me,
make it appear more plainly. Solid virtue, whereof I boast, admits no weakness
with its constancy, and it is ill to enter into the lists of honour, and at
first step to look behind us; our misfortune's great, it is arrived unto the
highest point, I look it boldly in the face, without trembling to see it.
Against whom soever my Country doth employ me, I accept this glory blindly, but
yet joyfully: that, to receive such fair commands, should smother in us all
other sentiments; who considers, besides to serve her, any other thing,
disposes himself poorly to his duty; this sacred right breaks all other
bonds; Rome hath found out my arm, I'll not examine it; with as sincere and
full a joy as I Married the sister, I will fight the brother. And lastly, to
cut off this frivolous speech, Alba hath named you, I know you no more.


I know you yet, and that is it which kills me; but this sharpe virtue was not
known unto me; as our misfortune now is, 't is arrived unto the highest point,
suffer me to admire it, and not imitate it.


No, no, embrace not virtue by constraint: and since you find more pleasure in
complaint, enjoy so sweet a good with all full liberty. Behold my Sister comes
to lament with you: I'll go to see yours, to resolve her soul unto this
thought, that she is still my wife, to love you still, though I dye by your
hands, and to take to her in her greatest misfortune the sentiments of Roman.


Sister, have you heard what account they make of Curiatius?


Alas! my fortune hath much changed her face.


Arm you with constancy, and show your self my Sister: if your Lover by my
death return a conqueror, receive him not as murderer of a Brother, but as a
man of honour, that doth what he ought to do, that serves his Country well, and
shows to all by his high virtue that he's worthy of you; and so, as if I
lived, finish the marriage: But if this sword cut off his destiny, give to my
Victory such entertainment: do not reproach me with your Lovers death; your
tears flow from you, and your heart's oppressed, consummate with him all this
weakness, Sister, quarrel with Heaven and Earth, curse envious fortune. but
think no more of death after the combat. Sir, I will leave you but a moment
with her, since we must go together where bright honour doth call us. --


Wilt thou go, my dear Heart? art thou pleased with this fatal honour so
far, as to purchase it at the expense of all our happiness?


Alas! I see I must, do what I can, either of grief die, or Horatius hand; I go
to this illustrious employment as to my punishment, a thousand times I curse
the account they make of me, I hate that Valour which doth make Alba esteem
me, my flame doth pass from despair even to crime, it quarrels with and doth
assault the Gods; I wail you, and my self, but I must go.


No, no, I know thee better, thou desire that I should pray thee, and that so
my power excuse thee to thy Country. Thou art but too famous by thy other brave
exploits, Alba already hath received by them all what thou ow'st her, none then
thee hath better sustained this war, none with dead bodies hath more covered
this ground, thy name cannot grow greater, there is nothing wanting to it;
suffer some other here to ennoble his.


Should I premit, and see before mine eyes another head crowned with immortal
laurels, which glory doth prepare me, and my Country reproach this to my
virtue, that it might have trimphed, if I had combated? and by my Love, my
Valour lulled asleep, crown so many exploits with such an infamy? No, Alba,
after the honour thou hast given me, thou shalt not fall, nor vanquish but by
me; thou hast committed to my hands thy fate, I'll give to thee a good account
of it, and live without reproach, or dye with shame.


I hope thou wilt not so betray my trust.


Before I'm yours, I must be for my Country.


But wilt thou for it so deprive thy self of brother in law, thy sister of her
husband, I of my brothers?


Such is our misfortune: the choice of Alba and of Rome, takes off all
sweetness from the names (sometime so sweet) of Brother in law and Sister.


Wilt thou also come to present me with his head, and ask my hand for guerdon
of thy Victory?


In the condition wherein I am, I must no more think of it; without hope, to
love you, is all that which I can do. You weep, my dear Heart.


I have cause to weep, my cruel Lover doth ordain me death; and when our
Hymen lights his torch, alas! he with his hand doth put it out, and opens a
tomb unto me; this unpitiful heart is obstinate to my destruction, and says
it loves me, when it murders me.


What powerful discourse hath a Mistress when she's blubbered with tears? and
how strong is a fair eye with such help? how tender is my heart become at this
so sad a sight? my constancy against it labours with some regret. Assault not
with your griefs my glory, and leave me alone to save my virtue from your
tears, I feel it tottering, and ill defends it self: the more I am your Lover,
the less am I Curiatius, already weak in combating against Amity, should it
o'rcome at once both love and pity? Begone, love me no more, shed no more
tears; where I oppose the offence to such strong Arms, I shall defend me
better against your anger; and to deserve it, I'll no more look on you,
revenge your self of an ingratfull person, and punish an inconstant. Show you
not your self as sensible of this injury? I have no more eyes for you. Yet you
have for me! must there be more yet? I renounce my faith unto you. Rigorous
virtue, whose Victim I am. What! can not thou resist, without the assistance
of a crime?


Commit no other crime, and I attest the Gods, that far from hating thee,
I'll love thee more: yes, I will cherish thee, false and ungrateful, and cease
to aspire unto the name of fratricide. Why am I Roman, or why Art not thou so?
I would prepare thee Laurel with my hand, I would encourage thee, and not
distract thee, and I would treat thee as I do my brother. Alas! I was to day
blind in my wishes, I did against thee when I did for him, He returns: what
misfortune! if the love of his wife works no more upon his soul, then mine
doth upon thine!


Good Gods! Sobina follows him. Is not Camilla strong enough to shake my
heart, but you must join my Sister too? And leaving her tears to conquer me,
bring you her hither to seek the same advantage?


No, no, Brother, oh no, I come not here but to embrace you, and to bid you
adieu; your blood's too good, fear not that there is any baseness in it,
nothing that may offend the constancy of these great hearts; if this
illustrious fate should shake either of you, I should not own him for brother,
or for husband: may I yet make a request unto you worthy of so brave a Husband,
and so brave a Brother? I would at once take off impiety, render unto the
honour that expects it, its purity, without mingling of crimes set its fair
lustre on it: in a word, I fain would make you lawful enemies; I am the sole
bond of that sacred knot which joyneth you; when I shall be no more, you shall
be nothing unto one another; breaking this chain, you break off your
alliance; and since your honour doth require effects of hatred, purchase by my
death the right and privilege to hate: Alba and Rome will have it so, 'tis fit
that you obey them; let one of you two kill me, and the other revenge me, then
your fight shall not be strange, or at least one of you shall justly fight for
to revenge his wife, or else his sister. But what! you would fully so fair
Glory, if any other quarrel should provoake you: your zeal unto your Country
doth forbid you such cares, you should do very little for it, if less then
this; unto it you must sacrifice, and without hate, a Brother in law, no more
then defer that which you ought to do; begin, and practise by his wife to
shed his blood, begin to pierce his bosom by his sister; begin to make a
worthy sacrifice of your illustrious lives to your dear praties by the death
of Sabina; you're enemies, you unto Alba, your to Rome, and I to both of them:
what! think you to reserve me to see a Victory, where I shall behold the
laurles of a brother or a husband smoke with a blood that I so cherished? can
I between you two govern my heart then? fulfil the duty of sister and wife?
embrace the conqueror in weeping for the conquered? no, no, before Sabina
shall feel this stroke, the death which expect from one of you, shall readily
prevent it. If you deny your hands, my own shall execute it; on then, who holds
you? on, inhumane hearts! I shall have means enough to force you to it; you
shall not be busy at the at the fight, but in the midst this body shall
arrest your Swords, and spite of your refusals, force them to make way here
before they reach at you.


O my wife!


O my sister!


They begin to mollify.


You sigh, your Visages grow pale! are you those great hearts, those brave
Heroes, which Rome and Alba have taken for defenders?


Wife, what have I done to thee, wherein have I offended thee, that thou
seek out against me such a revenge? what have my honour done thee? and
wherefore come thou with all thy force tassault my virtue? satisfy thy self
at least to have astonished it, and leave me to finish this great business.
Thou would fain reduce me to strange point, if thou lov'dst thy husband,
thou would not seek to prevail; be gone then, and no longer leave the
Victory doubtful and in suspense, the dispute on it makes me ashamed already:
suffer me to end my days with honour.


Well, proceed, fear me no more; he comes to thy assistance.


How comes this, Children? doth your love lull you asleep, or do you hearken
to its charm? Lose you yet time with women? even ready to shed blood, look
you on effeminate tears? begone, and leave these blubbered fools to their
misfortunes; their complaints have too much art and tenderness for you; they
would participate their weakness to you, and there is no way to shun those
strokes but only to fly from them.


Fear nothing from them, they are worthy of you, in spite of our endeavours;
I perceive, you may expect what ever you desire both from a Son and Son in law;
and if our weakness could have changed them, we leave you here to encourage
them; come, Sister, come, let us lose no more tears; against such virtues they
are but weak arms, 'tis but to despair that we must have recourse, Go,
Tigers, go to fight, and we will go to die.


Father, I do beseech you, entertain these passionate Women; above all things
see they come not forth, their troublesome affection would come with glory by
their cries and tears to interrupt our combat, and what they do to us, would
with justice do; we may be, perhaps, suspected of this evil artifice. The
honour of so fair a choice would be too dearly bought, if we should be
suspected of any cowardice.


I will have care of them; begone, your Brothers do attend you: think of
nothing, but what's due unto your Country.


What fare-well shall I bid you, and what complements use to express my self?


Oh! do not mollify my sentiments here: to encourage you my voice wants
language, my heart cannot form thoughts strong enough: At this adieu I have my
self tears in mine eyes. Do what you ought, and in your combat have no other
thought.


MY soul, we cannot stand indifferent, one side 'tis requisite I take; I must
be wife unto Horatius, or sister to Curiatius; cease we to divide our fruitless
cares, let us desire something, and fear a little less; but which to take,
alas! I know not, in a chance so contrary; it is a hard extremity to choose a
husband or a brother for an enemy; Nature or Love doth speak for each of them,
and by the laws of duty I am tied unto them both: on their high sentiments
rather lets rule our own, be the wife of the one, and sister of the other both
together, let's look upon their honour as a good unparalleled, let's imitate
their constancy, and let us fear no more; the death which threatens them is
such a fair death, that we should not be afraid to hear the news o'nt; let's
not call then the destinies inhumane, let us think upon the cause, and not upon
the hands, let us behold the conquerours as if we had no other thought but of
the glory which all their house receives from their Victory, without
considering what blood is shed to raise their virtue to that glorious hight,
let's make our interests of their Family, in the one I am wife, in the other
daughter, and hold of both by such strong obligations that they cannot triumph
but by my arms. Fortune, whatever evils thy rigour sends me, I have the means
to derive joy from thence, and to see now the combat without fear, the dead
without despair, the conquerours without confusion. Flattering illusion, sweet
and gross error, vain endeavour of my sonl, impuissant light, whose false
sparks take a privilege to dazzle me! how little thou last's, and how soon
vainshest! much like unto those lightnings which in the thick shades thrust
forth a sudden day, and afterward renders the night more gloomy and obscure;
thou strike mine eyes but with a moments brightness to overwhelm them with
eternal night. Thou too much flattered'st my punishment, and Heaven offended at
it, sells me this moment of refreshment very dear, I feel my sad heart
pierced with all the strokes, that now deprive me of a brother or a husband;
when I think upon their death, what ever I propose, I think by what arm, and
not for what cause, nor can I ^ehold the conquererours in their illustrious
rank but to consider at what bloods expense; the house of the vanquished party
only touches my soul, in one I'm daughter, wife in the other, and hold of both
by such strong obligations, that they cannot triumph but by my arms. This is
that peace then I so much desired! Too favourable Gods, you heard my prayers!
what thunder-bolts dart you, when you are wronged, when even your favours are
so full of cruelties? And in what manner punish you offence, if thus you use
the prayers of innocence?


Is it done, Julia? what news bring you me? Is it a bro^ers or a husbands
death? Or hath the sad fate of their impious arms of all the combatants made
as many sacrifices, and envying me the horror which I had of the conquerours,
condemned me to tears for all o^ them together?


Know you not what hath passed yet?


How should I understand it? know you not that Camllia and my self are shut up
in this house, as in a prison?


they fear our tears: we should without doubt have interposed our selves
between their arms, and by the just despairs of a chaste amity we should have
drawn some pity from both Camps.


There was no need of such a tender spectacle, their sight brought obstacle
enough unto their fight; as soon as they were ready to measure their swords,
both one, and the other Camp began to murmur, that persons so near allied,
should sacrifice each others life unto their Countries quarrel; one was moved
with pity, and another seized with horror, some wondered at the madness of
their zeal, others extolled their virtue to the Heavens, and some presumed to
name it sacrilegious and brutish; all these diverse sentiments had yet but one
voice, every one accused their Chiefs, all with a general consent abhorred
their choice, not able to endure so barbarous a combat, they cried out on it,
advaunced thereupon, and parted them.


Great Gods! what incense do I owe unto you for hearing my devotions?


you are not yet where you imagine now; you may hope, you have less to fear: but
yet there doth remain unto you cause enough wherewith to wail you. Vain was the
endeavour to free them from so sada fate, these generous, or rather cruel
combatants could not consent unto 't; the glory of this choice seemed so
precious to them, and so much charmed their ambitious souls, that when they
were deplored, they esteemed themselves happy, and took the pity that was
showed unto them for an affront: The trouble of both camps seemed unto them to
sully their renown, they rather would combat with both the armies, and dye by
the same hands that parted them, then quit the honours were conferred upon them.


What? were those Iron hearts so obstinate?


They were so, but the armies mutany'd, and uttering their cries both at one
time, demanded other combatants, or battle. Scarce was the presence of the
Chiefs respected, their power was doubtful, their words not attended: the King
himself was much astonished at it. Since every one (said he) dislikes this
discord, let us consult the sacred Majesty of the great Gods, and see we if
this change be pleasing to them: where's that impious soul will dare oppose
their will, when in a sacrifice, they shall be pleased to manifest it to us? He
held his peace, and these words seemed charms, yea from six combatants
snatched away their arms; and this desire of honour which shut up their eyes,
though blind, respected yet the Gods: their boiling heat submitted to the
counsel of Tullus; and were it by an appeal, or by a ready scruple, in both
armies 'twas made a law, as if they both acknowledged him for King; the
victims death will show the rest.


The Gods will not allow an impious combat, I hope well of it, since it is
deferred, and I begin to see what I desired.


Sister, I'll tel you good news,


I believe, I know it, if we may but name it such; I was in presence when 'twas
told unto my Father, but I gather nought from thence that may assuage my grief;
this intermission of our misfortunes, will but make their strokes more rude;
'tis but a longer time allow'd to our inquietudes, and all the comfort that one
may hope from thence, is only this, to lament those we love a little later.


The Gods have not in vain inspired this tumult.


Let's rather say, sister, that we consult them in vain; the same Gods have
inspired this choice into the breast of Tullus; and the public is not always
their voice; much less descend they into such low receptacles, but in the breast
of Kings, their living Images, whose absolute power is, and authority, a secret
ray of their divinity.


It is to form you ostacles without reason, to seek their voices otherwise
then in their oracles, and you can't to your self figure all lost, without
belying that was rendered to you yesterday.


An Orale can ne'er be comprehended: for the more we think to understand it,
commonly the less we understand it, far from settling on such a sentence; who
sees nothing in it obscure, ought to believe that all is so.


Let us build more assurance upon that which makes for us, and entertain the
sweetness of a just hope; when Heaven is favourable half ways to open its
arms, who doth not promise some good thence to himself, deserves it not; he
oftentimes hinders this favour from showing it self, and when it doth
descend, his cold refussall sends it away.


Heaven acts without us in these events, and orders them not on our
sentiments.


He makes you not afraid but for your good Adieu, I go to know what's done at
last; assuage your fears, hope at my return, to entertain you, Ladies, with no
other discourse but love, and that we shall employ the end of this day to the
sweet preparatives of a blessed marriage.


I hope it also.


And I dare not to dream on it.


The effect will make it plain t'y', which knows best to judge thereof.


In the midst of our sorrows, give me leave to blame you: so much trouble in
your soul I can no way approve of; if you were in my case, Sister, what would
you do then! if you had so much cause to fear as I, and were to expect from
their fatal arms such ils as mine, and such unparalle'd losses?


Speak more indifferently of your sufferings and mine, every one sees those of
another not with the same eye that he sees his own; but to look well on mine
wherein heaven plunges me, yours after them would seem ty' as a dream.
Horatius death is only to be feared by you, a brother's nothing to a husband;
the marriage that tyeth us unto another family, untyeth us from that wherein we
lived maids; these knots so different, are not to be compared; we must leave
Parents, Friends and all the world to follow a dear husband. But if, Sister,
so near unto a marriage, the Lover which a glad farther gives, is less unto us
then husband, and not less then brother, surely our sentiments between them do
remain suspended, our choice is impossible, and our desires confounded. Thus
you have in your complaints where to direct your wishes, and terminate your
fears: but if heaven should resolve to presecute us, for my part, I must fear
all things, and can hope for nothing.


When one must dye, and by the others hand, 'tis but an ill dispute this which
you make; let the knots be as different as they will, we must not leave our
parents in oblivion; although we leave them, Hymen doth not raze out those
deep engraven characters; to love a husband, we are not obliged to hate our
brothers; nature always doth conserve her first rights, when the death of
either one or other is proposed, we cannot choose, they are as well unto us, as
a husband, our other selves, and all evils are alike when that they are
extreme: but happily the Lover that doth charm* you and for whom you burn, is
not so to you as you'd have him, an evil humour, or a little zealousie, may
banish him your good opinion; and put him quite out of your fantasy; what they
do often, do the same by reason, and leave your blood out of comparison: To
oppose voluntary bonds to those whom birth hath rendered necessary, is a crime
indubitable: If heaven should resolve then to persecute us, I have the most
reason to fear all fortunes, and despair of all things; but for your part,
duty directs you in your complaints where to address your wishes, and
terminate your fears.


Sister, I see you never loved you know not Love, nor felt his darts: one may
resist him in the birth, but when he's grown, and become Master of us, we
cannot banish him; especially when the consent of Father in engaging our faith
hath made this tyrant lawful King. He enters with sweetness, but he reigns
by force; and when the soul hath tasted once his sweet temptation, to love no
more is that it cannot do; since it cannot desire but what he will, his chains
are for us as strong as fair.


I come to bring unto you sorrowful news; my daughters, but in vain I should
conceal it you, which could not but a little time be hidden; your Brothers are
in fight, the Gods ordained it.


I must confess this news doth much astonish me I thought there was in the
Divinities much less injustice, and much more of goodness: comfort us not,
reason is troublesome when it dares to oppose such a misfortune; we have the
end of our griefs in our hands, who can resolve to dye, can brave disaster. We
easily could make, Sir, in your presence a feigned constancy of our despair;
but when one can without shame be without resolved courage, 'tis a cowardice to
counterfeit it: the use of such art we leave to men, and will not pass for that
but what we are: It is not our desire that such a stout spirit should abase it
self by our example to complain of fortune; receive these mortal tidings
without trembling, behold without mingling your own with them our tears flow
down our cheeks; lastly we crave (as all the favour we desire in such
calamities,) that you will keep your constancy, and suffer our sad sighs.


I am so far from blaming the tears which I see you shed, that I can scarce
defend me from their force, and should perhaps yield to such strong assaults,
if herein we had both like interest: not that your Alba by her choice hath made
me to hate your brothers, all three are dear persons yet unto me; but amity is
not of the same rank, and hath not the effects of love nor blood. I do not
feel for them the grief that doth torment Sabina as a Sister, and Camila as a
Lover; I can behold them as our enemies, and give without regret my prayers and
wishes unto my Sons; they are (thanks to the Gods) worthy their Country; no
astonishment ever perished their glory, and I saw their honour increase highly
when their courages refused the pity of both camps. If they by any weakness
had desired it, if their high virtue had not presently refused it, my hand
should have revenged me upon them of the affront which their effeminate consent
had done me; but when in despite of them they would have other combatants,
I'll not deny it, I joined my prayers with yours; if pitiful Heaven had hearkened
to my voice, Alba should be reduced to choose anew, we should see then the
Horaces triumph without seeing their hands stained with the blood of the bold
Curiatii, and upon the event of a combat far more reasonable the honour of
the Roman name would now depend. The prudence of the Gods doth otherwise
dispose thereof, on their eternal order my spirit doth repose, it arms it
self on this occasion with generosity, and of the public good makes its
felicity. Endeavour both of you to do as much, to ease your griefs, and think
that you are Romanes: you are become so, you ( Camllia) born such; so glorious
a title is a treasure; a day, a day will come that Rome shall make its glorious
name feared like the thunderbolts through the whole earth, and all the universe
shall shake under its laws, it will become the ambition of Kings; for the Gods
have promised this glory unto our Aeneas.


Come you to tell us, Julia, the Victory?


But rather, Sir, the fatal sad effects of the fight Rome is subject unto
Alba, and your sons are defeated; two of the three are dead, her husband only
doth remain.


O effect of a sad fight truly fatal! Rome subject unto Alba, and my Son to
free her from it not employ himself unto the last gasp! No, this cannot be:
Julia, you are deceived, Rome's not subject, or my Son's slain.


A thousand from our Ramparts saw it as well as I: he made himself adimir'd
whilst that his Brothers stood; but when he saw himself alone against three
adversaries, ready to be encompassed by them; he saved himself by flight.


Would not our soldiers dispatch the traitor! would they give this coward
retraite into their ranks?


I had no heart to see more after this defeat.


O my Brothers!

Soft, mourn them not all, two of them enjoy a fortune that doth make their
father proud and jealous too; See that their tomb be covered with the most
noble flowers; the glory of their death hath paid me for their loss: this
happiness hath followed their unconquered courage, that they saw Rome free as
long as they had life, and would not have beheld her to obey but her own
Prince, nor to become the Province of an adjacent State. Lament the other,
lament the irreparable affront his shameful flight imprints on our brow,
lament the foul dishonour that he casts on all our race, and the eternal stain
he leaves unto the sometime glorious name of the Horatii.


What would you have him do, Sir, against three?


What! I would have him dye: a brave despair would have assisted him perhaps,
had he deferred his defeat a minute longer; at least Rome would have been a
little later subjected; so would he have left my hair with honour grey, and
that were a reward worthy his life. He is accountable unto his Country of all
his blood, every drop spared, perishes his glory; after this base bout every
instant of his life doth publish, with his own, my shame. I'll break the
course of it, and my just anger, against an unworthy son using the rights of
father, shall make in his punishment appear the glorious disacknowledgment of
such an action.


Hearken somewhat less unto these generous heats, and render us not altogether
miserable.


Sabina, your heart may easily be comforted, hitherto our misfortunes touch you
little, you have no part yet in our miseries: Heaven hath saved you your
husband and your brothers, if we are subject, 'tis unto your Country; your
brothers are the conquerous, although we are betrayed; and seeing the high
point whereto their glory mounts, you little look upon our shame; but your too
much affection for that so infamous husband, will persuade you to grieve as
well as we ere it be long; your tears in his behalf are but weak guards: I
swear by the great Gods, the supreme powers, that ere this day end, these my
proper hands shall wash off with his blood the stain from Rome.


Let's follow him anger transports him. Gods! shall we see nothing but such
misfortnnes? must we fear greater still, and must o^r fates always proceed
from friends and parents hates?


Ne'er speak unto me in the favour of an infamous person, let him fly me as the
Brothers of his wife; to save a blood that he esteems so precious, he hath
done yet nothing, if he keep not from my sight.


may give order for it, or I attest the sovereign power of all the Gods. --


Oh, father, take a sweeter sentiment, you shall see Rome herself to use him
otherwise, and by what fate soe'r she be oppres'd, to excuse a virtue so
o'r-charg'd with number.


Judgement herein makes but little for me,


I'm a father, and I have my rights apart. I am not ignorant how the true
virtue acts: there is no triumph where number doth oppress, her masculine
vigour always in the same point falls underneath the force, but yields not to
it. Peace, here comes


What is his business with us?


Sent by the King to consolate a father, and to express for him --


Take you no care on it, it is a comfort which I have no need of; I rather would
behold them dead, then covered with infamy, that come to take me from an
enemies hand; they died both for their Country like men of honour, 'tis
sufficient.


But, Sir, the other is a rarer blessing, of all the three he ought to hold
with you the chiefest place.


Would he have made the name of the Horatii perish with himself!


You only treat him ill after the deed that he hath done.


His fault belongs to me only to punish.


What fault can you find in his good conduct?


What brave virtue can you find in his flight?


His flight is glorious on this occasion.


You redouble, Sir, my shame and my confusion: sure the example is rare, and
worthy memory, to find in flight a way to glory.


What confusion, and what shame is't to you to have brought forth a Son that
doth conserve us all, that makes Rome triumph, and gains an Empire to her?


What preservation, triumph, and what Empire, when Alba ranges underneath her
laws our destiny!


What speak you here of Alba, and of her Victory? you know not yet half of the
story.


What? is not the combat finished by his flight?


Alba Though so at first, but she perceived soon, that he fled like a man, that
knew well how to manage Romes best advantage.


What! triumphs Rome then?

Be pleased to understand; the valour of this son, whom wrongfully you do
condemn, resting alone against three, (but in this passage, all the three being
wounded, and he free) too weak for all, too strong for either of them, he
thought it fit a little to retire him; he fled to fight the better; this quick
policy fitly divides the brothers, each of them follows him with a pace more
or less eager, as he doth find himself more or less hurt: their heat was equal
to pursue his flight, but their unequal blows did separate their pursuit: when
Horatius saw them thus scattered one from the other, he returned, and thought
them more then half conquered already: he did expect the first, and 'twas your
son in law, who all enraged that he should stay for him, in vain did make a
great heart to appear, assaulting him, the blood that he had lost weakened his
strength: Alba began to fear a change of fortune, she cried to the second that
he should aid his Brother; he made hast, and spent himself in vain attempts for
her, but found his Brother dead when he came up.


Alas!


Quite out of breath, he took his brothers place, and soon redoubled Horatius
Victory; his courage without strength was a weak prop: desirous to revenge his
brothers death, he fell down by him. The air did resound with cries, which all
sent unto heaven upon it; Alba breathed sorrow, and the Romans joy. As our
brave Hero saw his enterprise near at an end, he would a little vaunt as well
as conquer: I am come (said he) from sacrificing two unto the Ghosts of my dead
brothers: Rome shall have the last of my three adversaries, it is unto her
int'rests that I offer him: This said, he presently flew at him; between them
the Victory remained not long time doubtful; the Alban pierced with wounds,
could hardly stand, and as a Victim brought before the Altar, he seemed to
present his yielding throat unto the deadly stroke; so he received it. His
death establishes the power of Rome.


O my son! O my joy! O honour of my days! O unexpected succour of a tottering
State! O virtue worthy Rome, and blood worthy Horatius! Thou support of thy
deer Country, glory of thy race! When can I somother in my close embraces
the error wherewith I formed such false sent'ments? When my love bath thy
victorious front with tears of joy?


Sir, presently you may Use your caresses, the King goes to sent him unto you,
and deferres until to morrow the pompous sacrifice which we owe to the gods for
such a benefit; only to day we pay them but with songs of Victory, and
ordinary vows. The King doth lead him unto the Temple, whilst he sends me to
do this office to you both of joy and grief together: But this is not yet
enough for him, he will come here himself, perhaps to day; this noble action so
highly touches him, that he will thank you with his own mouth, for giving your
brave sons to the good of his State.


Such high acknowledgments have too much glory for me; I account my self
already too much paid by yours for the one service, and the others blood.


The King can't' do an honour (Sir) by halfs; and his Crown snatched from the
enemies hands, makes him esteem the honour he intends you beneath the Father's
merit, and Son's. I'll go to let him know what noble sentiments Virtue inspires
into you, and what ardour you express for his service.


I shall be very redeonble to you for that good office.


Daughter, this is no fit time to shed tears: it is not handsome when we see
such honours: We mourn unjustly for domestic losses, when public Victories
proceed from thence: Rome triumphs over Alba, and that is enough for us; all
our ills at this rate ought to be sweet unto us; in the death of a dear Lover,
you lose but a man, whose loss is easy to repair in Rome: after this victory,
there is no Roman but will be proud to give his hand to you. I must go to
Sabina with this news; this stroke (without doubt) will be grievous to her, her
Brothers stain all by her Husbands hand, will give her juster tears and plaints
then you: But I hope easily to dissipate the violence thereof, and that a
little discretion assisting her great courage, will make the generous love she
owes unto the Conqueror, reign on so noble heart: In the mean time, smother
this unbecoming and poor low passion. If he comes, receive him, and show no
weakness; make your self appear to be his Sister, and that in one womb Heaven
formed you both of the same blood and substance.


Yes, I will make appear plainly unto him, that a true Love can brave the
Destinies, and cannot take Laws from those cruel Tyrants, whom an injurious
Star gives us for Parents. Thou blam'st my grief, thou dare to name it base;
so much the more I lov't (unpitifull Father) as the more it offends thee: by a
just endeavour I will make it equal to the rigours of my fortune. Was there
ever seen any yet, whose rude traverses took in so short time so many several
faces, that was so often sweet, so often cruel, and gave so many various
strokes before the mortal struck! Was ever seen a soul more seized with joy and
grief, with hope, and fear; subjected (as a slave) to more events, and made the
piteous pastime of more changes! An Oracle assures me, a Dream frights me,
Battle dismayes me, and Peace pleases me: my Marriage is prepared, and in a
moment my Lover's chosen forth to fight my Brother. The two Camps in a mutiny,
disavowed such an unjust choice, they brake off the party; the Gods renew it;
Rome seems vanquished, and only of three Albans, Curiatius hath not at all in
my blood stained his hands God! did I not then feel too little grief for Rome's
misfortune, and two Brothers death? Flattered I not myself too much, when I
thought I might love him yet without a crime, and nourish some hope? His death
scourges me enough for that, and the inhumane manner wherewith my terrified
heart received the news thereof: his Rival told it me, and in my presence
making the recital of so sad a success, upon his front he wore an open joy;
which grieved my heart, and made the public good less then my loss So
building in the air upon another misfortune, he triumphed over him like to my
Brother. But this is not all, 'tis nothing unto that which doth remain; In such
a fatal stroke they ask my joy, I must applaud the Conqueror's exploits, and
kiss a hand that pierces my sad heart: in so great and so just a cause of
plaints it is a shame to weep, a crime to sigh. Their brutish virtue would,
that (in this case) I should esteem me happy; so with them, one must be
barbarous to be generous. But we'll degenerate (my Heart) from such a virtuous
Father; let us unworthy of such a generous Brother: 'Tis a glory to pass for
abject spirits, when bruitishnesse is held the highest Virtue. My just Griefs,
break forth: to what end should I keep you in? When one hath lost all, what's
more to be feared? Have no respect for this inhumane Conqueror: Fiar from
avoiding of him, come athwart him, trouble his Victory, provoke his anger, and
take (if possible) pleasure to displease him. He comes, prepare we show
constantly what a kind Mistress owes unto the death of him she loves.


Sister, behold the arm that hath revenged our two brave brother; that hath
broke the course of our contrary Destinies, that makes us Masters of Alba;
lastly, see the arm that makes today the fortune of two States: Behold these
marks of honour, these fair testimonies of glory, and give what thou ought
unto the happiness of my Victory.


Receive then my tears; 'tis that which I do owe unto it.


Rome Will see none after such high exploits; and our two brothers slain in the
misfortune of arms, are paid enough with blood, there needs no tears to mingle
with it. When the loss is revenged, 'tis recovered.


Since they are satisfied by the blood that shed, I'll cease to mourn more for
them, and forget their death, which your hand revenged. But who shall now
revenge my Lovers, to make me forget his loss too?


What say thou, unfortunate!


O my dear Curiatus!


Infinite boldness of an unworthy Sister! Must the name of a public enemy,
whom I have conquered, be in thy mouth, and his love in thy heart? Thy
criminal heat aspires to revenge, thy mouth demands it, and thy heart longs
for it; follow thy passion less, stint thy desires, make me not blush to
understand thy sighs; thy flames henceforth ought to be smothered, banish them
from thy soul, and think upon my trophies, let them ever be hereafter thy
only entertainment.


Give me then a heart like thine, barbarian. If thou would have me to speak
my thoughts, restore unto me my Curiatius, or leave my flame to act; my joy and
griefs depend upon his fortune: I adored him living, and I morn him dead.
Seek not thy sister where thou left'st her; thou shalt see no more in me but
an offended Love, which like a fury fixed to thy steps, incessantly shall
haunt thee, and still reproach thee with his death. Inhumane, blood thirsty
Tiger, that forbid'st me tears, that would that in his death I should find
charms, and that extolling thy exploits to heaven, I should my self kill him a
second time! May such misfortunes wait upon thy life, that thou fall to the
point to bear me envy, and sullie soon by some unworthy act that glory dear
to thy brutalitie!


O heaven! who ever saw so high a madness? Believe thou then that I should be
insensible of such an outrage, and that I should suffer this foul dishonour in
my blood! Love, love that death which makes our happiness; but prefer that
which thy birth owes to the interests of Rome, before the memory of a man.


Rome, the only object of my sad resentment! Rome, unto whom thine arm hath
sacrificed my Lover! Rome, that gave thee birth, and whom thou dost adore!
Lastly, Rome that I hate because she honours thee! May all her neighbours
conspire together in a league against her, and sap her yet unsettled
foundations: and if this of all Italie be not sufficient, let the East join
with the West against her; let a thousand several Nations (from the ends of
the Universe) pass the seas and mountains to destroy her; let her self
orethrow her walls upon her self, and with her own hands tear her bowels; let
the anger of heaven (by my prayers kindled) make a deluge of fire to rain upon
her; may mine eyes see those brave thunderbolts to fall upon her, her houses
ashes, and her laurels dust; fee the last Roman breathing his last gasp, and I
the cause of this, to die with pleasure.


Curiatius.







What have you done?


I think, an act of justice, Such a fault such a punishment requires.


You should have used her with less rigour, though.


Tell me not that she is my blood, my sister; my father for his daughter can no
more acknowledge her: Who is so bold to curse his Country, doth renounce his
family: Those names of love are then no more allow'd him, he makes his dearest
friends his enemies; the blood it self arms them in hatred of his crime, the
speediest vengeance is the best for it. This impious wish, though forceless, is
monster that must be smothered in the birth.


Horatius, why stays thy illustrious anger here? come, see thy Sister in thy
Fathers arms render her spirit: sacrifice unto the Country of the virtuous
Horatii the sad remains of Curiatius blood: So prodigal of thy own, spare not
theirs, join thy Wife to thy Sister, separate not Sabina and Camilla; our
crimes are alike, as are our miseries; I sigh as well as she, and do deplore
my Brothers; more guilty in this point 'gainst'gainst thy hard laws, in that
she wept but one, and I weep three, and that after her punishment my fault
continues.


Dry thy tears, or hide them from my sight, Sabina, make thee worthy of my
chaste half, and endeavour not to oppress me with an unworthy pity; if the
power of a chaste flame leaves unto us both but one thought, and one soul, it
is thy part to raise thy sentiments to mine, not mine to descend to the shame
and poverty of thine; I love thee, and I know the grief that presses thee;
embrace my noble virtue to overcome thy weakness, share my glory in stead of
sullying it, put it on rather then take it from me: And thou of my honour so
mortal enemy, how much better should I have pleased thee, if fallen in infamy?
Be more a Wife then Sister, and conforming thy self to me, make thee of my
example a law immutable.


Seek more perfect souls to imitate thee. I impute not to thee my loss: I have
the same sentiments I ought to have of them, and have a quarrel to fortune
rather then unto thy duty. But withal, I renounce the Roman virtue, if to
possess it I must be inhumane, and cannot see in me the Conquerours Wife,
without discerning there the Sister of the Conquered. Let us participate in
public of the public Victories; let us at home weep our domestic evils, and
not regard the common happiness when we behold our private miseries. Why
(cruel) dost thou covet to act otherwise? Entering, leave here thy Laurels at
the door, mingle thy tears with mine. What? doth not this effeminate discourse
arm thy high virtue against my sorrowful days? Doth not my crime (redoubled)
move thy choler? O how happy art thou, Camilla! She could soon displease thee,
and receive from thee what she did pretend: she could below recover all her
loss. Dear Husband, of the torment that doth press me dear author, if thy
anger ceases, hearken to pity; exercise the one of the other to punish my
infirmity, or end my griefs. I ask death either for a favour, or for a
punishment (I care not whether.) Let her be an effect of Love, or Justice, it
matters not; all her darts shall seem sweet unto me, if I see them to come from
a Husbands hand.


What an injustice is it unto the Gods, to give up unto women so great an
Empire on the fairest souls, and to be pleased to see such feeble Conquerours
to reign to strongly o'r the noblest hearts? My Virtue, unto what point dost
thou come to be reduced? Nothing can better warrant it then flght. Adieu,
follow me not, or hold thy sighs.


O Anger! Pity! deaf to my desires! You care not for my crime, and my grief
tires you; and I obtain from you nor punishment nor favour. Well, once more by
tears I'll try, and if that fail, then by myself I'll die.


LEt us withdraw our looks from that sad object, to admire here the judgement
of the God; When glory puffs us up, they can confound our pride; (our sweetest
pleasures come not to us without some sorrow) oftentimes they mingle
infirmities with our Virtues, and grant seldom the entire honour of a glorious
Actions to our ambition; I mourn not Camilla, she was a criminal; I lament my
self, and thee too more then she: I for producing unto the light a heart so
little Roman, thou for dishonouring by her death thy hand. I find it not
unjust, nor yet too quick; but (Son) thou might have spared thy self the
shame on it: her crime, though great, and worthy death, were better unpunished,
then punished by thy arm.


Dispose my fortune as you please; the laws command it so: I thought I owed
this stroke unto the place that gave me my first being. If my zeal to my
Country seems criminal unto you, if thereby I must receive an everlasting
stain, and by this action my hand become disgraced and profane, you can with
one sole word cut off my destiny. Receive your blood again, whose purity my
baseness hath unto so little purpose defiled: My hand could not suffer crime
grow in our race; suffer you not a spot in your own house: 'Tis in those
actions (wherewith honour is wounded) that a father, such as you are, shows
himself interested. His love must not appear, where all excuse is null; himself
takes part when he dissembles them: and he makes small account of his own
glory, when he forbears to punish what he doth not approve.


He is not always rigorous, but spares his children often for himself; his old
age doth delight to lean upon them; and punishes them not, to the end he may
not punish himself. I look upon thee with another eye then thou behold thy
self. I know -- But the King comes, I see his Guards.


Oh Sir, this is too great an honour for me, I should not see my King in this
poor place. Suffer me on my knees --


No, Father, rise; I do but what a good Prince ought to do: so rare a service,
and of such importance, requires the rar'st, and most illustrious honour: you
had for pawn thereof his word already, I could no longer have deferred it. I
know by his report (which I ne'er doubted) how brave and like your self you bear
the death of your two sons, and that your soul already being resolved, my
consolation would be superfluous: but I come to know what strange misfortune
hath follow'd the virtue of your victorious Son, and how it comes, that his too
much love for the public cause bath taken an only daughter from his father by
his own hands: I know what such a stroke can do upon the strongest spirit, and
doubt how you may bear this death.


Sir, with displeasure, but yet with patience,


'Tis plain, this is the virtuous effect of your experience: Many have taught
by a long file of years, as well as you, that miseries succeed the sweetest
happiness; few know like you to apply this remedy, and all their Virtue
yields to their Interest. If my compassion can ease your sorrow, know that 'tis
extreme, as is your evil, and that Tullus laments you as much as he doth love
you.


Sir, since Heaven doth put its justice in the hands of Kings, and the force of
the laws; and since the State asks rewards for virtues, and strict
punishments for crimes, of lawful Princes; suffer that a just occasion make
you to remember, that you lament too much what you should punish: Suffer --


What! that we send a Conqueror to punishment?


Allow him leave to finish, and I'll do justice; I am bound to render it to
all, at all hours, and in every place: it is by it that a King makes himself a
demi-God: and hence is't that I pity you, that after such a service, against
him they should demand me justice.


Suffer then, O great King, and the justest of all Kings, that all good men
speak to you by my mouth: not that our hearts, as jealous of his honours, urge
us to this; if he receives much, his high deeds do deserve it; add unto it,
rather then lessen it; we are also ready to contribute unto it: but since he
hath showed himself guilty of such a crime, let him triumph as Conqueror, and
perish as malefactor: stop his fury, and save from his hands, if you desire to
reign, the remnant of the Romans: hereupon depends the loss or safety of the
rest; seeing the blood shed by this fatal War, and so many fair knots of
marriage wherewith our happy destinies have so often united such near
neighbours, few of us have enjoyed such a happiness, as not I'have lost a
Cousin, or a brother in law, an uncle, or a son in law in Alba, whereby to have
occasion to shed tears for their own losses in the public joy: If it be an
offence to Rome, and that the fortune of his arms allows him to punish this
crime of our tears, what blood will this fierce Conqueror spare, that would not
pardon that of his Sister, nor excuse the grief which the death of a Lover doth
infuse into a Mistress heart, when ready to be lighted by the fair nuptial
Torch, she sees her hope in the grave with him? Making Rome thus to triumph, he
enslaves it: by this means he hath a right of life and death upon us, and our
offending days shall last no longer then it shall please his clemency to
suffer them. I could add, for the interests of Rome, that such a stroak's
unworthy of a man: I could demand, to be brought here before you that rare
exploit of a victorious arm; you should see then a fair blood (to accuse his
rage) retort into his cruel face: you should behold horrors which cannot be
conceived; her age and beauty (sure) would move you, but I hate those means
that show artifice. You have deferred the sacrifice till to morrow; Think you
that the just Gods (styled the revengers of Innocents) will receive incense
from a parricide hand? This sacriledg would draw their punishment upon you.
Look upon him but as an object of their hate, believe (with us) that the good
destiny of Rome in all these three fights did more then his arm, since these
same Gods (the Authors of his Victory) permitted that he suddenly should fully
the glory of it; and that such a courage, after so brave an Act, should in one
day be worthy of a Triumph, and of Death. It rests (Sir) that your Sentence
decide this: Rome never saw a parricide till now. Fear what may follow, and
Heaven's anger; save us from his unnatural hand, and fear the Gods.


Defend your self, Horatius.


To what purpose shall I defend me? Sir, you know the action, as being told it
now: what you think of it must be a law to me. One ill defends himself against
the opinion of a King: and the innocentest soul that ever was born is guilty,
if he judge him to be so: It is a crime to excuse himself unto him. Our blood's
his goods, he can dispose thereof; and we must think, that when he doth do so,
he deprives not himself without just cause. Then (Sir) pronounce, I'm ready to
obey. Others love life, and I am bound to hate it. I reproach not Valerius
heat, which makes him, loving the Sister, to accuse the Brother: my wishes at
this time conspire with his: he asks my death, 'tis that which I desire: We
differ only in this point, that I seek to conserve my honour in it, and he to
perish it. Sir, seldom is a subject offered to show the virtue of a great and
noble heart complete: according to occasion, it acts or more or less, and
appears strong or weak unto the eyes of those that are her witnesses: The
people, that only looks upon the outside, judges its force by its effects,
and dares to think, by an ill maxim, that who doth a miracle, must do it
still: After a complete action, high and illustrious, what glitters less ill
answers their expectation: they would have us to be all times alike, and in
all places: they examine not if one could better do then, nor that, if they see
not still a wonder, the occasion is less, and Virtue equal: Their injustice
destroys great names; the honour of the first attchievements is forgotten by
the second: and when renown is passed beyond the mean, if we'll not fall
thence, we must act no more. I will not boast the exploits (Sir) of my arm,
your Majesty hath seen my three encounters; hardly again shall I meet any
such, nor ever the like occasion will be to show my courage, and crown the
success; so that to leave here an illustrious memory, death only now can keep
alive my glory, and I must have it too as soon as I have conquered; for I have
outlived my honour: Such one as I beholds his glory perished, when he falls
into any ignominy: and my hand would have freed me on it already, if my blood
durst come forth without your leave: as it belongs to you, you must dispose
on it; to shed it otherwise, is to rob you of it. Rome wants not store of
generous warriors; enough besides me will sustain your Laurels; henceforward
let your Majesty dispense with me herein. And if what I have done deserves a
recompense, permit, great King, that with this conquering arm I sacrifice me to
my Glory, not my Sisters cries.


Sir, hear Sabina, and see in her soul the sorrows of a Sister and a Wife, who
(wholly desolate) at your sacred feet laments her Family, and fears her
Husband. It is not that I would by any artifice endeavour to take out of the
hand of Justice a guilty person; Whatsoever he hath done for you, use him as
such a one; and punish (Sir) in me this noble Criminal: with my unfortunate
blood wash off his crime. You shall not change your Victim for all that, nor
shall you herein take an unjust pity, but sacrifice the dearest mosty of him.
The knots of marriage, and his extreme love makes him live more in me, then in
himself; and if you grant that I shall die to day, he will die more in me then
in himself: the death which I beg, and would fain obtain, will raise his
punishment, and finish mine. See the excess (Sir) of my sad afflictions, and
the deplorable condition whereto I am reduced: What honour is it t'embrace a
man whose sword hath cut the thread of of all my family? and what impiety to
hate a Husband for his service to you, his Country, and his Friends? What?
shall I love an arm stained with the blood of all my Brothers? Shall I not love
an Husband that doth put a period to our common miseries? O (Sir) deliver me by
an happy death both from the crimes of loving, and not loving. I shall esteem
that Sentence a great favour: My hand can give me what I crave of you, but this
death shall be much more sweet unto me, if I can free my Husband from his
shame, and by my blood appease the anger of the Gods, in dying satisfy the
Ghost of his offended Sister, and conserve to Rome so good and glorious a
Defender.


Sir, it concerns me then to give an answer unto Valerius; I see my children
conspire with him against me, and all three would ruin me: they arm themselves
unjustly against that little blood's left in my house. Thou that by griefs
(contrary to thy duty) would leave thy Husband to go to thy Brothers, go
rather to consult their generous Ghosts. 'Tis true, they are dead; but they
died for Alba, and hold them happy in it, since Heaven would have it, she should
be subject: if that any sentiment remains after life lost, this misfortune
seems less, and its strokes not so rigorous, since all the honour of it falls
on us. All three will disapprove thy grief, thy tears and sighs, they will
condemn the horror which thou hast of a brave Husband. Be their Sister (
Sabia) and observe thy duty like them. Valerius in vain lifts up himself
against this dear Husband: a first motion was never held a crime; and praise is
due, in stead of punishment, when Virtue only produces this first motion. To
love our enemies even with idolatry, madly to curse the Country for their
death, to wish the State an everlasting ruin, is that which we name crime, and
that which he hath punished; the only love of Rome provoked his arm: He should
be innocent, if he had loved her less. What have I said, Sir? he is so, and
this my paternal arm had punished him already, were he guilty; I would have
better used the full power I have upon him by the laws of birth. I love honour
too well, and am not of a quality to suffer in my blood affront or crime: of
this I do desire no other witness but Valerius: he saw what rigorous
entertainment I prepared to give my Son, when ignorant as yet of half the
combat, I believed that by his flight he had betrayed the State. What makes him
so officiously to trouble himself with the cares of my Family? What makes him
to desire (in spite of me) to vindicate my daughter? By what reason in her
just death takes he an interest a father doth not meddle with? He fears, that
after this severity to his Sister, he'll not spare others. Sir, we have no part
but in the shame of ours, and in what manner another may act, what concerns us
not makes us not blush. Valerius, thou may weep, and in Horatius sight; he
takes no interest but in the crimes of his race; who is not of his blood, can
do no injury unto the immortal Laurels that impale his brow. Ye Laurels,
sacred boughs, which envy would reduce to dust, you that conserve his head
from the confounding thunder, will you leave him unto the infamous Ax, that
makes offenders fall underneath the executioners hands? Romans, will you permit
that they should sacrifice a man, without whom Rome had not been Rome at this
time, and that any Roman should traduce the glory of a Conqueror, to whom all
owe so fair a character? Tell us, Valerius, tell, since he must perish, where
thou would choose fit a place for his punishment. Is it within these walls,
which many thousands of voices make resound yet with the noise of his exploits?
Is it without the walls, in the midst of those places which smoke yet with the
blood of the conquered Curiatii, between their three tombs, in that field of
honour, the witness of his valour and our happiness? Thou can not from his
Victory conceal his Punishment: within the walls, without them all speak his
glory; all oppose themselves to the endeavour of thy unjust love, which would
with such a glorious blood defile so fair a day. Alba cannot endure so sad a
spectacle, and Rome with her tears will put an obstacle to 't. But (Royal Sir)
you will prevent them, and by a just sentence you can embrace her interest much
better: What he hath done for her, he can yet do; he can secure her still from
adverse fortune: despair not yet (Sir) of my feeble years. Rome now hath seen
me father of four children, three in her quarrel are already dead, there is
but one left me; keep him for her, remove not from her walls so strong a prop;
and suffer me to address my self unto him, to make an end. Horatius, do not
think the stupid people should be absolute masters of a substantial honour;
their vain voice tumultnous enough makes often noise: but as a moment raises
it, a moment destroys it; and whatever they contribute to our renown,
i'th'twinkling of an eye it vanishes to smoke: It doth belong to Kings, to
great ones, to accomplished spirits to see that Virtue in its least effects be
full; it is from them alone that we receive true glory; they alone assure the
memory of the true Heroes, live still in Horatius, and still after them. Thy
name shall remain great, illustrious, famous, though the occasion, less high
or resplendent, deceives the unjust expectation of th'ignorant vulgar. Hate
then life no more; at least live for me, and to serve thy King and Country
longer. Sir, I've said too much; but the affair concerns you, and all Rome
speaks by my mouth.


Sir, suffer me --


Valerius, it is enough, your sound discourse by theirs is not defaced: I keep
yet in my spirit the pressing reasons on it, and all your arguments are
present with me still: this heinous action (almost before our eyes) doth injure
nature, and even wounds the Gods. A sudden motion of anger, that produces such
a crime, cannot excuse him lawfully; the Laws that are the least severe
condemn the act, and if we follow them, he's worthy death: If otherwise we will
look on the guilty, this crime, though great, heinous and inexcusable, proceeds
from the same sword and arm that makes me now Master of two States: Two
Scepters in my hand, and Alba subject unto Rome, speak highly in the favour of
his life. Had it not been for him, I should have yielded obedience, whereas now
I give forth laws; and should be subject, whereas now I am twice Sovereign.
There are in all the Provinces many good subjects, that by feeble prayers only
acquit themselves toward their Princes: all can love them, but all cannot
assure their States by some illustrious actions; and you are and power to
establish Crowns are gifts which heaven gives but to some choice persons: such
servants are the wealth and strength of Kings, and also are to be above the
Laws; let them be silent then, let Rome dissemble what from her birth she sees
in Romulus; She can well suffer in her Liberator, what she hath suffered in her
first Author. Live then Horatius, live magnanimous soldier, thy Virtue sets
thy glory 'bove thy crime, Its generous heat produced thy offence; th'effect of
such a fair cause must be suffered. Live to do service to the State, but love
Valerius; let not any hate nor anger remain between you, and whether he
follow'd or love, or duty, without any sentiment resolve to see him. Hearken
less ( Sabina) unto the grief that presses you; remove from this great heart
those marks of imbecility: in drying of your tears, you'll show your self true
Sister of those Brothers you lament. But we do owe to morrow to the Gods a
sacrifice, and should have heaven but little propitious to us, if our Priests
before the action, find not out the means to purge it. His father shall take
care on it, I believe, it will not be hard for him to appease Camilla's Ghost. I
do deplore her fortune, and to give to it what her amorous spirit may happily
desire, (since in one day an equal heat of one and the same zeal finished her
Lovers destiny and hers) it is our will that one day, as a witness of their
two deaths, may see in the earth's womb their bodies laid, and shut up in one
tomb.


thus heaven well advertised thee what tragical events were to succeed; but
always it conceals a part o'th'secret even from the most refined and clearest
spirits. It seemed to speak of thy approaching marriage, it seemed to promise
all things to thy prayers; and hiding so from us thy sudden death, it's voice
too truly hath deceived our sense.

Thy prayers are heard, Alba and Rome shall be to morrow in a fair
Confaederacie; And thou with Curiatius shalt be joined, never to part: So have
the Gods enjoined.



