Acteon Diana; WITH A Pastoral Story of the Nymph OENONE: FOLLOWED By the
several Conceited Humours Of

By ROB. COX.

Acted at the Red Bull with great applause.

The second Edition, with the Addition of Simpleton the Smith, not before
extant.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Archer, at the Adam and Eve, in Little Britain,
1656.

Gentlemen, and Ladies! IF your serious occasions will permit me so much
honour, that this slight Book may be accepted and perused, I shall justly
acknowledge the favour to be far above either my hopes or merit. And if you
ever vouchsafed your Presence when it was presented on the Stage, I am
confident, your (no-way erring-) Judgments will now allow it, as it then was
intended, which was, rather to provoke a laughter, then occasion a
contemplation. It will likewise engage my grateful service, if I be not (in
your worthy opinions) taxed of Arrogance, to present my unpolished lines, when
daily those of excellence are offered to your Eyes and Ears: But in the
confidence of your clemency, I submit to the verdict of my grand Jury. And how
soever you are pleased to censure, will remain (as I ought) the humblest of
your servants,

ROBERT COX.
IF ever Dog was weary of a day, then have I cause to be weary of my life; I
am a Blacksmith by my Trade, and (though I say it) I have bin accounted a good
Workman, but I could never yet forge, or hammer out means enough to satisfy
the insatiate gut of my son Simpleton. He will not work, and yet no sooner is
his nose out of the Alehouse, but his head is in the Cupboard: His insatiate
stomach may well defy a Giant, or the great Eater of Kent; but I have thought
upon a way which he shall either take in hand, or graze with Hobb my horse;
Sirrah Simpleton, where are you?


Within. Here, here, Father.


Where, where, Sirrah?


At the Cupboard Father, at the Cupboard.


I thought as much; but come you hither sirrah, or I shall make your ears sing
prick song for you.


'Tis a miserable condition that a man cannot eat a little bit for his
afternoons Lunchins, but he must be disturbed in the best of his stomach.


A bit dost thou call it, O my conscience this devouring rascal, old as I am,
would eat me if he found me in the Cupboard.


I do not think there is such a genteel Smith in the town, that has such an old
niggardly Coxcomb to his father as I, he knows I have no better a stomach then
a young green-sicknesse girl, and yet he grutches me every bit I eat.


Leave off your muttering, and lend me an ear a while.


Truly I cannot spare one father; yet now I think on it, you have great occasion
for one ever since the last pillory day, but since you are my father, I will
vouchsafe to listen a while.


You know that I am old.


The More's the pity, that you were not hanged while you were young.


Thou hast drunk most of my means away.


I'll eat out the rest.


Leave your ill breeding, and give me sensibly a reason why you will not work?


Because I am lazy father.


Nay that's true.


True; why do you think I would be so unmannerly, to tell you a lie father.


How I shall maintain that coming stomach of yours, unless your self endeavour
for it: I know not, but if thou wilt be ruled, I'll make thee a man.


A man! why what am I now, a mouse what would you make of me?


An Ass, an Ass, a gross Ass.


You may well make me a gross Ass, you have so good a pattern.


Listen to me; you know the widows daughter at the corner, sweet Mistress
Dorothy, she's both young and handsome, and has money too.


I, and that will help to buy victuals.


Go and woo her, and I dare lay my life thou carry her.


I carry her, father; alas, I have but a weak back, and besides I am somewhat
lazily given, as you say, it were a great deal better that she would carry me.


Thou hast no more wit then my hammer head has, and no more brains then an
Anvil, which every one may strike on, but never move it; go take your Fidle, at
that they say you are excellent, and when she thanks thee from her Chamber
window, say thou art my son, and that I sent thee about the thing she wotes of.


O must I bumfiddle her under her Chamber window; well, I will go wash my
hands, and starch my face, because I may be sure to go cleanly about my
business.


A pox of fortune, she was never my friend yet; the money that I got with so
much trouble, I lost with one unlucky chance at dice. I have no means nor
hopes left to supply me, but what my sweet-heart Dorothy affords me, she has
and must again take pity of me, this is her window, I hope her mother will not
hear.


Who's that calls so boldly; speak, what are you?


Oh Doll thou know my fortunes, and my love last night hath broke me, and by
thee my fortunes must be splintered; one half piece does the business.


How often have I peec'd you, and still you break; and I shall do the same if
you continue thus; you know my mother keep's a look over my will, yet once
again I'll venture, come in the morning about five of the clock, and I'll be
ready for thee.


Oh my sweet Doll, thou never did deceive me.


Now must I go play an Alampadoe. under Mistress Dorothy's Chamber window, and
all that time perhaps she is a snorting, for to say the truth my music will
hardly have the virtue to waken her, and if she should wake, I could not tell
what to say to her unless it were to desire her to go to bed again. And because
I will be sure to be acceptable to her, I will join my nightingale voice
thereunto.


What slave is this presumes to court my Mistress, could I but see him, I would
satisfy my anger with the ruin of his limbs, but he is gone, and I loose time
in seeking Exit.


That was a roaring Rogue, he has made my heart jumpe upright into my mouth,
and if I had not held it fast with my teeth, without doubt it had forsaken my
body; but he is gone, and now I will venture forward.


I heard some music at my sweet-hearts window, could I but find him, I would
cut him, and flash him till his whole body were anoatmized; but he is gone, and
it was his wisest course.


That Roaring Rouge was far worse then the the other, he has almost frighted my
song out of my head. Oh! we true and faithful lovers, what perils and dangers
must we undergo, to gain the wills and affections of our dearest deers; but
now to my music, and because she shall take a great pleasure to think on it, I
will sing a song of a young wench that had a great mind to be married before
her time.

Oh! mother let me have a husband kind,
with toitre loytre loitre.
That day and night I may comfort find
of a toitre, c.
I care not whether honest man or knave,
so that he keep me sine and brave,
And that none else but I may have
his toitre c.
Oh daughter you are not old enough
for a toitre c.
And husbands often prove rough
with a toitre c.
Your tender heart no grief can carry
as they must do sometimes that marry
You yet may well a twelve-month tarry
for a toitre c.
Oh! mother I am in my teens
for a toytre c.
And younger wives are often seen
with a toitre c.
I pray let not me so Idle stand,
for I can do as well as any can.
I have had a proof with Iohn our man
of his toitre c.
Well if she does not run mad for me now, it is pity she should have music
under her window, as long as she lives again.


What owl is that shreikes so at my window, if he meant music sure he was
mistaken, I was about to have eaten my breake-fast, but this fool has turned my
stomach. What art thou that art so troublesome.


Good Mistress Dorothy, it is I, your none sweet-swotterkin, and if you please
to throw your eyes out of the window upon me, you shall behold one of the
faithfullest lovers that ever took hammer in hand. I love you better and dear,
then a Bear does honey, and I hope you will affect me as much as a Sow does a
bunch of Carrots.


Oh is it you? I thought none but a puppy like your self, would have disturbed
the neighbours with your gridiron-musick, a Saw were far mor pleasing.


Forsooth I am very sorry that you have no better skill in music, in my
opinion I sung most melodiously, but if you will be pleased to look with eyes
of judgment upon me, you will express your love in a better manner to me.


I shall express my love if you continue here, in a far Worser manner then you
think for; do you see this chamber-pot, it longs to be acquainted with that
trainless head of yours; therefore be gone, and save your self a washing.


If you should wash me, I think it would be but labour in vain; yet if you
please to distill any of your sweet water upon me, I shall desire to be smelt
out by you.


You ass, you puppy; must you needs force a drowning.


Is this the beginning of love? it is almost as bad as the proverb to me: stay,
it may be it is rosewater. Voh, it is as rank urine as ever any Doctor cast.
I'll call this same old Simpleton my father, that set me about this business.
Oh! Father Simpleton, where are you.


Oh mine Son, how hast thou sped boy?


O! I have sped most abominably, father,
I got a great deal more then I expected.

Oh my own natural boy!


I natural, to be sure; I had ne'er come here else.


But how did she relish thee.


Why she relished me with a whole chamber pot full of water.


Why thou ass, thou puppy, thou fool, thou coxcomb.


Why? how can I help it* why you (...) me so like a fool*


Come show me to her, and you shall see how I will handle her.


Nay father, I should be loath to marry her, after you have had the handling of
her.


This is her Chamber, is it not?


Yes* I know it by a good token, for here she opened the sluice, and let the
floodgates out upon me.


Mistress Dorothy, Mistress Dorothy, pray come to the window.


Sirrah, hold your tongue.


What again? sure this whole morning is nothing but my trouble* what wise-aker^
is that now?


She calls you wise-aker^* speak now.


I am your neighbour, Old Simpleton the Smith.


And I young Simpleton the Smith.


Oh neighbour is it you* here was your son but now, and he kept a worse noise
then a Bearbaiting* but you are civil, I will come down to you.


Look you there sirrah, she will come down tome, she says.


I by that time I have been a courtier as long as you have been, one woman or
other may come down to me too.


Good morrow nieghbour, what is your business pray.


Why it is this: this is my son. Nay it is my son, I'll assure you.


Yes forsooth, he is sure I am his son; my mother told him so.


Now I look better on him, he seems to me more handsome then before* your
company seasons him with discretion* but what's your business pray Sir*


Why, if you please forsooth, I would fain Join you two together in the way of
Matrimony.


Yes forsooth, to mock a marriage*


But hold Sir, two words to a bargain* what profession is your son of.


Forsooth I am a Blacksmith, and though I say it, I have as good working gear
as any smith in the parish* all my neighbours wives shall be my witness.


Sirrah, hold your tongue.


Why, shall I come a wooing, and say nothing for my self*


But what estate I pray has your son in posse^


Father, what estate have I in a posset.


Forsooth, two Cowes you shall have with him.


With a calfe to my knowledge.


Four ewes and lambs, and a horse to ride to market on.


Yes, and a ^ no, now I think on it, you may keep your ass your self.


Four mark in money.


Do you mark that.


With a bed and blankets.


And then we may dance the shaking of the sheets when we can.


These promises are fair, and if performed, I hope I shall not need repent my
bargain.


Nor I neither, come let's to bed presently, and afterwards we'll talk on it.


No, no, first to Church, and then to bed.


Oh then you won't follow the fashion of our country, we commonly go to bed
first, and to Church when we can, but come I am contented.


How now friend, what make you hereabouts?


My business is the same, I think, with yours; is it not for Dorothy?


I do confess it, and have known what love you long have born her; let us go
together.


Stand close, what means this?
Here comes the bride and bridegroom on so stately,
That were but maid and bachelor so lately.
And now let all the Blacksmithes be invited,
Cause Vulcan and his Venus are united.

What should this mean, Doll has a hat on?
She did not use to wear one.

Oh gentlemen! though I desire your company, yet now I heartily could wish your
absence.


Why, what's the matter Doll?


I am married.


To whom?


Do you not know him? Young Simpleton the Smith.


That fool, that Coxcomb; I'll break his hammer with his own jolt-head.


Stand close, I hear him coming.


Sweet-heart now we are married, things ought to be well carried.

And the first thing we should take care for, is how to get victuals, what's
that?


Nothing but the Rats and Mice.


As sure as I live, I'll lay a trap for those Rats. But what's the matter now?


Nothing but the Neighbours Dogs.


'Tis a thousand pities but such Currs were hanged up presently.


Oh Gentlemen! I would you were out of the house, for I am afraid he will
return again ere I can handsomely shut the door.


Why Doll, Doll.


Come ye behind me presently, I pray dispatch.


Doll: I have considered, that to set up my trade is the way to get victuals,
and I wont nothing of my tools but only a pair of Bellows.


Fear not husband, I have a little money that you know not of, and if I can but
hear of a good bargain, I will not fail to buy a pair of Bellows.


Oh thou pretty loving kind pigsny, but what makes thee wear thy coats of


Do not you know husband, it is the fashion for new-married wives.


Is it so? it is an excellent fashion in the Summer time; but I'll go out and
return presently.


What will you do? 'tis ten to one he spies you, and then my reputation runs a
hazard.


Appoint what way you will, we are contented.


I see him coming back; and truth to say, the course I shall advise will seem a
strange one, yet it must be: you know he did appoint that I should buy for him
a pair of Bellows; now if you two can bear it lustily, and blow it strongly,
this visit may be kept off from his knowledge.


Nay any thing good Doll, we cannot now be choosers.


So, lie down: I'll fetch a Chafingdish of Charcoal hither, and practice you a
while before he come.


I have plaid many a mad prank in my life, yet ne'er till now acted a pair of
Bellows.


So, so, blow lustily and fear not.


Wife: I have considered with my self, that if we lay out all the money in a
pair of Bellows, we should have little or nothing left to buy victuals.


Oh husband! you are deceived; for I have bought you a pair of Bellows, the
whole town shows not a neater.


Is this a pair of Bellows, let me see? this is an alamoda pair of Bellows, but
look you Doll; when the Bellows-mender comes by, let him stop this hole here,
for the wind comes out abominably. I'll call my Father Simpleton to see this
pair of Bellows. Father, father, come hither.


Did you ever see such a pair of Bellows as my wife has bought.


A pair of Bellows, Son! me thinks this would serve better for an Anvil: Let's
try how it will bear our strokes.


Well, a match.



