FRancisco, well met; whither in such hast?


I am going to a feast; where, if you please, you shall be welcome too.


I am willing to believe you, and will wait on you.


I'll promise you a dish of mirth, that's all, and if my hopes delude me not,
well dressed too, so quaintly relished, that it will provoke a laughter far
above thy spleen to suffer.


How can these times afford such entertainment?


Why, I'll inform you: 'Twas yesterday my luck to be encountered by a rustic
Sea-man, (or one at leastwise of as course condition.) This fellow, like a
perfect son of folly, began to rail extremely at his fortune, and needs would
make me Judge of his abuse. -- I have (says he) about some two years since,
married a wife, (wo worth the time I saw her) and in my absence she hath got a
trick to make me Cuckold whether I will or no; a barbarous Barber makes a beast
of me, Cutbeard his name, whom I do vow to be the cut-throat of.


I know the fellow well, he lives close by; but on I pray.


I finding that his humour might produce something worth laughing at, encouraged
him; he like a bladder that is swelled with blowing, was straight puffed up into a
desperate humour, so that he vowed this day for a revenge: And hereabout I am to
meet this Hercules.


It cannot choose but produce excellent mirth, which I'll assist with all my best
endeavours.


See, he is come laden with several instruments of death; he means to play a
prize with him, I think, -- Well Iohn, I see you are prepared for murder; have
mercy on the Barber, I say.


No, I scorn it, I will have no mercy, he has made a whore of a wondrous honest
woman, and a Cuckold of one, that for ought I know, might have been a Courtier.
For which abominable deed I scorn to show my self a Christian; for I do mean to
use him worse then a Jew would.


Nay, but consider, he's a man how-ere, and you can boast your self to be no
more, although you have the spirit of a Giant; you have brought weapons here as
if you meant to kill him twenty times. Troth tis too much.


If I bate him an Ace of forty, call me Coxcomb, I will draw his teeth one by
one, with an instrument called a pair of Tongs, then let him blood in the right
vein, and bid the Devil take him at his own peril.


Let me prevail with thee to calm thy rage, and take acquaintance of this
Gentleman a worthy friend of mine.


Do you long to be acquainted with me, Sir?


By any means, Sir.


Tis granted then; I'll toss a Can or a Pot with you, as soon as I have
dispatch't this bawdy Barber; would he were dead that my business might be
over.


What's your profession Sir? and how may I call you?


I am a Seaman, Sir, my name's Iohn Swabber -- an Officer of the ship, sir.


I cry you mercy, sir.


Nay, never cry for the matter, -- But I had forgot this Barber all this while:
Barber come forth, or by the beard of my great Grandfather, I swear, I will so
shashado, mashado, pashado, and carbonado thee, that thou shalt look like a
gallimafry all the days of thy life. Come forth I say,


Why neighbour Swabber, who provokes you thus? what do you mean? who has
offended you?


Oh slave of all slaves, who has offended me? why thou base, beastly,
boisterous, Babylonian, bawdyfac'd Barber, thou hast, thou hast made me fit to
chew the cud with oxen, climb the mountains with wild goats, and keep company
with none but Ram-headed people, for which I will tie thee up on the next
sign-post, and there thou shalt hang a twelve month and a day alive, for an
example to all such notable shavers; but if thou come and submitst to my
mercy, I will do thee the favour to let thee hang till thou be dead.


Fransisco hark -- I'll pawn my life this fellow's a rank coward, keep you his
fury up, and I'll persuade the Barber to a greater vein of roaring then ere was
practised by a suburb blade, I'll make him at the least seem valiant, fear not.


Do if it be possible, I'll hold him in discourse. -- But, Mr Swabber, what
think you if he does compound with you, will you be won to take an arm or two,
or both his legs, and save his other members?


Pish, tell not me, tis neither his arms nor his legs that I stand upon, he has
caused me to go in danger of my life: for the other day I had an occasion to pass
by a worshipful Gentleman's pack of hounds, they no sooner looked upon my
forehead, but they came at me in full cry; and I for fear left such a sent
behind me, that they came after me as perfectly by it, as if I had been a
Stagg; and if I had not got shelter of a house, without doubt I had been
presented to some great man for Venison, and my hanches had been baked by this
time.


You were in danger there I must confess.


And the Butchers Dogs still take me for a Bull, and fetch such courses at me;
and all this the Barber is the cause of.


I would revenge it, were I as you he should not have a tool left him to work
with.


No nor to play with neither, I'll have an inch of every tool he has. -- Barber
come forth, and let me kill thee upon fair terms, or else I will enter thy
house by force, pitch thee down the stairs, and send thee of an errand
headlong. And if thou dost submit to my mercy, I will shave thee to death with
thy own razor, therefore take heed. -- So, now let him come if he dare.


Well, now I see there is no hope to appease him, blood must ensue, and death
will take its course.


With whom? what's the matter?


The Barber is preparing for the combat, he has took his pole to serve him for
a lance, and one of his basins for a buckler, and vows to make you the
windmill, whilst he plays Don Quixote against you furiously.


A windmil! -- I'll begone.


You will not offer that sure. Who afraid?


Would it not make any one tremble with the thought on it, first to be made a
Cuckold, then a windmill? No, I'll begone, and come again to kill him when I can
find him in a better humour.


Consider what you do; he'll call you coward, proclaim you Cuckold still in
every Alehouse, and what disgrace will that be?


I care not, tis better be a Cuckold then a windmil; if he had meant to make a
fool, a puppy, or an ass of me, or any such Christian like creature, 'twere
another matter: but to be made a windmill of, and never to be respected but
when the wind blows, is not to be endured, therefore let him make windmils of
my weapons, if he will, for my own part I'll defend my self with my heels.


Come, I have brought him to a better temper, he will come armed with nothing
but a Razor, with which if he does slit your wezand-pipe, it will not be amiss
to take it patiently.


Let him not spoil my drinking, and I care not; but hark you, if you should let
him hurt me, I should be as angry as a Tiger.


Where is this slave that has provoked my rage to his destruction, I will swinge
this Boor, then hang him up for Bacon in my chimney, and send him to be
broiled for Pluto's breakfast.


Why This is worse then to be made a wind mil. Do you hear sir, if ever you had
the fit of an ague upon you, or ever knew the trembling of a man troubled in
conscience, that would be loath to die till he had made even with all the world,
consider me; alas, sir I have my rent to pay yet, and if I should be sent to
hell of an errand, they'll like my company so well, I should never come back
again; pray persuade him to send me to Jerusalem, or Ierico, or any those places
nearer hand.


Why can not thou excuse thy self? where's thy brains?


Alas, my brains are fallen intomy breeches; but if you'll stand between me and
harm, I'll venture to reconcile my self to him, -- Cut -- honest Cutbeard, did
not thou think I was in earnest all this while.


What ere thou were, thou shalt be nothing presently, death waits for thee,
come quickly I command thee.


Sir, pray persuade Mr Death to have patience for a matter of 40 or 50 years
more; for I have a great deal of business to do in this world yet.


Shall I be dallied with, let me approach him, for all the entreaties of the
world shall not preserve him past six minutes.


One minut's past already, -- and there's two.


Nay, prithee Cutbeard, be more merciful.


Three -- four -- five.


Will no entreaty serve? Then take your course.


Six, O now I am gone.


If he submit he may live, let him know it -- dost thou acknowledge thy own
cowardice and my heroic valor?


O mighty Hercules, I confess my self a Pigmy, and I will never think otherwise
while I live; these Gentlemen be my witnesses.


Why then all's well again. -- Remember Cutbeard,


I'll spice him fear not -- give me thy hand Jack, Thus do I grasp thy
friendship.


He grasps my hand devilish hard tho.


I hear pronounce thy wife to be a Venus.


O rare! Is my wife a Venus? That's more then ever I knew before; why then I
will be her husband Cupid.


No, Cupid was her son.


'Tis no matter for that, he shall be her husband for once, and we two will get
such abundance of young Cupids, that we will make all the world in love with one
another.


Since we are reconciled, know, honest Swabber, that I will make the whole world
dote on thee, I'll wash thy face, and powder thee to'th purpose, and shave thee
if thou wilt too.


No, by no means, I dare not venture my throat under thy fingers; but for
washing and powdering, that all the world may be in love with me, I am content.


Sit down then in this chair, look on this powder, the snow is nothing to it,
'twill create such a complexion on thee, that no Art did ever set upon the
proudest Lady.


But hark you Cutbeard, how shall I do to satisfy all the women that will
follow me for kisses, if you make me too beautiful, my lips will be worn
threedbare before I can get home; and then Parnell my own dear wife, will have
the least share of her own sweet husband.


For that we will take a course, -- wink, wink, good Jack, my Ball will search
your eyes else.


My eyes are honest, and fear no searching


Now I begin to sprucifie thy physiognomy, -- This powder was extracted from the
Phoenix, when she last burnt her self, and is indeed the quintessence of odors.


Nay, 'tis as odious as ever I smelt, that's certain, good Cutbeard let me have
enough I prithee.


Nay, I'll spare no cost, -- Judge Gentlemen, is he not strangely altered?


Past belief; I would not that my Mistress saw him now, my hopes would soon be
cooled then.


I think so, but I would have you to take notice, I will have nothing to do but
with great personages, for I must not make my self common.


What this fellow will com to no man knows yet, his fame no doubt will travel ore
all countries, and I am full resolved in my opinion, the Queen of Mauritania
will run mad for him.


If she run as mad as a March Hare, she gets not a bit; no, Parnell and my
neighbours shall have all.


Now if the Painters will draw Adonis out, let them come here for copies. So I
have done.


Prithee Cutbeard lend me a Looking-glass.


By no means; what did you never hear of one Narcissus how he pined away for
love of his own shadow: No, go home, your house is hard by, let Parnell see
you, and bless her self with wonder.


Honest Cutbeard, this Gentleman is a worthy friend of mine, prithee bestow
some of the same powder upon his face.


No, no, you shall be beautiful alone, tis best.


Parnell I come, and if thou be not stupid, Thou'lt say Jack Swabber is a
kin to Cupid.


Well Cutbeard, thou hast dressed him handsomely, I'd give a Crown that I were by
when first he finds what beauty he's adorned withal.


This day I am to meet with pretty Parnell, pray Heaven the Fool be absent when
I come, some two hours hence if you will meet me, Gentlemen, I'll tel you how he
takes his transmigration.


We will not fail. Farewell.


I wonder that my Barber stays thus long, can he neglect me thus? Well, I will
fit him; for if he use me once again thus basely, I will cashier him, and bestow
my love upon some one more constant: forty to one but Swabber comes before him,
and spoils all.

Who's this in the name of blackness? the clothes and walk of my dear husband,
and I'll lay my life he has got a vizard on. -- Nay pray now, indeed you'll
fright me presently, take heed.


She does not know me that's excellent, -- Parnell believe it, I am flesh and
blood, I would not have thee take me for a Goddess.


A Goddess quotha, a black one if you be one; what hast thou got upon thy face
I prithee?


Do not look too wistly upon me, Parnell, my beauty will put your eyes out if
you do, and then I must be at the charge of a Dog and a Bell for you.


A Dog and a fools head; pull off your vizard.


Do not touch me unless you make forty curtsies first. Come kiss me, and thou
wilt be out out of thy wits presently.


Nay, then I see tis a trick put upon him; I'll fetch you a glass, you shall
behold your beauty.


Do, and I will venture to be in love with my self for once. How shall I requite
honest Cutbeard? By this hand he shall have the honour to be Barber to all my
wenches.


Are you not wondrous fair? Look and admire your self.


O Parnell, Parnell, I am gul'd most basely, I have not half so much beauty as
a Chimney-sweeper: I'll kill the Barber the first thing I do.


Was it the Barber used thee thus?


I Parnell, 'twas he: I'll go fetch a company of my Fellow-Saylors, drag him
out, and hang him up at the main Yard presently. Parnell farewell: if I be
apprehended for the death of Cutbeard, what ever thou dost, send me a clean
shirt; for I shall have need on it.


Well Cutbeard, I commend thee for this project, thou hast dressed him
handsomely; would thou were it here, I would kiss thee for the jests sake.


I watched the time my Parnell, and have found it; How does the gul become his
feathers? Ha!


As I would have him: Oh Cutbeard, this kiss, and this, for the device.


Where is he, Parnell?


Why gone abroad in his new-fashion'd face, to fetch a gang of Sailors, who he
vows shall hang thee up at the main Yard, and shall use thee worse then the
Prentices a Suburb-Bawd on a Shrove-tuesday.


And those same water-rats are Divellish things; what a slave was I to use him
so?


What can thou fear when I am in thy presence? Away you milksop, hence from
me, avaunt.


Nay, gentle Parnel, by this hand I'll fight with a whole Army, if thou say
the word: prithee be reconciled.


Why Parnell, Parnell, here's thy own sweet husband; open the door dear wife.


O me, my husband's come, what shall I do?


Let me into the well* if thou think good, or hang me in the chimney stead of
Bacon.


Alas, that's full of hazard. -- No device!


Why huswife, housewife, must I wait half a day?


My peticotes fallen off, but I come presently -- Oh I have thought, come hither,
put on this biggin, I made it for my child that is at Nurse, and cram thy self
into this cradle here: there is no other way, therefore dispatch.


O me, thou never think upon my beard, that will betray all presently.


Take you no care, I'll make him to believe you were born with it; be quick, I
say.


Necessity compels me, send me off of this brunt once, I'll hunt the smock no
more -- Cover me close good Parnell.


So, keep you close, and when he prattles to you, sneere in his face, and call
him Dad; do you hear?


Why you proud, peevish, petty, paltry Parnell, why did you make me stay so
long?


I made what hast I could, but the child cried so.


The child! what child? have you got bastards here?


Bastards? they are your own then: Simon's come home, the boy I had a
twelvemonth since by you, he was born when you were at sea.


Is he brought home? As I'm an honest man I'm glad on it. Let me see him
Parnell.


Look here he is, the goodliest boy, and even as like thee Iohn, as if thou
had begot him all thy self.


Whoop, here's a boy of a twelvemonth old: if he grow but thus much this next
year, he'll be able to fight with a Giant presentl. But Parnely, he has got a
great beard too, how comes that?


Why he was born with it; many children are so, and 'tis a sign he will be a man
betimes, a wise discreet one too.


Dad dad, dad.


Nay, 'tis a wise child, I perceive that; for he calls me dad at first sight.
Good Parnel fetch me some milk for him, I'll see him eat.


He had milk but just now; prithee Iohn be patient.


You are a fool, he has been starved at Nurse, and we must make him fat. Fetch
some, I say.


I will not truly Iohn, you'll spoil the child.


I saw some stand in the next room, I'll fetch it my self so I will.


What will you do? You must endure with patience; I mingled batter but just now
for pancakes and that he'll bring, as certain as I live.


I shall be crammed to death; mercy upon me.


He comes, lie close again.


Dad, dad, dad.


I mine own boy, here's milk for thee, Simon. Parnel look, how greedily he eats
it.


Now fie upon you Iohn, you'll choke the child.


I mean to make him grow as high as Paul's, and show him for a wonder in
Bartholomew fair. Fetch me some more milk, this is all gone.


What, do you think I'll murder the poor infant?


By this hand I'll go to the Milk-woman and fetch him a whole gallon.


Up quickly and be gone; for when he comes he'll choke you without fail.


A pox upon him, never was child fed thus. But what will you do now?


Do not you fear; I'll fetch my own child; 'tis at a neighbours house, say the
Fairies have exchanged it.


Send thee good luck; farewell sweet Parnel.


So, if this child will serve him for a Simon, all will be well again. Iohn.


Come, give me Simon on my lap, I'll feed him till his guts crack again.


Alas, I went but in the next room, and in the mean time the Fairies have
exchanged him; look what a little thing they have left in's place.


I'll have none on it; go fetch me Simon, and tel the Fairies I'll indite them at
the Sessions for this. Oh Simon, Simon, what's become of thee?


Nay, prithee take not on so.


The goodliest boy of his age, that ever man saw. Pshaw, this has ner he beard,
I'll have none on it.


Why how no Jack, what in a passion? ha! twas that blackt thy face to day for
mirth sake, and thou did think 'twas Cutbeard.


I care not for my face, Simon is gone, that had a beard as big as Cutbeards
here, the Fairies have exchanged him; and look what a chitty-face they have
left in's room, a thing of nothing for him.


Come, you must use this they have left with courtesy; for they will whip Simon
every day in the week else. I know the nature of them.


Will they so? Nay then I must make much on it.


And now you must be friends with Cutbeard too.


With all my heart, for I am angry with none but the Fairies now.


We have brought music, and some neighbours with us, and mean to have a dance.
Come Iohn.


I can dance nothing but a melancholy dance. For I am in a grievous dump for
Simon still


I warrant thee. Strike up there.


Why that's well done; no time is counted lost,
Where civil mirth is gained with such small cost?


