BLind Cupid hath made my heart for to bleed,
Fa la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la.

But I know a man can help you at need,
With a fa la, la, la, la, fa, la, la, la, la, la.

My husband he often a hunting goes out, Fa la, la, c.


And brings home a great pair of horns there's no doubt; with a fa la, la, la,
c.


How is't Monsieur Simkin, why are you so sad? Fa la, la, la, c.


I am up to the ears in love, and it makes me stark mad, with a fa la, la, la,
c. I am vexed, I am tortured, and troubled at heart, Fa la, la, c.


But I'll try my skill to take off your smart, With a fa la, la, c.

And on that condition I give you a kiss, Fa la, la, c.

But what says your husband when he hears of this? with a fa la, la, c.


You know my affection, no one knows more,
With a fa la, la, c.

'Uds niggers noggers who knocks at the door? with a fa la, la, c.


There is a Royster at the door, he seems a Fellow stout.


I beseech you worthy friend, which is the back way out?


He swears and tears he will come in,
And nothing shall him hinder.

I fear he will strip me out my skin.
And burn it into tinder.

I have considered of a way, and twill be sure the best.


What may it be my dearest Dear?


Creep into this same Chest.
And though he roar, speak you no word,
If you'll preserve my favour.

Shut to the chest, I pray, with speed,
For something has some savour.

I never shall be quiet if she use me in this fashion.


I am here to bid you welcome; what mean you by this passion?


With some young sweet-fac'd fellow I thought gone out you were.


No sooth, the sweet-fac'd fellow is kept a prisoner here.


Where is the fool thy husband? Say, whither is he gone?


The Withal is a hunting.


Then we two are alone: But should he come
And find me here, what might the Cuckold think?
Perhaps he would call the neighbours in,

And beat you till you stink.


Yet in the bloody war full oft,
My courage I did try.

I know you have killed many a man.


You lie, you slut, you lie.


I never came before a foe,
By night nor yet by day,
But that I stoutly roused my self,

And nimbly ran away.


Within this chest I'll hide my self,
If it chance he should come.

O no my love, that cannot be,


I have bespoke the room.


I have a place behind here,
Which yet is known to no man.

She has a place before too,
But that is all to common.

Wife, wherefore is the door thus bared? what mean you pray by this?


Alas! it is my husband.


I laugh now till I piss.


Open the chest, I'll into it,
My life else it may cost.

Alas I cannot open it.


I believe the key is lost.


I have bethought my self upon a dainty trick.


What may it be my dearest love?
I prithee now be quick.

You must say that your enemy
Into this house is fled,
And that your heart can take no rest,
Until that he be dead.
Draw quickly out your furious blade,
And seem to make a strife.
Swear all th'excuses can be made,
Shall not preserve his life.
Say that the Rogue is fled in here,
That stole away your coin,
And if I'll not deliver him,
You'll have as much of mine.

Here's no man but my self,
On whom shall I complain?

This great fool does not understand,
This thing you must but faign.
My husband thus must be deceived, and afterwards we'll laugh.

Wife, since you will not open the door,
I'll break't open with my staff.

Good woman show me to the slave,
His limbs I strait will tear.

By all the honestly I have,
There's no man came in here.

When I have fought to purchase wealth,
And with my blood did win it,
This Rogue has got my purse by stealth.

But never a penny in it.


She's big with child, therefore take heed you do not fright my wife.


But know you who the Father is?


The Roarer on my life.


She knows not of your enemy, then get you gone you were best.


Peace husband, peace, I tell you true, I have hid him in the chest.


I am glad on it at my heart, but do not tell him so.


I would not for a thousand pound the Roarer should it know.


When next we meet his life is gone, no other must he hope; I'll kill him
whatsoere comes on it,


Pray think upon a rope.


What kind of person is it that in the chest does lie?


A goodly handsome sweet young man, as ere was seen with eye.


Then let us both entreat of him -- Pray put us not in fear: we do beseech you
go from hence.


But to morrow I'll be here.


Wife, run with all the speed you can, and quickly shut the door,

I would not that the roaring man should come in any more. Mean time I will
release the youth, and tell him how we have sped. -- Be comforted my honest
friend.


Alas I am almost dead, my heart is tortured in my breast with sorrow, fear and
pain.


I'll fetch some Aqua vitae, to comfort you again.


And cause I will requite you,
Whose love doth so excel,
I'll graft a pair of horns on your head,
That may defend it well.

Good husband, let the man stay here,
'Tis dangerous in the street.

I would not for a crown of gold,
The Roarer should him meet.
For should he come by any harm,
They'd say the fault were mine.

There's half a crown, pray send him out to fetch a quart of wine.


There's money for you Sir, -- Pray fetch a quart of Sack.


'Tis well, 'tis well, my honest friend, I'll see you shall not lack.


But if he should dishonest me,
For there are such slippery men.

Then he gets not of his half crown
One penny back again.

Thy husband being gone my love,
VVee'l sing, we'll dance, and laugh,
I am sure he is a good fellow,
And takes delight to quaff.

I'll fold thee in my arms my love,
No matter for his listening.

Gentlemen, some forty weeks hence
You may come to a Christening.

O sirrah, have I caught you,
Now do the best you can,
Your Schoolmaster ne'er taught you
To wrong an honest man.

Good sir, I never went to School,
Then why am I abused?
The truth is, I am but a fool,
And like a fool am used.

Yet sirrah you had wit enough to think to Cuckold me.


I jested with him, husband, his knavery to see.


But now you talk of knaverie,
I pray where is my Sack?

You shall want it in your belly, Sir,
And have it on your back.


