THis is the place, the way me thought was long,
And my slow pace did my affection wrong.
For who is he that would not wing his hast,
When by Oenone's eyes he shall be graced.
Most potent Shepherdess who hast power t'enthrall
Not only my poor heart alone, but all.
For every one that reigns here, strives to be
Rather her captive, then at liberty.
Her eyes do perfectly two Suns present,
And yet but one graces the Firmament,
The colour of her lips doth justly show
Like that of Cherries when they kindly grow
And such a form they have, they may entice
To think such only grew in Paradise.
The Lambs are fatter that by her do feed,
And all her Ewes more frequently do breed
Then any Shepherds, and do yield each year
A larger fleece then any others bear;
As if she brought a miracle to pass,
And fed them with her looks more then the grass.
If then she will (when other Shepherds stand
To beg a favour from her eyes or hand)
Esteem me most, my poor heart then will be
Taught the true sense of a felicity.
But soft, -- me thinks from yonder grove I hear
Voices that are familiar to my ear,
I'll not go to them; for Love says my duty
Is to attend none but Oenone's beauty.

YOu have forgot then ( Dorus) your protest.

No, I have not my Cloris, 'tis confessed.

But yet I saw you slide, a Garland neatly tied
Into Uranias' hand; let it suffice,
Though Love be blind, Lovers have many eyes.

Will you appear so strangely full of passion?

I have cause to fear dissembled love's in fashion.

Then why did you, I pray,
With Strephon sport and play?
You kissed and danced, till day was past its prime,
And all the while my heart did beat the time.

May I not dance, or harmlesly be kissed?

So I may chance give garlands if I list.

But when you are so free,
Me thinks you steal from me.
For every Lover will this Text approve,
There's charity in all things but in love.

That day the storm fell to be true you swore,

When the sun shined again, you vowed much more.

Those faithful vows I made,
were by yourself betrayed:
For I have learned to know it is my due,
To be no constanter in love then you.

Then jealousies be gone, and keep my sheep,
Lest that the Wolf should make their number small,
But of my love nothing command shall keep
But Cloris will, and Cloris will is all.

Shepherd, thy love is most unnatural:
For Nature does command friendships observance,
But by the fond desires thy heart is filled with,
Thou prov'st thy self ungrateful.

That Character was never coveted,
Nor must I wrong my innocence so much,
Not to demand a reason of this slander.

I will produce the truth thou would profess,
A witness against thy self: How oft have I
With care and industry preserved thy flock?
And when thy tender Lambs have been in danger,
How many times have I opos'd the wolf,
And made my strength defender of their weakness?
And when thy self hast follow'd idle pastimes,
Thy Flocks and mine have still been twined together,
Till by my vigilance I have instructed
The enemies to Shepherds and their Flocks.
They were to fear me, as thy sheep did them.
Nor have I had a thought (except those dear ones
That have been busied by Oenone's virtues)
Which has not still paid tribute to thy friendship.

You then would have prerogative in love,
And leave no privilege to me but friendship,
If you allow Oenone virtuous.,
And that her eyes have power to pierce all hearts,
Why should the man which you will call a friend,
Be banished from the blessed socitie
Of those who are her servants? 'Twere a crime
Against her beauty to believe she should
Merit but one mans service; he which reigns here,
I know must love, and that necessity
Makes rivals necessary.

Tis a truth
I must acknowledge, pardon me my friend,
I find the Nymph Oenone is too worthy;
Yet her perfections (were they centupled)
Shall not dissolve, nor in the least diminish
What has bin formerly esteemed a triumph,
Which is, a perfect friendship.

In that confidence
Thus we unite again -- But who comes here?

'Tis Hobbinall,
One that believes 'tis but Oenone's duty
Directly to confess her self beholding
To him for his affection: he supposes
That his deserts are greater then her beauties,
And is as confident the fair Nymph loves him,
As we are that she does not; yet his fortune
Is more to be commended then our fate;
For she is pleased to smile at his rude actions,
The best of our endeavours are not valued.

What paper's that he ruminates upon?
Let us observe a little.

'Tis a strange thing I find my self out every day more then other, to be one
of the understandingst, sweetest, neatest, and completest Shepherds that ever
took hook in hand. The other day I saw my face in a pail of water, and I had much
ado to forbear drowning of my self: 'tis no wonder then, that the beauteous
Nymph Oenone makes much of me, and lets all the other Shepherds shake their
ears like Asses; And the truth is, if I can find never a handsomer she shall
serve the turn. This was her birth-day, she being born in the year -- one
thousand six hundred, -- nay hold a little; but on this day of the month it
was, Winter or Summer, in the honour of which we all keep holiday; and
therefore for the credit of her beauty, and the honour of my own Poetry, have
made such a Copy of Verses on her, as will make her a thousand times handsomer
then ever she was in her life. --

I will peruse them now with the eyes of understanding.

OEnone fair, whose Beauty does enrich us,
Tell me the cause why thou dost so bewitch us.
On this day thou were born, though not begotten,
This day I'll think on when the art dead rotten.
And though thy coyness and thy pretty scorn
Makes many wish that thou had ne'er been born.
Yet for my own part this I'll swear and say,
I wish thy time of Birth were every day.
If she do not run mad for love of me now, 'tis pity she should have Verses
made on her as long as she lives.


Let's interrupt him -- Hobbinall well met.


It may be so.


But why so strange man? I hope you will remember we are your fellow Shepherds.


You were once, but now I command you to know, I am a Master Shepherd; for the
fair Nymph Oenone, that makes all your mouths run over with water, does
acknowledge me to be both Master and Mistress.


In part 'tis true, yet if you well consider, she makes you but her sport, no
otherwise.

If she make me her sport, 'tis more then ever she can make of thee: for thou
art one of the sowrest looked fellows that ever crept out of a vineger-bottle.


Here comes the fairest Idae ever nourished.


I will accost her.


Forbear a while good Hobbinall.


It was my fault.
To be so credulous; but 'twas his sin
To be so lavish of his protestations.
Oh Paris, Paris, thy inconstant nature
Argues the fickleness which Poets fancy
In women, but a Fiction.
I that have formerly acknowledged thee
The only person meriting respect,
Must now produce this thy particular falsehood,
As one to dare example; let no more
The Shepherds be at strife to please Oenone,
Let every Maypole-meeting every feast,
Be honoured by a happier Nymph then I,
To be the Mistress of those harmless pastimes.

Hail to the Nymph that graces Idaes vale,
Accept my service at this days solemnity.

And if the same from me can be accepted, nothing so pleasing is as to present
it.


I, you may talk as finely as you will, but when
I come to speak once, I'm sure you will be kicked off.

What you profess may well claim an acceptance.

Now will I see who is the most deserving Shepherd in all the vale of Idae --
little rogue, howdost thou?


O Hobbinall, you are welcome, I thought you had forgot me, you are my sport,
and should be ever near me.


Look you there, I am her sport she says; when will she give any of you such an
honourable title: but Sport, I do not think but thou art a Conjurer, or a Witch,
or a Devil at least; for thou hast infused such a combustion of Poetry in my
head, that I fear I shall never be my own man again, nor my Masters neither. --
There's a Copy of verses, read them; nay, they are my own, as sure as my name's
Hobbinall.


I thank you Sport, I'll study a requital.


Fair one, we come to celebrate this day
With other Shepherds who admire and joy,
To know so fair acreature as your self
At this time of the year made the world happy.

And we as bound to honour you (the fairest) that ever graced our sex, are come
to attend upon your recreations.


Your expressions,
(As they cause blushes) do exact a thanks.

Honour me
With your fair hand, Nymph, that I may lead
The way to all those pastimes which will follow.

The honour is to me, and I accept it.


Id'e laugh at that, no Sport, I'll dance with thee my self.


Some other time,
By chance I may be at leisure.

Will you not? well, by this hand then I'll stand out and laugh at every thing
you do, right or wrong. Sport, shall I show thee a dance of my own fashion?


It cannot but content.


Nay, I know that, hark hither, Lads.


Thus I beguile my passion, shadowing over
With a false vail of mirth, my real sorrows;
For when time takes an end, not all the stories
Which ever did lament forsaken Lovers,
Shall show a parallel to my misfortune.
My griefs shall stay, when all my joys depart,
And nothing but sad thoughts shall fill my heart.

How like you this Sport:

Beyond Expression, Sport,
I see your Virtues were concealed too long*

I so they were, but I mean to show them every day as fast as I can. But
sirrah, Sport, yonder's God Pan, with a company of the bravest Satyrs that ever
wore horns on their heads: come, Shepherds, let's go make them drunk, and saw
off all their horns.


Hail to that Nymph that graces Idaes Vale,
Whose beauty adds a Lustre to all those
That do acknowledge Pan as their chief Patron.
Not any Satyr henceforth for thy sake,
Shall own the nature he was bred withal.
But all their actions shall be like thy beauty,
Smooth and delightful, and when thou commandst,
Sweet Philomel shall quite forget her Rape,
And overcome with joy that thou art present,
Join with the other birds in cheerful notes.
The very trees shall entertain no whisper
From the rude winds, but what shall please thy ear,
And when thou speak the beasts shall dance more nimbly,
Then when the Thracian Orpheus charmed their senses.
And every object that can yield delight,
Shall be Oenones vassal: in the mean time,
I, and those Satyrs that attend my person,
Will move in dance, to let Oenone find,
She can make gentle a rough Satyrs mind.

Since my weak fortune knows no retribution,
But my weak thanks, accept them, being presented.

Approach then Satyrs, and let each one strive
To express the service due unto Oenone.

Now honour me to grace my Bower a while,
Where I will strive to let my Patron prove,
How fain I would be grateful to his love.


